17101 S109013 99844664 177104
LIbrum hunc, cui titulus (A Case for the Spectacles, &c.) cum nihil contineat Orthodoxae Fidei, bo∣nisve moribus adversarium, sed multa egregiè docta, fructum{que} studiosis Le∣ctoribus haud vulgarem allatura, dig∣num censeo, qui typis in publicum pro∣feratur. Decemb. 4. 1637. THO: WYKES R. P. Episc: Lond: Capell. domest.
A Case for the Spectacles, OR, A Defence of VIA TUTA, The Safe Way, By Sir HVMPHREY LYNDE Knight, In Answer to a Book written by J.R. called, A PAIRE OF SPECTACLES, Together with a Treatise Intituled, STRICTURAE IN LYNDOMASTYGEM, by way of Supplement to the Knights Answer, where he left off, pre∣vented by Death. AND, A Sermon preached at his Funerall, at Cobham, Iune 14th 1636. By DANIEL FEATLEY, D. D. The way of the Lord is streight, and the just shall walke therein; but the wicked shall fall therein. Hos. 14.9. Insanis veritas scandalum est, & caecis Doctoribus fit caligo quod lumen est. Leo Magn. Serm. 1. de Epiph. LONDON, Printed by M. P. for Robert Milbourne, at the signe of the Vnicorne in Fleet-street, neere Fleet-Bridge. 1638.
TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, By Divine Providence, Lord B. of DURESME, &c. May it please your good Lordship; AFTER I had taken a reso∣lution to apologize for my departed friend, and make a kind of hedge to his Via tuta, I seriously bethought my selfe, who would maimtaine the fence, by one so made; and patronize this pa∣tronage of that his worthy worke. For though the cause in hand, be the truth of God; and the person whom I undertake to defend against the Calumniations of
his Adversarie, be now , out of the eye ofHorat. Od. 14. l. 3. Subla∣tum ex ocu∣lis quaerimus invidi. Ovid. l. 3. De Pont Pascitur in vi∣vis livor post fata quiescit. Et Iuvenal. Sat. 1. Nulli gravus est prcussus Achilles, aut multum quaesi∣tus Hylas. envie, and the reach of malice; yet I well know, that neither the consi∣deration of the one, nor regard to the other, will prove any Amulet against the poyson of theAristoph. in Plut. , id est, annulis me∣dicinalis aut antidotus. Sycophants tooth, or venom of the Detracters tongue. Death I grant, which sets a period to all suits in Courts, should grant a Supersedeas of Course, against all Arrests and molestati∣ons of them who have taken Sanctuarie in the grave; and thereforeBrusonius facet et exemp. l. 1. Solon legem condidit, quâ prohibuit in de∣sunctos maledi∣cta consicere. Et Theodorus Chius cen∣suit Pom∣peium in aegypt, admittendum addens Mor∣tuos non mor∣dere. Erasm. Apoph. p. 374. Selon ena∣cted a Law, whereby, under a great pe∣naltie, he prohibited any to cast any foule aspersion on the dead. AndBruson. ibid. Asinius Pollio cum orationes condidisset in Plancum quas post mortem ejus legendas servabat audiit à Planco, cum mortuus non nisi larvas pugnare. Plancus sharply reproved the folly of Asinius Pol∣lio (who threatned to stigmatize him af∣ter his death, by publishing his declama∣tions against him) saying, None but Hob∣goblins fight with ghosts. Notwithstanding this privilege granted to the dead, even by the Law of Nature; I cannot remem∣ber
without horrour, nor expresse with∣out griefe, what the Acts and Monuments of the Church, present to the view of all men, concerning Popish malice survi∣ving life it selfe, and committing in∣humane (not onely unchristian) outra∣ges on the corpes, and not lesse upon the workes of Orthodoxe Professors now with God. The blessed Martyr, SaintCypr. de lap. & Ep. l. 2. Saevitum est in plagas, saevi∣tum est in vul∣nera: & in servis Dei non jam membra torquebantur sed vulnera: manabat pro fletibus san∣guis, & pro lae∣chrymū cruore semiustulatis visceribus deflu∣ebat. Cyprian, setting the cruelty of the hea∣then, as it were, upon the Racke, could straine no higher after hee had said, These Salvage Persecutors wreake their furie on the brused, and battered servants of Christ; and torture not so much their members as their wounds. Yet there is a Plus ultra in the enraged malice of our Romish Ad∣versaries, Saevitum est in cadavera, saevitum est in ossa, saevitum est in cineres. For theyVide hist. de mort. Spala∣tensis. M.S. Arraigne the dead, they sue against them an Ejection out of their long homes, and interre them inActs and Monuments, volume 3. pag. 778. The body of Peter Martyrs wife, at Oxford, was taken up by Doctor Marshall out of her grave, in the Church of Saint Frideswids, and buried in a dunghill. Lestals; nay they
burne theirActs and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 606. The body, and bones of Iohn Wickliffe, by the Decree of the Synod of Constance, were taken up & burned, 41. yeares after he was buried, in his owne Pa∣ish at Lutter∣worth, and his ashes taken & throwne into the river; and so was hee re∣solved into three ele∣ments, Earth, Fire, and Wa∣ter: thinking thereby, utterly to exstinguish and abolish both his name and Doctrine for ever. Acts & Monuments, volume 3. pag. 771. The Vicechancelior taking with him a publike Notarie, bound the Parishioners with an oath, to digge up Paulus Fargius his bones: and received the like oath of Roger Davis, and William Ha∣zell, for doing the like with Martin Bucer, when they came to the place of execution, the Chests were set up an end, with the dead bodies in them, and fastened on both sides with stakes, and bound to the post with a long iron chaine, fire being forthwith put to, as soone as it began to flame round about, a great sort of bookes that were condemned with them, were cast into the same. bones, and strew their ashes on the rivers. Tantene animis coelestibus irae? Loe the bowels of them who most boast of workes of Mercie, towards the bodies of true Professors, whilome, Temples of the holy Ghost: yet their charitie to their soules, exceeds this; for these they pe∣remptorily exclude out of heaven, and send them pell-mell, without Baile, or Mainprise, to the dungeon of hell; and there sentence them to more exquisiteCoccleus hist. Hussit. l. 2. Multo graviora esse crediderim Wicklefi tormenta quam sint apud inferos, vel scelera∣tissimorum hominum Iudae proditoris Christi, & Neronis Christianorum perse∣cutoris. torments, than either Nero the monster of men, or Iudas the betrayer of Christ himselfe, indure. Of thisEdmund. Camp. rat. 10. Calvinum & hes principes unum coelum capere non potest. Et Fishers resp. to Doctor White, and Doctor Fearley. c. 2. p. 152. Out of the unity of the Romish Church, no salvation. Et Coster resp. ad resut. Osiander proposit. 8. wisheth himselfe damned with Lucifer, if ever my Lutheran were saved.
straine is the KnightsFlood, Spect. c. 17. per tot. Papists dying in their Reli∣ligion saved, Protestants damned. Alastor, with whom I am to deale; whose perfect cha∣racter your Lordship may see in Sozimus, drawne to the life by Isidorus Pelusiota, , as your Lordship may find likewise, an exact Emblem of his booke in Plinie his description of thePlin. nat. hist. l. 9. c. 36. Beares whelpe, Jn∣formis caro sine oculis, sine pilis, ungues tan∣tum prominent? In which consideration, I thought it most needfull to make choise of a Patron of eminent qualitie,Ben. Syr. Apoph. , Sapiens nutu stultus fuste, Drus. in Alph. vet. sap. . who with his Authoritie, might stoppe the mouth of such railing Rabshakah's; and if need be, lend them a smart blow with his Crozure, asHom. Is. . Ʋlisses did Thersites with his golden Scepter. Now, although the Knight vvanted not many Noble and vvorthie friends, and some of your Lordships Sacred order, who honoured him living, and would willingly have afforded him their protection being dead. Yet two reasons were prevalent with me, to dedicate this Apologie to your
Lordship. First, because none of your Lordships ranke now living, to my knowledge hath so often entered into Lists with the Romish Adversaries, nor served so long in this sacred Leguer as your Lord∣ship; in so much, that at my aboade in France, now 25. yeares agoe: where I saw theFitzg: Hector Romuli∣dum cecidit sub Achille Iuello. Rhemensi Han∣nibali Scipio Fulcus erat. Tum cor papico∣lis Rainoldus fregit in Harto. Alba Stapleto∣num jugera de∣inde premunt: Ac cedes nostris pretium De∣ringe papyris. Nec gemmae Renues Annu∣lus ire comes. Abfuit Ely siis tantum sua Laurea lucis. Te Deus in lu∣os transtulit er∣go suos. Armes of other Champions of the truth blazoned in a Latin Epigram, I descried your Lordships among them in an apposite Anagram, made by a re∣nowned Pastor of the French Church. THOMAS MORTONIVS homo Martis notus. With this, or the like Euloge. Quassanda est istâ Pelias hasta manu. The other reason was, your Lordship in your last, no lesse unimitable, then un∣answerableMort. in∣stitut. sacram. l. 3. c. 3. p. 158. Of Rom. Tran∣sub. This sen∣tence I have seene lately can∣vased by a Ie∣suit against a judicious and religious Knight, falsly imputing unto him diverse falsities, &c. And l. 7. c. 7. pag. 545. Your Iesuit in his booke of Spectacles made in confutation of a judicious and religious Knight, among many other of his Paradoxes and Ab∣surdities &c. masterpiece, held up your buckler over the Knight then living, more
then once, and ward off the Iesuits blowes; and therefore I doubt not but that your Lordship will now bestride him being dead, and save him from all further injury. For my selfe, as nothing induced me to make this supplement to his Apologie, but the love of Gods truth, and the truth of my friends love: so I hope that all who love the truth in sincerity, upon the impartiall perusall hereof, will doe the Knight honour, and me right. For envie it selfe cannot denie that he hath much advantaged the common cause, both by convincing the Adversaries, in all the maine pints of difference betweene us, out of their owne mouthes, and disco∣vering more at large then any the mystery of their Indices expurgatorij; wherein though they professe to correct onely their owne writers, and that but from the yeare 1518. yet the Knight hath tra∣ced them upwards, and detected their corruption of all sorts of Writers in all former ages: whereby the judicious
Reader may observe such indirect dea∣ling in our Adversaries towards us, asMelancth. orat. Tom 1. de Od Sophist. Cum triginta Tyranni legem tulissent, ne quis è suo Ca∣talogo in dictâ causâ necaretur Critias tamen Therammenem collegam suum, cujus nomen in Catalogo scrip∣tum erat, in dictâ causâ in∣terfici jussit cumque The∣rammenes legis occiliū peteret, respondet, legem scriptam esse de iis quorum nomina sunt in Catalogo, se vero jam The∣rammenes no∣men in Catalo∣go delevisse. Critias in the Athenian State practised against Therammenes: there being a law enacted in the time of the 30. Tyrants at Athens, that none of them should be put to death without a legall tryall, whose names were written in a certaine Cata∣logue, Critias bearing a spleene to The∣rammenes, first blots his name out of the Catalogue, and then proceeds to sentence him to death; and when Therammenes pleaded the priviledge of the law, as be∣ing one of the thirty Governours, whose name was set downe in the Catalogue; Critias answered, that the benefit of the law was restrained to those whose names were in the Catalogue; but that he had newly strucke out the name of Therammenes. Let any that hath a single eye, judge whether the proceedings of our Romish Adversaries against us, are not altogether as injurious as this of Critias towards his Collegue Therammenes. First,
they raze out our Records, and burne our writings, and then nonsuit us for want of Evidence. Secondly, they blot and cut out by their Indices Expurgatorij, the most pregnant testimonies of Antiquity for us, and then charge us with false Allegations, because, forsooth, they agree not with their castrated Copies. I freely confesse that if any man shall search all the Knights quotations, especially out of the Romish Writers, in the latter corrected, or rather corrupted Editions of them, or looke up∣on him through the Iesuits Spectacles un∣rubbed, he will thinke him very foule in some Allegations at least: but let him in quire into the more Auncient and uncor∣rupted Copies, or looke upon the Knights writings without the Iesuits false glasses, and glosses, or even through those Specta∣cles he hath fitted for him in this last Pam∣phlet; as they are now wiped and clensed by me, he will finde him a most faire and ingenuous Writer. There is no text of Scripture among
many scores, no Allegation of Antiquity among many hundreths, vellicated by the Iesuit, which is not here vindicated: no argument seeming to be blunted, which is not sharpened, and a new edge set on it; no paint, colour, or varnish layed by the Ie∣suit on the rotten Pillars of Popery, which is not here scraped out, or washed away. And thus at the length the Case for the Spe∣ctacles begunne by the Knight is finished: on which I crave leave to imprint your Lordships Name and Armes; entreating your Lordship to accept this Dedication as an indication of my sincere love to my de∣ceased friend, and withall an acknow∣ledgment of that great debt of thankes I owe your Lordship for your Lordships many undeserved favours, which I am a∣ble no other wayes to discharge, then by underwriting my selfe, Your Lordships most humbly and affectionatly Devoted, DA. FEATLEY.
The CONTENTS of the first Part. In the Epistle to I. R. FAlsifications objected by the Iesuit, answerd and retorted. pag. 2. Personall succession of visible Professors is no certaine note of a true Church. pag 3. The second Commandement is morall, and the Iesuits leaving it out of the Decalogue, is unexcusable. pag. 8. In the Answer to the Preface. The Iesuits answer is full of railing, slanders, sophismes, and ter∣giversations. pag. 16. CHAP. I. The Articles of the Roman Creed, published by Pope Pius the fourth, were never anciently received. pag 25. The 39 Articles of the Church of England justified. pag. 30. Papists teach, that the Pope hath power to create new Articles of Faith. pag. 33. Many Doctrines of Poperie are new, by the confession of Papists themselves. pag. 38. Protestants have a certaine rule of Faith, Papists have not. pag. 45. The Roman translation of the Bible, is most corrupt. pag. 51. Three sorts of corruptions, and abuses of ancient Fathers. 1. By foy∣sting bastard Treatises, & entitling them to the Fathers. 2. By fal∣sifying their undoubted Treatises by additions, detractions, or mutations. 3. By alleaging passages and places out of them, which are not extant in their Workes: and of all these three kinds, Ro∣manists are proved guiltie. pag. 64. Corruptions, and falsifications of ancient Writers, by Papists: In the first Age. pag. 65. In the 2. Age. pag. 67. In the 3. pag. 68. In the 4. pag. 73. In the 5. pag. 77. In the 6. pag. 89. In the 7. pag. 90. In the 8. pag. 92. In the 9. pag. 105. In the 10. pag. 109. In the 11. pag. 110. In the 12. pag. 111. In the 13. pag. 112. In the 14. pag. 114. In the 15. pag. 115. In the 16. pag. 122. Of implicit Faith, and blind Obedience, maintained by Papists. pag. 143. CHAP. II. Papists their bitternesse against reformed Churches, is causlesse. pag. 148.
The definition of Heretikes agreeth to Papists, but no way to Pro∣testants. pag. 151. Rome confessed to be Babylon, by learned Romanists. pag. 157. CHAP. III. Cassander and Caesenus are justified. pag 164. Corruption in Faith as well as manners, are confessed to have been in the Roman Church by the learned of that partie. pag. 165. The Councell of Trent intended a reformation of Faith as well as manners. pag. 173. CHAP. IV. The Catholike Faith is not so indivisible, but that a man may renounce it in part, though not in all, as many learned Romanists have renounced the Trent Faith in part. pag. 178. Priests marriage is lawfull. pag. 181. CHAP. V. Romanists prefer their own interpretations of Scrip∣tures, before the ancient Fathers. pag. 188. CHAP. VI. Many errours have crept into the Church, whose first Authors cannot be named. pag. 191. The difference between Heresie and Apostacie. pag. 196. CHAP. VII. The petty degree of the Romish Faith is drawne from the ancient Heretikes, namely; the Osseni Helchescite, the Capernaites, the Manichees, the Angelici, the Collyridians, the Tacians, and the Cathorists. pag. 219. CHAP. VIII. The Antiquitie, and Vniversalitie of the Prote∣stant Faith in generall is proved by the testimonies of our lear∣ned Adversaries. pag. 253. There are but 22 Canonicall books of the old Testament, as is pro∣ved by the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, both of the Greeke and Latine Church. pag. 276. Errata in the first Part. PAge 42. line 8. reade his. lin. 17. r. authority, in marg. l. 2. r. ad Dard. p. 57. lin. 11. r. their foreseene. p. 66. l. 4. r. the deepe. p. 75. l. 20. r. Angles. p 92 in mar. l. 8. r. alius, in text, l. 29. r. rejected. p. 93. l. 16. r. serve. p. 109. l. 23. r. ma∣king him speake. p. 131. in mar. l. 12. r. veniali. p. 138. l. 25. r. very corruptly. p. 139. l. 25. in marg. r. repurgata: p. 153. l. 22. r. homoousians. p. 164 in marg. l. 25. r. vicesimi tertii. p. 173. l. 23. r. operierunt. p. 189. in mar. l. 17 sequinitur. p. 218. l. 2. r. Vitalian. p. 219. l. 18. in marg. r. regnum. p. 224. in marg. l. 10. r. minus. p. 248. in marg. l. 12. r. curvat. & l. 14. r. pronus. & l. 18. r. iudico. p. 25 1. l. 6. r. ar∣gument. p. 255. l. 3. r. ingenuously. p 257. l. 12. r. true body. & l. 21. r. is. & l. 22. dele and. p. 270. l. 4. r. looke. p. 271. l. 29. r. of the. p. 273. l. 3. dele to the p. 279. l. 22. r. when.
To J. R. AUTHOR OF THE BOOKE CALLED A paire of Spectacles. I Received a Treatise from you, (Mr. J.R.) not long since pub∣lished against me by the title of A paire of Spectacles, or, An Answer to a booke called Via tuta, The safe way: wherein you say the booke is shewed to be a Labyrinth of Errours, and the Author a blinde Guide. To what end your Spectacles were made for a blinde man I cannot tell; for sure I am, if I were blinde, a paire of your Spectacles could not make
me see: howsoever if the indifferent Reader will look but upon the Frontispice of your own book, he shall easily discerne that your glasses are deceitfull, and do justly occasion a Writ of Error to be brought against your selfe, for making that to seem in S. Au∣stin, your first Author, which is not. Your words are these:Qui autem praetergreditur regulam fidei, non accedit in viâ, sed recedit de viâ. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 98. Tom. 9. p 487. He that goeth besides the rule of faith (which is the Catholique Church) doth not come in the way, but goeth out of the way: wherein you have added these words of your owne (viz.) which is the Catholique Church, in the same character with S. Austin: and in lieu of Scripture you pretend the Church to be the rule of Faith; whereas that ancient Father assures us,Civitas Dei credit Scriptu∣ris—Undè fides ipsa concepta est, ex quâ ju∣stus vivit Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 18. Tom. 5. Sancta Scrip∣tura nostrae do∣ctrinae regulam figit. Idem de bono Viduita∣tis. Tom. 4. c. 1. that from the holy and canonicall Scriptures, that faith is formed and bred by which the just doe live. Nay more, hee expressely professeth with us, that the holy Scripture doth fix or settle the rule of our doctrine. And thus in your fist citation you falsifie S. Austin, and go besides the rule of faith and good manners also, and by stumbling at the threshold, you shew your selfe to bee the blinde guide you speake of in the first page, and the first place. I proceed to your Dedicatorie Epistle; first, you begin to descant upon my name, in paralelling the words Lyend and Lye, howsoever (say you) The title of Sir will be left for you. These bee the first flowers of your eloquence, and they savour sweetly. Now if I should repay you in your owne language, and shew you what men are branded with the letter (R) which stands for your name; if I should shoot backe (I say) your
arrowes, even bitter words, into your owne bosome, would it not shew rather want of matter than proofe of doctrine? If you delight to sit in the seat of the scornefull, it shall be my comfort to tread in the steps of my Saviour, who when hee was reviled, reviled not againe. To let passe your bitter reproa∣ches of my learning and breeding, I will come to the matter. You have not stated the question (say you) fully and truly, for you were to shew the visibilitie of the Church by persons in all ages. Then you demand of me where the Church was, which S. Paul called the house of God, and pillar of truth; and thus you prescribe mee my weapons, and teach mee how to fight. Touching the visibilitie of the Church, it is not to be confined within the narrow compasse of an Epistle; and therefore I will answer you and your Jesuites challenge at large in place convenient: and as touching your demand where the Church was, which is called the pillar of truth, I answer in briefe, not in Rome, but in Ephesus; for otherwise it might seeme incongruous, that the Apostle should exhort Timothy to walke circumspectly in the Church of God, because the Church of Rome was the pillar and firmament of truth. And therefore the Turke may better alledge this place to prove Mahmets religion, being now subject to his power, than you to justifie the Romish religion, because Ephesus was the pillar of truth. You proceed, and by way of prevention you tell
me the controversie is not so much of the doctrine as of the persons: and then you conclude simply in the very same page, The question is not of the doctrine, but of the persons. Oportet esse memorem: I will but let you see your contradiction, I quarrell it not, onely I pray you tell mee in the words of sobernesse and truth, did ever anywise man (except your selfe) un∣dertake to prove the true Church by the visibilitie of the persons? May not Jewes and Heretiques by the same reason claime a true Church, because they had visible persons in all ages? But say you this hath beene the way which the holy Fathers have taken, either in proving the Ca∣tholique faith, or disproving of heresies; and for your Assertion, you cite Tertullian, Irenaeus, Cy∣prian, Optatus and Augustine: give me leave to ex∣amine your Authors, for as yet you have produced but one ancient Father, and him you have falsified in the Frontispice of your booke. Tertull. pre∣script. c. 32. & lib. 3. Car. ad∣vers. Marcion.Touching your first Author, Tertullian, (in the first place cited by you) hee demonstrates two wayes how to discerne the Church: first, by shew∣ing some Apostle or Apostolicall person to have founded it; next, by the conformity of the do∣ctrine to the Apostles: and in his third book against Marcion (which is your second citation) hee hath nothing at all for your purpose. Iren. l. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. & l. 4. c. 43, 45, 46.Touching your second Author, Irenaeus, hee is expressely against you; for in the first chapter and third booke (cited by you) he saith, By the will of God they have delivered the Gospel to bee the pillar
and foundation of truth. In the second hee saith, that when Heretiques are convinced by the Scrip∣tures, they fall to accuse them, as if they were not right, or of authoritie, and that they are ambiguous and doubtfull. In the third hee proveth the truth of the Church by the conformitie of doctrine to the A∣postles, not by the visibilitie, as you pretend. In his fourth booke cited by you, he shewes that bare succession is no note of the Church; and in his 45. chapter, which you quote, there is nothing that ma∣keth for your question. And lastly, in the 46. chap∣ter he proveth that the New Testament is as severe against fornication as the Old, or rather more: and this may touch the free-hold of that Church which dispenseth with Stewes; but of the point in question he speakes nothing at all. Touching your third Author, S. Cyprian,Cypr. Ep. 52. & 76. in the 52. Epistle cited by you, he perswades Antonianus rather to adhere to Cornelius than Novatianus: and in his 76. Epistle alledged by you, hee shewes that Novatianus succeeding none in that See, was ordained by himselfe, and therefore could bee no true Bishop; but as touching the controversie in question, Ne gry quidem. Touching your fourth Author, Optatus,Optat. advers. Parmen. lib. 2. he hand∣leth not the question, neither maketh any thing at all for you. Lastly,August. Psal. 2. part. Don. & Ep 165. & de Utilit. crednd c. 7. touching S. Austin you cite the second Psalme, and there is nothing handled of the questi∣on: you cite likewise his 165. Epistle, wherein hee declares a succession of Bishops from the Apostles
time to Anastasius:Si ordo Episco∣porum succe∣dentium consi∣deranus est. Ep. 165. p. 751. Proculdubio ab Ecclesiâ Catho∣licâ sumendum exordium. De Utilit. creden∣di. c. 7. Idem contr. Cresc. l 1. c. 33. If (saith he) an orderly successi∣on of Bishops is to be considered. Yea but S. Austin (say you) particularly proves the question, where he tels his friend Honoratus, he must begin his enquirie from the Catholique Church. Hee that told the Manichees, wee must take our Exordium from the Church, told the Donatists like∣wise, wee must resort to that Church for the reso∣lution of our faith, which the sacred Scriptures un∣doubtedly demonstrate to be the true Church: for in them (saith he) we have knowne Christ,Idem Ep. 166. in them wee have knowne the Church. If you can derive your suc∣cession in person and doctrine, from Christ and his Apostles, we will answer you as sometimes S. Au∣stin answered Petilian the Donatist:Idem contr. l. Petil. l. 2. c. 85. Whether of us be Schismatiques we or you? aske you not mee, I will not aske you, let Christ bee asked, that hee may shew us his owne Church. After these severall passages you returne againe to your first Author Tertullian,Tertull. pre∣script. c. 19. and with him you conclude; where it shall appeare that there is the truth of Christian discipline and faith, there shall bee the truth of Scriptures and Expositions. And from hence you infrre, that we are first to seeke the persons that professe the faith, that is, the Church. Whereas in truth his testimony doth rather prove the per∣sons, by the doctrine, than the doctrine by the per∣sons, and ths is most agreeable to his owne Asser∣tion in the third chapter,Idem c. 3. Ex personis probamus fi∣dem, an ex fide personas? As if hee should say, wee plainly prove the persons by the doctrine, not the doctrine by the persons.
Now put on your Spectacles, and take a review of your Authors. The first maketh nothing for you, the second is expressely against you, the third speakes not to the point in question, the fourth and fifth handle the question, but not at all to your ad∣vantage, or our prejudice: and thus you have pro∣duced foureteene severall places out of the ancient Fathers in one page, and all either impertinently, or falsly, or directly against your selfe: by which the Reader may conjecture what is like to bee the issue of your whole worke, who have so grossely falsi∣fied so many authorities in your Epistle, and before the entrance into the body of your booke. From your lame proofes of the Churches authori∣tie, you proceed to the justification of your maimed commandements, viz. in leaving out the second, and altering the fourth in your Breviaries and Psal∣ters. You say you print them in your Bibles, and therefore they are not absolutely left out, as long as they are elsewhere: Mate quod scimus. It is true the words are contained in your Bibles. But Dic quod rogamus, why doe you not publish Gods comman∣dements as hee wrote them? Admit that in your Catechismes you should set downe this forme of Baptisme, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and leave out the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, would it be sufficient to say it is not absolutely left out, be∣cause it is contained in the Bble? Shew mee the man amongst your Papalins that dare alter a Kings command or a Popes Breve, and will your Church attempt more against the Precepts of God, than
against a Popes Bull or a Kings Proclamation? But the truth is, and you know it too well, if the second precept were expressely set downe in your Psalters, the common people would be too busie in expostu∣lating the cause why Image-worship should be com∣manded by the Church, and yet condemned by Gods word. Yea, but it is part of the first commandement (say you) or otherwise it is ceremoniall. Let it bee one or other, since God thought it needfull to be added, how dare you leave it out? It was the voice of God himselfe,Deut. 4.2. You shall not adde unto the word which I command, neither shall you diminish ought from it, that you may keepe the com∣mandement of the Lord your God. Againe, how is it a part of the first if it be ceremoniall, when the first is agreed on all hands to be naturall & morall? The truth is, it is not ceremoniall, but morall, and plainly distinct from the former; for the first for∣bids the true worship of any false god, the second forbids any false worship of the true God; and howsoever Peresius and Catharinus, and you for company, would have gladly the Law against Ima∣ges to be positive and ceremoniall, and so to cease at the comming of Christ; yet your owne Bellar∣mine disavowes it with a Non probatur:Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. c. 7. This opi∣nion is not allowed of us, both for the reasons made against the Jewes, and for that Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and S. Austin, doe all teach that the com∣mandements, excepting the Sabbath, are a Law wholly naturall and morall.
After your Apologie for your maimed comman∣dements, you grow so virulent, as if the poyson of Aspes were under your lips, you crie out, I notoriously falsifie some Authors, and impertinently alledge o∣thers; you charge me with execrable perjurie, you say, I am a framer of lies, and I offend in all kinde of falshood: and lastly, you conclude the booke to bee none of mine, but some Ministers, because you heare it from some, that I scarce skill of ordinarie Latine. I professe for my learning I cannot boast of it; I doe willingly assume that saying of Origen,Gratias ago Deo, quod ig∣norantiam meam non ig∣noro. Orig. 1 Cor. 1.27. Psal. 82. I am not ignorant of my ignorance: but let me tell you, as in Gods cause I seeke no praise, so I feare no re∣proach; for God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; nay more, out of the mouth of babes & sucklings he hath ordained strength, to still the enemie and the avenger. And howsoever seemingly you condemne mee for ignorance, yet I am verily perswaded that if I were more ignorant than you make mee, you would love me the more: for your Church commends Ignorance for the mo∣ther of Devotion: and the rather, because your owne Clemangis tels us,Nich. Clemang. c. 6. before the dayes of reformati∣on, Many Priests who had cure of soules, were sent to their flocks, not from their studies, or from the schoole, but from the plough, and they understood as much La∣tine as Arabick; nay, they could not read, and that which was shamefull, they could not distinguish an Al∣pha from a Beta. Neither can it be denied, that ma∣ny Popes have dispensed with ignorant men, who
per saltum, without any learning, have leaped into a Bshopricke. Pope Paul the third created Rober∣tus Venantius Arch-Bishop of Armach, for two spe∣ciall qualities;Tum quod Missam bellè canere, tum quia cursu Ve∣redario in equo vehi per tè di∣ceretur. Gen∣til. Exam. Con∣cil. Trid l. 2. sess. 1. p. 33. the one, because hee could sing Masse sweetly; the other, because he could ride a Post horse skilfully. And in the latter ages it was so usuall to admit any Ignoramus's into a Bishoprick, that when our King Edward the third sollicited Pope Clement the sixth, to create Thomas Hartfield Bishop of Durham, notwithstanding the Cardinals cried out he was a Lay-man, and an Ideot, the Pope replyed, If the King of England had entreated for his Asse,Si Rex Angliae pro asino suo supplicâsst, votum suum hac vice obti∣nuisset. Wal∣sing. citat. apud Antig. Brit. in vita Joh. Uf∣fordi. And Godwin in his Catal. of Bi∣shops, p 526. Eras. Encom. Mor. Heb. 7.3. he should have obtained it at that time. To come nee∣rer to the times; Julius the third made the keeper of his monkey a Masse-priest, and I presume he had small store of Latine. The Friar who would prove from the words of Christ, An non decem facti sunt mundi? that God made ten worlds, had scrace skill of ordinarie Latine. And lastly, hee was Sr. John Lack-Latine, who would prove that Melchisedeck offered salt with bread and wine, because he read in the text, Rex Salem, which is, the King of peace. I speake not this by way of recrimination, but to let you know, how well you and your fellowes are read in the two titles of the Law, De maledicis, & De Clerico promoto per saltum. Take therefore from me what learning you will, distraine it, and impound it at your pleasure, I will never trouble you with Replevin: on ly I say with S. Austin, Seeke others of more learning, but beware of them that presume of learning.
And whereas you conceive a Minister made my booke, and I beare the name onely for to countenance the worke: If I had received help from some in this kinde, you need not blame me for it, for it is ordi∣narie with your men, to have whole Colledges joyne their helping hand in defence of your cause. But in answer to your supposall, and to vindicate our Ministers from those great aspersion of igno∣rance, of corruption, of obstinacie, of perjurie, laid unto their charge (as Authors of the worke) I witnesse a true confession before God, who knowes I lye not, a Minister was so farre from making my booke,Via Tuta. Via Devia. that I neither had help from Clergy-man nor Lay-man, for composing or making either of my bookes. Let it suffice for me to have said the truth, which although it appeare never so simple, yet it is able to remove a mountaine of learning: if there be in mee, I say not any talent, but onely a mite of a talent, my prayer unto God is, & ever was, it may be bestowed wholly to the honour of his truth, and the benefit of his Church. And whereas you charge mee with obstinacie and malice (which, say you, is the true cause of all my errours) let mee tell you, if I were in an errour, you have not the patience to shew it me, but by bitternesse and railing. Your learning haply may worke miracles in the eares of the un∣learned that cannot judge; but it cannot turne dark∣nesse into light, nor errour into truth. And although your bitternesse might justly occasion that malice, of which you accuse me; yet it is so farre from my
thoughts, that I pitie you, and in requitall of your paines, I pray for you: and that which S. Paul said of the Israelites,Rom. 10.1. I wish to the Romanists and members of your Church, Brethren, my hearts de∣sire and prayer to God is that they may be saved. But (say you) these were not your first fruits, for you translated and published Bertram, an obscure Au∣thor, with a preface of your owne, and thereby gave sufficient triall of your ignorance and corruption, whereof you were convinced by (O.E.) but never clee∣red your selfe of so foule a taxe. It is true that some ten yeeres since I caused Ber∣tram to be reprinted, and published with a preface before it; and it is as true, that hee being a Romish Priest taught our doctrine of the Eucharist above eight hundred yeeres since, and therefore by way of prevention, you terme him an obscure Author, though he were famous in his time. As touching the foule taxe of ignorance and cor∣ruption, in false translting it (wherewith you charge mee) you are much mistaken; for I never translated it, but onely reprinted the old translati∣on: this both hee and you might have seene in the Frontispice of the booke, in these words: Translated and imprinted in the English tongue, Anno Dom. 1549, and now the third time published: so that the Transltion into English was made before I was borne. Againe, in the end of my preface you shall finde these words, Pittie it were but this lamp should receive a new light by reprinting him, which the ini∣quitie of the time had almost extinquished. Now I
pray, Sir, what cause was there of any answer to your namelesse Author, or rather what cause was there of his and your bitternesse, in charging mee with false translating, with ignorance and corrup∣tion? I professe I am not ignorant that your men are guiltie of many such false accusations (ad faci∣endum populum) to make your Proselytes beleeve, that all our bookes are full of lyes; of whom I may truly say, as S. Austin sometimes spake of the Do¦natists, When they cannot by slie and wily cosenage creep like Aspes, with open professed violence they rage like Lions. Lastly (you say) that an Answer to my booke hath hitherto beene deferred, because no man of learning would thinke it worth his paines to make any. Let mee tell you, I have received three printed answers to Via tuta, besides two written copies from namelesse Authors: the first was from a Mer∣chant, and that is called Via verè tuta: the second from a Priest, and that is called A paire of Specta∣cles to see the way: the third is from a Clerk, and that is termed A Whestone of Reproofe. The first printed Author is termed Mr. John Heigham, whose Treatise savours too much of blasphemie and ri∣baldrie: the second is Mr. John Floyd, whose worke is full of bitternesse and subtiltie: the third is Tom Tell troth (for so he termes himselfe) whose pam∣phlet is fraught with all childishnesse and imperti∣nencie. Now if none of these were men of learning, as you confesse (because no learned man would take the paines to answer it) what may I thinke of your
wisdome, which hath returned an answer full of railing accusations (such as the Angell of God would not have brought against the Devill him∣selfe)? I say, in regard your bitter lines are rather a libell without a name, than a Christian and mode∣rate confutation, I might well have declined a re∣plication to it, and have told you with S. Jerome, Your bitternesse deserves rather an answer with scorn,Magis indigna∣tionem scriben∣tis quam stu∣dium. Hieron. advers. Vigil. than a refutation in earnest. But when I considered it was the fruit of your religion, and common practice of your Church, that for want of matter you com∣monly fall upon the person, I resolved with my selfe to call you to a sober reckoning, that the truth of God might appeare, and that by your owne bit∣ternesse, you might better discerne the character of a bad cause, and an evill spirit. For a conclusion take but a short view of your bit∣ter reproaches: you term me a blind Guide, & a Mi∣nisteriall Knight; you say my booke is a Labyrinth of errours; you crie out my sirname hah the two first letters of a lye; you say the title of Sir will be left for me; you condemne me of execrable perjurie; you affirme I am a framer of lyes, and abound in all kind of falshood; you tell me, I scarce understand Latine, and it is conceived a Minister made my booke; you charge me with obstinacie, with malice, with cor∣ruption, with ignorance, with false translating; you proclaime the fearefull judgements of God upon me for perverting soules, and as if I were past all grace, you say I am not capable of any good advice; yet at last (as if you would make mee some amends
for all your accusation) you conclude: I forbeare to say any more, resting howsoever your well wishing friend. Surely you have said enough, and you doe well to forbeare to say more; for I thinke the words of your Epistle are so sufficiently dipt in lye and gall, that they will serve for your whole worke: but I pardon you, and shall returne you no other answer than the Arch-Angell gave to Satan,Jude vers. 9. The Lord re∣buke you: onely let me tell you, I cannot thinke you a well-wishing friend, whose heart and tongue is full of cursing and bitternesse; for I may truly say of you as Cato sometimes said of Lentulus,Dicam falli eos qui negant os habere. Seneca. They are much deceived that deny you to have a mouth (and a foule one too.) In the meane time you must remem∣ber that for your idle and vaine words you must give accompt to God; and for your fifteene seve∣rall falsifications you must give an accompt to your Reader. And thus by way of Traverse and deniall to all other things impertinently alledged, I answer No: to your railing I answer nothing.
AN ANSWER TO HIS PREFACE to the Reader. Good Christian Reader, FIrst thou shalt observe, that the author of the Spectacles chiefe aime is either by shifts and ca∣vils to outface the truth, or by Sophistrie and bitter words to darken it: one while hee cries downe my booke, and slights it in such a scornefull manner, as if it were not worth the answering; another while hee complaines that there is no place in the whole booke,Pag. 205. which is not either falsly or impertinently alledged: one while hee pro∣claimes, that my endevours are poore indeed, and farre short of what is requisite in writing bookes; another while he professeth, It hath somewhat in it
which may draw away an honest-minded man, and that his Catholique friend was stumbled at it. Now what is the reason of these impertinent excursions and contradictions? It was the observation of an∣cient Maxentius: Heretiques when they finde them∣selves not able to yeeld a reason of their wilfulnesse, then they fall into plaine railing. And certainly such is the bitternesse of this Author, that were I per∣swaded Pythagoras transmigration of soules into other mens bodies, had beene true; I should be∣leeve that the soule of Rabshekah had beene trans∣ported into his body: for otherwise if he had but a graine of charitie, hee would never spurne a blinde man (for so he termes me) when Christian charitie teaches him another lesson. If he were well versed in Antiquities, hee would never have cited so many places of ancient Fathers falsly and impertinently in one page, and yet condemne others of ignorance (and falsification) in the Fathers. If hee were well read in the Booke of Wisdome (I meane, in the sa∣cred Scriptures) he would never have replyed with such scorne and disdaine; for without doubt the Apostle spake to Mr. Lloyd the Romanist, as well as to the rest of the Romans:Rom. 11.3. Not to thinke of him∣selfe more highly than he ought to thinke, but soberly, according as God hath dealt to everie man the mea∣sure of faith. Hee that accuseth another man of ignorance, of lying, of malice, of execrable perjurie, and the like, had need be a man himselfe without all exception; yet if wee may beleeve the Doctors of his owne
Church, he is guiltie of these and much more: wit∣nesse the Sorbonicall censure at Paris, wherein Hal∣lier and Aurelius accuse him of lying,Aurelius in li∣bri sui titulo. Hallier in Ad∣monit. ad Lect. p. 8, 9. of ignorance, of heresie, of profane scurrilitie, of blasphemie and im∣pietie, of furious, filthy, and devillish railing, of un∣sufferable arrogancie, and the like: and as touching his bitter accusations, it seemes it is his accustomed manner of writing, witnesse his Spongia written against the Sorbonists,Aurelius in Vindiciis. p. 385. under the title of Hermannus Laemilius, otherwise discovered to be John Floyd: I say he hath drencht his sponge in that gall of bitter∣nesse (such charitie and unitie is there amongst them∣selves) that I may truly say of him, as the Spartans sometimes said of the Theban Oratour; If he think as he writes, his ignorance is desperate; if otherwise, his conscience is seared. To give you a taste of the manner of his writing: when I cite authorities that are pregnant, and be∣yond his just exception, hee spares my person, and condemnes the Authors themselves, and complaines they are branded with the note of heresie and sin∣gularitie: when as in truth they are branded onely by their Inquisitors, for speaking against the errors of their Trent Doctrine, being otherwise, knowne members of the Roman Church. When I cite an Author of our owne, as namely, B. Usher, for translating Aelfricks Homily out of the Saxon tongue, one while hee cries out, Ushers corruptions are laid open to the world: another while he tels mee, I tooke the words from Usher, be∣cause I understood not Latine, or perhaps because I
would be loth not to follow any errours or corruptions that come in my way: and thus hee spends about ten pages, sometimes inveying against our reverend and renowned Bishop, sometimes against mee, for false translating Aelfrick out of Latine, when as the Latine cited by B. Usher in the margent,See B. Ushers answer to the Jesuites chal∣lenge, chap. of the Reall presence. which hee takes to be Aelfricks, is the Latine of Bertram, and not Aelfricks, whose was translated out of the Saxon tongue, and not out of the Latine. Againe, when I cite an Author of his side, as namely, Petrus Crinitus, for taking down of Images in Churches, he stretches his throat, & makes this hi∣deous exclamation:Pag. 303. For your authorities of the Com∣mon Law, there are so many foule faults committed by you, that I know not where to begin: then hee tax∣eth me with leaving out two principall words (Hu∣mi & solo) whereas the Author, which I cite, hath no such words: I render the place truly as I finde it, I put not to him, I take not from him, I alter not one letter of his words or meaning, and yet he cries out, the faults are so many, that I know not where to begin. Againe, when I cite ten or twelve Authors for our Communion in both kindes, for our prayer in a knowne tongue, and the like: for most of them he sends me to Bellarmine for an answer, & for the rest (saith he) Ile question you. Then he complaines of falsifications, when as in fine, the Exception is a∣gainst the translation of some poore word (This) for (That): and when he is destitute of any colour of answer, his last refuge is this, The book is prohibited.
As touching my Englishing of Latine Authors, I confesse I have not translated whole sentences ad literam; for I intended not a volume, but a ma∣nuell: yet I ever faithfully render the true sense and meaning of the Author. Well, what exception could he take to this?Pag. 52. One while hee confesseth I set downe the Latine truly, but I doe not translate it literally: another while hee cries out: It will not serve your turne,Pag. 224. to say you place it in the English as you place it in the Latine, for in translation the sense is chiefly to be regarded. Pag. 459.Lastly, hee protesteth for himselfe, that hee hath declined no Author, either moderne or ancient; when as it will appeare, he sends many of them to Bellar∣mine for an answer; others he rejects, as condem∣ned by the Index Expurgatorius; others hee de∣clines, as unworthy of his answer, by slighting them, or otherwise passeth by them, as children use to doe; when they cannot read, they thinke it best to skip over. To say nothing of his Elenchs, his Sophismes, his Sophistry, his Fallacies, which are many, I will trace him in his steps (God willing) laying a∣side all bitternesse and railing accusations. In the meane time I will say with the Prophet David: Plead thou my cause,Psal. 35.1. oh Lord, with them that strive with me: for the flouds are risen, the flouds lift up their voyce,Psal. 93.4, 5. the flouds lift up their waves, the waves of the sea are mightie, and rage horribly; but yet the Lord that dwelleth on high is mightier.
An Answer to J. R. his booke called A paire of Spectacles. CHAP. I. The Summe of his Answer to my first Chapter. IN this his first Chapter, hee endevoureth princi∣pally to prove, that the Articles of the Roman Creed, published by Pope Pius the fourth, were anciently received, though newly defined by the Councell of Trent: for proofe, he instanceth in the first Councell of Nice, and compareth that Coun∣cell and their Creed with this of Trent: hee proceeds by way of recrimination to question the 39. Articles of our Church; he accuseth us for corrupting and mis∣interpreting the Scriptures, for declining Traditions, Fathers, and Councels: hee excuseth their Index Ex∣purgatorius, and accuseth us for falsifying the Fathers: and lastly, he concludeth with the doctrine of implicite faith: and this is the substance and contents of his an∣swer to my first Chapter. All which, and whatsoever else is materially contained therein, and the rest of his se∣ctions following, I will take into severall parts distinct∣ly, and returne him a moderate answer. The Reply to Mr. Lloyd. FIrst, touching your Trent Creed, you complaine that according to the common fashion of our
Ministers, by way of derision, I divide it into twelve points, as it were into twelve Articles, which (say you) he and they might with as much reason di∣vide it into foure and twentie. Here you begin to quarrell at your first en∣trance, but I hope you will gladly forgive us this wrong; for if wee accuse your Trent Fathers, for coyning twelve Articles in stead of foure and twentie, they and you are more beholding to us, for laying the lesser number to your charge: and yet if you please to review them, you shall finde they fall most naturally within the number of twelve. But you would know what difference there is betwixt the Councell of Nice, and the Councell of Trent, and their two Creeds. Let mee tell you, if ever the proverb held true (Comparisons are odious) it holds betwixt the two Councels, and their two Creeds: the Councell of Trent is not worthy to be named the day wherein the Councell of Nice is mentioned. That famous Councell of Nice was the first, and best generall Assembly, after the Apostles time, that was sum∣moned in the Christian world: it had in it 318. Bi∣shops, Totius orbis terrarum lumina, (saith Victori∣nus) amongst whom were the foure Patriarchs of the Easterne and Westerne Churches. It was called by the first and best Christian Emperour,Quasi serva∣tor & medi∣cus animarum. Euseb. in vita Constant. orat. 3. c. 10. Constan∣tine the Great, who was Vocalissimus Dei praeco, and (as it were) the Preserver and Physitian of our soules, (saith Eusebius.) This Emperour exhorted
the Fathers and Bishops of that Councell,Omni igitur seditiosâ con∣tentione depul∣sâ, literarum divinitùs in∣spiratarum te∣stimoniis res in quaestionem ad∣ductas dissol∣vamus. Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 7. p. 208. to lay aside seditious contention, and resolve all doubts and questions by the testimonies of divine Scriptures: and accordingly they framed their Creed out of the doctrine of the Apostles, and all who were not of the Arrian faction did assent and agree to it (saith Theodoret.) Now take a view of your Trent Councell, and compare them together. Your Councell of Trent, like Demetrius Assembly, was summoned by Pope Paul the third, without a lawfull calling; the three Patriarchs of Constantinople, of Antioch, of Alex∣andria, refused to be present; the Legates of the Kingdome of Denmark, of Suetia, and the Duke∣dome of Prusia, were all absent, and returned their answer, that theGravamina opposita, Con∣cil. Trid. Cau∣sa. 1. pag. 21. Pope had no right to call a Coun∣cell. Our QueeneEpit. rerum in orbe gest. sub Ferd. 1. ann. 1561. apud Scard. tom. 3. p. 2171. E Belgio in In∣sulam trajicere prohibuit. ibid. Elizabeth of blessed memory, disavowed the Councell, in so much that when the Pope sent Hieronymus Martinengus, as Legate into England, to summon our Bishops, shee would not suffer him to land, or set his foot on her Domini∣ons. The French King signifieth by his Legate James Amiot, that hee for his part, neither held it for a generall, not yet for a lawfull Councell; but for a private Conventicle: and accordingly hee wrote, Conventui Tridentino. The Emperour,Innoc Gentil. sess. 12. and Hist. of Trent, l 4. p. 319. Illyric. in Pro∣test. contr. Concil. Trid. Charles the fifth, declared by his Embassadour, Hurtado Mendoza, in the name of the whole Em∣pire, that the Bishops wholly hanging at the Popes bcke, had no authoritie to make lawes, in causes of re∣formation of religion and manners. Andreas Dudi∣thius,
the Bishop of five Churches,Dudith. in Ep. ad Maximil. 2. de Calice, & Sacerdotum conjugio. told the Em∣perours Maximilian and Ferdinand, that the Trent Fathers were like a paire of countrey Bag-pipes; which unlesse they were still blowne into, could make no musick. The Holy Ghost had nothing to doe with that Councell, and therefore they could create no new Articles of faith. Your historie of Trent tels us,The historie of Trent. the Spirit was sent in a Carriers cloak∣bag from Rome to Trent; but when there fell store of raine, the Holy Ghost could not come before the flouds were abated, and so it fell out, that the Spirit was not carried upon the waters (as wee read in Genesis) but besides them. Looke upon your Bishops, they were but fortie and two at the first meeting, and two of them titular; the rest, for the most part (saith Du∣dithius) were but hirelings,Andr. Dudith. ut suprà. young men, and beard∣lesse, hired and procured by the Pope, to speake as hee would have them. To say nothing of those Empe∣rours (who called the first and best Councels) and were present in person, when as the Popes send but their Legates:Euseb. in vitâ Constant. orat. 3. c. 16. Ego intereram Concilio (saith Con∣stantine) I was present at the Councell amongst you, as one of you. Touching his Imperiall seat in the Councell,Ibid. c. 10. his throne was very great and passed all the rest (saith Eusebius:) whereas there is no grea∣ter distance in the time,Advertendum, quod locus ubi sedet Impera∣tor, non sit al∣tior loco ubi te∣net pedes Pon∣tifex. Liber. Ceremon. l. 2. c. 2. than there is now difference in the places; for the Emperour is allowed but to sit at the Popes foot-stoole; and it is (specially) to bee noted (saith your booke of ceremonies) that the place whereupon the Emperour sitteth, may bee no higher than the place where the Pope setteth his feet.
Your Councell of Trent hath made many decrees for reformation of manners, but did they ever re∣forme this abuse, and restore the ancient custome? You then that are so confident in equalling those two Councels, doe you thinke there is no difference betwixt a conventicle and a generall Councell? be∣twixt a Councell lawfully called, and one summo∣ned by usurpation? betwixt a late Councell, held in a corner of the world, in the worst age, and an an∣cient Councell, in a most famous citie, held in the most flourishing age? betwixt a Councell that layes her sole foundation in the Scriptures, and one that builds her first Article of faith upon Traditi∣ons?Bulla Pii 4. Art. 1. betwixt a Councell approved by the whole Christian world, and one that is disclaimed by most Christian Kings and Bishops, and the major part of Christendome? But you would further know a difference be∣twixt their two Creeds. Let me tell you in briefe. When a Romanist, like your selfe, would needs know of a Protestant, the difference betwixt his religion and ours,Subesse Roma∣no Pontifici omni humanae creaturae decla∣ramus, dicimus, definimus & pronunciamus omninò esse de necessitate sa∣lutis. Bonifac. 8. in Extr. de Major. & O∣bed. cap. Unam sanctam. because both beleeved the Catholike Church in the Creed; the Protestant made answer, that wee beleeve the Catholike faith contained in the Creed, but doe not beleeve the thirteenth Article which the Pope put to it: when the Romanist was desirous to see that Article, the Extravagant of Pope Boniface was brought, wherein it was declared to be altogether of necessitie of salvation, for everie humane creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome. This thirteenth
Article in your Trent Creed (besides the newnesse of the rest) makes a great difference (Mr. Lloyd) be∣twixt the two Creeds; and the rather, because it is flat contrarie to the decree of the Nicene Councell, besides many other differences, as shall appeare hereafter. But (say you) they agree in this, that as the Arri∣ans of those times cryed out against that Creed, as be∣ing new, and having words not found in Scripture; for example, Consubstantiation: so our Protestants cry out against the Trent profession of faith, for the same reasons of noveltie, and words not found in Scripture; as for example, Transubstantiation. It is true, the Arrians at the time of the Coun∣cell cryed out against the Nicene Creed, for defi∣ning the word Consubstantiall, or Coessentiall, as be∣ing new: but it is as true they complained without a cause; for long before that time the word was used by Origen, and other ancient Fathers, as ap∣peares by Socrates:Doctos quos∣dam ex veteri∣bus & illustres Episcopos Ho∣mousii dictione usos esse cogno∣vimus, Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. August. contr. Maxim. l. 3. c. 14. Wee know (saith he) that of the old writers, certaine learned men, and famous Bishops have used the word : and accordingly it was resolved by S. Austin, that the name was not inven∣ted, but confirmed and established in the Councell of Nice. The word therefore Consubstantiall was not new, which they complained of, but the word Transubstantiation is so new, that it was altogether unknowne till the Councell of Lateran,Concil. Latera∣nense, Anno 1215. Bellarm. 1200. yeeres after Christ; & therefore your comparison holds not in the first place. But admit the Coun∣cell
had first devised the word,Quomodo di∣cis in Scriptu∣ris divinis , non inveniri? quasi aliud sit , quàm quod dicit, Ego de Deo patre exivi, &, Ego & Pater u∣num sumus. Ambros. de fide contra Arrian. Tom. 2. c. 5. p. 223. in initio. August. Ep. 174. . Athanas. Ep. quod decret. Synod. Nic. Congruis ver∣bis sunt expo∣sita. Nihil resert hanc vocem non esse in Scripturâ, si vex id signifi∣cat quod Scriptura do∣cet. Vas. in 1. Thom. Tom. 2. Disp. 110. c. 1. sect. 4. yet it is agreed on all hands, that the meaning of the word is contai∣ned in Scripture. S. Ambrose writing against the Arrians, puts to them this very question: How doe you say the word Consubstantiall is not in divine Scrip∣tures, as if Consubstantiall were any thing else, but I went out from the Father, and, the Father and I are one: the word therefore was a pregnant word, a∣greeable to the sacred word of God. And albeit (saith S. Austin) the word perhaps be not found there, yet the thing it selfe is found: and what more frivolous quarrell is it, than to contend about the word, when there is certaintie of the thing it selfe? In like man∣ner Athanasius answered the Arrians in those dayes, as I must answer you: Touching the word , albeit it be not found in Scriptures, yet it hath the same meaning that the Scriptures intend, and im∣ports the same with them whose eares are entirely affe∣cted towards religion. We cry not out against you simply, because your word Transubstantiation is not found in the Scrip∣tures, but because the true sense and meaning of the word is not contained in them; for the words Unbe∣gotten, Increate, the word Sacrament, the word Tri∣nitie, and the like, are not found in Scripture; yet wee teach them, wee beleeve them, because their true sense and meaning may bee deduced from the Scripture: and we professe with your Jesuite Vas∣ques, Nihil refert, &c. It mattereth not whether the word be in Scripture or no, so as that which it signi∣fieth be in the Scripture.
To come neerer to you: doe you but prove that the words, This is my body, imply Transubstantiati∣on, and let me be branded for an Arrian, if I refuse to subscribe to it: but that the world may know we condemne you justly, both for the newnesse of the word, and your doctrine also; hearken to the learned Doctors of your owne Church. Your Schoole-man Scotus tels us, that before the Councell of Lateran,Bellarm. l. 3. de Euchar. c. 23. Transubstantiation was not beleeved as a point of faith. It is true, your fellow Jesuites are ashamed of this confession, and there∣upon Bellarmine answers:Ibid. This opinion of his is no way to bee allowed:Suarez in 3. Tom. in Euch. disp. 70. sect. 2. and Suarez, not content with such a sober reckoning, proclaimes that for his lowd speaking hee ought to be corrected: and as touching the words of consecration, from whence you would inferre both the name & nature of Transubstantia∣tion,Mont. in Luk. 22. your Arias Montanus saith, This is my body, that is, my body is sacramentally contained in the Sa∣crament of bread: and (hee addes withall) the secret and most mysticall manner hereof, God will once vouchsafe more clearely to unfold to his Christian Church. The doctrine therefore of your carnall and corporall presence is not so cleerely derived from the Scriptures: nay on the contrarie hee pro∣testeth, that the body of our Saviour is but sacra∣mentally contained in the Sacramen (as the Prote∣stants hold) and therefore not bodily. It is more than evident, that the word Consub∣stantiation (used by the Fathers) was derived from the Scriptures, but you have not that infallible assu∣rance
for your word Transubstantiation, witnes your Cardinall Cajetan,Caet. in Thom. part. 3. q. 75. art. 1. he assures us that there appeareth nothing out of the Gospel, that may inforce us to un∣derstand Christs words properly: yea nothing in the text hindereth, but that these words [This is my body] may as well be taken in a metaphoricall sense, as those words of the Apostle, The Rocke was Christ: that the words of either proposition may well bee true, though the things there spoken be not understood in a proper sense, but in a metaphoricall sense onely. Nay more, your Jesuite Suarez confesseth,Suarez Tom. 3. disp. 46. that this Cardinall (in his Commentary upon this Article) doth af∣firme, that those words of Christ [This is my body] doe not of themselves sufficiently prove Transub∣stantiation, without the authoritie of the Church: and therefore by the command of Pope Pius the fifth, that part of his Commentary is sponged out of the Romish Edition. Thus one while you correct your Au∣thors, another while you purge them for delivering the truth in our behalfe. Look upon your Cardinall Bellarmine; although he will not allow that sense which the Lutherans give,Bell. de Euch. l. 3. c. 19. yet hee granteth that those words [This is my body] may imply either such a reall change of the bread, as the Catholiques hold; or such a figurative change, as the Calvinists hold. And although hee would seeme to prove that the words of Scripture are so plaine, that they may compell a refractorie man to beleeve them, yet having well weighed the reasons and allegations of other Schoole-men, at last concludes: It may justly be doubted,Bell. de Euch. l. 3. c. 23. whether the
text be cleere enough to inforce it, seeing men sharp and learned (such as Scotus was) have thought the contrary. How therefore your Church should ground a point of faith upon a doubtfull opinion, or on such words as by the testimonies of your best learned Divines may receive a double construction, I leave it to be judged. But farther in proofe of Pope Pius Creed, I could urge Sr. Humfrey (say you) with the 39. Articles appointed by the authoritie of the Church of England, to be uniformely taught by all Ministers, which they are to sweare unto; which Articles, though they be in∣deed new coyned, as the foundation of a new Church, yet Sr. Humfrey being his mothers Champion, will not (I suppose) yeeld her, or her doctrine to bee new. Thus you. It is true as you say, there are 39. Articles ap∣pointed by our Church, to bee uniformely taught by all Ministers: and it is as true that they are publi∣shed and received with unitie and consent (which your men acknowledge for a proper marke of the true Church.) And withall, let me adde this one thing for your observation (and indeed it is a thing remarkable) whereas all your Trent Articles have beene questioned, and confuted by Chemnitius, Chamierus, Gentilletus, and other Protestant wri∣ters, yet there was never any Papist could goe far∣ther, than to tell us, as you doe, I could urge you with the novelty of the 39. Articles. I say, never as yet did any Romanist attempt, much lesse was able to confute and overthrow our Articles, which stand
like a house built upon a rocke, immoveable, and cannot be shaken. Let me tell you further, your comparisons betwixt our Articles and yours doe not hold; for all your Articles are fundamentall points to your Trent be∣leevers, and the deniall of any of them makes them heretiques, and damned persons, as your Popes Bull expressely declareth. On the other side,Bulla Pii quarti. some of our Articles concerne the discipline of the Church, and are not essentiall to salvation; others concerne the ancient and latter heresies, wherein we teach the negative, and those are not properly Ar∣ticles of faith which we beleeve, but points of do∣ctrine which wee condemne, and beleeve not. And that you may know our Articles are not new, nor newly coyned by our men; if you will put on your spectacles, you shall finde that most of our prime Articles are taught and received by your owne Church, as well as ours; and therefore I hope you will confesse they are not coyned, and built upon the foundation of a new Church. Briefly touching our 39. Articles. The first sort are in the Affirmative, both ours and yours; and all those are uniformely received by both Chur∣ches. The second sort are ours onely, which we af∣firme, and you deny: and those are very few in number, and are evidently deduced from the Scrip∣ture. The third sort are yours, which we deny, and you affirme; and for that cause you terme our re∣ligion negative; and those remaine for you to make good. Joyne therefore those negative Articles,
which are wholly yours, to those positive Articles which you hold with us, and you shall easily dis∣cerne (if the denomination followeth the greater part) those Articles may most properly bee termed Articles of your faith; for I dare confidently avow that of the 39. Articles, there are above 35. yours, that is, either such which you hold with us, which are at least twentie, or such wherein the affirmative is yours, and not ours, which are at least fifteene: take therefore your owne libertie, either confute ours, or make good your owne, & herbam porri∣gemus, and I will give you the bucklers. You proceed, and upon a false supposall, that our Church hath created new Articles, you proclaime in the name of your owne Church these words: We teach that for Articles of faith, the Church can make none, as she cannot write a Canonicall booke of Scrip∣ture. Thus you. When Diogenes saw a supposed Bastard casting stones in a presse of much people, he gave the boy this caveat: Take heed lest thou hit thy father. This is like to bee your case; for by this Tenet you will wound the Church your Mother, and amongst o∣thers you will surely hit your holy Father the Pope. It appeares first, that you endevoured to shew, that your Church hath created no new Articles of faith, but for want of solid proofes you begin to faint, and thinke it the safest way to turne Prote∣stant in this point, and say, the Church can create none: but I wonder how you dare pronounce in
the name of the Church (we teach) whereas in truth your Church teacheth it not. This is therefore but a cunning device of yours, to dazle the eyes of the ignorant with your false glasses, and to make them beleeve it is the generall Tenet of your Church; and then you thinke they will conclude ac∣cording to your Assertion: Ergo, The Church hath created none; when as your saying makes more strongly against you, if either your Articles prove new, or the Pope and his Agents professe the contrarie. Mr. Heigham, who first answered my Book,Mr. Heigham in his answer called Via verè tuta, pag. 199. & 200. was a member of your Church, and he cries aluod, that the Church hath power to decree, and promulgate new articles of faith: But your third Replyer, Tom Tell-troth, in his Whetstone of Reproofe, thought it the wisest way to decline the question; for hee knew well when you were both at odds, and taught flat contrarie doctrine each to other, the Whetstone of necessitie would belong to one of his fellow writers. But to let passe such differences amongst your selves; bee it spoken to your comfort, Friar Walden, about two hundred yeares agoe, affirmed the same that you doe,Waldens doct. Fidei. Tom. 1. l. 2. Art. 2. c. 22. p. 203. viz. that the Church could not create a new article of faith: How can any such article (saith he) framed after many yeares, be catho∣lique and universall, when as it was unknowne to our fore-fathers for foureteen hundred yeares before? It was not beleeved, because not heard of, when the Apo∣stle tels us, faith commeth by hearing. Such an arti∣cle therefore, although it be of faith, yet it cannot be
catholique: and this hee proves directly from Fa∣thers and Councels. And whereas you affirme, that your Church can no more make an article of faith, than shee can make a Canonicall Booke of Scripture;Canus loc. Theol. l. 2. c. 7. p. 38. Canus, your Bishop of Canaries, will joyne with you, That the Church of the faithfull now living cannot write a Canonicall Booke of Scrip∣ture: and hee gives the reason for it; There are not now any new revelations to be expected, i∣ther from the Pope, or from a Councell, or from the universall Church: and from hence it will follow of consequence by your owne Logick; Therefore the Church can create no new article of faith. Thus farre I have waded in your behalfe, that you may the better justifie your owne Assertion; for you wil find your Church is like a house divided against it selfe (and therefore cannot stand long). I say that Quere which was made in Waldens dayes, was resolved above two hundred yeares before by your profound Schoole-man Thomas Aquinas, in your Churches behalfe, that the Pope had power Condere articulos fidei, to create new articles of faith; to remove therefore these fig-leaves with which you would cover the naked truth: This learned Doctour well understood that there were many new articles of religion crept into the Church in his dayes; he knew well, that (albeit he were the prime Schoole-man of his time) yet with all his sophistrie hee could not make them comply with the ancient Catholique faith: and thereupon
he thought it the surest way, to give the Pope an absolute and independant power over faith and re∣ligion, and accordingly resolved,Ad solam au∣thoritatem summi Pontifi∣cis pertinet no∣va Editio Sym∣boli, sicut & alia omnia quae pertinent ad to∣tam Ecclesiam. Thom 2.2. q. 1. Art. 10. It belongs onely to the authoritie of the Soveraigne Pope, to make a new Edition of the Creed, and all things else that con∣cerne the universall Church: Then he concludes the question, and gives this reason for it; The publishing of a new Creed belongs to his power who hath autho∣ritie finally to determine matters of faith: and this (saith he) belongs unto the Pope. Upon which pas∣sages Andradius, a chiefe pillar of your Trent Coun∣cell, confesseth, that the Bishops of Rome,Romanos Pon∣tifices, multa definiendo quae anteà latita∣bant, Symbo∣lum Fidei au∣gere consue vis∣se. Andrad. Def. Concil. Trid. lib. 2. in defining many things which had beene formerly hidden, have been accustomed to increase their Creed. Now what thinke you of your Aquinas position, and your Andradius confession? I hope you perceive that your learned Schoole-men are of another opinion: And that you may know that your Church doth not approve your pretended Tenet for Catholique doctrine; hearken and consider, what your holy Father the Pope declareth, touching this question, and then consider in what case you stand. Pope Leo the tenth sent out his Bull against Luther,Certum est in manu Ecclesiae aut Papae pror∣sus non esse statuere arti∣culos fidei. Tom. 4. Conc. Par. 2. in Bulla Leon. 10. in fne Lateran. Conc. novissi∣mi. p. 135. and amongst other articles, he chargeth him in particu∣lar with this, that Luther should say, It is certaine that it is no way in the power of the Church or Pope to ordaine articles of faith. This you see is Luthers Te∣net, and this is yours. Now what exception (think you) might the Pope take at this your Assertion? Behold, for this and the like Tenets, he thundereth Anathema against him; hee declareth this with the
rest of his Articles to be a pestiferous, pernicious, scandalous, and seducing errour to well-minded men; he protesteth, it was contrarie to all charitie, contrarie to the reverence of the holy Church, and mysteries of faith, and in conclusion condemnes all his Articles as hereticall,Inhibentes in virtute sanctae obedientiae, ac sub majoris ex∣communicatio∣nis latae sen∣tentiae. Ibid. p. 136. forbids them to be received by vertue of holy obedience, and under paine of the graund Excommunication. You have heard the sentence of your Lord Pa∣ramount, and by it you may know your owne doome. If you hold with Luther, you are in dan∣ger of Excommunication, and stand as a condem∣ned heretique by his Holinesse with the Luthe∣rans: If you forsake your hold, you have lost your faith: And thus you have a wolfe by the eares, you stand in danger whether you hold him, or let him goe. I wonder that you, having taken so long a time to answer so poore a Work, and having many Assistants for the composing of it, they and you could be all ignorant of the Popes infallible Bull. Your Cardinall Bellarmine,Quasi Ecclesia posterioris tem∣poris aut dese∣rit esse Eccle∣sia, aut facul∣tatem non ha∣beat explican∣di, & decla∣randi, constitu∣endi etiam & jubendi quae ad fidem & mores Christianos pertinent. Bell. in Barcl. who in these latter times hath laboured more than any other, to up∣hold your new Articles of faith; yet in obedience to the Pope, and saving all advantages to his cause, when (in the question of deposing Kings) he failed of antiquitie and proofe out of Scriptures and Fa∣thers, at last returnes this peremptorie answer; As if the Church of these latter times had ceased to be a Church, or had not power to explaine and declare, yea to ordaine and command those things, which apper∣taine to faith and Christian manners: and that you
may know that you and your Co-adjutors stand single in opinion against the Pope and his Cardi∣nals, your Jesuite Salmeron will shew you, that it stands with great reason to make additions in essen∣tiall points of faith:Doctrina fidei admittit addi∣tionem in es∣sentialibus. Salm. Tom. 13. Disp 6. Par. 3. §. Est ergo. Idem Disp. 8. and hee gives this answer for it: Because nature is not capable of all truths at one time: and from this and the like reasons he con∣cludes, therefore there may be new traditions concer∣ning faith and manners, though they were never cre∣ated, or declared by the Apostles. Thus you see the unitie amongst your selves: and howsoever these positions may seeme strange to you and others of your opinions, yet your School-men and Lawyers have played the Popes Mid∣wives: yea, Pope Leo the tenth hath put to his helping hand, to deliver your Pope Pius the fourth of that issue, I meane, those new borne Articles, of which your Church hath so long time before tra∣vailed. Briefly let mee tell you, your Articles are detected by your owne men to be grandement su∣spicious of new coynage; and if for no other cause, yet for this alone, they give a just occasion and jea∣lousie, when such poore shifts and evasions are de∣vised by your Pope and his adherents, to make them good: for it is a true saying of a renowned Bishop, and it is the faith of all reformed Catholiques:B. Morton, Grand Impost. cap. 2. sect. 2. He can onely make an article of faith who can create a soule, and after make a Gospel to save that soule, and then give unto that soule the gift of faith to beleeve that Gospel. I proceed to your doctrine: That is onely to bee
called a new faith (say you) which is cleane of ano∣ther kind, that is differing or disagreeing from that was taught before. Thus you. I will not take advantage of your first Assertion, that your faith is grounded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles (which you can never prove;) but wil joyne issue with you upon your last Assumpsit, That is only to be called a new faith, which is cleane of another kind, and is different & disagree∣ing from what was taught before: but such are ma∣ny of the Articles of Pope Pius the fourth, extra∣cted from the Councell of Trent, as shall appeare by proofes at large in their proper places. In the meane time let me tell you, your Church teacheth not onely Novè, but Nova, not onely Praeter, but Contra, even besides, and contrarie to that which she first received from the ancient Church: so that howsoever you seeke to darken truth by faire and specious pretences, yet in truth your Trent Additi∣ons are forraine to the faith, as neither principles nor conclusions of it. And that you may know and acknowledge with us, that your Trent faith is dif∣fering and disagreeing from what was taught be∣fore; I pray call to mind your owne confessions touching these particular Articles of your Roman Church. Your doctrine touching Lay-peoples communi∣cating under one kind (namely in bread onely) is an Article of the Roman faith, and now generally taught and practised in the Roman Church: but this practice, by your owne confession, is different and
disagreeing from what was taught before: for you say, pag. 253. touching the Authors which you bring for proofe, That it was the common practice of the Church, for the Laytie to communicate in both kinds. I allow of their authoritie. Your Prayer and Service in an unknown tongue, as it is now used in the Roman Church, by your owne confession is different and disagreeing from what was taught before; for, say you pag. 270. It is true, that Prayer and Service in the vulgar tongue was used in the first and best ages, according to the precept of the Apostles, and practice of the Fathers. In the beginning it was so. Your doctrine of Transubstantiation, which at this day is generally received, de substantia fidei, for an Article of Faith, yet by your owne confessi∣on is different and disagreeing from what was taught before; for, say you pag. 167. Transubstan¦tiation might well be said not to have beene, de sub∣stantia fidei, in the Primitive Church, (as Yribarne speaketh) because it had not beene so plainly delivered nor determined in any Councell, till Gregorie the se∣venth his time: and this was above a thousand yeares after Christ. Your private or solitarie Masse, wherein the Priests doe daily communicate without the people, is by your own confession different and disagreeing from what was taught before and practised; for, say you pag. 191. They say (speaking of divers Au∣thors) it was the practice of the Primitive Church to communicate everie day with the Priest. I grant it.
These points of controversie, which are so ea∣gerly pursued by your men against the members of our Church, the strength and force of truth hath extorted from you, and therefore I may truly con∣clude Ex ore tuo, from your owne confession, that your Trent faith is new, because it is different and disagreeing from what was taught before. You that have taken an oath to maintaine the Pa∣pacie, and are so ready to teach others, you (I say) have either violated your oath, or at leastwise have forgot your old lesson, Oportet esse memorem, &c. for verily it behoves him that speakes lyes and contradictions to have a good memorie. But it seemes you did conceive the Reader might easily passe by many such contradictions, being in severall passages, and farre distant pages. For otherwise it would seeme strange, that you, which so bitterly in∣veigh against our reformed religion, should con∣fesse the antiquitie of our Articles, and the noveltie of your owne, with flat contradictions to your owne Assertions. I will say to you therefore, as sometimes St. Hierome spake in his Epistle to Pa∣machius and Oceanus;Hieronym. ad Pamach. & Oceanum, Tom. 2. Thou who art a maintainer of new doctrine, whatsoever thou be, I pray thee spare the Romane eares, spare the faith that is com∣manded by the Apostles mouth, why goest thou about now after foure hundred yeares (I may say foureteen hundred yeares) to teach us that faith which we before never knew? why bringest thou forth that thing that Peter and Paul never uttered? Evermore untill this day the Christiam world hath beene without this do∣ctrine.
To pursue the rest of your Allegations: The Church of England (say you) admitteth of divers Books of the New Testament for Canonicall, whereof there was doubt of three or foure hundred yeares to∣gether in the Church of God, as the Epistle to the He∣brewes, the second Epistle of St. Peter, the Epistle of St. Jude, the Apocalyps of St. John, and some others, which were after admitted for Canonicall; I would know of him whether upon the admittance of them, there were any change of faith in the Church, or whe∣ther ever those books have received any change in themselves. Thus you. It seemes you begin to feare that your Trent faith would be discovered to be different and dis∣agreeing from what was taught before, and there∣upon you would seemingly illustrate the antiquitie of your new Articles by the authoritie of the anci∣ent Books of Canonicall Scripture. But, I pray, where doe you find that the Books of the New Testament, as namely, the Epistle to the Hebrewes, the Epistle of St. Peter, and St. Jude, and the Apo∣calyps, were not received (for three or foure hundred yeares) for Canonicall? It is true there was some doubt who were the right Authors of those Books, but their divine authoritie was ever generally ap∣proved by all Christian Churches, and allowed for Canonicall. The Epistle to the Hebrewes was therefore doubted of by some, because the diffe∣rence & diversity of the stile made them think it not to be St. Pauls; and by others, because the Author of it seemed to them to favour the error of the No∣vatian
heretikes, in denying the reconciliation of such as fall after Baptisme: The second Epistle of St. Peter (which you speake of) some doubted of, because of the diversitie of the style: The Epistle of St. Jude was doubted, because the Author of it hath borrowed both the matter and manner of writing from St. Peter, and therfore he was thought some scholar of theirs, but no Apostle. Others said he brought in a profane Author, concerning the strife of the Arch-angell and the Devill about the body of Moses, which cannot be found in Canoni∣call Scripture. Lastly, the Revelation of St. John was likewise doubted of; first, because of the no∣veltie of the title of John the Divine: secondly, because of the difficultie and obscuritie of his Pro∣phecies. These and the like reasons were motives to some in the Church, to question the Authors of those Books: but it was never generally impea∣ched. For further proofe of this Assertion, let an∣tiquitie be heard, and it will appeare, that all those Bookes were cited for doctrine of faith, by the writers of the first ages, and consequently were approved from, and after the dayes of the Apo∣stles.Hieronym.  Dardan, de terra repro∣missionis, Ep. 129. p. 1105. Looke upon St. Hierome, he proclaimes it to the Church, Illud nostris dicendum est. Be it known to our men, that the Epistle to the Hebrewes is not only received by all the Churches of the East, that now presently are, but by all Ecclesiasticall writers of the Greek Churches, that have beene hereto∣fore; as the Epistle of Paul, (though many thinke it rather to be written by Barnabas, or Clemens,) and
that it skilleth not who wrote it, seeing it was writ-by an Author approved in the Church of God, and is daily read in the same. This ancient Father shewes plainly, that howsoever some doubt was made of the Author of that Epistle, yet it was re∣ceived both by the Easterne & Westerne Churches. And howsoever some of the Ancients did attribute it to St. Luke; others (as namely Tertullian) did attribute it to Barnabas: yet all agreed in this, that it had an Apostolike spirit; and accordingly Car∣dinall Bellarmine tels you in your eare,Ineptè dici ve∣tustatem de hac Epistola dubitâsse. Bell. de verbo Dei, lib. 1. cap. 17. It is foo∣lishly spoken, in saying Antiquitie did doubt of this Epistle, when there is but one Caius a Grecian, and two or three Romanists, in respect of all the rest, that speake against it: and if we respect not the multitude, but the antiquitie of the cause, the Roman Clemens is more ancient than Caius; and Clemens Alexan∣drinus than Tertullian; and Dionysius Areopagita than both, who cites this Epistle of Paul by name. Touching the second Epistle of St. Peter, it was cited by Higinus Bishop of Rome, within an hun∣dred and fiftie yeares after Christ, and that by the name of Peter. The Epistle of St. Jude was cited by Dionysius Areopagita by the name of Jude the Apostle, within seventie yeares after Christ;Dionys. de di∣vinis nomini∣bus, cap. 4. Tertull. de ha∣bitu muliebri. Orig. l. 5. in c 5. ad Romanos. Cypr. in lib. ad Novatianum. by Tertullian within two hundred yeares after Christ; by Origen and Cyprian within two hundred and fiftie yeares after Christ. Lastly, touching the Revelation of St. John, it was received for Canonicall in the first and best a∣ges: Dionysius Areopagita cals the Revelation, The
secret and mysticall vision of Christs beloved Disci∣ple;Arcanam & mysticam visi∣onem dilecti discipuli. Dio∣nys Eccles. Hier. cap. 3. In Dial. cum Tryphone. Iren. lib. 1. cap. ult. and this was seventie yeares after Christ. Ju∣stin Martyr doth attribute this Booke to St. John, and doth account it for a divine Revelation; and this was an hundred and sixtie yeares after Christ. Ire∣naeus saith, this Revelation was manifested unto St. John, and seene of him but a little before his time; and this was an hundred and eightie yeares after Christ.Tertull. de praescript. l. 4. Tertullian, amongst other things, accuseth Cerdon and Marcion of heresies, for rejecting the Revelation; and this was two hundred yeares after Christ. Origen, in his Preface before the Gospel of St. John, sayth, that John the sonne of Zebedee saw in the Revelation an Angel flying thorow the middest of Heaven, having the eternall Gospel; and hee flourished two hundred and thirtie yeares after Christ. Thus you see the Catholique Christians, and most ancient Fathers in the first ages received both the Epistle to the Hebrewes, the second Epistle of St. Peter, the Epistle of St. Jude, and the Revela∣tion of St. John, with one consent, accounting them no better than Hereticks, which either doubted of them, or denyed them: and yet you, to outface the truth, would make the world beleeve, that it was three or foure hundred yeares before they were received into the Church, and made canonicall; and upon this vaine supposall you would know of me, Whether there were any change of faith in the Church when they were admitted, or whether those Books re∣ceived any change in themselves.
To answer you in a word, your proposition is foolish, and your question is frivolous; for those Books were alwayes received, even from the first times: and no more could that word of God bee changed, than God himselfe, who is immutable; and yet we see your faith is daily altered, for want of that foundation, and thereupon it behoves you to get more, and better proofes, for the confirmati∣on of your new Creed. From your justification of your Trent faith, you begin to looke asquint thorow your Spectacles at the reformed Churches, and after your wonted manner you crie out, They have no certaine rule of faith wherewith wee may urge them; authoritie of Church they have none: Scripture they have indeed, but so mangled, corrupted, perverted by translation, and mis-interpreted according to their owne fancies, that as they have it it is as good as nothing. Thus you. Have we no certaine rule of faith? What thinke you of the Scriptures? Doe not we make them the sole rule of our faith? and is not that rule by your own Cardinals confession,Bell. de verbo Deo. l. 1. c. 2. Regula credendi certissi∣ma, tutissimaque, the most certaine and safest rule of faith? And as touching the authority of the Church, it is an Article of our Religion,Art. 20. That the Church hath power to decree rites, or ceremonies, & authori∣tie in controversies of faith; and yet it is not lawfull for the Church to ordaine any thing that is contrarie to Gods word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another:
This Article shewes our obedience to the Scrip∣tures, it declares the authoritie of our Church, and it vindicates our Ministers from perverting and mis-interpreting of the Scriptures, wherewith you charge us in the next place. It is true (say you) Scripture you have indeed, but mangled, corrupted, perverted by translation. Here your charge is generall, and your accusation capitall; therefore you must give me leave, for the better discoverie of the truth, to send out a Melius inquirendum, that your Translation and ours being compared in particulars, the truth may better ap∣peare. First then it cannot be denyed, that the Prote∣stants in all their Translations have a recourse still to the Originall of Hebrew and Greek, which was in∣spired by the Holy Ghost; and these they preferre before all Latine and Vulgar Translations whatso∣ever:Bibl. Complut. in Proefat. on the other side, your Translation (as your Interpreters fancie) hangeth betweene the Greek and Hebrew, as Christ hung betweene two theeves. Nay more, your men esteeme the Vulgar Latine before the Originall:Bell. de verbo Dei, lib. 2. c. 11. Not (saith Bellarmine) that the rivers of Translations should be preferred before the foun∣taines of Hebrew and Greeke of the Prophets and Apostles, but because the fountaine is muddie in ma∣ny places, which otherwise should runne cleare; for without doubt, as the Latine Church hath beene more constant in keeping the faith than the Greeke, so like∣wise it hath beene more vigilant in preserving her bookes from corruption.
These Paradoxes doe open a gap to Atheisme; for if the originall Scripture be corrupted, what as∣surance, what certaintie can wee have of true faith and religion? (and if wee doubt, wee are condemned already.) Neither can it enter into my thoughts, that profane Writers should bee preserved in their simple purenesse from their first ages, and that their Translations should remaine in subjection to their copies, from whence they are derived, to be exa∣mined by them; and yet the Watchman of Israel, who neither slumbers nor sleepes, for want of provi∣dence, should suffer his sacred Word become a Tributarie to a Translation. But by this the world may see the guiltinesse of a bad cause; you will ra∣ther charge the word of God it selfe with corrup∣tion, than faile to make good the corruptions of your owne Church. Your learned Andradius condemnes them that preferred the Latine before the Hebrew of the Old Testament, (as pretending it was corrupted by the Jewes.Andrad. def. fidei Trident. l. 4.) It was very inconsiderately conceived (saith he) by some, that there was more credit to bee given to the Latine Edition than to the Hebrew, because the Latine ever remained entire & uncorrupt in the Ca∣tholique Church, and the Hebrew was falsified & de∣praved by the perfidiousnesse of the Jewes. And your owne Sixtus Senensis doth witnesse of the Greeke Text likewise,Sixt. Senens. Biblioth. l. 7. that it is the same which was used in the dayes of S. Hierome, and long before him in the Apostles times, and is free from hereticall corrupti∣ons, as by the continuall writings of the Greeke Fa∣thers
(as namely) Dionysius, Justinus, Irenaeus, Me∣lito, Origen, Affricanus, Apolinarius, Athanasius, Eusebius, Basil, Chrysostome, Theophylact, doth most plainly appeare; and yet your Gregory Martin, and the Rhemists, are not ashamed to professe that the Translation which they follow, is not onely better then all other Latine, but even than the Greeke Text it selfe,Preface to the Rhem. Testam. in those places where they disagree. To examine your Translation in generall, and so descend into the particulars of yours and ours. First, it is decreed by the Councell of Trent, that amongst divers Translations then in use, the old and vulgar Translation should be declared to be authen∣ticall in all publike Lectures,Concil. Trid. Sess. 4. Decre∣tam de editione librorum. Disputations, Sermons, and Expositions, and that no man should dare or pre∣sume to reject it upon any pretext whatsoever. What Translation was understood by the old vulgar, was not expressed in the Councell: It is pretended to be, and is called at this day St. Hieromes Transla∣tion, and, which is remarkable, the Translation was decreed but by 42. Bishops at the first begin∣ning of the Councell. From hence ariseth the first Quere, which of St. Hieromes Translations your Church doth fol∣low (for St. Hierome confesseth that the first was corrupt, and accordingly he did correct many things in his first Translation.) To this Objection your Cardinall makes this faire and free confession;Bell. de verbo Dei, l. 2. c. 9. Although Hierome did perceive some things fit to be changed, and afterwards did change them, yet the Church did adjudge the first translation for true, and
chose rather to keep that for the vulgar Edition. And then he concludes: Although the greatest part of the vulgar Translation be Hieromes, yet it is not that pure Edition which he translated out of the Hebrew, but in a manner mixt. Habemus confitentem reum. Now heare your owne Sixtus Senensis: Albeit he pretends that the different readings in the Bible be no prejudice to the Faith,Sixt. Senens. Bibl. l. 8. p. 664. yet (saith he) wee ingenuously confesse that many errours were corrected by Hierome in the old Translation, and likewise there are found in our new Editions some falsifications, solecismes, barbarismes, and many things ambiguous, not well expressed in the Latine; some things changed, other things omitted; and the like. Here both confesse that Hieromes first Translation was erroneous, (and the one saith that your Church hath chosen that which is not pure nor agreeable to the Hebrew, the other confesseth it hath Barbarismes and untruths.) To speake inge∣niously, the Sunne never saw any thing more de∣fective and maimed than the vulgar Latine. Your Bishop Lyndan cryes aloud,Lynd. de opt. genere Inter∣pret. l. 3. c. 1, 2, 4.6. and protesteth it hath monstrous corruptions of all sorts, scarce one coppie can be found that hath one booke of Scripture unde∣filed, many points are translated so intricately and darkly, some impertinently and abusively, some not so fully nor so well and truly, sundry places thrust out of their plaine and naturall sense: the Translatour possibly was no Latinist, but a smattering Gre∣cian. I proceed to the examination of more witnesses.
About forty yeares after Pope Paul the third had decreed the vulgar Latin in your Councel of Trent, Sixtus Quintus by his Breve prefixed to his Bible, gives us to understand, that certaine Roman Catho∣likes were of such an humour of translating the Scripture into Latin,Breve Sixti 5. that Sathan, taking occasion by them (though they thought no such matter) did strive what he could out of uncertaine and great variety of Translation, so to mingle all things, that nothing might seeme to be left certaine and firme in them: and thereupon hee takes occasion to publish a Latine Translation of his owne perusall, and with∣all makes his Declaration of it in this manner: We of our certaine knowledge and fulnesse of Apostolicall power,Sixt. 5. in Bulla praefix. Bib∣liis, An. 1588. doe ordaine and declare that the Edition of the vulgar Bible of the Old and New Testament, which was received by the Councell of Trent as au∣thenticall without any doubt or Controversie, is to be reputed or taken for this onely Edition; which being as well as was possible reformed and printed in our Vatican, our will and pleasure is, and we doe decree it to be read throughout the whole Christian World in all Churches; with this our determination and sa∣tisfaction for all men, That first it was allowed by a generall and joynt consent of the whole Catholike Church and Holy Fathers; secondly, by a Decree made in the late Councell holden at Trent; and now lastly by that Apostolicall Authority and Power which God hath given us: and therefore is to be received and accompted for a true, lawfull, authenticall and undoubted Copie, to be read, and no other, in all
publike and private Disputations, Lectures, Ser∣mons, or Expositions. This Translation was published by Sixtus with great care and paines, professing that he printed it in the Vatican at Rome,Nostra nos ipsi manu correxi∣mus, siqua pre∣lo vitia obrep∣serunt. Idem in Praefat. and corrected the Errours of it with his owne hands: he professeth it was appro∣ved by the generall consent of the whole Catho∣like Church: he professeth it was received for the best and most vulgar Latine Edition, excluding all other Translations private or publike whatso∣ever; and thereupon concludes,Ibid. Let no man at∣tempt to violate this our Decree, our will and decla∣ration herein, or by rash boldnesse contradict it: for if any shall presume so to doe, let him know that he shall incurre the indignation of Almighty God, and his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul. From hence will arise a second Quere, whether this Translation of Sixtus were that Hieromes Translation formerly confirmed, and ratified by the Trent Councell. If it were his, and confirmed by a Generall Councell, how came it to be cor∣rected by Sixtus? If it were not the same, how could Sixtus Bible be allowed by a Decree made in the Councell of Trent, (for so are the words of his Bull) whereas the Councell was called Anno 1545. and Sixtus published his Bible Anno 1592. which was above 40. yeares after the Councell was called? But observe the sequell; The Decree of Sixtus was kept inviolable for a short time, and approved by Urban the 7th, Gregory the 14th, and Innocent the 9th his immediate Successors: But
Pope Clement the eight, about seaven yeares after the death of Sixtus, called in question that Transla∣tion, and published another of his owne, Ad perpe∣tuam rei memoriam, and corrects Sixtus Bible, under this pretence;Clem. in praef. Sixti Bibl. that his Predecessor percei∣ved not a few things to have crept into the Bi∣ble through default of the Presse, and that it needed a second care, and that certainly he himselfe had in∣tended to bring the whole worke to the Presse againe, had he not beene prevented by death. These two Editions were published by two se∣verall Popes, and both commanded to be read and followed in their severall Breves: Pope Sixtus disclaimes all Bibles whatsoever, both Manuscripts and printed, of the vulgar Edition, which did not agree with his Edition Ad literam, to a letter. Pope Clement professeth that his Translation, al∣though it be not absolutely perfect in all points, yet without doubt it is more pure, and better cor∣rected than any other that was published before it. In conclusion, both agree that the Forme of each must be inviolably observed without the least particle of the Text added,Ne minima quidem parti∣cula mutata. Sixt. in Praef. changed, or detracted. Now take your choyce of which Translation you please; if you allow Sixtus, it was corrected in many places by Pope Clement; if Clements, you must incurre the curse of his Predecessor Pope Six∣tus: if you will receive the vulgar Translation, which you terme St. Hieromes, your Cardinall tels you it is not of his purest Edition. Lastly, if you approve the vulgar Edition, decreed by the Coun∣cell
of Trent, I say neither you, nor all the Papists living, can resolve which is that vulgar Edition. For a Conclusion, either your vulgar Transla∣tion before Clements time was corrupt, or in vaine did Clement command a Correctorium to passe upon it, and to be read according to that correction. The worke of Lucas Brugensis, who was living at that time, hath sufficiently discovered your corrup∣tions in the Bible of Sixtus, which in his time was reputed for that onely Edition confirmed by the Trent Councell, commanded to be read throughout all Chur∣ches, and allowed by the consent of the whole Catho∣like Church: this Bible (I say) which for many ages was reputed the onely authenticall Edition in your Church, is purged and corrected (I speake within compasse) in above 3000 severall places. And as it hath beene observed by a painfull labou∣rer in that Vineyard,Dr. Iames in his Bellum Pa∣pale. your Translations in many pla∣ces are flat contradictory each to other, (and he that beleeves contradictions, beleeves nothing at all.) From the charge in generall, I will descend into particulars. And first, I will give you an Instance in the Old Testament. We reade in the 34. of Exodus and the last verse, The Children of Israel saw the face, that the skinne of Moses face shone:Videbant fa∣ciem egredien∣tis Moisi esse Cornutā. Sixt. Bibl. Ibid. v. 29, and 35. your Sixtus Bible in the vul∣gar Translation twice renders it, They saw his face horned; but your Sixtus Senensis complaines of Hierome, that contrary to the Originall he so tran∣slated it. Thus one while you leave Hieromes Tran∣slation when it savours not to your Palate, another
while you excuse your owne by condemning of St. Hierome: (Now whether it were a part of that corrupt Translation which your men use, and Hie∣rome himselfe corrected,Rident ita que nos, & ex∣ecrantur Ju∣daei quoties Mosen in no∣stris Tēplis cor∣nutâ facie de∣pictum aspici∣unt, quasi nos eum Diabolum quendam, ut ipsi stultè inter∣pretantur, esse putemus. Sixt. Senens. l. 5. An∣not. 116. p. 368. . I dispute not) but (saith he) therefore the Jewes doe scoffe and hate us Christi∣ans, whensoever they happen to see the picture of Moses painted with hornes, as though, according to their Imagination, we thought him to have beene a Devill. Looke upon the particulars in the new Testa∣ment. In the third of Matthew for Repentance you translate Penance, and by Penance you understand satisfaction for sinnes. So that when the Evangelist saith, according to the Greeke Originall (Repent) you follow the Latine Translation, which hath an ambiguous construction, and say, Paenitentiam agite, which your Rhemists translate, Doe Penance. And in the 9th of St. Matthew,Math. 9.13. . where he saith, I am not come to call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance, you translate, I am not come to call the Just, but sinners, and leave out the word Repentance (which is in the Originall.) And lastly, as if you were guilty of a false Translation in both, in the first of St. Marke,Mark. 1.15. you translate the words according to the Originall, and in stead of Doe Penance, you right∣ly interpret, Be penitent, and beleeve the Gospel. In the 11 of St. Luke you have maymed and falsified the Lords Prayer: you say in this manner; Father sanctified be thy name, thy Kingdome come, our dayly bread give us this day, and forgive us our sinnes, for because our selves also doe forgive every
one that is in debt to us: And lead us not into tempta∣tion. In this absolute forme of Prayer, you have omitted all these words; Our— which art in hea∣ven, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, but deliver us from evill. Thus Christ taught his Dis∣ciples to pray in one manner, and you in that place teach your Disciples in another; and this is agree∣able to your vulgar Translation, but not to the Originall. In the 11 to the Romans we reade, according to the Originall; If it be of grace,Rom. 11.6. then it is not now of works, for then grace is no more grace: but if it be of works, then it is now no grace, for then worke is no more worke: your Rhemists according to their vul∣gar Edition render it; And if by grace, not now of works, otherwise grace now is not grace: and leave out all the latter part of the verse, in these words, But if it be of workes, then it is now no grace,. Graec. Orig. for then worke is no more workes; for what end let the Rea∣der judge. In the first Epistle to the Corinthians we reade according to the Originall, Let a man so accompt of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God;. 1 Cor. 4.1. your Rhemists following the Latine Translation reade, Dispensers of the Myste∣ries of God: and howsoever these words might be dispensed withall in some sense, yet by no meanes as you force it. For when your Proselites doe que∣stion your Priests why they take away the Cup from the Lay people, with these words so transla∣ted you answer them, We are the Ministers of Christ,
and Dispensers of the mysteries of God: and so by consequence we may dispence with the Sacramen∣tall Cup, by the authority of Scripture. Witnesse your Councell of Trent touching the Churches power of dispensing with the Sacrament,Id autem Apo∣stolus non ob∣scurè visus est innuisse, &c. Concil. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 2. which professeth that the Apostle doth plainly intimate un∣to us a dispensation with the Sacrament in those words mentioned. In the 15. of the Corinthians we translate accor∣ding to the Originall,1 Cor. 15.21. Behold I shew you a mysterie, we shall not all sleepe, but we shall all be changed: your Rhemists translate it according to the vulgar Latin,Rhem. Test. ib. flat contrary to the Originall, and the mea∣ning of the Holy Ghost; Behold I tell you a mysterie, we shall all indeed rise againe, but we shall not bee changed. In the second Epistle to the Corinthians wee reade according to the Originall, Wherefore hence∣forth know we no more after the flesh, yea though we have knowne Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know wee him no more:Rhem. Test. printed at Ant∣werp An. 1621. in 2 Cor. 5.16. your Rhemists, doubting these words may trench too farre upon your natu∣rall and carnall presence, have quite perverted the sense by their last Edition in these words, There∣fore wee from henceforth know no man according to the flesh, and if we have knowne according to the flesh, but now know him no more. Here is no mention at all of Christ, but the chiefe words (yea) and (Christ) which are emphatically delivered by the Apostle, are quite left out; and I cannot conceive but it is done wittingly, because you have carefully observed
the Errata upon the Annotations, but none upon the Text it selfe. In the second of the Ephesians we reade accor∣ding to the Originall,Ephes. 2.10. . We are his workmanship crea∣ted in Christ Jesus unto good workes: your Rhe∣mists following the Latine Translation deprave the Text, saying;Non satis com∣modè vertit vulg. Inter∣pret. &c. Vega opusc. de Mer. & Justif. q. 6. Wee are created in Christ Jesus in good works: Which is no fit interpretation (saith your owne Vega) because we must beware lest that some take occasion from the Latine, to attribute the cause of their creation in Christ, unto his foreseene good works; than which nothing can be more contrarie to St. Pauls doctrine. In the fift to the Ephesians according to the Originall we reade,. Eph. 5, 32. This is a great mysterie (spea∣king of Christs marriage to his Church) your Rhe∣mists, to prove Matrimony one of their seven Sacra∣ments, follow the Latin Translation, and say, This is a great Sacrament;Cajet. Coment. in hunc locum. whereas your Cardinall Ca∣jetan tells us, The learned cannot inferre from hence that Mariage is a Sacrament, for St. Paul said not, It is a Sacrament, but a Mysterie. Lastly, to maintaine your Image-worship, whereas we reade in the Hebrewes according to the Greek, Jacob blessed both the Sonnes of Joseph,. Hebr. 11.21. and worshipped leaning upon the top of his staffe: your Rhemists according to the vulgar Latine reade it, Jacob dying, blessed every one of the sonnes of Joseph, and adored the top of his rod. Thus I have given you a taste of the differen∣ces betwixt our Translations, and your vulgar
Latin; now let the Reader judge which of those readings are most agreeable to the Originall. If we enquire of your Rhemists, they tell us that we have no cause to complaine of their Translation, unlesse we complaine of the Greeke also. Nay more, they have not onely proclaimed it to the Reader, but they have outfaced the world in their Preface, that their Translation is so exact and precise,Preface to the Rhem. Testam. according to the Greeke, both the phrase and the word, that deli∣cate Heretikes (for so they terme us) therefore re∣prehend us of rudenesse, and that it followeth the Greeke farre more exactly then the Protestants Tran∣slations. It is true indeed, that sometimes you would seeme to affect the Greeke, sometimes the Latine tongue in your Translation; but withall you have cunningly devised uncouth words and phrases, and for this purpose onely, that the Scripture may seeme hard and obscure to the common people, that they might eyther take no pleasure in the reading them, or reape no benefit for want of understanding them:Rom. 13.13. Galat. 1.14.24 Galat. 4.17. 1 Pet. 2.5. Phil. 4.10. Ephes. 6.12. 1 Cor. 10.11. Hebr. 2.17. John 6.54. John 19.14. as for instance; Not in chambering and Im∣pudicities. I expugned the faith. They emulate you not well, that you might emulate them. Be also your selves superedified. Once at length you have reflouri∣shed to care for me. Against the spirituals of wic∣kednesse in the celestials. But they are written to our correption. That he might repropitiate the sinnes of the people. All shall be docible of God. It was the Parasceve of Pasche. These and such like are the exact and precise Translations which you so bragge
of, and for which we condemne you. Now doe you joyne to these English phrases, your falsifying and corrupting the genuine sense of the Holy Ghost by your Latine Translations, and tell me if I may not truly retort your Assertion into your owne bosome: Scripture you have indeed, but so mangled, corrupted, perverted by Translation, that as (you) have it, it is as good as nothing. But you have misinterpreted the Scriptures (say you) according to your owne fancies. Your bolt is soone shot, and if all your words were Oracles, and that Ipse dixit were sufficient, your bare word (for other proofes you have none) would easily conclude us; but I will shew you so plainly, that without Spectacles you may see that these Aspersions likewise reflect upon your selves. It was a question amongst your fellow Jesuits, whether Jacob Clemens the Dominican might by Authority of the Scripture kill Henry the third,B. Barloes de∣fence of the Articles, in his Preface, p. 7. King of France; and one of your Jesuits reasoned thus with himselfe: Ehud killed Eglon, and there∣fore I may kill Henry; for Eglon was a King, and so is Henry; Eglon signifies a Calfe, and Henry is a Calvinist; and therefore assuredly I may murther him by Scripture. I hope you will confesse that this Je∣suite, although he were of your Society, did inter∣pret the Scripture according to his owne fancie. In like manner, your Patriarke of Venice concludes seven Sacraments from the words of Scripture, and I conceive, it is according to his owne fancie: That
(saith he) which Andrew spake,Inn. Gentil. exam. Concil. Trid. l. 4. n. 26. Sess. There is a Boy which hath five loaves and two fishes, must be understood of the ranke of St. Peters successors; and that which is added, Make the people sit downe; signifieth, that salvation must be offered them, by teaching them the seven Sacraments. And whereas the Prophet Da∣vid saith; Thou hast put all things under his feet: Antoninus your Archbishop of Florence,Anton. in Sum. part. 3. tit. 22 c. 5. about two hundred years since, expounded those words in this manner: Thou hast made all things subject to the Pope; the Cattle of the field, that is to say, men living in the Earth: the fishes of the sea, that is to say, the soules in Purgatory: the fowles of the Ayre, that is to say, the soules of the Blessed in heaven: whether this Exposition be according to the sense which the Catholike Church holdeth, or according to his owne fancy, let the Reader judge. Whitak. & Camp. Rat. 9.To come nearer to you: Moses saith, God made man after his Image: Pope Adrian inferreth, There∣fore Images must be set up in Churches. St. Peter saith, Behold here are two swords: Pope Boniface concludes,Extra. de Ma∣jor. & Obed. Therefore the Pope hath power over the spirituall and the temporall. St. Mathew saith, Give not that which is holy unto dogges: Mr. Harding ex∣pounds it,Juels Def. p. 52. Therefore it is not lawfull for the vulgar people to reade the Scriptures. It was sayd to St. Peter in a vision, Arise, kill, and eate: your Car∣dinall Baronius hence infers,In voto Baro∣nii contra ve∣netos. The Pope is Peter, and the Venetians are the meat which must be killed and devoured. To let passe those farre fetched and ex∣travagant senses of Scriptures, which your learned
men wyer-draw for your Romish Doctrine. It is the word of God, Goe to my servant Job, and he will pray for thee: therefore there is an Invocation of Saints in Scripture. Give us this day our daily bread:Bellar. de Sāct. Beat. l. 1. c. 10. therefore the bread must bee given to the Com∣mon people, and not the Cup.Roffens. adver. Luther. Art. 16. Our Saviour opened the Booke of the Prophet Esay, and afterwards closed it:Ledis. de divinis Script. Quâ vis linguâ non le∣gendâ. cap. 22. therefore Prayer and Service in an unknowne tongue is commanded by the Scripture. These and such like false glasses you temper for your Specta∣cles, to deceive your poore ignorant Proselites with the name of Scripture; and for feare they should make any doubt of the right interpretation of them,Si quis habet interpretationē Ecclesiae Roma∣nae, de loco ali∣quo Scripturae, etiamsi—tamen habet ipsissimū verbum Dei. Hosius de ex∣presso verbo Dei. your Cardinall Hosius protesteth to all Romanists, If a man have the Interpretation of the Church of Rome of any place of Scripture, he hath the very words of God; though he neither know, nor understand, whether, nor how it agreeth with the words of Scripture. This puts me in minde of that excellent passage of St. Hilary, who speaking of the errours and Heresies crept into the Church in the dayes of Constantius, makes this generall com∣plaint, which in these dayes is truly verified in the Roman Church;Hilar. l. 3. ad Constant. & l. 1. ad Const. defunctum. Faith is now come to depend rather on time, than on the Gospel, your state is dangerous and miserable: you have as many faiths as wills, and as many doctrines as manners; whilst faiths are either so written as you list, or so vnderstood as you will. I come now to your forbidden Bookes, wherein the mysterie of iniquitie: will manifestly appeare:
and first touching the sacred Bible which is forbid∣den in the first place. The Bible (say you) is not so forbidden, but that it is in the Bishops power to grant leave, if upon Confe∣rence with the Parish Priest or Confessor of the partie that desireth leave, he finde him to be such a one as may not incurre danger of faith, &c. which with any reasonable man may be counted sufficient liberty. It is true that by the fourth Rule of Pope Pius the fourth, the Bible may be licensed by the Bi∣shop, but the party must have the license in writing: and withall it is decreed,Regula 4. in indice libr. prohibit. p. 16. If any presume without such license either to reade or have it, unlesse he come in first and give up his Bible to his Ordinary, let him not have the pardon of his sinnes. It is not lawfull then to reade the Bible without a dispensation, but with a license any man may reade it: and this (say you) is sufficient liberty for any reasonable man. If I should grant you that which you say, yet you are never able to make good that license: for Pope Clement the eight about thirty yeares after, upon this dispensation so granted, gives us to understand, That upon the Rule of Pius the fourth,Observatio cir∣cae 4. Regulam Ibid. p. 22. in fi∣ne Concil. Tri∣dent. no new power was granted to the Bishops, or Inquisitors, or Superiors, to license the buying, reading, or keeping the Bible in the vulgar tongue; seeing hitherto by the command and practise of the holy Inquisition, the power of granting such licenses, to reade or keepe Bi∣bles in the vulgar Language, or any part of Scripture, as well of the New as the Old Testament, or any sums or Hystoricall Abridgement of the same in any vulgar
Language hath beene taken from them: Quod qui∣dem inviolatè servandum est; and this is inviolably to be observed. You see then, that howsoever your Pius Pope gave a dispensation for the reading of the Scriptures: yet Pope Clement his Successor, declared that license to be void and of none effect; and that which concludes your Assertion for an un∣truth, it was by him decreed, to bee kept without any dispensation or violation.Inviolatè ser∣vandum. Thus touching the sacred Bible you have severall Translations, upon severall paines to be received, and both different each from other in many hun∣dred places: you have ranked the sacred Bible a∣mongst the Bookes prohibited; and lastly, you see∣mingly grant a license for the Ignorant to reade the Scripture: and by another decree you abridge that license so granted. I proceed from the forbid∣ding of Scriptures, to your purging and falsifying of the ancient Fathers. As for Fathers (say you) it is most grossely false which the Knight after the ordinary Ministeriall tune, stands canting, that we blot out and raze them at our pleasures. What is it then that these men would have? What is it they can carpe at? Nothing but that they themselves are stung, in that hereby they are kept either from publishing their owne wicked workes, or corrupting the Fathers at their pleasure; and to wipe away this blemish from themselves, would lay it upon us. Thus you. It seemes you have beene well acquainted with Rogues and sturdy Beggers, who have taught you
the Terme of (Canting) a word proper for such kinde of people: but whereas you say it is grosse∣ly false that you blot and raze the Fathers, and that therein we seeke to wipe away the blemish from our selves, and lay it upon you; for the better ma∣nifestation of the truth, first, looke I pray upon the place where the corrupted Fathers were printed, & see by whom they were licensed; then heare your owne men witnessing their owne confession, of pur∣ging them; and lastly, peruse the places which I shall produce razed and corrupted, and then tell me if the Mysterie of Iniquity doth not closely worke in your Roman Church, and that the ancient Fa∣thers are grossely falsified, and notoriously cor∣rupted by your owne men, even in the principall points of Doctrine controverted betwixt us. First then wee must observe, that corruptions and abuse of ancient Fathers may be of three sorts; either by foisting into the Editions bastard Treati∣ses, and intitling them to the Fathers; or by falsi∣fying their undoubted Treatises by additions, de∣tractions, or mutations; or lastly, by alledging passages, and places out of them, which are not ex∣tant in their workes: and of all these three kindes your men are guilty,Expurgari & emaculari curâsti om∣nium Catholi∣corū scriptorū, praecipuè vete∣rum Patrum scripta. Sixt. Senens. in Ep. Pio 5. as it shall appeare by instances in their severall Ages, for the first 800. yeares. First, concerning the purging of Fathers; your Sixtus Senensis, in his Epistle dedicated to Pope Pius the fifth, amongst his many and famous deeds, recounts this for one of the greatest, That he cau∣sed the writings of all Catholike Authours, but
especially those of the ancient Fathers, to bee purged. And Gretzerus your Jesuit proclaimes it by way of justification;Gretz. l. 2. c. 10 If it be lawfull to suppresse or inhibite whole Bookes, as namely Tertullian and Origen, then it is lawfull likewise to suppresse a greater or lesser part of one, by cutting out, razing, blotting out, or by omitting the same simply for the benefit of the Rea∣der. And Possevine your Jesuit tells us,Ad istos enim quoque purga∣tio pertinet. Possev. l. 1. Bib∣lioth. select. c. 12. that Manu∣script Books are also to be purged, as well as printed; which shewes your good intention to the ancient Writers. I may adde to these, that you doe not onely purge, and corrupt the Fathers (as shall ap∣peare in matter of fact in severall Ages) but you forge Bastard Epistles in the names of ancient Bi∣shops, and you thrust counterfeits into the Chayre of the true and Catholike Doctors. Peter Warbeck is taken for Richard Duke of Yorke, and obscure Au∣thors, as namely Dorotheus, Hormisda, Hermes, Hypolitus, Martialis, and other counterfeits, for famous Writers, and all to supply your defects of doctrine in the Orthodox Fathers. Severinus Bi∣nius hath published certaine decretall Epistles in the names of Clemens, Anacletus, Evaristus, Sixtus, and many others, to the number of thirty one, all Bishops of Rome: Insomuch, as their Epistles are cited by Bellarmine, by Peresius, by Coccius, by Baronius, by your Rhemists, for severall proofes of your Trent Doctrine. Gratian saith,Grat. Dist. 20. Decretales. they are of equall Authority with Councels: nay more, he labours to prove out of St. Austin,Distinct. 19. in Canonicis. that those decretall E∣pistles were reckoned by him amongst the Cano∣nicall
Scriptures; and yet by the severall Confessi∣ons of your learned Writers, are adjudged to be all counterfeit: and without doubt, their leaden-stile, the deepe silence of Antiquity concerning them, the Scriptures alledged by them after St. Hieroms Translation (being long before his time) doe easily convince them of falshood. Antoninus Contius, the Kings Professor of Law in the Universitie of Bruges, tells us that he brought many reasons in his Preface, and notes upon your Canon Law, which was printed at Antwerp,An. 1570. by which hee pro∣ved, and shewed manifestly, that the Epistles of the Popes,Silvester An. 314. who were before Silvester, were all false and counterfeit. The Preface, with the reasons al∣ledged against it, is now razed and purged; and Plantin the Printer gives this answer for it,Raynold. & Hart. Cap. 8. Divis. 3. p. 451. The Cen∣sor who was to oversee the printed Bookes, would not suffer it to passe, and what became of it he remembred not, nor knew how to procure it. Thus your men are not onely ashamed to publish their Bastard Epistles, and equall them to the Word of God, in behalfe of your new doctrine, but you censure also and purge your owne men for condemning such lying inven∣tions. Whether to forge a false deed, or to raze a true one, be the greater fault, it is not greatly materiall: for your owne men are guilty of both. And lastly, when neither purging, nor falsifying will serve the turne (which you have practised in Bookes set out the first 800. yeares) you bring a Prohibition a∣gainst all Authors, Priests, and Professors in the
bosome of your owne Church, which testifie the truth of our doctrine, and injoyne them silence by your Index Expurgatorius, by cutting out their tongues, and refining them with a new impression; and this hath beene your ordinarie practice, for the last 800. yeares. I will give you instances in both, and so I come to the second Age. In the second Age, Ignatius Bishop of Antioch witnesseth the antiquity of our Doctrine: he shews that our Communion in both kindes was practised in his dayes:. Ignat. Ep. ad Philadelph. There is one Bread (saith he) broken for all, and one Cup distributed to all. In your Edi∣tion printed at Colein, you have quite altered the sense by a corrupt Translation, saying: One Cup is distributed for all: and in the Margent,Unus Calix, qui pro omni∣nibus nobis di∣stributus est. Bibl. Pp. Tom. 1. Colon. Agripp. An. 1618. p. 85. Bell. de Euch. l. 4. c. 26. Una Eucha∣ristia utendum. And that your corruption may not want an Advocate, your Cardinall Bellarmine tells us; There is not much credit to be given to the Greek Copies, for the Latine reades it otherwise: by which reason, a man may appeale from the Originall to a Translation; which is a thing unheard of. Again, whereas he saith in the same Epistle, Oh yee Virgins in your prayers set Christ (onely) before your eyes, and his Father, being enlightened by his spirit:Ignat. ibid. ut suprà. hereby teaching, that we ought to directour prayers to the Trinity only, and not to Saints & Angels: your men in their late Edition printed at Lyons, by their corrupt translation have left out the word Precibus,Ignat. Lugdun. impres. An. 1572. and thrust in Animabus, soules for prayers; by which change of words, the sense & meaning of the Father is cleane perverted. It followeth further in the same
Page, in speaking of Peter and Paul, and other Apo∣stles, who betooke themselves to a married life; Severinus Binius, in his Annotations upon this place, tells us that those words (viz. Peter and Paul, and other Apostles, betook themselves to a mar∣ried life) ought to be razed out;The third age. An. 200. to 300. because (saith he) it is probable the Grecians in honour of Marriage, corrupted the Text: A faire warning for us to take notice, that in after Editions that passage may also be cleane left out. In the third Age, Tertullian paraphrasing upon the words of Christ,Caro nihil pro∣dest, ad vivifi∣candum scilicet. Tert. de Resur∣rect. carnis, c. 37. Caro nihil pro∣dest sed ad vi∣vificandum. Tertul. Parisiis apud Michae∣lem Julianum. An. 1580. p. (Mihi) 47. The flesh profiteth nothing: (saith) It is the Spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profi∣teth nothing, (namely) to quicken: your Tertullian printed at Paris, hath quite perverted the meaning of the Father, and causeth him to speake flt contra∣ry both to himselfe, and to the sense of Christ, in these words: The flesh profiteth nothing (but) to quicken. St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage is falsified and corrupted, for the circumgestation of your Sacra∣ment, and the Popes Supremacie. In his Tract of pa∣tience he tells us,Nec post gu∣statam Euchari∣stiam, manus gladio & cruo∣re maculentur. Sic Cypr. Pari∣siis apud Petrū Drovart. in vi∣co Jacobaeo. An. 1541. fol. 89. Nec post gesta∣tam Eucharisti∣am, &c. Cypr. de bono Patien∣tiae. Impress. Parisiis apud Claudium Cha∣pelet Via Jaco∣baea An. 1616. p. (Mihi) 316. Post gustatam Eucharistiam, &c. After the eating of the Eucharist, the hands are not, or ought not to be defiled with bloud: In your Cyprian printed at Paris and Colein, your men have witting∣ly altered the words, saying, Post gestatam Eucha∣ristiam; and so by transmutation of one letter, doe cite this place for the circumgestation of the Sacra∣ment: whereas the Ceremonie of carrying about the Eucharist, was not knowne in many hundred
yeares after Cyprians time. But Pamelius, a Canon of the Church of Bruges, and Licentiate in Divi∣nity, returnes this answer in defence of it:Cum manu non gustetur Eucha∣ristia, sed olim gestari consueta sit, prorsus illud ex Cambrensi Codice substitu∣endum duxi, pro eo quod erat gustatam. Annot. in lib. de bono Patient. pag. (Mihi) 321 Foras∣much as the Eucharist cannot be tasted with the hand, but was wont anciently to be carried with the hand, I thought it best to change the word Tasting, into Car∣rying; which I borrowed from an ancient Copie in Cambron Abbey. The word then we see was chan∣ged by his owne Confession, and the Cambron Co∣pie is brought for the defence of this forgerie: which differing from all other Copies may be just∣ly suspected. For his reason, that we taste not with our hand, it is frivolous: For St. Cyprian saith not, gustatam manu, but simply gustatam; which taste yet was not without taking the Sacrament into the hand. You have heard Pamelius confession: Now let us heare what Manutius hath done in publishing of St. Cyprian; for Pamelius tells us, that St. Cyprian printed at Rome by Paulus Manutius,Indiculus Co∣dicum in Cy∣priano. in the yeare 1563. is a much more bettered and corrected Edi∣tion, than any other: and accordingly your learned Priest Mr. Hart assures us, that Pope Pius the 4th,Hart & Ray∣nolds, c. 5. Di∣vis. 2. p. 167. being desirous that the Fathers should be set forth and corrected perfectly, sent to Venice for Manutius a famous Printer, that he should come to Rome to doe it; and to furnish them the better with all things ne∣cessary, be put foure Cardinals, wise and vertuous, in trust with the worke; and for the correcting of Cy∣prian especially above the rest, singular care was ta∣ken; by Cardinal Baromaeus, a Copie was gotten of
great antiquity from Verona, and the exquisite di∣ligence of learned men was used in it. These Testimonies make a faire shew of sin∣cere and plaine dealing: and no doubt if there were not double diligence used by them, the Roman Cy∣prian doth exceed all the rest, and is freest from cor∣ruption: That the truth thereof may appeare, let us looke into St. Cyprian in his booke touching the Unity of the Church.De Veritate Ecclesiae. Whereas the ancient and true Cyprian sayth, The rest of the Apostles were equall unto Peter both in honour and power; the Ro∣man Cyprian, printed by Manutius, and your late Paris Cyprian,Cypr. Parisiis apud Clauium Chapelet. An. 1616. hath added these words, The Pri∣macie is given to Peter. And whereas the ancient Cyprian saith, Christ did dispose the Originall of unitie beginning from one; the Roman and Paris have added,Unam Cathedrā constituit. p. 254. He appointed one Chayre. And whereas the ancient Cyprian sayth, The Church of Christ may be shewed to be one; the Roman and Paris have added,Cathedra una. constituitur ib. and the Chayre to bee one. And because the Chayre may bee as well applyed to the Bishop of Carthage, as to the Bishop of Rome, the Paris Cy∣prian hath added Peters chayre.Cathedram Pe∣tri. Ibid. And whereas it was in Cyprian, even in the Roman print too, Hee who withstandeth and resisteth the Church, doth he trust himselfe to be in the Church? the Paris Cyprian addeth;Qui Cathe∣dram Petri, su∣pra quam fun∣data est Ec∣clesia, deserit, in Ecclesia se es∣se confidit? ibid. He who forsaketh Peters chayre, in which the Church was founded, doth he trust himselfe to bee in the Church? Now as you have heard that Manutius hath added, and forged much in his Roman Edition, for
the Popes Supremacie, so likewise you shall ob∣serve, that he hath rased and purged an ancient Re∣cord and speciall Evidence, against the universality and supremacie of the Bishops of Rome; It is an Epistle written by Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea to St. Cyprian (which St. Cyprian translated into Latin, as your Pamelius doth confesse) wherein he professeth, that he is justly moved with indignation, at the manifest folly of Stephanus (then Bishop of Rome) that boasting so much of his Bishoprick,Atque ego hāc in parte justè indignor, ad hanc tam aper∣tam & mani∣festam Stepha∣ni stultitiam. Firmilian. Cyp. S. Ep. 75. p. 203 Noli te fallere, siquidem ille est verè schismati∣cus, &c. p. 204. Insuper & Cy∣prianum Pseu∣do-Christum, & Pseudo-Aposto∣lum, & dolosum operarium dice∣re, qui omnia in se conscius praevenit, &c. p. 205. and that he hath the succession of Peter, upon whom the foundation of the Church was set; brings in many other Rockes, &c. He bids him not deceive himselfe, he hath made himselfe a Schismaticke by separating himselfe from the Communion of the Ecclesiasticall unitie; for while he thinkes he can separate all from his Communion, he hath separated himselfe onely from all. He taxeth him for calling St. Cyprian a false Christ, a false Apostle, and a deceitfull workeman; which he himselfe being guilty of, and privie to him∣selfe, that those termes of right belong to himselfe; by way of prevention, he objected them to another. Touching these severall Additions and Extracti∣ons, Pamelius (by whom the Antwerp and Paris Cyprian were set forth) first excuseth Manutius for adding the words in his Roman print; and tells us, they were found in a written Copie of the Cam∣bron Abbey in Hannonia, which was the best of all the Copies he had; and therefore, saith e, we were not afraid to insert that Reading into the Text.Non sumus ve∣riti in textum inserere. Yet Manutius himselfe professeth, he perused five and
twenty printed and Manuscript Copies, which had none of those Additions; and as touching the Epi∣stle to, or from Firmilianns (which proves a resi∣stance anciently made against the usurped power of the Pope) Pamelius thinkes it was left out purpose∣ly by Manutius; and, saith he, Perhaps it had beene more wisedome it had never been set out at all:Argumentum Ep. 75. p. 198. (but withall he addeth) because Morelius did publish it before me, I thought it not fit to let it passe, but print it. Now let us looke backe, and examine the rea∣son of these several Editions and falsifications. Mr. Hart sayth, that the Additions were taken from a very ancient Copie gotten from Verona; Pamelius saith, they were borrowed from a Manuscript in the Cambron Abbey in Hannonia: but in 25. Co∣pies the Additions were not to be found. Mr. Hart saith, the true Copie was printed at Rome, by the Popes command, and with the advise of vertuous and wise men, to be perfectly corrected, and free from all spots. Pamelius saith, it was better than any other; but withall, it was not so exact, but that the old Proverbe might take place, the latter is commonly the better. Lastly, touching the razing out the Epistle of Firmilianus, Pamelius conclu∣deth that his Copie (which doth cite it) is so per∣fect,Indiculus Codi∣cum in initio Cypriani. that, be it spoken without envie, there will need no further recognition; yet happely (saith he) it had beene better it had never come forth. Thus you may discerne, what forgeries are used by your men, to support the circumgestation
of your Sacrament, and the Popes Supremacie; which is a maine Pillar of your Faith: And this may serve to shew your falsifications and forgeries in the third Age. In the fourth Age.The fourth age. An. 300. to 400. The first Generall Coun∣cell of Nice is forged by Zozimus Bishop of Rome, in behalfe of his owne supremacie. The pretended Canon is this;In Concil. Car∣thag. c. 1. Binius Those who in the Nicene Synod gave their sentence concerning Appeales of Bishops, said in this manner: If a Bishop shall be accused, and the Bishops of his owne Province shall thereupon con∣demne and degrade him, if he thinke fit to appeale, and thereupon flye to the most holy Bishop of Rome, if he be pleased to have the hearing of it, the Bishop is to write to the Bishops adjoyning, and let it be at his plea∣sure to doe what he will, and as he in his judgement shall thinke fittest to be done. This Canon is not to be found either in the Greeke or Latine Copies of the Nicene Councell; and those Canons in all were but 20. It is true that you pretend, that there were in all 60. Canons, whereof 40. were burned by the Arabians, (amongst which this Canon was one:) But if they were extant, how were they bur∣ned? And if they were burned, how came you to the knowledge of them? The truth is, their Bastar∣die (saith Contius your Lawyer) is proved even by this, that no man, no not Gratian himselfe,Raynold. chap. 9. Divis. 2. pag. 575. durst al∣ledge them. Eusebius Caesariensis Bishop of Caesarea is cor∣rupted, to prove the Popes supremacie: In the Ba∣sil print translated by Ruffinus, he sayth, Peter,
James,Euseb. impr. Basiliae ex Offi∣cinâ Henr. Pe∣trina, Ruffino Aquiliensi In∣terprete. Sed Jacobum, qui dicebatur Justus, Aposto∣lorum Episcopū statuerat. Eus. l. 2. Eccl. Hist. c. 1677. Petrum, Jaco∣bum, & Johan∣nem, non de glo∣riâ & honore contendisse in∣ter se, sed uno consensu Jaco∣bum Justū Hie∣rosolymonum Episcopū desig∣nâsse. Coloniae Allobrogum, ex∣cudebat Petrus de la Roviere. An. 1612. and John, after the Assumption of our Savi∣our, although they were preferred by him before all the rest of the Apostles, yet did they not challenge the honor of Primacie to themselves, but appointed James, which is called Justus, to be Bishop of the Apostles: In your Coleine Edition, you have altered the sense, in this manner: Peter, James, and John, when they had obtai∣ned of our Lord a high degree of dignity, they did not contend about glory and honor amongst themselves, but with one consent made James Bishop of Jerusalem: Thus the true and ancient Eusebius saith Peter and the rest did not challenge the honor of primacie; the latter saith, they did not strive about glory and ho∣nour: the ancient saith, they appointed James, which is called Justus, to be Bishop of the Apostles; the o∣ther saith they nominated Justus Bishop of Jerusalē. This Authority is so pregnant against the Popes Jurisdiction, claimed from Peter, that Bellarmine hath nothing to answer, but this: Although those words be found in the Basil print, translated by Ruffi∣nus, yet in a Colein print, translated and published by a Roman Catholike,Bellar. de Rom. Pont. l. 1. c. 26. the word Primacie is not to bee found; and in stead of the words [Bishop of the Apo∣stles] are inserted, Bishop of Jerusalem. The Car∣dinall doth not complaine, that Ruffinus Transla∣tion was false and corrupt (for they are the words in the Originall of the ancient Eusebius) neither could he say truly, that the Colein was translated by a Catholike, for indeed it is the property of an Here∣ticke to falsifie and corrupt the Text. And thus you have done in your Colein Edition, where you have altered the sense in that manner.
Eusebius Emissenus Bishop of Emesa in Syria is forged by Gratian for the doctrine of Transub∣stantiation:Grat. Dist. 2. de Consecrat. Quia corpus, fol. (Mihi) 432. his words are these; Christ the invisible Priest, turned the visible creature into the substance of his body and bloud, with his word and secret power, saying; Take, eate, this is my Body: whereas there are no such words to be found in all his Works. The Councell of Laodicea is falsified in favour of your Invocation of Angels. The words of the Originall are these:. &. c. Conc. Laod. Can. 35. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 245. Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and depart aside and invocate Angels, and make meetings, which are things forbid∣den: If any man therefore be found to give himselfe to this privie Idolatrie, let him be accursed. Now in the same Councell published by James Merlyn, and Fryer Crab, by transmutation of a letter, you are taught a lesson contrary to sense and reason, saying,Quod non o∣porteat Ecclesiā Dei relinquere, & abire, atque angelos nomi∣nare, & congre∣gationes facere. Merlin Tom. 1. Concil. edit. Col. An. 1530. f. 68. Crab. edit. An. 1538. Colon. fol. 226. Veritas non quaerit Angulos. It is not lawfull for Christians to forsake the Church of God, and goe and nominate or invocate Angels, or corners, and make meetings; and thus Angell are be∣come Anguli, Angels are become Angles, or Cor∣ners, as if truth did seeke Corners, when so faire an Evidence is brought against Invocation of An∣gels. St. Basil, the great Archbishop of Caesarea, was forged by Pope Adrian the first, at the second Councell of Nice, for the worship of Images; his words are these:Pro quo & fi∣guras Imaginū eorum honoro, & adoro, & veneror specia∣litèr, hoc enim traditum est à Sanctis Aposto∣lis, nec est prohi∣bendum: ac ideò in omnibus Ec∣clesiis nostris eo∣rum designamus Historias. Ci∣tat. ab Adriano. in Synod. Nic. 2. Act. 2. p. (Mihi) 504. For which cause I honor and open∣ly adore the figures of the Images (speaking of the Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs) and this being de∣livered us by the Apostles, is not prohibited; but in all
Churches we set forth their Histories. This Autho∣rity was cited by Pope Adrian, in the name of Ba∣sil the Great in his Epistles; when as in all his Epi∣stles, of which are extant 180. there are no such words to be found. St. Hierome is likewise forged for the same do∣ctrine, and by the same Pope: the words in the E∣pistle are these;Sicut permisit Deus adorare omnem gentem manufacta &c. Citatur ibid. Ep. Adr. p. (Mihi) 506. As God gave leave to the Gentiles, to worship things made with hands, and to the Jewes to worship the carved workes, and two golden Cheru∣bins which Moses made; so hath he given to us Chri∣stians the crosse, and permitted us to paint and reve∣rence the Images of Gods workes, and so to procure him to like of our labour. These words (you see) are cited by your owne Pope, at a generall Councell, as you pretend, for a point of your Romish faith; and yet there are no such words, nor the meaning of of them, to be found in either of those Fathers; and without doubt there was great scarcity of true an∣cient Fathers to bee found at that time, to prove your adoration of Images, when your Pope was driven to shifts and forgeries: especially, when your owne Polydore tells you,Polyd. de Rerū Invent. that the worship of Ima∣ges, not onely Basil, but almost all the ancient ho∣ly Fathers condemned, for feare of Idolatrie; as S. Hierome himselfe witnesseth. This puts me in mind of Erasmus complaint, that the same measure was afforded to Basil,Eras. in Praefat. lib. de Spirit. Sanct. Bas. which hee had otherwise observed in Athanasius, Chrysostome, Hierome, that in the middle of Treatises, many things were stuffed and for∣ced in by others, in the name of the Fathers.
St. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine is falsified and corrupted. Franciscus Junius as an eye witnesse,Junius Praefat. in Ind. Expurg. Belg. tells us, that at Leyden in the yeare 1559. being fa∣miliarly acquainted with Ludovicus Saurius Cor∣rector of the Printing house, and going to visit him, hee found him revising of St. Ambrose workes which then Frelonius was printing: after some con∣ference had betwixt them, Ludovicus shewed him some printed leaves, partly cancelled and partly razed; saying, this is the first Impression, which wee printed most faithfully, according to the best Copies; but two Franciscan Fryers by command have blotted out those passages, and caused this alteration, to my great losse and astonishment. It may be the discoverie of it by Junius might stay their further printing of it, or else might be an occasion to call it in after the printing; for other∣wise if that Impression may be had, it were worthy the examination.Bolscus dicit se in manibus Se∣cretarii hoc te∣stimonium vi∣disse, & in∣spexisse. In disp. de Antichristo in Apend. Nu. 49. &. 53. Lau∣rent. Rever. Rom. Eccl. p. 190. Non habent Petri haeredi∣tatem qui Petri sedem non ha∣bent. Grat de Paenit. Dist. 1. c. Potest fieri. But for a proofe of this falsified Ambrose, Lessius the Jesuit tells us, that Bolseck doth confesse he saw the Copie in the hands of a Se∣cretary: howsoever their later Editions are sufficient proofe of your manifold falsifications. But I will speak of Impressions (onely) that have been within my view. First, to prove your succession in doctrine in your owne Church, Gratian tells us from St. Ambrose, They have not the succession of Peter, who have not the Chayre of Peter; and thus he hath chan∣ged Fidem into Sedem, Faith into Chaire. This forgery in time may creepe into the Body of Am∣brose; but as yet the words of Ambrose are agree∣able
to our doctrine; that is,Non habent Petri haeredi∣tatem qui Petri fidem non ha∣bent. Ambr. de Paenit. c. 6. Tom. 1. p. 156. Basil. apud Joh. Frob. An. 1527. Ambr. de Sacr. l. 4. c. 5. Tom. 4. p. 393. Basil. ut suprà. they have not the succes∣sion of Peter, which want the faith of Peter. These be the words of true and ancient Ambrose, hereby de∣claring unto us, and them, that they may have the See of Peter, and yet want the faith of Peter. Againe, in his Booke of the Sacrament St. Am∣brose saith,Fac nobis hāc oblationem ascriptam, &c. quod fit in fi∣guram corporis & sanguinis Jesu Christi. Amb. Colon. A∣gripp. An. 1616 Tom. 4. p. 173. Make this Oblation to be a reasonable & acceptable one (quod est figura) which is a figure of the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ: Your Ambrose prin∣ted at Colein, doth mince those words, and sayth, (quod fit in figuram) as if it might stand for a figure, but were no figure; and more particularly in the Canon of your Masse, you cite all those former words of Ambrose to prove the Antiquity of your Masse, but you leave out the latter (which is a figure of the Body) and say;Ut nobis corp{us} & sanguis fiat dilectissimi filii tui Domini no∣stri Jesu Chri∣sti. Missale Parv. An. 1626 p. (Mihi) 82. Grant that it may be to us the body and bloud of our Lord Jesus Christ. And lastly, that Ambrose might seemingly appeare to be yours, in the point of Transubstantiation, whereas he shew∣eth the power and wonders of God in creating all things of nothing by his word only, and from thence concludeth,Si ergo tanta vis est in sermo∣ne Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae non erant; quantò magis operato∣rius est, ut sint quae erant & in aliud commu∣tentur? Idem de sacr. l. 4. c. 4. Basil ut suprà, p. 392. If therfore there be so great force in the speech of our Lord Jesus, that the things which were not begun to be (namely, at the first creation of all things) how much more is the same powerful, to make that those things may still be the same they were, and yet be chan∣ged into another thing? Here St. Ambrose sheweth plainly, that the Elements of Bread and Wine are the same in substance as they were before, although they are changed into another nature. Your Inquisi∣tours knowing well that such Doctrine is flat con∣trary
to their Tenet, which teach that the Ele∣ments are not the things in substance they were be∣fore Consecration, have wisely left out in their late Edition two poore words, (Sint) and (et) and ac∣cordingly the sense runneth after this manner; How much more is the speech of our Lord powerfull to make that those things which were,Ut quae erant in aliud commu∣tentur. Paris. An. 1603. & Colon. Agripp. An. 1616. Tom. 4. p. 173. should bee changed into another thing. And by this meanes St. Ambrose a Protestant, is become a Masse Priest; and with a clip∣ped tongue lispeth Transubstantiation. Fryer Wal∣den in writing against Wickliffe, cites this place by the halves (ut sint et in aliud commutentur) he would have the Elements one thing,Wald. de sacr. Euch. Tom. 2. c. 82 p. (Mihi) 138. b. and changed into ano∣ther, but excludes the principall words (quae erant) shewing that they should be the same, which they were before; and Lanfranck long before him stor∣med at Berengarius, for citing this place out of St. Ambrose in behalfe of our Doctrine, and cryes out against him, O mentem amentem! &c. O mad mind! O impudent lyar! now truly there is no such words to be found in all St. Ambrose his workes,Ed. Parisiis 1632. Ex editione Romanâ: In quâ quae vel vi∣tio vel incuriâ erant adjecta, sunt rejecta; quae sublata, re∣stituta; quae transposita, re∣posita; quae de∣pravata, emen∣data, &c. In the fift age. An. 400. to 500. &c. But there is an Ambrose lately printed at Paris, which makes a great promise of integrity and purity, and yet the words are corruptly printed, according to your o∣ther of Paris and Colein print. In the fift age, St. Chrysostome Archbishop of Constantinople is razed and purged, touching the doctrine of the Sacrament: his words bee these; If therefore it be so dangerous a matter to transferre unto private uses those holy Vessels (in which the true Body of Christ is not, but the mysterie of his body is
conteyned.) These latter words comprehended in the Parenthesis,Chrys. Antwer∣piae apud Jo∣hannem Steel∣sium, An. 1537. Paris. apud Jo∣hannem Roig∣ny. An. 1543. & Paris. apud Au∣doenum Parvū. Anno 1557. in the Editions of Antwerpe and Paris are wholly left out, there is not a syllable of them to bee seene: for indeed the Author of that worke saith negatively, that (the true body of Christ is not) there, which overthrowes the very ground of your Popish presence: and although your men make great brags of Antiquity, to prove your reall Sacrifice of the Altar out of St. Chrysostome; yet in the 19. Homily upon St. Matthew, where hee termes it the Sacrifice of bread and wine,Sacrificium panis & vini. they being also privie to this evidence, as against their owne doctrine,Sacrificium corporis & sā∣guinis Christi. Paris. apud Au∣doenum Parvū. An. 1557. in. c. 7. Matt. Hō. 19. Nunc autem nullo modo cog∣noscere quae sit Ec∣clesia Christi, ni∣si (tantummodò) per scripturas. Idem Homil. 49. Tom. 2 p. mihi. 858. in their Edition at Paris have taught him to speake the Trent language, in these words; It is the Sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ. Touching the Testimony of divine Scriptures, St. Chrysostome is purged; he tells us in his 49. Ho∣mily, That from the time that Heresies invaded the Church, there can be no triall of Christianity, nor re∣fuge for Christians, who are willing to know the true faith, but to the divine Scriptures; for at that time there is no way to know which is the true Church, but by the Scriptures onely: This authority is wholly agreeable to our doctrine, and thereupon these times of Controversies and Heresies, that have over∣spread the face of the Church, wee say with St. Chrysostome, those that be in Judaea, let them flye to the Mountaines of the Scriptures. But what an∣swer can be made, thinke you, to the razing of so faire an Evidence? BeholdTotus hic lo∣cus, tanquam ab Arrianis inser∣tus, è quibus∣dam Godicibus nuper emenda∣tis sublatus est. Bell de verbo Dei l. 4. c. 11. Bellarmine tells us, that this whole passage (as if it had beene inserted into
St. Chrysostome by the Arrians) is blotted out of the late corrected Editions: and, as our learned Doctor Crakenthorpe in his answer to Spalatto observed, there is above 70. lines in the Antwerpe Edition,Crakenth. in Spalat. p. (mihi) 59. published 1537. purged in this Homily. It seemes then it is hereticall doctrine, to have recourse to the Scriptures onely for finding of the truth; But sure I am, it is the part of Heretikes to raze ancient Re∣cords, and to avoyd the triall of their cause by the sacred Scriptures. The fourth Councell of Carthage (where St. Au∣stin was present) is in part forged, in part razed: In the 100. Canon it was thus decreed:Mulier bapti∣zare non prae∣sumat. Concil. Carthag. c. 100. Let no woman presume to baptize. What answer therefore may we expect to this Canon? Binius the publisher of the Councels, expounds the meaning of it thus; The Councell (saith he) doth decree that a woman should not presume to baptize, that is,Binius ibid. in his Annot. when the Priest is pre∣sent: on the other side, Peter Lombard and Gratian,Pet. Lomb. l. 4. Sent. Dist. 6. Grat. Can. Mu∣lier de Consecr. Dist. 4. they have put in their exception, (nisi necessitate cogente) except it be in case of necessitie: so that in the absence of the Priest, and in case of necessitie, women may baptize by the authority of your Church, notwithstanding the Councels decree. And this is according to Bellarmines confession: Al∣though (saith he) those words of exception (nisi ne∣cessitate cogente) be not found in the Tomes of Coun∣cels,Bell. de Baptis. l. 1. c. 7. yet Peter Lombard and Gratian cite the Canon in that manner. And thus by your owne Cardinals profession, your Priests have added that exception to the Canon, to dispense with women for Admi∣nistration
of the Sacrament, which is not found in the Councell. Againe, the same Councell is razed both by the compiler of the decrees, and publisher of the Coun∣cels: for the Councell saith in the 44. Canon,Clericus nec comam nutriat, nec barbam ra∣dat. Concil. Carth. Can. 44. Let no Clerke weare long hayre, nor shave his Beard: The decretals, and your late Councels published by Binius, have left out the word (Radat) and have quite altered the sense of the decree, and so you Church hath gone directly against the meaning of the Councell in shaving of Priests. S. Austin Bishop of Hippo is both purged, and falsi∣fied in favor of your doctrine. First, for the purging of him your own men make this declaration:Augustinus nuper Venetiis excusus, in quo, praeter multo∣rum locorum restitutionem secundum colla∣tionem veterum exemplarium, curavimus re∣moveri illa om∣nia quae fideliū mentes haereticâ pravitate pos∣sent inficere, aut a Catholica or∣thodoxa fide deviare. Prae∣fat. Ind. lib. pro∣hibit. ad Lecto∣rē, Genevae im∣press. an. 1629. St. Austin was lately printed at Venice, in which Edition, as we have restored many places according to the anci∣ent Copies; so likewise we have taken care to remove all those things, which might either infect the mindes of the faithfull with Heresies, or cause them to wander from the Catholike faith. This publike profession your men have made, and accordingly theIn hunc modū est repurgatus, ut in libri in∣scripsione testā∣tur qui editioni praefuerunt. Ibid. p. 6. Booke was purged, as those who were present at that Edi∣tion doe witnesse in the Inscription of the Booke: but let us returne to the corrupted Editions in our view. St.De Civitate Dei lib. 22. c. 24. Austin in his 22. booke of the Citie of God and 24. Chapter, is cyted byBell. de Purg. l. 1. c. 4. Bellarmine for the proofe of Purgatory: yet in that Chapter (saithLud. Vives in lib. de Civit. Dei. c. 8. Vives) in the ancient Manuscript Copies, which are at Bruges and Colein, those ten or twelve printed lines are not to be found: And in the 22. booke and 8.
Chapter he tells us, there are many additions in that Chapter, without question, foysted in by such as make practise of depraving Authors of great Authority. Touching forgeries and falsifications in particu∣lar: The humane nature of Christ is destroyed, if there be not given it, after the manner of other bodies, a cer∣taine space wherein it may be contained. In your Edi∣tion of Paris, printed by Sebastian Nivelle,An. 1571. this pas∣sage is wholly left out: This is observed by Dr. Moulin, but the Authour so printed I have not seene. But when neither adding nor detracting could make good your Transubstantiation, Fryer Walden thought it the surest way to forge a whole passage in the name of St. Austin, which indeed strongly proves the very name and nature of it: The words are these;Wald. Tom. 2. de Sacram. c. 83. p. (mihi) 141. No man ought to doubt when Bread and Wine are consecrated into the substance of Christ, so as the substance of bread and wine doe not remaine, whereas we see many things in the workes of God no lesse marvellous. A woman God changeth substantially into a stone, as Lots wife; and in the small workemanship of man, hay and ferne into glasse. Neither must we beleeve that the substance of bread and wine remaineth, but the bread is turned into the Body of Christ, and the wine into his bloud, the quali∣ties or accidents of bread and wine onely remaining. This forgery was judicially allowed by Pope Mar∣tin the fift, and his Cardinals, in their Consistorie, and yet it savours rather of a Glasse-maker, than an ancient Father: but what answer maketh Walden to this invention?Ego enim repe∣ri & trāscripsi de vetustissimo exemplari scripto antiquâ valdè manu formatâ. Idem Ibid. I found it (saith he) and transcribed
it out of a very ancient Copie written with a set hand. Thus one while you adde, another while you de∣tract, another while you falsifie the ancient Fathers, if either they make for us or against you; and yet you tell us, that we are guiltie of corrupting the Fa∣thers. But above all, Gratian hath most shame∣fully and lewdly falsified St. Austin, whom he hath made to say;Inter Canoni∣cas Scripturas decretales Epi∣stolae connume∣rantur. Dist. 29. In Canonicis. fol. 19. A. The decretall Epistles of the Popes are accounted in the number of Canonicall Scrip∣tures. The truth is, St. Austin in his booke of Christian doctrine, informes a Christian what Scripture hee should hold for Canonicall; and thereupon bids him follow the greater part of the Catholike Church: Amongst which those Churches are, which had the happinesse to injoy the seates of the Apostles, and to re∣ceive Epistles from them. Gratian in the Canon Law altereth the words thus: Amongst which Ca∣nonicall Scriptures, those Epistles are which the Apo∣stolicke See of Rome hath, and which others have de∣served to receive from her; and accordingly the title of the Canon is, Inter Canonicas Scripturas, &c. The decretall Epistles of Popes are counted by St. Austin for Canonicall Scriptures. Now judge you what greater forgerie, nay what greater blasphemie can be devised, or uttered against Christ and his Spirit, than that the Popes Epistles should bee ter∣med canonicall Scriptures, and held of equall au∣thority with the Word of God; especially since by your owne men they are censured as Apocryphall and counterfeit Epistles. Your owne Bellarmine, as
a man ashamed of such grosse forgeries, would seeme to excuse it;Bell. de Concil. Author. l. 2. c. 12. Primo. That Gratian was deceived by a corrupt copie of St. Austin, which he had besides him, and that the true and corrected copies have not the words, as himselfe reporteth. Thus Walden excuseth his forgerie by an ancient Manuscript, the Cardi∣nall by a corrupt copie; and yet, by your Cardinals leave, this and many other such like forgeries stand printed in the Canon Law, no Index Expurgato∣rius layes hold on them, notwithstanding hee professeth the worke was purged and restored to his integrity, by most learned men,Idem de script Eccles. An. 1100 de Gratiano. Alph. advers. haereses, l. 1. c. 2. in fine. Ad transma∣rina qui puta∣verint appel∣landum, a nullo infra Africam in Communione suscipiatur. Bin. in Concil. Milevit. Cā. 22 & Codex Can. Eccl. Afric. Can. 28. v. Nisi forte ad Apostolicam se∣dem appellave∣rint. Grat. cau∣sa 2. quest. 6. Placuit. fol. (Mihi) 153. Haec exceptio non videtur quadrare. Bell. de Pont. l. 2. c. 24. by the command of Gregory the 13. in the yeare 1580. Your Alphon∣sus â Castro tells us, that this shamefull errour ought to be made knowne to all men, lest others by this abuse, take occasion to erre in like manner; as namely, Johannes de Turrecremata, and Cardinall Cajetan, who both cited this place out of Gratian for the Romish faith, and the Popes Supremacie, and yet no such thing is to be found in St. Austin. The Councel of Milevis, alias, the African Coun∣cell, is falsified by Gratian for the Popes Supre∣macie: The words of the Councell are these, Those that offer to appeale beyond the Seas, let none within Africa receive them to Communion: Gratian ob∣serving that this was a strong evidence and barre to the Popes Supremacie, according to his custome, hath thrust in these words into the Canon (Except it bee to the Apostolike See of Rome.) Now what saith Bellarmine to this falsification? He confesseth that some say, This exception doth not seem to square
with the Councell: I know not how the squares goe with your men at Rome, but I finde that amongst your partie there is no rule without an exception; especially if it make against your doctrine. St. Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria is purged in the Text it selfe, and is forged by Aquinas, for two principal points of faith; viz. Transubstantiation, and the Popes Supremacie: Touching the first he saith, That we might not feele horrour,Aquin. in Cate∣na in illud Luc. 22. Accepto. pane, &c. seeing flesh and bloud on the sacred Altar, the Sonne of God condescending to our infirmities, doth penetrate with the power of life into the things offered (to wit, Bread and Wine) converting them into the verity of his owne flesh, that the body of life, as it were a quickening seed, might be found in us. Here is a faire Evidence, or rather a foule falsification for your carnall presence. But what saith your owne Vasques the Jesuit?Citatur Cyril∣lus Alex. in E∣pistola ad Casy∣rium, quae inter ejus opera non habetur, illius tamen testimo∣nium citat S. Thomas in Ca∣tena. Aquinas in opusculo contra errores Graeco∣rum, ad Urba∣num quartum Pontificem maximum. Cyrils testimony is cyted by Thomas, but there is no such Tract to be found in all his workes. Againe, touching the Popes Supremacie, hee brings in St. Cyrill saying, As Christ received power of his Father, over every power, a power most full and ample, that all things should bowe to him; so hee did commit it most fully and amply, both to Peter and his Successors, and Christ gave his owne to none else save to Peter fully, but to him he gave it. And the Apo∣stles in the Gospels and Epistles have affirmed in eve∣ry doctrine, Peter and his Church to bee in stead of God. And to him, even to Peter, all doe bowe their head by the law of God, and the Princes of the world are obedient to him, even as to the Lord Jesus. And
we, as being members, must cleave unto our head the Pope, and the Apostolike See: That it is our duty to seeke and enquire what is to be beleeved, what to bee thought, what to be held, because it is the right of the Pope alone to reprove, to correct, to rebuke, to confirme, to dispose, to loose, and binde. Here is a large and ample testimony cited in the name of an ancient Father for the honour and power of the universall Bishop. This passage is alledged out of Cyrils worke intitu∣led The Treasurie against Heretiques;Thesaurus ad∣versus haereti∣cos. Tom. 2. p. 1. but whereas there are 14. Bookes written by him of that Title, there are no such words to be found in the whole Tract. But observe the proceedings of your good Saint; hee conceived the authoritie of one Father (though rightly cited) was not a sufficient proofe for an Article of faith, and thereupon, to make good his former Assertion, hee summons 630. Bishops, who (saith hee) with one voice and consent made this generall acclamation in the Councell of Chal∣cedon; God grant long life to Leo, the most holy,Aquinas in opusculo, ut su∣pra. Apo∣stolike, and universall Patriarch of the whole World. He tels us further, it was decreed by the same Coun∣cell, If any Bishop be accused, let him appeale to the Pope of Rome, because we have Peter for a rocke of refuge, and he alone hath right, with freedome of power, in stead of God, to judge and try the cause of a Bishop accused, according to the keyes which the Lord did give him. Without doubt this decree was a good inducement for the Church of England to subscribe to the Popes Supremacie (if you could make good this proofe out of the Councell of
Chalcedon) for it is one of the first foure generall Councels, which we subscribe unto by our Acts of Parliament.An. 1. Elizab. But where are those words to bee found in that Councell? Your Pope Zozimus falsi∣fied a Canon in the first Councell of Nice (as I have shewed) and your Popes Champion St. Thomas hath falsified another, and both for the universality of the Pope; by which you may easily discerne, that you wanted antiquity to prove your faith, when your men are driven to forge and faine a con∣sent of many hundred Bishops, in an ancient and ge∣nerall Councell,See Concil. Chalced. Can. 28. Act. 15. for the supporting of your Lord Paramount; when as in truth it decreed the flat con∣trary doctrine. Grat. de Con∣secr. dist. 2. c. Comperimus. Gelasius Papa Majorico & Johanni Epis∣copis. Ibid.Gelasius Bishop of Rome is corrupted, where hee condemneth halfe Communion as sacrilegious: his words are these; We finde that some receiving a por∣tion of Christs holy Body, abstaine from the Cup of his sacred Bloud, which because they doe out of I know not what superstition, we command therefore that ei∣ther they receive the entire Sacraments, or that they be entirely with-held from them; because the divi∣sion of one and the selfe-same Mystery cannot be with∣out grand Sacriledge. Gratian, the compiler of the Popes Decrees, borrowed his chapter out of that Epistle of Gelasius (saith Bellarmine) & withall prefixed this Title before it,Bell. de sacr. Euch. l. 4. c. 26. The Priest ought not to receive the Body of Christ without the Bloud;Ea Epistola Gelasii, quae mo∣dò fortsse non e. Ibid. that is to say, without the conse∣crated Cup; and yet by Bellarmines confession, That Epistle peradventure is not now extant: and
which is more, your Non conficient Priests doe ge∣nerally commit that Sacriledge, by receiving the consecrated Bread without the Cup, flat contrary to the decrees of the ancient Bishop of Rome. In the sixth age, the second Councell of Orange is falsified in the behalfe of your merits; the words of the Councell are these:Hoc etiam salu∣briter profite∣mur & credi∣mus, quod in omni opere bo∣no non nos in∣cipimus, & posteà per Dei misericordiam adjuvamur; sed ipse nobis, &c. Concil. Arausi∣canum, Can. 25. Bin. Tom. 2. p. 639. We solemnely professe and beleeve, that in every good worke wee our selves doe not first begin, and are helped afterwards by the mer∣cie of God; but he, Nullis praecedentibus bonis me∣ritis, no good merits of ours going before, doth first of all inspire us with faith, and love towards him. This Councell condemned the Pelagians for their doctrine of Merits and Freewill; and accordingly declared that we have neither free will of our selves to doe good, neither any fore-going workes to merit any thing of our selves; and this is a safe and humble confession both of our weaknesse, and Gods good grace and mercy towards us. But ob∣serve your Church-men, for the defence of their merits, they have falsified the Canon, and quite perverted the sense and meaning of the Councell; and in the place of nullis meritis, no merits, have inserted the word multis, many merits; so that the Fathers of the Councell are taught to reade a new lesson, flat contrary to the ancient Doctrine of the Church, viz. We solemnely professe that wee first be∣ginne (many) of our owne merits going before, &c. than which assertion what can be more arrogant, in assuming power to our selves, and derogating from the goodnesse of our God.
In the seventh age, Gregory the great Bishop of Rome is falsified: his words be these; The King of Pride is neare,Greg. Ep. lib. 4. Indict. 13. Ep. 38. p. (mihi) 146. b. Edit. Antwerp. 1515. & Paris. An. 1521. fol. 384. in Aedibus Francisci Reg∣nault. and, which is a haynous thing to name, Exercitus Sacerdotum, a whole armie of Priests is provided to attend his comming. In your Edition of Antwerpe and Paris, for the word (exer∣citus) you thrust in (exitus Sacerdotum) so that whereas Antichrist comming it is observed that an host of Priests shall belong unto him; now on the contrary it is read, that at Antichrists comming there shall be an end of Priesthood. Now as you have detracted from Pope Grego∣ries doctrine in one place, so likewise you have ad∣ded to him in another, for honour of his See, and the Canons of your Church: the words are these, Let not the reverence due to the Apostolike See bee trou∣bled by any mans presumption;Greg. l. 11. In∣dict. 6. Ep. 42. Citatur à Bel. in Ep. ad Black∣well. contra jus regium. Vide Jacob. Re∣gis opera. p. 262. & 279. for then the state of the members doth remaine sound, when the head of the faith is not bruised by any injury, and the autho∣rity of the Canons alwayes remaine safe and sound. This was urged to Blackwell the Priest, by your Cardinall Bellarmine, as a principall testimonie Contra jus regium; and yet, as it is observed by a learned Divine,M. Stephanus. these and many such particular pas∣sages are inserted into the printed Gregory, which are not to bee found in the ancient Manuscripts. Againe, in the former Epistle St. Gregorie is likewise falsified by Stapleton, in behalfe of the Popes Supremacie: the words of St. Gregorie are these,Greg. Regist. l. 4. Indict. 13. Ep. 38. Certainly Peter is the first member of the uni∣versall Church; Paul, Andrew, and John, what are
they but heads of particular people? and notwithstan∣ding they are all members of the Church under one head. And lest any should apply the name of head to Peter, in his 36. Epistle, being the second Epistle before this, he saith,Omnia soli uni capiti cohaerent, viz. Christo. Ep. 36. Stapl. de prin∣cip. doctrin. l. 6. c. 7. All the members are joyned to one head, Christ. Now observe the addition and fal∣sification of your learned Stapleton; Andrew, James, and John (saith he) were heads of severall Congrega∣tions, and all members of the Church under one head, Peter. And thus your Popes creature hath left out Peter in the first place, where hee was made a member, and added the name of Peter in the last place, to make him a head. Againe, Gratian, who was ever ready to supply all defects for the Popes title, hath given us an in∣excusable forgerie, in the name of Gregorie, for the Papall power: the truth of it was this; When Ana∣tolius Deacon of Constantinople, had written to Pope St. Gregory, that the Emperour commanded another Bishop to be chosen in the place of the Bi∣shop of Justiniana, by reason of his head-ache; St. Gregory made this answer, You wrote unto me,Greg. l. 9. Ep. 41. Indict. 4. p. 370. that our most religious Lord the Emperour commanded another to be chosen in the place of our reverend Bro∣ther John Bishop of Justiniana, because of the paine of his head: by which tenour St. Gregory shewes that the Popes obeyed the Princes lawes (so they were not against their Canons.) Now observe Gratian hee leaves out first the words,Grat. causa 7. quest. 1. fol. (Mihi) 186. our most religious Lord, and in stead of the Emperours name, he as∣sumes the Popes person, saying, Your lovingnesse
wrote to me, that I should command another to be cho∣sen, whereas in those dayes, by the confession of Pope Gregory, the Emperors made Election of the Bishops, and not the Popes. The sixt Councell of Constantinople is falsified & corrupted by Gratian; in the 36. Canon of the said Councell it was thus decreed: We determine that the See of Constantinople shall have equall priviledges and honour with the seat of elder Rome, and in Eccle∣siasticall matters be advanced as far forth as it, being next unto it: Gratian cites the former, non tamē in Ec∣clesiasticis (saith he) but not in matters Ecclesiasticall; which is flat cōtrary to the meaning of the Councel. The eight age. An. 700. to 800.In the eight age venerable Bede was living, and taught our doctrine touching the Sacrament, but was afterwards forged by Fryer Walden, to prove the doctrine of Transubstantiation against Wickliffe;Ibi forma pa∣nis videtur, ubi substantia pa∣nis non est, nec est ibi, inquit, panis ali quam panis qui de coelo descen∣dit. Wald. Tom. 2. de sacr. c. 82. fol. (mihi) 138. b. his words are these: There the forme of Bread is seene, where the substance of Bread is not, neither is any other Bread there, but that which des∣cends from heaven: This is alledged out of the Booke de mysteriis Missae, in the name of Bede, when as in all his 8. Tomes, hee never wrote or mentioned any such worke. The Councell of Franckford is likewise corrup∣ted and falsified, for the honour of your Images; for whereas Regino saith,Concil. Franck∣ford. An. 794. Bin. p. (mihi) 141. Bin. Not. in Concil. Frāc. p. (mihi) 164. b. The false Synode of the Grecians, which they made for the defence of their worshipping of Images, was eected by the Bishops as∣sembled at Frankford, under Charles the Great: Binius the publisher of the Councels, declareth
that the Acts of the second Councell of Nice in the cause of Images was confirmed by it; which is so farre from truth, that he is inforced to confesse that therein he doth dissent, though unwillingly,Quam senten∣tiam optarem esse veram, sed suspicor esse falsam. Bel. de Imag. l. 2. c. 14. §. Multi. from Baronius and Bellarmine: and indeed Bellarmine professeth; I could wish this opinion were true, but I suspect it to be false. Againe, to make the world be∣leeve that the Synod of Franckford condemned not the second Councell of Nice (the chiefe upholder of Images) your men have razed out Nice, and thrust in Constantinople, which altogether condem∣ned Images: Now therefore take a short view of all these your forgeries and corruptions. In the first Age you have depraved the Scrip∣tures by your false translations and corruptions; and when all could not save your turne, you place the Bible amongst the Bookes prohibited. In the second Age you have forged Epistles in the names of 31. Bishops of Rome, which were none of theirs; and to suppresse our Doctrine touching the Communion in both kinds, and to uphold your invocation of Saints and Angels, you have corrup∣ted Ignatius by a false Translation; and you would have the Record razed touching the marriage of Priests. In the third age you corrupt Tertullian for your Transubstantiation; you falsifie Saint Cyprian for your circumgestation of the Sacrament, and your Popes supremacie. In the fourth Age you corrupt Eusebius Caesari∣ensis for the Popes supremacie; you forge Eusebius
Emissenus for your corporall presence; you falsifie the Councell of Laodicea for your invocation of Saints and Angels; you forge Saint Hierome and Saint Basill the Great, for your worship of Images; you falsifie Saint Ambrose for the Popes succession in the Roman See, and most corruptly for the Do∣ctrine of the Sacrament. In the fift Age you have razed two evidences in Saint Chrysostome, both which confirme our Do∣ctrine, the one concerning the Lords Supper, the other concerning our tryall by the Scriptures: you have falsified the Councell of Carthage for the bap∣tizing of women, and for the shaving of Priests: you have falsified Saint Austin for your Purgatory, and for your Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and your Popes decretall Epistles: you have forged the Councell of Africa for the honour of your A∣postolicke See: you have forged Saint Cyrill for your Transubstantiation, and your Popes Suprema∣cie. In the sixt Age you have corrupted the Coun∣cell of Orange for your Doctrine of merits, and for the honour of your Priesthood over secular powers. In the seventh Age you have razed Gregory the Great touching the comming of Antichrist; you have purged him in an Epistle which maketh a∣gainst the Popes Supremacie: you have falsified the Councell of Constantinople in your Popes be∣halfe. Lastly, in the eighth Age you have forged vene∣rable
Bede in behalfe of your Transubstantiation; and you have falsified the Councel of Franckford in behalfe of your Image-worship; and yet for all this you are not ashamed to professe, that for anci∣ent Authors you note onely what is amisse, but you nei∣ther raze nor blot out any thing; that corner-cor∣recting (say you) wee leave for such corner-compani∣ons as shunne the light, p. 144. What credit can be given to you or your Church, let the Reader judge, when as by your owne confession, the Trent Coun∣cell hath decreed it as a thing unlawfull to change any thing in the Bookes of ancient Catholikes,Concil. Trid. in Ind. lib. prohib. de correct. 4. p. (mihi) 32. except a manifest error appeare to have crept in by the fraud of Hereticks or negligence of the Printer. Sure I am you will confesse that all these mentioned corrup∣tions are not Errata, slips of the Printer; And as touching the fraud of Heretickes which did corrupt them, your Trent Councell (which made the De∣cree) could not meane the Protestants: for in those dayes they had printed no Fathers, neither had they any Manuscripts, but such as were kept pri∣soners in your Church: The name of Heretickes therefore doth properly reflect upon your Pope Adrian, upon Gratian, upon Stapleton, upon Tho∣mas Aquinas, upon Cardinall Bellarmine, who ap∣peare to be Authors of your falsifications; and in generall upon your Roman inquisitors, who are the knowne Authors of your corrupting and altering the true Fathers. And this must needes seeme very probable to all, because they are corrupted chiefely in those main Articles of Faith which make against
your Church. The ancient Records and Eviden∣ces which you have had many hundred yeeres in your possession, doe all witnesse these forgeries and corruptions in the printed Fathers, and will you claime the Fathers for your Rule of Faith, when you make them speake more like children than fa∣thers? Shall a Guardian to an infant, having pos∣session of his Lands, and keeping his Deeds and Evi∣dences during his minoritie, raze and falsifie them, and thereby intitle himselfe to the Wards Lands, because hee was some time possessed of them, and can produce forged Evidences for them? This is our very case: The Church of Rome in her infancie was a faithfull Guardian of her childrens right, shee kept the Manuscripts and the ancient Records of the Fathers, in that puritie as she first received thē; after the Pope had made an universall Title and claime to all Catholike Churches, hee intruded into other mens Rights by forgerie and corruptions, he made the Fathers speake according to the Trent decrees, in an unknowne tongue, and now by forged cavilla∣tion detaines the possession against the right own∣ers. But let me tell you, as the Kings Subject, you are lyable to punishment in such cases in temporall affaires.See the title of Forger of false deeds fol. (mihi) 180. b. For if any person shall by false conspiracie, subtilty and falsity, forge any Deed, Charter, or Wri∣ting, or shall pronounce, publish and shew forth in E∣vidence any such false or forged Deed or Writing as true, knowing the same to bee false and forged, and shall be thereof convicted, he shall be set upon the Pil∣lory in some open Market Towne, and there to have
both his Eares cut off, and also his Nosthrils to bee slit and cut, and seared with an hot iron, so as they may remaine for a perpetuall note or marke of his falshood. Compare now this humane law with those forgeries of divine Evidences, and tell me what you and your fellowes can say for your selves, why the same judgment should not be pronounced against you. For if the lawes of Kings are so strict in behalfe of temporall records and assurances betwixt men, what may wee thinke the Law-giver himselfe will require at their hands, who doe not onely raze and falsifie Evidences touching the greatest mysteries of Salvation, who I say not onely doe the same, but have pleasure in them that doe them? Thus much touching the razing and corrupting of the Fathers for the first 800. yeares. Now I proceed to your Index Expurgatorius, your pur∣ging and blotting out the moderne Authours for the last 800. yeares. Forasmuch (say you) as concerneth the late Catho∣like Authors of this last age, for this our Index (of which is al the difficultie) beginneth but from the yeere 1515. whatsoever needeth correction, is to bee amen∣ded or blotted out; yet for others going before that time, it is expresly said, that nothing may be changed, unlesse some manifest errors, through the fraud of He∣retikes, or carelesnesse of the Printer, bee crept in: Thus you. From your corrupting the ancient Councels and Fathers (which I have showne) wee are at last
come to the correcting of moderne Authors; and as I have led you through an Hospitall of maimed Souldiers, so now I will send you to the house of correction, where I will leave you without Baile or Maine-prize, till you have cleared your selfe and your associates, for wounding and cutting out the tongues, of your owne Authors, in speaking truth against the corruptions of the Church. P. 24. & 144.But your correcting Index (say you) began but from the yeare 1515. and nothing is changed of Ca∣tholike Authors before that time. I assure you, I have not heard as yet one sentence, nay scarce one word of truth fall from your pen, wherein you dissent from us; and this your assertion will prove as true as the rest. Yea, but (say you) it is expresly declared by the Church, that nothing may be changed; and if this be true (as true it is indeed) the lesse credit is to be given you or your Church-men, who make decrees, and breake them at their pleasure; for it shall appeare that your Index doth extend it selfe to the time of the Apostles: and how∣soever you pretend to purge the Fathers onely in the Index and Table of their Bookes; yet I say some you have purged in the Text it selfe, others you have corrected in the Index, in the expresse words delivered in the bodie of those Bookes. And as touching your Assertion, that you purge the latter writers onely from the yeare 1515. and not beyond that time, this is most false, and you had said more truly, if you had confessed that for 1515. yeares together, your Church spared no Authours,
ancient or moderne, if they speake not Placentia, agreeable to your Popes faith and doctrine. For the better manifestation of this truth, looke first upon your Correctorium (for so Lucas Brugen∣sis termes it) your worke of correction upon the Bible; and tell me if you have not altered, by your Popes command, above three thousand severall places in the Scripture, even in your vulgar Transla∣tion, which you call St. Hieromes; and although you dare not lay a Deleatur upon the sacred word of God, yet upon the Commandements, upon the Lords Prayer, upon severall places of Scripture (as I have shewed) there is a Deletur, a leaving out, and a detracting from it. Looke upon your Index Expurgatorius, prin∣ted at Madrid, by Cardinall Quiroga, and tell me if you have not purged certain places in the Index of the Bible, which are ipsissima verba, the very words to a letter, in the Text it selfe: as for instance;Justificamur fide in Christum, Galat. 2.16. We are justified by faith in Christ:Justitia nostra Christus, 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ is our Righ∣teousnesse:Fide purifi∣cantur corda, Act. 15.9. By faith our hearts are purified:Justus coram Deo nemo, Psal. 143.2. No man is righteous before God:Uxorē habeat unusquisque. 1 Cor. 7.2. Let every man have his wife, &c. All these passages I say are the very word of God, in the Body of the Scriptures, and yet they are commandedInd. Hisp. Madr. f. (mihi) 15. B. tanquā propositiones suspectae (for so are the words of your Index) as if they were things questionable, to bee blotted out. A∣gaine, when your glosses or marginall notes agree not to your doctrine, you cause your Index Expur∣gatorius to lay hold on them: as for instance; in the 26. of Leviticus, we reade in your owne Transla∣tion:
You shall not make to your selves an Idoll or thing graven;Deleatur illud, Sculptilia pro∣hibet fieri. Idem fol. 7. when the glosse in the Margent saith, God forbiddeth graven Images, Let that passage (say you) be strucken out. And whereas Samuel saith: Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him onely:Ibid. fol. 8. b. the glosse upon the Text, which is the same in substance, viz. wee must serve God onely, you command to be blotted out. These and the like places relating to the Scriptures, being contrary to your Trent doctrine, you have excluded from your late printed Bibles in the places aforesaid, as being too obvious to the eye of every Rea∣der.Ind. Hisp. Ma∣drid. p. 6. 7. & f. 138. (Mihi) 62. Crakenthorp. adv. Spal. p. 66. Bell. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 11. &c. Ind. Madrid. fol. 62. a. Deleantur ex Textu illa ver∣ba: Sed ubi non habuerit Dei timorem in se∣ipsis, nec Jesum per fidem inco∣lam, &c. Ibid. Eam verò so∣lūmodò natu∣ram, quae incre∣ata est, colere & venerari didi∣cimus. Ant. Me∣liss serm. 1. Bell. de script. Eccl. p. (mihi) 184. Looke upon the Fathers, and tell mee if your Index Expurgatorius doth not correct both St. Chrysostome, and Austin, and Hilarie, and Hierome, in their Index, touching the prime points of con∣troversie betwixt us: Nay more, St. Austin (saith Vives) is purged ten or twelve lines in the body of his workes; St. Chrysostome in his 49. Homily is purged 70. lines; & by Bellarmines confession, other places are razed out of him and other Fathers, as I have shewed before. Looke upon St. Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, who was living above 1200. yeares agoe, and tell me if your Inquisitors have not com∣manded a Deleatur upon his words, in the very Text it selfe. Looke before his time upon Gregory Nyssen, and tell me if through the sides of Antonius Abbas (who was living, by Bellarmines accompt, neare 900. yeares agoe) you doe not wound that ancient Father in the body of his workes, in com∣manding
this golden sentence to bee blotted out:Ind. Belg. p. 270. . Greg. Nissen. in Orat. 4. Tom. 2. Edit. Graeco-lat. p. 146. We have learned to worship and adore that nature (onely) which is uncreated:Parsōs warn-word to Sir Fran. Hastings wast-word. Enc. 2. c. 9. p. 69. your F. Parsons takes great paines to little purpose to excuse it; one while he tells us, that the sentence is not to bee und in Gregory Nissen (which is most false:) another while he confesseth, that they cannot stand to give a particular reason of every censure or expurgation that is made (which is most foolish.) But tell mee in good sooth, if those places of Scriptures and Fathers did make for your Religion, would you purge them? Or must we beleeve, that your Inquisitors would take such infinite care and paines to review all Authours for 1600. yeares, and spunge them onely in the Index? Without doubt that man who doth willingly deface the Kings picture, stamped in his coyne, would, if he durst, at∣tempt it upon his person: the Tables of Authors, and Glosses, were especially intended for the bene∣fit of the Reader, both for his better understan∣ding, and his more speedie searching of the truth. They resemble the Phylacteries of the Jewes, which had a Ribband of Blue upon the borders of their garments, that by them they might the better remember the Commandements of God: he that would have cut the fringes of those garments in those dayes, to prevent the remembrance of Gods law, would (no doubt) have offered violence to the Ta∣bles, on which God himselfe had written, if hee durst attempt it. The truth is, the words imprinted in the skirts and tables of your Bibles and Fathers,
are thornes in your eyes, and goades in your sides: and from hence we may easily discerne, why you leave out the second Commandement, and alter the fourth in your Psalters and Breviaries, which you dare not alter in your Bibles. And that your Assertion may more particularly appeare to bee most untrue, viz. that you purge no Authours before the yeare 1515. I will begin from the ninth age, where I last left, and shew your owne Authours purged, and forbidden in all the succeeding ages for this last 800. yeares. First therefore the Reader shall understand, that your Roman Inquisitors have published an Index of prohibited Bookes, and in that Index they have divided the Authors into three severall Classes, or orders.Classis. 1. In the first they ranke all those Bookes which are adjudged by your men for Heretikes; as namely, Berengarius, Wickliffe, Luther, Cassander, Erasmus, Raynolds, and divers others; whose Bookes not onely now written, but whatsoever shall be published in their names hereafter, are pro∣hibited as Hereticall.Classis. 2. In the second Classis they have ranked all those whose doctrine is not very sound, but suspected, and offensive, although the Authors themselves never forsooke the Church, and therefore not personally to bee noted: and of this sort are Charles the great, Agobardus, Bertram, Huldericus, Cajetan, and divers others, whose Bookes are now purged; and some of them lived 800.Classis. 3. years since. The third is of namelesse Authors, which (say they) deliver pernitious doctrine, and
are condemned by the Roman Church; and those onely which have beene published without a name since the yeare 1584. These three rankes of Classicall Authors, ac∣cording to our Adversaries doome, may be desti∣nated to these three severall places. The first sort to Hell, which containes the Heretikes and dam∣ned persons, never to be redeemed. The second sort to Purgatory, which are suspended and restrained upon suspicion of false doctrine, or veniall sinne, and must not be freed till they be purged, and have payd the utmost farthing to the Pope. The third, to Limbus Infantum, and those are Anonymoi, such as were unbaptized, and have beene published with∣out a name, from the yeare 1584. Of these three sorts, I will produce onely the Authors of the se∣cond Classis, which lived and died members of your Church, such as were never condemned for heresie, but (touse your own words) have Suspectam Doctrinam, that is to say in plaine English, Prote∣stant Doctrine: whereof some you have purged in your new Editions, others you have forbidden to be read till they be purged:The ninth age. An. 800. to. 900 See Craken∣thorp, p. 56. Carolo magno falsò adscriptū, de Imaginibus, cujus Titulus est, Opus illu∣strissimi, &c. Ind. l. prohib. p. (Mihi) 18. and this (as shall appeare) was many ages before the time prefixed, 1515. I proceed: In the ninth age Charles the Great wrote foure Bookes concerning Images; he profes∣seth that hee began the worke in his owne King∣dome; and your owne Ecchius, and Luzenburgus, both witnesse that this Emperour wrote all those Bookes: yet your Index Expurgatorius layes hold on him, and forbids the worke; pretending that it
is falsely ascribed to him, when as the true reason is, because he condemned Image-worship, and forbids the 7th. Councell to be called either a generall, or lawfull Councell: for otherwise your owne Hinc∣marus Archbishop of Rhemes,Hinckm. Rhē. contr. Hinchm. Jandun. Episc. c. 20. who was living when these things were fresh in memorie, professeth, that a generall Synod was kept in Germany by the con∣vocation of the Emperour Charles, and there, by the Rules of Scripture and doctrine of the Fathers, the false Councell of the Grecians, was confuted and utterly rejected; of whose confutation there was a good bigge Booke sent to Rome by certaine Bishops from Charles the Great, which in my youn∣ger yeares I read in the Palace. Now admit that Charles were not the Authour of those Bookes (although your owne men wit∣nesse he was) yet the Authour you see was anci∣ent, and living in that age; hee condemned your Image-worship, hee confuted the reasons of the Nicene Councell, and by this it appeares that your Church hath transgressed her limits above 700. yeares; and therefore your Trent decree was made sutable to your Spectacles, which makes that seeme to be, which is not. Agobardus Bishop of Lyons (An. 840.) is pur∣ged, propter non sanam & suspectam doctrinam; because he delivers our Protestants doctrine, which you account non sanam, in these words; If the workes of Gods hands be not to be adored and worship∣ped,Si opera manu∣um Dei, &c. Bibl. Pp. Tom. 9. p. (mihi) 590. no not in honour of God, how much more the workes of mens hands are not to be adored and wor∣shipped,
in honour of those whom they represent?Titulo de Ima∣ginibus expur∣gantur omnia quae sub hoc titulo continen∣tur, usque ad titulum. 2. Clas∣sis Ind. lib. pro∣hib. pag. (mihi) 711. This passage is yet extant in your late Bibliotheque of Fa∣thers, under the title of Images: but your Spanish Inquisitors have commanded all the things which are contained under that Title to bee blotted out, usque ad Titulum, to the very title. Papirius Massonus, the publisher of Agobardus workes, delivered the argument touching Images and Pictures in this manner; Detecting most mani∣festly the errours of the Grecians (that is, the Fathers of the second Nicene Councel) touching Images and Pictures, he denyeth that they ought to be worshipped; which opinion all wee Catholikes doe allow, and follow the testimony of Gregory the Great concerning them. This passage, together with more ample authorities are already purged according to command, by the Divines of Cullen, in their late corrupt Edition of the great Bibliotheque of the ancient Fathers:Bibl. P P. Tom. 9. par. 1. edit. Colon. Anno 1618. p. 548. & p. 551. but Gretzer your fellow Jesuite extremely wondreth that this judgement of the Booke of Agobardus should proceed from a Catholike; for Agobardus in that whole Book doth nothing else but indevour to demon∣strate, although with vaine labour, that Images are not to be worshipped:Usher p. 463. and yet I say it is more to be wondred that your men should purge such Authors of Antiquitie contrary to your Trent Decree; and when by purging them they have made our Faith and Doctrine invisible in them to the Reader, you call upon us to shew where our Church and Religi∣on was visible before Luther. Johannes Bertram, a Priest of the Monastery of
Corbey in France, wrote a Booke of the Body and Bloud of Christ: This Booke is forbidden to bee read by command of your inquisitors, and condem∣ned by the Councell of Trent. But the Divines of Doway, perceiving that the forbidding of this Book gave an occasion to many to seeke more earnestly after it, thought it better policie to allow it, and ac∣cordingly they publish it with this Declaration, Although we care not greatly whether this Booke of Bertrams be extant or no;Ind. Expurg. Belg. p. 5. edit. Antwer. Anno 1571. yet seeing we beare with many errors in others of the old Catholike Writers, and extenuate them, and by inventing some devise, oftentimes deny them, and faine some commodious sense for them when they are objected in disputations or conflicts with our Adversaries; we doe not see why Bertram may not deserve the same equity and diligent revisall, lest the Heretikes cry out, that we burne and forbid such antiquity as maketh for them. This is a free and faire confession of your men in our behalf, that the Fathers are but pretended for your Do∣ctrine, when as oftentimes they make against you; and indeed accordingly you have framed a commo∣dious sense for the better understanding of this Au∣thor: as for Instance, where he saith the substance of the Bread was to be seene visibly, wee must read it (say they) invisibly: and where he saith, the sub∣stance of the creature which was before consecration, remaineth after consecration; by substance, say they, you must understand accidents: These devises, howsoever at first they seemingly made some shew of answer to the vulgar people, yet they proved
harsh & untunable to the eares of your learned Pro∣selytes, and thereupon your Romanists wisely by way of prevention at length gave up this verdict; It were not amisse, nor unadvisedly done,Ind. Belg. p. 421 & Quiroga p. (mihi) 140. B. that all these things should be left out. But it seemes these small pills did not sufficiently purge the Authour; and thereupon, after more mature deliberation, it was at last concluded, Totus liber penitùs auferatur;Ind. Belg. p. 17. let the whole Booke be suppressed. Now what an∣swer doe you thinke can be made in justification of this proceeding? Your Jesuite Gretzerus brief∣ly resolves it: Dum prohibetur Bertramus,Gretz. de jure prohib. libr. l. 2. c. 10. while Bertram is forbidden, I deny that a Father is forbid∣den; for the Father is no naturall Father, but a Step∣father, who nourisheth not the Church with wholesome food, but with darnell and pernitious graine together with the Wheate: wherefore as the Popes have dealt with some writings in Origen and Tertullian, by the same right may they now, according to their wisdome, abolish any writing of others, either in whole or in part by cutting or blotting them out. Thus first they dis∣pensed with this ancient Author and our Doctrine; then they correct him in some passages, by speaking flat contrary to his owne meaning; and when all would not serve the turne, they absolutely forbid him to be read, or rather command him to be ut∣terly blotted out, and totally suppressed. In the tenth Age (975.The tenth Age Ann. 900. to 1000. Aelfrichs Ser∣mon on Easter day.) Aelfricus Abbot of Malmesbury wrote an Homily touching the Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist, which was then read through∣out all our Churches on Easter day, and consonant
to the Doctrine of our Articles. This Booke is ex∣tant in the Saxon tongue in many Libraries: but what is the reason he is not numbred amongst your Bookes prohibited? Why surely you have foisted in a Parenthesis, which by a miracle inferres your corporall presence, which makes some shew for your Religion; and yet because it is contrary to the whole scope of his Booke, you confesse that Harpsfield in his History shewes, That the Beren∣garian Heresie began somewhat to bee taught and maintained out of certaine writings falsely attribu∣ted to Aelfricke: and thus for one reason you will not prohibit him, or lay a deleatur upon his works; but for the other reason there is a deletur upon him, and he is a man cleane out of your Bookes. The eleventh Age, An. 1000. to 1100. Ind. lib. prohib. pag. 47. & p. 93.In the eleventh Age, Huldericus Bishop of Au∣spurg wrote an Epistle touching the single life of the Clergie, wherein he taxeth Pope Nicholas for restraining Priests from marriage, and therefore is rejected by your Inquisitours; his words be these: Assuredly you are not a little out of the way,Hulder. Episc. ep. de caelibatu Cleri. when you doe compell Clerks by force to keepe themselves from marriage, which you should admonish to forbeare; for it is violence when any man is constrained to keepe a particular decree against the institution of the Gospell and the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost; wherefore wee counsell you, by the fidelity of our subjection, that with all diligence you will remove such a scandall, and by your discipline root out that Pharisaicall Doctrine from the flocke of Christ. And whereas it was obje∣cted, that Gregory the Great long before that time
had made a Decree for the restraint of Priests mar∣riage, in his first Epistle to Pope Nicholas, hee tells him,Ibid. p. (mihi) 482. Orthodoxagra∣phia Patrum, Tom. 1 p. (mihi) 481. Plusquam sex millia infantum capita viderit, p. (mihi) 1482. There be some which take Gregory for a main∣tainer of their Sect, whose ignorance I lament; for they doe not know this perillous Decree was afterwards purged by him, when as upon a day out of his ponds were drawne above 6000. childrens heads; which after he beheld, he utterly condemned his Decree, and praised the counsell of Saint Paul, It is better to mar∣ry than to burne; adding this also of his owne, It is better marry than be an occasion of death. Here you see our Doctrine was taught, touching the marriage of Priests; and because it is a plaine evidence for our Church, your Inquisitours have ranked this Epi∣stle amongst the Bookes prohibited. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury taught our Doctrine in the most substantiall point, touching faith and good workes. The forme of preparing men for their death, was delivered to the sicke man in this manner:Credis nō pro∣priis meritis, sed passionis Do∣mini nostri Je∣su Christi vir∣tute & merito, ad gloriam per∣venire? &c. Ind. lib. prohib. p. 696. Dost thou beleeve to come to glory, not by thine owne merits, but by the vertue and merit of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ? Dost thou beleeve that our Lord Jesus Christ did dye for our sal∣vation, and that none can be saved by his owne merits, or by any other meanes, but by the merits of his Passi∣on? then for a conclusion it followes (fol. 35.)Nō erit despe∣randum vel du∣bitandum de salute illius, &c. Ordo bap∣tizandi cū mo∣do visitandi. Imp. Venet. Ind. Belg. p. 419. 1575. Ind. Madrid. p. 149. Ind. lib. prohib. p. ut supra. We ought not to doubt or despaire of the salvation of that man, who beleeveth with his heart, and confesseth with his mouth the forenamed propositions. These se∣verall passages are commanded by three severall Indices to be blotted out: Nay more, the Booke
which containes this Doctrine, you thrust it into the third Classis, amongst those namelesse Authors, which deliver Doctrine (say you) in some sort per∣nitious to the Catholike faith; as if the foundati∣on of all comfort in Christ were pernitious to the Christian faith: But let me tell you, your Inquisi∣tors have much forgot themselves; for they forbid that Booke, which, say they, was printed at Venice (1575.) when as by their owne rules they professe openly, that they never meant to condemne any namelesse Authors, but such onely as have beene published since the yeere (1584.) nor any Author whatsoever (by their Trent Decree) but from the yeere (1515.) Howsoever this namelesse Author was both printed atSee Bishop Ushers answer to the Jesuites Challenge, cap. Of Merits, p. 513. Venice, at Antwerp, at Coleine, at Paris, juxta ritum S. Romanae Ecclesiae (for so be the words) according to the rites of the Romane Church.Cassan. in Ap∣pend. ad opusc. Jo. Roff. de fi∣ducia & mise∣ricordia Dei. Cassander tells us the Book was to be had in all Libraries, and particularly was found inserted among the Epistles of Anselme, who was commonly accounted to be the Author of it: and the like is con∣fessed by CardinallHosius in con∣fessione Petri, cap. 73. Hosius himselfe. But this was the time wherein the Devill was let loose, and wherein your Pope Hildebrand did not onelyNon solum fabulas commi∣niscitur, annales corrumpit, res gestas invertit, sed etiam coele∣stia oracula a∣dulterat. Aven. Annal. l. 4. pag. 455. in∣vent Fables, corrupt Chronicles, and inverted things that were done, but did also adulterate the Scriptures themselves; and therefore Cardinall Ben, who wrote of the life of Hildebrand, and was living in that age, isInd. lib. pro∣hib. p. 11. vide Illyric. de vita Hildebrand. p. 1322. forbidden also to be read, because he tou∣cheth to the quicke your Caput fidei, the head of your Church.
In the twelfth ageSigeberti liber contra Papam Gregorium, & contra Epist. Paschalis Papae. Ind. lib. prohib. p. 85. Sigebertus Monachus Gembla∣censis wrote a Booke against Pope Gregory,The twelfth Age, An. 1100. to 1200. and a∣gainst the Epistle of Pope Paschalis; hee lived and dyed a member of the Roman Church, yet his Booke is prohibited, because it complaineth of the state of your declining Church;Sigebertus Ab. ep. p. 188. in lib. Goldasti Replic. Hactenus inter∣pretatur, ideo docuisse Petrū per Babylonem signare Romam, quia tunc tem∣poris Roma confusa erat I∣dololatriâ & omni spurtitie At nunc dolor meus mihi in∣terpretatur, quòd Petrus prophetico spi∣ritu dicens Ec∣clesiam in Ba∣bylone colle∣ctam, praevidis confusionem dissentionis quâ hodie scin∣ditur Ecclesia. Ibid. For what greater confusion (saith he) was there in times past in Babylon than there is now in the Church? In Babylon there was a confusion of languages among the Gentiles, in the Church of Rome the tongues are divided, and the minds of the faithfull. Saint Peter saith, the Church which is Babylon salutes you; hitherto hee did inter∣pret that Peter by Babylon did signifie Rome, because Rome at that time was confounded with Idolatry and all uncleannesse: But my griefe doth now interpret unto mee, that Peter by a propheticke spirit, by the Church at Babylon, foresaw the confusion of dissen∣tion, which doth now rent the Church of Rome. If this testimonie had made for our Church, (as it doth against yours) certainly you would ne∣ver forbid the Record to be read nor to be blotted out; but this shewes that there was a revolt, a de∣fection from the faith (after the loosing of Sathan) which were proper for your men to permit to bee read and seene in after ages, that the truth might appeare in all and every age of the alteration of the Church. Arnol de villa. Novaopera ni∣si repurgentur. Ind. lib prohib. p. 5. & 36. & 37.Arnoldus Carnotensis (Abbas bonae vallis) his workes are forbidden till they be purged, and for no other reason, as I can conceive, but because he disco∣vers the errours of your Church. He tells us, that
Cloyster Monkes are damned, because they falsifie the doctrine of Christ, and leade soules to Hell. He tells us, that your Clergie-men did most perfidiously mingle Philosophicall dreames with the sacred Scriptures. He tells us, that Masses did neither profit the living, nor the dead; and for these and the like Protestations a∣gainst the abuses of his time, he is now condem∣ned by your expurgatory Indices. Anno 1215. Urspergensis in Anno 793.In the thirteenth Age, Urspergensis Abbas is both corrupted and purged by the Inquisitours. The Sy∣nod (saith he) which not long before was assembled under Irene and Constantine his sonne at Constan∣tinople, called by them the seventh generall Coun∣cell, was therein the Councell of Franckford rejected by them all, as voyd and not to be named the seventh, nor any Councell at all. This Councell was assem∣bled at Nice and not at Constantinople; but the word Constantinople is forged in stead of Nice, that the honour of that Councell for Images might not seeme to be impeached or condemned, when as the Synod at Constantinople banished Images. Now what answer I pray is made in defence of this forge∣rie?August. Stench. de Donat. Con∣stant. l. 2. nume∣ro 60. Behold your Augustine Stenchius, Keeper of the Popes Librarie, tells us that wee have forged those Bookes, and conveyed them into the Popes Li∣brary, where they lye written in ancient hands. How probable this answer may seeme, that wee should forge Authours in defence of your cause, and con∣vey them into the Vatican at Rome, I leave it to be judged; sure I am it stands corrupted in your Co∣pie, printed by command of your Inquisitours and Superiours.
Againe, there be certaine additions to the Histo∣rie of Urspergensis, which treate of divers memo∣rable things, from the time of Fredericke the second,Ind. lib. prohib. p. 94. unto the time of the Emperour Charles the fifth; that is, from the yeare 1230. to the yeare 1537. all which are forbidden to be read; wherein are con∣tained the proceedings of the Councell of Constance against Hierome of Prague, and John Husse; where the decree is mentioned for the 19. Session of the Councell of Constance, viz.Sess. 19. de∣cernitur, Hae∣reticis non esse servandam fi∣dem, quam vo∣cant Salvum conductum. Pa∣ralip. p. 378. That faith is not to bee kept with Heretikes, which is wholly omitted and purged in your printed Councels. Honorius Bishop of Anthum in France,Anno 1220. Honorio Angu∣stodunensi (falso ut credi∣tur) adscriptus liber de praede∣stinatione & libero arbitrio. Ind. lib. prohib. p. 47. wrote a Booke of Predestination and Free-will, but so different from your doctrine, that your Inquisitors forbid him to be read untill hee be purged. What good soever the Elect doe, it is God that workes it in them, (as it is written) God doth worke in us both the will and the deed, according to his good pleasure; if therefore God doe worke in us, what reward is impu∣ted to man? God doth worke, and the Elect do worke; God doth worke his Elect by his preventing Grace to be willing, and by his subsequent Grace to bee able, and both co-operate by Free-will, by consenting with a good will, this good will is rewarded in them, as it is written, We have received Grace for Grace; wee have received Grace when God prevented us to be wil∣ling, and followed us to make us able. Looke into his forbidden Dialogues: Turne thee (saith he) to the Citizens of Babylon, consider the principall persons there, and thou shalt finde the
See of the Beast; for they neglect the service of God, pollute his Priesthood, seduce his people, and reject all Scriptures which belong unto salvation.Vide Illyr. p. 1426. in Dialog. de Prae∣destin. & lib. arbitrio. For these and the like discoveries of the corruptions in your Church, he is forbidden, and under this pretence also, that the Booke of Dialogues is falsely ascribed to him. An. 1320. Bell. de script. Eccl. p. 269. de Gulielmo Ocham.In the fourteenth age flourished William O∣cham a Fryer Minorite and a learned man, saith Bellarmine; but being too earnest a favourer of Lu∣dovike the Emperour, by that meanes hee fell into some errours, and therefore deserved to have his name registred amongst the Bookes prohibited. Now ob∣serve those errors;Ocham. Com∣pend. Error. Joh. 22. He complained that many in his dayes perverted the holy Scriptures, denyed the say∣ings of the holy Fathers, and rejected the Canons of the Church, and civill Constitutions of the Emperours; He professed, according to St. Hieromes and the do∣ctrine of Gregory the Great,Idem. Dial. par. 3. Tract. 1. l. 3. c. 16. that the Bookes of Judith, Tobit, the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus, and the Booke of Wisdome, were not to bee received for confirmation of any matter of faith; He profes∣sed that the Pope and Cardinals were no rule of faith;Idem Tract. 2. part. 2. c. 10. Dial. part. 1. l. 5. c. 25. p. (Mihi) 494. He professed that a Generall Councell, al∣though it be a part of the militant universall Church, yet is not the universall Church: and consequently (saith he) It is rashnesse to say that a Generall Coun∣cell cannot erre against the faith;Idem Dial. l. 3. prim. Tract. 3. part. c. 8. He professeth that it cannot be proved manifestly by Scripture, that Pe∣ter was Bishop of Rome, or that he removed his seat from Antioch to Rome, or that the Bishop of Rome
succeeded St. Peter,Idem. Dial. part. 1. l. 2. c. 3. p. 413. or that the Church of Rome hath the Primacie, or that hee governed the Church of Rome, or anything touching the Papacie thereof; He professeth with us,Idem Dial. l. 2. c. 1. part. 3. p. 788. that though it be expedient there should be one Bishop over some part of the Church and People of God; yet there is not the same reason there should be one over the whole Christian world: And lastly, touching Pope John the 22. he reports from the mouthes of them that heard it, that in the yeare 1333. on Munday being the third of January,Idem 2. part. proem. p. 740. Guliel. Ocham. opus 90. die∣rum. Item Dia∣logi & script. omnia contra Johannem 22. Ind. l. prohib. p. 4. Anno 1420. Nicholai Cle∣mangis opera quamdiu ex∣purgata non prodierint. Ind. lib. proh. p. 71. Clemangis de corrupto statu Ecclesiae. Pope John held a publike Consistorie, wherein by word of mouth, with great earnestnesse he indeavoured to prove that the soules of Saints being purged, see not God face to face till after the day of judgement. These are the supposed errors which caused his Dialogues and other of his workes to be prohibited. In the fifteenth age, Nicholas Clemangis Doctor of Paris, Archdeacon of Bayeux, so long as his works remaine unpurged (saith your Index) are forbid∣den. Now observe the reasons why hee is put to silence. The truth is, he wrote a Booke Of the Cor∣rupt estate of the Church; he declared that the Pope was the cause of all the calamities and disorders of the Church; he shewes that he was not contented with the fruits and profits of the Bishopricke of Rome and St. Peters Patrimonie,Idem. c. 4. though very great and Royall; he layd his greedie hands on other mens flocks, replenished with milke and wooll:Cap. 5. & 7. and usurped the right of bestowing Bishoprickes and livings Ecclesi∣asticall throughout all Christendome:Cap. 5. and disannul∣led the lawfull elections of Pastors, by his reservations,
provisions and advowsons,Cap. 6. Cap. 7. Cap. 8. and oppressed Churches with first fruits of one yeere, of two yeeres, of three yeeres, yea sometimes of foure yeeres; with tithes, with exactions, with procurations, with spoiles of Prelates, and infinite other burthens,Cap. 9. and ordained Collectors to seize upon these taxes and tributes throughout all Pro∣vinces, with horrible abusing of suspensions, interdict∣ments and excommunications, if any man refused to pay them:Cap. 10. Cap. 11. Cap. 12. and used such merchandise with suites in his Court, and rules of his Chancery, that the house of God was a denne of Theeves, and raised his Cardi∣nalls as complices of his pompe from Clergie men of low estate,Cap. 13. to be the Peeres of Princes, and enriched them with his dispensations to have and to hold Offices and Benefices,Cap. 14. not two or three, or ten or twenty, but a hundred or two hundred, yea sometimes foure hun∣dred or five hundred, or more, and those not small or leane ones, but even the best and fattest: To bee short, in that he filled the Sanctuary of the Lord with dumbe dogges, and evill beasts, even from the highest Prelates to the basest hedge-Priests,Cap. 19. & 20. Cap. 7. & 14. Cap. 29. Cap. 42. Cap. 18. Cap 3.4. 5 9. through usurpations, exemptions, compositions, symony, prosti∣tution and fornication committed with Princes of the earth, and all to maintaine the pride, and lust, and riot of his wordly state, which he hath lifted up above Kings and Emperours. Lastly, he complaines that the Study of Divinity is made a mocking stocke, and that which was most monstrous for the Popes them∣selves, they preferred their owne traditions before the Commandements of God. These bee the pretended errors (Mr. Floyd) which causeth your Index ex∣purgatorius
to spare no Author for his age; and yet you tell us, such corner-correcting you leave for such corner-companions as shunne the light, p. 144. Aeneas Sylvius (who was afterwards Pope Pius the second) is forbidden by your Index: and the reason is given for it; Aeneas wrote in behalfe of the Councell of Basil, when he was a young man (saithBell. de script. Eccles. de Aenea Sylvio. p. 289. An. 1450. Bellarmine) but when he was an old man, and Pope, he retracted it, and so his Bookes are deservedly for∣bidden. But what say you then to his Retractations? are you pleased with them? No,Cautè legenda opera Aeneae Sylvii; ipse enim in Bulla Re∣tractationis nonnulla quae scripserat, dā∣navit, &c. Ind. lib. prohib. Class. 2. . p. 3. you must yet wa∣rily read the Workes of Aeneas Sylvius, for in his Bull of Retractations hee hath condemned something himselfe which he had written; and therefore when a new Edition shall come out, let that Bull also be pur∣ged in the beginning of his Workes. It seemes then, neither that which hee wrote as a private man in his younger dayes, nor that which he retracted as Pope in his latter dayes, are well pleasing to your Church: Let us therefore compare the difference of his Doctrine with the difference of his degrees, and then you shall obsrve, whether according to the ancient saying, Honours have changed manners. Aeneas Sylvius as a private man, protested thatAntè Nicenā Synodum unus∣quisque sibi vi∣xit, & parvus respectus ad Ecclesiā Roma∣nam habebatur. Aene. Sylv. in Epist. 288. be∣fore the Councell of Nice each Bishop lived severally to himselfe, and little regard was there then had to the Church of Rome: Pope Pius the second (being the same man, but onely that hee was now become a Pope) doth exhort andSuadete om∣nibus, ut id soli∣um prae caeteris venerentur, in quo salvator Dominus suos vicarios collo∣cavit, &c. Bulla Retract. Pii, 2. Tom. Concil. 4. post Concil. Floren. p. 739. perswade all, that they would reverence the See of Rome, or that Throne of Majesty above all. Aeneas Sylvius saith, They
thinke themselves well armed with authority, that say, no Councell may be kept without the consent of the Pope:Ex hisce au∣thoritatibus mirum in mo∣dum se putant armatos, qui Cōcilia ngant fieri posse sie consensu Papae: Quorū senten∣tia, si ut ipsi vo∣lunt inviolata persistat, ruinā secum Ecclesiae trahet. Quid enim remedii erit, si crimi∣nosus Papa perturbet Ec∣clesiam, si ani∣mas perdat, si pervertat ma∣lo exemplo po∣pulos, si deni∣que contraria fidei praedicet, haereticisque dogmatibus in∣buat subditos? sinemusque cum ipso cuncta ruere? At e∣go dum veteres lgo historias, dumactus pr∣spicio Apostolo∣rum, hunc e∣quidem morem non invenio, ut soi Papae Concilia convocaverit, nec post; tempore Constantini magni, & aliorū Augustorū ad congreganda Concilia quaesitus est magnopere Romani consensus Papae. Idem de Concil. Basil. l. 1. Whose judgement, if it should stand as they would have it, would draw with it the decay and ruine of the Church. For what remedy were there then, if the Pope himselfe were vitious, destroyed soules, overthrew the people with evill example, taught Doctrine contrary to the faith, and filled his subjects full of Heresies? should wee suffer all to goe to the Devill? Verily when I read the old Stories, and consider the acts of the A∣postles, I finde no such order in those dayes, that onely the Pope should summon Councels: And afterward the time of Constantine the Great, and of other Em∣perours, when Councels should be called, there was no great accompt made of the Popes consent. On the contrary, PopeBulla Pii 2. Retractat. p. (mihi) 739. Pius saith, Order requireth that in∣feriours should be governed by their superiours, and all should appertaine to one, as the Prince and Gover∣nour of all things which are below him: As Geese follow one for a leader; and amongst the Bees there is but one King; even so in the Church militant, as also in the Church triumphant, there is one Go∣vernour and Judge of all, which is the Vicar of Christ Jesus; from whence, as from a head, all power and authoritie is derived into the subordinate members. Thus when he was young, and had read the old Stories, and considered the acts of the Apo¦stles, hee found no such Authority and respect given
to the Pope: but when he was Pope, and old, it seemes he forgat the Apostles and ancient Writers; then hee attributes all power and reverence to the Pope of Rome. Briefly, Aeneas Sylvius saith,De Romanis Pontificibus liceret exempla admodum mul∣ta adferre, si tempus fineret, quoniam aut haeretici, aut aliis imbuti vi∣tiis sunt re∣perti. Idem de Concil. Basil. lib. 1. Of the Popes of Rome wee might shew forth very many examples (if time would permit) that they have beene found either Hereticks, or else defiled with other vi∣ces. But Pope Pius saith (speaking of these and the like assertions)Pude erroris, poenitet malè fecisse, & male dictorū, scrip∣torumque ve∣hementor poeni∣tet, &c. Bull Retract. ut supra. I am ashamed of my error, I earnest∣ly repent both of my words and deeds, and I say, Lord remember not the faults and ignorance of my youth: And thus being Pope (saving all advantages to his See) he hath condemned himselfe and his Writings, as published by him when he was a private man; and yet notwithstanding, the Inquisitors professe hee hath retracted that, as Pope, which afterwards hee condemned; and therefore by their doome hee must have a new purgation, and from thenceforth, Tum Pius Aeneas. But tell mee I pray, was hee Pius Aeneas, when he complained that at Rome theNam & ipse manus imposi∣tiones, & Spi∣ritus sancti do∣na venduntur. Aene. Sylv. Ep. 66. imposition of hands, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost were sold for money? Was hee Pius Aeneas when he complained that the Court ofQuid est Ro∣mana curia hi qui summam tenent, nisi tur∣pissimum pe∣lagus ventis undi{que} durissi∣mis, & tēpesta∣ribus agitatū. dem. Ep. 188. Rome, in the chief amongst them, was but a most filthy Sea tossed on every side with winds and strong tempests? Was hee Pius Aeneas when he protested with griefe, thatJacet spreta religio, justitiae nullus honos, fides penè in∣cognita. Ep. 398. religi∣on was despised, righteousnesse dishonoured, faith in a manner unknowne? Or was hee Pius Aeneas when he retracted, as Pope, that which he had written, or when he condemned that which hee had retracted? No surely, he was Pius in nothing (in the opinion
of your Church) but in his Bull of Retractations; and he was Aeneas in nothing more than in condemning that which he retracted. And accordingly he him∣selfe beggs of your Church,Bulla Retra∣ctat. Pii 2. Illud Gentile nomen, parentes indidere nas∣centi; hoc Chri∣stianum, in Apo∣stolatu suscepi∣mus. Ibid. Pium recipite, Aeneam rejicite, Receive you Pius, but reject Aeneas; and he gives his reason for it; Aeneas is a heathenish Name, which our Parents gave us at our Birth; but Pius is a Christian name, which we assumed in our Apostolike calling. You may adde to this, Aeneas was a private man, and subject unto errour, but Pius was a Pope, and therefore in his determinations infallible; or rather you may truly say with him, that Aeneas before he was Pope,Nihil mentiti sumus, nihil ad gratiam, nihil ad odium retu∣limus. Bulla Re∣tractat. delivered the truth neither for feare nor hatred, and yet he was forced to retract it: but PiusCum doctrinā non sanam, & suspectam, & quae offensionem parere potest, contineant, &c. Class. 2. in Ind. lib. prohibit. when he was Pope, delivered false and suspected doctrine, and such as was offensive to your Church, and for that cause is commanded to bee purged. Quid Pius Aeneas, in te committere tantûm? What ill hap had good Aeneas, or rather what ill fortune had Pope Pius, that he could neither sa∣tisfie your Church, either as he was Aeneas, or as he was Pius? neither as a private Doctor, nor as an infallible Pope? or rather I may say with your owne Canus,Rivet. Criticū Sacr. Specimen. c. 7. p. 49. What doth it availe men who desire to know the truth, to raze Records out of their Bookes, when they cannot blot it out of their mindes? Anno 1450.Petrus Crinitus was a Romish Priest, and is commanded to be purged; and if we shall examine the reason, we shall finde it for no other cause, but
that he speakes the truth against your Pope, and Po∣pish Doctrine. To instance in particulars: Let both the Title and the Chapter be razed (say your In∣quisitors, touching Pope Boniface the 8.Petr. Crinit. l. 7. c. 13. de dom. Disciplinâ.) and the reason is pregnant: that Chapter shewes the inso∣solencie and pride of the Pope in particular, in mat∣ter of fact; and it further declares, that under pre∣tence of Religion, the Popes in generall thinke they may doe what they list. Againe,Idem. l. 14. c. 5. when he speakes of ancient Lawes, made in generall for Marriage and propagation of Children, they command that page to be strucken out; and there can be no other reason, but because on the contrary it is a positive law of your Church to forbid Marriage. Lastly, whereas he shewes that Leo the Emperour made an Edict,Idem. l. 9. c. 9. that all Images in Churches and houses of the Christians should be razed; and hee declares in his opinion, that it doth not appertaine to Religion to adore any mans Image; and that Valens and Theodo∣sius made Proclamation to all Christians, that they would suffer no man to fashion, to grave, or paint the Image of our Saviour, either in colours, or in stone, or in any other kinde of metall or matter; and that wheresoever any such Image should bee found, they commanded it to be taken downe:Index Belgic. p. 421. Index Madrid. p. 150. Ind. lib. prohi∣bit. p. 79. & 718. Bulla Pii 4. Art. 9. Art. 22. These and the like passages, your Inquisitors in three severall Indices command to be razed out; and what cause can you pretend, but that it makes against a speciall Arti∣cle of your faith, viz. that Images should be set up in Churches, and worshipped? and by this meanes you strike likewise at the Articles of our Church,
and when you have made such Doctrines and Evi∣dences invisible, by razing the records, then you bid us shew where the Church was visible before Luther. Now what credit shall the Reader give unto you and to your Trent Councell, that would assure us that your Church intended the purging of no Au∣thors, but from the yeare 1515. when as it appeares plainely that you have spared neither the writings of the Apostles nor the Fathers, in razing and falsi∣fying their owne very words and sentences? And as touching other Authors in the latter ages, you have gone beyond your Commission, hundreds of years, in falsifying, corrupting, forbidding, and purging them; and this was long before your prefixed yeare of 1515. Anno 1517. Bell. Chronol. p. 3. pag. 117.In the sixteenth age Luther began his Heresie (saith Bellarmine) Anno 1517. and your Church, to make some shew that your Index Expurgatorius had a relation onely to Luther and his followers, tooke her rise from the yeare 1515. (which was but two yeares before his comming) as if all the members of your Church before his comming had lived in the unity of one faith and doctrine. This deceivablenesse of your unrighteousnesse, I have in part discovered. Now I come to your Authors of this last age (for I will cite none but your owne Au∣thors) and therein lieth another mysterie not infe∣riour to the first; and that is this: your Index Ex∣purgatorius was first proclaimed generally against all Heretickes (meaning the Protestants) but when
it comes to examination, it points especially at the particular members of your owne Church; and that which is most remarkable, after that your Trent Councel had distinguished with Anathema's her Roman faith from the faith of Protestants, after she had forbidden and condemned by her Index divers of your owne Authors, as savouring of suspected, and false, and scandalous doctrine; nay more, after she had declared all to be Heretickes, and their Doctrine Hereticall, who would dare to teach or publish any contrary beliefe to that which was once established by a Generall Councell; yet I say, the members of your owne Church, and those not of the meanest ranke, both Bishops and Cardi∣nals, have delivered in print many points of Do∣ctrine agreeable to the Articles of our Church; and yet you say they never left the Church, they are not personally to be noted nor ranked amongst He∣retickes; when for the very same Tenets we are ac∣cused, accursed, forbidden, and utterly condemned as Heretickes and Reprobates: and thus the head of your Church being divided from the members, in points of saving faith, may say unto the tongue, I have no need of thee, and consequently may cut it out. Howsoever, this use we may safely make of your Index, that if in after ages by new Impressions the true doctrine of Protestants shall be razed and ut∣terly abolished in your Roman Authors, yet your very Index will appeare as a strong Evidence, to shew that such doctrines were taught in former A∣ges: and howsoever the faction in the Papacie for∣merly
prevailed, yet it is more than evident by the Testimonies and Records of your owne men, that we had not two Churches before Luther, but that we had alwayes Testes Veritatis, witnesses of Gods truth and our owne Religion in all Ages, in the bo∣some of the Roman Church. Anno 1500.I proceed to particulars in this last age. Cardinall Cajetan is purged in severall and maine points of doctrine, being different from your owne Church: Touching the ground of Transubstantia∣tion, he denies that the words of Scripture (This is my body) are availeable to prove it of themselves, and thereupon your Jesuit Suarez complaineth, Ex Catholicis, &c.Ex Catholicis solus Cajetanus, in Commentario hujus Articuli, qui jussu Pii 5. in Romana edi∣tione expunctus est, docuit, se∣clusâ Ecclesiae authoritate ver∣ba illa (Hoc est corpus meum) ad veritatem hanc confirmā∣dam non suffi∣cere Suarez. Tom 3. Disp. 46. Sect. 3. quaest. 75. Art. 1. p. 515. Impress. Mog. An. 1509. Amongst the Catholikes, Cajetan onely teacheth that the words, This is my Body, bee not sufficient, without the authoritie of the Church, to confirme the truth of it: And therefore by the com∣mand of Pope Pius the 5. this passage is blotted out in the Roman Edition. Touching justification by faith (onely) whereas hee saith,Absque excep∣tione aliqua cō∣ditionis, sexus, qualiatis, &c. dicitur omni credenti, sola fi∣des exigitur ad salutem. Cajet. Ep. Pauli &c. Parisiis 1571. fol. 4. Ind. lib. prohibit. p. 876. without any exception of person, of any Sexe, or quality, or condition, It is said of every Beleever, faith alone is required to salvation: your Index commands those latter words to bee blotted out. Lastly, in speaking of the Crosse and the like, he saith; These are altogether unlawfull, and not to be embraced, because they are part of an ill worship: you cause these words to be strucken out, and in lieu of them, you subjoyne these words fol∣lowing (which are flat contrary:)Idem. p. 805. These are altoge∣ther lawfull, and are to be embraced, because they are part of the divine worship: and the better to colour
these miserable shifts and falsifications, you give this Caveat to the Reader:Idem ibid. p. 805. Be warie if you finde any such Doctrine, for it is to bee feared the Heretikes have suggested it. Alphonsus à Castro wrote a large Booke against Heresies,Anno 1500. and in particular he charged Luther with many. Yet in his first Booke and fourth Chapter hee attributeth the same title of Heretike to the Pope, and shewes the Pope as Pope is subject to Heresie; but behold the record stands published against Luther, but is wholly razed touching the Pope. The words in my Edition are these; Where∣as some say that he which erreth wilfully in the faith,Quod autem alii dicunt eum quierraverit in fide obstinatè jam non esse Papam, ac per hoc affirmant Papam non pos∣se esse haereti∣cum, & in re seria verbis velle jocari. Ad hunc enim mo∣dum quis pos∣set citra impu∣dentiam asse∣rere, nullum fi∣delem posse in fide errare? nam cum haereticus fuerit, jam definit esse fidelis. Non enim dubitamus an haereticum esse & Papam esse coire in unum possint; sed id quaerimus, an hominem qui alias in fide errare po∣tuisset, dignitas Pontificalis efficiat à fide inde viabilem. Non enim credo aliquem esse adeo impudentem Papae assentatorem, ut ei tribuere hoc velit, ut nec errare, aut in inter∣pretatione sacrarum literarum hallucinari possit. Nam cùm constet plures eorum adeo il∣literatos esse, ut Grammaticam penitus ignorent, quî fit ut sacras literas interpretari possent? Alph. à Cast. advers. haer. l. 1. c. 4. p. (mihi) 6. b. Coloniae excudebat Melchior Nouesianus, Anno 1543. is now no longer Pope, and thereupon concludes the Pope cannot be an Heretike, they seeme in a sad mat∣ter to dally with words: For (saith he) wee make no doubt whether the Pope and an Heretike may agree in one person; but this is our question, Whether a man that otherwise might have erred in the Faith, by vertue of the Papall dignity, be made such as he cannot erre. For I doe not beleeve that there is any so impudent a flatterer of the Pope, that will give him this prehemi∣nence, to say, that he can neither be deceived nor misse in the expounding of the Scriptures; for seeing it is well knowne that many Popes be so utterly void of lear∣ning,
that they know not the Principles of their Gram∣mer, how may it be that they should be able to expound the Scriptures? These words I have cited at large out of my Edition 1543. for if you looke into Al∣phonsus, printed within these last threescore yeares, I beleeve you will finde them razed in this particu∣lar without an Index Expurgatorius; which plain∣ly shewes that as the Pope was and may be an He∣retike, so likewise falsifying of Records is a proper marke of Heretikes. An. 1500. Usher p. 162.Johannes Ferus a Frier Minorite, and prime Prea∣cher at Mentz in Germany, is purged and falsified in many points of controversie which he held with us. Touching the power of Priesthood in remitting of sinnes, it was the doctrine of Ferus:Non quòd homo propriè remittat pecca∣tum, sed quòd ostendat ac certificet à Deo remissum. Ne{que} enim aliud est absolutio quam ab homine acci∣pit quàm, si di∣cat, En fili, cer∣tifico te tibi re∣missa esse pec∣cata, annuncio tibi te habere propitium De∣um, & quaecun∣que Christus in Baptismo & Evangelio nobis promisit, tibi nunc per me annunciat & promittit. Fer. Comment. in Matth. l. 2. c. 9. Mogunt. An. 1559. Lugdun. apud Johannem à S. Paulo. An. 1609. Contr. Man did not properly remit sinne, but did declare and certifie that it was remitted by God: so that the absolution recei∣ved from man is nothing else, than if hee should say, Behold my sonne, I certifie thee that thy sinnes are for∣given thee, I pronounce unto thee that thou hast God favourable unto thee, and whatsoever Christ in Bap∣tisme, and in his Gospell hath promised unto us, hee doth now declare and promise unto thee by me. Of this thou shalt have me to be a witnesse; goe in peace and in quiet of conscience. This declarative power of remitting sinnes was Ferus doctrine; this is ours. But behold the case is altered; for in Ferus printed at Lyons 1609. all those words are razed out, and on the contrary saith, thatSacerdos enim Dei minister verè remittit peccata, ac certificat à Deo remissa. fol. (mihi) 160. b. In Matth. l. 2. c. 9. the Priest doth truely
remit sinnes, and, as the Minister of God, doth also cer∣tifie that they are remitted of God. Touching our justification by faith onely: the true Ferus saith,Nempe quòd solâ fide in Chri∣stum, & nullis meritis nosis, justificamur. In Ep. Pauli ad Rom. c. 16. In verba illa de∣leatur. Ind. lib. prohibit. p. (mi∣hi) 629. & Ind. Madrid. fol. 133 & Ind. Belg. p. (mihi) 393. That we are justified by faith alone in Christ, and by none of our merits; That our owne workes, whatsoever they be, are not of that value that they should merit a reward of condignitie or con∣gruitie, but so farre forth as God in his mercie doth accept them. These and the like passages are com∣manded to be blotted out. And whereas hee sayth,Sic verè nul∣lum hominum genus est quod minimè move∣tur verbo Dei, quàm hi qui in sua justitia confi∣dunt. Idem. in Joh. c. 1. There is no kinde of men that are lesse moved with the word of God, than those which trust in their owne righteousnesse; your men, as being guilty of their trust in their merits of workes, command this and the like passages to bee stricken out. Your Index of prohibited Bookes, published by theOpera tamdiu prohibentur quādi expur∣gatio nō pro die∣rit. Ind. l. pro∣hibit. p. 56. Cardinall of Sandonall and Roxas, tells us, that the workes of Ferus are forbidden to be read till such time as they shall be purged; and sure I am when they are purged they are none of his. For I appeale to you and your fellow Jesuites (Mr. Floyd) whether these passages following be his or yours; I meane, either the Protestant doctrine, which he published before Luthers dayes, or the Popish tenets which are since altered by the In∣quisitors, and taught by the Trent Fathers. In the third of St. Matthew, the true Ferus sayth,Quòd si ali∣quando merce∣dem audis pol∣liceri, scias non ob aliud esse de∣bitam quàm ex promissione di∣vina. Ferus in Math. 3. If at any time thou heare of a reward promi∣sed, know that it is not due for any thing else, but for the divine promise sake. Your Inquisitors com∣mand
it to be altered thus;Quòd si ali∣quando merce∣dem audis polli∣ceri, scias non sine promissio∣ne esse debitam Ind. Madrid. fol. (mihi) 125. If thou heare of a reward promised, know that it is not due without the promise. The one saith, it is not due for any respect, but for the divine promise, ex promissione divina; the o∣ther saith, it is not due without the promise: when the true Ferus addes Gratis promisit, gratis reddidit, He promised freely, and he hath given freely; you command these words to be stricken out. And whereas Ferus commenting upon the words of Christ,Ind. Belg. p. (mi∣hi) 372. Ind. lib. prohib. p. 627. Qui hanc fidem nescit, ad Eccle∣siā non pertinet, etiamsi videtur primus esse in Ecclesia. Idem in Mat. l. 3. c. 16. p. (mihi) 25. Ind. Madrid. p. 125. Ind. Belg. p. 370. Tu es Petrus, &c. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rocke I will build my Church, shewing that this Rocke was meant of Christ by the confession of Peters faith; And (saith hee) whosoever is ignorant of this Faith, belongs not to the Church, although hee seeme to be the chiefe in the Church. These words are otherwise read in your generall Indices, and are commanded to bee stricken out. And upon the words, Si quis natus fuerit, &c. he saith,In Joh. c. 3. p. (mihi) 69. Ind. lib. proh. p. 625. The Preachers of Gods Word ought first to teach faith by which a man is justified, and afterwards good workes; there the words (by which a man is justified) are commanded to be stricken out. Now as you have purged many places, so like∣wise you have forged and falsified others by addi∣tion or retraction: Looke upon his Commentary on the first Epistle of Saint John, and you shall be∣hold strange additions, and the true Protestant Do∣ctrine wrested to flat Popery; as for instance,Scriptura sa∣cra data est no∣bis seu certa quaedam regula Christianae do∣ctrinae. Idem in 1 Ep. Joh. c. 2. edit. Antwerp. An. 1556. The holy Scriptures (saith the true Ferus) are given us as a certaine sure rule of Christian Doctrine. In Ferus printed at Rome, he is taught to say, The holy Scrip∣tures
(andRomana edit. An. 1577. traditions) are given us as a cer∣taine sure rule of Christian Doctrine. The true Fe∣rus saith,Justus licèt in Christo manet, tamen sine pec∣cato nec esse potest; septies enim in die eti∣am justus cadit. Idem in cap. 3. Though the just man remaineth in Christ, yet he is not, neither can be without sinne; for even the just doe fall seven times a day: your Roman Ferus addeth,Sine peccato originali. not without veniall sinnes. The true Ferus saith,Fidē & chari∣tatē conjungit Apostolus, ita tamen ut fidem praeponat. Ibid. The Apostle conjoyneth faith and chari∣ty, yet so as hee preferreth faith: your Roman Ferus addeth, he preferreth faithAdditur, or∣dine, non per∣fectione. in order, not in perfection. The true Ferus saith,Charitas ti∣morem expellit, quia fidem quâ Christum, vitā, propitiationem & salvato∣rem nostrum apprehendimus, probat & con∣firmat, certám∣que reddit. Ib. c. 4. Alite r. Charity driveth out feare, because it trieth, confirmes, and makes as∣sured our faith, whereby we apprehend Christ, our life, propitiation and salvation: your Romane Ferus saith,Charitas ti∣morem expellit, quia peccata remittit, & Spiritus sāctus eam consolatur testimonium perhibens quòd filii Dei su∣mus. Ibid. Charity drives out feare, because it forgiveth our sinnes, and the Holy Ghost doth comfort it, giving testimony that we are Gods children. The true Ferus saith,Ibid. cap. 5. There be some, who after faith doe earnestly urge good workes, but because they teach not withall, to what end they are to be directed, and how much is to be ascribed unto them, they give cause that almost all the common people doe trust in their owne workes, and so they build upon the sand: the Roman Ferus saith, There were some, who after faith, and with faith, did earnestly urge good workes; but because they cast away their necessity, and others ascribed too much to them, they all did build upon the sand. Lastly, in the true Ferus, sometimes by changing of a word, or by taking away of a word, you pervert the sense and meaning of the Author: As for instance; where∣as the true Ferus saith, Saint John condemned all glorying in our workes (omnem gloriam;) your Ro∣man
Edition hath turned omnem into inanem, and saith, Saint John condemned (inanem gloriam) vaine glory, &c. And whereas the true Ferus saith, It is ri∣diculous that some will have Cephas for the head:Ridiculum est quod quidam hîc volunt, Ce∣phas idem esse quod caput. Idem. in Joh. c. 1. p. mihi (43) your Roman Ferus hath left out the word (ridicu∣lum est) and saith, That some will have Cephas taken for the head, which is most ridiculous. Claudius Espencaeus Bishop of Paris, lived and dyed a member of the Roman Church; yet is pur∣ged, because hee speakes not Placentia, sutable to your Trent Doctrine. In his Commentary on the Epistle to Titus, in his first digression, hee is com∣manded to be purged (per quinque paginas) five leaves together; in which hee complaines of the abuses and corruptions growne into the Roman Church and See; he shewes that their greedinesse of gaine, and love of money caused them to dis∣pence with all kindes of wickednesse; as namely, with unlawfull and forbidden marriages, with Priests keeping of Concubines, with incests, mur∣ders, rapes, witchcraft, killing of Fathers, of Mo∣thers, of Brothers, and things not to be named; and under the name and title of the Taxes of the Apostolicke Chamber (for so they terme them) in which Booke (saith hee) being publikely and daily printed,Taxae Camerae Apostolicae. you may learne more wickednesse than in all the summes and catalogues of vices. Then hee shewes that the Councell of Trent was a third time assembled by the command of Pius the fourth;Adeo tamen Romanam cu∣riā repurgare non permisit. yet by no meanes would hee permit that the Court of Rome should be reformed. And
thus in severall pages,Ind. Madrid. f. 60. & Belg. p. 74. Delean¦tur illa verba in Ep. ad Tit. c. 1. p. 74 p. 76, 77, 78. & 82, 83, 84. where hee complaines of the like abuses in the See and Court of Rome, the In∣quisitors command to be blotted out. Lastly, hee proves out of Gregory the Great, and Saint Bernard,Ibid. p. 526. In Tit. c. 3. That every soule is subject to the higher power; that is, the Priesthood to the secular power, the Bishops and Archbishops to Emperours and Kings: and in conclusion, when it is questio∣ned (saith hee) touching the reformation of the Cler∣gie, and orders of Monkes, for sending the Shepheards to their owne folds, and compelling them to feed their owne flocks, they say it is a thing that belongs to a Synod, and the Bishop of Rome:Res est synodi∣ca & pontificia Ibid. p. (mihi) 526. But was there any Reformation at the Councell of Trent? Did the Pope and Councell cause them to bee more diligent in their calling? &c. This and much more to the like purpose they command to be blot∣ted out. Polydore Virgil, a member of your Church, is purged in many points of Doctrine which make a∣gainst you. Possevine tells us,Possen. Appar. p. (mihi) 294. Tom. 2. that his Booke De inventionibus rerum is permitted to be read, if it be such as Pope Gregory the thirteenth comman∣ded to be purged at Rome (1576.) Now if any man list to compare that and Polydore printed at Paris 1528.Parisiis ex Of∣ficinâ Roberti Stephani, Anno 1528. hee shall finde that the true Doctrine of Polydore is not allowed, which protesteth against many points of Popery; but by the Inquisitors command hee is inforced contrary to himselfe to speake the Trent language. As for instance;Polyd. de In∣vent. Rerum l. 2. c. 23. in initio p. (mihi) 41. whereas the true Polydore saith, When God is every
where present, certainly there is nothing more foolish than to counterfeit his image: in your later Editi∣ons you have added these words, In the beginning after the first creation there was nothing more foolish; as if it were wisdome to represent God the Father in these dayes, which in the beginning of the world was foolishnesse. Ibid. l. 5. c. 4. p. 84. usque ad p. 87.In his fifth Booke and fourth Chapter, your Inquisitors command seven whole pages to bee stricken out; and the reason is pregnant: The mar∣riage of Priests, which is prohibited by a positive Law of your Church, is proved to be lawfull, yea and in some case commanded by the Apostles Do∣ctrine, and justified by the examples of Saint Paul, of Peter, of Philip, and other Apostles, that had wives; and he addeth, that according to Saint Pauls Doctrine, the Bishops and Deacons, and conse∣quently all orders of Priesthood, had them; and this custome (saith hee) continued long in the Church: and withall concludes;Porro, dum sa∣cerdotes gene∣rabant legiti∣mos filios, Ec∣clesia faelici prole virūm vi∣gebat; tum san∣ctissimi erant Pōtifices, Epis∣copi innocentis∣simi, Presbyteri Diaconíque in∣tegerrimi ca∣stissimíque. Ib. p. 86, 87. Ibid. c. 9. Furthermore, whilst the Priests did beget lawfull sonnes, the Church flourished with a happy off-spring of men; then your Popes were most holy, your Bishops most innocent, your Priests and Deacons most honest and chaste. Then he proves from Pope Pius the second, that as Marriage upon good cause was taken from the Priests, so it ought to be restored upon better. This and much more con∣cerning the marriage of Priests, is commanded to be stricken out. In his ninth Chapter, hee saith, Worship thou one true and eternall God; but worship thou no Image of
any living creature,Ind. Belg. p. 175 deleatur (say your Inquisi∣tors) let it be strucken out. In his sixth Booke,Idem. l. 6. c. 13. and beginning of his thir∣teenth Chapter, he testifies from St. Hierome, That almost all the holy ancient Fathers did condemne the worship of Images, for feare of Idolatrie. He proves from the Law of Moses, that nothing made with hands should be worshipped; and from the Prophet David, Confounded bee all they that worship graven Images. Hee shewes further, that Gregorie the Great, albeit hee reprehended Serenus Bishop of Marsilia for breaking downe of Images, yet hee commends him for forbidding the worshipping of them. These and the like passages are commanded to be strucken out, per octodecem lineas,Ind. Belg p. 177. Ind. lib. expurg. p. (mihi) 725. for eighteen lines together. Ludovicus Vives a Priest of your second Clas∣sis is purged, and namely by the Divines of Lovan,Plantins print at Antwerpe, 1576. in their Edition of St. Austins workes at Antwerp, Anno 1576. In his Epistle to King Henry the 8th, where he saith, that Princes are supreme Governours on earth next under God, this is commanded to be blotted out: And where he saith, The Saints are worshipped and esteemed by many, as were the Gods among the Gentiles; this passage without a command, in the aforesaid Edition is razed out. Againe, in his Comment on the 8th. Booke of the Citie of God, he tells us how your Romish Priests upon good Friday doe celebrate Christs passion up∣on the stage. There Judas (saith he) playeth the
most ridiculous Mimick,Lud. Viv. in Au∣gust. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 27. even then when he betrayes Christ; there the Apostles runne away, and the Soul∣diers follow, and all resounds with laughter; then comes Peter and cuts off Malchus eare, and then all rings with applause, as if the betraying of Christ were now revenged; and by and by this great Fisher Peter for feare of a Girle, denies his Master, all the people laughing at her question, and hissing at his deniall; and in all these revels and ridiculous stirs, Christ onely is serious and severe; but seeking to move passion and sorrow in the audience, he is so farre from that, that he is cold even in the divinest matters, to the great guilt, shame, and sinne both of the Priests that present it, and the people that behold it. These words and blasphemous actions,Ind. l. expurgat. p (mihi) 41. as being ashamed of them, you doe well to command them to bee blotted out; but yet they are reprinted, and your men are not ashamed to continue the practice of it in your owne Religion. And lastly, where he sayes, That those who pre∣ferre the Latin Translation before the Greeke and Hebrew fountaines,Idem in Aug. l. 15. c. 13. p. 83. are men of evill mindes and cor∣rupt judgements; that passage is left out in the An∣twerpe print. And whereas he saith, that the story of Susanna,Idem. l. 18. c. 31 of Bell and the Dragon, are Apocryphall Scriptures, and not received of the Jewes, nor tran∣slated by the Septuagint:Ind. l. expurg. p. (mihi) 41. all those words are com∣manded to be stricken out. Jacobus Faber Stapulensis, a member of the Roman Church, taught the Protestant doctrine in many points, and therefore he is purged by your severall Indices.
Whereas the Rhemists translate the Greek word , Penance, he defined it Repentance,Jac. Fab. in Evang. Matth. c. 3. fol. (mihi) 13. b. Ibid. c. 5. fol. 24. in initio. and makes a distinction betwixt Repentance and Pe∣nance, such as the Protestants doe; and therefore it is commanded to be stricken out. Againe, speaking of the Scribes and Pharisees, who did attribute righteousnesse to themselves and their owne workes;Ibid. c. 6. f. 30. a. Ind. Madr. fol. 112. The faithfull (saith he) which are of the Law of grace, doe worke most di∣ligently, but doe attribute nothing to themselves, or their owne workes; but all of them doe impute their righteousnesse to the grace of God; All consisteth with the one in the merit of workes, with the other in grace: the one respect themselves and their workes, and are delighted therein; the other regard not them∣selves, but the grace of God; they admire his good∣nesse, and therein is their chiefe delight. Againe, if any man shall doe good in this world, hee must not doe it because it is his will, but because God comman∣deth it; For he which is perfect hath not a will peculiar to himselfe, but his will must be the will of God; and this is the third Petition of the Lords Prayer. In the sixteenth Chapter of St. Matthew, up∣on the words, Thou art Peter, &c. he shewes, that according to St. Pauls doctrine,Ibid. fol. c. 16. (mihi) 74. b. the Rocke was Christ; Hee shewes that Peter was so farre from being a firme rocke, that Christ himselfe did inti∣mate the contrarie, when he said, Get thee behinde me Sathan, for thou savourest not the things of God, but of men: He shewes us further, that our Lord Christ promised to Peter the Keyes of binding
and loosing, but withall testifies, that those Keyes were not Peters, but Christs, whereby Peter doth not binde or loose by his power, but by the will of Christ. He addeth moreover, that not onely Peter received those Keyes, but also all the rest of the A∣postles: But (saith he) there be some which under∣stand by the Keyes of binding and loosing, the Popes power, as Christ spake of that faith, witnessing that he was the Sonne of the living God, which is one of the Keyes of the heavenly Doctrine, upon which the Church is founded, and Peters faith, as upon the true Rocke Christ, was builded.Deleatur ab illis verbis, Ne quis putet Pe∣trum, &c. us∣que ad, Aeterni Patris infusio. Ind. Madr. fol. (mihi) 113. & Ind. Belg. p. 51. This and much more to the same purpose, for thirty lines together, is comman∣ded to be strucken out. In his 20. Chapter he saith,Verum qui o∣peribus suis a∣liquo modo fi∣dunt, minus Deo fidunt, mi∣nusque amant Deum: qui au∣tem nullo mo∣do, sed pacto, sd promissioni imo omnia Deo tribuunt plus Deo fidunt, cu∣jus ineffabili bonitate qui novissimi fue∣runt operando, facti sunt pri∣mi gratiam re∣cipiendo; & qui primi ope∣rando, novissi∣mi gratiam re∣cipiēdo: Quare bonum, &c. deleatur us{que} ad Dei autem omnia. Ind. ut supra. Those which any wayes trust in their workes, have the least affiance in God, and love him the lesse; but those which give all to his promise, and to God himselfe, they trust most in God; by whose ineffable bounty, those which are last in wor∣king, are made first by receiving grace; and those that are first in working, are become last in receiving: Whatsoever therefore a man doth, it is good for him to trust wholly to God his goodnesse, for it is the will of God, and of his speciall grace, that wee are saved, and not of our will or workes: These words, and much more to the same purpose in the same chapter, are commanded to be blotted out. Touching his Commentaries upon Saint John, your Inquisitors have pronounced this definitive sentence,Ind. Madr. fol. (mihi) 115. Because they cannot be handsomely purged, let them all be spunged and blotted out.
Touching his Commentaries upon Timothy,In Tim. c. 3. fol. (mihi) 205. hee shewes, that it was lawfull for Priests to marry a Virgin till the time of Gregory the seventh, (which was nine hundred yeeres after Christ:) hee shewes likewise that the Grecians kept the Apostolicall Tradition in marrying of Wives, and could not change them, and that other Chur∣ches which vowed single life, by their inconti∣nencie fell into the snares of the Devill: And lastly, in his Commentary upon the Galathians, at large he proves,Per solam fi∣dem Christi in∣funditur justi∣ficatio. In Gal. c. 2. fol. 154. That by the Faith of Christ alone we are justified, and that he whichIdem c. 3. fol. 156. Qui au∣tem confidit in operibus, in se∣ipso confidit, & baculo inniti∣tur arundineo, qui frangitur in seipso, & supernum lu∣men non videt, unde descendit Justificatio. trusteth in his works, trusteth in himselfe, and leanes upon a staffe of Reed, which is broken in it selfe; whereby he doth not discern the heavenly light, from whence our justification doth descend: These and many other like passages in seve∣rall places of his Workes, which are consonant to our Protestant Doctrine, are commanded by theInd. Madr. f. (mihi) 118, 119. Inquisitors to be strucken out. Friderici Furii Cenolani Valentini Bo∣nonia; sive, De libris sacris in vernaculam linguam con∣vertendis.Fridericus Furius writes a whole Book of tran∣slating the Bible into the vulgar tongue, for the be∣nefit of the Lay people; hee dedicates his Booke to Cardinall Bovadillius, and he tells him that wee esteeme it an excellent thing to reade the workes of Greeke and Latine Philosophers; and therefore much more ought wee to search and know the will of God out of his sacred Scriptures: for the one is a matter of pleasure, and the other is a matter of ne∣cessity; the not knowing of the one may hurt little or nothing at all, but to bee ignorant of the other brings a grievous mischiefe, besides eternall destru∣ction
of the soule. Againe, what is it (saith hee) to forbid the Scriptures to bee read in the vulgar tongue, than to forbid God his owne purpose, and as it were to command God, which doth declare himselfe to all by his Word, that hee should not be manifested unto us? This is the whole scope of the Author, and for this cause, lest the reading of the Scripture in a knowne tongue should discover An∣tichristian Doctrine by frequent reading,Ind. lib. proh. p. (mihi) 36. the Book it selfe is forbidden, till it bee purged in this and the like places witnessing against your Romane Doctrine. Johannes Langus is numbred amongst your He∣retiques in the first Classis, pag. 51. Yet his Annotations uponPermittuntur verò ejusdem in D. Justinum an oratiōes, itē in Nicephorum scholia, si ex∣purgentur. Ind. l. proh. p. mihi 51. Justin Martyr, and his Com∣mentaries upon Nicephorus, are allowed if they bee purged. Now let the Reader observe for what cause you would have him purged: First touching his Annotations upon Justin Martyr;Multa conti∣net parum Ca∣tholicae Religi∣oni consona, in∣ter ea autem il∣lud est praecipu∣um, quòd tran∣substantiatio∣nem non agnos∣cit, sed opertè contendat, cum corpore & san∣guine Christi remanere ve∣ram panis & vini substātiā. They containe many things disagreeing to the Catholike Religion; but among those, that is chiefe, that hee doth not ac∣knowledge Transubstantiation, but doth openly main∣taine, that the true substance of bread and wine doth remaine with the body and bloud of Christ. Againe,Perversè ad∣modum inter∣pretatur illud Malachiae, In omni loco offer∣tur sacrificium nomini meo, de doxologia, be∣nedictione, lau∣dibus, & hym∣nis. Sic Ind. ut supra. He doth very maliciously interpret that place of Ma∣lachy, In every place a sacrifice shall be offered to my name, that is (saith he) in giving of glory, blessing, laud, and praise to the Name of God. Gerardi Lo∣richii Adama∣rii collectio tri∣ū librorū, &c. de missa publi∣ca proroganda. Ind. l. proh. p. 11.Gerardus Lorichius is prohibited till he be purged for the reproving and condemning your private Masse, and Communion in one kinde; his words be
these, There be false Catholikes, that are not ashamed by all meanes to hinder the Reformation of the Church; they, to the intent that the other kinde of theDe Missa pub. Racemati∣onum, lib. 2. Canonis pars 7. p. (mihi) 177. Sacrament may not be restored to the Lay people, spare no kinde of blasphemy.Excusum an. 1536. For they say, Christ said onely to his Apostles, Drinke yee all of this; but the words of the Canon of the Masse, are, Take and eate you all of this: Here I beseech them let them tell mee, whether they will have this word (All) to pertaine onely to the Apostles?See more, lib. 2. pars Cano∣nis 17. p. mihi. 210. &c. Then must the Lay people abstaine from the other kinde, of the bread also; which thing to say is an Heresie, and a pestilent and detestable blasphemie. Ambrosius Catharinus Archbishop of Compsa wrote against Cajetan;Opuscula ve∣rò similiter prohibentur, ni∣si corrigantur, Ind. l. prohib. p. 4. and (saithBellar. de Ec. Scrip. p (mihi) 312. Bellarmine) hee wrote likewise against Luther: Yet something hee wrote is disallowed of the Church, as namely, touching the words of consecration: other things are commonly refuted by the Doctours of the Church, viz. the cer∣tainety of Grace, of Predestination, &c. therefore his Workes are warily to be read. Thus you have Caje∣tan against Luther, and Catherinus against Cajetan, and Luther & both against the Tenets of their own Church; insomuch as the Inquisitors have com∣manded a deleatur upon Cajetan and Catharinus in the second Classis, and againstCommentaria in Lucam, nisi fuerint ex repurgat & impressis ab an. 1581. vel nisi anteà edita, expur∣gentur. Ind. l. prohib. p. 26. & p. 318. Ind. Belg. p. 317. Ind. Hisp. p. 63. Luthers whole Workes in the first Classis. Didacus Stella is prohibited to bee printed be∣fore hee be purged. The places which are purged are such wherein hee teacheth Protestant Doctrine, as may be seen inSee Appendix to the Romish Fisher caught in his owne net. Mr. Crashaw, and Dr. James, and D.F. Observations.
Ad solam vitae benè actae imi∣tationem, non etiam ad religi∣osum cultum, quem adoratio∣nem vocant Theologi, Di∣vorū monumen∣ta conservare fas est. In Comment. Jos. hist. c. ult. Ind. l. expurg. p. 31.Andreas Masius in his Commentarie upon Jo∣suah is purged for this Protestant doctrine; Wee ought to preserve the Monuments of Saints onely for the imitation of their godly life, not for Religious wor∣ship, which Divines call Adoration. Againe, hee saith,Idem in Jos. c. 22. The Church sets before our eyes the figure of Christs Crosse, (not that wee should worship it;) which latter words are commanded to bee razed out. Lastly, Cardinall Bellarmine, who was the first and best that ever handled all controversies in diffe∣rence betwixt us, was in danger of a prohibition, or rather of an absolute suppression of all his workes.Ind. Belg. p. 269. Your owne Barclay witnesseth of him,Barclay of the authoritie of the Pope. c. 13. p. 66. Engl. That there is not one of the Popes partie, who hath either gathe∣red more diligently, or propounded more sharply, or concluded more briefly or subtilly, than the worthy Di∣vine Bellarmine; who although he gave as much to the Popes authority in temporalties, as honestly hee might, and more than he ought, yet could he not satis∣fie the ambition of the most imperious man Sixtus the 5th. (who affirmed that he had supreme power over Kings and Princes of the whole Earth, and all People, Countries, and Nations committed unto him, not by humane, but by divine Ordinance:) and therefore he was very neare by his Pontificiall censure (to the great hurt of the Church) to have abolished all the writings of that Doctour (which doe oppugne Heresies with great successe at this day) as the Fathers of that order (whereof Bellarmine was then) did seriously report un∣to me. How probable this may seeme, his worke
of Recognitions doth witnesse to the world; where∣in he was inforced to recant that doctrine, which he had both sincerely taught and published according to the truth. As for instance; whereas he professed that the Pope was subject to the Emperour in tem∣porall affaires; on the contrarie hee recants it, say∣ing,Bel. Recognit. de summo Pont. p. 16. I allow not that which I said (with Albertus Pighius) that Paul appealed to Caesar to be his law∣full Judge. Againe, whereas it was said the Popes used to be chosen by Emperours, the word Emperor (potest, & fortè debet deleri)Idem de Cler. p. (mihi) 52. it must, and peradven∣ture ought to be blotted out. And when I sayd that Paul was subject to Caesar, as to his temporall Lord, I meant it was soDe facto, non de jure. Ib. p. 17. Sapendo M. Paolo chasotto Sisto Quinto usci un Indice de libri prohibi∣ti, il quale se ben subito si oc∣culto, non fu pero cio cosi presto fatto che non ne restasse∣ro gli essempla∣ri. Et in questo erano compresse le opere del Bel∣larmino. In lib. Confirmatione del considerati∣oni del M. Paulo di Venetia, di M. Fulgentio Brestiano ser∣vita. In Venetia appresso Ruber∣to Mejetti 1606. Con li∣centia de supe∣riori. in 4to. in fact, but not of right. And in truth it seemes, that neither the Pope, nor his Inquisitors were well pleased with this Ca∣tholike doctrine: For Frier Paul of Venice acknow∣ledged Cardinall Bellarmine and Baronius for lear∣ned men; and further saith, that he hath knowne the one and the other in Rome; but he could wish with∣all, that they had written that which they sincerely thought, without being forced to recant any thing that they had spoken. For Frier Paul knew well that under Sixtus Quintus there came out an Index of prohibited Bookes, which though it were suddainly stayed and called in, yet it was not so closely acted, but that there remained Copies of it; and in that Index the workes of Bellarmine were comprehended. If this learned Cardinals Booke had beene forbidden, you and your fellowes would have beene to seeke of an answere for many objections made against you;
for it is usuall with you to referre me for an answer to Bellarmine. But as it is observed, they recanted many things in their writings:Dum plurima Annalibus dige∣rendis pervocu∣tanda fuere, ag∣novit ingenuè quae primis edi∣tionibus aut mā∣ca, aut non om∣nino ad plenam veritatem abs se fuerāt scrip∣ta, id quod in Annalibus non semel testa∣tus est. For Baronius con∣fesseth, that in his first Editions many things were imperfect, and not altogether true, which were cor∣rected in the other impressions. And I am perswaded, ere long wee shall have an IndexDefēsio Johā∣nis Marsilii in favorem respō∣si 8. propositio∣nes continentis, adversus quod scripsit illu∣strissimus Car∣dinalis Bellar∣minus. Venetiis. 1606. Expurgatorius lay hold on him; For (saith Johannes Marsilius) I have heard that as he hath taken a liberty to mend the Fathers, Canons, and Historians, so he will cor∣rect the Councels after his manner, and for his owne purpose, and so assume unto himselfe a licence here∣unto; which God forbid. Againe (saith he)Marsil. p. 357. See B. Mortons encounter a∣gainst M. Par∣sons reckoning, l. 1. c. 1. p. 10, 11 the An∣swers of Cardinall Baronius are not unlike the an∣swers of Cardinall Bellarmine, who whilst he cannot finde an objected argument to be assoiled by Historie, he saith, that those words have beene inserted into the Bookes: much like to Mr. Floyd, when there is no answere to be made to some particular objections out of the Authors, you reject them all as condem∣ned by your Inquisitors: And this answere I am sure may serve for all objections that can bee made from most Classicall Authors. The last thing which I here meane to speake of, is a certaine distinction of explicite and implicite faith, which the Knight and his Ministers cry out against, and are pleased sometimes to make themselves merry withall, as if they would laugh out; but it is too well and solidly grounded to bee blowne away with the breath of any such ministeriall Knight, as he is. Thus you.
You professed formerly to teach mee for my learning; now it seemes you would instruct me for my manners: you tell me I make my selfe merrie with your doctrine, as if I would laugh out: truly I am sorry to thinke you teach such ridiculous do∣ctrine, as should deservedly cause laughter. Shall I make you my Confessor? I cannot chuse but smile when I consider what great paines you have taken in this whole Chapter, to uphold the Articles of your Faith with sixe pretended rules, and all infal∣lible, as namely, Scripture in the plaine and literall sense; Tradition or common beliefe and practice of the whole Church; Councels either generall or particular, confirmed by the See Apostolike; the authoritie of that whole See it selfe defining Ex Ca∣thedra, though without either generall or particu∣lar Councell; the common and uniforme consent of ancient Fathers or moderne Doctours and Schoole-men, delivering any thing unto us as mat∣ter of Faith: All these sixe rules (say you) we ac∣knowledge, and are ready to make good whatsoever is taught any of these wayes. When I say you assume confidently, that all these are infallible rules to leade men to the knowledge of your Faith, and at last you conclude, and as it were shut up all those rules of knowledge, with the do∣ctrine of an implicite faith. This I confesse is such a mystery of foolishnesse, as deserveth rather laugh∣ter than an answer: For, as Cato said, He marvelled that a Soothsayer did not laugh when he saw a Sooth∣sayer: So I am verily perswaded that your selves
doe smile when you meet each other, to thinke how you cousen the poore ignorant people with a blind obedience, and an implicite Faith. To let passe your Golden Legends and leaden miracles, (which occasion sufficient mirth in long winter nights for all sorts of people) what I pray is that implicite Faith, that you condemne me and our Ministers for laughing at? Mistake us not, I know no Pro∣testant doth laugh at an implicite Faith, which is directed to the proper object, the holy Scripture; we laugh not at an implicite Faith, which cannot be well unfolded or comprehended by reason, as name∣ly, the unsearchable mysterie of the Trinitie, of Christs conception by the holy Ghost, and the like; but we disclaime and condemne your Catho∣like Colliers Faith, which is canonized for your Popish Creed; that is, to pin our Faith upon the Churches sleeve, and to assent to every thing the Church propoundeth to be beleeved, without exa∣mination whether it be agreeable to the Scripture, or besides it. We laugh, or rather wee pitie that Merchant of Placentia, who chose rather to bee a Papist than a Protestant,Laurent. Di∣scept. Theolog. p. 5. because (saith he) I can briefly learne the Roman faith; For if I say what the Pope saith, and deny what the Pope denyes, and if he speake and I hearken unto him, this is alone sufficient for me. And wee cannot choose but smile at the judgement pronounced by your Gregorie de Valen∣tia, upon this poore ignorant Merchant; God (saith he) will have nothing to lay to this mans charge at the dreadfull day of Judgement: His meaning, it may
be is, God can charge him with nothing, because this man knew nothing. This doctrine of Obedience doth well agree with Cardinall Bellarmines exposition upon that place of Job, The Oxen did plow and labour,Bell. de Justif. l. 1. c. 7. and the Asses fed by them. By the Oxen (saith hee) are meant the learned Doctors of the Church, by the Asses are meant the ignorant people, which out of simple beliefe rest satisfied with the understanding of their Superiors. And accordingly your Cardinall Cusanus perswades his Proselytes to relye upon the Church, without further inquirie of the truth;Cusan. exercit. l. 2. & l. 6. For (saith he) Obedience without reason is a full and perfect obedi∣ence, that is, when thou obeyest, without enquiring of reason, as a horse is obedient to his Master. He that shall make a question in your Church, whether the Pope can erre, must resigne up his understanding with this beliefe,Bellar. de Pont. l. 4. c. 5. If the Pope should so farre forth erre, as to command vices, and forbid vertues, the Church were bound to beleeve that vices are good, and vertues are evill, unlesse she will sinne against her owne conscience. This is Bellarmines lesson, and that must bee your Faith. Nay more, Cardinall Tollet will assure you, that if one beleeve his Bishop,Toll. de Instruct. sacerd. l. 4. c. 3. although it be con∣trary to the faith, yet in beleeving that falshood, hee shall performe an act meritorious. I understand you are a Jesuite, and therefore I doe not much wonder, that you so much insist upon the justification of an implicite faith; for you had it from your founder, and are injoyned to make it
good by your owne Order. There is a little Pam∣phlet entituled Regulae Societatis Jesu, which your selves have caused to be printed at Lyons, in which Ignatius Loyala, the Spanish Souldier, and Patron of your Sect,Anticotton, or a refutation of Cottons letter to the Queene Regent, p. 24. printed at Ly∣ons by Jaques Roussin. Anno. 1607. hath laid downe these rules to your Societie: Entertaine the command of your Superiour in the same sort, as if it were the voice of Christ. A∣gaine, Hold this undoubtedly, that all which a Supe∣riour commands, is no other than the commandement of God himselfe; and as in beleeving those things which the Catholike faith proposeth, you are presently carried with all the strength of your consent; so for the performance of all those things which your Supe∣riour commands, you must be carried with a certaine blinde impetuosity of will, desirous to obey without fur∣ther inquiring why or wherefore. And lest that such command might seeme sometimes unjust and absurd, he commands your Jesuits so to capti∣vate their understanding, that they sift not the commands of their Superiours; but that they may follow the example of Abraham, who prepared even to sacrifice his sonne at the commandement of God: and of Abbot John, who watered a drie log of wood a whole yeare together, to none other purpose, but to exercise his obedience; and another time put himselfe to thrusting downe of a great Rocke, which many men together were not able to move, not that hee held them things either usuall or possible, but onely that hee would not disobey the command of his Supe∣riour.
This is that blind obedience and implicite faith which wee laugh at, and this is the ridiculous Do∣ctrine which your Rhemists teach. He saith enough,Rhem. Annot. in Luc. 12.11. and defendeth himselfe sufficiently, who answereth he is a Catholike man, and that his Church can give a reason of all the things which they demand of him. But we have not so learned Christ; wee are ready alwayes, according to the Apostles instruction, to give an answer to every man that asketh us a reason of the hope that is in us.1 Pet. 3.15. And for the better fulfil∣ling of the Law and the Prophets, wee testifie with Moses, Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed belong to us and our children,Deut. 29.29. that we may doe all the words of the Law. We say there∣fore, particular knowledge is to be joyned with the assent of faith; for no man can assent to that which hee never heard, and therefore I thinke no man of understanding, with a blind obedience and implicite faith, will resigne up his eie-sight, and looke through such spectacles as you have tempe∣red for them. For without doubt it was the con∣stant and uniforme Doctrine of the ancient Church, that howsoever faith apprehends mysteries not to bee inquired into, yet the proposition and do∣ctrine of all the Articles of Faith were distinctly taught and conceived by all: and thereupon Theodoret, who was then living, gives us to understand, that in his dayes You might see every where the points of our Faith to bee held and knowne,, &c. Theod. Graec. Serm. 5. not onely to them who are Ma∣sters in the Church and Teachers of the people,
but even of Coblers, Smiths, and Weavers, and all kinde of Artificers, of all sorts of women; and all these you may finde (saith he) discoursing of the Trinitie, and the creation of all things. CHAP. II. The summe of his Answer to my first Section. THe Church of Rome, not without cause, bitter against the Reformed Churches, because they are Heretikes: Theodoret is impertinently alledged: Bellarmine is falsified: The Catholike Church cannot be depraved be∣cause of her promises. And this (setting aside your reproches and impertinencies) is the substance of your second Chapter, in answer to my first Section. The Reply. First you say in your Title, The Church of Rome not bitter against Heretikes. It is true, the Church of Rome is not bitter against Heretikes (as you understand them for Pro∣testants) for they are no Heretikes: but if the termes of Luthers whelpes, Hell hounds of Zwing∣lius, damned persons, and worse than Infidels; if such termes (I say) be Catholike complements (which your fellow Jesuits have given us) I shall freely con∣fesse your Charitie is mistaken.
But (say you) the word Heretike, which is the worst of all, hath ever gone with such as have held new particular doctrines,1 John 2. and such St. John calleth Antichrists. Surely you have my assent and wishes with you, that is, that the name of Heretike may alwayes goe as it hath gone, with such as teach new and Anti∣christian doctrine. But let me tell you, this descrip∣tion of yours is a perfect Character of the Roman Church; and I verily beleeve that if all the pictures and patternes of a Papist were lost in the world, they might all againe be recovered, and a Papist painted to the life in the description of such an He∣retike as you here define. Looke upon the particular doctrines of private Masse, your halfe Communion, your Prayer in an unknowne Tongue, and tell me if these be not new: why else doe you and your associates confesse that the contrary Tenets were taught and revived by the Ancients? And as touching the name of Antichrist, if that be appropriate to Heretikes, it cannot touch the members of our Church; for we make Christ and his Apostles the sole rule of our Faith. On the other side, if you consider the Pope, either as he sits in the place of Christ, as his Vicar Generall, or as he and his adherents teach and uphold a doctrine against Christ (for the word Antichrist imports both) without doubt they beare the markes of Antichrist, is against Christ, & in the place of Christ as his Vicar. and consequently the word (Here∣tike) reflects upon your selves. Cassander tells us, there be some who make the
Pope of Rome almost a God,Cassand. de officio Piiviri. preferring his authori∣tie not onely above the whole Church, but above the sacred Scriptures, holding his judgement equall to the divine Oracles, and for an infallible rule of Faith. I see no reason (saith he) but that these men should be called Pseudo-Catholikes or Papists. Indeed I must confesse I much wonder, that any Prote∣stant should give you that honourable title of Ca∣tholike, especially when you terme them by the name of Heretikes. Those that have the marke of the Beast imprin∣ted in their foreheads, have borrowed both the Name and Nature from him; and therefore your Cardinall tells us,Bell. de Not. Eccles. c. 4. The word Papist is derived from the Pope, such as was Peter, And more particularly your Gregory Martin and the Rhemists give you to understand,Rhem. Annot. in Acts. 11.26. that to be a Papist, is to bee a Christian man, a childe of the Church, and subject to Christs Vicar. You that are so inquisitive after other mens pedigrees, see if with all your Heraldrie you can make good your nominal descent from Christ, and, as you stile him, Pope Peter. Bristow. De∣mand. 8.Your Father Bristow, as a knowne Antiquarie in this point, gives your Father Bellarmine the lye; for he avowes it for certaine, that your name (Pa∣pist) was never heard of till the dayes of Pope Leo the Tenth, and this was 1500. yeares after Christ; and this opinion I am sure is most probable, and more sutable to the Noveltie of your Reli∣gion. But (say you) we Catholikes stile the Knight
and the Reformers, by the common name of Here∣ticks. You told me formerly the title of (Sir) would be left for me: now you have added to the title the name of Hereticke, and you professe it is the worst word of all. It seemes the worst word you have is good enough for me: But I pardon you, and I must let you know that the name of Catholike is as comely with the Professors of your new doctrine, as a golden ring in a swines snout. And as touching the name of Hereticke wherewith you charge me, you rightly resemble Athalia,4 Kings 11. who when shee under∣stood that Joas the right inheritour of the Crowne of Judah, was proclaimed King, ranne in her furie to the Temple, and cryed out, Treason, Trea∣son, when the treason was not in King Joas, but in her selfe that wrought it. Your Alphonsus à Ca∣stro hath written a Booke against the Heretickes in all ages; and in his Index haereticorum, I have sear∣ched diligently, and I finde the names of certaine Popes among them, but mine owne name I doe not finde: For I professe with St. Austin, Errare possum, haereticus esse nolo, I may erre, but I will not bee an Hereticke. Shall I make my confession unto you? I beleeve all things which are contained in the Scrip∣tures,Cum hoc credi∣mus, Priuscre∣dimus, nihil am∣plius credendum esse. Tertul. Ibid. and nothing contrary or besides them as matter of faith necessary to salvation: I beleeve the holy Ca¦tholicke Church. This is an Article of my Faith, and this I first received from the Apostles Creed. Next, I undoubtedly beleeve the Nicene Creed; and this was called Catholicke by those holy Fathers, to
distinguish the Heretikes from the Orthodoxe Christians in the Primitive Church; or, according to your owne words,Chap. 1. p. 2. appointed to be publikely pro∣fessed by all such as meant to bee counted Catholikes; and for the same cause your Councell of Trent de∣creed it to be received (as a Shield against Heresies) and therefore by your owne confession,Concil. Trid. Sess. 3. the Coun∣cels decree, and your Creed it selfe, I am free from the name of Heretike. Lastly, I professe and be∣leeve Athanasius Creed, and that Holy and ancient Father witnesseth of that confession, Haec est fides Catholica, This is the Catholike Faith. If therefore I beleeve the Scriptures, and Ca∣tholike Church, which teacheth the true Faith; If I beleeve the Articles of the Nicene Creed, which distinguisheth the right Beleevers from the Here∣tikes; If I receive Athanasius Creed, which con∣taines the summe and substance of all Catholike Faith and doctrine, what remaines then why I should not be exempted from the name of Heretike, unlesse I shall acknowledge with you the fourth Creed published by Pope Pius the fourth, and con∣sequently subscribe to new particular doctrines, which (as you confesse) doth ever accompanie the nature of Heresie? But the Reformers are Heretikes. He that shall heare but the word (Reformers) in all probability will conceive that they were men which opposed some errors or heresies crept into the Church, and for that cause desired a Reforma∣tion. In the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Perga∣mus
and Thyatira there were some of the Sadduces opinion, who denied the Resurrection, others that joyned Circumcision and the workes of the Law with Christ, and the worke of salvation. The A∣postles you know did reprove those errors in their dayes, and no doubt many accordingly did reforme themselves: Now will you condemne those reformed persons for Heretikes, because they differed from the rest with an utter dislike of those errors which the seduced partie retained? Surely this is the true state and condition of our Church; and accordingly your Trent Fathers made a decree for Reformation in the Councell, and pretended that it was summoned to redresse Heresies which were crept into the Church; and will you say, if they had redressed them, the Reformers had beene Heretikes? The Rogatian Heretikes would have made the world beleeve that they were the onely Catholikes; and the Arrian Heretikes called the true Christians, sometimes Ambrosians, sometimes Athanasians, sometimes Homousians. And in this manner St. Paul himselfe was called before the Judges to make answer to matter of Heresie, and according to this way which you call Heresie, so worship we the God of our Fathers,Acts 24. beleeving all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets. They that so rashly pronounce and call every thing Heresie, are often stricken with their owne dart,Alph. de Heres. l. 1. c. 7. (saith your owne Alphonsus) and fall into the same pit which themselves have digged for others: Hee
shewes therefore by way of conclusion what hee would have called Heresie. This would I rather call Heresie (saith he) to accompt mens writings among the Scriptures of God;Ibid. and so doe they that thinke it a wicked matter to dissent from the writings of man, no lesse than it were the judgements of God. Now that your men are guilty of such Heresies in the highest degree, appeares by his owne confes∣sion; for he complaines of Gratian, who did insert the Popes decretall Epistles amongst the holy Scrip∣tures,Ibid. l. 1. c. 2. p. 14. as if they were of equall authoritie with them: and he speakes as an eare witnesse of others, who in their publicke Sermons have declared, that whosoever shall dissent from the opinion of St. Tho∣mas, is to be censured for an Hereticke. O fortes verbi Dei Praecones! O powerfull Preachers of the word of God (saith he;) or rather I may truly say of St. Thomas doctrine,l. 1. c. 7. for by this meanes it will come to passe, that blessed Bonaventure must be censured of heresie,Ibid. p. (mihi) 31. for he crosseth St. Thomas; and blessed An∣selme must be suspected of Heresie, because contrary to Thomas opinion, he thinketh him not a lover of our blessed Virgin who refuseth to celebrate the Feast of her Conception. As this Author wrote a tract against Hereticks, so likewise he professeth that the head of the Ro∣man Church, as well as the members are subject to that capitall accusation whereof you accuse the Re∣formers, and particularly he doth instance from Platina in Pope Liberius for an Arrian Hereticke, and Pope Anastasius for a favourer of the Nestorian
Heretickes, and withall hee resolves the question (which without all question is so to bee resolved) that the Pope (which you make one of the infal∣lible Rules of your Faith) may become an Here∣ticke. You shall doe well therefore to forbeare your name [Catholicke] till you can free your Pope and his adherents from the markes of Heretickes. In the meane time I might more justly retort your owne words, cum faenore, into your owne bosome, and say, We Reformed Catholickes, not onely stile, but prove J. R. and the Romanists to be rightly stiled by the common name of Heretickes. I proceed to the rest of your accusations; Theo∣doret (say you) it wholly impertinent. Bellarmine his meaning is abused, and his words corrupted. First touching Theodoret: his proofe (notwithstanding your exception) stands good; for if the agreement of both parties in the Nicene Councell, in his judge∣ment, ought to have allayed the heate of contention in the Church of Antioch, I might well conclude much more, that the three Creeds, and the first foure Generall Councels (wherein both sides agree) ought to have abated the edge of your sharpe and bitter Invectives against our Church. And as for abusing of Bellarmine, I assure you it was farre from my thoughts; and you cannot be ignorant that the inference, according to true meaning, standeth thus. If Protestants beleeve and hold all things necessarie for all Christians, then are they not to be accomp∣ted damned persons, and worse than Infidels: But
they beleeve the Apostles Creed, they teach the ten Commandements, and administer some few Sa∣craments, which in your Cardinals opinion are those things which are simply necessarie for all to know and beleeve; and to this argument you an∣swere nothing, but you quarrell about words. When I translate [nonnulla] a few Sacraments, you say I falsifie Bellarmine, for the word (few) is not there; and yet you know well, that by nonnulla hee doth not meane omnia,Nonnulla is a diminutive terme signify∣ing not none, that is, some, be they never so few. and therefore those which he meaneth are but few. The word utilia is in the same place of Bellarmine; and as for other words added or left out, they alter not the sense, nor are wee bound precisely to the words, but to the sense, in translating a passage out of any Au∣thor. But (say you) what man ever tooke Babylon for a true Church? If by Babylon you understand literally the anci∣ent Citie of Chaldea, or that famous City in Aegypt, once called by the name of Memphis, and now of Cair, you know well that it is not my meaning so to take it; (for you confesse that I otherwise ex∣presse my selfe:) but that a particular Church (as namely your Church of Rome, which was some∣times a sound, that is, a right-beleeving Church) may afterwards fall into Heresie, and become spi∣rituall and mysticall Babylon, this is not onely my assertion, but your Romanists and fellow Jesuites in the Church of Rome. Ribera your fellow Jesuite of Salamanca in
Spaine, tells us by way of prevention; If Rome shall commit the same things hereafter which she com∣mitted in the time of John, she shall be called Baby∣lon againe; as it was in the case of Hierusalem which of a faithfull City once, became afterwards a Har∣lot. And according to the Prophesie of St. John, he protesteth in this manner; We know this truth so perspicuously by the words of the Revelation, Ut ne stulcissimus quidem negare possit, that the veriest foole cannot deny the same. Then he concludes,Riberae Com∣ment. in Apoc. 14. v. 8. in c. 14. num. 31. n. 32. Since Babylon shall be the shop of all Idolatrie, and of all impieties, therefore it cannot be doubted, but that this shall be the condition of Rome hereafter. I will come nearer to you: Your Monke Sige∣bert about 500. yeares agoe interpreting the words of St. Peter (The Church at Babylon salutes you) delivereth this doctrine:Sigeb. Ep. p. (mihi) 188. in . l. Goldasti Re∣plic. Hitherto Peter by Baby∣lon did signifie Rome, because Rome at that time was confounded with Idolatrie and all uncleannesse; but my griefe doth now interpret unto mee, that Peter by a Propheticke spirit, by the Church of Baby∣lon, foresaw the confusion of dissention with which the Church of Rome at this day is rent in pieces. Honorius Bishop of Anthun in France, speaking of the fall of the Church of Rome, not long after the same time, cryes out to the members of his Church, Turne to the Citizens of Babylon,Honor. August. in Dial. de Prae∣dest. & l. arbit. and see what they are; behold the buildings of that damned Citie, consider the principall persons there, and thou shalt finde the See of the Beast. Thus you see the first Babylonian tels what he feared would come to passe
in the Church of Rome hereafter; but these two la∣ter proclaimed openly that Rome was become Ba∣bylon many hundred yeares since, and for their loud cries their tongues are now cut out by the command of your Inquisitors. How undeservedly were these men punished and forbidden to speake the truth, let the Reader judge; but that which is observable, you raze the Records which testifie for us; you forbid them to speake, if it make against your Church, and then you demand of us, What man ever tooke Babylon for Rome? I will give you one witnesse more, who is an∣cient and beyond exception, who spake (as it were prophetically) of the Church of Rome in her most flourishing state. St. Hierome writing to Marcella, a noble Lady, exhorteth her to depart from Rome, which he compares to Babylon.Hier. ad Mar∣cel. Ep. 17. Tō. 1. p. (mihi) 156. Reade (saith he) the Revelation of St. John, and consider that which is there said of the woman clothed in purple, of the blasphemy written in her forehead, of the seven Moun∣taines, of the great waters, of the fall of Babylon: Goe out from thence my people, Babylon is falne, and is become the habitation of Divels, and the hold and cage of every foule spirit. Now that wee might understand this was not spoken by him of heathen Rome, he adjoyneth these words following: Est quidem ibi sancta Ecclesia: There is a true or holy Church, there are the Tro∣phies of the Saints and Martyrs, there is the true confession of Christ published by the Apostle. Ludo∣vicus
Vives your very friend, in commenting upon this place, tells us, that St. Hierome thinketh there is no other Babylon described by St. John in the Revelation than the City of Rome;Lud. Vives in August. de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 22. But now (saith he) it hath put off the name of Babylon, there is no confusion now; you cannot buy any thing now in mat∣ter of Religion, without a faire pretence of holy Law for selling it, yet may you buy or sell almost any kinde of cause holy or hellish for money.In D. August. Annot. Ludov. Vives prohi∣bentur nisi cor∣rigantur. Ind. l. prohibit. Class. 2. For this and the like passages, your Vives is forbidden till hee be purged. I must confesse I doe not thinke that the Rhemists would have interpreted Babylon for Rome, if it had not beene to prove Peters being at Rome: It is hap∣py therefore for you that Peter wrote his Epistle from Babylon, for otherwise your succession from Peter had beene questioned; and it is as well for us that you are contented to allow Babylon for Rome, for by this meanes your Antichristian Doctrine is discovered, and your succession of Peters faith is quite abolished. But (say you) if you meane as you expresse your selfe, that a true Church may bee depraved, I know not what to say, but to stop my eares against that mouth of blasphemie: And is it blasphemie to say, a true Church may be depraved? Sure I am it is not blasphemie against the holy Ghost; for the mouth of St. Paul hath spoken it in particular to the Roman Church, even at that time when she was a most in∣corrupt Church; Towards thee goodnes,Rom. 11.22. if thou conti∣nue in his goodnesse, otherwise thou also shalt be cut off:
And may not a Church (thinke you) be depraved, that is in possibility of being cut off? What thinke you of the Church of Hierusalem?Psalm. 48.19. Did not the Prophet David terme it the City of God? and was it not afterwards termed a Harlot by the Prophet Esay? What say you to the Temple of Solomon? was it not termed by him,1 Kings. 8.20. the house of Prayer? and in Christs time was not that house of Prayer be∣come a denne of Theeves?Mat. 21.14. He that sayes Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, doth plainely intimate, that the true Church may be depraved, and that be∣fore his comming there was a true Church. What Babylon is (saith learned Casaubon) thus much the matter it selfe doth plainly shew,In his answer to Card. Peron. p. 9. Eng. that whether some private Church be understood in that place by the name of Babylon, or the greater part of the whole, it was before this a true Church, with which the religion might religiously communicate; but after it was more depraved, the religious are commanded to goe out, and to breake off communion with her. And as touching the authority you cite, that he would be with them to the worlds end, that the Church is built upon a Rocke, that the gates of Hell should not prevaile against it; these promises (I say) concerne no more the particular Roman Church, than the seven Chur∣ches of Asia that are falne away. The blasphemie then you lay to my charge (if any such be) is but against your Roman Church, and of such blasphe∣mie many of your best learned are guilty, in ac∣knowledging a depravation of their faith, (not∣withstanding all the promises of Christ to the
Catholicke and universall Church.) Your Bishop of Bitonto by way of prevention cryes aloud in your Councell of Trent,Cornel. in Con∣cil. Trident. Would to God they were not wholly with generall consent gone from religion to superstition; from faith to infidelitie, from Christ to Antichrist. I could bring you a world of complaints against the falling away and depravation of your Roman Faith, but that your eares will not endure such blasphemie. Howso∣ever, since your best learned have acknowledged Babylon to bee meant by Rome, and that Rome is falne from her first faith,Jerem. 51.6.9. I say with the Prophet Jeremie, Fly out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soule; we would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed; forsake her, and let us goe eve∣rie one into his owne Country, for her judgement rea∣cheth unto Heaven, and is lifted up even unto the skies. CHAP. III. The summe of his Answer to my second and third Sections. IN the second Section he saith I labour to prove the contention betwixt the Churches to proceed originally from them. The third Section is to prove the corruption both in faith and manners: Both which are easily answered; First
by asking, what is this to the purpose for the visi∣ble Church? Secondly, with the contradiction of a former lye, he telleth a new one; for the Refor∣mation was sought for manners onely, and not for doctrine. This is the substance of your third Chap∣ter, in answer to my second and third Sections. The Reply. You have answered two Sections almost in two words; the first, in denying it to be to the purpose; the latter, in giving me the lye: And thus like ano∣ther Caesar you have briefly expressed the expedi∣tion of your victory in few words,Veni, vidi, vici. I came, I saw, I overcame. First, you demand, what is this to the purpose of a visible Church? But I rather wonder to what purpose you make such a demand; For my Booke is entitled The Safe Way, not the visibility of the Church. Yet let me tell you, the Authors which I cite are for the most part members of your Church, and their authorities tend much to the proofe of a visible Church, if your Index Expur∣gatrius did not spunge them, and cause their testi∣monies to be often invisible. For instance; in our behalfe I cite Cassander: To Cassander you answer, he is like your selfe, an Hereticke, or next doore to them: and yet elsewhere you say, with much adoe he may passe for a Catholike.Pag. 21. Oportet esse memorem. I cite Cecenas Generall of the order of Franciscans, as witnessing the visibili∣tie of our Church above 300. yeares agoe; you an∣swer, he was condemned for disobedience and rebel∣lion; for he said Pope John the 22. was an Apostata
and an Hereticke, and therefore not true Pope: And in this manner you can easily resolve all doubts, and reject all Authors that speake not Placentia, accor∣ding to your pallate; onely (say you) St. Bede is a Catholicke. Now if you please, take a review of these Authors. Cassander (you know) was a lear∣ned man, he was highly favoured for his wisedome by two Emperours, Maximilian and Ferdinand; he was moderate in all his writings, he sought to ex∣tenuate the palpable errors and heresies of your Church, he indevoured to accord, and (if it had beene possible) to reconcile the differences on both sides; and lastly, he lived and died in the communion of the Roman Church. Cecenas was a Frier, and Generall of the Order of Franciscans, he was con∣demned de facto by the Pope; but it doth not ap∣peare quo jure, by what right, for if the accusation were true, the Pope deserved the punishment, and not the innocent Frier: listen therefore to the re∣bellion and disobedience for which he was accused. Cecenas shewes in particular that Pope John was a schismaticke and an heretike, in his peremptorie opposition against the Word of God and the Ca∣tholicke Church;Mich. de Cece∣na tractat. con∣tra errores Pa∣pae p. (mihi) 1314. & 1336 in Tom. 2. Gul. Occham. de Ju∣risdictione Im∣periali. Naucter. Ge∣ner. 45. Anno 1324. he charged him with twelve se∣verall errors, which you may reade at large in the place cited; and for those and the like accusations he was excommunicated and deposed by the Pope. I confesse the accusation was capitall, but it was no other than was justly laid to his charge. For Nau∣clerus saith, Many great and famous Divines of great learning and good life proclaimed Pope John (by the
name of Pope) to be an Hereticke for certaine errors; which errors notwithstanding it is said that he (cold∣ly) revoked at the time of his death;Tepidè. and hee addes withall, that Pope Benedict his immediate successor openly condemned the same errors. You see then it was not the Franciscan Frier onely, but many Di∣vines both good and learned did condemne him of Heresie; and not they alone, but the Pope himselfe who succeeded him, publikely condemned him for an Hereticke. And thus much touching Pope John the 21. called by some the 22. There was ano∣ther Pope John, by the name of 22. otherwise cal∣led 23. who was living one hundred yeares after; he was chosen Pope atPlat. in Joh. 24. Bononia, by the consent of all the Cardinals. Against this John, it was specially objected at the Councel of Constance,Quinimo dixit, & perti∣nacitèr credi∣dit, animam hominis cum corpore humano mori, & extin∣gui ad instar animalium bru∣torum. Concil. Constant. That he ob∣stinately held that the soule of man dieth together with the body, and is consumed to nothing, as the soule of brute beasts: Neither did he hold this Tenet as a private man (which is your generall Answer) for Antoninus saith plainely, Pope John held this error in the time of his Popedome,Johannes ser∣monē faciens in publico consi∣storio, dixit quadam haere∣sin sapientia. Anton. part. 3. tit. 21. c. 6. and pronounced words savouring of heresie openly in the Consistorie. Nei∣ther was this accusation of these men accounted rebellion and disobedience in them, as it was in Ce∣aenas; for (saith Gerson)Falsitas do∣ctrinae Papae Jo∣hānis, vicessi∣mi, quae dānata fuit cum sono buccinarum vel tubarum coram Rege Philippo per Theologos Parisienses. Gers. serm. in Festo Paschae Tom. 4. pag. (mihi) 491. his false doctrine was con∣demned by the Divines of Paris, and proclaimed with sound of trumpets in the presence of King Philip; and withall the Councell it selfe deprived him of his Popedome (which shewes plainly, the authority of a Councell is above the Pope.) And to his depo∣sition
subscribed 4. Patriarkes, 29. Cardinals, 47. Archbishops, 270. Bishops, 564. Abbots and Doctors, in all above 900. deposed both Benedict the 12. and John the 23. and yet these men are re∣puted by you for an infallible Rule of the Roman Faith. And thus not onely Ceaenas was deposed for his disobedience towards an Hereticke, and is now thrust into your first Classis of damned Au∣thors, but the whole Councell of Constance touching that Session (where they decred the Councell to be above the Pope) is rejected, and disavowed by your Church. It is no difficult thing then to prove your infalli∣ble Pope may bee an Hereticke; but if any man of your owne Church shall say so, and manifestly prove it, yea although it be a generall Councell, it must therefore be censured and condemned by your Church: And this may briefly serve in answer to what you say against my second Section. The third Section (say you) is of corruption both in Faith and manners,Pag. 50. which the Knight pro∣veth out of the Councell of Pisa, and out of the Councell of Trent; To which I answere: For matter of manners wee willingly acknowledge a reforma∣tion to be needfull, but for doctrine with the contra∣diction of his owne former lye, hee telleth a new one. It is a true saying of Chrysostome, A lyar thinkes no man speakes the truth;Qui mendax est neminem verum putat dicere. Chrys. in Matth. Hom. 19 But that the truth of my assertion may appeare, looke upon the Letters of summons; they declare that the Councell was cal∣led to reforme errors that concerned Faith; they
shew there was a due and wholesome reformation to be made, aswell of the Church doctrine, as of the manners of men, for quieting the consciences of the faithfull: And accordingly Pope Alexander did assemble the most learned of all Nations;Idem dixit, quod ipse vole∣bat vacare cir∣ca Reformatio∣nem Ecclesiae, &c. Acta Con∣cil. Pis. Sess. 20. Bin. Tom. 3. Pars 2. p (mihi) 837. the Cardi∣nals did binde themselves with an Assumpsit, that they would not proceed to the election of a new Pope (when his predecessors Gregorie the 12. and Benedict the 13. were deposed) unlesse the Pope would agree to a reformation in the Head and Members; and will you say the Pope did assemble the most learned of all Nations to teach good man∣ners onely? Cardinall de Aliaco was living in his dayes:De squallor. Rom. Eccles. p. 34. in Biblioth. Westmonasteri∣ensi. Gers. declaratio defect. virorū. he complaines that Pagan abuses, and dia∣bolicall superstitions were so many in the Church, that they could not be imagined. Gerson (Chancellor of Paris) complained of particular errors, that Images in Churches occasio∣ned Idolatrie; Apocryphall Scriptures were brought into the Church, to the great damage of Christian Faith.Occham compē∣dium contr. er∣rores Papae p. 957. Incipit Prologus. Looke into the age before him; Occham (a Frier Minorite) cries out, Alas the time of which the blessed Apostle prophesied (when men will not suf∣fer wholesome doctrine) is altogether fulfilled in our eares; For behold there are many that pervert the holy Scriptures, deny the sayings of the holy Fathers, reject the Canons of the Church, and civill Constitu∣tions of the Emperors. Looke into the age before him;Matth. Paris. p. 843. Grosthead (Bishop of Lincolne) complaines that there was a defection, a revolt, an Apostasie from the true Faith. Looke into Bernards time, and there
you shall finde by his owne confession,Bernard. in Cant. Serm 33. p. (mihi) 673. The wound of the Church was inward, and past recoverie. These former complaints and grievances in the Church did sound aloud in the eares of the later ages, and she made great mourning and lamentation for her children, because they were not such as she first bred them; and accordingly no doubt they wished for a reformation of errors in doctrine, as well as Disci∣pline in the Church. Looke after Pope Alexanders time, and before the Councell of Trent, and your Bishop of Bitonto will shew you the state and miserable condition of your Church, as it were in a Glasse.In Ep. ad Ro∣man. c. 6. Alas (saith he) how were the Scriptures neglected in the later Ages, to the detriment of all people!Rivet. Sum. Controv. p. (mi∣hi) 98. There was then in re∣quest a tedious and crabbed Divinitie about Relati∣ons, about quiddities and formalities; and all those things were handled and wrested with Syllogismes and humane Sophistrie, which (without doubt) by the same authority as they were received, might be refelled. The whole Age was spent about the decrees of men, which were contradictory amongst themselves, and ir∣reconcilable, and nourished perpetuall contention. He was accounted the best Divine, that knew best how to devise the greatest wonders for his Traditions. It was a part of their honour and vaine glory to speake bigge words with great lookes among women, not to be un∣derstood when they disputed of the Scriptures. The Preachers of the word were all sworne to the word of their Masters: and from hence sprung sixe hundred Sects; as namely, Thomists, Scotists, Occhamists,
Alexandrians, &c. O heinous wickednesse! The Gos∣spels and Epistles of the Apostles were laid aside, true Divinitie lay hid, and was handled of very few; but coldly, I will not say, unfaithfully. In what state the Church remained in those dayes, when Papall Traditions and cunning Sophi∣stry prevailed against the sacred Scriptures, let the Reader judge:Onus Ecclesiae c. 16. p. (mihi) 79 Your owne St. Francis foretold that the times were at hand, wherein many differences should arise in the Church, when charitie should waxe cold, iniquity should abound, and the Divell should be let loose, and that the purity of his Roman Religion should be depraved; and accordingly (saith my Au∣thor) the Image of the Crosse in the Church of St. Damian spake unto him;Vade, repara domum meam, quae ut cernis, tota labitur. Goe and repaire my house which you see is altogether decayed. Thus Bi∣shops, and Friers, and Images, stocks and stones cried out of the falling away of your Church (if we may credit your owne Authors) and yet by no meanes you will assent to a reformation of doctrine or manners. At Luthers first rising, which was almost 30. yeares before the Councell of Trent, your Guicciar∣dine tells us,Guicciard. Hist. lib. 13. that there were that yeare many mee∣tings at Rome, to consult what was best to be done. The more wise and moderate sort wished the Pope to reforme things apparently amisse, and not to persecute Luther. Hieronymus Savanarola told the French King, Charles the 8. he should have great prosperitie in his voyage into Italie, to the end hee should reforme the state of the Church, which if he did
not reforme, he should returne with dishonour; and so (saith he) it fell out. I come to the Councell of Trent it selfe, where you may reade many decrees for reformation, and yet neither doctrine nor manners reformed. But let us heare your owne confession. It is true, the Councell indeed complaineth with great reason of the avarice of such whom the Knight calleth the Popes Collectors, though the Councell speaketh not of the Pope: but false it is which he saith, that the Councell complaineth of Indulgences, an Article of faith (as his words are.) The Councell likewise complaineth of many things crept into the celebration of the Masse, and the words of the Councell are right cited by him in Latin in the Margent, but in the English he foully corrupteth them: For in stead of many things, hee translated many errors, which is a grosse errour and corruption in the Knight. These be your grand exceptions to the grosse corruptions laid unto my charge; but all this while you doe not discharge the accusations laid justly to your Church. And in this I must needs say, you play the Hypocrite, who can discerne a mote in your Brothers eye, and cannot see a beame in your owne: First therfore cast the beame out of your own eye, and then you shall easily disccrne without Specta∣cles, that the Collectors of Indulgences are the Popes Collectors, although the Pope is not mentio∣ned in that place; and Indulgences are an Article of Faith created by that Councell, although the Councell proclaime it not an Article of Faith: so
that (multa) many things, might well stand for ma∣ny errors and corruptions, since they were errors in practise. Neither would I have set the Latin in the Margent if I had meant to corrupt them in English; and withall, if you had taken the last edition (as you ought to have done) you should have found them in another Character, and then all your waste words of foule corruptions, had beene needlesse. But in this you resemble Palladius a lewd fellow, who in like manner charged St. Hierome with falsifications and false translations: He preacheth and publisheth abroad (saith Hierome) that I am a falsarie,Hieron. ad Pā∣mich. de optimo genere inter∣pret. Tom. 2. that I have not precisely translated word for word, that I, in stead of the word Honourable, have written these words, Deerely beloved: These things and such trifles (saith he) are laid unto my charge. Now heare what An∣swer St. Hierome makes; Whereas the Epistle it selfe declareth, that there is no alteration made in the sense, and that there is neither matter of substance ad∣ded, nor any doctrine devised by me, verily by their great cunning they prove themselves fooles, and see∣king to reprove other mens unskilfulnesse, they betray their owne. Let us heare therefore the rest of your Things (for so you will have me terme them) which are crept into your Church, and need a Refor∣mation. The Councell (say you) seemeth to acknowledge the avarice of Priests in saying Masse for mony, was not farre from Symonie. It speaketh of the use of Mu∣sicke, wherewith some wantonnesse was mixed, as also of certaine Masses or Candles used in certaine num∣ber,
proceeding rather from superstition than true Religion. This you confesse is true in your Coun∣cell, but to these you answer nothing.Concil. Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 9. You might have added to these abuses both Superstition and Idolatry in the Masse, for your Councell confesseth them both: and I thinke it toucheth your errors in Doctrine. But have you reformed all or any of these things? Is your superstitious number of Masses and lights in the Church abated? Are your lascivious and wanton songs, set to the Organs, and mingled with other Church musicke, redressed? Is your covetousnesse in Priests, with their Supersti∣tion and Idolatry in the Masse, abolished? These cor∣ruptions are things and things (as you call them) and such as I wonder your Councell was not ashamed to confesse, much more to tolerate,Mirae mirae en∣tis Res. Juve∣nal. or rather to pra∣ctice in the daily sacrifice of your Masse. I hasten to the Reformation in doctrine: but you tell me it is a Lye, the Councell never intended it; I instance in private Masse, Latin Service, &c. You answer it is most false, for the doctrine is the same still, and ever was. I perceive your passion makes you much forget your selfe: for your doctrine (I confesse) which is commonly received, is the same now, that was de∣creed in the Councell of Trent; but that is was ever the same, as now it is, all the Colledge of Cardi∣nals and Jesuits cannot prove. Looke upon your owne confession in those two particular instances: Your private Masse, where the Priest communi∣cates alone, is not the same now, as it was hereto∣fore;
For (say you) it was the practise of the Primi∣tive Church for the people to communicate every day with the Priest.Spectacl. pag. 191. Your Prayer in an unknowne tongue is not the same now as it was heretofore, for (say you) Prayer and Service in the vulgar Tongue was used in the first and best Ages;Pag. 271. and now the vul∣gar is become the Latin unknown tongue. Take heed therefore of these confessions, for by such palpable contradictions you may lose your Proselytes, and bring the Lye upon your selfe. Againe, you confesse that the Councell wisheth that the standers by did communicate, not onely spi∣ritually,Pag. 53. but also sacramentally: and doth not your Church in this wish a reformation in doctrine? Doth it not in this preferre the practice of the re∣formed Churches before their owne, and in a man∣ner confesse an error in the allowed practice of the Roman Church? Your Councell commands Pastors that have care of soules, to expound that to the peo∣ple, which is delivered in the Masse in an unknowne tongue; and doe not those that require the Priests to expound it to the people, shew likewise that without such exposition the people are little better for the Masse, and that the Church intended the people should understand it? What is this else, but to joyne hands with the Protestants, and to acknow∣ledge a reformation needfull in your Church, for requiring Service to bee celebrated in a knowne tongue, that the people may understand it? But that I may make good my assertion, and that the Reader may know I have said nothing but the
truth, in affirming the Councell of Trent did make decrees for Reformation for doctrine as well as manners, looke upon the second Session, and tell me if they did not professe a reall intention in both. The words of the Session are these;Concil. Trid. Sess. 2. Whereas it is the speciall care and intention of the Councell, that (the darkenesse of Heresie being expelled, which so many yeares hath covered the earth) the light and purity of the Catholicke truth may shine, through the helpe of Christ which is the true light; and that those things which need reformation may be reformed; the Synod exhorteth all Catholickes assembled, or to be assembled, and especially those who are skilful in the sacred Scrip∣tures, that with continuall meditation they may dili∣gently consider with themselves how these things may bee effected; that they may condemne those things which are to be condemned, and approve those things which are to be approved, that the whole world with one mouth, and confession of one and the same faith, may glorifie God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Take a review of the words of your Coun∣cell; First, Praecipua cura & intentio, ut propulsa∣tis errorum tenebris, quae per tot annos operiarunt terram; the chiefe care to dispell the darkenesse of errour which covered the earth: which words cannot be meant of the Protestant doctrine. For our light is pretended by you to be lately come in, and but in a part or corner of the world. Secondly, peritiam habeant sacrarum literarum, ut sedulâ me∣ditatione secum ipsi cogitent, &c. ut probare proban∣da, & damnare damnanda queant. There needed
not this diligence and skill in Scriptures for Luthers Religion, for they were condemned before by the Pope. Thirdly, Nullus debeat &c. obstinatis discep∣tationibus contendere, which should not be about Lutheran points, but about doctrines of their owne. Fourthly, in the third Section, de extirpandis hae∣resibus, &c. which (say they) is adversus spiritua∣les nequitias in caelestibus, which heavenly places are meant by their owne Church, not by Luthers, as is most evident. For they would never acknow∣ledge our Churches heavenly places. Now I pray, what thinke you of your Coun∣cels Decrees? Will not they extend to a Reforma∣tion in doctrine? or will you say that Heresies in manners crept into the Church, and the most lear∣ned in the Scriptures were chiefly to be imployed for reforming them, that thereby there might be one Faith of Papists and Protestants through the Christian world?De extirpan∣dis haeresibus, & moribus re∣formandis, quo∣rum causa prae∣cipue est con∣gregata. Sess. 3. Looke upon the third Session, and there likewise you shall finde a Decree for roo∣ting out of Heresies in doctrine, aswell as rectifying of manners and the discipline of the Church; and for both those causes (saith your Decree) the Councell was principally called. It is a most evident truth then (howsoever you redouble the lie upon me) that the Councell did intend a Reformation in do∣ctrine; for otherwise, to what end should the Pope summon all Christian Bishops out of all Nations, even at that time when the Protestants were in number infinite, and had discovered and proclai∣med the errors of the Roman Church? Besides, to
what purpose were those disputes and oppositions in the Councell against particular points of Do∣ctrine, if they had not beene adjudged erroneous, and needed a reformation? But herein the Reader shall easily discerne the policie of your Church. At the first calling of the Councell (when these first Sessions were made) the number of Bishops were but few, (about 40.) but after the faction of the Popes creatures in multitude prevailed, all hope of reformation was abandoned; And thereupon the Bishops of Apulia publikely declared, that the Trent Fathers were nothing else but the Popes crea∣tures, and his bondslaves;See Craken∣thorpe. and accordingly there was an oath proposed severally to be taken in this manner; I vow and sweare true obedience to the Bishop of Rome, &c.Bulla Pii 4. And all other things likewise doe I un∣doubtedly receive and confesse, which are delivered, defined, and declared by the sacred Canons, and gene∣rall Councels, and especially the holy Councell of Trent; and withall, I condemne, reject, and accurse all things that are contrary hereunto, and all Heresies whatsoever, condemned, rejected, and accursed by the Church; and that I will be carefull this true Ca∣tholike faith (out of the which no man can be saved, which at this time I willingly professe and truly hold) be constantly (with Gods helpe) retained and confes∣sed whole and inviolate to the last gaspe; and by those that are under me, or such as I shall have charge over in my calling, holden, taught and preached, to the uttermost of my power: I the said N. promise, vow,
and sweare, So God me helpe, and his holy Gospels. Andr. Dudi∣thius in Ep. ad Maximil. 2.Now what good (saith Dudithius) could be done in that Councell, which onely numbred, but never weighed suffrages? Though our cause was never so good, we could not come off with victory; for to every one of us, the Pope was able to oppose an hundred of his owne. This Author was sent as Ambassador to the Councell from the state and Clergy of Hungarie, and he confirmes what I have testified of their pro∣ceedings. But observe the mysterie of iniquitie displayed in your Councell, after it had continued eighteen years, and during the lives of eight Popes, in conclusion they declared in their last Session,Sess. 25. c. 1. Decret. de Refor. p. 312. contrarie to their former decree of Reformation, that the Synod was (chiefly) called for restoring of Ecclesiasticall discipline; and hereby is plainly dis∣covered their deceivablenesse of unrighteousnesse; insomuch as I may truly say with that learned Gentleman and Translator of the Trent Historie, The Bishops of Rome,Sir Nathaniel Brent in Ep. to the Historie of Trent. in stead of being Christs holy Vicars, as they pretend, have beene the greatest, and most pernicious quacksalving Juglers that ever the earth did beare. Those Bishops therefore that boast of the Law of God, and make as it were a covenant with him, to renew the ancient Faith, and restore it to her first integritie (as your Trent Bishops pro∣fessed) let them consider with themselves how neare that Prophesie of David doth concerne them, who deny a Reformation; For unto the ungodly (said God) why dost thou preach my Lawes,Psal. 50.16, 17. and takest my Covenant in thy mouth, whereas thou hatest to bee
reformed, and hast cast my words behinde thee. CHAP. IV. The summe of his Answer to my Fourth Section. TO this Section, the title whereof is, That many learned Romanists have falne from the Catholike Faith to be Protestants, he saith, the Catholike Faith is indivisible, and they that re∣nounce it in part, renounce it in all: Hee affirmeth that in Priests, who cannot conteine, to marry, it is a greater sinne than to keepe a concubine. This is the substance of his fourth Chapter, in answer to my fourth Section. The Reply. I shewed in my fourth Section, that many learned Romanists, convicted by evidence of truth, either in part, or in whole, renounced Poperie be∣fore their death.Pag. 58. That some have renounced the same in part (say you) is foolishly said, for no man can re∣nounce the Catholike Faith in part, it being indi∣visible. If I shall prove your assertion to bee a strange Paradoxe, the foolishnesse will returne into your owne bosome. For the better illustration therefore of your Tenet,Oratio in lau∣dem Athanasii. heare what division Gregory Nazi∣anzen makes upon that ground: When one taketh
up water in his hand (saith he) not onely that which he taketh not up, but that also which runneth forth, and findeth passage betweene his fingers, is divided and separated from that which he holdeth and incloseth in his hand: so not onely the open and professed enemies of the Catholike Faith, but they also that seeme to be her best and greatest friends, are sometimes divided one from another. What thinke you of this ancient Father? Is your Faith indivisible by his Doctrine? or will you say it is foolishly spoken of him? But (say you) he that ceaseth to beleeve one point, ceaseth to beleeve any one as he should: And is this wisely spoken thinke you? Is not this your latter error greater than the first? For proofe therefore of your assertion, shew mee that man, who before the Councell of Trent held all the points of your Faith, as they are now taught and received in your Church; I say, give me but one since the Aposles time, who within the compasse of fifteene hundred yeares beleeved all your doctrines of Faith, en∣tirely in all points, and for that one mans sake, I will confesse your Faith is indivisible, and submit my obedience to your Church. Your Index Expurgatorius discovers the weak∣nesse of your opinion: I speake not of Authors which were condemned in your first and third Classis for Heretikes, but of those Romanists who in the second Classis are purged for their suspected doctrine (as you terme it) and yet never forsooke your Church;Propter suspe∣ctam doctrinam Ind. lib prohibit. I dare confidently avow, that there are above foure hundred of those Classicall Au∣thors,
all members of the Roman Church, never excommunicated, never condemned for heresie in your Church, and yet are commanded by your In∣quisitors to be blotted out in some particular points of doctrine, which make against your Trent Faith. If these men therefore have renounced your Faith in part, how is your Faith indivisible? Or If they cease to beleeve one point, why doth your Church cite their testimonies, and allow their opinions in other doctrines consonant to your Church, when as (by your Tenet) he that ceaseth to beleeve one point, ceaseth to beleeve any one as he should? If you should forsake all Authors that forsake your doctrine in part (or in some particular points) you will generally suffer a Recoverie against your owne Church. I will give you but one instance. It is the common Tenet of the Roman Church at this day, that the blessed Virgin was conceived without originall sinne: yet the contrarie Tenet is likewise maintained by the members of your owne Church. Ludovicus Vives tells us, that two orders of Friers,Ludov. Vives in lib. 20. de Ci∣vit. Dei. cap. 26. p. 828. both fierce, and both led with undaunted Generals, set this question a foote; the Dominicans by Thomas Aquinas, and the Franciscans by Duns Seotus: the Councell of Basill decreed, that shee was wholly pure without all touch of sinne, but the Dominicans obje∣cted that it was no lawfull Councell, and the Mino∣rites of the other side avowed that it was true and ho∣ly, and called the Dominicans Heretikes for stande∣ring the power of the Church; so that the matter had come to a shrewd passe, but that Pope Sixtus forbad
this Theame to be any more disputed. To proceed to the rest of your observations. I produced for a witnesse Paulus Vergerius, who re∣nounced Poperie, being a Romish Bishop, by the testimonies of Sleidan, and Osiander; I cited the Councell of Basil, for dispensing with the cup to the Lay people; Aeneas Sylvius for Mariage of Priests; Mr. Harding against your private Masse; Mr. Ca∣saubon for your translating of the Scriptures; Lord Cooke for the Papists frequenting our Churches, till the 11th. of Qu. Elisabeth: Now let the Reader judge of your moderate and learned confutation: First,Pag. 59. Sleidan and Osiander (say you) are notorious fellowes both for lying and heresie; Paulus Verge∣rius, when he dyed, cast forth a horrible stench, and roared most fearefully like an Oxe; The Councell of Basile (you know) is of little or no authoritie with Catholikes, as being reproved by the Sea Apostolicke; Aeneas Sylvius, what hee wrote in the time of that Councell, is revoked by him in his Bull of Retractati∣ons; Touching Casaubon, you say there is shame enough in store for us both; Touching the Lord Cooke, he was soundly answered by a Catholicke Di∣vine, and so exposed to the scorne of the world for his notorious falshoods. These be your severall answers, and this is a confutation of their authorities: but I say to you, if these men have spoken untruth, beare witnesse of their falshood, if otherwise they delivered the truth, why do you reproach them? Either let their proofs bee plainly and moderately confuted, or let the
lying lips (saith David) be put to silence,Psalm. 31.20. which cru∣elly, disdainfully, and despightfully speake against the righteous. Such as is your charitie, such is your chastitie: for when I cite your Jesuite Costerus for a witnesse,Coster. Enchir. cap. 17. propo. 9. Pag. 64. that a Priest doth sinne more grievously in marrying a wife, than keeping a concubine, you scoffingly re∣turne me this answere: You seeme to take this for a great error, but in Priests who cannot marrie, it is a greater sinne to marrie, for it is not marriage. Thus you. And is the marriage of Priests no marriage? Was there no marriage in all the Tribe of Levi? What will become of all the sonnes of Aaron? were they all bastards?Ignatius ad Philadelph. I wish (saith Ignatius) that I may be found meet before God to follow their steps which raigne in his Kingdome; as namely, Abra∣ham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and Esay, and other Prophets; of Peter and Paul, and other Apostles, who lived in matrimonie, and used conjugall rites. And in conclusion hee answeres your assertion in these words; If any man call lawfull copulation and procreation of children,Idem, ibid. corruption and unclean∣nesse, that man hath a serpent, the Devill (that fell from God) dwelling in him. Againe,Grat. Par. 1. dist. 56. fol. 67. Osius Palea. your owne Gratian tells us from Pope Damasus, that many Bishops of Rome were Priests sonnes, as namely Pope Hosius, Bonifacius, Agape∣tus, Theodorus, Silverius, Deusdedit, Faelix, Gela∣sius, all these were Popes, and Priests sonnes: and then he concludes;Cōplures eti∣am alii inveni∣antur, qui de sacerdotibus nati, Apostolicae sedi praefuerūt. Ibid. There were many others also to
be found, who were begotten of Priests, and governed in the Apostolike See.Athanas. ad Dracontium. p. (mihi) 518. And Athanasius writing to Bishop Dracontius, tells him, that in his dayes ma∣ny Monkes were Parents of children, and Bishops likewise were Fathers of Sonnes; and this was 340. yeares after Christ. But I presume you will not say, that the mar∣riage of those Priests was no marriage, and their brood was spurious and illegitimate. Those who account it a Capitall offence for a Priest to marrie, and a veniall sinne to keepe a concubine, doe right∣ly resemble the old Heretike Aërius, who used to say,Epiph. haeres. 76. To have the company of a woman out of marri∣age, is no more sinne, than for a man to claw his eare. St. Austin puts the question,De bono Ma∣trim. dist. 27. Quoniam. and resolves it in this manner; Some say they be adulterous that mar∣rie after they have made a vow; but I tell you (saith he) they sin grievously that put such asunder. And elsewhere more particularly hee concludes against your Tenet;Augustinus de bono viduitatis cap. 10. They that say the marriage of such men or women as have vowed continencie, is no marriage, but rather adulterie, seeme unto mee not to consider discreetly and advisedly what they say. And in his Tract of holy virginitie he plainly shewes the Anti∣quitie of your error,August. de san∣cta Virgin. c. 34. and refutes it, where speaking of vowed persons, he tells us; that many of them are kept from marriage, not for love of their godly purpose of Virginitie, but for feare of open shame; which shame proceedeth of Pride, for that they are more afraid to displease men than God: they will not marry, because they cannot without rebuke, yet better
were it for them to marrie, than to burne, that is to say, with the flame of their concupiscence to be wasted; they are sorrie for their profession, and yet it grieveth them to confesse it.Chrys. contra Judaios Gentil. & haeret. serm. de nuptiis Cana in Galil. In like manner Chrysostome in the same age doth elegantly illustrate the honour of marriage in Spirituall persons. Our Lord honoured Marriage with his presence, and sayest thou that Marriage is a hindrance unto godlinesse? I tell thee Marriage is no hinderance. Had not Moses a wife and children? Helias, was not hee a virgin? Moses brought downe Manna from Heaven, so did Helias fire: Moses caused Quailes to flie in the heaven, and Helias shut it with a word. What hurt did virginity to the one? what impediment was wife and children to the other? See Helias coached in the ayre, and Moses travelling through the Sea. Behold Peter a Pillar of the Church, he had a wife, therefore finde no fault with Marriage. Looke into the Ages following; your Angelicall Doctor Thomas Aquinas resolves the question flatly against you & your fellow Jesuits. If an Aco∣lothyte (saith he) doe confesse to a discreet Priest,The Acolo∣thytes were those that ligh∣ted the Tapers at the reading of the Gospel in the Masse. that by no meanes he can containe, the Priest doth not much offend in giving him this counsell, that he should marry privately, and closely blinde the eyes of the Bishop. And if afterwards he be willing to take Orders, we hold it lesse sinne for him to use his wife, than to commit forni∣cation; for it is a lesse offence to accompany with his wife, than to commit fornication against the Divine Precept. They who pretend chastitie, and make a vow to keepe it, when they enter into holy Orders,
doe breake it even in this, when they allow a con∣cubine. Aeneas Sylvius was conscious to himselfe of the danger of that sinne, and therefore he wished that marriage were restored to Priests; yea, whilst he was a Cardinall he had his concubine, to whom at last he gave threescore Florens for her Dowrie: and it seemes when he was well in yeares, in or a∣bout the time of his Popedome, he confessed; I cannot boast of any merit in my chastity,Magis me Ve∣nus fugitat, quam ego illā horreo. Ep. 92. for to tell the truth, venerie doth rather flie from me, than I from it. Neither was it his particular case alone; for the Booke called Taxae Camerae Apostolicae, which your Bishop Espencaeus complained of, doth sufficiently witnesse the damnable effects of such divellish doctrine. The gravest Cardinals in Rome, who were appointed by speciall Commission, and presented their information to Pope Paul the third, doe sufficiently witnesse the forbidden fruits of such an evill tree: The words are these; In this City of Rome the Curtezans passe through the streets,Wolph. Lect. Memor. Anno 1535 p. 403. or ride on their mules, like honest Matrons, and in the midst of the day, Noblemen and Cardinals deare friends attend upon them. We never saw such cor∣ruption, but onely in this Citie, which is the example and patterne of all other: moreover, they dwell in faire and goodly houses. On the other side, you would make us beleeve, that your Curtezans goe altogether on foote; that they have a speciall badge of dishonestie, whereby they may be knowne; that they are despised and reviled of the people, but especially by Cardinals
and the Nobles; that they dwelt in out-houses and back lanes: but to ride on horsebacke, to be attyred as honest Matrons and Noble Ladies, to be atten∣ded by Priests and Cardinals friends, and to dwell in faire and beautifull houses, this shewes that your dispensation for stewes is occasioned chiefly by the forbidding of marriage; and by this meanes marriage, which is honourable in all,Heb. 13.4. and the bed un∣defiled, by the Apostles doctrine, is now become a sinne, and your Apostolike See the Mother of Fornications. This occasioned your owne Agrip∣pa to complaine of your casting up of the Bawds rents with the revenew of your Church.Agrip. de va∣nit. scient. c. 64. de Lenonia. I have heard (saith he) the accompts cast up in this sort; he hath two Benefices, one cure of twenty Ducats, a Priorie of forty Ducats, and three whores in a bro∣thell house. I list not any longer to stirre this filthie puddle,Camerinam movere. Eras. Adag. which stinkes in the nosthrils of God and good men; the counsell of your Canonist is safe and good in this particular.Panor. de Cler. Conjug. Cap. Cū Olim. The Church (saith he) should dis∣charge the part of a good Physitian, who when by ex∣perience he findes one medicine rather hurt than helpe, he removeth it, and applieth another: and there hee gives the reason, Because we finde by experience, that the Law of single life hath brought forth contrarie effects: and the rather, because it is resolved by your learned Cardinall:Cajet. in quod∣libet contra Lutherum. It cannot bee proved either by reason, nor yet by authority, to speake absolutely, that a Priest doth sinne in marrying a wife; for neither the Order of Priesthood, in that it is Order, nor the
same Order, in that it is holy, is any hindrance to matrimonie; for Priesthood doth not dissolve matri∣monie, whether it be contracted before Priesthood or afterwards, if we (setting apart all other Ecclesiasti∣call Lawes) stand onely to those things which we have received of Christ and his Apostles. Panorm. extr. de Elect. C. Li∣cet. de Vit. Ab.Againe, your owne Panormitan tells us, that the Priests of Grecia, being within Orders, doe marrie wives; and we see they doe it (saith he) sine peccato, without sinne, or breach of Law, either of God or man: And thus by your owne Tenet you stand with the positive law of man against the law of God; you stand in opposition against the Greeke Church, which ever used it; and lastly, you are at difference among your selves,Espencaeus de Continentia. l. 1. c. 11. p. 116. when many prime members of your owne Church utterly condemne it. The doctrine of St. Paul is evident and plaine, It is bet∣ter marrie than burne. This Law is cleane perver∣ted by your Jesuits doctrine;Utrumque est malum, nu∣bere & uri, imo pejus est nubere, quicquid excla∣mant adversa∣rii: praesertim ei qui habet vo∣tum solenne. Bell. de Mo∣nach. l. 2. c. 30. Hist. of Trent. l. 5. fol. 400. & 680. for (saith Bellarmine) Let our adversaries say what they will, it is worse to marrie than burne, especially for him that hath made a solemne vow: So that the Law of God must give way to the Law of man, and chiefly for reason of state and policie. For (saith Cardinall Rodolpho) if the marriage of Priests were tolerated, this inconvenience would follow, the Priests having house, wife, and children, would not depend upon the Pope but on the Prince, and their love to their children would make them yeeld to any prejudice of the Church: they will seeke also to make their Benefice hereditarie, and in a short space the authoritie of the Apostolike See will be
confined within the walles of Rome. And to these rea∣sons you may truly adde this, as appendant to the rest; the dispensation of Stewes would be neglected, and consequently the great Revenue of the Roman See would be utterly lost; and therefore the Index Expurgatorius will not lay hold of any such do∣ctrine. For a conclusion of this point. If you say mar∣riage of Priests be malum in se, evill in it selfe, you comply with the Devillish doctrine of Tatianus; If it be evill quia prohibetur, because it is forbid∣den onely, then fornication, which is evill of it selfe, and in it selfe, must needs bee the greater sinne. CHAP. V. The summe of his Answer to my Fifth Section. OF this Section (saith he) there is not much to be said, for there is nothing in it, but a li∣tle of the Knights own raving. Maldonat approveth and commendeth St. Austins explica∣cation, but addeth another of his owne. After this, the Knight hath a great deale of foolish stuffe, which needs no answer. The Reply. Your answer is short, by your words be some∣what
sharpe: and you can finde nothing in that Se∣ction but raving and foolishnesse? If it be raving to cite Texts of Scripture against your maimed Com∣mandements, your Invocation of Saints, your Prayer in an unknowne tongue, your worship of Images, and the like: If it be raving to say Purgatorie is created a point of Faith, & that Faith is confirmed by Councels, meerely for the benefit of the Pope and Clergie; that you doe not exercise the power of your Priesthood in binding as well as loosing, by reason no man will give monie to be bound, but to be loosed in Purgatorie: If it be raving to say your Jesuite Maldonat preferres his owne explication of Scripture before St. Austins, onely because it more crosseth the sense of the Calvinists; and with∣all confesseth that St. Austins opinion is more pro∣bable; If this I say may bee deemed raving, then will I confesse your railing is a good answer. But he despaires (say you) of his cause, who seeth Maldo∣nats saying practised by the Church of Rome against his Church and doctrine. Acts 5.38, 39.I confesse with the blessed Apostle, If our coun∣sell or worke be of men, it will come to nought, and then I might despaire of it, but if it be of God, yee cannot overthrow it, lest happely yee be found even to fight against God. We have no cause (blessed be God) to despaire of our Religion, which in one Age hath spread over the better part of Christen∣dome. But I conceive there is little hope of you or your cause, who have sold your selves either with Ahab to worke wickednesse, and maintaine
Idolatrous worship for your owne advantage; or like Maldonat,See Maldonat. Col. 1536. Unum è duo∣bus intelliga∣tur necesse est, aut tunc non scandaliz abimi∣ni, cùm videri∣tis filium homi∣nis ascendentē ubi erat prius: aut (contra) tunc magis scandaliz abimi∣ni: priorem sen∣sum plerique sequūtur, Chry∣sost. Augustin. &c. Yet Mal∣donat follow∣eth the latter. openly to professe greater hatred to Protestants, than love to the truth it selfe. For it is apparent, ex professo, he preferreth his owne o∣pinion without any authoritie, before St. Austin, nay contrarie to St. Austin, and hee gives this rea∣son for it; Because this sense of mine doth more crosse the sense of the Calvinists. But I may say to you, as sometimesLudov. Viv. de Civ. Dei. l. 13. c. 24. Ludovicus Vives spake upon the like occasion: St. Austin is now safe, because of his age, but if he were alive againe, he should be sha∣ken off as a bad Rhetoritian, or a poore Gramma∣rian. And yet this good Saint was so farre from defending any opinion against the knowne truth, that on the contrarie, he preferreth the in∣terpretation ofAugust. contr. Cresc. Gram∣mat. l. 1. c. 32. & l. 2. c. 32. p. (mihi) 218. & 241. Cresconius a Grammarian, before St. Cyprian the Martyr, because it seemed to him more probable and agreeable to the truth. CHAP. VI. The summe of his Answer to my Sixth Section. THe Knight (saith he) seemes to acknow∣ledge that he cannot assigne the time and persons when and by whom the errors of the Roman Church came in. Good Physitians use to enquire of the causes, effects, and other circum∣stances,
and upon the circumstance dependeth the knowledge of the disease. We pleade prescrip∣tion for our doctrine from the beginning. The difference betwixt Heresie and Apostasie. The Church cannot fall away, without some speciall note and observation. The Reply. It is to be wondered what art and policie your Church doth use to put off the triall of her cause, when it should come to hearing. If we speake of a depravation of your Faith, you crie out it is blas∣phemie; If we shew your owne mens complaints for a reformation of your doctrine, you say they meant a reformation onely of Discipline; If we plainly prove the noveltie of your Trent Articles, by comparing them with the Tenets of ancient Re∣ligion, you threaten to bring an action of the Case against us for slandering and defaming of your Church, except we can assigne the precise time and person when those errors came in. Let us use the words of your fellow Campian; Can I imagine any to be stuffed in the nose,Camp. Rat. 2. that being forewarned can∣not quickly smell out this subtle juggling? Why doe you not rather complaine of the Noveltie of our doctrine, and bid us shew the time when, and the Authors who first broached our two Sacraments, our Communion in both kindes, our Praier in a knowne tongue, our spirituall presence, and the like; if I faile in these, then say, The Knight see∣meth to acknowledge he cannot doe it. The errors in your Church which wee com∣plaine
of, are negative Articles amongst us, and the proofe lies on your side: If you cannot shew Apostolicall Authors for your owne doctrine, must we be therefore condemned, because we doe not prove the Negative? Or otherwise it must needes follow by your Logick, that it is the same doctrine which was once delivered to the Saints, because we cannot shew the first Author of it. You cannot denie that there are many particu∣lar errors in the Church, whose first Authors can∣not be named by you nor us, and therefore will you conclude they are no errors? The custome of communicating little children in the Sacrament of the Lords bodie and bloud was an error, and con∣tinued long in the ancient Church, yet the first Au∣thor of it was not knowne. There were many did hold there was a mitigation and suspension of the punishment of the damned in hell, by the suffrages of the living; this error was anciently received, yet the first Author was not knowne. The opinion that all Catholike Christians, how wicked soever, shall in the end be saved, as by fire, was an ancient error, but the Author is not knowne. Againe,Alph. contr. hae∣res. verbo In∣dulgentia. p. (mihi) 354. there are many things (saith your Alphonsus) knowne to la∣ter writers, which the Ancients were altogether igno∣rant of. There is seldome any mention of Transub∣stantiation amongst the Ancients; almost none of Pur∣gatorie; what marvell if it so fall out with Indulgen∣ces, that there should bee no mention of them by the Ancients? If therefore such errors crept into the Church in the first and best Ages, which are now
condemned by your selves and us, without enquiring after the time, and Authors that first broached them. Nay more, if your points of Faith, as name∣ly, Transubstantiation, Purgatorie, and Indulgences, were altogether unknowne to the Ancients (as your men confesse) why should you require us to shew the first Authors of your doctrines, which were utterlie unknowne to the ancient Fathers? Or ra∣ther, why do you not condemn them with us, as you do the errors which were received for true doctrines amongst the Ancients? If St. Peter were at Rome, no doubt the Church received & beleeved his Prophe∣sies;2 Pet. 2.1. There shal be false Teachers among you, who (pri∣vily) shall bring in damnable heresie. If the Apo∣stle both forewarned you and us, that errors and he∣resies must steale in privily, sensim sine sensu, secretly and by degrees into the true Church, and yet would not reveale the Authors of the heresies, what mad∣nesse were it in you or us to passe by those damna∣ble Heresies, or rather to pleade for them, because wee cannot learne the name of the false Tea∣chers? Vincent. Lyr. de haeres. c. 15.Vincentius Lyrinensis, who was living 400. yeeres after the Apostles time, complaines that cer∣taine in his dayes did bring in errors secretly, which a man (saith he) cannot soone finde out, nor easily con∣demne.Tertull. advers. Valent. c. 3. The Serpent hides himselfe as much as hee can (saith Tertullian) and sheweth his chiefe skill in wreathing himselfe into folds, and in thrusting him∣selfe into dark and blinde holes: Such is the nature of false teachers, they seeke nothing more (saith the same
Author) than to hide that which they preach,Idem c. 1. if yet they may be said to preach that they hide. But good Physicians (say you) use to enquire of the causes, effects, and circumstances;Pag. 73. for upon these circumstances dependeth the knowledge whether it be a disease or no. It is most true that Physicians will enquire of the causes of the disease, but will they deny the Patient to be sicke, or refuse to minister Physicke to him, unlesse he tell them precisely how or when he first tooke his disease or infection? For this is our case, and the point in question touching a reformation. Neither doth the knowledge of the disease of the body depend upon the circum∣stances of time, place, and person. I thinke you never read such Aphorismes either in Gallen or Hyppocrates; neither doth your knowledge of er∣rors and heresie in your Church depend on the cir∣cumstances of time, place, and persons: For some Authors, at the same time, and in the same place, might have broached truth, when another set his heresie abroach; as namely, Saint Austin precisely in the time and place, delivered the Orthodox Do∣ctrine of grace, when and where Pelagius spread his heresie. From your Rules of Physicke you returne to the Rules of Divinity, and tell us from Saint Austin, thatQuod univer∣sa tenet Eccle∣sia, nec Conci∣liis institutum, sed semper re∣tentum est, non nisi authorita∣te Apostolicâ traditū rectis∣simè creditur. De Baptis contr. Donat. l. 5. c. 24. in ini∣tio. Tom. 7. p. mihi 433. whatsoever the Catholike Church doth generally beleeve or practise, so as there can be no time assigned when it began, it is to be taken for an Apostolicall tradition. This place of Austin you neither quoted in your Answer, neither have you recited his words
faithfully, for hee speakes not of assigning the time when the Doctrine begins, but whatsoever the uni∣versall Church doth hold, not being ordained by Coun∣cels, but hath beene ever held, that is most rightly be∣leeved for an Apostolicall tradition. This is his Te∣net, and this is ours: but you have put in the word (Catholike) in your sense for universall, you have ad∣ded (generall beleefe and practise) you have thrust in these words (so as no time can be assigned when it began) and you have omitted the principall verb [that hath been ever held] which makes me suspect you omitted the citing of this place, lest your fraud should be descried: But I pardon you; let us heare the rest;P. 73. But such (say you) are all those things which you are pleased to call errors. If this were as easily proved as spoken, you should not neede to put us to the search of times and Authors for the first Founder of your Faith; For if your Popish Doctrines were alwayes held by the universall Church, and not ordained by Councels, we should not need to looke into your Councell of Lateran for your Doctrine of Transubstantiation, nor into your Councell of Constance for Communion in both kindes, nor into your Councell of Elorence for your seven Sacraments, nor into your second Councell of Nice for your worship of Images: for these and many such traditions were first ordained by Councels, and were not the generall beliefe and practice of the Church. Againe, if the universall Church had alwayes held your Doctrines from the Apostles times, why doe you your selfe confesse,
that your prayer in an unknowne tongue,Pag. praeceden∣ti. your pri∣vate Masse, your halfe Communion, were taught otherwise in the primitive Churches? Nay, if they be Apostolicall, how comes it that they are flat contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles? And thus much of your two rules of Physicke and Divi∣nity; let us heare the rest of your authorities. Tertullian (say you) hath this Rule for discer∣ning heresie from truth,Tertul. prae∣scrip. 31. p. mihi 78. That which goeth before is truth, and that which commeth after is errour. This Rule is most true, but these words you cite by the halves; for hee saith expresly,Id autem ex∣traneum & falsum quod sit posterius im∣missum. Id Domini∣cum & verum quod sit prius traditum: That was first delivered, which was true, and came from the God of truth; and this was the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; for that which commeth after (saith he) is farre different: where hee shewes like∣wise in these words following, that after Christs time, and in the dayes of the Apostles, there might be heresies,Ut aliquem ex Apostolicis vi∣ris (qui tamen cum illis perse∣vereverint) habent autho∣rem. Ibid. for the mystery of iniquitie began then to worke; and therefore hee will not have it enough to derive a Doctrine from a man which lived with the Apostles, unlesse it can be proved that he con∣tinued with them: and the reason (as I concive) was given by Nicephorus; After the sacred compa∣ny of the Apostles was come to an end,Niceph. l. 3. c. 16. and that their generation was wholly spent, which had heare with their eares the heavenly wisdome of the Sonne of God, then that conspiracie of detestable errour, through the deceipt of such as delivered strange Doctrine, tooke rooting; and because that none of the Apostles survi∣ved,
they published boldly with all might possible the doctrine of falshood, and impugned the manifest and knowne truth. But wee plead (say you) prescription from the be∣ginning.] It is not sufficient to plead it, you must prove it. The Mahometists at this day assume the name of Saracens (as your men doe the name of Catholikes) as if they came from Sara the free wo∣man, Abrahams true and lawfull wife, when in truth they tooke their first beginning from Agar the bond-woman; neither can there be any prescrip∣tion against the ancient Records and Evidences of the Word written by Christ and his Apostles. In∣deed you have found a right and easie way to claime a prescription from the time of the Apostles; for you have razed many prime Evidences of the Fa∣thers for the first 800. yeeres, which make for our Doctrine, and you have proscribed many learned Authors and their Records (as I have shewed be∣fore) for the last 800. yeeres, which testified against your errors: And now I come to your Churches apostacie or falling from the truth, which occasi∣oned these errors. Apostacie (say you) is a defection, or forsaking of the Name of Christ, and profession of Christianity, as all men understand it. I shewed in this Section, that in the primitive Church, when any heresie did arise that indangered the foundation (such as was the heresie of the Ar∣rians, of the Pelagians, and the like) the Authors were observed, the times were knowne, the place
was pointed at, and forthwith letters of Premoni∣tion were sent to all the sound members of the Ca∣tholike Church; by which publike advertisement the steale-truth was discovered, and herein the Au∣thor, the time, and place was observed and knowne to all: but in the Church of Rome it was other∣wise; there was first an Apostacie, a falling away from the truth, which was first caused by an error secretly stolne into the Church; and therefore it is sometimes called a mystery of iniquity, because my∣stically, covertly, secretly hee shall winde his abo∣minations into the Church of God: and accor∣dingly the Apostle gives Timothy to understand, that in the last times some shall depart from the faith,1 Tim. 4.1. giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of De∣vils, and such as speake falshood in Hypocrisie: which place plainely shewes (saith a learned Divine) that Antichrist himselfe shall not professedly renounce Christ, and his Baptisme;Mr. Bedel a∣gainst Wads∣worth. p. 40. that his kingdome is a revolt, not from the outward profession, but in∣ward sinceritie and power of the Gospel. And therefore all doe not understand Apostacie, a forsa∣king of Christ and Christianity: Not all, no not the same Apostle, where hee useth the same word Apostacie to the Thessalonians:, &c. 2 Thess. 2.3. Let no man deceive you by any meanes, for that day shall not come, except there come (an Apostacie) a falling away first: Hee speakes of the departing from the orthodox Faith, not from Christianitie. Not all, no not your Rhe∣mists in their Annotations upon this place:Rhem. Annot. in 2 Thess. 2.3. For it is very like (say they) be it spoken under correction,
that Gods Church, and all learned Catholikes, that this great defection and revolt shall not be onely from the Roman Emperour, but especially from the Roman Church, and withall from most points of Christian Re∣ligion, or (as they interpret in their Margin) from most Articles of the Christian faith. Not all, no not Campian your fellow Jesuite, who termes Luther an Apostata, for falling from your Church, not from Christianity. Not all, no not your Decretals, who terme a Monke, for leaving his Order, or a Clarke forsaking his habit, an Apostata. Not all, no not Gregory the Great,Greg. l. 6. Ep. 24. who called John Bishop of Con∣stantinople, an Apostata, for assuming the title of uni∣versall Bishop. Lastly, Not all, no not your Coun∣cell of Basil, where 900. condemned and deposed your Pope Eugenius for a Symonist,Concil. Basil. sess. 34. a forsworn man, a man incorrigible, a Schismaticke (an Apostata) a man fallen from the faith, and a wilfull Hereticke. I say therefore, not all, nor any of these did under∣stand an Apostacie to be a forsaking of the name of Christ and Christianity; and therefore I hope you will confesse, that your assertion is neither Catho∣like nor universall. When therfore we lay Apostacie to your Church, we doe not charge you with a totall falling from Christian Religion, like that of Julian the Aposta∣ta, with an obstinate pertinacie, in denying the principles of the faith necessarie to salvation, or a renouncing your Baptisme, and consequently the name of Christianitie: Wee charge you not with Apostacie in such a fearefull and horrible sense, un∣lesse
you will assume it to your selves;Lyra in 2. Thess. 2. but wee thinke with Lyra, that as there was an Apostacie or revolt of many Kingdomes from the Roman Empire, and of many Churches from the Communion of the Roman Church; so there hath beene an Apostacie from the Catholike faith in the midst of the Church, not for that all at any time did forsake the true Faith, but for that many fell from the sinceritie of the Faith. After your definition of Apostacie, you proceed in this manner; How then can we be Apostatas? in no wise certainely: but if wee erre, wee erre as here∣tikes, and if wee be heretikes, you confesse you must as∣signe the persons, time and place. I have cleared you from the hainous title of Apo∣stata in your owne sense, but not in ours;D. Potter p. 19. & 60. yet let me tell you (with griefe and pitty be it spoken) your profane and wicked application of the Apostles Creed, as you pretend, in jests, is a fearefull signe of falling from Christ and Christianitie it selfe: and therfore, although I may free your Church in ge∣nerall of that name, and in that sense, yet it behoves you to acquit your selfe in that particular. But this by way of friendly admonition. If we erre (say you) wee erre as heretikes] I shall easily condescend unto you in that: For the errors in the Roman Church caused an Apostacie at first, and was mysticall and secret; now after long pra∣ctise and usage in the Church, is become an heresie; and so wee may truely assent unto you, that you erre as heretikes: And although I am not bound upon this acknowledgment, forthwith to assign you
the Authors of your heresies, because they came in by degrees, and at severall times, privily, and insensibly; yet because you are so inquisitive after you predecessors, if you will have but patience, I will draw your pedigree in the next Section.Ecclesia sua de∣finitione non facit talem as∣sertionem esse haeresin, cum etiamsi ipsa non definivisset, es∣set haeresis; sed id efficit Ec∣clesia, ut nobis per suam cen∣suram pateat illud esse here∣sin. Alph. à Castr. l. 1. c. 8. D. Potter sect. 4. p. 101. & 97. In the meane time let me tell you, it is another errour in you to say, They come to have the name of heresie, onely by the condemnation of the Church. For the Church condemnes them, because they are here∣sies; contrariwise, they are not heresies, because the Church condemnes them. The Doctrines of Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Eunomi∣us, and Dioscurus, were themselves hereticall, even before they were solemnly condemned in the foure generall Councels: but woe to us and all the refor∣med Churches, if this Tenet were true and Catho∣like, for then are wee condemned already. But I pray, what if your Pope (whom you Jesuites now make the onely Church) admit, I say, your Pope were an Heretike, such as was your Pope Eugeni∣us, or your John the 23. or Pope Vigilius, or Pope Honorius, were they able to judge of heresies in others, that were tainted with them themselves? or must their definitive sentence in Cathedra stand for a Law,Si autem Papa erraret prae∣cipiendo vitia vel prohibendo virtutes, &c. Bell. de Pont. l. 4. c. 5. Sand. de visibili Monarch. l. 7. An. 1541. p. mihi 595. and make that heresie which is no here∣sie? Indeed your Cardinall sayes, The Pope hath power to make that no sinne which is sinne, and accor∣dingly he hath placed that Tenet amongst the Here∣tikes, and by the same Law he makes that to be he∣resie, which is no heresie. Your learned Sanders tells us, it is heresie to translate the Scriptures into
the vulgar Tongue, and accordingly he hath placed that Tenet amongst the Heretikes. Your Chancel∣lor of Paris and Director of the Councell of Con∣stance tells us, it is heresie to communicate in both kindes; and accordingly he hath wrote a Tract, De haeresi communicandi sub utrâque specie. And to passe by all the Trent Articles (the deniall of all or any of which makes a man an Heretike) your infallible Pope Nicholas proclaimeth,Qui Romanae Ecclesiae privi∣legium auferre conatur, hic pro∣culdubio labitur in haeresin. that whoso∣ever goeth about to abrogate the priviledges of the Church of Rome, he is no doubt an Heretike. If the deniall of all or any of these make an He∣retike, there is no doubt, all the Reformed Chur∣ches stand guilty of that capitall crime, by the law of your Church, and your Popes doome. Yet let me tell you; the Scriptures were translated into all Languages in the Primitive times, and Christ and his Apostles did communicate in both kindes; and your first foure generall Councels did bound and limit those priviledges of the Church of Rome, which are now extended into all parts of the Chri∣stian world; and were all these Heretikes? If you call this Heresie, goe on, and fill up the measure of your wrath, untill the time come that Christ and his Saints acquit us, or condemne us of that impu∣tation. In the meane time you shall doe well to reflect upon your selfe, and consider rather the case at this day betwixt the Sorbonists and the Jesuites, which meerely toucheth your owne particular.Aurel. in vindi∣ciis, pag. 383. Idem in libro sine titulo. Hermannus Laemelius, that is to say, John Floyd, termes the propositions of the Parisians, destructive to the Church, and hereticall; on the other side, they
accuse him of heresie,Hulier in ad∣monit. ad Lect. p. 8. 9. 16. 24. blasphemie, and impietie, and the like. Are you all members of one Church, un∣der one head the Pope, and are your propositions different and hereticall on both sides, and must I say, that you and the rest have the name of heresie onely by the condemnation of the Church? But you are sure the Pope will not condemne his owne members, and without his judgment they are but words of course, or at best but course phrases deli∣vered in heate against an adversary: For (say you) The Fathers did forbeare absolutely to condemne things for heresies, till they had acquainted the Bishop of Rome, and had his judgement, as is cleere by St. Cyrill of Alexandria, in the case of Nestorius. Neither doe we denie, that in this and the like case the Bishop of Rome ought to be acquainted; For Nestorius was Patriarch of Constantinople, and there∣fore good reason the Bishop of Rome, as another Patriarch, should be acquainted with it, that hee might be judged by his Peeres; but in other ca∣ses they sent Letters without acquainting the Bishop of Rome: neither ought you to require or expect that we should produce any such letters of premoni∣tion against the points of Trent doctrine, for which we now condemne you, because those errors which then began to spring in the Church, by custome and pertinacies became heresies in many ages after. About that time, and in that very Age St. Au∣stin condemned the superstition of some in wor∣shipping Sepulchers and Images (which at this day is an Article of your Faith:) but you answer that he condemned the heathenish and superstitious worship
of dead, perhaps wicked mens tombs and pictures: and for a solution of this place you referre me to Bellar∣mine. It seems you could give me no satisfactory an∣swer of your own, and therefore you returne me to your Cardinal; but I wonder why you do not recite his answer to this place. I conceived that you were ashamed of it, or there was some misprision that made you conceale it; & thereupon I have perused it, and find that he hath falsified both the place and meaning of it. As for instance: whereas Austin saith,Aug. de mori∣bus Eccles. Ca¦thol. l. 1. c. 34. p. (mihi) 774. Tō. 1. Bell. de Reli∣quiis Sanct. l. 2. c. 4. I know many worshippers of tombes and pictures, your Cardinall leaves out the word pictures, and saith, I know many worshippers of tombes; and for his full solution he subjoyneth, Austin wrote this in the be∣ginning of his first conversion. Again, he cites another place of S. Austin, as it were to illustrate the former, without any respect or mention of the worshippers of pictures, and tells us,Ibid. that the Emperour did pray at the Sepulcher of St. Peter, yet proves not the point in question, that he did worship the Sepulcher it selfe; for who doubts but that we also may worship God at St. Peters shrine, and yet not worship the shrine it selfe. Nay, hee goeth on further, and shewes that Austin did not reprehend Chrysostome, and Hie∣rome, but the ignorant sort of people: for Chryso∣stome saith, Let us adore the Tombes of Martyrs; when as there are no such words in Chrysostome, but rather, Let us adorne them.Ut Tumulos Martyrum de center curari. Chrys. And whereas he saith further, that Hierome wisheth Marcella, a Ladie, to worship the ashes of the Prophets in Bethlem; so likewise I say, he doth wish her in the same place to lick their dust; and therefore it was not to be un∣derstood
as a thing spoken properly, but figurative∣ly. For elsewhere he saith expresly against Vigilan∣tius, I say not, we worship not nor adore the reliques of Martyrs, but neither the Sunne, nor the Moone, nor Angels, nor Archangels, nor Cherubin, nor Seraphin. Neither did S.Andr. resp. ad Card. Bell. pag. (mihi) 49. Austin speak as you say of the heathe∣nish and superstitious worshipping of wicked mens Tombes, but of them which in ipsa vera Religione, in true Religion were worshippers of pictures and shrines. For he shewes, that his owne mother Moni∣ca did usually bring to the shrines of Saints certaine Bread and Wine,August. Confes. l. 6. c. 2. and other provision; but because the celebrating after the manner of the memory of the dead, did very much resemble the superstition of the heathen, she was forbidden it by St. Ambrose; which forbidding (saith he) shee did so piously and obedi∣ently embrace, as that my selfe did wonder to see her made (with such ease) rather a condemner of her owne ancient custome, than a questioner of the present prohibition. For a conclusion; whereas you would excuse it, that St. Austin did condemne onely the superstitious worship of wicked mens Tombes, your men are likewise guiltie of the same wor∣ship:Bell. de Sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 7. For your owne Cardinall will tell you, that the people (of the Roman Church) did for a long time celebrate Sulpitius for a Mqrtyr, who after∣wards did appeare and told them, that he had beene a theefe and was damned;Idem, ibid. And that Alexander the third reprehended certaine men for worshipping one as a Martyr, that was killed in his drunkennesse: and thus (to use your owne words) for these, I send you backe againe to Bellarmine for an answer.
I come to the rest of your answers. First I cited out of Ferus, that Masses, Monasteries, Ceremo∣nies, Feasts, Images, are otherwise now used than they were in the beginning: I produced likewise Po∣lydore Virgil, Erasmus, Scotus, Agrippa, Cassander, Gregorie de Valentia, in severall points against your new doctrine; now let us heare your severall an∣swers to them. Touching Ferus, he is a Frier (say you) in your Bookes, but not in ours, save onely in the Roman Index of forbidden Bookes. Touching Polydore, he saith as the Knight telleth us, and as much as any Heretike can say, but it booteth not, for his Booke is forbidden. Touching Erasmus, he is no Authour for us to answer, he is branded in the Ro∣man Index. Touching Scotus, you neither con∣demne him, nor answer him: he tells you plainly, that Transubstantiation was not received for a point of Faith till the Councell of Lateran, above 1200. yeares after Christ; but of this passage Ne gry qui∣dem: And yet you might have answered with Bellarmine, this opinion of his is no way to be al∣lowed; or with Gregorie de Valentia, for this say∣ing he ought to be corrected. As touching Agrippa and Cassander, you will not vouchsafe them an an∣swere, but reject them inter damnatos authores, as men to be cast out of your Synagogue. Lastly, tou∣ching Gregorie de Valentia, you say his authoritie doth make against the Knight, why else should he cor∣rupt and mangle it? But whether I or you have corrupted it, let the Reader judge; my words were these, The Communion in one kind, when it got first footing in the Church, minimè constat, it doth not
appeare (saith Greg. de Valentia:) You to prove my corruption, cite the words in this manner; When that custome began in some Churches, it appeareth not; but that there hath been some use of one kind ever from the beginning, I shewed before; so Valentia; and thus you. But in truth, this is none of Valentia's own period, but one of your owne making, who cunningly joyne the latter words which follow in Valentia, 4. or 5. lines after, to the former, with a But, which is none of Valentia's; & the former part of the period is no∣tably mangled by you: For thus it stands, When that custome began in some Churches,Augustana Confessio. it appeares not, as is acknowledged by the Augustane Confession. Now in that Confession, the words are these, The custome of both kindes remained long in the Church, neither doth it appeare when, or by what Author it was changed; so that he plainly speaketh of the Church in gene∣ral, & sheweth the corruption here pretended by M. Floyd to be but a cavill, viz. That Valentia saith this, not of the Church in generall, but of some particular Churches. Thus either you blot & prohibit all Au∣thors that make for us, although they be members of your own Church, or else you vouchsafe them no answer, or else you quarrell without any just occasi∣on offred; and this wil prove an easie way for the weakest scholar in your Church to answer all that can be produced against your faith and doctrine. Now as the Reader hath heard your answer in the generall, so let him see your exceptions to the parti∣culars: For whereas I said with St. Paul, Forbidding of marriage is a doctrine of Devils, you answer as if you were angrie with St. Paul, that he hath been an∣swered
more often than the Knight hath fingers and toes; and it seems, for that reason you will vouchsafe him no answer at all. This puts me in minde of the saying of Ludovicus Vives, a member of your owne Church, who assures us, If St.Lud. Vives de Civ. Dei. l. 13. c. 24. Paul were living in these dayes, he would be held either a mad man, or an heretike. And since you will not resolve me of St. Pauls meaning in that place, I will appeale to St. Bernard, an Abbot who was restrained from marri∣age by the law of your Church; who speaking of that restraint, gives us the true sense and exposition of St. Paul in these words: All heresies have an here∣tike for their founder; the Maniches had Manes,Bernard. in Cant. Serm. 66. the Sabellians had Sabellicus, the Arrians had Arrius, &c. so that we know the Authors of those plagues; but by what name will you terme the Author of those that for∣bid marriage? Surely it is not of man, or by man, and far be it from the spirit of God, but it is foretold (by the Apostle St. Paul) to be the fraud & doctrine of devils. But marriage (say you) is not a thing evil in it selfe, but because it lesse agreeth with the holinesse which is required for the exercise of Priestly function. I pray then what thinke you of a concubine? Doth com∣panie with her better agree for exercise of your fun∣ction, than with a wife? Sure I am, this is the doctrine of your Church: nay more, your Pope Siricius would inferre by authoritie of Scripture, that mar∣riage is unholy in it selfe, for he cites the Text for t, They that live in the flesh cannot please God.Qui in carne sunt Deo place∣re non possunt. Now I pray you what difference is there betwixt the anci∣ent heretikes, and the members of your Church? The Montanists, the Tatiani, the Eucratitae, did not
prohibite marriage to all, no more than you doe, but onely to their perfecti, as being a disparagement to their perfect estate; or as you interpret, not agreeing to the holines of Priesthood. Again, whereas I proved out of Polydore, that the marriage of Priests was not altogether forbidden till the time of Gregorie the 7. that is to say, above a thousand yeares after Christ; you answer, that which Polydore cites is most evi∣dently false, as appeareth particularly by a Canon of the first Councell of Nice, and the second Coun∣cell of Carthage. Now if Polydore were mistaken, it concernes not me, for I cited him truly, and he is a member of your Church; but the truth is, you are much mistaken touching those two Councels. For the Councell of Nice (saith Sozomen) commended Paphnutius judgement,Sozom. l. 1. c. 22. and touching this matter of mariage, made to decree an all, but left it to each mans owne will, without any force of necessity; And the Councell of Carthage forbiddeth not marriage in Priests, but commandeth abstinence from marriage rites for a certaine time, as St. Paul doth, that they may more freely give themselves to prayer, and the of∣fices of their sacred function. Which plainly shewes, that both Priests were married in those dayes, and consequently, that those two Councels make flatly against you. But Marius (say you) cannot find the be∣ginning of this prohibition; Polydore findeth it, and yet both make for the Knights purpose. And without doubt they doe, for they contradict not one the o∣ther: Polydore speaketh of publike, absolute, and re∣all prohibition; Marius of the first condemning it in any Priest; and these confessions may well stand to∣gether.
CHAP. VII. The summe of his Answer to Sect. 7. 1. That the imputations of ancient Haeresies are false. 2. That Succession besides Antiquity importeth con∣tinuance, and perpetuity without intermission. 3. That Protestants have no shaddow of successi∣on in person or doctrine. 4. That Papists have a most cleare personall Successi∣on, being able to shew 200. and odde Popes succeeding the other in place and office. 5. That personall Succession is a firme argument of succession in faith. IT is my promise in my seventh Section, to shew a descent of both Religions (as namely) that the Romish faith was derived from ancient Haeretikes, and the Protestant faith was drawne downe from Christ and his Apostles. But (say you) It is one thing to prove a thing to have beene anciently taught, another to have beene successively taught: It is true, Antiquity and Succession differ; neither did I undertake to prove that those Haere∣tikes, or your Church, had a perpetuall succession in person and doctrine; but for the truths sake I have acknowledged the antiquity of your Trent faith, although descended from ancient Haere∣tikes, and I made the first instance in Latin Ser∣vice,
and prayer in a strange tongue brought in by Pope Vitalian (as is witnessed by Wolphius:) but you cry out, It is a most strange absurdity to averre such a knowne falsehood upon no other autho∣rity,Pag. 87. then a professed Haeretike. And is he an Haeretike that speaketh the truth of your Religion? What say you to your prime Champion Mr. Harding? He saith expresly, About nine hundred yeares past, it is certaine the people in some Countries had their service in an un∣knowne tongue,Iuel in his 3. Article, Divis. 1. as it shall be proved of our owne Country of England. Now observe the difference, Wolphius said, the Latin Service came in after Christ about the yeare (666.) Mr. Harding (who wrote these (67.) yeares since) as appeares by Bishop Iuels Epistle, tells us it came in (900.) yeares past: compute Wolphius (666.) with Mr. Hardings time of (967.) and you shall finde that they agree about one and the same time, and therefore it was neither absurd, nor false, which Wolphius uttered. Neither doe you disprove the reason of Wol∣phius, but you make a quaere upon his assertion; During his (600.) and odd yeares) what other Ly∣turgies were there in the Latin Church, but Latin? And I may aswell say, what were there in the Greeke Church but Greeke? But this demand ma∣keth against your Service in an unknowne tongue, not against Wolphius, who affirmeth not that the Latin Service was not in the Latin Church before the yeare (666.) but that the Pope obtruded it
upon all Churches, even there where the Latin was not understood, as (in England saith Mr. Har∣ding) and elsewhere. For Origen tells us before that time,Orig. contra Celsum. lib. 8. the Greekes call upon God in the Greeke tongue, and the Latins in the Latin tongue, and all severall Nations pray unto God, and praise him in their owne naturall and mother tongues, for he that is the Lord of all tongues, heareth men praying in all tongues, none otherwise then if it were one voice pro∣nounced by divers tongues; for God that ruleth the whole world, is not as some one man, that hath got∣ten the Greeke or Latin, and knoweth none other. The ancient Primitive Churches therefore taught the Doctrine in a knowne tongue, Λ. 30. 666 Α. 1. 666 Τ 300. 666 Ε 5. 666 Ι 10. 666 Ν 50. 666 Ο 70. 666 Σ 200. 666 agreeable to the profession at this day. But the truth is, the Latin Service, and the name of the Latin Church is one of the most essentiall markes of the Roman Hierarchie. And I know not whether it were by conjecture, or by inspiration, that Irenaeus above foureteene hundred yeares agoe,Sed &  nomen sex∣centinum sexa∣ginta sex, nume∣rū habens valde verisimile est quoniam verissi∣mum nomen hoc habet vocabu∣lum. Latini e∣nim sunt qui nunc regnāt, sed non in hoc nos gloriabimur.] Irenae. l 5. cap 25. p mihi. 355. in the word La∣teinos, found out the name of Antichrist, and the number of (666.) The name Lateinos (saith he) conteining the number of six hundred sixty six is ve∣ry likely, because the truest kingdome hath that name; for they are the Latines that now raigne, but (saith he) we will not glory in this. You proceede to the Haeretikes Ossem, and you say first, I am notably mistaken in placing them to∣wards the Apostles time, and withall, you have read the Chapter there twice over, and the second time more attentively then the first, and
yet you find not any such word so cited by mee. Trajan, Anno 100. Bel. de script. Eccles. pag. mihi.First, this Sect continued till Trajans time, not an hundred yeares after the Apostles; and there∣fore it was no errour in me to place them towards the Apostles time: and if you please to peruse the place a third time with your Spectacles, you shall find these words,. Epiph. heres. 19 Nemo quaerat interpretationem, sed solum in oratione haec dicat; and there hee re∣peats a Prayer, which (if you peruse the Greeke text) is more expresse. Let no man inquire after the meaning, only in his Prayer, Let him say such words, (viz.) such Hebrew words which Epipha∣nius there setteth downe. Are not these Heretikes (thinke you) neere kinne to them who say, Heare Latine Masse, and say after the Priest, it mattereth not whether you understand what hee saith, or not. From Epiphanius you flie to Saint Ambrose, and there you make a great complaint, that I put in words of my owne in the same Character with Saint Ambrose, which are none of his (as namely) There were certaine Iewes amongst the Graecians,Ambr. in 1 Cor. 14. as namely, the Corinthians, who did celebrate the Divine Service, and Sacraments, which the com∣mon people understood not. I confesse ingenuously, it is an errour in the print, and I shall willingly alter the letter, but not the words, at the next impression. But I con∣fidently professe, it is agreeable to the true sense and meaning of the Author; and the strength of the argument is not in the words, but in the sense:
and therfore I may truly answer you with S. Au∣stine, What folly is it to contend about words,Aug. Ep. 174. when there is the certainty of the thing it selfe? It cannot be denied, that Ambrose taxeth the Hebrewes, who amongst the Corinthians, in Tra∣ctatibus & oblationibus, used sometimes the Sy∣riack, and sometimes the Hebrew tongue, which without doubt, the Greeks understood not. And therefore, in his Commentarie on this place, hee gives the Hebrew to understand; If you meet toge∣ther to edifie the Church,Ambr. in 1 Cor. 14. those things must be deli∣vered which the hearers understand: for to what purpose, or profit is it, that any one speake a tongue which hee himselfe onely understands, and whereof hee that heareth can reape no fruit? And a little after; The Apostle saith, I had rather speake five words in the Church, according to the Law, that I may edifie others, than any long and large discourse in obscuritie. Againe, by [oblationibus] (which you interpret, Offrings) Saint Ambrose cannot meane, the peoples gifts or offrings; (for there was no need of any speech, much lesse a long speech at these offrings.) It must therefore fol∣low, that either he meanes the celebration of the Sacrament, or some spirituall sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving. You proceed from one heresie to another, (viz) from your unknown Service, to your Tran∣substantiation. This Doctrine I shewed, had his descent from the Heretikes, Helcesaitae, from Marcus, from the Capernaites. Touching the
Helcesaitae, (you say) It is an hereticall fable: for those Heretikes make two Christs,Pag. 92. wee acknowledge but one, and the same both in heaven, and in the con∣secrated Host. It is true, this particular Instance is cited a∣mongst the Tables of Theodoret; but yet you have affinitie with their Tenets, as neere as cosen Germans once removed. For as you acknow∣ledge but one Christ in the heavens, and in the Host, no more did those Heretikes in words; for they rehearsed the Apostles Creed, Et in Iesum Christum, and not in Christos: and as they made a two-fold Christ, one in heaven, another in earth; so likewise you teach, that Christ in the Sacrament (here on earth) is invisible and indi∣visible, but in heaven at the same time visible, and with dimensions of quantitie, and distin∣ctions of Organs. And what is this, but con∣sequently to make two Christs, or at least, to make contradictories true at the same time, of one and the same Christ, in respect of his humane na∣ture to be visible and invisible? Touching Marcus the Heretike, (you say) Hee changed the colour; but you teach, that the co∣lour and accidents remaine, and the substance is changed. It is true; and your opinion in this, is more ab∣surd than that of Marcus: for he changed the Colour, to make the people beleeve it was true blood; and you make them beleeve it is blood, when there is neither tast, nor colour of blood.
Lastly, touching the Capernaites; you deny there is any likenesse of Doctrine. For (say you) the Capernaites thought they should eate Christs body piece-meale, but wee receive Christ whole and entire, not in the forme and shape of flesh, but of bread, &c. But I pray, which of the Evangelists ever charged them with any such conceit? The truth is, they understood the words of Christ as you doe, in a grosse and carnall manner: and therfore Christ in reproving them, saith not, Flesh eaten piece-meale, profiteth nothing; but absolutely, The flesh profiteth nothing. As touching your eating of Christ, whole and intire; it is all one with their eating of him by piece-meale: for there may be many differences in eating, but all eating the flesh of Christ with teeth and jawes, is Caperniticall. But you neither see, nor taste the flesh of Christ, which they dream'd they should; for you receive it, Not (say you) in the forme of flesh, but of bread. I will returne you an Answer from a learned Divine on our side:B. Bilson, in the difference between Christ subject, and un∣christian Rebel∣lion. pag. 748. You chaw the flesh of Christ actually with your teeth, and swallow the same downe your throats, and these be proper actions, and right instruments of externall and Ca∣perniticall eating; your eyes and your taste be not; else blind men, and such as by reason of Sicknesse can taste nothing, by your Divinitie can eate no∣thing. Since then you concurre with the Capernaites (in eating and swallowing) notwithstanding you vary from them in sight and taste, yet your opinion
establisheth a corporall eating of Christs flesh, and a perverting of the meaning of Christs words, no lesse than theirs did. Let mee paralell them together with the most favorable construction I can, yet your Church must have her Antiquitie and descent from those Capernaites. For, suppose the Capernaites did be∣leeve that Christ would kill himselfe, and give his body to be eaten; yet the Church of Rome teacheth, that Christ did eate his owne flesh, a thing no lesse barbarous (being meant litterally) than to kill himselfe. Admit the Capernaites did beleeve that Christ would give his flesh to be mangled by pieces, or by halves; yet your Chur∣ches opinion is no lesse cruell, to beleeve that in the Sacrament, Christs flesh is swallowed up whole at one morsell. Lastly, let it be granted that the Capernaites did believe, that Christs flesh should be eaten when hee was dead; yet the opi∣nion of the Romanists is more brutish, to imagine his flesh to be eaten when he was alive (being a higher degree of crueltie to devoure men alive,Apertissimi lo∣quimur, corpus Christi veri à nobis attectari, manducan, cir∣cumgestari, den∣tibus atteri, sensibiliter sa∣rificari, non mins quam anie consecra∣tionem panis. Alanus, lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 37. than when they are dead.) Sure I am, they both agree in this, that according to the letter they should eate the flesh of Christ, Orally, Corpo∣rally, and Substantially: they both agree in the sensible handling of his body, in devouring him with the mouth, and in grinding him with the teeth. Alanus the Romanist professeth openly in the name of the Church, Apertissimi loquimur, Wee affirme plainly, the body of Christ is truly
handled of us, carried about, ground with the teeth; and sensibly sacrificed. Long before him Pope Nicholas confirmed this doctrine in a Councell at Rome, and taught it for a lesson to Berengarius,Verum Corpus Domini nostri Iesu Christi sensualitèr non solum in Sacra∣mento, sed in ve∣ritate manibus Sacerdotum tractari, frangi, ac fideliùm dentibus atteri. Grat. de con∣secr. d. 2. c. 4. 2. Ego Beren∣garius. to let him know the great difference betwixt Papist and Protestant in the same Church, I beleeve that the body of our Lord Iesus is sensibly and in very deede touched with the hands of the Priest, and bro∣ken, and rent, and ground with the teeth of the faith∣full. This confession stands a Record in the Ro∣man Decrees, and unlesse you mince the words strangely, you must needs acknowledge that you eate the flesh of Christ peice-meale, and then you sympathize in all things with your first Parents the Capernaites. From Transubstantiation you proceede to the Popes Supremacy, wherein you say,Pag. 93. I am mista∣ken in saying that Phocas gave that authority to the Bishop of Constantinople. It is true this is a mistake of the Printer, but no corruption,Rogatu Bonifa∣cij Phocas co∣stituit sedem Romanae & A∣postolicae Eccle∣siae caput esse omnium Eccle∣siarum, nam an∣teà Constanti∣nopolitana Ec∣clesia se scribe∣bat primam om∣nium. Vsperg. in Phoc. fol. mihi. and in the last Impression (which you should have taken you shall finde (Rome) for Constantinople: and this you might well understand to be an error in the print, because my purpose was to shew a descent of the Bishop of Romes Supremacy, not of the Bishop of Constantinople: And this authority stands good against you (notwithstanding all your exceptions) viz. that the Pope of Rome, and that the See of Rome should be the head of all Churches; for before that time (saith Vspergensis) the Church of Constantinople did write her selfe chiefe of all
Churches; so that (anteà) before that time, the Bishop of Rome had no Supremacy: and this a∣grees to Pope Gregories owne confession, None of my Praedecessors did ever use that prophane Title.Nullus unquam praedecessorum meorum hoc tam prophano vocabulo uti consuevit. Greg. ep. 36. l. 4. Nay more, you had two Bishops of Constantino∣ple, (viz.) Iohn and Cyriacus, who both succes∣sively assumed the title of Vniversall Bishops, before ever the Bishop of Rome had any: and those Bishops were suborned by Mauritius, a bloody Emperour, like unto Phocas, who at that time made Constantinople the chiefe place of his aboade, and by meanes of advancing the Bishops dignity, sought to winne the greater credit to the City. Gregory the Great, writes unto them both severally, as they lived in their Sees, and doth accuse them of Pride, of Singularity, of error, of vanity, and blasphemy in that new title; neither doth he make claime to it himselfe, being then Bishop of Rome, For mine owne part (saith he) I seeke to encrease in vertues, and not in vanitie of titles;Greg. lib. 1. ep. 30. for if you call me universall Bishop, you de∣ny your selves to be that which indeede you are. And when Mauritius the Emperour did countenance the Supremacy in the Bishop of Constantinople, Gregory greets him in this manner:Idem. l. 4. Indict. 13. ep. 32. p. mihi. I have recei∣ved letters from my vertuous Lord, that I should bee at peace with my brother and fellow Bishop, Iohn; indeede it well beseemeth a Religious Prince to com∣mand Bishops in such things, but this was heavy to mee, that my Soveraigne Lord did not rebuke him for his Pride. After the death of Iohn the first Oe∣cumenicall
Bishop, Cyriacus succeeded in the See of Constantinople, and continued that title of Oecu∣menicall Bishop by the power of the Emperour; and accordingly Pope Gregory writes againe to Mauritius, not to take part with Cyriacus, and withall writes to Cyriacus at his first entrance into his Bishopricke,Idem. l. 6. ep. 28. that he would abolish the word of Pride, by which there was so great scandall given to the Church. After the death of Mauritius, Phocas (who was a souldier and fought under the banner of Mauri∣tius) was proclaimed Emperour by the muti∣neirs, who having committed many murthers and cruelties, (which Cyriacus could not approve) (for otherwise it is probable he might have conti∣nued the title of Oecumenicall) he called a Synod at Rome, consisting of (62.) Bishops, and by ver∣tue of his power, granted his Letters Patents to Boniface then Bishop of Rome, whereby your Popes had the first authority of (Volumus & jube∣mus) wee will and command. And thus Phocas pro∣cured his Imperiall authority by treachery and blood; Boniface obteined his power and Supre∣macy by pollicy, and flattery of a bloody Empe∣rour; and this (saith Platina) was magnâ cum con∣tentione, with great contention. Neither did Bo∣niface enjoy this Title many monthes, nor Phocas escape the heavy hand of God; for he was af∣terwards slaine by Heraclius,Quo quis pec∣cat, eo punitur. as Mauritius was by him. From Phocas you ascend to your first Progeni∣tors,
the Kings of the Gentiles, wherein I shewed the originall of your Papall Supremacy, not that your Popes did lineally succeede them, but that they did exceede them farre in Tyranny. But the Pope useth to stile himselfe servum servorum Dei, the servant of the servants of God, and will you have it (say you) that by reason of his humility,pag. 95. there must not be any Superiority? Surely, no; for he that said, learne of me, for I am lowly and meeke, made likewise this promise to him that would follow his lesson, He that humbleth himselfe shall be exalted.Matth. 20.25. Howsoever, it is not the title of ser∣vus servorum, that makes him Christs disciple, or a universall Bishop; for in that he succeedeth ra∣ther Canaan then Boniface: but he must follow Christs precept, and his example: his precept was, That none of his Apostles should reigne as Lord over his Brethren:Luke 22.27. his example was, I am among you, as hee that serveth. Neither is it the title which he assumes unto himselfe, that makes him humble; neither doe his Proselites & follow∣ers so much undervalue him as a servant: For saith Gerson,Gers. de potest. Eccles. consider. 12. Fawning, deceitfull flattery, whisper∣eth into the eares of ecclesiasticall persons, especially of the Pope, in a shamelesse manner, saying; as there is no power but of God, so there is none, either Temporall or Ecclesiasticall, Imperiall, or Regall, but from the Pope, in whose thigh Christ hath writ∣ten, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, of whose power to dispute is sacrilegious boldnesse, to whom no man may say, sir, why doe you so? though he alter,
overturne, waste, and confound all States, rules, and possessions of men: let me be judged a lyar (saith he) if these things be not found written by them that seeme wise in their owne eyes, and if some Popes have not given credit to such lying and flattering words. You see then, the Popes owne creatures and servants would make all other to be servants unto him. But it is strange to see how many of your men would palliate, and extenuate the Popes power, and Tyrannicall usurpation, some∣times under the vaile and title of a servant, and sometimes by a ceremony used at the time of his creation: your Mr. Harding witnesseth both, and seconds his humility in the title of a servant, with his (privie) reason,Ioel and Har∣ding. that is (saith he) lest the Soveraignty of honour exhibited unto him, should in his owne conceit lift him higher, then the degree of humane condition; to that purpose (saith he) see∣meth the stoole of easement at his creation, to be set before him to temper the highnesse of that vocation, with the base consideration of humane infirmities and necessities. That is to say, that he may re∣member himselfe in the midst of all his glory to be but a man; when as in truth, it is recorded, that the Porphirie stoole serveth to put the Pope in remembrance of his virility,Vt sedentis ge∣nitalia ab ulti∣mo diacono at∣trectentur. Isa∣bellicus. that the world may know he is no woman. Howsoever it seemes the title of servant is not sufficient to teach him humility, without the stoole of easement; (and a stoole of easement is no sweete badge of his hu∣mility.) But this is as common to others as to
himselfe; and therfore by that way of Humilitie, he will not merit a Superioritie. But (say you) because hee must carry himselfe like a Servant, must he not therefore feed the lambs, and sheepe of Christ?] God forbid. But Saint Ber∣nard, who otherwise maintained the Popes Su∣premacie, told us about 500 yeares since, that the Bishops of Rome, as well as other Bishops, who had the charge of Gods Church, were not Teachers,Bernard ad Eug. lib. 2. de Considerat. but Deceivers; they were not Feeders, but Beguilers; they were not Praelates, but Pilates. And certainly, if his whole Prerogative hang up∣on feeding the flocke, his Superioritie will quick∣ly come to nought: for most of them feed not, many are utterly ignorant, and cannot feed; o∣thers, especially the later Popes, feed their flocks for their owne ends. And (saith Saint Austine) Whosoever they be that feed the sheepe,August. in Iohn, Tract. 123. to the end to make them theirs, and not Christs, they love them∣selves and not Christ; for desire either of glorie, or of rule, or of gaine. For a Conclusion, the Popes humilitie is no other, then that which Antichrist professeth, Ad∣vancing himselfe above all that is worshipped,2 Thes. 2. or called God: no other then Dioclesian the persecu∣ting Emperour used, commanding by Proclama∣tion,Alexander ab Alexandro. That all should fall downe and kisse his feet. And as for his feeding of Christs sheepe, Nicho∣laus Clemangis a Doctor of Paris,Clemang. de rrupt. Eccle∣siae statu. cap. 5. & 7. about 200 years since, complained that the Pope, Not contented with the fruits and profits of the Bishopricke of
Rome, and Saints Peters Patrimonie, though very great and royall, laid his greedy hands on other mens flocks, replenished with milke and wooll, and usur∣ped the right of bestowing Bishopricks, and livings Ecclesiasticall throughout all Christendome: he rai∣sed his Cardinals, as complices of his Pompe,Cap. 13. from Clergy-men of low estate to the Peeres of Princes, and inriched them with the dispensations, to have and to hold offices and benefices, not two, or three, or ten,Cap. 14. or twenty, but a hundred, or two hundred, yea some∣times foure hundred, or five hundred, or more, and those not small or leane ones, but even the best and fattest. Nay more, instead of feeding the lambes and sheepe of Christ,Cap. 19, 20. Hee filled the house of God with dumb dogs, and evill beasts,Cap. 3, 4, 5, 9. even from the highest Prelates to the basest hedge-Priests, and all to maintaine the pride and riot of his worldly state, which he hath lifted up above Kings and Emperors; and yet this man is Servus Servorum. If this man therefore must carry himselfe a Servant, (as you pretend) why doth hee take upon him to be Lord Paramount? If hee be a servant, who shall be his master that shall teach him obedience? Your booke of Ceremonies tels us,Liber Cerem. 3. cap. 2. that The Pope him∣selfe giveth no manner of reverence to any man a∣live, neither openly by standing up, or by bowing downe, or by uncovering his head. Neither is hee a servant to the Emperour; for as soone as he seeth the Pope, he worshippeth him with bare head,Idem, l. 1. Sect. 5. c. 3. touch∣ing the ground with his knee. Againe, when he com∣meth to the foot of the Popes Throne, hee kneeleth
downe. Last of all, when hee commeth to the Popes feet, hee kisseth them (devoutly) in the reverence of our Saviour. This is a part of the Emperors duty, and the greatest Grandee upon earth must yield to this humble Servant of Servants. This is that Servant of Servants, that set the Imperiall crown upon the Emperors head, Henry the sixt, (not with his hand, but with his foot) and casting it off againe with the same foot,Celesnus 3us. said, I have power to make Emperors, and to unmake them againe at my pleasure.Paschalis 2us. This is that Servant of Servants, that set up the Son of the Emperor, Henry the fourth against his Father, and dispossest him of his King∣dome.Adrian 2us. This is that Servant of Servants, that did correct the Emperor Frederick, for holding the left stirrop of his horse, when hee should have held the right.Clemens 5us. Iuel, pag. 379. This is that Servant of Servants, that caused Franciscus Dandalus the Embassador of Venice, to come before him tied in iron chains, and to wallow under his Table with dogs, whilst his Holinesse sate at supper. This is that Servant of Servants,Innocentius 3us. who caused King Iohn to kneele downe at his Legates feet, and offer up his crown into his hand. This is that Servant of Servants, that termed King Henry the third,Matth. Paris, pag. 844. the eldest Son of King Iohn, the Popes vassall, and England his Iade. To conclude, by this Servant, Rex superbiae, the King of Pride,Rex superbiae in foribus est. Greg. l. 4. Ep. 38. (which S. Gregory foretold in his dayes to be nigh at hand) is now manifested to the world. From the Popes Supremacie, you proceed to
the worship of Images; and then you cry out,pag. 96. Here againe the Knight giveth more ample testi∣mony of his notorious naughtie dealing. Well, what is this grievous accusation? Why, when he said the Heretikes had the picture of Christ made, as they said, by Pilat; why I say, could not hee have gone on with Irenaeus? Thus you. Let mee tell you, I have omitted nothing ma∣teriall of your exceptions, nor nothing in the Au∣thors; but if I should recite at large, all the words of my Authors, which either make for us, or a∣gainst you, I should have wearied both my selfe and the Reader with impertinencies. Let us goe on with Irenaeus; They crowne them, and propose them with the Images of the Philosophers of the world, to wit, Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and the rest; and use such other observation towards them, as the Gentiles doe. Then you triumph be∣fore the conquest, in a vaunting fashion, Doth not this answer you, Sir Humphrey? Doe you not here find a difference betweene their worship and ours? betweene Idolatry and Religion? &c. This is too too grosse for such a subtile Knight as you are. To passe by your idle words, I must tell you plainly, this doth not answer mee. For the Car∣pocratians (I confesse) that as they worshipped the Images of Philosophers, they were heathenish; but as they worshipped the Images of Christ and his Apostles, I say, in that point of Idolatry, they are your Predecessors. But (say you) the Here∣tikes crowned the Philosophers Images.] It is true;
and so was Marcellina reckoned, and detested as an Heretike by Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and Saint Au∣stin, for having the Images of Christ and Saint Paul, in her Closet, and setting Garlands on their heads, and burning Incense to them. Nay more, Shee her selfe, saith Saint Austine, was of Carpo∣crates Sect,Aug. de Heres. heres. 7. and worshipped the Images of Jesu, Paul, Homer, and Pythagoras, with bowing her selfe,Epiph in 80 he∣res. anaceph.] Idem, lib. 1. he∣res. 27. and burning Incense. Epiphanius likewise chargeth the whole Sect of Carpocrates, with the same fault. The Heretikes called Gnostici, be∣sides all this, have Images painted with colours, and some of gold and silver, which they say, are the Images of Jesu; and made in the time of Pon∣tius Pilat, when Christ was conversant amongst them.Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24. And so doth Irenaeus also witnesse, they all restraining, and adjudging it to be Heresie and Idolatrie, to cense, and bow to the Image, even of Paul, or Christs. But doe you not find a difference (say you) betweene their adoring the creature of wood and colour, in place of the creature, and our adoring the Creator represented by the creature? If there be any difference in the manner of the Pagan worship and yours, it is in this: That the Christians who know God, and set up an Image unto him, offend rather than the Gentiles, who know him not: and if to worship a creature, which is the worke of Gods hands, be flat Idolatrie, how inexcusable is it to worship the worke of mens hands, and the shadowes of Creatures re∣presented by art, and applied by mans vaine con∣ceit
to resemble the Creatour? And in this re∣spect, Saint Austine preferred the Pagans and Heathens before the Manichees,Pagani clunt ea quae sunt, etc. Aug. contrà Faust. l. 20. c. 5. which were Christians: For the Pagans worship things that be, though they be not to be worshipped; but you (saith hee) worship those things that be not at all, but are fained by the vanitie of your deceitfull fables and tales. It is true,Gentes lignum adorant, quia Dei Imaginem putant. Ambr. in Psal. 118. Serm. 10. (as you say) the Heathen did worship the Creatures of wood, in place of the Creator: but the reason is given by Saint Ambrose, because they thinke it to be the Image of God. And doe not you the like, when you worship the picture of Christ in wood, or any other metall,I most firmly avouch, that the images of Christ, and the Mother of God, and o∣ther Saints are to be worship∣ped. Bulla Pij (4) Act. 9. because it is the picture of Christ? Those that worshipped the golden Calfe, knew wherof it was made: neither could there be such a Calfe amongst them, to thinke it was a true God. Tertullian obraideth the Pagans, That in their owne consciences they knew well enough, that the Gods which they wor∣shipped were but men, that it was to be proved in what places they were borne, where they had lived,Tert. Apolog. cap. 10. rovo∣camus ad con∣scientiam ve∣stram, &c. and left a remembrance of their workes, where they were buried: and may not the like be proved by many of your Saints which you worship in your Church? If the Pagans had adored their Images for God, there had beene some difference betwixt you; but they could answer the Christians, as Celsus the Philosopher did Origen:Orig. contra Celsum, l. 7. If the Chri∣stians deny things made of wood, stone, brasse, or
gold, to be God, wee grant it; for otherwise it were a ridiculous opinion; for who but a starke foole did ever account them for gods? But in conclusion, they joyne hands with you. These (say you) are the services unto the gods, or else certaine resem∣blances of the gods. I will come neerer unto you. It is the voice of the Heathen man in Clemens, We worship the Images which we may see,Clem. Recog∣nit. ad Iacob. lib. 5. in the honor of that God which cannot be seen. You may reade the like excuse of a Heathen man in Saint Austine: I worship neither the Image,Aug. in Psal. 113. Concion. 2. nor the devill, but by a Corporall figure, I behold the signe of that which I ought to worship. Now change but the name of Pagan into Papist, and these sayings will fully agree with your men: and therefore, if it be flat Idolatry in them that know not God, the greater sinne lyeth at your Churches doore, who joyne with Pagans and Idolaters, which otherwise pro∣fesse to know him, and worship him as hee ought to be worshipped, in spirit and truth. The diffe∣rence onely betwixt you and them, is this: They worshipped the Images of the heathen Philoso∣phers, aswel as of Iesus; and you say that you wor∣ship Images of Christ, and not of the Gentiles. And herein, your later error is greater than the first; for if you had told a Carpocratian, Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours wife, (because God hath for∣bidden it) Clemens saith, hee would have replied (as you doe) By thy Neighbour is understood,Clem. Strom. l. 3 the Neighbour of the Gentiles. And thus they excuse their disordered Lust; and you to decline your
Idolatrous worship, savour of one and the same spirit, and therefore (to use part of your owne words) This doctrine is too grosse for so subtile a Ie∣suit as you are. To conclude, you would know how our Do∣ctrine against Images, doth succeed the second Com∣mandement? Here you quarrell about the word Succeed, when I say no such thing, but that it is derived; and thus you fight with a Paper-man of your owne making. And lastly, you say the word Image is not in the Scripture, when as your vul∣gar Translation in Exodus is Sculptile; and yours in Deuteronomie, Sculpta similitudo; both which signifie, A graven Image, or the likenesse of any thing. Take for a Conclusion, that friendly ad∣monition which Origen sometimes gave to Celsus the Pagan,Communis sen∣sus cogitare nos cogit, &c. Orig. contra Celsum, l. 3. Common sense doth will men to thinke that God is not dleighted with honour of Images made by men, to represent his likenesse, or any signi∣fication of him: yea, who (saith hee) that hath his right wits, will not laugh at him, who after those excellent and Philosophicall disputations concerning God, or the gods, doth looke to Images, and either offereth prayers unto them,Ibid. l. 7. or by the contemplation thereof, as of some visible signe, goeth about to lift up his mind to the cogitation of God, thereby to be understood. And thus much may serve touching your Patrons, and first founders of Images. From your Images, you proceed to your Com∣munion in one kind, which I shewed was derived from the Manichees, &c. You to excuse the mat∣ter,
say, That before there were Manichees in the world, the blessed Sacrament was administred some∣times in one kind, sometimes in both. You say so, but you say nothing to prove it; and your ipse dixit will hardly carry it against a cloud of witnesses. For confirmation of what I said, that in this point of Doctrine you succeed the Heretikes, hearken to Leo Bishop of Rome;Leo. Serm. 4. de Quadrages. The Manichees, to cover their infidelitie, venture to be present at our myste∣ries, and so carry themselves in receiving of the Sa∣craments for their more safety, that they take the bo∣dy of Christ with an unworthy mouth: but in any wise, they shunne to drinke the blood of our Redemp∣tion, which I would have your devoutnesse (speaking to the people) learne; for by this sacrilegious simu∣lation, they may be noted by the Godly, that they may be chased away by the Priestly power. Leo (you see) speaketh of the Manichees by name, and those Lay-men also; and calleth the forbearing the Lords blood, a Sacrilegious sleight. Against these Heretikes also, wrote another Bishop of Rome in the same age,Grat. de Conse∣crat. Dist. 2. Cooperimus. namely, Pope Gelasius: We have intelligence (saith hee) that certaine men, re∣ceiving only a portion of the sanctified Body, abstain from the Cup of the sacred blood, who, for that it ap∣peareth they be intangled with I know not what su∣perstition, let them either receive the whole Sacra∣ments, or be driven from the whole; because the divi∣ding and parting of one and the same mystery, cannot be without grievous Sacrilege. What thinke you of your halfe Communion,
you that brag so much of the antiquitie of your Church? The Manichees, without doubt, were the first Authors of your Doctrine; and by the suffrages of two infallible Popes, your Sacra∣ment is sacrilegious. But (say you) as at that time the Church forbad the use of one kind, so now it for∣biddeth the use of both, and may againe give way when it shall seeme convenient for the use of both kinds. Thus you. It seemes you make no scruple to thwart the Institution of Christ, nor the Custom of the An∣cient Church: but because in this point your Church is branded with Sacrilege, I thinke in∣deed you could be content to joyne with the Protestants, and restore the Cup to the Lay-peo∣ple; but I would gladly know how it can be done? Is not your Communion in one kind, published and decreed by your Pope and Councell, for an Article of Faith? And is it in your Churches power to alter,Bulla Pij (4) Act. 6. & Con∣cil. Trid Sess. 13 and dispense with Articles of Faith at her pleasure? Surely this Confession proves, that your Church can create new Arti∣cles of Beleefe, which elsewhere you deny; or else this is no Article of Faith, being contrary to the practise of the first and best ages; and by con∣sequent, your infallible Pope and Councell, are guilty of Error and Sacrilege in a high degree. For a conclusiō of this point, you say the words, Drinke yee all of this, (from whence we draw our succession in Doctrine) were spoken to the Apo∣stles, and in them to Priests, not to the Laitie.
By this reason who seeth not, but you may as∣well take the bread from the Lay people as the cup, for that also was given onely to the Apo∣stles? but if the cup were proper for the Priests onely, why doe you deny it to your Non confici∣ent Priests? doe they stand in the place of Lay people? Nay more, were not all Non conficients at the time of Christs Institution? what strange shifts and evasions hath your Church, to uphold the Novelty of your faith? I will give you but one testimony of Antiquity: There is (saith St. Chrysostome) where the Priests differ no∣thing from the people,Chrys. 18. in 2. Corinth. as when we must receive the dreadfull mysteries; for it is not here, as it was in the old Law, where the Priest eates one part, and the people another, neither was it lawfull for the people to be partaker of those things of which the Priest was; but now it is not so, but rather one body is proposed to all, and one cup (to all.) To passe by innumerable authorities of the Ancients, which you know are full in our behalfe, I will shut up this haereticall point of doctrine (for such is the foundation of it) with a testimony of your owne side. There are some false Catholikes that feare not to stop the Reformation of the Church,Gerard. Lori∣chius de Missa publica prero∣ganda. p. mihi. what they can▪ these spare no blasphemy, lest that other part of the Sacrament should be restored to the Lay people: for (say they) Christ spake, drinke yee all of this, onely to the Apostles, but the words of the Masse be these, Take and eate yee all of this: Here I would know of them whether this were spoken
onely to the Apostles: then must lay men abstaine likewise from the Element of bread, which to say, is an haeresie, yea, a pestilent and detestable blasphemy. It is therefore consequent that both these words (Eate yee, Drinke yee) were spoken to the whole Church. Thus your Ancient Bishop of Rome termed your halfe Communion a Sacriledge, and this latter Author of your owne, termes it an haeresie, and a pestilent Blasphemy; and this may serve to prove your descent from the Haeretikes the Mani∣chees in this point. From your halfe Communion, you proceede to your Invocation of Angels, which I derived from the Haeretikes Angelici; and for answer to them, you say, they were Haeretikes swarving from the rule of the Catholike faith by excesse, that is, honour∣ing Angels more then their due. And this is your very case, for you doe not one∣ly honour them, but religiously worship them, and call upon them. I will compare your wor∣ship with theirs, and let the Reader judge, if you be not the children of those haereticall Authors called Angelici. St. Austin saith,Angelici in An∣glorum cultu inclmati. Aug. de haeres. c. 35. Angelici vocati quia Angelos colunt. Isid. O∣rig in l. 8. c. 5. Rhem. Annot. in Apoc. 19. Sect. 4. that those haere∣tikes were inclined to the worship of Angels; or as Isidore noteth, they were called Angelici, because they did worship Angels. The one saih, they were but inclined to worship, the other saith, they did worship. On the other side you teach, that there is a religious reverence, honour, and adoration, which is not to be denied to Angels, nay more, you make it a point of Faith, and have decreed
that the Saints and Angels reigning with Christ are to be worshipped and prayed unto.Art. 8. in Bulla Pij. 4. Thus where∣as the ancient Haeretikes were but inclined to a∣doration, your men have made it a doctrinall de∣termination flatly to adore them; and whereas they did worship them with a religious honour, (as a custome learned from the Heathen Philoso∣phers) you receive it as a Dogmaticall resolution of your Faith, delivered by your Trent Fathers; and surely in this if there be any excesse in the worship, it is in your selves. Againe, those Haeretikes learned their lesson from the Gentiles; For Celsus the Philosopher had said of the Angels, that they belong to God, and in that respect we are to put our trust in them,Orig. lib. 8. contrà Celsum. and make Oblations to them according to the Lawes, and pray unto them that they may be favourable un∣to us: And is not this your very doctrine? and yet these men (say you) swerve from the rule of the Catholike faith. Observe then what was the Chatholike doctrine of those times; Origen returnes his answer in the name of all true belee∣vers,Idem Ibid. Away with Celsus councell, saying, that we must pray to Angels, and let us not so much as afford any little audience to it. Againe, St. Chrysostome was living in the fourth age, when Apostrophes began to be used to Saints and Angels, yet hee telleth us, it was the Devills doing to draw men unto the calling upon Angels; These (saith hee) be the inchantments of the Devils,Chrys. in 1. Cor. Homil. 1. though he be an Angell, though an Archangell, though they be Che∣rubins
endure it not; For, neither will those powers themselves admit it, but reject it, when they see their Lord dishonored; I have favoured thee, saith he, and have said, call upon me; and dost thou dishonour him with calling upon others? This agrees with the doctrine of Theodoret, shewing,Theod. in Co∣loss. 3. that the Sy∣nod of Laodicea following that rule, made a Law, that they should not pray unto Angels, nor forsake our Lord Iesus Christ: and accordingly, they de∣creed it with a curse,Concil. Lao∣dic. Can. 35. Anno 364. Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and depart aside, and invocate An∣gels, and make meetings, which are things forbid∣den. If any man therefore be found to give himselfe to this priuie Idolatry, let him be accursed. This Canon makes so plainely against your Church doctrine,Merlin Edit. 1530. fol. 68. Crab. Edit. 1538. fol. 226. that both Merlin and Crabbe (as I have shewed) have turned the word Angelos into An∣gulos, and so by transposition of a letter, say, we must not leave the Church of God, and have re∣course to (Angles) or corners.Heiron. Epist. ad Riparium. And St. Heirom at the same time opposed Vigilantius, and pro∣fesseth of himselfe and the Catholike Christians of his time, Wee doe not adore or worship the Re∣liques of Martyrs, no nor the Sunne, nor Moone, nor Angels, nor Archangels, nor Cherubins, nor Se∣raphins, nor any name that is named in this world, or in the world to come, lest we should serve the crea∣ture, rather then the Creator, who is blessed for ever. You see then, by these few observations, that you are rightly descended from the Haeretikes in this point, and accordingly you have swerved
(with them) from the Catholike faith by excesse; Wherefore I will conclude this Invocation, with that memorable passage of St. Austin, Whom should I finde that might reconcile me unto thee?August. lib. Confess. 10. c. 42. should I have gone unto the Angels? with what prayer? with what Sacraments? Many endeavouring to returne unto thee, and not being able to doe it by themselves, as I heare, have tried these things, and have fallen into the desire of curious visions, and were accounted worthy of illusions. From your Angell-like or Angelicall prede∣cessors, you proceede to the Cathari or Puritans. These were Novations (say you) who out of pride and selfe conceits, as if they were more cleane and ho∣ly, did condemne Catholikes. And doe not your Cloister Monkes so conceive of themselves, who beleeve they doe more then God commanded, and that they can supererrorogate, and doe they not condemne the Reformed Catholikes as the Novatians did? To come neerer to you, is not the proud generation of Meritmongers derived from the Catharists? But (saith Epiphanius) whilst these men call themselves Puritans,Epiph. haeres. 59. by this very ground they prove themselves to be impure; for whosoever pronounceth himselfe to be pure, doth therein absolutely condemne himselfe to be impure. Againe, touching your predecessors, who for bad Marriage, I cited (out of Epiphanius, and St. Austin) the Haeretikes Tatiani, and the Manichees; But say you, That they did disallow it, especially in Priests, I doe not finde it in Epiphanius. It is true,
neither did I cite him for it, but I cited Saint Au∣stin in the Margent, which you wittingly omitted.Aug. ep. 74. Yet both Authors declare the Haeretikes to bee founders of your doctrine.Continentiam viro hic praedi∣cat, nuptias au∣tem scortatio∣nem & corrup∣tionem putat. Epiph. haeres. 46. & 47. p. mihi 93. 95. Auditores co∣rum ex carni∣bus vescuntur, & si voluerint uxores habent, quorum nihil faciunt qui vo∣cantur electi. Aug. ep. 74. Qui cum uxore exercent car∣nale commerci∣um in carne sunt & Deo placere non possunt, san∣cti esse non pos∣sunt. Dist. 82. cap. Proposu∣isti. Epiphanius shewes that the Tatiani had two proper markes of your Church; for their first Leader, Tatianus accoun∣ted of Marriage, as whoredome and corruption, and forbad the eating of meates. St. Austin like∣wise tells us that the Manichees did permit their hearers to eate flesh, to use husbandry, and to marry wives, but those which were called Elect, did use none of those things. Now if those Elect were not the hearers, they must needs be their Teachers, and consequently their Priests; And thus you have two sorts of Haeretikes to defend your Mo∣nasticke life, the one (viz.) the Tatiani, who a∣gree with Pope Innocent, saying, They which live in the flesh cannot please God, neither can they be ho∣ly. The other (viz.) the Manichees who permit Marriage to all, but to their Priests. Lastly, touching the Collyridian Haeretikes, so called from the Collyrides or cakes which certaine women used to offer to the blessed Virgin; I say againe, they were your first Leaders, and parti∣cularly for this reason, which you alledge to ex∣cuse your selves, Because they did exceede the mea∣sure of honor due to our blessed Lady.Pag. 99. And as touch∣ing the Antidico-Marianitae (with which haeresie you charge us) they were such who out of malice to the blessed Virgin, being puffed up with pride or envy (saith Epiphanius) would possesse men,Epiph. haeres. 78 p. mihi. 244.
that after the birth of our Saviour, Ioseph knew Marie, which never Protestant to my knowledge, ever taught, or thought. Therefore by way of prevention, you put this as a scandall upon our Church, to excuse your owne; But the truth is, we ascribe honour of preheminence unto that glorious person, before all other vessells of bles∣sednesse; we proclaime it with the Angel Ga∣briel that she was highly favoured, and blessed a∣mong women;Luke 1.2. but withall we testifie with Epi∣phanius, Christ said unto her, woman, what have I to doe with thee? my hower is not yet come; lest any man should thinke our Lady was of greater ex∣cellency,Epiph. l. 3. hae∣res. 79. contr. Collyridianos. he called her woman, as it were prophecying of the kinds and sects of haeresies that were to come into the world; lest any man having too great an opi∣nion of that Holy Saint, should fall into this haeresie and into the dotage of the same. And as touching her perpetuall virginity, that golden saying of St. Hierome against Helvidius we unfainedly professe and testifie with heart and voice,Hieron. contrà Helvidium. That God was borne of a virgin, we beleeve because we reade it; That Mary had Matrimoniall company with her husband after her delivery, we doe not beleeve, be∣cause we reade it not. And to make good my asser∣tion, that you tread in the steps of those haeretikes, which did exceede the measure of honor due unto our Lady, first looke upon Epiphanius, who opposeth this haeresie, he tells us, Although Mary be beau∣tifull,Epiph. l. 3. hae∣res. 79. and holy, and honourable, yet is shee not to be adored; For these women worshipping St. Mary,
renew againe the Sacrifice of Wine mingled in the honour of the Goddesse Fortune, and prepare a Ta∣ble for the Devill, and not for God, as it is written in the Scriptures, Their women boult flower, and their children gather sticks to make fine Cakes, in the honour of the Queene of Heaven. Therefore let such women be rebuked by the Prophet Ieremie, and let them no more trouble the world, and let them not say, we worship the Queene of Heaven. Here we see, the words which were spoken of the Heathenish Idolls, were applied by Epiphani∣us unto the Mother of Christ, not to deface the blessed Virgin, but to declare the fond errors of the Haeretikes. Now let us compare this do∣ctrine with yours. Bernardinus de Busto,Ad ornamentum regni terreni est, quod habeat Re∣gem & Regi∣nam &c. Bernard. de Busto part. 9. Serm. 2. Bb. Vshers an∣swer to a chal∣ling. p. mihi. (437.) who was living almost 200. yeares since, tells us, That it is for an ornament of an earthly Kingdome, that it should have both a King and a Queene, and therefore when any King hath not a wife, his sub∣jects often request him to take one. Hereupon the eternall King and Omnipotent Emperour minding to adorne the Kingdome of Heaven above, did frame the Blessed Virgin, to the end that he might make her the Lady and Empresse of his Kingdome and Empire, that the Prophecy of David may be verified, saying unto her in the Psalme, upon thy right hand did sit the Queene in clothing of Gold. He tells us further, that your Pope Sixtus the fourth, gran∣ted an Indulgence of twelve thousand yeares for every time, that a man in the state of grace should repeate this short Salutation of the Virgin, Haile
most holy Mary, the Mother of God (the Queene of Heaven) the Gate of Paradise, the Lady of the world; thou art a singular and pure Virgin, thou didst receive Christ without sinne, thou didst beare the Creator and Saviour of the world: Deliver mee from all evill, and pray for my sinnes. Amen. Looke upon Gregory the Great, printed at Ant∣werpe,Apud Iohannem Keerbergium. 1615. Tom. 1. p. mihi 490. Anno 1615. and there you shall find the Miter of Pope Sylvester the first, who was living Anno 314. with the picture of the blessed Virgin, and Christ in her armes, figured with this Motto, Ave Regina Coeli; Haile Queene of Heaven. And this was in the same age, wherein Epipha∣nius complaines of the womens custome in his dayes, Wee worship the Queene of Heaven. Bellar. in Praef. de Eccles. Mi∣litante.Lastly, Bellarmine himselfe doth terme her (Regina Coeli) the Queene of Heaven: which at∣tribute is rebuked, and forbidden by Hieremie, saith that ancient Father, and in his dayes con∣demned for a Heresie. And as touching the ex∣cessive honour (which you complaine of) that the Heretikes gave unto our Lady,Constituta quippe est super omnem creatu∣ram, et quicun∣que Iesu crat genu, matri quo∣que premus up∣plicat, & fiij gloriam cum matre non tam communem iu∣dico quam ean∣dem. Arnold. Crnotens. tract. de lau∣dibus Virginis. I verily beleeve, if your Churches Magnificats be compared with theirs, they will be found to exceed them farre. For first, the same Author testifies, That shee is constituted over every Creature; and whosoever boweth his knee unto JESVS, doth fall downe also, and supplicate unto his Mother, so that the glory of the Son may be judged not so much, to be common with the Mother, as to be the very same. Neither are your men contented to make her
the Queene of Heaven, and to make her equall to him, whom she her selfe termed her Saviour and Redeemer; but your Schooleman Bonaventure goes in a high straine,Iure Matris impera tuo di∣lectissimo filio, nostro Iesu Christo. Bonav. Corona. B. Ma∣riae Virginis Operum. Tom. 6. edit. Rom. An. 1588 and in one of his Orizons prescribed to her, hee saith, O Empresse, and our most kind Lady, by the authority of a Mother, com∣mand thy most beloved Son, our Lord Iesus Christ, (or as wee may reade in the 15th Psalme of your Ladies Psalter) Incline the countenance of thy Son upon us, compell him by thy prayers, to have mercie upon us sinners. But that which is most remarka∣ble, the Psalmes of David, which were wholly framed and dedicated to the honour of our Lord, E tranverso, are all applied to the name and ho∣nour of our Lady: as for Instance;Psalter Bonav. edit. Parifiis, An. 1596. Psal. 15.31.56.71.94. Preserve mee ô Lady, for in thee have I put my trust. Blessed are they whose hearts doe love thee, ô Virgin Mary, their sinnes by thee shall mercifully be washed away. Have mercie upon mee, ô Lady, have mercie upon mee, because my heart is prepared to search out thy will, and in the shadow of thy wings will I rest. Give the King thy Iudgements, ô Lord, and thy mercie to the Queene his Mother. O come let us sing unto our Lady, let us make a joyfull noise to Mary our Queene, that brings salvation. And for a conclusion, Let every spirit,Psal. 150. or every thing that hath breath, praise our Lady. After all these, and many such like passages of excessive honour, attributed to our Lady, your Bernardinus at last concludes: Truly, if it be law∣full to speake it, thou in some respect didst greater
things to God, then God himselfe did to thee and to all mankind.Volo ergo ego dicere quod tu ex humilitate reticuisti. Tu enim solus ce∣cinisti. Quia se∣cit mihi magna qui potens est, ego verò cano & dico. Quia tu fecisti majo∣ra ei qui potens est. Bernardin. de Bust. Mar∣tial. part. 6. Serm. 2. memb. 3. I will therefore speake that, which out of thy humility thou hast past in silence. For thou onely didst sing, Hee that is mighty hath done to mee great things; but I doe sing and say, That thou hast done greater things to him that is mighty. Now I appeale to your selfe, and to all your fellow-Jesuites, whether your Hyperdulia to the blessed Virgin be not transcendent, or (to use your owne words) doth not exceed the measure of honour due unto our Lady? And consequently, whether in this particular, upon your owne con∣fession, you are not descended from the Collyri∣dian Heretikes, your first parents? This is so apparently true, that you know no way to free your selves from the guilt of Heresie, but by waving the question, telling us, The line should be drawne along by a continued succession, from the beginning to the end: whereas I told you at first, I did not undertake to prove that those Heretikes, or your Church, had a perpetuall suc∣cession in person and doctrine; but to shew, How neere affinity you have with their adulterate issue. (For those were my very words;) and thereupon I concluded, that you had no succession in person and doctrine: but let us heare your answer? This is so false, and so apparently false, as that it is not to be doubted, but hee that shall averre it, will make no scruple of any lie, how lewd soever. Thus you. Good words, and found proofes would better become men of your profession. If you affirme
that you have a Lineall Succession, the proofe lyes on your side: and when I shall see it as plain∣ly proved, as spoken, I shall readily confesse my error, till then, let me tell you, it is not your Ca∣talogue of Popes, which you say are sold, and printed at London, that can make a firme agree∣ment of succession in Faith. For by that reason, our Queene Elizabeth of blessed memorie, suc∣ceeded Queene Mary in Faith; and consequent∣ly, our Faith must be good by your owne con∣fession. By that reason, Ahaz and Manasses, that shut up the doore of the Temple, succeeded Da∣vid in the Faith. By that reason, Pope Liberius the Arrian, succeeded Iulius a Catholike Bishop, in the Faith. By that reason, your Cardinall Poole succeeded Bishop Cranmer our Protestant Martyr, in the Faith. This (most firme Argument) therefore (as you call it) is but weake and infirme; and accordingly it was resolved by Saint Am∣brose, and the ancient Fathers,Ambr. de Poenit. cap. They have not the succession of Peter, that want the faith of Peter. In fine, if for no other cause, yet for this alone, your succession in Faith is interrupted, because you your selfe confesse, that some Articles which are received as points of Faith in your Church, are different from those which were received in the Primitive Churches; and therefore want suc∣cession in the true doctrine. And that you may yet farther know there was an interruption of the true Faith in succeeding Ages,Genebr. Chrono. lib. 4. your owne Gene∣brard confesseth, that there were fifty Popes suc∣ceeding
one another, rather Apostaticall, than Apostolicall. Cardinall Bellarmine in his Chro∣nologie, tels us of six and twentie Schismes in the Papacie, wherein it was questionable betwixt the Popes and Antipopes, who were the true succes∣sors of Peter. Your Cardinall Baronius tels us, that base Harlots beare all the sway at Rome,Baron. An. 912. and gave Bishopricks at their pleasures, and intruded their Paramours into Peters chaire, false Popes, whose names are written in the Catalogue of Popes, onely to note and designe the times. It is not then your Ca∣talogue of Popes (which you so much brag of) that can free you from Heresie, or make good your succession in the Faith: and therefore I will conclude as I first began; The pedigree of the Romish Faith is drawne downe from the ancient Heretikes, and the Protestant Faith from Christ and his Apostles. CHAP. VIII. The summe of his Answer to Sect. 8. 1. That I allege but three Authors, Adrian, Coster, and Harding; and them falsly, or impertinently, for three severall points of the Protestant Faith, none for the universality of it in generall, as the title promiseth. 2. That it is not sufficient to name some in the Ro∣man Church, who held some of our opinions, but
that I must shew a distinct companie from the Ro∣man, making a Church. 3. That it is not to purpose, to shew the Antiquitie and Vniversality of those points wherin we agree with you, but in those other points wherein wee disagree. 4. That if it were granted, the Protestant Church in former ages lay hid in the bosome of the Roman Church, that proveth it to have been invisible, ra∣ther than visible. The Reply. IN the eighth Section, I assumed to prove the Antiquitie, and Vniversalitie of our Religion, by and with the consenting testimonies of the Romane Church: you tell mee, It is a bold and unlikely adventure, and it is shamelesse and im∣pudent. These words be like a house full of smoake without fire: but what is the occasion of all this heinous complaint? Forsooth, the Knight brin∣geth not one Author, I say, not one for the Vniver∣salitie and Antiquitie of his Church. And is this so grievous an accusation? Surely, I thouht there was none so ignorant or impudent, as to denie both the Vniversalitie and Antiquitie of three Creeds; two Sacraments instituted by Christ; the two and twentie books of Canoni∣call Scriptures; of the first foure Generall Coun∣cels; of the Apostolike Traditions; of the An∣cient Liturgies; of the Ordination of Priests and Deacons. These are our Tenets, and these
were the particular Instances which I made: and to bring Authors for the proofe of these, as if we made a doubt of that which all true Christians did generally receive and beleeve, I say with St. Austin,Insolentissimae dementiae. Aug. It were a signe of most insolent madnesse. But admit I should produce some Authors for proofe of this generall beleefe, would their Au∣thoritie free me from your termes of Shamelesse, and impudent adventure? Certainly no: for (say you) If hee should have one, two, or three, or ten men, it would not be sufficient for him, unlesse hee have the Authoritie of the Catholike Church, or Church of Rome. To cite many Authors, or to bring none, then is all alike to you; for in your doome, nothing will free mee from the name, and punishment due to Heresie, but the authoritie of the Church: and yet in this, you have granted mee more than I could expect; for you have given mee liberty to take my authoritie from the Church, so it be from the Catholike, or the Roman. And hereby you have made your Roman Church distinct from the Catholike, which is most true; which, both you your selfe, and most of your fellow Jesuits have made all one, and confirmed by the title of (Roman Catholike) in all your writings. This being granted, I proceed to the rest of your exceptions. In this Section (say you) he brin∣geth onely three Catholike Authors, Adrian, Coste∣rus, and Harding, but no word for Antiquitie, or universalitie. Thus you.
Hee that shall reade my Section in Via tuta, with this your Answer, must needs confesse that you deale not fairly, nor ingeniously with mee: for sometimes you leape from the beginning of a Chapter to the end, then you returne againe to the beginning, being willing to conceale or con∣found the truth of my Assertions. You so mingle my words with your own in the same Character, that a prudent Reader can hardly discerne mine from yours: but most usuall it is with you to cry down my words with bitter passages, and decline the question in all. As for Instance, in this Se∣ction, whereas I said, the Church of Rome doth confesse the Antiquitie, and Vniversalitie of our Religion long before Luther, I instanced in our three Creeds, and the rest before named. One while you cry out of my impudencie, that I cite no Authors; another while, that if I did cite them, they would not serve my turne: but you never mention either the Creeds, or Scriptures, or Councels, or any of the points which you well knew had Antiquitie, and Vniversalitie in the name and opinion of all Christians. After that, you flie to the later end of my Section, and there you tell mee, I cite but three Authors, and yet none prove the Antiquitie or Vniversalitie of our Faith. Then you goe backe againe, and you tell the Reader, I say nothing here of the mans notable cunning and falshood, in making him beleeve, as if we did excuse our selves in those things whereof they accuse us.
If such extravagant excursions and reproches you call a Reply, or a Catholike Answer, I will lay my finger on my mouth, and say with your Cardinall, Qui decipi vult, decipiatur. Briefely, the substance of my Assertion was this: The three Creeds, the Canonicall Scriptures, the Apostolike Traditions, the foure first generall Councels, and the rest were so generally received in the bosome of the Roman Church, that for that reas n i might seeme a senselesse question, to de∣mand where our Church was before Luther. Next I shewed that the positive Doctrines of our Church (mentioned in our (39.) Articles) were contained in a very few points, and those al∣so had Antiquity and Vniversality; then I shewed that those doctrines which they obtruded upon us, were but Additions and Negative Tenets in our Articles, and that many of those additions were condemned, or at least excused, by their owne men: And I instanced in three Authors be∣fore mentioned, for three severall points of their Doctrine; and this is the substance and true meaning of that Section; and thus much by way of advertisement to the modrate Reader. Now to answer you distinctly to that you have produ∣ced confusedly. Your first exception is touching Pope Adrian the sixth: you say, It is not as Sr. Humphry put∣teth it, to wit, if te consecrated Bread be Christ, but if it be rightly consecrated. And doe not you still by Adrians confession
excuse your adoration, by implying a condition? and is it not all one according to your doctrine? For if it be rightly consecrated, it is Christ, if not, it is a Crust, and no man amongst your Com∣municants knoweth what it is, because he know∣eth not the Priests intention. Take it therefore which way you will, yet my assertion stands true; we condemne you for adoring the Elements, for ought you know, of bread and wine, because it doth depend upon the intention of the Priest, whether Christ be there or no; but yet you can∣not condemne us for adoring Christs rent body in the Heavens: and however the Priests doe consecrate, yet (saith Gerson) when the host is ado∣red,Gers. compend. Theol. Tit. de tribus virtut. p. 111. that condition is ever at lest to be supposed (if it be rightly consecrated) that is, if it be truely the body of Christ; And this is that Pope Adrian hath delivered by your owne confession, and therefore they are not to be cleered from Idola∣try, because they intended to worship one God, (as indeede there was but one God) but because they adored him there where he was not, and in that manner as they supposed him to be. The case (saith Catharinus) is like in the host not consecrated:Cather. Annot. in Caiet p. mihi 134. For God and Christ is not adored simply, but as he is existing under the formes of bread and wine: If therefore he be not there, but it be found that Divine worship is given to a creature insteede of Christ, there is Idolatry also: For even in this regard they were Idolaters who adored Heaven, or any other thing, supposing with themselves that they adored
in it the Divinity, whom they called the soule of the world. Compare then the certainty of your faith, with ours (which is the point in question) and tell me if in his we are not more certaine and safe then you can be. First, your owne Bellarmine tels us,Bell. de Iusti∣fic. l. 3. c. 8. that none can be certaine by the certainety of faith that he doth receive a true Sacrament. No man (saith Andeas Vega) can beleeve assuredly,Vega l 9 de Iustific. c. 17. that he receiveth the least part of the Sacrament, and this is so surely to be credited, as it is apparant that we live; And both give one and the same reason for it: For there is no way, except it be by Revela∣tion, that we can know the intention of the Mini∣ster, either by outward appearance, or by cer∣tainty of faith. From this dangerous consequence, we condemne your adoration, and resolve to let you know from your owne men,Th Saliflur. de arte Praedican∣di. c. 25. that No man, be he never so simple, or never so wise, ought precisely to believe that this is the body of our Lord that the Priest hath consecrated, but onely under this conditi∣on, if all things concerning the consecration be done as appertaineth; for otherwise he shall avouch a creature to be the Creator, which were Idolatry. Now as this way in the generall is uncertaine and dangerous; so likewise there are many other wayes, which may easily occasion this Idolatry; and therefore you cannot deny us to be in the more certaine and safe way. As for instance Io∣hannes de Burgo, who was Chancellor of Cam∣bridge about (200.) yeares since, gives us to un∣derstand that a Priest may faile in his intention
many wayes. As for example, If the Bread be made of any other then wheaten flower,Pupilla Oculi c. 3. & 5. &c. which may possibly happen, or if there be too much water in quantity, that it overcomes and alters the nature of wine; if the wine be changed into vinegar, and therefore cannot serve for consecration; If there be thirteene cakes upon the Table, and the Priest for his consecration determine onely upon twelve, in that case not one of them all is Consecrated: Lastly, if the Priest dissemble, or leave out the words of Conse∣cration, or if he forget it, or minde it not, in all and every of these wayes, there is nothing Consecrated, and consequently the people giving divine honour to the Sacrament all Bread or Cup, commit flat Idolatry. When I heare the Apostle proclaime to all Christians, that he which doubteth is condemned al∣ready; I cannot chuse but pitty the state and con∣dition of that miserable man, who hath a doubt∣full, perplexed, and uncertaine faith, who taketh all upon trust, and upon the report, sometimes of an Hypocrite, sometimes of a malitious Priest, who hath no intention at all to administer the true Sacrament. For (saith your Trent history) if a Priest having charge of foure or five hundred soules were an Infidell, but a formall Hyppocrite,History of Trent. and in absolving the Penitent, baptizing of children, and Consecrating the Eucharist, had an intention not to doe that which the Church doth, it must be said that the children are damned, the penitent not absolved, and that all remaine without the fruite of the Com∣munion.
Now let the Reader judge which doctrine is most certaine and safe, either that of your Church which may occasion flat Idolatry in the worship∣er, or our sursum corda, with hearts and eyes lifted up to Heaven, where we adore our Saviour Christ in his bodily presence according to the Article of your Faith and ours; and this is agreed on both sides to be without feare or perill of Idolatry. Lastly, as if you were guilty of false accusati∣ons, you say, suppose Adrian hath erred in this, or in any other point, doth it follow that he agree∣eth with you in all other? Then you tell a story of the Popes Bull against Luther. You quarrell with your owne shadow, for I had no relation at all to your Pope, nor made any instance of him more then in a Marginall Note; but since you stand so much upon the justification of his Doctrine, hearken I pray wherein he ma∣keth for you, and wherein he is wholly against you. Your Agrippa tells us, that in these latter times Pope Adrian erected a most famous Stewes at Rome.Agrippa de v∣nit. scient. c. 64. p. mihi. cap. de Lenonia. I confesse in this particular you may chal∣lenge him wholly for your owne; But whereas you say he detested Luthers doctrine as most wicked and damnable, you might have added likewise, he wished a reformation of his owne, and withall taught that doctrine for which you condemne both Luther and all his adherents for Haeretikes.History of Trent. l. 1. pag. 25. 26. & 30. First, witnesse his Nutio Francisco Chiericato, who had Commission from his Holi∣nesse, To ackowledge that the confusion of the
Church, was caused especially by the sinnes of Priests and Prelats, confessing that some abho∣minations, some yeares since, were committed even in the Holy See, that there were many abuses in spirituall things, so that it may be said, that the infirmity is passed from the head, to the members, from the Popes, to the inferi∣our Pelates; And lastly, he resolves himselfe that he would use all diligence that the Church of Rome should be first reformed; and the rather, because hee saw all the world did earnestly de∣sire it. And that you may know the Church of Rome, as well as the Court of Rome was fallen in∣to errors and heresies, hee himselfe publisheth, that he heard it related of his Predecessor, Pope Iohn the 22th. That hee would have induced the Vniversitie of Paris to beleeve, that the soules of the righteous doe not see God face to face; and that no man should take his degree in Divinitie, unlesse hee should first sweare to maintaine that perstiferous He∣resie, and perpetually to cleave unto it. And that you may be assured hee was not wholly yours, hee affirmeth for certaine, one Position which would confound all Poperie,Adrian in 4. de Sacram. Confir. sub finem. (viz.) That the Pope may erre, even in things touching the Faith, and avouch that which is Heresie by his determina∣tion, or decree. And thus your Pope Adrian com∣plaines of many abominable things in his owne Church: he tels us, his Predecessor was reputed a Heretike: he confesseth, that both himselfe, and all his Successors after him, were in possi∣bilitie
of erring, even in matters of Faith: and it is very probable in his erring opinion, hee began to erect that most noble Brothell-house in his owne See. And thus much touching the Margi∣nall note of Pope Adrian. Your second exception is touching Costerus, occasioned by these words, Wee accuse them for taking away the Cup from the Lay people; they ex∣cuse it, that it was not taken up by the commandment of the Bishops, but is crept in, the Bishops winking thereat (saith Costerus.) In answer to this, say you, I would know what excuse you can find for such a no∣torious lye. Let the Reader judge, whether this modestie of yours deserve an Answer, or whether this say∣ing of Costerus may not be termed, an Excuse. Howbeit (say you) this custome came in, not so much by the commandement of the Bishop, as by the peoples use and practise.] Well, take it as you would have it; yet, I say, his meaning must bee understood not at all by the Commandement of the Bishops, for that which is done by Command cannot bee said to have crept in. But the truth is, under colour of quarrelling with words, and giving me the lye, you seeke to dazle the eyes of your Rea∣der, and when you omit the weightier things of your Church, then you question, Where is Co∣sterus testimony for Antiquitie, Vniversalitie, Certaintie, and Safetie, when as you know well this testimony was not cited for that ende; And thus you straine at a Gnat, and swallow a Camell.
Let us heare the rest of your verball discourse. Since you are so shamelesse as to say, That we doe not condemne you for receiving in both kinds, Looke into the Councell of Trent, and see whether you doe not finde a heavy curse, &c. Thus you. And are you sure that your Councell hath suf∣ficiently cursed us, For following Christs example, and receiving in both kinds; for those were my very words, Following Christs example: (which you altogether omitted.) If therefore we have altered any part of Christs Institution, I say againe, Curse on in Gods name, and let your curses take effect: but if the celebration of our Mysteries be answerable to his will and word, that first ordained them, you curse not us whom you would hurt, but him that your cursed tongues cannot hurt, which is, God to be bles∣sed for ever. But let us heare your Councels? The Councell of Trent (say you) layes a heavie curse against any that shall say, that all and every of the Faithfull ought, by the precept of God, or necessitie of salvation, to receive both kinds. This cursing Councell toucheth not my Asser∣tion: for this Canon speaketh of the Precept of Christ, whereas I spake of his Example onely. And for proofe of this,Bell. de Euch. lib. 4. cap. 7. wee have Bellarmines te∣stimony as well as ours: It is not to be doubted, but that is best, and fittest to be practised, which Christ himselfe hath done. And therefore my Assertion still stands good, (viz) You doe not condemne us for following Christs example.
Touching the Councell of Constance, it con∣demnes not our receiving in both kinds, but pre∣vents the condemnation of her owne. They de∣creed their halfe Communion with this Caution, that If any should obstinately maintaine that it was unlawfull,Concil. Con∣stant. Sess. 13. or erronious, to receive in one kind, hee ought to be punished, and driven out as an Heretike. And howsoever you would seeme to condemne our Assertion, yet you condemne not our practise as unlawfull; for the Councell of Basil, not twen∣tie yeares after your Decree in the Councell of Constance, granted the use of the Cup to the Bo∣hemians. Your third exception is touching Mr. Harding, who in the question betwixt him and Bishop Iuel, of Private Masse, stands not to justifie his solitary, or private Masse, but rather excuseth it in this manner;Iuels Articles of Private Masse. pag. That it is through their owne default and negligence, whereof the godly and faithfull people, have sithence the time of the Primitive Church much complained. This (say you) hath no sense, for here is a Relative (Their) without an Antece∣dent. And let me tell you, this is a poore Pedan∣ticall observation; for to spend many lines about such toyes and trifling words, and to passe by the maine sinew & strength of the Citation; this is to confesse in plaine termes, that you cannot justifie your doctrine: and the rather it appeares in this particular point, wherein Master Harding doth not onely condemne the people for their neglect, but excuseth hereby your Churches ordinance in
generall, as being not guilty of the coldnesse of the people. Nay more, hee plainly intimates the Aniquitie, and Vniversalitie of our Doctrine in these words;Iuel. Divis. 7. p. mihi, 11. In case the people might be stirred to such devotion, as to dispose themselves worthily to receive their Howsel every day with the Priest, as they did in the Primitive Church, what would these mn have to say? And as touching Safety, and Certainty of our Doctrine, hee freely expresseth his thoughts, and liking of our Communion of Priest and People, saying; It were to be wished,Iuel in Art. 1. Divis. 9 p. 17. as oftentimes as the Priest doth celebrate the high Sa∣crifice, that there were some, who worthily disposed, might receive their Rites with him, and be parta∣kers Sacramentally, of the Body and Blood of Christ with him: and hee gives a reason for it,Idem, Divis. 25. p. mihi, 45. Because it would be more commendable, and more godly on the Churches part. And thus much touching your three Authors, whom (say you) I have so egregi∣ously belyed. Touching your worshipping of Images, I re∣ferre it to his proper Section. And whereas wee charge you with flat Idolatrie in the adoration of the Sacrament, of Reliques, of Images, and the like, howsoever I say, you excuse your selves with the manner of your adoration, yet (to our endlesse comfort be it spoken) you cannot charge us in the Positive Doctrine of our Church; no, not with the least suspition of Idolatrie. This I told you before, and (blessed be God) you have not wherewith to charge us in your Reply. But
you say, It is far greater evill for you to be truly char∣ged with Heresie, than for us to be charged with Ido∣latrie: yet neither you, nor all your fellow-Jesuits could ever prove us guilty of either. But what may wee thinke of your Church, which is justly charged, and highly guilty of both? Your Popes (which the Jesuits resolve to be the Church) are condemned for Heretikes by your Councels, ac∣knowledged Heretikes by the Popes themselves, and condemned of Heresie by your best learned Divines. Your worship of Images and Saints, concludes in flat Idolatrie; and in particular (by the Doctrine of your owne Church) the adora∣tion of the Sacramentall Bread and Cup, (for want of a right intention) becomes an Idoll in the Temple. These things I have in part proved, which in place convenient, shall be more fully handled hereafter. But it is observable, after I had ended my Se∣ction with this point of Idolatrie, I say, after this conclusion, you flye backe to the middle of the chapter, and now question me where our Church was before Luther: but when I answered that from your addition, and Articles of Faith, The question doth truly result upon your selves; Where was your Church? that is, where was your Trent Doctrine, and Articles of the Roman Creed, recei∣ved de fide before Luther? You are so farre from shewing it, that you cunningly suppressed these words, and not so much as mentioned them: and thus, one while suppressing the point in question;
other whiles, by declining the true state of the question, you shew your wit is better than your cause, and declare your Sophistrie to be better than your Divinitie. But to follow you backe againe, you say, Wee must shew you a companie of men in former times distinct from yours. It were no difficult matter, to shew you many that did seperate both from you, and the errours of your Church in former Ages. The Waldenses were a distinct companie of Beleevers, and sepa∣rate from your Church above 500. yeares since: Reinerius the Inquisitor confesseth upon their ex∣amination,B. Pp. Tom. 13. Reiner. contrà Wald. cap. 3. p. mihi, 299. that hee found they had in one Dio∣cese, one and forty Schooles, in another, ten; and withall, reckons up forty Churches by name in Lombardy, in Province in France, and other Kingdomes; he protesteth that amongst all Sects, There was none more pernitious to the Church of Rome, than it, and that for three causes: First,Ibid. be∣cause it is of longer continuance; for some say it hath continued from the time of Sylvester, (which is three hundred yeares after Christ) others say, from the time of the Apostles. Secondly, because it is more Vniversall, for there is scarse any Country, wherein this Sect hath not crept. Thirdly, whereas all other sorts blaspheme God, this Sect hath a great shew of godlinesse: for they live justly before men, they be∣leeve all rightly concerning God, and the Articles of the Creed; onely they speake evill of the Church of Rome, and hate it; and by this meanes draw mul∣titudes
to their beliefe after them. Thus if you re∣quire Antiquity for their Doctrine, they derive it either from Christ, or from Sylvester, 300. yeares after Christ, if Vniversality, all Coun∣tries were filled with their Doctrine; if good life, they lived well before men, and beleeved all rightly concerning God, and the Articles of their Faith; and this the force of truth hath ex∣torted from your grand Inquisitor. Augustus Thuanus President of the Parliament of Paris,Thuan. hist. Tom 1. 1550. p. 457. & 465. tells us, that those who are commonly called Waldenses, Picards, Albigenses, Cathari, Lollards, though by their difference of place they had divers names, yet they held the same faith, which Wicliffe held in England, and Husse in Bohemia, and ga∣thered strength at the comming of Luther, especial∣ly in the Caparienses, who professed a Religion a∣greeing almost in all things with Martin Luther: But withall he ingeniously professeth that Cardi∣nall Sadolet did examine them, and found many things malitiously fained against them. Poplinerius saith, that about the yeare 1100. these men did publish their doctrine differing but a little from the Protestants,Poplin. Hist. Franc. l. 1. Bb. Vsher de statu. Eccl. c. 8. p. 209. not onely through France, but also through all the coasts of Europe: For both French, Spaniards, English, Scots, Italians, Ger∣mans, Bohemians, Saxons, Polonians, Lituani∣ans, and othr nations doe peremptorily defend it to this very day; And by reason they separated from the doctrines of the Roman Church, Pope Innocent the third, about the yeare 1198. autho∣rised
certaine Monkes, who had the full power of the Inquisition in their hands, to deliver the people by thousands into the Magistrats hands, and the Magistrats to the Executioners.Histor. of the Wald. c. 3. St. Do∣minick who instituted the order of the begging Monkes, called Dominicans was a great persecu∣tor of them and their doctrine. The Mother of this Monke saith your Martyrologe,Martyrologe in the life of St. Dominick p. (mihi) 556. before he was yet borne, dreamed that shee was delivered of a whelpe, with a firebrand in his mouth, with which he set the whole world on fire; and your learned Do∣ctors have interpreted this dreame, that Domi∣nick should be that dogge that should vomit out the fire which should consume the Haeretikes. your infallible Pope likewise tells us, that he saw in his sleepe the Church of St. John Lateran, to tot∣ter and ready to fall,Ibid. p. 562. and that St. Dominick sup∣ported it, and held it up with his shoulders, signify∣ing thereby, that he, and those of his order should doe great good to the Catholike faith. And howsoever these reports may passe for dreames, yet this dog behaved himselfe so worthily in the persecution of those Christians, that from that time forward, the Monkes of his Order have bin alwayes im∣ployed in the Inquisition.Histor. Wald. c. 2. But herein we may admire the great mercy and goodnesse of God unto this separate Church, that notwithstanding this grievous persecution, it was recordd by George Morell, at that time a Pastor amongst the Waldenses, that there were then remaining accor∣ding to common report, above eight hundred
thousand persons that made profession of the same faith. And thus breefely I have given you one company of men in former times distinct from yours. If we tooke beyond those times; the Greeke Church was likewise separate from yours above eight hundred yeares agoe, and dif∣fered in the points of Transubstantiation, of Pur∣gatory, of private Masse, of Prayer in an unknowne tongue, of Marriage of Priests, of the Communion in both kindes, and the Popes Supremacy, I say in all these they separated from your Church; and this Church, if you require Antiquity, is before Rome in time; if Vniversality, she hath larger bounds, and multitudes of people, most of the Patriarchs, seven universall Councels, the Greeke tongue wherein the New Testament was written, insomuch as your Bishop of Bitonto was not asha∣med publikely to professe, It is our Mother Grae∣cia,Concil. Trid. Episc. Bitont. unto whom the Latin Church is beholding for all that ever she hath. And as touching the pro∣cession of the Holy Ghost, which your men say they deny (and therefore charge their Church with a knowne haeresie) it may seeme rather that this is an aspersion laid upon them then any just exception;Concil. Florent. Sess. 35. For at the Councell of Florence, a∣bout 200. yeares sithence, your Pope Eugenius answered the Graecians, that he was well satisfied by them touching the procession of the Holy Ghost; and that you may know they agreed with us in the principall points of our doctrine, the Greeke Patriarch congratulates with the re∣formed
Churches in this manner. We give thanks to God, the Author of all grace,Patr. resp. 2. in init, & resp. 1. pag. 148. and we rejoyce with many others, but especially in this, that in many things your doctrine is agreeable to our Church. For a conclusion, the Muscovites, Armenians, Aegyp∣tians, Aethiopians, and divers other countries and Nations (all members of the Greeke Church) taught our doctrine from the Apostles time to ours. This is so true an evidence in our behalfe, that Bellarmine,Bellarm. de ver. Dei. l. 2. . ult. in fine. as it were in disdain of the Chur∣ches, makes this answer; We are no more moved with the examples of Muscovites, Armenians, Egyp∣tians, and Aethiopians, then with the examples of Lu∣therans, or Anabaptists, and Calvinists, for they are either Haeretikes or Schismatikes. So that all Chur∣ches (be they never so Catholike and Ancient) if they subscribe not to the now Roman faith, are either Schismaticall or Haereticall. Thus I have briefely shewed you two sorts of Christians, who were distinct from you, and yet lived in the Communion of the Catholike Church. I shewed you others also which lived and died in the bosome of the Roman Church, but as farre different in opinion from your now professed Faith, as those that went out from you. The first sort separated themselves from your Church and Doctrine, the latter continued in communion with you, but separated themselves from the errors of prevayling faction in your Church: the one sort you persecuted unto death, for the other you cut out their tongues for speak∣ing truth.
But you are not of it (say you) since the time you have begun to be against it. And this you would inferre from Tertullian, That as out of the mild, fat, and profitable Olive,Tertull. de prae∣scrip. c. 36. the sower bastard Olive grow∣eth; so have errors fructified out of the true Church, but became wild by untruth and lying, degenerating from the graine of truth, and so not yours; and this doth fully answer the matter (say you.) Surely if you compare the true and fruitfull Olive to your selves, and us unto the bastard, and wild Olive, the matter (as you say) will be easily answered; but this is to beg the point in question, neither indeede can it be granted to you, without a sinne against the Holy Ghost. For the Spirit of God hath spoken it in particular to the Roman Church, that, Thou wert cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by nature,Rom. 11.24. and wert grafted contrary to nature into a good Olive tree. Now if the haeresies and errors (which are compared to the wild Olive) have sprung out of that good Olive tree, into which you were first grafted, or if the wild Olive is now returned to its owne nature, I will say to you, as sometimes Diogenes said to the Philoso∣pher, A me incipias, & erit verus sillogismus, let the wild Olive be applied to your Church (as it ought to be) and the comparison will redound upon your selves, and returne into your owne bosome. From the Communion with your Church, you question the Antiquity and Vniversality of those points wherein you differ from us; and you would
have me shew the deniall of them to have beene an∣tiently and universally taught.Pag. 121. Your demand to the first is unreasonable; For it is sufficient for us, that we professe that Faith which was once given to the Saints; besides, those new Articles which you thrust upon the Church, are wholly yours, and the proofe lies on your part to make good, as being properly your owne: on the other side, to shew the deniall of them to have bin anciently taught is unsensible; for the explicite deniall of them could not be taught till such Articles were offered and obtruded to us, but the implicite deniall we prove by the positive do∣ctrines of the Ancient Fathers, which is incom∣patible with your new additions and corrup∣tions. From the Doctrine in generall, you descend in∣to the particulars; and you say, one of our Sacra∣ments is an empty piece of Bread, and a sup of wine.Pag. 123. Hannibal of Carthage,Cicero de Ora∣tore lib. 2. when he heard Phormio the Orator talke pleasantly a long while toge∣ther, being afterwards demanded what he thought of his Eloquence, made answer in this homely sort; Multos se vidisse deliros senes, sed qui magis quàm Phormio deliraret, vidisse nemi∣nem. I will leave the application to your selfe, and the interpretation to the Reader, because you say I cannot translate Latin. Some truth or modesty I should gladly heare from you; but this is such an impudent Calumny, as Bellarmine himselfe would have beene ashamed
to have heard it fall from the Pen of any learned Papalin; heare therefore what your owne men confesse of Calvin and others, and what we pro∣fesse in the name of our Church. Your F. Kelli∣son saith of Calvin,Kellis. Surney. lib. 4. cap. 5. p. mihi, 229. That if hee did meane as hee speaketh, hee would not dispute with him, but would shake hands with him, as with a Catholike. And then hee repeats Calvins words; I say that in the Mysterie of the Supper, by the signe of Bread and Wine, is Christ truly delivered, yea, and his Body and his Blood. And a little before those words, hee giveth the reason; Because, saith he, Christs words, [This is my Body] are so plaine, that unlesse a man will call God a deceiver, hee can never be so bold as to say, that hee setteth before us an emptie Signe. This is likewise Bellarmines confession of him;Bell. de Euch. lib. 1. cap. 1. Non ergo vacuum & inane signum, It is no vaine and empty signe. Thus you see your fellowes and you agree like Harpe and Harrow; you say it is an empty peece of Bread, they answer in Calvins behalfe and ours, that it is not an empty signe:Idem ibid. c. 8. Nay, saith Bellarmine, both Calvin and Oecolampadius, and Peter Martyr, doe teach the Bread is called Christs Body figuratively, as being a signe or figure of his body, but they adde withall, it is no bare (and empty) figure, but such as doth truely convey unto them the things signified thereby;Bilson in the difference be∣twixt Subjecti∣on, and Christi∣stian Rebellion. Part 4. p. mihi, 779. for which truthes sake, Christ said not this Bread is a figure of my body, but it is my body. To give you an instance in some of our Church; God forbid (saith our learned Bilson) wee should
deny that the flesh and blood of Christ are truly pre∣sent, and truly received of the Faithfull, at the Lords Table. It is the Doctrine that wee teach others, and wherewith wee comfort our selves. Wee never doubted but the Truth was present with the Signe, and the Spirit with the Sacrament, (as Cy∣prian saith) Wee knew there could not follow an ope∣ration, if there were not a presence before. Neither doe I thinke you are ignorant of this, but that you have inured your selfe to falsities and reproaches. For it is apparently true, that the question in these dayes, is not of the truth of the presence, but of the manner: that is, whe∣ther it be to the Teeth and the Belly, or Soule and Faith of the Receiver. And therupon our learned and Reverend B. Andrews returned his Answer to Bellarmine; Wee beleeve the presence, Wee beleeve,B. Andrew. ad Bell. Apol. Resp. c. 1. p. mihi 11. I say, the presence as well as you: concerning the man∣ner of the presence, we doe not unadvisedly define; nay more, wee doe not scrupulously inquire, no more than wee doe in Baptisme, how the blood of Christ cleanseth us. From the Sacraments; you procceed to our two and twentie Bookes of Canonicall Scripture, and indeed wee allow but two and twentie. But will any Catholike (say you) allow this to have been Catholike Doctrine? Yes, without doubt, many good Catholikes did follow the Hebrew Canon of the Iewes,Orig sit which (saith Origen) compriseth but two and twentie bookes of the old Testament, accor∣ding
to the number of the letters among them. Melito, Bishop of Sardis, was a Catholike, and (saith Bellarmine) hee did follow the Hebrew Ca∣non of the Iewes.Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 1 c. 20. Hilar. in Pro∣log. in Psal. explanat.Hilary, Bishop of Poictiers, was a Catholike, and he told us, The old Testament was contained in two and twentie bookes, according to the number of the Hebrew letters. Cyril. Catechis. 4.St. Cyril, Bishop of Hierusalem, was a Catho∣like, and hee gave us the like Lesson; Peruse the two and twentie books of the old Testament, but med∣dle not with the Apochrypha. Anthanas. in Synops.Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, was a Ca∣tholike, and affirmes, that the Christians had a definite number of books comprehended in the Canon, which were two and twentie, equall to the number of the Hebrew letters. Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 20.Ruffinus was a Catholike, and Bellarmine con∣fesseth hee did follow the Hebrew Canon, which conteined our two and twentie books. Naz. Carm. lamb. ad Se∣leucum. lamb. 3.Gregory Nazianzen was a Catholike, and hee shewed to Seleucus, a Catalogue of the Canoni∣call bookes, and hee cites the bookes in order from Genesis to Malachie, the last of the Prophets; and leaveth out all the Apochrypha. Concil. Laod. cap. 59.The Fathers of the Councell of Laodicea were Catholikes: and in the 59th Canon, they allow onely those two and twenty bookes for Canoni∣call, which wee receive. There are others whom you terme Catholikes; as namely, Damascene, Hugo de Sancto Victore,
Lyranus, Hugo Cardinalis, Tostatus, Waldensis, Driedo, and Cajetan: all which differ from your Tenet of the Apochryphall bookes which are ca∣nonized by your Trent Councell (such agree∣ment is there amongst your best learned, touch∣ing the greatest point of your Beleefe) and yet forsooth your Church cannot be depraved. But here is one thing (say you) which giveth mee much cause of wonder; which is, that you talke of Traditions, as distinct from Scripture. I ever tooke you to be so fallen out with them, that you made the deniall of them a fundamentall point of your Re∣ligion, that you would not indure the word Tradi∣ton; but alwaies translated, or rather falsified it into Ordinances. Thus you. It is a true saying of the Heathen Orator;Cicero. Hee who once goeth beyond the bounds of Modestie, had need to be lustily impudent. I protest, I onely ter∣med your Additions, Traditions; and you que∣stion our Church, for false translating of the word. And cannot wee indure the word Tradi∣tions? Doe not we allow of all the Apostolicall Traditions, which agree unto the Scriptures? Nay more, doe wee not translate the word Tra∣ditions in the Scriptue, when the Text will beare it according to the Greeke originall? Looke up∣on the fifteenth of Matthew,Matth. 15. v. 2, 3, 6. and in three seve∣rall verses, 2, 3, 6. wee use the word Tradition. Looke upon the seventh of Marke,Marke 7. v. 3, 8, 9, 13. and in foure severall places of that chapter, yu shall find likewise, wee translate Traditions. Looke upon
Saint Paul to the Colossians, Galatians, and upon Saint Peter;Colos. 2.8. Galat. 1.14. 1 Pet. 1.18. and in all these, in the Translation joyned with your Rhemish Testament, you shall find the word Traditions. How may your Prose∣lytes beleeve you another time, when you say, Wee alwaies translate it, or rather falsifie it into Ordinances? For a conclusion of this Section; you say, that the three Creeds, the two Sacraments, the foure Generall Councels, the two and twenty books of Canonicall Scripture, We had them from you. Let it be your comfort then, that you had something in your Church which was worth the gleaning, after the devill had sowed the Tares amongst the good Corne. But I would not have you over∣much confident of that neither; for originally wee had them from the Church Catholike, be∣fore there was a Roman. For, the Gospell was preached in England before it was in Rome; and we had in England, a Christian Church and King, before Rome had a Christian Emperor, yea long before Poperie, or the name of Pope was heard of in the Christian world; (in the sense you now take it.) And in after Ages, when the Gospell of Christ was rooted out by Heathen persecutors (where it was first planted) it was afterwards re∣planted by Preachers, partly sent from Rome, partly by the Greeke Church, but by neither was the Faith preached and restored; which your present Church now teacheth, and maintaineth at this day.
And lastly, if wee had the three Creeds, the two Sacraments, the 22. bookes of Canonicall Scripture, and the first foure Generall Councels from you, then you cannot deny that we teach the Ancient Faith, first given to the Saints; and that we had a Church visible long before Luthers dayes, (for those Tenents were sufficient of them∣selves to make a glorious, and a visible Church in the first and best ages) they were received by succeeding Christians in all the later Ages, and are now become the Positive, and Affirmative Articles of our Beleefe, which for the greater part, were ever taught and received in the bosom of your owne Church. To shut up all your bitter Aspersions, of Corrupting, of Falsifying, of Ly∣ing, of Lynding, and I know not what reproches, cast upon me in these first (8) Sections; I will shut up all, I say, which hitherto hath beene delivered by you, with that answer of Socrates to his accu∣sers, before the Judges:Plato in Apolo∣gia Socratis. My Lords (saith hee) in what sort your affections have been stirred with mine accusers eloquence which you heard them speake, I cannot tell. But well I wot, for mine owne part, I my selfe, whom it toucheth most, was almost perswaded to beleeve, that what they said was true, yea although it were against my selfe; so handsomly they can tell their tale, and so likely, and so smoothly they convey their maters: every word they spake, had appearance of Truth, and yet in good sooth, they have scarsely uttered one word of Truth.
STRICTVRAE IN LYNDOMASTIGEM: OR, An Answere by way of Supplement to the Chapters remaining in the Booke Intituled, A CASE FOR THE SPECTACLES. Together With a Funerall Sermon preached at Cobham, June 14th. 1636. By DANIEL FEATLEY, D. D. LONDON, Printed by M. P. for Robert Milbourne, at the signe of the Vnicorne in Fleet-street, neere Fleet-Bridge. 1638.
STRICTVRAE IN LYNDO-MASTIGEM. The PREFACE to the Reader. Christian Reader; CLemens Alexandrinus hath a strange relation of Locrus,Admonit. ad Graec. . a famous Musician in Greece; who, as he was playing a choise Madrigall upon his Harpe, in the midst of it, brake his Trebble; and (see) a Grashopper leaping upon the necke of his Instrument, held out the note till he had made an end of the Song. The like accident hath befallen our Locrus, or rather Lynus; who, as hee was warbling an exquisite Lesson, lately prick'd by him, brake not his Harpes, but his Hearts string: and J like the Grass∣hopper, with my harsh sounding voice, must now supply that defect, and perfect the tune. The prime Doctor of the Schooles, Aquinas, was wont to say, that hee desired but to live so long, till hee might see the golden-mouthed
Father, Saint Chrysostome his imperfect worke upon Matthew finished. And J doubt not, but that many, who very much affected Sir Humphrey Lynde his person, and wri∣tings, heartily wish, that this his Cygnea cantio, and last worke against the common Adversarie, might be perfected. Which task, partly out of my respect to the worthy deceased Knight, partly at the request of some friends yet alive, I have undertaken; promising to adde (according to the distinction of the Schooles) perfectionem partium thereunto, but not graduum, a perfection of Parts, but not Degrees: that is, an Answer to all the parts and Chapters remaining, but not with the like multiplicitie of reading, and accu∣ratnesse of style, as may be observed in the Knights writings. For, J owne not this Worke as mine, nor intend to shape any new weapon against the Adversaries of our Re∣ligion, upon his Anvile, but onely Hammer that Iron which hee tooke red hot out of the fire. In which regard, I entitle my Anim∣adversions upon Flood his reply, Stricturas; partly, because like sparkles, they give some,
though small light into the points in Contro∣versie: partly, because they burne whereso∣ever they light. Some peradventure, would have wished a more moderate Answer; but in reason they could expect no other from him, whom, not zeale onely, of the truth of our Re∣ligion scandalously traduced, but love to a departed friend, and just anger and indig∣nation at an Adversarie, trampling upon his ashes, heat in the penning hereof, above his ordinarie temper. Were Romish Priests and Jesuits ingenuous Adversaries, in whom there were any hope to gaine by mildnesse, and win by yeelding unto them as much as might be, without prejudice to the Truth; I should then perswade all that write against them, to temper their Inke, rather with Rose∣water than Ʋinegar.Vrtica si mol∣liùs tractetur vrit. But in all my conflicts with them, at home and abroad, I find them like Nettles, which sting if they be gently touched, but hurt not at all if they be roughly handled.Greg in pasto∣ral. Lenis sibi∣lus, qui equos mitigat, canes instigat. The like Saint Gregorie observeth, That a gentle whistle, which quiets a mettled Horse, provoketh a bar∣king Curre; and such is the Jesuit, with
whom the Knight before, and now I am to deale: hee entitleth himselfe, I. R. and is indeed, all Ire and Rage, (like Labienus, for his furie, called Rabienus) every where full of Canina facundia, Dogg-eloquence. Whosoever vieweth the Picture he hath lately drawne of a most learned and reverend Pre∣late;The picture of D. White. A Pair of Spectacles for Sr H. L. to see his way. Hermanni Leo melii Spogia. or handleth the Spectacles he hath made for our Knight; or squeezeth the Spunge he lately presented to the Doctors of Sorbon; will say,Gutture tri∣fauci inanes territat Via∣bras. that if there were ever a Cerberus, whose tongue was set on fire with hell, this is he. Wherfore marvell not, that I turn the rods wherewith the Knight lashed him, into Scor∣pions; and his Vinegar into Aqua-fortis, (Si mordaciùs quicquam dixero non tam meae putes austeritatis quā morbi,Hieron. ep. ad Sabine. & adversas Iouin. l 1. Fel hienae oculorum resti∣tuit claritatē. putridae carnes ferro curantur, & cauterio, venena serpentina pelluntur antidoto; quod satis dolet, majore dolore expellitur:) but con∣sider what Plinie writeth concerning Balsa∣mum,Plin. l. 12. nat. hist. cap. ult. Optimum opo∣balsamum bux∣sum mordens stu est, fer∣ cus{que} in ore. that the sweetest, and best of that kind, called Opo Balsamum, is somewhat hot in the mouth, and biting in the taste. Thine in the Lord Jesu, DANIEL FEATLEY.
The Titles of the severall Chapters, and Sections in the ensuing Treatise. Chap. 9. Alphab. 1. Sect. 1. Of Iustification by Faith onely. Pag. 2. d: Sect. 2. Of Transubstantiation. Pag. 12. Sect. 3. Of Private Masses. pag. 42. Sect. 4. Of the seven Sacraments. pa. 69 Sect. 5. Of Communion in both kinds. pa. 127 Sect. 6. Of Prayer in an unknowne tongue. pa. 145 Sect. 7. Of the Worship of Images. pa. 176 Sect. 8. Of Indulgences. Alphab. 2. pag. 8. Chap. 10. Of the certaintie of the Protestant, and uncer∣taintie of the Romish Faith. pag. 44 Chap. 11. Of the greater safetie and comfort in the Pro∣testant Faith, then in the Romish. pa. 68 Chap. 12. Of respect due to the Ancient Fathers. pa. 84 Chap. 13. Of razing Records, and clipping Authours tongues, by the Roman Indices Expurgatorij. pa. 92 Chap. 14. Of the perfection and perspicuitie of Scripture, and our Adversaries blasphemous Exceptions against it. pa. 104 Chap. 15. Concerning Bellarmine his subscription to Pro∣testant Doctr: in the main point of Iustification. pa. 122 Chap. 16. Of Martyrs, and particularly, that the primi∣tive Martyrs were not Papists. pa. 128 Chap. 17. Concerning the Protestants charitable opinion of Papists, pag. 137. And in what sense some affirme the Romane a true Church. pag. 148 Chap. 18. Concerning the Confession on all sides for the Safetie of the Protestant Religion. pa. 154 A Sermon preached at the Funerall of the Right Worship∣full Sir Humphrey Lynde, at Cobham in Surrey. p. 171
Errata in the second Part. PAge 5. lin. 7. reade authors. in marg. l. 15. reade gloriamur, p. 17 l. 8. r. eat ye, p. 22. l. 8. in mar. r. fieri, p. 40 l. 1. dele of. p. 98. l. 28. in marg. r. alleviationem. p. 109. l. 2. in mar. r. de pecc. mer. p. 148. l. 10. r. at the first in. p. 151. l. 9. r. Of. p. 191. l. 12. in mar. r. perhibeat. p. 202. l. 12. dele visible. p. 203. l. 6. r. Miracles. l. 14. wonders shew. p. 218. l. 6. dele the. Alphab. 2. pag. 39. l. 12. in mar. r. hic. p. 51. l. 5. add hee. p. 58. l. 16 r. et. & l. 26. r. her. p. 62. l. 19. r. Of. p. 92. l. 8. r. Caietans. p. 134. lin. 5. r. the. Errata in the Sermon. Pag. 181. l. 12. in mar. r. vertit. p. 184. l. 14 in mar. r. Condemnant. p. 191. l. 1. r. menacing. p. 192. l. 35. in mar. r. illaqueet. l. 36. obiect et. p. 195. l. 27. r. conseruare. p. 202. l. 8 in marg. r. puteum. p. 204. l. 16. in mar. r. . l. 17. r.  pa. 211. l. 6. in mar. r. volentibus. l. ult. r. his. p. 212 l. 3. r. dores. l. 8. in marg. r. Christo. pa. 214. l. 7. in marg. r. obdcitur. & l. 11. in mar. r. Epitaphii. & l. 14. in mar. r. lacrymis implentur.
CONCERNING IVSTIFICATION BY FAITH ONLY. Spectacles Chap. 9. Sect. 1. THE Knight faileth in the proofe of his first point of Iustification, producing but one only place out of a booke intituled, Ordo bapti∣zandi & visitandi, and that of no speciall good authoritie, as hee al∣ledgeth it out of Cassander an Author placed in the first Classis in the first index librorum prohibi∣torum; and even in that which he alledgeth, there is nothing that doth not very well stand being rightly understood with the Catholique faith which wee now professe, for there is nothing but that which was shewed before out of Bellarmine, to wit, that in regard of the uncertaintie of our owne ju∣stice, that is, whether wee bee just or no, and for the perill of vaine-glory it is most safe to put our whole confidence in the sole mercy and benignitie of God; Which word sole, doth import confidence
in that, and in nothing else with which it may stand very well, that men in the favour and grace of God may doe workes meritorious of encrease of grace and glory, which is the controversie betweene us and heretiques. The Hammer. Eras. Apoph. Laconum.AS David cut off Goliahs head with his owne Sword, and Brasidas ranne through his Antagonist with his owne Speare, and Iustine Martyr refuteth the Philosophers out of the principles of Nature; and Constantine the ancient Romans out of the Oracles of Sibylla, and Eusebius the Gentiles out of their owne Historians,Credis te non posse nisi per mortem Christi servari? re∣spondet insir∣mus; etiam, tum illi dicitur age ergo dum super est in te anima in hac sola morte fiduciam tuam constitue, in nulla alia re fiducium habe, huic morti te totum cōmitte, hac solâ te to∣tum contege: fi dixerit tibi quod meruisti damnationem, dic, Domine, mortem, D. no∣stri Iesu Chri∣sti obtendo in∣ter me, & ma∣la merita mea ipsius{que} meri∣tum, offero pro merito quod e∣go debuissem habere, nec ha∣beo: credis quod Dom: noster Iesus Christus pro nostrâ sa∣lute mortuus fit? & quod ex proprijs me∣ritis vel alio modo nullus posset salvari nisi merito pas∣sionis ejus? Im∣pres. Venet. 1575. and S. Paul the Athenians out of their owne Poets: so doth the Knight here in a litigious case, of greatest moment, convince the Iesuite out of his owne evidence a booke intitu∣led, The forme and order of baptizing and visi∣ting the sicke; printed and reprinted, and practi∣sed for many hundred yeares without any check, or controle. In this booke the Priest is directed to put this question to the sick; Dost thou beleeve that thou canst not be saved but by the death of Christ? the sicke person answereth; I be∣leeve; then the Priest goeth on saying, Goe too there∣fore as long as thy soule remaines in thee, place thy whole confidence in this death only, have confi∣dence in no other thing, commit thy selfe wholly to
this death, with this alone cover thy selfe wholly, if hee say unto thee, thou hast deserved damnati∣on, say Lord, I set the death of our Lord Iesus Christ betwixt mee and my bad merits, and I offer his merit in stead of the merits which I ought to have and yet have not. What could Luther or Calvin, or Zuinglius, or Peter Martyr, or any Protestant in the world speake more expressely for the renouncing all merit, and relying upon Christ wholly and solely for justification and salvation? Yet our Spectacle-maker by a false glosse, as it were, a false glasse, would make us beleeve, that the author of the Liturgie cast his eyes another way, and that this allegation ma∣keth nothing for us. First, he excepteth against this Authour as a single witnesse, you produce, saith he, but one only place out of one authour, &c. I answer as the Lio∣nesse doth in the fable to the aemulous beast twitting her,Aesop. Fab. that whereas other females had many young ones at once, shee had but one, ac pol leonem inquit; but, saith shee, that one is a Lion of more worth then twenty whelpes: so I grant, that in this place hee insisteth but upon one allegation, but it is a most remarkable one; It is very likely that this ordo visitandi, as other parts of the Liturgie and Catechismes, and con∣fessions might bee penned by one man: yet after they are generally received, and approved, and passe currant for many ages, they carry the au∣thoritie of many, yea the whole Church; and
howsoever the Iesuite would intimate that the Authour was an anonymus, yet hee might have learned from their greatHosius Conf. Petricon. c. 73 Sed & An∣selmus Cartu∣ar. Interrogat quasdam prae∣scripsisse dici∣tur infirmis in extremis con∣stitutis. Cardinall Hosius that hee was the famous Archbishop of Canter∣burie. Neither is ther any reason to make scruple thereof, for it hath beene anciently printed with his Workes, and passed under his name, and both the style and the doctrine in it is very con∣formable to that wee find in his unquestionable writings, as namely in his Comment upon Ro∣mans chapter the eight (v. 18.) I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthie to bee compared with the glorie which shall bee revea∣led in us if a man, saith he,Si homo mille annis serviret Deo etiam fer∣ventissimè, non mereretur ex condigno dimi∣dium diem esse in regno coelo∣rum. should serve God a thousand yeares, and that most fervently, he should not deserve of condignity to bee halfe a day in the kingdome of heaven. Neither is Cassanders te∣stimonie of this booke (at which the Iesuite gives so many a flert) to be sleighted, for he was a man of eminent note, and in high esteeme a∣mong the learned of his age, hee was a favou∣rite of two great Emperours, and lived and died in good reputation, as appeareth by the sundrie encomiums before his Workes; as also the E∣pitaph on his Tombe. As for the setting him in the first Classis of prohibited bookes, no whit ecclipseth the glorie, but rather enobleth him, for that Index is a kind of Ecclesiasticall ostra∣cisme, by which the Romanists banish as farre as their power stretcheth, the most eminent Au∣thours, and most free and ingenuous professors
of the truth. AsTertul in A∣pologet. c. 5. consulite com∣mentarios ve∣stros illio repe∣rietis primum Neronem in hanc Sectam Romae orientē Caesariano gla∣dio ferocisse. Sed tali dedi∣catore damna∣nionisnostrae e∣tiam gloriamus qui enim scit illum intellige∣re potest non nisi grande a∣liquod bonum à Nerone dam∣natum. Tertullian draweth an argu∣ment to prove the sincerity and holinesse of the Christian Religion from the barbarous decree of wicked Nero against the professours thereof; it must needs, saith hee, bee singular good which that damned monster condemnes: so if any man peruse the Authours censured, and the passages expunged in the Index expurgatorius, hee shall find them to be of speciall note, and singular use. Albeit the Inquisitors pretend that they change not, nor blot out any thing, but onely where manifest errour is crept in, and that since the yeare 1515. Yet the Knight hath demonstrated be∣fore by undeniable instances in all ages, that they blot out of the Index of the Bible, the wri∣tings of the ancient Fathers; and since 800. yeares out of the Doctours of their owne Church, what maketh most against their er∣rours and superstitions. Yea, but saith the Ie∣suite, this supposed booke of Anselme hath beene printed, and reprinted by heretiques, and therefore may well fall under the Inquisitions censure; so hath Ignatius, Cyprian, Theodoret, and Ambrose, and Austine; yea and the originalls of the old and new Testament, and must they therefore come under their file, and bee sub∣ject to their Index correction? AsIohn 18.23 Christ spake to the high Priests servant; If I have spo∣ken ill, beare witnesse of the ill, if well, why smitest thou mee? So say wee of these bookes printed and reprinted by those whom hee tearmes here∣tiques,
because they impugne his errours and he∣resies, if they have printed ought amisse declare it: if not, why doe you prohibit or correct their impressions? Well (saith he) for all this, if the worst come to the worst, if this Authour prove to be S. An∣selme and his words Gospell, the Knight gaines nothing by it, or we lose, for though it bee the sa∣fest way to cast anchour at the last in the bottome of Gods mercie, and put our whole confidence in Christs merits, it doth not from hence follow, but that men may doe workes meritorious of increase of grace and glory. First, why doth he lispe here, and not speake plaine out the Romish tenet which is that our Workes doe merit not only in∣crease of grace and glorie, but remission of sinnes, andConcil. Trid. Sess. 6. c 32. Si quis dixerit hominis justi∣ficati opera non verè mereri augmentū gra∣tiae & vitam aeternam, & ipfius vitae ae∣ternae, si tamen in gratiò deces∣serit, consecu∣tionem, Ana∣thema fit. eternall life? Next, I would faine know how mercy and merit, nay sole mercy and merit can stand together? Certainly as mercy exclu∣deth merit, so sole mercy all merit. Can those workes which in S. Anselmes judgement will not beare scale in Gods ballance, weigh downe super-excellens pondus gloriae, a super-excellent weight of glorie? Certainly the Spectacle-maker put in a burning glasse into his Spectacles which hath much impaired his eye-sight, or else hee could not but reade S. Anselmes words in this place, in which he renounceth all merit, and that in most direct and expresse tearmes, I be∣leeve that none can bee saved by his owne merits,Vid loc. sup. cit. p. 4. or by any other meanes, but by the merit of Christs
passion. I set the death of Christ betwixt mee and my bad merits, and I offer his merits in stead of the merits which I ought to have, and have not. Concerning Transubstantiation Spectacles chap. 9. Sect. 2. à pag. 132. ad 187. THE Knight and the Protestants com∣mit  a great sinne in administring the Sacrament of Baptisme without those Ceremonies which were used in the Church from the Apostles times. Elfrick was not the Authour of the Homilie  and Epistles, the Knight citeth against Transub∣stantion, in which notwithstanding there is nothing against Transubstantiation, but much for it, if the Knight had not shamefully corrupted the Text by false translating it, in five severall places. The difference of Catholique Authours about things not defined by the Church maketh nothing  for Protestants, because they vertually retract all such opinions by submitting their writings to the censure of the Catholique Church. Cajetan is falsely alledged by putting in the word supposed, and Transubstantiation: he denied  not the bread to bee transubstantiated into Christs body, though hee conceived that those words, This is my body, doe not sufficiently prove the reall pre∣sence
of our Saviours body for which he is worthily censured by Suarez and the whole schoole of Di∣vines. Biel affirmeth that it is expresly delivered in holy Scriptures, that the body of Christ is contai∣ned under the species of bread, &c. Which former words the Knight leaveth out, because they made clearely against him, and in the latter set downe by the Knight, he denieth not that Transubstantiation may bee proved out of Scriptures, but that it may be proved expresly, that is in expresse tearmes or so many words. Alliaco his opinion maketh nothing for the Knight being a Calvinist, though hee seeme to fa∣vour the Lutherans tenet: and though hee thought the Doctrine of consubstantiation to be more possi∣ble and easie, yet therein hee preferred the judge∣ment of the Church before his owne. B. Fisher denieth not that the reall presence can be proved out of Scripture; for the fourth chapter of the booke cited by the Knight, is employed in the proofe thereof against Luther: but that laying a∣side the interpretation of Fathers, and use of the Church, no man can be able to prove, that any Priest now in these times, doth Consecrate the true body and bloud of Christ. Durand B. of Maundy doth not deny Transub∣stantiation to bee wrougnt by vertue of the words, This is my body; For though in the first place hee saith that Christ then made the bread his body when he blessed it, yet hee after addeth that wee doe
blesse, illâ virtute quam Christus indidit verbis,Durand. rat. c. 41. n. 14. by that power which Christ hath giuen to the words. Odo Cameracensis calleth the very forme of  Consecration, a benediction both because they are blessed words appointed by Christ, for so holy an end, and because they produce so noble an effect, or because they are joyned alwayes with that benedi∣ction and thankesgiving, used both by our Saviour in the institution of this holy Sacrament, and now by the Priest in the Catholique Church, in the Con∣secration of the same. Christopherus de capite fontium is put in the  Roman Index of prohibited bookes, and in the words cited out of him by the Knight, there is a grosse historicall errour in this that hee saith, that in that opinion of his, both the Councell of Trent, and all Writers did agree till the late time of Caie∣tan, as if Caietan were since the Councell of Trent; and in citing this place, the Knight is against him∣selfe, for whereas hee maketh Cardinall Caietan, and the Archbishop of Caesarea his two Champions against the words of Consecration, as if they did both agree in the same: here this Archbishop saith quite contrary, that all are for him but onely Cajetan. Salmeron relateth it indeed to bee the opinions  of some Graecians that Christ did not consecrate by those words, This is my body, but by his bene∣diction: but this opinion of theirs is condemned by him as Chamier saith expressely in the
place coted by the Knight, l. 6. de Eucha. c. 7. Bellarmine in the place alledged saith nothing, but what is granted by all Papists,De Euchar. l. 3. c. 23. to wit, that though the words of Consecration in the plaine con∣naturall and obvious sense inferre Transubstan∣tiation: yet because in the judgement of some learned men, they may have another sense, which proveth only the reall presence, it is not altogether improbable, that without the authority of the Church, they cannot inforce a man to beleeve Tran∣substantiation out of them. Alfonsus à Castro affirmeth that of Transub∣stantiation there is rare mention in the ancient Fa∣thers: yet of the conversion of the bread into the body of Christ, there is most frequent mention; and the drift of Castro in that place is to shew, that though there bee not much mention in ancient Wri∣ters of a thing, or plaine testimonie of Scripture, that yet the use and practice of the Church is suffi∣cient, bringing in for example this point of Tran∣substantiation, and the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son. The meaning of Yribarne and Scotus, saying Transubstantiation of late was determined in the Councell of Lateran is only this, that whereas the words of Consecration may bee understood of the reall presence of our blessed Saviours body either by Transubstantiation, or otherwise; so the sub∣stance of bread doe remaine: the Church hath de∣termined the words are to be understood in the for∣mer sence. And moreover Yribarne saith, that
Transubstantiation was not from the beginning de substantiâ fidei, because it had not beene so plainely delivered, nor determined in any Councell, till Gre∣gorie the 7 his time wherein it was first determined against Berengarius. It is not the reall presence whereof either S. Au∣stine  or Maldonate speaketh, but how they that eate Manna have died, and they that eate the body of our Lord shall live according to our Saviours say∣ing, which is a cleane different thing. Gregorie de Valentia having brought two or  three severall and substantiall answers to a place al∣ledged out of Theodoret concludeth somewhat roundly with the heretiques in this manner, that if no other answer will serve the turne, but that they will still stand wrangling; that it is no marvell that one or two (hee meaneth Theodoret and Gelafius) might erre in this point, and that Bellarmine Sua∣rez, and others answer the place otherwise, to whom hee remitteth the Knight. Cusanus speaketh not of ancient Fathers, but of  certaine ancient Divines, whose names and errours are set downe in our late Schoole-men: and this Cardinall himselfe in the place alledged by the Knight declareth his beliefe of Transubstantiation.Excit. l. 6. The Waldenses agree not with Protestants in the  point of the Sacrament; for they had Masse but once a yeare, and that upon Maundy Thursday, nei∣ther would they use the words, hoc est corpus me∣um, but seven Pater nosters, with a blessing over the bread.
Durand affirmeth not, that the substance of the Bread and Wine remaineth in the Sacrament, but the materiall part only, and hee acknowledgeth that all other Schoole-men were herein against him. Gaufridus and Hostiensis, though they recount three opinions concerning the presence of Christs body in the blessed Sacrament, of which the one saith, the bread is the body of Christ, another, that the Bread doth not remaine, but is changed into Christs body; a third, that the bread doth remaine, and is together with the body of Christ: yet they ap∣prove none for true, but only that of the body of Christ, being upon the Altar by Transubstantiation. Tonstall with Scotus, speake either of the word Transubstantiation, or of the proofe thereof by de∣termining that sense of Scripture, or if they meane otherwise the matter is not great. For one single Au∣thour, or two contradicted by others, carry little credit in matter of beliefe. Erasmus is not an Authour to be answered or na∣med as the Knight hath beene often told. The Hammer. In 3. p. Tho q. 61. insolubile est argumentū Suarez propter intricationem & obscurita∣tem non diffi∣cultarem.AS Nugno wrote of an Argument of Suarez the Iesuite, that it was in a manner insoluble, not in regard of the difficultie of the matter, but in regard of the intricacie and obscuritie in the manner of propounding it: so this Section may be truly said to bee uncapeable of a cleare and di∣stinct
answer thereunto, not in regard of any dif∣ficultie in the matter it selfe; for there is nothing contained in it, but Crambe centies cocts; but in respect of the confusion thereof, the Adversary following no tract at all, but leporis instar viam intorquens, purposely like a Hare leaping out of the way, that hee might not be caught, for which cause I have beene enforced to leave the order, or rather disorder in his Paragraphes, and cull out of the whole Section here and there, what hee materially answereth to the Knights allegations, and reduce it to the numbers following, where∣unto I purpose to referre my ensuing animad-versions. To the first Exception. Whereas hee taxeth  the Protestants for leaving out ceremonies in Baptisme used in the Church, since the Apostles time, hee shamefully abuseth his reader, for hee speaketh not of the signe of the Crosse, or of Godfathers and Godmothers, which ceremonies and custome of the ancient Church hee knoweth that we retaine: but of Salt and spittle, or baptis∣mall chrisme, which can never be proved to have beene used in the Apostles time, or many hun∣dred yeares after. Of the most ancient of them, to wit, Chrisme he himselfe else-where, Apolog. c. 2.Pag. 57. acknowledgeth that it began but about Con∣stantines time (as Aurelius the Sorbonist obser∣veth in his booke intituled Vindiciae censurae, wherein the Iesuite is trimmed, as such a shave∣ling deserveth.)
To the second concerning Elfrick. That Ael∣frick was not the Authour of the Homilies wee acknowledge, neither doth this any whit dero∣gate from their authoritie, but adde rather. For the more ancient the Authour was, the more au∣thoritie the Sermons carry. Now it appeareth out of an ancient Manuscript, that these Homi∣lies were extant in Latine before the dayes of Ael∣frick,In Bib. Bodeli∣anâ, Oxon. who was commanded by the Archbishop of Yorke Wolstanus to translate them into Eng∣lish, which after hee had faithfully done, the Bi∣shops at a Synod commanded them to bee read to the people on Easter day before they received the Communion. As for the shamefull corrup∣tion hee objecteth to the Knight by false transla∣ting the Homilies in five places, I cannot suffici∣ently pitty the grosse stupidity and blindnesse of the objecter. Hee who hath made a paire of Spectacles for the Knight, had need to have a Festrawe made for himselfe to spell withall; for here hee most absurdly and ridiculously mista∣keth a Collation for a Translation, and Bertram for Aelfrick. Doctor Vsher now Primate of Ar∣math, whom the Knight here followed step by step, maketh a kind of parallel betweene the word of Bertram, and divers passages in the Ho∣milies and Epistles translated by Aelfrick, to shew the conformitie of the doctrine in both. This parallel by this blind buzzard is taken for a translation,Cic. Phil. 2. Vis te, àsine, literas doceam, saith Tully to Anthony, non opus est verbis sed fustibus: yea
but the Authour of this Homilie is so farre from condemning Transubstantiation, that hee pro∣fessedly teacheth it in these words,Sicut Paulò antequam pa∣teretur, panis substantiam et vin creatu∣ram convertere potuit in pro∣prium corpus quod passurum erat, & in su∣um sanguinem qui pst fun∣dendus exta∣bat, sic etiam in deserto Man∣na, & aquam de petrâ in su∣am carnem, & sanguinem cō∣vertere prae∣valuit. As there∣fore a little before hee suffered, hee could change the substance of Bread, and the creature of Wine into his proper Body, which was to suffer, and into his Bloud which was there extant to bee afterwards shed, so in the Desert hee was able to change Manna and water into his owne body and bloud. I answer, this passage hee doth well to whet like a sharpe knife to cut the throat of Transubstantiation. For let it be granted according to the doctrine of Aelfrick and Bertram, that Christ so turned the Bread into his Body at his last supper, as hee tur∣ned Manna and water into his owne flesh in the wildernesse, what will hereupon insue? but that the conversion or change which is made in the elements is not reall, and corporall, but spirituall and sacramentall, as that was in the Desert: of which the Apostle speaketh, the1 Cor. 10.4. spirituall rock followed them, and that rock was Christ. When Manna fell, and the rock was strucken, Christ was not incarnate, nor many hundred yeares after: how then could the Manna, or the water bee real∣ly and properly turned into his flesh and bloud? Moreover, howsoever hee eludeth the former words of Aelfrick; There is a great difference be∣twixt the body wherein Christ suffered, and the body which is received of the faithfull, the body in which Christ suffered, was borne of the flesh of Mary, and consisted of bloud and bone, but the
other is gathered of many cornes without bloud and bone, (by saying) that the difference which Aelfrick sheweth betweene Christ on the Crosse and Christ on the Sacrament is in his manner of be∣ing, not in the being it selfe, not denying him to bee really in both: yet the later words which containe an inference upon the former: therefore there is nothing to bee understood in the Sacrament bodily, but spiritually: admit of no colourable evasion, for if nothing bee there understood bodily but spiri∣tually; then must needs the words, This is my bo∣dy, be understood figuratively, then must we not according to the doctrine of those times under∣stand any substantiall change of the bread into Christs very body, or the Wine into his bloud really and corporally. To the third. The difference betweene Papists of most eminent note concerning the words, by vertue whereof they teach Transubstantiation is effected, maketh much against the doctrine it selfe, and by consequence quite overthroweth it. For thus we argue against them out of this their difference: If the bread bee turned into Christs body, then either by the words of benediction before hee brake the bread, or gave it, &c. or by the very words of Consecration, viz. hoc est corpus meum. But hee neither changed the bread into his Body by the one, nor by the other; Ergo, hee changed it not at all. Not by the pre∣cedent benediction, as Aquinas and Bellarmine prove. For till the last instant of the prolation of
the words This is my Body, the substance of bread remaineth. Not by the words of Consecration: for as Durand and Odo Cameracensis, and Christo∣pherus Archbishop of Caesarea prove, Christ could not have said after hee had blessed the Bread, This is my body, unlesse by blessing it he had made it his body before. If when Christ said Take yee and eate, yet at that time the Bread by bene∣diction were not changed, it would follow that Christ did command his Disciples to take, and eate the substance of Bread, which to say is to deny the article of Transubstantiation. Neither can the Iesuite heale this sore by his vertuall salve, in saying, that those men above alledged, who impugne the present tenent of the Schooles con∣cerning the words of Consecration, in which the es∣sence of the Sacrament consisteth vertually retracted such opinions, because they submitted their writings to the censure of the Catholique Church: for so wee may say with better reason, that what they held against us, they vertually retracted by submitting their judgement to the Catholique Church, which we can easily prove not to bee the particular Ro∣man, but the Universall, which in all times, and all places through the Christian world hath pro∣fessed the common faith once given to the Saints without any of those later Articles which P. Pius the fourth,Jud. 13. and the late conventicle of Trent hath pinned unto it. To the fourth, Gajetan is truly alledged by the  Knight; for though neither the words Transub∣stantiation,
nor supposed are in him, yet the sence of them is to be found in him; for as both Suarez and Flood himselfe acknowledgeth (p. 147.) Cajetan said, that these words, This is my body, doe not sufficiently prove the reall presence of our Sa∣viours body without the presupposed authoritie of the Church; and if in his judgement they prove not so much as the reall presence of Christs bo∣dy in the Sacrament, much lesse prove they the presence thereof by Transubstantiation, or tur∣ning the bread into it. By the word supposed, which the Knight addeth more fully to declare Cajetans meaning, hee intended not suppositions, or barely pretended authority of the Church, but truly presupposed, which maketh not the speech sound at all contemptibly of the Church as Flood would have it, whose stomack is so bad, that it turneth sweet and wholsome meate into choler; Nectar cui fiet acetum & vaticani perfida vappa cadi. To the fifth. The Knight transcribeth so much out of Biel as was pertinent to his purpose: with the rest he thought not fit to trouble the reader.In Can. Miss Lect. 40. no∣tandum quod quamvis ex∣pressè tradatur in scripturâ quod corpus Christi veraci∣ter sub specie∣bus panis con∣tinetur, & à fidelibus sumi∣tur, tamen quo∣modo sit ibi corpus Christi an per conver∣sionem alicujus in ipsum, an sine conversio∣ne incipiat esse corus Christi cum pane ma∣nentibus sub∣stantiâ, & ac∣cidentibus pa∣nis in Canone bibliae non in∣venitur. The whole passage in Biel standeth thus, It is to bee noted, that though it bee expressely deli∣vered in Scripture, that the body of Christ is truly contained under the forme or species of Bread, and received by the faithfull, yet it is not found in the canon of the Bible, how the body of Christ is there,
whether by conversion of any thing into it, or whether it beginneth to be there without conuersion, or turning the substance, and accidents of bread remaining. The former words in which passage, make no∣thing against the Knight: Who in this chapter for the most part condemneth Papists out of their owne mouth, and therefore taking Biel for such, hee maketh use of his testimonie against the Ro∣man Church in point of Transubstantiation. Which is very direct and expresse, and the Ie∣suites answer is very weake and unsufficient there∣unto, to wit, that hee denieth only that Transub∣stantiation is found in Scripture in expresse words. For first Biel saith not non invenitur expressum, but non invenitur; It is not found in Scripture, whe∣ther Christs body be there by conversion of any thing into it. Now many things are found in Scrip∣ture, as the Trinity of persons, the eternall gene∣ration of the Sonne, the procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Sonne, the number and nature of Sacraments: which yet are not set downe in expresse words. Second∣ly, it is evident out of the former words of Biel, that hee accounted those things expressely to be delivered in Scriptures, which yet are not set downe in expresse words: for hee saith that it is expresly delivered in Scriptures, that the body of Christ is truly contained under the species of bread, and yet those words are not found in Scripure. If wee should admit then of Flood his glosse up∣on Biel, Transubstantiation is not found in Scrip∣ture,
that is, is not found expressely: Yet out Argument from Biels testimonie is no way dis∣abled thereby, because it appeareth out of Biels owne words, that hee holdeth that to bee expresly delivered in Scriptures, which is either expressed in word, or sence; the reall presence, he saith is expresse, not in the letter or forme of words in the text, yet in the sence: but so saith he, is not Transubstantiation; the apparant oppositi∣on betweene the members of his sentence shew∣eth that what hee beleeved of the reall presence, hee beleeved not of Transubstantiation, but the former he beleeved could bee proved out of Scripture, though not in expresse words yet in sence: therefore the later hee beleeved could not be proved so much as in sense, much lesse in ex∣presse words. To the sixt. Although Petrus de Alliaco in∣clineth rather to the Lutherans opinion in the point of the Sacrament, then to the doctrine of the Church of England: yet the Knight upon good reason produceth him as a witnesse; for hee speaketh home against Transubstantiation:Cameracē. in 4 sent. q. 6. art. 2. patet quòd ille modus sit possibilis, nec repugnet rati∣oni, nec autho∣ritati bibliae i∣mò facilior ad intelligendum & rationabi∣lior est quum, &c. his words are that (the conversion of bread into Christs body) cannot evidently bee proved out of Scripture, and that that manner or meaning which supposeth the substance of bread still to remaine in the Sacra∣ment is possible, neither is it contrary to reason, or to the authoritie of the Scripture; nay it is more easie to bee understood, and more reasonable then that which saith, the substance doth leave the accidents.
If this bee not as Flood will have it so much as in shew for the Knight, I am sure it is both in shew and substance against the Trent faith: for if it bee granted that Consubstantiation is not contrarie to Scripture, nor reason; it followeth necessarily that Transubstantiation is grounded upon nei∣ther, but rather repugnant to both, for as trans. denieth con. so con. trans. If the remaining of the substance of bread with the substance of Christs body be not repugnant to the authoritie of Scripture, nor the meaning of Christs words, then doe not these words, This is my body signifie, or make Transubstantiation which necessarily a∣bolisheth the substance of Bread, and putteth in place thereof the substance of Christs bodie. If Consubstantiation bee more easily to bee un∣derstood, and more agreeable to right reason in Alliacoes judgement then Transubstantiation: it is evident but for feare of his Cardinalls cap, hee would have simply avowed the former, and renounced the latter. To the seventh. Take Roffensis his words at  the best, the Iesuite is at a great losse: admit hee said no more then I. R. here confesseth that no man can bee able to prove, that any priest now in these times doth consecrate the true body of Christ: see what will follow hereupon, that no man is able to prove that your priests and people are not grosse Idolatours, adoring a piece of bread for Christ. Secondly, that none is able to prove that Christ is really and substantially offered in your
Masse: for if it cannot bee proved that he is there corporally present, as Roffensis confesseth, and you beare him out in it: it cannot bee proved that hee is corporally offered, restat ita{que} ut missas, missas faciatis;Roff. cont. Luth captiv. Bab. c. 4 ne{que} ullum positū hic ver∣bum est, quo probetur in no∣strâ missà ve∣ram fici car∣nis, & sangui∣nis Christi prae∣sentiam: non potest igitur per ullam scriptu∣ram probari. it remaineth therefore that you dismisse your misses, or Masses. For what can they availe the living, or the dead, if nothing but meere accidents and shewes of Bread and Wine bee offered, which are meere nothing. Wee may yet gather farther upon Roffensis his words, if it cannot bee proved by any Scripture, that Christs body and bloud are present in the Roman masse: it cannot bee proved that they are present in any Masse, unlesse it bee granted that the Roman masses are of a worser condition then others: if not in any masse, much lesse must Papists say in any Sacrament without the Masse. What then be∣commeth of the maine and most reall article of the Trent faith, which hath cost the reall effusion of so much Christian bloud, I meane the reall and carnall presence of Christ in the Sacrament. To Roffensis I. R. should have added Cajetan, and so hee might have had a parreiall of Cardinalls, for the Knight alledged him, and his words are most expresse, not only against the proofe of Transubstantiation,Caje. in 3. p. Tho. q. 75. dico autem ab ecclesiacum non appareat ex E∣vangelio coa∣ctivum ali∣uod ad intel∣ligendum haec verba propriè quod evangeli∣um non expli∣cavit expressè ab ecclesia ac∣cepimus, viz. conversionem panis in corpus. but also of the corporall pre∣sence of Christ (as out of the words hoc est corpus meum.) The Cardinalls words are, that which the Gospell hath not expressed, wee have received from the Church, to wit, the conversion of the bread into the body of Christ, I say from the Church, be∣cause
there appeares nothing out of the Gospell that can enforce a man to beleeve that the words, This is my body, are to bee taken properly. How doth this Flood swell in pride, that to so great a Cardinal, so profound a Schoole-man, so eminent a Do∣ctour, so divine a Commentatour, so golden a Writer (all which titles are given by the Roman Church to Cajetan) he vouchsafeth not a looke. But indeed he held a Wolfe by the eares, and was in a quandarie what to doe, whether to keepe his holt, or to let him goe: if hee had taken notice of his testimonie against the Roman Church, ei∣ther hee must have disparaged the Cardinall, or given his Trent faith a grievous wound. To the eight. Durand his words are plaine e∣nough  to prove that the conversion of bread into the body of Christ, is wrought by the vertue of Christs benediction before hee uttered the words,Benedixit be∣nedictione coe∣lesti, & vir∣tute verbi qua convertitur pa∣nis in substan∣tiam corporis Christi. Dur. rat. c. 41. num. 14. This is my body, hee blessed, saith hee, the bread by his heavenly benediction, and by vertue of the Word, whereby the Bread is turned into the sub∣stance of Christs body. Yea but saith Flood, hee ad∣deth, Wee blesse, ex illa virtute quam Christus indidit verbis, wee blesse by that power or vertue which Christ hath given to the words, true: verbis benenedictionis, not consecrationis according to Durands mind by that power which Christ gave to the words of benediction going before, not those words which you call the words of Conse∣cration ensuing after, viz. This is my body, which words yet Durand there rehearseth not to prove
the conversion to bee wrought by them, but to prove Christs body to be truly there. To the ninth. Though the forme of Conse∣cration may be called a Benediction for the rea∣sons alledged by the Spectacle-maker:Odo Camerac in canmis. di. 4. benedixit, su∣um corpus fe¦cit qui prius erat panis be∣nedictione fa¦ctus est caro non enim po benedictionem dixisset, hoc e corpus meum nisi in benedi∣ctione fieret corpus suum. yet it is certaine that Odo Cameracensis distinguisheth the one from the other, and ascribeth the conversi∣on of bread into Christs body to the vertue of the precedent benediction, and not of the subse∣quent Consecration, Christ blessed the bread, hee made it his Body, that which before was Bread by his blessing is made flesh; for hee would not have said after hee had blessed it, This is my Body, un∣lesse by blessing it hee had made it his Body. Yea, ut Flood threatneth to bring a place out of Odo expresly to the contrary, which is this, Take away the words of Christ,Odo Camera. exps in Can. miss. dist. 5. tolle vrba Christi, non fi∣unt sacramen∣ta Christi, vis fieri corpus, & sanguinem, ap∣pone Christi sermonem. and take away the Sacraments of Christ, wilt thou have the Body and Bloud of Christ made, put thereto the word of Christ, but which word of Christ? for therein is the cardo questionis, whether the word of Benediction going before, or the word of Consecration following af∣ter? In Odo his judgement by the word of bene∣diction; for hee saith Benedictione factus est caro, by blessing it became flesh, and that before hee ut∣tered the words, This is my Body; which in Odo his apprehension as wee heard before, could not bee true: unlelesse bread had beene turned into Christs body, before he pronounced them. To the tenth. Here Iohannes de Rivis, or Iohn of the Flood speaketh very disgracefully of hisI. R.
Father Christopherus de capite fontium, Christopher of the head of the Fountaines: Nay, to a most re∣verend Father, the Archbishop of Caesarea; for the Archbishop of Caesarea his booke, saith hee, De correctione Theologiae scholasticae; I doe not so much as looke into him, but remit it to the Roman Index, where you shall find this booke by you here cited forbidden, and even the arrogancie of the title sheweth it to deserve no better a place.Solinus c. 43. Bonasus Tauri similis fi inse∣quantur Aga∣sones, vehe∣mentiùs fimum emittit per tria jugera & quicquid tangit Vrit. The Bonasus when hee is hard followed casts dung in abun∣dance on the pursuer, and brayeth hideously; so doth I. R. cast filth, and raile downe right, when he is so hard pressed with a testimonie that he hath nothing to reply. The Roman Index Prohibitorum librorum is to Flood like the Philosophers pons asinorum in all extremities hee flieth to it. But what is this Index to us? hee might as well al∣ledge the Turkes Alcharon against the Knight. This Index of prohibited bookes deserveth not only a prohibition, but a purging by fire. For in the first ranke we find the holy Bibles translated into vulgar languages to bee set, and after them most of the prime and Classick Writers, almost in all professions. There is nothing so easie as to prohibit this or any other booke: but unlesse our Adversariee back this Papall prohibition with detection of errours and heresies contained in such bookes, and a solid confutation thereof; this tyrannicall prohibition of the workes of Au∣thours wil prove an evident conviction, that they forcibly smother that truth, the light whereof
dazleth their eyes. Yea, but saith Flood, there is a grosse historicall errour, in that he saith, that in that opinion of his, both the Councell of Trent, and all the Writers did agree till the late time of Cajetan, as if Cajetan were since the Coun∣cell of Trent. No historicall errour at all in the Archbishop, but a frivolous cavill in Flood. For hee saith not that the Councell of Trent was be∣fore Cajetan, but that the Councell of Trent, and all Writers (before it also) did agree till the late time of Cajetan. Yea, but the Knight maketh Cardinall Cajetan, and the Archbishop of Caesa∣rea his two champions against the words of Con∣secration, as if they did both agree in the same, whereas here the Archbishop saith quite contra∣rie, that all are for him but only Cajetan. A ridi∣culous sophisme, ex ignoratione Elenthi: the Knight alledgeth both Cardinall Cajetan, and the Archbishop of Caesarea against the words of Con∣secration, but not ad idem, not to prove the same conclusion: hee alledgeth Cajetan to prove that there is nothing in the words hoc est corpus meum to enforce Transubstantiation; but the Archbi∣shop of Caesarea to prove that the supposed con∣version is made, not by the words of Consecrati∣on, This is my body, but by the precedent words of Benediction,Christoph. de correct. theo∣sholist fol. 11.4. us{que} ad 63. risi pus quàm sta verba di∣ceret Christus corpus suum ex pane factum e∣rat, ista pro∣posito non fuis∣set vera, hoe est corpus me∣um, &c. Fol. 23. and this hee proveth against all Pa∣pists strongly after this manner; Vnlesse before Christ uttered those words, This is my body, his body had beene made of bread, this Proposition had not beene true, This is my body, for when Christ
said, take ye, eate yee, if at that time the Bread by benediction were not changed, it will follow that Christ did command his Disciples to take and eate the substance of bread, and so wee must denie the article of Transubstantiation; therefore, saith he, (certo certius constat Christum, non solum per ista sola verba non consecrâsse, fed ne quidem illa par∣tem aliquam fuisse consecrationis quam fecit) it is most certaine that these words were no part of the Consecration; And this hee proveth to bee the o∣pinion of all the ancient Fathers by name of Iu∣stine Martyr, Dionysius, S. Austine, Hesichius, S. Ierome, Gregorie, Ambrose, Rupert, Alquine, Bernard, Scotus, Landulph, Peter de Aquila, Pel∣bert, and others. To the eleventh. The Knight alledgeth not  Salmerons opinion, but his relation of the opini∣on of other men: and although his credit bee cracked with Protestants, yet it is whole with Flood and his fellow Iesuits: as Chamierus on the contrarie, his credit is good with Protestants, though none with Pontificians. Yea but saith Flood,P. 162. Chamier discovereth the Knights bad dea∣ling, I would faine know how, or wherein first how? by the spirit of prophesie? or by some letter sent to the Knight after Chamier his death; for Chamier was dead many yeares before the Knight wrote. Were he alive what bad dealing could he discover in the Knight, who out of him truly and sincerely relateth the words of Salme∣ron the Iesuite concerning the Graecians in theseCham. de Eu∣char. l. 6. c. 7.
words, seeing the benediction of the Lord is not superfluous or vaine, nor gave hee simply bread; it followeth that when hee gave it, the transmutati∣on was made, and those words, This is my Body, did demonstrate what was contained in the bread. What fault findeth hee in this allegation? If the Greekes had no such opinion, or Salmeron rela∣teth no such thing, the blame must light between Salmeron and Chamier; howsoever the Knight is free. For hee truly quoteth Chamier, neither dare Flood say that Chamier misquoteth Salme∣ron;P. 161. For, saith hee, though I found not this place in him, yet I will not say but it may bee there. Let this Spectacle-maker put on a better paire of Spe∣ctacles, and hee shall plainly reade the words al∣ledged out of Salmeron in the place quoted by Chamier. The geese in the Capitoll, if they gagled without cause,Cic. Orat. pro Rosc. Ameri∣no. were to be beate for it: and the dogges to have their legges broken, if they barked when there was no suspition of a theefe approaching; Some such like punishment they deserve in Tullies judgement, who lay foule a∣spersions upon others without any colour of proofe or semblance of truth. To the twelfth. At the Knights allegation out of Bellarmine, Flood here nibleth, but can no where fasten his tooth, hee excepteth at the chan∣ging of the singular number into the plurall, and translating Scriptures for Scripture, and the most learned and acute men, such as Scotus for most learned and acute men. It seemeth this Iesuite is
descended of the race of Domitian; whose grea∣test exercise was all day to strike at flies with a sharpe iron bodkin:Sueton in Do∣mitian. reade Scriptures in the plu∣rall, or Scripture in the singular or most acute,Bellar. de Eu∣char. l. 3. c. 23. Dicit Scotus non extare lo∣cū ullum scrip∣turae tam ex∣pressum, ut fine ecclesiae decla∣ratione eviden∣ter cogat tran∣substantiatio∣nem admitte∣re: atque id non est omninò im∣probabile: nam etiamsi scrip∣turae nobis tam apertae vide∣antur, ut co∣gant hominem non protervū: tamen meritò dubitari potest cùm homines doctissimi & acutissimi qua∣lis imprimis Scotus fuit, cli∣ter sentiant. or the most acute, the confession of Bellarmine ma∣keth still altogether as strongly against the groun∣ding of Transubstantiation on Scripture. Scotus saith, that there is no place of Scripture so expresse (viz. for Transubstantiation) which setting aside the declaration of the Church evidently enforceth a man to admit it. For though the Scripture, viz. That text of Scripture brought by him to prove Transubstantiation, seemed to bee so plaine as to enforce a man not refractorie to beleeve it; yet it may bee doubted whether that text, viz. Hoc est corpus meum bee cleare enough to enforce it, seeing most learned and acute men, such as Scotus was thought otherwise. If it may bee justly doubted whether the text, This is my body, inferre Tran∣substantiation, why doe our Adversaries blame us for doubting of it? If sharp-sighted Scotus, and other most learned and acute men thought the text enforceth no such thing: let our Adver∣saries give us leave to preferre their opinion be∣fore the judgement of Flood and others, neither so learned nor so acute. To the thirteenth.L. 8 con. haeres. verb. indulg. de transubstā∣tiatione panis in corpus Chri∣stirara in anti∣quis scriptori∣bus mentio ra∣ra, &c. The Knight regarded not at what Alfonsus à Castro aimed, but hee tooke up his arrow where hee found it, and shooteth it against your Trent doctrine. Of the Transubstan∣tiation, saith hee, of the bread into Christs body,
there is rarely or seldome any mention made in an∣cient Writers: What doth I. R. answer hereunto? Alfonsus (saith hee) saith true, and the Knight most false. For though of Transubstantiation there bee no mention, yet of the conversion of the bread into Christs body there is most fre∣quent mention;P. 164. Reade my riddle, wats this? rare mention of Transubstantiation, but not rare mention of the conversion of the bread into Christs body, pugnantia te loqui non vides? Is not this a flat contradiction? I would faine know, what diffe∣rence there is betweene Transubstantiation, and the conversion of the substance of Bread, into the substance of Christs body in the Sacrament. Neither can the Iesuite free himselfe here from uttering an evident contradiction in the same sen∣tence, by saying that Alfonsus speaketh of the word Transubstantiation, nor of the thing it selfe. For Alfonsus there speaketh of things not of words, as Flood himselfe confesseth in the same page five lines after, saying, that Alfonsus his drift in that place is to shew, that though there bee not much mention in ancient Writers of a thing, or plaine testimonie of Scripture, that yet the use and practice of the Church is sufficient, bringing in for instance the point of Transubstantiation, and pro∣cession of the holy Ghost. See here Alfonsus spea∣keth not of the word Transubstantiation, but of the point or thing it selfe; and of this thing or point (hee saith) there is rare or seldome mention in ancient Writers.
To the fourteenth. Neither Scotus nor Yri∣barne  speake of the interpretation of the words, This is my body, nor of the manner of the delive∣rie of the doctrine of Transubstantiation in for∣mer times, but de dogmate fidei,Bellar. l. 3. de Euch. c. 23. unum addit Scotus, &c. quod anie La∣teranense con∣cilium Tran∣substantiatio non fuit dog∣ma fidei. Trib. in 4. dist. 11. q. 3. disp. 42. in prima∣tivâ ecclesiâ de substantia fidei erat cor∣pus Christi sub speciebus con∣tineri: tamen non erat de fide substantiam panis in corpus Christi con∣verti. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. omnia quae continent fi∣dem, & mores in illis inveniuntur quae apertè posita sunt in scripturâ. Chrysost. in 2. ad Thess. hom. 3. manifesta sunt in divinis Scripturis quaecun{que} sunt necessaria Rivet Cathol. orthod. q. 18. 138. Gat. discourse of Tran. pag. 60. 61. Scotus 4. Sent. dist. 11. ad hoc multùm expressè videturloqui Ambrosius. of a doctrine of faith, which they expresly denie Transubstantia∣tion to have beene, and what they say, may bee confirmed by Flood his owne answer in this place. For if Transubstantiation in former ages was not plainly delivered, as hee confesseth, p. 167. it could not bee then dogma fidei, or de substantiâ fidei, any doctrine of faith. For all do∣ctrines of faith are plainly and evidently set downe in holy Scriptures, as S. Austine and S. Chrysostome joyntly teach. As for the pas∣sage alledged by Scotus out of S. Ambrose it is ful∣ly answered, & retorted by Andrew Rivet, Mr. Ga∣taker, and others; Whereunto I thinke fit to adde nothing, but that Scotus in the place alledged speaketh not confidently of S. Ambrose, that hee held the doctrine of Transubstantiation: but that in words he seemed to favour that opinion. To the fifteenth. Albeit S. Austine in the place  alledged by the Knight speaketh not expresly a∣gainst your carnall presence, yet by consequence hee quite overthroweth it; for if the unbeleeving Iewes in the Desert, and Iudas in the new Testa∣ment
died spiritually, after they had received the Sacrament: it followeth that neither the one, nor the other in S. Austines judgement received Christs true flesh, which whosoever eateth shall live for ever. Againe, it followeth that the true flesh of Christ cannot be eaten, but by faith only, and doth not this make much for the Knight? Yea, but saith the Iesuite, with due reverence bee it spoken to S. Austines authoritie, Maldonat his interpretation is more sutable to the text, and discourse of our Saviour in the whole chapter then that of S. Austines. And with due reverence bee it spoken here, Flood and Maldonat two Ie∣suites like Mules in the Latine proverbe, Mutuum scabunt, scratch and claw one the other; But let a∣ny man examine the interpretation of Maldonat, and that other of S. Austins, and apply them, both to the words of Christ, and his maine scope and drift in that sixt Chapter, and hee will find S. Austins discourse in that tractate to bee pure gold; and Maldonate his glosse to be drosse or Al∣cumie stuffe, which will not indure the fire. To the sixteenth. Gregorie de Valentia conclu∣deth not roundly with heretiques,Greg. de Val. de trans l. 2 c. 7. minimè mirum est si unus aut alter, aut etiam aliqui è vete∣ribus minimè conderatè & rectè hac de re senserint. (as Flood spea∣keth) but dealeth very squarely, confessing in effect that Gelasius and Theodoret are against Transubstantiation. Yea but (saith Flood) Bel∣larmine, Suarez, and Valentia himselfe bring o∣ther substantiall answers to those Fathers. Very substantiall answers indeed, that by substance are understood accidents like to the glosse in the Ca∣non
law, statuimus, id est, abrogamus, & quo magis id est, quo minus. The words of Theodoret are, that the mysticall signes after Consecration doe not goe out of their proper nature, but continue in their former substance, shape and figure, and may be seene and felt as before. How doth the Iesuite thinke you, expound these words?P. 175. Theodoret speaketh not (saith he) of the substance of bread, as if that did remaine, but hee only saith that the ac∣cidents remaine in their owne substance, that is their owne entitie, nature or being, which to them is not accidentall, and therefore may be tearmed their substance; for it is plaine that accidents have a cer∣taine being of their owne, different from that of their subject wherein they inhere, or rest. I grant that it is plaine they have: but it is as plaine or rather plainer, that Theodoret in that place by substantia understandeth no such thing. For in this very Dialogue hee exactly distinguisheth be∣tweene substance and accidents, and telleth us that by () or substance, hee meanes not ac∣cidents, but substance properly so taken, saying, wee call a body a substance,Theod. Dial. 2. c. 22. but health and sicknesse an accident. Besides that which hee here calleth signum my sticum, hee in this very Dialogue tear∣meth donum oblatum, the gift offered, & cibum ex seminibus, bread made of seeds; and afterwards, a thing visible and tangible: but who ever heard of accidents without a subject offered to God for a gift? or that dimensions or colours or fi∣gures are a nourishment made of feeds, or that ac∣cidents
without a subject can bee felt? Againe, it is evident and confessed by all, that accidents properly so called have not shape or figure. For that implies thrt the accidents should bee one thing, and shape and figure another, whereas shape and figure are meere accidents themselves. Last∣ly, if Theodoret had thought that the substance of bread and wine ceaseth, and is changed into the very body and bloud of Christ: and that the ac∣cidents thereof only remained; Theodoret had not taken the heretique in his owne net, by retor∣ting a similitude drawne from the Sacrament up∣on him; but the Heretique had taken Theodoret after this manner; It is granted by us both, that the body of Christ after his ascension is so changed, as the sacred Symbolls after Consecration: but the sa∣cred Symbolls are so changed, that in the Eucharist there remaineth only the outward shape and forme of bread, and not the reall substance; therefore Christs body after his Ascension is so changed, that the shape and forme of flesh remaineth, and not the very na∣ture and substance.Of this see more in the Romish Fisher held in his owne net, P. 144. Yea but (saith Flood) Theo∣doret speaketh of something which is wrought or made by Consecration, and which is understood and adored: What is this that is made here? not the accidents for they remaine the same, not the sub∣stance of the bread, for that was before, neither is that said to bee heleeved, much lesse adored. I an∣swer briefly; of bread that was before common, a holy Sacrament of Christs body and bloud is made, and beleeved and reverenced as a most
sacred mysterie: as when Waxe is made a seale, or bullion the Kings coyne, or money: the sub∣stance is not changed, but the use,Theod. ibid. non mutans natu∣ram sed natu∣rae adisciens gratiam. significancie or efficacie: so in the Sacrament according to the mind of Theodoret there is a change made, but accidentall only, not substantiall. To the seventeenth. Cardinall Cusanus is not  produced by the Knight, as a witnesse speaking plaine against Transubstantiation: but as lisping something to that purpose, not as maintaining professedly Consubstantiation: for that had not beene safe for him, the Roman Church from whom hee held his Cardinals hat determining the contrarie:Excit. lib. 6 si quis intellige∣ret panem non transubstanti∣ari, sed super∣vestiri nobiliori substātiâ. Pro∣ut quidam ve∣teres Theologi intellexisse re∣periuntur. but yet secretly favouring that o∣pinion, his words are, that some ancient Divines are found to have understood (by the words, This is my body) the Bread not to bee transubstantiated, but to be over-clothed with a more noble substance. Had he held Transubstantiation an article of faith, he would have branded those who held the contrarie with a note of heresie, and not said some ancient Divines: but some old heretiques thought, that the words, This is my body, implyed not Transubstantiation, but rather a kind of Con∣substantiation. As for that errour of the Printer in the marginall quotation at which the Iesuite glanceth, as if the Knight had mistaken libros ex∣citationum, for exercitiorum or exercitationum. I answer, the errour is as happy as that in the Co∣len edition of S. Cyprian, cessat error Romanus, for error humanus; and that in Platina, nisi qui du∣arum
partium ex Carnalibus integra suffragia tule∣rit,Plt. in vit. Clement. San∣der. l. 1. de sebsm. Aug. Or in Garnets Apologie by Eud. Iohann. rbustioribus est proponendus hic cibus Olidus for Cibus Solidus. for Cardinalibus, or that of the Printer of In∣golstade, Wolfeum conatu summo nixum esse pri∣mam toties ecclesia sedem occupare, & vanitatis sacerdotalis fastigium conscendere, for unitatis: For indeed those bookes of the Cardinall are no other then the exercise of his readers patience, or at the best of his owne wit or imagination. To the eighteenth. For Wickliff and the Wal∣denses, the Knight insisted not upon their testi∣monie, though well hee might; (for they were most eminent professours of the truth, and most free from those foule aspersions which their sworne enemies, and bloudy persecutors cast upon them) because his purpose was in this chap∣ter, as hee professeth in the title, vos vestris gla∣dijs jugulare, to cut your throat with your owne swords, and condemne you out of your owne mouth, as Christ doth the evill servant in the Gospell. 'Tis true, Wickliffe was condemned for an heretique in the Councell of Constance many yeares after his death, and barbarous inhumani∣tie was also exercised upon his bones. Yet will it follow no more from hence that Wickliffe was an heretique, then that Ieremie was a false Pro∣phet, or Christ and his Apostles false teachers, because they were condemned by councells of Priests. And of all Councells that of Constance carries the least credit, because it is not only con∣demned by all the reformed Churches, but by the Roman Church her selfe, and the Decrees
thereof repealed in later Councells. Touching the Waldenses what the Iesuite here writeth of them hee confirmeth by no testimonie, and the contrarie may be demonstrated out of Orthwinus Gratius,Histoire des Vaudois. and the Historie and confession of the Waldenses lately set forth out of authenticall re∣cords in French. To the nineteenth. The Iesuits answer to Durand  concerning the materiall part of bread remaining in the Sacrament, but not the substance, imply∣ing that the materiall part of Bread, and the sub∣stance are different things is not materiall nor true. For though the materiall part of any substance be a distinct thing, both from the forme & the com∣positum: yet is it a substance, and hath accidents inherent in it. For according to the axiome of the metaphysickes, ex non substantijs non fit sub∣stantia, a substance or substantiall compound is not made or composed of non substances. Sith the whole is not distinct really from all the parts united together, the compound cannot bee sub∣stantiall, unlesse the parts of which it consisteth be substances. Durand therefore affirming that the materiall part of the bread remained in the Sa∣crament after Consecration: held that some part of the substance of bread remained, and there∣fore the Knight no way wrongeth Durand, but Flood the Knight. If Durand held that the whole substance of the bread was turned into the body of Christ according to your Trent Decree:De Euch. l. 3. c. 13. why doth Card. Bellarmine censure his doctrine as he∣reticall:
if he taught not that the whole substance was converted, hee must needs hold that some part of the substance remained as it was before; which is all the Knight chargeth him with. As for that the Iesuite addeth to salve the matter, that he acknowledgeth all others to bee against him in this point,Durand. in 4. sent. dist. 11. q. 1. let him put on his Spectacles and reade the place againe, and hee shall see there are no such words. Only I find quest. 3. This modest parenthesis salvo meliori judicio. Which indeed are respective words befitting a modest man: but no way amounting to a confession that his opini∣on in that point was singular, and that all others were against him, which notwithstanding Flood puts upon him. To the twentieth. Touching Gaufridus and Hostiensis cited by the Knight out of Durand, it is evident that howsoever they might peradven∣ture incline to that,In 4. sent. dist. 10. q. 1. n. 13. which the Roman Church determined, viz. the second opinion that the bread doth not remaine, but is changed, yet they no way condemne the third opinion, viz. the sub∣stance of bread remaines, and is together with tho body of Christ. For as Durand well noteth, they call it an opinion, not an errour, or an heresie; nei∣ther doe they say it is to bee reproved, but let it passe without any censure, which they would not have done, if they had held Transubstantiation to be a doctrine de fide to be beleeved of all upon paine of damnation. To the twentie one. Cutbert Tunstall was a Bi∣shop,
and in great esteeme among all the learned in his time,In his Epi∣taph in Lam∣beth Chancell he is styled Aureus iste Se∣nex. Tunst. de Euch. l. 1. pag. 46. de modo quo id fieret for∣tasse satiùs e∣rat curiosum quemque relin∣quere conjectu∣rae sicut libe∣rum fuit ante concilium La∣teranense. and therefore not lightly to bee filli∣ped off, and sleighted by a priest and Iesuit de face vulgi, by saying that the matter is not great, whether Tunstall said, that for which hee is alled∣ged or no, because one single Author or two con∣tradicted by others carrieth no credit. For I find not that hee is contradicted by any. His words are these, of the manner and meanes of the reall presence, either by Transubstantiation, or otherwise perhaps it had beene bettter to leave every man that would bee curious to his owne conjecture, as before the Councell of Lateran it was left free. Neither did that learned Bishop of Duresme ever retract this opinion. For Mr. Bernard Gilpin a holy man, and a kinsman of the Bishop affirmeth, that the Bishop his Diocesan often told him, that Innocent the third had done very unadvisedly, in that he had made the opinion of Transubstantiation an article of faith. Neither doe wee find that any in his dayes or since before Flood taxed this Bishop for this his opinion. To the twentie two. None more sleight  men of worth then those who want it. Erasmus will live both in his owne workes, and in the wri∣tings of the ancient Fathers, and other Classick Authours corrected and set forth by him, when a thousand Floods, and Leomelij, and Daniels a Iesu shall bee buried in perpetuall oblivion. Erasmus was in great esteeme with Archbishop Waram, and Sir Thomas Moore Lord Chancellor
of England, and of divers Bishops, yea and Car∣dinalls also beyond the Sea, and what Tully spake of Aristotle may bee truly said of him,A golden ri∣ver. A hellish lake. there is in his writings, aureum flumen: but in the Iesuit his dversarie, lacus averni. Concerning private Masses, Spectacles Paragraph 3. à pag. 187. vs{que} ad 199. OVR Saviours words take yee, eate ye, make nothing against private Masse, for Christ there spake to all his Apostles who did all eate: and out of that place a man might as well say, that all must communicate that are in the Church at the same time as two or three. S. Pauls words where hee inviteth Christians to imitate him, are meant of chastening the body, fa∣sting and praying, and the like, in which Protestants follow him not, and if the words bee extended to the Sacrament, Catholike Priests imitate S. Paul there∣in, because they are readie to communicate with all such as come worthily to receive, but the Knight must prove that S. Paul would not say Masse, un∣lesse others would communicate with him, or that he teacheth that other Priests must not. Where S. Paul 1 Cor. 11. commandeth the people
to tarrie one for another when they came together to eate hee speaketh to the people, who made the suppers called Agape, as is plaine by the text wherein hee reprehendeth the Abuses that were committed, as that some did exceed, others did want, some were drunke, some went away hungry, which could not pertaine to the blessed Sacrament; besides the distri∣bution of that belonged to the Priests not to the peo∣ple who are here instructed, and reprehended for their manner of making their suppers. The cup of blessing is called a Communion, be∣cause  it uniteth us to Christ our head, and also a∣mong our selves, as members of the same body, and though it doe this most perfectly when it is also recei∣ved sacramentally, yet not only so, but it doth the same also in some measure being spiritually received: and as this union may remaine among us members, though every one among us doe not receive every day: so it may also remaine betweene us and the Priest, though hee say Masse, and wee not receive. If this argument of the Knight were good, it would follow that not only some, but that all the people must receive together with the Priest. The Catholique Doctours cited by the Knight say  indeed, that it was the practise of the primitive Church to communicate every day with the Priest, but they say not that it was of necessitie so to doe; nay some of them as Bellarmine and Durand prove manifestly that there was no such necessitie or dependence of the Priests celebrating upon the peoples communicating, that they might not cele∣brate
unlesse the people did communicate. For S. Chrysostome saith of himselfe that hee celebra∣ted every day, though there were no body to partici∣pate with him. The Councell of Nants forbidding Priests to ce∣lebrate alone, speaketh only of not saying Masse all alone, without one or two to answer; to whom the Priest may seeme to speake, when hee saith, Domi∣nus vobiscum, and the like; but whats this to say∣ing Masse without some body to communicate with him? The Councell of Trent doth not blesse and curse out of the same mouth, or approve or condemne the same thing, when it commendeth sacramentall com∣munion of the people together with the Priest, and yet condemneth those who say private Masses are unlawfull. For it is one thing for the Councell to wish that the people would communicate, because to heare Masse and receive withall will be more profi∣table: an other to say, that if there bee no body to communicate, such a Masse is unlawfull, or that the Priest must not say Masse. The Hammer. THe Iesuits answer to this Section of the Knight, wherein hee impugneth private Masse by foure texts of Scripture, two Ca∣nons of Councells, and twelve pregnant Con∣fessions of Romish Doctours, consisteth partly of
sophismes, and partly of sarcasmes, to both which I purpose to returne a short and smart an∣swer, first by refuting his sophismes, and after by retorting his sarcasmes. To the first sophisticall answer I replie.  That the words of our Saviour, Take, eate, this is my body were spoken to all future communicants as well as to the Apostles then present,Mat. 26.26. for they containe in them an institution of a Sacrament to bee celebrated in all Christian Churches, till the end of the world, as the Apostle teacheth us from the 23. to the 28. especially at the 26 verse,1 Cor. 11. as often as yee eate this bread, and drinke this cup, ye shew the Lords death till he come. This the Apo∣stles in their persons alone could not fulfill, for they lived not till Christs second comming: they must of necessitie therefore bee extended to all that in succeeding ages should bee present at the Lords Supper, who are as much bound by this precept of Christ to communicate with the Priest, or dispencer of the Sacrament, as the A∣postles were to communicate with Christ him∣selfe, when hee first in his owne person admini∣stred it; otherwise if the precepts Take, eate, doe this in remembrance of mee appertained to the A∣postles only, what warrant hath any Priest now to consecrate the elements? or administer the Sacrament? nay, what command have any faith∣full at all to receive the Communion? Yea but saith the Iesuit, if not only the Apostles and their successors, but all the faithfull are here enjoyned
to eate: it would follow that whensoever the Sa∣crament is administred, all must communicate that are in the Church at the same time. It will follow that all who are bid to the Lords table, and come prepared to whom the Priest in the person of Christ saith, Take eate, this is my body ought to communicate; and this was the custome of the ancient Church as Micrologus teacheth,De eccles. ob∣serv. sciendum juxta antiquos patres quod so∣li cōmunican∣tes divinis my∣sterijs interes∣se consueve∣rint. Orat. de conse∣crat. dist. 2. per∣actâ consecra∣tione omnes communicent nisi malint ec∣clesiasticis care∣reliminibus. Wee must know, saith he, according to the ancient Fathers, that none but Communicants were wont to be present at the mysteries, and therefore before the Communion, the Catechumenie and penitents which were not prepared to communicate, were commanded to depart ite, Missa est: and wee find an ancient Canon of the Roman Church attri∣buted to Gelasius, enjoyning all under paine of ex∣communication that are present after the Consecra∣tion is finished, to participate of the blessed Sacra∣ment. To the second. The precept of the Apostle, bee ye followers of mee as I am of Christ, 1 Co. 11.1. is generall, and reacheth as well to acts of pietie, as charitie. As non est distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit, so non est restringendum ubi lex non re∣stringit; as wee may not distinguish where the law doth not distinguish: so we must not restraine where the law hath no restriction. The Iesuite himselfe saith, that S. Pauls imitation is directed to all, if to all, then to Priests; and againe hee saith, these words come in very fitly to prove that in all things that appertaine unto salvation wee should
seeke to imitate S. Paul as hee doth Christ. And I hope the Iesuit holdeth the worthy receiving of the Sacrament a matter of salvation. I am sure the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 11. Hee that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnati∣on to himselfe. But what need wee dispute this point any further? sith the Apostle after hee had delivered this precept in the beginning of the chapter, in pursuit thereof at the 23 verse instan∣ceth in the Sacrament it selfe, saying, What I re∣ceived of the Lord, that I delivered unto you, that the Lord Iesus the same night hee was betrayed tooke bread &c. Surely if wee are to follow the Apo∣stle in the performance of morall duties, much more of religious, and this the Iesuit in the end is compelled to grant, and therefore addeth for his further answer, that Catholique Priests doe imitate S. Paul in the administration of the Sacrament, be∣cause they are ready to communicate with all such as come worthily to receive. Catholique Priests, that is in his language Romanists imitate S. Paul in their Masse; wherein? and how? he administred a Sacrament, they offer a sacrifice: hee prayed in a knowne tongue, they in the Latine unknowne to the people: he acknowledgeth no Lords supper where there is not a Communion,1 Cor. 10.17. whereby ma∣ny are made one bread and one body, because they all partake of that one bread; they say private Masses in which the Priest bids the people eate, and drinke, but eateth and drinketh all himselfe: hee speaketh of breaking of bread, they breake none
at all: hee commandeth every one to examine him∣selfe, and so to eate of that bread, and drinke of that cup, ver. 28. They forbid the Laytie to touch the cup: and call they this an imitation of the Apo∣stle? is it not rather an immutation and violation of the Apostles holy precepts and practise? in these things they tread in the Apostles steps, as the Antipodes doe in ours, who are therefore so stiled, because their feet and steps are diametrally opposite to ours. Yea but saith Flood, there are many things which S. Paul did,P. 194. and wherein he did desire to bee followed, as chastening of his body, fa∣sting and prayer, in which Protestants are not so well able to prove themselves followers of him, as Papists can doe. I answer, that although S. Paul in this place speaketh of no such thing, neither can his words reasonably bee stretched to the chastening and beating downe of his body to bring it in sub∣jection, because hee addeth, as I am of Christ bee ye followers of mee as I am of Christ. Now wee reade not that Christ beate his owne body, or needed to endeavour to bring it into subjection, which was alwayes so from the beginning: yet let him rightly understand the Apostles practise in taming his flesh, and subduing his body, and he will find Protestants as ready to follow him as any the most austere Papist. For by taming his body hee meaneth not whipping or scourging, which Papists receive by tradition from the here∣tiques called flagellantes or the whippers: nor was his fasting an abstinence from flesh and fee∣ding
on the daintiest fish, and powring downe the sweetest and strongest wines,Act. 28.33. Te have conti∣nued fasting, having taken nothing, wher∣fore I pray you to take some meate, for this is for your health. but an afflicting his body by watching, continuall labour, and fasting from all kind of sustenance, and such fasts not only private Christians among us keepe often, but our whole Church in publike calamities by the command of supreame authoritie religiously observeth, and hath reaped singular benefits thereby. To the third. That the precept of S. Paul, to  tary one for another when they came to eate, apper∣taineth to the Sacrament is evident, first by that hee calleth it the Lords supper which they came together to eate,1 Cor. 11.20. when yee come together in one place, this is not to eate the Lords Supper. Now that by the Lords Supper, not the Agape which were not instituted by him, but the Sacrament is meant not only S. Austin and S. Cyprian,Ep. 118. tract. de coen. dom. and the Fathers generally quoted by Casaubonus,Exercit. 16. sect. 23. Baron. annal. tom. 1. An. 34. Constat coenam domini sic enim patres appella∣re consuevere institutionem sacratissimae Eucharistiae. Greg. Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 6. g. 1. puncto 1. solet vocari hoc sacramentum coena domini sicut appellavit but Baronius and Gregorius de Valen∣tia, and the Fathers in the Catechisme of the Councell of Trent expresly affirme. Secondly, it is evident by the coherence of the Apostles discourse in this chapter, who having reproved some abuses in eating the Lords Supper, to set an edge upon his reproofe relateth, v. 23. & sequen∣tibus the institution of the blessed Sacrament, and from thence inferreth, verse the 33. and 34. where∣fore my brethren, when you come together to eate ta∣ry one for another, and if any man hunger let him eate at home, that ye come not together to condemna∣tion.
Yea but saith the Iesuit,Apostolus 1 Cor. 11. & Chrysostomus, hom. 1. de cena dom. quam sarè appellationem tanquā à vete∣ribus patribus usurpatā com∣memorat quo{que} catechismus Romanus. Ca∣thechis. Trid. pat. tract de sa∣cram. Alt. san∣ctissimi patres Apostolorum authoritatem secuti coenae e∣tiam nomine eucharistiam interdum vo∣cârunt, quòd illâ ovissimâ cenâ salutari mysterio à Christo domi∣no sit instituta. some among the Co∣rinthians exceeded others, and some did want, some were drunke, and some went away hungrie, which could not pertaine to the Sacrament as every one knoweth. I grant these abuses could not fall out in the very act of receiving the Sacrament in which every one had but some part of the Con∣secrated bread, and a draught also of the holy Cup in such a small measure and quantitie, as they could not bee distempered thereby: neither doth the Apostle taxe these abuses at the Lords Supper, but in their owne supper which they tooke before, v. 21. their disorders in these hee sharply reproves, not only as breaches of the Morall law, and acts of intemperance, but also as prophanation of the Sacrament, to which they ought to have come with a holy preparation be∣fore. Yea but saith the Iesuit, the distribution of the Sacrament belonged to the Priests, not to the peo∣ple who are here reprehended for their manner of making their suppers. I answer, that albeit it ap∣pertaineth to the Priests to deliver the sacred ele∣ments, and the people to receive them from them: yet because the Priests cannot give, if none bee to take from them, the people who either ab∣sented themselves from the Communion, or came not together, but one after another, are justly reproved: because by this their negli∣gence or disorder, the Sacrament could not bee so decently, or solemnly celebrated, as it ought. Now if the Apostle as the Iesuit will have it, re∣quireth
the people to cary one for another, before they began their feasts called Agape; how much more thinke you would hee require this dutie of expecting one the other before they began the Lords Supper? which is one of the chiefest and most publike Act and service, whereby we pro∣fesse, and expresse the Communion of Saints. The neglect of the former dutie in not staying for their guests at their Agapae, could bee at the most but a discourtesie or incivilitie; but the neglect in the later, as the Apostle teacheth, trenched upon their conscience, and hazarded their salvation, wherefore my brethren, saith the Apostle, v. 33.34. When you come together to eate tarie one for a∣nother, and if any man hunger, let him eate at home that you come not together to condemnation. To the fourth. The text of the Apostle, the cup  of blessing, which wee blesse,1 Cor. 10.16: is it not the Communi∣on of the bloud of Christ? the Bread which wee breake, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ, for wee being many are one bread and one body, be∣cause wee are all partakers of that one bread, is per∣tinently alledged by the Knight against private Masse, which is a communion without communi∣cants; much like to Caesars monument,Philippica. 1. which the Oratour fitly tearmeth insepultam sepulturam, an unburied buriall. How is the cup of blessing a Communion if none pledge as it were the one the other in it? how is the Bread a Communion if it bee communicated to none? How are the people made one bread, and one body by it, if they partake
not of it. I grant the union betweene the head and members, and Priest and people may re∣maine though the Priest say Masse, and the peo∣ple receive not: as likewise it may remaine though the Priest say no Masse, nor communicate him∣selfe, because there are other meanes of this Communion besides the Sacrament: yet because this Sacrament was ordained principally to con∣firme this union, and communion, and from thence taketh its name, they who impropriate a common, and of a publike communion make a pri∣vate Masse, destroy both the name and nature of this Sacrament. Moreover, as the worthy parti∣cipation of the Sacrament wonderfully confir∣meth: so it was instituted by Christ to represent the union of the Priest with the people, which cannot bee done in private Masses wherein the Priest communicateth alone. For that represen∣teth rather a distinction and separation of the Priest from the people, then an union. Yea but (saith the Iesuit) if this argument of the Knight were good, it would follow that not only some, but all the people must receive together with the Priest, and that the people must not receive one without the o∣ther. I answer, that it followeth indeed that all the people that are solemnly invited by the Priest, and come prepared, ought to receive together; and this the Apostles words strongly enforce, wee being many are one bread and one body,1 Cor. 10.17. because wee are all partakers of that one bread, marke it, all partakers of one bread, and therefore all one
bread and one body. How can Papists make this argument good out of their private Masses, wherein none partaketh of the Bread, or ta∣steth of the Cup but the Priest? To the fifth. By the Iurie of twelve men true  and honest in the Iesuits account, (for they all li∣ved and died in the communion of the Church of Rome) all Priests that say, (I cannot say cele∣brate) private Masses are cast as transgressours of the traditions and customes of the primitive Church; Nay farther as novelists and innova∣tors. For they all testifie and that joyntly, that the practise of the primitive Church is for our pub∣like Communion, and against their private Mas∣ses, true saith the Iesuit, they testifie concerning the practise of the primitive Church, but they affirme not that the contrary practise was unlawfull: the people then did communicate ordinarily with the Priest, but there was no necessitie so to doe. Admit this answer were true, that the verdict of this Iurie passed for the practise and manner of the primitive Church, not for any Canon or precept so to doe: yet the Knight hath the better of the cause. For they all prove that for which hee produceth them, viz. that by the confession of our Adversaries antiquitie is for us in this point, and that there was a Church celebrating the Lords Supper as we doe, in the first and best ages when there was no Church extant in the world, either maintaining or practising private Masses. No man doubteth but that the constant and uni∣forme
practise of the primitive Church ought to sway more with all religious Christians,De sacrific. Miss. Dur. rat. l. 4. c. 53. in primi∣tivâ ecclesiâ omnes qui ce∣lebrationi mis∣sarum intere∣rant communi∣cabant. Bellith. in ex∣plicat can. c. 50 Micro. de ec∣cles. observat. Tolos de Riti∣bus c. 38. In∣nocent. 3. l. 6. myster. mis. c. 5 Odo. in expos. can. antiquitùs nullae missae si∣ne collectâ, hoc est, caet aliquo modò offerenti∣um, & sacra∣menta partici∣pantium age∣bantur. Iustin. in 1 Cor. 10. olim quod nunc etiam Graeci usur∣pant, ex uno eo∣dem{que} pane cō∣secrato deliba∣tae particulae singulis tribue∣bantur ut me∣lius unio & conjunctio cum Christo at{que} a∣pertiùs signifi∣caeretur. then any novell constitution or practise of any later Church whatsoever. If wee had nothing but their practise, that alone were of great moment. Yet wee have more, I meane their judgement. For sith whatsoever is not of faith is sinne, especi∣ally in actions of this nature, their constant and uniforme practise in this kind, may serve as a de∣monstration to any sober-minded man, that what they did, they thought most agreeable to Christs institution. But the Witnesses depose farther, for some come home to the point of unlawfulnesse of private Masses. Albeit Cocleus saith no more then that anciently the Priests and people did com∣municate together; and Durandus, that all that were present at the celebration of the Masse did everyday communicate. And Bellichus and Micro∣logus, and Tholosanus, and Innocentius the Third, that in the infancie of the Church, all that were pre∣sent together at the Sacrament were wont to com∣municate. Yet Odo Cameracensis goeth a step far∣ther, saying, in the Primitive Church they never had Masses without the convention of the people to communicate together. Iustinian addeth to the pra∣ctise of the primitive Church, the present practise of the Greeke Church backing them both with a good reason, In ancient times, saith hee, which the Greeke Church useth at this day of one loafe of bread Consecrated, divers parts were distributed to each communicant, that by this their Communion their
union with Christ might bee more plainly expressed.Hugo de S. Vict. in spec. eccles. post baec dicitur communio quae sic appellatur ut omnes commu∣nicemus, vel di∣citur commu∣xio quia in pri∣mitivâ ecclesiâ populus com∣municabat quolibet die. Cassand. de so∣litar. miss. pro∣priè communio dici non potest nisi plures de eodem sacrifi∣cio participant. Ioan citat Cassand. con∣sult de solit. miss. res ipsa clamat tam in Graecâ quàm in Latinâ eccle∣siâ non solùm sacerdotes sa∣crificantes, sed & reliquos presbyteros, di∣aconos, nec non & reliquam plebem aut sal∣tem aliquam plebis partem communicàsse quod quo modo cessaverit mi∣randū est, &c. Bellar. li 2 de miss. c. 9 et 10 Durandus de hoeret. l. 2. c. 4. And Hugo out-strippeth him, saying, it is there∣fore called the Communion, to teach us that we ought all to communicate of it, or because the people in the primitive Church did communicate every day toge∣ther. Cassander enforceth the Argument drawne from the name of this Sacrament yet farther a∣gainst private Masses, it cannot bee said properly a Communion, but where some people are partakers of the same sacrifice with the Priest. And lastly Io∣hannes Hoffmisterus not only speaketh plainly, but cryeth out against your private Masses, The thing it selfe doth speake and cry alowd, that both in the Greeke and the Latine Church, not only the sacri∣ficing Priest, but the other Priests and Deacons, and the rest of the people, or at least some part of the people did communicate together, and how this cu∣stome ceàsed it is to bee wondered, and wee ought to endeavour that it may bee restored againe in the Church. Yea but saith the Iesuit, Bellarmine and Durand prove by manifest authoritie, that in the Easterne Church in the time of S. Ambrose, S. Austine and Chrysostome, the people did com∣municate but once a yeare: and yet S. Chrysostome even there where hee complaineth of the peoples coldnesse, saith of himselfe, that hee celebrated everyday, though there were none to commu∣nicate with him. I answer, that the publike and solemne time at which all were bound to com∣municate in the Easterne Church, was but once a yeare, to wit at Easter: yet did the people in those
dayes both at other times, and especially when they lay on their death-bed, receive the Com∣munion: which was therefore called Viaticum morientium. As for S. Chrysostome; 'tis true that he much complaineth of the backwardnesse of the people in comming to the Communion, and professeth for his owne part, that hee neglected not his dutie to ce∣lebrate the holy Sacrament, though hee were much discouraged therein by the paucitie and raritie of those, who presented themselves at the Lords Table: yet I find not that he any where saith, that he cele∣brated the Communion when there was none to participate with him. For though it may bee at sometime especially on the weeke dayes, none of the people did communicate with him: yet al∣wayes some of the Clergie, who assisted that acti∣on communicated with him; and therefore the Iesuits inference, that by our doctrine the Priest must not say Masse once in seven yeares, unlesse the people bee so devout as to receive with him, is most absurd. For in all Colledges, and Cathedrall Churches, the Priests and Deacons communi∣cate every moneth at the least, though none of the people sometimes receive with them. But in parish Churches it were a prophanation and a meere mockerie to administer the Communion without some of the people, to say, Take, eate, and drinke you all of this, when there is none to eate or drinke but the Priest himselfe, none, I say, neither Layk nor Clergie man. To the sixt. The Canon of the Councell of
Nants is mounted against solitarie Masses; and what are solitarie Masses but private Masses? the Fathers in that Councell account it a ridiculous superstition in a Priest, to say, the Lord bee with you, and lift up your hearts, and wee give thankes unto the Lord, or let us pray, when there is none to make answer,Concil Nan. c 30. & Cas∣sand. p. 83. or present whom hee inviteth to pray with him; and is it not altogether as ab∣surd and ridiculous for the Priest to say as hee doth in all private Masses, Take, eate,De myster. missae, c. 15. piè credendum est quòd Ange∣li dei comites assistant oran∣tibus. and drinke yee all of this, when there is none to eate or drinke with him? Neither will Innocentius evasion serve the turne, that wee are piously to beleeve that though there are no men present, yet that the Angels ac∣companie them that pray; for neither can the An∣gels joyne in such formes of prayer as are used, looke upon our infirmities, and deliver us from for∣nication and other deadly sinnes: neither is it a∣greeable to sound Divinitie or Philosophie to bid Angels that are spirits receive the body and bloud of our Saviour. Here for want of better an∣swer the Iesuit picketh a quarrell with the Knight for not citing the Councell of Nants out of any originall but out of Cassander,Flood. p. 197. beyond whom and one or two more such fellowes, saith he, it seemeth his learning did not stretch. I will repay him in his owne coyne. For the Iesuit himselfe citeth not the Councell of Nants out of any originall but out of Bellarmine and Burchard, beyond whom,P. 197. l. 27. and one or two more such fellowes, it seemeth his lear∣ning did not stretch. Is it no disparagement for
Flood a professor in Divinitie, and writer of Con∣troversies to cite a Canon of a Councell out of Bellarmine his fellow-Iesuit, and is it a disparage∣ment for a Knight no professed Divine, to cite a Canon of a Councell out of Cassander a most learned Doctour, and great Antiquarie in high esteeme when hee lived in the Roman Church? If the Iesuit answer that hee could not cite the originall, because that Decree is not now extant in any Councell of Nants that wee have, with one and the same answer hee justifieth the Knight as well as himselfe. It is no argument of Ignorance, but rather of faithfulnesse and since∣ritie when a man cannot come to the sight of a record himselfe to transcribe it out of others ver∣batim, who have seene it and avouch them for it. To the seventh. The Councell of Trent like Satyrus in the Poet bloweth out of the same mouth hot and cold;3. V. 11. or like the fountaine in S. Iames, sendeth forth at the same place sweet water and bitter,c. 6. can. 8. op∣taret quidem sacro-sancta synodus ut po∣pulus qui astat communicaret, quòd hujus sanctissimi sa∣crificij fructus uberior prove∣niret. for the Councell accurseth them who say private Masses are unlawfull, and yet wisheth that there might bee no private Masses. It is true that it is one thing to wish that the people would communicate because to heare Masse and receive withall, will bee more profitable: another to say, if there bee none to communicate the Priest must not say Masse, or that such Masse is unlawfull, yet there is such affinitie betweene these two sayings, that a good argument may bee drawne from the one to the other. For hee that wisheth a reforma∣tion
in private Masses, or (which is all one) that of private Masses they were made publike Com∣munions, consequently acknowledgeth that pri∣vate Masses are faultie, or defective: and if faulty so farre as they are faulty, unlawfull. And thus the indifferent reader may see that the water of this Flood wants ashes and soap to bee mingled with it, lavat enim non perluit, for it washeth but scowreth not, nor fetcheth out foule staines in the Masse-priests linnen. Having refuted his sophismes, I come now to retort his Sarcasmes.Loemel. spong feles unguen∣torum fragran∣tiâ, & Tigres pulsu tympano∣rum in rabiem aguntur. Tigers if they heare a drum grow madde: in this section the Knight sounded an alarum, and caused the drum to beate hard, at the sound whereof the Iesuit his adversarie after the manner of the Tiger groweth starke madde, and snappeth at every one hee meeteth. First hee falleth upon the Knight for creating a Cardinall, to wit, Hugo de S. Victore,Flood p. 188. of his owne free goodnesse to make up the number of his Bishops and Cardinals. I answer for the knight, that he created no super∣numerall Cardinall: for he would not usurpe up∣on the Popes priviledge; but committed a small errour in an hue and cry, which was made after one Hugh in stead of another, yet peradventure it was not the Knights mistake, but the Correctors. For Hugh of S. Victor, though he hath his Cardi∣nals hat in the margent, yet hee standeth bare-headed in the text (it is called a Communion,Lynd safe way p. 119. be∣cause it is a common union of Priests and people, otherwise, saith Hugo, it is called a Communion, for
that the people in the primitive Church did com∣municate every day.) But admit the Knight mi∣stooke Hugo de S. Victore, for Hugo Cardinalis, as Bellarmine confesseth, that many learned men of his owne side mistooke Anselmus Laudunensis, for Cantuariensis; yet Flood should have pardo∣ned or let passe and overseene this small over∣sight, because wee tooke him at a worse fault in the like kind in examining his last Section, where∣in as I there shewed hee grosly mistaketh Bertram for Elfrick, and a collation of two Authours for a translation of one. Eras. AdagLoripedem rectus derideat Aethiopem albus. After this hee jeareth at the Knight for saying that the Councell of Trent wished well to our doctrine,P. 189. What, saith hee, have you Masses Sir Humfrey? take heed it may cost you money: an In∣former that should heare this might catch you by the backe, and bring you in for so many hundred markes as you have received bits of bread in your Church, which truly might prove a deere ordinarie for you. The Orator said well,Cic. pre Coel. nihil tam volucre quàm ma∣ledictam, nothing is so easily cast out as a contu∣melious word, and I may adde nothing so easily returned backe. The Knight no where saith that wee have any Masses in our Church, but only that the Councell of Trent wisheth well to pub∣like Communions wherein the people communi∣cate with the Priest, which are not certainly your private Masses: but admit hee had said wee have Masses in our Church, hee might very well have
defended this speech by my Lord of Duresme his distinction of Christ his Masse,Tho. Mor. e∣pisc. Dunelm. l. nitit. Christ his Masse. and the Pope his Masse. Wee have Christ his masse at every com∣munion, neither is any man merced for being present at it, but for being absent from it. For Masses are not sold with us, as they are with Pa∣pists where there is a price set for drie Masses, and wet Masses, for low Masses and high Masses; the ordinarie was but a groat for the one, and a tester for the other, but now it is raised; and so to speake in the Iesuits language the Priests Masses prove a Deere ordinarie for the Laitie. After this madde Tiger hath left the Knight, hee fastens his teeth upon our Communion Table, calling it an emptie Communion, nothing but a morsell of bread,P. 190. and a sup of wine, and a prettie service and good-fellow Communion.P. 199. Flood is the same full and fa∣sting, in jeast and in earnest, for in both hee con∣tradicts himselfe, which discouereth an idle and addle braine. If our Communion bee emptie and nothing but a morsell of bread, and a sup of wine what good-fellowship can there bee in it? But in good earnest how can the Iesuit call ours an emp∣tie Communion, which is every way full, and ful∣ler then theirs, both for the signes, and the things signified? for the signes, we have the substance of Bread and Wine, they nothing but hungrie acci∣dents and shewes, a bit of quantity, and a morsell of colours, and a soppe of figures; neither have the Laitie among them so much as a sup of the conse∣crated cup. For the thing signified we teach that
all communicants by faith feed on the very body and bloud of Christ, and all that so feed partake of all the benefits of Christs passion: they teach that Infidels and reprobates eate Christs body, and reape no benefit at all by it. As for his good-fellow Communion, let him take it to himselfe, for Aquinas noteth, that sometimes their Priests are overseene by drinking the liquor in the Consecrated cup,Missal. in cu∣tel. se casu gulae Euchari∣stiam evomue∣rit. and the cautels of the Masse appoint what is to bee done in case the Priest being drunke before cast up the host. As for our Communion there can bee no excesse, or as hee tearmeth it good-fellowship in it. For the people have warning a weeke at least before to prepare themselves, and they receive alwayes fasting before, and the quan∣titie is so smal that it cannot distemper any, which this bone Compaignion could not bee ignorant of. But it seemeth hee tooke a cup of vinum Theolo∣gicum in the Taverne before hee set pen to paper in this section. For beside manifold contradictions before noted, hee tearmeth in it our Communion sacrilegious,P. 199. not considering that they sacrilegi∣ously take the cup from the Laity, and that we have restored it, and he concludeth the Section with these words, here is enough of such an idle subject. Now the subject as appeares by the argument of the Section, and the title he putteth throughout, is Private Masse. Nay which is a most certaine demonstration of his distemper; when hee wrote this Section hee forgot that hee was a Priest, and reckoneth himselfe among the Laitie, saying,
the union may remaine betweene us and the Priest,P. 197. l. 1. though he say Masse, and wee not receive. Concerning the 7. Sacraments, Spectacles, paragraph. 4. a pag. 199. us{que} ad 242. THe Knight unjustly chargeth Bel∣larmine  for laying a foundation of Atheisme,Concil. Trid. Sess. 7. can. 1. Bell. de effect. sacram. l. 2. c. 25. si tollamus authoritatem praesentis eccle∣siae, & praesen∣tis concilij, in dubiū revocari poterunt omni∣um aliorum cō∣ciliorum decre∣ta & tota fi∣des christiana. 1 Eliz. 1. in saying that if wee should take away the credit of the Roman Church and Councell of Trent (which decreeth the precise number of 7. Sacraments;) the Decrees of other Councels, nay even Christian faith it selfe might be called in question, for if such a generall Councell may erre, the Church may erre; if the Church may erre, the faith which that Church teacheth may faile, and consequently there can bee no certaintie. S. Gregorie the great, did often say, and write, that hee did hold the 4, first Councels in the same honour that hee did the 4. Gospels, which is the same, as to say they could as little erre as the 4. Gospels. And the Parliament lawes of England give as great authoritie to those 4. first Councels, as S. Gregorie doth, acknowledging that for heresie, whatsoever is condemned for such by any of them, which is in other words to acknowledge them for a Rule of faith,
and consequently of infallible authoritie: neither can any thing be said more against the present Church, and present Councell of Trent, then against the Church of that time, and the Councels of those times. The Knight impertinently alledgeth the testimo∣nies of S. Paul,You know that I have withdrawne nothing that was profita∣ble v. 27. I have not shrunke to de∣clare unto you the whole counsell of God. Acts 20.20. and Bellarmine l. 4. d. verb. Dei. All those things are written by the A∣postle, which are necessarie for all men, and which they preached generally unto all. For S. Paul spea∣keth not of the written word, but of the doctrine of Christ by him preached; neither doth Bellarmines saying helpe any thing, because though those things which are necessarie in generall for all to know, which are but few bee written, there bee yet many more not written, which are necessarie to bee knowne by some in the Church. The Knight in praying that the Anathema de∣creed by the Councell of Trent might fall upon his head, if any Papist could shew the number of seven Sacraments to have beene the beliefe of the Church for a thousand yeares after Christ, is too forward to draw malediction upon himselfe; it will come fast enough to his cost. It is an heavier thing then he is a ware of to have the curse of a mother, and such a mother as the Church which doth not curse without cause,Ecclesicus 3.11. nor out of passion. For as the Scripture saith, maledictio matris eradicat fundamenta, the male∣diction of a mother doth roote out the foundations. The Knights definition of a Sacrament, to wit, that it is a seale witnessing to our consciences, that
Gods promises are true is senselesse, and without ground, largely refuted by Bellarmine,Bell. l. 1. de sac. in genere. c. 14. 16. and proved to bee most absurd. For how can the Sacraments bee seales to give us assurance of his words, when all the assurance wee have of a Sacrament is his word? this is idem per idem. Besides, what promises are these that are sealed? or if they be sealed, what need we more seales and Sacraments then one? if there may bee more, why not seven as well as two? Againe, how doe wee see the promises of God in the Sacra∣ments? these are but foolish fancies, bred in here∣ticall braines, and so to be contemned. The Knights Argument against five of our Sa∣craments,  that in them the element is not joyned to the Word, or they have not their institution from Christ, or they bee not visible signes of invisible sa∣ving grace, is frivolous. For confirmation and ex∣treame Vnction have the element, and the Word, to wit, oyle and the forme: order and penance have institution from Christ, as is confessed in order the patten with an Host and Chalice with wine in it is the outward element: in penance humble confessi∣on with prayer, fasting, and almes deedes, are the outward element: in Matrimonie the bodyes of a man or woman are as much an outward element, as water in baptisme: and though Matrimonie might bee a naturall contract before the Gospell, yet was it exalted to the dignitie of a Sacrament by Christ, and though it bee an holy thing as order is, yet as or∣der is forbidden to all women, so upon good reason Mariage is forbidden to all Priests: because it is good,
but of an inferiour ranke, and not so agreeable to the high estate of Priest-hood. That S. Ambrose, Austine, Chrysostome, and Bede teaching,Aug. in Iohan. tract. 15 de la∣tere in cruce pendentis lan∣ceâ percusso, sacramenta ec∣clesiae proflux∣erunt. that out of Christs side came the Sa∣craments of the Church prove no more two then se∣ven Sacraments. For they say not that they were then instituted, or that there were no more Sacra∣ments instituted, or that other Sacraments did not issue from thence. Saint Ambrose maketh expresse mention of the Sacrament of confirmation,L. 2. de sacram. c. 24. and of penance, as Bel∣larmine sheweth: who also yeeldeth a reason why S. Ambrose in his bookes de Sacramentis mentio∣neth no more but three Sacraments, because his in∣tent in that worke is only to instruct the catechu∣menie in those things which are to bee done at the time of Baptisme. For hee neither writeth to the be∣leevers of his age, but only to some beginners, as is manifest by the title of one of his bookes: neither doth he there speake of the Sacraments which the Church hath taught and declared, but of the Sacra∣ments which those beginners that hee spake to, had newly received. S. Austine in those places where hee speaketh of two Sacraments restraineth not the number to two only.Respice ad mu∣nera ecclesiae, munus sacra∣mentorum in baptismo in Eucharistiâ, et ceteris sanctis sacramentis. For in his first Sermon upon the 103. psalme, hee saith, cast thine eyes upon the gifts, or offices of the Church in Baptisme, the Eucharist, and the rest of the holy Sacraments: and in his Epistle 118. having brought in the two Sacraments, Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, he addeth this generall clause,
and if there bee any thing else commended in cano∣nicall Scriptures. Neither doth the place the Knight citeth out of the third booke de doctrinâ christianâ availe him any thing; for it is plaine by the word sicuti, that he bringeth in Baptisme, and the Lords Supper for example only, which doth no way re∣straine the number. Besides, his word in this place is not sacraments as the Knight citeth him, but signa signes, which is therefore a corruption of the Knights. S. Cyprian de ablutione pedum, reckoneth but  five Sacraments, not that hee thought there were no more:Cyp. de ablut. ped. propter hoc benignissime Domine, pedes lavas discipulis quia post bap∣tismum quem sui reverentia iterari non pa∣titur, aliud la∣vacrum procu∣rasti, quod nun∣quam debeat intermitti. but that it pertained not to his purpose to speake of more in that place: his scope being only to speake of such Sacraments as had relation to our Saviours last Supper, and by ablutio pedum, that Authour meaneth the sacrament of penance, as ap∣peareth by the words following, for this, O most be∣nigne Lord, thou didst wash thy Disciples feet, be∣cause after Baptisme which may not be iterated, thou hast procured another laver which must never bee intermitted. S. Isidore in his sixt booke of Etymologies cited  by the Knight, doth not so much as intend to speake of any Sacrament at all, but his only intent is to treat of the names of certaine feasts, as the title of the chapter sheweth, to wit, of feasts and their nmes. Among which he putteth Christs Supper. Moreover, to shew that S. Isidore held more then the three Sa∣craments the Knight speaketh of, in his second booke de Ecclesiast. offic. c. 16. & l. 23. c. 19. he mentio∣neth
two more, Penance and Matrimonie. Alexander hales in the place alledged by the Knight saith not, that there are no more then foure Sacraments, but on the contrarie concludes, Par. 4. q, 5. n. 7. art. 2. that there bee neither more nor fewer then seven Sacraments; tis true indeed that Hales was of opinion that the forme and matter which wee now use in the Sacrament of confirmation were not appointed by our Saviour, but by the Church in the Councell, at Melda: but this Hales saith, sine praejudicio, that is with leave, not stifly nor arro∣gantly maintaining his owne opinion. Hugo de Sancto victore excludeth not Penance from being a Sacrament. For in his 23. chapter hee calleth Penance the second board after shipwrack,C. 12. Septem sunt principa∣lia ecclesiae sa∣cramenta, &c. and saith, that if any man endanger his cleansing, which he hath received by Baptisme, he may arise, and scape by Penance. Moreover, the same Hu∣go in his Glasse of the mysteries of the Church saith, that there are seven principall Sacraments of the Church, whereof five are called generall, be∣cause they belong unto all, to wit, Baptisme, Confir∣mation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreame vnction; and two speciall, to wit, Matrimonie and Order. Although Bellarmine denieth that Extreame Vnction can be deduced out of the last of S. Marke: and Cajetan out of the first of S. Iames, and al∣though Hugo, and Peter Lomberd, and Bonaven∣ture, and Alensis, and Altisiodorensis denie it to bee instituted by Christ: yet none of them all denie it to be a Sacrament.
Bessarion the Cardinall saith not that there are  but two Sacraments; for he was a great man in the Councell of Florence, wherein seven Sacraments are precisely taught: but that we find these two Sacraments expresly delivered, and that wee find none other, and none of the rest so delivered, that is, so plainly. Soto, though he denieth that ordination of Bi∣shops,  is truly and properly a Sacrament: yet hee denieth not the Sacrament of order in the Church. Durand saith indeed that Matrimonie is not ae  Sacrament univocally, agreeing with the other six: but all acknowledge it to bee an errour in him, and Divines of his owne time did note it for such, though the matter then were not so clearely defined. Cajetan saith indeed, that the prudent reader  cannot inferre out of the words of S. Paul, Ephes. 5. hoc est magnum Sacramentum, that Matrimonie is a Sacrament: yet hee denieth it not to bee a Sacra∣ment.Locor. Theol. l. 8. c. 1. si Lu∣theram de hoc matrimonio∣rum genere dis∣ceptare volue∣rint, intelligant se in scholae disceptationem incidisse, neo∣portere catho∣licum ad eorum argumenta re∣spondere: sin verò argumen∣tentur matri∣monium cum sacris ceremo∣nijs admini∣stratum Sacra∣mentum eccle∣siae non esse tunc catholicus respondeat fi∣denter, securè contra pugnet.  For though it bee not inferred from that place, it may be inferred from other; or if neither from that nor other, yet it may bee deduced out of tradition. Canus telleth us that the Divines speake so un∣certainly of the matter and forme of Matrimonie, that hee should bee accounted an unwise man, who in so great differences of opinion, would take upon him to establish any thing certainly: yet hee denieth not Matrimonie to be a Sacrament. For these are his words, if the Lutherans argue that Mariage admi∣nistred with sacred Ceremonies, sacred matter, sa∣cred
forme, and by a sacred Minister, as it hath e∣ver beene administred in the Roman Church, even from the Apostles time; if I say they argue that this is not a Sacrament of the Church, then let a Catho∣lique answer confidently, let him defend stoutly, let him gainsay securely. Vasquez doth not say, that Matrimonie is not a Sacrament properly so taken: but that S. Austine speaking of Matrimonie doth use the word Sacra∣ment but in a large sense: This is true, but it is but Vasquez his private and singular opinion, not in a point of faith, but only in the meaning of one Father, in the use of a word, and in this his opinion he is con∣tradicted by other Catholique Divines. Bellarmine saith, that the Sacraments signifie three things,De Sacram. in Gen. l. 1. c. 9. one thing past, to wit, the Passion of Christ; another thing present, to wit, sanctifying grace, which they worke in our soules; another thing to come, to wit, eternall life. The signification of these three things is most apparant in Baptisme, and the Eucharist: but not so apparant in the rest. Thus farre the Knight quoteth Bellarmine, but leaveth out that which followeth, tamen certum est impli∣citè illa omnia significari; but it is certaine that the rest of the Sacraments signifie all these things at least implicitly.
The Hammer. ALthough the Iesuit was very angrie when hee wrote this Paragraph, as appeareth by his snarling at every passage almost: yet in his discretion hee thought good not to meddle with some things, which were too hard for his teeth. To Theophylact, Fulbert, and Paschasius, and the last passage out of S. Austine, as also to the refutation of the popish arguments for their sep∣tenarie number of Sacraments, from incongru∣ous and ridiculous congruities, hee replieth not a word, and three of their prime Schoole-men, Durand, Vasques, and Cajetan, hee lets shift for themselves, defend them he neither will nor can; yet for all this hee puts up as if hee had done wonders in this Paragraph, and filleth up the de∣fect of solid answers with bragges, and swelling words of vanitie; Bullatis vndi{que} nugis pagina turgescit. But these bubbles wee shall see will dissolve of themselves, in the particular answer to his twen∣tie severall exceptions against the Knights dis∣course. To the first. The Iesuit in this Paragraph  thinketh that hee discourseth very profoundly, for page 201. he saith, the Knight is not capable of it; whereas his chanel here is so shallow, that any child instructed in his Catechisme, may wade
thorow it. Without an infallible rule, saith he, there can be no certaine beliefe in God. An extreame ve∣ritie, without an unerring Pope no certaine rule of faith, an extreame falsitie: the Iesuit cannot see Christ for the Pope, nor the Scripture for the Trent Canons. Let him remove them out of the way; and if hee have an eye of faith, hee may clearly see both, and in them an infallible rule of faith, and certaine meanes to learne true beliefe in God. The occasion of this discourse of the Iesuit was the Knight charging Cardinall Bellar∣mine for laying a foundation of Atheisme in say∣ing that if we should take away the credit of the Roman Church and Councell of Trent, the Christian faith it selfe might bee called in questi∣on. The charge lieth heavie upon the Cardinall. For to disparage the selfe-sufficiencie of the holy Scriptures, and suspend our Christian faith upon the Decrees of a late factious conventicle, reje∣cted by the greater part of the Christian world, is a ready way to overthrow all Divine faith, and true religion. Yet the Iesuit seeketh to cover the nakednesse of the Cardinall with these fig leaves; If a generall Councell may erre, the Church may erre; if the Church may erre, the faith which that Church teacheth may faile, and consequently there can bee no certaintie. How easily are these leaves plucked away, and torne in pieces? 1. Though such a Councell as the Councell of Trent, con∣sisting of a few Bishops swaied by the Italian fa∣ction may erre, it would not from thence follow,
that the whole representative Church might erre. 2. Though the whole representative Church in a free and generall Councell lawfully called might erre, yet many millions in the Catholique Church may hold the orthodox beliefe, and con∣sequently the faith of the Church not totally faile. Yea but saith the Iesuit, take away the infal∣libilitie of the Church there is no rule of faith. This assertion of his is open blasphemie, as if God would not bee true, though all men were found liars: though the Roman Church and Pope erre a thousand times, yet the rule of faith remaineth unvariable in the holy Scriptures. Yea but S. Gre∣gorie equalizeth the foure first generall Councels to the Gospel, and saith in effect, that they could as little erre as the 4. Gospels, and that upon the deniall of their authoritie the Christian faith might be shaken as well as by the deniall of the Gospels: and the like authoritie giveth your Parliament unto them. I answer, S. Gregorie e∣qualizeth the foure first generall Councels to the foure Gospels, not in respect of authoritie, but in respect of the veritie of the articles defined in them: he saith not, they could as little erre, but they did as little erre, in their decisions, or to speake more properly that their doctrine was as true as Gospell, because the determinations in those first generall Councels against Heretiques are evidently deduced out of holy Scriptures. Our Parliament alluding to the words of S. Gregorie speaketh in the same sense, as hee doth. Yea but
saith the Iesuit, your Parliament lawes acknow∣ledge that for heresie whatsoever is condemned for such in any of those Councels, which is in other words to acknowledge them for a rule of faith, and consequently to bee of infallible au∣thoritie, and to joyne them in the same ranke with the Canonicall Scriptures. Idem jungat Vulpes; by the like reason the Iesuit might say we joyne the booke of Articles of Religion, and Homilies in the same ranke with the Canonicall Scriptures, because we condemne for heretiques all that obstinatly maintaine any doctrine repug∣nant to them: which wee doe not, because we hold the Decrees of a provinciall Synod, to bee of in∣fallible authoritie: but because wee are able to prove all the Articles there established, to be con∣sonant to the holy Scriptures. Yea, but further saith the Iesuit in the same statute, you give power to the Court of Parliament,P. 23. with the assent of the Clergie in their Convocation to adjudge or deter∣mine a matter to be heresie, which is the very same as to give it power to declare faith, or to be the rule thereof. I answer, the statute giveth power to the Convocation, to declare faith, and deter∣mine heresie out of Gods word, and by the sen∣tence thereof, and no otherwise. In such sort to declare faith, is not to be the rule of faith, but to judge and measure things by the rule. There is a maine difference betweene these two, which yet the Iesuit here confoundeth as if they were co∣incident) to declare faith, and to bee the rule of
faith every Iudge declareth the Law, yet is he not the rule of the Law. The Inquisitors in their ju∣dices expurgatorij, and the Sorbonists in their censures declare what is heresie: yet they are not I trow the Rule of popish faith, every meater in the market declareth that such or such is the measure of corne and graine▪ yet is not every, or any corne-meater the Winchester standerd. It is one thing to be the rule, and another to measure by the rule, and declare what we have measured. But to retort the Iesuits phrase upon himselfe, hee is not capable it seemes of this discourse which yet every market-woman or boy is. Well, let the authoritie of generall Councels bee great in the Church, and of the foure first Councels greatest of all, quid hoc ad Rombum? what maketh this for the infallibilitie of the Trent conventicle? much saith the Iesuit every way, for what, saith hee, can you say more against the present Church, and present Councell of Trent, then against the Church and Councels of those times? What can we say? nay what can we not say? what have we not said? or what could all the Papists in the world answer to what wee have already said? After hee hath taken away the legall exceptions made against this conventicle by the Authour of the historie of the Councell of Trent, and of the litterae missivae, and Iewel his Treatise affixed to that Historie, and Chemnisius his Examen, and Doctor Bowles his latine Sermon preached to the Convocation, and lately printed: after hee hath
proved which hee will never bee able, that the Assemblie at Trent was a free and generall Coun∣cell, and called by lawfull authoritie, and all the proceedings in it according to ancient Canons: yet it will still fall as short of the Councell of Nice in authoritie, as in antiquitie: that consisted of most eminent, learned, and holy Bishops and Confessors: this for the most part of hungrie ani∣mals depending on the Popes trencher as Dudi∣thius a Bishop present at that Councell declareth at large in his letter set before the Historie of the Councell of Trent, to which I referre the reader. To the second. The testimonies alledged by  the Knight for the sufficiencie of holy Scriptures are ponderous, and weightie, and the Iesuits ex∣ceptions to them are sleight, vaine, and frivolous. To the testimonie out of the Acts, I have kept backe nothing that was profitable unto you, and I am pure from the bloud of all men,Act. 20.20.27 for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the Councell of God, hee saith that S. Paul speaketh of the doctrine by him preached, not of the written word of God: as in like manner our Saviour saith, that what hee heard from his Father hee made knowne unto them, Iohn 15.15. and yet delivered not one word in writing. It is true, S. Paul speaketh of the do∣ctrine which he preached, but it is as true that the doctrine which he preached hee confirmed unto them by testimonie of Scripture. For S. Luke saith Acts 17.2. that S. Paul as his manner was, reasoned with them out of the Scriptures opening
and alledging that Iesus whom hee preached unto them was Christ, and they that received the word with all readinesse of mind searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so: and again I con∣fesse that after that way which they call heresie,Act. 24.14. so worship I the God of my fathers, beleeving all things which are written in the Law, and the Prophets. If the Iesuit had read the verse immediatly fol∣lowing, testifying to the Iewes and Greekes repen∣tance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Iesus Christ: hee could not but have seene the absurdi∣tie of his answer, wherein he denieth that S. Paul speaketh of the written word. For who knoweth not that repentance towards God, and faith to∣wards Iesus Christ are written almost in every Sermon of the Prophets, and chapter of the E∣vangelists. What hee addeth for confirmation of his answer, (from the example of our Saviour, who made knowne to his Disciples whatsoever hee heard from his Father, and yet delivered not one word in writing) no whit at all helpeth his cause. For albeit we grant that our Saviour wrote nothing (except wee give credit to a relation in Eusebius of a letter written by him to King Ab∣garus) yet hee commanded his Apostles to write those things which they had heard and seene, what thou seest write it in a booke,Euseb. eccles. hist. l. 1. Apoc. 1.11. and send it to the seven Churches; and S. Peter saith,2 Ep. 8.2. that no Scripture is privatae , that is, as Cal∣vin well rendereth the words privatae impulsionis, of private impulsion or motion: for the prophecie
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy Ghost: and therefore Irenaeus saith expresly,Advers. haeres. .3. c. 1 no per alios dispositi∣onem salutis accepimus quam per quos Evan∣gelium ad nos pervenit, quod primum praeco∣nia verunt, po∣steà secundùm Dei volunta∣tem in scriptis reliquerunt, co∣lumnam & firmamentum fidei futurum. Euseb. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 14. fide∣les iteratis precibus impe∣trârunt à Marco ut mo∣numentum il∣lud doctrinae quod sermone, & verbis illis tradidisset, eti∣am scriptis mandatum a∣pud eos relin∣queret. Esay 8.20. that what the Apostles preached first by word of mouth by the will of GOD, they afterwards delivered in writing to bee a pillar and foundation of our faith: and S. Austine affirmeth, that what Christ would have knowne of his words and deeds as needfull to our salvation, that hee gave in charge to his Apostles to set downe in writing. If this suffice not, I will stop the mouth of this Iesuit with the free confession of a greater Iesuit then hee, Gregorie of Valence in his eight booke of the Analysis of faith the fift chapter, minimè in ip∣sorum arbitrio positum fuit scribere, aut alio tempore aut alijs verbis scribere, the penmen of the holy Ghost were so guided by the spirit that it was not in their power, or at their choyce to write, or not to write, or to write at another time, or to write in other words then they did. To the testimonie of Bel∣larmine the Iesuit gives as sleight an answer as to the former out of S. Luke, whereunto I need to reply nothing, because in a case so cleere wee need not the Cardinals confession, having such expresse testimonie of Scripture and Fa∣thers, as namely of Esay, to the law and to the te∣stimonie,Deut. 4.2. Cursod is e∣very one that continueth not in all things which are written in the booke of the law to doe them. And Moses wrote this law, and deli∣vered it to the Priests which bare the Arke. Gal. 1.8. 2 Tim. 3.15. if they speake not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, of Moyses, yee shall not adde unto the words which I command you (which to bee spoken of the written law is apparant by comparing this text with Galathians
3.10. and Deuteronomie 31.9.) And the words of Christ, Iohn 5.39. search the Scriptures, for in them you thinke you have eternall life. And of S. Iohn his beloved Disciple, Iohn 20.31. these things are written that yee might beleeve that Iesus Christ is the Sonne of God, and that beleeving ye might have life through his Name. And of S. Paul, if we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any other Gospel then that yee have received;Advers. her∣mog. c. 22. ado∣ro scripturae plenitudinem: scriptum doceat Hermogenes. Epist. ad Pomp. nihil innovetur inquit Stepha∣nus, quod tra∣ditum est, unde est ista tradi∣tio? Vtrum de Dominicâ, & Evangelicâ authoritate de∣scendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis, & epistolis veni∣ens? ea enim facienda quae scripta sunt Deus testatur, si ergo aut in evangelio prae∣cipitur aut in Apostolorum▪ epistolis aut A∣ctibus contine∣tur, observetur haec sancta tra∣ditio. (that is as S. Austine expoundeth it praeterquam quod in Scripturis lega∣libus & Evangelicis accepistis, if any preach unto you any Gospell beside that which is contained in the writings of the Law and the Gospell, let him bee ac∣cursed. And, thou hast knowne the Scriptures from a child which are able to make thee wife unto salva∣tion through faith which is in Christ Iesus, for all Scripture is given by Divine inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction and righteosnesse, that the man of God may bee perfect throughly furnished to all good workes. And of Tertullian, I adore the fulnesse of Scriptures; let Hermogenes prove what hee saith out of Scriptures, or otherwise let him feare the woe denounced against all such as adde any thing there∣unto, or take there from. And of S. Cyprian; our brother Steven will have nothing to bee altered in the Church tradition; Whence is this tradition, is it from the Gospel, or the Acts of the Apostles, or their Epistles, if it be so then let this holy tradition bee kept, for God himselfe witnesseth that wee ought to observe those things that are written. And of
Athanasius,Athanas. orat. 1. cont. Ar. Sufficiunt per se inspiratae scripturae ad veritatis in∣structionem. Basil. Serm. de fide: . Hom. 3. in 2. ad Thess. . Et in 2. ad Cor. Hom. 3. . Ierom. advers. Helvid. c. 5. credimus quia legimus, non credimus quia non legimus. Augustin. de doc. Chris. l. 2. c. 9. in ijs quae a∣pertè posita sunt in scriptura inveniuntur illa amnia quae continent fidem & mores. Cy∣ril in Evang. Iohan. l. 12. c. 68. ea conscripta sunt quae scribent Sufficere puunt ad mores dogmata{que}. Vincen. Lyrin. advers. Haeres▪ hic requirat aliquis cum: sit. perfectus scripturae canon sibi{que} ad omnia satis super{que} sufficiat. Biel in can. mis. lec. 71. quae agen∣d, & quae fugienda, quae amanda, & quae contemnenda, quae timnda, & quae auden∣da, & quae credenda, & speranda, & caetera nostrae saluti necessaria, quae omnia sola docet Sacra scriptura. the holy Scriptures are sufficient to in∣struct us in the truth. And of S. Basil, it is a mani∣fest falling away from faith, either to refuse any thing of those that are written, or to bring in any of those things which are not written. And of S. Chry∣sostome, all things that are needfull are manifestly set downe in holy Scriptures; And againe, in the ho∣ly Scriptures wee have a most exact ballance and rule of all things. And of S. Ierome, who maketh the Scripture a two edged sword cutting heresies on both sides, both in the excesse, and in the defect, We beleeve, saith he, because we reade in Scriptures, we beleeve not what we reade not. And of S. Austine, among those things which are openly set downe in Scriptures, all such things are to bee found us ap∣pertaine to faith and manners. And so of S. Cyril, all things which Christ spake and did are not writ∣ten, but all are written which the writers of the Gos∣pell thought to bee sufficient for doctrine of faith and manners. And of S. Vincentius Lyrinensis, the Canon of the Scripture is perfect, and over and above sufficient for all things. And of the prime of the Schoole-men Gabriel Biel▪ The Scripture a∣lone teacheth us what we ought to beleeve and to hope for what things are to bee done, and what to bee
shunned, and all other things that are necessarie to salvation. And of William Pepin, Dom. 2. advent sola haec scripturadocet perfectè & planè quid cre∣dendum, &c. The holy Scripture alone teacheth per∣fectly and plainely, what wee ought to beleeve as the articles of our Creed, what wee ought to doe, as all divine precepts what wee ought to desire as hea∣venly joyes, what we ought to feare, as eternall tor∣ments. And of Scotus;In prim. sent. prol. q. 2. sacra scriptura suffi∣cienter conti∣net doctrinam necessariam viatori. The holy Scripture suffi∣ciently containes doctrine necessarie for away faring man, that is in his travell to heaven. Howbeit, because Cardinall Bellarmine beareth downe all before him, the more to convince this Iesuit, and nonplus all Papists, I will examine what the Knight alledgeth out of him to our present pur∣pose; All things are written, saith he, by the A∣postles, which are necessarie for all men to know: If all things which are necessarie for all men to know, then all things which are necessarie for all Priests, Bishops, Cardinals, yea and the Pope him∣selfe to know, unlesse the Iesuit will prove them to bee no men. Assuredly the Apostles and the Fathers assembled at Nice and Constantinople set not downe a different Creed for the Priest, and for the people, but one for all Christians. Yet I grant, that as the measures of the sanctuarie were double to the common; so the learning of a Priest ought to bee double at least to that of the common sort: a more exact, full, and exquisite knowledge of all, both the principles, and con∣clusions of faith is required in them then in the
other: yet nothing is required of them as necessa∣rie to salvation, which may not bee drawne out of holy Scriptures, in which are contained all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge.2 Tim. 3.16.17. Oecum. & Chrys. in hunc locum  Lit. ad Phil. Hisp. reg. Nam quod ad Theologiam at∣tinet quae sum∣ma Philosophia est, his libris omnia nostrae religionis, & divinitatis my∣steria expli∣cantur: quod verò attinet ad eam partem quae moralis nominatur, hinc quo{que} omnia ad omnes virtutes praecepta colli∣guntur, quibus quidem duabus partibus omnis nostrae salutis, & foelicitatis ratio contine∣tur. Banes in 1. p. Tho. q. 1. art. 8. conclus. 1. om∣nia quae non consonant ju∣dico eorum gravioribus censuris inu∣runt id{que} tantae facilitate ut meritò irride∣antur. The Apostle saith not only they are able to make wise unto salva∣tion indefinitely, but that the man of God, that is the minister of God, may be wise & not only wise unto salvation, but furnished to every good worke, that is, as S. Chrysostome and Oecumenius expound it, ful∣ly accurately, and exactly instructed. And for ever to seale the Iesuits mouth; thus much Gregorie the thirteenth Pope of Rome in his letters to Phi∣lip King of Spaine, freely confesseth thus expati∣ating in the praises of holy Writ, as for Theologie which is the prime Philosophie or metaphysick in these bookes (speaking of the Bible) all the myste∣ries of our religion, and divine knowledge are un∣folded, and as for that part which is tearmed mo∣rall; from hence all precepts to all vertues are ga∣thered, and on these two parts depend all the course or meanes of our salvation and happinesse. 3. To the third. What Dominicus Banes wrote of certaine Divines in his time, that were so free in their censures of other men, that they became a laughing-stock to all men of judgement, may bee truly applyed to the Bishops assembled at Trent, who are so free in casting their thunder-bolts of anathemaes against all that differ from them in judgement, that the learned and judicious ac∣count divers of their Canons no better then Pat∣guns. As arrowes that are shot bolt upright fall
downe upon their heads that shoot them, unlesse they carfully looke to it: so causelesse curses fall alwayes upon the cursers themselves, and hurt none else. This made the Knight so much sleight the bruta fulmina of your Trent Councell. Yea but saith the Iesuit, It is a heavie thing to have the curse of a mother,Apo. 17.5. and such a mother which doth not curse without cause. The Church of Rome I grant is a mother, but mater fornicationum, as shee is tearmed the mother of fornications and abominati∣ons of the earth; but shee is none of our mother, Ierusalem, or to speake more properly the catho∣like christian Church is our mother, the Roman Church must speake us very faire; if wee owne her for a sister, even this sheweth her to bee no Mother, that shee is ever cursing us: the true Mother would by no meanes suffer her child to bee divided. This cruell Stepdame not only suf∣fereth those whom shee would have taken for her children to be cut in sunder, but her selfe as much as in her lieth by her curses, divideth them from God, and all the members of Christs mysticall body, yet wee spare to apply the words of the Psalmist unto her; shee loved not blessing, and therefore it shall bee farre from her;Ps. 109.17.18 shee delighteth in cursing, and therefore shall it enter like oyle into her bowels, and like water into her bones. Howso∣ever wee are not scared with the bugbeare, the Iesuit goeth about to fright us withall; Maledi∣ctio matris eradicat fundamenta, the curse of a Mo∣ther doth roote out the foundation; For first the
booke out of which he citeth this text is not Ca∣nonicall. Next we denie that the text any way concerneth us, who are blessed and not cursed by our Mother the true Catholike Church; as for the Roman Church shee can in no sence bee tear∣med our mother. For we had Christian Religion in this Island, before there was any Church at Rome at all, as I have else-where proved at large. Lastly, the text the Iesuit alledgeth is falsly translated,Ecclesiasticus 3.11. he should have rendred the Greeke thus; A Mother in dishonour or defamed, is a reproach to her chil∣dren, such a Mother wee grant the Church to be a reproach to all her children. To the fourth. The number of Sacraments we prove two manner of wayes, first , 2 ; first by demonstrating our two; secondly, by refuting the five they adde thereunto. Howsoever the Iesuit here as also Baylie the antagonist of Ri∣vet insult upon us, as if it were unpossible to prove the precise number of two Sacraments and no more, because neither the name, nor the num∣ber of Sacraments is any where set downe in ter∣minis in Scripture: yet they shall find that wee faile not in proofes of this point, but they in their answers. For to reserve the refutation of their five to the next Paragraph, we demonstrate our two by arguments drawne first from the name, secondly from the definition of Sacra∣ments, thirdly from the example of Christ, fourthly from the end of the Sacraments, fiftly from the testimonies of the ancient Doctours of the Church.
1. From the name, Sacramentum is derived from the verbe sacrare, to consecrate, and signi∣fieth a holy thing, a holy Rite whereby wee are consecrated unto God. Now it is evident that by Baptisme wee give our names to Christ, wee take our militare sacramentum, to fight under his banner, and that thereby wee are sanctified and consecrated to his service: the like wee may ob∣serve in the Lords Supper, wherein wee offer our bodies and soules, as a holy and lively sacrifice un∣to God, we are incorporated into Christs body, and made one bread and one body, because wee partake of one bread, the bread which we breake; Is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? the Cup of blessing which wee blesse, is it not the Communion of the bloud of Christ? In the rest which our Ad∣versaries tearme Sacraments, there cannot bee given the like reason of the name. For by then wee neither put on Christ, as in Baptisme: nor are made members of his mysticall Body, as by the Lords Supper. 2. From the definition of Sacraments; every Sacrament of the New Testament is a seale of the new Covenant.Rom. 4.11. Now it is agreed on all parts that he only hath authoritie to seale the charter, in whose authoritie it is to grant it. But wee find that Christ in the New Testament set only two seales, Baptisme, the Institution whereof wee have, Teach all nations baptizing them,Math. 28.19. in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost; and the Lords Supper, the institution
whereof wee have, hee tooke bread and brake it, saying,Luk 22.19. this is my Body, doe this in remembrance of mee. In these Sacraments wee have all the con∣ditions required, first an outward and visible sign, in Baptisme water, in the Eucharist bread and wine. Secondly, an Analogie or correspon∣dencie betweene the signe and the thing signified, betweene Water which washeth the body, and the spirit which washeth the soule; betweene bread and wine which nourisheth the body, and Christs body and bloud which nourisheth the soule. Thirdly, a promise of sanctifying and sa∣ving grace, to all that use the outward rite accor∣ding to our Lords institution: the promise annex∣ed to Baptisme wee find,Mar. 16.16. Mtch. 26.28. Hee that beleeveth and is baptized, shall be saved; to the Eucharist wee find, this is the bloud of the new Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sinnes,Iohn 6.51. and if any one eate of this bread hee shall live for ever. When our adversaries shall prove in each of their five supernumerarie sacraments, these three conditions wee will subscribe to their whole number of seven, till then wee content our selves with our two. 3. From the example of Christ. Christ our head consecrated in his owne person all those holy rites, which hee instituted for his owne members.Mat. 3.15. This Christ himselfe intimateth, when being repelled by S. Iohn from his baptisme, say∣ing, I had need to bee baptized of thee, and com∣mest thou to mee? He answered, Suffer it to bee so
now, for thus it becommeth us to fulfill all righte∣ousnesse.Serm. de E∣piph. baptizari voluit quia voluit facere quod facien∣dum omnibus imperabat, ut bonus magister doctrinam su∣am non tam verbis insinua∣ret quam acti∣bus exerceret. And S. Austine saith therefore Christ would bee baptized, because hee would doe that which hee commanded all others to doe, that as a good master hee might not so much insinuate his Do∣ctrine by words, as exhibit it by acts. But this our good Master exhibited by acts the doctrine of two Sacraments only, whereof hee participated himselfe: of Baptisme, Math. 3.16. And Iesus when he was baptized, went up straight way out of the water: of the Eucharist; Matth. 26.29. I will not drinke hence-forth of this fruit of the vine, un∣till the day when I drinke it new with you in my Fa∣thers kingdome. Which words necessarily imply that before hee uttered them, hee had drunke of the cup which hee gave to them, saying, Drinke yee all of this. 4. From the end of the Sacraments. We need  but two things to instate us in grace, remission of our sinnes, and ablution; no more to maintaine us in our christian life, but birth, apparell, food and physick: but all these are sufficiently represented, and effectually conveied unto us by two Sa∣craments. For we receive ablution by the one, ab∣solution by the other: wee are bred by the one, wee are fed by the other: wee are clothed by the one, wee are healed by the other. 5. From the testimonies of the ancient Do∣ctours of the Church, S. Austine,L. 2. de Symb. ad catechume∣nos. c. 6. percus∣sum est laetus ut Evangelium loquitur & statim manavit sanguis, & a∣qua quae sunt ccclesiae gemina Sacramenta; a∣qua in quâ sponsa est puri∣ficata; sanguis ex quo inveni∣tur esse dotata. Isid. l. Origin. sunt autam Sa∣cramenta bap∣tismus & Chrisma cor∣pus & sanguis Christi. Rupert. de vict. verb. l. 12 c. 11. quae & quot sunt prae∣cipua salutis nostrae sacra∣menta? Sacrū baptisma, san∣cta corporis e∣jus, & san∣guinis Eucha∣ristia geminum spiritus sancti datum. Pasc. l. de coena dom. sacra∣menta Christi∣anae Ecclesiae Catholicae sunt baptismus, & corpus, & san∣guis Domini. Fulbert. ep. 1. lib. part. Tom 3. tertium est noscere in quo duo vitae sa∣cramenta con∣tinentur. Christs side was strucken, as the Gospell speaketh, and presently there issued out of it water and bloud, which are the
two twin Sacraments of the Church, water whereby the Spouse is purified, and bloud wherewith shee is en∣dowed. S. Isidore, the Sacraments are Baptisme and Chrisme, the body and bloud of Christ. Rupertus, which and how many are the chiefe Sacraments of our salvation? Hee answers two, holy Baptisme and the holy Eucharist of the body and bloud of Christ, the double gift of the holy Ghost. Paschasius, the Catholique Sacraments of the Christian Church, are Baptisme and the body and bloud of Christ. Fulbertus, the way of Christian religion is to be∣leeve the Trinitie and veritie of the Deitie, and to know the cause of his Baptisme, and in whom the two Sacraments of our life are contained. Of all these arguments brought by Protestants the Iesuit could not be ignorant. Yet hee glaunceth only at one of them, to wit, the second which he would make us beleeve to bee an absurd begging the point in question; How can, saith he, Sacraments bee Seales to give us assurance of his Word, when all the assurance we have of a Sacrament is his Word? This is idem per idem, or a fallacie called petitio Principij. As S. Austine spake of the Pharisees, Quid aliud eructarent quàm quo pleni erant, What other things should these Pharisees belch out, then that wherewith they were full: wee may in like manner aske, what could wee expect for the Ie∣suit to belch out against the Knight, then that which he is full of himselfe, sophismes and falla∣cies. That which hee pretends to find in the Knights argument every man may see in his, to
wit, a beggarly fallacie called homonymia. For the Word may be taken either largely for the whole Scripture, and in that sense wee grant the Sacra∣ments are confirmed by the Word, or particular∣ly for the word of promise, and the Word in this sense is sealed to us by the Sacrament: and this wee prove out of the Apostle, against whom I trust the Iesuit dare not argue; what Circumcisi∣on was to Abraham and the Iewes, that Baptisme succeeding in the place thereof, is to vs: but Cir∣cuncision was a Seale to them of the righteousnesse of faith promised to Abraham and his posteritie:Rom. 4.11. therefore in like manner Baptisme is a seale unto us of the like promise. What Bellarmine urgeth against our definition of a Sacrament to whom the Iesuit sendeth us, is refuted at large by Mo∣lineus Daneus, Rivetus, Willet, and Chamier, to whom in like manner I remand the Iesuit, who here desiring, as it seemed, to bee catechised as∣keth, what promises are sealed by the Sacra∣ments? I answer, of regeneration and com∣munion with Christ. His second quaere is, what need more seales then one? or if more, why not seven as well as two? I answer, Christ might adde as many Seales as hee pleased, but in the new Te∣stament hee hath put but two, neither need wee any more, the first sealeth unto us our new birth, the second our growth in Christ. If I should put the like question to the Iesuit concerning the King, what need he more Seales then one? or if he would have more, why not seven as well as two?
I know how hee would answer, that the King might affix as many seales to his Patents, and other grants as hee pleaseth: but quia frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, because two seales are sufficient, the Privie seale, and the broad seale: therefore his Majestie useth no other. Which answer of his cuts the wind-pipe of his owne objection. His last question is a blind one, how may wee see, saith he, the promises of God in the Sacraments? S. Ambrose and S. Austine will tell him by the eye of faith, Magis videtur, saith S. Ambrose, quod non videtur, that is more or bet∣ter seene, which is not seene with bodily eyes; Sa∣craments, saith S. Austine, are visible words, be∣cause what words represent to the eares, that Sacra∣ments represent to their eyes, which are anointed with the eye-salve of the spirit. In the Word we heare, the bloud of Christ clenseth us from our sinnes, in the Sacrament of Baptisme we see it af∣ter a sort in the washing of our body with wa∣ter: in the Word wee heare Chris bloud was shed for us: in the Sacrament of the Eucharist af∣ter a sort we see it, by the effusion of the Wine out of the flagon into the Chalice, and drinking it; In the Word wee heare, that Christ is the bread of life, which nourisheth our soules to eternall life: In the Sacrament after a sort wee see it by feeding on the Consecrated elements of Bread and Wine, whereby our body is nourished, and our tempo∣rall life maintained and preserved. To the fift. In the former Paragraph we han∣dled
those Arguments which the Logicians tearme Dicticall,. in this we are to make good our Elencticall; in the former we proved positively two Sacraments in this privatively we are to ex∣clude, and casheere all that the Church of Rome hath added to these two, which deviseth Sacra∣ments upon so weake grounds, and detorteth Scripture in such sort for the maintenance of them, that a learned Divine wisheth, that as for the remedie of other sinnes, so there were a Sa∣crament instituted as a speciall remedie against audacious inventions in this kind, and depravati∣ons of holy Scripture to countenance them. For of an Epiphonema this is a great mysterie,Ephes. 5.32. they have made a Sacrament, the sacrament of Matrimo∣nie: of a promise, whose sinnes yee remit,Iohn 20.23. they are remitted, they have made a second Sacrament the sacrament of Penance: of an enumeration of the Governours and Ministers of the Church, Ephes. 4.11. And hee gave some, Apostles: some Prophets: some, Pastours: some, Evangelists: some teachers, a third Sacrament, the sacrament of Or∣der: of a relation what the Apostles did, Acts 8.17. In laying hands on them, who received the gift of tongues; a fourth Sacrament, the sacrament of Confirmation: Of a Miracle in restoring the sick to their former health by anoynting them with oyle in the name of the Lord; a fift Sacrament, the sacrament of Extreame Vnction. A child can∣not be bishopped; a single partie contracted; a Priest or Deacon ordained; a penitent reconciled; a dying
man dismissed in peace, without a sacrament, the sacrament of Extreame Vnction. If they take Sacrament in a large sense, for every divine My∣sterie, holy Ordinance, or sacred Rite, they may find as well seventeene as seven Sacraments in the Scriptures: if they take the Word in the strict sense for such a sacred Rite, as is instituted in the New Testament by Christ, with a visible signe or element representing and applying unto us some invisible sanctifying and saving grace; I wish the Iesuit might but practise one of their Sacraments, that is, doe penance so long till hee found in Scripture that, and the other foure Sa∣craments which they have added to the two Insti∣tuted by Christ. To begin with them in order, and give Order the first place, wee acknowledge the ordination of Priests and Deacons by Bi∣shops to be de jure divino, and we beleeve where they are done according to Christs Institution, that grace is ordinarily given to the party ordai∣ned, but not sacramentall grace, not gratia gra∣tum faciens, but gratia gratis data, a ghostly po∣wer for the good of others, not a necessary grace of the Spirit sanctifying and saving the soule of the ordained. Besides, this Sacrament of order is out of order. For it hath no element added to the sanctified forme of words. Yes that it hath (saith Flood) the Host, Chalice, and Patent, or Letters of order. The Bread and Wine, I grant are ele∣ments appointed by Christ, but in another sacra∣ment the Eucharist, not in this, and tis confessed
on all sides, that as in the Sacraments of the old Law, so of the New, the elements must not bee confounded. Neither doth Christ any where command that in the ordination of Bishops, or Priests, such a Rite or Ceremonie should be used: neither doth the Host or Chalice signifie or re∣present the invisible Grace, or Ghostly power then given. And as for the instrument it is a parch∣ment, but no element; it is a legible writing te∣stifying the party is ordained, but no visible signe of an invisible grace; no Seale of the new Co∣venant. For the Patent, Chalice, and Bible, they are not, as before was said, any sacramentall signes of divine grace, but only ensignes and tokens of their severall offices and functions, or instru∣ments that are to bee used in their ministration, besides, every one of these orders is conferred by words and Ceremoniss cleane differing one from another, whereupon it followeth, that ei∣ther none of them is a Sacrament properly so called, or that each of them apart is a Sa∣crament, and so the number of Sacraments will bee neere doubled. Bellarmines evasion De Sacram. ordin. l. 1. c. 8. to wit, that they are all unum genere, and referred to one end will not serve the turne, for so all the other six Sacraments are unum genere, and all referred to one end, to wit, to unite the receivers some way to Christ, or derive some grace from Christ to them, and yet they are not one Sacrament, but as they teach, six distinct species.
For Confirmation, we allow of it as an Aposto∣licall tradition, not as a Sacrament of Divine In∣stitution. For where doth Christ command that those who have heene baptized, should bee after confirmed by a Bishop? Where is an element or forme of words prescribed by Christ as in Bap∣tisme and the Lords Supper? The Iesuit answe∣reth that the element in this Sacrament is chrisme, or oyle. But this cannot bee: because in di∣vers Sacraments there ought to bee divers ele∣ments, and therefore sith Chrisme and oyle is the element in Extreame Unction, which taketh the name from thence, it cannot bee the matter or element in Confirmation. Accedit verbum ad ele∣mentum, saith S. Austine, & fit Sacramentum, the word of promise being added to an element appointed by God maketh a Sacrament. In this we have neither Word nor Element, there∣fore as the Greeke Oratour spake of the evill lawes enacted in his time,Aristot. Rhet. l. 2. , the lawes need a law to mend them: so we may say of this Sacrament of Confirmation, it needeth confirmation and better proofe for it, then yet we see. For Penance, as it is practised at this day in the Roman Church, it is not of divine institution: as it was practised in the Primitive Church, and is at this day in ours is a Divine ordinance, but yet no Sacrament: because we find in it no outward element with a forme of words prescribed by Christ: no visible signe of invisible grace. No
(saith Flood?) is not the true sorrow of heart decla∣red by humble confession, together with prayer, fa∣sting, and Almes-deeds, an outward element, or thing to bee perceived by sense? I answer, that eve∣ry thing perceived by sense, is not presently an element in a Sacrament, it must bee as the Schooles out of S. Austine define a visible signe of invisible grace. Confession and prayer are in∣deed audible, but not visible: Fasting and Almes-deedes are visible, but visible workes of pietie and charitie, not visible elements in the Sacra∣ments: they are morall duties, not sacramentall Rites. For what correspondencie is betweene these, and absolution or remission of sinnes? how doth Fasting or Almes exhibit to the eye this invisible grace? Contrition of the heart of which hee speaketh, is no visible or sensible signe, Confession is sensible, but not vi∣sible, nor ordained as the elements are in Sacra∣ments to signifie the grace of God, but to aske it: The sacred signes ought to be administred by the Priest, but Confession is made by the penitent. The same may be said of corporall satisfactions which are accomplished by the sinner, and com∣monly in his house by fastings, or whippings, or abroad by pilgrimages, whereas sacred signes are to bee administred by the hands of the Priest, and ordinarily in the Church; Absolution also cannot bee a sacred signe of the grace of God, seeing that if it bee good and available, it is the grace of God; besides this Absolution, is not an
element, nor a visible signe of an invisible grace, for the words are not seene: if it be said that it is sufficient, that it is significantly the grace of God, by the same reason the preaching of the Word should bee a sacrament, for it is significantly the grace of God. In all Sacraments the Word must bee joyned to the element; but here they will have the Word to bee an element: the imposition of the Priests hands on the penitent is a visible action, but not a visible element, nor is it institu∣ted by Christ. When the Trent Councell, and the Roman Catechisme come to assigne the matter of this Sacrament, they doe it very faintly with a quasi materia, Sess. 14. de poenit. c. 3. & Catechis. Rom. part. 2. c. 5. They say the actions of the pe∣nitent are, quasi materia, and such as the matter is, such is the Sacrament quasi sacramentum. For Matrimonie, it is a holy ordinance of God, but more ancient then the New Testa∣ment, and therefore can be no seale of it: it was instituted by God in Paradise, not by Christ in the Gospell: yea but (saith the Iesuit) though it were before a naturall contract, yet might it not be exalted by Christ to the dignitie of a Sacra∣ment? I answer, the Iesuit must not dispute what Christ might doe, but what hee did; When hee proveth out of the Evangelists or Apostles, that Christ exalted it to the dignitie of a Sacrament, wee will hold it in that high esteeme, but this hee can never doe: for none of the Evangelists relate that hee altered the Law, or nature of Matrimo∣nie:
but only that hee confirmed it, and honou∣red it with his presence, and the first Miracle which hee wrought. Other exaltation wee find not in the Gospell; And as S. Ierome speaketh in the like kind, quia non legimus, non credimus, be∣cause wee reade it not, wee beleeve it not. Our second exception against the Sacrament of Matrimonie is, that in it there is no outward element sanctified by the Word of promise. To this the Iesuit answereth; the bodies of men and women, are they not as much as an outward ele∣ment? Yes surely as much in quantitie and more too:Bell. l. 1. de matrim. c. 6. Si matrimonium consideretur. Vt jam factum & celebratum conjugati sunt materiale Synbolum & externū cujus refutat. vid. apud Chamie∣rum Panistrat. Cathol. de sacr. l. 4. c. 27. but none ever before this Iesuit and his Ma∣ster Bellarmine maketh mens bodies outward ele∣ments in any Sacrament: the bodies of men and their soules are either the Ministers, or receivers in every Sacrament, not the elements or materi∣all parts thereof. The element in every Sacra∣ment hath the denomination of the whole, as when wee say the sacrament of Circumcision, of the Passeover, of bread and wine: but who ever heard of the sacrament of men and womens bo∣dies. Our third exception against the sacrament of Matrimonie is that if it bee a sacrament con∣ferring grace, as they teach, ex opere operato, why doe they deprive Priests of it? and make them take a solemne vow against it? The Iesuit answe∣reth, that though Mariage bee a holy thing, as Order also is, yet as Order is forbidden to all women, so upon good reason Mariage is forbidden all Priests. Tis true, I grant that all holy things in them∣selves
are not fit for all ages, sexes, and callings. In particular it is no way fit that women should be admitted into holy Orders, because they are forbidden to speake in the Church;1 Cor. 14.34 and it seemeth to bee against the law of nature, that the weaker and more ignoble sex should be appointed to in∣struct and governe the stronger and more noble: but there is not the like reason in Order and Ma∣trimonie.Heb. 13.4. For the Scripture saith, Mariage is ho∣nourable among all; but not that the order of Priesthood is commendable in all men much lesse women. Yet the Iesuit saith, that upon good reason Mariage is forbidden Priests, because is is not agreeable to the high and holy estate of Priest∣hood and religious life. A strange thing that a sa∣crament should not bee agreeable to the most sa∣cred function, that a holy Rite conferring grace should not bee agreeable to a religious life. If Marriage were any disparagement to the holinesse of priesthood, why did God appoint married Priests under the law? and Christ chose married Apostles in the Gospel? Eusebius saith of Spiri∣dion, that though hee were married, and brought up children, et that hee was nothing thereby  hindered or disparaged in his sa∣cred function,Sozom. Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 11. Chrys. in Gen. 5.22. and S. Chrysostome in his Homi∣lie upon those words, Enoch walked with God, noteth it that it is said twice for failing, Enoch walked with God, and begat sonnes and daughters to teach us that marriage is no impeachment to ho∣linesse, or the highest degree of perfection, whereby
wee are said to walke with God. To shut up this point concerning Matrimonie, Cardinal Bellar∣mine teacheth us, that the seven Sacraments an∣swer seven Vertues; Baptisme answereth to Faith, Confirmation to Hope, the Eucharist to Chari∣tie, Penance to Iustice, Extreame Vnction to For∣titude, and Matrimonie to continence or tempe∣rance; if so, then certainly Matrimonie is most a∣greeable to the office of a Bishop or Priest;1 Tim. 3.2. For a Bishop must bee continent and modest, and as it there followeth, the husband of one wife; and unlesse the rules of Logick faile, if Matrimonie hold correspondencie with temperance, the prohibiti∣on thereof, and forced single life must needs an∣swer to intemperance, as the testimonie of all ages proveth it. For Extreame Vnction the lagge of all their Sacraments little or nothing can bee said. For it wanteth all the three conditions requisite to a Sa∣crament: it hath neither element, nor forme of words prescribed by Christ, nor any promise of saving & sanctifying grace. The Apostles indeed used oile, but as a medicine to heale the body, not as a sacrament to cure the soule. As the Apostles used oyle, so Christ spittle in restoring sight to the blind: will they hereupon make spittle an eighth sacrnment? Sacraments ought to be of perpetual use in the Church, whereas the Unction whereof the Scripture speaketh, wherby the sick were mi∣raculously cured, is ceased long agoe; if the Iesuit will not give eare to us, let him yet yeeld so much
respect to Cardinall Cajetan, as to peruse what he commenteth on that text of Scripture on which the Church of Rome foundeth this Sacrament; Is any sick among you,Iames 5.14.15. let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anoyn∣ting him with oyle in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if hee have committed sins they shall bee forgiven him.Cajet. com. in hunc locum neque ex ver∣bis, neque ex effectu, verba haec loquuntur de Sacramen∣tali Vnctione, seu sacramento Extremae Vn∣ctionis sed ma∣gis de Vnctione quam instituit Dominus Iesus in Evangelio à discipulis exercendâ in aegrotis: textus enim non dicit infirmatur quis ad mortem? sed absolutè infirmatur quis? & effe∣ctum dicit in∣firmi aliationem & de remissione peccatorum non nisi conditionaliter loquitur, cum extrema Vnctio non nisi propè articulum mortis detur, & directè ut ejus forma sonat, tendit ad remissionem peccatorum adde quod Iacobus ad unum aegrum multos praes∣byteros tum orantes, tum Vnguentes mandat vocari, quod ab Extremae Vnctionis ri∣tu alicnum est. On these words thus Cajetan inferreth, it cannot bee gathered either from the words, nor from the effect here mentioned, that the Apostle speaketh of sacramentall or Ex∣treame Vnction, but rather of that anoynting which Christ appointed in the Gospell to bee used in hea∣ling the sick, for the Text saith not, is any man sick unto death, but simply is any man sick; and the effect hee attributeth to this anoynting is the ease or raising of the sick; of remission of sinnes he speaks but conditionally, whereas Extreame Vnction is gi∣ven to none but at the point of death, and directly tendeth to remission of sinnes as the forme impor∣teth. Adde hereunto that S. Iames commandeth many Elders to be sent for, both to pray and anoynt the sick, which is not done in Extreame Vn∣ction.
To the sixt. The Knight having shot two ar∣rowes  out of S. Austines quiv er, the one with a head, the other without, yet sharpe pointed: the Iesuit quite concealeth the one, and endeavours to blunt the other. The former hee drew out of S. Austine his treatise de symbolo ad catechumenos, where speaking of Baptisme and the Lords Sup∣per, he saith, haec sunt Ecclesia geminae Sacramen∣ta, these are the two twin Sacraments of the Church. To this the Iesuit answereth, ne gry quidem.De latere in cruce pen∣dentis lanceâ percusso sa∣cramenta Ec∣clesiae profluxe∣runt. To the other taken out of the 15. tract vpon S. Iohn, that out of the side of Christ the Sacraments of the Church issued, he would seeme to answer some∣thing. First he quarrelleth at the quotation, say∣ing, I doe not thinke you will find in Chemnitius your good friend. S. Ambrose and Bede cited, Whereunto I answer, that though the Knights good friend Chemnitius cite not Ambrose and Bede, yet the Iesuits good friend Card.De Sacram. in gen. l. 2. c. 27. Amb. l. 10. in Luc. & Bed. c. 19. Ioh. in∣telligunt per sanguinem qui è latere efflux∣it redemptionis pretium, & per aquam baptismum. Bellarmine citeth them both, his words are, Ambrose in his tenth booke upon S. Luke, and Bede in his comment upon the 19. of S. Iohn understand by blood which issued out of our Saviours side the price of our re∣demption, by water Baptisme. Next the Iesuit en∣deavoureth to untwist this triple cord, by saying that these three Fathers speake of Sacraments is∣suing out of Christs side, but no way restraine the number to two. Whereunto I reply, that though the word Sacramenta for the number may bee as well said of seven as two Sacraments: yet where S. Austine alludeth to the same text of
Scripture, and falleth upon the same conceite, he restraineth the number to two, saying, there issued out of Christs side water and blood, quae sunt Ec∣clesiae gemina Sacramenta. Now I would faine know of the Iesuit where ever hee read gemina to signifie seven, or more then two? Were the Dioscuri which are commonly knowne by the name of gemini seven, or two only, to wit, Ca∣stor and Pollax? As for S. Ambrose and Bede though they say not totidem verbis, that the two Sacraments of the Church issued out of Christs side, as S. Austine doth: yet they can bee under∣stood of no more then two Sacraments: for there were but two things which issued out of our Saviours side, to wit, water and blood, whereby they understand Baptisme and the Lords Supper. Had there issued out of our Saviours side, toge∣ther with water and blood Chrisme or balsamum, or had a rib beene taken from thence, the Iesuit might have some colour to draw more Sacra∣ments out of it: but now sith the Text saith there issued onely two things, water and blood; and the Fathers say the Sacraments of the Church are thereby meant: it is most apparant that by Sacra∣menta they meant those two only: which they there name in expresse words, Baptisme and the price of our redemption, that is Christs blood in the Eucharist. To the seventh. The authoritie of S. Ambrose is as a thorne in the Iesuits eye, for it cannot but bee a great prejudice to their cause, that so lear∣ned
a Bishop as S. Ambrose, writing six bookes professedly of the Sacraments omitteth the Ro∣mish five, and spendeth his whole discourse upon our two. If the Church in his time beleeved or administred seven Sacraments, hee could no way be excused of supine negligence for making no mention at all of the greater part of them: it were all one as if a man professing to treate of the ele∣ments, or the parts of the world which are foure, or of the Pleiades or the Septentriones, or the Planets which are seven should handle but two of that number. Bellarmine therefore and after him Flood pluck hard at this thorne, but cannot get it out (saying that S. Ambrose his intent was to instruct the Catechumeni only, as the title of one of the books sheweth.) For first S. Ambrose hath no booke of that title, viz. An instruction to them who are to bee catechized, or are beginners in Chri∣stianitie. The title of that booke is De ijs qui ini∣tiantur, of those who are initiated or entred into ho∣ly mysteries. Secondly, this is not the title of any of the six bookes de sacramentis alledged by the Knight, but of another tractate. Thirdly, admit that S. Ambrose, as S. Austine and Cyrill wrote to the Catechumeni, and intended a Catechisme: yet they were to name all the Sacraments unto them, as all Divines usually doe in their Catechismes: because the Sacraments are alwayes handled a∣mong the grounds, and principles of Christian religion. And though the Catechumeni are not presently admitted unto all, yet they are to learne
what they are, that they may bee the better pre∣pared in due time to receive them. Fourthly, it is evidently untrue (which the Iesuit saith) that S. Ambrose writeth not to the beleevers of that age, but only to some beginners. The very front of his booke proves the Iesuit to bee frontlesse. For S. Ambrose his first words are, I will begin to speake of the Sacraments which wee have recei∣ved, &c. In Christiano enim viro prima est fides, for the first thing in a Christian man is faith. And as hee writeth to all beleevers not beginners on∣ly, so hee speaketh also of the chiefe Sacraments of the New Testament, and not of those only which the catechumeni received, as is apparant out of the fourth chapter of the first booke De sacra∣mentis. Wherein hee proveth according to the title of that Chapter, Quòd sacramenta Christia∣norum diviniora sint, & priora quàm Iudaeorum, That the Sacraments of the Christians are more an∣cient and more divine then those of the Iewes; and hee instanceth especially in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Lastly, the Iesuit in this answer apparantly contradicteth himselfe, first, saying that S. Ambrose intent in that Worke was only to instruct the catechumeni in those things that were to be done in the time of Baptisme,P. 210. and with∣in a few lines after he saith,Bud. deasse, Ve∣ritas nonnun∣quam invitis erumpit ac fallens inter mendacia ab audientibus de∣mum agnosci∣tur cum inte∣rim loquentes adhuc se habere in potestate putent. that he writeth of the Sacraments whereby they were so initiated which are three, Baptisme, Confirmation, and the Eucha∣rist. So true is Budaeus his observation, That lyes dash one with the other, and truth breakes out of
the mouth of the lyar ere hee is aware. Who ever heard of rhe Eucharist to bee administred in the time of Baptisme, or that the Eucharist was administred at all to the punies or catechumeni whilest they were such, certainly if the catecu∣meni or younger beginners, to whom hee saith S. Ambrose wrote, were capable of the doctrine of the Eucharist, containing in it the highest myste∣ries of Christianitie, they were much more capa∣ble of Penance, Matrimonie, and Extreame Un∣ction, which are easie to bee understood by any novice in Christian religion. To the eight. That it may appeare what was  the judgement of S. Austine in this maine point of difference, betweene the Reformed and the Ro∣man Church, I will weigh what is brought on both sides, first what the Iesuit alledgeth for se∣ven: and then what the Knight for two. S. Au∣stine having written divers Catechisticall trea∣tises, in which hee had occasion to name and handle the Sacraments: yet no where defineth the number of them to bee seven, neither nameth all of them either joyntly or severally: this the Iesuit knowing well enough, bringeth no one testimonie for the proofe of their seven Sacra∣ments out of him, but forceth only some senten∣ces to prove out of them that hee held more then two, as namely out of his first Sermon upon the 103. Psalme, Cast thine eyes upon the gifts or of∣fices of the Church in Baptisme, the Eucharist, and the rest of the holy Sacraments, and Epist. 118.
having brought in two Sacraments, Baptisme and the Lords Supper, hee addeth such a generall clause, and if there bee any thing else commended in holy Scriptures; which words of his import that hee held more sacraments then Baptisme and the Lords Supper, in that very sense wherein those two by him named are called Sacraments. I answer, S. Austine in neither of these places ta∣keth the word Sacrament in a strict sense: but in a large for every sacred rite commended in Scrip∣ture, or gift and office of the Church. As for the word coeteris, the Iesuit insisteth upon: it impor∣teth only a generical convenience and similitude not a specificall; and so wee acknowledge that there are many sacred rites in the Church, which agree with Baptisme and the Lords Supper in the genericall notion of Sacraments: but not in the specificall as the word Sacrament is taken for a peculiar seale of the New Testament, having thereunto annexed a promise of justifying grace. Now let us weigh what the Knight alledgeth out of S. Austine for two Sacraments only,De doct. Chris. l. 3. c. 9. Our Lord (saith that Father) and his Apostles have delive∣red unto us a few Sacraments in stead of many, in performance most easie, in signification most excel∣lent, as is the Sacrament of Baptisme and the Lords Supper. To disappoint this testimonie, the Iesuit first layeth corruption and falsification to the Knights charge, because S. Austines words are signa pauca, not sacramenta. Which is nothing but a meere cavill, for signa and sacramenta are in
S. Austine no other then synonima, by signa hee can meane no other then sacramenta. For he in∣stanceth there in no other, neither did Christ de∣liver unto us any other signa or sigilla but these two. Yes, saith the Iesuit, for it is plaine by the word sicut, that hee bringeth in Baptisme and the Lords Supper for example only, and doth not re∣straine the signa to these two. It is not plaine, for sicut bringeth in an example be it one, or more, neither can wee from thence inferre that there are more. For S. Iohn speaking of our Saviour saith, vidimus gloriam ejus sicut unigeniti filij Dei, Wee beheld the glorie as of the only begotten Sonne of the Father. Will the Iesuit from thence inferre that God had more only begotten sonnes? but to expound S. Austine out of himselfe those signes or Sacraments which here hee calls a few, in his 118. Epistle hee tearmes most few (Sacramentis numero paucissimis) surely seven Sacraments are not numero paucissima, fewest in number, but two are so: and therefore in his booke De symbolo ad catechumenos, he tearmeth them gemina Ecclesiae sacramenta; which passage the Iesuit taketh no notice of, because hee could give no answer at all unto it, yet hee setteth a good face upon the matter saying, this may suffice for such testimo∣nies as were alledged out of S. Austine. Of all the Roman Captaines I cannot liken him fitter to a∣ny then to Terentius Varro, who though hee fought so unhappily against Hanniball at Cannae, that hee lost 40000. men upon the place, yet hee
seemed to bee little daunted therewith, and the Roman Senat sent him publike thankes, quòd de republicâ non desperâsset, that hee despaired not of the Common-wealth. To the ninth. The authour of the treatise De ablutione pedum, who was farre later then S. Cy∣prian, mentioneth indeed five sacraments which are more then two, yet lesse then seven, and for those five hee nameth, it is evident hee intended not that they were Sacraments in a strict sense. For one of them is ablutio pedum, which if it bee a Sacrament in the proper sense, then hath the Ie∣suit an eighth sacrament as himselfe is sapientum octavus. Not so, saith hee, for ablutio pedum which that Authour meaneth is the sacrament of Penance. Then belike Peter and the Apostles did Penance whilest Christ washed their feet. Al∣though there may lie hid some mysterie in that ablution, and therefore it may bee tearmed a Sa∣crament in a large sense,L. 2. de sac. c. 24. as Bellarmine expoundeth that authour. Yet our Lord himselfe revealeth unto us no other mysterie, nor maketh any other inference from it then a patterne of humilitie,Ioh. 13.14. If I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one anothers feet. Yea but (saith Flood,) the authour speaketh of another Laver after Baptisme, and what can that bee other then Penance? He speaketh of another laver, not of another Sacrament, which laver is no other then the laver of penitent teares. But dicis causa, let ablutio pedum be Penance, yet wee have but foure
Sacraments mentioned by this Author, what be∣commeth of the other three? To this hee answe∣reth that the Authour mentioned not them, because his scope was in that place to speake of such Sacra∣ments as had relation to our Saviours last Supper. A ridiculous evasion, for what relation hath Bap∣tisme, or Penance, or Confirmation, or order to our Lords Supper? But the Iesuit like a Lawyer that hath taken his fee of his Client, thought himselfe bound in conscience to speake some∣thing in behalfe of this Authour, though no∣thing at all to the purpose, like Erucius in Tully, Ego quid acceperim scio, quid dicam nescio.Cic. pro Rosc. Amer. To the tenth. The Iesuit in his answer to S. Isi∣dore bewrayes extreame negligence. For the  Knight quoting S. Isidore at large in his sixt book, and not naming any chapter, this Desultorius Miles posting through one chapter, and finding not the words there, chargeth the Knight with falsification; whereas in the chapter immediatly following, to wit, the 19. according to the later edition of S. Isidore (but in the 18. according to the former) the testimonie alledged by the Knight is found in expresse words, and Baptisme, Chrisme, and the Lords Supper reckoned by him for the Sacraments of the Church there, without ad∣dition of any other; If hee had held seven sacra∣ments, questionlesse in that place hee would have named all, or at least the major part of them. The Iesuit applieth a plaister to this sore, to wit, that else-where the same Father mentioneth Penance
and Matrimonie. But the plaister is too narrow, and the salve of no vertue at all. First, it is too narrow, for though Penance and Matrimonie be added to Baptisme, Chrisme and the Lords Sup∣per, we have yet but foure (or if we take Chrisme not for a Ceremonie used in Baptisme but a di∣stinct Sacrament from it) at the most, but five: wee are still out of our reckoning, wee heare no∣thing of Order and Extreame Vnction. Second∣ly, as the plaister is too narrow, so the salve spread on it is of no vertue at all. For though S. Isidore compareth Penance to Baptisme in respect of the effect thereof, viz. washing away of sinne, yet he maketh not thereby Penance a Sacrament. Whatsoever washeth away sinne is not therefore a Sacrament,Acts 15.9. Faith purifieth the heart, as the Apo∣stle speaketh;Luk. 11.41. and Christ himselfe saith, doe Almes, and all things shall bee cleane unto you; Yet doth it not from thence follow, that either Faith or Charitie are Sacraments. For Matrimo∣nie he saith indeed there are three boones or good things in it, or as the Iesuit translateth the words, three goods of it, fides, proles & sacramentum, faith, issue, and a Sacrament, but by sacrament there hee understandeth the great mysterie of the union of Christ with his Church, whereof Ma∣trimonie is a signe, and hee alludeth to the words of the Apostle,Ephes. 5.34. , this is a great mysterie,Apoc. 17.17. I will tell thee the mysterie of the woman and of the beast. which the Latine interpreter translateth sacramentum, as hee doth also the sacrament of the woman, and as strongly might they conclude out
of him,So S. Aug. de peccauerit & remiss. l. 1. c. 26 calleth bread which was gi∣ven to the Ca∣tecumeni an holy Sacra∣ment, and in Psal. 44. the mysteries of Christian reli∣gion Sacra∣menta doctri∣nae. that the Whore of Babylon is an eight Sa∣crament, as Matrimonie is the seventh. In our booke of Homilies Mariage is called a Sacrament as all sacred Rites may in a large sense. The Iesuit should have proved according to his undertaking pag. 202. that Mariage is a Sacrament in a strict sense, but his proofes are as his honesty is at large. To the eleventh. Hallensis lived in a darke age, yet in this point hee saw some light through a chinke, whereby he discovered that three of their supposed Sacraments, to wit, Order, Penance,  and Matrimonie had their being before the New Testament,Part. 4. q. 5. memb. 2. and consequently were not to bee said properly the Sacraments of the new Law: and hee giveth us also a sufficient reason to ex∣clude the fourth, to wit, Confirmation; because as hee teacheth, the forme and matter thereof were not appointed by our Saviour, but by the Church in a Councell held at Melda. Yea but saith the Iesuit hee addeth, sine praejudicio dicendum, let this bee spoken with leave, adding, let us heare but such a word from the Knights mouth, and hee shall see the matter will soone bee ended. For answer whereun∣to I say, first, that the words of Hallensis, sine praejudicio, no whit prejudice the truth of his as∣sertion: but only shew the modestie of the man. Next, for the Knight, whosoever peruseth his Booke with the Preface, shall find that hee spea∣keth farre more modesty and submissively then Hallensis here doth,Part. 4. q. 5. memb. 7. art. 2. Sed tumor Iesuitae non capit illius modum. What Hallensis concludeth that
there be neither more nor fewer then seven Sa∣craments, maketh little against us, for he neither addeth Sacraments properly so called, nor Sa∣craments of the new Law, in quibus vertitur car∣do quaestionis; if the Iesuit so expound Hallensis he maketh him contradict himselfe, and so utter∣ly disableth his testimonie. For all Sacraments properly so called of the new Law must be insti∣tuted by Christ, the authour of the new Law, which Hallensis denieth of Confirmation. A∣gaine, they must have their being by the new Law, not before which hee affirmeth of three of the seven Sacraments as I shewed before. To the twelfth. Wheresoever the Knight ma∣keth mention of Hugo, the Iesuit maketh an hi∣deous noise like an hue and cry, you say, saith the Iesuit,P. 231. of Hugo, that hee excludeth Penance from the number of the Sacraments and admitteth holy water. For both which Sir Humphrey a man may hold up his finger to you, and wagge it, you know what I meane, &c. The Knight knoweth well what you meane, and also what manner of men they are, who hold up their finger in such sort, viz. fooles or mad-men, utrum horum mavult accipi∣at. Is it a matter that deserveth such hooting to al∣ledge Hugo de sancto victore out of Master Perkins in his Problemes a most learned worke, against which never a Papist yet durst quatch. How ma∣ny hundred testimonies doe Bellarmine and Baro∣nius, and this Iesuit alledge at the second hand? Were the allegation false, Master Perkins must
beare the blame, who misquoted Hugo, not the Knight, who rightly alledgeth Master Perkins, but the Iesuit neither doth nor can disprove the allegation, but out of another booke of Hugo he alledgeth a passage for seven Sacraments, which yet as I shall shew hereafter may well stand with that which Master Perkins alledgeth out of him against Penance. But before I expound Hugo, I wish the reader to observe in the Iesuit, how true that is which the Naturalists relate concerning Serpents, that the more venemous they are,Plin. l. 8. c. 23. Aspidi hebetes oculi dati, eos{que} non in fronte sed in tempori∣bus habet. the shorter sighted they are. Hee who odiously and malitiously chargeth the Knight with a false quo∣tation in this very place falsly quoteth the same Authour himselfe. For the words hee alledgeth out of him, to wit, that there are seven principall Sacraments of the Church, are not found in the booke he quoteth, viz. speculum de myst. Eccles. c. 12. It is true such like words are found in another Treatise of his, to wit de sacramentis, but this neither excuseth the Iesuits negligence, nor helpeth at all his cause. For he that saith there are seven principall Sacraments, implieth that there are more then seven, though lesse principall. Either Hugo taketh the word Sacrament in a large or strict sence: if in a large, he contradicteth not us; if in a strict sence, he contradicteth the Iesuit and the Trent Fathers, for they teach there are no more then seven Sacraments, whether principall, or not principall. Hugo reckoning seven as prin∣cipall tacitly admitteth other as lesse principall.
Yet the Iesuit singeth an Iôpoean to himselfe, and most insolently insulteth upon the Knight,P. 231. say∣ing, Bcause you may lesse doubt of Penance, whereof for thus abusing your authour and reader you de∣serve no small part, he hath a particular Chapter, wherein hee calleth it as wee doe with S. Ierome the second board after shipwrack, and saith that if a man endanger his clensing which hee hath received, by Baptisme he may rise and escape by Penance. How say you to this Sir Humfrey? have I not just cause to tell you your owne? Agreed, suum cui{que} let the Iesuit tell the Knight, and I will tell the Iesuit his owne; the Knight neither holdeth with the do∣ctrine of Merit, nor the sacrament of Penance; the Iesuit who holdeth both may by his beliefe merit their holy sacrament of Penance, for egre∣giously abusing Hugo de Sancto Victore, and S. Ie∣rome and his reader, by making a Sacrament of a metaphor, and out of them arguing thus wood∣denly against the Knight. Hugo hath a particular chapter wherein hee calleth Penance as wee doe with S. Ierome, the second boord after shipwracke, Ergo, Penance is a Sacrament of the new Law; doth he not deserve for concluding so absurdly, to have the character of his owne sacrament in∣delebly imprinted upon his flesh. To the thirteenth. The Knight alledgeth not Bellarmine nor Hugo, nor Peter Lumbard, nor Bo∣naventure, nor Hallensis, nor Altisiodorensis, nor Suarez himselfe as if they expresly and in direct tearmes denied Extreame Unction to bee a sacra∣ment:
this they doe not, neither as things stood with some of them might doe safely, the Roman Church having defined the contrarie. Yet so great is the force of truth, that what in words they affirme they consequently deny;Suar. tom. 4. disp. 39. sect. 2. nonnulli negârunt hoc sacramen∣tum fuisse à Christo institu∣tum ex quo planè sequeba∣tur non esse verum sacra∣mentum. and thus much Suarez ingenuously confesseth; some, saith hee, have denied that this Sacrament was instituted by Christ, whence it followeth by plaine consequence that it is no true Sacrament. Yea but saith Flood, if those Schoole-men had lived in this age, they would have said that Christ did institute it. Whereunto I answer, that all Iudgements pro∣ceed ex allegatis & probatis, not allegandis & pro∣bandis upon things alledged, and proved not upon things to be alledged and proved in future times, neither is it likely that they would have altered their opinion, upon notice of the Trent decision, for if the Church of France, and divers other Romish Catholiques, as they tearme them, sub∣mit not at this day to all the Decrees of that Councell: much lesse may it bee thought that those ancient and acute schoole Divines, who bare the greatest sway in their times, would have suffered themselves to be baffled by the pretence of a pettie Councell, charging her canons with no∣thing but paper-shot. Every Sacrament of the New Testament is supported with two pillars, institu∣tion by Christ, and a promise of justifying grace annexed to the due receivers thereof set downe in Scripture, the former pillar the ancient Schoole∣men take from Extreame Unction: the later Bel∣larmine
and Cajetan, how then can it stand? The Iesuit answereth upon a third pillar unwritten tra∣dition. But this I have proved before to be a weak and rotten one: and to speake the truth it serveth Papists as pons Asinorum did the ancient Logi∣cians to which they fly for shelter, when all other helpe faileth them. Albeit they bragge much of Scripture, yet upon examination of particulars it will appeare, that their new Trent Creed consi∣sting of twelve supernumerarie Articles, hath no foundation at all in Scripture: and therefore they are forced for their support to fly to verbum Dei non scriptum, an unwritten word of God, which I would faine know of them how they prove to be Gods word? Whether by Scripture, or by unwritten tradition? by Scripture they cannot say, for it implies a flat contradiction, that ver∣bum non scriptum should be scriptum, that unwrit∣ten traditions should be found in, or founded on Scripture; if they say they prove it to bee Gods word by tradition, then they prove idem per i∣dem the same thing by it selfe, and build their faith upon a sillie sophisme called petitio principij, the begging the maine point in question. To the fourteenth. In the allegation of Car∣dinal Bessario the Iesuit chargeth the Knight with ambiguous translation,P. 225. and so placing the words, that they may have a double sence, the one to deceive the simple, and the other to excuse him∣selfe against the objections of the learned: and for this he pronounceth a woe against him, vae
peccatori terram ingredienti duabus vijs, Woe to the sinner going on the earth two wayes: But the truth is, as Pentheus after he was distracted, ima∣gined, duplices se ostendere Phoebos,Orestes apud Euripidem E∣lectram soro∣rem appellat Furiam, quòd eam ne fureret in lecto con∣stringeret. that hee saw two Sunnes, when yet there was but one in the skie: so the Iesuit in a fit of frantick malice, ima∣gined the Knight to goe two wayes whereas hee goeth but one, and that a faire and streight way, for he setteth the Latine words of the Cardinall without any adition or detraction in the mar∣gent, haec duo sola sacramenta in Evangelijs ma∣nifestè tradita legimus, and hee translateth them faithfully: wee reade that these two Sacraments only were delivered us plainly in Scriptures; hee rende∣reth not the words we reade plainly in Scriptures, that there were two only Sacraments delivered unto us, which had beene a misplacing of Bessa∣rions words, and mis-interpretation of his mea∣ning, bu wee reade that these two only were plainly delivered in the Gospell; there is no more ambi∣guitie in the translation then in the originall, which though it denieth not that other Sacra∣ments may bee delivered in the Gospell, yet it affirmeth that these two only are plainly delivered there, and consequently that these two only are, de fide, matter of faith, and upon paine of damna∣tion to be beleeved; for as I proved before out of S. Austine, and S. Chrysostome, all things that con∣cerne faith and manners, and are necessarie to sal∣vation are plainly delivered in holy Scriptures. To the fifteenth. Some Papists as Flood con∣fesseth,
denie the foure inferiour Orders to be Sa∣craments,P. 234. and Soto denieth the superiour, what a confusion is here in your sacrament of order? If the ordination of Bishops be not truly and pro∣perly a Sacrament, as Dominicus Soto acknowled∣geth, neither is the ordination of Priests a Sacra∣ment; for what can be alledged more for the one then the other? and if the ordination of Priests be no sacrament, much lesse Deacons, or subdea∣cons or Acolytes or Exorcists. Whether there be the same character imprinted in the ordination of Bishops, and Priests, it is not materiall to our present question, for if it be the same, then it fol∣loweth according to the doctrine of the Schooles, that they are one and the selfe-same Sacrament: if a diverse character bee imprinted by the one, and by the other, then are they two distinct Sacraments. If they are the same Sacra∣ments, then Soto denying the one, consequently denieth the other to bee a Sacrament: if they are distinct Sacraments, then there are eight Sacra∣ments. Yea but saith the Iesuit, Whether there bee a new character in a Bishop, or the same extended is no matter of faith, and therefore wee are not to dispute with you of it, but keepe you off at the staffes end, or rather out of doores: when you are once ad∣mitted into the Catholique Church, wee may admit you to speake of a Schoole-point or else not. Wee know well that yee are loath that we should heare of your differences among your selves: but the fire of contention cannot bee kept within the
walls of your Schooles, quis enim celaverit ig∣nem? Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo, it breaketh out, and if ye looke not to it, it will set on fire the whole fabrick of your Romish Babel. Meane while the Iesuit giveth us great incou∣ragement to desire to bee admitted into the Ro∣man Church, because then forsooth wee shall have leave to tread the endlesse mazes of scholasti∣call disputes. To the sixteenth. If Soto come short, Durand  commeth home to the point in question, for hee affirmeth that which is alledged by the Knight, and confessed by the Iesuit, that Matrimonie is not a Sacrament univocally, if not univocally, not truly and properly, but equivocally or analogical∣ly. Yea but saith the Iesuit, all acknowledge it for an error in Durand: hee saith all, but hee names none. Surely the Divines of the reformed Church acknowledge it for no error in Durand, but defend it for a truth: and for such Romish Divines that adhere to the Councell of Trent, they are but a faction in the Church, nor is their authoritie more to be urged against the Doctours of the reformed Churches, then the authoritie of the Doctours of the reformed Churches against them: which yet if any should produce against any of the Articles of their new Creed, they would not vouchsafe them so much as a looke. For the definition of the Church in the Councel of Florence, which the Iesuit toucheth upon, it is of little or no authoritie, because that Councell
was not general, nor called by lawfull authoritie, but by the schismaticall Pope Eugenius the fourth, who was deposed by a generall Councell held at Basil. To the seventeenth. Because the Iesuit is for∣bidden by the Popes law to tast of the fruits of Matrimonie, at which it seemes his mouth waters, hee is content to let the tree fall to the ground, for want of support. To Cardinal Cajetan who gave a strong push at it, by denying that it can be pro∣ved to bee a Sacrament. Out of the words of S. Paul Ephesians the fift, hee answereth nothing but with ifs, if it be not proved out of that place it may be out of others, if out of no other, yet out of tradition to his ifs I returne fies; fie for shame that they should bind all their followers under paine of a heavie curse to beleeve this Sa∣crament of Matrimonie, and yet know not where to ground this their beliefe, upon Scrip∣ture or tradition. If it may be proved to bee a sa∣crament out of S. Paul,Ephes. 5. their most learned Car∣dinal Cajetan is out: if it may not be proved out of those words, Cardinal Bellarmine and almost all Papists that wrote since Cajetan are in an er∣rour. The Iesuit holdeth a Wolfe by the eare: hee dares neither hold with Cajetan, nor against him: but puts the matter off with an iff. If it cannot be proved to bee a Sacrament out of that passage, as Cajetan affirmeth, yet it may bee out of other texts. What texts? why doth he not name them? it is a signe hee feareth his coyne is counterfeit, that
hee dare not bring it to the test. If that place which seemeth to make most for his Romish te∣net, make nothing at all, as the acute Schoole∣man, and most learned Cardinal Cajetan confes∣seth there is no likelihood that other texts which have lesse appearance will stand them in any stead, and therefore for his last refuge he flyeth to unwritten traditions, as the old Dunces as I noted before, ad pontem asinorum. To the eighteenth. Canus puts a strong sharpe  weapon in our hands to wound your Trent do∣ctrine concerning Matrimonie,Canus loc. The∣ol. l. 8. c. 5. in materiâ & formâ hujus Sacramenti, viz. Matrimo∣nij statuendâ, adeò sunt in∣constantes & varij, adeò in∣certi & ambi∣gui ut ineptus futurus sit qui in tantâ illo∣rum varietate, & discrepan∣tiâ rem ali∣quam certam, constantem, & exploratam conetur afferre. but withall for∣biddeth us to strike with it, as the Iesuit Flood tel∣leth us, as if we were at his beck, and might not use our weapons as wee list. But let him know, though he be so foolish as to give advantage, wee will not bee so childish as to leave it. If that bee true which he writeth, that the Divines of Rome write so uncertainly of the matter and forme of Matrimonie, that it were folly in any to goe about to reconcile these differences, and determine any thing certaine in the point: we will inferre upon him that it is likewise folly to define Matrimonie to be a Sacrament, for if the matter and forme of Matrimonie bee so unknowne as hee saith, the genus of it must needs be unknowne. For the ge∣nus as Porphyrie teacheth, is taken from the matter,L. de praedicab. c. de genere. and answereth thereunto as the difference is taken from the forme. If the genus be uncertaine, how can it bee an article of faith, that matrimonium is species sacramenti. The whole nature of a thing
consisteth of matter and forme, which if it bee unknowne, the specificall essence is unknowne, and if the specificall essence be unknowne, how can it be ranked in its predicament under its pro∣per genus? what Papist soever therefore defineth Matrimonie, and putteth it under a Sacrament as the proper genus, Canus putteth the foole upon him take it off when you can. To the nineteenth. Vasquez giveth the Iesuits cause not so light a blow (as hee imagineth) in saying that where S. Austine calleth Matrimo∣nie a sacrament, hee taketh the word Sacrament in a large sense, and not in the strict and proper: for if S. Austine bee so to be understood, he held not Matrimonie a sacrament properly so called, but in a large sence onely, and if that were his judgement, we have a great advantage of our Ad∣versaries in the cause. Ffor S. Austine carrieth a great stroake, not only because hee is held the a∣cutest of all the ancient Fathers, and father of all the Schoolemen: but especially, because the Pope in the Canon law professeth Augustinum sequimur in disputationibus, Wee follow for the most part, saith Pope Gelasius, S. Ierome in the interpretation of Scripture, S. Gregorie in matter of moralitie, but S. Austine in point of controversie. Yea but saith Flood, this is but Vasquez his pri∣vate and singular opinion concerning S. Austine. Neither doth the Knight otherwayes urge it then as the singular opinion of a singularly learned Iesuit enforced by evidence of truth, to give over
their chiefest hold of antiquitie in this point the authoritie of S. Austine. Well, be it so saith Flood, Vasquez is so farre for you, yet we have an Oliver for a Rowland, Bellarmine for Vasquez; for this opinion of Vasquez, is contradicted by other Ca∣tholique Divines, and by Bellarmine in particular. Where is then the unitie our Adversaries so much bragge of? two of the greatest Champions of the Pope Vasquez and Bellarmine strive about S. Austine, and the one refelleth the reasons of the other, so that it seemeth our popish Divines are as ill resolved about the proofe of their doctrine, as I shewed before out of Canus, that they were in a wood concerning the doctrine it selfe. More∣over I adde, that though Bellarmine may goe in equipage with Vasquez: yet Vasquez against them more disparageth their cause, then Bellarmine for them helpeth it. For a testimonie from an ene∣mie is of more force for us, then the testimonie of a friend, or rather sworne vassall to the Roman Church can be for them. To the twentieth. Sithence signification is of  the essence of the Sacrament, and Bellarmine will have this signification necessarily to containe in it three things, the Passion of Christ, sanctifying grace, and eternall life. And whereas farther he confesseth that the signification of these three things is most apparant in Baptisme and the Lords Supper. The Knight strongly concludeth out of him that our doctrine concerning two Sacra∣ments is more certaine and evident, then theirs
concerning seven, and consequently that our be∣leefe is safer in this point then theirs. As for that which the Iesuit addeth out of Bellarmine, that the rest of the Sacraments signifie all these things at least implicitly were it true, yet wee had the better of the cause. For our two Sacraments, as it is confessed, signifie these things plainly and evi∣dently; theirs obscurely and implicitly; but in∣deed it is not true that they signifie or represent those things at all. For what representation is there betweene imposition of hands in orders, or joyning of hands in Matrimonie, or confessing sinnes in penance, or chrisme in Confirmation, or oyle in Extreame Unction, and the Passion of Christ, and eternall life? What the Iesuit addeth for conclusion, that the rest of the Knights secti∣on is nothing but such foolish stuffe as hee is wont to talke, without rime or reason, needeth no other answer then this that the Knight indeed from p. 157. to 161. taketh an inventorie of a great deale of foolish stuffe, but it is theirs, not the Knights, to wit, that Christ satisfied the people with five loaves and two fishes which make seven, and that which Andrew said, there is a boy here which hath five loaves and two fishes, must be un∣derstood of the ranke of S. Peters successors,Tyrabosc. pat. Ven. vid. Gen∣tilet examen concil. Trid. l. 4. and that which is added; make the people sit downe, signifieth that salvation must bee offered to them, by teaching them the seven Sacraments. Againe, there are seven Vertues, seven mortall sinnes, seven Planets, the Lord rested the seventh day, seven
dayes thou shalt eate unleavened bread; Balak effered seven Bulls, and seven Rams; and in the Apocalips wee reade of seven Candlesticks, seven Seales, seven Trumpets, seven Angels: Ergo, there are seven Sacraments properly so called, or rather properly so proved. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? Are such arguments the reasons of men, sobriae & vigilantis fidei, as S. Austine speaketh, are they not rather dreames of the seven Sleepers? or as Epictetus spake of arguments against the truth,Ex Humfr. in Vit. Iuelli. Haec sunt infernorum somniorum Phantasmata. Concerning the Communion in both kindes. Spectacles, chap. 9. Section 5. a pag. 242. us{que} ad 259. THe Knight in alledging the Coun∣cell  of Constance touching Com∣munion, in one kind translateth the Latine falsly and absurdly. I con∣fesse that under one kind only all and whole Christ, and the true Sa∣craments are received, as if the Councell had said, omnis & totus Christus, whereas the words are, totus at{que} integer Christus, that is, whole and en∣tire Christ. In bringing this Decree, hee hath brought a staffe
to beate himselfe withall, for the non obstante which hee would joyne with Christs Institution in both kindes, as if the Councell forbid it in both kindes, notwithstanding Christ did so institute it, is not so joyned in the Councell, but otherwise thus; Though Christ did Institute this venerable Sacrament after supper, and administred it in both kinds, yet not∣withstanding this, the approved custome of the Church hath observed, and doth observe, that this Sacrament is not to bee Consecrated after Supper, nor to bee received by the faithfull but fasting; whieh Decree I suppose the Knight will not con∣demne. This was no new thing begun by that Councell, but it being growne to bee a generall practise to com∣municate in one kind, which also from the beginning was somewhat practised, and certaine heretiques arising, and condemning the practise and beliefe of the whole Church; this Councell condemned them, and commanded the former custome to bee still re∣tained. Though Christ did institute the Sacrament in both kindes, yet it is lawfull to receive in one: neither doth the Councell decree any thing against Christs Precept by establishing the Communion in one kind, for Christ may institute a thing without comman∣ding it. For example, hee did institute Mariage, yet commanded not every man to marry. The Councell of Trent doth not any way contra∣dict Christs institution or practise as the Knight would have it: but inferreth only thus much, though
Christ did institute and deliver the blessed Sacra∣ment to his Apostles in both kindes in the last Supper, yet is Christ contained whole and entire in one kind, and a true Sacrament received, wherein saith hee, I would faine see, what opposition the subtiltie of the Knights wit can find? what reason can hee give? why it may not stand with Christ his institution in both kinds, that he be whole under one, and if whole, why not also a true Sacrament? The words, Drinke yee all of this, and doe this  in remembrance of mee were spoken and apper∣taine only to the Apostles, and in them to Priests, as appeareth more plainly by S. Mark, who sheweth all which our Srviour meant of when hee said, Drinke yee all of this, for saith S. Marke, and they did drinke all. Though Christ at his last Supper did institute a  Sacrament in both kindes, and so gave it to his A∣postles: yet Christ might at some other time after his resurrection communicate some of his Disciples in one kind; and some Fathers thinke hee did his two Disciples at Emmaus. The Knight needeth not to produce ten or eleven  Authours to prove it to have beene the practise of the primitive Church, to communicate in both kinds: for that would have beene granted him without all that labour: but hee should have proved that the practise was grounded upon some divine precept indispensable, or else it followeth not, but that it is in the power of the Church to alter the practise in the use, and administration of the Sacrament.
Bellarmine bringeth six severall Rites or pra∣ctises of the ancient Church which Protestants can∣not deny, evidently convincing the frequent use of one kind. The Nazarites among the first Christians in Ie∣rusalem did communicate in one kind, for they were forbid to drinke wine, or even eate a grape or reisin. The Knight in alledging Tapperus against the Communion in one kind, leaveth out the principall verbe, and one halfe of the sentence answering the former, which of it selfe was imperfect, which was the Authours absolute judgement and determination for the whole sentence of Tapper, art. 16. is this, it were more convenient if wee regard the Sacrament, and the perfection thereof to have the Communion under both kindes, then under one: for this were more agreeable to the Institution thereof, and to the integritie of a corporall refection, and the example of Christ; but in another consideration, to wit, of the reverence which is due to the Sacrament, and to the end wee may avoide all irreverence, it is lesse con∣venient, and no way expedient for the Church, that the Christian people should communicate in both kindes. In the lawes of King Edward the sixt revived and confirmed by Queene Elizabeth, it is ordained that the Communion bee delivered to the people un∣der both kindes with this exception, unlesse necessi∣tie otherwise require. That it is not requisite that every article of faith
have sufficient and expresse proofe of Scripture,Dial. 2. cont. Lucifer. etiam∣si sacrae scrip∣turae authori∣tas non sub∣esset, totius or∣bis in hanc partem consen∣sus instar prae∣cepei obtinerct. for as S. Ierome teacheth, although the authoritie of holy Scripture were wanting, the consent of the whole world on this side should have the force of a Precept. The Hammer. IN this Section the Iesuit beginneth merrily with a fiddle, but endeth sadly, and every where answereth sorily. For to omit his omissi∣on of some things that pincht him shrewdly, as namely, first that the Councell of Constance by reason the first Sessions judged the Councell above the Pope, is condemned, and rejected by the Councell of Florence and last Councell of Lateran; but for the last Sessions wherein the halfe Communion is e∣stablished contrarie to Christs precept, and holy in∣stitution, it is allowed by Pope Martine the fift, and rectived of all Catholiques; whereby it appeares that Papists are more tender of the Popes supremacie, then Christs honour; Secondly,De Euchars l. 4. c. 7. that Bellarmine saith, that it is not to be doubted; but that is best and sittest to bee practised that Christ hath done. Now it is evident out of Scriptures, and confessed by the Fathers in the Councell of Constance and Trent, that Christ instituted and administred the Sacrament in both kindes: Lastly, that the Papists in this point apparantly contradict themselves, for they require antiquity, universality, and consent, as
the proper markes of Catholique doctrine, and yet confesse that in this the practise of their Church is contrarie eo the practise of the Primitive Church, nor was it ever received in the true Church, till a∣bove a thousand yeares after Christ.Dichotomived. To let passe these his preteritions, all that hee saith in replie to other passages of the Knights may be dicotomi∣zed into idle cavils, and sophisticall evasions, as shall appeare by the examination of each parti∣cular, To the first. The Iesuit as it should seeme tooke Ennius the Poet for his patterne, who as Horace observeth, Nunquam nisi potus ad arma prosiluit, &c. never undertooke the description of a warre, or set himselfe to write strong lines be∣fore hee had comforted his heart with a cup of strong liquour. For if the French wine had not assaulted his Capitoll, as the Frenchmen did some∣times the Roman: if a strong fume had not made his head so dizzie, that he thought all things be∣fore him went round, hee would never in so seri∣ous a subject as is the Sacrament of Christs blood use such light and comicall saracasmes as he doth; against this saith he, hee bringeth two pla∣ces of Scripture,P. 243. and the practise of the Primitive Church, and so concludeth the antiquitie and uni∣versalitie of his Church, this goeth round with a fiddle Sir Humfrey: if hee had a purpose to make sport to his reader in the merrie pin hee was set on, hee should rather have said your Creed Sir Humfrey goeth round with a crowd. But crowde
or fiddle whether hee please to tearme the lear∣ned discourse of the Knight, I hope it will prove like Davids Harpe, and conjure the evill spirit out of the Iesuit. To fall upon the particulars in order, whereas in the first place hee chargeth the Knight with false and absurd translation of the Decree of the Councell, rendering totus Chri∣stus, all Christ, not whole Christ, and would make us beleeve that all can in no sense bee attri∣buted to Christ; hee forgot that text of the Apo∣stle that Christ is all in all. Surely it should seeme this Iesuit is descended from Pope Adrian, who was choaked with a fly, for what a silly fly choa∣keth him here? The Knight to avoid a tautolo∣gie in translating totus & integer Christus, whole and whole Christ, rendereth the word all and whole Christ, and what falsitie or absurditie is there in this? doth not every punie know that omnis in Latine, and all in English is often taken collectivè, as when wee say Lazarus was covered all over with sores, doe not the Papists themselves sometimes so render the word totus, as namely in those places, I have stretched my armes all the day long to a rebellious people? and all the day long have I beene punished, and all Scripture is given by di∣vine inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righte∣ousnesse that the man of God may bee perfect, throughly furnished to all good workes: In which passages it is most evident that all is taken for whole, and so the best interpreters render ,
tota scriptura, that is the whole Scripture. To the second. The Knight in bringing the Decree of the Councell of Constance, hath not brought in a staffe to beate himselfe withall, but to beate all such Romish curres as barke at the light of the Sunne, I meane the cleare words of Christs institution,Sess. 13. Drinke you all of this. Yet saith that Councell to the Laitie, none of you drinke of this. If Christ had said in like manner, receive you the Communion after supper, we would ne∣ver receive it fasting. It is true that he instituted it the night he was betrayed after supper, which circumstance yet bindeth us not now to receive it at that time: but the argument no wayes fol∣lowes from the change of a circumstance to the change of a substantiall act: the Church may dispence with the one, not with the other. Wee argue not barely from the practise of Christ and his Apostles, but from their doctrine and pra∣ctise. What Christ did and taught, as S. Cyprian soundly collects, must bee perpetually observed in the Church: but he taught and practised the Communion in both kindes, fecit & docuit, hee both did so, and taught us so to doe; but for the circumstances of time, number of Communi∣cants, & gesture sitting or leaning, though at that time he used such circumstances: yet he cōmanded not us to use them, and therefore wee may admi∣nister the Sacrament at another time, to a greater or lesser number then twelve, we may receive it also with another gesture then Christ or his Apo∣stles
used, because he no where tieth us to those circumstances, but wee may in no wise admini∣ster or receive it in one kind, because he comman∣deth us to communicate in both, saying, drinke ye all of this; and what though the Councell joyne not the word notwithstanding to Christs institu∣tion in both kindes, but to his administring after supper: yet this no way excuseth the Fathers in it from confronting Christ, and abrogating his commandement by their wicked Decree: for notwithstanding Christs command, drinke you all of this; that Councell by a countermaund forbiddeth any Priest under a great penaltie to exhort the people to communicate in both kindes, or to teach that they ought so to doe. To the third. If the Iesuits forehead had not beene made of the same metall which hee wor∣shipeth in his images, hee would have blushed to utter so notorious an untruth contrary to the Re∣cords of all ages, and the confession of all the learned of his owne side. Never any before this Iesuit durst to say, that the halfe Communion was the beliefe, and practise of the whole Church before the Councell of Constance, for besides Salmeron, Arboreus, Aquinas, Tapperus, Alfonsus a Castro: the Councell of Constance, Bellarmine and Cassander alledged by the Knight,See grand Sa∣crilcg. Sect. 17: I could adde Estius the Sorbonist, Ecchius the great adversarie of Luther, Suarez their accom∣plished Iesuit, Soto their acutest Schoole-man, and Gregorie de Valentia, who of all other hath most
mok laboured in this argument, all not only affir∣ming, but some of them also confirming that the Communion in both kindes was anciently, and universally administred to the people. It is well knowne that the Easterne Churches in Greece and Asia, and Southern in Africa, and Northerne in Muscovia have ever, and at this day doe admi∣nister the Communion to the Laitie in both kindes: and in the Westerne and Roman Church it selfe for a thousand yeares after Christ and more, the Sacrament was delivered in both kindes to all the members of Christs Church, which is manifest saith Cassander,Cassand. con∣sult. art. 22. by innumerable testimonies of anci∣ent Writers, both Greeke and Latine. And when the new custome of communicating in one kinde began a little before the Councell of Constance,Soto artic. 12. q. 1. in dist. 12. non modo inter haeretieos ve∣rùm inter Ca∣tholicos ritus ille multo tem∣pore invalnit. it was impugned not by heretiques, as Flood would beare us in hand, but by good Catho∣liques, as Soto a man farre before Flood ingenu∣ously confesseth. To the fourth. Albeit I grant there is some difference betweene an institution, or constituti∣on, or command: yet our argument drawne from Christs institution in both kindes is of force a∣gainst the Romish halfe Communion. For a command is, as the genus, and an Institution is as the species, every command is not an institution: but every institution is a command; for what is an institution, but a speciall order or appoint∣ment in matter of Ceremonie or Sacrament? was not the institution of Circumcision an expresse
command to circumcise every male child? was not the institution of the Passeover a command for every familie to kill a Lambe, and eate it with sowre herbes? Was not the institution of Bap∣tisme a command to Baptise all Nations in the name of the Father, Sonne and holy Ghost? Was not the institution of the Lotds Supper by words imperative, Take, eate, doe this in remembrance of mee, and drinke yee all of this? Yea but the Iesuit instanceth in Mariage, which we acknowledge to be instituted by God, yet not commanded. I an∣swer, all sacred Rites (and namely the ordination of Mariage) are injunctions and commands to the Church, or mankind in generall, though they bind not every particular person, but such onely as are qualified for them;Gen. 2.24. if crescite & multipli∣camini, bee rather a benediction upon Mariage, then a command to marrie, yet certainly those words used in the Institution of Mariage, therefore shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they shall bee one flesh, containe da direct command not to every man simply I grant, but to every one that hath not the gift of conti∣nencie. To avoide fornication, saith the Apostle,1 Cor. 7.2. let every man have his owne wife, and let every wo∣man have her owne husband. And againe, if they cannot containe let them marry,V. 9. for it is better to marry then to burne. To the fift. There needs no subtiltie of wit to  find out the opposition betweene the Decree of the Trent Councell and Christs institution; the
dullest wit cannot but stumble upon it. For if whole Christ be received in either kind, why did Christ who doth nothing superfluously, institute the Sacrament in both kindes? If the Sacrament can no otherwise exhibit Christ unto us then by vertue of his Institution, how can wee be assured that whole Christ is communicated unto us, when we violate his institution administring the holy Communion but by halfes? the Sacrament exhibiteth nothing but what it signifieth, but the bread signifieth Christs body not his blood: the wine signifieth his blood, not his bodie; there∣fore accordingly the one exhibiteth only his bo∣dy, the other his bloud. Againe, if Christ bee whole in either kinde, then a man might receive whole Christ in drinking of the cup only, though he eate not at all of the bread, and consequently a man may without sinne at the Lords board drinke only of the Consecrated cup, and not eate of the bread which yet no Papist to my know∣ledge ever durst affirme. To the sixt. This evasion of the Iesuit is ex∣ploded by Philip Morney,De Euch. l. 1. c. 10. & Chamierus tom. 4. resp. Bellar. & in D.F. his conference with Eve∣rard p. 256. and divers others. This may suffice for the present, for the overthrow of this gene∣rall answer of all Papists to the words of the in∣stitution, Drinke you all of this, viz. (that by all in S. Mathew and S. Marke, Priests only are to be un∣derstood.) First I note at this time the Apostles were not fully ordained Priests. For as yet
Christ had not breathed on them, nor given them the power of remission of sinnes: next admit they were Priests, yet in the institution of this Sacrament they were non conficients, supplying the place of meere communicants, and therefore consequently whatsoever Christ commanded them, hee commanded all receivers after them. Thirdly, Christ commanded the same to drinke, to whom before hee said, Take, eate, this is my bo∣dy; but the former words, take, eate, are spoken to the Laye-people as well as Priests, therefore the words drinke you all of this, are spoken to them also,Math. 9.6. those things which God hath joyned to∣gether let no man put asunder. Fourthly, I would faine know of our Adversaries when Christ saith, This is the cup of the New Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sinnes, who are those many? will they say Priests only? have the Laytie no sinnes, or no remission of sinnes by Christ bloud? if they have, as all professe they have, why do they forbid them that which Christ expresly commandeth them, saying, Drinke ye all of this, for it is shed for you and for many. All worthy communicants are to drinke Christs bloud for whom it was shed, thus much Christs reason importeth; but it was shed for the Laytie as well as the Clergie, they therefore are alike to drinke it. If the Laytie expect life from Christ, they must drinke his bloud as well as eate his flesh,Iohn 6.53. for except a man eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, hee hath no life in him.
Lastly,1 Cor. 11.28 when the Apostle enjoyneth all to exa∣mine themselves before they receive the holy Communion, I desire to bee informed by our Adversaries, whether this Precept of examinati∣on concerneth not the Laytie especially? I know they will say it doth, because the people most need examination, that they may confesse their sinnes, and receive absolution for them before they presume to communicate: let them then reade what followeth in the same verse, and so let them eate of that bread, and drinke of that Cup, let a man examine himselfe, and so let him eate of that Bread, and drinke of that Cup: the coherence of the members in this sentence inferreth, that as none are to be admitted without precedent exa∣mination: so that all who have examined them∣selves are to be admitted to the Lords table, both to eate of that Bread, and drinke of that Cup. To the seventh. There is no force at all in the in∣ference which the Iesuit would make from Christ his breaking of bread with the two Disciples at Emmaus, to prove the Communion in one kind, for neither is it likely Christ instituted any sup∣per after his last Supper, neither was the place fit for a Communion being a common Inne: nei∣ther reade wee of any preparation on the Apo∣stles part, nor of any words of institution used then by Christ: neither could the Iesuit alledge any one Father, who saith that Christ at that time administred the Communion to those two Disci∣ples in bread only. For it is well knowne to all
that are acquainted with the language of Canaan, that breaking of bread in Scripture by a Synecdo∣che is taken for making a meale, and it is very unlikely that the disciples travelling at that time of the yeare in so hot a countrey as Iudaea is, when they came to their Inne for a repast, should call for bread only and no drinke. To the eighth. Though the Iesuit make many  a bravado here, and else-where: yet upon the matter in granting to the Knight that the generall practise of the primitive Church was to com∣municate in both kindes, he yeeldeth up the buck∣lers. For the maine scope of the Knight in this and other Sections is to prove the visibilitie of our reformed Church in former ages by the con∣fession of our Romish adversaries: this hee doth in the point of the Communion in both kindes abundantly in this Section, and the Iesuit cannot denie it; it followeth therefore that in this maine point of controversie betweene us and the Church of Rome, wee have antiquitie, universa∣litie, and eminent visibilitie, and the Roman Church none of all: whereby any understanding reader may see that the Knight hath already wonne the day; Yet for the greater confusion of the Iesuit I adde that what the primitive Church did uniformly, they received it from the Apo∣stles, and what the Apostles did joyntly, no doubt they did by the direction of the holy Ghost, according to our Lords will: and so their example amounteth to a Precept. Againe, the
practise of the Catholique Church is the best expositour of Scripture, therefore the question being concerning the meaning of that text of Scripture, Drinke you all of this, whether they concerne the Laytie, or Clergie only, that must bee taken for the true exposition which the Ca∣tholique Church by a constant and vniforme practise hath allowed. Lastly, either this practise of the Catholique Church was grounded upon some divine Precept, or it is a meere will-wor∣ship which the Iesuit dare not say: if it be groun∣ded upon any divine precept undoubtedly upon this, Drinke yee all of this, that is, as well Mini∣sters as Laye people, as Paschasius commenteth up∣on the words. To the ninth. The arguments of Bellarmine drawne from six ancient Rites to prove the fre∣quent use of Communion in one kind are an∣swered at large by Philip Morney, and Chamierus, in the places above mentioned, and they are every one of them retorted against Bellarmine himselfe by D.F. in his booke intituled the Grand sacri∣ledge, cap. 14. accipe quomodo das si tibi machera est, & nobis vervina est, if it be sufficient for him to ob∣ject by proxe, why may not we answer by proxe? To the tenth. To the instance in the Naza∣rites, I answer first, that I read of no other Na∣zarites since Christs time in the writings of the ancient Fathers, then certaine Heretiques so tear∣med of the sect of Ebionites, who went about to cloath the Gospell with the beggarly rudiments
of the Law, upon whom S. Austine passeth this verdict,L. De haeres. ad quod vult De∣um dum vo∣lunt Iudaei esse & Christiani nec Iudaei sunt, nec Christiani. that whilest they laboured to bee both Iewes and Christians, they became neither Iewes nor Christians, but a sect of heretiques, partly judai∣zing, partly Christianizing. Secondly, if there were any Nazarites that sincerely imbraced the Gospell, questionlesse they communicated in both kindes: for though they had vowed against drinking of wine, yet either their Vow was to be understood of drinking it civilly not sacramen∣tally: for their corporall refection, not for their spirituall repast: or if their vow were absolutely against wine, yet Christs command, Drinke yee all of this, implied a dispensation for their Vow in that case. A private vow of any man must give place to a publike command of God: even now adayes those who upon any great distemper of body or mind by wine, vow to abstaine from it, yet make no scruple of conscience to take a small quantitie of it physically for the recoverie of their health: how much more ought they to doe so notwithstanding their vow, if it bee pre∣scribed by the heavenly physician for the cure and salvation of their soules? To the eleventh. Concerning Tapperus the  Knight no way misquoteth him though hee leave out some passages in him; for the truth is Tappe∣rus halteth betweene two opinions, he speaketh some words plainly in the language of Canaan, and o∣thers hee lispeth in the language of Ashdod, where he speaketh in the language of Canaan, as
hee doth most plainly in those his words (if wee regard the Sacrament and perfection thereof, and the integritie of corporall refection, and the exam∣ple of Christ, it were more convenient to have the Communion under both kindes) the Knight hearke∣neth to him: but where hee lispeth in the language of Ashdod, saying, (that in consideration of the reverence due to this Sacrament it is ill and incon∣venient to communicate in both kindes) the Knight had reason to turne a deafe eare to him, for it is cosin germane to blasphemie to say that is ill and inconvenient, which Christ and his Apo∣stles, and the whole Church in all places for more then a thousand yeares practised: the Knight might well say to Tapperus in the words of him in the Poet, , I will be sober with you, but I will not runne madde with you. To the twelfth. For the statute made in the dayes of that Phoenix of his age, King Edward the sixt, the meaning is, unlesse among the people there bee some that either by a naturall antipa∣thie to wine or other infirmitie, cannot receive the Sacraments in both kindes, it is ordained that it be delivered to every one in both kindes, ces∣sante ferreâ necessitate obtinet haec aurea regula, that all receive the whole Sacrament in which the Statute, and the articles of Religion, published first in the reigne of this blessed Prince, fully ac∣cord; For so wee reade Article the thirtieth, both parts of the Lords Sacrament by Christs ordi∣nance
and command ought to bee ministred to all Christian people alike. To the thirteenth. That every article of faith  ought to have sufficient proofe out of Scripture is proved by innumerable testimonies of antiqui∣tie produced by Philip Morney in his Preface to his booke De Eucharistia, Bilson of Supremacie part the fourth Abbot against Bishop, chapter the seventh; and Laurentius de disp. Theolog: Neither doth S. Ierome any way contradict them or us, for wee beleeve that the consent of the whole Christian Church is an infallible argument of truth. Albeit wee teach that any particular Church, as namely the Roman or the French, or the Dutch or the Greeke Church may erre: yet we denie that the catholique Church universally hath ever erred, or can erre in matter of faith ne∣cessarie to salvation: and further I adde for con∣clusion, that as the words of S. Ierome alledged by the Iesuit make nothing against us, so if they bee applied to our present subject they make most strongly against him, being propounded after this manner. Although the authoritie of holy Scripture were wanting for the Communion in both kindes, (which is not so) yet the consent of the whole world, on this side testified by their uniforme practise confessed by Papists them∣selves, ought to have the force of a divine Pre∣cept, and so there would bee an end not only of this Section as the Iesuit speaketh, but of this whole Controversie.
Concerning Prayer in an un∣knowne tongue. Spectacles, Sect. 6. a pag. 259. us{que} ad 283. THe Knight falsly chargeth the Councell of Trent with approving prayer in the vulgar tongue: for though the Councell saith that the Masse containeth great instruction, yet it doth not say that it ought to bee in the vulgar tongue: nay contrarily it pronoun∣ceth an anathema against any whosoever shall say that the Masse ought to bee celebrated in the vulgar tongue. It hath beene the generall practise and custome in the Church of God, of having the Masse, and the publike office in Latine, all over the Latine and Westerne Church, both in Italie, Spaine, France, Germanie, England, Africa, and all other places, and so likewise in Greeke in the Graecian or Ea∣sterne Church, though it were as large in extent, and had as much varietie of languages in it as the Latine Church hath. Vniformitie which is fit to be used in such things and unitie of the Catholique Church is excellently declared, and also much maintained by this unitie of language in the Church office.
The use of vulgar tongues in the Masse or Church  office would cause not only great confusion, but breed an infinite number of errours by many severall translations. The use of vulgar language in such things would  breed a great contempt of sacred things, with pro∣phanenesse and irreligiositie, besides the danger of heresie, which commeth no way sooner then by mis∣understanding of holy Scripture. The place of Scripture alledged by the Knight  concerning announcing our Lords death, is not un∣derstood by words but by deeds, as is most plaine by the circumstances. The text of S. Paul where he asketh how hee that  understandeth not the prayers shall say Amen, is not of the publike prayers of the Church which no man can doubt of, either for the truth or goodnesse, and therefore he may confidently say Amen to them, but of private prayers made by private and Laye men extempore in an unknowne tongue. Haymo requireth not that all that are present at  Divine service should understand, but only that he that supplieth the place of the idiot or Laye-man in answering for the people, should bee so farre able to understand, as to answer Amen at the end of every prayer. Iustinian the Emperour is ordinarily taxed for  taking too much upon him in Ecclesiasticall matters: yet all that hee saith may bee well maintained with∣out prejudice to the present practise of the Roman Church, for in the Decree alledged by the Knight,
hee requireth nothing more, but that Bishops and Priests should pronounce distinctly and clearely that which according to the custome of the Easterne Church was to bee spoken aloud. The Canon law capite quoniam in pleris{que} re∣quireth only that where divers Nations are mingled, that the Bishop of the Citie should substitute one in his roome to celebrate the divine Office, and admini∣ster the Sacraments according to their owne rites and language: for indeed it is a matter of necessitie in administration of some Sacraments to use the vul∣gar language, as in Mariage and Penance, but not so of other things. Lyra, Belithus, Gretzer, Harding, Cassander, and the rest of the Authours quoted by the Knight say indeed, that in the beginning, Prayers were in the vulgar tongue, but the reason was because those three holy languages, Hebrew, Greeke, and La∣tine dedicated on the crosse of Christ, were then most vulgar, none of them speake a word of any Precept. There is no precept in the Scripture commanding prayers in a knowne tongue, or forbidding in an unknowne, whose authority or example can you bring for your selfe in this matter? name him if you can. It was more needfull in the Primitive Church that the people should understand, because they were to answer the Priest, which now is not so as Bellarmine noteth, because that belongs only to the Clarke. That the Knight contradicteth himselfe in one place, saying▪ That the alteration of the Church ser∣vice was occasioned by certaine Shepheards, who in
the dayes of Honorius having learned the words of Consecration by heart, pronounced them over their Bread and Wine in the fields, and thereby Transubstantiated them into flesh and bloud, and for this prophane abuse were strucken dead by the hand of God. In another place hee saith, that the alteration was brought in by Pope Vitalian about the yeare 666. which cannot well agree with his former observation, for Honorius the first was the sixt Pope before Vitalian, by which computation the alte∣ration must have beene fourescore, or a hundred yeares before Vitalian. The Hammer. AMong the knowne errours of the Roman Church, there is none more grosse or palpably absurd, then this concerning Prayers in an unknowne tongue; For as Velleius the Epicure in Tully, goeth about to maintaine by reason that it had beene better a man had not beene indued with reason then with it: so in this argument our Adversaries in good earnest strive cum ratione insanire, to prove by reasons, that it is best to exhibit to God an unreasonable service to speake understandingly for speech without un∣derstanding, and that in the publike worship of God: to perswade civill men that in their prayers the Priest ought to bee a Barbarian to the people, and the people to the Priest, In a word, to enforce
the people instead of offering the calves of their lippes to God, to offer to him the lippes of calves bel∣lowing without understanding. The Knight therefore upon very just reason taketh the Church of Rome to taske for this unsufferable abuse, and undeniable aberration from the Primi∣tive, and catholique Church. Wherein he con∣foundeth all Papists not only with pregnant testi∣monies of Scripture, and ancient Fathers, but al∣so with the confession of the learnedest of their side. Yea, but Flood the Iesuit maketh great brags that he will reckon with him for it; and reckon he doth according to his best skill in Arithmeticke, but to halves, for the Knight presseth the Roma∣nists with the historie of the Councell of Trent, and the contradictions of their Bishops there, and other passages of moment which the Iesuit si∣lently passeth by, being willing to charge him∣selfe with no more then he thought he was faire∣ly able to put off. What he saith either by way of objection against the practise of the reformed Churches, or in answer to our arguments shall be particularly discussed in my replie to his par∣ticular heads. To the first. The Knight saith not that the Councell of Trent approveth in expresse and di∣rect words the practise of our Church,Concil. Trent. Sess. 22. c. 8. but that by consequence it doth so in saying the Masse containeth great instruction for the common people, and commanding that the Masse-Priest, or some other should frequently expound or declare unto
them the mysteries of the Masse: for if the Masse containe as the Councell saith great instruction for the people, and for that end ought to bee ex∣pounded unto them, by the same reason it ought to be translated into the mother-tongue, and so read unto them; Unlesse they will say that the people receive as much instruction from that they understand not, as from that they under∣stand.In 1. ad Cor. c. 14. melius ad edificationem ecclesiae est ora∣tiones publicas quae audiente populo dicuntur dici linguâ communi cleri∣cis & populo quam dici lati∣nâ. Contar. in ca∣tec. interrogat ult. populus lin∣guâ non intel∣lectâ orans ca∣ret eo fructu quem percipe∣ret, si orationes eas quas ore pro ferunt, eti∣am intellige∣rent nam & speciatim in∣tenderent ani∣mum, & men∣tem in deum, ut ab eo impe∣trarent etim speciatim ea quae ore petunt, & magis aedifi∣carentur ex sensu pio earum orationum quas ore proferunt. Which none will say but he that were a degree below S. Pauls idiot. Doubtless that which was written and appointed to bee read before the people for their instruction, and edification, ought to be delivered unto them in a language which they understand: but the Masse was writ∣ten and appointed to bee read before the people for their edification and instruction (as the Councell agnizeth) therefore it ought to be ce∣lebrated in a knowne tongue. This reason alone prevailed so far with two Roman Cardinals, Ca∣jetan and Contarenus, that they subscribed to the doctrine of the reformed Church in this point. The former his subscription is in these words, It were better for the edification of the Church, that the publique prayers which are made in the audi∣ence of the people should bee said in a tongue com∣mon to the Priest and people, then that they should bee said in Latine. The other in these words, The people that prayeth in an unknowne tongue wanteth that fruit which they might reape, if they under∣stood those things which they pronounce with their lips, for they would in a speciall manner apply their
mind to God, that they might obtaine of him those things which they pray for especially, and they would bee more edified by a godly feeling of those prayers which they utter with their mouth. To the second. The generall practise and cu∣stome of the Westerne Church, having their publike service in Latine, and of the Easterne Churches, having their service in Greeke, maketh for us, not against us. For the Latine service was generally understood in the Westerne Church, and the Greeke in the Easterne; when and where it was not so generally understood they had their service in their Mother-tongue, as namely among the Syrians, Armenians, Russians, Egyptians, Ae∣thiopians. While the Roman Empire flourished, and the Imperiall lawes bare the sway, as namely in Italie, Spaine, France, Germanie, England, A∣frica, and wheresoever the divine service was ce∣lebrated in the Latine tongue, the people gene∣rally understood the Latine. If the Iesuit speake of later times after the inundation of Gothes and Vandals, when the Latine tongue was corrupted and degenerated into severall languages, as Itali∣an, Spanish, and French, in such sort, that the people in those parts underdood not the Latine: God stirred up i these Westerne parts many re∣ligious and learned men, who turned the Bible, and the common prayers into the vul∣gar tongue, and the Bishops of Rome were very much to blame, who commanded not the like to be done throughout all their jurisdiction, and it
is worth the observation that Irenaeus teacheth, that the number 666. containeth the name latinus,L. 5. c. 30. and that in that very yeare of our Lord Pope Vi∣talian commanded the Latine service generally to be received in the Westerne Church, though at that time in most parts few of the people un∣derstood it. To the third. We are not so much to regard uniformitie in the Church-service, as conformi∣tie to the will and word of God, which requireth that all things in the Church bee done to edification,1 Cor. 14.15, 16.26. that we pray with the spirit, and with understan∣ding also, that the people joyne with the Priest in all parts, as well prayers as giving of thankes and te∣stifie it by saying Amen, Which cannot be done if prayers be said in a tongue which people under∣stand not. Moreover, as diversitie of instru∣ments tuned together marreth not the musicke, but maketh it sweeter: so diversitie of languages, in which the same prayers are said, breeds no de∣formitie at all, but uniformitie rather. Sith it is not the different sound of words, but of sense that makes a difference either in the beliefe or practice of the Church. There was never more unitie then in the Apostles time,Acts 2.46. when all the be∣leevers were of one mind yet then they praised God in divers languages, Parthians and Medes,Acts 2.9. and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Iudaea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and the parts of Lybia, about Cyrene and strangers of Rome, Iewes
and Proselites, Creets and Arabians, wee doe heare them speake in our tongues the wonderfull workes of God. To the fourth, The diversitie of translations either of the Scriptures or the Church office breedeth no inconvenience at all, provided care be taken that the translations bee revised by the learned, and licenced by authoritie: nay on the contrarie the Church reapeth much benefit by it for languages have beene therby improved, and the Scriptures much opened. For oftentimes that which is obscure in the originall, is cleared in a good translation. An unknowne tongue is like a vaile before a beautifull picture, or a filme before the eye, which by a good translation is taken a∣away. If it were either unlawfull or inconveni∣ent to translate the holy Scriptures, or choyce parts of them in the Church Liturgie into vulgar languages; why did Severus translate them into the Syrian, S. Ierome into the Dalmatian, S. Chry∣sostome into the Armenian, Vlphila into the Gothi∣an, Methodius into the Slavonian? Bede into the British,Aeneas Syl∣hist. Bohem. c. 30. and the Divines of Doway and Rhemes of late into the English? Nay, why did the Pope himselfe signe and subscribe unto the Petition of Cyrill, and Methodius Monkes sent to convert the slaves, and Dalmatians who in behalfe of their Converts, desired of his holinesse, that he would give leave to say service unto them in the Slavo∣nian tongue, which the Pope consented unto up∣on their much pressing him with that text of holy
Scripture,Ps. 150. v. ult. Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord, and let every tongue confesse unto him. To the fift. If there were any force in the Ie∣suits  reason at all, it would prove that neither the Scriptures of the Old Testament should have beene delivered to the Iewes in the Hebrew, nor the New Testament to the Greekes in the Greek. For Hebrew was then the vulgar tongue of the Iewes, and the Greeke o the Gentiles, yet wee find that neither the writing the Old Testament in the Hebrew, nor the New in the Greeke, which were then the vulgar languages to those people, bred any contempt of sacred things with prophanesse and irreligiousnesse, but the cleane contrarie effects. The use of Scripture in a vulgar tongue is not the cause why any dise∣steeme or undervalew it, but want of instruction in heavenly mysteries, and carelesse and superfi∣ciall reading without searching into the bottome of the spirituall meaning, where Orient Pearles lie. A counterfeit stone if it bee often handled is discovered to be false, and thereby looseth its va∣lew, whereas a rich Diamond though it be worne every day on the finger, loseth nothing of the price, or valew of it. If the publike use of Scrip∣tures would have derogated any thing from the worth and valew of it, God would never have commanded the children of Israel to rehearse the booke of the Law continually to their children,Deut. 6.7, 8, 9. to talke of it when they tarried in their house, and when they walked in the way, when they lay downe,
and when they rose up, to bind the words of the law for a signe upon their hand, and as frontlets between their eyes to write them upon the posts of the house, and upon the gates. Worldly wise men seeke to improve their knowledge by concealing it, or at least impropriating it to some few: but God con∣trariwise valeweth his wisdome by making it common. Earthly commodities the rarer the dearer, but heavenly Iewels the more common they are, the more pretious: of other liquour the lesse wee tast, the more we thirst after it, but hea∣venly wisedome thus speaketh of her selfe, Hee that drinketh of me, the more he drinketh the more hee shall thirst. As the comfortable beames of the Sun which shineth daily upon us are not lesse valewed, then the raies of those starres that sel∣dome appeare in our horizon: so the word of God which is the light of our understanding issu∣ing from the Sunne of righteousnesse loseth no∣thing of the reverend estimation, and religious respect due unto it by the frequent irradiation thereof at the preaching and reading of Scrip∣ture, nay it gaineth rather with all hearers in whom there is any sparke of grace. As for dan∣ger of heresie,Rain. l. 1. de Idol. indeed Claudius Espenceus wri∣teth, that a friend of his in Italie told him, that in that countrey they made shie of reading Scrip∣ture, for feare of being made heretiques thereby, but by heretiques hee meaneth such as S. Paul was, who after the way which they call heresie wor∣ship the God of their Fathers,Acts 24.14. beleeving all things
which are written in the Law and the Prophets, for otherwise if heresie bee taken in the proper sence for erroneous doctrine in point of faith, it is as absurd to say, that the ftequent use of Scriptures is a cause or occasion to bring men into heresie, as that the often taking of a sovereigne antidote a∣gainst poyson, is the ready meanes to poyson a man.. Chrys. tom. 5. Matth. 22.29. S. Chrysostome in his Homilie de Lazaro ex∣horteth all his Christian hearers to the frequent reading of Scriptures, as a speciall meanes to preserve them from errours and heresies. For all errours in point of faith arise from the ignorance of Scriptures, as our Saviour teacheth the Sadu∣ces, saying, Yee erre, not knowing the Scriptures. Assuredly there is lesse danger of falling into heresie by reading Scriptures, then any other booke whatsoever, partly because they alone are free from all possibilitie of errour, partly because God promiseth a blessing to those that reade and meditate on them: yet our Adversaries suffer all other bookes to bee translated out of the learned Languages into the vulgar, only they forbid the translation and publike use of the Scriptures, which containe in them most wholsome receipts, not only against all the maladies of the will, but of the understanding also: not onely against all morall vices, but also all intellectuall errours in matters of faith which wee call heresies. To the sixt. Had the Iesuit but an ounce of di∣scretion and common understanding hee would never translate  to announce, which is
no English word at all, neither is hee of sufficient authoritie to coyne new words at Doway or Saint Omers, and make them currant in England. For the matter it selfe it is false which hee saith, that the Actions at the Lords Supper without the words shew forth, or as he speaketh, announce the death of our Lord, for Bread is broken, and Wine poured out at common meales, yet our Lords death is not thereby declared: both must concurre, mysterious rites, and sacred formes of words lively to present Christs death. The Knights argument therefore standeth firme. The Sacraments ought so to bee celebrated, that by them the Lords death might bee shewed forth: but it cannot be shewed forth, unlesse the Evan∣gelicall storie, and especially the words of the In∣stitution be pronounced in a language that may be understood. For to speake Latine to the peo∣ple that understand it not, is surdo narrare fabu∣lam, to tell a tale to a deafe man, or to set a beau∣tifull picture before him that is blind, or in the Knights phrase to speake to a wall; at which not∣withstanding the Iesuit ridiculously carpeth, say∣ing, I never heard before, that it was all one to speake Latine, and to speake to a wall, were hee ac∣cording to our English proverbe as wise as a wall, hee could not but understand what was the Knights meaning, to wit, that to speake Latine prayers and exhortations, as Papists doe at their Masse to those who understand them not, is no better then to speake to so many walls, when the
Apostle touching upon the same string the Knight doth,1 Cor. 14.9. tearmeth the uttering words in an unknowne tongue, as speaking into the ayre; This Iesuit in the spirit of Lucian might in like man∣ner have jeared at the Apostle, saying, I never heard that to speake in an unknowne tongue, bee it Greeke, Latine, or Hebrew, is to speake to the ayre. The meaning of both phrases, to speake to a wall, and to speake into the ayre, is all one to lose a mans breath to speake idlely and unprofitably, or to no end and purpose, when no man is the better for it, as the Iesuit afterwards confesseth, saying, The other reason from the Apostle is, that those which heare a prayer in a strange language, are nothing the better for it, nor can say Amen unto it. What then can the common people bee the better for hearing popish Mattens or even-song, which are chaunted in Latine, a language which they un∣derstand not. To the seventh. Admit the Apostle in that  place spake not of publike prayers, but rather of private extemporarie devotion: yet the reasons he there useth against prayer in an unknowne tongue, are as forcible against publike as private ptayers. For if wee may not pray without un∣derstanding, or speake into the ayre in our private devotions, much lesse in our publike. But the truth is, the Apostle speaketh evidently of pub∣like prayers, and all the parts thereof; first of pe∣titions v. 15. secondly, of giving of thanks v. 17. thirdly, of prophecying and interpreting of
Scriptutes v. 4. fourthly, of singing Psalmes v. 15. and all this when the whole Church bee come together in one place v. 23. Moreover, he speaketh of prayers made in the Church, v. 19. of the edification of others, v. 12.26. and of blessings also wherein the people are to joyne with the Priest v. 16. and what can such prayers, benedictions, hymnes, and thankes-givings bee other then parte of the publike Liturgie in the Church in those dayes? Yea, but saith the Iesuit, hee cannot speake of the publike prayers of the Church which no man can doubt either for the truth or goodnesse of them, and therefore hee may confi∣dently say Amen to them, though they bee uttered in an unknowne tongue. I answer, that the Apostle here speaketh not of confidently saying Amen, but understandingly saying it, which no man can doe, who is utterly ignorant of the tongue in which the Priest prayeth.Hos. de verb Dei. I beleeve what the Church be∣leeveth, the Church be∣leeveth what I beleeve. And howsoever, none of the coliers implicite circular faith can make any doubt of the truth or goodnesse of the prayers said in the Masse: yet those whose eyes are not put out with the Romish coale dust, may very well doubt of them; first they may well doubt whether the Church of Rome which appointeth them may not erre as other Churches have done, especially considering what the Apostle speaketh expresly of that Church,Rom. 11.22. Vid. Bull. praefix breviar. Rom. Melchior loc. theol. l. 11. c. 5. nec enim ani∣mus est tueri omnes historias quae passim in ecclcsiâ lecti∣tantur. Claudius Espen in 2. ad Tim. c. 4. digres. 2. nostri quantum me pigeant fal∣sa in ecclesia Dei cantica canentes quan∣rae nugae canore mihi audibiles? in uno hym∣no praeter in∣eptitudinem sententiarum mendacia ad minus 24. reperi. Petrus Pictau: ep. 31. conqueritur inepta ac falsa in laudem Sancti Mauri super aquas currentis afficta. that if shee continued not in her goodnesse, shee should be cut off. Second∣ly, hee may doubt whether all those corruptions and abuses which the Fathers in the Councell of
Trent complaine to have crept into their Masse are reformed. Thirdly, he may doubt whether the Priests booke may not bee some-where false printed. Lastly, he may doubt whether the Priest alwayes reades true; surely that priest who bap∣tized a child, in nomine patria filia, & spiritua sancta; and another who read in the Doxologie glia pni: flo: & spui sco scutrat in primpo scla scla∣rum, Amen, said Masse by rote, and could not have skill of brachygraphy, nor well spell La∣tine, and can no man then doubt of the truth and goodnesse of any of the prayers that are said by your Masse-priests? To the eight. The shaft which the Knight  draweth out of Haymo his quiver, flieth home. For first he expresly teacheth that S. Paul speaketh of publike prayers,1 Cor. 14. and among other reasons used by the Apostle against the conceiving of prayers in an unknowne tongue, hee insisteth upon that v. 16. when thou shalt blesse with the spirit, how shall hee that occupieth the Roome of the unlearned say Amen at the giving of thankes, seeing he un∣derstandeth not what thou sayest? adding if one knoweth that onely tongue wherein hee was borne and bred; if such an one stand by thee whilest thou dost solemnly celebrate the mysterie of the Masse, or make a Sermon, or give a blessing, how shall hee say Amen at thy blessing, when hee knoweth not what thou sayest? for asmuch as hee understanding none
but his mothers tengue, hee cannot tell what thou speakest in that strange and barbarous tongue. Hereunto the Iesuit answereth, that if wee take Haymo altogether, wee shall find hee doth not re∣quire, that all that are by, shall understand, but that hee that supplieth the place of the idiot, or laye-man in answering for the people shall under∣stand. An answer befitting an idiot indeed, for doth not S. Paul,1 Cor. 14.16: and after him Haymo speake indefinitly of any that occupie the place of the unlearned, or standeth by at Service or Sermon in an unknowne tongue? or is it lesse absurd for any other man to be present at a prayer which he understandeth not, then for a Parish-Clarke whom alone hee will have here to be understood. Who is very much beholding to him for be∣stowing the name of idiot upon him, and truly such a Clarke as the Iesuit here defineth, may ve∣ry well take the idiot in the worst sence to him∣selfe.P. 265. For he requireth no more in a Clarke then that hee understand the Service so farre, as to bee able to answer Amen. But it seemeth the Iesuit tooke his holy orders per saltum, and skipt over the Clarke. For if hee had well considered what belongs to the Clarkes office, he should find that he hath more in his part then to say only Amen; for in all ancient and later Liturgies that I have seene, many short sentences or responds are to be said by him, as namely Christe eleeson & cum spi∣ritu tuo, & habemus ad Dominum, and the like, neither can hee say Amen to any prayer in the
Apostles sence, unlesse hee perfectly understand it: for to say Amen, is not only to utter the word which a Parret or Popenjay may doe, but to joyne in prayer with the Priest, and to give his assent to every clause. To the ninth. The Iesuits answer to Iustinian  is lame on both feet. For whereas hee taxeth him for taking too much upon him, it will appeare to any who peruseth the Code & Digests, that hee ta∣keth no more upon him then God commendeth to Princes, to wit, the custodie of both tables: he did no more then S. Austine affirmeth appertaineth to Christian Kings, to command those things that are just and honest not only in civill affaires, but also in matters of religion; for what he did, hee had ma∣ny excellent presidents before him in David, Sa∣lomon, Hezekiah, and Iosiah, Kings of Iudah; and Constantine and Theodosius, and other Chri∣stian Emperours, as is declared at large by B. Bil∣son in his defence of the oath of supremacie, and Doctor Crakenthorpe in his most learned Apolo∣gie of this Emperour. Next what hee saith that the Decree of this religious Emperour may well stand with the present practise of the Roman Church is most false.Novel. constit. 123. For the words of the Empe∣rour are generall, commanding all Bishops and Priests to celebrate the sacred oblation of the Lords Supper, and prayer used in Baptisme, not in secret, but with a lowd and cleare voyce, that the mindes of the hearers might bee stirred up with more devotion, to expresse the prayses of
God. Now I would faine know to what end all Bishops and Priests are commanded to pro∣nounce their words clearely and distinctly, both at the administration of Baptisme, and the Lords Supper; but that their hearers might undetstand what they say, and bee affected with those things they heare; which cannot be if the Priest speak to them in an unknown tong? For how can the lowd pronouncing of words in a strange language stirre up the devotion of the people to praise God for his benefits, which the Emperour here requireth under a great penaltie, saying? Let the Bishops and Priests know that if they neglect to doe according to our princely command, they shall yeeld an account in the dreadfull judgement of the great God for it, and wee having information of them will not leave them unpunished. To the tenth. After the Imperiall Decre the Knight alledgeth a text out of the Canon law, not to shew his skill in both lawes, as the Iesuit would have it, but to demonstrate that the pra∣ctise of the Roman Church in this point of pray∣er in an unknowne tongue, is against all law both Ecclesiasticall and civill,Tit. 3. de Offic. and that the walls of the Romish Babell are battered by her owne canons; for though the Decree of Pope Gregorie were made upon a speciall occasion: yet it is grounded upon this generall rule, that Service and Sacraments must bee said and administred to the people in a language they understand, which the Iesuit him∣selfe confesseth in part, saying, that it is a matter
of necessitie in the administration of some Sacra∣ments to use the vulgar tongue, as in Mariage and Penance; as for the Councell of Lateran, and the Pope in his Decree, they speake indefinitely of holy Service and Sacraments, and the Logitians rule is that indefinite propositions in materia ne∣cessaria are to be taken for universals, and by the same reason, which the Iesuit alledgeth for Pe∣nance and Mariage to be celebrated in a knowne tongue wee may conclude, that Baptisme also, and the Lords Supper ought to bee so celebrated. For in both, questions are put to the people, to the godfathers in the one, and communicants in the other, and answers are expected from them. To the eleventh. The Iesuit is like them taxed  by the Apostle who knew not what they spake, nor whereof they affirme. Our question is not, whether divine Service ought alwayes to bee said in the mother tongue, for wee our selves doe o∣therwayes in divers Colledges: but the point in controversie is, whether the service ought al∣wayes to be said in a tongue understood by those that are present: this all the Authours alledged by the Knight affirme, and therefore they make for us, and assuredly if for seven or 800. yeares the publike prayers of the Church were offered to God in a language understood by the people, as is confessed: questionlesse in many places the prayers were turned into vulgar languages. For it cannot be imagined that all the people in the Christian world before Pope Vitalians time un∣derstood
Hebrew,Lyra in 1 Cor. 14. in primiti∣va ecclesia be∣nedictiones, & coetera fiebant in linguâ vul∣gari. Gretz. def. Bel. l. 2. de verb. Dei linguâ au∣ditoribus non ignotâ omnia peragebantur, & consuetudo tunc ferebat ut omnes psalle∣rent. Harding. apud Iewel. ia 3. art. divis. 28 Verely in the primitive Church pray∣ers were made in a common tongue knowne to the people. Liturg. canoni∣cam precem, & in primis dominici cor∣poris, & san∣guinis conse∣crationem ita veteres lege∣bant, ut à po∣pulo intelligi, & Amen ac∣clamari possint. Iohan. Belit. in sum. de divin. offic. in primiti∣va ecclesia pro∣hibitum erat ne¦quis loqueretur linguis nisi esset qui in∣terpretaretur quid enim pro∣desset, &c. Wald. in doct. art. eccles. tit. 4. c. 31. fuit ergo ratio talis benedictionis in ecclesiâ tem∣pore Apostoli cui respondere solebat non tantùm clerus sed omnis po∣pulus. Aquinas lect. 4. ideò erat in∣sania in primi∣tivâ ecclesiâ quia erant ru∣des in ritu ec∣clesiastico. Greeke, or Latine, neither is it a point much materiall, whether the Authours alledged by the Knight speake of any Precept of praying in a knowne tongue or not, it is sufficient, that they confesse that it was the generall practice of the primitive Church, to performe their de∣votions in the vulgar tongue. For certainly what they generally practised in their divine Service, they thought to be fittest and most agreeable to Gods commandement. If wee had nothing but their practise for us, it alone would prove the vi∣sibilitie of our Church in this maine point, wherein wee stand at a bay with the Roman Church; but the truth is, though the Iesuit would bee loath to heare it, his owne witnesses Cassan∣der, Belithus, Waldensis, and Aquinas speake home to the point even of a Precept; the words of Cassander are, the Canonicall prayers, and especial∣ly the words of Consecration of the body and blood of our Lord; the Ancients did so read that all the people might understand it and say Amen according to the precept intimated by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.16. The words of Belithus are, that in the Primi∣tive Church it was forbidden that any should speake with tongues, unlesse there were some to interpret: for what saith hee, should speaking availe without understanding? Waldensis saith more then that, in the Apostles time, the giving of thankes was in a knowne tongue, he confirmeth the practise with a reason, saying, There was reason it should bee so, because in those times not only the Priests, but the
people also were wont to answer Amen. Aquinas go∣eth a step farther, that it was madnesse in the Primi∣tive Church for a man to have prayed in an un∣knowne tongue, because then the people were rude and ignorant in Ecclesiasticall rites. Now if the Iesuit thinke that it was not prohibited in the A∣postles time, to doe any madde act in time of di∣vine Service, he himselfe is bound for the Anti∣cyrae. Now for that the Iesuit addeth for the im∣bellishing of his former answer, that none of the vulgar languages but the three learned, to wit, the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine, were Dedica∣ted on the crosse of Christ, and consequently that they being the best and perfectest of all lan∣guages were fittest for divine Service to be said in them: it is more plausible then substantiall. For though I grant that every devout soule so affect∣eth the person of our Lord and Saviour, that shee loveth the very ground hee trod upon, and ho∣noureth those languages above all other in which his titles were proclaimed, for the greater ad∣vancement of his kingdome: yet the reason hol∣deth not in our present case. For though a gol∣den key bee simply better then a key of iron, yet a key of iron which will open to us a casket of most pretious Iewells, is better for that use then a key of gold which will not open the lock. Admit the originall languages of Greeke and Hebrew are simply perfecter, and better then any other which are derivatives from them, yet the Mother∣tongue, or vulgar language, is better and fitter
for the congregation in time of divine Service, be∣cause it answereth the wards of their understanding, and openeth to their capacity the Divine mysteries then celebrated, which the learned languages cannot doe. As for Pilats writing over the Crosse, it is certaine he had no end therein to honour the three Languages, with this title: but to dishonour our Saviour thereby, and put a scorne upon him; and therefore that inscription in the three lan∣guages was rather a pollution then a Dedication of those tongues. If Pilats action herein bee of any force it maketh rather against then for our Adversaries. For Pilat therefore commanded the title to be written in those three languages, that it might be understood of all, or the greater part of those that then were at Ierusalem. By which reason people of divers languages ought to have their mysteries (for so the Iesuit calleth this title) celebrated in their owne severall lan∣guages.Praef. in psal. his maximè tribus linguis sacramentum voluntatis Dei, & beati regni expecta∣tio praedicatur ex eo{que} illud Pilati fuit, ut in his tribus linguis regem Iudaeorum Dominum no∣strum Iesum Christum esse praescriberet. S. Hilarie who is alledged by Baylie the Iesuit for the consecration of these tongues, nei∣ther saith that these tongues were consecrated by that inscription, nor that Christs kingdome is to be proclaimed in them only. His words are in these three languages, especially the mysterie of Gods will, and the expectation of his blessed kingdome is preached; and hence it was that Pilat wrote our Lord Iesus Christ King of the Iewes in those three tongues. This testimonie cutteth the throate of our Adversaries, for the adverbe maximè or chiefly implieth that the mysteries of Christs
kingdome were to be preached in other tongues, though in these especially, because these were then, and are some of them at this day most ge∣nerally knowne and understood.In c. 15. Marc. Deus voluit ut causa mor∣tis Christi va∣rijs linguis scriberetur quo ab omnibus in∣telligeretur. Et Hieron. ib. hae tres linguae in crucis titulo conjunctae ut omnis lingua commemoraret perfidiam Iu∣daeorum. Baron. tom. 10 Anno Chris. 880. ep. 147. literas Slavo∣nicas, à Con∣stantino philo∣sopho repertas quibus Deo laudes debitas resonent jure laudamus, & vt in eadem lingua Christi Dei nostri praeconia, & opera enarrentur, jubemus: neque enim tri∣bus tantùm linguis, sed omnibus Dominum laudare authoritate sacrâ monemur, quae praecepit dicens, laudate Dominum omnes gentes: nec sanè fidei vel doctrinae ali∣quid obstat sive missas in eadem Slavonica lingua canere, sive sacrum evangelium, vel lectiones divinas N. & V. Testamenti benè translatas, & interpretatas legere, aut alia horarum officia psallere quoniam qui fecit tres linguas principales Hebraeam scilicet Graecam, & Latinam, ipse creavit & alias omnes ad laudem & gloriam suam. Lyra and S. Ie∣rome harpe upon this string, God would have saith Lyra, that the cause of Christs death should bee written in divers tongues that every tongue might declare the trecherie of the Iewes, and which marreth all the Iesuits musick, the Popes Diapa∣son soundeth out the same note, for so wee reade in Pope Iohns Epistle to the King of Moravia, we commend the Slavonian letters found out by Con∣stantine the Philosopher, whereby those of that coun∣trey set forth the due prayses of God, and we com∣mand that the preaching and workes of Christ our God bee declared in them, for we are admonished by the Divine authoritie which commandeth, saying, Prayse the Lord all yee Gentiles, to prayse the Lord not in three tongues only, but in all, for hee who made the three principall languages, Hebrew, Greeke and Latine; hee created also all other for his glorie.
To the twelfth. To this insolent interrogation of the Iesuit wee answer, that in generall, prayer in an unknowne tongue is commanded in all those texts of Scripture, which require us to come neere unto God, and pray unto him with our heart. For by the heart the understanding as well as the will and affections are meant, as ap∣peareth by that prayer of Solomon, Da mihi cor intelligens? in particular and expresse words it is commanded in the 1 Cor. 14. chapter through the whole, out of which wee thus argue, if it be bet∣ter in the Church to speake five words with un∣derstanding, that by our voyce wee may teach others, then a thousand words in an unknowne tongue: then certainly the publike Service of the Church ought to be in a knowne tongue; but it is better in the Church to speake five words with un∣derstanding to instruct others thereby, then a thou∣sand words in an unknowne tongue, v. 19. There∣fore the publike Service of the Church ought to bee in a knowne tongue. If all things ought to be done in the Church to edification, then ought the publike Service to bee in a knowne tongue; (for hee that speaketh in an unknowne tongue edifi∣eth not, v. 5.) but in the Church all things ought to bee done to edification, v. 26. Ergo, the publike Service ought to bee in a knowne tongue: If in the prayers of the Church the people are to joyne with the Priest, and testifie their consent with him by saying Amen to his prayers, and gi∣ving of thankes: then ought the publike Service
to be in a knowne tongue: But in the prayers of the Church, the people ought to joyne with the Priest, and testifie their consent by saying Amen to his prayers, and giving of thankes. Ergo, the publike Service ought to bee in a knowne tongue. If in the Church prayers wee ought to pray and sing with understanding, then ought Church ser∣vice to bee in a knowne tongue (for if wee pray in an unknowne tongue our spirit prayeth, but our understanding is unfruitfull, v. 14.) But in the prayers of the Church wee ought to pray and sing with understanding, v. 15. Ergo, the publike Service ought to bee in a knowne tongue. Nei∣ther can the Iesuit shift off these passages with a wish, saying that S. Paul indeed adviseth and wisheth, that when any prayer is made in an un∣knowne tongue, there should bee some to interpret, but that hee requireth no such thing to bee observed as a divine precept: for v. 37. hee addeth, if any man thinke himselfe a prophet or spirituall, let him know that the things which I write unto you, are the commandements of God. To conclude, when S. Iames commandeth, that whosoever prayeth,Iames 1.6. aske in faith, nothing doubting but that hee shall receive what he asketh, hee necessarily implieth, that wee ought to pray to God in a knowne tongue. For how can hee beleeve that hee shall receive what he prayeth for, if he knoweth not what himselfe saith in his prayers, or what an other prayeth for him, to whose prayers hee saith Amen. To the Iesuits second quaere, where prayer in an un∣knowne
knowne tongue is forbidden. I answer, Esay 29.13. and Marke the 7.10. Well Esay prophesied of you hypocrites, this people honoureth mee with their lips, but their heart is farre from mee: and 1 Cor. 14. where the Apostle professedly dispu∣teth against speaking in the Church in an un∣knowne tongue. But the Iesuit excepteth, that S. Paul in that chapter condemneth not simply prayers in an unknowne tongue, though hee pre∣ferreth prophecie. By which his ignorant ex∣ception, it should seeme that hee read that chap∣ter in an unknowne tongue; for hee speaketh so wide from the matter as if hee understood never a word in it. It is true that the Apostle in that chap∣ter comparing the gift of tongues, and prophecie together condemneth neither of them, but pre∣ferreth the gift of prophecie; and in prosecution of the comparison falleth upon those who used the gift of tongues in publike prayers in the Church, and hee expresly condemneth that pra∣ctise of them, because they that prayed in such sort uttering words that were not understood, spake not to men, because no man understood them, v. 2. spake into the ayre, v. 5. edified not by those prayers, v. 12.17. because others could not joyne with them in their prayers, nor say Amen to their thankes, v. 15. Now if the Apostle reproved the use of the miraculous gift of tongues (which re∣dounded so much to the honour of God) in the Church, without an interpreter, v. 28. saying, if there bee no interpreter, let them keepe silence in the
Church; How much more may wee conceive would he have sorbidden the use of an unknowne tongue acquired by humane industrie? To his third quaere, what authoritie we can bring for our selves, or example? I answer, that the Knight hath brought the authoritie, and example of the catholique Christian Church for 700. yeares at the least, and because he calleth upō us to name a∣ny Father, who teacheth as we do, that the service of the Church ought to bee in a knowne tongue,Exposit. in psal. 18. vult ut quod cana∣mus intelliga∣mus ac humana ratione non quasi avium voce canamus nam, & psit∣taci, & corvi, & picae, & hujusmodi vo∣lucres saepè ab∣hominibus do∣centur sonate quod nesciunt sciunter autem cantare natu∣rae hominis di∣vina bonitate concessum est. I name S. Chrysostome, who in his Commentarie upon the 14. chapter of the first to the Corinthians saith that the Apostle teacheth, that we ought to speak with our tongues, and withall to minde what is spo∣ken, that wee may understand it; and S. Austine willeth, that wee understand what wee sing like men indued with reason, and not chatter like birds, for ousels, parrats, crowes, pies, and such other birds, are often taught by men to sound out that which they know not, but to know what they sing, or sing with knowledge and understanding, is by Gods will pecu∣liarly given unto man. I name also Iustine Mar∣tyre, and S. Basil, and many other ancient Do∣ctours, whose testimonies are plentifully alled∣ged by Bishop Iewell, Article the third, and Bil∣son of Supremacie, part the fourth, and not yet answered by any Papist to my knowledge. To the thirteenth. The observation of Car∣dinall  Bellarmine concerning the different cu∣stome of the ancient Church, and the present Roman, maketh rather against the Iesuits then
for them. For who will not attribute more to the uniforme practise of the primitive Church, then to the heteroclyte practise of later Churches? as∣suredly the practise of the primitive Church wherein the people answered the Priests, and not the Clarke only, is most agreeable to the do∣ctrine of S. Paul, and consonnt to reason. For publike prayers were instituted especially for three ends, first, for the most solemne worship of God, when thousands of hands are at once lifted up to him, and as many tongues confesse his name: secondly, for the stirring up of greater de∣votion, when many hundreds praying and bles∣sing, and singing together, like so many coales on the same hearth kindle one the other, and in∣crease the flame. Thirdly, for more prevalencie with God, when we offer violence, as it were to heaven, and send up our united devotions like a vollie of shotte to batter the walls of it; They who pray in a tongue which the people understand not, and therefore cannot joyne with them in their prayer, faile of all these ends. Yet to sodder all, the Iesuit beareth us in hand, that the Masse be∣ing the same continually, the people understand it sufficiently for the exercise of their devotion, though not to satisfie vaine curiositie; which speech of his is partly sencelesse, and partly blasphemous: it is sencelesse to imagine that a man who never learned his Grammar, nor ever was taught Greek or Latine, by hearing onely the Masse read over, though a thousand times should come to under∣stand
it; secondly, it is blasphemous to say that to desire to understand the particular contents of the Epistles and Gospels read in the Masse, or the psalmes of David, sung in the Church is vaine curiositie, or hereticall pride. Loe here Flood his channell falleth againe into the Stygi∣an lake. To the fourteenth. There is no contradiction  at all in the Knights observations. For though this story of the shepheards abusing the words of Consecration, and strucke dead for it, might peradventure occasion some alteration in those Churches, where it was beleeved, yet there was no generall command for the practise of the La∣tine Service, in all Christian Churches before Vitalians time; who in the yeare 666. verified the number of the name of the beast in himselfe, which according to the interpretation of S. Ire∣naeus, who flourished within two hundred yeares after Christ, is lateinos, as before I noted. But for mine owne part I have no faith at all in that le∣gendarie fable of the Sheepheards; First because those that coyned it, agree not in their tale, for some say, that the Bread and Wine were transub∣stantiated into flesh and bloud, and the sheepe∣heards for their prophane abuse strucke dead: others tell it otherwise,Cassand. li∣turg. c. 28. Honorius in Gem. animae, Bellar. l. 2. de Mis. c. 22. that neither the Bread nor the Wine were transubstantiated, but consumed by fire from heaven, nor the sheepheards strucken dead, but onely laid for dead. As for the Au∣thour of the booke called Pratum spirituale, hee
is of no credit at all. For in his Spirituall mea∣dow, as hee tearmeth his worke, there are many such Eutopian flowers, as this is, where I leave the Iesuit to gather him a nosegay, till I have leisure to meete with him in the next Section. Concerning worshiping of Ima∣ges. Spectacles, Sect. 7. a pag. 283. us{que} ad 319. THe text of Scripture which the Knight quoteth, maketh not any mention of Image-worship, but I∣doll-worship, which hee could not but know to bee a different thing ha∣ving beene so often told it. It followeth not the Iewes might not adore Ima∣ges; Ergo, wee may not: for the Iewes might not eate bloud nor swines flesh, nor many other things which wee may. If the second Commandement were morall, and now in force, the Knight could not have his wives picture, nor shee his, without breach of that Com∣mandement: therefore in that sence hee cannot urge it more against our pictures, then wee against his. Cornelius Agrippa was a Magician, and there∣fore no heed to be given to what he testifieth against the Roman Church.
Philo Iudaeus saith nothing, but that the Iewes  admitted no image into the Temple, which is true; for God cannot bee painted, neither could they have the Image of any Saint: for there was none as yet which might have that honour, to have their images or pictures in the Temple, themselves being not yet admitted into the heavenly Temple of God. It is no marvaile that the Iewes hate crucifixes,  sith they could not indure Christ himselfe. Notwithstanding the prohibition in the second  Commandement, were it Morall or Ceremoniall, men did adore the Cherubins in the Temple, and the Arke and the Temple it selfe. There may in the New Testament bee some pre∣cept,  or example both of our Saviour and his Apo∣postles for the adoration of images, though not written in Scripture, because as S. Iohn saith, that all is not written, or rather a very small part is writ∣ten as his words import. Wee have the example of our Saviour and his A∣postles  testified by good authenticall histories, many great and grave Authours make mention of two severall images made miraculously by our blessed Saviour himselfe, one was that which hee sent to Abgarus King of Edessa, who had a desire to see him: the other was that of Veronica, which hee made with wiping his face, as hee was carrying his Crosse: a third was one which Nicodemus gave to Gamaliel, all which are testified, not only by grave and learned Authours, but by God himselfe, though not in Scripture, yet by great and wonderfull mi∣racles.
S. Austine taketh not Simulachrum for an image, as the Knight falsly translateth him, but for an idoll, and so commendeth Varro for comming neerer to the knowledge of the true God, and going further from idolatrie then other Gentiles. Eusebius saith not, that images sprang from an heathenish custome, but hee meaneth by mos gen∣tilis, the fashion of their owne people, and kindred, who were wont to honour such that had done them a∣ny benefit, or helpe by erecting statues in memorie of them. Moreover, Eusebius relateth this storie of the womans statua with approbation; upon the basis or foot thereof, there grew a certaine strange and unusuall kind of herbe, which as soone as it grew up so high as to touch the hemme of the brazen gar∣ment, it had vertue to cure diseases of every kind. The Councell of Elliberis, was an obscure pro∣vinciall Synod of 19. Bishops onely, without any certaintie of the time when it was held, to which we oppose one of Constantinople, another at Rome, under Gregorie the third, and a third at Nice, of 350. Bishops. Moreover, this Councell forbiddeth not pictures absolutely, but painting on walls, and so leaving them to the furie, and scorne of the Gen∣tiles, and it is plaine, that the ouncell made the Decree out of honour to images, because they thought not the walls a place convenient, because the plaster breaking off in some places, they might become de∣formed, and so contemptible. Valens and Theodosius whom the Knight joy∣neth in making a law against images, were not alive
together: Valens being killed 23. yeares before Theodosius was borne; besides Valens was a wic∣ked Arrian heretique, upon whom God did shew his judgement by a disasterous end, and the law made by him cited by the Knight is fowly corrupted, and the meaning wholly perverted, for the law was made in honour of the Crosse, to wit, thus wee com∣mand that it shall not bee lawfull for any to carve or paint the signe of our Saviour Christ, either on the ground, or in any stone or marble lying on it. Nicolaus Clemanges was himselfe a Wiclefi∣an  heretique. Cassander, Erasmus, and Wicelius, are of no  account in the Roman Church. The Councell of Nice, held under Constantine  and Irene, was not condemned at Frankford; Nay, in that very Councell an Anathema is said to all such as deface Images. Polidore Virgill, in saying the ancient Fathers  condemned the worship of images, for feare of Ido∣latrie, speaketh not of the Fathers of the New Te∣stament, but those of the Old; particularly naming Moses and Hezekias: nay farther, Polydore ac∣counteth him a dissolute and audacious man, who judgeth otherwise of the worship of Images, then hath beene approved by the Decree of two or three Councels which he there alledgeth. Peresius denieth not the worship of Images, but  that the picture is to bee adored with the same wor∣ship, as the prototype, or thing represented by it, which maketh nothing against the doctrine of the
Catholique Church touching the worship of Images. Agobardus his drift in his booke De picturis & imaginibus, is onely against the idolatricall use or abuse rather of images against which hee speaketh very much, by occasion of some abuses in his time. Although it were true that some silly women, or ignorant rusticks should bee so blockish, as to con∣ceive some Divinitie in pictures, and accordingly adore them: yet the use of pictures must not bee ta∣ken away for the abuse, for the axiome of the law is, utile per inutile non vitiatur. The Hammer. AS those who beheld the head of Medusa were turned into stocks and stones, and presently deprived of all life and sense: so those who gaze upon with admiration, this head of the Romish doctrine concerning Image-wor∣ship, become so stupid and senslesse, as if they were turned into those stocks and stones, to which they give religious veneration. A notable expe∣riment hereof we have in a conference in France, in which a Sorbon Doctour present, hearing how absurdly the Patrones of Images maintained the worship of them said, of a truth I find the words of Psalmist verified, those that make them are like un∣the to them, and so are all they that put their trust in them. But wee need not goe so farre for an in∣stance; the Iesuit in this Section maketh good
that observation, shewing us a forehead of the same metall the images are made for which hee pleadeth. For he loadeth the Knight with shame∣lesse calumnies, and most impudently defendeth such grosse idolatrie as the wiser of the heathen were ashamed of: hee whetteth his poysonous tooth, and like a mad dogge snaps at all hee mee∣teth with, and farre out-raileth Rabsekah himselfe, as the Reader cannot but judge if hee peruse but a few passages ensuing, namely first, page 298. This is your discourse Sir Humphrey, wherein you have given so sufficient testimonie of notorious bad dealing, especially in the two places of Eusebius, and of the civill law: that if there were nothing else falsified or corrupted in your whole booke, this were enough utterly to deface all memorie of you, from among honest men. And page 301. What say you to all this Sir Humphrey? looke now into your owne conscience, and see whether it can flatter you so much, as to say you are an honest man. And page 205. May not you then beare away the bell from all lying, and corrupting fellowes that have ever gone before you? Hee that seeth such foule stuffe come out of the Iesuits mouth, would hee not thinke that he were sicke of the disease called miserere? but I leave his Grobian language, and come to consider first what hee laieth to the Knights charge, and after, how hee dischargeth himselfe of the idolatrie and superstition, where∣with the Knight in this chapter burdeneth the Roman Church. First, he chargeth the Knight
with false translation, of the Councell of Trent. Wee teach that the image of Christ, the Virgin Mo∣ther of God, and other Saints are chiefly in Churches to be had, and reteined, which Decree he might have translated a little better, and more clearely by say∣ing, that those images are to bee had, and reteined especially in Churches, the Latine word being prae∣sertim, and his translating it chiefly, and placing it so odly, gives cause to thinke he had an evill meaning therein, as if hee would have his reader thinke that the Councell taught that those images were the chiefe things to be had in Churches, &c. It is a signe of a light head to stumble at a straw: yet here lyeth not so much as a straw in the Iesuits way: only he wanted a festrawe to point to the accent, which is set upon Churches not upon had, the meaning of the Councell and the Knights is all one, to wit, that images by that Decree were to bee had, and reteined chiefly or especially in Churches, not to bee had or held to bee the chiefe thing in Churches. For no man would imagine that the Councell could bee so absurd and impious, as to preferre images before the sacred Scriptures, the Font and Chalice, the Altar or communion Ta∣ble: much lesse the sacred Symbols of Christs bo∣dy and bloud. Secondly, he chargeth the Knight with grosse ignorance, in Chronologie, But I may aske you, saith hee, how come you to say the Iewes never allowed adoration of Images for foure thou∣sand yeares, when as the people of the Iewes were not such a people above two thousand yeares; nay
Moyses lived not past 1500. yeares before our Sa∣viour, so that of your owne liberalitie and skill in Chronologie you have added 2000. yeares to make your doctrine seeme ancient. There is a grosse mi∣stake I confesse, but in the Iesuit, not in the Knight: who saith not 4000. yeares, but for al∣most 4000. yeares in the first edition, and in the later editions this scape of the presse is mended, and the figure altered. For the matter it selfe, the Knight might truly have said, that the people of God, who lived partly under the law of nature, partly under the law of Moyses, never allowed adoration of Images for 4000. yeares: so ancient is the doctrine of the reformed Churches in this point. Thirdly, he chargeth the Knight with Sim∣bolizing with Iewes in the hatred of Christ, You saith hee, in alledging the Iewes hate of the crosse, as an argument why you should also hate the same, ta∣citly confesse that you love Christ so well as they:1 Cor. 16.22. A fearefull charge: for whosoever loveth not the Lord Iesus, let him bee anathema maranatha, but a ridiculous proofe; for a man may hate an idoli∣zed crucifix, out of love of Christ, because hee cannot endure Christ his honour to bee given to graven images. Heate of zeale against idolatrie, doth no way argue coldnesse of affection to the true religion;2 King. 15.4. Witnesse King Hezekiah the non pareil of a religious Prince, who demolished the brazen Serpent, and stamped it to powder, cal∣ling it nehustan, though it were an image and type of Christ crucified, as Christ himselfe teacheth
us.Io. 3.14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wildernesse; So must the Son of man be lifted up; Witnesse Saint Peter, who loved Christ more then the rest of the Disciples,1 Pet. 4.3. Diligis me plùs quàm hi? and yet hee brandeth all Image-worship by the title of abo∣minable idolatrie. Nay, witnesse S. Iohn the be∣loved Disciple, who went behind none in zeale against idolatrie,1 Io. 5.21. saying, babes keepe your selves from idols. It is one thing to dislike crucifixes in Churches out of hatred of Christ, as Iewes, Turkes, and Infidels may doe: and another thing to disallow them out of hatred of idolatrie and superstition. To stab the Kings picture, or any way deface it out of hatred, or contempt of his per∣son is disloyaltie: yet to take a piece of counter∣feit coyne prohibited by law, though bearing the Kings image, and pricke it full of holes, or naile it to a post, is no argument of disloyaltie, but contrarie, an act of Loyaltie, and obedience also to the Kings lawes. Lastly, hee chargeth the Knight with Sacriledge and prophanation of ho∣ly things, saying, You, and such as you, have had your shares in pulling downe of images, and silver shrines, this last hundred yeares, are more like to be drawne with the love of gaine, to the pulling downe of Images, then wee that lose all for maintaining and setting them up: for what wee and our Ance∣stors have parted with from our selves, and out of our owne purses for the honour of God and his Saints; you or men of your religion, pull back from God and his Saints, to bestow upon your backs and
bellies, and upon your Ministers, their wives and brattes. I would cast this dunge backe againe on your Nunnes bellies, and Popes face, and tell you of the brats of the one buried in the earth, and drowned in moates, to cover the shame of the parents, and give you a bill of the expence of the other upon their mistresses, farre surmoun∣ting the charge of all the Ministers wives in Eng∣land; but I choose rather to purge the Knight from all foule aspersion herein, who is so farre from having any hand in pulling downe your silver shrines, and images, and making sale of them, that he was not then borne, when by command of King Edward the sixt those Monuments of idolatrie were knocked downe and defaced, which yet was accounted a worke so acceptable to God,Vit. Ed. 6. by Sir Iohn H. that the selfe-same day that the images were broken downe in London, God gave us a nota∣ble victorie in Scotland; but the truth is, the Knight chargeth the Iesuit home with the exam∣ple of Demetrius and his followers maintaining images, because they were maintained by them. For who seeth not in all popish countries, how when all other Artificers shut up their shoppes, to wit, on Sundayes and holy dayes the Priests open theirs, setting out as it were their golden puppets on the stalls, whereof they make no small advantage? and therefore to all his railing rheto∣rick with which he concludes this section, I hold fit to returne no other answer then the French provetbe, The Asse brayeth never so hideously, as
when hee is over-hard girt. Thus having held up my buckler for the Knight, and warded off the Iesuits blowes: now I fall on whetting and shar∣pening the Knights sword, wherewith he woun∣deth the Idolatrous superstition of the Roman Church, the edge whereof the Iesuit endevoureth to dull by the twentie exceptions above mentio∣ned, which now I will scan in order. To the first. It is true that wee have beene oft told by Papists, that we ought to make a diffe∣rence betweene Image-worship, and Idoll-wor∣ship: but it is as true that this is a distinction without difference, which hath beene a hundred times refuted by all those who have entred into lists with Papists about the question in hand, and did not the Iesuit arme his forehead with the me∣tall of his images, he would blush to say that the texts alledged by the Knight make against idols,Vulg. lat. ex e∣dit R. Stepha∣ni, non facietis vobis idolum, & sculptile nec titulos eri∣getis, nec in∣signem lapi∣dem ponetis in terrâ vestrâ ut adoretis eum. Lorinus in Act. 7. v. 29. sculptilis ima∣go distinctiùs ac enixiùs pro∣hibita est, quo∣niam cultus i∣dolorum versa¦batur potissi∣mùm insculptâ imagine vel statua quae so∣liditate parti∣um, at{que} crassi∣tie magis exhi∣bet personam, quae adoranda proponitur, quàm si haec in superficie dun∣taxat coloribus exprimatur. Tertul. cont. Marcio. l. 4. c. 22. nec enim imagines eo∣rum, nec sta∣tuas populus habuisset lege prohibente. Vasquez. disp. 5. in 3. p. Thō. & disp. 94. c. 2. substantia praecepti fuit, usum quemli∣bet imaginum auferre. and not at all against images; for the first text, Levit. 26.1. word for word according to the ori∣ginall, and agreeably to the vulgar Latine is thus to bee rendred, Yee shall make you no idols nor gra∣ven images, neither reare you up a standing image, neither shall you set up any image of stone in your land to bow downe to it. The second text Exod. 20.4. is thus to be translated, Thou shalt not make thy selfe any thing carved or graven, in Hebrew Pesel derived from pasal, signifying to carve or en∣grave, in Greeke , in the vulgar Latine unto which all Papists are sworne sculptile. To which Commandement Tertullian alluding saith,
Peter knew Moses and Elias by the spirit, when they appeared with Christ in the Mount, not by any picture or image which hee had seene of them, for the people of the Iewes had no such, the law prohi∣biting it. And Vasquez the Iesuit convinced by the evidence of the text confesseth, that God in the second Commandement forbiddeth not only to worship an image for God, but also to worship God in any similitude, and consequently hee thereby ta∣keth away all use of any image of God. Yet were there any mist in the word pesel, the words fol∣lowing clearely dispell it; nor the likenesse of any thing, that is in heaven above, or in the earth be∣neath, or in the waters under the earth, thou shalt not bow downe to them, viz. with thy body, nor wor∣ship them in thy soule: Papists doe both, and there∣fore though they could escape the net laid for them in the first words (non facies tibi sculptile) yet they are caught and strangled in the next. For albeit they could prove that their images are no idols prohibited in the word pesel, yet cer∣tainly they are the similitudes of something that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. The third text alledged by the Knight out of Deut. 4.15.16. & 17. is thus rendered in their owne vulgar Latine,Custodite soli∣citè animas vestras, ne for∣te deceptifaci∣atis vobis sculptam ima∣ginem, vel si∣militudinem masculi vel foeminae. keepe care∣fully your soules, you saw no similitude in the day in which the Lord spake to you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire; take heed lest peradventure be∣ing deceived, you make to your selves any graven image, or the likenesse of male or female. Neither
is the last allegation out of Esay the fortieth, lesse prevalent then the former, to batter downe all popish images,v. 18. to whom will you liken God? or what likenesse will you compare unto him? in the vulgar Latine, quam imaginem ponetis ei; and verse the 20. the worke-man melted a graven image, and the Goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chaines, hee that is so im∣poverished, that hee hath no oblation, chooseth a tree that will not rot, hee seeketh unto him a cunning work-man to prepare a graven image that shall not bee moved, &c. And this may serve to illustrate the texts alledged by the Knight. Now for the words imago & idolum, upon which the Iesuit foundeth his distinction of image-worship, and idol-worship, if wee respect the originall, and ancient use of them, they are all one for  is derived from , signifying the shape, or forme of any thing;L. de sensu & sensibili. and Aristotle calleth the species of such things as we apprehend by sence idola; and Tullie interpreteth the word imagines by ido∣la:Cic. de fin. i∣magines quae idola nomi∣nantur. and the second Councell of Nice, action the sixt, tearmeth the images then used in the Chur∣ches idols, saying, these idols may bee converted to other uses. And lastly, Cardinall Cajetan in his Comment upon the 20. of Exodus speaking of the images of the Angels in the Arke tearmeth them idola Cherubinorum, word for word, the idols of the Cherubins. But if wee have regard to the more common use; the words imago & ido∣lum, differ as much as mulier & scortum, a wo∣man
and a strumpet. For as such women only as are abused, and defiled by corporall fornication are tearmed strumpets: so now for the most part, those images only which are abused to spirituall fornication are called idols. Thus Tertullian de∣fineth idolatrie to be the consecration of images,De idol. c. 4. imaginum con∣secratio est i∣dololatria. Isid. l. 8. Orig. c. 11. idolum est simulacrum quod humana effigie est con∣secratum. or devoting of them to a religious use, or setting them up to be worshipped; and agreeably hereunto S. Isidore defineth an idoll to be an image, conse∣crated in a humane shape, and such were all idols at the first, but in processe of time as men in a quag∣mire sinke still deeper, and more foule them∣selves: so the Pagans fell by degrees into grosser idolatrie, and turned the glorie of God, not only into the similitude of a corruptible man, but also of beasts and fowles, and creeping things, Rom. 1.23, 24. The difference which Cardinall Bellarmine maketh betweene an image and an idoll, viz. that an idoll is the representation of that which hath no existence in nature,De tradit. p. 3. multa idola e∣rant in quibus, nec daemon ali∣quid responde∣bat, sed tan∣tùm benefacto∣rum Deum re∣presentârunt. but an image the likenesse of something existent, is very false and absurd. For as Martinus Paresius confesseth, there were ma∣ny idols of the Gentiles, in which they represented God as a benefactour. The mother of Mica dedi∣cated the hundred shekels of silver unto the Lord, to make a graven and a molten image,L. 2. de imag. c. 24. idololatria non solùm fit cum adorantur idola relicto Deo sed etiam adoratur ido∣lum cum Deo, quod si latria quae exhibetur imagini prop∣ter aliud est i∣dem cultus cum eo qui ex∣hibetur Deo, aequè colitur creatura at{que} ipse Deus, quae certè ido∣lolatria est. Lor. Comment in Act. c. 17. si verum est Cherubin ore, manibus, cruri∣bus, erectione corporis huma∣nam, jubis à pectore, & cervice pen∣dentibus leoni∣nam, alis A∣quilinam, un∣gulis pedum vitulinam fi∣guram retu∣lisse and per∣swaded her selfe that God would blesse her for it: yet no man doubteth but that was an idoll, and shee an idolatresse, Iud. 17.4. Nay, the Car∣dinall himselfe ingenuously acknowledgeth, that to exhibit divine worship, even to the image of God
is idolatrie; which, saith he, is committed not only when an idoll is worshipped in stead of God, but al∣so when an idoll is worshipped together with God. By his owne confession then, an image made to represent the true God, may bee an idol, by attri∣buting to it latria, or the worship proper to God. Moreover, the Cherubins hee will have to bee as they were indeed images, and not idols in his sence: yet never was there any thing in nature existent in that forme, as they were expressed, namely, as the Rabbins teach, and the popish Painters draw them at this day, in the shape of a child with wings; or as Lorinus hath it, with the face, hands, thighes, and body of men, but with the mane of Lyons, wings of Eagles, and parted feet of Calves. And no man doubteth but that the image which Aaron made, and which Ezekiah brake downe, and which the Philistines conse∣crated, and the Baalites worshipped were idolls: yet were they representations of things existent in nature, the first of a calfe, the second of a Ser∣pent, the third of a fish, the fourth of the Sunne. To the second. The Iesuit maketh a brutish re∣plie unworthy a Christian, much lesse a Divine. For who knoweth not, that delectus ciborum, the difference of meates was a part of the Ceremo∣niall law abrogated by Christ, who teacheth us, that it is not that which goeth into a man which de∣fileth him,Matth. 15.17 but that which commeth out of him; Who sent Peter to Cornelius, Acts 10. and by a miraculous vision revealed unto him, ver. 14.15.
that he might not account any meate common or un∣cleane, what God hath cleansed, saith he, that call not thou common. Let the Iesuit shew us a like abro∣gation of the law concerning making and wor∣shipping of images, and then wee will free his Church from idolatrie in this point. But on the contrarie, it is so evident, that the second com∣mandement in the Decalogue is not ceremoniall,Clemens A∣lex. in pro∣trept. Tertul. de Idol. c. 4. Bellar. de i∣mag. l. 2. c. 7. and positive, but morall, that not only the anci∣cient Fathers; but their great Cardinall is forced to confesse as much; nay, he is so zealous in the point that he taketh Peresius, Catharinus, and all such Romanists to taske, as affirme the second Commandement to bee juris positivi, and solid∣ly proveth out of Irenaeus, Cyprian, and S. Austine, that it is a morall, and consequently bindeth us as strict as the Iewes. To the third. The Iesuits argument is a non se∣quitur,  for God by Moses forbiddeth not simply to make any image, but to make any image to our selves, thou shalt not make thy selfe any graven image, to wit, to bow downe to it, or to worship it, as the words following declare, thou shalt not bow downe to them, nor worship them. Now what a loose kind of arguing is this of the Iesuit, the law forbiddeth us to make any image of God there∣by to worship him: therefore it forbiddeth us to make any image of man or woman to remember them: the law forbiddeth all superstitious use of images, therefore it forbids all civill use of them scilicet?
To the fourth. Although Cornelius Agrippa wrote bookes De occultâ philosophiâ, wherein he seemeth to hold too neere correspondencie with Magicians, and Conjurers, yet this doth not al∣together disable his testimony. For Eusebius and Constantine the great made good use, not only of the prophecies of the Sybbillaes, who for ought appeares were heathenish women: but also of the Oracles of Apollo, dictated by the divell him∣selfe, Seneca would have taught the Iesuit a better lesson by precept, non quis dicat, sed quid dicat; we are not to consider so much who it is that speaketh, as what it is that is spoken: and Virgil by his practise, who often read the Poemes of Ennius, whose skill was little in poetrie, & language obso∣lete, and being questioned for it, answered aurum è stercore, I gather gold out of muck. By the Iesuits rule no Physician or Apothecarie should make use of a pretious stone called Bufonites, because it is found in the head of a Toad, or of a Turkes; or Lyncurie, because it issueth out of the body of a spotted beast, called Lynx. Let Cornelius Agrip∣pa be in his eyes as ugly as the Lynx or Toad, yet the sentence or testimonie rather which the Knight taketh from him like the Lyncurie or toadstone, it is of price and of good use, to wit, that the Iewes were so farre from making any thing that they worshipped, or worshipping any thing that they made, that they abhorred nothing more then images. To the fift. Philo Iudaeus in this point is Philo-Christianus
a friend to our orthodox Christian doctrine, concerning the unlawfulnesse of ma∣king any image of God,Antiquit. l. 18. c. 11. Iudaei supplicant ne se adeam necessi∣tatem cogeret, nevè sacraram urbem pollueret vetitis imagi∣nibus, tum Pe∣tronius, pug∣nabitis igi∣tur cum Cae∣sare, nec illius opes, nec ve∣stram imbecil∣litatem adhi∣bentes in con∣cilium, non pug∣nabimus ni∣quiunt, & moriemur citi∣ùs quam disce∣damus à legi∣bus simul{que} procumbentes, nudantes ju∣gulos, paratos se aiebant ad excipiendos gladios. Aelius Lamp. in Alex. Strom l. 5. & 6. Moses mul∣tis ante seculis apertè legem sanxerit, nul∣lam oportere sculptilem, vel fusilem, vel fi∣ctam, vel pi∣ctam imaginem simulacrúmve facere, quoni∣am inquit nihil in rebus genitis potest referre Dei imaginem. Lib. de Spectac. c. 23. jam verò ipsum opus personarum quaero an Deo placeat qui omnem simili∣tudinem vetat fieri, qunatò magis imaginis suae, non amat falsum author veritatis, adul∣terum est apud illum omne, quod fingitur. Orig. l. 4. cont. Celsum; Dei in corporei, & invisibilis nul∣lam effigiem faciunt . Minut. Fel. in Octav. quod e∣nim simula∣crum Deo fin∣gam cum si re∣ctè aestimas sit Dei homo ipse simulacrum? Lactant. divin. instit. l. 2. c. 8. quare non est dubium quin religio nulla fit ubicun{que} simulacrum est: nam si religio ex divinis rebus est, divinum au∣tem nihil est nisi in coelestibus rebus; carent ergo religione simulacra, quia nihil potest esse cre∣leste in ea re quae fit ex terra. Concil. Elib. can 36. placuit picturas in ecclesia esse non debere ne quod colitur, aut adoraturin parietibus pingatur. Orat. cont. Greg. Sabel. stultorum, & vecordium ista sunt verba, oculis, & loco volentiam comprehendi id quod incorporale est. or setting it up in the Church or Temple. For in his booke wherein he treateth of his Embassie to Cajus hee writeth, that the Temple from the first beginning to his time never admitted any image, being the house of God: for the worke, saith hee, of painters and carvers, are the images of materiall gods, but to paint the invisible God, or to faine any representation of him, our Ancestours held a wickednesse. Philo is secon∣ded by Iosephus, When the Emperour Caligula was desirous to have his owne image set up in the Church of Ierusalem, the Iewes, saith Iosephus, first intrea∣ted him, that hee would not defile the holy Citie with images forbidden by the law, and for their owne particular, they resolved rather to die, then suffer the law which forbad the setting up of images in Churches to bee abrogated. Neither was this the common opinion only of those learned Iewes, that none could, or ought, expresse the majestie of God by pictures: but of the Christian Doctors in all succeeding ages, for In the second age Adrian the Emperour com∣manded, that Temples should be made in all Cities without images, and thereupon it was presently con∣ceived, that he intended those Temples for Christi∣ans. Clemens Alexandrinus teacheth, that Moses made a law whereby hee plainly and expresly forbad any image molten, carved, or painted, to be made of God, because, saith hee, there is nothing in the
creature that resembleth the image of God. Tertullian living much about the same time, in his booke De spectaculis affirmeth, that God hath forbidden the likenesse of any thing to be made, much more the likenesse of his owne image: the au∣thour of truth doth not love any thing that is false or counterfeit, and all that is feigned or formed by art of him, is nothing but counterfeit. Origen spea∣king of the South Church, saith, the Christians make no image of the incorporall and invisible God. In the third age Minutius Felix, when the Gen∣tiles demanded of the ancient Christians, why they had no Images returned this answer, What image shall I make to God, when man himselfe, if we rightly judge, is Gods image? Lactantius conclu∣deth peremptorily, there is no doubt that there is no religion, whersoever there is an image, for seeing reli∣gion consisteth of Divine things, and nothing divine is to be found, but in heavenly things; images there∣fore are voyd of religion, because nothing that is hea∣venly can bee in that thing which is made of earth. In the fourth age, the Councell of Eliberis decreed, that no pictures should bee in Churches, lest that which is worshipped and adored, should be painted on walls. Athanasius condemneth them for fooles and senselesse, who liken God to corporall
things:Euseb. evan. praef. l. 3. quid simile habet corpus huma∣num menti Dei? & quis tam amens e∣rit ut dei for∣mam, & ima∣ginem statuâ viro simili re∣ferri phibeat? Eusebius is as hot in the point as Athana∣sius, what similitude hath the body of man with the mind of God, who would bee so mad as to imagine the forme and image of God to be resembled by an image and statue like unto man; and in his Epistle to Constantia the Empresse, who sent to him for an Image of Christ, he thus debateth the matter, What image doe you require of Christ, such an one as may expresse the characters of his divine nature? but I thinke you are sufficiently instructed of this, that no man hath thus seene the Sonne, but the Fa∣ther. Doe you require the image of the forme of a servant which he tooke?Epiph. ep. ad Iohan. Ierus. ep. 60. in veni ibi velum pen∣dens in foribus ejusdem eccle∣siae tinctum at{que} de pictum, & habens i∣maginem qua∣si Christi vel sancti alicujus non enim satis memini cujus imago fuerit: cum ergo hoc vidissem in ecclesiâ Christi contra autho∣ritatem scrip∣turarū, hominis pendere ima∣ginem scidi illud & ma∣gis dedi consi∣lium custodibus ejusdem loci ut pauperem mor∣tuum eo obvol∣verent, at{que} efferrent. Irome in E∣zek. l. 4. c. 16. nos unam ha∣bemus vivam, & unam ve∣neramur ima∣ginem quae est imago invisi∣bilis, & omni∣potentis Dei. Amphiloc. ci∣tat. à pat. con∣cil. Constanti∣nop. An. 754 . Aug. de mor. Eccl. c. 34 novi multos esse sepulchro∣rū & pictura∣rum adoratores, &c. Ep. 109 ad Ian. in primo praecepto prohibetur coli aliqua in figmen∣tis hominum Dei similitudo, non quia, non habet imaginem Deus, sed quia nulla imago e∣jus coli debet, nisi illa quae hoc est quod ipse. L. de fid. & symb. tale simulacrum Deo nefas est Christiano in templo collocare. but you must understand that that was joyned to the glory of his God-head, in so much, that his Apostles could not behold the glory of his flesh in the mount; much more glorious is it now having put off mortalitie, who is therefore able with dead and livelesse colours, and a shadowed picture to expresse those bright and shining beames of so great glorie. Epiphanius as zealous as either for entring into a Church at Anablathra, and fin∣ding there a vaile hanging at the doore died, and painted, and having the image as it were of Christ, or some Saint, seeing this, that contrary to the au∣thoritie of Scriptures the image of a man was hung up in the Church of Christ, he cut it, and the vaile and gave counsell to the Keepers of the place, to wrap and burie some poore dead man in it, and he intreated the Bishop of Ierusalem to give charge hereafter, that such vailes as that was, being repug∣nant to Christian religion should not bee hanged up
in the Church of Christ. S. Ierome in his Com∣ment upon the sixteenth of Ezekiel teacheth, that Christians never acknowledge, nor worship any image of the invisible and omnipotent God save one, to wit, his Sonne. In the fift age Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium instructeth us what account the Church made of images in these words, Wee have no care to figure by colours the bodily visages of Saints in tables, be∣cause wee have no need of such things; But by ver∣tue to imitate their conversation; and S. Austine treating of the catholique Church professeth that hee knew many worshippers of graves and pictures, and withall addeth the Church censure of them, but the Church, saith hee, condemneth them, and seeketh every way to correct them as un∣gracious children: and in his 109. Epistle to Ia∣nuarius, c. 11. hee writeth that in the first Com∣mandement, any similitude of God devised by man, is forbidden to bee worshipped, not because God hath not an image, but because no image of him ought to bee worshipped, but that which is the same thing that hee is; as for drawing him after the simili∣tude of a man hee utterly disliketh it, saying, it is unlawfull for a Christian to erect any such image, and place it in the Church; for as else-where hee argueth, images prevaile more to bow downe the
unhappy soule, in that they have a mouth, eyes, eares,Psal. 113. Conc. 2. plus e∣nim valent si∣mulacra ad curvandam infoelicem ani∣mam, quòd os babent, oculos habent, aures habent, nares habent, manus habent, pedes habent, quam ad corrigen∣dam, quòd non loquantur non videant, &c. God. li. 8. tit. 12. prohibe∣mus basilicam alicujus ima∣gine obscurari. Greg. Regis l. 7. ep. 109. ad Seren. praetereà judico dudum ad nos perve∣nisse, quòd fraternitas vestra quos∣dam imaginum adoratores a∣spiciens eas∣dem ecclesiae imagines con∣fregit at{que} pro∣jecit, & qui∣dem zelum vos ne quid manufactum adorari possit, habuisse laudavimus, sed frangere easdem imagines non debuisse judicamus, idcirco enim pictura in ecclesia adhibetur, ut hi qui literas nesciunt saltem in parietibus videndo legant, quae legere in codicibus non va∣lent. Vid. Concil. Nic. 2. Act. 6. Zonoras hist. Tom. 3. . nostrills, hands and feet, then to correct it, in that they neither heare, nor see, nor smell, nor handle, nor walke. In the sixt age. The Emperour Iustinian set∣teth downe a law made by Theodosius and Valen∣tinian, which forbiddeth Churches to bee obscured with any images or painted tables. In the seventh age. When Images began to be set up in the Churches, Serenus Bishop of Mar∣silis brake them downe, which fact of his, though Gregorie disliked, because he thought that images might profitably be retained as lay-mens books: yet in this hee commended his zeale, that hee would by no meanes suffer them to bee wor∣shipped. In the seventh age. There was a Councell held at Constantinople, Anno 754. wherein It was de∣creed by 338. Bishops in this manner, Wee doe de∣clare that all images of what nature soever, made by the wicked art of the Painter be cast out of Chri∣stian Churches, whosoever from this day forward shall dare to set up any images of God either in the Church, or in a private house; if hee be a Bishop let him bee deposed, if he be a lay-man let him bee ac∣cursed. Zonoras saith, that in the hearing of all the
people they openly forbad the worshipping of Images,H. de orthodox fid. l. 4. c. 17. & orat. de imag. calling such as adored them idolaters. And in the yeare 794. Charles the great called a Councell of 300. Bishops of France, Italie, and Germany, in which the second Synod of Nice, which decreed the erecting and worshipping of images is refuted and condemned; yea, and some of the patrones of images, as namely Durand, and Gregorie the se∣cond professedly inveigh against all Images and Pictures, made to represent the Deity or Trini∣tie, it is unpossible, saith Damascene, that God who can neither bee seene by man, nor circumscribed, should be expressed in any shape or figure; nay, saith hee, it is extreame madnesse and impietie to make a representation of the Godhead:Ep. Greg. ad Leo. Imper. de imag. in. and Gregorie the second giveth this reason to Leo the Emperour why they painted not God the Father, Quoniam quis sit non novimus, because wee know not who hee is, and the nature of God cannot be painted, and set forth to mans sight. Rhem. cont. Hinc. Laud. c. 20.In the eighth age. Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes tells us, that not long before his time a generall Synod was called in Germanie by Charles the great, and therein by the rule of Scriptures and Fathers, the Councell of Nice indeed saith he, a wicked Councell touching images, which some would have to bee broken in pieces, and some to bee worshipped was utterly rejected. In this age in the yeare 824. a Synod was held at Paris under Lu∣dovicus Pius, where the foresaid Councell of Nice was likewise condemned.
In the ninth age.Ionas Aureli∣an, de cultu imag l. 1. quae picturae non ad adorandum, sed solummodò teste beato Gregorio, ad instruendas nescientium mentes in ec∣clesijs sunt antiquitùs fie∣ri permissae. Agob. l. de pict. & Ima∣gin. rectè ni∣mirum ad e∣jusmodi eva∣cuandam su∣perstitionem ab orthodoxis fratribus defi∣nitum est pi∣cturas in ec∣clesia fieri non debere, ne quod adora∣tur in parieti∣bus depirga∣tur. Rhemig. in psal. 96. non sunt adoranda simulacra, nec enim Angelus adorandus est. Ansel. gloss. interlin. in Deut. c. 4. formam non vidistis ne scilicet volens imitari sculpendo fa∣ceres idolum tibi. Ʋid. Symph. Cathol. p. 822. Ann. lal 2. . Ionas Bishop of Orleans wrote against Claudius Bishop of Turin concer∣ning images, wherein he holdeth, that the images of Saints are not to bee worshipped, though they may be set up in Churches for ornament, and to bring in∣to the mind of simple people the storie of the Bible. And Agobardus Bishop of Lions telleth us, that the orthodox Fathers for the avoiding of supersti∣tion, did carefully provide that no pictures should bee set up in Churches. Rhemigius boldly profes∣seth, that neither images nor Angels are to bee worshipped. In the tenth age. Anselmus Laudunensis the authour of the interlineare glosse upon the Bible, composed of the Fathers writings, expoundeth that text of Deuteronomie, Yee saw no manner of similitude in this sort, lest that willing to resemble that similitude by engraving, thou shouldst set up an idoll to thy selfe. In the eleventh age. Nicetas Croniates a Greeke historian reporteth in the life and reigne of Isaac Angelus, one of the Easterne Emperours, that when Frederick Emperour of the West made an ex∣pedition into Palestine, the Armenians did gladly receive the Almaines, because among the Almaines and Armenians the worshipping of images was forbidden alike.
Annal. p. 1. Hist. eccl. l. 18. c. 53. imagines patris, & spi∣ritus sancti ef∣figiant quod est pe rabsurdum. Durand. in 3. sentent. dist. 9. q. 2. facere i∣magines ad re∣praesentandum deū patrem, et spiritū sanctū, aut venerari ejus imagines fatuū est; unde Damascenus dicit quod in∣sipientiae sum∣mae, & impie∣tatis est, figu∣rare quod est divinū. Avēt. hist. Bavar. l. 7. In Deut. 4. in imaginibus sig∣nantibus Deum unde scilicet trinitatem duo inconvenientia sequi possunt primū idolola∣tria ne etiam i∣mago colatur, secundum er∣ror, & haeresis scilicet attri∣buere Deo illam corpore itatem, & essentialem differentiam▪ qualē tres illas figuras figura∣re cōspicimus. Gerson com∣pend. theolog. de pri. praecep. ad adorandum, & colendum prohibentur imagines fieri.In the twelfth age. Roger Hoveden an English Historian condemneth the worship of images: for speaking of the Synodall Epistle written by the Fathers of the second Nicene Councell, wherein Image worship was established, hee addeth, quod omninò ecclesia Dei execratur, which the Church of God altogether abhorreth. In the thirteenth age. Nicephorus writing of the Iacobites saith, that they made images of the Father, and the holy Spirit, which, saith he, is most absurd. Durand stoutly maintaineth, that it is utterly unlawfull to picture, or represent the Trini∣tie, or God, otherwise then as in Christ hee tooke our flesh: and Pope Iohn the 22. calleth certaine men that dwelt in Bohemia and Austria, Anthropomor∣phitas (that is, heretiques ascribing an humane shape to God) because they painted the Trinitie in forme of an old man, with a young man and a Dove. In the fourteenth age. Abulensis is utterly against all painting of the Trinitie, because from thence two inconveniences may follow; first the pe∣rill of idolatrie, in case the image it selfe should come to bee worshipped: secondly, errour and here∣sie by ascribing to God such bodily shapes and formes, as the Trinitie is usually pictured withall. And Gerson commenting upon the first Com∣mandement speaketh fully in the Protestant lan∣guage, all images are forbid to bee made to adore or worship them: thou shalt not adore nor worship them; that is, thou shalt not adore them with any
bodily reverence, as bowing or kneeling to them, thou shalt not worship them with any devotion of mind. But to returne back to Philo, whose testimonie the Iesuit would faine put off by a double answer, first, that the Iewes had not in their Temple any picture of God, because hee cannot be painted: next that they had no picture of Saints, because there was none as yet might have the honour to have their pictures in the Temple, being not yet admitted them∣selves into the Temple of God. The first of these answers, the better it is, the worse it is for him∣selfe; the stronger it is, the more it maketh against the practise of his owne Church: in which wee see the Trinitie familiarly painted. In his second answer hee palliateth idolatrie by impietie, and that hee may have some colour to set up images of new Saints in Churches upon earth, hee excludeth all the old Saints before Christ, out of the heavenly temple of God. Not to digresse here to a dispute about their imaginary Limbus, I would faine know of the Iesuit, where did Enoch walke with God after hee was translated, that hee should not see death? to what place was Elias carried in a fierie chariot, not into heaven? When Dives soule was dragd by Divels into hell, was not Lazarus soule carried by Angels into heaven? the text saith,Luk. 16.22. hee was carried into Abra∣hams bosome; and where is that S. Austine will informe you, even where the soule of his friend saint Nebridius, and other blessed Doctours and confessours now live: whatsoever place, saith hee,
is meant by the bosome of Abraham, ibi vivit Ne∣bridius meus quis enim alius locus tam piae animae?August. Con∣fess. l 9. c. 3. there my Nebridius liveth, for what other place were meete for so godly a soule? To the sixt. There is nothing so easie as for a man with Antipho to pursue his owne fancie, or shadow, to set up a man of straw, and push him downe with a festraw: the Knight doth not thus argue, the Iewes hate the Image, and crosse of Christ, therefore Christians ought so to doe: for by the like reason it will follow that wee should condemne the very Gospell, yea and hate Christ himselfe, because the Iewes doe so; that is not his argument, but the Iesuits phantasme. The Knights argument standeth thus if of his enthy∣mem we make a Syllogisme; None may or ought to give a scandall to Iew or Gentile. But by setting up images or crucifixes in Temples, the Iewes are so scandalized, that even those among them, who other wayes might be enclined to embrace the Christi∣an faith are made utterly averse from it: because they cannot perswade themselves that it can bee the true religion which main∣taineth image-worship, which is so directly and expresly forbidden by God in the law. That the Iewes are thus scandalized at the idola∣trous practice of the Roman Church, the Knight proveth by an eye-witnesse Sir Edwine Sands, who in his description of the religion in the West
parts observeth, that the worship of images as it is at this day practised by the Roman Church, is such a stumbling block to the Iewes, and hinderance to their conversion, that when they come to Christian Sermons, as in Rome they are enjoyned at least once a yeare, so long as they see the Preacher direct his speech to a little woodden crucifix that standeth on the Pulpit by him, to call it his Lord and Saviour, kneele to it, embrace it and kisse it, to weepe upon it, as it is their fashion in Italie, it is preaching suffi∣cient for them, and perswadeth them more with the very sight of it to hate Christian religion, then any reason the world can alledge to love it. To the seventh.De idol c. 5: Apostolus af∣firmat omnia tunc figuratè populo acci∣disse, & ad∣dit benè quòd idem Deus qui lege vetuit si∣militudinem fi∣eri, extraordi∣nario praecepto serpentis simi∣litudinem fieri mandavit, si eundem Deum observas, ha∣bes legem ejus ne feceris simi∣litudinem, si & praeceptum factae posteà si∣militudinis re∣spicis, & tu imitare Mosen ne facias ad∣versus legem simulacrum ali∣quod, nisi & tibi Deus jus∣serit. The argument drawne from  the Cherubins, is refelled professedly by Tertul∣lian, the Apostle, saith he affirmeth, that all things happened to the Iewes in figures, and hee addeth well, the same God, who in his generall law forbad any similitude to be made, by an extraordinary pre∣cept commanded some similitude to bee made, if thou dost serve the same God, thou hast his law; Make to thy selfe no graven image, or similitude, if thou regardest the Precept of making a simili∣tude (as of the Cherubins, or brazen serpent, &e.) imitate thou Moses, make thou no image a∣gainst the law, unlesse God command thee by a Precept. Whereunto wee may farther adde, that the Cherubins were not made publikely to bee seene and gazed upon by the people: but were kept in the holy place whither the Priests only resorted; neither were they worshipped by the
Priests, as Lyra (cited by the Iesuit) who was himselfe a Iew at the first, and well knew their practice, professeth, the Iewes, saith he, worshipped not the Arke nor the Cherubins, nor the mercy seate, but the true God which promised to helpe them, neither were they set up in the Temple for adoration, but for ornament,L. 9. c. 6. q. 7. non ut adora∣rentur sed ob ornatum▪ & pulchritudinem Taberna l vel Templi, & ad majestate Dei plenius o¦stendendam. Lorin. in Act Apost c. 17. de Cherubinis jussi Dei fa∣cis, & de a∣lijs imaginibus a Solomone dicedum, fusse duntaxat ut appendices, & addita∣menta ornatus alterius rei non vero per se propositas mo∣do accommo∣dato ad adora∣tionem quam constat quo{que} ab Haebreis ipsis, non fuisse exhibitam, quod utrum{que} docet Tertullianus erit{que} id magis verum, si verum est Cherubin ore, manibus, cruribus, erectione corporis humanam, jubis à pectore, & cervice pendentibus Leoninam, alis aquilinam ungulis pedum vitulinam figuram retulisse. Vasq l de ador it. 2. disp. 4. c. 6. nunquam cheru∣binis honor, aut adoratio adhibita fuit, aut sculo, aut genuflexione, aut oblatione thuris, aut alio signo peculiari ad ipsos directo, nec quisquam nisi ex suo cerebro, & abs{que} ullo fundamento contrarium poterit affirmare. as Azorius convinced by evi∣dence of truth acknowledgeth, saying, the Che∣rubins were not painted or engraven on the Arke, to the end they might bee adored, but only to adorne and beautifie the Tabernacle, and more fully to ex∣presse the majestie of God, with whom Lorinus and Vasquez accord, concerning the Cherubins made by the command of God; and other images in Solomons Temple, wee must say that they were there as appendices and additions for the adorning of something else, not set forth by themselves in a manner fit for adoration; which it is manifest that the Iewes never exhibited to them, both which Tertullian teacheth. Vasquez commeth not behind Lorinus, teaching a contrarie lesson to Flood here, his words are, That the Cherubins were never adored nor worshipped, neither by kissing them, nor with bowing of the knee, or by offering Frankinsence, or by any other meanes, neither can
any man affirm the contrarie, except it be out of his owne braine without any foundation or ground at all. To the eighth. In this allegation the Iesuit  sheweth from whence he and his fellowes are de∣scended,L. 3. cont. hae∣res. c. 2. cum ex scripturis ar∣guuntur in ac∣cusationem convertuntur ipsarum scrip∣turarum, quasi non rectè ha∣beant, ne{que} sint ex authori∣tate, & quia variè sint di∣ctae, & quia non possit ex his inveniri veritas, ab his qui nesciunt traditionem, non enim per∣literas tradi∣tam illam, sed per vivam vocem. Aug. in Io. tract. 49. San∣ctus Evange∣lista testatur multa Domi∣num Christum & dixisse, & fecisse quae scripta non sunt: electa sunt autem, quae scriberen∣tur, quae salu∣ti credentium sufficere vide∣bantur. Cyr. in Io. 12. c. 68. non om∣nia quae Do∣minus fecit conscripta sunt, sed quae scribentes sufficere putârunt tam ad mores quàm ad dogmata, ut rectâ fide, & operibus, & virtute rutilantes, ad regnum coelorum perveniamus. viz. from the ancient Gnosticks and Valentinians, who as Irenaeus testifieth against them, When they are convinced of their heresies out of Scripture, they fall on accusing the Scriptures themselves, impeaching their authoritie, and char∣ging them with ambiguity, and saying that the truth cannot be found out of them by those who know not tradition, for that it was not delivered by letters, but by word of mouth. But because I have beate the Ie∣suit heretofore out of this dodge, and have pro∣ved abundantly the sufficiencie and perfection of Scriptures, I will spare farther labour herein, and only shew how shamefully he depraveth one text to the derogation of the whole Scripture, S. Iohn in the place alledged by him speaketh not of points of faith or manners, precepts, or exam∣ples for our imitation, but of miracles, Io. 20.30. Many things truly did Iesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this booke; Upon which words S. Austine and S. Cyrill hus glosse full in the Protestant language, the holy E∣vangelist testifieth that Christ did, and said many things that are not written, but those things were chosen to bee written, which seemed sufficient for the salvation of them that beleeve; and S. Cyrill, all things which Christ did are not written, but what
the writers thought to bee sufficient as well for our conversation as doctrine, that shining with the right faith and vertuous workes, we may attaine to the kingdome of heaven. To the ninth. Were the grave authours, the Iesuit speaketh of authenticall, and these stories gospell: yet the Adversarie would gaine nothing thereby, nor we lose; For we are none of the I∣conomachi that bid battell to Images, and knock them downe wheresoever they find them with battle-axes. Forbeare the representation of the invisible Deity, and blessed Trinitie, and remove all scandall from the people, and perill of idola∣trie, and let the images and pictures of Christ and his Saints stand where they doe for memorie, hi∣storie, and beautifying and adorning the walls and windowes. Wee dislike it not as the Iesuit may reade in our bookes, and see in our Chur∣ches, and houses. But the truth is, neither are the stories of credit, nor the authours of them of that account as the Iesuit would have them.Comment. in 2 Timoth. Of some of them wee may truly say, as Espencaus doth of Nicephorus, that they are in these relati∣ons, si non mendaces, saltem audaces, if not altoge∣ther fabulous, yet very audacious; for the image sent to King Abgarus, it is of no more credit then the letter sent with it, which the Romish Church, as all other Christians, hold to bee Apochrypha were it Canonicall it should make a part of the
New Testament. And for the second we cannot but wipe our eyes in bewayling their folly, who beleeve that Christ by wiping his face, as hee was carrying his Crosse, should imprint his image in his handkerchiefe. Yea but these images are confir∣med by wonderfull miracles wrought by them. I answer first out of Biel upon the canon of the Masse,Dist. in pro∣phano cultu Diabolus plu∣rimùm delecta∣tur, & quan∣tum valet co∣operatur ac assistit appa∣rentibus mi∣raculis. Cic. in Ver. act. 6. multa prodi∣gia vim ejus numen{que} de∣clarant. Strab. l. 8. Geograph. Espenc. loc. sup. cit. dae∣monum spectris & mulierum somnijs parum verecundè utebantur. Edwin Sands discourse of his Travels, & Apolog. Herodoti per R. Stev. that the Divell is much delighted in pro∣phane worship (such is your worship of images) and helpeth it forward as much as hee can by see∣ming miracles; next, that this was the heathens plea for their worshipping of images; for Tully speaking of the image of Ceres in Sicily, saith, many wonders doe shew the divine vertue thereof; and the Graecians as Strabo writeth, used to set up in tables the diseases cured by Aesculapius in Epidaurus, as the Papists at this day doe, the di∣seases cured by the image of the blessed Virgin in Lauretto. Thirdly, that learned Papists finde much fault with the seventh generall Councell for founding the worshipping of images upon the delusion of Divels, and old wives tales, and dreames. Lastly, most of the Popish legendary stories in this kind, may easily be proved to bee no miracles of God, nor wrought by sorcerie or enchantment through the power of Satan, but to be meere impostures wrought by their Priests, who are the greatest juglers in the world in this kind. To the tenth. S. Austine maketh great ac∣count  of this speech of Varro, for hee twice
maketh mention of it in this fourth booke. First chapter the ninth,L. 4. De civit. Dei, c. 9. Var∣roni simulacra ita displicue∣runt, ut cum tantae civita∣tis perversâ consuetudine premeretur, nequaquam tamen dicere & scribere dubitaret, quòd hi qui populis instituerunt simulacra, & metum demp∣serunt, & er∣rorem addide∣runt. Varro was so farre out of love with images, that though hee were pressed with the perverse custome of so great a City as Rome was, yet hee made no bones, both to say and write that they, who first brought in Images, both tooke away religious feare of God, and added errour to boote: and in his thirtie one chapter he hath this memo∣rable observation, the Romans worshipped their gods more then a 170. yeares without images, and if they had done so still, saith hee, the gods had beene more chastly or purely worshipped by them. Yea, but the Iesuit with a wet finger turneth over these passages, as if nothing were said by S. Au∣stine or Varro to the prejudice of their images shrines, or Altars: for S. Austine by Simulacrum meaneth not an image, but an Idoll, not the repre∣sentation of the true, but a resemblance of false and feigned deities. The distinction of image and i∣doll, I have before refelled: nothing remaines for the refutation of this answer of the Iesuit, but that I shew out of S. Austine,De fide, & Symb. c. 7. nec id ipsum quod sedêre pater dicitur flexis politibus fieri putandum est, tale simula∣crum Deo ne∣fas est Christi∣ano in Templo co locare. that by Simulacrum hee meaneth any image, even of the true God. And not to trouble the reader with many instan∣ces those words of his in his Treatise of faith, and the Creed, clearely convince the Iesuit, Wee must not thinke, saith he, that God the Father who is said to fit, sitteth in heaven with bowed knees, as a man sitteth in a chaire, such a simulacrum or image, it is not lawfull to set up in the Temple of Christians, had the Iesuit but perused the chapter
pointed to by the Knight, to which he professeth to give a direct answer, hee would have given himselfe the lye, and checked his former inter∣pretation of S. Austines words; for immediatly after the former period, the Father addeth, that Varro in proofe of his assertion alledgeth the custome of the Iewish nation; and a little after he saith,Hujus senten∣tiae suae testem ad hibet gentem Iudaeam. Vnum Deum, à quo mundum crederet guber∣nari, sine simu∣lacro colendum censuit. that Varro thought that God by whom hee beleeved the world was governed, ought to be worshipped without an image: by which words it is evident, that by simulacra hee meant, not only the images of false gods, which alone the Iesuit calls Idolls, but al∣so of the true God; For the Iewes whose cu∣stome hee bringeth in for himselfe, abhorred all Images or Pictures even of the true God: and Varro himselfe by that Governour of the world whom hee would have to bee worshipped, with∣out an image, meant the true God, as S. Austine himselfe testifieth of him. Howsoever the title which hee there giveth him of anima mundi, or soule of the world, soundeth harsh in a Christian eare: yet S. Austine alloweth of Varro his asserti∣on or opinion, as comming neerer to the truth, then other of the heathen Philosophers, in that hee taught but one God, and him to bee not ma∣teriall or corporeall, but of a spirituall and invisi∣ble substance, and therefore not to bee drawne with pensill, or counterfeited with colours, with∣out errour or impietie. To the eleventh. Eusebius relateth the storie  of Veronica her statue dedicated to the memorie
of Christs miraculous cure wrought upon her, with approbation thereof as being a lasting mo∣nument, and standing testimonie of her gratitude to our Saviour, and much tending both to the confirmation of the Gospell in generall, and that particular miracle of Christ, for who would not beleeve that the woman was cured of her bloudy issue by touching the hemme of Christs garment, when hee saw an unusuall kind of herbe growing at the foot of that Statua, which as soone as it grew up so high, as to touch the hemme of the brazen garment, received a miraculous vertue from it to cure diseases of every kind; notwith∣standing all this faire weather Eusebius falleth fowle upon the Originall of this erecting statuaes to the memorie of the dead, attributing it to a heathenish rite or custome. Neither doth the Knight any way wrong Eusebius in the relation, or translation of this passage. For certaine it is, that the people of God began not first to set up images, or erect statuaes. The first which wee ever read of, was consecrated to Belus, the suc∣cessour of Ninus by the Assyrians who were Paynims, and the word  ethnicus or gentilis, signifieth Gentile or Heathen; whatsoever the Iesuit alledgeth out of Thomasius Dictionarie to the contrarie, saying, Looke in your Dictionarie of Thomas Thomasius, whether amongst all the Englishes of Gentilis which are there set downe,P. 300. you can find heathenish, which I dare say you cannot. The Greeke word in Eusebius text is , and the
Latine gentilis signifieth the same thing, to wit, belonging to a countrey, people, stocke, or family, had the Iesuits, and Seminarie Priests at Doway and Rhemes, better studied Thomas Thomasius Di∣ctionarie, they would not have fraught their English translation of the Bible, with so many affected harsh-sounding, and uncoth words to English eares, as announce archisynagogue, a∣zymes, commessations, depositum, didrachme, euro∣clydon, exinanited, holocaust, hosts, victimes, pa∣raclete pasche, resuscitate, neophyte, superedified, and the like. Againe, though Thomasius render not the word Heathenish, yet he rendereth it gentile, which is all one; and let the Iesuit turne over all his Thomasius, and Eliots, and Riders, and Coopers, and Calepines, and see whether hee can finny other proper Latine word answering to the English Heathen, or heathenish, then gentilis or ethnicus, a word derived of the Greeke  or , the very word used by Eusebius in this place. When so often in the holy Scriptures of the old Testament the word gentes occureth, as in the 2 Psal. v. 1. the 9. v. 5. and the 10. v. 16. and the 44. v. 2. and the 98. v. 1. and the 135. v. 15. and else-where, what can the Iesuit meane by it but Gentile, or how can he translate it in pure and proper English,Orat. de obit. Theodos. regem adoravit, non lignum uti{que} quia hic genti∣lis error est, & vanitas impio∣rum. but heathen or heathenish na∣tions: according to the meaning of the holy Ghost in those texts? What will hee say to the words of S. Ambrose, When Helena read the title upon the Crosse then newly found, shee fell downe
and worshipped what or whom? The King (saith that Father) to wit, Christ there entitled the King of the Iewes; not verily the wood, for that is a heathe∣nish errour, and a vanity of ungodly men. Doth not gentilis here signifie prophane, Pagan and heathe∣nish, therefore the Knights credit is salved in that his translation of Eusebius, and the Iesuits credit and cause also lyeth a bleeding. For though the word  in Greeke, and gentilis in Latine; sometimes in good authours signifieth no more then belonging to a countrie or nation,Verisimile est quod majores nostri ad gen∣tilis consuetu∣dinis similitu∣dinem, quàm∣primùm acce∣dentes, eos qui tanquam ser∣vatores illis fuissent, apud se honore ad hunc modum afficere con∣sueverunt. be it Chri∣stian or heathenish: yet in this place of Eusebius it cannot be otherwayes taken then for heathen, for Eusebius a little before saith, it is not to be wondered that those who are sprung of the Gentiles, or came of heathenish parents, and received benefits of our Sa∣viour where he lived, did thus unto him, adding it is very likely, that ur ancestours herein followed the custome of the heathen; who honoured all such with Statutes who had been as saviours unto them preser∣ving their lives. To the twelfth. The Councell of Eliberis is as a thorne in the Iesuits eyes, and therefore he hath many plucks at it: yet he plucks it not out, but pricketh his owne fingers. First, he saith it was an obscure Councell,Vid suprà ver∣ba Agobardi. without any certainty of the time when it was held. As obscure as he maketh it, it is a Councell of reverend antiquity cited by S. A∣gobardus, and approved by him, and honourably mentioned by all Writers, who impugne idola∣trous innovations, & corruptions in the Church.
As for the time Baronius and the best Chronolo∣gers affirme, that it was held in the yeare of our Lord 305. in the time of Marcellus the first, and was consequently more ancient then the first most famous Councell at Nice, if to this Councell the Iesuit oppose one of Constantinople, the other at Rome under Gregory the third, and the third at Nice in favour of images: we in like manner op¦pose to those idolatrous and hereticall, many Councels of better note, condemning image-worship, as namely the Councell of Constantino∣ple, held in the yeare 754. and another celebrated there in the yeare 814. and a third at Frankford in the yeare 794. and a fourth at Paris under Lu∣dovicus, in the yeare 824. together with the book of Charles the great, and the Epistle of the English Bishops penned by Alcuinus, and mentioned by Houeden in his storie of England, and many other tractates of famous writers of England & France, who professedly impugned and refuted the De∣crees of the second Councel at Nice, establishing i∣mage-worship. Yea, but saith the Iesuit, the Canon of Eliberis shooteth not home to the point in questi∣on, for it forbiddeth not pictures absolutely in Chur∣ches, but only painting them on the walls. I reply first, that the Councell forbiddeth pictures in Churches absolutely, the expresse words of the Canon are, placuit in ecclesiâ picturas esse non de∣bere, it seemed good to the Councell, that pictures should not be in Churches; Whereof the 19. Fathers present at that Synod render this reason, ne quod
collitur in parietibus depingatur, lest that which is worshipped should be painted on the walls. Secondly, I reply if the Councell of Elliberis, as the Iesuit granteth, forbiddeth any image to be painted on the Church-walls, why doe Papists every where in their Churches at this day paint images on the walls? Yea but the Iesuit addeth, who is best at a dead lift, that we are besides the matter, in produ∣cing the Canon of this Councell against images, which was made in honour of them, si credere fas est. For the Councell, saith the Iesuit, forbad painting images on the walls of the Church, because they thought not the walls a place convenient, lest the plaister breaking off in some places, they might be∣come deformed, and so contemptible. Whereunto I rejoyne, first, that if the Councell did this out of honour to images,Canus loc. theol. non mo∣dò impruden∣ter, sed & impiè decre∣tum. why doth their learned Bishop Canus so severely tax this Decree, tearming it not only a foolish, but an impious Canon? Secondly, if the Councell made this Deeree out of honour to images; Why doe not all Papists, who stand so much for the honour and worship of images, o∣bey this Decree, and deface all images that are pointed on Church-walls? Thirdly, if it bee an honour to images to be removed out of all Chur∣ches according to the purport of this Decree in the Iesuits understanding, then the reformed Churches may justly be thought to have shewed the most respect, and done the greatest honour to images of all other, by casheering them out of their Churches, pra amore excluserunt foras, no
doubt out of love they shut them out of doores. Fourthly, this reason taken from plaister brea∣king a plaister to make it whole, for if for this reason images may not bee painted on walls, for feare of being defaced by weather or the plai∣ster breaking: by the like reason they should not bee painted in cloth, or upon board, be∣cause they are in like manner subject there to be soyled, razed, stolne away, or many other wayes to be injured. To the thirteenth. The Iesuit sueth a Du∣plex querela against the Knight concerning Va∣lence the Emperour; first, because hee stileth him a good Emperour; next, because hee ranketh him with Theodosius a Copartner with him of the Empire, whereas Valence was killed twen∣tie three yeares before Theodosius was borne. Against his first quarrell I need plead nothing, because Valence is not so styled by the Knight in the last corrected edition of Via tuta. If the Knight had so styled him in any former edition,Bapt. in Chrō. he might have vouched a good authour for it, namely bap∣tista Egnatius who speaking of Valence, and his brother Valentinian saith, Digni imperio fratres, & inter bonos referendi, they were worthy the Em∣pire, and to bee ranked among good Princes, saving that Valence was somewhat blemished by being se∣duced in judgement by the Arrians;Invect. in Iu∣lian. as also was Constantius the Emperour; and yet Gregorie Nazianzen commendeth him for a religious Prince, that much promoted the affaires of the
Christians against the heathen. and for the blotte of errour in his judgement hee layes the blame of it upon the subtile wits of the Arrian here∣tiques, who put tricks upon that other-wayes good Emperour. For the second quarrell hee pickes, it is not worth a straw. For though Valence and Theodosius lived not together, yet they might both enact the same law. Valence might first make it, and after Theodosius confirme and revive it, as King Iames hath revived many lawes made by Queene Elizabeth, and other her predeces∣sours, though they never reigned together in this Kingdome; howsoever if there were any er∣ror in relating this law out of the Coad as the Iesuit pretendeth,Zanch in praec. 2. Sed Petrus Crinitus scri∣bit apertè se vidisse legem ipsam in anti∣quissimis codi∣cib. qaae simpli∣citer habebat, ne pingeretur nulla mentione soli, aut mar∣morum humi positorum facta. . he ought to plucke Petrus Crinitus by the beard for it; for the Knight quoteth not the Coad or Digests for this law, but Petrus Crini∣tus, De honestâ disciplinâ, l. 9. c. 9. where hee may find the precise words alledged by the Knight, unlesse peradventure his Petrus Cri∣nitus hath felt the razor of the Popish Inquisiti∣on, and if so, let him looke to more ancient editions of Crinitus, quoted by the Authour of the English Homilies, and Zanchius in his Com∣ment upon the second Commandement, where this golden locke of Petrus Crinitus is not cut off. For what Timon spake concerning the Editions of Homer, may bee said of Crinitus and other Ro∣mish Authours, the most correct copyes are those that were never corrected.
To the foureteenth. The Iesuit should have  said a Paulian heretique, for Clemanges and Wickliffe professe with Paul, Acts 24.14. That after the way which they (the Papists) call heresie, they so worship the God of their fathers in spirit and truth, that they beleeve all things written in the Law and the Prophets; and nothing as neces∣sarie to salvation, which is not written in them. It is true, Wickliffe was condemned for an he∣retique: but it was many yeares after his death, when hee could not plead for himselfe: and the Councell which condemned him was a perju∣red and a condemned Councell, not only in the judgements of Protestants, but also ingenuous Papists; for in that Councell three Popes were deposed, and a fourth chosen, Martin the fift Huz and Ierome of Prage, contrary to the safe conduct, sent them under the Seale of the Em∣perour Sigismund, were burnt to death, and their ashes throwne in the River. Now as it is an ho∣nour laudarì à laudato, to bee commended by men that themselves deserve commendation: so it is no disgrace or disparagement at all damnari à damnato, to bee condemned by a Councell which is condemned, and reproved it selfe even by the Roman Church at least in the first Sessions of it. And such as are the first fruits,Bellar. de Con∣cil. c. 7. Conci∣lium Constan∣tiense quan∣tum ad primas Sessiones ubi definit concilium esse supra Papam reprobatum est, in con∣cilio Florentino, & Laterananensi ultimo. such is the whole lumpe.
To the fifteenth. All the Iesuits Geese are Swannes,Multa Dir∣coeum levat aura Cygnum, &c. but our Dircaean Swannes with him are no better then geese, antiquum obtinet; this was just the fashion of the ancient here∣retiques, the Gnosticks, and the Donatists, if any came over to their side, hee was pre∣sently cryed up for a man of singular parts and vertues, but if hee returned to the bo∣some of the Church, hee was cryed downe for a Weather-cocke, or a tressis agaso. It was well saith Saint Austine, for Maximia∣nus and Primianus, that they fell to the Do∣natists sect, whereby presently they gained the reputation of great Clarkes and primemen, wheras otherwayes if they had kept their old sta∣tion, Maximianus would have beene held Mini∣mianus, and Primianus Postremianus: but let me tell the Iesuit that how much soever he sleighteth Cassander, Erasmus, and Wicelius: that the worst of them in the time when he lived, was of bet∣ter account then I.R. or Leomelius, or Daniel a Iesu. As for gravitie and wisedome, hee commeth farre short of Cassander, for zeale and integritie, of Wicelius: so if wee speake of all kind of learning, hee is not worthy to carry E∣rasmus bookes after him; Dispeream, si tu matulam praebere Mamurrae dignus es. But I spare him in this kind, because for his
impudencie and ignorance: two Sorbon Do∣ctours, Aurelius and Lallier, have disciplined him to the purpose, and I will bee loth saevire in plagas & vulnera. Yea but some of these mens Workes are marked in the Roman Index, saith the Iesuit, they are so indeed to the eter∣nall prayse of their ingenuity: and to the ever∣lasting infamie of the Romish Inquisitors cru∣eltie, who so deale with the witnesses of truth, as Pope Sergius did with Formosus his prede∣cessor after his death; they mangle and deface them, cutting off their thumbes and fingers wherewith they testified and signed the truth in their writings. To the sixteenth. In this Paragraph the Ie∣suit  is totus fermento: it wonderfully transpor∣teth him, and putteth him in a cold sweat, that the Knight should say out of Chemnitius, that the second Synod of Nice, in which Image-worship was established, was condemned in the Councell of Frankford held in the yeare of our Lord 794. The Magdeburgians, saith hee,P. 308. and other your owne Authours affirme, that that very Councell of Frankford did say an Anathema to all such as deface images; is not this then abo∣minable falshood in your friend Chemnitius to cite, nay forge it against images, and in you to fol∣low him in it? ne Saevi magne Sacerdos: let not the Iesuit lay about him so furiously, lest per∣adventure hee lend a blow to his best friends,
for besides other Historians of good note, Hinc∣marus Archbishop of Rhemes,P. 306. Hincma. Rhem. advers. Hincma. Lau∣dunens. c. 20. Graecorum pseudo-Syno∣dus destructa est, & peni∣tùs abdicata. Ado. Vien. in cron. aetat. 6. pseudo-syno∣dus quam sep∣timam Graeci appellant pro imaginibus a∣dorandis abdicata penitùs. Idem habet Regino ad. ann. 794. Bellarmine, lib. de Concil. c. 7. Concilium Francofordiense reprobatur, quantum ad alteram partem in qua ex errore damnatur septima Synodus. whom himselfe calleth a Catholique indeed; nay, and Cardinall Bellarmine himselfe also  saith as much as Chemnitius or the Knight, to wit, that the Councell of Nice was condem∣ned in the Councell of Frankford; neither doth the Anathema pronounced in that councell a∣gainst such as deface images, fall upon us who fight not against images, as the Iconomachi did, but against image-worship, as that Councell of Frankford doth. To the seventeenth. The words of Polydore Virgill are these,De invent. l. 6 c. 13. de simu∣lacrorum cultu jam agamus quem non mo∣dò nostrae rell∣gionis exper∣tes, sed teste Hieronymo omnes ferè ve∣teres sancti patres damna∣bant ob metum idololatriae. Let us now speake of the Worship of images, which not only those which were ignorant of our religion, but as Saint Ie∣rome testifieth, almost all the ancient holy Fa∣thers condemned for feare of idolatrie. To this allegation the Iesuit saith, that Polydore is to be understood of the Fathers of the Old Testament only. Although Polydore hath not the word Old Testament, but ancient Fathers and Saints, which style the Church of Rome never attri∣buted to any before Christ. But bee it so, let us take what hee granteth, wee have then the testimonie of the true Church before Christs
Incarnation against image-worship: and this is advantage enough, unlesse the Iesuit could con∣front their judgement by Christ and his Apo∣stles, or some of the Fathers of the New Te∣stament. Yet what if Polydore Virgill in that place nameth some of the Fathers in the New Testament?Divus quo{que} Gregorius Se∣renum epis∣copum Mar∣siliensem re∣prehendit quòd imagines fre∣gisset, & laudat quòd coli inhibu∣isset. will not that stoppe the Iesuits mouth? reade then a little further in Polydore in the same chapter courteous Reader, and thou shalt meete with these words. Saint Gregorie also reproveth Serenus the Bishop of Marsellis for breaking downe images, and yet commen∣deth him in that hee forbad the worship of them. To the eighteenth. Peresius saith, that there  can bee no sound proofe brought either out of Scripture, or tradition of the Church, or com∣mon consent of Fathers, or determination of a generall Councell, or any other effectuall rea∣son to perswade a man, that the image of Chrtst,L. de tradit. nullum quod ego viderim, afferunt vali∣dum funda∣mentum, neque scripturas, ne{que} traditio∣nem ecclesiae, ne{que} commu∣nem consen∣sum sancto∣rum, ne{que} con∣cilij generalis determinatio∣nem aliquam, nec etiam ra∣tionem quâ hoc efficaciter suaderi posset, scilicet imagines Christi, & sanctorum adorari debere, eadem adorati∣one quâ & res quae repraesentantur. P. 242. and the Saints, are to bee worshipped with the same adoration that the samplers are. Is this no∣thing against you? then Aquinas, and in a manner all the Schoole-men, Ludovicus Para∣mo, Bernardus, Pind, Franciscus Petigianis, Petrus de Cabrera, Azotius, Lamas, Rubio, Bu∣stus, quoted by the Bishop of Ely, in his re∣ply to Fisher, with divers others reckoned up by Bellarmine, l. 2. de imag. c. 20. were no
Papists. For all the above-mentioned, hold that opinion for Catholique, whieh Peresius con∣demneth. To the Nineteenth. The more wee looke into Agobardus the greater reason wee have to make account of him: for the first hee alled∣geth the Councell of Eliberis against setting up of images in Churches: next hee affirmeth that the ancients had pictures of Saints painted or carved, ad recordandum non ad colendum, to remember the Saints by them, not to worship them. Lastly, hee averreth that there is no example in all the Scriptures, or Fathers for adoration of ima∣ges: and what doth or can any Protestant say more against the doctrine of the Roman Church in this point, then this Agobardus doth, whom this Iesuit canonizeth for a saint? neither can he put him off by saying, that hee speaketh against Idoll-worship,Hic author cautè legendus est, quoniam laborat eodem errore quo Agobardus, & reliqui ejus aetatis Galli, qui ne∣gabant sacris imaginibus ul∣lum deberi cul∣tum religiosum. or some abuse of Images which crept in in his time; for Bellarmine who bet∣ter studied Agobardus, then this Iesuit, in his booke of Ecclesiasticall Writers, ad an∣num 820. in his censure of Ionas Bishop of Or∣leans saith, this Authour is to bee read with caution, because hee was infected with the same opinion that Agobardus, and other French Bishops
of that age were, who denie any religious worship to bee due to images. To the twentieth. Sententias loquitur  Carnifex; this is the first essay wee heard from this Iesuit, but nothing to the purpose, for wee grant that things that are good in themselves, and of a necessarie and profitable use, are not to bee taken away for the abuse: but wee denie that Images in Churches are of that nature; neither is his law-Axiome uni∣versally true, Vtile per inutile non vitiatur, that which is profitable, is not corrupted or made bad by that which is unprofitable. For the brazen Serpent in the Wildernesse was for a time utilis, profitable, curing them that had beene stung by the fiery Serpent: yet per∣inutile vitiabatur, it was corrupted and made scandalous and unprofitable by the peoples abusing it to idolatrie: and if that Image be∣ing a type of Christ, and set up by Gods spe∣ciall command, was yet broken in pieces by good King Ezekiah, after the people began to worship it: how much more ought those images to bee knocked downe, and stamped to powder, which are set up in popish Chur∣ches against GODS commandement, and have beene abused to idolatrie above eight hundred yeares in such a grosse manner, espe∣cially
by the vulgar, that as Polydore Virgill ingenuously confesseth, many of the ruder sort of them, magis ijs fidunt quàm Christo, put more confidence in the image then Christ him∣selfe?
Concerning Indulgences, Specta∣cles, paragraph 8. a page 319. usque ad 345. THE Knight himselfe granteth the use  of giving Indulgences, to have been in the ancient Church, and that Bi∣shops had power to grant them. Christs Merits lying in store for  the need of all men, may be fitly com∣pared to a common Treasure, and be called by that name. So farre forth then as those Pardons were grounded on Christs merits, or granted by applica∣tion of them to the penitent, there is no difference betweene theirs and ours. Saint Paul forgave the incestuous Corinthian,  not onely in the person of Christ, but for their sake also: which importeth, the prayer and deserts of Saints to have some place in the bestowing of that Indulgence; and so likewise, it was the practise of the Primitive Church: and what was this, but by applying the superabundant merits in the one, to supply the want in the other? That the merits of Martyrs were applied to  others, appeareth by Tertullian, who being become now an Heretike, did reprehend that custome, say∣ing,
that a Martyrs merits were little enough for himselfe, without having any surplussage to helpe others withall. Many a man continueth his great austerity of Fasting, Watching, Praying, and other exercises of all vertues, after hee hath obtained pardon for the fault it selfe, by hearty contrition and by humble confession obtained also remission of the temporall punishment, within the space of 1, 2, 3, 7, 10, or 12 yeares (for example sake) hee then leading the same life for 20, 30, 40, 50, or 60 yeares, as many have done; what shall become of all that satisfaction which is over and above, for that sinne or sinnes which hee committed before? It doth not perish or passe without fruit, though not of him, yet of others: and if they be not applied presently, why may they not then be said to lye in deposito, as money in a Treasurie? Sith all grant Indulgences for the living, why not for the dead, so long as they pertaine to the Commu∣nion of Saints, and have need thereof? The authority which the Knight citeth, to make Indulgences applyed to the soules in Purgatorie to be ridiculous, out of the old Sarum booke of the houres of our Lady, doth not mention Purgatorie, but one∣ly saith, That whosoever shall say these and these prayers, shall gaine so many thousand yeares of pardon, which is no more for the dead than for the living. It is false which the Knight averreth, that wee give Pardons for thousands of yeares in Purgatory
after death. For wee doe not so, neither doe wee un∣derstand those Pardons, wherein are mentioned such number of yeares so, as if men were without those Pardons, to remaine so long in Purgatorie: but wee understand those yeares according to the penitentiall Canons, by which, many yeares penance were due for one sinne, and many mens sinnes being both very grievous, and as a man may say, without number, according to the account of the ancient penitentiall Canons, they may soone amount to thousands of yeares, which, though a man cannot live to per∣forme here in this world, nor even in Purgatory, for the length of time; yet hee may in Purgatorie, in few yeares space, nay, few months, or few weekes space, suffer so much punishment as is answerable to all that penance of many thousand of yeares, which a man should have performed here, if hee could have lived so long. The Authours alleaged by the Knight, against  Indulgences, prove no more than wee grant, that there is not so expresse mention in Scriptures or an∣cient Fathers of them, as of many other points, because there was not so much use of them in those dayes. Though some Fathers mention them not, wee  prove the use of them out of others more ancient, to wit, out of Saint Cyprian and Tertullian, as you may see in Bellarmine, lib. de indul. c. 3. and be∣sides them, the authority of certaine Councels, as that of Nice, Ancyra, and Laodicea. Though wee had not either the testimonie of these
Fathers, nor of those Councells, yet would not that follow which the Knight groundeth thereon, to wit, that wee want antiquitie, and consent of Fathers for them; for it is a most strong argument of anti∣quitie, that it is the practise of the Catholike Church, time out of mind, and of consent, that no man is found to have spoken against them, but onely  knowne Heretikes,In contrariū est generalis con∣suetudo & do∣ctrina ecclesiae quae contineret falsitatem, nisi per indulgen∣tias dimitte∣retur aliquid de paenâ pec∣catori debitâ. such as the Waldenses, who were the first impugners of Indulgences. Durand, whom the Knight alleageth in the first place, having propounded the question, in 4. sent. dis. 20. q. 5. an aliquid valeant indulgentiae, after the manner of the Schooles, putteth two arguments against them in the first place, and then commeth with his arguments. Sed contra, agreeing expresly with his conclusion. On the contrarie, saith he, is the  generall custome and doctrine of the Church, which should containe falshood,De heresibus, l. 8. tit. indulg. verum etsi pro indulgentiarum approbatione sacrae scripturae testimonium apertum de sit, non tamen ideo contemnende erunt quoniam ecclesiae catho¦licae usus a mul∣tis annorū cen∣turiis tantae est authoritatis, ut qui illam con∣temnat haereti∣cus merito cen¦seatur. if something of the punish∣ment due to a Sinner, should not be forgiven by In∣dulgences; and presently after, hee nameth Saint Gregory, and saith of him, that hee did institute Indulgences at the stations in Rome. Alfonsus a Castro, though hee confesse the use of Indulgences, not to have beene so much in those ancient times as since; yet hee alloweth them so farre, as to condemne any man for an Haeretike that shall deny them. 14. The Knight prateth very freely of the Popes selling of Indulgences, and bringing money to his owne coffers by them: but to that I need to make no other answer, but that it is such riff-raff-stuffe
as their Ministers are wont to eeke out their bookes, & Sermons, without being able to shew any Bull of Pope, or testimony of good authour of any Indulgence so granted. For the Knights prophane jeast out of Guicciar∣dine of playing a game at Tables for an indulgence,  suppose that were true, might not a man thinke you tell as good a tale of some Protestants, who in their pots have made so bold with Almighty God him∣selfe, as to drinke a health to him; and were not this a fine argument to prove that there is no God? It is intollerable presumption in the Knight to  take upon him to censure so great a Councell as that of Trent. Wherein the whole flower of the Catho∣lique Church, for learning and sanctity was gathe∣red together, the splendour of which Councell, was so great, that your night owle Heretiques durst not once appeare, though they were invited to goe and come freely with all the security they could wish. Whereas the Knight saith that it is a senselesse  and weake faith that giveth assent to doctrine, as necessary to be believed, which wanteth authority out of Scriptures and consent of Fathers. I answer, he knoweth not what he saith, for all the Fathers agree, that there are many things which men are bound to believe upon unwritten traditions, whose authority you may see in great number in Bellarmine.De verbo Dei. l. 4. c 7. The consent of Doctours of the Catholique  Church cannot more erre in one time then another, the authority of the Church, and assistance of the
Holy Ghost being alwayes the same, no lesse in one time then another,Tertull. de pre∣script. cap. 28. quod apud mul∣tos unum inve∣nitur, non est er∣ratū sed tradi∣tum. and Tertullians rule having still place, as well in one age as another, that which is the same amongst many, is not errour but a tra∣dition. St. Paul thought, he answered sufficiently for the  defence of himselfe, and offence of his contentious enemy, when he said (1 Cor. 11.) If any man seeme to be contentious, we have no such cu∣stome, nor the Churches of God. It is false which the Knight againe repeateth, that an article of faith cannot be warantable, without authority of Scriptures, for faith is more ancient then Scripture; to say nothing of the times before Christ, faith was taught by Christ himselfe without writing, as also by the Apostles after him, for ma∣ny yeares without any word written. As no lesse credite is to be given to the Apostoli∣call preaching, then writing, so no lesse credit is still to be given to their words, delivered us by tra∣dition, then by their writings: the credite and  sense of the writings depending upon the same tra∣dition. De baptismo. l. 2 c. 7. l. 5. c. 25. cont. Maximin: l. 3. c. 3. et Epist. 174 de Genesi ad litteram. l. 10. c. 23. l. de cu∣ra pro mortuis. et Epist. 118. de unit. eccles. c. 22. et tract. 98. in Iohan.St. Austine defendeth many points of faith, ei∣ther onely or chiefely by tradition, and the practise of the Catholique Church; as single Baptisme against the Donatists, consubstantiality of the Sonne, the divinity of the Holy Ghost, and even unbegottennesse of the Father against the Arrians, and the Bap∣tisme of children against the Pelagians: to say no∣thing of prayer for the dead, observation of the
feasts of Easter, Ascention, Whitsontide, and the like. Nay, this truth was so grounded with him, that he accounted it most insolent madnesse to dispute against the common opinion, and practise of the Catholique Church. In his booke of the unity of the Church, he saith, that Christ beareth witnesse of his Church; and in his Tractates upon John, ha∣ving occasion to handle those words of St. Paul. If we, or an Angell from Heaven, &c. where∣with the Knight almost concludeth every Section, he thus commenteth upon them, the Apostles did not say, if any man preach more then yee have re∣ceived: but besides that which you have received, for if he should say, that he should prejudicate, that is, goe against himselfe, who coveted to come to the Thessalonians, that he might supply that which was wanting to their faith, but he that supplieth, ad∣deth that which was lacking, taketh not away that which was before: these are the Saints very words in that place, by which it is plaine, that he taketh the word praeter besides, not in that sense, as to signifie more then is written, as you would understand it, but to signifie the same that contra. St. Paul him∣selfe useth the same word , para, besides, Rom. 16.17. for contra, and you in your owne Bibles translate it so. I beseech you brethren marke them which cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.
The Hammer. Cic. pro Rosc. Amer.AS Erucius the accuser of Roscius Ame∣rinus having little to say against him, to fill up the time, rehearsed a great part of an invective which he had penned in former time against ano∣ther defendant: so the Iesuit here, failing in his proofes for indulgences (for which little or no∣thing can be said) to fill up the Section, tran∣scribeth a discourse of his, which he had former∣ly penned, concerning the necessity of unwritten traditions, which hath no affinity at all with the title of this Chapter, de Indulgentiis. In other pa∣ragraphs we finde him distracted, and raving; but in this he turneth Vagrant, and therefore I am to follow him with a whip as the law in this case provideth. Touching the point it selfe of Indulgences, which Rivet fitly termeth Emul∣gences, but the Iesuit the Churches Treasury: whosoever relieth upon the superabundant me∣rits and satisfaction of Saints for his absolution, for his temporall punishment of sinne after this life, shall finde according to the Greeke proverbe  instead of treasure,Eras. Adag. Thesauri Car∣bones. glowing coales heaped upon his head in hell. For neither are there any merits or superabundant satisfactions of Saints,Luk. 17.10. Christ saying, when you have done all, you are unprofitable servants, nor were there any, could they be applied or imputed to any other men,2 Cor. 5.10. the Apostle teaching that every man shall receive
according to that which himselfe hath done in his body, whether it be good or evill,2 Cor. 11.15. nor hath the Pope any more power to dispose of this treasury for the remission of sinnes; our Saviour, Matth. 18. v. 18. and Iohn, 20.23. conferring the same power of remitting sinnes upon all the Apostles which he promised to S. Peter, Matth. 16. Nei∣ther, if the Pope had any speciall power of grant∣ing Indulgences, could it extend to the soules in Purgatory, quia non sunt de foro Papae, because they are not subject to the Popes court,Serm. 2. de de∣funct. 9 9. as Gerson rightly concludeth. Neither lastly, can it be proved, that there is any Purgatory fire for soules after this life, St. Iohn expresly affirming, that the blood of Christ purgeth us from all our sinnes.1 Iohn 1.7. The fire therefore of Purgatory is rightly ter∣med chymerica and chymica, chymericall and chymicall; chymericall, because a meere fiction, and chymicall, because by meanes of this fire, they extract much gold. The Apostle saith, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus. If no condemnation, no punishment,Rom. 8.1. eter∣nall or temporall. The Prophet saith,Mica. 7.18. he will cast our sinnes into the depth of the Sea, surely there is no fire to purge them: if we repent us of our sinnes,Ezek. 18.22. God promised us that they shall be remembred no more, if they shall not be so much as mentioned, surely they shall not be sentenced to be punised with fire, either temporall or eternall. In that time, sai h the Lord,Ierem. 50.20. the iniquity of Israel shall bee sought for, and there shall be none, and the sinnes of
Iudah, and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve: from which text we thus argue. All their sinnes whom God pardoneth, shall be found no more, if found no more, then to be purged no more, especially after this life. Where there is no spot, there needs no purging, or clensing, but in the soules of all beleevers there remaines no spot, as Bellarmine himselfe confesseth,L. 2. de Indul: c. 3. cum dici∣mus ex sancto Iohanne quod sanguis Iesu Christi purgat nos ab omni pec∣cato, respondet Apostolum lo∣qui de remissio∣ne culpae quae maculam pro∣prie gignit in animâ, macula enim est quae ablutione tolli∣tur, non paene quae debitorem non sordidum facit. shaping this answer to our objection, out of St. Iohn (that the blood of Christ purgeth us from all sinne) the Apostle speaketh of the remis∣sion of the fault which properly begets a spot in the soule, for it is the spot which is taken away by wash∣ing. When we say that Christs merits are applied to us, our adversaries jeare at us, holding it for a most absurd doctrine, that the merits of one should be imputed to another: and yet what they deny to Christ, they attribute to Saints: that which they deny to God, they attribute to the Pope: they will by no meanes heare that God imputeth to us the merits and sufferings of his sonne, although the Scripture is expresse for it: and yet they teach that the merits and satis∣factions of Saints by the Pope, may be applied to us, and that they satisfie for our temporall punishments. But to leave farther prosecution of the point in generall, and to graple with the Iesuit in the ensuing particulars. To the first. The Iesuit playeth the Sophister, and faine would deceive the simple Reader with the ambiguitie of the word Indulgence, which
the Knight accuratly distinguisheth; and shew∣eth, that the Indulgences now granted by the Pope, are no more like the Indulgences in use in the Primitive Church, than an Apple is like to a Nut. The Indulgences wherof we reade in the ancient Fathers, were mittigations of some cen∣sures of the Church, before inflicted on the living for their amendment: these are reluxations from satisfactorie paines in Purgatorie flames after this life. After which, notwithstanding,Cyp ad Demet. post quam hinc excessam est nullus datur pe∣nitentiae locus, nullus satisfa∣ctionis effectus. as Saint Cy∣prian truly informeth Demetrian, there remaineth no place for repentance, no effect of satisfaction, here eternall life is either gained or lost. To the second. As the Iesuit doth sometime an∣swer  to that wch we object not, so he oft proveth that we deny not. We attribute more to Christs merits than any Romanist doth; for we teach, that they are a Treasure of infinite value, abun∣dantly sufficient, without the additiō of any Saints merits to them, to discharge the infinit debt of all mankind: to release all who by faith apply them to themselves, from all temporall, as well as eter∣nall punishment. We professe, with that religious Divine, Effusio justi sanguinis Christi tam dives fuit ad pretium, ut si universitas captivorum redem∣torem suam crederet, nullum diaoli vincula retine∣rent: The effusion of Christs righteous blood is so rich in price, that if all the captives did be∣lieve in their Redeemer, the devils bands could hold none. And in very deed, this is one of our mainest exceptions against the Roman Church,
that they infinitely wrong the infinite bounty of our Redeemer, by going about as it were, to eeke out his merits by the excrescensie and superabun∣dancie of Saints satisfactions. What they arro∣gate to Saints in this kind, they derogate from our Saviour; wee acknowledge his merits to be a rich Treasurie, containing in it, many millions of pure gold; whereunto, to adde the sufferings of any Saints or Martyrs, were no better than to take away pure gold, and instead thereof (to fill up the roome, not the summe) to lay a few brasse tokens. This seemed so absurd to some of the acutest Schoolemen, as by name, Durandus a Sancto Portiano,Durand. in 4. sent. dist. 20. q. 3. and Iohannes de Mayro, that they excluded all Saints satisfactions out of this treasurie: their reasons are specially these, No∣thing needeth, or indeed can be added to that which is of infinite value, but such are Christs merits and sufferings. Secondly, the Saints are already abun∣dantly rewarded, and that far above their desert, as the Apostle witnesseth, Rom. 8.18. I account, that the afflictions of this present life are not wor∣thie the glorie which shall be revealed: and (2 Cor. 4.17.) our light affliction, which is but for a mo∣ment, worketh for us a farre more exceeding and eternall weight of glorie. Wherefore, the Saints sufferings being so fully recompensed already, cannot helpe towards the expiation of the sinnes of others.Ego teneo cum Francisco de Mayro in tra∣ctato de indulg. quod cum me∣rita sanctorum sint ultra con∣dignum remu∣nerata a deo, et sic exhausta quod solum dantur (indul∣gentiae) ex me∣rito Christi & passionis ejus; cujus minima gutta sanguinis vel sudoris sufficeret ad expiatiorem omnium pecca∣torum quae un∣quam fuerunt perpetrata aut perpetrabuntur. To which point, Angelus de Clavatio, verbo Indulg. numero. 9. I hold, saith hee, with Francis Mayro, in his Treatise of Indulgences,
that forasmuch as the merits of Saints are rewarded of God beyond their merit, and thereby the treasure of them is exhausted, that Pardons are onely given for the merit of Christ and his passion: the least drop of whose blood, or sweat, would have been suf∣ficient to expiate all the sinnes that ever have beene or shall be committed. Thirdly, the intention of him that meriteth, is most necessarie required to this, that the fruit or reward of his merit redound to another: but, supposing that the Saints were so rich in merits and sufferings, that they had any to bestow upon others, yet it cannot be proved, that the Saints had ever any such intention, to transferre the fruit of their passions upon others. Fourthly, if the Saints sufferings could expiate our sinnes, the Saints might be accounted our Redeemers, which Aquinas himselfe blushed to affirme,Durand. in 4. sent. dis. 20. q. 3. quia inten∣tia merentis est necessaria ad hoc quod fructus seu intensi merentis redundet in alterum s enim fructus meriti passionis Christi in nos redundat ex ejus epress â intentione quod autem intentio quorumcunque sanctorum fuerit fructum passionum suarum in nos transferre, nulla historia docet. Aquin. sum: part. 3. q. 48. art 2. passiones sanctorum proficiunt ecclesiae non quidem per modum re∣demtionis, sed per modum exempli. and there∣fore resolveth the quite contrarie; the Sufferings of Saints profit the Church, not by way of Redemp∣tion, but by way of Example. To the Third. The instance is not to the pur∣pose:  for the Corinthian, whose punishment Saint Paul released, was alive; our question is of Indulgences, releasing soules after death. Se∣condly, the incestuous Corinthian was excom∣municated, and thereby excluded for the time, from the Communion of Saints: our question is
of those that died reconciled to the Church, in the state of grace, Whether they by the Popes Indulgence, may receive ought out of the trea∣surie of Saints sufferings, to purchase their free∣dome from Purgatorie, or at least, mittigation of their paines there? Thirdly, the Indulgence Saint Paul granted the Corinthian, was the relea∣sing the sentence of Excommunication, not aba∣ting flames of Purgatorie. Fourthly, Saint Paul condescended more willingly to grant that ex∣communicate Corinthian his absolution, for the earnest prayers and intreatie of some of his neighbours and friends: hee did not impute the sufferings or merits of his friends unto him, and in that consideration absolved him. These things therefore, agree as well as Harpe and Harrow, to absolve the living from sentence of Excommuni∣cation, at the suit or request of persons that have well deserved of the Church, or have a speci∣all interest in our love: and to release the dead out of Purgatorie, by imputing the surplus∣sage of another mans merits and satisfactions un∣to him. To the fourth. The Iesuit might have lear∣ned of Dr. Francis White in his reply to Fisher the Iesuit, from whom hee borrow'd this ob∣jection, an Answer thereunto: or if hee thought much to learne of him, hee might have beene be∣holding to his owne Pamelius, so farre, as to informe him, that the Indulgences which Ter∣tullian impugned, were not such as wee treate
of, but the same whereof Saint Cyprian speaketh,Ep. 10.11.12. to wit a relaxation of canonicall censures, and pe∣nance to adulterers and other notorious sinners upon the request of martyrs, being in prison and yet alive. Now it seemed to this Father to be unjust and unfitting, both that the Martyrs in such cases should be intreaters, and that the Church should grant absolution to such persons, or mitigate the censures most iustly imposed upon them. Whether Tertullian in this were in the right or not, it makes nothing for the Iesuit, or a∣gainst us, for he speaketh of living Martyrs and not dead: of forgiving the crime it selfe, not on∣ly the temporall punishment, and that in this life, not in Purgatory. As this is one of the most im∣pertinent allegations in his booke, so he handles it as strangely and absurdly; for first, he discredit∣eth and disableth his witnesse, by branding him with the note of an Heretique, and then he pro∣duceth him. To the fift: What rope of sands hath the Ie∣suit here twisted; first he can never prove that any  man can fully satisfie for the least sinne commit∣ted against the infinite maiesty of God, much lesse by any penance he can endure, though never so long, satisfie over and above as he speaketh. Se∣condly, the continuance of his penance, if it bee done in true humility, and sincerity, shall not be without fruit to himselfe, for it shall be a meanes to mortifie his fleshly lusts, and prevent future sins and through faith in Christ, to obtaine a greater
reward in heaven. Thirdly, had the Saints any such surplussage of merits, and were there nothing allowed to themselves for it here, or hereafter: yet could not these their merits be communicated to others for their behoofe, because God hath set it downe in his law expressely,Ezek. 18.20. that as the sin of the sinner, so the righteousnesse of the righteous shall be upon himselfe. To the Iesuits quaere there∣fore. Why may not the over-plus of their sufferings lie in deposito as money in a treasurie, for the bene∣fit of others? I answer briefly, because there is no such money, nor such treasurie, nor order from the master of the house, to lay up such supposed money in such an imaginary treasury, as it were in a Banke, for the benefit of others. Doe we say this onely,Iob 9.3. doe not the Scriptures and the Fathers say the same. Doth not Iob demaund how should man be just with God? if he contend with him, he cannot answer him one for a thousand. Doth not David?Psal. 19.12. Pro. 20.9. Esay, 64.6. Iames, 3.2. Bas. l. de penit. non Angeli su∣mus sed homi∣nes, et cadimus et resurgimus, id{que} saepius eâ∣dem hora. Ambros. apol. David, c. 2. u∣nusquis{que} nostrū per singulas horas quam multa delinquit Bernard de quadrup. Debit quis amplius grunniet dicens nimium labo∣ramus, nimium jejunamus, ni∣mium vigila∣mus, cum nec millessime nec minime parti dbitorum suo∣rum quis valeat responders. Serm. de virgin. Stulta petitio, vix justus sal∣vabitur, vix Sanctis justitiae suae oleum suffi∣cet ad salutem, quantò minus & sibi & pro∣ximis. Who knoweth how oft he offend∣eth? Doth not Solomon? Who can say, I have made my heart cleane? I am pure from my sinne. Doth not Esay ingenuously confesse? We are all as an uncleane thing, and all our righteousnesse is as filthy ragges, and St. Iames, in many things we offend all, and after him St. Basil, We are not Angels, but men, we fall and rise againe, and that often times in one and the selfe-same houre. And Ambrose. Every one of us how often doe we sinne? every houre. And most fully of all, St. Bernard, Who dare gruntle from henceforth, saying?
we labour too much, we fast too much, wee watch too much, seeing that a man cannot answer the thousandth, nay, not the least part of his debt. And againe, commenting upon those words, 25. of Matth. and the 8. Give us of your oyle, a foolish petition, the righteous shall scarce be saved, the oyle of their owne righteousnesse, hardly sufficeth the Saints to salvation, how much lesse will it serve themselves and their neighbours. To the sixth. The reason is not alike, for In∣dulgences for the living, are the releasing of Ec∣clesiasticall censures inflicted upon their per∣sons, which undoubtedly the Bishops have pow∣er to mittigate upon the submission of the party, whereof they can take notice: which can have no place, in the soules of the deceased, as the Church hath no power to enjoyne them penance for their misdemeanour, so neither to take it off: for as the Iesuit himselfe confesseth,  the Pope is no superiour in respect of the soules in Purgatory, nor are they under his power.P. 328. Absolu∣tion is a iuri∣dicall act to be performed by a superiour and judge towards an inferiour and a subject being under his power, which the soules in Purgatory are not in respect of the Pope. Here by the way, let the Reader observe how the Iesuit un∣wittingly striketh a blow at the Popes triple crowne. For if the soules in Purgatory are none of his subiects, where is his third Kingdome? Why should he weare a triple crowne, if he may not beare his sword in Purgatory? the word Mysterium anciently engraven upon the Popes Miter, was wont to be thus declared, that the three Crownes compassing it, signifie the rule he beares in Heaven, Earth, and Purgatory, but if
he hath of late lost that kingdom, and is not now as the Iesuit saith, Superior to the soules that frie in Pur∣gatory. What power hath he to mittigat their fine, or release their mulct, or abate their fire? much lesse wholly absolve them from the guilt of tem∣porall punishment there in toto? As for that he ad∣deth, concerning communion of Saints, it yeelds no support at all to his cause: for the communion of Saints, which all Christians beleeve, is partly in the blessings of this life, partly in the use of spiri∣tuall graces, whereby they pray one for another, admonish, instruct, and comfort one the other; this communion no way extendeth to inward habits, as faith, hope & charity, nor to outward penall suffe∣rings, wch can be imparted to no other, as may be most evidently deduced out of Scriptures, and the joynt testimonies of the ancient Fathers. First therefore wee say, that the Saints have no supera∣bundance of merits or satisfactions, as I have pro∣ved before: next that admitting they had any, they cannot dispose of them to others, for every one shal beare his own burdens, every one shall receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath don, whether it be good or bad, not according to that wch he hath don or suffred in the body of another. The wise virgins said to the foolish that begged of them oyle to fil their lamps,Gal. 6.5. de pudicit. c. 22. Quis alienam mortem sua sol∣vet nisi solus fi∣ius Dei, proinde qui illum emu∣laris donando de icta si nihil ipse deliquisti plane patere pro me si vero pec∣cator es quomo∣do oleum faculae tuae sufficere ti∣bi & mihi po∣terit. In Iohan. tract. 24. Et si fratres pro fratribus moriantur, ta∣men in frater∣norum pecca∣torum remissio∣ne nullius san∣guis martyris funditur. Leo ep. ad Pa∣lest. Accepere justi non dedere coronas, et de fortitudine fide∣lium nata sunt exempla patientiae non dona justitiae singulares, quippe eorum mortes fuerunt, nec alterius quisquam debitum suo fine persolvit. Bernard. ep. 193 cont. Abelard. Satisfactio unius omnibus imputatur, sicut omnium pecca-ta ille unus portavit, nec alter invenietur qui fore fecit, alter qui satisfecit, satisfecit ergo caput pro membris. Not so, lest there be not enough for us & for you; the righteousnes of the righ∣teous shalbe upon him, & the wickednes of the wicked shalbe upon him, Ez. 18.20. Who ever (saith Tertul∣lian) satisfied by another mans death, his owne death,
but only the Son of God: therfore thou, who imitatest him in forgiving sins, if thou hast sinned in nothing thy selfe I pray thee suffer for me; but if thou art a sin∣ner as I am, how will the oyle of thy little lampe suf∣fice for thee and for me? If Tertullians coyne be not currant, I am sure St Austine & St Leos is, Although, saith St Austine, brethren dye for their brethren, yet the blood of no Martyr was ever shed for the remission of their brothers sinnes. For, as St. Leo testifieth, the righteous have received, they have not given crowns: from the fortitude of true beleevers; we receive exam∣ples of patience, not gifts of righteousnes. For their death was singular; neither did any of thē by it dis∣charg the death of another; the head hath satisfied for the members, & the satisfactiō of one is imputed to all. Marke, he saith of one, not of more, & the head satis∣fied for the mēbers, not the mēbers one for another. To the seventh. I freely subscribe to the con∣clusion, and beleeve without any scruple, that the  56000. yeares of pardon granted by the Pope, to every one that shall say seven prayers before the Crucifix, and seven Paternosters, and seven Ave∣maries, is no more for the dead then for the li∣ving. For done to such an intent, neither are the better for it, neither the living nor the dead are gainers, but onely the Pope himselfe and his A∣gents, who sell paper and lead at a deerer rate,
than any Merchant or Stationer in Christen∣dome. Yet, by the Iesuits leave, Pope Gregory granting 14000 yeares of Pardon, and Nicolas the first, as many, and Sixtus the fourth, twice as many, which make up the full number of 56000; must needs be thought, to intend benefit to the soules in Purgatorie, or in hell: unlesse you will make the Pope to be so absurd, as to suppose that any were to live upon earth so many thousand yeares, which had beene an errour 55000 times worse than the errour of the Mille∣naries. For they taught, that the Saints should live a thousand yeares with Christ on earth: but these, that sinners should live in durance here, or in Purgatorie 56000 yeares, which is 50000 yeares longer than by all computations, the World hath, or as most thinke, shall last. To the eighth. What Scripture or Tradition hath the Iesuit for this his incredible paradox? If wee should grant him such a Purgatorie as hee desires, which no man yet could find either in the Map of this world, or in the Table of holy Scriptures: yet is it impossible to defend with any probability this position of his, that in few weekes space, a soule might suffer punishment answerable to the Penance of many thousand yeares. For, the learned Romanists generally ac∣cord, that Purgatorie fire differeth little from hell, but in time; that the one is eternall, the other temporall: they beleeve it to equalize, or rather exceed any fiery torment on earth. How
then can they imagine so much fuell to be laid on that fire, and the torments in it so im∣proved, that a man may suffer so much punish∣ment in a few weekes, which may weigh downe, or beare scale with the penance of 56000 yeares; or if the torments could be so increased, what soule would be able to beare them for those few weekes, nay rather a few houres? To the ninth. The Authours alleaged by the  Knight, namely, Durand, Sylvester Prierias, Major, Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Alfonsus a Ca∣stro, Antoninus, Cajetan and Bellarmine, speake not, as the Iesuit would have it, comparatively, but positively. Durand saith,Durand. 4. sent. dist. 20. q. 3. de indulgētiis, pau∣ca dici possum per certitudi∣nem quia nec scriptura ex∣pressè de iis lo∣quitur, sancti etiam patres Ambrosius, Hi∣larius, &c. minime loquun∣tur de indul∣gentiis. Prierias, cont. Luth. de Indul. Indulgentiae au∣thoritate scrip∣turae non in∣tuere nobis sed authoritate ecclesiae & Romanorum Pontificum. Major, in 4 sent. dist. 2. q. 2. Difficile est modum indulgentiarum fundare authenticè in scripturâ sacrâ. Roffensis, artic. 18. cont. Luther, Quamdiù nulla fuerat de purgatoria cura nemo que∣sivit indulgentias, nam ex illo pendet omnis indulgentiarum estimatio ceperunt igitur in∣dulgentiae postquam ad purgatorii cruciatus aliquandiù trepidatum erat. The Scriptures speak not expressely of Indulgences, neither the Fathers, Austine, Hilarie, Ambrose▪ Jerome, &c. Syl∣vester Prierias affirmeth, that Pardons have not beene knowne to us by the authority of Scriptures, but by the authority of the Church of Rome, and the Popes. Fisher Bishop of Rochester confesseth, that of Purgatorie there is little or no mention a∣mongst the ancient Fathers, and that as long as Purgatory was not cared for, there was no man sought for Pardons: sith Purgatorie therefore hath beene so lately knowne and received of the whole Church, who can now wonder concerning Indul∣gences? And here Master Flood is at a stand,
his Flumen is turned into Stagnum; for having made offer to answer Durand, and finding that his answer would not hold, his heart failed him, and hee durst not venture to shape any answer at all to the Authours last mentioned, namely, Alfonsus a Castro,Alfon. de verbo Indulg. Harum usus in ecclesia videtur serò receptus, de Transubstanti∣atione rara in antiquis mentio de purgatorio fere nulla, quid ergo mi∣rum si ad hunc modum conti∣geret de indul∣gentiis ut apud priscos nulla sit mentio? Antonin part. 1. tit. 10. de indulgentiis ni∣hil expressè ha∣bemus in sacrâ scripturà aut etiam patrum scriptis. Cajet. opus. 15.1. Nulla scrip∣tura sacra nul∣la priscorum doctorum gre∣corum aut la∣tinorum autho∣ritas indulgen∣tiarum ortum ad nostram deduxit notitiam. Bellar. de indul. l. 1. c. 17. Neque mirum videri de∣bet si authores antiquiores non habemus, qui harum mentiorum faciunt. whose words are; There is no∣thing in Scripture lesse opened, or wherof the ancient Fathers have lesse written, than of Indulgences; and it seemeth the use of them came but lately into the Church: there is seldome any mention of Tran∣substantiation among the Ancients, almost none of Purgatorie. What marvell then, if it so fall out with Indulgences, that there should be no mention of them by the Ancients? Antoninus; There is not any expresse testimonie, for proofe of Indulgen∣ces, either in Scriptures, or in the writings of the ancient Fathers. Cajetan; There is no authoritie of Scriptures, or ancient Fathers, Greeke or Latin, that bringeth the originall of Indulgences to our knowledge. Bellarmine; It is not to be wondered, if wee have not many ancient Authours which make mention of Indulgences; for, many things are retai∣ned in the Church onely by use and custome, without writing. See how the Romanists second one the other: Bellarmine saith, That not many ancient Authours make mention of Indulgences. Cajetan and Antoninus say, Not any. Durand saith, that The Scriptures speake not expresly of them. Prierias saith, That they speake not at all of them.
To the tenth. The Indulgences those Fathers  and Councells speake of, have no more affinitie with the Pardons the Pope selleth now adaies, than the Rivers of Paradise have with Styx or Avernos; or Simon Peter with Simon Magus; or Phillip the Apostle with Phillip King of Macedon, as I shewed before. To the eleventh. The Iesuit hath neither pro∣ved  the practise of the Catholike Church, nor of the Romane, time out of mind, for Indulgen∣ces: but onely practises of later times, since ma∣nifold abuses crept into the Roman Church. As for his negative Argument, to wit, that It is a strong evidence of consent, for Indulgences, be∣cause none is found to have spoken against them: unlesse hee otherwise qualifie it, it will no more prove Purgatorie, or the lawfull use of Indul∣gences, than it will prove there is a Common∣wealth in Eutopia, or Cities, or Countries in the Moone, or many worlds; because, peradventure none is found to have spoken or written against them. And for the Waldenses, that they were the first impugners of Indulgences, is said by the Iesuit, but not proved; much lesse, that these Waldenses were known Heretikes. For they were farre from heresie by the confession of their grea∣test adversarie, the Inquisitor Rainerius.Cont. Wald. cap. 4. They live, saith hee, justly before men, and believe all things well concerning God, and all the Articles contained in the Creed, Solummodo Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant & Clerum, onely they
speake evill of the Romane Church and Clergie. To the twelfth. It was happy for Durand, that hee lived before the Inquisition and Index Expurgatorius.Durand. in 4. sent. dist. 2. q. 3. Quod dictū est Petro. Mat. 16. tibi dabe cla∣ves, &c. intel∣ligitur de pote∣state ei data in foro poeniten∣tiae, de collati∣one autem in∣dulgentiarum non est quomo∣dò de beat intel∣ligi, sancti enim Ambrosius, Hilarius, Au∣gustinus, Hie∣ronimus, mini∣me loquntur de indulgentiis. For he argueth so strongly against Indulgences, saying, (that Little can be spoken of any certainty concerning them, because the Scrip∣ture speaketh not expressely of them; for what is spo∣ken, Matthew the 16. to Peter, I will give thee the Keyes, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heaven; is understood, of the power given him in the penitentiall Court, and cannot be understood of the bestowing of Indulgences; for the holy Fathers, Ambrose, Hilarie, Augustine, Je∣rome, speake not at all of Indulgences) that his wri∣tings, if not his person, would have beene purged by fire, if hee had lived in these times: yet, true it is, that having argued strongly against Indul∣gences, and the Church Treasurie, so farre as it consisteth of the merit of Saints, hee bethought himselfe, and pro formâ, alleageth to the contra∣rie, the Custome and Doctrine of the Church, meaning the Romane Church; whose lash hee feared, if hee should not have given backe that by Whole-sale, which hee had taken away from her by Re-tale. Its true also, that hee mentions Indulgences at the stations of Rome in the dayes of Saint Gregory: but let it be noted, that Gregory is without the compasse of the Pri∣mitive times, and that hee was interested in the cause; for, Purgatorie fiers began to singe men in his time, and thereupon, Indulgences to be
in request, which afterwards proved a Staple commoditie to the See of Rome. Lastly,Mart. Epig. de Lab. Non es crede mihi bo∣nus: quid ergo ut verum lo∣quar optimus malorum Piso∣nes Senecasque Memmios{que}, et Crispos mihi redde sed prio∣res fies protinus ultimus bono∣rum. as Mar∣tial writeth of Labulla, it may be truly said of this Grgory, that hee was the worst of the good, and best of the bad Popes. To the thirteenth. The Knight, after Alfon∣sus, quoted Antoninus, Cajetan, and Bellarmine, to prove the noveltie of Indulgences, and that there is no ground for them in Scriptures, or the writings of the ancient Fathers: to whom, the Iesuit answereth not a word; and here the second time, hee is Gravelled in this Section. To Alfon∣sus hee seemeth to say something, but upon due  examination as good as nothing: first hee falsi∣fieth his words, saying, page 334. that Alfonsus confesseth the use of Indulgences to be most an∣cient, and of many hundred yeares standing; whereas his words are not, that the use of In∣dulgences was most ancient, but that it was said by some, to be most ancient among the Romanes: Apud Romanos vetustissimus praedicatur illarum usus; this praedicatur is of no more credit, than Plinie his fertur, or Solinus his aiunt. For not∣withstanding this report, Alfonsus resolves in that very place, It seemes that the use of Indul∣gences came but lately into the Church. Secondly, the Iesuit forceth a wrong Inference from Al∣fonsus his words. For albeit, hee affirmeth that Indulgences are not to be ontemned, because they have beene in use in the Church for some hundreds of yeares: yet hee condemneth not
a man for an Haeetique that shall deny them, but any one that shall contemne the Church or de∣spise her autority: his words are Quoniam ecclesiâ Catholicâ tantae est authoritatis ut qui illam contem∣nat Haereticus meritò censeatur, we say the same also,Matth. 18.17. and the Scripture beareth us out in it, tell the Church and if he refuse to heare the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen or a Publican, but what if Alphonsus out of feare blowes hot and cold with one breath, whats that to us? He lived and died a professed Papist, and therefore what he writeth against Protestants is little to be set by, but what he writeth against the Church of Rome whom he had a minde to defend in all things, and whose feed advocate he was, must be thougt to be drawne from him by evidence of truth; howsoe∣ver let it be noted that Alphonsus calleth not him an Haereticke, who denieth Indulgences, as the Knight doth,Vid. Rain. Thes. Romana eccle∣sia nec est Ca∣tholica nec sa∣num membrum Catholicae eccle∣siae. but who contemneth the Catho∣like Church, which neither the Knight, nor any Protestant doth: we deny not, much lesse doe we contemne the authority of the Catholike Church. But we deny that the Roman Church is the Catholike, or a sound member thereof. To the fourteenth. Our Ministers doe not like Flood, and other Iesuits, bring muddy stuffe in their sermons, out of Petrus de Voragine, and the like fabulous Authors: but what they produce in this kinde against the Pope for his base sale of In∣dulgences, and making merchandize of his ghostly power, they proove out of good Authors,
grave Historians, Canonists, and Schoolemen, such as are the author of the lives of Popes, and the booke called Taxa camerae Apostolicae & Cen∣tum granamina, together with Wescelius Cronin∣gensis, Guicciardine, Henricus de Gandavo, & Al∣tisiodorensis. If Altisiodorensis words are not plaine enough, Summ: l. 4. d. relap. Dicunt quidam quod relaxatio non valeat quantum ecclesia permit∣tit, sed facit ut excitentur fideles ad dandum, et de∣cipit eos ecclesia; some say that the Popes Indulgence prevailes not so much as the Church promiseth, but that thereby men are stirred up to give more freely and that therein the Church deceav th them; what say they to that note in Taxa camerae Apostolicae,Nota diligenter quod hujusmodi gratiae non con∣scedūtur paupe∣ribus; quia non sunt, nec pos∣sunt consolari. Matth. Par. in Hen. 3. Romanorum lo∣culos impregna∣re. note diligently that such favours, to wit, Indulgen∣ces are not graunted to poore folke, because they have not wherewithall, they cannot be comforted: or that pregnant phrase of Matthew Paris, that Christs blood alone though it be all sufficient to save soules, yet the same without saintly satisfaction applied by the Pope, is not sufficient to impregnate his holinesse Coffers. If the Iesuit smell not in these sentences the fat steame of the Popes Kitchin, he hath no nose. To the fifteenth. It is well the Iesuit termeth  the drinking of a health to Almighty God, a tale, and by his quoting no authour for it, sheweth that it was a signal lye of his owne inventing, when he was betweene hawke and buzzard: Never any but himselfe who can blush at nothing, affirmed any such thing of any Protestant, that ever came to
that height of impiety and prophannes, as to drinke a health to his Maker:Historia Ital. l. 13. Leo nullo temporum et locorum habito delectu per uni∣versam orbem amplissima pri∣vilegia quibus non modo vinis delictorum ve∣niam consequen∣di sed & defun∣ctorum animus, ejus ignis in quo delicta ex∣iari diuntur paenis eximendi facultatem pol∣licebatur, pro∣mulgavit, quae quia pecuniae tantum a mor∣talibus extor∣quendae gratia concedi notum erat & a que∣storibus huic negotio praefe∣ctis impudenter administra∣bantur magnam pleris{que} locis indignationem offensionem{que} concitarant, & presertim in Germania ubi a multis ex ejus ministris hujusmodi mortuos penis liberandi facultas parvo pretio vendi, vel in cauponum tabernis aleae subiici cernebantur. but Luitprandus and Polonus, telleth us of one Iohn the twelfth, a Pope of Rome, and consequently no Protestant: who made so bold with Almighty God, as to give Orders in a Stable, and so familiar with the Divell, as to drinke a health to him. As for the Knights prophane jeast as he calleth it: it is no jeast, but a serious testimony out of a grave histo∣rian, convincing the Popes agents of Atheisme and prophannes, and the Popes themselves, of sordid covetousnesse, his words are, Leo published large privileges through the whole world without any distinction of times and places, by which he pro∣mised not onely pardon to the living, but also power to deliver soules of the dead out of Purgatory paines; which because it was knowne that they were granted onely to fill the Popes coffers, and because his farmers carried themselves lewdly in the sale of them, great offence was taken at them, especeally in Germanie, where such Indulgences were set at a low price, and seene to be staked in Tavernes and Ale-houses at games of Tables. To the sixteenth. The Trent Synod was not a Councell, but a Conventicle, wholly swayed by the Italian faction, wherein not the flower of the Catholique Church for learning: but the bran of the Romish, boulted by the Pope, was gathered to∣gether.
Let Andreas Dudithius the Bishop of Quinque eccles. who was present at this Councell,Ep. ad Maxi∣mil. speake his minde of it, the matter came to that passe, through the wickednesse of those hungry Bi∣shops that hung upon the Popes sleeve, and were cre∣ated on the suddaine by the Pope, for the purpose, that that Councell seemed to be an assembly, not of Bi∣shops, but of Hobgoblins, not of men, but of Images, moved like the statues of Daedalus by the sinewes of others. What the Iesuit addeth of night owles, not daring to appeare in the splendour of that Councell, hath no colour of truth. For it is no newes for owles to appeare at popish Councells. At a Councell held at Rome by Pope Heldebrand,Fascic. rerum expetend. & fugiend. Or∣twhinus Gratius writeth, there appeared an huge great Owle, which could not be frayed away, but sca∣red all the Bishops. As for Protestants, whom this Blacke-bird of Antichrist termeth night Owles, if they had flocked to that Councell, they had shewed themselves not Owles, by appearing in that twi-light at Trent, but very Wood-cocks, to trust any security offerd them by those, who after publike faith given to Iohn Huz, and Ierome of Prage, notwithstanding the safe conduct of Si∣gismond the Emperour, for their going to, and comming from the Councell at Constance, most cruelly burned them at a stake to ashes. To the seventeenth. Divine faith must be grounded upon divine authority, and that cannot  be the Catholike faith, which wanteth consent of Fathers. As for those Fathers whose authority
Bellarmine draweth ob torto collo, to testifie for unwritten traditions de verbo Dei. lib. 4. cap. 7. the Iesuit may see them fully answered in Iunius Whitaker, Daniel Chamierus, and Dr. Davenant Bishop of Sarum, and a farre greater number of Fathers alleaged to the contrary, by Robert Ab∣bot in his answer to William Bishop, cap. 7. Phillip Morney in his preface to his booke, de sacrâ Eu∣charistiâ and Iacobus Laurentius in his singular tractate de Disputationibus, and others. To the eighteenth. The assistance of the Holy ghost was more speciall in the times of the Apo∣stles then in latter ages: they could not erre in their writings, others might; yet we charge not the Catholike Church of Christ in any age, with any fundamentall errour, though we may the Roman; Tertullian his rule may have still place, and as well in one age as another if it be rightly taken, and not misconstrued and misapplied; for if it be taken generally, that whatsoever is the same amongst many, is no errour but tradition, it is it selfe a great errour. For the same opinion concerning the inequality of the Father and the Sonne is found amongst many; to wit, the Arrian Chur∣ches: the same doctrine concerning the proces∣sion of the Sonne from the Father onely, is found amongst many, namely, all the Greeke Chur∣ches at this day: the same practise of admini∣string the Eucharist to children, was found a∣mongst many; namely, all the Churches of Af∣frica in St. Austines time, yea, and in all Chur∣ches
subject to the Bishop of Rome for many ages, as Maldonat the Iesuit confesseth; yet the above named Positions, and this latter practise are con∣fessed on all sides to be erroneous. But Tertullian by many understandeth not the practise of some particular Churches,Tertul. de pre∣scrip. Age nunc omnes ecclesiae erraverint ve∣risimile est ut tot et tante in unam fidem er∣raverint. much lesse of factious per∣sons of one Sect, but the generall and uniforme doctrine and practise of the whole Church as his words in the same Chapter, quoted by the Ie∣suit declare. Goe too now, admit that all Churches have erred, is it likely so many, so great Churches should erringly conspire in one faith? To the nineteenth. We derogate nothing from  any generall custome of the Catholike Church, let the Iesuit produce out of good Authors any such custome for Indulgences to redeeme soules out of Purgatory flames by Papall Indulgences, and this controversie will soone be at an end; howsoever let me tell the Iesuit the way, that this text of St. Paul is impertinently alleaged to prove this or any other article of the Trent faith. For St. Paul in this place speaketh not of any Article of faith nor matter of manners necessary to salva∣tion, but of habits, gestures fashions, and indif∣ferent rites: in matter of which nature there is no question at all, but that the custome of the Churches of God ought to sway, as is abundantly proved by Dr. Andrewes late Bishop of Winche∣ster, in his printed Sermon upon that text. To the twentieth. Disputabamus de alliis re∣spondet Iesuita de cepis, we dispute of Indulgences,
the Iesuit answereth of Traditions in matter of Faith. These are very distinct questions, and so handled by all that deale Work-man-like in points of difference betweene the Reformed, and the Romane Churches, but the Jesuits common place of Indulgences was drawne drie, and therefore hee setteth his cocke of Traditions on running, which yeeldeth nothing but muddy water. What though Faith be ancienter than Scriptures, the Argument is inconsequent? Ergo, Scripture is not now the perfect rule of Faith. Faith neither is, nor can be more ancient than the Word of God, upon which it is built, this Word of God is now written; and since, the consigning and confirming the whole Canon of the written Word, by Saint Iohn in the Apocalypse, is be∣come the perfect, and as the Schooles speaketh, the adequate rule of Faith. It is true, Christ and his Apostles first taught the Church by word of mouth;Lib. 3. advers. heres. cap. 1. Non enim per alios dispositio∣nem salutis, no∣strae cognovi∣mus quam per eos per quos Evangelium pervenit ad nos, quod quidem tunc praeconiaverunt postea per dei voluntatem in scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum & columnam fidei nostrae futuram. but afterwards, that which they preached, was by the commandment of God, committed to wri∣ting, to be the foundation and pillar of Faith; as Irenaeus testifieth in expresse words. To the twentie one. If the Iesuit could prove as undoubtedly any words of the Apostles that are not set downe in Scriptures, to be their owne words, as wee can prove the writings we have, to be theirs; wee would yeeld no lesse credit to
them, then to these: but that neither can hee, nor so much as undertaketh to doe. And where∣as he further saith, that the credit of the Scrip∣ture depends upon Tradition; unlesse hee qualifie the speech some way, it is not onely erroneous, but also blasphemous; for it is all one, as if hee should say, that man gives credit and authority to God (as Tertullian jeareth the Heathen,In Apolloget. not receiving Christ for God, because the Romane Senate would not give their consent and appro∣bation to make him one, Iam homo deo propitius esse debet) or that the credit and authority of Gods Word dependeth upon mans receiving it. Whereas in truth, Gods Word is not there∣fore of divine and infallible authoritie, because the Church delivereth it to be so; but on the contrary, the Church delivereth it to be so, be∣cause in it selfe it is so; and the Church should erre damnably, if shee should otherwise conceive of these inspired Writings, then as of the un∣doubted Oracles of God, to which we owe ab∣solute consent and beliefe,Vid. August. supr. cit. without any question or contradiction. To the two and twentieth. Saint Austine de∣fends  no point of Faith against Heretikes, either onely or chiefly, by the Tradition and practise of the Catholike Church; but either onely or chiefly by the Scriptures. For example, in his booke of Baptisme, against the Donatists, after hee had debated the point by Scriptures, hee mentioneth the custome of the Church, and re∣lateth
Stephanus his proceeding against such as went about to overthrow the ancient custome of the Catholike Church in that point. But hee no where grounds his Doctrine upon that custome, though hee doth well approve of it, as wee doe. Againe, in his booke against Maxi∣minus, and his 174 Epist. to Pascentius, hee con∣firmeth the faith of the Trinity by the written Word, against those Heretikes: his words, Ep. 175,Haec si placet audire quemad∣modum è Scrip∣turis sacris as∣serantur. to the same Pascentius are; Here thou maist heare, if thou wilt, how these points of our Faith are maintained by Scripture. So farre is hee from founding those, or any other points of faith only, or chiefly upon unwritten Traditions. What the Iesuit alleageth out of his tenth booke, De Genes. ad literam,Consuetudo matris Ecclesiae in baptizandis parvulis nequa∣quam spernen∣dus est, ne{que} ul∣lo modo super∣flua depu∣tanda. cap. 23. no whit advantageth his cause; for there Saint Austine saith no more, but The custome of the Church in baptizing Infants, is no way to be despised, or to be accounted super∣fluous. Wee all say the same, and condemne the Pelagians of old, and Anabaptists of late, who deny Baptisme to be administred to children, or any way derogate from the necessitie of that Sa∣crament. The Iesuit saith, hee will say nothing of Prayer for the dead, yet hee quoteth Saint Austine, de curâ pro mortuis, as if in that booke hee taught Prayer for the dead, and grounded it upon unwritten Tradition. Whereas in that booke, hee neither maintaineth Prayer for the dead, nor maketh mention of any unwritten Tradition for it; but on the contrarie, solidly out
of Scriptures proveth,Esaias Prophe∣ta dicit, Abra∣ham nos nesci∣vit, et Israel non cognovit nos: si tanti pa∣triarchae, quid erga populum ex his procreatur, ageretur, igno∣raverunt quo∣modo mortui vivorum rebus at{que} actibus cog∣noscendis adju∣vandisque mis∣centur; et paulo post ibi ergo sunt spiritus de∣functorum ubi non vident que∣cun{que} aguntur, aut eveniunt in istâ vitâ ho∣minibus. Ep. 118. Si quid horum sic faciendum di∣vinae Scripturae praescribat au∣thoritas, non est dubitandum quin ita facere debeamus, simi∣liter si quid per orbem tota frequentat Ec∣clesia. that the Saints departed have no knowledge of our affaires upon earth: the Prophet Esay saith, Abraham knoweth us not, and Israel is ignorant of us. If so great Patriarchs knew not what befell their posteritie after their death; how can it be defended, that the dead inter∣meddle with the actions or affaires of the living, to helpe them onward, or so much as to take notice of them? A little after, he concludes flat upon the Negative, The Spirits therefore of the dead there remaine where they knowe not what befalleth to men in this life. To what end therefore, should wee call upon them in our troubles and distresse here? Neither hath this Father any thing in his 118 Epistle for the Iesuit, or against us; for there hee speaketh of Ecclesiasticall Rites and Customes, as appeares in the very title of that Epistle, not of Doctrines of Faith: and yet, even in these, hee giveth a preheminence to the Scrip∣tures. If, saith hee, the authoritie of divine Scrip∣ture prescribe any Rite or Custome to be kept, there is no question to be made of such a Rite or Custome: and in like manner, if the whole Church throughout the world constantly useth such a Rite or Custome. The Iesuites next allegation out of this Fathers booke De unitate Eccles. cap. 22. falleth short of his marke; hee saith there, that Christ beareth wit∣nesse to his Church, that it should be Catholike, that is, spread over the face of the Earth, and not to be confined to any certaine place; as the Province of Affrica. Wee say the same, and adde, that the
bounds of it, are no more the territories of the Bishop of Rome, than the Provinces of Affrica. Wee grant, that Whosoever refuseth to follow the practise of the Church, to wit, the Catholike, or universall Church, resisteth, or goeth against our Saviour, who promised by his spirit, to leade her into all truth, and to be with her to the end of the World. Which promise may yet stand good and firme, though any particular Church erre in Faith, or manners, as did the Churches of Asia, planted by the Apostles themselves, and the Church of Rome doth at this day.Cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 6. Now, because that testimonie of Saint Austine, wherewith the Knight concludes almost every Section; If wee, or an Angell from heaven, preach unto you any thing, whether it be of Christ, or of his Church, or any thing which concerneth Faith, or manners, besides that which you have received in the Legall and Evangelicall Scriptures, let him be accursed; is as a beame in all Papists eyes; therefore, they use all possible meanes to take it out, but all in vaine; for the words of the Apostle, on which Saint Paul commenteth, are not as the Iesuit would have them: If any man preach unto you, Contra against; but if any preach unto you, Praeter besides:Ep. ad Galat. . as Saint Chrysostome and Theophylact ac∣cutely observe. The Apostle saith not (if Chryso∣stome rightly understand him) if they should preach any thing contrary; but if they shall in their prea∣ching, adde any thing, be it never so little, besides that which wee have preached unto you, let him be
accursed.Ne{que} enim in∣quit si contra∣ria solum pre∣dicaverint in∣tulit anathema esto, sed si evan∣gelizaverint preter id quod ipsi evangelisa∣vimus, hoc est, si plusculum quidpiam ad∣jecerent. And Theophylact is altogether as plaine as Chrysostome, in his Glosse upon the words, The Apostle inferreth not, if any man preach con∣trarie to that yee have received; but if any preach besides that which wee have preached unto you, that is, if they shall presume to adde any thing, though never so little, let them be accursed. Neither doth Saint Austine in his tractate upon Saint Iohn, upon which Bellarmine, and after him, Flood, so much beare themselves, any whit contradict the for∣mer interpretations of Saint Chrysostome and Theophylact. For his words in that place carry this sense, The Apostle saith not, if any man preach more unto you, than you have already received, that is, perfectly conceived and apprehended: for then hee should goe against himselfe, who saith, that hee desired to come to the Thessalonians, to supply that which was lacking to their Faith; to supply, I say, that which was lacking to their Faith, not to the Gospell which Saint Paul preached: hee saith not, let him be accursed, who further infor∣meth you in the Doctrine of the Scriptures, or delivereth you more out of them, than yee have yet received within that Rule; but hee that deli∣vereth you any thing besides that Rule. And that this is his meaning, appeareth by the words im∣mediately following, which the Iesuit cunningly suppresseth, to wit, these, Qui praetergreditur re∣gulam fidei, non accedit in viâ, sed recedit de viâ; Hee that goeth besides the Rule of Faith, doth not goe on in the way, but departeth out of the way.
Yea, but the word in the Greeke translation, , here used, is the same with that, Rom. 16.17. which wee in our Bibles translate, against, not Praeter, besides. Yea, but the Jesuits in their owne Latine vulgar translation, to which they are all sworne, (as wee are not to ours) render this , or Praeter besides, and not Contra against: and that this translation is most agreeable to the A∣postles meaning, appeareth by comparing this text, Rom. 16.17. with a parralell'd text, 2 Thes. 3.6. Withdraw your selves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the Tradition which you have received of us. There is no necessity therefore, of expounding , in that text to the Romans, by Contra against; wee may as well (or better) expound it by Praeter, that is, besides: yet, if in one place  might signifie Contra, it doth not follow that it must be so taken, Galathi∣ans 1.8. for it is well knowne, that the naturall and most usuall signification of  in Greeke, is Praeter besides, not Contra against; and words are to be taken in their most proper and usuall signification, unlesse some necessarie reason, drawne from the circumstances of the text, or analogie of faith inforceth us to leave it, which here it doth not. As for Saint Austines judge∣ment in the point it selfe, to wit, that Scripture is the perfect rule of Faith, hee plainely delivereth it, both in his 49 tractate upon Iohn, and in the ninth chapter of the second booke De doctrinâ christianâ; and in the last chapter of his second
booke De peccatorum meritis & remissione, and in his booke De bono viduitatis, cap. 11. What words can be more expresse and direct for the sufficiencie of Scripture, than those in his 49 tra∣ctate upon Iohn? The Lord Iesus did,Quae saluti cre∣dentium suffice∣re videbuntur. In iis quae aper∣te posita sunt in Scriptura inve∣niuntur illa om∣nia quae conti∣nent fidem, mo∣res{que} vivendi. G. ult. Credo e∣tiam hic divi∣norū eloquiorū clarissima au∣thoritas esset, si homo illud si∣ne dispendeo sa∣lutis ignorare non posset. Sancta Scriptu∣ra nostrae doctri∣nae regulam fi∣xit, ne audere∣mus sapere ul∣tra quam opor∣tet. and spake many things which are not written, as the Evan∣gelist testifieth; but those things were chosen to be written, which seemed to suffice for the salvation of Beleevers: unlesse those in his second booke, De doctrina christiana, Among those things which are openly or plainly set downe in Scriptures, all things are found which concerne or containe Faith or manners: or those in his second booke of the remission of sinnes, I beleeve that the autho∣ritie of divine Scriptures, would have beene most cleere and evident in this point, if a man could not have beene ignorant of it, without perill of his sal∣vation: or lastly, those in his booke in the com∣mendation of Widowhood, What should I teach thee more than that which thou readest in the Apo∣stle? for the holy Scripture setleth the rule of our Doctrine, lest wee should presume to be wise above that wee ought.
Concerning the infallible certain∣ty of the Protestant faith, and the un∣certainty of the Romish; Spectacles, Chapter the 10. a page 346. us{que} ad 380. THE Knights failing in his proofes of our novelty is a sufficient proofe of our antiquity, and his owne novelty. The Jesuits may not be ashamed of the oath they take to defend the Papa∣cy, nay, they may glory in it as an heroicall act, whereby they binde themselves to the defence of that authority whereon the weight and frame of the whole Catholike Cburch and salvation of all soules from Christ his owne time, to the very end of the world; hath, doth, and still shall de∣pend. Catholike Doctors whom the Knight chargeth with division among themselves, may indeede differ in opinion so long as a thing is undefined, for so long it is not faith, but when it is once defined, then they must be silent, and concurre all in one, because then it is matter of faith. The Knight can have no certainty of his Christia∣nity,
because that dependeth upon his Baptisme, or the faith of his parents which he cannot know. He can have no certainty of his Marriage, or the legitimation of his children, because the validity  of the contract dependeth upon the intention of the parties which marry, and no man can have any certaine knowledge of anothers intention, and so the Knight is in no better case then his adversaries in this respect. It is cleane a different thing to dispute of the cer∣tainty  of the Catholique faith which we maintaine, and of every mans private and particular beliefe of his owne justification or salvation, which we deny to be so certaine: the one being grounded upon the authority of Gods divine truth, and revelation, the other upon humane knowledge, or rather conje∣cture. Howsoever though we be not ertaine by cer∣tainty of divine faith, that this or that man in parti∣cular is truely baptized or ordained a Priest; yet we are certaine by the certainty of divine faith, that not onely there be such Sacraments, but that they are also truly administred in the Catholike Church. It might be good and profitable as Bellarmine  noteth, to invoke the Saints, though they them∣selves should not heare us, as the Knight would prove out of Peter Lumbard and Gabriel Biel, who though they doubt of the manner, yet they doubt not of the thing it slfe; Gabriel saith, the Saints are invocated not as givers of the good things for which we pray, but as intercessours to God the gi∣ver
of all good. And Peter Lumbard saith that our prayers become knowne to the Angells in the word of God which they behold, so also doe Saints that stand before God. Though it be true which Caietan saith, that it cannot be knowne infallibly that the miracles where∣on the Church groundeth the Canonization of Saints be true: yet it followeth not that we are uncertaine whether the Canonized Saints be in Heaven or no, because the certainty of Canonization dependeth up∣on more certaine ground; to wit, the authority of the See Apostolique, and continuall assistance and di∣rection of the Holy-ghost, the spirit of truth, to whom it belongeth not to suffer Christs Vicar, using humane diligence, and proceeding prudently in a matter of that moment,Ep. 68. vive∣bant ut latro∣nes, honora∣bantur ut mar∣tyres. to erre; and whereas St. Austine saith that many were tormented with the Devill in Hell, who were worshipped by men on earth: it may be well understood of the Martyrs of the Donatists, who were Canonized by those Haeretikes to be Martyrs, whose soules were tormented in Hell: and whereas Sulpitius and Cassander speake of wicked Robbers and damned persons honoured by the name of Holy Martyrs, it followeth not that because some peo∣ple in St. Martins time did erre in worshiping a dead theefe for a Saint, without any approbation of the Church: ergo Catholikes may erre in wor∣shiping of Saints Canonized and Authorized by the Church. Though Gregorie, and other Catholike Divines differ about the place, manner, punishment, and du∣rance
of Purgatorie: yet, none rejecteth the beliefe of Purgatorie it selfe. And as for Saint Austine, alleaged by the Knight to the contrary, his words are to be meant of the finall and eternall place of soules. For otherwise, Saint Austine is so expresse for Pur∣gatory, in the very booke and place quoted by the Knight, to wit, in his Enchiridian ad Laurentium, that Mr. Antonie Alcock, a zealous Disciple of Luther, as it seemeth, translating it into English, is faine to write certaine annimadversions upon this Chapter, wherein hee confesseth,C. 110. Neque negandum est defunctorum animus, &c. Saint Austines opi∣nion is here for Purgatorie. The Saints owne words are, Neither is it to be denied, that the soules of the dead are relieved by the pietie of their friends li∣ving, when the sacrifice of our Mediatour is offred for them, or almes given in the Church. The same Father elswhere saith, The whole time betweene the death of a man, and the generall resurrection, con∣taineth the soules in hidden receptacles, as each is worthy, either of ease or paine. The Doctrine of Catholikes, concerning worship∣ping  of Images, is not uncertaine, it being this onely, that Images are to be worshipped, but not as Gods. For the second Councell of Nice, it requireth not onely kissing of Images, and a civill kind of imbra∣cing, but a prostration on the ground, and praying on the knees before them: Gregorie de Valen∣tia taketh the word Simulacrum, in a good sense, and concludeth out of Saint Peter, that some Image-worship is lawfull, not any Idoll worship, as the Knight imposeth on him.
The Hammer. IN this Chapter, the Iesuit in the fourth, fift, sixt, seventh, twelfth, fifteene, and sixteene Paragraphs, doth nothing but seeth againe his old Coleworts, which were tasted before, and after cast into the dunghill. From whence, I purpose not to gather them againe, or set them before the Reader, lest his stomacke should rise at them: but I addresse my selfe to examine onely such Sophismes, Cavils and Evasions, whereby hee indeavoureth to elude or retort the Knights ar∣guments, brought against him in this Section, in order as I have set them downe. To the first. The consequence of the Iesuit, drawne from the Knights supposed failing in his proofes, failes many wayes, as may be proved by manifold instances. For albeit, many later Mathematitians faile in refuting Copernicus his giddy opinion of the earths circular motion, and the heavens standing still: yet this their fai∣ling is no sufficient proofe of Copernicus his new fancie: neither will it follow, that the religion of Pagans & Infidels hath sufficient ground, because Lactantius failes in his proofes of Christianitie, in Saint Ieromes judgement: and Cyprian also in the judgement of Lactantius. The defects of the Patron or Advocate, ought not to be imputed to the cause. It is a weake and silly Religion, whose whole strength consisteth in the weakenesse of
some of the opposers of it. The truth is, the Knight hath not failed in his proofes of the no∣veltie of the Trent Creed, as the judicious Rea∣der will find: yet if there were any defect in them, it may be abundantly supplied out of Iuels challenge at Saint Pauls Crosse, Abbots answer to Bishop, intituled, The true ancient Roman Catholike, and Doctor Faner in his Booke of Antiquitie, triumphing over noveltie, and divers others. To the second. That the salvation of all soules  dependeth upon the Popes supremacie, which the Iesuits are bound by a fourth, and supernu∣merary vow to defend, is a bold and blasphe∣mous assertion, derogatorie to Christ himselfe, who is the Saviour of his body,Ephes. 5.23. 1 Cor. 3.11. and only foundation which beareth up the waight and frame of the whole Catholike Church. When Christ said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rocke will I build my Church; hee meant not, as Saint Au∣stine rightly observeth, To build himselfe upon Peter, but Peter and the whole Church upon him∣selfe; non super te edificabo me, sed super me edifi∣cabo te. The Church was founded and establi∣shed before there was any Pope or Bishop at Rome, and shall so continue, when Rome shall,Tract. de aufe∣ribilit. Papae. perchance, be burnt with fire, and the Papacie which now tottereth, shall be utterly destroyed. Doth not their owne Gerson teach, that the Pope may be quite removed, and yet the Catholike Church still remaine? how then can the Jesuit
say, that the waight and frame of the whole Catho∣like Church▪ dependeth upon the authoritie of the Pope? To the third. The Knight used a dilemma, or two-forked Argument. Either the Popes sworn-Servants, and our sworne enemies, whose depositions before wee heard, against divers ar∣ticles of the Trent Faith, concurred with other Papists in judgement, or not: if they concurred, then by the joynt confession of all, for those points, at least, they are destitute of universality, which yet they make a prime note of their Church: if others concurred not with them in judgement, then their Doctors are divided a∣mongst themselves, and consequently, they want another speciall marke of their Church, which they make unitie in point of Faith. To avoid the push of this Ramme, the Iesuit startsQuintil. Insti∣tut. orat. lib. 6. Diverticula et anfractus suf∣fugia sunt in∣firmitatis, ut qui cursu pa∣rum valent fle∣xu eludunt. aside into a Scholasticall speculation, whether any thing is to be held for an article of. Faith before it be defined, and resolveth the matter thus: When a a thing is once defined, to wit, by the Church, then it becomes a matter of Faith. Hee should rather determine, because this or that is a matter of Faith, therefore the Church defineth it to be so, and not because the Church defineth it to be so, therefore it is a matter of Faith. For Faith, if it be divine, is founded upon Gods Word, not the Churches definition: if nothing be matter of Faith, before it be defined by your Church, then Transubstantiation was no article of Faith,
before the Councell of Laterane, and Innocentius the third his dayes; nor the Doctrine of Con∣commitancie, and lawfull communicating in one kind, before the Councell of Constance, under Martin the fift; nor the Popes superioritie to Councels, before the Councell at Laterane, un∣der Leo the tenth; nor most of Pope Pius the fourth his Articles, before the late Councell of Trent, wherein those points were first defined. Then which, what Argument can be more for∣cible, to convince the novelty of the Romish Faith? But whether an article of Faith is to be accounted such, because it is defined to be such by the Church; or whether it be defined to be such by the Church, because it is such in its owne nature; it will little serve the Iesuits turne to make up the breaches of the Roman Church. For certaine it is, that their Doctors differ a∣mongst themselves, even in points defined by the Church. For after the bookes of the Old Testament, with all the parts (knowne by the name of Apocrypha) by the Councell of Trent were defined to be of Canonicall authoritie; Six∣tus Senensis makes scruple of some of them.Sixtus Senens. bib. Sanct. l. 1. Af∣ter the immaculate conception of our Lady was defined by Sixtus the fourth, and the feast in te∣stimonie thereof, authorised by him; yet, the Dominicans generally hold, that shee was con∣ceived in sinne. After Justification by inherent righteousnesse,De Caus. instit. l. 7. c. 21. was defined in the Councell of Trent, Albertus Pighius and others, cited by
Vegas held the contrary. And though the Coun∣cell of Trent stigmatize the doctrine touching assurance of salvation, yet Ambrosius Catharinus, a learned Papist, set forth a learned treatise de cer∣titudine salutis. Lastly, though Pope Leo the tenth, in the Councell of Lateran, defineth the Pope to be above a generall Councell, yet the Sorbonists at this day maintaine, that a generall Councell is above the Pope. Therefore as St Tho∣mas Moore said pleasantly of a poore Physitian that he was more then medicus, to wit, by one letter,Mor. in Epigr. meaning that he was mendicus. Vna tabi plus est litera quam medico; so it may truely be said of the unity Papists brag so much of, that it is more then Vnity by a letter, to wit, Vanity. To the fourth. If the Knight or any Prote∣stant suspended the efficacy of their Baptisme up∣on the faith of their Parents, or (as all Papists doe) upon the intention of the Priest, the Iesuit might with some colour object to us the uncer∣tainty of our Christendome: but let him know if he doth not, that we maintaine generally that the effect of Baptisme dependeth not upon the faith of the Parents and God-fathers, nor yet upon the intention of the Priest, knowne to God onely and himselfe; but upon his outward acti∣on and his words knowne to all the Congrega∣tion. We say that the observation of Christs in∣stitution in baptizing the partie in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy-ghost, and not the Priests hidden intention makes Baptisme
effectuall to all that belong to the covenant. To the fift. The Iesuit most absurdly infer∣reth absurdities upon his owne Tenet, suppo∣sing  it to be ours, whereas we disclaime it, affir∣ming that although the Church useth in marriage, all meanes possible by questions and answers, by joyning hads, by plighting their troth in most significant tearmes, and confirming their mutu∣all promises by giving and receiving a ring, and denouncing Gods judgments against them in most fearfull manner, if they know any thing one by the other, why they should not be ioyned in marriage, yet because the heart is knowne to God alone, the validity of marriage with us de∣pendeth upon the outward profession, and sa∣cred action done before sufficient and undoubted witnesse and not the secret intentions of the par∣tie. What the Iesuit addeth by way of jeare, that a small deale of orders serves our turnes, for he seeth not any thing done by vertue of our ordination which any man or woman may not doe without it. I hold it not worthy any other answer then that, sith he professeth his eye sight to be so dimme, he would make use of the Spectacles he made for the Knight, by helpe of them if he be not starke blinde, he may see, that by vertue of our ordination, men in holy orders preach the Gospell, administer the Sacraments, remit and retaine sinnes: which if he thinke any man or woman may doe without ordination, like the foole in the Poet,Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria cur∣runt. he is gone from one extreame to the other, and of a Papist
become an Anabaptist. With us none may execute the Priests office, but he that is called thereunto, as was Aaron. If the Iesuit meane that any man or woman may doe the outward acts of Priesthood de facto, though not de Iure: may they not doe the like also sometimes among them? doth not their Legend tell us that some Boyes getting by heart and pronouncing the words of Consecration, hoc est Corpus meum, turned all the Bakers bread in the street into flesh? Do not Lady Abbesses and Nuns chaunt Mattins together in Romish Chap∣pels? Do not Midwives christen children in their Church? With what face then can he charge us with those disorders whereof all the world seeth we are free, but he and his Church most guilty? To the sixt. If we can have but a conjecturall and wavering knowledge of our salvation, what comfort can a true Christian have in life or death? If his hope be onely in this life, the Apo∣stle affirmeth expressely,1 Cor. 15.19. that he is of all men most miserable; and certainely he is but little bet∣ter if all his hope in the life to come be no better then a guesse, or slender conjecture. Iustly there∣fore did Martin Luther tearme the Romish do∣ctrine concerning uncertainty of salvation, non doctrinam fidei sed diffidentiae, no doctrine of faith but of diffidence and distrust, which if this Iesuit stiffely maintaines, I would faine know of him how he interpreteth that Article of the Creed, I beleeve the remission of sinnes. Is the meaning onely this, that there is a remission of
some sins in the Church? if so, then the Devill beleeves as much concerning this Article as he, but if as he beleeveth in the Article of the Resur∣rection, the Resurrection of his owne flesh, so in the Article of remission of sinnes, the remis∣sion of his owne sinnes; then his owne justifi∣cation, and particular beliefe of his owne sal∣tion is a part of his Catholike faith; and if that be but conjecturall, then there is no certainty in the Catholike Faith. It is true, that it is a different thing to dispute of the certainety of the Catholike faith in generall, and of every mans private and particular beliefe of his owne justification, and salvation: yet there is such a dependance be∣tweene them, that if the former be uncertaine the latter cannot be certaine. Yea but (saith the Iesuit) we are certaine, by the certainty of divine faith, not onely that there be seven Sacraments, but that they are also truely administred in the Church, so as there can be no danger of the fai∣ling of either, to the notable preiudice of faith and the salvation of soules. I reply first, that for five of the seven as was discussed at large, Section the fourth, the Iesuit is so farre from any certainty that indeede he can bring no probability that there be any such Sacraments in the Catholike Church; and for the other two which we ac∣knowledge to be Sacraments properly so called, he cannot be certaine that they are ever effectual∣ly administred in his Church according to their owne Tenents, who suspend the efficacy of them
upon the Priests intention. Nay farther, he can∣not be certaine that they have any Church at all amongst them, for there can be no Church (as they teach) without a visible succession of lawfull Pastours, whereof hee cannot be certaine, sith no man knoweth whether the Bishops, who or∣dained their Priests, or the Archbishop, who or∣dained their Bishops, or the Pope, who conse∣crated their Archbishops, intended that which your Church intendeth; and if there failed an intention in any of all these, or in him who bap∣tized or ordained their first Pope, (since the Bi∣shops of Rome began to be Popes) hee hath no certainty according to his owne grounds, of any Priesthood or Christianitie in his Church. To the seventh. I never heard before, that it could be good, or any way profitable, surdo fa∣bulum narrare, to tell a Tale in the eare of a deafe man. Where doe the Scriptures, or ancient Fa∣thers give any approbation to such senslesse de∣votion? can a man call upon him with faith, or any hope of obtaining his suit, whom hee con∣ceiveth to be out of his hearing? Yea, but Ga∣briel Biel speaketh not doubtfully, but certainly, of Invocation, though hee seeme to doubt of the manner how Saints in heaven know our necessi∣ties on earth. Biel indeed lispeth somewhat that way, but hee speaketh not plaine; hee saith, In∣vocantur sancti, not sancti sunt invocandi; hee speaketh confidently and certainly of the pra∣ctise of the Romane Church, but not of the truth
of this point of the Romish Faith, that Saints ought to be called upon: for that hee taught,In Can. Missae Dist. 31. videri probabile. that It may seeme probable that God revealeth to Saints, all those suits which men present unto them: consequently holdeth, that it may seeme also probable, that the living may pray unto them. But what is this his probabile, or Peter Lumbards not incredibile, to build an Article of Faith upon? Yea, but Pe∣ter Lumbard, though hee make some doubt, whe∣ther the Saints heare our Prayers as they pro∣ceed from us, (they being in Heaven,Sicut enim An∣gelis, ita etiam sanctis qui Deo assistant, petiti∣ones nostrae innotescunt in verbo Deo quod contemplantur. and wee in Earth, they being but in one place, and those that call upon them in a million of places, di∣stant farre one from the other) yet, Hee maketh no doubt of their knowing and seeing our Prayers in the Word of God, as the Angels doe. I answer, that this imaginarie Glasse of the Schoolemen, wherein they conceive, that the Saints and An∣gels see all things by the contemplation of God, in whom are all things, hath beene long agoe battered in pieces. For if, because they see God, they must needs see all things that are in him, and know all that hee knoweth; it would hereupon insue, that the Saints knowledge should be infi∣nite, as Gods is: that they should know the day and houre when Christ shall come to judgement, contrary to the expresse words of our Saviour, Marke 13.32. that they should know the secrets of all hearts, which the Scripture ascribeth as a singular prerogative to God. To avoid these Rockes, if our Adversaries will confine the
knowledge of the Saints or Angels, to such things onely, as God shall be pleased to reveale unto them, they beg then the point in question, which they ought to prove: viz. That God will reveale to every Saint, what every man on earth pray∣eth to him for. To the eighth. First the Iesuit in this answer flatly contradicteth Cajetan, whom hee under∣taketh to defend: for, if the Church groundeth not the canonization of Saints upon the report of miracles voyced on them: Cajetans Argument in that place is weak, and of no force. Secondly, for the authoritie of the See Apostolike, and the infallibility of the Popes judgement, they are as uncertaine, or more then that such persons ca∣nonized by the Pope are Saints.L. 3. ep. 3. nec quisquam sibi quod soli filio tribuit pater vindicare se putet, ut ad areum purgan∣dam, &c. 1 Kings 8.39. Saint Cyprian in his time, severely censured those who arroga∣ted to themselves that which the Father hath gi∣ven to the Sonne onely; to wit, in the floore of the Church, to take the fanne in his hand, and sever the Wheat from the Chaffe. If God onely knoweth the hearts of all the children of men, either the Pope must be God, as the Canonists blasphemously called him, or hee cannot infallibly know who are true Saints, and sincerely beleeve, and love God. As for Saint Austines complaint (that many were worshipped by men on earth that are tormented by the devill in hell) they are in∣definitely spoken, and not restrained to Dona∣tists, or any other Heretikes: yet, were it so, wee may see in those Donatists a perfect picture of
Papists. For what Donatus did in Affrica, that doth the Pope in Europe; hee canonizeth those of his faction for Saints. And as the Donatists gave the honour of Martyrs to those, who justly suffered death for Robberies and Murders, so doe the Papists crowne the heads of Murderers and Traitours with the garland of Martyrdome; witnesse Becket, Campian, Oldcorne, and Garnet; whereof the first standeth in the Kalender of Ro∣mish Saints, the later in the Register of Jesuiticall Martyrs. Neither can the Iesuit so easily fillip off the testimonie of Cassander, as if hee taxed the ignorant for making a Saint of a Thiefe,Cassan. consult. art. 2. and no way touched upon the Pope or your Church; for hee layeth not the blame upon the people, as the Iesuit here doth, but saith simply, that Saint Martin found a place honoured in the name of a holy Martyr, to be the sepulcher of a wic∣ked Robber. Secondly, 'tis well knowne that the people cry not up at first a Saint, or Martyr after his death, but the Priests, who voyce mi∣racles upon them, and keepe their Shrines and Reliques, and by shewing them to the people, make no lesse gaine, than Demetrius and his fellow Crafts-men did of their silver Shrines of Diana. To the ninth. As hee that plucks the stickes  out of the Chimney one by one, at last puts out the fire: so the Knight by loosening, or quite removing the fuell of Purgatorie fire, conse∣quently extinguisheth it. If all the parts and cir∣cumstances
of the Doctrine of Popish Purgatory are doubtfull and uncertaine, the whole certainly can be no Article of Faith: but the Antecedent the Knight proves out of Bellarmine, Dominicus a Soto, Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Gregorie the great, and venerable Bede, let the Iesuit there∣fore looke to the Consequent. The Church of Rome commandeth every one upon paine of hell-fire, to beleeve a temporarie purging fire after this life. First, upon what ground, Scripture, or unanimous consent of Fathers, or Tradition of the Catholike Church? no such thing. But upon apparitions of dead men, and testimonie of Spirits, whether good Spirits or evill they can∣not tell. Next, wee demand what soules, and how long doe they continue there? To this they must answer likewise Ignoramus. Soto think∣eth that none continueth in this purgation ten yeares. If this be true, saith Bellarmine, No soule needs to stay in purging one houre. Thirdly, the soules that are supposed to be there, till their sinnes are purged, wherewith are they purged? With fire onely; so saith Sir Thomas Moore, and proves it out of Zacharie 9.11. Thou hast delive∣red the prisoners out of the place where there is no water: or with water and fire: so saith Gregorie in his Dialogues, lib. 4. Some are purged by fire, and some by bathes: and Fisher Bishop of Roche∣ster, proves it out of those words of the Psalmist, Wee have passed thorow fire and water. Fourthly, admit they are purged by fire, whether is this
fire materiall or metaphoricall? Ignoramus, Wee know not, saith Bellarmine, lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 6. Lastly, is there any mittigation of this paine in Purgatorie, or no? They cannot tell this nei∣ther. For venerable Bede, hist. Ang. lib. 5. tels us of the apparition of a Ghost, reporting that There was an infernall place where soules suffered no paine, where they had a brooke running through it. Neither is it improbable, saith Bllarmine, l. 2. de Purg. cap. 7. that there should be such an hono∣rable prison, which is a most milde and temperate Purgatorie. Yea, but saith the Iesuit, Saint Austin is a firme man for Purgatorie, and hee will prove it out of that booke of Enchiridion, and place quoted by the Knight. Resolutely spoken, but so falsly,Encharid. ad Laurent. c. 69. Tale aliquid e∣tiam post hanc vitam fieri in∣credibile non est, et utrum ita sit quaeri potest et ut inveniri, aut latere possit, nonnullos fide∣les per ignem quendam purga∣torium salvari non tamen tales de quibus dictū est regnum Dei non possidebant. that in this very booke, chapter 69, Saint Austine speaking of a purging fire, and commenting upon the words of Saint Paul, Hee shall be saved as it were by fire; addeth immediately, It  not unlikely that some such thing may be after this life: but whether it be so or no, it may be argued; and whether it can be found, or not found, that some Beleevers are saved by a purging fire; yet it is certaine, that none of them shall be saved, of whom the Apostle saith, they shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. And in the same booke, chapter 109. he resolves, that All soules from the day of their death to their resurrection, abide in expectation what shall become of them, and are reserved in secret receptacles accordingly as they deserve, either torment or ease. These hidden Cells or Receptacles wheresoever
they are scituated in St. Austins judgment,C. 109. Tempus quod inter ho∣minis mortem & ultimam re∣surrectionem interpositam est animus abdi∣tis receptaculis continet, sicut unaque{que} digna est vel requiae vel arumnâ. cer∣taine it is, they are not in the Popish Purgatory; for St. Austine placeth in these secret Mansions all soules indifferently, good or bad, whereas the Popish Purgatory is restrained only to those of a middle condition, being neither exceeding good nor exceeding bad. Againe, in St. Austines hid∣den repositories, some soules have ease, and some paine, s each deserveth: but in the Ro∣mish Purgatory, all soules are in little-ease, being tormented in a flame little differing from Hell fire, or rather nothing at all, save onely in time, the paines are as grievous but not so durable. Else where St. Austine is most direct against Purga∣tory, and wholly for us, as namely, de peceat. meritis de remissione, l. 1. c. 28. There is no mid∣dle or third place, saith he, but he must needs be with the Devill who is not with Christ. And Hy∣pog. l. 5. The first place the faith of Catholikes by divine authority beleeveth to be the Kingdome of Heaven, the second to be Hell, tertium locum pe∣nitùs ignoramus, the third place, we are alltogether ignorant of; and in his booke de vanit. seculi cap. 1. Know that when the soule is seperated from the body, statim, presently, it is either placed in Para∣dise for his good worke, or cast headlong into the bot∣tome of hell for his sinnes. Neither can the Iesuit evade by saying that there are two onely places where the soules remaine finally and eternally, to wit, Heaven and Hell, but yet that there is a third place where the bodies fry in purging for
a time; for St. Austine speakes of all soules in generall both good and bad, and saith that statim, that is, presently upon death, they are receaved into Heaven, or throwne into Hell; and therefore stay no time in a Third place. What then say we to the passage in which the Iesuit so triumpheth? Enchirid. ad Laurenc. c. 110. Neither is it to be denied, that the soules of the dead are relieved by the piety of their friends living, when the Sacrifice of our Mediatour is offered for them, and Almes given in the Church. We answer, that where St. Au∣stine is not constant to himselfe, we are not bound to stand to his authority, and therefore we appeale from Saint Austine missing his way in this place, to the same Austine,Nullum auxili∣um misericor∣diae potest pre∣beri a justis de∣functorum ani∣mabus etiam si justi praebere velint, quia est immutabilis divina senten∣tia Qualis quisque moritur talis a Deo judicatur, nec potest muta∣ri, corrigi, vel minui dimia sententia. hitting his way elsewhere, namely, l. 2. Quest. Evan. c. 38. There can be no helpe of mercy afforded by just men to the soules of the deceased, although the righteous would never so faine have it so, because the sentence of God is immutable: and Ep. 80. ad Hesich: such as a man is when he dieth, for such he is judged of God, neither can the sentence of God be changed corrected, or diminished. As for Mr. Anthony Al∣cots confession, that Saint Austines opinion was for purgatorie, it maketh not for the Iesuit, but against him; for he saith, it was his opinion, not his resolved judgment, and his opinion at one place and at one time, which after he retracted and resolved the cleane contrary, as Mr. Alcots there in part sheweth, and Danaeus most fully in his Comment upon St. Austine his Enchiridian ad Laurentium.
To the tenth. If all Papists did agree in this, that all Images were to be worshipped, but not as Gods; yet are they at odds in other Quillets concerning Images; namely, whether they are to be worshipped in themselves, and for them∣selves, or onely ratione prototypi, in regard of that they represent: whether properly, or im∣properly: whether with kissing and imbracing, and other civill complements, as Tharasius the Patriarke of Constantinople teacheth, or with pro∣stration, or corporall submission before Images, as the Iesuit indeavoureth to prove out of the Acts of the second Councell of Nice. Neither is it certaine, and resolved among all Papists, that Images are to be worshipped, but not as Gods. For some of them deny, that they are at all to be worshipped, others over-lavish on the contra∣ry, and teach, that they are to be worshipped as God.De Imag. sanct. l. 2. c. 22. For though Bellarmine himselfe approve not the opinion of those Roman Catholikes, who teach that Latria, or divine honour is due to Ima∣ges, unlesse it be improperly, and by accident; yet hee confesseth that Alexander de Hales, Aquinas, Cajetanus, Bonaventure, Marsilius, Almaine, Carthusian, Capreolus, and Henricus teach, that The Images of God are to be worshipped with the same worship wherewith God himselfe is worship∣ped; and what is this lesse, than to worship Ima∣ges as God? As for the Canons and curses of the Councell of Nice, they are but Bruta fulmi∣na, and if the Iesuit be not as senselesse as the
Images which hee worshippeth, hee must needs confesse as much. For to speake nothing of the ridiculous arguments used in that Councell, such as these are; God made Man after his owne Image, therefore we may make or worship Images: and the Angels are to be painted, quia corporei sunt, be∣cause they are bodily substances. What is there spo∣ken in the 115 Psalme, the 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 ver∣ses, against Idols, which may not be applied to your Popish Images? It is said of them, They are the workes of mens hands; are yours the worke of Angels, or Devils? It is said of them, They have mouthes and speake not, eyes and see not, eares and heare not, noses and smell not, hands and han∣dle not, feet and walke not: doe any of your vene∣rable Images made of silver and gold (or rather, of which you make so much silver and gold of) speake, see, heare, smell, handle or walke? I conclude therefore in the words of the Psalmist, They that make these Images are like unto them, and so are all they that defend the worship of them. For Gregorie de Valentia, the Iesuit telleth but a sorry tale; for first, hee disparageth his lear∣ning in the Greeke, saying, that alleaging a Text out of Saint Peter, who wrote in Greeke, hee followed the Latine translation, never look∣ing to the originall: which argueth in him, ei∣ther grosse ignorance in the Greeke, or grosse negligence. After hee hath thus disgraced their noble Champion, hee leaveth him in the open field, saying, pag. 377. Neither doe I allow Valen∣tia
his use of the word Simulacrum, nor his explica∣tion of Saint Peters text, neither this his argument drawne from thence. The truth is, Gregorie de Valentia is unexcusable;De Idolatr. l. 2. Quid attinebat ita determina∣tè cultus si nu∣lacrorum illi∣citos notare, si omnino nullos simulacrorum cultus licitos esse censuisset. for howsoever hee di∣stinguisheth of Image and Idoll-worship, and intendeth to prove no more out of Saint Peter, then that some Image-worship is lawfull: yet, if his collection were good out of Saint Peter, it would prove some Idoll-worship to be lawfull. For Saint Peters word is, , un∣lawfull Idolatries; and if because Saint Peter bran∣deth Idolatrie with the epithet of Vnlawfull, he will infer that therefore some Idolatrie is lawfull: by the same reason he might conclude, that some Adulterie or Theft were good and profitable, because the Apostle, Ephes. 5.21. biddeth us to have no fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of darknesse. For the distinction of an Image and an Idoll, I have spoken at large heretofore; here onely I observe, that the Iesuit (in saying that Idolum, according to the prime signification of the word, might be taken more indifferently, because it signifieth the seeming shape or beauty of a thing or person) contradicteth himselfe, and the whole current of his owne Doctours, and strength∣neth our Arguments against them, drawne from the prohibition of making or worshiping Idols,Flood, pag. 337. that is, the shape or beauty of any thing or person. The shape or beauty of any thing or per∣son, according to the prime signification and ety∣mologie of the word is an Idoll: but all Popish
Images are the shapes of some thing or person, they are all therefore Idolls, and the worshipers of them Idolaters, according to the primitive signification of the word. The truth is, every I∣doll is an Image, and every Image an Idoll, ac∣cording to the first signification of the word: but according to the present use, an Idoll for the most part is taken in the worst sense, and signi∣fieth such an Image onely as is idolized, that is made for religious worship, or rather irreligious, as all Popish Images are: and because they are so, the places of Scripture which we bring a∣gainst the worship of Idolls, as this of Saint Pe∣ter, are strong and in force against them and their Worshippers. And this may serve for answer of the fourteenth Paragraph of this tenth Chapter. In the 15. and 16. following, he doth but champe somewhat of that which before he chewed, and there∣fore I conclude this Chapter with his owne words a little altered: we finde not in matter of faith uncertaine in the Protestant Church, no∣thing certaine on the Iesuits side but onely this, that he is alwayes and every where himselfe, that is a Proteus: whose motto may be that of the Hea∣thens Goddesse, Fortune: constans in levitate suâ, constant to his inconstancy, and true to his false dealing.
Concerning the greater safety and comfort in the Protestant faith then in the Romish; Spectacles, Chap. 11. a page. 381. us{que} ad 404. THE Knight though he talke so much of proving the safety, and comfort of the Protestant faith out of Catho∣like Roman Authors, yet he cannot name that man that saith any such thing: for suppose he finde one or two Authors that say some thing different from the com∣mon opinion, doth he presently say, the Protestant faith is safe? e points of Protestant religion, which of themselves perhaps might seeme indifferent, their disobedience and spirit of contradiction makes dam∣nable. The Protestant religion is not safer then the Ro∣man, in regard of the all-sufficiency of Scripture, on which the Protestants relie, for the Catholikes relie upon the same ground of safety, acknowledging and reverencing the authority of Scripture, as much, nay much more then Protestants. It is not safer to adore Christ (as Protestants doe) sitting at the right hand of his Father in Heaven,
then to adore the Sacrament: for Christ is as surely in the Sacrament as in heaven, the same Catholique faith teaching both verities; and to make you study a little, saith hee, I may say in some sort, more sure; for a man that would be contentious, may deny Christ to sit at the right hand of his Father, because his Fa∣ther hath neither right hand, nor left. There is no more fafety in the Protestant doctrine  of Iustification, than the Romane. For Catholikes trust wholy in God, attributing no more to their owne good workes, than that they cooperate to Iustifica∣tion, meriting grace and glorie: and on the contra∣rie, Protestants teach vaine confidence in most of these points, as that a man must assure himselfe that his sinnes are forgiven, that hee must assure himselfe of his salvation, and that he cannot fall from grace, and the like: which ground supposed, how can hee worke out his salvation with feare and trembling? Though some Catholikes say, that there is more perfection of the Sacrament, which consisteth in the representation in both kinds, than in one; yet there is the same safety and fruit in one, and in both kinds. Though the sacrifice of the Masse is more profi∣table,  when the people comnunicate with the Priest, as the Knight proveth out of the Councell of Trent, Harding and Bellarmine: yet hee proveth not, that there is any danger in private Masses, or that it is unlawfull for the Priest to say Masse without hee have some to communicate with him, which is the Controversie between Catholikes and Protestants.
Aeneas Sylvius, Cassander, and Panormitan are of opinion indeed, that Priests should have libertie to marry: yet they would not have them marry a∣gainst the law standing in force, but they would have the law taken away: which is a farre different Doctrine from that of Protestants. Howsoever, it is safer to follow the judgement of all other Doctours of the Catholike Church, all other Fathers and Councels teaching the contrarie; of all which, there is abundant proofe in Bellarmine, and which was never contradicted by any, but knowne wicked men. Though publike Prayers in Latine may not be so profitable to the people, yet they are lawfull and safe, and the fruit of refection of the understanding by Prayer in a knowne tongue, whereof Aquinas spea∣keth, will not countervaile the tenth part of the in∣convenience which may happen by having publike Prayers in a knowne tongue. The inconveniences are vanitie, curiositie, contempt of Superiours, dis∣putes, schismes, prophanation, and divulgation of secret Mysteries: besides, the very ignorance of the Latine tongue, and consequently, of all learning which would follow thereof onely in Clergie men, is ten hundred times more harme, than that fruit in the Laitie is good. Cajetan was greatly mistaken, when hee expoundeth the fourteenth chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corynthians, of publike Prayers in the Church: and hee is also mis∣taken in the very end of Prayer, which is not edifi∣cation, or instruction of the people, but the honour of
God immediately. Gabriel Biel speaketh not of Prayer in a knowne tongue, nor of publike Prayers, but onely of mentall Prayer, and vocall; and giveth those seven reasons which the Knight alleageth, to shew, that besides mentall Prayer, it is convenient to use vocall. There is no danger in worshipping Images, or  praying to Saints: and Erasmus, Cassander, and Chemnitius, who teach the contrary, are of none authoritie. Neither Bernard, nor Waldensis, nor Bellar∣mine,  contradict the Doctrine of the Romish Church in the point of Merit. For Catholikes acknowledge with Bernard, that there is no safe rest or securitie for a weake soule, but in the wounds of our Saviour; which doth not hinder but a man may say, God re∣wardeth the good workes of his servants, out of his justice and fidelitie, which out of his mercie he gave them grace to doe: and though Waldensis and some other Divines, approve not of the word of Me∣rit, especially De condigno; yet in the thing it selfe, they all agree, to wit, that eternall life is gi∣ven to men, as the reward of their good workes: which is all that others meane by condigne Merit. The Doctrine of Bellarmine, to wit, that it is most safe to trust wholly in the Merits of Christ, is as well the Catholike Doctrine, as the Protestants: who condemne not Protestants for not trusting in their workes, or trusting wholly in Christ; if so be they deny not the necessitie and efficacie of good workes, for purchasing grace and glorie.
The Hammer. AS Asia Minor is called by some Geographers Asia Asiae, and the field of Agrigentum, Sicilia Siciliae, and Attica, Graecia Graeciae, and the Ball or Apple in the eye, the eye of the eye: so this Chapter of the Knight may be not unfitly termed via viae, the safest path in his safe way, other Chapters tend to the proofe of his title Via Tuta: but this is full upon it. For here he proves by many remarkable instances, that our rocke is much more sure then theirs, our very adversaries being judges; his instances are prayers in a knowne tongue, communicating in both kindes, partaking of the Sacrament with the Priest, immediate addresse to God by Christ, adoring the Creator onely, resolution of our faith upon Gods word, relying wholly upon his Grace and mercy, and renouncing mans merit. And whose understand∣ing apprehendeth not, that it is safest to pray to God with understanding; whose spirituall sen∣ses tell him not that it is more comfortable and profitable to communicate with a Priest then to looke on, and to receive the Sacrament in both kindes, then in one onely; whose reason per∣swadeth him not that it is safer to worship God in spirit, then by an Image; to adore Christ in Heaven, then in a peece of bread; to expect ayde from God, then Saints; to trust in Gods word, then in mans; in his Grace, then our will;
and in Christs merits, then our owne? yet as restie jades stumble in faire way: so the Iesuit in this fairest rode of the safe way stumbleth of∣ten, and tumbleth also, as the Reader may ob∣serve in the severall annotations at his particular slips, or rather downefalls in this Chapter. To the first. The Knight doth not conclude  out of any one particular, but maketh an inducti∣on out of many particulars in this manner. The Protestant faith by the best learned among Pa∣pists in the point of Communion in both kindes, of Prayer in a knowne tongue, justification by Faith alone, et sic de ceteris, is safer then the Ro∣man: ergo, simply and generally it is safer. Though Silurus his Son could breake every Ar∣row by it selfe, which his Father gave him, yet he could not in like manner the bundle or sheafe of Arrowes which he put in his hand, and bid him assay to breake them if he could, —nam vis unita fortior. Et quae non prosunt singula multa ju∣vant; but the Iesuit hath not beene able to breake any one of the single Arrowes shot by the Knight in the former Sections, how then will he be able to breake the sheafe in this? To the second. By the uncharitable censure  of the Iesuit, he sheweth of what spirit he is. The searcher of all hearts knoweth that we con∣tradict Romish doctrines, not out of disobedi∣ence to man, but out of obedience to him who commandeth us to contend for the true faith: and to reprove and convince all gainesayers. What Pa∣pists
intentions are, we take not upon us to judge: their doctrines we put to the test of Gods word, and finde them false and adulterine, and all be it some points of their beliefe, considered in them∣selves, might seeme indifferent: yet as they hold them they are not, because they are not of faith,Rom. 14.23. and whatsoever is not of faith is sinne. Now no point of the Romish Creed as they hold it, is of that faith the Apostle speaketh of, that is, divine faith; because they ground and finally resolve all their articles not upon Gods word, but upon the authority of the Pope,Resp ad Archi- epis. Spalaten. c. 47. Firmitas fundamenti et firma licet implicita in aureo hoc fun∣damento veri∣tatis adhaesio valebit, ut in Cypriano sic in nobis ad salu∣tem: faenum & stipula im∣becilitas & ca∣ries in tecto & contignatione, & explicita erroris opinio non valebit, nec in Cypriano, nec in nobis ad per∣nitiem. or Church of Rome, which is but the authority of man; whereas on the con∣trary as Doctor Crakenthorpe demonstrateth, If any Protestant build hay or stubble upon the true foundation, he may be saved; because he holdeth the true foundation, which is, that every doctrine of faith ought to be built upon Scripture. If the Iesuit wonder at this conclusion, let him weight the Au∣thors reasons, and he will be forced to confesse, that the errors, if there be any in Protestants, in regard they sticke close to the true foundation, and implicitly deny them, cannot in them be damnable, whereas the very true doctrines of faith in Papists, because they hold them upon a wrong ground and foundation, very much dero∣gatory to God and his truth, are not so safe. To the third. With what face can the Iesuit  avow this? considering that Prieras before al∣leaged, and other writers approved by the Church of Rome, mainetaine this blasphemous
assertion, that the authority of the Church is greater then the authority of Scripture, and all Papists of note at this day, hold that the Scripture is but an imperfect and partiall rule of faith; all Prote∣stants on the contrary teach, that it is an entire and perfect rule of faith; Papists believe the Scrip∣ture for the Churches sake, Protestants the Church for the Scripture sake; Papists resolve all points of faith generally into the Popes infalibility, or Churches authority, Protestants into the written word of God, which as Bellarmine himselfe con∣fesseth,De verbo Dei non script. l. 4. c. 1. containeth all things necessary for all men to beleeve, and is a most certaine and safe rule of beleeve∣ing. Yea but saith the Iesuit out of Vincentius Lerinensis,De verbo Dei l. 1. c. 2. he that will avoid the deceits and snares of Haeretikes, and remaine sound in the faith, must strengthen his faith two wayes, to wit, by the authority of the divine law, and the tradition of the Catholike Church. This advise of Vincentius is sound, and good if it be rightly understood, and not in the Iesuits sense. Vincentius there by tradi∣tion of the Catholike Church understandeth not unwritten verities, but the Catholike expositions of holy Scriptures, extant in the writings of the Doctors of the Church in all ages, and we grant that this Catholike exposition of the Doctors where it can be had, is of great force to con∣firme faith, and confound Heretikes.Vt Scripturae ecclesiastice in∣telligentiae jun∣gatur authori∣tas. For the stop∣ping of whose mouth that Father saith, and we de∣ny it not, that there is great neede to add to the Scrip∣ture the Churches sense or interpretation, albeit as he
there addeth, which cutteth the throat of the Iesuits cause, The Canon of Scripture is perfect, and sufficient of it selfe for all things: nay ra∣ther, as hee correcteth himselfe, Over and above sufficient; cum sit perfectus scripturae canon sibi{que} ad omnia satis super{que} sufficiat. To the fourth. Here the Iesuit would make his Reader study a little, and his Adversarie to muse;Vero nihil ve∣rius, certo nihil certius. but it is indeed, whether hee be in his right wits, or no. For first, as Seneca well resol∣veth, one thing cannot be said truer than another; one truth in Divinitie may be more evident to us than another, but in it selfe it cannot be truer or surer. Secondly, admitting there could be de∣grees of certainty, at least quoad nos, there can be yet no comparison, in regard of such certain∣tie betweene an Article of the Creed assented unto by all Christians, and a controverted con∣clusion, maintained onely by a late faction in the Westerne Church. But the sitting of Christ at the right hand of his Father, is an Article of the Creed, set downe in expresse words in holy Scripture,Mark 16.19. Luke 24. consented unto by all Christians in the world; whereas the carnall presence of Christ in the Sacrament by Transubstantiation, is no Article extant in any Creed, save onely that of Pope Pius his coyning, in the yeare of our Lord, 1564. It is neither in words set downe in Scripture, as the other Articles are; neither can it be necssarily inforced or deduced by con∣sequence, as foure great Cardinals of the Roman
Church confesse, Cameracensis, Cajetan, Roffen∣sis, and Bellarmine. Neither was this Doctrine of the Romane Church ever assented unto by the Greeke Church, nor by the Latine anciently, or generally, as I shewed before. Thirdly, the Ie∣suit contradicteth himselfe within eight lines: for having said in the eighteenth line,Pag. 384. that Christ his corporall presence in the Sacrament was more sure, than his presence in heaven at the right hand of his Father; about seven lines after, forgetting himselfe, hee saith, that Wee shall find as much to doe (marke as much, not more) in expounding that Article of the Creed, as they doe in expounding the words, This is my Body. Wherein it is well hee confesseth, that Papists make much to doe in ex∣pounding the words, This is my Body, which is most true; for by the demonstrative Hoc, they understand they know not what. Neither this Body, nor this Bread, but an Individum vagum, something contained under the accidents of Bread, which when the Priests saith Hoc, it is Bread; but when hee hath muttered out an Vm, it is Christs Body. Likewise by the Copula est (is) they understand they know not what; either shall be, as soone as the words are spoken, or is converted unto, or is by Transubstantiation. Last∣ly, by Body, they understand such a body as in∣deed is no body, without the extension of place, without distinction of Organs, without facultie of sense, or motion: and will hee make this fig∣ment so incredible, so impossible, as sure, nay
more sure than the Article of Christs ascension into heaven, and his sitting at the right hand of his Father there? Yea, but the Iesuit deman∣deth, Wherein are you more safe than wee? if hee be not there, wee are in danger of adoring him where hee is not; if hee be there, then are you, saith hee, in danger, by not adoring him where hee is. I an∣swer, wee are every way safe, and they both wayes in danger: wee are safe, because if hee be there, wee who worship him there in spirit and truth, not under any corporall shape, are in no danger at all; because wee worship him at his Table, as hee requireth: if hee bee not there, wee can be in no danger, for not worshipping him there where hee is not. They are in danger both wayes, of Will-worship if he be there; of Idolatrie, if hee be not there. Of Will-worship, I say, if hee be under the accidents of Bread and Wine, because they are no where commanded to worship him under such formes: if hee bee not there, then are they apparantly guiltie of grosser Idolatrie, by exhibiting Cultum latriae, divine worship to a piece of Bread. To the fift. Here the Iesuit, like an Adder, thrusteth out his forked sting, pricking with one of his forkes, the Knight, for calumniating their Doctrine: with the other, the Doctrine of the Reformed Church, touching assured hope of salvation, as matter of vaine confidence, and a dangerous precipice of the soule. The first is ea∣sily plucked out; for the Knight chargeth them
with nothing, but what the Iesuit himselfe con∣fesseth. For if men cooperating to their justifica∣tion, merit both grace and glorie, they doe not ascribe the whole glorie of it to God; but as the Romans, for the victorie they gained over the Cimbri, sacrificed Deo & Mario: so doe the Pa∣pists at this day, for the conquest of their ghostly enemies, and their purchase of heaven, burne incense Deo & Mariae, to Christ and Mary, and attribute their justification and salvation, partly to Christs merits, partly to their owne; together with the superabundant satisfaction of the bles∣sed Virgin Mary, and other Saints. The other forke reacheth not home to invenome our most wholsome doctrine, concerning assured hope of salvation: for though wee teach, that a man ought to be assured that his sinnes are forgiven him: yet withall wee teach, that this assurance is upon condition of Repentance and Faith. And withall wee affirme, because hee stan∣deth not by his owne strength, but by Gods power, Who worketh in him both the will and the deed; hee ought not to be high minded, but to feare, and in this feare to worke out his salva∣tion. I meane, in feare:Phil. 2.13. as feare is opposed to carnall security and presumption, not as it is opposed to religious confidence: and as hee must worke out his salvation with this feare, so also with trembling; as trembling is taken for an awfull and filiall reverence, not for a servile affrighting. For the trembling here meant, is
not onely joyned with assured hope, that God will worke both the will and the deede, but also with joy, rejoyce unto him with trembling. Psal. 11.To the sixt. Though the Iesuit tug hard, yet  the Knight holdeth him fast in Hales, Vasquez, and Valentia his net. For if it be true that the Sa∣craments effect what they represent, it will fol∣low upon the Iesuits owne confession, that in re∣gard the Sacrament is perfecter in both kindes then in one, in regard of representation, it must needs be more perfect also in the fruit and ope∣ration: and if so, then more safety and comfort  in our entire, then in their halfe communion. Bell. de Missa, l. 2. c. 10. Ne∣gari non potest quin sit magis perfecta et le∣gitima, missa ubi cōmunican∣tes adsunt quā ubi non adsunt. Harding, art. 1. of privat Masse, Where the people cōmu∣nicate, it is more cōmen∣dable, & more godly. Concil. Trent, ses. 22. cap. 6. more fruitfull, and more pro∣fitable.To the seventh. The Iesuit would faine con∣tradict the Knight, but indeede he contradi∣cteth himselfe. For in granting that which Bellar∣mine, Harding, and the Councell of Trent extor∣teth from him, that it is more profitable for the people to communicate with a Priest at the Masse, then to looke on; he sayes by consequent that there is more safety in it: which is the proper point in controversie in this Chapter. For as that which is unprofitable for the soule, cannot but be dange∣rous: so that which is profitable to the soule cannot but be safe, nothing is profitable to the soule but that which some way tendeth too, and furthereth the salvation thereof: and is not that safer which more tendeth to salvation? To the eight. Aeneas Silvius maketh no men∣tion at all of any Law of single life, but simply saith,De gestis con∣cil. Basil. l. 2. that It were safer for Priests to marry; for
that meanes many Priests might be saved in married Priesthood,Coss. de caelib. Sacerd. art. 23. Panor. de cler. conjug. c. Quum olim. Credo pro bono et salute anima∣rum statutum nunc iri ut non valentes conti∣nere possint contrahere. which now in barren Priesthood are damned. Cassander and Panormitan make men∣tion of the law, which tieth Priests to single life, and both thinke that the abrogation of it would be good and behoovefull to the soules of many Priests that those who cannot attaine to the first degree of chastity in a single life, may be permitted to live in the second degree of chaste marriage. And what is it else that we contend for, but that it may be left free to the Ministers of the Gospell to marry if they thinke good? which liberty implieth two things; First, that where there is a law restrai∣ning them from marriage, that law may be abro¦gated: Secondly, for the future, that no law pro∣hibiting marriage in the Clergie may be enacted. Yea but saith the Iesuit, all the Doctors, all the Fathers, all the Councells, and the continuall pra∣ctice of the Church from the very beginning is a∣gainst Priests marriage, of all which you have abun∣dant proofe in Bellarmine. I answer, of all this, nay, none of all this, as you may see in Chemnitius History de celibatu sacerdotum, Iunius, and Chaume∣rus their reply to Bellarmine, and most largly and plentifully in Dr. Hall now Bishop of Exon. his three bookes against Cosfin; intituled, The honour of the married Clergy.Pag. 392. Yea but saith the Iesuit in the last place, the law restraining Priests marriage was never contradicted by any but knowne wicked men. What a lowd and Stentori∣an untruth is here uttered by a foule mothed
Iesuit? Was Paphnutius the confessor, Spiridion the Saint, were all the Fathers of the first gene∣rall Councell of Nice, together with Pope Pius the second, and the Fathers at the Synod at Basill, besides infinite others, produced by the Authors above named, all knowne wicked men? The Lord rebuke thee thou false tongue. To the ninth. The Iesuit here onely troubleth the water, that the truth may not be clearely seene in the bottome; let the water but settle a little, and we shall presently discerne it: for though the tearmes be different, profitable, and lawfull, as likewise unprofitable and unlawfull: yet the question, whether prayers in an unknown tongue be profitable and safe for the soule, and whether they be lawfull or coincident. For what∣soever is unlawfull, is consequently unprofitable, and whatsoever is unprofitable in divine service is unlawfull, because against the rule of the A∣postle, let all things be done to edification; now in a prayer which a man understandeth not, how is the understanding bettered? or as Aquinas speaketh, fed by the fruit of refection. As for the inconveniences that are pretended to come by prayers in the vulgar tongue, neither the He∣brew nor the Greeke Churches, nor all the refor∣med in the Christian world finde any such: and if there should fall any such, they are not to be imputed to Gods Holy Ordinances, but to mens abuses. Yea, but saith the Iesuit, the very igno∣rance of the Latine tongue, and consequently of all
learning that would follow thereon onely in Clergie men, is a thousand times more harme, than the fruit in the Laitie is good. Here the Iesuit straineth ve∣ry high, but without all shew of reason, or sha∣dow of Truth, and against daily experience: for who knoweth not, that the Clergie in the refor∣med Churches, where Divine Service is in the vulgar tongue, are as ready and expert (to say no more) in the Latine tongue, as your ordinary Masse-priests. Againe, you are exceedingly over∣lavish, in saying, that ignorance in Latine in Clergiy-men, is a thousand times more harme than that fruit is good which the Laitie might reape by the publike service in a knowne tongue. For the Clergie are but exceeding few, in com∣parison of the Laitie, scarse one for a hundred, I may say a thousand; and the saving knowledge which the Laitie might, and doe reape by the Divine Service, and Sacred Scripture read in a knowne tongue, is a thousand times more worth, than the knowledge of the Latine tongue in the Clergie. Lastly, his consequence, that the ig∣norance of the Latine tongue would bring with it the ignorance of all Sacred learning, is most ignorantly absurd. For who knoweth not, that the Scriptures themselves (the treasurie of all Sacred learning) were written in Hebrew and Greeke. To say nothing of the first generall Councels, and the prime and flower of all the Greeke Fathers, to the knowledge of whom a man may attaine without any Latine at all. But
because Latine is your best mettall, you under∣value Gold and Silver. For Cardinall Cajetan, hee may for the Iesuit goe with Crassus, and ga∣ther cockles and pibles at the shore of Cajeta; for he maketh no more account of Allegations out of this Cardinall, than of Tricae apinaeque aut si quid vilius istis; Me thinkes the Scarlet robes of the learnedst of all the Romane Cardinals, and Schoolemen of his time, should produce a like colour in the cheekes of this Iesuit, if hee have not lost all tin∣cture of modesty. Doth Cajetan sometime nodd? Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus? And doth the noddie Flood never? Cardinall Cajetan affirmeth, that Saint Paul in the four∣teenth chapter of the first Epistle to the Coryn∣thians, speaketh of publike Prayer; the Jesuit Flood denieth it, utri credemus? Whethers autho∣ritie will beare downe the scales? Cardinall Ca∣jetan saith, that edification is the end of publike Prayer; and hee hath Saint Paul of his side, pre∣scribing in this chapter,1 Cor. 14. that All things be done to edification: but Sus docet Minervam, the Jesuit Flood instructeth the Cardinall better, that the end of Prayer is the honour of God, as if Subor∣dinata pugnarent, things that are subordinate were contrarie; or as if the edification of the people tended not to the honour of God, or there might not be severall ends of Prayer: the first and chiefe, the immediate worship of God; the secondary and lesse Principle, yet necessary
also, the instruction and edification of the people. For Biels seven reasons,Can. missae. lect. 62. insisted upon by the Knight, though they were not alleaged profes∣sedly to preferre Prayer in a knowne tongue, before Prayer in an unknowne; yet the reasons there set downe, as strongly inferre the Knights conclusion, as that which there Biel intendeth. The evidence whereof is so cleere, that the Iesuit himselfe is constrained to confesse,Pag. 401. l. 11. that Some of his reasons indeed, have no place where the words are not understood. Those reasons therefore fight for us, and the rest with a little helpe, will be brought to doe good service against Romish and unintelligible Prayers; for how can a Prayer whereof never a syllable is understood, Stir up the mind to inward devotion? which is Biels first reason: Or enlighten the understanding? which is his second: Or cause the remembrance of things spoken in the time of Prayer? which is his third: Or keepe the thoughts from wandering? which is his fourth reason: Or cause a more full performance of dutie, both in body and soule? which is the fift: Or a better redoundance from the soule to the body, by a vehement affection? which is the sixt: Or serve for the instruction of our Brethren? which is the last. To the tenth. The Knight needed not here  to alleage any more authorities against the perill of Idolatrie and Invocation of Saints, because before in the seventh Section, hee had cloyed his Reader with testimonies in this kind; for
the worth of Erasmus and Cassander, Quos rumor albâ gemmeus vehit pennâ; their Epitaphs, and printed Eulogies before their workes, which have kept their fame alive this hundred yeares, make good proofe to the world, that they are like to flourish in perpetuall memo∣rie, after the leaves of a thousand such scribblers as the Iesuit is, shall be withered. In Chemnitius the Iesuits eyes failed him; for the Knight in this place, alleageth not his words, but the words of S. Austine; and them, not to prove that we can∣not pray to any Saint living or dead: but accor∣ding to the title of his whole booke, and spe∣ciall Argument of this chapter, that it is the safest and sweetest way to have immediate addresse to our Saviour: Tutiùs, saith he, & jucundiùs loquor ad meum Iesum; I speake with more safety and de∣light to my JESVS. To the eleventh. Here the Knight may well say, Dicite Iō Pean & Iö bis dicite Pean: For here twice hee hath brought his Adversa∣ries to subscribe unto Iustification by Faith alone; and to confirme with his owne hand, the title of the Knights booke with advantage. The ti∣tle is but Via tuta, but the Iesuit confesseth over and above, that the Protestants way, who relye upon Christs merits onely for salvation, is Via tutissima, The safest way. And if Vasquez and Bellarmine, and other pleaders for merit by con∣dignitie, meane no otherwise than the Iesuit in∣terpreteth
them, we shall all soone shake hands; for who ever denied, that God rewarded our good workes? but here, either wittingly or ig∣norantly, the Iesuit concealeth the conditions required, to every meritorious Act, ex condigno. First, that the worke be properly ours, and not his, of whom wee pretend to merit. Secondly, that it be opus indebitum, a worke to which other∣wise wee are not bound. Thirdly, that it be some way profitable and beneficiall to him from whom wee expect our reward. Fourthly, that it have condignity to the reward expected; or as Vas∣quez speaketh, Be worthy of the reward, and have an equall value of worth to the obtaining thereof. Vpon all these conditions wee contest with Pa∣pists, and consequently deny any merits of con∣dignitie; yet freely acknowledge a reward of good workes, and this reward to be due unto us, (but a reward of grace and free bounty) and due to us by his promise, no way by our de∣serts.
Concerning the Fathers, whether Protestants or Papists attribute more unto them; Spectacles, chap. 12. a page 405. us{que} ad 434. IT cannot be unknown to any man of lear∣ning, or that hath but any the least ac∣quaintance with the Controversies of this age, what great advantage wee Catholikes have by the writings of the ancient Fathers, how highly wee esteeme them, what confidence wee place in them, and how wee appeale to them for decision of our Controversies; and how small respect on the other side Heritikes shew, either to their persons or writings, as being in their opi∣nions but men, and subject to errour. Or rather how contemtibly they speake of them; for proofe whereof, a man need not goe no farther than that little Trea∣tise of Campian's ten reasons, the fift of which is of the Fathers. In the thirteene Instances, by which the Knight will prove, that Bellarmine, and Stapleton, and Senensis, and Gregorie de Valentia, and Sanders, and Ribera, and Canus, and Salmeron, either elude or reject the Fathers, the Knight dealeth not squarely. For, though hee quote the words for the
most part truly, yet hee concealeth their reasons which they give of their answers. Neither doe those Writers insist onely upon those answers to the places objected out of the Fathers, but adde many other unto them, to give the Reader better satisfaction, as will appeare by the particular examination of each passage. The Hammer. ALthough in this Chapter the Iesuit lye as open to the lash, as in any of the former; yet partly because hee is like him in the Poet, that was so tawed and fleade with rods, that there was no skin left on his body for a new stroke to fetch off: partly because, Page 406, hee confes∣seth hee cannot tell what to say to the Knight; but especially, because the Argument of this Chapter is most fully and accurately handled by Dr. Humphrey, and Dr. Whitaker, in their answer to Campian his fift reason, and in a singular Trea∣tise lately set forth by Laurentius, intituled, Re∣verentia Ecclesiae Romanae erga sanctos patres. I will forbeare to examine the severall Paragraphs in this Chapter, (wherein, whatsoever is mate∣riall, is refuted in the answers to the former Se∣ctions) onely I will point at some notorious fal∣sities and absurdities, if not to rectifie the Iesuits judgement, yet to disabuse the credulous Reader. First, hee denieth not that the Romane Doctors above mentioned, utter those disgracefull spee∣ches
of Saint Austen, Origen, Theodoret, Cyprian, Tertullian, and the rest, but he addeth that they gave other answers to our objections out of those Fa∣thers. What is that to the purpose, or against the Knight? who denieth not that Popish writers have other shifts and evasions to our arguments drawne from the testimony of ancient Fathers besids those, which are here set down in this chap∣ter, which are refuted by Chamierus, Iunius: and for the better part of them by me in the for∣mer Sections: but he produced these passages onely to shew the Romanists disrespect and sleigh∣tening of the ancient Fathers, if in any thing they crosse their Trent Faith. Secondly, to touch up∣on some particulars, how ridiculously and absurd∣ly doth the Iesuit speake, Pag. 417. Epiphanius saith in plaine manner, that the Image which he saw hang in the Church at Anablatha, and tare downe the vale in which it was drawne, was not the Image of Christ or any Saint, but the Image of a man, he knew not whom; which if it had bin Christs, or any Saints he would have knowne whose it was, neither would he have called the Image of Christ or any Saint the Image of a man. Why I pray you? is not Christ a man? were not Saints men? What should E∣piphanius have said else, who saw there the re∣presentation of the feature, and liniaments of a man, but knew not what man that was? he saith, he saw a vaile having on it the Image as if it had beene of Christ, or some Saint, for he knew not whose it was. If he knew not whose it was, for
ought he knew it might be made for the Image of Christ, or any Saint. Vpon what ground then doth the Iesuit say, that it was neither the I∣mage of Christ nor of any Saint? Thirdly,P. 423. he saith it is evident that Saint Chrysostome did say Masse every day; whereas neither in that place quoted by him, neither in any place in all his workes can it be gathered, that he ever said Masse, or administred the Sacrament without communi∣cants: the Romish Masse is of a farre later date, then the age of Saint Chrysostome. Fourthly,P. 425. he most shamefully and falsely traduceth the Prote∣stants (whom he tearmes the Haeretikes of this age) that they speake generally, very meanely and contemptibly of the most sacred Virgine. I mar∣vaile his heart did not smite him, when his hand wrote these words so directly against the truth, and his owne conscience. For he cannot be igno∣rant that King Iames in his admonition to all Prin∣ces, set forth in Latine, French, and English, and our Church in the booke of Common Prayer, speake most honourably and reverently of that most Sacred and blessed Virgine, religiously ob∣serving the feasts of her Annuntiation, and Puri∣fication, and rehearsing at every Evensong, her Magnificat. Fiftly,P. 427. he saith that Saint Ierome al∣loweth the the booke of Judith to be Canonicall Scrip∣ture: whereas in the place quoted by him, the preface to Iudith he saith onely that it is read, or that he had read somewhere, that the Nicene Synod did reckon the booke of Judith among the holy Scrip∣tures,
but for himselfe he saith in that very Pre∣face, that this booke is not fit to be alleaged for the confirmation of those things that are in controver∣sie. And in his Preface to the booke of Proverbs, he saith expressely, that the booke of Judith is not accounted by the Church for Canonicall. Iudith & Tobie,P. 430. & Machabeorum libros legit quidem ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipit. Sixt∣ly, he affirmeth that there is no controversie be∣tweene them and us concerning the immaculate conception of our Lady; whereas both Chemni∣tius and Reynolds, & many other Protestant writers have overthrowne the ground of their feast of the immaculate conception of our Lady; and all reformed Churches in generall have strucke that feast out of the Calender, and the title of the 15. Article of religion of Christ alone without sinne, sheweth to the world, that we beleeve it to be the prerogative of our blessed Saviour, among all the Sonnes of Adam, that he alone was free from all originall and actuall sinne. And now Master Flood, sith you are taken in so many and fowle untruths in one Chapter; I hope the Reader will not envie you that Guerdon, which Aristotle bestowes upon a lewd and lowd Lyer, not to be credited when he speaketh the truth.
Concerning Razing of Records and clipping Authors tongues; Spe∣ctacles, Chap. 13. a page 435. us{que} ad 446. BECAVSE there have beene ma∣ny  bookes published this last age, by occasion of Haeresie, and liberty which came therewith to the great prejudice of the Catholike faith: there hath beene a course taken for the restraint of all such, not onely writings of Haere∣tikes, but even of Catholikes which have any tang of haeresie: and this kinde of care hath beene ever used in the Catholike Church. So wee see in Scripture it selfe some that followed curiosities be∣comming Christians, confessed their deedes and burnt their bookes. Gelasius in the yeare 490. maketh a Catalogue of haereticall bookes, which he forbiddeth: and I would know of the Knight, or any man else that cry∣eth so bitterly against our Index Expurgatorius, what he can say against it, that he may not say a∣gainst this Decree, and Councell of Gelasius, and against which we may not defend our selves by oppo∣sing
it as a buckler against all their darts? Sith all swarving from the rule of faith is a decli∣ning  to haeresie, it appertaineth to the Catholike Ro∣man Church, which as Gelasius saith, hath neither spot, nor wrinkle, to prevent the danger that may come by such bookes forbidding the use of them. It were a more dangerous and unnaturall part in the Church not to use this care, then it were in a mo∣ther that should see sugar and rats-bane lie together, and seeing her child going to taste thereof, should for∣beare to warne it. I will not stand particularly to examine every Au∣thor, and justifie the inquisition: onely I cannot omit one Author called Bertram, whom of all men living me thinkes the Knight should never so much as have named, considering how much disgrace he hath su∣stained by translating that booke, and ventring his owne credit, and the credit of his Church, upon the faith thereof. Another thing I am to note concerning his quo∣ting the Canon of the Councell of Laodicea, where∣in first is to be noted his error in Chronologie concer∣ning the time of this Councell, which he maketh to be in the yeare 368. forty three yeares after the first Councell at Nice; whereas it was celebrated before that Councell. Secondly his corruption in the transla∣tion and cutting off the Canon, which is thus; non oportet relictâ ecclesiâ ad angelos abominandae idolatriae congregationes facere, quicunque au∣tem inventus fuerit occultè huic idololatriae va∣cans anathema sit. Now where in this Canon doth the
Knight finde the word invocation of Angells, which is the thing he pretendeth, to be forbidden. Whereas the Knight objecteth to us the recantati∣on  of Henry Buxhorne, who was sometime appointed to put in execution the tyrannicall Decree of the in∣quisitors, and had noted 600. severall passages to be spunged and blotted out; which animadversions of his he wished he could have washed away with his teares and blood, his heart being smitten, and his eyes open by the mercy of God: I answere, if such matter will serve the Knights turne he may have enough: neither neede I search corners to finde out such obscure fellowes, as this Buxhorne; he might bring the Fathers of the Knights religion: for ex∣ample, Luther, Calvine, Zuinglius, Beza, Carol∣stadius, and who not? for though they might pre∣tend severall causes, yet there was one principall one, which consisted indeede in the smiting of their hearts with a fiery dart of carnall love, and when they found an Eve to give them an Apple, then their eyes were opened, and so it proved also with their friend Buxhorne, as I shall shew by a briefe story of his life, most authentically related by that grave and Holy man Oliverius, of the society of Jesus. Henry Buxhorne, a licentiate of Divinity, &c. It was not the razing then of evidences that made Buxhorne fall from his faith, but there were certaine Luthe∣ran baites wherewith many of them were catched, which were aurum, gloria, delitiae, veneres, gold, glory, delights and Venus, of which some are cat∣ched with one, and some with another.
The Hammer. IN the former Section, the Iesuit shewed him∣selfe a prevaricatour, but in this a cowardly runnagate. For to the mangling of authors, and ra∣zing out of Records objected against him, name∣ly, this marginall note out of Stephanus his Bible, Deus prohibet sculptilia fieri. This Glosse upon Gra∣tian the Priest, cannot say significatively of the bread, This is my Body, without telling a lie, Cassanders observation upon the same words, that setting aside the authoritie of the Church, they prove not sufficiently Transubstantiation, Cassanders whole Tract concerning the Communion in both kinds, Vdalricus his Epistle touching the lawfulnesse of Priests marriage, Anselmes Treatise concerning the visitation of the sicke, together with divers passages in Cassander against merit, in Polydor Vir∣gil against Images, in Langus against Transub∣stantiation, in Ferus against the Popes suprema∣cie. The Iesuit answereth nothing at all in parti∣cular, but onely applies Salves in generall, which no way heale the wounds given by the Knight to the Inquisitors, as the Reader shall see by taking them off one after another, and viewing the Sores. To the first. The Iesuits instance is wide from the purpose. For those Books were not burnt by any decree of the Church, much lesse the Church of Rome, which was not then in being: but by
the owners of them, to testifie their unfeined Re∣pentance; for so wee reade, Acts 19.19. Many also of them, brought their Bookes together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found it 50000 pieces of silver. Secondly, these Bookes which the owners burnt of their owne accord, were Bookes of such as used curious Arts; that is, Books of Art-magick, Necromancie, Sorcerie, and the like. Whereas, the Bookes which the Romish Inquisitours either mangle or utterly deface are Christian Treatises, written for the most part by them, that lived and died in the bosome and peace of the Church of Rome. To the second. This Decree of Gelasius which  the Iesuit opposeth, as a Buckler against all our darts, is not altogether approved by the present Romane Church; for in reckoning the Canoni∣call bookes of Scripture, the Pope there exclu∣deth the booke of Baruch, and the second booke of the Macchabees, and the booke of Nehemiah, which the present Romane Church receiveth for Canonicall. Secondly, Gelasius with his Roman Councell, freely give their censure of all Theo∣logicall bookes then extant, but they clip not the tongues of any Authors, nor burne their bookes. If the Romish Inquisitors had done no more, if they had let the Records and Evidences remaine, and onely censured them at their pleasure; wee would not so much have blamed them, for using the freedome of their judgements: wee would
only freely have censured their Censures,Lips. Epist. Critica nostra non effugêre . and left all to the judicious and intelligent Readers judge∣ment. An errour in Criticisme is pardonable, but the making away of the evidence of Truth,Advers. Gen∣tes, l. 3. Inter∣cipere scripta, & publicatam velle submer∣gere lectionem, non est Deos de∣fendere sed ve∣ritatis testifica∣tionem timere. and defacing authenticall Records, is a damnable practise, and an undoubted Argument, both of an evill conscience, and a desperate cause; as Ar∣nobius layeth the Law to the Gentiles. To the third. Gelasius his testimonie of the Romane Church, whereof hee was then Bishop, can be of no great moment. It seemeth at that  time, the Church of Rome wanted good neigh∣bours, that the Pope was faine to blazon his owne armes, and guild his owne Diocese; not thinking of the old Proverbe, Laus propria sordet in ore. Howbeit, wee grant in Gelasius his time, the Ro∣mane Church had not many spots and wrinkles, for then shee was young in comparison; now she is old and decrepit, and all full of wrinkles: and after the manner of crooked old age, boweth downe, to wit, to rood-lofts, Images, and Pictures. But nei∣ther then nor now, hath shee any power to forbid the use of any Books through the whole Church: but onely within her owne jurisdiction. To the fourth. This Plaister is a great deale too narrow for the Sore of the Romane Church, to which the Iesuit applieth it. For it is not their admonitions to the Children of their owne Church, which we here complaine of; but their cutting out of the tongues of learned Authors, when they witnesse the truth: not the censuring their
own Writers, but the mangling of some of them, and utterly abolishing others. Vnder colour of taking away Rats-bane out of the way, they take away Sugar from their Children; and which is worse, debarre them from the sincere Milke of the Word, I meane, the Scriptures in the vulgar language. Yet were there Rats-bane, in some of the Writers with whom the Inquisitours have to deale, they should have onely given notice there∣of, or prescribed some Antidote against it, con∣sidering that Physitians, and Apothecaries, and Housholders also, make good use of Rats-bane sometimes. To the fift. The Iesuit doth well, not to under∣take  justifying of the Inquisition, which hee well knoweth hee is not able: onely here and there hee nibleth at some Author or other that hath falne into their hands, as Bertram in this place: whom the Knight long agoe rescued, and gave unto him the wings of the Presse to flie abroad; whereby hee hath received no disgrace, but ma∣ny thankes from all that love the Truth in since∣ritie. For the translation thereof, which the Iesuit imputeth to the Knight, as a great dispa∣ragement to him; the truth is, the Knight tran∣slated not Bertram, but published the translation of another, by re-printing it, and gracing it with a learned and elegant Preface of his owne. Which, I marvell not that the Iesuit kicketh at, because hee and his fellow Iesuits are sore Galled with it. When the Iesuit shall prove any falsi∣fication
in the translated Copie, or any errour inserted into it, hee shall receive a further an∣swer. Till then, let the brand remaine upon the Romane Index, for damning the originall; and upon the Iesuit, for defaming the true translated Copie of so learned and orthodox a Writer as Bertram was. To the sixt. In citing the Councell of Laodi∣cea, and detecting the Inquisitours foule dealing with it, by turning Angels into Angles, to gaine a starting hole for their Idolatrie: the Iesuit by recrimination objecteth to the Knight, errour in Chronology, and corruption of the Councell. To the first I answer, that the imate of Armath, and other learned Antiquaries have set this Councell about the yeare mentioned by the Knight; your Binius ingeniously confesseth, quo anno celebratum fuit incertum est; It is uncertaine in what yeare of our Lord this Councell was held; hee saith, it was celebrated before the Councell of Nice, but hee brings no proofe of it. If wee should grant him that this Councell were elder by 40 or 50 yeares, than the Knight accoun∣teth it, it would be more for our advantage, and against him; sith Councels, the more ancient they are, caeteris paribus, the more authority they car∣rie with them. To the second I answer, that the translation which the Knight followed, agreeth verbatim with the originall, : which words, two of the Romish Translators set
in Columnes one against the other by Binius, render, as followeth. The first thus, Quod non oporteat Christianos relictâ dei ecclesiâ abire, & Angelos nominare. The other thus, Quod non opor∣teàt ecclesiam dei relinquere atque Angelos nomi∣nare. That is, that Christians ought not to leave the Church of God, and goe their wayes, and name An∣gels: that is, mention them in our Prayers, or take their names in our lips, as the Psalmist spea∣keth of Idoll-worshippers;Psal. 16.4. Their drink-offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take their name in my lips. And thus Theodoret in his Comment upon the second Chapter of St. Paul to the Colossians, vers. 18. alleageth the Canon of this Councell: Because, saith hee, they commanded men to worship Angels; Saint Paul enjoyneth on the contrarie, that they should send up Thanksgiving to God the Fa∣ther by him that is Christ, and not by the Angels. The Synod of Laodicea also following this rule (of the Apostle) and desiring to heale that old disease, made a Law, that they should not pray unto Angels, . Here the Iesuit hath both the Canon, and the Report; the Canon of the ancient Councell held at Laodicea, thun∣dring against their Invocation of Angels: and the learned and ancient Father Theodoret his Re∣port of it. To the seventh. Those men whom the Iesuit  nameth, were not Fathers of our Religion, but Brethren onely of our profession; neither was their motive for the change of their Religion
carnall love as the Iesuit, like impure Nero, judging others by himselfe, conceiveth; but a voyce from Heaven saying unto them, goe out of Babylon my people,Apoc. 18.4. lest you partake of her Plagues. It is true, those instruments of Gods glory were married as the Apostles St. Peter and St. Phillip, and many of the chiefe Bishops and Pastours in the Primi∣tive Church were, of whom it may be said as Sozomen spake of Spiridion that famous Bishop of Cyprus:Eccles. Hist. l. 1. . they lived in wedlocke, and had many chil∣dren, without any disparagement at all to their Sa∣cred function. As the Rod of Aaron in these brought sorth fruit in Holy Matrimony: so it budded also in others in our Church, who fol∣lowed virginall chastity, and lead a single life, as Iewell, Reinolds, Andrewes, Lakes, and many o∣ther reverend Prelates and Doctors, who for e∣minent learning and examplary life, may com∣pare with any of the Romish Mitred Prelates, or late Canonized Saints. Neither can they pre∣tend that any Eve gave these an Apple, whereby their eyes were opened: but on the contrary we can produce many a Lucretia who have given Apples to their Popes,Lucretia nomi∣ne, sed re Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa nurus. whereby their eyes have beene blinded, and their reputation for ever bla∣sted. See Picus Mirandula his oration extant in Fasciculus rerum expetendum & fugiendum, and Mantuan his Poem. Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara cinaedis Servit honorandae Divûm Gany medibus aedes. As for Olivereus Manareus his Legend of Bux∣horne,
if the Reader will be pleased to peruse an apologie for this Buxhorne, written to the Chan∣cellor of Lovan, wherein the true cause is rela∣ted, for which this licentiate Divine abandoned the Papacy, he shall finde in that treatise printed in the yeare of our Lord, 1625, a Rowland for his Oliver, or Oliverius Manareus the Iesuit, to whose relation as much credit is to be given as to Cocleus his History of Luther, and Bolsecs of Cal∣vin. The Devill, the grand Calumniator hath suborned in all ages men of prostituted conscien∣ces, and corrupt mindes and mouthes, to staine with their impure breath, the golden and the silver vessells of the Sanctuarie: but Illi linguarum, nos aurium domini sumus, their tongues are their owne, they may speake what malice dictateth; our eares are our owne, and we will hearken unto, and assent onely to what truth confirmeth. As for their Lu∣theran baits, he mentioneth, aurum, gloria, dilitiae, veneres; gold, glory, delights and Venus, if these things abound any where, it is in the Roman Church, where the Pope who pretends himselfe to be the successor of Peter the fisher; fisheth with a golden hooke, and baits it with fleshly lusts; what so pompeous and glorious as his Holinesse triple Crowne, and his Cardinals Hats, and his Bishops Miters and Croziours; for what sence hath not the Romish Religion baits? for the eyes they have gawdie shewes; for the eares, most me∣lodious musicke; for the smell, sweetest incense and perfumes; for the taste, feasts without num∣ber;
for the touch, whole streets of Curtezans, not onely in Rome it selfe, but in all the Popes Townes which are commonly knowne by this fowle Cognizance. Concerning our adversaries their blasphemous exceptions against the Scripture; Spectacles, Chap. 14. à page 447. us{que} ad 463. THough Catholikes hold for most certaine, that the Scripture is not the sole rule of faith, nor that out of it alone all controversies can be decided, as for example in particu∣lar, which bookes be Canonicall Scrip∣ture, which not: yet for most things now a dayes in controversie, many Catholikes have offered to trie the matter onely by Scripture. Though Catholikes ground many points upon tradition and practice of the Church: yet they ground others upon plaine and expresse authority of Scripture, from which, Protestants are faine to flie, running to this or that corner of I know not what fi∣gurative, or tropicall interpretation. Though the Pope question not, much lesse con∣demne
Scriptures of obscurity and insufficiency: yet his Apostles and Evangelists have left some things in writing, of which some are hard even by the judg∣ment of Scripture it selfe, for so saith Saint Peter of the Epistle of Saint Paul, which saith he, the un∣learned and unconstant doe abuse as they doe other Scriptures, to their owne perdition. If any condemne the Scripture of insufficiency, it  is St. John in saying, that all things are not written, and St. Paul in willing the Thessalonians to hold the traditions which they had learned, whether by speech or letter. Whereas the Knight chargeth us with ranking the Bible in the first place of prohibited bookes: wee  say it is false; for it is not in the Catalogue of such bookes: onely in the rules which concernes the In∣dex there is mentioned, how the free use of vulgar translations is not to be permitted; but for the La∣tine vulgar translation there is no manner of re∣straint, though if there had beene, we might very well have warranted it by the authority of St. Je∣rome, who did no way admit such free use even of the Latine Bibles. It is no such crime to forbid the reading of Scrip∣ture  to some sort of people, as may appeare by the te∣stimony of this holy Father, who in the same place saith moreover, that the beginning of Genesis, and the beginning and end of Ezekiel were not to be read by the Iewes, till they came to thirties yeare of age. A kinde of forbidding of reading the Scripture
is no derogation, but a great commendation of it, for they are forbidden to be read out of reverence and honour due unto them, and in regard of the danger which may come by them, not of themselves, but in regard of the weakenesse of the Reader for want of necessary learning and humility. For Cornelius Agrippa, it maketh no more matter what he saith, then what the Knight saith, for it is but aske my brother if I be a theefe. Not to answer the places objected by the Knight, out of Lindan, Lessius, Turrian, and Pighius, I say in generall, that those things are spoken not of the Scripture, as it is in it selfe, that is, consisting of both words and meaning, but of bare words and letters only, which Haeretikes still do, and ever have abu∣sed, as the Devill himselfe did to our Saviour; and in this sense it is a wood of theeves. Our Authors say no more then St. Jerome doth in effect; Marcion, Basilides, and other plagues of Haeretikes have not the Gospell of God,Comment. in 1. ad Gal. because they have not the Holy Ghost, without whom it be∣commeth the Gospell of man which is taught; nor let us thinke that the Gospell consisteth in the words of Scripture, but in the sense; not in the superficies or barke, but in the pith; not in the leaves of speech, but in the roote of reason: so that if the Knight will say any more of this matter, he must undertake the quarrell against St. Ierome. Lessius in particular, whom the Knight most o∣braideth to us, is farre from saying that the Scrip∣ture is uncertaine in it selfe; that is, that the do∣ctrine
thereof is doubtfull, but onely that our rule will be uncertaine, or rather wee uncertaine of the rule, because wee cannot know the Scripture by it selfe. It is not all one to say that Scripture alone is no  sufficient Rule, and to say it is imperfect. For al∣though the Knight imagineth, that the All-suffi∣ciencie, or containing of all things expressely, is a necessarie point of perfection, hee is deceived; for then would it follow, that the Gospell of Saint Mat∣thew, Saint Marke, and other particular Bookes should be imperfect, and especially that of Saint John, wherein hee saith expressely, that all things are not written. Were the Scripture perfect in the Knights sense,  yet would it not then be a sufficient rule of Faith of it selfe alone; for it would still be a booke or wri∣ting, the very nature whereof, doth not suffer it to be the sole rule of Faith, or judge of Controver∣sies; for a Iudge must be able to speake, to heare, and to answer, whereas, the nature of a Booke is, as it were, to leave it selfe to be read, and expounded by men. No Catholike declineth the triall of Scripture, in  regard of imperfection, but onely in regard that it being a written Word; no Heretike can be convinced by it, as I shewed you even now out of Tertullian, who saith, It is lost labour to dispute with an Here∣tike out of Scripture. Let any man by the effects, judge who reverence  the Scripture most, Catholikes or Protestants: let
him compare the labours of the one in translating and expounding Scriptures, with the labour of the other, and hee shall find the truth of this matter. In admitting any triall with Protestants by Scrip∣tures,De praescript. c. 15. Non esse admitten∣dos haereticos ad ineundam de scripturis provocationem, quos fine scrip∣turis probamus ad scripturas non pertinere. Vos qui estis? quando & unde venistis? quid in meo agi∣tis non mei. Quo denique Mar∣cion jure syl∣vam meas cae∣dis. wee condescend more to their infirmitie than wee need, or they can of right challenge. For wee acknowledge that saying of Tertullian most true, that Heretikes are not to be admitted to the Scrip∣tures, to whom the Scripture in no wise belongeth; who are you, when, and whence are you come? What do you in my ground, you that are not mine? By what right, ô Marcion, dost thou fell my wood? By what leave, ô Valentine, dost thou turne my fountaines? By what authoritie, ô Apelles, dost thou remove my bounds? &c. This is Tertullians discourse and words, where it is but changing the names of Mar∣cion, Valentine, and Apelles, into Luther, Calvin, and Beza; and it will fit as well, as if it were made for them. You must first shew your selves owners of the Land, before you can claime the writings and evi∣dences belonging to it, and which make good the Title. The Hammer. VVHereas many other things argue, that our Adversaries maintaine a desperate cause: so especially their excepting against the holy Scriptures of God, and refusing to be tried by them in the points of difference betweene
us and them. For what was the reason why the Manichees called in question the authoritie of the Gospell of Saint Matthew,Aug. l. 28. cont. Faust. cap. 2. and the Acts of the Apostles? Desperation; because by those writings they were convinced of blasphemous Errour.Irenaeus, l. 8. cap. 26. What was the reason why the Ebionites rejected all Saint Pauls Epistles? Desperation; because by them their heresie was most apparantly con∣futed.Iren. l. 3. c. 2. Cum ex scrip∣turis arguuntur in accusatio∣nem convertun∣tur ipsarum scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant, nec sint ex authori∣tate nec possit ex iis inveniri veritas ab his, qui ignorunt traditionem. Tertul. praesc. advers. haret. What was the reason why the Gnosticks and Valentinians disparage the Scriptures, saying, that They were not of authoritie, and the truth could not be found out of them by those who were ig∣norant of Tradition? Desperation. What was the cause why Papias, and the Millenaries pre∣ferred word of mouth before Scriptures, and pretended , unwritten tradition for many of their fables? Desperation. What was the reason why the Heretikes in Tertullians daies refused to examine their Doctrines by the touch∣stone of the Scriptures, saying, More things were required than the Apostles had left in writing, for that either the Apostles knew not all, or delivered not all to all. In like manner, wee can impue it to nothing else but diffidence, and distrust of their cause; that Lyndan, Turrian, Lessius, and Pig∣hius speake so digracefully of holy Scriptures as they doe, terming them dead Characters; a dead and killing Letter, a shell without a kirnell, a leaden rule, a boot for any foot, a nose of wax, Sy∣bils Prophesies, Sphinx his riddles, a wood of Thieves, a shop of Heretikes, imperfect, doubtfull,
obscure, full of perplexities. If they should bestow the like scandalous Epithets upon the Kings Let∣ters patents, or the Popes Buls or Briefes, they would bee soone put into the Inquisition, or brought into some Court of Judicature, and there have either their tongues or their eares cut, or their fore-heads branded: yet the Iesuit is so farre from condemning these blasphemous speeches in his fellow-Jesuits and Romanists, that hee deviseth excuses for them, and sowes fig∣leaves together, to cover these their Pudenda: which I will plucke off one after another, in my answer to his particular exceptions against the Knight. To the first. It is true, that some Roman wri∣ters of late have made an assay to prove some of their Popish doctrines out of Scripture: but with no better successe than Horantius had in un∣dertaking to refute Calvin his Institutions, as ap∣peareth by Pilkington his Parallels. If the Scrip∣tures were so firme for our Adversaries, why are not they as firm for them? why doth the Iesuit in the fore-front of this Section, bid, as it were, defiance to them, professing in plaine termes, that The Scripture is not the sole rule of Faith; nor that out of it alone, all Controversies can be decided. Doubtlesse, any indifferent Reader will con∣ceive, that the Scriptures make most for them who stand most for their authoritie, and per∣fection, as all the reformed Divines doe, not onely affirming, but also confirming, that the
Scripture is not only a most perfect, but the only infallible rule of faith:Ep. 112. Si di∣vinarum Scrip∣turarum earum scilicet quae in Ecclesiâ Cano∣nicae nominan∣tur, perspicuâ firmatur autho∣ritate, sine ullâ dubitatione cre∣dendum est: a∣liis verò testi∣bus vel testi∣moniis quibus aliquid creden∣dum esse sua∣detur, tibi cre∣dere vel non credere liceat, quantum ei mo∣menti ad faci∣endam fidem vel habere, vel non habere per∣penderis. Ep. 97 Solis iis Scripturarum libris qui jam Canonici appel∣lantur, didii hunc timorem honoremque de∣ferre, ut nullum earum autho∣rem scribendo aliquid errasse firmissimè cre∣dam. lib. de Nat. & Grat c. 61. Me in hujusmodi quorumlibet Scriptis hominum liberum, quia solis Canonicis debeo sine recusatione consensum, l. 11. c. 5. & Ep. 48. every article of divine faith must be grounded upon a certaine and infallible ground to us, but there is no certaine and infalli∣ble ground to us of supernaturall truth but Scrip∣ture, as is abundantly proved by Saint Austine; If any thing be confirmed by perspicuous authority of Canonicall Scriptures, we must without any doubt or haesitation beleeve it, but to other witnesses or testi∣monies, we may give credit as we see cause, and in his 97. Epistle to St. Ierome, I have learned to yeeld that honour and reverence onely to the Cano∣nicall Scriptures, that I most firmely beleeve, that no Author of them could erre in any thing he wrot: and in his booke de natura & gratia, I professe my selfe free in all such writings of men, because I owe absolute consent without any demurre or staggering onely to the Canonicall bookes of Scripture. To the same purpose he writeth against Faustus the Ma∣nichee l. 11. c. 5. and ep. 48. But what neede I presse St. Austine when the evident letter of Scripture is for this truth, Titus, 1.2. Rom. 3.4. God cannot lie, and let God be true and every man a lier that is subject to error and falsehood. A∣gaine, the Scriptures are sufficient to instruct us in all points necessary to salvation: therefore every article of divine faith is evidently grounded upon Scripture. The Antecedent I thus prove, 2 Tim.
3.15.16. whatsoever is profitable for doctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse, in such sort that it is able to make a man wise unto salvation, and perfect to every good worke, is sufficient to instruct in all points of salvation: but the Scripture is so profitable, that it is able to make wise unto salvation and per∣fect to every good worke: Ergo, It is sufficient to in∣struct in all points necessary to salvation. The major is evident ex terminis: the minor is the let∣ter of the text;L. 3. Advers. haer. c. 1. Non per alios dispo∣sitionem salutis nostrae cognovi∣mus quam per eos per quos e∣vangelium ad nos pervenit, quod quidem tunc preconia∣verunt, postea per Dei volun¦tatem nobis in Scripturis tra∣diderunt fun∣damentum & columnam fidei nostrae futuram. Aug. l. 3. cont. Lit. Petil. c. 6. Sive de Christo sive de ejus ec∣clesia, sive de quacunque re quae pertinet ad fidem vitam{que} nostram, non dicm si nos, nequaquam comparandi ei quid dixit si nos, sed omnino quod seturus adjecit, si Ange∣lus de Coelo vobis annunciaverit praeterquam quod in Scripturis Legatibus & Evangelicis accepistis, anathema sit. and that the adversary may not except that this is my collection onely, I will pro∣duce to him impregnable testimonies of the anci∣ent Fathers. Irenaeus, We have not knowne by o∣thers, the meanes which God hath appointed for our salvation, then by those by whom the Gospell came unto us, which at the first the Apostles preached by word of mouth, but afterwards by the will of God, de∣livered in writing to be the foundation and pillar of our faith. The second is Saint Austine, Whether concerning Christ, or concerning his Church, or con∣cerning any thing that pertaineth to our faith and life, I will not say, if we but even as he going forward addeth, if an Angell from Heaven shall preach unto you any thing but what you have received in the Scriptures of the law and the Gospell, accursed be hee. Yea but the Iesuit objecteth against us and these
Holy Fathers, that by the Scriptures we cannot prove, which bookes of Scripture are Canonicall, and which are not. I answere: first, our questi∣on here, is not of the principles of Divinity, but of Theologicall conclusions. Now that Scripture is the word of God, and that these bookes are Canonicall Scriptures, are principles in Divinity, and therefore not to be proved (according to the rule of the great Philosopher) in the same science: It is sufficient to make good our Tenet, that the Canonicall Scriptures being presupposed as prin∣ciples, every conclusion de fide, may be deduced out of them. Secondly, that such bookes of Holy Scriptures are Canonicall, and the rest which are knowne by the name of Apochrypha, are not Canonicall, is proved by arguments and testimo∣nies drawne out of Scripture it selfe, by Whitaker, Disputatione de sacrâ Scripturâ, controversiâ primâ; by Reynolds most copiously in his Censura librorum Apochryphorum. Thirdly, I retorte the Iesuits argument against himselfe, when they teach tra∣dition is part of Gods word, how prove they it to be so? by Scripture, or Tradition? by Scrip∣ture they cannot prove, that unwritten traditions are Gods word: if they prove it by Tradition, then they begge the point in question, and prove idem per idem. To the second. The Romanists ground some  doctrines of their faith upon the letter of Scrip∣ture, but it is that letter which killeth, as for ex∣ample; they ground their carnall presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, upon those words in the sixt of St. Iohn; unlesse yee eate the flesh of the Sonne of God and drinke his blood, you have no life in you: which words, if you take according to the letter, this letter killeth, saith Origen; but it is the spirit saith our Saviour, that quickeneth, the flesh profi∣teth nothing, the words which I speake unto you, they are spirit, and they are life, Iohn, 6.63. He that pierceth the barke, and commeth to the sap, runneth not from the tree of life, but rather run∣neth to it: so doe we when we leave the barke of the letter upon necessary occasions, and pierce into the heart, and draw out the sap of the spiritu∣all meaning. To presse the letter of Scripture a∣gainst the spirituall meaning and analogie of faith, is not onely Iewish but Haereticall. For ex∣ample, The Anthropomorphites ground their hae∣resie upon plaine and expresse words of Scrip∣ture: from which to use the Iesuits owne words, All Orthodox Divines are faine to flie to figurative and tropicall interpretations. To the third. First, Saint Peter saith not,  but , not in which Epistles of St. Paul, but in which points and heads of doctrine many things are hard to be understood. Secondly, though some points be hard to be understood in themselves, or are obscurely set downe in Scripture, it fol∣loweth not from thence, that all things necessary to salvation are not plainely delivered therein. For, as before I proved out of Saint Austine and Saint Chrysostome, Among those things which are
plainly delivered in Scriptures, all such points are found as containe faith and manners, all things that are necessarie are manifest. Thirdly, those things which are obscurely set downe in Saint Pauls Epistles, may be, and are elsewhere in holy Scriptures more perspicuously delivered. Last∣ly, Saint Peter saith not, that those things are hard to be understood simply, and to all men; but to the ignorant and unstable, who wrest all Scripture to their owne destruction. Among which number, the Iesuit must reckon himselfe and his associates, before they can fit this text to their purpose. To the fourth. First, this passage out of Saint  Iohn hath beene discussed before, and cleered; where I shewed, that it maketh nothing against, but strongly for the sufficiencie of Scripture, to instruct in all points necessarie to salvation. For, though all Christs speeches and actions are not registred by the Evangelist, yet as Saint Austine rightly inferreth out of the words following, (haec scripta sunt ut credatis & credentes vitam aeternam habeat is) electa sunt quae saluti creden∣tium sufficerent:2 Thess. 2.15. Such things were made choice of to be written, as might suffice for the salvation of all Beleevers.Ver. 2. And Paul as his manner was went unto them of Thes∣salonica, and three sabbath dayes reasoned with them out of the Scrip∣tures. Neither is that text of Saint Paul any whit derogatorie to the perfection of Scrip∣tures: for whatsoever hee meanes by Tradition (per Sermonem) taught by word of mouth, it is certaine out of the seventeenth of the Acts, that all Saint Pauls speech and discourse to the Thessaloinans, whereunto the words have
reference were out of Scripture. Secondly, the words themselves, Tenete traditiones quas dedi∣cistis sive per sermonem, sive per Epistolam; im∣port not that the Apostle delivered divers things to them in writing by an Epistle, and without writing, by word of mouth: but that he prea∣ched to them, and taught them the Christian doctrine both wayes, by Letters, and by speech: and that they should have as much care of his writings, as of those things hee spake to them in presence. Thirdly, admit they were different things which hee spake to them, and which hee wrote: all that can be from thence inferred, is but this, that all points of saving Doctrine are not written in this Epistle of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians: which may be granted without any prejudice to our Tenet. For those things that are not written in that Epistle, might be, and undoubtedly are written in other of his Epistles, or other bookes of holy Scripture. To the fift. Saint Ierome is not against the free use of Scripture in the vulgar tongue, for hee himselfe translated the Scriptures into the vulgar tongue of the Dalmatians; hee dedicates his Commentarie upon Scripture to Lay-persons, yea many of them to women: whom he exhor∣teth,Haec monilia in pectore, haec in auribus he∣reant. to account them as their chiefe casket of Iewels; let these Iewels hang upon your neckes, and in your eares, Epist. ad Demetriad: wherein hee much commendeth the Husbandmen about Bethlem, for being so perfect in Scriptures, that They had
the Psalmes of David by heart, and sang them as they followed the Plow. Arator stivam tenens can∣tat Davidicum melos: he instructeth Laeta a reli∣gious Matron, how to bring up her daughter in the knowledge of the Scriptures, and what me∣thod to observe in the reading thereof, Pro gem∣mis & serico divinos codices amet,In fleed of silks and precious stones, let her handle the books of holy Scripture: let her first learne the Psalter, &c. discat primo Psalterium his se Canticis avoret, & in Proverbiis Salomonis erudiatur ad vitam. In Ecclesiaste con∣suescat quae mudi sunt calcare. In Iob virtutis & patientiae exempla sectetur. Ad evangelia transeat nunquam ea positura de manibus, &c. Neither are the words you quote out of him, against the free use of the Scripture, but against the practise of some forward persons, who, Lapwing-like, offer to flye with a piece of the shell on their head, taking upon them to expound holy Scriptures to others, which they understand not themselves, and to teach that which they never learned, do∣cent quod nunquam didicerunt. To the sixt. This practise of the Iewes con∣cludeth nothing at all, but that those passages of  Scripture above mentioned are very difficult, and subject to misconstruction; and therefore require a discreet Reader of ripe yeares, and judgement. Whether this their practise be commendable or no, in restraining all before they arrive to thirty, from reading those passages of Scripture, I dis∣pute not: but this is certaine, that even this cu∣stome of theirs which the Iesuit brings against us, makes for us; for they permitted all men be∣fore
thirty, to reade all other chapters of holy Scriptures, and after thirty, these also. To the seventh. The honour the Papists doe  the Scriptures, in prohibiting them to be read, is like the favour she did her Paramour in the Poet, Quae prae amore exclusit foras, which out of pure love thrust him out of doores. The greatest honour wee can doe Gods holy Oracles, is diligently to reade them, attentively to heare them, humbly to obey them, and daily to search them, as the deeds and evidences of our salvation;Ioh. 5.39. according to the Precept of our blessed Saviour, Search the Scriptures, for in them yee thinke yee have eternall life, and they are they which testifie of mee. As for the Iesuits reason, drawne from the weaknesse of the Readers, it is very weake, and of no force at all.Psal. 19 7. Prov. 1.4. First, because the Scriptures were written to give knowledge to the simple, and wisedome to the unlearned. Secondly, because if this his rea∣son were good, their Church should prohibit all other bookes as well as Scriptures, or rather much more than Scriptures, in regard there are errours in them, but none in Scriptures: and God hath promised a speciall blessing to those, who in obedience to his ordinance, diligently reade and study the holy Scriptures, which hee hath not to those that reade other books. To the eight. This Proverb might most right∣ly have beene applied to the Iesuit in the former Section, when he, a Iesuit, produced Oliverius Manerius a Jesuit, against Henry Buxhorne, Deane
of Tyelmond, then hee said in effect, Aske my brother Jesuit if I be a thiefe, or rather a slande∣rer. But it no way fitteth Cornelius Agrippa, and the Knight, the one being a zealous Protestant, the other a professed Papist, though discovering, and ingeniously confessing divers abuses in the Papacie. If hee were as the Iesuit sayes, a Ma∣gician, because hee wrote of Art-magicke; what were Pope Hildebrand and Sylvester, who not onely studied, but also practised the black-Art, as Benocardinalis, Platina, and others write. To the ninth. The Iesuit will not stand an∣swering  every one severally, because hee dare not keepe that station for feare of Gun-shot. For the answer hee giveth in generall, it is false and absurd, if not impious: false, because it is cer∣taine, that those similitudes cannot be applied to the letter onely, without the meaning; nor doe the Heretikes now a dayes, nor did the Devill himselfe alleage onely the letter and syllables of Scripture, but the meaning also,2 Pet. 4.16. though perver∣ting and wresting it to an evill end, and drawing false conclusions from it. Hee that calleth the Scriptures Sybils Prophecies blasphemously car∣peth at the obscuritie of the meaning: and Pig∣hius, who compared it to a nose of wax, impi∣ously taxeth the diversitie of senses, and interpre∣tations which the Scripture is subject unto in it selfe. Lastly, the Iesuit taketh himselfe by the nose, in saying, Heretikes in all Controversies run to the letter of the Scriptures, leaving the true
sense, and spirituall meaning: for so doe the Ro∣manists apparantly, namely, in the Controversie of Supremacie, Ecce duo gladii; Loe here two swords: therefore the Pope hath the temporall and spirituall Sword at command. Peter, rise up, kill and eate: therefore the Pope hath power to put Princes to death. In the question about the number of Sacraments, they alleage the letter of that text in the vulgar translation, Hoc est mag∣num Sacramentum, to prove marriage a Sacra∣ment; whereas the Apostle in the same place saith, that hee speaketh not of corporall mar∣riage of a man and his wife: but of the spirituall marriage of Christ and his Church. Likewise in the Controversie about the reall presence, they run to the letter, Except yee eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood: though Christ in the same place expounding himselfe, saith, The words which I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life: the like may be observed in other Controversies. For answer to all which texts, wee tell him out of Saint Ierome, whom himselfe quoteth in the next Paragraph; That the Gospell consisteth not in the words of Scripture, but in the sense: not in the superficies or barke, but in the pith: not in the leaves of speech, but in the root of reason. To the tenth. How neere neighbours the Ro∣manists are to Marcion, who denied, or by conse∣quence, overthrew the truth of Christs humaine nature; as the Papists doe in the Sacrament, vail∣ing him under the outside, or accidents of a round
wafer; and what affinitie the Iesuit hath with the rest of the ancient Heretikes, the Knight shewed him before in his seventh Section: and if hee desire to know more of his pedegree from them, I referre him to an Appendix to Whita∣kers answer to Sanders his Demonstration, page 801. As for the aspersion of old Heresies, which hee casts upon us, they are washed away by Bi∣shop Morton, and Doctor Field, in their Treati∣ses of the Church, Ad notam sextam. But why hee denies that wee have the Spirit, arrogating it onely to himselfe, I see no reason but the pride of his owne spirit, together with the malice of the evill spirit, who suggested unto him this un∣charitable censure of us. To the eleventh. The Scripture is a Light,  Psal. 119. and the nature of a light is, first to discover it selfe, and then all things else: there∣fore Calvin to his fond question, how know you Scripture to be Scripture? answereth acutely by retortion, how know you the Sun to be the Sun? If hee say, by his bright lustre and beames; wee say the same of holy Scripture, that it is discer∣ned by its owne light. Which, if the Papists see not, the fault ought not to be laid upon the Sun-beames, but upon their Owles eyes. To the twelfth. That rule which needeth any  thing to be added to it, is imperfect: but all Pa∣pists teach, that to the written Word unwritten Traditions must bee added to make a compleat and perfect rule of Faith: all Papists therefore
teach, the Scripture alone to be an imperfect Rule. We on the contrary stand for the perfecti∣on of Scripture, and constantly and unanimously defend that not onely the whole Scripture is per∣fect, but that every part also hath its owne per∣fection, but not the perfection of the whole. Be∣cause the eyes have not the perfection of the whole head; or the head, the perfection of the whole body; a man cannot conclude, that the eye, or the head is imperfect: no more can the Ie∣suit conclude that the Gospell of Saint Matthew, Saint Marke, or Saint Iohn are therefore imper∣fect, because they containe not in them all do∣ctrines in particular necessary to salvation. It is sufficient that they together with the rest, per∣fectly instruct us in all points of faith: by them∣selves they perfectly informe us so farre as the Holy Ghost intendeth, that we should be infor∣med by each of them in particular, and this is their perfection, that they have no defect in mat∣ter or forme, and that they concurre with the rest of the bookes of Scripture, to the maine end of the Holy Ghost in committing the word of God in writing, for the infallible and perfect in∣struction of the Church, and every faithfull soule in all Doctrines needfull to salvation. To the thirteenth. Although many Protestants have written de Scripturâ judice, and they have warrant out of Scripture so to stile it; (the words which I have spoken they shall judge you) yet in pro∣priety of speech, which especially ought to be
used in stating questions, the Scripture is rather to be termed a rule and law, or sentence of the judge, then the judge himselfe: the supreame and infallible judge of all controversies, we teach to be the Holy Ghost, speaking to us out of Scrip∣tures, and the subordinate or inferior Judge the consencient authority of the Catholique Church. To the fourteenth. The Iesuit shewed no such thing, nor can shew out of Tertullian,De praescrip. ad∣vers. haeret. c. 17. who con∣vinced the greater part of Haeretikes in his time by Scripture, as appeareth in his writings. In the place which the Iesuit quoteth, he hath no such words as he alleageth out of him: viz. that there is no good to be done with Haeretikes by Scriptures. He saith indeede in that place, that it was but in vaine to con∣ferre with a certaine kinde of Haeretikes by Scriptures alone, quia ista haeresis non recipit quasdam Scriptu∣ras, et si recipit, non recipit integras et si aliquatenus integras praestat, &c. That is, This haeresie admits not of certaine Scriptures, or not intire, or if in some sort intire, it perverts them by divising divers inter∣pretations. In which words he no way dispara∣geth the holy Scriptures, or derogateth from their perfection: but discovereth the wicked practise of Haeretikes, and their evasions and tergiversations, when they are most evidently convinced by Scrip∣tures. Will you say that if a Bedlam or willfull ma∣lefactor either by puffing out the Candle, or shut∣ting his eyes, or looking another way, will not reade or see the evidence that is brought against him, that therfore the evidence is not able to con∣vince him?
To the fifteenth. Though it were granted the Iesuit, that the Papists have written more upon the Scriptures then Protestants, it will not from thence follow, that they more reverence or ho∣nour the Scripture: sithence in their very Com∣mentaries upon Scripture, they derrogate from the authority, sufficiency, and perfection of them, by refusing to referre all points of faith in contro∣versie to their decision: by resolving their faith last of all not into them, but into the Church: by teaching, that they are obscure even in points ne∣cessary to salvation; and that unwritten Tradi∣tions are equally to be reverenced with them. Secondly, compare men with men, and oportu∣nities with oportunities; it may easily be proved that the Protestants in their preaching, and wri∣tings upon Scripture, have beene farre more la∣borious then the Papists. Name me one Papist who Preached so often, and wrote so accu∣rately upon the Holy Scriptures, as Calvin. I grant their bookes exceede in bulke and number, because they have a hundred to one, and they a∣bound with leisure, and meanes, having many thousands maintained in their monasteries, who are not charged as our Divines are, with care of soules, and perpetuall labours in their Pastorall function. To the sixteenth. If it were sufficient to ban∣dy sentences without proofe, and words without reasons, how easily could we say, mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. It is but changing the names
of Marcion, Valentine and Apelles, into Bellarmine Valentia and Lessius, or if you will, into Iohn Flood, and it will fit as well as if it were made for him. How proves he that Papists are in the Church, and Protestants out of it? He shall ne∣ver prove but that we have as good title, and much better, to the Holy Scriptures, the deedes and evidences of our salvation then they. To the seventeenth. Possession of a land, pro∣veth  not necessarily a right to the writings, and evidences belonging unto it. For possession may be got by violent usurpation, or intrusion; but on the contrary, the writings and evidences left by the disposer and bequeather of the land, be∣ing examined, will shew who hath the true title to the land, that is, the Church. By these deedes and evidences, we offer to be tried, but they re∣fuse the triall, pretending I know not what nun∣cupatory will by word of mouth, and disparaging these writings, and evidences as uncertaine, am∣biguus and unperfect, as the Knight hath made good against him in this Section.
Concerning the testomonies of Cardinall Bellarmine; Chapter 15. Spectacles, a page 464. us{que} ad 485. THE testimonies alleaged by the Knight out of Cardinall Bellarmine for the Protestant faith, in the points of Transubstantiation, private Masse, Prayer in an unknowne tongue, Com∣munion in both kindes, the number of Sacraments, the necessity of good workes, and justifi∣cation by faith alone, have beene all answered in the former Sections, and that which he addeth concer∣ning universality and miracles, maketh for the Ca∣tholike and against the Protestant faith. The Hammer. THe testimony of an adversary is of great force,Isid. Polus. ep. . especially a learned one, most of all one his death-bed, when he looketh every houre to be summoned before the Judge of all flesh: and therefore we have all reason to make great dainties of the noble confession of the learnedest of all our Romish adversaries in the maine point of faith, wherewith he gave up the ghost: Domi∣ne
me admittas in numerum sanctorum tuorum, non meriti astimator, sed veniae largitor. Lord admit me into the number of thy Saints, not weighing my merits, but pardoning my offences: this testimony and prayer of his, printed in his will, the Knight in this Section backeth with another taken out of his third booke De justificat. c. 17. Vel habet homo vera merita, vel non habet, &c. Either a man hath true merit, or he hath not; if he hath not, he is dan∣gerously deceived, and seduceth himselfe, whilest he trusteth in false merits; for these are deceitfull ri∣ches, saith Saint Bernard, which rob a man of the true: but if he hath true merits, he looseth nothing by this, that hee regardeth them not, but putteth his whole trust in Gods mercie only. This is not on∣ly Forte, but Fulgens telum: to use the words of Quintilian, Not onely a strong, but a beautifull, bright, and shining weapon: wherwith the Knight giveth his Adversary such a deadly wound, that hee panteth as it were for life, through all this Section. Much adoe hee hath to say any thing, which yet is as good as nothing: to wit, that Bellarmine in his first booke De Iustificatione, cap. 1. saith, that Hee will indeavour by five principall Arguments, to demonstrate that a man is not justi∣fied by Faith onely. What will the Iesuit conclude from hence? that the Cardinall contradicteth himselfe? I grant it, and I take it for a singular Ar∣gument and Evidence of Truth on our side, which inforced this great Cardinall, after hee had spent all his strength in justifying the Ro∣mish
Tenet concerning justification by workes, and the merit therof, in the end to undoe all that he had done, and conclude fully with the Knight, that In regard of the uncertainty of a mans owne justice, and the danger of vaine-glory, it is safest to renounce all mans merit, and to put our trust onely in Gods mercie. Sufficit ad meritum scire, quod non sufficiant merita. For other passages in this chap∣ter, I shall passe them over with a drie foot, be∣cause there is nothing materiall in them said in excuse of Bellarmine his warping from the Ro∣mish Religion, which hath not beene discussed before. As for such Rotten-stuffe wherewith hee pieceth it up in his later Paragraphs, namely, five, six, seven, and eight; fetched from Romish Broker-shops concerning the name Catholique, and multitude of Professours, and miracles, because none of it sutes with the title or argument of this Chapter, I will not defile my hands with it: one∣ly I wish the Reader to take notice, that the Iesuit twice in this Chapter convinced by evidence of Truth, yeeldeth the Knight the Bucklers, ac∣knowledging out of Cardinall Bellarmine, That our Doctrine is safer than theirs, in two maine points: the one concerning the Sacrament, the other justification by Faith onely. For the first,Linea 28. Page 465, hee is constrained to con∣fesse, that though hee holdeth Private Masse to be lawfull; yet, that It is a more perfect, and in a certaine sort more lawfull Masse, where there be some to communicate with the Priest:
for then it hath both the ends for which it was or∣dained. Certainly, that which is more lawfull, is safer: our Communion therefore, wherein some of necessitie communicate with the Priest, is safer than their Private Masse by the Iesuits owne confession. For the second, I find, page 471. that, though much against his will, yet in Terminis, hee concurres with Bellarmine, in ac∣knowledging our Doctrine concerning relying onely on Christs merits, and Gods mercie for salvation, to be safest: and what else doe all Pro∣testants contend for in the point of Justification by Faith alone; but that all men renounce their owne inherent righteousnesse, and trust onely to Gods mercie in Christ for Justification and Sal∣vation? If at Christs dreadfull Tribunall, the safest Plea are Christ his merits applied to us by Faith, I wonder any dare to use any other? If there be safety, nay most safety, as the Iesuit con∣fesseth in this point of Protestant doctrine, there must needs be truth in it; for there can be no safe∣tie for the soule in a lye.
Concerning Romish Martyrs; Spectacles, Chapter 16. a page 485. usque ad 490. THE blessed Martyr Edward Cam∣pian in his tenth reason, bringing all sorts of witnesses for proofe of the Catholike Faith, beginneth with Martyrs; those particularly, who being Pastours of the Roman Church, suffered Martyrdome successively one after another, to the number of thirty three. These (saith Cam∣pian) were ours, and nameth some of them, as Te∣lesphorus, Victor, Sixtus, Cornelius, with the particular points, which they held conformably with us against Protestants. That these Martyrs are ours, notwithstanding they died not for any of those points the Knight men∣tioneth, is plaine, because they professed the same Catholike Faith which wee doe; which wee also prove by the Faith of their successour Vrban the eigth, who, as hee holdeth their seat, so also their Faith; for Peters Chaire and Faith goe together, as the very Heretike Pelagius confessed to Pope So∣zimus, saying to him, Tu qui Petri fidem & sedem tenes. Not to stand here upon the most effectuall and
infallible Prayer of our Saviour himselfe, Oravi pro te Petre ut non deficiat fides tua: which proofe must stand firme till Sir Humphrey can tell us what Pope began to vary from his predecessors. For adoration of Images, whereas the Knight  asketh whether any of these three and thirty were canonized for it: though there be no speciall men∣tion of any of these three and thirty, their adoration of Images, yet there is very pregnant presumption thereof by this, that Pope Sylvester, who was the very next after the three and thirtieth, and was Pope in time of Constantines conversion, had the pictures of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, which it is most like, he received from his Predecessors. Moreover it is plaine, that those three and thirty  were ours, by their owne decretall Epistles, which are so full of those points which Father Campian citeth, that the Heretikes have no other shift, but to denie the authority of the same Epistles. That the consecrated Bread depending upon the  Priests intention, is the reall Flesh of Christ: or that this Priest, Garnet by name, hath power to conse∣crate, is no matter of Faith; but that in the Sacra∣ment, the matter, forme, intentton, and all things requisite concurring, the Bread and Wine is really and truely converted into the Body and Blood of Christ: this is a matter of Faith, and this a man is to die for. Neither maketh it any matter whether any man have died for it, or not; for that is more in the persecutors power, to appoint what point of a mans Faith hee will put him to death for, than in
the Martyrs owne, who must be readie to die for all and every one, as well for one as for another. The Hammer. IN this Chapter the Knight pulleth the gar∣land of Red Roses off from the heads of all Pa∣pists: I meane the Crowne of Martyrdome, by three most forcible arguments, which may thus be reduced into Syllogisticall forme. 1. None of those who suffered death for the common Articles of the Christian Faith, which we all professe: are to be accounted Popish Martyrs. But the 33. Popes and all the Martyrs in the Primitive Church, suffered death for the common Articles of faith, which we all pro∣fesse. Ergo none of them were Popish Martyrs: neither can they lay any more or better claime to them then we, if so good. 2. All that may be tearmed truely Popish Mar∣tyrs, must suffer death either for the profes∣sion of the Trent Faith in generall, or some speciall point of it, wherein they differ from the reformed Churches. But none of the Primitive Martyrs suffered death for the profession of the Trent Faith in generall, or any point thereof wherein
they differ from the beliefe of the reformed Churches. Ergo, none of the Primitive Martyrs were Popish. 3. If the Articles of the Romish Creed published by Pope Pius were either unknowne to the Primitive Church, or not then declared to be de fide, none in those dayes could suffer Martyrdome for them. But the twelve new Articles of Pope Pius his Creed were altogether unknowne to the Primitive Church, or not then declared and defined to be de fide, as the Iesuit Page 490. in part acknowledgeth. Ergo, none in the Primitive Church could suffer Martyrdome for them. What wards the Iesuit hath for these blowes, we shall see in the examination of the particular exceptions before mentioned. To the first. It is as true that those 33. marty∣red Popes were Martyrs of the Romish Religion,  as that Campion the Iesuit, who suffered death for Treason against Queene Elizabeth, was a Martyr. The truth is, that although Campion in his tenth Reason, search Heaven, and rake Hell also, for wit∣nesses to prove the truth of the Romish Religion, yet he findeth none, as D. Whitaker clearely de∣monstrateth in his answer to that tenth reason, and his defence thereof against Dureus. To let
others passe, those 33. Bishops of Rome, the Iesuit mentioneth, who now weare Crownes of Mar∣tyrdome in Heaven, never ware the Popes tri∣ple Crowne on Earth.P. 486. l. 16. I answer that those Martyrs suffered death not for the points now in controversie with Haeretikes, but for the pro∣fession of Chri∣stianity at the hands of the enemies of Christ. They sate as Bishops of Rome, they sate not as Lords over the whole Church: neither was the cause of their death any contestation with Princes for Soveraignty, nor the maintenance of any points now in con∣troversie, as the Iesuit himselfe confesseth, but the profession of Christianity. They were not therefore Martyrs of the Roman Church as she is at this present, nor of their Trent Creed; but of the Catholike Church and the common faith once given to Saints. To the second. The Iesuits argument drawne from these 33. Bishops of Rome to Pope Vrbane the eighth fall short at least by 1300. yeares. If he should thus argue in the Schooles: Pope Vr∣bane the eighth, in the yeare of our Lord, 1633. held the Trent faith, and beleeved Pope Pius the fourth his Creed: therefore the 33. Bishops that suffered Martyrdome under the Heathen Empe∣rours within 300. yeares after Christ, held the same faith, and subscribed to the same Articles of Trent; he would be stampt at, and hissed out by all present; for who knoweth not that George the Arian immediatly succeeded Athanasius the most Orthodox Bishop, and that all the Arian Bi∣shops in Constantius his time, held the Sees of those Orthodox Bishops, who in the first Coun∣cell at Nice condemned that blasphemous haere∣sie.
In our memory, did not Cardinall Poole a Papist, succeede Cranmer, a Protestant Bishop and Martyr? againe, did not Parker, in Q. Elizabeths daies, a learned Protestant succeed Cardinall Poole an Arch-papist, in his Arch-bishoprick of Canter∣bury? What a wooden Argument then is this, to in∣ferre succession in Doctrine from succession in the same Chaire? This wretched Argument the Iesuit proves as lewdly, by the testimonie of Pelagius the Heretike. This is indeed to Aske his brother if he be a thiefe, or no: to aske an Heretike whether your Romish Doctrine be not hereti∣call. Yet so unfortunate is hee in his proofe, that even this his onely witnesse, how liable soever to exception, saith nothing for him: Pelagius was not so absurd as to hold this position, that Peters Chaire and Faith goe alwaies together; but only spake in a glozing manner thus to Pope Sozi∣mus, Thou holdest Peters Chaire and Faith: and will the Iesuit inferre an universall from a parti∣cular? Pope Sozimus held Peters Chaire and Faith: therfore all that hold Peters Chaire, hold his Faith. What holdeth these two together?Luke 22.32. Quest. vet. & N. Test. q. 75. Quid ambigi∣tur pro Petro rogabat & pro Iacobo et Iohā∣ne non rogabat? ut caeteros ta∣ceam manife∣stum est in Pe∣tro omnes con∣tineri. a most strong and effectuall Bond, saith the Iesuit, namely, Christs promise to Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith faile not. The time will faile me to declare particularly how many waies this Argument of the Iesuit failes: first, Christ prayed not here for Peter onely, as Saint Austine affirmeth, What doth any man make question here∣of? did Christ pray for Peter, and not for James
and John? To say nothing of the rest, it is manifest, that in Peter all the rest are contained. This prayer then no more privilegeth the See of Rome from error, than of Ierusalem or of Ephesus, or any other See of the Apostles. Secondly, Christ prayed not that Peter might not erre, who afterwards erred,Gal. 2.14. and was reproved by Saint Paul, Galathians the second: but that his Faith might not faile, that is, be overcome in that fearfull temptation, in such sort, that hee might not rise againe after his fall. Thirdly, Christs prayer is for Peter himselfe in his person, and the Apostles whom Satan winnowed, not for his See. Fourthly, if this promise any way belonged to his Successors, certainly no more to those of Rome, than Artio∣chia; so infirme is this the Iesuits proofe, which yet hee saith, Must stand firme, till Sir Humphrey can tell what Pope began to varie from his Predeces∣sours. Agreed: Sir Humphrey shall presently tell him by name, Liberius the Arnian, Vigilius the Eutychian, Honorius the Monothelite condem∣ned in three generall Councels sixth, seventh, and eighth; Iohn the three and twenty, deposed in the Councell at Constance: as for other enormous crimes, so for this his damnable heresie, that Hee denied the immortalitie of the soule, and the life to come. To which, after the Iesuit hath replied, in∣stance shall be given in many other Popes, which have beene branded with the note of heresie in like manner. To the third. A strange and loose inference,
three and thirty Popes adored Images because their Predecessor had the pictures of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Pope Gregorie allowed of the standing of pictures in the Church,Vid. supr. yet would have them by no meanes adored: Helena the mo∣ther of Constantine had the wood of Christs crosse, yet adored it not, saith Saint Ambrose. If to have the picture of Saint Peter, or Saint Paul, nay, or of Christ himselfe, maketh a man an Idolater, or a Papist, then not onely all the Lu∣therans generally, but very many of the most or∣thodoxe Divines in our, and other reformed  Churches, will be proved as good Papists as Pope Sylvester. To the fourth. Not only Protestants, whom the Iesuit nick-nameth Heretikes, but also Contius, and other Romanists have disparaged these Epi∣stles: and if the Iesuits nose be not very flat, and stuffed also, hee may smell the forgerie of these Decretals by the barbarisme of the stile, disa∣greeing to those times, and many absurdities and  contradictions noted in them by Coqueus and others. To the fift. If it be no matter of Faith, that this particular Priest Transubstantiateth the Bread, because no man knowes his intention, nor that particular Priest, Et sic de caeteris: It followeth, that it is no matter of Faith to beleeve, that any Priest in the Roman Church, by the words of Consecration, turneth the Bread into Christs Body. As for that, hee
addeth, that it is no matter whether any ever died for this point in particular; I answer, it is a matter of great moment: for if Garnet would not take it upon his salvation, that this Bread hee consecrated, immediately before he death, was turned into Christs Body; nor any ever would, or did pawne his life for Transubstantiation: it is evident, that Papists themselves doubt of the certainty of that Arti∣cle. On the contrarie, wee can produce hundreds, nay thousands, who for denying Transubstantiation, have beene put to death, and have signed the truth of the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, concerning the Sa∣crament with their blood: and therefore the Doctrine of the Protestants in this point, is of more credit than the contrarie, because it is strengthened and fortified by a Noble armie of Martyrs.
Concerning the Protestants chari∣table opinion of the salvation of Pa∣pists; Spectacles, Chap. 17. à page 491. us{que} ad 508. THE Knights discourse in this Chap∣ter  is wholly from his purpose, which he pretendeth in the title of his Chapter, which is to answer our objections. The Knights eight instances in  the Doctrine of Merits, Communion in both kinds, publike use of Scripture, Priests marriage, Service in a knowne tongue, Worship of Images, Adoration of the Sacrament, and Traditions, are all answered before, and proved some false; for the things wherewith he chargeth us are all absurd, if we consider the proofes of Scripture which he bringeth. All testimonies from an enemy proceede not from  charity, but from truth, and such are those which Catholikes bring out of learned Protestants, to prove that a man dying in the Romish Religion, may be saved. Free-will, Prayer for the Dead, Honouring of Re∣likes, Reall Presence, Transubstantiation, Communion
in one kinde, Worshiping of Images, the Popes Pri∣macy, Auricular Confession, and the like, are all ac∣knowledged, some by one Protestant, some by ano∣ther, not to be materiall points; so as a man may without perill beleeve either way: the severall au∣thors are, Perkins, Cartwright, Whitgift, Fulke, Penrie, Somes, Sparks, Reynolds, Bunnie, and Whitaker. John Frith, a Foxean Martyr, acknowledgeth, that the matter touching the substance of the Sacra∣ment bindeth no man of necessity to salvation or damnation, whether he beleeve it or not. John Huz held the Masse, Transubstantiation, Vowes, Freewill, Merit of workes, and of the haeresies now in controversie held onely one, to wit, commu∣nion in both kindes. Dr. Barrow acknowlegeth the Church of Rome to be the Church of God, Hooker, a part of the house of God, and limbe of the visible Church of Christ; Dr. Somes, that all learned and reformed Churches, confesse that in Popery there is a Church, a Ministry, and true Christ: Field and Morton, that we are to be accounted the Church of God, whose words may be seene in the Protestants Apologie, Tract. 1. Sect. 6. Whereas the Knight saith, that men otherwayes morally good, relying wholly on the merits of Christ, that is, living Papists, and dying Protestants in the principall foundation of our faith, may finde mercy, because they did it ignorantly: where hath the Knight learned this Theologie, that a man may be
saved in one Religion, yet so as he must die in ano∣ther. This is a new conceite never heard of before, that a man may be saved in a Religion, but so as not to die of it. To conclude, since Protestant Doctors make no  doubt, but we may be saved in our faith: and no Doctour of ours saith so of your faith, it is out of doubt the safer way to embrace ours. The force of which argument, the Knight goeth not about to a∣void, otherwise then by denying that to be the opini∣on of learned Potestants, which being proved to be so manifestly, the argument still hath his force, and the more, because he cannot answer it. The Hammer. IN the former Chapters the Knight brandish∣ed his sword: but in this he holdeth up his Buckler to beare off a blow, wherewith some Professors especially of the Female Sex, are said to have beene wounded to death. For thus they whet their sword, and shape it on the Protestant an∣vile: Protestants confesse, at least, many of them, that there may be salvation in the Roman Church; but Papists absolutely deny that there may be any salvation in our Churches:Fisher relation of a 3. confe∣rence. therefore it is safer to come to theirs, then to stay in ours; to be where al∣most all grant salvation, then where the greatest part of the world deny it. Hereunto the Knight truely and solidly answers. First, that our Protestant Tenents are of that na∣ture,
that the Papists themselves cannot pretend with any probability, that there is any danger in them, but rather in the contrary; as he ma∣keth it evident by eight remarkeable instances. Secondly, that our Religion is not to be ac∣counted the worse, but rather the better for our charitable opinion of our Adversaries: for true piety is ever joyned with compassionate charity. Thirdly, that though we leave the persons of Papists to their and our judge,Rom. 14.4. What have I to doe to judge another mans servant, seeing he standeth or falleth to his owne master? not pronouncing damnation on them, as they doe on us: yet we proclaime confidently to all the world, that their doctrine is not safe. Fourthly, he distinguisheth also the persons of Papists, some are invincibly ignorant, who are compelled to resigne up their own eye-sight, and to look through such Spectacles as their Priests and Pastors have tempered for them; for these poore soules if they make as good use as they can of the publike and private means afforded them for sa∣ving knowledge, and hold fast the Articles of the Apostles Creed, without opposition to any ground of Christian Religion; and furthermore have a minde and purpose to obay God, and keepe his Commandements, according to that measure of knowledge and grace which they have recei∣ved, and live for outward things in the unity of the Church where they dwell, much may be said: other live under Princes and States, who as Gods true Watchmen and Shepherds, desire they should be better informed, and take care,
that they may have meanes to be instructed in the true saving knowledge of Christ; such Papists shutting their eyes against Gods light, and per∣sisting in their ignorance, and saying in effect, Wee will not the knowledge of thy wayes, Iob 21.14. goe not safely out of the world. How the Ie∣suit refuteth these answers, wee shall see in the examination of his particular exceptions. To the first. That cannot be farre from the  Knights purpose, which agreeth with the title of his whole Booke, Via tuta, The safe Way: this safe way hee proves to be the Protestants way by divers instances, in which the Papists af∣firmation is dangerous, but our Negation cannot but be safe. For example, there is apparant dan∣ger in maintaining the adoration of Images, and the creatures of Bread and Wine in the Sacra∣ment: because it is expressely forbidden under many fearfull curses; to offer Sacrifice, burne In∣cense, or exhibit any Divine Worship to any save God onely, Psalm. 97.7. Confounded be all they that worship graven Images, and boast themselves of Idolls: but there can be no danger in not Worshipping the Creature insteed of the Crea∣tour, who is blessed for ever, Rom. 1.25. They are in danger of a curse that forbid Marriage, and hold it in some persons to be unlawfull and un∣cleane; which Saint Paul calleth, The Doctrine of Devils, 1 Tim. 4.1, 3. But there can be no danger in not prohibiting Marriage in any, which is Honorable in all, and the bed undefiled,
Heb. 13.4. They are in danger who equall Traditions with Scripture, because it is written, Cursed be hee that addeth or taketh away from the words of the Law, or the Gospell, Deut. 4.2. Apoc. 22.18. There is danger in confidence in our owne merits; because, Cursed is hee that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arme, Ier. 17.5. but there can be no danger in not relying upon our owne merits; for Blessed are they that trust in Christ, and him onely, Psalm. 2.12. for that the Cardinall himselfe confesseth to be Tutissimum. There is danger in taking away the Cup from the Laity, for it is a violation of Christs insti∣tution; for Jesus said unto them, Iohn 6.53. Ex∣cept yee eate the flesh of the Son of man, and drinke his blood, yee have no life in you: but there can be no danger in not taking away the Cup from the Laity, but reaching it to them; for Whosoever eateth Christs flesh, and drinketh his blood, hath eternall life, vers. 54. There is danger in keeping the Scriptures from the Laity; for The people perish for want of knowledge:Hos. 4.6. and God powreth his wrath upon the people that know not his name:Psal. 79.6. but there can be no danger in permitting them to Search the Scriptures, for in them they have eternall life, Ioh. 5.39. and, Blessed are they whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and that exercise them∣selves in that Law both day and night, Psal. 1.2. There is danger in praying in an unknowne tongue; for they which doe so, Worship they know not what; draw neere to God with their lips,
but their hearts is farre from him: but there can be no danger in Service in a knowne tongue; for the Apostle saith, I will pray with the spirit, I will pray with understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. It was a curse inflicted upon the builders of Babel, that they understood not what was spo∣ken: and the gift of tongues hath beene ever esteem'd a singular blessing conferred upon the Church, whereby the people of all Nations and Countries understood the Apostles, and their Successors preaching to them, and praying for them. To the second. I reply, that all his answers  are refuted in my Animadversions upon the for∣mer Chapters, onely some Cavils hee addeth, which I will answer in a word. Flood. I presume, his Father had some Apprentise bound not to marry during his Apprentiship: I would then know of him, whether his Father in that case did forbid marriage, and teach the Do∣ctrine of Devils. Answer. It had beene fitter for the Iesuit to be bound Prentise than set to schoole, hee is so dull and stu∣pid that hee maketh it all one to forbid a Boy
under age to marry during the time of his Ap∣prentiship, and that under a legall penalty, with∣out any vow or oath: and to forbid the whole Clergie to marry at all, by tying them to single life by a vow and solemne oath, whether they have the gift of continencie, or not. Flood. Saint Paul saith, the gift of Tongues is a signe for Infidels; but Prophecie, that is, Exhortation or Interpretation, is for the Faithfull, or those that believe already: wherein, I would know what any man can find against Prayer in the La∣tine tongue. Answer. I will easily helpe the Iesuits ignorance herein: Prayer in the Latine tongue, when it is not un∣derstood, is Prayer in a Strange tongue, which the Apostle here implyeth, No way tendeth to edi∣fication. Nay farther, he proveth it to be a curse out of the Prophet Esay,28.11. to a people to heare a Language which they understand not: and if that people were accursed, in that they heard a Lan∣guage which they understood not; our people in this regard must needs be blessed, who heare in the Church the Word of God read, and Divine Service said in a Language which they under∣stand.
Flood. The Catholike Church doth draw in severall Nations to unity of Language, making all to speake one and the same Tongue: whereas He∣retikes in the severall places, by use of other Lan∣guages, understand not one the other, and there∣in most perfectly resemble the Babel-builders, as well in their diversitie of tongues, as in the di∣versities of Doctrines. Answer. The Iesuit here ignorantly babbleth about Babel, and the builders thereof, upon whom God sent as a curse, not simply the diversitie of Languages which Acts 2. was given to the Apostles by mi∣racle for a blessing: but confusion of Languages, whereby it came to passe, that though they all spake one to another, yet none understood one the other. This curse cannot be denied to be fal∣len upon the Lay-people in Poperie in the time of their benediction; and hereby the Romane Church, as by many things else, may be discer∣ned to be Spiritually Babylon. Now whereas the Iesuit saith, that they make all Nations to speake one and the same tongue, his tongue runneth be∣fore his wit: for though the Pope by injoyning Latine Service, make all Nations under the Ro∣mane jurisdiction, heare one and the same tongue
in their Service: yet hee maketh them not to speake it, nor so much as understand it. Where∣as all the Reformed Churches, as they agree in the unity of their Doctrine against Romish er∣rours and superstitions; so they also concurre in this, that they have all their Liturgies in their Mother tongue, that all the children of our Chur∣ches may heare their heavenly Father speake un∣to them in his Word, and they to him in their Prayers in a language understood. Flood. But for that which hee saith, that hee acknow∣ledgeth universalitie of Nations and people, not to be a marke of his Church, I cannot but won∣der at it; for what is this, but even in plaine termes to confesse his Church, not to be the Church of Christ? Esay saying, All nations shall flow unto it: and the Prophet David describing the kingdome of Christ, saith, that Hee shall beare sway from Sea to Sea: and Daniel describeth the kingdome of Christ, Like a mountaine growing from a little stone, and filling the whole Earth: Saint Iohn seeth a Multitude which no man could reckon, of all Nations, and Tribes, and People. Answer. Wee doe not say that the Church of England is the Church of Christ, that is, the whole, or
only Church of Christ, but a Church of Christ; or to speake more properly, a member of the Catholike Church scattered over the face of the the whole earth. The texts alleaged by the Iesuit, are meant of the Catholike or universall Church, not of a particular; for it implieth a kind of contradiction, that a part should be the whole, and all Nations comprised in one. Secondly, the Knight speaketh not, Page 312. simply of multi∣tudes, nations, and tongues, when hee denieth that wee have any such in our Church: but of multitudes, and nations, and tongues that are at the Woman her command in the Apocalypse: The Citie which raigneth over the Kings of the Earth,Apoc. 17.4, 5, 6, &c. which sitteth on seven mountaines, and is drunke with the blood of Saints and Martyrs: of whom it was foretold, that shee should ascend out of the bot∣tomlesse pit, and goe into perdition. These can be no markes of our Church, as all the world seeth: and if they be, as indeed they are most visible and apparant markes of the Romane Church, let them lay claime to her, and keepe her to them∣selves, wee no way grudge or repine at it. But if the question be, where it is safer being with the Woman that fled into the wildernesse, or this Queene-regent of the world, wee give warning to all that have Care of their salvation, to come out of Babylon, that they be not partaker of her plagues. To the third. It is not true, that all testimonies  proceeding from an enemie, are from evidence of
Truth; for a testimonie may proceed from an enemie sometimes from weaknesse of judgement, as Tertullian long agoe hath observed, conclu∣ding, that it is no certaine and undoubted Argu∣ment of strength and valour to conquer an Ene∣mie: for many times the victorie is gotten, not because the conquerour was a man of might, and well handled his weapons; Sed quia qui vinceba∣tur infirmis erat viribus: but because hee had the good hap to enter into the lists with a weake Adver∣sarie. Yet, let the Iesuits Observation be gene∣rall, the Knight will gaine by it; for the greatest part of his booke consisteth of Testimonies ta∣ken from the mouth of learned Romanists: and therefore by this Rule laid downe by the Iesuit, all must be presumed to proceed from evidence of Truth. For the testimonies which hee here alleageth out of Protestants against us, though they have beene long agoe answered, in the Pro∣stants Apologie, written against Brerely his falsly so called Catholike Apologie: yet in the due place I shall shew, that they make nothing for, but ra∣ther against the Romish Church. To the fourth. The Iesuit cannot be ignorant, that the misnamed Catholike Apologie set forth by Brerely, was refuted seven and twenty yeares agoe by a Catholike Appeale for Protestants; there all these shafts which Brerely taketh out of the Protestant Quivers, are either broken, or their heads so taken off, that they can doe no hurt to any that hath his Buckler of Faith on, or his eyes
in his head. To which Appeale I referre the dis∣creete Reader; when the Iesuit shall quote any of these Authors for any particular point, he shall have a punctuall answer. To the fift. Frith was a worthy and glorious  Martyr, whose faith may be knowne by his bookes yet extant: wherein he no way appro∣veth of Transubstantiation, but condemneth it expressely. Neither doth he say that a right be∣liefe in the Sacrament touching the substance thereof is no matter of salvation: but that it is no matter of salvation to beleeve after what manner the substance of Christs body is in the Sacra∣ment, whether by Consubstantiation, or Tran∣substantiation which is most true: for as Doctor Andrewes, late Bishop of Winton acutely obser∣ved, Christ said hoc est Corpus meum, non hoc mo∣do est, or fit Corpus meum, this is my Body, not the bread is after this manner my body. To the sixt. If communion in both kindes be  an haeresie, Christ, his Apostles, and the Primi∣tive Church which administred and received the Communion in both kinds, as is confessed in the Councell at Constance, cannot be free from hae∣resie. And whereas the Iesuit saith, that this Martyr in all other points held with Papists, the contrary appeares in his printed bookes, and by the prayer he made at his death, mentioned by Cocleus in the history of the Huzzites, wherein he prayeth to God, that his soule after his death might be where the soule of Wickliffe is.
To the seventh. To the Iesuit his allegations out of Barrow, Hooker, Some, Bunnie, and Covell; Dr. Morton now Bishop of Duresme answereth at large in his Catholike appeale, l. 4. from the first Section to the sixth, where he proveth, that the testimonies themselves, and the reasons an∣nexed to them doe shew, that the above cited Protestants yeeld no more security to the Romish Church, then they doe to any other erroneous Church, wherein there is true baptisme and the the profession of the chiefe principles of faith. Barrow acknowledgeth the Church of Rome to be a Church of God, that is a Church professing Christianity, in which there may be a possibili∣ty of salvation, not an Orthodox or right belie∣ving Church, in which there is certainty of sal∣vation. Hooker saith, that the Church of Rome is a member of the visible Catholike Church, a member, not the Catholike Church, and no sound member nei∣ther, according to that Thesis of Doctor Rey∣nolds, Romana ecclesia nec est Catholica, nec sanum membrum Catholicae. Dr. Somes saith, as likewise Iunius,Iunius de Ec∣cles. l. sing. Pa∣patus est in Ec∣clesia seu in pa∣patu est Eccle∣sia, Papatus ta∣men non est Ec∣clesia. that in Popery there is a Church, that is, under the Popes dominion Christ hath his Church, or that Popery is in the Church: yet that Popery is not the Church. Bunnie saith, that we are not a severall Church from the Papists, that is, not essentially deffe∣rent from it, no more then a sicke man differeth from a sound. Covell saith, the Church of Rome is a part of the Church of Christ, but a very unfound part. From all which passages, this onely may be con∣cluded
of the Roman Church, as of other erro∣neous assemblies, that though in regard of their manifold errors, they must be esteemed sicke and unsound Churches; yet in regard of the be∣ing and essence of a Church, they must be ac∣knowledged visible Churches of Christ. Nei∣ther Field nor Morton saith, that the Church of Rome is the Church of God, but a Church of God. Fields words are, Romana ecclesia est verè ecclesia, non vera ecclesia; is truely a Church, not a true Church: Morton proveth in one whole Section, that the Church of Rome is not properly the Catho∣like Church, but a particular Church subject to er∣ror. Sect. 6. Protest. appeal, l. 4. But in this point, in what sense the Protestants call the Church of Rome a true Church, see a late Trea∣tise set forth by Doctor Hall, the Bishop of Ex∣ton, called the Reconciler; wherein, both he and Bishop Davenet, and Morton, in their letters affixed thereunto, cleare the matter nothing at all I assure you to your advantage. To the eight. The Knight saith not that a  man may be saved in one Religion, yet so as he must not die in it: but that a man living in one Religion, to wit, the Popish, may be saved: so that he renounce it before his death, and dye in a better: for not onely the bosome of the Church, but also the gates of Heaven are alwayes open to the penitent, as the Prophet Ezekiel teacheth:C. 18. 23. neither is this any new conceit of the Knight, but the generall opinion of all Protestants, as the Ie∣suit
may read in the Catholike Appeale, l. 4. c. 1. The Reverend Bishop now mentioned, under∣standing how that great and honourable personage in the last Act of her life, renounced all presumption of her owne inherent righteousnesse, and wholly af∣fianced her soule to Christ in beliefe to be justified onely by his satisfactory justice, did therefore con∣ceive hope of her salvation by vertue of that Cordiall prescribed by the Holy Apostle, viz. that where sinne aboundeth, the grace of God doth super abound, which the Apostle hath ministred for the comfort of every Christian, who erring by ignorance, shall in sincere repentance for all his knowne sinnes, de∣part this mortall life, having the heele or end of his life shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace, not of the new Romish, but of the old Catholike faith, which is the faith of all Protestants.C. 15. p. 363. And againe, in his booke intituled, the Grand Imposture, If you demand why Protestants have so charitable opinion of some Romanists, you are to understand, that it is in regard of that, without which the cannot be sa∣ved, that they died in the beliefe of this Protestant Article of Faith, which is to be justified by remissi∣on of all their sinnes, through the satisfactory righte∣ousnesse of Christ, apprehended by faith, and not by the legall justice or perfection of inherent righteous∣nesse in themselves, as your Councell of Trent hath decreed: and this opinion we finde verified in the experience of many Papists, who howsoe∣ver in their life time they professe and magnifie your doctrine of perfection of works: yet on their
death-bed as soone as the least glimpse of the ma∣jesty of Christs tribunall is revealed unto them, and the booke of their conscience begins to be unclapsed, and so laid open before them that they cannot but reade their sinnes, which in their life∣time they held as veniall, to be deadly and written in Capitall litters: then they take Sanctuary in the wounds of Christ, from whence floweth the Ocean of all expiatory merit and satisfaction, by which it is impossible but that every faithfull pe∣nitent should receive life. To the ninth. To this argument I say, that it  is paralyticall and weake in the sinewes. For how doth this follow? the Donatists held as the Pa∣pists doe, that all men were damned that were not of their sect; St. Austine de unit eccles. c. 12. and other Catholike Bishops thought that some of them might be in the state of grace, and that their Baptisme was good, Ergo, it is a safer way to embrace the Donatists haeresie then the Ca∣tholike Faith: or at least send their children to the Donatists to be baptized,L. 1. De bap∣tis. cont. Do∣nat. c. 3. Esse vero apud Do∣natistas baptis∣mum, & illi as∣serunt & nos concedimus. because both parties granted that there was true Baptisme among the Do∣natists, whereas the Donatists denied that there was any true Baptisme among the Catholikes; or this, the Indian Priests teach, that it is unlawfull to take bread from the hand of a Christian; the Christi∣ans teach that it is lawfull to take bread from an Indian: therefore it is safer to take bread from an Indian then from a Christian, or have fellow∣ship with an Infidell Indian then with a charita∣ble
Christian, because a Christian hath a better opinion of the Infidell, then the Infidell hath of him: as Protestants have a more charitable opi∣nion of Papists, then Papists have of them. When the Iesuit is sober let him thinke how to give an answer to Bishop Morton his instance, whereby he sheweth the invalidity of this mad argument of Iesuits, A mad man thinketh other men to be beasts, a sober man confesseth that a mad man is a man and no beast: is a mad man therefore in the right or in the better case then the sober man, because the sober man judgeth better of the mad man, then the mad man doth of the sober? Concerning the confession of all sides for the safety of the Protestant Religion; Spectacles, Chapter 18. à page 509. us{que} ad finem. THAT the ground of safety which the Knight thinketh he taketh from Ca∣tholikes, is foolish, impertinent, and without sense as he setteth it downe; for thus he saith, it is the safer way to persist in that Church, where both sides agree that salvation may be had, then where one
part standeth single by themselves in opinion: for I would know what Church is that wherein there be two sides to agree or disagree? or what Church that is, that doth not stand single in opinion by it selfe, if it be a Church of a different faith (as we speake here of a Church?) A Church must have unity, it being a company of men, all professing the same faith and Re∣ligion, therefore it is plaine there is no sense in this principle of his. I would aske him whether the Protestants doe not  stand single as well as we, by affirming of what we deny, or denying what we affirme: or rather whe∣ther he and his Church be not so much more single then we, as they have not one on their sides for every million, which we have or have had on ours. By the Knights argument, a man may prove any  haeresie that ever was, nay, Iudiasme and Turcisme to be a safer way then the Catholike, or even the Knights Protestant faith: for Arius may say, he a∣greeth with us Catholikes in all things, save onely in the Divinity of the second Person of Trinity, whom he acknowledgeth with us to be an Holy Man: and that we stand single by our selves in the assertion of his Divinity. Macedonius may say the same of the Holy-Ghost: Nestorius of the plurality of per∣sons in Christ: Eutyches of the singularity of Na∣tures: Sergius Pyrrus, and the Monothelites of the unity of will in Christ: Ebion, Cerithus, Mar∣cion, and almost all haeretikes in their severall haere∣sies, may say as the Knigh doth, of the points con∣troverted, that we stand single by our selves in them:
and so it is the safer way to beleeve onely that wher∣in they and wee agree; nay, the Iewes may make the same argument thus, That they agree with us, that there is one God Creatour of heaven and earth, and that the old Testament is Canonicall Scripture; for the rest wee stand single: and the Turke may say that hee agreeth with us, that Christ was an holy man, and a Prophet; for the rest wee stand single: and therefore hee is in the safer way. What can the Knight say for defence of his Argu∣ment? For though Iewes and Turkes doe not agree with us in the profession of the Christian Faith, yet I see not why that should be necessary by the Knights Argument; and thereby a man may see what a good guide he is, and how safe a way he goeth: and whether the saying of Salomon be not truly verified of his Safe Way;Prov. 14.12. There is a way which seemeth to a man straight, and the end of it leadeth to death, and consequently to hell: for what other is the end of Heresie, Judaisme, and Turcisme? whereto the Knights rule doth leade all such as will be ruled thereby. The Hammer. SEmper ego auditor tantum nunquam ne reponam? Hitherto the Knight held up his Buckler, and stood upon his owne defence: but here hee set∣teth upon his Adversarie, closeth with him, wresteth his owne Sword out of his hand, and therewith giveth him as many wounds as Iulius
Caesar received in the Senate. For, besides the 12. Articles of Pope Pius the fourth his Creed., in all which, the Papists stand single, hee instan∣ceth in eleven points more, wherein the Papists agree with us in our affirmative positions, but they alone maintaine their affirmative addition; wher∣upon hee condemneth the Iesuit as Christ doth the Evill Servant in the Gospell, out of his owne mouth thus: That Religion is lesse safe, in which the Professours stands single, than that in which the parties, other wayes dissident, a∣gree. But in all or most of the affirmative points of Popish Religion, they stand single; but in all such positive points of the reformed Faith, not only Papists, but in a manner all Christians of the world concurre with us. Therefore the Popish Religion, by the Iesuits owne rule, is lesse safe. To illustrate this by a few instances, the posi∣tive points of our Doctrine are chiefly these: 1. That the three Creeds; the Apostles, the Nicene, and that of Athanasius are to be recei∣ved upon paine of damnation. 2. That religious worship is due to God. 3. That God is to be called upon. 4. That Christ is had of the Church. 5. That hee is our Mediatour and Advocate.
6. That hee was conceived without sinne. 7. That wee are saved by his merits and satis∣faction. 8. That the Scripture is a rule of Faith. 9. That there are two and twenty Canonicall Bookes of the old Testament. 10. That the originals in the Greek and Hebrew are authenticall. 11. That there are two Sacraments of the new Testament, Baptisme, and the Lords Sup∣per. 12. That Children of the Faithfull are to bee christened. 13. That in Baptisme, water is necessarily to be used. 14. That Christ is truly present at his Supper; and that the worthy Receiver is by faith made spiritually partaker of the true and reall body and blood of Christ. 15. That the Sacrament may be administred in both kinds. 16. That the Images of Christ and his Saints may serve for Ornaments and Memorials, and that there is a lawfull historicall use of them. 17. That Peter had a Primacie of Order among the Apostles. 18. That there are two places for soules depar∣ted, Heaven and Hell. 19. That there are three holy Orders in the Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
20. That Confession to a Priest, in case the Con∣science be troubled with any grievous Sin, is profitable and behoovefull. To all these points, and many more like unto these, the Papists assent; but in all their additions they stand single, as namely: 1. That a fourth Creed made by Pius the fourth, is likewise to be received under paine of dam∣nation. 2. That religious worship is due to Saints. 3. That Saints and Angels are to be called upon. 4. That the Pope is the visible head of the Church. 5. That Saints are our Mediatours and Advo∣cates. 6. That the Virgin Mary also was conceived with∣out sinne. 7. That wee are justified and saved in part by our owne Merits, and superabundant satisfactions of Saints. 8. That Tradition is a rule of Faith as well as Scripture. 9. That besides those two and twenty, there are other Books of the old Testament, to wit, Tobit, Judith, Baruch, The Wisdome of Salomon, Ecclesiasticus, and the Maccabees, to be ad∣mitted into the number of Canonicall Scrip∣tures. 10. That the vulgar Latin translation of the Scrip∣ture is most pure and authenticall. 11. That besides Baptisme and the Lords Supper,
there are five other Sacraments; Confirmation, Order, Penance, Matrimonie, and Extreme Vnction. 12. That Gallies and Bels may, and ought to be christened. 13. That besides Water; Creame, Salt, and Spittle are to be used in Baptisme. 14. That Christ is present in the Sacrament by Transubstantiation, and that his body and blood is not onely received spiritually by Faith, but also carnally by the mouth. 15. That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper may lawfully be administred to the Laity in one kind onely. 16. That besides an historicall, there is a religious use of Images; and that they are to bee wor∣shipped. 17. That Peter had not onely a Primacie of Order, but a power also, and jurisdiction over the Apostles. 18. That besides Heaven and Hell, there is a third place of abode for soules, to wit, Purga∣torie; and a fourth also, termed Limbus in∣fantum. 19. That besides those three holy Orders of Bishops, Prists, and Deacons, there are others, as namely, Exorcists, Acolyts, &c. 20. That confession of every knowne Sin to a Priest, is necessarie. Now because Negatives are not properly Ar∣ticles
of Faith, but Positives or Affirmatives; it appeareth evidently, that the Faith of the refor∣med Churches is assented to by Papists them∣selves, and all Christians in the world, and ther∣fore is most certain & safe by the confession on all sides: wheras the Popish additions, wherein we stand onely upon the Negative, and they are to make good the Affirmative, are assented to by none but themselves; and therefore by the Iesuits rule, are weak, doubtful, and lesse safe. This is Vul∣caneum telum et argumentum palmarium, the main and principall argument whereby the Knight de∣monstrateth the title of his Booke; and hee is so confident of it, that if that be to be accounted the safer way, wherein different parties agree both in one, as the Iesuit laid it downe in the former chapter, hee will joyne issue with all Papists in the world in this very point: and if in this hee make not good the title of his Booke, that wee are therefore in the safer way, because they agree in the principall and Positive points of Religion with our Doctrine; hee will reconcile himselfe to the Roman Church, and creepe upon all foure to his Holinesse for a Pardon. At this the Iesuit is so mad, that he fometh at the mouth, and raveth, saying,Pag. 512. That to creepe upon all foure is a very fit gate for men so devoid of reason, as to make such Discourses, and to use such malicious insinuations, as if men used to creepe upon all foure to the Pope, Parce sepulto Parce pias scelerare manus:
be not so inhumane and barbarous, in tearing the fame of the dead; there is no cause at all given of such rage and furie. The Knight doth herein no way blaspheme, or falsly traduce Dominum deum Papam; for those that ordinarily kisse the Popes toe, unlesse his Holinesse be the more courteous to hold up his foot the higher, must needs be neere creeping on all foure. To say nothing of Dandalus King of Creete and Cyprus who was upon all foure, and that under the Table before the Popes Holinesse, as Iewell in his Apo∣logie, and the defence thereof undeniably pro∣veth out of good Authors against Mr. Harding; yet the Knight in this place chargeth not the Pope with any such imperious demand of Lucife∣rian pride: but onely professeth what penance hee would willingly enjoyne himselfe, if hee should abuse the Reader, and not make good the Title of his booke by the argument above pro∣pounded; against which, what the Iesuit here particularly Articleth and objecteth, I will now consider. To the first. The words which the Iesuit would make seem so ridiculous, are related by the Knight, as their owne words not ours, as any may perceive by the Preface to them, therefore say they, and by this that they are written in a lesser Character, and is it not senslesse in the Iesuit, and most ridiculous to laugh at himselfe, and put his owne nonsense upon the Knight, who taking the Iesuits words as he found them, scorning to nible
at syllables, interpreted the Iesuits words at the best, and taking his meaning, joynes issue with him upon the point in this manner. In a Church professing Christianity, where the Scriptures of the old and new Testament are received, and the two Sacraments instituted, by Christ admi∣nistred, suppose we there to be two sorts of Professors, either publikely allowed as in France, or at least tollerated, as in other King∣domes, both these entituling themselves to be members of the pure Orthodox Church, and neither of them having beene particularly con∣demned in any generall Councell, received through the Christian world; the probleme then is, whether of these two, that party is not in the safer way, who holdeth no positive Arti∣cle of faith, to which both parties (besides all other Christians) give not their assent unto: then the other who maintaineth twelve Arti∣cles of faith at least, wherein they themselves stand single, and are forsaken by all Christians, not onely of the reformed Churches, in Eng∣land, France, Germany, Denmarke, Swethland, Norway, Poland, Transylvania, but also in the Ea∣stern, and Greek Churches dispersed through the large Dominions of the Turke in Europe, Asia, and Africa. But thus it standeth betweene us and Papists, all the positive Articles which we hold necessary to salvation, they themselves, and all other Christian Churches in the world assent unto: whereunto the Church of Rome hath ad∣ded
many other positive Articles in joyning all under paine of damnation to beleeve them; in all which additions, she standeth alone by her selfe: therefore it is safer to adhere to the do∣ctrine and faith of the reformed Churches, then the Pope his new Trent Creed. The Iesuits ex∣ceptions against this argument are very idle, and all his instances in Turkes, Iewes, and Haeretikes, nothing to the purpose: for the unbeleeving Iewes and Turkes never were, nor yet are mem∣bers of the Catholike Christian Church: the A∣rians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and Marcionites have beene long agoe excluded out of the true Church of Christ, and their Haeresies are by name condemned in ancient generall Councells approved by the whole Christian world. These therefore come not within the verge of the Knights proposition, which is restrained to Chri∣stian Churches, and such whose Tenets have not in particular as yet beene cryed downe, and cen∣sured as erroneous in any oecumenicall Councell: among such, doubtlesse those are in the safer way, who hold nothing for an Article of faith necessa∣ry to salvation, which is not clearely deduced out of Holy Scripture, and assented unto, even by the opposite part, whose testimony, saith the Iesuit, Page 498. must needs proceede from evidence of truth. To the second. The Iesuit hath received an∣swer already to the former of these demands, where I shewed by twenty instances that we
stand not single as they doe, by affirming what they deny, and denying what they affirme: for the most, if not all the affirmative Articles of our Creed, are firmed and subscribed by Papists them∣selves, whereas their additionalls to them are fir∣med by none but themselves: and therefore herein our cause hath a great advantage on theirs. For if their beliefe be true, our beliefe in all the affirmative Articles thereof must needs be so; but not on the contrary, because they have many affirmative Articles which we give no credit un∣to. To his second demand I answer, that though a multitude of Professors is no perpetuall and in∣fallible marke of the true Church:Luke 12.32. Matth. 7.13. Apoc. 13.17. Apoc. 20.2. Apoc 17.4. The woman ar∣rayed in purple and scarlet, called The Whore of Ba∣bylon, had a cup of gold in her hand, &c. Apoc. 13.3. All the world wondered, and followed the Beast. & ver. 8. All that dwell upon the erth shall worship him▪ whose names re not written in the Booke of Life. for Christs flocke is but a little flocke in comparison, and broade is the way that leadeth to death and destruction; and though it is true that in the latter and worser ages of the Church, especially after the yeare 666. which is the number of the name of the Beast, and much more after the thousandth yeare wherein Satan was let loose, the Romish Church was much more visible to the eye of the world then the Protestant, as it is prophecied in the Apocalypse the 16.6. that the false and malignant Church should be farre more glorious and pompous then the true Spouse of Christ: yet in the first and best ages of the Church, our adversaries have not so much as one single witnesse, who can be pro∣ved to have given testimony to their Trent faith, and since the happy reformation began by Mar∣tin Luther in King Henry the eights dayes, the
better part of Europe is fallen from the Pope; adde we to them all those, who in Asia and Africa professe the Christian faith, and yet acknowledge not the Pope, nor subscribe to the Trent faith: and it will appeare we have neere a thousand for one in the Catholike visible Church scattered far and wide over the face of the earth, as may be seene in the Mapps set forth in a booke printed the last yeare, and intituled Christianographie, or the De∣scription of the multitude and sundry sorts of Chri∣stians in the World, not subject to the Pope, with their unity, and how they agree with the Protestants in the principall points of difference betweene them and the Church of Rome. To the third. If the argument bee so weake, let the Iesuit remember that it is his owne, and that he confesseth as much in the first words of this Chapter, which are these, The substance of this Section is contained in the title, and it is nothing but to turne the Catholike argument, mentioned in the former Section the other way for the Protestant side. The argument then is a Catholike argument of their owne, and if it make for Haeretikes, Iewes, and Turkes, as he saith it doth, the blame and shame thereof must light upon the Iesuits, that first framed it, and not upon the Knight who re∣torteth it onely upon them: for thus it mooveth upon their Axletree, that wherein Professors of different religions both agree, is safer to beleeve then that wherein they stand single, but Iewes and Christians agree in the beliefe of the old
Testament; Christians and Turkes agree in the truth of Christs humane nature, in other points the Christians are single, therfore the beliefe of a Iew or a Turke is safer then the beliefe of a Christian. The conclusion is here false and blasphemous, the minor or assumption is evi∣dently true, and confessed on all sides: the fault therfore must needs be in the major or ground of this argument, but the major or ground is your owne, as will appeare by reducing the Iesuits Ar∣gument, propounded in the former Section, into forme: That Church wherein parties of a dif∣ferent Religion, as Papists and Protestants a∣gree, is a safer way than that wherein one party stand single. But Papists and Protestants both agree, that salvation may be had in the Romish Church; but the Protestants stand single, in that they say, salvation may be had in the Pro∣testant Church: therefore it is safer living and dying in the Papists Church than in the Prote∣testant. In this Syllogisme, the Knight and all Protestants, though they answer to the Assump∣tion by distinguishing, as is expressed in the for∣mer chapter: yet they simply & absolutely deny the Major, which is not universally true, nor at all necessarie. Secondly, Dato & non concesso: that the Major is true, the Knight nimbly turnes the mouth of the Papists owne Canon, to batter their owne walls, thus: That position, say you, in which both Papists and Protestants agree, is safer than that wherein one partie standeth single: but in the
eleven Points mentioned by the Knight, Papists and Protestants agree: in the twelve Articles coy∣ned by Pope Pius the fourth, the Papists stand single; therefore the Protestant Faith is the safer. To the fourth. A strange Argument, for the Iesuit to conclude other mens sight from his owne blindnesse: because hee seeth not how the Knight can avoid the instances in Jewes, Here∣tikes, and Turkes, whereby hee goeth about to disable the Knight his retorted Argument; ther∣fore will hee inferre, that any man may see that the Knight is no good guide. For pitty let some fit the Iesuit with a paire of Spectacles, that he may bet∣ter see the Knight his way, and his own wandrings.How far the Romish Religiō is distant from Heresie, Iu∣daisme, and Turcisme, or rather trench∣eth upon all three; See P: Croy his booke of Conformi∣ties, and Sut∣cliffe his Turco papismus. Iews and Turks are out of the Christian Church, hold not all Positive Articles necessary to salva∣tion, and therefore they come not in the Knights way at all; nor hath hee to doe with them in this Argument, which proceedeth from professed Christians, and not open enemies to the Faith. For the Knight from his heart detesteth all pathes leading to any of those dangerous pre∣cipices; and chaulketh to all men Viam vere tu∣tam, certam, rectam & regiam; a faire and Safe Way, and the very Kings High-way to his Pallace, wherein wee have Christ and his Apostles for our Leaders; the holy Spirit for our Guide; the blessed Angels for our Convoy; the ancient Fa∣thers and Doctors of the Church for our fellow Travellers through the whole, and the best lear∣ned
of the Romane Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and Schoolemen to beare us companie the grea∣ter part of our way. Wherefore, I doubt not, but that the indifferent peruser of the Knights Book, and the Iesuits Answer, and my Reply unto it; will breake out into the Apostles exclamation, and say to this Romish Sorcerer,Acts 3.13. or rather if hee will so, false Spectacle-maker, Flood: O full of all subtiltie and mischiefe, thou child of the devill, wilt thou not cease to per∣vert the right way of the LORD? FINIS. Laus DEO sine fine.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FVNERALL OF THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir Humphrey Lynd, Knight. A Cobham, June the 14th. 1636. By DANIEL FEATLEY, Doctor in Divinitie. NVMB: 23.10. Let my last end be like unto his. LONDON, Printed by M. Parsons, for Robert Milbourne, at the signe of the Vnicorne in Fleet-street, neere Fleet Bridge. 1638.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Funerall of the Right Worshipfull, SIR HVMPHREY LYND, Kt. At Cobham, June the 14th. 1636. NVMB: 23.10. Let my last end be like unto his. THeocritus termeth the dart of love ,Theocr. Idull. de cup. . Dulce acerbum: and Seneca compareth the Remem∣brance of a deceased Friend to a kind of Apple called Suave ama∣rum, A sweet bitter, or bitter sweet. Such is the fruit I am to present you with at this present, partly bitter, and partly sweet; and that both in respect of the Doctrine, and the Application thereof: bitter in the Do∣ctrine,
as it giveth you a tast of death, Let mee die the death, &c. but sweet, as it gives you a relish of the blessed estate of the righteous both at, and after death, so blessed, that it is desired even by the wicked; Let my last end, saith Balaam, be like unto his. Againe, bitter in the Application, as it rub∣beth your memorie with the consideration of your irrecoverable losse of such a Friend as here lieth before you: yet sweet, as it presenteth to you his invaluable gaine, and unconceiveable blisse. Let my last end be like his. I find some difference in the translation of this Text: for the seventy Interpreters ths render it, . Let my seed be as this seed: and indeed sometimes the word used in the originall is taken for Posteritie, or children which come after, as inNot to his po∣steritie. Daniel, 11.14.None to raise her up. Amos, ▪ 2.Let her po∣sterity be cut off. Psal. 109.13. and according to this tran∣slation, Balaam prophesieth a blessing, not onely to the righteous Israelite, but to his seed also: ac∣cording unto his promise made untoGen. 17.7. And I will e∣stablish my co∣venant be∣tween thee and mee, and thy seed after thee in their genera∣tion, for an everlasting co∣venant, to be a God unto thee, and thy seed af∣ter thee. Abraham, and his seed after him. Saint Ierome readeth the Text thus, Moriar ego morte Iustorum, & sint no∣vissima mea similia illius: Let mee die the death of the Righteous, and let my last things be like unto his. In the Calde paraphrase , it is, Let my end be like his: which word is often used for aHen. Ains∣worth in Num. reward which is after labour,Surely there is an end, and their expecta∣tion shall not be cut off. Prov. 23.18.Receiving the end of our faith, the sal∣tion of our soules. 1 Pet. 1.9. which also may be implyed here: and the word understood of the blessed reward
which the righteous have after this life in hea∣ven, Math. 5.12. Rejoyce, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. But Baalam be∣ing a spell-man of Satan, though for a moment, and in a trance transformed into a Minister of the Gospell,2 Cor. 11.14, 15. His end was according to his workes, as the Apostle telleth us of all such; and no marvell, for Satan himselfe is transformed into an Angell of light: therefore it is no great thing if his Mini∣sters also be transformed as the Ministers of righ∣teousnesse, Whose end shall be according to their workes.. The originall hath  that is, word for word, Let the last of mee be like unto his: which seemeth to be no other, than an explication of the former part of the verse, Let me die the death of the Righteous; for the last of man in this world is his death. I retaine therefore the last transla∣tion as being most agreeable to the originall, and pertinent to Baalam his scope at that time, and  my intention at this present. Now for the CoherenceThe Cohe∣rence. of this verse with the former, I need speake little: because some kind of incoherence in the passionate speech of a man besides himselfe, is no incongruitie. For as the herbePlin. nat. hist. lib. 26. cap. 14. Herba Anony∣mus non in∣veniendo nomen invenit. Anonymus, got that name by the lacke of a name: and as the signe of an indefinite proposi∣tion, is the want of a signe set before it: and as the Rhetorick of an Epistle, according to the de∣finition of Politian,Epist. lib 1. Ornamentum est ornamentis carere. is such as weedeth out the figures and flowers of Rhetorick: so, it is congruity and correspondencie in the speech of a distracted
man, to be like him that uttereth it, that is, distra∣cted. When the body is in good temper, the pulse beateth evenly and regularly; but in a Fever, or any other distemper, it beateth unevenly and star∣tingly, holding no proportion at all: so, when the mind is in frame, our speech is composed, and the parts of it have good connection; but it is otherwayes when the braine is distempered, or wee are through any violent perturbation, lift off the hookes; for passion exceeds reason, and extasie exceeds passion. In such a case wee are not ma∣sters of our owne conceits, and much lesse of our words; it is much if they carry good sense with them, it is too much to expect composure and exact coherence in them: as wee may see in. Lycophron his Cassandra. Yet for Balaams words here, if by Righteous, wee understand the people of Israel, not in regard of their inherent righte∣ousnesse, but in regard of Gods gracious calling them to the knowledge of his judgements, and by his holy ordinances and statutes severing and distinguishing them from the prophane and im∣pure Gentiles: something may be said for the co∣herence of this verse, which followeth after this manner: How shall I curse whom God hath not cursed? and how should I defie whom the Lord hath not defied? for from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hils I behold him; loe the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the na∣tions. Who can count the dust of Iacob, and
the number of the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of this righteous people and let my last end, or my posterity be like unto his. Howbeit it seemeth to me more probable that Balaam being in a transe, had a glimpse of the blessed estate of the elect after this life, and be∣ing ravished therewith in spirit, breaketh off his propheticall prediction, and falls into a passionate prayer for himselfe, that he might goe away in this pleasant trance, and enter presently by the gate of death into the possession of blessed im∣mortality. Let me dye faith he the death of the righte∣ous,The Sense. which thou hast foreshewed me by thy spi∣rit to be so blessed, and let my last end be like unto his, which I see hath no end of joy or hap∣pinesse. Lord now let thou thy Seer depart in peace, because his eyes hath seene the Salvation of thy people, and felicity of thy chosen, and glory of the Saints, triumphing in Heaven. When I thinke hereupon, my foule danceth for joy, and faine would leape out of my body, were it not tyed fast with Nerves, Arteries, and other Ligaments of flesh, which I may not break, and cannot of my selfe untie: come Death ther∣fore, and cut them all asunder, that my soule may even now escape as a bird out of the net of my body and fly up immediatly into Hea∣ven, and nest with the Cherubins by the mercy Seat. Others desire to live, but I to die, and because I may notVirg. Aeneid. 6. projecere ani∣mas. throw away my life, give me
leave to resigne it into thy hands. Let me die the death, not the deathes, for the first death may upon some tearmes be desired, but the se∣cond upon none at all. When I die let me die as the righteous doth, that is, most comforta∣bly and joyfully, and let my last end be like un∣to his; that is, let it be peace, and in peace abun∣dance; and in abundance, joy; and in joy, varie∣ty; and in variety, security, and in security, eternity. A Divine rapture, a Saint-like wish, a Heaven∣ly ejaculation: yet darted out of a foule Quiver, out of the heart and mouth of Baalam, which in this regard may not unfitly be compared to the Lyncurie, a pretious Stone, issuing out of the bo∣dy of the Lynx an uncleane and spotted Beast: or the Bufonites, a Stone of great vertue, yet found in the head of a Toad. Certainely if ever whol∣some Sugar was found in a poysoned Cane; if ever out of a sinke there exhaled a savour of life: if ever a bitter Fountaine sent forth medicinall water: if ever the Divells Charmer set or sung a Divine spell it is this in my Text.The Divi∣sion. Wherein are presented to your religious thoughts, 3 points of speciall observation. The Parts.1. The desire of the Person, 2. The object of the desire, 3. The condition of the object.
1. The desire of the Person, Strange, 2. The object of the desire, Dreadfull, 3. The condition of the object, Comfortable. 1. The desire of the Person is, Let me dye 2. The object of the desire is, the death 3. The condition of the object, of the righ∣teous, and let my last end be like unto his. From the desire of the person I inferre;Doctrinall points. 1. That the mouthes and tongues of wicked men are not their owne to use them alwayes as they list. 2. That gratious speeches sometimes fall from un∣gratious lips. 3. That a suddaine good motion, or a pious eja∣culation, is no sufficient ground of hope for salvation. Howsoever the wicked are brought in by the Psalmist vaunting in this manner;Psal. 12.4. with our tongues we will prevaile, our lips are our owne, who is Lord over us? yet they shall one day gnaw theirApoc. 16.10. And the Angell powred out his violl upon the seat of the Beast, and they gnawed their tongues. tongues for it: for their lips and tongues are not their owne, but his who made them: who though he permit them ordinarily to use them at their pleasure, yet when he will, he either silenceth them, or formeth such words by them, as the wicked of their owne accord would never have uttered. Was1 Sam. 10.11. What is this that is come to the Sonne of Kish? is Saul also among the Prophets. & 19.24. Sauls tongue his owne, when after he had heard David play upon his Instrument, he suddenly himselfe became an Instrument of Gods glory, sounding out his praises by the gift of Prophecy. Was Pilats wifes tongue her owne,
when relating her dreame to her husband, shee charged him toMatth. 19.27. have nothing to doe with that righ∣teous one, by reason of whom shee suffered many things in her dreame. WasAug. confen. l. 8. c. 2. Victo∣rinus qui tot an∣nos ore terricre∣po Deos genti∣lium defensi∣tasset non eru∣buit esse infans fontis tui &c. 4. Victorini lingua quo telo grandi. v. 51. Et. acuto multos pereme∣rat, &c. Victorinus tongue his owne, when of a sharpe and dangerous weapon that had wounded the Catholike faith; it was suddenly turned into an armed Sword drawne for the defence of the truth? WasIohn. 11.50.51.52. Implet. puerum, & citharaedum facit: implet armentarium, & facit Pro∣phetam: implet piscatorem, & Principem A∣postolorum fa∣cit: implet persecutorem, & Doctorem Gentium facit: implet publica∣num, & Evan∣gelistam facit.  In 1. Reg. 10. Deus corda sanctorum tangit quando iis sp. S. grati∣am tribuit & ejus tactum sentiunt, quia recepto internae virtutis munere a carnalitatis suae delibitate Commve∣tur, qui protenus Coelestis exercitus milites fiant, &c. Caiphas tongue his owne, when he delivered that Prophesie? it is expedient that one man die for the people, which the Text saith, he spake not of himselfe, but being High-Priest that yeare, he Prophesied that Iesus should dye for that Nation, & not for that Nation on∣ly, but that he should gather together in one, the chil∣dren of God that were scattered abroad; God saith St. Gregory by his spirit toucheth the tongue of an Heardman and maketh him a Prophet; of a Fisher∣man, and maketh him an Apostle; of a child, and ma∣keth him a Musitian; of a Publican, and maketh him an Evangelist; of a Persecutor, and maketh him the Doctor of the Gentiles; whereunro I may adde, he toucheth the tongue of an accursed Balaam, and maketh him a blesser, even after he had received the wages of iniquity, to diminish by his curse the seede of the righteous, and set his heart and tongue against the people of God, and tooke his journy with Balaac, and the Princes of Moab to the high places, from whence he might discover the Host of Israel as it passed, with a full purpose
from the top of those high hills, to have cursed them downe to the deepe pit of Hell: at the very instant God turneth his tongue within his mouth, and as if he had mistooke his Q and fell upon a wrong part, he blesseth where he thought to have cursed, and curseth where he intended to have blessed, saying, how goodly are thy Tents O Jacob,Numb. 24.5.6.7.8. and thy habitations O Israel, as the valleyes are they stretched forth, and as gardens by the River side; God brought him out of Egypt, his strength shall be as an Vnicorne, he shall eate the Nations, his enemies, and bruise their bones, he coucheth and lieth downe like a young Lion, who shall stirre him, and blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee: whereas the promise of the blessing to Abraham consisted of two branches. 1. That God would give the land of Canaan to him and to his seed. 2. That he would make his seede as the dust vv of the earth:Gen. 13.15, 16. under which, spirituall graces in Christ were also comprehended: the Lord causeth Balaam here to ratifie them both for their dwelling alone in the land, and for their innumerable encrease, and whereas Balaac envied their multitude, and would therefore have them x cursed that they might be diminished;Numb. 22.3, 5, 6. Balaam is here forced to ut∣ter a blessing for their further encrease. Thus God resisted him in all his counsells and enterprises.
Some peradventure, would have thought this prophecie fitter to have come out of any mans mouth than Baalams. Could God make no bet∣ter choice of a Vessell to containe, or a Conduit to convey the water of Life, than the wind-pipe of Baalam? what is Saul among the Prophets? Paul among the Preachers of the Gospell? Baalam turned a Blesser? how many queasie stomackes are there that will loath the daintiest meats, if they be served in a sluttish dish? In which regard, the Senatours of Lacedemon hearing an excellent motion made by an infamous person, and percei∣ving many averse from it, onely out of a distaste of the person of the speaker, powred out, as Plu∣tarch observeth, Sweet liquor into a sweet vessell, commanding a person of qualitie and reputation among them, to owne the motion, and propound it as from himselfe; and so it passed with generall applause. God could have done so; but here it pleased him to utter his goodnesse by the mouth of Baalam, as before hee uttered wisdome by the mouth of his Asse: by2 Pet. 2.16. The dumb Asse speaking with mans voice, forbad the madnesse of the Prophet. whom hee reproved the madnesse of the Prophet, both to teach us, that his power dependeth not upon meanes, but all meanes upon his power; and that hee is able to draw2 Cor. 4.6. God comman∣ded the light to shine out of darknesse. light out of darknesse, and life out of the jawes of death, and sweetnesse out of the gall of malice and bitternesse. Therefore, when wee see not onely goodMatth. 12.35. men out of the good treasurie of their heart, bring forth good things: but also sometimes (according to
my second Observation) evill men, out of the evill shop of their mouth, utter good wares. When wee heare not onely Holy2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God spake as they were mo∣ved by the holy Ghost. men, of whom Saint Peter speaketh, but also sometimes unholy men speake as they are moved by the holy Ghost: let us be advised by Seneca, to consider non quis di∣cat, sed quid dicatur; not who it is that speaketh, but what it is that is spoken: and imitate the wisdome of Virgil,Ennius ingenio maximus ar∣te rudis. who being demanded why hee turned over so many leaves in Ennius, whose language was impure, and skill in Poetrie very small: answered, E stercore se colligere aurum; that hee raked gold out of muck: and with Aesops cock, found a Pearle in a dunghill.Aesop. fab. gal∣lus gallinatius dum verit ster∣corarium offen∣dit gemmam. Doe you the like; the Muck is Balaams dirty and filthy mouth; the Pearle, or gold you are to take up, is this gol∣den sentence, in which these three divine verities glister: 1. That the righteous dye as well as the wicked. 2. That their death is blessed. 3. That this blessednesse of their death is desired, even by the worst men that breath. The French have a Berry which they name Vve de spine, The grape of a thorne: such is the fruit of this branch of my Text, Vva de spina, a sweet and wholsome grape, yet growing upon a thorne. You will aske (it is very like) how may this be?Matth. 7.16. Doe men gather grapes of thornes, or figs of thistles,
saith the true Vine, Christ Jesus? I distinguish therefore of two sort of grapes: 1. Of a holy profession. 2. Of a religious conversation. These later cannot be gathered of thornes: the former may. There is a great deale of difference between the fruits of our lips, and the fruit of our lives; Si bene dixerimus vestrum est, si bene vixe∣rimus nostrum est: the fruit of our lives is to our selves especially, but the fruit of our lips to you; you may be the better for them, though some∣times some of us are not. For, the water that pas∣seth through a leaden pipe into a garden, watereth the garden, yet leaveth little or no moysture in the pipe: the influence which is coveighed by the beames of the Sunne into the minerals, inricheth them; yet, not the beame, nor the ayre through which it is carried: the Font water that cleanseth the child, is it selfe cast into the draught: the builders of Noahs Arke were overwhelmed in the deluge, andVirg. En. 3. Mortuus in nu∣dâ Palinure jacebis arenâ. Palinurus Aeneas his Pilot saved the Ship, yet was himselfe drowned. Are there not many, who like Watermen, looke one way, and row another way? looke towards heaven, but row with all their strength to hell? whomLact. diu in∣stit. l. 3. c. 15. Redundant in ipsos maledi∣cta in publicum missa quos non alitur intueri decet, quam medicos quorū tituli habent medicamenta pyxides ve∣nena. Lactantius fitly compares to Apothecaries boxes which containe in them poysons, having the title of Antidotes or Remedies written on the out∣side: such are they who will claime aquaintance with Christ at the last day, saying,Math. 7.22, 23. Have we not
prophecied in thy name, and in thy name cast out de∣vils, and in thy name done many wonderfull works? to whom hee will professe, I never knew you; depart from mee, ye that worke iniquitie. The spirit,Ioh. 3.8. as it bloweth where it listeth; so also, how much it list∣eth, lesse in aurâ than in vento; and lesse in it, than in procellâ or turbine: some are inspired with the spirit of Prophecie, yet not of Prayer: some with the spirit of Prayer, yet not of com∣punction: some with the spirit of Illumination, yet not of Renovation or Sanctification: Baalam prophecied of the birth of Christ, yet was not himselfe regenerated; and Caiphas of his death, yet was not thereby mortified. Wherefore, let none presume of sanctifying grace, because they have the gift of prophecying or extemporarie supplication; for the trumpet may sound shrill, yet the breath of him that bloweth it, be impure: glasse ringeth as well as silver, but it will not indure the hammer: if any have the gift of utterance, let him strive for a great measure of sanctifying grace to fill his heart, that out of theMatth. 11.34 abundance therof his mouth may speake. Secondly, let us judge of men, rather by their actions than by their speeches: By their fruits, saith Christ,Matth. 7.16. ye shall know them; not alwaies by their leaves or blossomes: for corrupt trees may have faire leaves of a good profession on them, and goodly blossomes also, godly motions, ho∣nest intentions, and holy desires. The light of
nature is not quite extinct in any; hee is no man who hath not a conscience, which, if it be woun∣ded deeply, will extort from him at some time or other, a condemnation of his evill wayes; and stirre up in him at least some faint and languishing desire of amendment of life. Saint Gregorie truly noteth, that AsMoral. in Iob. Ille compungi∣tur nec iustitiae propinquat iste temptatur & tamen culpa eum non inqui∣nat quod nec malos bona im∣perfecta adju∣vant, nec bonos mala inconsum∣mata condem∣nat. good men have sometimes evill thoughts, so evill men have good: yet, as the one hurt not the one, so the other helpe not the other; for as evill motions, if they be not prosecuted, hinder not salvation; so good motions, if they be not pursued, further not salvation. Wherupon, Lyranus saith, thatIn Numb. c. 23. Mali licet nolint vivere vitam justo∣rum appetunt tamen mortem eorum. The wickedst of men, who have no will at all to live the life of the righteous; yet in a pang some∣time heartily wish, and desire to dye the death of the Righteous. God knocketh at the hearts of all, either by a softer knock, the inward motions of his spirit; or by a lowder knock, with the rod of afflictions: and hee calleth also unto them, either by the voice of Nature, or his written Word, and if they will give eare, and albeit they cannot open the doore, yet give a plucke at the bolt, or a lift at the latch: God will either give them, by in∣crease of grace strength to open it, or at least by their good indeavour, they shall make their con∣dition more tolerable in the day of judgement. Pharoah that anvile of steele, which indured so many strokes at the hand of God, and brake not in sunder, yet sometimes was mollified: Felix is frighted; the Iews send forth a pious ejaculation:
HerodMarke 6.20. heareth John gladly, and doth many things; PharaohExod. 9.27. I have sinned: the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. his acknowledgment was a true confession; FelixActs 24.25. his trembling when St. Paul reasoned of righteousnesse, temperance, and judge∣ment to come, was a good symptome: the Iewes prayer,Ioh. 6.34. Lord evermore give us this bread was a zealous flash, and pious pang. Herods attention and joy at S. Iohns preaching were hopeful beginnings: yet all these confessions, affections, prayers, and hopefull assayes, were but asPsal. 129.6. grasse on the house top, whereof the Mower filled not his lap, or the un∣timely fruit of a woman which never seeth the Sun: Good motions must be followed, honest intenti∣ons pursued, holy thoughts dwelt upon, pious vowes performed, zealous resolutions continued. If God kindle in us a sparke of Divine fire, we must blow it that it flame, else it will yeeld little warmth to a benummed conscience, much lesse hope ever to see the light of Heaven; so preci∣ous are the things which God hath laid up in store for his children, that the wicked themselves when they are represented in visions to their eyes, or by the word preached to their eares, cannot but affect them, and thirst after them, and pray for them; but these their desires and pray∣ers be they never so fervent for the time, conti∣nue not, but like a sparke of fire in greene wood; unlesse they be continually blowne by the spirit of God, soone dye: they resemble theMatth. 13.5. seed cast in stonie ground, which bare no fruit, because it tooke no roote. The Iewes for a while rejoyced in St.
IohnIoh. 5.35. his light, who was a burning and a shining lampe: and I perswade my selfe there cannot be found a man so desperatly wicked, who never conceived a good thought, or felt some good motion within him. What a happy thing were it for a sonne of Belial if he might be in Heaven with a wish; if it were enough to say, Lord be mer∣cifull to me a sinner, Lord remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome, let me die the death of the righteous. But let none deceive themselves with any such conceit, or groundlesse hope: but let them beleeve the words of truth himselfe protesting against such, and saying,Matth. 7.21▪ Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord shall enter into the Kingdome of heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father which is in heaven. Not every one who in the midst of his mirth and jollity, checks him∣selfe, and darts out a short prayer: Let me die the death of the righteous, shall arrive at the faire ha∣ven, but he that steareth his course by the com∣passe of Gods law and card of Scripture: he that walketh uprightly before God and man, neither halting in his Religion, nor doubling in his dea∣ling: he that maketh Gods glory his end, his grace his meanes, his word his guide, his Saints his companions, his Commandements his way, and holdeth on streight in it to the end, neither declining to the right hand nor to the left. Doe you desire beloved, as Balaam doth here, to die the death of the righteous, I will tell yo in a word how to compasse your desires. Be you your
selves righteous, and so you shall be sure to die the death of the righteous; for the death of the righteous shall be your death, if you be righteous; and his last end, the end of your course, if you take his. Demand you yet farther, how can they that are laden with sinne and iniquitie become righteous? I answer briefly, by remission of sins, imputation of Christs righteousnesse, and the power of sanctifying grace. Remission of sins is obtained by repentance, righteousnesse by a live∣ly Faith, and sanctifying grace by hearing dili∣gently the Word, duly receiving the Sacraments, and daily practising such religious duties as are prescribed in the Word. These are good preparations in generall to a comfortable end, and a happy dissolution; but in speciall, I commend unto you at this time, these three following: 1. To consider your later end, and comment often upon your owne death. 2. To meditate upon Christs death. 3. To expresse them both to the life, by mortifying your fleshly members upon earth. The meditation of death is of singular use, for it killeth sin in us, and either quite taketh away, or much diminisheth the feare of death. As the stro∣king of a dead hand on the belly, cureth a tympa∣nie; and as the ashes of a viper, applied to the part that is stung, draws the venome out of it: so of the
ashes of a sinner, wee may make a soveraigne Salve against Sin, after this manner: Dost thou let loose the raines to thy impetuous lusts, and art given to licentious pleasures? lay the ashes of a voluptuous person to thy heart, and say, all our sinfull delights and pleasures, all our mirth and laughter, is but like the crackling of thornes under a pot,Eccles. 7.6. which will turne in the end into ashes and mourning. Art thou a Narcissus, or Nireus, in∣amoured with thine owne beauty? take of the ashes of a beautifull person, now rotten in the grave, and lay them to thy heart, and say, such as these stinking ashes and foule earth are, I shall be. Art thou inclined to luxurie, or gluttonie? take of the ashes of a glutton, and lay them to thy heart, and say, this is all that remaines of my de∣licate Fare, to make a small quantitie of foule earth, or ashes good for nothing, I have spent so much in pampering of my flesh. Lastly, art thou high minded, and puffed up with pride? lay the dust and ashes of a proud man to thy heart, and say, this man that walked so stately, and looked so high, here lyeth low enough, and is trod upon by every begger that walketh over his grave. Such thoughts as these, are excellent sawces to season the pleasures of this life, that wee surfeit not of them. In which regard, I sup∣pose it was, that the Aegyptians usually served in a Deaths-head, with a shovell full of mold at their greatest Feasts, with their first course: and Ioseph of Arimathea built his Sepulcher in his
garden: and lest the Emperours of Rome, in the height of their honour, and pride of their glory, should forget the frailty of their condition, and vilenesse of their nature, the ancient manner was at their Inauguration, to shew to them divers sorts of Marble, and bid them chuse of which they would have their tomb-stone made. A like ceremonie is used at this day, in the Inthroniza∣tion of the Pope; before hee is set in his chaire, and puts on his triple Crowne, a piece of toe, or wadd of straw is set on fire before him, and one appointed to say, Sic transit gloria mundi; the glo∣rie of this world is but a blaze. Moreover, the thinking often upon death, ma∣keth it more familiar, and lesse terrible unto us, PrevisaEras. Aag. jacula minus feriunt; the darts of death foreseene wound lesse, they pierce not the heart so deepe; because it is forearmed with premedia∣ted comforts against them. A man that is struc∣ken on the sudden, though but lightly, starteth, and is much affrighted at the blow: whereas, a trained Souldier in the field, that looketh for death every houre, scarse stirreth for a Bullet, but marcheth on couragiously, fearing no colors. Even children, though they are much scared at the first, with the sight of a vizard; yet after they have looked stedfastly on it, and handled it, fin∣ding no hurt at all in it, they make themselves sport with it: even so the child of God, the first time the devill representeth to him the gastly vi∣sage of death, is terrified with it, it is as a Bug∣beare,
or an Hobgoblin, it scareth and affrighteth him; but when hee looketh stedfastly on it, and feeleth for the sting therof, & findeth it is pluckt out, hee contemneth it, and insulteth over it, saying,1 Cor. 15.55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victorie? Doe thy worst, thou canst not hurt mee; separate thou maist my body from my soule, but thou canst not my soule from Christ; so the Jewell be safe, what care I much what becommeth of the casket: yet that also shall be restored, and more beautifully trimmed and adorned than ever it was, at the last day. Another meanes to gaine an easie and safe passe over the troublesome sea of this life, is to medi∣tate frequently upon the death and passion of our Saviour, and thus to reflect upon our selves: The Lord of life suffered death upon the crosse, & shall I that am sold under sin, hope to escape? The Sonne of God paid this tribute to nature, shall I that am a servant stand upon it? The King of glorie entred into his Kingdome by this gate, shall I desire to avoid it, or feare to follow him? My Redeemer, when hee was nailed hand and foot to the Crosse, incoun∣tred Death, then armed with a deadly sting, and hee disarmed it, left it as good as dead; and shall I feare to deale with an enemie so conquered and spoiled? My master mastered Death when it was alive, shall I feare to grap∣ple with it, being halfe, or rather altogether dead, for any hurt it can doe me? according to
the mnacing Prophecies of Hosea, Ero mors tua ô mors; OHos. 13.14. death, I will be thy plagues. These, and the like applications of the death of Christ, and the power thereof to our selves, furnish us with a second strong weapon against the feare of death. A third, Saint Paul frameth for us, and reacheth unto us, to wit, to1 Cor. 15.31. By our re∣joycing, which I have in Christ Iesus our Lord, I die daily. die daily; not inSeneca Epist lib. 1. Quotidie morimur, quo∣tidie enim de∣mitur aliqua pars vitae. Seneca his meaning, Wee are daily dying, because every day a part of our life is taken away: but according to SaintHier. Epitaph. Nepot. c. 60. Platonis est sententia sapi∣entis vitam meditationem esse mortis; laudunt hoc Philosophi et in caelum, ferunt, sed multo for∣tius Apostolus, quotidie mo∣rior, aliud enim est conari, aliud agere, aliud vivere morit∣rum aliud mori, victurum ille semel moritu∣rus est ex glo∣riâ, iste semper moriturus est ad gloriam. Ieromes interpretation, It was one of divine Plato his Essayes, That the life of a wise man is a continuall meditation upon death: the Philosophers commend this in him for a strong line, but the Apo∣stles is farre stronger; I die daily: it is one thing to thinke upon, or indeavour; another to act: one thing to live, as being once to die; another thing to die, as being ever after to live. By our rejoycing, which I have in Christ Iesus, I die daily; that is, I inure my selfe to die; I feele the pangs of death; I am out of all hope and love of life, my soule is al∣way in my hand, I withdraw it what I can from my body, I mortifie my fleshly members in such sort, that in my faintnesse, and great weake∣nesse, nothing supporteth mee from falling, but the crosse of Christ, whereby I am crucified to the world, and the world to mee. He that desireth to live after hee is dead, must die while hee is alive, and that three manner of wayes:
1. To the World. 2. To the Flesh. 3. To Sinne. 1. To the world by retiring out of it, or at least, renouncing the pompes and vanities thereof. 2. To the Flesh, by subduing it, and killing the lusts thereof with the sword of the spirit, by watching, fasting, and praying, and other exer∣cises of mortification. 3. To Sin, by shutting up all the passage of the soule against it, by resisting the first motions to it, and nipping it in the Bud. This is the death whichTertul. de poenit. Caro ante ho∣minem suam prae mortua. Tertullian extolleth; andClimach. Sealpar. . Climachus maketh it a round in his scale of Paradice, when the flesh is killed, and the man alive? when morti∣fied in mind as well as in body, wee have no sense or feeling, either of the vanities of the world, or delights of the flesh: when wee live not, but Christ in us. Of this death, SaintLeo, Serm. de 7. frat. Praeti∣osa mors qua occiditur homo, non termi∣natione sen∣suum sed fine vitiorum. Et serm. 1. de re∣surrect. Inte∣rest cui quis aut moriatur, aut vivat, quia est mors quae causa est vi∣vendi, & est vita quae cau∣sa est moriendi. Leo understan∣deth the words of the Psalmist; Precious in the eyes of the Lord, is the death of his Sants, Psal. 116.15. A precious death indeed, which bereaveth not a man of sense, but of lust; destroyeth not Nature, but Sinne: driveth not a man out of the world, but chaseth the world out of his mind and affections. And of this, SaintBern. Ser. 52. in Cant. Mori∣atur anima mea mortejustorum, ut nulla me il∣laqueat fraus nulla oblectat, iniquitas bona mors quae vi∣tam, non au∣fert sed trans∣fert in melius. Bernard, and Hugo de Sancto Victore, interpret the words of my text; Let mee die the death of the Righteous in such sort, that I feele no incentive of lust, no pricke of anger, no heat of desire: let no fraud insnare mee, no
iniquity delight me, it is a good and happy death which taketh not away life, but improveth it. There is a threefold death saithHug. Card. in num. Hugo Cardi∣nalis. 1. Of Nature. 2. Of Sinne. 3. Of grace. 1. In the first, the flesh dieth. 2. In the second, the soule. 3. In the third, the whole man. 1. The first seperateth the soule from the flesh. 2. The second divideth the spirit from grace. 3. The third sequestreth the whole man from the world. 1. The first death is of all, 2. The second of evill men onely, 3. The third of the Godly. Those that are dead, In the first sense, are buried in the world. In the second sense, are buried in Hell: In the third sense, are buried in Heaven. Of the first it is said, O death how bitter is thy re∣membrance. In the second the widdow that lived in pleasure is said to be dead being alive. According
to the third sense: Balaam wisheth, let me die the death of the righteous, that is, a death proper to the Saints of God, who though they live in the flesh, yet they walke after the spirit; though their com∣moration be on earth,Phil. 3.20. yet their conversation is in Heaven, they have no more to doe with the world then if they had quite left it, nor with the flesh, then if they had shaken it off, they looke not after the Pageants of the world, nor heare the noyse of it, nor tast the delights of it, nor de∣file themselves with the corruptions of it: like men dead, they have no thought of ambition, no sense of pleasure, no motion or inclination to the lusts of the flesh, or the lusts of the eye or pride of life: their dying after this manner is their whole life, and by thus dying dayly they bring their minde to that temper, that the feare of death cannot worke upon them. If you pricke or cut a piece of dead flesh, it shrinketh not at it, it feeleth no paine: no more is a mortified man affected with the panges of death; What feareth he to depart out of the body, which he account∣eth no better then the prison of his soule? what careth he to leave the world at his death, who abandoneth it all his life? what passeth he for the losse of temporary delights and pleasures, who never accounted them delights or true plea∣sures? but rather in regard of sinne adhering to them,Bernard me∣ditat. c. 13. Accusat me cōscientia testis est memoria ra∣tio judex, vo∣luptas carcer, timor, tortor, oblectamentum tormentum, nam inde patimur unde delecta∣mur. paines and tortures of the soule, quot oblecta∣menta tot tormenta, especially considering, that he is to exchange them for solid comforts, unspeak∣able
joyes, unconceiveable delights and everla∣sting contentments. This may suffice to have beene spoken of the desire of the person, now followeth the object of his desire, with the limitation thereof, The death of the righteous, from whence these conclusions may be enforced. 1. That the righteous die as well as the wicked. 2. That this their death is blessed. 3. That the blessednesse thereof is desired e∣ven by the wicked themselves. But before I may expatiat into these fields of meditation, I must remove the let or obstacle in my text, let me die; Balaam speaketh not in the Indicative mood, but in the Optative, and conse∣quently, his words imply, first a desire of death, secondly, a craving leave to resigne up his life: hence two emergent questions are briefely to be discussed. First, whether death may be desired. Secondly, whether in any case a man may shorten his owne end and make away himselfe. Concerning the first, Nature, Reason and Grace seeme to pleade strongly against it, Nature hath imprinted this law, not onely in man but in all creatures els, se concervare, to doe their utmost to preserve their being. Reason teacheth us that it is extreame folly to desire our greatest losse, which to the naturall man is the losse of his temporall life; for when it goes away, all his possessions,
wealth, and comforts in this world goe with it. Religion objecteth, that this time of our life, is tempus gratiae, the time of grace, in which we may make our peace with God: so long as we breath we may call upon God and hope for mercy; but as St. CyprianAd Demet. postquam hinc excessum est nullus relinqui∣tur penitentiae locus, nullus da∣tur satisfactio∣nis effectus hic vita aut amit∣titur aut tene∣tur. Leo Serm. 5. de Epiph. Non ita delin∣quentes peccata delectent, ut illos in his actib{us} finis vitae inveniat quia in inferno nulla est corre∣ctio nec datur remedium satis∣factionis, ubi non superest actio voluntatis. speaketh, after wee are gone from hence there remaines no place for repentance. An ocean of teares if we could shed them will not procure unto us a drop of water to coole our tongue: and therefore it cannot stand with spi∣rituall wisdome to abridge these golden moments of time, upon the usage whereof dependeth our eternall happinesse, or misery: on the contrary, it may truly be alleaged, that not onely Balaam here, but Eliiah also, and Ionah, and David, and Saint Paul have longed for death, Eliiah complai∣ned,1 King. 19.4. it is enough now O Lord, take away my soule for I am no better then my Fathers.Ionah 4.8. Ionah in the bitternesse of his soule wisheth to die, saying, It is better for me to die then to live. David sigheth,Psal. 55.6.8. O that I had wings like a Dove, then would I flee away and be at rest, I would hasten to escape from the win∣dy storme and tempost,Psal. 42.1.2. And as the Hart panteth af∣ter the water brooke, so panteth my soule after thee O God, my soule thirsteth for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appeare before God? St. PaulPhil. 1.23. is in a straight betweene two, having a desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ which is farre better. To assoyle this doubt, we must distin∣guish first quomodo in what respect, or how; se∣condly, quare, for what cause or end; thirdly,
quatenus, how farre forth death may be desired. First, quomodo? death is no way to be desired as a punishment of sinne, but as a period of sinne: not as it is in his owne nature, but as it is changed by Christ: not as it is a posterne gate to let out our temporall, but a streete dore to let in eternall life. Secondly, quare? for what end or cause death is to be desired, not to ease us of the burthen of any heavy crosse laid upon us: not to free us from our painefull or dangerous imployments; but either that we may be discharged from sinne, and severed from the company of the wicked: or that we may be more nearely united unto Christ, and more fully enjoy him then we can in this life. Thirdly, quatenus? how farre forth. No man may absolutely desire death, but with submission to Gods will who is Lord of our life, to whom we ought to commit our soules as our faithfull Creator. Concerning the second question, it hath beene much argued by Phylosophers, and not a little by Divines. The Stoicks generally taught that life was a thing indifferent, and that it made little matter whether death come to us, or we come to it.Sen. Ep. 69. Neque interest multum, mors ad nos veniat vel ad illam no▪ Dost thou see, saith Seneca, yonder steepe place, from thence thou mayest descend to liberty? dost thou see yonder deepe well, in the bot∣tome of it, thou shalt find libertie? Dost thou see yonder tree with snags and crooked boughes, upon it
hangs libertieSen. de ira Vides illum praecipitem lo∣cum illàc ad li∣bertatem de∣scenditur, vides illud flumen illum putem libertus illic in imo sedet vides arborem bre∣vem, & pen∣det inde liber∣tus.. It isSen. Ep. 12. Malū est in ne∣cessitate vivere, sed in necessita∣te vivere nulla necessitas est. an evill thing to live in necessitie, but there is no necessitie to live in this necessitie: for the point of a small pen-knife openeth a way to immortalitie; according to this their do∣ctrine, Zeno, Cleanthes & Seneca killd themselves. And not onely the Heathen Lucretia, but the Christian Sophronia rather spilt her owne blood, than she would suffer it to be defiled by a Tyrant: and Pelagia, rather then shee would suffer a Soul∣dier to deslowre her, leapt into the river and drowned her selfe: Rasis also in the booke of Maccabees, razed himselfe out of the booke of Life, and is commended by the Author of those bookes. Nay, in the Canonicall Scriptures wee reade, that Sampson, whose Faith is enobled in Saint Paul to the Hebrewes, pulled downe the house where the Philistines were assembled to∣gether, and died himselfe amongst them. Not∣withstanding these and all other arguments and instances, which desperate men have devised to maintaine their desperate position,L. 1. de civit. Dei, cap. 21. Exceptis iis quos lex justa generaliter, vel ipse fons justi∣tiae deus speci∣aliter, occidi ju∣bet quisquis hominem vel quemlibet, vel seipsum occide∣rit homicidi crimine inne∣ctitur. Saint Au∣stines conclusion standeth firme, Excepting those whom a just Law in generall, or God the fountaine of Iustice in speciall commandeth to be slaine; whosoe∣ver kils either himselfe or any other, is guilty of Man-slaughter. For the Law, Thou shalt not kill, first reflecteth upon a mans selfe, and certainly felo de se is the worst felon of all; and albeit, ma∣ny in former ages, and some at this present day, partly for want of knowledge, or feare of God, partly out of pasillanimitie, not able to beare the
heavie crosses laid on them, partly upon deepe discontents, breake the lanterne of their body, and quench the light of their life: yet the sinne they commit therein, is of the deepest die, and most dangerous of all other, next the sinne against the holy Ghost, because it killeth body and soule at once, and depriveth the delinquent of all time of repentance for so horrid a crime. One Male∣factour was pardoned on the Crosse at his execu∣tion, but wee never reade in holy Scripture, of any pardoned after death. Sampson was a type of Christ, and what hee did, as Saint Austine ex∣pressely teacheth, hee did by Gods command, and was assisted in it by divine power, his strength miraculously returning unto him. And if Sophronia and Pelagia had not a speciall warrant from God, to do what they did for the preservation of their chastitie, they ought to be strucke out of the cata∣logue of Saints, as they struck thēselves out of the catalogue of living. For Lucretia, S. Austin catch∣eth her within hisLib. 1. de ci∣vit. Dei, c. 19. Innocentem ca∣stam vim per∣pessam Lucre∣tiam Lucretia interemit si adulteram, cur laudatam, si pu∣dicam, cur occi∣sm. Dilemma, faire Lucrece kils Lu∣crece: if as an adultresse, why is shee so extol∣led for chastitie? if undefiled, why should shee be slaine? the more innocent shee was, the more horrid and detestable was her putting to death, especially by her owne hand. For Rasis, though the2 Mac. 14.42.46. Author of the Maccabees saith not that hee did well in falling upon his owne sword, and af∣ter casting himselfe downe from a wall, and plucking out his owne bowels, and casting them upon the throng; yet because hee enobleth him
for valour, saying, Hee did manfully: the Booke is deservedly branded with the note of Apochry∣phall. For as Saint Austine demonstrateth it,Lib. 1. de ci∣vit. Dei, c. 22. Pusillanimis est seipsum oc∣cidere, non magnanimi, majorque ani∣mus merito di∣cendus est qui vitam erum nosum magis ferre potest quam fugere. It is no point of valour, but an argument of cowardise, for a man to kill himselfe: hee is of greater courage, and more valorous, who can indure the extreamest miseries of this life, than hee who cowardly flies from them, by making away himselfe. To Seneca, I oppose Epictetus, a Philosopher of his owne sect, who in the first of his Disputes, the ninth Chapter, divinely concludeth the point, Admo∣nishing all men to wait upon God, and not to quit our charge here upon earth,Epict. dissent. lib. 1. c. 9. . Tusculan quest. l. 1. Vetat do∣minus ille nobis deus injussu nos hinc suo demi∣grare, cum vero causam justam deus ipse dede∣rit, nae ille vir sapiens laetus ex his tenebris in illam lucem excesserit, nec tamen curteris vincula ruperit leges enim vetant, sed tanquam à magistratu aut aliqua legitima potestate, sic à Deo evocatus at emissus exierit. till hee give us some token of his pleasure, or dismisse us: with whom Tully concurreth, observing, that God setteth us all in this world as Souldiers in battell array, and wee are to keepe our standing under paine of death, till wee have order from our Captaine to remove our station, or are called off by him: a wise man will desire no∣thing more, than to be freed out of the darke prison of his body, yet dare hee not breake the walls of the prison, for thats against the Law. As a subject may not goe out of the kingdome without his Sove∣raignes leave, or passport: so neither may any man depart from this life without the passe of Almightie God, the Lord of the whole earth. Wherefore Balaam here craves leave, as it were, to travell from earth to heaven, saying, Let mee die: and Ionah and Elijah exhibit a like petition,
Take away my life: and Simeon, before hee de∣parts, sings his Nunc dimitis, Lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace. All men have a Race set before them which they must finish, not balke any part of it, if they expect a Crowne of righteousnesse. Most disconsolate therefore, and dreadfull is their case,Virgil, En 6. Lucem{que} peros projecere ani∣mas. who throw away their soules (which they should returne to him that gave them) some by dashing their owne braines out, as He∣rennius: some by cutting their vaines, as Seneca: some by choking themselves with a napkin, as Lentulus: some by hanging themselves, as Iudas: some by falling upon their owne sword, as Saul: some by sucking poyson out of a ring, as Hanni∣ball: some out of their Pen, as Demosthenes: some by supping up burning coales, as Portia: some by leaping into the fire, as Sardanapalus: some from an high rocke into the sea, as the In∣dians: some stabbing themselves, as Dido: some setting Aspes at their brests, as Cleopatra: some dying in a bravery, as Calanus: some in a fury, as Iulian: some in envie, as Cato: some to avoid in∣famie, as Lucretia: some to testifie their love, as Panthea: some to be rid of a tedious disease, as Atticus: some to attaine speedily immortalitie, as Cleombrotus; who, presently after he had read Plato his Treatise of the Immortalitie of the soule,Cic. Tusc. 1. leapt from a high wall to make triall of the truth of it. It is to be feared that these, and most, if not all that follow their desperate courses, goe down quicke into hell, and immediately passe from the
first death to the second: for how should they looke to be saved by God, which thus cast away themselves? what hope can they have of the be∣nefit of a pardon, who by their very sin, bereave themselves of all meanes of getting it? and if God of his infinite mercie should send them one, they execute themselves before they can make use of it, easing the devill of the paines to fetch them away; for they fetch their fees themselves, and leape into the pit of destruction. I tremble at Christs words uttred to Paula, by way of Proso∣popaeia, in Saint Ierome;Ad Paul super obit Blesillae, ego nullam ani∣mam recipio quae me nollente seperatur à cor∣pore tales stulta Philosophia ha∣beat Martyres habeat Zenonē, Cleombrotum vel Catonem, &c. I give no harbour or enter∣tainment to any runagate soule, that maketh an escape out of the prison of the body, by breaking the walls thereof, or getteth out any other way without my warrant. I hope rather with Saint Austine, that there may be sometimes, inter pontem & fontem misericordia; Mercie between the bridge and the river: and that, though the wind-pipe be stopped that no breath can passe, yet that Gods spirit may by grace, worke that sorrow in a moment, which through the infinite merits of Christ apprehen∣ded by Faith, may free them from everlasting sorrowes. Yet, to presume upon some rare ex∣amples in this kind, to run any such desperate course, were as great folly and madnesse, as for a man to venture to leape off a high Tower; because peradventure, some one hath at some time, caught hold of the battlements of the Church in his fall, and thereby escaped death. The Let being removed, now I may freely
expatiate in the fields of Meditations set before mee: 1. Concerning the necessitie of death in ge∣nerall. 3. The condition of the death of the righ∣teous in speciall. In all States, Common-wealths, and King∣domes, besides the Law of Nature, and of Na∣tions, to which all professe themselves subject, there are some peculiar Statutes, Ordinances, and Customes: by the observation whereof, wee di∣stinguish their severall governments. This may be exemplified in the three great and main estates of the world: the Kingdome of 1. Heaven. 2. Earth. 3. Hell. Whose Lawes are as different as their places are distant. 1. The Law of Heaven is: None that are admit∣ted into it shall ever die. 2. The Law of Hell is: All that come there, die for ever. 3. The Law of the Land, or Earth, is: All that live in it must die once. In that they die, they are distinguished from the citizens of heaven, who never die; in that they die but once, they are distinguished from the in habitants of hell, that die alwaies. Of this statute
Law SaintHeb. 9.27. Paul maketh mention in the Epistle to the Hebrewes, Statutum est omnibus hominibus semel mori: It is appointed for all men once to die. This statute is like the laws of Medes and Persians, that never alter: this statute taketh hold of all that injoy the benefit of life, and set foot on the earth; Qui vult excipere, conatur decipere. If all men are in danger of this Statute, then the righteous as well as the wicked. Non te tua plurima Pentheu Labentem texit pietas. Righteousnesse is termed by Saint Paul, A greatEphes. 6.14. Shield, or Target; yet it is not deaths proofe. If righteousnesse could have saved from death, Iob had not died: if Faithfulnesse, Moses had yet lived: if Valour, Ioshuah had overcome death: if Wisdome, Salomon had prevented death: if Ri∣ches, Crassus and Craeses had bought out death: if all naturall and supernaturall graces had with∣stood the assault of death, our blessed Lord and Saviour had never beene deaths prisoner three dayes and three nights. Me thinkes I heare you object,Rom. 6.23. Death is the wages of Sinne; therefore it is no wayes due to the righteous. The answer is ready: The mostLeo, serm. 2. de Epiph. Haec est perfectorum vera justitia ut nunquam prae∣sumant se esse perfectos. righteous man upon earth, be∣sides his originall corruption, hath many actuall sinnes, for which death is owing to him. Yea, but Christ hath wiped out all the scores of these sinnes of his elect: why then doth this debt of nature remaine to be paid? I answer, that as Christ tooke away the guilt of sinne, not sinne it
selfe: so hee tooke away the sting of death, not death it selfe: the death of the body still re∣maines, but the sting therof, which alone maketh it penall, is taken away, Tollitur mors non ne sit, sed ne obsit: Christ upon the Crosse, triumphed over death and hell, and put death it selfe to death; that is, quite destroyed the nature thereof: of a curse, making it a blessing: of a losse, an advantage: of a punishment, a benefit: of a departure, an en∣trance: of the gate of hell, the portall of heaven. O blessed change of the nature of death! the sting of sin is made a soveraigne remedie against all sinne: the posterne to let out, is made the street doore to let in life: the wages of iniquitie purchaseth to the Martyrs, through Faith in Christ, a Crowne of righteousnesse.Aug de civit. Dei, l. 13. c. 4. Nisi peccassent primi parentes non morerentur peccabunt justi nisi moriantur. Tunc dictum fuit, si manda∣tum transgressi fueritis, morte moriemini; nunc dicitur, si mortem recuse∣varitis munda∣tum transgredi∣mini: mortui sunt illi quia peccarunt; non peccantisti quia moriuntur. Ib. Nunc ma∣jore et mirabili gratia salva∣toris in usus justitiae peccati paena conversa est. Our first Parents died because they sinned, wee die that wee may not sinne: it was then said, If thou transgresse the Commandement, thou shalt die: but now contra∣riwise, if thou refuse to die, thou transgressest the Commandement: Sinne delivered them over unto death, death delivereth us from all sinne. Our Pa∣rents were cast out of Paradise that they might die, wee die, that wee may be received into Pa∣radise through Christ, who hathHieron. Ep. 3. Flammea illa romphea custos paradisi et pre∣sidentes foribus Cherubini Christi restin∣cta & resorata sunt sanguine. removed the Cherubin that kept the way of the tree of life, quen∣ching the fiery blade with his blood. Thus death, which before was a curse, by Christ who was accursed for us, is become a blessing; and the dead are pronounced by the spirit,Apoc. 14.13. Blessed. When wee say that the death of the righteous
is blessed; our meaning is not, that death in it selfe is a blessing, for thence it would follow, that life in it selfe should be a curse: but we pronounce the death of the righteous blessed in respect of the circumstances, adjuncts, and consequents thereof; blessed it is, 1. In regard of the comforts that are mini∣stred to them in it. 2. In regard of the benefits they reape by it. 3. In regard of the estate they enjoy after it. The comforts which the spirit of Christ ap∣plieth to the godly to support them in their grea∣test weakenesse of body, are principally and chiefly these. 1. A good conscience whichProv. 15.15. feasteth the soule when the body is not able to take any sustenance. 2. The remembrance of all the good that by the power of Gods grace they have done in all their life, which encourageth thē cheer∣fully to take their leave of the world, as being to goe to receive aMatth. 5.12 great reward in Heaven. 3. Many speciall tokens of Gods favour which he vouchsafeth to shew them a little before death; on some he bestoweth the spirit of prophecy, on others a singular gift of prayer, on others an extraordinary mea∣sure of patience: on all an encrease of the former graces of the spirit, whose motions are quickest when their naturall motions are
slowest, or quite stopped, most sensible when the body begins to be senslesse: most lively, when they are in dying. 4. A glimpse of the glory of God and a neerer sight ofApoc. 21.10, 11. the heavenly Ierusalem de∣scending from God, whose streets are beaten gold, and foundations of the buildings, precious stones. As Moses a little before his death, dis∣covered the land of Promise upon the top of Mount Nebo: so before the soules departure out of the body, she discovereth the land of Promise as it were hard by. The more the earth goeth out of sight, the more Heaven commeth in her eye, and as it were, unawares in a moment she looseth the darke shadowes of this world, and is compassed about with the light of Heaven; shee seeth the face of God, and Christ at his right hand, shining in his humane nature, brighter then the Sunne in his strength. The consideration of the first of these bred that resolution in St. Ambrose with which he gave up the ghost,Ambros. vita per Costerium. amicis per∣suadore vos lenibus ut diu∣turniorem sibi vitam à Domi∣no impetraret praeclarissimam illam senten∣tiam & Apo∣stolico viro dig∣nam dixit, non ita inter vos vixi ut vixisse me pudeat, nec mori timeo, quia bonum Dominum ha∣bemus. I have not so lived that I am ashamed to live longer, nor feare I to die because we have a good and gratious Lord: and the like it wrought in Oecolampadius, whose last words were these: I am now going to the tribunall of Christ, and that with great confidence, by Gods grace I will make it there appeare, that I have not misled the people, but taught them the truth of God. The second, to wit, the remembrance of the
life past, in the service of the true God, movedHieron. pag. 215. Egredere, quid times e∣gredere anima mea quid dubi∣tas? Septuagin∣ta prope annis servisti Christ & jam mori times? In hac verba exhala∣vit spiritum. Hilarion the Hermite, to chide his soule as it were out of the dores of his lips; goe forth my soule, why hankerest thou about my body, what diffi∣culty makest thou about thy passe? hast thou served Christ this threescore and ten yeares, and art thou now afraid to goe to him. The effects of the third and fourth considera∣tion were those dying words of those Saints and Martyrs which deserve to live in perpetuall me∣mory, of Babylas, Returne to thy rest O my soule, for now God will wipe away all teares, and now I shall walke before him in the land of the living: of Bay∣nam, I feele no more paine in the fire, then if I were in a bed of down, it is as sweete to mee as a bed of Roses: of Glover,Fox, Acts and Monum. & Crisp. hist. of French Martyrs. He is come, he is come, meaning the com∣forter, the Holy Spirit: and of Iohn Bradford, Be of good comfort brother, for we shall have a joyfull supper with the Lord this night, if there be any way to Heaven in a fiery Charriot, this is it, and the like. Now the benefits we purchase by death are chiefly these. 1. Freedome from sinne, and our naturall cor∣ruptions, under the heavy burthen whereof, St. Paul pittifully groaneth, Rom. 7. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver mee from this body of death. Verse 24. 2. From the company of the wicked, which was such an affliction to the Psalmist, that he la∣mentably complained of it: Woe is mee, that I
am constrained to dwell with Mesech,Psal. 120 5. and to have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar. 3. From the miseries and calamities of this life which are so many and so grievous, that the wi∣sest of the Heathen judged it the best thing, in the first place not to be born, the next to die as soone as we are borne. And agreeably to this judgment of the life and death of man, they appointed contrary ceremonies to those we now use, for they brought their friends into the world with mournfull Ob∣sequies, but they carried them out of the world with joyfull Exequies, all sorts of sports and pa∣stimes, and for this their custome,Tully, Tusc. q. 1. they alleage not onely reason but religion also: for Diana be∣stowed suddaine death upon Cleobis, and Bito, and Apollo upon Agamemnon, and Tryphonius, as the greatest reward for their piety. If they so estee∣med of death that knew of no life after death, no abiding out of the body, what is it fit that wee Christians should judge thereof? who ought to make reckoning of no life but after death: no a∣biding, but out of the body: no dwelling, but in Heaven; for as the Apostle teacheth us,Heb. 13.14. ; we have here no abiding city, but we looke for one that is to come; if we looke for an abiding city or standing houses, our Saviour directeth us to Heaven,Iohn 14.2. In domo Patris mei multae mansiones sunt, in my Fa∣thers house there are many mansions, or places of aboad, there are mansions indeed:Luke 16.9. here but Inns or rather boothes, there are everlasting habitati∣ons,
where can be no earthquake to shake the foundation, nor tempest to beate upon the roofe, nor cannon to batter the walls, nor theeves to rifle the roomes, nor a cruell Land-lord to thrust us out of dores, nor false neighbours to take our house over our head: there are severall mansions, for men, for women, for virgins, for wives, for widdowes, for children, for young men, for old, for confessors, for Martyrs, for innocents, for all sorts of beleevers, of all countries, nations, and languages: in these mansions I would willingly lodge my discourse at this time, but I must remem∣ber that we are now in the house of mourning, and you expect that I should speake something of him to whom we can now speake no more. I enlarged my self on set purpose in handling the parts, and discussing the Doctrinall points in my Text, that I might keepe off as long as might be the turning of the Thesis into an Hypothesis, which is like to turn now my action into passion, tropes into sighes, and words intoHier. ad He∣lio. Stylus ipse quasi sentiens, & cera sub tristior vel ru∣bigine, vel situ obducit, quoties nitor in verba prorumper, & super tumulo ejus Epitaphii hujus flores spar∣gere toties la∣chrymi implen∣tur oculi & re∣novato dolore totus in funere∣sum. teares. The explica∣tion of this Scripture was but the making and spreading the Plaster, in which there was no paine: but the application of it to our greene wounds, cannot be without some smart. How is it possibly so worthy, so able, so noble a mem∣ber should be pluckt from Christs mysticall bo∣dy, and the fellow-members feele no paine? Be∣loved, if Learning be precious, which is the chiefe vertue of the understanding: if Vertue, the chiefe grace of the will and affections: if Grace, the per∣fection
of our immortall spirits: if our Country, the best governed: if our Church, the best refor∣med in the Christian world, be deere unto us: we cannot but be sensible of the losse of so generall a Scholler, so accomplished a Gentleman, so gra∣cious a Christian, so zealous a Patriot, so able a Champion of the Truth. When we see another golden branch rise up in his place, then wee will parallel him; till then, wee shall misse him. Hom. Il. α.. To speake nothing of his vertuous nts, his ingenuous education, his religious ordering of his family, his much improving by his industrie, the estate left him by his friends, his happy match made in heaven, before it was consummate on earth; for hee affianced his Spouse to Christ be∣fore he contracted her to himselfe: he gained up∣on her faith, before he wan her love: and by thus uniting her to himselfe by spirituall, as well as carnall bonds, he had her heart knit unto him to his last breath: and in the Kalender which hee made of all Gods blessings, which he vouchsafed to afford him in this world, hee put her as the chiefest. He no where set his foot, where he left not behind him some print of his worth, and re∣ceived also some garland of honour; being Victor in the schoole at Westminster, Collector in the Vni∣versitie, Commissioner in the Country where hee lived, and Burgesse in the Parliament. Nec deërant venti si te dare vela juvisset Sed tu littus amas.
And to higher places hee might have aspired, if hee had not above all preferments, preferred a private contemplative life, which was his heaven upon earth. If you divide his life into three parts, two of them were spent in the contemplation of celestiall Mysteries, and the study of the Contro∣versies of Religion, betweene the Romane and the reformed Churches: wherin, what progresse hee made, and how far hee out-stripped others, especially of his owne ranke, may appeare by his Via tuta; the bounds whereof, were not the pre∣cincts of this Kingdome, but rather the limits of the Christian world; for it hath not onely beene often reprinted in England, but also transported into other Countries, and translated into Latine, Dutch, and French. Yet this was but his Primi∣tiae, the whole harvest of his labours is behind, which may in time be brought into the Churches Magazin of English Writers; if the industry of such as shall gather them, be incouraged by au∣thority, whereof I conceive the better hope, be∣cause it is well knowne that hee stoode alwayes as well for the discipline as the doctrine of the Church of England, like another Athanasius, hee kept alwayes the Kings high way. .Epiph. contra. haer. neither declining to the right hand nor to the left: and as his writings, so his actions were conformable both to the lawes of God, and Canons, and Constitutions of the Church of England; and as he lived, so he died by rule. Before his last sicknesse, he set his
house in Order, that hee might wholly intend that which requireth a whole man, his preparation to death. After Gods hand was upon him by a painfull sicknesse, hee never ceased to lift up pure hands to God, even to the last gaspe: when I came to visit him, I found him not complaining of his violent fits, or terrifying paines; but con∣trariwise, lauding and praising God for visiting him in love, and chastening him in compassion. Whereas many, saith hee, in this disease of mine, are distracted, God hath given me the use of my reason and understanding: many at this time, for feare of the Infection, are deprived of the accesse of friends, whose companie I injoy to my great comfort: some in my case are no lesse trou∣bled in mind, than pained in their body, I thanke God, I have peace within; the Spirit testifying to my spirit, that I am one of his children. His disease growing upon him, when hee conceived that hee was going the way of all flesh, hee provided him∣selfe of that which the ancient Fathers fitly term, Viaticum morientium: the food, in the strength whereof we are to walke to Gods holy Mount. When the Sacrament was administred unto him, he lif∣ted up himselfe in his bed, and faine would, if he could possibly, have received it kneeling upon his knees; but finding his strength so to faile him, that by no meanes he could accomplish his desire, he brake out into these words: O Lord accept the will for the deed; I bow the knees of my heart unto thee, though I cannot of my body.
And by lifting up his eyes and hands unto Hea∣ven, and inclination of his body with an awfull feare, and trembling, he expressed no lesse reve∣rence then if Christ had beene bodily present to his eyes, who was then both spiritually and cor∣porally present to his faith. On the day of Pen∣ticost, dedicated to the Holy Spirit the Comfor∣ter, the Comforter came in a speciall manner un∣to him; for after he had made an humble con∣fession of his sinnes, and an orthodoxall professi∣on of his faith, and received absolution of the Church, kissing the hand of the Minister that gave it him, praying most fervently that he might not appeare in the presence of God, full of soares as he was and naked, but covered with Christs righteousnesse: he fell into a kinde of trance, and in a vision saw himselfe presented before God in a shining damaske robe edged with gold, covering him from the head to the foote. This he imparted to me and his dearest consort, onely adding with all, that he knew well many were apt either to sleighten, or censure the relations of such visi∣ons, but saith he, I thought fit to declare unto you what the Lord hath done for my soule: I was at the present, and ever since I have beene singu∣larly comforted by it, and more then ever before encouraged to goe to my Saviour. The night be∣fore he died, being admonished by his ancient schoolefellow, and fidus achates, to give some te∣stimony of his constancy in the reformed Reli∣gion, now at his departure, because saith he, it is
not unlikely that the Adversaries of our professi∣on, may cast some such aspersion upon you, as they did upon Beza, Reynolds, Bb. King and Bb. Andrewes, that they recanted the Protestant Reli∣gion, and were reconciled to the Roman Church before their death: he professed before him and all that were present, that if he had a 1000. soules he would pawne them all upon the truth of that Religion, which is established by law in the Church of England, and which he declared and maintained in his Via Tuta. The last words he was heard to speake to his deerest Lady, were the repeating of the words of the Apo∣stle. I have finished my course, I have kept the true faith, therefore is laid up for me a crowne of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day,2 Tim▪ 4.7.8. and not to me onely, but to them also that love his appearing. In expectation of which crowne, he continued to his last breath, fixing his eyes and lifting up his hands to Heaven (as it were) pre∣sently to receive it from God. This Crowne of righteousnesse the Lord give us all, af∣ter we have finished likewise our cour∣ses, and breathed our soules into the armes of our Redee∣mer. Cui. &c. FINIS.
