18532 S110152 99845758 176940
An Hower-glasse of Indian Newes. woodcut of ship
AN Houre Glasse of In∣dian Newes. OR A true and tragicall discourse, shewing the most lamentable miseries, and distressed Calami∣ties indured by 67 Englishmen, which were sent for a supply to the planting in Guiana in the yeare. 1605. VVho not finding the saide place, were for want of vic∣tuall, left a-shore in Saint Lucia, an Island of Caniballs, or Men-eaters in the West-Indyes, vnder the Con∣duct of Captain Sen-Iohns, of all which said number; onely a 11. are supposed to be still liuing whereof 4. are lately returnd into Eng∣land. Written by Iohn Nicholl, one of the aforesaid Company. Homo es? humani nila te alienum puta. LONDON Printed for Nathaniell Butter, and are to bee solde at his Shop neere Saint Austens Gate. 1607.
To the right Worshipfull Sir Thomas Smith of London Knight, go∣uernour of the worshipfull compa∣nie of Marchants of London, tra∣ding the East Indies. THe fortunate companie of most Wri∣ters, professe themselues (as it seemes in their Dedications) to haue such choise of Patrones, that at length there proues but one, which out of their ma∣ny reasons of choise they will make choise of. It fa∣reth not so with mee (right Worshipfull) who find reasons weak to induce me, but necessitie strong to enforce me to craue your Patronage: Vnlesse this be a reason, that from you alone I can hope for, both that countenance to warrant me, & that courteous∣nes, not to discountenance mee, that iudgement to finde, and yet that gentlenes to forgiue; being as none of those that are Intus caeci foris oculati, so neither of those that are wise at home, and fooles abroad: ac∣quainted, and delighted to bee acquainted with for∣raine matters, knowing that though they be forraine yet they be humane, & that it is nothing else, Res hu∣manas negligere: then Humanitatem ipsam, naturam{que} humanam exucre. Which if it be a reason, it is all, and yet it is such an one as is borrowed from you, brea∣theth
by you, and dyeth in your dislike. The case then standing (R. Worshipfull) that I am forced beeing a stranger, to betake my selfe to such a one, to whose knowledge and experience, a Coun∣trie is but a Cittie, and the whole world a Countrie, & therefore with whom the stranger is no stranger: I most humbly request your Wor. that it be not any way offensiue to you, which was euery way necessa∣rie to me. For bee it from anie to imagine, that I sought heereby to adde anie thing to your Ocean: But who thinkes this, thinkes not a misse, that I ho∣ped the relation of a miserable and lamentable voy∣age, would so much more moue you then manye o∣thers, by how better you apprehend such things then many others. Such therefore as it is I haue, and such as I haue, I giue, and in moste humble and hearty maner, offer to be viewed then, when you giue your serious eyes leaue to play. Thus beseeching God to send his continuall, and perpetuall bles∣sings vpon you and all yours, I hum∣bly take my leaue. Yours humble in all dutie: Iohn Nicholl.
To the Reader COurteous Reader, albeit I might be indif∣ferent how thou censure my doings here∣in, forasmuch as I haue the thousand strong of my conscience to witnesse with me, that I published this pamphlet with no worse intention then with the verie best namely to make knowne vnto the world the greatnes and good∣nes of God, miraculously shewed vnto vs: yet if it would please thee to think the best, thou shouldst adde vnto my ioy, without any detraction from thy selfe, nay by shewing thy selfe to haue bonum animum, thou shoul∣dest perswade me that thou hast bonam mentem, for bona mens, bonus animus, a good minde, a good thought. Wher∣fore let me intreate thee to be one houre in thy life so idle as to abide the running out of this Houre-glasse. Many things wee felt which heere are not to be found, by reason that the desperatenesse of our case deliuered them to neglect, and neglect to obliuion. This that is heere is the iust account of a perfect memorie, tending not to discourage any from attempting the like, but ra∣ther to encourage with the munition of prouidence, be∣cause Praemonitus, praemunitus, forewarned, well armed. Thus requesting you that my wants may bee supplied in thy gentlenesse: adding then strength to thy goodnesse, when thou meetest with my weakenesse, I bid the heartily farewell. Thine to the best of his power: Iohn Nicholl.
VIS nondum natus, vis viuere mortuus olim? Tempora temporibus iunge aliena tuis. Vis paruus magnus fieri, vinctusque solutus? Tu loca vicinis iunge remota locis. Non vita est, vitas qua vitat vita alienas: Libera mens non est sequitur quae corpus vt vmbra Pars vitae, Indorum vita remota, mea est, Quò mens it libro rapta (Nichole) tu. I. C. DEare bought, far sought, they say wil Ladies please They pleas'd, good manners will that meaner be: Feare no repulse, O newes from Indian seat! For man he is not, is not mannerly. H. S.
A True and Tragicall Discourse, shewing the most lamentable miseries, and distressed calamities, indured by 67. Eng∣lish men, which were sent for a supplie to the planting in Guiana, in the yeare 1605. TO make a long and tedious dis∣course of that which may be vtte∣red in few words, expe ce tea∣cheth, doth rather moue a loathing in the Reader, then any way pro∣cure a liking either in reader or hearer: in which respect I haue rather desired briefly to deliuer a plaine truth, which of it selfe to the wise and discreete is euer most acceptable, then with filed phrases, or eloquent termes (which indeede in mee are wanting) to adde any thing more then is most true, nei∣ther to represent, or lay open to the view of the worlde, ought more then what my selfe with my associates haue had as wofull experience, as euer (in my iudgement) had any creatures liuing vnder the Canopie of Heauen: only thus much I thinke it not impertinent to deliuer, for the better explanation of that which followeth, I make no question, but that the greater sort of people, which either haue trauailed themselues, had conuersation with tra∣uaylers, or imployed themselues to much reading,
are not ignorant that in the maine of America, in that part thereof which is vulgarly called The west India, amongst many other large Teritories & Dominions, is the great and mightie Kingdome of Guiana, scitua∣ted neare about the middle of the saide continent, or somwhat more southerly, it being neare vnder yt Equi∣noctial line, the Souther most part therof, and extending it selfe to about some 5. or 6. degrees of North Latitude, being bordered on the South-west with Perue, on the South with Amazonis, on the North with Mexico, and on the East with the Ocean Sea. The saide Countrey of Guiana was first discouered or made knowne to our English Nation, as farre as I can learne, about the yeare of our Lord 1594. at the charge and direction principally of Sir Walter Raw∣leigh: the same againe seconded by himselfe the yeare following: afterward againe by Captaine Keymish and oth, at the charges of the said Sir Walter Raw∣leigh it being reputed to bée the chiefest place for golde Mines in all the West India: but the prosecution ther∣of being left off for a time, by what occasion I know not, it so happened that in the yeare of our Lord 1602, Cap∣taine Charles Leigh made a voyage thither, for the discouerie thereof, and finding a fit place for habitation, determined to procure the planting of a Colonie there in the Riuer Wiapica, which said determination at his returne being put in practise, with the furtherance and speciall charge of the worshipfull Knight Sir Oliue Leigh, certaine men were sent thither, there to inha∣bite vnder the conduct of the aforesaid Captain Charles Leigh, who remayned there about a yeare and a halfe, where he with manie of his companie dyed. For a sup∣plie vnto which companie, was another companie sent, in the yeare 1605. at the charges of the sayde Sir Oliue Leigh, and certaine other aduenturers▪ of which companie my selfe was one, all vnder the conduct and
leading of Captaine Sen-Iohns, who being embar∣ked in the Oliue Branch of Sir Oliue Leigh, where∣of was captaine and master vnder God, captaine Catlin and Arthur Chambers. Being thus readie, doe set saile the twelfth of Aprill one thousand sixe hundred and fiue, nothing hapning worth note, till wee came as high as the North Cape, where an English Barke ouertaking vs, foure of our Gentlemen, by reason of their sickenesse were desirous to returne home againe, so that getting their passage for Lisbone, they tooke their leaue of vs, whose names were, Maister Rogers, Maister Catlin, Maister San∣ders, and another whose name I doe not now remember. So wee continued our course to the Canaries, and so to Cape Blancko in Barbarie, and from thence to the Ile of Mayo: in which time of our voyage it fell out as often it hapneth in such actions, that our companie being deuided, (as being some sea-men, and the rest land-men, who are for the most part many times of contrarie natures) there was some heart-burning and malice one against another, which rested not onely in the common sort, but rather and most chiefly in our captaines, whose haughtie mindes not brooking contradiction on either side, had like to haue growne to a daungerous dis∣tention, had it not beene appeased by the diligent per∣swasions of some other of the companie, whose plau∣sible spirites were more addicted to vnitie and peace, then any way liking of such daungerous and indirect courses, they well fore-knowing that ciuill discorde haue beene the ouerthrow of mightie kingdomes, and great common weales, and therefore well might haue béene the vtter subuersion of our so weake & slenderly go∣uerned companie. But all parties being now (as it see∣med) to the outward view quieted, we went a shore vpon the said Ile of. Mayo to take in fresh water and slt, where we found 5. Portugals, which had bin robbed by
the French, and there set a shore, where hauing stayed fiue dayes hunting of Goats, and refreshing of our men, we departed to saint Iago, where we landed the fiue Por∣tugals, in reward of which kindnesse of ours, the Inha∣bitants tooke thrée of our men, and kept them as priso∣ners while they sent seauen leagues into the Countrey to know the Gouernours pleasure, and at night sent them aboord againe, hauing taken certaine commodities from them, which they had to buy some of their fruits. From thence (hauing weyed our Anchor) with a mer∣rie gale we sailed towardes our desired place to the coun∣trey of Guiana: but missing of our expectation, here be∣gan the first scene of our ensuing miseries: for whether it was our Masters want of knowledge that we fell not with the prefixed place, or that the current which our ma∣ster alledged to be the reason, that setting verie strongly to the North-wards, put vs so farre short thereof, or whi∣ther (as of all others that is most certaine) it pleased God in that place at that time, and in such a manner, to let vs feele some part of his heauie displeasure, conceyued a∣gainst vs for our times formerly mispent: so as I say the ending of our hopes was the beginning of our mise∣ries: for plying to and againe, wandring as it were in a wildernesse of woe, betwixt hope and dispaire, the time passed away & with the time our victuals, the onely hop of our health exceedingly wasted: therevpon our allow∣ance was greatly shortned, & with the same & other occur∣rencee our mens minds very much distracted, which bred amongst vs many fearfull & daungerous mutinies. And as one miserie commeth still in the necke of another, so fa∣red it with vs: for with our want of victuals, we being neare vnto the Equinoctiall, and the Sun in that part of the Zodiacke which was neare vnto our Zenith, it was so exceeding hot, that with the vehemencie thereof many of our men fell maruellous weake, and some of them died, namely our Carpenters mate Iohn Browne, our
Cooke, and Robert Paine, and many others were is weake, that they were not able to come aboue the hat∣ches. This extremitie caused vs (though against our sto∣macks) to entreate the master to bring vs to the nearest shore he could. And so hauing beene seuenteene wéekes at sea, in stead of our hopefull expectations of attaining to a pleasant, rich and golden Counteey, and the comfortable companie of our friends and Countrey-men, there as we supposed then resident, we were brought to an Iland in the West India somewhat distant from the maine, called Santa Lucia, hauing about twelue degrees of North latitude, inhabited onely with a companie of most cruell Caniballs and man-eaters, where we had no soo∣ner anchored, but the Carebyes came in their Peria∣goes or Boats aboord vs with great store of Tobacco, Plantons, Potatoes, Pines, Sugar Canes, and diuerse other fruits, with Hens, Chickens, Turtles, & Guauas: for all which we contented and pleased them well. These Carrebyes at their first comming in our sight, did seeme most strange and vgly, by reason they are all naked, with long blacke haire hanging downe their shoulders, their bodies all painted with red, and from their eares to their eyes, they do make three strokes with red, which makes them looke like diuels or Anticke faces, wherein they take a great pride. The next morning we went a shore with all our weak men, where there was sixe or seauen houses planted by a pleasant fresh water Riuer, which Captain Sen-iohns bought for a Hatchet of an Indian Captaine called An∣thonie, who could speake a little Spanish, and he told vs he had beene a slaue to the Spaniard in the Ile of Mar∣gareta: so he and al his companie went to another towne some three myles of. Whilest our sicke men were a shore refreshig them∣selues, our Maister would haue departed, and haue left them to shift among the Carrebyes, but Captaine Sen-Iohns,
and the chiefe of our companie would not con∣sent thereto. And seeing it was in vaine all of vs for to venter home in the Shippe with that small allowance, wee were willing to come a shore, and there to liue vn∣till it should please God to send some meanes to bring vs a way: vpon that condition they should deliuer vnto vs one great peece, and euery man his Musket and wea∣pons, and halfe the munition in the ship, with all our Chests and commodities whatsoeuer, which hee would not graunt, before we had subscribed to a certaine Wri∣ting which he wrote to excuse himselfe at his returne in∣to England: so we receyued foure little Barrels of pow∣der, and ten round Bullets for the great Peece, which when wee brought a shore did much feare the Indians, for they asked vs if we brought it to kill them. But to please their humours, wee tolde them it was to kill the Spaniards, and then they came and helped vs a shore with her, and with all our Chestes, of their owne ac∣cord. Now after they had deliuered all things a shore out of the Boat, we thought it good to stay her, and to kéepe her for our owne vse, for wee did not know what neede we might haue of such a commoditie afterwarde: so wée sent the sailers aboord in an Indian Boat, onely three would not goe but would stay with vs: so we were in all left a shore threescore and seauen in the Isle of Saint Lucca. At night when we were all sitting togither at supper about a great fire, which they could well perceue from the ship when it was darke: and as it should seeme in reuenge of their Boat, before they departed they pur∣posed to let vs know they were not well pleased with the action, they shot a great peece at vs with a single Bullet, but as it pleased God it fell downe by the side of our house, and missed vs, which if it had come amongest vs we sitting so thicke, it could not haue chosen but haue
beene the death of many of vs. This made Captaine Sen-Iohns discharge our péece at them, without intent to hurt them, but fairly ouershot them: for he might haue sunke them, and would if they had shot once more: then presently they weyed Anchor and departed. The next morning Captaine Sen-Iohns went in the Boate, with fifteene more in his companie, to trade with Anthonio his father for Rone cloath, which he had saued at sea great store: but when we came there, contrarie to our expectation, we found our ship there trading with them, who had incensed the Indians sore agaynst vs, telling them that we were had people, and would take all they had from them, and would cut their throats. And as we towed alongst the shore, they discharged halfe a dozen peece of Ordenance, and a volly of small shot at vs, but there great shot ouershot vs, and light vp∣on the rockes, and scarred the Indians a shore mightily, and their small shotte light short without harming vs. Their decermination was to driue vs from our Boat, or else to haue sunke her, for their great shot came so thicke that wee were forced to leape a shore into the Woods: then they manned their Periago, and came to take our Boat away, which wee perceyuing entered her againe, and escaped all their malice: so wee returned home a∣gaine safe, and they departed toward Saint Vincent, the eighteenth or ninteenth of August, 1605. After the departure of our ship we remained in peace∣able manner amongst the Indians, dayly trading with them for all manner of victuall, as Plantons, Potatoes, Penas, Papaians, Pumpins, Gallobashoes, Pappes, Mammies, Guiauas, with diuerse other fruits, and To∣bacco aboundance, all verie pleasant to eate. Also they brought Turtles, Guanas Hens and Chickens, Wood∣cocks and Snipes, with some Pellicans. As for the Turtles, we our selues did vse euery night
by courses to send out sixe to catch them, which is easily done, by reason that euery night they vse to come a shore, and lay their egs in the sand, and by the heat of the Sun they are hatched. At their cōming out of the water they do make as broad a tract as a Cart with their sins, by which meanes wee are ledde to the place where they doe sit, and so we turne them on their backes, which being done, they can doe nothing but so lie till they bee deade. The meate of them dooth eate like vnto Veale, and I haue seene taken out of one of them to the number of sixe or seauen hundred egges, which wee doe frie with the fat or oyle of the Turtle, and also with Cassada wee did make exceeding good White-pots and Puddings, putting the Egges and Oyle into it. Also the Guana is proportioned like a Serpent, more then an ell long, with foure short feete. In eating it is like a Connie, and hath in his belly to the number of fiue and twentie or thirtie Egges. This Cassada is a roote of a tree, whose iuce is poyson: but being squeassed, the flower doth make an excellent kind of bread, and will kéepe long. The Indians did maruaile much at our manner of dressing our meate, and they would be familier, and would dine with vs verie often, but by no meanes wee could not make them eate salt: for they vse to eate all their meate seasoned with Ginnie Pepper: their women came verie seldome vnto vs, for they are verie iealous ouer them. Once or twice there came some wo∣men with them, vnto whome wee gaue shirts to couer their nakednesse, whereof they seemed proud: Their an∣cient women are verie vgly, by reason of their side breastes, which dooth lie like emptie bagges: but those which haue not giuen sucke, are well proportioned and proper. Also we had a Net, with the which wee would get at one draught as many fish of diuerse sorts, as would
serue all our companie a day. A little before our arriuall, three Spanish ships were cast away, and much of the goodes these Indians had saued with their Boats, and hid it in the Woods, they had so much Roan cloath, that all their Periagoes had sayles thereof. They also had great store of stuffe, Sirge, and Spanish woollen cloath, cloakes and appa∣rell: insomuch that if we had had a Barke of fortie tuns burthen, wee could haue loaden her home with such commodities as would haue made a sauing voyage. All which we could haue bought for hatchets, kniues, beads, fish-hookes, and thimbles, with other trifles. Thus for the space of fiue or sixe Weekes, wee went not much abroade, but cut downe the Woods about our houses euerie day, and mounted our great Peece vp∣on broade Tables, which wee our selues had sawne, least the Carrebyes should at any time assault vs. Soone after this, there came onother Captaine from Saint Vincent, called Augraumart, which was brother to Anthonio, who was offended with him for selling the houses vnto vs: for the which cause Anthonio bid vs kill him, and tolde vs hee purposed to bring twelue Periagoes loaden with Carrebyes to kill vs, but wee found this Augraumart verie kinde vnto vs, and was willing to doe, or tell vs any thing wee desired him, for he taught vs to make a Grater, which he made of small sharpe flint stones beaten into a broade boord to grate our Cassada on, whereof we made our breade, and hee tolde vs, that Anthonio would cut our throates, and therefore bid vs kill him. This made vs doubtfull which to trust to. We had certaine Articles drawne, which were to bée obserued, wherein Captaine Nicholas Sen-Iohns was Captaine: his brother Alexander Lieutenant, Miles Pet, and Philip Glascock were commaunders for the appoynting of our Watch: Iohn Rogers was our
interpreter for the Spanish tongue, and was to buy and bargaine with the Indians for all the companie, both for commodities and victuals, Maister Garret, Master Tench, Francis Brace, and my selfe, were appointed to order the domesticall matters. Carebie sig∣nifies in their language, A valiant man.All the occasions yt we made whereby the Carrebyes should fall out with vs, was that one of our companie did sell a sworde vnto Captaine Anthonio, which was con∣trarie to the Articles wee had set downe, for none was (vpon paine of seuere punishment) to sel either Sworde, Dagger, or Hedge-bill: which when we knew, Alexan∣der Sen-Iohns with a dozen more went to his house, and found him in his bed, which they call an Hamaco, with a little fire vnder him because hs was not well, and the Sword standing by him, which yong Sen-Iohns tooke and brought forth to vs. This droue him into a great rage against vs, for neuer after that would he be familiar with vs. The Carrebyes did weare for an ornament vpon the small of their naked aimes a foure-square plate, which maister Browne a Gold-finer told Captaine Sen-Iohns had three partes of it Golde, who asked the Carrebyes where they got it? who presently pointed vs to a great Mountaine on the North-west part of the Island, whose toppe we might see from the place where wee dwelt: but Anthonio saide there was none. These contrarie tales made vs suspect some villanie, and that it was but a pol∣licie to drawe some of our companie thither, whereby they might the better deale with vs: for at home they drst not attempt any thing against vs, both for feare of our great Peece, and also wee would not suffer them to bring their bowes and arrowes within our Centi∣nell. Yet our Captaine would not bee content till wee consented that hee should goe to the Mountaine, and tooke with him all sortes of commodities to bargaine with the Indians for Cloath, and he tooke old Browne
the Gold-finer, and his sonne George Browne, Iohn Ro∣gers, Maister Looking, the three sailers, whose names were, Iohn Fleming, Thomas Butler, Owen a Welch∣man, Iames Garret, & one Ioseph and Christopher, two Grocers, and one Maister Euans, with diuerse more, to the number of sixtéene. And vpon A Monday they all imbarked in the Boat taking eight dayes victuall with them, promising to re∣turn betwixt that and the next Monday, leauing his bro∣ther Miles Pet, Philip Glascock, M. Garret, M. Tench, and my selfe, to rule at home. Vpon Tuesday & Wednes∣day the Indians did not come vnto vs with victuals as they had wōt, which made vs after suspect that they were at the slaughter of our men at the Mount: & vpon Wed∣nesday, my selfe with 3. more went to Anthonios house, where we found a great number of women, but not pas∣sing halfe a score men, making great preparation of vic∣tuals: some baking of Cassada, others roasting and boy∣ling of great fishes and Turtles. I offred to buy some of them, but they refused and would not, neither would they looke of any commoditie we had, which made vs much maruell: for before that time they neuer denied vs: so we departed, & by the way we light of a narrow path where∣in we trauelled a little, and all along the way did growe aboundance of Guiaua trees, whose fruit is as big as an Apple, and verie pleasant to eate: the greene ones are wholesome for the bloodie flixe. Wee had not trauayled a Mile, but wee entered downe by a Thicket into a most pleasant Garden of Potatoes, which droue vs into greate admiration to beholde the manner of it, for it was made round like a Bower, encompassed with a greene Banke, so equally, that made vs thinke some Christians had made it for a strength to saue them from the Indians: and vppon the toppe thereof did growe a companie of the moste
tallest Trées that euer I behelde, which did naturally growe so neere one to another, and so thicke from the roote to the toppe, that wee could not perceyue the skie through them. But following the path, wee percey∣ued it to passe through a narrow cut in the banke, where wee traueyled two or three miles further, passing through many goodly Gardens, wherein was aboun∣dance of Cassada, Potatoes, Tobacco, Cotten-wool-trees, and Guiaua trees, in diuerse places as wee tra∣uayled wee did maruaile to see the huge and great trées that were there: for most of them were fiue or sixe fa∣thoms about, and fearing that wee shoulde bee be∣nighted, wee returned the same way againe, with as much greene Tobacco, Potatoes, and Cassada, as wee could carrie, which did much content our men at home: for the Indians had not brought any victuals in three dayes before. At night sixe of our men went to seeke for Tur∣tles, and founde two verie great ones, but could not bring them home. For when they had turned them on their backes, it beganne to raine, thunder, and lighten so extreamly, that they had much a doe to get home themselues, and so it continued all night, with the moste horriblest thunder-claps that euer I heard, with lightning and raine as light as day, which caused vs to awake, and after prayers to fit all night by greate Fiers, drinking of Tobacc, with extra∣ordinarie myrth amongest our selues, little fore∣seeing the daunger that befell to vs the next day. Earely the next Morning, wee went to bring home our Turtles, and there wee founde a great number of Carrebyes on the shore, and three or foure Boates by them, roasting of lande Crabbes, for what pur∣pose they were so gathered together wee know not, but least we should suspect them of any bad intent towardes
vs, they willed vs to eate with them, and brought home our Turtles to our houses. All that fore-noone wee kept good watch, for there was verie many which came both by Sea and land. and Augraumart and his father came with a great num∣ber of Indians, and brought in his hande a quarter of a Turtle, and a hundred Egges, and gaue them to young Sen-Iohns, and tolde him, that if hee would goe to his Brother Anthonius house, hee should haue greate store of victualls, and that hee should see his wife, and the more to perswade vs to goe, hee promised that wee should haue Hamacas for to sleepe in, which is the beds they vse. Their Women dooth make them of Cotten that growes naturallye on the Trees, wereof they haue a∣boundance. Wee manye times made ste vnto them for their Hamacas, because they would bee a meanes to saue vs from the Stings of curtaine. Flor called a Musketo, the which would so torment vs with their pay loued stings, and cause vs to swell as though we had the Leprosie, for they would sting through three payr of Stockings, but they were not willing till now on the suddaine that wee should haue any. And because they were so kinde to vs, wee tooke them all into our houses, and were verie merrye and pleasant with them, and gaue them Aqua vitae which they delighted much in. But Maister Tench (who had wont to bee a curi∣ous corrector of vs in our merrments) did show himselfe so extraordinarie pleasant, that hee fell a singing of Cat∣ches with the Carrebyes, and caused them in drinke ca∣rouses of Aqua vitae and water. If wee had beene determined to haue kild them, wee might haue done it at that time with small danger, wee had a hundreth and aboue of them within out hou∣ses without eyther dowe or Arrowes. And when some
of our companie, made such a motion as to put them to the Sworde (for some of vs was halfe and more iealous of them, that they had done some mischiefe to our cap∣taine, by reason one of our companie did say, that hee heard an Indian say, that the Captaine of the Eng∣lish had his hande cutte off at the Mount) but this was not regarded, but was imputed that hee had misconstrued the Carrobyes language. Maister Tench was agaynst it, saying: God woulde not bee pleased with such a bloudie Act, agaynst such harm∣lesse people, and therefore willed vs not to doe it without they gaue the first occasion, wherein hee wronged him∣selfe and vs all, in seeking to saue the liues of them, who within three houres after most cruellye mur∣thered him. Before Dinner they all departed, but Augrau∣mart and his father, who dined with vs. And pre∣sently after dinner, eighteene was chosen to goe to Anthonios house with Augraumart and his father, who had neither bowe nor arrow: onely his father had a Brasell sworde. This they did least wee shoulde suspect their trea∣cherie. But wee not fearing anie treason, because wee had beene often times well vsed there before, went on boldly, And some of our companie thought that the verie fight of our Peeces was sufficient to terrifie them, for attempting any villany against vs. And therfore did not egarde either to charge them, or to light our match. In this carelesse and secure manner wee trauay∣led through a little necke of land which runnes farre in∣to the Sea, and then wee entered vpon the sand, which was so extreame hote with the reflexion of the Sunne that wee were not able to trauaile apace, being loaden with our Peeces. But Maister Alexander had put off his Doub∣let,
and gaue his Boy his Peece, & went iesting & play∣ing arme in arme with the two Carrebyes a good space before vs, vntil wee came to a point of Land a quarter of a mile from Anthonios house, and then hee called vs to come forward, but hee beeing light and coole, did keepe a greate way before vs still. And when hee least suspected daunger, Augraumt made as though hee would imbrace him, And suddenlye clas∣ping holde with one hand on his Rapyer, and the other on his Dagger, and his Father with a great Brussell Sword, strooke him downe before we could come at him, but he recouered againe. Then came the Arrowes so thicke out of the wood, that we could not get our match in the Cocke for pulling the Arrowes out of our bodyes: so amongst vs all was but fiue or sixe peeces discharged, which when the Indians saw giue fire, they did fall flat on the ground, shouting and crying with a moste hellish noyse, na∣ming vs by our names when they hit vs. Then wee retyred backe to a poynt of land, thinking there to haue fitted our peeces, and to haue giuen them a volley of shot, But there came another Ambush on our backes, and round about vs, insomuch that wee were in∣forced to forsake our peeces, and betake vs to our swords, which did much incourage them, for when they see wee could not hurt them with our peeces, they would come so neere vs, as though they purposed to make choyce in what place to hit vs, of some they shot in the faces, others through the Shoulders, and of others, they would naile their feete and the ground together. Maister Budge and Robert Shaw ranne into the sea, and there were both drowned and kild with Arrowes, Maister Tench had a little Bucklet, with the which bee did saue himselfe a long time, but at the last an Arrowe passed through both his legges, that hee could not goe,
and stooping to pull it out, they kild him, and if anye of vs offered to runne at one or two of them, they would runne away, and of a suddaine twentie or thirtie would inclose vs, and still shoote Arrowes in them til they were downe, and then would they with a great Brassell sword beate them to death, and after would rifle them: Maister Kettleby did behaue himselfe verie gallantlye, for hee did not respect what arrowes hee receiued in his bodye, so hee could but reach one stroke at a Carrebye, but they were too nimble for vs in regard they were naked. Yet neuerthelesse, wee runne through them all, thin∣king that if wee had escaped that ambush, there had béen no more to trouble vs, but as I was a pulling Arrowes out of his bodye, to the number of twentie at the least, there came the third ambush out of the woodes from whence came an Arrowe and hit him in the Breast, which hee perceiued would bee his death, for hee could not stand but as I hold him, but I was forced to let him goe, and shift to saue my selfe. Then I ouer tooke young Sen-Iohns his bodye almost full of Arrowes, of which I pulled out a number, But what for the bloud that runne from him, and the ex∣treame heate hee was in by his running, hee was not able to ouertake the ret of our companye that was before. And still the Carrebyes did gather ground vppon vs, and the Arrowes came thicke on euerie side. Then hee willed mee to intreate them stay, and when I had ouertaken one, I caused him to stay, which hee was vnwilling to doe, for hee tolde mee his Sword would not come foorth of the Scabberd, so I tooke hold of the Hilts, and betwixt vs both pulled it out, but before wee had made an ende, these cruell and bloodye Carre∣byes had encompassed yong Sen-Iohns yet (to my griefe) I did stand and beholde his ende, who before hee fell
did make them run like so many Curres from a Lyon: for looke which way hee ran, they all fled before him: his body was so loaden with Arrowes, that he fell to the ground: and vpon one hand and knees, hee did keepe them from him with his Swoord, so much hee scorned so basely to dye at their handes. We two were then the onely markes they aymed at: for hauing rifled young Seniohus, they pursued vs very hotly, which caused vs make haste to foure of our fel∣lowes, who were entred into a narrow path, which lea∣deth through the woods, from the sandes to the Houses where wee dwelt: but there was in the path an other Ambush, which droue them backe to the sandes againe: and when they saw vs so hardly chased, they entred the path with vs againe. The one side of the path was a high Mountayne, the other went downe a low Valley. The first foure tooke vp the Mountayn, by which meanes, they were a fayre marke for them to hitte, who dropped downe one after another. All this time, neyther Harry which was M. Stokeleys man (a Marchant now in Bucklersbery) nor my selfe was shot: but as we thought desperatly to run through them in the narrowe path, there came an Arrowe and pearced quite through his head, of the which he fell sud∣denly, and I ran to lift him vp, but he was dead without speaking one word to mee at all. Then came there two Arrowes and hitte mee in the back, the one directly against my hart, the other through my shoulder blade: so (with my swoord in my hande) I ran vpon them desperatly, thinking (before I had died) to haue ben the death of some of them. And in my run∣ning, I saw Captaine Anthony, with an Arrow in his Bow drawne against me, who stood vntill I came very néere him (for he purposes to haue sped mée with that
shot) which when I sée come. I thought to put it by with my swoord, but it light on my hand, & passed thorow the handle of my sword, and nayled both together: but I cō∣tinued running at him still; and before he could nocke an∣other, I made him and all the rest turne their backs, and run into the sands againe: which oportunity when I e∣spyed, I leapt into the wood, downe to the valley, where I found a great Lake: And hearing them, with great showts and cry, which they vse in signe of tryumph and victory, pursue mee still, I leapt into the Lake, with my sword nayled to my hand, and two arrowes in my backe, and by the helpe of God swamme ouer, but with much adoo: for the further side was shallow water, but I wa∣ded in mud vp to the waste, which had almost spent me. Now when I was ouer, I conuayd my selfe into the thickest parts of ye wood, making all the haste I could, to giue my fellowes, which were at home, warning, lest the Indians should set on them vnawares: and in my going, I came into a path, and sought for a great trée, to sée, if by the ayme of the Iland, I could perceyue which way our houses stood. Then suddenly I heard a great noyse, which made me stand behind a tree, and there I saw two or three Indians goe by me, which I imagined were go∣ing to set on thē at home: but it pleased God I got home, & gaue warning before their cōming: so Miles Pet char∣ged our great Peece, and al our men were in redines for their cōming. Then presently, they all came in sight vpō the sands, whome we sent away (by shooting of our great Peece) & came no more in 3. daies: in which time, we for∣tified our selues with our Chests: And vpon Munday morning (before wee had made an end of praier) there came to the number of 13. or 14. C. Indians (both by sea and land,) & there beset vs round, making a noyse with their Hornes, and made most horrible cryes, which they no vse, the more to terryfle their enemies: and we did an∣swere
them agayne with the lyke cryes, deuyding our selues into 4 parts, according as we had made our Forts of our Chests, placing fiue in euery Forte, and thrée to the great Péece, where Miles Pett, my selfe and an∣other was. Then they shot their Arrowes among vs as thicke as hayle, and lest they should follow in vpon vs and make vse of those Arrowes agayne, we gathe∣red them all together, & made great fires with them be∣fore their faces, and many times they purposed to rush in vpon vs by multitudes, & to haue beaten vs downe with their Brazell Swoordes: But our great Peece was so mounted, that very readyly we could turne it which way we pleased, and looke which way their greatest company went, we let her flye amongst them. So perceiuing that they could not preuaile against vs, they put Cotten wooll vpon the end of their Arrowes, and put fire on them and shot at our Houses which were made on long Canes or Réedes, and suddenly tooke fire by reason of the heat of the day, & burned downe to the ground, fastning on our Chests which were our Forts, and burned all downe to the ground, the extreme heat of the flame did make our men forsake their Forts, and retyre behinde the great Péece, to the Sea-side, which incouraged the Carrabies mightily. M. William Kettleby lay close vnséene of the Indians vpon the sand, and with a long Peece hee would reach thē 12. score paces, & galled them much: otherwise, they would haue come on the backes of vs by Sea, but he shot their Boats thorow and thorow, and scard them for entring that way. Now, when al our men were fled be∣hind the great Peece, onely Philip Glascocke & Richard Garrat stood behinde the smoke, and marked where they purposed to enter, & eche of them discharged halfe a score times at them: At last, Philip Glascocke receiued an Arrowe in his head, and Richard Garrat one in his Brest, and two in his backe. And when the
Indians saw that all were fled but them two, they pur∣posed to enter through the smoake vpon vs: but in the entring, hée gaue a warning to Miles Pett to turne the Peece against the smoake: which presently we did, and let flye amongst them and droue them all backe, with most lamentable skrikes and cryes: no doubt but that shot was the death of many of them: for she was char∣ged with stones. Then they blew their great Hornes, and all retyed backe to their Boates, without shooting one Arrowe at vs. After that our house was burned and all our Chests, which before were our Fort, we fortified our selues with the remnants of the stakes, and thatch which we saued frō burning, setting it in the ground slepewise, couering it with Sand & Earth, which saued vs euer after from their Arrowes. In all these extreme dangers and imminent Cala∣mities which all this while we endured, let the Christi∣an Reader iudge in what a perplexed state we were plū∣ged, séeing still one misery to follow another, and each misery farre exceeding the former: As first, our danger at Sea to be famished: then a comfortlesse remedy a∣gainst Famishment, to be lett in a farre remote and vn∣knowne place, amongst a cruell, barbarous and inhu∣mane people, without hope of euer hauing any meanes to recouer the sight of our natiue and deare countrey and friends▪ Then the losse of our Captaine (and others) which before (in all extremity) was still some comfort vnto vs: And now (lastly) these lamentable strata∣gems of the massacre of our fellowes and friends, ther∣in séeing as in a Glasse, the vtter ruine and Butcherly murthering of our owne selues, being we made most assured accompt to drinke of the same Cuppe: But this was the least of our feares, and not the greatest of our miseries: For being now for a time rid of our bloud∣thirsty
Which departed in their Peria∣gos. enemies, our prouision of victuals being al wa∣sted, spent and spoyled, and hauing no meanes to get a∣ny more, it would haue mooued the heart of the cruellest Tirant in the world to compassion. But in the midst of all this vnendurable misery, it pleased God (contrary to our expectatiō, in some sort) to relieue vs euen by our enemyes: For when all the rest were out of sight, one Periago returned very well prouided of victual, and thrée or foure came on land, with as much as they were able to carry of Cassada, Potatos & Plantons, and cryed vnto vs to exchange with thē, first holding vp their Bowes, and after laying them on the ground againe in signe of peace: which we perceiuing, sent out three likewise to bargain without weapons, carrying Kniues, Beades and other trifles: Which being done, they departed, and we returned, giuing prayse to God (thus miraculously) for to feede vs, for wée had no meanes of our selues to get any. Then, the Nette (with the which we had wont get asmuch fish of all sorts as would suffise vs all for a day) the Indians tooke from vs. Thus for the space of 6. or 7. dayes, euery day figh∣ting for the space of thrée or foure houres, and then our victuall began to faile againe, which caused vs to hold out a Flag of truce: which the Indians perceiuing, came in peaceable maner vnto vs, Then one Francis Brace (by meane of his French tongue) made them vnder∣stand that our desire was to giue them all that wee had, if they would let vs haue a Periago to carry vs away, which one Captain Antonio willingly consented vnto, and the next day after brought her, drawing her ashore within the compasse of our Fortes, we giuing them, of Hatchets, Kniues and Beads vntyll they were conten∣ted: And to please them the more, we gaue them euery one a Shouell or a Spade, and so they departed.
And then wee went all to worke, some to make the Sayle, which wee made of very good Roane-cloath, and some to make the Mast: and euery one did labour all that he could, to bee ready against night: for Antonio told vs, that his Brother Angrauemart would come the next day from S. Vincent with twelue Perriagos, all laden with men and Arrowes: whose words we al∣way found true, for he could not dissemble. And wee concluded, rather then wee would stay and dye so miserably at the Carrabies hands, who thirsted for nothing but to eate our flesh, and drinke our blood, as they had done with many other of our fellowes, wee promised vnto the LORD (who had all this tyme fought for vs,) to betake our selues vnto his mercy, and doubted not but that hee would guide vs safely to some Christian Harbour. And vpon the xxvi. of September. 1605. at one a clocke after midnight, we embarqued all xix. in that little Vessell or Boate which the Indians had made all of one trée, shee was not so broade as a Wherry, but it was almost as long agayne: Our Roapes for our Sayle were our Garters, and our Yard, a Lance: Shée had a little Rother or Helme, but not one of our com∣pany had skyll howe to vse it, neyther had wee Com∣passe to direct vs, but sayling by the Sunne in the day, and by the Starres in the night, kéeping al∣wayes betwixt South-west and West: for wee ima∣gined, the maine Land of the West-Indies lay so. The Victuals that wee had, were not sufficïent to serue that company three dayes: for we had not aboue twentie Biskets, three Cassada Cakes, a dosen Plan∣tons, and some thirty Potatos: and of Water, some foure or fiue Gallons, & a little Barrell halfe full of Rice, which Master Garrard had giuen him to serue in the Country of Guyana, if we had gotten thyther.
And as it pleased the Lord, hee had saued it, vntill this our great necessitie for the preseruation of our liues: for all our other victuall was gone in two dayes, our water in three daies, & then Richard Garrard gaue to euery two of vs a Porindish of his Rice twice a day, which wee washed in salt water & so eate it rawt. Thus wee continued at Sea, seeking for land for the space of tenne dayes, where wee indured one great tempest, although to our great perill, looking alwayes when wee should bee swallowed vp in the huge waues, the storme continewing for the space of foure and twentie houres, both boysterous for winde and rayne (for all the Sea was in a white foome) which was vnto vs in the midst of our danger, a great comfort: for wee saued the rayne water and druncke it gladly, thanking God for that good refreshing: who likewise sent the very fowles of yt ayre to léede vs, for they being wery of their flight, would rest them on the side of our boate, so that wee tooke them and dried them in the Sunne, with a little Gun∣powder and eate them. Our boate was so neere the wa∣ter, that euery waue came ouer her reddie to sinke her, but that foure of vs did nothing but laue it out a∣gaine by courses. To speake of the misery we indured there, it is vnpossible; for I cannot expresse it. Vpon the tenth day after our comming foorth of S. Lucea, beyng the fifth of October, one Thomas Mor∣gane died, not being able to liue of that small allow∣ance. And at twelue a clocke at noone wee threwe him ouer-boord: and within an houre after, it pleased God to glad vs with a ioyfull sight of the land: then wee boisted vp our sayle, fell to rowe with all the force wee could, making to the néerest place, imagining all dan∣gers were past.
But the winde béeing calme, we were benighted be∣fore wée could come at it, and so wanting the light of the day, wee were vpon the Rockes before wee were aware: and by reason that the breach of the waue was so great and violent, we could not holde her off, but (forceably) ranne against the Rockes, and there split our Boate to the very middest, and all our men tur∣ned out, I onely holding the Helme, thinking the next Waue would heaue her ouer the Rockes, not knowing her to bée split. But the Breach was so great, that it turned mée vn∣der, putting mee in great danger to bee grated to pee∣ces with her weyght aboue mee against the great Rockes: And at the last, wee all recouered our selues, some sitting vpon great Rockes, others on the rootes of great Trées, thynking there to saue our selues tyll the morning: And I finding a long Poale which fell out of our Beate, tooke it and asked if any would ven∣ture to the shoare with mee: which Francis Brace per∣ceyuing, tooke the other-ende: So we two waded to the Land, and then the rest all followed, and some brought Perrywinckles in their handes, and broke them out of the shelles and did eate them rawe: then euery one cryed out for fresh Water. So William Pickes and my selfe went to séeke for water: but we had not gone halfe an houre, but wee came to our Fel∣lowes agayne, without finding of any Water to com∣fort vs withall. So, the place where we landed, proo∣ued to be a broken Island incompassed with the Sea, about a league from the Mayne. As soone as it was Day, wee igged pites in the ground for fresh water, but could finde none that was to bee drunke: some went to the Boate to saue such com∣modyties, as were left vndriuen away with the Sea: Others found Perrywinckles on the Rockes, which
was all the victuall wee had to eate: but our stomacks were so weake, we could not eate aboue two or thrée a day. Thus not knowing what course to take to saue our liues from famine, one Myles Pet, William Pickes, and my selfe went and haled the Boat out of the rockes to the shore, which was split to the very midst, and so far with our swords we cut off, & put in a head in the midst, and fastned it with our Daggers, Kniues, and Bodkins, stopping all the leakes with our shirtes. So fiue of our company ventered in her to the maine land, their names were Myles Pett, William Kettlebie, William Pickes, Francis Brace, and William Butcher, leauing Richard Garrard, Philip Glascocke, Iohn Cox∣ford and my selfe with the rest in this hungry and deso∣late Island. And at last it pleased God to bring them to the maine land: they haled their Boate alongst the shore, crossing many great riuers, wherin they were pur∣sued by diuers deuouring Serpents of the Sea, as the Alligortos, who are of such force, that they will pull a horse vnder water and deuour him, and will trauell more then two leagues from the water to séeke their prayes: And also that greedy Sharke, who hath thrée rankes of téeth set like a saw, and will bite off a mans thigh at one snatch. Yet God preserued them miraculously: And when they were like to giue ouer trauelling, being in despaire for euer to find any Spaniards for to succour them with foode, God pittying their estates, guided them to a place where they found a great Earthen pot full of wheat flower, which they boyled with fresh water,A pot of flower set in a Caue by some In∣dian. and satisfied their hungry appetites with thankes to God for the same. And within two dayes after, they met with thrée Spaniards, and with halfe a dozen Indians and Negros, trauelling from Carraccas to Coro, driuing horses and Mules loaden with Marchandize.
Who séeing their weakenesse for want of victual, vn∣loaded their beasts to feed on the grasse, whilest they fed our hungry men with plentie of their good cheare, shew∣ing them great courtesie, suffering them to ide, & went themselues afoote two or thrée dayes, till they came to a towne of ciuill Indians, called Tocoya, where they stay∣ed to refresh them. And there they let the Spaniards know in what mi∣serable case they left vs in a desolate Island, where wee indured the greatest misery that euer men did and liue: for wee continued fiftéene dayes, hauing no kinde of meat but Periwinckles or Whelkes, Tobacco, & Salt∣water, which did nothing at all nourish vs: yet it tooke away the desire of hunger, and saued vs from eating one another. In that fiftéene dayes fiue of our companie pined to death for hunger: Their names were Iohn Perkins, Edward Greene, Ierome Swash, Thomas Stubs, and an olde man called Iohn. Tobacco was the chiefe food I found to do me good, and did preserue my lyfe, and those which could take it downe, did kéepe strongest, but those which could not take it at all, died first. By noting one or two of our men to die, wee knewe when any of vs drewe neere our death, which was, first they would swell very bigge, and after, fall to the very bones, and then wanting natural strength in their backs to hold vp their heades, it would fall downe and droupe in there bosomes, and within twelue houres after they would die. At the 15. daies end.Francis Brace, hauing more strength then the rest, guided the three Spaniards to the Island where we were, wee little expecting it, for wee thought they had béene kilde, eyther by wild beastes or Saluages, and wee had giuen ouer looking for comfort, but euery one particu∣larly desiring God, yt himselfe might not be the last man
of dying: which conceit was worse then death it selfe vn∣to vs. But his returne did adde much comfort vnto vs in that disesse: for they brought vs victuall, which when wee had eate had almost kild vs, by reason of the weak∣nesse of our stomackes, beyng so farre spent, that wee could not disgest it, although we did eate it very spa∣ringly. The next day the Spaniards carried vs to the maine land, where wee had horses brought vs, and the goods we had, they tooke it all for the King of Spaines vse, and then they conuaied vs to Tocoya, where we which were weake remained for fiftéene daies, and those which were strong went to Coro, fiftie leagues from Tocoya. At the 15. daies end, one of the three Spaniards, whose name was Signior Carow Vallo, came for vs with hor∣ses, who shewed himselfe as carefull to vs, as if wee had béene his owne Countrymen and friends, & in 5. daies brought vs to Coro to our fellowes, where wee were brought before the Gouernour, and by a Flemming which could speake a little English, which had been pry∣soner there sixteene yeres, we were examined of the cause of our comming on that coast, who excused vs very well, for he knew, that if we confessed whither wee were deter∣mined to goe meaning Guiana, they would eyther haue put vs to death, or condemned vs to the Gallies to rowe. But e told them, that wee neuer purposed to come into the West Indies, but that we were by misfortune and tempest driuen on that coast, and told them of all the mi∣series and dangers we had indured and escaped, which droue them into great admiratiō, saying we were deuils and not men. And the Fleming told vs, the fathers of their churches said, that if we had béene good Christians, we deserued to be canonized for Saints: but in regard we were Lutherans, it was more by the deuils meanes, then by the prouidence of God wee escaped those dan∣gers.
So all the chiefe of the Towne being there, euery man was desirous to take one of vs, who did not vse vs like prysoners, but were as carefull of vs as of their owne children, not suffering vs to want any thing that was necessary for the procuring of our health. My selfe beyng extreme sicke of the Callienturo, one Captain Peroso, who married his daughter with whom I dwelt (whose name was Francisco Lopus) hauing good skill in Phisicke, came daily to my chamber, & there let mée blood, purged, and dieted me, giuing his daughter in charge not to let me want any thing, by whose cour∣teous and tender vsage, it pleased God to restore mée to my health and strength againe. There in Coro two of vs died, who was Thomas Fletcher, (hee was seruant to a silke man at the signe of the Angell in Cheapside) and one Foulke Iones a shoomaker. In Coro eleuen of vs remayned aliue, beyng all that was left of thrée score and seuen, for the space of fiue moneths, euery day going to one another when we plea∣sed, and often riding into the Countrey, where the In∣dians tooke great delight in our company: for at our com∣ming they would prouide all kind of delicious fruites, which were in most abundance in that countrey, and kil Deere, and wild Porks for vs, & would bring vs Apes, Munckyes, Parrats, and any thing that they thought wee delighted in. The Countrey there about Coro doth yeeld aboun∣dance of Suger, Hony, Ginger and Pitch: Also, they haue very good Wheat growing there, but their Bread is altogether made of Maiz, of yt which they haue great plenty: for they reape foure times a yeare. This Maiz, they do make it with the iuyce of Suger-Canes, which makes it an excellent kinde of Bread, and it will keepe long as Bisket. Also they make their drinke of this
Maiz and of Potatos, which is very strong and swéet, for the Indians will quickly be druncke therewith. Whilst wee were there, a Spanyard rode into the Countrey to a place of his (with his Brother) to make Tobacco, where he had many Indians dwelling: one of his chiefe Indians (which vsed to bee famyliar with him) took a new Hatchet (which his Master had broght with him) and asked his Master what it cost, & suddenly cloue his head therewith, which his brother perceiuing, ran for his Rapier, thinking to reuenge it: but ye Indian women had stolne it a way before, and so they kyld him also with their Bowes and Arrowes, and thrée or foure Negros which seemed to resist them: And thereupon he fled to the Mountayns, gathering a great company vnto him, pro∣mysing them, that if they would ayde him agaynst the Spanyards in Coro, he would giue them their Wiues & daughters in marriage: But before they put it in pra∣ctise, Captayn Peroso, by a polycie, tooke him feasting amongst his fellowes and women, and tooke thirty with him, and brought all to Coro, where they were to suffer death with great torments, to terrifie the rest, not to doo the lyke: And of some, they cut off their thumbs, and cut the sinewes of their two fore-fingers, whereby they wanted the benefit of shooting. Our entertainment was such, that we could not desire to part from them, to come into our owne countrey, without offending them: For there being a Frigat at Coro, redy to go for Carthagena, foure of vs made en∣treaty for passage, which was Philip Glascocke, Ri∣chard Garrard, William Pickes and my selfe, all the rest being in the Countrey vpon pleasure, some in one place and some in another, and when the Ship was redy to depart, our Signiours perswaded the Gouernour not to let vs go, without he had a Letter from the Vice-Roy,
that wee might passe in safety into Spaine, and so for England: and then he shewed them a Letter, that it was at our owne choice, whether we would go or tarry: yet because they were loath to part with vs, they willed the Fathers of their churches to tell vs, that if we would stay, wee should bee as themselues, and they would wyllingly bestow their Daughters and their goods vp∣on vs. Also they told vs, that now England & Spayn were all one in Religion, and that our Sauiour Christ came in a Vision vpon the Crosse, and appeared before our Kings Maiestie, and told him that hee was in an error, and byd hym turne, and bee as the Catholickes are, for they are good Christians: and how at the sight there∣of, three of our chiefe Byshoppes were strucke into a traunce for the space of three dayes, and after they re∣couered agayne, they preached that they should all re∣pent and become Catholickes: adding further, that the King had sent to the Pope, to send learned men into England, to teach their Doctrine aright, which we well perceyued, was onely the suggestion of their Popish Priestes, thereby to haue made vs hearken to ther Do∣ctrine: yet notwithstanding all their allurements on both sides, our desire was for our owne Coun∣trey: And so, three procured meanes for to go. But William Pickes, by meanes the Gouernour said, that foure was too many to venter in the Ship, was staide. So, about the last of Aprill, Philip Glascocke, Ri∣chard Garrard, and my selfe, tooke our leaues to depart, leauing all, with whom we dwelt, very sory: who gaue vs great store of prouision for our passage, and wept, as though they had parted from their owne brethren and Children. They were very loath to let vs go to Carthagena, for
feare we should be put into the Gallyes. And the Gouer∣nour of Coro himselfe, wrote vnto the chiefe men of Carthagena, in our commendations. As to Don Pedro de Barres, who was his sonne in Law, but it tooke small effect: for as soone as wee arriued there (which was the sixth of May, within foure dayes after, we were cōmit∣ted to Pryson for Spies by the Tenientie:The x. of May we were cō∣mitted. 1066. for the Gouer∣nour was dead, not thrée dayes before we came: yet we carried one Letter frō Coro, written by Signior Gesper Sansious, in our behalf, to Signior Antonio Cābero, who prooued a special friend to vs: for we had not bē an houre in prisō, but he came to vs & comforted vs, & bid vs not to feare, for we should not want any thing wherin he could pleasure vs: so he went to the Tenientie, & profered 3. of his Negros to set vs at lybertie: & if we made an escape, he should haue those Negros for his owne vse. The woorst of these Negros was woorth 300. Duc∣cates: but he would not, neither would he allow vs any Victualles. But this Canbero sent vs euery day at noone one very good meales meat. Also, there were thrée Englishmen, who serued as Marryners in the King of Spaynes Galliounes of Plate, who after that they were at Sea, were by a very great tempest of weather dryuen backe agayne to Carthagena, in great danger to be suncke: for she had twelue foote water within her: some of them escaped to the Hauanna, and fiue of their most richest Gallionus were in the Shoaldes betwixt Carthagena and the Ha∣uanna lost: these thrée English men did allow vs twelue pence a day, so long as wee remayned in prison. Euery Saturday, the Tenientie doth sit vpon mat∣ters concerning the Prysoners, with his Alcaldes or Iustices. This Tenientie commaunded, that we should be sent
to the Gallyes. Then one Alcalde who was alway found a fauourer of English men, his name was Sig∣nior Francisco Lopus de Moralis, called for our Exami∣nation, which when he had perused, he told him that he could not with Iustice commit vs. Who answered a∣gayne, Then let them remayne in pryson, vntil the Gal∣liouns come from Spaine for the Treasure. Then, within two Moneths after, a Deputy Gouer∣nour was chosen,Who was Pri∣soner also. vnto whome a Portyngall (who was our great friend in the pryson) framed a Petition, which was deliuered by Iohn Frengham our Countrey-man. Whose Answere was to him, that if we could procure a∣ny Spaniards to bayle vs for our foorth comming, we should be at liberty. Which graunt, Signiour Francisco Lopus and Anto∣nio Cambero had no sooner heard of, but they entred in Bond of a thousand Duccates for our foorth-comming. The cause, why Francisco Lopus did this for vs, was because Captaine Drake, when he tooke Carthagena, did saue all his fathers goods, and his life withall. And at our deliuery, the Tenientie told vs, that al∣though by order of Lawe, they could iustly haue put vs to death: Yet seing God had so myraculously saued vs, and that wee had indured so many miseries to saue our liues, and that onely we came to them for succour and re∣liefe, they were content to set vs at libertie. Then Francisco Lopus brought vs a discharge from the Gouernor to the Iayler for our deliuery out of pry∣son, and brought vs all thrée to his owne house, where was prouided for euery of vs a seuerall bedde, for the country is so hot, wee cannot lye but one in a bed. Our entertainement was great, and all our seruices in plate, with great varietie of meates, and all the most delicious
Indians fruites whatsoeuer, and yet he thought wee neuer fared well, without hee sent vs one extraordi∣nary dish or other from his owne table. Also many Gallants resorted to his house to play at Cardes, who would shewe themselues very liberall vnto vs at their winning. There wee continued in great pleasure, vntill the Galliouns were readie to goe for Spaine with the treasure. The Citty of Carthagena is a place of great force, for by Land, you can not come to it, but one way, which is strongly garded: it is (almost) encompas∣sed with the Sea: It hath foure Castels, two at the entrance of the Harbour, and one within, where Chaynes are drawne acrosse the water. The fourth is within the Citty, where their Court of guarde is kept, of 500. Souldiers: and it hath foure Churches. The day before we embarqued,Aug. 25 there came two more of our company from Coro, which was Miles Pet and Richard Farne. Francisco Lopus procured vs passage in thrée seueral Ships: Philip Glascocke, Miles Pet and Richard Farne in the Ship, called St. Bartholomew: Richard Garrard, in La Madre de Deos: my selfe in La Santa Cruse. So we were a moneth in sayling to the Hauanna, which is neere thrée hundred Leagues from Carthagena.Sep. 20. In the Hauanna, we liued al ashore with eightéene pence a day for our dyet. It is a place of great strength, for it hath I. great Castle built vpō the Rocks at ye entrance of the Har∣bour, and another within on the other side, which com∣maund all the Towne and Harbour: And the thrée within the towne, where Don Pedro de Valdes was Gouernor, which was Prisoner in the Tower 1588.
There they victualled the Flat, and watered and repayred their shippes, & because they had no victuall to serue all the Fléete, they left two ships there, the out whereof was that wherein our three men were pla∣ced, called the S. Bartholomew: the other the S. Vin∣cent. And about the tenth of October, wée departed for Spaine by the Bermouthos, and shot the Gulfe of Florida in eight dayes against the wind, and so w were nine weekes in sayling betwixt the Hauanna, and the coast of Spaine: the tempest and stormes wée had were wonderfull great, in so much that all the Fléete were dispersed, and not aboue two shippes did hold cōpany together, which put them in great feare, lest they should haue met with the Flemings, who might with thrée good ships haue taken all their trea∣sure with small adoe: for euery little Caruill did put them in feare, thinking her to be a man of warre. And within thrée dayes before we came in sight of Spaine, we ouertooke one of the company, which had béene long wanting. And the Master of the Santa Cruse, wherein I was, thinking to welcome her with a peale of Ordinance, went himself without the ports to charge a peece, and suddenly fell into the Sea, and before we could bring the ship assayes, he was drow∣ned. And vpon the fiftenth of December wée came a∣gainst the barre of Saint Lucas, but could not enter, because the winde was contrarie. Then came the Gallies out of Cales, and towed vs into Cales, where they vnloded the treasure. This made well for vs which were prysoners: for they were so busie with the Plate, that they neuer regarded vs: for when the Captaine and Souldiours were gone with it, we went ashore to Cales without controulment: And
when I thought to haue béene secure, the Captaine, with whome I came home by chance, met me in the stréete, and called me to him, and said, that I did know how that I was deliuered vnto him as prisoner, and willed me to come to him in Saint Lucas, and there he would séeke a discharge for me. And I promised him that I would come: but afterward I feared that hee would haue deliuered me to the Iustice; & so not da∣ring to trust him, I neuer came in his fight more, but sought all meanes for my passage, which I found har∣der to get, then when I was in the Indies: for our owne Coūtrimen would answer vs, that they would not in danger themselues, to take vs, without we had a discharge from the Spaniards. Whose vncomfortable speeches did much dismay vs: so we remained in Cales, in Saint Lucas, and in Siuill, without any hope of passage, one moneth and more, at the charge of Iohn Frendgeham, Willi∣am Gourdon, Ioh Dane, who was chiefe Trumpeter of the Spanish Fléete, and Iohn Painter, a Musician: And at the last, (despayring of passage) M. Garrard got passage for Sandwitch: And my selfe made moane to Master Barwicke, Master of a little Ship of Welles in Norfolke, called, The George, who at the first word, graunted mée passage. So on the second day of February, 1606. hee landed me safely at ye Downes, in Kent, giuing me two shillings to bring me to Lon∣don. FINIS.
