C5825A 807.g.5.[46] R232408 99888871 196398
A CONGRATULATORY POEM ON THE ARRIVAL Of His Sacred MAJESTY, AT The CITY of CHESTER. August the 27th. 1687. HAste haste! let the free sound of winged Fame Proclaim our joyes, and our old sorrows tame; We have no room for sadness: all our bliss, Centers in present welcom Happiness. The Dolphins peep above our sandy Barr, Mermaids cut Capers in the serene Air: Bells ring alone, the silver Trumpet sound, Swans sing, and Moles appear above the Ground. Here Royal James newes his imperial Eye, As full of Love, as awfull Majesty. Eccho's of praise with fragrant Murmurs ring Around our City to our Glorious King; A King, whose Gracious deeds have ever shown, There is no Royal Vertue like his own. Even they, who are not willing to obey, Blush, unto him Observance not to pay: Decrepid Age his Crutches throwes aside, Matron's look spruce as a new Married Bride. Boy's gallop, all our Girls with nimble feet, And speaking Eyes, contend their Prince to meet. Even they, who on our Altars Live, compose Te Deum's new, and seem well pleas'd as those: Dull sighs are banisht, fears disperst, and wit, Stands all a Tipto for this Triumph fit.
Our Conduits run fresh wine, and by their store, So Fillip nature, we can weep no more: Tis Criminal to Greet: now Heaven has Lent Of Happiness the solid Complement. From our indulgent Caesar, who well skills With Mercy to convince, and please the wills, Of all who know the benefit of Rest: nothing can better be then what is best. And to conform our Easiness the more, Loyal and brave Tyrconnel is come o'er, Dear to his Prince, and naturally fit, For Royal Trust; this was a Lucky hit: With him the Irish Nobles hopefull are, Their King may Dublin see and Molingarr. Lets drink now freed from persecuting pain, And wish his Royal heart Auspicious Reign: And long, who (of all Kings) appears to be The instrument of Sacred Liberty, And him, who is not pleasd with present Grace, We cannot Judge to be of Loyal Race. Chester shall build a Monument of Brass, Which may Endure till Sun and Moon shall pass Away, and Glorious James his soul shall be, Above the tenth sphere with Eternity: And future Ages gradually shall know, From what spring, Brittains happiness did flow: Mean time, this gratulation may dispence, Our Sacrifice for Loyalty and sense.
