H2586b C.112.f.9[59] R231587 R231398 R231587 99888648 195863
Honest Invitations, By the Ʋnborn DOCTOR, Seventh SON of the Seventh SON; WHO by God's Blessings cures all curable Diseases in the Bodies of Men, Women and Children, having had 27 Years Travels and Practice in Physick, and all Manual Operations, thorough several Parts and Rindoms, so that he doth know the Nature and Quality of all or most Regions and Climates, which of them is more hotter, drier, moister, and colder than other; and so knowing as to find the true Constitution of any Patient's Body, and what Humour when sick do, or may most abound, whether Choller, Flegm, Blood, or Melancholly; and in what degree of Heat, Driness, Moistness, or Coldness, they may be affected; so by the knowledge of this, he can give a Medicine which may reduce the Patients into their former state of Health, and not like some other Doctors, which give one and the same Medicine to all Patients that shall be afflicted with one and the same Distemper, not at all considering the true Constitution of the Patient's Body; that is the reason so many Doctors fail in curing their Patients, and the Distempers do bring them to the Grave; when a Doctor which is truly knowing in what I have before said, may through God's blessing restore them to their perfect Health again; so no more of this, but a word to the Wife, is enough, as Soloman said; — but, Principiis obsta sero Medicine paratur,— Cum mala per longas as invaluere moras.— Resist Beginnings, late is Physick us'd, When the Disease delay'd is deep ininfus'd. NOW follow a Catalogue of what he'll do, Be your Distemper old or new. First, the French-Pox you may be sure, He with speed will soundly cure. And as for the Gout, if any can, He'll ease or cure with any man; But I confess unto you all, It is che Master of Physician-Hall. And as for the Stone, He never yet fai'd in none; If in the Bladder it will not dissolve, he safely cuts it out, And cure the Patient, you need not doubt. And as for the Dropsy, Scurvy, which often do combind, A Cure for them both from him, you not doubt to find; For the Scurvy by sweetning of the Blood will decease, And the Dropsy by Sweat and Ʋrine will decrease; But if of this it will not admit, He'll Tap for the same, Do not forget. Now as for the Palsy, Convulsions, Agues, Fevers, and all aching Pains, He'll cure in Limbs, Nerves, Joints and Veins. Now Chollick Pains, and Griping in the Guts, Comes from Wind and Choler, flowing o're-much; Yet a Cure from him, you need not doubt to find, For Chollick, Gripes, and the Wind. Now if Vertigo, Giddiness, Melancholly, Megrims, Phreusie Fits, Or Apoplex, Do your Head oppose, With reddy Face, or scabby Nose, A cure from him may be had for them all, You need not doubt or sear at all. And as for Wounds, Tumors, swelling Ulcers, Cancers, and old Running sores In the Year he cures many Scores. Now to all Women, he is a Friend, If they be sick or ill, he doth them mend; For if Obstructions do them annoy, He'll open them and clear the Way So Barrenness he do's prevent To many Patients great Content. And as for Children (if curable) of what e're they Ail, To cure them, he'll never fail. And as for those that Deaf may be, Or lost their sight, and cannot see, He by Art doth them restore, Be they rich, or be they poor; For many one of each degree, that Deaf and Blind have been, He hath brought to hear and see agen; So 'tis for that very thing, His Fame in England now do ring. Now whose Bones are broke, or out of Joint, He reduceth them with a slight. So all you that of a Cure do stand in need, Make haste, and go to him with speed; For be you poor, sick, lame, or blind, He'll on his Word to you be kind. So to conclude, and make and End, I to you this Paper send, That you may see God's Gift is great to me, By which I cause the Lame to go, and the Blind to see. Now for the Conveniency of my Patients of the West Parts of London. I am to be spoken with every Monday and Thurs∣day, from Nine in the Morning, till Eight at Night, new Door to the Pump in Demark Court, at the Lower-End of Exeter-street, near the Strand or Exchange. And Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, at my own House in Golden-Lane, at the Golden-Key, near Old-street, where any Person or Persons may be accommodated with a Lodging or Lodgings convenient, if their Distempers shall require the constant Attendance of the Doctor, which if Curable, both Lodging and Cure my b had of him at reasonable Rates. With Allowance.
