11728 99838818 3207
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Mr. Edmund Geninges PRIEST, Crowned with Martyrdome at London, the 10. day of Nouember, in the yeare M. D.XCI. Pretiosa in conspectu Dnī, Mors Sanctorum eius Psal. 115. AT S. OMERS by Charles Boscard.
S. Cyprianus Epist. 9. in fine. O beatam Ecclesiam nostram, quam temporibus no∣stris gloriosus Martyrum sanguis illustrat! E∣rat antea in operibus Fratrum candida; nunc facta est in Martyrum cruore purpurea.Happy is our Church, which the glorious bloud of Martyrs doth in these our dayes illustrate! It was made white before in the workes of our Brethren; but now is become purple in the bloud of Martyrs.
THE AVTHOR TO HIS BOOKE. GO mournfull Muse the trumpet of my cares, Sound out aloud this dolefull accident; Tell all the world how ill the matter fares, T'is hard if none will help thee to lament. A Tygers hart such sorrowes will deplore, His teares I wish that neuer wept before. VVhen as the noble Romans made returne From forrayne conquests, and great victoryes; They on theyr Altars sacrifice did burne, Their famous actes therby to memorize. And thus they left vnto posterity, The due reward of worthy chiualry. Shall then the sufferings of our Champion sleepe, His glorious combats and victorious stryfe? No, no (deare Muse) thy pen thou now must steepe, In bloudy accents of a martyrs lyfe. A lyfe indeed, for when his dayes had end, Eternity of lyfe did death amend.
THE BOOKE TO HIS READER. AFfected wordes, or Courtly complement, Do not expect, who euer reades this story; Vertu's my ground, it needs no ornament, And to deceyue you so, I should be sory. If any such there be, post to King a Book so called. Liere, He hath applause, seeke not contentment heere. Poets may paynt, and diuersely adorne Theyr feygned passions, and Chymera's strange; Teaching theyr pennes to weepe as one forlorne, And vp and downe in barren deserts range. But if true griefe do once possesse theyr mind, They feele theyr combats in another kind. My authour's playne, nor is his griefe a fiction, The world can witnesse what himselfe doth proue; Read that ensues, t'is writ for thy direction, And ease thy passion, as desert shall mooue. It it be pen'd according to thy fancy, Then learne to suffer by his constancy.
To the very R. my euer Deare, and VVor∣thy Friend, Maister I. G. P. WORTHY SYR, This ensuing Relatiō, which of late I receaued frō you in writtē hand, I now returne againe in Print by way of dedication. My reasons (for so vnusual a thing) are two. First, for that I iudge your selfe (before all others only Worthy to pa∣tronize the same; it being the subiect of him, in whome (before all others) you euer had, and haue still most right & interest. Secondly, that as in his vertuous life tyme, you were neerly conioyned vnto him both in Affection & Bloud: so now after his glorious death, his me∣mory might be liuely represēted vnto you both in Hart & Mynd. The which I haue heere en∣deauoured to expresse to my best power. Turne then ouer the leafe, & behould that mirrour, wherein you most delight. And so I rest, Yours euer most assured I. W . P.
Edmundi speciem spectat quicumque Geningi, Robora, virtutem, spectet et ille fidem. IpsVM ter DVrae fera LeX, fera neXVe bearVnt, Ter{que} cruenta dies dena Decembris erat. Num{que} tenet raptum dum cor è corpore lictor, Gregorij è caelis numina lingua petit Huic dens ex proprio vix nato nascitur ore, Roboris hoc signum pro{que} fide{que} Deo. Mart baf.
THE PREFACE. SACRAMENTVM REGIS caelare bonum est:Iob. 12 opera autem Dei reuelare, & cōfiteri hono∣rificū est. It is a good thing (saith the holy Scripture) to cōceale the se∣cret of a King: but it is most honourable to reueale and cōfesse the workes of God. Like as this sētence (Courte∣ous Reader) is verifyed, touching all the diuine works of Almighty God himselfe in generall: so the truth of it is most apparent, concerning his admirable workes in iust men and Saynts in particuler. The reason of this is manifest, because the relation of such wor∣kes doth not only tend highly to the honour of God, who by this meanes is shewed to be admira∣ble and prayse-worthy in his Saints;Psal. 67 but also to the glory of the Saintes themselues, and of Gods militant Church on earth, of which, whiles they liued, they were liuely members. Hence it hath bene euer a laudable custome of liuing Christians to report and make knowne to the world, the noble actes of Gods Saints departed cut
of this vale of miseryes. But is this the onely good, that ariseth of such endeavours? No, for the historyes of the Liues of Saints doe confirme our fayth, stirre vs vp to imitate them, and haue sundry other most profitable effects. And although these motiues may suffice to perswade any Chri∣stian to penne, and publish the famous actes of holy Martyrs: yet not onely these, but others also mooue me to vndertake this labour, touching the life and death of Edmund Geninges Priest, who amongst many others, in defence of Christs Ho∣ly and Apostolique Church, not many yeares since hath in this our Iland most gloriously shed his inno∣cent bloud, and lost his temporall life, to gayne eternall. Of which motiues, one is my owne exact knowledg of many particulers,Motiues that in∣duced the Au∣thor to wryte this dis∣course. concerning this Blessed man, wherof others, better able to performe this matter then my selfe, perhaps are ignorant: which parti∣culers being memorable, would peraduenture therby be buryed in perpetual obliuion, if I should not de∣liuer them thus in writing to posterity. Another motiue is, my particuler loue, and deserued affection to the party of whom I am to treat. The third is, the perswasion and intreaty of some speciall friends,
whose requests in such a matter I cannot well ei∣ther neglect or withstand. Finally some secret mo∣tiues haue often assaulted my mind, and inuited me to this enterprize, which in mature consideration seeme to me to haue proceeded from God himselfe, who would not haue the memory of his Saints so long obscured & forgotten. These reasons as they vrged me forward, so o∣thers also contrariwise hitherto kept me backe,Why this Booke was not publis∣hed be∣fore this day. & disswaded me from such proceedinges. First a feare or suspition of being accounted ouer partiall, by reason I haue bene so much linked vnto him in friend∣shippe and fauour, for which cause my Relation perhaps vnto some, might seeme in part faygned through affection, and consequently of doubtful truth. Secondly my owne insufficiency and want of experi∣ence in penning such a worthy discourse as this de∣serueth. These two conceits haue hitherto kept me backe from publishing of this intention. But now the former motiues are demeed by me more forcible, and weygh downe these opposit obiections, especially seing that both these letts & obstacles in the sight of an indifferent Reader, may after a sort be eyther much weakened, or altogeather remooued. The one by a protestation of truth and sincerity. The other
by another meane of like quality. First therfore the censure of Salomon is not vn∣knowne to me, who auoweth, that, Hee who spea∣keth lyes shall not escape vnpunished, but shall perish.Prou. 19 cap. 6. Sap. 1 That, God hates a lying tongue. &, That a mouth which lyeth killeth the soule. Vnto whose sentence that of the Psalmist is confor∣mable, telling vs, that our Lord will destroy all those that speake lyes.Psalm. 5 Ioan. 8. Nay our Sauiour him∣selfe affirmeth, the Diuell to be a lyer, and the father of lyes. These thinges (I say) I knowe. VVhat then will it profit me to seeke to honour a Martyr, by faygning and forging a lye? Doth the glory of Gods Saints need any such foule and dis∣honest helpes? No surely. But I will say, as holy Iob sayd:Iob. 12. Numquid Deus indiget nostro menda∣cio, vt pro illo loquamur dolos? Therfore to cleare my selfe from this suspition, I protest, that I will make mention of no one thing, which I haue not eyther knowne to be true my selfe, or heard from his mouth whose life and mar∣tyrdome I write, or haue not receyued as true, by relation from very honest, vertuous, and sufficient persons, whose tender and Catholike consciences (as may iustly be thought) could not beare the burthen
of vttering such vntruthes. Now touching mine owne insufficiency, I hope that the best minded Readers, whom principally I desire to profit and pleasure, will not so much exact, or expect at my handes (discoursing of such a mat∣ter) Eloquence and Rhetoricall figures, as truth and the playne deliuery of thinges, tending to Gods glory, and theyr owne edification. And thus hauing deliuered vnto thee (gentle Reader) the motiues of my writing, and the drift of mine in∣tent, humbly beseeching God to assist me with the ayde and direction of his holy spirit, cra∣uing both thy patience and pardon for such faults as shall escape me eyther in wordes or style, I will enter vpon my forsayd intended Rela∣tion.
Nuntia Christicolis venturae cladis, inermes Aethere ab armatis nocte perire videt. M. b. f A BRIEFE RELATION OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF M. EDMVND GENINGES, ALIAS Ironmonger Priest & Martyr, who suffered in Grayes-Inne fields the 10. of December in the yeare of our Lord 1591. & 34. of the raygne of Q. Elizabeth. OF HIS BIRTH, CHILD∣hood, and Education. CHAP. I. ACCORDING to the laudable, and euer-vsed custome, practised by the Wri∣ters of Sayntes liues, in all ages throughout the Christian World, who in recounting theyr memorable actes
and deedes, do commonly vse to lay o∣pen, as theyr first ground-worke, theyr of∣spring, birth, and education, to the end, that as well the secret and hidden decrees of God Almighty (apud quem nulla est acceptio persona∣rum, with whom there is no acception of persons) might be made manifest: as also to conuince the blinde errours of humane rash iudgments, whose censures are common∣ly according to the outward apparence; and euery thinge that is vnlikely, by them is dee∣med impossible,His pa∣rents their na¦mes concealed for spe∣ciall rea∣sons. quia vana sunt iudicia homi∣num, because the iudgments of men are vayne. I had thought to haue declared at large the birth, and education of this our thrice happy Martyr, leauing the world to iudge of his miraculous alteration; but for diuers respects, perswasion forceth me to silence at this time. And behold in limine, at the very first, I will not say a miracle, yet at least a wonder; for scarce had Nature cleansed his sylly corps from such vncleanes as it brought à maternis visceribus, from his mothers bow∣ells, but presently within an houre or two appeared a signe of the magnanimity and
great courage which he was afterward to set forth to the view of the whole world. And this it was. The Midwyfe and other women hauing accomplyshed euery thing belonging to theyr office in the birth of the infant; the Nurse sate her downe by the fire, to giue the child his first food; and directing her dugge into his mouth, he presently bitt the same. At which vnexpected payne, the sim∣ple woman sent forth loud scrikes and cryes, which she no sooner had done, but the child bitt her agayne. Which vnwonted acci∣dent so bereft the Nurse of all patience, that she was ready to haue done the child some mischiefe had not the women then accom∣panying his mother ranne to succour him;He was borne with a tooth in his head. who inquiring the cause, they perceaued the lambe to haue played the lyon, and sear∣ching his mouth they found him to haue a very faire white tooth in the forepart ther∣of. Which strange spectacle worthily put them all into admiration: and after a day or two, when his weake mother had some∣what recouered strength, they related vnto
her the whole matter which had happened, who what with griefe and wonder was so per∣plexed, as being not able to conteyne her∣selfe within the limits of temperate mother∣hood, she brake forth into deepe passions. At which time it chanced that a venera∣ble old man, a Doctour of Diuinity lodged in her house, a Catholike (as I my selfe haue heard her say) who hearing and seeing what had happened, and grieuing for her im∣patience came in to visit her, or rather to comfort and content her. The Doctour was no sooner entred the chamber, but she be∣gan to relate the whole discourse,A pro∣pheticall speach foreshe∣wing his end. as if he had knowne nothing therof. Which done, the graue Doctour began to vse many spi∣rituall and comfortable wordes, and in the end vttered (if I may so terme it) these pro∣pheticall speaches. Be of good cheere (sayd he) your Sonne is, and shall be very well: and concerning his tooth, assure your selfe it doth foretell, that he shall trauayle further, then the Queene hath any land, & at the length retourne agayne to the vnspeakeable ioy and comfort of all that loue him.
These wordes of the Doctour were often rehearsed in the hearing of many, long be∣fore his going ouer the seas, by his mother: the effect of which saying I leaue to the in∣different Reader to consider, whether it be not altogeather accomplished, and whether his glorious Martyrdome, and great courage in the same, foreshewed by his tooth, was not a cōfort to all that loued him or fauoured the Catholike cause. But let vs returne to our Infant, who vntill he was two yeares old had the same tooth in his head, but then he lost it, and it vanished away without payne, trouble, or any aduertisement. With no lesse admiration may I report vnto you his admirable ripenes and grauity euen in his infancy,His grauity in his child¦hood. who was neuer deligh∣ted with childish playes, or any thing that might seeme toyish: no, he would neuer be inticed to play at any time with like aged children, but loued greatly to behold the heauens, and therfore he vsually went forth in the euening to delight himselfe with the sight of the skies bedecked with starres. And on a tyme in these his tender yeares going
forth at night according to his custome, this strāge spectacle appeared to him in the ayre. He saw, as it were, armed men with weapons kil∣ling and murthering others that were disar∣med, and altogeather destitute of like furni∣ture, and great store of bloud running eue∣ry where about them. This strange sight put the child into a great feare,A vision fore∣telling our Co∣untryes persecu∣tion. which caused him to runne in hastily to tell his mother, being then a Wid∣dow, what he had seene, and she presently went forth with three or foure of her neigh∣bours, who that night had supped with her, and they were all eye-witnesses of the same spectacle. Thus much I my selfe haue heard them report, who also affirmed, that my self was then present, but being very yong, I cannot remember it. This happened in the beginning of our chiefest persecution, not long before the glorious death of B. Father Campian, and the rest, about the yeare 1581.
Seruit hero, duce hero, Christi fit seruus Vter{que}, Fidus pro{que} hero agit maxima, pro{que} Deo.
OF HIS CONVERSION to the Catholike fayth. CHAP. II. NOW GROWING further in yeares, fre∣quenting the Shooles vntill he was 13. yea∣res of age, in which processe of time he at∣tayned to so great vertue of obedience towards his mother, of modest behauiour towards all, of reuerence towards his elders & betters,His ver∣tuous e∣ducatiō. and profited so much in learning, that he was not onely worthily admi∣red & beloued of many, but especially of his Schoolmaister aboue others, who had greatest tryall of him, who now began to affect him so much, and to conceaue such an opinion
of him, as he would often vse S. Paules wor∣des vnto him, Gratia Dei es id quod es, & gratia eius in te vacua non est. Through the grace of God thou art that which thou art, and his grace in thee is not void. Now I cannot heere but much admire the prouidence of Almighty God, who by his secret and vnexpected meanes bringeth euer that to passe which he hath preordayned. This youth during all this time, was no member of the Catholike Church, but frequented the Protestants Conuenticles, with the rest of his friendes. How then was he drawne to the true fayth and religion? Oh God, that ordereth all thinges sweetly, dis∣posed this accordingly: for it happened that a Gentleman comming to the place where he was taught, and lodging at his Scoole∣maisters fathers house,How he became  to Catho∣like Gen¦tlemen who kept an Inne in the same Citty, and by chance, or as God would haue it, meeting the Schoolmayster there at supper, after other ordinary communication, inquired of him, whether it were not possible to get in that Citty a handsome youth to ride with him as his page, whom (quoth he)
I will mantaine like a gentleman, if he haue learning, nourture, and behauiour beseeming such a person. To which the Schoolmaister made answere: Such a youth there is heere, Qui virtutem in vultu gerit, who carryeth ver∣tue in his very countenance: but (sayth he) he is the child of a widdow, who I much feare will not easily be perswaded to depart from him. Whereupon the Gentleman much desiring to haue a sight of the youth, obtayned that he should be sent for to his lodging, at whose comming he found the Scoolemaisters wordes most true,His lea∣uing of his Fri∣ends. and therfore would not cease his suite vntill he had obtayned his mothers consent, which by long intreaty and large promisses, and an assured speedy retur∣ne (the Iunekeeper and Schoolmaister being his suretyes) at length he enioyed. And so this our yong man being aged about 16. ye∣ares, vpon a sodayne willingly left both mo∣ther, friends, and Country, and with all alacrity put himselfe into the gouerment of a maister, that was vnto him a meere stranger. But heere I must aduertise my
Courteous Reader, that this good Gentleman was a Catholike, and very much persecuted for his religion in his temporall fortunes,M Rich. Sher∣wood. and therfore made seldome any long aboad in one place, for the better preseruation of his liuing. The same man afterwards went beyond the seas, and was made Priest, so that the man became fellow and brother to his mayster, as shall be related hereafter. This Gentleman at the first had a watchfull eye ouer his new seruant in all his actions, be∣cause he knew all his friendes to be earnest Protestants, but in short time he found him so trusty, so secret,Hi fi∣delity to his mai∣ster. and so diligent in all his busines and affayres, that he began to deale with him touching religion for the saluation of his soule: and perceyuing him both tra∣ctable, capable, and willing to heare, he so far instructed him, that at length the youth blushing at his owne ignorance, earnestly desi∣red to be reconciled, and made a member of the Catholike Church, from which he promised he would neuer swarue, Deo adiuuan∣te, with Gods assistance. Which pious re∣quest was not long denied him to his excee∣ding
comfort and consolation. Behold heere his first entrance into the way towards heauen, his first stepp to his glori∣ous martyrdome,His first step to∣wards heauen. whose deuout beginning made him gratious both to God and man. For as before he was diligent in all his mai∣sters affayres; so now he was most fortunate in what he tooke in hand, which caused him to be loued of euery one, with whom he con∣uersed. I cannot heere let passe one thing amongst many which this our pious yong Man did in the seruice of his foresayd Mayster, which I relate the rather, because the Gentle∣man himselfe, being a Priest in Bruxells of Flanders, told it afterward vnto me; and this it was. The foresaid Gentleman hauing dealt in matters of great importance with many Re∣cusants of our Countrey, it so fell out, that one of them (whom for many respects I for∣beare to name) was taken & committed close prisoner in London; and because waighty mat∣ters had passed betwixt the prisoner and the foresayd Gentleman touching landes, and other affayres, and therby was like to en∣sue
some domage extraordinary to the Gen∣tleman,His Mai∣sters con¦fidence in him. if some meanes were not wrought to aduertise the prisoner how to answere to those accusations which would be layd a∣gainst him; and hauing by himselfe sought all the meanes that he could, to haue accesse to the said prisoner, & perceiuing no hope therof without eminent danger, desisted, determining at last to send this his trusty seruant, confi∣ding more to his approued wit & lucky successe in all his actions, then to any probability of accomplishing the same. And (thus resolued) he sent Edmund who was not yet 17. yeares of age, to effect that enterprize which him∣selfe could not performe; and this he only im∣posed vpon him, not directing him how it was possible to be atcheiued. The youth hauing his charge, went with all readines, committing his cause to God, Quia non erit impossibile apud Deum omne ver∣bum, for that nothing is impossible to God.His hap∣py suc∣cesse in his Mai∣sters bu∣sinesse. Determining therfore to do (as a trusty ser∣uant) what did lye in him, and thinking on no other meanes, he tooke vp his lodging neere to the prison, hoping in time to get ac∣quayntance
with the keeper or his man, and so to bring to passe his intended purpose. Neyther was his hope frustrate, for within few dayes he so ordered the matter, as he fell into great familiarity with the said keepers man, who (as God would haue it) had the charge of the forsaid close prisoner: and to be briefe, in short time he dealt so iudiciously in his busines, that he did not only procure to speake with the said prisoner, but also to haue accesse vnto him three or foure times with paper and incke, to write his mind; and in the end concluded all thinges so effectually, as if his mayster had beene present, which was no small meruayle to all those that were in daunger, or priuy to the same.
Patria' deseritur tellus regit alter in artes Procliuem retrahit corpora languor edens▪
OF HIS GOING BEYOND the seas, and of his behauiour there. CHAP. III. THIS OVR IN∣genuous youth, hauing acquitted his mayster & others of much trouble and daunger imminent by his fortunate dispatch with the close prisoner, his maister hauing resolued to forsake the Realme, and to retire himself, and liue within the compasse of a religious life,His Mai¦sters going beyond seas. determined to place his man with some one of his ac∣quayntance, least perhaps he should returne not without some daunger of his soule to his owne friends who were Protestants. This
his purpose he disclosed vnto his man Ed∣mund, with good counsayle and perswasion to remayne firme in his fayth and religion. But when our youth vnderstood his Mai∣sters resolution, he cryed out with like wor∣des to those of S. Laurence, Quò vadit Magi∣ster sine seruo? quò Pater sine Filio? Whither go∣eth my maister without his man?In vita Sancti Laurent Whither goeth my father without his sonne? And with teares distilling from his eyes he humbly in∣treated he might go togeather with him; Say∣ing as it were with S. Peter; Domine,Luc. 22. tecum pa∣ratus sum, & in carcerem, & in mortem ire: Mayster, I am ready to go with you any whi∣ther, to prison, yea to death. But the good Gentleman forecasting his future ability,His gri∣efe that he must forsake his Mai∣ster as also to try his spirit yet a little further, made him answere, that it was impossible. To which our Edmund replyed. Alas! and is it impossible? Shall my natiue soyle restrayne freewill? or home-made lawes alter deuout resolutions? Am I not yong? Can I not stu∣dy? May I not in time get what you haue gotten? learning for a scholler? yea vertue for a Priest perhaps, and so at length obtayne
that, for which you are now ready? Direct me the way, I beseech you, and let me (if you please) be your precursor. Tell me what I shal do, or whither I must go, and for the rest, God, who knowes my desire, will pro∣uide and supply the want. Can it be possible that he that clotheth the lyllies in the field, and feedeth the foules of the ayre, will for∣sake him that forsaketh all to fulfill his diuine precept. Seeke first the Kingdome of God, and his iustice,Matt. 6. and all other thinges shall be giuen vn∣to you? Finally he ended (to the admiration of his mayster) recyting the wordes of our Sauiour: Qui reliquerit domum, vel fratres, aut sorores, aut patrem, aut matrem &c. propter me, centuplum accipiet,Matt. 19 Luc. 18. & vitam aeternam possidebit: Whosoeuer shall forsake house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother &c. for my sake, shall receyue a hundreth fold, and pos∣sesse life euerlasting. By these motions repeated with great fer∣uour of spirit, his Mayster well perceyued God Almightyes calling in him, and ther∣fore willingly condescended to let him take his aduenture. And so procuring him com∣mendations
to the English Seminary at Rhe∣mes in France, and furnishing him with mo∣ney sufficient for such a iourney,His pas∣sing ouer the seas. he dismissed him to shift for himself, his maister being not able to warrant his owne passage. And thus in all loue and affection, the maister and man parted. At which time he was little aboue 17. yeares of age, and presently without the knowledge of his other friendes, he went to Grauesend, and ther he vsed such diligence (God Almighty withall concurring) that he passed the seas, and safely arriued at his intended port, from whence he trauayled to Rhemes, being the shelter of all his comfort; so forcible was the hand of God. And there he found that Right Worthy President D. Allen (afterward Car∣dinall) ready to intertayne him with all fa∣therly affection. No sooner was he receyued into the Col∣ledge, but with all diligence and alacrity,His ver∣tuous conuer∣sation at Rhemes. he applyed his studyes, mixing with his se∣rious thoughts great desires and endeauours to obtayne vertue, and religious deuotion. Neyther laboured he in vayne, for in short time he so much profited, that as of many
he was affected for his amiable and out∣ward behauiour; so was he for his true zeale, and inward vertues, of most intirely beloued and admired, but of none misliked. It were too long to shew in particuler his perfect o∣bedience and resignation of himself to the will of his Superiours, his humility annexed with his exceeding patience, as I my selfe haue heard his sayd Superiours make report of him; one amongst others by occasion tray∣ting of him in writing, gaue this Censure. Edmundus Geninges erat prouidus ad consulen∣dum,His prai¦ses writ¦ten by his Supe¦riours humilis ad obediendum: erat in Christo deuo∣tus, in fide firmus, in bonis operibus promptus, in sermone verissimus, in bonitate conspiouus, & in charitate praeclarus: Vexabatur frequenter, tolera∣bat patienter: Erat in eo in cunctis operibus dis∣cretio, & imitabilis erga omnes dilectio. Edmund Geninges was prouident and wise to giue or aske counsell, humble to obey: he was deuout to Christ, in fayth firme, prompt in good workes, most true in his worde, in goodnesse conspicuous, and in charity ex∣cellent: he was often vexed and sicke, he suf∣fered all patiently; there was euer in him, in
all his actions discretion, and towards all sorts of people loue, worthy of Imitation. He was indeed of a very weake constitu∣tion of body, and not able therby to endure any great hardnes, by meanes wherof at the first, by taking some extraordinary paynes, partly in his study, and partly in his spirituall exercises, he fell into great sicknes, for which visitation he was much pittyed,His sic∣knes at Rhemes. and his case greatly lamented by many. And being not able to go forward in his Course by reason therof, by the direction of his Superiours, he had thought to haue abridged his longer Courses of study, and onely haue heard Posi∣tiue Diuinity and Cases of Conscience. But as he changed his mind, so did a continuall ague, and other infirmityes still molest him, which at length brought him into a most dangerous consumption; in so much as the Phisitians despayred of his recouery. This when the President vnderstood, he thought it best, and for the youths greatest good, to send him into England, in hope that change of ayre would worke some new effect. And so resoluing, he furnished him with all thin∣ges
necessary for his iourney. The younge man yielded willingly to the aduise of his Superiour for obedience sake, but with much griefe, and anguish of mind, that through want of age and learning,His de∣parture towards England. he could not enioy so great a benefit, as was holy Priesthood, the only thing he came for. He also much feared his owne weakenes, least his Protestant friendes should by theyr daungerous snares, and allurements intangle him in his Religion. Neuerthelesse he depar∣ted towards England, and came to Newhauen, in France, where finding 2. or 3. banished English Priests (to whome he was commen∣ded) he stayed with them expecting passage. But listen I pray you a while, what befell vnto him. Did he attayne England, the in∣tended scope of his trauaile? No verily, for then had not the Doctours Prophecy bene veryfied,His lying sick at New ha∣uen. to witt, that his returne should be a comfortable ioy, and a ioyfull comfort to all that loued him. But what befell him? These religious Priests laboured earnestly to obtayne passage, the passenger prayed de∣uoutly for health, or safe conduct: and thus
spending the restlesse time for the space of one fortnight, at the length they chaunced vpon a shippe fraught for London, in which they procured him passage, and preparing him victualls, and all thinges necessary for his iourney, acquaynted him therwith, that he might be ready, when the Maister of the ship should call. But on the other side, although whiles he made his abode in this place, he had bene assaulted with diuers fitts of intolerable griefes, as themselues had bene eye witnesses, yet now vpon the suddayne he desired a little longer respite to debate and waygh the mat∣ter, for that he himselfe (as he sayd) greatly amended: and if (quoth he) there be any hope of recouery, I would be very loth to hazard my selfe in so great ieopardy, es∣pecially being not armed with the armour of proofe, which I came for,His ear∣nest de∣sire not to go back in∣to En∣gland. to wit Priest∣hood. These vertuous men aforesaid hauing bargayned with the shipper for his pas∣sage, halfe displeased, perswaded him earnestly to take that good opportunity: but he with bashfull modestye, craued theyr patience,
declaring what extraordinary motions had caused that vnaccustomed kind of dealing, protesting that he found himselfe at that in∣stant greatly amended, and almost aswell as euer he was. Which strange speaches not without great admiration, inforced them to cease theyr suite, and breake out into these termes: Digitus Dei hic: haec mutatio dextrae Ex∣celsi.Exod. 8. Psal. 76. The finger of God is heere: this change comes from the right hand of the Highest. Hence admiring his Saintely affability, and mild behauiour, with all contentment they condescended to his desires.His sud∣den reco¦uery of a langui∣shing di¦sease. And he truly on the very next day, made such a shew of recouery, that he was able with a stomake to eate his meate, to go a good long walke, and such like tokens he gaue of health, by doing much more then he was able to do before, that it was wonderfull. Wherupon the sayd good Priests resolued to cherish him a while, and so to send him back agayne to Rhemes. And finally, within another fort∣night, he was so strong, that he departed towardes Rhemes, where not long after he arriued to his owne vnspeakeable ioy, and
the comfort of his Superiours, and friendes in the Colledge. O that I could heere declare, or as it were rudi Minerua expresse the inscrutable determi∣nation & proceedings of God Almighty to∣wards this his chosen Martyr! Is it not true that holy Dauid sayth, Behold the eyes of our Lord, are euer ouer those that feare him,Psal. 3.2. and such as hope in his mercy? And is not that of the Wiseman veryfied,Sap. 81. VVisedome disposeth all thinges sweetly? Who euer saw, or heard of a disease so incurable as was his, being that he was farre spent with a long consumption, recouered naturally without a miracle in so short a time, and altogeather cured without any help of physicke? But, Opera Dei admi∣ratio nostra, Gods workes are our wonders. Well let vs returne to our new recouered Champion,His zeal towards his affli∣cted Co∣untrey. who shaking of all feare of a new fall into sicknes, and hauing expelled all the cold fits of a shiuering feauer, with other languishing griefes of body, began now in soule to burne with exceeding cha∣rity, and religious zeale towards his Coun∣treys good. Wherfore taking to himselfe a
strong resolution he determined to arme him∣selfe with such furniture, as time and place would affoard, and so to giue a present onsett to his enemyes, neyther fearing theyr new-made Lawes, nor other torments whatsoeuer, but blazing this for his poesie, Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? If God be with vs, who can be agaynst vs? O how often haue I heard his Collegian fel∣lowes recite vnto me his euer vsed phrase when occasion was offered him to talke of England, and Martyrdome therin, which was, Viuamus in spe, Viuamus in spe: let vs liue in hope, let vs liue in hope! But his inward sweet inspirations being vnknowne to his Go∣uernours, they now agayne began by all me∣anes to perswade him to take his whole time in the course of his studies, shewing him that want of yeares must needs be his hinderance from being Priest so soone as he desired,His ear∣nest de∣sire of Priest∣hood. which impediment being by him perceyued, his intention of a speedy course (proceeding from his fiery flames of burning charity towards his Countrey) was therby a little asswaged, yet the cause being not extinguished, it brake
forth agayne within a while after with such ve∣hemency, as being not able represse it any longer, he began a new, and more ear∣nest suite to the President, to obtayne Priest∣hood. And to excuse his want of yeares he alledged such reasons, that the sayd President with the Seniours of the Colledge debating and discussing the matter maturely, thought it expedient, considering on the one side his decayed body, & on the other his vn∣quencheable thirst of mind to gayne soules to God in our vnfortunate Countrey, to pro∣cure him a dispensation to be made Priest, which in short time they performed to his vnspeakeable comfort.
Accipe Verbipotens calicem ritus{que} Sacratos, Sanguine Sacra tuo conficienda manent.
HOVV HE VVAS MADE Priest being but 23. yeares of age: and of his preparation to the same. CHAP. IIII. NOT LONG AF∣ter that the President & Superiours of the Col∣ledge (as we haue sayd) had thought it conue∣nient,A dis∣pensatiō obtay∣ned frō Rome for his Priest∣hood. that a dispensation should be procured for Edmund Geninges to be made Priest before he was of full yeares, the sayd Edmund vnder∣standing that letters were now returned from Rome, made repayre to M. D. Barret who was then President, and his louing good-father
(D. Allen being then sent for to Rome) to receyue his long expected answere; and being by him aduertised, that his dispensation was obtayned, and that he should presently be promoted to holy orders; being also exhorted with many spirituall admonitions, to make a due prepa∣ration for the receyuing of so great a function as is holy Priesthood, he was almost cast into an extasy of ioy, all his thoughts now chiefly tending to nothing els, but how he might obtayne the perfection of vertue, that being the chiefest armour of a religious Priest, wherby his actions should be wholy deuoted to the glory of God, and the profit of his afflicted countrey. Now he began more carefully to gather vp fragrant flowers of diuers colours, to be∣decke his English garland. Humility by due desert chalendged the first place. Patience inflamed with burning Charity possessed the next. Now long prayer, and other vertuous acts besought Perseuerance, and that his vn∣worthines might in no case infringe his future good purposes. Now he began to me∣ditate on the exceeding dignityes, and pre∣rogatiues
of Priesthood, of the great charge he was to vndertake, and of the exact account he was to render; yea he shaked and trem∣bled at the wordes of the Prophet Malachy, Labia Sacerdotis custodient scientiam,His stran¦ge appre∣hension of the worthi∣nes of Priest∣hood. & legem requirent ex ore eius; quia Angelus Domini Exer∣cituum est. The lippes of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and men shal require the law of God from his mouth; because he is the Angell of the Lord of Hostes. The appre∣hension of which thing was so vehement, that it put him into a continuall shaking of his flesh, as it were a palsy, which conti∣nued with him euen to his dying day. And many there did note the cause, but more heere in England did see the effect, and I my selfe at first sight did wonder at the same. It were to long to recite all & euery one of his particuler preparations to holy Priest∣hood, especially he hauing learned S. Au∣gustines lesson; In via virtutis non progredi, re∣gredi est: not to go forward in the way of vertue, is to go backward. And therfore he spent no day without some act of vertue,
either of charity or humility: at night he vsed to exclayme agaynst himselfe, & say with that renowned king, O diem perdidi! Alas I haue lost the day!His pre∣paration to Priest¦hood. Good God how he imbra∣ced euery occasion offered, for the exercise of any vertuous action, was it neuer so base and meane: which being perceyued by the Persident, for his greater exercise of humi∣lity, patience, and charity, he made him Prefect of the Infirmary. This office he very thankefully vndertooke, and hauing now matter to worke vpon, he so laboured about the sicke Students, euen in the basest offices, that he was called the very patterne of piety, and humility: his commiseration was so great, as he might well haue sayd with holy Iob, Miseratio ab infantia mea creuit mecum:Iob. 31. mercy and pitty hath growne and increased with me euen from my infancy. Time being now come that he should be made Priest, with all humility, tamquam in∣utilis seruus, as an vnprofitable seruant, yet cherefully he imbraced it, quia iugum Christi suaue est, & onus eius leue, because Christs yoke is sweete, and his burthen light. His
exceeding deuotion and carefull recollection in celebrating Masse,His deuo¦tion in celebra∣ting Mas¦se. imprinted in the harts of all his Collegian fellowes, an euer∣lasting memory of him; and they generally would report his extraordinary pious, and comely behauiour at the Altar, to the great comfort and edification of all: for although he was by nature very affable and merry, desirous of good and vertuous company; yet before and after Masse, he was seldome or neuer seene, for the space of one whole houre, to laugh, play, or spend any time in talke, except some vrgent occasion compel∣led him to speake, but in continual prayer and meditation, in which he so behaued himselfe, as if with the Psalmist he had made a perpe∣tuall league, and sayd, Meditabar in manda∣tis tuis, quae dilexi nimis: I did meditate on thy commandements, which I haue excee∣dingly loued. By this his piety was much noted, and was very exemplar throughout the whole Colledge.
Mittitur ad patrios socio comitante Penates; Ad Thamesim cautùs separat ambo timor. M. b. f.
OF HIS MISSION AND departure towards England: his ship∣ping, and ariuall there. CHAP. V. LONG HAD NOT our vertuous Priest byn invested with holy Or∣ders, but that Aposto∣licall faculties were gi∣uen him, & so with some others he was sent for England, departing from the Colledge,Act. 8. Rom. 8. tam∣quam ouis ad occisionem, & sicut agnus ad victi∣mam, like a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lambe to be sacrificed. And thus wholy mortified, he tooke his leaue of all the Su∣periours, & Schollers, who weeping euen as those good Christians did for the departureAct. 20.
of S. Paul, and procumbentes super collum eius obsculabantur eum, falling vpon his necke they kissed him with teares, & deducebant eum ad portam, and many of them brought him forth of the gates of the Citty, with diuers others his Companions in that iourney, as F. Tho. Stanney of the Society of Iesus, M. Doctour Singleton, M. VVilliam Mush, and M. Robert Clinch all Priests. Within few dayes they came to Treport in Normandy,His ta∣king of shippe. where presently they endeauoured to procure a speedy, and (if it might be) a safe passage. And behold after two or three dayes aboad there, they found an vnexpected and alto∣gether vnwonted vessel fraught for England, whose maister was a Frenchman, and in re∣ligion well affected. This man imagining (as it may be supposed) what they were, of∣fered them vnrequested safe passage, and to set them a shore by night, if they so pleased: who with ioyful harts accepted of his mo∣tion, yielding harty thankes to God for his goodnes, and care towards them, as also to him for his friendly offer. On the next day committing themsel∣ues
to the tuition of theyr high Protectour God Almighty, they tooke shipping; and wind and weather being both prosperous, they sayled along the coast of England, and meant to haue landed on Essex side: but for theyr sakes the Maister of the Barke lingered that euening, vntill it was two houres within night, and being come neere vnto Scarbrough, there came out a little boate with diuers Ro∣uers, or Pyrates in it, to haue surprised them, who shot at them diuers tymes with muskets, but had no harme; for the wind being then somwhat contray, the maister turned his ship and sayled backe into the mayne sea, where in foule weather they remayned three dayes; and so at last being driuen Eastward, they landed neere vnto VVhitby in Yorkeshire, on the side of a high Cliffe, with great danger of theyr liues. At last they came to VVhitby,How he was set on shore where going into an Inne to refresh thēselues, they found there one Ratcliffe a Purseuant, who after an exact view of them all, questioned with them about their ariuall in that place, whence they came, and whither they would? They answered, that comming from New∣castle,
they were by tempest driuen thither. And so after refreshing of themselues, they went all to a Catholike Gentleman his house (whose name for diuers respects I suppresse) within 2. or 3. myles of VVhitby, by whome they were directed some to one place, some to another, according to their owne desires. Being thus ech one sent to seuerall places, M. Geninges with one other kept togeather, who trauayling by the way,How they sepa¦rated thē¦selues for feare. determined at last to separate themselues also for feare of suspition, and so seuerally to commit them∣selues to the protection of God and their good Angells. And whiles they thus resol∣ued, they came to two fayre beaten wayes, the one tending Northeast, the other South∣east: & euen then, and there (it being in the night) they stayed, and fell both downe on their knees, making a short prayer togeather, that Almighty God of his infinite mercy would vouchsafe to respect his hūble Seruants, and send them peaceable passage into the thickest of his vineyard. Then rysing vp, they imbraced one another with teares trick∣ling downe their cheeks. Thus Edmund tooke
his leaue. Seing (quoth he) we must now part, through feare of our enemyes,His de∣parture from his Compa∣nion. & for our greater se∣curity, farewell sweet Brother in Christ, and most louing Companion. God graunt, that as we haue bene friends in one Colledge, & companions in one wearisome, and dange∣rous iourney: so we may haue a merry mee∣ting once agayne in this world to our good comfort (if it shall please him) euen amongst his, and our greatest aduersaryes. And that as we vndertooke for his loue and holy name sake, this meritorious course of life together: so he will of his infinite goodnes, and high clemency make vs partakers of one hope, of one punishment, of one and the selfe same reward. And also as we began, so wee may end together in Christ Iesus. Thus being not able to speake one word more for griefe and teares, they departed with mutuall silence, the one directing his iourney towards London, because he was borne there, the other North∣ward, because he was affected that way.
Bis sequitur Frater, bis cor exaestuat, horr et, Bis coma sic Fratrem nouit adesse suum M. baf
OF HIS COMMING TO London, and the strange finding out of his naturall Brother. CHAP. VI. ALMIGHTY GOD the authour of all good motions, by his holy spirit, first directed this our blessed Priests will & purpose to draw neare to his owne pro∣per Countrey, that he might profit and take some care of his owne particuler friendes,His re∣payring to his owne Coun∣trey. & kinsfolkes. Comming therfore to the Citty where he was borne, halfe a yeare after his ariuall, he found most of his nearest friends and allyes to be all dead, except one brother,
whom he heard to be in London, but in what place he could not at that time conueniently learne. And though he feared least that too much enquiry should breed suspition, yet brotherly charity could not forbeare, but prouoked him forward to seeke his lost-sheep whom he well knew to be infected with a con∣tagious disease of his soule. Hence presently he wēt to London, where like a good sheepheard he left no place vnsought, where he might suspect his said Brothers aboad. And thus spēding a moneth at the least, & seing no hope to preuayle, he resolued to leaue the Citty for a season. But God whose secret proui∣dence passeth all human vnderstanding (when the time of his departure drew neere) vnex∣pectedly, and as it were digito, with his finger, directly pointed him to the obiect that he so long sought to behold, yet very strangely: and thus it was, as I haue heard from his owne mouth. Hauing (as I haue sayd) a determination to leaue London for a while, he walked forth of his Inne one morning (certayne dayes be∣fore he had purposed to trauayle) to visit
a friend of his on the other side of the Citty, he lying then in Holborne; and passing by S. Paules Church, when he was on the East side therof, he suddaynly felt a great distempera∣ture in his body, in so much as his face glowed, and as he thought his hayre stared, and all his ioynts trembling for feare, his whole bo∣dy seemed to be bathed in a cold sweat.A sudda∣ine feare came v∣pon him as he went in the streets at the sight of his Brother. This strange accident of the alteration of his body causing him to feare some euill to be immi∣nent towards him, or daunger of taking, he looked backe to see if he could espy any to pursue him: but perceyuing no body to be neare, but only a yong youth in a browne coloured cloake, making no reflexion who it should be, he went forward to his inten∣ded place, to say Masse that day; taking cō∣fort in that saying of the Psalmist, Iacta co∣gitatum tuum in Domino, & ipse te enutriet: put thy trust in our Lord, and he will nourish and protect thee. Behold heere the loue of Almighty God, who gaue him a sight of his brother whome he sought for, though he passed by him with∣out salutation, the one of them not knowing
the other. But was this all the fauour that God shewed to this his elected Martyr? Had he only a bare sight without knowledge? No, no. Attend the sequele. Not long after, the very morning before he purposed to de∣part out of the towne, the blessed man re∣collecting himselfe in his deuotions, serious∣ly prayed, that his departure without fin∣ding of his desired brother might increase his patience: and although it grieued him sore yet did he cry, Fiat voluntas tua, my will is thy will,The se∣cond ty∣me of the same feare. sweet Lord, thy will be done. His deuotions being finished, he went a∣broad to another place where he had promi∣sed to celebrate Masse that day before his departure: which done, as he was retur∣ning homewards towards his Inne, vpon Ludgate hill, suddaynly as he was going, he felt the same motions as he had done the time before: for heat striued to expell cold, and cold heate, all his ioynts trembled, as dreading some great trouble, or misfortune to ensue: and as alwayes the silly lambe na∣turally feareth the rauening wolfe; so his inno∣cency fearing the worst, looked backe to see
who followed him. And behold no man of marke, but a youth in a browne coloured cloake: and at the same instant reflecting on the time past when he suffered the like per∣plexity, and stedfastly viewing the yonge man, presently he was stroken with this cogita∣tion, This (quoth he) may be my brother. And let no man meruayle that he could not know him by his fauour, for he had not seene him in the space of eight or nine yeares before,His first know∣ledg of his bro∣ther. and he left him a very little boy in the Countrey, and then was much al∣tered (as I haue heard) almost from white to blacke. Well, the aforesayd apprehension was so vehement, that it caused him to ap∣proach the youth, & being come vnto him he courteously saluted him, and enquired what Countrey-man he was; and hearing he was a Stafford-shire man, gently demaunded his name? Who made answere, his name was Geninges, by which he knew certaynly he was his brother so long looked for. Then with a glaunce towards heauen, in lieu of louing thankes, and with a smiling coun∣tenance vpon the party, he told him he was
his poore kinsman, and was called Ironmon∣ger, and that he was very glad to see him well: and thus they walked downe Ludgate∣hill, he questioning of al his friends, and in particuler about himselfe, asking what was become of his brother Edmund. The youth not suspecting him to be the same man, told him, he had heard he was gone to Rome to the Pope, and was become a notable Papist, & traytour both to God and his Countrey, and that if he did returne and were taken, he would be hanged infallibly. Our sweet Martyr hearing this, and smi∣ling at the boyes folly, told him, Edmund was his eldest brother,His com¦munica∣tion with his brother. & therfore (quoth he) you ought to speake well of him: he added, that he himselfe had heard, that he was a very honest man, & loued both the Queene and his Countrey, but God aboue all: yet tell me good cosin Iohn (quoth he) do you not know him if you see him? To which Iohn answered, No, he could not re∣member eyther visage or stature. Notwith∣standing then he began to suspect and feare that he was his brother, and a Priest: yet
neuerthelesse not knowing what a Priest was, boldly told him, he could not tell what he was, yet that he greatly dreaded, he had a brother a Papist Priest, and that he was the man; swearing withall, that if it were so, he would discredit himselfe and all his friendes, if he were so proued, and protesting in that he would neuer follow him, although in other matters he would greatly respect him. Which wordes Edmund hearing, could no longer conceale himself from his suspitious brother, but told him truely, he was his bro∣ther indeed, and for his loue, had taken great paynes to come to seeke him, perswa∣ding him to keepe in secret the knowledge of his arriuall. To which the youth answered, he would not for a world disclose his returne,His bro∣thers fea¦re to in∣cur the law for not reue¦ling him but yet he desired him to come no more vnto him, for that he feared greatly the daunger of the law, that being he was his brother, he should incurre the penalty of the Statute newly made in concealing him. The good Man hearing this, thought it neyther time nor place conuenient (being then in a tauerne) to talk of religion, he being
but a waggish youth: only he told him he was deceyued, for that he was no such man∣ner of man as he tooke him for: neyther was I (sayth he) euer at Rome, or with the Pope, but only haue trauayled in other Coun∣treys, for which fact there is no such punish∣ment appoynted by the law. To conclude, much talke they had about diuers thinges, by which the good Priest well perceyued his poore brother farre from any good affection to Catholike religion, but rather wilfully giuen to persist in his Pro∣testancy, withour any hope of a present re∣couery. And therfore declaring vnto him his present departure out of towne, tooke his leaue, assuring him, that within one mo∣neth or little more he intended to returne, at which time he would see him agayne,His de∣parture from his brother, and fare∣well. and conferre with him more at large about some necessary affayres which concerned him very much. And thus the two brethren par∣ted, the one to do his function, in conuer∣ting of soules, the other to meditate how to corrupt his owne; and so the one went to spend his time in studying how to perswade;
the other how to withstand: the one purpo∣sed to make hast backe agayne hoping to saue a soule, brothers loue him therunto prouo∣king; the other wished his brothers neuer re∣turne, through feare of conuersion, licen∣tious liberty brothers loue peruerting.
Cùm veteri peragit Missa pia Sacra sodali. Jnfestat turbam turba profana piam.
OF HIS RETVRNE TO London: and the manner of his taking, imprisoning, examining &c. CHAP. VII. THE TIME AP∣appoynted being expi∣red, our Godly Cham∣pion, hauing laboured in the Countrey by exhor∣ting, instructing, & exer∣cising amongst Catholi∣kes his Priestly function, withall diligence, according to his promise make to God, re∣turned to London, to the end he might visit, & confer with his brother. The same night on which he came to the Citty, he repayred
to a Catholikes house in Holborne, where he found M. Polidore Plasden, a very ver∣tuous & godly Priest. After a friendly and kind congratulation with some discourses of ech others successe in the haruest of England,His mee∣ting with M. Plas∣den. they began to confer of that which euer was and still is the chief ioy to all true zealous Priestes, and theyr only felicity, to wit, tou∣ching the offering of the dreadfull Sacrifice, where they might serue God togeather the next day, and say Masse. At length they concluded to say their mattins togeather & ce∣lebrate the next morning at M. Swithin VVelles his house, being in the vpper end of Holborne. They also made some acquaynted with theyr meeting there, whom they wished to be present; and this they did the rather, be∣cause it was the Octaue day of the feast of all Saynts, to the end that theyr good fren∣des as well as themselues might on that great feast be partakers of so worthy a benefit.Their cō¦ference of spiri∣tuall mat¦ters. They themselues that night kept togeather, preparing to solemnize the morne according as the dignity therof required, & theyr poore
abilities affoarded. Wherfore they heard Con∣fessions, and did such like actes of deuotion, as became such mortal men as Almighty God in his secret wisedome had chosen as Saynts, and had determined on the feast of all Saynts to marke as his owne Saynts, to the view and sight of the whole world, by beginning theyr Saintly cōbat to the glory of all Saynts. O that I could here expresse the deuo∣tion and consolation which these good men had all that night powred and infused into them,His pre∣paration to Masse and cele∣brating of the di¦uine My¦sterie. they not knowing what should befall them on the morrow! Day being come they lifted vp theyr soules to heauen, and recō∣mending theyr good purposes with the sinnes of the people to the holy suffrages of all Saints they went so to Masse, no doubt accompa∣nyed with troupes of Angells and Saynts comming to behold and succour them in the Tragedy which heere ensueth: for now M. Geninges being at Masse, there were present as hearers, the forsayd M. Plasden, M. Eu∣stach VVhite Priests, M. Bryan Lacy Gentle∣man, Iohn Mason, & Sydney Hodgson lay men with Mrs. VVelles, whose house it was, and
and other deuout people who came thither on that day for the same purpose, M. VVelles himself being from home, and out of the towne. But behold when he was euen at the Con∣secration of the holy body and bloud of our Sauiour, one M. Topliffe with other officers knocked at the dore. Which suddayne noyse stroke feare and terrour into the harts of all that were present. But the forenamed good Priests with the rest arose from theyr deuo∣tions, and drawing out their weapons, (as S. Peter did to defend our Sauiour) were ready at the chamber dore when their ene∣myes had burst it open,His say∣ing of Masse & the offi∣cers en∣trance. bidding them to stand, not suffering any one of them to enter vntill the Priest had finished his Masse. At which time, eyther Iohn Mason, or Sydney Hodgson came vnto them, and seing them so maliciously bent that they would not expect, one of them ranne vpon M. Topliffe to haue throwne him downe the stayres, and with such vehemency, as they tumbled downe both togeather. Then M. Plasden hauing appoynted the
rest to keepe the broken dore, went to the Altar, and bad the good Priest go forward without feare, and finish his Masse, to the greater glory of God, and honour of all his Saints: and after returning to the dore, he espied M. Topliffe hastening vp the stayres with a broken head,His man¦ner of taking. and fearing he would haue raysed the whole streete for help, the more to pacify him, seing no meanes to es∣cape, he told him, that he should come in presently, and they would all yield: which pro∣mise was accomplished by & by; for no sooner was the Masse ended, but he with the rest rushed in, & tooke M. Geninges, & all the rest, men & women, with Church-stuffe, bookes, beades, and all thinges that they could find. They carried them all to New∣gate, and were not ashamed to leade M. Ge∣ninges through the streetes in his Priestly vestements, for greater shew of this theyr insulting triumph, and the more to make him a laughing stocke to all the beholders, who are commonly ready (as they well knew) exceedingly to scoffe at such an vnwonted spectacle.
Thus these deuout Catholîkes to the number of ten, or thereabout, were com∣mitted close prisoners.His exa∣minatiō before Iustice Yonge. They vsed them very hardly, according to theyr accustomed man∣ner, and within few dayes after, they were brought before Iustice Yonge, and exami∣ned very strictly vpon poynts and articles set downe in the Edict lately before published. Finally they being all examined, were set back to the prison whence they came, there to ex∣pect the tryall of the law, and execution ac∣cording to the same, if they altered not theyr mindes. In the meane time M. Swithyn VVelles came home to his owne house, in which (as is aforesaid) all these Priests and Catholikes were apprehended,Maister Wells his appre¦hension. he not knowing what had happened; and finding his dores shut vp, and all his people gone, inquired of his neyghbours the cause of this suddayne alte∣ration, who told him that his wife was pri∣soner in Newgate, with many other Papists ta∣ken by M . Topliffe and others of the Quee∣nes Maties. officers. M. VVelles hearing this, & being a man of great feruour and courage,
went forthwith to Iustice Yonge, and deba∣ted the cause of the ransacking of his house in his absence, demanding his wife and keyes of his lodging. But the Iustice presently sent him vnto his wife with a payre of iron boltes on his legges, promising him audience on the morrow concerning his suite. The next day, as he promised, the Iustice came to the prison with diuers other offi∣ciers and examined the sayd Gentleman con∣cerning his inward dispositions and inten∣tions,His im∣prison∣ment and examina∣tion. bycause they had nothing to lay to his charge touching the rest which were ta∣ken in his house. They pretended indeed much matter agaynst him, but he boldly ans∣wered that he was not acquainted with theyr doings: Notwnding (sayth he) sith I must needs suffer in so good a quarrell, I will now willingly be partaker of theyr merit. Whervpon he affied he thought his house the better, that so  a Sacrifice had ben there celebrated, and wished that himself had ben present when it was offered, to the glory of his Sauiour Iesus Christ, and pro∣fit of so many soules that heard it. Then the
Iustice began to storme when he found him so resolute, and therefore told him in playne termes, he came time inough to tast of the sauce, although he were ignorant how the meate sauoured. And so for that time they de∣parted, leauing him in prison whereto he was committed.
Vinctos sanguineum stiterunt ante tribunal, Mitibus assignat vox rabiosa crucem.
OF M. GENINGES HIS Arraygnment, and Condemnation: and what happened therin. CHAP. VIII. AFTER MANY examinatiōs, threats, & deuises vsed to with∣draw these good Priests & Catholiks from their Religiō, the fourth day of December the Offi∣cers came with billes, halbards, and other weapons to the prison,His arrai¦gnement and so conueyed them from Newgate to the Sessions-House in the old Baily, as if they had bene so many incorrigible felons, or heynous Traitours. There they were arraygned, and indighted of grieuous crimes, and a Iury was impa∣nelled
to finde them all guilty of high treason, and yet all that they could proue against them, was no more, then that one of them had sayd Masse in M. VVelles his house, & the rest had heard the sayd Masse. But M. Topliffe made a long exclamation against M. Brians man for tumbling him downe the stayres (as is sayd before) and playnely told him before all the people, he should he hanged for it. Many bitter wordes, and with some deri∣sion also, passed from the Iudges,How the Iudges put a foo¦les coate on his backe at the Bar. and Iusti∣ces against the sayd persons arraygned, a great part wherof touched M. Geninges, and M. VVelles: but especially M. Geninges was scorned and reuiled, because he was a very young man, and had angred them with dis∣putes. Nay the more to make him a scoffe to the people, they vested him agayne, not with his priestly garments, but (almost as King Herod and Pilates souldiours did our Sauiour) with a ridiculous fooles coate, which they found in M. VVelles his house, and when they had so altered him, they laughing told him, he was more fit in that attire to
be presented to the Queene for a iester, then to a Nume for a Confessor. Moreouer they most slaunderously affir∣med, that it was impossible for him, being a yonge man, faire and fine, and as they tear∣med him frolicke,Falsely launde∣red. not to breake the bands of vowed chastity, by being naught with those beautifull yong women with whom he had daily conuersed. But our chast Priest, Sa∣piens in bono, & simplex in malo, wise in good, & simple in vice, well knew they iudged ac∣cording to the grounds & principles of theyr owne Religion, & the custome of many of those which do professe it; & therfore me∣riting therby very highly, tooke all thinges with exceeding great patience, and replying nothing to such calumnious slaunders: only with S. Stephen he sayd,Act. 7 Domine ne statuas illis hoc peccatum; Lord lay not this sinne vnto them. Neuerthelesse in the meane time he called to minde, what his Lord and Maister had suffered before him for his example, & imagined all those calūniations by him now suffered, to be liuely representations of the Iewish slaunders towards Christ our Sauiour,
although in a farre inferiour degree. He also firmely fixed in his tender hart, the memory of our Lords wrongfull con∣demnation,His pa∣tience in suffering iniuri∣ous wor∣des. and bitter Passion, as a sure bul∣warke for his defence agayinst the assaults of all their bitter accusations. I cannot here re∣cite all the occasions of merit offered to these blessed Confessours by the Iuges. Neyther is it my purpose to set downe in particuler, all the taunts, threats, calamniations, and exaggerations which agaynst euery one of thē they thundered out. But any man, but of a meane vnderstanding may easily imagine them to be great, seing that they who vtte∣red them were throughly practised in such like exercises. To conclude they spent that day in nothing els: so that it being late, they com∣manded the prisoners backe to the gayle, & tooke order that the Iury on the next day should be ready at Westminster-Wall by 8. of the clocke in the morning: which done they departed for that night. On the morrow, the prisoners were car∣ryed through the streetes with a great trayne, euery one being led betweene two men with
halbards on theyr shoulders to Westminster, where before some of the Priuy Counsell, and certayne Iudges,His se∣conds ar∣raignmēt at West∣minster. they were agayne ar∣raygned, and the same Iury the day before impanelled was to giue vp theyr verdict. But now began a new combat. M. Topliffe to shew himself diligent, and Iustice Yonge vigilant, left none of the former calumnia∣tions vnrepeated, with additions and digres∣sions, as best liked themselues: so that, what between the Counsells sharp admonitions & rebukes, the Iudges explications of Statutes, & Iustice Yonges and M. Topliffes slaunders, they passed all the forenoone, determining no one thing agaynst the prisoners, but a∣rose and went to dinner, without doing any more. They were no sooner departed, but the glorious Confessours all imbraced one the other,His en∣courage∣ment of his fel∣lowes in the Com¦bat and mutually encouraged themselues to sustayne the future assault, as they had done the combat already past, to the great edification of many standers by. But M. Geninges especially perswaded them all with a pleasant sweet speach (in the hearing of
many Catholikes) not to yield one iote to any of theyr enemyes allurements, animating them with the saying of S. Iames, Appropin∣quate Deo, & appropinquabit vobis: Approach to God, and he will approach to you. And so they passed all the time of the Counsells dinner within the barre in prayer and exhor∣tation to perseuerance. In the meane time their aduersaryes hard harts affoarded them not one bit of bread, or drop of drinke for theyr sustenance, so that they stood all that day without any refreshing, or bodily nou∣rishment. After dinner the Lords and Iudges re∣payred agayne to the Bench,His finall condem∣nation with the rest. and there agayne also vsing long discourses of treasons, they affirmed the Priests to be traytours, and re∣turned Renagates, Seducers, Plotters of Conspiracyes, and the like, which those guilt∣lesse soules neuer dreamed of. To be briefe the verdict was giuen vp, and the Priests were all found guilty of high treason for re∣turning into the Realme, contrary to the law prouided in that behalf; and all the lay peo∣ple both men and women were found guilty
of fellony for religious causes. M. VVelles also, though he proued himselfe not to haue bene in towne when this Masse was sayd, yet was he rancked amongst the rest, only because it was his house, & for allowing the same after∣ward O beati qui persecutionem patiuntur pro∣pter iustitiam,Matth. 5 quoniam ipsorum est regnum caelorum! O Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousnes sake, because theyrs is the king∣dome of heauen! The sentence of death was pronounced agaynst them thus, that they should all dy at Tyborne, except M. Geninges and M. VVelles, who should by executed before M. VVelles his owne dore in Grayes-Inne fieldes.Their laces of Executi∣on ap∣pointed. Then the Iudges began to perswade them, being cōdemned, by all meanes possible they could, to conforme themselues to the present Pro∣testant Religion, by going to theyr Chur∣ches and Seruice, to acknowledg themselues guilty, and to submit theyr fault to the mer∣cy of the Queene; and they did assure them, that so they should obtayne mercy, els no∣thing was more certayne then an vntimely death. But now the elect of God calling to
remembrance the saying of S. Paul: Corde creditur ad iustitiam, ore autem confessio fit ad salutem; with the hart we beleeue vnto iustice, but with the mouth confession is made to saluation; seing no meanes to escape, but by denying both God and their Religion humbly beseeched them to cease theyr suite, and not to endeauour to remoue what was (by Gods grace) immoueable. They affir∣med stoutly they would liue & dy in the true, Roman, and Catholike doctrine, which they and all antiquity had euer professed: and de∣nied boldly to go to theyr Churches, or once to thinke that the Queene could be the spi∣rituall head of the true Church, or Clergy of England: the same they pronounced tou∣ching theyr opinions in such like matters. The night drawing neare they sent them to Newgate, from whence they came, with troupes (as they were brought) or officers,Offer  v¦to him of  go to Church. there to expect death at the Counsells plea∣sure. M. Geninges and the other two priests were cast into the dungeon. In the meane while twice or thrice Iustice Yonge, M. To∣pliffe, and others came to the prison, and
calling M. Geninges from forth the dungeon where they had layd him, they promised him both life and liberty, if he would go to theyr Church, and renounce his Religion. And although they found him euer in his answeres both then and at the barre, very constant and resolute; yet they ceased not still to pursue their intentions, hoping at length to gayne him, because they imagined his tender yeares could not still withstand their forcible charmes: forcible I say, for what sweet allurements can be more forcible then life, liberty, liuing, & promotion to a con∣demned captiue? But this our constant Confessour remem∣bred the wordes of our Sauiour,Luc. 9. Qui me eru∣buerit, & sermones meos coram hominibus, hunc filius hominis erubescet, cùm venerit in maiestate sua, & Patris, & sanctorum Angelorum. He that shall be ashamed of me, & of my wor∣des before men, him the Sonne of man will be ashamed of,His con∣stancy after his cōdem∣nation. when he shall come in his owne Matie, and of his Fathers, and of the holy Angells . And alwayes he pondered deeply with himself this other sentence of
our Lord, Quid prodest homini si vniuersum mun∣dum lucretur, animae verò suae detrimentum pati∣atur? What doth it profit a man, if he gayne the whole world, & sustayne the domage of his owne soule? Hence he resolued and was able to withstand a million of like batteryes, if they could had happened. At length they finding him so constant, and immoueable, waxing angry, they furiously put him into a certayne hole within the prison, whence he could neither get vp, nor downe without hazard of breaking his necke, which was also so darke that he could not see his owne handes. There he remayned in prayer and contem∣plation without all food or sustenance to the hower of his death, desiring God of his infinite godnesse to giue him constancy & per∣seuerance (as he had done in his former cō∣flicts) to the end which neare approached, and not to forsake him now in his greatest agony.
Vitae norma decens pariter mors iunxerit Vna. Haec duo Thesêa pectora noxa fide. M. ba. f.
OF HIS EXECVTION; and what happened therin. CHAP. IX. VHEN THE HAPPY houre of his passion was come being 8. of the clocke on fryday the 10. day of December, M. Plasden, M. VVhite, and the rest were carryed to Tyborne, & there executed. Mistresse VVelles to her great grief was repriued, and died in pri∣son. M. Edmund Geninges, and M. Swythune VVelles, as is aforesayd, were condemned to be executed in Grayes Inne fieldes on the North side of Holborne, ouer agaynst his owne dore. When they were brought thither, after a few speaches of a Minister or two that were there present, M. Geninges was taken of the fledd,
wheron he lay. In the meane time he cryed out with holy S. Andrew: O bona Crux diu desiderata, & iam concupiscenti animo praeparata, securus & gaudens venio ad te; ita & tu exultans suscipias me discipulum eius qui pependit in te! O good gibbet long desired, and now prepared for my hart much desiring thee, being se∣cure and ioyfull I come vnto thee; so thou also with ioy, I beseech thee receyue me the disciple of him that suffered on the Crosse. Being put vpon the ladder naked to his shirte,His words to M. To∣pliffe on the lad∣der. many questions were asked him by some standers by, wherto he answered still directly. At length M. Topliffe being present cryed out with a loud voyce; Geninges, Geninges, confesse thy fault, thy Popish treason, and the Queene by submission (no doubt) will grant thee pardon. To which he mildly ans∣wered; I knowe not M. Topliffe in what I haue offended my deare annoynted Princesse, for if I had offended her, or any other in any thing, I would willingly aske her, and all the world forgiuenesse. If she bee offended with me without a cause, for professing my fayth and religion, because I am a Priest, or
because I will not turne Minister agaynst my conscience, I shalbe I trust excused and innocent before God: Obedire (sayth S. Peter) oportet Deo magis quàm hominibus; I must obey God rather then men,Act  and must not in this case acknowledge a fault where none is. If to re∣turne into England Priest, or to say Masse be Popish treason, I heere confesse I am a traytour; but I thinke not so. And therfore I acknowledge my selfe guilty of these thinges, not with repentance or sorrow of hart, but with an open protestation of inward ioy, that I haue done so good deedes, which if they were to do agayne, I would by the per∣mission and assistance of Almighty God ac∣complish the same, although with the hazard of a thousand liues. Which wordes M. Topliffe hearing, being much troubled therwith, scarce giuing him leaue to say a Pater noster, bad the Hangman turne the ladder,His ca∣sting off the lad∣der and vnbo∣welling which in an instant being done, presently he caused him to be cut downe, the Blessed martyr in the sight of all the be∣holders, being yet able to stand on his feete, & casting his eyes towardes heauen, his senses
were very little astonished, in so much that the Hangman was forced to trippe vp his heeles from vnder him to make him fall on the blocke. And being dismembred, through very payne, in the hearing of many, with a lowde voyce he vttered these wordes, Oh it smartes; which M. VVelles hearing, replyed thus: Alas sweete soule thy payne is great in∣deed, but almost past, pray for me now most holy Saynt, that mine may come. He being rip∣ped vp, & his bowelles cast into the fire, if credit may be giuen to hundreds of People standing by, and to the Hangman himselfe, the blessed Martyr vttered (his hart being in the executioners hand) these wordes, Sancte Gregori ora pro me, which the Hangman hea∣ring, with open mouth swore this damnable oath; Gods woundes, See his hart is in my hand, and yet Gregory in his mouth; ô egre∣gious Papist! Thus the afflicted Martyr euen to the last of his torments cryed for the ayde & succour of Saynts, and especially of S. Gregory his deuoted patron, and our countries. Apostle that by his intercession he might passe the sharpnes of that torment.
And thus with barbarons cruelty our thirce happy Martyr finished the course of his mortall life, and purchased no doubt a crowne of im∣mortality in the glorious Court of heauen. Wherfore now he triumpheth with all vnspea∣keable ioy, and eatitude amongst the number of those blessed martyrs who haue in this world suffered all torments of persecution,His feli∣city in heauen and haue withstood Princes and Potentates, lawes and lawmakers, for the honour and glory of theyr Lord and Sauiour, and therfore haue found true the confortable saying of holy Dauid,Psal. 126. Qui seminant in lachrymis, in exultatione metent: They who sow in teares, shall reape in ioy. Now so much the more is our Saynt glorifyed, by how much the more he was tormented, ac∣cording to that saying of S. Cyprian: Quò longior vestra pugna hic, corona sublimior; praesens tamen confessio quantò in passione fortior, tantò clarior & maior in honore. By how much your combat is the longer, by so much your crowne shall be the higher; so that by how much stronger the present confession is in suffering, so much more glorious and greater it shall be in honour.
Jussit amor pietas{que} sacram me tangere dextram: Cede loco pollex; cedere iussit amor.
OF A CERTAINE MIRA∣cle that happened at his death. CHAP. X. THVS HAVE I expressed, and related in a rude stile the life and death of Edmund Geninges Priest,Many particu∣lers of his life omitted for bre∣uity sake omitting for bre∣uity sake many particu∣lers; yet what I haue writtē doth sufficiētly manifest his exceeding great vertue and happines, who by so glo∣rious bathing of his body in his owne bloud, washed away all other defects of humane frailty, & who by approued constancy and patience, passing couragiously, as it were,
through fyer and water, attayned to a Pa∣radise of euerlasting pleasure and rest. So his owne Countrey which first sought to bring him to perdition by her infectious doctrine, brought him at last to heauen by her seuere persecution. But now attend, I beseech you, how the glo∣ry of his martyrdome was declared and con∣firmed by an euident signe,The ve∣neration of Reli∣ques. shewed by the hand of Almighty God, who by diuine testi∣mony manifested to the world the truth of his cause, & the greatnes of his reward, making knowne also how acceptable a thing it is in his sight to esteeme highly and reuerence the sacred reliques of his chosen Saynts. And truely euen in this his Martyr to the con∣fusion of our Aduersaries he gaue great so∣lace and comfort to Catholikes concerning that point. And this it was. At the massacring of his body, as there were many Protestants who came rather to behould the spectacle thē to pitty the innocent: so were there many Ca∣tholikes present also, who resorted to his ex∣ecution, partly to see this good pastour, Qui pro ouibus suis animam suam posuit,Iohn 10 who gaue
his life for the loue of his sheepe, partly by the sight therof to confirme theyr fayth, & in∣crease theyr charity, and to get courage to imbrace all like assaults and combats, if like occasion should be offered: and partly to par∣ticipate, although not in act, yet at least in desire, with him in his martyrdome; yea and to animate our Champion now in the lists to greater magnanimty: for amicus praesēs consolatio est afflictis, a present frend is a cōfort to the affli∣cted, and S. Paul commandeth vs,1. Thess. 5. consolari in∣uicem, to comfort one another. Amongst the rest there was a Virgin who had wholy dedicated her selfe to the seruice of God. She being desirous to be partaker of so great a merit,Desire to get some of his Reliques. and to get if it were possi∣ble some little part or parcell of his sacred flesh, or guiltlesse bloud, powred on the ground, to keepe as a perpetuall relique for her priuate deuotion, vsed all diligence to drawe neere to the Gibbet, that she might obtaine her desire: but seing her selfe frustra∣ted of all in that kinde, through the presse of people, and also through daunger of being discouered, deuotion being her guide, she fol∣lowed
his quarters, as they were drawne backe agayne to be boyled at Newgate, ho∣ping there at the least to touch them, before they were dispersed to hang on the gates of the Citty, being as it were in despaire of any greater benefit. And comming to the prison, the people flocked togeather to behold the fresh blee∣ding quarters, according to theyr wonted custome, when any such thing is to be seene, before they were carryed vp to boyling,His quarters shewed to the people. desiring the executioner to shew them peece by peece, that so their curiosity might giue censure (as they said) whether he was fat or leane, blacke or fayre. To satisfie theyr request, by chance Bull the Hangman tooke vp one of his forequarters by the arme, which when he had shewed to the People, he contēptuosly flung it downe into the bas∣kett agayne wherin it lay, and tooke vp the head that they might see his face. And (as God would haue it) both arme and hand of the foresayd quarter hung out ouer the sides of the basket, which the said virgin espying, drew neare to touch it, and approaching
warily with feare lest any should take notice of her so doing, hauing a determination and vehement desire to touch his holy & annoyn∣ted thumbe which then appeared next her, if it were possible; and because it was a part of his hand which so often had eleuated the immaculate body of our B. Sauiour Iesus Christ, she purposed not to leaue it vnhand∣led for her last farewell. This her determination and purpose she presently performed,A miracle. and taking the thumbe in her hand, by the instinct of Almighty God, she gaue it a little pull, only to shew her loue and desire of hauing it. The se∣quele was miraculous: for behold she not imagining any such matter would haue fol∣lowed, by the diuine power, the thumbe was instantly loosed from his hand, and being separated she carryed it away safely both flesh, skinne, and bone without sight of any, to her great ioy and admiration. O strange and miraculous separation! O bene∣fit past all requitall! The thumbe of a man newly dead and quartered, to depart from the hand, as it were, sponte sua, of it owne
accord, to pleasure a friend, that loued him so entirely, and that in the middest of so many hundreds of people, of a different Re∣ligion, yet not espyed by any. But the strangnes therof I leaue to your pious consideration, confessing my selfe altogeather vnworthy, and not any wayes able to explicate the worthines of the same. The Vir¦gin vpō the for∣said mi∣racle became a Nūne.This yonge Gentlewoman presently vpon this miraculous purchase, hauing fully re∣solued to forsake the vanityes of the world, and especially this our troublesome Coun∣trey, went not long after beyond the seas, carrying with her this pretious Relique, which she much esteemed. There she de∣uoted herselfe to S. Augustine, and is since become a venerable Nunne of the same Or∣der. Afterward she hearing of this Martyrs owne brother to liue in the Seminary at Doway, sent him for a token, a little peece of the same thumbe, inclosed in a letter written with her owne hand, protesting the verity of all the aforesayd narration.
Jam Virtus, pietas, redeunt iam saecula prisca Tu Stephanus, Saulus dum tibi frater erat!
OF THE CONVERSION OF his Brother to the Catholike faith. CHAP. XI. SEING I HAVE now agayne made men∣tion of this our Martyrs brother, I thinke it will not be vngratefull to the Reader, if I relate briefly how he came to be a Catholike,The mā¦ner of his bro∣thers Conuer∣sion. & how afterward he took his iourney to Doway, & there put in practise such his good purpose, as was to follow the stepps of his deare brother, whose life & death I haue rehearsed. Verily whosoeuer readeth it, shall find the intercession of this Saint to haue bene the only cause (next after God)
of all his good. I haue declared already how little hope there was of his Conuersion, when his brother was liuing: for although he was young, yet was he obstinate, and rather in∣clyned to a Puritanicall spirit, then any way fauouringe the Catholike doctrine, nay he was euer brought vp where he neuer heard any good report of a Catholike, no not so much, as that they were honest men. I haue likewise shewed the great desire the blessed Martyr had to bring his Brother to be a member of the Catholike Church,The ob∣stinacy of his brother before his Con¦uersion & the great care he tooke for his conuersion. I haue further sett downe the Martyrs strange manner of finding him; and being found, the vnbrotherly salutation he gaue the finder, whose behauiour was such, as time and place would not giue leaue once to speake of Reli∣gion. Finally I haue mentioned, that the cause of the holy Martyrs cōming to London whē he was taken, specially was his brother Iohns loue: but indeed he was martyred before euer he could see him, and so he neuer vsed vnto him any perswasions or reasons for Religion, nor yet commended he him to any one friends
care, so hastened was his vnexpected death. Now I will truly relate the manner of his Conuersion, being it cannot but redound highly to the glory of God, and honour of the blessed Martyr, who by his prayers ob∣tayned that in heauen, which he himselfe could not effect on earth. Thus then it hap∣pened. This Martyrs Brother called Iohn Geninges being in London at the very time of our Chāpi∣ons apprehension, cōdemnation, & execution, hearing of the same, rather reioyced, then any way bewayled the vntimely & bloudy end of his nearest allyed, hoping therby to be rid of all perswasions, which he mistrusted he should receyue from him touching Catho∣lique religion.The oc∣casion of his bro∣thers Cōuer∣sion. And through blind wilfulnes intending to withstand all spirit of grace, he therfore neglected, yea rather scorned to go to see his brother, eyther imprisoned, arraigned, or martyred; such was the fro∣ward blindnes of his heresie. But about ten dayes after his execution towards night, ha∣uing spent all that day in sport and ioylity, being weary with play, he resorted home,
where to repose himselfe he went into a se∣cret chamber. He was no sooner there set downe, but forthwith his hart began to be heauy, and his head melancholy, and he be∣gan to waygh how idlely he had spent that day. When he was entred into such conceits, there presently was represented vnto his mind a strange imagination, and apprehension of the death of his Brother, and amongst other thinges, how he did forsake not long before all worldly pleasure, & for his Religion only indured intollerable torments. Thus within himselfe he made long dis∣courses concerning his Religion and his Bro∣thers, comparing the Catholike manner of liuing with his, and finding the one to desire payne, the other pleasure, the one to liue strictly, the other licentiously, the one to feare sinne, the other to runne into all kind of syn, being stroken with exceeding ter∣rour and remorse, he wept bitterly, desiring God, after his fashion, to illuminate his vn∣derstanding, that he might see and perceyue the truth. O what great ioy & consolati∣on felt he at that instant! Nay what reuerence
on the suddayne began he to beare to the B. Virgin and the Saynts of God, which before he had neuer scarse heard talke of! What strange motions, as it were inspirations, with exceeding readines of will to chaunge his Religion, possessed his soule! And what a heauenly conceipt had he now of his deare brothers felicity! He imagined then he saw him;His bro∣thers vow and per∣fomance he thought he heard him. In this extasy of mind he stayd not long, before he vowed, as he lay prostrate on the ground, to forsake kinred and Countrey to finde out the true knowledge of his brothers fayth, which he soone after performed (although with much difficulty) and departed England without aduertising anyone of his friendes, and went beyond the seas to performe his former promise. Finally he attributed his Conuersion wholy (next after God) to the intercession of his blessed brother. And truely no man according to reason can otherwise imagine, seing of a Protestant he became a Catholike in fayth, without perswasion or conference with any one man in the world.His fi∣nall Cō∣uersion. But sanguis Martyrum (as Ter∣tullian
sayth) est semen Ecclesiae, The bloud of martyrs is the seed of the Church of Christ. Therfore we may now cease to meruayle, seing all England hath bene sowed with like grayne, that it hath already reaped at the least twenty for one, our spring still conti∣nuing, our haruest euer increasing. And seing Almighty God hath vouchsafed to ho∣nour our Nation with so many glorious Mar∣tyrs, it remayneth that we beholding the manner of theyr conuersation, may imitate theyr fayth, and endeauour to follow theyr happy footsteps. In the meane time it be∣houeth vs Catholikes touching our selues to pray for grace and perseuerance in that which wee haue begun. Touching others, Charity cannot but inforce vs to pray for theyr conuersion. Let vs therfore dayly and hourely with the Prophet Ieremy cry out vnto our Lord: Recordare Domine, quid acciderit nobis: Intuere,The Cō¦clusion. & respice opprobrium nostrum: haereditas nostra versa est ad alienos: domus nostrae ad extraneos; pupilli facti sumus absque patre: matres nostre quasi viduae. O Lord remember what hath
happened vnto vs: behold and see our great reproach; our inheritance is gone to stran∣gers; our houses to aliens; we are become children without a father; our mothers are made as it were widdowes. Let vs moreouer in our priuate deuotions, implore the suffra∣ges of such holy Saynts, who in our misera∣ble Countrey haue lost theyr liues for Gods quarrell. And let vs finally follow the coun∣sell of holy S. Ephrem, saying: Imitemur San∣ctos, vt per eorum merita cum ipsis in regnis cae∣lestibus gaudeamus: Let vs imitate Saynts, that through theyr meritts, we may ioy with them in the heauenly kingdome. Which God of infinite goodnes graunt, for Christ Iesus sake. Amen. FINIS.
THE APPROBATION. VITA Sancti huius, ac constantissimi Martyris, & Sacerdotis, cuius pugna plu∣rimùm creuit & pugnantis gloria, hoc libello sincerè descripta, proelo digna est, vt eius in∣tuentes exitum, conuersationis fidem imitentur. Audomaropoli 10. Feb. 1614. Ioannes Redman S. Th. D. librorum Censor.
A BRIEFE RELATION BY WAY OF APPENDIX, Concerning the Life and Death of M. Swithune Welles Gentleman, companion and fellow-Martyr to the foresayd M. Ed∣mund Geninges Priest. ALTHOVGH I haue already briefely touched the euer-wor∣thy Martyr M. Swithune VVelles,Chap. 8. & 9. yet hauing now receaued a more āple Re∣lation of his excellēt ver∣tues, shining both in his life and death, I am inui∣ted to set the same downe by way of Appendix word for word as it came to my hands, that the blessed memory of so renowned a Champion of the Catho∣like
fayth may remayne consecrated to all posterity. He was the youngest sonne of Thomas VVelles Esquire, and brother to that Worthy Confessor Gil∣bert VVelles Esquire, whose immoueable constancy a midst so many,His birth & family & so great persecutiōs vnder the late Queene Elizabeth, hath beene highelie Honorable vnto the Cath. Cause, establishing a happy poste∣rity behind hym, enriched with the ample inheri∣tance of his approued vertues. This Swithune being vertuously educated from his infancy, & carefully instructed in all manner of lear∣ning fitting that age, as he was very pregnant of wit & vnderstanding; so by his especiall industry and diligence he became so singularlie qualified, espe∣cially in the studies of humanitie,His ver∣tuous e∣ducation as he not onely equalled, but far excelled most of his fellowes. He was kind of nature, pleasant of conceit, cour∣teous of behauiour, generous in courage, affable in speach; briefely all his deportment was so prudent∣ly seasoned with vrbanitie, that he delighted his fa∣miliars, gayned friendes, & quailed his enemies. From studies he fell to other laudable exercises fitting his degree, but being now growen to some riper yeares, hee tooke to wife a vertuous Gen∣tlewoman, who togeather with himselfe being most vniustely condemned to death, after a longe and hard imprisonment yielded her blessed soule into the handes of her Creator, in the cōstant confession of our Holy Fayth, in the prison of Newgate, in the yeare of our Lord 1602. In this estate as he grew more mature in age, so
he did in vertues. To the prouident care of a good maister of a family he adioyned many other excellent imployments, highlie to his prayse and honour. For although he were much delighted in hauking, hun∣ting, and other such Gentleman-like sportes, yet he so soberly gouerned his affections therein,His ex∣ercise in riper yeares. that he was content to depriue himselfe of a great part of those pleasures, & retire to a more profitable im∣ployment of trayning vp young Gentlemen both in vertue & learning: wherin he had such happy suc∣cesse, that his Schoole hath byn as it were a fruitfull Seminary to many worthy members of the Catholik Church, whereof one hath already gayned the crown of martyrdome, others yet remaine, some in∣dustrious & paynefull workmen in the happy har∣uest of soules, & some continue strōg & immoueable pillars to support the Cath. Cause agaynst to many grieuous stormes, and tempestes as are daily raysed agaynst it. I shall not need heere to speake how temperate hee was in prosperitie, how contented in aduersitie. Yow shal heare himself an vndoubted witnes heer∣of, excellently expressing the same in his owne wor∣des, taken out of a letter of his, directed vnto a wor∣thy Gentleman M. Gerard Marin his brother-in-law, whose vertuous life and death in the constant pro∣fession of our holie fayth deserueth also great prayse and renowne in the Cath. Church.His im∣prison∣ment. Thus then he writeth, being now a prisoner in the Clincke. The Comfortes which Captiuity bringeth, are so manifold, that I haue rather cause to thanke God
highly for his Fatherly correctiō, then to complaine of any worldly misery whatsoeuer: Dominus de caelo in terram aspexit, vt audiret gemitus compeditorum. Exaudiuit pauperes, & vinctos suos non despexit. In∣trocat in conspectu tuo gemitus compeditorum. Potiùs mihi habetur affici pro Christo, quàm honorari à Christo. These and the like cannot but comfort a good Chri∣stian, and cause him to esteeme his captiuity to be a principall feedome, his prison a heauenlie harbour, and his irons an ornament, and comely badge of Christ himself. These will plead for him, and the prison will protect him. God send me withall the prayers of all good folkes to obtayne some end of all miseries,His cou∣rage & cōstancy in the Ca¦tholike fayth. such as to his holie will and pleasure shalbe most agreable. I haue beene longe tyme in¦durance, & indured much payne, but the many fu∣ture rewardes in the heauenlie payment make all paynes seeme to me a pleasure. And truly custome hath caused, that it is now no griefe to me at all to be barred from company, desiring nothing more thē solitarinesse; but rather I reioice that therby I haue the better occasion with prayer to prepare my self to that happy end, for which I was created, and placed heere by God, assuring my self allwayes of this one thinge, that how few soeuer I see, yet am I not alone: Solus non est, cui Christus comes est. When I pray, I talke with God, when I read he talketh to mee, so that I am neuer alone. He is my chiefest compa∣nion, and onelie comfort: Cum ipso sum in tribula∣tione. I haue no cause to complaine of the hardnes of
prison, considering the effects therof, and the rather because I fasten not my affection vpon worldlie vanities, whereof I haue had my fyll, to my great grief and sorrow. I renounced the world before euer I tasted of imprisonment, euen in my Baptisme,His ioy in suffe∣ring for Christ. which being so, how little doth it import in what place I be in the world, sith by promise I vowed once neuer to bee of the world, which promise & profession how slenderly soeuer I haue kept hereto∣fore, I purpose for the tyme to come, God assisting me with his grace in my commenced enterprise, to continue to my liues end. Mūdus mihi crucifixus est, & ego mundo. Absit mihi gloriari, nisi in cruce Christi. I vt∣terlie refuse all commodities, pleasures, pastimes & delightes, sauing onely the sweet seruice of God, in whom is the perfection of all true pleasures. Vanitas vanitatū, & omnia vanitas praeter amare Deum. Bound I am, and charged with guyes, yet am I loose and vnbound towardes God. And far better I account it to haue the body bound, then the soule to bee in bondage, lyuing at liberty.His hard vsage in prison. But what meane I to make so many wordes to you that know this better thē my self. Beare with mee I pray you for my bold∣nes, & pardon me if I be ouer tedious. Hoc solùm efficit amor. To conclude with some other matter: So it is that I haue heere inclosed a Letter of a contrarie effect to this, directed to a man of a contrary Religiō, wherin you may peruse my estate & vnderstand my request. In case yow shall so thinke good, you may deliuer the same, and further the matter. I would not haue sued to be ryd out of this most vile and
chargeable prison, if I had wherewith to defray so exceeding great expences: for the more vile and hard vsage, the more merit. I am hardly threatned which danger of death. But if it be no worse, I will not wish it to be better▪ God send me his grace, and then I waygh not what flesh & bloud can doe vnto mee I haue answered vnto many curious and dāgerous questions, but I trust with good aduisemēt, not offending my conscience. What will become of it, God knoweth best, to whose holy protection I commit yow. è Carcere & Catenis ad Regnum. Tuus dum vixero, Sw. VV. Loe heere the Heroicall resolution of this noble mynd! see to what sublimitie of Christian perfection his holie sufferinges soone aduaunced him! Briefely his euer memorable deedes far surpassed his wor∣des.His reso∣lution to dy for the Cath faith. How vnconquerable was he in the greatest heat and fury of his persecutions! How vndaunted at the dreadfull sentence of death, of all terri∣bles the most terriblest? How religiously disposed! how zealousely prepared! how compleatly ar∣med did he enter the feild to fight the battaile of our Lord; like a vailiant captaine of Christes well-ordered Army! For euen in the way to his execu∣tion seing by chaunce an old aquaintance of his, he could not forget his wonted myrth, but saluted him in these words. Farewell deare friend (sayth he) farewell all hauking, hunting, and old pastimes,
I am now going a better way. Finally being now come to the place of exe∣cution (which for his greater terror, and reproach was contriued before his owne house, in Grays-Inne-field,His mar∣tyrdome on the North side of Holborne) as one ouer∣ioyed with the burning desire of holy martyrdome, he was so far from intreating any least respite of life, as that he rather hastened the executioner to accom∣plish his greatly expected death. Dispatch M. Topliffe (quoth he) dispatch, are you not ashamed to suffer an old man to stand heere so longe in his shirt in the could? I pray God make yow of a Saul a Paul, of a Persecutor a Catholike Professor. And in these & other like sweet speaches, full of Christian piety, charity, and magnanimity, he happily consum∣mated the blessed course of this his mortal life, with the Crowne of a glorious Martyrdome, the 10. day of December, in the yeare 1592. O blessed life! O happy death! The whole Church triumphāt of heauen reioyceth in your victories:An Apo∣stophe to the Cath. of England the whole Cath. Church militant on earth exulteth in your triumphes. Let then our Cath. Nobility and Gentry emulate, & imitate this rare example. Hence may they learne how sweet the yoake of Christ is, which seemeth to worldly myndes so hard and difficult; how easie and light the burden is, which seemeth so heauy & insupportable. This magnani∣mous spirit & inflamed zeale our holy martyr learned in the schoole of tribulation & persecution, growing with the great Apostle, then most strong when he was most weakened, then most cheerfull when
he was most afflicted; then most couragious, when he was most fiercely assaulted. Let not then your generous hartes bee dismayed, let not your noble courages be quayled: cast your selues securely and confidently into this heauenly fornace, where your fayth and constancy being once tried, shall like most pure and refined gould giue a far more glorious luster, shining before Men and Angells, to the greater glory of your eternall Father, who gra∣ciously vouchsafeth magnificently to Crowne all these transitory & momentary sufferinges, with eternall rewardes. FINIS.
