12495 99839310 3718
A Combat betwixt Man and Death: OR A Discourse against the im∣moderate apprehension and feare of Death. Written in French by I. Guillemard of Champdenier in Poictou. And Translated into English by EDW. GRIMESTON Sargeant at Armes, attending the Commons House in Parliament. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes. 1621.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL St. THOMAS RICHARDSON Knight, Sargeant at Law, and Speaker in the Commons House of Parliament: And To all the Knights, Ci∣tizens, and Burgeses of that honourable Assembly. Most worthily honour'd: BOund by your many bounties to some publike
seruice of acknowledge∣ment and gratitude; I could not in al my poore faculties, finde any so neere fit for your graue acceptance, as this last of my aged labours. Which, though a worke farre from all worth of receit and countenance, of so many exempt and exem∣plarie Iudgements, and learning, for elocution, and substance; yet for the good suggestion of the subiect and obiect; I pre∣sum'd you would not dis∣dayne it, euen your owne noble names inscripti∣ons.
Good Motiues be∣get good actiues; and the speedie way to proceede deaths victor in the con∣templatiue man, is, to practise in the Schoole of the Actiue. There is no such schoole as yours, to teach the conquest of corruption and iniustice; which euery man must first subdue, before hee conquer their conque∣rour. I suppose therefore, I set all mens steps in the way to his conquest; in shewing them your Olym∣pus (where all equall and Common-wealth Com∣bats
are consummate) in my therefore bold dedi∣cation to you. Besides, when combats were an∣ciently intended; Hercu∣les (the Father and Fau∣tor of combats) was in∣uok't; and all your vnited vertues, composing one Hercules; in exploring and extirpating, all the priuie Thefts and violen∣ces of inhumane iniu∣stice, (whose conquest is necessary Vsher to the Combats and conquest of death:) to whom but to your Herculean facul∣ties, could this Combat,
with so sacred decorum be consecrated? And your still willing-to bee-well-employed old Seruant, holding these humane readings and writings, no vnfit contentions for his age to sweate in; hee hopes your most ho∣nour'd and liberall impu∣tations will allow him; not to carry your club idlely, nor for onely of∣fice or fashion. But be this allusion held too light for your grauities. My humble endeuour to serue you worthily, I am sure is serious enough.
And therefore, (euen for the diuinitie of his Presi∣dent that accepted the Will in his weake ser∣uant for the worke) I thrice humbly implore, your religious imitati∣ons; resting Euer your most du∣tifull bounden, ED. GRIMESTON.
The Preamble. WEe reade of a certaine Philosopher called Egesias, who had so great dexteritie to describe the mourne∣full face of this life, and such grace in setting forth the smyling counte∣nance of death, as all men went ioy fully vnto it; yea, many (rauished with the loue thereof) did hasten their ends: Such Philosophie at this day were very seasonable if euer; these hideous Eclipses in the firma∣ment; these rainie cloudes in the ayre: this contagious poyson disper∣sed ouer all; that intestine alterati∣on which doth silently murmure with∣in the bowele of Christendome; that thicke cloude of the East which threa∣tens bourely to fll vpon our decay∣ed
houses; are so many defiances, which Death sends to mortall men, to summon them to the Combat. All men must vndergoe it, of necessitie, no man can free himselfe by flight; there is onely one remedie which of∣fers it selfe vnto vs, that speedily and without delay wee make a fayned Combat against death, to haue some happy presage of victory: As Alex∣ander the Great did, from a duell performed at pleasure, conceiuing that he should get the victory of Da∣rius; for that the souldier which acted his person did vanquish him of Dari∣us. In like sort let vs trie; at the least this triall will teach vs what wee can de, or rather what wee cannot; to the end that after the knowledge thereof, we may haue recourse to him who makes perfect his power in our weakenesse; to the Eternall, who alone can rescue vs out of the pawes of death. Hee will teach vs moreouer, how much many are to be blamed at this day, which liue in the light of the Sunne of Iustice, to bee so fearefull at the time of death, when as poore
Pagans were so resolute. But you will say vnto mee, What doctrine can wee expect from Pa∣gans? by whom mans life is not in∣structed but ruined, as saith Lactan∣tius; and who are the Patriarkes of Heretickes, as Tertullian doth wit∣nesse. I answere, that if wee had put on Christ after the perfect stature of a Christian man, this labour were in vaine: But for this we may not vt∣terly condemne all humane Philoso∣phie, but the truth which it hath spo∣ken, must be pulled away as from an vniust detayner, saith S. Augustine. Moreouer, long since the maximes of Aristotle and other Philosophers, were allowed in the schoole of Christ, namely, in that which concernes na∣turall things, in which ranke natu∣rall death is Humane Philosophie in so much as she hath yeelded herselfe a seruant to diuine truth, hath not beene reiected but imbraced of the first & most cleere sighted fathers; of Lactantius I say, who hath writ∣ten that Philosophie doth not hurt when as the spirit is seasoned with
religion: Of Clemens Alexandri∣nus, who saith learnedly, That al∣though the Doctrine of our Sauiour be of it selfe sufficient, seeing it is the power and wisedome of God; yet by the doctrine of the Grecians, if it bee not more fortified, it is yet vnable to repell the insulting of Sophisters, and to discouer their ambushes; It is the bedge and rampar of the Lords vine. These great spirits, (saith he, in an∣other place) being free from passions, are accustomed to ayme point blanke and hit the marko of trueth: Thus he speakes, and therefore Lipsius did not forbeare to call it the meanes Manud. lib. 2. c. 19. and reconciler of diuine and humane Philosophie. To conclude; that great Diuine Nazianzene, as if hee had vndertaken the ouerthrow of this pre∣sent obiection, teacheth that this Do∣ctrine should not be basely esteemed, Orat. fune in Basil. for that it seemeth so to some. But wee must hold them sinister and impertinent Iudges, who desire to haue all men like vnto themselues, to the end they might hide themselues with the multitude, and auoide the
censure of ignorance. Finally, wee confesse, that in the mysteries of Christ, he that will follow the opini∣on of Philosophers, shall stumble con∣tinually. But the first death, where∣of we treate, is no mysterie of Christ, but a thing as common as life: What Ensigne-bearer then shall we follow in this; Plato, or Aristotle;  or Seneca? both the one and the other, but our owne aduice aboue all, and aboue our owne aduice the holy Philosophie of the Word of God, Ari∣adnes clue to guide vs in this laby∣rith: Let Seneca vndergoe his owne Law: I haue freed my selfe from all, saith hee, I carry no mans Epist. 45. bookes. I yeeld much to the iudgment of great personages, so I attribute something to my owne. Horace saith, I am not bound to sweare to the words of any master; whereas the gale of my reason shall driue me; there will I cast Anchor; he speakes like a Poet in an extacie. Seneca with a moe setled spirit will say, That the election and direction we Epist. 76. must take in this point, is from per∣fect
reason, by the which we exceede bruite beasts, and come neere vnto God: e might as well haue named the Euangelicall faith, the true con∣suation of reason, but hee under∣stood not the name. But before I conclude, I beseech you Gentlemen reade the whole Dis∣course, and then giue your censures; for as one Swallow makes no Sum∣mer, but many flying in diuerse pla∣ces, and at seuerall times; so if one reason shall not seeme sufficient vnto you, many ioyned together will chase away the apprehension of death. I meane not all apprehension, but the excesse; for it is the end of this Com∣bat, which tends to no other end but to reduce the extreame feare of death, to a iust meane, and to sweeten the imaginary bitternesse: but wholly to pull this feare vp by the roote, is nei∣ther possible nor profitable, to the nd that no man deceiue himselfe: It is not possible, for that man being na∣turally subiect to passion, hee cannot disrobe himselfe vtterly of all passi∣ons but with his humanitie; it is the
worke of death: why then should we feare it? seeing that by the benefit thereof we cast away all feare. Nei∣ther is it profitable during this life; for, as Architas saith, Vertue springs from passions, and prooce∣ding from them, dwels with them; euen as the best harmony is composed of a sharpe Superius and a graue base: euen so feare, like to other pas∣sions, being reduced to a mediocritie, to the seate of true reason, is conuer∣ted into valour, a vertue most neces∣sary in a man. Moreouer, a wise and vnderstanding man must not cast Stobae. Serm. 1. himselfe rashly into dangers; for hee cannot eclipse himselfe of this life, but to the great preiudice, (not of him∣selfe) but of the Church or Common∣weale. Finally, I expect not herein to please all the world; I haue bene long of Solons minde, that in a mat∣ter of importance it is a hard thing to please all men, but I will adde, im∣possible: On the other side I know that Momus the Cynick will shoote against this butte the blackest arrows
of his enuie and disdayne: yet I en∣treate you Gentlemen, not to beleeue his saying, vntill that hee hath done better vpon this subiect; otherwise (as you know) he is not to bee admit∣ted in his opposition. There are twelue houres in the day; if this Discourse be forced to hide it selfe at the first, it may be it will haue passage at the last: and admit it should not happen; that which one spake brauely, I will protest freely, It is enough if I haue few readers, enogh if one, & enough if none at all: for in this matter the ad∣uice which Seneca gaue to his friend Serenus, for a point of tranquillitie, pleaseth me, and I wll depend there∣on. What neede is there (saith hee) to compose bookes, which last whole Lib. de tranquil. vir. c. 1. ages? wilt thou breake thy braine that posteritie may speake of thee? Thou art borne to dye; funerals without pompe are not so full of trouble: wher∣fore if thou doest compose any thing, let it be in a plaine stile, to imploy thine ile time, and for thine owne vse. Euen so I haue ioyfully imployed
my selfe, (according to my poore fa∣cultie) to gather together the points of reason dispersed here and there, against the feare of Death; if it bee for no other then my selfe, yet my la∣bour shall not be in vaine; and hauing done what I could, I shall be ac∣quited. But I had almost forgot to defend my selfe from the iuectiue of some seuere Areopagite, to haue produced the strongest obiections of the most rofane against the immortalitie of the soule: These are (hee will say) stinking irruptions of pestilent excre∣ments, which should be buried in the bottomlesse pit of hell, and not infect the pure ayre of our Horizon: To thi crimination I oppose foure rea∣sons for my iustification; the one is, that the ayre of our Horizon is not pure, but much infected with such contagion, hee that doth not feele it nor heare it: is a lepar and deafe. There is one hath written aboue 20. yeeres since, that impiety which before did but whisper in the eare, and mutter betwixt the teeth, presumed
now to come into the Pulpit and to poure forth her blasphemies; and doe wee not see and heare in this age, (which is much impaired) that the most prophane are in most fauour and authoritie? In this latter plague at Paris, the chiefe Chirurgians of the Citie assembled in their Colledge, where they published by writing all the poy∣son of this malignant disease, and haue according to their Arte, pro∣pounded counterpoysons to quench it; who will blame them? nay, who will not thanke them? The plague of the soules, the damned doctrine of her death, is propounded and refuted by sollide reasons, who will repine at it? The second is taken from the thing it selfe, which is, the immortalitie of the soule. Truth will not be flattered nor disguised, shee contents her selfe with her owne constancie, and her naturall Ornaments; shee is like the Palme tree which the more it is prest downe, the higher it growes: It is like gold, the more it is tried the brighter it shines.
Hee that doubts of his cause likes not many questions; we doubt not of the immortality of the soule; the more she strikes against the stone of contention, the more the fire of her immortall extraction will appeare. The third reason comes from them that contradict the trueth; if you suf∣fer them alwayes to braue it, in the end they will proclaime a triumph. It is not the part of a braue soldier, but of a coward, to suffer his enemy to keepe the field; he must chase him away, and vanquish him if it bee possible. Answere the foole accor∣ding to his folly, saith the wise man, to the end, hee esteeme not himselfe wise. Finally, the order of my disputa∣tion hath held me vnto it, the equall Law of duels binds mee to with∣stand all the attempts which my ad∣uersarie shall deuise to make against me; I entertayn him in the chiefe charge of the feare of death: I am bnd to doe it in the accessory of the immortality of the soule, least I should be held a Preuaricatour, a
turnecoate and a perfidious dissem∣bler of the cause: But it may be some consor will reply, You plant distrust∣full thornes in the hearts of the sim∣ple, which heretofore dia flie ioyfully vpon the wings of the immortality of their soules. I answere, That to pull vp the thornes which Satan and his adhe∣rents haue planted, to resolue diffi∣culties propounded by Sphisticall reasons, is not to plant. Moreouer, simple soules whch haue bin taught in the Lords Schoole, the honour which they owe vnto him, will not suffer themselues to bee dazeled nor deceiued with the illusion of carnall reasons. Thirdly, humane fragilitie is such, that these which now saile happily in the sea of this world by the fauourable winde of diuine grace, may to morrow strke against the rockes of incredulitie haue a contra∣ry winde and suffr shipwracke, and so haue eede of the answeres ere set downe. To conclude, counterpy∣sons are not for the sound, but for
the sicke and infected: these confu∣tations are not for them which bee cleane in heart and sound in spirit, but for such as irreligion and pre∣sumption of humane wisedome haue bewitched. Othou the Crator of all things, the Authour of our life, the Inspirer of our soules, the Father, Sonne and holy Ghost, one true and onely God; I humbly beseech thee, illuminate the eyes of my vnderstanding, that I may plainely see the happy issue of fearefull death, that it will please thee so to purifie the thoughts of my soule, that shee may fully apprehend the true causes of her immortality: that it will please thee so to fauour my penne, that it may write worthily vp∣on so worthy a subiect; that the worke finished, thou mayest be glorified, the Reader edified, and my selfe fortified. Amen.
The Combate be∣twixt Man and Death. The first Argument ta∣ken from the Instrumen∣tall cause of eternal life. The only meanes to attaine to the perfection of that good which the world so much desi∣reth, should not giue any amaze∣ment to the world. Death is the only meanes. Therefore Death should not giue any amazement to the world. THE first propo∣sition of this Argument doth plainely iustifie
it selfe; for without excepti∣on all men desire the happi∣nesse of life, the perfection of Soueraigne good, which is the beatitude of the holy Spirit, called eternal life: I ex∣cept not ill doers, for they erre in doing ill, and either beleeue that it is good, or the way which tends vnto it. But there is but one way to attaine vnto this good, which is death. Now then to abhorre this death more then horror it selfe, greedily to desire that good which only death can giue vs; to desire health and reiect the potion whereby we may re∣couer it; to affect the plea∣sures which (they say) are in those fortunate Ilands, but without any figure in that heauenly Paradice; to refuse
to enter into that shippe which alone can bring vs thither, were to mocke at himselfe. Let vs proceed and come to the proofe of the 2. proposition, for thereon is grownded the force of our Syllogisme: That Death is the onely meanes to attaine vnto the perfection of life, is manifest, in that the per∣fection of euery thing is the enioying of the ends; all the lines of our dessignes, all the proiects of our enterpri∣ses, all our sweating and toyle tend, and aime at the end. Who knowes not that death is the first end of life? feeles not but that life in her greatest vigour driues him directly thither? all men may see that life is vnited insepa∣rably
vnto death, by the con tinuance of the same successi∣on of times, cōsider this time, whereof the enioying is the life. There are three parts, that which is past, the pre∣sent, and the future: the pre∣sēt is the bond of that which is past, and of the future: and as this article of the present time runnes as violently to∣wards the future, as the Pri∣mum Mobile turnes in the heauē, so doth ourlife run vio lently towards her end. This life is a very way, as soone as thou doest enter into it, and makest but one step, it is the first pace towards the end of the way, towards the end of life, which is death: for the going out of the cra∣dle is the beginning of the entry to the graue, whether
thou wilt or wilt not, whe∣ther thou thinkest of it or not; yet it is true, yea as cer∣taine as in an howre-glasse, where the first graine of sand which runnes is a guide vnto the last to the end of the ho∣wer: Euery day we passe car∣ries away some part of our life, yea as we grow, life de∣creaseth; this very day which we now enioy is deuided be∣twixt Death and vs: for the first howres of the morning being past to the present (in their flowing) are dead to vs: wherefore Seneca had of∣ten this sentence very fitly in 2. Sam. cha. 14. his mouth. Death hath degrees, yet that is not the first, Which diuides vs in twaine, but of the death is the last. And it is the very reason
why that wise Tekohite sayd vnto Dauid in the present 2. Sam. 2, 14. time: For certaine we die, and slide away as the waters which returne no more. So many degrees as there are in life, so many deaths, so many beginnings of another life: Let vs examine them, and take speciall note of the first death, to iudge of the latter; for herein as in all the other workes of wise Nature, the end is answerable to the be∣ginning. The first degree of mans life is, when being fashioned and framed, hee liues in the wombe of his mother; this is a vegetatiue life, a life proper to plants only, wherein hee may receiue nourishment & grow; in this life he conti∣nues commonly but nine
moneths, at the end of which time hee dies, but a happy death whereby he gaines the vse of the goodly sences of nature, that is to say, of sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching: behold then the first death when as the Infant by the force of nature is driuen out of that fleshie pri∣son, comming from which place he striues and stretch∣eth out himselfe; hee is angry with nature, and cries in∣cessantly, but he is ill aduised; it is his good, and the begin∣ning of his perfection. Now followeth the infantiue life, not differing from that of beasts, which extends vnto seuen yeares compleate; of this life child-hood is the death, which begins at eight yeares, and retaines nothing
of the Infancy. As for the exterior of man, which is the body, not the flesh, nor bones; not the foure principall hu∣mors, if that bee true which the Phisitions hold for a Maxime, that our bodies change all their substance e∣uery seuen yeares. And in truth how could our sliding nature so long subsist? if it were not maintained by drinke and meate, the which by a certaine vertue infused into all the members of the body, digested, purged, and applied, doth transubstantiat it selfe into our very bodies proportionably as the sub∣stance decayes: as appeares by the words in the booke of Wisedome, cap. 5. Being borne wee suddenly desist from that being wherein wee
were borne. It is no more the first body which wee brought into the world, that is dead; wee haue an other in our child-hood the third de∣gree of life, which extends vnto 18. yeares, at the end wherof his death encounters him; in the which beginnes the 4. degree of life, which goes vnto 22. and then dies: but from this death riseth youth, the 5. degree which florisheth vnto 30. yeares, & then his flower falls and his youth is lost; but a rich losse, seeing, thereby man-hood the perfect age is gotten, which being strong and vigo∣rous climbes vnto 50. yeares, and this is the 6. degree of life. Then comes age the 7. degree of life, and the death of man-hood, at what time
the spirit is fortified, and growes more ripe in good Counsell, and wiser in his actions; this life ascends vnto the decrepit age as they call it, which begins at 70. yeares, where rests the death of age, and so runnes on vnto the graue all the remainder of his life: and this is the 8. de∣gree of life. In the end suc∣ceeds in his turne the last, principall, and most to be de∣sired death; I say the princi∣pall, for that it makes an end of all the other deathes that went before, and feares no more the miseries of life: I say to be desired; for she alone doth crowne the actions of mortal life with glorious im∣mortality; it is the hand which sets vpon our heads the flourishing Diadem of
eternall life. It is the last staffe of the ladder manifested vnto Iacob by vision, ordained by God, to the end wee may thereby ascend vp into heauen: It is that dun horse, that is to say, pale and mournefull to our Apoc. 6. 8. opinions, but yet wee must backe him to runne the car∣reere of death, to passe vnto that most happy aboad. Poore man thou tremblest at the shadow of death, thou doest crie and howle when she layes hold on thee, euen so thou diddest when thy mo∣thers strength cast thee out of her wombe: if then thou haddest had thy iudgement neate as now thou hast, thou wouldest haue held thy selfe happy to haue left a most fil∣thy prison within the cir∣cuite
of that round Citty: In like sort if now, thou hadst thy vnderstanding and Spi∣rit Rom. 12. 2. transformed and renewed (as the Apostle speakes) thou shouldest see plainely that what doth terrifie thee, is that which should assure thee. But yet if God hath not imparted vnto thee the light of his grace, take aduice of humane reason, call Seneca Epist. 24. & 103. vnto thee, who had but the eyes of a man, and consider what he sayth; thou shalt find that in it are no ambushes nor constraint, it is onely pure and simple nature, which speakes by reason; it is an vndoubted Maxime, that na∣ture alwayes tends and at∣taines for the most part to the perfection of her worke.
Man is her Master peece, all other Creatures are made for him, the perfection of man is his perpetuity in a most happy life, nature leads man by degrees to this per∣fection. We see she failes not in the second degree▪ seeing that the Infant borne is much more perfect then that which is newly ingendred in the wombe: it failes no more in the third, nor cōsequently to the eighth, as I haue shewed. Let vs conclude thereby, that it is impossible she shold faile in the principall, which is the ninth degree of life, which shee must perfectly fi∣nish: wee must iudge of the end of the worke by the be∣ginning and progresse. Fi∣nally, if the study of Philoso∣phy bee a kinde of death, as
Philosophers hold, for that man is sequestred from the company of men, and the va∣nities of the world, to haue his spirit free and at liberty in his braue meditations: and if in this estate man is more accomplished, and more perfectly happy, without comparison, then they that trouble themselues continu∣ally with the affaires of this actiue life; Oh what shall it bee when as the soule purged from the infection of the sen∣ses, freed from all commerce with the body, shall be whol∣ly in it selfe ennobled with a supernaturall grace; illumi∣nated with a celestiall flame, & inspired with an vnspeake∣able ioy: how beautifull, hap∣py, and ioyfull shall shee be? To this death then let vs di∣rect
our vowes, and our eies: let vs take acquaintance and be familiar with her; shee is our friend, since that Iesus Christ did vanquish and sub∣due her for our sakes; shee is prepared for vs as a way, into which wee must of necessity enter, to goe into our Coun∣trey which is heauen: It is the onely meanes ordained of God, to go vnto that most blessed Mansion. Let vs then stretch out our armes coura∣giously, and with a smiling countenance (when we shall see her turned towards vs, making signe that shee will imbrace vs) let vs receiue her; for shee is a necessary gift to our cortupted nature, which wee must not reiect, but im∣brace, as Saint Chrysostome saith. In 10. Mat.
The first Obiection. Euery end of a worke is not the finall cause; therefore it fol∣lowes not that death is the fi∣nall cause of life, although it be the extreame end. THere are three cōditi∣ons Arist. l. 2. Phys, c. 2. necessary to a finall cause, the one is, that it be the last point of the opera∣tion; the other is, that the worke bee finished for the loue thereof: if the first bee found in death, the second (which is the principal) falls, seeing that the actions of life tend not vnto death, as to their deare and best beloued. Answer. I said not that death was the finall cause of life, but the way; yea, the onely
way which leades vs vnto it, and that for the loue of that great and foueraigne good, which is ioyning to the gate of death, we should desire it, and not bee amazed at it, af∣ter the example of S. Paule, who writing to the Philip∣pians, desired to be dissolued, c. 1. v. 23. and to be with Christ, the which was farre better for him, that he might bee crow∣ned with a crowne of Iustice, 2. Tim. 4. and enioy that vnspeakeable good, as hee saith else-where. But some Infidels will say, I demand proofes hereof fauo∣rable to my reason. I answer, that hee hath put the flame of reason into thy vnderstan∣ding, who doth illuminate e∣uery man which commeth into the world, hath presen∣ted his grace vnto thee in the
Gospell to beleeue, and there is nothing but the barre of thy sinnes that doth hinder thee: neither is this Gospell concealed from any, but such as haue the eyes of their vn∣derstanding blinded by the Prince of this world. But if thy reason, beeing blinded, cannot apprehend the soue∣reigne Good which is in death: yet shall you plain∣ly see a meere priuation from all miseries; an absolute rest and a tranquility which can∣not be interrupted; and ther∣fore if there were no other but this reason, death should cause no amazement, but ra∣ther giue contentment, con∣sidering the estate of this life.
The second Obiection. All demolishings carry defor∣mity, and cause horror. Death is a demolishing of man; therefore death causeth hor∣ror. PAllaces, Temples, and other buildings, yeeld a pittifull spectacle when we see them ruined: and what shall man doe, who exceedes in excellency all buildings; yea, the earth, the heauen, and all that we behold? what can hee doe, lying vpon the earth in death, but perplexe our mindes? To this I answer by distin∣ction to the similitude, and then I flatly deny the appli∣cation. I say therefore to the
first proposition, that there are two sorts of demoli∣shings, the one is necessary, and wisely vndertaken for a better structure; the other is preiudiciall and vndiscreetly done, by reuenge for a totall ruine; I confesse that this in its deformity, should giue cause of horror, but I cannot confesse that the like is in death, in the demolition of man, but onely the first: for as a wise master of a familie, when hee sees that his house threatneth ruine, that it sinks in many places, and the walls open, commands it to be pul∣led downe, that with the ru∣ines and materials hee may raise another to cōtinue ma∣ny yeares: euen so nature, a most expert. Architectrice, seeing man ladē with woūds,
deiected with misery and me∣lancholy, cōsumed with age, and grown croked with the goue, & catares, sowe him couptible in the graue, that 1. Cor. 15. 42. after many changes, she may raise him incorruptible by the powerful voice of Christ. Ioh. 5. 25. If the earthly habitation of this mansion bee destroyed, saith the Apostle S. Paule, we haue a dwelling with God, 2. Cor. 5. that is to say, an eternal house in heauen, which is not made with hands: and therefore we sigh and desire so much to be cloathed with our mansi∣on which is in heauen, and this is for our soule, expect∣ing the Resurrection of her body: And this body, sayth the same Apostle, being sown in dishonour, shall rise againe 1. Cor. 15. 43. 44. 45. in glory, sowne in weakenesse
shall rise in strength; and sowne a sensuall body, shall rise a spirituall body. What thē can man produce against this, but onely some murmu∣ring of his Incredulity, that it exceedes the bounds of rea∣son, without the which hee will not assure himselfe of a∣ny thing? I answer, that the full perswasion of that which is written in the holy word, is well grounded vpon faith, a particular gift of heauen to all true Christians, touching the returning of our bodies: as for the reasonable coniec∣ture of our future life after death, I deny that this hath beene altogether vnknowne to men guided onely by the instinct of nature, and I will proue my assertion sufficient∣ly in the 39. Argument, if
God so please. To this first consolation, we will adde a second, that is, nature finding the declining and wasting of the substance of man, came by a sacred ma∣riage to stay some portion in the matrix of his deare moi∣ty, and to fashion and bring forth many other reasona∣ble creatures, at diuers times, creatures which haue the same flesh and bones of fa∣ther and mother. And if it be true, that a good friend is a second selfe, what shal a good sonne bee, but himselfe with∣out any addition? whereby is plainly manifested, what Ma∣crobius saith, that the body Lib. 7. of his Saturnales. recoiues three aduantages of the reasonable soule, that is to say, he liues, he liues well, and in succession of time, he
remaines immortall: Eccle∣siasticus goeth art her, saying That if the father of a childe dyes, it is all one as if hee were not dead; for hee hath left his like behind him, hee hath seene him, and hath ioyed hauing left one who shall take reuenge of his ene∣mies, and requite his friends. And this was it which mo∣ued that great Law-giuer Plato, to make a law, that e∣uery Lib. 4. c. 30. de Legib. man at a comperent age should marrie a wife; else he shuld be called before the Iudge, condemned in a fine and declared infamous; for that (as he afterwards sayth) euery man should consider in himself, that there is a certen power & efficacie of nature, which makes men to purchase an Immortalitie: he would
inferre, that whosoeuer leaues children doth reuiue in some sort in them. It is an order of nature which we must in∣violablie obserue, ingendring we perish of the one side, but we begin again of the other. If our parents by their fading and dying substance had not giuen vs life, we could not haue entred into it of our selues; what wrong is it if nature doth that of vs for our children, which she bath done of our Parents for vs? Moreouer death (which is a priuation of life) is a begin∣ning of life in nature, remay∣ning in the first matter, by the which she disposeth her selfe to a new forme, not to continue still at this defor∣med spectacle. Thirdly, wha great deformitie see you in
death, which is not in him that sleeps? Fourthly, that de∣formitie which may be, is not seene by him whom it concernes, it is to the sur∣uiuor that it should be hide∣ous: but most commonly they find it pleasing, reaping by that meanes large succes∣sions, elboe roome, freedome from comptroll: and if it were otherwise, the world would not be able to con∣taine vs. And thus much for the first part of the obiecti∣on; As for the 2. which re∣sembleth the demolishing of building to death, this simili∣tude hath no proportion, yea it is contrary to the state of the question; for what makes a ruined building deformed? It is the disorder we see in it, it is but a heape of stones and
timber; the stones are not layd in order one vpon ano∣ther, neither is the timber raised as it ought to be: It is then the forme that wants when as the materialls re∣maine: but in man, or rather a dead carcase, the soule which is the forme receiues no blemish, she is freed from the surprises of the graue. Thou doest not complaine that the egge-shell is broken, when a chicken comes forth: neither is the body of man to be lamented when as the soule flies away. But what great difformitie doest thou see in a dead body? thou seest little or no diffe∣rence at all with one that sleeps; this doth not terrifie thee, why should the other a∣maze thee? especially if thou
doest consider that the body which is dead, is truely a∣sleepe, the which is a subiect of an other discourse, as we shall see if God please. But all things haue their period, the ladder his last staffe, and life her last degree. Thou did∣dest ascend ioyfully, so must come downe againe with the like content, if in the last steppe or in the midst thou beest not carried away acci∣dentially by some violent death; but to returne to the place where thou hast beene taken, thy nature doth ex∣hort thee, yea it forceth thee. If too vniust, thou doest not willingly giue thy consent: looke into the degrees of life, and this contemplation will giue thee cōsolation against death: when thou wert borne
into the world, there was found in thee an appetite to some substāce or meat with∣out thy selfe, the which ha∣uing beene supplied thee, and sent by the mouth into the stomacke, was conuerted in∣to a concoted iuyce, and then transformed into bloud by the liuer, refined into spi∣rits by the heart, and finally fitted to thy decaying body: thou didst receiue nourish∣ment, force, and Ioy, these are the first degrees of life: then climing higher thou hast extended the fiue facul∣ties of thy senses, thine eye to see beautiful things, thine eares to heare melodious sounds, thy nose to smell pleasing sents, thy mouth to tast holesome and delightfull sauours, and thy hand to
handle smooth and wel poli∣shed things; these are other degrees of the same life: At length the reasonable soule comes to play his part, the vnderstanding desires to know whatsoeuer the sences apprehend: whatsoeuer his eye sees, his eare heareth, his hands touch; and moreouer what they neither see, heare nor touch, reason flying to his age giues some light, con∣tributes discourses and lends him Counsell; Memorie a faithfull register keepes a Iournall booke of all; and will quickned by the goodly obiect which presents it selfe to the vnderstanding, giues her consent and keepes all ioyfull: so as by the Imagi∣nation which is alwayes rea∣dy at the first sommons, that
which hath once pleased the minde is often repeated; and these are the last and good∣liest degrees▪ of life, after which a wise man should pre∣pare himselfe to decline, & it he will not doe it willing∣ly, his owne temper which had raised him, will draw him & force him thereunto mau∣gre his resistance: the na∣turall heate diminisheth, the Imagination (which consists in a certaine point of heat) growes weake, the radicall moysture consumes, and the memorie is lost; reason doats for that the memorie is not firme enough, nor the Imagi∣nation strong▪ to conclude, the will can no more loue any thing, shee is still way∣ward and displeased, and the vnderstanding doth nothing
but doae, for that the vi∣gour and vertue of the sences is decayed; they which were wont to make a faithfull re∣port of al things in this world vnto the soule, haue no more any power, the sight growes dimme, the hearing hardned the smelling verie dull, the mouth without tast, the bo∣dy without appetite, the hands knotted with the Goute. Finally, it is no more what it was. And how then should these building of the bodie, subsist? seeing the foun dations decay daily. This fa∣cultie which desired and re∣ceiued sustenance is altoge∣ther distasted, that fierie ver∣tue which did concoct it, suf∣fers it to goe downe all rawe; finally, that power which did nourish and giue strength
vnto the body, is now be∣come vnable, so a the bodie withers, growes crooked and leane, and in the ende dyes. Thou doest imagine (O ) that this last period of y bodies fayling is very horri∣ble, thou doest beleeue it▪ but thou art deceiued, seeing it giues a finall end to all other defects which troubled thee & made thee wayward. Alas wouldest thou alwaies liue & languish in this pittifull in∣fancie, to which thy many yeares doe reduce the? re∣member what thou some∣times desired, seeing these old men twise children, when as thy reason and iudgement (being ound and perfect) made thee conceiue what a pittie and miserie it was to liue in that estate: remember
(I said) that thou desiredst not to liue so long, now the effect of thy desire, the ende of thy life offereth it selfe, which thou canst not, nor maist in reason refuse. The third Obiection. The Losse of Happines causeth an insupportable griefe. Death is the losse of happinesse. Therefore, &c. THe rest of the minde is the happinesse of life, to the which man i led of himselfe, if he doth not wretchedly resist it; for his owne reason makes him easely and distinctly to know his soule, his bodie, and those thing which are for his body: she teacheth him that onely
his soule is his, and that his body and those things which concerne it, depend of an o∣ther; and therfore should not affect them but so far as they are profitable: and not be troubled for any accident that shall befall them, as not concerning him, seeing it toucheth not the soule: so as the spirituall and bodily in∣firmities to which the bo∣dy is subiect, as pouertie, re∣proach and disdayne of men; which may happen to a man without dert, should be in∣differēt vnto him, seeing they are out of his power. As for that which is in his power, as to allowe, desire, poursue the good and good things which are honest and according vn∣to reason; and contrariwise to hate and flye the euill, hee
applyes himselfe  o easy, ▪  he  cont vnlesse  death comm betweene do interpt this happi, and . The Answer▪ It is true that the  of  doth  in  parts▪ at all  ad in ∣uery place. And it is also true that the very meanes o at∣taie vnto it is veue▪ But it is likewise  that  the one nor the other can be obtained in this life▪ all wee can haue is but a shadowe of the one and the other, as far different from the ffect as night is from day; for night
is the shadow, and the day is the light of the Sun: which is  cause hat they which in  o a  full of dagerous beasts, being surpri∣zed by night, desire nothing more  to see day appa so  that are in this life should desire nothing but to see the day of the Lord, & the Sun of Iustice to shine vpon thm▪ I they  it no▪ they are not tue n but tish, hauing taken the ha∣bit of beasts. But to answer more categorically to these Soicks▪  especially o Epict from whom this obiection is drawne, to say that the bodie and those ex∣ternall thing which hap∣pen vnto man, should not bee respected of him, it is the farthest from reason
that can be, euen to the vulgar fort, who whollie runne after honour, riches and pleasure: and to say that a man in some great Infir∣mitie either of bodie or minde feeles no paine, were to make a iest of himselfe. Aristotle (called the ye of reason) is not of that opini∣on; these are his words in his Booke of Manners: It is Elbi. ad Nicoma. L. 1. c. 8. impossible (faith hee) or verie hard, that any one should do wel without means and preparation. Many things are effected by friends, by wealth, by credit and authoritie; and they that are depriued of these thinges blemish their happinesse, like vnto them that are issu∣ed from obscure parents, who neither haue children,
nor good children, or that are crooked. For he is not perfectly hap∣pie that is deformed, of a base race, and without issue. This is too much; see what Antipater one of the great authors of the Stoicks sayth, who attributs something, al∣though but little, to exterior things. But what sayth Seneca? the Seneca. Epis 92. wise man writes, that he is happie, yet he can neuer at∣taine vnto that Soueraigne good, vnlesse the naturall Instruments be propicious. And although the bodie, and the exterior things be not the soule which is the prin∣cipal sea of happines, yet are they accessories, Instruments and meanes which God hath ordayned and vnited; and
therefore they should tast of the happinesse of the soule, if there be any, as the fire ds∣perseth his heat in the ayer that doth enuiron it. As for the other ground of this imaginarie felicitie that man doth easily apply himselfe to seeke that onely which is ho∣nest and according vnto rea∣son: it is a greater Parodoxe then the precedent; for the most vertuous man in the world hath a continual com∣bate against vice, & is neuer at truce; how then hath he any peace or rest? The eye o his vnderstanding is daze∣led at the shinning of his o∣ueraigue good; his wil straies from the true ende, or in ayming mistakes one for an other: and therefore most commonly if hee be not di∣rected
and animated from a∣boue, he followes that which he should fly, and flyes that which he should follow, so as he shall neuer hit the white, now win the Crowne of Iu∣stice, which is the true feli∣citie of man. Let vs then con∣clude with S. Iohn That what 1. Iohn. 3. Coloss. 3. we shalbe doth not yet ap∣peare; with S. Paul, That our life is hidden in Christ: That it is in safe keeping, and that the ende of this mortall life is the beginning of the immortall. Let vs say in the ende, that all things haue their Periode, that wee are borne to liue. We liue to die, and wee die to liue againe, but without any more tur∣ning, for the Circle shalbe returned to his point and the light of the bodie shall suffer
no more eclipse: Come then O gentle death, which doest make an end of the miseries of this world, and beginnest the happinesse of Heauen; which dost free vs from mor∣tall paine, and bringest vs to enioy immortall good, which doest conuert our teares and toyles into ioy & rest, which doest change our fantasticall treasure into that which is certaine, and our temporall into spirituall and eternall. Retire then O you deceitfull vanities, for the charme of your pleasures cannot pre∣uaile with me who am resol∣ued to die; hold your tongue also O vaine deception of Philosophie and humane tra∣dition; for I am taught by the death of my Sauiour, & by his resurrection, that my
greatest perfection is, to ac∣knowledge my imperfection, my blindnesse, my death in my sinnes: and that my grea∣test happynesse in this world is to obteyne remission of my sinnes, and to mortifie my corrupted members, to the end, that a good death may soone bring mee to the ha∣uen of saluation, and eternall life, Amen. The second Argument taken from the vicious fruits of the extreame feare of death. That which breedes many in∣conueniences in the spirit & bodie of man, must bee spee∣dily
pulled away. The extreame feare of death causeth great inconueniences▪ Therefore that must be speedily pulled away. SOme one sayed truely, (speaking of the exces∣siue apprehension of death,) that it is the ordinary obiect which troubleth the vnderstanding of man, makes him to lose his Iudgement, to abandon all duety, and to cast himselfe into a shame∣full forgetfulnesse of him∣selfe. Let vs. see how: Hee that feares death vnmeasu∣rably, he must of necessitie feare euery thing that may bring it, that is, all that hee sees, and what he cannot dis∣cerne; whereas death lyes in ambush, whereby it happens
that this man doth easily fall into many errours, as into foolish superstition, think∣ing by his voluntarie submis∣sions▪ by mtoring of words not vnderstood, by adoring of stocks, and stones, to moue God to pitty him, and to turne away death, which hee imagines vpon the least acci∣dent, the flying of a bird, or the croaking of a Crow should take him by the throate. So we reade of Ari∣slodemus King of the Messe∣niens, who being in warre a∣gainst his subiects, the dogs howled like Woolues, and an herbe called Dogstooth grew neere vnto his Altar; the which being interpreted by his Soothsayers to bee an ill presage, he concoiued such a feare as hee died. And as
this disordered motion of feare, makes men credulous to the words of Satan, so doth it make them incredu∣lous to the assured promises of the Eternall; the which prouoking the wrath of God, in the end hee doth execute vpon them his sentence pro∣nounced against the fearefull & incredulous, casting them into the Lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Apocal. 21. O how fitly then did Saint Augustine say, that by too much fearing the temporall death, they did ingulfe them∣selues in the eternall: a feare∣full man not onely makes himselfe a slaue to fantasti∣call diuinity, but also a bond∣man to any one that is sub∣iect vnto him▪ said King
Lew. 11. who to assure himself against death shut himselfe vp solitarie at Plessis neere Tours, yet could he not bee confident; the opening of a doore amazed him, he hated all those he suspected, and he suspected all the world: his most confident were dismisss and put from his person, and hee remayned alone melan∣cholie, dreaming, froward, and chollericke, nothing pleased him but onely dis∣pleasure: he grew iealous of his sonne-in-law, of his owne Sonne and his Daughter; on∣ly his Phisitian possest him, controlled him and kept him in awe with his words threat∣ning death; I know well, said hee, (swearing a great oath) that one of these mornings you will send mee away with
the rest, but you shall not liue eight dayes after; Thus this imperious seruant kept his King captiue. Thus this King lost his li∣berty more pretious then his life, for maintaining where∣of, good men should alwaies striue. Wherunto Seneca had Epist. 71. reference when he sayd, that the vilest death was to bee preferred before the honestest seruitude, for that this liber∣ty cannot safely confish but in the contempt of death; as Agis King of Lacedemon taught him that demanded an assured liberty of him: and in truth hee that feares not, death; may passe freely like a Knight without feare, who shall hinder him: seeing the extrem▪ dangers▪ of death cannot amaze him? Moreo∣uer
fearefull persons are the ruine of States and Commo∣nalties; for in the least dāgers, through feare and the threats of great men, they yeeld ea∣sily to a mischiefe, and sub∣iect themselues to the fauour of the wicked and the will of the base multitude. Third∣ly, a man that trembles so at the apprehension of death, runnes into assured misery, which depriues him of all pleasure of life, makes his facewrincle, and grow pale before his time: Which the Italian Gentleman will veri∣fie, who being imprisoned vpon a certaine accusation, and receiuing newes that without all doubt he should lose his head the next day, the feare of one night did so trouble his braine, and di∣stempered
his body with sha∣king, as he became all gray and worne. But ô miserable men, after all your shifts and escapes, in the end you must come and yeeld your selues at the Port of Death: So much the more miserable, (I do not call you miserable for that you are subiect vnto death, but for your extreame feare) that many thinking to free themselues from death, haue run head-long into it: some thinking to escape, haue cast themselues out at a win∣dow and broken their neckes; others flying their pursuing enemies swords, haue leapt like fishes, (but without fins,) into a deepe riuer, as into an assured Sanctuary, where they haue beene drowned. Nay, besides all this, they
which thinking still to de∣lay and escape that which they feare so extreamely, when they see themselues in the bed of death, then doe they vomit out their rage a∣gainst heauen, and exclaime iniuriously against the true God; and being desperate they cast themselues into the infernall gulph. Let vs conclude with Sene∣ca, That the feare of death 1. de Tran∣quil. 11. will neuer profit any liuing man, but drawing him into many miseries which are much more to be feared then death it selfe, will make him in the end insupportable and offensiue to all kind of peo∣ple, yea to himselfe: For ha∣uing his nose groueling to the ground like a hogge, hee will neuer bee able to lift vp
his eies nor his spirit to hea∣uen, where all perfect and as∣sured contentment is to bee found. If yeelding to all this, you will aske me the meanes how to bee freed of this fearefull terror, I will tell you that it is to know what Deathis, as it is taught in the 13. 14. and 20. Argu∣ments; and not to rely vpon doubtfull and false opinions. An Obiection. Euery roote bringing forth fruits worthy repentance should be carefully preserued. The feare of death bringeth forth fruits worthy of re∣pentance. Therefore the feare of death should bee carefully preser∣ued.
WHatsoeuer thou Eccles. 7 the last verse. sayest or doest, re∣member thy end, and thou shalt neuer sinne, sayth the son of Syrach. Answ. the continuall meditation of death to him that knowes it rightly, helpes wonderfully vnto vertue. And Seneca say∣eth, Epist. 121 that man is neuer so di∣uine as when hee doth ac∣knowledge himselfe to bee mortall. Yea it auailes in Christian duties; but that the feare of death is profitable to any thing, I cannot compre∣hend. I will not deny but that many haue bene wonderfully stirred vp to piety by the feare of death, as among o∣thers, the historie makes mentiō of Peter Vualdo in the yeare 1178. who in the city of
Lyons sometime, being as∣sembled with many of the chiefe of the Citty to recre∣ate themselues, it so happe∣ned that one of them fell downe suddenly dead: Vualdo a rich man was more mooued then all the rest, and seized with feare and apprehension, he addicted himselfe more to do penance, and to meditate true piety. But who doth not see that it is not properly death which causeth this inclination to pietie, but the iudgement of God, which wee discerne through death as through a glasse? that it is the worme of Conscience which doth a∣waken vs by the contempla∣tion of Death, and stirres vp sinners to iustice & sanctitie? It is the ignorant confusion
of the second death with the first, which doth so strongly amaze men. Finally, it is a seruile feare and not com∣mendable, yea, condemned of the Pagans themselues, to forbeare to doe euill for Horace Oderunt peccare ma∣li fohmidi∣ne poenae. feare of punishment. Let vs conclude then, That this first death, which is naturall and common to all men (seeing that her poyson hath beene quenched in the bloud of Christ, as Tertullian speaks; seeing that the Crosse: of Ie∣sus Christ hath pulled away her sting, triumphed ouer her, and giuen a counter-poyson for the poyson of sinne) it is not euill, but the greatest good that can arriue to mor∣tall men: and to feare to ob∣tayne so great a good is a vice and no vertue, before all
vpright Iudges. The Third Argument drawne from the Impossibility That onely is to bee feared that lyes in the power of man. Death lyes not in the power of man. Therefore not to be feared. VIce onely should hee feared, to be auoyded; but nothing that is without the power of man is vice, as Epictetus saith in his Enchiridion. Moreouer, that feare is good that can pre∣uent an imminent danger; but to that which can nei∣ther bee remedied nor fore∣seene, feare serues but to ad∣uance it: Man may preuent
and auoyd that which hee holds in his owne power and will: as the approbation of vice, the hatred of goodnesse and of true honour, rashnes, passions, vnlawfull loue, vn∣restrained heauinesse, exces∣siue ioy, vaine hope, damned despaire, &c. But all that which blinde man by his o∣pinion doth affect or feare so much, as wealth, pouertie, the honour or dishonour of the world, life and death, are not tyed to his will, nor subiect to his scepter; And there∣fore the Philosopher will Arist. 3. Ethic. 6. rightly say that neither pouer∣tie, nor sicknesse, (let vs also adde death) nor any thing that flowes not from our owne mallice, are to bee fea∣red, let vs follow the Do∣ctors Tact. 4. Histor. of wisedome (saith Hel∣uidius
in Tacitus) which hold honest things onely to bee good, and dishonest bad: power, nobilitie, and what∣soeuer is without the spirit of man, reputation, riches, friends, health, life and all things that depend of the free will of man, flow neces∣sarily & perpetually from the decree of the Eternall: and to seeke to hinder their course, were to striue to stay the mo∣tion of the heauen and starres. This prouidence of God dispersed throughout all the members of this Vni∣uerse, hath infused into euery mooueable thing, a secret & immooueable vertue, as Boe∣tius saith, by the which shee doth powerfully accomplish all things decreed in its time, and place and order;
To seeke to breake the least linke of these causes chayned together, were as much as to runne headlong against a rocke to ouerturne it. I will that thou knowest the howre & place of thy deceasse, that to auoyd it thou flyest to a place opposite vnto it, that thou watchest the houre; yet shalt thou find thy selfe arri∣ued and guided to the place, at the houre appointed, there to receiue thy death: and that which is admirable, thou thy selfe insensibly wouldest haue it so, and diddest make choice of it. To this force let Iulius Caesar oppose all his Imperi∣all power, let him scoffe at Spurinus & his prediction of the 15. of March, the day being come, hee must vnderstand from his Sooth-sayer who
was no lyer, that the day was not past; he must come to the Capitoll, and there receiue 23. wounds, and fall downe dead at the foote of Pom∣peys statue. Let Domitian storme for the approching of fiue of the clocke foretold, yet must he die at the houre, and for the more easier expe∣dition, one comes and tells him that it had strooke sixe; he beleeues it with great ioy: Parthenius his groome tells that there is a pacquet of great importance brought vnto him: he enters willingly into the Chamber, but it was to bee slaine at that very in∣stant which hee feared most. But if these histories seeme ouer worne with age, who remembers not that memo∣rable act at the last Assem∣bly
of the Estates at Blois, of that Duke who receiued ad∣uertisement from all parts, both within and without the Realme, that the Estates would soone end with the ending of his life? euen vpon the Eue, one of his confident friends discouered the busi∣nesse vnto him; going to dinner he found a note writ∣ten in his napkin, with these words, They will kill you. To which he answered, They dare not; but they failed not. Oh God how difficult is it to finde out thy wayes! Let vs then cōclude that the houre of death appoynted by the immoueable order of God, is ineuitable, so that (as one saith) We shal sooner moue God then death: So the Pa∣gans, who erected Altars to
all their counterfeit Deities, did neuer set vs any to death. This firme decree of all things gane occasion to the Pagans to figure the three Destinies, whose resolution great Iupiter could not alter, no not to draw his Minion Sarpedon out of their bonds. Let vs speake more properly; God can doe it, but he wil ne∣uer do it, or very seldome, to shew his infinit power by mi∣racle. Let vs in the end say, That seeing death is ineuita∣ble, it must needs follow, that the feare of it is vnprofitable: On the other side, let vs adde, that mās life is not to be cut off before the time: & there∣fore a carefull waywardnesse to prolong it, auailes no∣thing: the Destinies which haue resolued immutably to
spinne it out till such a time, they will doe it, feare it not: and in the danger of death, will rather shew a miracle to preserue thee, as to the Poet Simonides, who supping with Scopas, in a Towne of Thessa∣lie, word was brought him, that two young men were at the dore to speake with him: the Poet went forth, but found no body at the doore, but hee heard a great noyse of the chamber which sunke downe, and smothered Scopas and al his guests in the ruins. We reade that Gelon then a young Infant, but appoin∣ted to liue longer, to gouern Sicile, was drawne out of the like, but a stranger danger: for as hee was at schoole in the presence of his master and many of his compa∣nions,
behold, a great Wolfe enters into the school, comes to Gelon, layes hold of his booke, and drawes it by the one end: Gelon without a∣mazement holds fast, and ra∣ther suffers himselfe to bee drawne forth by the Woolfe then to let goe his hold; and in the meane time the buil∣ding happened to sinke, and ouerwhelmed both Master and schollers. Thus God shewes his pro∣uidence, preseruing by his Angels those whom he plea∣seth from present and most eminent dangers. So would hee saue Lot and his family from the fire of heauen, al∣most against their will: For it is written, that the Angels tooke them and thrust them out of Sodome; yea, it is writ∣ten,
that the Angell executi∣oner, to shew the force of prouidence, told Lot, that he could not doe any thing vn∣till hee were retired into a towne adioyning, which was afterwards called Zohar; into the which he was no sooner entred, but the Eternall pow∣red downe fire and brim∣stone vpon Sodome and Gomorah. We reade of Titus Vespa∣sian, that two famous knights had conspired to kill him, whereof he was aduertised; but making no shew thereof, he tooke them by the hands, led them forth to walke, and hauing called for two swords he gaue to eyther of them one, as prouoking them to that which they had resolued but being amazed both of
the manner and of the Em∣perours courage. You see (sayth he) that destinie doth iustly hold the principalitie of the world, and that in vaine men practise murthers against it, be it through hope to purchase greatnesse, or for feare to lose it. Let vs therefore acknow∣ledge, that it is not of vs, but of the word of destinie, which God hath pronoun∣ced, that the lengthening, or shortning of our liues de∣pends. The great God is to vs a God of strength to deli∣uer vs, and the issues of death belong vnto the Eternal: & therefore the Apostle sayd, that Christ is dead and risen againe, that he might haue power ouer the dead, and the liuing: and therfore this vex∣ing
care of life, nor that great horror of Death cannot pro∣fit vs any thing. Let vs then leaue these things, and fini∣shing our course resolutely & ioyfuly, let vs yeeld al into the hands of our soue raigne Master; neither to tempt him, nor to despaire of him, for both the one and the o∣ther are equally hateful vnto him: and if our soule puft vp with the vent of temptation be desquiet within vs: let vs say vnto it with Dauid. My soule, returne vnto thy rest, feare nothing. Euery kinde of death of them that are belo∣ued of God is precious in his sight, verie precious sayeth S. Bernard, as being the ende of labour, the consummati∣on of the victorie, the port of life, and the entrie to per∣fect
felicitie. The first Obiection. If Death did flow from the en∣chayned order of destinie, we should not see it without order sometimes to goe slowly, some∣times to runne headlong. But that is vsually seene; There∣fore it seemes not to flow from destinie. THe vnequall Issue of The An∣swer. life which we see hap∣pen to men, doth not alter, but rather corroborate destinie: it is the immutable decree of the Eternal, he sees who should amend or im∣paire in this life, he that hath made all for his glory, euen the wicked for the day of calamitie: And therefore
he soone tooke vp Enoch to himself, lest that malice shold corrupt his spirit, sayth the text. Contrariwise, if Constan∣tine the Great, who was cruel in his youth, had beene cut off, he had not bin a Christi∣an, neither had hee so much extended the kingdome of Christ. There is yet another reason, which is, the deliue∣rance of good men from the miseries of the world, when death comes: I will gather thee vp with thy fathers, sayd God, to Iosias the good King, 2. Kin. 22. to the end thy eyes may not see all the miseries which I will bring vpon this place. On the other-side a long life is a great languishing to the wicked: So Caine after his parricide committed, was cursed of God, and liuing, so
pursued by the Iudgement of God, as he often cried out Gen. 4. 13. that his punishment was in∣supportable, and therefore hee should wander vpon the face of the earth, and that whosoeuer should finde him would kill him: but God pro∣uided, setting a brand vpon his fore-head, to the end no man should slay him. But how comes it that the death of some is suddaine, as the shot of an harquebuze cānot bee more suddaine; and so long in others which lan∣guish of some long infirmi∣tie? I answere, that to search into the Counsells of God, (which is properly the desti∣ny wherof we speake) is more infinite then to seeke the bot∣tome of a gulph. That great Apostle rapt vp to the third
heauen, finds nothing but depths, incomprehensible Iudgements, and wayes im∣possible to be found out. Rom. 11. Moreouer I do not see (to speake truely) that death is more suddaine to one then to an other is it to them that being sound and vi∣gorous, are so strooken as they die presently? Yet be∣ing thus strooken they know not whether they should sur∣uiue it or no, seeing some one hath escaped being thus stro∣ken. Wherefore I do not see that death is more slow to one then to an other. Is it to them that lie bedred 10. or 20. yeares? yea, and what know they whether they shal die the first day they take their beds? To conclude I say, that see∣ing
the comming of death is imperceptible, and that it is impossible for any man to say assuredly I am dead, or I shal suruiue; that death cannot be suddaine or slow to any man, other men iudge after the e∣uent, but not before. And therefore it seemes to mee that the question which is made, whether a languishing death or a suddaine be most to be desired, is in vaine, for that we shall find that death is suddaine to all men, see∣ing it comes so swiftly as no man can feele it: For so was the will of the Eternall, to the end that mortall man should bee alwayes ready to die, and not delay when hee feeles it, for it is insensible.
The second Obiection. It is a vaine and pernicious thing to giue eare to Astrolo∣gers, in their predictions. The former discourse seemes to perswade a man vnto it. It is therefore vaine and perni∣cious. EXperience hath and doth dayly verifie, that they which haue easily giuen credit to the predicti∣ons of future things, are for the most part in the end de∣ceiued: Niceas King of Syracu∣sa found it true to his cost, for confidently beleeuing his di∣uines that his death was neere, he wasted his treasure in all kinds of excesse, and li∣ued in want all the remain∣der
of his life, which did far exceed the terme of his pre∣diction. Aboue all the lamen∣table taking of Constantinople by the Turkes is memorable: The Grecians bewitched with a certaine old prediction, that the day would come when a mighty enemie shold seaze vpon most of the forts of Constantinople, but being come to the great place cal∣led the brazen Bull, he should be represt and driuen out by the Inhabitants, who to resist him had seazed vpon this place: The Constantinopoli∣tanes giuing credit he eunto, hauing abandoned their strongest defences, retire into this place, wher they attend the Turke; but they falnt, are put to flight, slaine and sackt, and so to the great preiudice
of Greece, the Imposture of their Prophecie was mani∣fest. Answer: I grant the Maior of the proposition, and doe confirme it by the Law of God. Let no diuiner be a∣mong you vsing diuinations, nor regarders of times, nor any that vse predictions, nor Sorcerer, &c. Whosoeuer vseth any such thing is abo∣minable to the Lord. And what should not Christian Magistrats doe herein, seeing they are forbidden by infidels Mecaenas, speaking to Augustus the Emperor, of the gouern∣ment of the Common weale, sayth; That there ought not to be any Soothsaier in the Common weale, for all such kinde of men in speaking sometimes truth, most com∣monly
lie, and are the cause of Innouations and troubles. The Turkes Empire obserue the like prohibition, accor∣ding to the Alaron which sayth, that all kinde of diui∣ning is vaine, and that God alone knowes all secrets. But according to this de∣position I denie the Minor, and add, that in all my pre∣cedent discours, there is not a word which tends any way to the maintayning of Astro∣logers, to heare and beleeue them. I did produce some Histories to proue that our dayes are so determined by God, as they cannot exceed their bounds prescribed; and this doctrine is true, holy & diuine. Behold the Oracles: Man borne of a woman is of a short life, & fall of cares &c.
His daies are determined, thou hast the number of his moneths with thee; thou hast prescribed his limits, which he shal not passe: And Dauid sayth vnto God. My times are in thy hand: and therefore Christ is dead and risen, that he might cōmand both ouer the dead & liuing, sayth S. Paul, Rom, 14. 9. The Iewes would haue put Christ to death before his time, but they could not; they sought (sayth the Gospell) to lay hold of him, but no man did it, for that his houre was not yet come. The time of Ie∣sabels death and the ende of her wickednes was accompli shed; the time of her death & the place had bin foretold by the Prophet Elias: Iehu was chosē to execute this decree, 1. King. 21.
he did it without any regard till after the euent. He runnes furiously into the towne of Iesrehel, where Iesabel was, af∣ter whom he sought: Iesabel thought to stay him with her painted face, and with the charme of her affected looks which she cast from her chā∣ber window, but Iehu com∣manded 2. King. 9. 30. 31. &c. they should cast her downe; which was done, and her bloud rebounded a∣gainst the wall & against her houses: (the Scripture addes) being entred he did eate and drinke, & after sayd, Go now and burie this cursed woman for she is the daughter of a king; but they found nothing remayning, but the skull, the feete & palmes of the hands, whereof they made report to Iehu; who said, It is the word
of the Lord which he had de∣liuered by his seruant Elias, say ing, that in the field of Iesreel the dogs shold eate the flesh of Iesabel. And as God for the edification of his Church, wold rayse vp Prophets to de clare his promses or threats: so wuld he somtimes thurst on certen men to denounce his Iudgements to the world to make them amazed in their euents: to these fortel∣lers whensoēuer we finde in them the Propheticall zeale of the Lord, we ought to giue credit as soone as they haue pronounced the word. But to these latter spirits (most com∣monly Lyars) we must neuer giue any credit, vntill after the euent of that which they haue foretold. For the thing being past, it is no more
doubtfull, we may then be∣leeue it, but not before; and this was the meaning of the former discourse. Otherwise it is not lawful to inquire of doubtfull euents of any Ma∣gitian, Astrologer & Mathe∣matician: yet a wise and iudi∣cious man may (without scruple of cōscience) by cer∣ten coniectures gathered from the reading of good books, from the vse of things & the obseruatiō of the like; he may (I say) conceiue, pre∣sume or suspect which way the destinie tends, and what his ende is, but fearefully & without confidence, not to make a profession of it. God only can search the bottome of his decrees, & none other without his particular and expresse assistance, no not the
Angels neither good nor bad: the determinatiō of our dayes is one of his decrees, it can neither be knowne nor stayed by vs. Behold let∣ters from heauen to the end we may doubt no more: Man saith Solomon, knowes his Ecclesi. 9. 12. time no more then fishes which are taken in the net, and birds in the snare; so men are snared in the bad time when it falls suddenly vpon them: In vaine therefore doe we feare that which cannot be corrected by vs. The third Obiection. If the cause of death be euita∣tabl, the effect also shalbe. But the cause of death is euita∣ble. Ergo.
IT is writtē that a wiseman shal rule the stars, for that finding himselfe inclyned to some mortall disease by some malignant influence of the stars, he will change the ayre, & correct that bad com∣plexion, that it impaire not. We are also commanded to honor the Physition for ne∣cessities sake, by reason of the Phisicke which he ministers for the preseruation of life. Moreouer, Gods prouidence hath not imposed any neces∣sity in humaine actions, whereof he is Lord, and espe∣cially of those which depend of his free will; as who can hinder a man from killing himselfe if he please, as many haue done? We reade also in the booke of truth, that the periode of the ruine of Nini∣uie,
assigned to 40. daies, was Ionas 3. 4. 10 Isat. 38. 1. 5 altered by their repentance. also the execution of the sen∣tence of death pronounced to Ezekias, was by his prayers & teares protracted 15 yeares. Answer. Whatsoeuer it be, Destiny (as Boetius saith) comming frō the immoue∣able beginnings of proui∣dence, ties together by an indissoluble bond of causes, all humane actions, and all their euents, so as the diuine prouidence is alwayes cer∣taine, and alwayes infallible in her euents, not contradic∣ting the meanes which the same diuine prouidence hath ordained, whereof some are necessary, others cōtingent. The effects are necessary which haue their cause neer, immediate, conioinct, & ne∣cessary:
and they are contin∣gent which haue a contin∣gent cause, and whose effect may happen or not happen; if it happens, God had so ap∣poynted it. Thou who foun∣dest thy selfe subiect to a dropsie, hast left the reuma∣ticke ayre where thou wert, hast abstained from wa∣ter, and hast imployed the Phisition, whereby thou hast auoyded the disease and death: God had so ordained it, not onely for the cause, but also for the meanes. Yet let man determine in his full liberty, let him make choyce according to his owne will; yet shall hee not choose any thing but what God hath foreseene and decreed from all eternity. I say there is a gulfe in this question, where∣at
Tully suffered shipwracke, Lib. de Di∣uinat. rather cutting off from pro∣uidence, then diminishing a∣ny thing from humane liber∣ty; so as (wherewith S. Au∣gustine doth taxe him) see∣king to make men free, hee hath made them sacrilegers; wherefore I will strike saile, for the very name of Desti∣ny was distastfull to Saint Augustine and Saint Gregory, for that the Ancients did wrest it to the disposition of the starres: but if any one (saith S. Augustine) attributes the actions of men to Desti∣ny, for that hee vnderstands by that name the power and will of God, let him retaine his vnderstanding and cor∣rect his tongue. Let vs con∣clude with the Poet: Hope not by your cries▪ to alter Destiny.
Thus after the Diuines of these times, and the opinion of Chrysippus (hauing beene so purged, as there is no more any feare to stumble at it) may we vse this word of De∣stiny. As for the sacred histo∣ries obiected, they contradict not the doctrine propoūded no more then the immuta∣bility of Gods decrees. That which had beene denounced to the Nineuits, to Ezekias, & to others, was with a condi∣tion, if they did not repent; they submitted themselues: so as iustly, and without pre∣iudice to the diuine proui∣dence, the sentence was made voyde. But you will say, Where is the expression of this condi∣tion? It is vnderstood, and
drawne from an infallible consequence of the end of the denuntiation made in the name of the Eternall by Io∣nas and Isay: Yet forty dayes and Niniue shall be destroy∣ed, cried Ionas: Dispose of thy house, for thou shalt dye the death, and shalt not liue, saith Isay to Ezekias. Why were these trumpets, if God meant to ruine them, & not to saue them, in giuing them warning? Therefore the de∣cree of the fatall time, both for the men of Niniue, and for Ezekias was firme, seeing the denuntiation of their death was but a meanes to aduance them to the end and last period of their estate and life.
The fourth Obiection. If that which the diuine proui∣dece hath decreed to doe, were immutable, in vaine then should we imploy the meanes to aduance it or hinder it. But we imploy them not in vain, for that God hath comman∣ded it. Therefore what the diuine pro∣uidence hath decreed to doe, is not immutable. IF all bee so disposed by a fat all necessity, why then being sicke, doe I call the Phisition, and why am I commanded to honour him? And why, being found, doe I preserue my selfe from disea∣ses, especially those which are contagious?
Answere, I denie the con∣sequence of the maior, for that the position of the first and principall cause, con∣cludes not the remotion of the instrumentall: the reason is, that God to bring to ef∣fect his decrees, would also haue the second meanes and causes imployed; hee doth witnesse it in his word, and in the gouernement of the world, and he hath comman∣ded vs to vse them. As there∣fore it is not in vaine that the Sunne doth shine and is dar∣kened, nor in vaine that the fields are manured and wa∣tered from heauen: It is God which hath created light and darkenesse, and it is hee that makes the earth to spring: In like manner it is not in vaine that being sicke wee call for
the Physitian, and vse his physicke; it is not in vaine that wee auoyd the infected ayre, and to conclude, it is not in vaine that we eate and drinke: although that God be the authour of our health, yet it is the forsaking of  grace and vertue which casts vs into diseases. It is finally hee, who is the powerfull and soueraigne arbitrator of the length or shortnesse of our life: The reason is, that God who by his absolute will and pleasure hath predestinated these ends, hath withall dis∣posed of the meanes and wayes tending to the said ends; so as it appeareth, it is not our intention to take from man all care of his life, but onely to put away the su∣perfluitie, the immoderate ex∣cesse,
and particularly the ex∣treame feare of death, for that it is vnprofitable, yea, hurtfull vnto him: and there∣fore a wise man will willingly obey the aduertisement of S. Basile, which he directs to all Christians: Submit thy selfe, saith he, to the will of God; if thou doest march freely af∣ter it, it will guide thee; if thou goest backe thou doest offend it, and yet she will not leaue thee, to draw thee whi∣thersoeuer she pleaseth. Be it the place, the time, or the kinde of thy death, these three things are vncer∣taine vnto thee, & out of thy disposition; & therefore thou shouldest rely vpon him who Eccles. 3. 2. Psal. 3. 9 alone knowes the time to be borne and to dye, and who holds thee fast both before &
behind. Some one makes ac∣count to liue long, but he shal dye sodainely, as it is said in Iob: yea at midnight a whole Iob 34. nation shall be shaken, passe, and the strong stalke carried away. As for the place, some one shall returne from blou∣dy battailes who soone after shall dye in his house; finally, some shall escape violent contagions, who shall die of slow feuers, as I haue seene, & any man may easily see in e∣uery Countrie. Let vs then conclude this discourse with the verses of Cleanthes the Stoicke, which Seneca hath thus translated: Duc me Parens, celsique dominator poli, Quocunque libuit, nulla parendi est mora,
Adsum impiger, fac nolle, , Malusque patiar, quod . Father and Ruler of the lostie Skie; What way thou pleasest, leade, and I Will follow with my will, and instantly. Grant I may follow with no grieued bloud, Nor like an ill man beare what fits a good. Whereunto he subscribes saying, So wee liue, so wee speake, and let vs adde, So we die. The fift Obiection It is not possible but humane
nature should bee terrified with that which is horrible of it selfe. Some kind of death hath such circumstances as it is very horrible of it selfe. Therefore it is not possible but it should terrifie. MAny dissembling the feare which they haue of death, when they come to thinke and speake of some kinde of sicknesse, drawing neere vnto death, and especially of the plague, they cannot finde blacke e∣nough to set it forth, nor hor∣rour sufficient to abhorre it. But let vs see what reasons they can pretend: It was a great scourge, say they, of the wrath of God, executed vp∣on the people for Dauids am∣bition,
so as there dyed 70. thousand in lesse then one day; threatned in the Apo∣calipse to embrace the fourth Apoc. 6. 8. part of the earth. It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God. Moreouer, it is an vnspeakeable paine to be burnt with the sore, to bee strangled with the plague, &c. Thirdly, it is a sorrow which exceeds all extreames, to bee abandoned of wife, Father, mother, children, friends, and kinsfolkes. Final∣ly, it is a perpetuall griefe to die, and haue no meanes to settle his estate. Answer. These reasons are but goodly shewes to shad∣dow the feare they haue of death, and the shame which lies lurking in their hearts;
for seeing they must leaue this life, what doth it import them, whether it be by water, or by land, or by any other, meanes? As for the first rea∣son, Dauid wil answere for vs, that we must not iudge rash∣ly of the poore man in his torment: His son will adde, that none can discerne whe∣ther he be worthy of loue or hatred by that which hap∣pens exteriorly: The Apostle will say, The iudgements of God beginne by his owne house: Iob, the Apostles, the Martyrs will manifest by their examples, that they whom God loues are most chastized in this world. Finally, Iesus Christ will teach vs, That in the blind man so borne, neither his Iohn 9. sinne, nor the sinne of his fa∣ther
and mother, was the cause that hee was borne blind: that neither the Galile∣ans so cruelly intreated by Pi∣late, nor the Iewes smothered in the ruines of the Tower which was in Silo, were more guilty then those which had escaped this disaster. A faith∣full man is not tempted a∣boue his strength, if afflicti∣on abounds, consolation will superabound. He dies happi∣ly which layes downe his soule with a setled spirit, fee∣ling in himselfe the peace & grace of God through Iesus Christ, in the remission of his sinnes. And it is a thousand times better to be quickned by the light affliction of the plague, and to carry away an inestimable weight of glory, then to be smothered in the
delights of sinne, and in dan∣ger of a finall ruine both of body and soule. The example produced of Dauid makes for this against the Obiector. Who sinned? Dauid in ambitiously num∣bring his people: who is puni∣shed? the people: the Greci∣ans are plagued for the foo∣lish Horat Quicquid dearant Reges, &c. resolutions of their Kings, sayd the ancient Pro∣uerbe. But where is the duty of Iustice, will you say? God knowes it; his will is the rule of equitie, it is iust seeing God will haue it so: And on the other side, it was not the wil of God for that it is not right. But we commonly see that the plague layes hold of the poorer sort (whereupon Galen calls it Epidemique, that is to say, popular; where∣of
the baites are famine, slut∣tishnesse and stinkes,) rather then the chiefe of the Towne infected, who notwithstand∣ing will be found much more faulty before God. Looke vpon that long plague which vnder the Em∣pire of Gallus, and Volusian continued 15. whole yeares, and which comming out of Ethiopia vnpeopled all the Ro∣mane prouinces; reade it and Zonaras Tom. 2. iudge of it. As for that pretended paine, wee must not appre∣hend it to be greater then in simple swellings and Impo∣stumes, or in Cauteries; the poison rather mollifying then increasing the paine. But there are two kinds of plagues, as Phisitions do ob∣serue; the one is simple, when
as the spirits onely are infe∣cted by a venemous and con∣tagious ayre, which hath bin suckt in by the mouth, or the nose, or that hath gotten in∣sensibly into the body by the pores of the skinne, so as a man shal be stroken that shal not feele any thing: it may be, he shall be more faint and heauy then of custome, but with very little heate and al∣teration; so as hee shall bee sometimes smothered vp be∣fore he feeles any paine. The other is a compound, when as the Contagion seazing the spirits, doth communi∣cate his poyson with the foure humours, infects them, and alters them, but without paine, for these humours are incapable: yet these humours beeing infected and altered,
infect and alter the parts of the body, in the which they reside, as in the head, the heart, and elsewhere; and there growes the paine, but no greater then in Feauers and swoundings; yea, lesse by reason of the putrid vapour, which doth dull and morti∣fie the members, so as the paine is no more then a small incision; yea, lesse then the pricking of a pinne. The greatest is a certaine in∣flammation in the hypocon∣driake parts, in the bowells which enuiron the heart: for as poyson is the capitall ene∣my of life, so this enemy of life strikes furiously at the heart. The worst is a certaine heate whereof the Patient complaines: as Thucidides obserues in the plague which
happened at Athens, but what paine in this heat, that is not greater in the burning of a little finger, or in a Tertian Ague? But if your opinion will not yeelde to these rea∣sons, inquire of them which haue beene toucht with this infection; they will answer that feare hath beene their greatest paine, and if they had been assured of recouery, they had felt no paine. I know you will reply, that there is a difference betwixt them that recouer, and them that die. But I will answer you, that the paine is equall, yea grea∣ter in them that recouer, then in them that dye: they that recouer are more vigo∣rous, and the vicious humour stings them, and is more sen∣sible then in them that are
weaker, when the parts lesse able to resist, are sooner got∣ten and lost. As a Leper, ha∣uing his flesh infected with Leprosie and rottennesse, feeles little or no paine, in the most sensible pricking: euen so a weake woman hath lesse torment in her deliuerie, although the throwes bee more dangerous; wherein ap∣peares the admirable wise∣dome of Nature, which doth not afflict the afflicted. Now followeth the third reason obiected, the abando∣ning of wife, kinsfolkes, and friends. Answer. It is an ac∣cident which happens sel∣dome or not at all this day: hardly can that which life hath vnited by marriage, consanguinity and friendship be dissolued in death. More∣ouer,
a wise man, who should haue learned to bee content Plato 3. de Repub. with himselfe in life, should not be discontented if he die alone. It was a constant Do∣ctrinein the resolute Stoicks, that he is happy that is con∣tent with himselfe, and de∣pends not vpon any other man, nor vpon any thing in the world; but like Iupiter, liues and moues of himselfe, rests in himselfe, gouernes himself, & enioies his worthy thoughts, as Seneca saith. And how can hee bee happy, who (beeing subiect to anothers Epist. 9. command) is not master of himselfe? Let him drag after him fetters of gold, yet hee shall stil be in fetters. We wil not heere commend the Sti∣loons, Timons, and other ha∣ters of mē, which like wolues,
fled from all company; but those that offering them∣selues to company, and see∣king their friendship, are wretchedly chased away, and being forsaken of others, re∣tire themselues into them∣selues, lose nothing, but aug∣ment their felicity. So, as Se∣neca said rightly, thinke and Epist. 20. desire this thing aboue all the prayers which thou shalt make vnto God, to bee con∣tent with thy selfe, and with those things that may spring from thy selfe: What felici∣ty, saith he, can be neerer vn∣to God? Whereunto Saint Ambrose subscribeth, In what Desart, saith hee, is not that man accompanied, that doth enioy a happy life? He then that can liue alone, wil neuer grieue to be abādo∣ned
by men in death, being accompanied by Angels, & by his Sauiour the true God. Thirdly, Physitions, Sur∣gions and other expert men imploy themselues for thee, are about they to assist thee, and to restore thee to thy health. Thy wife, thy chil∣dren, thy friends, with their teares would bathe thy bed, increase thy sorrow, and be infected with thy disease; It this then better both for thee and them that they be absent. Thou hast proued their affection in liuing, why wouldst thou try it in dying? thou doest leaue thy worldly friends in death, but thou goest to purchase more faith∣full and better in heauen, euen Iesus Christ, the Angells and the Saints: whereat then
doest thou complaine? thou a Christian, whereas a Pagan reioyceth? Mercurius Trisme∣gislus (by the report of Calci∣dius) sayd when he dyed, that he returned into his countrie where his kinsfolkes and best friends were. Finally thou ac∣cusest thy disease, for that it takes from thee means to dis∣pose of thy affayres. A wise man should not forbeare to settle his estate vntill the ex∣treamitie of an in curable dis∣ease; for he hath then other matters to thinke of then worldly affayres: he should haue foreseene it, and proui∣ded in time; a good souldier when the trompet sounds to battaile, doth not begin to discourse of his house, and to thinke of some peece of ground, but prepares to fight
for his life is in question. E∣uen so a wise man at the point of death should not once thinke of the world, but of the conflict which he hath a∣gainst the Diuell and sinne; there is question of his con∣science, of the life of his soule of the inheritance of heauen, which he loseth if he be van∣quished: our life is vncertain, many other diseases besides the plague, may cut it off so∣denly; the Apoplexie, Lethar∣gie, Catarre, Squinancie, and many others, when they come leaue no place for af∣fayres. Therefore during the time of health let vs com∣pound our quarrells with our neighbors, and dispose of our estates with our children & kinsfolks, that we may bee ready at the first sommons of
our God, prepared at the first signe of that spiritu∣all Combate which shalbe giuen vs, to fight well, to liue or to dye, as it shall please the Lord. Watch and pray, Mat. 24. sayd Iesus Christ to his Dis∣ciples, for you know not when that time shall be. And, Let your loynes bo girded, and your candells Luk, 12. light. The sixt Obiection. The losse of that which is hap∣py and ioyful, causeth horror. Life is happy and ioyfull. Therefore the losse of life cau∣seth horror. PLato is cited to proue the Minor, who writes 3. de Repu. that man may enioy feli∣citie
in his body, and that he is happy aboue all the Crea∣tures: therefore Gallen in his booke of the parts of the bo∣dy, doth wonderfully extoll the author of nature, for ha∣uing delt so bountifully with man: And Dauid of more au∣thoritie then all these, seemes to sing the praises of the E∣ternall for the good he hath done vnto man, saying: Thou Lord hast made him little lesse, Then Angells in degree: And thou hast crown'd him in like sort, With glory, state, and dignitie. ANswer. All the Philoso∣phers except Plato, Gal∣len and some few o∣thers, being dazeled with the
brightnesse of some guists re∣maining in man after his shipwracke in the beginning of the world, did not poure forth such prayses of the condition of man, but in a manner all with one voice haue called nature, not a mo∣ther, but a cruell stepdame, for the many miseries where∣with shee hath ouercharged man, as we see in Tully, and as Cic. lib. 3. de repub. Saint Augustine reports. E∣uen so Aristotle (who is held the Ensigne bearer of Stob. serm. 69. Philosophers) being deman∣ded what man was, he is, say∣eth he, the patterne of Im∣becillity, the booty of time, the sport of fortune, the i∣mage of inconstancy, the ballance of enuy and calami∣ty, the rest is nothing but spittle and choller. Demccri∣tes
also required to giue his aduice of the condition of man, answered, that it was a miserable fortune, seeing that the goods which were care∣fully sought after, hardly came vnto him; but miseries which were not sought for, nor any way expected nor suspected, ranne vnto him: Wherefore the Comedian Ne∣optolimus being demanded what admirable thing hee did obserue in Aeschilus, So∣phocles, and Euripides: No∣thing, sayeth hee, in their words doth amaze mee, but that which I haue seene touching Philippe, who celebrating the marriage of his daughter Cleopatra, and being at a stately supper ho∣nored with the name of the 13. god, was the next day
stabbed and cast vpon a dunghill. But you will say, This life wants no pleasures. Without doubt (if you obserue them well) they are poore plea∣sures, bitter, pinching, and in∣termixt with displeasures; yea in laughing the heart shalbe grieued, & his ioy end with care, sayeth Salomon in Pro. 14. 13 his Prouerbes. He also run∣ning ouer breefely in Ecclesi∣astes, the vanity, toyle of the body, vexation of mind, and heauines of soule, concludes, That he thinkes him more happy that was neuer borne, then the liuing or the dead; for, sayeth hee, he hath not seene the bad workes which are done vnder the Sunne. As for that passage of the Psalme alledged, it makes no∣thing
to the purpose, for that he considers not man as he is, but as he was in his in∣tegrity and innocencie in the earthly Paradice, or as hee is Eccle. 4. restored in Iesus Christ man, as the Apostle expounds it in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Chap. 2. That no man was for his transgression degraded from the rancke he held, and lost the priuiledges he had, it ap∣peareth by the comparison of that which he is, with the titles which are giuen him. 1. God had made man. 2. Sinne had vndone him, and all his naturall life is but a spirituall death. Ephes. 2. 1. 3. That is to say, with a true, perfect and healthfull knowledge of God, of his wil and of his workes. 4. Hee hath lost all that,
and there hath succeeded ig∣norance, blindnes, & strange darkenesse. 5. His desire and actions were conformable to the lawes of God. 6. All that is depraued, and there is nothing but a horri∣ble confusion in his will and actions. 7. He was absolute Lord ouer all Creatures, which trembled at his looke, and brought him fruits accor∣ding to his desire. 8. Now they rebell and assaile him; yea the earth in∣stead of good corne, brings forth nothing but thornes & thistles. 9. He had frequent con∣uersation with God, inspired of him, and breathing by him.
10. Now the Prince of the power of the aire, the vn∣cleane spirit, workes power∣fully in the children of rebel∣lion, which are all the sonnes of Adam, Ephes. 2. 2. 11. A glorious angelical and diuine Maiesty did shine in his face. 12. Now they couer their shame with leaues, they hide themselues among the trees, and crie out, Mountains fall vpon vs and couer vs. To conclude, there is no greater contrariety betwixt day and night, then of these famous qualities to the infa∣mous blemishes of man, as he liued in this world before his regeneration, in the which by little and little hee recouers this Iustice, holinesse and trueth, Ephes. 4. 24. But
the fulnesse thereof is reser∣ued to heauen, whither death leades vs, and therefore to be desired. The Fourth Argument, taken from the effici∣ent cause. All that a good and wise mo∣ther giueth vnto her Chil∣dren, cannot be hurtfull. Nature our good and wise mo∣ther giues vs death. Death then cannot be hurtfull. THe first proposition of this Argument can∣not bee denyed after the experience which wee haue seene, after the compa∣rison which God makes of himselfe with a mother, who cannot forget her child, nor
he his people: After that Ie∣sus Christ had said, No man giues a stone instead of bread nor a Scorpion for fish, to him that he loues: And how then can nature the liuely spring of so liuely a loue, giue any thing that is very hurt∣full, and fayle at neede and in the principall, hauing ne∣uer fayled vs in all the course of our life? Now to proue that the second proposition is true, and that nature hath ordayned death for her children, Seneca doth teach Ad Polib. 3 vs, saying, That death is a Law of nature, yea, that our whole life is but a way vnto it. S. Cyprian also doth affirme that it is a decree intimated vnto the world, that whatso∣euer is borne should haue an end: and from whom is this
decree? from God the Au∣thour of nature, the execu∣tioner of this decree: but it is a fauourable decree to such as Heauen fauours. It is a generall Law, to re∣store that which is lent vs; this life is but a loane, wee must restore it at the end of the time: it is a tribute wee owe, for we entred vpon con∣dition to depart when it shall please the master. Moreouer what is this life, but a harmo∣ny rising from the mixture of the foure elements, which are the foure ingredients of our bodie? and what is death by the censure of Hippocrates, but a diuorce of marriage of these foure Elements? This diuorce is as naturall to man as it is naturall that fire should be contrarie to water,
and ayre to earth; for their contrarietie is the cause of this diuorce, which is death. I know that it is not sufficient for humane life to haue a bo∣dy well tempered with his Organes, and to haue the power of life, but he must al∣so haue a fist Effence; as a Lute well strung and well tu∣ned, is not sufficient to make it sound, vnlesse there bee a hand to play vpon it. And I also maintayne that as the Musitian ceaseth to play when the Instrument is vn∣strung, so the soule ceaseth to giue life vnto the body, yea, flyes out, when it is destroy∣ed: but this destruction is na∣turall, and by consequence death; and to that end Na∣ture hath planted this body vpon pyles which take vent,
vpon boanes not very solide, caulkt ouer with soft flesh, glued with a viscous humour, which may easily melt with heate or dissolue with rayne; full of transparent veines ea∣sie to pierce; watered with vnholesome water, tempered with contrarie qualities, which a certaine temperature keepes at quiet for a season: but when euery one desires to command his compani∣on, and time in the end pre∣senting the occasion, the common right being forced, the body sodainely falls. And this force is of nature, who must needes effect the words of the Lord, spoken vnto man: Thou art dust, and shalt returne to dust; Sonnes of men returne, but whither? From whence you came, to
the earth, to death; death then is of nature, and there∣fore Thales the Milesian said, Laert. lib. 1 Binson li. 7. that there was no difference betwixt life and death, for that they are both equally according vnto Nature; and as one demanded of him, why he was in life and dyed not? For the same cause, an∣swered he, that the one is no more excellēt then the other. It is also the reason why the Emperor Antonin the gentle seeing his seruants weepe, ly∣ing sicke in his bed, hee sayed vnto them, Why weepe you for me? and not rather the naturall and mortall condi∣tion of all the world, that is to say, Why doe you not rather weepe for life which is of a mortall condition? The answere of Anaxagoras was
more vertuous, who being aduertised of the death of his deere and onely Sonne, sayd; O Messenger, thou bringest me no vnexpected newes, I know well I had begotten a Sonne that was mortall: hee was not insensible like a stone but he considered that no∣thing had chanced to his sonne but what he had fore∣seene from his birth; his long foresight and his sodaine con sideration of the condition of all men for to die, had tēpered all sorow in him, and brought him to reason, which should alwaies holde the helme of this little world man. Like was the answere of Lochades, father to Siron vp on the like report of the death of one of his children: I knew well (sayth he) that he
should dye. VVe shall see o∣thers hereafter, to the ende Plut. in Lacon. they may haue no cause to say that this resolution was monstrous in the world. To conclude, nature to make vs resolue ioyfully vnto death, seemes to direct vs to the sweete song of the Swanne, a presaging bird, consecra∣ted to Apollo by Antiquitie, Cic. Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1. the which dying, nature ga∣thers together about the heart the purest and sweetest bloud, which makes him Iouiall and to sing a happie presage: to whom Socrates, Plato and Tully send them that haue so great feare of death. An Obiection.
Satan, Man, and Sinne are the causes of death. Therefore it is not Nature. ANswere; When it is said in the holy Scrip∣ture that Satan holds the empire of death, that by one man sinne entred into the world, and by sin death; finally that death is the re∣ward of sinne; we must not vnderstand it of the naturall death, whereof the question growes, but of the spirituall and eternall death, as many of the ancient fathers doe ex∣pound it: And how else could the threatning of God a∣gainst Adam be vnderstood, touching the tree of know∣ledge of good and euil? Thou shalt not eate; for on that
day thou shalt eate of it thou shalt die the death: obserue the words, from that day, for he died not that day, but li∣ued long after; but from that day being fallen from grace, he dyed the spiritual death: then what doth this Hebrew phrase to die the death mean but the principall death, which is the eternall, the se∣cond death? But this death brought in by Sathan, by sin, by man, hath no power ouer the children of God, & good men (to whom this discourse is onely directed) since that it was subdued, bound and confined into hell by Iesus Christ our Sauiour (as Atha∣nasius hath wel obserued) that as the waspe strikes violently against a stone, but hurts it not by her incursion, but ra∣ther
bruzeth her selfe and looseth her sting; euen so death incountring Christ fu∣riously who is life, she could not hold him in her bands, but she hath lost her sting, so as they whom shee terrified before, insult ouer her now. So then death simply, the laying of the bodie into the ground, there to be putrified, the way to heauē, is good to the good, & is giuen of God by nature; life & death are of the Lord, sayth wise Ecclesi. 11. vers. 14. It is he that giues life and death: that maks vs to descend into the graue & to rise againe, saith the Pro∣phetesse Anna. 2. Sam. 2. It is then our good mother that calls vs to death, let vs fol∣low and obay her voice, see∣ing we can receiue no harme
and how can it bee hurtfull? seeing it is the sepulcher of vices, and the resurrection of vertues, sayth S. Ambrose: and how how can it bee dange∣rous? seeing it is that Toad∣stone which by his fecret ver∣tue expels and rectifies all vn∣cleane things. And in truth, as Toades when they are growne olde and heauy with a fat poyson, are set vpon by an infinite number of Ants, which sucke him and deuour him, so as nothing remaines but the said stone, which af∣terwards they may freely handle, yea profitably: So death hauing beene purged from sinne, is now by the al∣mighty power of the Eter∣nall, conuerted into a most souereigne remedy, against sinne.
The second Obiection. There is not any thing ingene∣rate in all Creatures by na∣ture in vaine. But the feare of death is inge∣nerate in all Creatures. Therefore the feare of death is not in vaine. FOr the proofe of this Ar∣gument, shall suffice the approbation of all Crea∣tures great and small, which flye from death; the same rea∣son is for man, whom the complexion of his flesh, be∣ing proportionable to the quality of the Elements, in∣clines him to loue the world; he may be where he will, yet his naturall disposition will draw him towards his coun∣trey,
although in stead of some sweete liquor which he promised to himselfe, hee should drinke wormewood: So man beeing borne in the world, and accustomed vnto it, can hardly leaue it. Answer. The nature of man doth sometimes affect and abhorre one & the same thing, but for diuers conside∣rations: if he beholds death nakedly, there is great feare, as we may discouer in many; but if he can haue the iudge∣ment and patience to see her attired in her precious ornaments, with vertue, with heauen gates, by the which onely we are brought in; of the assured ioy and rest of the minde, in the possession whereof shee sets the soule; then doe wee affect it and de∣sire
it: and this desire should be held more natural in man for that it is more proper vnto him, seeing it pro∣ceeds from the true iudge∣ment of reason, which makes him man. Moreouer for a more cleare solution of the argument, we must distinguish the vniuer∣sall nature from the particu∣lar: vniuersall nature is that vertue that admirable & in∣vestigable proportiō infused by God into the Vniuerse, the proper Instrument of the principall agent of this soue∣raigne essence, which hauing insinuated into this Chaos the first matter, hath brought it in six dayes too this good∣ly ornament, and hath preser∣ued it many thousand of yeares: of this nature, we de
nie that she plants in beasts the feare of that shee giues them, that is to say, death: but as to shew vnto the beasts of the earth al the lights of hea∣uen; as well the fixed stars as wandring, she turnes about the heauens; so to shew vnto heauen all the Creatures, she hath giuen the passage & re∣turning of life & death: else it were impossible, if (as in a tree the dry leaues falling giue place to green that spring) so in beasts the first should not giue way to them that follow. As for particular nature (the very cōplexion of euery one) to whom death is so terrible, I say it is an ill ordered feare. The Order is preposterous when as the particular doth not follow the Law of the generall; and it is the ruine
of States when as the priuate good is preferred before the publike. The Romaine Em∣pire did flowrish when as the Popilij, Scipios, Fabij and o∣thers did choose rather to be poore in a rich estate, then rich in a poore estate Euen so is it in the societie of man∣kind taken in all ages; euery one must dispose himselfe to follow this generall order of supreme nature, and whosoe∣uer shall contradict it, shall shew himselfe a bad Cittizen of this great Cittie of the world: and opposing himselfe let him not therfore think to escape the inexorable desti∣nie of his end, but as the bird takē in the limetwig, thinking to free her selfe by striuing, is caught the faster; so man which is ensnared by death,
the more furiously hee tor∣ments himselfe, the more he shall aduance the obiect of his torment. Let euery one therefore looke vnto his du∣tie, to his children, and to them that shall come after, to prepare himselfe to giue them place; here to tends that great desire, the issue of par∣ticular nature to ingender, that great care of fathers & mothers in the nourishing, preseruation, education and bringing vp of their children to the end they may sucoted them; and why then? hauing prouided for all, & left yong oliue plants in our old stock, hearing the bell sound a re∣tret, wherefore, I say, should we shew our selues deafe, vn∣willing & faynt hearted? The fat all bird drawn by the sent
of thy Carcase is perched ouer thy window, & art thou still restie? doest thou not feele thy seditious guests with in thee which cōspireth thy infallible ruine? Nature will haue it so, she commands thee to depart; feare not, fol∣thy good mother, and thou shalt do well. Let vs therfore conclude, that although our particular nature, our com∣plexion makes vs to abhorre death, yet wee must not be∣leeue her, no more then the seruant of the house which is borne to obey. It is the mi∣stresse, the vniuersal vertue of the world which commands vs to depart, and to suffer o∣thers to enter: let vs follow and obey, all our trembling and horror is in vaine. But to what ende is it (will you
say) for me to haue flourish∣ing children, if in the meane time I become worms meat? I answer: Thou art not all wormes meat, for the subti∣lest part of thee liues in thy children: all thy person is not food for wormes, for thy soule (the most excellēt part) escapes: thou art not long the foode of wormes, for another forme; and it may be another soule shalbe soone adapted. The Fift Argument, from the end of Nature. Euery end whereunto the Law of Nature doth direct all the actions of our life, is for our good. Death is the end whereunto the Law of Nature directs all
the actions of our life. Therefore death is for our good. IT is a wonderfull strange thing so to feare that pas∣sage whereunto our brea∣thing and the course of our life seemes to tend. For al∣though the life be but a swift course of some dayes, run∣ning swifter then a Weauers shettle, yet the greatest part of the world desires to haue them shorter, and would see them as soone shut vp as dis∣couered: As wee may see in playes, which for that they hold their eyes and spirits captiues, are very pleasant vn∣to them, for that they rauish their thoughts and sences, & expell all languishing con∣ceits. Inquire of a Dancer, a Tennis-player, a Dicer, or
a Courtier, why they liue, continually in a Dancing-schoole, a Tennis-Court, in a Dicing-house, or in great mens houses? They will an∣swere you (if they vouch∣safe you answere) That the time would be tedious if they should not spend it in some thing; and euen we our selues being more retired, if some more profitable imployment did not make vs to spend the time, we would say, Oh, how long this day is, when will it be night? And if this slow night came not to interrupt our complaints, they would breake out into mournefull lamentations: & in the meane this night presenting her∣selfe vnto vs the longer through death, we are quite cōfounded, her countenance
defaceth the remembrance of all our former miserie. What inconstancie is this? wee will and wee will not see our end, we desire that e∣uery day should passe away swiftly, else wee complaine, & we wil not haue our life to slide away, for then wee howle; and yet our life is no∣thing but a multiplying of many dayes whence comes it? It is for that this way∣wardnesse which cleaues vn∣to vs by reason of this slow course of euery day of our life, proceedes from our na∣ture, who finds neither hir appointed abode, nor hir set∣led perfection here: and this pale feare which seazeth vpon vs at the discouerie of the gate of death, proceedes from the corruption which
hath happened to our na∣ture. For proofe whereof, the table of Natures innocencie in the beginning, which is, described vnto vs at the en∣trie of the Bible, doth testi∣fie sufficiently: for Adam and Eue in Eden were alwayes cheared with delights and pleasures, they had continu∣ally the vse of an hundred thousand wonders, neuer thinking of the future, nor desiring presently the end of the day which held them: they had their happinesse in the present life; the which hath beene hidden in heauen by reason of their transgres∣sion, whither we must ascend through death to enioy it: thither our nature doth call vs, from the which our cor∣ruption doth diuert vs. Were
it not then better to obey na∣ture so officious towards vs, then a pernicious deprauatiō which hath possessed vs? And therefore the Ancients to taxe this vnreasonable desire of liuing here without end, left vs in their pictures how that Tithon beloued of Au∣rora, obtained of the gods, at the entreatie of the God∣desse, that he should not die; But this man being tired with a million of sundry ca∣lamities, and ouerladen with a burthensome old age, so as like vnto little Infants, he was saine to be bound vp, swadled and rockt, hee besought the Gods that he might be suffe∣red to die like other men. Whereby they shew that death hath bene granted by the gods, as a fauour vnto
men, as being the safe port of all the tempest of this world. Nature hath set a measure and fulnesse to all thing, wee finde it in the greatest plea∣sures which continuing long are in the end distastfull vnto vs: Even so hath she done in life, wherefore there are old men which would not wil∣lingly returne backe to the first beginning of their In∣fants life, vpon condition to Lib. de Se∣nect. run the same dangers which they past; the which Tully af∣firmes of himselfe, that if any god would giue him force to become young againe, hee would refuse it: no (sayth he) hauing finished my course, I will not bee brought backe from the end to the begin∣ning; for what commodities hath life, nay what toyles
hath it not? And admit I should confesse that it hath pleasure without any distast, must shee not haue her full measure and saciety, who can contradict this? The sixt Argument taken from the Vnt∣uersall Law. All freeing from a common mi∣serie carries in it selfe conso∣lation. Death is a freeing from a com∣mon miserie. It therefore carries in it selfe consolation. THe consolation of the miserable is to haue companions, sayeth the old Prouerbe; for men by conference of their common
misery, reape some ease and discharge, as if they carried a heauy burthen in common: Now ô you which dying thinke your selues debarred of felicity, consider how death with an equall foote beates and ouerthrowes the Castells of Princes and the Cabinnes of Sheepheards: Search Salomon, and you shal find that neither wisedome nor riches could preserue him from death; nor Sampson his force, nor Absolon his beauty; Hercules with all his exploites, is laid in the graue, Alexander with his Empires, Caesar with his happy vi∣ctories, Craesus with all his pompe is gone, Xerxes is vanished with his miraculous bridge vpon the sea of Helles pont; all, all gone to the Pal∣lace
of Ruine, whereas death commands. Call these great Princes, in whose ambitious hearts their greatnesse had stirred vp enuious vapours, we haue them all for compa∣nions in death, the Oracle hath sayed it, and experience doth shew it. You are gods, but yet you must die: You Princes you shall passe like to one of vs. Behold a great man who dying sayed with a mournfull voyce, Helas, I am rich; powerful, and migh∣ty, and yet can I not wrest the shortest terme from pale destinie. It is a great con∣solation, sayeth Seneca to Po∣lib. c. 21. to think that whatso∣euer shall happen to vs by death hath bene suffered by all, and all must suffer it; and therefore hee cries out in the
beginning of this Chapter in these termes, What man (saith hee) is so full of arto∣gancie, and yet so vnable, that will exempt himselfe or his from the necessitie of nature, calling all things to one end▪ In life men are vnequall, but their beginning and en∣ding are equall: all are borne with one poore nakednesse, and all dye with a stinking cold, and liuing, no man is more certaine of the next day then his neighbour; hee onely is happy to whom the most miserable kinde of life doth not befall. Happy then are wee if wee compare our selues with those people of Aethiopia called Acridopha∣ges, Strab l. 17. Diodor. l. 3. c. 3. or caters of Grasse-hop∣pers, who liuing farre from the sea, and being destitute
of all succours, haue no other meate but these Grasse-hop∣pers, which certaine hot windes from the west, raise vp and bring vnto them, the which they pouder vp with salt and liue thereon; for that growing old, which is not a∣boue fortie yeeres, they breed in them certaine lyce which haue wings, and stinke; the which in a short space eate their bellies, then the brest, and in the end the whole bo∣dy; their paine beginnes with an itching intermixt with pleasure in scratching, which increasing by little and little leaues him not vntill that hauing torne himselfe with his nayles hee hath made an issue for the lice and stinking matter, which come forth in such aboundance as there is
no possibilitie to bee cured, and so through the vehe∣mencie of their torment they end their miserable dayes with horrible cryes. But let vs returne into our way, and say with the holy writ; Death is the highway of all the earth, all enter in∣to it, let vs follow them by the tracke. And you to whom the Ruler of the world hath giuen the Empire of life and death as it were at pleasure, abate the frowning of your browes; for what a poore man may feare of you, the same is threatned to you by the great Master of all, saith the tragicall Poet Seneca. Obiect not vnto mee the beauty of your Pallaces, nor the magnificence of your Se∣pulchers, for the Philosopher
Seneca will maintayne that Senec. Epist. 91. we ought not to take mea∣sure of your tombes, which seeme to take another course: but one and the same dust makes all men equall, if wee be borne alike wee must dye alike: that great Establisher of humane rights, hath made no distinction in our natiui∣tie and extraction with o∣thers, but in the time where∣in we liue; when we shall bee come to the end of mortall men, then farewell ambition, thou must bee like to all that the earth doth couer. Let vs comfort our selues in the death of great men, and therefore let vs heare the last speeches and commande∣ment of great Saladin Sultan of Aegypt and Syria: I will (said he in dying) without a∣ny
other obsequies, they car∣ry an old blacke iuppe vpon the end of a lance, & that the Priest cry out aloude all the people hearing him, I haue vanquished, I haue liued a great Prince; but now I am vanquished by death, and my life closed vp; I haue beene rich, now I haue nothing but a mourning weede. To this goodly table let vs adde a second, which the pensill of antiquitie hath drawne; Cre∣sus being vpon a burning pile is preserued from the fire by Cyrus, but rather reserued to another season. Cyrus made his profit of the words of Cresus, that no man could ac∣count himselfe happy before his death: he thinks of it, and wills, after his death others should thinke of it with him,
when as he caused these words to be grauen vpon his tombe▪ I am Cyrus which con∣quered the Empire of the Persians; let no man enuie this little peece of ground which couers my poore car∣case. What followes? Alexan∣der comes hunting after new worlds, and stumbles vpon this tombe; hee reades and considers of the words, and compassion made his heart to grieue (saith the History) for the inconstancie of things, why? for that he must in like manner dye, & soone after hee dyed. Let vs con∣clude and say with the Apo∣stle, that it is decreed that all Heb. 9. 27. men shall die once, that no man is exempt, no, not Em∣perours, Kings, Princes, Lords; no, not Popes, Car∣dinals
nor Bishops, neither rich, strong, nor healthfull; and thereby let vs take com∣fort. An Obiection. Any thing that is cause of strāge accidents is strange. Death is the cause of strange ac∣cidents. Therefore it is strange. THis reason tends to confute the precedent Argument: For that death ouerthrowing the highest mountaines, degra∣ding and vnthroning Kings and Emperors, and consining thē into obscure caues, with simple mourning clothes, which rot in the end vpon their bodies, seemes wonder∣full
terrible. Answer. The Monarks of the world haue their priuate consolation in death; yea, I will say, that the greater they are, the grea∣ter fauour they receiue in death. A Kings life is an vn∣quiet life, full of ten thousand cares and troubles: he must watch for the quiet of his subiects, and against the sur∣prises of his enemies; he hath not an houre free from a∣mazement, and eats not a bit without feare of poyson: and therefore that King of Persia did iustly exclaime against it; O Crowne (said he,) hee that knew how heauy thou art; would neuer take thee vp where he should finde thee: Say not, O ambitious, they are bare words onely, which neuer giue the effects; many
great men haue spoken it and done it. That famous Em∣perour Dioclesian, reiecting the Romaine Empire, shut himselfe in the Gardens of Salona, to manure them with his owne hands. That great King and Emperour Charles 5. protested, that hee had found more pleasure and content in one day in his so∣litary life, then in all his roy∣all and triumphant reigne. But to conclude, the expe∣rience of all ages doth teach vs that the greatest gates are most subiect to winde, the highest tops of Mountaines are soonest shaken, and th greatest Emperors are most assayled, and haue no rest but in death onely.
The 7. Argument from the commendable efect of the contempt of Death. Euerie thing that makes vs va∣liant should be pretious. The contempt of death makes vs valiant. Therefore the contempt of death should be pretious. THere is nothing that hath in it so great force to make a man valiant as the contempt of death; he that feares it not makes himselfe master of the most strong and vigorous life in the world: Seneca sayth, that death is not to be feared epist. 24. 41. Epist. 4. that by the benefit thereof any thing is to be preferred,
or auoyded. Agesilaus being demanded of one how hee might purchase great fame, If thou contemnest▪ death (sayd he.) He whose spirit is seazed on with the feare of death; will neuer performe any memorable thing in war this passion will benumme & withdraw mens hands from the goodliest exployts in the world. Plut. in Lacon. Alex∣ander said that there was not any place so strong by nature or by art, that was safe for cowards. We reade that Phi∣lip king of Macedon hauing mae an irruption into Pe∣loponesus, and that one step∣ping forth sayd, That it was to be feared the Lacedemoni∣ans would endure many mi∣series, if they did not com∣pound with Philip: to whom
one Damidas answered; O Dwarfe, sayd he, what harme can happen vnto vs that feare not death? Epictetus also teacheth vs, that to attempt nothing basely wee must al∣waies haue death before our eyes, to make her familiar & frendly vnto vs; where of wee shall haue sufficient proofe in a souldier of Antigonus band, who finding himselfe toucht with a deadly infirmitie, had death in such disdaine as no∣thing amazed him, yea hee was fearefull to the most hy∣deous feare. The king saw him among the rest and admired him, and obseruing his pale colour he inquired of him, the cause of his palenes, and was informed of his disease; the king thinking that by his cure his force and valour
would increase, caused his Physitions to recouer him: but the effect prooued con∣trarie, for the souldiar being cured had no other care but to liue, and this care made him to feare euery thing, yea the shadow of a leafe; his fu∣rious humor was gone down to his feet to fly away. Where fore we must therfore thinke of death, know, it and con∣temne it. To this end the ancients did set dead bodies at the doores of their houses to be seene of passengers; for the same reason the Egyptians did cause an image of death to be carried about in their bankets and set vpon the ta∣ble, not to strike terror into them, but rather a disdaine by the frequent beholding of what it is. And so it was
at Constantinople in the electi∣on & creation of a new Em∣peror, they were wont to breathe into his heart vertue & valour, when as being set in his highest Throne of glorie, a mason came neare to him and made a shew of an heape of stones of di∣uers formes, to the ende hee might choose which did best please him to build his tombe. It is the same reason why at the Coro∣nation of the Popes, when as he that is new called, pas∣seth before S. Gregories Chappell, the master of the Ceremonies holding an handfull of flaxe at the ende of a drie reed, setts fire to it, and cries with a loud voyce: Pa∣ter sancte, sic transit glo∣ria
mimdi. O I would to God that both they and wee did thinke seriously of this: that remembring how lightly this life passeth away, wee might make haste, for feare to be sodainly surpri∣zed, euery man to doe his dutie according to his vo∣cation; euen as they doe which liue at Court, being set at the table make what haste they can in feeding, least the meat be taken a∣way before they haue dy∣ned. VVhy stay wee then? Let vs make hast to attaine to that royall dignitie, which hee deserues best that is most at libertie; and hee is most that least feares death. Behold what a tragical Poet sayth:
Hee is a King that conquers feare, And th'ills that dèsperate bosomes beare; That in his Towre set safe, and free, Doth all things vnderneath himsee: Encounters willingly his Fate, Nor grudges at his mortall state. From those golden verses the golden memory of Hel∣uidius an ancient Romain shal for euer shine, who seeing the ancient liberty captiuated, by Vespasian, and being com∣manded by him that hee should not come into the Senate, hee answered, That whilest he was a Senator hee
would come vnto the Senat, Vespasian replyed, Bee in the Senate and hold thy peace. Heluid. Let no man then aske my opinion. Vsp. But I must in honour demand it. Heluid. Then must I in iustice speake what my conscience commands me. Vesp. If thou speakest it, I will put thee to death. Heluid. You may do what you please, and I what I ought. Let this example bee al∣wayes before our eyes, and especially to vs Christians, that of the twelue Apostles, who neuer yeelded to the cruell assaults of death, but alwayes reioyced with an inuincible courage (as the text saith) to be held worthy to suffer reproach for the Act. 5. 41. Name of Christ. Where∣fore
aboue all the world they haue purchased a most holy fame, yea their twelue names are written in the twelue foundations of the celestiall Apoc. 21. 14. and eternall City: O what a worthy reward for so great valour in the contempt of death! The eight Argument ta∣ken from the worke of God. The reward wherewith the E∣ternall doth sometimes re∣compence them he fauors, can∣not be euill. Death is that wherewith hee doth sometimes reward them he fauors.
Therefore Death cannot bee euill. IF that be true which Sile∣nus (in Tully) and others, with reason report, that the first degree of happinesse is, not to be borne, and not to fall into the dangers of the present life: That the second is, to die in being borne; with∣out all doubt the third must bee, not to continue long in the miseries of the world, but hauing beheld the workes of God, the wandring couse of the stars, the swift motion of the heauens, the inuariable changing of day and night, presently to die. Say not that thou art taken in thy youthfull age, that is a priui∣ledge which God giues thee, to free thee from a thousand
Combats of vice which thou shouldest endure; or it may be thou shouldest be conque∣red, as Salomon was by volup∣tuousnsse, or as Nero by cruel ty. Looke vpon the insolencie and corruption of that time, it will appeare that thou hast more cause to feare, then to hope in liuing longer, sayed Seneca to Marullus, epist. 00. If this were in those times, what shall it be in this age, which is as many times im∣payred, as there haue since slowed yeares and daies. And admit thou wert assured to continue alwayes vertuous and victorious, yet shouldest thoube continually couered with dust, altered with thirst, full of bitternesse, and old with anguish. Enoch pleased God, and was beloued of
him, he was rapt vp into hea∣uen▪ that the malice of the world should not change his vnderstanding, sayeth the text. c. 44. Cleobis, and Biton, religious and dutifull chil∣dren, for that they tooke the yoake and drew the Charri∣ot of their deceased mother vp the hil, for want of Mules, and the houre of the inter∣ment pressing on, they re∣ceiued the night following in recompence of their sin∣gular piety a happy death. Marcellus Nephew to Augus∣tus Caesar, adopted by him: Marcellus vpon whom the hope of all the Romaine Em∣pire did depend, dyed in the 18. yeare of his age; a thou∣sand others, yea innumera∣able haue bene cut off in their vigorous youth, the most ex∣cellent
(as the ripest cheries) are the first taken, it happens to these timely wits as to the ripest fruit, they fall first; and Homer writes that the He∣roes and Demigods neuer ex∣tended Odyss. l. 13 their dayes euen vnto the threshold of old age. Se∣neca reports that his prede∣cessors had secne an infant of great stature at Rome, but they saw him die presently, according to the opinion of euery man of iudgement; whereupon hee addes that maturity is a signe of immi∣nent ruine, that whereas the increasings are consumed they desire the end. More∣ouer, hee abuseth himselfe much, which thinkes he hath liued long, because hee hath past many yeares if he shew no other signes, but his pale
face and his gray head. Behold what the wise man saith; Man is not gray for that hee hath liued many yeares, but for that hee hath liued wisely: long age must bee measured by the honest conditions and manners, not by the number of dayes. It depends of another (saith Seneca) how long wee shall liue, but of our selues how good we are: the importance is to liue well, and not long; yet many times liuing well doth not consist in liuing long, saith the same, Epist. 10. That the iniury of times doe anticipate and interrupt in shew the lawfull course of our dayes, our apparent ver∣tue will make our life more compleate. Yea, but God doth promise long life to Exod. 20.
them that shall honour their parents. I answer, That God doth promise prolongation of a happy life to them that shall obey him. This happi∣nesse is not in this world, it is onely to bee found in hea∣uen; it is therefore of heauen, whither his speech tends: And although the literall sense be of the land of Cana∣an, yet was it a figure of the mysticall and chiefe abode; that is to say, of he auenly Paradise, which was the mould of this land, flowing with milke and honey, and all sorts of blessings. And if any one against this probable reason, will vnderstand the promise to be generall of the whole earth, we may answer, that God (like vnto Physiti∣ons) grants vnto men that
haue sicke spirits, not what is most profitable, but what they importunatly and igno∣rantly desire. Otherwise I will neuer yeeld that this life (with what singular and ex∣traordinary happinesse soe∣uer it be fauoured from hea∣uen) is better then the life e∣ternall, whereunto death doth infallibly leade the chil dren of God. It is the onely cause why it pleased the E∣ternall to take iust Abel vnto him by death, and would suf∣fer cursed Caine to languish long. It is also the reason why Iesus Christ doth not pro∣mise long life (as the Lawe doth) to those that shall ho∣nour him and follow him, but the Crosse, yea death it selfe, Mat. 10. Mar. 13. It therefore remaines true that
the Oracle saith, Iust men are Esay. 58. taken away from the euill, enter into peace, & they rest vpon their bed, &c. And in like sort it is true, that death cannot bee ill, seeing it is the reward that God giues vnto his for their faithfull seruice; or at the least, it is the begin∣ning, if it be not the totall. The Ninth Argument taken from the rule which should measure all the desire of man. Man a reasonable Creature should not desire any thing but what is seasoned with reason. The estate of this present life is not seasoned with good reason.
Therefore man should not de∣sire the estate of this present life. THe maior of this Ar∣gument cannot bee de∣nyed, by any reasona∣ble creature, to whom I speake: the minor is iustified by the numbring of the three degrees of life, vegetatiue, sensitiue, and intellectuall; either of which being consi∣dered apart, or all three to∣gether, they haue no vaile∣able reason to mooue vs to loue them: but let vs examine them in order. In the vege∣tatiue life is chiefly obserued a facultie, drawing, retay∣ning, concocting and expul∣sing, to nourish and make grow; so as the chiefe end in the Indiuiduum is growing,
in this growing what reason of loue? and in this what hath not a tree more then man? yet no man desires to bee a tree: yea, should hee exceede in height that at the Indies, which the Portugalls eye∣witnesses, sayling to Goa, say to bee higher then a crosse∣bow can shoote; what a∣uailes it man to be of a mon∣strous height, but for a hin∣drance? Witnesse Nicomachus the Smyrnean, who growing to such a prodigious height, that being but young hee could not remoue out of one place, had continued an vn∣profitable stocke, if Aescula∣pius by strict dyets and vio∣lent exercises, had not aba∣ted him. In this then wee see no reason to desire life: Let vs come vnto the sensitiue;
we perceiue in creatures fiue senses, answering to fiue sen∣sible obiects, which are in the world. And let vs obserue, that the perfection of the sence is when it enioyeth his proper obiect; as the perfecti∣on of the eye is to see co∣lours, of the eare to heare sounds; of the nose, to smell sents; of the mouth, to taste sauours; & of the hands, yea, of the whole body, to touch tactible qualities. The sight in colours obserues the sor∣ting and mixture of diuers va∣rieties, the proportions and exact dimensions. I de∣ny not but man may take pleasure therein, but it is a brutish & vnreasonable plea∣sure, if it bee not referred to the honour of the Authour of these colours; if it bee religi∣ously
referred, man will de∣sire an increase of sight, both of body & minde; the which he finds in himselfe to be ob∣scure, short and so weake, that at the brightest colours it melts and is dispersed as the lightning. This desire cannot bee perfect but in the new casting of the body by death; and therefore Dauid, said, Turne away mine eyes lest they behold vanitie: Psal. 119. they had seene it in Ber∣sabee and elsewhere, hee had beene almost lost: But yet if in the sight lies the point of the reason of life, why is not man another Linx, to pierce through stone walls, and to see without hindrance what∣soeuer is in the world? The hearing, in sounds di∣stinguished, conceiues a har∣mony,
which is no other thing but an aire beaten with many and diuers tunes, followed with a iust propor∣tion and happy incounter here vpon earth, since that sinne was brought in by man. Man of this Lute (the world) being speciall string, All th'other nerues, doth into discords bring: And renders now, for an en∣chanting aire, A murmure so offensiue to the eare, As Enion would amaze, Enion the rude, That th'ancient arrs the Chaos made, renew'd. HEEre then there is no reason to desire life, but rather the end, to go
and heare the mellodious sounds, which are made in heauen, diuine in their mea∣sured times and proporti∣ons, which euen the poore Pagans haue acknowledged. Smelling of sents seemes a certaine exhaling vapour, tempered of heate and moi∣sture, but he is soone loathed bee it neuer so delightfull; as of muske, some cannot en∣dure it, but sound at the sent of it: But besides all this there are in the world many pestiferous vapors, which make man sicke, yea die; and therefore by consequence herein there is no more reason to desire life then death. Tast feeles the sauours which are made by the seasoning of diuers liquors, but in those
man doth soone find a distast and repletion, if he vse them without measure or disconti∣nuance. Where is then the true reason of mans good, which must be taken without measure, without interrupti∣on and without satiety? the more it is taken, the more it is desired, and the more com∣pleate it is, the more it doth reioyce and content. In the end comes touching; the pleasure whereof cannot bee but in the feeling of smooth and polished bodies: This pleasure as of the former sence, if it be continued with∣out intermission, becomes very vnpleasant, and the most excellent point thereof slides sooner away then it is percei∣ued: this pleasure which the greatest hold to be so great,
at the very instant it passeth, and giues to man two dan∣gerous checkes, one to the soule, which it depriues of vnderstanding; the other to the body, which it driues in∣to a falling sicknesse. Aristotle doth witnesse the first, Hippo∣crates the last. These are the differences which distinguish a liuing Creature from a plant, the sensitiue life from the vegeta∣tiue: If sensible things per∣ceiued by their sence were of themselues to bee desired, without doubt the more ex∣cellent they were in their kind, the more pleasing they should be: yet contrariewise we see that the thing that is most sensible offends that sence most which is proper vnto it. The fire burnes with
touching and doth stupefie and takes from it his sensitiue vertue: the thunderclap dulls the hearing, troubles the braine, and by a long conti∣nuance of a great noise makes him deafe, and so of the other sences. Moreouer, if the reason of life consisted in the sences, who would beleeue that man were the more perfect crea∣ture, seeing that many exceed him in sence? for the spider in the subtiltie of touching, the Ape in the bountie of tast, the Vulture in the force of smelling, the Boare in the ventue of hearing, and lastly the Linx in the seeing facultie exceeds him farre. Thirdly these Organs of the sences are ordained only by nature for the vegetatiue
life, that is to say, either for the preseruation of the Indi∣uiduum, by eating and drin∣king, or of the Species by ge∣neration. It is true that man applyes them also to other ends then we haue obserued: but those Creatures which haue nothing but the two first degrees of life, whereof we treat, imploy their sences to no other end, but to enter∣taine themselues, or for ge∣neration. So the Lyon will start at the sight of a stag, but it is for that he sees his preie prepared, and not simply for that the stag hath such vari∣etie of colors. The Nightin∣gale, will answere with a me∣lodious sound; hearing ano∣ther sing; it is not for any de∣light it hath, for in a true de∣claration it sufficeth not that
the sence take pleasure in the obiect; which is proper and proportionable vnto it, but this proportion must also be inwardly apprehended & cōceiued; the which is neither found in the Nightingale, nor in any other creature destitut of reason. And whence then comes (will you say) the cause of this sodaine answer to the voice heard? It proceeds from the complexion of the Nigh tingale, to the point wherof it mounts, when as the sound which beates the ayre, strikes his eare, and enters thereby into his head: as we finde by experience in our selues; whenas hearing any one yaune, we are moued to doe the like; hearing one sing, we sing; seeing the world runne we runne after it, yet know
not whither: the Quaile by example wilbe moued at the singing of the masle, not for any delight shee takes, but from the motion to genera∣tion which she feels kindled in her selfe. The Dog will faune and leape vpon his ma∣ster, whom he had lost; and yet this doth not proceed from any naturall instinct, & tends to no other end but to be kept, defended and fed by his sayd master. Finally hee that will duly obserue it, shal finde that all the sences of vnreasonable creatures haue no other end, but preseruati∣on, & generation an end inti∣mated in the vegetatiue life; a life (we saw) had no suffici∣ent reason to moue our de∣sire; how then shall the sensi∣tiue haue? Moreouer, if rea∣son
and the desire of life con∣sisted in the pleasure of the sences, why haue they which were most giuen vnto it, had wretched ends, and ignomi∣nious liues? the Emperour Vitellius Spinter thinking to find his felicitie in it, incoun∣tred his ruine; hee was giuen to lust and gormandize, so excessiuely, as at one supper hee was serued with 2000 sorts of fish, and 7000 of fowle. And what was the end of this life? He was sodainely slaine, pierced through with small darts, drawne naked through the streets, and cast into Tiber, after the eight month of his Empire, and before the sixtieth of his age. To this wee will adde one in our fathers time, Muleasses
King of Tunis, who although hee were banished from his Realme, and had succours de∣nyed by Charles the fift, yet he was so drowned in the de∣lights Paul. Iou. l. 44. of his Hist. of sensualitie, as hee spent a 100 Crownes for the sauce of a Peacocke: and the more to bee rauished with musicke, he caused his eyes to bee banded, and to delight his smelling hee was continu∣ally perfumed with Muske. What happened? He was de∣feated in battaile by his own Sonne Aminda, and as hee fled disguized, he was follow∣ed by the sent of his per∣fumes, discouered and taken, and his eyes put out with a hot Iron by his owne Chil∣dren. O crueltie! but a iust iudgement of God, for his voluptuousnesse.
Then comes the sight so piercing and passionate after the faire faces of women, and stayes not there onely, but (O shamefull sight) it will see the bodies naked, the which is condemned both by God and man: Romulus condem∣ned that man to death which suffered himselfe to bee seene naked by a woman; how much more is that woman to bee condemned, which layes aside all modestie with her smocke, as Giges said in Herodotus? The Emperours Lib. 1. Valentinian, Gratian, & Theo∣dosius, religious obseruers of chastitie, did forbid vpon great penalties that none should shew themselues na∣ked in publike; but to Tibe∣rius, Caligula, Heliogabalus & others, who tooke no delight
but to defile their eyes and bodies with such shamefull spectacles, God did shew his horrible Iudgements in their deaths. Finally voluptuousnesse hath not only bene the cause of the ruine of men alone, but of whole Estates: Sybari∣des a Towne seated betwixt two riuers, in old time strong and flourishing, did rule ouer foure bordering people, had vnder their obe∣dience 25. Townes, and could bring to field 300. thousand men armed: yet by the disso∣lution of the Sybarites; in two moneths ten dayes shee was spoiled of all her felicity and greatnes, drowned and quite ruined. The like excesse was the ouerthrow of that migh∣ty Romaine Empire, as wee
may easily reade in them that haue written of that subiect. As long as Curius and Fa∣bricius led Du Bartas in Iudic. lib. 6. The Romaine Armies, that for dainties fed On boiled turnops; and the cresses were Amongst the Persians, th'on∣ly delicate cheare, In peace both led their liues retired still, And (fear'd in warre) did with their Trophees fil Almost all earth: But when of th' after seede, (Of Syrian Ninus) Persians learn'd to feede On sugar delicacies; and that Rome, (With pleasure of their bel∣lies ouercome,
In Galba's Rule, Vitellio's, Nero's liuing), No lesse for glory in their di∣shes striuing, Then if in conflict, they the field had won Of Mithridates; and Al∣cides son: All iustly saw themselues, by nations spoy'ld, That they long since, had fought withall, and foil'd. Warning those Realmes, that take their courses now, Lest they their earth, with e∣quall ruines strow. The Obiection. The moderate vse of the sences in worldly things is pleasant and lawfull. Therefore it is reason to desire life.
ANswer. The word mo∣derate shewes of it selfe that this reason is verie moderate and weake, yea that there is contradicti∣on in the adioinct (as they say:) true pleasure admits no moderation, it tends alwaies to the eminent & soueraigne degree, and will alwaies be continued without interrup∣tion or satietie: This is not found in the sences, in the en∣ioying of worldly things; not the first, for the supreme de∣gree of the sensible thing of∣fends, yea ruines his proper sence, the which is contrarie to pleasure: not the second, for if the sences be not inter∣rupted in their actions and tyed by sleepe, they euapo∣rate all their vigour, & their action becomes odious vnto
them: Neither in the third, for presently our sences are glutted, and the thing is te∣dious vnto them by a long staie, as experience doth plainely shew. Moreouer, vanitie is so fixt to the sences and to the sensible things of the world, since that sinne entred, as the beloued Disci∣ple of Iesus Christ cryes in∣cessantly to the eares of Christiās Loue not the world nor the things that are of the world; if any one loues the world, the loue of the Father is not in him: for (sayth he) all that is of the world, that is to say, the desire of the flesh the couetousnes of the eyes, the ouerweening of the life, is not of the Father, but of the world. And it is the rea∣son why S. Ambrose hath
made a booke of the flight of the present world, to conclude, that whosoeuer wil be saued, must mount aboue the world, as he speaks. Let him seeke the veritie with God, Let him flie the world and leaue the earth, for hee cannot know him that is, & is alwayes, if he doe not first flie from hence. VVherefore Christ meaning to draw his Disciples neere vnto God the Father, sayd vnto them, Rise, let vs goe from hence. We must then sequester our selues, & if he that cannot (as Ioha. 14. the same author saith) soare vp to heauen like the Eagle, Amb. c. 5. of the flight from the world. let him flie to the mountaine like a sparrow, let him leaue these corrupt vallies of bad humors &c. Voluptuosnesse is the Diuells pillow. Let
man beware how hee sleepe vpon it, lest he be smothe∣red. If these diuine words doe not moue them of the world, at the least let them giue are to that which a Pa∣gan aduiced his friend: The greater the multitude is saith he, among whom wee thrust our selues, the more we are in danger; there is nothing so pernitious to good manners as to be in Theaters; by such pleasures, vice doth more ea∣sely creepe into vs: finally, it it is his end to sequester man from the delights of the world. But finally, if the pleasure of the senses contained any reason to desire life, the dis∣pleasure which accompanies them containes reason to make men loathe it, seeing it
is certaine that pleasure and paine are linckt together; pleasure beginnes and pas∣seth away lightly, paine fol∣lowes and continues long: the which Boissard hath in his 38. Embleme represented excellently by a hiue of Bees, to the which an indiscreete maide comes, being desirous to taste of the hony that was within it, she thrust her hand rashly into the hiue; the Bees mad angry, stung her, so as for a little sweetnesse, she had a sharpe and durable paine. Euen so that man (saith he) which indiscreetly casts him∣selfe into the sinke of volup∣tuousnesse, retaines nothing but griefe & long repētance. The tenth Argument. taken from the Intellectual life.
If the life of man hath any rea∣son why it should be desired, it is found in the intellectuall life. But it is not found. Therefore there is not any. WEe haue searched deep enough into the vegetatiue & sensitiue: Let vs now sound the Intellectuall, and prooue the truth of the Minor of our Argument. It is by the vn∣derstanding that wee are nei∣ther plants nor beasts, but a most excellent creature; that is by reasoning which wee vnderstand, and vnderstan∣ding is the proper worke of man, in the which Aristotle hath fixed his last and soue∣reigne felicity. If then there be reason in humane life, for
the which it is to bee desired, L. 10. Ethic. . 7. it must bee drawne from hence: But humane life is for her actions. Of Intellectu∣all actions, wee haue three degrees, the apprehension of simple things, as a stone, a tree, a horse, a man; in this single apprehension there is neither good nor e∣uill, pleasure nor displeasure, reason nor absurditie. Then followes the second opera∣tion of the intellect, the com∣position and diuision of things like or dislike, where∣by the truth or falsehood is made manifest; which truth or falshood is better knowne by the third operation of the vnderstanding, which is the discourse, inferring by one thing another, and conclu∣ding the truth.
Here certainely should the true good of man bee found, if hee could attaine to the knowledge of the souereigne and first truth, seeing (accor∣ding vnto Iesus Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life) That is eternall life to know one true and onely Ioh. 17. c God, and Iesus Christ whom he hath sent: But who can do it of himselfe? seeing that the onely meanes to attaine vnto it is folly vnto the Gen∣tiles, and scandall vnto the Iewes, as the Apostle saith. No man can doe it of him∣selfe, no more then flye to heauen: hee alone obtaines this knowledge, who illumi∣nated from aboue, hath made his reason captiue to his faith. But yet all that man knowes of this first truth, is
but obscurely, and as it were by a glasse; which cannot but stirre vp a desire to dislodge out of this life, to bee with Christ, and to see God face to face. As for the know∣ledge of the things of this world, which is gotten one∣ly by the strength of Nature, men attaine vnto it but in the declining, when as their eyes are darkened with age, and their spirits distempered with a thousand langui∣shings; beginning then one∣ly to learne when as life be∣ginnes to leaue them. And yet after they haue swette, washt, and studied, where are they? That is, knowing, or thinking to know somthing, they finde they are ignorant of ten thousand; and if they fixe the point of their con∣templation
in the essence of the thing which they thinke to know, they shall finde that the greatest part is hidden from them: And it is that which Ecclesiastes teacheth, saying, I haue obserued that man cannot giue an account of any worke of God which he hath done vnder the Sun; the more he shall toyle in it, the lesse hee shall vnderstand, how wise soeuer hee boast himselfe. Conformable here∣unto, Democritus said, that truth was hidden in the bot∣tome of a deepe well. The same reason armed the Em∣perours Valentinian and Li∣cinius against learning, as a∣gainst a publick plague: Fau∣stus also Proconsul in Asia put all the learned men he could get to death, for the onely
hatred of learning. Tully by the report of Va∣lerius, who had so much che∣rished learning, as hee had purchased the title of The Father of Bloquence, did in the end contemne it. And what was the cause that Ari∣stotle (called the miracle of the world, the spirituall man, for his rare knowledge) did in the end cast himselfe head∣long in the floud Euripus, but that hee could not compre∣hend the flowing and ebbing twise in 24. houres? It seemes that all the sci∣ences (as hath bin obserued by others) are but the opini∣ons of men, though confi∣dently deliuered like vnto the decrees of a Court of Parlament; as hurtfull as pro∣fitable, more pestiferous then
wholsome, bad rather then good; imperfect, doubtfull, full of errours and controuer∣sies; by reason whereof Socra∣tes the wisest in the world, will say, that he knowes but one thing, which is, that hee knowes nothing. This saying is common to the seuen wise men of Greece, Nothing too much. This is of Archilochus; The vnderstanding of men is such as Iupiter sends them daily: And Euripides saith, What wisedome doe these poore men thinke to haue? we vnderstand not any thing, let euery man doe accor∣ding to his owne will; and in another place, Who knowes whether to liue here bee not to die, and that to die be not reputed life to mortall men? O worthy speech of a Pagan!
And what shall we say of the Pyrrhonicques, who make pro∣fession to doubt all things? Reiect them not without hea∣ring, seeing that Seneca la∣ments their errour; seeing 7 Quaest. natu. c. vlt. St. Augustine vouchsafes to write of them, that they hold that man cannot attayne to the knowledge of things be∣longing to Philosophie. As for other things they follow apparence, not affirming, not consenting directly. See what a Diuine of our time saith, conformable to this, Charron in his booke of wise∣dome; And to the end, they should not bee censured to doate without reason; these are the considerations which they produce. The 1. is taken from the different complexions of
men and beastes, and of men among themselues. Hemlocke is the foode of Quailes, it is poyson to men▪ Demophon warmed himselfe in the shadow, and quaked in the Sunne: Mi∣thridates after long custome made poison so familiar vn∣to him, that hee could take it without any feare, perill or danger▪ The second is taken from sensible things, the which differ of themselues, according to the diuersity of the sences: An apple shall bee pale to the sight, sweete in the taste; and they say commonly that the thing which is sowre in the mouth is sweete at the heart: Yea, they shall bee diuers to the same sence. Of an egge the
yolke shall be hot, and the white cold; of some hearbe the roote hot, and the leafe cold. The 3. is taken from the alteration of men in health and sickenesse, in their sleepe and waking, in their youth and age; a change which doth suggest diuersitie of iudgement vpon the same thing, so as that which plea∣sed him doth offend him: and thereof comes the prouerbe that he which was an Angell in his youth, is become a di∣uell in his old age. The 4. is taken from the contrariety of Lawes and customes, which make that honest in one place, which is vicious in an other: In Turqy plurality of wiues is honorable, in Chri∣stendome it is a sinne: At Sparta it was allowed to
steale, so as they were not surprized in the theft; in Eu∣rope it is a vice punishable howsoeuer they bee taken. Finally, by Lycurgus Lawes, Adultery was allowed, and by those of the Persians in∣cestuous marriages, with the mother, sister and daughter; and by Platoes Lawes the commonalty of women, so∣domy, and such vices as are at this day odious to be named. The 5. is drawne from the mixture of diuers things, and of the diuers situation where they are set▪ so the purple co∣lour seemes to the eye to va∣ry in the Sun, the Moone, & by a candle: So a Pigeons necke, or the wing of a cocke takes the colour of gold, sil∣uer, greene, blue, or any other according to the place: So
the Camelion takes the co∣lour suddainly of that which doth enuiron and touch it. The 6. is from the want of experience of men, by reason of their short life; for some∣times we giue a rash iudge∣ment of things, whereof if we had duly considered, wee would change our opinions. The 7. All our knowledge is grounded vpon the vncer∣taine supposition of certaine principles, which if they were changed as they might be, al our knowledge would bee conuerted into meere igno∣rance. The 8. the same things shalbe great & small, square, and round, plaine, and rough, if they change place, and be contrariwise compared. The 9. is deriued from our want of custome, who admire ma∣ny
things which we had ne∣uer seene; and the Sun which exceeds all the wonders of the world, is not admirable vnto vs; for that since our birth we haue alwayes be∣held it. Finally, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Hippocrates, and o∣thers affirme; That there are many things in the world which cannot bee discerned by any of the fiue sences, no not by the vnderstanding; & what knowledge then can we haue? And who is assured that there are not many worlds? as many wise men maintaine, not without rea∣son, seeing that the power of God is infinite, and that he is not idle vntill hee can do no more. And if there bee but this world only, as others hold, who can comprehend
that infinite Vacuum beyond the heauens? These are bot∣tomlesse gulphes. Now what assured know∣ledge is there in so many doubts of worldly things? VVhat constancie in that which is so wauering? And if in the most easie sciences appeare so many obiections, oppositions and obscurities, what shall it be in those which are more hidden and remote? Let Physicks come, the most easie science to be apprehended; at the verie en∣trance you shall finde such a conflict of Philosophers, as al the ayre is darkned, and the eye troubled in his iudge∣ment. Thales Milesius main∣taines that water is the prin∣ciple in this science. No (saith ,) it is the ayre.
Heraclitus the Ephesian af∣firmes that it is the fire, Leucip pus that they be the Atomes: Empedocles, loue and hatred: Plato the Ideas; Aristotle (like a new starre) hee will set mat∣ter; forme and priuation: and he that hath contradicted all that went before him, shalbe refuted by his heires, who will maintaine euen by the deposition of Aristotle him selfe, that Principles which haue equiuocation, should not be accounted for true principles: such is priuation, and therefore in steed thereof some Peripaticiens will set motion, which ties the one vnto the other. I, but motion is an accident, and an acci∣dent cannot be a principle to a substance; and therefore the Hebrew Philosophers haue
added spirit to matter and forme. Vpon so many con∣trarieties in the foundation, what strength can there be in the building? Let vs obserue the like in Historie, which is much more easie; As many writers as you shal reade vpō one subiect, so much contra∣diction shall you finde. Will you for confirmation of the Pops Primacie, assure your selfe what time S. Peter came to Rome? some will hold that it was at the beginning of Claudius Empire: No, sayth S. Ierome, it was in the second yeare; & the Bundel of times replies that it was in the 4. The Passionall on the other side will passionatly main∣taine that it was in the 13. VVill you also know the cer∣tentime of the death & passiō
of our Sauiour? Tertullian sayes that it was in the 30. yeare of Iesus Christ, and the 15. of Tiberius; but Ignatius and Eusebius witnes, that it was in the 33. yeare of Christ and the 18. of Tiberius: Onuph rius, Mercator and other late writers will sweare, that it was in the 34 yeare of Iesus Christ; and if we yeeld some thing to antiquitie, we shall beleeue that Iesus Christ was 50. yeeres old when hee was crucified, and that it was not vnder Tiberius, but vnder Claudius: & to this the Iewes discourse tended, Thou art not yet 50. yeeres old, and yet thou sayest thou hast seen Abraham. If in this so holy a thing, where there is not any cause of blind passion, there appeares such apparent con∣trarietie,
what shall wee thinke of History, where as the penne puft vp with passi∣on, and transported with flat∣terie or slander, hath eyther aymed too high or too low, at the white of truth, the onely commendation of an historie? And admit wee should find writers void of all passion, the which seemes impossible, (if we except the secretaries of God, who were guided with the holy Spirit) yet their Histories should be vncertaine for the most part, for that they haue not beene spectators of the times, pla∣ces and persons, necessary circumstances in a History; & how can they know them, seeing that many times that which is done in our owne Towne, in the streete, yea, in
our house, is concealed from vs? Nay, the most exquisite and most certaine science, is nothing but vanitie & trou∣ble of mind, saith Salomon: Eccles. 1. c. And if wee shall rightly ob∣serue it, we shall find the most learned most disquieted, and the most vnlearned most at rest. S. Augustine hath seene it and was amazed, crying out with S. Paule, The vnlear∣ned rise vp and lay hold of heauen, and we are plunged into hell with our learning. It is the reason why Nicholas de Cusa hath written bookes of learned Ignorance, where hee commends them that make not so great account to know and vnderstand ma∣ny things, as to doe well and liue well. Knowledge then, being for
the most, ignorance in this life, cannot contayne any subiect to loue life: And ther∣fore wee will conclude, That seeing in all the degrees of life there appeares no suffici∣ent reason to desire it so ve∣hemently; that this desire is not commendable but to be blamed, namely, in man; who being man, for that hee hath a reasonable facultie, should not will any thing, much lesse affect it with passion, but by a true iudgement of vnpassionate reason. An Obiection. All that is ordayned for the seruice of God, is grounded vpon good reason▪ Life is ordayned for the seruice of God.
ANswer. That life is good which in all her motions, actions, and meditations, seeks nothing but the humble seruice of her Creator; but it it a chiefe point of their seruice, that man liuing should doe that honour vnto his Lord, to giue certaine credit vnto his oath, and to the writings of his testament sealed with his bloud. Verily I say vnto you that whosoeuer heares my Iohn. 5. 24. words, and beleeues in him that sent me, hath eternal life the which is repeated in ma∣ny other places: Whosoeuer hath this certain assurance of faith in him, what can he feare? death, nay rather desire it, seeing that in heauen by this death, (which serues vs
as a bridge to passe thither,) we shall be like vnto the An∣gels, and shall doe the will of our heauenly Father, ob∣tayning the Petition which we should daily make vnto him, by the expresse com∣mand of his Son, in the Lords prayer: Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen. Let vs say, the will is good, which aimes directly at the ho∣nor of God, so long as it shall please him to keepe it in his fauour; but yet death is bet∣ter which the Eternal sends, to giue vs thereby a better life. The 11. Argument taken from the de∣scription of Death.
No Cessation from a labour vn∣profitably renewed is vn∣pleasing. Death is a Cessation from a la∣bor vnprofitably renewed. THere is no neede of Eagles eyes to pierce into the truth of this argument, the least attenti∣on will comprehend it: For what is this life, but a daylie weauing of Penelopes Webb? it is finished in the euening, but the night vndoes it, & in the morning we beginne againe with as great eagernes as if it had neuer beene. The which made Seneca to poure forth Epist. 24. these complaints: When shal we cease to weaue daily one worke? I rise, and then goe to bed: I hunger & then fill my
selfe; I am a cold, and then I warme me. There is no ende, the head and tayle hold fast together, whereas the same things in their courses doe incessantly approch and re∣coyle againe: It is day, and night comes, sōmer appears, and winter doth aduance, & still they walke one rounde: I neither see nor doe any thing that is new. I doe but goe about this wheele, sayth the same Philosopher. If I be layed, I say, when shall I rise, and when will night fill vp her measure to glut me with distemperatures vntill day? sayth Iob Chap. 7. It is the true bodie of the infernall shadow of Ixion, who tied vnto a wheele turnes about Epist. 78. perpetually. There is not any one so dul
but sees this earthly Laby∣rinth, and yet no man will leaue it: Euen so they that are borne in a prison affect not their libertie; so they that dwell among the Cimme∣rians in darknes, desire not a cleere skie. So the children of Israel would not leaue the house of bondage, they quar∣relled with Moses who spake vnto them, they cursed him, and being come forth they would haue returned often: what was the cause? custome which was become another nature, feare to finde▪ worse in their iorney, & ignorance a cruell beast. No man will leaue this miserable earth, fearing to fall into greater miserie; so much doth the loue of the place & custome retaine the inhabitants in
their miseries, saith Seneca; Many floate miserably be∣twixt the torments of life & the horrour of death; they will not liue, yet know not how to die; like to Vlysses in Homer, who tooke fast hold of a wild Fig-tree, fearing to fall into bottomlesse Charyb∣dis, but yet ready to leaue it, if the feare were past. So Tiberius confest that hee held the Empire as a Wolfe by the eares, the which if hee might without danger haue abandoned, hee would wil∣lingly doe it: So Seneca; and Epist. 4. so experience doth teach, that many keepe themselues close in life, like vnto them whom a violent torrent hath carryed into some rough and thornie places. But let vs learne of a silly
woman, That death is the calme port for the stormes of this sea, to the end, that with her wee may take plea∣sure in it: Monica speaking to her sonne S. Augustine, vsed these words: As for me (my sonne) I take no more any pleasure in any thing in this impure world; what should I doe here longer in this base estate? I know not why I liue hauing no more to doe: here to fore I had a desire to liue, to see thee liue to Christ; I see it, why then stay I longer here? and soone after yeelded vp her soule to the Spirit of all power. Euen so, O mortall men, liue as long as you list, exceede the many yeeres of Nestor, or the 969. of Methu∣salem; yet shall you not see any other thing in this world,
but those foure great Prin∣cesses, the foure seasons of the yeere, holding hands toge∣ther, and dancing this round continually, sometimes shew∣ing their gracious aspects, & sometimes their backs defor∣med, as Philo the Iew speaks. It is like Sysiphus stone, which being thrust vp by force to the top of the Mountayne, returnes presently backe a∣gaine to the foote of it; and like the Sunne which hath no sooner toucht one of the Tropikes, but hee suddenly turnes to the other. To con∣clude, it is Danaes tonne pier∣ced full of holes, they may well poure in water, but they shall neuer fill it: These are fictions, but they haue their mysticall hidden sences. The holy Scripture hath
Parables, and Philosophie figures; let no man therefore reiect them, for so did the an∣cient Philosophers shadow their Philosophie. And as mercenarie labourers toyling and sweating in the longest day of Sommer; reioyce when they see the Sunne decline and neere his setting: so wee after such painefull trauaile whereunto this life doth force vs, let vs reioyce when wee draw neere vnto our de∣clining; and let vs not refuse being weary and tyred, to rest our selues in the sweet armes of death, to the which with∣out doubt, there is no bed in the world, how pleasing soe∣uer, to be compared. There is nothing here but ignorance that keepes vs backe. If the Israelites had truely vnder
stood the beauty and bounty of the land of Canaan, if they had beene assured of the en∣ioying thereof, they had not so often murmured against Moses, being ready to stone him; they had not wisht for the oynions and leekes of E∣gypt, they would haue taken courage in the midst of the desart. Let vs then conclude, that there is nothing but the blindnesse of man which hin∣ders him from seeing the ioyes of heauen, whereunto death is the waye Wherefore let vs open the eyes of our vnderstanding, & not grieue for the grosse foode of this world, for in heauen there is prepared for vs the meate of Angels.
Obiection. Any exchange from a place that is pleasing and certaine for one that is vncertaine, must needs cause trouble & vexa∣tion. Death is the exchange of the world which is pleasing and certaine, for a place wholly vncertaine. MOst part of the world when the Lampe of this life is almost wa∣sted, are so perplexed, as they do lose themselues. In the chiefe Citie of Aragon, vpon a Knights tombe this Epi∣taph is written in Latine: I know not whither I goe, I die against my will, Farewell suruiuers.
The Emperour Titus dy∣ing, said, Alas! must I die that haue neuer deserued it? There is to be read at Rome, vpō the stone of a Sepulcher of Sex∣tus Perpenna to the Infernall gods, I haue liued as I list, I know not why I die. Where∣unto may be added the ver∣ses which the Emperour A∣drian a little before his death made vnto his soule: My pretty soule, my dain∣tiest, My bodies sociable Guest: Whither is my sweetest going; Naked; trembling, little knowing? Of that delight depriuing∣me, That while I liu'd I had from Thee.
Many at this day in the light of the Gospell, shew by their actions, that they are no better resolued then these were, although that shame will not suffer them to con∣fesse it, when as death appro∣cheth. Answer. Wee deny the Minor of the Argument; for it is not true that death is of it selfe to bee beloued: if it appeares so, it is but in com∣parison of some extreame misery, which we apprehend in leauing it; for the liuing are (as we haue said) like vn∣to them which are carried a∣way violently with a stream, who (to saue themselues) lay hold of that which comes first to hand, yea if it were a barre of burning Iron. If you will then aske them how
pleasing that estate is, you may easily ghesse what they will say, That if they were as certaine (as it is most cer∣taine) that there were no harme in death (as shall ap∣peare) they would not breake out into such complaints. It is also false that this place is certaine. Gorgias the Rheto∣rician will not depose it, for Stob. serm. 115. being demanded if hee died willingly: Yea, said hee, for I am not grieued to leaue a lodging which is rotten and open of all sides. And Epi∣curus had often in his mouth, that against any thing in the world wee might finde some place of safety: but we all li∣ued in a City which was not fortified against death: and in truth this body is but a little plot of earth, comman∣ded
of euery side, flanked of none, hauing furious enemies without, & mutinous with∣in. Ingeners haue made ma∣ny impregnable forts, but neuer able to resist death. Physitions haue drawne out Maxim ser 36. the quintessence of their spi∣rits; if they haue any time found a delay, yet must they in the end yeeld and pay the interest. Fabulous Aeson re∣turned to youth by the Sor∣ceresse Medea, and true La∣zarus raised againe by the Sauiour of the world, haue not yet for all that escaped death. But you will reply, It is that which wee would say, that without death, life shold be certaine. I answere, that you know not what you say, for life as it
is made here, and whereof our question is, cannot bee without death: to desire to be a man, and not be willing to die, is not to desire to liue; for it is one of the conditi∣ons of life, as shall appeare in the following Argument. Moreouer I adde, that what incertainty of the future E∣state soeuer you pretend, doubtlesse it cannot bee so miserable (except the repro∣bate) as that of this life. Thirdly, admit that life were certaine, yet the pleasures would not be so, but rather the displeasures certaine. That wise King of Macedon saw it, feared it, and protested against it. For newes com∣ming vnto him of three great prosperities, that hee had won the price at the O∣lympike
games, that hee had defeated the Dardanians by his Lieutenant, and that his wife had brought him a goodly sonne; hee cried out with his hands lift vp to hea∣uen, O Fortune; let the ad∣uersity which thou preparest for me in exchange of thy fa∣uours, be moderate. But I will sommon you Merchants which make a profession of trafficke: There is a bargaine offered vnto you; in the which you finde of the one side gaine to bee made, and of the other losse; I demand if like a good hus∣band you will not weigh the losse with the gaine, to the end that finding the losse the greater, you may breake off the bargaine. And why should not man obserue the
like in life, which is much more important? Why should bee not ballance the pleasures with the displea∣sures, and finding these grea∣ter and more grieuous, why should hee feare to lose the pleasures, to auoyd the dis∣pleasures? A Poet speaking of a so∣litary life sayd, That if there be not so great ioy, without doubt there is not so great paine: If death haue not the ioyes of this world, it hath not: the torments of life which are farre greater. Ob∣serue it for a certaine Max∣ime, that there are three things here below, which march equally with an in∣constant pace: the estate of the aire which they call time; life, and the opinion of
man. And that which is worse, there are more cloudy dayes then cleere, more mi∣serable dayes for man then happy, and more changes to bad then good. But that which should fully assure vs going out of this life, is Iesus Christ, who protests That no man shall pull his sheepe out of his hands, Ioh. 10. We know whose wee are by the faith that is in vs, by the which we are fully perswaded that God will keepe our pledge vntill that day, 2. Tim. 1. Moreouer we are assured of the end, by the beginning, for to him that hath, shalbe giuen more. Luc. 19. Finally, we doubt no more: For the holy Spirit doth witnesse with our Spi∣rit, that we are the children
of God. Rom. 8. 16. This is certaine; but admit that it were not so, there is no plea∣sure in the world, be it neuer so short, but it leaues behind a venimous sting of serious repentance. I see thy large possessions, thy stately hou∣ses, the amiable aspect of thy children, thy treasure, the greatnesse of thine honors, finally all the pompe in the world, raise thee vp with their goodly shewes; but be∣leeue me, these things are not so happy as thou doest hold them: for proofe, looke vpon them that haue them in a higher degree then thy selfe, if notwithstanding they bee not miserable, they be transi∣tory things; if thou leauest not them first, they will leaue thee; if thou doest affect them
more then as an exercise for thy spirit, thou hast neither witt nor iudgement. This vnderstanding which makes the man, should not crouch vnder these carnall things: it must rayse vp him∣selfe to those which are eter∣nall, to the beauties, bounties & exquisite workmanship of this vniuers. All the pinching care which thou takest for the world, is but a toyle to the bodie, vexation of minde, and a losse of time: do what thou wilt, enioy all the possessions of the earth; but know this for certaine, that one onely houre can take them from thee. Doest thou not see that all runnes to change in this world, like vn∣to the Moone, which imme∣diatly doth gouerne it? Art
thou mounted to the highest degree? thou must descend a∣gaine: he that loues thee, wil hate thee; he whom thou hast saued, it may be will kill thee (as it happened to Iulius Cae∣saer:) thou doest laugh to day, it may be to thou shalt weep to morrow. Doest thou tri∣umph to day? an other day thou shalt be led Captiue: finally art thou aliue to day? another day will carrie thee to the graue: and not know∣ing what day, if thou art wise thou wilt suspect euery day; like vnto that good old man Messodan, who being inuited by one of his friends to a feast the next day, sayed vnto him Doest thou put me off vntill tomorrow, who after so ma∣ny yeares did neuer hold any one day assuredly mine? but
I haue held euery day as if it had beene my last; a resoluti∣on which differs much from these young old men, who hauing one footein the graue yet thinke they may liue one yeare more at the least, and the yeare being past, yet an∣other, and so alwaies: what is this, but against the order of nature to thinke to liue euer? The 12. Argument. from the condition of life. No man should hate any essenti∣all condition of that which he pursues. Death is an essentiall condition of life. Therefore no man should hate Death that seekes life.
IT wee consider of death, not in her introduction, but as she hath beene blest by God since by his grace, it is no fearefull paine to life (as we conceiue) but an in∣separable qualitie. Life is a burning Lampe, the body is the cotten, the radicall hu∣mour the oyle, the naturall heate the fire; this fire con∣sumes the oyle and cotten by little and little, and in few houres had deuoured it all, if nutriment supplied and changed by a secret vertue did not kepe it repayred: yet can it not preserue life from naturall ruine but for a time, for that the vertue in∣grafted into all the members of the body, wearing by de∣grees, in the transubstantia∣tion
of meates, and applica∣tion thereof to the fading substance, comes in the ende to waste, the humor dryes vp, the fire is quenched, & death followes: and seeing that we see death inclosed in the bo∣die of life, he should be verie indiscreet that would seeke life and hate death; and hee wise and vertuous, that will no more regard death then life, seeing it concernes his dutie. Heare what Pompey the Great (returning out of Sici∣ly with Corne to famished Rome, in a great storme) said vnto the Master of the ship; being halfe dead: Gowe, goe we; the question is not to liue, but to goe. This great personage did consider that it was as naturall for man to
dye, as to liue: and in truth all that haue liued are dead, what force soeuer they pre∣tended to oppose, the most puissant beasts in the world the Elephants goe to dust; yea Nature willing to shew how little that is which here seemes great, and how vpon the least occasion all force decayes, shee suffereth the Elephant at the sight of the least and basest creatures, of a Mouse or an Ant, to bee so seazed with feare, as he trem∣bles strangely. The Tyrants were smothe∣red with lightning in the Phlegrean fields. The Tyrant Maximine with his 8 foot in length, with his great thumb carrying his wiues bracelet for a ring, who drew carts laden, brake an horse teeth
with his fist, and did split trees with his hands: Al∣though he thought himselfe immortall, by reason of his force, yet he lyes slaine by his subiects. In the same estate is Ma∣rius, whose fillips were like blowes with a hammer. A∣mong the Moderns, George Castriot Prince of Albania, va∣liant and fortunate in his ex∣ployts, who with his owne hands had slain 2000, Turks; who neuer gaue but one blow to cleaue a man in two, and to ouerthrow the strongest; yet in the end death subdued him, and layd him in his graue. Let the Idolatrous Turkes search his Tombe for his bones, and from those re∣liques draw an inuincible force to themselues; yet hee
is dead: doth not this suffice? Behold Cities, Common weales, and kingdomes, they haue their youth and vigor; so in like manner their age and death: where is Thebe that great City, whereof the name is scarce remaining? where are those . Cities of Candie? where is Sparta and Athens, wherof there remains nothing but the base ruines? And thou the Queene of Na∣tions, falsesly held to be eter∣nall, where art thou? destroi∣ed, ruined, burnt, and drow∣ned; in vaine do they seeke thee, for thou art not where thou were built; And you Constantinople; Venice, and Pa∣ris, your day will come, and why not? Seeing that whole Monarchies runne swiftly to their ruine, the Assirian, Persi∣an,
Grecian, and Romaine are perished. You Turkes; you florish for lme but, behold  Scthians prepare to wrest the reines of the world out of your hands, and what wonder? if that riues which by nature is apt to tiue, if that which is easie to melt, melt, if that which is corrup∣tible decayes, and if that which is of a mortall condi∣tion dies. Without doubt if there be any thing to be ama∣zed at, it is how we are borne, how wee subsist, amiddest a thousād deaths, which reigne vpon vs; we haue but one nar∣row entry into life, but wee haue an infinite number to go out, which are very large and slippery; And yt (o strange brutishnesse) we won∣der how we die, and not how
we liue: Let vs then conclude with the Spirit of God, That euery man is dust, and shall returne to dust, for such is his condition. The 13. Argument taken from the benefit which the thought of death brings. Whatsoeuer doth multiply life should be precious to them that loue life. The Meditation of death mul∣tiplies life. Therefore the meditation of Death should be precious to them that loue life. A Great Philosopher ob∣seruing the vncerten∣ty of the time of death
and finding that life must in∣fallibly fall, by a bullet, by iron, by a dart, a stone, a haire, as Fabius the Pretor was choakt in drinking milke; with a kernell, as the Poet Anacreon; with a flie, as Pope Adrian. 4. with a splinter be he neuer so well armed) as Henry 2. the French King, whom a splinter of Captaine Lorges lance flying into the beuer of his caske, wounded in the head, whereof he dyed: by the rush of a doore, as Ite∣renius the Sicilian: in the Ve∣nerian act (a ridiculous death) as Gallus Pretorius, and Titha∣rius a Romane Knight, who were smothered in the bed of lust; By the holding of their breath without constraint, as it happened to Comon: by delight, as to Chilon, who hea∣ring
his sonne commended for that hee had wonne the prized the Olimpike games▪ was so moued with affection as he dyed; yea, in laughing, as old Philemon, who hauing seene an Asse eate sigges vp∣on his table, he commanded his seruant to giue him drinke, whereat hee did so laugh, as hee fell into a hicke and so dyed. Yea, life is rui∣ned by the pricke of a needle, as in Lucia the daughter of Marcus Aurelius, who prick∣ing her selfe dyed: By the tooth of a combe, like to Ru∣fynius the Consull, who combing himselfe, hurt his head, and ended his life. That great Philosopher, I say (con∣sidering that so many acci∣dents, and ten thousand o∣thers not to bee foreseene,
might in an instant take away life) gaue this wholsome counsell, That wee must di∣spose of euery day in such sort as if it should close vp our life within the compasse of the twelue houres. Consi∣der, saith hee, how goodly a Sen. Epist 31. thing it is to consummate life before death, and then to at∣tend without care the time that may remayne: and the better to induce vs thereun∣to, let vs remember the ad∣uice which Iesus Christ gaue vnto his Disciples of him selfe: I must doe, saith hee, the workes of him that sent me, whilst it is day; the night comes and then no man can worke, Ioh. 9. By the day hee signifies life, by night death; and his will is, that whilst we liue we should doe our duties
without any procrastination, for that night is neere, that is to say, death: But when a well setled soule (saith the same) knowes there is no dif∣ference betwixt a day and an age, shee then beholds (as it were from aboue) the dayes and successe which shall fol∣low her, and laughs at the course and continuance of yeeres. The same Seneca doth also make a pleasant discourse of Pacuius the vsurper of Sy∣ria, who being at night buried in wine, (as as if he had pre∣pared his owne funerall) cau∣sed himselfe to bee carryed from the table to his bed, & in the meane time his friends clapping their hands, danced and sung; He hath liued, hee hath liued; and there passed no day but this was done.
And the Authour addes, what he did in an vnseemely manner, let vs doe with rea∣son; that night approching and ready to lay vs in bed, let vs sing with ioy, I haue runne the course of my prefixed life, and if God doth adde an increase of tomorrow, let vs account it for gaine. In do∣ing so, euery day shall bee a life vnto vs, and by the mul∣tiplication of dayes our life shall be multiplyed, and why not? seeing that in what day soeuer we dye, we dye in our owne proper day, as the fame Seneca saith, calling the pre∣sent Epist. 70. & 120. day, that proper day; see∣ing the dayes that are past are no more ours, being so lost for vs, as they can bee no more restored: As for the future, we cannot call them
ours, being not yet come, and may bee wrested from vs in an instant by many acci∣dents: Moreouer, what is there in an age, that wee find not in one day, the heauen, the earth, the inhabitants thereof, the day and night by the reuolution of the hea∣uens? But you will say, This pen∣siue thoght of death, hamme∣ring continually in our heads doth hasten our death. Answ. You are deceiued, a wiseman thinkes quietly of it; and in thinking of it aduanceth no∣thing; no more then the mar∣riner in seeing the sayles still, and the wind to blow; it is by the wind and sayles, not by his looking that he is car∣ried into the Port: So by the waues of this life, not by the
meditation of death, wee are carried to the graue. Let vs then end with the saying of the Philosopher Musonius, That he imployes not the day rightly, who re∣solues not as if it were his last. The 14. Argument ta∣ken from a Si∣mile. Euery sweete and sound sleepe is pleasing. Death is a sweete and sound sleepe, Ergo. A Naxagoras sayed, there were two excellent in∣structions in Death, the one in sleepe, the other in the time going before our birth. Let vs now consider of the
first instruction. We see that most of the heathen Philoso∣phers haue saluted death, with the name of sleepe: Pla∣to in the end of his Apologie of Socrates: Tully in his booke de Senectute: Obsenie, fayth hee, there is no thing so like vnto death as sleepe. Homer faith, that sleepe & death are brother and sister twinnes. Let vs obserue with Plutarque that Homer shewes their similitude, terming them twinnes, for they that are so doe most commonly resemble. And in truth wee cannot denie but there is betwixt them great affinitie. It is one of the causes of death, the cold vapour, vn∣digested, and quenching the naturall heate, a vapor which appeares vpon the superficies
of the bodie, which they al∣so call the sweat of death. Sleepe proceedes from the fume which the meat digest∣ing; causeth: this fume moun∣ted vp and thickned by the coldnes of the braine, de∣scends againe and disperseth it selfe ouer all, enters into the nerues, by the which both sence and motion is distri∣buted throughout the whole body: so as death makes all the actions of the body to cease, euen so sleepe doth all the feeling of the sinnewes, of the senses, and all motion of the exterior members: For as wee doe often finde children lying asleepe vpon the ground, thinking they were dead; so man dying doth oftē deceiue them that stand by, being not able to
iudge whether he be dead or sleepes. Man cannot alwayes watch, he must sleepe; neither can he liue for euer, he must dye: and as he growes idle that can take no rest, so hee is madd that thinkes, not to die. As he that stooping to his worke doth stemm with traf∣ficke Boate along the shore the streame, and pouring out himselfe in watrie sweate breakes all the bancks in vp∣rore: In retreate made to his Cottage, from the labo∣ring light, strecht on the straw sleepes soundlie all the night. As man after that hee hath sweat with tedious labour; being broken and growne crooked with age, after that he hath tost and turmoyld, &
kept a great stir in the world, being layed in the earth rests in death; he that goes to bed puts off his clothes; he that dyes vnclothes his bodie; and his soule departs. And as he that hath eaten and drunke freely feels in his stomacke a gnawing and cruditie which hinders his rest; so hee that hath busied himself too much with worldly affayers, feels vpon the approching of rest a remorse of conscience, and an irresolution, which will not suffer him to imbrace death quietly, sleepe seazeth vpon mn lying awake in his bed insensibly, so can he not obserue the verie moment of approaching death; when sleep comes he feels no paine, no more that the verie in∣stant of death) If men be fro∣ward
and cry out when death approcheth, so do they, espe∣cially little children, who crie most when sleepe comes vpon them; Finally as in our soundest sleepe wee feele no paine, & we hold it a wrong to be awaked; so let vs as∣sure our selues we shall feele lesse paine in death, seeing her sound sleepe cannot be troubled, nor interrupted in any sort: and therefore Dioge∣nes taken with a sound sleepe a little before his death, the Physition inquiring if he had felt no paine, no, answered he, the brother comes before his sister. So Gorgias Leōtinus, be∣ing neere his end, his bodie without strēgth, he had many slumbers, so as a friend of his demanding how hee found himselfe. Well (saith he) the
brother beginnes to deliuer mee into his sisters hands. Moreouer, Nature which hath made nothing in vaine, seems to assure vs of this pro∣portion, by the Dormouse, which sleepes all Winter so foundly, as it will rather en∣dure all extremities then a∣wake: I haue seene a man of good credite, put one into water boyling on the fire, the which did not awake, but on∣ly mooue the hinder legs a little; yet in the Spring it is nimble & leaps from branch to branch: a goodly signe of the Refurrection of the dead. The fifteenth Argument, taken from former experience. Not to be yet, and to be no more, are alike, yea the same.
We ere in peace and rest when we were not yet. Therefore when we shall bee  more shall be i peace and rst. IT is an humane Argument which takes matters at the orst, and death for the  priuation of the whle man; yet without preiudic of his right, if there bee any foūd▪ Of necessity (saith Po) Plat. Apol. of Socrat. in the end. death must bee one of these two, a with-drawing or extin∣guishing of al sense, and of the soule likewise: or a transmigra tion (as they hol) into some other place: if death doth ex∣tinguish all, and be like vnto sleepe, the which most com∣monly when it is not trou∣bled▪ with dreames and fan∣cies, bring a uiet rest; O God
what a gaine is death  &c. But if it be true (which some say) that death is a ran∣sport o the happy regions, that our soules hauing shi∣ned in these mortall bodies, on this bare earth, go to shine elewhere: as when the Snne aft that he hath en∣ligned ou horizon, des∣cnds to giue day vnto an o∣ther, and then returnes to make his course anew: what decease is there of the soule mor then of the Sun, which runnes his course through our horizon all the day, and at night seemes extinct and dead to vs? Or suppose there were an vtter extinguishing & decease of the Soule, aswel as of the Body, what cause were there of feare in this ex∣tinguishing? since not to haue
bene at all, and to cease to be, is all one; because the effect both of the one and the o∣ther is, not to be▪ Then why should wee feare that now, when by the experience of a∣boue fiue thousand yeares, when we were not, that is to say, that we were dead, we ne∣uer felt any kind of paine? Hereunto king Aasis had re gard, obseruing one who la∣mented much for the losse of his sonne: If (sayd hee) tho didst not mourne when thy sonne was not at all, neither shouldest thou now grieue that he be no more. Let vs conclude with Se∣neea, That (according to the opinion of all the world) he Eipst. 7. carries the supreame degree of folly, that weepes for that hee liued not a thousand
yeares since, so hee doth se∣cond him which grieues that he shall not bee here the like e o o it i all on, ou d no be, and You haue ot ben. So spak the wie man by the mouth of m, saying, We  as if we  not b▪ Obiection. Not to ha had llent things, and o  lo them fter the enioyng them a time are verie different. t he that hath not beene, is like to him that hath ot had those exllent things, life and the  thereof; and he that is no more, like him that hath lost them, after the en∣ioying of them. Therefore not to haue bin, and
not to be are verie diff things▪ THe verie word o los▪ i of it sele  he tha after a cl fight,  lose his   then he which hath lo  knowledge of his sences, o reason an  out th which we had not bin? Wha is  into this  not see him∣selfe swallowed vp in a gu of darkenesse ay, in eternall horror? And therfore S.   the name o the faithfull aith 2. Cor. 5. That we whic in this lodging groane vnder the burthen, dsire not to e vncloathed, bu to be clo∣thed againe; to the ende▪ tha mortal may be swallowed
by life: Which shewes that the desire of man is to be, & if he enclines to deh it is  assured ōsideration, hat by ath he enters into a  and mor perfect being; els he would alwaies  not to be, that  to say, death, i we take it as the argument giues it. I answere: That if there bee a great difference not to haue beene,  to be, he ha the  ∣nefit that is no more; for hee hath this aboue the other, that he hath enioyed life and the fruits thereof, which the other ha vnles you will deny that h which hath bin admitted into the Kings Chamber,  ass ▪ th not any  abue im that
hath not beene admitted at all, and that hee which hath beene a Maior or a Consul in a free Citie, is not more ho∣nored then hee which hath neuer beene. But the Obiec∣tor supposeth one thing which is not, That this life is adorned which most excel∣lent gifts; being full of most sharpe agonies, as is iustified in the 18. Argument: and thefore I deny the conse∣quence of his Minor, and to prooue the falsehood, I pro∣duce that which Salomon saith, Eccles. 4. that hee more esteemes the dead, then those which bee liuing; yea hee e∣steemes him that hath not beene, more happy then the one or the other. Secondly, the losse of fight, of sences, of the habit of si∣ences,
is grieuous to a liuing man, who hath enioyed them for a time, for that he is ca∣pable of sorrow: but to make it a conclusion to a dead man, who should be more grieued to haue lost all this, and life it selfe▪ there is no conse∣quence, for that death is in∣capable of sorrow and mour∣ning; wherein the Prouerbe of Hesiodus may be verrified; The moitie is more then the whole, the losse of sences and reason are more grieuous, and more to bee lamented then the priuation of life. Thirdly, I deny that man dying loseth any thing, hee was but Vsufructuarie of life; God the proprietarie de∣mands it, and he restores it, what losse? Thou art not an∣gry if any curious sercher of
the most exquisite rarities of the world; if hauing suffered thee to see his Cabinet he af∣terwards drawes the cur∣taine, thou wilt take it pati∣ently how great soeuer thou art: If the Seigneurie of Ve∣nice hath done the the ho∣nour to see their stately trea∣sure, & haue dazled thine eyes with the glistering of those 14. Pearles, of their Ducall Bonet, of the 12. Crownes of gold, and of other most rich ornaments; wouldest thou not take it patiently to giue place after some houres? Know then that it is reasona∣ble, that the Lord of Lords, hauing brought thee into his house, there to behold the golden studdes which adorne the firmament, & to obserue the diuers motions of the 7.
Planets, and among the rest, of the Sunne, the eye of the world; to touch and com∣prehend the 4. Elements and other infinite goodly crea∣tures; if it be his pleasure and hee make signe vnto thee to giue place to others that sur∣uiue, it is reason thou shoul∣dest dislodge, and thanke the Lord for his fauour. Finally, I maintayne, that the depth and horrour is as great to reason, to liue perpe∣tually here without end, the same life which wee now breathe; (for our discourse is of this life) as great I say and greater then to bee dead. depth; for who can perfectly comprehend a life without end? horrour, for who would alwayes liue with the feare of a hundred millions of horri∣ble
miseries, which may hap∣pen in a hundred millions of yeeres, not making mention of the vices and sinnes wher∣vnto man is subiect & which a good man should feare more then death. As for the authoritie of S. Paul, it is not nature only, but the heauenly grace, which makes him to speake so; and they that shall be partakers of this grace in the same degree, may braue death with S. Paule▪ and say vnto him, O death where is thy 1. Cor. 15. victory, O graue where is thy sting? &. And if S. Paule in this place did contemplate in spi∣rit the excellent ornaments which hee had seene in the third heauen in his extacie, and on the other side toucht to the quicke with the vene∣mous sting of sinne, he makes
no mention but of the sim∣ple deliuerance, as if it had beene sufficient for him. O wretched man that I am (sayth he) who shall deli∣uer me from the body of this death▪ Hee makes mention of deliuerance, for that he fel Cobate in himselfe, and found himselfe prisoner to the Law of sinne, as the verse going before doth de∣clare▪ But you will reply, There is nothing to be com∣pared to life, it is a naturall desire and common to all men. Ans▪ Man desireth not only to be and to liue, but to beet ease: else what is hee, that like to Ixion in the Poet, would alwayes liue, to be fa∣stened to a whele? Who would alwayes liue the dam∣nable
life of Satan and his angells, in the middest of an vnquenchable fire, but mad men and fooles? And in truth the desire wee haue to roule on alwayes from day to day, is, that by an abusiue hope, we promise vnto our selues some future pleasure and content: The Apostles desire (better ordered and grounded) was to put off this mortall body, and to put on one that was bessed and immortall; not vpon earth where it is not to be found, but in heauen, and by a diuine and celestiall po∣wer. But that doth contra∣dict this assertion, That man desires as much or more to end the miseries of this life, as to continue this miserable life; and therefore certaine wise men of the world, did
settle their resolution vnto death vpon this Dilemma, saying, Either we shalbe hap∣py in death, if the soule e∣scapes; or else we shalbe with∣out paine or misery, if all re∣maine: No small aduantage doubtlesse, seeing the grea∣test point of happinesse in this life, is to beeleast vn∣happy. The 11. Argument taken from two re∣semblances of Death. Sounding is a kinde of Death, and the shadow of the body is an Image of it, But in swounding there is no paine, nor in the shadow any amazement.
BY Syncope. I vnderstand the strongest and most extended swounding, not that which is gentle, which happeneth sometimes at the opening of a veine, in the which the patient neither loseth feeling nor speech, but that which carries away all the forces of a man, his natural (I say) and principally his vitall. Sleepe is nothing to represent death in re∣gard of this symptome, for it is death it selfe; only there is in this sometimes a retur∣ning to life, and there none. I haue seene it and obserued it in my father being an old man. I haue conferred it with some that were apparantly dead, yet could I not finde a∣ny difference; he lay without
any shewe of soule in any of his ects, notwithstanding that he was continually rol∣led vp and downe in a cham∣ber; his pulse, was not to bee felt, he was in a cold swet o∣uer all, the extreamities of his body were exceeding cold: And these are the very signes of a right Syncope, by the which the truth of our Maior is iustified, that to fall into the Syncope, is to fall into death; for as death is a cessation from all action, and motion, so the Synco∣pe interrupts all motion, and all the functions both of sense and life. And that in this accident there is not any paine, experience doth wit∣nesse: and the report of such as reuiue is to bee credited, and serue for as good a testi∣mony
to the curious and in∣credulous, as if they were i∣sen from the dead. They de∣pose and will depose, that in the incursion of this death, there is nothing but quiet rest, so sound a sleepe, as the naturall is nothing in com∣parison of this. And in truth when my father was restored to his health, and as it were returned to life againe, hee was much amazed, to see the company which came to suc∣cour him▪ and his first words were, What is the matter? Be ing demanded if hee had felt no paine, he answered, No, & did not remember that hee had any accident; so as all the time betwixt the first accesse of his disease and his separa∣tion, was without his fee∣ling or memory. Thus if the
body becomes so insensible, that the soule (although it be present) suspends her action and agitation, what shall it then be in death, when being separated, shee shall haue no communion with it, how much more shall it bee with∣out paine? As for the bodies shaddow, there are none but litle children that are afraid, being not able for the weake∣nesse of their iudgement to know what it is▪ But they that haue any vnderstanding; and take a little leasure to obserue this obscure▪ Image; moouing at the shaking of their bodies, finde that it is only a priuation of the light; in the ayre opposed to their bodyes: for the Sun, the can∣dle, or any other thing that shines, not able by his beams
to pierce through a solid bo∣dy, is forced to fall vpon the Superficies, so as it cannot lighten the ayre, which is be∣yond the said body. Where∣vpon it remains obscure and without light, and is fashio∣ned according to the pro∣portion of the body. Man therefore being assu∣red that death is nothing to the body but the priuation of life, by reason of the le which happens in the light of life, which is the soule; the which notwithstanding (no lesse then the Sun, or a Can∣dle) doth retaine her life and remaine immortall: Man, I say, being assured of this truth, hee should not feare death, no more then the sha∣dow of the body; for neither the shadow nor death haue
any setling of any thing, but onely a simple priuation of another. The seuenteenth Argument taken from diuersity, which is pleasant to man. That wherein the nature of man is pleased, should not dis∣please the minde. The nature of man is pleased in diuersitie. &c. WE proue the maior of our argument, by the suffrages of many wise men. No man can erre sayth Cicero, that follows 1 de Legib. nature for his guide. And a∣gaine, To follow the conduct of good nature, is to follow Lib. de Se∣nect. and obey God. Chrysippus doth willingly heare nature, according to the which wee must liue conformably, sayth
Laertius, it is common nature and properly humaine: wher∣vnto Seneca wil giue his con∣sē. Sen. de vit. beat. c. 8. Naturae rerum assētior, saith he: More∣ouer it is our intent to liue ac cording to nature; for, sayth he, to liue according to it, & to be happy is the samething. This common nature is in∣terpreted by the Stoicks to be God, as Clemens Alexādri∣nus doth witnes: The Stoicks 2. Stroma. in decore aturae sayth he, haue setled the end of man to liue according to nature, changing the name of God into the beautie of nature. Let the world, sayth Philon, consent and concurre De mundi opi. with the Law, and the Law with the world. Let euery good man as soone as he is made a Cittizen of the world, direct his actions ac∣cording
to the arbitrement and will of Nature, by the which all this vniuers is go∣uerned: We are afflicted, saith Seneca, with diseases, but cu∣rable; de Ira. c. 13 for Nature which hath made vs perfect, if wee de∣mande correction, helps vs▪ Wherefore S. Ierome saith, Ad Deme that in our spirits there is a certen naturall sanctitie, if 2. deirrg. we may so speake; the which being president in the for∣tresse of the spirit, exerci∣seth the iudgement of good and euill: which is (saith he in the same place) that Law, which by the testimonie of the Apostle is infused into al men, and as it were written in the tables of the heart. Wherefore the spirit of man should neuer part from the motions of this nature, ac∣cording
to which all this world moues an  enter∣tayned. But to come to the minor of our , that nature is pleased in diuers chāges, we see that this world doth neuer subist any mo∣ment of time in one estate, not heauen, nor the seasons, much lesse the earth our com∣mon mother. For Nature hauing with a varied loue Bartas in the 2. day of the 1 weeke. Wounded the Heart; Not a∣ble to remoue The formes of all the fauor to one part, And at one time; she takes into the heart Forme after forme so; that one face embraces Forme by that Tract; a∣ther forme defaces:
But aboue all there is no poulpe nor Proteus so change∣able as ma for what plea∣seth him in the euening, is in the morning distastful; euery day he layes new foundati∣ons for his life, sayth Sen he reuiues new hopes, at the end, yea before the last peri∣ode Epist. 13. of the thing hoped for; he often changes aduice, and turnes to the contrary of that which he pursued; and therefore life is to many a ve∣ry sport, sayth hee: No man knowes what he would haue, and yet he is alwaies in quest▪ still desirous to change place, as if he might there plant his change, sayth Lucretius: And seeing that man delights so Lucre. 3. much in change, seeing that his particular complexion leades him and forceth him
vnto it, seeing that the vniuer sall nature guides him to it, as by the hand: seeing that in this life (a death rather then life) he could not find his con∣tentment, but misery vpon misery; why doth he not run ioyfully to the end of this life, and seeke to finde a bet∣ter? Obiection. Man cannot lose that which is pleasant vnto him, without displeasure. But life is pleasant to man. &c. IN this Theater of the world there is nothing so admirable as man, sayth Abdala Sarasin: he may, if hee will, take the part of God
and bee happy and ioyfull in this world; for by his free wil he may become wise, and be in a good, happy, and plea∣sing estate, as certaine Philo∣sophers do shew. I will not (sayth Seneca to his Lucilius,) Epist. 23. that thou euer want con∣tent, I will that it grow in thy house, which it shall doe, if it dwell within thee: other petty ioyes fill not the spirit, but make smooth the brows, they are light, vnlesse thou wilt hold him ioyfull that laughes; the spirit should be cheerefull, assured, and eleua∣ted aboue all: and presently after he sayth, the ioy where∣of I speake is sollid, and the greater, for that it is deepe in the heart. And in another place, the spirit of a wise man is as the world aboue the Epist. 59.
Moone, alwayes cleere and without clouds. But what is this ioy? it is De vit. bea. c. 3. 6. (saith Seneca) peace, concord, & greatnesse of spirit ioyned to mildnesse; it is to bee con∣tent with things present whatsoeuer, and to become a friend to his affaiers: It is (sayth Dcritus) to haue Cic. 3. de finibu 3. Offic. 1. his spirit free from feare; and the religious Doctor Saint Ambrose will say, That tran∣quillity of conscience and as∣sured innocency, make the life happy. Finally, Salomon will cry out, than a ioyful spi∣rit is a delightful banket▪ and contrariewise, a troubled minde thinkes alwayes of things which are distastfull & mournfull. Trust not to these mela∣cholie men, to whom adu
choler makes white things seeme blacke; those that are happy, vnfortunate, and to feare where there is nothing but subiect of assurance. Life is as we gouerne it, good or bad, pleasant, or displeasant; and therefore Epictetus sayed fly, That euery thing had two ends, and that by the one it was easie to beare, by the other combersome. If your brother, saith hee, hath done you wrong, doe not consider of t of that side that he hath done you wrong for then it is vneasie to beare; but of the other, as he is your brother, that you haue beene nourished together, and then you wil find it very tolerable. Du Vair, who like the in∣dustrious Be, hath gathered summarily together the flow∣ers
of the Stoicks, writes, that nature may say vnto vs, as the Philosopher did vnto his Di∣sciples, What I present vnto you with the right hand, you take with the left, your choice tends alwayes to the worst, you leaue what is good, and imbrace the bad; Let vs take things by the good end, wee shall finde that there is sub∣iect of loue in that which we hate. For there is not any thing in the world, but is for the good of man; As for ex∣ample, you haue a sute with your neighbour, when you thinke of him, your sute coms to minde, and then you curse him and are disquieted: the reason is, you take it by the bad end; but take it by the other, and represent vnto your selfe that he is a man like
to you, that God by a resem∣blance of nature calls you to a mutuall affection; that he is in the same Citie, in the same Temple, and doth commu∣nicate in the same Lawes, the same prayers, and the same Sacraments with thee, that you are bound to succour one another reciprocally. Finally, the Stoicks hold for a Maxime, that a wise man is exempt from iniurie, either to giue or receiue: he cannot doe any, being borne onely to ayde; & hee receiues none, for that being grounded vp∣on vertue, hee valiantly con∣temnes all reproch & wrong, so as hee is inuulnerable, as Seneca saith; not for that hee is not strooke, but for that, as hee saith, hee cannot bee hurt.
Answer: I know that the Stoicks (with whose fethers our obiector decks himselfe) haue sought to frame their wise man of that fashion, that he should not be capable of any ill, but continually pos∣sest of a sollide ioy: but what∣soeuer they haue purtray∣ed was but a vaine picture, without effect or truth▪ like vnto the Chimeres and Cen∣taures. Who wil beleeue that a wise man put vpon the racke, feeles no paine! Who can say that the life of Metel∣lus is not more to be desired, then that of Regulus turned Cic. 3. de fi∣nib. 5. de fi∣nib. Sen. epist. 66. vp and downe in a pipe full of nailes, and that they are e∣quall fauours? That a wise man will ioyfully holde his hand burning in the fire, like vnto Mutius Scaeuola?
Finally, that a wise man beeing burnt, tormented and put in Phalaris burning bull, will notwithstanding say, O what a sweete life is this! Let them do what they list, I care not. These and such like are the Paradoxes of these Phi∣losophers, who (as Cicero 4. De Finib. saith) carry admiration in their foreheads, but beeing strip't naked, they giue cause of laughter, & of themselues (as Plutarke saith) they con∣fesse their absurditie and va∣nity. And in truth, who wold not laugh, when among o∣ther things they say, that on∣ly a wise man is truely a king, rich & beautifull? yea though he were a slaue, a begger, or a Zopirus with his nose cut off, &c. But let vs answere punctu∣ally
to the reasons obiected: The Sarazin Abdala vnder∣stands, that by some excellent relickes of thesoule, man is admirable to the world; but hee doth not touch his felici∣tie, for hee hath nothing of that remayning; since his transgressiō, he is continually here below, miserable in eue∣ry degree: He had the gift of free will, to haue enioyed his owne happynesse if hee had would; but for that hee abu∣sed it, he lost himselfe and his liberty, saith S. Augustine. He rules ouer all creatures, but a miserable domination, in the which the meanest sub∣iect exceeds his Lord in feli∣citie; and twise miserable, in the which the Lord suffers more miserie then the most wretched of his subiects.
Reade Plutarke, and then Homer, but aboue all the Spi∣rit of God in the holy writ, who knowes what wee are, and qualifies man with no o∣ther titles, but of darkenesse, Ephes. 5. and foolishnesse to thinke a good thought of himselfe; a brutish man, who compre∣hends not the things which are of the Spirit, and cannot 1. Cor. 2. vnderstand them, for they are spiritually discerned. Finally, hee shewes him to Ephes. 2. Coloss. 2. Math. 12. be weake, sicke, dead in his sinnes, a vipers broode, not a∣ble to doe any good thing, for that he is bad; and by con∣sequence, cannot take part but with Satan the prince of darkenesse, and the father of lyes and all iniquitie. Moreouer, if Seneca and o∣thers to retayne men in life,
teach them what they ought to doe, it is no argument that they diuert them from death when shee shall present her∣selfe vnto them: but contra∣riwise, Seneca doth in a man∣ner Epist. 36. Epist. 24. 31. generally protest, That death hath no discommodi∣tie, that it is not onely with∣out ill, but without the feare of ill, and that it is a foolish thing to feare it, &c. As for life hee calls it de∣ceitful and vicious, for that it is alwayes imperfect. But see how vpon this question hee opens his heart to sorrowfull Martia for the death of her De consol. ad Mart. 32. Epist. 202. ad Mart. c. 20. sonne; O ignorant men, saith he, of their owne miseries, which doe not commend death, as the goodlyest inuen∣tion of nature! For whether that she holds felicitie inclo∣sed,
or excludes calamitie; be it that shee ends the satie∣tie and wearinesse of old age, or that shee carries away youth in his flower, in the hope of better things; be it that shee calls vnto her the most vigorous age, before that it hath mounted the roughest steps, yet is she to all men their end, to some a re∣medy, to some a vow; and those are more bound vnto her, to whom she coms with∣out calling. He goes on, but he cuts off his discourse to come to the end of his life which was cut off: for being commanded by Nero to dye, without any delay hee willed his Surgeon to open a veine in his foote, holding it in a bason of warme water, and saw with drie eyes his life fade
away. But S. Ambrose assures, that a good consciēce makes the life happy; Be it so, but forgets to adde, That in the death of the faithfull this happynesse is doubled, for it is pretious before God: And in the end I deny that those men, in whom a melancholy humour doth most abound, suffer themselues to bee so a∣bused in their iudgements: for this humour is more ad∣uised then all the rest, hauing some diuine matter in it, as Aristotle saith; and therefore more to be credited then the rest, and particularly more then the Iouiall sanguine. As for the admonition of the Stoicks, it was easie for them to speake it, but vertue consists in action: and I know not whether Epictetus did
that himself which he taught to others; otherwise (as the prouerbe saith) I hate the Philosopher which is not wise but for others, and not for himselfe. You will that I take the most troublesome things on the best fide; yea, but I see no end of that side: it is like vnto occasion, which hath long haire before, and bald behinde. Where is that end then? I cannot see it, and admit I should, I cannot at∣taine vnto it, being borne vn∣der the planet of Saturne, & alwaies taking things on that side which is sadde. I would haue my neighbour and my aduersarie obserue your pre∣cept, and he would haue me; and so neither of vs doe it: and we continue by reason of the one and the other, in
continuall vexation. Finally, the pleasure of this world is very small, and in∣termixt with many displea∣sures: It is a Myne where there is gold, but it is so fast∣ned to the stones, as to draw one crowne it will cost 12. So there is not one ounce of ioy, but doth cost a pound of sorrow. The 18. Argument taken from the miseries of life. Euery Estate that is full of cala∣mity, should desire, and not apprehend a change. This present life is full of cala∣mity &c.
THe field of this streight life is so spacious, and so full of great dangers and extreame miseries, as the exchange thereof, to him that hath any sence, cannot be but delightfull. Obserue the diseases of the body, mea∣sure & number their greatnes and their great number: con∣sider the tempests & stormes of the passions of the soule, the clouds and troubles of his vnderstanding; and you will conclude; that man must of necessity change this life, or to be continually misera∣ble in euery degree. And therefore he was fitly compa∣red to a Bull, which leapt suddenly into his Maisters garden, and by chance ouer∣threw sundry skepps of Bees,
which being prouoked came forth, assaile him and sting him on the throate, backe, in the eyes, and generally all o∣uer. And it auailes him no∣thing to pierce the ayre with his homes, to beate the earth with his feete, to whippe his flankes with his strong tayle, to roare & make a noyse; yee his stingings sticke still-to him, and do not leaue him: So man since that in his Crea∣tures garden, in the earthly Paradise, he durst presume to ouerthrow and transgresse his Masters commandments, there is no part of him from the head to the foote, which is not toucht and pierced e∣uen to the marrow of his bones with many calamities: his head is subiect to infla∣med Phrensies, which make
him madd; to the Apoplexie, which like Lightening de∣priues him of all motion; his eyes are toucht with the Opthalmie or inflāmation: the Squinancie takes him by the throate, which making the Muscles to swell with a con∣gealed bloud, stoppe the passage of respiration: the inflamed Pleurisie stabs him in the sides; the Feauer burns him, the swelled Dropsie drownes him: the Iaundise makes war against his Liuer, powring forth gall for pure bloud; the vngentle Cholike wrings his bowells, straitens the passages, and makes of his mouth a stinking Iakes; the bloudy flux excoriates his gutts: the hardened grauell staying his vrine in the blad∣der, pricks him most horribly:
the Goute knits his sinnews faster then bonds of Iron: the Canker burnes his flesh more then fire it selfe; the filthie and lousie Phtiriasis eats his skin: Finally, there is not a∣ny member either within or without the body, that is not subiect to many infirmities; Who can comprehend them all, seing the eyes alone by exact search of Physitions is assayled with 113. diseases? And who doth not see here that the estate of man is very wretched? And that which doth aggrauate this, is, that euen those helps wherewith they think to ease themselues the medicins are conuerted into worse torments then thé disease: the strict dyets, the bitter potions, the cutting and burning of members,
which they vse in Cankers and other vlcers; that tubbe wherein they boyle the bo∣dies of such as are infected with the venerian scab, or the French poxe; with a thou∣sand other deuices to restore health and life to man: what torments, what agonies, and what cryes do they not cause vnto the poore patients? These miseries are great, but those of the minde are grea∣ter, which seemed for her no∣ble extraction not to be sub∣iect to any. Come and let vs runne ouer her faculties: the vnderstanding holds the chiefe place; at the very en∣trie of life we see in infants a greater ignorance then in brute beasts: Fawns as soone as they are borne know their. dammes, and without helpe
of any, goe into the most se∣cret places to seeke the dug and sucke; whereas children new borne know not where they are, and being neere the breast, will crie and perish with hūger rather then suck, as S, Augustine writes, and ex∣perience doth teach: This ig∣norance Lib 1. de pec. mer. & remis. c. 38. hath taken such deepe roote in the spirit os man; as to roote it out, and passe vnto the sciences, there is found such difficultie, as most men had rather liue perpetually in darkenes, then to take so much paines to learne. Thirdly, (and that is most lamentable) man knowes no∣thing of his last end, in the getting of which knowledge consists his soueraigne good; hee goes alwayes astray, if
God doth not inspire him from aboue. Let all the sects of Philosophers be witnesse, who by so many diuers waies haue sought it, yet could not finde it. Fourthly, the ignorance in man of his Essence, is a nota∣ble misery: the Angels know themselues perfectly. The soule knowes nothing lesse then it selfe: and the body which was giuen it for an Organ of the Sciences, hin∣ders it, that she neither knows her selfe, nor any other thing; for the body which corrupts, makes the soule heauie, and Wis. 6. this earthly habitation puls downe the spirit, that it can∣not raise it selfe to thinke of many things. For a fift point there is a curiositie or natu∣rall itching, to obserue the
actions & errours of others, more willingly and diligent∣ly then his owne; this misery is great: for to know his owne faults is alwayes profi∣table, and many times neces∣sary; to examine other mens actions, is seldome good, and many times pernicious. There is for the 6. place, and for the deepest degree of the calamitie of man, the depra∣uation of his will: he wils not that which hee should, and wils that which hee should not: that which hee should do is conformable to nature; to reason, & to vertue; where∣of the Law is written in his heart, and the seed cast in his spirit. Other creatures moue speedily and easily, to that which is proper vnto them and seemely, and contrari∣wise
they go vnwillingly and by force, to that which is re∣pugnant to their nature. But men, they reioyce when they haue done euill, they take de∣light in their impious works, saith wife Salomon: Man Prou. 2. drinkes sinne as the fish doth water, saith Iob. Yea the cor∣ruption is so generall, as it is become a prouerb, It is a hu∣mane thing to erre: he thoght so, who to excuse his sinne of adultery, said, The night, loue, wine and my yong age, perswaded me vnto it, &c. Fi∣nally, wil you see a great signe of great misery in the spirit of man, which is, that he is neuer content with his condition, an other pleaseth him better. Other creatures apply them∣selues easily to the course that is offered vnto them, &
seeke no change: it is the pro∣perty of sicke persons to af∣fect sometimes one thing, sometimes an other, to change beds hourely, as if in the bed only consisted the re∣medy of their griefe; they de∣sire one kind of meate, and are presently distasted. Wee (sayeth S. Gregory) borne in Greg. hom. 36. in Eu. the misery of this pilgri∣mage, are presently loathed, we know not what we should desire; and a little lower: In the end we grow into a con∣sumption, for that we are di∣stasted of euery thing, and we are wonderfully tired with the want of eating and drink∣king. Saint Chrysostome doth also sharpely censure this fit∣rious dainty, for that euery man doth commonly com∣plaine
of that whereunto he is most bound, as if it were an insupportable charge, Homil. 60. Cleobulus in Plutarke, ob∣seruing the inconstancy and foolish demands of many, sent them for answere to the mother of the moone: On a time, sayd he, the moone in∣treated her mother to make her a little garment that might sit close to her body: And how is it possible, answe red shee, seeing that some∣times thou doest encrease, then thou art full, and after decreasest? If now from this most eminent part of the soule, wee descend vnto the sensitiue, how many men are borne blind, or deafe, and dumbe, or lame, or in some o∣ther part counterfeite and monstrous? who although
they were not so in the be∣ginning, yet are growne so: how few be there but feele it in their old age? Looke into, other Creatures, if you finde these defects. In man that facultie of an∣ger, which was giuen him as a strong man at armes, to re∣pulse all that outwardly should offer to trouble him; behold how it seeks to domi∣neere ouer reason, how it treads it vnder foote, and turnes man into a madd dog to bite, and into a Scorpion to flatter and sting, and into worse then that Let vs pro∣ceede, and leauing those na∣turall infirmities, Let vs ob∣serue the accidentall; How many haue endured an vn∣speakable torment by thirst, which hath forced them to
drinke their owne vrine, yea that of others? Then hunger, which could not abstaine from humaine bloud, but hath fallon vpon dead car∣casses, and liuing men; not onely vpon strangers, but e∣uen mothers vpon their own children, deuowring them cruelly and greedily, where∣of Lament. 4. 10. the sacred historie and Pagan is full. Thirdly, there is so great paine to maintaine this dy∣ing life, that man in this world hath lesse rest then a Mill Asse; Man is borne to labour as a bird to flie, sayth the holy writ: and the Eter∣nall cries from heauen; Thou shalt eate thy bread with the sweate of thy browes. Doe not tell me that this is no generall Law: it is; for with∣out
exception, hee that tra∣uells not with his bodio, tra∣uels in minde: thinke you that ambitious and voluptuous men, yea theeues, are not more troubled and vexed then handy-crafts men? If you reply, that at the least stu∣dents are happie; yea, in com parison of them that are more miserable: but being considered absolutely, they haue their part of miserie by their sitting life, which is ne∣cessarie to meditation; they haue sooner filled their bo∣dies with diseases, then their soules with knowledge. Moreouer, he that adds know ledge, adds torment, sayth the wise man; and yet most part of students haue no soo∣ner learned the tongues, the instruments of sciences, nor
the principles, but they must leaue all, eyther through death, which cutsthem off; or through age, which tends vn∣to it, & which depriues them of all ablenes, memorie, in∣dustrie, sight &c. Wherefore one dying complaynes, that when he began to know ma∣ny things and to gouerne his life well, he was called out of life. Another beginnes his booke with these words: Hippoc. Aph. 1. Life is short, the arte long, the occasion hasty, the expe∣rience dangerous, the iudge∣ment difficult: as if he would say, Miserable man, who can∣not possibly for his short con∣tinuance, for his weeke iudge∣ment, for the slownesse of his flesh, for the slippery estate of the world, attaine vnto that knowledge which is so
necessary for him. But this is not all, we haue yet but light∣ly runne ouer the miseries which man hatcheth in his bosome; they which assayle him without are more vio∣lent: Hee hath his God and Lord interessed and angry a∣gainst him, wee are all borne the children of wrath, the whole world makes warre a∣gainst him; and what won∣der is it, seeing that hee that rules it is his enemy? he is infe sted with the incursions of spiritual malices, which dwel∣ling in the most cloudy ayer, are alwayes ready like carri∣on kites to fall vpon the prey of man. Man is alwayes to man, & in al places a trouble∣some enemy, and the ancient prouerbe sayeth, That man is a wolfe to man, and the more
meanes he hath to hurt, the more dangerous hee is; and in truth neuer Tigers, Onces, or Lyons, haue so torne men in pieces, as the Phelares; the Busines, the first Emperors, the Massachiers, & Benz. l. 3. c. 5. the Spaniards at the West In∣dies. Fourthly, there is not any little Creature which doth not shoote out the darts of his poore splene against man, being grieued to see such a Tyrant reigne vpon the Fiftly the heauen, fire ayre sea & sand are armed against him, & dart out against him their wenimous influences, lightening and hayle: They shake him with their earth∣quakes, they swallow him with there opening; they
drowne him, they burne him. If thou thinkest in fayre weather to walke into thy Garden, to recreate thy selfe, the Aspike attends thee in ambush vnder ome flower or herbe which thou doest in∣tend to gather. If thou doest enter into a strangers house, the mastiue will take thee by the thigh; if into thine owne, yet art thou not without feare, for thine owne dog may be madd, byte thee and make thee mad. Fynally, that which exceeds all these mise∣ries, is, that when thou shalt thinke thy selfe most safe, a thousand vnexpected acci∣dents may ouerthrow thee: some one returnes from mar∣ket (saith S. Augustin) sound and lustie, who falling breaks a leg, whereof hee shall dye.
Who semes better assured then he that is set in a strong chaire? yet vpon some trou∣blesome newes, hee may be disquieted, fall, and breake his necke; Another laughing eating and drinking, shalbe suddenly surprized with an Apoplexie rising from some vnknowne cause, and dye presently. What receptacle seemes more safe and com∣modious for hunters that are wearie and full of sweat and dust, then a cleane house with a good fire? And yet a Prince with his traine, thinking to retire him to such a place, found himselfe in such dāger of death in the morning, as he could not escape without the losse of his nayles, that fell away by the vehemencie of his paine, and two of his
company found smotheredin the morning whence, thinke you proceeded the cause of this strange Accident? It was from the wall newly pla∣stered, which cast forth a vi∣rulent vapor, which together with the smoake of a great cole fire, fumed vp into the head, & dispersed his poyson throughout all the members of their bodies; Who could haue foreseene this accident, but too late? Ammianus Mar∣cellinus reports tho like to Hist. lib. 5. haue happened to the Em∣perour Iouinian, who was found smothered in the mor ning by the like poyson. And to conclude, what seemes freer from breaking, then a head lying in the shadow far from any house? & yet it hap pened that the Poet Aeschi∣lus
being so retired, an Eagle Val. Ma l. 9. c. 12. flying in the ayre, thinking his bald head had bene a flint stone, let fal a Tortose to break it; and to haue the meate; but falling downe it brake the skull os poore Aeschilus. The first Obiection. That which shall not happen vn∣to vs, is not to bee accounted among our miseries. But these misfortunes shall not happen vnto vs, &c. THese miseries (if it plea∣seth God) shall not be∣fall vs, but where is that warrant from heauen to as∣sure vs? The comicall Poet saith, That man cannot be ex∣empt from any humane ac∣cident: No man liuing can
say without warrāt, This shal not happen vnto mee, saith Menander. What befalls to one, thinke it may happen to thee, saith Seneca; for thou art a man: and therefore retaine Epist. 7. 19. this and thinke of it, not to be deiected in aduersity, nor puft vp in prosperity, but haue alwayes before thine eyes, the liberty of fortune, as being able to lay vpon thee all the miseries shee holds in her hand. Man is in continu∣all warre vpon earth: Is there not a course of warre orday∣ned for mortall men vpon Iob. 7. earth? saith Iob. If he be freed from his enemies abroad, let him beware of some treache∣rous Synō at home: Be alwaies ready sayd Iesus Christ, for you know not the day nor the houre: no man is no more as∣sured
against death then the bird is against the shot of a harquebuze; God would (saith S. Augustine) that wee should watch continually. But if changing thy tune, thou thinkest that thy neigh∣bour is not afflicted like thy selfe, and that hee is much more happy, thou art much deceiued: Euery man feeles his owne griefe: Herodotus hath seene it and written it, saying, That if all men liuing Lib. 7. laden with their owne mise∣ries, had brought them toge∣ther vpon one heape, to ex∣change with them of their neighbours; hauing well weighed them and viewed them, euery man would wil∣lingly carry backe his owne. Without doubt this present life is so full of miseries, that
in comparison thereof death seemes a remedy. A long life is but a long torture, saith S. Augustine. And what other opinion can wee haue, seeing that Iesus Christ, who was giuen vs for a perfect presi∣dent, is neuer propounded vn∣to vs laughing, but somtimes weeping? as when hee appro∣ched the Tombe of his friend Ioh. 11. Lazarus, and when as he wept vpon the ingratefull Citie of Luk. 19. Ierusalem: and therefore the Apostle saith, That in the Heb. 5. dayes of his flesh, hee offered himselfe with great cries and teares to him who could saue him from death: What is that? but to shew vs that this life is not worthy of ioy, but of lamentation; not of laughter, but of crying: as the Philosopher Heraclitus
doth esteeme it, who alwayes with a weeping voice did lament the estate of this life. The second Obiection. It is a cowardly consideration not to be willing to die, but to cease to liue. This reason hath that conside∣ration. TO denounce death to end the miseries of this life, is (sayth one) to pro pound a carnall end to the li∣king of sensuality: Vpon death (sayth another) the pri∣uation of thislife, there is no Cataplasme, but of a better life: for the losse of earth, but the enioying of heauen. Answere. Death is the corruption of the flesh, and a
priuation of all the sences: to the end therefore that the remedy may be proportiona∣ble to the flesh, it must also be fleshly, sensible and palpa∣ble. I grant that in retiring ourselues, we must not think only to fly from humaine mi∣series, but rather to draw neere to diuine fauours: But betwixt doing and duty, who doth not at this day see an infinite distance? That elect vessell of the holy Ghost, that great Apostle Saint Paul, Rom. 7. 23. seeles a Law in his members fighting against the Law of his vnderstanding: He com∣plaines 2. Cor. 12. 7. there was a thorne thrust into his flesh; the angel of Satan did buffer him: what is this but the relikes of sin, of infirmity, distrust? what glosse soeuer they will set of
it. If Saint Paul were such a one, what then are we poore dwarses, wauering and stag∣gering? let vs not flatter and seduce our selues, for our workes discouer vs; O God fortifie vs, and make thy ho∣ly Spirit to reigne in vs; and attending the happy effect of diuine promises, let vs medi∣tate of the Testament sealed with the bloud of Christ. But if the horror of death which doth threaten vs of e∣uery side, comes to hinder our holy meditations, let vs vanquish it by the darts of reason: this may be done, and it is that we ought to doe; The Surgion which hath sercht a wounde, hath appli∣ed a fit Cataplasime, hath made his patient without passion or paine, is to be cō-mended.
The Philosopher which hath examined the naturall death, hath found ot the cause of the feare it giues, & hath accomodated reasons fit to take awaie this feare, and to assure mans cou∣rage; is not to be contemned. I know well that hee which through death hath made vs see the life eternall: hath done more; but this worke is of God and not of men: and if the sacred word of the e∣ternall God doe it not, no humaine voice can doe it. But doe you say, there is no Catapsme fit for the losse of a pleasant life, but the hope of a better? Answer; You pre∣suppose two suppositions heere which are not; First, that life is full of pleasures. Secondly, that in death wee
haue a feeling of the losse, a∣gainst that which hath beene and shab be said; to the which I will send the refutation: & in the meane time for witnes of my saying; I propound that great Diuine S. Augustin writing that which follow∣eth: The present life is doubt∣full, blind, miserable, beaten with the flowing and ebbing of humors, weakened with paines, dried vp with heate, swelled with meate, vndermi∣ned with famine, cōfounded with sports, consumed with sorrowes, distempered with cares▪ dlled with pride, puf vp with riches, deiected with pouertie, shaken in youth, made crooked in age, bro∣ken by diseases, and tuined by  &c. Many great men who ha not wanted
any thing for the enioying of all pleasures; yet would they in their life time haue writtē vpon the Marble which should couer them dead, for a conclusion of the Epitaph, these last words: The life and bih of mortall men is no∣thing but toyle and death: as one waue driues on ano∣ther, so one miserie thrusts on another: the one is no sooner flying, but the other followes him: And as in the eye, one teare springs of an∣other, so one sorrow riseth out of another: as Buchanan hath learnedly written in his Tragedie of Iepthe. The 3. Obiection. It is not lawful of himselfe and without other some Com∣mand,
to remaine in a place that is bad and troublesome. Life is a place bad and trou∣blesome. It is not therefore lawfull of himselfe, without other com∣mand, to remayne in life. THis long Iliade of ca∣lamities of this pre∣sent life, seems to per∣swade man to the doctrine of the Stoicks, which is to de∣part when it is too trouble∣some: so speaks Seneca, A wise man liues as long as he ought not solong as hee could: he will: see, how, with whom, & how he should liue, and what he should doe: if many things fal out troublesome & crosse his tranquillitie, he frees him∣selfe, and he doth it not on∣ly in the vrgent necessitie, but
as soone as fortune seemes suspect vnto him, he cōsiders that it imports not whether he giue himselfe his ende, or that he receiue it. Moreouer that it is wretched to liue in necessitie: but there is no ne∣cessity to liue in necessitie. Di∣ogenès meeting one day with Speusippus being sickly, & cau∣sing himselfe to be carried by reason of the Gout, he called vnto him in these tearmes, God giue thee a good day Diogenes: to whom he answe∣red, But God giue you no good day, that being in this estate hast the patience to liue. With the sharpnes of these Cynicall wordes Speu∣sippus, was so moued, as con∣trarie to the precepts of his sect, he ended his owne life. But let vs produce (if you
please) some reasons by the which these men haue deba∣ted there follie. The 1. Life and death, say they, are indif∣ferent things, and therefore man acoording to his com∣moditie may vse them indif∣ferently Lucret 3. Wherefore saith , As one that is inui∣ted, hauing feasted & taken his refection, retyres him∣selfe so being glutted with life, why dost thou not depart? O foole why doest thou not imbrace: a pleàfing rest? what interest hast thou that death should come vnto thee, or thou goe vnto it? Perswade thy selfe that this speech is false, and proceeds from an indiscreet man: It is a goodly thing to dye his death, for it is alwayes thy death, and especially that which thou Sen. epist. 69.
hast procured to thy self. The 2. Death is the goodliest port to libertie, which is the fruite of wisedome. I will not serue (said that Laeedemoniā child) & cast him down a precipice: Sene. Epist. 26. who learned to dye in con∣tempt of seruitude, he is free from all power: what doth a prison, a dungeon or fetters touch him? he hath an open port. The 3. Wherefore hath nature giuē so streight an en∣trance vnto life, and hath pre∣sēted vnto man so many large issues vnto death, if it shal not bee lawfull for him to depart when he pleaseth? On which side soeuer (said Seneca) thou shalt cast thy miseries, thou shalt finde the end of thy miseries: De Ira, 3. c. 15. doest thou see this precipice by which they descend to li∣berty? doest thou see this sea,
this riuer, this pit? there is li∣berty in the bottome: doest thou see this little tree, croo∣ked, cursed? Liberty hangs at it: Doest thou see thy throat, thy heart? These be the fruits of seruitude: Plinie saith, that the earth our common parēt hath (for pitties sake) ordai∣ned poysons to this end, that beeing able to swallow them easily, we may with equall fa∣cility dislodge out of this world: So in old time, Kings and great men did keepe cer∣taine poyson ready for any suddaine vse in the doubtfull euents of fortune, as Titus Li∣uius reports: and therefore many haue poysoned them∣selues, being valiant, and e∣steemed great personages: Zeno being 98. yeeres old, yet strong and lusty; returning
from the Schoole, hee stum∣bled and fell; and being down hee strooke the ground with his hand, saying, re I am, what wilt thou? And being come to his house, hee layd downe his life of himselfe. Cleanthes hauing an Vlcer in his mouth, and hauing ab∣stained two dayes from meat by the aduice of the Phisiti∣ons, was cured; Beeing then perswaded by them to eate a∣gaine: Oh no, said he, hauing past the greatest part of the way, I will not, I will not returne againe; and so he died of abstinence. We could pro∣duce many others much cō∣mended, as Lucrece, Cato, and others, if they were not suf∣ficiently knowne. Answer. I deny that the swarme of miseries of this
present life, is a sufficient cause to depart when wee please; the great God which hath placed vs here, must first come and take vs away. Py∣thagoras in Tully, forbids to leaue the Corpes de guarde without commandement of the Captaine: as a prisoner breaking prison agrauates his crime, so the spirit violating his body, makes himself guilty of a double torment. And he that hath so strictly forbiddē to kil, meant it as well of him∣selfe as of others: And there∣fore Virgil platonizing, sings vnto vs, that they which haue inhumanly slaine themselues, hold the first place in hell: As for the vertue which they pretend in it, the most quick sighted Philosopher hath Arist. 3. Ethic. c. 7. seene nothing but feare and
foolishnesse, & thus he speaks It is the part of a coward, and not of a valiant man, to dye by reason of pouerty, of loue, Ethie. ad Eud. lib. 3. or for any other thing that is troublesome; it is a faintnesse to flie difficult things; and af∣ter, He suffers not death as a good thing, but flying the e∣uill. Finally, he that murthers himselfe, wipes himselfe for euer out of the booke of life; for that he dies impenitent, in the act of sinne, neuer to haue remission after this life, nor (as Saint Augustine sayth) any indulgence of correcti∣on. But to come neerer to our Stoickes, wee will first appeale srom Seneca to Epictetus; O men! sayth hee, haue pati∣ence, attend God vntill hee giue the signe, that hee hath
dismist you from this mini∣stery, then returne vnto him. But for the present, support couragiously, inhabite this region in the which he hath placed you; this habitation is short, easie, not burthen∣some, &c. The 1. reason in∣ferring, that life and death are indifferent, is false; for it is to teare in pieces the sacred communion of the soule with the body, of man with his neighbour, to kill him∣selfe. Man is not borne for himselfe, but after God for his Country, which hee depri∣ueth of a good son, such as he ought to bee. Aristotle hath Ethic. l. 5. c. vlt. seene it, and hath written it, saying, That he that kils him∣selfe doth wrong vnto the Comonalty; but to doe wrong is no indifferent thing:
Moreouer, it is a sinne against nature; for euery man loues himselfe, naturally,  and de∣sires to preserue his being: al∣so wee do not see any other Creature, but man, to kill himselfe through impacien∣cy of paiue. The 2. reason which speakes so much of li berty, is friuolous and ridicu∣lous; for what liberty is there in a dead man? who hath neither the power nor the will to chase away a fly that stings him; who is made sub∣iect to all sorts of wormes, rottennes, and stench what is liberty, but a power to do what we list? but death nei∣ther hath will, action, nor my power: it a s mos dry in my opinion to produce this de∣fence. As for the third, poysons
are giuen by the earth rather to preserue life, thē to destroy it, to make antidotes & pre∣seruatiues against malignant and venimous diseases, and a thousand vnexpected acci∣dents, by the biting of mad or venimous beasts: omitting the true cause of diuines, that the sinne of man hath infe∣cted all, powring forth his poyson vpon the Creatures which euiron him; & there∣fore as Saint Paul sayth, they Rom. 8. sigh and long after their fu∣ture restauration. Finally, examples binde vs not, but rules; wee liue not according vnto others, but as we ought: the Law of God is plaine, sealed in the particular na∣ture of euery one, Thou shalt not kill, by the which we are forbidden the simple homi∣cide
of our neighbor, for that he is of humaine blood; next the parricide of father or mo∣ther, for we are their blood; which doth much augment the hainousnes of the offēce: 3. The murthering of our selues, which exceeds parri∣cide in a degree of horror. To this we must haue regard, not vnto what Zeno, or Cleanthes haue done. And the Stoickes who in all other places so much recommend vnto their Disciples, seemelines, honesty and duty, seeme to me in this point forgetfull, blind & pre∣uaricators: what shal we then do? That which a wise Pagan Curt. l. 5. did aduise vs; It is for valiant men, sayd he, rather to con∣temne death, thē to hate life. Many times faint hearted mē are driuen to a base cōtempt
of thēselues, throgh the wea∣rines of labor, but vertue will trie al things: Seeing thē that death is the end of all things, it is sufficiēt to go ioyfully vn to it. To his words we adde, That our intēt is not to take away life, but the terror of death when it comes: a wise man wil liue ioyfully, so long as it shall please the Lord of life: He wil die also more ioy∣fully when it shall please the same Lord. This is that he ought to do, and doubtlesse man may without sin desire, yea pray vnto the Lord that hee may liue long for many reasons, but especially for 2. The one concernes the glory of God, in the administratiō of the charge which hee hath committed vnto vs; therefore the Son of God in
dying would saue his Disci∣ples, by that voice full of ver∣tue, which he vsed to the Ro∣maine souldiers and Iewes, If you seeke me, let them go: the which preserued them long, especially his well-beloued S. Iohn, whom he retained in life vnto ninety yeares. The o∣ther respects our children, parents, and friends, of whom Iohn 18. 8. we may and ought in consci∣ence haue a care, seeing that (by the censure of the Apo∣stle) hee which hath not a care of his family, hath deni∣ed 1. Tim. 5. 18 the faith, and is worse then an Infidell. But besides these reasons and some others which doe simbolize, I say that the de∣sire to liue were not fit, if there were no other reason; sor there is no ceasing from
finne so long as life doth last; so as the longer wee liue the more lpable we are before God: So as I maintaine, that the feare to vndergo death, I meane death simply, is al∣wayes vicious, foolish and ig∣norant. But to be a Murtherer of himselfe, without compari∣son it is much more execra∣ble; the Lawes of euery well gouerned Common-weale haue thundred against it: yea the Grecians: in the midst of rmes, (whereas lawes are silent) would not in signe of indignitie, burne the body of Aiax, according to their custome, for that hee had slaine himselfe: The virgins of Milesia for that they had furiously strāgled themselues were drawne by publike ig∣nominie
through the streets of the Citie: and in such cases God doth vsually shew visi∣ble signes of his reuenging wrath: So in Parthenay a towne in Poitou, a certaine woman in the absence of her husband, was taken with a de∣uilish despaire; she tooke the little children, when shee had smothered them and hanged them, then she came vnto her selfe, went vp on a stoole and hung her selfe, and and thrust awaie the stoole with her foote; but the rope brake, and she falling downe halfe dead, found a knife, (the Diuell is a readie officer to furnish instruments to doe euill) which she takes and thrusts into her bosome; The next day, the matter being knowne, all the world ranne
thither with the iudges, who caused her bodie to be cast out vpon a dunghill neere vnto the towne wall. Not far from it there was a corps de gard, and neere it a place for a sentinell; the gard being set (for it was in time of warre) the sentinell heard a fearfull noise in the ayre right against this Carcasse, and after a long stay was forced to leaue his stand: the gard also a∣mazed with this noyse, thought to flie awaie: Thus the Diuells made sport with this poore desperate woman. The 19. Argument taken from the contradi∣ction of man touch∣ing Death.
Not any thing that is sometimes called for by vs with ioy, being come, should be trouble some. Death is sometimes called for by vs with great ioy. THe Pagans to describe the pittifull estate of man in this life, haue fai∣ned that Prometheus, mingling the slime of the earth with tears, made antherof; wher∣unto a Latine Poet hath allu∣ded, saying, Teares b the our Births; all inteares we liue. And Death in teares, Many alarums doth giue. But what need of testimony but the continuall feare and feuers which spring from the apprehension of those infir∣mities wherof we haue made mentiō? Thy bowells wroung
with the cholicke, a thousand gripes and throwes at euerie child bearing, if thou beest a woman; the pinching cares that trouble the mind, make thee by interruption & soden exclaming to desire death; & not without reason, seeing that the Prophet Elias serues 1. Kings 19 thee for a patterne, who not knowing how to auoyd the ambushes that were layed a∣gainst him, did wish to dye. But let vs cast our eyes vpon those miseries that make vs to desire Death, not as wee propounded them, nor as we haue found them, but as they make themselues known. If we shall indge of the streame by the spring, what may we hope for of the life of man, conceiued betwixt the vrine and excrements, borne naked
& all in tears; but only a per∣petuall flux of corruption, pouertie, and calamities: & therefore it is not without reason that S. Bernard sayd, That man is but a stinking sperme, a nourishment for wormes, a sacke of excre∣ments; and such should wee see him within, if the skinne did not stay our sight out∣wardly. Doe we doubt of it? seeing of this liuing substāce there are ingendred wormes about an ell long, and be∣ing dead, serpents in the pithe of the backe, as Plinie writes, Lib. 10. c. 6. and experience teacheth. Plu∣tarke reports that the king of Egypt hauing caused the bo∣dy of Cleomenes to be hanged, and the garde hauing disco∣uered a great serpent wound about his head, they called
the people, who running to this spectacle called Cleome∣nes as a demy-God. The like happened to a young man a Germaine, who would neuer suffer his picture to be drawn in his life time, but onely granted to his kinsfolkes, (who importuned him) that some dayes after his inter∣ment, they might take him vp, and draw him as they found him: Being taken out of the graue; they saw about the Diaphragma & the pith of the backe many little Ser∣pents, to verifie what the au∣thour of Ecclesiasticus faith, . 10. ve. 13. When man dyerh he becoms the inheritance of serpents. The life of man is a candle ex∣posed to all winds, saith Epi∣ctetus: His body is a store∣house of all sorts of diseases,
saith another; his flower (his most excellent point of glo∣ry) is such as he is alwayes in paine and martyrdome; and this point passeth away, daz∣ling the eye like a flash, great∣nesse and worldly riches are no more sssured, then the waues of the sea; they flowe suddainely, and ebbe no lsse violently. Sesostris King of Egypt, causing himselfe to bee drawne in a Chariot of pure gold, by foure Kings his pri∣soners, one of them held his eye fixed vpon the wheele, which did rolle vp and down by him; Sesostris obseruing it, demanded of him the cause of his countenance; who answered, That looking vpon the wheele, and obseruing the spoaks to bee sometimes aloft and suddainely downe
againe, I call to minde the rolling change of my selfe and my companions Seso∣stris considers hereof, abates his pride, and giues liberty to his Captiues. Such is the e∣state of the affaires of this world, like vnto a marke, sub∣iect to infinite darts of aduer∣sity: No man knowes what the night brings, sayd one in Titus Liuius; the pleasures are vncertaine, but the displea∣sures most certaine: Nature giues vs a taste at our com∣ming into the world, where wee enter weeping. And ac∣cording to this instinct of nature, the Thraci. ns wept at the birth of their children, numbring what miseries they should suffer in the world! For the same reason the Getes (a religious people) held that
it was better to die then to liue; therefore they lamented at their child-birthes, and sung at their burialls. And wise Salomon saith, that the day of death is better then Eccles. 7. that of birth. Looke into Erasmus vpon the prouerbe, Optimum non nasci. Sophocles in like manner, giues aduice, that it is more reasonable to weepe at the birth of their children, as beeing entred in∣to great miseries; and beeing dead, to carry them ioyfully to the graue, as freed from the miseries of this life. And who will doubt any more of this, seeing he that neuer lies, calls this life death? Ioh. 5. saying, Hee that heares my words, and beleeues in him that sent me, shall passe from death to life.
The Lycians law ordayned, that they which wold mourn should put on womens robes, for that it did in no sort befit graue and discreete men to weepe for the dead, but for passionate women. Vpon this law a Lawyer of Padoua groū∣ded his testament, although he be taxed by another. First hee charged his heire vpon great comminations, to ba∣nish all blacke cloth from his Funeralls, and that he should prouide singers and players on Iustruments, to sing and play, going among the Priests, both before and be∣hinde the Corpes, to the number of fifty; to euery one of which he bequeathed halfe a Ducate for his paines. Moreouer hee ordained; that 12. young virgines, atti∣red
in greene, should carry his body vnto Saint Sophias Temple, in which he should be interred, suffering: them to sing ioyfull songs with a loud voyce, and for a reward hee bequeathed them, a certaine summe of money to helpe them at their marriage: All sorts of Priests and Monkes might assist, except such as were barred with blacke, lest that colour should darken the beauty and cheerefulnesse of his Funeralls: he had seene with Heraclitus, that during the dayes of this miserable life, there is no subiect but of teares, and that at our depar∣ture we should reioyce with Demoeritus. And therefore Plato doth rightly call death a medicine for all miseries: and Seneca esteemes it the
end of seruitude. Let vs seale vp this dis∣course with the memorable aduice which Epictetus gaue to the Emperour Adrian, en∣quiring why they set garlāds vpon the dead? It is in signe (answered he) that at the day of their death, they haue tri∣umphed ouer the diuers as∣saults of this life. Let vs then dye when it shall please the prince of this life, to cease the teares and alarmes of this life, and to beginne the life of heauen, whereas God will wipe away all teares from our eyes, whereas death shall be no more, and there shal be Apoc. 21. no more mourning, crying, nor labour. Obiection.
If men call for death, and being come refuse it so much, it is a signe that it is very horrible. But the antecedent is true: Ther∣fore the consequent is also true. IT is reported in Laertius, that the Philosopher An∣tisthenes, tyed to his bed by a greeuous disease, (and the more grieuous, the more he loued his life,) was visited by Diogenes; who knowing the man, had taken a naked sword vnder his gowne: An∣tisthenes perceiuing him, cri∣ed out, O God, who shall de∣liuer me from hence? Diogenes answered presently, that shal this, shewing him his sword: But Antisthenes replied more sodainly, I meane from these paines, and not from my life.
It seemes that most of those crier sout for death, make that their refuge, when she appro∣cheth neere them. Esope in the Apologue hath naturally described it by that old man, who being laden with a great burthen, and falling into a Ditch, he grew to despaire; and calling for death, death came, and commands him to follow him; O no, said he, I call thee to helpe me vp with my burthē that I may returne. Answer. I know well that many feare death much, not for any desire to liue, nor for the pleasures they haue in life (for the two examples ob∣iected shew the contrarie) but for that they know not what death is. And there∣unto tends this Combate, to kil this feare of death in man.
I therefore persist in my opi∣nion; that it is nothing but the feare, which man hath to fall into some greater miserie (as we haue shewed) doth make him so much apprehēd death. But there is no euill in this, as appeares in the fol∣lowing argument: Therefore there is no reason of feare, which reason should gouern a reasonable man. Let vs not trust to those distrustful spies, which being returned from the point of death, cry out Horror, hor∣ror; for they faile more in co∣rage then in bodie, and de∣serue the like punishment to them that went to discouer the land of Canaan, who be∣ing returned brought no∣thing but bad and slande∣rous tydings to al the people
as the holy Scripture doth witnes. Let vs rather beleeue wise and valiant men produced heereafter vpon the Theater, who (like vnto Iosua spies) Chap. 2. depose ioyntly, that God hath deliuered death into our hands, that it is quencht for our sakes. Next, it is not true that all men flie death being called, many haue bin greeued returning to health after some great sicknesse, which they thought should haue swallowed vp their life. Giue me leaue to speake this truth of my selfe: being 120. leagues from my parents, a∣bout 14. yeares since, study∣ing in a towne streightly be∣sieged and famished, I fell sicke of a bloudie flux, where∣of many dyed, & whereof my
master was dead. In this estate I was resolued to dye, but when I found that God gaue me force to vanquish my disease, I was verie melan∣cholike in the beginning, & held it a losse to be recoue∣red. And therefore notwith∣standing this opposition, wee will close vp our discourse with Seneca, saying, That In consolat. contra mortem. c. 20. death is the cause that life is no martirdome. The 20. Argument taken from the remouing of the euill of death. No euill consisting in a falfe o∣pinion and nothing in effect, is to be feared. Death is an euill consisting in a
false opinion, and nothing in effect. &c. IT is a great aduantage (as great Captaines say) to haue obserued and measu∣red his enemy from head to foote: Let vs in like manner obserue and measure death, and we shall find it is but an Anatomy, a vaine name, a Picture, and Image, a scar∣crow, a bable, a fantasticke feare, an imaginary fire, which some men see in an e∣uening walking in Church∣yards: An ideot at the sight thereof would be amazed, & sweare that hee hath seene a spirit walking; but a wiseman will vnderstand that it is an oyly exhalation, which by a∣gitation takes fire. Ignorant opinion makes man beleeue
that death is very euill, when it is a priuation from all euil, hee is amazed with a false a∣larme: So women and weake spirits dare not remaine a∣lone in their Chambers, for that they imagine they shal see spirits and apparitions; little children are afraid to see their parents masked, A∣stianax could not endure the sight of Hector armed: but lay aside these armes; take a∣way the maske, & you shall conuert their feare into assu∣rance, and their cries into ioy: So pull away these false maskes of hideous lookes, and the trembling cries of them that die, they are but fained, or sorrowes grownded in the aire of an imaginary euill. So Cassan∣der did tremble at the sight
of Alexanders picture, dead long before; the table would not bite him, yet hee quaked, as if it had beene some furi∣ous beast: the reason was that his imagination being im∣payred, hee thought that A∣lexander was wonderfully in choller against him. Wil you haue an apparent signe, that in this horrible apprehension of death mans iudgement is troubled, and therefore sus∣pected to bee false? The strongest and most vigorous, the yongest and most iust, do least feare the losse of life; who in reason should appre∣hend it most, if it were to be feared, hauing more interest in it; but old men and such as are subiect to the cholike & stone, and malefactors, feare it without measure. Maecenas
tormented continually with a feauer, was content to bee cut and mangled, so as with all his paines hee might pro∣long his life. How many Messales offen∣ders would liue in torture, or broken vpon the wheele, so as they might not end their liues: What is the reason of this? but that his iudgement is peruerted, beleeuing that all the paine he feeles shall be doubled in death. If he be a reprobate, and vnderstands it of the second death, and not of the first whereof wee now discourse, his iudge∣ment is right; but for a good man to thinke that there is a∣ny great paine in a naturall death, hee erres much. It is not the death (said Aeschines) but the violent passion a∣gainst
death, which is horri∣ble. If they thinke there bee any discomodity in death (sayd the old man Bassus,) let Sen. epi. 30. them know, it comes from them that die, not from death, which frees them of all paine. Pindarus sayth of man, that he is but the dreame of a shaddow; but let vs speake it (and with more reason) of death; a dreame is false, and a shaddow the opposition of a sollide body to the light. So death the priuation of life, is an euill dreamed, and false. Good God, who can repre∣sent that which is not? vnder what idea can the Painter i∣magine to draw it? he will present vnto vs bones bound with sinewes, without flesh and naked, hauing a sythe in
his hand, this is something; but be well aduised, to thinke that death doth subsist be∣yond this representation, as a liuing man doth subsist longer then his picture, you should bee foully deceiued, for take away this represen∣tation, and all other imagi∣nation, and you take away all that is of death; for it is no∣thing at all, therefore the portrait is false. May a man paint a voice, the which al∣though it be inuisible, yet it falls vnder the sence of hea∣ring? but death in what sence so euer you take it, is incapa∣ble of all sence; and by con∣sequence, not to bee drawne by any pencel. What is death then? it is a word of few let∣ters, which hath no subsistāce but in imagination; nothing
in nature, nothing in effect. We laugh at the Bourgondian spies, who in their war against the French King Lewes 11. be∣ing sent to discouer the Country, fled at the sight of certaine Thistles, as if they had discouered a troupe of men at Armes. If we had the vnderstanding to know death, as the sight hath to distinguish thistles, we should find that they are more ridi∣culous, which fly amazed from the incounter of death, for it is nothing at all; where∣as thistles are at the least pricking plants. Let vs then say boldly, That to feare that, whereof neuer any man yet felt the sting; to draw from a wan∣dering fantasie, proceeding from an vnsetled braine, a
true and sensible paine, is a meere folly: Oh God! what paine can there be at the very instant when life flies away, in a body depriued of all sence? Let a sicke body en∣dure all the extremities of paine, yet in death there is none at all: doest thou not yet beleeue it? take the mēbers of a liuing body cut off; hacke them, burne them, yet they shall not feele any thing; no more shall all the members of one body vnited in death. The which Diogenes hath re∣presented wittily, although Cynically after his manner, discoursing of burialls, say∣ing, That being dead he wold bee onely cast vpon the ground. But sayed his friends vnto him; Will you be eaten by
Dogs, and birds? Oh no, sayd he, lay astaffe by me, that I may driue them away: How canst thou doe it (replyed they) when thou shalt haue no sence? What then, sayd he, shall the deuouring of beasts hurt me, when I haue no feeling? To conclude, it is an apparent follie to feare death, for the loue of this trā∣sitorie life: for this present life giues vs vnto death, and death vnto eternall life, as S. Ambrose teacheth, & thinkes it a pertinent reason, in his booke of the happines of death, Ch. 8. And as we can∣not rife vp high in leaping, vnlesse we strike the ground with the soles of our feete; so the foule cānot mount vp to heauen, vntill she hath giuen a blow to this body of earth.
The 21. Argument taken from the discommoditie of life. Whosoeuer shall tremble for the losse of nothing, is vnwise. The life of this world is no∣thing. IT is a sentence as much propounded in words by Cicero, as verified in effect of it selfe, That all wise men dye quietly and willingly, & that such as dye murmuring and vnwillingly, are indis∣creete. And in truth life is such, as none but in cōsiderate men, and such as mistake it, will greeue for it. According to the holy Philosophy, life is but a shadow which takes life from heauen, and is equall in her swift passage to the violēt motion of the heauens; it is
a grasse yesterday greene in the field, to day cut vp, dri∣ed and layed vp: a flower ye∣sterday flourishing, to day withered; the watch of a night a dreame, a vapour which ap∣peares for time, & then va∣nisheth againe; And accor∣ding to the voice of man, life is a languishing death, a course from one mother to another from a fleshly mo∣ther to a earthly, it is a bub∣ble, a puffe, a comming in & going out &c. As when an arrow is shott at a marke (sayth Sal. Wise. 5: 18.) the ayre which is diui∣ded, sodainely closeth vp a∣gaine in such sort as the pas∣sage cannot be seene: So we after we are borne presently fade away: The Psalmist pro∣ceeds farther, when he sayth,
that who so shold waigh man with nothing, he should finde that nothing were more weightie. But obserue what Aristotle saith, being deman∣ded what man was: He is the example of weakenesse, the spoyle of time, the image of inconstancie, the ballance of enuie and calamitie, & the rest is nothing but flegme & choller: Finally both accor∣ding to God and men it is nothing. Behold how life (the which you will grant me) is the fruition of time: and what enioy wee of this time, but the verie present, which flowes away incessant ly? It is a moate which is in∣diuisible and imperceptible, whereon thou doest no soo∣ner thinke, but it passeth a∣way, and whilest thou art
reading these short lines ma∣ny nowes are vanished. Make no accoumpt of that which is past, nor of the future; for all the time that is past vnto the first moment of the crea∣tion, and all the time that is to come vnto the last point of the great & last day, haue no being, but in your imagi∣nation: there is but this pre∣sent onely that hath essence, but it is a point which stay∣eth not, so small and so swift as nothing can hold it but it will escape. It is the very Saturne which deuoureth all it hath engen∣dred, pleasures, honor, riches, life: make no rampar of plea∣sures, for they are as suddain∣ly changed into displeasures, Boethius hath long since writ∣ten it.
Of so fraile Nature is all hu∣mane pleasure, That sudaine griefes make there their sharpest leasure: And euermore those men are most afflicted, That most we see to their delights addicted. This life the seate of flu∣ent pleasures, changeth in∣constantly, like the Moone, and more: for the change of the Moone is but i her acci∣dent all light, her body remai∣ning still; but liuing man changeth from one substance to another, there remais nothing but the name: The Moone (as they say) doth dayly aduance or retire three quarters of an houre, and so much of her light increa∣seth or decreaseth, and is al∣wayes different from that she
was the night before; and if our sight were sharp enough, we should see this change to bee made euery minute: the like is of our fading bodies, which doe change from mo∣ment to moment. Moreouer, most part of the world exchange their liues for a very little; the Souldier for a poor pay, the Merchant for a little Merchandize; and others for losse: which shewes that their life is nothing, or very little. Saint Augustine seeing the Citie of Hippona besged by enemies, who were  for the spoyle of it; seeing death to swimme be∣twixt the eies of himselfe and his countriemen, was wont to say; That, man is not great, who holds the ruine of buil∣dings, and the death of men
a great matter: You shall see that your life is no great mat ter; yea nothing, if you com∣pare it (how long soeuer it be) with all the time in ge∣nerall that hath bin, or shall be (said Seneca to Martia) you shall finde that all your age is not a graine of sand in re∣gard of the sand of Affricke; a droppe of water in respect of the Ocean: for this is some proportion from one graine to many, from one droppe of water to the sea; but betwixt the life of man and Eternity, there is none at all. And a∣boue all, that which shewes most plainely the vnprofita∣blenesse, and vanity of the life of man, is, that a great part of life flies away in doing euill; a great part in doing nothing; and all in doing a∣ny
other thing then well li∣uing, as Seneca doth teach learnedly in his first Epistle. If we obserue it wel, wee will subscribe; for a great part of our life is wasted in sleepe, and walking; and in our in∣fancie to deceiue and pacific our froward dispositions: and all in other things then in rest and tranquility, or the sweete enioying of life and the pleasures, which present themselues. Whereas feare and hope afflicting vs, doe possesse euery day, yea, euery houre of our age: So as the Philosopher Zenon said right∣ly, that man was not so poore of any thing as of time. Let vs then conclude the same with Seneca, That it im∣ports not much to liue, for slaues and stagges liue; but it
is a thing of great moment to die discreetly, valiantly, and honestly: for none but wise men can doe it; the reason is, that the most ignorant (saith Calicratides) liue by the bene∣fit of nature, but to dye in the bed of honour, that is by the vertue of man. Plu. in Lacon. The 22. Argument. taken from things which do resemble. All braue Comedians bend their spirits wholly to act their parts well, and reioyce at the Comedy. Men liuing in the world are Comedians. Therefore braue men should bend their spirits to liue wel, and to ioy at the end of life.
THe Island of the Her∣maphrodites begins his discourse with these verses: The world's a stage, and man is a Comedy, One beares the bable, th'other acts the folly. So Epictetus spake to the men of this time. Imagine that you play a morall Scene vpon this Theater of the world, in the which you act what part it pleaseth the ma∣ster; if short, short; if long, lōg: If he wil haue thee repre∣sent a begger, or a lame man, a King or a rogue, thou must act it as naturally as thou canst, and onely feare to faile; but in the end clap hands in signe of ioy. The good and the end are conuertible tearms, saith Plato in Philebus.
Aristonimus sayd, that the life Max. in serm. 67. of man was like a Theater, on the which the most wicked held the first rankes. Aeneas Syluius writes, that our life is a comedy, whereof the last Leg. coment de reb. gest. Alpbonsi. act is death: He is then no good Poet, sayth hee, that doth not order al the acts wel and discreetly vnto the end: he would say, that it is not sufficient to liue well, but we must die well, vntill which no man can be held happie, by the saying of Solon, yeae∣of Saloman; for man, sayd he, shall be knowne by his chil∣dren. Caesar Augustus lying in Sueton. the bed of death, and feeling himselfe at the last periode of life, sayd often to his friends. Haue I acted my personage well in this place? haue I pro∣nounced my part well? had I
a good grace? What thinke you? Goe then, giue a Plaudite and clappe your hands. This life is a verie stage, on which some mount vp to be actors, others stay below to be spe∣ctators; and then after the Catastrophe, euery one must make his retreat into the last house. If the ancients in their simplicitie had reason to vse this comparison, wee in this age haue much more; for we liue not at this day but by shewes and fictions, & in most the outward counte∣nance is the maske of the in∣ward man, dissembling, which hath euer increased, since the Kings time, who would haue his sonne learne no o∣ther Latiue but these words, (Quinescit dissimulare, nescit regnare) not to defend him∣selfe
carefully, but to practise it seriously, during his whole reigne. In olde time they detested that speech of Lysanders, That when the Lyons skinne will not serue, wee must sowe on the Foxes: but at this day there are none more estee∣med and honoured, then such as can cunningly offer their seruice vpon all occasions; who can make a shewe of friendship to allure; who haue their welcome, and at parting many submissions and humble conges. But it is to lull him asleepe, and to pra∣ctise some supercherie; they wilkisse the hand, which they would gladly see burnt. Let euery man take heede of his most inward friend aigh Iere∣mie, c. . Trust not in any
brother, for euery brother makes a practise to supplant; and a bosome friend goes a∣way detracting: If then, how much more now? Let then our courteous Courtiours be suspect vnto vs, and see what the fore na∣med treatie of Hermaphro∣dites sayeth in the Chap. of the Entregent. This booke represents to the life, the wic∣ked abominations of France, if we vnderstand it as it is written, the prohibition for the allowāce, mean thy anti∣phrasis. Finally, at this day the most peopled towne are full of Monsters, which coun∣terfet the voice of pastors, to draw men vnto them, & eate them like bread Oh what sa∣fety is there among so many wolues disguised like sheepe?
among so many enemies car∣rying the face of friends? Vp∣pon this occasion Salomon cryes out in his time, That he had beheld all the wrongs which were done vnder the Sunne, and seeing the teares of them that suffer wrong & haue no comfort, for that they which doe the wrong are the stronger. Ecceles. 4. In these times, the oppressed not onely finde no support, but they meet with deceit∣full men, who vnder the co∣lor of Iustice, deuoure the re∣mainder of their substāce: Oh whatsafety? This peruers age is a very Sodome: God attends but our retreat to rainedown fire, brimstone, and burning flames. Let vs beware when the Angell of the Eternall shal take vs by the hand; when
the voyce of God shall call vs, let vs not looke backe a∣gaine like vnto Lots wife, by a treacherous greefe for this treacherous life: but rather let vs sing with ioy, the song of the Lambe, who hath gi∣uen himselfe for our sinnes, to Galat. 1. 4. the end he may retyre vs out of this wretched world: as S. Paul speaks. The 23. Argument taken from the effects of Death. Whosoeuer hath a will to bee sa∣cred and inuiolable, should affect death. Euery liuing man should haue that will. THIS Argument is drawne from the Law of nature, which spea∣king
by Chilon & Solon, doth pronounce the dead to bee very happy, and forbids to curse the dead; and in truth a man cannot wrong his ho∣nour more, then in speaking iniuriously of him who can∣not answere? It is the fact of cowards to fight with the tong against them that can make no reply, and to pull a dead man out of his graue. It is a duty of piety to hold Laert in the name of Chilon. them that are departed out of this world, sacred & inui∣olable: If the last words of a dying man be blessings, as Iob doth witnesse, desiring them to come vpon him; as Iob 29. Iacob did practise it vpon the Patriarkes, as Saint Ambrose Amb. de bono mort. c. 8. doth expound, as & experi∣ence doth teach: what e∣steeme should wee make o
him, whose soule being sepa∣rated from the body, doth conuerse with Angells in hen? And is it not very reasona∣ble not to depraue them which cease to be, seeing they are not to bee layd hold on? but it is most iust to make an end of hatred by the death of thine enemy. Pausanias King of Sparta vnderstood it, and did practice it; who ha∣uing slaine Mardonius Lieu∣tenant Herod l. 9. to the King of Persia in battell, he was aduised by Lampon a man of great au∣thority, to cause him to bee hanged, for that he had done the like to King Leonidas: No, no, sayd hee, that were to di∣shonor my selfe and the Country which thou doest so magnifie; if I should bee
cruell against a dead man, it were an act befitting Bar∣barians, and not Grecians, who cannot allow of such disor∣ders. And in truth it is the act of fearefull confusion, to tears in sunder the skin of a dead Lyon: It is an act befit∣ting the fain the arted  before Troy, to insult o∣uer dying Hector: But it is the property of a generous Lyon to resist them that make head against him; and to passeon, and not, to strike him that falls flat to the earth like a dead man  (Nature speakes heere,) It is a villanie and an vnworthy foolery to fight a∣gainst the dead; it is for appa∣ritions, shadowes and wal∣king spirits, to wrestle with them. The statue of Nicon the
wrestler borne at Tasos, did witnesse it, without words, when as one who had enuied and hated Nicon, at the sight of this statue, fell into his old spleene which he had borne him liuing; who taking a staffe layd vpon the image, to despight the memory of Ni∣con; the image to bee reuen∣ged Suidas & Pausa. l. 6. of this affront, fell vpon him with all his weight, and crusht him to death: This was an accident, but it was well and iustly ordained. But behold another more eui∣dent; Fabia wife to the Em∣perour Heraelius, Being carri∣ed dead to her tombe, it hap∣pened that a maiden (by mis∣chance) did spit out at a win∣dow vpon the body; for which she was taken & burnt in the same fire that was pre∣pared
to reduce the body of Fabia to ashes: In such re∣commendation they had in those dayes the honor of the dead. The rage of Sylla is iustly held detestable, who not content to haue done all the violence he could to his enemies whilest they liued, after their death would draw their bones out of their graues, and cast them into the riuer. The death of the Saints is pretious before God; let vs also say, the death of vertuous men is pretious before men: and if any one hath bene ble∣mished in his life, it should be buried in his graue. Lewis 11. of France, a great King, hath verified it in his owne person, towards his enemy the faire Agnes, whom some
of those times supposed that the Kings Father had enter∣tained: After her death she was intōbed in the Church of the Castle of Laches; and by reason of a certaine rent shee gaue vnto it, her body was layd in the middest of the Quire. Lewis comming thither some time after, there was suite made vnto him by a Priest, that hee would suffer them to remoue that Tombe to some other place, for that it did incomodate them. The King beeing informed who lay there, answered, That which you demand is vniust; although this woman were in her time very opposite vnto me, yet will I not violate her Sepulcher: Moreouer, I can∣not conceiue that you haue
laid this body in so eminent  place, without some rich pre∣sent; performe that to your Benefactor being dead, which you promised her being al, and remooue her not from thence: & to bind you more strictly towards her, I giue you for an increase, sixe hun∣dred pounds starling. If this were done in a life which was blemished, what shall it bee in one that is all pure and vntainted? If it be obserued towards them that dye a drie death, how much more towards them that are vniustly slaine by Tyrant Behold a memorable history among many, which inti∣mates that God hath a watchfull eye ouer them. Per∣dinand fourth, Mg of Spaine, transported with choler, vp∣pon
a suspition ill grounded for a murther committed, commanded two bretheren of the house of , to bee throwne headlong from the top of a rocke: Going to their execution, these Gen∣tlemen protest and crie out, that they dye innocents; and seeing the Kings eares were shut vp to their iust defence, they cited him to apear with∣in 30. dayes before the soue∣raigne Iudge: The dayes run on, and the King is carelesse, vntill that vpon the 30. day hee found himselfe seazed at the first, but with a light in∣firmity, but it increased so suddainely, as hee dyed the same day. Consider hereof you to whom honour is more preti∣ous then life, and who liuing,
feele the stings of Enuy and slander, more then your bo∣dies are followed with their shaddowes: Take comfort heerein, for God by your death, will preuent these vn∣iust pursuites, and make an end of these iniurious taxati∣ons. Enuy assaults the man li∣uing, but lying in the bed of death, she leaues him at rest, Ouid. Pascitur in viuis liuor, post fala quiescit. as the Poet saith: and then due honour is giuen to men of merit. O you which medi∣tate day and night on your learned writings, writings either to chase away igno∣rance, or to reforme men de∣formed with all sorts of vices, in this debaucht age: faint not for any malice they beare you liuing; death will smo∣ther this rancor, & consume
this enuy; we see it daily, and before vs Cate the Cenfor did taxe it sharpely: I know, saith hee, that many ignorant of true honour, will traduce my writings if I publish them; but I let their babling fall to the ground (meaning the graue) whereas the sharpest stings of slander are abated and buried: and the bookes, which during the life of their Authors, durst not looke vp∣on the light, no more then Owles; after their death flie out like young Eagles, and behold the Sunne. Obiection. Whatsoeuer God and men hold to be euill, is euill. God and men iudge death to be euill. Ergo, &c.
THIS Argument is grounded vpon the Diuine Oracle pro∣nounced to Adam: That day thou shalt eate of the fruite of the tree of knowledge of good and euill, thou shalt die the death; & the Apostle saies that Death is the reward of sin. As for men, in Cities wel gouerned, their lawes impose the punishment of death for theeues, murtherers, sedici∣ous, &c. I answer: That death in her beginning is bad, but not in her deriuation; but it is good, in respect of his po∣wer and wisedome, who drawes light from darkenes, good from euill, & life from death; for now by the bles∣sing of God, death serues as a ladder to the faithfull to as∣cend vp into heauen. So the
diuersity of tongs sent at the building of the Tower of Ba∣bel, proceeded from the fury of God kindled against the builders, to frustrate their en∣terprize: Yet the same tongs haue bene since imparted to the Apostles, vpon White-son∣day, by the fauour of God, thereby to haue the myste∣ries of the Lord declared. So garments were inuented in token of the losse of our na∣ked Innocency; and yet in continuance they are be∣come an honorable orna∣ment for our bodies, as wee see Euen so in the beginning God sent death in his fury; and since he sent it in fauour to Enoch, to Iosias, and to all them, hee loues. The holy Ghost speaking by the penne of Salomon, sayth, that
hee more esteemes the dead which are already dead, then the liuing which are yet li∣uing. As for malefactors, death is not inflicted vpō thē as it is simply death, but for two reasons adiacēt; the one is, that depriuing them of all motion, it makes them cease to commit any more euill, & frees the Country of such vermine. The other, that it is imposed for a publike infa∣my, and therefore they are set vpon scaffolds and gib∣bets in publike place; & this deserued infamy is the true torment of the punishment, death is but an accident: and do wee not see many delin∣quents desire an honorable graue more then life? the which they would not do, if they held death to bee the
worst of euills, and not ra∣ther an extreame dishonor, in which they feele their soules to suruine. Bias there∣fore did answere wittily, be∣ing demanded which of all kind of death was the worst, That, sayth hee, which the Lawes haue ordained: infer∣ring thereby, that a naturall death is not euill, but that which crimes haue deserued, the which is not giuen by na∣ture, but by a hangman: and yet not so much by the execu tioner, who is but the instru∣ment, as by a villanie perpe∣trated, which is the true cause. So sayd S. Peter, Let none of you suffer as a mur∣therer, theese, malefactor, or too curious in other mens affaires: But if any one suffer as a Christian, let him not
be ashamed, but let him glo∣rifie God in that behalfe. The 24. Augument taken from the testi∣monie of wise men. All wise men in the conflict of Death, depose that death is not euill. But that is true which all wise men depose, &c. THe troupes of Christi∣an Martirs & heathen Philosophers, march∣ing so boldly vnto death, are so many witnesses without reproch, to conuince them of falshood, which hold death to be so great an euill. Let vs be carefull lest this blasphe∣mie creep into our thoughts,
that they were in despaire or mad: No, no, their verie e∣nemies dare not speake it, ha∣ng knowne that they were for the most part, men fa∣mous in pietie, iustice, vertue and wisedome, and for such as were recommended by all men. The Ecclesiasti∣call Historie is gored with thousands of such Martires; the author of the tables hath set downe some in the end of his first booke of whom I make no mention. But be∣hold the manly courage of Blandina, who by her ioyfull countenance doth summon vs vnto death, whereunto she doth march with such a grace and state, as if she had gone to a nuptiall feast: Then fol∣lowes happie Tiburtins con∣uerted vnto Christ by Vrban
in the yeare 227: who mar∣ching vpon burning coales, seemed to tread vpon Roses. These Christians with infi∣nite others, as well ancient as moderne, had neuer any horror of death, but haue desired it, yea sought it as a refreshing and refection to their bodies & soules: but for that no man doubts but the zeale of Christians hathmade them continue constant vn∣to the death, and the diuine power had so fortified their resolutiōs, that neither their reason could be swallowed vp nor drowned by the hor∣ror of persecution; Let vs come to others, & of a mul∣titude: let a few suffise. Socra∣tes accused by the Athenians to thinke ill of the Gods, for that he reiected pluralitie &
adored an vnitie, was con∣demned to dye; before the which he would first censure his iudges, saying: To feare death, O my Lords Areopa∣gites, is to make shew to be wise, and not to be; for it is to seem to know death to be euil which they vnderstand not. He did so little apprehend death, as when as eloquent Lisias had giuen him an Ora∣tion artificially penned, which hee should vse for his Apologie, whereby hee should be absolued, he read it and found it excellent; yet he sayd vnto Lycias, If thou hadst brought me Sicionian shoes, admit they had beene fit for my foote, yet would I not vse them, for that they were not decent for me: So thy discourse is most eloquent
and fluent, but not fit for men that are graue and reso∣lute: The executioner then presented him poysō in a cup, which Socrates tooke with a constant hand, and deman∣ded of him (as a sicke pati∣ent would doe of the Physi∣tion to recouer health) how he should swallow it: & then without any stay drunk it vp, after which he walked a little & then tooke his bed; his boy vncouering him felt his parts to grow cold. Socrates, being wak't, directed his speech to Criton, who aboue all others Eras. Lib. 3 Apoth. wished him a longer life; and to make him thinke of it, had propounded vnto him his children & his deare friends, that for their sakes, if not for his owne, hee would preserue his life, which was necessarie
for them: No no, answered hee; God who hath giuen me my childrē wil care for them; & when I shall be gone from ce, I shall finde friends, either like vnto you, or bet∣ter; neither shall I bee long depriued of your compa∣ny, for you must soone come to the same place. Then (as if he had by this potion reco∣uered his health) hee cried ut, O Criton, we owe a Cock to Aesculapius, be not forget∣full to sacrifice vnto him. Let vs obserue that in the last passages of life, he was in no sort amazed, but dying ioy∣fully, comforted his suruiuing friend: and let vs not doubt, but hee who was the first a∣mong the seuen Sages of Greece, knew before Demost∣henes, that which this Orator
spake couragiously to Phi King of Macedon, who threat∣ned him to cause his head to be ct off: Well, saith hee, if thou giuest mee death, my Countrey will giue mee im∣mortality. And doublesse So∣crates liues, and will liue eter∣nally; so the suruiuing ha∣uing seene the assurance of his death, held him most happy, as going to liue another life, and in another place. And Aristippus (that ioyfull Philo∣sopher) beeing demanded in what sort Socrates was dead, In that manner (said he) that I my selfe desire. Inferring that death was more to bee wished for then a happy life. Let vs heare a second, that is, Laert. l. 2. c. . Theramenes, to whom they presented a great cup of poy∣son, the which he dranke re∣solutely,
and returned the cup to Criti, the most cruell of the 30. Tyrants, which had condemned him; Theramenes therein alluding to the man∣ner obserued at this day in Germanie, which is, that hee, which drinkes to any one, sends him the same glasse full of wine that hee may pledge him. These deathes are full of courage: but behold a wo∣man dying, who exceedes Plin. l. 3. them all, and that onely to incourage her husband to dy; it is Arria the wife of . This woman being ad∣uertised that Petus was con∣demned to what death hee would choose, went vnto him to perswade him both by word & the effect to dislodge out of this life: she had a na∣ked
dagger vnder her gowne, and giuing her husband he last well, shee thrust her selfe to the hart, and draw∣ing it forth againe with the like courage, she held it vnto Petus, and spake these her last words vnto him. P, non dole Pete▪ O my deere Pe∣tus, it doth not paine mee, and then dyed. Let vs seale vp these examples with two women, who commonly doe passionatly loue the presenta∣tion of their children; yet a certen Lacedemonian hauing heard that her Son fighting Plut. in La con. Apoth. valiantly had beene slaine in battaile, O (sayd shee) this was a braue Sonne; not la∣menting the death of her Sonne, but reioycing at his vertue. Another, hearing that her Sonne returned safe from
battaile, and that hee had d, shed cryed out vnto him, There is a bad report of thee, thou must eyther de∣face it, or not liue; holding it better to dye, then to sur∣uiue an Ignominie. Obiection. If the greatest fauorites of God haue feared death, it is to bee feared. But Dauid, Ezechias, and o∣thers fauored by God, feared Death, and especially Iesus Christ, the only and wel-be∣loued, Sonne of God, feared it, &c. ANswere. Neither Dauid, nor Ezechias, nor the o∣ther seruants of God
feared death, as it was death simply alone considered, but for that God threatned them, in regard of their sins, by reason whereof it seemes they had some confused ap∣prehension of hell, which is the second death. Doubtlesse my fault is great (sayd Dauid) but I pray thee saue mee by thy great bounty. These are Psal. 6. the words of God to Ezechi∣as, Dispose of thy house, for Esay 38. thou shalt die shortly, and shall not liue. We must note that Ezekias heart was puft vp with glory, & God would humble him by the conside∣ration of death wherewith he threatned him: But these two, and all other the ser∣uants of God, setting aside these threats, being in the fa∣uour of God, haue with Saint
Paul desired to die, and to be freed from this mortal body, to be with Christ, with God. Man here below should not apprehend any thing but the conscience of another life, a life which, dying without re∣pentance & grace, leades to death eternall, as that of Saul and Iudas; who being despe∣rate slue themselues, quench∣ing the match of a vicious life, to kindle it in the fire of hell, where there is a Lake of fire and brimstone. As for the death of Christ, the great difference it hath both in the cause and the ef∣fects, from that of the faith∣ful Christians, makes it to dif∣fer a world: The reason is, Gods Diuine Iustice to re∣uenge the iniury which hath beene done him by the diuell
in the nature of man, the which not able to do in him without his totall ruine, hee hath done in his surety, in Iesus Christ his Son, whom to that end hee sent into the world to take humaine flesh in the Virgins wombe: It is he that was wounded for our offences, broken for our ini∣quities, Esay 53. 5. censured to bring vs peace, and slaine to cure vs, as the Prophet speakes, and the Apostles testifie. The fruites, first the glory of God is ma∣nifested in his loue, in his bounty, and in his mercy to∣wards vs, to haue so loued the world, as to giue his owne Son to death for it, to the Iohn 3. 6. end that whosoeuer did be∣leeue in him should not pe∣rish, but haue life euerlasting, as the same eternal Son doth
witnes. Secondly, it is our saluation, the redemption of the Church from sinne and death; for it is the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world. And these are the reasons why Iesus Christ was terrifi∣ed in death, feeling the wrath of God vpon him for our sinnes: But the death of the faithfull is nothing like; for in the greatest torments which Tyrants can inflict vpon them, it mortifies the sence and takes away all paine, by the abundance of his conso∣lation; as Ruffinus writes of Theodorus, and as our Annales Lib. 10. hi. c. 36. testifie of the smiling death of Martirs in the middest of burning fiers: for God is sa∣tisfied, the passage is open, the venimous teeth of death
are pulled out, seeing that the Lord wrestling with her, hath slaine her, as S. Augustine speakes; and like a most ex∣pert Phisition, hath made a wholesome Treacle to purge our bodies of those corrupt, burning, stincking, and deadly humors; and to make it sound, holy, impassi∣ble and immortall. The second Obiection. Euery iust reward is proportio∣nable to the paine. The reward of Martyrsis great. Therefore their paine is great. THe holy Writ, and the ancient Fathers vpon it, beare witnesse of the honour and great triumph which the Martyrs obtaine
in heauen: if their conflict a∣gainst death bee answerable to this triumph, as equity re∣quires, it must bee exceeding great, and therefore it is no easie thing to dye; the which S. Augustine seemes to con∣firme, Si nulla esset mortis a∣maritudo, Homil. de verb. apost. serm. 3 5. non esset magna Mar∣tyrum fortitudo: If (saith hee) there were no bitternesse in death, the Martyrs valour should not be great. Answer. He is truely a Mar∣tyr, who for the honour of God, and for the loue of his neighbour, doth constantly seale the contract of the alli∣ance of God with his owne bloud: and the true cause of Martyrdome is, to suffer death for iustice, and for the name of Christ, as Christi∣ans, Mat. 5. 1. Pet. 4. 1. Pet. 3. and in doing well. This
bloud thus shed is the true seede of the Church, the very Commentary of the holy Scripture, the Trompet of Gods glory, the true Victo∣ry of the cruelty and obstina∣cy of Gods enemies, the holy Lampe to lighten and draw to the Kingdome of Christ, those which are in the shad∣dow of death, &c. In consideration whereof, these holy Champions of the faith, are honored in heauen with a Crowne of gold, clo∣thed Apoc. 6. with white garments, &c. Vpon earth in the primi tiue Church, vpon the day of their suffring, which they cal∣led their birth-day; the faith∣full assembled vpon the place of their Martyrdome, did ce∣lebrate their happy memo∣ry, repeated their combates,
& commended their resolu∣tion; exhorting the assistants to doe the like, if they were called to the like combate, as well by reading of their bloo∣dy history, as by the sight of the place where their blood was newly spilt. It is that which Cyrillus in the epistle to Smyrne, & the Paraphrase of Rufynus doth teach vs: where∣in Cyr. l. 6. Cont. Iul. we may see, that it was not the death, but the cause of the death, which made them to bee so recompenced and recommended. And what∣soeuer they haue had in hea∣uen, shall bee giuen to all o∣thers which shall haue the like will to serue their master; though not the effect, the like Crowne, nor the like gar∣ments. To mee, saith that great Martyr, S. Paule, the
Crowne of Iustice is reser∣ued, 2. Tim. 4. which the Lord, the iust Iudge, shall giue mee in that day; and not onely to me, but vnto all those that shall loue his Comming: And what Christian is it that desires not the comming of Christ? It is also written, that all the Armies which are in heauen, wherein all the faithfull are, followed the faithfull, the Apoc. 19. true, the Word of God, vpon white horses, clad in white Cypres. Finally, in this inestima∣ble reward (which God giues vnto Martyrs) there is not so great a regard had to the merit and grieuousnesse of their death, as to the most precious blood of his Sonne Iesus Christ, and to his free promise: wherefore this Ob∣iection
is to no purpose; and if it were, it doth incite men more to desire then to refuse death, if it bee true that the enduring of the first death, in the Saints, is a freeing frō the second, as Saint Augustine Lib. 13. de Ciu. dei c. 8. teacheth. The third Obiection. It is impossible but man should be toucht with a great appre∣hension of euery sharpe com∣bate he is to endure. Such is death. MAn hath three cruell enemies which present themselues vnto him at his last farewell; a sensible paine at the dissolution of the foule from the body: sinne re∣presents vnto him heauen
gates shut, and hell open: and Satan tempts him, and lets him see his criminall Indite∣ment, whereof he is ready to execute the sentence. Answer. It is impossible that at the soules departure from the body, there should be any great paine; the soule leaues the body, as the light doth the ayre, which it doth inuest, as Viues speakes after S. Augustine: Wee must not Lib. de Anima. then imagine heere a grosse tearing of the soule from the body, as of a piece of cloth: for the vnion of the soule with the body is spirituall and incomprehensible; But of the pretended paine in death, there is sufficiently spoken in the Obiection fol∣lowing. As for the two other enemies, it is true that the
conscience presents vnto a dying man the foulenesse of his sinne: and it is true that Satan tempts man to des∣paire, to precipitate him in∣to eternall perdition. But for all this must a man that feares God, feare death? and feare to lose the battaile? No, but hee ought rather to assure himselfe of the victory, and present himselfe boldly to the Combate, as a valiant & fortunate Champion, against one that is weake and vnfor∣tunate. They that are for vs are stronger then they that are against vs: God which hath begunne, continues his worke in vs, and ends it to his glory: the faith which he hath prāted in vs, wil quench the inflamed darts of the wicked spirit: the full assu∣rance
of the remission of sins by Iesus Christ, dead for our sinnes, and risen for our iusti∣fication, will pacifie the con∣science, and shew him Iesus Christ in heauen, sitting on the right hand of God, and stretching out his armes to him. Thirdly, the seales of the holy Ghost in vs (for by it we are sealed to the day of Re∣demption,) Baptisme, the Communion of the body of Christ, and the Spirit of san∣ctification, will terrifie Satan and make him flie. Finally, the good Angels which from our birth, and throughout the whole course of our liues, haue administred vnto vs, guided and comfor∣ted vs, will redouble their loue and courage in the like
offices, at our greatest need, and at our last gaspe. Let vs not feare, seeing we haue such assurance in the Word of God, which doth plainely witnesse, that the Angells are administring Spirits, sent to serue for their sakes that shall receiue the inheritance Heb. . Psal. 91. Mat. 18. of saluation. Here then is no subiect of desperate feare, but rather of an assured resolu∣tion. The 4. Obiection. All paine is euill. In dying there is paine. EPicharmus (by the testi∣mony of Cicero) sayd, Cic. lib. 1. Tus. quast. that he would not die, but to be dead he cared not: The reason is in my opinion,
for that he feared the passage of death, not death it selfe, which hee thought with vs had no paine. There are ma∣ny at this day of this opini∣on, abhorring death like an internall gulfe, for that they conceiue there is some sharp and violent paine which they endure before it comes; and thereunto tends the pro∣uerbe: He is in bad case that dies: And S. Augustine seemes L. 13. de ciuit. Dei c. 6. to attribute I know not what sharpe feeling and force a∣gainst nature, in the diuulsi∣on of the soule from the body which were vnited toge∣ther. Answere: If death be ter∣rible by reason of the paine we apprehend in it, then life by the same reason should be more; for in it some man en∣dures
more by the cholicke, the stone, the sciatica, yea, by the tooth ach, and by many other infirmities with∣out death, then an other hath felt in dying. And there is this aduantage in death, that it comes but once, wher∣as the aboue mentioned in∣firmities are often reitera∣ted in life. But to haue a per∣fect view, if this paine bee so great, as opinion (a bad counsellor) doth make vs beleeue: let vs search with reason into the immediate cause of that which doth en∣gender this paine in our bo∣dies. The pathes which leade man to death are infinite, but all bend to one of these foure high wayes, outward force, subtraction of meate
and drinke, inward sicknesse, and old age. These foure kinds of death may happen to al men, yea to wise men, al∣though by iniustice touching the first; by some rare acci∣dent, as touching the second; concerning the third, by or∣dinary corruption of hu∣mors; and by an infallible defect of nature touching the fourth. Paine (according to the definition of learned Phisitions,) is the feeling of some thing that is offensiue and troublesome to the na∣ture of the body, for that it is contrary to the health thereof; the which happens either by the dissoluing and cutting of his continued sub∣stance; or by the alteration thereof, which alteration proceeds from the intempe∣rate
heate or cold: for as for humidity and drinesse, they are rather passiue qualities then actiue, whose operation is very slow, and the paine in the member that is altered, is suddaine not gentle; as if you be exceeding cold and come to a very sensible paine, cold settles his paine in disioy∣ning, & heate in burning: and it is to bee noted, that any sence may be wounded, yet little or nothing is his paine, in comparison of that of touching, the which is disper∣sed ouer the whole body, & from which no other vessell of the sences is exempt; which is the cause that wee some∣times feele prickings in the eyes, and shootings in the eares, &c. Let vs now come to the
application, Death which comes to man by extreame age, can be no cause of paine; there being nothing in him that tortures his body, no∣thing that doth suddainely alter and change him by ex∣treame cold, or heate; but his life goes out presently (like vnto a Candle that wants tallow) by the losse of his ra∣dicall humour, deuoured by little and little since his birth by his naturall heate: and al∣though this heate doth yet striue as it hath formerly done, to conuert the meate which is familiar and fit for the body, into radicall hu∣mor, to repaire his losse, yet she can worke no more, her vertue failes her; euery agent hath his vertue limited, what soeuer doth act, suffers in a∣cting:
through vse and in con∣tinuance of time this heate decayes, dissolues, is lost, and death ensues: So as it hath bene disputed in vaine, whe∣ther life might bee continu∣ed, this radicall humor being restored by some fit nutri∣ment; for that humor being at the first a certaine ayery & onely portion of that seede which doth reside in all the sollide parts, it is impossible that such an humour, and so much as is needefull, should be supplied in it's place. The only fruite of the tree of life which was in Eden, had this secret vertue, by the diuine ordinance, to make man im∣mortal that shold eate ther∣of; and therefore according to the opiniō of the Fathers, God suddenly after the sin,
chased Adam and Eue out of Eden, least they should lay hold of that fruite, and be∣come Irenae. Hilarie. Greg. Naz. Theodoret. Chrysosto. and others. immortally miserable with the diuells. In processe of time there happens two notable changes to this radi∣call humour; the one in the quality, for that it degene∣rates by little and little, & of naturall becomes strange: the other in the quantity, for that it is wholy wasted; whereun∣to man being once reduced, he can suffer no paine: if hee complaines, it is rather for griefe that hee must dye, or some other distemperature, and not the death, which doth cause some troublesome alteration in his sinewes & sensible parts. As for death which pro∣ceeds from diseases, there are
some long, others short. If they be long, the paine is lit∣tle, for that nature doth ac∣custome it selfe to that which comes by degrees; it turnes to a habite, and hee feares no griefe, or very little, there be∣ing nothing but the suddain alteration which nature can∣not endure: that which cau∣seth pain is that which chan∣geth the good temperature, the which in very long languishing diseases comes slowly and insensibly. As for example, in an Hectick feuer they grow leane, and consume away by little and little, and dye with paine, which is in a manner imperceptible; there is nothing but an heauinesse of the spirits, but in their bo∣dyes feele no paine. It is e∣uen so of the paine of the
Lights, whereon the rheume distilling, it doth consume them by little and little, as a spout of water doth a stone, so as in the end this infirmity brings the patient insensibly to death. As for short diseases, the paine is short: What great pain can there be in a swoun ding? in an Appoplexie that happens by the sudaine dissi∣pation of the spirits? What great paine can a moment of time bring to man? But you wil reply, that there are disea∣ses wonderfully sharpe: It is true; but if you will obserue them, they are least dange∣rous for death, whereof our discourse is. Nature giuing death, knowes how to mor∣tifie the members so wel, and to weaken the vertue of the
sinewes, as man cannot dis∣cerne when death seazeth on him, no more thē when sleep surprizeth him. It is an A∣phorisme of Hipocrates, When a sicke body (saith he) feeles no paine, playes with the co∣uering of his bed, and pulls off the wooll, it is a signe of death, and no likelihood of life & what paine then, when as hoping to recouer, and feeling ease of his paine, hee shall dye? As for famine and thirst, which quench the spi∣rit of life, that happens very seldome, and the Annales in 16. ages haue scarce obser∣ued two, the one vnder the Empire of Honorius, at what time in the Theater at Rome there was this strange voyce heard, You must set a price Zzim. 6. Annal. vpon humane flesh. The o∣ther
vnder Iustinian, at what Procop. de bell. Goth. l. 11. time they did not only eate mans flesh, but euen the ex∣crements of men. Here in truth is great horror, but little paine, neither can I beleeue (whatsoeuer they say) that he which dies of hun ger feeles no great torment: examine it by your selfe; whē you haue fasted long, you shall feele a great debility, & a great appetite, or a great heate in all your members, but no great paine: it is in the sinewes to feele where the paine lies, which sinewes do not suffer any thing in the extreamity of hunger or thirst, but the principal parts which receiue the nourish∣ment, therefore in this most pittifull; and pitty is here ta∣ken for the paine. Let the
death of Charles 7. the French King, be an example vnto vs, who being full of suspition and way wardnesse, & enter∣tained in that humor by the dayly reports of his house∣hold flatterers, that they would attempt against his person; yea a Captaine in whom he trusted most, assu∣red him that they meant to poyson him; he gaue such cre∣dit to this aduice, as he resol∣ued neither to eate nor drinke in which capricious humor hee continued seuen dayes. But in the end being prest not with paine but by his Phisitions, and house hold seruants; who laid before him the danger of life, whereinto he did voluntarily bring his person when hee would haue eaten he could not, by rea∣son
(sayth the History) the passages of the stomake were shrunke. Let vs weigh these last words, and acknowledge, that this naturall fire in vs wherewith the lampe, of our life is kindled, is like vnto the Elementary, alwayes actiue; wherefore wanting his ordi∣nary nutriment, hee turnes himselfe violently vpon that which beares it, vpon the ra∣dicall humidity, the which it doth waste and consume in a short time; and this humidi∣ty being consumed, the mem∣bers remaine dry, and with∣out vigour; so as when they offer them the accustomed remedy, hauing lost their vsuall vertue, they disgest it not, but cast it vp againe. It is the same reason why such as obserue a certaine
houre for their meales, when this houre is come they feele certaine motions of an appe∣tite in their stomacke, which requires meate: But if they passe this houre, either by fa∣sting or by diets, they lose their appetites, for that this heate being frustrated of his ordinary repast, falls either vpon the peccant humor, or that failing, vpon the vitall humour; and as we suffer it to do more or lesse, so we receiue more or lesse preiudice. Now if in the first and most sensible touches of this natural heate, we feele no great torment, as euery man may try in the religious fasts of the Church, which passe the ordinary time of eating three or foure houres: I cōclude necessarily, that the longer they abstaine
from meate, the lesse they suf∣fer; for the heate decaying still, by the want of nourish∣ment, the actiue vertue also decreaseth, and his subiect the body, suffereth lesse by such a languishing acti∣on; also the body which for his part decayes in force, is daily lesse susceptible of paine, vntill that all his hu∣mor being exhausted, and his heate euaporated, hee must die. Last in ranke come good men, who are vniustly put to death by Tyrants, to whom the paine is sensible according to the horror of the punishment. But I an∣swere: First, that it happens seldome, God holding in his power the Tyrannous resolu∣tions of great men; that they
may not execute their wic∣ked designes against his ser∣uants: wickednesse shall ne∣uer preuaile so much, she shal neuer conspire so strongly a∣gainst vertue, but the name of wisedome shall alwayes re∣maine sacred and venerable. Sen. epi. 14. Secondly, God who suffers it, giues them ease in their torments, & knowes how to restraine and suspend their paines; (as hee did to his ser∣uants, Sidrac, Mizac, and A∣bednego in the burning fur∣nace:) as they go ioyfully to death, and sing the praises of the Lord cheerefully in the middest of the fire, as hath bene seene in the Martyrs: And thus much for this point. But if after all these reasons they persist still in a fantasticall apprehension of
some great paine in the arti∣cle of death, wee will adde, that it is not fitting to ac∣cuse death; it is life, the re∣mainders whereof cause the paine, and death is the end. Wherefore Diogenes being demanded if death were euil, How can it be (sayd hee) se∣ing we neuer feele it present? and that which is absent can∣not bee hurtfull to any man; whilest that man hath fee∣ling he hath life, but if he bee dead, hee hath no feeling, and that which is not felt, is not hurtfull. And therefore hee con∣cludes, that it was not death which was euill, but the way to death, which was misera∣ble; which if we feare, what is all the life (said he) but a path tending vnto death? And
S. Augustine aboue named, August. de ci. Dei. l. 13 c. 9. means no other thing: whilst they haue feeling, they are yet liuing; if liuing, they are rather sensible before death, then in death, by whose com∣ming all sense is lost. The 25. Argument taken from the indignity. That which is repugnant to one of the principall vertues, is vnworthy of man. The extreame feare of death is repugnant to fortitude, one of the principall vertues. WE meane not here to speak of bodily force, but of that of the minde, by the which Caesar (but of a weake body) did more braue exployts thē
Hercules. There is nothing more worthy of a man then Fortitude, a vertue whereun∣to he should aime al the acti∣ons of his life; for that alone doth neuer faile to yeeld a re∣compence, either aliue or dead, saith Seneca, Epist. 81. and hee doth not perish that dies adorned with vertue, saith another. Saint Augu∣stine confirmes this, when he Lib. 1. de li. arb. c. 13, attributes the disdain of life, and the contempt of death, to the force of the minde: The greater and more despe∣rate the danger is, the more doth magnanimity increase in a generous minde, to free all difficulties, that hee shall encounter. And seeing that the end is better and more excellent then that which tends vnto it, hee will con∣clude
with reason, That hee were better to lose his life then vertue. But Fortitude, one of the foure cardinall vertues, besides the generall, hath a particular reason, why man should seeke to preserue it in her greatest perfection; for by it hee enioyes the true tranquility of the minde, the which (as Cicero reports) is nothing else but a quiet, sweete, and pleasing disposi∣tion of the soule, in all the euents of life: Which carries two Crownes; patience in paine, & resolution in death. By which the confirmation of the Minor is inferred, there beeing nothing that doth more oppugne, and in the end ouerthrow all force and resolution, then the extreame
feare of death. Feare, and es∣pecially that of death, beeing destitute of reason & iudge∣ment, wounds the soule with amazement, alienates his right sense, makes it idle and without action; it doth waste him, vndermine him, and consume him as rust doth I∣ron, and the worme an apple. A man alwayes shaking with feare, is without heart and courage, but halfe a man; such as histories report Clau∣dius Caesar, the 5. Emperour to haue beene, whom nature had begun, but not finished, for that hee was base and faint-hearted. Moreouer, feare by the ter∣rible obiect of death, causeth the heate which is the chari∣ot of force, to retire into the bottome of the belly, in stead
of drawing it about the heart as courage doth, so as the heart is alwayes panting: and which is worse, whereas it should extend it selfe by dila∣tation in his natural motion, hee shrinkes himselfe vp a∣gainst nature, whereby there followes a great debility in all the members of the body, and sometimes death, as it happened to Lycas; who vp∣pon the very report of Hercu∣les force, was so terrified, as beeing retired into the cor∣ner of an Altar, dyed there. But a generous man resolute to death, will not feare any thing that shall present it selfe to crosse him in the course of his duty; like vnto Anaxarchus, whom Alexander threatning to hang, he said, Threaten thy Courteours,
who feare death; for my part I care not whether I rot a∣boue or vnder the earth. So∣crates also beeing blamed by one, for that hee did a thing which would cause his death, he answered, My friend, thou art not well informed, if thou thinkest that a man of honor shold apprehend danger, yea, death in his actions; but on∣ly consider whether they bee iust or vniust, good or bad. Such was the courage of the Prophet Micheas, when he re∣sisted King Achas, and told Is∣rael of his sinnes; being filled with vertue by the Spirit of the Eternal, with iudgement and with force, as he himselfe Mic. 3. speakes. Thirdly, feare not onely hurts it selfe, causing his arms to fall out of his hands, and
laying him open to his ene∣mies darts; but like vnto the plague it infects others. And therefore King Agamemnon would not that a rich man and a fearefull should goe to the warres of Troy; but to stay him, he would haue sent him a distaffe, if he would not eouer his shame honestly. But on the other side, a vali∣ant man finds meanes to free himselfe in the greatest dan∣gers. So Aristomenes a Lace∣demonian, being taken priso∣ner and deliuered bound to two souldiers, hee found meanes to burne his bonds and his flesh to the quicke; then falling couragious∣ly vpon his guardes, hee slue them, and so escaped. It is a common saying among men, That vertue hath no ver∣tue,
if it be not in paine: and the greatest paine in the opi∣nion of man, is when hee is at the point of death; then should a valiant heart shew his inuincible courage, to vāquish this terror of death. It is this courage which made Saint Paule to say▪ That if he did serue for an as∣persion Phil. 2. 18. vpon the sacrifice & seruice of faith, hee was ioy∣full. It is the same Spirit that made Ignatius to say, beeing condemned by Infidels to be cast to wild beasts: I am the wheate of God, I shall bee Iren. lib. 5. ground in the teeth of beasts, to bee made pure and cleane bread. If the Trumpet which sounds an alarme, be pleasing to a valiant Souldier, what shall death bee to a vertuous
man, when shee shall sound with her siluer Trumpet, or∣dained by God to call the as∣sembly, the Church to hea∣uen, Num. 10. 2 and to make men leaue the earth, where they haue no a biding place? what feare we? They that haue the chol∣licke and the gout, are not so much terrified with the re∣turne of their paine; and can vertuous men so much feare death, which hath not so much paine, no none at all? seeing that what we feel whē death approcheth, is of the re mainder of life, not of death▪ to what end serues this co∣wardly feare? Fly an hono∣rable death of the one side, and a shamefull end will find thee of the other. So Sisera left his Armie and fled into Iudg. 4. the house of Iahel; but when
he thought to take his rest, Iahel came and draue a nayle of the Tabernacle into the temples of his head, and slue him. But to haue this courage and resolution to resist the terror of death, it is not suf∣ficient to speake in the time of health, as Souldiers do of their valour at the table: lear∣ned discourses (sayth Seneca) Epist, 26. make no demonstrations of true magnanimity; the most feareful will sometimes speak more boldly then they shold. We must meditate seriously of death, according to the obiects which are presented vnto vs, and not make any difficulty to go and comfort our dying neighbours; for it is better to enter into the house of mourning then of Eccle. 7. 3.
seasting, sayth the wise man: To offer ourselues to al dan∣gers of death, when our vo∣cation doth call vs; like vnto Iesus Christ, who being dis∣swaded by his Disciples from going vp to Ierusalem, he sayd vnto them, There are 12 houres of the day: after Ioh. 12. the example of the Apostles, namely of Saint Paul, who was thrice whipt with rodds, 2. Cor. 11. continued whole dayes and nights in the bottome of the sea, &c. We ought to do it, for Christ is a gaine to vs both Philip. 1. in life and death; for that dy∣ing, we change the drosse of the world, for the gold of heauen; we going out of life, as out of a deepe pit of dark∣nesse, and ignorance: and wee ascend vp into the heauenly
Vniuersity, whereas the dee∣pest sciences are learned; and wee passe from a miserable seruitude, into a most happy freedome of spirit: Let vs then quicken our spirits, and take courage, and not be like vnto the skōme of the world, to whom dying, Nature makes this reproch, which is read in Seneca: What is this? Epist. 22▪ I haue put you into the world without couetous desires, without feare, without super∣stition, without treason, and without any other such in∣fections: As you entred into the world, so depart this life, without apprehension, feare, vexation, or passion, which torment your soules. But es∣pecially let vs be carefull to depart without feare of death, which among all hu∣maine
passions is most despe∣rate: it is done, if we once put on a Christian courage and magnanimity, and shall not flie, but offer our selues, fol∣lowing our vocation, to the greatest dangers: As good Macedonius did, who seeing two Captaines march to re∣uenge the irreuerēce done to the statue of Placilla, by the expresse and vnworthy com∣mandement of Theodosius her husband; seeing them I say, runne to a great Massacre, meetes them, stayes them, & pulls them from their horses, and by more then humaine authority, commands them to desist from such cruelty, & to tell their master, That the greatnesse of his estate shold not make him forget that he is a man: that hee seekes to
teare that a sunder which he cannot put together; deface liuely Images which hee can∣not repaire; and that this outrage should touch the Creator. By the boldnesse of his words and by his con∣stancy, he amazed these Cap∣taines with the feare of Gods reuenging wrath, and makes them returne towards the Emperour, who hauing heard them, pacified his rage. Obiection. Whatsoeuer is a guift of nature, cannot be gotten by art. Fortitude is a guift of nature, &c. ANswere: It is true, that fortitude hath her foun∣dation in the irascible
faculty: but her culture, her instruction and increase is purchased by labour, study, and continuall exercise. If Alexander, Caesar, and other valiant Captaines, had not bene continually thrust into armes, hazarded themselues in warre, and cast themselues into battailes, they had ne∣uer purchased the habite of valour, nor gotten so many triumphes vpon their ene∣mies. In like manner if wee desire to conquer our selues, and our owne passions, which are most dangerous enemies; wee must exercise our selues continually in these listes of vertue, and weede out of our hearts two contrary vices; the one is dull negligence, which lulling vs asleepe in the world, will not suffer vs
to consider what this life is, how miserable, how vaine & wauering; although wee sup∣pose it be perpetuall, contra∣ry to that which experience doth teach vs, shewing vs dayly that either necessity doth pull it away, or vanity doth swallow it vp, or hasty nature doth end it. The o∣ther extreame vice is feare, which is the cause that wee cannot once thinke of such necessity but with trembling and horror. And as the eye viciated with some yellow humour, or looking through a yellow glasse, thinkes all it sees to be yellow; yea, the purest white: So our soules being infected with this ter∣ror, increased by faintnesse, and fortified by cowardise, takes quiet things to be hor∣rible,
the safest port and secu∣est from winds, to bee more dangerous then the Rocke Capharois: and finally, death (the happy end of all mise∣ries) to bee the beginning of most horrible paines. But let vs purge this peccant hu∣, ast off this  scart, and clothe our selues with this force, with this resolute vreue; and wee shall visibly▪ see and iudge with reason, that wee haue beene miserably deceiued, taking our friends for enemies, the greatest safety for horror, and  happinesse  death for misery. The 26. Argument taken from the instru∣mentall cause.
In euery expedition the meanes must be proper vnto it. A good conscience is the proper meanes to the expedition of death. Therefore we must haue a good conscience. IF we consider profoundly of the cause of this terror, which man hath of death, we shall finde it is a naturall feeling (though; dull, and some what brutish) to haue offended his Lord, thinking that he attends nothing but death, to lay open the vo∣lumne of his faults, to indite him criminally, to pronounce sentence of condemnation against him, and to deliuer him ouer to Satan the execu∣tioner, to cast him into a fire Det. 28. which is neuer quenched.
Man hath a confused appre∣hension of all this, he sees no∣thing in life, hee feares it in death, his conscience within accuseth him, and serues for a thousand witnesses: It is that which makes the wic∣ked to tremble when the leaf of a tree doth fall, and liues no more assured then if his life were tyed to a thread, it is the Worme which neuer Esal▪ 66. dies, but gnawes the wicked continually: It is a bad con∣science (said Diogenes) which keepes man from beeing cou∣ragious, and without feare. Let a man bee by nature har∣dy, yet a bad conscience will 8 tob. ser. 22 make him most fearefull, said Pithagoras; yea he added, that the torments which hee shall suffer, will bee much more sharpe and painefull then
whipping to the body, the di∣seases of the minde being far more grieuous then of the body; which gaue occasion to Poets to paint the Furies armed with burning torches, to burne the wicked. So was the Emperor Caligula intrea∣ted for his cruelties, terrified with feare waking, awaked suddainely sleeping, alwayes troubled, neuer in quiet. Nero was in the same estate hauing slaine his mother. So Saule being forsaken by the Eter∣nall, was possest by an euill spirit; hauing bad newes of his speedy death, he trembles 1. Sam. 28. for feare, forsakes his meate and drinke, is much perplex∣ed, falls downe vppon the ground, as the Scripture doth obserue: for then the Iniustice committed against
Dauid (whom he had confest with his mouth to bee more lust then himselfe) came to his minde. Wherefore if we will liue without feare of death, let vs liue without wounding of our cōsciences: for it alone in life doth neuer feare, said wise Bias: It is it Antonin. Melissa part 1. se. 66. that makes men liue in tran∣quility, finding thēselues not guilty of any thing. Perian∣der sayd, that a good consci∣ence Stob. ser. 22 made Agis King of the Lacedemonians, triumph ouer Stob. ser. 1. de pruden∣tia. his enemies in death; for as hee was led to execution by the Ephores, seeing some (mo∣ued with compassiō) to weep, Weepe not for me, said hee, for it is against equity and reason that I am led to this death: they which haue con∣demned mee are more vniust
then I am. Inferring thereby, that he died well and honest∣ly, Plut. in La∣con. Apoth. seeing they put him to death wrongfully, and with∣out cause. Plato doth teach vs, that Socrates was wont to insult o∣uer death, in these tearmes; I haue beene carefull, said he, to liue well in my youth, and to die well in my age: I am not tormented within me with any paine; I am not vn∣willing to dye, for seeing my life hath beene honest, I at∣tend death ioyfully. This is much, but it is nothing, in re∣gard of Saint Paule, who pro∣testing that he felt not him∣selfe guilty in any thing, cri∣ed out with a bold spirit, that hee was assured, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor po∣wers;
neither things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, should se∣parate Rom. 8. him from the loue of God. Let vs thē be careful to polish our soules, and to set∣tle our consciences; let vs ap∣ply our selues to a well orde∣red equity: let the body sub∣iect it selfe vnto the soule, and follow her motions: Let the inferiour powers of the soule obey the commandements of reason: Let reason gui∣ded by the holy Ghost, ob∣serue the Law grafted in eue∣ry creature by nature, especi∣ally in man, and most of all the Law of Moses. To doe this is to be vertuous, and to be vertuous is to haue a good conscience. We must then direct all our actions to ver∣tue, if wee desire to liue in the
world without feare, with∣out paine, in peace and ioy: vertue doth first of all make the soule perfect in her intel∣lectuall part, disperseth the clouds of error & ignorance, & illuminating reason, doth adorne it with prudence. Secondly, she labours to polish the will of man, and hauing reformed it by her or∣derly course, shee giues him the habite of Iustice. Thirdly, she doth temper the angry part pulls away the extreame feare, and on the o∣ther side prunes away the sprouts of rashnes, and plants betwixt both valour and ha dy feare. Finally, it doth also bridle the faculty of concu∣piscence, and restraines the motions of voluptuousnesse, and makes them obedient to
the command of Tempe∣rance. It is in a few words, the true meanes to get a pure and vpright conscience, es∣pecially if we bee carefull to be as honest in our priuate & secret actions, as if all the world did behold vs: Seneca doth recommend this vnto vt in many places. Wee reade of one called Virginius, whose History was written by Cluuius, who pre∣sented it vnto the sayd per∣sonage, and sayd vnto him, If there be any thing written o∣therwise then thou wouldest, pardon mee, and reforme it: Oh no▪ answered Virginius; Erasin. lib. 8. Apoth. whatsoeuer I haue done, hath bene done in that manner, & to that end, that it might bee free for all to write at their pleasures: a worthy speech of
a noble spirit, and content with his conscience in his a∣ctions. Iulius Drusus, when as one promised a great sum of mony to his Master mason, that his house might not be subiect to the view of any man; and I (sayd he) will giue twice so much, if thou canst build my house in that sort, as all men may see into it what is done there: This was to saue his conscience, & not to do more in secret then be∣fore all the world. And what a madnesse is it in most men not to feare God, nor their conscience, and yet to feare men who can do least in the correction of their faults? What shall we then feare in this world? One only God; for his feare will inspire our hearts with an hardy cou∣rage,
against the greatest feares. The 27. Argument taken from the frequent think∣ing of Death. He that will receiue Death ioy∣fully, must propound it often to his thoughts. Wee all desire to receiue it ioy∣fully, &c. SOme (sayth Seneca) come to their death in choler, Epist. 30. but no man receiues it when it comes, with a cheere∣full countenance, but he that hath long before prepared himselfe for it. Let vs try this remedy, it cannot be bad: In the night after our first sleepe, in bed, let vs presuppose that we are dead, and by a strong
imagination; let vs settle our selues in that sort, as hauing no sence, nor feeling, & that our soule and reason tells vs that it is euen so in death, & that there is no other diffe∣rence, but that our soule is yet present in the body; and then let vs goe vnto our friends, or to any other that die; let vs view them, talke vnto them, and touch them being dead; and we shall finde that in all this there is no∣thing to be feared, that all is quiet, that there is nothing but opinion that  abuse man. Let vs proceed; enter the Church-yards, and go down into their graues: wee shall finde that  the dead rest in peace, yea so profound  peace▪ as no liuing creature
can interrupt them. Let vs yet go on farther, there is no danger; for by the saying of Plato, the knowledge of death is the goodliest science that man can attaine vnto. Let vs do like vnto Iohn Patriarke of Alexandria, build our tombes and not finish them, but eue∣ry day▪ lay one stone. Let vs haue some Anatomy or Mō∣mie in our houses, and let vs not passe a day without be∣holding it let vs handle it, it is death. Little children by little and little grow familiar with that which they did strangely fly, and in the end they play with it, and know that it is but a dead image of copper▪ which so terrified them: Wee shall also see in death, that it was but a shad∣dow that so amazed vs. Let
vs yet do more; waking and not dreaming, let vs dis∣pose our selues of purpose, as Philippe King of Ma∣cedon did by chance; who wrestling vpon the sand, after the manner of the Country, saw and measured the length of his body, and admired the littlenes thereof, in the shape printed in the sand, where he had fallen. Finally, let vs not forget what the Emperour Maximi∣lian, 2. or 3. yeares before his death commanded carefully to be done; that they should carry with him a coffin of oake in a chest, with an ex∣presse command, that be∣ing dead they should couer his body with a course sheete; hauing put lime in his eares, nosestrills and mouth,
and then to lay him in the ground. Let vs follow these great examples, both high & low, and wee shall see that when death shall present her selfe vnto vs, it will bee with∣out amazement. But if wee flie from euery image of death, from al thought ther∣of; if the ringing of bells (a shew of some mans death) doth importune vs; finally, if euery word of death be trou∣blesome, (as there haue beene such) I doubt not but to them death is wonderfull terri∣ble. Obiection. If the most reasonable feare Death most, it is by reason to be feared. But the antecedent is true; there∣fore
the Consequent must follow. SEneca, yea, experience doth teach vs, that In∣fants, Epist. 36. little children, and such as haue lost their iudge∣ments, feare not death. Answere: Wee deny the antecedent: for making com∣parison of the most reasona∣ble men with other of lesse capacity, wee shall finde that the most iudicious feare not death; for that by their rea∣son (as through a cleere light) they see plainely that there is nothing fearefull or painefull in death, but all quiet and ioyfull. But they whom the Philo∣sopher meanes, haue a reason that is blind, weake and fan∣tasticall, apprehending Cen∣taures,
Furies, and Cerberus to be in death; whereas there is no such matter, and therein they haue lesse reason, then they that haue none at all. Miserable is the sight of the Butterflie, who thinking through great errour, that the light of the candle is the naturall light of her life, flies to it, and is there burnt: Mi∣serable in like sort is mans Reason, who imagining through error, that the vitall life is the true life, which is the death; the mortall body to bee her proper lodging, which is the graue; thinking then to preserue himselfe, hee loseth himselfe, and to liue, he dies, so as his reason doth but trouble and deceiue him: And to this doth the Sun of Iustice aime, saying▪ Hee that
will saue his life, shall lose it; and he that shall lose it for Iuke 14. my sake, shall saue it. The 28. Argument ta∣ken from things con∣ioyned. Feare alwayes as an inseparable companion, marcheth with hope. But nothing can giue man an assured hope; And therefore not of feare. HOpe is a desire, astri∣uing and eleuation of the mind, to attaine to some future good, that is dif∣ficult and yet possible: if this good bee vertuous, the hope is commendable, and hereof a good man shalbee alwayes replenished, and it will neuer
suffer him to faint in the mid dest of aduersities, but will raise him vp to better things, as Apolodorus sayd, & more holily S. Paul, that hope con∣founds not, for that the loue is infused into our soules by Rom. 5. the holy Ghost. Finally, ha∣uing our anchor-hold vpon God, from whom shee feeles all motions within, wee may assure our selues to obtaine all things necessary, how dif∣ficult soeuer; and to repell whatsoeuer shalbee hurtfull vnto vs, how painefull soe∣uer: Neither shall hee euer feare, but greedily desire death, as the end of his car∣reer; whereas they that haue run and combated, shall re∣ceiue the Crowne of glory kept, promised and hoped for. But if this good hee but
an imaginary good, as the glory of the world, of the earth, and of this present life; then shall the hope be doubt∣full and deceiuable, and ioy∣ned to feare to lose that which wee enioy (a feare which doth alwayes insepa∣rably accompany hope:) she will let go the flouds of trou∣bles and disquietnesse vpon miserable man, and will still vexe him with fearefull appa∣ritions of death. Wherefore if we will not feare death, let vs not hope for the prolon∣gation of life: Thou shalt ceasse to feare, saith Seneca, if thou doest leaue to hope▪ It is so, my friend Lucilius; al∣though these thing seeme to be contrary, yet are they tied one vnto another, as one chaine doth the Sergeant to
the prisoner. So these things which seeme contradictories, are alike: the greatest cause both of the one and the other, is, for that we doe not measure ourselues, and stay our selues vpon present things, but let flye our thoughts farre be∣fore vs; so as fore sight, the goodliest ornament of man, is hurtfull vnto vs. Beasts flie apparent dangers, and being past, they retaine no shad∣dow of them, but liue in all security and rest; and wee trouble our selues for that which is to come, & for that which is past. This is true, for either the remembrance of some wrong, or some phā∣tasticall reproach past, doth vexe vs to the heart; or the future feare of dangers trou∣bles
our soules: onely the pre∣sent time which we hold, and which is only ours, and shold chiefly concerne vs, seemes not to touch vs; wherein the stupidity is as wonderfull, as the apprehension is witty. Let vs then know, as Salomon doth admonish vs, That ther Eccle. 3. 22 is nothing better for man then to ioy in that hee doth, for that is his portion: For who will bring him backe to see what shall bee after him? But wee haue spoken enough in generall of the propositi∣on of the Argument: Let vs come to the second part. Doubtlesse, hee that shall cast his eyes vpon that which doth present it selfe euery day, and shall lend his eare to heare what hath beene said, cannot doubt of the Mi∣nor
of our Syllogisme: wee see dayly (if we will not shut our eyes) the effect of Senecaes speech, saying; That it is a Epist. 102. great folly in vs to dispose of our age, when wee haue not to morrow at our command. O how great is their vanity, saith hee, which enter into long hopes! I will buy, I will build, I will lend, and then I will rest mine olde age in peace. O poore man, who can promise any thing to himselfe that is to come! Who doth not seem to hear the Apostle Saint Iames con∣testing against couetous mer∣chants, and saying, Now you that say, Let vs goe this day and to morrow to such a Ci∣ty, & continue there a yeere, let vs traffique and gaine; and yet you know not what shall
befall the next day: for seeing the thing which wee hold doth often slippe out of our hands, and that of the very time we now enioy, a part of it is subiect vnto hazard; it were to dreame without slee∣ping, to hope in the incer∣tainty of life, as Plato saith, and after him Aristotle; for that such as future hopes do leade, promise to themselues many things, which in the end proue vaine: these hopes figured in the shaddowes of the future, wrest out of our hands the present, and make vs runne like vnto Esops dog after the shaddow of a thing; and like vnto those who ha∣uing dream'd they had found a treasur, when they awaked found nothing but straw in their bed: they are netts to
take the winde. I will not buy future hope with the price of present time; the Ter. Adel. 22 Hor. Car. 5. reason is giuen by Horace, the short line of life forbids vs to beginne a long hope: Euen at this instant night, the ghosts and Pluto's streight Mansion will hasten thy end: We hope, saith another, for some great matter by affecti∣on, but it may be to morrow will close vp our destiny, and so deceiue our hope, & mor∣tifie our affection. Mans life is like vnto a game at dice; if thy chance falls not to thy desire, thou must rest contented, for thou canst not correct it by art; & therefore hope not for any thing, but what thou doest presently enioy: otherwise if thou makest any assured ac∣count,
that this or that shall happen vnto thee: I will tell thee, nay common chance will thee, that it may bee it will not succeed. But the di∣uine Oracle pronounceth a curse vpon him, that puts his trust in the strength of man. And hereof ages past & pre∣sent do furnish vs with thou∣sands of examples; but I will produce but two for all the rest. Pyrrhus who might haue liued a happy King, and haue enioyed that which the time did present vnto him, yet he, transported with a hope to subdue all Italy, was graci∣ously informed by Cineas, a seruant of his, but a iudicious Orator, after this manner: Sir, if the Gods make vs Vi∣ctors, what profit shall wee reape by this victory? Wee
shall haue an easie meanes, saith he, to conquer all the ci∣ties that are vpō the consines of Italy: and this done, replied Cineas, what shal then becom of vs? Sicile, answers Pyrrhus, will willingly submit vnto vs. Shall Sicile then (pursued Cineas) be the end of our wars? Who shall then hinder vs, said the King, to passe into Affrick, to Carthage, and from thence into the kingdome of Macedon? Whereunto Cineas, Well, my Prince, when all this shall be made subiect to our power, what shall we do in the end? Pyrrhus smiling, answered, We will then rest quietly at our ease, with plea∣sure and content. Cineas ha∣uing brought him to the point he aymed at, made him this last reply: Sir, seeing wee
enioy all that can bee desired in a happy and contented life, who can now interrupt our quiet, and trouble our fe∣licity? and not deferre it to vncertaine dayes, and lay it vpon dangerous hazards. This was more then enough to moue Pyrrhus to content himselfe with what he had, if vain hope had not made him insensible; but hee must haz∣zard himselfe, & fight against the Romanes, & then he must be besieged encountered and slaine by a woman. Goe you Princes, propound vnto your selues these haughty hopes of glory, but expect nothing but smoake: flatter not your selues in your fortunes, she is treacherous; the more shee smiles, the more she is to bee feared. Iulius Caesar is the se∣cond
example; shee was his friend for a time, but in the end she betrayed him: when as he should haue contented himselfe with that great Ro∣maine Empire, he conceaued new hopes of subduing the Parthians, and makes his pre∣paratiues; but in the meane time his Citizens conspire his death, and fayle not. So Esops Falconer, whilest that hee is watchfull to take the Fowle, a viper which hee ca∣sually trode vpon, turnes, and bites him by the foote, whereof he dyed. Manilius cries out, That good is alwayes mixt with e∣uill here below, teares follow vowes, and in any thing for∣tune neuer keeps one course. The safest remeady not to be troubled nor infested with so
many vnquiet euents, which follow one another in this life, is to quench in vs the baites of them, which are two, hope, and feare: for wee floate betwixt these two continually, and alwayes de∣pending vpon the accidents of fortune, wee either suspect them or affect them. What then, will you say, must wee wholly despaire? No, it is not my meaning; there is a meane betwixt all hope and all des∣paire, the which Seneca pro∣pounds vnto thee: Hope not, Epist. 105. saith he, without despaire, nei∣ther despaire without hope. Otherwise (as he doth wise∣ly aduertise thee) it is like the life of a foole, which is in∣gratefull, Epist. 13. trembling, and al∣waies tending to the future: Ingratefull, for that he makes
no account of that which is past, nor of the present: trem∣bling, for that it feares more and sooner then it should: & in the end it bends to the fu∣ture, for that it relies not vp∣pon the present good which presents it selfe; doth not tast it, nor make any account of it, but either ioyes with hope of the future, or else pants for feare. And this future, how short soeuer it bee, yea, the night following, it may bee, will conclude thy life. Heare what God said to the foolish couetous man, who through hope to liue at ease, to eate, drinke, & make good cheare, resolued to build Barnes, to store vp his Corne, promi∣sing afterwards to himselfe great ioy and long life: But O foole (said the Eternall,) Luk. 12. 19. 20.
this night thy soule shal bee taken from thee. Obiection. To thrust a wretched man into despaire, is a cruell thing. To take all hope from a wret∣ched man, is to thrust him into despaire. &c. THe Philosophers Elpi∣stiques held opinion, that there was nothing did more mollifie the bitter∣nesse of miseries in this pre∣sent life, then hope; And by the saying of Thales it is the most common thing to men: for it neuer flyes away with other transitory things, but continues with man euen vn∣to the end. Pindarus termes it the nurse of old age; for be he neuer so much broken and decayed, yet he hopes to liue
one yeare at the least. Yea, some one (as the Poet sayth) hanging on a gibbet, will not lose all hope to escape; she is so faithfull a compani∣on euen vnto death. Plato calles it the renewing of all good fortune. Finally, some haue descri∣bed it by a hog, which thru∣sting his nose into the ground and hoping to finde some∣thing to eate, teacheth vs that passing on, wee should hope for better things. Answere. I shall willingly grant the argument and the exposition, if they he applied to the true hope, the nurse of faith; and grounded vpon the diuine power and assi∣stance, which euen a wise man hath at his death, sayth Salomon; but of humane hope
which hath nothing to sup∣port it but riches, or humane power, or health and strength of body, or some other world∣ly thing, I will deny it con∣stantly, and with reason: For there is nothing firme on Paradin. nil soli∣dum. earth, all is wauering and fraile; to hope in it, is to leane vnto a tottering wall, and to bee crusht in the ruines: it is to ease himselfe being weary vpon a swords point, which will pierce him through. To warne man hereof, is not to cast him into a gulph of des∣paire, but to retire him; for who wold not despaire, when hauing basely hoped for all prosperity, he runnes into ex∣treame ruine? But when one cries out; Beware, trust not; they are then weary, & seeke some better assurance, so as
nothing befalls vnexpected, and by consequence, nothing can driue him into despaire. Let vs set before you Polycra∣tes the most fortunate man in the world, who to shaddow his fortune, cast his richest Iewell into the sea, which within a short time was re∣stored in a fishes belly, that was presented vnto him: Yet must Amasis King of Egypt, his allie and friend, write vnto him, That these prosperities were to be suspected, & that this calme would bring a storme, in which hee should suffer shipwracke: And lost hee should bee ingaged with him, hee renounced all the rights of friendship, which they had contracted toge∣ther, according to the vse & custome of those times: The
which fell out so; for in the end he was taken by Orbetes Lieutenant to Cyrus, whom others say to be Strape to Da∣rius, and tyed ignominiosly to a gibbet. It seemes S. Am∣brose did meditate and make proffit of this History, who hauing incountred a man who bragged that he had ne∣uer tasted any misfortune, hee presently left him, saying, That he feared to be lost with him, who had neuer felt any disaster: His coniecture pro∣ued true, for presently an earthquake swallowed vp the lodging, with this Mig∣nion of Fortune, and al them of the family, euen in the sight of S. Ambrose, being not yet farre off. Prosperity the stepdame of vertue, plants and waters
whom shee pleaseth, but is soone wearied by the incon∣stancy of her loue; shee sup∣plants, them not without a∣mazement; shee applies her selfe vnto them for a time by some miserable happines, but in the end shee crosseth them and ouerthrowes them; and therefore Valerius Maximus sayd truely, That greatnes & riches were nothing but frailty & misery, and like vn∣to little childrens babies & toies; and what hope then is there in such things? But some Idolatrous flatteror of Princes, will perswade them that all things yeeld vnder their power, and vndergo what yoake it shall please them to impose. To this flat∣tery I will oppose the sincere confession made by Canute, a
powerfull King of England, who adds words to the effect Camden History of England. for a memorable example to al the monarchs of the world: Seeing the sea begin to flow, he commanded his chaire to be set vpon the shore, & sate himselfe downe in it, and still obserued the waues as they approched: Then the Prince begā this speech; Stay ô sea, the Land whereon I sit is mine; thou art on it, and in that respect thou doest be∣long to mee: neuer yet any one gaine-sayd mee but was punished; I forbid thee to mount any higher, beware thou doest not touch nor wet thy Lords garments. The sea had no more respect then eares, but trembling at the voyce of a greater Monarke, came on his course, and did
wet the Kings feete, which was the thing he expected; & then hee added: Let all the Inhabitants of the world know, that the power of Kings is so weake, as the least creature guided by the Al∣mighty, disdaines it. Where∣unto the embleme of Alc doth allude, representing the Beetle a little & weake ani∣mall, yet banding against the Eagle, findes meanes to re∣uenge himselfe: for, creeping into her feathers, he is carried by her into her nest, where he breakes her egs, and doth ex∣tinguish the race. We reade of Sapores King of Persia, who hauing besieged Nifibis a Christian Towne, hee was chased away by an Army of Hornets and Waspes; which succors they did attribute to
the prayers of Ieames the faithfull Pastor of that Church. I omit the misera∣ble Prelate of the Abbey of Fulden in Germany, who was pursued & in the end deuou∣red by rattes, notwithstand∣ing all his force and deuices, whereof the Tower built in the middest of the riuer of Rhine beares witnesse. Plinie makes mention of Conies, which did vnder∣mine & ouerthrow a Towne in Spaine. Moules ruined ano∣ther in Thessaly, Frogs made the Inhabitants of a certaine Towne in Gaule to abandon the place. But it is well knowne to all men, how God incountered the arrogancy of Pharao King of Egypt, with armies of diuers smal beasts▪ If the last wormes of the
earth, opposing against the great enterprizes of great men ouerthrow them, and what hope then is there in this world? What shall wee say more, but with Lipsius, Lips. de const. c. 6. That the most shining Dia∣mond of constancy, a vertue so necessary in the inconstan∣cy of Fortune, is not to bee transported with hope nor feare? a supernaturall orna∣ment, neere vnto God, which makes man free from passi∣ons, exempt from the insul∣ting of Fortune, and makes him a free King, subiect to God only, whose seruice is to reigne, as the wiseman say∣eth. The 29. Argument taken from the vnprofitable∣nesse of life.
The freeing from a most vaine vanity should not make man sad. Death is a freeing from a most vaine vanity. SAlomon a powerful King, wise and rich, hauing sought, examined and ta∣sted all that is excellent, plea∣sant & happy in this world, yet in the end hee cried out with a true voyce, in the booke of truth; Vanity of va∣nities, all is but vanity. The Paraphrase vpon this Ser∣mon, doth teach vs, that the end of it is, to let the world know, That they deceiue themselues to their great confusion, which either with∣in, aboue, or vnder the world, hope: to finde any thing so
firme, wherein there is assu∣red contentment: no, sayeth hee, there is nothing in the world but is inconstant, with∣out stay, fraile & most vaine. And in truth when man hath past his youth, and leaues his passions, comming to a more perfect age, his life promiseth felicity, yet vpon condi∣tion, that hee shall imploy himselfe with all his force, either to heape vp store of riches, or to purchase much credit, or to wallow in volup∣tuousnesse: but after that hee hath toyled, turmoyled, and killed both body and soule, she leaues him empty & lost, finding her deceite too late. For, Had man of wealth such store, That much still heap't vp more,
And held in his free hold, A spring of liquid gold, His coffers seeing fill'd With treasures, still instill'd Pearles, that best choises please, Brought from the bloody seas; And in rich labour could, (To breake his fruitefull mould,) A hundred Oxen yoke, Yet would desire still choke His throate with thirst of more. And yet of all the store, His heart affects to haue, Hee carries nothing to his graue. Euen as Boetius exclaimes against sencelesse greedinesse; for in truth all shee hath is nothing; shee desires all shee hath not, and that is infinite:
she gapes alwaies after gaine, one lucre sommons another, and she holds al lost that she cannot attaine vnto. Finally, Couetousnesse is the anuile, whereon are for∣ged the chaines of iniquity, to binde and ast couetous men headlong into hel: these chaines are foure; Impiety, Inhumanity, forgetfulnesse of Gods Iudgements, and Distrust; whereby we may in∣fere, that in stead of happi∣nesse, there is nothing heere but misery. Now comes the second, Ambition, which knowes no bounds, and hath neither end nor meane; if shee possesseth this day a whole Countrey, to morrow shee will seeke to conquer a new Kingdome, & after this conquest she wold
seaze vpon all the world, and thē pierce through the earth, to finde new words; a strange thing, as Valerius saith, that Val. Max. man should thinke his glory hath too streighr a lodging in this world, which not∣withstanding was sufficient for al the gods: but it is more strange that man should bee so tormented for the enioy∣ing of a handfull of earth, who hath the fruition of the Sunne, the heauen, and of all the elements; in regard wher∣of this earthly Globe is no∣thing: for the Sunne alone by the iust computation of Philosophers, is a 166. times bigger then the earth. Why should a little portion of this little earth breed him so much care? Hee that hath more, should he care for lesse?
Man hath the common en∣ioying of the principal of life, of the sea, heauen and stars; and must he for a little point of earth, depriue himselfe of the quiet enioying of al these things, which be farre grea∣ter? An ambitious man is al∣wayes shaken with feare, and musled with enuy; he feares continually the crosses of fortune, his enemies terrifie him, and his friends are sus∣pect vnto him: hee eates not without feare of poison, hee sleepes vnquietly, for that his aduersaries watch for his m∣ine. Enuy filing ouer the tri∣umphs of other men, stings him continually; hee thinkes himselfe as much deiected as another is aduanced; Thou thinkest him happy, and hee
holds himselfe miserable, & would confesse it to thee if his ambition did not stay him: and if he feared not by this confession to make him∣self contemptible, the which he most abhorreth, he would shew thee, that in his greatest banquets, he hath no more assurance thē he, ouer whose head there hangs a naked sword, staied onely by a horse haire, as in old time that of the Tyrant of Sicile. But the aduertisement giuen to Phi∣lip King of Macedon growne insolent for the victory of Cheronee, by Archidamus King of Sparta, after the Spartane manner, is notable: Philip, said hee, measure thy shad∣dow, if thou findest it big∣ger then of custome: as if hee would say, Why doest thou
thus insult ouer thine ene∣mies, who in thy person hast receiued no increase, vnlesse it he care and feare? Then followes Pleasure in eating, drinking, and in the venerian act: this pleasure if it keepes not the bounds of necessity and honesty, it is in∣famous and vnwholesome; The throat hath slaine more (faith a Phisition) then the sword. Intemperance is the very bayte of an impure spi∣rit, which delights in vnpure and vndigested humours: drunkennesse depriues a man of the vse of reason, & trans∣formes him into a beast, yea, a furious beast apt to com∣mit many mischiefes. And therefore Saint Augustine speakes of drunkennesse, that it is the mother of all villa∣nies,
the subiect of offences, the roote of crimes, the distē∣perature of the brain, the ru∣in of the body, the shipwrack of chastity, the losse of time, a volūtary rage, an ignomini∣ous languishing, the corrup∣tion of manners, &c. Either of these voluptuousnesses is like vnto the byting of ser∣pents, which they call Taren∣tula: They that are toucht, laugh, sing, and dance; but it is a Sardonian laughter, which brings them to a fatall end; and what pleasure? As for the act of venery, out of the due of lawfull marriage, it is by the testimony of Diogenes, wine mixt with poyson, Laert. lib 6 which in the beginning seemes sweete, but presently after it makes him feele a deadly bittemes: it is the mire
wherin man doth deuolue ru∣ine, and lose himselfe: It is in this act onely, saith Saint Ierome, that God did neuer touch the heart of his Pro∣phets. Thrice, and foure times wretched Ixion, who thinkest to imbrace in thy armes the goddesse Iuno, and 7. Ethic. 11 it is but a cloude thou doest hold: The pleasure of this world is but a vaine shadow of felicity, the substance is in heauen. To bee short, wee must abhorre voluptuousnes, like the Sirenes, as the Anci∣ents haue mystically painted them out: all that is seene of them is exceeding faire, they glister with the shining of sparkling Diamonds, they cast forth a sweete sent of Muske and Amber, their greene eyes dart flames into
the coldest heart; gold binds vp their flaxen haire, their necks are circled with rubies, a Cypres of siluer wauing o∣uer their shoulders; their breasts of Alablaster open, whose pappes like two round curds of milke, did seeme to leape: on their fore-heads were fixed two of Cupids bowes; their cheekes were crimson, and their mouthes little, but their tayle which is hidden vnder the water, is pointed, with teeth spotted, and venemous; finally, hide∣ous and fearefull, and they that are once stung, die with∣out helpe; and what pleasure? These are the three carreeres which men in this world run by troopes: heereunto the most actiue of minde and bo∣dy, straine their sinewes, and
bend their spirits, who shall haue most, and al for an ima∣ginary happinesse; Some in the beginning of the course fall to the ground; others end in the middest, and these not able to iudge of the va∣nity of the world, are pe∣rished in the middest of it; The last beeing come vnto the end, finde (but it is in the extreamity) that rey haue imbraced the shaddow for the body, vanity for felicity, and desolation for consolati∣on? then they crie, O deceit∣full world, O miserable life! But before they can come to consider wherein the happi∣nesse of life doth consist, and settle themselues in a course to attaine vnto it, death sea∣zeth on them. Obiection.
It is no good cōsequence to argue from the abuse to the thing a∣bused. Your argument proceeds from the abuse to life. THey laugh at Lycurgus, causing the Vines to be pull'd vp, for that some men were drunke; and he were more mad that would cut off his nose because hee is trou∣bled with rheume: and what were hee that would take a∣way life, vnder colour that one vseth it to couetousnes, another to ambition, a third to voluptuousnes? Let vs ba∣nish the abuse, and retaine life; that knowing with Dio∣genes the goods of nature to exceed them of fortune, let vs refuse Alexanders siluer, if hee will depriue vs of our li∣berty,
and the true vse of the Sun. Let vs imitate Xenocra∣tes, who grauely answered his Ambassadours, who had brought him 50. tallents, or 30000. crownes, That he had not vse for so much siluer. Finally, wilt thou be rich? Doe not labour to multiply thy wealth, but to make a substraction of thy concupi∣scence. As for the other a∣buse of ambition, let Socrates prescribe vs a Rule, who hearing a relation of his praises in a discourse compo∣sed by Plato, interrupted him, crying out, Oh what lies this young man speakes of mee! Let vs consider rhat glory is mixt with the honey of Tra∣pezonde, whose violent vapor doth strangely confound the spirits of such as vse it, and
makes. them forgetfull of God, Apostates to the faith, and voyd of all naturall rea∣son. For Voluptuousnesse, let them cast their eies vpon the Curij & Fabricij, who will bee more then content with tur∣neps and beanes; yea vpon Epicurus, who with water and a little rice, would contend with Iupiter, for his felicity. Let Cyrus, and Zaleucus King of Locres, be also heard; the first against the excesse of wine; the other against whor∣dome: Cyrus being roughly demanded by his father in law Astiages, why hee had re∣fused to drink the cup which hee had presented vnto him; For that, said he, I conceiued it had beene poyson, remem∣bring that at your last feast,
euery man that vsed it, did stagger at euery step, and his spirits so confounded, as hee could not vnderstand any thing, nor speake to purpose. Zaleucus made a law, that the Adulterer should lose both his eyes; wherein he was so strict, as his owne son be∣ing conuicted, he vnderwent the same punishment, and by a fatherly compassion, pulled out one of his sons, and one of his owne eyes. Answer. I yeeld to all this, and doe willingly giue my voyce, hauing neuer insisted but for the abuse; neither that we may depriue our selues of life for any misery: Yea, I haue maintained the contra∣ry against the Stoicks hereto∣fore. It is the excesse of the feare of death, I striue to
prune and root out; shewing that vanity and corruption is so vnited to life, that all which liue, yea the greatest spirits, wallow in this mire: and therefore death which giues an end to this vanity and corruption, should cause no feares to reply, that it is the abuse and not the life: we may answer againe, that the abuse is generall, since the fall of the first man, no man can be exempt, if hee be well obserued. Let Diogenes go suddaine∣ly with a torch lighted into the most frequent market of Athens, nay into the most fa∣mous royall Faire of France, to search; yet shal he not find one: and I know not whether hee himselfe which could so taxe others will bee found
without blame; and whether he (as it hath bene reproched vnto him) did not more glo∣ry in his Tub, then Alexander in his Empire. Oh how easie it is to speake and lie! Vertue consists in practise and acti∣on: there will not any one be found in this age, that is not tainted more or lesse with one of the aboue named vi∣ces, or with all three; wee can giue no instance. All men suffer themselues to be led to some vaine hope which they attend from day to day, which in the end deceiues them; and death deliuers them from this deception, why then should it be so ter∣rible vnto them? But repre∣sent one out of ten thousand, who hath learned wherein the true end of life doth con∣sist,
that is to say, in the tran∣quillity of the mind, in conti∣nuall action according vnto vertue, yea according vnto piety, as hee knoweth, and striues to haue the spirit of a wise man (whereof Seneca speakes epist. 60.): that is like vnto the world, aboue the Moone alwayes cleere. Yet must he confesse, that he is in a wondeful cōbate, yea in in∣supportable paine, being tos∣sed with contrary windes of diuers passions, which neuer leaue him, no more then his body or flesh: Sometimes the immoderate loue of transitory things stings him, sometimes the hatred of e∣ternall things sollicites him; or prophane ioy, or the me∣lancholy of the minde, layes hold of him and consumes
him: if vaine hope leaue him, then furious despaire gets hold, or boldnes thrusts him on to mischiefe, or feare re∣tires him from good, and fu∣rious choller transports him beyond the bounds of rea∣son: so many passions so ma∣ny cords to bind him, so ma∣ny assaults so many paines, if it succeed not wel; and most commonly it proues contra∣ry to his proiect; for this hea∣uy flesh, this sensuall concu∣piscence which hee is to in∣counter, dawes him stil to the ground. But harken how that great Apostle, more vertuous then all the Philosophers toge∣ther, for that hee had the gift of the Spirit of God, in a higher degree: heare how in the like conflict he cries out;
Miserable man that I am, Rom. 7. v. 24. who shall deliuer mee from the body of this death! If this seruant of God liuing the life of Iesus Christ, yet for the mortal assaults which he felt, tearmes this present life death, and were death a deli∣uerance; what feare wee in death, that wee do not salute it rather as the safe port from all the stormes and tempests of this life, full of baites and snares? as S. Augustine sayth. Let vs feale vp this discourse with the ring of Seneca, De . vit. c. 19. which is, That the condition of all men imployed is mi∣serable, and that most miser∣able which attends no other thing but his imployments: hee taxes the greatest part of men, who (like vnto Liuius Drusus,) from their infancy,
to their dying day, giue themselues no truce, alwayes in action, in trauell of minde or body; if they meete with any pleasure, they passe it o∣uer lightly without taste; if with displeasure, they are toucht to the quicke. Finally, they run so swiftly, as they looke not to their way; they thinke not of their life, and cannot say what it is: all actions shall bee plea∣sant, but that which is pro∣per to man, which is, to haue the spirit purged, giuen to Philosophy, and to the medi∣tation of that which con∣cernes man in the world. Let vs then say with reason, O va∣nity of vanities, this is no∣thing but vanity.
The 30. Argument ta∣ken from the restoring of mankind. Whatsoeuer being lost shalbee powerfully restored to vs a∣gaine, should not trouble vs in the losse. Life being lost shalbe powerful∣ly restored, &c. IF thou beest a Christian, Christ commands thee, & thy faith doth bind thee to beleeue the Resurrection of the flesh; in the which, by the powerfull voyce of the Creator, raysing them vp which sleepe in the dust, the life which thou hadst left, shalbee restored vnto thee a∣gaine, with most pretious in∣terests. But if depriued of the eyes of this faith, thou canst not see the beginning
of the creation of the world, seeing that by faith (as the Apostle doth witnesse) wee Heb. 11. verse 3. vnderstand that the ages haue bene ordained; yet as a miscreant thou doest beleeue the eternity and fatality of the world, let vs admit this supposed truth to bee true: know then, that the limited reuolution of the heauens be∣ing ended and al the order of causes chained together, re∣turned to the same point, in the which they hold all things ballanced in an equal weight: know I say, that this same concatenatiō of causes by a necessary reuolution, wil restore thee to life, yea to the same estate, in the same place, & in the same positure thou art in at this present▪ so as you which reade these
things, or heare them read, shall be the same, at the same time, reading or hearing. It is the true extraction which moued that great Zoroastres to assure, that one day al men should take life againe. Plato was of the same opinion, say∣ing, That after the returne of the eight spheare, which was in thirty six thousand yeares, all things should in like man∣ner returne. The reason; there is no∣thing made new vnder the Sun, and there is nothing, but what hath bene and may re∣turne hereafter. So the Sun withdrawing his quickning influence with his body from our Zenith: the trees being Thepomp l. 1. c. 17. withered remaine without fruit, without any verdure & without leaues: If thou hadst
not seene it the yeares past, yet thou mayest in some sort beleeue that the Sun should returne, and by his returne giue that vegetatiue vertue, that springing sap, & sweete smelling spirit to herbes and trees, which thou didst hold depriued of that power (and so they were, for this life which is in them, in the be∣ginning of Winter descends from the branches to the bo∣dy, and so to the roote:) but the same gracious Star, which by his retyring had caused this death, returning, drawes backe by a wonderful regres∣sion and reuolution of na∣ture, this vegetatiue vertue, from the earth to the roots, to the body, and to the bran∣ches; and makes it to be seen and smelt by the buds, blos∣somes,
leaues, and fruites. A dead man and one liuing is all one (sayd Heraclitus:) hee Plut. in consol. ad Apollon. that watcheth and the slee∣per, the young and the old; for that being past, it be∣comes this; and this being past, becomes that. Like vn∣to a potter, who of one lumpe of clay may make beasts, and then confound them into a masse, and then fashion them againe, which hee may conti∣nue incessantly: It is art that doth this, and art is but an imitation of nature. Thus na∣ture sports it self in the com∣mon nature of all Creatures; she makes them and vndoes them againe, and then makes them againe, and afterwards dissolues them: of water she makes snow, and of snow water, and so incessantly: of
grasse shee makes pasture for sheepe, the sheepe make dung, the which is cast vpon the ground, & grasse growes againe; and so by circumuolu∣tion in all other Creatures. Wherefore comfort your selues, you that are discom∣forted in death; for what you haue and what you loue, shall be giuen you againe. And the Prouerbe of the liuing is not admitted in death; That the tearme is worth the mony: that the re∣uolution of so many thou∣sands of yeares to returne vnto the point, which they hold at this present, will put you out of patience, and so vexe you, as it will farre ex∣ceede the little content of so short a life: This is not in death, where there is a full
cessation of all distempera∣tures, and of obseruation of times, and expectance; wher∣as ten millions of yeares can∣not last so long, as one night of twelue houres, which you shall passe in a deepe sleepe; and yet notwithstanding the length, in the morning you will thinke it to haue beene very short: and in like man∣ner the 5000. yeares from the Creation, which haue past when you were not, were they of any continuance to you? your reason then should assure you of the like for that which is to come. Obiection. All that passeth (according to the hazard of fortune) by a 100 thousand changes, cannot
be restored to the former e∣state. A dead body according to the chance of fortune, passeth by a hundred thousand changes. OF bodies some shall be deuoured by birds, or beasts of the field; o∣thers reduced to powder; & some eaten with wormes, ser∣pents, and toads: These ser∣pents and toads after some dayes are extinct, & of them a new thing is made, and so in infinitum: By what reason then can that be restored to the same estate, which hath all these changes? Moreouer, it is to fall into contradicti∣on to mainetaine this do∣ctrine: The beasts which haue beene and shall bee, are infinite in number, according
to their infinite forms, which haue giuen them being. But the common substance, the receptacle of formes, is fi∣nite and limited; by what a∣rithmeticke then can she fur∣nish the bodyes of those infi∣nit creatures, which haue bin in the world, during so long a time? For it may be that a small portion of this com∣mon matter, hath serued to more then a thousand crea∣tures: in the restauration, to which of these shall it be sub∣iected? If but to one, then what shall become of the rest? You haue propounded an example of the clay, I ac∣cept it, and let you thereby see the impossibility of your assertion: take a piece of the bignesse of your fist, and fa∣shion a man: vndoe it, and
make an horse, then make an Ape; then dissolue it to his masse, and frame an Eagle: behold foure creatures fashi∣oned of one ball of clay. Now come and make your restitu∣tion, and striue (without ad∣ding any thing to this clay) to make this man, horse, ape, and Eagle, all as great at one instant; and you will finde your selfe confounded, there being substance but for one of the foure. Euen so it is of this common substance, by the consent and testimony, both of Christian and Hea∣then Philosophers. Answer. This doctrine is drawne from the Stoicks, who attribute vnto the world, a certaine period in his conti∣nuance, after the which there is a renewing and restoring
of the same plants, creatures and men that haue beene at infinite times in the Eterni∣ty of the world, which after a long age resumes by deluge, or an vniuersall deflagration, her first face: all this continu∣ance from one tearme vnto another, is called the great yeare, which Macrobius ex∣tends to fifteene thousand yeares, Firmic us to 30. thou∣sand, and others to more. Be∣hold what Seneca saith to Po∣lybius Consul. ad Polib. init. of another sect; Some (that is to say, the Stoicks) threaten the world with an end: this Vniuerse which con∣taines all things both hu∣maine and diuine, shall bee dissolued in one day, if it bee lawfull to beleeue it: One  Nat. quest. . 9. day shall plunge this Vni∣uerse into his Chaos, and first
darkenesse. And Berosus who hath interpreted Belus, saith, that this must be done by the course of the starres, yea hee maintaines it so confidently, as he assignes the time of the conflagration, and of the In∣undation; for hee holds the earthly things shall burne, when all the starres that now hold diuers courses in the fir∣ment, shall bee gathered to∣gether in the signe of Cancer, being set in such a station, as a straight line may passe through them and their hea∣uen. And the Inunda∣tion shall then be, when the like assembly of the starres shall be in Capricorne; there is the Solstice, here the win∣ter; that is the signe of bur∣ning summer, this of moyst winter. If you enquire how
this can bee done, the same Author will answer you, that it may be done without any great force; for that, saith he, nothing is difficult to nature, when as she runs to her end: she is sparing of her force, in the first framing of things, but their increase beeing come, she disperseth her selfe to a suddaine ruine, and des∣cēds to it with violēce. What a long time is required, after the seed is receiued, to bring the Infant to light? with what trouble is he nourished and bred vp? But how easily is he dissolued? Cities which haue had a whole age to builde them, are ruined in an houre: a forrest which hath beene so long in growing, is consu∣med to ashes in a moment. Numenius saith, that the Sto∣ickes
hold, That all things after a long time vanish and perish, being dissolued in a celestiall fire. Tully hath also spoken of it: After the inflammation 2. de nat. Deor. there shall remaine nothing but fire, by the which, and of the which there shall be the renewing of the world, and the same ornaments shall ap∣peare. And Numenius in Euse∣bius addes, That after the fire the world should be setled & made perfect againe, as it was before, yea the same men; and therefore Seneca sayth, That Epist. 36. death which wee so much feare and fly from, doth not rauish away, but only suspend the vse of life; a day wil come which will restore vs to light. Moreouer, such periodicall
conuersions happen from all eternity, eternally, and with∣out ceasing, as Numenius say∣eth. And to conclude, let vs know that this opinion hath not beene held so absurd a∣mong Christians, but that Octauius hath vsed it against the Pagans, to refute the ob∣iection which they made, That the Christians did pre∣scribe an end to the starres, and to heauen: It is a con∣stant opinion of the Stoickes, sayth he, that after all humor is consumed, this world shall burne: and Nature by whom this reuolution is made, seemes to giue vs some no∣tice, in that the fields being burnt by the labourer, or drowned by water as in Egypt, as in pooles dried vp, and when the sea is retired; in that
I say, this earth remaining, is found renewed, fat and pro∣ducing many Creatures, yea great and perfect, as they write namely of Nile after it is retired. Now vnder the wings of these great personages I come to maintaine this com∣bate, and refell the reasons of the Obiector: Wee haue in our Argument toucht two points simbolizing together, although the one be Christi∣an, and the other Heathen; the first is the Resurrection of the flesh, which we extend to man only, not of other Crea∣tures: And let vs say, that he who of nothing could make all, may easily ouerthrow the imagined difficulty, and raise vp and restore to the same estate the bodies of dead
men: for he that can do more, can do lesse without all con∣trouersie; and hee that could of nothing make that which was not, may repaire that which was vndone. But how shall this Resur∣rection bee made, and what assurance shall wee haue? Be∣hold how: In the presence of all the world, of Angells, of men, and of diuells, (with vnspeakable ioy to the good, and incomprehensible hor∣ror to the wicked) the Lord shall come with a cry of ex∣hortation, and the voice of . Cor. 15. 1. Thes. 4. the Archangell, and the Trumpet of God; these are the very words of the text. By the sound of this trumpet all the dead shall awake and rise out of their graues; and they that shall liue and re∣maine
at this comming, shal∣be suddenly changed, and of mortall shalbe made immor∣tall, by his force and efficacy, Phil. 3. 2 who can make all things sub∣iect vnto him, as the Apostle sayth. The bodies of the chil∣dren of God shall rise againe; like the glorious bodie of Iesus Christ, impassible, spiri∣tuall, and yet fleshly, shining like stars, subtil, light, transpa∣rent; and full of all happines: behold the letters of heauen: Idem. We attend the Sauiour, who will transforme our vile bo∣dies, and make them confor∣mable to his glorious body. We know, sayeth Saint Iohn, that after hee hath ap∣peared, wee shall bee like Ioh. 1. . vnto him: God will wipe Apo. 21. 4. away all teares from our eyes, sayth hee; death shall
bee no more, there shalbee no mourning, cries, nor la∣bour: The body sowne in corruption, shall rise spiritu∣all, 1. Cor. 15. 45. sayth S. Paul, for that no sollide thing can hinder it, it may without helpe or wings, flye into remote pla∣ces; as Iesus Christ after his resurrection, did manifest it more then sufficiently in Ag . Adimant. c. 12. his body: finally, hee shall bee spirituall, for that hee shal∣be readily and willingly obe∣dient to his glorified spirit. In this flesh and not in a∣ny other shall I see my Saui∣our, sayth Iob, c. 1. 9. For this mortal body must put on im∣mortality, sayth the Apostle. Thirdly, they which haue bin 1. Cor. 15. 13. vnderstood (sayth Daniel 12.) shall shine like the heauens, and they that bring many to
Iustice, shall glister like the starres for euer. Also the glory of the Sunne is one, the glory of the Moon 1. Cor. 25. 41. another, and the glory of the starres is also different; euen so shall bee the resurrection of the dead; whereby it fol∣lowes that the bodyes raised again shal haue no grosse sub∣stance, but shall be transpa∣rent like vnto glasse. Fourthly, beeing raised a∣gaine, we shall bee taken vp 1. Thes. 4. 17. into the clouds before the Lord, and beeing ascended into heauen, wee shall haue vnspeakeable ioy, such as the eye hath not seene, the eare not heard, nor hath entred into the heart of man. These are wonderfull things, but what assurance? the Spirit of God doth assure thee, if
thou beest of God; for God doth seale vp an earnest pen∣ny 2 Cor. 1. 22 of his holy Spirit in their hearts that are his, as the Apostle teacheth. Secondly, If the soule be immortall, the body must one day rise immortall, to the end, that this soule be∣ing created for the body, may giue it life againe being re∣united. Moreouer (as Saint Ambrose teacheth) it is the order and cause of Iustice; De fid. resur rect, c. 19 seeing that the work of man is common to the body and soule, and what the soule doth fore-thinke, the body effects; and therefore it is rea∣sonable that both should ap∣peare in iudgement, to re∣ceiue either punishment or glory. Thirdly, Iesus Christ is ri∣sen
for vs, and to assure vs that by the same diuine po∣wer that hath drawne him out of the graue, we also shal be raised. I proue the ante∣cedent by aboue 500. witnes∣ses, 1 Cor. 15. 6 which at one time haue seene Iesus Christ, liuing af∣ter that he had beene crucifi∣ed by the Iewes, as the Apo∣stle sheweth: and Ioseph also who was a Iew, doth witnesse it, lib. 18. c. 2. & 4. of his An∣tiquities. He was seene pre∣cisely by women, beleeued by the incredulous: and for a ful assurance thereof, hee would (contrary to the nature of his body, which aspired nothing but heauen) conuerse forty dayes vpon earth: Heere is reason sufficient in this mat∣ter of faith, whereas reason should yeeld her selfe priso∣ner;
and yet to make it ap∣peare visibly, and to free all doubt, God would both in the ancient and new alliance raise vp some that were seene and admired of the people. So Lazarus being called out of his graue, was beheld of all men, and the malicious Pharisies tooke counsell to put him to death as well as Iesus Christ. The same God would ma∣nifest a plot of the future Re∣surrection to his Prophet E∣zechiel, when as he had trans∣ported him into a field full of Ezech. 37. drye bones; which when hee had seene, and prophesied o∣uer em, behold a motion, the bones draw neere one vn∣to another, and suddainely behold they had sinewes vp∣pon them, and flesh came, and
then the skinne couered it; and in the end after a se∣cond duntiation of the word of God, the spirit came, and then appeared a great army of men. As for this point which concernes an article of our faith, the Resurrection of the flesh, the Obiector dares not deny, but there is matter suf∣ficient in this world to fur∣nish for the restoring of all the dead bodies; not since an imaginary Eternity, (for we are now vpon tearmes of di∣uinity, whereof wee must be∣leeue the principles, and not question them,) but from the first man vnto the last that shall be: Herein there is no∣thing that inuolues contra∣diction. The other point was, that
suppose the eternity of the world, after the reuolution of all things, and the encoun∣ter of the same order in all points that is at this present, there shall bee the same Su∣perficies, the same creatures, and the same men that are at this present: this also hath no implicity, seeing we affirm not, that all things, the same creatures, which haue bin & shalbe for euer, shalbe restor'd together at one instant, but by degrees, and euery one in his turne. Behold how this first matter perisheth not, and is not reduced to no∣thing, but flowes dayly vn∣der new formes. This matter is bounded, the starres and the heauen which roule a∣bout it, make it to bring forth creatures continually,
and man sometimes; but by some rare constellation, as the Naturallists speake. The heauens, I say, are bounded, and their motions limited: Wherefore I maintaine, it is not impossible, that in an e∣ternity of time, that which is limited and bounded, and hath once met and is ioyned, may yet againe meete and be reioyned: if we consider that it is not by chance, but by fatall necessity: that this Vniuerse roules without cea∣sing; as al they among the Pa∣gans which haue had any vn∣derstanding haue acknow∣ledged: Yea one of them said, that who so would de∣mande proofes thereof; must be answered with a whip: but behold a most certaine proof; all creatures, euen those that
haue no vnderstanding, tend alwayes to their ends pro∣pounded, and all encoun∣ter in one vniuersall end: If there were not a certaine prouidence in the world, which prescribes to euery creature that end which it knoweth not, and makes it containe it selfe; the world should not be a world, that is to say, a most excellent and well ordained composition, but the greatest confusion that could be imagined. See∣ing then that the heauens in their motions, the starres in their coniunctions, the cau∣ses in their order, euen vnto the last, may encounter toge∣ther: so those things which wholly ded of them, may bee red  the same e∣state.  is a max∣ime
in Physicks, that the mat∣ter and the Agent haue such power after the death, and destruction of the creature, as they had during his life: what then can hinder it but by the position of the same causes, and the same circum∣stances of time concurring, the same effect may be repai∣red? Moreouer, the thing which is no more, is no farther from being then that which hath not bene; and there is no im∣possibility but that which hath had no being, may come to light; neither is ther any repugnancy but that which hath bene once liuing, may come againe to life; yea, and who knowes whether that which is now, hath not beene often heretofore? I
should beleeue it, if I did giue credit to the eternity of the world. As for the similitude of clay, which the Obiect or (not vnderstanding me) doth presse so strongly, it is very fit in this matter: for the worke∣man which hath made a man, and then hath wrought it to make a horse, and then confounded it to make an ape, and in the end an Eagle; may if hee please, returne and make the same man which he had made first; and hauing vndone it, may make a horse, and so consequently one af∣ter an other in infinitum, not that hee can make them all foure subsisting at one time, therein the Obiector fights with his shadow, and not with my saying. And to demonstrate the
power of Nature turning a∣bout her circle, & returning backe to the point where she had begun, and passing ouer all the circumference of the circle, to repaire that in place and time which she had dis∣solued; shee would leaue for an earnest penny, the Phenix, the only bird of his kinde, which is seene in Arabia; and which the Egyptians in their Hierogliphicall letters pain∣ted, to describe by his long continuance, the immorta∣lity of the soule. This goodly birde after many ages past, to renew himselfe, casts him∣selfe vpon a pile of stickes layd together, the which hee doth so beate with his wings, and with the helpe of the Sun, which hangs perpedicu∣larly ouer him, as it takes fire,
and consumes the body: out of which springs a little worme, and of that a little birde; which being couered with feathers, in the end flies away, and becomes the same Phenix. You will question the truth hereof, if the same Na∣ture did not as much or more in the silke-worme, whose egge is no bigger then a graine of millet; it discouers a little woolly worme, the which without dying trans∣formes it selfe into a moth, & that changeth into a flie which hath scales, and this becomes a butterflie, which beating it selfe continually layes egges; of these egges come little wormes, and so consequently by an infinite circulation. Wherefore these diuerse
changes and formes happe∣ning in our bodies, should not amaze vs, but rather as∣sure vs, that hauing bin car∣ried farre about, they shall returne to their first estate, seeing that their walkes and this Vniuerse haue their li∣mits and bounds, and seeing (by the testimony of the wise Ecc. 3. 15. man) that which hath beene is now, and that which is to come hath also beene: God calling backe that which hath past, that is to say as the Diuines expound it, that God by his administration, makes the Creatures succee∣ding one an other, returne in their order, as if they went a∣bout a wheele; which kind of speech is taken from the ce∣lestiall Spheares which go∣uerne the seasons, signifying
that those things which hap∣pen by time, are wheeled a∣bout with the reuolution of time, which containes them. These are the words of no vulgar Diuines, whereby wee may see how much they yeeld to this o∣pinion. The end of the first Booke.
The Second Booke. The first Argument ta∣ken from the Immorta∣litie of the soule. That which is free from Death in the principall part, should not feare it. Man in his soule (his prin∣cipall part) is freed frem death, Therefore hee should not feare it. IF all men could vnderstād with∣out doubting, & perswade them∣selues without wauering, that their soules at
the departure from their bo∣dies are happilie immortall, there is not any one, without contradiction, but would goe, cheerefully and resolutely vn∣to death, considering the mi∣series of this life, and the hea∣uie burthen of the bodie; for it is the sepulcher of the soule, as Plato saied. The soule is a plant transported from heauen into a strange soyle, into a body of earth, where it sighs, pines away, and desires to depart. The greatest thing in the world (sayth Periander) is contayned in a litle space: Socrates maintained, that the true man was that within, which is lodged in the body as in an Inne. S. Bernard ex∣horts the bodie, to know it, & to intreate his guest which
is the soule) well: The which Ser. 6. ae. Aduent. Anaxarchus did apprehend, who being beaten in a mor∣tar, did crie out couragiously to the tyrant Nicocreon, Beat beate, O hangman, the flesh and boanes of Anaxarachus▪ So M. Laeuius seeing Galba a great Orator with a defor∣med Erasm. Apoth. bodie, sayd, That great spirit dwels in a poore cot∣tage. But S. Paul shewes it better then all these; If this earthly lodging be destroied, if this bodie returne to ashes, 2. Cor. 5. we haue a mansion with God. And the body is the clothing of the soule, the which Esop obiected to one who abused the beautie of his body: He are my friend, sayd he, thou hast Max. ser. 44. a faire garment: but thou put∣test it off ill. Man is a caualier his body is the horse, the spi∣rit
is the rider: if the horse be lame, blind orresty, sayth one, the rider is not in fault. The bodie is a ship, the spirit the Pilot, the ship suffers wracke, but the Pilote saues himselfe by swimming, or vpon some boarde, the body dies, the soule saues it selfe vpon the table of faith and repentance. The bodie is a Lanterne, the soule the Candle; if the glasse be cleare and transparent, the light is the greater: so by the disposition of the body, the soule is knowne more or lesse. Man is a bird shut vp in the shell of the egge, expecting vntill the shell breake of it selfe that he may come forth; so doth, the soule that the body my be broken, to the ende shee may flie to heauen. There are three places
assigned to man, the first is the matrix, the second is this world, & the third is heauen; the first is short, the second a litle longer, and the third is without ende: In the first he cries at the comming forth, for that he is ignorant of the goodly spectacle of the world which God (as a table coue∣red with all sorts of meate in a great Hall) hath prepared for him: In the second, hee apprehends and desperatly feares his departure, for that he knowes not this third hea∣uen, the seate of Iesus Christ, of the Angells, and of the blessed, which is prepared for him, infinitely more excellent then this base earth; where he shall remaine euerlasting∣ly, and perfectly happy. And these are the liuely simili∣tudes
with many other like∣wise, which are continual∣ly in the mouthes and wri∣tings of such as treate pro∣foundly thereof; whereby man may see that he hath no subiect to feare death, seeing that by it his soule, his prin∣cipall part, and by which hee is man, receiues so great a be∣nifit: And what shall it bee when the holy Ghost shall assure his Spirit, that his bo∣dy being layd in the ground, as in a sacred pawne, shalbe restored to him immortall, in the great and last day? But attending this incom∣parable good, let vs proue this immortality byreason; & first of all: The soule reuiues, and fortifies it selfe in the greatest agonies of death. So Testators witnesse, that
they are sound in minde, though very sicke in body: so the disposition of a man at the point of death is of more weight, for that hee hath a better conscience, & a more liuely feeling of his soule. And Hippocrates giues aduice Lib. 1. de prognost. to obserue, if in diseases there appeare nothing that is Di∣uine: meaning that we should obserue the sighes, and the gestures of the sicke patient; for if they be vnaccustomed of heauen, or of God, it is a signe that the soule begins to discouer it selfe, seeing it thinkes of heauen her proper mansion. So Cyrus (being in the bed of death) caused his children to approach vnto him; to whom hee gaue Xenoph. lib. 8. goodly admonitions; but a∣mong others hee told them,
that hee could neuer bee per∣swaded, that the soule lying in the body did remaine after the death of the mortall bo∣dy, as if he would say, that vntill then he had studied to assure himself, but now he did not doubt of it. Nay, we shall sometimes see ignorant Countrimen, discourse ex∣ceeding well at the point of death; as wee reade of a cer∣taine labourer altogether vn∣learned, being neee vnto his death, had recommended his health, his wife and children, with as great Rethorike as Cicero could haue vsed dis∣coursing before the Senate. This reason was taken as a strong defence against death, by the King of Arrgon, and anorm. l 4. de Al∣phons. represented by Seneca to all that are fearefull in death,
saying, This day which thou fearest so much, as the last, is the birth day of eternity. The 2. is taken from reli∣gion, and from the homage which man doth owe vnto God for the immortality of his soule; not in one Coun∣try but in all; not in one age, but for euer; not in one per∣son, but generally in all by some adoration, prayer, of sacrifice, in what fashi∣on soeuer, man will sooner forget his King, his father, yea himselfe, then his God; yet hee makes no doubt but there is a King, he sees him, he knowes him, he honours him: and that he hath a father, of whom hee holds his life, and with whom he doth conuerse dayly, and whom he is bound to loue; finally, he tries him∣selfe,
growes conceited, and many times abuseth himselfe with the great loue of him∣selfe; and yet hee holds him∣selfe more bound to God, then to all these: hee will not feare to displease them, if he can no otherwise please God; and will hold for Maximes, That it is beter to obey God then men: that he which doth not renounce father or mo∣ther for the loue of God, is not worthy of him: hee that doth not renounce himselfe, and take vp the Crosse of af∣fliction for the seruice of God, deserues to bee renoun∣ced of him. The vnciuill wars which haue swallowed vp so many men in Christendome, within these 50. yeares, had no other pretexts then these sentences; and they had no o∣ther
foundation then the conscience of the soule, that immortall seale, which God did graue in the soule when he did infuse it into the bo∣dy of mā, as Chrysostome saith. Let vs obserue it in some ex∣amples, but great in euery re∣spect. Alexander the Great, being incensed for that the Iewes had denied him suc∣cors, marcht with his Army to ruine them, if the high Priest Iaddus with his orna∣ments, and his holy troupe, had not gone out to meete with Alexander: Who when he saw the high Priest, he ad∣mired him, and fell downe at his feete; whereat his people were amazed, and troubled, and his most confident Par∣menio came vnto him: How comes it, sayth he, since that
you worship a man, you whom althe earth is ready to acknowledge for a God? It is not hee (answered Alexander) but God in him, whom I worship, who appeared to me in vision in the like habit in Macedon. Whence came this suddaine forgetfulnesse of his owne reuenge, & from whence this acknowledge∣ment to the Immortall? but from an immortall soule. As Antiochus held Ierusalem be∣sieged, the feast of Taberna∣cles drew neere, & the Iewes being resolued to celebrate it, they sent an Embassage vnto him, to demaunde a truce for seuen dayes, that they might attend the holy worship of their great God. The soule of this great King being toucht with religion,
not only yeelded to their de∣mand, but also hee himselfe turned to this homage, cau∣sed oxen with gilded hornes to bee conducted to the Cit∣tie gates, with great store of Indense, and sweet smells to be sacrificed. In which a∣ction whether should we ad∣mire most, either the pati∣ence of this great King, wil∣lingly and deuoutly hinde∣ring his ready victory? Or the forgetfulnesse of himselfe, suffering those sacrifices that he knew to be vndertaken a∣gainst his honor, his fortime, and his life? And what doth not this confused apprehension of God worke in the immortall spirit of man? Cybels Priests wil geld themselues, thinking to please their goddesse; the
Athenian Priests will drinke Hemlocke to liue chastly; the Virgins will lye vppon certaine leaues fit to morti∣fie their lusts; and Cicero will crie out to countenance thē, that they must come chastly to the gods: Yea, Agamm∣non will sacrifice his daugh∣ter Iphigenia to pacific Diana: Adrian in Egypt will sacrifice his Mignion Axtinons: Vialeri∣an will vse the superstitious custome to offer vp children; the Hetrusci had that institu∣tion in their Countrey; & the ancient Gaules in Prouence, in Gaguin. lib. 19. hist. of France. the City of Arles, had two pillars erected, and thereup∣on an altar of stone, to offer humaine sacrifices. The third is taken from the wise ordinance of nature, which in many millions of
things hath made nothing in vaine; nothing that wa∣uers or leanes sometimes of this side, sometimes on that, as Erasistratus said: how then should it be in man, her ma∣ster-peece, in the soule the principall part? Hath she planted a vehement desire of immortality, the chiefe point of her excellency? hath shee giuen her a taste in this miserable life, to leaue her altered for euer? The fourth is from the continual action of the soule which neuer takes rest day nor night, like vnto the Sun: sleepe doth not shut her eies as it doth the bodyes, neither by consequence, death. Con∣sider it, when as the body is in a found sleep without mo∣tion, not in the beginning of
his rest, when as the vapours of his disgestion fuming vp into the braine, trouble it; but after mid-night, and es∣pecially at the point of day: Then when the soule her faculties holds free, From seruing bodily variety; Then when alone, and dead, to life (in fort) Sau'd from dayes waues, she enters nights calme port. It is then, that being rai∣sed aboue time, she reades in future (which is present: to her) the things which God is ready to doe. So Astiges last King of the Medes, in his dreame saw the stocke of a Vie comming out of his daughters belly, which coue∣red all Asia with her bran∣ches. The Interpreters being
consulted with, they answe∣red, that his daughter should haue a sonne, which should enioy all Asia, and dispossesse him of his Kingdome: the e∣uent fayled not, notwithstan∣ding all the opposition that Astiages could make. Tertul∣lian Tertul. lib. de anima.  de somno. reports, that the daugh∣ter of Polycrates dreamed, that her father raised vp on high, was washt by Iupiter, and annoynted by the Sun: The euent expounded her dreame soone after, for that Polycrates being hanged, the raine washt him, and the Sun ming his grase annoyn∣ted him. But who is ignorant of Io∣sephs dreame of his future greatnesse? of Pharaohs: tou∣ching the fertility and famin which should follow in Egypt?
of Daniel touching the foure Monarchies of the world: of ilats wise vpon the false ac∣cusation of Iesus Christ the iust, & of infinite others; yea, and of our selues, if we haue obserued them: For what is he, saith Tertullian, so voyd Idem. of humanity, that hath not sometimes felt in himselfe some faithfull vision? Thus the Eternal doth vn∣to the good, to assure them of the immortall action of their soules; and to the wic∣ked, to terrifie them with his eternal iudgement, send such dreames of future things, to amaze or assure according to his good pleasure. So hee spake by his Prophet, Your sonnes and your daughters Iel. : shall prophesie, your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dreame dreames. Let vs conclude with Tertullian, That seeing Tert. de re∣sur. carnis. sleepe the image of death cannot seaze vpon the soule, that the soule being alwaies liuely and actiue, can not fall in Veritatem mortis, into the verity of death. The fifth. Man in this life is more miserable then any of the creatures, and more ca∣pable of felicity, then any of them, they being all made for him, who neuer heere vpon earth attaines vnto his soue∣raigne good, which hee most desireth, as Aristotle and Theo∣phrastus haue acknowledged, and as euery man is a good witnesse in himselfe. Who will not then thinke but his true place is in heauen, and in it his soueraigne good? And
what part of man can flie thither but his immortall soule, which in a momēt, not parting out of the body, transports it selfe thither in Idea? Tully in his Tusuculans, and others. The sixth complaint of Theophrastus (of nature as of a step-mother) seemes most iust, to haue giuen a lōg life to no end, to certain creatures; and to haue denied it vnto man, who might therby haue attained vnto wisedome, the greatest good in this world, if the soule dyed with the bo∣dy; for then onely we beginne to be wise when wee dye, and many times were preuented by death: But nature hath done nothing but most wise∣ly; and therefore shee hath satisfied this complaint ano∣ther
way. The seuenth is drawne from mans conscience, which being good makes Innocen∣cy to lift vp her head by the feeling of another life; and to looke down for an offence by the apprehension of a fu∣ture iudgement. There is no light so cleere, nor testimony so glorious, as when truth shines in the spi∣rit, and the spirit is seene in truth, saith Saint Bernard. In Cant. serm. 85. A good conscience is stron∣ger then a brazen wall, said Horace. Let him speake bold∣ly and confidently for him∣selfe, that hath not offended, saith Plautus; and with the shaking of his chinne, retort Hic murus aheneus esto nihil con∣scire sibi, nulla palles cere culpa. the false reports of a bad fame as Ouid speakes. This did emboldē innocent Susan∣na
against the two old men; chusing rather to dye then to offend God: This made Io∣seph rather to leaue his robe with his mistresse, then his heart. Finally, it is that which in the middest of many deaths, gaue resolution vnto Cato, Phocion, and many other hea∣then: as to Philip King of Ma∣cedon, who beeing animated by some to take reuenge of such as spake dishonorably of him; O no, said he, I will make them all lyars in doing well. On the other side, there is nothing that doth more ter∣rifie and torment then a bad conscience. Let the most re∣solute wretch that is, come, and I will make him confesse in some sort howsoeuer;
his crime committed in se∣cret, in the night, without witnesses, and without any accuser; yea although he had his pardon, or were acquite before men, or were so ad∣uanced as he were not iusti∣fiable before any man: yet he must needes confesse that hee is inwardly troubled, and fu∣riously tormented: the Swal∣lowes by their importune noyse will publish the parri∣cide attempted by a cauteri∣zed conscience, as hath hap∣ned in old time: Or imagi∣nary flies, wil buzze continu∣ally in the eares of the ser∣uant that hath killed his ma∣ster, vntill the fact be reuea∣led. Whence is the spring of this liuely feeling in the soul, but from the apprehension
of immortall paine? Gods wil being that for the loue of iustice, iudgement should ra∣ther go against the life of the body, then that which is hid∣den should not come to light. Obiection. Counsell giuen by fauour, vpon weake coniectures, doth ra∣ther shake then support a right. Such are these reasons. THE steppes of such as bring good tydings are pleasing and welcome; and they that bring bad, dis∣tastfull and reiected: So the 400. Prophets which promi∣sed victory vnto Achab a∣gainst . Ki. c. 22.
Ramoth of Gilead were welcome; but only Miches, who pronounced the contra∣ry was put in prison: and yet they were false, and this true. Let vs beware of the like, least that fauour and grace deceiue vs in this matter. Let vs take the ballance of equi∣ty, and weigh the reasons propounded; if they be good they wil weigh downe what∣soeuer shallbe opposed; and if they bee currant, they will endure the touch: let vs then try the first. Huart, a great Philosopher of Spaine, maintaines that the vnderstanding hath his be∣ginning, his increase, and his constitution, and then his de∣clining, like vnto a man; (hee meanes his body, for the vn∣derstanding is the most excel∣lent
part of man) and like o∣ther Creatures, and plants: And for this cause, hee that will learne at what age hi vnderstanding is most strong and vigorous, let him know that it is from 33. vnto fifty, at what time the gravest Au∣thors should be made, if du∣ring their liues they haue had contrary opinions: Hee that wil write bookes should compose them at this age, neither before, or after; if hee will not retract or alter them. Hitherto Huart, which ex∣perience doth confirme; for we see that as a man doth ad∣uance in age, he growes in wisedome; and Iesus himselfe made true man, aduanced in wisedome and stature. Con∣trariwise, age declining, the
spirit decaies in memory, in quicknesse, in vnderstanding; so as man being very old, hee becomes twice a child, fum∣bling with his tong, & doa∣ting in minde. As for that the Testators say, that they are sound in minde, it is to shew that neither age nor sicknesse hath as yet made them lose their spirits; and therefore it is a true signe of their decay, concluding con∣trary to the intention of the Author. And whereas the labourer spake so diuinely, it did not proceed from the neerenesse of death, but from the alte∣ration of the temperature of his braine, growne whot in the first degree by the force of his infirmity: so some wo∣men haue prophecied and
spoke Latine, yet neuer lear∣ned it, by the same reason of the temperature required, & yet they die not suddainly in this estate. To the 2. Religion pro∣ceedes partly from nature, partly from institution; from nature who to rule all Crea∣tures, Prims in orbe Deos fecit timor. & to make them follow the traine of his order, graues in them al a certaine terror & indistinct apprehension; The Creatures feare man, and by this feare are contained in their duties: man feares a hid∣den superiority, and main∣taines himselfe in society, & many times hee feares hee knowes not what, nor where∣fore; and therefore it happens that women who are com∣monly more fearefull, are more religious. Yea they re∣port
of certaine bruite beasts which adore the deity as Elephants; yet they do not say that their soules are im∣mortall. From institution, for as vessells do long retaine the sent of their first liquor wherewith they are seasoned, so children maintaine vnto the end the religion wherein they are bred and brought vp, although it were the most fantasticke and strange in the world: yea, if in stead of sa∣uing it should damme them; as we may see, if we will open our eyes, in these times so fertill in religions. To the 3. If the soule bee mortall, it followeth not that nature hath made any thing in vaine; if she hath hope or feare to be immortall, it is to encourage it to vertue, that
is to say, to the preseruation of that goodly order, and to terrifie it from the infraction thereof, if she dies, her alte∣ration of the immortality dries away. Nature hath al∣so giuen vnto the Bat a desire to see the light of the Sun, & yet this desire neuer takes effect. Finally, euery creature flies death, and desires life, not for a time but for euer; and by consequent, in their kind de∣sire to be immortall, and yet they attaine not to it. To the 4. The heart beats continually and is immortal; Dogs sleeping dreame, and are mortall; therefore the vnquiet and vncessant action of the soule, can bee no cer∣taine signe of her immortali∣tie. To the Fift. Iohn de Seres,
almost throughout the whole course of his history of France will answer, That man findes no miserie but what he seekes The philosophers yea Diuines will say, that felicitie propor∣tionable vnto humaine na∣ture, consists in an vpright disposition of his will, to car∣ry himselfe according to the reason that is in him, towards all things that shall present themselues, to make his pro∣fit of al things, not to trouble himselfe with any thing that can happen in this world, and to nourish the seeds of vertue which are sowen in his mind. To the Sixt, Solon will an∣swer, that it is a hard matter to please all men: some com∣plaine of the shortnes of life; if we obserue it, these are such as haue prodigally consumed
thēselus at cardes & dice, and haue not found it but toolate. Others complaine of the length, and cut it off before their time: But Seneca wiser then either, well say, that wee must not be carefull to liue Epist. 94. long, but enough; to liue long is a worke depending of desti∣nie, to liue enough is of the minde. The life is long if it be full, and it is full when the spirit affects her good, and tranfers her power to her selfe. O ex∣cellent speech, hee that hath eares let him heare. Let vs proceed; certen creatures liue longer then man, and which? Rauens, Stags, the Phenix. I doubt it much: as for the Phe∣nix, it is a fabulous thing; for Stags, we know not any thing but by a writing which was
found about a Stags necke, Caesar gaue me this: if it were the first Caesar, it is long since, but it might be some other, whilest that the Emperours reigned in France, and that is not long. As for the Rauen a most importune and vnfortu∣nate bird, who hath tryed it? But admit this were true, there were but two or three excepted out of the generall rule of nature; which is, that man her chiefe worke liues longer then any other crea∣ture; and it is her pleasure to except from the generall, as we see else where: ceasee then to blame that which you should commend and admire To the Seuenth and last, simbolizing much with the second, you must receiue the same answer. And moreouer
there is not found any gene∣rous instinct in the soule of man, which appeares not as great in brute beasts, for the preseruation and defence of their yong. As for the confession (pre∣tended so easie) of an offence committed, the diuerse kinds of tortures invented to wrest it out in iustice, belie it: but you will say they are inward∣ly tormented; how know you that, who can see nothing but the exterior part? Answere: The doctrine of the humaine soule depends of a superior knowledge, that is, of the Metaphisicke, whereof the rule is the Canon of the old and new Testament: man must not presume to thinke he can fully comprehend it; her perfect intelligence is re∣serued
for vs exclusinely for euer, when we shall behold it in heauen in the glasse of the Trinitie and diuine vnitie: here this is an Article of our faith, vnderstood in the resur∣rection of the flesh and life e∣ternall. When there is any question of faith, reason must be silent and yeeld; and there∣fore S. Bernard cōfesseth that In the de∣dic. of the Temple Homily. 5. when he thinks of the estate of the foule, he thinks to see two things in it in a manner cōtrarie: if he beholds it with his humaine discourse, as she is in her selfe, and of her selfe, he can say nothing more cer∣ten but that shee is reduced to nothing &c. Next, it was affirmed that man was verie credulous to uill, & incredulous to good: suspirion turnes alwaies cun
ningly to the worst part, said an Ancient; hee swallowes downe slanders and impo∣stures sweetly, and distrusts honest and vertuous things; such is his miserie. If he think that the immortalitie of the soule cannot be grownded sollidly vpon any humaine argument, let him also thinke that there cannot instance be giuen to the contrarie, which is not easily ouerthrowne, so as he bring a spirit that is tractable & not preiudicate. And aboue all, that hee doe not perswade him-selfe that he may see it or feele it, as the smoake or heate going out of the fire, so the soule going out of the bodie; for it is a spirit, and therefore not possible to be comprehended but by reason and vnderstan∣ding,
which are spirituall o∣perations, but let vs answere him to euery point. It seemes the Obiector takes an ill presage of the im∣mortallitie of the soule; for that she is fauourable: as if it were not the nature of man (if he be not brutish) to court those things which are wor∣thy & excellent, as the soule of man is aboue al the world. All men applaude men in great authoritie; we esteeme pretious things, as siluergold Pearle: what a sot or rather a madd man is he, that will haue a concoit that the thing is not excellent, because it is respected? As for the 400. Prophets, they spake vnto the King according to humaine sence, and were found false; Micheas according to the
word of God reuealed vnto him, and it was true. The Obiector reasons according to carnall sence, & he shal be taxed with falsehoode; Wee speake according to the spirit of God in his holy writ, & we shall be found true. He de∣sires in the end (or makes a shew to desire it) that wee should ballance our reasons. I am content, and I protest it will be to his confusion; for the Father of light will not suffer Satan the father of lies to triumph ouer the truth. For the first instance then we say, that Huart doth not meane the soule by the vnder standing, but the intellectual spirits, whereof she hath need to argue and to vnderstand the things of this world, and to write worthily; and these
intellectuall spirits holding of the vitall bodie, it is not strange if they be more vi∣gourous according to the e∣state of the body; and contra∣riewise if they perish, when the bodie perisheth: for al∣though they be of a celestial substance, exceeding wht, exceeding light, and most substantiall, that they may be more ready to serue the soule, yet are they mortall: but the soule in her substance recei∣ueth no increase nor diminu∣tion) since the moment of her creation, & infusion into the body; at all times, yea in all men she is equally perfect, as complete in the Ideot as in the learned, in the coward as the couragious: these are the diuers instruments of the bo∣die, whereof she makes vse,
which make her diuers in her effects; & these instrumēt  diuerse, for that they are di∣uersly mixt of the foure first humors. Moreouer this Spa∣nish Philosopher defines the immortalitie of the soule a∣gainst Gallen, which he calls a substantiall acte and forme of a humaine bodie. Cap. 7. of his Examen of spirits: Here the impostor: doth imperti∣nently confound mortall spi∣rits with the immorall spirit: and our reason grownded vp∣on this, that the soule (the bodie dying) thinkes of the delightfull places in heauen, and foretelles things to come with much certitude, accor∣ding to the opinion of Tully and our owne. To the Second. This gene∣rall submission of all menin,
all places, and at times vnder a powerfull Maiestie, shewes the natural bond which man hath to doe his homage by reason of the immortalitie of his soule; and that he doth rather worship, vaine, ridicu∣lous and abominable things, then none at all: doth not de∣face this bonde, but con∣firmes it more; yet shewing, that he wanders in the dark∣nes of this world, and in steed of taking the way of the East to goe vnto heauen, if he be not guided and directed from aboue, he takes the contrarie way, and wanders farre: The which we yeeld; but it is a ter∣ror (answers he) to keepe man in his dutie: it is true, & there∣fore; religion is not in vaine, for without it, for one disor∣der man would commit ten
thousand; it proceeds, say you from nature and institution. I answer, it is from nature only that she takes her beginning; education doth manure it & better it; but what doe you vnderstand by nature? For the Philosophers haue beene ac∣customed to signifie 4. di∣stinct things by the same name, which yet symbolize together; the lowest is the temperature of the 4. humors in the body of man: The 2. is the soule which giues motion vnto the body; The 3. is the ordinance and rule which God hath established in the world: The 4. is God himself, called by some in that regard nature naturant. If the Ob∣iector means that feare and religion proceed onely from the temperature of the 4. hu∣mors
in the body of man, hee is condemned of falsehood & contradiction by his owne saying, in that he attributes feare to other creatures, the which he knower differ from man, in the same temperature and in truth, it is in the soule that the reuerence of the De∣ie, that is, of God, is grauē, it comes from this vniuersall rul and whereas hee would inferre that in women great feare causeth great religion, he must vnderstand that reli∣gion in man hath conscience for her chiefe, foundation, which applyes the naturall apprehension of a superiority to an acknowledgment there of; and for accessories shee hath contemplation in the superior part, and feare in the lower. As for the principall
foundation, it is common to men and women; the two o∣thers are diuers: Contempla∣tion is greater in men, and feare in women. Contempla∣tion doth stirre vp the will to the seruice of God by two considerations; the one is of the diuine power & bounty, to haue had wil and power to giue life, when as wee dreamt not of it; to haue drawne vs out of endlesse dangers, and to haue continued the course of his graces, notwithstāding our ingratitude. The other consideration is, from the basenesse, and weakenesse of man, which makes him to feele his imperfections, and to repaire vnto the fountaine of all good: feare doth stirre vp to humilitie, to contriti∣on of heart, to confession of
mouth, and to satisfaction by works. The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedom, sayth the wise man. Man then being raysed a degree higher then woman in con∣templation, if he doth vse his knowledge rightly, submit∣ting himselfe wholy to God, hee shall be much more zea∣lous to his seruice, as it hap∣pened to S. Iohn the Disciple which Iesus Christ loued a∣boue the rest: but for that they are oftē puft vp they abuse it, for pride is a spiritual poyson which spoyles all, as it happe∣ned to Belzebub; & therefore most of our learned men are not so religious as women & ignorant people, who being gouerned by a moderat con∣templation, doe husband with all humilitie their mo∣derate
knowledge of God; & the affection in this feminine sexe is commonly more zea∣lous then in the other. Finally, by the reuerence which is stronger in him, this sexe feares to offend God, and to make the holy Ghost heauy, by whom he is sealed vntill the day of redempti∣on, as S. Paul speakes: it is not feare onely then that begets religion, for then Deere, Conies, and other fearefull Creatures should bee more religious. Moreouer, it is no generall rule that women are more religious, if it bee not at this time, which is as barren in deuout men, as it is fertill in many religions: for wee shall finde as many men recorded for Martyrs as women; and
in the Catalogue of the A∣postles, the first Architects of the Christian Churches, we shall not find the name of any womē: they are not suffe∣red to speake in the Church. And if the Elephant doth therein seeme to imitate man, they are but shewes and gesticulations, hauing no de∣uotion in the heart, which is the essence of religion: and what hee doth, is by the in∣stinct of his owne temper, which approcheth neere vn∣to that of man; And what doth Aelian & others report so memorable of him, but that hee turnes vp his sout towards the Sun and Moone, as if hee did worship them? & doth not the flower called Heliotropium more? it be∣ing weighty, turnes round a∣bout
lightly as the Sunne goeth. To the 3. The impostor sayth, that the soule is kind∣led with a desire of immor∣tality, to the end it may bee stirred vp to vortue: it is well spoken, for true vertue in this world, is the sole and true good of man, which makes him worthy of the heauenly beatitude, which layes hold of a vertuous soule; but this vertue without this immor∣tality is a poison to man, keeping him from running headlong to all carnall and vicious pleasures, so as they be delightfull; and as many Philosophers and men of God, as shall crie out against the riots of the flesh, they are so many tormenters: but the soule is immortal, and vertue
is or should be requested: and therefore one sayd long ago, That a man were better to cast himselfe headlong into the sea, then to be tyrannized by vice; And on the other side Plaustus wil say, that there is no price so excellent as ver∣tue, that it marcheth before al things; liberty, health, life, goods, kinsfolke, country, & children are defended and maintained by it: And Clau∣dian sings, Ex  mortalia despicit arce. that from a high Tower she laughes at mortal things, for that she is certaine of her immortality. Finally, she is rightly pain∣ted treading death vnder her Cur tibi mors pre∣mitur? ∣sciosola mori. feete, for she alone swims, & is assured to escape spoile & shipwracke, as the Philoso∣pher Stilpon did fitly teach King Demetrius, who enqui∣ring
of him if he had lost no∣thing in the warres, No, sayd he, for that vertue which I e∣steeme aboue all thing, is not subiect to pillage. But beasts, replies hee, flye death also. Answere. To speake properly beasts flie not from death, for they are wholly ignorant what it is: they will see the knife made sharpe to cut their throates and not be moued; but being endued with the sense of feeling as with the other senses, they will crie & struggle when they feele a pricking, or cutting, or any other paine. Some beasts of pleasure, some birds for delight, are cunningly taken by men, to bee nourished daintily; the which in their taking will torment themselues more,
then if they had the stroake of death. To the 4. he sayth, that the hart, (let vs adde to helpe him) milles, clockes, and such like, are in continuall action, which notwithstanding cease in the end of their motion: but let vs answere, that there is difference betwixt a natu∣rall action or one that is ar∣tificially forced, and that which flowes freely and vo∣luntarily without intermissi∣on or rest; such as is the acti∣on of the soule in her thoughts and desires, which wee maintaine to bee a true signe of her immortality: & as for that which wee did al∣ledge of her continuall Vi∣gilancy, whilest the body sleepeth, when as by assured dreames shee falls vpon the
time to come, hee cannot re∣ply any thing to this but that dogs dreame. I deny it: Their barking and the o∣ther actions they do sleeping, as well as waking, proceede from a certain temperature, into which they fall; as in our selues in the brutall part, by the gathering together of certaine grosse humors a∣bout the heart, being prest, we are forced to cry out. The obiection to the 5. is his confirmation; for if man abused by his imagination, seeking the good encounters that which is bad, he is twise miserable in his dessignes & in his euents. True it is, man is subiect to so many mise∣ries in this life, as at euery step hee meetes with a thou∣sand; if hee thinkes to haue
found any pleasure, it is sud∣dainly drowned with a floud of teares: this did the Comedi∣an Plautus vnderstand, saying, that mans age is so compo∣sed, In Amphi. as it hath pleased the gods, that pleasure should haue care for companion; yea, if any good happeneth, presently some discommodi∣ty followes in greater abun∣dance: And Ouid sayd, it was a vertue to abstaine from a smiling pleasure: Horace, he bids chase away pleasure, it cost too deere. And this made Lucretius though an Epicure, to blame men who were too greedy of this life, in these words: What is there here, (O man) of such delight, Whose want so ruthlesse seemes in her despight?
Thou fear'st (O foole,) and shak'st at thought of death, That through al tempest brings where blowes no breath. Our aduersary goes on, and presumes that man may liue happily in this world if he will. Answere: Without doubt he would, for no man takes counsell, if he shalbe happy, he neuer troubles himselfe to choose felicity, but for the meanes to attaine vnto it, as Aristotle sayth: hee neuer de∣sires Lib, 3. E∣thic. c. 2. & 3. any hurt but vnder a shew of good, for that good∣nesse is the proper obiect of the will, the diuell chooseth our euill for his owne good, holding it a great benefit vn to him if many perish Man then by this desires to bee happy if he may, (by the dis∣course
of the aduersary) how is it possible that no man in the world, neither hath nor shall bee truely happy by his owne faculties? The true fe∣licity of man is to be perfect∣ly complete, by the aggrega∣tion of all sorts of happines; but there was neuer any such seene, neither shall there bee in that estate; he shall alwaies want more good things then he doth enioy, as the earth doth not beare all sorts of fruits, nor man enioy all man∣ner of good; if he abound in some gifts of the minde, he is defectiue it others: gifts are diuers, as the Apostle tea∣cheth, 1. Cor. 12. yea contra∣ry one vnto another, as a great iudgement to a great memory, and both these to a great imagination. Moreo∣uer,
if hee haue a viuacity of spirit, hee hath a debility of body; if he be fortunate to the good of this world, he is barren of heauenly graces so it hath pleased God to enter∣taine humane society, not to make man happy in al points Nemo est ab omni pa? beatus. as Horace hath said. Now if to this defect of good things, we make an ad∣dition of an infinite number of badde which crosse him, what shall become of this poore man? But hee will re∣ply with the Stoicks, that ver∣tue may so frame and dispose the soule of man, as hee will not be troubled at any thing that shall happen vnto him, but will apply all to his owne good. Answer. This is not so ea∣sie to bee spoken, but it is as
hard to be performed. If ver∣tue were not difficult to learne, to what end doth S. Augustine speake of so many Schoolemasters, so much se∣uerity, rods, whips, and so much discipline? and why doth the holy Scripture say, that we must often whip the well-beloued child, lest hee should become stubborne? and then it will be hard, yea, impossible to tame him. And farther, what signifie those notable punishments inuented by our Elders, the Scaffolds, gibbets, strapados, wheeles, fires, and others, but that such seuerity is ne∣cessary, to suppresse the sury of man to vice? Finally, there is nothing so difficult as vertue, saith Ari∣stotle. 2, Ethi. e. 3 But that which is worst
of all, when we thinke after a thousand crosses to haue at∣tained to this throne of ver∣tue, what a combate doe wee feele in our selues, seeking to put it in execution? now wee will, and instantly wee will not the same thing. What a monster is this, saith S. Au∣gustine, and whence comes it? Consess. l. 8. c. 9 If the spirit commands the body, it presently obeyes: but if he commands himself, hee findes nothing but resi∣stance: and in the chapter following, I had disposed my selfe, saith hee, after a good resolution to serue my God and Lord; it was I that wold, and I that would not: I nei∣ther had an absolute will, nor a full power to resist; where∣fore I had a battaile within me, and was diuided within
my selfe, and this diuision happened in despite of me. Hitherto S. Augustine: that good man so fashioned to vertue, confesseth to be in a continuall warre, and where there is war there is no peace nor rest. Moreouer wee must not wonder at these rodomonta∣does of the Stoicks; they haue spoken others more strange, but more vnsauory. A wise man, saith Seneca, is alwayes ioyfull, actiue, quiet, and assu∣red Epist. 59. as a rocke; and liuing e∣quall to the gods. Cicero playing the Stoicke, A happy life, sayth he, subsisteth by the 2. De natur. deor. vertues, like vnto that of the gods, and yeelding in no∣thing vnto them but in the immortality, which is of no moment to liue will. But be∣hold
the fulnesse of folly: There is something, saith Se∣neca, Epist. 53. wherein a wise man sur∣passeth God; he is wise by the benefit of nature, not by his owne: a strange case, to haue the imbecility of man, com∣pared with the assurance of God. So Crysippus both im∣pudently and flatteringly, compared Dion of Syracusa to Iupiter his soueraigne God, and maintained that he was not inferiour vnto him, nei∣ther in knowledge nor in ver∣tue. These are goodly fanta∣sies, or rather frenzies, I will aduise such people not to take Elleborum, nor to purge, or neuer to awake out of their doting dreames: for being in health or awake, they shall finde themselues naked and
miserable; like vnto the mad page, who thought himselfe to be the greatest Emperour in the world, & that all Kings were his vassalls, and did him hommage: but beeing cured, he found himselfe to be only but a poore Page, and bound the next day to serue him whom hee would not haue accepted (beeing sicke) for his lacquay. In the sixth obiection hee auerres, that Solon hath de∣termined how hard it was to please all. I answer. That Solons mea∣ning was to speake of man to man, whereas the defectiue worke is often censured by a weake braine: but of God it is otherwise, his worke is so excellent, as there is not any thing but is admirably com∣mendable,
and not to be cen∣sured in any point, but by fooles; And if man had not in his soule another life, then this terrestriall, the most resi∣ned brains would be to seek, for that man the most excel∣lent of Creatures, is of no more continuance; but hee doubts of this proposition. Hee doubts of that which all the world hold for certaine: if the Phenix in his first bree∣ding, and in his sole Indiui∣duum be strange, yet it fol∣lowes not but that there may be such a bird, most rare, and very long liued. Moreouer, the Stagge found in the For∣rest of Senlis, during the reigne of Charles 6. whereof Belle forrest makes menti∣on: Admit wee should take the computation, from the
time that the Emperors reig ned in France, yet should we finde fiue hundred yeares, which is the age they giue vnto a Stagge. As for the Ralien, Virgil assignes him Alipicem Cervum ter vincit Corvus. much more age. He thinkes hee hath well satisfied when hee saith, that it is natures sport to make exception in generall rules: For as true as it is in matters indifferent, of small donse quence, and with∣out preiudice to the crea∣ture that is found excepted from the generality; so is it as false in matters of great consequence, and which turne to great harme. I will then that the diuine prouidēce be obserued, spor∣ting it selfe to make Lawes, and to giue exemptions, that all beasts haue the ends of
their haire bending towards the taile, and that the Origes is exempt, hauing it towards the head: that all beasts can moue their eares, and not man: that whatsoeuer flies hath feathers, but the Batte hath none. Finally, that all things in the world are in perpetuall motion, the earth not. But what doth this im∣port? But for the last in∣stance, which God would haue for the great good of the earth: She should rest firme still in her fixed fight, Not to her left hand stirring, nor her right. As it is in the 104. Psalme. But man if hee haue nothing
but this life, he hath need of a very long life: Who shall see and iudge of this goodly frame, this goodly order of the world, but man the good∣liest workmanship of nature? and how can he doe it but by along life? he doth not equall nor exceede the long conti∣nuance of the celestiall mo∣tions, before they bee retur∣ned to their first point; moti∣ons which giue life to euery thing by their diuers cour∣se. How can he in his soule get wisedome, so necessary for the conduct of life, seeing that vse engenders it, and memory brings it forth, as Afranius saith, if by a num∣ber of yeeres hee gets not the vse and experience of so ma∣ny affaires inuolued in this world? Also how can hee
preserue his bodily heath, or restore it beeing decayed, if he haue not the knowledge of Phisicke, seeing it is a long arte, and life is short? saith Hippocrates. Lastly, he lightly passeth ouer the last and strongest reason of conscience, for that I assure my selfe his consci∣ence did bely, his pen; and therefore hee will entertaine vs with a certaine instinct of the vnreasonable creatures, which he cōcludes in a man∣ner to be Conscience. Answer. Creatures with∣out reason and without tea∣ching, are skilfull from their first being, in that which is profitable vnto them, to affect it, seeke it, and finde it; and to abhorre and flye from that which is hurtfull: and in
that they are so couragious to defend their young, pro∣ceedes from the blood of the arteries, mooued with the hearing or sight of their ad∣uersaries, which they do na∣turally apprehend: for then the blood beeing mooued, it runs luddainly to the heart, and doth quicken the power of choler, and thrust him on to resist and reuenge: all which proceedes from the temper of the beast. But con∣science is a diuine vertue in∣grauen in the soule (which S. Paule calls the spirit of vn∣derstanding, Ephes. 3.) which applyes the knowledge of our spirit to the worke, wit∣nessing To. 1. quaest, 79. art. 13. for vs, or against vs, of that which wee know wee haue done, or not done; wher∣of growes the prouerbe, That
a mans conscience serues for a thousand witnesses: shee withholds vs, or thrusts vs on, we as shal think the thing fit to be done, or not. Final∣ly, she doth excuse vs or ac∣cuse vs, as wee shall iudge to haue done well or ill: This quality, or rather act, is not found but in a reasonable soule, and is a true signe of her immortality, and of an other life, where shee is to giue an accoumpt of all her actions. And although that in a wicked and depraued man, this inward and immor∣tall Esay 66. Marc. 9. worme bo so deeply hid∣den; as they must sometimes haue outward tortures to draw it out; yet this doth not argue but he hath it inward∣ly, and that in the end it will appeare in despight of him,
when the apprehension of an ighominious punishment shall cease a little. Yea most men confesse, before they come to the torture; and therefore what the Obiector hath opposed doth nothing infringe our reason. The 2. Argument taken from the goodly order of Nature. It is not possible that goodly iustice should faile in the principall point. If the soule of man were mor∣tall, this goodly iustice of na∣ture should faile in the prin∣cipall point. It is not therefore possible, the soule of man should bee mor∣tall.
EVEN as in this world there is no Catbuncle more glistering, not vertue more eminent then Cic. de offic. c. de Iusti. iustice; and as man is the goodliest piece in the world, and containes in himselfe the modell of all the perfections of other Creatures, it is rea∣sons will that this Iustice should adorne and beautifie this head of the world; and yet it is in him, (if wee well obserue it) that shee is most obscure and blemished; in all other things (man only ex∣cepted) shee shines and gli∣sters. The heauens and their Starres obserue the law of the Eternall inuiolably, in their motions, in their influ∣ences, and in their alterati∣ons; the Elements change themselues one into ano∣ther,
to preserue the sundry kinds of plants and Crea∣tures in the world, and obey their Creator religiously: Plants and vnreasonable Creatures haue alwayes ef∣fects and vertues concurring with the it proper essence. It is that which moued Dauid to say, That the heauen, the Sun, and all the host of hea∣uen, did declare the power and wisedome of God, Psal. 19. And in the 148, the wa∣ter, fire, trees, and vnreason∣able Creatures are stirred vp to praise the Lord; the which being faithfully performed by them man should die with shame, that hee alone is de∣fectiue in his duty, being most bound vnto it. And hereof God com∣plaines by Esay, Harken you Isay 1. 5.
heauens, and thou earth giue care; for the Eternall hath spoken, saying, I haue nouri∣shed children and haue bred them vp, but they haue rebel led against me. The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Asse his master crib &c. And the Philosophers propound for an infallible Maxime, That man is the most vniust of all Creatures, and they searche out the causes: the grossest precepts of iustice, are, to liue ho∣nestly, to doe no man wrong, to giue euery man his owne: no man is ignorant hereof, his naturall reason being more then sufficient to in∣struct him, and yet who doth it? Yea they are all made abo∣minable, and there is not any
one that doth good, sayeth the Oracle. They are giuen ouer to the couetousnesse of their owne hearts, to filthines to pollute their owne bodies, sayth the Apostle. If this com∣plaint were true & iust then, it is a thousand times more at this present: I call you to witnesse, who trauelling haue past through Italy, Spaine, and France: I say to witnes, of the adulterie, Incest, Sodomie, and filthynes, you haue seene there; or if your chast eyes could not endure the sight, yet what you haue heard. Then the robberies, spoyles & iniustice, vnder the cloake of iustice, which reigne now in this realme, and their goodli∣est houses are built vpon these foundations. But it is not at this time only, but hath been
in al ages; for from the infan∣cy of the Church, there neuer wanted some swelling iniqui tie, and a patient iustice, saith S. Ierome. As for murthers, Epist. to Castritian they were neuer so frequent; to kill a man is but a sport, & great men make it their pastime. But that which is worse, they not only commit such iniustice, but they also allow of it, they fauour it, & they are aduanced to the highest dignities. The mis∣chiefe is cōmitted sometimes furiously, when as blinde rage commands; but the approba∣tion proceeds slowly from a setled spirit, and is much to be condemned, so as S. Paul doth rightly make it the second degree of Iniustice. Rom. 1. 32. But come and lift vp your eyes, see and iudge who they
be which hold the seate of iustice; they are for the most most part the most disloyall, the most impious, the most vniust, & the most malicious among men. It is not in this age alone that this Iniustice hath sprōg vp, it hath beene in all sea∣sons. I haue seene, sayth Sa∣lomon; vnder the Sunne, Im∣pietie in the place of iudge∣ment, & iniquitie in the feare of Iustice: Offices be the re∣ward of such as make straight things crooked, sayth Terence. In Phor∣mone. Ouid. Meta Iuuen. 6. Sene. in Octa. Other Poets vsing the voyce of the people of their ages, cry out that Pittie lyes deso∣late, that the virgine Astraea, that is, iustice, hath bin for∣ced at the last to yeeld to Mas saores & extortions vpon the earth. This is not all, there is a
third degree yet more abho∣minable, & more iniurious to Iustice; when as good men are opprest by the wicked, and Iustice troden vnder foot by Iniustice; what good or iust man is there but sees it and feels it? Why doest thou hold thy peace, said Abacuck to the Lord, the wicked op∣pressing Abacuk, 1. the iust? So Caine slue Abel, so Esau persecuted Iacob: so the Pagās haue alwaies mo lested August. l. 1 c. 9, de, ciuit. dei. the Israelites & sought to ruine them: so the Iewes & Infidels haue afflicted Chri∣stians: so the Arrian Heretikes did with all violence perse∣cute the Catholikes; Pompey with the iust Senate was van∣quished by Caesar, Cato mur∣mures, and despayring kills himselfe. So the Romaine Emperors haue euen glutted
their rage vpon the innocen∣cie of Martirs; so the Goathes & Barbarians tormented the Romaines as soone as they were become Christians: Theodos. l. 5 Thirtie Tyrants inuade and ruine that goodly Common∣weale of Athens: The Turke at this day holds the reynes of the Empire of the world, triumphing euery where ouer Christian armies: Finally, what are these great king∣domes, but great thefts? as a Pirate did fitly obiect to Ale∣xander the Great, who made him to keepe silence with Plut in the life of Alex. shame. This iniustice being ob∣serued by many, hath giuen occasion to thinke that all things are turned by chance, as Claudian doth represent it Graphically; and Dauid him∣selfe Lib 1. in Rusfin.
confesseth, that hee hath beene readie to leaue the good way, and to forsake the partie of God: for that he saw the wicked in such abun∣dance. These men, saies he, for all that they possesse, Are nothing worth; yet still we see they spend There liues whole length in varied happinesse, Pamper'd with all things to their very end. What shall we then thinke; yea, whereon can wee assure Rom. 2. 6. Apo. 22. 12 our selues without wauering, that the life of man in this world, is a List and Careere, in which as he hath wrestled and combated, so being de∣parted, hee shall receiue ei∣ther the Crowne of glory, or the shame of infamy? and this
shall bee when as iustice shall appeare in her greatest beau∣ty and lustre. But in the mean  this diuine prouidence will that the good (as corne in the aire) be thrasht, fan∣ned and sifted, to the end at their departure, they may be laid vp in the granier; and on the other side, the chaffe, that is to say, the wicked who haue beene alwayes in ioy, shal be cast into the fire, that is neuer quenched. Afflicti∣on is the narrow way, into the which he must enter who desires to come into the Kingdome of heauen: The reproche of Christ is the ho∣nour of the child of God, the Crosse of Christ is his Scep∣ter, his stripes & torments are roses and gilloflowers. So Moses, saith the text, held the Hebr. 11.
reproch of Christ to be grea∣ter riches, then the treasures of Egypt; yea hee did rather choose to bee afflicted with the people of God, then to enioy for a time the pleasures 2. Cor. 11. 22. of sinne. So S. Paule did ra∣ther choose the trauells, im∣prisonments, beatings, and death, then all the honour he could expect to be a Pharisi∣an Doctor among the Iewes. So a million of Martyrs haue rather made choice of chains fires, and of death of serue Christ, then of Diadems, tri∣umphs, and wordly felici∣tie. So Regulus did choose ra∣ther to bee tormented in a pipe stucke full of nayles, at Carthage, then to giue preiu∣diciall counsell to his coun∣trey. Socrates had rather dye
then adherre to Pagan Ido∣latrie. Seneca preferred death before the flattering of his vicious Prince, verifying by effect the words of his E∣pistle, I loue not torments, Epist. 67. saith he; but if there be que∣stion to suffer them, I desire to carry my selfe brauely, couragiously, and honestly. Cato spake more, as the Poet reports: Gaudet pa∣tientia du∣ris, Letius est quories magno sibi constat ho∣nestum. Patience most ioyes when most her crosse abounds, Most honor costs most, and most ioy redounds. But for what reason? S. Ambrose saith, The wise man is not broken by the paines of the body, nor vexed by the discommodities: in the midst of miseries he is alwayes hap∣py, for that the happinesse of life doth not consist in the
tickling pleasures of the bo∣dy, but in the cōscience pur∣ged from all filth of sinne. What wilt thou then doe in this secure peace of the wicked, in this continuall ware-fare of good men? haue a little patience; And thou in the'nd shalt say, with comfort driuen, Thy vowes are heard, euen from the highest heauen. The Gods, sayth Homer, suf∣fer not the sinnes of men to Iliad, l. 4. passe vnpunished, & although they deserre the punishment, yet by the waight they recō∣pence the slownes: If the di∣uine wrath be slow, yet it is Iuutal, Sa tyr 13. violent, sayth another. It is that which did most fortifie Cyrus, in the assurance of the Xenoph. lib. 8. Cyrop immortality of the soule, see∣ing the wicked in this life to
prosper, & good men decay. And what shall wee Christi∣ans then doe. Wee will at∣tend with Dauid, that the measure of sinne may be full; and then when they haue made an end to fill vp the measure of their fathers, they cannot auoyde the iudge∣ment of Hell fire, sayth Iesus Mat. 23. Christ I know for a certaine, sayth Dauid, that God will Psal, 140. doe iustice. I know the Lord th' afflic∣ted will Reuenge, and iudge the poore. All these wicked ri men which haue had their plea∣sures and abundance in this world, shall haue miseries in the other; and  se poore Lazares which haue beene here diuersly tormented, shal be comforted, and enioy an
eternall rest, as the Euange∣list Luke, 16. speakes. Finally, the wic∣ked after this life, changing opinion, and sighing with the anguish of theirminds, wil say among themselues: Be∣hold him whom wee haue sometimes derided, & made prouerbs of dishonor; wemad men held his life to be mad, and his death infamous; and how is hee accounted of a∣the children of God, & his portion among the Saints? Wised. 5. And thus doth a wise man discourse. We may therefore conclude, that seeing lustice, this pretious pearle, doth east forth but sun-beames in this world, vpon vnreasona∣ble creatures: and that her bodie beautiful in perfection, is in heauen, whither she was forced (flying the earth) to
haue recourse, there to re∣ceiue such as had cherished & sought her vpon earth; and contrariewise to banish for euer such as had persecuted her with all violence: Wee may, I say, necessarily cōclude That the soules of men are immortal, to the end that the happy may be crowned with this iustice, and the wicked cast by the heauie burthen of their iniustice to the bottom∣lesse pit of hell. Amen. Obiection. If the soule did escape the graue, shee might fing the prayses of God. But she cannot. THE Minor is proued directly by a text of the holy Scripture: There is
no mention of thee in death, who shal worship thee in the Psal 66. graue? saith Dauid, being grie∣uously Ps. 115, 17. sicke: And, The dead do no more praise the Lord, neither they which descend whereas they speake not. Eze∣chias fearing death, speakes Isay 38. 10. thus vnto the Lord: the graue shall not worship thee, death shall not praise thee, and they that descend into the pit at∣tend no more thy truth. Answere: These holy men haue neuer thought, much lesse spoken, that the soule was mortall, but only that they whom death takes a∣way, do no more declare the glory of God to the liuing, & that a dead mouth cannot preach the wonderful workes of the Eternall: And for proofe hereof, Dauid doeth
assure vs in another place, where he sayth, I shal not die, but liue, and declare the Ps. 118, 17. workes of the Eternal; and, If I descend into the pit, what proffit shall there bee in my blood? Shall the dust praise thee, and preach thy truth? By which words hee shewes that he meant not to speake, but of the praises of God made by the mouth among the liuing. As for Ezechias, when hee deliuered these words, hee had bene then assured to liue by Esay; so as hee makes it knowne, that whereas God prolonged his life, it was to magnifie him in the world, and to declare his mercy: and yet that the Saints deceased sing the prayses of God in heauen, appeares by many
texts, but that in the Apoc. is sufficient, of the 4. beasts, Apo. 5. and the 24. Elders, who sung a new song. Moreouer those innumerable multitudes of all Nations, Tribes, people, and tongues, attired in long white robes, and ha∣uing branches of palme in their hands, crying with a Apo. 7. loud voyce, Saluation to our God, who is set vpon the throne, and to the Lambe. But some one will reply, seeing the Saints in heauen sing most melodiously and holily the praises of the Lord, how coms it that they alledge this reason to pro∣long this life, that they may celebrate the name of the Eternall? I Answer, that the heauens haue no neede of these holy sounders out of
the Lords praise: that they haue from the beginning the Angells which sing con∣tinually, Holy, holy, holy, is he which-hath beene, which is, and which shalbe; and more∣ouer, the faithfull deceased. But the earth is altogether desert, wherefore the chil∣dren of God desire to re∣maine there the course of their prefixed age, to the end they may publish the praises of God to the ignorant world: and although it be to their losse, yet the seruice of God, and the glory of their Maister, is more deere vnto them, then their owne health, as Moses and S. Paul among others haue witnessed. The second Obiection. If the soule being immortall, had bene (as they say) infused
into the body of man, imme∣diatly from God, it is not pos∣sible but there shold remaine some knowledge. But there remaines none. IF the Soule be created im∣mediatly by God and in∣fused into the body, from the very moment of this creation and infusion, shee is perfect in her essence, and therefore should haue a cer∣taine knowledge; but wee do not remember our birth, nor our Baptisme, by reason of the great imperfection of our nature in that age: If then (as those Infants, of whom Aristotle makes mem∣tion, 11. sect. pro. 27. who spake as soone as they were borne) we had had the temper of the braine, re∣quisite to the vnderstanding
and memory, we should then haue vnderstood, and wee should now remember as well, as those things which we haue seene within a yeare, and since that time which brings al things to maturity, hath ripened our nature: But if the soule be immortal and not subiect to time, and if from the beginning of her creation, shee hath receiued her perfect stature, how can time deface her vnderstand∣ing? and how is it that she re∣membreth not any thing, no not in dreaming, when shee was put into the body? Some will reply, That this sinfull mortall body is the cause of this misery, but I may an∣swere, that the corporall can∣not worke vpon the spiritu∣all; and that the Diuines
hold, that man by his offence hath lost all supernaturall guifts & priuiledges which were freely giuen him; but not such as were naturall, & conferred vpon him by the right of Creation; and who doth not see, but that to vn∣derstand & to remember, are naturall guifts? Answere: The soule of man is extracted immediatly from God, and being once in∣fused into the body, shee re∣ceiues not in any age, neither in her substance or forces, a∣ny change, alteration, or in∣crease. Yet by vertue of the sentence of condemnation which God pronounced a∣gainst Adam, and al his poste∣rity, the Creator not confir∣ming the soule in her excel∣lency and innocency, but lea∣uing
it to it selfe, shee hath in an instant lost her dignity, is become ignorant and vici∣ous; and the infection of car∣nall sences which shee hath suckt vp being in the body, doth augment her deprauati∣on, so as she is not able to re∣member any thing of this actiō proceeding from God, in her creation and vnion to the body: So Adam and Eue not confirmed in their felici∣ty (as the Angells and Saints are now in heauen by the be∣nefit of Iesus Christ) as soone as they had committed the transgression, were in an in∣stant made mortall, ignorant and vicious. A plate of iron flaming in the fire, hath no sooner felt the fresh ayre, but it loseth his fiery colour; Euen so the soule is no soo∣ner
gone out of the Eternall forge, but shee loseth her colour and brightnes, and the body is as cold water to the burning, iron; so as now the soule hath no knowledge in the body, but what she gets by the sences: and they that are deafe by nature are also naturally dumbe; for being vnable to heare the words di stinguished, neither can they le them: And they that are borne blinde, cannot distinguish of colours, &c. Let vs conclude with S. Augustine, That the spiritual Lib. 12. de genesi ad Literam. light, in the which man had beene created to know his Creator, himselfe, and things that are profitable for him, was quenched by sinne: Let vs add with Nicholas de Cusa, L. 9. exer∣citat. That the soule of man sent in
to a morrall bodie, is like vn∣to  infant, which as soone as it was borne was carried into  strang countrie, wholy  of inhabit a, & nou∣rished by a she Wolfe; being growne great he could in no for know the place of his birth,  his father & mo∣ther.  had a consed fee∣ling of this truth, writing, that the soule which liued appy and knowing in the copanie of the Gods, being confined into this prison of the foule infected body, to frame it & giue it life, hath in stantly lost l her happines & knowledge, by reason of the bad temperature of the body. The 3 Argument taken fr the voyce of all the world.
The voyce of the people is the voyces of God, and by conse∣quent, of the truth. But the Soule is immortall ac∣cording to the voyce of the people. MAny writers haue col∣lected the opinions of people and of ages, vp∣on the iudgement of the soule as Macrobius vpon Scipioes Dreame, Marsilius Ficinus, & others: And among the Mo∣derns Mons de Plessis, Crepet the Celestin with others, to whom I send the reader; where he may see a wōderful consent of men to conclude that the soule is immortall, as holding it not from any other Master then themselues from their vnderstanding, & from their conscience, from
which knowledge proceeds the loue of iustice, the desire of honour, and the care of in∣terring their bodies &c. And as in old time, so at this day there is no nation but beleeues it. Iohn de Lyra in his voyage of America, writes, Chap. . that it is constantly beleeued there; They haue found the inhabitants of the Westerne Ilands to be verie brutish, yet haue they a tast of the immor talitie of the Soule. Thomas Heriot in his Historie of the inhabitants of Virginia, a country not long since disco∣uered, writes that these peo∣ple make the same profession, and hold that presently after the soule is separated from the body, she is carried away according to the workes which she hath done, either
into the māsion of the Gods to be there happie for eer; or into a Gulfe, which they call Popogusso, to burne eter∣nally. Finally there can bee no instance giuen against this generall beleefe of Nations, dispersed ouer the face of the whole earth: If any one will oppose himselfe, it is the ex∣crement and scomme of the people; to which Hierocles a Pithagorean hath long since giuē a holy precaution, saying That a wicked man will not haue his soule immortall to the end he may not be punish ed for her offences; but hee preuents the sentence of him that must iudge him, con∣demning himselfe to death, and yet shall be therein de∣ceiued, for wheras he thought this death would be without
paine, he shal feele it as sharp ly as it shal be long. But some one will obiect, that to finde out a hidden verity, one mans deepe iudgement is of more force, then a hundred thou∣sand that are meane, such as the vulgar haue commonly; for that to the vnderstanding invention serues more then number; for it is not of him & his vertue, as of corporal for∣ces, the which may be vnited together, and take vp a great burthen: wherefore to make a peace, sayeth the Wiseman, many are required, but for coū sel, one among a 1000. More∣ouer Seneca doth stil exhort not to follow the multitude. Answer: It is true, that the best things do not please ma∣ny; & matters are so ordained as one sayth, that we sooner
follow the euil then the good. Yet this doth not impeach, but the generall testimony of al men concerning the soule, should be of great moment, for that there be no opposite parties here, one for the mor∣tality, another for the im∣mortality: and not onely the simple people, but euen the learned, assure the immorta∣lity of the soule. Moreouer, it is not an institution of life to suruiue, but a truth to be∣leeue; and therefore this ob∣iection doth in no sort wea∣ken this reason of the immor∣tality of the soule. Obiection. If the soule were immortall, no man would doubt, especially, the learned and wise.
But many doubt, and in a man∣ner none but the simple and ignorant beleeue it to be im∣mortall, THe consequence of the propositiō is good, for who is hee that doubts whether he be a man, a dog, or a wolfe? Who seeing and feeling, doubts whether hee sees and feeles? &c. As for the Assumption, it is sufficiently verified by thē that haue not doubted, but haue cōstantly beleeued that the soule was immortall. VVe reade of Sardanapalus a pow∣erfull King of Assiria, who Atheneus lb. 1. de dip nosophistis not onely held this beleefe, but would haue posterity know it, commanding that vpon his tombe there should bee carued the Image of a
woman, holding her hand vp∣pon her head, and some of the fingers closed like vnto them that sound their cli∣quets, with this inscription, as if the Image had spoken it: Sardanapalus Sonne of A∣nacyndaraxes, built Anchiale and Tarsis in one day: Eate, drink and sport, for the rest is not worth the playing with the fingers: that is to say, A point for all the rest. In the Towne of Brescia, there is another Tombe to be seene, whereon is written, D. M. and among other pro∣phane words, these of a mil∣der temper: I haue liued, and haue beleeued nothing be∣sides this life, and haue whol∣ly dedicated my selfe to plea∣sing Vens. The Antiquaries obserue,
that among the Pagans, such as held the soule to bee mor∣tall, caused the doores to bee hanged close shut vpon their graues, and of this sort there are many noted. The Philosopher Aristoxe∣nus (by the report of Lactan∣tius) durst maintaine that the Lib. 7. c. 13. soule of mā was nothing, yea, during the time shee was in the body; but as the strings of an instrument being tu∣ned make an accord, so in mans body, the gathering together of the bowells, and the vigour of the members, produce all that harmonie which appeares in man. The Saduces in the Church of God, haue denied the im∣mortality of the foule. Bar∣bara wife to the Emperour Sigismond, in the yeare 1400.
derided her women for that they praied and fasted, saying, that they must liue merily, and imbrace all pleasures, for that after death the soule did perish with the body; And many at this day shew by their liues, that only for ciui∣lity and outward honesty, they must confesse the soule to be immortall. And what a great wise∣dome is it to beleeue no∣thing inwardly? Du Bartas in his Triumph of faith speakes of one: I meane that Monster Theo∣dorus hight, Who shamelesse saies, there is no God at all; And that the wise may (when occasions fall,) Be Lier, Traitor, Theefe, and Sodomite.
And he addes that this killing of-spring hath past to Rome, from thence into France, and that it buddes forth in the Courts of Kings, in seates of Iustice, and in the Church; finally, there are scarce any other impes that put forth at this day: to haue no God, and the soules to be mortall, are held equall things. Answere: I should wonder at the admirable patience of God, to suffer that the seede of Atheisme should produce such branches of prophana∣tion, if I did not see blasphe∣mers and such as make a pro∣fession to deny God, parri∣cides, yea, diuells to bee tol∣lerated by him, who with pa∣tience attends vntill the measure of their sinnes bee
full: But to answere cate∣gorically, I deny the conse∣quence of the proposition: It is true, there hath beene such a one, who hath doub∣ted whether hee were a man; witnesse the Philosopher Pyrrhon, who makes professi∣on to doubt all, and main∣taine, that whatsoeuer wee thinke to be, say, or do, is but by an vncertaine opinion. Moreouer, you shall finde some one so wounded in the imagination, by the force of some deepe melancholy, as he hath thought himselfe to be transformed into a wolfe, and also hath gone out of his house by night, howling and imitating the actions of Vuierus l. 4. c. 23. a wolfe; the which bred the opiniō of becoming wolues. In like manner I say, that the
darke fumes of voluptuous∣nesse, the depraued humours of wickednesse, may also o∣uerthrow the vnderstanding of some men, and make them doubt of that which they would not vnderstand, the immortality of the soule; least that the apprehension of an eternall iudgement, should trouble their carnall pleasures. As for Sardanapalus, hee hath also doubted whether he were a man, since that hee tooke vpon him a womans habit among his Courtisans, and handled a distaffe with them. For my part I beleeue that he had the humour and spirit of a beast; as Tully re∣ports, that Aristotle hauing Lib. 5. Tus. read this Epitaphe, sayd that they should haue written it
vpon the pit of a beast, not on the graue of a King: The same answere shall serue for the like thing pretended at Brescia. As for the third, their ignorance and malice would force a beleefe of mortality of soules; what others more honest and more wise haue done, shall serue to confute them: For the same antiqua∣ries write, that many caused to bee drawne vpon their tombes, doores halfe open, shewing thereby that their soules escaped from the tombe. If one Philosopher would dispute of it, there are others, who to get fame haue questioned matters more ap∣parent; as Cardan, the fourth Element of fire; Copernicus: the motion of heauen, main∣taining by the illusion of rea∣son,
that it is the earth & not the heauen that moues: There haue beene alwayes and shall be such fantasticke humors, who would make themselues famous, with the preiudice of the truth. As for the Empresse Bar∣bara, hee should haue added that shee was an insatiable Letcher; & therefore she had great interest, (not to giue an accoumpt of her dissolute life,) to perswade her self that al was extinguished in death. Now followeth this depra ued age, into the which as in∣to the bottome of a sinke, al the filth of precedent ages haue seemed to run; yet there are (God bee thanked) who beleeue it in their hearts, and deliuer it with ther mouthes, that their spirit is immortal,
and they that speake it only with their mouthes, it is suf∣ficient that naturall shame will not suffer them to disco∣uer the villany of thier hearts; and this bashfulnesse (an im∣pression of God) is sufficient to make them inexcusable in the great day of the Lord. Moreouer, they that with a furious impudency haue be∣leeued that the soule died with the body, haue for the most part in their miserable ends made knowne the iudgements of God, who pu∣nished them for their frantike opinion; as Lucian, who was torne in pieces by dogs; Lucre tius who grown mad, cast him selfe downe a precipice: Ca∣ligula who was cruelly slaine; with infinite others: Or else they haue shewed it in their
confused and irresolute car∣riage, the distemperature and trouble of their soules im∣pugning their damnable opi∣nion. To conclude; As for Theo∣dorus, and the swarme of his disciples, who in a manner a∣lone hold the chaires in all e∣states, I will suffer them to be led in Triumph before the triumphant chariot of faith: that which Du Bartas sayth in the beginning of the second song, is sufficient to confound them. The 4. Argument. That which proceeds immedi∣atly fom God, is euerla∣sting. Such is the soule.
I will prooue the conse∣quēce of the Maior, for the rest is plaine of it selfe: whi∣lest the Sun shall last he will cast foth his beames; whilest there is fire there will come forth heate; whilest the heart beates in the body, there re∣maines life; for that the posi∣tion of the sufficient cause, very neere and immediate, doth of necessity establish the effect, the which conti∣nues as long as the cause, if there happens no inpeach∣ment: But God is a suffici∣ent cause, neuer hindered in his effects; he is the neere and immediate cause of the soule which hee breathes into the body, as soone as it was dis∣posed and fit to receiue that breathing; hee is immortall, and by consequent the soule
is immortall. So hee created the Angels, & the Angels shal subsist for euer; so he made the heauen & earth, and they shall neuer perish. If they re∣ply that the heauēs shal passe; & that God wil cōsume them as a flaming pyle of wood, as the Poet speakes after S. Peter: 2. Epist. 3. The answer is, That it is not to be vnderstood of the sub∣stance of the world, but of the qualities, which being vaine and corrupted by rea∣son of man, shalbe changed, Rom. 8. and renewed by fire, to shine more purely like refined gold. They may againe obiect, That God with his owne hands had moulded and fa∣shoned the first man, who not with standing is dead. I an∣swer, that God was the effici∣ent and immediate cause of
man, but not the formall nor the materiall; his substance was the slime of the earth, which might be dissolued; his forme was his soule, which might be separated: But in the soule, and of the soule of man, God holds immediatly the foure kinds of causes; the efficient, for he hath made it of himselfe, without any help; the materiall, not that it is of his essence, but that hee hath created it of nothing, as hee did the world: the formall in like manner, his continual in∣spiration retaines it, as his continuall prouidence pre∣serues the world from ruine; and therefore Christ sayd, my Father works hitherto, and I with him. Finally, he is the finall cause for man liues to know and serue God. If they
reply againe, that God being a voluntarie cause in his acti∣ons, should not be numbred among the naturall causes, which necessarily produce their effects, if there be not some let: that is most certen; but where the word of God is euident, we must not doubt of his will; but it is apparent in the passages alledged, that the soule is immortall. And therefore we may profitably and safely conclude, That if from the sufficient and neere cause the effect doth necessa∣rilie flow, and that this effect doth continue as long as the cause, if there happen no lets: that vndoubtedly the soule is immortal, seeing that God her most sufficient cause, and who feares no disturbance, is immortall; so as to denie this
immortalitie, is to deny the Deitie. Obiection. That which hath bin alwaies re∣quired to be sufficiently testi∣fied, yet hath beene still deny∣ed, cannot be certaine. The immortalitie of the soule hath beene alwayes required to be sufficiently testified, yet hath beene still denyed. NO great ioy doth at any time accompanie a deepe silence. If the soule going out of the bodie, felt it selfe immortall, (shee should feele it if she were so, for going out of the body, as out of a darke prison, shee should haue the fruition of all her light:) if shee felt her
selfe, as I say, immortall, shee would witnesse it by some signe to the poore kinsfolkes that suruiue, being desolate by reason of his departure, to comfort, fortifie and make them ioyfull. And although the soules which are in hea∣uen be there detained by a voluntarie prison, hindering them from comming downe; and on the other side those that are in hell, are tyed there by a will that is captiue, as one hath affirmed: But the soules that goe out of the bo∣dies which are yet on earth, euen vpon the lips of them that die, why haue they not instantly, before they fly to heauen, being so often re∣quired, giuen some smalle proofe of their immortalitle? Answer: This Obiection
seemes subtill, but to speake truly it hath but the shew & not the effect, for it is subiect to many pertinent answeres: First to alledge an incon∣uenience is not to dissolue the question. 2. It is a con∣sequence ill applied, to say Such a one hath not spoken, therefore hee is no man. Wee haue digged verie deepe into the earth, and yet wee neuer heard any of them that goe with their feete a∣gainst ours; therefore there are no Antipodes; So the soules speake not vpon dead mens lippes, therefore they haue none: for beeing thus hindred, is the cause they nei∣ther heare nor see any signe of their life. Thirdly, the teares of the dead mans kinsfolkes are ill
grounded: Socrates a Pagan knew it well, when hee said, that we must leaue the soule at rest, and not trouble it with lamentations. The holy Ghosts goes farther, and as∣sures, That blessed are the Apoc. 14. dead which dye in the Lord: yea, for certain, saith the Spi∣rit, for they rest from their la∣bours, and their workes fol∣low them: this should assure and reioice, and not discom∣fort (by a foolish desire) that ioy of the soule of the decea∣sed. Fourthly, God will not that we should be inquisitiue of the dead, he forbids it ex∣presly in his law, & pronoun∣ceth Deut. 18. Leuit, 12. Esay 8. abhomination against them that doe it. He hath gi∣uen Moses and the Prophets, let vs adde the Apostles; if
they will not beleeue them, neither will they beleeue the soules of the deceased. If that the liuing are forbidden to enquire, how then can the dead haue leaue to speake? Fifthly, the soules are prest at the departure from their bodyes, to yeeld an account of their administration in this life, vndergoing a parti∣cular iudgement. This is beleeued rightly, and wholesomely, saith S. Augustine, that the soules are Llb. 2. de orig. ani∣mae, . 4. iudged at the departure from their bodies, before the com∣ming to this Iudgement, at the which hauing taken a∣gaine the same bodyes, they must appeare. Also S. Hilary saith, that immediately with∣out Vpon the 2 Psnl. at the end. any delay, after death we vndergo a Iudgement, and
passe into Paradise, or into Hell. Finally Salomon, to the end wee should not doubt, sayth, That God will easily render vnto man according to his workes, at that day of his deceasse; That the affliction of one houre makes him for∣get all pleasures, and that the ende of man is the manifesta∣tion of his workes. 6 S. Athanasiws sayeth, It is not the will of God that the Quest. 15. soules should declare the e∣state wherein they are, for that many should be deceaued, & many errors wold grow; the Deuils being ready to make men thus abused, to beleeue what they would suggest; as 2. Tom. Lib 1. discourse 5, of death and the im mortalitie of thesoule. Crepet the Celestin doth well obserue: and he adds, that the like happened lately to a
poore woman of Verum, sedu∣ced by a diuell which appea∣red vnto her in the forme of her Grand father; perswa∣ding her to goe in Pilgri∣mage, & to doe other things which were impossible. So S. Augustin writes that Vincen∣tius the Donatist was counsel∣led Lib. 3. c. 11. arduers. Vincent. Donatist. to write against the Chri∣stian religion, by a spirit which appeared vnto him. 7. The Soule destitute of the Organs of her body, be∣ing not yet glorified nor illu∣minated with the Celestiall splendor, nor adorned with the supernaturall gifts, which God cōfers vpon her for her felicitie, cannot satifsie the will of the kinsfolkes that be present, desiring a testimonie of her blessednes and life: for the soule, sayth S. Athanasius
in the former passage, as soone as she hath layed down her body, can worke neither good not euill. And as for vi∣sions that appeare from thē, God by a certaine dispensa∣tion, shewes them as it plea∣seth him. For as a Lute if there be no man to play of in, seems idle and vnprofitable: so the soule and body being separa∣ted one from another, haue no operation. The which Ec∣clesiastes doth confirme, say∣ing, Certainly the liuing Eccie. 9. know that they shall dye, but the dead know nothing, nei∣ther doe they get any thing, for their memory is forgot∣ten: in like manner, their loue, their hatred, and their enuy perish, and they haue not any portion in the world
of whatsoeuer is done vnder the Sun. Wherfore let vs cō∣clude and say, That the soule (whilest that shee giues any life to her dying body) with the last puffe of life, yeeldes a certaine testimony of her ioy and immortality, by the in∣spiration of the holy Ghost; as it happens to many good men: But to demand instant∣ly vpon death some token from the soule dislodging, were to tempt God, to mock at the deceased, acd to be an vniust demander, and there∣fore iustly to be refused. The 5. Argument taken from the aspect of the face. Whatsoeuer is represented by a iust mirrour or glasse, is true. The immortality of the soule is represented by the iust mirror
of the face. AS the soule of man is the Image of God, so the face is the Image of the soule, and therefore the Eternall creating the soule of man, did breathe it Genes. 2, in his face, which the holy Ghost cals respiration of life: so the property of man is to paint in his face by his diuers colours, the diuers affections of his soule. Wisedome, saith Salomon, cleeres the face of man, and his fierce and sowre Eccles. 8. aspect is changed. The La∣tines haue called it vultus, for that the will is read in the forehead: the manners of the soule follow the humours of the body, saith Gallen; and if some one belies his inclina∣tion, it is a maske which hee
puts on, and therefore Mo∣mus did vniustly blame God, for that hee had not made man with an open heart. Thereon is all the Art of Phi∣siognomie grounded, an Art (which without this faining) euery man would learn with∣out teaching. By the face that Diuiner Egyptian, familiar to Marc. Anthony, did know the diuers dispositions of men. These markes of the face, are im∣printed with the seale of the soule: and hee that will not iudge by such markes ingra∣uen, of the brightnesse and immortality of the soule, is without iudgement. Homer writes that Vlisses hauing escaped from ship∣wracke, was graciously en∣tertained and reuerenced by
the Pheagues, hauing no orna∣ment then, but this vertue & generous disposition, the beauty & excellency where∣of appeared in his fore-head. Man in like sort carries on his fore-head the markes of his immortal soule: Wherof the first is the carrying his coun∣tenance straight vp to hea∣uen, proper to man, at all times, to him alone, and to all the generation of man∣kinde; which shewes his be ginning to bee celestiall and immortall: for that onely is perishable which is vnder the region of the Moone, & whatsoeuer is aboue it, is not subiect vnto destinie. The 2. is that foresight a∣farre off, those beames, I say, cast farre and wide by the piercing sight, without stay∣ing
vpon that which doth touch it, or enuiron it neere; which shewes that the flight of the soule must go farre. If any one say, that certaine birds, & foure footed beasts see farre; but it is not to the same end, for man doth it on∣ly for the pleasure of the sight, & to obserue the beau∣ty of his celestial habitation: whereas other creatures are sharpe sighted either to ob∣serue their enemies, & to flie from them; or to looke after their prey, to deuour it: not to heauen, to obserue hea∣uen, and to send vp thither by the beames of their sight, their most ardent vowes, as man alone doth. Moreouer, this farre fly∣ing sight of man, is a noble signe of his spirituall know∣ledge,
which vniting the time past to the presēt, doth alwayes casts her goodly thoughts vpon the future. The third is the reuerent ma∣iesty of the whole face, that sparkling fire of the eyes, stri∣king a colde feare into the fiercest creatures; and a fly∣ing amazement, which are eye-witnesses of some hidden nature very diuerse to that of beasts. We reade of the Em∣perour Maimilian, I. who being detained a prisoner by them of Bruges, & entreated vnworthily, reduced to ex∣treame, dangers, and hourely ready to bee slaine, yet no∣thing daunted, nor abating the greatnes of his courage, his cruellest enemies durst not behold him in the face; the most mutinous did him
reuerence, and the beames of his eyes (saith the History) did amaze, and pierce the consciences of the Rebels, to the quicke. We may say as much of the French King, Francis I. taken prisoner at the battaile of Pauia; for hee had no prison, but a royall Fcalel. li. 3. of the french Mō. Court. What cause was there of such amazement in their victorious enemies, in regard of their prisoners? if it were not that in them (being in that estate) apeared marks of their royall dignity, of their spirituall vnction, of their diuine Lieutenancie; which did melt and co∣found the hearts of their ad∣uersaries. Let vs say the same of man; for although he be a prisoner, sold vnder sinne, and slaue to Satan, yet hath he in
him the diuine character, the breathing of the mouth of God, the liuely Image of the liuing God, who giues him a royalty ouer all creatures; who terrifies them with his onely looke, puts them to flight by his bare words, and makes them obey and serue by his commandement: And if at any time they make shew to reuenge themselues, they are either prest on by famine, or thrust on by feare to de∣fend their liues; or else God would haue it so by reason of the sinnes of man. The fourth are his good∣ly words, expressing the di∣uine cōceptions of the soule, proper to man onely: The speech is the Image of the soule; he that shall mince and digest it, shewes himselfe o
be an hypocrite. See farther what Serres saith in the first Serre. epist. 115. of the signes. Let no man ob∣iect the speaking of parrots, for these words found no∣thing of their intention, but rashly giue againe the sound of the words which are tun'd into their eares, without any vnderstanding, As for Bala∣ams Asse, which spake with sence to her vniust master, say∣ing, What haue I done that thou hast beaton me thrice? am not I thine Asse? haue I▪ beene accustomed to doe so vnto thee? shewing that there was some strong reason that forced her to stay. It is so rare a miracle, as it may bee nei∣ther before nor since, the like hath not happened: & there∣fore Moses saith, that the E∣ternall opened the Asses
mouth, or framed by his pow er, a humaine voyce in the Asses mouth. As for the Oakes of Done and the Oxen which draw∣ing at Plough in the second Punike warre, spake these words (Beware Rome) either it is fabulous, or the Diuell spake by them. But the most excellent. words of man, be∣ing set downe immortally in writing, or flying eternally in memorie of men, shewes that their spring is immortall, as much as the effect can repre∣sent the cause. Oh God, how could this knowledge of the immortalitie, this ardent de∣sire thereof, the expression of this desire by immortal words come into the thought of man, and from man, if all in him were mortall?
And to finish it, wee may add the quicknes of hearing, vnderstanding the singing of birds, the musicke of voices and the harmomie of instru∣ments. Let no man obiect other creatures vnto me, they heare the soūd, but not the ac cord of tunes. Moreouer this hearing of man is so perswa∣ded by the charms of a diuine tongue speaking from a Pul∣pit of truth, as she would wil∣lingly leaue the world to en∣ioy the heauenly felicitie; no small coniecture that the soule is capable of immorta∣litie, seeing she hath such power ouer the eare her Or∣gan, to make it vnderstand & desire, at the declining of the dying body, See moreouer what Iohn de Serres sayth, in the 45. profe of the immortality of the soule.
The first Obiection. Whatsoeuer is built vpon an vncertaine foundation, is doubtfull and wauering. The immortalitie of the soule is built vpon an vncertaine foundation. IT seemes that the rea∣son of the preaching of the soule in her exēption from the graue, flowes originaly for that she vnderstāds immortal things, & that by the ioyning of time past with the present she infers the future; wherein she is chiefely distinguished from beasts which are mor∣tall: but this ground-worke is not sollid. Some one spea∣king of the soule, to shew her immortalitie, saith, that they
did not iudge her eternall, for that no man could compre∣hend the Eternitie, that is to say, that long terme past without beginning: If this be admitted, the question is de∣cided, and the soule will be found mortall, seeing that she cannot perfectly compre∣hend the immortalitie; for it is as difficult to conceaue a continuitie to come without end, as it is of that which is past without beginning. More ouer the difference of a rea∣sonable man, hath no aduan∣tage by his continuance ouer beasts, seeing that continu∣ance is but an accident, and beasts are not longer liued then trees, yea shorter, yet are they are as much aboue trees, as men are aboue beasts. Thirdly they whom
we wholy follow, as Aristotle, (that myracle of the world) Gallen the first fauorite of na∣ture, Hippocrates surnamed the diuine, and others, haue spoken doubtfully, or denyed it flatly; Gallen, Aristoxenus and Dicearchus Aristotles di∣sciples, yea and Plutarke him∣selfe do witnesse, that Aristotle denyed it: Hippocrates sayd, that the soule went alwayes on vnto death. Finally, if she be of heauen and immortall, why doth she not participate of heauen & immortalitie? why are her thoughts fixt vpon earth and perishable things? The plant retaines something of the soyle, what hath the soule of heauen? Answer, Mans vnderstan∣ding comprehends in a cer∣ten
fashion a continuance without end, and for proofe, giue him a terme of an hun∣dred Millions of yeares: hee will extend his spiritual sight an hundred Millions beyond that; and if you will, as farre beyond it, for that this visible force cannot be in any sort limited by time. The hea∣uens and starres in their sub∣stance shall continue without end, yet in their quallities they must change; but the soule doth well comprehend this continaunce. Moreouer it is no good consequence to say, Bulls feele not the vigour of their force, therefore they haue none. A man being borne and bred in the bot∣tome of a darke caue, thinks that he hath no facultie to see, is he the therefore blinde?
the soule being buried in the darkenesse of a mortall body as in a graue, sees not her im∣mortalitie, hath she therfore none? Thirdly, we doe not say that man is immortall, for that he differs from beasts, but for many reasons deliuered & to be deliuered. Fourthly, the Philosophers aboue mentio∣ned would see and touch the soule in her immortalitie, & she is not subiect to any sence S. Basile hath seene it in spirit Lib. 2. de anima. & written it with his hand: The soule, sayth he, cannot be seene with eyes, for that she is not illuminated by any colour, nor hath any figure or corporal character. Aristotle knew it whengoing out of the fabrike of corporall nature, hee sayd that it was not the charge of a Physition to treat
of all sorts of soules, as is the intellectuall, which hee pro∣nounceth to differ from the sensitiue & vegetatiue, from which, he sayth, shee may se∣parate her selfe, as the perpe∣tuall from the corruptible. Gallen had his eyes fixed on∣lie vpon the body (the subiect of Phisick) and therefore hee sayd freely, that it did not im∣port him in his arte, if hee were ignorant how the soules were sent into the bodyes, or whether they past from one to an other; But if it please Gallen, leauing the limites of his arte, to take the fresh ayre of diuine Philosophy, pre∣sently his goodly conception is followed with these words The soule is distilling from the vniuerfall Spirit, descen∣ding from heauen, &c.
Which hauing left the earth, recouers heauen, and dwells with the Moderator of all things in the Celestiall places. As for Hippocrates, his words sound more of the immortalitie, then of the death of the soule, hauing this sence, That the soule goes alwayes increasing vntil the death of the bodie. But if you desire effects and not words, what conceit could Aristotle, Gallen and Hippocrates haue of the soule to bee mortall, who by an immortall labour haue purchased such great same throughout the world? and whose authoritie is the cause that they are now produced, and maintained? Finally, that which he ob∣iects of the soules thoughts, fixed for the most part on
the fraile things of this pas∣sing world, it is no smal signe of the corruption of man∣kind; but no argument, that the soule is perishable, seeing she retaines still the immor∣tal seale which God hath set vpon her in her first creati∣on. The. 2, Obiection. The container, and that which is contained, should enter∣taine themselues by a iust pro∣portion. The body and the soule are the container, and contained. IF the soule bee immortal, seeing the body is mortall, what proportion were there betwixt the soule and body? How hath nature
(which doth all things by a iust weight, number, and measure) ioyned things to∣gether which are so dislike? It serues to no purpose to produce the birde kept in a cage, which as soone as shee can get out flies away; for he is kept there by force, and not as forme in substance. Answere: Wee grant the whole argument, and wee adde, that it is sinne which came by accident, that hath caused this great dispropor∣tion. Otherwise man before sinne, in his estate of innocen∣cy, had his body immortall: & therefore Iesus Christ our Sauiour, like a cunning Logi∣tian, drew the resurrection of the body from the immor∣tality of the soule, for that God was called the God of Mat. 22. 31
Abraham, of Isaacke, and of Iacob; but God sayth, hee is not the God of the dead but of the liuing. So sayth Saint Augustine, and Saint Bernard, that the soule is so separated from the body, as there re∣maines still a naturall incli∣nation to resume it againe, & to minister to his body; and this onely doth hinder her, that shee is not affectionate towards God withal her ver∣tue and force, as be the An∣gells; and therefore her bles∣sednesse is imperfect: For the soules, ô flesh (saith Bernard) cannot without thee bee ac∣complished In sermo. 5. de festo omnium Sancto. in their ioy, nor perfect in their glory, nor consummated in their felici∣ty; and in the same place hee distinguisheth their degrees or places for the soule; in this
life as in a Tabernacle; before the resurrection in heauen, as in a gallery; and then after the resurrection in the house of God. But you will say, this answere is Metaphisicall, I desire one that is naturall. Answere: This goodly order which you recommend in na∣ture required this ordering, that as there are some Crea∣tures meerely spirituall, o∣thers meerely corporall, so there were some which were mixt, both spirituall and cor∣porall, and that is man, who in that smal forme represents all that is in the world, and who by his senses doth com∣municate with the Creatu∣res, and by his vnderstanding with the Angells, giuing his right hand to heauen, and his left to the earth.
The 3. Obiection. If reason loades vs to the im∣mortality of the soule, by the same meanes she shold guide vs to the resurrection of the body. But that is not true. I Proue the Minor by this knowne Maxime of reason, That there is no returne from priuation to the habit, nor (by consequence) from death to life, no more then from starke blindnes to sight. Wherefore they of Athens (where one writes that the men are borne Philosophers) hearing S. Paul discourse of many points of heauenly Act. 17, 32. doctrine, they gaue an atten∣tiue heare vnto him; but
when hee came to the Resur∣rection of Iesus Christ, they interrupted him, mocking at him as one that doated. Ans. I deny it, that the resurrectiō of the dead is absolutely be∣yond the apprehension of na∣ture; The West-Indians who are without the Church of Christ, beleeue it and practise it, as well by the ceremonies of their interrements which aime directly at it, as by the vsuall intreaties they make to the Spaniards, digging for the gold of their Sepulchres, that they should not take out & carry away the bones, to the end they may rise a∣gaine speedily, as Benzo re∣ports. Lib, 2. c. 20 At, Rome this Epitaph is yet to be read in Latine vp∣on a Pagans tombe: The pub∣like hath giuen a place vn∣to
Aurelius Balbus, a man of an vnspotted life; I rest heere in hope of the resurrection. But that which is most won∣derfull and exceedes all cre∣dit, if they that write it were not eye witnesses and worthy of credit, that in Egypt in a place neere vnto Caine, a mul∣titude of people meete on a certaine day in march, to bee spectators of the resurrection of the flesh, as they say; where from Thursday, to Saterday inclusiuely, they may see and touch bodies wrapt in their sheetes after the ancient manner; but they neither see them standing nor walking, 2. tom. l. 4. of the bisto. meditati∣ons. c. 13. but onely the armes or the thighes, or some other part of the body which you may touch: If you go farther off and then returne presently,
you shall finde these mem∣bers to appeare more out of the ground, and the more they change place, the more diuers these motions ap∣peare. This admirable sight is written by Olaus Magnus, by certaine Venetian Ambassa∣dors, by a Iacopin of Vlmes & others; but I leaue the inter∣pretation free to the iudge∣ment of the reader. Thirdly, if it were a worke without the compasse of reasō, Plutar∣que, Herodotus, nor Plato wold euer haue beene credited in writing, that one Thespesius, Aristeus, and Erus, were rai∣sed vp againe. Plinie, who be∣leeued nothing but what hee saw; among many that were raysed vp, he reports of a wo∣man which was dead seuen
dayes, and raised againe: and that one Gabienus a valiant souldier of Caesars, being put to death by order of iustice, and left vpon the publike place, was found afterwards speaking, and asking for Pompey, who came vnto him and had much speech with him. Melchior Flauian makes mention of a woman whom hee had seene, whose name was Mellula, neere vnto Da∣mas in Syria, raysed vp againe the 6. day after her death, in the yeare 1555. God will bring such tokens, to assure the world of a future and v∣niuersall Resurrection. As for the Maxime, that there is no returning againe to the habite, it is abusiue not only to God, who can do all, but euen to nature, and to
the order of the world, which hath his forces limited: So in a little child, whose teeth haue beene pulled out, the vegetatiue vertue will bring vp new. So we reade of a certaine Abbesse, who being an 100. yeares olde, grewe young a∣gaine, had her monethly courses, her teeth put forth againe, her haire grew black, the wrinckles of her face fil∣led vp: Finally, shee became as fresh and as faire as shee had beene at the age of 20. yeeres. And if wee may be∣leeue histories, she was not a∣lone, but followed and pre∣ceded by many others. The naturall vertue at a certaine time, as trees in the Spring, did renue her worke euen foure times; as to that man
seene in the yeere 1536, by the Viceroy of the Indies, who examined it carefully, and found out the truth. Fourthly, that which shewes an insenfible impression of na∣ture of the future Resurrecti∣on, is the earnest and generall care to burie the dead hono∣rably, yea to keep them from corruption, by balmes and Aromaticall sents, by images of brasse, and nayles fastened in the bodies, for that brasse hath a speciall vertue against corruption. There are yet o∣ther deuices, which the Egyp∣tians haue, and doe vse, and particularly obserued by thē of Arran, an insularie region, whereas the bodyes hang in the ayre and rot not; so as the families without any amaze∣ment, know their Fathers,
Grandfathers, and great∣grandfathers, and a long Ortel. in his great Theal tab. 10. band of their predecessors. Peter Martir of Milan, writes 2. Decad. l. 2. the same of some West-Indians of Comagra. Moreouer, I deny that man may alwayes see the tayle of that wherof he sees the head; the resurrection of the body, seeing the immortality of the soule; that he must needes see the consequent, if he disco∣uers the Antecedent: for the one hiding it selfe, the other appeares, sometimes to the sight of the vnderstanding. And to conclude, I deny not but that it is true which mans reason cannot verifie, vntill it hath found out why the Adamant doth so power∣fully draw iron vnto it, and holds it fast by an vnknowne
vertue; & why forked sticks of Elder are proper to dis∣couer veines of gold and sil∣uer? Why long aftrr a man is dead, the bloud will gush out if the murtherer appro∣cheth? Why if some despe∣rate man hang himselfe, will there rise suddaine stormes and tempests? Why the stone called the Amede, drawes i∣ron to it on the one side, and reiects it on the other? with infinite other secrets of Na ture. The third Obiection. We onely feare that which wee think should be hurtfull vn∣to vs. The soule feareth death. Therfore the soule thinks death should be hurtfull vnto her.
SOme make a question how the soule can be im∣mortall, seeing she hath so great feare of death. Men laugh at the attempt of little children, be they neuer so in choler; for that they cannot hurt them: why should not the soule thē mock at death? Doth she not in like manner see the immortality, & feele it in her selfe, without giuing so great apprehension to the poore body, which, of it selfe without her should ne∣uer feare death, no more then a bruit beast? Why is not the power of death dissolued, whereas the authority of im∣mortality intercedes? as Ter∣tullian speakes in the first booke of the Trinity. Answer. This is a most eui∣dent signe, not of the morta∣lity
of the soule, but that man is degenerate and corrupt. That her Port is no more so free and braue, But casts her eye downe, like a fearefull slaue. He seeles in his Conscience, that he is guilty of high trea∣son to God; that this volun∣tary offence must soon or late bring a necessary punishmēt; he feels in this life, some smal touch; he fears & not with∣out reason (if by faith & re∣pentance his pardon bee not inrowled, and his absolution sealed) that at the departure from this life, the executio∣ner of diuine vengeance should stand lurking behind death, to take him by the throat, and to punish him according to his merits. Wherefore if corruption did
not generally possesse al men, she would suppresse this fear, reuerence her Creator, and do her duty vnto him; and then she should see that by that respectiue feare to offend her God, she should be fully de∣liuered from all other feare: shee should see, that fearing onely the death of the soule, (which is onely to be feared) shee should not feare that of the body, which is to be desi∣red. But for that most men (as S. Augustine doth teach) feare the separation of the Tom. 2. in Psal. 48. soule from the body, and not the true death, which is the separation from God: it hap∣pens, that fearing that, they fall often into this: So the soule beeing willing to shake off this feare of the Creator, she must needes feare euery
creature, euen the smallest, frogs, mice, and flies; which flying about, awake him sud∣dainely, and many times trouble him much; but in the end death is aboue all ex∣treame feares the most feare∣full: And why is this? if like vnto bruite beasts all dyed in him; and if in death there were nothing to bee feared. Wherefore Propertius saith: The spirit is something death leaues it in store, The palest shadowes scapes to the burning shore. But to conclude: The soule hauing beene too familiar with the flesh, shee hath got∣ten a habite, she hath drawne such corruption, as being ig∣norant) of the happinesse which attends her in heauen,
shee cannot leaue this valley of misery, this obscure pri∣son, but with great griefe: be∣ing like vnto the man, which being carried away an In∣fant by a she wolfe, was nou∣rished by wolues, did houle with them, and did liue, and would liue among them: and if hee were taken by other men, he would leaue them to returne to his wolues, as the History makes mention of one, verifying the Prouerbe, That nourishment passeth nature. The sixt Argument from the efficient cause, of Im∣mortalitie.
The eleuation aboue time and place, is the efficient cause of Immortaliti. But the soule is eleuated aboue all time and place. IT is without all question, that onely time ruines all things, yet the vnderstan∣ding is not subiect to time; for the time past is present vnto it: And therefore man shall see an act plaied before him, and yet he shall haue another in his vnderstanding, which was done 10. 20. or 30. yeares before: and shall haue it so present in his minde, as the spirituall intuition thereof, will steale from his corporall eyes that which is presently acted before them. So Scipio Affricanus sayed, that he was neuer lesse alone, then when
he was alone; why? For that his actes past, his armies led, and his triumphes, presented themselues vnto him in the most solitarie walkes of his garden. Obserue a horse; he doth not see, seele, nor thinke of any thing, but the obiect that is before his eyes: But contrarie-wise, the soule is there where she stayes least; she studies, and calls to mind what is past, & becomes wise for the future before shee sees; and of three times makes but one, for that she is not subiect to time; this is plain∣ly seene in the Prophets, to whom the future is reuealed in the spirit as it were pre∣sent, by him that hath made time. And this is the true reason why the Prophets speak without lying, of things
to come, as if they had bin done: So Esay chap. 9. spake of Iesus Christ; A child is borne vnto vs, a child is gi∣uen vs; for hee saw him borne with his Propheticall eyes, dead and risen againe. I would insist vpon this Argu∣ment if it were not as plaine as it is firme. As for the naturall place of the Soule, she is not de∣finite, for she is all in the braine, all in the heart, all in the liuer, all in the Ma∣trix; & so of the other parts of the bodie, not according to the totall of her vertue; for she is one in the head, an nother the feete, another in the sight, another in the hearing. But she is thus diffu∣sed according to the to∣tall of her essence, which
makes her in some sort infi∣nite, and by consequent, im∣mortall. It is not then of her as of the moouer of a great wheele, which touch∣ing one part makes all the rest turne; Nor as a King who sitting in his Pallace stretcheth out his hands to the farthest confines of his kingdome: But as God in the world, who is in heauen, on earth, and all in all. The first Obiection. All that is distempered by heate and drought, is perishable. Such is the Soule. GAllen thinking that the Soule burnes in the body by a burning feauer; is lost with the great
losse of bloud, and that a strong poyson doth poy∣son it, hee protests plainely, that vntill that time hee had doubted what the substance of the Soule was; but then growne wiser, as well by practise, as by age, he durst boldly sweare, that it was nothing but the temperature of the bodie. And therefore calling Pla∣to out of his graue, hee de∣mands of him, how it is pos∣sible the soule should be im∣mortall? Answer: The heate of a fe∣uer, and the corporall force cannot worke vpon the soule, neither can she suffer; and al∣though the actions which the soule doth by meanes of the Organes of the body, be depraued or interrupted by
the deprauation and inter∣ruption of the Organes, yet for all that the soule loseth nothing of her vertue, nor of her habilitie. He that euen now played excellently well on the Lute, must not be held to haue lost his cunning, if taking a Lute ill mounted and with  string, hee play ill; or if ha∣uing no strings at all, he cea∣seth to play: It is euen so of the spirit in the body for in the sinewes flowing from the braine, there distills a cer∣tain vital spirit, as a beame of the Sun, of whose force the soule makes vse first, to han∣dle the sinewes, and by them the Muscles; which being af∣terwards moued, reuiue eue∣ry member apart, and alto∣gether. Now if any maligne
disease come to depraue this subtile humor, the functions of the soule feele it, but not the soule. Moreouer, as certaine vn∣cleane spirits, remaining in some darke and filthy house by reason of the vapors a∣greeing with their dispositiō; if it be clensed, the doore & windowes set open, if a good aire, a comfortable Sun, and wholsome wind enter into it; if it be inhabited by many, who passe the time ioyfully, and especially if they play vpon many Instruments, these spirits quit the place: So by a contrary analogie, the soule is kept and enter∣tained in the bodie by cer∣taine spirituall qualities and fit for her exercises; which comming in time to change
to the contrarie, they chase away the soule, being glad vpon that occasion to dis∣lodge from a place which was not to be held. Thirdly, if the tempera∣ment bee nothing but the Quintssence of the mixtion of the foure elements, where∣of mans body is compounded as the harmonie is the fift sownd, rysing from all the parts in Musicke: and if Gallen meanes not to speake but of this soule which hee hath felt in the touching of the pulse, in the Anato∣mie of the body; I say, of the vegetatiue and the sensitiue soule, wee may yeelde vnto him; But of the reasonable soule which contaynes these two, within her compasse (as the fift angle doth a triāgle &
quadrangle) & which makes vse of the temper to the bo∣die, as of an instrument, to rule and gouerne it, as the Pilot doth the Helme to conduct his ship; that cannot be: for to confound the in∣strument with the principal agent, the Pilot with the Helme were no reason: In the actiōs of a vegetatiue & sensi∣tiue life, although there be a mature tēperature required, yet shall they neuer proue, that this temper is necessary to vnderstand and contem∣plate, seeing that out of all question the most exquisite contemplation consists in the sequestratiō of the soule from the communion of the bo∣dy; for that contemplation is the more certen, the more it is sequestred from grosse
circumstāces of matter, place and time; things which with their accidentarie attires are perceiued by the sēses, do of∣ten deceiue. How often hath our sight and our hearing de∣ceiued vs? thinking to see & heare one thing, which pro∣ued another. But the sciences as the Mathematicks, which extract the Essences out of bodyes, are neuer decei∣ued following their art; and much lesse the Metaphisicke, which cōtemplates the pure spirits, free from any conta∣gion of matter. But if the reasonable soule were no∣thing but the temperament of the body, it could not bee but among a milliō of beasts which are in the world, some one should bee found which had the same mixture of the
the foure first humors which are in man, and by conse∣quence, the same reasonable facultie: and if any reply that the chiefe difference is in the braine, I will answer, that the Anatomy doth not shew any difference of the braine of men and beasts. The 2. Obiection. If the soule liued out of the body, she should haue some a∣ctions without the body. But this is not true. ARistotle saith, that the soule in the body vn∣derstandeth nothing, but by her conuersation with the Ideas, which the imagi∣nation represents vnto her, whether that shee gets new
knowledge, or contemplates that which is gotten. But the Ideas perish with the bo∣dy, and by consequence, the soule. Answer. The excellent effects of the soule, suffice to conuince her presence and essence; as for the vnderstan∣ding it is double, passiue and actiue; and these two faculties remaine still, although the fi∣gures which imagination hath furnished, bee vanished. So a man in the bottome of an obscure Caue hath not lost his faculty of seeing, al∣though hee, cannot plainely iudge of colours. But the soule, you will say, vnder∣stands not any thing beeing out of the body, seeing that within it she vnderstands not any thing without him. It
followes not. That great Workman, who after a man∣ner incomprehensible to vs, hath vnited and ioyned the soule vnto the body, two such different natures, with∣out any apparent meane to reconcile them: that great workeman, I say, is powerfull to furnish new meanes to her operations, when hee hath called it vnto him: and what? wee shall know when it shall be fit. In the meane time, if we will beleeue Thomas Aqui∣nas, it shall be by the conuer∣sion . quest. 86. al, 1. of the soule to things which are simply intelligible as the other spirituall sub∣stances doe. Iesus Christ also hath vouchsafed to teach vs, that in heauen we shall be like vn∣to the Angels. Let vs not
then trouble our selues heere no more, then for the childe comming into the world: In the mothers wombe it liued by the nauell: this meanes is cut off by his birth, but na∣ture hath prouided him a mouth, another passage in another life. It is euen so of the soule; it is nourished in this corruptible life, by a car∣nall meanes, and in the hea∣uenly by another, which is spirituall. But you will re∣ply, that the soule is to re∣turne into the body; and not the infant into the wombe. I answer, That it is sufficient the similitude explaining the thing, shewes it not to be im∣possible. Moreouer, it is not likely that in the Resurrection, the body which shall bee spiritu∣all,
should furnish the same meanes for the actions of the soule, as it doth in this life; but this businesse is too intri∣cate. Let vs put in practise what S. Augustine propounds vnto vs; Let not the soule, saith he, labour do fore know it selfe absent, but to know it selfe well being present, and how much shee differs from other things: Aso, shee hath not taken her forme from Christ, but her saluation; and therefore the Sonne of God descended, and tooke vpon him mans soule, not to the end the soule should know it selfe in Christ, but that shee should know Christ within her selfe; for by the ignorance of her selfe, her saluation is not onely in danger, but by
the ignorance of the eternall word, as Tertullian doth lear∣nedly teach, lib. de Car. Christ. The third Obiection. If the soule of man were im∣mortall, it should also be im∣materiall. But she is materiall. IF the soule bee materiall, she is dissoluble into her first matter, with all other sublunary things: but she is materiall if shee proceedes from the Fathers seede, as Tertullian, Origen, and other ancient & moderne Diuines thinke, and mainetaine it by their written bookes. And in truth how can it bee said, that the infant is the sonne of his father, if hee hold no∣thing
from him but his basest part, the body, not his form, not his soule: how could the holy Ghost say, that all the soules which came out of Ia∣cobs thigh, were 66? How can Gen. 46. originall sinne flow from the father vpon the sonne, which hath no seat but in the soule? And this made S. Augustine doubt in his fourth booke of the beginning of the soule, the which he did write being olde; to doubt, I say, of this beginning, not daring to de∣liuer his opinion: and some more hardy haue maintained that she proceeded from the congression of the two seedes of man and woman, as by the striking of the iron against the stone fire comes forth. Answer. The principall foundation of the immorta∣lity
of the soule is the word of God: so they which haue had more feeling of this word, haue better acknow∣ledged it; as Zoroastres, Mer∣curius Trismegistes, Pithago∣ras, and Plato, surnamed the Diuine for that effect: but A∣ristotle, Gallen, and others, who would measure all by humaine reason, haue won∣derfully deceiued themselues in matters which exceeded this measure, as in this Do∣ctrine. If then the Obiector will beleeue this witnesse, of whom he cites a passage, the question will be soone ended: the holy Scripture sayth, that the Eternall breathed the spi∣rit of life into the nosestrills of Adam, he being framed of the slime of the earth; the
which is not spoken of any other creature: In Ecclesia∣stes it is said, that the spirit returnes to God that gaue it: Iesus dying cryed out, Father into thy hands I commit my soule. Hee promiseth to the beleeuing theefe, that he shal be that day with him in Para∣dise; finally, S. Stephen dying made this prayer, Lord Iesus receiue my soule; with a thousand other passages. As for that which he speakes of the generatiō of the soule, we first will oppose the authori∣tie of Tertullian, lib. de Anima c. 13. You mothers, sayeth he which are newly deliuered, answer, the question is of the truth of your nature, if you feele in your fruite any o∣ther viuacitie from you but what your arteries do breath.
And for this cause the infant is sayd to be the true sonne of his father and mother, from whom the bodie with his Organes proceeded; to make which perfect God in∣fused the spirit, so as this spi∣rit is made for this bodie, and not the body for this spirit simply. Moreouer, the gene∣ration is not ended, nor con∣sisteth in the production of the forme or of the matter onely, but of all that is com∣posed: therfore he that com∣poseth or that ioynes the matter with the forme, the flesh with the soule, he doth truly ingender man. But it is he that makes this con∣iunction, who disposeth so of matter and forme, as the soule followes infallibly, and it is that which makes man in
the generation, and man and woman are the begetters of the infant. As for the passage of Mo∣ses, who doth not see the in∣tellectuall figure, who means one thing for another, the body for the soule by reason of their strict vnion? Finally, that which made S. Augustin doubt of the generation of the soule, was, that hee could not comprehend how the sin which dwells in the soule of the father, doth pasfe vnto the sonne: But that is so plainely fet downe by the Di∣uines at this day, as it is need∣lesse to speake of here, neither were it to the pourpose: It sufficeth that the Pagans themselues haue acknowled∣ged that the soule came into man otherwise then from
man. Aristotle sayes plainly, that it is something from without vs: Seneca, The soule, sayth he, if thou lookest vn∣to her first beginning, is not made of that masse of heauy flesh, but is descended from the celestiall Spirit: Epictetus calls the soule a branch puld from the diuinitie: Plutarque in the Platonicall questions sayth, that the soule parti∣cipating of the vnderstan∣ding and reason, is not onely a worke of God, but a part of him, and not onely made by him, but of him; these are Hyperbolicall Elogies, but by them these personages haue made it knowne how reue∣rently they did esteeme of a reasonable Soule, hauing no thought that shee was ma∣teriall.
The 7. Argument taken from the effects of the Immortalitie of the soule. Manifest effects doe manifestly shew their cause. Consolation in the greatest hea∣uines, hope in the most despe∣rate euents, fortitude in the sharpest assaults, are effects in man proceeding from the immortalitie of the soule. MAn floating vpon the sea of this world, at e∣uery puffe of winde of aduersity would swound away and perish, if the considerati∣on of the immortall being of his soule, as a most sure an∣chor, did not comfort & forti fie him they that haue strooke against the rocks of aduersity
can witnesse it; and such as haue not, must prepare them∣selues for it; for prosperitie which seemeth to be marri∣ed vnto them, wil crosse them and ouerthrow them in the end, if they be not very wary: for that her greatest hap∣pines is miserably to sup∣plant her fauorites; & there∣fore euery man should in time make prouision of a strong Antidote against for∣tune: And the true Antidote is a full perswasion of the im∣mortalitie of the Soule. For happen what can happen, let the heauens riue, let the earth open, let the waues ouerflow the world; such a man will Medijs tran quillus in: vndis. continue constant & vndaun∣ted. By this resolution, Crates, Diogenes, Socrates, the Curij, Fabricij; Decij and others, de∣sired
rather to leaue their riches, Scepters, fauors, the quiet rest of their bodies, yea their owne liues; then to a∣bandon the least point of their dutie and honour. By this beleefe Regulus did ioy∣fully suffer the inhumane tor∣ments of the Cathaginians to maintaine the Maiestie of his Countrie. Attilius stood vnstirr'd at death that grew, And with a deathles spirit ouerflew Foes highst inflictions: smiling in disdaine At all the terrors in the Punique paine. It is also the onely assu∣rance which giues firme foo∣ting to the doctrine of Christ, and makes a Christian hope in the middest of despaire,
which seemes howrely ready to swallow him vp, either in the outward gulfe of perse∣cution; or in the inward gulfe of his flesh, of his sences, of his owne reason; which hee must renounce to reuerence this doctrines of the Crosse of Christ, which is a scandall vnto the Iewes, and follie vn∣to the Gentiles; which offends the most deuout, and is re∣iected by most learned of this world. How shall hee hope (as some haue sayd) in things so farre from reason? what, shall a man ioy when hee is a dap∣tiue, and force his reason by the which he is a man, to giue glorie to God immortall? Whence can it flow but from the spring of his immortall soule? doubtlesse it was an ad∣mirable
thing, that contrary to the Edict of Nere (where∣by whosoeuer confest him∣selfe a Christian, without any farther search should be put to death, as an enemie to mankind:) men and wo∣men went by thousands to Christian Assemblies, and to death, not sadly but ioyfully. But this exceeds all won∣ders, that all thefe miseries endured, haue no other foun∣dation, but to beleeue in a man whom no man sees; to haue one for King who hath beene hanged on the crosse, and to haue him sor the on∣ly and true God, whom they had seene to haue but the disfigured forme of an infamous seruant: to men of iudgement, and to such as the truly faithfull are, this
would seeme impossible, if their immortall spirits did not atend after this life (nay rather, this miserable death) a most happie life, as after a sharpe Winter, a most sweet Spring. Finally, the onely appre∣hension of the immortalitie of the soule, is it which giues force in the fiercest alarmes, and sharpest temptations: which made weake Dauid to triumph ouer strong Goliath; Debora and Iudith, of power∣full Tyrants: this made Sceuo∣la a prisoner to amaze king Porsenna, & to raise his seege from before Rome; with many other examples both ancient and moderne: all which had no other reasō to moue them in their braue exploicts, but the glorious brething of their
immortall Soules. The first Obiection. From deluding opinions many times there follow strange and true effects. Therefore the effects do not al∣wayes argue their cause to be true. THE false Prophets of Baal did cut thēselues; the Anabaptists at this day do strange acts; & many others deceiued with vaine fancies, which in them hold the place of certaine know∣ledge, act terrible things. Answere: That false pas∣tor, that very impostor, as counterfeit as lying, being directly opposite to the
truth, cannot bee conceiued but by comparing with the truth, whereof he is the sha∣dow and priuation. Euen so false religion presupposeth the true necessarily; for ha∣uing held her place, shee makes terrible worke, as in the false Prophets aboue mentioned, in the Anabap∣tists and other Heretickes. As then all religions haue for their first foundation the adoration of the Diuinity, although diuers and varia∣ble, which more or lesse fol∣low the patterne which hath bene giuen vs by God in his holy word: so all the Heroicke deeds, all the worthy actions, though thrust on diuersly by diuers passions, yet haue they all the immortality of the soule for their first foundati∣on,
without the which men like vnto beasts, would onely care for the belly, and not performe any worthy act; much lesse endure so many reproches and miseries in this world, as hath beene shewed, and as is dayly seene. The second Obiection. If the soule were immortall, it should be an euident Princi∣ple to euery man by his owne light, as that two & 2. make 4. that the whole is bigger then the part, that we must flie euill and do good &, things which wee know without lear∣ning. ANswere: I grant the consequence of the Maior; for that the
soule is immortal, it is cleere by her owne brightnesse, al∣though she hath beene much darkened by sinne: This is knowne to all men, in all pla∣ces, and at all times, which are the very conditions of the Principle. And all that which they alledge, is but to defend this truth against the cunning & Sophistrie of the wicked spi∣rit and of his supporters, la∣boring by cauillings to da∣zle the eye of the soule; that not seeing her immortality, she might be intrapt in the snatos of Satan, and suffer shipwradke of her faith. The third Obiection. If the soule were an essence sub∣sisting of her selfe, she should
be knowne of all. But no man could euer know it. ALL men that enter in∣to this question of the soule, cry out, O darke∣nesse, ô pitty! That which leades vs to the knowledge of things, is vnknowne vnto vs. that we haue a soule, sayth Seneca, by whose commande∣ment wee are thrust on and called backe, all men confesse it; but what this soule, this Lady and Queene is, no man can decide, neither yet where shee abides. Laertius, or ra∣ther Heraclitus for him: Let vs passe ouer the soule (sayth hee) for no man can finde it, yea, if hee should imploy his whole life; so profound is the reason thereof. Do not vrge
that the eye seeth euery thing but it selfe; for the eye seeth another eye, but one soule knoweth not another soule: yea, the eye seeth it selfe, not his image, but his proper substance, in the reflexion of his visuall beames, by the meanes of the looking∣glasse; as for the soule, al they that haue deliuered their o∣pinions, haue seemed to doate. Varro hath sayd, that Lact. de opist. c. 17. it was an aire conceiued in the mouth, purified in the lights, made lukewarme in the heart, & diffusedly spred ouer the whole body: Zeno, that it was a fire kindled in our bodies by the celestiall fire: Empedocles, and Circias, that it was nothing but the blood; Hippocrates, that it was a subtile spirit insinuated
throughout the whole body: Thales, that it was a nature mouing of it selfe without rest: Asclepiades, a common exercise of the senses: Hippoc. that she goes alwayes on vn∣till death, 6 Epistle part 5. com. 5. Finally, if it were euer, it is in this, That so many heads, so many opinions. Answere: The soule flow∣ing from the diuine essence, hath that common with God, that we see many nega tions of her, but few or no af∣firmations: but we know with Aristotle, that it is the perfec∣tion of a natural body which may haue life; that it is the beginning of nourishment, feeling, motion, and vnder∣standing: And yet more then that, although wee cannot
climbe so high: the reason is, that the knowledge which the soule hath of things, is from the senses by meanes of the Ideaes; but the soule cannot bee perceiued by the senses: of her there are no Ide∣as, nor by consequence any knowledge. And as for this aire, this fire, these spirits, such as they are fashioned in the braine, they are but or∣ganes and vessells fit for the soule; seeing that wee see them wast and consume eue∣ry moment, without losse of life, the which notwithstand∣ing cannot subsist with∣out the ministery of the soule. Finally, as for the different opinions of diuers men, they shew that they know not what it is; but withall they
demonstrate that they know there is a soule which they striue to know; but who is he that would study to know that which is not in nature, vnlesse he were mad? The second Obiection. If the soule were endowed with a speciall motion, she would expresse it by her body. But she doth not expresse it. IF the soule at the depar∣ture out of the body, had her flight towards heauen, she would giue some signe of it to the body, stirring it with some speciall motion. Simple Creatures mooue themselues in all sorts of mo∣tions, differing from plants, which without mouing from
their place, doe but grow vp and spread abroad, for that their soules are diuers: and why should not man, who hath a speciall soule, haue a speciall motion? As for that he bounds and skips, therein a goate or a cat hath more then hee; neither is that the reasonable soule that doth it, but rather the vegetatiue, the mixture of the naturall fire which raiseth him: wher∣fore as soone as a man breathes and exhales: this fire, hee falls from his leape; but of any proper or particu∣lar motion of this flying soule, hee feeleth nothing. Answere: Seruius vpon the 6. of Virgil will answer, That the soule in the body is like vnto a Lyon shut vp in a streight cage, which notwith∣standing
loseth nothing of his force, although he cannot shew it; but if he once escape, you shal see him as strong as before, so as a man would thinke his force had bene a∣bated in his prison. Moreo∣uer, some haue bene so actiue as they haue flowne; as at Pa∣ris in the yeare 1551. there was one vndertooke to flie from the Tower of Nefle vnto the Louure, the riuer being betwixt both, the King ex∣pecting him: and although hee could not get to the end of his enterprise, yet hee got vp into the aire after such an admirable manner, as hee came to the mid-way. But the flying of the Creature doth not proue his essence immortall, for then birds should be immortall. And
how then can the soules mount vp to heauen going out of the bodies? If thou doest beleeue the holy Scrip∣tures, the Angells sent to serue them louingly which shall receiue the inheritance Hebr. 1, 14 of saluation, will carry them as the Angell did poore La∣zarus. Luke 16, 22 Hereunto that good Fa∣ther Macarius had regard: There is a great Mistery, saith Hom, 22, of the estate of them that die. hee, accomplished in soules going out of the bodies; for if they bee guilty of sinne; troopes of diuells and bad angells flocking about them, seaze vpon those soules, as their slaues, and carry them away &c. But if they bee in good estate, the companies of good Angells carrying them to a better life, present
them vnto the Lord; yet wee will not deny but in the soule there is an intrinsecall vertue to climbe vp to heauen, with a swiftnesse equall to her de∣sire: if that fire hath a secret force to mount vp to his pro∣per place, being a dead Ele∣ment, what then shall the soule separated do, being so actiue, and so quicke, and whose proper Country is Heauen? And although that heauen, especially that which is the mansion of happy soules, bee so many leagues distant, as Astrologers which haue sought to take the height, haue found millions, & being much amazed haue mounted neere to two thousād millions of leagues; yet we must not beleeue that the soule is long in passing
this great distance; for that her motion, not being conti∣nued, but diuided like to that of spirits, departing out of the body she is presently in heauen, euen as in this cor∣ruptible bodie, in a moment shee sends the beames of her sight and thoughts vp to heauen. But wholy to stoppe the mouth of our aduersarie, we say that the true know∣ledge of the soule in her im∣mortalitie, is no humaine in∣uention, but a diuine reuela∣tion, as Iustine Martyr sayth; and that since shee is fallen Dial. cont Triph. from her first integritie, which fall hath so amazed & dulled her, as she knowes not truely what she hath beene, what she is, or where shee is, nor whither she shall goe, of whosesinne she is the subiect,
as Iron is of rust; it hath who∣lie spoyled her, dulled her quicknesse, and weakned her vigour; which is the cause that she stumbles in the way of health, is blynde in the knowledge of the least things & is interrupted in the course of her brauest discourses by a flye or any toye: To conclude, shee is so troubled, as shee dreames of a thousand fan∣cies, & in a manner mistakes euery thing. The fift Obiection. To alledge the desire of a mor∣sell of fruit, for the onely reason of so great a miserie, is to shew himselfe ridicu∣lous. Moyses for all the miseries of Adam and his descen∣dants,
produceth no other rea∣sons. DV Bartas hath seene this Obiection, & hath writ∣ten in these termes: Who shall direct my penne to paint the Story Of wretched mans forbidden bit-loft, glory? And, Though Adams doome in euery Sermon common, And founded on the error of a woman, Wearie the vulgar; and bee iudg'd a iest Of the prophane, zeale∣fcoffing Atheists? Answer: The offence of the first man is not so small as it seemes to an eye troubled
with carnall sence But i was a chaine where all the greatest sinnes, Were one in other, linked fast as twinnes. Let vs examine them and condemne them; The 1. is Ingratitude, to haue recei∣ued from God these soue∣raigne blessings, as wisdome, iustice, felicitie, the gouerne∣ment ouer all Creatures; and then to haue more honoured the Deuill then his bene∣factor. Secondly, Pride; not to content himselfe with his ho∣nest condition, but to seeke G. 2. 22. to make himselfe equall to his Creator. Thirdly, his Infidelitie, not to giue credit to the threat∣nings of God, Thou shalt die the death: and to beleeue Satā, mocking at the threats
of God, and accusing him of enuie; You shall not dye, but God knowes that what day you shall eate thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as Gods. Fourthly, the contempt of God, wilfully disobeying, and touching the forbidden Tree. Fiftly, his reuolt from God to his aduersarie, from whom hee hopes & attends his ima∣ginary greatnesse: the which the Doctors of the Church weighing, they haue found that it was no small sinne, but the greatest in certaine cases that man could commit; for three reasons set downe by S. Augustine, and these are Aug. lib. 4. de Ciu. D. c. 12. & 15. the contents, 1. Neuer man had that facillitie to keepe himselfe
from sinne that Adam had; for hee had but one Com∣mandement, and that most easie; hee had no concupi∣scence that induced him to e∣uill; but he had diuine autho∣ritie, & that grieuous threat to diuert him. 2. Man was most happy in the earthly Paradise; but we although we haue great bles∣sings from our God, yet wee haue them partly in faith, as th' Incarnatiō of Iesus Christ; partly in hope, as eternall life: which is the cause that not tasting them yet, wee feele many doubts crossing our minde. Besides, in the mid∣dest of Gods consolations, wee are stung with many af∣flictions, so as it is no won∣der if many leauing the way of heauen, turne themselues
to the goods of this world. But Adam had receiued infi∣nite blessings of God, with a perfect knowledge of him, and no vexation; and yet hee was an Apostata vnto God. 3. That sinne is greatest which brings most ruine vn∣to mankinde: but there is none committed since, that hath made a greater spoile; By it (sayth S. Augustin in the former place) the vniuersall Masse of humaine nature is condemned; for that hee which did first commit it, is punished with his posteritie, which was in his rheines. It followes then, that it is a most horrible sinne, and they that speake otherwise, haue neuer duly cōsidered thereon: or else they are verie bad dis∣puters, concluding it a small
fault in breaking an easie com mandement of a light thing; for it is that which giues most waight vnto the sinne, as hath beene already declared. To the King of heauen, im∣mortall, inuisible, to God onely wise, be honor and Glory, for e∣uer and euer, Amen. FINIS.
The Errata. FOl. 227. l. 11. for death reade life. In M. fol. 254. verses set in prose. fol. 161. l. 7. for men reade wise men. fol. 398. l. 13. for Creatures reade Creator. fol. 306. l. penul. for daintie reade vani∣tie. fol. 313. l. 7. re Massachres, ead. l. 16. for sand reade and, fol. 330. l. 7. reade who hath learned, fol. 344. l. 17. r. alarmes, fol. 355. l. 7. reade Apologie. fol. 361. l. 6. reade thousands of offen∣ders. fol 372. l. 4. reade seazure, fol. 374. l. 1. reade for there. fol. 382. l. 7. reade seene. fol. 404. l. 14. for ioyfull reade pleasant.
