13366 99854936 20398
TROIA BRITANICA: OR, Great Britaines Troy. A Poem Deuided into XVII. seuerall Cantons, intermixed with many pleasant Poeticall Tales. Concluding with an Vniuersall Chronicle from the Creation, untill these present Times. Written by Tho: Heywood. Et prodesse solent, & Delectare Poetae. LONDON; Printed by W. Jaggard, 1609.
To the Right Honourable Edward Earle of Worcester, Lord of Chepstoll, Ragland, and Gower, Knight of the most Noble order of the Gar∣ter, Mayster of the Horse, and one of the Kinges most Honourable Priuy Councell. TO you, whose Fauour gaue my Muse first breath, To try in th' Ayre her weake vnable wing, And soare this pitch, who else had tasted death Euen in her byrth, from the Castalian spring She dedicates her labours (as they are) Though as you see, poore, featherlesse, and bare. Your Noble hand, to her, supportance gaue, Euen in her Pen-lesse Age about to fall, Her Cradle then had beene her Infant graue, Had not your power and Grace kept her from thrall: Then by the Muse, by your hie bounty raisde, Y'are by your Merit and my duty praisde. Her power (though weake) yet to her sickly strength Is willing, your past Graces to record, Though smothered long, yet she findes time at length To shew her office to her Patron-Lord, Wishing (for your sake) that vpholds her still, Her worth, had correspondence to her will. Then had her Theame, that treats of forren deeds, Beene only tunde to your desert and Merit, And you, from whom her nonage Art proceeds, Should by her Pen, Eternity inherit:
But since (great Lord) her best fruites are but words, Prise what her hart, not what her Art affoords. Tis fit those Lordes which we from Troy deriue, Should in the Fate of Troy remembred be, For since their Graund-sire vertues now suruiue, And with the Spirits of this Age agree, It makes vs fill our Cantons with such men, As liumg now, equaldtheyr vertues then. Homer (long since) a Chronicler Diuine, And Virgill, haue redeemd olde Troy from fire, Whose memory had with her buildings line In desolate ruyne, had not theyr desire Snatcht her fayre Tytle from the burning flame, Which with the Towhe had else consumde her name. Had they surviude in these our flourishing daies, Your vertues from the auncient Heroes drawne, In spight of death or blacke obliuions rage, Should liue for euer in Fames glorious fawne, Rankt next to Troy, our Troy-novant should be, And next the Troyan Peeres, your places free. Nor let your Honour my weake stile despise, That striues to Register your names with theirs; For could my numbers like blinde Homersrise, I would create you, Fames eternall heyres: Accept my strength, (my weaknesse I bewray) Had I like Art, I would as much as they. Your Honours euer faithfully deuoted, Tho: Heywood.
TO the two-fold Readers: the Courteous, and the Criticke. THe fauourable and gracious Reader, I salute, with a submisse Conge both of heart and knee: To the scornefull, I owe not so much as an hypocriticall in∣treat, or a dissembled curtesie. I am not so vnex∣perienced in the enuy of this Age, but that I knowe I shall encounter most sharpe and seucre Censurers, such as continually carpe at other mens labours, and superficially pervsing them, with a kind of negli∣gence and skorne, quote them by the way, Thus: This is an Error, that was too much streacht, this too slightly neglected, heere many things might haue been added, there it might haue beene better followed: this superfluous, that radiculous. These indeed know∣ing no other meanes to haue them selues opinioned in the ranke of vnderstanders, but by calumniating other mens industries. These Satyrists I meet thus: It were (in my opinion) more honor and honesty for them, to betake them seriously to the like studies, and the time they wast in detracting others, rather spend in instruc∣ting themselues, and by some more excellent worke (moulded out of their owne braines) giue the foyle to others of lesse Fame and consequence: This were a com∣mendable and worthy detraction, sauouring of desert; the other, a meere ranco∣rous folly, grounded on nothing but malicious ignorance. For who more apt to call coward then the most tymerous, but he only merits a name among the vali∣aunt, that hath actually and personally wonne his reputation by some deed of same and Honour. But since these Criticks are a generall Subiect in the front of subiect booke, I am content to neglect them, as those Ireguard not, and to the friend∣ly and best iudging Reader, thus turne my Apologie. I haue aduentured (right Courteous) to publish this Poem, and present it to thy generall acceptance; If it be gently receiued, and fauour ably ceusured, it may incourage me to proceed in some future labour; if any way distasted, I am so farre from troubling the world with more, that I shall hold this little, much too much. Yet if you vnderstandingly consider this proiect, you shall finde included herein a
briefe memory or Epitome of Chronicle, euen from the first man, vnto vs, this se∣cond time created Britons, with a faithfull Register, not onely of memorable thinges done in Troy and this Island, but of many, and the most famous accidents happening through the World, In who se raigne and what yeare of the world they chanced (with which we haue conferred the Histories of the Sacred Byble) & the truth of the times so eeuen, that who so euer will daigne the perv sall of these, shall not onely perceiue such thinges were doone, but bee also-satisfied in whose Raigne (then successiuely gouerning in the kingdome of Britaine) they happened. In all which, I haue taskt my selfe to such succinctnesse and breuity, that in the iudisiall perusall of these few Cantons (with the Scolies Annexed) as little time shall bee hazzarded, as profite from them be any way expected. Accept then (I entreat you) this mingled Subject (as well home-borne as for∣raine) and Censure it as fauourably, as I haue offred it freely. Though something may perhaps distast, something againe I presume will please the most curious Pal∣late: Let that which pleaseth, mittig at the harshnes of the other. He that speaks much, may (excusably) speake somewhat Idely, and he that in vnknown Climats trauayles farre, may (by misaduenture) wander out of the way: but where the mayne intent and purpose is honest and good, it is pardonable to expect the best. And in that hope, I prostrate these my barraine industries to your kindest and gentle Constructions.
Proemium. I Hold it necessary as a Preface to this generall History, to remember some Antiquities touching the ages of the World, with the first peopling of kingdomes, and of the foure Monarchies which may illustrate this Poem, if in any place it appcate darke and intricate. Theye are 16 56. from the Creation, Noah entred the Ark, and the Vntuerse was destroied by the Deluge, with all man∣kind (Noah and his family excepted) of his three sonnes Sem, Ham, and Iapheth, were all Nations procreated. The posterity of Sem in∣habited Carion. the East by the Riuer Euphrates; Cham, the places neere Irodan & Nyle, towards the Meridian; Iapheth, the lesse Asia towards the West, whence many Nations of Europe proceeded. Sems sonnes were fiue; Elam, of whom came the Persians, from him Xenophon Xenophon. deriueth Cyrus. Assur, of him came the Assyrians. Ninus, of him the Niniuttes and Badilonians. Arphaxad, of him the Caldeans, and from his Nephewe Fber, were driued the Herbrues; (the word signifieth Trauellers or Strangers) Of this line came Abraham, Dauid, and the Messias. Aram, of him the Syrians descen∣ded, of which Damasco is the metropolis; therefore it was thus written; The head of Aram is Damascus. The posterity of Cam was Chus, of whom came the Aethiopians in the farthest Ptolometes. Coasts of Aphrica, and the Libians cald to this day Chirsita: The sonnes of Chus were Saba of whome the Sabaans, and Euila, of wheme the Indians descended. Nemrod first raignd in Babylon, Misraim occupied Aegypt, which the Arabians and Turks to this day call Mizri: The sonnes of misraim were Lydas, who pco∣pled Lydia, a Nation that after seated themselucs in some parts of Itahe, and La∣bain of whom the Sun-burnt Lybians are thought to descend: Of Euam came Pinus. Herodo. Pliny the Cyrenians, who built the Citty Cerenaica, of who came the Mauritanians, and of him a famous Riuer that still beares his name. Of Canaan came the Sydonians and Tyrians: Heath built Hebron where Abraham dwelt and was buried: Iebuseus possest Gaba and Ierusalem. Iapheths sons were Gomor or Togerma, of whom the Cinerians take their originall, They are seated beyond Thrace, neer the Meotiden Fenne, where the Bosphort inhab te, not farre from Cimbrica Chersonessus: Of Magog came the Sthians, and of them the Turks: and to proue the Turke to be in God and Magor, Ezechiell saith, the Nations of Magog lie toward the south, which in the latest dayes shall seeke the fall of Israell. And the Apocalip. Magog Hdotus shall lastly Emperise the world: Of Madai came the Medes: Of Iauan or Iabu, the Iouians or Graecians, The sonnes of Iauan, were Elisa, of whome came the Aeolians in Asia minor. Tharsis. built Tharsis the chiefe Citty of the Cilicians: Of Cethim came the Macedonians: Of Adodanim the Dodoneans in Epire. Iauan, was that Ianus that raignd in Italy. Of Tubal came the Hispani and Iberi. Of Mosoch
came the Muscouites. Of Tyrus the Thrasians. The Sons of Gomer were Ascanes, Riphat, and Togorma. Of Ascanes came the , who after shifted thēselues Apollonius in Argonant Iustinus post∣hum. Isliad. 2 . into other Prouinces, and ofthem came the Cimbrians, the Bythinians, the Can∣coues, the , and Heueti: Of Riphat came the Riphei, Gyants that inhabited the Riphean Hilles, where the Sanromass then liued. By the  are meant all such as speake in the  tongue: From Riphat came also the Paphlagonians, these  themselues into Europe, some inhabiting Russia, Lytuania and Polonia, from the Adriaticke shoare vnto Illusria. Likewise Fistula, Albis, and Bo∣hemia,  where before liued the Hermaduri and Boij. Among the Sonnes of Sem Gether is numbred, of whom came the Getes, Paralip: they were called Gotti or Gothes, who inhabited Wallachia, these speake the Al∣main toung, and mixt themselues with the Germans, whose name is deriued of Gerim and Ani, which signifieth, miserable Strangers. The French are cald  . of Wallen, which in the Almain toong signifies, Wanderers. From Brute cam the Britons, since called Angli. In Nemrod was the first Monarchy establisht, he liued a hundred years after the Floud, after 200. yeares Ninus built Niniuy in , whose wife Semira∣mis First Mon. after his death erected the walles of Babilon. Ninius her sonne succeeded, in whose time Abraham came into Palestine, Him succeeded Amraphel king of Sen∣naar or Babylon, Of these Assyrian Monarches Sardanapalus was the last, whose proud name we thus deriue; Sar, a Captaine; Dan, a ludge; , a Destroy∣er; He was ouerthrowne by phul-Belochus a Babilonian, and Arbaces a Medean when Osia raignd in Iuda, phul belochus raigned ouer the Babilonians and Ni∣niuites forty yeares. Arbaces ouer the Meades and Persians. Belochus warred vp∣on Israel, whom succeeded his Sonne Phal Assur, called in the Scriptures Tiglat Peilassur: He raigned 23. yeares, him Salmanasser succeeded, and raigned ten yeares, he besiedged Samaria, of him Hosea speakes, Chapter 10.  suc∣ceeded Salmanasser, who besiedged Hierusalem, and raigned ten yeares, his Ar∣my was ouerthrowne by the Angels: Assur haddon next ruld, ten yeares. In him Esay. 39. Kings, 4. 23 Paral. 35 I eremy 39 Daniel  declined the Monarchy of Assiria, and Merodach became Monarch ouer the Chaldees, Benmerodach raigned after his Father 21. after him Nabuchednezzar Primus 35. He warred against Aegipt, Nabuchadnezzar Magnus raigned forty, in Zedechias time he besiedged Hierusalem, a  and sixe monthes, him succee∣ded euill Merodach, who releast Ieconias: he dead, Balsaar succeeded foureteene , he was a greet Blasphemer. In his time Babylon was raced, and the Mo∣narchy transferred to the Persians: he himselfe being slaine by Cyrus. The kings Died:  of Aegypt in the times of this Monarchy, were these. Osyris with his Wife Isis, who liued in the time of Abraham. Orus, Bochoris, Busyris, Miris, , who Herodotus. liued in the time of Samson. pherones, of whom all the Kinges of Egypt were Kings 3, 14  46 called pharoes. Proteus whom some call Cetes, to him Paris and Hellen sayled in theyr returne from Greece. Rampsinitus, Cephus, or Cheops, Cephris, Mycerinus, Anycis. Sabachus, called in the Bible Sesach, Sethen, Psamneticus. Nechos who o∣uercame
Iosia by the Citty Megeddo, and was after slaine. Nabuchadnezzar, , Apries, who sackt , and slew the Prophet Ieremiah. Amasis, in whose time the Monarchy came to the Persians. In Greece in the time of this Monarchy liued Iapethus, the Sonne of Noah, af∣ter whō raigned Hellas, now was the expedition of the Argonats, Erictheus, Per∣seus and his Acts. The warres of Troy. , with the Theban History, noto∣rious in Oedipus and Iocasta, with the deathes of the two Brothers Eleocles, and Polynices. Now were the  famous. Rome in the time of this first Monarchy, Lactantius. Dionisius . . The second Monarchy. was bullt the tenth year of Achas, King of Iuda, It was  by Kings 6244 yeares. Rhomulis raigned 38. Numa 43. Tullius Hostilius 32. Aucus Martius 2 4.   37. Seruius Tullius 44. In the last part of his raigne began the Persian Monarchy:  the proud 25. He was repulst his Kingdome by the Consull Brutus, because his Sonne Sextus had  rauished , the wise of Collatyne. The Persian Kings were, first Cyrus, who raigned 29. hee ouercame Cresus of Metasthenes. Xenophon. . Lydia, besiedged Babylon, and was after slaine by Tomyris, Queene of Scithia In his time liued Thales Milesius, Pithagoras borne in Samos, Solon, and Draco, who first ordred the yeare,  the monthes, added the Epact, and collec∣ted first the Poems of Homor. Cambises the second King, who raigned 7. years, added Egypt to his Empire, and couered the Iudgement Seate with the skinne of his false Iudge Sisamnes. The third Darius he by the neyhing of his , was elected Emperor, raigned 36. He by the craft of his Friend Zopyrus, wan Baby∣lon, and added to his Dominions the Getes, Cymerians, and . Now li∣ued Hippias, the Sonne of Pysistratus in , and Miltiades. This Darius was the Sonne of Histaspes, called in the Scripture Ashuerosh, Husband to Hester, cal∣led by  Aristona, as the Name of Vasts was Atossa. Some refer the Histo∣ry of Iudith to these times, Fourth Xerxes raigned 20. He  Greece with . an Armye of 10000000. Souldiers, his cheese Captaine was Mardonius, his chiefe Counseller Artabanus. He was first repulsed by Pausanias of Sparta, af∣ter  expeld Greece by . In these warres were famous, Artstides and Cimon. 4. Artaxerxus with the long hand ruld 40. He was thought to bee the Son to Darius and Hester. In his time liued Esdras, Haggeus, Zachartus, and Nehemi∣ah. About the time of the Pelloponesian Warre. And now was Rome gouerned Demosthe. by the  forme of gouernment infamous, in the lust of , to the chast Roman Lady Virginia. Darius Nothus raigned 19 In his time hued famous Alcibiades: and Sophocles, & Euripides, two famous Tragedians. Artaxerxes Mem∣non 40. he loued the famous Lady Aspatia, the Noblest Greekes in his daies were Clearchus, Anaxilaus, Lisander, who conquered Athens (after gouerned by 30. Tyrants) who were supprest by the  of Thrasibulus. Now happened the Wars betweene the Phocenses and the Locri: with  Leuctricum. And now  Conon, and  Epamaminōdas in Greece, about the  that English Brennus sackt Rome. Artaxerxes Ochus next Memnon, raigned 26. In his time happened the Warre which was called Bellum sacrum.  raigned foure yeares, he was slaine by Bagoas. Him Darius succeeded, & in the sixt yeare The third Monarchy. of his raigne, was slaine by Alexander the Great, in whom began the third Monarchy translated to the Gracians.
Alexander by his Father Phillip deriueth his byrth from Hercules, by his Mo∣ther Olimpius from Aeacus, He conquered the World, raigned as Emperor 12. years: In the 32. of his age. He dead, the Monarchy was dded into four parts, Aegipt, Syria, Asia Mynor, and Macedon. The Kinges of Egypt after Alexander, were these: Ptolomeus the Sonne of Lagus: Ptolomeus, Philodelphus, Alexander, Philopater, Epiphanes, Philometer, Euergetes; Phiscon, Alexander, Lathurus, Au∣letes, Father to Cpatra, Dionisius her Brother, in whom ended the race of the Ptolomees, and now Egypt came vnder the Irisdiction of the Romans. The Kings of Macedon were Perdicas, Craterus, Antipater, Cassander, Anti∣gonus 1. Antigonus 2. Demetrius, Philippus, and Perseus, who was surprised by the Romans. The Kings of Syria, who after the death of Alexander possest Babylon, Syria, and Asia Minor, were Antiochus Soter, Antiochus Theos, Antiochus Magnus, who had these three Sons, Seleucus Philopater, Antiochus Epiphanes, and Demetrius. Demetrius after his Brothers decease, had two Sonnes: Demetrius Nicanor, and Polibises Antiochus Sedetes. The Son of Nicanor was Antiochus Griphus. The Son of Sede∣tes was Antiochus Cyzenius. These hauing slaine each other, from theyr Issue, Tygranes King of Armenia ret the Kingdome of Syria, which first Lucullus, and after Pompeius Magnus annext to the Roman Empyre. These in the time of the third Monarchy, were Captaines and Gouernors a∣mong the Iewes. Nehemiah, Ioconias, Selathiel, Zorobabel Resa Mesollam, ohan∣na Ben Resa, Iudas Hircanus primus: (in his Dukedome Alexander flew Darius.) Iosephus primus, Abner Semei, Eli matathai, Asa mahat, Nagid Artaxad, Haggai, Eli Maslot Nahum, Amos Sirach, Matathia Siloah, Iosephus Iunr, Ianua secuns Hircanus. And then began the race of the Machabees in Matathias, whose Sons succeeded him, Iudas, Ionathas, Simon, Iohannes Hercanus. The Kinges of that line were Aristobulus, son to Hercanus, Alexander Ineus, Queen Alixandra his Wife, (otherwise cald Salome.) The Sonnes of Alexander, were Hircanus and Aristobulus, in theyr death ended the line of the Machabees. Succeeding these in the 30. yeare of the raigne of Herod Tetrache, was borne the Sauiour of the World, vnto which we haue studyed to reduce the best knowne Nations of the Earth, leauing the 4. Monarchy among the Romans, who by this time awed The fourth Mohy. the Earth, whose warres and Fortunes being so commonly from many worthy Writers, translated into our moderne tongue, We here om letting this short Epitome onley serue in the Front of our Booke, to instruct your memories, and guide your thoughts through those vnknown Deserts, in which without this di∣rection, many Readers may loose themselues: bee this therefore their Pylot to direct them to the harbour of these latter Ages more familiarly knowne.
Argumentum The yeare of the Lord a∣boue the line. TYTAN and Saturne differ, their great strife, The yeare before Christ vnder the line. Is by their carefull mother (VESTA) ended: Saturane, his Sister Sybill takes to wife, And the heyre-males that are from thē descended He doomes to death: faire Sybil saues the life Of Iupiter, grim Saturne is offended, And to the Oracle at Delphos hyes, Whiles Titan thrugh the earth his fortune tries. ARG. 2. The Worlds Creation, gold from the earths veines, Neptune and Plutoes birth, ALPHA conteines. CANTO. 1. THis VNIVERSH with all The opinions of the old Phi∣losophers tou∣ching the cre∣ation. Thales Milesi. Haraclitus therein conteined, Was not at first of Water fashioned, Nor of the Fire, as others oft haue fcyned, Nor of the Ayre, Hyppasus as some haue vainly spred. Nor the foure Elements Anaxamines in order trained. Nor of Vacuitie and Atom's bred. Empedocles Nor hath it beene Eternall (as is thought Epicurus By naturall men) that haue no further sought. 2 Neither hath man in perpetuity bin, Mrdorus And shall on earth eternally perseuer By endlesse Generation, running in One circuit; (In corruption lasting euer)
Nor did that Nation first on earth begin, Didorus Vnder the mid Equator: some indeuour So to perswade; that man was first begunne, In the place next, to the life-giuing Sunne. 3 Neither was he of Earth and water framed, Empedocles Tempered with liuely heat (as others write;) Anaximander Nor were we in a former world first named, Democritus As in their curious Problems (some recite:) Others, more ripe in Iudgement, haue proclaimed, Z Man fram'd of clay, in fashion exquisite; In whom were breath'd sparkes of Celestiall fire, Whence he still keepes his Nature, to aspire. 4 But this most glorious Vniuerse, was made Myses Of nothing, by the great Creators will; The Ocean bounded in, not to inuade Or swallow vp the Land, so resteth still The azure Firmament, to ouer-shade Both Continent, and Waters, which fulfil The Makers word, one God doth sole extend Without beginning, and shall see no end. 5 That powerfull Trinity created man Adam, of Earth, in the faire field Damaske, And of his rib he Euah, formed than, Supplying them with all things they can aske; In these first two, Humanity began; In whom, confinde IHBHOVAHS fix-daes taske. From Adam then and Euahs first Creation, It followes we deriue our Brittish Nation. 6 Inspire me in this taske (Ihoues seede I pray) With Hippocrenes drops besprinke my head, To comfort me vpon this tedious way, And quicken my cold braine nigh dull and dead; Direct my wandring spirits, when they stray, Least forren and forbidden paths they tread: My iourney's tedious, (blame not then my feares) My voyage, aymes at many thousand yeares.
7 Oh giue me leaue, from the Worlds first Creation, The ancient names of Britons, to deriue From Adam, to the Worlds first Invndation, And so from Noah, to vs that yet surue: And hauing of Troyes Worthies made relation, Your spurs the Chariot of my Muse must driue Through all past Ages, and precedent times, To fill this new World with my worthlesse rymes. 8 Oh, may these Artlesse numbers in your eares, (Renowmed IAMES) seeme Musically strung, Your fame (oh IOVES-star'd Prince) spread euery where, First gaue my still and speech-lesse Muse a tung: From your Maiestike vertues (prised deare,) The infant life of these harsh meeters sprung; Oh, take not then their industrie in skorne, Who, but to emblaze you, had beene yet vnboe. 9 Not let your Princely Peeres hold in disdaine, To haue their Auncestry stild'e and inrolde In this poore Register, a higher straine Their merits aske, since brazen leaues vnfold Their neuer-dying Fame, yet thus much daine, Not to despise to heare your vertues told In a plaine stile, by one, whose wish and hart, Supplies in zeale, want both of Skill and Art. 10 Times faithfully conferd, the first inuention Of most thinges now in vse, heare you shall finde, Annext with these, the vse and comprehention Of Poes, once to the Goddes desceind, Suffer our bluntnesse then, since our intention Is to good vse, sent from a zealous mind. If Stones in Lead set, keepe their vertues: then, Your worth's the same, though blazde by a rude Pen. 11 In the Worldes Child-hood, and those Infant-daies, When the first earth was in her strength and prime, The Golden Age. Ofher owne nature yeilding plants and Spraies, Flowers, both for smell and Medicine: when each time
The chearefull beames of the bright Sunne displaies, Hessed. in ope∣ribus & disbus. To ripen fruites in their conuenient time; Before the labouring Swaine with'is iron plow, Made furrowed wrinkles in the Earths smooth brow. 2 When men were gouernd more by Will, then Art, Pherecrates. And had their appetites by Nature swayde, When Fraud was vnbegot, and had no part In the worlds Empire; before Coyne was made, Tremigistus. When man his mutuall fortunes did impart Without Extortion, Guile, or Vsurers trade; Before smooth Cunning was to ripenesse growne, Marcil. ficinns. Or diuellish Wax and Parchment yet were knowne. 3 I meane the golden world, the purest Age, Tibullus. That knew not brazen warre, or fatall steele, For war was in his cradle: yron age Bred but his teeth: yet did the world not feele His rauenous phangs, no man did battell wage, Or try the inconstant course of Fortunes wheele; There was twixt king and king no grim defiance, Nor bands (saue of affection and alliance.) 4 Then liu'd Vranus a great Lord in Creet, Vranus and Vesta. 1954. To Aethra and great Demogorgon heire, He married with a Lady bright and sweet, Vesta through all those climes (sur-nam'd the faire) 2009. Hiberius sonne of Iubal go∣uerned Spaine. Nynus Assyria Mogus Gallia With two young lads she did her Husband greet, Tytan and Saturne, at two births she bare: Tytan the eldest, crooked, and il-fac't, Saturne well shap't, faire spoke, and comely grac't. 5 Vranus, in his hopefull issue famed, Vranus called also Creet. Begot on Vesta two faire Daughters more, The first Sibilla, the last Ceres named, Fairer were neuer seene in Creet before. Both were by Nature in her cunning framed, Out of her beauties choise, and purest store: Tytan, was for his vgly shape abhord, But Saturne, for his comlinesse adord.
6 This Saturne, was the first by whose inuention The Earth was Til'd, and Ear'd, and gaue increase, Before his fruitfull daies, was neuer mention To sowe, or plant; Till then a generall peace Was made twixt th'earth and vs, our apprehention Strecht not to know her secrets: Now gan cease Blind Ignorance in man, Saturne first found, To till, to plow, to sow, to reape the ground. 7 He likewise was the first that strung the bow, And with a feathered Arrow pierst the Aire, Phbus at first, admired, and did not know What new made Birds could flie so swift and faire, Mistaking Saturnes shafts, for who would trow, Mans wisedome could inuent a thing so rare, (Being Earth-bred) to stretch his braine so hie, As teach his shafts way through the empty skie. 8 And now began th'amaz'd Earth to admire, To see such strange fruites in her bosome growing; To see her head weare such vnknowne attire, To see the Swaines, some planting, others sowing; Now first began the birds to pearch them hier, And shun mans sight, still wondering, but not knowing, How men below on th'earths verdure lying, Should reach into the aire, and sttike them flying. 9 To kill the Sauadge beast he likewise taught, And how to pierce the Serpents skale from farre, By him, the wilde-swift-running Hart was caught, He first deuis'd for vs the vse of warre; He shewd which mines of earth be good, which naught,) Which be the veines of Gold, which siluer are; He Minerals first found, and from the mold, To decke his Pallace, brought refined gold. 10 Yet some great Saturnes glory would deface, Pliny. And say, that Cadmus first this mettall found In high Pangeus, a huge hill in Thrace, Else Thoas and Eaclis searcht the ground Herodotus
For gold ore; and Panchaia was the place, Knowne in such precious mettals to abound: Some, twixt Erichthon and Ceacus deuide, Finding bright siluer (first in Athens tride.) 11 Idei Dactili Iron mettall wrought In Creet: some deeme, two Iewes in Cipres made it, Selmentes and Damnameneus brought Clement. The Ore from thence, and to their vse assaide it; For yellow Brasse the fly Pannonians sought, The Scithian Lydus, with the fire allaid it, Aristotle. And taught it first to melt; which some suppose, The Phrigian Delos did by Art disclose. Theophrast. 12 Midacritus a Minerall more then these Strabo. Brought from a Prouince that belongs to Spaine, Lead: from the Ilands Cassiterides, Which some would Attribute to Tuball-Caine. Glaucus all Mettals brought beyond the seas Taught how to sother, (else their vse were vaine.) The first Smiths-forge, the blacke Calibians made, And after taught the Ciclopes their trade. 13 Cyniras: the Stythee, leuer, Tongs and File, Polycron. Polidor. Pyrodes was the first from flint stroke fire, Which how to keepe in matches longer while Prometheus taught: This Vulcan did acquire: The bellowes: Anacharsis in the Isle Cal'd Scithes, and thus men did still aspire For knowledge; and in seuerall Countries nurst These Arts, of whom we hold king Saturne first. 14 Therefore the Cretan people much esteemed him, And cal'd him God on earth for his rare wit; Much honor he receiu'd which they beteem'd him, And in their populer iudgements held it fit To burne him Mirrhe and Insence, for they deem'd him Worthy alone amongst the Gods to sit, Perswaded such a high inuentious straine, Could not proceed from any Mortals braine.
11 As these rare guifts the giddy Commons noted, So in his mothers hart they tooke Impression, Who on her sonnes perfections inly doted, Making for him her daily intercession, Thus in a Sea of sweet content he floted; For who, but of his vertues made confession? In processe, and the chiefe of Saturnes pride, The old Vranus craz'd, fell sicke and dide. 12 After a few sad funerall sighes and teares By Vesta, o're her husbands body shed, In crooked Tytan, to the world appeares A strong intention, to impale his head With his dead fathers Crowne: This Vesta feares, And calling Saturne, thus to him she sed: My dearest sonne, tis by the Lords decreed, That in Vranus Prince-dome, thou succeed. 13 Thy brother Tytan, though in Age before thee, Yet in thy wisedome thou hast him out-stript; Thou hast the popular loue, they all adore thee, His blasted hopes, are in the blossome nipt; With Coine, with Men, with Armor, I will store thee, Let him stand fast, or he shall sure be tript: Both Lords and people, ioyne with me thy mother, To invest Saturne, and depose thy brother. 14 With that, before her sonne could make reply, Where they were speaking, rusht bold Tytan in, A storme was in his brow, fier in his eye, Difference twixt Tyta and Saturne. After some tempest, he doth thus begin: Must then young Saturne raigne? Oh, tell me why? Am I a Bastard, and begot in sinne? Hath Vesta playd the strumpet with my Father, That you despise me, and elect him rather? 15 Was I not of that Virgin-wombe the first? And lay I not as neere your heart as he? Was I not of those breasts before him nurst? And am I not his Elder in degree?
What haue I done, you should affect me worst? Your Mayden-birth, and your first progeny: Before him I was borne, and to be plaine, (By all the Goddes) I will before him raigne. 16 Had I not in your wombe, the selfe-same being? Am I not of the selfe-same bloud created? Is not my Royalty with his agreeing? Is not my birth before his Anti-dated? Is elder Tytan, now not worth the seeing? Must in my right, that young boy be instated? Hath he so well, or I so ill deseru'd: No: first I came, and I will first be seru'd. 17 And turning to young Saturne, with an eye Threatning reuenge, and ruyne to his life, Prin-cox (quoth he) must you be plac't so hye, The only darling of Vranu wife? Canst thou so soone out-leape me? Thou shalt die, And in thy fatall obits end this strife; Then, with his fatall blade he blest his head, Had the blow falne, it had strooke Saturne dead. 18 But Vesta staide it comming, and withall Came Ceres and Sibilla thrusting thither, They hugge young Saturne, but on Tytan fall, Thundring on him with clamors, altogither, The yonger brother they their Soueraigne call, And bid the elder packe, they care not whither: The people second them: thus in disgrace, The Stigmaticke is forst to leaue the place. 19 But hauing better with himselfe aduised, Erythea Si∣bylla. Tytan and Saturne thus the strife decide, That Tytan (for his shape so much despised) Should leaue the Scepter vnto Saturnes guide, Their strife compounded. And so to stint all mallice enterprised; But after Saturnes death, the Crownet'abide Lu. To Tytan and his heyres, by his last will; So Saturne sweares all his heyres male to kill.
20 King Saturne must not let a sonne suruiue Apollonius li. 2 Argonant. To keepe his brothers I ssue from the Crowne, Only his Daughters he may saue aliue, These Couenants are betwixt them both set downe: Hence-forth, no more these haughty brothers striue, For eyther by Indenture knowes his owne: The Crowne is Saturnes, due to Tytans seed, To make which good, all Saturnes sonnes must bleed. 21 The elder brother, thus o'reswaide with might, Cannot indure that Clyme, but seekes another, To see his yonger throned in his right, Or to be cal'd a Subiect to his brother, And therefore full of anger and despight, He leaues his Countrey, Sisters, and his mother; And to be rid at once of his disgraces, He seekes aduentures strange, in forren places. 22 Where Fortune his attempts so much befrended, That many Warlike Nations he subdud'e, No quest, saue Armes and valour, he intended, And how by Vsurpation to intrude Into the rightes of others, who defended Their Honors, both by strength and multitude: Thus he of many Islands raignes sole King, And all the World, of Tytans Actes doth ring. 23 Yet into Creet he daily sendes espiall, To know if Saturne made his Couenant good, Forcing his slye skouts (mauger all deniall) To bring him word, how Saturnes glory stood, Whether of Mariage he had yet made tryall, Or hauing Children male, had spilt their bloud; Knowing himselfe to be sufficient strong, By force of Armes, to right his former wrong. 24 So with his fiue and forty Sonnes makes thence, Diod. Slus. With fayre Tytea, mother to seuenteene Of that large broode; all these with rage dispence, And by their late attonement, Exiles beene.
With patience they depart (but with pretence) Hoping well Armed once more to be seene, And with their brood of Tytanois to meet, And tug with Saturne, for the Crowne of Creet. 25 Rhea (of all the beauteous daughters fairest) Brides with Hiperion, her best-lou'd Brother: He likewise, for his feature was the rarest Of Tytans sonns (there liu'd not such another) Oh sweet Hiperion, thou in shape comparest With all the Gyant yssue of thy mother; At feuerall byrths, two Babes she childed soone, The male she cald the Sunne; Female, the Moone. 26 The tother Tytans fearing, to these two Their Fathers Conquests should in time descend, A monstrous Act they haue intent to do, Whose scandall shall beyond both Poles extend, And none but Parricides would yeild vnto, For they that should their Brothers life defend Conspire together, and gainst right or reason, In dead of night, they seeke his death, by Treason. 27 But first they take his little sonne, the Sunne, Pausanias in Corinthiacis. And to the floud Eridanus (well knowne, That streames along their Coast:) In hast they run, Where the young Lad amongst the waues is throwne, This, when his tender Sister knew was dun, From a high Rocke, her selfe she tumbled downe: In pitty of whose beauties, grace, and yeares, The Gods translate them, to the brightest Spheres. 28 Meane time, the new made King of Creet's renowne Increast so much, that he was term'd a God, Of Tytan mor Can 3 stan. 27 He was the first that ware a Lawrell Crowne, The first that venter'd on the Scas, and rod In triumph on the waters; (this being knowne) They held them happiest, that could make abod In his blest Prouince, which being well conducted, Kings sent their Sonnes to him, to be instructed.
25 Saturne in those daies was helde onely wise, Many young Princes in his Court wer traid, He taught them both the vse of Seas and es, And what hd wealth within the Earth remained; Then gan he Citties build, and Lawes deuise, for an Irregular people he disdained: The mynerall mountaine-veines he vnder-minde, And was the first, that perfect Golde refinde. 26 Yet neuer did this King in ought miscarry, Hauing what Earth, and Sea, and Ayre could yeild, Happy in all thinges, saue, he durst not marry, He sees the gorgcous house, he late did build Shine with reflecting Gold (his obiects varry) He sees his ripe corne, growing in the field, He sees the wilde Birds by his Archers caught, Pierst with those shafts, whose vse before he taught. 27 He sees the vast Seas, by his Oares deuided, And the decepe waters, without danger past, By Art of Sayle and Rudder, they are guided, (What greater happinesse could Mortall tast?) But when the Couenant long before decided Twixt him and Tytan he records, at last, It pierst his hart with sorrow: for his life Seemes to him tedeous, led without a wife. 28 What bootes him all his Honours and ritch state? His wealths-increase, and all his worldly pleasure? For whom doth he rise early, and sleepe late? Hauing no heyre, to inherite all his Treasure: He knowes he hath incur'd his Brothers hate, Yet must his seed, make of his kingdome seazure: He enuyes his owne wealth, bicause he knowes, All his life time he toyles, t'enrich his foes. 29 He loues his Sister Sybill (yet not so That if she chdren haue, their blouds to spill) And yet his timerous passions howerly grow, Nor can he on her beauty gaze his fill:
Faine would he marry her, and yet doth know If shee haue Issue, he her sonnes must kill, So that he wishes now, (but all too late) That for his vow, he might Exchange his state. 30 In this distraction many dayes he dwelt, Till Loue at length in Saturnes hart preuailed, Such feruent passions in his brest he felt, That spight his Oath, (which he so much bewailed) He feeles his soft thoughts in his bosome melt: (Needs must he yeild whom such faire Jookes assailed) And now vpon this desperate point he stood, To wade t'her bed, thogh throgh his childrens blood. 31 This can great Apis witnesse, who that time Peloponessus gouern'd: This records Iubalda, who the Spanish seat doth clime; This Craunus kneel'd to by th'Italian Lords: This Satron, who the Gaules rul'd in his prime, Now to Semiramis Assyria affords The Monarchy: who after Ninus dide, Married her Sonne, and perisht by his pride. 32 The marriage rights with solemne feasts are done, Saturne marri∣eth his Sister Sybill. Sybill both wife and sister; the first Queene That raign'd in Creete, hath now conceiu'd a sonne, Neuer hath lesse applausiue ioy bin seene 2000. At such a Brides Conception: the time's come 1963. The long suspensiue daies expired beene: For if a male, his blood the Earth must staine, A male she brought forth, and the Lad was slaine. 33 For so the King commanded, being a King, He thought it base if he should breake his word, Oh golden dayes, of which the Poets sing, How many can this Iron age afford That hold a promise such a precious thing, Rather to yeeld their children to the sword, Then that the world should say, thy oath thou brakest, Or wast so base, to eate the word thou spakest.
33 Such difference is twixt this, and that of gold, We in our sinnes are stronger; Vertues weaker; Words tide them fast, but vs no bonds can hold; They held it vil'd, to be a promise breaker; A Lyar was as strange in times of old, As to find out amongst vs, a true speaker: Their harts were of pure mettall, ours haue flawes, Now lawes are wordes; in those daies, wordes were lawes. 34 The Funerall of the first slaine infant ended, And the sad daies of mourning quite expir'd, At which the pittious Queene was most offended, But now her spirits with dull sorrowes tired, The King a second metting hath intended, And the Queenes nuptiall bed againe desired; Sibill conceiues, and in her wombe doth cherish, More children, ready in their birth to perish. 35 And growing neere her time, the sorrowfull father, Displeas'd to see his wife so apt to beare, Who for his vowes-sake wish her barren rather, (The murther of his first sonne toucht him neare,) Sends through his Land, a kingly traine to gather, And makes for Delphos, hoping he shall heare Some better comfort from the Delphian shrine, Whose Oracles the king esteemes diuine. 36 He therefore first his sacrifice prepares, And on Apollos Altar Incense burnes, Then kneeling to the Oracle, his praiers Mount with the sacred sume, which neare returnes, Tell the pleas'd God acquainted with his cares Lookes downe from heauen, & sees him how he mourns, Desiting that his power would nothing hide, But tell, what of her next birth should betide. 37 With that there fell a storme of Raine and Thunder, The Temple was all sire, the Alter shooke, The golden roofe aboue, and pauement vnder,
Trembled at once, about gan Saturne looke, To see what heauenly power had caus'd this wonder, Faine he the holy place would haue forsooke, When th'Oracle thus spake: thy wife growes great, With one that shall depose thee from thy seat. 38 For from her royall wombe shall one proceed, That in despight of thee in Creet shall dwell; So haue the neuer-changing fares decreed, Such is the Oracles (thrice sacred) spell; A sonne shall issue from king Saturnes seed, That shall enforce his father downe to Hell, This heard, the discontented king arose, And (doubly sad) away to Creet he goes. 39 What shall he do, faire Sibils time drawes neere, And if the Lad which she brings forth suruiue, The newes will stretch vnto his brothers eare, To whom he sware to keepe no male aliue, Besides a second cause he hath to feare, Least he his father, from his kingdome driue, Then, to preuent these ils, he swears (on hie,) Inspight of fate, the infant borne shall die. 40 Yet when the King his first sonnes death records, In his resolued thoughts it breeds relenting, The bloudy and vnnaturall act affords His troubled thoughts, fresh cause of discontenting, None dare approach his presence, Queene, no Lords, That to his first childs death had bin consenting: The first vnnaturall act appeares so vilde, The king intends to saue his second childe. 41 So oft as he the murder cals to mind, So oft he vowes the second son to saue, But thinking on his couenant, grows vnkind, And doomes it straight vnto a timelesse graue; Againe, the name of sonne would pitty find, And for his oth some refuge seekes to haue: But when the Oracle he doth recall, The very thought of that, confounded all.
42 So deare to him his Crowne and state appeared That he his pompe before his blood preferred, It ioyes him to commaund, and to liue feared, And now he thinkes his foolish pitty erred, And setting light his issue, seemes well cheared, His fortune to the Goddes he hath referred, Rather then loose his Scepter, tis decreed, Sib versus. Had he ten thousand brats, they all should bleed. 43 Resolu'd thus: newes is brought him by his mother, That Sibell (late in trauell) is deliuer'd The birth of Iupitey and Iuno. Of two faire Twins, a Sister, and a Brother, At this report, his heart is well nigh shiuer'd, 2014. Go, spare the one (quoth he) and kill the tother; Alas (saith she) we women are pale-liuer'd 1946. And haue not heart to kill: no beast so wilde Abraham en∣ters Cana 24, yeares af∣ter Circumci∣sion was com∣maunded: and Sodome and Gomorrah bur∣ned. Or brutish, but would spare so sweete a childe. 44 And shall a father then so madly fare With his owne issue, his childs blood to spill? And whom the Tigers and fell beasts would spare, Shall reasonable man presume to kill? The birds more tender ore their young ones are, Fishes are kind vnto their issue still. Fish, bird, and beast, in sea, Aire, arth, that breedeth, Though reasonlesse, her tender young ones feedeth. 45 Further she was proceeding, when the son, Lycophron. An irefull frowne vpon his mother threw, Away (quoth he) and to Sibilla run, And let the same hand that my first borne slew Destroy this to, for as we haue begun, We will persist, the Lady sad, withdrew, Affraide and greeu'd at once, to see him moued, Whom, as her King (she fear'd) her son; she loued, 46 No sooner was she out of fight, but he One of his trusty seruants cals on hye, Who waits his pleasure on his bended knee,
Quickly (quoth Saturne after Vesta flie, Say, if the brat suruiue, Sibill and she As Traytors to our person, both shall die: Hees gone, and little in the King doth lacke, At his departure to haue cal'd him backe. 47 Twice was the word halfe out, and twice kept in, Faine he would haue it done, and faine neglected, He thinkes dam'd Parricide on vgly sinne, But worse he thinkes from State to be deiected, Neuer hath Prince in such distraction bin, His bloud he lou'd, his kingdome he affected: But since he cannot both at once enjoy, His state hee'l saue, his yssue hee'l destroy. 48 Ambition to his fiery rage gaue fewell, He now remembers not his Sibils teares, Whose tender hart laments, to lose her Iewell, No sparke of pitty in his looke appeares, It sports him only to be tearmed cruell, At name of Father, now he stops his eares; Had not his Crown, more then his couenant tēmpted, Sybill, thy sonne had bin from death exempted. 49 But the commaund is gone, and in his breast He now reuolues the vilenesse of the deed, Scepter, and Crowne, and life he doth detest, Within him, his remor cefull entrailes bleed; And now at length, the King would thinke him blest, Might he togither perish with his seed: And that which most his Melancholy furthers, He knowes, the world condems him for his murthers. 50 No joy can cheere, no object make him glad, The dayes in sighes, the nights in teares he spends, Nothing can please him: (be it good or bad) His troubled and craz'd sences it offends, That he is now surnam'd, Saturne the Sad, He sets not by alliance, strangers, friends; Here leaue him in the depth of his dispaires, A melancholy King, composde of cares.
51 And to the Queene returne who sadly waites Her Infants execution or repue, Did Saturne see this boy (she thus debates) That he would kill him, I can scarce belecue? Alas: poore infants borne to wofull fates, What corsicke hart such harmelesse soules can greeue; Thus lies the Queene, til from her Lord she heare, Halfe chear'd with hope, and halfe destroy'd through feare. 52 In Vesta comes; her sad cheare Sybill spies, And in her bed (though weake) her selfe sh'aduanced, She might haue read the Message in her eies, For as vpon the smiling Babe she glanced, She fil'd the chamber with lowd shreekes and cries, At which the wofull mother was intranced: The Grandam, in her eyes the kings wil showing, The mother, by her lookes, her meaning knowing. 53 Not long in this strange sorrow they remained, But the kings seruant mongst the women presleth, A generall flush the Matrons cheekes hath stained, And his owne blush ng with theirs, confesseth That place vnfit for him; yet none complained, For euery one his cause of comming gesseth; Knowing the gentle knight, would not present him In such a place, vnlesse the king had sent him. 54 On whom, as more attentiuely they gaze, Thus wils the king (quoth he) my sonne shall die; In vaine with sorrowfull teares your eies you glaze, Or fill this chamber with a generall cry, He for the heart of his young infant staies; Which if his mother, or his Queene deny, They shall abide like doome, hee'l haue their harts; The message ended thus: the knight departs. 55 So long in sorrowes simpathy they mourn'd, That with excesse of griefe their soules were tired, Now for a space they haue their feares adiourn'd,
And of the kings displeasure more inquired, At length their mourning into madnesse turn'd, (Quoth Sibell) no base murtherer shall be hired To worke this out-rage, so the king hath wild, And by my hand the weete babe shall be kild. 56 With that a knife the wrathfull Sibell snatcht, And bent the point against the infants brest, Thinking to haue his innocent life dispatcht, And sent his soule vnto eternall rest; The Lad his mother by the bosome catcht, And smiling in her face, that was addrest To strike him dead, away she hurles the knife, And faith (sweet babe) that smile hath sau'd thy life. 57 Then giue it me quoth Vesta, for take heed, My son hath charg'd vs on our liues, to slay him, The infant by his Grandams hand shall bleed, So wils the king (whats she that dares gainsay him?) My aged hand shall act this ruthlesse deed, And I that should protect him, will betry him, She aimes to strike, at which the infant smilde, And she insteed of killing; kist the childe. 58 Are you so timerous (quoth the Midwife by?) Or do you count this babe so deare a treasure? Know you not, if we saue him we shall die, And shall wehazard death in such high measure? Though you would slight it, by my life not I; I am more fearefull of the kings displeasure: With that, a keener blade the Beldam drew, The babe still smild, away the knife she threw. 59 When they behold the beauty of the Lad, They vow within themselues his life to saue, But then the kings Iniunction makes them sad, And straight (alas) they doome it to the graue; Now with their blades in hand, like Beldams mad, They menace death: then smiles the pretty knaue, Then fall their kniues, then name they the kings will, And then agai they threat the babe to kill.
60 Three times by turnes the Infant past their hands, And three times thrice, the kniues point toucht his skin, And each of them as oft confounded stands, (Such pitty did his smiling beauty win) That more then they estecme their liues or lands, They all abhor the vilenesse of the sinne; At length they all consult with heedfull care, Iupiter saued. To saue the owne liues, and the childe to spare. 61 Saith Vesta, in the bordering Prouince dwels Melliseus king of Epyre. Old Mellisseus, a renowned King, His daughters I brought vp in sacred Spels, And taught them Chares, to sow, to weaue, to sing, No Lady liuing these bright Dames excels In vertuous Thewes, good graces, euery thing; To these my little Graund-child I will send, And to their trust, this prectious charge commend. 62 Faire Almache and Mellissee I know, Alias, Advas∣tea, and Idas (For so these vertuous Ladies haue to name) Will when they vnderstand what Queene doth owe Apollon. Rhod. lib. 3. Arg. Pausanias in Messemacis. Lactan. lib de falsa religione. This royall yssue, and from whence it came, Their best and choysest entertainment shew, And to no eare our secret Act proclaime; Thus they conclude, all needfull things are fatcht, And on her way a trusty mayde dispatcht. 63 Who in the Citty Of on safe ariuing, Apol. Atheni∣ensis gramat. To the two Sisters she her charge presents, They glad to heare of Vesta still suruiuing, Eusebius. Yet grieued at her cause of discontents, Welcome the Damsell, In their honors striuing To cheere her, who as doubtfull still laments, Not knowing yet how the young Prince shall speed, Or what the prouident sisters haue decreed. 64 The courteous virgins, hearing the sad story Of vertuous Sybill and her sonne related, Both for the mother and the Sonne, are sorry,
And hauing with themselues a while debated, They hold their womanish pitty much more glory Then to be rude, and cruell estimated, And now their studies are, the Babe to hide, And for his carefull fostring to prouide. 65 They beare him to a Mountaine, in whose brow, A Cue was dig'd, the round mouth was so strait, That at the entry, you of force must bow, But entred once, the roome was full of State, This Cauerne for the darknesse, they allow To sheld the Infant from the Fathers hate; Which being selected as a place most meet, The Damsell is againe sent backe to Creet. 66 With milke of Goates they nurst him for a space, Paus in Aras Till Fortune on a time so well prouided, That when to still the Babe (who cride apace) Aratus in pha∣nomenis. They sounded Cymbals, and with tunes deuided Strook on their Tymbrels, by some wondrous grace, nus in Sacri A swarme of Bees was by, that Musicke guided Into the place, who made the Caue their Hiue, Virg. 4 Greg. 2. sastor. And with their Hony, kept the Child aliue. 67 By this the Damsell is return'd againe, And all the newes to Vesta ha related, What prouident care the royall Dames haue tan To saue the Prince, how well they haue requited Her former loue; still Saturne thinkes it slane, Being with the terror of his death affrighted, Which in the Kings opinion, to make good, Vest a salutes him with a cup of blood. 68 An Abbest stone into the bole was brayed, It shew'd like the Babes hart, beaten to powder, The Dowager in funerall blacke arrayed, With reerence to her Son and Soueraigne bowed her, (Women haue teares at will) their wiles to ayde, And she hath plenty to ber plot allowed her; See here (quoth she) and as she more would say, Griefe strikes her mute, and tus her head away.
69 Againe she would proceed, againe she faileth, But the third time begins her sad Oration: See heere thy sonne, whose losse thy wife bewaileth, Murdered and massacred in piteous fashion; In vaine against the froward fate she raileth, In vaine she teares her eies in extreame passion, Saturne hath to this cruell act constrain'd her, And see of thy young son the poore remainder. 70 Now maist thou keepe thine oath with Titans feed, Yet that thou cruell art, I needs must tell thee, Neuer did Tiger father such a deed, In tiranny the Wolues cannot excell thee? Now maist thou safely weare thy imperiall weed, (Can this thy issue from thy throne expell thee?) This blood can neuer gouerne in thy sted, Alas poore Grand-child, thou too late hast bled. 71 Th'vnwelcome newes seeme welcome to his cares, And yet he wishes they awhile had staide; That the vil'd deed is done, he glad appeares, Yet in his gladnes, he seemes ill apaid: She moues the king with her laments and teares, (What cannot weeping women men perswade?) The king in sorrow of his sonne late dead, Vowes euer to abiure Queene Sibels bed. 72 And whilst the warme blood reck't before his eies, No wonder if he purpost as he spake, But when the beauty of his Queene he spies, Her graces mou'd him, and his vow he brake: Such charming vertue in her beauty hes, That he forgets the rash oth he did make; And rather then his nuptiall sweets forbeare, Hee'l sacce a young sonne euery yeare. 73 These stormes blowne ouer, and their sorrowes spent (For violent tempests neuer long remain'd) The king young Iuno to Parthemia sent,
There amongst Princes daughters to be train'd, To doe her honors, is his whole intent, Since his sonnes bloud by timelesse Fate is drained: Nor maruell, if to honor her he striue, Knowing (saue her) no Issue left aliue. 74 Time keepes his course, the King and Queene oft meet, And once againe she hath conceiu'd a Male, The Lad in secret is conveyde from Creet To Athens, in a vessell swift of sayle; Th' Athenian King, they with the Infant greet, Who the Babes fortunes sadly doth bewaile, And the young Neptune fairely doth intreat, And traynes him like the sonne of one so great. 75 The husband-King, who no such guile surmised, Is by the crafty women mock't againe; New teares are coin'd, a second tricke deuised, To make him thinke that Issue likewise slaine: Once more the King with sadnesse is surprised, Once more appeasd (for teares he knowes are vaine,) Againe the King and Queene are met in bed, And in small processe, she againe is sped. 76 A sonne and daughter at this birth she bare, The sonne she hides, the daughter she discloseth, The birth 9f Pluto & glaa The sonne she Pluto named, the winde stood faire, And him into The ssalia she disposeth, The messenger applies with earnest care Her tedious iourney, for no time she lofeth: Whst the twin-brother she is forst to hide, Her daughter Glauca in her childhood dide. 77 Neptune was nurst by Aruo, after growing To manhood, fairefoot Amphitrite hee would haue espousde, but she her beauty knowing, Despisde the Sea God, thinking to liue free, wherefore he sends the Dolphin, who straight showing His masters thoughts, the Louers soone agree, Higinius in fab Stellarum. For with the Dolphins signe to Heauen was orne, And plast on hye, not farre from Capricorne.
78 The vntam'd Gennt he did first bestride, Pausanias in Arcadicis. And made him seruant to the vse of Man, (Before him) no man durst presume to ride, (Famous alone he was in Athens than) He coupled first the Steedes, and curbd their pride, And by his Art, the armed Chariot ran: Pam. Him∣nographus. Therefore, as greatest honor to his state, The Horse to him was freely consecrate. Sphocles 79 And when he trauels o'rc the foamy waues, With foure Sea-palfreys he is drawne along, By sundry Nymphes and Girls, (whose loue he craues,) Apollen. lib. 4. Four-score fayre sonnes he got, surpassing strong, Zezes in bi. . Who Cittyes built, and mena Hostile braues Plutarch Gainst Tyrants, that vsurpt their States by wrong: Herodotus. He Riders grac't, and Sea-men gladly cheared, And by his hands, the wals of Troy were reard. 80 To him three Temples consecrated were, H. in . Of great Magnificence; In Isthmus one, In Tenarus a second did appeare, Plut. in vita Pompeia. A structure (in that Isle) famous alone, A third to him the stowt Calabrians reare, Hom. lib. 5. odis Semblant to these, through all the world were none; Vpon these shrines to make his glories full, Virg. 5. The people vsde to sacrifice a Bull. 81 Pluto (whom some call Mammon) God of gold, Pau. in Atticis Atticis Who (after) did the Tartar kindome seaze, As oue a Scepter in his hand doth hold, Neptune the Trident, so he graspes the Keies: Some thinke this God inhabited of old Hiberia, him the Pyren mountaines please, Hiberia cald Spaine. Of whom and Proserpine his rauisht Btide, Desist; to speake what Iuno did betide. Strabo lib. 3. Geographca. 82 Thus eldest Ipiter liues in a Caue Neere Oson, nurst with Hony from the Bees, Th' Athenian King did the young Neptune saue,
In Athens, where great Clearks haue tane degrees; 2250. Athens the well of knowledge, and the Graue 1913. Of Ignorance, where Neptune safety sees Pluto the youngest of the three, doth dwell In lower The ssaly, since tearmed Hell. 83 The time these liued, was Patriarch Isaac borne, In Lybia Affer raignde, Brigus in Spaine, By Inachus, the Argiue Crowne is worne: Aratus doth the Assyrian state maintaine; Now Sodom and Gomorrha to ashes turne, Pelloponesus doth Aegidius gaine, Germania is vpheld by Herminon, And Aethyopia sway'd by Phaeton. 84 Saturne, that of his three sonnes nothing knew, Doted on louely Iuno, and oft sent Vnto her place of Nurture, where she grew Faire and well featur'd, there her youth she spent, Whose soiorne in Parthemia Saturne drew To visite her (on earth his sole content) Many rare presents, and rich guists he brought her, Where leaue him in Parthemia with his daughter. Ovr Poem, though familiarly knowne to them of iudg∣ment and reading, yet because it may not seeme intri∣cate to the lesse capeable, I thought it not altogither impertinent to insert some few obseruations to the ende of e∣uery Caate. Touching this Vranus, from whom our History takes life, some Writers (and those not of the least authority) thinke in him to be figured Chanaan, sonne of Cham, sonne of Noah, whom Noah cursed, but spared his sonne Cham, because God had once blessed him. This Canaan for sundry benefits by him bestowed uppon many Nations, was called by some Ogyges, by others Fenix, as also Coelum, Sol, Proteus, Ianus, Geminus, Iunonius, Quirinus, Patulcius, Bacchus, Vortumnus, Chaos, Ile∣ton
or the seed of the Goddes. Also his wife Vesta, for her bounty, they cald Tellus, Opis, Aretia, and Cibilla, the mo∣ther of the Gods And these liued in the third generation after the Floud. From this Vesta, came the virgin Vestals in Rome. This Cham father to Canaan, was cald Aegiptian Saturne, and Nemroth, Babilonian Saturne. Cham was also called Sa∣turne in Italy, who came thither to dwell, in the time that Comerus the Scythian vsurped there: a neighbour to olde Ianus that dwelt in Laurentum: And this was in the yeare of the world 1898. the yeare before Christ 2065. but rather then enter too deepe into antiquity, the sequele of our historie we deriue from Saturne of Creet. There were two Iupiters, the first Iupiter Belus, from Cicero de natu∣ra deorum. whom Nilus descended and first Idolatrised to him: the se∣cond Iupiter of Creet, who was after instiled Olimpian Iu∣piter, and supreame king of the Gods. Tytan, Saturnes brother, is often by the Poets taken for the Sunne, he is likewise cald Hiperion, and ruler of the Bochas. Planets: but Bochas writes Hiperion to be Tytans sonne, and not a name soly attributed to the Sunne. Where Saturne makes his expedition to the Oracle: I read of two Oracles, one spake in Delphos from the mouth of A∣pollo, the other in Aegypt, from Iupiter Belus, who is like∣wise cald the Sonne of Saturne, and the second Emperour of Babylon after Nemroth. Oson a Citty and mountaine in Epyre where Iupiter was nurst. This Epyre is a Countrey in Greece, hauing on the North Macedonia, the East Achaya, the West the sea Ioni∣um: It cannot be the mountaine Ossa, because Ossa is in Thessaly. Saturnus was the first father of the Goddes, who begatte Lactantius. Iupiter, Iuno, Neptune, Pluto, and Glauca, by his wife Ops, otherwise cald Sybilla. Demogorgon, signifieth Earth, and Aethra Ayre, suppo∣sed Vranus father and mother. Cadmus sonne to Agenor king of Phenicia, who beeing sent by his father to seeke his sister Europa whom Iupiter in Ovid. meta. 2. the shape of a Bull had rauished, and not finding her, durst not returne to his Countrey but staied in Boetia, where bee
built the famous Citty Thebes, brought letters first into Greece, and found the casting of mettals in Pangeus a pro∣montory in Thrace. Panchaia a sandy countrey of Arabia, where is plenty of Frankincence. In a high hill of this Countrey, Thoas and Aeaclis first found out gold Ore. Erichthon other wise Erichtheus, he was nurst by Mi∣nerua, after instated king of Athens, he first inuented the Chariot, and is supposed to be the first that tryed mettalles, part of which skill, some take from him, and attribute vnto Ceachus. Idaei Dactili otherwise called Corybanthus, were certain priests of Cibell, these are sayae to find out the vse of Iron. Salmentes and Damnamenecus, two Iewes, S. Clement speakes of, who first found out the vse of Iron in Cipres. Lydus the sonne of Atis, and brother to Tyrrhenus, of him Lidia tooke the name: he first melted brasse, and made it pliable to the hammer: a cunning which Theophrastus would bestow vpon one Delos the Phrigian, but Aristotle yeildes it to Lydus. Cassiterides are ten Istandes in the Spanish sea, in these Midacritus (by the opinion of Strabo) first found out the vse of Lead. Cynaras, aritch King of Cypres, who vnawares laye with his daughter Myrrha, and on hir begat Adonis. Hee first deuised the Stithce, Tongs, File and Leauer. Pyrodes was sonne to Cilix, of whom Cicilia took name, and Cilix was sonne to Phenicia, he was the first strooke fire from the flint. Prometheus sonne to Iapetus, who for stealing Fyre from heauen to inspire life in his Images, was by Iupiter tyde vnto the mount Cancasus, where an Eagle still gnaweth his en∣trailes. Anacharsis a great Phylosopher, borne in Scythia, he first deuised the Bellowes, and as some suppose the Potters wheele. Apis King of the Argioes, he taught first the plantinge of vines, and after his death was worshipt in the shape of an Oxe. Iubalda gouerned Spaine. Craunuis Italy. Satron the Gaules.
Semiramis Assyria. At the same time Saturne married his Sister Sybill. This was in the yeare of the World 2000. and the yeare before Christ 1963. Seauen yeares after this, which was 250. yeares after the Deluge, Noah paid his due to Nature. Almache and Mellisee, are supposed to be Adrastea and Isde. THus it is our purpose to be are along with vs the best kno∣wen Kingdomes of the Worlde, that the truth of an Hy∣story being countenanced with their credit, may purchase the better beliefe. The end of the first CANTO.
Argumentum Young Dardanus his brother Iasius slew, And leaues the Countrey where he sought to rayne Warre twixt th' Epirians and Pelagrans grew, Lycaon is by Ioue exilde, not slaine: Iupiter of Calisto taking vew, A votresse, and one of Dians traine; Loues, and is loath'd, the Virgin is beguild, Clad like a mayd, he gets the Mayd with child. ARG. 6. TH'Epirian slaine: Troys first foundatiō layd, Chast Dians vowes in Dcta are conveyd. CANTO. 2. OH blind Ambition and desire of Raigne, How camst thou by this rule in mortall breasts? Who gaue thee this dominion ore the braine? Thou murdrest more, then plagues or fatall pests; Thy drinke Mans bloud, thy food dead bodies slaine, Treason and Murder are thy nightly guests: Ambition knowes no lawe, he that aspires, Climbes by the liues of brothers, sonnes, and Syres. 2 Corinthus, of whom Corinth tooke first name, 2425. Electra daughter to King Athlas marryed, From Lybia hath he fetcht the louely Dame, 1538. And thence to Naples this rich purchase carried:
Corinth and Naples are indeed the same, One Citty; though by Time their names be varried: These dying, left behinde them to succeed, Two Princes, Lords of many a vahant deed. 3 Whilst Corinth there, Memnon all Egypt swayde, In Italy Atleus: Harbon Gaul, Hesperus Spaine, the Argine King was made Crassus: in France King Ludgus gouern'd all Arming himselfe gainst such as did Inuade, Syrus in Syria: Assyrias crowne doth fall To Mancaleus which whilst he maintaind, Orthopolis in Pelloponessus raign'd. 4 Moyses was borne the selfe-same happy yeare, That faire Electra was made haplesse Queene: Who spake with GOD, and saw the bush burne cleare, By whom the Israelites deliuered beene From Pharaohs bondage, whom the fiery spheare Guided by night, when in the day was seene The Cloud to vsher them: In whose blest daies, Corinthus yssue their proud fortunes raise. 5 One Dardanus, that other Iasius hight, Dardanus and Iass. Who strongly for their Fathers Crowne contend, And to their aydes assemble many a knight, By force of Armes their challenge to defend, But Armes nor bloudy battell; force nor fight Now Cecrops built Athens. Can vnto this vnnaturall warre giue end: Till (at the length) a Treaty was appointed, Which (by accord) should be the King annointed. 6 Iasius to Parlee comes vnarm'd: his brother Vnder his Robes of peace bright Armor wore: And being met, his vengeance could not smother But slew him dead; The Lords his death deplore, Thus pitiously the one hath kilde the other: Iasius vnto his Sepulcher they bore, But Dardanus that him so basely slew, Vnto the Pallaee Royall they pursue.
7 The people such a Traiterous practise hated, And vow his blood shall for his murder pay, Such as lou'd Iasius, the rest animated, And round begirt the place where Dardan lay, Who cals such friends as on his person waited, And in the dead of night steales thence away, For well he knowes, they Iasius lou'd so deerely, That they his murder will reuenge seucrely. 8 Before the dawne of day they shipping take, The darkenesse of the night, their purpose aideth, Through the vast Ocean a swift saile they make, But as the morning riseth, and night fadeth, The sterne Corinthians to their fury wake, And euery man th'vngarded house inuadeth, But when they entring, found the brother fled, They curse the liuing, and lam the dead. 9 Long they their weary Fortunes haue in chase, Still in the mercy of the Seas and winde, But where to harbor they can find no place, Or in the seas wilde deserts comfort finde; At length they touch at Samos Isle, in Thrace, A soile, which yet contents not Dardans minde, Ballast, fresh water, victuals he takes in, And hoysing saile, seekes further shores to win. 10 By this the Asian Seas his ships hath past, And now within the Helle spont he rides, The Marriners the shore discry at last, Where calling all their Sea-gods to their guides, To their discouery they apply them fast, And now their vessels neere the cost abides, Not long about the briny beach they houer, But Dardan landes, the Iland to discouer. 11 He finds it fruitfull, pleasant, and a soile Fit to inhabit, hie woods, champion fields, He holds this countrey worth her former toile, The place he likes, and to this clime he yeilds,
And after all his trauell and turmoile, 2485. He plants himselfe: a Citty here he builds, 1478. The first foundation of Troy He casts a huge Ditch first, then layes a frame, And after cals it Dardan by his name. 12 The time the groundsils of great Troy were layd, Was Lacedemon built (by computation) In Athens Ertchthonius King was made, And Danaus ruler ore the Argiue Nation: Hercules Dasinas, Phenitia swayde, Egiptus Egypt; now the first foundation Of great Apollos Temple was begun By young Eristhones, King Cecrops sonne. 13 In processe is much people there conuented, Being a Citty, well and fairely seated, And all such people as this place frequented, Were by him and his followers well intreated, No stranger, from the King past discontented; No Marchant in his traffique was defeated: In time, his wealth and people both abound, And here in Dardan, Dardanus liues crownd. 14 This Dardan on Candame got a sonne, Eruton hight: who the same state maintained, Time keepes his course, away the swift howers run, The second King, in Arts and Warres is trained, Imagine seauen and forty Winters dun, So long Eruton in this Citty raigned: Troos his sonne the kingdome doth enioy, Troy named of king Troos And of this Troos, came the name of Troy. 15 A puissant King in Armes, his valors fame Through all the Asian confines stretched far; Kingdomes he doth subdue, Invadors tame, By him the two first kings ecclipsed are; And the Dardanians change their auncient name, And of King Troos, so renowmd in warre Are Troyans cald, for so King Troos chargeth, And with his fame, his new-built towne enlargeth.
16 Now all the Graecian Citties Troy out-shineth, Whose glory many neighbour kings enuy, Yet none so bold, that outwardly repineth, Or date in publicke tearmes, king Troos defie: The strongest people he by loue combineth, The weaker he by armes doth terrifie, King Tantalus that liues in Phrigia crownd, Most enuies Troy should be so farre renown'd. 17 But leaue we him in enuy, Troy in glory, For enuy still lookes vpward, seldome downe, And turne to that which most concernes our story, How Iupiter attain'd his fathers crowne; How Sybill oyfull was, but Saturne sorry To heare his sonnes suruiuing in renowne; How Tytan war'd on Saturne, how Ione grew, And in his fathers aid, his Vnckle slew. 18 Twixt the Pelagians and Epiriens riseth Contentious warre, in Epire raigned then War betwixt the Epiriens & Pelagians. King Milleseus; who in armes surpriseth Certaine Pelagians, king Lycaons men: Lycaon with his watlike troopes aduiseth, By pollicy of warre, both how and when He may awaite th' Epiriens the like domage, And make their king vnto his state do homage. 19 At length Ioues Guardian, the great Epyre king, Vnto the son of Titan offers peace, In signe whereof they Oliue branches bring, To signifie their hostile Armes surcease: Lyaon. Lycaon sonne to Tytan whom wars sting, Had likewise gald and spoild his lands increase; Applauds the motion, sweares to this accord, Condition'd thus, to leaue an Epire Lord. 20 An Epyre Lord, as Hostage straight they take, And in Pelagia with Lycaon leaue him, There to abide, till they amends shall make For all the spoiles, th' Eperiens did bereaue him,
The King the daies doth watch, the nights doth wake, Least his Epirien hostage should deceiue him: Lycaon of his couenant naught doth slacke, The time expires the Lord should be sent backe. 21 And to that purpose Melliseus sends Ambassadors, from Epire to Pelage, Who to Lycaon beares his kind commends, Lycaon full of spleene and warlike rage To quit his former inury, intends, And with much paine his fury doth asswage, Yet giues them outward welcome, they desire Their Hostage Lord to beare backe to Epire. 22 Vnto a Morrowes banquet he inuites them, Saying they shall receiue him at that feast: The morrow comes (full ill the kings requites them) He makes th'Epirien to be kild and drest, Part to be sod, part to be rosted, which incites them To horror and amazement, they detest So horible an obiect: Then the King Thus saies; Behold your Hostage here I bring. 23 Young Iupiter was at the Table seated, Sent with the rest, by his great soster-Father On th'Ambassie: he hauing heard repeated A deed so monstrous, or inhumane rather, As one that brookt not to be so inreated, His lofty spirits he to his heart doth gather: And rising from the Table, drawes his sword, And beares away the mangled Epyre Lord. 24 Into the Market place his load he beares, Before the amazed people to dislose it: The bold vndaunted Worthy nothing seares, But beares the body, and in publicke shewes it; Some roasted, and some sod, some bak't appeares, And cucry soule abhorres the deed that knowes it: Who wondering whence so vilde a mischiefe came, Behold (quoth he) your King Lycaons shame.
25 Behold the prince, the sonne of Titan kept, Vpon his honour safely to deliuer, Some were asham'd, some threatned, and some wept, Some of their trembling arts with terror shiuer, Which Saturnes sonne espying, forth he stept, And saith: shall such a Tirant and badliuer? Shall such a bloudy and insatiate diuell Vnpunisht scape, for practise of this euill? 26 The infamy of this inhuman act, to you; it hath defam'd your nation, Where re report shall blazon this base fact, Of our Epitan murdred in such fashion, It will appeare that you the Tirant bact, And that it was your deed; This short Oration, Tooke such effct, that each man blusht whin, Feeling himselfe toucht with that horrid sin. 27 Much more he spake, to bring the king in hate With such his subrects as had neuer lou'd him, That fell Lycaon but vsurpt his state, And brought a scandall on them all, he prou'd him, Thus of his murdrous act he doth dilate, To which his tirany and ranker mou'd him, His ormer cruelty, this bloudy sight, And Ioues perswasions, makes them bent to fight. 28 Saturnes bold sonne will no aduntage leese, But with his many tirannies proceeds, He makes such burne, whose harts before did freeze, At the recitall of his bloudy deedes: Then beares againe the course, which none that sees But his heart fires with rage, or Inly bleeds, Then cries aloud: you bound that would be free, Cast of your seruile yoake, and follow me. 29 You whom the bloody Tirant hath opprest, Now (whilst you may reuenge you) arme, and strike, You that haue seene th'Epirian kild and drest, Let him not on your bodies act the like:
Aime all your weapons gainst the Tirants brest: With that, this catcht a Iauelin, that a Pike, One takes an Axe, another snatcht a Spade, Some Swords, some Staues, the pallace to inuade. 30 Their youthfull Captaine they attend, and meet With the fierce Tirant, arm'd and well prepar'd: They Barricado both ends of the street, Then to the battell (where they no man spar'd) By this Ioue layes Lycaon at his feet; And there had slaine him, but his spleene was bar'd By one of his best Captaines, who did bring Happy supply, and so preseru'd the king. 31 Th'inraged multitude esteemed nought The dauncing Courtiers when they came to blowes, They watily, the people madly fought, And euery man his dauntlesse courage showes, Whilst all about, young Ioue his kinsman sought, And still the clamor of the battell rose So loud, that it rebounded gainst the skies, And heauen it selfe did Eccho with their cries. 32 Yet Ioue triumphant in the first ranke stood, His foes fixt battaile he by force displaces, It raines sharpe Arrowes till the ground flowes blood, And yet no knight his honored fame disgraces: It did th'Epiriens and their Captaines good To see the streets pau'd with their enemies faces: In this high tumults heat, Lycaons fled, Lycaon va∣quisht by Iu∣piter And sprightly Ioue left Conqueror mongst the dead. 33 The Tirant when he saw his seruants slaine, To saue his life, workes for his secret scape, And to the forrest flying from his traine, Hecatcus Mi∣leseus lib. 2. ge∣nealogiarum. He strangely feeles himselfe trans-form`d in shape, Both woluish forme and mind, he doth retaine, And in the woods he liues by spoile and rape: He liu'd a Tirant whilst his kingdome stood, And chang'd into a Wolfe, still thirsts for blood.
34 Where we will leaue him in the desert Groue, Trans-formd in body, but not chang'd in mind. And as my story leads, returne to Ioue Who sees Lycaon fled, none left behind, But such as whilst they breath'd, in valour stroue, And dying, to the fire there corpes resignd: To the Pelagians turning he thus saies: Be yours the Conquest, but to heauen the praise. 35 But they his honours backe to him resigne, And with a generall shout their caps vp fling, Saying (ô Ioue) thy valour is deuine; And thou of vs Pelagians shalt be king, Iupiter made king of the Pelagians. They guard him to the pallace, and in fine The Crowne and Scepter to his hand they bring: And after search, finding Lycaon fled, They Saturnes sonne inuested in his sted. 36 King Iupiter had not yet raignd an hower, But with his trusty followers searcheth round About the Pallace royall, for the power Of king Lycaon, but he no man found; (Death spares the king, that doth his folke deuoure,) Yet iealous of his state, like kings new crown'd, To abide all future garboiles and assaults, He searcheth all the Sellers, nookes, and vaults. 37 And breaking vp a strong bard iron dore, He spies a goodly chamber richly hung, Where he might see vpon the catelesse floure, A discontented Lady rudely flung: Her habite suting with her griefe she wore, Her eyes rain'd teares, her Iuory hands she wrung: Herrobes so blacke were, and her face so faire, Each other gracst, and made both colours rare. 38 The Virgin lookt out of her sad attire, Like the bright sun out of a dusky cloud; Her first aspect set the kings hart afire, Who vailing first his bonnet, he lowe bowd,
And to haue seizd her fingers preaseth nyer, But she at fight of strangers weepes alowd, Her drowned eie she to the Earth directeth, And no man saue her owne sad woes respecteth. 39 The youthful Prince whom Amorous thoughts surprise, With comfortable words the Lady cheeres, Supports her by the arme, intreats her rise, And from her bosome to remoue her feares, Yet will not she erect her downe-cast eies: Nor to his smooth-sweete language lend her cares, Till from the Earth he rais'd her by the arme, And thus with words, begins her griefe to charme. 40 Bright Damsell, did you know the worth of all Those pretious drops you prodigally spill, You would not let such high-prizd moysture fall, Which from your hart your Conduit-eyes distill; Oh spare them though you count their valew small, To haue them spar'de Ile giue you (if you will) Although not in full paiment, yet in part, A Princes fauour, and a Souldiors hart. 41 You dimme those eyes that sparkle fire Deuine, By whom this melancholy roome is lighted, The place were darke, and but for their bright shine, We in this Dungeon should be all benighted: Oh saue your beauty then and spare your eyen: Why should you at our presence be affrighted; we come not with our weapons drawne to feare you, But with our comfortable words, to cheare you. 42 But say, our hostile weapons were all bent Against your breast; yet why should you be mated? Bewty's sword-profe, no forceable intent But by a face so faire is soone rebated, Your beauty was vnto your body lent, To be her Secretary; where instated, It is as safe as if a wall of Iron Impreguable, your person should inuiron.
43 With that the wofull maide vplifts her eie, And fixt it first vpon the Princes face, But there it dwelt not long, for by and by It wandered wildly round about the place, Yet comming to her selfe, when she gan spy Her selfe mongst strangers with a modest grace, Hauing her raging griefe awhile restrain'd, Thus blushing, she her sad estate complain'd. 44 My father, oh my Father, where is he? To whom these Subiects should of right belong: You are the Limbes, the head I cannot see, Oh, you haue done the king some violent wrong, What Stranger's this that doth sollicite me? How dare you thus into my chamber throng? And fright me, (being a Princesse) with your steele, Or wheres the King, that to this youth you kneele? 45 If King Lycaon liue, why do you bow Vnto a stranger, he suruiuing still? If he be slaine, why am I hindred now, Vpon his Coarse my Funerall teares to spill? I may lament by Law, no lawes allow; Subiects by Treason their liege Lords to kill, My teares are naturall, and come in season, ' Your treacherous act is meer vnnaturall Treason. 46 By these her words, the Amorous Prince doth gather This Lady to be king Lycaons daughter, It grieues him now he hath exil'd her father, And once againe of fauour he besought her, But she all sorrow now intreats him rather To leaue the Chamber, since his comming brought her Nothing but newes of death, and words of care, Her Fathers ruine, and her owne dispaire. 47 By many faire perswasions the Prince moues her, To stint her passion, and to stop her teares, He whispers in her are how much he loues her, But all in vaine, his tongue he idly weares:
By all Rhetoricke and Art he proues her, Which makes her at the length lend her chast eares, And thus reply: I cannot loue, vntill You one thing grant me, the Prince sweares he will. 48 Remember (quoth the Lady) you haue sworn, Being a Prince, to breake an oath were base: Wer't in a Peasant, it were hardly borne, But in a Prince it seemes a worse disgrace: The greater y'are, the greater is your scorne, If you should taint your honour in this case: Tis nothing if a poore Stars beames be clouded, But we soone misse the Moone in darknes shrowded. 49 Princes are earthly Gods and placst on high, Where euery common man may freely gaze On them, the peoples vniuersal eye, Is howerly fixt to scan their workes aud wies, They looke through spectacles your deeds to spy, Which makes the Letters of your shame, or praise Grosser to be discernd, and easier scand, (A king should be a light to all his Land.) 50 These words sight out, haue fan'd the amorous fire, Which did the brest of Saturnes sonne inflame: He that at first her beauty did admire, Now wonders at the wisedome of the dame, And museth how from such a deuilish Syre As king Lycaon, such an Angell came: Now he entreats her aske, with spirit vndanted, For as he is a Prince, her sute is granted. 51 Be it (quoth he) the fortunes of this day: Be it my selfe, my selfe sweet Saint am thine: Be it this kingdome, and this Scepters sway, Behold my interest I will backe resigne; We haue no power to say such beauty nay, Being but mortall, and that face deuine, Whats your demand (sweet Saint?) It is quoth she, That I a consecrated maide may be.
52 Oh, had she askt more gold then would haue fild Her fathers Pallace, packt vp to the roofe, Or in her sad boone had the Lady wild, Of his resolued spirit to see large profe, Monsters he would haue tamde, and Gyants kild, And from no sterne aduenture kept aloofe, In hope to haue woon her loue: but being thus coy, This one request, doth all his hopes destroy. 53 The Prince is bound by Oath to graunt her pleasure, Yet from her will, he seekes her to disswade, Hoord not (quoth he) vnto your selfe such Treasure, Nor let so sweet a flower vngathered vade: Nature her selfe hath tooke from you fit measure To haue more beautious Creatures by you made, Then crop this flower before the prime be past, Loose not the Mould that may such fayre ones caft. 54 Let not a Cloyster such rare beauty smother, Y'are Natures may ster-peece, made to be seene; (Sweet) you were borne, that you should beare another, A Princesse, and discended from a Queene, That you of Queenes and Princes might be mother: Had she that bare you still a virgin beene, You had not beene at all: Mankind should fade, If euery Female, liu'd a spotlesse mayde. 55 You aske, what you by no meanes can defend, In seeking a strict Cloyster to enjoy, Yee wish to see the long-liu'de world at end, And in your hart you mankinde would destroy, For when these liues no further can extend, How shall we people th'Earth: Who shall employ The Crowns we win? the wealth for which we striue? When dead our selues, we leaue none to suruiue. 56 You might as well kill Children, as to hold This dangerous error: Nay Ile proue it true: For Infant-soules that should haue beene cnrold In Heauens predestin'de booke, begot of you,
Are by your strangenesse, to obliuion sold, You might as well your hands in blood imbrew, Nay better too, for when young Infants die, Their Angell soules liue in Eternitie. 57 And so the Heauens make vp their numbers full, You (Lady) heauen and carths right disallow; What Gods conclude, shall mortals disannull? So many as you might haue had ere now: So many Angels from heauens throne you pull, From carth, so many princes by your vow: Now could I get a sonne, but you being coy, Faire murdresse (that you are) haue kil'd the boy: 58 Much more (but all in vaine) the amorous youth Thinkes in his smooth sweet language to disswade her, But nothing that he pleads she holds for truth, Though by all gentle meanes he sought to haue staid her, She vrgeth still his oath: he thinkes it ruth To haue such beauty cloister'd, and had made her Virginity, for Venus sweets to haue chang'd, Had not his Oath that purpose soone estrang'd. 59 Now faire Celisto by Ioues gtaunt is free Diana To be admitted one of Dians traine, Dian a Huntresse, the broad shadowy tree The house, beneath who roofe she doth remaine, Venson her food, and Honey from the Bee, The flesh of Elkes, of Beares, and Bores new slaine, Her drinke the pearled brooke, her followers, maides, Her vow, chast life, her Cloister, the Coole shades. 60 Her weapons are the Iauelin, and the Bow, Her garments Angell like, of Virgin-white; And tuckt aloft, her falling skirt below Her Buskin meetes: buckled with siluer bright: Her Haire behind her, like a Cloake doth flow, Some tuckt in roules, some loose with Flowers bedight: Her silken vailes play round about her slacke, Her golden Quiuer fals athwart her backe.
61 She was the daughter of an antient king Cald Iupiter, that sway'd the Attick scepter, To her as suters, many princes bring Theyr Crownes: which scorning, she a virgin kept her, Yet as her beauties fame abroad doth ring, Her suters multiply, therefore she stept her Into the forrest; meaning to exempt her From such, as to their amorous wils would tempt her. 62 This new religion famous in a Queene, Of such estate and beauty, drew from farre Daughters of Princes, they that late were seene In Courts of kings, now Dians followers are, Where they no sooner sworne and entred been, But against men and loue they proclaime war: Many frequent the groues, by Dians motion, For fashion some; and some too for deuotion. 63 The old Plateenses holding her deuine, Gaue her the sacred name of Euclia, Plut. in Arist. Their maids ere married, offered at her shrine, And then they freely chus'd their marriage day, Without her leaue they neuer tasted wine, Or durst in publicke with their husbands play: The Temple of Diana at Ephesus. Whole Asia ioyn'd to make a Church of stone, Built by the Architector Chersiphrone. 64 To this th'Aegiptian hie Pyramides, Nor the great Iouiall portract could compare, The 7. Won∣ders. Mausolus Tombe the Manes to appease, Rear'd by the Carian Queene, but trifles are: The huge Colossus that bestrid the seas, And made Rhoades famous for a worke so rare: Great Babels Tower, nor Pharos stately Ile, Could ranke with this, for cost, or height of stile. 65 Two hundred twenty years it was in framing, In length, foure hundred fiue and twenty feet; In breadth, two hundred twenty: Thus proclaiming Their feare of her, they chast Diana greet:
Of all faire Damsels her the Goddesse naming, And to her seruice, in her Temple meet: A Fabricke famous, both for height and length, Proportion, beauty, wormanship, and strength. 66 A hundred seauen and twenty Collumbs great, All of white Marble, in faire order stand: Sixe hundred feet in heigth, both huge and neat, The like were neuer wrought by mortall hand: Princes of sundry Kingdomes that intreat Her Diuine grace, and yeild to her command: Each one, a high and stately piller bringes, Full thirty sixe, rear'd by so many Kinges. 67 All these contend, which should the rest exceed In large expence, to make it more admir'd, Herostratus that neuer did glad deed, Neither with wit, nor gracious Thewes inspir'd, Knowing no meanes his owne renowne to breed, In deuilish spleene, this royall wonder fier'd; The purpose why he did this deed of shame, Was, that the world should Chronicle his name. 68 This when dispoiled Ephesus once knew, They made a law, with fine to him that brake it, To make him lose the fame he did pursue, His very name, was death to him that spake it, For many yeares it dide, but times renew And from obliuious dusky Caues awake it, Elce had their scilence from these ages kept, This strange report, that long amongst them slept. 69 The world, the very day it lost the grace Plutarch in vita Alexand. Of this rare worke, another Wonder bred Greater than this, from royall Philips race, That then tooke life, when this in fire lay dead: In Macedon, a much renowmed place, Young Alexander in that Temples stead Entred the world, whose glories did aspire Aboue this structure, then consumd with fire.
70 Now is Calisto one of Dians traine, And to th' Arcadian Forrest newly flitted, Her beauty can scarce equald be againe, Mongst al the Huntresses wheres she's admitted: Meane time Ihoue cheeres his friends: Inters the slaine, And all his businesse is by order fitted: The State establisht, Time in triumph spent, And newes of all, by posts to Epire sent. 71 His great affayres determin'd: the Prince now Hath leysure to bethinke him of that face, To which his future actions he doth vow, Now he remembers each particular grace: That Loue that makes the Idle spirits bow, Still giues occasions way, and businesse place: Abandon sloth, and Cupids bow vnbends, His brands extinguist, and his false fire spends. 72 For idlenesse makes Loue, and then maintaines What it hathmade, when he that well employes His busie houres, is free from Venus traines, And the true freedome of his thoughts enioyes: He had no time to sigh, that now complaines, The good his businesse did, his sloath destroyes: Loue from the painfull flyes, but there most thriues, And prospers best, when men lead slothfull liues. 73 Being alone, Calistoes shape imprest So deepely in his heart, liues in his eie: Shee's lodg'd both in the Forrest, and his brest, And (though farre off) she is imaginde nie, Phabe abroad beholds her mongst the rest, Young Ihoue at home, in his blind phantasie: And now too late he wishes (but in vaine) Her still at Court, or him of Dians traine. 74 He haunts the Forrests and those shadowy places, Where fayre Dyana hunteth with her Mayds, And like a Hunts-man the wilde Stag he chases, Onely to spy his Mistresse mongst the shades:
And if he chance where bright Calisto traces, He thankes his fate, if not his Starres vpbraids, And deemes a tedious Summers day well spent, For one short sight of her, his soules content. 75 At length, he thus concludes: I am but young, No downy heire vpon my face appeare, I'le counterfet a shtill effeminate tongue, And d'on such habit as the Huntresse weares, When my guilt Quiuer crosse my brest is hung, And Bore-speare in my hand such as she beares: My blood being fresh, my face indifferent faire, Modest my eie, and neuer shorne my haire. 76 Who can discouer me? Why may not I Be entred as an Ancresse mongst the rest? This is the way that I intend to try, (Of all my full conclusions held the best) My habit Ile bespeake so secretly, That what I purpose neuer can be gest, My Lords assemble, and to them shew reason Why I of force must leaue them for a season. 77 Th'excuse vnto the Nobles currant seemes, He takes his leaue and trauels on his way, Of his entended voyage no man deemes, Now is he briskt vp in his braue aray, So preciously his mistresse hee esteemes, That he makes speed to where the Virgins stay, And by the way his womanish steps he tride, And practis'd how to speake, to looke, to stride. 78 To blush and to make honors (and if need) To pule and weepe at euery idle toy, As women vse, next to prepare his weed, And his soft hand to Chare-workes to imploy: He profits in his practise (heauen him speed) And of his shape assumed graunt him ioy, Of all effeminate trickes (if youle beleeue him,) To practise teares and Sempstry did most greeue him.
79 Yet did he these mongst many others learn, He growes compleat in all things (sauing one) And that no eye can outwardly discerne, Vnlesse they search him, how can it be knowne? But come vnto the place, his heart doth earne, Twice it was in his thought backe to haue gone: But I am Ioue (quoth he) and shall I then Of women be affraide, that feare no men. 80 With that he boldly knockes, when to the gate A royall virgin comes, to know his will: Atlanta that first strook the Calidonian Boare. This Lady after was a Queene of state, And in Arcadia the fierce Boare did kill: Atlaula she was cal'd, admitted late, Who thinking to haue there remained still, King Meleager in Achaya raign'd, And to his nuptiall bed this Queene constrain'd. 81 Faire Virgin (quoth Atlaula) whats your pleasure? Ioue, after bowes and Cuttsies, thus bespake her; Bright Damsell, if you now retaine that measure Of grace, you haue of beauty from your maker, Pitty a maide, that hath nor Gold, not Treasure, And to your sacred order would betake her: Know, from a Noble house I am discended, That humbly pray to be so much befrended. 82 Preferre me to the Mistresse of these shades, Diana, whom I reuerence, not through folly, But as diuinest Goddesse of all maides, To whose chast vowes I am deuoted wholly, Atlaula saies she will, and straight inuades Diana thus. Oh thou adored soly Of Virgins: (fairest Cinthia) will you daine, To make this stranger Lady of your traine. 83 Diana takes her state, about her stand A multitude of beauties, mongst the rest As Ioue about him lookes, on his right hand He spies Calisto, Dians new come guest,
She, for whose sake he left th'Epirian Land: At sight of her, fresh fires inflame his breast: And as he stands, wal'd in with beautious faces, He most commends Calisto for her graces. 84 So many sparkling eyes were in his sight, That hedg'd the sacred Queene of Virgins round, That with their splendor haue made noone of night, Should all at once looke vpward, the base ground Might match the sky, and make the earth as bright, As in that eeuen, when Ariadne crown'd, was through the Galaxia in pompe led, Millions of starres all burning o're hir head. 85 Diana, Ihoue in cuery part surueyes, Who simpers by himselfe, and stands demurely, His youth, his face, his stature she doth praise, (A braue virago she suppos'd him surely) Were all my trayne of this large size (she saies) Within these Forrests we might dwell securely: Mongst all, that stand or kneele vpon the grasse, I spy not such another Manly Lasse. 86 So giues her hand to kisse: Ihoue grace doth win, With Phabe and Atlanta, who suppose Him what he seemes, and now receiued in, With all the Maydes, he well acquainted growes, They teach him how to Sow, to Card, and Spin, Calisto for his bed-fellow he chose: With her all day he works, at night he lies, Yet cuery morne, the mayde, a Mayde doth rise. 87 For if he glaunst but at a word or two Of Loue, or grew familiar (as Maydes vse) She frownes, or shakes the head (all will not doe) His amorous parley she doth quite refuse: Sometime by feeling touches he would woo; Sometime her necke and breast, and sometime chuse Her lip to dally with: what hurt's in this? Who would forbid a mayd, a May de to kisse?
88 And then amidst this dalliance he would cheere her, And from her necke, decline vnto her shoulder, Next to her breast, and thence discending nearer Vnto the place, where he would haue bin boulder: He finds the froward Gyrle so chastly beare her, That the more hot he seem'd, she showed the colder, And when he grew immodest, oft would say: Now fie for shame, lay by this foolish play. 89 Alas (poore Prince) thy punishment's too great, And more than any mortall can endure, To be kept hungry in the sight of meat, And thirsty, in the sight of Waters pure: Thou seekst the food thou most desirs't to cate, Which flyes thee most, when most thou thinkst it sure, Tis double want, mongst Riches to be poore, And double death, to drowne in sight of shore. 90 Besides, the Prince too boldly dares not proue her, As ignorant, how she may take his offer, Nor dare he tell her he is Ihoue, her Louer, Though she at first might deeme, the Prince did scoffe her: Yet if she should his secrecie discouer, He feares what violent force the Queene might profer To one, that with such impudence prophane, Should breake the sacred Orders of her traine. 91 He therefore a conuenient season watcht, When bright Diana the wilde Stag would chase, The beautious Virgins were by couples matcht, And as the lawnes they were about to trace, Their pointed Iauelins in their hands they latcht About theyr necks, in many a silken lace Their Bugles hung, which as the groues they trip, Were oft-times kist by euery Ladies lip. 92 And in their eares the shrilling Musicke tingled, Which made the ecchoing hilles and Vales resound, Ihoue and Calisto mongst the rest was mingled, Vntill the youthfull Prince occasion found
To shrinke behind: him faire Calisto singled, And throwes her selfe by Ihoue vpon the ground, And saies: how coms it you so soone are tyred? (Oh Ihoue thou now hast, what thou long desired) 93 He chose a place, thicke set with broad-leau'd bowes, Which from the grassie earth skreend the bright Sunne, Here neuer did the wanton he-Goat browze, Nor the wild Asse for food, to this place run, This seate as fit for pastime he allowes, And longs withall vntill the sport be dun, For whilst the game flyes from them, here he lags, Couer'd with trees, and hemd in round with flags. 94 Nor are they within heating of the cryes Of the shrill Bugles th'Huntresse Virgins weare, When the bold Prince doth gainst Calisto rise, Resolu'd to act what he did long forbeare, Nothing to hinder his attempt he spies, Being alone, what should the bold youth feare? Now with his Loue, he once more gins to play, But still she cryes; nay prethe (sweet) away. 95 H gins t'vnlace him, she thinkes tis for heate, And so it was for heate, which only she, And none but she could qualifie: His seat He changde, and now his dalliance growes more free, For as her beauty, his desire is great, Ye all this while no wrong suspecteth she: He heaues hir silke-coats, that were thin and rare, And yet she blusht not, though he see her bare. 96 Ihoue takes th'aduantage, by his former vow And force perforce, he makes her his sweete prize: Calisto deflou red. Th'amazed Virgin (searce a virgin now) Fils all the neighbour-Groues with shriekes and cries, She catches at his locks, his lips, his brow, And rends her garments, as she strugling lies: The violence came so sudden and so fast, She skarce knew what had chaunst hir, till twas past.
97 As when a man strooke with a blast of Thunder, Feeles himselfe pierst, but knowes not how, nor where, His troubled thoughts confusd with paine and wonder, Distracted twixt amazednesse and feare, His foote remoues not, nor his handes doth sunder, Seemes blind to see, and beeing deafe to heare, And in an extasie so farre misled, That he shewes dead aliue, and liuing dead. 98 Euen so this new-made woman, late a mayde, Lyes senslesse after this her transformation, Seeing in vaine she had implor'd heauens ayde, With many a fearefull shrike, and shrill Oration, Like one intranc't vpon the ground shees layde, Amazde at this her sudden alteration: She is she knowes not what, she cares not where, Confounded with strange passion, force and feare. 99 Ihoue comforts her, and with his Princely arme, He would haue raisd her from the setled grasse, With amorous words he faine her griefe would charme, He tels her what he meant, and who he was, But there is no amends for such shrewd harme, Nor can he cheere the discontented Lasse, Though he oft sware, and by his life protested, She in his Nuptiall bed should be inuested. 100 But nothing can preuaile, she weeping sweares, To tell Diana of his shamefull deed, So leaues him, watering all her way with teares, Young Ihoue to leaue the Forrest hath decreed, He would not haue it come to Dians cares, And therefore to the Citty backe doth speed: She to the Cloyster with her checkes all wet, Alone, as many, as when first they met.
IAsius raigned in Italy, at whose marriage, the famous E∣gyptian Io was present. This was in the yeare of the world 2408. It was iust six yeares after that Moyses at the age of forty, hauing slane the Egyptian, sledde from the sight of Pharao. Eleuen yeares after Moyses departed out of Egypt, the two brothers Dardanus and Iasius waged warres in Italy: Iasius was assisted by the Ianigenes (so cald of Ianus,) Dar∣danus was ayded by the Aborigines, so called by Sabatus sa∣ga, who succeeded Comerus Gallus the Scythian in cer∣taine conquered Prouinces of Italy. At this time Lusus raignd in Spaine, Allobrox in france, Crothopus the 8. king of the Argiues, now raigned: Crau∣nus the second king of Athens: and at this time Aaron was consecrated high Priest among the Israelites. Iasius was slaine in the yeare of the world 2457. in whose place Coribanthus his sonne succeeded. Dardanus soiourned certaine yeares in Samothracia, & erected his Citty Dardan cald Troy, in the 31. yeare of the Dukedome of Moyses, receiuing that Prouince where his ci∣ty Barotus was erected, from Atho prince of Moeonia. About the same time, by equall computation, Archas & Calisto subduing the Pelagians (by the helpe of Iupiter) cald the whole prouince Archadia. Tantalus ruled the Phrygians, who were before his time, cald Moeones: This Moeonia is now called Lydia, vnder which clymate Arachne was borne, by Pallas turned into a Spider. Diana was thought to be daughter to an ancient king cal∣led Iupiter of Atticke, which Itake to bee Iupiter Belus be∣fore spoken of. She was the first that instituted a profest order of Virginity. The Poets call this Diana Cinthia, and phaebe, figuring in her the Moone, and that her brother phoebus & she, were borne of their mother Latona, daughter to Caeus the Gyant in the Iste of Delos. Atlanta was daughter to Iasius, sister to Coribantus, she first wounded the Calidonian Boare, and was after espoused to Meleagar sonne to Oeneus the king of Calidon, by his wife Althea.
Lycaon was the sonne of Pelasgus, the sonne of Iupi∣ter and Nyobe, and of Melibea, or as some thinke Cillene. He had many sonnes by many wiues, Moenalus, Thespro∣tus, Nectinnes, Caucon, Lycus, Maeuins, Macareus. In Archadia, Menatus that built the Citty Menatus. Moe leneus that built Moeleneus not farre from Megapolis. Acontius, that built Acontium. Charisius, that gaue name to Charisium, and Cynethus to Cynetha: he hadde besides Psophis, Phthinus, Teleboas, Aemon, Mantinus, Stimphelus, Clitor, Orchomenus, and others. Some recken them to the number of fifty, others to ma∣ny Apollodorus. more. Amongst all these, he had but two daughters, Ca∣listo and Dia. Touching Ariadnes crowne, it is thus remembred, Arat. in astron At , corona nitet clarum inter sidera signum, Defunct a quem banchusibi dedit esse Ariadnae. being for saken of Theseus in the Isle Naxos, whom before she had deliuered from the Mynotara, she was espoused by the God Bacchus, and by him had Thoas oenopio, Staphilus, Exanthes, Latramis, and Tauropolis. Theopompus. The end of the second CANTO.
Argumentum CAlista knowne to be with Child, is driuen From Dians Cloyster: Archas doth pursue His mother: vnto him Pelage is giuen, Now termed Archady: when Tytan knew Saturne had sonnes aliue, his hart was riuen With anger: he his men togither drew To Battayle: the two brothers fight their fils, Ioue saues his Father, and his Vncle kils. ARG. 2. TRans-formed Calisto, and the Gyant-kings, Ioues Combat with great Tiphō, Gāma sings CANTO. 3. 1 WHen I record, the dire effects of Warre, I cannot but with happy praise admire The blessed friendes of Peace which smoothes the scat Of wounding steele, and al consuming fire, Oh, in what safety then thy Subiects are, King Iames. Royall king Iames, secur'd from Warres fierce yre, That by thy peacefull gouernment alone, Studrest deuided Christendomet'attone.
2 To thee, may Poets sing the'r chearefull laies, By whom their Muses flourish in soft peace: To thee, the Swaines may tune eternall praise, By whom they freely reape the earths increase; The Merchants through the earth applaud thy daies, Wishing their endlesse date may neuer cease, By who they throgh the quartered world may traffick. Asia, Europe, America, and Affricke. 3 Thy Liege-men thou hast plac'st as on a hill, Free from the Cannons reach, from farre, to see Diuided Nations one another kill, Whilst thy safe people as Spectators be, Onely to take a view what blood they spill, They neere to ruine, yet in safety we Alone in peace, whilst all the realmes about vs, Enuy our blisse, yet forcst to fight without vs. 4 So did the Newter Londoners once stand On Barnet-Heath, aloofe, to see the fight Twixt the fourth Edward, Soueraigne of this land, Warwicke & Oxford. And the great Duke of Warwicke in the right Of the sixt Henry, in which, hand to hand, Braue Iohn of Oxford a renowned knight Made many a patting soule for liues-breath pant, And vanquisht many a worthy Combattant. 5 So stood the Kentish men to view the maine, In the yeare Eighty eight, when th'English fleete The Spanish Armado, sent to inuade En∣land. Fought with the huge Armadoes brought from Spaine, With what impatience did they stand to see't On the safe shore, willing to leaue the traine Of such faint Cowards, as thinke safety sweet In such a quarrell, where inuaders threat vs, And in our natiue kingdome seeke to beat vs. 6 Where Royal Englands Admirall, attended With all the Chiualry of our braue Nation, The name of Howard through the earth extended By Naual triumph o're their proud Invasion,
Where victory on the Red-Crosse descended, In Lightning and Earths-thunder, in such fashion That all the sheafed feathered shafts of Spaine, Headed with death, were shot them backe againe. 7 It shewed as if two Townes on th'Ocean built, Had been at once by Th'eauens lightning fired, The shining waters with the bright flames guilt, Breathd Clouds of smoke, which to the spheres aspired, The bloud of Spanish Souldiers that day spilt, Which through the Port-holes ran, Neptune admired, And tooke it for the Red-sea, whilst the thunder Of English shot, proclaymde the Sea-gods wonder. 8 But least this Ordinance should wake from sleepe, Our auncient enmity, now buried quite, The graue of all theyr shame, shall be the deepe, In which these peopled Sea-townes first did fight; Yet that I may a kinde of method keepe, And some deseruing Captaines to recite: Liue famous Hawkins, Frobisher and Drake, S. Fran Drake S. 10 Hawkins S. Mart. Frobi∣sher. Whose very name, made Spaines Armadoes quake. 9 Now to returne vnto Pelagia backe, Which Ihoue hath made to him and to his seed, Then takes his leaue: the people loath to lacke The Prince, that from a Tyrant hath them freed Who of their liues and Honors sought the wracke, would change his purpose, but he hath decreed Pelagia to forsake, and I must leaue him To Epires King, who gladly will receiue him. 10 And to the Forrest to Calisto turne, Whose sorrow with her swelling belly growes: Alasse, how can the Lady chuse but mourne? To see hir selfe so necre her painfull throwes: Tis August, now the scortching Dog-starres burne, Therefore the Forrest-Queene a set day chose For all her traine to bath them in the floud, Calisto mongst them by the riuer stood.
11 The Queene with iealous eyes surueies the place, Least men or Satyres should be ambusht by them, The naked Ladies in the floud to face, Or in their cloth-lesse beauty to espie them, Now all at once they gin themselues t'vnlace: (Oh rauishing Harmony) had I bin by them, I should haue thought so many silken strings, Tutcht by such white hands, musicke fit for kings. 12 They doffe their vpper garments: each begins Vnto her Milke-white Linnen sinocke to bare her, Small difference twixt their white smocks and their skins, And hard it were to censure which were fairer: Some plunge into the Riuer past their chins, Some feare to venture, whilst the others dare her, And with her tender foot the riuer feeles, Making the waters margent rinsh her heeles. 13 Some stand vp to the Ankles, some the knees, Some to the Brest, some diue aboue the Crowne, Of this her naked fellow nothing sees, Sauing the troubled waues, where she slid downe: Another sinkes her body by degrees, And first her foot, and then her legge doth drowne, Some their faint fellowes to the deepe are crauing, Some sit vpon the banke their white legs lauing. 14 One onely discontented, shrinks aside, Her saint vnbracing idely the doth linger, Full faine the Lasle her swelling brest would hide, She pins and vnpins with her thumbe and finger, Twice Phabe snds, and musing she denide To bath her: she commands the rest to bring her, Who betwixt mirth and earnest, force and play, All but her Cobweb shaddow, snatcht away. 15 Dian at first perceiues her brests to swell, And whispers to Atlanta what she found, Who straight perceiu'd Calisto was not well, They iudg'd she had her Virgins belt vnbound,
But when her vaile beneath her nauell fell, And that her belly shew'd so plumpe and round, They little need to aske if she transgrest, Calistoes guilty blush, the act confest. 26 Therefore she banisht her, nor sutes nor teares, Can with the Queene of Damsels ought preuaile, Who when by strict inquiry made, she heares `Of Iupiter and his deceitfull stale, Who seem'd so like a Virgin: Phebe sweares, Because her iudgement thenceforth shall not faile, And to avoide occasion of like venter, To search all such as to her traine shall enter. 17 Thus is Lycns daughter banisht now The Citty, by her late assum'd profession, Banisht the Cloyster by her breach of vow, For by no praiers, teares or intercession; Diana her reentrance will allow After exilement, for her late transgression, Therefore asham'd, thrugh darke shades she doth run, Till time expires, and she brings forth a sonne, 18 So did our Cynthia Chastity preferre, Qu Elizabeth. The most admired Queene that euer rained; If any of her Virgin traine did erre, Or with the like offence their honors stained From her Imperiall Court she banisht her, And a perpetuall exile she remained, Oh bright Elisa though thy dated daies Confine: there is no limit to thy praise. 19 Calistos sonne immagine seuen years old, Brought vp mongst Lyons, Tygers, Wolues, & Beares, The sauage impe growes day by day more bold, And (halfe a bruit) no beast at all he feares, He brookes both Summers heat and Winters cold, And from the Woolfe his pray by force he teares, Vpon a time his mother crost his will, Whom he inrag'd pursude, and saught to kill.
20 She flies, he followes her with furious rage, Till she is forest the Forrest to forsake, And seeing no meanes can his spleene asswage, She doth the way vnto the citty take, The neighbour Citty which is cal'd Pelage, Where Iupiter by chance did merry-make; Whose hap it was, then crossing through the street, The mother and th'inraged sonne to meete. 21 Calisto spies Ioue, and for helpe she cries, And at his Royall feet she humbly throwes her, He stops the sauage, and with heedfull eyes, Viewing Calisto well, at length he knowes her, Though clad in barke and leaues, (a strange disguise) For a kings daughter, and a Realms disposer: Helpe Ioue (quoth she) and my pursuer stay, Archas thy sonne his mother seekes to slay. 22 Ioue gladly doth acknowledge the bold Lad To be his son, for all the guifts of nature, Pattern'd and shap't by Iupiter he had, And of him nothing wants, but age and stature, He caus'd him in rich garments to be clad, And then he seem'd to al, a goodly creature, For being attir'd in cloath of Gold and Tissew, He may be easily knowne to be Ioues Issue. 23 The strife betwixt the mother and the childe, Is by the father and the husband ended, Calisto hath againe her selfe exil'd, Scorning the grace that Ioue to her extended: She hies her to the groues and forrests wilde, With generall mankind for Ioues sake offended, But in her flight as through the fields she ranged, She feeles her figure and proportion changed. 24 Her vpright body now gan forward bend, Hecateus, And on the earth she doth directly stare, And as her hands she would to heauen extend, She sees her fingers clawes, o're-growne with haire,
And those same lips Ioue did of late commend To be for colour perelesse, kissing rare, Are rough and stretcht in length, hir head down hangs Her skins a rough hide, and her teeth be fangs. 25 And when she would her strange estate bewaile And speake to heauen, the sorrowes of her hart, Instead of words she finds her Organs faile, And grunts out a harsh sound, that makes her starr, She feares her shape, and ouer hill and dale Runs from her selfe, yet can she not depart From what she flies, for what she most doth feare She carries all the way: the shape of Beare. 26 And though a perfect Beare, yet Beares affright her, Calisto trans∣formd into a Beate. So do the Wolues, though mongst their sauage crew Her Father liues, how should a Wolfe delight her Vnlesse Lycaon in such shape she knew? Meane time young Archas proues a valiant fighter, And in all Martiall practise famous grew, Pauson, in Ar∣cadicis. Adding seaueu Summers more vnto his age, Hee seats him in the kingdome of Pelage. 27 Where leaue him raigning in his Grandsiressted, Pelagia cald Archadia of Archas. Changing his kingdome and his peoples name, Whether by loue or fate (I know not) led Themselues Arcadians they abroad proclaime, After the name of Archas now their head Pelage a Citty too of ancient fame, They Archad call, a stile that shall perseuer Vnto the people and the Towne for euet. 28 Archas in Archad liues, in Epyre Ioue, Saturne in Creet, the God of Earth proclaimed, Tytan through forren Seas and Lands doth roue, Hauing by Conquest many Nations tamed, For time still gaue him Conquest where he stroue, which made him through the world both fear'd & famed Yet with a world the Tyrant seemes not pleasd, Till he haue Creet his Natiue birth-right cea.
29 By strict inquiry, heat length hath found His periur'd Brother hath kept sonnes aliue, against the couenant he by oath was bound, Which was, that no male issue should suruiue: This of his future war must be the ground, He vowes in Irons his Brothers legs to gyue, His hands to Manacle, his necke to yoake, In iust reuenge that he the league hath broke. 30 His sonnes all Gyants, and by nature strong, He sends to assemble to this dreadfull warre, Who like their father apt for rape or wrong, Without the cause demaunding gathered are, Tytons sons all Gyants. Vnnumbred people in their armies throng, Brought by the Big-bon'd Titanoys from farre, Where he and all his Gyant-sonnes assemble, They make the groning earth beneath them tremble. 31 Lycaon was not there, him Ioue before Had from th' Arcadian kingdome quite put downe, There was the Gyant Typhon, he that wore Typhon. The Ciprian wreath, and the Cicillian crowne, Briarius. Huge Briareus that the scepter bore Of Nericos, a monster, at whose frowne Nations haue quak't, whole armies stood agast, And Gods themselues shooke till his rage were past. 32 Coeon likewise king of great Coeas Isle, Con. A fellow of a high and matchlesse size, Who the rough Ocean calmed with a smile, And with a frowne hath made the billowes ise, Aegeon. Aegeon too that hath inlarg'd his stile Through many a kingdome: from whose raging eies Bright lightning flames haue in his furious ire, Afore a storme of thunder flasht out fire. 33 Of him the great Mediterranean Ocean Is cald th' Aegean Sea, it doth deuide Europe from Asia, and hath further motion a long the greatest part of Greece: beside,
This Gyant to the Gods scorn'd all deuotion, Therefore was cal'd Brianchus for his pride: The next Hyperion of the selfe-same breed; All these haue sworne the death of Saturnes seed. Hyperion. 34 There likewise came vnto these wars Japetus, (Calum and Terraes son) in Tytans aide, Iapetus He brought with him his sonne Prometheus, Whom Tytan the first houre a Captaine made, His brother Athlas too, and Hesperus, Their royall Ensignes in the field displai'd, Promesheus. And ouer diuers seas their armies ferried, From Mauritania, Lybia, and Hesperied. 35 Their Randezvouz in Sicily they made, And thence by sea they rigge a royall sleet, The flourishing realme of Saturne to inuade, In time, their countlesse hoast takes land in Creet, Valles by them are fil'd, hils euen are laid, Townes burnt, high Castles leuel'd with their feet, Where ere they turne, fite from their eye-bals flashes, Which townes and villages consumes to ashes. 36 Saturne their bold inuasion much admires, Not knowing whence their quarrell may be grounded, He cals his Counsell, and of them inquires How their immense ambition may be bounded, How with his enemies blood to quench the fires, And by what power the soe may be confounded, Aduise is giuen to make a generall muster, To beat them backe that in such numbers cluster. 37 And as the king thron'd in his chaire of state, Sits in his pallace, all his chiefe Peeres by him, On these affaires to Counsell and debate, In thrusts a Knight from Tytan, to desie him, And mongst the Lords that bout him circled fat, He rudely throngs, and presseth to come me him, But being kept backe, aloud he lifts his voice, And thus greets Saturne from the Tytanoys.
38 Thus sayes imperious Tytan, Saturnes Lord, Like a low vassaile from my Throne discend, Or I shall chase thee thence by fire and sword, And with thy glory, to thy daies giue end, For thou hast broke thy oath and Princely word, And therein made an enemy of thy friend: My Crowne I but resign'd vpon condition, And thou those bands hast broke by thy Ambition. 39 Whilst Saturne his male-children kils: so long He is the King of Creet, but that neglected, The occasion of this wae. He weares the Cretan Diadem by wrong, Thy periury is to the world detected, And therefore with an army great and strong, Shall Saturne from his high throne be deiected: Thus Tytan doth the king of Creet defie, And by these Summons, to submit or die. 40 Bold spirited Saturne doubly mou'd appeareth, At his proud Message, with disdaine and wonder, Disdaine; as being a Prince that nothing feareth To heare his scorned enemy-threatnings Thunder; With admiration: when he strangely heareth Of sonnes aliue, which makes him deepely wonder, And taking Sibell by the hand thus say, (Hauing commanded first his traine away.) 41 Sister and wife, I charge thee by the zeale Thou owest to me thy husband and thy brother, The truth of all this practise to reueale, And what I next demaund thee nothing smother, Since it concerns th'estate of all our weale, Art thou of any liuing sonne the mother? The trembling Queene, low kneeling, thus repli'de, You charge me deepe, and I will nothing hide. 42 I am a woman, and full well you know, A woman hath a soft and tender brest, But more, I am a mother: can you show A mother that in this kind hath transgrest?
Stranger may stranger kill: Foe murder foe, Which mothers to their children most detest: Was it for murder you espous'd me first, To be a wife, of all good-wiues accurst? 43 I'de rather be a pittious mother helde, Then through the world a Murdresse be esteem'd, Be my selfe murdered rather, then compeld To murder those for whom this womb hath teem'd: This wombe with three faire Princely sons hath sweld, Which dead to Saturne and the world are deem'd, Yet all three liue, but cruell husband where, Saturne shall neuer know, nor Tytan heare. 44 Th'amazed king immagines by her looke, Her feruent tongue doth on her hart-string strike, Necessity at this time; makes him brooke What his disturbed soule doth most dislike, Without reply the sad Queene he for sooke, It pierst his hart as if an enemies pike Had by the aime of some strong hand bin cast, And side to side through all his entrailes past. 45 He comes where all his Lords in counsell sat, And tels them of three sons preseru'd to life, The Peeres at first seeme much amaz'd thereat, Yet all commend the pitty of his wife, And praise her vertue: (intermitting that) They next proceed to Tytans hostile strife, And thus conclude their enemies to expell, Whom they know Barbarous, bloody, fierce and fell. 46 When calling him that the defiance brought, This answere backe to Tytan they returne, That they his brauing menace set at naught, That their owne blouds shall quench the towns they burn That their immediate ruines they haue sought, And they no longer can reuenge adiourne, But the next sonne shall see strange vengeancetane Of all his Cretan subiects they haue slaine.
47 The Messengers dismist, while they prepare Armes and munition for the Morrowes field, Meane time great Tytans sonnes assembled are, Who all their Fortunes on their fury build, Their hauty lookes their spleenfull harts declare, Each brandishing his sword, and ponderous shield, Longing to heare from Saturne such reply, That on his men they may their valours try. 48 Nor do they tempt the Deities in vaine, They haue what they desire: to them behold The bassled messenger gallops amaine, But ere the Knight his message hath halfe told, So much the Gyant kings their braues disdaine, That with their scornefull feet they spurne the mold, Their browes they furrow, and their teeth they grate, And all the Gods blaspheame, to shew their hate. 49 Now hath the Sunne slid from his fiery Car, And in cold Ister quencht his flaming head, Blacke darknes risting from the earth afar, You might perceiue the welkin to orespread, Orions blazing lockes discouered are, Pale Cinthia gouernes in Apolloes stead, Bootes his waine, about the pole hath driuen, And all the stars borne bright that spangle heauen. 50 The morning comes, Tytan in field appeares In compleat harnesse, arm'd from head to toe, Next him Aegeon, who no Corslet weares The Armour of the gyants. Or coat of Armes to incounter any foe, Vnarmed as he is, he no man feares, A plume doth from his guilded helmet flow, Made of the Peacockes traine, his armes is strong, In which he shakes a skeine, bright, broad, and long. 51 Creous huge sinnowy Armes, and brawny thighes Are naked, being tawnied with the sun, Buskins he weares that boue his ankles rise, Puft with such curl'd silke as Arachne spn,
A coat of Armes well mail'd that fits his size, Laceth his body in, these Armes he woon Of a huge Monster, in the Isle of Thrace, Whose weapon was a weighty iron mace. 52 His knotted beard was as the Porphir blacke, So were the fleecy lockes vpon his crowne, Which to the middle of his armed backe, From his rough shaggy head discended downe, His fiery Eie-bals threaten Saturnes wracke, Sterne vengeance rous'd her selfe in Caons frowne, His sheild, a broad iron dore, his Lance a beame, Oft with his large stride he hath Archt a streame. 53 Typhon in skins of Lyons grimly clad, Next his too Brothers in the march proceeds, The hides of these imperious beasts he had, From th'Erithmanthian forrest, where his deeds Liue still in memory, like one halfe mad The Gyant shewes in these disguised weeds, The Lyons iawes gnawing his Helmet stood, And grinning with his long fangs stain'd in blood. 54 And yet his owne fierce visage lowring vnder, Appeares as full of terror as that other, Two such aspects makes the Saturniens wonder, Next him appeares Euceladus his Brother, Whose eye darts lightning and his voice speaks Thunder (This was the onely darling of his mother,) His weapon was a tall and snaggy Oake, With which he menac'st death at euery stroake. 59 Hiperion in an armor all of Sunnes, Shines like the face of Phoebus o're the rest: This Gyant to his valiant Brothers runs, Crying to Armes, base lingering I detest, Damn'd be that Coward soule that damage shuns, Or from apparant perill shrinkes his brest, Behold where Saturne mongst his people crownd, His hornes and Clarions doth to battell sound.
56 Saturne appeares as great Hyperion spake, Borne in an Iuory chaire with bright stones stoodded, Mongst which in trailes ran many an Anticke flake, With rich Inamell, azur'd, greene and rudded, At the first push their enemies rankes they brake, He fought till his bright Chariot was all bloodded: About him round their bowes his Archers drew, A fight which yet their Foe-men neuer knew. 57 The big-bon'd Gyants wounded from a farre, And seeing none but their owne souldiers by them, Amazed stand at this new kind of warre, To receiue wounds by such as came not nie them, From euery wing they heare their looses iarre, They knew not where to turne, or how to flie them, The showers of Arrowes rain'd so fast and thicke, That in their legges, thighs, brest, and armes they stick 58 So long as their strong Bowes of trusty Ewe And silken strings held fast, so long fresh riuers Of Crimson blood the Champion did imbrew, For euery shaft the Archers Bow deliuers, Or kils or woundes one of their countlesse crew, But when they once had emptied all their quiuers, And that the enemy saw their arrowes wasted, To blowes and handy-strokes both armies hasted. 59 Thou famous English Henry of that name Henry the 5. The fift: I cannot but remember thee That wan vnto thy kingdome endlesse fame, By thy bold English Archers Chiualry, In Agin-Court: when to the Frenchmens shame, Agincourt. King, Dolphin, and the chiefe Nobility Were with the ods of thousands forcst to yeeld, And Henry Lord of that triumphant field. 60 But such successe king Saturne had not then, He is in number and in strength too weake, His people are but one to Tytans ten, Nor are his guards so strong their spleene to wreake,
The Gyant-Kings with infinites of men, Into their foes Battallions rudely breake: Their Polaxes and Clubs they heaue on hie, The Kings surpriz'de and the Saturniens fly. 61 The Tytans brandish their victorious Glaues, and enter the great Citty (Hauocke crying) In Cretan bloud they drowne their Chariot Naues, And slaughter all the poore Saturniens flying, One hand sharpe steele, the other fire-brands waues, In euery place the grones of people, dying Mixt with the Conquerors showts, to heauen aspire, and in their harsh sound, make a dismall Quire. 62 The Citty's ceizd, Saturne and Sybill bound, Whilst Tytan Lords it in the Cretan Throne, His reuelling sonnes for Pillage ransacke round, And where they heare Babes shrike, or olde men grone, They showt for ioy; meane time King Saturnes wound Sybill bindes vp: and being all alone In prison with her Lord, to him relates The fortunes of her sonnes, and their estates. 63 She tels him that young Ihoue, in Epire famed For Martiall triumphs, is theyr naturall sonne: He that Lycaon queld, Pelagia tamed, And many spoyles for Milliseus woon: No sooner did the King heare young Ihoue named, But he repents the wrongs against him doon; and proud of such an Issue so farre praisd, Hopes by his hand to haue his Fortunes raysd. 64 He therefore by the carefull Damsell sends, (The selfe-same Damsell that to Oson bore him as from a sorrowfull father kind commends) The Damsell hauing found him, kneeles before him, And the whole proiect she begins and ends Of Saturnes fall, and prayes him to restore him: Ihoue (that till now) a father neuer knew: amaz'd at first, himselfe a space withdrew,
65 And hauing in his hart her words debated And euery thing conferd: his birth vnknowne Which from his infancy the maide related Euen to the time that he to yeares was growne, Knowing the day and houre exactly dated, His mothers pitty, and his fathers frowne, To which her words she doth as witnesse bring The two fayre danghters of the Epyre King. 66 The youthfull Prince is to the full perswaded, It glads him to be sonne to one so great, He sweares his Vncle shall be soone disgraded, And tumbled headlong from his Fathers seat, And all that haue the Cretan Clyme inuaded Shall be repulst with scandall: In this heat The Epire King he doth of ayde implore, And Archas, whom he late had crownd before. 67 Were he a stranger, yet he holds it sinne, Not to pursue his rescue being opprest, But being his father, and his next of Kin, That by a Tyrants hand is dispossest, His mother to, that had his ransome bin And kept the bloudy weapon from his breast: All these incite his valour, and the rather To seeme kind sonne, to so vnkind a Father. 68 Posts are to Archas in Archadia sent, His father with two thousand men to meet, Who musters vp his troopes incontinent, Proud that his valour shall be knowne in Creet: The bold Parthemians likewise to Ihoue sent Of their owne voluntary minds a Fleet Of ships well stor'd with men, who both admire His valour, and his amity desire. 69 The men of Oson round about him flocke, Glad by so braue a Captaine to be guided, Knowne to be issued from a Regall stocke, Meane time King Milleseus hath prouided
His stout Epiriens, who haue vowd to blocke The Cretan streetes, with trunkes of men deuided, So with the remnant of their forces troope To make proud Tytan and his Issue stoope. 70 Their Army they transport, and on the beach Of the ritch Cretan shore securely land it, No man appeares their entrance to impeach, The selfe-opiniond Foe so slightly mand it, They thinke their fortunes out of dangers reach, And that their power's so great, none can withstand it, The couetous Princes more intend the spoyle Of one ritch towne, then losse of all the soyle. 71 But when the watch from the high Citty wals, Sees all the neighbor playnes with Armor spread, Alowd to Tytan and his sonnes he cals, To arme with speed: the Gyants straight make head Tydings of bloudy broyles them nought appals, With courage they their businesse managed, And hauing each addrest his sword and shield, Issue from forth the gates, and take the field. 72 Into three Battailes Iupiter diuides The Royall Army he conducts: The mayne King Melliseus by appointment guides, Th' Osoniens and Epyriens fill his traine, Some from Alacre he receiued besides, A Citty subiect vnto Epires raigne: Ihoue the Parthemians in the vaw doth beare, Yong Archas with th' Arcadians leades the reare. 73 Syx Battailes Tytan makes, the great'st he leades, And in the other fiue his sonnes employes, It cheeres him when he sees his Army spreads So many furlongs, led by his bold boyes: He sweares, the ground whereon his enemy treads Shall drowne the hoast that he this day destroyes In their owne gore: and after in small while, Yeeld to their mangled trunks a funerall pile.
74 By this young Archas twixt the Camps appeares, A trumpet all the way before him sounding: Iupiters Em∣bally to For Tytan through the army he inqucers, The Tyrant with all pride and spleene abounding Admits him, in the presence of his Peeres, Legions of armed men his person rounding: His sudden comming, much amazement breeds, When Archas with his message thus proceeds. 75 Thus saith Prince Iupiter, king Saturnes sonne, Stay there (quoth Tytan) for thou hast confest, That what I do, is all by Iustice done, And by good right my selfe I here invest: The Cretan Crowne I haue by conquest won, In which I haue a filiall Interest: The name of Saturns sonne, Saturne excludes, And Tytan iustly enters (not intrudes.) 76 When Archas thus replyes: Great Saturnes seede And yssue Male suruiues, to see thee slayne, The bloud thou sought to shed, shall make thee bleed, And all the Gyant Princes of thy traine, So hath the Epire King with Ihoue decreed, Therefore before your blouds this verdure staine Leaue (these vsurped Confines) and release My Graundfire King, that hostile armes may cease. 77 Else, thus thy Nephew Ihoue by me hath sworne, By me his soone Archas, th' Arcadian King, To plucke that Crowne from off thy browes, in skorne, And thee from that Tribunall headlong fling, and such as thy vsurped state suborne He shall to tuyne and destruction bring: Tytan, whose rage darts fire out of his eyes, Thus to the bold vndaunted youth replies: 78 Princox, Thou thinkst by thy despightfull braue To daunt vs, but thou giu'st vs greater spirit: Thou comst from Saturnes sonne: Thou dost depraue In that one word, his Tytle, not my Merit:
Thou telst vs we our naturall Kingdome haue, Which as our fathers eldest we inherit, For iust so old as Ihoue is, iust so long, Satarne vsurpt vpon my right, by wrong. 79 Go tell thy Father, that his life is mine, And I that life am now come to bereaue, So is thy life too which thou must resigne; When he got thee, he should haue askt me leaue, His death was at his byrth due, so was thine, Which then deferd, you now come to receiue: Reply not: the proud braucs thou hast commenced, Hath vs and all our Issue much incenccd. 80 Archas departs: Tytan his Souldiors cheeres, And tels them the directnesse of his cause; That tis Tranus Scepter which he beares, And he his eldest by all Natures lawes, The true successor to the Crowne he weares, They signe his Aue with a shrill applause, And by these motiue arguments perswaded, Threaten their liues, that haue his Clyme inuaded. 81 So thoue and Milleseus hauing heard His peremptory answer, both prepare For iminent vengeance, not to be deferd, Lowd showts and cryes from both sides pierce the ayre, The Battaile. In cuery battell dauntlesse rage appeard, The Champions in their hot bloud proudly fare: A confusd noyse drums in their halfe-deafe eares, Of trumpets, drums, shouts, swords, shields, splintered Speares. 82 Out of this Battailes Chaos and confusion, Of vndistinguisht valor Prince Ihoue springs, And where he Tytan spies makes rough intrusion, Maugre the strength of all the Gyant-kings: This prologue was to some the full conclusion Of that daies Tragedy: theyr darts and Slings From cuery part with enuious hands they cast, And Ihoue through thousand weapons points hath past.
83 Proceeding still, his sword prepares the way Euen to the Chariot where his Vncle sat, And spite of those that would his violence stay, He strikes him on the Helme, and layes him flat, There had he slaine him dead, but to the fray Encelad coms, and much inrag'd thereat Assayles the Prince, whilst he the fight intends, The rescude Tytan his high chayre ascends. 84 The noyse of his surprisall, in small space Was spread through euery wing of this large field, Such as beheld him fall, ran thence apace, And to his sonnes reported he was kild: In hast they draw their forces to this place, And Ihoue is round incompast (Heauen him shield) Saturne from his high turret lookt, and wondred, To see one Knight hold battell, gainst an hundred. 85 And calling Sybill to the Battlement, From whence they might the doubtfull skirmish view, They may perceiue how Ihoue incontinent, Twenty tall Souldiors of King Tytans slew: Amaz'd they stand at his great hardiment, One askt another, if this Knight they knew: When noting well the bold deedes he had done, (Quoth Sybill) may not this be Ihoue, our sonne? 86 Whilst in this hopefull doubt they stand confounded, Behold, young Archas hauing vnderstood His Father Ihoue with thousand foes was rounded And mongst the Gyants fought, all gul'd in blood, He causd a lowd charge to be shrilly sounded, And thither makes where Ihoue inuiron'd stood: Now grew the battell hot, bold Archas pierses Thrugh the mid-hoast, & strewes his way with herses. 87 And at first shocke, breakes through th'Iron ring Of armed men, that had his Father pend, Whose sword by this emboweld the proud King Enceladus, and to his daies gaue end:
But when he saw his sonne fresh succors bring, And to large proofe his dreadlesse spirit extend, With such essentiall ioy the Prince doth cheare him, Each blow deales death and not a man dares near him 88 Saue Tytan, who mongst many Corses lying, O're which his Armed chariot swiftly ran, Amongst the rest Euceladus espying, The blood forsooke his cheeke, his face look't wan, He stampes, he stares, he strikes, still vengeance crying, And in disordered fury spares no man, Plmmets of Lead, he from his Chariot threw, And many of the bold Archadians slew. 89 Ioue wondering whence so great a cry should grow, Or who so many of his men had slaine, Spies Tytan comming on, him Ioue doth know, And with all speed makes towards him againe: Now is the warre at height, for many a blow Deales wounds and death, thicke shewers of arrows rain, Quarters of men, and heads, with Helmets battered, Halfe hid in blood through all the fields are scattered. 90 Tytan encounters Ioue, Ioue him defies, And from his Steely Burgon beates out fire, By Tytans side doth proud Hyperion rise, Against him Archas doth the field desire, And now each other brauely doth despise, They combat son to son, and Sire to Sire, But Ioue and Archas best in power and skill, Tytan & Hy∣perion slayne. Old Tytan and the young Hyperion kill, 91 Iust as they fall, comes Typhon, hauing late King Milleseus and his battell chaced, His enemies swords had hewd off many a plate From that iron coat in which his sides weare laced, Who letting out the nailes that bound him straite, Waikes in a cloud of his own smoake, vnbraced, And as vpon his fathers trunke he gazed, He pluckes his bold foote backe, and starts amazed.
92 But when he further looking, gan espy The proud Hyperion weltring in his gore, The Combat twixt Iupiter and And huge Enceladus besides him lie, He quite forgets their Obits to deplore: The Earth he curses, and blasphemes the sky, And from his knotty head the blacke locks tore: With that inrag'de, his Axe alost he heaued, And Ihoues broad shield iustin the middle cleaued. 93 Both armies giue them field-roome, two such spirits Beget in their encounter preparation, If Ihoue suruiue, King Saturne Creet inherits: If Typhon liue, great Typhon rules that Nation: Both parties stand Spectators of their merits, To view this Combat with high admiration, Forgetting fight, their weapons downe they bend, To see these two (the best on earth) contend. 94 Huge Typhon is vnweeldy, Ihoue more quicke, and better breath'd, doth oft-times trauerse round, (To speed him with a blow, or with a pricke) Till he hath worne a bloudy circle, round about his bulky foe: Typhon strikes thicke, But his vaine blowes dig Trenches in the ground, Had they falne right, they to the waast had cleft him, and both of Father, Crowne, and life bereft him. 95 Two tedious houres lasts this renowmed fray, Yet neither Victor: with this fight compard All the dayes bloudy broyle appeard but play, Both warde, both strike, both skorne to be out-dard, Ihoue with one blow, quite through his Targe makes way It cuts the steele-bars, the guilt studs it pared: Typhon to be aueng'de of this disgrace, Aymes a stiffe stroke full at his armed face. 96 It crost his Visor, and so downe it glanced, And onely rac'st his Gorget: when Ihoue stands A Tip-toe with his armes on high aduanced, Holding his conquering sword in both his hands,
He fals it on his Beauer as it chanced, The massiy stroake vnreuets all the bands That lockt his Helme, his wounded face appeares, He mad, with his sharpe nayles his Armour teares. 97 And now both strike at once, steele against steele, And armour against armour: their lowd strokes Make the woods tremble, and the earth to reele, Such blowes, cleaue Rocks, and fell the mountain-Oakes, At length they close and grapple, Typhons heele Twines about Ihoues mid-legge, his armes he yoakes about his Gorget: actiue Ihoue lets slip, and by fine slight, catcht Typhon on the hip. 98 The Gyant scapes the fall, and both let goe, Their weapons lost, they buffet fist to fist, and at aduantage lie: now hie, now low: To close againe, Ihoue catcht by Typhons wrist, Typhon by his, both tugge, both cunning show: Typhon makes play, Ihoue catcht him by the twist, Heaues him alost, and in his armes he brings him To a high Rocke, and in the Sea he flings him. 99 Typhon thus dead, their bands disordred fly, Ihoue, Archas, and the Epyre King pursue them, Aegeon scapes, hereafter kept to die By him that with his brothers fought and slew them, Bri'reus, Iapet, Athlas, Hespery, Prometheus too disguis'd, that no man knew them, Fled with the rest: Ihoue tyred in the chace, Returnes to Creet, his parents to embrace. 100 Oh in what ioy was Sybill boue the rest, And Grandam Vesta freely to behold him, They weepe their teares of Ioy vpon his breast, And thousand sighes in their strict armes infold him, Saturne for Iuno sends, with Ihoue to feast, And his two sonnes (of whom his wife hath told him) With Archas and the Epyre King to meet, At generall Triumphs, to be made in Creet.
HEr virgin belt vnbound, Stanzo 15. It was the cu∣stome in those daies, the day of euery virgins mariage, to haue hir girdle loosed, by him that shoulde bee her husband. In the 26. Stanzo, where Calisto is sayde to bee turned into a Beare, Phurnutius sayth, that the Lady hunting, was deuoured of a Beare, and being seene no more, was thought to be metamorphosed into a Beare. There be two Beares in the heauens, the greater and the lesse, into which Ovid saith, Atchas and his mother were translated: one of them Nau∣phus first obserued, the other Thales Milesius. Homer cals them Helicopes. The warres twixt Iupiter and the Tytanoys, is called by the Poets Gygantomachia, Of which Ovid the first of his Metamor: Aff: classe ferunt regnum coeleste gigantes, Atta{que} congestes struxisse ad sidera mantes, &c. Of this there are diuers Fables extant. Briaceus they cald Centimanem Gigantem, the Gyant with a hundred hands, alluding to his valour and his credi∣tious strokes, which he gaue so thicke, as if he had strook with an hundred hands at once. And of Typhon, Ovid in his Metamorph. 5. most inge∣niously thus speakes; Vasta Gyganteis Iuierta est Insula memoris, Tynacris & magnis subiectum motibus vrgit, Aethercas ausum sperare Typhocaledes, et sic deinceps Iapetus is certeinly thought to be sonne of Iaphet, the 3. sonne of Noah. Euseb. 2. eug. prepar. Tantalus some thinke to be the sonne of Iupiter and the Nymph Plota: Others, of Iupiter and Plutus: as Iohannes Diaconus and Didimus: Others haue thought him to be the Lucian in dial. de dipsad. sonne of Imolus King of Lydia: as Zezes: Others, the son of Aethon. Talia ferre Puto quo{que} Tantalou aethone natum, Qui nullo potuit fonte leuare sitim Tantalus being to feast the Gods, for the more magnificence of the banquet and as the richest dish, slew his sonne Pelops,
and serued him in: which the Goddes knowing, all refused to Pind. in Olimp. eate, onely Ceres, almost distraught with the losse of hir dau∣ghter, rashly eate of the shoulder: The Goddes pittying the murder of his sonne, floung al his limbes intoa Caldron, which Lycophron. boyling a space, they restored him againe to life, whom bicause he came out of the Caldron yonger then when he was slaine, he was called Pelops, but when his shoulder wanted (of which Ceres had hungerly fed) the Goddes made vp the place with Isacius. Iuory, which shoulder of Iuory, was after, a badge of all the Pelopidans. Of his torments in hell, the report is common. His children were Broteus, Pelops and Niobes. The end of the third CANTO.
Argumentum, IHoue Esculapius kils, Apollo drtues To keepe Admetus sheepe in Thessaly, And next his beautious sister Iuno wiues, At her returne from Creet to Parthemy, The father with the sonne in battell striues, But by his puissance is insorst to fly: Acrisius keepes his daughter in a Tower, Which amorous Ihoue skales in a golden shower ARG. 2. To deuine physicke: Gods made first of men, And Perseus birth, swift Delta guids my pen CANTO. 4. THou deuine Art of Physi let me sing Thy hononred praise, and let my pen aspire To giue thee life, that vnto life canst bring Men halfe departed: whether thy first Syre Was that Prometheus, whoom the Heauens King Stole by his skill part of the vitall fier That kindles life in man, thereby to saue Sicke men, that stand with one foot in the graue. 2 Or whether Aesculapius was thy father, Sonne to the Sun-god, by whose liuely heat Symples and Plants, their saps and vertues gather, Let it suffice I know thy power is greate;
And my vnable muse admires thee rather, Then comprehends thy worth, let them intreat Of thy perfection, that with fame professe thee, And in their Arts vnto the life expresse thee. 3 As famous Butler, Pady, Turner, Poe, Atkinson, Lyster, Lodge, who still suruiue: Besides these English Gallens thousands moe, Who where they come, death and diseases driue From pale sicke creatures: and all Cordials know, Spirits spent and wasted to preserue aliue, In this with Gods and Kings they are at strife, Physitians Kings and Gods alone giue life. 4 Some hold young Mercury deuisd the skill Of Phisicke first, and taught that Art abroad, Some vnto Arabus impute it still, Someyeild that honour to th' Egiptian God, Arabus sonne to Apollo. Cal'd Apis or Serapis, others wil Apollo chiefe, what time he made aboad With king Admetus, but mostvoyces runne, The first renown'd was Esculap his sonne. 5 Hippocrates reduc't it to an Art, Gallen and Auicenna him succeed, Cassius and Calpitanus too, impart His soueraigne skill, Rubrius taught first to bleed, Antonius Musa chear'd the wasted hart, Aruntius too helpt euery griefe at need: Archagathus profest this first in Rome, But all submit to Noble Gallens doome. 6 The first that did this sacred Art renowne, And gaue it fame on earth was as I read, The tale of Aesculapius. Great Aesculape who tracing vp and downe To gather Simples in the flowry Mead, Hard by a rocke that weares a bushy crowne, And boue the neighbour champion lifts his head, He spies a Swaine in habit neate and briske, Hold battell with a dreadfull Bassiliske.
7 A monster that kils onely with his eie, Which from th'vnarmed Shepheard shrunke and ran, Apolles sonne with wonder stands him e, And thinks, or that no beast, or this no man, Admiring by what hidden Diety The piercing Cockatrice out-gaze he gan, Vnlesse by chance there lodg'd a Vertue rare, In some one simple in the wreath he ware. 8 All the strong armour gainst this horrid beast, Was but a Chaplet which begirt his braine, Which Esculape suspecting, much increast His Ardency, to know what hidden straine Slept in strange working herbs (thus being possest) He begs the Garland from the ignorant Swaine, Who now vnwreath'd, againe the beast defies, Who straight returnes, and kils him with hir eies. 9 Apolloes sonne by certaine proofe now finds Th'inuertued hearbes haue gainst such poyson power, To combate with th'eie-killing Beast he minds, (Thirsting for fame) the wreath with many a Flower, And hearbe, and plant, about his braine he binds, And so with speed hasts to her Rocky tower, Skales her foule den, and threatens present warre, T'out-gaze her neare, who seeing, kils from farre. 10 The big-swolne Serpent with broad eye-lids stares, And through the aire her subtle poison flings, The Sunnes-hearbe charmed, soone her venom dares, And shrinkes not at her persaunt eie-bals stings, The Basiliske in her owne strength dispaires, And to flie thence, she shakes her flaggy wings, But his Dart takes her as she meant to rise, And pierst her hart, that pierst harts with her eies. 11 Proud of this Trophy, he returning sees The harmelesse Swaine vpon the ground lie dead, Whom pittying, he discends vnto his knees, Taking the vertued Chaplet from his head,
And hearbe by hearbe into his mouth doth squeeze, And downe his throat their powerfull liquor shed, But when the iuice of one pure herbe was draind, The new departed life it backe constraind. 11 Nor wonder if such force in hearbs remaine, What cannot iuice of deuine Simples bruisd? The Dragon finding his young Scrpent slaine, Hauing th'herbe-Balin in his wounds infusd, Restores his life and makes him whole againe. Who taught the Heart how Dettany is vsed? Who being pierced through the bones and marrow, Can with that hearbe expell th'offensiue arrow. 13 Who taught the poore beast hauing poison tasted Dictamum. To seeke th`hcarbe Cancer, and by that to cure him? Who taught the Bore finding his spirits wasted To seeke a branch of Iuy to assure him? The Tortois spide a Dragon, and straight hasted Sauory or Maioram. For Sauery, arm'd with which he can endure him, Chyron found Centery, whose vse is holy, Achilles Yarrow, and great Hermes, Moly. 14 The Storke hauing a branch of Orgamy, Can with much ease the Adders sting eschew, And when the little Weasill chast, doth fly The Dragon, he defends himselfe with Rew, Much might be done by their rare purity, By such as all their opperations knew: No maruell then if such as know their skill, Find by their practise, Art to saue or kill. 15 The Basiliske and the reuiued Swaine, With all the powerfull hearbes that life restore, He beares to Paphos: they beholding slaine So horrible a Monster knowne before, Perceiuing likewise how he cal'd againe Men dead to life: his person they adore, Now Esculapius name is sounded hie, Through the vast compasse of the spatious skie.
16 And whether enuious of this Princes name, Fitting the humorous world with such applauses, Or whether for receiuing such as came From the last field: or at what carping clauses Ioue was agrieu'd at Esculapius fame, I find no certaine ground but for some causes Vnknowne to me, he Paphos doth inuade, And great Apollo to his sonne giues aide. 17 But Saturnes seed preuailes: much bloud he spils To quench the heat of his incensed ire, Paphos he sackes, and Esculapius kils, Oh, wheres the Art that made thy name aspire? Whose fame, Sea, Earth, and Heauen with clangor fils, To others thou gauest life, now life desires, (In vaine alas) when heauen hath doomd thy date, Prepare thy soule, all physicke comes too late. 18 Besides this sentence, I pronounce or hie There is no strife with heauen: when their houres call, Physitians must as well as patients die, And meete at the great iudgement generall, Paphos is spoil'd, Apollo forcst to slie, The Cretans him pursue, he scapes them all Disguis'd, and is in exile forcst to keepe In Thessaly, the king Admetus sheepe. 19 I told you erst, how Saturne reinuested Into Parthemia, for bright Iuno sent There, with her vnknowne Brothers to be feasted, And how Athenian Neptune had intent To meet with Pluto there. Things thus digested, Triumphant Ioue, now full of griefe Ostent, For his late conquest, in his breath'd defiance, Is in all pompe receiu'd by his alliance. 20 Chiefely by twin-borne Iuno, not alone His Sister, now his troth-plight Queene and Bride, Iupiter mati∣ed to Iuno. Their long diuided bodies they attone And enter amorous parley, which espide
By Saturne, speedy Purseuants are gone To all the bordering Kings to them alide, Vnto their solemne spousales to inuite, King, Prince, Duke, Marquesse, Baron, Lord, and Knight. 21 Metis the daughter of Oceanus Apol. lib. 1. bib. They say, was Ioues first wife, whom being great He swallowed: least of her being childed thus, Hesodus. One should be borne to lift him from his seate; Ibo. Draconus. By this the God growes more then Timpanus, And swelling with the same, with throwes did sweat, Till after anguish, and much trauelling paine, The arrned Pallas leapt out of his braine. 22 Metis deuout'd, he Themis takes to bed, Espousing her within the Gnossean Isle, Orpheus in arg. There where the flood Theremus lifts his head, Pausn corint. His third wife Iuno, whom he wan by guile, Ioue knowing it vnlawfull was to wed His sister: by his God-hood in small while Transformes himselfe, and like a Cuckow flies; Apol. Rhodius. Where Iuno tasts the pleasure of the skies. 23 But at his becke the King of Gods and men, Commands a storme the Welkin to orecast, At which the Cuckow trembling, shrinketh then Her legges beneath her wings, Iuno at last Pitties the fearefull Bird, who quakes agen, And wraps it softly, till the storme was past, In her warme skirt, when Ioue within few houres Takes hart, turnes God, and the faire Queen deflours. 24 After which rape, he takes her to his Bride, And though some thinke her barren without heires. Some more iudicious, haue such tales denide, (Gods that know all things, know their owne affaires) And vvhat they vvill, their povverfull vvisedomes guide, Hermesinax eleg. scriptor. Their children Preces were, vvhom vve call Prayers, These dwel on earth, but when they mount the sphears Haue free accesse to Ioue their fathers eares.
25 Imagine all the pompe the Sea can yeild, Or ayre affoord, or earth bestow on Man, Seas-fish, Ayres-Fowle, beast both of Parke and field, Rareties flowed in abundance than, Nature and Art striue which is deeplier skild, Or in these pompous Nuptials better can: Twixt these (being more then mortall) seem smal ods, And the high sumptuous shewes made by the Gods. 26 Night coms, a daughter is begot, and nam'd Hebe, the long-liu'd Feast at length expires, Hebe. Great Iupiter and Iuno are proclaimd Parthemian King and Queene: Neptune desires To visite Athens, being likewise nam'd Th'Athenian King, (his bloud Ambition fires,) Pluto departs, in Tartary to dwell, There founds a deuilish Towne, and cals it Hell. 27 No day so cleere but darke night must ensue, Death is the end of life, and care of pleasure: Paine followes ease, and sorrowes ioy pursue, Saue (not to want) I know not what is Treasure, The Gods that scourge the false, and crowne the true, Darknesse and Light in equall ballance measure: Tydes fall to ebbes, the world is a meere graunge, Where all things brooke decay, and couet chaunge, 28 Not long these triumphs last, when Saturne seeing Parthemian Ihoue such generall fame atchieue, Out-shining him, hee envyes at his being, (Still feare is apt things threatned to beleeue:) But when the Oracle with this agreeing He cals to mind: his Soule doth inly grieue, For this is he whom Delphos did foretell, Should Saturne from his Crowne and Realme, expell. 29 Now turnes he loue to hate: his Ioy to Sadnesse, His Fathers-pitty, to a Foe-mans spight, His pleasure to despaire, his myrth to madnesse, In teares he spends the day, in sighes the night,
To spleene his feares conuert, to griefe his gladnesse, And all to Melanchollie is sad affright, Nor can his troubled sences be appeas'd, Till as a Traitor he Prince Ioue hath ceas'd. 30 He therefore musters vp a secret power Warre twixt Saturne and lupiter. Of his vnwilling Subiects, to surprize Ioue in Parthemta, Ioue ascends a Tower At the same time, and from a farre espies Their armed troopes, the fields and Champions scowre, From euery quarter clouds of thicke smoke rise, No way he can his eyes or body turne, But he sees Citties blaze, and Hamlets burne. 31 More mad with anger, then with rage dismaid, From that high Tower he in hast discends, To know what bold foe dares his realmes inuaid, And gainst his peacefull kingdome enuy bends, Tidings is brought, great Saturne hath displaid His hostile fury, and his wracke intends: But Ioue, that in his Fathers grace affide, Sweares he shall die, that hath his name belide. 32 It bears no face of truth, no shape of reason, A father should a guiltlesse sonne pursue, A sonne that hath his father sau'd from Treason, And but so late his dangerous enemies slew, From whose embracing armes he for a season, With much vnwillingnesse himselfe withdrew, All things well poys'd, he cannot yet debate, How such hot loue so soone should change to hate. 33 But whilst he argues thus, behold his foes With armed rankes begirt Parthemia round, Mongst whom the prince his father Saturne knowes, And heares his warlike tunes to battell sound, He now forgets the filiall zeale he owes, And cries (to armes) their fury to confound, But then againe into himselfe retiring, He to his Father sends, his peace desiring.
34 Twice his submission to King Saturne came, Twice his submission he returnes in skorne, Then Ihoue his protestation doth proclaime, That with vnwillingnesse his Armes were borne, Loth with his Syre to fight, more loath with shame By his bold foes, to haue his Kingdome torne: Which to make good as Saturne earst had vowd'e, They charge and (cry Assault) with clamors lowde. 35 Since no entreaty can preuaile, he rather Then trust to certaine death, must battaile wage, Archas with him their sterne Parthemians gather, And issue boldly, to withstand the rage Of their knowne mallice: Twice Ihoue meetes his Father, Twice giues him place, yet nothing can assvvage His setled hate, he threats the Prince to kill, Who whilst he strikes, beares off, and guardeth still. 36 And seekes out other Conquest mongst the troopes, Of men vn-numbred, where his valour shines, The strongest Champion to his fury stoopes, And where he profers warre his stand resignes, That now the pride of Saturne flagges and droops, Archas his forces with Prince Ihoue combines, And make one hoast of able strength and feare, Before them as they fight the field to cleare. 40 So haue I seene a storme of hayle and rayne, With thicke tempestuous clouds of night and smoke, Before it lay the fields of standing graine, And top the stiffe bowes from the tallest Oake: So where they come these Princes smooth the plaine, Making the greene leaues weare a Crimson cloake: The skarlet drops that from the wounded slide, Into deepered, the spring-tydes liuery dide. 38 They still pursue the slaughter, Saturne flyes, Him Archas hotly to the Sea-side chaces, But in a Creeke a new-rigd ship he spies, And skapes by sea, his swist steps Archas traces,
But all in vaine, the gentle gusts arise and beare him from the sight of his disgraces, Leaue we the conquered Father basely fled, The conquering sonne, triumphant mongst the dead. 39 Who from Parthemia posts in hast to Creet, To ceize vnto his vse his Fathers Crowne, The Cretans him with Olyue branches meet, (For who at prosperous Fortunes dare to frowne?) The Scepter and themselues too, at his feet With one consent and voice they prostrate downe, His person with applause they circle round, Thus Ihoue & Iuno, King and Queene are crownd. 40 So without threatned armes or rude hostility, In greater pompe, and more degrees of State, By Englands Commons, and our high Nobility, Was Royall Iames mongst vs receiued of late, K. Iames and Queene Anne With his Queene Anne, to the Realmes large vtility, Oh, may their dayes on earth haue endlesse date: In stead of Olyue branches, enterteined With zeale, with loyall thoughts, and harts vnfeined. 41 Some say, Ihoue guelded Saturne, and surrendred His procreatiue parts into the Ocean, Of which the Goddesse Venus was engendred, Betwixt them and the Seas continuall motion I thinke such superstitious people tendred Vnto these idle dreames too much deuotion: Else by this Morrall, signifie they would, He mongst his Souldiors dealt his Fathers gould. 42 And from this plenty surfets mongst them grew, Lasciuious gestures, Lust that had no measure, And in this kind, appeares the Morrall true: For ost excesse, begets vnlawfull pleasure; And so the Froath-borne Venus might accrew, and be begot by Saturnes gelded treasure: So sacred spels are writ in parchment Tables, So golden truths are meant, in Leaden Fables.
42 Opinion, strongly mongst the Heathen raignes, And hath continued from the longest season, I searcht the Iudgments of some ydle braines, (That no Religton like, but built on Reason:) To know what strength it hath, when it restraines Some men in loyall bonds, fils some with Treason: But found theyr censures vary from the right, For thus th'Irregular prophanely wright. 43 Opinion iudgeth all by apparition, And from Opinion, shame or Honor springs, The opinion of some ydle discontents. (Opinion) Thou that art all Superstition, Thou makest Beggars, or pronouncest Kings, For why should man to man, make low submission; Since each of vs, his line from Adam brings? Hauing at first, one Father, and one mother, What duty owes a brother to a brother. 44 Whats wealth to him that nothing doth esteeme it? Whats to the dunghill Cocke the Pearle he found? Giue him a graine of Barley and hee'l deeme it A richer prize: What differs gold from ground To him that hath no iudgement to esteeme it? Or Diamonds from Glasse? Search the world round, Nothing is pretious held, but whats thought best, Nothing acquir'd, but whats in most request. 45 Opinion's all: Say, I this man adore: He is to me a King, (though but a Slaue,) Or if a King, of him that bowes no more Or holdes him none, the stile he cannot haue. Religion is Opinion too: Before Religion was, Man worshipt euery Graue, And in these daies, through all the worlds dominions, We see as many Churches as Opinions. 46. Opinion first made Kings, first founded Lawes, First did deuide the Gentle from the Base, First bounded Man in compasse for, because Men thought it good, they gaue Opinion place:
From this comes all contempt and all applause, Reuerence to some, and vnto some disgrace: This, Peace compounds, or Concord turns to ods, This, first dam'd Deuils, first created Gods. 48 This, breedes the Atheists skorne, the Christians feare, The Arrians error, Pagans misbeliefe, This makes the Turke his Alcoran to heare, Breeds in the bold, presumption: penitent, griefe: This made the Iewes their Saniour Christ forsweare, Despising him, choose Barrabas the Theefe: Hence came the Persian Haly (long agone) Diffring from him the sect of Praester-Iohn. 49 Hence comes the Protestant to be deuided From Triple-crowned Rome: a long-liu'd warre Not yet by armes or Arguments decided: Hence came the Catholikes mongst themselues to iar, Hence, diuers orders, diuers waies are guyded: Some Iacobins, and some Franciscans are: Templers, Capoochians, Fryers both blacke and gray, Moonks, and the Iesuits, bearing the most sway. 50 In our reformed Church too, a new man Is in few yeares crept vp, in strange disguise And cald the selfe-opinion'd Puritan, A fellow that can be are himselfe precise, No church supremacy endure he can, No orders in the Byshops Diocyse: He keepes a starcht gate, weares a formall ruffe, A nosegay, set face, and a poted cuffe. 51 He neuer bids God speed you on the way, Bicause he knowes not what your bosomes smother, His phrase is, Verily; By yea and nay, In faith, in truth, good neighbor, or good brother, And when he borrowes mony, nere will pay, One of th'elect must common with another, And when the poore his charity intreat, You labour not, and therefore must not eate.
52 He will not Preach, but Lector: nor in white, Because the Elders of the Cburch commaund it, He will no crosse in Baptisme, none shall fight Vnder that Banner, if he may withstand it, Nor out of antient Fathers Latine cite, The cause may be, he doth not vnderstand it, His followers preach all faith, and by their workes, You would not Iudge them Catholickes, but Turkes. 53 He can endure no Organs, but is vext To heare the Quirristers shrill Antheames sing, He blames degrees in th' Accademy next, And gainst the liberall Arts can Scripture bring, And when his tongue hath runne beside the text, You may perceiue him his loud clamors ring Gainst honest pastimes, and with pittious phrase, Raile against Hunting, Hawking, Cockes, and plaies. 54 With these the Brownists in some points cohere, That likewise hold the marriage ring prophane, Commanded prayers they'l not indure to heare, and to subseribe to Cannons they disdaine: They hold more sinne a corner'd cap to weare Then cut a purse: leaue these as vilde and vaine, By thee (Opinion) Realmes haue bin confounded, What darst not thou, where thou art firmly grounded? 55 To the first world now let my muse retire, And see how strong thou wast Opinion then, To create dieties I must aspire And giue eternity with my fraile pen, Such as the world did in those daies admire, It deified, and so made Gods of men: The Cretan Iupiter, to heauen translated, And Saturne, sire of all the Gods instated. 56 Made Iuno Queene of heauen, Venus of pleasure, Ceres of Corne, and Bacchus God of wine, Cupid of Loue, Mars Warre, and Mammon treasure, Pallas of wisedome, and of speech deuine,
God Mercury: men did their God-hoods measure By their owne thoughts, and vnto such resigne Their speciall honours, in whose harts they guest Most power in that, which they on earth profest. 57 This made the Heathen kings by Ioue to sweare, Their Queenes at Iunoes sacred Altar kneele: Child-bearing women, chast Lucian feare, Souldiers at Mars his shrine, to hang their steele, The Swaines to honor Ceres, by whose cheare Their graine decaide or prosper'd: this made kneele Drunkards to Bacchus, Orpheus strung his Lyre To Phaebus God of Musicke, and of Fire. 58 To Esculapius the Physitians prai'd, Shepheards to Pan, and Poets to the Muses, A God of Neptune Nauigators made, And he that gardens loues, Pomona chuses, Chast Virgins still implore Dianaes aide, And who that loues, God Cupids name refuses, Vulcan commandeth Smiths, Flora Flowers, Aeolus winds, and Pluto infernall powers. 59 The Poets write, three brothers lots did cast For th' Vnuersall Empire: To Ioue fell Th' Olimpicke heauens, which all the rest surpast, Great Neptune with his three fork't Mace must dwell Within the bosome of the Ocean vast And guide the Seas, blacke Pluto gouernes hell, Opinion, whence these Gods build all their glory, Must be the Base, to our succeeding story. 60 Whilst thus Egiptian Belus was instated, The reuerend Moyses in Mount Nebo died, And Captaine Iossua second Iudge created, The Thractan Boreas, from his Mothers side Stole faire Orithia, hauing long awaited, To make the beautious Virgin his sweet Bride, From whose rude armes she neuer could be freed: But leauing these, of Belus we proceed.
61 The blustring winds before they had a king To locke them fast within his brazen Caues, Great deuestations ore the earth did bring, Tossing blacke tempests on the curled waues: Tis said rough Boreas shak't his flaggy wing, Gainst his three brothers with opposed braues, Who with such mortall hate, at variance fell, They made heauen shake, earth reele, the Ocean swl: 62 No Mediterren Sea, before this brall, How the Me∣deterranean sea first came. Was knowne in the earths armes to be inclos'd, The Seas tost by the winds, brake downe the wall, Which for his bounds the fates had interpos'd, At such dissention, the foure Brothers fall: Hauing the raines of all their gusts vnlos'd, They cleft the Earth, the Ocean full of pride, Thrusts in, and two maine Lands shoulders aside. 63 His traine of waues by Calpes he brought in, And through his deepe Abismes leads them to warre, He people euery place where he hath bin With his broad waters: who are still at iarre With the torne earth, more roomth and space to win, For his vnbounded limits (stretch't so farre) That they haue prst the aged Tellus hart, The middle∣earth sea that parts Europe from Africa. And from Europa, Affrica still part. 64 So was Italia and Sicilia one, Till the rough gusts the Ocean did inuade, Who forcst a channell, where before was none, Valer. Flaccus lib. 1. Argon. And twixt these kingdomes large irrnpion made, Therefore the Gods th'vnbrideled winds t'attone, That their commaundlesse furies might be staid, Surprisd them, and to Aelous bound in chaines Gaue them, and he their roughnes still restraines. 65 With Ioues lasciuious pastimes I proceede, As cheefely to the fall of Troy allide, Oh you Ioues daughters borne of heauenly seed, My braine and pen by inspiration guide,
That what the fates haue against Troy decreed Of Priams glory, and Achilles pride, Of Hectors valor, and bright Hellens fate, With all your aydes I may at large delate. 66 Not how on Semele, Ioue Bacchus got, Nor in the shape of Bull Europa stale, Of Swan-transformed Loeda speake I not, Nor of Mnemosine frame I my tale, Nor how Esopis did her honour blot, Nor Astery by Ioue turnd to a Quaile, Nor how for Nicteis he himselfe transformed, Nor Ioes rape, at which Queene Iuno stormed. 67 But how he rauisht Danae that bright Lasse, By many suters (but in vaine) assailed, How she was closed in a Tower of Brasse, Which with a golden Ladder the prince skaled: What cannot gold? whose brightnesse doth surpasse, How oft hath Gold boue womens strength preualed? Laps that haue had gainst all temptations power, Haue spred themselues wide, to a golden shower. 68 From Iupiter of Archad, and a dame Cal'd Isis did one Epaphus proceed, To him was borne a sonne of ancient fame, Hight Belus, who great part of Egipt freed From tirrany; and after swaide the same, He had a Sister too, who soone decreed Archad to change for Affricke, and her name Lybia, from whom the grim Busyris came. 69 Belus two children had (so the fame runnes) Denas. Egiptus. 2409. Danaus and Egiptus: Danaus he Had fifty girles, Egyptus fifty sonnes, Twixt whom, these Brothers a full match decree, 1473. All parts are pleas'd, not one the marriage shunnes, False Danaus, with his daughters doth agree, As with their Bridegroomes in their beds they lay, The fifty husbands in one night to slay.
70 (Saue young Ypermenestra not a maid,) But in her husbands bosome sheath'd her knife, And she alone the bloudy plot bewraid, And to her Linceus prou'd a loyall wife, Of all Egistus sonnes, he by her aide, Alone did from the murther scape with life, Of whom, as they in nuptiall loue remained, He Abas got, Abas in Arges raigned. 71 Abas Acrisius got, from him discended The tale of l pitr & Danae. Bright Danae, of whom we now intreat, Whose beauties fame is through the earth extended, Acrisius iealous of his Fathers seat To Egipt hies, and there his prayers commended, Offering large quantities of Gold and Wheat. At the God Belus his great Grandsires shrine, Of his faire daughters fortunes to deuine. 72 This answere he returnes: Away, be gone Thou sonne of Abas, Danae forth shall bring A gallant boy, shall turne thee into stone, And after thee in Arges raine sole-King: Acrisius now hath turn'd his mirth to mone, From whence his ioyes should grow, his sorrows spring, His hoped Issue and successiue heire, Late, al his pleasure, now is all his care. 73 He intimates that from her wombe shall rise A gallant boy, that shall his Grandfire kill, And Arges Crowne by force of armes supprize, He sweares the maid shall liue a Virgin still, And to preuent his fate, doth straight deuise A Tower impregnable, built on a hill, The building of Barreia to∣wer Strong of it selfe: but yet to make it sure, He girts it with a treble brazen Mure. 74 The guiltlesse Lady wonders at the state Of this new worke, not knowing why tis built, To see sharpe Pynacles themselues elate So high towards heauen, the Arches richly guilt,
Huge Marble collumnes to support the gate, In euery place rich tinctures largely spilt, The Tarras with white Iuory pillers rail'd, And the Crosse-ebon bars, with guilt stoods nail'd. 60 It seemes too strong for pleasure, and for warre It shewes too neat: but now the worke is ended, Who that beholds it shining from a farre, But with admiring thoughts the worke commended? The nearer you approach, the more you are Inflam'd with wonder, not a staire ascended But of white Marble, not a doore but Brasse, The windowes glaz'd with Cristals, not with glasse. 61 All things prepard, the King will Danae carry To view the Tower, she giues it due with praise, He thus proceeds; Child thou shalt neuer marry, But in this place of pleasure end thy daies, And in this brazen circuit euer tarry, The Lady starts, and thinkes too long she staies In that loath'd place which now to her appeares No Pallace, but a dungeon full offeares. 62 And asking why she must be kept a slaue, Or how she hath deseru'd so strict a doome, To be so young put in her Marble graue, (For whats a Prison, but a liuing Toombe?) Or for what cause she may no husband haue, But liue an Ancresse in so strict a roome, Knowing her selfe a Princesse ripe and sit, Wrongd (as she thinkes) not to be married yet: 63 Acrisius tels her what great Belus spake, When hee with Orisons kneeld at his throne, That from her wombe the world a sonne should take, That shall his Grandsire change into a stone, She interrupts him, and thus scilence brake, Oh would you be eternall liu'd alone? And neuer die? What would Acrisius haue, More then an heire to lodge him in his graue.
79 Did you not into stone great Abas turne, And Abas to his Father Linceus so, Their funerall trunkes to sacred ashes burne, O're which their monumentall marbles grow, Oh Father, no man can his Fate adiorne, Shall these your eyes be closed vp by a Foe? Or can you deeme your owne bloud shall betray you? Who are more fit within your stone to lay you? 80 What you did to your Father, let my sonne Performe'to you: successiuely succeed: Your Fathers glasse is out, yours must be run, Leaue then your Crowne to one of Abas breed: In vaine (quoth he) we cannot thus be wun, To alter whats vnchangeably decreed; Here shalt thou liue, but royally attended, Like a bright Queene, and from a King descended. 81 So leaues her guarded with a troope of Mayds, And envious Beldams that were past their lust, These, with rewardes and threats the King invades In his high charge, to be seuere and iust, But most the Matrons, (fittest for such trades) Rather than wanton wenches, he dare trust: Louers may Louers fauour, Crones are past it, and enuy, but not pitty those would tast it. 82 So doth the full-fed stomach meate deny Vnto the famisht: So the Drunkard spils Wine in aboundance, which would cheare the dry, Cold age the appetite of hot lust kils, Danae thy beauties fame is sounded hie, Mongst many other Kings: Ihoues eares it fils, He loues her by her fame, and longs to see her, Nor are her thoughts at peace before he see her. 83 A thousand bracelets, Iewels, Pearls and Rings, With gold of sundry stamps, the King prepares, And hauing readied all these costly things, In a poore Pedlers trusse, he packs his wares,
So hies to Danaes Tower (loue gaue him wings) Hope sometime cheeres him, sometimes he dispaires: At length arriues there, in an euening late, And fals his rich packe at the Castle gate. 84 Where two leane wrinkled Crones stand Centinell, To giue the watchword to Acrisius guard, Appointed straight to ring the larum Bell, If any man once neere the Castle dar'd, The Pedler askes, who in that pallace dwell, Or how they call the place? Hast thou not heard Of Danae quoth the Beldam (looking sower) Whom Arges King, closd in this-brazen Tower. 85 He viewes the place, and finds it strongly seared, Not to be won by armes, but skal'd by slight, I came from Creet, quoth he, and was intreated Heere to deliuer tokens of some weight From great king Iupiter: their cold blouds heated With hope of gaine, they cheare their age-duld sight, And with a couetous longing, earne to view What precious knackes he from his Hamper drew. 86 A thousand seuerall Trinckets he displaies, If this be Danaes Tower quoth he, then these Belong to you: the Crones his bounty praise, And in their hands two costly lewels cease, The younger Ladies now are come to gaze, Not one amongst them but he seekes to please: Some Gold, some stones, some Rings, some Pearles he gaue, And all haue something, though they nothing craue. 87 Blear'd with these gifts, their charge they quite forget, And euery Ladies ee dwels on her prize, Comming fore Danae, she beholds them set With sundry brouches sparkling in her eyes, And asking whence they had them, they bid fet The Pedler vp, who hath of fairer size, Brighter Aspect, and for a Queene to weare, In worth not to be valewed, yet not deare.
88 Danae commands him vp, he glad ascends, And through their brib'd hands freely is admitted Euen to her chamber: Gold, thy might extends Beyond all opposition, the best witted Thou canst corrupt; diue through the hearts of friends, By thee are wal'd Townes entred, skonces splitted, By thee are armies swayed, Camps ouer-runne, Children the Fathers spoile, and Sire the sonne. 89 No wonder then if Gold the Pedler brought, To enter, where besides him, no man came, Behold the Goddesse this great King hath sought, Oh how her bright eie doth his soule inflame! Pearles, Iewels, Rings, and Gold, he sets at naught, yea all the world, if valewed vvith this Dame, Variety of costly gems he shewes her, And makes her of them all, the free disposer. 90 So wils the Cretan King, not vvill he take One mite in way of Chaffer or set price, She thankes the Pedler for his Maisters sake, And hovv to please him, askes her maids aduice, But they so much of their ovvne Ouches spake, Whose brightnesse did their thoughts imparadice, That they contend whose Iewell rarest glisters, Whilst Ioue in Danaes eare, thus softly whispers. 91 Behold vvhat loue can do: that King of Creet That prizes Danae aboue any rate, Wrapt in course Garments (for a King vnmeet) (For Danaes Loue and grace, despising state) Proftrates himselfe at thy Imperiall feet, Resolud before he entred Darrains gate, Thy beauty, vertue, youth, and fame to saue, Buried already in this brazen graue. 92 For Lady, to vvhat purpose are you faire? as good to haue a tan`d and vvrinkled hide, Why is your hands so vvhite, your brovv so rare? An Ethiops face maskt, shevves as full of Pride,
These brazen walles that only Iudges are Of your bright lookes, al wonder are denide, Your Goddesse-shape is to the sencelesse stone No better than the beauty of yon Crone. 93 What difference makes the dead twixt grace and skorne? What luster giues Apollo to the blind? What are the choyseft dainties if forborne? Whats musicke to the eares whom deafnesse binde? What is the costlyest garment if not worne? Or being worne, if none his riches mind? What shewe's in Iewels hid behind a skreene? Whats state vnknowne? whats beauty if not seene? 94 The Princesse sighes, as knowing all is true, When Iupiter proceedes: Renowned Dame, Set this ritch beauty to the broad-worlds view, These rare perfections let the world proclaime, Whom thousand Kingly Sutors shall pursue, Vnmaske this beauty: to that end I came: Oh, leade not here a base condemned life! That may abroad, liue a free Queene and wife. 95 Pitty yout seruant Iupiter, whose treasure, Whose life, whose Crowne, whose fortunes are al yours, Robbe not your selfe of all earths glorious pleasure, Pitty your youth, whose pride a gayle deuours, A dungeon takes of such perfections ceasure, That should command all free enthroned powers: And die not here, t'eternal bonds betraide, Rob'd of all sweets, that for your tast were made. 96 You are a woman desperate here, and lost, Kept from mans sight, for which you were created, And beauteous Princesse (which should touch you most) Your gealous father by the world is rated As one that coopes you but to spare his cost, And enuying you a Queene fhould be instated, A Tyrant, that prefers his gealous feares, Before your vertue, beauty, youth and yeares.
97 Graunt me your loue (oh grant it) blush not Queene, That loue, shall be your ransome from this place, This prisoned beauty shall abroad be seene, and Empresses shall homage to your face, and then this Gaile where you haue cloystred beene You will despise, and tearme Acrisius base, That gold in Brasse, and pearle in stone would shrowd, Muffling the bright Sunne in so base a clowd. 98 Her tender hart relents, his amorous shape Appeares out of his base vnknowne disguise, and if her hart his sweet words cannot scape, No wonder if his feature charme hir eies, She knowes no Peasant dares attempt her rape, Nor any base thought ayme at her surprise: and saue King Iupiter by fame held peerlesse, She knowes no prince so bold, so rich, so fearlesse. 99 But as she would reply, her Virgin-guard Began to leaue their conference, and draw neere them, Which Iupiter espying, straight prepar'd His bounteous packe with more rewards to cheere them, and whilst they askt the Princesse how she far'd, He ransacks for more trifles, and doth beare them Vnto the female waiters, Danaes traine, So with fresh toyes he bribes them once againe. 100 They throng about him round, to be seru'd first, and as they tast his bounty start aside, Comparing which is best, and whose the worst, More words and wagers must the strife decide, and whilst these gemmes are by the Ladies pust, and none neere Danae and the King abide: She viewes the amorous Prince with more satictic, and he the Princesse courts with fresh variety. 101 She neither giues him promise, nor deniall, Neither repulse, nor graunt, (so Women vse) When men (in sight of others) make their tryall, They will not say you shall: least you abuse
Their friendly grant, but take them free from spyall, And say withall, they shall nor will, nor chuse, Then you shall find them weakly, fighting fall, And willingly, vnwilling prostrate all. 102 Giue louers opportunity, their loues Are halfe won to their hands without more sute, The man that verball Court-ship onely moues, Shall all his life time in vaine words dispute, When one that proffers faire, and fine force proues, Speeds with his Action, though his tongue be mute, For euery maid, takes one thing from her mother, Whilst her tongue one thing speaks, to think another. 103 The night growes old, and the bright Lamps of heauen, Are halfe burnt out: the Beldams call to rest, What shall the Pedler do, so late be driuen Out of his Inne, the lodge that likes him best, To lie with Charles-Waine, and the Hyads seauen, He hath deseru'd more grace they dare protest, To turne him out at this time might seeme cruell, That bought his bed with many a high priz'd Iewell. 104 And yet to harbor him, they needs must feare, Because they shall incurre Acrisius ire, If such a tiding should arriue his care, Their bodies all were doomd vnto the fire, But by what meanes can King Acrisius heare? Beside, what pesant pedler dares aspire To Danaes bed? and all their liues betray, Faine they would haue him gone, and faine to stay. 105 His bounty hath preuail'd, and he prouided A priuate lodging in a place remote, Danae vnto her Princely couch is guided, So much her Hand-maids on their fauours dote, They carelesse plucke her doore too, the locke flided Besides his fastning place, which none doth note, Then take their toyes, and to their beds they bear thē, Longing for day, that they in sight may weare them.
106 A generall hushtnesse hath the world possest, And all the Tower surpriz'd with golden dreames, Alone King Iupiter abandons rest, Still wishing for Apolloes Golden beames: Desperate of hope, he knowes not what is best, When rising, from a farre he spies bright gleames Pierce from his window, as from Danaes Tower, In th'humid nights most taciturnall houre. 107 He knowes sad sleepe hath ceas'd vpon the many, He heares no waking clocke, nor watch to iarre, He venters forth, and searching, finds not any, And in his way to this new blazing-starre, He layes his eare to euery rit and crany, Till he with fearefull strides hath woon so farre, That he must now these Marble steps ascend, Which led vnto the bower of his fair friend. 108 Wher comming, with a soft and trembling pace, To touch the doore, he feeles it yeild him way, And freely giues him entrance to the place Where his diuinest Mistresse Danae lay, He kist her finger, hand, necke, brest, and face, And euery thing the white sheete durst betray, That done, into her siluer armes he crept, And all this while the amorous Virgin slept. 109 Imagine how she waking grew amazed, Imagine him a double Rhetoricke vsing, Action and words: sometimes her selfe she raised To call for helpe, his dalliance quite refusing, Imagine then how he his loue imblazed, He at her scorne, she at his boldnesse musing, His gifts, his name, his loue, plead on his part, Gainst him, her fame, her feare, and her chast hart. 110 Loue makes him eloquent, and sweet occasion, Makes him bold too, shee's bashfull, and withstands, He laies to her both battry and perswasion, And much ado she hath to passe his hands,
Being girt in Armes, how can she scape invasion, Or breake the compasse of his Iuory bands: She would be gon, he wooes her to lye still, So hee'l no violence vse, she sayth she will. 111 Oh banquerupt Ihoue, in midst of all thy blisses Ioylesse, and yet with pleasures ing'd about: He wooes againe with Court-ship mixing kisses, A thousand batteries, Danae hath held out: And still the siedger his irruption misses, They parly, but conclude not, both are stout: Sometimes he striues, then she begins to threat, Then hee from striuing, falles againe t'entreat. 112 What, cannot opportunity and place Bed-fellowship and loue, if they conspire? A comely feature and a Courtly face, Cour-ship and Name of King to win desire? All these in Iupiter intreat for grace: All these haue set her amorous hart a fire, And gainst all these, the least of which command, Saue bashfulnesse, sh'hath nothing to withstand. 113 And thats too weake gainst things of their ability, Yet is it of a temper, not to yeeld, For though it be subdude with much facility, T'will proudly seeme still to maintaine the field: It raignes in many that professe ciuility, Who all their pleasures on compulsion build: For bashfull women long since arnt this skill, What they would giue, to grant against their will. 114 Women are weake, and weake ones must obey, Faire Danae is but woman, and must fall, Her glory is, that she hath held him play, And kept her friendly so so long from all: What should she doe, the Prince will haue no nay, Her guard's asleepe, if she for help should call: What with compulsion, lou, force, and faire words, She lyes confus'd, and he the Princesse bords.
115 This night the warlike Perseus was begot, And now the early day-star gins to rise, Perseus. Who cals the Prince vp, least the Beldam trot Should find his night-walke with her gealous eyes, But she their priuate sport suspected not, Nor knew the King in his assumd'e disguise: Teares when they part are in aboundance shed, When he must leaue the Princely Danaes bed. 116 It is compounded and betweene them sworne, That Ihoue must come in Armes by such a day, By whom the Lasse must be from Arges borne; So takes his leaue, he dare no longer stay, The Sunne is cal'd vp by the early Morne, High time, to send the Pedler on his way: They praise the largesse of their bounteous guest, But of his Iewels, Danae keepes the best. 117 Leaue Ihoue towards Creet, and Danae in sad plight, For his departure, whom she tenders deerely, She neuer lou'd vntill this Ominous night, And now to see him part, she riseth early, Gladly with him she would haue tane her flight, But feares her father would reuenge seuearly Her bold attempt, and backe returne her weeipng, To spend her future youth in stricter keeping. 118 Besides she sares (that which indeed was trew) That she (of Ihoues seed) might conceiue a sonne, Which if the gealous King Acrisius knew, At these sad tidings he would franticke run: The Princesse to her charuber now withdrew, Arm'd with this hope, that Ihoue the deed had done: Th'only renownd, ritch, puissant, and of power, By force of Armes, to free her from the Tower. 119 Now to record what I remembred earst, How Troos in Troy his neighbor Kings out-shined, And in the same place where it was reuerst, How all Troys fame King Tantalus repined,
But how the Phrigian forces were disperst By Troas: is to another place assignde: Here should I speake how Troy to fame aspired, But my Muse flags, and my dull pen is tired. ESculapius the sonne of Apollo and the Nymph Coronis Homer bymno. Pson. in ms∣semacis. others thinke, of Arsiona the daughter of Leusippus. Hee was taught his Physicke of Chiron the Centaur, which Zezes chil. 10. and Lactantius lib. de falsa Religione, Menus. both affirme he had a sister called Eriope, a wife, Epone, & a sonne Machaon and Podilarius. He was called Antonius, Orpheus in bym Medicus oucaeata, Leuctricus, Cortineus, Corilaeus, Ag∣nitas Booueta, and he was borne among the Epidaurians. Iupiter wan from Aeculapius the sle Paphos, and gaue it to his daughter Venus. Paphos was built by Aeos sonne to Typhon. In Saturne ended the golden world, and in his sonne Iupi∣ter began the Brazen age. Acolus was son to Acesta and Iupiter, because the clouds and mysts rising about the seauen Eolian Islands, of which he was king, did alwaies portend tempestuous gusts and blasts, therfore the Poets feigned him to be king & god of the winds. Epaphus the sonne of Isis and Iupiter Belus, builded the famous Egyptian Memphis, the yeare before Christ came in∣to the world 1492. Orosius writes, that the fifty marriages concluding in nine & forty murders, was the year before Chr: 1473. for which Daunaus was expulst his Realme, and fled to the Argiues, where he spent the remainder of his age. The yeare after this vnnaturall massacre, Aaron deceased amongst the Israelites. By Isis some say is meant Io, and by Iupiter Belus, Iupiter of Creet, Ovid in his metamorph: Hince Epaphus magni genitus de semine tandem, Creditur esse Ihouis. Epaphus and Phaeton, the one the sonne of Iupiter by Io, the other the sonne of Phaebus by Clymenen, beeing at some difference about their blouds, Phaeton leaues his mother to trauaile to the Pallace of the Sunne, where asking his vnhappy boone as a sure testimony of his discent from phaebus, he by his rashnesse and pride fired the world, and was strooke headlong
from the Chariot of the Sunne, by one of Iupiters thander∣bolts. Of Iupiter it is thus remembred, of Europa he begot Mi∣noes Calimachus de coaditis insulis. and Rhadamant, Archas of Calisto, Pelasgus of Ni∣obe, Scarpedon & Argas of Laodomeia, Hercules of Alc∣mena: Taygetus of Taigetes: Amphion and Zetes of An∣tiope: Castor, Helena, Pollux, and Clitemuestra of Laeda: Perseus, of Danae: Deucalia of Iodoma: Britamart of Archelaus lib. de fluminibus. Carme the daughter of Eubulus. Aethilius the father of En∣dimion of Protogenia. Epaphus of Ione. Aegina of the daughter of Asopus. Arcecilaus and Carbius of Terrebia: Colaxes of Ora: Cirnus of Cirna, Dardanus of Electra, Hiarbus of Garamantius: Preces, Proserpina, and the Ti∣tiae, with infinite others, too long to recount. Fit Taurus Cignus satyras{que} aurumque ob amorem, Europa, Laedes, Antiopae, Danaes. Zeus kvknos Tavros Satvros krusos di e'rata Ledes, Evrotes, A'ntiopes, Danaes. Apollo exilde by Iupiter kept Admetus sheepe, which Pin∣darus in pithicis affirme, or his Oxen, as Horace 1. carmi∣num. Lucianns in di∣al. Calim. in hymn. And therefore he had the title to be called euer after, the god of pastures. As Virg. 3. Georgic. Te quo{que} Magne pales & te memorande Canemus pastor ab Amphriso. The end of the fourth CANTO.
Argumentum KIng Tantalus before the Troians flyes, Saturne arriues in Creet and by Troas ayded Once more intendes his Kingdome to surprise, Creet is by Troian Ganimede inuaded, In ayde of Iupiter the Centaures rise, Aegeons ful-fraught Gallies are disladed: Danae and her young sonne are turnd afloate, By Arges King, into a Mast-lesse boate. ARG. 2. PElops, the two Atrides and Aegeon, Vulcan the Gorgones in Epsilon. CANTO. 5. 1 WHose inspiration shall my heauy brayne Implore, to make my dull Inuention light, Or to a loftyer key my pen constraine, Or raise my Muse, that takes so low a flight, Thou Ihoue-borne Pallas o're my numbers raine, And musicall Apoll giue me spright, With the bright rayes that from thy temples shine, To shew me way vnto the Muses nine.
2 Of whom the eldest Clio first deuisd To Chronicle the Royall gests of Kings, Strutting Melpomene in Gules disguisd In Theaters, mongst Tragicke Actors sings, But soft Thalya hath such straines despisd, And to her Commicke sceanes shrill laughter brings, Wind Instruments Entirpe best affects, Terpsichore the stringed Lyre directs. 3 The Geometricke figures Erato Hath in her charge, as first by her disclosed, But from Calliope hie Stanzoes flow, For the Heroik numbers first composed, The course of starres are by Vrania know, And how the Planets we aboue disposed, But Polihimnia smooth Rhetoricke chuses, The youngest of Ioues daughters, and the Muses. 4 All these at once their sacred gifts aspire, That may giue beauty to my taske in hand, Affoording helpe when I their aide desire, To guide my tost-Bark to desired Land, A slender barke, slow sayl'd, and apt to tire, And founder in the Sea: weake, and vnmand, Apollo with the rest, my voyage speed, Whilst to Troyes fatall ruine we proceed. 5 King Tantalus the sonne of Iupiter, That rain'd in Attique, brought an host 'fore Troy, Which his sonne Pelops led: how can he erre, Being directed by so braue a Boy That vndertakes his army to transferre, And Troos with his new Citty to destroy, This Pelops with the King of Elis ran, And in the course bright Hyppodamia wan. 6 Her Father Oenemaus was betraid My Myrtolus his treacherous Chariot-driuer, And in the race slaine, Pelops by his aide, Of many suters dead the sole suruiuer,
After the goale obtaind, inioyes the maide, 2617. Intending with all pompous state to wiue her, 1346. Eliud of the tribe of Benia∣min, slew Eg∣lon K. of Mo∣ab. Th'espousals ended, Time with swift pace runnes, And she in processe, hath producst two sonnes. 7 Thyestes and Atreus nam'd: the first Ore-come with burning lusts insatiate heat, Rauisht Atreus wife (oh deed accurst) For which Atreus doth him home intreat, And takes his Children where the Babes were nurst, To dresse their bodies for their fathers meat, Some bak't, some rost, some sod (oh bloody deed!) To make a father on his owne childe feed. 8 Atreus two sonnes had, the eldest hight Agamemnon, who was after Mycenes king, The progeny of Menelaus and Agamem non. And Greekish Generall of the ten yeares fight, Twixt Greece and Troy, which we must after sing: The second Menelaus, in whose right, The Argiue Dukes their puisant Armies bring, Husband to Hellen, when prince Paris sought her, And Hellen, Iupiter and Laedaes daughter. 9 But we digresse: gainst Pelops and his Sire Ilion and Ganimed from Troy appeare, These are the sonnes of Troos, many a bold squire They led with them to Ilion, the first yeare He rain'd in Troy in bright celestiall fire, Came the Palladium downe from heauens high spheare, Which Ilions Towers long after did inioy, Continuing till the vtter sacke of Troy. 10 Their hostile Instruments to battell sound, Ten thousand hands at once to heauen are raised, Which in their fals, as many strike to ground, Cowards are scorn'd, none but the bold are praised, The Troyans haue begirt the Phrygians round, Pelops aboue the rest his fame imblazed, And Ganimed that doth bold Pelops see, Fights, as if none need kill a man but he.
11 Such was the valour of this Troian youth, Though Troos and Ilion both did wondrous well, He onely stands, defends, breakes, and pursueth Their standing battailes: by his valour fell The Phrigian host, now murdred without ruth: Charon is tyr'd, with ferring soules to hell: The Troians follow with victorious ries, Whilst Tantalus and valiant Pelops flies. 12 This was that Tantalus bright Plota bare, (Whom for a speciall grace) the Gods admit Tantalus in Hell. To their high Counsell, where they oft repaire, He blabs their secrets, therefore they held fit To punnish him in hell with torments rare, In Laethe chin-deepe he must euer sit, Hungry, whilst Apples touch his lips: and dry, Whilst from his thirsty chin the waters flie. 13 And this that Pelops whom his father slew, Pelops death and life. 1642. And hewd his body into gobbets smal, Whose Massacre the Gods in mercy rew, And gathering vp his limbes to match them all, 1321. They misse that peece to ioyne his body new, Which from the throat doth to the shoulder fall; Which they with Iuory peece, and who more bolder Then new-made Pelops, with his Iuory shoulder. 14 And yet inforst to flie: but had his men Bn euery one a Pelops, none had fled, He was the last in field, preferring then Fore Coward runners, the resolued dead, But what can one alone gainst thousands ten? Led by so braue a Prince as Ganimed, Leaue we triumphant Troos, now let our hand Direct sea-toyled Saturne safe a Land. 15 Who from his sonne in the last battaile flying, his Grand-child Archas to the sea-side chast, Saturnes ar∣riue in Troy. We left him in a ship the Ocean trying, Where he hath plowed strange Seas: great dangers past:
Now entring th' Hellespont, from farre espying (After his tedious course) a Towne at last; His Martiners to shore their sailes imploy, And Sea-beat Saturne touches land fore Troy. 16 Which Troos amidst his plausiue triumphs seeing, With Ilion, Ganimed, and thousand more, Makes towards the harbor, whilst old Saturne freeing His men from ship-bord hath imprest the shore, He makes his habit with his stile agreeing, The Troyans wonder at the state he bore: Himselfe so well prepar'd, his ships so faire, Both to the barbarous Troians seeming rare. 17 So small a number can no warre pretend, Therefore their strange arriue they neede not feare, As farre as doth their Hemisphere extend, They view the sea, but see no shipping neare, Which makes the King salute him as a frend, And aske the reason of his landing there, Saturne replies: Behold poore strangers throwne, To vnknowne people, on a Land vnknowne. 18 Yet would you haue his Countrey, Nation, name, That knowes not on whose earth his bold feet tread, Nor with what breath he may his stile proclaime, From his owne Natiue ayre so farre being fled: If you perhaps haue relisht Saturnes fame, Whose glory liues, although his state be dead: Then view that Saturne with respectiue eies, Whose far-spread beames set, at his sonnes vprise. 19 Saturne hath spoke enough, whose longing eares Haue not bin fild and cloy'd with his renowne, The Heauenly musicke of th'Harmonious spheares, Climbe to his praise: by him the fields are sowne, (The Archers shoot) and Childing-Tellus beares, In what remote climbe is not Saturne knowne, By him are seas past, heady ships contrould, He first Tild, Ploud, Sowd, Reapt, and fined Gold.
20 He need not of his Ominous wars possesse him, Troos knowes his issues triumph, and his flight, Inspir'd with supernaturall gifts they gesle him, And hold themselues heauen fauoured in his sight: He vowes in Creet againe to rpollesle him, Where Ihoue vsurps gainst all paternall right, After few daies in feasts and triumphs ended, A puisant host is to his charge commended. 21 Of twenty thousand souldiers, Troians all, Commanded by the valiant Ganimed, Ganimeds warre against Iupiter. A better war-exployted Generall Neuer appear'd in sight of Ersignes spred, They passe the Egeon seas (which men so call) Of the Grand Thiefe Egeon, he that fled From Iupiter, when all the Tytans perisht, Now on these Seas by murdrous Pyrats cherisht. 22 Saturne directs their landing, as best knowing The safest harbors: and their army guided Through many furlongs of his ancient sowing, Neuer till his daies by the Plough diuided; But as their host to Creet is nearer growing, With hope to take the Cretans vnprouided, King Iupiter is by the skouts discride, With many Centaures that on horsebacke ride. 23 But not expecting any hostile power, Or to beat backe inuaders, doth he gather This puisant host, hee's for the brazen Tower Where Danae liues, coopt by her ruthlesse father, But now that host the Cretan soile must scoure, Which amorous Ihoue would haue conducted rather To scale the brazen forsse, the darke skreene, Twixt courtly freedome, and his cloistred Queene. 24 To this imployment the stout Centaures came Vnder Ixions conduct, twice two hundred, Who first deuis'd Thessalian steeds to tame, They seem'd at first, halfe horse, halfe man vnsundred,
At whose strange manage, and admired name, (Vnknowne till now) th'amazed Troians wondred, The battailes ioyne, and both the hosts discouer, About Ihoues Tent, a Princely Eagle houer. 25 He takes it for an Ominous signe of good, The Troians for some heauy sad presage, By this, a thousand quarters swim in blood, And from both sides the heated Champions rage, In a deepe red they dy the neighbour flood, Neuer did bolder spirits battaile wage, The dying grone, the feare-confounded shrike, The wounded bleeding fall, the standing strike. 26 The Centaures boldly fight, the Prince of Troy Shines both in Armes and valour aboue all, Hauing both Art and strength his steele to imploy, And many halfe-dead limbes about him sprall, The Combat twixt Ine and Ganimed. To him Ihoue makes, and is re-met with ioy, On either part whole troopes before him fall, So haue I seene two burning Meteors fare, Breaking through diuers clouds to tilt in th'aire, 27 Two fiery Meteors I may call them right, For they were both in gilded Armors laced, And had they fought in a darke cloudy night, With such rough blowes their shields and helmes they raced And forcst from them such store of fiery light, With steele encountring steele, and blowes well placed, The two maine Armies might haue fought in view, By the bright sparkes that from their Armors flew. 28 This Monomachy lasted not, for yonder Comes Saturne on the part of Ganimed, On th'other side, the hoofed Centaures thunder, And Character deepe halfe Moones where they tread, By whom the Champions are inforst assunder, And all confus'd that was in order led, Thus in this tumult and disordered brall, By scotes and hundreds they drop downe and fal.
29 Saturne assailes his sonne, but is refus'd, He shuns th'vnnaturall combat with his Sire, Amongst the Troians he his Champions chus'd, The Hostile stranger shall his worth admire, Against whose Armies he such valour vs'd, That force, pforce, their vaward must retire: Meane time Prince Ganimed King Saturne righting, Alone, is midst a hundred Centaures fighting. 30 Encountring Eson, arm'd at euery peece, Eson well mounted, gainst the Troian ran, This Eson. sonne was after knowne in Greece, Iason. Twas he that did the stately Arges man, And in his bold quest of the golden fleece, With the rich Sheepe deepe speld Medea wan, Who after old, decrepit, weake, and hored, Was by his daughter to his youth restored. 31 Him Ganimed vnhorst, and in despight Of the bold Centaures mounted on his steed, Prouing the manage of this vnknown fight, And in the proofe mad many Centaures bleed, (But all in vaine) his troopes are put to flight, Saturne is shrunke, and left him at his need, And o ther ships in toopes his soulds fled, Whose shamefull steps, the Prince of force must tred. 32 The Centaures and the Cretan king pursue them Vnto the Oceans Margent, and euen there, Twixt Sea and shore, in countlesse heaps they slew them, Such as escape, their course to Troy-ward beare, For Saturnes men, the Cretans cannot view them, Another vnknowne tract (alas) they steare: Whether the winds and waues their vessaile driue, Twice driuen from Creet (gainst heauen in vaine wee striue) 33 Iupiter and the Centaures such ships take, As should haue bin imploid for Darraynes Tower, And after Ganimed to Sea they make, Pursuing them to Troy with all their power,
They Land at once, the fearefull Troians quake, Doubting if earth or sea, shall them deuoure, Troos with an host discends, as one that guessed, The Prince his sonne, was by his foes distressed. 34 The battaile is renewed, the king intends To rescue sonne and Subiects in such state, But (ouer valiant) Ganimed extends His valour beyond wisedome, all too late The King of Troy his puissant fury bends, In rescue of his sonne, now in sad fate: The Cretans him surprize, and he being tane Ganimede ta∣ken. With this rich prize, they make to Sea againe. 35 Leaue Troos and Islion mated at this crosse, The pride of Troy is not to be re-won, He ras him much aboue his kingdomes losse, And all Dardania mourneth for his son, How in the guard of those that from Molesse Came with Ixion, and on horse-backe run, Ioue giues command (being at Sea assured) The Prisoners to be chear'd, the wounded cured. 36 And calling now to mind the Bird that soaredThe first en∣signe borne in Battell. About his rich Pauillion, he ordained Her picture should be drawne and quaintly skored, Vpon a Crimson Ensigne richly stained, Which since that fight, to all that Mars adored, As a perpetuall instance hath remained: Till then, they bore no flags, no Scutchions drew, Ioues Eagle was the first, in field that flew. 37 He now remembers Danae, and commands His Pylots to direct his waftage thether, But what the king inioynes, the wind withstands With boysterous gusts it foulds their sailes together, And hurries them along by diuers Lands, They beare their wandering course they ken not whether Aegeon. At length, they in the sea, Aegean wander, Of which, the Theefe Aegeon was commander.
38 The blustring tempest hath diuorst their Fleet, Only the Ship wherein the Centaurs saile, With Ihoue and Ganimed, the Pirats meet, The rest were straide, and of their Voyage faile, Yet some amongst the rest take land in Creet, Some bandied too and fro, by euery gale, Yet all their barkes liue, none so neere to die, As this the Pyrats from the shore discry. 39 Sixe Gallyes they disanker from the Isle Cald Desert, and their Barke incompasse round, Ihoue and the Centaurs arme them in smal while, And al their Martiall notes to battel sound, Which the bold Troian hearing, gan to smile In scornfull guise, to see his armes fast bound: Oh when (quoth he) stood Ganimed thus still To heare the Martial musicke of Kill, kill? 40 Is my opinion of knowne Armes so weake? My name so poore, the Centaurs scorne mine ayde? Did we for this their maine Battallions breake? And with our Armed breast their hoasts invade? Why may I not in this case boldly speake? Shal I stand still, to see my life betraide? Although a Prisoner, yet this fauour show, To guard mine Honor, gainst a common foe. 41 Not fighting against Troy, we are a friend, These Pyrats with your honors cou mine: Oh let the King of Cre such grace extend, That by his side I may in Armour shine, To see how wel I can my head defend: Some desperate Act vnto my charge assigne: They hale vs neere, our ship the Pirats boord, For Honors sake, giue me my Armes and sword. 42 These words charme Iupiter, and draw a vaile Betwixt his hart and Ganimeds disgraces, The King relents, the Princes words preuaile, His bands he looseth, and with kind embraces
Sweares to him friendship that shall neuer faile, Armd as they are, they take their pointed places, Ihoue in the Prow, the Centaus at his beck, To face their foes, guirt round their vpmost decke. 43 Their golden Eagle is displaide: the Gallies Grapple on euery side their hooked steele, Some from the Beak-heads, some the wast make sallies, But those the Centaurs make like Drunkards reele, And drop downe to the Sea, here no man dallies, Some, with long pointed Irons bare their Keele To sinke them, others by the Ship sides crall, The Centaurs lop their hands off, downe they fall. 44 Twice they are forst t'vngrapple and vnhooke Their double chaynes: To this I may compare, Sir Richard Greenvield. Thy boording (valiant Greenvild) thou didst brooke, A hotter skirmish then the Pirats dare, Who keeping one good Ship, skornst to be tooke By a whole Fleet of Spanish men a-warre, Fighting till powder, shot, and men were wasted, And these consum'd, euen til thine owne life lasted. 45 As often as they boorded thee, so oft Brauely repulst, their sides bor'd through and through, And three times with thy three Decks blowne aloft, As high as heauen (what more could valor doe?) Now thy proud Ship hath al her Ensignes doft, Those sayles the Amorous winds with courtings wooe To tinder burnt: thou profferd life despising, Reuenge, one of Q. Elizab. ships Royall. Leau'st thy (Reuenge) euen with the waters rising. 46 The Gallyes fasten still: (a watchword giuen By Iupiter,) at once they headlong skip (Dispearst) into such vessels as were driuen Within their teach, and leaue their Cretan Ship, Now many a Pirats skull is bruis'd and riuen, Some heau'd ore boord, some softly slip Into the sea for feare, their liues to smother, So, by auoyding one death, seeke another.
47 Th'vndaunted Gyant-Theefe-Egeon now Kens Iupiter, him Iupiter espies, And facing him in his owne Gallies prow, Thus with vndaunted language he defies: Behold thy fate, see Ihoue thy ruyne vow, Whom thou by Coward-ods sought to surprise, Thou, that by land my ruthlesse fury fled, Shalt now by Sea be forst t'abide me dead. 48 I am the sonne of Saturne, by whom fell, Tytan, with al the Earth-bred Gyant seed, Thy Sire and brothers I haue sent to Hell, and thy destruction I haue next decreed: At this, th'inflam'd Egeon gan to swel, Rage makes his language lagge, his fury speed: Action proceeds his words, before he spake, With his huge Axe vpon Ihoues helme he strake. 49 The blow was put to loane, while they two striue, Prince Ganimed hath al the Gally cleared, and mongst them all he leaues not one aliue, Saue the graund-theefe, who now not to be feared Ihoue hath subdude, and gins his legges to gyeue, Since in the Gyants rescue none appeared, Bulke, hands, legs, thighes, the Prince at once inuirons Egeon nrpri∣sed. and leads him with an hundred chaynes of Iron. 50 In these the harmlesse Trauellers he bound, (Now his owne plague) they that suruiue are fled, and on the Seas disperst, now doth Ihoue ground His loue vpon his new friend Ganimed, He enters his owne ships and wanders round The spacious Vast, where wind and waters led, Crossing both Torrid and the frozen lines, By this the Sunne had compast all the Signes. 51 The Ramme of Helles, and Europaes Bull, Castor and Pollux, Cancers burning Signe, The 12. Ce∣lestiall Sign. Th' Herculean Lyon, and the Virgin-Trull, The skale of Iustice, and the Scorpions line,
Chyron the Centaur, with the horned skull Of watry Capricorne, next whom doth shine The Troian lad, that from his lauer powres, Last the two Fishes drilling Southern showres. 52 And at the yeares end taking land in Creet, After his tedious progresse on the streame, Queene Iuno welcoms him with kisses sweet, His subiects kneele to him as their supreame, Fiue hundred Steeds presenting at his seet, But he whose thoughts harpe on another theame, Prisons Aegeon, Ganimed sets free, And in his grace (saue Iuno) who but he? 53 But Iuno, when his mind on Danae ran, Shewd like a Crow vnto a siluer Doue, Rose to a Black-berry, Rauen to a Swan, It makes him mad he cannot ayde his Loue, Twelue Moones are fild and waind, since haplesse man The day expir'd, he should his valour proue, And now (though late) hee'l try his best endeuour, To fetch her thence (for better late than neuer,) 54 But loe, amidst his hostie preparation, The rest of the history of Danae By chance a Lord of Arges rode that way, Who, knowne to be a stranger of that Nation, The King demaunds of Danae, to bewray What he hath heard: he gins a sad Oration Which doth the Princes hoast from waftage stay, In what remote Clime, if by Rumor blowne, (Quoth th' Arges Lord) was not bright Danae known? 55 When she was Danae, and whilst Darrain Tower Inclos'd earths-Beauty in her brazen hold, But now shee's cropt, and that sweet smelling flower Is vaded quite and withered, wrapt in mould: The King at this lost all his vitall power, His bloud forsakes his hart, his braine growes cold, His thoughts confuse, his soule within him bleeds, When th' Arges Lord of Danae thus proceeds.
56 Of the Tower, Darrains strength, Acrisius guard, Within how many gates of brasse inclosed, Of their nocturnall watch, Diurnall warde, Twixt man and her, what strong bars enterposed To keepe her chast, what deafe man hath not heard: Yet al these locks are with those bolts vnlosed: Oh heauens! what mortall wit? what humane skil Can keepe a woman chast, against her wil? 57 Thou gealous foole, why dost thou gayle thy wife? When Darrains strong Tower cannot loue expel? The fruits of Gelousie. Better thou hadst to graunt her a free life, If she be honest, she wil guide it well: If otherwise adicted, vaine is strife Though in the circuit of Brasse walles she dwel, Inmure her body fast as thou canst thinke, Shee'l make thee Cuckold, bee't but through a chinke. 58 Perhaps her body in strict bonds thou hast, Yet canst thou not the thoughts within her stay: Not she that dares not sinne, is counted chast, Not she thats matcht, and cannot step astray: Not she that feares, is mongst the vertuous placst: "Alone shee's Chast, that will not, though she may: Their Natures are, to couet things demde, And in forbidden pathes to tread aside. 59 Oft haue I seene a Steed would keepe no Tract, But fling, and bound, when he was too much raynde, But when he felt his curbe and bridle slackt, Play with the Byt, that he so much disdaind, And so that Steed by gentle meanes is backt Which brookes no Ryder, being much constraind, So doth a sicke man stil, though he be chid, Most couet, what the Doctors most forbid. 60 Had Danae mongst a thousand suters playd And reueld in her Fathers pallace, then I doubt not but she still had beene a mayd And (as she did before) despised men:
Her ruthlesse Father her fresh youth betraid, When he inclos'd her in her brazen den: Though thousand gates and doores her beuty smother Loue breakes through al, to make the maide a mother. 61 Her time expires, her father spies her great, And threats the Beldams to consuming fire; New Guardiens are appointed in this heat, Acrisu doth by sundry meanes inquire Of her, and of her guard, by no intreat Or forced torment, made to glut his ire: Will they confesse, the Ladies all dare sweare, (Sath' vnsuspected Pedler) none came there. 62 Nor will bright Danae yet disclose her shame, Vntill the long lamented houre draw neare, Nine Moones o'repast, her houre of Childing came, Deniall bootes not, when such signes appeare; And now gainst Cretan Ihoue shee gins t'exclaime, And gainst all them that will themselues forsweare: The birth of Perseus. A childe is borne, the Lad she Perseus names, Cleares all her maids, and on her selfe exclaimes. 63 Th'offended King hath doom'd them both to die, And (being inexorable) that doome stands; The Seas they in a mastlesse boat must try, Where both th'Imperious wind and waue commands, The pitteous Marers themselues apply To their vnwilling taske: In their loth hands They Perseus take, and the faire Danae guide, To tast the mercy of the rigorous tide. 64 The Argiue Lord heere sighes, but heere Ihoue rages, Threatning Acrisius, cursing his delay, But Ganimed at length his spleene asswages, And aymes his threatned thoughts another way, Hauing lost Danae quite, he now ingages His loue to Iuno, and beside her lay, Of whom he got a sonne; In small time after, From his Aunt Ceres he deriu'd a daughter.
65 None comes amisse to him, stranger nor kin, Of his owne Nation, or of climes remote, His daughter Venus tels him tis no sin For men to practise dalliance where they dote, Prince Ganimed that long in grace had bin, And did this loosenesse in his Hauior note, Demanded how he could his thoughts deuide, To loue so many, thus the King repli'de: 66 I will not in my owne vaine errors stand, Nor boldly that (which some condemne) maintaine, The fault is great, if it bee truely scand, I knew it bad, but can it not refraine; For mad-man like I striue to plow the sand, In seeking my free humor to restraine: I burne, and seeking ease, run to the fire, I loath my fault, and yet my guilt desire. 67 I want the power to gouerne mine owne will, My head-strong appetite beares all the sway, I know my waies losse, yet I wander still, I see the path, and yet I turne astray: Thus like a Ship misguided without skill, Whom a stiffe violent Tempest beares away, To wracke it on some Rocke or shallow sounds, I am transported quite beyond my bounds. 68 I loue, but yet I know not in what fashion, I loue a thousand, for a thousand reasons, My mouing thoughts abide in no firme station; My hart is subiect to my blind thoughts Treasons, For euery sundry Lasse I enter passion, And am of loue prouided at all seasons: That wench is modest! oh shees in my Bookes, I onely loue her for her modest lookes. 69 Yon lasse is bold, (see, see) my heart she easeth, I like her, shees not like a Milke-sop bred, And straight this thought my apprchension seyseth, She will be much more plyant in the bed,
This is a Shrew: her sharpenesse my soule pleaseth, Because no sheepe, I would the Damsell wed; And in that thought I skale her amorous fort, Sharpe Noses are all Shrewes, yet apt for sport. 70 Is she a Scholler? Then her Art delights me: Is she a Dunce? Her simplenesse contents me: Doth she applaud my loue? Her praise incites me: Or discommend me? Yet she represents me With matter of new loue: Admit she spights me, I loue her: for her spight no whit torments me; For though her words be rough, smooth is her skin, What in the first I loose, the last, I win. 71 Hath she a tripping gate? Her short steps moue me, And in her quicker motion I take Pride: Takes she large steps in going? As you loue me Let me haue her, I like her for her stride: Sings she? I am inchanted, let her proue me, I on her lips can quauer and deuide: Is she vnweldy? Yet my hart she charmes, And may be much more actiue in my armes. 72 Her I affect, she is so sweet a Singer, And I loue her, though she can tune no note: She playes vpon the Lute, that nmble finger Would please me better in a place remote: Yo dances; I affect a lusty springer, And on such capting legges who could not dote. This cannot dance; yet when she lies in bed, She will find Art to haue thy fancies fed. 73 All things Inchant me that these Ladies do, And in my frozen breast bright bon-fires make; Thou art a Bona-roba, and I wo Thee for thy bredth and length: thy Stature sake: Thou art a little Lasse, I like thee too, And were I sleepy thou wouldst keepe me wake: Not one can come amisse, I can find sport, Both with the fat and leane, the long and short.
74 You Lady manners wants, I straight suppose, Would she learne Court-ship, how it would beseem her: This court-ship hath, and I must needs disclose What loue I for her manners can bet me her, That hath a whitely face, and a long nose, And for them both I wondcrous well esteeme her: This the greene sicknesse hath, I long to proue her, This lookes not greene, but black, I therfore loue her 75 Is her haire browne? So louely Ladaes was, Browne trameld lockes best grace, the brightest hew: Are her lockes yellow? Such Auroraes glasse, Presents in her attyring to her view: Is haite orient bright? It doth surpasse, If Chesnu coloured? Such do I pursue: My eies still aime at beauties rare perfections, and I all colours loue, and all complexions. 76 My loue can fit it selfe to euery story, I loue a young girle, and a woman staid, Her fresh yeares please me, and I should be sorry To loose her youth: who would not loue a Maid, anothers lookes are Matron-like, I glory In her: and I her person must inuade: To end as many as the world can hold, M'ambitious loue likes, be they young or old. 77 Now to proceed of Danae and her sonne, Long tost vpon the Oceans ruthlesse streames, at length her barke th' Apulian shores hath won, about the houre when Phoebus dons his beame, and to ascend the Easterne hill begun, When she new wakt out of her horrid dreames: Her selfe halfe dead with cold, her Babe neare frozen, Finds that her barke hath a faire harbor chosen. 78 Which a poore Naples Fisherman espying, Kenning a Barke that had nor Oare nor saile, He leaues the nets that on the shore were drying, and puts to Sea the mastlesse boat to hale,
Which boording on the bare plankes, he sees lying A beautious Goddesse, couer'd with a vaile, And on her knee a babe, or dead, or sleeping, To which she sange not, but was softly weeping. 79 It mou'd the poore man to behold her teares, He sees th'extremity they both are in, Her sailesse boat vnto the Land he steares, And her young infant that was bare and thin A wraps in his Capootch, and softly beares Vnto his cottage, where no Prince hath bin, He makes a chearefull Fire, and in a while, The halfe-staru'd babe doth on his mother smile. 80 And being refresht with what the Cottage lent, Their Natiue beauties repossest their faces, Whose rarenesse the poore man admiring; went To acquaint the King with one so full of graces, Who sends for her to Court incontinent, And hauing seene her beauty Danae places, In his throne Royall, swearing by his life, The bounteous seas haue sent him this rare wife. 81 This King Pelonnus hight, who gently praies, To acquaint him with her birth and fortunes past, The blushing Dame her modest eye gan raise, And to his faire demaund replies at last, She tels him she hath spent her youthfull dayes In Arges: next how she to Sea was cast: Of Darraines Tower, of her vntimely fate; Of Iupiters forg'd loue, Acrisius hate. 82 Discoursing orderly the sum of all, At which the King oft wept, her fortunes ruing, blaming the cause of her vntimely fall, At euery Inter-medium loue renewing, He thinkes Acrisius hate too great: too small Pelonnus ma rieth Danac & begat Danaus. houes loue, that left such beautie for pursuing, he wooes, she yeelds, that did the King besot, And married, Danaus is betweene them got.
83 Of whom and of young Perseus forbeare, To speake of Saturne through the world notorious, And Iupiter subduing Climats ncare, As Cecill, Lemnos, Cipres (stil victorious) Piercing large Italy, and welcom'd there By Ianus, for mongst Kings his stile was glorious, This Ianus byfrons was of auncient name, Of him our Ianuary tooke first name. Iaunary. 84 Ianus tels Ihoue King Saturne dwels them by, Teaching rude Nations Tillage, there vnknowne And held in reuerence, for the Princes nie Receiue his exilde people as their owne, He shewes him plowes, teemes, yokes and harrowes lie, And fields of ripened graine, already growne: This King at length brought Saturne to Ihoues view,  & Ipiter accord. And by his meanes, attonement twixt them grew. 85 The good old Ianus in Taurentum raignde, So did Euander in Mount Auentine, Ianus Eder. Since one of Roomes seauen hils, and proudly nam'd By these King Italus of auncient line, This Italus from Ciracuse constraind Italus. Built the great Citty Albe, by which shine Bright Tyber Streames, al these at once desire, Peace and accord betweene the sonne and Syrc. 86 Saturne surrenders Creet, hauing erected A Citty, where Roomes Capitoll now stands, And a chast Virgin to his wife elected, Saturns second mare. Philicis cald, colleagued in nuptiall bands, Of whom he Picus got, Picus protected That Citty after Saturne, and commands The Realme adiacent, Faunus was his sonne, and from this Faunus did Latinus come. 87 The Poets make this Faunus for his care O're husbandry, the auncient Sire and Father Of all the Rural-gods: His Queene was fayre And Fatua hight, who would haue bedded rather
With Hercules suppos'd Amphitrites heire, But our dispersed story we must gather, And of Nicostrate, wife to Euander, A little speake, before too farre we wander. 88 Who dotes on Iupiter, and laught him charmes, With Negromanticke Charracters, in which He expert growes, and hauing left off armes, Studies the blacke spels of this sorcering Witch, Abandons horrid sound of shrill alarmes, Now onely labours to be wise and rich, And leaues the Iatian Kings, where long he staid, After the league twixt him and Saturne made. 89 To Cet returning, where Queene Iun was The birth of Vulcan and Proserpine. Deliuered of a foule mishapen Lad, Cald Vulcan, Ceres of a louely Lasse, Hight Proserpine: the enuious Queene growes sad, To see her Aunts child in bright lookes surpasse Hers in deformed foulenesse: Ihoue's more glad Of Proserpine then Vulcan, which espide, The iealous Queene doth with her husband chide. 90 She chafes, he laughes, she blames his wanton ryat, He giues her liberall scandall a deafe eare, She counts her selfe food to suffice his diat, and tels of all his scapes, how, when, and where, That he is forst to keepe his Queene in quiat, To marry Ceres to a great Lord there, With whom he gaue t'augment his name and power Sicill and Syracusa for her dower. 91 To Vulcan he the Isle of Lemnos gaue, To be instructed in his Geomancy, In the deepe bowels of the earth to raue, To learne the force of fire in Pyromancy, Taught by Beroutes, and Piragma graue, The third Sceropes red him Negromancy, Himselfe the God of Smiths, Lemnos his seat, Where these three Cyclops on his Anuiles beat:
92 And frame Ihoues trisulck thunders, some dcuine Lame Vulcan in his birth was straight and faire, And being in Ihoues lap where Planets shine How Vulcan became lame. And stars like golden studs sticke round his chaire, The Mansion of the Gods, th'heauens Christaline, Dandling his smiling babe, he spies the ayre Al in guilt flames, earth burne, the Meteors drinke The boyling Seas, and heauens huge Collumes shrink. 93 For Phaeton had set the world on fire, At which Ihoue rising from his throne in hast, To thunder-strike the youth that durst aspire, Downe drops his sonne towards earth, and falling, past Through al the Planets, by Apollo hier Then al the rest, So by the Moone at last, Twixt heauen and earth, who can describe the way? When he was falling a long Summers day. 94 He lights in Lemnos, nor can Vulcan die By this occase, being borne of heauenly seed, Though on the earth amaz'd the infant lie He breaths at last, (so haue the Fates decreed) Of Vulcans craft, and how he did affie Venus (Loues Queene) how Mars did twixt them breed Strife and dissention: how the winged boy Was borne, belongs notto the tale of Troy. 95 Yet that I may not slightly let them passe, Without some smal remembrance of my pen, Whose history so oft recorded was, By auncient Poets, hie-renowned men, To Thracian Mars, and the bright Paphian Lasse A little space we must looke backe agen; And speake how she her bridal bed did blot, The very night yong Cupid was begot. 96 When Mars and Venus made appoint to meet, And to that end a priuate Conclaue found, To dally out the howers in kisses sweet, And sports in which the loues-Queene did abound,
That no sly tell-tales should their pastimes greet, The obscure Caue they first perused round, To shunne disturbance til their game was done, Iealous of all: but fearing most the Sunne. 97 Knowing his searching eye is prying still Through euery Casement, loope-hoole, chinke, or crany, Therefore to blind him they must vse their skill, The blabbing Phaebus they dread most of any: A noble youth on Mars attended still, Whose secresie he had prefer'd 'boue many: Gallus they call him, whom God Mars wil haue To watch the Sunne at th'entrance of the Caue. 98 The Louers enter, Gallus stayes behind, All the night long his eye-lids neuer close, But towards the Dawne, dul sleepes his sences bind In their soft chaines: his powers to rest dispose; He neither feares Fawnes, Nimphs, stars, moon, or wind, Nor any other eye: the Sunne God rose, And in his mounting through th' Olimpick sky, He that sees all things, did the Louers spy. 99 The Tel-tale Sunne straight to the Smith discouers Th'adulterate practise of this amorous payre, Who straight deuis'd a net to catch the louers; Meane time Mars wakes, sees Venus lye all bare, (Both ouer-slept themselues) for Phaebus houers Ouer their caue, and in his face doth stare: Th'astonisht War-god knowes not what to thinke, Seeing the Sunne stil peeping through a chinke. 100 Th'astonisht God first gently Venus wakes, Who blusht to thinke the Sunne their stealth had spide, Then by the curled lockes he Gallus takes, And thus he saies; Since then we are descride By thy default, behold (poore Gallus quakes Before his sentence, and his face would hide) be thou transformd, thou that hast wrought our shame Vnto a bird, that stil shal beare thy name.
101 This new made Bird (the Cocke in shape translated) Yet in his hart his ancient thoughts retaines, For euery morne the Sunne by him is rated; He by his crowing to God Mars complaines, Before the Sunne is in his chaire instated, Or in his hand takes the Celestiall raines, He gainst his sides still with his wings, is drumming, And tels to all the world the Sunne is comming. 102 Of Perseus next, and of the Gorgon slaine, And of Acrisius, by young Danaus ayde Restor'd to Arges, and the Tower Darraine, And of Andromede the louely maid My muse sings next: In Hespery cal'd Spaine, Porcus (suppos'd a Sea-god) often preyd On harmelesse Strangers, who their voyage bore Along by Spaine, vpon th'Hesperian shore. 103 This Porcus three sweet daughters leaues: Medusa, Euriale, and Scennio, their names; The Gorgons. All faire at first: the glorious eye of day Saw neuer three more bright and stately dames, These did the spacious Dorcad Islands sway: The eldest gainst Mynerua warre proclaimes, At which the Goddesse high displeasance takes, And turnes their golden heires to crawling snakes. 104 She leaues them all no more saue one broad eye, Plac'st in Medusaes forehead, and to shine Like sulphure, whose Aspect infects the sky, Parches the grasse, and blasts both Rose and Spine, It hath the Basiliskes true property, To kill farre off, her head is Serpentine: And by the pest, that on her fore-head burnes, All that behold her face, to stones she turnes. 105 About her Pallace thousand pictures stand, Once men, now Images of sencelesse stone; Of all that in the Dorcad Islands Land, If by these Gorgons seene suruiues not one:
More then Medeas rod, or Circes wand, her poysonous eye-ball hath trans-form'd alone: armies of men haue compast her at ones, Armies of men her eie hath turnd to stones. 106 Throughout her kingdome you may people see Disperst and taking stands in sundry places, But neither moue hand, arme, head, foot, or knee, For they haue stony limbes and Marble faces, That oft-times Trauellors deceiued be, To see dead stones retaine such liuely graces: Some asking them the climate, some the way, Others to know th'vncertaine time of day. 107 Nay sometimes quarrels haue betwixt them growne, Receiuing to their answeres no reply, one angry fellow drawes vpon a stone, And sweares deepe Oaths hee'l make it speake or die, others more patient yet displeas'd are gone, And say they skill no points of honesty: Nor wonder if these strangers so mistooke, When euery dead face had a liuing looke. 108 Heare one was going, and in going spide By Adder-haird Medusa, and so stayes, Euen as one legge did fore another stride, and as his hindmost heele he gan to raise To draw it after, both his legges abide Fixt to the earth, his armes beside him playes: his body forward bends, the picture showing, The shape of one on earnest businesse going. 109 Another digging as the Queene came by, Stoopes stil with one Hand boue the other placst, The right foot fixt, the left aduanced hie To driue the dull Spade in, another facst the Gorgon-monster, as his loue past by, Who spreads his amorous armes t'infould her wast: and smiling in her face, his Image stands, Laughing with halfe-shut eyes, & broad-spread hands.
110 Heere stands a Fisher by the waters brinke, The Angle-hand stretcht forward to the rier, And there a Sheapheard heau'd his hands to drinke On his blacke bottle, both his lips vnseuer, His head bends backe, legs stride, and you would thinke He dranke still, but this draught must last for euer: His bottles gone, stil stands he strangely faring, Hands heau'd, necke bent, mouth yawning, eies broad staring. 111 Of Marble Statuës many thousands more, In Field, Groues, orchards, High-waies, houses, streets, Some naked, others in the robes they wore, So hardly doth she deale with al she meets, This man she takes conferring, but before He can conclude his tale, his spirit fleets: Some she finds chafing, laughing, striking, riding, Al urn'd to stones in selfe-same shape abiding. 112 I feare my pen hath with Medusa met, For on the sodaine it growes stiffe and dull, And cannot now defray my promist debt, And with the Gorgons staine this Margent full, Heere therefore this daies iourney shall be set, And blame me not, if my tyr'd hand I pull From his Diurnal task, at our next view, I bring him on this stage, that Gorgon slew. IXyon was King of Thessaly, who being by Iupiter taken vp into Heauen, and comforted of certaines griefes there, fell in loue with Iuno, which Iupiter perceiuing, deceiued him with a cloud, made in the likenesse of Iuno, of which Ixi∣on begat the Centaurs: After adiudged by the Destinies to be tortured with the wheele in hell. I hold Ganimed rather surprized by Iupiter in battaile, then as some write to be stolne by him as his minion, & after this rape made his Cup-bearer. Apulia where Danae was cast vpon the shore, is now a part of Italy bordering vpon the Adriaticke sea.
Vulcan was Iupiters Smith, an excellent workeman, on whō the Poets Father many rare workes, among which, I find one, not vnnecessary to be remembred, which Ouid speaks of, and I thus English. This Tale is blaz'd through heauen, how once vnware Venus and Mars were tooke in Vulcans snare: Mars & Ve∣nus. The God of Warre doth in his brow discouer The perfect and true patterne of a Louer: Nor could the Goddesse Venus be so crewell To deny Mars: (soft kindnesse is a Iewell In any woman, and becomes her well) In this the Queene of loue doth most excell: (Oh heauen) how often haue they mockt and flouted The Smiths polt-foote (whilst nothing he misdoubted) Made Iests of him and his begrimed trade, And his smoog'd visage, blacke with Cole-dust made: Mars, tickled with lowd laughter, when he saw Venus like Vulcan limpe, to halt and draw One foot behind another, with sweet grace To counterfet his lame vneeuen pace. Their meetings first the Louers hide with fear, From euery iealons eye, and captious eare. The God of Warre and Loues lasciuious dame, In publicke view were full of bashfull shame; But the Sunne spies how this sweet paire agree, (Oh what bright Phoebus can be hid from thee?) The Sun both sees and blabs the sight, forthwith, And in all post he speeds to tell the Smith: (Oh Sunne) what bad examples doest thou show? What thou in secret seest, must all men know? For silence, aske a bribe from her faire treasure, Shee'le grant thee that shall make thee swell with pleasure. The God whose face is smoog'd with smoke and fiar, Placeth about their bed a net of Wiar So quaintly made, that it deceiues the eye Straight (as he feignes) to Lemnos he must hie, The Louers meet, where he the traine hath set, And both lie fast catcht in a wiery net: He cals the Gods, the louers naked sprall And cannot rise, the Queene of Loue shewes all: Mars chafes, and Venus weepes, neither can flinch,
Grappled they lie, in vaine they kicke and winch: Their legs are one within another tide, Their hands so fast that they can nothing hide: Amongst these high Spectators, one by chance That saw them naked in this pitfall dance: Thus to himselfe said: If it tedious be Good God of warre, bestow thy place on me. Of the Gorgons, because there are many opinions, we wil a little insist vpon their particuler discouery. Of them there is a Hesiodus in Theogon. double; kind some hairy, some bald, yet al born of Phorcus & Cetus. These three Sisters had but one common eye, and one Aeschilus in . common tooth to feed with. The Latines call them Lamiae, à gutteris amplitudine, which Lamia some thinke to bee the  in Phoricis. daughter of Neptune, and the first Prophetesse, cald Sibilla among the Aphrians. They were also cald Pemphrado Pri∣to Athen. Apol∣lodor. lib, 2. and Dino, to whom some haue likewise added Iaeno, whose name both Aeschilus and Hesiod in their workes remember. Melanthes lib, de mysterijs. They were cald Greae, and liue in the vtmost Islands of Iberia Apollod. Menander lib, de mysterijs. towards the West. Some likewise number Silla amongest the Gorgons; Others describe them not with snaky lockes, but Nimphodorus Theopompus. Poleme. heads of Dragons and Girdles (about their wasts) of Vipers. All concluding in this, that their sight was immediat death, which Aeschilus signified in this. Sunt tres sorores his volucres non procul Serpentibus dirsque comptae Gorgones Quas intuens nemo diu spirauerit. The Beast Nomades in Libia hath likewise the name of Gor-gon, Alexander, Mdius lib,  . somewhat resembling a sheep, which others describe more like a Sea-calfe, It is said this monster by the infection of his eyes kils what beast soeuer he meets. His hair couers his brows. Many of Marius Souldiers marching against Iugurth, follo∣wed , 2 this beast, mistaking him for a sheepe, and presentlie fell down dead: by these Greae, Phorci, these Gorgons & mōsters of the sea, is vnderstood nothing else but that knowledge and wisedome, which is acquired by experience, to purchase which it behoued Perseus to vse the aid of Pallas, the helme of Plu∣to, and the sword of Mercury, by vertue of which, he subdude those monsters. Which the Poets haue amongst others thrust into hell. Centauri in foris stabulant, ; biformes. Et centum geminus Briareus, ac belua Lernae Virgil. Horndum stridens, flammis{que} armata chimaera Gorgones Harpiae{que} & forma tricorporis vmbrae.
Argumentum PErseus the Gorgon kils, then takes his way To Ioppen, on his flying horse alone, Destroyes the Monster, frees Andromeda, Acrisius saues, turnes Atlas into stone: King Pricus Wife, the beauteous Aurai Doates on the valiant Knight Bellerephon: The Troians are with fearfull pests annoyde, By Hercules, great Troy is first destroyde. ARG. 2. IN Zeta Phineus fals, Chimer is slaine, Dis acts his rape: Queene Ceres doth complain. CANTO. 6. 1 MInerua, thou that hadst the power to make Monsters of them, that thy high Name despise, To turne a golde-Wire to a crawling Snake, And change the beauty of bewitching eyes, The Patronage of all my labors take, More sacred Names, thy God-hood may comprise Religion, Vertue, Zeale, we may thee call, Whose foes are vgly, and with Adders crall.
2 The three foule Gorgons by thy power disguised, Were Lust insatiate, Auarice and Pride, These Sisters in Hisperia tyranised, All looking with one eye, who can deuide Their powers and Natures, being three comprised Within one head, and Sisters neere allide, All such as on their strength themselues assure, Sencelesse of good, as stones they soone obdure. 3 Therefore to arme vs gainst this horrid fiend, Behooues vs to implore Myneruaes ayde, Perseus bright shield vnto our arme to bind, And then we boldly may such foes inuade, His shield was Cristall, and so bright it shind, Perseus killeth the Gorgon. 1497 It dim'd the Gorgons eye, and whilst she plaid In darkenesse, and her killing sight forsooke, Her monstrous head he from her shoulders strooke: 1466 4 About the time Perseus the Gorgon slew,  lib. 3. . Theopompus lib 17. Pegasus. Busyris gouern'd in Egiptia, Cadmus rul'd Thebes: to Komos France was due, Belochus Emperor of Assyria, Othoniall Trumpets before Israel blew, Prince Radamant raign'd King in Lycia: Tyrhenus Italy, and Triton Spaine, Whilst Liber Pater all the East doth gaine. 5 The Gorgons head with power to turne to stone, Vpon his shield he fixt, and of the blood That Issued from the wound, swift Pegas shone, And neigde out of the earth a Stallion good, Whom Perseus backt, and out of sight is gone, Flying o're Mountaine, Valley, rocke, and flood, From Arctos vnto Cancers burning tracke, And from hot Cancer to cold Arctos backe. 6 In his high Airery progresse ouer all The Prouinces and Clymes beneath him spreading, Where ere the purple drops from Gorgon fall, Adders and Snakes are bred, the people treading
Their secure steps, see vgly Serpents crall, Their venomous stings, and fearefull hisses dreading: Affrique doth Snakes in most aboundance store, Affrica most abounding with snakes. Because he longest did o're Affrique soare. 7 Yet whilst his venomous spoyles were bleeding new, But leauing Affrique, forward Pegas flyes, He now the Raemme, now doth the Fishes view, And mounts and stoopes as the winds fall or rise: At length he leaues the Orient to pursue, The farre Septemtrion keeping still the skies: Till falling with Hyperion in the West, He with the day-tyrd Phoebus couets rest. 8 And stooping with the Sunne into these Seas, Where night by night he sleckes his fiery Carre, And Atlas of that Orchard keepes the keyes, Atlas. Where golden Apples in aboundance are; Thus Perseus greetes him: May your Highnesse please To be my royall Host, who come from farre: If greatnesse may my welcome more approoue, Know thou in me receiuest the Sonne of Ihoue. 9 If nouelty in strangers thou acquirest, Behold, my flying steed and couered shield, Hence groome (quoth Atlas) thou hat rest desirest, Lodge with the waking starres in the broad field, To thee that to our Pallace thus aspirest, We scorne all succour and reliefe to yeeld: Thou com'st, as Prophets did long since reueale, From Hespery my golden fruit to steale. 10 One of Ihoues yssue our Duiners say, Must perpetrate such theft, and thee I feare, This prophe∣sie had his end in Hercu les. Thou lookst like one that aymes at golden pray, And I my Aurea Mala, hold so deere, That I haue stopt vp each accessiue way: Instead of pales, high mountaines their heads reare About mine Orchard, by a Dragon kept, A wakefull Monter, one that neuer slept.
11 With that he violent hands on Perseus layes, To beat him from his Pallace, but Ihoues sonne The Gorgon-sheild vnto the King displaies, Atlas trans∣formed. Who instantly turnes to a hill of stone, His haires and beard increase to Trees and sprayes, His Bulke and Shoulders into hils are growne: His head a Promontory top, o're-peering The neighbour Rockes, and other Mountains neering. 12 His bones to stones, his bloud to Christall springs, And by the Gods decrees he so increaseth, And with his growth such height and vastnesse brings, That heauens huge weight, the two strong poles releaseth To rest them on his shoulders: the Larke sings The Sun his earely note, the night surceaseth: Acrisius Grand-child doth with Phoebus rise, And to his arme his shield Gorgonian ties. 13 His hooked skeyne he fastens to his thigh, So mongst the clouds on Pegas backe he sores, The Swaine below that filles his wandering eye, Leaues off his labor, and the helpe implores Of powers deuine, t'explaine this nouelty, He passeth diuers Seas and sundry shores: Euen to th' Aethiopian Clime, and thence, To where Cepheus makes his residence. 14 There for her Mothers guilt, Andromeda; The tale of Perseus and Andromeda. 2589 By vniust Hammon was condemnd to die, Whom as yong Perseus in his Ayery way, Did from amongst the racking clouds espy, 1374 Saue that the winds her golden haires display, And drops of Pearle raine from her watry eye, He had mistooke her, being chain'd alone, For some faire Image of white Marble stone. 15 But when he saw no Marble was so white, Nor Iuory to her skin to be compared, He raines his winged Steed and staies his flight, And greedily vpon her beauty stared,
To shake his flaggy wings forgetting quite; He loues, and greeues to see how ill she fared, And now his toong no longer he refrains, But sayes: oh you, vnworthy these rude chains, 16 Much fitter for a louers kind embrace, Tell me your stocke, your Nation, and your name, And why such beauty should possesse this place? Or for what crime into these bands you came? Faine would the bashful girle haue hid her face, Saue that her hands were bound: she blusht for shame: Twice did he vrge her, she was silent still, Yet the third time tels al, against her will. 17 How bright Casseipe her beauteous Mother,  in Per∣seide. Knowing her daughter to be wonderous faire, The pride her hart conceiued could not smother, But with Nereides must needs compare, Aratus. For which they l complaind to Ihoues great Brother Neptune, who with infection taints the ayre, Nor can the pest cease, or the Towne be spared, Til she there dy, that was with Nimphs compared. 18 But in the midst of her discourse, behold, Ere she can end her lamentable tale, A huge Sea-monster with his long traine rold In curled knots, makes the poore Girle looke pale, The frowning billowes are by him controld, Boe which h'aduanceth many a shelly skale: She shreekes: her Sire and Mother, both dispaire, The people with shrill out-cries pierce the ayre. 19 Which Danaes sonne espying, thus he saies Vnto the Queene and the lamenting King: The time you see is short, the Monster staies Assur'd destruction to yon maid to bring, If then Ihoues son his towring fames can raise, And pierce yon huge Sea-Dragons skaly wing, Destroy the Monster, and presetue her life, Shal the bright Virgin be my troth-plight wife?
20 Who doubts, but the sad Parents soone agree? They paw ne their honors to this sudden motion; Phineus besides, the Maide doth promise free, Resigning vp his right with much deuotion; The Couenantsmade, and now from farre they see The Whaly Monster beare a-brest the Ocean, And driuing with his Fins whole Seas afore, In making to the Virgin on the shore. 21 When suddenly young Perseus mounts the skies, His shadow danc'st vpon the siluer waues, Which when the wrathfull Serpent did espy, Against the idle shape he fumes and raues, And as his drowned traine appeares on high Aboue the brine, in which so oft he laues: The dantlesse Prince, whose courage neuer failes, Strikes with his Faulchion, fire out of his scales. 22 And as you see a towring Eagle, when She spyes a speckled Serpent, soone her spangles Vpon the greene brest of some Moorish Fen Stoopes downe, and in the Dragons Crest intangles Her talents: least his Iawes turning againe, Ceaze her proud Sears, and whilst in vaine she wrangles And threatens ruine to the princely Fowle, She tires on euery knot and curled rowle. 23 So Perseus sowses on the horrid Beast He hewes and beats him, till he makes him reele, Possessing still his backe, which much increast The Monsters fury, such strange weight to feele, Sometimes aboue the Sea he lifts his brest, And Perseus still pursues him with his steele, Somtime beneath the blood-stain'd waues he shrinks, The whilst his woūds like graues, whol billows drinks. 24 Whilst he the Sea, the Prince the Ayre supplies, Waiting aloft to see the fiend appeare, Whose yawning chaps aboue the Billowes rise, Ready to swallow all the Confines neare,
Whom as the valiant Prince againe espyes, He makes to him amaine, all voyde of feare: And on his winged Steede against him tilts, Shouing bright Harpe vp euen to the hilts. 25 The wounded Whale casts from his hillish Iawes Riuers of Waters, mixt with purple gore, But from their force the wary Prince withdrawes, And strikes behind, on both sides and before, In many a place his shelly Armour flawes, Still byting Harpe, makes the Hell-hound rore: And tyrd at length, the brutish Monster drownds, In the blacke bloud that yssued from his wounds. 26 The God of Seas quak't at the frightfull sound His Monster made: the Gods aboue looke pale, The waters in the which his bulke lay drownd, With feare shrunk from him: now the slaughterd whale Receiues from Perseus many an vnfelt wound, Whom Keene-edged Harpe pierst from head to tale: The parents now clap hands: the Mayde reioyces, The people lift to heauen their plausiue voyces. 27 And whilst the multitude their wondring eyes Cast on the Monster, Perseus raines his steede, And from the Marble rocke the Mayde vntyes, By his late valour from the Hell-ound sreede, How can Cepheus or his Queene enise, Cepheus. Or the bright Mayde to giue sufficient meede To Perseus for his merite, who desires, With quicke dispatch to kindle Hymens fes. 28 The yeere Andromeda from death was freede, Pheamone first in Pythia propheside, Cadmus found Letters: taught the Greekes to reede: . Cecrops th' Athenian Monarchy supplyde, Rhomnus the Spanish Scepter (in the weede Pontificke.) Ranses did through Aegypt ride, Achaio did Achaya first instaure, Now breath'd in Creete, the two shapt Mynotaur.
29 The pallace is prepard, in euery place Lowd Musicke sounds, the Bride is richly clad, The Father his bold Sonne in Law to grace Inuites the Neighbour Kings: but Phineus mad, From this high feast absents himselfe a space, Till of his friends, great troops he gathered had, To force the Virgine, freed on Ioppens shore, Now Perseus Bride, though plight to him before. 30 Behold, the Pallace Court throngd with a crew, Of men in Armour glistring: The loud sound Of Nuptiall Musicke, through the Hall that flew, With shrill confusions on the sudden drownd, And still their showtes and cryes more violent grew, Till all the Bridall guests, incompast round With hostile fidge, amazedly discend, To know what foes their powers against th em bend. 31 With wrath vntam'd, the hurrying multitude Rageth, and growes Impetuous: some cry, bring That Stranger hether, whom we will exclude From the fayre Court: some cry, lets haue the King: Others the Bride: some mongst the rest more rude, Say, come, the Pallace to the ground lets fling: And whilst these seuerall clamors pierce their eares, Proud Phineus first, before them all appeares. 32 And shaking in his hand an Oaken Speare Headed with Brasse: he thus bold Perseus greets: Behold, th'Auenger of my nuptiall Pheere, Whom thou wouldst force. The Pallace Court & streets Glister in armes, and canst thou hope to beare Andromeda from hence, Him Cepheus meets, And as he was about his Speare to cast At warlike Perseus, Thus replyes at last. 33 Oh! what will Phineus do? What hellish rage Mads thee to mischiefe? Who begot this strife? Is this for Danaes Sonne sufficient wage, Whose valor hath preserud my Daughters life?
Why doest not thou, thy loue with ours ingage, For sauing her that should haue bin thy wife? Whom not bold Perseus but the Gods bereft thee, The fates, and not the prince, hath wiuelesse left thee. 34 When she was married to the Marble rocke, The fastning of those chaines thy bands vntide, Wa'st not enough, thou borne of Cepheus stocke, Her husband and her Kinsman necre allide, Saw'st all this people round about her flocke To see the sea- Whale in his bowels hide And bury her? Her freedome not pursuing, Vnworthy thou didst leaue her to her ruine. 35 Is Phineus sorry that she did not bleed, That her Redeemer he pursues with ire? Or if thou holdst her such a high-priz'd meed, Why didst thou not her from the Rocke desire? Or else, to him that hath my daughter freed, Why dost not yeeld her? Phineus eyes sparke fire: Doubtfull at whom he shall his Iauelin fling, His Riual Perseus, or his Kinsman King. 36 The vprore like the raging sea increaseth, Where thousand Rebels are by Perseus slaine, Till tyr'd with slaughter his tough arme surceaseth, With multitudes of men to strow the plaine, For not a daring souldier neere him preaseth, But dies by Harpe, and yet all in vaine Such throngs of Phineus friends his valor cumber, That Noble vertue must needs yeeld to number. 37 Therefore the Prince his Gorgon shield vncases, And saies aloud (since you compell me) see, Reuenge sufficient for my foule disgraces, For where strength failes we must vse policy, All that are Perseus friends, turne hence their faces, My foes all perish in their surquedree: Fright Babes with Bug-beares, quoth the next that stands, ayming a speare at Perseus with both hands.
38 But as on Gorgons head he casts his eye, His limbes grow stiffe, and he is changed to stone: Another strikes the next that stands him by, And pierst him through the brest, who now doth grone His soule to Ayre: this done, he ment to fly, But feeles his actiue spirits fled and gone: His Marble arme hath lost his nimble speed, To draw it from the bulke which he made bleed. 39 Behold a Prince borne by the seauen-fold Nyle, Crying to Perseus thus: See here thy bane, Be proud, that we who dallied all this while, Will at the length vouchsafe thy blood to draine: And as he spake such words, a scornefull smile His visage casts, intending to haue slaine The Ihoue-star'd prince, his frozen Statue showes Like one still smiling, and still threatning blowes. 40 What? Stand you at the Gorgons sight amazed? (Quoth Moble Erix;) or hath Witchcrafts spell Such power vpon the valiant, who haue blazed Their armes in many conflicts, and fought well? Lets see what deuill in this shape is raised, Whom my steele-pollax cannot prostrate fell, But in his pressing forward, he soone feeles Cold leaden numbnesse gyue his sencelesse heeles. 41 Amongst the rest, one ofbold Perseus crew, Glancing his eye vpon his maisters shield Turnd stone: him one of Phineus souldiers knew, And thought to cleaue him standing in the field, But with the stroke fire from the Marble flew, His fore-head sounded like a brazen shield; At which the Souldier musing, Gorgon spyes, So stands transformd, with wonder in his eyes. 42 So that at last Phineus repents his spleene And vniust warre made for Andromeda, Two hundred of his traine his eye hath seene, All Statuës: vnto some he cals (Away)
Follow to some: Where liues that enuious teene, With which you threatned Perseus? Wherefore stay Your paces from pursuite? Wheres the defying? So claps them on the shoulders, Courage crying. 43 But when he felt their hardned limbs offend His aking hand, and yeild it no impression, And that their mockery shapes did idly bend Their threatning armes, now finds he his transgression: His penitent hands he doth to heauen extend, Praying that they would ayd his intercession To great Acrisius Grand-childe, who strikes dead, So many bold sprites with his Gorgons head. 44 Now as with oblique paces, and his eies Turnd from the conquering Prince, he kneeling, speakes; Hoping t'appease him with submissiue cries, The implacable Prince his rage thus wreakes, Behold what doome the Impartiall Deities Alot the wretch that Lawes of honor breakes: So with his shiled Gergonian him pursude, Hardning the face which he behind him skrewd. 45 At th'instant his retorted necke waxt hard, His spread Armes stiffe, his fixt eyes shewing feare, And you would thinke his shape all sence debard, Spake as it stood, words that a man might heare: These tumults done, and Hymens rights prepard, The Prince intends another course to beare: He takes his leaue, consorted with his Bride, And to his Mother his swift steps applide. 46 In the Mid-way he youthfull Danaus meets, (His hopefull Brother) who at the first sight Salutes him and his wife, with kind regreets, In many a sweet discourse they spend that night: At length the Murke and Palped darkenesse fleets From the skies azurd forehead: with the light The Princes rise, and speed them to the shore, To which the mast-lesse boat their mother bore.
47 Now Phrigian Mydas (famous for his eares, In giuing Apolloes honor to God Pan, And for his golden wish) the Scepter beares Of Phrigia: In Israell that good man, Samgor was Iudge, whose power so great appeares, He of the Philistyns kild many a man; And in one battaile whilst the Trumpets blew, VVith an Oxe-goade sixe hundred Heathen slew. 48 But in these passages great Saturnes Sonne, That with the Troians was at broad hostility, At Ganimeds request, a league begun, Now Ihoue and Troos are one: he whose ability Could not defend his Troy from being ore-run, Now can commaund Troyes foes with much facility: So, to yeeld way, rebates the greatest stroake, So, softest walles, hard bullets soonest choake. 49 T'wixt England and great Spaine, two potent Nations, Like enmity, hath long time beene commenced, The league twixt Englád and Spaine. And whilst Eliza liu'd, her proclamations Oppos'd their pride, and her owne Prouince fenced, But now with mutuall kind Congratulations, All iniuries on both sides are dispensed, And our great Englands Ihoue for Spaines best vse, Hath at their suite, granted a termine Truce. 50 Troos yeelds his due to Nature, him succeeds 2856 Ilion his Sonne, who Ilions high Towers reard, 1307 More famous for his buildings, then braue deeds, A royall Prince, and more beloud then feard, He for a present, sends foure milke-white Steedes To Cretan Ihoue (a Present much indeerd) Who by the Knight that such a treasure brought, Re-sends a pretious gold-branch quaintly wrought. 51 Much richer gifts in enterchange of state, Our Soueraigne to the lofty Spaniard gaue The warlike Constable, who came of late From Hespery: a fiue yeares truce to craue:
More precious presents and of dearer rate, The L. High Admiral Imb. for Spaine. Bare Englands Admirall: both rich and braue, When from K. Iames sent with a princely traine, He was the great Embassador for Spaine. 52 Ihoues branch (cald the Palladium) the King plac'st In Pallas royall Temple, where it stood Till Troyes proud wals were quite deiect and rac'st, And Islions lofty Turrets swam in blood: Great Islion dies, and he that next him grac'st The Troian Crowne (a prince not all so good) Laomedon, of whom vve heere vvill stay, To beare the Sonnes of Danae on their way. 53 Who as they past the desart, from a farre They might espy a goodly Knight lie spread Vpon the grasse, he seem'd a man of Warre, For he was arm'd at all points (saue the head) On his faire brow appear'd no souldier scarre, It seemes he had not Armes long managed: Exchanges past of many a kind salute, Thus speaks the med Knight, whilft they stand mute. 54 Who hath not of the great Acrisius hard? Acrisius, hē that built the brazen Tower? Novv Arges King no longer, but debard His nate kingdome by his Brothers power, His Brother Pricus hath against him ward, And all his glors reft him in an hovver: Stay there (quoth Perseus) you haue toucht me neerly Acrisius vvrongs, King Pricus shall buy deerely. 54 Weare Acrisius Grand-child, and discended From beautious Danae, and that fort of Brasse That Lady Rumor hath so farre commended, Who in Gold-liquid-showre-drops courted was; Oh! vvhere vvas I Acrisius, t'haue defended, With Pricus blood to haue staind the Argiue grasse: Both Abas sonnes, a Prince frugall and thrifty, He, Linceus sonne, the sole remaine of fifty.
56 Is Brother-hood abroad so light esteemed, That kingdomes can such holy knots vnty? Let me no more Ihoues Royall soone be deemed But for Acrisius wrongs, King Pricus die, He that in all the world austeerest seemed, And stood vpon most points of honesty, Hath prou'd the greatest Hypocrite: like those, Without precise: within, religious foes. 57 Assist me Noble Knight in this aduenture, (Quoth the great Gorgon-tamer:) when replide The armed stranger, by the firme Indeture Of honor, I am else-where bound to ride; But if with me you will my voyage enter And see what shall my Chiualry betide, My Noble taske atchieu'd, I then wil lead you To Pricus, where my knowledge much may sted you. 58 When I the Triple-shapt Chimere haue slaine, Whose dreadfull forme makes all Sicilia quake, Bellerephon. Bellerephon will then returne againe, And your attempt gainst Pricus vndertake: The Princes wonder at Chimeraes name, And that one knight his desperate life should stake Against such ods, asking what Imposition Hath sent him on this dangerous expedition. 59 Or whether vncompeld he be so mad To seeke assur'd destruction, and to scale The Deuils den, where nothing can be had But certain ruine, his tough skin is Male, A terrible huge Lyons head (which drad) A Chieures body, and a Serpents tale, Him whose vast gorge whole armies cannot fill, Why should one desperate Knight attempt to kill? 60 Bellerephon replies, by Pricus doome, K. Pricus Bro∣ther to Acris. Not my owne will I am compeld to go, Else in my growing yeares that yet but bloome, I'de flesh my sword on a more equall foe
But in Sicilia I must seeke my Toombe, Or kill the triple-Monster, dreaded so, (Sayth Perseus then) VVhat makes him so seuere? Attend (quoth he) great Princes you shall heare. 61 Oh! Why did Nature frame these Women fayre? Bellerephons tale. And make theyr outward features Angell-bright? When their blacke insides staynd and spotted are, With Lust, with Pride, Contempt, disdaine, & Spight? Why should the snowy Swans in beauty re Haue such blacke feet? Why should the Lilly white Beare such ranke smel? Can men withstand their fates, When golden vessailes bring in poysoned cates? 62 I thought I might haue gatherd a fresh Rose, And not haue prick't my finger with a Thorne: Or a sweete flower out of the Garden chose, But not a Nettle in my hand haue worne: Still, next the sweetest flower, the Nettle growes, The rarest beauty hath the rudest scorne: The Rouers Shippe beares the best promising sayles, The foulest Serpents the most golden skales. 63 By a fayre Woman is my youth mispent, My Innocent youth that neuer loue imbraced, Her deuillish mind to mallice wholly bent, My fortunes hath o're turnd, my Name disgraced, And I, through her maleuolt entent Like a poore exile from my Countrey chaced: Oh woman! Made of Enuy, Pride, and Lustes: Woe to the man, that to thy weakenesse trusts. 64 My hopes (quoth Perseus) I on this haue layde, And thinke her heart to be her beauties peere, Nor where I trusted most am I betrayde, Andromeda I know still holds me deere, The stranger Knight (quoth she) that doth vpbrayde, Our sex so much, me thinkes is too seuere, To blame all women, for one Ladies deedes, At this all silence made, whilst he proceeds.
65 In Pricus Court my Child-hood I haue spent, And there the grace of many Ladies gained, But I whose thoughts were all on Knight-hood bent, Regardlesse of their lookes, their loues disdained: Among the rest, Queene Aurea often sent Gifts and smooth Letters, fraught with lines vnfaigned: This beautious Q. whose thoughts were at such strife, Was my dread Soueraigns spouse: King Pricus wife. 66 Morethen her rauishing beauty could intice, Th'allegiance to my King with me preuailed: The more the wanton Queene incites to vice, The more her sighes and amorous Courtships failed: I held my name and honor of more price, Then basely yeild, when womanish lust assailed: At last, with such hot flames her entrailes burnd, Thar (being disdain'd) her loue to rancor turnd. 67 She that before held of my person deerely, Now damnes my presence to the deepest hell, And in her hart vowes to reuenge seuerely My loyall scorne (I know no hate so fell As that which was once Loue) It toucht her neerely, Where loue once log'd such poysonous hate doth dwell, That now she aimes her enuy at my head, Nor can she liue, Belerephon not dead. 68 Forthwith she cites me to King Pricus throne, And as a Rauisher I am accusd, She sweares that when I found her all alone, I would her royall person haue abusd: And then round pearles about her eyebals shone, Which dropt downe by her cheeks, (such craft she vsd:) Oh heauen! what cannot cunning women doo? By oaths, and teares, to win their husbands too? 69 I pleaded Innocence, but what (God wot) Could my weake plea against her teares preuaile? And to accuse her spouse-breach booted not, Her whom teares helpt, could protestations faile?
Besides in honor I could lay no spot Vpon her loyalty, rather bewaile Her want of grace, and the hy-Gods importune, To assist my Innocence, and guide my fortune. 70 When I askt witnesse of such foule abuse, She thus replide, commixing words with teares: When lustfull men aime at such horride vse, They watch all spyal-eyes and listning eares: Nor can the want of witnesse plead excuse, For who (that to a woman fancy beares) Will, when he seekes t'inforce her gainst all reason, First, call his witnesse, to such hated Treason? 71 Rather he watcheth the most silent houre, When man and beast is sunke in leaden slumbers, And Morpheus he that hath on midnight power, The world with vniuersal darkenesse cumbers: When (sauing Lust and Murder) al the powers Of earth lie husht and charmd: vvhen no man numbers The yron toongs of Clockes: such a blacke time Should haue bin guilty of his more blacke crime. 72 For double vvitnesse in this case I stand, Pricus (you are my Husband and my King) And where should Aurea if not at your hand Seeke Iustice: at that word fresh sourses spring From her drownd eies: what need the cause be scand With more sufficient proofe? What needs she bung More arguments? Since euery teare she split, Perswades her loyalty: my heinous guilt. 73 The King though inly mou'd with wrath and spleene, Yet in his calme lookes moderates his Ire, He cals to mind how faithfull I haue bin, Since, (when I seru'd as Knight) before (as Squire) Loath would he vnreuenged leaue his Queene, As loth doth he my Innocent blood desire: Therefore twixt both, this rigorous doome he gaue, That the Chimeraes wombe should be my graue.
74 His tale thus ended, the two Princes vow To lend him all assistance: by their aide Belerephon hath made Chimera bow, Which done, they ioyntly Pricus Realme invaide: Acrisius by their armes is raised now, And Pricus slaine: In Arges they are staide By old Acrisius, who repents at last, Of Danae, mongst the ruthlesse Billowes cast. 75 The Noble Perseus he adopts his sonne, And makes him Heyre aparant to the Crowne: Sorry for all the spight against him done, And now bright Danae he accounts his owne, Sending young Danaus and Bellerephon With royal gifts (soone to the Princesse knowne) Shewing by these his reconciled hart, But with the warlike Perseus hee'l not part. 76 Whom the same day he Arges King creates, Himselfe in Darraine liues a life retyred, Perseus Issue. Herodot in Polimnia. Perseus, Andromeda his Queene instates In the like pompe (a Lady much admired) Fiue children he begat (so would the Fates) More valiant, with their Fathers gifts inspired: Rich Scelenus, great Bachmon, and bold Demon, Noble Erictreus, and faire Gorgophon. 77 This Gorgophon is held to be the first, Pausanias in That in those daies was knowne to marry twice, Her husband dead, alone this Lady durst Proue second spousals, which was held a vice, The chasest Matrons her example curst, Who held their constant loue in Soueraigne price: Our hinder widowes, Saint her name in heauen, Some foure, some fiue, nay some haue told to seauen. 78 His sonnes takes wiues, Acrisius still suruiuing, Who glories in his warlike Grand-childs seed, Their honors from their Fathers acts deriuing, For by their swords did many Tyrants bleed:
But leaue them in their deedes of valour striuing, And of Acrisius timelesse fate proceede: Forgetting what was told him long agone, That Danaes Sonne must turne him into stone. 79 When Perseus had in Arges gouernd long, Vpon a night he much desird to see Acrisius: and to Darraine that was strong With triple gates, alone ascended he, There knocks, the Porters had forgot his toong, and with bold words denyde him entrance free: At which inrag'de, the Prince his Harpe drew, And at first stroke th'Ill-languad'g Guardian slew. 80 The vprore flowes apace, Clamors arise From all parts of the Fort: to the Kinges eare They come at last, who with the Warders cryes Astonisht, to the tumult preaseth neere, Thinking t'appease the broyle and riotyze, But haplesse man vnwares he perisht there: 2657. The inraged Prince that mad-like layde about, 1306. Struck with a blow, his Grand-sires life-bloud out. 81 Perseus the vnauoyded fates now blames, And layes Acrisius in his Marble graue, He that on earth intoyes the hy'st-stilde-names, Vnto theyr doomes must yeeld himselfe a slaue, From all delights the Prince himsefe reclaymes, In Arges Throne he no delight can haue: But for his sake that th' Argiue Scepter bore, he leaues the Prouince, neare to see it more. 82 His Court vnto Mecenes he transported, But thither did his sorrowes him pursue, Theseus inre∣bus Corinthia∣cis. and therefore with a huge hoast brauely sorted, himselfe into the Orient he withdrew: his army he with warlike phrase exhorted Gainst Lyber-Pater, whom in armes he slew, and where the Easterne Monarchs bloud lay spilt, Persepolis a stately Towne he built. Persepolis.
83 He cals the prouince Persea by his name, Where Bachmon in the kingdome him succeeds, Erictreus did all the Nations tame By the red Sea, and there his honoured deeds Are Chronicled: great Scelemus thy fame Liues in Mecenes: the Pontificke weeds Are for thy Royalty reseru'd alone, In Thebes, remaines twice-married Gorgophon. 84 Alceus and Electrion from his line Discend, Alceus was Amphitrioes Sire, The genealo∣gy of Hercules Electrion as Bochas doth deuine, Alcmena got, whose face all eyes admire, Alcmena and Amphitrio combine Themselues by Hymens ceremoniall fire: Of this bright Theban dame through Greece commen∣ded, This Monster-tamer Hercules discended. 85 But how great Ihoue with bright Alcmena lay, Himselfe transforming to Amphitrioes shape, Adding three nights together without day: How Iuno enuious of her husbands rape, Alcmenaes Child-birth hindred, and did slay The vnborne infants who with wonder scape Her Hell-borne charmes, how by Galantis smile, Iuno was mockt, Alcmena scapt her guile. Galantis Alc∣menaes nurse. 86 How young Alcides in the Cradle lying, Check't two inuenomed Snakes, by Iuno sent To strangle him: how Ypectens dying pectent Her∣ules tvvinne-Brother and sonne to Am∣phitrio By those charm'd Serpents, to Elisium went, And how the Ihoue-star'd Lad his valor trying Vpon th'Olimpicke mount: disgraced sent All such as came to haue their valours tride, To leape, to run, to wrastle, or to ride. 87 How by the K. Eristeus he vvas taught, Lou'd beautious Megera, and fam'd all Greece, And through the world renown'd aduentures sought, Conquer'd great Cacus and the golden fleece:
How Achelous he to ruine brought, Doted on Deianeira that faire peece, And Iole, who the more fame to win, Made great Alcides on a distaffe spin. Iole daughter to Cacus. 88 All these we leaue as tales too often told, And rubs that would our running voyage let, Not that our thoughts despise them being old, (For to antiquity we owe much debt) But because Time that hath his acts inrold To many a Common sale his deeds hath set, Therefore (though no part of his worth to reaue him) We now for matters more allide, must leaue him. 89 And now looke backe to Troy: Laomedon Intends new wals about his Towne to reare, But wanting coined Gold to deale vpon, Solicits all the Gods, such as dwelt neare, Chiefely those two that rule the Sea and Sun, Neptune and Phoebus Mony-maisters vvere, Of whose rich Priests for so much coine he cals, As may repaire his Citties ruin'd wals. 90 They dispuruey their vestry of such Treasure As they may spare, the vvork now being ended Herodot. Demand their sums againe: but out of measure At their request the Monarch seemes offended, And saies he meanes to pay them at his pleasure: The Gods (by whom Troy vvas vvith wals defended,) Inrag'd at his ingratitude, conspire, With ioynt reuenge to vvreake their spleenfull ire. 91 The vvrathfull Neptune first his Billowes raisd Aboue the high-built-Wals, thinking to drowne Those lofty spires whom all the world hath praisd, Hurrying his brinish waters through the Towne: Now Dolphins play, where barbed Steeds haue graz'd, In euery pau'd-street Neptunes Billowes frowne, Till being weary with the Citties sacke, He drawes himselfe into his Channels backe.
92 For by the fates appointment the proud God Must keepe his falling ebbes as well as flow, Else pale-fac'st Cinthia, at whose dreadfull nod Obedient Neptune shrinkes, her rage will show, For she commands his waues, and his abod Is pointed by the Moone, whether below In his Abisme, or rockes appearing hire, He guids his lookes by her immortall fire. 93 But as he shrinkes his waters at her becke, He leaues much slimy filth vpon the shore, Now gan the God of Fire his beames reflect Vpon the drownded Continent that wore The sea-Gods wrath, and now must bide his checke, A hot contagious stemme (not knowne before) Poysons the Clime, and as the heat increast, The infectious pest consum'd both man and beast. 94 Halfe-perisht Troy vnable to withstand Their double wrath, her people from her flye, Knowing they both offended Sea and Land, And to abide their vengeance must needs dye, The King himselfe that wants power to command, The all-consuming Plague, fears to come nye, The wals he reard, but must to Delphos trauell, To excuse his Pride, that with the Gods durst cauell. 95 His due Oblations ended: tis returnd, That he must seeke th'offended Gods t'appease, Else the hot plague (his peoples entrailes burnd,) Shall all the remnant of his subiects cease, Nor must his fearefull pennance be adiournd: Nothing can Neptune and Apollo please, But monthly to a Monster of the flood, To yeild a beautious maide of the Kings blood. 96 This couenanted, the Troyan King prepares Alotted Virgins, now th'infection slakes, At length alas (for bold Fate all things dares,) Hesione daugh∣ter to Laomedō The lot the beautious maide Hesione takes,
The Kings sole Daughter, Fortune nothing cares For him, whose hand th'Imperiall Scepter shakes. The hood-winckt Goddesse dare on all sides strike, Beggers and Kings, in lots are both alike. 97 Imagin her with thousand Virgins guided Vnto her fearefull Toombe, her Monster-graue: Imagin how the hulky Diuell slyded Along the Seas smooth breast, parting the waue: Alasse poore naked Damsell, ill prouided, Whom Millions, without heauens help cannot saue: Yet see, help coms: behold the pride of Greece Deck't in the conquest of the Golden fleece. 98 Along the glassie Hellespont by chance Alcides sayling, sees vpon the Land The all-dispoyled Virgin in a Trance, Wayling her ruine on the bryny Strand, Aboue the Waues he sees a Whale aduance His dreadfull shape: at whose sight all that stand Vpon the Beach, some sounding, as halfe dead, Others dismayde, backe to the Citty fled. 99 Such onely, whom the cause concerned most, And vnto whom the Virgine was allyde, Attend her swallowing, on the Marine coast, For whom (no Mortall) safety can prouide, Now great Alcides with his Greekish hoast Lands on the Continent vnterrifide: And while the Troian King with terrour shakes, The Virgins Rescue boldly vndertakes. 100 Two barbed Steeds, the best that Asia bred, Are by the King ordaind the Victors med, By whose strong hand the Sea-Whale shall fall dead, The Virgine liue, and Troy from pest be freed; Now fals his huge Club on the Monsters head With such impetuous weight, and violent speede: As if Heauens greatest Collumne should downe fall, That beares the high roofe of th'Olimpicke Hall.
101 The hydious Augur slaine, and she releast, The periur'd King, the promist meede denies, And seeing Troy both wal'd, and free from pest, Excludes the Greeke for his bold enterprise: Who sayles from Greece: after few months of rest Doth burne Larisse, and Tenedos surprise, Ruinates Troy, expels Laomedon, The first de∣struction of Troy. Beates downe the wals made by the Sea and Sunne. 102 In which atchieuement Philicteles fought, (Made of Alcides vanquisht foe his friend) The King Eristheus there for honor sought: Cron K. of Thebes. And Creon to this dreadfull fight gaue end, The Noble Theseus his assistance brought, Theban Amphitrio did his arme extend Gainst Asiaes pride, and with the rest returning, Ayded great Hercules in Troyes first burning. 103 These as they were a Ship-board, hauing fild The vast Wombes of their Barkes with wealthy spoiles, Insulting in the Troian bloud they spild, Discoursing of their fightes and dangerous broyles, And such great victories attained but seild, Though with more labours, and Insudate toyles: Cups of Greeke Wine vnto this Conquest crownd, Thus King Eristheus boards the Princes round. 104 Now the first Vigill of the night is entred, With some discourse lets ouertake the Sunne, Who flying, is by this beneath vs centred, And whilst the waking Stars their courses runne, Discourse, who first the Tartar gates aduenterd, And by whose hand that bold attempt was done, Of Orpheus and Euridice, and in fine Pluto and Proserpine. Of Pluto, and the rauisht Proserpine. 105 When Theseus thus: Since you desire to know The true report of these Tartarian bralles, Which none can better then Alcides shew, Or Theseus Present: by th' Aetnean Walles,
The Waters of Pergusa gently flow, And thence into the Neighboring Rier fals: Crownd with a groue, through which the lake doth run, Making his bowes a Bon-grace from the Sun. 105 Hether fayre Proserpine repayring still, With Daysies, Daffadils, and Lillies white, Roses and Mary-golds her lap to fill, And to returne home laden (a sweete sight) Chaplets to make, or Gyrlands by fine skill; By chance the God of shades in edge of night In his blacke Ebon Chariot hurrying by, Vpon the Virgine casts a Rauishers eye. 106 He spyes, and loues, and catches vp at ones, Th'affrighted Virgine, who lets fall her flowers, he beares her ouer hils, Dales, Rocks, and stones, She, cals on Mother, Friends, and (teares she powers,) Mother nor friend can heare her shriekes and groanes, Through pooles and Lakes the God of Tartar skoures, he yerkes his hot Steedes with his wyery strings, And from his Coach Wheeles rusty darknesse flings. 107 And cals his Ietty Stallions by their Names, Whose hard hoofes make the vaulted Center-sound, his ratling Chariot, through the ayre proclaymes his feare and flight, with burnisht Brasse shod round, Nor once lookes backe the dreadfull God of flames, Or thinkes his rape safe on the vpper ground: But with his Ebon-Mace the earth inforces, Which cleft, sinkes him, his Chariot, and his horses. 108 The Queene of Plenty, she that crownes the land Ceres With seuerall graine, and Neptunes Kingdome bounds, Searches about, but cannot vnderstand Of her fayre Daughter, yet the world she rounds, And day by day she takes this taske in hand, But in her bootlesse search her selfe confounds: Aurora finds her in her trauels rising, The setting Sunne still sees her, ease dispising.
100 But in our labors we our pen must rest, Least in her search, vve our Inuention loose, Which finding tyr'd vvith trauell, vve hold best A vvhile to cherish, (therefore rest we choose) Heere therefore let vs breath, ere vve disgest Troyes second fall, as that vvhich next ensues: Our Muse vvith Phoebus sets, and vvith the Sun To Morrovv rising, is our taske begun. THe Gorgons were cald by other names, Pemphrado, E∣rito Apolld. Athē. lib. 2, Melanthes lib. de misterȳs. and Dino, to whom was added a third Iaeno. Pegasus taking his flight out of Helicon, striking the earth with his hooues, there presently sprung out the pleasant Fountaine Hippocrene, after consecrate to the Muses. Some moralize this winged Horse to a swift-saild Ship, in vvhich Perseus saild in all his forraine aduentures. Aurea Mala, which the Latines conster golden Apples, the Greekes call golden Sheepe, the word importing so much. Atlas for his exquisite skil in Astronomy was said to beare heauen on his shoulders. Of this Sea-monster S. Augustine speakes in his Booke de S. Augustine. Ciuitate Dei, affirming that one of the bones, was in his time still vncon sumed and kept. The monster Chimere described with a Lyons head, a Goats belly, and a Serpents taile, was a mount aine in Sicily, whose top was full of wilde Lyons, the middle of Goats, and the foote and lower part swarmed with serpents: This hill Belerephon by the ayde of Perseus, cleared of all these Sauadges, & after made it habitable. Where Iupiter is said to put three nights into one, som haue ingeniously imagined it, to be about that time, when at Iosu∣ahs prayer the Sunne staide his Diurnal course (till he had the slaughter of his enemies) which being kept away from a Coun∣trey so farre remote, must of force lengthen the night by his absence, as it prolonged the day by his presence. Galanthis by her craft deceiuing Iuno, was by her after in uid Meta∣morph. her anger transformed into a Weasill. Philocletes sonne to Paean, and after his surprisall, com∣panion with Hercules in all his trauels, to whom at his death
he gaue his arrowes, poysoned in the bloud of Hydra. The length of that night before mentioned, may else be allu∣ded to that in the 2. Kings, Chap: xx. where Zedekiah bee∣ing promist by God fifteene yeares life after his extreame sick∣nesse, and crauing a signe, God commanded the shadow of the Sun to go backe ten degrees, which was incontinently perfor∣med in the Diall of Ahuz: as it was promised him by Isaiah the Prophet. The Nereides with whome Andromeda was compared, Hes. in Thg. were the daughters of Nereus the son of Oceanus & The-tis: his daughters were nimphs of the sea: he had by the nimph Doris these three children, Halia, Spio, Pasithae & Ligea, with others to the number of fifty, whose names Hesiodus re-members, and Apollodorus. Laomedon, besides Hesione, whom he best loued, had 3. daughters more, Aethasa, Astioche, and Medicastes, but Apollodorus Athen. Hesione being deerest to him, Neptune and Apollo chuse her to be deuoured of the Sea-monster. The end of the sixt CANTO.
Argumentum EVridia stung with a Snake and dying, Sad Orpheus trauels for her sake to Hell, Among th'Infernals Musickes vertue trying, Much honoured (euen where fiends & deuils dwel) Ceres to Hercules for vengeance crying, Th'vndaunted Greeke, seekes Pluto to expell: Iasons rich Fleece, & proud Troy once more racst By Hercules, in our next skeades are placst. ARG. 2. WHo Musick found: hell sakt: Perithous harms Eta describes, with great Medeas charmes. CANTO. 7. 1 MVsicke by which the Spheares are taught to moue, And tune their motion to their makers praise, Approues it selfe deuine: first found aboue, After bequeath'd fraile man, to cheare his daies: Whether t'were taught vs by the Birds, that proue Their harmony, in their sweet-Chirping layes, Or whether found by man: of this I am sure, It hath bin Ancient, and shall long endure. 2 Let Homers Demodocus witnesse beare, And Virgils Iopas: with this heauenly skill, Eusebius. Some say Amphion rauisht first the eare, Which Zephus did with Notes and Crotchets fill,
But others Dionisius hold most deare, As one that made his Ayers lowd and shrill, Men diuersly deriue Musickes soft feet, Some from Arcadia; likewise, some from Creet. 3 On Shalmes Trezenius Dardanus first plaid, Solinus On Cranes legs first, but after fram'd of Reed, Bright Mayaes sonne on a parcht Tortoys made Th'vnshaped Harpe: most Writers haue agreed That Tubal gaue it forme, with pins that staid Mercury: The tuned strings, to make his Musicke speed: Pan found the Pipe, to play at Syrinx sute, Tymarias, was the first, that strung the Lute. 4 Nables and Regals, holy Dauid found, Dirceus an Athenian, Clarious shrill, And these the Lacedemons did first sound, When the Messenians they in armes did kill: Vnto the Dulcimer first danced round The Troglodites: after the Rebeck still Th' Archadians fought: Pises Tyrhenus was The first that fashiond Trumpets made of Brasse. 5 Which some to Myses attribute, and say The Haebrewes with a Siluer Trumpet led, Marcht, and retyrd: were taught to keepe array, When to fall off, when on; fly or make head: Dromslades the Romans taught: the Cretans they, After the Lute their hostile paces tread: Great Haliattes with his sword and shield, Marcht not without lowd pipers in the field. liattes king of Lydia. 6 This, as it hath the power in dreadfull Warres Mongst soft effeminate breasts to kindle rage, and to relenting grace all entrance barres, So hath it power the rudest thoughts t`asswage: To musicke moue the Plannets, dance the stars, It tempers fury, makes the wilde man sage, In this consent of stringes, he that can well, May with harmonious Orpheus enter hell.
7 We left Queene Ceres in her Daughters Quest, Measuring the earth from one side to another, Yet can she find no end to her vnrest, Her Daughter lost, shee is no more a Mother: The earth once cherisht, she doth now detest, Gainst which her spleene, she can no longer smother: She cals it barbarous, vnthankefull, base, And no more worthy of her Souergne grace. 8 And much against her ancient pleasure speakes, For what she fauour'd earst, she now dislikes, In euery place she comes, the Ploughes she breakes, The laborous Oxen she with Murraine strikes, Vpon the toyling Swaines her spleene she wreakes, Cattell and Men choake vp their new-plasht Dykes: The barraine fieldes deceiue the Plow-mans trust, The vsuring seede is molded vnto dust. 9 Which rather in the parched furrow dries, Layd open vnto euery rigorous blast, Else to the theeuish Byrds a prey it lies, Or if it hap to gather root at last, Cockle and Tares, euen with the Corn-eares rise, Else by the choaking Cooch-grasse it is past: Thus through her griefe, the earth is barraine made, The hoped haruest perisht in the blade. 10 Meane time Euridice, the new made Bride Orpheus and Euridice. Of Orpheus, with a princely traine consorted, As in a Meddow by a Riuers side, Vnto her Husbands Harpe one day she sported, And by his tune her measured paces guide, In a swift Hadegay (as some reported:) She shricking starts, for whilst her Husband singes Vnto his Harpe, a Snake her Ankle stings. 11 In Orpheus armes she dyes, her soule discends, Ferryed by Charon o're the Stigian Lake, The woefull Bridegroome, leaues his house and friendes, Vowing with her the loath'd world to forsake,
To the Tenarian part his course he bends, And by the way, no cheerefull word he spake: But by ten thousand pathes, turning doth crosse Through Tartary, and through the blacke Molosse. 12 There is a steepe decliuy way lookes downe, Which to th'Infernall Kingdome Orpheus guides, Molossia a part of Epire, so cal∣led of Molous Sonne to Pyr∣hus and Androch. Whose loouer, vapors breathes: he sits not downe, But enters the darke Cauerne with large strides, With thousand shadowes, he is compast round, Yet still the suffocating Mists diuides: Millions of Ghosts vnbodied, bout him play, Yet fearelesse, Orpheus still keepes no his way. 13 Hels restlesse Ferriman with Musicke payd, Is pleas'd to giue him waftage too and fro, The triple Hell-hound, that his entrance stayd, Charmed with Musicke, likewise lets him go, So through the ayry throng he passage made, (Th'immortall people that remaine below:) And tuning by the way his siluer stringes, To the three fatall Sisters, Thus he singes: 14 You powers Infernall, full of awfull dread, M:  s. rerum Astro∣nomicarum. Whose dietyes no eye terrestriall sees, I know all Creatures that are mortall bred, At first or last, must stand to your decrees, I come not as a spy among the dead, To blab your doomes, or rob you of your fees: I onely pierce these vaults (voyd of all crime) To seeke my Bride, that perisht fore her time. 15 By loue, whose high commaund was neuer bounded In Earth or Heauen, but hath some power belovv By your blacke Ministers: by Orcus rounded Minos, Eac, Rhodamant. With Styx, whose pitchy Waters ebbe and flow, By those three Kings, by whom all doomes are sounded, The Elisian pleasures, and the Lake of Woe: By all the dreadfull secrts of the dead, Fayre Parcae knit againe her vitall thread.
16 I seeke not to exempt her from your doome, This is our generall home, heare we must stay, Though now releast, (as all things hither come) So must she too, and heare abide for aye, Graunt that she now may but bespeake her roome, And to her death allot a longer day: Or if th'immoued Fates, this will not doe Before my time (with her detaine me to.) 17 This with such moouing accents Orpheus sung, Hels torments That Chin-deepe Tantalus forgot to bow Vnto the shrinking Waue: Ixion hung Vntost vpon the Wheele: and Sisiphe now Rests him vpon his stone. His Harpe was strung With such rare art, the Danaes knew not how: To vse their empty tubbes, Stix breath'd not fire, Nor can the vulture on Prometheus tyre. 18 The Sisters weepe, Hels Iudges appeare mild, Clotho,  Atropos. And euery tortur'd Ghost forgets his paine, Proserpine laught, and the drad Pluto smild To see her chang'd of cheere, no souls complaine, Hels Senate to his grace is reconcild, And all agree, she shall suruiue againe: Through million-Ghosts, his Bride is sought & found, And brought to him, still haulting on her wound. 19 He takes her, with this charge at Plutoes hand, Not to looke backe till he Auernus past, In Argonanti∣cis. And the large limits of the Stygian Strand, Through darke and obscure wayes, through deserts vast, Steepe hils and smoaky Caues, his Wife he man'd, Vntill he came where a thin plancke was pla'st O're a deepe raging Torrent, where dismayd, Orpheus lookes backe, her trembling arme t'haue staid. 20 Which the three-throated Cerberus espying, Snatches her vp, and beares her backe to hell, In vaine are all his sighes, his teares, his crying: Lowder then he can play, the Dog can yell,
He blames his too much loue, and almost dying Is ready with his Bride mongst shades to dwell, So long vpon the barren plaines he trifled, Till with hels vapors he was almost stifled. 21 At length the Rhodopeian Orpheus turnes His feeble paces to the vpper earth, Which now with discontented Ceres mournes The rape of Proserpine, still plagu'd with Dearth, Either the Sun the gleby Champion burnes, Else too much raine doth force abortiue birth To the ranke Corne, the world forcst to complaine, With widdowed Orpheus and the Queene of Graine. 22 Who hauing searcht Earth, of her child to know, She finds her no where on the earth abiding; And skaling heauen, Heauen can no daughter showe, Therefore both heauen and earth the Queene is chiding, Onely she left vnsought the vaults below, But heares how Orpheus hath by Musickes guiding Past through Auernus and the Stygian fires, Therefore of him she for her childe inquires. 23 He tels her of her Daughter new translated, Whom in the vaulted Kingdomes he had seene With Pluto, in th'infernall Throne instated, Where though against her will she raignes as Queene: Oh Ihoue (quoth she) and hath that God (most hated Of Proserpine) the hellish raptor beene! Monarch of Deuils, since thou doest constraine mee, Vnto the Gods aboue I must complaine mee. 24 This was (quoth Hercules) about the season When Hyppodamia matcht with Theseus frend, Noble Perithous by the Centaures Treason, Was rauisht and re-purchast: But an end, Our watre-toyld limbes we keepe against all reason From Natiue rest, I feele soft sleepe discend and close my eye-lids with his downy wings, I must to rest; For this time, farewell Kings.
25 Whether being weary of his hoftile paine Tooke in the former fight, he couets rest, Or whether modesty made him refraine, To heare his praise where he deserued best: But his returne the Kings intreat in vaine, When Theseus thus proceeds at their request; Ceres displeasd the hye Olimpus mounts, And to the eare of Ihoue this rape recounts. 26 Reuenge great Ihoue (quoth she) thy wrongs and mine, And if mine cannot moue thee, let thy owne, For ours betwixt vs is faire Proserpine, (By diuellish Pluto into Orcus throwne) Long lost, long sought, my daughter's found in fine, Rather not found, her losse is certaine knowne: For how alas can I vvell tearme her found Whom I still lose, kept low, beneath the ground. 27 In the rude armes of the blacke Dis shees plac'st, Hels Adamantine gates besides inclose her, Let not thy Aunt great Ihoue be thus disgrac'st, But of my owne childe make me free disposer, Else let my name be from thy Bed-role rac'st, and be no more a Goddesse, if I lose her: But Ihoue by faire words seekes t'appease the Mother, and reconcile her to his Stigian Brother. 28 But th'vnappeased Goddesse hates the Thiefe, That with her daughter all her pleasure stale, and since heauen giues no comfort to her griefe, Sheele try vvhat Mortal can her daughter bale, She comes vvhere Hercules and all the chiefe Of Greece assembled, where she tels this tale: And weeping, sweares to be at sterne defiance, With the Tartarian Dis, and his alliance. 29 Before Alcides on this Iourney went Vnvvares to him, my friend and I prepare, (Noble Perithous) to this one discent, Thinking to cheare the Queene opprest vvith care,
But fate was opposite to his intent, We scarce (well arm'd) had tucht the lowest stare: But Cerberus, my friend vntimely slew, and me halfe-dead vpon the Pauement threw. rithous slaine. 30 Vnto my rescue great Alcides came, To Hyppodamias husband much to late, The Ihouiall youth that can all Monsters tame, Ere he findes leysure to lament our Fate, Or on the murdrous Hel-hound to exclaime, He fals his huge Club on the Monsters pate, Which with such violent fury pasht his braines, It stounds him, so he leaues him bound in chaines. 31 Aduentring forward in his Lyons case, Th'vnbodied Ghosts affrighted from him flie, Who see such terror in his yrefull face, Poore soules they feare by him againe to die, Hels Marble gates he beates ope with his Mace And manly might amongst the Deuils try, Who as they stop his way, his Club makes reele, Whilst Furyes fly him with their whips of steele. 32 Vast hell is all in vprore, Pluto wonders To see his black-fac'st ministers afraide, he feares th'Imperiall Lord of fire and Thunders Attempts his lower Kingdoms to inuade: From Proserpine, his twined armes he sounders, Takes vp his sable Mace of Porphyr made: And with his blacke Guard forward marcheth still, where greatest was the presse, the cry most shrill. 33 Hell had beene sack't, and all hels right displayd, had not the Fates whom Gods and Men obey, The fury of th'aduentrous Graecian stayde, and with their reuerent paces stopt his way, (Those whom the Gods incline to, he obeyd) In their Brasse rols that neuer shall decay, Alcides (by their license) reades his Fate, and armes layde by, more mildly they debate.
34 Pluto inquires the cause of his arriue, He tels him for the rauisht Proserpine, Whom as he heares, the King intends to wiue, Whose heauenly face must among Angels shine, Not be amongst the Deuils damnd aliue, Of this the Fate twixt him and his define: And thus amongst them they compound the cause, According to their neuer-changing Lawes. 35 That if Queene Proserpine hath kept strict fast, And since her entring Hell not tasted food, as she hath once the Stygian riuer past, So backe to earth she may re-saile the flood; Inquiry made, the girle alas did tast Some few Pomgranat graines, which vnderstood, Her doome the fates amongst themselues compoun d, That Proserpine must still liue vnder ground. 36 Attonement made with hell, the glorious Greeke, Arm'd with his club returnes the way he came, Vpon the earth archieuements new to seeke, Since hell is fild with his victorious name, Through many a winding path, and turning creeke, He comes at last where my deere friend lay slaine: I wounded, and the triple Hell-hound laid Bound in those Gyues which he for others made. 37 To mournefull Hyppodamia he presents The murdrous Dogs with her deere husbands coarse, She sings his Dirge in many sad Laments, But at the fiend that slew without remorse Her husband, shee aimes all her discontent, And on his face imprints her womanish force: heere Theseus wept, nor could he longer hide His priuate sorrow for his friend that dide. 38 This is the Noble Theseus Aethraes sonne, By King Egeus, that durst hell inuade, In battaile th' Amazonian Baldrick wonne, And stout Hyppolite his Dutchesse made,
Who when King Minos closd Pasiphaes Sonne The lal or inth made to Dalus. The Mynotaure in the Dedalian shade: He by her helpe, to whom she proou'd vntrue, Looke in the Skolly. Releast the Tribute, and the Monster slew. 39 Eristheus, and the valiant Theban King, That knew the Prince Perithous, much lament him, But with their teares the day began to spring, They wish the Fates a longer date had lent him, With kindled Lampes th'attendant Pages bring The Princes to their Cabins: He that sent him On this attempt, at parting they desire To blesse their shores, whilst they the seas aspyre. 40 Our thoughts must land them which their Trophyes brought From ruin'd Troy, on seuerall Coasts of Greece, Remembring Iason, who with honor sought The fam'd aduenture of the golden Fleece, Duke Aeson in this voyage spared naught, Many bold Knights well arm'd at euery peece Assist the Noble Greeke in this aduenter, Offng the Argoe with the Prince to enter. 41 Duke Peleas gaue it furtherance, to whose Court Where Iason feasted, then Alcides came Peleas King of Thessly, and Vnckle to son. With Philocletes, as his deare Consort, From strange aduentures that Imblaze his fame, Disankring from the fayre Thessalian Port, Accompanied with many Knights of fame: Castor and Pollux, bold Amphitrion, Amphion, Zetus, and sterne Telamon. 42 Amphion was a fayre Harmonious Youth, Well skild in Musicke, Zethus was his Brother, Amion. Zethus. Begot by Cretan Ihoue one happy night, Vpon the fayre Antiopa his Mother, She Lychus Wise, yet rauisht with the sight Of Iupiter, her loue she could not smother: These her fayre sonnes built Thebes, with large extent, Thebes. Two yeares before they on this voyage went.
43 With all the Graecian chiualry attended They disimbogue, the gentle B llowes smile, Th' Aegean Seas they passe, but late defended By the Grand Thiefe, that gaue those Seas their stile, No wind or waue their well-tig'd ship offended, But the calme looking Thetis harbors guile: Her fawning front she wrinkles with a frowne, Ad thinkes th'ambitious Argonants to drowne. 44 At the blacke Euening close, the Sea lookt white, A tempest. The storme-presaging Waue begins to swell, And blustring Eurus rising now at night With his flag Winges, vpon the waters fell. The Mayster bids slacke sayle, but gainst the might, Of his commaunded Mates, the winds rebell: The Boat-Swayne brals, the Marriners are chid, For what they would, the stubborne gusts forbid. 45 All fall to labour, one man helps to steere, Others to slacken the big bellied Sayle, Some to the Cap-string call, some pray, some sweare, Some let the Tackles slip, whilst others hale: Some cling vnto the maine-Mast, and cleaue there, Some chafe with anger, some with feare looke pale: Some ply the Pompe (and that which would deuour Their ship in time) Sea into Sea repoure. 46 Sharpe-bting winter growes, and on each side The foure seditous Brothers threaten war, and tosse the Billowes, who in scornefull pride Spit foaming Brine, the winds with waters iarre, The breaking seas, whose entrance were denyde, Beae gainst each Pitchy-rib and calked sparre: and by their Oaken strength denyde Intention, Fall where they were begot, to meere confusion. 47 Now as the shriking Billowes are diuided, Low Vallyes tweene two mighty Mountaines fall, From whose steepe breasts the shaken vessaile slyded, Burying in Sea, Sayles, Tackles, Masts, and all:
But here remaynes not long, the Barke well guided, Climbes vp those clyffes, a dreadfull watty wall: That to themselues, amazd with feare they show, Like men in th'ayre surueighing hell below. 48 It seem'd as if the Heauens and Seas had Wars, And that the one the other did defy, Twixt whom the mutinous winds make greater Iars, Th'ambitious Billowes seeme to threat the sky, And fling their brine-waues in the face of Stars, Who therewith mooud, melt all the Clouds on hye, And such tempestuous shewers of raine thaw downe, As if their drops meant the vast Seas to drowne. 49 The waters both of Heaueu and Earth are mixt, Flagging their sayles to make them brooke no blast, No Lampe of heauen appeares (wandring or fixt) Darkenesse hath o're the face of both heauens past, And left his vgly blindnesse them betwixt, Whose horride presence makes the Greekes agast: The Heauens bright fire, the troubled Water braues, sindging with lightninges force the Gulfy waues. 50 Vnto these Argonants I may compare Our Island-voyages, alike distrest, The Islands voyage. With whelming seas, thicke Mists, and troubled ayre, Loud claps of Thunder: Lightning from the West, so dreadfull, that their Pilots loose their care, Through feare, forgetting what should stead them best: The sea, to quench Heauens glorious Lamps aspyres, Heauen burns the Ocean with her lightning fires. 51 As braue a Generall Martiald our great Fleete, as that bold Greeke that sought the fleece of Gold, hoping by sea an enemy to meete, Fiercer then Iasons, and more warlike bold, Renowned Essex, at whose warlike feete Spaines countlesse spoyles and Trophyes haue been told, Who from Hesperia brought to Englands Greece, More Gold then would haue weigh'd downe Iasons fleece.
52 Grim Terror with the Greekes a ship-board lyes All night: some weepe, some rage, the boldest feare, Soliciting the Gods with Prayers and cryes, Seeing their Fates and hopelesse ruins neere, They thinke on Fathers, Children, Wiues, Allyes, But whom they faine would see, they wish not there: Grim terror in the Morning forward sped, The Sunne begins to wake, the tempest fled. 53 Who as from forth the Spanish Seas he raisde His burnisht lockes, and bout his shoulders shooke them, and (as his custome is) about him gazd To view fayre Thetis bounds, and ouer-looke them, He spyes th'Imbarqued Greekes, with feare amazd, So sore the rough tumultuous Sea had tooke them: He sees their Pendants torne, their Sheetes all rent, Their Hatches broken, and theyr mayne-mast spent. 54 Therefore he angry, Neptune doth intreat, as he would haue him guild his siluer streames, Or thaw his frozen Waters with his heate, Or cheare his coole Waues with his gorgeous beames, Th'aduentrous Greekes (his charge) not to defeat, But they may safe re-view their Natiue Realmes: Neptune is pleas'd, his Trident calmes the Seas, And grants them waftage to what coast they please. 55 Who entring th' Hellespont acquire some shore VVhere they may land, their Fortunes to repaire, at Tenedos they tutch (knowne long before By great Alcides, since he battayld there) Where great Laomedon the Scepter bore, and to preuent like dangers threatning care, Re-builds his battred holds, and with supplyes, Mans euery Sea-skout, that adiacent lyes. 56 These Garrisons, the Graecian Peeres deny Reliefe or Anchorage, till the Kings mind Be fully knowne: Who heares his foes so nye That had so late his forces ouerthrowne,
Therefore inraged, he sends them to defie, And from his Coasts to get them quickely gone, Or mongst them all hee'l leaue no liuing Greeke For golden Pillage on the seas to seeke. 57 Vndanted Hercules at this offended, Sweares (by his Father Ihoue) Troyes second wracke, And with his Argonants had then discended Mauger the King, but Iason kept him backe, Who being chiefe Commander, hath intended A golden coarse, the Colchōs first must sacke, Therefore (though much against Alcides will) Put from that shore, the Conqueror threatens still. 58 Vowing if Fate affoord him safe returne, In whose aduenture al the Peeres vnite, Troyes wals to batter, and their Citty burne, And be the Kings eternall opposite, To whose disgrace Troy shall in ashes mourne, Th'vngratefull King be forc'st to death or flight, And all these lofty Towers, at his next Landing, Not haue one stone vpon another standing. 59 Resolued thus, they make to hoyse vp saile, Weigh Anchor, and their tackles hale and pull, Their lofty spleenes gainst Troy they now auaile, And onely ayme at the Phrixean wooll, The God of winds affoords them a calme gale, Making their waue-washt sheetes shew swelling full, Whose gentle Gusts the Graecian Heroës bring Phasis a town in  and a Riuer: Medea. To Colchos, welcom'd by the Phasian King. 60 At whose arriue, Medea Iason viewing, Oh heauen (quoth she,) what passion's this I feele? Shall yon faire Graecian youth his fame pursuing, Die by inchanted fire, or tempered steele? Oh saue thy fame (by this attempt eschevving) Thy arme vvants povver to make the Dragon reele: Thy amorous hand (alasse) too soft and white, with Brasse-hoou'd Buls (that breath out fire) to fight.
61 More fitter t'were a Lady to embrace, T'imprison beauty in a cristall fold, Oh why should one that hath so sweet a face, (Made to be lou'd and loue) seeke acts so bold? Too ventrous Greeke, for loues sake leaue this place, Thou knowst not what thou seekst, the fleece of Gold A royall prize it is, yet amorous stranger, It hath not worth to countervaile the danger. 62 For the least blood shall drop downe by thy skin, Or in the' combat staine the Colchian grasse, Is of more worth then all that thou canst win, Yet doth the riches of this Fleece surpasse: But stay: What blind maze am I entred in? What louing laborinth? Forgetfull Lasse: Oh canst thou to a strangers grace appeale, Who comes from farre, thy Fathers fleece to steale? 63 This Iason is our foe: dwels in a Land Remote, and of another Clyme indeed, If thou wilt loue, about thee Princes stand Of thine owne Nation, let this stranger bleed, Despise him then, and all his forraine band, That in thy Fathers pillage haue agreed: Instead of loue, the amorous Greeke defie, And by th'inchanted Monsters let him die. 64 But shall Medea view that Tragicke sight? And see his faire limbes by her Monsters rent? Shall his white fingers with grim Hell-hounds sight, That might Medea in her loue content? Apollo may I neuer tast thy light, Pertake thy earthly rise, or low discent, But by my Art I shall so well prouide, To be the Gold-Fleece-conquering Iasons Bride. 65 But how Medea? Wilt thou then forsake Thy Country, Father, Friends: All which are great, and (to thy Lord) a rouing Pyrate take, One that perchance hath no abiding seat?
Fond Girle thou wrongst him these faint doubts to make A Royall Prince and in all acts compleat, Thy Country, Father, Friends, trifles but small, And this one warlike Iason worth them all. 66 That he is louely; witnesseth mine eye, And valiant: what can better record beare Then this attempt, whose fame to heauen will flye, T'amaze the Gods that shall this Nouell heare, I leaue a barraine kingdome, to discry A populous Nation, what then should I feare? In seeking with this amorous Greeke to dwell, I aske Elisum, in exchange for Hell. 67 A Land, where if his people him resemble Humanity, and all good Thewes are rife, Who if they loue their Lord, cannot dissemble Their harts to her that shall safegard his life, Th'inchanted Buls whose bellowing made heauen trēble, Shall by their ruines make me Iasons wife, Whom all the faire and potent Queenes of Greece, Shall better welcome then the conquerd Fleece. 68 Opinion'd thus; at their next enter-view, (After their diuers oaths betweene them past) That he the fam'd aduenture shall pursue; Whose conquests with inchantments she binds fast, And when his hands these monsters shall imbrew, He to receiue her as his Bride at last: Night passeth on, at the next birth of day, Aurora frights the Fearell Stars away. 66 Much confluence of people throng together, Dionis. Mile∣sius. In the large field of Mars they take their places, The Princes of the Land in Scarffe and Feather And Triumph robes, expect the Greekes disgraces, The burdend earth grones with spectators: whether The King himselfe martiald with golden Maces In person comes, his Bans him inuest In a high Throne, degrd aboue the rest.
70 To such prepared ioyes the Frenchmen came, To see the valiaunt Mount-morensi roon, Charles Branon Duke of Suffolke. against Charles Brandon, who for Englands fame, Vanquisht their Knight, at which their ioy was doon, The French, who to disgrace the English came, Saw how bold Charles at one incounter woon Their Champions armes, the French Qu. to his pheer, Which chang'd their promist mirth to sadder cheere. 71 Behold where Polymelaes sonne vndanted, Iason sonne to Eon and Ponela. against the brazen-hoofed Beasts appeares, How (richly armd) his sword aloft he vanted, T'incounter with the two infernall steares, Who as he strikes, still breaths out words inchanted, Antimachus . 3. . The Graecians stand amaz'd, Medea feares To see young Iason Lord of her desire, Betwixt two Buls, their Nosthrils breathing fire. 72 And least her Incantatious force might faile, She mumbles to her selfe more powerfull charmes, Still doth the dreadlesse Greeke those Buls assaile, Reddy to scorch him in his twice-guilt armes, His sharpe edg'd sword their horned crests makes vaile, That fire that scaldeth others, him scarce warmes, (Such power hath Magicke) the fell Buls grovv tame, And Iason tugs with them amidst the flame. 73 And first he by the dangling dew-laps takes them, Who force perforce his valour must obey, He twixt his sinnowy armes together shakes them, They bellowing yeeld themselves his glorious prey, To bow their stubborne necke, bold Iason makes them, On which th'obedient yoake he gently lay, The Greekes applaud his conquest with shrill cries, The Colchians shew their sorrowes in their eyes. 74 But alls not furnisht yet, he makes them draw The teemed plow, to furrow vp his field, The rusty yron doth the greene verdure flaw, Quite vanquisht now, the conqud Oxen yeild,
Yet more then this the Colchian Princes saw, The Vipers teeth he cast vpon his shield, And sow'd them in the furrowes: they straight grew, To armed men, and all on Iason flew. 75 The Greekes dismay, th'incourag'd Colchians showt, Onely Medea doth their ioy detest, With magicke she assists her Champion stout, Her Exorcismes haue power to arme his brest, Those that but late incompast him about, And with their steele strooke Stars out of his Crest, Seeke mutuall armes, amongst themselues they brall, So by seditious weapons perish all. 76 It now remaines the three-tongu'd venomous Snake, The Riuer-waking-Serpent to make sleepe, Whose horride crest, blew skales, and vnces blacke, Threat euery one a death (vnto his keepe The Fleece is put) Medea bids him take Grasse in blacke Lethe, laid three nights to steepe, Vttering such powerfull charmes as calme the winds, Apolon. lib. 3. And the mou'd Billowes in their Channell binds. 77 Those drops being spinkled on the Dragons head, The words thrice spoke (the wakefull Serpent lies) Drownd in forgetfull slumbers, seeming dead, and sleepe (till now not knowne) seales vp his eyes, Iason in safety may the Mansion tread Where Colchos long preseru'd the golden prize, and now at length faire Polimelaes sonne, Inioyes the Fleece that he with danger wonne. 78 Proud of this purchase, but of her more glad, That by the Vertue of a powerfull word, More hy command vpon these Monsters had, Then he in vse of his remorslesse sword, Vnto his Argoe he Medea Lad Commanding all his merry mates aboord But secretly, least when King Aeta knew, his daughters rape, he might her flight pursue.
79 Which to preuent the Negerous Lady takes The young Absyrtes, a faire hopefull youth, Absyrtus Bro∣ther to Medea Strabo lib. 7. And when her father after Iason makes, And with rough fury her escape pursuth, She chops the Lads limbes into bits and flakes, and in the Kings way strowes him without ruth, Atusilaus. Phcides lib 7 And whilst he gathers vp with watry eyes His peece-meale body, she in safety flies. 80 With triumphs they in Greece are welcomd all, Timaut 2.  . And Iason famous for his royal Quest, The Bed red Father will his sonne install In his owne kingdome, and with him his guest Deepe-speld-Medea, at whose Magicke call The Seas and winds, or trauell, or find rest: Oh Magicke, by thy power what cannot they, To whom the Seas submit, the winds obey? 81 Amongst those Princes that with Iason vvent, and vvere at home receiu'd, the great Alcide amidst this generall Ioy seemes discontent, His spleene to Troy he can no longer hide, To be reueng'd he holds his firme intent, He that to their distresse reliefe denide, Must knovv whatt'is to scorne his firme alliance, So through all Greece he breaths gainst Troy defiance. 82 And vvith a gallant army taking Land, attaines the shore perforce, and in his way, No Village, Fortresse, Tovvne, or Tower can stand, But to his ruthlesse fury must giue way: This hearing, King Laomedon hath mand a Noble army, to make good the day: Which ere the Sun into the West-sea fall, Must see ten thousand Troians kild and thrall. 83 Laomedon remembring what great vvracke Twelue-labord Hercules before time made, Recounts to them his vvrongs, his Citties sack, Their tyranies to al vvhom they inuade,
Therefore incites them to repulse those backe, That haue too long vpon his confines staid: Behold (quoth he) these would your freedomes barre, Then with a generall showt prepare for warre. 84 The hoast of Greekes that heare their exclamation, Wait but to heare Alcides watch-word giuen, Who cheares them thus: You are that warlike Nation Whose fame fils all the Clymates vnder heauen, Sinc you are strangers, let your salutations Be with your swords, not words; for yet ere Euen You standing hoast in their owne bloods wee'l drown, And part the rich spoyle of yon rampierd Towne. 85 Lowd chearing Instruments on both sides sound, The battailes ioyne, both Greekes and Troians sinke: They that but late the firme Earth proudly bound, Now must below the waues of Lethe drinke, The great Alcides borne to sway the ground, Against his strength opposd, al mortals shrinke: Who being more then man, must needs haue ods. To fight with any that are lesse then Gods. 86 Him whome th'all-doming Fates will haue to sway, How can Laomedon in armes subdue, Though Troy be strong, yet must it Greece obey, Alcides with his Club whole thousands slew, By his sole-strength the Greekes obtaine the day, And to the Citty gates the foe pursue, Who mingled with their troopes, in this aduenture, Slaughter the bold, and with the Cowards enter. 87 So by the English was great Cales suprisd Cales. And entred, with the Spaniards that retire, they that at first the generals name despisd, Now at the last are forc'st his fame t'admire, English and Dutch in Spanish wealth disguisd, Cales twice taken once by Sir Francis Drake, since by the Earle of Essex. Laden their fleet with pillage, whilst bright fire Consumes the Towne, which twice the English take, As Greece did Troy, great Essex and bold Drake.
88 Stout Aiax Telamon amongst the rest, Set his first foot in Troy, but him succeed Ten thousand Greeks, and many a warlike brest, Pierst with the Argiue weapons, freshly bleed: They sacke the populous Towne from East to West, Troyes second sacke is by the Fates decreed: They sacke and ransacke, spoile, and freely kill, And all the Towne with shreekes and clamors fill. 89 Amongst the rest that perisht in this broile, Laomedon fals by Alcides hand, Whilst euery where the conquering Graecians spoile, No man so bold that dares against them stand, Great is the booty in so rich a soile, They pillage all the substance of the land, Beat downe the wals, the Temples ruine quite, And kill poore infants in their mothers sight. 90 The Matrons in their husbands armes deflow, The reuerent Virgins in their parents eye, And such as interdict their awfull power, By their remorselesse bloudy weapons die, Hie looking Troy is ruin'd in an houre, Those Towres quite racst, whose sharpe spyres mockt the sky and that proud towne the Asian glory ones, Is now a confus'd heape of men and stones. 91 Al-conquering Hercules reueng'd at last Of Troyes ingratefull Soueraigne, takes full ceasure Of Asiaes Monarchy: his fury past, amongst his host he parts the Citties treasure, But Telamonus Aiax most he gracst, and gaue him her that pleas'd him aboue measure, The bright Hesione his valours meed, The beautious Virgin from the sea-Whale freed. 92 Well was it for young Priam the Kings sonne, Hercules Lybi∣cus That he was else-where in the East imployd, The Lybian else that Asia ouer-ronne and conquered Troy, had likewise him destroid,
Th laden Greekes after the conquest woon, Are fraught with wealth, with pleasure ouer-ioyd: Poore Troy, whilst they in their full mih abound, Liues desolate, and leueld with the ground. 93 The Monster-maister hauing fild the sky With martiall clangor in the lowdest straine, After reuenge on Cacus Tyranny, and the great Gyants of Cremona slaine, King Pricus death, King Affer raised hie, And the two Collumnes that he reard in Spaine, To include in few his many deeds; we thus In narrow roome, his labors twelue discusse. 94 1. The Eremanthion Bore, 2. and the fire-breathing Bul, The 12 labors of Hercules. 3. The Lernan Hydra. 4, and the winged Hind, 5. Stymphalidus. 6. The Amazonian trull: 7. Th' Aegean stables, the seauenth taske assind, 8. The Cleonean Lyon. 9. with the scull Of Diomed, who fed his Steeds gainst kind: 10. The golden fruit made ripe by bright Heperion, 11. Grim Cerbarus, 12. and triple-headed Gerion. 95 These taskes by Iunoes imposition ended, Whilst he on Ictes attractiue face Doted, and her deserts alone commended, Faire Deyaneyr imputes it her disgrace, With such great wrongs vnto her bed offended, Because his vassaile had supplied her place. She sends a shirt, (and meanes her husband good) Dipt in the poyson of the Centaures blood. 96 The traitor Nessus passing a deepe foord With Deianeyre, away with her he flyes, Alcides cannot reach him with his sword, But after him his wounding arrow hies, The dying Centaure speakes this latest word, Faire Deiancyre, before death close mine eyes, Receiue a guift, in signe I lou'd thee deerely, Which though I die, in time may stead thee neerely.
97 I know thy Lord a Conqueror, yet subdude By womens beauty: therefore when you find, The lustfull Prince mongst Forraine Queenes intrude, and that their amorous Court-ships change his mind, Send him a Shirt, with this my bloud Imbrude, The vertue is, to make Alcides kind: This said, his life he ended in a trice, She (for it was his last) trusts his aduise. 98 Hearing faire Iole the hart had ceasd Of her deare Lord, and that she kept away, She feeles her thoughts within themselues diseas'd, and hopes to call him backe that went astray, The Centaures dying guist the Lady pleasd, Her seruant Lychas posts it without stay: Oh! Thou weake woman, thou his death maist vant, Whom Hell-hounds, Gyants, Monsters, could not daunt. 99 Hoping (alasse) his fauour to regaine, The Innocent Lady her deare Lord destroyd, He d'ons her present, whose inuenomed Bane Cleaues to his bones (Oh! Who can Fate auoyde?) More then a man before he would complaine Alcides beares, and no whit seemes annoyd: Such tortures as the strongest might strike dead he brookes: yet no part of his coulour fled. 100 But when he felt such Tortures, anguish, smart, That Gods aboue, nor Deuils damd could beare, That stung his breast, and pierst his Noble hart, he growes Impatient, that could neuer feare Infernall panges, Infusde in euery part, he striues the poysonous Shirt away to teare: But with the cleauing Linnens forst to draw The Brawnes from off his armes, and leaue them raw. 101 The poysond boyles, and he that could confound Gyants, so late to his immortall fame, Now from the head to heele, is all one wound, The raging venom-drops his flesh inflame,
Sometimes he grouels on the sencelee ground, Sometimes those powerfull hands that Monsters tame, plucks down huge rocks, & cleaues thē with his stroaks And sometimes by the roots rends vp huge Oakes. 102 Mad with these Torments Oeta Mount he traces, Where creeping in a hole he Lychas spies, When stalking to his Caue with leasurd paces, About his head he wheeles him in the skies, And that being done the whole Mount he defaces, A groue of Trees dispoyld about him lies, A thousand Oakes he heapes vp on a pile, And kindling thm, sayes with a fornfull smile, 103 Whom neither Iunoes wrath, nor Plutoes hell, Whom neither Lyons, Buls, Dogs, Dragons, Whales, Whom neither Tyrants grim, nor Gyants ell, against that spirit a womans gift preuailes, Her iealousie hath power that hart to quell, Whom Serpents feare with their uenomed skales, Since none on earth deserues our blood to spill, The great Alcides shall Alcides kill. 104 The fire burnes bright, he Philocletes cals, And vnto him bequeaths his shasts and bow, Who at his warlike fet confounded fals, The Club and Lyons case his bold hands throw Into the flame, then he whom noughts appals, Cries Ihoue I come, and boldly leaps in so: The death of . That life that mortall did the heauens aspire, Now with Immortall wings climes heauen by fire. 105 Alcides dead, and Priam backe returnd From his successefull Battailes in the East, He sees his Country spoyld, his Citty burnd, His Father slaine, which most his griefe increast, These losses with his Sisters rape he mournd, Nor are such weighty sorrowes soone surceast: we for a while will leaue him to his care, His Syre t'intoombe, his Citty to repaire.
MEdea some thinke to be the daughter of Eta, some the daughter of the Sun, some the Daughter of Hecare. Apollod lib. 3. Cals her Aeea. Heraclides writes her Eripid, in Med . Andron Teius. . Epist. to be the daughter of Neaera of the Nereides: Dionisius Mi∣lesius, cals her the daughter of Eurelytes, others of Ipsaea, & that Chalciope was her sister. She had a sonne cald Medus by Aegeas. Demodocus a Harpers name in Homer, of whom the Country Medea tooke name. Iopas a King of Affrica, one of Didoes wooers, a skilfull Cithara canitus . per  Aurata  quae maximus Atlas.  canit errā tem Lunam  labores.    et pecu∣der vnde imber et Ignes. S. . Timonax in re∣bus . Musition, Iason committed to the charge of his Vnkle Pelius, in his minority, because Pelus was loath to resigne to him his kingdome, deuised for his Nephew the dangerous enterprize of the golden Fleece, which lason contrary to his Vnckles sup∣position, with his Argonants valiantly atchieued. In memory of Absyrtus, there are still certaine Islandes in the Venetian Sea, cald Absyrtides of Absyrtus, there slaine by his sister Medea. Phrixus was sonne to Athamas, and Brother to Helles, of whom the Ram that bore the golden fleece, was named Phri∣xeus: Helle with her Brother Phrixus was drowned. Of whom that Sea is still called Hellespontus. Because we onely remember  and the Mynotaur, and haue no further Trafficke in our History with his life, I holde it not much amisse in these Annoaations, to remember, that History, and how the Mynotaure was begot: Ouid ar∣te Amandi. Ida of Caedars and tall Trees stand full, Pasiphae. Where fed the glory of the Heard (a Bull Snow-white) saue twixt his hornes one spot there grew, Saue that one staine, he was of milky hew. This faire Steare did the Heyfers of the Groues Desire to beare as Prince of al the Droues, But most Pasiphae with adulterous breath, Enuies the wanton Heyfers to the death, Tis saide that for this Bull the doting lasse Did vse to crop young boughes, and mow fresh grasse, Nor was the Amorous Cretan Queene affeard To grow a kind Companion to the Heard: Thus through the Champion she is madly borne
And a wilde Bull, to Minos giues the horne, Tis not for by auery he can loue or loath thee, Then why Pasiphae doest thou richly cloath thee? Why shouldst thou thus thy face ad lookes prepare? What makest thou with thy glasse ordering thy haire? Vnlesse thy glasse could make thee seeme a Cow, But how can hornes grow on that tender brow? If Mynos please thee, no Adulterer seeke thee, Or if thy husband Mynos do not leeke thee, but thy la ciutous thoughts are still increast, Deceiue him with a man, not with a beast: Thus by the Queene the wilde Woods are frequented, And leauing the Kings bed, she is contented To vse the groues, borne by the rage of mind, Euen as a ship with a full Easterne wind: Some of these strumpet-Heyfers the Queene slew, Their smoaking Alters their warme bloods imbrew, Whilst by the sacrificing Priest she stands, And gripes their trembling entrailes in her hands. Zezes histors 19 At length, the Captaine of the Heard beguild With a Cowes skin, by curious Art compild, The longing Queene obtaines her full desire, And in her infants byrth bewrayes the Sire. This Mynotaure, when he came to groath, was inclosed in the Laborinth, which was made by the curious Arts-maister Dedalus, whose Tale likewise we thus pursue: When Dedalus the laborinth had built, In which t'include the Queene Pasiphaes guilt, And that the time was now expired full, To inclose the Mynotaure, halfe man, halfe Bull: Dedalus and Icarus. Kneeling he sayes, Iust Mynos end my mones, And let my Natiue soile intoombe my bones: Or if dread soueraigne I deserue no grace, Looke with a pittious eye on my sonnes face, Ouid 2. de arte Amandi. And graunt me leaue from whence we are exild, Or pittie me, if you dny my Child: This and much more he speakes, but all in vaine, The King both Sonne and Father wil detaine, Which he perceiuing saies: Now, now, tisfit, To giue the world cause to admire thy wit,
Both Land and Sea, are watcht by day and night, Nor Land nor Sea lie open to our flight: Onely the Ayre remaines, then let vs try To cut a passage through the ayre and fly, Ihoue be auspicious to my enterprise, I couet not to mount aboue the skies: But make this refuge, since I can prepare No meanes to fly my Lord, but through the ayre, Make me immortall, bring me to the brim Of the blacke Stigian Water, Styx Ile swim: Oh human, wit thou, canst inuent much ill? Thou searchest strange Artes, who would thinke by skill. A heauy man, like a light Bird should stray, And through the empty Heauens find a fit way. He placeth in iust order all his Quils, Whose bottoms with resolued waxe he fils, Then binds them with a line, and being fast tyde, He placeth them like Oares on eyther side, The tender Lad the downy Feathers blew, And what his Father meant, he nothing knew: The wax he fastned with the strings he playde, Not thinking for his shoulders they were made, To whom his Father spake (and then lookt pale) With these swift Ships, we to our Land must saile: All passages doth crewell Mynos stop, Onely the empty ayre he stils leaues ope. That way must we, the Land, and the rough deepe Doth Mynos barre: the ayre he cannot keepe, But in thy way beware thou set no eye On the signe Virgo, nor Boetes hye: Looke not the blacke Orion in the face That shakes his Sword, but iust with me keepe pace. Thy wings are now in fastning, follow me, I will before thee fly, as thou shalt see Thy Father mount, or stoope, so I aread thee, Take me thy Guarde, and safely I will lead thee: If we should soare to neere great Phoebus seate, The melting Waxe will not endure the heate, Or if we fly to neere the Humid Seas, Our moystned wings we cannot shake with ease.
Fly betweene both, and with the gusts that rise, Let thy light body saile amidst the skies, And euer as his little sonne he charmes, He sits the feathers to his tender Armes: And shewes him how to moue his body light, As Birds first teach their little young ones flight: By this he cals to Counsell all his wits, And his owne wings vnto his shoulders fits, Being about to rise, he fearefull quakes, and in this new way his faint body shakes: First ere he tooke his flight, he kist his sonne, Whilst by his cheekes the brinish waters ronne: There was a Hillocke not so towring tall As lofty Mountaines bee, nor yet so small To be with Valleyes euen, and yet a hill, From this thus both attempt their vncoath skill: The Father moues his wings, and with respect His eyes vpon his wandering sonne reflect: They beare a spacious course, and the apt boy Fearlesse of harme, in his new tract doth ioy, and flyes more boldly: Now vpon them lookes The Fishermen, that angle in the brookes, and with their eyes cast vpward, frighted stand, By this is Samos Isle on their left hand, Vpon the right Lebinthos they for sake, Astipalen and the Fishy Lake, Shady Pachime ful of Woods and Groues, When the rash youth too bold in ventring, roues; Looseth his guide, and takes his flight so hie, That the soft wax against the Sun doth frie, and the Cords slip that kept the Feathers fast So that his armes haue power vpon no blast: He fearefully from the hye clouds lookes downe Vpon the lower heauens, whose curld waues frowne at his ambitious height, and from the skies He sees blacke night and death before his eyes, Stil melts the wax, his naked armes he shakes, and thinking to catch hold, no hold he takes: But now the naked Lad downe headlong fals, And by the way, he Father, Father, cals:
Helpe, Father helpe, I die, and as he speakes, A violent surge his course of language breakes. Th'vnhappy Father, but no Father now, Cryes out aloud, Sonne Icarus where art thou? Where art thou Icarus, where dost thou flie? Icarus where art? When loe he may espy The feathers swim, aloud he doth exclaime, The earth his bones the Sea stil beares his name. But least we inst too much on these impertinent tales, we wil proceed in our proposed History. The end of the seauenth CANTO.
Argumentum THE twice sackt Troy with all abundāce flowes, Her wals mlarg'd, hir spacious bounds augmēted, Fortune on Priam all her fauour strowes, Her populous streets from all parts are frequented, Proud of his sonnes, the King impatient growes, And with all Greece for wrongs past, discontented: Warlike Anthenot by Embassage seekes, To haue the Kings faire Sister from the Greeks ARG. 2. THe worth of Poets. Who first weapons found, Troy & the Troians, Theta makes hir groūd CANTO. 8. 1 FAyre Poesie, both ancient and Deuine, Tell me thy true Diuinity and age, Emmius oft cals thee Sacred, thou didst shine In Moses dayes, a Prophet wise and Sage, Who sang sweet Hymnes compos'd in measured line, To great Iehoua. Oft Dauid did asswage His melancholy cares in many an Oade, Tun'd to the praises of th'almighty God.
2 A sweeter verse then good Isaias wrote, Or Salomon in his deuinest song, For Number, Accent, Euphony or note Were neuer set with pen, or ayr'd with toong, Greeke Pindarus, whose meeters made men dote, Nor Saphos vaine so Musically strong, Could in their fluent Verse, or sweet inuention, Better delight the rauisht eares attention. 3 The rising and soft Cadens of a verse, In Deutronomium liuely is expressed, He that shall Dauids Haebrew Psalmes reherse, Shall find true number in his words professed, Not Orpheus, Horrace line could sooner pierce Th'inchanted braine: not Homer whom so me gessed To be chiefe Poet, this approues it holy, Not as some hold deriu'd from Apish folly. 4 In verse Hexamiter did Moises praise The heauens Creator (through the red sea flying,) S. Hiroms. Archilochus Iambickes first gan raise, Apollo meetred Verse, all Prose denying, Daphne the sonne of Mercury assaies The Elegeick verse (soone after dying,) Thespis: Quintilian Tragedies deuisd, Which Sophocles soone after enterprisd. 5 A Poëm is the richest Monument, And onely liues when Marble toombes decay, Shewing Kings deeds, their merit, and discent, Notstab'd by time, whom Sepulchers obey, Thou proud Achilles with thy great ostent, Where stands thy Monumentall graue this day: Toome-makers die disgracst, then Homer trust, By whom thy fame liues, now thy graue is dust. 6 By Poëm Troyes name is preseru'd from fire, Which else long since had perisht with the towne, Who in these dayes would for her fame inquire? Had not deuine wits Chronicled her downe,
Those flames that eate her buildings with like Ire, Had burnt her Name, and swallowed her renowne: But Poësy apt all such things to saue, Redeems her glory from Obliuions graue. 7 Poets are Makers, had great Homer pleasd Penelop had beene wanton, Hellen chast, The Spartan King the mutinous hoast appeasde, And smooth Vlisses with the horne disgra'st, Thersites had the Imperiall Scepter ceasd, And Agamemnon in his rancke beene plast: Oh! Homer, t'was in thee Troy to subdue, Thy pen, not Greece; the Troyans ouerthrew. 8 Achilles, durst not looke on Hector when He guld his Siluer armes in Greekish bloud, Homer that lou'd him more then other men, Gaue him such hart, that he gainst Hector stood, Twas not Achilles sword, but Homers pen That drew from Hectors breast a Crimson-flood: Hector his Myrindons, and him subdude, In such hye-blood faint hands were not imbrude. 9 Twas Poesy that made Achilles bold, Stout Aiax, valiant, and Vlisses wise, By Homers guift the great Alcide contrould The hoast of Greekes: all such as highly prise The sacred Muse, their Names are writ in gold, Thersites was well featur'd, but denyes The Muse her honor, therefore to his shame, The Muse hath made him Stigmaticke and lame. 10 This made great Scipio Affricanus bring Dead Ennius from the rude Calabrian Coast, Pompey gaue Theoptanes a Citty. placing his statuë, that his prayse did sing, In Romes hye Capitoll, who now can boast Of such rich meede, worthy the greatest King? So Pompey guerdon'd learning to his cost: And gaue a large Towne rounded with a Wall, And thought it for the Muse a guift to small.
11 Art thou a Tyrant? to thy seruice take, Some Helliconian Scholler, whose fine quill To after times thy raigne, may gentle make, And giue them life, whom thou in rage didst kill? Art thou a Vsurer? Wilt thou not forsake A hundred for a hundred? Learne this skill: To some one fluent Poet pension giue, And he shall make thy famous bounty liue. 12 Had Thais fauour'd Arts, the Arts had raisd her, and made her Chast as Faire: This Lucresse knew, Thais a Cur∣tezan of A∣thnt. Because she lou'd the Muse, the Muse hath praisd her, Lending the knife, with which her selfe she slew: Who Lais can accuse? Though fame hath blaz'd her For wanton? who can say report is true? Lais a Curte∣zan of Corinth Happly though Chast, al Poets she eschewes, And now liues onely famous mongst the Stewes. 13 Art thou a Coward? Exhibitions lend To Schollers that shal make thee ventrous bold; Art thou a Glutton? Make the Muse thy friend? Or a loose Leacher? Giue thy Poet Gold, Hee'l cleare thy Fame, and giue thy scandall end, He can redeeme renowne, to ruine sold, Make Ryoters frugall, the dull blind to see, The Drunkard temperate, and the Couetous free. 14 Th'ambitious meeke, the Lofty minded low, Th'inconstant stable, and the Rough, remisse; Women that your defectiue humors know, Are likewise by your bounty helpt in this, Some speciall grace vnto the Muses show, That haue the power t'inthrone your names in blisse: Had faire fac'st Hellen this opinion cherisht, O're-whelmed Troy, had not for her sake perisht. 15 They can make wantons Ciuill, the Foole wise, The stooping Straight, the Tawny coloured faire, The merry, Modest, and the Loose, precise, and change the colour both offace and haire,
All your Mercuriall mixtures then dispyse, For your Vermillion tinctures take no care: What neede you far for couloured vnctions seeke, When our blacke Inke can better paint thy cheeke. 16 Some of this Artfull coulour now I want, Which from the Muses I desire to borrow, In Melancholly Priam to dispaint The perfect Image and true face of Sorrow, At sight of ruind Troy his spirits faint, Yet after gathers strength, and on the morrow Resolues himselfe with bootlesse cares to striue, To interre the dead, and cheere those that suruiue. 17 In processe, taking truce with all Vexation, Priam intends a fayrer Troy to reare Of larger bounds, so layes a firme foundation So strong, that being mounted they need feare Nor Phoebus wrath, nor Neptunes Invndation, Nor any other bordering Neighbour neare: His Towne repayrd, King Priam in small space, Takes to his Wife a Princesse, borne in Thrace. 18 Great Aegipseus Daughter, Hecuba Prooues Mother of fiue Sonnes, the first in Row Aegipseus King of Thrace. Hecubaes Issue. Hector, the boldest Knight in Asia, Paris the fayrest, expert in the bow, Then Deiphebus, named by Phaebus ray, Helemus taught all hidden Arts to know: Bold Troylus youngest of his Mothers store, Hath Bastard-Brothers fiue and forty more. 19 Some thinke young Polidore from her descended, And Ganimed that standes in Aebes place, Her Eldest Girle Creusa, much commended Matcht with Eneas, of a Noble race, VVhose puisance next: Priam most extended Then sweet Cassandra, one of regall grace, A Prophetesse: but Polixene surpast, Fayrest of all the world, and Heebs last.
20 But now since Armes, and Battailes, Swords, & Speares, With other warlike Engines we must vse, Before Troyes rich aboundance touch our eares, With some delay we must restraine our Muse, To shew what people the first Armour beares And who they were first broake the generall Truce: In the first age, erae men keene weapons knew, They fought with naked fists, but no man slew. 21 Some say, the Thratian Mars first Armour brought, Diodorus. Others, that Pallas was of wars the ground, Tully. Others, that Tubal-Cayne for weapons sought, Ihosephus. And taught the way how to defend and wound, Most thinke Lame Vulcan on the Styth first wrought Homer. Helmets, Swords, Speares, the Lacedemons found: The Haberion Midias, Messenius filed, Iauelins and Darts Aetolus first compiled, Atolus Sonne to Mars. 22 Yet were not Souldiers arm'd at euery Peece, Herodotus. Some thinke th' Aegyptians flourisht in this trade, And Helmets and bright Salets brought to Greece, Leg-harnesse by the Carians was first made, Polidor, These Iason vsde in Conquest of the fleece, Great Fuluius Flachus Iustings Speares assayde: At Capua first, by old Tyrhenus framed, Plutarch. For the browne Bill, the Thracian was first named. 23 Pyses the hunting Staffe, the warlike Queene Penthiselea, taught the Pollax-fight, Crosse-bowes were first among the Cretans seene, Quartyes and Bolts the Syrians bring to sight, The euer-bold Phenetians furnisht beene Dares. The first that was seene to vse the snield. With Brakes and Slings to Chronicle their might: In lists appointed, in the Argiue fields, Acrisius and bold Pretus fought with shields. 24 Epeus at Troyes seidge the Ramme deuisde, The Tortoyes Citty wals to vndermine, Artemon Clazemonius enterprisde Bellerephon, to imitate the signe
Cald Sagitarius, Footmanship dispisde, Peletronians a nation of Thes∣saly. And backt the Iennet: after some Deuine: Bridles, Bits, Trappings, to adorne a Steede, Seru'd first the Peletronians warlike speede. 25 But of all Hellish Engines, he whose brayne By Deuilish practise first deuisd the Gun, The world shall Vniuersally complaine A generall murder, by that, Almain done, By which the strong men are by Weakelings slaine, By him hath many a Mother lost her Sonne: Macheuil histo∣rie Floretina. This Hell-borne Art, sinceby the Deuill must Venice against the Genoes practise first. 26 Of Priam now, and of his royall seede, Priam: Their fashions, and their features Dares writes, The aged King of puissance in his deed, And in his prime-age expert in all fights: Tall, but well shaped, Mounted on his Steede, In Horseman-ship excelling all his Knights: Grisled his heyre, grey-eyde, Beard full and long, Soft voy'st, his limbs, though slender, rare and strong. 27 In enterprises dreadlesse: early rysing, Eating betimes, with Musicke highly pleasd, Not rash to execute, but with aduising, Sound in his body, and no way diseasd, Vpright in sentence, flattery dispising, Apt to be angry, and as soone appeasd: Euen to the last, in armes his body prouing, Amorous of Ladies, and Souldiers dearely louing. 28 Hector the eldest of King Priams race, Hector. Past in his puissance all Knights of that age, An able body, and a pleasant face, Affable, and not much inclinde to rage, Big-limb'd, but featur'd well, which added grace To his proportion, young, but grauely sage: His flesh tough-hard, but white, his blew veines ayery, His quicke eye fiery bright: his skin much heyry.
29 His head short curld: his beard an aburne browne, His pleasant Language lisping, but not lowd, (Saue in the wars) he was not seene to frowne, Saue to his Gods and King, he neuer bowd, In field a Lyon, but a Lambe in towne, Strong without equall, but in Armes not prowd, Was neuer knowne to speake fellonious word, Or but against Troyes foes to vse a sword. 30 Aduentrous bold, but with discreet aduice, Patient of trauell, with no labour tyr'd, In the Pannonian wars he triumpht thrice, And more the Tent, then walled towne desird, Oft hath his pillow bin a Caue of Ice, Oft hath his sword his foes Caske proudly fird To warme him by, when he before appard With Isicles low hanging at his beard. 31 Forth of Troyes gates neare yssued man so strong, So double vertued, Chiualrous and mild, Or better Vsher through a Mattiall throng, Mongst foes a Gyant, to his friends a Child, Dreaded and lou'd, and sooner bear̄ing wrong, Then knowne t'oppresse: he neuer grace exild From Captiues, whom in armes he ouerthrew, He neuer fled the strong, or yeilding slew. 32 A Homers fluence, or a Virgils pen, Behooues him that should giue great Hector due, Whom with this Title, Valianest of Men, I now forbeare his Brothers to pursue: Parls. Next Alexander sirnam'd Paris, when His Mothers ominous dreame mongst Shepherds threw The infant Prince. In him you may discouer The true proportion of a perfect Louer. 33 Straight bodied, mid-statu'rd, wondrous faire, A pleasant looke, his eye both great and gray, Round visag'd, soft, and Crispe at end his haire, Smooth skind, well spoke, effeminate euery way,
No Coward, eloquent, an Archer rare, Swift, a good Hunts-man, and much giuen to play, Cunning at Chesse, which as most voyces run, Was by King Priam first in Troy begun. Daris. Ches-play first deuised in Troy. 34 Louing gay cloaths, and go richly clad, Costly in Iewels, and stones highly rated, Quicke-witted, iesting, dallying, seldome glad, Who aboue all things Melancholy hated: At loose lasciuious speeches seeming sad, And by all Starre-conicture fairely fated, A Courtly carriage, and a promising face, A manly looke mixt with a womanish grace. 35 Bold Deiphebus, and wise Helenus, Deiphebus. Were scarse to be distinguisht, both so like: The last a Clarke, sawes hidden to discusse, Helenus. The first not taught to pray so well as strike, The one deuout, the other Chiualrous, One grub'd his pen, while th'other tost his Pike: Though seuerall byrths, yet twins they seemed rather And both the true proportions of their Father. 36 The most redoubted Troylus youngst of fiue, Troylus. Next after Hector was esteemd in field, (Saue this bold brother) the best Knight aliue, Most expert in the vse of sword and shield: Cressida. Amorous of Calchas daughter: Ladies striue Which to his sweet embracements soon'st may yeild: Neuer was Knight in valor better proued, Or Courtier amongst Ladies deerlyer loued. 37 Then in one word, his aprises to comprise, He was another Hector, shape, looke, gate, Stature, proportion, fashion, haire, and eyes; Martiall encounter, or for Courtly state, Aeneas a bold Knight, a States man wise, Louer of peace, and foe to sterne debate: A Counsellor and Souldier, who imparts, Aeneus. Inequaliz'd proportion, Armes and Arts.
38 Large stature, and broad set, deuinely skild, His haire by Nature browne, but grayed with yeares, Cleare ey'd, sharpe visag'd, but with colour fild, One of King Priams best esteemed Peeres, Sober in speech, and seene to laugh but seild, Whom Paphian Venus by Anchises beares, Preferring much the Counsels of the old, And Beards of Siluer, before Haires of Gold. 39 Anthenor, second to Aeneas, blacke, Anthenor. Long, and leane visag'd, whom the King affected And much esteem'd his Counsell, in the sacke And fall of Troy, by Priam much suspected, Polydanus his sonne, in whom no lacke Polydanus. Of vertue was, or valor well directed: Of Counsell with his Father in Troyes fall, Resembling him, leane visag'd, swart, and tall. 40 Menon of all the Kings that Priam aydedMenon. With best assistance, and most valiant Knights, Broad-brested, and big-limb'd, not soone disswaded From hostile oppositions, and sterne sights, By him was many a Graecian Knight disgraded, Whom hope of Honour, more then gaine incites: Queene Hecuba, Religious, Graue, well staide, Heeba. A Manly Woman, somewhat rudely made. 41 Andromache, well shapt, looking alost, A dromache. Exceeding faire, her eye-ball broad and cleare, Her Alablaster skin, white, smooth, and soft, A worthy Wife to such a worthy Peere, As full of Grace as Beauty, praying oft, A visage Louely, but withall seuere: Promising loue, but with so Chast an eye, That what her beauty grants, her lookes deny. 42 Creusa like her Mother bodied well, Creusa. But nothing faire, her grace is manly rude; Onely the wise Aeneas happy fell Into her fauour, with good Thewes indude,
Her inward, more then outward gifts excell, Vnapt young amorous Courtiers to delude, A gracious, affable, kind, modest Creature, Loued for her Vertues, more then for her feature. 43 Cassandra, Hecubs second, chast and wise, A profest Virgin, and Deuinely red, Cassandra In Deuinations, Sawes, and Prophesies, She for her life abandons Hymens bed; Faire-hair'd, Meane-statur'd, Round-mouthd, stedfast eies Sometime her yellow Lockes about her spread: (Rapt with Deuinest fury) oft she weares, Like a rich cloake, wouen of her golden haires. 44 But young Polixena among the rest, Most Beautifully perfect, Rauishing sweet, Polyxena Of all Terrestriall graces, loe the best, In one exact and Compleat creature meet, Celestiall coloured veines, Swan-downy brest, And from her Natiue golden crowne to feet Spotlesse, her brow the whitest, eye the clearest, And her Rose coloured Cheeke of al Dyes dearest. 45 One Ladies beauty lies most in her haire, Anothers in her Checke, this in her brow, Her eye is quicke, another colour's rare, To which the Knights their deeds of Honour vow, Foot, skin, or hand: and all esteemed faire, The least of these best Iudging wits alow: And where but one of all these are extended, For that one guift bright Ladies are commended. 29 On such quicke feet as makes you Lady praisd, Polixena doth lightly touch the ground, Such hands as make anothers name imblazd, White, azure-vain'd within her Gloues are found; A body on two Iuory collumnes raisd, A brest so white, a Globe-like head so round: a haire, so bright-hewed Brests so softly sweld, Saue in this maide no Mortall hath beheld.
47 She is all beauty, Nature shew'd her skill To haue this Maide made in all parts compleate, her Store-house, the Creator first did fill, The Prodigall Queene, doth for the Lady cheate her Surplusse, then the world lamenteth still The Troian Ladyes Larges was so great: That hye-borne women yet in many places, Are for'st since her, to haue hard-fauoured faces. 48 But least we dwell vpon her shape too long, From her vnto the buildings we looke downe, Leauing the Ladyes fayre, the Princes strong, It followes, that we next suruiew the Towne, How Priam sought to quit Hesiones wrong, His Scepter, State, and his Imperiall Crowne: These by th'assistance of th'all-guiding Fate, And by the Muses helpe, we next relate. 49 The glorious Towers and Spyres of Tray looke hye, Sixe principall Percullist Gates admit The sixe gates of Troy. The people in and out: first Dardany, Fimbria the second (but scarce finisht yet) Hely the third: we Chetas next descry, Troyen the fift, with Marble Turrets fit: The sixt and last, but of like state with these, Cald by Antenor, Antenorides. 50 Vn-numbred Pallaces, houses of State, With their guilt couers seeme to mocke the Sunne, Which towards heauen their hye tops eleuate, Staples of Forraine Marchants now begun, Free Traffickt-Marts, and Wares of euery rate, By which, much wealth may be acquird and wun: Nothing is wanting in this New-built-Towne, That may acquire Troy Riches or Renowne. 51 Midst this young Citties hart, a Riuer glydes, The Riuer Symois. Bleeding her Azure veines through euery streete; Whose meeting streames a spacious Channell guids To the maine Ocean, where the Troyan fleete
In all tempestuous sea-stormes safely rides, The Merchant ferried for his pleasure, meets His laden Lyters, Barkes, and ships of trade, Whom at their rich keyes they with Cranes vnlade. 52 Vpon the highest hill the rest o're-peering The Pallace royall doth the King erect, On her wind-mouing vanes Troyes Scutchion wearing, Whose shyning guilt vpon the Towne reflect, The Marble posts, and Porphyr-Collumnes bearing, Roofes of pure-gold from the best Mines select; By good aduise they Islium Towers inuest, A Citadell to ouer-looke the rest. 53 The glorious Sunne, from whose all-seeing eye, Nothing on earth can be conceiled long, In his Diurnall trauels through the sky, Saw neuer Pallace built so faire and strong, The square Pyramides appeared hye, As if they had bin rear'd the Clouds among, The Porches, Tarras, windowes, Arches, Towers, Resembling one of Ihoues Celestiall Bowers. 54 More then the rest his great Hall men admire, Built like th Olimpicke pallace, where Ihoue feasts, Paued with bright Starres, like those of Heauenly fire, On which he treads, when he inuites his guests, The roofe hung round with Angels (a rich Quire) With Diamond eyes, red Rubies in their breasts, Holding like Grapes long branches in their fists, Of Emeralds greene, and purple Amethists. 55 At one end of the Hall stands Priams Throne, To which by twelue degrees the King ascended, His chaire all Gold, and set with many a Stone, By curled Lyons, and grim Beares defended, Who seem'd to fawne on him that sat thereon, The curious Grauer all his Art extended: The sauage Monsters that support his chaire, Euen to the life, cut and proportiond are.
56 Next this, from twenty hie steps looking downe Towards the Skreene aloft inthroned stands Ihoues Statuë, on's head a glorious Crowne, An vniuerse and Scepter grac'st both hands: His length full fifteene foot, his colour browne, His front Maiesticke, like him that commands: His state, as when with Gods he was couersing, His face so dreadfull, and his eye so piersing. 57 By his Stone-shining Alter, rooted growes The rich Palladium, the two Thrones betwixt, Whose golden roote enameld Branches strowes Through the vast Hall, the leaues with blossomes mixt: Mongst which ripe Fruits their coloured sides dispose, As mellowed with the Sun, Deuinely fixt; A wonder twas, this Arbor to behold, The Fruit and blossomes Stones, the branches Gold. 58 Of selfe-same Metall was his dining boord, Where with his Sonnes and Peeres oft times inuested He eat in state, and sometimes would affoord That stranger Peeres were at his Table feasted; In stead of plate they precious Lycours powr'd Into bright hollowed Pearle, rarely digested, Gold was thought base, and therefore for the nones, They diu'd for Pearle, and pierst the rockes for stones. 59 With as great state as Troian Priam could, I haue beheld our Soueraign, Strangers feast, In Boules as precious, Cups, as deerely sould, and hy-prizd Lyquors equall with the rest, When from the Lands-graue and the Browns-wicke bold, The Arch-duke and the Spaniard Legats prest: But chiefely when the royall Brittish Iames, at Greenwitch feasted the great King of Danes. 60 No King for wealth was to this King compared, Fortune showrd all her bounties on his head, No King had bold Sonnes that like Priams dared, Or Dames with greater beauties garnished,
Kings and Kings sonnes were in their eyes insnared, Whom their imperious beauties captiue led: Prince Hector more his Fathers Crowne to grace, Addes by his sword, Pannonia, Phrigia, Thrace. Three king∣domes con∣quered by Hector. 61 Full with all plenty, with aboundance stored, Seeing his wals so strong, his Towne so faire, Himselfe by forraigne Potentates ador'd, And his Exchequer rich without compare, Fifty tall sonnes, the least to vse a sword, And most of them in Martiall Turneyes rare: His Counsell graue, his Lords of hie degree, As prouident, as full of Chiualry. 62 He therefore now bethinkes him of his shame, Done by the Argiues in Alcides dayes, Therefore against all Greece will warre proclame, And to their opposition, forces rayse, He summons all his Lords, who forthwith came, To whom assembled thus King Priam sayes: Oh! which of all this faire and princely traine, Hath not (by Greece) a friend or Kinsman slaine. 63 Shew me the man hath not inricht their Treasure With his owne substance by his Father lost, Whose wiues & daughters haue not serud their pleasure, If they be rich, they Reuell at our cost, Their Barbarous Tyranies exceed all measure, They spoil'd our Nauy on the salt Sea Coast; Beate downe our Wals, they pillag'd all our goods, And waded knee-deepe in our Fathers bloods. 64 Amongst vn-numbred of your neare allyes, My royall Father treacherously they slew, Were not your Fathers in the selfe-same wyse Butcher'd and mangled by that murdrous erew? I see my words confirm'd in your wet eyes, (Remembrance of these wrongs their moist teares drew) Besides they slewe my Sister in their spleene, A free borne princesse, Daughter to a Queene,
65 Behold my state, surueigh your priuate powers, Is it for Priams honor this to beare? Being your Soueraigne, my disgrace is yours, And that which troubles me, should touch you neare; We haue defer'd reuenge to these last howers, Till we had gathered Armes, strength, wealth, and feare: And now since heauen supplies our generall need, I aske your Counsel: Is reuenge decreed? 66 So deepely did the Kings words pierce their brests, That with a generall voyce, Reuenge they cry, Now euery man the inuasiue Greeke detests, And thinkes it long, tili they-can Greece defie, Soone after this, the King his Nobles feasts, Longing till some aduantage they can spy To make their warre seeme iust, at length deuise This colour to their Hostile enterprise. 67 That Pryam shall in courteous manner, send To al the Graecian Kings, to aske againe His captiue Sister, like a royall frend: (Which if they grant,) in friend-ship to remaine: But if this Embassie their eares offend, And they the faire Hesione detaine; To Menace warre: Anthenor Nobly mand, At Priams vrgence, takes this taske in hand. 68 In Thessaly where Peleus that time raign'd, Anthenor after some few moneths aiues, And of Hesiones estate complain'd, That her returne might saue ten thousand liues, But if to bondage shee were still constrain'd, Her Brother that as yet by faire meanes striues, Must in his Honour seeke by armes to gaine her, Vnto their costs, that proudly dare detaine her. 69 Peleus inrag'd, commands Anthenor thence, Nor will he grace the Troian with reply, That dare to him so proud a sute commence, He therefore makes with speed from Thessaly,
Great Telamonis Aiax to incense, Who keepes the Princesse in base Slauery: In Salaminaes Port he Anchor casts, And thence vnto Duke Aiax Pallace hasts. 70 Mildly of him the Embassador demands Hesione, or if he keepe her still, With her to enter Hymens Nuptiall bands, Not as a Slaue to serue his lustfull will: When Tellamon this Message vnderstands, He was in thought, the Troian Lord to kil: So scornefully the Duke his Message tooke, His face lookt pale, his head with anger shooke. 71 He tels him he is not allyde at all With twice-won Troy, nor any league desires; The beautious Princesse to his lot did fall, Whom he wil keepe (and mauger all their yres,) For scaling first Troyes well defended Wall, She was his Trophies prize: He that aspires To take her thence, or once demand her backe, Is but the meanes their Troy againe to Sacke. 72 And so commands him thence, who still proceeds Vnto Achaia, where the famous Twins Castor and Pollux haue aduanc'st their deeds, And by their Valours were both crowned Kings; Vnto their Court in hast Anthenor speeds, And to their eares his Embassie begins: But they with Telamons rude scornes reply, And charge him straight out of their Confines hie. 73 With like contempt Duke Nestor sends him backe, So did the two Atrides; So the rest Of all the Argiue Kings, command him packe Out of their bounds, as an vnwelcome guest, Since Troy deseruedly indur'd such wracke: Anthenor answered thus, esteemes it best, Backe to resaile, and to King Priam tell, What in his bootlesse voyage him befell.
74 The King at this reproach inflam'd with rage, Assembles all his people, Sonnes, and Peeres, Intending by their aydes new warre to wage, To which the youthfull Gallants wanting yeares, Freely assent, but those of riper age, Out of their grauer wisedome, not pale feares, Seeke by their Counsels Priam to perswade, To raigne in peace, and not proud Greece inuade. 75 Among the rest, great Hector, from whose tong Did neuer yssue proud discourteous word, Whom Greeke nor Troian can accuse of wrong, Nor they within whose blouds he glaz'd his sword, Rayseth himselfe aboue the populous throng, And thus he sayes: Who rather should afford Vengeance on Greece, then I your eldest sonne, Hectors Ora∣tion. To whom these rough iniurious wrongs are done. 76 But if we well consider what a foe, And what great wrath vpon our heads we pull, Not Greece alone, but all that homage owe, Asia and Affricke make their numbers full, The oddes is too vnequall, therefore knowe, I am of thought all warres to disanull. Troy's but a Citty, and though rich and strong, Yet gainst the world oppos'd, must needs take wrong. 77 Why will Rich Priam hazard his estate, Being in peace? what need we couet warre? What can we more desire, then fortunate? So Priam, Troy, and all our people are: Why should we seeke t'incurre the Argiue hate, Of which remains so incurable a scarre? Wisemen in their reuenges should forsee What ends may fall, not what beginnings be. 78 My Grand-sire's dead, perhaps he did offend, But howsoeuer he cannot now suruiue? To seeke his life we vainely should contend: Methinkes in this against the Gods we striue,
What the Greekes mar'd, the Gods themselues amend, Whence should we then our detriments deriue? Our Troy is since her second fall, much fairer, Her people richer, and her buildings rarer. 79 Troy lost a King, that losse your Grace supply, And though (your sonne) of this I proudly vant, He is in you receiu'd with vsury, They pillag'd vs, and yet we nothing want, Of all their wounds, we not one scarre can spy, Vnlesse Hesione our Princely Ant: Whose bondage long since hapning, we may gesse, The custome and continuance makes seeme lesse. 80 But how soeuer neare to mee allyde, I do not hold her freedome of that meed, That for her sake Troy should in blood be dyde, Priam or any of his yssue bleed: And for this cause do I my selfe deuide From their rash Counsel, that Reuenge decreed: Knowing all warre is doubtfull, and fore-seeing Of Troy, what it may be, not of Troyes being. 81 If any hot blood prouder then the rest, Accuse my words, and thinke I speake through feare, I wish that man the boldest Graecian guest That euer with Alcides Anchor'd heare, That I might print my valour on his Crest, And on his armed Vaunt-brace proue my Speare: This said, great Hector Congied to the King, Then takes his place, when vp doth Paris spring. 82 And to the King his Idaes dreame relates, And how he iudg'd three beauties for the ball; How farre he Venus 'boue the rest instates, The fairest Greeke vnto his lot must fall, A fit reuenge for those whom Priam hates: For if the King will make him Generall, He makes no doubt, from Greece a Queene to bring, Shall equalize the Sister of the King.
83 Now all the peoples voyce on his side flowes, In euery eare his famous dreame is rife, When ranckt next Paris, Deiphebus growes, Perswading still to giue these discords life, As one that by presumptions thus much knowes, His voyage can procure no further strife: Then if the promising Fates assist his Brother, To proue th'exchance of one Queene for another. 84 But Helenus with sacred spels indude, The prophesie of Helenus. Seekes this prepared voyage to restrayne, He saith, the Greekes shall with their hands imbrude In Troyes bloud royall, conquer once againe, Intreating Paris, he will not delude Theyr reuerent eares, with dreames and visions vaine: Assuring him, that of this Quest shall grow The Citties vniuersall ouerthrow. 85 When youthfull Troylus thus: Who euer heard A bookish Priest perswade to hostyle Armes, Let such as are to Fates and Sawes indeard, Crouch by the fires that smoking Alters warmes, And cherish their faint sinnewes (much affeard) Dreading their owne, not Souldiers threatned harmes: He that's a Priest, amongst priests let him pray, We Souldiers cry Arme: and a glorious day. 86 What lets the King my Father, but to grant My Brother Paris a right royall fleete? That in reuenge of our surprised Aunt, He Warlike prayes among the Graecians meete? Shall tymerous Clarkes our Martiall Spirits dant? No royall Father: know reuenge is sweet: Which since the Fates by visions promise beare: Not to obey their Hests, we Cowards were. 87 Troylus preuailes, and Hector is perswaded To shun the imputation of base feare, With which his courage should be wrong vpbrayded, A tymerous thought came neuer Hector neare,
Sice tis agreed that Greece must be inuaded, Hee'l guard his honor with his sword and Speare; Or if the Gerekes will on the Troians pray, Through his bold body they shall first make way. 88 Without his faire applause it had not past, So reuerent was th'opinion of his braine; His words were Oracles, so sweetly gracst, They generall murmur in all Counsels gaine, His free consent they hauing won at last, The King appoints them a well furnisht traine, With two and twenty Ships well rig'd and man'd, In any part of Greece freely to Land. 89 Which when the Prophetesse Cassandra heares, Indu'de with deuine wisedome, she exclaimes, Her yellow Tramels she in fury teares, And cries alowd: poore Troy shall burne in flames. Oh had not changelesse Fate made deafe their eares They had bin mou'd: Th'vnhappy King she blames: The credulous Queene, rash Paris, and all Troy, That giue consent their Citty to destroy. 90 But as her Deuinations neuer fayled, So were they neuer credited for true, Till Troy vnwares with mischiefe was assayled, And then too late their misbeliefe they rue, They that now held her mad, ere long bewailed Their slacke distrust, when threatned Ils ensue: But twas a Fate their Sawes were still neglected, and till prooud true by processe: false, suspected. 91 Apollo, in whose sacred gift remaines The true presage and ken of future things, Phoebus and Cassandra. Dotes on Cassandraes beauty, and complaines, To her chast eares he tunes his golden strings; The crasty Girle that in her heart disdaines The gold, as she had earst despised Kings, Demands a boone, which Phaebus hath decreed To grant Cassandra, in sure hope to speed.
92 He sweares by Styx, an oath that cannot change, That he will graunt what she shall next impose him, She askes to know the skill of secrets strange, And future Prophesies; withall she shewes him Her beauty where his eyes may freely range: The amorous God of Fire securely throwes him In her faire lap, and on her Iuory brest, Laies his bright head, so grants her her request. 93 But when she feeles a deuine spirit infus'd Through all her parts, (this Phoebus did inspire,) She fled his loose imbraces, and refus'd By any meanes to accomplish his desire: He mad with anger to be thus abus'd, Thus sayes: Thou think'st to mock the God of Fire: Thy Sawes, though sooth, yet shall do no man good, Not be beleeu'd, or else not vnderstood. 94 This was the cause the King remain'd vnmou'd, The Queene vntoucht with her lamenting cries, And all those Princes that their safeties lou'd, Though long for-warn'd, her Counsell yet despise, Her Spels haue credit, when th'euents are prou'd, Till then, though true, they are esteemed lies: But leaue Cassandra to her ceaselesse care, And Paris to his Troian Fleet prepare. 95 Who with his Brother Deiphebus sends, To hast Aeneas to the Seas with speed, Polydamus, Anthenor, and such frends, As in this generall voyage were agreed, His Souldiers most Pannonians, he entends Shall rather see his Aunt from Aiax freed, Or some bright Graecian Queene, for her disgrace Shall Captiue liue in faire Hesiones place. 96 Imbarckt, and passing diuers Seas, at last, In Lacedemons Port they safely Land, But what twixt Paris and bright Hellen past, What fauours he receiu'd from her faire hand,
How the Greeke Spartan Queene the Troian grac'st, You in the sequell Booke must vnderstand, Some small retyrement at this time we craue, What you want heere, another place shall haue, TOuching the Dignity of Poets, I referre you to Ouids 3. Booke, De arte Amandi, omitting others, translating him thus: SEe, see, What alterations rude time brings, Poets of old, were the right hands of Kings, Large were their gifts, supreame was their reward, Their meeterd Lines with feare and reuerence hard, Honour, and state, and sacred Maiesty, Belong'd to such as studied Poetry: Ennius (by Scipio the great) was sought, And from the Mountaines in Calabria brought: Dishonoured now, the Iuy Garland lies, The Ancient worship vnto Poets dies, Yet should we striue our owne fames to awake, Homer an euerlasting worke did make, His Illiades cald, else who had Homer knowne, Had Danae in her Tower an old wife growne, And neuer vnto publish view resorted, How had her beauty bin so farre reported? And in another place proceedeth thus: We in our flowing numbers beauty praise, And in our Poems your deserts can raise: We first bestow'd on Nemesis a name, Cinthia by our admittance keeps hir fame, Lycoris neuer hath bin knowne before, By vs she sounds in euery forraine shore, And many proffer me large gifts, to know Who my Corinna is, whom I praise so: In vs there is a power shall neuer perrish, Vs the Pierides and Muses cherrish: A Godhead raignes in vs, & with the stars, We haue Trafficke and acquaintance, holding wars Which none saue Barbarisme, our Sacred spirit, We from the bye Deuinest powers inherit.
POlydor was sonne to Priam and Hecuba, who was com∣mitted to Polynestor, to be kept in the time of the Tro∣ian warres, with a great sum of money. The description of the Troians be according to Dares the Troian, who liued in the warres of Troy, and writ their vt∣ter subuersion. The Peletronij were the Lapithes, who first found the vse of Bridles, Bits, and Snaffels, so cald of Peletronium a Towne in Thessaly. Castor and Pollux were two twins, whom Iupiter begot of Laeda, Kings in Achaya, Brothers to Helena. The Fortunes of Paris, his casting out to bee a Sheapherd after the ominous dreame of his Mother, with the vision of the three Goddesses in the mount of Ida, are more at large expres∣sed in his Epistle to Helena. Cassandraes Prophesies true, and neuer credited, alude to the Prophet Tyresias a Southsayer of Thebes. Who vvith striking two Adders ingendring, became forthwith a Woman. Seauen yeares after, he likewise finding two Serpents, stroke them, and was immediately turned againe into a man, and participated both the affection of man and vvoman. It so fell out, that Iupiter and Iuno arguing, fel into great difference: Shee holding obstinately Women lesse wanton then men: Hee affirming men lesse Lasciuious then Women: and who can better moderate this discention then Tyresius, that had felt the desires of both, to him they appeale; He tooke Iupiters part, and averd Women to be most Luxurious: At vvhich Iuno inraged, strooke him vvith blindnesse, vvhich because Iupiter could not helpe (for one Godde cannot vndoe what another hath done) she gaue him the guift of Prophesie: to vvhich, the spightfull Goddesse added also this, that his Prophefies (though true) yet they shoulde neuer bee belee∣ued. Clazemonij vvere people of Ionia. Of that Country, Arte∣mō, was cald Clazemonius: It was the name of a Physitian in Pliny, also a beautiful young man much loued of al Women. Mideus wat called Messenius of Messe, a Towne in Pe∣loponesus. Of Acrisius vvee haue spoake before, the Fa∣ther of Danae' his Brother Praetus, sought to dispossesse
him of his kingdom, and they are said to be the first that vsed a shield in battaile. Of the Palladium, what it was, many writers differ: Pal∣ladia, are all such Images as are made without hands, or such Pherecides. as fell from heauen to Earth: such was the Palladiū of I roy, and light first in the Citty Pessinus, a Mart-Towne in Phry∣gia, where Sibell had a Temple. Others thinke it to be giuen Dio, Drodorus. by Iupiter to Icus the Brother of Ganimed, whose censure we most allow. Though others write this Palladium to bee made by Asius a great Phylosopher, and a Mathematitian, of Ihanes An∣tiochs. whom the thirde part of the world was called Asia, being mo∣deld with this Vertue, that the Citty which inioyed it, shoulde for the time be inuincible. The like things was attributed to the shafts of Hercules, giuen to Philocteres by dying Hercu∣les in the Mount Oeta, betweene Thessaly and Macedonia, when the Delphian Oracles had signified to the Greeks, that Troy could neuer be surprised without the shaftes of Hercu∣les, they sought Philoctetes, and demaunding of him those spoiles (which hee vvas bound by oath to conceale) being ex∣treamely vrged, hee pointed with his foote to the place where they vvere buried, vvhich the ioyfull Greeks inioying, they receaued by them victory, and the Troians the ouerthrow. The end of the eight CANTO.
Argumentum PAris departs from Troy, & Greece doth enter Whom Menelaus welcomes, hauing seene; The King is cald thence by a strange aduenter And to his Troian-guest he trusts his Queene: Paris fayre Hellen Loues, & doth present her With a long sute, to heale his wound yet greene: First Paris writes, she answers; Then with ioy Greece they for sake, & both are shipt for Troy ARG. 2. BRight Hellen courted, Paris birth and Fate, With his Loue-trickes, Iota shall relate. CANTO. 9. WHo can describe the purity of those, Whose beauties are by Sacred Vertues guided, Or who their vgly pictures that oppose Their beautis against Chastity deuided, Proud Lucifer an Angell was, but chose Vice: Vertue to eschew: and from heauen slided: Women like him (in shape Angellicall) are Angels whilst they stand, Deuils when they fall. 2 Their gifts well vsd, haue power t'inchant the wise, To daunt the bold, and ruinate the strong, Which well applyde, can make the ruin'd rise, The Coward valiant, weake to tast no wrong,
They are all poyson, when they wantonize, All Soueraigne, where ther's Vertue mixt among: Chast, nothing better; wanton, nothing worse, The grate-fulst Blessing, or the greatest Curse. 3 Had Spartan Hellen bin as chast as faire, her Vertue sooner might haue raisd a Troy Then her loose gestures: great without compare, Had power so rich a Citty to destroy: By this time all the Troians Landed are, and Paris of the Queene receiu'd with ioy: To whom th'inamored Prince in priuate sends These lines, in which his duty he commends. The Epistle of Paris to Hesten. HEalth vnto Laedaes daughter, Priains son Sends in these lines, whose health cannot be won But by your guift, in whose power it may lie, To make me whole or sicke; to liue, or die: Shall I then speaks? Or doth my flame appeare Plaine without Index? Oh, tis that Ifeare: My Loue without discouering smile takes place, And more then I could wish shines in my face. When I could rather in my thoughts desire To hide the smoke, til time display the fire: Time, that can make the fire of Loue shine cleare, Vntroubled with the misty smoke of feare: But I dissemble it, for who I pray Can fire conceale, that will it selfe betray? yet if you looke, I should affirme that plaine In words, which in my countenance Imaintaine: I burne, I burne, my fault I haue confest, My words beare witnesse how my lookes transgrest. Oh pardon me that haue confest my error, Cast not vpon my lines a looke of terror, But as your beautic is beyond compare, Suite vnto that your lookes (oh you most faire) That you my Letter haue receiu'd, by this The supposition glads me, and I wish
By hope incourag'd, hope that makes me strong, you will receiue me in some sort ere long, I aske no more then what the Queene of Beauty Hath promist me, for you are mine by duty, By her I claime you, you for me were made, And she it was my iourney did perswade: Nor Lady thinke your beauty vainely sought, I by deuine instinct was hether brought, And to this enterprize, the heauenly powers, Haue giuen consent, the Gods proclaime me yours, I ayme at wonders, for I couet you, yet pardon me, I aske but whats my due, Venus her selfe my iourney hether led, And giues you freely to my promist bed: Vnder her safe conduct the seas I past, Till I arriu'd vpon these Coasts at last: Shipping my selfe from the Sygean shore, Whence vnto these Confines my course I bore: She made the Surges gentle, the winds fayre, Nor maruell whence these calmes proceeded are, Needs must she power vpon the salt-Seas haue, That was sea-borne, created from a waue, Still may she potent stand in her ability, And as she made the seas vvith much facility To be through-saild, so may she calme my heat, And beare my thoughts to their desired seat: My flames I found not Here, no, I protest, I brought them with me closed in my brest, My selfe transported then without Atturney, Loue was the Motiue to my tedious iourney; Not blustring Winter when he triumpht most, Nor any error droue me to this Coast, Nor led by Fortune where the rough winds please, Nor Marchant-like for gaine crost I the Seas: Fulnesse of wealth in all my Fleet I see, I am rich in all things saue in wanting thee. No spoile of petty Nations my Ship seekes, Nor Land I as a spie among the Greekes, What need we? See of all things we haue store, Compar'd with Troy (alas) your Greece is pore,
For thee I come, thy fame hath thus farre driuen me, Whom golden Venus hath by promise giuen me, I Wisht thee ere I knew thee, long ago, Before these eyes dwelt on this glorious show: I saw thee in my thoughts, know beautious Dame, I first beheld you with the eyes of Fame, Nor maruell Lady I was stroke so farre, Thus Darts or Arrowes sent from owes of warre Wound a great distance off: so was I hit With a deepe smarting wound that ranckles yet, For so it pleas'd the Fates, whom least you blame, Ile tell a true Tale to confirme the same. When in my Mothers wombe full ripe I lay, Ready the first houre to be hold the day, And she at point to be deliuered streight, And to vnlade her of her Royall freight, My Byrth-houre was delaid, and that sad night A fearefull vision did the Queene affright, In a sonnes stead to please the aged Sire, She dreampt she had brought forth a Brand of fire, Frighted she rises, and to Priam goes, To the old King this ominous dreame she showes: He to the Priest, the Priest doth this returne, That the Child borne shall stately Islium burne: Better then he was ware the Prophet guest, Hecubaes dreame. For loe a kindled Brand flames in my brest, To preuent Fate a Pesant I was held, Till my faire shape all other Swaines exeld, And gaue the doubtfull world assurance good, To preuent the Oracle, Para was cast out among the shepheards of Ida. your Paris was deriu'd from royall blood. Amid the Idean Fields there is a place Remote, full of hie Trees, which hide the face Of the greene mantled Earth, where in thicke rowes, The Oake, the Elme, the Pine, the Pitch-tree growes: Heere neuer yet did browze the wanton Ewe, Nor from this plot the slow Oxe licke the dew: The sauage Goat that feeds among the Rockes Hath not graz'd heere, nor any of their Flockes, Hence the Dardanian wals I might espy, The lofty Towers of Islium reared by,
Hence I the Seas might from the firme Land see, Which to behold, I leant me to a Tree: Beleeue me, for I speake but what is true, The vision of Paris. Downe from the skies with feathered pynions flew The Nephew to great Atlas, and doth stand With Golden Caducens in his hand, (This as the Gods to me thought good to show, I hold it good that you the same should know: Three Goddesses behind young Hermes moue Great Iuno, Pallas, and the Queene of Loue; Who as in pompe and Pride of gate they passe, Iuno, Palles, and enus. Scarse with their weight they bend the tops of grasse: Amaz'd I start, and endlong stands my haire, When Mayus Sonne thus sayes, abandon feare Thou Curteous Swaine, that to these groues repairest, And freely Iudge which of these three is fairest: And least I should this curious sentence shun, He tels me by Iboues sentence all is done. And to be Iudge I no way can eschew, This hauing saide, vp through the Ayre he flew: I straight take Hart a grace, and grow more bold, And there their beauties one by one behold. Why am I made the Iudge to giue this dome? Methinkes all three are Worthy to o're-come: To iniure two such Beauties what tongue dare? Or preserre one where they be all faire: Now this seemes fairest, now againe that other, Now would I speake, and now my thoughts I smother, And yet at length the praise of one most sounded, And from that one my present Loue is grounded: The Goddesses out of their earnest care And pride of Beauty to be held most faire, Seeke with large Ariues, and gifts of wondrous price, To their owne thoughts my censure to intice: Inno the Wife of Ihoue doth first inchant me, To Iudge her fairest, she a Crowne will grant me: Pallas her Daughter, next doth vnder take me, Giue her the price, and valiant she will make me: I straight deuise which can most pleasure bring, To be a valiant Souldier or a King:
Last Venus smiling came with such a grace, As if she swayed an Empire in her face, Let not (said she) these guifts the Conquest be are, Combats and Kingdomes are both fraught with feare. Ile giue thee what thou louest best, (louely Swaine,) The furest Saint that doth on earth remaine Shalbe thine owne, make thou the Conquest mine, Faire Laedaes fairest daughter shalbe thine. This said, when with my se'se I had deuised, And her rich guift and beauty ioyntly prised: Venus victor, ore the rest is plac'st, Iuno and Pallas leaue the Mount disgrac'st, Meane time my Fates a prosperous course had ron, And by knowne signes King Priam cald me Son: The day of my restoring is kept holy Among the Saints-dates, consecrated soly To my remembrance, being a day of ioy, For euer in the Calenders of Troy. As I wish you I haue bin wisht by others, The fairest maids by me would haue bin Mothers, Of all my fauours I bestow'd not any, you onely may inioy the Loues of many: Nor by the Daughters of great Dukes and Kings Haue I alone bin sought, whose marriage Rings I haue turn'd backe, but by a straine more hie, By Nimphs and Phairies. such as neuer die. No sooner were you promist as my due, But I (al hated) to remember you: Waking, I saw your Image, if I dreampt, Your beautious figure stil appeard to tempt And vrge this voyage: Til your face excelling These eies beheld, my dreames were all of Hellen. Imagine how your face should now incite me, Being seene, that vnseene did so much delite me: If I was scorcht so farre off from the Fyer, How am I burnt to Cinders thus much nyer: Nor could I longer owe my selfe this treasure, But through the Ocean I must search my pleasure, The Phrygian Hatchets to the rootes are put Of the Idean Pines, (asunder cut)
The Wood-land Mountaine yeilded me large fees, Being despoyl'd of all her tallest Trees, From whence we haue squar'd out vn-numbred beames, That must be washt within the Marine streames: The grounded Oakes are bowed, though stiffe as steele, And to the tough Ribs is the bending Keele Wouen by Ship-wrights craft, then the Maine-mast, Acrosse whose middle is the Saile yard plast. Tackles and sailes, and next you may discerne, Our painted Gods vpon the hooked stearne: The God that beares me on my happy way, And is my guide, is Cupid: Now the day In which the last stroke of the Hammer's heard, Within our Nauy, in the East appeard, And I must now lanch forth, (so the Fates please) To seeke aduentures in the Egean Seas. My Father and my Mother moue delay, And by intreaties would inforce my stay: They hang about my necke, and with their teares Woo me deferre my iourney: but their feares Can haue no power to keepe me from thy sight: And now Cassandra full of sad affright, With loose disheuel'd Tramels, madly skips, Iust in the way betwixt me and my Ships: Oh, whether wilt thou head-long run she cries? Theu bearest fire with thee, whose smoake vp flies Vnto the heauens (Oh Ihoue) thou little fearest What quenchlesse flames thou through the water bearest: Caffandra was too true a Prophetesse, Her quenchlesse flames she spake of (I confesse,) My hot desires burne in my breast so fast, That no Red Furnace hotter flames can cast. I passe the Citty gates, my Barke I boord, The enter∣tainment of Paris. The fauourable winds calme gales affoord, And fill my sails, vnto your Land I steare, For whether else (his course) should Paris beare: Your Husband entertaines me as his guest, And all this hapneth by the Gods behest, He shewes me all his Pastures, parts, and Fields, And euery rare thing Lacedemon yeilds,
He holds himselfe much pleased with my being, And nothing hides, that he esteems worth seeing. I am on fire, till I behold your face, Of all Achayas Kingdome, the sole grace, All other Curious obiects I defie, Nothing but Hellen can content mine eie, Whom when I saw, I stood transformd with wonder, Sencelesse, as one strooke dead by Ihoues sharpe Thunder: As I reuiue, my eyes Irowle and turne, Whilst my flam'd thoughts with hotter fancies burne, Euen so (as I remember,) lookt Loues Queene, When she was last in Phrygian Ida seene, Vnto which place by Fortune I was trained, Where by my censure she the Conquest gained: But had you made a fourth in that contention, Of Venus beauty, there had bin no mention: Hellen assuredly had borne from all The prize of beauty, the bright Golden Ball. Onely of you may this your Kingdome boast, by you it is renown'd in euery Coast: Rumor hath euery where your beautie blazed, In what remote Clyme is not Hellen praised? From the bright Eastern Suns vprise, Inquire Euen to his downfall, where he slakes his fire, There liues not any of your Sex that dare, Contend with you that are proclaimd so faire; Trust me, for truth I speake. Nay vvhats most true, Too sparingly the vvorld hath spoke of you: Fame that hath vndertooke your name to blaze, Plaid but the envious Husvvife in your praise: More then report could promise, or fame blazon, Hen at nine yeares of age rauisht by Theseus. Are these Deuine perfections that I gaze on: These were the same that made Duke Theseus lauish, Who in thy prime and Nonage did thee rauish; A vvorthie Rape for such a vvorthie Man, Thrice happie Rauisher, to ceize thee than When thou vvert stript starke naked to the skin, A custome in Pelepones, the Prou in which   stands. (A sight, of force to make the Gods to sin:) Such is your Countries guise at seasons vvhen, vvith naked Ladies they mixe naked Men;
That he did steale thee from thy Friends, I praise him, And for that deed, I to the Heauens will raise him: That he return'd thee backe, by Ihoue I wonder, Had I bin Theseus, he that should assonder Haue parted vs, or snacht thee from my bed, First from my shoulders should haue par'd my head: So rich a purchase, such a glorious pray, Should constantly haue bin detai'nd for aye. Could these my strong Armes possibly vnclaspe, Whilst in their amorous Foulds they Hellen graspe, Neither by free constraint, nor by free-giuing, Could you depart that compasse, and I liuing: But if by rough inforce I must restore you, Some fruits of Loue, (which I so long haue bore you,) I first would reape, and some sweet fauour gaine, That all my suite were not bestowd in vaine; Either with me you should abide and stay, Or for your passe your maiden-head should pay. Or say I spar'd you that, yet would I try What other fauour, I could else come by, All that belongs to loue, I would not misse, You should not let me both to clip and kisse. Giue me your heart faire Queene, my hart you owe, And what my resolution is, you knowe, Til the last fire my breathlesse body take, The fire within my breast can neuer slake, Before large kingdomes I preferd your face, And Iunoes loue, and potent gifts disgrace. To sold you in my amorous Armes I chusd, And Pallas vertues scornefully refusd. When they with Venus in the Hil of Idc, Made mee the Iudge their beauties to decide, Nor do I yet repent me, hauing tooke Beauty: and strength and Scepter'd rule for sooke: Methinkes I chusd the best, (nor thinke it strange) I still persist, and neuer meane to change; Onely that my imployment be not vain, Oh you more worth then any Empires gaine, Let me intreat, least you my byrth should scorne Or parentage: know I am royall borne.
By marrying me, you shall not wrong your State, Nor be a wife to one degenerate. Search the Records where vve did first begin, And you shall find the Pleyads of our Kin: Nay Ihoe himselfe, all others to forbeare, That in our stocke renowned Princes were: My Father of all Asia raignes sole-King, Whose boundlesse Coast, scarce any featheredwing Can giue a girdle too, a happier Land A neighbor to the Ocean cannot stand: There in a narrovv compasse you may see Citties and Towers, more then may numbred be, The houses guilt, rich Temples that exell, And you will say I neere the great Gods dwell. You shall behold hie Issiums lofty Towers, And Troyes braue Wals built by Immortall powers, But made by Phoebus the great God of Fire, And by the touch of his melodious Lyer: If we haue people to inhabit, vvhen The sad earth grones to beare such troopes of men: Iudge Hellen, Likevvise when you come to Land, The Asian Women shall admiring stand, Saluting thee with welcome, more and lesse Inpreasing throngs and numbers, numberlesse: More then our Courts can hold of you (most faire) You to your selfe will say, alasse, how bare And poore Achaya is, when with great pleasure, You see each house containe a Citties Treasure. Mistake me not I Sparta do not scorne, I hold the Land blest where my Loue was borne: Though barren else, rich Sparta Hellen bore, And therefore I that Prouince must adore; Yet is your Land methinkes but leane and empty, You worthy of a Clyme that flowes with plenty Full Troy, I prostrate it is yours by duty, This petty-seat becomes not your rich beauty; Attendance, Preparation, Curtsie, state, Fit such a Heauenly forme, on which should waite, Cost, fresh variety, Delicious diet, Pleasure, Contentment, and Luxurious ryet,
What Ornaments we vse, what fashions faigne, You may perceiue by me and my proud traine, Thus we attyre our men, but with more cost Of Gold and Pearle, the rich Gownes are Imbost Of our chiefe Ladies, guesse by what you see, you may be soone induc'st to credit me. Ganimed. Be tractable faire Spartan, nor contemne A Troian borne, deriu'd from Royall stemne: He was a Troian and allyde to Hector, That waits vpon Ihoues cup, and fils him Nector: Cephalus. A Troian did the faire Aurora wed, And nightly slept within her Roseat bed: The Goddesse that ends night and enters day, From our faire Troian Coast stole him away, Anchises. Anchises was a Troian, whom Loues Queene, (Making the Trees of Ida a thicke Screene Twixt Heauen and her) oft lay with, view me vvell, I am a Troian too, in Troy I dwell: Thy Husband Menelaus hether bring, Compare our shapes, our yeares, and euery thing I make you Iudgesse, wrong me if you can, you needs must say I am the properer man: None of my line hath turn'd the Sun to blood, And rob'd his Steeds of their Ambrosiall food: My Father grew not from the Caucasse Rocke, Nor shall I graft you in a bloody Stocke: Priam nere wrong'd the guiltlesse soule, or further, Made the Myrtoan Sea looke red with murder. Myrtoan is a part of the sea betwixt the Ioutum & Egum. Nor thirsteth my great Grand-sire in the Lake Of Lethe, Chin-deepe, yet no thirst can slake: Nor after ripened Apples vainely skips, Who flie him still, and yet still touch his lips, But what of this? If you be so deriu'd, You notwithstanding are no right depriu'd: You grace your Stocke, and being so deuine, Ihoue is of force compeld into your Liue. Oh mischiefe! Whilst I vainely speake of this, Your Husband all vnworthy of such blisse Inioyes you this long night, enfolds your wast, And where he list may boldly touch and tast,
So when you sat at Table, many a toy, Passeth betweene you my vext soule t'annoy, At such hie feasts I wish my enemy sit, Where discontent attendes on euery bit, I neuer yet was plac'st at any Feast, But oft it irkt me that I was your Guest: That which offends me most, thy rude Lord knowes, For still his arme about thy necke he throwes, Which I no sooner spy but I grow mad, And hate the man whose courting makes me sad: Shall I be plaine? I am ready to sinke downe When I behold him wrap you in his Gowne, While you sit smiling on his amorous knee, His fingers presse, where my hands itch to bee: But when he hugs you I am forc'st to frowne, The meat I'am eating will by no meanes downe, But stickes halfe way, amidst these discontents I haue obseru'd you laugh at my laments, And with a scornefull, yet a wanton smile Deride my sighes and grones, oft to beguile My passions, and to quench my fiery rage, By quaffing healths I'haue thought my flame t'asswage, But Bacchus full cups make my flame burne hyer, Add wine to loue, and you adde fire to fire. To shun the sight of many a wanton feat, Betwixt your Lord and you I shift my seat, And turne my head, but thinking of your grace, Loue skrewes my bead to gae backe on your face. What were I best to do? To see you play Mads me, and I perforce must turne away, And to forbeare the place where you abide, Would kill me dead should I but start aside: As much as lyes in me I striue to bury The shape of Loue, in mirths spight I seeme mery: But oh, the more I seeke it to suppresse, The more my blabbing lookes my loue professe. You know my Loue which I in vaine should hide, Would God it did appeare to none beside, Oh Ihoue how often haue I turnd my cheeke, To hide th'apparant teares that passage seeke,
From forth my etes, and to a corner stept, Least any man should aske wherefore Iwept: How often haue I told you pittious tales, Of constant louers, and how Loue preuailes? When such great heed to my discourse I tooke, That euery accent suited to your looke. In forged names my selfe I represented, The Louer so perplext and so torented, If you will know? Behold I am the same, Paris was ment in that true Louers name: As often, that I might the more securely Speake loose immodest words that sound impurely, That they offencelesse might your sweet eares tutch, I haue lispt them out, like one had drunke too mutch: Once I remember, your loose vayle betraid Your naked skin, and a fayre passage made To my inamored eye, Oh skin much brighter Then snow, or purest milk, in colour whiter Then your faire mother Laeda, when Ihoue grac'st her, And in the shape of Feathered Swan imbrac'st her: Whilst at this rauishing sight I stand amazed, And without interruption freely gazed, The wreathed handle of the Boule I graspt, Fell from my hold, my strengthlesse hand vnclaspt, A Goblet at that time I held by chanee, And downe it fell, for I was in a trance; Kisse your faire daughter, and to her I skip, And snatch your kisses from your sweet Childs lip. Sometimes I throw my selfe along, and lie Singing Loue-songs, and if you cast your eie On my effeminate gesture, I still find Some pretty couered signes to speake my mind, And then my earnest suit bluntly inuades Aethra and Climnca your two chiefe maides, But they returne me answeres full of feare, And to my motions lend no further eare. Oh that you were the prize of some great strife, And he that wins might claime you for his wife, Hyppomanes with swift Atlanta ran, And at one course the Goale and Lady wan,
Euen she, by whom so many Suters perisht, Was in the bosome of her new Loue cherisht: So Hercules for Deyaneira stroue, Brake Achelous horne, and gain'd his loue, Had I such liberty: such freedome graunted, My resolution neuer could be daunted, Your selfe should find, and all the world should see, Hellen (a prize alone) reseru'd for me. There is not left me any meanes (most faire) To Court you now, but by intreats and praire, Vnlesse (as it becoms me) you thinke meet, That I should prostrate fall, and kisse your feet, Oh, all the honour that our last age wins, Then glory of the two Tyndarian Twins, Worthy to be Ihoues Wife, in heauen to raigne, Were you not Ihoues owne daughter, of his straine. To the Sygean confines I will carry thee, And in the Temple of great Pallas marry thee: Or in this Island where I vent my mones, Ile beg a Toombe for my exiled bones: My wound is not a slight race with an arrow, But it hath pierst my hart, and burnt my marrow, This Prophesie my Sister oft hath sounded, That by an heauenly dart I should be wounded: Oh then forbeare (fayre Hellen) to oppose you. Against the Gods, they say I shall not lose you: Yeeld you to their beheast, and you shall find, The Gods to your petitions likewise kind. A thousand things at once are in my braine, Which that I may essentially complaine, And not in papers empty all my head, Anon at night receiue me to your bed. Blush you at this, or Lady doe you feare To violate the Nuptiall lawes austearc? Oh (simple Hellen) Foolish, I might say, What profite reape you to be Chast, I pray? 1st possible, that you a World to winne, Should keepe that face, that beauty, without sinne? Rather you must your glorious face exchange For one (lesse Faire) or else not seeme so strange:
Beauty and Chastity at variance are, Tis hard to finde one Woman chast and faire, Venus will not haue beauty ouer aw'de, Hie Ihoue him selfe, stolne pleasures will applaude, And by such theeuish pastimes we may gather, How Ihoue gainst Wedlocks lawes, became your father: He and your mother Laeda both transgrest When you were got, she bare a tender breast. What glory can you gaine Loues sweets to smother? Or to be counted Chaster then your mother? Professe strict chastity, when vvith great ioy, I lead you as my Bride-espousd, through Troy; Then Ientreat you raine your pleasures in, I wish thy Paris may be all thy sinne. If Citherea her firme Couenant keepe, Though I within your bosome nightly sleepe, We shall not much misdoo, but so offend, That we by marriage may our guilt amend. Your husband hath himselfe this businesse ayded, And though (not with his toung) he hath per swaded By all his deedes (as much) least he should stay Our priuate meetings, he is farre away: Of purpose rid vnto the farthest West, That he might leaue his wife vnto his guest. No fitter time he could haue found to visit The Chrisean royall Scepter, and to ceize it: Oh, simple simple Husband: but hees gone, And going, left you this to thinke vpon. Faire Wife (quoth he) I prethe in my place, Regard the Troian Prince, and do him grace: Behold, a witnesse I against you stand, You haue beene carelesse of his kinde command. Count from his first dayes iourney, neuer since Did you regard or grace the Troian Prince; What thinke you of your Husband? that he knowes The worth and value of the face he owes? Who (but a Fool) such beauty would indanger, Or trust it to the mercy of a Stranger. Then (royall Queene) if neither may intreat, My quenchlesse passion, nor Loues raging heate
Can win you, we are wooed both to this crime, Euen by the fit aduantage of the time, Either to Loues sweet sport we must agree, Or shew our selues to be worse fooles then he. He tooke you by the hand the hower he rode, And knowing, I with you must make abode, Brings you to me, What should I further say? It was his minde to giue you quite away. What meant he else? Then lets be blithe and iolly, And make the best vse of your Husbands folly: What should we doe? Your husband is farre gone, And this colde night (poore soule) you lie alone: I want a bedfellow, so doe we eather, What lets vs then, but that we lie together. You slumbring thinke on me, On you I dreame, Both our desires are feruent, and extreame: Sweet, then appoint the night. Why doe you stay? Oh night, more clearer then the brightest day, Then I dare freely speake, protest, and sweare, And of my vowes the Gods shall record beare: Then will I seale the contract, and the strife, From that day forward, we are man and Wife: Then questionlesse I shall so farre per swade, That you with me shall Troyes ritch Coast invade, And with your Phrygian guest at last agree, Our potent Kingdome and rich Crowne to see: But if you (blushing) feare the vulger bruit, That sayes, you follow me, to me make suite, Feare it not Hellen; Ile so vvorke with Fame, I will (alone) be guilty of all blame. Duke Theseus was my instance, and so were Your brothers Lady, Can I come more neare To ensample my attempts by? Theseus haled Hellen perforce: Your brothers they preuayled With the Leucippian Sisters, now from these Ile count my selfe the fourth (if Hellen please.) Our Troian Nauy rides vpon the Coast, Rig'd, arm'd, and Man'd, and I can proudly boast, The bankes are high, Why doe you longer stay? The windes and Oares are ready to make way,
You shall be like a high Maiesticke Queene, Led through the Dardan Citty, and be seene By millions, who your State hauing commended, Will (wondring) sweare, some Goddesse is descended. Where ere you walke the Priests shall Incence burne, No way you shall your eie or body turne, But sacrificed beasts the ground shall beate, And bright religious fires the Welkin heate, My father, mother, brother, sisters: all Islium and Troy in pompe maiesticall, Shall with rich guifts present you (but alasse) Not the least part (so farre they doe surpasse) Can my Epistle speake, you may behold More then my words or writings can vnfold. Nor feare the bruit of vvarre, or threatning Steele, When we are fled, to dogge vs at the heele: Or that all Graecia will their powers vnite, Of many rauisht, can you one recite, Whom vvarre re-purchast? These be ydle feares, Rough blustering Boreas fayre Orithea beares Vnto the Land of Thrace, yet Thrace still free, And Athens raisd no rude Hostility: In winged Pegasus did Iason saile, And from great Colchos he Medea stale: Yet Thessaly you see can shew no scar Of former wounds in the Thessalian warre. He that first rauisht you: In such a Fleet As ours is, Ariadne brought from Creet: Yet Mynos and Duke Theseus were agreed, About that quarrell, not a breast did bleed: Lesse is the daunger (trust me) then the feare That in these vaine and ydle doubts appeare. But say rude vvarre should be proclaimde at length, Know, I am valiant and haue sinowie strength: The vveapons that I vse are apt to kill, Asia besides, more spacious fields can fill With armed men then Greece, amongst vs are More perfect Souldiers, more beasts apt for war: Nor can thy husband Menelaus be Of any high spirit and Magnanimity,
Or so well prou'd in Armes: for Hellen I Beeing but a Lad, haue made my enemies fly, Re-gaind the prey from out the hands of Theeues, Who had dispoild our Heards, and stolne our Beeues, By such aduentures I my name obtained, (Being but a Lad) the conquest I haue gained Of young men in their prime, who much could do, Deiphebus, Ilioneas to, I haue orecome in many sharpe contentions, Nor thinke these are my vaine and forg'd inuentions, Or that I only hand to hand can fight, My arrowes when I please shall touch the white. I am expert in the Quarrey and the Bovv, You cannot boast your hartlesse husband so: Had you the power in all things to supply me, And should you nothing in the world deny mē, To giue me such a Hector to my brother You could not: The earth beares not such another: By him alone all Asia is well mand, He like an enemy against Greece shall stand Opposd to your best fortunes, wherefore striue you? You do not know his valour that must wiue you, Or what hid vvorth is in me, but at length You will confesse when you haue prou'd my strength: Thus either war shall still our steps pursue, Or Greece shall fall in Troyes all-conquering view, Nor vvould I feare for such a royall Wife, To set the Vniuersall world at strife: To gaine ritch Prizes, men will venter farre, The hope of purchase makes vs bold in vvarre: If all the vvorld about you should contend, Your name would be eternizd vvithout end, Only be bold, and fearelesse may vve saile Into my Countrey, with a prosperous gale, If the Gods graunt me my expected day, I to the full shall all these Couenants pay. THese two Epistles being so pertinent to our Historie, I thought necessarie to translate, as well for their elegan∣cy as for their alliance, opening the whole proiect of
the Loue betwixt Paris and Hellen, the preparation to his iourney, his entertainment in Sparta, as also Hecubaes dreame, Paris his casting out among Shepheards, his Vision, and the whole prosecution of his intended Rape. Laeda was wife to Tindarus King of Laconia. The Poets write, that Iupiter accompanying her in forme of a Swanne, she brought forth two egges, of the one came Pollux and He∣lena, of the other came Castor and Clitemnestra, after wife to Agamemnon. The Pleyades from whom Paris deriues his progeny, are the seauen starres, once daughters to Lycurgus the famous Law-giuer of Athens. Hermione was daughter to Menalaus and Helena, be∣trothed to Orestes, but married to Pyrrhus, for which cause Orestes slew Pyrrhus at the Altar, and after enioyed his loue Hermione. To prosecute the Tale of Ariadnes transformation after she had saued the life of ingratefull Theseus, who by hir aduise and prouidence slew the Mynotaur, Theseus in his returne home for sooke her, and left her vpon a desolate Island. It so fell out, MAdde Ariadne stayde that Isle about, Left desolate vpon that harren plaine Where the brooke Dia poures into the Maine, Who waking from her rest, her vaile vnbound, Her barefoot treading on the vnknowne ground, Her golden haire disheue'ld, loude she raues, Calling on Theseus to the deaf-ned waues, On Theseus, cruell Theseus, whom she seekes, Whilst shewers of teares make furrowes in her cheekes. She cals and weepes, and weepes and cals at once, Which might haue mou'd to ruth the sencelesse stones, Yet both alike became her, they both gracst her, The whilst she striues to call him, or cry faster. Then beats she her soft breast, and makes it grone, And then she cryes, What, is false Theseus gone? What shall I doe? she cryes, What shall I doe? And with that noate, she runs the Forrests throoe,
When suddenly her eare might vnderstand, Cimbals and Tymbrels toucht with a lowd hand, To which the Forrests, Woods, and Caues resound, And now amazde she sencelesse fals to ground. Behold the Nymphs come with their scattered haire, Falling behind, which they like garments ware, And the light Satyres, an vnruly crew, Neerer and neerer to the Virgin grew. Next old Sylenus on his lasie Asse, Sylenus the Priest of Bac∣chus. Nods with his drunken pate, about to passe, Where the poore Lady all in teares lies drownd, Scarce sits the Drunkard but he fals to ground, Scarce holds the Bridle fast, but staggering stoopes, Following those giddy bachinalian troopes, Who daunce the wilde Lauolto on the grasse, Whilst with a staffe he layes vpon his Asse. At length, when the young Satyres least suspect, He tumbling, fals quite from his Asses necke. But vppe they heaue him, whilst each Satyre cries, Rise good old Father, good old Father rise. Now coms the god himselfe, next after him His Vine-like Chariot, drawne with Tygres grim, Coulour, and voice, and Theseus, she doth lacke, Thrice would she fly, and thrice feare pluckt her back, She trembles like a stalke the wind doth shake, Or a weake reede that growes beside the Lake, To whom the God spake: Lady, take good cheere, See one more faithfull then false Theseus heere: Thou shalt be wife to Bacchus, for a guift Take the high heauens, and to the Spheares be lift, Where thou shalt shine a starre to guide by night, The wandring Sea-man in his course aright: This saide, least his grim Tygers should affray The trembling Mayde, the God his Coach doth stay, And leaping from his Chariot with his heeles Imprints the sand, and then the Nymph he feeles, And hugging her, in vaine she may resist, He beares her thence (Gods can do what they list) Some Hymen sing, some Io, Io cry, So Bacchus with the mayde all night doth lie.
Therefore when wine in plentious cups doth flow, And thou the night vnto thy Loue dost owe, Pray to the God of grapes that in thy bed, The quaffing healths do not offend thy hed. Agreeable to this, is that in the first booke, de Art. aman. for from Paris he deriues these Loue-tricks in wine. LOe, I can teach thee, though thy toung be mute, How with thy speaking eie to moue thy sute: Good language may be made in lookes and winkes, Be first that takes the cup wherein she drinkes, And note the very place her lip did tutch, Drinke iust at that, let thy regard be such: Or when she carues, what part of all the meat She with her fingers touch, that carue and eate: Carouse not, but with soft and moderate sups, Haue a regard and measure, in thy cups: Let both thy feet and thoughts theyr office know, Chiefly beware of brauling, which may grow By too much wine. From fighting most abstaine, In such a quarrell was Eurilion slayne: Where Swaggering leades the way, Mischiefe coms after, Iunkets and Wine were made for mirth and laughter: Though to be drunke indeed, may hurt thy braine, Yet now and then, I hold it good to fayne: Instruct thy lisping toung sometimes to trip That if misplacst, a word transgresse thy lip It may be iudgd that quaffing was the cause, &c. The end of the nynth CANTO.
Argumentum HEllen re-wrytes, the Troians sute preuails, And of the appointed Rape they both agree, Proud of so fayre a purchase, Paris sailes To Troy, from whence the Graecians seek to free The rauisht Spartan: Menalaus bewailes The absence of his Queene, longing to see Reuenge on Troy, to which the Graecians meet, Castor and Pollux perish with the Fleet. ARG. 2. KAppa records her Rape, describes and brings To Aulis Gulph the powerfull Graecian kings. CANTO. 10. Hellen to Paris. NO sooner came mine eye vnto the sight Of thy rude Lynes, but I must needes re-wright: Dar'st thou (Oh shamelesse) in such heynous wise, The Lawes of Hospitality despise? And being a straunger, from thy Countries reach, Solicite a chast wife to Wedlocks breach? Was it for this, our free Tenarian Port, Receiu'd thee and thy traine, in friendly sort?
And when great Neptune nothing could appease, Gaue thee safe harbour from the stormy Seas? Was it for this, our Kingdomes armes spread vvide, To entertaine thee from the waters side? Yet thou of forren soyle remote from hence, A stranger, comming we scarce know from whence, Is periur'd wrong the recompence of right? Is all our friendship guerdond with despight? I doubt me then, whither in our Court doth tarry, A friendly guest, or a fierce aduersary: Nor blame me, for if iustly you consider, And these presumptions well compare togither, So simple my complaint will not appeare, But you your selfe must needes excuse my feare. Well, hold me simple, much it matters not, Whilst I preserue my chast name farre from spot, For when I seeme toucht with bashfull shame, It shewes how highly I regard my Fame: When I seeme sad, my countnance is not fained, And when I lower, my looke is vnconstrained. But say my brovv be cloudy, my name's cleere, And reuerently you shall of Hellen heere: No man from me adulterate spoyles can win, For to this houre I haue sported without sin, Which makes me in my hart the more to wonder, What hope you haue in time to bring me vnder, Or from mine eie what comfort thou canst gather To pitty thee, and not despise thee rather: Because once Theseus hurried me from hence, And did to me a kind of violence, Followes it therefore, I am of such prize, That rauisht once, I should he rauisht twice: Was it my fault, because I striu'd in vaine, And vvanted strength his fury, to restraine? He flattered and spake fayre, I strugled still, And what he got, vvas much against my will: Of all his toyle, he reapt no wished fruit, For with my wrangling I vvithstood his sute, At length, I was restor'd, vntoucht and cleere, In all my Rape, I sufferd naught (saue feare)
A few vntoward kisses, he (God wot) Dry, without rhellish, by much striuing got, And them with much adoo, and to his cost, Of further fauours, he could neuer boast: I doubt your purpose aymes at greater blisses, And hardly would alone be pleasd with kisses, Thou hast some further ayme, and seekst to do What (Ihoue defend) I should consent vnto: He bare not thy bad mind, but did restore me, Vnblemisht, to the place from whence he bore me: The youth was bashfull, and thy boldnesse lackt, And tis well knowne, repented his bold fact: Theseus repented, so should Paris do, Succeed in Loue, and in repentance to; Nor am I angry: Who can angry be With him that loues her? If your hart agree With your kinde vvords, your suite I could applaude So I were sure your lines were voyd of fraude. I cast not these strange doubts or this dispence Like one that were bereft all confidence: Nor that I with my selfe am in disgrace, Or do not know the beauty of my face, But because too much trust hath damag'd such As haue beleeu'd men in their loues to much, And now the generall toung of woman saith, Mans words are full of Treason, void of faith. Let others sinne, and howers in pleasure wast, Tis rare to find the sober Matron chast: Why, say it be that sinne preuailes with fayre ones, May not my name be rank't among the rare ones? Because my mother Laeda was beguilde, Must I stray too, that am her eldest childe? I must confesse, my mother made a rape, But Ihoue beguild her in a borrowed shape, When she (poore soule) nor dreampt of god nor man, He troad her like a milke-white feathered Swan: She was deceiu'd by error, If I yeild To your vniust request, nothing can shield Me from reproach, I cannot plead concealing, T'was in her, error, tis in me plaine dealing:
She happily err'd, He that her honour spilt, Had in himselfe full power to salue the guilt; Her error happyed me to (I confesse) If to be Ihoues childe, be a happinesse. To omit high Ihoue, of whom I standin awe, As the great Grandsire to our Father in Lawe, To passe the kinne I claime from Tantalus, From Pelopes, and from Noble Tyndarus. Laeda by Ihoue in shape of Swan beguild, Her selfe so chaungde and by him made with chld Proues Ihoue my Father: then you ydely striue Your name from Gods and Princes to deriue. What need you of olde Priam make relation? Laomedon, or your great Phrygian Nation? Say, all be true: What then? He, of whom most To be of your alliance you so boast, Ihoue (fiue degrees at least) from you remoued, To be the first from me, is plainly proued; And though (as I beleeue well) Troy may stand Powerfull by Sea, and full of strength by Land, And no Dominion to your State superior, I hold our Clyme nothing to Troy inferior: Say, you in ritches passe vs, or in number Of people, whom you boast your streets to cumber, Yet yours a Barbarous Nation is, I tell you, And in that kind, do we of Greece excell you. Your ritch Epistle doth such guifts present, As might the Goddesses themselues content And woo them to your pleasures, but if I Should passe the bonds of shame, & tread awry If euer you should put me to my shifts, Your selfe should moue me more then all your guifts: Or if I euer shall transgresse by stealth, It shall be for your sake, not for your wealth; But as your guifts I scorne not, so such seeme Most pretious, where the giuer we esteeme. More then your presence, it shall Hellen please That you for her haue past the stormy Seas, That she hath causde your toyle, that you respect her, And more then all your Troyan Dames affect her.
But ye'are a Wag in troth, the notes and signes You make at Table, in the meats and Wines, I haue obseru'd, when I least seemde to minde them, For at the first my curious eie did finde them. Sometimes (you wanton) your fixt eie aduaunces His brightnesse against mine, darting sweet glaunces, Outgazing me with such a steadfast looke, That my dazd eyes their splendor baue for sooke, And then you sigh, and by and by you stretch Your amorous arme outright, the bowle to reatch That next me stands, making excuse to sip Iust in the self-same place that kist my lip. How oft haue I obserud your finger make Tricks and conceited signes, which straight I take? How often doth your brow your smooth thoughts cloke When (to my seeming) it hath almost spoke, And still I fearde my Husband would haue spide ye, In troth you are to blame, and I must chyde ye: You are too manifest a Louer (Tush,) At such knowne signes I could not choose but blush, And to my selfe I oft was forst to say, This man at nothing shames. Is this (I pray) ought saue the truth? Oft times vpon the bord Where Hellen was ingrauen, you the word Amo haue vnder-writ, in new spilt wine (Good sooth) at first I could not skan the line, Nor vnderstand your meaning: Now, (oh spight) My selfe am now taught, so to Read and write. Should I offend, as Sinne to me is strange, These blandishments haue power chast thoughts to change Or if I could be mou'd to step astray These would prouoke me to lasciuious play: Besides, I must confesse, you haue a Face, So admirably rare, so full of grace, That it hath power to woo and to make ceasure, Of the most bright chast beauties to your pleasure. yet had I rather stainelesse keepe my Fame, Then to a straunger hazzard my good name: Make me your instance, and forbeare the fare, Of that which most doth please you, make most spare.
The greatest vertues of which wise men boast, Is to abstaine from that which pleaseth most. How many gallant Youths (thinke you) desire, That which you couet? Skorcht with the selfe-same fire? Are all the World fooles? Only Paris wise? Or is there none saue you haue iudging eies? No no, you view no more then others see, But you are playner and more bold with me, You are more earnest to pursue your game, Iyeeld you not more knowledge, but less shame I would to God that you had sayld from Troy, When my Virginity and bedde to enioy A thousand gallant princely Suters came: Had I beheld young Paris, I proclaime, Of all those thousand I had made you chiefe, And Spartan Menalaus to his griefe Should to my censure haue subscribde and yeilded, But now (alasse) your hopes are weakely builded You couet goodes possest; pleasures fore-tasted, Tarde you come, that should before haue hasted, What you desire, another claymes as due. As I could wishe t'haue beene espousde to you, So let me tell you, since it is my fate, I hold me happy in this present state, Then cease fayre Prince, an ydle suite to moue Seek not to harme hir whom you seem to loue: In my contented state let me be guided, As both my stars and fortunes haue prouided, Nor in so vaine a quest your spirits toyle, To seeke at my hands an vnworthy spoyle. But see how soone poore Women are deluded, Venus her selfe this couenant hath concluded, For in the Idaean Valleyes you espy Three Goddesses, stript naked to your eie, And when the first had promist you a Crowne, The second Fortitude and warres renowne, The third bespake you thus: Crowne, nor Wars pride Will I bequeath, but Hellen to thy Bride, I scarce belieue those high immortall Creatures, Would to your eye expose their naked features,
Or say the first part of your Tale be pure, And meet with truth: The second's false I'am sure, In which poore I was thought the greatest meede, In such a hie cause by the Goddes decreed. I haue not of my beauty such opinion T'imagine it preferd before Dominton, Or fortitude: nor can your words persude me The greatest gift of al, the Goddesse made me. It is enough to me, men praise my face, But from the Goddes, I merit no such grace, Nor doth the praise you charge me with offend me, If Venus doe not enuiously commend me. But loe I graunt you, and imagine true, Your free report, claiming your praise as due, Who would in pleasing things call Fame a liar, But giue that credit, which we most desire. That we haue mou'd these doubts be not you grieued, The greatest wonders are the least beleeued, Know then I first am pleasde that Venus ought me Such vndeserued grace: Next, that you thought me The greatest meede: Nor Scepter, nor Warres Fame, Did you preferre before poore Hellens name. (Hard-hart tis time thou shouldst at last come downe) Therefore I am your valour, I your Crowne, Your kindnesse conquers me do what I can, I were hard-harted, not to loue this man; Obdurate I was neuer, and yet coy, To fauour him whom I can ner'e enioy. What profits it the barren sandes to plow And in the furrowes our affections sow, In the sweete theft of Venus I am rude, And know not how my Husband to delude; Now I these Loue-lines write, my pen I vow Is a new office taught, not knowne till now, Happy are they that in this Trade haue skill, (Alasse I am a Foole) and shall be still, And hauing till this houre not slept astray, Feare in these sports least I should mis my way The feare (no doubt) is greater then the blame I stand confounded and amaz'd with shame.
And with the very thought of what you seeke, Thinke euery eie fixt on my guilty cheeke, Nor are these suppositions meerely vaine, The murmuring people whisperingly complaine, And my maid Aethra hath by listning slily, Brought me such newes, as toucht mine honor hily: Wherefore (deere Lord) dissemble, or desist, Being ouer-eyde, we cannot as we list, Fashion our sports, our Loues pure haruest gather: But why should you desist? dissemble rather: Sport, (but in secret) sport where none may see, The greater, but not greatest liberty Is limitted to our Lasciuious play, That Menalaus is farre hence away, My Husband about great affaires is pousted, Leauing his royall guest securely hoasted, His businesse was important and materiall, Being employd about a Crowne Imperiall: And as he now is mounted on his Steed, Ready on his long iourney to proceede, Euen as he questions to depart or stay, Sweet hart (quoth I) oh be not long away, With that he reacht me a sweet parting kisse, (How loath he was to leaue me, ghesse by this.) Farwell fayre Wife (saith he) bend all thy cares To my domesticke businesse, home affayres, But as the thing that I affection best, Sweet Wife, looke well vnto my Troian guest. It was no sooner out, but with much paine, My itching spleene from laughter Irestraine, Which striuing to keepe in and bridle still, At length Iwrung forth these few words (I wil.) Hee's on his iourney to the Isle of Creet, But thinke not we may therefore safely meet, He is so absent, that as present I Am still within his reach: His Eare, his Eye And though abroad, his power at home commands For know you not Kings haue long reaching hads? The fame for beauty you besides haue giuen me, Into a great exigent hath driuen me:
The more your commendation fild his care, The more iust cause my husband hath to fear: Nor maruell you the King hath left me so, Into remoate and forraine Climes to goe, Much confidence he dares repose in me, My carriage, hauiour, and my modesty, My beauty he mistrusts, my hart relies in my face he feares, my Chast life he affies in. To take time now when time is, you perswade me, And with his apt fit absence you invade me: I would, but feare, nor is my mind well set, my Will would further, what my feare doth let. I haue no husband here, and you no wife, I loue your shape, you mine, deare as your life. The nights seeme long to such as sleepe alone, Our letters meet to enterchange our mone: You iudge me beauteous, I esteeme you faire, Vnder oue Roofe vve Louers lodged are, And (let me die) but euery thing consider, Each thing perswades vs we should lie together, Nothing we see molests vs, naught we heare, And yet my forward will is slackt through feare: I would to God that what you ill perswade, You could as well compell, So I were made Vn-willing willing, pleasingly abusde, So my simplicity might be excusde: Iniurious force is oft-times wondrous pleasing, To such as suffer ease in their diseasing, If what I will, you gainst my vvill should doe, I with such force could be well pleased too. But whilst our loue is young and in the bud, Suffer his Infant vigor be withstood, A flame new kindled is as easily quench't, And sudden sparkles in little drops are drencht: A Trauellours Loue is like himselfe, vnstaid, And wanders where he walkes, It is not layde On any firmer ground, for when vve alone Thinke him to vs, the winde blovves faire, hees gone: Witnesse Hypsipile, alike betraide, Ariadnt. Witnesse vvith her, the bright Mynoyan maide:
Nay then your selfe, as you your selfe haue spoken To fayre Oenone haue your promise broken, Since I beheld your face first, my desire Hath beene, of Troyan Paris to inquire: I know you now in euery true respect, Ile grant you thus much then, say you affect Me (whom you terme your owne.) Ile grow thus farre Do not the Phagian marriners prepare Their sailes and Oares, and now whilst we recite Exchange of words about the wished night: Say that euen now you vvere prepard to clime my long wisht bed, iust at th'appointed time The wind should alter and blow fayre for Troy, You must breake off, in midst of all your ioy And leaue me in the infancy of pleasure, Amid my riches, I shall lose my treasure. You will for sake the sweets my bed affoords, T'exchange for Cabins, Hatches, and pitcht boords, Then what a fickle Courtship you commence, When, with the first vvind, all your Loue blowes hence. But shall I follow you vvhen you are gone, And be the graund-child to Laomedon? And Islium see, whose beauty you proclaime? I doe not so despise the bruit of fame, That she to whom I am in debt such thanks, Should fill the Earth with such adulterate pranks: What will Achaia? What will Sparta say? What will your Troy report and Asia? What may old Priam or his reuerent Queene? What may your Sisters hauing Hellen seene, Or your Dardanian brothers deeme of me? Will they not blame my loose nchastity: Nay, how can you your self faithfull deem me, And not amongst the loosest dames esteem me No stranger shall your Asian Ports com neare But he shall fill your guilty soule with feare. How often (angry at some small offence) Will you thus say; Adultresse, get thee hence, Forgetting you your selfe haue been the chiefe In my transgression, though not in my griefe.
Consider what it is forgetfull Louer, To be sinnes Author, and sinnes sharpe reprouer, But ere the least of all these Illes betide me, I wish the earth may in her bosome hide me. But I shall all your Phrygian wealth possesse, And more then your Epistle can expresse; Gifts, wouen gold, Imbrodery, rich attire, Purple and Plate, or what I can desire? Yet giue me leaue, thinke you all this extends To counter-vaile the losse of my chiefe friends? Whose friendship, or whose ayde shall I imploy, To succour me when I am wrong'd in Troy? Or whether can I, hauing thus misdone, Vnto my Father or my Brothers ronne, As much as you to me, false Iason swore Vnto Medea, yet from Aesons dore He after did exile her: Now poore hart, Where is thy Father that should take thy part? Old Aeres or Calciope? thou tookest No aid from them, who thou before forsookest. Or say thou didst (alas they cannot beare Thy sad complaints) yet I no such thing feare, No more Medea did, good hopes ingage Themselues so farre, they faile in their presage: You see the ships that in the Mayne are tost, And many times by Tempests wrackt and lost, Had at their launching from the Hauens mouth, A smooth sea, and a calme gale from the South. Besides, the brand your mother dreampt she bare The night before your byrth, breeds me fresh care, It Propheside, ere many yeares expire, Inflamed Troy must burne with Greekish fire, As Venus fauours you, because she gained A double prize by you; yet the disdained And vanquisht Goddesses, disgracst so late, May beare you hard, I therefore feare their hate: Nor make no question, but if I consort you, And for a Rauisher our Greece report you: Warre will be wag'd with Troy, and you shall rue, The sword (alas) your conquest shall pursue:
When Hypodamia at her bridale feast, Was rudely rauisht by her Centaur guest, Because the Saluages the Bride durst ceaze, War grew betwixt them and the Lapythes: Or thinke you Menelaus hath no spleene? Or that he hath not power to auenge his teene? Or that old Tyndarus this wrong can smother? Or the two famous Twins each lo'ud of other. So where your valour and rare deedes you boast, Castor & Poll. And warlike spirits in which you tryumph most, By which you haue attaind mongst Souldiers grace, None will beleeue you that but sees your face, Your feature and fayre shape, is fitter farre For amorous Courtships, then remorselesse warre: Let rough-hevv'd Souldiers warlike dangers proue, Tis pitty Paris should do ought saue loue. Hector (whom you so praise) for you may fight, Ile finde you warre, to skirmish euery night, Which shall become you better: Were I wise And bold withall, I might obtaine the prize, In such sweete single Combats, hand to hand, Gainst which no woman that is wise vvill stand: my Champion Ile encounter breast to breast, Though I vvere sure to fall, and be o'repreast. In that you priuate conference intreat me, I apprehend you, and you cannot cheat me, I know the meaning durst I yeeld thereto, Of what you vvould confer; What you would do, You are too forward, you too farre would vvade, But yet (God knowes) your haruests in the blade. My tyred pen shall heere his labour end, A guilty sence in theeuish lines I send, Speake next when your occasion best perswades, By Clymenea and Aethra my two maydes.
1 THese enter-changes of theyr Amors past, And Menelaus absent, they compound, That in some place an ambush shall be plac't, With which the Queene shall be incompast round, And willingly surpriz'd, seeming agast, and at theyr armes, to weepe, to shrieke, to sound: But all in vaine, the Troyan seemes to feare her, and force perforce, vnto his Fleet to beare her. 2 Shee in her frightfull agony, seemes dum, Yet when shee was past helpe, for helpe she cride, She cals for rescue, that had rescue come, Euen at the sight of Spartan armes had dide: Shee seemes affrighted at the Troian drum, and at theyr stearne allarmes terrifide: Shee cals on Father, Husband, Brother, Friend, Naming them most, who could her least defend. 3 This vprore made the bold Pannomians guard The passage to their ships, still Hellen cryes Vpon th' Acaians, from her rescue bar'd, The rumour of her Rape through Sparta flyes, Whilst Paris with his Souldiers keepes strict ward, Launching at length with his desired prize: Her two Twin-brother-Kings, that nothing doubt, At the same season soiournd thereabout. 4 And hearing of their Sisters Rape, make hast, The Rauisher with fury to pursue, They disimbogue, hoping to gaine at last Sight of the Tro Nauye, which now grew neere to the Hellespont, hauing quite past Th'Aegean Sea, the Windes against them blew, The Surges swell, and with the rough Winds meet, Conspiring both the ruyne of the Fleet.
5 Ships, Sailes, and men, are swallowed in th'Abisse, The brothers to two Starres the Gods translate, Castor & Pol∣l translated into the two Poles, the North and South, Pauson. One of the Poles by Castor named is, The tother Pollux, to record theyr fate, Where now they shine in theyr Celestiall blisse, But so farre distant in theyr blest estate, As neither hath the power to see his brother, For when we rayse the one, we loose the other. 6 By this time with his Troian Rape arriues At Tenedos, the amorous Troian Lad, Which Priam vnderstanding, nobly striues To welcome her (at her arriuall glad) The Queene attended with the Noble Wiues Of all the Troian Princes, richly clad, Issues from Troy, with thousands following after, To entertaine bright Ladaes rauisht daughter. 7 Behold where (on an aumbling Palfrey mounted White as her mothers feathers) she appeares, Now one of Priams daughters counted, For with that stile, young Paris Hellen cheeres, At meeting, the old King himselfe dismounted, and with soft kisses dryes her feigned teares, Old Hecuba next Priam cheeres her mone, and after her, her daughters one by one. 8 Hector and Troylus with the Lords of Troy, Kisse her by turnes, and with kind armes embrace her, The people with applauses crowne theyr ioy, Whilst Priam 'fore the multitude to grace her, Betrothes the Spartan to his amorous boy, And in's returne on his right hand doth place her, Aeneas and Anthenor highlie praisde, Kneele to the King, and by his hand are raisde. 9 The long diuorced Peeres now enterchange Their free embracements, whom with kisses sweet Theyr wiues, to whom such fauours were grown strange, with theyr long absence wirh like language meete,
The Troyans eyes on Hellen freely range, With prayse and wonder they her welcome greet, Her beauty euen so deepe in Hector strake, He now repines that he against her spake. 10 The ground is strewd with sweet and various flowers, In euery place is Musicke heard to sound, From Tenedos in lesse then two short howers They enter Troy, whose Walles are peopled round, She wonders at their buildings and hye Towers, The like to which in Sparta are not found, Wals, wealth, and people, Pallace, all appearing Richer to th'eye, then theyr report in hearing. 11 She treads not but on Arras, Casts her eyes But on ritch hangings, beautyes, rooffes of Gold, Iewels, State, Garments: Now she doth despise The pouerty of Sparta, as things old, The nouelties of Troy she gins to prise, But most delights in her sweet armes to infold Inamoured Paris, who as much excels her husband; as Troy Sparta, in ought else. 12 The morrow coms, by Priam shee is led To Pallas Temple, and espoused there To Paris; and at night conueyde to bed By Hecuba, her bright Attendants were Andromache, Crevsa, (and instead Of hand-maydes) Polyxene and Cressyde, deare To Troylus; None saue Ladyes of estate, Are suffred on the Spartan Queene to waite. 13 Eyght entyre dayes and nights, the hye feast lasts, And Troy's all mirth, whylst Sparta is all woe, With swiftest speed a winged Curror hasts As farre as Creet, Queene Hellens Rape to show, Menelaus his sad howers in anguish wasts, By this the Graecian Kinges his sorrowes know: And of themselues assemble, offering free, Theyr hostyle ayde, and in Troyes fall agree.
14 To bring so huge a Nauy on the Seas, Behooues vs know theyr names that first deuisde These noble vessayles: whether for their ease, Whether Ambitious, they the Land despisde, Whether the Creatan Minos did first please Strabo. Diodo. The sutges God: or Neptune enterprise The foaming billowes, being by Saturnes motion, Made Admirall of all the brinish Ocean. 15 Whether Ericthris in the red Sea sayled Pliny And first made Boats, which others would impute To the Meones, such as neuer sayled In th'Hellespont, or whether the pursuit Palydor Of Danaus in the Egyptian Sea preuailed, An honour which to him most attribute: Or whether Navigators first had place, In Atlas kingdome, or in Samo-Thrace. Polichron. 16 This I averre, his Arke first Noah made Fore th'vniuersall Deluge, since his dayes Iason the Greeke, who Colchos sought to invade, Composde the Galley, which next him assayes Sesostris King of Aegypt, In this Trade Eytheus flourisht, whom our Anthors prayse For Marine skill, his Barge did first deuide The Surges with two Oares on eyther side. 17 First, with three course of Oares Amocles rowed, The Carthagens with foure, as many write, Amocls of Corinth. Nesichthon of Salamis. With fiue Nesichthon: These were first bestowed By the bold Romans in the great Sea-fight At the first battayle Punicke: He that owed The sixe-Oard barge to do Zenagaras right Must yeld it him (in Siracusa dwelling For ship-wrights Craft, all other much excelling. 18 Hyppias the Troyan the broad Lyter framed, The Cyrenens the Hoy, which some more fine, The Gallioon call: with Barks the Cyprians tamed The rude sea-Rouers, Cockboates (some diuine)
Th' lyrians built: the Keele and Craer were named By the Phenetians first: the Brigandine The Rhodians rear'd: the Canoas now in trade, In India by the Germans were first made. 19 The Copians found the Rudder, the broad Oare The sly Plateans by their Art composed; Young Icarus the saile not knowne before, Which some affirme, King Aeolus disclosed, With Masts and Sayle-yards Dedalus did store The Cretans: but the sterne Typhis disposed: The stemme Pyseus: Anacharsis wrought The Tackle, Anchors first the Tyrhens sought. 20 Athens first ferried men, whether we must draw Th'Graecian fleete, the great'st that hath bin seene, Such store th'amazed Neptune neuer saw, No not when France and England met betweene A sea-battaile fought be∣twixt Phillip of Frāce & Ed. the 3. in the yeare 1340. when there were slay Frēch 30000, ships taken 200. Callice and vs, where after many a flaw; Phillip gaue place to the third Edwards spleene, Before, the blacke Prince, by wars prosperous chance, Quater'd our Lyons with the Flowers of France. 21 Nor when the stout Venetian Gallies frame Their expedition gainst the Turkes Armade, Nor when Sea-wars Malta or Rhodes proclaime, Whose ponderous hulkes the Oceans backe nie swayde, Nor when th'uincible huge Nauy came In the yeare Eighty eight, England t'inuade: Were there so many Vessailes well prouided, As by the Argiue Pylots are now guided. 22 Great Agamemnon they Grand-Duke create Agamemnon Of all their powerfull hoast, who in the ayde Of Menelaus, as one of hyest estate, With full an hundred ships at Athens staide, All stuft with Armed Knights sworne to the Fate Of threatned Troy, whome they with scornes vpbraid, With forty ships faire rig'd and well supplide Menelaus In Athens road, doth Menelaus now ride.
23 For Athens was their Randeuous, and there King Archelaus and Prothenor stay, Archlaus. With fifty Ships that of Boetia were, With fifty Ships from Orconomies bay: Prothenor. Helmius. Ascalaphus. Helmius and Duke Ascalaphus appeare, The Kings Epistrophus and Sedius, way Their Anchors next, and to the Spartan King, Epistropus. Thirty tall ships rig'd from Phociden bring. Sedius. 24 King Telamon launcht fifty Souldierd well Telamon. From Salamine, and in his princely traine Theuter. Thebus. Duke Theuter, Polyxeme, and Thebes fell, With Duke Amphimachus: from Pylon came Amphimachus With three-ag'd Nestor fifty ships t'expell Nestor The Troians from the Hellesponticke Maine; Thoas with fifty ships the harbour sought, Thoas whether K. Doxunois likewise fifty brought. Doxunois 25 King Telamon Chileus three times tenTelam. Chyleus And six good Ships rig'd, in the Spartans Quest, Amphimachus Amphimachus and Polibetes, men Polybetes. Of high rcsolue, accompany the rest With thirty saile, King Idumeus then, Idumeus. And Cretan Mereon their loues exprest, Mereon. They fourescore and two Frigots brought in place, And thirty two Vlisses weighed from Thrace. Vlisses 26 Twelue Ships from Phrygia Duke Tynelus brings, Tynelus Prothocathus And from Phtlaca fifty two arriue, at the great charge of two imperious Kings Prothesilaus Prothocathus: The Prince to that did wiue Laodomeia faire, whose praise Fame sings. Prothesilaus: Collesis seeks to driue Collosis. With foure and twenty Craers th'opposed fleets Whom King Machaon by appointment meets. Machaon 27 Machaons Sonne Pollydris thirty three, Pollydris Achilles. Thelaphus Eruphilus Achilles two and twenty hath in store, King Thelaphus as many, these agree By their ioynt Armes to win the Troian shore,
Eruphilus hath likewise vowd to free The rauisht Queene with two and fifty more: Anthipus and Amphimachus are seene, Anthipus From Rustican with Hulkes and Hoyes thirteene. Amphimachus 27 King Polybetes that from Rythee came, Polybetes Bring sixty two, and in his friendly ayde, His Brother the Duke Lopius mou'd with fame Lopius Of these great warres, seekes Phrygia to iade: Diomedes King Diomed of Arges threats the same, Fourescore and two tall Vessailes he displaide: Eurialus and Thelanus in sight, Of all the hoast, beneath his Ensignes sight. Eurialus Thelanus. 29 Thirteene K. Fureus, Polyphebus nine, Fureus Polyphebus Prothoylus fifty two, as many led The King Carpenor of the Bresseian line, Carpenor Theorius Theorius foure and twenty colours spread, In foure and twenty ships, all these in fine In the Athenian part meet and make head: Twelue hundred twenty Ships make th'Ocean trēble, In whom full sixty nine bold Kings assemble. 38 But ere we further enter or proceed In these Heroike wars, we hold it fit, Before the Graecians or the Troians bleed, To memorize their shapes; ere we admit The Argiue Peeres (all in one thought agreed) To be reueng'd on Troy, and ransacke it: Hellen Hellen the first, as Pearelesse through all Lands, As Venus picture that in Coos stands. 31 She was nor dwarfe-like statur'd, nor too tall, Nor foggy fat, nor yet Consumptiue leane, Her Wast not grosse, nor yet too slender-small, Her saire proportion, was smooth, quaint, and cleane: Her habit shadowed no extreame at all, She was all shaped by the Golden meane; So rare, that neuer eye dwelt on her Checke, But lost it selfe, and had his light to seeke.
32 What should I with harsh Language slubber o're Exact perfection? Shall my ragged quill In seeking Natures cunning to explore, Iniure the worke in which she shewes such skill? T'expresse such Graces as the Gods adore In Hellen, would a spacious Volume fill: And asko (should I her beauties al recite,) A world of Paper, and an Age to write. 33 And all my Subiect should be Hellen, she That in the Vniuerse can find no peere: Hellen the scope of all my Verse should be, Yet to her worth my praise not once comes neere; Therefore, since more them Hellen call on me To speake their Valors, and insert them heere: I leaue her with this Title: Hellen, fairest Of all the World, and for Perfection rarest. 34 Bold Agamemnon Duke of all the Host, Invoakes me next his features to set downe, Tall statur'd, ably limb'd, adored most Of all the Argiues with th'imperiall Crowne: White-bodied, straight, tres-puissant without boast, Hardy, well-spoke, Ambitious of Renowne. Menelaus, of meane stature, his voyce lowd, Brown-hair'd, well set, Valiant in armes, not prowd. 35 Achilles, he whose Myrmidons defended The hoast of Greekes with a strong brazen Mure, From Thetis Goddesse of the Sea discended, Pourefull, expensiue, on his Couenant sure, Bright-hair'd, his face and feature much commended, His eye much fiery, his Complexion pure: Broad shoulder'd, and big-arm'd, large brested, strong His match in Atmes, liu'd not the Greekes among. 36 King Tantalus, broad, fat, and hye withall, His head Crispe-blacke, his Beard-thicke, but not long, Affable, Courteous, and despising bral, Delighting much in Musicke, and in Song:
Al as broad as Tantall, and as tall, But in his deeds of Armes more actiue strong: He that alone by the Greekes awfull rector, Was chosen worthy to encounter Hector. 37 Aiax Oeleus was of smaller size, Of milder temper, Curteous, Blacke his haire, His Colour fresh, himselfe of faire Emptize, And a great part among the Princes bare; Vlesses King of Ithaca most wise, A right Mercurialist, in discourse rare, An Orator, whom Iudging eares applaud, Yet Oyly toong'd, full of deceit and fraud. 38 King Diomed, of Gyant-like aspect, The largest Greeke that menac'st Troy with steele: A Prince, whom all the Princes must respect, His ponderous blowes make many Troians reele, Equally apt to fight, or to direct, Dreadlesse of Fortune, or her turning wheele: Comely, and deck't with all the guifts of Nature, His hart hauing Correspondence with his stature. 39 The three-ag'd liuing Nestor, Pytous King, Slenderly-tall, his Visage Sagely graue And promising Counsell, he whose Muse did sing Of King Prothesilaus, to him gaue The wreath, for quicke and Actiue combatting, Yet all his Art his body cannot saue: His looke effeminate, his Courage bold, His strength by might, but not by feare controld. 40 Strout Neptolynus, in his Countenance grim, Blacke-hait'd, broad-ey'd, his hairy win-browes meet, Arm'd at all points, deepe Riuers he would swim, Though heauy bodied, actiue were his feet, They that most curiously decipher him, Report his Language stammering and vnsweet: Palumides, faire-shapt, but sickly tender, His Colour chearefull, but his stature slender.
41 Nereus Ipasse, the faire Greeke Homer lou'd, Penelaus, Leitus, Eurialus, Clouius Arcecilaus, Nobly prou'd, Ialmen of Boetia, Ascalaphus; Bold Idomen, (a Fury) being mou'd, The Phocean Scedius, and Amphimachus, Prothous, Ieonteus, Polybetes, Guneus, Aemilius, and great Philoctetes Philoctetes companion to Hercules. 42 Who brought the Arrowes dipt in Hydraes blood, To Troyes sad siege, there was the braue Prothenor, By whom Podarces and King Merion stood Tlepolemus, Cteatus, and Alphenor, Phidippes, Anthipus a souldier good, With stout Alceus soone, K. Agapenor, Talpheus, Phetides, King Polyxemon, Muestheus, Stenetus, Thoas, sonne to Andremon. 43 Rough Polidarius, fat, and scornefull proude, False of his promise, and yet warlike bold, Mathaon of meane stature, yet aloude For valiant to, and mongst the best inrold, More princes did the Greeke pauilions shroud, Whose shapes we leaue, to haue their merits told: Now come we to Crescida, Calchas doughter, So faire, that many warlike Princes sought her. 44 She was a worthy and a beautious Dame, Whom Troylus lou'd, and Diomedes sought, To gaine her Grace, they wan immortall Fame, And still their glorious spoiles to Cresseid brought, For her the mighty Persian Sophy came, To gaine her Loue, he gainst the Troyans fought: Filling the number of the Graecian hoast, Who waite but waftage to the Dardan Coast. 45 They call a Counsell, and dispatch away Achilles and Patroclus to the Isle Cald Delos, which our Cosmographers say, Stands midst the Ciclades: Heere of long while
Te God Apolio, vnto such as pray, Giues answere (by his Oracle:) His smile Cheares such as kneele, his frown strikes them with ter∣ror Such was the Panims Faith, the Pagans Error. 46 To this faire Clyme (which some Ortigia call,) The Sun and Moone were in their Nonage seene, Latona brought them forth: Heere first of all Phoebus (the dayes God) and his Sister Queene Cynthia, that guids the night, both rise and fall: Heere stands the Temple, and the guilded Skreene, On which Apolloes Statuë dwels for aye, pronouncing Oracles to such as pray. 47 Heere did Achilles and Patroclus find The Troian Calchas, reuerent Thystranes sonne, Sent by King Priam to know Phoebus mind, And what shall in these future warres be done: The Oracles hath by his priests assignd, That after ten yeares Troy shall be o're-run: Which Calchas hearing, with Achilles makes His speedy peace, and so his Troy forsakes. 48 Achilles proud of such a glorious pray, With these glad tydings to the Fleet returnes, Who with all prosperous speed their Anchors way, And whilst Troyes King reuolted, Calchas mournes, Whose graue aduice was to his Realme chiefe stay, No longer th' Argiue Duke his speed adiournes: But launcheth his Fleet royall: They set sales, And the calme Eurus yeilds them gentle Gales. 49 Diana (that was euer friend to Troy,) Neptune intreats, that may command his waues, The great Armade of Gracia to destroy And swallow them within his Briny graues, She takes it ill, the Greekes depart with ioy From Aulis Gulfe, yet none her license craues Or offers at her Altars, the due rights Of Sacrifice, amongst those Kings and Knights.
50 Amidst the wrathfull Tempest Calchas praies To Neptune and the Moone, their Fleet to spare, Who not with words to be appeas'd, will raise His tumbling waues, and tosse them in the ayre, Vnlesse great Agamemnon Altars raise To angry Cynthia, and performe his Prayer, And on her bleeding Shrine, at Dians feet, Kill Iphegenia to preserue the Fleet. 51 Loath is the Generall his Childs blood to spill Yet holds it better that one Lady dye, (Although his Daughter) then the Seas to fill With Ships, bold Knights, and Kings aduanced hye: Calchas the Priest the Innocent Maid doth kill, T'appease Dianaes wrathfull Deity: The Sacrifice perform'd, the wind blowes faire, The Seas are calm'd, the Sun hath clear'd the Aire. 52 And now the wind playes with those swelling sailes Which they but late in fury rent and tore, Calme Zephyr cheares their Fleet with gentle Gales, Which made but late the violent Surges rore, (This can the Gods) but ere proud Greece preuailes, Or Land their powers vpon the Phrygian shore: Or that Scamander field in blood be dide, We from our taske our selfe a while deuide. Aethra and Clymenen, were Hellens Chamber-maids and imployd in all her most priuate businesse. Some affirme that Paris onely met Menelaus vp∣on the sea, and haled him as hee was in his voyage towardes Creet, and by that meanes vnderstanding his absence, thoght it a fit opportunity for him to steale away his Queene. And that he rauisht her out of the Temple dedicate to Cyherea, where Paris and she as strangers one to another, sacrificed to∣gether, but in this Imitate Ouid as my approued Author.
That Menelaus was at home when Paris Landed in the Isle Cythere, and gaue him friendly entertainment, though some seeme to disproue, yet Ouid in diuers of his workes affirms it. WHen Menelaus from his house is gone, Poore Hellen is afraid to lie alone; De Arte A∣mandi 2. And to alay these feares (lod'g in her breast) In her warme bosome she receiues her guest: What madnesse was this? Menelaus, say Thou art abroad, whilst in thy house doth stay Vnder the selfe same roofe, thy Guest, and Loue? Mad-man vnto the Hawke thou trusts the Doue: And who, but such a Gull, would giue to keepe Vnto the Mountaine-Wolfe full folds of Sheepe. Hellen is blamelesse, so is Paris too, And did what thou, or I my selfe would doo. The fault is thine, I tell thee to thy face, By limiting these Louers, Time and Place. From thee the seeds of all thy wrongs are growne, Whose Counsels haue they followed, but thine owne? (Alacke) what should they do? Abroad thou art, At home thou leauest thy Ghest, to play thy part: To lie alone, the (poore Queene) is affraid, In the next roome an Amorous stranger staid, Her Armes are ope to imbrace him, he fals in, And Paris I acquit thee of the sin. And in another place somewhat resembling this: Orestes liked, but not loued deerely Hermione, til he had lost her clearely: Sad Menelaus, why dost thou lament Deremedio Amoris 2. Thy late mishap? I prethee be content: Thou knewest the amorous Hellen faire and sweet, And yet without her didst thou saile to Creet, And thou wast blithe and merry al the way, But when thou saw'st she was the Troians pay, Then wast thou mad for her, and for thy life, Thou canst not now one minute want thy wife. So slout Achilles, when his louely Bride Briseis, was dispos'd to great Atride,
Nor was he vainely mou'd: Atrides too Offerd no more then he of force must doo: I should haue done as much, to set her free, Yet I (heauen knovves) am not so Wise as he. Hipsipile the Daughter to Thoas King of Lemnos, whō when al the women of that Island had slain their Husbands & Kinsmen, she onely referu'd her Father aliue, for which they after exiled her. By the Mynoxan Maid, is vnderstood Ariadne forsaken by Theseus. The Meones are those, who are now cald Troians. First Dardanians of King Dardanus. Coos an Isle in the Sea Icarium, not farre from Rhodes, now called Langor. The chiefest Citty is likewise cald Coos, where as some thinke, Apelles left his admirable vnfinisht Picture of Venus, so rarely begun, that not the most exquisite Art-maister (hee dying before it was finished) durst enter∣prise to perfect it. Homer. Virgill. The assembly of the Greekes was in the Hauen of Athens, or Aulis Gulfe, a port-Towne in the Country of Boetia. The names of the Graecian Princes, though they seeme som∣what straunge, yet are all remembred by Homer and others, that writ the History of Troy, which (though no question) di∣uers Translations and seuer all Languages haue somewhat cor∣rupted, yet they all meet in one Trueth, that such men as are heere remembred, were at this renowned siedge. Legos where the Temple of Apollo stands: in the Nauel of the world. It is likewise cald Ortigia, of the Birds Ottiges. in English Quailes, because those Birds (to vs common) were first seene in that Island. Many differ about the Sacrifice which Agamemnon slew Metamor. 12. to appease the wrath of offended Diana: some thinke it to haue beene a Hart: but Ouid avers is to be the daughter of Iphegenia. Theacritus in dioscuris Apollon, lib, 1 Of Castor and Pollux there are many thinges extant, of their byrth we haue spoke before. They vvere the Sonnes of Iupiter, not of Tyndaris, They vvent vvith Iason to the
Conquest of the golden Fleece, where Pollux slew hand to hand Amicus the Gyant-sonne of Neptune, who had beefore dar'd all the Argonantes to a single Combat, and after the Colchian voyage, when Theseus had rauisht Helena, they warred vppon Athens, and hauing recouered her, spared all the vanquisht Athenians, and in their returne these Brothers Zezes hist, 46 rauisht the two Daughters of Leucippus and Arsinoe. They were cald Phebe and Falaira: Of Phebe Pollux begot Asi∣neus: Of Falaira, Castor begot Amagon, whose former Hus∣bandes pursuing the rauishers, fought against them a bloudy battaile neare to the foot of the mountaine Taigetes, & when they had hidde themselues within the body of an ore-growne Oake, they were espide by Linceus, of all mortal men the best Stasinus in rebus Ciprijs. sighted, which an ancient poet thus describes. —Quo tempore Linceus, Taygeti velox ascendit Culmina montis, Lustrauitque oculis quicquid tenet insula magni, Tantalidae Pelopis: praeacuto lumine vidit, Hos ambos intra ventrosae robora quercus, Pollucem fortem & domitorem Castora equorum. Of their deaths we haue already discoursed, they were af∣ter drowning, translated into Starres, to whom the Nauiga∣tors of old did ordinary Sacrifice. The end of the tenth CANTO.
Argumentum THe Graecians Land, Prothesilaus fals By Hectors sword, King Diomed is sent With wise Vlisses to debate their brals, And fetch the Spartan to her Husbands Tent: Hellen denide: the Greekes begirt Troy wals, But are by Hector raisd incontinent: Troylus and Diomed in Armes contend For Cressida, so the first battels end. ARG. 2. Our English Worthies, Fame & her rich Crowne, With Troyes confedred Kings, Lambda sets down CANTO. 11. OH can we forraine Worthies Memorize, And our owne Natiue Champions quite forget, Whose fame swift Clangor hath through pierst the skies, To whom due Honor still remaines in debt: How many true victorious Peeres arise From this faire Garden, midst the Ocean set: How many an English Knight hath borne his head As hie as those, whom Troy or Greece hath bread? 2 Achilles, Aiax, Diomed, or those Whom Homer hath extold with Golden praise, Haue not done greater spoile vpon their foes, Then some that haue suruiu'd euen in our dayes,
And had I spirit but like the least of those That writ the Graecian Acts, my pen should raise Our Brittish Champious, and their acts proclame, Aboue the Greekes in the high Tower of Fame. 3 What could Achilles more then Brittish Bren, Bren. That after many dangerous battailes wun, Fotrag'd France, Denmarke, Germany, and then Sackt Rome, and high Pernassus ouer-run, And by the ayde of his bold Englishmen, Laid siege vnto the Temple of the Sun: Or what bold Graecian dare gainst Nennius stand, Nennius. That fought with twice-foyl'd Caesar hand to hand. 4 Renowned Arthur famous in his age, Arthur. In his round Table, and his thirteene Crownes, Hie Romes Impetious Senate felt his rage, and paid him homage in their purple Gownes, His Came'lot Knights their hardiments ingage, Through all the world to purchase their renownes: Of Noble Edgar, my dull Muse next sings, Edgar Row'd on the Thames by eight commanded Kings. 5 Bold Edmond (Sir-nam'd Ironside) him succeeds,Edmond I∣ronside. a brauer Spirit breath'd not vitall ayre, The Bastard Williams Sonne, Duke Roberts deeds aske the next place, for his attempts were rare, Robert of No, mandy sirnamed Cort-bise. By Cort-hose many a Tyrant Panim bleeds, By whom the Christians re-invested are: and whilst hye Syons Towers triumphant stand, He chosen Monarch o're the holy Land. 6 Richard the first that Cordelyon hight,Richard Cordelyon. Edward long shankes. Edward 3. Black prince inuested don Pedro in Spaine. Iohn a and Edward Sirnam'd Long-shankes, without Peere, Was neuer Dardan Prince or Argiue Knight, That in their ages more admired were: Edvvard the third that Conquer'd France by fight, and Edvvard the Blacke Prince to England deere, He forrag'd France, for Pedro wan all Spaine, Which after Iohn a-Gaunt subdude againe.
7 Henry the fift, then whom the world neare bread A worthier Prince. Bedford and Talbot bold, Bedford. Talbot. Who in their forrain Regency so sped, That puissant France was by their powers controld, Edward the fourth (though wantonly misled) Edward 4. Richard 3. Wan ten set battailes: The third Richard sold His name to scandall, else his warlike merit, Might with the rest, a Worthies name inherit. 8 The valiant Earle of Surrey often staidEarle Surrey The Northerne Enemies from filching heare: Charls Bran∣don. In the eight Henries dayes Charles Brandon made England renown'd, by his victorious Speare, And those whose Woorths these late times haue displaid Howard, Grey, Norris, Sidney, Essex, Veare: These, had they liu'd in aged Priams dayes, Had dim'd the Greekes, and matcht the Troians prayse. 9 Now to our hostile preparations, we Must arme our Pen, the Greekes are vnder saile, There is a place from Earth, Sea, Heauen, stands free, And equally remoued from them all: In the worlds Nauell, fixt where Concaues be, And hollow-sounding Vaults through Crannies small: Where the reports and rumors of all sounds, Giue shrill Reuerberat Ecchoes and rebounds. 10 Heere Fame her Pallace builds by wondrous skill, Fame. Seating her selfe in her most lofty Tower, Yet is her house erected on a hill, A thousand Loope-holes are within her Bower, A thousand doores and windowes open still, Transparant euery late and early hower, Full of Big-bellyed Vaults, and the wals such, Of sounding Brasse that rings with euery tutch. 11 Whose empty wombe continuall murmur yeilds, And iterates againe each word it heares, Within this place no toonglesse silence builds, No solitary dumnesse spares the eares:
A whistling wind flyes round about the fields, Which shakes the trembling branches, but forbeares All violent gusts: about this hollowed ground, There are perpetuall calmes, no Tempests found. 12 And though no silence, yet no clamors rise, Onely a whispering murmur like the Seas Heard a farre off, or when the troubled skies, (With remote Thunder mou'd) soft showers appease, The Courts are throng'd with multitudes of spies, Light giddy people tatling what they please: Who (in and out) through euery chamber passe, Whispering sometimes what is, and what neare was. 13 Infinite Currors, Purseuants, and Posts, Embassadors, and such as hurry newes, Heralds (such men as Trafficke betweene Hosts) Walke too and fro, and no man Tales eschewes, One speakes of Warres, of Combats, and rude boasts, Another serious talke of Peace pursues: All as they are dispos'd, this man is telling Of buying Land, that other speakes of selling. 14 Some talkes of this mans Honors, that mans shames, Others of Stormes, and many a boysterous flaw, Some men of their successe and chance in games, One what he heard, another what he saw, Some men of Knights aduenturers, some of Dames, Others how long their sutes haue hung in Law: Toies with things serious passe, graue things with bables Lies mixt with truths, and truths discourst with Fables. 15 Numberlesse rumors through the Pallace flye, In euery nooke they make their free intrusion, heere bashfull truth doth face the bold fac'd lye, To fend and proue begets a meere confusion, Whilst some th'attentiue eare with newes supply, Others report Stale things, and in conclusion, Addes of his owne, which bandied without ceasing, From euery seuerall tongue receiues increasing
16 Heere you may see a dwarfe-like rumor grow, Euen in an instant to a Gyants size, Whether the Nature of the winds that blow, Retaines the power to make the tumors rise Or whether Fame all tydings apt to know, Giues to her traine such Bombast Liueries: Their growth is strange, whom I compare aright, Vnto the Mush-roome, statur'd in a night. 17 Heere dwels credulity, rash error, feare, Doubt, volubility, and quicke beliefe, There is no voyce hath power to pierce the eare, But fame of brutes and rumors, Queene and chiefe, Shrieks through the world: From hence the Troians hear Th' Atrides rage, King Menelaus griefe: Their expedition, and their Naual power, Ready the threatned Enemy to deuower. 18 Their Frontier Townes that border next the waues Are fortified, three distant leagues from Troy Tenedos sub∣verted. Stands Tenedos, whom with imperious braues The Argine Flect assault, race, and destroy: The wrathfull Greeke not one poore Phrygian saues, But to their ruines all their powers imploy: This done, by generall Counsell tis decreed, Two Kings to Priam shail on Message speed. 19 Into the Hall where th'aged King then sate, Attended with his Captaines, Sonnes, and Peeres, And such confedered Kings as to the Fate Of threatned Troy, brought Horsemen, Bowes & Spears, On this hie businesse to deliberate, And rid their hearts from all inuasiue feares: In, throngs Vlisses and bold Diomed, Two Princes arm'd at all points saue the head. 20 Heere sat the King Pandrastus King Pandore, Pandrastus. Panodrus. Galior. And the King Galior, that to Priams ayde, Brought each of them a thousand Knights and more, Foure Kings that from Tholosson waftage made,
Carras, Amasius, Nestor dreaded sore, Carras. Amasius. Nestor. Amphimac. And stowt Amphimachus: these Kings displaid Their warlike Ensignes, in all dreadfull fights, Bringing along fiue thousand valiant Knights 21 Next these seauen Kings, K. Glaucus tooke his place, Glaucus Three thousand bold Squires he from Lycia brought, Sarpedon. His Sonne Sarpedon of the Troian race, In all King Priams battailes brauely fought, Next whom Eusemus sat, distant a space, Eusemus. Who with three thousand Knights Troyes honor sought, Lyconians all, Lyconias Realme he guided, Since into seuerall parted Crownes deuided. 22 Two puissant Kings to make the Iury full, Came from Larissa, these had in their traine Mystor. Knights sistene hundred; Mystor, whose tough scul The Argiue Princes bruis'd: Capidus slaine Capidus. In battaile too, about the Spartan Trull, Neuer to see hir Natiue Clyme againe: On a rich bench sast by King Priams State, These twelue bold Kings vpon the right hand sate. 23 Vpon the left, from Thahory that came, King Remus, who besides three thousand men, Remus. Brought foure great Dukes, seauen Earles of Noble fame All clad in Azure armes, wel noted then; The King of Trachy, whom some Pylex name, Pylex. Was plac'st next him, this royall Monarch, when He entred Troy, had in his Princely traine, Eleuen hundred valiant Knights, all after slaine. 24 With him Duke Achumus the Troians ayded, Achamas. By whom Pessemus the Pannonian KingTessemus. Was seated, him great Hector had perswaded Vnto these wars three thousand Knights to bring, All expert Archers, with whom Stupex traded, Stupex. Fortunus Samnus Ausernumus A valiant Duke, and in his youthfull spring: Next him sat three Boetian Dukes Fortunus, Duke Samnus, and the bold Duke Ausernumus:
25 These led twelue hundred Knights, next whom tooke Boetes. Two Brother-Kings, the bold Boetes first, Epistemus. place, The other Epistemus, of one race, Both Princes, in the Realme of Burtia nurst, They brought a thousand Knights the Greekes to chace, Men of great spirit, and such as all things durst: Next them was set a Gyant (dreaded sore) hilemus. Philemus, of the Realme of Paphlagore. 26 The Aethiopian Perseus Rauen-blacke, Perseus. Thiction. And the King Thiclion of the selfe-same hue, With Symagon, in whom there was no lacke Symagou. Of heart or skill his foe-men to pursue: These Kingly Moores that Priam come to backe Next to the lofty Gyant sit in view, Three thousand sunburnt knights, that brauely fought From Aethiopia they to Phrygia brought. 27 This State was full: and lower one degree, Another longer Bench runs crosse the Hall, Where mixt with Priams valiant sonnes, you see More of these leagued Kings in order fall: First of the ranke was Hector, next him, be Hector. Two potent Kings, Thelemus hye and tall, Thelemus. And young Archilochus a valiant Boy: Archilocus These with a thousand good Knights strengthen Troy. 28 Paris next them, and by his amorous side, Two Princes raigning in Argrestes Land, Two Kinges from Argrest They brought twelue hundred Knights to see them tride, Next these was Troylus plac'st on the left hand, Trolus. Deiphebus. And Deiphebus full of warlike pride Mixt amongst these, a King of great command: Epistropus, that beyond Scythia came, Epistropus. Twixt Greece and Troy his valour to proclame. 29 He brought a thousand Knights, and a strange Beast Halfe horse, halfe Man, two perfect shapes deuided, A Sagittary cal'd (not dreaded least) Sagittarius. An expert Archer, his strong shafts were guided
With wondrous ayme and cunning, which increast His dread among the Greekes (at first derided:) Next, great Epistropus rankt by their yeeres, Sat Priams Bastard-sonnes, next them his Peeres. 30 Next them a Prince in Iewels rich, and Gold, That many Knights brought from Meander flood, The barbarous Meones Duke Nastes told, Nastes. By whom, vpon a costly foot-pace stood Tentumidas, by some (sirnam'd the Bold,) Tentumidas. Now aged in his prime, a Souldier good: By him Prince Pindarus aduanct his head, Pandarus. Hyrtacides. Next him Hyrtacides in Sestos bread. 31 Adrastus, Amphius, Merops, Princes three, Adrestus. Amphius. Merops. Are ranked then, by whom Ennonius sits, And Chronius, vnder whom the Mysians bee, Pylemen the next empty place well fits, Ennonius. Chronius. Pylemen Pyrechmes. Euphemes. Prince o're the Paphlagonian Chiualry: Pyrechmes next, whose fiery Horses bits The Paeons manage. Good Euphemes then Whom the Cicintans led, all expert men. 32 Ascanius and Dius, who doth guideAscanius. Dius. The Halizonians next in order fall, Then Pyrous who his Thracian Souldiers tride, Pyrous. Mnemon. Pyleus. Hypothous. And warlike Mnemon boldest of them all: Pyleus and Hypothous them beside, These the Pelasgians vnto battle cal: Warlike Aeneas of the Noblest race, Next whom, the Lords and Barons take chiefe place. 33 Anthenor, with Polydamus his sonne, The glistering Ladies keepe another State Aboue them all: Priams hye throne begun To lift it selfe where he in glory sate, Benches of Dukes and Earles from all sides run, Apparel'd in rich Robes of greatest rate: Thus was the King prepar'd, when the two Greekes, Presse forward to his throne with blushlesse Cheekes
34 At their approach the Lords amazed rise, And at their bold intrusion musing stand, Vlisses and Di∣omeds Embas∣sle. Vpon these two, the Kings fix all their eyes, Prepar'd for some strange Nouell, when his hand Vlisses wafts for silence, and applyes His speech to Priam thus: Hee whose command Rauisht from Sparta, great Atrides wife, Forfeits to Greece, his Country, Crowne, and Life. 35 If thou beest he whom all these Lords adore, I summon thee in Agamemnons name, Backe to her Lord, Queene Hellen to restore, With full amends done to the rauisht Dame, And to present thy lustfull sonne before The bench of Argiue Kings, t'abide such shame That he in after times to our successors, Be made a terror to the like Transgressors. 36 Else shall th'inraged Princes spoile thy Townes, Thy Matrons in their husbands armes defloure, Slaughter thy Sonnes and bury their renownes, And with thy peoples blood the channels scoure, Of these confederate Kings ceaze all the Crownes, When death that swallowes them must thee deuoure: Say, wilt thou to preuent this and much more, Punnish thy sonne, and Hellen backe restore? 37 To this th'incensed King replies againe, Th'vnable Greekes (alas) are much too weake, Wanting the power thy proud vants to maintaine, Or to make good what thou doost rashly speake: They rauisht our faire Sister, whom in vaine We re-demanded, her despights to wreake: Our Sonne the amorous Paris crost the deepe, To fetch thence Hellen whom the Boy shall keepe. 38 Haue they not slaine our Father, spoyld our Citty, Pillag'd our people, wiues nor Matrons spared, Eucn Babes and Infants mangled without pitty, And in their barbarous rigor all things dared,
Then in faire Hellens rape what wrong commit I, Since not the least of these Greece hath repair'd: Since whilst our Sister leads a Strumpets life, Hellen is grac'st to be young Paris wife. 39 You shall repent: King Diomed replies, This insolence which we will punish deerely, By vs the Generall of the Greekes defies: Priam and Troy whom wee'l chastice seuerely, Vnto whose ruines seauenty Princes rise, Whose forces shall begirt you late and earely: These words promist, the Troians so disdaine them, That many drew their Faulchions to haue slain them. 40 But euer. Honoured Hector qualified The sudden vprore, and appeas'd the brall, Their passage by the multitude denide, Hector makes free, and Vshers them through all, Yet many proud braues past on either side Twixt the strange Kings and them i'th Pallace Hall: At their departure casting vp his eye, King Diomed by chance doth Cresseid spy, 41 As she with Hecuba and Hectors wife, Creusa and Pollixena was plac'st, Him thought he neuer saw in all his life A Lady better form'd, or Sweet-lyer grac'st, His mutinous thoughts are in themselues at strife, To see a face so faire, an eye so cha'st: Beauty so full of charme, with which inchanted, He craues her name by whom he seemes so danted. 42 When vp starts netled Troylus; and thus sayes, Her name is beautious Cressid whom you seeke, And Troylus Mistresse? to whose heauenly praise My soule hath bin deuoted many a Weeke, And if thou aym'st my graces thence to raise, I challenge thee the combat valiant Greeke, He would accept it, but he needs must part, His body goes, he leaues behind his hart.
43 The dantlesse Troians now prepare for warre, Whilst to th'incamped hoast the Legat Kings Relate King Priams answere, and how farre He stands from peace, the Grand-Duke now begins Like a good Captaine to foresee what barre May lie twixt him and safety: with swift wings Achilles is dispatcht to crosse the Scas, With Telephus the sonne of Hercules. 44 Because the Messean Land where Theutram raign'd Theutrm. Was fettile, they from thence demand supply Of Victuall for the hoast, but he disdaind T'assist them, therefore him the Greekes defie: The Kings hye blood Achilles Faulchion stain'd, Theutram (alas) by him is forest to dye, And Telephus crown'd King, from whose rich Coast, With store, & Victuall he relieues the hoast. 45 Twelue Moones were past since first the Greeks took land, When Duke Palamides at th'host ariues, Whose absence murmur'd long, yet the command Of the whole Army, with the Princes liues, Are made his charge, none seeming to withstand his principality: this Duke deriues His byrth from Naulus, and is made the head Of the stout Greekes, in Agamemnons stead. 46 But in desaster houre, Vlisses friend, To Agamemnon by his crafty fraud, Both to his life and his command gaue end: He that but late the Argiue Princes aw'd, And foyld the common foe, cannot defend his owne deere life, but whilst the hoast applaud Atrides honor, in vnhappy season, Is forcst to perrish for suspected Treason. 47 Tenedos sackt, the Greekes insult vpon't, The first battaile. And from that place made leuell with the plaine, The Fleet disanchors, whose proud Nauall front, Prothesilaus proudly doth maintaine,
Hoysing the first Sayles in the Hellespont, A hundred Ships whose Flags and Pendants staine The Ayre with various Colours, he commands, And twice repulst, vpon the Beach he Lands. 48 His ships tough ribs vpon the sands he brake, And many Greekes, some drown'd, some landing, fall, As well the boldest that the Ship forsake, As those that keepe aboord must perish all, Onely the bold King makes the Troians quake: Who whilst his maymed traine for rescue call, Makes good the place, till with an hundred more, Archelaus and Prothenor mans the shore. 49 Now growes the battle hot, for the rude rout Of the disordered Troians madly flocke To impeach their Landing, who with courage stout Leape on the shore, and there abide the shocke Of the proud Foe, who murder all about, And with rude taunts their proud Inuasion mocke: But Askalus and Agabus draw neare, Two Kings, whose landed souldiers change their chear. 50 Yet at the length into the Sea driuen backe, Till Nestor seconds them with fresh supply, and now th'astonisht Troians suffer wracke, Yet still make good the shores with fresh supply; againe repulst, the Greekes made good the lacke Of more arm'd men; Vlisses Ships prest ny, Whose dreaded Ensignes on the Margent spred, Conquer the Beach, the whilst the Troians fled. 51 King Philomenes enuious of his Fame, A pointed Speare brake on Vlisses face, and stounded him: but when the bold King came T'himselfe againe, he quitted that disgrace: So much did wrath his Noble thoughts inflame, he wounded him in such a speeding place, That had not Ihoue kept backe his Weapons force, The late victorious, had dropt downe a Corse.
52 Whilst these two Kings contend, the Greekes retire, And backe into the blood-stain'd Sea are driuen, When Thoas with his fleet doth Land desire, Now Agamemnons Ships are all to riuen Vpon the Strond, his men halfe blood, halfe mire, Tugge for the shore, whilst many die vnshriuen; Next Menelaus hath vnmand his Ship, And from his Barke doth stormy Aiax skip. 53 At whose approach neere to the brinish brinke, Th'amazed Troians yeild him Landing free, Beneath his ponderous Arme the strongest shrinke, Before his sword th'affrighted people flee, Their soules below the waues of Lethe drinke, Whose deeds of valor when King Perses see: He with a band of Moores their violence stayde, Making th'astonisht Greekes expect more ayde. 54 When the great Duke Palumides discends Vpon the Continent, and in his traine A thousand Armed Knights, his Noble Friends, Whose swords the Beach with blood of Troians slaine: Palumides gainst Symagon extends His pointed Iauelin, Symagon lies slaine: A valiant Moore, to Perses neere alide, Though strong, he by the sonne of Naulus dide. 55 Now gainst the beaten Troians rose lowd cries, Which puissant Hector hearing, from the Towne, Issues from forth the gates, and soone applies His fortitude, where Warre seem'd most to frowne; His armor Siluer-white, his shields deuise A Lyon Gules the field, Or after knowne And dreaded mongst the Greeks, where ere he marches The Flowers & grasse with blood of Greeks he parches 56 Prothesilaus him encounters first, and at his Steely Beauer aymes his Speare, The King his Staffe vpon his Visor burst, But from the Worthy Hector past not cleare:
All that encounter him must tast the worst, The steel-head Lance from off his steed doth beare: The dreadlesse King, who rose by great indeuour, But Hector cleft his head quite through his Beauer. Prothesilaus slaine. 57 So passeth on strowing his way with Corses, That in a while his smoaking blade was feared, Whom ere he meets he to the ground inforces, His valour hath the drooping Troians cheared, He without riders leaues fiue hundred horses, Whose broken limbes lie on the earth besmeared: Death Marshals him the way where ere he traces, Pauing the Margent of the Sea with faces. 58 His courser Galathee the Noblest Steed, That euer Knight bestrid, i'th morning white, In euery bare place seemes from farre to bleed, His valiant ryder shun'd no dangerous fight: Hee's flak't all ore, and where no wounds indeed Were hewed, great gashes grisly to the sight Appeare vpon him, Galathee still stood Sound, and yet stain'd all ore with Gracian blood. 59 Nor wonder if his white Steed were so painted, When his sharpe sword so many Riuers shed, This day a thousand Knights beneath him fainted, And on the verdure by his hand lye dead, With this mortality the ayre is tainted, The spatious plaines with wounded Greekes are spred: Charon the sweat wipes from his ghastly face, And neuer wrought so hard in so short space. 60 Hels Iudges and the Gods of Darkenesse wonder, What's now to do on earth, that such a throng Of Ghosts whose threds the fatall Sisters sunder, Presse in such multitudes for sentence: long The Princes of the Vaults and regions vnder, Were not so troubled to iudge right and wrong: For neuer in one day it hath befell, So great a Sessions hath bin seene in Hell.
61 Th'inuincible Dardanian Heroe tyr'd With purple Massacre, towards night with-drew, Horse, Armes, and Plumes the brightest morne admir'd For whitenesse, at his yssue, purple grew, And he returnes Vermilion all: attir'd In Crimson, scarce the royall Priam knew Great Hector from the Torras where he stood, Seeing his onset white, Retrait all blood. 62 Soone was the Noble Troian mist in field, For with his Myrmidons proudly attended Achilles Lands, and that renowned sheild God Vulcan made, in which his art extended, He vaunteth: yet the daunted Troians yeild, Th'vnconquered shores Hector so late defended Lie open to inuaders, whole Greece Lands, For gainst the great Achilles no man stands. 63 Euen to the Citty wals the Troians fly, Whom the maine hoast with hostile showtes pursude, And had not Noble Troylus heard the cry, Paris and Deiphebus where they view'd So great effusion from a Turret hy, They'had won the Towne, the streets had bin imbrude With Natiue blood, but they in hast discend, Releeue th'opprest, the Citty gates defend. 64 And yssuing with three thousand Knights, compell Achilles to retrait, and when his face Look't backe from Troy ward, there was none so fell Vpon the Graectan party, but gaue place: This day Prince Diomed was seene t'excell In Armes: him Troylus met in equall race: They spur their Steeds that ran both swift and true, Incountring, both their Staues to splinters flew. 65 Their Launces broake, they try their burnisht blades, A thousand fiery starres at euery rushing Fly from their helmes, with fury each inuades His opposite, their mutuall Armors frushing,
The big-limb'd Diomed himselfe perswades, Young Troylus cannot match his strength, and blushing A beardlesse Lad should hold him so long play, Doubles his blowes and thinkes to end the fray. 66 The Noble youth whom Cresseids loue prouokes To all atchieuements, beyond mortal power, (Though young,) his lofty spirit his riuall yoakes, Who thought his infant Vertues to deuoure, He doubles and re-doubles warlike stroakes, The battell lasts the best part of an houre: But whilst vpon their helmes each champion thunders Night that deuides the hoast their fury sunders. 67 This Eeuen the Greekes incampe, earely the Morrow,The second daies battayle. They shine in armor with the rising Sunne, The Troian Princes from their Ladies borrow Rich fauours, and withall to horse-backe runne, A kind of feare begot twixt ioy and sorrow, Liues in their eyes, til the dread fight be done: To see their Champions proudly arm'd they ioy, Grieue to behold so huge an hoast fore Troy. 68 Now are both Battailes pitcht, Menon appeares First from the Argiue hoast: from Troy forth stands Hector, who in his burnisht Beauer weares Andromachs Gloue, and now all Troy commands: These two begin the battell with their Speares, They broke, they tosse their bright steele in their hands: Hector soone hurles King Menon from his horse, So passes on to proue his warlike force. 69 The two hoasts ioyne, ruffling confusion flyes Through all Scamander field, the dying grones Are mixed with th'applausiue Conquerors cryes Troians and Greekes conquer and fall at ones, Renowned Hector this day wins the pryse, he sunders Males and Armors, flesh and bones: His al-deuiding sword was made by charme, No steele so wrought but shrunke beneath his arme.
70 Thus like a raging storme he rusheth still, Ouer his Plume a Clowd of terror hung, And where he rides he doth on all sides kill, His bloud-staind Faulchion spares nor old nor yung, Tyr'd with his horse, his Chariot Mount he will, Now vp he takes a Bow deuinely strung, And shooting midst the Hoast, not one steele-head Iat'd from his Bow but stroke a Graecian dead. 71 Him the King Menon and king Glaucion then, Huge Thesus and Archilochus defie, They in their squadron lead three thousand men, But Hector in his Chariot still sits hie, Vntill his Brasse-shod wheeles are purpled, when Their Naues are drown'd in blood of men that die: Charioted Hector these foure Kings assaile, But his smart Steeds spring through their armed pale. 72 Menon that was too forward boue the rest, Pursues great Hector in his lofty Carre, A dart the Troian quiuer'd through his brest, King Menon bids his last farewell to warre, King Menon slaine. With multitudes the Prince is ouer-prest, And yet he kils the Greekes neare and from farre: Neere, with his fatall sword he cleaues their harts, And a farre off, with his keene shafts and Darts. 73 Vnto this rescue Prince Securabor, One of King Priams Bastard sonnes soone came, And Noble Margareton thirsting for Honor, and mongst the Greekes to get a name, All Priams yssue cowardice abhor, Duke Menesteus enuious of their fame, Against them comes, now clamors fill the skie, Whilst about Hectors Chariot thousands lie. 74 Vnto this hostile tumor from Troy-ward, Three Kings with Noble Troylus the fourth man Make their incursions: King Sampitus far'd Like a fierce Lyon, King Maclaon wan
With anger, and the King that all things dar'd Alcanus: gainst whom Menesteus ran And bore him Nobly, yet alas too weake, Till Thesus came the Troian rankes to breake. 75 Troylus Menesteus singles, but his Horse Stumbled, and he enforcst on foot to fight: Fiue hundred Greekes beguirt him, and enforce The youthfull Troian (now debard from flight) To be their prisoner; Many a liuelesse corse Troylus first made, before compeld t'alight: When Hector heard but word of his disgrace, He slew on all sides till he wan the place. 76 But first Alccenus had addrest his Speare, Against the Duke that led Prince Troylus bound, The Steele point tooke him twixt his cheeke and eate, And made th' Athenian Duke a dangerous wound, Sampilus seconds him (a Steed was neare) On which they mounted Troylus from the ground: Menesteus mad that he hath lost his prise, Pierst through the throng, and cald for more supplies. 77 King Menelaus and Prothenor knowing Th' Athenians voyce, presse that way with their powers, But find Hyripsus and King Hapon strowing The earth with Greekes, at which the Spartan lowers: These foure their forces ioyne, many yet growing, Their swords supplant: death through the Champion scowers At whom th'Olimpian Gods amazed stand, To see him with such quicknesse moue his hand. 78 Anthenors sonne Polydamus makes on, King Rhemus backes him with three thousand more, Their Speare-length (through the presse he had not gon) But Celidus him from his Courser bore, A fairer Prince then Celidus liu'd none, By Venus gift he Beauties Liuery wore: Polydamus re-mounted, soone addrest, A second course, and pierst him through the brest.
79 Which Menelaus seeing, soone assayles Rhemus, and layes him stounded in the field, And but that stowt Polydamas preuailes, H'had borne him to his Tent vpon his shield, Still was not Hector Idle, Hils and Dales His Chariot skoures, to him the mightiest yeild: For like a raging Torrent after Rayne, Where ere he comes confusion fils the plaine. 80 Now was he by the men that Aiax led Troopt in: the Salamines Thunder about him Like Ciclopes, as if his Noble head Were Vulcans Anuile (yet the boldest doubt him) And seeing store of Carcasse bout him spred, Wish in their hearts to fight else-where without him: For like a baited Lyon at a stake, he cuts them off, and makes the boldest qnake. 81 King Theuter somewhat rougher then the rest, as worthy Hector kept these Dogs at bay, Finding the Prince with two much taske opprest, against him with his Courser makes swife way, The brazen-headed staffe glides by his brest, and gainst his rib he feeles the Iauelin stay: King Theuter thou hast done a Noble deed, Thou art the first that mad'st great Hector bleed. 82 Well was it for thee that thou staidst not long, Those that growe next him for thy act must fall, Like a mad Bull he fares the Greekes among, and whom he hits, beneath his Chariot sprall, The Prince, the common man, the weake, the strong, The Bold, the Coward, tast confusion all: The Sun looks pale, heauen red, the green earth blusht To see their bones beneath his Chariot crusht. 83 Whose valour Thesus seeing, nobly spake: Thesus. Great Hector, I admire thee, though my Foe: Thou art too bold, why dost thou vndertake, Things beyond man, to seeke thine ouerthrow?
I see thee breathlesse, wherefore dost thou make So little of thy worth, to perish so? Fond man retyre thee, and recouer breath, And being thy selfe, pursue the workes of death. 84 Prince Hector his debility now finding, Thankes royall Thesus, and begins to pawse, And bout the field with his swift coursers winding, Vnto a place remote himselfe withdrawes, Meane time King Menelaus the battaile minding, Wan in the dangerous conflict much applawse: Heere Celidonius valiant Moles slew: Moles that his discent from Oreb drew. 85 By Mandon, King Cedonius lost an eye, A Graecian Admirall, Sadellus kils, And Aix Telamonius doth defie Prince Margareton, King Menestheus, spils The Galles red blood, Prothenor low doth lie By Samuels Speare, renowned Hector fils The field with wonder, he his Carre forsakes, And Milke white Galathee againe he takes. 86 At his first entrance he espies his friend Polydamas by thirty souldiers led, Amongst whom spurring, they themselues defend, But scarce one man hath power to guard his head, Vnto their dayes great Hectors sword gaue end, And freedome to Polydamas, nye dead: With shame and wrath, next to the battell came King Thoas to redeeme the Argiues Fame. 87 With him the King Philotas who adrest Themselues gainst two of Priams Bastard Sonnes, Young Cassilanus puts his Speare in rest, And with great fury against Thoas ronnes, He brake his staffe, but Thoas sped the best, As to their bold encounter Hector comes, He sees his young halfe-brother he held deare, Through-pierst (alas) by Thoas fatall Speare.
88 Hye-stomackt Hector with this obiect mad, hurries through the thicke prease, and there had slaine Whole thousands, for the death of that young Lad, But his red wrath King Nestor did restraine, For with six thousand Knights in armor clad, he fortifies the late forsaken plaine: Gainst whom marcht Philon, of the part of Troy, Their battailes ioyne, each other they destroy. 89 Polydamus and Hector taking part With Philon, aged-Nestor growes too weake, For Cassilanus death the Greekes must smart, They through their flankes, wings, rankes, and squadrons breake When Aiax Telamon spide what huge wreake, The Troian Worthy made: his men take hart, And with King Menelaus them dispose, To rescue Nestor, and assault their Foes. 90 Gainst them Aeneas with the hoast arriues, And ioynes with Hector: on the Argiue side Philoatas with three thousand souldiers striues, all proued Greekes, whose valors had bin tride: Aeneas and great Aiax gage their liues To equall conflict, whom their troopes deuide: Philoatas on great Hector thinkes to proue him, (In vaine) he from his saddle cannot moue him. 91 But him the Woorthy stounded with a blow, A flatling blow that on his Beauer glancst, Vlisses and Humerus next in row, With twice fiue thousands Knights on Hector chancst, But Paris hapned with as many moe On Hectors part, where numbers lye intrancst: Paris a keene shaft from his Quiner drew, Whose fatall point the King of Cipresse slew. 92 This Ciprian, Kinsman to Vlisses was, In whose reuenge the Ithacan defies Prince Paris, who in Arch'ry did surpasse, These two in field against each other rise,
And with their mutuall blood they staine the grasse, But parted by the tumult, they deuise On further massacre, neere to this place, Troylus, Vlisses meets, and wounds his face. 93 Nor scapt the Troian wound-free, in this stower Was Galathee beneath Prince Hector slaine, And he on foot, the Greekes with all their power Begirt him, and assault the Prince amaine; But he whose fame aboue the Clouds must lower, From all their battering strokes still guards his braine: Till Dynadorus Priams Bastard son, Against well-mounted Polixemus ron. 94 A strong Barb'd horse the Noble Greeke bestrid, a Worthier Maister now the steed must haue, The Bastard youth gainst Polixemus rid, Vnhorst him, and his Steed to Hector gaue, Who mounted, farre more deeds of Honor did, Leauing the Greekes most Coarses to ingraue: a troope of Archers Deiphebus brings, Who expell the Greekes with arrowes, darts, and slings 95 At the first shocke the Prince King Theuter hit, and car'd a deepe wound on his armed face, The well steel'd point his sword-proofe Beauer split, and now th'assaulted Greekes are all in chace, Some saue themselues by swiftnesse, some by wit, Young Quinteline of Priams Bastard race, and King Moderus haue surpriz'd by force, Thesus, and spoyl'd him both of armes and horse. 96 Whom when the Dardan-Worthy saw surpriz, d He cals to mind the cur'sie to him done, By whom nye breathlesse, he was well aduis'd, The future eminence of warre to shunne, King Thesus whom his Victors much despis'd, Hector releast, and by the glorious Sunne, Sweares not to leaue him, till he see him sent, With safe conduct vnto his warlike Tent.
97 Here Thoas, by whom Cafsilan fell, Is by great Hector beaten from his Steed, Who razing of his Helme, to send to hell A soule he so much hated, was soone freed By Menesteus: who makes on, Pell-Mell With a huge hoast, and rescues with all speed Th'astonisht King: not long the day he tride, Till Paris with an arrow pierst his side. 98 Humerus glaunst a Iauelin through the sight Of Hectors Beauer, that it racst the skin, Th'inraged Prince on proud Humerus light And with one stroke he cleft him to the chin, Proceeding on, hee still pursues the fight, The Grecians loose, and now the Troians win, They beate them to their Tents, where some inquire For pillage, whilst the rest the Nauy fite. 99 In this pursute Hector and Aiax meete, Who (after interchange of hostile blowes) Part on eeuen tearmes, and with kind language greet, For the two kinsmen now each other knowes: Aiax intreats the Prince to spare theyr Fleet, And saue theyrtents, whose flame to heauen-ward grows Which courteous Hector sweares to vndertake, For Aiax and his Aunt Hesiones sake. 100 Oh Il-stard Hector! Thou hast ouerseene A Victory, thou canst not reach to more? Hadst thou to him inexorable beene Thou hadst sau'd Troy, and freed the Dardan Shore: Duke Aiax prayet hath wrought Troyes fatall teene And hath the power (lost Grecia) to restore: Oh, hadst thou tane the aduantage of this day, all Greece had perisht, that now liues for aye. 101 But theres a Fate in all things: Hector blowes His wel-knowne horne, his Souldiers all retreat: The Greekes to quench theyr Fleet themselues dispose, and re-instaure their tents, whose spoile was great:
The next day from the campe to Priam goes A Herald, to surcease all hostile heat: Demanding truce till they the dead haue grounded, And both of Campe and Citty cur'd the wounded. 102 Tis granted, from the Towne with Coffins com Pale widdowes, winpled in their mourning weeds, To fetch their husbands coarses cold and nom, To whom they offer solemne Funerall deeds, The Children fetch their Sires, and Fathers some Their slaughtred sons, which generall mourning breeds: The Greekes likewise their fellow-mates desire, And yeild their bodies to the hallowed fire. 103 But whilst these odoriferous piles they reare, And sacrifiz'd their friends in holy flames, And in perfumed Boxes, prized deare, Coffin their precious ashes, least their names Should die in Lethe: Nouell broyles appeare, And Ate through the Campe discord proclames: But now to truce our spirits we haue intention, Before twixt them we moue a new dissention. TO omit all our English worthies, whose names wee haue only memoriz'd, not hauing roome to insert their deeds in so little a compasse as we haue prescrib'd to our Histo∣ry, we rather couet to touch matter more forraigne, and lesse familiar to some, with whome our Booke must necessarily Tra∣ficke. In the description of Fame, we haue rather imitated Ouid then Virgill, his Fama malum quo non &c. In the description of King Priams state, we must needes imagine it great, where so many forraigne Kings assembled in his ayde, in whose names we haue confer'd Dares, the Tro∣ian Dictes, the Greeke Homer, Virgill, and others, who though in some particuler thinges (not momentarily they dif∣fer) yet they generally concurre in this, that such Princes with such populous and almost inuincible assistance succored Troy.
Telephus ioynd in commission with Achilles, to saile to the land of Messe, was sonne to Hercules, whom Theutam (ha∣uing before in the battayle receiued his deaths wound) volun∣tarily adopted his successour, for the great loue that he for ma∣ny benefits formerly receiued) had borne to his father Her∣cules. The passages of Loue betwixt Troylus and Cressida, the reuerent Poet Chaucer hath sufficiently discourst, to whom I wholy refer you, hauing past it ouer with little circumstance. The description of the first battailes seruice, disordred and confused, we must excuse, with this necessity, that beeing to remember so many, and to imploy them all, we could not do it with a directer method, then to set downe things done with∣out order disorderly, and actions hapning by accident acciden∣tally, and confused things, confusedly. King Prothesilaus was the first King that perisht before Troy, for though it were foretold by Oracle, that he that first set foot a shore, should perish by the sword of Hector, yet hee fearelesse of death, first landed, and in his too much valor made the fayre Laodomeia a desolate widdow. Ate, Goddesse of reuenge or strife, she is cald by Homer one of Ihoues daughters, Lesio. Homerus Iliad. 7. Presba dios thugater ate H pantas a-atai, Ate prisca Iouis proles quae leserit omnes. Mortales— The Tale of Cephalus and Procris, because I haue o∣mitted in my former Cantons, especially in that which seemes to inueigh against Iealousie, I thinke not altogither vnneces∣sary to insert in this Skolia, knowing that which was ill for∣got, cannot be amisse remembred at any seasonable opportu∣nity, Here therefore (though out of his ranke) I intend to ad∣mit him. BEneath Hymettus hill well cloath'd with flowers, A holy Well her soft springs gently powers, The Tale of Cephalns and Procris. Where stands a Cops, in which the Wood-Nymphs shroue, (No wood) It rather seemes a slender Groue, The humble shrubs and bushes hide the grasse, Heere Lawrell, Rosemary, heare Myrtle was,
Heere grew thicke Box, and Tam'rix, that excels, And made a meere confusion of sweet smels: The Triffoly, the Pine, and on this Heath Stands many a plant that feeles coole Zephirs breath. Heere the young Cephalus tyr'd in the chace, Vsd his repose and rest alone t'embrace, And where he sat, these words he would repeate, Come Ayre, sweet Ayre come, coole my heat: Come gentle Ayre, I neuer will for sake thee, Ile hug thee thus, and in my bosome take thee. Some double dutious Tel-tale hapt to heare this, And to his Iealous wife doth straight-way beare this. Which Proctis hearing, and with all the Name Of Ayre, (sweete Ayre) which he did oft proclaime, She stands confounded, and amazd with griefe, By giuing this fond tale too sound beleefe. And lookes as doe the Trees by winter nipt, Whom Frost and cold, of fruit and leaues hath stript, She bends like Corueile, when too ranke it growes, Or when the ripe fruits clog the Quinch-tree bowes: But when she comes to her selfe, she teares Her Garments, and her eyes, her cheekes, and heares, And then she starts, and to her feet applies her, Then to the Woods (storke Wood) in rage she hies her. Approaching somewhat neare, her seruants they By her appointment in a Vally stay, Whilst she alone with creeping paces steales To take the Strumpet whom her Lord conceales. What mean'st thou Procris in these Groues to hide thee? What rage of loue doth to this madnesse guide thee? Thou hopst the Arye he cals in all her brauery, Will straight approach, and thou shalt see their knauery, and now againe it Irkes her to be there. For such a killing sight her heart will teare, No truce can with her troubled thoughts dispence, She would not now he there, nor yet be thence: Behold the place, her iealous mind fortels, Here doe they vse to meet, and no where els: The Grasse is layd, and see their true impression, Euen heere they lay: I, heere was their transgression.
A bodies print she saw, it was his seat, Which makes her faint hart gainst her ribs to beat, Phoebus the lofty Easterne Hill had scald, And all moist vapours from the earth exhald: Now in his noone-tide point he shineth bright, It was the middle houre twixt noone and night: Behold young Cephalus drawes to the place, And with the Fountaine water sprinkes his face, Procris is hid, vpon the grasse he lyes, And come sweet Zephir, Come sweet Ayre he cryes. She sees her error now from where he stood, Her mind returnes to her, and her fresh blood, Among the Shrubs and Briars she moues and rustles, And the iniurious boughes away she stles, Intending, as he lay there to repose him, Nimbly to run, and in her armes inclose him: He quickly casts his eye vpon the bush, Thinking therein some sauage Beast did rush, His bow he bends, and a keene shaft he drawes, Vnhappy man, what doost thou? Stay and pause, It is no bruite beast thou wouldst reaue of life; (Oh man vnhappy) thou hast slaine thy wife: Oh Heauen she cries, Oh helpe me I am slaine, Stil doth thy Arrow in my wound remaine: Yet though by timelesse Fate, my bones heere lye, It glads me most, that I, no Cuck-queane dye: Her breath (thus in the Armes she most affected,) She breaths into the Ayre (before suspected) The whilst he lifts her body from the ground, And with his teares doth wash her beeding wound. The end of the eleuenth CANTO.
Argumentum A Chilles transformation: Palimed Accusd of Treason and condemnd to die: After long battaile, honor Hector led The boldest Argiue Champion to defie: The Graecians storme to be so chalenged, Hector and Aiax the fierce Combat try: A Truce, a Banquet: at this pompous feast, Queene Hellen is inuited a chiefe guest. ARG. 2. Deiademeias Loue, Vlisses Spleene, Two Princely husbands claime the Spartan Queen CANTO. 12. 1 FArre beit, I so much on Hector doate, To rob the aduerse part of any right, I am not to the Troians so deuoate, (Though thence deriu'd) that the least Argiue Knight Should me accuse, or any passage coate, Guilty of flattering loue, or partiall spight: Loe to both parts we newtrall hate professe, But equall loue, as we can euenly gesse.
2 I cannot flatter with smooth Virgils pe Or giue Augustus more then he should haue, (With Ouid) bestow Dieties on men, And where he hates or loues, condemne or saue: Blind Homer, how shall I excuse thee then; That all the glory to Achilles gaue, For wit and strength, to whom hast thou don wrong, Vlisses was as wise, Aiax as strong. 3 If Hector with Achilles thou comparest, Or rather wouldst preferre the valiant Greeke As he whose valour and esteeme was rarest, Needs must I cast a blush vpon thy cheeke: Because great Hector was thy foe, thou sparest To speake of him, (his praise must be to seeke) And all thy skeads Achilles Fame display, Whom Hestor hath vn-horst twice in one day. 4 I must confesse Achilles highly blest, To haue a Homer in his Country borne, Had Troy bred Homer, or had Greece possest Renowned Hector, no Prince should haue worne A wreath equall with his, Fame should inuest The Troian hyest, maugre Enuies scorne: Shew me the cause else, why to his disgrace, Hector's the worthy? he hath lost the place? 5 Or how can this through Gracia be digested, A Troians Fame should with such Luster shine, The generall bench of Iudgements hath inuested The Troian Hector one amongst the nine, Though Homer for Achilles hath protested, Made his Fame Tower-lesse, and his birth Deuine: Yet hath the world the Troian so respected, Achilles is put by, Hector elected. 6 And reason too, for what Achilles wan, Was by the valour of his armed traine, When Hector fought, he buckled man to man, And by his proper hand lie thousands slaine,
But how Achilles Fame at first began, And who first brought him to Scamander plaine, My Muse sings next, Ihoue-borne my braine inspire, Whilst I the Fate of Thetis sonne inquire. 7 Old Peleus yssue by the Seas faire Queene, Lycomedes K. of Scyros. Thetis in Lycomedes Court abides Clad like a Gitle (for such his youth was seene) His warlike hand a Womanish distaffe guides, Achilles and Deiademeia. A female shape obscures his Martiall spleene, In stead of Cushes a long Kirtle hides His warlike limbes, those armes mongst Virgins plaid, That were indeed for Vulcans armor made. 8 The carefull Mother that pre-science had By Oracle, her sonne'fore Troy should fall, Seekes to preuent his Fate, and sends the Lad Vnto the King of Sciros (being but small) He passes for a Girle, so was he clad, Such was his shape, gate, gesture, looke, and all: And through the Court a generall voyce doth ronne, Of Thetis daughter, not of Thetis sonne. 9 The King appoints him Bed-fellow to be With faire Deiademeia his sole-Child, So well the youthfull paire in bed agree, That when Achilles laught, the Lady smild, And when he honor'd, she would bend her knee, With him she tasted ioy, or mirch exild: His amorous gestures were to her a Lawe, To keepe her actions and her lookes in awe. 10 Achilles growes, so doth the Lady too, And as their yeares increase, so their affection, Custome and long continuance taught them doo Pleasures to youth vnknowne (without direction) Without suspicion, he may freely woo, The opportunous night friends her complexion: When in her Armes the Prince doth rudely rush Night Curtens her and none can see her blush.
11 So long they vse this dalliance, the young Lasse Feeles her brests swell, and her lanke belly grow, (No maruell) by the Prince with childe she was, Of him that wrought Troyes fatall ouerthrow; Great Neptolemus who did surpasse Neptolemus cald Pyrrl. In Martiall prowesse, and laide Islium low: Whilst these things are in processe, tis decreed By Oracle, Troyes warres shall ill succeed. 12 For when th'inuasiue Greekes demaund th'euent That in these expeditions shall betide, Answere is them return'd, incontinent Without Achilles, Troy shall swell with pride, And therefore was Vlisses forthwith sent With Diomed, to finde the Prince, denide By Thetis, vnto whom was then reuealed Her sonnes short date, (the cause she him concealed.) 13 The crafty Greeke the Mothers guile suspecting, To Lycomedes Court posts in disguise, His weeds of state and Princely robes reiecting, He Pedler-like attempts the enterprise, He beares along bright glasses, faire reflecting Cawles, Laces, Tyres, to please young Ladies eyes: Besides these womens toyes, he beares along A bright sword, and a Bow surpassing strong. 14 In the Court-hall he opens his faire packe, And twenty seuerall Ladies come to buy, The Pedler needs not aske them what they lacke, Not one, but with some trifle gluts her eye, Achilles (hanging at the Pedlers backe,) Spies a faire Bow, and by his Hamper lye A rich caru'd sword, the strong Steele-bow he drew, And shooke the sword, by which the Prince he knew. 15 Then closing with Aeacides, perswades The valiant youth to suite him to his kind, His loose effeminate habit he vpbraids, Tels him what honors are to him assind,
with what disgrace he liues mongst wanton Maides, And what renowne attends a valiant minde: Which in his noble thoughts takes such Impression, The Prince repents his former loose transgression. 16 He teares his feminine Vales, rends off his tyres, His golden Cawle and Fillet throwes aside, and for his head, a Steele-wrought Caske desires, That hand that did so late a spindle guide, To brandish a bright luster'd sword aspires, a sword that must in Hectors bloud be dyde: His smooth Rebata from his necke he fals, and to the Greeke, for a stiffe Gorget cals. 17 From his large Limbs th'Imbrodered Roabes hee shakes, and leapes out of his Garments with proude scorne, In stead of which, he a rich Vaunt-brace takes, Which buckling on, growes proud to see it worne, The wanton Guirles first wonder what he makes, With sword and armes (his Garments hauing torne:) But when he frown'd, the Ladies grow affrayde Of him so arm'd, with whom but late they playde. 18 But now Vlisses, Diomed, and he, Leaue (without leaue,) both Sciros and the King, (Deiademeia most bewailde of thee) Whoseyssue in thy Wombe thou feelst to springe. They pierce through Greece, whom when the Princes see, To their arriue, they Oades and Cantons sing: Praysing theyr Gods, that haue Achilles found, Whose hand must lay Troy leauell with the ground. 19 This Thetis hearing, that her royall sonne had left his secure habit of a Woman, and by Vlisses to the warres was won, She for his safety doth her wits still sommon, To Lemnian Vulcan she doth post-hastronne, Whose art in forging armes she knew not common: at her be-heast, he for her Sonne did yeild, a Speere-proofe-armour, and a Globe-like Shield.
20 What can a Mothers care gainst Fare preuaile? Not Vulcans Armour can defend his life, When th'vnauoyded destinies assayle against the Sisters bootlesse wee make strife, Mortall preuention then of force must fayle, In vaine then hast thou laboured (Peleus wife) To guirt his body in a steely wall, Since thy Achilles must by Paris fall. 21 No sooner was he borne, but the fayre Queene Plung'd him into the Sea, all saue the heele, By which she held him fast, that which was seene Beueath the waues, was wound-free against Steele, Had she but drown'd her hand, the Prince had beene Sword-proofe euen there, her nicenesse would not feele The coldnesse of the waues, therefore that part Was left vnarm'd, for Paris poysoned Dart. 22 Who therefore would against the Fates contend, By whom our elementall parts are swayde, Since euery thing thats borne must haue his end, and Nature still decayes what she hath made, Tis Heauen, not Earth, that can our liues defend, The hygh powers must in all things be obayd: But leaue the fayre-foot Thet is, and proceede To what the Campe hath against Troy decreed. 23 By this great discords monges the Gracians fall, Twixt Duke Palamides, and Mecenes King, But no man knowes the byrth of this great brall, Or from what Fountaine these dissentions spring, Achilles thinkes his warlike meed too small, He will not fight: not Diomedes bring His Men to battayle, while their Soueraigne head, Is Nawlus sonne, the generall Palamed. 24 Whom some affirme, the amorous Paris slew, In euen Incounter of opposed hate, But others say, gainst him Vlisses drew Such points of Treason, as concern'd his fate,
About Palamides strange rumours flew, Twixt whom and great Atrides fell debate About the Soueraigne sway, enuies fire nurst Long in their bosomes, into flashes burst, 25 The King of Ithaca marryed but newly Vnto the chastest Queene that hath beene crown'd, Vlisses and Pa∣lamides. When all the Grectan Kings appointed duly, To make their meeting, and assemble round, Gaue out he was turn'd Frantique, but not truely; Which craft of his, the Son of Nawlus found: For comming where Vlisses Plowd the Sand, and steer'd the crooked Rafter with his hand. 26 Palumides iust in the Mad-mans way, Layd young Telemachus his first borne Son, Which made the Greeke his yoaked teeme to stay, and where his Issuelay, the place to shon, Palumides dilcouers his delay, Finds that his Lunacy by craft was don: That whilst the Gracians were with Troy at strife, He might at home sleepe with his constant wife. 27 In ill time did the Son of Nawlus this, The vengfull King rouz'd from so fayre a Bride, who by this meanes now quite abandon'd is, Doth in his bosome spleene and rankor hide, and for the losse of euery amorous kisse, Threatens a wide wound in the Princes side: Oh treacherous Greeke! to want thy wife in Bed, Mustat Troyes siedge cost the great Generals hed. 28 Arnea was Sole-Daughter to the King Icarius and faire peribea his wife, Peribea daugh∣ter to Nais. who feeles a young Babe in her VVombe to spring, The Father when he knew th'Infant had life, after conception: doubting some strange thing, Oracle. Femine Peri∣bea ds Peri∣beapdorem fort ere. To Delphos hyes, where answers then were ryfe; When th'Oracle thus spake, the princely Dame Shall child one full of Honor, full of Shame.
29 A beauteous Maide the troubled Mother beares, The Father misinterprets Phoebus minde, And to auoyde her shame his future feares Commits her to the rage of Seas and Wind, The Birds that bred of Meleagers teares, Heredotus lib. de perse & An∣dromeda. Cald Meleagrides (by Nature kind:) With their broad wings about the Cock-boat houer, And from all stormes the beautious Infant couer. 30 And hauing nourisht her for a certaine space, Into the selfe-same Port her Barke they driue, Where the sad King without paternall grace, First launcht it forth, and finding her aliue Circled with Birds of Meleagers race, Their melting harts against their furies striue: Penelopes Grece sig. A brood of Indian hens. They take the young Arnea from the Sea, And call her of those Birds Penelope. 31 In beauty, stature, and in wit she growes, But when her Father findes her apt to marry, Fearing the Oracle, whom still he knowes Sooth in his words, perswades the dame to tarry, A safer course to keepe her chast, he chose, (Virginiti's a heauy loade to carry:) And to deuise to haue her nobly sped, At a high rate he sets her Maiden-head. 32 When all the Graecian Princes sought her grace, And lay their Crownes and Scepters at her feete, Icarius leades them to a Martiall race, where the young Kinges in hot incounter meete, Aboue them all, Vlisses won chiefe place, The shamefast Queene must her new Husband greete: The bashfull modesty of this chast Dame, The earefull Father did misconster: shame. 33 For woman-hood this Lady had no Peere,  in Chrisilla. witnesse her many Suters in the time Her Husband absent was, some twice ten yeare, who though much woo'd (and in her youthfull prime)
Yet in their force or fayre meanes could appeare, Not the least taynt of any amorous cryme: Though many Suters through her doores intruded, They by her Bow and Web were all deluded. 33 Whether Vlisses breast doth malice shrowde, And being at full groath, now out it must; Whether his loue to Agamemnon vowde, Bred in the Nawlian Prince some great distrust; Or whether great Palamides grew proude, And in the Ballance of his awe vniust: But the great Duke vnto the Barre he brings, And there arraignes him by a Bench of Kings. 34 Vnto this royall Sessions men are brought, That sweare Palamides would Greece betray, And that King Priam had by Factors wrought, To make the Argiue Campe the Troyans pray, The Generals priuate Tent is forthwith sought, Where Bags of Troyan Coyne conceiled lay: This euidence condems the Prince (betrayd) For there that Gold before Vlisses layd. 35 And Agamemnon is againe restord, With whose election the late Truce expires, The maimd are cur'd, the victors are ador'd, The bodyes slaine, receiue the funerall fires, The third battell. The Obits on both sides are full deplord, And eyther party the fayre field desires: The great Atrides Martials his fayre hoast, Who shine in Steele by the Sygean Coast. 36 Vpon the aduerse party, Hector leades His mn to battaile, flanct with sleeues and winges, His nimble Horsemen forrage round the Meads, The maine well-fen'st with Skirts of Shafts and Slings, In forehead of the battayle Hector treads, This day the Generall ouer thirty Kings: The charge is giuē, arm'd knights meet breast to breast Striking bright starres out of each others Crest.
37 The doughty Greekes after their long tru'st ease, Are full of breath and vigor, they fight well, The Troyans that but late droue to the seas The scattred Camp, thinke likewise to excell, Euen Ballan'st is the field, as the Scales please who Victors be, who vanquisht none can tell? On both sides some are conquer'd, some subdue, And as the day increast, the conflict grew. 38 Broad breasted Diomed gainst Paris rides, and lifts him from his Saddle with his Speare, The Prince, the Buttockes of his Horse bestrydes, And hardly can the Troyan keepe him there, Whilst Diomed his quicke remoue derides Vnshaken, from the Prince he passes cleere: Spurring from troope to troope, making intrusion, Where the hot fight was growne to most confusion. 39 Now in his Chariot stands Achilles hy, And with his Speare before him, squadrons strowes, Great Hectors puissance he longs to try, Or some thats able to withstand his blowes, And whilst whole troopes before his Chariot fly, The raynes vpon his steedes white necke he throwes: Calling for Hector: Hector, fore him stood, His Chariot-steedes caparison'd in blood. 40 To whom Aeacides, what ere thou be That thus confronst me like the God of warre? Know tis Achilles must thy life set free, And tumble thee from thy triumphant Carre: This said, a pointed Iauelin he lets flee, Which Hector at his loose perceiu'd to iarre, And tooke vpon his Targe: the Dart he cast, Pierst nine Steele folds, and in the tenth stucke fast. 41 Helme-graced Hector started at this blow, And aemulous of great Achilles Fame, Charg'd in his hand another dart to throw, But first he sayes: Inquir'st thou Hectors name?
Behold him heere, see thy eternall foe, Hector thou seek'st, and loe I am the same: His actiue arme his language doth pursue, For with his latest word his Iauelen flew. 42 Well was it his Orbicular Targe was strong, Which Vulcan by deuine composure made, Else had it stretcht the warlike Greeke along, It hit against the Bosse, and there it stayde, But with the force it brake the mighty thong In which his massie shield about him plaide: The affrighted Palfreyes with so great a stroke Startle aside, and the proud Curbe reuoke. 43 Now when Achilles rousde himselfe, and saw Illustrate Hector in his Chariot stand, Himselfe so basely, his hot Steedes withdraw, As if he meant to charge some other band, Thinkes in himselfe it is too great a flaw To his cleere mettald fame, and with his hand Wastes to Imperious Hector from a-far, T'abide a second deadly shocke of warre. 44 Th'vndaunted Heroë, who already wonders, The brauing Greeke so quickly should retire, And what strange fate their Brasse-bard chariots sunders, Since both so ardently the fight desire, Expects Achilles, who against him thunders, VVhilst from the Flints his armed wheeles beate fire: Now the two Chariot-driuers prooue their might, The Prince with Prince, Horses with Horses fyght. 45 This six-fold Combat hath not lasted long, VVhen Archeptolemnus that guides the raines Archeptolemnus Hectors Chari∣oter. Antomedon A∣chilles Chario∣ter. Of Hectors Coach-Steedes, thinking them more stronge Then those whom rough Antomedon constraines, Lashes his fiery Palphreyes, hot and young, Expert Antomedon his skill disdaines: Yerkes his proud horse, whose fiersenesse he dares trust Till their white foaming mouthes snowed all the dust.
46 The two sterne Champions mounted in theyr Carres, Confront each other with their armed Staues, Whose points on eithers Vaunt-brace print deep scarres, Sometimes they flourish them, with idle braues Dart them sometimes (like Knights well seene inwarr,) But when they ioyne, they Combat with their Glaues: Sometimes they grapple, sometimes they retire, And at their meeting make their Helmes all fire. 47 The grim Aeacides mad in his mind, The warlike Troyan should against him stand, Inradg'd, his teeth against his teeth doth grinde, And beates his Arm'd-breast with his Gauntlet hand, About him through the field doth Hector winde, His fayre-maynde Coursers haue so well been man'd: That to retreat, or to assault the foe, He at his will can checke, or make them goe. 48 Antomedon hath taught his Steeds like skill, For trauersing, he likewise takes the fielde, His Iades are countermaunded by his will, For with the Curbe they both rebell and yeild, Theyr Milky foame vpon their breasts they spill, Being parted thus: great Hector vaunts his Shield: Achilles his: againe their Coursers meete, And from the Earth beate Thunder with their feete. 49 In this rude Iustle is Achilles bruis'd, His high plumde Helme close to his Scull is batterd And he within his Chariot sits diffusde, His Sword, his shield, his Darts about him scatterd, Antomedon retraites, to haue excusde His second shocke: and o're the plaines he clatterd: his barbed teeme o're thousand Coarses flyes, In whose Red-blood, his Chariot Naues he Dyes. 50 Great Hector scornes pursuit, nor takes he breath, But fals vpon the next Greeke that he finds, And prints on him the bloudy stamp of death, The long imprisoned soule his Sword vnbinds,
Meane time Achilles rous'd, abroad surveith For Hector, th'obiect of all Noble minds: But when he found himselfe from Hector straid, The Prince doth base Antomedon vpbraid. 51 Who falling prostrate, sooths Achilles thus, Let not on me your deadly hate be grounded, Not I from him, but Archeptolemus Made way from me, for sure great Hectors wounded? With you retyr'd the sonne of Priamus On equal points: our rich-main'd Steeds haue bounded: Ouer these plaines great Hector wel-nie dead, By great Achilles, is to Troy-ward sped. 52 This calmes the wrathfull Greeke who else had sought His opposite amidst the slaughtering troopes, Disioynd from him th'inraged else-where fought, And where he reares his hand that Squadron stoopes, His armed Chariot, midst their Phalany wrought Horrid effusion, Troyes proud faction droopes Beneath Achilles arme, nor can it yeild, (Saue Hector) one to stand him in the field. 53 The Arch-Duke Agamemnon with his speare Encountred King Pandolus, till both bled King Thelamon prest to Sarpedon neare, And with his blade he raught him on the hed, By their rude force they both vnhorsed were, Against Eurialus King Thesus sped, Neither scape wound-free; Carras bare him well, Gainst Scenetus, till from their Steeds both fell. 54 King Philomenes made Anhenor flye, King Rhemus with the King Philotas ran, Before Vlisses doth Arastus lye, Aiax this day hath slaughterd many a man, King Priams Bastard sonnes themselues apply In many a skirmish since the charge began: Young Deiphebus and Aeneas stand Gainst Hupon, and the three-ag'd Nestors band.
55 Troylus and Diomed fiercely assaile, And brauely beat each other from their steeds, Both resku'd by the prease, else without faile There had bin fixt the period of their deeds, Re-mounted Diomed breakes through the pale Of his arm'd foes, and to his horse proceeds: So Troylus hewes his passage through the rings Of harnest foes, and to his Steed he springs. 56 Paris and Menelaus once more meet, And bring vnto the battaile fresh supplies, With thundering strokes vpon their Helmes they greet, Bretes the Admirall Hector defies: Bretes that did command their blacke-stem'd Fleet, Against him doth Priamides arise, And with such violent rage vppon him sped, That with one blow he cleft his Helme-deckt hed. 57 The Admirall thus dead, Hector desires The goodly Steed, from whom the Greeke was feld, Which (as for deeds of honour he inquires) The King Archilochus by chance beheld, Who seeing Bretes dead, the wound admires, His face lookt pale, his hart with anger sweld: And with his sword he couets to make bleed The Troian Prince, who still pursues the Steed. 58 Who storming to be troubled in the chace, Against the King Archilochus returnes, Inraged Mars is figured in his face, And in his lookes the eye of Gorgons burnes, The Greekes blunt sword can scarce his Helmet race, So weake a foe (inflamed Hector) scornes: Vpon his Crest his Faulchion he lets fall, And cleaues the Greeke, helme, body, armes and all. 59 The emulous son of Thetis, crost by chance The blacke goar'd field, and came to view this blow, And mad in mind, against him charg'd his Lance, In hope the towring Prince to ouerthrow,
Him Thoas seconds, and doth proudly'aduance His reeking sword, late crimson'd in the foe, Both with remorflesse blowes; the Prince offend, And his bruisd Shield about his arme they bend. 60 Had not his helmet beene of mettall pure, With Axes they had hewed it from his head, But he that made it was an Arts-man sure, Else had his braines bin on his harnesse spread, Nor had he long bin able to indure Such tedious battry, had not Fortune led Paris, Aeneas, Troylus and the rest, To rescue valiant Hector, thus opprest. 61 At their approch the Achive bands retire, Whom to their Pallisadoes they pursue, By this, in heauen ten thousand Lampes of fire Shine through the ayre, and now both Hoasts withdrew, The re-assembled Greekes Hector admire, And mongst themselues into sad counsell grew: Since not by force of Armes, by what sly traine, The neuer-daunted Worthy may be slaine. 62 More honoured Hector, in his royall braine Reuolues on milder thoughts, how bloud to saue: It pitties him to see so many slaine, And come to such a generall timelesse graue: Then, that no more red bloud may Symois staine, And change the coulour of her siluer waue, He by a generall challenge will deuise, For thousands safeties, one to Sacrifice. 63 Against all Greece hee'l flyng his hostile gage, And to a single Fight their Princes dare, That two bolde Champions may the combat wage, And in their mutuall Fury, thousands spare, Meane time, blacke night, from th'vniuersall Stage Of Earth, is cha'st and driuen: Now all prepare For th'early Field, and with Apollo rise, To shine in Armour by his rhadiant eies.
64 The Princes to the place where Hector lay Throng in theyr Armes, and his command attend, After they had tooke and giuen the time of day, with him they to the aged King descend, Before whom Hector briefly doth display his purpost challenge, which they all commend, For well his Father and his Brothers know, Hector hath power t'incounter any foe. 65 The Sunne, vp the steepe Easterne hils clymes fast, Th'embattaild Greekes vpon the plaines appeare, To them the faire-rankt Troians march in hast, Within the reach of Hectors armed speare: Both Hoasts attend the charge: when vnagast The Prince first wafts, that all the Campemay may heare, Then leaning on his Iauelin, makes this boast, Euen in the face of their assembled hoast. 66 You curled Greekes, that haue vnpeopled quite Hectors chal∣lenge. Threescore vast Kingdomes of theyr ablest men, To throng our fieldes with numbers infinite, All hopelesse of theyr safe returne agen: Among these sixty Kings that shine so bright In burnisht Steele, vpon this sanguine Fen: Can you select one boulder then the rest, T'encounter armed Hector, Creast to Creast? 67 Or if your Princes be too weake a number, Can all those threescore Climats yeild one hand, Amidst this world that coms our Realme to cumber, That dares betweene these hoasts gainst Hector stand? Or doe you all feare deaths eternall slumber? As well your Kinges. as those of common band, That with a braue, breath'd in so many eares, No soule (more valiant then the rest) appeares. 68 If any of these Princes proue so free His prodigall life against ours to ingage, Know by exposing his, whole thousands be Sau'd from the spoyle of warres infernall rage:
Oh, let me then that thrifty Champion see, That will spare Graecian blood, with him wage wage Equall contention: with my liues expence, I will maintaine the Troians eminence. 69 A Prince shall meet that Prince: as neere allide To thundering Ihoue as he thats best degreed, If in his warlike Chariot he will ride, I in my Chariot will contont his speed, March me these foure white Coursers Greece hath tride, These faire Andromache doth mornely feed: With her white hand with bread of purest wheat, And waters them with Wine still when they eat. 70 Xanthus, Podargus, Lampus, Aethon deare, Hectors steeds To Hector, you my armed Coach shall draw, And in this fierce exposure shall appeare, Before the best Steeds that the Sun ere saw, But all Greece cannot match your swift Carrere, Not Diomedes Steeds that fed on rw And mangled limbes, that in their Mangers bleed, Can equall you in courage or in speed. 71 Therefore Ile cease that oddes, and once againe Leauing the Kings to common men I turne, Among such clusters growing on this plaine, In no warme brest doth so much valor burne, But shall so many shewers of blood still raine On Symois banke: so many widdowes mourne For their slaine Lords, so many Children cry For their poore Fathers that heere slaughtred die. 72 If not for Loue of honour, in despaire Methinkes some one our puissance should accost, For no two soules that heere assembled are, Shall scape the y of our Troian hoast, Death and deuouring ruin shall not spare One, of your infinites, you are ingrost All on destructions File, then let some Greeke (Despairing life,) a death with honor seeke.
73 Yeilds our besieged Towne a Nobler spirit Then sixty assembled Kingdomes can produce? That none dares enterpose his hostile merit, But all put off this combat with excuse, Among such infinites will none inherit A name with vs? Feares Greece our hand shall sluce Their Vniuersall blood? That feare can slaue So many Legions with one Hectors braue? 74 I beg it of you Greekes, let some forth stand To try what puissancelyes in Hectors sword, If I be foyl'd by his all-daring hand, The Spartan Hellen shall be soone restord, And all the spoyles brought from the fertile Land Of Cythara, made good, and he ador'd With these ennobled armes, the sword and crest Of Hector, Honors more then all the rest. 75 If I subdue your Champion: Greece in peace Shall ease our burden'd earth of this huge weight, Hostility betweene our hoasts shall cease, You with your men and armes your ships shall freight, And from our bloud-stain'd soyle free this large prease, So shall illustrate Hector reach his height: When th'Vniuersall world hath vnderstood, Hector gag'd his, to saue his Citties blood. 76 Oh, let it not in after times be saide, Twice thirty kingdomes could not one man finde, Prince, Knight, or Swaine, durst equally inuade, A Troian Prince in Armes, and height of mind, Nor let succeeding time the Greekes vpbraide, To heare such lofty spirits so soone declinde: Behold, heere stand I to abide the rage Of his arm'd hand, that dares but touch our gage. 77 These words thus breath'd, a generall showt is giuen Through al the Trn army, which aspires And strikes against the Marble floores of heauen, Where fixed are ten thousand sparkling fires,
The hart of whole Greece is asunder riuen, Rude tumult springes out of their strange desires: A confusde murmur flyes along the shoare, Which to the Tryans eares, the calme winds boare. 78 The ager Souldiers mutiny: Some say, Oh would the Kinges and Dukes were not in place, Our Darts through Hectors Curace should make way, But common-men must not the Peeres disgrace, The rage-burnt Kinges their furies cannot stay, They fixe their fyr'd eies in each others face: Yet none presums the Gaunlet vp to take, When thus the younger of th' Atrides spake. 79 Is it my lot all Grecia to excuse? Greece, that farre from these powers hath congregated? Shall Pesant cowardise the Campe abuse, Whilst Menelaus liues a King instated? It shall not: what these Princes all refuse, I will take vp, the cause shall be debated Twixt me and Hector, for the generall hoast, (And reason) since the cause concernes me most. 80 With that he ceasde the gage, when his great Brother Blaming his rashnesse, makes him let it fall, And now the warlike Kinges eying each other, The Spartans wordes moou'd fury in them all, Their shame and rage they can no longer smother, About the Gauntlet they begin new brall: Toward the ground nine royall Princes bed, And for great Hectors gage at once contend. 81 The Archduke first: then great Andremons Sonne, Thoas, King Diomed, King Idomen, Aiax the strong, surnamed Telamon, Aiax Oleus: Eriphilus, and then The warlike Ithacyan, that alwaies won The praise for eloquence, boue other men: Vlisses: King Meriones, all these Stoope to the earth, and would the gauntlet cease.
82 T'appease their wrath, thus Nestor doth deuise Three seuerall Lots into some Helme to throw, And that bold Prince whose hand extracts the prize Betweene the Armies to assault the foe, The Lots are made, and all with ardent eyes, Into the Generals Caske iniect them so: Achilles was not there, till word was sent Whose the Lot was (that day he kept his Tent.) 83 The souldiers that had prou'd great Hectors might, Pray to the Gods the Combats chance may fall To Aiax Telamon, that he may fight With Hector, for the Greekes in generall, If not on warlike Aiax, it may light On warlike Diomed, broad set, and tall: Or if not these, yet to appease his rage, Great Agamemnon may the battaile wage. 84 The Heralds from the generals Helmet drew The first Inscription, which being knowne, was laid At Aiax foot, the Prince the Paper knew, Glad of his Lot (as all the souldiers praid) The Kings retyr'd, onely sterne Aiax grew Neere to Dardanian Hector, nought dismaid; Arm'd at all points, he struts vpon the plaine, Like angry Mars, after an army slaine. 85 His shape was huge, his presence full of feare, An angry Tempest sat vpon his brow, A Sanguine Plume doth from his Helme appeare, Which double armes his backe, and seemes to bow Beneath his Bases: arm'd with such a Speare His right hand was, that none can disallow: Athwart his breast a purple Bawdricke fell, Bearing a sword, which many had sent to hell. 86 The scabberd Crimson Veluet, richly embost And chap't with Gold: vpon the hilt was grau'd The battaile of the Centaures who were lost In that fierce warre, and whom the conflict sau'd,
This swotd was aged Telamons and cost A Citties prize, the bright Blade had bin lau'd In many bosomes, many Princes bloods, The handle was stucke round with Golden stoods. 87 The Pummell wayde a Talent, rarely wrought The combat twixt Arche∣lous & Her∣cules. With Artfull Modules, on that curious round, Grim Achelous with Alcides fought, And there in all his Proteus shapes was found, Thether the prize faire Deyaneyr was brought And placst aloft; beneath her, those that sound Vnto the dreadfull charge, with Clarious shrill, Sit with swolne cheekes their lofty pipes to fill. 88 Such Art th'inchacer shewd, to mocke the eye, That some would thinke their Reeds did Musicke yeild: There sat the King her Father Thron'd on hye, With him his Peeres, and round about the field Th'vnruly multitude still pressing nye The bounded lists, to see their Champions weild Their dreadfull Armes, and who the prise can win, One with a Club arm'd, and a Lyons skin. 89 The other with his God-hood and his power, To change himselfe to shapes of strange disguise, Sometimes he seemes a Dragon, to deuoure His riuall Prince, who doth his Art dispise, For on his head his Club fals like a Tower, Next like a fire into his face he flies: Ali which the Noble Champion cannot tame, For with a Club he straight beats out the Flame. 90 Then like a grim mad-Bull the halfe-God raues, And with his hornes Alcides thinkes to gore, But he contemning such inchaunted braues Flyes to his head, and with his rude hands tore One horne quite off (at this the Workman grieues) The conquered Bull in falling seemes to rore: Foure Nimphs discend from a faire sacred hill, And this rich horne with Flowers and fruits they fill.
91 Which of the horne of plenty still beares name, This and much more the hye-pris'd Pummell beares A finer temper'd blade, or of more fame Cornucopia. By his proud side no Princely souldier weares: With this arm'd Aiax to the combat came, And singly to the Dardan Prince appeares: On his left arme a ponderous Targe he bare, Quilted with seuen Oxe-hides all Tan'd with haire. 92 Tycheus was the Currier drost those hides, Best of his trade that dwelt on Hyla then, Accootred thus, strong Atax with huge strides Stalkes in the field before the best of mn, And fixing his bold foot, boldly h'abides Cononting him: the Argiue army when They saw the Salamine Prince beare him so prowd, Their soules reioyc'st, their harts his lot allowd. 93 Priamides that neuer was affraide, Of ought (saue feare) his Combattant thus greets, Oh thou whose presence to my soule is made More pleasing then the most delicious sweets! Let me pertake his name, who vndismaide In such faire equipage great Hector greets: For since mine eye first knew Apollos light, I neuer saw a more accomplisht Knight. 94 Nor one whose presence better pleas'd mine eye, (Although my foe) Ile giue thee all thy dew, If courage suite, by shape I can spy No blemish in thee; either let me view Thy open Helme, or else thy name discry, When stormy Aiax vp his Beauer drew, And thus reply'de: The Helmet I had on, Obscur'd the face of Aiax Telamon. 95 And Coozin Hector, know I am the least Of many that our spacious campe containes, Who to thy fury dare oppose their Crest, And on euen language charge thee on these plaines,
We come to fight, not brall, then doe thy best, The strongest hate that in thy bosome raignes Powre on my Shield, destruction be my share, If with my Sword or Speare, I Hector spare. 96 Gramercies Cooze, the Troyan Heroë spake, Thou lou'st me best, to lay it soundly on, These noble thoughts thy mixed byrth did take From vs of Troy, and not from Telamon: Our Dardan bloud thou in thy arme dost shake, But when thou fearest: thy Mothers heate is gon: And onely that remaines to chill thy hart Which Troy disclaymes, and yeilds Greece as her part. 97 And would to Ihoue I knew where that blood ran, Vnto those Veines I would direct my Speare, And those in which our Kindred first began, My hate should spare, as blood to Hector deare: Come Noble Aiax, beare thee like a man, And one of Hectors Kinsmen, scorning feare: (Feare) is a word in Troy not vnderstood, A banisht exile from all Priams bloud. 98 More, I could wish that I might prooue my rage On some, whose veine no Troyan moysture guides, Thetis arm'd Son, whose heate we must asswage, Tetydes, or the Elder of the Atrides, Saue these liues, none can equall conflict wage With Hector: but behold, our fury rides On Horrors wings, our bloud is vp and hye, Then guard thee Cooze, my Iauelin now must fly. 99 His words and speare together cleaue the ayre, The Combat betwixt Aiax and Achilles. The Golden-headed-staffe as lightning flew, And like the swiftest Curror makes repayre Whether t'was sent, and doth his message true, Aiax huge shield hath interpos'd the bare, Which Hectors agitagious still pursue: Through sixe tough hydes, it pier'st without respect, But the sharp point vpon the seauenth was check't.
100 Aiax then shakes his Iauelin, forth it flyes, And through the Plates of Hectors Target pierces, The toughest Mettall that the Anuile tryes, Must at his force relent: a thousand hierces His rage hath fild, and now the Prince applies His Vniuersall power, fry dispierces Through all his veynes, which to one force vnited, No wonder, Hector was so well requited. 101 The Combat is begun, which to descry, To their full vertues doth surpasse my skill, Their blowes so swift are, they deceiue the eye, The least of thousands are of power to kill, At aduantagious places they soone spy, Both seas and shores with their lowd strokes sound shrill: Were neuer heard such blowes, so sound, so thicke, Or seene such Wards, so cunning, and so quicke. 102 Such that saue Hector and blunt Aiax, none On Earth could equall, then much lesse exceed These two Heroicke spirits, spent and gone, To riuall them, no age the like can breed; Nor maruell though these two exceld alone, They being both deriu'd from God-like seed: In whom th'Imperiall Dietyes contended, In two such men, to haue two Hoasts defended. 103 Infinite Charges passe from eyther side, From eyther part their nimble Iauelins sing, Both fixe their bold feet, and such stormes abide As with their force tempestuous fury bring, Euen till their Noble blouds the Verdure Dyde, with Ecchoing rage, their vaulted Helmets ring: Whose deafning Clangor from the field rebowne, Through the best Arches of Troyes Marble Towne. 104 Their speares being shiuered in the empty ayre, The Truncheons swelling from their hands they take, with interchange of heate, they madly fare, Till the tough Oake euen to their Gauntlets brake,
And now their hands vnseruiceably bare, For their bright Swords, their crack't staues they forsake, Behold their wrastling Steeles contend on hye, And ug for honor in the empty sky. 105 With lightning such as Ihoues Incensements breede, Swifter then thought, or sight, theyr furies meet; Both seeming doubly arm'd with such quicke speede, Theyr bright swords guard them round, frō head to feet, Theyr trusty Armours stand them much in steed, For with such wounding strokes theyr Caskes they greet, So full of horror, that both armies wonder, how Earth-bred men, shold make such Iouiall thunder. 106 The inuincible Dardanian with one stroke, Raught Aiax Beauer, and vnplum'd his hed, The Steely Claspe (deuinely wrought) it broake, Which in the Salmin Duke sterne fury bred, Who striuing now the Dardan Prince to yoake, His spleene and powerfull Sword together sped, The point to Hectors breasted Armour flew, And from his Bulke Vermillion drops it drew. 107 The Troian growes inflam'd, the Argiue proud To see his bright Skeyne in such bloud Imbrude, Th'Inuaders showte, and lift theyr cryes aloud, To see their Champion with such power indude, For this (great Hector) in his Soule hath vowde Suddaine reuenge, he growes more fierce and rude: His Sword plyde Aiax Helme, yet shining bright, As Cyclops hammers on theyr Anuiles light. 108 So well t'was tempered, and his strength so hy, That his tough mettal'd Blade in pieces flew, At selfe-same instant Aiax gan apply His trusty steele, and close to Hector grew, But as he thus pronoun'st (now Hector dy) And heaues his arme aloft to make it true, his Sword vpon his Caske fell as he spake, And with the force close by the handle brake.
109 The Champions both disarmed saue their shields, First Hector with his eye doth round inquire, And findes a scatter'd Rocke left in the fieldes, Neuer till then remou'd, now all on fire, To auenge his wonnd, what no man else could weild, (His mind boue Mortall puisance gins t'aspyre:) His puisant arme aduanceth at the last, And the huge Masse he towards Aiax cast. 110 He takes it on his shield, but with the power Of his comparelesse strength, the seauen tough Hides were all to crusht and bruisd, he thinkes some Tower Of arched stone from his high structure slides Him to intombe aliue, and to deuour, Downe droppes his Targe to earth, and he abides Astosht for a space, at length his eye Glan'st on a young tall Oake that grew fast by. 111 VVhose sinnowy strings with shaking to and fro, He soone vnloos'd, and by the Earth vp teares, And wauing boue his Helmet, with one blow seekes to giue end to all the Dardans feares, should it fall steddy, he should lye full low, The threatning Oake still in the ayre appeares: Menacing vengance, but before it light, Here breath my Muse, and cheere thy traueld sprite. Achilles his concealement ofhis sex in the Court of Lyco∣medes: De Arte Aman∣. 1. Ouid thus writeth. NOw from another World doth saile with ioy, A welcome Daughter to the King of Troy, The whilst the Graecians are already come, Achilles and Da. (mou'd with that generall wrong gainst slium:) Achilles in a Smocke, his Sexe doth smother, and layes the blame vpon his carefull mother, What mak'st thou great Achilles, teazing Woo, When Pallas in a Helme should claspe thy Scull? What doth these fingers with fine threads of Gold? Which were more fit a Warlike Shield to hold.
Why should that right hand, Rocke or Tow containe, By which the Tron Hector must be slaine? Cast off thy loose vailes, and thy Armour take, And in thy hand the Speare of Pelias shake. Thus Lady-like he with a Lady lay, Till what he was, her belly must bewray, Yet was she forst (so should we all beleeue) Not to be forst so, now her heart would greeue: When he should rise from her, still would she cry, (For he had arm'd him, and his Rooke laid by) And with a soft voyce speake: Achilles stay, It is too soone to rise, lie downe I pray, And then the man that forst her, she would kisse, What force (Deiademeia) call you this? Antomedon was Achilles Charioter, and Squire to Pyr∣hus, Ouid de Arte Amandi lib. 1. whose skill Ouid remembers. By art of Sayle and Oare, Seas are diuided, By art the Chariot runs, by art Loue's guided, By art are Bridles rain'd in, or let slip, Typhis by art did steare th' Hemonian ship: And Tymes succeeding, shall call me alon, Loues expert Typhis and Antomedon. The reason why Achilles kept his Tent, and was not in the Homer. field when Hector breathed his chalenge, is not fully resolued: some thinke he was discontent about a difference betwixt the Generall Agamemnon and him, who kept away perforce Bri∣seis, a beauteous Lady, claimed by Achilles as his Prise, which wee rather follow in our History, then to lay his absence on his Loue to Polixena, whom hee had not yet seene, and the pro∣mise which for her sake he made to Hecuba, to keepe himselfe and his Mmidons from the battaile. Achelous was sonne to Oceanus and Tellus (viz:) the sea and the Earth whence all Riuers are deriued, who bee∣ing Strabo lib. 10. vanquisht by Hercules, hid himselfe in the Riuer, called of himselfe Achelous, a famous stoud in Greece, diuiding Aetolia from Acatnauia. This Achelous was before called Plutarch lib. d fluminibus. Thoas, and riseth from the Mount Pindus, but Plutarch
calleth it Thestius, of Thestius the son of Mars and Pisidices who had three daughters. Calirhoe, Castalia and Dirce, of whom the famous Greeke Poet Akeloou thugater diska, &c. Eurip. in Bachis Oh Acheloi filia, venerande Virgo dierce: The Flouds of Achelous were so famous that all the waters vsed in the deuine sacrifices were by the Oracle cald Aquae Heredot in Eutripe. Acheloae. The Poets faine him to transhape himselfe in a Bul, because Hellanicus. Riuersplow the earth as Oxen make Furrowes, or because Buls draw neere to the brinkes of riuers when they bellow for fresh pasture: else because waters breaking violently through any fall, make a confused noise, like the roarings of many Buls together: He was ald a Dragon by his many indented win∣dings and turnings. Hercules being leagued with King Oeneus, vndertooke Strabe 10. to suppresse this raging riuer, whose many inundations had much damag'd his Kiingdome, who extenuating his maine streame, by inforcing it into many riualets, by that meanes made the country more fertil, therefore it was moraliz'd that Hercules breaking off his horn receiu'd in the same all fruits of plenty. To this Cornucopia or horne of abundance, Iupiter gaue Xanthus in re∣but Etolicis. this property, that whosoeuer held it, and wisht, should receiue according to their desire. The rarieties of the most choise fruits and wines of all kinds, how delicious soeuer to tast the Pallat. This vertue was first prou'd by Amatthea daughter to Hemonius King of Aetolia, though some take Amatthea to Hergenes lib de Phrygia. be the Goat that nurst Iupiter with her milke, when Rhea had giuen him to be brought vp to Adrastea and Isde. The end of the twelfth CANTO.
Argumentum A Chilles dotes on beauteous Polixaine, And at her faire request refraines the fielde, The Truce expierd, both Hoasts prepare againe For battaile, with proud harts, in valour steel'd: The Greekes are beate backe, many kild and taine, Patroclus don's Achilles Armes and shield: Him Hector, for Achilles tooke and slew, Whose Armor gone, his Mother seeks him new. ARG. 2. TRuce after Combat, Hecuba is wonne By Paris meanes, to league with Thetis sonne. CANTO. 13. 1 AWake soft Muse from sleepe, and after rest Shew thy selfe quicke and actiue in thy way, Thy labouring flight and trauell long opprest Is comforted, no longer then delay, But with thy swiftest winges fly in the Quest Of thy prefyxed goale: The happy day In which this Kingdome did her wide armes spread, To imbrace king Iames, our Soueraigne Lord & head.
2 And you (great Lord) to whom I Dedicate A second worke, the yssue of my braine, Accept this Twin to that you saw of late, Sib to the first, and of the selfe-same straine, That onely craue the shelters of your state, To keepe it from all stormes of Hale and Raine, Who neither dread the rage of winds or Thunder, whilst your faire roofe they may be shadowed vndr. 3 Your fauour and protection deckes my phrase, and is to me like Ariadnes clew, To guide me through the Laborinthean Maze, which my brain's intangled: Tis by you, That euery vulger eye hath leaue to gaze, and on this Proct takes free enter view, Which, but t'expresse a due debt (yet vnpaid) Had still remain'd vnperfect and vnmade. 4 Proceed we then, and where we left repaire: About his head (the Tree) rough Aiax flings, Like to a threatning Meteor in the aire, Which where it lights exitiall ruin brings, Such seemes th'vngrounded Oake, leauelesse and bare, Who shakes ore Hectors Crest her rooted strings, And with such rude impetuous fury fell, T'haue dingd him through the Center downe to hel. 5 But Hector with his broad shield waits the fall, Which shiuers all the plates of his strong Targe: The Graectans too much fury, strikes withall, The plant from his owne hands, in his rough charge, Vnarm'd once more they grapple, to make thrall Each others strength their armes sinnowy and large, About their sides with mutuall strength they cling, and wrastling striue, which can each other fling. 6 When loe, the Kings on bothsides much admiting Their neuer equald valour, loth to lose Such Champions, in whose charging or retyring Their spring of victory, declines or Flowes,
(Their Conquests droop towards earth, or rise aspiring) The generall of each hoast his Warder throwes Betweene the Combattants, who still contend. By slight of strength to giue the difference end. 7 Two Guards from either Army step betweene Their heated furies, till their blood retyr'd, For with fresh breath they both abate their spleene, And cease that Combate thousands late admyr'd, Instead of blowes their friendly Armes are seene T'infold each other (with new loues inspyr'd) Aiax his Belt pluckes from athwart his brest, An enter∣chāge of gifts betwixt Hec∣tor and Aiax. And giues to Hector (of all Knights the best.) 8 Who takes a good sword flesht on many a foe, And enter-chang'd with Aiax (but oh Fate) Two ominous Tokens these good Knights bestow, Which to themselues prou'd most vnfortunate, To Hectors heeles must Aiax Baldricke grow, And three times drag him by each Troian gate: Whose sight whole Troy with clamorous shricks shal fill, With Hectors sword, Aiax, must Aiax kil. 9 These passages of friendship giuen and tooke, Behold a Herald from the Towne appeares, Who greets the proud Greekes with a friendly looke From Priam, (reuerent both in state and yeares:) Them, whom but late the Troians could not brooke, Troy now inuites, and for a space forbeares A Truce. All hostile hate, betweene both hoasts proclaiming A day of Iubile for feast and gaming. 10 The Faith of Hector as best hostage giuen, Th'inuasiue Kings in peace the Citty enter, Whom Priam feasts, with all that vnder heauen Can be found rare, or bred aboue the Center, The Dames and Damsels all pale feare bereauen, Amongst the dreadfull Greekes dare freely venter, And they that late did fright them aboue measure, Haue liberty to sport and Court their pleasure.
11 Vnpeered Hector (who had neuer seene Achilles, (but on Horse-backe arm'd) before, Eyes him with pleasure, and forgets all spleene, Dictes. And Thetis sonne that (but in blood and gore) Stain'd and besmear'd, had neuer Hector seene, Freely surueighs his shape: his robes he wore: His brawny Limbes, broad bulk, his face, and stature, Nor can he but applaud the pride of nature. 12 To whom Achilles thus? Hector, I see A presence I could Loue, but his Fame hate, Tis thy renowne alone doth blemish me, And makes me in these warres vnfortunate, I neuer yet dropt blood, but drain'd by thee, For which, my teene is growne inueterate: Nor could I rellish pleasure, but still trusting To end thy dayes, by sword-fight, or by iusting. 13 To him the Heroë mildly thus replies: Aeacides pursues a double wrong, That comes from Greece our Citty to surprise, And race our wals that we haue builded strong, Your Loues we hold deere, but your hates despise, (As opposites that dare not front vs long: If more thou wouldst: To armes: referre the rest, Sit, (for th'art welcome) freely tast our feast. 14 Priam and Agamemnon take chiefe place, The rest are rankt vnto their states or fames, The Greekes feasted by Priam. Troylus and Diomed, sit face to face, and gin to brall, for Diomedes blames Troylus, and Troylus him, to his disgrace The iarres appeas'd, for see the fairest Dames Of the best bloods of Troy, richly attired, Bring in the Queene, whose state the Greekes admired 15 Hellen, Troyes Fire-brand sat at this hye feast, Nor did she blush to see her husband there, Him, Paris thinkes a bold vnwelcome guest, and that to Hellen he was plac'st too neere,
Alone he tasts no dainties, mongst the rest, Her very sight hath cloyd him without cheare; On Hecuba faire Pollixene attended, Whose beauty great Achilles most commended. 16 Now the reuolted Calhas free time found Gainst Troian, louely Cresseid to perswade, With Arguments and words so firme and sound, The Troian now no more may Court the Maid, King Diomed must henceforth be the ground Of all her passionate Loue, she can be staid In Troy no longer (though she wisht it rather) Shee's but a Child, and must obey her Father. 17 Whilst all the Kingly Leaders had lowd chat Of Chiualty, hye Bloods, and deeds of warre, (And as their humors led, of this or that) Of many a bleeding wound and grisly skarre, Whilst some spake much, and some sat mute thereat, Achilles loue to Polixena. Achilles eye fixt on a brighter starre Then any shines, fixt mongst the heauenly fires, The rarest Pollixene alone admires. 18 He neither can dilate of Noble deeds, Nor enter-change discourse of slaughtered Kings, What comes of peace, or what of warre proceeds; What profit rest, what hurt inuasion brings; His new dissolued heart within him bleeds, And from his Rocky brest a Fountaine springs Of passion, onely by her sight ingendred, In place of which, old hate is quite surrendred. 19 It now repents him he hath lift a blade Against the Syre, that such a childe hath bred, Or to the place that foster'd that sweetmaide, His bloody Myrmidons to battaile led; Or that his dreadfull hand did once inuade Her Brother (for whose Loue hee's well-nye dead) To gaine whose beauty, he could find in hart, Greece to renounce, and take the Troians part.
20 Queene Hecuba obserues Achilles passion Thinking to make it vse-full to her good, That the most strong of all the Argiue Nation, Shall for her daughters sake spare Troian blood: By this, the feast and Royall preparation Breakes vp, the Kings that on their honors stood, With bounteous thanks take leaue, bent on the mor∣row, This Truce-full ioy to mix with hostile sorrow. 21 The selfe-same night by Hecubaes aduice, Vnto Achilles Tent faire Paris sends, Offring his Sisters loue (held at hye price) Mixt with the aged Queenes most kind commends, With courteous words the bold Greeke they intice To leaue the siege, which Thetis sonne intends Her nuptiall bed being promist, with much ioy, Answer's return'd, hee'l warre no more gainst Troy. 22 Now while he rests him in his Idle Tent, And to his amorous Harpe Loue-Ditties sings, A battaile la∣sting 30 daies Both Armies sundry Stratagems inuent, Great Hector to the field his puissance brings, Vpon the plaine appeares incontinent A gallant hoast led by th'incamped Kings: Warres Musicke sounds, Mars trots vpon his Steed Ore thousand mangled sides, that freshly bleed. 23 Sometime the Troian Leaders with their powers, Euen to their Pallisadoes beat the Foe, Whence being repulst, the camp the Champion scowers And fore Troyes gates their purple Launces grow, Whom th'yssue from the Citty soone deuoures, Againe the Greeke sustaines great ouerthrow: Againe relieu'd, the Troian powers they face, Whom to their Tents againe the Dardans chace. 24 Full thirty daies together Fortune striues To make their Conquest doubtfull, in which time Vnnumbred Knights on both parts lost their liues, Some in their waine of yeares, some in their prime,
Some slaine out-right, some captiu'd put in Gyues, Some loose their Fame, and some to honors clime: Amongst whom Hector in the first ranke stands, For deeds of name wrought by his warlike hands. 25 Though farre-fear'd Aiax did hye workes of Fame, And blacke-hair'd Agamemnon boldly fought; Though strong-limb'd Diomed his worth proclame By Martiall Acts midst fields of slaughter wrought, Though Nestor oft-times to the battaile came, And (to his strength and age) for honour sought: Though Menelaus oft in field was seene, Vlisses too, more full of guile, then spleene. 26 Though these and more among themselues contended, With aemulation to atchieue most praise, Yet when great Hector to the field discended, Back't by his Brothers, their swift current stayes, Aboue them all his glorious worth extended, The Greekes grow warre-tyr'd after thirty dayes: And beaten to their Trenches much decayd, Achilles his abstinence frō battaile. They ioyntly flocke t'implore Achilles ayd. 27 Who with his Myrmidons from field abstaines, In hope to gaine the fairest Dame aliue, Still through the fields remorselesse slaughter raines, The Greekes beyond their Parapets they driue, Still they intreat, he still their words disdaines, Within the Campes skirts he may heare them striue: Yet (all this notwithstanding) he seemes loath To Arme himselfe against a sacred oath. 28 But when he saw the wounded souldiers run, Their bleeding heads amongst the Tents to hide, Heard, by their swords so many slaughters done, Beheld some mangled, that before him dide, Found how the foe their Campe had well nye won, Perceiu'd the fire burne bright on euery side, Himselfe surcharg'd with Flames, in his tent sweating And all the princes by his bed intreating.
29 He then relents, and at their faire request, Hee'l keepe his oath, and yet affoord them ayde, For now the man whom he esteemed best, He whom alone his bosome friend he made, Patroclus don's his armes, his shield, his Crest, And to his thigh girts his victorious blade: And with three hundred Myrmidons attended, He yssues where the Campe was least defended. 30 At his appearance when those armes were seene So well, among the Troians knowne and feared, They make him way, Patroclus had not beene Long in the place, but all the Greekes were cheared: They that before stood like a haruest screene, Gaue backe apace, for not a man appeared, Patroclus still aduanc'st Achilles shicld, And with his Myrmidons maintaines the field: 31 Now horrid Massacre pursues apace Th'astonisht Troians Paris, wounders most To see Achilles arm'd, makes good the place, And with such rage assault the Troian hoast, That not a man dares their Pauillions face, Or gainst the Myrmidons his valour boast: He cals him troth-lesse, periur'd, false, forsworne, And as he speakes (withal) is backward borne. 32 The cry growes great, which Hector ouer-hearing, He cals vpon his men to cease base flight, And spying one aboue the rest appearing, Dreadfull in shape, and all imbrude in fight, His quakefull hand and sword, so often rearing, He takes him for the warlike Pelean Knight Achilles, of the Graecians great'st in pride, Whom he had oft before in battaile tride. 33 He chuseth from his Page an Oaken speare. Hewed from the hart of Ihoues relentlesse tree, And couching it, spurres with a full Carriere Against Patroclus: his proud Steed was free,
And like a shot starre doth his Ryder beare, At euery plunge the ground neere kist his knee: His constant ayme, that neuer er'd at need, Tops the proud Greeke from off his Noble steed. 34 And now Achilles armour strowes the field, Patroclus slain Patroclus lyes vpon the Verdure spred, Heere lay his sword, and there his trusty shield, The Myrmidons (as had their Lord bin dead, And neuer more victorious Armes should weild) Al in disordred rankes retyr'd and fled: Achilles armes ceizd, who durst longer stay? This was the cause the Dardan wan the day. 35 When dead by Hector was Menetius son, And that his wounded body strowed the plaine, (Quoth Hector) Now Achilles armes are won, These are mine owne, and these wil I maintaine: He strips the faire Patroclus (new foredone,) And thought at first Achilles he had slaine: But when he saw one not of God-like kind, The Armes he takes, the body leaues behind. 36 Achilles franticke with so great disgrace, Losse both of friend, and of his glorious armes, Torments himselfe with fury for a space, Threatning to Princely Hector hostile harmes, Yet when he thinkes to haue his life in chace, And rowse the Worthy with his warres alarmes: He now records his friends disgrace in field, To combat him, he hath nor armes, nor Shield. 37 The bright-foot Amphetrite his fayre Mother, Thetis other∣wise called Amphetrite. Knowing the griefe her sonne conceiues at hart, Her true Maternall pitty cannot smother, But with her care she seekes to cure his smart, Instead of these, she will prouide him other Made by Deuine composure, not Mans art, And thus resolu'd, to Lemnos she doth hie, Where Vulcan workes in heauenly Ferrarie.
38 She found him with his face all smoog'd and blacke, And labouring at his Forge quite hid in smoke, The stifling fume kept the faire Goddesse backe, About she was her soft steps to reuoke, But whilst the Cps on their Anuiles thwacke, She spies faire Charis, and to her she spoke: That the Lame Mettall-God might vnderstand, Thetis his friend, the Seas-Queene was at hand. 39 Charis the hand-maide, grace whose Office still Charis. Is to strow Venus louely bed with Flowers, And to them both Caelestiall Nectar fill, As vnto Ihoue-himselfe faire Hebe powers, Prayes the bright Goddesse but to stay vntill The swetty Smith his face and visage skowers; And whilst she tels the God of her repaire, To ease her selfe in a rich golden Chaire. 40 Charis departs, she mounts the Inamel'd seat, Homer Iliad The backe of solid Gold richly ingrau'd, Cut and inchac'st, it shewed his skill was great, and in the Metall too, no cost was sau'd, So though the frame was large, his art was neat, The foure supporters round about were stau'd With pillers of white siluer, moulded so, That by the worke, the worke-man you may know. 41 Meane time faire Charis to the Smith relates, How faire-foote Amphetrite stayes without, at this report lame Vulcan thankes the Fates, Who had so well his businesse brought about, The Queene whose fauour he so highly rates, Should take the paine to finde his Concaue out: Of whom, he (falling through the Plannets seauen,) More fauour found, then all the rest in heauen. 42 With that his apron from his brest he takes, His airy Bellowes haue surceast to blow, He sleckes his Coales, his smoaky Forge forsakes, Spunges his hands and face, then gins to throw
A rich Roabe ore his shoulders, and so makes On to the Queene, whose mind he longs to know: When after many a limping Curtsie made, Thus Amphetrite doth the Smith perswade. 43 If euer I was held worthy the name Of the seas-Queene, vnfortunate alone, Apollodorus. For of the seed of Gods deriu'd I came, Yet (married to a Mortall,) find you none Thetis except: yet ist to me no shame; Behold my Deuine beauty, I was one Euen Ihoue himselfe lou'd, whom, cause I denide, In spight he gaue me to a Mortals Bride. 44 Yet am I not esteem'd amongst them least, For when my hye espousals were first made Staphilus in lib de Thessalia. In the Mount Pelion, all the Gods increast My glory with their presence; for none stayed Or kept away from th'Hymenean feast, Sauing the Goddes discord, the Spheares plaid Dailochus. Pherecides. Musicke to vs; my Peleus me contented To grace, whom all the Gods rich gifts presented. 45 Ihoue gaue vs Graces on our bed to wait, Apollo, Ingots of the purest Gold, Zezes histo 45. Pluto, a smarag'd to be worne in state, Iuno, a lem worth, more then can be told, Neptune two Steeds, aboue all Mortall rate, Xanthus and Ballia, whom you may behold Still draw my Coach, a rich Knife rarely wrought, Mongst other presents you God Vulcan brought. 46 But what of these digressions, If my hap Hath euer bin to do you any grace, When falling from hye Heauen, in my soft lap I gently catcht you, See: behold the place On which your head fel, which to fold and wrap In smoothest silkes, my robes I did vnlace: For this, and much more kindnesse by me done, Requite all, with an Armour for my sonne.
47 Inough (quoth Vulcan fetch Pyragmon straight) A parcell of the best and purest Steele, And you Berountes let it finde the waight Pyragmon, Berountes, and Spes, the three Ciclops that attend on Vulcan. Of your huge Hammers, and their ponders feele, The Ciclops fetcht a Plate six Cubes in haight, So Massie, that the burden made him reele; Sceropes stain'd with smoake, the Bellowes blew, And all at once themselues to worke withdrew. 48 They forg'd a Helmet with rich Flowers inchac'st Achilles armor So curiously, that Art it much exceeded, Borders of sundry workes about were plac'st, The precise sight of the best eye they needed, That could discerne the closures, they were grac'st With God-like skill (from God-hood it proceeded) For beauty, it was glorious to the sight, For proofe, no Steele could on this Helmet bite. 49 The Gorget, Vaunt-brace, Backe-peece, brest, and all, Came from the selfe-same substance, and like skill, The Cushes that beneath the girdle fall, Impenetrable were, and Steele-proofe still, And though the thickenesse did appeare but small, The Plates they with such strength of Mettall fill: It hath the force and puissance to withstand The sharpest Speares hurl'd from the strongest hand. 50 Aboue them all, his shield the rest surpast, Massie, and onely for his Arme to weare Achilles shield For whom twas made, vpon the same was ra'st The great world Tripartyte: heauen and each Spheare, Thence all the hye Circumference was pla'st Starres, Moone, and Sun, the signes that rule the yeare, The Ram, the Bull, and the Twin-brothers signe, The Crab, the Lyon, and the Maid Deuine. 51 The Skale, the Scorpion, and the Centaure fell, Sterne Capricorne, and he that water powers, The Fishes: all these were ingraued well, There Phoebus stood, about him dayes and howers,
With the foure Seasons: First the Spring gan swell With sweetest Buddes: Sommer that seldome lowers Stood next in ranke, well clad in freshest greene, Autumne next her, in ragged Roabes was seene. 52 There stood old Winter in hye Furs attyred, On whom the flakes of Snow like Feathers hong, He shyuering lookes, as if he warmth desired, With chattering teeth, hands Palsied, quaking tong Below the Earth, with Dales and Hils admired, Fields full of Grayne, & Meads with Grasse new sprong: Here Citties rarely built, there Hamlets stand, Here fallow-fields, besides them, New-tild Land. 53 Betweene the middle Earth, Seas ebbe and flow, Whose Billowes in their caruing seeme to moue, Here the Leuiathan huge waues doth throw From out his Nostrils to the skyes aboue, The Dolphins, of a thousand coullours show, Here Whales their heads aboue the waters proue: And sayling ships contriu'd by cunning rare, On which strange Fish, with wonder seeme to stare. 54 A thousand sundry Obiects made by Art, This huge Orbicular Shield in compasse holds, What Heauen or Earth, or Seas to vs Impart, His Globe-like compasse to the eye vnfolds, When Vulcan taking the fayre Queene apart, (who with much wonder his strange worke beholds:) Presents it her, made perfect for her Son, In whose rich armes, Troy seemes already won. 55 At Vulcans Caue she yoakes her Chariot-steeds, which o're the Oceans rugged backe make way, And as she freely on the Seas proceeds, About her Coach the Quicke-ear'd Dolphins play At her Sonnes Tent (fam'd for his warlike deeds, She lights, and to the Couch on which he lay:) Tost those rich armes, which when Achilles view'd, The halfe-dead spirit within his breast renew'd.
56 He leaps from of his Pallet, to imbrace The beautious Queene, and soone intreats her ayde, To arme his shoulders, and his head to grace, With that inchaced Helme God Vulcan made, Who now compleatly furnisht, longs for place Where thus be-seene, he Hector may inuade: He cannot sleepe for gazing on his Shield, In hope t'aduance it in the Morrowes field. 57 Thetis departs, when th'early Cocke gaue signe, With his lowd notes Aurora to dispose, Who leaues the Bed-rid Tython sunke in Wine, From whom the Gold hair'd Goddesse blushing rose, To harnesse Phoebus Coach-steeds, who in fine About his face, his Beames bright ghstring throwes: To dry the Mornings teares, who weepeth still, To see th'vnkind Sunne climb th'Easterne hill. 58 He had not left the forelorne Goddesse long, A Battaile. But from Olimpus top he may espy, Plaine-Crested Hector, his arm'd Troopes among, Chearing them vp the proud Greekes to defy: Next him marcht Noble Troylus, Memnon strong, Antenor and Aeneas mounted hye: Young Deiphebus and Polydamas, Paris, whose ayme in Arch'ry doth surpasse. 59 Sarpedon, King Epistropus: beside Many more Kings that sundry battailes led Against these soone the Curld Inuaders ride, The grim Atrides first aduan'st his hed, Achilles next, past with vaine-glorious pride For his rich armour, Nestor next him sped Menon, whose armes were set with many a stone, And (he that Hector stood) bold Telamon. 60 The Ithacan, with Lacedemons King, The widdowed Spartan: ground of all this broyle, These to the fielde their seuerall battailes bring, With thousand followers, bent on death and spoyle,
Their barbed Steeds the earth behind them fling, Harnesse and quartered limbes blocke the smooth soyle: Amongst the rest, Achilles loftiest stood, and his new armour double-Guilds in blood. 61 With Memnon, onne to Tython and the Morne, Apollodorus lib. 3. Who came from Egipt in King Priams aide, Aeacides encounters, change of scorne Betweene them past, bold Memnon nought dismaide, With that strong hand that had the Scepter borne Of Persiaes kingdome, and did once inuade Susa, as farre as where Choaspes flowes, Vpon his Helme thunders two persant blowes. 62 They stound him in his saddle, make him kisse Hesiodus in Theogonia. His Steeds curl'd Crest, ere he can Mount his head, Achilles who esteemes no other blisse, But to behold his foes before him spread, (Wak't from his sudden trance) espyes by this, A Graecian Squadron bout King Memnon dead, And his bright sword still to wring ore his Crest, Threatning in his third fall, Eternall rest. 63 The proud Greeke sends a blush out of his face, as red as that in which his proofe was lau'de, he now records his strength, his god-like race, and his rich armour with such artingrau'de, He knowes it ill becomes his Name or Place, By any Mortall puissance to be brau'de; He doubles strength on strength, and stroak on stroak, Euen till he mists himselfe in his owne smoake. 64 Auroraes Darling prooues to weake a Foe Simonides Poeta For him, on whose tough Shield no Steele can bite, His conquer'd Sword and Armes the field must strow, Achilles is too strong an opposite, His Red-cheek't Mother ouercharg'd with woe, K. Memnon slain by Achil∣les. Laments her Son vntimely slaine in fight: In griefe of whom, a Dusky Roabe she weares, And fils the whole world with her dew-drop teares.
65 The death of Memnon euen to Hector flyes, That Tragicke newes cost many a Princes life, Incenst, he seemes all safety to dispise, And where he spurs, he makes red slaughter rife, For euery drop of bloud, a bold Greeke dies: Him Troylus seconds in his purpled strife: And (if as for a wager) they contend, Whose Sword most pale Soules can to Orcus send. 66 They breake a Ring of Harnesse, making way Into the Battayles Center, where they see a Noble Knight maintaine a gallant fray, Gainst many Troian Knights (in valor free) Yet of them all, this Champion gets the day, The strongest cannot make him cringe his knee: Polydamus against him brauely sped, Yet still his gaz'd at Shield, safeguards his hed. 67 Against which Paris many arrowes spends, But all in vaine, they shiuer gainst his Targe, and whom he best can reach his force extends as far as life, the prisoned Soule t'enlarge, Young Deiphebus to that place descends, and with his Speate in reast, doth gainst him charge: But the Dardanian fayles in his intent, And from the Noble Knight is bleeding sent. 68 Victorious Hector at such deeds amaz'd, But more at the rich Armor that he ware, Mannadge and shape in heart he highly praysd, and in his honors longes to haue a share, Hupon Larissaes King, that long had gaz'd Vpon his valor, sees him fight so fayre: A pointed Staffe against his breast he prooued, But from his Steed the bold Greeke was not mooued. 69 Vnhappy Hupon could not stay the forceKing Hupon slaine. Of his keene Sword, but soone before him fals, King Philos slaine. King Philos, next against him spurd his Horse, And (turne thee valiant Greeke) aloud he cals,
But he was likewise slaine without remorse, It seem'd he was invr'd to such hot brals: Hector no longer can his rage forbeare, But gainst the vnknowne Knight aymes a stiffe Speare. 70 Who when he Hector from a far espyde, As if he had but sported with the rest, and that was he gainst whom he should be tryde, He thrild a Iauelin at the Dardans brest, T'was terror to behold these Champions ride, and skorch the Plumes that grew in eithers Crest, With fire that from their Steele in sparkles flew, No sooner dead, but still they forced new. 71 Ther's for Patroclus death, the proud Greeke sayes Ther's for my armes, which thou didst basely win, and as he speakes vpon his shoulders layes, at euery dint his bruisde armes pincht his skin, Hector now knowes his Champion by his phrase, and by his stroake (he thinkes his armes too thin:) Such puissant blowes, whose weight he scarce can like, None but Achilles hand hath power to strike. 72 A well knowne Knight, in vnknowne armes he sees, against whose force he gathers all his might, His hye-stretcht arme contendes to make him leese All fore-past Fame, and hazard dreadfull fight, But now the multitude like Swarmes of Bees Betweene them flocke, who farre from all affright: Vex in their heated bloods to be so parted, So with their Steedes mongst other rankes they started. 73 Three puissant Kings beneath Prince Hector fell, Archilochus, a Souldier of hye Fame, Three Kinges slaine by Hec∣tor. Prothenor, who in battailes did excell, And with th' Atrides to the field then came: King Archelaus too, a Champion fell, Who mongst the Greekes had won a glorious Name: And whilst halfe tyerd, he from the throng withdrew, The Sagittary slaine by Dio∣med. King Diomed the Sagittary slew.
74 Thoas tooke Prisoner, to the Towne was sent, Whom Paris with his arrowes had surprisde, Antenor likewise to Vlisses Tent Was Captiue led (whom he before depisde) Epistropus, his hostile fury bent Gainst Polyxenes, in rich armes disguisde; King Polixe∣nes slaine. They part, when Polixenes full of pride, Crost-Hectors course, and by his valor dyde. 75 Once more the dauntlesse Troians haue the best, The night comes on, both Hoasts themselues withdraw, The Citties Captaines take them to their rest, But th' Argiue Kings (that naught but ruine saw Impendent still, whilst Hectors able brest Bucklerd large Troy from each tempestuous flaw) At Agamemnons Tenta Counsell call, To find some traine, by which the Prince may fall. 76 Achilles oft-times Mated, vowes in heart With his blacke Mirmidns to guirt him round, And neuer from a second field depart, Till Hectors length be measured on the ground, Th'assembled Kings, whose bleeding wounds yet smart, Vow by all meanes his puissance to confound: For well they know whilst Noble Hector stands, In vaine gainst Troy they reare their armed hands. 77 Night passeth on, and the gray Morne appeares, The Greekes a six-months Truce of Troy demaund, In which the Campe bloud-staynd Scamander cleares Of Bodies slaine by warres infernall hand, A Herald to the Camp King Thoas beares, Receiuing backe Antenor, Nobly man'd, The Truce expires, both parties now prouide To haue their Armes tight, and their Weapons tride. 78 Andromache this night dreampt a strange dreame, Andromaches dreame. That if her Husband tryde the field that day, His slaughter should be made the generall Theame Of Troyes laments, she faine would haue him stay,
She wooes him, as he loues the populous Realme, Her Life, his Honors, safety, or decay: The ayde of Troy, their Vniuersall good, To saue all these in keeping still his blood. 79 This (Hector censures) spoake from Womanish feare, He armes himselfe in hast and cals to Horse, Takes in his hand a bright Brasse-headed Speare, Longing for some on whom to proue his force, Andromache spends many a ruthfull teare, His thoughtes were fixt, they bred no soft remorse: He armes for field, she to the Kings proceeds, and tels his thus: If Hector fight, he bleedes. 80 Her dreame and feare she to the King relates, and praies him to entreat her Husband fayre, Or if soft speech his purpose naught abates To vse his power: This said, she doth repayre Where Hecuba and Hellen kept their states, and where the rest of Priams Daughters are: To whose requests she knowes hee'l soonest yeild, Still vrging them to keepe him from the field. 81 The Greekes Imbattayld are, and from the Towne, The Troians Issue the Mid-way to meet, When from the loftie Pallace hastning downe Andromache, prostrate at Hectors feet Throwes her fayre selfe: and by King Priams Crowne, His Mothers loue, her owne imbracements sweete: his Brothers, Sisters, and his little Sonne, Astianax Hec∣tors Sonne. Con-iures his stay, till one daies fight be done. 82 Hector bids one: she mingles words with teares, and once more casts her selfe to stop his way, (That he shall backe) she begs, she wooes, she sweares, and shun the battaile for that ominous day, her horrid dreame hath fild her heart with feares, And hill she hanges on him, to haue him stay: She weepes, intreats, clinges, begs, and Coniures stil, (In vaine) hee's arm'd, and to the battayle will.
83 King Priam by Antenors mouth desires To vnarme him streight, and to the Court returne, For should his life fayle: Troyes fayre Sons and Sires, Matrons and Damsels, for his death should mourne, The Prince inrag'd, his Eye-bals sparkle fires, With inward rage his troubled Entrails burne: He knowes from whence these Coniurations spring, And that his Wiues dreame hath incenst the King. 84 Yet will he forward: when the aged Queene This hearing: with the Spartan makes swift speede, They ring his Horse: Intreat him cease his spleene, And for one day to act no warlike deed, The more they pray, the more they rouse his teene, a purpose irremoueably decreede: Hee'l put in action though they kneele and pray, and compasse in his Steede to haue him stay. 85 This Priam vnderstanding, he descends, And in his face a gracefull reuerence brings, He stayes his Courser by the Raines, and ends The difference thus: Oh! Thou the awe of Kings, Death to thy Foes, supporture to thy Friends, From whose strong arme our generall safty springs: Refraine this day, tempt not the Gods decree, Who by thy Wife this night forwarneth thee. 86 The discontented Prince at length is wonne, Yet will he not vnarme him for them all, But to expresse the duty of a Sonne, With Priam and the rest he mountes the wall, To see both Armies to the Skirmish roone, Where some stand hye, and some by slaughter fall: King Diomed and Troylus from a farre, Wafts to each other, as a figne of warre. 87 They meete like Bullets, by two Souldiers chang'd, Their way as swift, their charge as full of Terror, Their Steedes keepe euen, they neither tript nor rang'd, Both Man and Horse are free from any Error,
No art of Warre was from these Knights estrang'd In Troylus, might be seene a Souldiers Mirror, In Diomed, the patterne of such skill, as they desire that would their Foe-men kill. 88 The fayre-browde Sky shrinkes vp her Azure face, Least their sharpe splinterd Staues should race her brow, Both couet honor in this warlike race, and in their hearts they eythers ruine vow, But Menelaus happily came in place, With him three hundred Knights that well knew how To manage battaile, these betweene them grew, and they to further ranks perforce withdrew. 89 Miseres (King of Phrigia) met by chance The Spartan King, and shooke him in his Seat, Against Duke Aiax, Paris charg'd a Launce, Aiax Telemon and him, the Sal'mine did but ill intreat, At the first blow he stounds him in a trance, Then midst the Troian rankes doth oyle and sweat: Striuing behind, on both sides, and before, Euen till his armes with bloud were vermeil'd o're. 90 Prince Margareton, vnto Hector deare Knowing the slaughter Noble Aiax made, against his Vaunt-brace brauely prooues his Speare, and to their vanquisht Phalanx brings fresh ayde, Aiax is for'st his fury to forbeare, The Troians powers on all sides him inuade, Till Agamemnon comes with fresh supply, at whose approach, th'astonish Troians fly. 91 Yet Noble Margareton keepes his stand, Nor can the strongest arme of Greece remoue him, He feeles the strength of Agamemnons hand, Grim Aiax sword with a towers weight doth proue him, Yet shrinkes not, till the place was Nobly man'd By Paris and Polydamus that loue him: These hearing Margareton much distrest, Rescue the Prince, who brauely guards his Crest.
92 It ioyes the King and Ladyes, that on hy Stand on the Torras to behold the field, To see the Prince so full of Chiualry, And with such power to vle his Sword and Shield, Achilles (in a place where thousands lye Besmeard in bloud, as if he meant to build a wall of Limbes and Quarters) brauely fought, And bout himself a siedge of bodies wrought. 93 Where issuing after much effuse of blood To calme himselfe, remotely from the throng (Retyerd alike) young Margareton stood Striuing for breath, he had not rested long, Butspyes Achilles with a purple flood Powerd o'rehis armes, a Iauelin light and strong The valiant Troian Prince against him bent, Whom the proud Greeke receiues incontinent. 94 From broken Speares they come to two-edg'd Steele, Oh! How stont Hector yernd to be in place, His very Soule doth all the puissance feele Of him that hath his Brothers life in chace, No stroake that makes Prince Margareton reele, But (as he thinkes) it tingles on his face: And from the wall in Armour he had lept, Had not the King and Queene perforce him kept. 95 By this the youthfull Priameian tyerd With oddes of might, he wauers too and fro, Doubtfull which way to fall, the Greeke admierd To find so young a gallant plunge him so, and therefore with hisanclent rankor fierd, He doubles and redoubles blow and blow: Till he (whose deere life was to Hector sweet) Prince Marga∣reton flaine. Sinkes from his Horse beneath his ruthlesse feete. 96 Who with his barb'd Steede tramples o're his Coarse, Whose Iron hoofe the Princes armor raceth, This Hector seeing, breakes from all their force, He cla ps his Beauer downe, his Helme fast laceth,
With mble quicknesse vaults vpon his horse, (And yssuing) where he rides, the enemy cheareth: For Margaretons death, he vowes that day, Achilles with a thousand more shall pay. 97 Two Noble Dukes he chargeth, and both slew, D. Coriphus & Duke Basti∣dius slaine. Duke Cortphus, Bastidius big and tall, And forth like lightning mongst their squadrons flew, Where such as cannot flye before him fall, Leocides an Armour fresh and new, (He was amongst the Greekes chiefe Admirall) Would proue gainst Hector, but in his swift race, Leocides slain. The Troians Speare brake on the Grns face. 98 A splinter strooke the Greeke into the braine, And downe he sinkes, Achilles full of yre, Spying so many bold Pelasgians slaine, Prickes on with Polyceus: both desire To proue themselues with Hector on the plaine, The bold assaylants need not fare inquire For the sterne Prince: In that part of the host, Th'are sure to find him where the cry growes most. 99 Both Menace him, gainst both he stands prepared, Duke Policeus to Achilles deare, Policeus slaine (Whose Sister he was promist, had warre spared His destin'd life) drew to the Troians neare, At the first stroke his Beauer'd face he bared, But with the next his sparpled braines appeare, Achilles mads at this, and sweares on hye, For Polyceus death, Hector shall dye. 100 His threatned vengeance Hector did soone quaile, For through his thigh he quiuers a sharpe Dart, Achilles woū∣ded. Achilles feeles his bleeding sinnowes faile, And with all speed doth to his Tent depart, Where hauing bound his wound vp, wan and pale, With fury, and the rancor of his hart; Three hundred Myrmidons that all things dar'd, he leads to field his person to saue-gard.
101 Swearing them all theyrioynt-rage to bestow On Hector, and on him sterne vengeance power, And sauing him t'intend no Dardan Foe, That Heauen with him may on his Conquests lower, They listen where the clamors loudest grow, And there spy Hector, wald in like a Tower With heapes os men, that bout him bleeding lay, For not a ling Greeke durst necre him stay. 102 Now tyrd with slaughter, he was lean'd vpon The Pomell of his bright victorious Blade, and for his strength and breath was almost gone, His Armour he had slackt, it loosely playde about his shoulders (for he dreaded none:) Him now the bloudy Myrmidons inuade: In three-fold rings about him they were guided, To take the Noble Hero vnproulded. 103 Oh! Where is Paris with his Archers bow? Where's youthfull Deiphebus now at need? Where's the inuinced Troylus, to bestow His puissant stroakes before Prince Hector bleed? Where is Aeneas to repulse the foe? You Troyes confedred Kings, where do you speede? Bring rescue now, or in his Mountaine fall Bencath destruction, he will crush you all. 104 All these are absent, naught saue death and ruine Compasse the Prince, a tripple ring of blades Inguirts him round, who still their rankes renewing, Threaten to send him to th'infernall shades, With bloudy appetites his fall pursuing, Achilles as they shrinke, on hye perswades With promises: and some with threats, he sweares To pay the base shame of their dastard feares. 105 A hundred Myrmidons before him lye Drownde in their owne blouds, by his strong arme shed, The rest renew the charge with fresh fupply, and thunder on his shoulders, armes, and head,
Achilles strongly ar'd and horst, spurres by To see the hunger of his Blood-hounds fed: Was neuer Mortall, without might of Gods, That stood so long against such powerfull ods. 106 They hew his armour peece-meale from his backe, Yet still the valiant Prince mataines the fray, Though but halfe-harnest, yet he holds them tacke, And still the bloudy Slaues vpon him lay, Armour and breath at once the Prince doth lacke, Stor'd with nought else saue wounds (alacke the day:) Yet like a stedfast rocke the worthy stood, From whom ran twenty seuerall springs of blood. 107 This, when the fresh-breath'd Greeke beheld, and saw So much effuse of blood about him run, He chargd his warlike Myrmidons withdraw, And crying out alowd: Now Troy is won, (With shamefull oddes against all Knight-hoods law) Gainst naked Hector, well-arm'd Thetis son Aymes a stiffe Iauelin, and against him rides, The death of H. The ruthlesse staffe through picrst his Royall sides. 108 With him King Priam and whole Asiaes glory, Queene Hecuba with all her daughters faire Sinke into Lethe, euen the Gods are sorry To see the man they made without compare, So basely fall, to make Achilles story Reproachfull to all eares that would not spare So great a Worthy, but with oddes strike vnder, Him that atchiud things beyond strength & wonder 109 Hector thus falne, the Troians (whose whole power Lay in the arme of Hector) flye the field, And now th'incourag'd Greekes Scamander scower, (The head subdude, the body needs must yeild,) Behold the Prince that aw'd within this hower, Millions of Greekes lyes dead vpon his shield, He gone, whose Atlas Arme vpheld their states, Amazed Troy rams-vp her sieged Gates.
110 At sight of which Achilles sweld with rage, From Hectors breast, the Belt Aiax him gaue Snatcheth in hast, and his sad spleene t'asswage, Fetters his Legges, and like a conquerd slaue, Voyde of all honor, ruth, or Counsell sage, at his Horse-heeles he drags him like a slaue: Hauing Troyes wall first three-times circled round, hurdling the Dardan Hero on the ground. 111 To thinke so braue a Peere should basely bleede, A Prince t'insult vpon a slaughter'd Foe, and ganst a worthy act so base a deede, Makes my soft eye with Springs of Sorrow flow, Nor can I further at this time procede, The Greekes blacke practise doth offend me so, Heare therefore I desist my Tragicke verse, To mourne in silence o're Prince Hectors hearse. Aeacides, a name we sometimes giue to Achilles, is a deriua∣tiue of Aeacus, and is as much as to say, the Grand childe of Aeacus, sometime we call him Pelias Issue (viz:) the Sonne of Peleas, the Sonne of Aeacus. Patroclus a Noble Greeke, sonne to Menetius and Sthe∣uele, he was brought up under Chiron the Centaure with Achilles, who euer after entirely loued him. Chiron likewise, whom we hae before in some places men∣tioned, is thought to be Sonne of Saturne. Ouid. Metamer∣pho. 6. Vt Saturnus Equo geminum Chirona creauit. Apollonius lib. 1 Arg. His Mother was cald Philyra: Ad mare descendit montis de parte suprema Chiron Philerides. Saturne deflowring the faire Philiris, Daughter to the old Oceanus, and fearing leaft his ife Rhea (otherwise cald Si∣billa) Appolo lib. 2. should discouer his wantonnesse, transhapes him selfe in∣to a Horse, and then beg at in the Islands Philerides, Chiton the Centaure, from the Nauell vpwardes hauing the perfect semblance of Man, the rest downewards the shape of an Horse. Suidas. Others haue thought him to be the Sonne of Ixion, & Bro∣ther to the race of the Centaurs. He taught Aesculapius Phi∣sicke,
Hercules Astronomy, and Apollo to play on the Lute or Harpe. Of Thetis, otherwise cald Amph  it is thus re∣ported, that she was the most beautifull of all the Goddesses, & when Apollo, Neptune, and Iuter, contended about her Homer. which should ioy her bed (being all frustrate) Iupiter inra∣ged, doom'd her to be a mortals Bride, because shee had so pe∣remptorily despised their God hoods. The Goddesse much a∣grieu'd to be so abiectly bestowed, despised Pelcus, who ex∣treamely doted on her beauty, and still when hee would haue comprest her, she metamorphised her selfe, somtimes to a flame of Fire, sometimes to a Lyon, then a serpent, so dreadfull, that he was still deter'd from his purpose, till after by the aduice of Chiron the Centaure, (neglecting all terror) she helde her Isacius. fast so long, till hauing run through all her Protean shapes, he wearted her in her transformation, till she return'd into her owne shape of the most beautiful Goddesse, of whom he begat Achilles. Tython for his beauty beloued of Aurora the morning, is said to be the son of Laomedon, and Brother to Priam, thogh by diuers mothers, he gat Pram of Leucippe, and Tython of Sma, or else of Rhoea the daughter of Scamander: Au∣rora begd of the Fates for her Husband Tython Imortality, which being imediately graunted her, she had for got with his length of life, to beg withal that he should neuer wax old and decrepit, wherefore he is said to be euer bed rid, till the Gods pittying his feeblenesse, turn'd him after into a Grashopper. Horatius lib. 2 Carminum. Longa Tithonum minuit senctus. sua a chiefe Citty in Persia, where the great Sophies keepe their Courts, it is seated neare the famous riuer Choaspes, and was builded by Tython. Pclasgians are an auncient people of Greece dwelling in Peloponesus in the edge of Macedonia, of whom the gene∣rall Graecians sometimes haue vsurpt that name. The end of the thirteenth CANTO.
Argumentum TRoylus, Achilles wounds, and is betraid By his fell Myrmidons, which being spredd, The bloody Greeke still loues the beautious Maid Pollixena, and for her loue is lead To Pallas Church, whom Paris doth inuade, And with an Arrow in the heele strikes dead: Penthisilea with her valiant Maydes, Assists sad Troy, Greece lofty Pyrthus ayds. ARG. 2. IN this last fight, fall by the Argiue spleene, Paris, Amphimachus, & Scithiaes Queene. CANTO. 14. 1 TO whom, Andromache may I compare Thy Funerall teares ore Hectors body shed, If mongst late Widdowes none suruiue so rare To equall thee, lets search among the dead, The Carian Queene that was as chast as faire, Bright Artimesia a wonder bred: Galathian Camna did likewise constant proue, Artimesia Camna. And al'd her in firme Coniugall Loue. 2 What Fathers griefe could equall Priams teares? Who lost a sonne, no age, no world could match, Whose arme vpheld his glory many yeares, Whose vigilant eye did on his safety watch,
Englands third Edward in thy face appeares Like griefe, when timelesse death did soone dispatch Edward the 3. Thy braue sonnes life, Edward Sirnam'd the blacke, By whom Spaine flag'd, and France sustained wracke. 3 No Margaret, when at Teuxbury her sonne Q. Margaret wife to Henry the 6. Was stab'd to death by Tyrant Glosters hand, Felt from her riueld cheekes more Pearle drops ronne, Then Hecuba, when she did vnderstand The thred of Hectors life already sponne, Whose glories stretcht through Heauen, aire, sea, & land Though he of semblant hope to England were With him, whom Asia did account most deare. 4 Nor could the Countesse Mary sorrow more, To heare her Brother (the braue Sidney wounded,) Laide Mary Countesse of Penbrooke, & Sister to Sir Phillip Sidney. Whose death the seuenteene Belgian states deplore, Whose Fame for Arts and armes the whole world soun∣ded, Then did Cassandra, who her garments tore, Creusa who with extreame griefe confounded, With whom Polyxena bare a sad straine, To heare a third part of the earth complaine. 5 Nor when the hopefull youth Prince Arthur dide, Prince Arthur elder brother to Prince Hen∣ry, after Henry the 8. Leauing his Brother both his life and Crowne, Could the prince Henry lesse his sorrowes hide, Then Hectors Brothers who still guard the Towne, The vniuersall Citty doffes her pride, The King himselfe puts on a Mourners gowne: The Queene and Ladies with their leagued Kings, Bury with him their best and costliest things. 6 So when from Rome great Tully was exild, Full twenty thousand Cittizens the best, M. F. Cicero. In garments Tragicke, and in countenance wild, For twelue sad Moones their loues to him profest, But Troy euen from the Bed-rid to the Child, From Crutch vnto the Cradle, haue exprest A generall griefe in their lamenting cryes, Lookes, gestures, habits, mournefull harts and eyes.
7 Now when the Fountaine of their teares grew dry, And Men and Maons him bewayld their fill, With one Ioynt-voyce for iust reuenge they cry On him, that did the Prince by Treason kill; They lay their sad and Funerall Garments by, The souldiets long to proue their Martiall skill, And try their strengths vpon Scamander plaine, Thinking themselues too long Inmut'd in vaine. 8 Tis Questionable whether greater woe In Troy, then glee within the Campe abounded, They hold themselues free from that late dread foe, Who with his Steed had oft their trenches rounded, And neuer but to th' Argiues ouerthrow appear'd in field, or to the battaile sounded With shrill applause, they proud Aehilles Crowne, And with Brauadoes oft-times front the Towne. 9 Thus when re-spirited Greece had Dominear'd and brau'd the fieged Troians at their gates, Old Priam for his age now little fear'd, With Troylus and the rest, of warres debates, For Hectors slaughter (to them all indeer'd) They vow reuenge on those hye Potentates That were spectators of the ruthlesse deed, When Hectors coarse thrice round the wals did bleed 10 And yssuing with their power, the aged King Puts acts in execution, much aboue The battaile. His age or strength, he youthfully doth spring Vpon his Steed, and for his Hectors loue, Amongst the throng of Greekes dares any thing, The valour of King Pria Himselfe gainst Diomed he longs to prone, and scapes vntoucht, then gainst Vlisses rides, and still his age doth equipage their prides. 11 Forthwith gainst Agamemn he contends, and on his Beauer raught him many a blow, Who like a souldier his renowne defends, amazd that weake age should assacult him so,
The King his puissance further yet extends, Against the Spartan King (an equall foe) Whom with his speare he did so ill inrreat, Faire Hellens husband sits beside his seat. 12 From them he further to the throng proceeds, And deales about great Larges of grim wounds, Admir'd alone for his renowned deeds, Some with his sword vpon the Caske he stounds, This day old Nestor by his Iauelin bleeds With many more, and still the field he rounds: Against old Priam not a Greeke dare stay, Who soly claimes the honour of that day. 13 Yet the meane time the King was in this broyle, Bold Deiphebus kept the rest in fee With bloods and death, whilst Paris made great spoyle Of such as in their valour seem'd most free, Aeneas strongly mounted, gaue the foyle Vnto th' Athenian Duke, whose warlike knee Bended to him, yet in an vpright hart, Achilles in his rescue claimes a part. 14 The King Epistropus amongst them fought, So did Sarpedon gainst th'incamped Kings, The stout Pelasgian strength they dreaded nought, Now mongst their renged squadrons Treylus flings, And on their foyl'd troopes much effusion wrought, In him the life and spirit of Hector springs; Twice he Achilles met, and twice him feld, Who all the other Kings of Greece exeld. 15 A hundred thousand Troians were that day Led to the field to auenge Prince Hectors life, Double their number on Scamander stay, To entertaine them in their aemulous strife, Duke Aiax Telamon then kept in play Troylus, whilst murder through the field grew rife, The sterne Polydamas did Nobly fight, And was the death of many a gallant Knight.
16 But Troyls that succeeds Hector in force, In courage, and in all good Thewes beside, Whom ere he met that day did braue vnhorse, Till his white Armour was with Crimson dide, For Hectors sake his sword vsd no remorse, His warre-steel'd spirits to slaughter he applyde: No man that saw him his bright weapons weild, But sware another Hector was in field. 17 This day is Troyes, and now repose they borrow From the still night, to giue the wounded cure, And such of note as dide, t'intombe with sorrow, They that , themselues with armes assure, And so prepare for battaile on the morrow, Some to be siedge, the rest the siedge t'indure: Or if they can, to their eternall praise, The forren Legions from their Trenches raise. 18 Six Moones gaue nightly rest to th'Hostile paines, Ofiust so many dayes, for full so long Troy without respight the proud Campe constraines, Howerly to proue whose puissance is most strong, Blood-drops by Plannets on Scamander nes, Horrid destruction flyes the Greekes among; Troylus still held the Noblest Armes professor, And Hectors equall, though his late successor. 19 T'omit a thousand Combats and Contentions, Hostile Encounters, Oppositions braue, Such as exceed all human apprehensions, Where some win liuing honour, some a graue, With Stratagems and sundry rare inuentions, The Towne to fortefie, the Campe to saue: And contrary, to stretch all human reach, The Hoast t'indamage, and the Towne t'impeach, 20 In all which, Troylus wondrous Fame atchieued, His sword and Armour were best knowne and feared, Aboue the rest the Argiue Dukes he gricued, By his sole valour were the Troians cheared,
In acting wonders scarce to be beleud, The life of Hector in his blood appeared: Priam and Troy now thinke themselues secure, So long as Troylus mongst them may indure. 21 Achilles by his valour mated oft, And (as he thinkes) much blemisht in renowne, To see anothers valor soare aloft, But his owne bruitfull fame still sinking downe, His downy bed to him appeares vnsoft, He takes no pleasure in his regall Crowne: The best delights to him are harsh and sower, Since in one arme rests a whole Citties power. 22 The Greekes thinke Hector in this youth aliue, To stop whose honors torrent they deuise, For since by force of armes in vaine they striue To catch at that which soares aboue the skies, They to the depth of all their Counsels diue, How they by cunning may the Prince surprise: Being well assur'd that whilst his honors grow, In vaine they seeke Troyes fatall ouerthrow. 23 The sonne of Theis feeles his armes yet sore, By the rude stroakes that from his fury came, His armour heere and there be sprinkt with gore Of his owne wounds, that he is well-nye lame With often iustles: and can no more Indure the vertue of his strength or Fame: For since his brest's in many places seard, Hee'l flye vnto the rescue of his guard. 24 Since neyther the broad-brested Diomed Can in the course his rude incounter stay, Since last when Telamon against him sped, He was perforc'st to giue his fury way, Since all those  Agamem led, Though Martial'd in their best and proud'st array, Could not repell his swift and violent speed, he by his guard his ruine hath Decreed.
25 The selfe-same charge that he gainst Hector vsd, Gainst Troylus he his Myrmidons perswades, Behold where he with Hectors spirit infusd, Troylus. The warlike Thous in euen course inuades, Him, whom his strength of armes might haue excusd, The Treian sends vnto th'Elisian shades: The Athenian Duke against him spurres his horse, But quite through-piercst, the Greeke drops downe a corse. 26 Foure Princes in as many coarses tasted Like Fate, yet still the Dardan Prince sits hye, No coarse, no towring blow he vainly wasted, (In his great heart an hoast he dares defie) King Diomed once more against him hasted, And long'd with him a warlike course to try: But horse and man were in the race ore-throwne, (Normaruell) now the princes strength was growne. 27 The elder of th' Atrides next him grew, And tryes the vigour of his arme and Speare, Him likewise Troylus brauely ouerthrew, And forth (vnshooke himselfe) he past on cleare, Now well-nigh breathlesse he himselfe with-drew, Whom then the spleenefull Pelean watched ncare: And as he lights to rest him on the ground, Him the blacke Myrmidons incompasse round. 28 With mercilesse keene glaues they siege the youth, Whom all at once with fury they assaile, In them is neither Honoured grace not ruth, Nor is one Troian neere the Prince to bale Achilles, with the rest his blood pursuith, (Thousands against one man must needs preuaile) Who seeing nothing else saue death appearing, Euen gainst all oddes, contemnes despaire, or fearing. 29 But through their squadrons hewes a bloudy trackt, And lops the formost that before him stands, Had Deiphebus now his Brother backt, Or had the place bin by Sarpedon mand,
Or had Epistropus (whom he now lackt) Vpon his party, tear'd his conquering hand, Had their brigat Faulchions-brandisht by his side, The Myrmidons had fayl'd, Troylus not dide. 30 But hee's alone rouud guirt with death and ruin, And still maintaines the battel, though in vaine, On euery side a bloudy passage he wing, To worke himselfe out through a dismall Lane Of Myrmidons: Achilles still pursuing, Who keepes the hindmost of his rough-hair'd traine: Yet had Prince Troylus markt him where he stood, And almost wrought to him through death and blood 31 But ods preuail'd, he sinkes downe the mid-way, The death of Troylus. Euen in his fall his sword against him darting, That did both Hectors and his life betray, Boasting a Noble spirit in his departing By Troylus death the Greekes obtaine the day, The Myrmidons their many wounds yet smarting, Cure in their Lords Tent: whom the Greekes aplaud, For Troylus death (gainst honour) wrought by fraud. 32 Now the deiected Troians dare no more Enter the field, the Greekes approach the gates And dare them to grim warre, who still deplore Hector and Troylus in their Tragicke fates, Queene Hecuba yet keepes reuenge in store. Of which at length with Paris she dabates, Vowing to catch his life in some flye traine, That by like fraud her two bold sonnes had slaine. 33 She clas to minde the great Athilles pride, Withall, the loue he to her Daughter beares, A thing in zeale she can no longer hide, Since in Polyxena like loue appeares, Troyes weake deiection she makes knowne besides, Disabled by a siege of many years: Therefore intreats him to accept her loue, And in a generall truce the Argiues moue.
34 The lofty Greeke proud, by so great a Queene To be sued to, when he records withall How much hees fear'd, he gins to slake his spleene, And the Maids beauty to remembrance call, What can he more? Since he hath dreaded beene, And seene his ablest Foes before him fall: But yeild to beauties soft inchaunting charme, Knowing weake Troy dares not conspire his harme. 35 The day drawes on, a peace hath bin debated, To which Achilles the proud Greekes perswades; Some thinke it needfull, others, hyer rated Their honours, and this Concord much vpbraides, Alone Achilles longs to be instated In her faire grace (the beautifulst of Maids) And with the sonne of Nestor makes repaire, Where Priam with his sonnes and Daughters are. Archilochus the sonne of Nestor. 36 Truce is proclaim'd, the Damsell richly clad, And by the Troian Ladies proudly attended, Whom none that saw, but admiration had, As at a Goddesse from hye heauen discended, The innocenr Maide was still in count'nance sad, For losse of those that Tray but late defended: Yet guiltlesse in her soule of any spleene Dreampt gainst the Prince, by Paris or the Queene. 37 Vnarm'd Achilles to the Temple goes, Whom Nestors sonne attends to Pallas shrine, and all the way with Gold and Iewls strowes, Prising them Earthy, but his Bride Deuine, and nothing of their Treacherous act he knowes, When Paris from a place where he had line With arm'd Knights yssues, and a keene shaft drew, Which in the heele the proud Achilles slow, 38 Who when he sees himselfe and friend betraid, and wounded to the Death, whilst he could stand, Brandisht his sword, and mongst them slaughters made, But now he wants his Myrmidons at hand,
and his strong armour Paris to inuade, The death of Achilles and Archilochus. Alacke, the Temple was too strongly man'd: his strength that cannot bandy gainst them ali, at length must sinke, and his hye courage fall. 39 There lies the great Achilles in his gore, and by his side the Sonne of Nestor slaine, Amongst the Trotans to be feard no more, His body to the Greekes is sent againe, Whom they for Hectors change, and long deplore his death (by Treason wrought:) vpon the plaine For him a Monumentall Toombe they reare, and for his death a ioynt reuenge they sweare. 40 The siedge still lasts, vpon the part of Troy Penthisilia with a thousand Maydes, penthis Vowes all their Amazenian strength to imploy, and for the death of Hector, Greece vpbraides, Whilst in the Campe with much applausiue ioy, Neoptomus Grim Pyrrh is receiu'd, Pyrrh that trades In gore and slaughter, with reuenge pursuing, Euen to the death, Troy, for his Fathers tine. 41 No longer te he will delay, but streight Dare them to battaile by the Morrowes Sunne, The Scythian Damsels long to shew their height, and imitate theyr deedes before-time dunne, They know they enterprise a worke of weight, and long for Signall, now to battaile runne: The  Greekes that were of Pyrrhus traine, Whom th' Amazonians soone repulse againe. 42 Penthisilea, was not that fayre Queen A tale of a chast Queene amongst the Amazons. Of Amazons, of whom we now intreate, That made a Law, what Man so'ere had beene Within her Court, to make a byding Seate aboue three dayes, he might not there be seene, Though his power mighty, and his State were great: For if within her Court he longer dwelt, The penall Law was, he should sure be gelt.
43 So much she feared the supposed traines, With which soft Women-kind vs men accuse, That our society she quite disdaynes, Nor shall our fellowship her Ladies vse, To this decree she their applause constraines, Because false men their weaker Sex abuse: From which her words, nor warning can restrain thē, She chusd this way, the onely meanes to tame them. 44 This strikt decree kept many from her Coast, That else had flockt as Suters to the place, Their Angell beauties which men couet most, Must from the eyes of man receiue no grace, Many too bold their deerest Iewell lost, And were made Eunuches within three dayes space: Else they were thought vnfit for the Queens dyet, Who held that the first way to keepe them quiet. 45 Some that could well haue ventur'd their best blood, Were loath to hazzard what they needs must pay, The Queene so much vpon this Edict stood, That she had driuen her Suters quite away, And still (to be at rest) she held it good, Vowing t'obserue it to her dying day: Hauing this prou'd, those men that came most bold, Their forfit pay, none more submisse and cold. 46 So that in processe few approacht their shore, But such as had no meanes to hue else-where, Whom their owne Countries did esteeme no more, But pay theyr fine, they may be welcome here, And haue good place, and Lands, and liuings store, Nothing the Court hath, can be held too deere: Amongst the rest that held a Soueraigne place, Their liu'd a Baron of a Noble race. 47 He that was from his Nate Countrey fled, For some offence that questioned his life, and as a refuge to secure his head, He shund the deadly Axe to tast the Knife,
But time out-weares disgrace, his course he led Among the Damsels, free from femenine strife: Doubtlesse the Woman that's suspitious most, Would be resolu'd to see what he had lost. 48 The Noble Eunuch left a Sonne behind In his owne Countrey, who being growne to yeares, Grew fairely featurd, of a generous mind, and in his face much excellence appeares, He vowes the world to trauell, till he find His banisht Father, whose estate he feares: At length by search, hee's made to vnderstand, Of his late soiourne in the Scithians Land. 49 Thither he will, for so his vow decrees, But when he knowes an Edict too seuere, Hee's loath to pay vnto the Land such Fees, Which he hopes better to bestow else-where, In this distraction, loe from farre he sees A nimble Fayry, tripping like a Deere: and as holies strowde on the grassie playne, With swst speede she makes to him amaine. 50 And greetes him thus: (Fayre Youth) boldlie proceede, I promise thee good Fortune on thy way, Among the Scithian Dames thou shalt not bleed, Onely obserue and keepe still what I say, My counsell now may stand thee much in steede, and saue thee that, thou wouldst be loath to pay: Receiue this Handkercheife, this Purse, this Ring, The least of them a present for a King. 52 These vertues they retaine: when thou shouldst eate, Vpon the Board this curious Napkin spred, It streight shall fill with all delicious meate, Foule, Fish, and Fruits, shall to th place be led, With all delicious Cates, costly, and neate, Which likewise shall depart when thou hast fed: This Ring hath hath stone, whose vertue, know Is to discerne a true Friend, from a Foe.
52 In this thou mayst perceiue both late and early, Who flatters thee, and who intends thee well, Who hates thee deadly, or who loues thee deerely: The vertue of this Iewell doth excell, Out of this Purse if I may iudge seuerely, and in few words the worth exactly tell: Valew it rightly, it exceedes the rest, and of the three, is rated for the best, 53 So oft as thou shalt in it thrust thy hand, So oft thy Palme shall be repleat with Gold, Spend where thou wilt, trauell by Sea or Land, The riches of that Purse cannot be told, Vse well these guifts, their vertues vnderstand, Thanke my deuinest Mistresse and be bold: Adde but thy will to her auspicious ayde, Shee'le sure thee that which others late haue payde. 54 Incourag'd thus, he pierces theyr cold Clime, Where many hot Spirits had beene calm'd of late, And enters the great Court at such a time, When he beheld his Father sit in State, They that uriew the Youth now in his prime, Not knowing his decree, blame his hard Fate: And wish he might a safer Countrey choose, Not come thus far, his deer'st things to loose. 55 For not a Ladyes eye dwels on his face, Or with iudiciall note viewes his perfection, But thinkes him worthy of theyr deerest grace, They prayse his looke, gate, stature, and complection, And Iudge him Issu'd of a Noble race, A person worthy of a Queenes election: Not one among them that his beauty saw, But now at length too cruell thinke their Law. 56 After some interchange of kindest greeting Betwixt the Father and the stranger Son, Such as is vsuall to a suddaine meeting, With extasies that Kindred cannot shon,
To omit their height of ioy, as a thing fleeting, For greatest ioyes are oft-times loohest don: The Fath of his Sonnes ability, Askes, If  brookt his  losse with facility. 57 For well he knowes, he cannot anchor theare, Or soiourne on that rude and  barous Cost, But his free harborage must cost him date, (Censuring his Sonne) by what himselfe had lost, she gentie Youth, whose thoughts are free from feare, Sayth he is come securely there to host: and spight the Queene and Ladies (with oaths deepe) Sweares to his Father (what he hath) to keepe. 58 By this th' Amazonian P heares Of a young stranger in her Court arriu'd, She sends to know his Nation, Name, and yeares, But being told his Father there suruiu'd, A reuerentman, one of her chiefest Peeres, She will not as the custome haue him gyu'd: But takes his Fathers promise, oath, and hand, To haue his Sonne made Free-man of her Land. 59 Three dayes the limits him, but they expierd As others carst, he must the Razortry, all thinges determin'd, the fayre Queene desierd The Stranger to a banquet instantly, Who at his first appearance much admierd Her state, her port, proportion, face, and eye: Nor had he (since his Cradle) seene a Creature So rich in beauty, or so rare in feature. 60 Downe sat the Queene and Damsels at the board, But the young Stranger stands by, discontent, They pray him sit: He answeres not a word, Three times to him the Queene of Scithia sent, But still the Youth would no reply affoord, The rest not minding what his silencement: Leaue him vnto his humor, and apply Themselues to feede and eate deliciously.
61 But when he saw the Ladies freely eate, and feede vpon the rude Cates of the Land, At a with-drawing board he takes his seate, and spreads his curious Napkin with his hand, Streight you might see a thousand sorts of meate, Of strangest kinds vpon the Table stand: What Earth, or Ayre, or Sea, within them breeds, On these the Youth, with lookes didainefull feeds. 62 The Queene amaz'd to see such change of cheare, Whose beauty and variety surpast, Longing to know the newes, could not forbeare, But rose with all her Damsels at the last, To know from whence he was supplyde, and wheare, With Cates so rich in show, so sweete in tast: The like in Scithia she had neuer seene, The least of them a seruice for a Queene. 63 For now she hath in scorne her owne prouision And cals her choysest banquet, homely fare, Her dainty Cates she hath in proud derision, Since she beheld the Strangers foode so rare, The Youth, who hopes by this t'escape incision, Tels her (if so she please) he can prepare A richer feast (yet not her Treasure wrong) With any dish, for which her grace may long. 64 She growes the more Inquisitiue, and streight Sweares, if he will her royall Cater be, Shee'l in her Kingdome rayse him to the height Of all high state, and chiefe Nobility: For well she knowes, it is a worke of weight To furnish her with such variety: Since her cold Climat, with ten Kingdomes more, Cannot supply her board with halfe that store. 65 When vp the Stranger ryseth, and thus sayes: Madam, for your sake was I hither guided, Whom I will freely serue at all assayes, For you this dyet haue I here prouided.
Sit then, and as you like, my bounty praise, These no illusions are to be derided, But meats essentiall, made for your repast, Sit downe and welcome, and wher't please you tast. 66 The more she eats, the more she longs to know Whence this strange bounty of the heauens proceeds, They proue as sweet in tast, as faire in show, The more she wonders, still the more she feeds, The more she eats, the more her wonders grow, She vowes her Land shall Chronicle his deeds: And make him Lord of all his present wishes, Excepting Loue, and what belongs to kisses. 67 The stranger then his Napkins vertue tels, What wonders it affoords when it is spred, Without all charmes or Negrticke spels, Or inuocations made vnto the dead, Onely in natiue Vertue it excels (A secret power by inspiration bred) This hee'l bestow with all their Vertues store, To saue his forfet but for three dayes more. 68 Th'ambitious Queene loath her Decrees should slacke, More loath to loose a Iewell of such prize, That can affoord her all things she doth lacke, To make a feast as with the Dieties, Vowes for three dayes he shall sustaine no wracke, But then her law of force must tyranize: Meane time her Court is for the stranger free, Vpon these firme conditions they agree. 69 Glad was the Queene, more glad the amorous stranger, For neither at their bargaine was agrieued, She for her guift, he to escape such danger, Hauing his Man-hood for three dayes reprieu'd, In her faire Parke he longs to be a ranger, Where fed such store of Deere (scarcely belieu'd) Till he by tride experience had beheld, How many beauties in the Court exceld.
70 Now trusting to the vertue of his Ring, He longes to proue; who hate, who meane him good, Who onely to his eare smooth flatteries bring, Who with the Queene vpon his party stood, For flattery is like an oyly Spring, Whose smooth soft waters waxing to a flood: Entyce fond men, his Siluer streames to crowne, But he that proues to swim, perforce must drowne. 71 Among the rest, one Beldam neere in place, Vnto rhe lustlesse Amazon, he knowes Perswades the Queene to his especiall grace, and stands in plea bweene him and his Foes, With her he growes acquainted in small space, And in her lap a liberall Treasure throwes: He giues h Gold in euery place he finds her, And by large bounty to his Loue he binds her. 72 The time weares on, his three-dayes Lease expires, In which he s the things, to which hee's borne, His owne Fee simple, yet the Queene requires To haue the forfeit since, the day's outworne, But still his precious guifts the Youth inspires With chearefull hope, he shall not liue forlorne: But trusts by promise of the fayry Dame, A Man to part thence, as a Man he came. 73 The day fore th'Execution, he was viewing His precious Ring, the like was neuer seene, Finding the time so neare, he sits still ewing His rashnesse, for he feares the Knife is keene, Each man he thinkes a Barbar him pursuing To haue him Enunch't; when in comes the Queene And spyes this glorious Ring vpon his Finger, (The Beldam, to this troubled youth did bring'er.) 74 Of this she fals in Question, much admiring The Splendor, and besides she longs to know What vertue't hath, with gency desiring If it be rare in worth, as rich in show,
The Youth into his former hopes retyring, Recounts to her what Soueraigne Vertues grow From this bright Loue, a meanes ordaind by Fate, Onely by which she may secure her State. 74 In this her Friendes she may discerne and try, On whom she may relye her certaine trust, Who in her charge their vtmost wils apply, Who in her Seate of Iudgement proue most iust: Next, she by this all Traytors may descry, Such as against her vertues arme their lust: Such as intend their Soueraigne to depose, Briefly, it points her Friends out from her Foes. 76 No maruell if the Queene were much in loue With such a Iewell, and for it would pay What he would aske, as that which much behooues To keepe her doubtfull Kingdome from decay, To buy it at the deerest rate she proues, He onely craues but respight for one day: That she but one day more his Youth would spare, Eare he came bound vnto the Barbers Chayre. 77 The match is made, his guifts are knowne abroad, and from all partes they come this man to see, The multitude esteeme him as a God, That to their Soueraigne Queene hath beene so free, A starely Seede he mos and thereon road About the Court, wherethrongs of people be: and from his Purse, of Gold whole handfuls flings, A bounty that is seldome seene in Kings. 78 A thousand times his arme abroad he stretcht, as oft the figured plates of coyn'd-Gold fly about theyr eares, still to his Purse he reacht, And still to his applause the peoply cry, The more they showte, the greater store he fetcht From his deuine vnending Treasury: The newes of this vnto the Queenes soone came, Wondring whose praise her people thus proclaime.
79 In comes th'admired Stranger and alighting, The Queene him meets, and takes him by the hand To lead him vp: he by the way reciting The Proiect she much longs to vnderstand, The Scithian Queene in his discourse, delighting Vpon the vertue of this Purse long scand: Thinking if this third Prize she might inioy, She by her wealth might all the Earth destroy. 80 But Treasure cannot gaine it, for tis Treasure Euen of it selfe, in vaine she offers Gold aboue all wealth, the Youth esteemes his pleasure, One thing will doo't, that in her eare he told, The couetous Queene's, perplexed aboue measure, To buy the price that will be cheaply sold: Onely to bed with her, he doth desire, But till two Peares be roasted in the fite. 81 Oh! Gold, what canst not thou? Long she doth pause, How great's the Wealth, how easie tis to buy She knowes, besides she is aboue her Lawes, And what she will, no Subiect dares deny, Why should she loose this Iewell? What's the cause She to her owne Land should proue Enemy? Whose weale, since she may compasse with such ease, Why should she not her-selfe somewhat displease? 82 The time's but little that the Youth doth aske, Besides, shee'l cause her Maide her charge to hast, If she compare her wages with her taske, She knowes her time will not be spent in wast, The friendly night will put a blushlesse Maske Vpon her brow, then how can she be trast? The fire is made, the Peares plast, both agreed, To Bed they goe, good Fortune be their speed. 83 The trusted Hag, he knowes to be his friend, and one whom he had bribed long before, It pleasd her well, that his desires haue end, To haue had him Eunuch't, would haue griu'd her sore,
In bed meane time the louing payre contend, To proue the game she neuer tride before, And still she cals to make a quicker fire, And prethy sweet Nurse let the Peares be nyer. 84 They shall (quoth she,) yet let them roast at easure, The way-ward Queene yet thinkes the time too long, And that she payes too sweetly for his Treasure, (For yeeld she must) the stranger prooues too strong) Yet still she cals (not yet?) Tis out of measure, Nor yet, nor yet, she sings no other song, Alacke the Beldams slacknesse quite betrayes her, (The onely meanes to keepe him from the Razer.) 85 The youth preuail'd, the Queene's somewhat appeasd, And for there is no helpe the vtmost tries, Since her the stranger hath by wager ceasd, Before the watch-word giuen she must not rise, The Beldam thinkes at last the Queene t'haue pleasd, Oh Madam they are rosted now (she cries:) Are they indeed? Let them rost on (quoth she,) And prethy Nurse put in two more for me. 86 I know not what effect this wager tooke, But the next day she canceld her strict Law, She that men hated: Eunuchs cannot brooke, Command was giuen that all such should withdraw, And not presume within her Court to looke, That could be found toucht with the smallest flaw, And this Decree among the Scithians grew, Till the sad day that they their husbands slew. 87 For when their flying men were quite disgracst, And sayl'd in battaile, they disdain'd their yoke, And scorning all subiection, proudly facst Their foes themselues with many a boysterous stroke, From Scithiaes bounds all men they cleane displacst, And strongly arm'd, through many Regions broke: Thus raign'd successiuely many a bold Dame In Scithia, whence Penthisilea came.
88 Their Pollaxes, whose vse the Greekes neare knew, Thunder vpon theyr losty Caskes and fell them, The Greekes stll guarde the field, although some fewe Perisht at first, and striuing to excell them, Being but Women, they some Damsels slew, And with the oddes of number they repell them, But when the Queene into the battaile flings, VVhere eare she comes, she bloudy Conquest bringes. 89 King philomines Combats by her side, VVith many a bold Knight brought from Paphlagone, Gainst whom the King Cassilius fierce can ride, Srriuing that day to haue his valour knowne, Betweene them was a fayre and euen course tryde, Amphimacus to Priam deare alone Since Troylus death, thrust in amongst the Greekes, Forcing their flight with many clamorous shrikes. 90 Him Aiax Telamon encounters then, And stayes the fury of his barbed Steede, Acting that day, deeds, more then commen men, Such as through both the Armies wonder breede, Whom Noble Deiphebus meetes agen, The youthfull Prince, whose valour doth exceed, The fearefull slaughter of his puissance stayes, Whose discipline his Focs could not but prayse. 91 And had not wrathfull pyrrhus now led on His Fathers Myrmidons, and quite forsooke His vntryde Knights, the day had sure beene gon, But where they march't, the Earth beneath them shooke, And to withstand theyr vigor, they found none, Till Paris with his Archers that way tooke: and now began a fierce and Mortall fray, In Emulation who should fly, who stay. 92 Paris preuailes, his forces gaine the best, And Lycomedes Grand-child must retire, Behold, where gainst the Troians Aiax Crest Seemes aboue all his Souldiers to aspyre,
His huge seauen-folded Targe still guards his brest, For Paris through the field he doth inquire: Whom as the Sal'mine fighting, spyes from far, He heares a Steele-shaft from his Crosbow iarre. 93 It aymes at him, and where his Armour parted Betweene the Arme and Shoulder, there it fell, Aiax obseru'd the man by whom he smarted, And pressing forward, vowes to quite him well, Through the mid-throng the neerest way he thwarted, No opposition can his rage expell: Till he had past through Groues of growing Speares, To come where thousand Shafts sung by his eares. 94 Yet past them all, euen till he came where fought The amorous Troian, and to him he makes His guard of Archers, the Greeke dradded naught, But o're his Helme his reeking Glaue he shakes, Which in his fall assured ruine brought The death of Paris. Vpon the Earth, the dying Troian quakes: And in his death leaues all terrestriall ioy, Faire Hellen, Priam, Heeuba, and Troy. 95 Oh! Had the Raptor in his Cradle dide, Millions of liues had in his death beene sau'd, and Asiaes glory, that late sweld in pride, Had not with siedge and death so long beene brau'd, O're his dead Coarse the warlike Greeke doth stride, and workes his way through harnesse richly ingrau'd: Whose curious workes he blemisht where he stood, Blurring their Fingers with wide wounds and blood. 96 The Dardans fly at Brute of Paris fall, The Greekes with dreadfull march their flight pursue, Euen to the very skirts of Troyes fayre wall, But betweene death and them the Scithians grew, Squadrons of Greekes before the Damsels fall, Now the re-spirited Troians fight renw: Twice fore the Scithian Queene did Pyrrhus stand, Yet twice by her repulsed, hand to hand.
97 Night partes the battaile vpon equall oddes, In Paris death, the Troians haue the wurst, Hellen and Troy bequeath him to the Gods, His death lesse mourn'd, then hath his life bin curst, The morning comes, the Greekes make their aboad Before the gates, through which the Scithians burst: And scorning to be Coopt, each with her shielde Brauely aduanst, make roomth into the field. 98 Them Deiphebus follows with his traine, The Sole-remainder of King Priams race, By whom at first a valiant Greeke was slaine, That in the Campe inioyde a Soueraigne place, Amphimachus next him spurs on the plane, With Philomines who rankes on apace: Aeneas and Antenor, these contend, With all their powers to giue the long siedge end. 99 In vaine: for lo, vpon the aduerse part, Guirt with his Fathers Myrmidons appeares, Sterne Pyrrhus, whose late bleeding woundes yet smart, Next him Pelides, with a band of Speares, Then marcht Tysander with a Lyons hart, Vlisses, Steuelus, and (proud in yeares:) Nestor: the two Atrides well attended, The two Achiaces next the field asnded. 100 These with the other Princes proudly fare, Disordred ruine, ruffles on each side, Thousands of eyther party slaughterd are In this incounter, Deiphebus dide, And baue Amphimachus, forward to dare, The death of Deiphebus and Amphiema∣chus. And able to performe (a Souldier tride) And now on Priams party onely stand, The Scithian Damsels to protect his Land. 101 Troy droopes, and  aspyres full foureteene dayes, Penthisilea hath vphld her fame, Both Campe and Cty surfit with her prayse, and her renowne deseruedly proclayme,
The best of Greece her hardiment assayes, Yet shrinke beneath the fury of the Dame: None can escape her vigour vnrewarded, Troy by this sterne Virago's soly guarded. 102 But destiny swayes all things: Troy was founded To endure a third wracke, and must fate obay, Therefore euen those that with most might abounded, Cannot reprieue her to a longer day, The Sythian Dames (by many Princes wounded) Were with the Queene at length to Greece a pray, Her too much hardinesse her selfe inmur'd, Admidst her foes, in Armour well assur'd. 103 And when her Launce was plinter'd to her hand, Her warlike Pollax hew'd to pieces small, Her selfe round guirt with many an armed band, Euen in her height of Fame she needs must fall, The warlike Wench amongst the Greekes doth stand Vnbackt by Troy, left of her Damsels all, The battery of a thousand swords she bides, Till her yron plates are hew'd off from her sides. 104 Thus brathlesse, and vnhaest, (fresh in breath And strong in armor,) Pyrrhus her inuades, At these aduantages he knowes tis eath To cope with her quite scuered from her Maids, His baleull thoughts are spur'd with rage and death, Close to her ide in blood of Greekes he wades: (Blood sluc'st by her) and naked thus assayles her, Whilst a whole Campe of foes from safety railes her. 105 After much warre th'Amazonian fals, Whom Pyrrhus lops to pieces with his Glaue, The death of Pnthisilea. And ing p-meale hew'd her, lowd he cals To haue her limbes kept from an honoured graue, But to be strow'd about the sieged wals: She dead, the Troians seeke themselues to saue By open flight, her Virgins fighting dye, Scorning the life, to gaine which, they must flye.
106 Now Troy's at her last cast, her succors fayle, Her souldiers are cut off by ruthlesse warre, Her Sea-ports hemd in with a thousand sayle, In her land fiedge two hundred thousand are, They close their Iron gates their liues to baile, And strengthen them with many an yron barre: After that day, they dare no weapons weild, Or front the proud Greekes in the open field. 107 Aeneas and Antenr now conspire, (As some suppose) the Citty to betray, Dares. And with the Greekes they doome it to the fire, But whilst the rich Palladium's seene to stay, In Pallas Temple, they in vaine desire King Priams ruin or the Lands decay: Therefore the slye Vlisses buyes for Gold, The Iewell that doth Troy in safety hold. 108 Oh cursed Priest, that canst thy selfe professe, The Palladi bought by V∣lisses of the Priest of Pal∣las for a great sum of mony. Seuere in habit, but in heart prophane, Would of thy name and Order, there were lesse, That will not sticke to sell their friends for gaine, Who (but that knowes thy Treason,) once would gesse Such treacherous thoughts should taint a Church-mans braine, But many to the Gods deuoted soly, In harts are godlesse, though in garments holy. 109 Whether by purchase, or by stealth, (Heauen knowes,) But the Palladium now the Greekes inioy, And by a generall voyce the Campe arose From their long ege, their ships againe t'inioy, The Greekes vnto the sea themselues dispose, And make a show to bid farewell to Troy: But of this Stratagem, what next befell, This Canto will not giue vs roome to tell. ARtimesia Queene of Caria, and wife to King Manso∣lus, she is famous for her Chastity & the loue to her hus∣band, after whose death she made so royalla Sepulcher
for him, that it was helde of the Wonders of the world, and of that, all stately buildinges haue since then beene called Man∣solea. Camna a beautious maide borne in Galatia, the wife of Plutarchus lib∣de virtutibus Mulierum. one Sinatus, she was religiously deuoted to the cha Goddesse Diana, whom her Countrey held in great reuerence, whome when Synorix had often sollicited with loue, but coulde not preuaile, he treacherously slew her husband Sinatus, and af∣ter inforced her to his Marriage-bed, to whom by the vrgent instigation of her friends, and the promotion expected by the greatnesse of Synotix, she seemed willingly to yeild, (he per∣swading her, that for his loue to her, he wrought the death of her beloued Sinatus.) When before the Altar of the Goddesse they were to be espoused, she drank to Synorix (as the custom was) a Bowle of Wine, in which when he had pledged her, shee told him with a ioyfull countenance, that in that draught they had both caroused their deaths, being extreamely ouer-ioyed, that before the chast goddesse Diana, & in the face of so great a people, she had iustified her owne Innocence, and reuenged the murder of her husband, which incontinently appeared, for the potion being commixt with poyson, they both expired be∣fore the Alter. When Achilles was slaine in the Temple by Paris, it is re∣membred Antimachus. of him that the Graecians could not purchase his bo∣die of the Troians till (to ransome him) they waighed them downe ass much Gold as poysed the body of Hector. Tis sayde that for his death all the Muses & Nimphes wept exceedingly Rursus redempto pro altero cadauere Lycophron in Alexandra. Pr pondus Auris splendidi partoj ferent. The Isle Boristhenes was called Achilleides of Achilles that Ibicus. was there buried, besides it is Poetised of him that in the Eli∣sian field, after his death, he espoused Medea. Herodotus in Euterpe. Paris that slewe Achilles, and was after slaine by Aiax, was sent into Greece with two and twenty saile, whence hee brought the faire Hellen. His Shipmaister, or he that built Diognetes in rebus. his ships, was called Phereclus. Some thinke he pierst Greece first by the Commandement of Venus, and hauing  Smernais Harmonida Hellen, carried her into Aegypt, where he first lay with her.
Others are opinioned, that he bedded with her in Athens, and , Duris . . had by her these foure Sonnes, Dunichus, Carithus, Aga∣nus, and Ideus. Others thinke, he first lay with her in Cranae, one of the Sprad Islands, which when Paris had done almost Alexandar in  . by violense, and after many teares sbed for the leauing of her Husband, it is said, that of her teares grew the Hearbe Hele∣nium, which if women drinke in wine, it prouokes mirth and Venery. Of Helena it is thus recorded, Menelaus being dead, after their returne to Greece, for her former luxuriousnes, she was expulsed from Lacedemon by her Sonnes, Nicostratus and Megapenthe. She fled to her Cozen Polixo, the Wife of Tle∣polemus, who gouerned Rhodes, where shee soiourned for a space, but Polixo after remembring, that her Husband was by reason of the Adultery of Hellen, stain in the wars of Troy,  in  . she came vpon Hellen suddainely, as she was bathing her selfe amongst her Maids, and hurriyng her vnto a tree, vppon the same she strangled her. Others report, that Hellen waxing old, & seeing her beau∣ty wrinkled, and quite faded, in griefe therof hanged her selfe, as a iust reward of her former incontinence. Some thinke the Palladium to be bought by Vlisses of the priest of Pallas. Others, that it was stole by Vlisses and Dio∣med, others that it was Merchandized by Aeneas and Ante∣nor, In which sale, the famous Citty of Troy was betrayed to  lib. 3. the Greekes. These opinions are vncertaine, but when Ilus was to build the Pallace of Islion, following a party-couloured Oxe, he praied to the Gods, that some auspicious signe might satisfie him from the Heauens, that his buildinges were plea∣sing to the dietyes: then to him descended the Palladium, an Image of three Cubits height, which seemed to haue motion, and to walke of it selfe; in the right hand holding a Speare, in the left hand a Distaffe, or Rocke and a Spindle, and where he further proceeded to the Oracle to know the vertue of this Palladium, it was them aunswered him, that as long as that was kept free, inviolate, and vnprophaned, so long TIOY shold be in peace and security, which accordingly happened. For till Vlisses had either bought or stolne away the Palladium, the Greekes had neuer any apportunity or meanes to vse any vie∣lence vpon the Citty. The end of the 14. Canto.
Argumentum ON th'Hellesponticke Sands Epus reares A brazen horse: the Graecians hoise vp saile And feigning to depart: Synon with teares Tels to the inuaded King an ominous tale, The Fleetereturnes by night: After ten yeares Troy is surprisde, and the proud Greeks preuaile, The Citty a burnt, and after tragicke broyles, The Greekes returne, laden with Asiaes spoyles. ARG. 2. LAocon and Polites, Hectors Ghost. K. Priams death, Troyes Fate, Crevsa lost. CANTO. 15. 1 TReason, whose horrid Front I must vnmaske, And pluck the Vizor from thy Fiend-like face, To paint thee out in coulours is my taske. And by thy clouen foote thy steps to trace, In which (I still Diine assistance aske) Hell gaue thee Byrth, and thou  thy race From the grand Prince of darkenesse, in whose Cell Thou first tookst life, and  returne to dwell.
2 Ty thou wast strong, and thy defence was good, But Treason through thy strength made bloody way, Hadst thou not harbour'd Traitors, thou hadst stood, And to thy age annext the longest day, But Treason that most thirsts for Princes blood, And of the hyest kingdomes seekes decay, Enters thy Court, and couets to destroy With thy proud buildings (euen the name of Troy.) 3 Thy enuy stretcht to our Chast Maiden-Queene, Q Elizabeth. Whose Vertues, euen her foes could not but praise, Yet gainst her graces didst thou Arme thy , Thinking by Parries hand to end her dayes, Doctor Parry. But God and Truth (whose Patron she was seene,) Against their Cannons did hye Bulwarkes raise, Such Bullet-proofe, that neither priuate Traine Could reach her, or the open arme of Spaine, 4 What Parry mist, fourteene fierce Traitors moe Babington & his Stir'd vp by Rome, tooke Sacramentall vowes, That God that kept her  th'invasiue foe, Against these bloody Butchers knit their browes; Heauen gaue them all a fatall ouerthrow, (For heauen no such  act allowes:) But to all them a blacke end hath appointed, Whose bold hand dares to touch the Lords anointed. 5 If such Aeneas and Antenor were, Percy and Catesby with their Conederates. That would for Coyne their King and Country sell, Like plots with them our late Arch-traitors beare, To whom for aye they may be ranked well, Guido Vaux. And thou (Gui ) that neuer yet foundst peere (For a damn'd purpose) bred in Earth or hell: He whom all pens with most reproaches taint Symon, (with thee compat'd) is found a Saint. 6 He told a forg'd tale to a forraigne King, With hope his King and Countries fame to raise; But thou, from strangers didst thy complots bring, He a strange Countrey, not his owne betraies,
The poysons from the head of Treasons spring, False Guide suckt, which fed him many dayes: Treasons, Milkt, tasted, seemes to quench the thurst, But once tooke downe, it  men till they burst. 7 That fate which he and his confederates had, May all receiue that beare their Treacherous mind, Their purpose cuill, and their ends were bad, A Fate to all men of their ranke affignd, And that great King whose safety hath made glad The hearts of three great Kingdomes,  confind: Long may he raigne, still guarded by those powers, Whose hands Crowne Vertue, & her foes devowers 8 That the same state that was in hazard then, May in this peacefull Kingdome long endure, The King to guide his Peeres: Peetes, Common men: Whose summon'd Parliaments may plant secure Brittaines faire Peere, for many a worthy pen To Chronicle: These acts black and impure, We cannot iustly on Aeneas lay, In whose reproach we must our Censures stay. 9 Since some, whose hy workes to the world are deere, Whose grauity we reuerence and admire Virgils Eneids. His Fame, vnto posterity would cleare, And in his Innocent applause desire, T'were pitty he that two New-Troyes did reare, As famous as that one consumde by fire: (Rome and our London) for the double gaine Of one lost Troy, should weare a Traytors staine, 10 The bruised Greekes  with rough stormes of War, By Pallas art,  a Timber-steede, The horse of Troy. Whose Backs Tree, , of such huge vastnesse are, That they in all   wonder breed, The Mountaine structure may be seene from far, Which finisht, they amongst them haue agreed: To stuffe his hollow  with great store Of Harnest men (so  it on the shore.)
11 This done, their new-calkt Nauy they winde thence, As if they to Myne would backe repaire, Beneath a promontory not farre thence, They Anchor East, where they concealed are, Now Troy secure and dreadlesse of offence, Looseth her selfe from her Diurnall care: Wide stand the Ports, the people yssue free, Th'vnsouldierd fields and Deserts, plaine to see. 12 Where Hector did  inuade, Where Nestor pitcht, where Troylus wan the day, Where grim Achilles log'd, where Aiax made His hot incursions, hewing out his way, Where Agamemnon with his forces plaid, Where with his  Vlisses lay: Where such men fought, and such their valours tride, Where some men conquered, others brauely dide. 13 Some wonder at Myneruaes stately piece, Saying t'were good to place it in her fawne, Since the Pelasgians are return'd to Greece, Their brazen horse may through their wals be drawne, Other more staide know they are come to Fleece And pillage them, this leauing as a pawne Of some strange Treason, whose suspected guile, Seemes to frowne inward, though it outward smile. 14 Thus is the multitude in parts deuided, Some wonder at the Module being so rare, Others, whose braines are with more idgement guided, would rip his wombe, which some desire to spare, Ardent Laocoon thinking to haue decided This generall doubt (as one that all things dare) Is seene from top of a high Tower discending, A threatning speare against the Machie bending. 15 Crying from farre, you foolish men of Troy, Oh, can you trust the presents of a foe? Who came from Greece these high wals to destroy, And ten whole yeares haue wrought your ouerthrow,
What can you in the Danauish Treasons ioy? Amongst you all, doth none Vlisses know? Either this swelling wombe is big with childe Of armed Greekes: or gainst your wals compild. 16 These brazen hoofes are made to  your mure, The trusty pale that hath so long defended Your sonnes and wiues, where they haue liu'd secure, Maugre the ruine by the foe intended, Against your trusty Guards no wrong endure, Whose Bulwarkt strength you haue so oft commended: This said, against the brazen Steed he flung A steele-head speare which through his entrailes rung 17 The trembling Mole from forth his Cauernes gaue A horrid grone, a noyse of armor iar'd Through his transfixed brest, (if ought could saue Ill-fated Troy) this had their ruin bard, And they had ript the bowels of that graue, From which the sad confused sound was heard: Behold the Dardan shepheards with lowd cries, Before the King bring bound a Greekish prise. 18 Dispersed Troy assembles, and attend Some vncoth Nouell, manacled now stands, The surprisd Greeke, his eyes to heauen extend, To heauen he likewise would exalt his hands, Whilst showers of teares downe by his cheekes discend, And thus he sayes: Haue I  the bands Of armed Greekes, to  heere in Troy? And whom my foes haue spar'd, must foes destroy. 19 Relenting Priam is soone mou'd to ruth, His misery and teares woo him to passion: He thinkes such lookes, such teares should harbor truth, And pitties him, disguisd in wretched fashion, With comfortable words he cheares the youth, Askes him of whence he is, and of what Nation: When to the passionate king he thus replide, Priam commands, and I will nothing hide.
20 Who hath not heard of the Duke Palimed, By the Pelasgian Princes doom'd to dye, Whom false Vlisses to the scaffold led, Him aboue all the rest most loued I, He was my Kinsman (but alas hee's dead) With that, swift watry drops drill from his eye: Him when I guiltlesse saw, condemn'd of Treason, I mourn'd my Kinsmans death, (as I had reason) 21 Not could I keepe my tongue (vnhappy man) But priuate whispering haue I breath'd gainst those, That sought his death, to threat them I began, Who to my friend had bin opposed foes, Fox-like Vlisses first, obseru'd me than, Whom Calchas seconds (why should I disclose My miserable state) vnhappy wretch? Since their reuenge as farre as Troy doth stretch. 22 I had but dide there, and I heare am dying, (Griefe stops his speech, he can no further speake) Still what he wants in words, with teares supplying, Till they with interruptions silence breake, When after farre-fecht sighes himselfe applying To further processe, (he proceeds:) the wreake They threatned then, since now I must not flye, Synons Tale (Witnesse you Troians, Synon cannot lye. 23 Oft would the warre-tyr'd Greekes haue left this Towne, But still the Morrow tempests them restraine, Threatning their Nauy in the Abisme to drowne, And they attempt their wisht returne in vaine, But most the angry Neptune seemes to frowne, When old Epeus had vpon this plaine, Builded this Monumentall Steed, of late To the Deuinest Pallas Consecrate. 24 Euriphilus is straight to Delos sent', To know the Oracles aduice heerein, He thus returnes: A Virgins blood is spent To appease the tempests when these warres begin,
And in their end the Gods haue like intent, That you with sacrifice shall purge your sin: In your pursute they humaine bloud desire, and you with bloud must purchaso your retyre. 25 This when the vulgar knew, not one but feares, Whose dreaded life offended Phabus craues, Oh! Hence proceedes the force of all my teares, All prophesie his ruine, that depraues The Oyle-tong'd Greeke: Vlisses Calchas cheares, To point him out that must appease the Waues: Ten dayes he scilence kept, as loath to name, His destin'd life, whom Phabus seemes to clayme. 26 Scarce with Vlisses clamors is he won To sentence any: till with vrgence great, He doomes me to the flames, the people ron To see him that must tast the Alters heate, all glad that this denounced doome is don, That I th offended God-hood must intreat: And that my bloudy slaughter answers all, Which each one feard, vpon himselfe might fall. 27 The day was com, my brows with wreaths wer crown'd, and I made ready for the sacred fire, My hands behind (as you behold them) bound, The Priest in his Pontificall attyre, Ready to strike, and I incompast round With fire and death, (yet Mortals life desire) The truth Ile tell, alasse sinne cannot lie; I lcapt from of the Altar, thence I fly. 28 Pursude in vaine, feare gaue my body winges, In a deepe saggy couert, I obseure me, Vntill the night had with her aiery stringes Drawne her blacke vaile o're Heauens face, to assure me, Hoping to hide me, till the Argiue Kings Had sayld from thence, but thinking to seeure me: Poore wretch, I from the Gracians fled a way, and now (alasse)  made the  pray.
29 Whom neither Heauen, nor Earth, nor Greece, nor Try, nor ayre, nor Sea, will take to their protection, But all conspire poore Snon to destroy, Then ayre, Come lend me part of thy infection, Heauen, Earth, and Sea, all your  powers imploy, and like confederates  in my deiection: and then he beates his breast, weeps, sighes, & grones, Whose griefe King Prim and all Troy bemones. 30 The good old Prim bids his hands vnbind, and cheares him thus: Of Greece thou art no more, Thou shalt be ours, thy Countrey hath resign'd Thy life to vs, which freely we restore, Then say; What meanes this Monster we here find Vpon our Beach? Whom should this guist adore? Or what Religion's int? Whence is he bred? Or for what cause doth he our Confines tred? 31 When with his new loosd hands to heauen vpreard, Thus Synon: Witnesse you eternal Fires, Thou  , which but late I feard, and all you powers to whom our zeale aspytes, That I hate Greece, and Troy that hath me cheard I am ingra'st too, Try hath my desires: I am a Child of Troy, Greece I desye, Witnesse you Gods, that Synon cannot lye. 32 The false pelgians in great Pallas Her: Diomed   offended, By stealing from her charge with guile vniust, Herrare Palladium for which she extended Reuenge gainst Greece: they to appease hir, must By some Oblation see their guile amended: That her commensed  may be withdrawne From them, whose violence spard not her wne. 33 And now to make the  borne Pallas smile, Whose anger made the Tempests gainst them war, Chalchas  the high Equinall pile, That his huge  might all entrance bar,
Through your percullist Gates (such was his guile) For should you on this Horse print the least Of an offensiue hand (being for her made) You by your  haue your liues betrayd. 34 If you deny it entrance through your wals, Or this vnweildy frame in ought despise, Well guarded Troy by Pallas anger fals, The Greekes returne, and long-liu'd  dies: But if this Steede for whom the  cals Pierce through your  mure, or if it rise And mount aboue your wals, to Pallas shrine, Troy still shall stand, and Greece the wracke is thine? 35 Priam and his consederate Kings shall then To Sparta, and Meceane the Greekes pursue, Deuast their losty spyring Cittis, when The clamorous Land shall their destruction rue, Loosing by Troy whole infinites of men, Witnesse you Gods, poore Synons words are true, Such lookes, such teares, such protestations chiefe, Wins in all Troy remorse: the King beliefe. 36 What many a well-rig'd barke, and armed Keele, What not the bloudy edge of ten whole yeare, To make Troy tast inconstant Fortunes wheele, Vlisses wisedome, nor Achilles Speare, What not King Diomeds through piercing Steele? All this did periurd  with a teare; Bold (whilst all the rowt on Synon gaze) a dread portent that doth all Troy amaze. 37 Along the troubled Billowes towards the shore, Two Blacke-scal'd Serpents on their bellyes glide, at whose approach the foaming Surges rore, These ery Serpents to the Beach applyde, and in Laocons bloud who that time wore The Priest-hoods roabes, their arming Scales they dide: Their winding traines, they with loud hissinges roule About his breast, till they inlarg'd his Soule.
38 The Monster-multitude before dismayd At the recourse of these infernall Snakes, Thinke bold Laocon to be iustly payd, Because he yet his harmefull Iauelin shakes, Some Cables fetch, some with their Leauers stayd The Pondrous Engine which deepe urrowes rakes Along the Earth: others the Wals hurle downe To giue the Horse free passage to the Towne. 39 Wide stand the yron-bard gates, whilst all the rout Buckle to worke, the fatall Muchine climes, Ththronged Bulwarkes (big with Souldiers stout) Ready to be deliuered: hallowed rimes, The Virgins sing, and nimbly dance about, Myneruas Steed, the wonder of these times: Thinking themselues boue others highly blest, That can be more officious then the rest. 40 Foure times the Brazen Horse entring, stuck fast Anenst the ruinde guirdle of the Towne, Foure times was armour heard (yet vnagast) The fatall Beast with sacred wreathes they Crowne, (Sunke in blind ignorance) and now at last, Before Mineruaes shrine, they place it downe: In Himnes and Feasts the ominous day they spend. Offring to her that must their liues defend. 41 Meane time heauen turnes. night from the Ocean fals, Inuoluing with blacke darkenesse, earth, and ayre, And call the Gracian craft about the wals, The scattred Troians slumber, far from care, and now his Pilots (great Atrides cals,) Who backe to Tenedos with speed repayre: The Vniuersall Phalanx lands in hast, And through the silence of the Moone are past. 42 Now startles Synon, and a flaming-brand, He wafts from top of one of  Towers, Which like a Beacon in the night must stand To guide the Greekes, and their nocturnall powers,
Then with a Key graspt in his fatall hand, Feareless, he through the palped darknesse scowres To the big bellied Stallion, turnes the spring, and through the doore the Harnest Grecians fling. 43 First, blacke-hayrd Pyrrhus fixes in the ground, His Oaken Speare, and from the loft he slydes, Vlisses next, yet halting of his wound, and then the younger of the two Atrides: Tysandar from the structure next doth bound Thoas and Athanas, two warlike guides: With Stheuelus downe by a Cable fall, and bruisde with leaping, on the Pauement sprall. 44 Pelidus followes these, and then the man That in his braine first cast this fatall mould, Epeus th'enginer, whom Synon than Did in his blacke and penurd arms in fould Their sweatty browes, they with the darknesse fan, Each chearing vp his Mate with courage bould: Strip their bright Swords, by whose quicke glimering light, They find their way in the darke star-lesse night. 45 The Citty sunke in Wine and Mirth they'nuade, Slaughter the Watch that on the ground lie spred, Then through the broken Wals (but late decayde) The Generals Army is by Synon led, And Agamemnons coulours are displayde, Now tumults and confusions first are bred: Hauocke begins, loude showtes and clamors rise, Lifting their Tragicke vprore through the skyes. 46 Heauens lamps were halfe burntout, t'was past midnight When to Aeneas in his bed appear'd Sad Hector,  and wan, full of affright, His hayre clotterd with bloud, his ruffled Beard Hectors ghost Disordred, all those deepe caru'd wounds in sight, Which in defence of Try and his indeard: Were graude vpon his flesh, behind him fall, Those thongs, that drag'd him round about Troyes wall.
47 Oh, how much from that great King-killer chang'd, Hye spirited Hector, when being proudly deckt In great Achilles spoyles, he freely rang'd Through guards of Steele, whilst from his Helme reflect Trophies of Greece: Oh me! How much estrang'd, From him that did all Asiaes pride protect, Euen to their Fleet the Achiue Kings pursue, And mongst their ships round Bals of Wild-fire flew. 48 When to the sleeping Prince approaching nye, He with a sigh from his decpe intrailes fetcht, Thus sayes. (Thou Goddesse sonne, Aeneas flye) And from these burnings, that by this are stretcht Quite o're your glorious buildings, climbing hye, Deliuer thee: the Arme of warre hath retcht Euen to the Crest of Troy, and with one blow, Giuen it a sad and certaine outhrow. 49 Greece hath your wals, the Vniuersall roofe Of Troy is sunke and falne, her bearers fayld, Destruction that hath houered long aloose, Hath ceaz'd her towers, and her spires auayld, Could might haue kept her, by the manly proofe Of this right hand, the Prisoner had bin bayld: But Troy (alas) is sentenc'st, and must dye, Then from her funerall Flames (Aeneas flye.) 50 To thee her Gods and Reliques she commends Thee, that must her posterity ruiue, For though her glory heere in seeming end, Yet dying Troy in thee is kept aliue, Now cleaues the earth, and the sad Ghost discends, Aeneas with dull sleepe begins to striue: And waking, heares a noise of clattering Warre, And many  Clamors,  and farre. 51 When mounting on a Turret, he might spy The Citty all on Flame, and by the light, A thousand seuerall Conflicts: sparkles flye As farre as to the Sea, the waues shine bright,
And now at length he sees, Synon can lie, His Treasons manifest, still this blacke night Clamors of men, and Trumpets, clangors grow, Whilst with warme recking blood the chanels flow. 52 Aeneas armes in hast, graspes in his hand A two-edg'd Semiter to guard his life, Knowes not to whom to run, or where to stand, In euery  is danger, rage, and strife, Yet longes for skirmish: and on some proud band To proue his strength, now whilst the tumults rife: For since th'Achiue fires such splendor giue, To dye in armes, seemes sweeter then to liue. 53 Behold, where from the forraine slaughter flying Panthus Otri∣ades. Panthus Otriades, Priest of the Sunne? Scoures through the streetes: Aeneas him espying, Cals to him thus. Whether doth Panthus run? What meane these flames, these grones of people dying? This frightfull iarte of battailes new begun? When Panthus thus: Aeneas lets away, Of Troy and vs, this is the latest day. 54 Troy was, and  was, but they are past, Great Ihoue hath from th'earths bosome swept vs all, Th'insulting Greekes haue conquerd vs at last, And forraine Steele now menases our wall, The Brazen Horse that midst our Meure stickes fast, Hath powrd an army forth: whole thousands fall And drop downe from his sides, whilst Synon stands Warming amidst the flames his treacherous handes. 55 The Gates are ceasd, the broken wals made good With bright Death-pointed Steele, Irruption's bard, Behold my passage was Knee-deepe in blood, Crossing the streete from great Atrides guard, Such as escape this purple falling flood, Fyre or the Sword consumes, our choise is hard: Ruine beguirts vs, and what most we feare We cannot fly, death rageth euery where.
56 Now hurries strong Eneas, madly faring, Through flames, through swords, whether Erinnis cals, Eg'd on by rage and fury, no man sparing, On euery side are fires, wounds, Clamors, brals, To him arm'd Ripheus ioynes (and wonders daring) Iphilus, Hypanis, and Dimas, fals In the same tanke: youthfull Chorebus tride, Doth likewise glister by Aeneas side. 57 Chorebus, who for faire Cassandracs Loue, Came from Megdomia to the Dardan broyles, These seeking, flying death, all dangers proue, And taske their valours to all desperate toyles, To places of most slaughter they remoue, Euen where the Greekes commit most horrid spoyls: Arm'd with this Saw; This onely Captiues cheares, When safetie flyes, all-resting death appeares. 58 Thus seeke they certaine death amidst the hart Of Flame-guilt Troy, whilst the blacke fatall night Flyes hood-winkt twixt the poles, her yron Cart Rusty with darkenesse, oh what Mortall wight Can halfe the terror of that houre impart, Such howles, sighs, grones, wounds, slaughters & afright: In euery street, Liues-blood, death, murder, feare, The reeking Faulchion, and the fatall Speare. 59 With Arm'd Androgeos they encounter first, Androgeos. Androgeos who mistakes them for his mates, And cheares them thus, we haue already burst, and made irruption through the batterd Gates, Now let your Swords that for their liue-blouds thurst, Glut them with purple healths, behold their Fates: But when from them he lookes some fyre apply, With armed hands vpon his traynes they fly. 60 And put them all to massacre: the whiles Chorebus sayes. Some comforts in despaire, Fortune vpon our first endeuours smiles, The Foes are vanquisht, and we victors are,
Then come; Make vse of their Pelasgian guiles, Put on their armes, and to their Guards repayre: Their proper armes shall gainst themselues contend, Where vertue fayles, vse fraud, (to God and friend.) 61 With that he dons Androgeos shining Caske, Which like a Bearded Commet glisters farre, The rest in forraine Helmes theyr faces maske, And mingled with the Greekes, began new warre, Still Fortune smiles on their Nocturnall taske, Where Greekes with Greekish armes confounded are: And mongst their frighted guards, great vprore growes, Since from their Friends, they cannot ken theyr Foes. 62 A thousand fall to Hell, a thousand fly, Some to the Nauy, others to the shore, and many Pale-fast Greekes affray de to dye Run to the Horse where they were lodg'd before, and in his darke conceited Entrayles lye, See fayre Cassandra from the Temple dore, Drag'd by blacke Myrmidons: her Son espyes Frightfull Chorebus, and that way he flyes. 63 They after him, adismall conflict now Growes in the entrance of the Temple, when Theyr friends mistaking theyr disguised brow, Route from the battayle, meetes by strength of men Huge stones, and Webs of Lead stounding below Their Greece-arm'd Friendes, whose craft's deceiu'd agen: (By Ignorance) they call theyr friends on hye, and by theyr tongues the grcians them descry. 64 For now rough Aiax reuels in the place, The two Atrides with their armed Bands, And sly Vlisses too: yet in the face Of all theyr guards the bold Chorebus stands, The death of Chorobus. Till number o're swayes might: Migdoniaes race Is now extinct by force of thousand hands: Then Ripheus fals, then is bold Dimas brest Through-pierst: so one by one decliue the rest.
65 Alone scapes bold Eneas by a cry Raisde at King Priams Pallace, whether hying More Mutiny and broyles he may espy, More Tragicke sight of wretched Troians dying, The massacre seemes dreadfull in his eye, Before the assaulted Gates are thousands lying: The hauocke did so volent appeare, as had their bin no place of death but there. 66 The vntam'd Mars vpon his Altars grones, Hye crown'd in bloud: some Greekes tho Pallace scale, The Laders cleaue vnto the lettying Stones, Whose Marble Collumns bend, and seeme to faile Beneath the weight of fire and Steele at ones, and still the Banicadoed Gates the' assayle: Where able armed Pyrrhus stands before, Th'inflamed Porch (his armor slack't in gore) 67 The inclosed Princes broyle, doubly pend in With flames and steele, inclosde on enery side With eminent death, yet no irruption win Though they diolue, the hye roofe beautified With Gold and figures (which to touch were sin) The Geometricke ridge of Siluer tride: Fires o're their heads, and drils downe by the wals, Which scalds the Princes as it melting fals. 68 Sterne Pyrrhus sweats, and with Antomedon His fathers Charioter assaults the place, Scarse able to endure the armes they hau on, So ouer-heat with Flames, in whose bright face They stand with naked swords to gaze vpon Those shrinking Monuments the fires imbrace: at length with beames shocking by strength of hand, They shake the wals, vnable to withstand. 69 Which tumbling in, like a Bay-window showes, Whose gaping mouth seemes vast, (oh) now appeares, The gorgeous Courts, whose floore each Lady strowes With her torne garments, haire, and pearly teares,
Still, still, their shrickes and feminine clanger growes, as the Breach waxeth, so increase their feares; Their cries pierce heauen, slake Fire, and soften stones, Yet mooue not Pyrrhus and his Myrmidons. 70 For neyther Priams Guard, the doore of Brasse, Nor trusty Marble can withstand the Foe, But through them all by force of armes they passe The heauy Gates, they from the henges throw, Shiuering theyr plated leaues like paines of Glasse: Which with the fury of theyr burnings glow: and breaking in, the spacious Courts they fill With bloudy Souldiers, who on all sides kill. 71 King Priam, when he saw his Towne inuaded, His Troy sitting in fire, not to be freed, and all those Gods that long had Islium ayded, Shrunke from his helpe, and in his fall agreede, That his farre shining beames at last were faded, and the Vniuerfall hart of Troy must bleede: The larum Bels of death on all sides ringing, His shrieking wife and Daughter bout him clinging. 72 Expecting helpe from him in whom remaind No helpe at all, he first dissolues in teares, But casting vp his eye to haue complaind His griefe to Heauen, his Sword and Helme appeares, Hung by the Walles, with rust and Canker staynd, Now burdens to his arme, in former yeares Easy as Silkes, his griefe conuerts to rage, He dons those armes, forgetfull of his age. 73 To whom the sad Queene with wet eyes thus sayes: What meanes my wofull Lord in his weake hand To tosse this burdenous Steele? There is no prayse For men to fight, when the high Gods withstand, Liu'd puissant Hector in these Fatall dayes, Yet could not his stronge Limbs protect thy Land: Much lesse these Saplesse branches, poore and bare, Then let the reuerent Priam keepe his Chayre.
74 Heere at these holy Altars let vs cling, The Gods, if they be pleasd, our liues may guard, If not, we all will perish with the King, and die at once, there shall not one be spard: Behold, where broken through th'all-slaughtring ring Of Pyrrhus Myrmidons, Slaues rough and hard: The young Polytes well-ny breathlesse rons, Polytes, one of Priams best-lou'd Sons. 75 Through many an Entry and blind-turning path, The burning Pyrrhus hath the Lad pursude, Longing vpon the Youth to vent his wrath, now both at once before the King intrude, The slaughterd-thoughted Greeke, all bale and scath In the Childs bloud his satall Blade imbrude Which plucking from his wounds: in the same place Sparkled the Sons bloud in the Fathers face. 76 To whom the arm'd King thus: You Gods aboue, Whose diuine eyes all deedes of horror see, as you are ust, and actes of pitry loue, Behold how this rude man hth dealt by me, What God (worthy Heauens Pallace) can approue So blacke a deede as this, that's done by thee? Before the Fathers eye the Child to kill, The death of Polytes. and in his face his Innocent bloud to spill. 77 Thou art a Bastard, not Achilles Son, Of some she Wolfe, or Hyrcan Tygresse bred, not (to be shrin'd in Heauen) would he haue don So horrible a deede, so full of dred, The shame and scandall thou this night hast won, More then Achilles honors shall be spred: Thy Father honor'd, liude and dide in fame, Dishonored thou, shalt perish in thy shame. 78 With that the Iaelin in his hand he threw, Th'vnprofitable strength of his weake arme, Though it had art to guid the Weapon true, It wanted power to doe blacke Pyrrhus harme,
Against the long skirt of his Targe it flew, But the round Bosse, as if composd by charme, Shooke off the ydle steele, which on the barre That tooke the blow, scarce left the smallest scarre. 79 Inflamed Pyrrhus thus to him replies: Priam, thy soule shall straight discend to hell, Euen to the place where great Achilles lyes, And my sad deeds vnto my Father Father, With that (all wrath) in Prisms face he flies) The prostrate King at Ihoues hye Altar fell: With such hot rage he did the King pursue, That though he mist, the whiske him ouerthrew. 80 When being groueled in Polites gore, Grim Pyrrhus with his left hand takes the king, By his white lockes (neuer prophand before, His reuerent head against the ground to ding, His proud right hand a smoaking Curtlax wore, The death of Priam. Which to perpetuall rest must Priam bring: With which against the good old King he tilts, Till his hart bloud flowed much aboue the hilts. 81 This was old Prisms Fate, his fatall end, And ending glory, he that As swayed, Whose spreading Fame did through the earth extend, Liu'd till he saw both him and his betraid, Euen till he had no subiect, Sonne, or friend, And saw Troyes spyres euen with the groundsils laid, Who now before loues golden face lyes dead, A namelesse coarse, a Trunke without a head. 82 All this, when good Aeneas saw from farre The ends of Troy and Priam: burnt, and slaine, And no abatement yet of heat, or warre, To his owne Pallace he returnes againe, Where gathered on a heape together are, His wife Creausa showring teares amaine: His seruants: old Anchises, and his sonne Askanius, these about Aeneas ronne.
83 After some short discourse of their affaires, Aeneas on his backe Anchises takes, For young Askanius he his left hand spares, In his right hand his guardant sword he shakes, Creusa followes close, with teares and Prayers, So through the fire and foe Aeneas makes: He with his sonne and Syre, the right way choose, But in the darkenesse they Creusa loose. 84 Whom missing, they Creusa call alowd, Creusaes death Creusa, for whose safety they'l returne, But sorne blacke Fate doth her in darkenesse shrowd, Either Troyes Funerall fires the Lady burne, Else is she stifled in the Hostile crowd, For her, the Father, sonne, and husband mourne: And seeking her amidst the wrathfull flames, Helenus. They encounter Helenus; who thus exclaimes. 85 Keepe on Aeneas to the Sen shore, The heauens on Troy and vs haue vengeance powred, Onely thy ruind fortunes they restore, They smile on thee, that haue on Priam lowred, The faire Creausa thou shalt see no more, Her, the none-sparing slaughter hath deuowred: But in her stead, the Gods to thee shal giue A wife, in whom deceased Troy shall liue. 86 Follow yon starre, whether his Bearded beames Directs thy Nauigation: on the fand Thousands attend thy conduct through the streames, Whom ruin spares, for thee and thy command, Obserue yon blazing Meteor, whose bright gleames Points thee vnto a rich and fertile Land: Where, after many strange aduentures past, Storme-driu'n Aeneas shall arriue at last. 87 They to a spacious Climate thee restore, Italy A Prouince which the Gods and fates hold best, The Meditteren Sea beats on the shore, With the Scicilian waters, South and East,
The Adriaticke Billowes North-ward rore, With the hye Alpes incompast on the West: These Countries it containes, Latium Liguria, The Climates of Campania and Hetruria. 88 With Fertill I stria and Calabria, Full peopled Craunia and Apentium, Aemilia, else cald Rhomandtola; With Gallia, Cisalpina, and Pycenum, Iapidia, Vmbria, and Venetia, Flauinia, Apulia, Sumnium: All these are Italy, with great Lucania, Which shall in times to come be cald Rhomania. 89 Farewell and thriue, but leaue vs to our Fates: This saide, the Deuine Helenus retires, And shuts himselfe within those fatall gates, Where none commands but foes and raging fires, Aeneas hasts to meet his promist Mates, And on the Coast their fellow-ship desires, Who through the street hewes out a bloody tracke, With old Anchises hanging at his backe. 90 Still stium burnes, nor are the ruthlesse Flames Yet quencht, Ihoues sparpled Alters licke the blood Of slaughtred Priam, the bright vestall Dames Are puld from Pallas Statuë where they stood, About their golden lockes (with lowd exclaimes) Rough souldiers wind their armes, and through a flood Of gore and teares, in which the pauement flowes, Drag them along, that faint beneath their blowes. 91 The young Astianax from that hye Tower, The death of Astianax. On which his Fathers valour oft he saw, Is tumbled headlong on the rough-pau'd flower, His all to bruised limbes lye broke and raw, To wofull Hecuba, in thrust a power Of blood-staind Greekes, without regard or awe, and from her aged armes, snatcht by rude force Polixena, whose beauty begs remorse.
92 Shees hurried to Achilles tombe, where stands Sterne Neptolemus, from top to toc Satued in blood and slaughter, in both hands Wauing a keene glaue, Crimsond in the foe, To bind with Cords her soft armes he commands, That more red liues may on his Faulchion flow: The death of Polyxeua. There the bright Mayde that bands did ill become, He piece-meale howes vpon Achilles tombe. 93 Thus is King Priam and Queene Hecubs race, Extinct in dust, young Palidore alone, The youngest Lad is with the king of Thrace Left in great charge, with Gold and many a Stone Polymnestor K. of Thrace. Beyond all rate, but Polymnestor base, Hearing the pride of Troy was spent and gone, False to the world, and to his friend vntrew, The death of Polidore. To gaino that wealth, the louely Infant slew. 94 Whose death when Hecuba reuenged had, By tearing out the periur'd Tyrants eyes, First she records the beauty of the Lad, Then all the glories she beneath the skies Possest before, which makes her Franticke-mad, On her sloine husband, daughters, sonnes, she crics: Troy she bewaild, and fatall Greece she curst, The death of Hecuba Till her great heart (with griese surcharged) burst. 95 Ten yeares, ten months, twelue dayes this siege indured, In which of Greece before the Towne were slame, The number of Greckes & Troians slaine at the siedge. Fourescoute hundred and sixe thousand, all inured To steely warre: Of Troians that maintaine The honour of their Citty, well assured, (Besides the number that were prisoners tane) Six hundred fifty, and six thousand tride, Omitting those that in the last night dide. 96 Chiualrous Hector voyd of fraud or slight, Eighteene great Kings slew by his proper hands, No aduantagious oddes he vsd in fight, Therefore his fame spreds farre, through forraigne lands,
Three Kings to do the amorous Paris right Fell by his Bow, next rankt Achilles stands: Who (besides Troylus and great Hector) slew Seauen puissant Kings at Troy (if Fame speake true) 97 Foure Kings beside the Sagitary fell By Diomed, two by Aeneas lost Their precious liues, though many moe fought well, Their warlike deeds are not so farte ingrost, Blacke Pyrrhus acts aboue the rest excell, Who thinking mongst them to be praised most: Three Royall liues his Tragicke wrath obayd, Ironia. An aged King, a Woman, and a Mayd. 98 Not how two worthy Greekes in words contended, Who should the rich Vulcanian armor haue, Ouid metam. Now how from Aiax, who had Greece defended, Th'impartiall Iudges to Vlisses gaue, To proue that Counsell aboue strength extended, And had more power the Argine Campe to saue: In griese of which great losse, Aiax grew mad, Slaine by the sword that he from Hector had, The death of Aiax. 99 Nor of Vlisses trauels twice ten yeares, Nor of his loue with Circe the faire Queene, Who by her spels transform'd him and his Pecres, And kept him thence, where he desird t'haue beene, With faire Penelope, Fam'd mongst the spheares In liuing chast: though Princes full of spleene Possest her kingdome, and her pallace ceaz'd, VVhom (wanting power) she by delaies appeasd. 100 Nor how he after twenty winters came, Telegonus son to Vlisses and Circe, o∣therwise cald Calipso. And in disguise his constant Lady proued, How he by armes releast the beautious Dame, And all her suiters from his Land remoued, Vlisses slain by his Bastard son Telegonus. Nor how Telegonus won with the Fame Of him whom most the witch Calipso loued From his faire Mother Circe himselfe vvith-drevv, And vnavvares his Royall Father slevv.
101 Nor how King Naulus laide Traines on the Seas, To aenge him on the Gracians for his sonne Palamides, whose death did much displease The aged Prince, since twas by treason donne, Nor how such wandering Greekes as he could ceaze, Who on his shores their ship-wrackt vessels ronne, Nauls destroyd, and vnto ruine brought, Since they his sonnes deere life esteemed nought. 102 Nor how King Agamemnon home returning, Was by his faire wife Clitemnestra slaine, The death of Agmemnon How false Egistus in the Queenes loue burning, Plotted with her to shorten the Kings raigne, Nor bow Horestes for his Father mourning Grew mad, and slew Egistus that had laine The death of Cletemenestra With his faire Mother, whō when he had caught her, Vnchild-like he did with his owne hands slaughter. 103 Nor how blacke Pyrrhus Hellens daughter stal The faire Her mione, she that before Was to Horestes troth'd, and should Sance fayle, Haue bin espousd to him, who at the doore Of Delphos Templeflew him without blae, The death of Pytrhus. Staining Apoltos shrine with Pyrrhus gore: Not how that face for which the whol world wrangled The death of Hellen. To see it chang'd with age, her selfe she strangled. 104 Nor how the Greekes after their bloody toyles, Antenor left to inhabit raced Troy, And after th'end of their sad Tragicke broyles, All Asiaes wealth within their flect inioy, Robbing the Towne of all her richest spoyles, Whose hye Clowd-peircing spyres the flames destroy, nor how Aeneas doth his forces gather, And ships with his young son, and aged Father. 105 Rigging to soa these two and twenty sayle, That fetcht the fire brand that all Troy inflamd, The selfe-same shippes in which the Troian stale The Spartan Queene, gainst whome all Greece exclaimd,
Nor of Queene Didoes loue and Tragicke bate, Nor of Aeneas trauels nobly fam'd: Nor how Andromache was Captaine led, Left to the hot lust of the Conquerors bed. 106 With whom Cassandra was inforst to goe With Helenus that kend deuinest things, And al these sad proceedings did fore-show, and propheside to Troyes confedered Kings, Nor of King Dimeds sad ouerthrow, Of Albions Isle first knowne, my Muse next sings, Her Chariot now I can no further driue, Brittaine from conquerd Troy, we next deriue. Dolopes are a people of Thessaly, in the borders of Phthi∣olis, out of which prouince Vlisses made choyce of his Guard. Pallas whose name we have often vsed, some take to be the Pausa. in Atti∣cis Heredotus in Melpom. Apollonius lib. 4. Arg. nanc. Daughter of Neptune and Tritonis, and liued in the time of Giges. Others hold her to be sprung of Ihoues braine, as wee haue before remembred.—Palluda quandam Cum patris è capite exilijt Clarissia patuam lauerunt Tritonis aquae. The like many others affirme, as also that when she leapt out of slefichorus Lucias. Ihoues brain, at the saide time it rained a shewer of Gold on the Earth. Of her birth many writers differ, some affirme her Strabo. lib. 14. to be the Daughter of riton: others to berather the Daugh∣ter of upiter & Thetis: Others of Craunus, differing from Apollodors. Athenodor izantius. zozes Cic. de nature deorum their opinions, therfore I hold with Cicero, who auers, that there were more of the names. One of the Mother of Apollo, a second borne by Nyle. and adored of the Egyptians, a third of the braine of upiter, a fourth of Jupier and Ceriphe, the Daughter of Oceanus, whom the Arcadians call Cerin, and the Inuentor of the Chariot. A fift that was supposed to kill hir Father, to perserue her virginity. Pallas and Mineta were one, she was also by some called Callimachus in Himn. Homer. Simonides Coe∣us 2. geneal. Isacius. Hor I. carnium Tiloma. Ihouis filia gloriosa Tritonia. Both Greece and Troy highly honered her, she is saide to inuent Armes, and to haue aided her Father Jpiter in the destruction of, the Tytanoyes, which the poets call Gigo∣mantichia. Of whom it is thus remembred. Palluda bellorum studijs Cautanus amicam è Ihoue progenitam magno quae destruit vrbes. Stesicherus.
And of another thus: Sed prius illa fugis fumtia soluit equorum Calli. Colla lauans alti fluctibus Oceani. And so much of Pallas or Minctua, to whom the Troians de∣dicated their chiefe Temple. Migdonia is a part of Phrigia, next Troas by the Riuer Rhindacus, of this Countrey Prince Chorebus, that loued Cassandra, was called Mygdonides. The Scaean sbore: Scaea is a gate of Troy, opening to the West, where Laomedon was buried, of that Gate the Sea & shore adiacent, beare the name of Scaea. The Names of the 18. Kinges slaine by Hector, are thus, though somewhat corruptly by anient Writers remembred: K. Archilochus, K. Protesilaus, K. Patroclus, K. Menon, Dares. Dictes. K. Protenor, K. Archimenes, K. Polemon, K. Epistropus, K. Ecedius, K. Doxius, K. Polixenus, K. Phibus, K. An∣thiphus, K. Cenutus, K. Polibetus, K. Humerus, K. Fumus, K. Exampitus Achilles slew 7. Kings, K. Cupemus, King Yponeus, K. Plebeius, K. Austerus, K. Cymonius, K. Mem∣non, K. Neoptolemus, besides Hector, Troylus, and Mar∣gareton, with other of Priams Bastard Sonnes. Some likewise, contrary to the assertion of Ouid and others, affirme that Paris slew the Emp. Palumides, Aiax and A∣chilles. Aeneas slew K. Amphimachus, and K. Mereus, the faire Greeke whom Homer so much loued. yrrhus the son of Achilles, slew K. Priam, an aged man, Queene Penthisi∣lea, awarlike woman, Polytes a young Lad, and Polyxena a beauteous Maide. K. Diomed slew the Sagittary, K. Anti∣pus, K. Escorius, K. Obstinus, and K. Protenor. Many o∣thers were slaine in the disordred battailes, but how, or by whom, it is not particularly registred. Of Vlisses loue to Circe Ouid in diuers places toucheth it, part whereof I he thus Englishe. (Calipso as they on the sea banke stood, 2. De Arte A∣mand. Casting her eyes vpon the Neighbour flood, Desires the acts and bloudy deeds to beare, Done by th'Odrisean Captaines sword and speare, When holding twixt his fingers a white wand, Vlisses & Circo What she requests he drawes vpon the sand, Heres Troy (quoth he) (for here the Towne is ment) Thinke Simois that, Imagin this my Tent, Here Scithian Rhesus Tents are pitched hie, This way his Horsemen slaine, returned I.
Here Dolon dyde, when on the suddaine oe, A climbing Waue the shewers doth ouerthrow, And as the drops vpon his worke doth fall, It washt away his Tents, his Troy, and all: To whom the Goddesses dares Vlisses trust These sencelesse violent waues that are so curst, And darestthou with these waters be annoyd, By whom such great Names are so soone destroyd? How could her magicke potions Circe please, De remedio A∣moris lib. 1. When ise Vlisses Ships float on the Seas, All exorcisms the louing Witch doth try, To stay the Greekes, whilst he away doth fly. All Spels and Charmes the louing Witch assaide, That such hot flames might not her thoughs inuade, But spight the cunning Hag, and charme her best, Vlisses flies, Loue scornes to be supprst: She that Mens shapes could from themselues estrange, Had not the power her owne desires to change. Tis sayd, that when Vlisses would away With such like words she did intreat his stay: What I hop't earst, I doe not now intreat, That you with me would make a lasting seate And be my Husband, yet if I my race Call but to minde, I might de serue that place. Despising me, a worthy Wife you shunne, A Goddesse, and the Daughter of the Sunne, All that I beg, my humorous Loue to feede, Is onely this: you would not make such speede. Stay but a while, it is an easte taske, What lesse thing can you grant? What lesse I aske? Behold, the deepe Sea rageth: Neptune feare, Stay till a Calme, and then begin to steare, Why shouldst thy fly? Thy fore sheate, and thy Mizen, Why swell they with the Wind? No Troy is risen, For thee againe to sacke, heare are no brals, No man thy Mates, and thee to battaile cals: Heere true Loue raines, heere peace is firmely grounded, In which my selfe, and onely I am wounded, My heart is thine, and shall be thine for ay, And all my Land is in thy Kingly sway: She speakes, he lancheth, and the selfe same wind, Mm 2
That fils his sayles, blowes thence the words and mind. Of Circe, otherwise cald Calisso, hee begot Telegons, who Zczeshistor. 16. Chil. 5. Hesiodusin Theog. Homerus libr. odiss. Dionisius Milc∣tus. afterward unawares slew his Father Vlisses. Shee was the Daughter of the Sun and Perses. Others haue imagined hir the Daughter of Hecate, or of Aeeta: others to bee the Daughter of Asteripes and Hiperion, as Orpheus in Argonantis. Aeetae affinis coniunctaque sanguine, solis filia quam proprio dixerunt nomine Circen Astropey, patuus Hiperiony est auus, illa, &c. She had by Vlisses these sons, Agrius & Latinus: Telegons Hesiodus in Theog onea. Lycophron. and Auson, of whom Ausonia (alias Italia) bears the Name, with Casiphon, with Marsius, of whom the Marsiaus tooke Name, and Rhomanus: Her Toomb was in one of the Phar∣macusan Islands, not far from Salamine. Diomedes, the manner of whose death wee haue not tou∣ched Strabo lib. 9. Tymaus siculus in our History, was kild by Danaus, whose Countrey hee had before freed, and in the same slaine a huge Dragon, vvho threw his body with all the statues that were reared to his ho∣nor (Ingratefully) into the sea where they perished. Of Clitemnestraes Adultery Ouid saith: De arte Aman∣di. 2. De remedio A∣moris. I. Whilst Agamemnon liud with one contented, His Wife liude chast, and neither it repented. His secret blowes her heart did so prouoke, VVanting the Sword, she with the Scabberd stroke: She heares of Criseis, and the many Iarres About Lyrnesis, to increase the warres, And therefore meere reuenge the Lady Charmes, To take Thiestes in her amorous Armes. And in another place; VVhy could not his blind lusts Aegistus bridle? will you needs know, th' Adulterer was still Idle, When others laboured Islion to annoy, And lay strong siedge about the wals of Troy, Abroad he war'd not; nor at home he law'd, His thoughts no nauall office could applaud: what he could doe he did, (for so it prou'd) Least he should nothing doe, he therefore lou'd, So is this loue begot, so is he bred, So cherisht, so at length be gathers head, The end of the 15. Canto.
Argumentum HAuing the sight of our wisht harbor gaind, The yeares from Brute to Christ: what famous Kinges Gouernd in Britan, & how long they raignd, From Christ to Norman William, and what things Of specill note were in their daes containd, In a briefe Chronicle, our Muse next sings: Much matter in few words: swift runs our Glasse, We many Ages in one instant passe. ARG. 2. A Genealogie exactly found, From the first man, to Norman Williā crownd. CANTO. 16. 1 ADam got Seth: Seth, Enos: Enos, Cayne, Cayne, got Melaliel: Iareth next begon, From Iareth Enoch, that to Heauen was tane, He got Methusalem, whose line doth ron To Lamech: of him Noah, and from Noah came Ihapheth: then Cichem, who was Iapheths Son: Cichem got Cipre: Cipre, Creete, and so Creete, Saturne: from whose braunch great Ihoue doth grow.
2 Dardanus is immediate Heyre from Ihoue, Dardanus Son to Jupiter and Electra. And by Candame, got Erichthonius, Erichthon Tros: Tros Ilion: next him stroue Laomedon, and he got Priamus, And when the Greekes from Troy Aeneas droue, He by Creusa had Askanius: Who after (Carthaginean Dido past) Vp through the Riuer Tiber ayles at last. 3 At Hostiaes Port (the place the Gods behight) Aeneas Landes: Euander him receiues The Latines King, whose Daughter at first sight Aeneas loues, and for her sake, bercaues The Tuskayne King of life in single fight, Turnus King of Tuskaine Turnus being dead, the fayre Lauinia leaues Her virgine vowes, by whom the Troian Prince Siluius begot: and Siluius, Brutus since. 4 Brutes Mother in her painefull throwes deceast, (H) his glancing Shaft his Father slew, For which with melancholy griefes infest From Italy, the Prince himselfe withdrew, Ten thousand voluntary men vnprest, Consort him, strange aduentures to pursue: Whom Corineus with many Troians more Mcetcs, and assists, new Countries to explore. 5 Brute (Grecian Pandras who denide him way, And through his spacious Kingdome passage free) O're-comes in battaile, but denyes to stay Till he more Coasts and various Clymats see, Fayre Innogen, a Virgin fresh as May, Innogen Daughter to Pandras. He marrieth, and with Pandras doth agree, For her rich Dower to haue a royall fleete, Well furnisht for his Trayne: with all things meete. 6 He past Alcides Pillers, euen to Guall, Landing in Guien, Guffor the proud King Denyes prince Brute to hunt, but (Mauger all) He chac't his Deere, and made his Buckes to spring,
Thence, Albion he discries, like a white wall Washt with the sea, and longs his fleet to bring To a safe Harbour, where he might suruay, The long sought Isle where he his boues must lay. 7 When Ayoth iudged Israell, in the yeare Hugh Genesis and Harding. Threescore and twelue, of his command and state, Aegiptian Dana daughters lauded heere After long search, who for they had of late, Theyr nine and forty husbands by th'austere Iniunction of their Sire, brought to sad Fate: Albion of Al∣bania the el∣dest Sister. Were in a Mastlesse ship to exile throwne, And landinging heere, cald this Isle Albion. 8 Some say of these Viragoes spirits begot Gyants, that were of huge and monstrous size, The yeare of the world a∣boue the line./ The yeare be∣fore hri: vn∣der the line. Who when they grew to stature, spared not Asfinity, for Sonne with Mother lies, Brother with Sister: so the learned Scot Marian, doth in his Chronicles comprize: And of these lustfull Ladies, in small while, Twelue thousand Gyants peopled this large Ile. 9 PRince Brute with Corineus doth Albion enter, Brute. At Totnes, thirty monstrous Gyants kils, And after much and dangerous aduenter, 2855./1108. Builds London (cald new Troy:) his Throne he fils Twenty foure yeares, then payes his last debenter To Nature; Brittaine he to Locrine wils: Scotland to Albanact, Wales, Camber swayes, 2878./1085. Israell was iudg'd by Samuell in their dayes. 2 Locrine raign'd twenty yeares, his wife him slew, Locrine. Because he Sabrine lou'd, and her forsooke, 2889./1074. Mother and Child bold Guendolina threw Into the Seuerne streames, who there name tooke From Sabrine. In his dayes young Dauid grew, 2889./1704. And with a Sling the great Goliah strooke: At Locrines death, sterne Guendoline begun, Guendoline. Her husband she succeeds; and her, her Sonne.
3 Madan rul'd forty yeares, and in his dayes Madan. Was beautious Absolom by Ioab slaine, 2916./1047. Memprisius twenty yeares the Scepter swayes, Meprisius. Procuring first his Brother Manlius bane2954./1009. Whom Madan lou'd, and had intent to raise: In Lust and ryot he consum'd his raigne, For which iust heauens their righteous vengeance powred, Memprisius hunting was by Wolues deuoured. 4 Him his sonne Ebranke in the Throne succeeds, Ebranke. Who gouernes threescore happy Summers thorow, 2972./991. Famous for many charitable deeds, He builded Yorke, Dunbar, and Edenborowe, Brute Green Next him Brute Greene-shield don'd th'Imperiall weeds, After twelue happy yeares his subiects sorrow 3033./930. For his vntimely Fate, and in his raigne, B'Elias prayer the Priests of Ball were slaine. 3034./929. 5 L'Eill, Brutes sonne, raignd fiue and twenty yeares Leill. 3046/917. And Carleil built, then did his seat resigne To young Lud Hurdibras, lou'd of his Peeres, Lud Hurdi∣bras. Who gouernd Britaines Scepter twenty nine, He Winchester and Canterbury reares, With Shafts-bury, then seekes a Throne deuine: 3071/892. Whose Obits were in Brittaine long bemoned, 3097/896 The propher Zachary in his dayes was stoned. 6 BLadud, Luds sonne raignd next, and Bath erected, Bladud. A Sorcerer, and did attempt to flye, And hauing twenty yeare the Realme protected, He brake his necke downe from a Steeple hie, 3109./854. Amos and Amazia were directed In those dayes by the spirit of Prophesie. Leir. Leir next him, in whose time (as Bookes say) 3123/840. Ionas three dayes in the Whales belly lay. 7 Leir built Leicester, forty yeares was Crownd, Famous in his three Daughters and their Loue, The youngest most suspected, faithfull found, And they that promist most, least thankefull proue,
Kindest Cordeilla that did most abound Cordeilla. In filiall zeale next Leir sits aboue:1358./805. Morgan and Cunedadgius two false Peeres, Morgan. Cunedadgius Depose their Aunt after fiue vnhappy yeares. 8 They ioyntly raigne, till Cunedadgius slew His Brother Morgan in Glamorgan-sheere, 3162./801. (From whom the Title of that Country grew) And after gouernd three and thirty yeare, Now Naum preacht: Riuallo doth pursue Riuallo. The Kingdome next, a Prince that had no peere: In his dayes Propheside, Esay, Micheas, 3196./767. The Prophets Adad, Amos, and Oseas. 9 Forty six yeares he gouernd: In his raigne Rome was first built, wise Sibell gaue forth Sawes, King Ezechy by God heal'd of hispaine, Had fifteene yeares life promist: for some cause The Sun full ten Degrees, turnd backe againe: Thales Milesius to the Greekes gaue Lawes: In Brittaine it raind blood, Riuallo wained, Gurgustius. And eight and thirty yeares Gurgustius raigned. 3242./721. 10 Now Ioel taughts, his Iliads Homer wrate, 3252/711. And Glaucus Chius Sodering first inuented, Sicillius next Gurgustius takes the state, Sisillus. Forty nine yeares he gouernes well contented, 3279./084. Amon in Iuda raind: Zaleucus sate Iudge on his sonnes eye: Ieremy lamented For the sad Tragedy of King Iosias, 3299/668. Now flourish Olda, Baruch, Sophonius. 11 Now Phalleris in Agrigentine swayde, 3311./652. And thrust Perilles in his brazen Bull, To tast the torment he for others made, Iago next Sisillius makes vp full Iago. Twenty fiue yeares, then in his Tombe was laide, Nabuchadnezar sought to disanull 3327./636 The Hebrew Lawes. susannaes fame increased, By th'Elders wrongd, by Daniels doome released.
12 Fifty foure yeares Kinimachus was knowne 3351./612. After ago in the Brittish Chaire, Kinimachus Arion with his Harpe was o're-Boord throwne, Whom through the Seas the pittious Dolphin bare: Bell was cald God, and fore him rumpets blowne, And the three Children in the robes they ware 3369./594. Cast in the fiery Furnace, now I gesse, Liud Solon: Sapho the sweet Potesse. 13 Annaximander th' Horoscope first made, Gorbodug. Aesope in Birds and Beasts, first figured men: Next King Kinimachus, Gorbodug swayde 3404/559. The Brittish Scepter: In the Lyons den Daniell was cast. Now Cyrus did inuade 3417./546. Cressus of Lydia, t'was the season when Zacharias, Aggeus, Malack Propheside, 3430./533. And the chast Lucresse by her owne hand dide. 14 Next Gorbodug, Ferrex and Porrex raigned, Forrex After fiue yeares, bold Porrex Ferrex slew. For which their Mother Porrex much disdained, Porrex And in his blood did her blacke hands imbrew, 3467./496. After their death sedition was maintained Full one and fifty yeares, whilst no man knew Th'imediate heyre, and whilst these wars were norisht 3475./488 Darius, Xerxes, and Queene Hestor flourisht. 15 Th' Athenian Sophocles, a Tragicke Poet, Plato, Cratinus, Aristarchus, were 3513./450, All Commicke Writers, as their workes best show it: Empedocles of Athens, did acquiere Musickes full ground, and made the world to know it, Parmenides made Lodgicke first appeare: Which in Mount Cancasus he first deuised, 3522./441, Esdras the Scribe the Scriptures now comprised. 16 MVlmutius Dunwallo, sonne and heyre To Cloten Duke of Corweyle's next instated, Mul∣mutius. He did the foure broad High-wayes first repaire, First Crown'd: Paules Church first built and consecrated,
And after forty yeares from Brittaines Chaire To a new Throne in hea he was translated, 3550./413. Now Socrates th' Athenian hea charmes, Demosthenes, famous for Arts and Armes. 17 BEline and Bren the Brittish Crowne deuide, Beline. Bren. Being by their Mother (after wars) attoned, Whilst Bren in forraigne Armes his valour tride, Beline built Belinsgate: all Denmarke groned Beneath his yoake, Bren (to the Galles alide,)  3563./400. Sackt Rome, burnt Delphos, and was after stoned, With Hayle and Thunder-stroke, much blood was spilt, In Italy ten stately Townes he built. 18 Twenty sixe yeares hetwixt them they supply 3568./395. The Crowne and Sceptet: Dionisius raignd In Sicily, Damn and Pythias try Their mutuall friendship. Xenophn maintained His schoole in Athens, Plat prized higher His Accademy rear'd: Now was ordained 3586./377. For King Mansolus, by the Carian Qneene, A stately Tombe rankt mongst the wonders nine. 19 GVrguintus, Belins sonne, ninteene yeares made Gurguintus. The Brittaines homagers, by euen Tradition, 3588/375. Aristotle liu'd, whose Fame shall neuer fade, Sonne to Nichomachus, a great Physition, 3595./368. Now Macedonian Phillip gan t'inuade His neighbour-Kings in many an expedition, 3604/359. The Noble Marcus Curtius for Romes sake, Arm'd at all points, leapt in the Curtian Lake. 20 GVintheline six and twenty yeares made good Guintheline. His right in Brittaine, Mercia his faire wife  3607/356. Deisde the Mercian Lawes: by Tibur flood The clouds raind stones: after Darius strife, 3628./311. Which ended in effsion of much blood, Cecilius. Kimar. By poyson Alexander lost his life: Next Guintheline, seauen yeares Cecilius raigned, Next him three yeares Kimar the state maintained. 3633./330.
21 Nine yeares Elanius raign'd, Morindus eight, Elanius. Morindus. Deuour'd of a Sea-monster: In their dayes Onias sonne of Taddus, reacht the height3,652./311. Of the Priests Office: Gorbomannus swayes Gorbomanus 3660. Eleauen full yeares, a Prince assisting right,3660./303. (Symon Onyas sonne), the Habrewes raise Archigall. To the Priest-hood, next iust Gorboman, Fierce Archigall to Tyranize began.3671./292. 22 After fiue yeares depos'd, his second Brother Succeeded in the stile of Elidure, Elidure A vertuous Prince, there sat not such another In Brittaines Chaire, in life seuere and pure; Fiue yeares himselfe did Archigallo smother, 3676./287 And his deposing patiently endure: At length by Elidurus met and knowne, Archigallo. To Archigallo. he resignes his Throne.3681./282. 23 Ten yeares the twice-Crown'd Archigallo now, Gouernes the State in Honour, and then dying, To Elidure againe the Brittans bow, Elidure. After two yeares his Brothers him defying, Keepe him in bonds: the Brittaine Peeres allow, 3691./272. Their double rule, nine yeares their Conquesttrying:Vigenius. Peridure. Vigenius and Peridure are past, 3693./270. And Elidure the third time Crown'd at last,  Elidure. 24 Raigning foure yeares. In this forepassed state Liu'd Epyre pyrrhs, and Lisimachus, 3702./261. The High-priest Eleasar chus'd oflate, Receiues th'Egiptian league: Now breath Seleucus And Ptolomy; now by the Roman Senate Siluer was coyned first, Theos-Antiochus 3684./279. In Syria raign'd, blood sprang out of a Well, And from the Clowds Milke in abundance fell. 23 MAnasses liu'd high Priest among the Iewes, 3705./258. Ten yeares ruld Gorboman, Morgan ,Gorboman. Morgan. Emerianus. Emerianus next to him, pursues The Diadem: a Tyrant full of spleene,
After seauen yeares deposd: Inall insues, 3736./227. A temperate Prince, who twenty yeares was seene In Brittaines Throne: Amilchar Carthage swaide, Illyrian Teuca id proud Rome inuade. 3756./207. 26 RImo raignd sixteene yeares, bold HanniballRimo. And Scipio fought, Wise Cato liu'd in Rome: Next Rimo King Geruntius they install, Geruntius Him after twenty yeares his Lords intoome, The losty Spaniards from Romes Empire fal, And after stand to Fuluius Flaccus doome: 3771/192 Ten yeares Catellus raign'd: the Iewes were foyld, Catellus And by Antiochus Gods Temple spoyld. 3790./173. 27 The Mother and her seauen sonnes Martird were,  3795./168. The worthy Iudas Machabeus fought Coill. Gods battailes, Coill raigned twenty yeare,3800./263. Great Carthage was destroyd, and Corinth brought To fall by fire: The Doctrines first apeare 3820/140. The Pharisei and Sadducei taught: Fiue yeares iust Porrex, drunken Cherimus Porrex. Cherimus Fulgen. Eldred Androgeus Dedantius Detonnus One, Fulgen two, one Eldred, one Androgeus. 28 Dendantius fiue yeares, two Detonnus held The soueraignty, then lest this life for new, Nature a Monstrous byrth in Rome compeld, Hauing foure hands, foure feet: Corne grew In Bonony on Trees, whose tast exceld,3843./120. The Parthian Arsaces, Demetrius slew.  3835./128. Great Scipio Affricanus ends his life, By salse Sempronia his disloyall wife.  3848./115. 29 Young Vrianus three, King Eliud fiue,Vrianus Eliud. Mrianus Bladunus Capenas Ouinius Sisilus. Bladgabred. Two Merians, and Bladunus twaine, Capens three, Ouinius doth next striue, And his imperiall state two yeares maintaine, Two Silius, Bledgabredus id suruiue Full twenty yeares in his auspitious raigne Hircans gouernd in the high-Priests sted, Marius mpht o're Iugurth, Captiueled. 3857/109
30 Archemachus raignd two, Eldotus foure, 3869./94 Two Rodianus, three Redargius, Archemac. Eldotus. Rodianus Redargius Samillus Penesillus Pirrhus Caporus Diuellus He. Samillius two: the Brittaines next adore, King penesellus three, two princely pirrhus, And after him Caporus two, no more, Now grew the watres twixt Scilla and Marius: Diuellus foure, Helyas, Ely named, Gouernd ten months, when death his body claimed.3893./70. 31 Lvd, Helyes sonne, his happy rule began, Nam'd Troynouant, Luds-towne, Ludgate erected, Lud Eleaun yeares raign'd, then to Cassibelan3894./69 Left his two infant sonnes to be protected,  belan Who till the Princes grew to state of man, By all the Brittish Peeres was King elected: Raign'd nineteene yeares, in his dayes twice repeld 3911/52 The Roman Casar, the bold Brittaines queld. Caesar. 32 Nennius wan Casars sword, and had it brought To be hang'd ore his hearse: Pompey the great With Iulius Casar in Pharsalia fought, 3916/47 Iulius vsupes in Romes Imperiall seat, Was stab'd with Bodkins, he that neuer fought, But conq'd, in all Martiall acts compleat: Now flourisht Cicero with praise Deuine, Hermius and seditious Cateline. 3919/44 33 And not the least grace to Triumphant Rome, The rare Comadian Roseius, Next in rowe Of Brittish Kings, must young Tenancius come, 3921/42 Twenty three yeares he raignd, and then did owe Tenancius No more to nature, then th'adopted son Of Casar, great Augustus: now doth grow Romes Monarchy: Marke Anthony through pride 3934/29 Rebeld, by Aspes great Cleopatra dide. 34 Virgil and Horace flourisht: In these dayes Iesus Sabetes sonne was consecrated High Priest: King Herod Iewries Scepter swayes, A generall peace is through the world debated,
The Brittaines next, King Cimbelinus raise, 3944./19 And fiue and thirty yeares he is instated: Cimbeline. And now the Sauiour of the world was borne, Th'eternall King Crownd with a wreath of Thorne.The yeare of the world∣boue the line./The yeare af∣ter Christ vn∣der the line. 35 Hortensius, Lyuy, Salust, Ouid, all  3962./1. Were Fam'de in Rome, valiant Guiderius next, The Brittaines as their soueraigne Liege install, Twenty eight yeares he gouernes, much perplext 3978./17 With Roman warre: now chanc'st Seianus fall. Guiderius. Vnder Tyberius, now as saith the text:3985/24. Iohn Baptist preacht, and by King Herod dide,  3994./33. Pylate was Iudge, and Christ was Crucifide. 36 Now Aruiragus raignes, and takes to wife 4006/45 Th'Emperour Clodius daughter: Iwries King Aruiragus. Was eat with wormes: Graue Seneck breath'd this life, And Simon Magus did his Money bring To buy the Holy-ghost, his Fame was rife Amongst the Romans: now did Nero sing Vpon a hill Troyes burning to his Lyre, Hauing before set stately Rome a fire. 37 Saint Marke in Alexandria Martyrd was, At' Ierusalem Iames for the Gospell dide, Paule suffred too, whose boldnesse did surpasse, 4017/56. Peter likewise in Rome was Crucified, 4019./58. Queene Voada a gallant Brittish Lasse, Marcht with fiue thousand Ladies by her side, and in one battaile (if report be true,) 4029/68 Full fourscore thousand valiant Romans slew.  4024./73. 38 Next Aruiragus, Brittan Marius guided, Marius Now was the Temple of the highest defaced, His City sackt, and those that Christ derided, 4024/73 Burnt, staru'd, or slaine, Ierusalem quite raced, Iosephus liu'd, Domitian Rome deuided, and after Tytus in the Throne was placed: 4070/108 Ignatius life in Rome mongst Lyons vanisht, Saint Iohn whom Christ lou'd, was to Pathmos banisht.
93 In Rome now liu'd Cornelius Tacitus, Suetonius, younger Pliny, Iuvenal, Valerius Flaccus, and Patauius, and the Lasciuious Poet Martial, and vnder Traian: Aulus Gellius, Plutarch and Apuleius: now the wall From Tyne to the Scotch Sea was made for strength, Being one hundred and twelue miles in length. 48 Coylus built Colchester: now Iustine wrote, 4087/126 and with his Bookes and Life Christs Fayth defended,  Coyll. Egyptian Ptolomee the Starres did note, 4141./180. and Mathematickes found. Lucius ascended The State next Coyll, who first set aflote Baptizme in England, by the Church commended Lucius. For our first Christian King: he mounts the Spheares, and without King, leaues Brittan fifteene yeares. 49 Seuerus th'Emperor did fiue yeares supply 4169./208. The Brittish Throne, then of the Goute he dyde  Seuerus. At Yorke, to Bassianus his ally, 4174./213. Leauing both Rome and Brittans Islle to guide Six yeares this Caracalla lifted high, Caracalla. His Crowned state in Tirany and pride:4179./218. Tertullian now and Origen were knowne, Carassus. Carassus next assumes the Brittish Throne, 4187./226. 50 Gouernd eight yeares, then by Alectus dide, Alectus. Asclipiodale After three yeares bold Asclepiodale, Alectus slew, in hight of all his pride, And Roman Wallus, by whose timelesse fall Walbrooke tooke name. He thirty yeares supplide  4193./232. The kingdome, then exchangd his Mortall state, Artabanus great Artaxerxus slew, S. Albon martyr'd, left this life for new. 4223/262. 51 COill kild Asclepiodale, and raignedCoill. Twenty seuen yeares: Constantius succeeds  4250/289. By marraying Brittish Hellen, hauing gainedConstantius. The Roman Diadem: His vertuous deedes
The fauour of the multitude attained 4271./310. Next: Constantine (sur-nam'd the great,) who reads Constantine The Bible first in Brittan: Arrius preacht, 4284./325 And th'Arrian errors through the whole world teacht 52 Now at Ierusalem Queene Hellen found The very Crosse whereon our Sauiour dide, 4290./329. And the three nayles his feet and hands did wound, Octauius Octauius next fifty foure yeares supplide The Diadem, and then was laid in ground, Three hundred eighteene Byshops now applide The Nycene Counsell, now did Ambrose reed, And Athanasius that set downe the Creed. 53 With learned Basill, and about their dayes Iulian-Apostat liu'd: the next adanced 4344./383. Was Maximus, whom the bold Brittans rayse, To Vrsula a pittious Fortune ehanced, With eleuen thousand Maids passing the Seas Maximus To Brittaine lesse, their liues were all intranced: S. Ierom flourisht, writing Bookes Deuine,  4388./387. So did in Hyppone learned Augustine. 54 GRatian succeeds, whom the bold Brittans slew 4352./391. After foure yeares, in whose vnhappy aigneGratian Ambrose the Millein Byshop famous grew, And Chrisostom did the true faith maintaine In Constantinople, a Doctrine new Th'Hereticke Pellges did in Carthage faine, Where all his errors to his pride imputed, Were by two hundred and seuen Clarkes confuted. 4380/419 55 Algelmond raign'd first King of ombardy, at Millen th'Emperor Theod dide, Alaricus sackt Rome. The Monarchy 4381/422. and Throne of France first mond supplide, The Scots and Picts vnpeople Brittany, But Constantine the Brittaines valiant guide, 4394./443. Who came from Brittaine lee, the Throne ascnds, Constantine and rules ten yeares,   Romes tribute ends.
59 COnstans a Foole, the sonne of Constantine,4404./443. Was from a Monke by Vortiger made King,Constans. And hauing one yeare gouernd, did resigne 4409./448. To the Duke Vortiger, who gouerningVortiger. Eighteene whole yeares, two Lords of Saxon line, Hngest and Horseus cald, an army bring To Land in Brittaine, where not long they tarried, Till Vortiger Prince Hengists daughter maried. 57 For which the Brittaines him deposd, electing Young Vortimer his sonne to sway the state, Vortimer. He the allyans of those Lords reiecting, 4426./465. Whom Vortiger his Father raisd so late, Gouern'd six yeares, the land in peace protecting, Whom his faire Step-dame brought to timelesse Fate, By cursed poyson, which no sooner chanced, 4432./471. But Vortiger was once againe aduanced.  Vortiger. 58 In these dissentious dayes Gensericus The Vandall King tooke Cartage. Attila 4402./441 King of the Hunnes, euen to Thermopilus Ore-came all Greece, Illyria, Thracia, Against whom brauely fought Meroneus, The most renowned King of Gallia, 4411./450. Nam'd Gallia, France, and till King Pepius time, All the French Kings discended of his line. 59 Venice was now first founded and begun, 4417/456 Of such poore people, as to shun the rage Of Tyrant Attila the samous Hun, From Aquilea fled: whose pride to asswage, The Roman Aetius a braue battaile won, Slew eighteene thousand Hunnes (in his young age) 4418./457. Aetius enuide for raising Romes Dominion, Was murdred by his Maister Valentinian. 60 Which Emperor at Thrasila was slaine By one of Etius souldiers, Vortiger Of Brittaines awfull seat, possest againe, The Saxons with the Brittish Peeres conferre,
VVhere at a VVatch-word giuen by Hengists traine, 4432./471. Foure hundred Brittish Barons murdred were; Hengist. The King surprisde, and being in prison pent, Gaue to them Norfolke, Suffolke, Sussex, Kent. 61 And of this Hengist Brittan chang'd the name, Was cleaped-Hengists Land; since England cald, Next Constantines two younger Sonnes proclaime Their rights in England, being naught appald at Hengists might, stird by their Fathers Fame, 4442/482. Ambros and Vter seeke to be instald: Aurelius Ambros. They land at Totnes, Vortiger they burne, Kill Hengist too, for whom the Saxons murne. 62 Now Merline Aurelius, Aurelius Ambres raign'd Thirty three yeares, made Stone-henge, which till now Hath on the plaine of Salsbury remaind, He dead, the Brittans to his Brothers vow Like homage, and in State haue entertaind Vter Pendragon, to whose throne they bow 4461/500. Sixteene whole yeares: He doats on Cornwayles wife, Vter Pendragon. and for her loue bereaues her Husbands life. 63 Of her he Arthur got: In France Clodouens 4478./517. Gouernd as King, the first that was Baptiz'd In Italy: great Theodoricus Arthur. King of the Astrogothes, who enterprisde Gainst Odeacer battaile, bold Honoricus Gouernd in Affricke, who so much despisde True Fayth, that he for th' Arrians in one hower, By shops exild, three hundred thirty foure. 63 Arthur the worthy, next the State ascended, Fought twelue set battailes, and the order made Of the Round Table, whose renowne extended Through all the world, whilst Arthur doth inuade Forraine Dominious, and Christs Faith desended, 4504./533. Mordred at home, his Crowne' and Queene betrayde:  Mordred. Twixt whom, at Arthurs backe returne againe, War was commenst, in which both Kings were slain.
65 Next Arthur, Constantine, Duke Cadors Sonne, 4504/543 After his Vncle sixe and twenty years Constantine. Had gouern'd England, his estate begonne, Slew Mordred Sonnes in fight, with Saxon Peeres, That ayded them in battale, these warres donne After foure Sommers, he ascends the Spheares: 4482/521. Iustine a Swine-heard, by ambition fierd, By crafty meanes th'Imperiall Seate aspyerd. 66 Now liu'd in Italy the famous Dame 4488/527 Analasiantha, with Athalarius Her Son, by whom her Soueraignty first came, She could both Greeke and Latine well discusse, Whose reuerence many Histories proclayme, Daughter to th'Emperor Theodoricus: Iustinian, the Gracian Empyre swayes, The Persians to their State Cosroe rayse. 67 Iustinian in his Captaines much renowned, 4505/545 Narses the Eunuch, a right  Knight, And Bellisarius, whose name was crowned Through all the world: Twice Carthage won in fight, Twice rescude Rome: his fame in Persia sowned, Thrace, Greece, th'Affricke Gaths, he put to flight: For much more seruice th'Emperor from his head, Tore out his eyes, he for'st to beg his bread, 68 Aurelius Conanus slew in field, 4507./546. Constantine, Arthurs Nephew, three yeares swade, Aurelius Co∣nanus. Then did his due to death and nature yeild,4509./548. And Vortigore his Sonne is Soueraigne made, Who did but foure yeares Brittans  weild,  Vortigorus. When Malgo did the  inuade, 4513./542. Who slew his first Wife, her chast Bed for sooke, Malgo. And to his Bride, his Brothers Daughter tooke. 69 King Totylus sack't Rome the second time, What in the first he spoyl'd, he now repayred, 4539./578. Altinus king of Lumbards, full with Wine, Cals for a Mazer (which he might haue spared)
Of his Wiues Fathers Scull, for which in fine, She loath'd her Husband, and yet further dar'd: Vnto his loyall Bed she prou'd vntrue With Helme-child, who after Albine slew. 70 CAreticus by help of Irelands King, 4577./586. Cald Gurmond, Brittan Malgo did expell,  Careticus. Ethelfrid. Whom after three yeares Ethelfrid did bring To ruine, and in battaile prosperd well, About this time Sybert th'East Saxon King, Erected Westminster: Ethelfrid fell, 4574./613. And Cadwan, Duke of Northwales, him defeated,  Cadwan. And two and twenty yeares in peace was seated. 71 Queene Tredegunde of France in the meane season, 4549./588. Lawdry the Earle of Soysons deerely lou'd, And for his ake destroyd the King by Treason, Gainst Gregory, (sir-nam'd the great) was mou'd By ohn the Patrarch (against all reason) The Churches Primacy which he improu'd, 4586/625. Arabian Mahomet his Alkeron made, Frensh Brunchild liu'd, who had Princes ten betrayde. 72 CAdwallin, Cadwans Sonne next Bittan guided, 4596/335. Benet the Monke, Paynting and Glazing found,  Cadwallin. The Sarasins by Mahomet prouided, Wan Persia, where Ormisda long sat crown'd, And in short space hauing their powers diided, Conquerd all Aegypt with the Climats round: Damascus likewise was subdude by them, So was rich Antioch and Hierusalem. 73 Three yeares Cadwallader (esteem'd the last 4644./683. Of Brittan Princes) gouernd: and he dead,  Cadwallader The Kingdome wholly to West-Saxons past, 4684/723. Of whom King Iue first impald his head,  Iue raigned 37 yeares. Ethelard. And next him Ethelard, whose raigne was grast By reuerent Beda, of whose workes we read: Of Clearkly Bookes on seuerall Subiects stil'd, Threore and eyghteene Volums well compil'd. 4685/724
74 Next Ethelard, raign'd Cuthred, whom succeeds4690/729. Sigebert, and he not one full yeare did raigne, Cuthred. But was deposde for many tyrranous deedes,4706./745. And after besely by a Swine-heard slaine,  Sigebert. Kinulphus to the Kingdome next proceedes, Who after by a man of Sigeberts traine 4709/748. Was murdred in the night, as he should passe Kinulphus. Vnto his Mistris, a braue Brittish Lasse. 75 The Sarasins pierce Europe, Rhodes they wasted, 4702/749 The Firmament two daies appeares to burne, The Emperour Constantine his Army hasted The Sarasins by armes to ouerturne, Where thirty thousand Pagans of death tasted, When Constantine expites, the Christians mourne: His Throne and State Iustinian next maintained, And from the Turkes, Affricke and Libia gayned. 76 The next West-Saxon King was Brithricus, 4739/778 Who eyghteene yeares after Kinulphus fall Brithricus. Raign'd King, came from the blooud of Cerdicus, And queld the Danes in many a bloudy brall, Wiu'd Ethelburgh, by whom, as Bookes discusse He poysond was: yet whilst he gouern'd all S. Albons, Winchcombe Abbeyes were both built, Blood rayn'd, which seem'd like Crosses where t'was spilt. 77 Egbert the Sexon, thirty seauen supplyde 4756/795 The Soueraignety, now raign'd Prench Charles the great, Egbert. Eyghteene whole dayes the Sunne his light denyde, Hyren the Empresse from th'Imperiall Seat Her young Sonne Constantine deposde through pde, And after did him cruelly intreat: She causd his eyes be torne out of his head, And foure yeares after gouernd in his stead. 78 King Ethelwolfe, the fore-nam'd Egbert's Sonne, 4793/832 As Chroniclers affirme, Oxford erected,  Ethelwolf. a Priest at first, in Orders he begon, Till after marrying, he the State affected,
The Warlike Danes his Kingdome ouer-ron, 4804./843. But are expled: Sergius is Pope elected:  Os Porci  . Whose name Os Porcy seem'd so vile, that they Chang'd it, and from him all Popes to this day. 79 Foure Sonnes each other in the State succeedes 4816./845. King Ethelwald, who gouern'd not a yeare  Ethelwald. When Ethelbert his Brother don'd the Weedes 4817./856. Imperiall, and next him doth appeare  Ethelbert. The third Sonne Etheldred, (whose body bleeds4824./863. By the bold Danes) who after slaughterd were Etheldred. By the fourth Sonne: at Brixium as Bookes tell, Three dayes together bloud in thicke shewers fell. 80 Young Alured from Ethelwolfe the last, 4833/872, Twenty nine yeares sixe monthes, the Scepter bore,  Alured. Hungar and Hubba quite through Scotland past, Bels were first vsde in Greece (not knowne before) 4862/901 In sixe set battailes, Alured disgrast Edward. The warlike Danes, then dyde: The Peeres adore Edward his elder Sonne, who nobly beares The Brittish Scepter foure and twenty yeares. 81 Nine Popes in lesse then nine yeares were instald, Adelwald, Edwards Brother, twice rebelling VVas by the Elders Prowesse twice appald, And after slaine, the Huns and Hungars quelling All Europe, were much feard: a Princesse cald 4872/911. Elflede, King Edwards Sister much excelling: after the throwes in her first Child-birth tryde, For euermore her Husbands Bed denide. 82 And proouing armes, by them she honor sought, She tam'd the VVelch-men, and the Danes disgraced, 4886/925 Next Edward Adelstane the battailes fought, Adelstane. Of the bold English, and the Castles raced (as the proud Danes reard) and to ruine brought The Sarafins euen from Hetruria chased: 4896/915 Th Italian Guards: they Gn ouerthrow, VVhere bloud three dayes out of a VVell did flow.
83 Now Gui of Warwick, Danish Colebrand slew, And England of all Tribute quite releast, King Edmond did the Soueraignety pursue, 4901/940 When Adelstane at Malmsbury deceast, Edmond. Slaine after fiue yeares: by succession true Eldred his Brother raignes, whose pomp increast: 4907/949 Edmonds two Sons being young, the Peeres cōplaine, Eldred. and thinke their Vncle of more worth to raigne. 84 France, Tuskaine, Germany, the Hungars wast, 4915/954 Hugh King of Italy, by Fire destroyes The nauy of the Sarazens, then past To Traxinetum, Edwin next inioyes 4916/955. The Scepter (Eldred hauing breath'd his last)  Edwin. At Kingstone crown'd, whose hart was set on toyes, He Dunstan banisht, his Landes and Treasure lauisht, and his neere Nc vpon his Crowne-day rauisht. 85 And next he slew her Husband, for all which after foure yeares he was depriude his state, Edgar his Brother, a Prince wise and rich, 4920./959 In all things ust, seuere, and Fortunate, ascends the Throne, no Sorcerer nor Witch Edgar. His sentence spard, Theeues, Bribers he did hate: To him Ludwallis, Prince of Wales obayd, Three hundred Wolues for Tribute yearely payd. 86 Forty seauen Monasteryes this King erected Red Crosses made, and on mens Roabes were seared, When Duffus had foure yeares the Scots protected, 4927/966 Donewald a Scotch Lord, that no bad thing feared, Him basely slew, and from his Throne derected, From which, xe monthes no Moone or Sunne appeared: The Turkes by Euecus Earle of Bygar, Were Spaine expold, he first King of Nauar. 87 King Edgar in his sixteenth yeare expyres, 4939./975. When his Sonne Edward was at Kingstone crownde, Edward Slaine by his trayterous Stepdame, who desires The Crowne for her Sonne Etheldred: he founde
Exter Abbey, Swayne of Denmarke fires 4936/978 Citties and Townes in England, burning round: Etheldred. King Etheldred raign'd in this Kingdome free, Thirty eyght yeares: His murdred Brother three. 88 Now Stephen was made first King of Hungary, And thirty nine yeares raign'd. Alphons of Spaine 4961/1000 Besiedging great Visenum valiantly, Was with an arrow kild, and strowed the plaine: All the Lord-Danes that liu'd here tyranously, Were by the English Wiues in one night slaine: Ierusalem was by the Turkes possest, Whom twice the bold Venetian Duke distrest. 89 King Edmond (sir-nam'd Iron-side) next his Father Edmond Iron-side. Inioyes the Kingdome, gainst whom Swanus Son The bold Canutus all his Dans doth gather, Twixt whom were many battayles lost and won, 4977/1016 After much bloods effusion they chose rather, By single strife to end the broyles begon: Theyr valors were in epuall ballance tryde, and after Combat they the Land deuide. 90 Edrick of Stratton, valiant Edmond slew, 4978/1017. And from Canutus had a Traytors meede, The valiant Dane in Stiles and Honors grew, Canutus. He Scotland wan, and Norway: To his seed Leauing foure Kingdomes, Vice he did eschew, Nor euer did a juster Prince succeed: 4993./1032. English and Dans he atton'd vnto his doome, and after went on Pilgrimage to Roome. 91 Robert the Norman Duke, for valor famed, Hyes to the holy warres in Palestine, He gone, his young Sonne William is proclaymed 4896/1038. The Norman Duke: Now seekes a Throne deuine  Harrold. Harefoote. Canutus when he twenty yeares had raigned, and Harrold Harefoote vnto whom incline The Dans in England, next the Scepter swayes, and three yeares past: at Oxford ends his dayes.
92 Hardi-canutus the same number fild, 5002/1041 and drinking dide: whom the good Edward (Sainted  Hardicanutus For holy workes) succeeds, no bloud he spild, Nor with knowne sinnes his high profession taynted, 5004/1043 He married as the great Earle Goodwin wild, Edward Th'Earles Daughter Edgitha, and nothing wanted: That a iust Prince should haue, one and twenty years, In zeale and clemency the Crowne he weares. 93 This Goodwin, Alphred Edward younger Brother, Traytorously slew, and by his power he yoaked The King himselfe, betray de his Soueraigne Mother, By Byshop Robert to these illes prouoked, 5008/1047 But Heauen no longer could such mischiefe smother,  5016/1055 Swearing by Bread, he by the bit was choaked: The swallowing Sea deuour'd all his Lands, Which to this day beare name of Goodwins sands. 94 William the Bastard Duke first landing heare, 5014/1053 Was by the King receaued, and Englands Crowne Promist by Edward, which no English Peere Was knowne to contradict, after lenthome With greatest pompe, and Harrold the same yeare Earle Goodwins sonne, a man of great renowne: Arriude in Normandy, and with oathes deepe, Sware (the King dead) for him the Crowne to keepe. 95 But Edward dead, Harrold vsurpes the seate, 5027./1066. Whom Fauston and the Norwey King inuade  Harrold. Vpon the North, both whom he did defeate, And brauely slew in battaile. William made A new Incursion gainst whom in t'is heare, Harrold his Ensignes in the field displayde: The Norman Duke preuaylde: and Harrald slaine, 5028/1067. William (the first so cald) begins his raigne. William.
In Brutes time whilst he gouernd Brittan, Anaeus Silui∣us raigned amongst the Latines. Dercitus in Assyria, Ath∣letets in Corinth: Pipinus in Thusan, Codrus in Athens, Lanquet. in whose dayes the Arke of God was taken by the Philistims. In Locrynes raigne Dauid was annoynted King ouer Israel. In Guendolins raigne, he  Vriah, and marryed Ber∣sheba. In Madans dayes, Salomon built the Temple, &c. From Brute to Caelar, the Brittans were not Tributary Stow. to any, the gouernment of the Romans from Caesar to Theo∣dosius, lasted 483. years. In Theodosius the youngers raign, the yeare of Christ 443. the Tribute . The gouernment of the Saxons continued the space of 600. yeares in continuall warre and hostility, either with the Brit∣tans, the Danes, or the Normans. The opinions of those that write of the first inhabiting of Harding. this Iland are diuerse, and how it came first to receiue the name of Albion, some thinke of the Chalky and white Cliffe which seemes to wall it in from the Sea. But Hugh Genisis, a Hugh Gene∣sis. Roman Chronicler, writing of all the Kinges and Kingdomes of the World, from the Vniuer sall Deluge, to Christ. Writes, that Danaus, King of Greece, had fifty Daughters, and Ae∣giptus as many Sonnes, who being married, and the women the first night murdring their Husbands, were for the offence banished, and sayling on the Seas, were driuen vpon this I∣sland, which Albiana called after her Name Albion: vvith these Ladies he reports that Spirits engendred, and begotte Gyants, who laie with their Mothers and Sisters (led onely by their lustes) till they had multiplyed themselues to the num∣ber of twelue thousand. But Idoubt not, but that this Land may contend with any other whatsoeuer, for her antiquity, be∣ing inhabited with the first, which beeing continually vexed within it selfe with ci  and forraine inuasions, her Marian. Monuments and remembrances, haue by these warres bin de∣oured, which haue left the certainty of our first Antiquity doubtfull to the world, and not truely reembred by any that haue undertooke her first discouery. Here moreouer, wee could haue tooke fit occasion to haue
recorded all the Genealogies before the flood, with a briefe re∣port, who after the floud peopled euery other Kingdome, and from whom euery Region tooke her Name: but it had bin a By Mirandula. course, too strange and different from our purpose, which is onely to finde out such thinges as haue alliance to this Land of Brittan, and the memorable things best knowne to us. We infist not much in Aeneas trauels, of his landing at Car∣thage, his loue to Queene Dldo, her killing her selfe at his departure from her land, the funer all of his Father Anchises, with his warres against king Turnus, for the beautious La∣ninia These, because they are amply set downe in Virgils 12. Virgil. Bookes of his Aeneids, wee thought better rather superfici∣ally to passe them ouer with a bare remembrance, then to bee too palpably tract in a History so common to all men Which we (the rather to) omit, because we hasten to the antiquittes, and the successiue Souer aigneties of our natiue Island, whose age (our purpose is) to deriue from the first Inhabitantes, and so to continue it euen to this present government. The Antiquity of London was helde to bee longe before Rome. For Brute landed here in the yeare of the Lord 2855. in the yeare before Christ 1108. Rome was built long after, Eusebius. in the time that Riuallo ruld in Brittain, the yeare after the floud 155. after Comerus, the first king of Italy, 1414 after the destruction of Troy, 432 after Brute arriuedin in this Land of Btain 355. The end of the sixteenth CANTO.
Argumentum OF all great Brittans Kinges, truely descended From the first Conqueror next we shall intreat, How they haue sayld, or how their hands extended Through any forraine Realmes by Conquest great, How they begun, and how their raignes they ended, Till royall Iames claymes his Monarchall Seate; In whom three kingdomes, first by Brute deuided, Vnited are, and by one Scepter guided. ARG. 2. From Norman William a true note collected, Of all the kinges and Queenes that here protected. CANTO. 17. 1 William, the Norman Duke is next inuested, William the Conqueror. Sixt of that Dutchy entring by sterne warre, 5028/1067 A troublous raigne he liu'd, and sildome rested From rough rebellious armes: yet euery barre His Sword remou'd, Hertford his pride detested, Roger Earle of Hertord But for his Treason was confined farre: Earle Walter too, into that faction led, 5037/1076 Disclosde the plot, and for it lost his head.
2 Duke Robert, Williams Sonne, by th'instigation 5042/1081 Of the French King, doth Normandy inuade, Against whom William raysde the English nation, And when no Prince betwixt them could perswade, They met and fought, with much loude acclamation, Robert vnhorst his Father, and then stayde His warlike hand, whom by his voyce he knew, And raisd him: for which, peace betweene them grew. 3 William inuading France, in Caan expyerd, 5050/1089 And there lies buried by his warlike Peeres, after he many Towers and Townes had fierd, Raigning o're England one and twenty yeares, Foure Sonnes he left, one Danghter much admierd: Robert and Richard, who ascends the Spheares Before ripe age: William who next doth sway, Henry cald Bewclack, and fayre Adela. 4 Whilst our great Conqueror liu'd, the King of Danes, 5030/1069. Canutus by the English Out-Lawes ayded, Inuades the North, but William him restraynes, Henry the Emperor Bauaria inuaded, 5031./1670. Malcolm that ore the troublous Scots then raignes Peirces Northumberland, at this time vaded The Saxons glory, Otho them defaced, Otho Duke of Bauaria. after the Thuringas he by armes had chaced. 5 Eudochia who had seuen yeares worne the Crown Of Graciaes Empyre, was by maryage tyde Pope Gregory the seauenth. Vnto Rhomanus, one of high renowne, (Sir-nam'd Diogenes.) Gregory denyde Marriage to Priests, the Russ. Duke was put downe  5030/1069 By Prince Demetrius, neare to him allyde: William foure Castles built, his Foes to tame, At Yorke, at Lincolne, aud at Nottighame. 6 Henry then Casar for some sinne detected, 5037/1079 Did by the Pope stand excommunicate, and being of his Feudor King reiected, To Gregory submits him and his State,
Now liu'd the famous Oswald much respected, Byshop of Sarum: Casar absolu'd late: (The second time condemnd) gainst Gregory sped, Robert Byshop of Rauenna, made pope by the name of Clement. Stating Rauennaes Robert in his sted. 7 Vradislaus was the first King made Of Boheme, and of all the Countries neare, Ansell who then Galisiaes Scepter swayed,  5047/1089 Did gainst the Sarazens in armes appeare, And wan from them Tolledo, by the ayde Of Christian Princes: Rufus gouernd heer Next after conquering William, thirteene springs Will. Rufus He sat inuested in our Throne of Kings.5050/1089 8 Twice Robert made incursion, but supprest 5051/1090. By Williams power, the Scots inuade againe But are appeasd, the Welshmen Rees inuest, Who in a conflict was by William slaine: 5055./1044 lerusalem by Pagan Armes opprest, Th'assembled christiā kings by force maintain: 5061/1100. Where dide in battaile as the rumor ran, The Babilonian Souldan, Soliman. 9 The Norman Robert, chusd King by election Of Palestine, refusd the Sacred stile, Which Bulloin Godfrey tooke to his protection, Scotch Malcolm with his sonne entring by guile Northumbers Marches, came to the deiection By valiant Robert, who was Earle that while: 5060/1099 (Both slaine in field) K. William the same yeare, Erected the great Hall in Westminster. 10 Duncan vsurpes in Scotland, not two yeares He gouernd there, but in his bed was slaine, 5060./1099 Donnald restor'd, not long the Scepter beares, But Edgar (that ambitious was to raigne) By armes supprest him, and the Dia'dem weares, 5062./1101 Rufus being hunting, Tyrrell of his traine, By glauncing of an Arrow, the King slew, Henrie next gouernes, by succession true.
11 Thirty fiue yeares did Henry Beauclarke guide Henry Beu∣clarke. Th'Helme-Royall, he for Thest strict lawes decreed, Robert returnd from Palestine, defide Henry, who after parley were agreed, 5062/1101 Long their truce lasted not, Beu-clarke denide His Brothers pension, great dissentions breed: 5067/1106 After much warre, Duke Robert they surprise, Who for a prisons breach forfeits his eyes. 12 Norwich Cathedrall Church is founded new, S. Bartholmewes built, by Reior a Musitian, In Belgia great Inundations grew, Being almost drown'd: Now vpon good condition Peace twixt the Emperor and King Henry grew, Whose daughter was with much hye superstition Made Empresse: Maud the English Queen being dead Henry takes Adelisia in her stead. Adelisia daughter to the Duke of Louaine. 13 The King of England with French Lodwicke tryes Great discords, where the English gaine the best, In their returne by Sea great Tempests ryse, 5071/1110 Where all the yssue-Royall most and least Perisht, with many Nobles grane and wise, Where eight-score soules at once are sent to rest: 5081/1120 Of all the ship, one Butcher and no more, Escapt the seas, and swam vnto the shore. 14 Geffrey plantagenet (the Emperour dead) Wiues Maud the Empresse, vnto whom she bare Two sonnes, Henry and Geoffrey: now life fled From Beu-clarke, who to Stephen resignes his Chaire, But ere he rests him in his earthy bed, 5096/1135. He is renown'd for many buildings rare: Dunstable Priory, Reading Abbey, and Windsore fayre Castle, that on hye doth sland. 15 Duke Bohemond in Asia warres maintaining, Was by the Turkes surpriz'd, restor'd againe By Tanered, who in Puell after raigning, Infinite Turkes were by his valour slaine,
Baldwin defies the Souldan, thereby gaining Gazim and Damascus, Two famous Townes: Now Alphons rules in Spaine: Lawes the groe in France, in Scotlands rights, Malcolms first , that Alexander ight. 16 Alexius did the Gracian Empire sway, Henry in Rome, the Pope-om Pascall guids, In Hungary  Stephen: about that day A blazing-Starre appeares, and long abides, Two Moones are seene, and in Flaminia Blood raignes; Michaell the Duke of Venice rides 5083/1122. Against the Pagans, who were made his pray  Rhodes, Chiu, Samos, Lesbos, Mitelene. At oppen: After in his  feturne, He many of the Emperours townes did burne. 17 Charles Earle of flaunders in the Church was slaine By the proud Bggis prouost, which related,  5085/1125 William the sonne of Cort-hose did complaine, And by French Lewes was next Earle instated, Balach the Parthian did proud warres maintaine 5086/1125 Gainst Baldwin, which was by rough steele debated: Baldwin surprizd, fayre Stons Towers quite raced, And faire Ierusalem once more defaced. 18 Stephen Earle of Bulloin sonne to th'Earle of Bloys, K. Stephen and Addela next Henry rules as King, Though Maud the Empresse had th'applausiue voyce, Of many English peeres, through which warres spring, Gloster and Chester Earles, after much choise 5102/1141 Of fields and battailes, such an Army bring, That Stephen is tooke, and vnto Bristow sent, After releast, by London and by Kent. 19 These Counties rayse an army and surprize Gloster, for whom the Barons change King Stephen, 5107/1136 Dauid of Scotland doth gainst England rife, after much warre then discords are made ecuen, By th'Empresse meanes his Barons him despise, First Stephen preuailes, the Lords their Lands bereauen: But gathering head, at Wilton they preuaile, Where the King flyes, whom Gloster doth assaile.
20 Henry, Mads sonne, after K. Stephens decease, Is proclaim'd King, which soone attones their strife By which mild Stephen raignes all his dayes in peace, Eustace son to King Stephen. His sonne, the French Kings Sister takes to wife, Gersa the sonne of Bela gan encrease His fame among the Hungars, and his life Was fearefull to the Germans; Lewes swayd France, The Turkes grim Alaph to their Crowne aduance, 21 Earle Roger rul'd Sicilia. Almany 5114/1153 Great Barbarosse, Romes Empery Conrade, Adrian of England held the Papacy, In Scotland raignd Malcolm a beautious mayd, 5115/1154 The English Iewes at Easter Crucifie A Christian child, and life for life they paid: Next Stephen, King Henry, second of that name, Henry the 2 Sonne to the Empresse Maud the Peeres proclame. 5116/1155 22 Thirty fiue yeares his prosperous raigne doth last, In which he Englands  augmented, With Scotland, Ireland, and then further past To th'Orcad Isles, whose forces he preuented, Brittaine, Poictou, and Guien he made fast To th'English Crowne,  that but late dissented, His sword appeasd, and after well protected, Which done great Rutland Castle he erected. 23 Two Sunnes at once within our skies apeare, And in the Moone a bloody Crosfe was seene, 5118/1157 Lewes of France sent ouer Margaret heere, His daughter, to be made young Henries Queene, By which the discords that both Realmes did feare In this alliance quite dispersed beene: Once more the King gainst Scotland is prouoked, Pope Adrian drinking, with a Fly was choked. 5120./1159 24 Vradislaus for his valour showne, At Milleins siedge, was by the Emperour made Bohemians second King, his Armes well knowne, A faire red Rampant Lyon: Baldwin layde
On his blacke hearse, Almerious is growne King of Ierusalem, who brauely staid Th `Aegiptian power, and in one gloriouday, Wan from the Souldan Alexandria. 25 Now Thomas Bket who before had fled To Rome, and there complaind him of the King, Was to his Sea restor'd, after strooke dead In Canterbury Church (a ptious thing) Him Rome Cannoniz'd for a Saint, which bred 5132./1171. Much superstition: Salladine doth bring A puissant host his Conquests he began, 5133/1172 And by the sword Egipt and Sarry wan 26 Henry, King Henries sonne, was twice instated And Crown'd in England in his Fathers dayes, By which much vprore was by warre debated, The sonnes against the father tumults raise, The Pope gainst th'Emperour Fredericke animated, Fredericke submits, and at his foot he layes His princely head, whilst with a Lordly checke, 5137/1176. The Pope his foot sets on the Emperors necke. 27 Andronicus hauing his Maister slaine, 5143./1183 (The childe Alexius left to his tuition) Three yeares the Gracian Empire doth maintaine, Baldwin the fift, (a Chiln of faire condition) Is Crowd in Syon: Saladin againe 5144/1183 Gainst Palestine doth make new expedition: Subdues Ierusalem, and nce his dayes, The Infidell the holy kingdome sways. 28 Henry the sonne before the Father dyes, 5149./1186 Whose warres his Brother Richard takes in hand, And by hostility the King defies, Vnable gainst his puissant sonne to stand, Sickenesse and griefe of thoughts the King surprise, Who dying, to Prince Richard leaues the Land: 5150/1189. Richard in Anes a bold reputed Knight, Who for his stout heart Cordelyon hight. Richard Cordelion.
29 Eleuen full years, nine months and twenty dayes 5151/1189. He sat inthr'd Now Bayliffes first begun In London: many Christian princes raise Fresh powers, to gaine Ierusalem late wun, Almaine, France, England, Burgoine (whom most praise) To this, Sicilia, Venice, Pysa run, 5152./1191 And quell the Pagans. Richard Cipresse tooke, And Acon, where the French King him forsooke. 30 Frederick the Empetor, hauing late subdude The lesse Armenia, where his Fame was sowned, Through greatest part of Asia gan inttude, 5151/1190 And of that Tri-part world was soueraigne Crowned, But by misfortune or by rashnesude, Was after in the flood Selephins drowned: Richard exchang'd with Gui of Lessingham The Crowne of Cipresse, for Ierusalem. 5154./1193 31 Grac'st with the title of the holy King, Returning with a small and slendet traine Towards England, where his Brother Iohn vsurping, Tooke to himselfe a short rebellious raigne, The Austrich Duke, King Richard enuying, Surpriz'd him first, then gaue him to be slaine To s fierce Lyon, whom vnarm'd he beat, And from his bulke his warme heart tore and eat. 32 Thence ransom'd, (after warre) prince Iohn submits, 5154/1193. Whilst Saphandenus Egipts Empire swayde, In Spaines Tribunall the eight Alphons sits, Emericus Hungariaes King is made, To Innocent the third, th'Emperour submits, Who eighteene years the Papall Crosier staide, 5159/1198 He first deuisd Auricular confession, Which since his time, the Popes keepe by succession. 33 Richard besideging Gailerd long with Steele, Was with an Arrow from the Castle wounded, 5161/1200 Shot by the hand of one Peter Bazeele, He slaine, Retrait the valiant English sounded,
His want, the Cleargy, Peeres, and Commons feele, In whom Religion, power, and state abound: Next him King Iohn succeeds by the Lands doome, King Iohn Who whilst he raign'd despisd the threats of Rome. 34 Raign'd seuenteene years, him phillip King of France 5162/1201. Inuades, in Arthur Duke of Brittons name, Whose powers the English Iohn surprisd by chance, Imprisoning Arthur whence these Garboyles came, The Persians Dauid to the Throne aduance, Who with his Indian Troopes marcht with much Fame, Of Parthia and Armenia Conqueror, And of Tartaria the first Emperor. 5164/1203 35 Fiue Moones were all at once in Torkeshire seene, After which portent many stormes insude, prince Iohn hauing incurd the popes fell spleene, Stands with his Land accurst, which some allude To Byshop Lanchton, who at Rome had beene, 5167/1206. And sought in Canterbury to intrude: In Suffolke was a strange Fish tooke, that bore The shape of man, and six months liu'd a shore. 36 The Maior and Shrieffes in London were first made, 5170/1209 Wales twice rebelling was by warre appeasd, Th'English at Sluce the Nauy of France inuade, A thousand twenty sayle at once they ceasd, Pope Innocent great Coesars pompe all aide, Making such Lawes as searce the Empire pleasd, Onely such princes should as Emperors stand, As should receiue their Crownes at the popes hand. 37 Of whom the Saxon Duke Otho was first, 5173/1212 Venice subdues Coreyra, and the Iles Adiacent, Otho by the popeaccurst, For taking to himselfe the Empires stiles, Against him Menace warre pope Innocent durst, and traind into these broyles by prayers and smiles: Fredericke the second, who the Diadem weares after Duke Otho, three and twenty yeares.
38 Iohn for a yearely tribute to Rome payde, Of twice fiue hundred Markes, absolues his Land, King Alexander is the Scotch King made, 5174/1213 (After deceased William, to command,) He twenty and foure yeares the kingdome staide, Against King Iohn the English Barons stand, And to their faction the French Lewes bring, Whom in Iohns stead they seeke t'elect as King. 5177./1216. 39 Amidst these tumults Iohn by fate expires, (As some suppose) by poyson: whom succeeds Henry his sonne: him more the Land desires Then Lewes, hated for some bloody deeds, Henry the 3. For him the people make triumphant fires, 5179./1220 A generall ioy his hye instalment breeds: at nineteene yeares, the kingdome hee attained, and fifty fix yeares o're his subiects raigned. 40 Our Ladies Church in Westminster he reared, 5181/1220. Now Hocata the second puissant King Of great Tartaria, was renownd and feared, He first the Title of great Caan did win, The drooping Scotch King was by Henry cheared, To whom he gaue his Sister (next of Kin) 5182/1221 Faire Ioane Robert: Graciaes Empire swayd. Who to his Empresse tooke a beautious Mayd. 41 She was before betroth'd to a great peere Of Burgoine, he the Emperours pompe despysing, Entred his armed pallace without feare, 5183/1222 The Damsell in the Emperors armes surprising, He first cut off her nose (reuenge seuere) And from that place himselfe disguising: To her'fore bribed Mother posting fast, Th'in constant Dame into the Seas he cast. 42 The Scots in Cathnes their proud Byshop burne, Because he curst such, as their tythes denide, 5184./1223 Wards were first graunted, Frederick doth returne 5186./1225 Towards Asia, and the Souldan puft with pride,
Vanquisht in field, and now no longer mourne Those Christians that in Palestine abide; 5190/1229 England with France makes warre, and after peace, Tumults in Wales arise, but soone surcease. 43 Frederick, King Henries Sister takes to wife, 5196/1235. Cald Isabell: Henry takes Elanour, Daughter to th'Earle of Prouence, ending strife Twixt them before begun, about that houre His spousals were solemniz'd, and ioyes rife, In th'Element appear'd a war like power 5198/1237 Of men in armes, of diers wings compacted, The Merton Statute now was first enacted. 44 This yeare the famous faction first begun 5201/1240 Of Guelfes and Gibelines, Tartarian Caan Inuades the Hungars, and their kingdome won, 5202/1241 Where their King Bela was in battaile slaine, The Mother eats her Childe, and Sire, the Sonne, So great was hunger mongst the Hungars than: Now London Aldermen were first elected, 5203./1242 and Frederick once more by the pope reiected. 45 Pope Innocent the fourth from th'Emperour flying 5204/1243. To Lyons: to the Cardinals first gaue Red hats. A Iew in Spaine Christs faith denying, picrst a huge rocke, there found a hallow Caue, In it a Marble stone which with Steele trying, He finds a Booke inclosd with praecepts graue, 5206/1245 Which spoke of Christ, by which the Story saith, The stiffe-neckt Iew was turn'd to Christian faith. 46 Henry with London Citty late displeasd, For sentence gainst one Margaret Viell past, 5209/1248 Into his power the Cities Charters ceasd, Which by submission they regain'd at last, Young Alexanders Father long diseads Expir'd in Scotland, the young prince in hast at nine yeares Crownd, to whom Henry affide, 5213./1252. His Daughter Mary, whom he tooke to Bride.
47 In Italy bloud issued out of bread 5214/1253 As out of woundes, French Lewes was surprisd By the great Souldan: Mango Caan's made head Of the rude Tartars, who being well aduisde, 5219/1254 Receiued the Christian Fayth, and after sped against the Turkes, in Crosses red disguisde: Alphons of Spaine bestowes his Daughter fayre On young Prince Edward, Henries hopefull heyre. 48 Richard of Cornwall, Brother to the King,5218/1257 At Aquisgraue was Emperor elected, and Alphons of Castile the State affecting, 5219/1258. Was by the Electors from the State reiected, Albertus Magnus flourisht in his spring, And Michael Paleologus, respected For his great warres in Greece, who Baldwin slew, 5221./1260. and thirty fiue yeares in the Empire grewe. 49 At Oxford the mad Parlement began, 5225/1264. King Henry with his Barons doth contend, They fought neare Lewes, many a valiant man Of Noble bloud came to a timeless end, The King against his Peeres the best he can, Striues by the Sword, his Barons to offend: Richard of Cornwayle Brother to the King and Em∣peror. Who Manger all his force the battaile wonne, Surprisd the King, his Brother, and his Sonne. 50 Prince Edward entred Asia, and there fought 5233./1272 against the Turkes, where he atchieued much fame, at length his life was by a Sarazan sought, Who with a Knife to his Pauilion came Empoysoned: and his death had almost wrought, For in his princely arme he fixt the same: Richard, King Henries Brother, and Romes king 5233/1272 First dyes, and after Henry, the same spring. 51 Next whom, Prince Edward Long-shankes was inucsted, Edward the first. and thirty foure yeares raign'd, admir'd and feared, Th'vsurping pride of Priests, he much detested, 5235/1274 Bounty and Vertue in this Prince appeared,
Nicholas the third made Pope, from th'Empire wrested 5238/1277 Two Kingdomes for two Nephewes, much indeered: 5240/1279 Of lewes at once (that in their wealth tooke pride,) Two hundred eyghty foure, for Coyning dyde. 52 Lewellen next rebeld, slaino by the hand Of Roger Mortimer. After not long Dauid his Brother did gainst Edward stand, 5246/1285. A daungerous Rebell, and infaction strong, Yet perisht likewise, with his warlike Band Of Welch reuolted: (other things among) King Edward ioyes, to quell the French-mens scorne, and for Prince Edward at Carnaruan borne. 53 Alexander Issu-lesse fell from his Steed And brake his necke, the Carmelites began. 5247/1286. Phillip the fayre, in France was King decreed, Two Women in Heluetia liued than, Who in their Wombs did two strange Monsters breed, One bore a Child that had the face of man, and body of a Lyon: th'other bred 5248/1287 One with two bodies, from the Girdle-sted. 54 The Scotch King dying Issulesse, contention In Scotland grew, who should succeede the State, The strife Edward atton'd, and after mention 5253./1292 Made of their Title, which these Lords relate, He arbitrates theyr fierce and hot dissention, And to Iohn Balioll priz'd at hyest rate 5254/1293 He giues the Crowne, which pleased Scotland well, Madock and Morgan now in Wales rebell.  5255/1294 55 Edward thrice war'd gainst Scotland, and preuayled,  5260/1299 The French Kings Sister Margaret tooke to Wife, and to his Sonne the Princedome he entayled  Edward the 2. the 1. Prince of Wales. Of Wales, proud Ottoman began great stufe With Christendome, and many Townes assayled, In him the Empire of the Turkes tooke life: 5261/1300 Pope Boniface the eyght suruiued than, He first in Rome the Iubilee began.
56 Creat Tamor Ca gouernd Tartaria, Albert the Empire, France, King Phillip guided, 5267./1306. Prince Ladislaus ruld Hungaria; Clement the fift the seat of Rome deuided, Transporting it to France, which from that day Seauenty foure yeares continew'd vndecided: 5268/1307. Seraph th'Egiptian Souldan-ship supplide,  Edward 2. Edward the first in his Scotch garboiles dide. 57 The second Edward him succeeds, and raignes 5269/1308 Full eighteene yeares, a Prince of no renowne, He ryots, Lusts, and wantonnesse maintaind Mongst priuate vnthrifts, and his peeres put downe, Henry the Emperour hauing brauely gaind, Henry 7. Em. Many great fields was with an yron Crowne 5270/1309. at Milleine Crownd, where he aduancst his name, The Crutched Fryares first into England came. 58 Peirs Gaueston twice banisht by the Peeres, Was by the King recald: Iohn Tamer rose 5076./1315 In rebell armes, destroyd by his owne feares, Phillip the long, their King the French-men chose, The hauty Spencers triumpht many yeares Ouer the Nobles, who themselues oppose against their pride: the Spencers they exile, Whom the loose King reuoked in small while. 59 Twenty two Barons (for the Spencers loue) 5283/1322. The King cut off: the Sun six houres appeared Of sanguine hew, his glorious brightnesse stroue with his red Maske, which at the last he cleared, Edward his force did twice gainst Scotland proue, (Both times the soyle with English blood besmeared:) 584/1323 The Queene and Prince the Spencers could not brook And like two exiles their owne Land forsooke. 60 Sir Iohn of Henault Lands in the Queenes ayde, And hy the Barons helpe, the King pursued, who after in strong Barkley Castle layde Sir Roger Mortimer, a man indude
With Pride and Tyrrany the King betrayde, 5287/1326 and with the Kings bloud  Tower Imbrude: Baldock, the Spencers Minions to the King, The Conquering Peeres vnto destruction bring. 61 Edward King Edwards Sonne, fifty yeares bore Edward the 3. Englands rich Scepter: Charles the French King dide, Leauing no issue of the Royall store, 5288/1327 Therefore King Edward being next alyde, Claymes France, to which the Doncipeeres restore Phillip Valois, and Edwards clayme deride: Sir Roger Mortimer (long graft boue reason 5291/1330 By the Kings Mother) was condemn'd of Treason. 62 Edward the Blacke-Prince was at Woodstocke borne, 5293/1332 King Edward fought the fild cald Haldonne Hill In Scotland, After some few dayes out-worne, The King his clayme to France doth menace still, Petrach the Laureat liu'd, the French in scorne, Foure hundred Sayle with armed Souldiers fill: 5301/1340. These Edward meetes at Siuce, whom fame hath sounded, Thirty three thousand of French t'haue slain & drowned. 63 The order of the Garter was first made, Soone after was the famous Cressie field, Don Petro by his Spanish Peeres betrayde, Was to their violent fury forst to yeild, Edward wan Callis: Iohn next Phillip swayde 5309/1348 In France, and mena'st with his warlike Shield: The braue Black-Prince at Poytieres battayle wonne 5317./1356 The field, the French King Prisoner, and his Sonne. 64 Melchella was now Souldan, Amurath Emperor of Turky, and with Conquest fought, 5324/1363. (A persecutor of the Christian Fayth) The French King-Iohn hauing his peace now bought, at Sauoy dide: and Charles the sixt next hath The Crowne of France, Don-Peter ayde besought: 5327/1366 Who late exiled from the Crowne of Spaine, Was by the Black-Prince repostest againe.
65 The Duke of Lacaster France ouer-run. Iohn a Gaunt Duke of Lan∣caster Vnfought withall: Sir Robert Knowles likewise Marcht by the Citty Paris: now begun 5334/1373. Great Baiazeth among the Turkes to rise, The braue blacke Prince (from France where he had won So many Noble fields) returning dyes: 5337./1376. The King himselfe (as our best writers say) Expird, of Iune the two and twentith day. 66 Richard the second, sonne to the bold Prince Richard 2. Edward (sit-namd the Blacke) at yeares eleuen Began his rule, whom many men conuince Of wanton ryot, and a course vneuen, Well tutor'd in's minority, but since 5341/1380 He manag'd state, too much neglecting heauen: Gunnes were deuisd first by a Germaine Fryer, France doth the Kingdome of Nauar desire. 67 Queene ane of Naples flourisht, Bohemes King Vinceslaus, was Almaine Emperor made, Twixt Portugall and Castile discords spring, Two Popes contend; the Genowayes inuade The bold Venetians, and to battaile bring Their Nauall powers, both Ensignes flye displaid: 5342/1381 Iacke Straw dyes, stabd in Smithfield by the care Of William Walworth, at that time Lord Maior. 68 A wondrous Earth-quake did whole England shake, 5343/1382 King Richard th Almaine Emperors daughter wiude, The Turkes in Christendome great vprores make, 5346/1385 Iohn Galeazo in those dayes suruiu'd, Duke Iohn of Gaunt, doth a braue voyage take To conquer Spaine, and in his purpose thriu'd: The Barons of the Realme themselues with-drew, 5347/1386 And many of the King seducers slew. 69 The Duke of Lancaster his daughter Kate, 5349/1389 Married to Henry Castiles eldess sonne, His second daughter had the Queene-like state Of Portugall, by which all warres were done,
The Turke in Hungary suppreft but late, 5350/1389. Seekes by his power all Geece to ouer-ron: The Acade∣my of  leine foud. Against Constantiopolis, he layde at eyght-yeare siedge: now Colleines Schoole was made. 70 Robert of Scotland dying, Iohn his heyre 5356/1395 Succeedes next: Richard (Queene Anne beiug dead) Espousd French Isabel: then did prepare For Ireland, where's voyage slowly sped, The Duke of Gloster and Earle of Arun∣dell. He put to death his Vncles, for the care Of him and his Realmes safty (sore misled) Hereford and Norfolke Dukes the Combat clayme, 5359/1398 and both are banist in King Richards name. 71 The Sithian Tamberlaine the Turkes subdude, and kept theyr Emperor in an Iron Cage, Hereford against his sentence, durst intrude Himselfe int'England, and gainst Richard wage A threatned warre: the Peeres Richard exclude From gouernment, who in his strength of age Resignes his Crowne, his Dignity, and Fame, Edward the fourth. To Henry Bullingbrooke, fourth of that name. 72 Gainst whom the Duke of Exeter, Richards Brother, 5360/1399 The Dukes of Surry and Aumarle conspyre, With Glocester, who his hatred cannot smother, And Salsbury, all these his life conspyre, and for it lost their lyues, with many other Of the same faction, seeking to aspyre: Richard is slayne in Prison, after showne Through London streets, to haue his death wel known. 73 Owen Glendoure raysd armes: Hotspur rebeld, Woorster, Northumberland, with others moe, 5362/1401 Whom Edward met at Shrewsbury, and queld, Giuing those Lords a Mortall ouerthrow, The Milleine Duke, that many yeares exceld Galiazo Duke of Milleine. In Tyranny, at length was layde full low: Leauing to Iohn his Sonne the Dukedomes Seat,  5363/1402 This yeare was stated Mahome the great.
74 Charles of Cremona, by the Treason dide 5367/1460. Of base Cabrinus Fundulus, his slaue, Th'Arch-Byshop Scroope, that Edward late defide, Surprizd in field, came to a timelesse graue, In Poland at Cracouia full of pride, Was founded th'Accademy: some depraue 5368/1407 The Burgoin Duke, that did his hands imbrew In Orleance blood, whom he by Treason slew. 75 Saint Andrewes Vniuersity begon 5372/1411 In Scotland, Ioh the Milleine Duke is slaine Of his owne Subjects: Ladislaus won The Citty Rome, which he gaue vp againe, Henry the S. King Edward dying, left vnto his son Henry the fift, a faire and prosperous raigne: 5374/1413. Ten yeares he did his Royall fame aduance, and to his Crowne annext the Realme of France. 76 Great Amurath sway'd Turky: Iohn, Castile: The sixt Charles, France; Pope Martin, Peters Chaire: at Henries claime to France the French-men smile, With many taunts they Englands puissance dare, King Henrie crost the seas, and in small while 5377./1416 at Agin-court, manag'd a fight so rare: That in one battaile he the Land ore-tun, Leauiug the Crowne successiue to his son. 77 Ieremy Prague, and Iohn Husse dye by fire 5378/1417 about religious causes, Ziscaled The Thaborytes, and further gan aspire against the Emperour to list his head, French Katherine was Crownd Queene by great desire Of all our English peeres: Duke Clarens sped 5382/1421 against the Dolphin, but (alas) in vaine, By multitudes he was ore-set and slaine. 78 Henry t'auenge his Brothers death, prepares 5383/1422 againe to inuade France, where he breaths his last, Pale death that in his rigour no man spates, Beteaues him life: his infant sonne not past
Eyght months of age, assumes the Lands affayres Henry the sixt Vnder protection: Bedfards Duke was great5389/1428 With Regency of France, a Sorceting Maide, Ioane de pusill. Fought on the Dolphins part, and brought him ayde. 79 Who in small time was King of France proclaymde, at Orleance braue Mountacute is slaine, Prince Sigismond is Roman Emperor nam'd, 5394/1433. Eugenius doth the papall Sea maintaine, Eug. 4. Phillip guides Milleine: now was Talboot fam'd, Who many lost Townes did in France regaine: 5398/1437 Now flourisht Francis Forza in his pride, The Lyons in the Tower this yeare all dyde. 80 Zeuza liues Persiaes King: for Sorcery 5399/1438 Dame Elen Cobham the Protectors Wise, With diuers others were found treacherously  5420/1441 To haue cnnspyred against King Henries life, Dame Margaret to the King of Scicily Sole-Daughter (which began much future strife) 5406/1445 To Henries Bed, with Suffolke crost the Scas, now liu'd the braue Prince Huniades. 81 Humphrey the Duke of Gloster, was depriu'd 5408/1447 His harmelesse life at Bury: Suffolke now 5411/1450 Was banisht England, where he long had striu'd By the Kings grace to make the Barons bow, Iacke Cade, a mutit ous Rebell, now suruiu'd, Dating the Kings Edicts to disalow: This was the yeare of Iubilee: In Menz, 5413/1452. Faustius first printed, at his owne expence. 82 The Turkish Mahomet sackt and despoylde 5414/1453 Constantinople: at this time was fought  5415/1454 Saint Albons battaile, where the King was foyld, and by the Duke of yorke a prisoner blought To London: the sixt Henry being much toyld 5416/1455 With Kingdomes cares, his peace and quiet sought, Making proud yorke protector: now was fam'd George Castriotus, (Scanderbag sir-nam'd,)
83 Great Warwicke at Northampton the King met In battaile, of the Barons many slew, Surpri'd the King in person without let, 5420/1459 The Duke of Torke reuiues his claime anew, Whom many of the chiefest Lords abet, 5421/1460 And in the Parlement his right pursue: Being Titled heyre apparant to the Crowne, at Wakefield him, King Henries Queene put downe. 84 Great Warwike at Saint Albons she made flie, Rescuing the King her husband in small space, Torkes sonne the Earle of March gan to defie, and sought by armes King Henry to displace, Neere Torke both powers each other soone discry, Where the fourth Edward hath the King in chace: Edward 4. and now the victors Lord it where they please, Whilst Margaret with her young son crost the Seas. 85 Twelue Kingdomes, and two hundred Citties more, 5224/1463 Great Mahomet subdues: next Exham field Was fought by them that Henry would restore, But to King Edwards powers perforce they yeild, 5225/1464 Who wiues the Lady Gray, she that before Was wife to Sir Iohn Gray: Warwick, his shield aduancst against the King, whom he had Crownd, and for French Bona seekes him to confound. 78 Edward flyes England, Henry is restord, 5431/1470 and Edward with an army Lands againe, Where Warwickes pride vpon his shield is scord, Edward ore-comes his powers on Barnet plaine, Earle Warwicke by the Commons is deplord, 5432/1471 Edward the fourth once more vsurpes his raigne: Gloster kils Henries sonne, then madly fares Gainst Henrie, whom he murdred at his Prayers. 87 Cassanus gouernd Persia, Mistris Shore 5435/1474 Was famous for her beauty: Hungary Mathias ruld, The Pope (not knowne before) 5436/1475 at twenty fiue yeares made the lubily
The Duke of Clarens is lamented sore, 5444./1483 Being in a Wine-but murdred treacherously: Edward expyres: two sons he leaues behind, Three Daughters, and a Brother most vnkind. 88 The eleauenth of Aprill, and the eleauenth sad yeare Edward the 5 Of his young age, fift Edward gins his raigne, But eare he yet was Crown'd, Richard (too neare) His Vncle did his hands with murther stayne, Both Edwards Children by his doome seuere, Were Butcherd in the Tower, and fouly slaine: now famous wearc, Gaza, Sabellicus Pycus Myrandula, Aldus Minutius. 89 George Valla, Hermolaus Barbarus, Pelitian Platine, with a many moe, Marcilius Ficinus, Pomponius Latus With Iohannes de monte regio, Now Venice and Ferara peace discusse, 5445/1484 Great Baiazeth sustaines an ouerthrow By the bold Souldan, next instated came Vsurping Richard, cald third of that name. Richard the 3. 90 Two yeares, two months, and two dayes he inioyes Regality, whilst Charles the eyght swayes France, And Innocent the eyght his power imployes In Rome, his Bastards to inhance Richard, the Duke of Buckingham destroyes, Who thought the Earle of Richmond to aduance: 5446/1485 Henry Earle Richmond, Mlford Hauen sought, Where landing, he the field of Bosworth fought. 91 Richard there slaine, Henry the seauenth sits Crown'd, Henry the 7. Twenty three yeares: Vgnerus Persia guides: Fredericke the Empire: Henry, to make found The breach that Torke and Lancaster deuides, a happy nuptiall contract doth propound With fayre Elizabeth, whom soone he brides: She heyre to yorke: This yeare (a disease new) The Sweating sicknesse first in England grew.
82 Spaines Ferdinand, the kingdome of Granade 5448/1487 Wan from the Sarazens: Lambert a Child Taught by a Priest cald Simon, came to inuade England with a new stile, by him compil'd As Sonne to Clarens: in this claime were made Chiese Leaders, Francis Louel once exil'd: 5450/1439 Broughton, and Lincolnes Earle, with whom took part, A valiant German that hight Martin-Swart. 83 These Henry slew in battaile, and arrear'd A Taxe of the Tenth-penny through the Land, 5451/1490. For which the Commons in the field appeard, And kill Northumbers Earle: with a strong band Henry inuaded France: Columbus cleard 5453/1492 The vnknowne Seas, and boldly tooke in hand The Indies first discouery: Insurrection 5456/1495 By Perkin Warbeck, in forraine protection. 84 In Italy a Stone exceeding great Fell from the ayre: Lord Audly now rebeld, 5457/1496. Henry and the Scotch King of peace intreat, The Turke the bold Venetian forces queld, 5459./1498 Who at Dyrachium sought him to defeate, Katherine of Spaine, a Lady that exceld, Was fianst to Prince Arthur, Sforce subdude 5461/1500 Milleine, and all the French-men did exclude. 1462/1501 85 Margaret King Henries Daughter was affyde Vnto Scotch Iames: In Germany bloud raind,  5460/1502 Elizabeth the Queene in Child-bed dyde, The French this yeare from Naples were constrainde 5469/1508 By Ferdinand of Spaine: Now in his pride Liu'd Prestor-Iohn, Great Ismael Sophy gaind,  5470/1509 Vpon the Turke in many a warlike strife, Henry the seauenth at Richmond ends his life. 86 At eyghteene yeares Henry the eyght succedes And thirty eyght yeares raign'd, his Brothers Wife Henry the eyght. He marries by the Popes dispence, which breedes Among the Cardinals murmure and strife,
Emson and Dudley hated for theyr deeds, 5471/1510. To please the Commons were depriu'd of life: Now Doctor Collet liu'd, a man of fame, Erasmus too, deriu'd from Rhoterdame. 97 The Turkish Tyrant Selimus by warre, 5473/1512 Two Aegiptian Souldans chast and slew, The Muscouites the stoute Pollonians barre, Some rights, for which great battailes t'ween them grew, France still retaines the memorable searre Of Henries valor, who that time o'rethrew 5474/1513 Turwin and Turney: in whose streetes appeare, Turrets as many as be daies 'th yeare. 98 A peace with France, King Lewes, Mary wiues, Sister to Henry, and within few dayes 5475/1514 Expyres, Charles Brandon gainst the French-men striues, At Tilt and Barriers where he won great prayse, and fetcht the Queene thence: Francis next suruiues The King of France: Charles Brandon now assayes The Queene, and marryes her, in small while after, 5476/1515 Mary was borne, King Henries eldest Daughter. 99 Charles Duke of Austrich is made King of Spaine, 5478/1517 The Citties tumult chanc't on Ill-May-day, Cardinall Woolsy flourisht: now complaine The Popes allyes gainst Luther: Turkes display 5479/1518 Theyr Ensignes against Belgrade: once againe 5481/1520 Zuinglius began against the Pope t'inuaye: Whose Doctrines, learnd Erasmus seemde to abet, Henry at Arde in France, the French King met. 100 Charles is Crown'd Emperor: th'eyght Henry writ5481/1520 A Booke gainst Luther: This yeare lost his head The Duke of Buckingham, and now did sit In the Turkes Throne, a Prince with fury led, 5483/1522. Who Belgraue did besidge, and threatned it Great Solyman: The Emperor Charles him sped For England, where at Windsore he was called Vnto the Garter, and there Knight installed.
101 Christierne of Denmarke banisht, with his Wife 5484/1523 Enter this Land, where they were well intreated, The Earle of Surry in his Northerne strife, In many sundry fights the Foe defeated, Stormes and tempestuous Gusts this yeare were rife, And in Granade, a Prodince fayrely seared, 5487/1526. Were Citties swallowed, the great Turke makes hed, From whom the Hungars king, drown'd as he fled. 102 The Annabaptists sect was first begun, 5488/1527 Charles Burbons Duke sackt Rome, and there was slaine, Vaivad grew great in Fame, this yeare the Sunne Appear'd three Sunnes at once. Katherine of Spaine, (Before prince Arthurs wife) the king is wun, To be diuorst from; this diuorse in vaine 5490/1528 Cardinall Woolsie seekes (by meanes) to crosse, Which to his ruine turnes, and fauours losse, 103 Tindall the holy Scripture now translated, 5491/1530 Th'arrested Cardinall at Leister dide,  5493/1523 And Ferdinand is King of Rome created, Anne Bulloine next became King Henrtes Bride, And Thomas Cromwell whom the Cleargy hated, Made of the Counsell, the Kings Sister tyde In marriage to Charles Brandon, dyes forlorne, 5494/1533 Elizabeth was now at Greenewich borne. 104 For Treason dyde the holy Mayde of Kent, 5494/1536 Lady Anne Bulloine like wise lost her head, Erasmus after seauenty Winters spent Expi'd, whose fame through Christendome is spread, Lady Iane Seamors beauty did content The King so well, he tooke her to his bed, 5498/1537. And on Saint Edwards Eeue this yeare, tooke life noble Prince Edward, by the kings late Wife. 105 Fryer Forrest dyde for Treason: One of Spaine, 5499/1538 For eating Flesh vpon a day of Fast, Was hang'd in Paris (and tooke downe againe) His Lady burnt: A full conclusion past,
Of Marriage tweene the King and Lady Anne 5500/1539 Of Cleeue, which solemne contract did distast The Kinges soone after: who for her rare feature, Wiu'd Lady Katherine Howard, a fayer Creature. 106 Cromwell next lost his head: the disputation 5501/1540. Begun at Rat'isbone: Henry th'eyght is stiled The King of Ireland, by his proclamation, and Lady Katherine Howard, who defiled Her vnchast body, with much lamentation Led to her death: now Luther was reled 5504./1533 In the Popes Trident Counsell, the King wed The Lady Katherine, Lat'mer to his Bed. 107 The Turkish Barbaressa famous grew In Germany, at Mounster bloud did raigne, Troubles with Scotland: next these did insue The Counsell held at Spyre: now once againe Henry inuaded France, and did pursue 5505/1544. The Bullenois, since many did complaine Against the Stewes, they were abandond quite, The pope the Wormace Counsell did accite. 108 Luther expyres, soone after dyes the king, 5507/1546 Henry the eyght, whom the sixt Edward then  1508/1547 Succeedes at nine yeares old, now first gan spring That reform'd Church, which at first many men  Edward the 6. Impugn'd: Masses no more the Church-men sing, Next Musele-borrow field did happen, when Much bloud was spilt a both-sides, Bonner now, 5509/1548 (Great in his Fathers dayes) the king makes bow. 109 Stephen Gardiner is cast into the tower, The Brother Seamers (falling at dissention By meanes of their proud Wiues) begin to lower Each vpon other, which without preuention, Causd timelesse Fate, both their sweet liues deuower, 5500/1549 First Arundell, then Kit had firme intention To change the State, but both were hang'd in chaines, Bulloine was giuen vp by the French-mens traynes.
111 At Feuersham was murdred by his Wife 5512/1551, Arden, by helpe of Mosby and Blacke-Will, 5514/1553. The Trade with Musco did now first grow rife,  Cuford Dud∣ley to the D. Northumber∣land. Mong th'English Marchants, by the Nauiall skill Of one Gabato, he that first gaue life To these aduentures. Many rumors fill The Land with newes, that Edward lately dide, Meane time the Lady Iane's made Guilfords Bride. 112 Edward at sixteene yeares ofage deceast, The Duke Northumberland proclaimes Queene Iane, Q. Iane. But soone her young and Infant title ceast, The Commons by their power Mary maintaine, Q. Mary. Sister to Edward: her high State increast, And next her Brother she begins her raigne: Guilford and Iane, with whom the Queene's offended, Sent to the Tower where their sweete liues they ended. 113 Bourne preaching at Panles-Crosse, the Masse maintaining, Bourne Can∣non of Paules A suddaine tumult at his Sermon raisde, A man vnknowne his Doctrine much disdaining, Threw at his face a Dagger: Ridley praysd Mongst protestants: and Cramner fauour gaining Ridley Bishop of London Cramer Arch∣bishop of Cterbury. In Edwards dayes, were for Arch-traitors blaz'd And dide by fire, Northumberland that sped To Cambridge: on the Tower-hill lost his hed. 114 The Turkish Solyman with his owne hands Slew his sonne Mustapha, the Cardinall Caral Poole In Henries dayes but late exild his Lands, Was by the Queene recald, now gan to fall The protestants; against them strictly stands The Catholicke Cleargy: the proud Genowayes brall With the French King, who after in small while, Wan by the Turkes ayde the rich Corsicke Ile. 115 Englands great Queene espousd Phillip of Spaine, 5515/1554 Sir Thomas Wyat for rebellion dide,  Coortney earle of Deuonshire. Duke Suffolke Father to the Lady Iane, Was at the Tower beheaded, Coortney allyde
To the blood Royall once more they restraine Of Liberty: the fourth Paule full of pride Supplies the pope-dome, the same year did chance, Much warr and trouble betweene Spaine and France. 116 Lady Elizabeth was keptin hold, and by the Queene committed to the Tower, 5516./1555 There harshly vsd, her life to danger sold, By souldiers thece remooud to Wood-stocke Bower, Sir Henry Benning-field (somewhat too bold) Vpon her iust proceedings looking sower: 5517/1556. a blazing Comet twelue full nights appeared, Great Lones of Money by the Queene were reared. 117 Great dearth in England: For base murder dide at Salisbury Lord Sturton: Callis lost, 5510./1558 Which was by England many yeares supplide, Since the third Edward, the proud Clergy mgrost all the spirituall fruits, to glut their pride, Phillip tooke fea, and left the English Coast, K. Phillip. For griefe of which Mary soone after craisd, 5520/1959. and dide, with Cardinall Poole, (in England raisd) 118 Next whom the faire Elizabeth is Crownd; a Princesse with all gracious Thewes indude, Q Elizab. She did the Gospell quicken, and confound Romes Antichrist, all such as he pursude With fire and Inquisition, she guirt round With safety, and her Lands pure face imbrude With blood of Innocents, her prospetous raigne Cleard, and wipt off each foule and bloody staine. 119 Henry the French King in the ilt was layde Henry the 2 Breathlesse at Paris, Paules is burnt, a peace 5521./1560. Betweene the Realmes of France and England made, Newhauen siege, and a great plagles increase, Lord Henry Stewart to the hests obayd Of the Scotch peeres, whose vgings neuer ease: 5525./1564 Till to their generall comforts, he was seene Espousd to Lady Mary Scotlands Queene.
120 Now came the Baden margra with his wife 5246./1565. To London, she heere brought him a new sonne, Whom the Queene Christend, breathing a new life In his decaid estate. Now was begun 5227/1566. The Burse on Cornhill, whose renowne grew rife In euery place, where Traffickes gaine is won: In Scotland to restore a kingdome torne, Iames (of that name) the fixt, this yeare was borne. 121 Henry of Scotland was by Traytors slaine, And Shan Oneile in Ireland put to flight 5528/1567 By bold Sir Henry Sidney, with the gaine Of a great battaile, where theyr Treasons light Vpon the Traytors: with a gallant trayne, The Muscouite lands in his Emperors right 5530/5569 T'establish Trafficke: now as rebels stand Th'Earles of Nor thumber land and Westmerland. 122 Debate with Scotland: and in Norfolke grew Conspiracy, the Queene in person came 5531./1570 To Gressams Burse, to take a princely view, To which she gaue at his request a name, Royall Exchange: this yeare the Christians slew Many proud Turkes, and beate them backe with shame 5532/1571. Into theyr Foretresses, and Citties walled, This was the battaile of Lepantho called. 123 A massacre in Paris, now their heads The Norfolke Duke lost, and Northumber land, 5533./1572 A blazing starre, six months together spreds Her fiery rayes, now by the violent hand Of one George Browne, who murdrous futy leads, 5524/1373. Was Maister Saunders slaine (the matter scand) Anne Dreury (for that fact) and Saunders wife, George Browne, with trusty Roger lost his life. 124 By Furbusher, Cathaia was made knowne, 5435./1576. The Essex Earle this yeare at Dinelon dide In Ireland, where his Fame was dreadfull growne, Ioh  Cassimerus did through London ride,
Desmond rebeld, Drake that had compast rowne 5542/1582 The world, and many dangerous Fortunes tride, Was Knighted by the Queene, Mounsier arriued, Thinking the English Monarchesse t'haue wiued. 125 William the Prince of Orenge was betrayde, 5543./1582 And with a Pystoll by a souldier slaine, Poland Musco into England made 5544./1583. avoyage, and did six months heere remaine, Purser and Clinton Pyrars, that denaide allegiance to the Queene, at length were tane By William Barrowes: Antwerpe sackt and spoyld By Parmaes Duke, who long against it toyld. 126 Northumberland himselfe in the Tower slew, 5546/1585. Iago, Domingo, and Carthagen, By Drake and Furbusher (whom most men knew) Carletle and many gallant Englishmen Surprisd and ckt, the Earle of Liester grew Great in the Land, and sayld to Flushing then: 5547/1586 Where his Commission he at large relates, Being made chiefe Generall to the Belgian states. 127 Embassadors from Denmarke gratulate Her highnesse raigne, the Earle of Arundell Conuict, aleague twixt England and the state Of Scotland, Noble Candish furnisht well In two good ships well mand and builded late, His twn ships the Desire and Content. Compast the world: the foureteene Traitors fell, and suffer'd for the guilt, at Zutphen dide, Noble Sir Phillip Sidney souldiers pride. 128 His death a generall griefe mongst souldiers bred, 5549/1588. a Parlyment. The great At made of Spaine Rode on the English Coast, and gainst vs sped, But by our Fleet they were repulst againe, at Tilbery, the Campe was brauely led By Elizabeth in person, in whose traine all Englands Chiualry mustred and met, Leister meane time to Nature paid his debt.
129 Portugall voyage; Lodwicke Grewill prest For murder: the bold Duke of Guise betraid And slaine, by the third Henry, when he least Suspected Death, a Fryer no whit dismaid, (Incouragd by the Guisians as tis ghest) Henry 4. kild Murdred the King, then Henrie Burbon laid Claime to the Crowne, whom England so supplies, That by her ayde, his warlike Fortunes rise. 130 Whom Essex, Willoughby, Norris assist, Sir Roger Williams with a many moe, Strong Paris they besiege, and as they list 5552/1591 March thorough France, maugre the common foe, Hacket is hangd in Cheape, who did persist In blasphemy: In London gan to grow 5553/1592 a grieuous Plague: Lopes arraind and tride, Drawne from the London Tower, at Tyburne dide. 131 Cales sieg'd and won, the Duke of Bulloine lands 5555/1594 In England: th'Islands voyage, this yeare came 5557/1596. Embassadors from Denmarke, from whose hands The Queene receiu'd rich presents: Now with Fame Th'Earle Cumberland renownd in forraigne Lands 5558/1597 Wan Iohn de Porterico, sackt the same: Lord Burleigh (Treasurer) submits to fate, 5559/1598. Since the sixt Edward Counsellor of state. 132 Essex is sent for Ireland, gainst Tyrone, a Muster at Mile-end: Essex comes backe 5560/1599 With a small traine of followers, after whom Lord Montioy speeds, against the dangerous packe Of Irish Rebels, whose braue valours showne In his hye Conquests, and their fatall wracke: The treacherous Gowry gainst King Iames conspired, 5561/1600 whose safety heauen couserud, the world admired. 133 Peace betwixt Spaine and France: from Barbary, and from the Russian Emperour Legats come, To gratulate the Queenes hye Soueraignty; A sudden Insurrection, for which some
Suffred, some Finde, some set at Liberty, Supprest without the clamour of the Drum: Embassador from Scotland, th'Earle of Marre, Desmond sent Prisoner from the Irish warre. 5563./1602. 34 Martiall Byron arriues from France: great ioy For victories in Ireland, since their pride Was queld by th'English, who their powers imploy To end the warres: soone after the Queene dide The death of Q. Elizabeth. At Richmond, in her death she did destroy All former mirth, this Virgin Queene supplide, Forty foure yeares, fiue months a prosperous raine, To Englands honour, and the feare of Spaine. 133 To Register her vertues, I should spend An age of time, yet thinke my scope too small, The pages of this Volume would extend Beyond strict number, yet not quote them all, Therefore her praises, in her death I end, They are so boundlesse that they cannot fall Within the compasse of my apprehension, Being subect to no limit, no dimension. 136 And to attempt that taske, I should alone My owne sicke weakenesle to the world bewray, And of her worth the smallest part or none, Vnto the Readers couetous eyes display, Therefore since she hath left an earthy Throne, For heauens hye Mansion (there to raigne for aye) I leaue her shrind mongst Angels, there to sing 5594/1603. Vn-ending praises to th'eternal King. 137 KIng Iames the sixt in Scotland, of that name In England first, her true and lawfull heyre, Next Queene Elizabeth the peeres proclaime, King Iames. And gladly plant him in fae Englands Chaire, Whose Vertues, Graces, Royall gifts, and Fame, Zeale, Iustice, Learning, all without compare: For thousands such, my Muse must' needs adore him, Vnriuald yet, by such as raignd before him.
138 His praise is for my pen a straine too hye, Therefore where he begins I make my pause, and onely pray that he may still supply Great Brittaines Empyre with the Lands applause, That as he hath begun to rectifie This Common-weale, and stblish vertuous Lawes: He still may'inioy his Queene, and yssue Royall, Mongst subiects euer true, and Peeres still loyall. 139 But where's the harbour and the happy Bay, Where after stormes I may in safety ride, The Gusts and Tempests now begin t'allay, Whose many boysterous flawes my Barke hath tride, A gentle Land-wind with my sayles doth play, and (thankes to Heauen) I now my hauen haue spide, And maugte the Seas wrath: Behold at last, Heere doth my shaken Ship her Anchor cast. HE that expects in this briefe Epitomy of Chronicles, that infinitnes of laber, to suruey all the particuler kingdoms of the earth, and euery destinct accident hapning in the, must not onely allow mee an Ages limit (and all too little) but with all assist me in the search of many Authors, whose workes are (some rare to be found) & others not at all extant. But my purpose was not to troble the world with such prolixity or con∣fusion of History, onely in a briefe Index, or short Register, (to comprize many and the most noted things) & to conferre their times with our history of England: In which, if I haue any way failed the Readers expectation, by inserting things friuolous, or omitting things Material, I must excuse it thus; I haue more will then Art, and more Indeuour then Cunning; yet, I make no question, he that shall succeed me in the like labour, will vse some mittigation of his Iudgement against me, and say at the least: It is done, though not well done: Onely thus much let me speake in my owne behalfe: With Ages past I haue been too little acquainted, and with this age present, I dare not bee too bold. FINIS.
