15489 99844197 8988
A PLEASANT SATYRE OR POESIE: Wherein is discouered the Catholi∣con of Spayne, and the chiefe lea∣ders of the League. FINELIE FETCHT OVER, AND laide open in their colours. Newly turned out of French into English. PROVERBS 19.25. Smite a scorner, and the foolish will be warie, &c. printer's device of Thomas Orwin BY WISDOME PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY. AT LONDON, Printed by the Widdow Orwin for Thomas Man, dwel∣ling in Pater-noster row at the signe of the Talbot. 1595.
A SATYRE MENIP∣PIZED, THAT IS TO SAY, a Poesie, sharplie, yet Philosophicallie and wisely rebuking vices without regard of persons. Touching the vertue of the Amongst the Phisitions it is a name giuen to medicines, vsed to purge all humours, & here applied to the briberie and other cor∣ruptions of the Spanyard. Catholicon of Spayne, and concerning the hol∣ding and assemblie of the States of Paris. Anno. Dom. 1594. The Printer of the French Copie to the Reader. THis discourse, touching the assemblie of the States of Paris, and touching the virtue and strength of the Catho∣licon of Spayne, was made and writ∣ten in the Italian tongue, by a Gentle∣man of Florence, which was at Paris, whilest the Estates were held and as∣sembled there, of purpose (as is to bee supposed) to carrie the same to his Master the Duke of Florence, that so he might represent vnto him the wonderfull estate of the affayres of France. But it fell out, that as he did returne into his coun∣trey, and passed by Amiens to goe into Flanders, his horse keeper being a Briton borne, and vnwilling to hazard him∣selfe in so long a voyage, and hauing perceiued that his Ma∣ster was no good Catholike (& yet he gathered it by nothing but this, that he called that He meaneth the King now raigning, who hath this name of Bearne, a coū∣trey subiect vn∣to him. Biarnois the King of France) he gently parted from him, without telling him any thing that grieued him, or that troubled him in his quiet estate: and to comfort himselfe for the keeping and feeding of two horses, he carried away the better of them, together with the cloake bagge or maile, in which was the originall of the sayd dis∣course. But God would haue him taken by certaine re∣ligious persons of Chasteauuerd, and brought before the Maior of Beauois, where he had been declared and ta∣ken for a good prize, by reason of some bootie or bagge of
He meaneth as I take it, double pisto∣lets: sure I am it is some Spa∣nish coyne. Grosse & pal∣pable supersti∣tion, beleeue it who will. Doublons found in the maile, but that he shewed them an ounce of Catholicon, which he carried in his purse, with se∣uen hallowed graines, and a shirt of Chartres, which had re∣mained nine daies and nine nights at our Ladies feete vnder the ground, being a preseruatiue to hinder the batterie of the cannons and artillerie, and to let the taking of the towne either by warre, or by iustice. In so much that he freely con∣fessed that he had forsaken his Master, after he knew him to be an heretike by this, that he called the Biarnois, King of France. Now amongst the instruments or stuffe found in the maile, Robbers pre∣tend right. (whereof there was a solemne Inuentoire taken and made, in the presence of the Maior, and of Doctor Lucain, the superintendent or ouerseer of the prizals and pillages) there was found the original or first copie of this Italian dis∣course, which the Maior did not vnderstand, and therefore praied the aforesaid Doctor Lucain, to translate it into good French. Of which the sayd Doctor excused himselfe, affir∣ming, that though he had skill well to speake the language of Rome, Better a bad one then none at all. yet he was not able, or knew not to appropriate it to the French finenes or naturalnes of their owne tongue. So that indeede they were inforced to giue it to a certaine little Monke or Frier called Romipete, who the next day after did disrobe and vnapparell himselfe from his vsuall garments, euen for very haste that he had to be at Paris, at the solemne blessing & generall procession, Deuotiō good enough for so bad an action. which the Legate should make for that same holy and Catholike enterprise, that Peter Bar∣riere of Orleans was to doe, & had vndertaken and sworne it vnto him, namely, to assault & murther his Maiestie at Me∣lun Howbeit, it so fell out, that the sayd poore Monk was ta∣ken by certaine Gentlemen, and found charged with the said discourse, which seemed so pleasant vnto thē, that presently one of thē turned it into French, & so from hand to hand the translatiō of it came euen vnto me, which I haue caused to be printed, as well to relieue from paine such as are curious to be∣hold all newes or nouelties, as to prouoke thē that yet lāguish vnder the yoke of that tyrānie: for they must needs be rotten & infected lepers indeed if they feele not this pricking goade, & doe not at the leastwise send forth some groanes for their libertie, that is readie to yeeld vp or dye. Farewell.
THE VIRTVE OR STRENGTH OF THE CATHOLICON. BEcause that the Catholique States, not long sithence held, and assembled at Paris, are not States by the douzzen, as wee may say, or common and accustomed, but haue some∣thing in them very rare and sin∣gular aboue all the rest, which as yet haue euer been held in France, I haue thought I shall doe a worke pleasant to all good and zealous Catholiques, and seruing much to the edification of faith, to set downe by writing the summe thereof, which is as it were some An Arrabian worde, and ex∣pounded by that which followeth. elixir, or quin∣tessence abstracted and drawne, not onely out of the orations, but also from the intentions and pretentions of the principall persons, that plaide their parts vpon this scaffolde or stage. But because both the prouinces ap∣poynted and summoned long time before, and their assignatiōs also were sundry times made frustrate by the white scarft souldiers, Hee meaneth the Kings for∣ces, who did commonlie weare white scarfes. Goodly things to comn end men to the counsell of E∣state. who crossed the waies of the de∣puties, that they could not passe, nor assemble themselues at the day set, the assemblie indeede was not so great, as some did hope and desire it might haue been. And yet notwithstanding there were founde in it, very notable & famous officers, who nothing at all gaue place, for the length and greatnes of their beards, and the burlines of
their bodie or corps, to the ancient Peeres of France. And among them, there were three at the least, of ve∣rie good knowledge & marke, that did weare coyfes, af∣ter the catholique manner, and one that did weare the great hat, and very seldome put it off. Which things the Politikes (who yet in Paris are more than sixteene,) tooke in the worst part, and saide, that the three that did weare coyfes, That is bald, as his was, reade the historie. were scuruie and scabbed, and he that did weare the great hatte, had a head like the Poet Aeschi∣lus, in so much as their common speech was, that in the said Estates, there was none but three scuruie or scalled persons, and one that was pilled or balde: and if the In∣quisition of Spayne had been in good time brought in, A holie house. I sawe more than fiue hundred of them (what say I fiue hundred?) yea fiue thousand, which by their blasphemies deserued nothing lesse, then the colling and imbracing of the president Brisson. But the lot fell not vpon any of them, but vpon a certaine poore miserable man, an Asse leader, who to hasten forward his miserable dullard al∣together wearied and tyred, with blowes and burthens, spake with a very high and vnderstandible voyce, these offensiue and blasphemous words, Let vs go (grosse Iohn) to the Estates: which wordes being taken, at the pond head, He meaneth the fauourits of Spayne. as wee say, and ere euer they were fully fallen, by one or two of the number of the foure squared Cuba, and brought to two Inquisitors or Promoters of the faith, namely, Machault, and de Here: this blasphemer was holilie and Catholikelie condemned to bee beaten and scourged naked with rods at his Asse tayle thorowe all the foure corners or quarters of Paris: which was an infallible prognostication, and a very famous and plaine prelude, to testifie to all the people that were assembled for that solemne action, that the proceedings of all the orders and States should be full of iustice and equitie, A scabbed horse good e∣nough for a scalde squire. as the sayd iudgement it selfe, which was the scantling of the great peece of the iustice of the Estates that were to come.
But whilest men were making preparations and scaf∣folds in the Louvre, (the ancient temple and dwelling place of the Kings of France) & while they were looking for the Deputies of all quarters, Pomp enough for so paltrie a meeting. who from moneth to moneth should come thether, with small noyse, and without pompe or shew of traine, as men were wont to doe in old time, before the pride and corruption of our fathers had brought in ryot & vicious superfluitie, The French word signifi∣eth such as play legier de maine, and vse sleights to de∣ceiue mens sights, and bringing drugs cut of farre countreys, would per∣swade mē the excellencie of them by recei∣uing them themselues. there were in the Court of the sayd Louvre, two craftie Iug∣glers or Apothecaries, the one a Spanyard, and the other a Lorrain, which it would haue done a man meruailous much good to see them vaunt their drugges, and to play their iuggling trickes all the liue long day before all thē that would go to see them, and that without paying any thing. The Spanish Iugler or Apothecarie was very pleasant, and mounted vpon a little scaffold, playing rex, as we say, or shewing his knacks and rugling tricks, and keeping the bancke or seate, much like to many of those that a man may see at Venice in the place of S. Marke. Vpon his scaffold there was tyed or set vp a great skinne of parchment written in diuers languages, and sealed with fiue or sixe seales, of golde, of lead, and of waxe, He meaneth the Cardmall of Plaisance power Legan∣tine from the Pope. with certaine titles in letters of gold, hauing therein these wordes: Letters touching the power of a certaine Spanyard, and of the meruailous effects of his drugge called Higuiero of Hell, or a Catholicon compounded. The summe of all this whole writing was, that this treacle maker, the young sonne of a certaine Spanyard of Grenado, ba∣nished into Africke for Mahometisme, the Phisitian of Ceriffa (who made himselfe King of Marroco, A fit instru∣ment for the Pope and the Spanyard. by a cer∣taine kind or sort of Higuiero) his father being dead came into Spayne, caused himselfe to bee baptized, and put himselfe to serue at Tolledo, in the Colledge of the Iesuites there: who hauing learned that the simple Ca∣tholicon of Rome had no other effects but to build vp soules, and to cause saluation and blessednes in the o∣ther world only, being wearie of so long a terme or time,
tooke counsell and was aduised by the counsell of his fathers will or testament, A word much vsed amongst Phisitians, A∣pothecaries and Distillers. to sophisticate this Catholicon so well, that by meanes of handling of it, of remouing and stirring of it, drawing it thorow a Limbecke or Stil∣latorie, and bringing it into powder, he made thereof, within that Colledge, That is a soue∣raigne and choyse thing. such a soueraigne electuarie, as sur∣passed all the Philosophers stones of what sort soeuer, the proofes and triall whereof also were diducted and layd out by fiftie articles, such as insue hereafter. I. That which that poore vnhappie Emperour Charles the fift could not doe with all the vnited forces and all the cannons of Europe, The principall of Dame Ve∣nus Knights. his braue sonne Dom Philip, by the meane of this drugge, hath been able to performe it, seruing himselfe therein but with a simple Lieutenant ouer twelue or fifteene thousand men at the most. II. That if this Lieutenant haue of this Catholicō in his En∣signes & Cornets, And into what towne will not an Asse laden with golde pearce? he wil enter without giuing blow into a kingdome that is enemie vnto him, & the people there will meere him, and will goe before him with crosses & banners, Legats and Primats. And though he destroy, ra∣uine, Witnesse the West Indies, and the Low Countreys. vsurpe, murther, and sacke all: yea though he carrie away, rauish, burne, and make all a wildernesse, yet the people of the countrie will say: These are our people, these are good Catholikes: they doe this for peacesake, and for our mother holie Church. The name of his place or house at Ma∣drill. Let a King (who is a sluggard and keepeth at home) but assay and endeuour to affine or trie this drugge in his Escuriall, & write but one word to father Ignatius, (the ingrosser and close keeper of this Catholicon) he will finde him out a man who (his con∣science kept safe, or as wee say, with a safe conscience) will murther his enemie, whom hee was not able by force of armes to vanquish in twentie yeares. III. If this King purpose to assure his Estates and territo∣ries to his children after his death, and to inuade another
mans kingdome with small expenses, let him write but one word thereof to Mendoza his Ambassador, It is against the order of the Alphabet to set a lier be∣fore a lesuite. or to father Commolet, and that beneath in his letter he write with Higuiero of hell, I the King, they will furnish him with some one religious Apostata or other, who will goe vnder some godly shew, as a Iudas, to murther and that in colde bloud, a great King of France, He meaneth Henrie the 3. his brother in law, in the middest of his Campe, without any feare of God or man. Nay they will doe more, they will cano∣nize that murtherer, and place that Iudas aboue S. Peter, Worthie fruits of a right reli∣gion. and wil baptise this prodigious and horrible misdoing or offence with the name of a blow or a stroake from hea∣uen: and the gossips at this baptisme shall be Cardinals, Legates and Primates. IIII. Let a great and a mightie armie, of pitiful, and yet fea∣red and renowmed Frenchmen, be prepared and made readie to aduenture honorablie, or to do well for the de∣fence of the Crowne and countrey, and to reuenge so fearefull an assault and murther, A strange me∣tamorphosis, but yet no vn∣true tale. let them cast in the midst of this armie but halfe a dramme of this drugge, it will benumme all the armie and strength of these braue and noble warriors. V. Serue for a Spye in the Campe, in the trenches, at the cannon, in the Kings chamber, and in his councels: yea, though men knowe you for such a one, yet if you haue taken in the morning but one graine of Higuiero, who∣soeuer shall taxe, reproue, or accuse you for it, A sound iudg∣ment. shall be taken for an Huguenot, or a fauourer of an Heretike. VI. Fight and play on both sides, as we say, be vnfaithfull and traiterous, yea so farre that you touch and take the kings coyne, to make warre euen against himselfe also: be not grieued any whit at all for so vngracious a deede: practise with the enemie, &c. yet if you glew your sword within your scabberd with this Catholicon, you shall be
taken to be a very good man. VII. Will you be an honorable scoffer and newter, cause your house in euery part to be painted, not with the late S. Anthonie, but with the crosse of Higuiero, and behold you shall be exempted from armour, proclamation, pro∣scription, &c. VIII. Haue about you but halfe an ounce weight of this Ca∣tholicon, you neede no more strong or auaileable passe∣port to procure you as good entertainment, and to be as well welcome to Tours, These are lea∣guer townes. as to Mante, to Orleans, as to Chartres, to Compaigne, as to Paris. IX. Be acknowledged and taken for the pensionarie or feed man of Spayne, seeke priuate profite, betray, change, sell, barter, disioyne and set Princes at iarre, so you haue one graine of Catholicon in your mouth, Strange effects they will im∣brace you, and will enter into as great distrust against very faithful and ancient seruitors, as against Infidels and Huguenots, how free and faithful Catholikes soeuer they haue alwaies been before. X. Though al goe from euill to worse, though the enemie aduance his purposes and practises, and departeth not from peace, but the better to bring in againe & assault it, considering the goodly shewes that men make him: though the Catholike Church it selfe runne at randon, as we say: A small mat∣ter to moue such stirres. though there be peruerting of all order, ecclesia∣sticall or secular, through default of speaking good French, doe but closely and cunningly sowe a little of Higuiero thorowe the world, no man will regarde what you say or doe, nay, no man dare speake of it, fearing least he should be accounted a Huguenot. XI. Make your selues Cantons, and install your selues ty∣rannously in the Kings townes, euen from Newhauen to
Meziers, and from Nantes euen vnto Cambray: be a vil∣laine, a runnagate, or traytor: obey neither God nor the King, nor the law, haue notwithstanding thereupō in thy hand a little of this Catholicon, and cause it to bee prea∣ched or commended in your canton or towne, you shall be a great and catholike man. XII. Haue a dishonest and shameles face, For euill ex∣ample, as we say. and a blistered forehead, as haue the vnfaithful Iailors of Pontheau de mer and Ʋienne: rubbe your eyes but a little with this diuine or heauenly electuarie, you shall be taken and reported to be a very honest and rich man. XIII. If a Pope, as for example Xistus the fift, doe any thing against you, you shall bee permitted, Papists against the Pope. and that without hurting the conscience, to execrate, curse, thunder out a∣gainst him, yea to blaspheme him, so that there be in your incke neuer so little of this Higuiero. XIIII. Haue no religion, mocke in sport and as much as you will the priests and sacraments of the Church, and all law both Gods and mans: eate flesh in Lent in despight of the Church, you neede no other absolution, nor better pardon, then halfe a dramme of this Catholicon. XV. Would you very quickly become a Cardinall? An easie step∣ping stone to promotion. rubbe one of the hornes of your cap with Higuiero, it will be∣come red, and you shall be made a Cardinall, though you were the most incestuous and ambitious Primate of the world. XVI. Be thou for any thing as guiltie of death as Mothe Ser∣rant: be conuicted for coyning and counterfeiting mo∣ney as Mandreuille, be a Sodomite as Senault, A meruailous chaunge, yea contrarie to all reason and re∣ligion. a wicked person as Bussie, an Atheist and vngratefull as the Poet of the Admiraltie, wash thy selfe with the water of Hi∣guiero, behold thou art become an vnspotted lambe, and
a piller of the faith. XVII. Let any sage Prelate or Counsellor of the estate be∣ing a true Catholike Frenchman, thrust in and oppose himselfe against the woluish or foxish enterprises of the enemies of the state, so you haue a graine of this Catho∣licon vpon your tongue, God make it to prosper eue∣rie where, as there, & there and elsewhere better, as he shall see good. They are good by excellencie, or in the super∣latiue degree. you shall be permitted to accuse them, yea to haue a will and desire (so long as God will let you alone) to let religion perish and decay, as it doth in England. XVIII. Though some good preachers, not able to teach chil∣dren, doe goe out of the rebellious townes, to ayde the simple people elsewhere to arme themselues, if he haue but a corne of Higuiero in his cowle or hood, he may ve∣ry well and safely returne backe againe. XIX. Let Spayne set his foote vpon the throate of the ho∣nour of France: let the Lorraines striue to take or robbe rather the lawfull inheritance from the Princes of the bloud royall, let them debate and discourse vpon their owne, no lesse furiously then subtilly, and affirme that the Crowne is their owne, vse but thereupon a little of this Catholicon, and you shall perceiue that men will more meruaile to see some question out of season moued, con∣cerning a Bishops cope, or about Plessis monument, then to trauaile with oares and sailes, as they say, to make for∣tish and foolish tyrants, that tremble for feare, to forgoe or let loose their pray. This is almost the halfe of the ar∣ticles, which the whole writing of the Iugler or Apothe∣carie of Spayne did containe, time shall cause you see the residue. XX. As concerning the Iugler or Apothecarie of Lorraine, hee had but a small or little stoole before him, couered with an old napkin, and aboue a Larkes voyce or call on the one side, and a boxe on the other side, full also of Catholicon, whereof notwithstanding he sold very little,
because it began to smell, lacking the most necessarie in∣gredient, that is to say, gold, and vpon the boxe there was written, Fine Galamathias, otherwise named Catho∣licon, compounded or made for to heale the Kings euils. This poore Iugler or Apothecarie, did not liue by any thing but by this occupation, and he was almost dead for cold, although he were clothed or couered with a cottage or caban furred all of skinne, He alludeth to both the Car∣dinals, Cardi∣nall de Plai∣sance, being for Spayne, & de Pelleue for the Guises. Strange disea∣ses healed by strange medi∣cine. whereupon the pages called him Monsieur de Pelleue. And because the Iugler or A∣pothecarie of Spayne was very flatteratiue and pleasant, they called him Monsieur de Plaisance. Indeed this mans drugge was very soueraigne: I haue seene that it hath healed Monsieur d'Aumale Countie of Boulongne, of the yellow iaundise, whereof he languished. The Poet of the Admirakie was thereby healed of the itch, where∣with he was gnawne euen vnto the bones. The Regi∣ster Senault of the bloudie flixe: and more then ten thousand zealous or hot Catholikes of the high or great euill of the heart, and a hundred thousand that were rea∣die to dye in Chaitres, and pining away, without this Hi∣guiero And if the Iailor of Vernueil had in time & place had of this drugge, he had well passed or escaped the cru∣eltie of S Romain of Roan. Monsieur du Maine taketh of it euery day in a posset of asse milke, to heale the most disloyall and wicked hickcock of the world. The Duke of Sauoy took also of it, to heale him of his greedie appetite & yet gluttonie therewithal, but he vomited al vp againe poore man. There are worse Saints in Bretaigne, If worse can be. then the Catholike seruant of Monsieur de Fontaines gouer∣nour of S. Malo, who out his masters throat in his bed, by meanes of two thousand crownes, for our mother holie Church. That is they that dwell in base Bretaigne. The deuout Christian is by the base Bretons e∣steemed a second S. Yues, because he is neuer vnsurnished of Higuierb and Catholicon. To be short, all the cases re∣serued in the bull, in the Lords Supper, are purely and plainly absolued by this Catholike, lesuisticall, and Spa∣nish quintessence.
A SHORT SVMME OF THE ESTATES of Paris, called together the tenth of Februarie 1593. and drawne out of the notes and remembrances of the Ladie of la Lande, otherwise called Bayonnoise, and out of the secret talkings and speeches that passed betweene her and the father Commelaid. MOnsieur the Duke of Mayenne, Lieutenant of the estate and Crowne of France, the Duke of Guise, the Constable d'Aumale, the Countie of Chaligny, Prin∣ces of Lorraine, and the other deputies of Spayne, Flan∣ders, Naples, and other townes of the vnion, being as∣sembled at Paris, being found amongst the estates cal∣led together thither on the tenth of Februarie 1593. would that before they began so holie a worke, there should bee kept a procession, like vnto that which was plaied in the presence of Monsieur the Cardinal Caietan, which was almost as soone done as it was sayd. For Monsieur Roze not long since Bishop of Senlis, and now the great Master of the Colledge of Nauarre, and Rector of the Vniuersitie, caused the morrow after, and that by his most ancient Bedle, or staffe bearer, both furniture and persons to be prepared therefore. Now the procession was on this manner. A good pro∣cession where the diuell bea∣reth the crosse The foresayd Doctor Roze, leauing off his Rectors hood, tooke his Master of Arts gowne, with a camaile and a linnen garment, and a tippet vp∣permost: his beard and his head were new shauen, his sword by his side, and a pertisane on his shoulder. The Curats, Holy men, ho∣lie matter. Amilthon, Boucher, and Lincester being some∣what more strangely armed, made the first ranke, and before them marched three little Monkes and nouices, their gownes or frockes being trussed vp, hauing euerie one a head-peece on their heads, vnder their hoodes or cowles, and a target hanging at their necke, in which were painted the armes and deuises of the sayd Lords. Master Iames Pelletier, curat of S. Iames, marched on the
one side, one while before, another while behinde, clo∣thed with violet, in a souldiers scholasticall attire, his crowne and his beard were new shauen, he had a coate of maile vpon his backe, with a rapier and a dagger, and a halberd vpon his left shoulder, after the manner of a Ser∣ieant of a band, who did sweat, pant and breathe, to place euery man in his ranke and order. Afterwards there fol∣lowed three by three, some fiftie or threescore religious persons, as well Franciscane Friers, as Iacobins, blacke Friers, hoodded Friers, Minimes, bon hommes, Feuil∣lants, and others all couered with their cowles and ha∣bits, buckled and armed, according to the ancient catho∣like fashion, Much. and according to the manner of the Epistles of S. Paul. Amongst the rest there were sixe Capuchins, or blacke Iacobine Friers, hauing euery one a morraine on his head, and vpon the same a cockes feather, cloathed also with coates of maile, their sword girt to their side vpon their habits, one carrying a speare, another a crosse, the one a sword, the other a harquebuze, and the other a crossebow, all rusticall and clownish thorough Catho∣like humilitie: all the rest almost had pikes, which they did oftentimes shake, for want of better pastime, sauing a fueillant Frier which was lame, who armed all vpon the bare, assayed to make roume with a two handed sword, and a battaile axe at his girdle, his Portuise hanging be∣hinde, and he made a goodly shewe vpon one foote, tur∣ning as it were a little mill before the Ladies. And at his taile there were three Minimes or Friers all in one array or apparell, that is to say, euery one of them hauing vpon their habits a plate or armour of carraies or proofe, & the hinder part discouered or vnarmed, a sallet on their head, and a sword and a pistoll at their girdle, and euery one a harquebuze a crocke, without forke or stay for it. Be∣hind was the Prior of the Iacobins, very well appoynted, drawing a bowed or crooked haldberd after him, and ar∣med lightly or sleightly, as one in a dead pay. I could not perceiue either Charterhouse Monkes or Celestins
that were excused or exempted from this trafficke or bu∣sines, but all these went forward and marched in much good order, I meane Catholigue, Apostoligue, and Ro∣maine, and they seemed to be the ancient Cranequiniers of France. They ment as they passed by to salute them with a volley or peale of shot: Wise enough to looke to himselfe. but the Legate forbad them that, for feare least some such mischance might happen to him or some of his, as did to Cardinall Caie∣tan. After these goodly fathers, there marched the foure sorts of begging Friers, Leane like lo∣custs. which were multiplied and in∣creased to many orders, as well ecclesiasticall as secular: after, Belike some of them were dead, or els they were foure more, but not to the course of their conuersation. Such cuppe, such couer. the parishes: then the sixteene great persons of Pa∣ris foure and foure together, reduced to the number of the Apostles, and attyred like them that play at Corpus Christ-tide. After them marched the Prouost of the Mer∣chants, and Sheriffes or Aldermen, arraied with diuersi∣tie of colours: afterwards the Court of Parliament, such a one as it was: the Italian, Spanish and Wallon gards of Monsieur the Lieutenant: afterwards a hundred Gentle∣men newly aduanced by the holie vnion: and after them certaine old souldiers of the brotherhood of Saint Eloy. There followed afterwards Monsieur the Bishop of Lyō, and that very sweetly: the Cardinall of Pelue, very hum∣blie: Great praises. and after them Monsieur the Popes Legate, a very mirror of perfect beautie, and before him marched the Deane of Sorbonne, with a Crosse, vpon which hung the buls of his power. Also there came Madam de Nemours, representing the Queene Mother, or the grandmother (but that is doubtfull) of the King that should be, and there bare vp her taile, or (if we should speake courtlike) her traine, Madamoiselle de la rue, the daughter of that noble and discreet person, Honorable at∣tendance. Monsieur de la rue, heretofore a cutter of garments, or a tailor, dwelling vpon S. Mi∣chaels bridge, and now one of the hundred Gentlemen and Councellors of the estate of the vnion: and then followed Madame the Dowagir of Montpenfier with her greene scarfe, which was very foule with much vsing
of it, and Madame the Lieutenant of the estate & crowne of France, waited vpon with the Ladies of Belin, and of Bussie the Clerke. Then Monsieur the Lieutenant set for∣ward and caused himselfe to bee seene, and before him two Heraults furred with Hermines, and at his sides two Wallons carrying coates of armes very blacke, all beset with the red crosses of Lorraine, hauing before and be∣hind, a deuise in imbroiderie, the bodie whereof repre∣sented the historie of Phaeton, and the poesie was this: Phaetons sto∣rie fit for this procession. In magnis voluisse sat est: that is, in great matters it is e∣nough to haue a will. As soone as they were come in this apparell and order into the Chappell of Bourbon, Mon∣sieur the Rector Roze, putting off his halfe cowle, or tip∣pet, as also his sword and partisane, went vp into the pul∣pit, As well as he could. where hauing prooued by good and forcible argu∣ments, that this was the time, wherein all should go well with them, propounded vnto them one godly, expedient and profitable way, to put an ende to the warre within sixe moneths at the furthest, reasoning thus. In France there are seuenteene hundred thousand steeples or chur∣ches, whereof Paris is accounted but for one alone: Soone sayd. now take out of euery church one catholike man to be a soul∣dier, and to goe to warre at the charges of the parish, and let the monies be managed by the Doctors of Diuinitie, or at the least by certaine Graduats to be named, we shal make twelue hundred thousand fighting men, They neede many for so great vnder∣minings. and fiue hundred thousand pioners. Then al the assistants or com∣panie were seene to leape for great ioy, and to crie, O stroke or blow from heauen. Afterwards he did liuelie exhort them to warre, and to die for the Lorraine Prin∣ces, yea and if neede were, and rather then faile, for the most Catholike King: and this he did with such earnest∣nes and vehemencie, that hardly could they restraine his regiment of Friers, & tutors, or schoolemasters, that they had not presently runne to take the forts of Gournay, and S. Denis, A strange po∣wer in so sim∣ple a meane. but they were restrained and kept backe with a little holie water, as men quiet and pacifie flyes & bries
with a little dust. After this Monsieur, the pulpit man en∣ded with this conclusion, But he & they were none of them. Blessed are the poore in spirit, &c. The sermon being finished, Masse was sung in a high note, by Monsieur the most reuerend Cardinall of Pelue: at the end whereof the chanters & songs men did thun∣der out this verse: If a man knew them. How beloued are thy tabernacles, &c. Then all those that were to bee of the assemblie, accom∣panied Monsieur the Lieutenant to the Louvre, No meruaile where there was such a cō∣fused troupe. the rest did confusedly withdraw themselues, some hither, some thither, euery one to himselfe or his owne. The peeces of the Tapistrie, wherewith the hall for the Estates was hanged. BEfore I speake vnto you, touching the ceremonies, and the order of the seates of the sayd Estates, it shall not be besides the purpose, to portraite and figure out vnto you the disposition and order of the hall where the as∣semblie was to be kept. The carpenters worke, and the scaffoldship for the seates, was altogether like to that of the estates which were held at Troyes, A pretie, though not so right a resem∣blance. in the time of Charles the 6. at the instance & pursuit of the K. of Eng∣land & the Duke of Burgundie, when Charles the 7. the Dolphin, and true heire of the Crowne of France, was degraded by the sayd estates, & declared vncapeable to succeed in the kingdome, & he and all his adherents and fauourers excommunicated, aggrauated and reaggraua∣ted, Or as we say, with booke bell & candle. bels founding, and candles put out, afterwards bani∣shed (howbeit but for a season). But the tapistrie where∣with the sayd hall was hanged, being twelue peeces or thereabout, seemed to bee made in our age, and plainely wrought, yet richly garnished, in the vpper border, and the cloath or chaire of estate, vnder which Monsieur the Lieutenāt should sit, was of the same. At one of the sides and parts of the cloath or chaire of estate, there was liue∣ly represented one Sertorius, apparelled after the French fashion, amongst the Spanyards, asking counsel of a hind appointed thereto, from which he he said, he vnderstood
the will of the gods. On the other coast or side there was the shape of Spartacus, making his oration to an armie of slaues, whom he had caused to be armed and to reuolt a∣gainst the Romane Empire. In the third there was the portraiture of the foresayd person, hauing a torch in his hand, and came to set fire on a temple: & at the neather part of the same side, there was written, If I cannot by wa∣ter, by ruine I will quench. The fourth could not be seene by reason of the obscuritie or darknes against the shewe of it. On the head and below the sayd cloath or chaire of estate, there was a crucifix, New things best please. according to the present stāpe of Paris, hauing the left hand tied to the crosse, and the right hand free or vnbound, holding in it a naked sword, about which was written this saying, Ʋpon thee, and vpon thy bloud. Without the three coasts or sides, and before, there were the falles of Icarus and of Phaeton, very well wrought, and it made a goodly shew to see the sisters of this young fellow, by metamorphosis, to be turned into popular trees, one of which, who had broken her hippe in running to succour her brother, did naturally & liuely resemble the Dowager of Montpensier, all her haire hanging about her eares. The first peece of tapistrie nigh to the cloath or chaire of estate, was the historie of the golden calfe, as it is de∣scribed in the 32. chap. of Exodus, where Moses and Aa∣ron were there represented by King Henry the 3. lately dead, and Monsieur late Cardinall of Bourbon: Some fitnes in these represen∣tations or ex∣positions. but the golden calfe was the figure of the late Duke of Guise, lifted vp on high and adored by the people: and the two tables signified the fundamentall law of the Estates of Blois, and the Edict of Iulie made in the yeare 1587. and in the lower part of the peece these wordes are writ∣ten, In the day of vengeance I will visite euen this their sinne. The second peece was a great countrie as it were of di∣uers histories both old & of this age, distincted and sepa∣rated one of them from another, and notwithstanding
very wittily referring themselues to the same perspec∣tiue. In the vpper part of it there was to bee seene that goodly entrance by night, which Iohn Duke of Burgun∣die made into Paris, and when the Parisiens cryed Christmas from the feast of all Saints. At one of the corners was Harelle of Roan, where a Merchant cal∣led le Gras, A good choise and a meet mā for that place. that is, grosse or fatte, was chosen King by the common people. At the other corner were the Iacke men of Beuoisin, with their Captaine Guillaume Caillet: at the corner below were the pretie pigges or hogges of the league of Lions: and at the other corner were the noble acts of the ancient Maillotins, vnder these Captaines Simonnet Caboche, and Iacques Aubriot, the Kings of Buchers and Pillers, and the whole in men cut short and seruing for nothing but for the countrey. But at the bottome and in the midst of the peece there were expressed by figure and liuely set out the barricados of Paris, where men might behold a King (who was sim∣ple, plaine, and a good Catholike, and who had done so many good turnes, and giuen so many priuiledges to the Parisiens) to be driuen out of his owne house, and beset on all sides with tunnes and barrels to take him. There were represented also diuers braue stratagems, or warlike deuises, Meet men to manage such matters. of the Sirs or Knights, who did leade Tremont, Chastigneray, Flauacourt, and other rammers of the pauement (we call them pauiers) to the place of honour: and in the lowest part of the sayd peece were written these foure verses: Iupiter with his tunnes or fats Doth bring vs good and ill also: But by these new vpstarts he doth The whole cast downe and ouerthrowe. The third peece contained the historie of Absalom, that with barricados distressed his father, and draue him out of the citie of Ierusalem, hauing by vnworthie enter∣taining and making much of, gained and corrupted the most base and beggerly porters of the common people.
Afterwards there was shewed the punishment that he receiued therefore, and how Achitophel his wicked counsellor, did accursedly finish his daies: all the faces and countenances approched nigh vnto, or were like to some of the sayd Estates: and there were easily knowne the President Ianin, Marteau, Ribault, & others, to whom the late Duke of Guise made so many goodly shewes in the assemblie of the Estates at Blois: Faire words make fooles faine. also there were seene Choulier, la Rue, Pocart, Senault, and other but∣chers, and horse coursers, euon as base and low as dike∣clensers, and kennell rakers, all people and persons of ho∣nour in their occupations, which the foresayd dead mar∣tyr did kisse on their mouthes for zeale of religion. The fourth represented in grosse the feates of armes of the murthers done in old time and in our age also, o∣therwise called Bedouins and Arsacides, who feared not to goe and kill, euen in the chamber and in the bed, those whom their imagined Prince Aloadin, It seemeth to me he mea∣neth the Pope, or some that hold that part. surnamed the olde, of sixe or seuen mountaines, should commaund them. Amongst others there were two very apparant fi∣gures, the one of a certaine Countie of Tripoli, murthe∣red by a Sarazin, zealous of his religion, whilest he kissed his hands: the other of a King of France and Poland, trayterously striken with a knife, by a wicked Monke or Frier, yet pretending zeale vpon his knees, presenting vnto him a letter sent him: and vpon the forehead of the sayd Monke or Frier, there was written in great letters, the transposition of the letters of his name, Frier Iames Clement, IT IS HEL THAT HATH CRE∣ATED ME. In the fift men might behold the battaile of Senlis, where Monsieur d'Aumale was made Constable, and had giuen him for his labour, the winged and hot spurres by Monsieur de Longueville, a politike Prince, and an arme of yron by la Nouë and Givry his suffragan. About the same were written these verses, by soures, as we say, or one foure after another.
Nature giueth to euery one Feete to succour them from fall: Feete saue the man, and he Needes but to runne well with all. This valiant Prince d'Aumale Though he runne full well in breath, And though that he did lose his maile, Yet could he not ouerrunne death. They that were of his traine Did not sleepe in any place, Sauing by their happie flight Of their doublets the fine case. When the barricade is ope, For feare of blame to come, Tarrie not, I say, behind: It needes but well to runne. To runne is worth a crowne: Runners, men honest are: Tremont, Balagny, and Congis The same can well declare. To runne well is no vice: Men runne to get that is aught: It is an honest exercise: A good runner was neuer caught. He that runnes well is able man, And hath God for his stay: But Chamois and Meneville Did not runne enough away. Oft he that doth abide Is cause of his owne paine: But he that flieth in good tide Perhaps may fight againe. Its better to fight with feete To riue the aire and winde, Then to be killed and beaten For comming slow behind.
He that in life hath honour, Should therefore death sure shunne: When out of life he goeth There needes but well to runne. And at the corner of the sayd peece, there was to bee seene Pigenat in his bed, sicke, inraged, mad, and furious, with this fortune, and waiting for an answer of the letter, which he had written and sent in poste, to Madame Saint Geneviesue, a very good Frenchwoman, if euer there were any. In the sixt was painted out the miracle of Arques, where fiue or sixe hundred discomforted & weake men, readie to passe the sea and to swimme, nodded their heads at them, mocked them, and put to flight, by the in∣chantments of this Biarnois, He meaneth the Duke du Maynes for∣ces, who brag∣ged as much as euer did he. twelue or fifteene thousand Rodomonts, renders of small ships, and eaters of yron chariots. And which was the goodliest thing that could be to be seene, the Ladies of Paris were in the windowes, and others which had kept place tenne daies before in the shops and working houses of S. Anthonies streete, to see this Biarnois brought prisoner in triumph, bound, wheras he came decked with iewels, & (as he gaue it thē) beautifull also, because he came in another habit or kind of apparell by the suburbs of S. Iaques and S. Germaine. The seuenth contained the battaile of Ivry la Chaussee, where a man might haue seene the Spanyards, Lorrains, and other Romish Catholikes in mockerie, or otherwise, Those that tooke part with the king. to shew their bare breech or taile to the Maheustres, and the Biarnois altogether heate, who with his bridle aba∣ted, carried the vnion behind him on horsebacke. There a man might well haue seene Monsieur the Lieutenāt cur∣sing the hindermost, & leauing the Countie d'Aiguemōt for pledges, & being deceiued with more then the moitre of the iust prise, to run away vpō a Turkie horse, & to get Mante by a wicket or posterne gate, and to say to the in∣habitants in a very lowe note or voyce, My friends, saue me and my people: all is lost, but the Biarnois is dead.
Aboue all it was a wonderfull pleasure, there to see them wisely to make an Inuentorie of his coffers and chests, and to see them also religiously to reach out of his coffer and to spread abroad the standard of the faith, wherein was painted a Crucifix vpon blacke taffeta, with this in∣scription, Christ being guide, such a one as a man may see hanging in the Church of Mante. This, good Christian people, is that standard which should haue serued for a golden flanke, for the Kings successors in time to come, if the cord had not broken. At the corner of the sayd ta∣pistrie, there was a daunce of shepheards and peasants, and behinde or neete vnto them, as it were a table, in which was written this song following. Let vs begin the daunce, Let vs goe, its very well: Spring time begins in France, The Kings are passed we can tell. Let vs take a little truce: Forwe are full wearie: By Kings chosen by beane Still vext and tired are we. One King alone remaines: The sots are chast away: Fortune euen at this time With broken pots doth play. You must yeeld all againe I say, ye hindered Kings, That would take what you can, And yet possesse no things. A captaine great and stout Hath brought you downe I say: Let vs goe Ieane du Mayne, The Kings are past away. The eight was a representation of the Paradise (or ra∣ther Paradises in the plurall number) of Paris, within which, and ouer the holie Pixe, were the images of three Saints, newly printed since Pope Gregorie his calender,
bringing with them double fasts. Iames Clemēt. One of them was cloa∣thed with blacke and with white, Fit resemblan∣ces. bauing a pricking or sharpe foote, and a little knife in his hand, as it were a cutpurse, farre different from that of S. Bartholomew. The Popes Legate. The second was cloathed with a red gowne, and a cu∣rate or breast-plate vpon it, and a hat of the same colour with long cords or strings to it, hauing in his hand also a cup full of bloud, whereof he made semblance as though he would drinke, and out of his mouth came forth a wri∣ting, in these tearmes: Stand with your head-peeces, polish your speares, and put on your coates of maile. The third was a Saint on horseback, as it had been S. George, The Cardinall Pelue. hauing at his feete a great many Ladies and Damosels, to whom he reached out his hand, and shewed them a crowne in the aire, towards which in sighing he aspired with this deuise or saying: The things that are faire are hard. The people brought them store of candles, and sayd new Suf∣frages and Letanies, seeing that they did miracles: but the winde carried away and blew out all. The borders of the sayd peece were of white processions, and of sermons, and Te Deums strengthened againe, where men might see in a small volume the faces of Boucher, Lincestre, & the little Fuillant frier, exhorting the people to peace, by a figure named Antiphrasis. That is con∣trary meaning. The ninth set out to bee seene, as it were naturally, a great giantesse lying vpon the ground, which brought forth an infinite number of vipers and monsters of diuers sorts: some called Gualtiers, other some Catillōnois, Li∣pans, Leaguers, zealous Catholikes, and Chasteauverds: and vpon the forehead of the sayd giantesse there was written: This is that goodly Lutetia or Paris, who that she might commit whoredome with her minions and darlings, hath caused her father and his wife to be slaine. Madame of Spayne serued her in stead of a Midwife, and a nurse, to receiue and to nourish her fruite, or to giue it sucke. In the tenth there was very well described the historie of the taking of the towne of S. Denis, by that worthie
Knight d'Aumale, and there appeared the Lord of Viq, and the holie Apostle of France, who did strengthen his leg or thigh of wood: and S. Anthonie of the fields, who put fire to the powder to make the Parisiens afrayd. A∣boue vpon the same peece was a writing contayning these words: Saint Anthony being robbed by a head of the leaguers conioynd, Went (as to one more strong) to S. Denis to lay open his mind, Who to reuenge this wrong, hath giuen him sure promise. Some little while after, this great robber did assay To take S. Denis, but S. Dents tooke him by the way, And reuenged vpon him both the one and the other enterprise. And below was the epitaph of the sayd Knight d'Au∣male, That needeth not, for it is here mentio∣ned. euen as it followeth, sauing that it maketh no men∣tion that he was eaten with rats and mice: He that lieth here a taker was Right bold and hardie sure, Against S. Denis who a fine Enterprise did procure. But yet S. Denis more subtill Then this taker of renowne, Did take him, and both slay him eeke Within his taken towne. In the eleuenth there was to be seene, and that nigh at hand, the piteous countenance of poore president Bris∣son, as also of his Deacon & Subdeacon, when one spake vnto them of confession: in giuing them the order of the vnion, also their eleuation and lifting vp in charge. And because that the aforesayd peece was not large enough to couer the doore of the entrie or cōming in, there was tacked vnto it halfe a peece of the Apotheosis, or canoni∣zation of the foure Euangelists and Martyrs, Saints, Lou∣chard, Ameline, Anroux, and Aymonnot, making a long letter or writing, & at their feet was writtē these 4. verses. You crack ropes lewd & wicked mē, that Iudges hang on hie, Impunitie vnto your selues you doe pretend thereby: But you ought cleane the cōtrarie attēd & wait again, Awicked wretch neuer yet could put his righteous Iudge to pain.
The twelfth and the last neere vnto the windowes did containe at length, and that very well drawne, the por∣traiture of Monsieur the Lieutenant, attired as Hercules Gallicus, holding in his hand innumerable bridles, wher∣with also there were haltered & mousled calues & colts without number. Ouer his head, as if it had bin a clowd, there was anymph, which had a writing cōtaining these words: Looke that you play the calfe. A goodly poe∣sie & promise. And from the mouth of the said Lord Lieutenant, there issued another, where∣in were written these proper termes, I will doe it. And this is that as neere as I was able to obserue and marke it, which was in the sayd tapistrie. As concerning the benches & seates, where Messieurs or my Lords the Estates should sit, they were couered al with tapistrie, be sprinkled with little crosses of the Lor∣raines, some blacke and some red, and with armes parted in two, of true and false argent, the whole being more emptie then full for the honour of the feast. Touching the order held and obserued for their seates or places. AFter that the assembly was entred somewhat forward within the great hall, drawing neere vnto the steps, where the cloath or chaire of estate was exalted, and the chaires were prepared, there was place assigned to euerie one by a Herault of armes, intituled Courte ioy, A fine fiction for the same. or as we say, short ioy S. Denis, who called them very lowd three times together after this manner: Monsieur the Lieu∣tenant, Monsieur the Lieutenant, Monsieur the Lieute∣nant, of the estate and Crowne of France, come vp on high into this kingly throane, in the place of your ma∣ster. Monsieur the Legate, place your selfe at his side. Madame, representing the Queene Mother, or the grandmother, set your selfe on the other side. Mon∣sieur the Duke of Guise, Peere of the Lieutenancie of the estate and Crowne of France, place your selfe
very finely the first for this time) without preiudice or dammage of your right to come: It may be it shall neuer be so againe. Monsieur the most re∣uerend Cardinal of Pelue, Peere (though but for a while) of the Lieutenancie, place your selfe right ouer against him, but at no hand forget your Calepin or Dictionarie: Madame the Dowager of Montpensier, as a Princeste of your estate, seate your selfe vnder your nephew. Ma∣dame the Lieutenant of the Lieutenancie of the estate, without preiudice of your pretenses & claimes, set your selfe ouer against her. Monsieur d'Aumale, Constable & Peere of the Lieutenancie, aduaunced into Peereship by reason of your Countie of Boulongne, place your selfe side to side by the most reuerend Cardinall, but beware that you rend not his cope with your great spurres. High and mightie Countie of Chaligny, that haue this honour to haue Monsieur the Lieutenant for your younger bro∣ther, take your place and feare no more Chiquot that is dead. Monsieur the Primat of Lyons, and without doubt he that shalbe Cardinall of the vnion, and now is Peere & Chancellor of the Lieutenancie, He kept her as his concubine. leaue your sister there, and come hither to take your place in order. Monsieur de Bussie the Clerke, heretofore the great penitentiarie of the Parliament, and now the great Steward spirituall of the towne and castle of Paris, set your selfe at the feete of Monsieur that Lieutenant, as the great Chamberlaine of the Lieutenancie. Monsieur de Saulsay, Peere and great Master of the Lieutenancie, Yea of a better. for default of another, take this staffe, and goe very gently to sit in this soft seate pre∣pared for you. And you Messieurs, the Marshals of the Lieutenancie de Rosne, Dom Diego, Bois-daulphin, and Seignior Cornelio, loe here is a bench for you foure, sa∣uing that you may bee augmented or diminished, if the case so fall out and require the same. Messieurs the Secre∣taries of the Estate, Marteau, Pericard, de Pottes, and Ni∣colas, A tall man be∣like. this fourme below is for you foure, if Monsieur Ni∣colas buttocks or breech can reach so high. Monsieur de S. Paul, Countie of Rethelois, but yet vnder the title of
hiring it, and hauing it at a price, come not so nigh Mon∣sieur de Guise, least you ouetheate him, but keepe your selfe nigh to the Lord de Rieux. Messieurs the Ambassa∣dors of Spayne, Naples, Lorraine, and Countie of Bour∣gongne, this bench on the lest hand is for you, and the bench on the right hand appoynted for the Ambassadors of England, Portugall, Venice, the Lords, Counties and Princes of Germanie, Suisserland and Italie, and are ab∣sent or appeare not, shall be for the Ladies and Damo∣sels, according to the date of their impression. Further∣more, let all the deputies take place according to their pensions. And this was almost the sitting of Messieurs the Estates, all without disputation or debating, Churchmen striue for high places. by rea∣son of the great presences, sauing that the warden of the Franciscane Friers, and the Prior of the Iacobins, made some small protestation which of them should goe for∣most: but Madame de Montpensier rising vp, A goodly drudge, and a worthie reason of conclusion. gaue the first place to the Prior of the Iacobins, for remembrance, as she sayd, of S. Iaques Clement. There was also a little garboyle betweene my Ladies of Belin and of Bussie, by reason that the one of them hauing let goe a certaine euil pseudcatholike winde, Madame de Belin spake very loudly and loftily to Ladie Bussie, Let vs go Mistris Pro∣ctoresse, the taile doth befume vs: you come hither be∣like to perfume the crosses of Lorraine. But Monsieur the great Master of Saulsay, hearing this noyse, & know∣ing the cause thereof, cried vnto them holding his staffe in his hand, Good words Mesdames, ye come not hither to trouble and disquiet our estates, It is an euill bird that defi∣leth his owne neast. as mine owne sister not long time since, daunced the galliard of the late king in this very hall it selfe. The noise being pacified, and the ill sent or sauour past, Monsieur the Lieutenant began to speake after this manner, with the great silence and at∣tention of Messieurs the Estates.
The speech of Monsieur the Lieutenant. MEssieurs, you shall all be witnesses, that since I haue taken armes for the holy League, I haue alwayes had mine owne preseruation in such great recommen∣dation and respect, No lye. that I haue with a very good heart & courage, continually preferred mine owne particular in∣terest, before the cause of God, who knoweth wel inough to keepe himselfe and it without mee, and to reuenge him of all his enemies. Yea I can say further, and that in trueth, that the death of my brethren hath not so farre caused my passions to breake forth (whatsoeuer goodly shew I made thereof) as the desire I haue to walke in the waies and paths that my father and my good vncle the Cardinall had traced out before me, and which my bro∣ther the Balafre was happily entred. You knowe that vpon my returne from my expeditiō of Guyenne, which the politikes call vp and downe, vp and downe, I did not effect in this citie that which I thought, by reason of the traytors, The Duke de Maynne was none. who aduertised the tyrant their master: and I receiued no other fruite by my voyage, but the taking of the inheritresse of Caumont, whom I did appoynt for wife vnto my sonne: but the chaunging of my affayres haue made me at this presēt, to dispose otherwise therof. Moreouer, you are not ignorant, that I would not ingage mine armie to any great exployte, or hard siege, (where∣in notwithstanding Castillon deceiued mee, which I thought to take and carrie away in three daies) to the end that I might keepe my selfe more whole and sound, and the better able to execute my Catholike purposes. Concerning mine armie in Daulphin, I caused it alwaies to stop and stay, and I kept me on my skoutes to attend and waite, whether in the Estates of Blois ye should haue neede of me. But the matters there hauing taken the left foote, and falling out crosse to our wishes and at∣tempts,
you sawe with what great diligence I came to finde you in this citie, and with what dexteritie my cou∣sin, the Constable d'Aumale here present, So holy a man could not but giue so holie a thing. caused like∣wise the holie spirit in haste to come downe vpon a great part or companie of my Masters of Sorbonne. For as soone as it was said, it was as soone done. And frō thence haue proceeded all our goodly exployts of warre: from that haue taken their first originall these hundred thou∣sands of holie French Martyrs, which are dead by the sword, by famine, by fire, by rage, by desperation, and o∣ther violēce, for the cause of the holie vnion: from thence hath come the correction of so many braggers and boa∣sters, which would play the galants, and compare them∣selues with Princes: from thence hath proceeded the ruine and ouerthrow of so many Churches & Monaste∣ries, which hurt the safetie of our good townes: from this hath flowen such great sacke and pillage, as our good souldiers, free archers and nouices haue committed in many cities, townes and villages, who also haue serued in stead of a Curat for the faith, to the deuout children of the Masse at midnight: yea from hence hath it been that so many faire daughters and women without marriage and against their wils, haue been filled with that, which in marriage they loue best of all. And God knoweth, whether these young Monkes and Friers, A great doubt, their chastitie considered. newly turned out of their frocks or gownes, & these disordered priests haue therein deuoutly turned the leaues of their por∣tuise, and gotten plenarie pardons. To be short, this is the onely cause of the prompt and zealous decree of my Masters of our mother Sorbonne, Ful cups make men of sharpe iudgement. after that they haue drunke wel, which hath caused in the end many stroakes from heauen to clatter and sound. And through our good diligence, wee haue brought to passe that this kingdome which was nothing els but a pleasurefull garden of all pleasure and aboundance, A very good change. is now become a great and large vniuersall buriall place, full of all violences, faire painted crosses, coffins, gallowses and gibbets. As soone
then as I was arriued in this towne, after that I had sent to heale the citie of Orleans of too much ease, and to forbid the trade and traffique of the Loire, The name of a ruine passing by it. which maintained their delights, I ment to doe as much in this towne also. And it fell out well, in which Madame my mother, my sister, my wife, and cousin d'Aumale (who are here to giue mee the lye for it, if I doe not speake true) did very catholikely assist me. For they and I had no more great paine and care, then to lay a groundworke for the warre, and in so doing to comfort and discharge all the deuout habitants good Catholikes, of the weight of their purses, and to giue them leaue curiously to roue vp and downe, with their feete and their hands, to seeke and to seaze for vs the rich iewels of the Crowne, belonging vnto vs in the collaterall line, and by the forfeiture of Lord of the fee. We found much vnprofitable treasure: we discouered with a little expence, by the reuelation of a catholike mason, and the holie innocencie of Monsieur Machaut (whom I name here for honours sake) the good∣ly and large muguot of Molan, Because he ser∣ued your turne notwithstanding his di∣uels and familiar spirits that kept it, whom the sayd Ma∣chaut knew powerfullie and skilfully to coniure, secret∣ly filling the bottome or soules of his host with crownes of the summe. And without this diuine succour, Mes∣sieurs, you know that we knew not yet of what wood to make arrowes: for which the holie vnion is greatly in∣debted to the painfull labour and great good husban∣drie of the sayd Molan, who did so honestly refuse his master and all his friends to aide them with money, and to preserue it for vs, A right re∣compense of treason, name∣ly, idolatrous seruices. Adde drunkē∣nes vnto thirst, and glorie in your owne  so fitly for our purpose. And forget him not, to cause to be sung to him a salue or good mor∣row, whatsoeuer it be, forget not to promise him a Masse to be sung with holding vp of hands, when he shall bee constrained to make his will quite and cleane contrarie. I will not forget the costly moueables of gold, siluer, ta∣pistrie and other riches, which wee made to bee taken, sold, yea to make port sale of them, appertaining to these
wicked politikes fauouring the King, wherein my cousin d'Aumale did her dutie very well, foyling her selfe in the coffers and caskets, yea stouping so low, that she went to the ditches and holes, where she knewe that there was vessell of siluer hidden. In so much that afterwards our dearly beloued cousin her husband, she her selfe and her chiefe page, did greatly performe their businesses, and were healed of their catholike iaundise, wherewith they were made yellow from the time of the warres that they had for their Countie of Boulongne, catholikely & law∣fully deuolued vnto them, by the merite of their Pater∣nosters and deuout processions, and not by vsurpation, or domestical theeuerie, as these relapsed heretikes say. This being done to declare my liberalitie and magnificence, after that I was assured of sundrie townes, castles and churches, which easily suffered themselues to be perswa∣ded by good preachers, vpon whom I bestowed part of my bootie, I prepared this puissant and glorious armie of olde souldiers vsed to the warres, all freshly furbished, which I brought in a very good order and discipline, di∣rectly to Tours, where I thought to say as a catholike Cae∣sar, I came, I sawe, I ouercame. But that fauourer of here∣tikes caused to come in poste this Biarnois, whō I would not attend ouer nigh, nor see him in the face, For comming to nigh an he∣retike, or ioy∣ning battaile with him. left I might be excommunicate: and further you know, that the le∣uying of the siege of Senlis, where my cousin here pre∣sent, hath done well (to speake of him) ioyned to the dis∣comfiture of Saveuse, gaue me colour to turne my coun∣tenance: which also I did as willingly, as you Messieurs of Paris would desire it, and ardently request it of me. Besides, you know to what point we were brought, when that tyrant fortified with the heretikes, came to beard vs, and to take Estampes and Pontoise; but by the good and deuout prayers of the fathers Iesuits, and the intercession of Madame my sister, and the intercession of diuers holie and religious confessors, we found out that holie martyr, which caused to sound that blow from heauen, and deli∣uered
vs out of the miserie and captiuitie, into which we were readie and like within few daies to fall. In so much, that hauing taken breath, and made new attempts, and new bargaines with our good most Catholike King and nursing father, I lifted my hornes on high, and with a gal∣lant armie deuided into two parts, I went to hasten to go gainst the Maheutres, who following the good aduise, which my said Ladie and sister had receiued concerning the same, would haue fled beyond the seas with a small traine: but because they found not their vessels readie at Diepe, where I was to visite them, I put my selfe in in∣deuour to bring them all prisoners to you in this citie, and you doe well remember, But not per∣formed, the greater shame. with what assurance I pro∣mised it to you, and with what preparations you looked for it. Notwithstanding, when I saw that these heretikes made vs beards of dung, and all to berayed vs, and that they would not suffer themselues to bee taken without mittons or winter gloues, I fled into Flanders to seeke such things there, and left them in the meane while to make that packe of stuffe in the suburbes of this citie, and afterwards suffered them to goe and walke all the winter long to Vendosme, to Mans, Laual, Argentan, Faleze, A∣lençon, Vernueil, Eureux and Honfleur, which I let them take very plainly, certainly assuring my selfe that shortly after I should haue all their bootie in grosse, when they should haue taken a very great cold, and be readie to dye therewith. Brauadoes are but simple feare-bugges. And indeed I did very brauely make them lift vp their breech at Dreux, and they had fled away, if they would haue beleeued me. But you knowe that this put∣ting off and on, protracting also the time, cost vs well: for these wicked politikes would haue nothing but me, and they would haue dishonored me, if they could haue ioyned with me, from which I knew well how to keepe my selfe, by the good example of my cousin of Nemours, and of my beloued and trustie cousins also the Duke d'Aumale, and the Knight his brother, who had not for∣gotten the way to Mante. I cannot Messieurs, I cannot
speake of this crosse blow of fortune, Patheticall passions. without sobbes and teares: for I should now be all on doing, you knowe well what. In stead that I was to goe, to seeke, and begge a master in Flanders, and there it was that I chaunged my French couerture or cloake into a cape after the Spanish manner, and gaue my soule to the Southerne diuels, to vngage that, which I had as most deare within this citie. But I tell you plaine I would haue as soone become Lu∣cifers seruant, as seruant to the Duke of Parma, that I might worke despight to the heretikes. I will not passe vnder silence the cunnings, sleights & inuentions, which I vsed to busie and to retaine the people, and those that thought to escape vs, wherin I cannot but acknowledge, that Madame my sister here present, and Monsieur the Cardinall Caietan haue done very expresse and notable seruices to the faith, by subtill newes and Te Deums sung to purpose, and by counterfeited cloathes in the streete of the Lumbards, who haue giuen occasion to many to dye chearfully with the rage of famine, rather then to speake of peace. And if a man would beleeue Monsieur Mendoza (a meruailous zealous man for the faith, He loueth it on the ridge. and a louer of Frāce, if euer there were any) you should neuer haue more this horror, to see so many dead mens bones, in the churchyards or buriall places of S. Innocent and of the Trinitie; and that the deuout Catholikes would ra∣ther haue brought them into powder, drunke them and swallowed them vp, and incorporated them into their owne bodies, as the ancient Troglodites did their fathers and friends that were dead. Open confes∣sion shall one day haue open punishment. Must I needes recite the vile and slauish submissions that I made to bring our new friends to our succour? And yet I my selfe am witnesse, that I alwaies had my purposes and practises apart, what∣soeuer thing I sayd or offered to that good Duke, and I alwaies reserued to my selfe with my streight and secret counsell, to doe some good thing for me and mine, in keeping the pledges if I could, and come what would, I would not vndoe it, but by force: and I shall alwaies
finde difficulties enowe, to execute that which men de∣maund: neither will I want buls and excommunications, thankes to Monsieur the Legate, who knoweth all the Tu autems thereof, to deceiue and bring into a fooles pa∣radise, they that will beleeue them. Wee haue alreadie practised two most famous Legats to helpe vs to sell our snaile shels: We haue had pardons gratis, or of free cost, without vntying our purses, & wee know with what bias wee must take our holie father, threatning him a little with making peace, if he yeeld & grant vs not that which wee demaund of him. Haue wee not had from Rome lightenings and thunderings, by hooke and by crooke, against our politike enemies? Haue not we caused them to be excommunicate, and to become blacke as diuels? We haue caused Paradises to bee continued to our pur∣poses and attempts: He meaneth the citie and v∣niuersitie of Paris. we haue before hand instructed the preachers, that are faithfull, and such as haue learned to lay pawnes to gage, vnder good title. Wee haue caused the brotherhoods of S. Francis, and of the name of Iesus, to renew their oaths: wee haue had ordinarily incompa∣rable processions, who haue obscured the glittering and glorie of the goodliest mummeries that euer were feene. Wee haue caused to bee sowen vnder hand, and that throughout all France, the Catholicon of Spayne, yea some such Doublons, or double Duckets, as haue had meruailous effects, euen to the blew politike cords. What could I haue done more, but to giue my selfe to the di∣uels for the pledge and aduancement of Hyrie, as I haue done? Reade Iosephus bookes, touching the warres of the Iewes, for that is as it were such another fact as ours is, and iudge whether those hote fellowes, Simon and Iohn, haue had more inuentions and disguisements of their matters, to make stiffe and obstinate the poore people of Ierusalem, to dye thorowe the rage of famine, then I haue had, to caufe to dye with the same death, a hundred thousand soules within this citie of Paris: yea to proceed so farre, that the mothers should cate their owne
children, as they did in that holie citie. Reade this histo∣rie I pray you, and for the cause aboue specified, and ye shall finde that I haue not spared any more then they did the most holie reliques and things of greatest vse in the Church, that I could cause to bee molten for my af∣fayres. I haue a hundred times broken my faith, particu∣larly sworne to my friends & kindred, that I might come to that which I desired, without making shewe of it: and my cousin the Duke of Lorraine, and the Duke of Sauoy, knowe well what to say concerning this poynt, whose affayres I haue alwayes set behinde the cause of the French Church, and mine owne matters. And as touch∣ing publique faith, I haue alwayes supposed that the ranke or degree which I holde, did sufficiently dispense with me therefore: and the prisoners which I haue held with mee, or caused to pay raunsome against my pro∣mise, or against their composition that I made with them, cannot any whit at all vpbrayd me, because I haue absolution for it from my great amner and confessor. I will not speake of the voyages which I haue caused to me made against the Biarnois, to astonish and at once to amaze him, where I neuer thought it. The cun∣ningest on my side haue been imbarqued therein, and haue felt nothing thereof, but the freshnes of the ra∣sor. Neither should this displease Ville-roy, who went not thereto, but in good faith, as you may beleeue, I haue indeede allured others, that bragge not of it nei∣ther, and who haue treated for me to two diuers ends or purposes, as well to hasten forward our friends to succour vs, as to astonish and amaze our enemies with mustard. And if the Biarnois would haue beleeued some one or other of his Councell, who haue a graine of this Catholicon vpon their tongue, and who haue alwayes cryed out, that they must make nothing more sharpe, for feare of making all desperate, wee should now haue faire play, in stead that we see the
people, euen of themselues disposed to wish and de∣maund peace, a thing that wee ought all of vsto feare, more then death: and I for my part would loue a hun∣dred times better to become a Turke or a Iewe, with the good grace and leaue of our holy father, then to see these same relapsed heretikes to returne and to enioy their goods, Long prescrip∣tion. which you and I now enioy, and that by iust title, and good faith, a yeare and a day, and aboue to. O God, my friends, what will become of vs if we must render all back againe? If I must returne to my old condition, how shall I maintaine my plate and my gards? Must I passe thorow the Secretaries and treasurers of the Exchequer, and warriors, altogether new fellowes, wheras ours passe thorowe mine owne hands? Let vs dye, yea let vs dye, rather then come there. It is a braue buriall, euen the ru∣ine and destruction of so great a kingdome as this is, vn∣der which it is better for vs to be buried, if we be not able to graspe or catch that which is aboue. There was neuer man that ascended so high as I am, that would come downe but by hie force. There are many gates to enter into the power which I haue, but there is but one onely issue to get out of it, and that is death. This is the cause why I (seeing that a heape of politikes that are amongst vs would offer vnto vs the head of their peace, and of their French monarchie) haue aduised my selfe to pre∣sent vnto them a maske and mummerie of the Estates, & after that I had differred it, as long as I could, to illude, and make to waxe cold the present pursuites of their de∣puties, and I haue called you here together with you to giue order thereto, & to turne ouer together their quiers, that so I may know where the disease holdeth them, and who are our friends, and who are our enemies. But yet not to lye vnto you herein, A mā of good conscience. I doe it for no other purpose then to shut vp their beakes and bils, and to make them beleeue that we trauaile very much for the publike good, and minde very willingly to make an agreement for
the good people (notwithstanding all this) shall not pisse much better contented. I know there are none here but our friends, no more thē there was in the Estates at Blois: & by cōsequent I assure my selfe, that al of you would do as much for me, as for euery one of you namely that I, or some one Prince of our house might be King, If you be not deceiued. and you shall finde that the best for you. Yet so it is, that this cannot be done so soone, and there is yet a Masse to bee sayd, and there must be made a great breach in the king∣dome, because it will be conuenient, that we giue a good part of it to them that should helpe vs in this busines. On the other side, you well foresee the daungers and incon∣ueniences of peace, which setteth all things in order, and yeeldeth right to whom it appertaineth: and there∣fore it is much better to hinder it, then to thinke of it. And concerning my selfe, I sweare vnto you, A holie and re∣ligious oath. by the deare and welbeloued head of mine eldest sonne, that I haue no veine that reacheth not thereto, and I am as farre from that, as the earth is from heauen: for although I haue made shewe by my last declaration, & by my subsequent answer, that I do desire the conuersion of the King of Na∣narre, I pray you to beleeue, that I desire nothing lesse: and that I loue rather to see my wife, my nephew, and all my cousins and kinsfolkes dead, then to see this Biarnois at Masse, that is not the place where I itch. I haue not written and published it, but with a purpose and deuise, euen no otherwise then Monsieur the Legate maketh his exhortation to the French people. And all those e∣scripts or writings which Monsieur of Lions hath made, and will make concerning that subiect or matter, are not but of an intent to hold the people in wayting for some good aduenture (you vnderstand me well) which the fa∣thers Iesuits will procure to make a second holie martyr. And from else where, it is as much diuision and as great weakening and infeebling to our enemies, and as great preparatiues for the third side, where wee haue also a good part, as being a great meane, if it clatter and make
noise, for vs well to performe our businesses, and for the aduancement wherof, I pray you to employ your allian∣ces and intelligences, as I do mine: not to constraine the heretike to turne his coate, for I neither desire it nor meane it, and I assure my selfe that he will neuer doe no∣thing that way, he hath so great an obstinate hart: which is the thing I demaund, to the ende that he may alwayes remaine in his skinne, which will get vs very many good Catholike, Apostolike and Romane friends, inspired with the holie spirit, which wil much hinder him on their behalfe, and will put him into a great accessorie: and I assure my selfe, It were hard, if not mōstrous, that he should that the King which they will make, will not counterpoise me in the ballance. Whatsoeuer fall out, we haue sent thick & threefold our agents to Rome, as Monsieur the Cardinall of Pelue, my good master, can witnesse vnto you, to ouerthrow the negotiation of the Cardinall of Gondy, who will not chafe therefore more then he ought, and the practises of the Marquis of Pisa∣ni, who is too good a Frenchman for vs, who are gone to Rome to seeke & finde, if they can, a good way for peace. But wee haue stirred vp our Ambassadors of Spayne, to protest against their audience, and against that that the Pope would doe, concerning the pretended conuersion of the Biarnois. Monsieur the Legate hath ayded vs to make our remembrances and instructions, and for his part will imploy therein all his abilities and strong con∣federations of the Consistorie. Strong props. And if his holines doe o∣therwise, I know well how we must haue reason therein and bring him thereto, namely, by threatning him that wee are very well able to make in this case our owne a∣greement and accord with the politikes, and that with the losses and disaduantage of the Church of Rome. Also would you not counsell me that for one Masse, which the King of Nauarre should cause to bee sung (which God forbid) I should demise my selfe from the power that I haue, and of a halfe King that I am, to become a seruant, that so I might cause the tempest of this warre to fall vpō
the head of these good Catholike Spanyards our friends, Good teach∣ers for such schollers, who will teach vs to beleeue in God. It is very true, that if the sayd conuersion fall out in good earnest, I shall be in great paine and trouble, and shall hold the woolfe by the eares. Notwithstanding, Monsieur of Lions, and our good preachers haue taught me, that it is not in the po∣wer of God to pardon a relapsed heretike, and that the Pope himselfe cannot giue him absolution, no not in the very article or poynt of death, which wee ought to holde for the thirteenth article of our faith, New Creedes ioyned. and adde it to the Apostles Creed: yea, that if the Pope would intermeddle in it, wee would make him himselfe to bee excommuni∣cate by our mother of Sorbonne, who knoweth more Latin then he, Good praise. and drinketh more Catholikely then the Consistorie of Rome. This then is the poynt, vpon which we must principally insist, by what meanes we shall hin∣der the peace, and shall make immortal warre in France. Monsieur of Lions knoweth very well that the King of Spayne and I, haue promised him vpon our honour, a red hat, if he can doe so much by his rhetorike, to come to that end; and his sister hath alreadie receiued for pled∣ges a carcan or little chest of three thousand Duckets, and a chaine of Catholike pearles, with a hundred thou∣sand Doublons, or double Duckets. Wee haue also cer∣taine politikes in the conuenticle and simple Senate of the enemies, who spinne alreadie some cordes or strings of the sayd red hat, and if we send them but a little cri∣mosin silke, to make the reines of their mule, they will ayde vs well, and much hinder that these wicked Hugue∣nots out of their wits, shall not enter into the Estates, and that nothing shall bee done or passed there, to the hurt and dishonor of our holy father, and the holy Apostolike sea, no though that the priuiledges of the French Church should be lost therefore. I coniure then all this holie as∣semblie to hold their hand, and to imploy wet and drie e∣uen all that they haue, that the Parisiens & other townes come not vpon vs, to breake the head of their peace, but
that they take death in good part, and suffer their vtter ruine, rather then to thinke of it, or to open their mouth for it. Wee must rase out of the Church prayers, these grieuous wordes (Giue peace, O Lord) as Monsieur the Legate will by and by giue you to vnderstand, that they are not of the effence of the Masse, nor words appertai∣ning to the Sacraments: onely let vs make colour and good shew If Ville roy be wearie of it, No scarsitie of bad men. we haue Zamet, who for the pleasure that my good cousin the Duke of Elbeuf hath done to him, wil not complaine of his paines and voyages, and will easily suffer himselfe to be abused, vpon the hope of his salt lofts. Whatsoeuer it bee, yea fall out what can, if wee vnderstand our selues well, and continue our intellgences, with this happie third side, we shall so well iumble together the affayres, that they of Bourbon shall not see themselues these thirtie yeares, where they thinke to be: for I will neuer make any more account of them, The Cardinall of Bourbon. then I made of their vncle, whom I let dye in prison and in necessitie, without remembring or caring any whit at all for him, after he had serued vs for a pretext, and a planke (whom these Huguenots called a rotten planke) to mount to the place where I am: for I know very well, that so long as there shall be of this race of Bourbon (that maketh better proofe, then my selfe, of the descent from S. Lewes) neuer, neither I nor any of mine shall raigne without quarrell. This is the cause why you ought not to doubt, that I will doe all that I am able, to ridde my selfe of them. At the least one thing comforteth me, which is, that if the enemies hold Saint Denis, where the ancient Kings are buried, wee possesse the iewels, reliques, and kingly ornaments therof, which are freed from them, by the holie deuotion of my bro∣ther of Nemours, who caused the Crowne to be molten. But which is more, Confesse and be hanged, as they say. the holie Ampoule or viole of Reims, is in our pōwer, if we had any thing to doe with it: with∣out which you vnderstand me well. This is a great blow
from heauen. Therefore wee pray all good Confessors, Preachers, Curats, and other deuout pensionaries, to bee outragious about this subiect and matter, to the end that God may doe that therein that liketh vs. For mine owne regard, I will keep as much as I can the matters in a bal∣lance and apparance, as I haue alwaies done in the go∣uernment of this citie, not suffering that the partie of the politikes should bee too much taken downe, nor that of the sixteene too much lifted vp and insolent, for feare least the one of them, making it selfe the more strong, would not also make it a law to me: which thing my cousin the Duke of Lorraine vpbraided mee withall, which also I haue learned of the Queene Mother, A catholike mans prayer for a catholike woman. whom God haue mercie vpon. Furthermore, I beleeue that there is not one of you, that doth not remember the death of Sacremore, after that hee had done mee many good seruices: I haue hope that I and my nephew shall doe many other to the honour of this good God, be∣cause that you the rest Messieurs, serue vs with the like affection, and waite for the like recompense in this world or in another. Concerning the pill or poyson that certaine politikes haue a minde to hit me in the teeth with, accusing me that Saint Cere, A foule fault easily wiped & washed away. or la Loüe (I knowe not whether of the two) had giuen him, they lie in it, wicked men as they are, I neuer so much as drea∣med of it: and indeed it is nothing but a certaine heate of the liuer, which the Phisitians call falling off of the haire, A great exe∣cration. and Monsieur of Lions knoweth that gowtes come very often without that: and if it bee otherwise, I would to God the wolues might eate vp my thighs, praying you for the honour of the holie vnion, to be∣leeue nothing of that matter, and to regard your af∣fayres, for wee haue an enemie that sleepeth not, and who vseth more bootes then shooes. You will, I hope, giue order for it, and will keepe your selues from the kings euill, and from falling from the highest euill, if you can. I haue sayd.
Monsieur the Lieutenant hauing finished his speech, with the great applaude of the affistants or companie, (where the president de Nully, and Acharie the lackie of the League were seene to weepe for ioy) the Deane of Sorbonne, the great Datarie of the Legate rose vp and cried with a lowd voyce, Humiliate vos, &c. Humble your selues to the blessing, and afterwards ye shall haue an oration. Then Monsieur the Legate, three deepe and bountifull blessings being first made, began to speake after this manner following. The Oration of Monsieur the Legate. IN the name of the Father, ✚✚. I take great ioy, and am almost out of my selfe (O Lordes, and people, more Catholike then euen the Romanes themselues) to see that you are here gathered, for a matter so great & Catholike. But on the other side, I find my selfe much a∣mazed, to perceiue so many grosse opinions amongst you which are the Catholike leaguers, Such as were sometimes in Italie. and it seemeth vn∣to me that those ancient factions of blacke and white are reuiued, for as much as some demaund white, and other some blacke. But one onely thing seemeth to me need∣full, for the health and saluation of your soules, that is, not to speake at any time of peace, and much lesse to labour and procure it, before that first, all the Frenchmen bee dead after the manner of the Macchabees, and that also so valiantly, as Sampson was, slaine and buried amongst the ruines of this captiuated earthly Paradise of France, Paris he mea∣neth. that so you may the better enioy the immortall quietnes of the heauenly Paradise. Warre then, warre, O valiant and magnificall Frenchmen: for it seemeth vnto me, that when men discourse and reason of peace, and that they speake of truce, with these heretike rascall knaues, Hot burning charitie. that there is offered vnto me a glister of inke, considering that it is a great deale better for the quietnes of Italie, and for the securitie of the holie Apostolike sea,
that the Frenchmen and the Spanyards should warre one of them with another in France, or els certainly in Flan∣ders for the religion, or for the Crowne, then in Italie for Naples or Millan. Wherefore to tell you the trueth, the most holie father doth not care for all your affayres fur∣ther, A good shep∣heard. but so farre as it toucheth him not to be spoyled of the Annates and commendanes, and other expeditions and dispatches which be made in Rome with your golde and siluer. Giue your soules as much as you will to the diuell of hell, it is a small matter to him, prouided that that which issueth vnto him out of Bretaigne, The crowne and the bellie wholly respec∣ted. and the ancient reuerence due vnto his holines, doe not faile him. So much more great and reuerend shall be his holines, by how much you other little mannikiens shall become little and very little ones. And speake not any more of so great good turnes and such excellent fauours, as your predecessors haue done to the holie Apostolike sea, and much lesse of the riches and countries, that the Popes hold by the benefite of Charles the great, and of his suc∣cessors Kings of France, that is a thing done alreadie. The Pardons that you haue receiued a few yeares since, Orels. with the fewe Indulgences or forgiuenes, and the Iubilees are of a much greater price. It is enough that the Crownes & Scepters of the world, be at the disposition of his holines, and so may bee chaunged, iested withall, translated and taken and giuen, after his owne manner: for it is written, Well sayd di∣uell, speaking his words, and in his spirit. I will giue thee all these things. And that I may proceede to speake vnto you in the Latin tongue, lest happily some did not sufficiently vnderstand the Italianā, I will tell you the summe of my legation, which is taken out of the tenth chapter of Matthew. Thinke you not, I pray you, that I haue come to send peace into this land: I came not to send peace but a sword, for I haue nothing more in charge and secret instruction, then that I may continual∣ly exhort you to battaile and fighting, and with all my strength may let, that you should not at any hand treate, touching reconciliation and peace amongst your selues:
which verily should bee a great crime and vnworthie Christian and Catholike persoas. And another poynt that I haue to doe with you, is touching the election of some good Catholike Prince to bee your King, shaking offvtterly this familie of the Bourboniās, which is whol∣lie hereticall, or a fautrix and fauourer of heretikes. But I know that ye shal do a most gratefull and gracious thing to our Lord the Pope, and to the holy Apostolike sea, and also to my most christian benefactor, and most Catholike King of Spayne, and of so many other kingdomes, if you conserue the Dutchie of Britannia Armorica, to his most famous daughter the infant, and bestow the kingdome vpon some Prince of his familie, whom she will choose for her husband, and will vouchsafe worthie of the dow∣rie Crowne of France whollie to either of the competi∣tors. But of this poynt, that most reuerend Cardinall of Pelue, Elegantly spo∣ken. shall dispute vato you, and for the residue shall supplie it, for he knoweth better then me my selfe your businesses, which for twentie yeares space, as well Lo∣tharingically as Spanishly he hath handled at Rome, and that so subtilly and faithfully, that he hath brought your matters to that poynt, into which you see them now re∣duced. Aske my fel∣low and I be a theese. Wherefore when this godly Prelate and citizen did beleeue, that his mother France was in the agonie of death, and did draw the last breath, he came lately to vi∣site her, as a good and a deuout confessor, and the best cō∣patriot, to helpe you in the funerall, or rather vulnerall pompe and exequies thereof. But if you would choose some one seeking out of his benefactors of Lotharingie, and Guisie, surely you should do to him according to his heart, and he would cheerefully annoynt and consecrate him with the oyle of the holie pot, crewse or crewer, which he hath at Reims expressely reserued, and very wel kept vnder the custodie of S. Paule, Duke of Campania and Rotelia: looke you to it. I by the expresse mandate of our Lord, if you shall doe any thing in this matter a∣gainst the lawes & manners of this king do me, or against
the Councels of the Church, And what not? or against the Gospell and Decalogue (specially according to the impression of heretikes) doe promise you full absolution and indul∣gence, and that freely for euer and euer, Amen. Alas for mee, I did not remember to cause you to vnderstand a much and merueilous good newes, which I haue recei∣ued in haste from Rome, by meanes of Zametto, that is, that his holines doth excommunicate, charge, accurse all Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priests & Friers which are politikes royall, or fauouring the King, how much Catholike soeuer they be. And for to take away all differences and iealousnes betwixt the Spanyards and French, the most holy father shall make, But yet the Spaniards had it first. that the French shall haue the kings euill, aswell as the Spanyards, & shall become also as great brauaders or bragging fellowes, & bouggerers as they. Moreouer he giueth full indulgence and pardon to all, how great good Catholikes soeuer they be, be they Lorraines, or Spanyards, or French men, the which shall murther their fathers, brethren, cousins, neighbours, superiours, royall Princes, politike heretikes in this most christian warre, during three hundred thou∣sand yeares of true pardon. A very good reason. And doubt ye not that the holie spirit shall be wanting vnto you, for the holie Con∣sistorie will cause it to come downe from the armes of God the father, at their pleasure or commaundement, as ye knowe that hee hath denied these many yeares to create any Pope, that hath not been an Italian or a Spanyard. In fine, I pray you for my sake make a King: and I doe not care whosoeuer hee bee, although hee were the diuell, so that he bee a seruant and a feuda∣tarie of his holines, and of the Catholique King, by whose meanes I stand, and haue been made a Cardinall, thankes to the good Duke of Parma for it. This I will tell you, that my voyce of choise, shall willingly bee for the infant or daughter of Spayne, More (it is said) thē she should for she is a valiant and worthie Ladie, and much beloued of
her father. Neuertheles, doe you that which shall please the Lord the Duke of Feria, and Monsieur the Lieute∣nant. But take you heed in the meane time, how you opē your mouth to speake or reason of peace or of truce: o∣therwise the holie Colledge will denie Christ himselfe. I commend my selfe heartilie vnto you. Againe I say vnto you farewell. These words being finished, little Launay, heretofore made minister in the vniuersitie of Geneue, and at this present the basest person of Sorbonne, after that he had eaten vp the great breuiaries and heures of the late king, to make banquets to Monsieur the Lieutenant, fell vpon his knees with Garinus the Franciscan Frier, and apostle apostata, and assisted with Cuilly the Curat of S. Ger∣main Lauxerrois, and with Aubry the Curat of S. Andrew des Arts, comming backe from shriuing Peter Barriere, thundered out with a lowd voyce, before Monsieur the Legats crosse, O crosse all haile, our onely hope in this time of the passion. Some of the assemblie thought not well of it, notwith∣standing euery one followed them, singing the same song, and the stirre being ended, the lot fell to Monsieur the Cardinall of Pelue to speake, who lifting himselfe vp vpon his two feete like a goose, after that he had made very deepe reuerence before Monsieur the Lieutenants seate, he hauing put off his red had into his hood behind, and afterwards making such another before Monsieur the Legate, Great prepara∣tion to heare a goose hisse. and last of all one most low of all the rest be∣fore the Dames or Ladies, did in fine sit himselfe downe againe, & hauing coughed or sneezed three good times together, and that not without auoyding of some phleg∣matike matter, which also prouoked euery one to do the like, he began to speake after this manner, directing his words to Monsieur the Lieutenant, who three times sayd vnto him, Couer a thousand, or put on my master.
The Oration of Monsieur the Car∣dinall of Pelue. MOnsieur Lieutenant, you shall excuse me, if to con∣tent this learned assemblie, and to keepe decorum, and the dignitie of the ranke or place that I holde in the Church, by the prouidence of you & yours, Man setteth vp such mates. I make some discourse in the Latin tongue, in which you know that I haue a long time studied, and knowe almost as much thereof as my grandfather, A learned race. who was a good souldier and a good farmor, and that vnder Charles the eight. But when I shall haue spoken three words, I will then come to you and your affayres. Wherefore I will now direct my selfe to you famous men, Neuer word of this kind more true. and the most picked out of all the filth and stinking dirt of France, that I may make you to vnderstand many things, which cannot sufficiētly enough bee expressed in the French language. For it is most fit, that wee chiefly that haue studied in the most famous vniuersitie of Paris, High poynts doubtles. and are more wittie then the tagge ragge of the people, should haue some secret mat∣ters in vs that women should not vnderstand. I wil there∣fore that you know (and yet let these things be spoken to godly eares alone) that there hath gone out an edict, or if you will rather, a rescript, from our Lord the Pope, by which it is permitted vs to choose, create, sacrate, and an∣noynt a new King, what a one shall please you, A shrewd li∣mitation. so that he be of the stocke of Austria or Guise. You haue therefore to prouide a Prince of whether nation you will, for of these Bourbonians there are no speeches nor words, how much lesse of this heretike relapsed, whom the same our Lord the Pope, by the foresayd rescript affirmeth, to bee euen now damned in hell, A sober iudge∣ment. So it appea∣reth. and that his soule shall shortly serue Lucifer for an afternoones beuer. Indeede I am a Frenchman, neither will I denie my countrie: but if this choise might goe according to my liking: verily for my
good, and the good of mine, yea and for your good to, I would willingly pray you, that you would giue your voy∣ces to some of the Lotharen familie, whom you knowe to haue done so well in the Catholike common-wealth and Church of Rome. But peraduenture my Lord Le∣gate hath another intent, Who doub∣teth of that. to please the Spanyards: but he speaketh not all the things hee hath in the ambrey or chest of his breast. In the meane while hold you this firme, An egge not more like an egge, then this lewd fellow like the Legat. that you must at no hand speake or heare concer∣ning making of peace with these damned politikes: but rather arme your selues, and prepare your selfe to suffer all extremities, yea euen death, famine, fire, and the ru∣ine of the whole citie or kingdome. For ye can doe no∣thing more gratefull and acceptable to God, and to Philip our most Catholike King. I know well enough that Luxenburgh, and Cardinall Goudiu, and the Mar∣quis Pisanus, are gone to Rome to prepare the minde of our Lord the Pope, to heare the legation of this Biarnois, treating of his conuersion. But looke how safe the Moone is from the monkies or woolues, Speake again, and speake better if can be so much auerse is the heart of our Lord the Pope, from such businesses. Bee strong and secure euen as I, so I bee within the Parisiens walles. Verily I had prepared some good thing to say vnto you, concerning the bles∣sed Paul, whose conuersion was yesterday celebrated, because I did hope that yesterday it should bee my good happe to speake in my order. But the ouer long oration of my Lord de Mania, A right name, if it be well vn∣derstood. deceiued me: and therefore I am constrained to put vp the sword of my good Latin, into the sheath or scabberd which I would haue whet and sharpened against this conuersion, concerning which sundrie politicians, sowe I cannot tell what into the com∣mon people, which notwithstanding I neither beleeue nor desire. For blessed Paul did much differ from this Nauarre: for he was noble & a citizen of Rome: & that he was noble, & descended of a noble race, appeareth by
this, that at Rome he had his head cut off. Belike none be beheaded but noble per∣sonages. But this fel∣lowe is infamous for heresie, and all the familie of the Bourbonians doth descend from a poultrer, or if you had rather haue it so, from a butcher, that solde flesh in the butcherie of Parisijs, as affirmeth a certaine Poet, greatly a friend of the holie Apostolike sea, and therfore because he would not lye. Thou art iud∣ged by thine owne mouth vnthriftie ser∣uant. Paul also was conuerted with a mi∣racle, but this not, vnles some would say, that he did by besieging inclose this citie about some foure moneths with sixe thousand men, whilest there were within more then a hundred thousand: and that this is a miracle, that he tooke so many cities and strong holds, without the subuersion of walles, but by place without wayes, by holes and straight caues, that could scarcely bee pearced by one onely souldier. Adde ye: that Paul feared, and was affected with great feare by lightning from hea∣uen: but this man is feareles, neither is afrayd of any thing, neither thunder, nor lightning, nor flashings, nor showres, nor winter and yee, or heate, no not our set battailes nor our armies, so well surnished and orde∣red as they are, More miracles yet. which hee dare expect and come be∣fore with a handfull and small force, and either ouer∣throw them, or put them to flight. Let this swift and vnsleeping diuell perish ill, which doth so labouriously wearie vs, and letteth vs from sleeping as much as we list. But this much concerning Paul, least Policarpus, whose feast is kept this daye, may perhappes enuie, whom yet I will pretermit, Vnskilfull in vitas patrum. because I haue foreseene or premeditated nothing concerning him. I remember indeede when I was at Rome in the time of Pope Gre∣gorie, that I propounded in the Consistorie fiue pro∣tests or problemes to bee disputed of, which all re∣spected this most holie congregation, concerning the choosing of a King of France. For from that time, wherein this dead Henry the fautor of heretikes spoy∣led mee of my Bishopricke of Senon, and put my rents and benefices, which I had in his kingdome, in
in his owne hand and purse, I alwayes had a minde and intention of reuenging myselfe, A holy prelate ouercome euill with well do∣ing. and did all that I could, and will doe for euer, though I should giue my soule to the diuell, that this most notable iniurie might fall vpon the head of all the French, that suffered it, neither did op∣pose themselues against my sname & opprobrie: which when I had often protested, I did at the last effectuall, and you knew well what to say. A notable be∣holder of formes, and a singular flat∣terer. But these men Princes, and these women, the famous pearles and meruailous genis of all the world, call me else whether, to whom both men and women now the matter requireth that I should speake, as also to the rest of the troupe of deputies & de∣puting, for whom it is behouefull that they should vn∣derstand mee disputing and reasoning in the French tongue, which I haue almost vnlearned to speake, I haue so greatly forgotten mine owne countrie. Then I will returne to you Monsieur the Lieutenant, and I will tell you, that if I had found in France the affayres to haue passed, according to the practises and intelligēces, which I haue managed, for these fiue and twentie yeares space, with the Spanyards at Rome, A good Frēch man. I should now see the late Monsieur your brother, in this royall throane, and wee might haue occasion to sing with that good Patriarch, Nunc dimittis. But sith that this was not the will of God that it should be so, patience perforce: he goeth farre e∣nough that passeth beyond fortune. Yet by the way I will tell you, Fie for shame that you will sweare by such great and holy things. that of my faith, credit and honestie, it is a pleasant sight for you, yea Monsieur Lieutenant, it is a pleasant sight for you to bee seene sit there where you are, & ye haue a goodly shew, ye fit your place well, and it will not be euill for you to bee made the King, and you lacke nothing but a good pegge or pinne to hold you well therein. You haue euen the very selfe same fashion and manner (I alwaies reserue and except the honour which I owe to the Church) that some Saint Ncolas of a countrie towne or village hath. By the faith that I owe to God, me thinketh that we celebrate here the feast of In∣nocents,
or els the day of the three Kings of Colen. If you had now a full glasse of good wine, Thē he might be Hugo bon compaignion. and that it would please the maiestie of your Lieutenantship to drinke to all the companie, wee would all crie the King drinketh, euen as well that it is not long sithence that the He meaneth the twelfth day Kings are passed where we did very much let, that they should not make a king of the beane, for feare of inconuenience, and of euill prefage or prediction: but if ye were here, in the midst of this Lent comming, wee would ride all with you about the streetes, and would keepe there midde Lent on horsebacke, if wee could retaine vntill then all this Catholigue assemblie, to which I will now addresse my speech in generall, A sore prote∣station, and a great losse if he should sor∣goe it. and that all the world may vnder∣stand me. Messieurs, hold me not for an honest man and a good Catholike, if the maladie of France (I minde not to speake of the French disease) I would say your mise∣ries and pouerties, haue not caused me to come this farre, where I haue carried my self, as a very hypocrite, Correct it not, for it is no lie. I would haue sayd Hypocrate, but my tongue hath made me to trippe. This great Phisitian, seeing his countrie afflicted with a certaine epidemicall disease and cruell pestilence, that did roote out all the people, counselled them to cause to be lighted great store of fires throughout all the countries, to purge and driue away the euill ayre. And me, altogether of the same manner, A medicine to expell poyson. to the end I might come to the butte of all my Catholigue deuises and pur∣poses, and for an antidote to our holie vnion, which is smitten with the plague, I haue been one of the princi∣pall authors (I speake it without vaunting) of all these fires and flames, Neither neede you boast of that. that breake foorth and burne now all France, and which haue euen alreadie brought and con∣sumed into ashes, the brauest and best that the Goths and Visigoths left therein. If the late Cardinall of Lorraine, my good master, were aliue, he would giue you a good testimonie therof, for hauing drawne me from the great pot of the hooded Friers of Montague, and afterwards placed me in the Court of Parliament, where I well dis∣couered
the colledge, or tolde tales out of the schoole, where he made me Bishop, afterwards Archbishop, and in the end Cardinall, and this was alwaies vpon this ex∣presse and plaine condition, that I should bring this busi∣nes to his perfection, and should obliege my selfe & my soule for the aduancement of the greatnes of Lorraine, and the detriment of the house of the Valois, and of the Bourbons, whereunto I haue not been wanting in all that was possible to me, and that my braine or skonse could stretch vnto. And in these latter daies, the presidents Ve∣tus and Ianin haue ayded me with notes, Like will to like quoth the diuell to the collier. remembrances and practises, and haue as it were vpheld my credit with their foote, and somewhat before them my collegues Dauid and Piles, could not haue done any great matter without me, He meaneth their practises. nor I without them. Poore Salcede knewe somewhat of our secrets, but not all, and he had not a good bill or beake, for he discouered the pot with the ro∣ses, whereupon he missed but a little to destroy vs toge∣ther with himselfe, notwithstanding wee haue well had reason from all these Valesiens, and shall haue (God hel∣ping vs) from these Bourbonists, if euery one of you will play the gallant man. As for me, Messieurs, behold me at your commandement, to set and to sell, to spend and dispend, so that as good zealous Catholikes, you subiect your selues to the Archcatholikes Princes Lorraines, This eloquēce almost passeth intelligence. & to the supercatholikes the Spanyards, who do so greatly loue France, and doe so much desire your soules health, that euen of catholike charitie, they would therefore lose their owne, whereof there is great pitie, and I pray you in good time to aduise, lest this Biarnois doe not play vs, or giue vs a tricke or a badge of his occupation. For if he should go to conuert himselfe, and heare a wicked Masse onely (ah ha, ah ha) we should be striken downe, and we should euen at one blow haue lost all, both our double Duckers, and our paines or trauaile also. But though these honest people of Luxenburgh and Pisani, doe pro∣mise it to our holy father, it may bee that there will no
such thing fall out. This is the reason wherfore in doubt, He would or should haue sayd without doubt. ye ought to make hasse to put your selues into the hands of Phisitians, these good Christians of Castile, who are skilled in your sicknes, and know the cause thereof, and by consequent, are so much the more proper, to heale it if you will beleeue them: for they which say, Phisitians dea∣ling by practise rather then skill. that the Spanyards are dangerous empirikes, and do as the wolfe that promised the sheepe to heale her of her cough, that is false, they are all heretikes that say it, and euery good Catholike ought to beleeue vnder paine of excommuni∣cation, and the censure of the Church, that the faithfull and valiant King of Spayne, would haue lost his king∣domes of Naples, Portugall, and Nauarre, And why not the Indies and all as well as these? yea his Dutchie of Millan, and the Countie of Roussillon, & all the rights and titles that he hath in the Low Countries, which the Estates keepe for him, and that all the Frenchmen should be good Catholikes, and would willingly and in haste re∣ceiue his garrisons, together with the holy Inquisition, which is the true and only touchstone to know the good Christians and zealous Catholikes, children of humilitie and obedience. Beleeue not then that this good King sendeth you so many Ambassadors, and causeth to bee sent vnto you these good persons, the Legats of the holie father, of any other intention but to make you to beleeue that he loueth you aboue all nothings. As right as can be. Can you thinke rightly, that he that is the Lord of so many kingdomes, that he cannot count them nor call them by the letters of the crosse rowe, and so rich, that he cannot tell what to doe with his treasures, would so much as take paine only to wish so small a thing as the signeurie of France? The foxe saith he will eate no grapes. All Europe, by a manner of speech, is not so much as one countrie, in comparison of the new Ilands conquered a∣gainst the sauages: when he sweateth, these are his Dia∣dems: when hee wipeth his nose or face, these are his Crownes: when he tosteth himselfe, these are his Scep∣ters: when he goeth about his affayres, these are nothing but Counties & Dukedomes that come out of his bodie,
he is so well stuffed and replenished therewith. It should be then to very great purpose to suspect that hee would be King of France. But what, what? I say not therefore to heale the kings euill or great poxe (wherewith his Southerly countries are very sore infected) hee maketh not any reckoning of the prayers of the deuout inhabi∣tants of his good towne of Paris, who haue besought him by plaine letters signed with their hands, to receiue them as his good subiect; and seruants, & to accept the weigh∣tie burthen of the Crowne of France: or if his backe were so bowed, and charged with other Crownes more precious, that that of France could not finde place, that yet at the least he would recompence therewith one of his Nobles or Princes, who should doe him fealtie, hom∣mage and reuerence for it. Marrie otherwise, I beseech you for the honour of God, A reasonable request. thinke not that he thinketh thereof. His behauiours in the Low Countries, and in the new found lands, should assure you that he thinketh of no euill, no more then an old ape. And though it were so, Begin Cardi∣nall with thy selfe and thy friends, and then it may be thou shalt the better per∣swade. that he had caused you all to kill one another, and to perish by fire, sword, and famine, should not you be very happie to bee placed on high in Paradise, aboue Confes∣sors and Patriarches, and to mocke at these Maheutres, which you should see vnderneath you to roste & boyle in Lucifers fires? Dye when you will, wee haue Moores, Africans, Wallons and Foruscites to set in your place: kil, murder, and burne hardly all: Monsieur the Legate will pardon all: Monsieur the Lieutenant will aduow all: Monsieur d'Aumale will adiudge all: Monsieur of Lions will seale all, and Monsieur Marteau will signe all: I my selfe will serue you for a father confessor, and all France also, if it haue the heart or spirit to suffer it selfe to dye a good Catholike, & to make the Lorraines and Spanyards her heires, as I beseech you all in generall and particular, assuring you next after Monsieur the Legate, that your soules shall not passe thorowe the fire of purgatorie, A gracious graunt ha∣uing been alreadie sufficiently purged by the fires which
we haue inkindled in the foure riuers, and in the midst of this Realme, for the holie League, and by the penance, fastings, and abstinence which wee would make you doe in deuotion. As touching the election of a King, I giue my voyce to the Marquis of Chaussons, Quaint quali∣ties for such a place. he is neither thicke lipped, nor flat nosed, but a good Catholike, Apo∣stolike, and Romane. I recommend him vnto you and me for my selfe: In the name of the father, the sonne, and the spirit, Amen. These words being finished, all the Doctors of Sorbonne, and masters of Arts there present, strooke the palmes of their hands together, and cryed, Ʋiuat, that is, let him liue, sundrie times together, so mightily, that all the hall sounded with it: and after that the noise was a little ceased, the Prior of the blacke Monkes rose vp out of his place, and mounted vpon his bench or seate, from whence he pronounced very loud∣ly, and that with good grace also, these foure little verses, as if he had composed them ex tempore. Or ex trumpe∣rie rather. His eloquence he was not able to cause to be seene, For fault of one booke, in which all his knowledges beene: My Lords the Estates, this very good man excuse, His Calepin at Rome he left and could it not vse. And euen presently after, a little master of Arts, stood out on his feete, and turning his visage towards Mon∣sieur the Cardinall of Pelue, replied vpon the same point in so many carmes or verses. Adde but h. and it will be charms. The ignorant Friers had very good reason To make you their head, Monsieur most grand: For they that haue heard your goodly oraison, Haue beknowne you to be of other the most ignorant. All the world thought this rime very pleasant, and af∣ter they had made a second clapping of the hands, & yet not so long as the first was, Monsieur of Lions rose vp, & made a signe with his hand that he would speake. Great prepara∣tions to heare a goose hisse. Wher∣fore after that all the world had sonorously and theolo∣gically coughed, hauked, spit, and respitted, that they
might the more attentiuely heare him, by reason of the reputation of his eloquence, hee discoursed thus or thereabout. The Oration of Monsieur of Lions. MEssieurs, I will begin my speech by a patheticall ex∣clamation of the royall Prophet Dauid: Quam ter∣ribilia iudicia tua, &c. O God, how terrible and admi∣rable are thy iudgments? They that will very narrowly looke or take heede to the beginnings and proceedings of our holie vnion, shall haue very good occasion, with their hands ioyned together, Ah mannerly Prelate. and lifted vp into heauen to crie: O God, if your iudgments bee incomprehensible, how much your graces are they more admirable, and to say with the Apostle, Where sin aboūded, there superaboun∣ded grace also. Is not this a very strange thing, Messieurs, yea zealous Catholikes, to see our vnion now, so holie, so zealous, & so deuoute, that was almost in all the parts of it composed of people that before the holie barricades, were all beiewelled and enriched with some note ill sol∣faied, Warre wor∣keth wonders. and also ill agreeing with iustice? And as it were by a miraculous metamorphosis, to see sodainly and at one blow, Or rather or∣dure. atheisme conuerted into ardure and feruencie of deuotion: ignorance into science of all nouelties, and curiositie of newes: concussion and extortion, into fa∣stings: robberie, into generositie and valiantnes: to be short, vice and crime transmutated into glorie and ho∣nour? These are the stroakes from heauen, as Monsieur the Lieutenant hath sayd, euen from God himselfe: I say so fayre and beautifull, that Frenchmen ought to o∣pen the eyes of their vnderstanding profoundly for to consider these miracles, and thereupon ought the good people of this Realme, and those that enioy goods to, to be red with shame, with almost al the Nobilitie, the more sound part of the Prelats, and of the Magistrates, yea the
most cleere sighted, who make shewe to haue in horror, As they should indeed. this holy and miraculous chaunge. For what is there in the world more admirable? And what can God himselfe doe more strange, then to see all turned vpside downe in a moment, valets and varlets to become masters: small ones made great ones: the poore, rich: the humble, in∣solent and proude: to see them that obeyed, to com∣mand: those that borrowed, to lend to vsurie: those that iudged, to bee iudged: those that imprisoned, to bee im∣prisoned: and those that were faine to stande, What man? wither wilt thou? to sit O meruailous case! O great mysteries! O the secrets of the profound casket of God, vnknowne to mortall caytifes. The yards & elles of shoppes are turned into partisanes: the penners into muskets: the breuiaries or portuises into targets: the copes into corselets, and the hoods into be∣uers and salades? Is it not another great and admirable conuersion of the greatest part of you, Messieurs, the zea∣lous Catholikes, (among whom I will name for honours sake, the Lords de Rosne, de Mandreville, la mothe Se∣rand, the cheualier Breton, Mo then a good many. and fiue hundred others of the most famous of our side, which would make me make a hyperbaton and ouerlong parenthesis, and that they whom I name not, would not take it well at my hands?) Is not this I say a great matter, that you were all not long sithence in Flaunders, bearing armes politikely, and im∣ploying your persons and goods against the archicatho∣like Spanyards, in the fauour of the heretikes of the Low Countries, and that you are now so catholikely ranged, euen all at once into the lap of the holie Romane league, Fit fellowes for such ser∣uice. & that so many good sots or fooles, banquerouts, saffron sellers, desperate persons, hault-gourdiers, forgers, or counterfeiters, all people giuen to the spoyle, and wor∣thie of the rope, should so couragiously set themselues forward, and be of the first in this holie part, to doe their affayres, and should become Catholikes with double eares, very long before others? Very passio∣nate exclama∣tions. O very patternes of the prodigall childe, whereof the Gospell speaketh: O de∣uoute
children of the Masse at midnight: O holy catho∣licon of Spayne, that art the cause that the price of Masses is redoubled, the holie candles and lights cherished a∣gaine, and made more dead offerings augmented, and saluez multiplied, that art the cause that there are no more traitors, robbers, burners, falsifiers, cutthroates and theeues, sith that by this holie conuersion, they haue changed their name, and haue taken this honorable title of zealous Catholigues, Quid non mor∣talia pectora cogis, auri sa∣crafames? and of souldiers of the Church militant. O deified double Duckets of Spayne, that haue had this efficacie to make vs all young againe, and to renue vs into another better life: this is that which our good God speaking vnto his father sayth, in S. Matthew the 11. Thou hast hid them from the prudent and wise, and hast reuealed them to babes. Certainly, Messieurs, me thinkes I see againe that good time, in which the Christians to expiate and satisfie for their offences, crossed themselues, and went to make warre beyond the sea as pilgrims, against the miscreants and infidels. O holie pilgrims, thou of Lansac, and thy good brother the bastard Bishop of Comminges, who haue caused to be inrolled by throngs and troupes in your quarters, so many honest people, who being like vnto minstrels, had nothing in so great hate as their house. I will not here comprehend many Gentlemen and others, who are of the wood, whereof some haue made them whatsoeuer it be, and haue the shewe of it, and shewe themselues va∣liant cockscombes vpon the pauement of Paris, who hauing been pages on foote, or seruing the Catholike princes, If this bee not good, tell vs what is? or their adherents, haue bound themselues in liuelines of heart, to followe their parte, yea if they should become Turkes: liking better to bee traytors to their King and countrie, then to fayle of their word, to a master, who is himselfe a seruant and sub∣iect of a King. In trueth we are greatly obliged to these people, loe, as well as to those, who hauing receiued some storme or dammage, of the tyrant or his followers,
haue thorough indignation, and a spirite of reuenge, turned towards vs, and haue preferred their particular wrong, to all other duetie: and we ought also as much to thanke them, who hauing committed some murther, or notable wickednes, and robberie on the enemies side, haue catholikely cast themselues into our armes, to e∣scape the punishment of iustice, and to finde amongst vs all freedome and impietie, Hee would haue saide im∣punitie. for these more than none o∣ther, are bounde to holde good, and that euen vnto death for the holy vnion. And this is the cause why you must not distrust the baron d'Alegree, nor of Hacquiville, gar∣dien of Ponteau on the sea, nor of the Iailor of Vienne, and others who haue giuen so faire blowes and stroakes, to gaine paradise, with the dispensation of their oath: nor likewise those, which haue couragiouslie put their hand to blood, and to the imprisonment of politike magi∣strates: in which Monsieur the Lieutenant hath a great deale of dexteritie, to ingage them, and to cause them to doe things irremissible, and which deserue not euer to haue any pardon, no more than that which he hath done. Cursed coun∣sell. But let vs take heede of those nobles, that say they are good Frenchmen, and that refuse, to take pensions and double ducketts of Spaine, and haue conscience to make warre, against merchants and labourers: these are dan∣gerous people (I cannot tell you) and are able to make vs false sleuces. For they brag that if the Biarnois would goe to Masse, their swordes should neuer cut against him or his. Remember you the enteruiewes and parlements, which some make so often at Saint Denis, and of the passeports that they receiue, and that they send so easilie on the one side, and on the other. These people, A heinous of∣fence. Messi∣eures, heare not masse but on one knee, neither take they holy water in entring into the church, but in their bodie forbidding it. O, would to God, that they were all like to that holie pilgrime, confessor, and catholike zealous martyr, Monsieur de la Mothe Serrand, who being in the prisons at Tours, for yeelding testimonie to his faith, re∣fused
to dine, and take his refection of porridge vpon a friday, Stumble at a straw, & leap ouer a blocke. fearing least they had put some fatte in his soppe: and this champion of the faith, this Macabee, this de∣uoute martyr, protested to suffer death rather, than to eate any other soppe, than that which was catholike. O famous assistants, chosen and tried at all aduentures, for the dignitie of this notable assembly, the very pure creame of our prouinces, A country me∣taphor. the very wine lees of our go∣uernement, which are come hither with so many tra∣uailes, some on foot, some alone, other some in the night, and the greatest parte at your owne costs and charges. Doe not you wonder at the heroicall actes of our Lou∣chards, Gentlemen of the new stampe. Bussis, Senaulds, Oudineaux, Morreliers, Crucez, Goudards, and Drouarts, who haue so well come by the feather? What thinke you of so many Caboches as are found, and God hath raised vp at Paris, Roan, Lions, Or∣leans, Troyes, Toulouze, Amiens, where you see but∣chers, taylors, fillipers, iuglers, tumblers, cutlers, and other sortes of persons of the very drosse and scumme of the people, to haue the first voyce in councell and assemblies of the estate, and to giue lawe to them, that before were great of race, of riches, and of qualitie, who now dare not cough nor mutter before them. Scripture rightly appli∣ed. Is it not in this, that the prophecie is accomplished, which saith, hee raiseth the poore out of the dungehil? Should not this be a crime to passe ouer vnder silence, that holy martyrfryer Iames Clement, who hauing been the most vnorderly and wicked of all his couent (as all the Iacobins of this citie knowe well inough) and hauing many times had the chapter, and the diffamatorie whip, for his thieueries and wickednesses, is notwithstanding sanctified at this daye, and now is alofte to debate and dispute with S. Iago of Compostella, Affections fit enough for such a fact and fellow. who shall haue the first seate? O blessed confessor and martyr of God. How gladlie would I bee the paranimph and encomiast of thy praises, if my elo∣quence could attaine to thy merits? But I loue better to holde my peace therein, than to speake too littlethereof.
And continuing my discourse, I will speake of the strange conuersion of mine owne proper person: although that Cato saith, Nec telaudaris, nec te culpaueris ipse, A great clarke, good latinist and singulat versifier. thou shalt neither praise thy selfe, neither shalt thou blame thy selfe, yet I will freely confesse vnto you, that before this holy enterprise of the vnion, I was no great deuourer of the crucifix, and some very neare about me, and that haunted me most familiarly, haue had in opinion, that I did a little smell of the faggot, because that being a yong scholler, I tooke pleasure in reading the bookes of Cal∣uin, and being at Tolouze, I had mingled my selfe to preach and teach in the night with the new Lutherans, and afterwardes made no great conscience nor difficul∣tie, to eate flesh in Lent, nor to he with my sister, A beast: for a∣busing thy si∣ster and Gods word also. follow∣ing the examples of the holy patriarches of the Bible. Bur since that I had signed the holy league, and the fun∣damentall lawe of this estate, accompanied with double duckets, and of the hope that I had of a redde hatte, no man hath doubted touching my beliefe, neither hath there any further inquirie been made, touching either my conscience, or my cariages. Verily I confesse, that I owe this grace of my conuersion next after God, to Monsi∣eur the Duke d'Espernon, who (hauing vpbraided me in the Councell with that, whereof none doubted in Lions touching my sister in lawe) was the cause, that of a great politike, and a very slender Caluinist that I was, From euill to worse. I became a great and coniuredleaguer, as I am at this pre∣sent the director and ordainor of secret affaires, and such as importe the estate of the holy vnion, neither more nor lesse, than blessed Saint Paul, who of a persecutor of chri∣stians, was made the vessell of election. This is the cause wherefore hee faith: where sinne hath abounded, there shall grace also abounde. Doubte not then any more to continue firme and constant in this holy partie, full of so many miracles, and of strokes from heauen, of which you must needes make a fundamentall lawe. As touching the necessities and oppressions of the clergie, you shall or
may aduise thereof, if it please you, for for my regarde, I will put paine that my great pot bee not ouerthrowne, and I shall alwaies haue credite with Roland and Ri∣bault, that will not fayle to pay mee my pensions, from whatsoeuer part siluer come. Euery one will aduise to prouide for himselfe, if he thinke it so good, and for my patte I desire not peace, vnlesse first I may be a Cardinal, as they haue promised mee, If thou maiest be iudge. and as I my selfe haue well deserued. For without mee Monsieur the Lieutenant could not be in the degree where he is, because it was me my selfe, that retained the late Duke of Guise his brother, who woulde willinglie haue gone from the estates of Bloys, distrusting of some deafe deuise and ambushment of the tirant: but I caused him to remaine, and to waite for a dispatch from Rome, which should be brought me within three dayes, and that was the cause, why Madame his mother here present, hath many times reproached me, that I was the cause of his death: whereof Monsieur the Lieutenant and all his, ought to yeelde mee thankes, because that vpon this pretext, and to reuenge this good∣ly death of his, Whot passions and bad per∣swasions. we haue stirred vp the people, and taken occasion to make another King. Courage therefore, cou∣rage I say my friends: feare not to expose your liues, and that which remaineth of your goods for Monsieur the Lieutenant, and for them of his house. These are good princes and good Catholikes who loue you to the full and on the ridge. Speake not here of abrogating from him his power, which some murmur and mutter, that it was not giuen him but vntil some next holding or assem∣bly of the Estates: but these are the accountes of the Storke. They that haue tasted this morsell, they will ne∣uer bite. Would you demaund a more goodly and braue king, and one that is more grosse, and more grasse or fat∣tie than he is? Good parts to commend to a kingdome. Hee is (by S. Iames) a faire peece of flesh, and I thinke you cannot finde one that ouerweigheth him. Messieurs, of the nobilitie, that keepe the townes and castles, in the name of the holy vnion, are you not very
glad to leuie and gather vp all the taxes, tenths, aydes, shoppes, fortificatious, watches, imposts, and that which is giuen for all wares, as well by water as by land, and to take your rights and customes vpon all prices, ransomes, and pillages, without being bound to make an account thereof to any man? Vnder what King would you finde a better condition? You are Barons: you are Counties and Dukes in the proprietie of all the places and prouin∣ces which you hold. You command absolutely therein, Right as can be, of clubbes, spades and all saue the harts. and as it were kings of the cardes. What would you haue better? Leaue and forget these glorious names of French monarchie, and remember no more your ancestors, nor them who haue inriched and inobled you. To be briefe, he that standeth well, let him not remoue himselfe. As touching you, Messieurs, the ecclesiasticall persons, of a trueth I loose my Latin in speaking to you, and I see very well that if the warre last, there will be a shamefull num∣ber of poore priests: but also hope not you for your re∣compence in this brittle and fraile world, What text sheweth that? but in heauen where the crowne of eternall glorie waiteth for them that shall suffer and dye for the holie League. Let him saue himselfe that can. As concerning my selfe, I am capable enough to beare and weare a red hat, but to remedie & meete with the necessities and oppressions of the Cler∣gie, it is not in my power, neither indeed will my gowtes giue me leaue or leisure to thinke thereupon. Notwith∣standing, I feare one thing, that is, that if the King of Na∣uarre reuoke the passeports and striuings for benefices, which he hath giuen to the Monasteries and Chapiters, Prayer for their patrons. there will be daunger lest ye all crie to the murther, after the holie father, and Monsieur the Legate, and the most reuerend Cardinall here present, that might well leaue the bootes in France, if they did not in good time saue themselues beyond the mountaines. I leaue it to my ma∣sters the preachers, to holde alwaies in breath their de∣uout parishioners, and to represse the insolencie of these demanders of bread or of peace. They know the passa∣ges
of scripture, to accommodare cheni to their purpose, and to turne them and to vse them to the occasions as they shall haue neede. For it was nouer sayd for naught, that the Gospell is, A homely re∣semblance, & a foule abusing of scripture following. a tripe wifes knife, that cutteth on both sides: according to that, And out of his mouth there went a sword sharpened on either side: And as the Apo∣stle S. Paule saith: The word of God is liuely and effec∣tuall, and more pearcing then a two edged sword. Now that which for the present most importeth our affayres, is to build and set vp a sundamentall lawe, by which the French people shall be kept and held to suffer themselues to be coyffed, biggened, haltred, and lead at the appetite of my masters that sit in chaires and pulpits: yea they shall suffer themselues to be barked and pilled to the ve∣ry bones, and their purses to bee cleansed euen vnto the bottome, without speaking a word, or asking any cause why. For you Messieurs know, that we haue to doe with our pensions. But aboue all, cause oftentimes to bee re∣nued the othes touching the vnion, vpon the precious bodie of our Lord, and continue the brotherhoods of the name of Iesus, and of blessed S. Francis: for these are good collers for the rascall people, with which matter wee charge the honor and conscience of our good fathers the Iesuites, and wee recommend also vnto them our spyes, to the end that they continue to cause to be held surely our newes in Spayne, and receiue also secret mandates from his Catholike maiestie, for to cause them to be kept for Ambassadors, Agents, Curats, Conuents, Church∣wardens, and Masters of brotherhoods: and that in their particular confessions, they doe not forget to forbid vn∣der paine of eternall damnation to desire peace, Counsell fit for one that should be a Cardinall to giue. & much more to speake of it, but to in borne and make stiffe the deuout Christians, to sacking, to bloud, and to fire, rather then to submit themselues to the Biarnois, though indeed he should go to Masse, as he bath giuen in charge to his Ambassadors thereof to assure the Pope. But wee know well enough the counterpoyson, if this should fall
out, & we would giue good order, that his holines should beleeue nothing of it, and though he should beleeue, The end of all. yet he should doe nothing, and though he should doe, that we would receiue nothing of it, if I be not Cardinall. Better a bad example then none. And why should not I be, seeing Master Piere de Frontac, be∣ing but a simple aduocate of Paris, of the time of King Iohn, was so well, for hauing diligently defended the causes of the Church? And me that haue forsaken my master, and betrayed my countrie, to vphold the greatnes of the holy Apostolike sea, should not I be so? And I wil bee so: yea I assure you I will bee so, or my friends shall faile me. I haue spoken. After that the sayd Lord Archbishop had finished his Epiphonema, It was fit it should be so. with great mouing of the bodie and con∣tention of voyce, he did very basely demaund permission of Madame de Montpensier, to withdrawe himselfe to change his shirt, because he had ouerheate himselfe in his harnesse. The beadle of Monsieur the Rector, which was at his feete, caused the prease to be reffed into two: after∣wards sliding downe by the seates of the deputies, my sayd Lord the Rector Roze, cloathed with his Rectorall habit aboue his roche and portable camail of a Bishop, putting off his cap diuers times, began thus. The Oration of Monsieur the Rector Roze, beretofore Bishop of Senlis. MOst famous, most noble, As right as can be. and most Catholike Syna∣gogue: euen as the virtue of Themistocles waxed hot, by the consideration of the triumphs and trophees of Miltiades: so doe I feele my selfe to haue my courage in warmed, in the contemplation of the braue discourses, of this riuer of rhetorike and flood of eloquēce, I meane Monsieur the Chancellor of the Lieutenancie, Oh what sorce there is in el∣uish examples. who com∣meth to triumph in speech. And after his example, I am moued with an vntollerable ardure, to set out my rheto∣rike, and to set vpon a stall my merchandise in this place,
where oftentimes I haue made preacliments that by the meanes of the late King, haue made me of a miller to be∣come a Bishop, Great prefer∣ments. as by your meanes, I am of a Bishop be∣come a miller. But I thinke that I haue sufficiently de∣clared by my passed actions, that I am not ingrate, and that I haue not done any thing, but that which I haue seene to be done, by diuers others of this noble assistāce, who yet haue receiued more benefites then me of the dead King, and haue notwithstanding brauely chased him out of his kingdome, and caused him to bee murthe∣red, for the good of the Catholike faith, vnder hope to haue much more, as wee were gently promised. Now I will not here rubbe againe the things passed, It needeth not. nor catch your beneuolence by a long exordium or entrance, but summarily I wil tel you, Messieurs, that the eldest daugh∣ter of the King, I say not of the King of Nauarre, but of the King that we shall chuse here, if God be pleased, and waiting for that I will say, the eldest daughter of Mon∣sieur the Lieutenant of the Estate and crowne of France, the vniuersitie of Paris doth declare vnto you in all ob∣seruance, that from her very swadling cloutes, and first beginnings, she hath not been so well nurtured, manne∣red, modest and peaceable, as she is now, by the grace and fauour of you the rest Messieurs. For in steed that we were wont to see so many men and women sellers of old apparell, sellers also of old mantles, pattins, great pots, & other sorts of wicked people to runne vp and downe the streetes, Notable or∣ders. to haunt brothell houses, to draw wooll, and to braule with the cookes of the little bridge, you see no more a man of such people throughout al the colledges: All the supposts of the faculties and nations, that made hurlie burlie for the suites of licenses, appeare no more: they play no more these scandalous playes, and biting satyres vpon the scaffolds of colledges, and ye see there a goodly reformation, all these same young regents be∣ing retired, that in disdaine would she we it, that they knew more Greeke and Latine then other men. These
factions amongst the master of artes, wherein they did beate one another with the blowes of their cappes and their hoods, are ceased: all these schollers of great or good house, little and great haue giuen vs the slippe. The booke sellers, printers, binders, guilders, and other people of paper and parchment, to the number of more than 30000. haue charitably deuided the wind, in a 100. quarters, to liue thereof, and haue yet left sufficient for them that haue remained behinde them. The publike professors, who were all royall and politikes, come not any more to breake our heads, and trouble our braines with their orations, and with their congregations in the three Bishops, Spoken cun∣ningly, & like an Alchymist. they haue put themselues to doe Alchy∣mie, euery one by himselfe. Briefelie, all is quiet and peacefull: and I will say much more vnto you. Hereto∣fore in the time of the politikes and heretikes Ramus, Galandius and Turnebus, no man made profession of letters, vnles he had with a long hand and great charges studied, and gotten artes and sciences in our colledges, and passed thorough all the degrees of the scholasticall discipline. But now by the meane of you the rest Messi∣eurs, and the virtue of the holy vnion, and principallie, by your blowes from heauen, Monsieur the Lieutenant, the butter men and butter wiues of Vanues, the ruffians of Mont-rouge, and of Vaugirard, the vine dressers of Saint Cloud, coblers of Villejuifue, A monstrous change. and other catholike can∣tons, are become Masters in artes, bachelors, principals, prefidents, and bousiers of colledges, regents of classes, and so sharpe, subtill and argute Philosophers, that bet∣ter than Cicero, now they dispute de inuentione, Or rather As∣sodidactos. that is of inuention, and learne euery day to be aftodidactos, that is teachers of themselues, without any other Master than you, Monsieur the Lieutenant, they learne I say, to dye of famine, perregulas, that is to say, by rules. Also now you heare no more in the classes that clamorment and braw∣ling of latine, amongst the regents, that did batter and
beate the eares of all the world: in steede of this bablerie and pedlers French, you heare euery houre of the daye the Argentine harmonie, Meruailous Metaphors. and the very idiome and pro∣per speech of kine, and weaned calues, and the sweete singing of asses, and of swine, as if it were of the nightin∣gales, that stand vs in steede of clockes or belles, for the first, second, and third. Sometimes heretofore wee were wonderous desirous, to learne and to haue the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine tongues, but at this present wee haue more neede of an oxe or neats tongue salted and pou∣dred, that would bee a good commentarie, I can tell you, after our oaten bread. But le Mains and Laual, and these infallible weigh Masters of Angers, with their Capons of high grease, and their wonderfull fatte hennes, haue deceiued vs as well as the tongues, and we haue no more but a sower and bitter remembrie of these same acade∣micall messengers, that came downe or lighted at the crosse, and other famous Innes, in the harpe streete, and that at the daye and very poynte of time named, to the great contentment of the schollers waiting for them, and of their regents felling olde garments. You Monsieur Lieutenant, are the cause of all this: and all these mira∣cles and monstrous things are the workes of your hands: A high com∣mendation. and yet it is true that our predications, preachments and decrees, haue not hurt or hindred them: but yet for all that, you were the principall motiue and instrument thereof: and to speake to you in one worde, you haue vn∣done vs, and more than vndone vs: Excuse me if I speake so, I will say with the Prophet Dauid, Loquebar in con∣specturegum, Such as you Monsieur are. & non confundebar. I did speake in the sight of Kings, and I was not confounded, nay I did not blush, no more than a blacke dogge. Whether wilt thou Rector. You haue I say so defiled and defamed this faire eldest daughter, this shamefaste virgin, this flourishing damsell, the onely pearle of the world, the diamond of this Fraunce, the carbuncle of the Kingdome, and one of the most white floure deluces of
Paris, that forraine and strange vniuersities make Greeke and Latin sonnets thereof, Et versa est in opprobrium gen∣tium, And it is turned into the shame of the nations. In the meane while my masters our doctors, finde nothing therein but to laugh: for they haue not the quodlibetarie questions so frequent: He would haue sayd pro∣ceede. there passe out no more Bache∣lers, Licenciats, nor Doctors, where they were wont to haue their banquets, drinkings one to another and feasts, and did crambe themselues vp to the throate: the wine of Orleans commeth no more here, much lesse that of Gascoigne, so that all ergoes are ceased and layd aside. And though some one of these that are most Spanioli∣zed by meanes of some double Duckets, and doe receiue some pension of the Legate closely or secretly, yet that is not as much to say that the others feele it. Moreouer, Monsieur the Lieutenant, you haue caused Louchard, And why not? for of like there should be the like cō∣sideration. your steward or pursebearer, and a very zealous man, to be hanged, and haue by consequēt declared to be hang∣able, all they that haue been present at the ceremonie of the order of the vnion, which hath been giuen to the president Brisson. Now so it is, that all the young Curats, Priests and Friers of our vniuersitie, and our other Doc∣tors for the most part, That is, we are caught in the lime twigge. we haue all been promoters of this tragedie, therefore gluc. And I tell you, that if you had not basted your selfe to come, wee had indeede serued our turnes with others, and wee had not remayned in so faire a way, and such speech at this day is very high to them, whose teeth could haue done no euill, if you had yet lingered but three daies to come. But to come backe to my first theame, I argument thus: Louchard and his companions were iustly hanged, Doctorly done because they were gal∣lowclappers and deserued hanging. Atqui, but the more part of our other Doctors were consorts and adherents, and counsellors of the aforesayd hanged one: therefore crackropes, gallowclappers, are pendable, or worthie to be hanged. And it serueth to no purpose to alleadge the abolition that was graunted vnto vs, touching the Ca∣tholike
tholike murther, for the maxime of the law will be strōg, Remissio non dicitur nisiratione criminis: that is, remission is not sayd to bee, but as in regard of a crime, the afore∣sayd abolition not being able to abolish the merited paine, no though you should mollifie or soake it a hun∣dred times in the Catholicon of Spayne, which is a sope that scoureth, and that cleane away, euery thing. And therefore we must necessarily argument thus in Baroquo. He conclu∣deth in mood and figure full finely. Whosoeuer causeth zealous Catholikes to be hanged, is a tyrant, and fauourer of heretikes: but Monsieur the Lieutenant hath caused Louchard to be hanged and his companions, the most Catholike Catholikes, and zea∣lous zealous aboue all: therefore Monsieur the Lieute∣nant is a tyrant, and fauourer of heretikes, worse then Hēry of Valois, who pardoned Louchard, & la Morliere, worthie of the gibbet, three yeares before the barrica∣does. And that it is not so, I proue the minor, à maiori ad minus: that is, from the greater to the lesse. That Biar∣nois held in his hands prisoners, the principall heads of the League, as Boisdaulphin, Pescher, Fontaine, Martel, Flavacourt, Tramblecourt, the Cluzeaux, and many o∣ther, that owe me thankes, if I name them nor, whom he caused not to be hanged, though he were able & might haue done it before: Well spoken, and like a Di∣uine. Quia non vult mortem peccatoris, sed vt resipiscat: that is, because he will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent, as some haue done: and notwithstanding he is an heretike, or accoun∣ted for such a one: Ergo, Monsieur the Lieutenant is worse then an heretike, because he hath caused to bee hanged his best friends, who put the bread into his hands. To say that this was done, ad maiorem cautelam: that is, for better heede and greater subtiltie, or to bring downe the pride and insolencie of the sixteene, that is good: notwithstanding in the meane while they were hanged. And this saying cannot hinder, that we bee not alwaies iudged and reputed great dolts & blockheads, that is in Latin and French sots, for that we haue indured
him so long: and which is worse, that the politikes may conclude in mood and figure, that Sorbonne can erre: a matter I tel you, that would make me once againe to be∣come mad, and runne vp and downe the streetes. For if this one should haue place, wee should neuer bee able to proue, by all the flowers of our rhetorike, nor by all the fundamental lawes of the kingdome, on which Monsieur of Lions hath relied so much, and made so great recko∣ning, that so many ten thousands of poore christians, as wee haue made, and daily doe make to dye, with sword, Death for trea∣son, counted martyrdome, with these re∣uerēd doctors. with famine, with fire, by our headlong decree, should be iudged true martyrs, if it be so that our foresayd decree be not able to absolue them from the oth of fidelitie and naturall obedience, that subiects owe vnto their Prince. Wherfore Messieurs, I supplicate you, in the name of our Academie, to couer with a cloake this worthie fact here, the most catholikely that you can, as Monsieur the Le∣gate doth the intentions of Pope Sixtus, who loued not the League so dearly as some sayd he did. Furthermore, I will furnish you with so many places and passages of scripture, as you would haue, for I haue of them euen to sell againe. But aboue all things, I recommend vnto you, The belly hath no eares, though it haue a mouth to speake. Messieurs, our pensions, and of my masters or fellow Do∣ctors of the holie facultie of theologie, as also of my ma∣sters the Curats and Preachers for whom I speake. For you haue to doe with vs, and you are not able to passe these things. And Madame of Montpensier knoweth well enough to say, that she gayned more townes, and dispatched more work with a very few double Duckets, which she distributed to the preachers and Doctors, then the King of Nauarre did with all his taxes and armies. I doe in good time aduertise you, that if you furnish and fit not the appoyntment, there is danger, least wee giue our selues whollie ouer to proue, He meaneth their rents and reuenues, ordi∣narie or extra∣ordinarie. that it is best to haue a law∣full King, though wayward and wicked, seeing hee will leaue vnto vs the bread of the chapiter, and purgatorie, without innouating any thing till the Councel that shall
be. But in expecting that, aduise ye whether wee shall make a King or no. I know that Monsieur the Lieutenant would gladly bee he: so also would his nephew bee: and likewise his brother the Duke of Nemours: and I doubt not, but that the Dukes of Sauoy and of Lorraine haue as great desire of it: for of a trueth they haue as much right to it one as another. Now concerning Duke Mercurie, his agents will doe as much for it as he himselfe. If he had taken in good faith and earnest Don Anthonio the King of Portugall, Practise to ap∣prehend Don Anthonio. and had deliuered him to his very good friend, the most Catholike King, as hee promised him, I beleeue that he would haue been content with the rights and claimes that hee hath to the Dutchie of Bretaigne, like vnto those which his grandfather Iohn had by his wife. But here, he that is not he, taketh not he. First of all, I counsell you not to stay your selues vpon the Duke of Sauoy, or vpon the Duke of Lorraine: for they are not (in speaking with reuerence) but cods or bladders that haue enough to doe in their owne house: and I assure my selfe that they will be content with very little. If you wil leaue to the Savoyard, Daulphin & Prouence, with some little part of Lionnois & of Languedoc (yet so that you make him to take Geneua also) I would ingage my life that he will demaund no more of you, If you can, or be able. but the confiscation of Esdiguieres. The name of a worthie man that holdeth him touch. As touching the Duke of Lorraine, take frō him the Dukedome of Bouillon, and giue him Sedan, Mets, all Champagne, and part of Bourgongne, which is for the good seating of him, you shall appease him after∣wards for a morsell of bread, though it bee but browne. I come now vnto you Monsieur of Guise, the sonne of a good father and of a good mother, one whom the pro∣phecies haue of long time destined to kingdomes and empires, and haue surnamed you Pepin the short, or cur∣talled. You, behold you, vpon the poynt to be another great Charles the great, your great great grandfather, if the fayre or market hold. But regard, I pray you, that you suffer not your selfe to bee deceiued. These Messieurs of
Spayne, Spanyards paynted out. although they be our very good friends & good Catholikes, be not merchants at one word, and buy & sell with no more: and that is found true in them, not at this time only, for there are almost two thousand yeares since that they haue medled with more matters then they should, and that men haue giuen them this name to bee fine and cunning in doubling of poynts. They promise you this diuine damosel or daughter in mariage, to make her a Queene in solidum, that is, altogether and wholly with you: but take you heede that the Duke de Feria haue not filled his seates signed without charge. He hath a boxe full of such things, wherewith he serueth himselfe vpon all occurrences, as of a last for euery shooe, and as one saddle for all horses: he dates them, or he antedates them with his chamber pot when pleaseth him. I haue feare, something that he hath propounded vnto vs, that this is nothing but arte and subtiltie to amaze vs withal, when he hath seene that we will not vnderstand, or be of minde to breake the law Salick. If you haue but neuer so little nose, you shall smell it. For we knowe in good part, that the marriage is alreadie accorded of her and of her cousin the Archduke Ernest. Adde, that is, ioyne hereun∣to, that those of the house of Austrich doe as the Iewes doe, that doe not marrie but in their tribe or familie, and hold one another by the tayle as hannekins and hanne∣tons doe. Leaue of therefore this vaine hope of Gynecocratie, That is go∣uernment of women toge∣ther. and beleeue that little children mocke at it, and goe from it to mustard. I heard the other day one, that comming verie brauely from the tauerne, did sing these foure verses. The League finding it selfe flat nosed, And the Leaguers much without repose, Aduised themselues of a fetch, which is To make a King without a nose. But if I had been able to haue made him to haue been caught by the commissarie Bazin, who ranne after him,
he had had no lesse then the miller that mocked our E∣states. What wil you say to these impudent politikes, that haue put you in a shape in a faire leafe of paper, A prety deuise. alreadie crowned as a king of the cardes, by anticipation, and in the same leafe haue also put the figure of the sayd infant or daughter, crowned for Queene of France as you, you regarding huze a huze one the other? And in the neather part of the sayd painture, haue placed these verses, which I haue kept by heart, because that therein it goeth as on your side. The French Spanalized haue made a King of France, To the daughter of Spayne they promised haue this King: Aroyaltie very small, and of slender importance: For their France is comprised within Paris, a strange thing. O Hymen mariage god, for this cold mariage Thy quiet torch, I pray at this time doe not bring: Of these disioyned corps, men set out the image, That make the loue of eyes both two within one thing. It is a royaltie onely in shew most sure: Deceit and not true loue hatched hath this mariage: Good cause that being King of France in portraiture, They cause him to espouse of a Queene the image. If Monsieur of Orleans in the qualitie of Aduocate ge∣neral, would cause to be searched out these same wicked politike Printers, it is his charge, and they might bee knowne by their caracters, and his good gossips Bichon, N. Niuelle, Chaudiere, Morel, and Thiere, will discouer the matrice. Touching my selfe, I willingly forbeare it, for these heretikes are euill speakers as diuels, & I should feare they would make some booke against me, as they did against the Catholike Doctor and Lawyer Chopin, vnder the name of Turlupin. And neuer mend it is like∣lie. Messieurs of the hall, or place of hearing, will therein doe their duetie, more & lo∣co solitis, after their wonted manner and place. I will hold my selfe content to preach the word of God, to main∣taine my Beadles, and carefully to solicite my pensions. Let all this be spoken by a parenthesis. But Monsieur de
Guise my good child, beleeue me, and you shall beleeue a very foole: stay no more vpon that, Neuer better spoken. it is not foode for our foules or birds. Lift not vp your traine for all this: we doe not inlarge or make longer your table by reason of this. There is hay: there are none but beasts that delight in it: but doe better: obtaine of the holie father a croi∣sade, or an expedition and voyage against the Turkes, and goe and reconquer that goodly kingdome of Ieru∣salem, which appertaineth to you by reason of Godfrey, your great vncle, euen as wel as that of Sicilie and the kingdome of Naples. How many scepters and crownes are prepared for you, if your horoscopus lie not, as you your selfe are wont to say, that you haue not a limited fortune. Leaue this same wretched and miserable king∣dome of France to him that will vouchsafe to take the burthen of it. It is not fit that your spirit borne for Em∣pires, and the vniuersall monarchie of the habitable world, should stoope to so small morsels or matters, and vnworthie of you and of your late father, A carefull caution. whom God ab∣solue, if it be permitted to speake so of Saints. And you Monsier the Lieutenant, to whom I must needes now speake. What thinke you to doe? you are grosse and fully panched: you are heauie and deformed: you haue head big enough indeede to beare a crowne. But what? you say you will none of it, and that it would too much ouer burthē you. The politikes say, that the foxe sayd so touch∣ing mulberies which he would faine haue had. The foxe will eate no grapes. You hin∣der vnder hād that your nephew should not be chosē: you forbid the deputies, that none of them bee so bold as to touch this great string of the royaltie or kingdom. What shall we do then? We must haue a King: who as the poli∣tike doctors say, is better takē thē sought. You make the K. of Spaine beleeue, that you keep the kingdom of Frāce for him, & for his daughter: & vnder this hope, you sucke & draw from the honest man all that that the Indies and Peru can send him, he maintaineth vnto you your plate, he sendeth you armor & armies, but not at your deuoti∣on
or disposition. For he looketh to himselfe for all you, and hee distrusteth you both one and other, as though ye were blinde, A iust iudge∣ment. and taketh you as theeues. In the meane while, yee haue prouoked the sixteene, who accuse you to bee a marchant of crownes, and haue offered this of Fraunce to him that would giue most. They make books of this to your preiudice, wherein they discipher all your actions. They say that you haue close practises with the Biarnois, and cause wordes and messages to be caried vn∣to him by Villeroy and Zamet, to lull him a sleepe, and to cause him to vnderstand that you are a good French∣man, and will neuer be a Spaniard, and that you can giue him Paris backe againe, and make peaceable vnto him all his kingdome, when hee shall haue been at Masse, and acknowledged our holy father, and vnder this baite and deceite, you haue drawne or gotten fortie thousand politike crownes for three moneths, which indeede should bee rated for foure, A good arith∣metician. euery one tenne thousand crownes a peece, making you to vnderstand that the Spanish King would pare and clip your distributions, if he knew that you treated concerning accord and agree∣ment with heretikes. But it is discouered that secretly you send your agents to Rome and into Spaine, to lette that the Pope should not giue him absolution, if hee de∣maunde it, and to stirre vp the King of Spayne, to send new forces towards the frontiers, you thinke you are ve∣ry subtile: but your subtleties and fetches are sowen to∣gether with white thred: And therefore easilie discoue∣red. in fine, all the worlde seeth them. For these politikes haue dragons in the fieldes, that take all your packets, and by diuelish arte diuine and de∣cipher al your ciphers, as also those of the King of Spaine and of the Pope, though they bee neuer so subtile and craftie, so well that they know all your affaires, both at Rome, and at Madrill, and in Sauoy and in Germanie. You iuggle and deale craftily with all the world, and all the world doth deale so with you likewise. Danger there is that you become not that, that the Countie Saint Pol
constable of France, in the time of King Lewis the ele∣uenth was: who after that he had abused his master, and the Duke of Bourgongne, That is, lost his head in the place of execu∣tion, as wee would say at Tiburne, or the tower hill. and the King of England all at one time, in the end was made Cardinall in Greue. As for being King of your head, looke not for it: your parte is perished, frozen, or runne into the fire: all your elders set themselues against it Your cousines competitors, would rather goe and departe to the other sides, than to indure it, the sixteene make no more account of you, for they say that they haue made you that that you are, and you hang them vp and diminish their number as much as you can, the people had hope vpon your word, that you would vnlock and open the riuer, and make the wares and trade free: but they see to the contrarie, that they are more locked vp and straitned than before, and that the bread and the small good they haue to liue of, com∣meth not thorow your well dooing nor by your valour, but of the liberalitie of the Biarnois, and of his good na∣ture, or of the couetousnes of the getters of it, which drawe out of it all the profit. Briefelie, the greater parte beleeueth that you will prolong as long as you can, the Lieutenancie, in the which men haue placed you, and liue alwaies in warre and in trouble, and yet well to your ease, well serued, well intreated, well guarded of the Swissers and of the Archers, that there lacketh nothing, but the coates of armes, and the applause of the people to be King, whilest all the rest of the people dieth starke mad through famine. You will keepe the pledges, and bee the perpetuall person, who will haue the charge of, and looke well to the goods that are vacant, which hin∣dereth and prolongeth, as much as hee can the deliue∣rance of the things cried, least hee should render an ac∣count. Mōsieur Lieu∣tenants lets. Besides you cannot be King by the mariage of the infant or daughter of Spaine, you are maried alrea∣die, and would you put your finger in the hole? For you haue ridden the olde one, that keepeth hir selfe well from the hee Coate: and besides there must bee another more
lustie fellow than your selfe, for this girle of thirtie yeres, blacke as pepper, and of an oken appetite. Moreouer though we should haue chosen you King, yet you should haue to doe with the Biarnois, who knoweth a thousand feates or prankes of Basque, and who sleepeth not but as much as he will, and at the houre that hee will, who ma∣king himselfe a catholike, as he threatneth you hee will doe, will drawe on his side all the potentates of Italie, and of Almaine, and withall, the heart of all the French gen∣try, or gentlemen of France: of which you see alreadie the greatest parte, with so many poore afflicted townes, wearie of their warre and of their pouertie, part to shake in the haft, and to make a writing of their retraict, that demaunde nothing else but that colour and good occa∣sion, to withdrawe themselues from the couple, & there∣with to couer or colour their repentance. Doe you dreame thereof, Monsieur the Lieutenant for the like you haue counterfeited the King, and yee haue farted a∣gainst, or like the Biarnois, in edicts and declarations, in seales, in guardes, and great prouosts, and masters of re∣quests of your house. Though you would burst, and would blow vp your selfe, great as an oxe, as doth the fe∣male frogge, yet shall you neuer be so great a Lord as he, although some say, that he hath not so much fat vpon all his bodie, as is able to feede a larke. But doe you knowe what you doe? I would counsell you, but that you haue been Bigamus, or haue had two wiues, to make your selfe an Abbot: A good prefer∣ment for so great a seruice. whosoeuer shall be King, he will not re∣fuse to bestow vpon you the Abby of Clugny, which is of your house: you loue a fatte soppe or brewis as wee say, and you thrust your selfe willingly into the kitchin: you haue a very ample and spacious belly, and so you shall be crowned, I say crowned with the same crowne, and your crowne made with the same cissers, It needeth not: an honest man may be taken vpon his word. that Ma∣dam your sister saide hung at her girdle, to make the monkelike or frierlie crowne of the late Henrie of Va∣lois. You will not demaund of me neither fidelitie nor
oath for this matter, but I am of this aduise. I will not speake here of Monsieur of Nemours, your vterin (but the politikes say adulterin) brother: Speake clean∣ly for shame. he hath done his ca∣ca or needes in our little chests: he hath his purposes and attemptes by himselfe, and is like to Picrocolus, that by discourses well reasoned of, made himselfe Monarch of the world, foote by foote. If he can gouerne the King of beasts, as hee hath done the shippe of Paris, I will say that he hath skill to doe more, than Master Mousche, or flie. These beastes forget some times their gouernours, speciallie if they change their habite or attire: hee shall not bee ill parted with, if hee come to his pretentions, whereto you Monsieur the Lieutenant, and Monsieur of Lyons will doe him, I beleeue, very good offices. The whole summe, Messieurs, you are too many dogges to gnawe one boane: you are iealous and enuious one of a∣nother, and you can neuer tell how to agree, or liue with∣out warre, that would put vs into worse estate than be∣fore. But I will tell you: let vs doe, Deepe coun∣sell. as they haue done in the consistorie, for the election or choyse of a holy father: when two Cardinals sued and laboured for the pope∣dome, the other Cardinals, for feare they should incurre the hatred of the one or of the other, chose one amongst themselues, the weakest backed of them all, and made him Pope. Let vs doe so, you are foure or fiue robbers in the realme, all great Princes, and such as haue no want of appetite and stomacke. I am of aduise, that not one of you should be king: wherefore I giue my voyce to Guil∣lot Fagotin, the keeper of Gentilly, a good vine dresser, and an honest man, who singeth well at the deske, A worthie ex∣ample. and knoweth all his office or seruice booke by heart. This will not be found without example, in such times as this is: witnesse the Harelle of Roane, where they made king one named le Grasse, or the fatte, one as wee would say, who was much worse aduised than Guillot. And thus you see whereupon I founde and grounde mine aduise. I haue read sometimes the great and diuine Philosopher
Plato, who saith, that those realmes are happie, where Philosophers are kings, and where kings are Philoso∣phers. Now I know that it is little more than three yeares since that this good gardian of Gentilly and his familie, together with his kine meditated day and night Philoso∣phie, in a ball of our colledge, in which there is more than two hundred good yeares, that men haue read and treated, and disputed publikely, philosophie, and all Ari∣stotle, The place san∣ctifieth the person with these men, in all matters. and all fortes of good morall bookes. It is not pos∣sible that this good man hauing raued, slumbred and slept, so many dayes and nights, within these philosophi∣call walles, where there haue been made so many skill∣full lessons and disputes, and so many goodly wordes vt∣tered, that there should not something thereof abide, that hath entred, pierced and penetrated into his braine, as it did to the poet Hesiodus, when hee had slept vpon mount Parnassus. And this is the cause why I persist and meane, that he may as well be king as another. Now as Monsieur Roze ended these wordes, there sprong out a great murmuring amongst the deputies, some approuing, other some reprouing his opinion, and the princes and the princesses were seene, to whisper in the eare one of another: yea it was hard that Monsieur the Lieutenant saide very basely to the Legate, A prophesie and no lie. this foole here will marre all our misterie. Notwithstanding, the foresaid Roze would haue continued his speech: but when hee sawe the noyse to begin againe, with a cer∣taine generall clacking of hands, he rose vp in choler, and cried with a very loude and outstretched voyce. How now, Messieurs? Is it permitted here to speake what one thinketh? Haue not I libertie to speake and conclude my arguments, as Monsieur of Lyon hath done? I know well that if I had been a courtier as he, I should not haue named a person: for he hath charge from the clergie, to name Countie du Bouchage, Frier Angell, for the hope that this Prince louing change, would change also our miseries, into stroakes or blowes from heauen. But I pray
you keepe him to be are the golden torch in the battailes: for it ought to be enough for him, that he hath quite for∣saken the bagge and the wallet. At these wordes euery one began againe to crie, to whistle, to hisse: and though the heraulds, the vshers, porters and all cried aloude, Hush and be still: the word peace is a bull∣begger. let euery man holde his tongue (not daring to speake the worde peace there) and that Monsieur the Lieutenant sundrie times commaunded them to make silence, yet it was not possible to appease the bruite and noise, in so much that the sayd Lord Rector, sweate, fret, fomed, and stroke with his foote, and seeing that there was no more meane to take his theame againe, cryed as loude as hee could, Messieurs, Messieurs, I see well that you are in the Court of King Petault, where euery one is master. I leaue it to you, and you to your selues: let another speake: I haue spoken. And thereupon he set himselfe downe againe, mum∣bling very much, and wiping the sweate from his fore∣head, and there scaped from him, as some say, certaine o∣doriferant belchings of the stomacke, that smelled of the perfume of his choller, with certain words in a low note, Good stuffe: but there can come nothing els from thece. complaining that they had defrauded the assignation sent out of Spayne, for my masters the Doctors, and that others had made their profite of it, but that this was the gold of Tholouze, which should cost them very dearely. At the last, the rumour beginning a little to bee reappea∣sed, Monsieur du Rieu the younger, Countie and gardien or keeper of Pierre-font, deputie for the Nobilitie of France, apparrelled with a little cape, after the Spanish fashion, and a certaine high coppin tancked hat, lifted vp himselfe to speake, and hauing twise or thrise put his hand to his throate, which did itch, he began in forme following.
The Oration of the Lord of Rieu, Lord of Perriere∣font, for the nobilitie of the vnion. Or Roration rather, as you shall perceiue by the things contained herein, and the manner of the handling thereof. MEssieurs, I knowe no cause why they haue deputed me, to beare the word in so good a companie, for all the Nobilitie on our side. I must needes say, that there is some diuine thing or matter in the holy vnion, seeing that by the meanes thereof, of a commissarie of the artil∣lerie, poore & miserable enough, I am become a gentle∣man, and the gouernour of a very faire fortressc, yea that I may equall my selfe to the greatest, and am one day to mount very high, either backward or otherwise. I haue good occasion to followe you, Monsieur the Lieutenant, and to doe seruice to this noble assemblie, by black or by white, He dwelleth by euill neigh∣bours. by wrong or by right, seeing that all the poore Priests, Friers, and good people, deuout Catholikes, I as∣sure you, doe bring mee candles, and adore mee, as a S. Maccabee of times passed. This is the cause wherefore I giue my selfe to the liueliest and quickest of the diuels, that if any of my gouernment thrust in himselfe to speak of peace, I runne vpon him as a grey or russet woolfe. Let warre liue: there is nothing but to haue it, of what part soeuer it befall. I see I cannot tell, what nicenes of our nobilitie, that speake of preseruing religion and the estate altogether: and that the Spanyards shall lose in the ende the one and the other, if we suffer them to doe it. Touch∣ing my selfe, I meane nothing of all this, prouided that I leuie taxes daily, and that they pay me my appointmēts, I care not what betide the Pope, Wel and wise∣ly added. or the pretie wench his wise. I am after my intelligences to take Noyon: if I can bring it about, & to effect, I shall be Bishop of the towne, and of the fields to, and shall make a mouth at them of Compeigne. In the meane while I chase the cowe, and the inhabitant also, as much as I can, and there shall not be peasant, husbandman, or merchant round about me,
and within tenne miles compasse, that shall not passe by my hands, and that shall not pay me custome and raun∣some. I know inuentions to make them come to reason: I giue them whipcordes, A right com∣parison. or the ends of cordes tyed with knots vpon them, after the fashion of the Franciscane Friers girdle: I hang them vp by the arme holes: I heate their feete with a red hot frying pan: I put them in yrons and in the stockes: I shut them vp in an ouen: in a chest that is powred full of water: I hang them as a capon to be rosted: I beate them with stirrop leathers: I salt them, I make them to fast: I tye thē, being stretched out, within a fanne. Briefly, If crueltie be gentlenes. I haue a thousand gentle meanes to draw out the quintessence of their purses, and to haue their substance, and to make them beggers and vagabonds for euer they and all their race. What care I for that so I haue it? Let no man speake to me hereupon, touching the poynt of honor: I know not, what it meaneth. There are that boast they are descended of these olde Knights of France that chased the Sarasins out of Spayne, and put King Peter againe into his kingdome. Othersome say, that they are of the race that went to conquer the holie land with S. Lewis. Others, that they are come downe from them that haue sundrie times placed the Popes a∣gaine in their seates, or that haue driuen the Englishman out of France, and the Bourguignons out of Picardie, or that haue passed the mountaines for the conquests of Naples and of Millan, Out of the a∣bundance of the heart the mouth spea∣keth. which the King of Spayne hath v∣surped against vs. I care not for all these titles and goodly conueiances, nor for armes, whether they were timbred or not timbred. I would be a villaine of foure descents or races, so that alwaies I may receiue taxes without yeel∣ding an account. I haue not read, neither the bookes, nor the histories and Annales of France: & I haue nothing to do with this, to know whether it be true, that there were Paladins and Knights of the round table, that made pro∣fession of nothing but of honor, and to defend their King and their countrie, and would rather bee dead then re∣ceiue
a reproach, or suffer that one should doe iniurie to an other. I haue heard reckoned vp by my grandmo∣ther, in carrying her butter to market to sell, that there had been sometimes one Gaston de Fois, one Countie de Dunois, one la Hire, one Poton, one captaine Bayart, & others who became inraged for this poynt of honor, and to get glorie to the Frenchmen. But I take my leaue of their good graces as in this regard. An example or description of a lustie cut∣ter, such a one as was Kain, Lamech, or Nimrod. I haue a good rapier and a good pistolet, and there is neither Sergeant, nor Prouost of merchants, that dare summon or arrest me. Fall out what may, it is sufficient for me that I am a good Catholike. Iustice was neuer made for gentlemen, such a one as I my felse am. I will take the kine, and the cocks and hennes of my neighbour, when it shall please me: I will raise vp the rents of his lands: I will take them away againe, and shut them vp with mine owne within my in∣clofure, and yet he shall not dare to mumble or grumble at it. All shall be for my good comelines: I will not suf∣fer my subiects to pay taxes or toles, but to my selfe, and I counsell you, Messieurs the nobles, to doe euen so. And so indeede there shall be no neede of treasurers and fi∣nanciers, or recesuers of reuenues, that may make them∣selues fat with, and vse the substance of the people, as the coleworts of their garden. Ill sworne, and like a new vp∣start gentlemā. By the death of God, if I finde either sergeant, or receiuer, or man of iustice doing exployt vpon my lands, without demaunding leaue of me therefore, I wil make them eate their parchemine: we haue indured enough: are we not free? Monsieur Lieute∣nant, haue not you giuen vs license to doe all things? and Monsieur the Legate, hath not he layd the bridle in our neckes, Good counsel of a ghostly father. to take all the goods of the politikes, to kill and to murther kinsfolkes, friends, neighbours, father and mother, prouided that therein we doe our owne busines∣ses, and that we be good Catholikes, without euer spea∣king either of truce or of peace? I for my part will doe so, and I pray you also to do the like. But I haue yet another thing to remonstrate vnto you, that is, not to speake any
more of this Salique law. I know not what it is, He meaneth double duc∣kets. but Seig∣neur Diego hath giuen it mee by memorie, with some round peeces that will doe me great good. This in the whole is the matter, that wee must goe sacke these same furred hoods of the court of Parliament, that play the galants, and meddle with the affaires of the estate where they haue nothing to doe, but to see and behold. O that you would giue them me but a little to manage: neuer did Bussie the clerke doe his worke so well. If Monsieur the Legate commaund me only to goe to them, and put my hand on their necke or breast, there is not either square cappe or hood, that I will not make flye about, if they heate mine eares ouer much, yea to this Monsieur Maistre, and to this du Vayr, that set all the rest in traine. Monsieur Lieutenant, why giue you not order for it? Know you not wel, that the president de Nully hath told you, & named by name & by surname all they that haue spoken for this wicked lawe? Why doe you not send for them, and throw them into the riuer, as he hath counsel∣led you? And this goodly fellowe Marillac, that was so much heate at the beginning, Crueltie cau∣seth it. and spake of nothing but fire and bloud, I feare at the end he will become ban que∣rout to the League, if they promise him to bee Councel∣lor of Estate to this Biarnois. Let vs take heede of these people that turne their coates so easily, and followe the winde of fortune, when they see that their side goeth ill. O worthie cōmendation. Ha braue Machault: Ha valiant Bourdeaux, you are worthie to be as my selfe exalted to the highest degree of the honor of nobilitie! Amongst the long gownes, I loue none saue you, and that famous president, which I will yet name here by honor, Monsieur de Nully, who besides the couragious beginning and progresse that hee hath made for the League, whereof he may be well sayd to be the putatiue father, Wickednes wrought by e∣uill meanes, and therefore a double trans∣gression. hath worthily vouchsafed to expose his daughters, and to prostitute their reputation to the brothell house, that he might doe seruice to Messieurs the Princes, and to my masters his Curats & Preachers.
Shall I speake of also the heroical deed of that good man Baston, that so valorously signed the League with his owne very bloud, drawne out of his hand, which after∣wards by miracle remained maimed and benummed, so much would this glorious martyr suffer for the holy v∣nion? And thou noble are boutant of the vnion, Lewis of Orleans: thy catholike Englishman, and thy expostula∣tion: and thy oration made in the fauour and for the ho∣nor of the Legate, and of the Spany ards, did deserue that they should haue put thee in the place of president Bris∣son: A good sen∣tence ill ap∣plied. but men recompence not good people as they should, no more then thy companion in office, for ha∣uing written so curiously the lawes of the vncle against the nephew. These are iust and virtuous men, and not those dunghill churles, and beshitten fellowes, who see∣ing that there was nothing more to be grabeled and sif∣ted in their palace of this towne, and that all their sacks were voyd and emptie, or hung vpon the hooke, depar∣ted from hence and went to Tours, and to Chalons, where they knew that the manger was full, and the racks garnished. A readie, it may be a right iudgement. Briefe, take away fiue or sixe of al this mislead troupe, all the rest is nothing worth, and the best to the diuell. I cannot tell what these persons and people of iu∣stice haue done vnto me: and yet I loue them not. I did once shewe my hand vnto an olde Gypsie woman, who tolde me that I had a round thumbe, and that I should keepe my selfe therefore from the round and halfe round. I beleeue that she ment to say from these people that weare the round cap. In fine Messieurs, I haue charge from the Nobilitie, to remonstrate vnto you that you must once againe abate and take downe the insolencie of these hochebrides and swallowers of mysts, and doe your affayres whilest the weather is fayre: If the law Sa∣lique be maintained and vpheld, I feare least Monsieur the Legate will be sore troubled therewith, and the in∣fant or daughter of Spayne be in daunger to be shauen. But for this matter, I referre my selfe to Monsieur the
Lieutenant, who hath good skill to breake the stroake, and totricke his cousins beard, yea and shaue it to, and that without a razor. Furthermore, if you must needes chuse a King, I pray you thinke vpon me and my merits. Some haue made me beleeue, that there haue sometimes been chosen worse then me. If that can be. The Lydians (but I knowe not what kinde of people they are) made one, that did driue or holde the plough. The Flemmings made one their Duke that was a brewer of beere: the Normanes, a cooke: the Parisiens, a piller of the barke of trees. I tell you I am more then all these: for my grandfather was a ferrier in France, or of France: and if he got hell, I shall gaine paradise. Consider I beseech you Monsieur de S. Paul, now Countie of Rethelois, Mareschall of the vnion and Archbishop of Reims, who indeed had his father not long sithence dwelling in a caue or odde corner couered with straw nigh vnto Nangy, A noble race, and worthie descent. and who as yet hath his sisters married one of them with a tauerner, and the o∣ther with a tysser maker: and yet behold he is Peere and Mareschall of France, and one that lendeth money, but yet vpon good pledges, to Monsieur de Guise his master and good benefactor. By this reckoning you may well make me King, and so you shall doe well: for if you doe, I will let you doe all you would. I will abolish all these stables of iustice, I will suppresse all these Sergeants, Pro∣ctors, Pettifoggers, Commissaries, and Councellors, ex∣cept them that be of our friends: but there shall bee no more speech of summoning nor of seazing, nor of pay∣ing mens debts: ye shall be all as rats in the chaffe, and it shall suffise mee, if you call me Site. And good rea∣son to. But ye shall aduise hereof. For the least, I knowe well that I am as well wor∣thie of it, as another, and I will say nothing more of it but this, that I am thrust forward to goe and execute mine enterprise vpon Noyon, after that I shall haue combated with the gouernour of this citie: and hereupon I kisse the hands of your mercie.
After that the Lord of Rieu had finished his militarie or souldierlike sermon, euery one of the assistants decla∣red by his countenance, that they had taken pleasure in his naturall eloquence, for a man that had no letters or learning: and who might make good fruite, if he did so a long time in this world. Hereupō rose vp one of the de∣puties, named the Lorde Angouleuent, who very loude∣ly caused them to vnderstand, that he had a charge from the new nobilitie, & on the behalfe of the honest men & masters of the vnion, to remonstrate vnto them some thing of importance, touching this qualitie, and that it was reasonable, that he should be heard before the third estate, which was not composed or made but of towne dwellers, requiring Monsieur the Lieutenant to cause audience to bee giuen vnto him, and calling vpon the people of the King of the vnion, and namely the aduo∣cate generall of Orleans (who sometimes before had written in the fauour of the saide nobilitie) to cleaue vn∣to his request, and speaking that he rose vp, and stoode al∣together vpright, vpon the seate where he was set, and began to say, A very vnman∣nerly interrup∣tion of a wise noble man. Monsieur the twelfth: but sodainely hee was interupted by reason of a great noyse of pesants, that were behinde the deputies, which noyse being a little ceased, hee began againe, Monsieur the twelfth, and by and by the noyse arose more great than before, and yet he ceased not the third time to say, Monsieur the twelfth of May. And afterwarde arose vp the Lord of Aubray, which had in charge to speake for the third estate, and contested that it did belong to none but to him, to speake that day of the barricades, and that they were neuer ac∣customed in Fraunce, to make more than three estates, and so hee let that the deputie of the new nobilitie was heard, as being but a dependence, and a member of the saide third estate. The said Lord of Angouleuent, dispu∣ted long time on his part, saying that euery one was there for his money, and began againe sundry times these three
wordes, Monsieur the twelfth, and at euery time he was interrupted. At the last as the rumor increased, and the factions for the one and the other were alreadie heate, so farre as to come for it to the blowes of the fist, the aduo∣cate of Orleans remonstrated, that it was no more time now to rest vpon the auncient formes, which were but for shoemakers and coblers, nor yet vpon the ceremo∣nies of times past, saue onely in the fact of faith and religion: A strong ex∣ception, or else that will down also. and that the assembly of the said estates should be vnprofitable, if they did not all things therein after the new manner. And as for him that hee had seene the re∣membrances and instructions of the new nobility, which deserued very well to bee considered of. Notwithstan∣ding considering now that it was some what late, and that Monsieur the Lieutenant was fresh and fasting, and the houre of Monsieur the Legates dinner was past, hee required, Well added: for it is not ea∣silie done. that the said Lord of Angouleuent should put his speech in writing, and deliuer it vp, and should holde his tongue, if he could: otherwise and for defaulte there∣of, he should be sent to the Countie de Choysie: which thing Monsieur the Lieutenant approued with his head. And the rumor being by little and little ceased, and the foresaide d'Angouleuent hardly set downe againe, the saide Lorde d'Aubray, deputie of the third estate, hauing laid aside his sword, spake his oration very nigh after this manner. The oration of Monsieur d'Aubray for the third Estate. BY our Ladie, Messieurs, A patheticall exordium. you haue giuen vs a goodly speech. There is no neede now that our Curats should preach vnto vs, that we ought to drawe our selues out of the mudde, and to make our selues cleane. As touching that which I see by your discourse, It is a mar∣uaile, if euer they can come out. the poore Parisiens haue enough of it already within their bootes and it will be very hard, to pull them out of the mudde and
mire. From hence forth it is time for vs to perceiue, that the false Catholicon of Spayne, is a drugge that taketh men by the nose: and that it is not without cause, that other nations call vs little quailes, because that as poore quailes that are hooded, and very credulous, the prea∣chers and Sorbonists, No vnfit re∣semblance. by their inchaunting quaile pipes, haue caused vs euen to giue our selues into the nettes of tyrants, who haue afterwards put vs into a cage, and shut vs vp within our walles to teach vs to sing: wee cannot but confesse, that wee are at this time taken and made greater seruants and slaues, than the Christians in Tur∣kie, or the Iewes in Auignon. We haue no more either will or voyce in the chapiter or assembly. We haue no more any thing proper, or that wee may well say this is mine. You, Messieurs, that set your foote vpon our throate, and fill our houses with garnisons, haue and pos∣sesse all. Our priuiledges, franchises, freedomes and aun∣cient liberties are ouerthrowne, and taken away. Our towne house, which I haue seene to bee the sure refuge of the succors of our kings in their vrgent and weightie af∣faires, A sore change. is become a but cherie: our court of Parliament is none at all: our Sorbonne is a brothell house, and the v∣niuersitie become sauage or wilde. And yet the extre∣mitie of our miseries is this, that in the middest of so ma∣ny mischiefes and needes, it is not permitted vs to com∣plaine, nor to demaunde succor, and hauing death as it were betweene our teeth, we must of necessitie say, that we are in good health, A pitifull and iust complaint. and that we are very happie, to be so wretched for so good a cause. O Paris that art no more Paris, but a denne of outragious beasts, and a citadell of Spaniards, Wallons and Neapolitanes, a sanctuarie and sure retrait of robbers, murtherers and killers. Wilt thou neuer thinke againe of thy dignities, and remember thy selfe what thou hast been, in comparison of that thou art? Wilt thou neuer cure thy selfe of this frensie, that for a lawfull and gracious king, hast begotten vnto thy selfe fiftie little kings, or wrens rather, and yet fiftie tyrants?
Beholde thou art in irons: The spanish Inquisition. beholde thou art in the inqui∣sition of Spayne, more intollerable a thousand folde, and more hard to bee borne and indured of spirits, that are borne liberall and free (as French men are) than the most cruell deaths that Spaniards can deuise. Thou wast not a∣ble to beare a small augmentation and increase of taxes and offices, or some new edicts, The fruites of senseles trea∣son. that did not much im∣port thee: and yet now thou indurest men to poll thy houses, to pill and to sacke thee euen vnto blood, to im∣prison the Senators, to driue away, and banish thy good citizens, and counsellors, yea to hang and to murther thy principall magistrates. Thou seest this, thou indurest this: yea thou doest not onely indure it, but thou doest ap∣proue it and praise it, and thou darest not, neither canst thou tell how to doe otherwise. Thou couldest not sup∣port and beare with thy king, so gracious, so gentle, so ea∣sie, so familiar, that made himselfe a fellow citizen with thee, and burgesse of thy towne, that hee inriched thee, that he hath garnished thee with glorious and sumptu∣ous buildings, increased thy forts and stately ramperts, and adorned thee with honorable priuiledges and im∣munities. What say I, couldest not support and beare with? It is much worse. Kindenes ren∣dred for good. Thou hast chased him out of his owne towne, out of his owne house, out of his owne bed. What, say I chased him? thou hast pursued him: what? pursued? thou hast murthered him, and canoni∣zed the murtherer for a saint, and made bonfires for his death. And now thou seest how much that death of his hath profited thee. For that is the cause why another is ascended into his place, much more watchfull, much more laborious, and a far better warriour, & that know∣eth better to keepe thee in, somewhat more straitely, as to thy damage and hurt thou hast alreadie proued. I pray you, Messieurs, if it were permitted, to cast yet these last abois, in libertie, let vs a little consider, what good or what profit hath come vnto vs, by this detestable death, which our preachers did make vs beleeue, was the sole
and the onely meane to make vs blessed. The great dif∣ference be∣tweene good gouernement and tyrannie. But I cannot discourse vpon this poynte, but with very great griese to see things in the estate in which they are, in comparison of that they were then. At that time, euery one had yet corne in his garner, and wine in his seller: euery one had his vessell of siluer or plate as we call it, his tapistrie, and his costly moueables: the women had then their girdles halfe of siluer: the reliques were hole and sound: they had not so much as touched the iewels of the crowne. But now who is there, that can boast that he hath where∣of to liue for three weekes, vnles it be these the eues and robbers, that haue made themselues fat with the wealth of the people, and that haue on all hands pilled and pol∣led the moueables, both of present and absent? Haue we not by little and little consumed all our prouisions, sould our moueables, molten our vessell, and pledged all that wee haue to the garments on our backs, to liue not onely poorely, but verie wretchedly and caytife like? Where are our halles and our chambers so well garni∣shed, and so decked with diaper and tapistrie? Where are our feastes and bankets, and our licorous and dain∣tie tables? Loe we are brought to milke and white cheese like the Swissers. Our bankets are of a bitte of biefe, yea the biefe of a cowe, for all the messes and seruices wee were wont to haue: and happie is he that hath not eaten the flesh of horses and of dogges: and happie is hee that alwaies hath had oaten bread, and coulde make a little paste of it, with the broath of brawne sold at the corner of the streetes, in the places where heretofore they did sell the delicious and daintie tongues, young quailes, and legges of mutton. And it hath not been long of Mon∣sieur the Legate, and of the Embassador Mendoza, that we haue not eaten our fathers bones, as the sauage and wilde people of new Spayne doe. If he can, he is a man of no sense. Can any man thinke of, or remember all these things without teares, and without horror? And they that in their conscience knowe well inough, that they are the cause thereof, can they
heare speake of these things without blushing, and with∣out apprehending the punishment that God reserueth for them, for so many euils and mischiefes whereof they are authors? Yea when they shall represent vnto them∣selues the images of so many poore citizens, as they haue seene fallen in the streetes, all starke and stone dead through famine: the little infants and sucking babes to die at the breasts of their languishing mothers, drawing the breast for nothing, and not finding what to sucke: the better sorte of the inhabitants, and the souldiers to goe through the towne, leaning vpon a staffe pale and feeble, more white and more wanne than images of stone, resembling rather ghosts than men: If they be so good, how bad are the rest and the inhu∣maine and discourteous answer of some, euen of the Ec∣clesiasticall persons, who accused them, and threatned them, in steed of succouring or comforting them. Was there euer barbarousnes or crueltie like to that, which we haue seene and indured? Was there euer tyrannie and domination matchable to that, which we see and indure? Where is the honour of our vniuersitie? Where are the colledges? Where are the schollers? Where are the pub∣like readings and lectures, to which people did run from all the partes of the world? Bookes turned into blades, a good change. Where bee the religious stu∣dents in the couents? They haue all taken armes, and be∣holde they are become all of them vnruly and wicked souldiers? Where are our chasses? Where are our preci∣ous reliques? Some of them are molten and eaten vp: o∣ther some are buried in the grounde, for feare of robbers and sacreligious persons. Where is that reuerence that men caried once, to the people of the Church or Clergie, and to the sacred mysteries? The diuell a lie it is. Euery one now maketh a re∣ligion after his owne manner, and diuine seruice, serueth for no other vse, but to deceiue the world through hypo∣crisie: the priests and preachers haue so set themselues on sale, and made themselues so contemptible, by their offensiue life, that men regarde them no more, nor their sermons neither, but when they are to be vsed to preach
and spread abroade some false newes. Where are the princes of the blood, that haue been alwaies sacred per∣sons, euen as the pillars and staies of the crowne, and of the French Monarchie? Where are the Peeres of France, that should be the first here to opē to, & to honor the E∣states? Al these names, are no more but the names of por∣ters, wherof some make litter for the horses of the Messi∣eurs of Spayne and of Lorraine. Where is the Maiestie and grauitie of the Parliament, heretofore the defender of Kings, and the mediator betweene the people and the Prince? A prison, as we would say here, the Fleete or Tower. You haue caried it in triumph to the Bastille: and authoritie and iustice, ye haue led them captiue more in∣solently and more shameleslie, than the Turkes woulde haue done. You haue driuen away the best sorte of people, and retained none but rascals or of scourings: who are either full of passions or else base minded. Be∣sides euen of them that doe remaine, ye will not suffer so few as foure or fiue to say what they thinke, and you threaten them also, Hee meaneth some kinde of torture or tor∣ment. to giue them a billet, as vnto here∣tikes, or politikes. And yet you would make men be∣leeue, that that you doe, is for no other respect, but for the preseruation of religion, and of the estate. This is well said: but let vs a little examine your actions, and the cariage or behauiour of the King of Spayne towards vs: and if I lie one word, A fearefull execration. let Monsieur Saint Denis, and Ma∣dame Saint Genuiefue, the great patrons of Fraunce ne∣uer helpe me. I studied a little while in the schooles, and yet not so much as I desired: but since I haue seene di∣uers countries, and trauailed into Turkie, and thorow out all Natolia, and Sclauonia, euen vnto Archipelagus, and mare maior, A good touch∣stone indeede. and Tripoli of Syria: where I found the say∣ing of our Sauiour Christ to bee true: By their fruites yee shall know them. Men knowe sufficiently enough, what are the intentions and inuentions of men, by their works and by their effects. First, I will speake it (and yet with an honorable preface) that the King of Spayne, A mannerly man. is a great prince, wise, subtill, and very aduised, the most mightie,
and hauing the greatest territories of all Christian prin∣ces, and that he should be yet so much the more, if all his lands, countries, and kingdomes were sure and ioyned one of them to another. But France which is betweene Spayne and the Iowe countries, is the cause that his sepa∣rate and disioyned Lordships, No lie surely. Beare with bragging and lying a little. cost him more than they are worth. For aboue all nations hee feareth the French, as that which he knoweth to be most noble, and to haue the greatest valure and impatience against the rest and rule of a strange people. And that is the cause, why be∣ing wise, prouident, and well counselled as hee is, since that hee was constrained to make that miserable peace which was sealed and signed by the death of our good King Henry the second, Ah wilie foxe: but yet well discouered subtiltie. and not daring either openly to gainesay the same, or beginne warre, whilest that France was flourishing, vnited, agreed and of the same minde and will together, hee indeuoured to sowe diuision and discord amongst vs our selues: and so soone as hee sawe our princes to be miscontent, or to iarre amongst them∣selues, he did secretly and closely conueigh himselfe into the action, and incouraged the one of the sides, to nou∣rish and foster our diuisions, and to make them immor∣tall, and to busie our selues, to quarrell and fight one with another, yea to kill one another, that whilest these trou∣bles were amongst vs, hee might bee left in peace, and so long as we did inweaken our selues, to grow & increase, without losse and lessening. Plaine & preg∣nant proofes. This was the course and pro∣ceeding that hee held, after that hee sawe the princes of Vendosme, and of Condie malecontent, who also drew and caried with them the house of Montmorencie and of Chastillon, and to set themselues against the aduan∣tageable aduancements and proceedings of your father, Bleare eyed men and bar∣bers, as it is in the prouerbe, are acquainted therewith. and of your Vncles (Monsieur Lieutenant) who had in∣uaded and vsurped all authoritie and kingly power, in the time of young King Frauncis their nephew. I speake nothing but that all Fraunce, euen to the smallest and basest of them, yea that the whole worlde knoweth.
For all the bloudie tragedies, which since that time haue been plaied vpon this pitifull scaffold of France, haue all of them been borne and proceeded from these first quarrels, and not from the diuersitie or diffe∣rence of religions, as without reason men doe yet to this day, make the simple and idiots to beleeue. I am old and haue seene the affayres of the world, as much as another, yea by the grace of God, and the goodnes of my friends, I haue been Sheriffe, and prouost of the merchants also in this citie, in the time that men proceeded thereunto by free election, and that they did not constraine nor vse violence to men, for their suffrages and voyces, as you haue done, Plaine speech and particular application. Monsieur Lieutenant, not long sithence minding and purposing to continue Monsieur Boucher at your deuotion. But I remēber yet those old times, as if it were but yesterday past, or this day present. I can remē∣ber well from the beginning of the quarell, that fell out betweene Monsieur your late father, and late Monsieur the Constable, which proceeded from no other cause, but from the iealousie of one of them ouer another, both of them being the great minions and fauourits of Hen∣rie the second their master, Figulus figulū odit, as it is in the prouerbe. as wee haue seene also Mes∣sieurs de Ioyeuse, and d'Espernō, vnder King Henrie the third his sonne. Their first falling out was for the estate of great Master, which the King had giuen to Monsieur your father, when he made Monsieur of Montmorency Constable, who had been great Master before, and who had the Kings promise, that the sayd estate should be re∣serued for his sonne. Another cause of their ill husban∣drie, or bad carriage of themselues, was the Countie de Dampmartin, which both of them had gotten after di∣uers sorts: Sum ego mihi metipsi proxi∣mus: I loue my selfe best. and being entred into suite about the same, Monsieur the Constable got it by an arrest or decree. This did so alter and chaunge them, that either of them indeuored to east his cōpanion out of the saddle, or as we say, to set him beside the cushion. And from thence pro∣ceeded the voyage, that Monsieur your father made into
Italie, where he did no great matter, because that Mon∣sieur the Constable (who caused him to bee sent thither, that so he might the more quietly, wholly and alone pos∣sesse the King) it may be hindred, or slacked the affayres: but he remained not long vnpunished for it: for he was taken afterwards on S. Laurence day, while your father was absent, who being returned, did by a certaine good happe, and the same indeed very wonderfull, It was well done of the Guise to ouer∣come euil with well doing. take againe the townes of Picardie (which wee had lost) and Calais besides. And that he might the better reuenge himselfe of the euill dueties that he knew were done against him in his voyage, caused also the imprisonment of Monsieur the Constable to bee prolonged, and forgot no arte that might hinder or delay his deliuerance, which gaue an oc∣casion to my Lords of Chastillon, to desire the ayde, and to cast themselues into the armes and protection of the King of Nauarre, this Kings father, and of Monsieur the Prince of Conde his brother, who had married their neece. Also these two great houses fell into factions and partakings, which were yet stirred vp and incensed by the contention begun betweene the Prince of Conde, & Monsieur d'Aumale your vncle, for the office of the colo∣nel of the light horse: there was as yet no mētion of reli∣gion or Huguenots. Hardly did any know what was the doctrine of Caluin and Luther, A little fire maketh a great flame. but by the death of them that we sawe burne stiffe in their opinions: and yet not∣withstanding the matter of the warres, and of the enimi∣ties that we haue seene, were then in preparing, and hath continued vntill this present time. But the trueth is, that when my Lords of Chastillon, very couragious men, and not able to indure the iniuries offered them, saw that the fauour of your house did ouertoppe theirs, and that they had not any meane to finde credite and fauour about the King, by reason of the lets that they of your race & house cast in the way, they were counselled to withdraw them∣selues from the Court, and as they were in their retraite, they shewed themselues (but whether it were in good
earnest, or of policie and prudence I know not) to fauour the new Lutherans, who till then preached no where but in caues and dennes, and by little and little ioyned them∣selues with them in faction and intelligence, It is not good to fall into the clawes and pawes of vn∣reasonable men. the rather to defend and keepe themselues from your father & your vncle, then to attempt any stirring or bringing in of no∣ueltie, except then when the King, at the prouocation of your vncle (who had made the Pope to write vnto him thereabout) did himselfe take Monsieur d'Andelot at Crecy, and sent him prisoner to Melun. After this im∣prisonment, and that also of the Vidame of Chartres, and of certaine counsellors of parliament, fell out the violent and miraculous death of the King, Whē the wic∣ked rise vp, mē hide them∣selues. which exalted your house to the soueraigne degree of power, neere about the young King Francis: and on the other side, did abate and almost altogether beate downe the house of Mon∣sieur the Constable, and of all those that did belong vnto him. And this was then when his kindred (voyde of all hope of ordinarie meanes, because that all was executed vnder the fauour of your allies) ioyned themselues in se∣crete intelligence with the Lutherans here and there scattered in diuers corners of the kingdom. And though they had as yet but little credit with them, as who were people vnknowne vnto them, and had not partaked, nei∣ther in the Supper, nor in Synode, or Consistorie, not∣withstanding by the meanes of their agents, well skilled and practised in secrets, they made that memorable en∣terprise of Amboyse, and assembled from all the quarters of the world, Taciturnitie a good virtue. and that with meruailous silence, such a great number of people, that they were readie at the day named, to accomplish a cruell execution vpon your side, vnder this pretext to deliuer the King out of the capti∣uitie, A Iudas a∣mongst the twelue. wherein your fathers and your vncles held him. But these good people could not keep themselues from trai∣tors, whereupon followed the execution done at Am∣boise, which discouered also the authors of the faction. And thereupon insued the rigorous commaundement which they gaue to the King of Nauarre, and the impri∣sonment
of Monsieur the Prince of Conde in the estates at Orleans, and sundrie other heauie accidents too long now to recite: Mens malice ouerthrowne when God will. which had continued and increased farre worse, if the sodaine death of the young King had not al∣tered the course, and broken the blow, which some went about to cause to light vpon these chiefest princes of the bloud royall, and vpon the familie of Monsieur the Con∣stable, and of the Chastillons. A man may easily iudge, how much your house was shaken and tossed, as it were by this vnlooked for death: and you may beleeue (Mon∣sieur Lieutenant) that Monsieur your father, and Mes∣sieurs your vncles played all at one time, A fit compa∣rison. at one kinde of game or blushing, as you might do if a man should bring you newes of the death of your two brethren. But they lost not their courage no more then you doe: and had afterwards very good counsels and consolations from the King of Spayne (of whom we will speake by and by) who during these first dissentions was vpon the skoutes, and watched to whom hee might offer his fauour, and how he might blow and stirre the fire, on the one side & on the other, to make it to increase to that power and greatnes, in which we haue seene it, Holy purpo∣ses for so ca∣tholike a prince. and doe yet now see it burne and consume all France, which is the finall but of his pretensions. Vpon hope then of the support of so great a prince, which would not spare to promise men & money, your father without being astonished with so lumpish a fall, perceiuing the King of Nauarre to be pla∣ced in his ranke of the first prince of the bloud, for the sauegard of young king Charles, and Monsieur the Con∣stable put in his charge or office againe, knew so well & rightly to play his ball, that he practised them both, The recouerie of Nauarre & some such conceits. and drew them to his lure, against their owne brethren, and against their owne kinsmen: feeding one of them with a hope that I dare not speake of, and flattering the other by submissions and honors, that he bestowed vpon him. And this he did so artificially and wel, that entring a∣gaine into the paths and waies that he had forsaken, and
taking his old aduantage, after that Monsieur the Prince of Conde was set at libertie (who had fairely preuented him but two or three daies onely) he went with a number of men of warre, and in great troupes, to seize the young King and the Queene his mother at Fountainebleau, & brought them to Melun. And this was then when my sayd Lord the Prince, and Messieurs of Chastillon, per∣ceiuing themselues, neither by their head, nor by their houses, strong enough to resist so puissant enemies, co∣uered with kingly authoritie and power, became Luthe∣rans at one clap, and declared themselues to be heads & protectors of the new heretikes, whom they called to their succour, and by their meanes did in open warre seaze and take many great townes of the kingdome, without making yet any mention of their religion, but onely for the defence of the King and of his mother, and to deliuer them out of the captiuitie & bondage, where∣in Monsieur your father held them. And you Monsieur Lieutenant know, that these people alwaies boasted, that what they did as in this behalfe, it was at the request and commandement of the Queene Mother, whose letters written and sent by her to them for that purpose, they haue caused to be published and imprinted. You are not ignorant of that which passed in this warre, and how af∣terwards the King of Spayne sent your father succour, but yet the same such, Fit fellowes to fight a field. as I am ashamed to speake of it: al labourers and handicrafts men, gathered together, who would neuer fight at the battaile of Dreux, but couered themselues with the wagons and carriages appoynted for the baggage. Notwithstanding, this was a baite to in∣kindle the courage of the partakers, and to cause them to hope that they should indeed some other time doe some aduantageable thing, if they would yet once again come to fight together. But afterwards the diuers changings and alterations of our affayres, did indeed offer vnto the Spanyard another sport. For your father being dead, and peace being made, knowing notwithstanding these
mightie families animated and stifly set one of them against another, and that without hope of reconciliation, When a bad cannot pre∣uaile, a worse will be proui∣ded. he practised Monsieur the Cardinall your vncle (which on his behalfe did not sleepe) to maintaine the troubles and diuisions in this realme, vnder the beautifull name of religion, of which in former time mē made little or no account. Monsieur your vncle, Cardinall of Lorraine com∣mended. being (as he was indeed) wittie, and pleasing whom he would, had skill in such sort to gaine the heart of the Queene Mother, and the Queene Mother the heart of the King her sonne, that he perswaded them, specially the Queene mother, that Mes∣sieurs the Princes of Bourbon, ayded by them of Mont∣morency and Chastillon, sought nothing but her ruine, and would neuer bee quiet or leaue off, till they had dri∣uen her out of the realme, and sent her into Italie to her kinsfolkes. God pardon that good Ladie. A deuout prai∣er for a holie woman. But for the ap∣prehension and conceit that she had of these things, I feare much that she was the cause of many euils, that we saw in her time. For vpon this matter, she did so hate thē, that she neuer ceased till she had destroyed them, as she did the one of them in the battaile of Iarnac, and the o∣ther at the massacre of S. Bartholomew, where if all they of Montmorency had been found, they had had no bet∣ter market of it then the rest. To which poynt Messieur your vncle, did very nimbly put his hand, and valiantly pushed or lifted at the wheele, that so he might put fire in the head of that young King Charles: without whose death wee neede not doubt, but that he had had the like scorne, that Monsieur the Mareschall of Montmorency gaue him and Monsieur your brother in this towne, Doubtie Dukes, and very cleanly, whē he made them do all in their breeches, because they bare weapons and armour forbidden them, without his passe∣port and leaue. But it seemeth, that the sodaine death of these their Kings one after another, did alwaies breake & set out of square the goodly attempts of your house, and saued, or at the least prolonged the liues of your princi∣pall enemies. Now let vs come to that which fell out
afterwards, for it is time to speak of you, and of Monsieur your brother, who began from that time forward to ap∣peare in armes, and to walke in the footsteps and tracts of your predecessors. A fardle of frumps against Duke du Mayenne. You haue alreadie caused your va∣lours and valiances to appeare in the siege of Poictiers, which you brauely defended, contrarie to the aduise of the first husband of Madame la Lieutenant, Monsieur of Montpezat, your predecessor, who counselled you to for∣sake all, and to get you packing thence. Afterwards you were at the battaile of Montcontour: and after that, at the iourney or exployt done vpon S. Bartholomews day: where the companions on the other side were taken napping, if not on sleepe, and prouoked to say, whence come you. Cardinall of Lorraine. And though Monsieur your vncle at that time was turning ouer his portuise in Italie, yet the play was not performed without his intermedling, and seeking to haue the King of Spaynes approbation of it, & the Popes absolution, touching the marriage, which seemed for a lure, and a trappe also to the Huguenots. Afterwards you continued your blowes at the siege of Rochel, where mē did perceiue, that he that is at this day the King of Na∣uarre, and Monsieur your brother, were but one heart & one soule: Men may maske, but dissimulation wil break out. and their great puritie and familiaritie, ingen∣dred ielousie and suspition in all the world. But we must come to the matter. When you sawe that King Charles was dead, who otherwise did not loue you very much, & had sundrie times repeated the saying of the great King Francis, For he had no cause so to do. whereof he himselfe had made these foure ver∣ses, now very rife and common in euery mans mouth. King Francis was no whit beguiled, When he foretold that the Guisian race Would spoyle his sonnes of all they had, And leaue his subiects in worse case. When you saw him, A steppe to the scepter as they thought. I say dead without children, and the late King his brother married with your barren and vnfruitfull cousin, you began (Monsieur your brother and you I meane) to attempt and assay many practises and
plots, which many people sayd were the cause of all our miseries. I am not of that number which beleeue that Messieurs your father and vncle, had from their time layd the foundation of the building that your brother & you haue builded since, though there bee that speake of the notes of Dauid and of Piles, who haue better then No∣stradamus prognosticated & foretold all that which we haue seene since their death: and though some assure ys, that Monsieur your vncle, Cardinall of Lotraine. had framed a certaine forme of all the order that was to beheld therein. But I cannot beleeue, that he that had as much vnderstanding as a mā could haue, could hope to make his nephewes kings of France, seeing as yet three brethren, children of the Kings house in the right line, all of thē very puissant, and in the floure of their age, readie to be married; and be could not diuine or gesse, that they should dye without issue, as they did afterwards. Besides, hee sawe a great number of the Princes of the royall bloud, that kept not themselues warme with the robe of heretikes; that should haue cut off all hope from his desires. I knowe very well that in his time, he was the author that the Archdeacon of Thoul writ this much, A pedigree published, but to small pur∣pose. that those of the house of Lorraine were descended from Charles the great, by the males, that is to say, of Charles Duke of Lorraine, to whom the king∣dome appertained, after the death of Lewes the fifth king of France: and that Hugh Capet hauing taken him at Laon, and brought him and his wife prisoner to Orleans, he had a sonne or male child, of whom he affirmed the Dukes of Lorraine are descended: this was vnder hand cast amongst the people, As all did well perceiue. and you were neuer a whit grie∣ued with it, though that the common and true histories doe plainly enough shew and witnesse, that there was an interruption & breaking off of males in the race of Lor∣raine, by two women, and namely in the wife of God∣frey of Bouillon, named Idain. A worthie Archdeacon. So the sayd Archdeacon made an honourable amends for it, according to the ar∣rest and sentence giuen against him, and like a lewd fel∣lowe,
and sloathfull, or fainthearted man, vnsayd that he had spoken. But in fine, there was small appearance, that at that time my sayd Lord your vncle could aspire to the kingdome, hauing so many hinderances and heads, ei∣ther to fight against, Two worthie waies to work by. or to cause to dye by the sword, or by poyson. It is very true, that euen from his beginning, he was very ambitious and desirous of greatnes, and of the gouernment of the state, more then any other of his age: and I make no doubt of it, but that he desired to possesse the Kings, and to haue held them, had hee been able, in tutorship and vnder gouernment, as in olde time the Maiors of the palace did, that so he might dispose of all according to his pleasure, and set vp or pull downe those whom hee had listed: Wicked mens purposes and practises are vaine. which is the thing whereto commonly the greatest aspire Notwithstanding, being almost come thereunto, while he was liuing, he gathered together and prepared for you the materiall sluffe, with which you haue built this proued attempt, with your foot to hold the crowne of France, hauing left in your hand, first great riches, great estates, the chiefe offices & char∣ges of the kingdome, great gouernments, many souldiers bound by good turnes done them, many seruants also, great intelligences with the Pope & the King of Spayne, and other Princes your kinsfolkes and allies: and which is more, a great opinion amongst the common people, that you were good Catholikes and sworne enemies to the Huguenots. You knew very well how to make great profite to your selues by these preparations, and sundrie sorts of stuffe, which ye found after his death, all readie to bring vnto the worke. When I say you, I meane your self brethren and cousins. After King Charles his death, ma∣ny things succeeded well to you one after another, Diuers deuises to strengthen the Guisian faction. and to very good purpose. First the barrennes of the King, or of your cousin his wife: then the retraite and absence of the King of Nauarre, of which you were in part a cause, for the distrusts into which you brought him: and after that the diuision and dissention between the King and Mon∣sieur
the Duke his brother, whereof you were the onely authors and promoters, vnder hand and closely sharpe∣ning the spirits of the one against the other, and secretly promising them to ayd them. Another thing wherewith you thought to strengthen your selues well, was the as∣sistance that Messieurs the Princes of Conty and of Soys∣sons, yeelded for a time to the King of Nauarre their cou∣sin germane, when they sawe that the things you went a∣bout, were directly against all their familie, and that you boasted you would supplant or vndermine them: for thereupon you vndertooke the matter, which you haue neuer since forsaken or forgotten, namely, to cause to be comprehended by and vnder the Popes bull, If Spayne play not a part in this pageant, nothing can be done. and by oths and protestations of the King of Spayne, neuer to ap∣proue hereticall princes, nor the children of heretikes, and then ye found out and first deuised these goodly names of adherents and fautors of heretikes. After all this, ye made your practises with the King of Spayne more o∣penly, and assured your conditions, and couenanted then for your pensions, promising him the kingdome of Na∣uarre & Bern for his share, with the townes that should serue his turne in Picardie and Champagne, and ye com∣muned with him concerning the meanes, that you would vse to get hold of the estate. And the pretext that ye pre∣tended thereto, was the wicked gouernment of the king, Good pretexts to countenāce a bad cause. the prodigalities which he bestowed vpon his two mi∣nions, Esperon and Mercurie, whereof you drew one to your owne line, which was thought neuer a whit the better. You imployed all your diligence to make the poore prince odious to his people: you counselled him to raise the taxes, to inuent new imposts, to create newe officers, by which you your felues profited: for some did maintaine to Monsieur your brother at Chartres, af∣ter the barricades, that he had receiued halfe the money of three edicts made to fill the purse, Fine deuises to shred him of his kingdome. and which also were very pernicious or hurtfull, whereof notwithstan∣ding you cast and layd the hatred vpon that poore king,
whom you made to muse vpon and dwell in ridiculous deuotions, whilest you your selues sued for the good fa∣uour of the people, and contrarie to his liking, tooke vpō you the charge and conducting of great armies, draw∣ing vnto you the heads and captaines of warre, & cour∣ting and making much of in words, the very simple and meane souldiers, that ye might get them to bee on your side, practising the townes, buying the gouernmēts, and putting into the best places gouernours & folke at your owne deuotion. And this was then that you conceiued the kingdome present almost (euen as the appetite com∣meth many times by eating) when you sawe King Henry without hope of issue, He must needs goe that the diuell driueth. the chiefe Princes accounted for heretikes, or fautors of heretikes, the Consistorie of Rome to lay the raines or bridle in your necke, and the King of Spayne to giue you the spurre. You had no more to hin∣der you, but the late Monsieur, who was a shrewd hol∣low dreamer, and who vnderstood well with what wood you warmed your selues. He must be dispatched out of the way: and Salcede his testament discouered vnto vs the meanes of it: Who can stād against such deadly attēpts. but force preuailing not, poyson did the deede. All your seruants foretold this his death more then three moneths before it came to passe. Afterwards ye made no more small mouths, or spake closely for the dissembling of your purpose: you went no more cree∣ping as cunnies, nor in secret: but you plainly layd open your selues. And yet notwithstanding the better to set forward your affayres, you would make honest people beleeue, that this was for the publique benefite, and for the defence of the Catholique religion, Catholike re∣ligion a fayre pretext. which is a pre∣text and cloake, that seditious persons and stirrers vp of nouelties, haue alwaies taken to couer themselues with∣all. Into this insensible net you drew that good man Monsieur the Cardinall of Bourbon, a prince without malice, and ye were able so cunningly to turne and wind him, that yee seized him with a foolish and vndiscreet ambition, that in the end ye might deale with him, as the eat doth with the mouse, that is to say, after ye had plai∣ed
with him, to eate him vp. No vnapt cō∣parison. No vntrue ex∣position. You drew thereunto sundry Lordes of the Realme, diuers gentlemen and captaines, many cities, townes, and communalties: and amongst others this miserable citie, which suffered it selfe to bee taken as it were with birde lime, partly by reason of the hatred that they had against the misdemeanours of the late King: partly also by reason of the impression, which you put into them, that the Catholike religion would vt∣terly be ouerthrowne, if the King did die without childrē, & the succession of the kingdom shuld come to the King of Nauar, who called himself the first prince of the blood. Hereupon you forged & framed your first declaration or manifestatiō, that had not in it so much as one only word of religiō, but you did indeed demaund therein, They will hardly agree with others that diffent frō themselues. that althe states & gouernments of this kingdome, shuld be taken from them that possessed them, and were not at your de∣uotion, which escape you amended in your second de∣claration, by the counsell of Rosne, who (to the end hee might set alon a fire) said, that there needed nothing else but the setting out of religion: and then you preached vnto vs of a Synod at Montauban, A fine deuise to foster the fire of faction in Fraunce. and of a diet in Ger∣manie, where you saide that all the Huguenots of the worlde had plotted together, to seize the Kingdome of Fraunce, and to drawe the priests out of it. Some verily beleeued you, yea and I my selfe (who am not of the craftiest) had some opinion thereof, and thereupon ioy∣ned my selfe with this partie, for the feate that I alwaies had, to forgoe my religion: many good people did as my selfe, that are for all that in no better estate. The o∣thers that demaunded nothing but newe hurlie burlies and stirres, made shew as though they did beleeue it. A braue band and a very ho∣ly company. Sun∣dry saffron sellers, indebted and bankrouts, yea stubborn and criminous persons, and such as were worthy of death for the offences they had committed, followed you, as people that had neede of ciuill warre. Hauing thus plaied your part, and receiued many doublons or double duc∣kets out of Spaine, you put your selues into the fieldes,
with a very good and braue armie. Whether it were or no: the fact was euil. Some say that this, was not done without the knowledge and consent of Queene mother, who loued troubles, that shee might make her selfe necessary, and a person to be imployed in doing all thinges, whereunto she was very apt and fitte. But as much Italicanated and craftie as she was, yet she was deceiued therein For at the first she did not beleeue, that your desseignes and attempts did fly so high, and did not discouer the lampe or light, which brake out some∣what late after that you had set your foote so forwarde, that there was no more meane for you to retire, this be∣ing not very likely, though she had conceiued some dis∣contentment against, and mislike of her sonne, (who in∣deed suffered himselfe to be gouerned rather by others, than by her) that she would suffer him to fall, Yet natural people com∣mit vnnatural things. and to see him depriued of the crowne, to establish your brother therein, in whom she trusted not but for fashion sake on∣ly. Wherefore the aide that that good Ladie yeelded you, was not to destroy her sonne, but to bring him to humili∣tie and acknowledgment of his fault: which she thinking she had done by your meane, she caused you afterwards to disperse your armie, which serued you for no other pur∣pose, but to acquaint you with your forces, and to extort by violence, Law against law. this edict of Iulie, which did frustrate and dis∣anull all the other edicts, made for pacification, and did yet once againe renew fire, fagot, slaughter, and all in Fraunce against the Huguenots. But you continued not in so faire and good a way. For hauing vnderstood, that the good townes that had promised you to rise vp for you against the King, (when they should see you in the fields with an armie) had failed you and were yet retai∣ned, with some feare & reuerence of the name of Kings, and of the rovall maiestie: you practised without vnar∣ming your selues, And who wil not such things make almost despe∣rate. and that within al the cities & townes, you practised I say, such of the inhabitants, as you knew had any credit, or dignitie aboue the people. You cor∣rupted some by money, that came to you in great abun∣dance
out of Spaine: other some ye corrupted by promi∣ses of riches, offices, benefices: and other some by impu∣nitie of the faultes they had committed, and for which they were pursued by iustice and lawe: but principally you prepared your engines against this miserable citie, For what wil not wicked men do to ob∣taine their pur∣pose? where you forgot no art or cunning, and that euen vnto the most abiect and shamefull submitting of your selues, that so you might winne and obtaine the simple people. Your brother went for that purpose to arme himselfe in Champagne, and Bourgongne, that so he might surprize and take the places appertaining to the King, and not those of the Huguenots, whereof there was no speech in that country, sauing at Sedan, Two armies and neuer a good or godly leader. where hee accomplished his businesses very ill. And you Monsieur the Lieutenant went into Guienne, with a mightie armie, to watch the occasion to play your part: and this in my minde is the reason, that yee performed no greater matter there, be∣cause ye would temporize, and looke to giue your blow on the other side, as not long sithence you sayd. But the heretikes of Xaintongne, ceased not to mocke you ther∣fore: for vpon your returne, they made a little time in their prittle prattle, which deserueth that you shuld know it, and lo it is this. Lift vp ye vaults your great gates I say, Fine frumps in verse though not of the best. Ye gates of Paris lift vp and giue way. For so there shall enter the Duke of glory, Who a hundred Huguenots to kill, A thousand papists hath slaine with good will: Hath he not well gotten thereby? The quatraine or foure verses also that in those quar∣ters were made therof are common, touching the townes and places which ye tooke. Oronce is a goose, and Theuet a ducke perchance, Two Geogra∣phers. Who in setting out the mappe or card of Fraunce, Haue forgot to put downe, or els left out in disdaine The townes & castles, that this great Duke hath taine. I will not speake of the goodly taking that you made,
of the castle of Fronsac, No, but rather he should be arraigned for it, at a better barre. and of a young Ladie that was there, who was the heire of the house of Caumont. That deserueth not to bee rehearsed in this good companie, though that that good man de la Vauguyon, died for griefe of it, neuer being able to haue iustice against you for it. Neither indeede was this any thing in comparison of that that you had purposed to doe in this towne vpon your returne, whereof you know that I know some thing, though not all. Who could haue knowne this, and haue beene silent. For I knewe not, that at that time you had plotted to take the King in the Louure, and to kill, or to imprison all his best and chiefest seruants, if the Lieu∣tenant of the Prouost Hardy had not reuealed it, who discouered all your assemblies and enterprises by their li∣mits and bounds: and was the cause that the King well aduertised thereof, caused to bee taken, both the great and little castle, the Arsenac, and the towne house, and hartened and strengthened his gards, that he might hin∣der the execution of your purpose and attempt. You will confesse, A little pitie, spilleth a citie. I am sure, that had hee done then, that which he should and could, that both you and all your agents and facients had been cast away, whom they then knewe by their names, and by their surnames, euen as well as when they were declared afterwards. But they proceeded therein too gently, and that by the counsell those, which then saide, and yet at this day affirme, that we must not prouoke or sharpen any thing. Afterwards you ceased not to practise and solicite all the world, They will pro∣phecie for old shoes. euen openly, and principally the preachers and curates, vpon whom you bestowed some small part of your double duckets: you sent another armie into Guyenne, whereof you made great account, and which you thought should either haue shut vp or taken the King of Nauarre. Oh goodly things, you went and thrust headlong, euen into death and destruction, that yong Lord, being ouer pre∣sumptuous of the hopes that you had giuen him, that he should be the King of Tholoze. Your brother had other forces on foote, that stood him in good steed, to beate
backe the Reisters, Pride goet before shame. that came to the succour of the Hu∣guenots of Guyenne: and you Monsieur the Lieutenant, must needs goe thither in person, and yet you were not able to hinder their passage. And if he had had no more but you and yours, who would needs meddle there with∣all (whatsoeuer thing ye would make men beleeue to the contrary) they had come to drinke our wine euen at our gates, and you had beene brought to a marueilous exi∣gent. And yet forsooth you would haue all the glory of their ouerthrow giuen to you, and robbe therof the King and his good seruants, who temporizing therein, and set∣ting themselues against their passage ouer the riuer Seyne, brought and wrought the greatest effects thereof, Some grow great by other mens actions. that indeed got you a great deale of honor and fauour a∣mongst the Parisiens, the greatest part whereof knewe not as yet at what you aimed: but they that were parta∣kers of your secretes, and that then first tooke the name of zealous catholikes, made alreadie a God of your bro∣ther, called vpon him in their affliction, and had recourse vnto him, when men did threaten them with the King & iustice. Whereupon he became so proud, rash and hea∣die, that he durst enter into this citie with eight horse on∣ly, and that against the very expresse forbidding, that the King had giuen him concerning the same, although we know well enough, that hee had appointed fiue or sixe hundred horsemen, No pageant without the Pope play a part. that should the same day approch & draw nigh vnto him. Pope Xistus the fifth could well declare what punishment that deserued, when he vnder∣stood the newes of it, and would not haue failed to haue done and executed the same, had such a thing fallen out to him. But the good mother and the counsellors made by her hand, It is vnnatural to be for o∣thers against her sonne. and according to her humor (of whom wee haue yet too many remaining) were able so aptly to stāpe and imprint feare, in the feeble spirit of this poore prince, that he durst enterprise nothing, lest hee should exaspe∣rate the Parisiens, and lest he might yet bring againe the troubles and miseries of warre into his kingdome. For
albeit he loued not the Huguenots more than you, yet so it fell out that hauing a long time tried their selfe willed∣nes and stubbornes, and seeing that to no purpose, they went about to ouercome them, and to carry them to rea∣son, by the violence of warre, hee resolued with himselfe, no more to assay or vse forcible meanes or waies, Or rather! esse crueltie. but by a more gracious remedie began to drawe them vnto his obedience, and to the acknowledgement of their former faultes, depriving them of his court and of his companys, of honours, charges, gouernements, offices, and benefi∣ces, from which the greatest part of them were grieued to see themselues excluded, which sell out so prospe∣rously, Mischieuous policie. that I cannot but aduow that their forces were lesse earnest and more diminished by fiue or sixe yeeres of peace, than by tenne yeeres of open warre. And there sprong vp no new Huguenors, the old waxing colde and wearie also of the length of their troubles, and the great∣est number of them permitting their children to become catholikes, that so they might bee made partakers of ho∣nors, and benefits, or good turnes, as well as others. But you and yours, being impatient of peace, and hauing al∣waies small regard of religion, so that you might come to your attempts and purposes, would not suffer this trā∣quillitie, Fit similitude. which was not healthfull or good for you. You had learned that fishing was the best, when the water was most troubled, so that indeede you neuer had had rest, had you not seene borne this goodly day of the bar∣rieades, which hath ruinated and ouerthrowne both vs to you, and you to vs. Albeit it bee notorious and euident enough, and your brother were he liuing would not de∣ny it, and all they that were of the enterprise or attempt, and are here present will confesse it with mee, that if the King would haue vsed his power and authoritie, wee had beene that day all cast away, he being very certaine, that you were preuented and ouertaken three whole dayes, and that the day of the exploit, which should haue been done, was not appointed but vpon the Sunday. So well,
that the King, When men will not take oppoitunitie, and vse the meanes God hath giuen them, good reason they should smart. who knew all the enterprise (though those that came neerest vnto his persō, indeuoured to disswade him, and to turne him away from beleeuing the reportes which wee made vnto him thereof) had his Swissers, and his gards, and other men of warre all readie before day, who had alreadie taken the places, foure corner streetes or wayes, and quarters of the citie, the mor∣ninge before that your brother or any of his enter∣prisets or accomplices were awake, who (as you know) vnderstanding vpon his awaking that which was pas∣sed, thought himselfe so surprised, ouertaken and vn∣done, that hee expected nothing else, but that they would come to besiege, and take, or kill him in the house of Guise, where he was resolute to defend himselfe, with his sworde onely, hauing for that purpose as yet made no preparation of any armour or weapons, east they should come thither to search, and to take away al suspition con∣cerning him. After the same manner the sixteene, and the most mutinous of the faction, hid themselues in caues and boles, and in their friends and neighbours houses, looking for nothing but present death, Euery one that euill dooth, hateth the light. yea there was none of them so hardie, as that he durst be seene or ap∣peare in the streete, except it were more than eyght or nine of the clocke at night. So that the King was able enough, and that without any resistance, to haue seized vpon them, and vpon your brother also, and absolutely to haue established his authoritie againe, if hee would haue suffered his men of warre, to haue laide about them with their hands, and to haue charged the first, that aduanced themselues to make the barricadoes, and to stoppe the passages of the streetes. But his fearefulnes, A mitigation but how true, let mé regarde. or rather his naturall goodnes, together with the impressions, that his mother, and his traiterous counsellors had wrought in him, hindred him from vsing the aduantage which hee had in his hand or power, causing all his men of warre, to be forbidden to strike or hurt any person, and to keep themselues quiet, without enterprising any thing, or offe∣ring
violence to any of the inhabitants, which was the cause, that the mutinous taking heart and courage vpon the waies of their plotted enterprise, had leasure to arme themselues, and to shut vp as it were betweene two gulfes or streames those that before they durst not looke in the face. And your brother also, seeing that they were so slow to come to take him, there came vnto him, and that from all quarters, people in armes, whome those of the Kings side did let freelie passe, because they had no charge giuen them to looke to him, and knowing that they of his part, began to acknowledge him, and to make head in the quarters, A dastard in the faint har∣tednes of his foe gathereth strength. according to the order that they had before plotted, of a desperate man that he was, he be∣came fully assured and resolute, and sent his appoynted gentlemen through the streetes and quarters of the ci∣tie, to assist and encourage the inhabitants to take the gates and places. For his part, after that he was hartened by a great number of men of armes, who had their mee∣ting at his lodging, he went out of his house, about tenne or an eleuen of the clocke, that he might be seene in the streetes, and by his presence giue them the signe of a ge∣nerall reuolt, which presently set fire in the head of all the conspirators, who as madde and furious people, fell vp∣on the Kings Swissers, They that spare others are smitten themselues. and cut them all in peeces, and the other men of warre seeing themselues shut vp betweene two barricadoes, before and behinde, without daring to defend themselues, because that the King had forbidden it them, yeelded themselues to the mercie of your bro∣ther, Crueltie coue∣red with cle∣mencie. who caused them to bee conducted in safetie out of the towne, which hee did not so much of clemencie and gentlenes, that was naturall in him, as by sleight and sub∣tiltie, the better to come to his last but, which was to seize himselfe of the King, whom he sawe to be in armes, and vpō his guardes in the house of Louvre, hardly to be forced so readily, without great murther. His cūning ther∣fore was to spin gently, & to counterfeite a man of poore estate, saying that he was greatly grieued with that that
had fallen out: in the meane season he visited the streetes' to incourage the inhabitants, hee assured himselfe of the strong places, hee made himselfe master of the arsenac, where he had good in telligence with Selincourt, Who it should seeme, was as it were the ma∣ster of the or∣dinance. that he might haue the Cannon, the pouder & bullets at his deuo∣tion. He besotted with faire words, the poore knight that kept the watch, who yeelded him the Bastille, because he lacked good furniture for defence of it. He lacked nothing but the Louvre. He had the palace: but that was no hard thing, because it held not the master, who had a backe gate, to withdrawe himselfe. And this was the cause why step by step, they aduanced the barricades, that so they might gaine the new gate, & that also of S. Honorus. He was sure in a pittifull ta∣king But the poore prince well aduertised of that, which they pur∣posed to do, & that they ment nothing against others but him, neither daring to trust his mother, neither the gouer∣nour of Paris that then was, that intertained him with speech, & with agreement, tooke a couragious resolutiō, and such a one as was approoued by many good people, which was to flie away, and to leaue the place and al, with which your brother thought himselfe much astoni∣shed, Some mens feare, spoyles other of then hope. A vehement exclamation, and worthie wish doues. seeing the praye that hee supposed hee had in his shares, was escaped from him. O memorable feaste of the barricades. Let thy eeuens, and thy octaues be long. From that time hitherto, what haue wee had but wret∣chednes and pouertie? But anguishes, feares, tremblings, onsets, ouerthrowes, defiances, and all sortes of miseries? These were nothing else but subtilties, craftes, dissimula∣tions and counterfeitings, on the one side, and on the o∣ther, practised and managed by him that could best take it, and that could deceiue his companion: yea, began to goe cheeke by iole with your master, and because you were not able to take him by open force, you tooke counsell, to set vpon him by crafte and subtiltie. You made shew, as though you had been heauie and sad for that which fell out, The Croco∣diles teares. specially to thē whom you sent vnto him, but to straungers you braued it, and vaunted your
selues, Out of one fonntain com∣meth sweet & sowre water. that you were masters of all, and that there was no let but in your selues, that you were not Kings: and that in that day of the barricadoes, you had gotten more, then if you had gained three battailes or soughten fields. Con∣cerning which matter, your owne letters, and those of your agents giue large credit. You sent diuers times sun∣drie sorts of Ambassadors to the King, as well to Roan, as to Chartres, to make him beleeue that the people of Pa∣ris were then more at his deuotion then euer, and that they did desire to see him, and to welcome him into his good citie, and you indeuoured nothing but to draw him thither, that so you might perfit the busines begun. But he would doe nothing in that matter, and so he did well. In fine, after manifold declarations, which you drew from him (whereof he was no niggard) in which was shewed how he did forget and remit all that was past (wherein you would neuer suffer to bee vsed the word of pardo∣ning) you went and carried your selues very churlishly and vnciuilly in the promoting of the Estates, The more the wicked are forborne, the worse they are. wherein you promised vnto your selues, that all should passe at your pleasure, by the meanes of your running vp and downe, and suites that you made in the election of the deputies of the prouinces. In which neuer did any man see such shamelesnes as you vsed, that sent from citie to citie, and from towne to towne, to cause men of your fac∣tion to bee chosen, Fie vpon such sree election. that they might come to the foresayd estates prepared with notes and furnished with remem∣brances fit for your purpose: whereof some were cho∣sen by violence, othersome by corruption of money or briberie, and othersome thorowe feare and threatnings. Amongst others from this towne you sent the president de Nully, la Chapelle Marteau, Compan, Rowland, and the aduocate of Orleans, who were euen in open shewe the principall authors of the rebellion, and the instru∣ments which you most vsed to deceiue the people. What neede is there to rehearse here that which passed in the sayd Estates of Bloys, The Lord is knowne by executing iudgement: the wicked is suared in the workes of his owne hands: Marke this, mark this. and how God blinded the eyes of
them of your familie, that they might goe and throwe themselues into the ditch or pit which they had prepa∣red for another man? Then when ye thought to be aloft euen aboue the winde, after that goodly fundamentall lawe, by which you declared the late Cardinall of Bour∣bon to bee the first prince of the bloud, and the King of Nauarre vnworthie euer to succeed to the crowne, as al∣so his cousins, adheronts, fauourers of heretikes: euen thē I say, behold a great storme that tooke away those two great pillers of the faith, Messieurs your brethren, the one naming himselfe Lieutenant generall, great Master and Constable of France, and the other the Patriarch of the French Church, and cast them into such a deepe gulfe of the sea, that they were neuer seene not heard of since. Was not this thinke you, Yes surely was it. a great stroake or blow from heauen, and a wonderfull iudgement of God, that they that thought to hold their master in a chaine, and made an account to leade him within three daies, by force or otherwise, into this towne, to cause him to be shauen for a monke, and shut vp in a Cloyster, should sodainly finde and feele themselues taken and shut vp by him, whom they thought to intrap and take? Some are of this mind, and haue not spared to speake it, that you Monsieur the Lieutenant, being iealous of the greatnes and high for∣tune of Mosieur your brother, If he did so, was well, though that he a, med at therein was euill. did aduertise the King that dead is, of the enterprise they had in hand, to leade him a∣way, and that you admonished him to make haste to pre∣uent it. Whether this bee true yea or no, I report mee to your selfe: but this is a matter very vulgar and common, that Madame d'Aumale your cousin, was expresly at Bloys, to discouer all the secret to the King: where she lost not her labour, and some say that her husband & she would from thence forward haue been banqueroute to the League, if the King would haue giuen him the go∣uernment of Picardie and of Boulongne, A charitable, but whether a true iudge∣ment it is vn∣certaine. and haue payd his debts. Concerning your selfe, I thinke not that you had so dastardly and wicked a minde to betray your bre∣thren,
and men know wel enough, that you were called to come and to bee present at the mariage, where they would haue made you of their liuerie. But whether it were that you distrusted the inclosing, or that you would not hazard all three together, you kept your selfe at Liōs vpon the scoutes, to watch the issue and execution of the enterprise, which was farre otherwise then you hoped for, and it missed but a very little, that you your selfe had not been of the play, sauing that Seigneur Alphonsus Corse was somewhat before you, or indeed a little too forward. Madame your sister had the same feare that you had, A shrewd wo∣mans wit. who knowing the newes, thought not her selfe sure e∣nough in the suburbes, but got her selfe into the towne. Oh how had we been now at peace and quietnes, if this prince had had the courage to haue proceeded further, and to haue continued these blowes and stroakes? Bitter effects following wāt of execution of iustice. Then surely we should not haue seene Monsieur of Lions sit so nigh you, and seruing you for a gunner, or instrument, to performe your practises and his owne by at Rome and in Spayne, and to hinder by his sermons, and his reasons coloured with religiō, that we cannot haue peace, which we stand so much in neede of. Then we should not haue seene the furious administrations and gouernments of Marteau, Nully, Compan, and Rowland, who haue brought the people to desperation, if that instice (the cre∣dit and renowne wherof we haue carried hitherto) should after their apprehension be executed, as indeed it ought. Then should we not haue seene all the other great cities and townes burne with the fire of rebellion, as they doe, if their deputies had passed by the same order. But the gentlenes of that King (who in no sort was bloudie) was content to see his principall enemie and competitor bea∣ten downe and ouerthrowne: A pitie mar∣ring all. and then he rested or staied when he should most liuely and quickly haue pursued his way. Notwithstanding, if the Lord d'Antragues had done that which hee promised for the reducing of Orleans, (which he thought to heale, as he had indeede spoyled it)
and had he not suffered himselfe to be out runne and pre∣uented by S. Maurice and Rossieux, As haste many times maketh waste, so there is a foreslow∣ing that wor∣keth great mis∣chiefe. matters had not been so farre out of square, as they were for want of giuing order to that first tumult: whither you came vpon the very beginning of their first reuolt, and incouraged them to rebell, and to be in good earnest obstinate: and accor∣ding to their example you caused vs to doe as much. Af∣terwards, euen as it were very sodainly, this fire inflamed all the great cities and townes of this kingdome, & there are very fewe thereof that can boast they were exempted therefrom, so skilfull were you, Wilie and wic∣ked perswa∣sions may doe much: men are so inclined to the worst. nimbly to practise men of all sides. And thereupon to make vs without hope of re∣conciliation to our Lord and Master, you caused vs to make out our processe against him: you caused vs to hang and to burne his picture: you forbad vs to speake of him, but in the qualitie of a tyrant: you caused him to be excommunicate: you caused him to bee execrate, dete∣sted, and accursed, by the Curats, by the Preachers, and by little children in their prayers. And can any thing so horrible and fearful be spoken or alleadged, A fit instru∣ment for such a foule fact. as that which you caused to be done to Bussie the Clerke, the pettie ad∣uocate, accustomed to kneele vpon his knees before the court of parliament, of which he had the heartie affection and loue; and the great rage to goe and take him from the venerable seate of soueraigne iustice, and to leade him captiue and prisoner in triumph thorow the streetes, euen vnto his fort and denne of the Bastille, from whence he came not out but in peeces, with a thousand concus∣sions, exactions, and villanies, which he exercised against honest and good people besides? I cease to speake of the pilling of sundrie rich houses, the selling of precious moueables, the imprisoning and raunsoming of the in∣habitants and gentlemen, New baptisms in poperie, be∣sides them that are done at the font. that they knewe to haue mo∣ney, and to be furnished with siluer, whom they baptized with and called by the names of politikes, or adherents, and fauourers of heretikes. And vpon this speech, there was made a pleasant time of that time, which I thinke
worthie to bee inserted into the registers and quiers of our estates. To know them that are politikes, Adherents, or fauourers of heretikes: Let them be close and hid as you can, You neede little more, but these verses to scan. He that of times or men doth complaine, In this golden world wherein we remaine: He that all his goods will not freely bring To vphold this cause, is iust worth nothing: He that is slow to the vnion to sweare: He that his well furred gowne daily doth weare, In steed of putting on his harnois: He that saith not the Biarnois, But saith the King, and him doth allow, And at the sixteene doth mocke and mow: Thinking them men farre from all credit still That murmureth at them, or of them speaketh ill: That by the fourtie a figge doth not set, That hath not his beard after the League very net: That hath seene letters from the other side of the land, Trust you not in all this, beware at any hand, That with the Princes and states doth not goe, That at Easter heareth Masses two and no moe: That hath not his beades about his big necke, Deserueth therefore a halter, rather then a checke. That is greatly grieued when they him call out To watch at the gate, or by night to be a skout: To be called to the trenches, or to the rampart, He is none of the right side, he hath no good hart. He that speakes of peace, or conceiues thereof hope, Shall be sure to feele the fagot or the rope. He that much trusteth in his odde deuotions, And runneth vp and downe in all processions, Ʋsing many prayers and often pilgrimages, If therewith he intermingle in his suffrages A poore sigh, and say, Lord some peace doe vs giue,
He is at the least an adherent, not worthie to liue. And though that he make a faire shewe euery houre, Take heed he white you not with meale or with flowre. He that loueth not these men preach to he are Commelae, Guincestre, and Bouchar the Friar: Or that willingly doth not bid, God speede To Louchard, Morliere, or la Rue indeede: He is a Maheutre, and a very sorie man, Worse by much then a Turke, or a Mahometan. He that honoureth not the Lordship say I Of Baston, Machault, and of Acarie: And that hath sayd, at any time or place, That the law will not goe vpright in any case. Who askes at his window by night or day Of his next neighbours, what this meane may By so many alarmes, and Toxsains also, That all the saints doth not feare on a row, That the good and renowmed feast pardie Of Barricades the blest hath not kept holie. He that reuerently hath not spoken or ment Of the bloudie knife of Frier Iames Clement, Who, then when Bichon, or els Niuell Some newes did print or began to tell, Doubteth thereof and enquireth of the author, I will pawne my credit he is sure a fautor. Some others there are that men marke full well With a more sure marke, then any we doe tell, S. Cosme, Oliuier, and the Clerke Bussy, Lay hands on these galants and bring them to me, They are so, and why so? this is most sure, The money they haue in their purse you cannot indure. I haue kept these verses by heart or in memorie, be∣cause they are so common, that women and little chil∣dren haue learned them, and because there can bee no∣thing more naturally put downe, It commeth now well in to lay open their sinne. to expresse our procee∣dings, and the manner that wee haue vsed to finde out money and siluer. But they had forgotten to set in order
therein the gold of Molan, and the treasure of the great Prior of Champagne, who holpe vs to set forward your voyage to Tours: which indeede was neither long, nor of great effect. For after that you had brought I knowe not what troupe (gathered together of people missead thorow error, and with a loue and desire of noueltie, that you had put into their neads) to braue your master, whom you thought to take vnprouided, or els in hope that they of Tours would make some tumult, to deliuer him into your hands, so soone as you saw that they spake vnto you with cannot shot; & that the King of Nauarre was come, to assist and succour his brother, hauing a notable inte∣rest and care indeede, that hee might not fall into your hands, The vngodly flieth, when no mā almost pursueth. feare at the shew & sight of the white scarfes, did so seize and take hold of you, that you must needes retire with diligence, and that by wandring waies, where there were no stones. And this your foule flying you would haue couered with the request, that we made vnto you to succour vs against the courses of Messieurs de Longue∣ville, Better a bad excuse, then none at all. de la Nouë, and d'Givry, after the shamefull leuïe of the siege of Senlis. And being here, you distrusted your selfe, that they would not long delay to followe you at your heeles, hauing two so mightie whelps at your taile. Whereupon you gaue some order for the defence of Pa∣ris, Fie vpon such Phisitions. but it was by a medicine against poyson, worse (if wee had taken it) then the disease it selfe would or could haue been. And this was then when the Parisiens began to perceiue, and see guests liuing at their owne discretion and pleasure in then houses, contrary to all the ancient priuiledges, granted them by the former Kings: but these were but little fleurets or filips, in comparison of that which wee suffered afterwards, and yet notwithstanding you suffered them to take euen before and vnder your nose Estampes and Pontoise, without sutcouring of the. And you seeing that they returned vpon you, minding either to draw you soorth to the field, or to shut you vp within our walles, you I say did then well perceiue by the
proceeding of the Kings affayres, Neede made them monkes, or to vse moks. that yours went conti∣nually to ruine, and that there was now no more meane to saue & deliuer you, but a blow or stroake from heauen, which was by the death of your master, your benefactor, your prince, your king. I say your king, for I perceiue em∣phasis or force in this, word which importeth a person, consecrated, annoynted, & highly esteemed of God, as a mean betwixt angels & men, or as a man may say, ming∣led or made of thē both. For how shuld it be possible, that one man alone, weake, naked, vnarmed, A reason able good speech. could command so many hundred thousand men, and make himselfe to be feared, followed and obeyed, in all his pleasures, if he had not, as wee may say, some diuinitie or some part or parcell of the power of God intermingled therewith? as some say that the spirits intermingle, and cast the thun∣der betweene, and within the clowdes, in which they make these straunge and fearfull fires, that doe very farre and much passe the materiall and elementarie fire? I will not say, that you were he that chose particularly that wic∣ked fellowe, which hell created, He meaneth Frier lames Clement. to goe and giue that exe∣crable blowe, which the very furies of hell themselues would haue feared to haue done. But it is very euident, that before he went about this accursed enterprise, Sometimes it is not amisie to be a blabbe of a mans tongue. you saw him, and I could well tell the places where, and the times when, if I would. You incouraged him: you pro∣mised him Abbeyes, Bishoprickes, mountaines and mer∣uailes, and ye left the rest to bee done to Madame your sister, to the Iesuits, and to the Prior of his order, who pas∣sed somewhat further, & promised him nothing lesse, thē a place in paradise aboue the Apostles, if it fell out that he were martyred. That it was so, & that ye were very well aduertised of all the mysterie or secret, you caused the people, that spake of yeelding themselues to be preached vnto and taught, Good reason: all lead by one murthering spirit. that they would yet haue patience but seuen or eight daies, and that before the ende of the weeke, they should see some great matter, that should set vs in our former rest and quietnes. The preachers of
Roan, of Orleans, and of Amiens, preached it at the same time, and in the same tearmes. Afterwarde so soone as your Frier possessed with a diuell was departed, you cau∣sed to bee arrested and apprehended for prisoners in this citie, more than two hundred of the principall citizens and others, whom yee thought to haue goods & friends, and to be of credit with them of the Kings side, as a pre∣caution or forewarning, wherwith you purposed to serue your selues, The name of some diuel, sig∣nifying therby the murtherer Clement. to redeeme that wicked Astaroth, in case he were either taken before the facte or after the facte. For hauing the pledge of so many honest men, you supposed that they durst neuer put that murtherer to death, be∣cause of the threatning which yee had giuen out, that yee would cause to die in the way of change for him, those whom you kept prisoners: who in truth are much bound to them, that in a headlong heate or choller, slewe with the blowes of their rapiers that wicked wretch, after hee had giuen his stroake. And you your selfe ought not lesse to thanke them. For had they suffred him to liue (as they might haue done) and put him into the hands of iustice, It is almost as wel discoue∣red now. we had had the whole thread of the enterprise, naturally and liuely deducted, and you had beene there incouched in white clothes, for a marke of your disloyaltie and felo∣nie, that neuer would haue beene blotted out. But God did not so permit it, and we know not yet the end wher∣to he keepeth you. A very large assertion, but yet for the most part true. For if the examples of former times doe carrie with them any consequence, to iudge of the affaires of the time present, wee neuer sawe yet vassall or subiecte, that enterprised to driue his Prince out of his kingdome, to die in his bed. I will not strengthen this maxime or rule, by many histories, nor resute those, which our preachers alledge, to defende and iustifie that horrible act. I will speake of no more but two, the one out of the Bible, and the other out of the Romane histo∣ries. You haue heard it may be, some preach, that those that slew Absalom, though he were vp in armes against his father, his King, and his countrie, were notwithstan∣ding
punished with death, A man shall hardly see such justice in Frāce or Spaine. by the commaundement of Dauid, against whom hee made warre. If you haue read the conflicts that were made between Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, for the Empire of Rome, you haue read & found that Vitellius put to death, more then sixe hundred men, who bragged that they had slaine Galba his predecessor, & had presented a petition to be recompenced therfore: It may be he meaneth Ma∣chiuel. which he did not, as saith the author (who at this day ser∣ueth insteede of an Euangelist to many) for the friend∣ship that he caried to Galba, nor for the honour that hee ment to doe him, but to teach all princes to assure their life and their present estate, and to cause them, that shuld dare to attempt any thing against their persons, to know & vnderstand, that an other prince their successor (though perhaps their enemie) after some one sort or other would reueng their death. And this is the cause, wherefore you Monsieur the Lieutenant had great wrong, to make shew of so great ioy, Woe to them that laugh now, for they shal weepe. hauing knowne the newes of that cruell accident that befel him, by whose death you should enter into the waies of the kingdome. You made bonfires, or fires of reioycing, where you should indeed haue obser∣ued funerals you tooke indeed a greene scarfe in token of reioycing, whereas ye ought to haue doubled and re∣doubled your blackes in signe of mourning. Good & imi∣table exāples. You should haue imitated Dauid, who caused Saules bones to be ga∣thered together, and to bee honorably buried, although that by the meanes of his death, he remained a peaceable King, and lost thereby his greatest enemie. Or to haue done as Alexander the great, who caused sumptuous ob∣sequies to bee made for Darius: or as Iulius Caesar, who wept with hotte and bitter teares, vnderstanding of the death of Pompey his competitor, and deadly aduersary, and put them to death that had slaine him. What could a man of a base and bad mind doe els? But you cōtra∣rie to the practises of these great personages, did laugh, & make feastes and bonfires, and all sortes of ioy, when you vnderstoode of the cruell death of him, from whome you held all that you and your predecessors had or haue, of wealth, of honour, and of authoritie. And not con∣tent
with these common reioycings, which did sufficiēt∣ly witnesse, how much you approued this accursed acte, you caused the murtherers picture to be made, & shew∣ed it publikely abroad, All this what∣soeuer, is but the reward of iniquitie. as if it had beene of a canonized saint. You caused his mother and kinred to be sought out, that you might enrich them with publike almes, to the end that this might be a lure, and a baite for others, that would vndertake to giue yet such an other blowe, to the King of Nauar, vnder hope & assurāce, which they might receiue by the example of this new martyr, that after their death, they shuld be so sanctified, & their kinred wel re∣cōpensed. But I wil not further examine your conscience, nor prognosticate vnto you, A plaine and true speech. that which may fall out vnto you for this fact. But Gods word must needes be false and ful of lying (which it is not nor cānot be) if you do not ve∣ry quickly receiue the wages & hire that God promiseth to manquellers and murtherers, as your brother did, for hauing slaine the late Admirall. But I will leaue this mat∣ter to the diuines to treate hereof, that so I may come to put you in minde of a great and stale faulte, which you committed at the very same time. For sith you feared not in so many places to declare, that your speciall marke was to raigne and be a King, you had then, and by reason of the blow, a good occasion offered you to cause your selfe to be chosen King, and you might better then haue attayned thereto, than you can at this present, when you sue, Many deuises are in mans heart: but the Lords purpo∣ses shall stand for euer. ride, runne, corrupt and all to get it. The Cardinall of Bourbon (to whom vnaduisedly you gaue the title of the King) was a prisoner. Your nephew (vpon whome they did bestowe all the commendations and glorie of his father) was so likewise, and neither the one nor the o∣ther could hurte you therein or hinder you, as your ne∣phew doth at this day: you had yet the people hartned, earnest and running after noueltie and change, who had a great opinion of your valour, from which you are much fallen since, and I make no doubt but that you had caried it away, thorow the hatred of the lawfull successor, who
was notoriouslie knowne to be a Huguenot. And besides, you had diuers preachers, who had laide out a thousand reasons to perswade the people, that the Crowne did be∣long rather to you than to him. Nay foule and false. The occasion for it was faire, namely, the changing of it from one line to another. And although it bee all but one familie, and of the same stalke, as we may say, notwithstāding the distāce of more than ten degrees (in which the doctors say, there ceaseth all the bond and right of consanguinitie) made a goodly shew, although that Doctor Baldus hath written, that this rule faileth in the familie of the Bourbonians. Wher∣unto adde, that you had the force and the fauour of the time in your hand, wherewith you could not serue your owne turne, or helpe your selfe, but rather, thorough a certaine fainthartednes, and very foule and grosse cow∣ardise, you would obserue forsooth some little modestie, and forme of the ciuill lawe, giuing the title of the King to a poore priest that was a prisoner: The Cardinall of Bourbon. although that in all other things, you did shameleslie violate all the lawes of the realme, and all lawe besides of God and of man, whether it were naturall or ciuill. You forgot all the maximaes and rules of our great masters, touching the matter of enterprise, vpon the estates of an other man, e∣uen that of Iulius Caesar, which oftentimes for his ex∣cuse and defence spake these verses, out of a certaine Greeke Poet. If that thou must needes wicked be, be so a kingdome to obtaine But yet in other things be iust, and eke the lawes maintaine. You were afraide to take the title of a King, Stumble at a straw, and leap ouer a blocke. and yet you were not afraide to vsurpe the power of it, which you disguised and masked, with a qualitie or esstate alto∣gether new, & such a one, as was neuer heard spoken of in Fraunce? And I knowe not, who was the author there∣of, yet some attribute it to the president Brisson, or to Ia∣niu. But whosoeuer inuented this expedient, fayled in the termes of Grammer, and of Estate also. A fitte and good reason. They might haue giuen you the name of Regent, or of Lieutenant ge∣nerall
of the King, as they haue done sometimes hereto∣fore, when the Kings were prisoners, or absent off their kingdome and realme. But Lieutenant of the estate and Crowne, is a title vnheard of, & very strange, which also hath too lōg a taile, as it were a chimer, or mōster against nature that maketh little children afraid. Whosoeuer is a Lieutenant, is Lieutenant to another whose place he hol∣deth, & who is not able to do his functiō or office, by rea∣son of his absence, or some other hinderance or let: and a Lieutenant is the Lieutenant of some other mā: but to say that a man should be the Lieutenāt of a thing without life, as the estate or crowne of a King, is a very absurd thing, & such a one as cannot be mainteined. And it had bin more tolerable to say, Lieutenant in the estate and crowne of France, than Lieutenāt of the estate. But this is but a smal matter to faile in speech or words, A true asserti∣on. in cōparison of failing in deeds. When you were clothed and cloaked with this goodly qualitie, you did so rudely & roughly empty our purses, that you had the meane to raise vp a great armie, with the which you promised to pursue, besiege, take and bring prisoner, He that recko∣neth without his host must count againe. this nowe successor to the crowne, who did not call himself Lieutenant, but in plaine termes King. You had made vs then to gard and keep our places, & to hire shops in S. Anthonies street, that we might see him passe in chaines, whē ye brought him prisoner from Diepe, what did yee withal this great armie, (very groffe indeed by al your strāge succours, of Italie, of Spaine, & of Germanie,) The horse and man are pre∣pared against the day of bat∣tell, but victo∣rie is from the Lord. but to lay opē and cause to be knowne your own reachles weaknes, & vnorderly gouernment, not so much as once daring with thirtie thousand mē, to set vp∣on fiue or sixe thousand, which gaue you the head at Ar∣ques, and in the end constrained you, shamefully to turne your backs, & you your selues to seeke surety & safety, in the riuer of Somme? We were greatly deceiued, when in steede of seeing this new King in the Bastile, wee beheld him in our suburbs, with his armie as a certaine lightning or clap of warre, that preuented our thoughts, & yours al∣so.
But you came and succoured vs, A needlesse worke. then when we were assured, that he would do vs no hurt. And we must con∣fesse, that without the resistance that one (who is at this day his seruant) made against him at the gate of Bussy, he had taken vs before you arriued. From that time hitherto, you haue done nothing in your Lieutenancy worthy the remembrance, If this be his commendati∣on, praise him for tyrannic. but the establishment of your councell of fourtie persons, and of sixteene, which you haue since re∣uoked and scattered, as much as you could. And whilest that you laboured the aduancement and estate of your owne house, and that you suffered your imagined King to wast & weare away in prison, without succouring him, either with mony or with meanes, to maintaine his royall estate: he that is King indeed, put himselfe in possession of Dunoys, of Vendosmois, of Maine, of Perch, and of the better part of Normandie, in so much that at the last, whē hee had in conquering compassed the third parte of his kingdome, you were constrained, partly thorow shame, Fit motiues for such man∣ner of men. partly thorow despaire, & partly thorow mens importu∣nitie towards you, to come before him, or into his sight, then when hee besieged Dreux, where hee shewed you a tricke of an old souldier, that so he might haue the better meane to fight with you. For he raised his siege, & made shew to retire into Perche, to draw you on more forward & to cause you to passe the riuers in following of him: but so soone as hee sawe you were ouer, and incamped in the plaine, he turned his face directly vpon you, & gaue you the battel, It is all one with God to ouercome by few, or by many. which you lost more for lacke of courage and good guidance, than for want of mē, the number of those on your side farre passing his. And yet in this great affli∣ction you could not refraine your selfe from giuing vs a newe deuised tale (which is a common thing with you) you and your sister feeding vs with lies and false newes, and the more to comforte vs in this losse, you went about to make vs beleeue that the Biarnois was dead, whose face you durst not looke vpon, They were wont to aa dead mā hut∣teth none. nor attende his recountring of you. But wee saw this dead man quick∣ly after, nigh vnto our gates, and you your selfe were
so afrayd of his shadowe, that you were not at leisure to repose or rest your selfe, till you were passed into Flan∣ders, where you made that goodly market with the Duke of Parma, which sithence hath cost vs so deare, & which hath so ruinated your reputation, and ouerthrowne your honor, that I see not any meane at all, able for euer here∣after to raise you vp againe. The Spany∣ards he mea∣neth, and it is no lye: as also in particular the Prince of Parma. For in steed of being a ma∣ster, you went and made your selfe a seruant and a slaue, of the most insolent and proudest nation vnder heauen: and you your selfe serued the most cruell and ambicious man that you were able to chuse, as afterwards you pro∣ued, whē he made you to serue him as a boy doth his ma∣ster at tennise, yea to lackey after him, and to waite at his gate, before he would giue you an answere, though when it came it was of very small importance also. Which thing the gentlemen of France that accompanied you, despised and disdained, and you alone were not ashamed to make your selfe vile and obiect, dishonouring your li∣nage, race & nation, so much were you transported with a desire of reuenge and ambition. But in the middest of these indignities, and dishonest submissions, which you made to the preiudice of the name of France, and of your qualitie, Carefulnes & painefulnes, two good ver∣tues. our new Kings staied not, nor kept holie day, as we say, for want of worke: for he shut vp our riuer aboue and below, by taking Mante, Poissy, Corbeil, Melun, and Montreau: after that he came & tooke from vs the plaine of France, by the taking of S. Denis. That being done, there was no more difficultie to besiege vs, as indeed we were by and by after. What did you to succour vs? or ra∣ther what did you not to cast vs away, and to make vs most miserable? A kinde and carefull Cap∣taine. I will not speake that, which some haue reported of you, that ye did commōly say, that the taking of this citie should be more hurtfull to your enemie than profitable, and that his armie should bee destroyed and dispersed in taking of it. I could neuer beleeue, that ye would haue taken pleasure to see your wife, your childrē, your brother, & your sister, to fall into the enemies hand,
and to stand at their mercie: And yet we must needs say, that the time which you set to come to succour vs was so long, Hee giueth twise that gi∣ueth in good season: then what is the contrarie. that it made vs readie many times to fall into des∣paire: and I beleeue, that if the King had demanded some terme or time of you to take vs in, he would not haue de∣manded more, than you would haue giuen him. Oh how happie had we bin, if we had bin taken the morowe after we were first besieged? Oh how rich should we haue bin now had we made that lost? But we haue burned in a smal fire: we haue languished and yet we are not healed. A worthy & no vnfit com∣parison. Then should the valiant and victorious souldier haue taken a∣way our moueables, but we shuld haue had siluer to haue ransomed and redeemed them againe: but since, we haue eaten vp our moueables, and our money also. It may be hee would haue inforced some women and maides: yet surely he would haue spared the most noble, and thē that had had any abilitie to heale or to helpe their chastitie, by respect or by friendes: but sithence they haue of them∣selues put themselues into the stewes, and are yet therin, thorow the force and power of necessitie, which is much more violent, and of longer infamie and ill name, than the transitorie and short violence of the souldier, which is dissembled, and is presently buried & forgotten, wher∣as this is spread abroad, is continued, and becommeth at the last a very shamelesse custome without returning. Nothing spa∣red in an anar∣chie or confu∣sion. Our reliques had been safe and sound: the auncient iew∣els of the crowne of our Kinges had not beene molten as they are: our suburbs had been in their former estate, and inhabited as they were, whereas now they are ruinated, forsaken, beaten downe and spoyled: our citie had been rich, wealthie, and well peopled as it was: our rents due to the towne house, should haue been paid, whereas you drawe out the marrow thereof, and the last pennie: our farmes in the countrie had beene laboured and tilled, and we should haue receiued the reuenewes thereof, whereas nowe they are abandoned, forsaken, and vnoccupied. We should not haue seene die a hundred thousand men,
by famine, A pitiful spec∣tacle, and yet who had re∣morse. sorrow, & pouertie, who died within the space of three moneths in the streets and in the hospitals, with∣out mercie or succour. We should yet haue seene our v∣niuersitie flourishing and frequented, where it is now al∣together solitarie and left alone, seruing now for no o∣ther vse, but for peasants, and for the kine and beasts of the villages nigh thereto. We should hauc seene our pa∣lace replenished with honourable persons of all qualities and estates, The differēce between good gouernment and tyranny. and the hall and the gallerie with Mercers, Haberdashers, &c. continually full of people: whereas now we see none but idle loyterers walking vp & downe at large; and greene grasse grow there, where men had hardly roome or space to stirre themselues: the shops of our streetes had been garnished with artisans and handi∣crafts men, whereas now they are emptie and shut vp. We should haue had presse and multitude of carres, cha∣riots, and coches vpon our bridges, whereas now in eight daies space we saw but one onely passe, and that was the Popes Legates. Mischiefs fore∣seene and not remedied, in∣crease griefe. Our storehouses & market places should haue been couered with beasts, full of corne, of wine, of hay and of wood. Our places appoynted for selling of victuals, and our markets had been thronged with the prease and multitude of merchants, and of victuals, where now they are all voyd and emptie, and we haue nothing but at the mercie of the souldiers of S. Denis, of the fōrt de Gournay, Chevreuse, and Corbeil. Ha Monsieur the Lieutenant, suffer mee as in this regard, to vse one excla∣mation, by the way of some short digression, besides the course (I confesse) and order of my oration, that I may be∣waile the pitiful estate of this citie the Queene of cities, of this little world, and the abridgment of the world it selfe! Ha ye my masters the deputies of Lions, Happie is he who is warned by other mens harmes. Tholouze, Roā, Amiens, Troies, & Orleans, look vpon vs, & take example by vs. Let our miseries make you wise by our losses. You all know well enough what we haue been, & now ye see what we are. All of you know in what a gulfe & bottom∣les pit of desolation we haue been thorow this long and miserable siege: & if you do not know it, reade the histo∣rie
of Iosephus touching the wars of the Iewes, Former exam∣ples and ours alike in many things. & the be∣sieging of Ierusalē by Titus, which doth naturally & liue∣ly expresse this of our citie. There is nothing in the world that may be so well compared one with another as Ieru∣salem and Paris, excepting the issue and end of the siege. Ierusalem was the greatest, the richest, and the best peo∣pled citie of the world: so was Paris. Which did her head lift vp as farre aboue all other townes, As the firre tree aboue the furze, or briers that vse doe clownes. Ierusalem could not indure the holy Prophets, All that haue grace may pro∣fite by this comparison as well as Paris. that laid before them their errors and idolatries: & Paris could not suffer her Pastors & Curats that blamed & accused her superstitious & foolish vanities, and the ambition of her princes. We made warre against the Curats of S. Eusta∣chius, and of S. Mederic, because they told vs our faults, & did foretell the miseries and mischiefe that should come vpon vs therefore. Ierusalem put to death her King & her annoynted one, of the race and stock of Dauid, & caused him to be betraied by one of his disciples, & of his owne nation: Paris hath chased & driuen away her prince, her king, her natural annointed one, & afterwards caused him to be betraied & murthered by one of her Friers. God will cut out & destroy lying tongues: but they re∣gard not that. The do∣ctors of Ierusalē gaue the people to vnderstand that their king had a diuel within him, in whose name he wrought his miracles: Our preachers and doctors haue they not preached this vnto vs, that our late king was a sorcerer, & that he worshipped the diuel, in whose name he did al his deuotions? Yea some haue bin so impudent & shameles to shewe in the pulpit publikely to their hearers, certaine shapes or images made according to their own pleasure & fantasie, which they did sweare was the idoll of the di∣uel, that that tyrant did worship: so lewdly did they speak of their master and of their king. These same doctors of Ierusalem proued by the scriptures, that Iesus Christ de∣serued to dye, and cryed with alowd voyce, Wee haue a lawe, and according to the lawe he ought to dye. The diuel will alleadge scrip∣ture, but yet not rightly. And haue not our preachers and Sorbonists, proued and approued, by their texts applied according to their owne fantasie, that it was permitted, yea praise worthie and merito∣rious
to kill the King? and haue they not yet preached it after his death? Which in Ierusalem there were three factions, which caused themselues to be called by diuerse names, but the most wicked of them, called themselues zealous, and were assisted with the Idumeans that were strangers. Paris hath been tossed and vexed altogether in the selfe same sorte, with three factions, that is of Lor∣raine, Spayne, and the sixteene, participating of both the other two, vnder the same name of zealous, who haue their Eleazars, A pretie allusi∣on, and yet no illusion. and their Zacharies, & Acaries, and more Iohns, than there were in Ierusalem. Ierusalem was be∣sieged by Titus, a Prince of diuers religiō from the Iewes, he going at that time to the hazards and dangers of the assault, as a simple souldier, and yet so gentle and graci∣ous was he, that he procured himselfe thereby to be cal∣led the delights of mankinde. Paris was besieged by a Prince of a differing religion, but yet more courteous and gentle, more bolde also, and readie to goe to the blowes, Would to God he had neuer strēgth∣ned your hope or heart that way. than euer was Titus. Besides, Titus would not in∣nouate or change any thing in the religion of the Iewes, no more doth this prince in ours, but contrariwise giueth vs hope, that one daye hee will imbrace it and that very shortly. Ierusalem suffered all extremitie, before it would acknowledge a fault, and acknowledging it, had no more power to redresse it, and was hindred from it by the heads of the faction. How much haue we suffered before we would know our selues? And since our sufferings, how often haue we desired, that wee might yeelde, if wee had not beene hindred therefrom by them that holde vs vn∣der the yoke? Ierusalem had the sort of Anthonia, the temple and the fort of Sion, that bridled the people, and let them that they could not stirrre nor complaine. We haue the forte of S. Anthouie, the temple & the Louvre, as it were the forte of Sion, Comparisons fitte enough. that serue vs for snaffles and for bittes, to holde vs in and to bring vs to the appe∣tite of the gouernours. Iosephus, of the same nation and religion that the Iewes were, exhorted them to preuent
the wrath of God, and made them vnderstand, that they themselues destroyed their temples, their sacrifices, and their religion, for which they sayd they fought, and yet for it would doe nothing. Good counsell not regarded, bringeth sun∣drie mischiess. We haue had in the middest of vs many good French citizens, and catholikes euen as our selues, that haue giuen vs the like exhortations, and de∣clared by good reasons, that our selfe-willednes, and our ciuill warres, would ouerthrow the Catholike religion, & the Church, & all ecclesiasticall order, causing the priests, religious men and religious women and all, to fall to wic∣ked life, wasting benefices, and abolishing Gods seruice, throughout all the plaine countrie, and notwithstanding we persisted as before, without hauing any pitie of so ma∣ny desolate and straying soules, forsaken also of their pa∣stors, which languished and pined away, without religiō, without feeding, and without administration of any Sa∣crament. In fine, sith we agree together, Like sinnes, like punish∣ments. and are like in so many meetings of things to the citie of Ierusalem, what other thing can we look for, than a whole ruine and vtter desolation, as theirs was, vnles God by an extraordinarie miracle, giue vs againe our right wit and sense? For it is impossible that wee can any longer time indure thus, be∣ing alreadie so beatē down, fainting & sluggish with lōg ficknes, that the very sighs and groanes which we fetch, are nothing els, but the very hickcockes or pangs going before death. We are shut vp, pressed, inuaded, And that is not very good. cōpassed in on all sides, and wee take not the ayre, but the stinking ayre that is within our walles, from our myres and sinkes, for all the rest of the ayre, from the libertie of the fields is withheld from vs. Wherfore ye free cities, learne, learne, I say, by our damage and losse, to gouerne your selues from this time forward, after another fashion, & suffer not your selues to be mislead, and haltred as you haue been, by the charmes and inchauntments of the preachers, who are corrupted with money, & with some hope, which some princes giue thē, who aspire nothing but to ingage you, and to make you so weake, so souple, & easie to bee bent,
that they may play with and enioy at their own pleasure, your selues, your riches, your libertie and all. For concer∣ning that which they would make you beleeue touching religion, An apt com∣parision. it is but a maske or visor, wherewith they busie the simple (as the foxes couer their footing, with their long tailes) that so they might catch them, & eate them vp at their pleasure. A common vse indeede. Haue you euer seene any other re∣spects in them that haue aspired after tyrannous gouern∣ment ouer the people, than this, that they haue alwaies made, taken, and vsed, some goodly title and shew of the common wealth or of religion? And yet when question hath been of comming to some agreement, their particu∣lar interest and profit, hath alwaies been in the vantgard, and they haue set the benefit and good of the people be∣hinde, as a matter that did not touch them. Or else if they were victors and did ouercome, their end was alwaies to bring vnder, and churlishly to vse the people, by whome they were ayded and assisted, to come to the very top of their desires. But so are not they that de∣fend such things. And I am abashed (seeing that all histories, as well olde as new, are full of such examples) to behold, that yet there are found men so poore in vnderstanding, as to rush vpon, and to flie vnto this false lure. The histo∣rie of the ciuill warres, and of the reuolt which was made against Lewis the eleuenth, is yet fresh, and as wee say, bleeding new. An example. The Duke of Berry his brother, and cer∣taine Princes of Fraunce, raised vp and hartened by the King of England, and yet somewhat more encouraged by the Countie of Charolois, vsed no other colour for le∣uying of their armies, than the benefite and comfort of the people and kingdome. But in the ende, when they were to come to composition or agreement, they intrea∣ted of nothing, but to increase to one his yearely pensi∣on, and to giue offices and friendly conditions of agree∣ment to all those, that had assisted them, without any more mention of the commō wealth than of the Turke. If you will wade somewhat higher in the French Chro∣nicles, you shall see that the factions of Bourgongne, and
of Orleans, were alwaies coloured with the comforting or easing of the taxes, or of the euill gouernment of the affaires: and yet notwithstanding the intent of the prin∣cipall heads thereof, was nothing else, but to keepe vnder the authoritie of the kingdome, and to giue one house aduātage against another, as the issue hath alwaies made plaine proof of it. Though hee should haue done it, & did it indeed some∣times, yet of late you haue vniustly detay∣ned the same. For in the end the King of Englād cari∣ed alwaies away some part of it for his share, & the Duke of Bourgongne did neuer depart, without some citie or countrie, which he tooke for his bootie. Whosoeuer will finde leasure to reade this historie, shall finde therein our miserable age naturally and liuely set out vnto vs. He shal see our preachers the blowfires and bellowes of conten∣tion, that ceased not to intermeddle therein, as they doe at this daye, though at no hand, there was then question touching religion: they preached against their King, they caused him to bee excommunicated, as they doe at this present. They set vp propositions, and vsed disputa∣tions in Sorbonne, against the good citizens and com∣mon wealths men, as they doe now. A man might haue behelde then murders and slaughters of innocent peo∣ple, and of furies and outrages committed by the people themselues, euen as ours doe. Our mynion the late Duke of Guise, is there represented and set out, in the person of the Duke of Bourgongue, False, and spe∣ken like a Frenchman: for our Kings had and haue a lawfull right. and our good protector the King of Spaine, in that of the King of England. You therein see our easines to beleeue, and simplicitie, accom∣panied with ruiues, desolations, sackings, burnings of townes and suburbes, such as we haue seene, and see con∣tinuallie vpon vs, and vpon our neighbours. The com∣mon good, was the charme or witcherie that stopped vp our predecessors eares: but indeede the ambition and the reuengement of these two great houses, was the true and first cause, as the ende discouered it. And thus haue I deducted and laide out vnto you, that first the iealousie and enuie of those two houses, of Bourbon and of Lor∣raine, and since the onely ambition and couetousnes of
these of Guyse, haue bin and are the only cause of all our mischiefes & miseries. It is the cup of fornication mentioned in the Apocalyps. But as for the catholike & Romane religion, it is the drinke wherewith they haue infatuated vs, and caused vs to fall on sleep, and a poyson wel sweet∣ned with sugar, and which serueth for an obstupatiue, or benumming medicine, to astonish or benumme all our members, which whilest we are on sleepe wee feele not, when they cut away now one piece, then an other, euen one after an other, and that which remaineth be but as a truncke, which very quickly will leese all the blood and the heate, and the very life it selfe, thorow ouermuch euacuation. In the same historie doe yee not find also, as it were the very type of our goodly estates here assem∣bled? That remai∣neth yet to be proued. Those that were held at Troies, in which they dif∣inherited the true and the lawfull heire of the crowne, as an excommunicated and reagrauated person, are they not altogether like these of ours? God knoweth what manner of people were in those estates. Doubt yee not that they were all such, as you here my maisters cho∣sen out of the dregges of the people, openly mutinous and seditious, corrupted by money, and all pretending and aiming at some one particular profite, by change, and by noueltie, Notable men and very fit for such an assem∣blie. as you my masters doe. For I assure my selfe that there is not one of you, that hath not herein some speciall interest, and who desireth not, that the af∣faires may remaine in the same troublous estate, wherein they are. There is not one of you, but he occupieth and enioyeth the benefice, or the office, or the house of his neighbour, or that hath not taken their moueables from them, or raised any reuenewes there of, or conimated some thieuerie and murther thorow reuengment, wher∣of hee is afraid lest he should be tried, if peace were once made. Notwithstanding at the last after so many mur∣thers, and penuries, these wicked and ill disposed persons, must needs come and acknowledge Charles the seuenth for their King, and throwing themselues downe at his
feete, demaund pardon for their rebellion, though that before that they had excommunicated him, and decla∣red him vncapable to be their King. A good and right applicati∣on as now ap∣peareth by the successe. As who seeth not and may easily iudge, by the bad course that wee take, that wee euen in the same sort must doe as much as that commeth vnto, though it bee foreslowed for a while, and that in short space wee shall bee constrained there∣to, by fine force of necessitie, which hath neither lawe, nor respecte, nor shamefastnes. If I sawe here some of the princes of the blood of Fraunce, and of the peeres of the crowne, who are the principall persons, and without the which cannot assemble nor holde iust and lawfull estates. If I sawe here the Constable, the Chaun∣cellour, the Mareschals of Fraunce, that are the very officers indeede to authorize the assembly. If I sawe here the presidents of the soueraigne courts: the proctors generall of the King in his parliament, and a number of men of qualitie and reputation, knowne a long time to haue loued the good of the people, and their owne honour: ha, Good reason, for there were lome probabi∣lity at the least. in trueth I should hope that this gathering together and assembly, should bring vs much fruite: and I would be contented, simply to declare the charge that I haue of the third estate, which is to represent and set out the great desire that euery one hath to haue peace, and the great benefire or profite that shall come thereby. But I see here, none but strangers full of pas∣sion in thirsting after vs, and altered from our blood, and from our substance. A worthy cō∣panie to be the assēbly of the estates. I see here none but ambicious women, and such as are giuen to reuengement. I see none but corrupted and wicked priests, and such as are full of foolish hopes. All the rosis not hingels, but light chaffe full of necessitie, that loue war & trouble, because they liue of other good mens goods, and know not how to liue of their own, nor to maintaine their traine in time of peace. All the gentlemen of noble race and valour, are on the other side neere vnto their King, And so would euery honest man. and standing
for him and their countrie. I should be ashamed to speake the words for them, or in the name of them that are here for the third estate, if I were not indeed aduowed and al∣lowed by other honest people, that will not meddle with this rascall sort, that are come scatteringlie out of the Prouinces, as the Franciscane Friers doe to a pro∣uinciall chapiter. Plaine & par∣ticular dealing What doth Monsieur the Legate here, but to hinder the libertie of our free speech, and to incourage them that haue promised to doe meruailous things for the affayres of Rome and of Spayne. He that is an Italian, and the vassall of a strange prince, ought not here to haue either order or place. Here are to be handled the affayres of Frenchmen, yea such as touch them very nigh, and not those of Italie and of Spayne. From whence should he haue this curiositie, if it be not to profit there∣by with our burt? A Frenchman Italianated, Spaniolized, & Lorainized. And you Monsieur de Pelue, doe not you make a goodly shew in this companie, to pleade the cause of the King of Spayne, and the right or title of Lor∣raine? You I say, which are a Frenchman, and who (we know) was borne in Frāce, to haue proceeded so farre, as to haue renounced your chrisme & your nation, to serue the idols of Lorraine, Spanyards wel set out. and the southernly diuels? you should yet haue brought and caused to sit here euen a∣boue the flouredeluce, the Duke of Feria and Mendoza, & Don Diego to take their counsell, how France ought to be gouerned for they haue interest in it, and you haue wrong Monsieur the Lieutenant, Spanyards will seeke and aske enough. that haue not admit∣tod them thereto, as they did impudently demaund the same. But indeede their presence should haue been vn∣profitable, seeing that they haue here their agents & ad∣uocates, that haue spoken so worthilie for them, and be∣sides you will not forget to comniunicate vnto them e∣uery thing of the issue of our consultations. But I would willingly demaund of you, Monsieur the Lieutenant, to what end or purpose haue you assembled these good and honest people here? Are the se those noble estates in which you promised vs to giue such good order to our
affayres, and to make vs all blessed? I cannot much mer∣uaile, that you haue so much reculed to be found here, & so long delayed, Meet men to attend such a master. and made the poore masters of the de∣puties to trot so much vp and downe after you. For you doubted much that here would be found some blunt fel∣low that would tell you your owne, and would scratch you where you did not itch. You alwaies had a minde to draw out your Lieutenancie to the length, and to conti∣nue this soueraigne power which you haue vsurped, that so you might also continue the way, without which you could not be so well intreated, nor so well followed and obeyed as you are. But now we will put an end thereto, If you doe so, it is well. and in so doing put an end to our miseries also. We ne∣uer bestowed vpon you this goodly and new deuised qualitie of the Lieutenant of the Estates (which in trueth sauoureth rather the stile of some clerke of the palace, or of some pettie schoolemaster, Things graun∣ted for a time are not so easi∣ly reuoked. then the grauitie or waight of the charge) but for a time, and till such time as there were other prouision made by the Estates and generall. In so much that now it is time that you bee put downe therefrom & dispossessed therof, and that we aduise now to take another gouernment, and another gouernour. You haue liued sufficiently enough in anarchie and dis∣order. Is it your minde that for your pleasure, Necessarie de∣maunds. & to make your selfe and yours great, against all right and reason, wee should for euer continue miserable and wretched? Will you proceed to destroy that little that remayneth? How long will you be sustained and nourished with our bloud and our bowels? When wil you bee full with ea∣ting vs, and satisfied with seeing vs to kill one another, to cause you to liue at your ease? Let not thine owne mouth praise thee, but anothers. Doe ye not suppose that you haue to doe with Frenchmen, that is to say, with a warrelike nation, which though it be sometimes easie to be deceiued, yet very quickly returneth to their duetie, and aboue all things loueth their naturall Kings, and therein cannot be passed? You will be altogether asto∣nished, when you shall finde your selfe abandoned of all
the good cities and townes, who will make their agree∣ment and composition without you. You shall see ere long, As fell out in Villeroy. Vitry, and others. now one, then another, euen of them whom you take to be your most familiar friends, that wil treate with∣out you, and will returne themselues to the hauen of safe∣tie, because they haue knowne you to bee an vnskilfull pi∣lot, that could not tell how to gouerne the ship, whereof you had taken charge, and haue made shipwracke of it, or cast it away very farre from the port. Haue you then the name of peace so much in horror, that you will not conceiue any whit at all thereof? They that are able to o∣uercome, doe yet demaund it. To what end then haue ser∣ued so many voyages, so many goings and commings, which you haue caused Monsieur de Villeroy, and others to make, vnder this pretext, to speake of agreement, and to bring the matters to some tranquilitie, if it might bee? You are then a cogger, and an abuser, that deceiue both your friends and your enemies, and against the naturall disposition of your nature, vse nothing but crafts and de∣ceits, to hold vs alwaies vnder your pawes, at your owne pleasure. A politike course to vp∣hold their cor∣ruption. You neuer yet would haue publique affayres handled by publique persons, but in corners and secretly, by people of meane place, made by your owne hand and depending vpon you, to whom you whispered a word in the eare, altogether resolute to do nothing of that which should be agreed. By this meanes you haue lost the cre∣dit, and good will of the people (which was the princi∣pall stay of your authoritie) and haue caused to be slan∣dered the proceedings of sundrie notable men that you haue imployed therein, in manner of purchase, and to graunt some thing vnto them that intreated you there∣fore. You haue feared to offende strangers that affisted you, Ill works de∣serue ill words at the least. who yet notwithstanding did not take it very well at your hand. For if you knew the speeches that they vse of you, and in what termes the King of Spayne writeth, con∣cerning your deedes and manners, I thinke you not to haue so slauish and abiect an heart to entertaine him, and
to seeke after him as you doe. There haue been seene let∣ters surprised and deciphered, in which he nameth you hogge, and sometimes swelling toade, and in others, Lo∣cho profiado: and generally their king mocketh you, and plaieth with your nose, and commaundeth his agents to entertaine you with sweete and pleasant words, Faire words make fooles faine. yet voyd of effect, and to regard that you take not ouer sure foo∣ting, and too much authoritie vpon you. Your aduersa∣ries on the Kings side beleeue, that you demand and seek for truce to no other end, but to waite for your forces, & the better to prepare your partie at Rome & in Spaine, & wee say that it is to make the warre to continue, and the better to dispatch your priuate affayres. This being so, how can you (so feeble and weake as you are) hope to make men beleeue that you either would or could saue vs? It cannot be done but by a publique and authentical negotiation, which iustifieth, authoriseth, and giueth cre∣dite to a right meaning. This is the thing that you might doe, vnder the good will or pleasure of the Pope, If he did, he shewed not himself a man of peace. to the end that ye may yeeld his holines the respect which you owe him. Could he take it ill, that you had a minde to hearken vnto peace, with your neighbours, with your King? For though you would not acknowledge him for such a one, yet you cannot deny, but that he is a prince of the bloud of France, and King of Nauarre, who hath al∣waies held a higher degree and state than you, and hath continually gone before and aboue you, and all your an∣cestors. On the other side, A good per∣swasiō touch∣ing a bad per∣son. we would beleeue that the ho∣lie Father, imitating the example of his predecessors, would stirre you vp to that good worke, if he sawe you inclined thereto, that so he might quench the fire of ciuil warre, which consumeth so goodly a flowre of Christen∣stome, and ouerthroweth the strongest piller that vphol∣deth the Christian Church, and the authoritie of the holy seate, neither would he stand any longer vpon this terme heretikes. A reason, but Popes may crosse one ano∣thers perswa∣sion and prac∣tise, and yet neither of thē erre any way. For Pope Iohn the second went indeed himself to seeke the Emperour of Constantinople, and to intreate
him to make peace with the Arrians, worse than these, and to commit and commend the whole quarrell into the hands of God, who would accomplish that, that men could not doe. For mine owne part (Monsieur the Lieu∣tenant) I beleeue, that if you would take this way and course, without coūterfeiting or dissimulatiō, it could not but be very sure & profitable to the generalitie of France, and to you, as in respect of your owne particular very ho∣norable, and to your great vnburthening, and the con∣tentment of your spirit. Also that this is the one, and the only meane, and that there remaineth no other, to stay or vphold the present fall of all our building, I freely speake vnto you after this manner, without feare of the racke or of proscription: That is great braggers and boasters, as Rodomont was. neither doe I feare these Rodomontade Spaniards, nor the sowre countenances, & writings of the mouthes of the sixteene, which are but beggerly & needy fellowes, which I wil not vouchsafe euer to salute for the slēder accoūt that I make of thē. I am a friend to my coū∣try, as becōmeth a good burgesse, & citizen of Paris. I am iealous for the preseruation of my religion, and am in all that I am able, your seruāt, & the seruant of your house. To be short, euery one is wearie of warre, in which we now very well perceiue, there is no more question touching our religion, That is the point indeed. but concerning our bondage, and to whom amongst you the carcases of our bones shall remaine. Thinke not to finde in time to come, so many men as you haue done, that in liuelines of heart will cast themselues away, and betroth or marry themselues to desperation, for the rest of their life, and of their posteritie also. Wee very well perceiue, that you your selues are in the snares of the King of Spaine, and that ye can neuer come out of them, but wretched, and as it were forlorne. You haue done like the horse, A fable, but yet good in the morall and meaning of it. who to defende himselfe from the hart, who (he perceiued) was more liuely and full of strength than he, called for man to his succour. But man put a bridle in his mouth, sadled him, and betrapped him, afterwards he put on his spurs & backed him, & brought
him to the hunting of the hart, and to euery other place, where he thought good, neuer comming off of his backe, nor taking off his bridse and saddle, and by this meanes made himselfe subiect to the hollie crap, and to the spur, to serue his turne in euery worke, in euery charge, yea and in the very cart it selfe, as the King of Spaine hath done with you. And doubt ye not of this, This is no lye, for be hath practised it vp∣on others, as nigh to him as he. but if by your meanes be were once made master of the kingdome, but that he would very quickly be rid of you by poyson, by slaūders, or otherwise, for this is the fashion that he vseth, & wher∣with he commonly saith, hee must needes recompence them, that betray their prince and their countrie. Let them serue for witnesses and examples, that wickedly de∣liuered vnto him the kingdome of Portugall: who com∣ming vnto him to demaund the recompence which hee had promised them, before he was in possession of it, sent them vnto that councell of his, which is called the coun∣cell of conscience, where answer was giuen them, that if they had brought Portugall into the hands of the King of Spaine, as a thing appertaining vnto him, they had done nothing but that which good and loyall subiectes should haue done, and they should haue their recompence and hire for it in heauen. But if they deliuered it vp, beleeuing that it did not appertaine vnto him, meaning so to take it from their master, they deserued to be hāged as traytors. A good reason: for of like sins, there should be the like pu∣nishment. And this is the wages that you must looke for, after that you shall haue deliuered vs vp vnto such people: which we for our parts are not purposed to endure. We knowe too well, that the Spaniards, and Castillians, and Bour∣guignons, are our auncient and deadly enemies, which of two thinges demaund the one, either to bring vs vnder, Spaine hath a double pra∣ctise and pur∣pose in assaul∣ting Fraunce. and to make vs slaues if they can, that so they may ioyne Spaine, Fraunce, and the low countries, in one tenure and vnder one gouernement: or else if they cannot (as indeed the best aduised and most wise amongst them, doe not hope for that) yet they may at the least in weaken vs, and bring vs so low that neuer or for a long season, we should
neuer bee able to relieue our selues, nor withstand them to the face. For the King of Spaine (which is an old fox) knoweth wel the iniurie that he doth vs, vsurping against all right and iustice, the Kingdome of Naples, the Duchy of Millan, and the Countie of Roussillon, which belong vnto vs: he knoweth the natural disposition of the french nation, that knoweth not how any long season to conti∣nue in peace, without setting vpon their neighbours. Whereof the Flemmings haue made a prouerbe, A wittie sen∣tence. which saith, that when the Frenchman sleepeth, the diuell roc∣keth the cradle. Besides he seeth his estates and countries deuided and almost all of them vsurped by violence, a∣gainst the good will and liking of the inhabitants, who are ill affected to him ward. He seeth himselfe to be olde and brittle, and his eldest sonne smally valiant, & of euill health, and the rest of his familie, to be in two daughters, one whereof he hath married with the most ambitious, The Duke of Sauoy. and yet needie prince of Europe: and the other that ma∣keth a partie, and cannot faile but find a great one. If af∣ter his death, (which cannot in the very course of nature be very farre off) his estates and countries should bee de∣uided, and that one of his sonnes in law should set vpon his owne sonne, he knoweth that the Frenchmen would not sleepe, and that they would wake againe their olde pretenses, titles and claimes. Doth hee not then herein play the part of a very prudent, & foreseeing prince, to in∣feeble vs by our selues, & to bring vs to so low an estate, that wee shall not bee able to hurt him, no not after his death? You see also how hee hath caried himselfe in the succours that hee hath sent vs: All bewraieth the treachery of Spaine. the greatest part in paper and in hope, the waiting for whereof hath wrought vs more euil, then the comming thereof hath done vs good. His double duckets and his men came not, but euen whē we had a long time drawn our breath, and were not able to doe any more, although hee might much more soone haue succoured & relieued vs. He maketh vs not fatte to sell vs, as the butchers doe their hogges: but for feare we
should die ouer soone, and minding to reserue vs to a greater destruction, hee prolongeth our languishing life, Weigh these comparisons. with a little water, brued and tossed with crummes of browne bread, which also hee giueth vs, with a licked or cleane finger, as iaylors nourish and feede condemned persons, the better to reserue them to the execution of punishment. What is become of so many millions of double duckets, which he braggeth he hath spent for the safetie of our estate? And why should not the people haue them, seeing it is the price of themselues? except you wil sell them for nothing. We see none of them amongst the people, the greatest parte thereof are in the hands of our aduersaries, or amongst you Messieurs, the princes, go∣uernors, captaines, and preachers, who keepe them very fast locked vp in your coffers: there remaineth to the people nothing, but redde or copper coyne, for the stam∣ping whereof we haue imployed al our kettles, caldrons, chafers, weights, chaynes and copper vessell, and will imploy therein our gunnes and our belles, if our necessitie indure yet but a small time longer: for the double duc∣kets, and the twise double duckets of the fine golde of Peru are vanished away, and are no more to bee seene. And this is the poynt vpon which a Poet of our age, hath made a very pleasant and proper quartain, or soure verses in sorte as they follow. By thee (O thou proude Spayne) and by thy double duckets of gold, Whole poore France, we sots daylie vexe with troubles manifolde, And yet of all the duckets, that so many troubles doeraise In fine nothing remaineth to vs, but doublings and delaies. Touching the same matter, another honest man hath not spoken much amisse, when though in another rime he said, The French that before simple were and kinde, By double duckets are double now become, And the double duckettes thēselues are turned into winde Or into copper and red doubles, that hardly will runne. Spanish pra∣ctises sauour not of, or fa∣uour not reli∣gion. To perswade our selues this day, that that which this good prince doth in this behalfe, is for no other purpose, but the preseruation of Catholike religion and nothing els, that cannot be. We doe very well know, and that by
his agents, and by his notes of remembrance or instruc∣tions, what is his intent and purpose. We know how he hath liued, and treated heretofore with the Huguenots of the Low Countries. The articles of their agreement are imprinted and published by his authoritie, by which also he permitteth them the exercise of their religion. And made he no other reckoning but of this, it is long agoe since he offered so much to Duke Maurice, and to Mes∣sieurs the Estates, that so he might haue had peace with them. Father and sonne both a∣like affected to the Catholike faith. He would not do worse then his father, who (as we haue heard) yeelded vnto the protestants of Germanie, and to the Lutherans, that that they desired to haue, so that they would acknowledge him for their prince, and would pay him his rights and due. If he doe so much loue the Catholike religion, and hate them that are not such, how can he suffer the Iewes & Moores in his countries? how can he agree with the Turkes and the Mahometists of Africke, from whom he purchaseth peace very dearly? It needeth not now, Away with such trash. that his spies the Iesuits Scopetines should come to sell vs these snaile shels or scallope shels of S. Iames: the sport is alreadie very much discouered. The Duke of Feria hath let vs see his remembrances or in∣structions, by degrees and peece after peece, as though he had brought out of Africke (a countrie fruitfull in ve∣nims and poysons) by the commaundement of his ma∣ster, a wooden boxe full of diuers drugges, of diuers qua∣lities: one that killeth quickly, another that killeth some∣what slowlie, another more fit in summer, another that hath better operation in winter, Beastly and bad phisicke. to serue his owne turne therewith and to vse them, as in respect of vs, according to occasions and occurrences that may fall out: hauing in charge to giue vs such a one, if he finde vs disposed to such a humour, and to giue vs another, if he find vs other∣wise affected. Before that we gaue out that wee ment to maintaine and vphold the law Salick (a law that for these eight hundred yeares hath maintained the kingdome of France in his force and manly courage) they did speake
vnto vs of the rare virtues of that diuine daughter, To wit, of the K. of Spayne. that so she might be chosen inheritor of the crowne, when they sawe that we ment to holde the ancient custome of the males, they offered vs to bestowe her vpon some prince that we should chuse for King, and thereupon suites were made for the Archduke Ernestus, Many fetches, and all full of fraud. to whom she is indeede appoynted wife. Afterwards, when they perceiued that this Ernestus was not the harnesse that would fit vs, they spake of some prince of France, to whom the daughter might bee married, and so they would make them Kings of France wholly and together. A meete man to promote such a cause. And yet for all this there were found notes of remembrances, instructiōs, & man∣dates very plaine, signed also with the proper hand of, I the King: whereunto Monsieur the Legate serued for a broaker, to make the merchandise of value and prise: for he came not hither for any other ende or purpose, as also he was not made Cardinall, but by the fauour of the King of Spayne, with protestatiō to ruinate France, or to cause it to fall into peeces, in the hands of them that haue made it that it is: and we know that he hath a speciall briefe or direction to bee present at the election of the King of France. Ha Monfieur the Legate, you are discouered, the vaile is taken from you, there are no more enchantments that hinder vs from seeing cleerely: our necessitie hath taken the pearle out of our eyes, as your ambition hath put it into your owne: you see cleere enough into our de∣struction, but you see no whit at all into your owne dutie, of a pastor of the Church. So doe all of his coate and order. You come hither to pull away the fleece from the flocke, and to take away her fat pa∣stures, and her grasings. Your owne priuate profit blin∣deth you: thinke well of this, that wee respect our owne. The interest, profite, and purpose of your masters (that set you on worke, as a day labourer to his taske, about the pulling downe of a house) is to make themselues great with our morsels, and to hold their owne seigneuries and Lordships in quiet. But it is our part to lay our selues o∣pen, and to compound our disagreements, by taking a∣way
the foolish vanities, Good words, so they may be wel perfor∣med. that yee haue put into our head, and by making of peace. Wee will get out of this same deadly labyrinth or maze, what price soeuer it cost vs. Nò paradise, though neuer so well hanged with tapistrie and orras, no processions, no brotherhoods, nor assemblies of fourtie, nor preachings, whether they bee ordinary or extraordinary, giue vs any thing to eate. The pardons, stations, And wil not feed the soule, or strengthen the body, but rather destroy both. indulgences, briefes, and buls of Rome, are al of them hollow and light meate that satisfie noue but emp∣tie braines. Neither the glorious boasting of Spaine, nor the brauery of Naples, nor the mutinie of the Wallons, nor the fort of Anthonie, nor that of the temple or citadel, (wherewith men vse to threaten vs) that can hinder vs from desiring and demaunding of peace. Wee will haue no more feare that our wiues and our daughters should bee rauished or defiled by souldiers, and that such of thē, as need hath turned from regard of their honour and cre∣dit, Who could describe them better. shall returne to the right way. We will haue no more of these horseleaches, exacters and greedie guttes: we will remoue these foule and shamefull imposts, (which they haue deuised in the towne house) set vpō the moue∣ables and free marchandise, that come into the good townes (where there are committed a thousand abuses and disorders) the profite whereof redoundeth not to the publik good, but vnto them that manage the money, and giue it away cheek by iole as we say, and without discre∣tion. Wee will haue no more of these caterpillers, that sucke & gnaw the fairest floures of the garden of France, Notable com∣parisons and resemblances. and paint themselues with diuers colours, and become in a moment, of little wormes that creepe vpon the ground, great butterflies, flying painted with gold and azure: wee will cut off the shamelesse number of treasu∣rers, that make their owne benefite of the taxes of the people, and turne to their owne vse the best and the last pennie of the treasure, and with the rest cut and lash out at their pleasure, to distribute it to them onely, from whō they hope to receiue the like, and inuent a thousand ele∣gant
and fine termes, to shew the neede of the state, It is not alone in France, but it may be foūd elswhere. and to refuse to shew curtesie or fauour to an honorable per∣son. We will haue no more so many gouernours, that play the little Kinges or wrens rather, and boast that they are rich enough, when they haue a peece of a riuer of sixe foote long and large, at their commaundement. We wil be exempted from their tyrannies and exactions, and we wil bee no more subiect to watchings, and wardings, and night scouts, in which we lose the halfe of our time, and consume our best age, and get nothing but catarrhes, reumes, and diseases, that ouerthrow our health. Do it, and doe wel. We wil haue a King, who shall giue order to all & shal keep all these pettie tyrants in fear & duetie: that shal chastice the violēt, that shal punish the stubborne, that shal roote out thieues and robbers, that shall cut off the winges of the ambitious, that shall cause these spunges and thieues of the common treasures, to cast their gorge; that shal make euery one to remaine in the boundes of his office, and shall keepe all the worlde in peace and tranquillitie. A fable, but yet applied to good purpose. To be short, wee will haue a King, that so wee may haue peace: but yet we will not doe as the frogges did, that waxing weary of their peaceable King, chose the storke who deuoured them all. We demaund a King, and a na∣turall head, not an artificiall: a King alreadie made, and not to be made: If you doe, wo to you. and therein we will not take the coun∣sell of the Spaniards, our olde and ancient enemies, who by force would become our tutors, and teach vs to be∣leeue in God, and in the christian faith, in which they are not baptized, and haue not known it past three daies. We will not haue for Counsellors and Phisitians those of Lorraine, who of a long time haue breathed and thirst after our death. The King that wee demaund, is alrea∣die made by nature, borne in the very plot of ground, of the floure deluce of Fraunce, a right branch and flourishing, and springing from the right stalke of Saint Lewes. They that speake of making an other deceiue themselues, & know not therein how to come to an end.
Men may make scepters and crownes, A wise and godly speech. but not Kings to weare them and beare them. Men may make an house, but not a tree or a greene bough. Nature must needes bring it foorth in time, out of the iuice and marrowe of the earth, that maintaineth the stalke in her bloud and vi∣gor. A man may make a legge of wood, an arme of yron, a nose of siluer, but yet not a head: So we may make Mar∣shals, Peeres, Admirals, Secretaries, and Counsellors of estate, and that in grosse also, and many at one time, as wee say, but yet not a King. He alone must spring onely from himself, that so he may haue life and lustines in him. That one eyed fellowe Bourcher, A familiar ex∣ample and fet from a bad person. the pettie schoolema∣ster of the most wicked and lewd people of this citie and land, wil confesse vnto you, that his eye, enammeled with the gold of Spayne, seeth not any thing: Euen so an elec∣ted and artificiall King, should neuer bee able to see vs, and so he should bee not onely blind in our affayres, but also deafe, insensible, & vnmoueable in our complaints. And this is the cause why wee will not heare speech nei∣ther of the daughter of Spayne, whom we leaue to her fa∣ther: If he can doe any thing a∣gainst them. nor of the Archduke Ernestus, whom wee recom∣mend to the Turkes, and to Duke Maurice: nor of the Duke of Lorraine, or of his eldest sonne, whom wee will leaue to treate of the matter with the Duke of Bouillon, and with them of Strausbourgh: Yea & shame him also in the warres against him. nor of the Duke of Sa∣uoy, whō we put ouer to the Lord of Diguieres, that doth not much helpe him. That fellowe should bee content with this, that by fraude and treason he hath taken from vs the Marquesdome of Saluces, in danger to yeeld it ve∣ry quickly and that twise told, if we may haue but a little time to take our breathe in. In the meane season he shall haue this fauour, to call himselfe King of Cypres, and to draw his antiquitie out of Saxonie: A fine frump. but France is not a morsell for his mouth: how double footed, and large mouthed soeuer he be, no more then Geneua, Genes, Fi∣nall, Monaco, and the Figons, which haue alwaies giuen him the figge, or garbumble, as we say. Besides, he will
make a goodly molehill, and a braue shew indeed, He meaneth King Philips daughter. with the disdainfull highnes of the daughter he hath maried, who will serue rather to ouerthrowe him with expence and sumptuous pride, thē to make him waxe great. Con∣cerning the Duke de Nemours (for whom the Baron of Tenecay hath remembrances and instructions, by which he mindes to make him more worthie to bee preferred, then the Duke of Guise) we would counsell him (for the good he hath done vs, by freeing vs from warre, and for his valiant deedes, Scoffe on, and that drily. standing I tell you vpon very good proofe) if he be well there where he is, that he hold him there, and keepe him from the beast. I will say nothing touching the Duke of Guise. You may trust him therein, but in nothing els. Monsieur the Lieutenant shall speake for himselfe, and he will commend himselfe to his sister. But so it is that these robbers and theeues of the kingdome, are neither fit nor sufficient, nor seruing for our taste to command vs: besides, we minde to keepe our ancient lawes and customes, we will not at any hand haue a king by election, nor by lot, as the zealous and not men of Ierusalem, that chose for their prieft a countrie man named Phanias, contrary to the good manners, and contrarie to the ancient lawes of Iudea. In a word, Plaine dealing est. wee would that Monsieur the Lieutenant should know, that wee acknowledge for our true King and lawfull, naturall and soueraigne Lord, Henry of Bourbon, heretofore King of Nauarre. This is he alone, who for a thousand good reasons, The person  power of the King com∣mended. we doe acknowledge to bee capable of and able to vphold the state of France, and the greatnes of the re∣putation of Frenchmen: he alone that can relieue and lift vs vp from our fall: that is able to put the crowne in her first beautie and honor, and to giue vs peace. It is he alone and no other, that can (as a natural Hercules borne in France) discomfite these hideous monsters, that make all France horrible and fearfull to her owne children. It is he alone and no other, that will roote out these pettie halfe Kings of Bretaigne, of Languedoc, of Prouence, of Lyonnois, of Bourgongne, and of Champagne: that will
scatter these Dukes of Normandie, of Berrie, and So∣longne, of Reims and of Soissons: all these vaine visions shall vanish away at the glorie of his presence, when hee shall be set in the throne of his auncestors, and in his bed of iustice, which waiteth for him in his kingly palace. You haue nothing, To wit either of trueth or of shew of truth. Messieurs, nor you Monsieur the Lieutenant haue nothing, that ye can obiect against him. The Pretext of the Vnckle before the Nephew, is taken from you by the death of Monsieur the Cardinall his Vnckle. I will not speake of him either by flattery, or in slanderous sort: A very worthy sentence. the one sauoureth a flauish minde: the other is proper to the seditious. But I can tell you in trueth (which thing also you your selues, and all those that trauaile in the world will not denie) that of all the Princes which France hath set before vs, marked with the floure deluce, and that appertaine to the crowne, yea of all those that desire to come nigh it, there is none de∣serueth so much as hee, nor that hath so many royall vir∣tues, nor so many aduantages and prerogatiues, aboue the common sort of men. I will not speake of other mens wants: A pretie prete∣rition. but if they themselues were all set out or written in the table appoynted for election and choyse, he should bee found by very much the most capable, and the most worthie to be chosen. One thing indeede hee wanteth, which I coulde tell in the care of some, if I lifted. I will not say it is his different religion from ours, which you so much vpbraide him with: for in some good measure we knowe, No, GOD wrought not that work, but his owne cor∣ruption. that God hath touched his heart, and that he is willing to be taught, and doth alreadie applie himselfe to instruction, yea that he hath caused word to be sent to the holy father, concerning his very nigh conuersion: of which I make such account, as if I had alreadie seene it, he hath alwaies shewed himselfe to haue such regarde of his promises, and to be so religious a keeper of his words. Put the har∣dest: the best will saue it self, as we say. But though it were so that he should continue in his o∣pinion, must we therefore put him by his lawfull right of succession to the crowne? What lawes, what councels,
what Gospell teacheth vs to dispossesse men of their goods, Good reasons, why Kings of erromous and corrupt religi∣ons are not to be deposed. and Kings of their kingdomes for diuersitie of their religions? Excommunication stretcheth not but vnto the soules, and not vnto mens bodies and goods. Innocent the third, exalting the most proudely that pos∣sibly he could his popelike power, said, that as God had made two great lights in the firmament, to wit the sunne for the day, and the moone for the night, so hath he made two in the Church, the one for mens soules, which is the Pope, whom he compared to the sunne, and the other for mens bodies, which is the King. Mens bodies enioye outward goods, and not their soules: The right ende of excommu∣nication. excommunication therefore cannot take them away, for that is but a medi∣cine for the soule to heale it, and to bring it to health, and not for to kill it, it is not to condemne it, but to make it a∣fraide of damnation. Some say that men would not feare it, if it did not take from them some sensible or worldlie cōmoditie touching this life, as for example, their goods, A bsurdities in∣suing the a∣buse of ex∣communica∣tion. and conuersation or companie keeping with men: but if that might haue place, they must when they excom∣municate a drunkard, forbid him wine and strong drinke, and when they excommunicate whoremongers, they must take from them their wiues, or women, and forbid the leprous to scratch and rubbe. Saint Paul to the Co∣rinthians forbiddeth men to eate and drinke with for∣nicators, backbiters, drunkards, theeues, but yet hee faith not, that they must take their goods from them to make them afraide, and to drawe them backe from their vices. I woulde willingly demaunde when they haue taken the kingdome, and the crowne from a King, because hee is excommunicate, or an heretike, whether then they must choose another, and put that other in his place, for it is not reasonable that the people shoulde remaine without a King, as you Messieurs, would worthilie indeede prouide for it. A question not easie to be absolued. But if it should so fall out afterwardes, that this King being excom∣municated, and destituted of his estates, should come to
repentance, and be conuerted to the true faith, & obtaine his absolution either of the same Pope, or of another succeeding him (as they are very much accustomed to reuoke and vndoe that, A girde in∣deede. which their predecessors haue done) how could it bee, that that poore King spoyled of his kingdome, should enter into it againe? Those that should bee seized of it, and holde it by iust title, as three yeares possessors thereof, The Duke de Mayn may speake to this. would they put themselues from it againe thinke you, and yeeld him the places, forts, treasures, armes and ordinances, which they withheld? These are but the reckonings and accounts of olde do∣ting men, neither is there reason nor shew of reason in all of it, or in any parte thereof. It is long since this axi∣ome or sentence generall was concluded, that the Popes haue not any power, to iudge of or concerning tempo∣rall kingdomes. Good autho∣rities. And it is long agoe also since S. Bernard saith: I reade that the Apostles stoode to be iudged, but that they sate and iudged others, I neuer reade. The Apo∣stles appeared very humbly before iudges, to bee iudged by thē, but they neuer sate in the chayre to iudge others: wee knowe also very well, He reasoneth from the grea∣ter. that many Arrian Emperors, comming to the empire by succession or by adoption and choyse, were not reiected or repelled, by their right beleeuing people and subiects, but were receiued and admitted into the imperiall authoritie and gouernment, without tumult or sedition. And the christians alwaies had this maxime or rule, as a perpetuall marke or cogni∣sance of their religion, that they did obey such Kings and Emperors, as it pleased God to giue or set ouer them, whether they were Arrians or Pagans, Sufficient proofes. conforming them∣selues therein to the example of Iesus Christ, that did o∣bey the lawes of Tiberius the Emperour, imitating like∣wise Saint Paul and Saint Peter, that obeyed Nero, and haue in their epistles expressely commaunded, to obeye Kings and Princes, because all soueraigne power is of God, Application of that that was deliuered. and representeth the image of God himselfe. This differeth much from the mindes of our mutinous men, that driue them away, and murther them. And it is con∣trarie
to you, Monsieur the Legate, that would haue the whole race to bee destroyed. In deede if wee had no more of the blood of this noble kingly familie & stocke, or that we were in a kingdome that goeth by election, And yet his deuise of de∣struction full of blood. as in Polonia or in Hungarie, I would not much sticke to say, that men should hearken vnto you. But hauing had time out of minde, this worthie lawe (which also is the first, and the most auncient law of nature) that the sonne should succeede the father, and the nearest kinsmen in degree of consanguinitie, to them that are nearest of the fame line, stocke, and familie, and hauing one so braue and noble a prince in that degree or respect, without controuersie or disputation, that hee is the true naturall and lawfull heire, and most able and fitte to succeede to the crowne, there is now no more place for election: and we ought to receiue with ioy and gladnes, Men must not fight (as it were giants) a∣gainst God. this great king that God sendeth vs, who hath no neede of our aide to make him to bee, but is alreadie without vs, and will bee still in despite of vs, though wee would, what we coulde, hinder him in it. But I haue straied from my purpose, that so I might say something, concerning that which men obiect against him, touching religion, but this is not it that I meant, when I said that he wanted somewhat, and which much hindreth the aduancement of his affaires: neither is this it, that the preachers and praters, doe vp∣braide him with touching the loue of women. And why not the Clergie men also, then and there pre∣sent? A prophane speech, and therefore to be read with iudgement. I am sure of this, that the greatest parte of this companie, and specially you Monsieur the Lieutenant, cannot giue him that reproach, without blushing. For indeede, this is not the imperfection that can hinder valiant acts: but con∣trariewise there was neuer braue warriour; that loued not Ladies and women, and did not delite to get honor, that so hee might bee the better beloued of them. This is the reason why Plato wished to haue an armie or hoast, wholly compounded and consisting of amorous peo¦ple, for they would be inuincible, Groundes good enough for so badde a speech. and would performe a thousand goodly exploytes of armes and deedes of che∣ualrie,
to please their mistresses. Likewise the poets, good naturalists, and great masters in the knoweledge of dis∣positions and maners, alwaies haue made Mars the God of battle, The more, the worse. the friend of Venus. Consider, if you will, all the great captaines, and monarchs of the world, there shall very few of them be found sober, and stayed in this matter or busines. Titus the Emperor, who is set forth vn∣to vs, for the most vertuous, most wise, & gentle prince, that euer bare scepter, did not hee desperately loue the Queene Berenice, yet so notwithstanding, as that his loue neuer preiudiced himselfe, nor brought any hinderance or backwardnes to his affaires? True, but that is not in fleshly filthines. Princes must haue yeel∣ded vnto them some refreshings or recreations of their spirits, after that they haue trauailed in such serious af∣faires, as bring with them our quietnes, and after that they haue ceased from their great actions of besiegings, of foughten battles, of pitching their tents, of dispersing and lodging their armies, &c. It is not possible, that the spirite should be alwaies (as if it were a bow continually bent) occupied in these graue and waightie administrati∣ons, without some refreshing, and turning aside to other thoughts, A iolly proofe. more pleasant and comfortable. This is the cause why the wise man himselfe hath saide, Bonum est pauxillum amare sanè: insanè non est bonum. To loue a little and wisely also, is a very good thing, But foolishly to loue & ouermuch too, no goodnes doth bring. It hath euer bin too rife, that the people haue giuē vn∣iust iudgements concerning their princes actions, A bad collec∣tion. and haue alwaies medled wrongfully to interpret their man∣ners and complexions, neuer thinking vpon this, that there is not so much as one amongst them, that iudgeth thereof, but hee doth worse and hath greater imperfecti∣ons. Kings, though they be Kings, cease not for all that to be men, subiect to the same passions that their subiects are: and yet we must needs confesse, that this man hath fewer faults in him, then any of those that haue gone be∣fore him. And though he haue an inclination to loue faire
and goodly things, he loueth none but such as are perfect and excellent, It is a foule fault to miti∣gate great sins. euen as he himselfe is excellent in iudge∣ment, and to know the price and the valour of all things. And yet this little withdrawing play or pastime in plea∣sure, is to him as it were an exercise of vertue, insteed of hunting & hauking, without leauing euen in the midst of his recreations, to know the matters that fall out in his ar∣my, These things are good, but yet cannot make vice to be virtue. or to obserue & marke the situation of cities & pla∣ces, thorow which he passeth: the nature of mē with whō he meeteth, of places and countries, which he trauerseth: and he curiously learneth the passages and watches of ri∣uers, and keepeth in memory the distances of cities and townes: marketh in what quarters it shal be fit and com∣modious to campe his armie, when it shal passe that way, and alwaies he enquireth and learneth some thing tou∣ching his enemies actes, neuer hauing as yet vndertaken such voyages, but that he had in hād one or two enterpri∣ses against certaine rebellious places. But though it be a goodly thing to be continent, wise, temperate, austere, And who wil deny it, but A∣theists. graue, and withdrawne, as a man may say, from the plea∣sures of this life, yet some mē wil haue alwaies somewhat to say against it. When men are once set vpō hating of an other mā, they interpret in the worst part al that he doth, yea euen the verygood it self that he doth. It were a good∣ly thing I confesse, to abstaine from all pleasures, The power of truth and ho∣nesty wil cause you to confesse it. & to do nothing but pray to God, and giue almes: and yet some would say, this were but counterfeiting & hypocrisie. If it be lawful thus to iudge of another mans actions, against the expresse forbidding that God hath made therof, why shal it not be lawful for me to beleeue, yt all these Moores and Spaniards, that make so many signes of the crosse, and strike themselues so hard, Perhaps you may iudge so, & not breake charitie. & with such a noyse vpon their breastes in masse time, are notwithstāding Iewes & Ma∣hometists, whatsoeuer goodly shew they make? why shal I not say, that Monsieur of Lions is a Lutherane, as he was sometimes, although he turne vp the white of his eye, and cause it so to appeare, in lifting it to the Churchrooses or
vaults, Better a bad excuse then none at all. when bee either worshippeth or maketh snow to worship the crucifix? But it is not in this age only, that mē vse to speake so of Kings, & there is an old prouerbe that sayth, that Iupiter himselfe when he raineth, pleaseth not all men. Some would haue raine for their coleworts: o∣thers seare it because of their haruests. But that which I haue deferred hitherto to speake of, and which as I think, is wanting vnto him, it is that for which you and I are most bound vnto him, that is, that he handleth vs ouer gently, Commenda∣tion of cle∣mencie. and spareth vs too much. Clemencie (in which he is aboundant and excessiue) is a very laudable virtue, and which bringeth in the ende very great fruites, and such as will continue long, though that they be long and slow in comming. Howbeit, it belongeth to none but to Con∣querours to vse it, and to them that haue none to resist them. Difference be∣tweene clemē∣cie and feare, fainthearted∣nes, &c. Some attribute it to fain heattednes and seareful∣nes, rather then to valiancie and nobleres. For it seemeth that such as spare their enemies, desire that others should practise as much towards them, and that they demaund recompence for their generositie: or els they feare, that if they shew themselues seuere, that they can haue no rea∣son of their other enemies, that rest yet to be subdued. O∣thersome name it very plainly, imbecilitie or weakenes of heart, supposing that he that dare not vse his right, is not yet assured of victorie, but rather feareth that he shuld be ouercome. But the Philosophers that haue intreated this poynt to the full or to the bottome and depth of it, haue not ascribed it to virtue, whē those that enterprised to trouble an estate, haue shewed themselues gentle and courteous in the beginning of their attempts and execu∣tions, A bad exāple. as that gentlenes that Iulius Caesar vsed towards the souldiers and citizens of Rome before that he was conquerour, was not clemencie but statterie, and am∣bitious curtesie, by which he would make himself accep∣table to the people, A good sen∣tence though not well ap∣plied. and draw euery one to his side. And this is it that that great master of Estates sayth, The fame of clemencie is profitable to such as affect authoritie, or
els vsurpe rule. For to such as inuade a kingdome against right and lawe (as you Monsieur Lieutenant doe) the ac∣count or reputation of being gentle and gracious, is of very great vse. But this rather was Caefars clemencie, that hauing ouercome Pompey, & discomfited all that might resist him, he came to Rome without triumph, and par∣doned all his deadly enemies, putting them all in posses∣sion of their goods, honors and dignities, of which not∣withstanding there was but a bad issue to himward: A foe well v∣sed, will conti∣nue a foe still. for those whom he had pardoned, and shewed most fauours vnto, were they that betrayed him, and miserably mur∣thered him. Wherefore there is a difference betweene clemencie and gentlenes. Gentlenes ordinarily is to bee found in women, and in men of small courage: but cle∣mēcie is not in any but in him that is an absolute master, and that doth good, when he is able to doe all manner of euill. Wherfore let vs conclude then, that our King ought to haue reserued the vse of his clemencie, till he had had vs all in his power. This is inclemencie, yea crueltie sayth Cicero, to pardon them that deserue to dye, A good sen∣tence in reason and religion both. and the ciuill warres shall neuer haue end, if we will hold on to be gra∣cious, and shewe fauour, where seueritie of iustice is ne∣cessarie. The malice of rebels waxeth more stiffe & hard, by the gentlenes that is vsed towards them, because they imagine that men dare not prouoke them nor put them to doe worse. I make no doubt of this, Nor any man els. but had he hotly & earnestly corrected all those that fell into his fingers and hands, since these troubles, wee had been all at this pre∣sent vnder his obedience. But sith God hath been pleased to giue him and to worke in him a naturall disposition, so sweet, gracious and fauourable as we see and feele it is, let vs yet hope much better of him, A good and strong reason. when he shall see vs lye flat at his feete, and to offer vnto him our liues and our goods, and to aske him pardon for the offences past, see∣ing that finding vs armed to resist and to assault him, he receiueth vs to mercie, and giueth vs our life, and all that we demaund. Let vs goe, let vs goe therefore my friends,
and that all of vs with one voyce, and demaund peace of him. There is no peace so vniust, which is not much bet∣ter then a most iust warre. A place of scripture, but not so rightly alleadged as should be. Oh how beautifull are the feet of them that declare peace, that declare good things and saluation, sayth Isai? Oh how goodly feet haue they that bring peace, and declare the health and safetie of the people? Why stay wee to chase away from vs these trou∣blous guests, cruell citizens, proude beasts, who deuoure our substance and wealth like grashoppers? Are we not yet wearie in furnishing, and that to ryot and pleasures, these harpies? Monstrous birds hauing the faces of women or maides, but clawes of mer∣uailous capa∣citie, yea rapi∣nitie. Monsieur Legate, let vs goe: and as for you, returne to Rome, and leade away with you your porter of rogations and pardons, the Cardinall of Pelve: wee haue more neede of holie bread, then of hallowed beades and graines: let vs goe Messieurs, the Agents and Ambassadors of Spayne, we are wearie with seruing you, as fencers to vphold your pride, & with killing our selues to shew you pleasure. Let vs goe Messieurs of Lorraine, with your great companie of princes, wee hold you but for shadowes of protection & defence, the horseleaches of the bloud of the Princes of France, hapelourdes, little ships or foists without wares, reliques of saints, that haue neither force nor virtue. They are but feare-bugges in such mens mouthes. And let not Monsieur the Lieu∣tenant thinke either to hinder vs, or to backward vs by his threats: we tell him aloude and plainly, yea wee de∣clare it to all you Messieurs, his cousins and allies, that we are Frenchmen, and that wee will goe with the French∣men to hazard our life, and that little that is yet left vnto vs, to assist there with our King, our good King, our right∣full King, who will also very quickly bring you vnto the same confession either by force, or by some good coun∣sell, A necessarie addition. which God will inspire into you, if you be worthie of it. I know very well, that before I depart from this place, you will either giue me some little pretie pill, or it may be you will send me from hence to the Bastille, where you will cause me to bee murthered, as ye did Sacre-More, S. Maigrin, the Marques of Menelay, and diuers others. But
I shall account it for a good peece of fauour, if ye will cause me to dye quickly, Feare cannot put out fideli∣tie to prince, &c. rather then to let me languish a long while in these anguishing and grieuous miseries. And yet before I dye, I will shut vp and finish my verie long oration with a poeticall epilogue or conclusion, such as I haue made long agoe. Messieurs the princes Lorraines, You are full weake in your reines: For the crowne thus to quarrell, You cause your selues to be beate well: You are valiant and strong amaine, Yet your indeuours are all but vaine. No force can be like in any thing To the puissance of a King: And reason this is not indeede, That on the children which succeede, The seruants base should make warre, Out of their land to driue them farre. Great folly he doth performe and make, That from his master ought doth take: God against rebels and their maine Kings and their good causes will sustaine. To the Nauarrias then leaue and lay downe, Of our mightie Kings the noble crowne, Wrongfully by your selues pretended, So well haue you it molten and ended. If any right you had had thereto, You should not haue molten it as you doe: Or els you must haue for name of renowne The title of Kings without a crowne. Our Kings from God set vp renownd, Are alwaies borne to vs well crownd. The Frenchman true neuer doth range To King or prince that is but strange. All the villaines, or the greatest part Haue made you their head with all their hart.
They of the nobilitie that doe your part take, Are such as with haste their owne wounds doe make. But the very King of Frenchmen hard, In steed of his poore and Scottish gard, Is now assisted with none but great Princes, Or els with Barons and Lords of Prouinces. Wherefore then my friends let vs rise and goe Our blessed S. Denis all vnto, There deuoutly to acknowledge and confesse This great King our master, he is no lesse. Let vs all goe together as thicke as the raine, Of him to craue peace, and the same to obtaine, Vnto his table without feare we will goe, A prince so familiar he is, and gentle also. All the princes of the Bourbon race Haue euer had in them this rare and good grace, Very meeke for to be, and gentle also, And yet couragious in all whereabout they goe. But ô you princes that to vs are strangers, And daily vs thrust into thousands of dangers, And with nothing but smoake still doe vs feede, Keeping warre kindled, and vpholding it indeede, Get you soone packing into your owne land, Ʋery hatefull to vs, here doe you stand: And reckon your race from Charlemaigne pardie, Ʋpon the bounds and borders of vpper Germanie: Proue thee by your Romans or men of Rome, That from Charles the great you descend and come, That good people after the depth of their drinke, Of that mysticall matter somewhat may thinke. I haue sayd. This oration being finished (which indeede was beard with great silence and attention) many people re∣mained very flat nosed and much astonied, Plain speeches hath good ef∣fects. and a good while after there were no coughing, hemming, spitting, nor any noise made, as if the hearers had bin striken with a blow from heauen, or brought into some deep dreame,
or drowsines of their spirite, vntill a certaine Spaniard one of the mutinous crewe, first rose vp and sayd with a very loud voice, Let all of vs kill these villachoes, Take a Spani∣ard without pride and mu∣tinie, and the diuel without a lye. or villaines, which when hee had sayd, hee departed out of his place, without shewing any reuerence to any man. Where upon euery one was willing to arise & to depart. But the Admirall de Villaris, the present & newe King of Iuetot, did beseech the estates in the name of the catholik cantons, & of the leaguers of Catillonnois, Lipans, The firebrand of contention. Gual∣tiers, & other zealous communalties, not to make peace with the heretikes, vnlesse hemight remaine admirall of the East, and of the West part, and were paide his costs, with the detaining of such benefites and fauours as hee thought belonged vnto him: also that they would not chuse a King, but such a one as shuld be a good cōpanion, and a friende of the Cantons. After wards there rose vp Ribault and Roland, and besought the assembly, Two honest men, I warrāt you. to fru∣strate and abrogate the law de Repetundis, that is a lawe made against such as were accused of extortion, or mo∣ney vniustly taken, in time of their office, because this law as they tooke it, was neither catholike nor fundamē∣tall. This being done, euery one rose vp with a certaine marueilous stilnes: & in going out the herauld aduertised them at the gate as they went out to returne to the coun∣cell againe, at two of the clocke in the after noone. At which houre I that now speake, ment not to faile, Goodly things to be seene & heard at Paris garden. for the great desire that I had to see rare and singular things, and the ceremonies that should bee kept there, to the ende I might the better aduertise there of my master, and the Princes of Italie, which with an earnest desire waite for the proceeding and issue of these famous estates, held a∣gainst all order & maner vsed and accustomed in France. Wherefore I came againe to the Louvre after dinner, and that in good time also: You might do so, for your fare was but short. and offering my selfe to en∣ter into the vppermost hall, as I had done before in the morning, the herauld or vsher put me backe, because hee saw that I was not marked with L. and I had no token,
as I saw many had that entred in much worse state, and more ragged and rent then my selfe, whereupon I con∣ceiued some small displeasure. Honorable persons for so high an assem∣blie. For amongst others, I saw admitted thereto, of butchers more then three, of tauer∣ners, brasiers, sergeants, pelt or felmongers, that I knewe, and who were to haue a voyce in the election. Yet my curiositie made me to passe my disdaigne: and that I might know whether the princes and princesses without taile, entred in the same ceremonie and order that they did in the morning, I ment to waite their comming, and in waiting therefore, I gaue my selfe in the meane while, to behold and consider the tables of open and plain pain∣ting, Neither is that materiall, but marke the de∣uises. which were set aboue the steps of the staires. I know not whether they were there placed expresly to decke the place, or to sell. But this I can say, that I tooke meruai∣lous great pleasure to behold them one after another, for the workmans hand in them was excellent, and the work it selfe was very neat and naturall, full of dark speeches of diuers meanings, which made al to bend their spirits, that they might diuine or gesse thereupon. The first, This was Duke de Maynne. vpon which I cast mine eye, was the figure of a giant, hauing both his feete vpon a wheele that was ill greased, the spokes whereof were all writhen and croo∣ked: and belowe his head, as if it were two foote and a halfe off, or therabout, there was figured a crowne of fine gold, but yet without precious stones, because Monsieur of Nemours had eaten them vp, & neere vnto it was a kingly scepter, A patterne of their presiden∣cie & gouern∣ment. somewhat eaten with mice, and a sword of iustice, but yet rustie, because it had not been worne & vsed: to which the sayd giant stretched out his armes as much or as farre as he could, and lifted vp himselfe vpon his feete, with such aduantage, that he stayed not himselfe vpon the wheele, but vpon the nethermost part of the artels, and yet he could not attaine thereto, because it was altogether full of cities, and of good and great townes betweene them both. The King that now raigneth. And on the right hand there was an arme crowned, that as it were with a small rod of yron
did strike him on the fingers: vnder this wheele, And why might not these be wo∣men of his kinred? there appeared (as there doth aboue that of Saint Katherine) a mōster with three womens heads, who had their names written comming out of their mouthes: Ambition, re∣bellion, counterfeited religion. I could not tell at the first shew, what this might signifie, but hauing looked somewhat more warily vpon the visage or face of the giant, it seemed to me that it did resemble that of Mon∣sieur the Lieutenannt, and had a head and a panch as bigge as his, with all the linaments of eyes, of nose, and of beard, sauing that hee had not the Pelade of Roane, and aboue were written these soure verses, that made me to vnderstand the whole mysterie. O giant thou takest pleasure thy selfe vp to reare, And aboue this wheele thy selfe to exalt, But if Godwill vouchsafe our prayers to heare, To the crowes and rauens a mouth make thou shalt. Next vnto this table, there was an other, The Cardinal Pelve. of no lesse workemanship and pleasure, where there was painted a very little man, made and mingled of white and of red, apparelled after the Spanish fashion, and bearing not∣withstanding a french face, who had also two names. At his right side hee had an inckehorne hanging, and at his left side a sword orrapier, which was fastened belowe: the pummell whereof was crowned with a garlande of floures, such as maids haue when they goe to bee buried. His countenance was double, and so was his hatte also, If he had said his heart also, he had not lyed. and his pouch or purse was foure folde, and ouer his head on the side betweene the sunne in the South and his set∣ting, there showred a very small raine of gold, that cau∣sed him to betray his master. The daughter of Spaine. And he had in his hand a pa∣per crowne which hee presented to a young Ladie, that was speechlesse and withered, which made shew to take it altogether, with a very faire little husband of butter, Duke Ernestus belike. molten against the sunne. I could not comprehend what the figure ment, but by the inscription which I sawe be∣neath in these wordes. Ʋendidit hic auro patriam, domi∣numque
potentem, imposuit: that is in plaine english. This wretch his countrie for gold did sell, And his mightie master betraied, a shame to tell. And belowe the same table there was this verse also. Eheu: ne tibi sit priuata iniuria tanti. Alas, the priuate wrong or feare, Let it not be to thee so deare. Which made me to doubt, He meaneth the Lieuter āt the legate, and Pelve. that this was one of the persons of the Trinitie, though indeed hee had forsaken and shaken off the holy Ghost. I saw on the other side of the staires, another table, that was more great and large than the first were, and ming∣led with sundry, diuers and pleasant inuentions, which made me to turne to looke vpon them, because also that on the top there was written the description of the Iland of Ruach, newly augmented since the time of Rabelais. In the midst was a certaine Lady, Belike he mea∣neth the Dut∣ches of mont∣pensier. hooded or vailed after and liuing, and shee had her humme or taile vpon the ground, between two stooles, and about her were a great companie of Churchmen, Friers, Iacobins, and Iesu∣ites, some of them bringing her packets sealed and brid∣led, Secret muti∣nous persons and light peo∣ple easily led. and vnto others shee her selfe deliuered the like: the others that were apparelled like priests, that had fat benefices or parishes, had the bellowes of organs, wher∣with they did blowe in the breach of many of the inha∣bitants, who suffered themselues to be caried away with the winde. Others stoode vpright, their throate being wide and open, & the foresaid curats or priests did blowe into their mouths, and nourished them with winde, as if it had beene with some heauenly food, fitte to heale the goutie, A description of the famine of Paris. such as had the stone, or abundance of corrupt humors, in the whole bodie. In the nethermost part of the said figure, a man might see as it had bin a publike place, representing hals or markets, or the place Mau∣bert or Paris, where insteed of bread & meat, they set out to sale footbals, the skinnes wherin rammes stones were,
and the same skinnes much blowed vp, and the great bladder of a hogge, with which they traffiqued in the market, and sold it from hand to hand, at a good recko∣ning. There was also an other sorte of victuall in paper, whereof some made great account, so that euery one that would, could not haue of it, which the retailers caried vp and downe the streetes, and they cryed newes, newes, Newes descri∣bed. as men crie, haue you any mise or rats to kill. The fore∣saide Lady furnished the counter-cariers therewith, for from her, they came out in abundance from vnder her coate or gowne: and there was great pleasure to beholde the diuers deformed countenances of them, that rooted as hogges doe, vnder her taile, to tast thereof. The rest of the countrie of the saide table, was full of windmils, turning emptie, and hauing fanes or weather cocks in the aire, together with sundry cocks of the Church. And at the foure corners, It shuld seeme he meaneth troubles from Spaine. there was the foure winds reft into two, whereof it seemeth, that the southeast was the great∣est, and blowed most mightily, and sent the cloudes to∣wards the North, north East. In the neather part of the said table, there was written this little quartaine. Lo here you may see the new found land, Where the queene feedeth herselfe with wind, He that gladly would newes know or vnderstand, Let him smell to hir forepart and not behind. Whilest I was rauished in the contemplation of this third table, and before that I had cast mine eies vpon the other that followed, the princes and princesses afore∣said passed by, and I must needs runne after, A pretie fictiō. that I might enter as one of their followers: but because that the prease was not very great, the herauld or porter, that had once alreadie put me backe, marked me, and did more rough∣ly and rudely thrust mee backe, than at the first, which made me to be fully resolued, to withdraw myselfe, and to leaue there the Estates, very close and shut vp. That was the first session, wherein at the euening I vnderstood that they were in consultation, with what wood they
should warme themselues the next lent, and vpon what foote the vnion should goe. High poynts in a low house I also vnderstood, that the issue of the councel was, that men should obserue sundry lents in a yeare, with often commandings of double fasts, which in continuance would turne themselues as double tertian agues doe. Also they there forbad to sell speckled egges after Easter, because that children had plaied with thē before, which was a matter of very ill example. They forbad also the plaies and games of Bourgongne, and the nine pins or nine holes of master Iohn Roseau. Specially gen∣tles & nobles. Like∣wise they enioyned women to weare great bums, and in all safetie to increase vnder the same, without fearing the babble and vaine speech of midwiues. Some whispered and murmured also, that dauncings should be censured, and mules banished Paris. It was aduised also, to turne the lodging house or Inne of Bourgongne, into a colledge for the Iesuits, Iesuites well deciphered. who had neede of recreation, by reason of the great quantitie of bloud, where with they were swol∣len and puffed vp, as a filled bagge, and had neede of a surgeon to let them bloud. Sundrie other holie and praise worthie ordinances were made at the beginning of the play, whereof one promised to giue mee the list or cata∣logue. But aboue all other things, they commended the paines of Monsieur of Lions, A necessarie law among many needeles before. who framed a fundamental law, by which it should be inacted, that whosoeuer with∣in Paris, or within any other towne, brideled by the vniō, should speake of peace for twentie yeres space, or should demaund for traffique and trade, or should lament for the good time past, he should bee sent into exile to Sois∣sons, as an heretike, or Maheuter, or should pay to the bagge or purse of the vnion, a certaine quantitie of dales, towards the maintenance and entertaining of the Doc∣tors. For there must alwaies be an opposition, or else their state cannot stand. Some also propounded this, that if the King of Na∣uarre became a Catholike, Monsieur the Lieutenant must needes become a Huguenot, and that his late bro∣ther had indeede a minde to bee so, if they would haue
receiued him. As touching the choise of a King altoge∣ther new, some say that it was readie to be adiudged and determined, but yet that it was not without great dispu∣tation, because that some spake to this purpose, that it was better to haue a Common-wealth, as the ancient French had: That is a con∣fused gouern∣ment by the people. A state of go∣uernement consisting of sew. othersome demaunded an anarchicall de∣mocratie: othersome would haue the Athenian Oligar∣chie: othersome spake of a perpetuall Dictator & yeare∣ly Consuls, which was the cause, that by reason of the di∣uersitie of opinions, they could not resolue any thing thereof. Notwithstanding, there was some appearance that they spake to haue a King. For one named Trepelu the vine dresser of Suresnes, stoutly and stiffely defen∣ded, that the king was the very starre, and the very sunne, which so long since had gouerned and inlightened the kingdome of France, and with his heate nourished, Necessitie of a king notwith∣standing cor∣ruption in him that executeth the office. foste∣red, and sustained the same. And what though some∣times the sunne comming after a frostie night, it cau∣sed the vines to freeze, yet it did not thereupon insue, that we should spit against it, and not vse it any more, nor for all that to leaue the good quaffing of quarts at a time, though that wine were very deare. And this is almost all that I could learne, and that I can report, of that which passed in the estates of Paris, from whom notwithstan∣ding men looke that there will come out very fearefull clappes and noyses. I would it were so, that that Babylo∣nian kingdom diuided might come to ruine. For they say that Kings and Popes will intermingle one with another, and that the Primate of Lions sleepeth not day nor night to hatch a writing, that will make all the world to lay downe weapons and armour, and constraine all the Maheutres to flie from hence into England, or els that way. Wee shall in short time see what it will bee. God is aboue all. The rest of the wordes and speeches, A pretie iest, though I ap∣prooue not therein the vse of scripture words. and all the things that were done there, are they not written in the booke of the words of the daies of the Kings, not of Iudah, but of Spayne.
Whilest these sayd estates were assembled, there were certaine little verses made both in Latin and in French, which did runne vp and downe the streetes, where of I haue made a collection, that the Italians, who are cu∣rious and desirous of such things, may see them. AN EPISTLE OF THE LORD OF EN∣goulevent, to a certaine friend of his, touching the oration that the Cardinall of Pelve made to the Estates of Paris. MY great good friend, you shall vnderstand by this rime, That yesterday the estates were opened in good time, Where there were very many goodly orations made: But of all them that of tongues had the gift or trade, That great and graue Prelate of Sens the Cardinall, By his learned discourse hath rauished vs of our wits all. Doe you desire to heare it? vnstop doe your eares then, (So saith the song) and you shal haue meruailes amongst mē: He spake very largely of one father Pretion, Of whom that learned Liuie maketh the ample mention In his Decade, where he saith, that in his time or age This worthie Pretion was a very great personage. He speaketh further of this, exiuit edictum: But I know not whether he were a Greeke or a Britton. He spake also de Domino, and of the countrie du Mayne, In a very well set countenance and a grauitie Romaine: Of S. Paul the conuert he spake much also, How fearefull he was when vpside downe he fell tho. And so he said he was a gentleman braue and bred, A graue and great proofe. Which appeared by this, that at Rome he lost his head. He spake in French also, that was lame and a runnagate, Of the Spanyard for sooth, and of the bonet of the Legate, And of his blessed crosse, For Gregorie: this is eloquēce passing intel∣ligence. and of Gringore the Pope, Of Luxembourgh and Pisani, of whō they haue small hope. When he spake of the place that was so fowly araied,
Some thought then how much he was defiled and afraied: When he daunced la volte, and a very great companie say That this was for K. K. his niece or kinswoman gay. An incestuous Cardinall. Another added therewithall (howbeit a very good cōpanion) Fie vpon the same said he, it smelleth much of an onyon. He bragged that if he might one day in the Consistorie spēd, With fiue protests al cōtrouersies he wold soone heare & end. The fencer he plaid, and to them that heard him he seemed to vaunt, That Iesus Christ himselfe had sometime been a protestant. Some danger there is that some one or other will him send They shall haue a good catch. To the protestants in Germanie, amongst them his life for to end. As for that which remaineth this bearer (that was nie Heard all the matter, and whom of purpose send I,) Shall tell it you better: so much write doth my pen That its alreadie reft, and laugheth lowd now and then. Farewell. An excuse touching the sayd oration. His eloquence he could not make seene, yet had he a good wil, For want of a little pretie booke, wherein was all his skill. Learning lieth in his booke. My Lords the estates, excuse this man good and kind, At Rome his learned Calepine he left there behind. A dictionarie. Another touching the same oration. he ignorant friers had very great reason Like will to like quoth the diuell to the collier. To make you their head, Monsieur most grant: For they that haue heard your goodly oraison, Indeed haue confessed you to be most ignorant. To the Spanyards concerning their double duckets Good Lord how yellow and how faire No good v∣sing of Gods name. Doe your double duckets appeare.
Cause of them to be searched out great store Ye halfe Moores and more. Spanyards he meaneth. In the midst of your yellow and golden sands, Or from thence you shall be returned, all dried vp and burned. Paris, which is not your pray, sends you cleane away, With a hundred foote of nose thorow all lands. That is greatly derided. Vpon the bruit that ranne abroad, that they ment to make a Patriarch in France: and touching the hanging of foure of the sixteene. Holie father, France to hold you haue no hope, If they there set vp against you another Pope, Sure you will lose it: thinke well of it yet, Its no small morsell to lose, when nought you can get. Those mischieuous Maheutres, Reasons why the Pope shall forgoe France. and shred politikes, Though themselues they doe call good Catholikes, Yet surely good Romanes they neuer will be, And much lesse the Huguenots of all them three. Our Paris the poore hath so much sustained sure, As impossible it is any more it should indure. Thinke well of it at the least if you will, The zealous Catholikes there they hang doe and kill: A kingdome diuided can not long in∣dure. From sixteene to twelue, the number is decreast, And so without doubt swept needes must be the rest: That after the first foure brought downe from aboue, They may be set on perches, as it were a stockdoue. Touching Mont-falcon, and the sixteene of Paris. That each haue his owne is iustice indeed, The propor∣tion is good. To Paris sixteene, by foure quarters agreed, Mont-falcon must haue sixteene pillers hie, So euery one hath his owne, who can this denie?
Touching a treasurer who was committed prisoner to the Bastille. What hath he done that thus in prison they hold? In his chest good store had he of angels and gold. Gold many times bringeth his griefe. Oh sore wicked man that to prison he goes, He did lodge too nigh him, his very great foes. Vpon the imprisonment of a foolish aduocate. For my part I know not by what good reason, That out of the Cannon or Ciuill law can be had, A drie blow a∣gainst iniustice They haue thus put a sot or foole into prison, Sith thorow the streetes, there runne so many mad. Concerning the bonfires made at Saint Peters feast. 1592. The fire at S. Iohns feast liked me well, Woe be to thē that laugh, for they shall weepe. They sing about it, daunce roundly and turne: Concerning S. Peters, nothing I will tell, But these fires our France, inkindle and burne. Whereupon they were called the zea∣lous of the vnion. God speede ye Messieurs, ye Catholikes, Without faith in God, or his sonne and delite: Greedily haue ye deuoured vp the blessed relikes, What will not these men doe that deface their owne re∣ligion. And the Crucifix ye haue swallowed vp quite. Some thinke that for your zeale, and no other things, Good men you zealous name doe and call: But you haue this name indeed of the wings, Because so well you doe flie therewithall. The wicked spirit that doth you inrage, Ʋnder the colour of blessed religion, France hath razed and vnited in this age: Accursed bee that vnion that maketh dissention. And thereof and not els, it is called the vnion.
Touching the double crosses of the league. Tellme, I pray thee, what it doth signifie, That the leaguers haue a double crosse with paine? Surely that in the league, An excellent mystery. they meane to crucifie Gods sonne Christ himselfe yet once againe. To Monsieur the Lieutenant touching the taking of Pelade. Pelade, Mocke on hardly, and cloath him with shame. sir, you have taken sure, By the breach that you doe know, Keepe it well I pray you Monsieur, It is of good worth, sith you haue it so. To Monsieur dela Chapelle in the vrsins. The aduise of all Frenchmen is referred to one thing, When of you Monsieur de la Chapelle, they haue any talke, You aduise ouer late, Some must rush into their owne ruine. and are not sure of the most cunning, That enter into the league, when others from it walke. To Monsieur of Lyons. Monsieur a Cardinall sure you shall bee, Where the disease holdeth you, know well doe wee: But let it not of ioy, The place of execution, where loosing his head, hee wil haue no place to set his hat on. at all you bereue. That Master Iohn Rouzeau, as he doth say, Oweth you the redde hatte in Greue. To Boucher the Preacher. Of ciuill warre, O very flame & furie, And to the world an ensigne sure: If thou canst not be the Bishop of a citie, Happy man he, if he might haue it. Yet of the fields, we will thee it procure.
To the Aduocate of Orleans. If thou wouldst be hanged, that which is good then do, Seeing that on thee poore wretch, no mercy men can haue: But if some little of thy goods thou wouldst faine spare to, A desperate end for a des∣perate person. Thē go cast thy self into the water, the rope so shalt thou saue. Of two horses slaine or dying in going to see the Duke of Parma. A certaine president, Triboulet that had to name, Followed Monsieur Roland, that sheriffe of great fame: The Duke of Parma and Plaisance to greete very sure, He had two horses, better french then he in that case, Fooles must buy their plea∣sure deare. That constrained to go thither, had therat such disgrace, That both of them in two daies were dead with displeasure. Touching the same matter. O coch man thou, when thy horses dyed, Because too sore they were runne and tyred, Thou oughtest in such a strange accident To haue put in the coch the very president: A more fit place for him. For as some report in causes of request, He is worth two great beasts at the lest. Of two that sue and labour for the Kingdome. Two vnto suite the Kingdome haue bread, But their desire of it they shall lose withall, The one because he hath verily too great a head, The Duke de Mayne. The Duke of Guise. An the other because his nose is too small. Touching the election of the Duke of Cuyse. The league did it selfe flat nosed find, And the leaguers much astonied were sure,
Another subtletie they had then in their mind, The young Guise still. A King without a nose to themselues to procure. An answer for the Duke of Guise. The little Guisard makes mocks and moes, At all your verses and sonnets so quicke, Want of sense and shame go together. For hauing a strong breath and a flat nose, He feeleth not when men doe him pricke. Touching the vow of a shippe of siluer, made to our Ladie de Laurette, by Marteau prouost of the Marchants. 1590. In danger of shipwracke, some vow to saints to make, And when they are on shore, Fie vpon such trumpery. the same from them to shake, Is a praisewort hie thing, neit her will I it blame: But who is so foolish, Begge such a. one for a soole. as that he will pay the same, Being yet on the seas, in the rage of the tempest? Theuet sure I am, neuer yet saw so great and grosse a beast. A rebuke touching the same matter. What haue I said? thereof repent doe I, He is not a beast that maketh a vow No more than a Tigre. And plaieth with our skinne in hanging it hie, And acquits him with our losse, he careth not how. Touching the doctors of the vnion. The doctors of the counterfeite and dissembled vnion, By their foolish doctrine, which they themselues shape, Popery and paltery ioyne alwaies toge∣ther. Suppose of the mantle, of their holy religion, To make the iolie Spaniard, a new and fresh cape. The Epitaph of the Cheualier d'Aumale. He sundry times escapeth that flieth out of warre, Commendati∣on of cowar∣dise. But he that standeth to it, and putteth himselfe too farre,
Is oftentimes cast away, and trussed vp into a male, For the proofe hereof, I report me to Cheualier d'Aumale. Though he had in his hands some good pith and strength, Yet with his feete had he foughten as well at the length At S. Denis, as in many encounters he missed the trap, We should not neede here to plaine of his grieuous mishap. An other. He that lieth here a taker was, right bold and hardie sure, Against S. Denis that a fine enterprise did procure: But yet S. Denis more subtle, than this taker of renowne, The pot goeth so often to the water, that at the last it com∣meth broken home. Did take him and both flea him eke, within his taken towne. An other. S. Anthonie being robd, by a head of the leaguers conioynd, Went (as to one more strong) to S. Denis, to lay opē his mind, Who to reuenge this wrong, hath giuen him sure promise: Some little while after, this great robber did assay To take S. Denis, but S. Denis tooke him by the way, He goeth far in sinne, that is neuer puni∣shed for it. Andreuenged vpō him both the one & the other enterprise. A Sonnet vpon this, that the said Cheualier d'Aumale, was slaine nere vnto the lodging or inne, that had for signe the Kings sworde. 1. Two notable examples al∣ledged by the way of simili∣tude. As heretofore men sawe when the great Greeian tempest Vpon the wals of Neptune had his lightening sore exprest, Polyxene to fall, and Achilles prouoked for to be, And eke vpon the Troian coast, the fall all too bloudie: 2. And as Iulius Caesar of an ambitious heart and hate Of the great Romane citie, did ouerthrow the state; And being foe to Pompey, and the libertie also, At his image feete fel dead, with a hundred blowes and moe: The true red∣duion of the similitude, So at S. Denis towne, of his kings the bloodie foe, Ne are to their costly tombs, hath had a great ouerthrowe,
A sacrifice very late offered vp vpon their dust, Beleeue let vs more than euer, that there is one God iust: Sith of this rebell, The time, the place, the ma∣ner of dooing and all would be obserued, in Gods iudge∣ments. Let popish & atheisticall traytors marke this. we saw the paine, the place and all, Yea that euen at the signe of the Kings sword he should fall. Another concerning the same subiect or matter. There is but one God, who rebels doth ouerthrow And reuengeth Kings: and their iust quarrels also Takes into his hand, and them sustaine he will, Such did not beleeue it, as now beleeues it still. This knight, that not long since men saw to be so Of the state and his master a very deadly foe, (So cruell, so presumptuous, so bolde and so hie, That with his lift vp head, he thought to touch the skie) Is fallen, and that into a grieuous ruine and decay, Whither Gods wrath did carrie him, and harry him away: At S. God is known by executing iudgement, the wicked is snared in the workes of his owne hands. Higgaion. Selah. Denis he is founde starke and stone dead, Fallen also into the snares, that for others himselfe spread: For his pride there fell vpon him this grieuous wrath and vengeance, Neare vnto the tombes of the auncient Kings of France, Whose brused and broken bones in that same place doe rest, And seeme Gods iustice therein, religiously to haue blest. Who (for the truth and faith that this wretch did violate) Would haue this sacrifice to the Kings there to be immolate, And that his bodie with mise eaten vp should be, As Hatto, the Archbishop of Mentz, was deuoured with rattes while he liued. (As great a wanton of the dames of Paris as was he) Before that to iust buriall, men could in season bring His bodie full of filth, and rottennes stinking. To cause the greatest of the leaguers to vnderstand, That thus dooing still, they shall be punished by his hand. Another touching the same matter, written in Latine, and translated out of the same. As the virgine of Priamus did fall vpon the Phrygiā shore, Two exam∣ples as before applied. And at the marble of her foes tombe, was constrained to dye therefore,
And as Caesar with many wounds, at his son in lawes picture, Hauing conquered others, for all that fell at the feete of the conquered sure: So at the tombe of his own Kings, a foe to Kings in breath Falles dead, and imbloodeth the ground, with a iust de serued death. Wherfore ye godly men euen now reioyce, for why this offring odde Both at kingly tombes is punished, & sheweth there is a God. Against the same Cheualier d'Aumale. This man by mightie guile did take, S. Denis towne of fame, Oh how vn∣searchable are Gods waies, and his iudge∣ments past fin∣ding out. But taker he, in taken towne was caught, and perished in the same. A Sonnet vpon the retiring of the Duke of Parma. But where is now this power so huge, so mightie & so great, An abrupt & patheticall ex∣dium, but fitte for the pur∣pose. That when it came to vs it seemed all the Gods themselues to threat? And that promised to itselfe to breake, and downe to the ground to fling The famous french nobility, with their armed prince or king: This preparation great & proud, to smoke or winde is turnd. And that great Duke that thought himselfe, So God con∣foundeth pride of hart. all the worlde to haue burnd, Without dooing ought, constrained is into Flanders to retire, Hauing lost his people, his time, his fame, & that hee did de∣sire. Henrie our great king as a hunter good, doth him pursue and chase, He presseth him, he followeth him, and the fox flieth apace With his nose to the ground, ashamd, despised and blamed & brought to danger. Yee Spaniards proude learne this of mee, Spaniards learne in time. neuer yet did any stranger Intrap or take a Frenchman but with losse, dāger & shame, The Frenchman is not vanquished, but by one of the same name.
A Sonnet to all them of the League. O ye vnnatur all Frenchmen, To all French generally. and bastards of this land, That tamed cannot be, but by your owne force and hand: Now put ye off this courage, inhumane and vnnaturall, That puss you vp with pride, & by ignorāce destroyes you all. Ye pettie princes of Lorraine, To the Lor∣rainists. He meaneth the Pope, or the Spanyard, or both. To the Pari∣siens. shake off your hope therefore, The error of that Cumane asse follow ye not any more, Who clothed with the skinne of the Romane lion great, (Seeing the very lion stout) doth hart and hope forget. And you ô ye Parisiens, recourse whither will you haue? You must needs whether you will or no (voyd of hope your selues to saue) Subiect your selues to that dutie, to which the laws you bind: But if against your selues you stirre your king that is sokind, Chastened you shall sure be: for on babes and fooles we spend Some chastisement, or els indeed they will neuer sure amend. Touching the Lords of Vitry and of Villeroy, who haue acknowledged the King. The vnion her selfe her force doth still vntie, Vitry and Villeroy witnesse doe this thing: To God therefore alone be infinite glorie, Praise vnto them, honour to the King. This Lieutenant in false conceit, This great piller sweld with wind and no more, That thought the King to counterfeit, Shall be grosse Iohn euen as before. The Duke du Mayne. The League, it selfe to destroy goes about, Wherewith confounded are the wicked race: The seede thereof shall sure be put out A house diui∣ded in it selfe can not stand. By torture, sharpe swords, or some other strange case. Ye people of bloud, of spoyle, and the rope, And still will be named zealous as yet: The Leaguers. Cry the King mercie, so may you haue hope, Or els from hence ye shall goe to the gibbet.
Ye sixteene, Mount-falcon calleth for you, The sixteene appointed to gouerne Paris. To morrow the crowes will crie very lowd: The sixteene pillers of his chappell new Shall be your tombes, wherein you shall be shrowd. To the King concerning his very great clemencie. Amongst the goodly virtues, this is one very excellent, Pitifull to be to the vanquisht, and to pardon all: But take heed of too much, chieflly to rebels impenitent: Too much pi∣tie spoyleth a citie, yea a kingdome. For Caesar as great a prince, as your selfe, did thereby fall. Concerning the same matter in Latin, and turned into English. Pitie in a great prince is a great virtue indeed, A good thing can hardly be too oftē repea∣ted. And to be willing alwaies his enemies to spare: But yet too much pitie is not safe, as we may reade, By the bloudie death of Caesar, a prince very rare. Vpon the same matter. Heretofore it was a virtue fit for a cour agious king, To the greatest of his foes, grace and pardon to show: But sith Caesar was murthered, and that for this thing, From a virtue to a vice, it is become, as many moe. In Latin, but translated out of it. In former time for captains great pity was a virtuous trade: But sith that Caesar was destroied, this virtue a vice is made. To the King. O thou victorious prince, and now the best of all that liue, God out of his hand into thine, two scepters great doth giue: France & Na∣uarre.
And in a throne of long'st indure hath placed thee againe, In spite of all the sore attempts of that coniured Spayne. The wishes of all Frenchmen good, are heard yet at the last, Thou race of Lewes S. shalt reigne, in peace, and sit full fast. That which the heauens giue thee sure, no man can take frō thee, Though voyd of scepter and of crowne, thou shouldst commād with glee. Notwithstanding all this, ô King, a King thou shalt be sure, Its virtue that makes kings, A worthie sentence. their crowne, & alfor to indure. In Latin, and translated out of it. Vnconquered prince, and of thine age, the glorie eke alone, Euen GOD himselfe doth set thee vp, True, for kings reigne by him. vpon thy grandsires throne: And with a happy hād doth reach, to thee two scepters braue, Which takē from the Spanish foe, thou shalt vphold & haue. In daies past, one of the sisters three did spin this goodly thred: But though they should denie to thee, the gold crowne of thy head, And eke the holie oyle that was vouchsafed of France to the King, Which messenger both swift and faire, from heauen high did bring, That shal not let, but rule thou maiest, after thy fathers rate, Virtue crowns the king, virtue, I say, the king doth cōsecrate. T.W.
THE FRENCH PRINTERS DISCOVRSE, TOVCHING THE exposition of these words, Higuiero of hell, and concerning other matters, which he learned of the Au∣thor himselfe. MY masters and good friends, the profite that I haue made by the imprinting of this treatie, and that which Iowe to this dis∣course, haue made mee very desirous to knowe who was the author hereof. For after that the French copie was first giuē me at Chartres, at the consecration of the King, by the gentleman of whom I haue heretofore made mention, I did perceiue that sundry learned men, yea and I my selfe, did very easily iudge, by the stile and language of the booke, that an Italian was neuer able to make so good a french worke, and so well polished, as this is, that shew∣eth an absolute knowledge of all the affaires, and of the very natural disposition of all the most famous men of Fraunce. Wherefore we must of necessitie conclude, that hee was a French man that made it, yea such a French man, as had good vnderstanding and intelligence, and was well trained vp at court, & that the Florentine which was about to cary it into his countrie, from whom his ser∣uant stole it together with the male, had but only turned it out of French into Italian, that so hee might cause it to be seene, and read in Italie. And this was the cause why I my selfe trauailed with a certaine wonderfull care, to discouer and finde out him, who had made vs indebted vnto him for this worthy worke, that hath giuen so great pleasure, contentment, and liking, to all good and honest people. But not withstanding all the inquirie, that I was able to make thereabout, I could not finde a man, that told mee any very certaine and assured newes, touching
the same, but speaking only by presumptions, suspitions, and coniectures; till one of these dayes last past, when I was almost past hope, to knowe any thing touching the matter, there did by fortune come vnto me in the street, a very aged man, very leane also, and pale, which since I haue heard to bee called Master Polypragmon, That is Master busie bodie. who ab∣ruptly and vpon the sodaine demaunded of me, if it were not I that had printed the Catholicon of Spaine. At the first I made some difficultie and doubt, to consesse it vnto him, fearing that hee had bin some one of them, that had bin named therein, and had felt himselfe moued there∣with, as diuers had done: no, no, saith he, keep not close from me, that that all the world knoweth, I was at Tours when you first imprinted it, and knowe andeed the name of them, that gaue you the originall copie thereof: but for all that it may bee, that neither your selfe, nor they which gaue you it, knewe who was the author thereof. Perceiuing then, that he knewe so much of this matter, I could not but confesse, that in trueth I had printed it at Tours, but that I was not able to finish it, but in the very time that I must trusle vp my baggage to come in to this citic, after that the Parisiens were returned to their for∣mer good vnderstanding, and brought into the obediēce of the King. That fell out well for you, sayd he, for before that you had set it abroad, diuers men had seene sundrie imperfect, and defectiue copies, which had very much stirred vp their desire, to see the rest well polished and published. But you are much out of the way, when in your Epistle set before the booke, you sayd that it was an Italian that made it, at the assēbly of the Estates of Paris. For I know very well the name of him that composed it, who also lodgeth not farre from hence. Whereupon I was very glad of this encountring, and I did very earnestly pray him to name him vnto mee, at the least wise, if it were lawfull for me to know him: because that I had ve∣ry many thinges of great importance, to tell him for his benefit and honor. I will sayd he, tell you his name, and
wil also shewe you his lodging, vpon condition, that you will not disclose it to any man, for he is a person that doth not loue to be so much visued, as many doe now a daies. Those that told you that hee was of Italie, were deceiued by one letter only, he is not of Italie, but of Alethie, That is, Truth. which is farre differing from the other: That is, Liber∣tie. That is, Free speakers. That is, Lo∣uers of mony. That is, Desi∣rers of honor. That is, Vn∣knowne. That is, a hater of gardens. and he was borne in a lit∣tle towne, that men call Eleuthere, inhabited heretofore and built by the Parresiens, who haue continual warre a∣gainst the Argytophiles, & Timomanes, a very puissant & populous natiō. His name is the Lord Agnoste, of the fa∣milie and stocke of Misoquenes, a gentleman of good e∣state and no deceiuer, which loueth the counsell of wine better, than the councell of Trent. You shall know him by this, that he is alwaies attired after one maner, and neuer changeth his apparell or garments, as if hee had nothing els but to thinke vpon, and to gouerne Lions. Hee is a great little man, that hath his nose between both his cies, his teeth in his mouth, his beard vpon his chinne, and wil∣lingly wipeth his mouth, and his nose vpon his slecues. You shall find him at this presem, lodged in the streete of Good time, at the signe of the Rich labourer, and he go∣eth very often to walke in the blacke Friers, because hee loueth them very well. And hereupon I recommend me vnto you, for I haue to deale in other places, by reason of certaine packets that are come from Rome, which as∣sure vs, that our absolution hangeth by no more, but a twisted thread at this time of the yeere. As hee had very brutishly & thickly spoken these words, he went his way, and left me yet in suspence, nor withstanding I was some∣what better satisfied, than I was before, sith I knewe the name, and the lodging place of mine author. And at the same time I went thorow all the quarters of Paris, and inquired of the street, and the signe that he had told me, but no newes were to bee found, neither of Good time, nor Rich labourer. In the daies following I did weare three paire of shoes, or there about, in rūning vp & down the streets, & could learne nothing. To be brief, I had bin
in the same state stil; but yt by hazard, I met with a certain honest mā, whō I had somtimes heard say, was a Parresiē, of whom I asked the same question, which I had vnprofi∣tably made alreadie tenne thousand times, and that to sō many men. He told me that he had heard speech of a cer∣taine gentleman of Eleuthere, and of the familie of Miso∣quenes, but he knew not whether it were he that I asked for, because that there were diuers of that name in Ale∣thie. I besought him to guide me to the lodging of him whom he knew, which thing he did, and at the last, after many turnings and windings, thorowe fundrie & diuers little streetes, he shewed me a little low doore, into which I entred without knocking, and found in a little high chamber, very pleasant & well furnished, a man of good∣ly representation, leaning and reading vpon a booke, drawing very nigh to the cut and fashion that that man master Pol had described vnto me. I demaunded of him (greeting and reuerence being presupposed) whether he were the Lord Agnoste Misoquene: men indeede (sayd he) call me Misoquene, but I am not Agnoste. He whom you inquire of, is indeede my very neere kinsman, and we are both two of one countrie, and of one towne, but it shall be very hard for you at this present to finde him: for his lodging is more hidden and secret, then the neast of a Tortoise. Not withstanding, if you would haue any thing with him, I can from hence at any time aduertise him thereof. Then sayd I vnto him, Monsieur, I beleeue that it is he, that is the author of that little discourse, that is made touching the holding and assemblie of the Estates of Pa∣ris, and of the Catholicon of Spayne, which he hath in∣titled, A Satyre Menippized. I haue heard him himselfe there of (sayd he) say so. That is a worke (quoth I to him) which hath been very much receiued, and which I haue imprinted (for I am a Printer at your commaundement) without knowing the value thereof. Which may appeare by this, that at the beginning thereof at Tours, I printed but seuen or eight hundred copies, but so soone as it was
seene at Paris (whither I brought it with my presses and moueable goods) the whole world thought it so beauti∣full and so well done, that men ranne vnto it as to a fire, in so much that I printed it foure times in three weekes, and I am readie now to print it the fift time, if I had con∣ferred but onely one halfe houre with the author. After this, this honest man sayd, I haue oftentimes heard my cousin say, that he was very much grieued, that this trea∣tie came into sight, before he had reuewed the same, and cut off diuers things, which it may be, he thought easie e∣nough to passe then, when he composed the same: but in the time wherein we are, it may bee they may ingender some scandale, and offend some persons of qualitie, who are named therein, or poynted out thereby. For those which haue acknowledged and amended their faults, do very well deserue, that men should suppresse and burie the remembrance therof, rather then refresh it, and make it perpetuall, by such prouoking and merrie writings. Al∣so I haue heard him complaine of a certaine booke seller, who either thorowe couetousnes, or of iealousie towards others, hath caused this worke to be printed in very small letters, ill corrected, and very vnpleasant: and who also hath been so rash and headie, to take from it, and to put to it, whatsoeuer pleased himselfe, which thing indeede iu∣stice ought not to indure. Notwithstanding the argumēt is publike, whereunto euery man may put additions, spe∣cially such as respect the matter: for otherwise, or besides that I know very well, that my sayd cousin, neither wish∣eth, nor hopeth to haue honor or praise thereby. Then I de naūded of him, if there were not any meane for me to see the said lord Agnoste. And he answered me, that there was not any for that season, because that his sayd cousin did sometimes shut vp himselfe for eight daies space to∣gether, without seeing any man. But yet that if he had a mind to know any matter concerning his intent or pur∣pose, he thought he was able to satisfie me, euen aswell as his cousin himselfe, because that they had oftentimes
discoursed together, touching this matter, as also con∣cerning this, that some came vnto him euery day to re∣port vnto him the speeches which men vsed in the pa∣lace, and thorow out the citie touching his booke. I will therefore bee bold, seeing that I cannot haue this good∣nes to behold him, euen I, I say, will be bold, to demand of you some doubts, whereat I see sundry men to stum∣ble, and not to be able well to resolue themselues. First, wherefore did he affect this new title of Satyre Menippi∣zed, which all the world vnderstandeth not, seeing that in the written copies, it had this inscription, The abridg∣ment and soule of the Estates. This question (sayd hee) cannot fall but in ignorant spirits, for all they which haue bin brought vp in learning, knowe very well, that this word Satyre, doth not only signifie a poesie, containing euill speech in it, for the reproofe, either of publike vices, or of particular faults of some certaine persons, of which sort are those of Lucilius, Horace, Iuuenal, and Persius: but also all sortes of writinges, replenished with sundry matters, and diuers argumentes, hauing prose and verse intermixed or mingled therewithall, as if it were pow∣dred neats tongues interlarded. Varro saith, that in an∣cient times, men called by this name, a certaine sorte of pie or of pudding, into which men put diuers kindes of hearbes, and of meates. But I suppose that the word com∣meth from the Graecians, who at their publike and so∣lemne feastes, did bring in vpon their stages or scaffolds, certaine persons disguised, like vnto Satyres, whom the people supposed to be halfe Gods, full of lasines, & wan∣tonnes in the woods, euen such a one, as presented him∣selfe aliue vnto Sylla, and such a one of them as Saint Hie∣rome rehearseth, appeared vnto Saint Anthonie. And these men disguised after this manner, being naked and tattered, took a certaine kind of libertie vnto themselues, to nippe and to floute at all the worlde, without punish∣ment. In olde time, some made them to rehearse their iniurious verses all alone, without any other matter in
them, then railing and speaking euill of eueryone, after∣wards men mingled them with Comedie players, who brought them into their acts, to make the people laugh: at the last, the more graue and serious Romanes chased them altogether out of their Theaters, and receiued in their place, Vices in playes: but the more wise and wit∣tie Poets vsed them, to content there withall, their owne bad spirit of euill speaking, which some of them thought to bee the chiefe goodnes. And there are great numbers of them found in our countrie of Parresie, who loue ra∣ther to lose a good friend, then a good word or a merrie iest, applied well to the purpose. Wherfore it is not with∣out cause, that they haue intituled this little discourse, by the name Satyre, though that it be written in prose, being yet notwithstanding stuffed and stored with gallant Iro∣nies, pricking notwithstanding and biting the very bot∣tome of the consciences of them, that feele themselues nipped therewithall, concerning whom it speaketh no∣thing but trueth: but on the other side, making those to burst with laughter, that haue innocent hearts, and are well assured that they haue not strayed from the good & right way. As concerning the adiectiue Menippized, it is not new or vnusuall, for it is more then sixteene hundred yeares agoe, that Varro called by Quintillian, and by S. Augustine, the most skilfull amongst the Romanes, made Satyres of this name also, which Macrobius sayth were called Cyniquized, and Menippized: to which he gaue that name because of Menippus the Cynicall Philoso∣pher, who also had made the like before him, al ful of sal∣ted iestings, & poudred merie conceits of good words, to make men to laugh, and to discouer the vicious mē of his time. And Varro imitating him, did the like in prose, as since his time there hath done the like, Petronius Arbiter, & Luciā in the Greek tongue, & since his time Apuleius, and in our age that good fellow Rabelaiz, who hath pas∣sed all other men in contradicting others, and pleasant conceits, if hee would cut off from them some quod∣libetarie
speeches in tauernes, and his salt and biting words in alehouses. Wherefore I cannot tell what man∣ner of men these daintie ones are, that thinke some doe euill, that according to the example of these great perso∣nages, ment to giue vnto a like worke, a like title vnto that of theirs, which is now become common, and as we say, appellatiue, whereas before it was proper and parti∣cular: as not long time since, a learned Flemming and a good Antiquarian, hath vsed the same. And this is al that I can tell you in this respect. If you desire any other thing, I will tell you my aduise or opinion. Then sayd I vnto him, I am sufficiently satisfied as touching the title; but there is very great disputation amongst some, what the author should meane by these tearmes, Higuiero of hell: for there are very many persons that knowe not what it meaneth, and make thereof sundrie horned and ill fauou∣red interpretations, such as in my minde the author him∣selfe neuer thought of. I knowe very well (sayd he) that there are diuers that desire to play about the affinitie of the words: some, to make themselues merrie therewith: and others to draw the author into enuie: but there is much oddes betweene eight and eighteene, and a great difference betweene breathing and whistling. I haue heard my cousin a hundred times say, and I knowe it also as well as hee, that Higuiero of hell, signifieth no other thing in the Castillian or Spanish tongue, but the Figge tree of hell. For the Spanyards, as also the Gascoignes, turne the F into H, as hazer, harina, hijo, hogo, higo, for faire, that is, to do, farine, meale, fils, a sonne, feu, fire, figue, a figge. And this at this time is but too common in Paris, where the women haue learned to speake, as well as to doe, after the Spanish manner. Where he sayth then, that the drugge of the Spanish Iugler, or Apothecarie, was called Higuiero of hell, it is for diuers reasons. First, be∣cause the figge tree is a wicked and an infamous tree, the leaues whereof (as we may see in the Bible) haue ser∣ued heretofore to couer the priuie parts of our first pa∣rents,
after that they had sinned, and committed high treason against their God, their father and creator: euen as the Leaguers to couer their disobedience and in∣gratitude against their King, and him that hath done thē all good, haue taken the Catholigue, Apostoligue, and Romane religion, and thinke therewith to hide their shame and sinne. This is the cause also why the Catho∣licon of Spayne, that is to say, the pretext which the King of Spayne, and the Iesuites and other preachers, wonne by the double duckets of Spayne, haue giuen to the sedi∣tious and ambitious Leaguers, to rebell against their na∣turall and lawfull King, and to fall away from him, and to make in their owne countrie, warre more dangerous than ciuill, may very properly bee called, the Figge tree of hell, in steed that that wherewith Adam and Eue did couer their open sinne, was the Figge tree of Paradise. And euer since that time this tree hath alwaies been ac∣cursed, and of euill name amongst men, bearing neither flowers nor any buddes, nor any thing els to garnish it withall, and the very fruite it selfe hath from thence been drawne to name the most dishonest part of women, and the most filthie and foule disease that breedeth in the parts, that wee cannot well name. You are not igno∣rant of this also, that the ancient people did account this tree amongst the gibbets or gallowses: as for example, whē Timon the Athenian would haue plucked vp one of them that did him some anoyance in his garden, and whereupon sundrie had in former time been hanged, he caused to bee proclaimed with the sound of a trumpet, that if any were willing to be hanged, he should dispatch and come thither quickly, because he ment to cause it to bee pulled vp by the rootes. Plinie teacheth vs, that this tree hath not any sent or sauor; no more hath the League. Againe, that it easily casteth her fruite; and so hath the League done: that it receiueth all manner of corrup∣tions, as the League hath receiued all sortes of people: and that it doth not last or liue long; no more hath the
League done: and that the greatest part of the fruite, which appeareth at the beginning, neuer commeth to ripenes; no more hath that of the League. But that which yet better agreeth with it, and hath many more confor∣mities with the League, than S. Frauncis hath with our Lord, is the Figge tree of the Indies, which the very Spa∣nyards themselues haue named the Figge tree of hell. Concerning which, Mathiolus sayth thus much for truth, that if a man cut but onely one leafe from it, and set but the one halfe thereof within the ground, it will take roote there, and afterwards vpon that leafe there will growe an other leafe, and so leaues growing vpon leaues this plant becommeth hie as it were a tree without bodie, stalke, branches, and as it were without rootes, in so much that we may reckon it amongst the miracles of nature. Is there any thing so like and so much resembling the League? which of one leafe, that is to say, of a very small begin∣ning, is become by little and little from one person to an other, to this great height wherein we haue seene it: and yet notwithstanding, because it wanteth a good foote, or a good stalke to beare it vp, it withered and decayed at the first blast. But this is not all. This Figge of the In∣dies, called (as you haue heard) the Figge tree of hell, bringeth foorth fruite like vnto the common figges, but yet somewhat more grosie and great, finishing by the forepart in a crowne, (these are the proper tearmes of Mathiolus) and are of colour betweene greene and purple, within there is nothing, sauing a certaine kinde of puffed matter, as in our figges, but yet so full with a cer∣taine red kind of iuyce, that it tainteth mens hands, as the mulberies or blacke beries do, and causeth them that re∣ceiue it, to make vrine as red as bloud, wherof many peo∣ple are greatly afraid. Haue you not seene that the League hath had the very same effects? The fruites thereof haue been great, and more puffed vp and swollen than com∣mon fruites, and their end was a crowne, that is to say, the crowne of France, to which it tended: the colour of the
League was greene and red: greene for the ioy that they had of the death of the late king, whereof they did a long while weare the scarfe: and red, as well that they might bee knowne in the liueries of the Spanyards, as for the bloud of the good Frenchmen that they ment to shed. This Figge tree of hell is so common in the Iland of Hispaniola, newly discouered in the Indies, that a cer∣taine Italian author fayth, that the whole countrie is full thereof, and that there it commeth as it were in despite, euen vnto the courts of their houses. There is also an other Spanish Phisition, named Iohn Fragosus, that wri∣teth of the propertie of a certaine oyle (which they call the oyle of the Figge tree of hell) in these tearmes: Some late men that write of the things of the West Indies, haue a peculiar chapter of a certaine oyle that they call, the oyle of the Figge tree of hell, and they say, that it commeth from Gelisco, a prouince in newe Spayne. And a little after hee sayth: It is the same that they account Cherua, or Catapucia maior, which the Ita∣lians call, Palma Christi, or Mira solis. All which plain∣lie declareth, that that which the Italians call fico d'in∣ferno, that is, the Figge tree of hell, it is called by the Spanyards, Higuera d'inferno, or in the Castillian tongue, Higuiero d'infierno, that is as before, the Figge tree of hell. These then are the reasons that haue moued my cousin, to name the Catholicon of Spayne, the Figge tree of hell; because that the Spanyards so call that Figge tree of the Indies, that beareth her fruite full of bloud, as indeed the League hath done. And if a man would proceede yet further, and say that that Figge tree is the Palmar, you shall finde therein a thousand other confor∣mities or agreements, which it would be too long to dis∣course vpon: and amongst other, that which a certaine Phisition of Africa hath written, that of the tree Pal∣mar alone, a man might make all manner of tooles and prouisions for a shippe, yea the very shippe it selfe,
and that the fruite thereof may be applied to all vses, and serueth for bread, for wine, for linnen cloth, for vessell, for table, for couering of houses, and in a worde, for all that a man would haue: as the League at the beginning of it, serued for all sortes of people: for all sortes of hopes, and for all meanes, to couer all sortes of passions, as of hatred, of couetousnes, of ambition, of reuengement, and of in∣gratitude. There is indeede another tree, which Baptista Ramusius, calleth Higuero, and saith that it must be pro∣nounced by foure sillables: but I am sure it was not the purpose of my cousin to speake thereof, An herbe of the kinde of spourge. A kinde of spourge, with a leafe like purse∣lane. no more than of Lathyris, or of Helioscopion, which the grammarian Ne∣brissensis calleth also Higuera del infierno, that is the figge tree of hell, because hee witches and shee witches com∣monly vse it, to worke their charmes and inchauntments by, as the Leaguers haue vsed the name of Catholike re∣ligion, to charme and inchant the people withall. And this as I take it, may suffise or satisfie them, that would di∣uine or dispute concerning this terme. Some haue tolde my cousin, that diuers thought hardly of it, that hee hath expressed the proper names of some of the seditious and principall authors, of all the miserie and mischiefe of France. But I haue heard him say, that hee was of such a countrey, where they vsed to call bread, bread; & figges, figges. Those that for money had deliuered their owne citie to Phillip King of Macedonia, complained indeede that his souldiers, after the yeelding of it, called them traitors, and vpbraided them with their treason. I knowe not (said the King) how to doe you any helpe in this, for my souldiers are grosse and lumpish fellowes, and call things by their owne names. Those, who after they had caused sundry townes to reuolt against the King, & had as much as they could maintayned warre, and exercised al manner of tyrannies against the poore people, and ha∣uing ruinated all their neighbours, and who seeing them∣selues no longer able to holde out, and that there was no more to catch or take, did very dearely sell those places
to the King, and deliuered vp the poore inhabitants to his mercy, shall those I say, be angry, if men call thē tray∣tors? But it were a hard matter, that no one word should scape the Parresiens, euen against them that haue taken golde and siluer, and that haue merchandized, & bought, and solde, to come to a certaine price, I wil haue so much for doing it. For though that they had done that which they should haue done, (as Iudges that execute iustice, which they are bounde to doe) yet for all that, in taking money they haue marred all, and ought not any longer to receiue honor, for their good doing. They cannot saue themselues from this, that men should not call them trai∣tors, troublers of the state, merchants, and sellers of their countrie; and there is none but God alone, that can bring to passe, that things alreadie done, should not bee done, neither can hee bring to passe, (vnles it bee by a certaine kinde of grosse forgetfulnes, which hee can bring vpon our spirites or vnderstandings) that wee should not re∣member any more, that which is alreadie past. And con∣cerning this matter one of our poets, (whereof our town Eleuthere, is very well furnished) hath spoken not many dayes since, in sixe small verses, Those that thorow ciuill warres, for gold and siluer told Vnto the King doe sell, places and townes of hold, Though in my minde, good markets they doe make: (For, for some small coyne, they expose thēselues to strife, And therewithall doe sell their honor and their life) Yet neuer did honest man this trade vpon him take. Notwithstanding, if any are to be found, that at the be∣ginning suffered themselues to be caried away, with the flood of the League, whether it were for feare to forgoe their religion, or for some particular affection that they bare to the heads of that side, or for some displeasure and hatred, that they had conceiued against the late King, they are they themselues, that submitted themselues to, and that acknowledged, the present King, so soone as they saw him to become a catholike: and haue brought
into his power, the places that they helde without mar∣chandise, or entring into composition with their master: and these are more excusable, for their first error or fault, than the other: yea they deserue recommendation and praise, and to be put in our chronicles, for that they haue deliuered their countrie from the Spanish crueltie, as we see to haue bin done to them, that haue freed France from the English men. Frō whence haue proceeded so manie goodly priuiledges, to families, to townes, and to com∣munalties, who of themselues did shake off the strange yoke, that they might the better submit themselues to the sweet power of their naturall Kings. But that which most grieueth all honest and virtuous people, is to see that they, that haue not done it but by force and necessitie, are yet notwithstanding ioyfully entertained, receiued, and welcommed, and boast that they are the cause that the King is conuerted. These men cause mee to remember a certaine answer, that Fabius the great gaue to a Romane captaine, gouernor of Tarentum, who after that hee had suffered the towne to bee lost by the treason of the citi∣zens, bragged of this, that hee was the cause, that Fabius tooke it againe. Truely (sayd Fabius) I had not taken or recouered the towne, if thou hadst not lost it: euen so may these people bragge and boast here, that they are the cause of so many Trophees & triumphes as the King hath atchieued in conquering his realme againe, for without their treason and rebellion, he had not gained so much honour, as he hath done by bringing them vnder, and ranging them to reason. I saw also others, that haue not so much as stirred out of their houses, and from their quiet rest, to rent and teare the name of the King, and of the princes of the blood of France, as much as they were able, who also not being able any longer to withstand, by reasō of the great necessitie that pressed them, because they had two or three daies, before the reducing of their towne to the Kings obedience, some good sighing and sense to doe better, and yet notwithstanding at this day,
those that speake most loftily, and haue great estates, of∣fices, and recompences, and bragge that they haue done more seruice to the King, & to Frāce it self, thā those that forsooke their houses, their goods, and offices, for to fol∣low their prince, and who did willingly indure all maner of needs, rather than so much as to winke at the tyrannie of these strangers, whether they bee Lorraines, that is of the Guysian faction, or Spaniards. But this complaint de∣serueth an other Satyre Menippized. But for this time I will tell you no more, but two small quartains or verses, which two of our good countrie men made by the way, or vpon the sodaine, as wee say, at a certaine time, when we discoursed vpon this matter. If French men Lewd, in Fraunce recompensed bee, And the best men aduanced to no degree, Let vs somewhat be lewd: men will forget the offence, He that hath not done ill, shall haue no recompence. The other euen at that very instant time also, pursued the selfe same matter, and to no lesse purpose, than the former verses were. To be welcome indeed, and our affaires well to do, During this tedious time, and miserable to, Agnoste my friend, canst tell what way we shall take? Some place lets surprise, and then our peace we will make. I know very wel, that there are many people, that take no delight to heare men speake and write thus freely, and are offended at the first worde, that any man mentioneth our afflictiōs alreadie past, as though after so many great losses, they would take away from vs our feeling and our tongue, & our speech, and libertie giuen vs to complaine withall. But herein they should doe worse vnto vs, than Phalaris did vnto them, whom he stifled and choaked in his brasen bull; for hee did not hinder them from crying, but this rather, that he would not heare their cries, as the
cries of men, lest he might haue pittie vpon them, but as the bellowings of bullockes and buls, the better to dis∣guise the sound of mans voice. This is a hard case, that they that haue beene pilled, robbed, imprisoned in the Bastile, ransomed, and driuen from their townes, & from their charges, should not cast out some euill speech a∣gainst them, when at their returne, they find their houses voide, forsaken, ruinated, wherein there is nothing but the bare wals, whereas they left them richly stored with moueables, and handsomely trimmed vp, with all maner of things. Who can euer stop the mouth of the posterity, and hinder them from speaking of the third part, and of them that haue brought it out, & nursed it, & which keep it yet shut vp in a chamber, nourishing it, and sustaining it with good meate, one day to bring it forth vnto light, and to cause it to be seene, well sauoured, and very great, when they shall see time and commoditie fit for it? It was neuer yet heard of, neither shall it euer bee, (what lawes or ordinances soeuer, men may make therefore) that euill speech should not be better receiued than praise, special∣ly when it is drawn from the trueth it selfe: and that there is not a hundred times more pleasure, to speake euill of some slothfull person, than to praise an honest man. This is the punishment that wicked men cannot escape, and though they haue all their pleasures beside, yet at the least must they haue this dipleasure, & this worme about their hearts, to know that the people teareth them in pieces, & secretly curseth them, and that writers wil not spare them after their death. Thanks be to God, we are not vnder any Tiberius, that spied out the speeches of his subiectes, or that made of all offences newe articles of high treason against the Prince. He giueth to honest people, as much libertie as they should desire: hee knoweth the naturall disposition of French men, as one that cannot indure, nei∣ther all bondage, nor all libertie. Likewise it were not reasonable continually and for euer to stirre vp our olde
quarrels, and to vse iniurious fashions, that might hinder the kitting together againe of his people, in one and the same deuotion, vnder his obedience. For it were better to endeuour to sweeten our euils, than to make them more sharpe, to the ende that we may all of vs range our selues to the ancient fidelitie, and humilitie which wee owe vnto our King, without partialitie, or varietie of minds. Neither should any man thinke it ill, that wee pricke and prouoke them, that shewe themselues to bee restiue, and seeme as it were to repent that they haue re∣pented. In all euents whatsoeuer, when there shall be no other, but those that are notoriously wicked, and yet will bee offended therewithall, I beleeue that the Parresiens will not bee much grieued therewith. Neither doubt I, but that little Oliuier, and Boucher, and d'Orleans, will bee now much troubled, to make some Anticatholicon, and Apologies, against the tables and tapistries, for they haue now leasure to sell them, and many men looke for them, if their Lucubrations and studies, may deserue such expectation. As concerning my selfe, I will alwaies coun∣sell my cousin to busie himselfe about some other thing, than to answer them. But I know more than a dozen in our towne, or citie, whose paper and pen are eaten vp, and yet attend but some compulsorie matter, to make ex∣tracts, and vidimus, out of their Menippized Satyres, much more bloudie then the first. If you learne any thing thereof, I pray you my good friend, cause me to vnder∣stand the same. You perceiue how to pleasure you, I haue a little straied from our purpose, and haue suffered my selfe to be transported to indignation and wrath, which I haue conceiued against those people, that yet build vpon the foundations of the first rebellion: and who also threa∣ten vs, to play with sharpe and edged swords, whereas heretofore they haue plaied but with rebated weapons. And indeede I was not farre off from powring forth my choller vpon the Iesuites: but because I vnderstand they
are not like to continue long in this countrie, and by that meanes the Spanyards shal haue no greater present taste, (for as a deputie of Bourgongne sayd well, a Spaniard without a lesuite, is as a partrich without an orenge, or some other sauce) I am contented to say nothing. But to returne to the point, from which wee haue gone aside. I pray you, if you doe againe imprine the Saryre Menippized, to blot out of it the names of them, that are become the Kinges good seruantes, and who also continue therein with some good resolution. And albe∣it there are still some, that yet shake in the haft, and haue neede of a yeeres triall at the least, before they may be nusted, or haue their names rased out of the booke notwithstanding, sith it belongeth not to you or to mee to iudge of them, the best way will bee to take out of the booke all proper names, and not to offend any one man of them, that may hurt, and bee in the midst of vs. And this is that, that I meant to say vnto you for the last point. And so you shall leaue nice, if you list, to my rest, for it is nowe supper time. And then I per∣ceiued verie well, that hee ment to giue mee leaue to depart, and I prayed him, that hee would pardon me, because I had bin so tedious vnto him, but I had ta∣ken so great pleasure to heare him, that the time see∣med vnto mee not to bee long. Notwithstanding I be∣sought him that before I did depart, I might yet a little aduertise him, that sundry men saide, that the oration of the Lorde of Aubray, was to too long, and ouer se∣rious in comparison of them that went before it, which were all very short, and full of fictions: and that I for my part, could not tell either what to answere, or what reason the author had, to leade him so to doe. Where∣unto hee aunswered and sayd, neither doe I, for my part, vnderstand anie more thereof than you, but that I sup∣pose that my cousin ment to imitate therein the natu∣rall disposition of the saide Lorde of Aubray, who is
so aboundant and plentifull in reasons, and can neuer finde an ende, either of his knowledge, or of his dis∣course, and specially in such an action, as wherein hee ought to make shew of all that hee knewe, and that with a desire to perswade, if hee could. But in that he hath made him to speake so seriously, it was to procure vnto him more dignitie and credite, than to those other that went before him, who all of them are ranke knaues, to whome it had not bin seemely, to haue made them speake any good thing: and indeede there was none found but hee, in whose mouth it was fitte to speake the truth, and to set out things that might serue for the instru∣ction, and serious knowledge of matters alreadie past. And this is all the craft, that men ment thereby, and the coine wherewith they should pay these delicate and sine cared men, in whose power it is, to pare and cut off from it, or els to read no more, but the fourth part or halfe of it, as they themselues list, if they thinke the whole too long. But in this matter I referre my selfe to men of better iudg∣ment, whether there bee any thing in it, that a man may take away, and which is not verie fitly applyed to the purpose. Notwithstanding it is permitted you, to cut it, or pare it, as shall best like you, I for my parte, will not thinke the wine the worse therefore. And so to conclude, I pray you leaue me alone in peace to my selfe. Hereupon I durst not further presse him, though indeede I had verie great desire to knowe, whether hee or the Lorde Agnoste, had not done something touching the mat∣ter of the Iesuites, but hee stopped my mouth, and said vnto mee, wee are accustomed according to the man∣ner of our countrie, to speake that that wee thinke. I will therefore tell you, that I suppose that wee haue dis∣coursed enough at this time, and I yet once againe pray you to leaue mee in peace, or let mee bee alone, which when he had spoken, he called his seruant and said, let one come, and lay the cloth: wherupon I was ashamed
to tary any longer, and came away instructed and fur∣nished with these good answers, which I thought good to communicate vnto you, for the contentation and satisfying of them, that are as my selfe, curious to know the truth. FINIS.
