17641 99847681 12735
THE RENEGADO, A TRAGAE COMEDIE. As it hath beene often acted by the Queenes Maiesties seruants, at the priuate Play-house in Drurye-Lane. By PHILIP MASSINGER. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Iohn Waterson, and are to be sold at the Crowne in Pauls Church-Yard. 1630.
Dramatis Personae. The Actors names. ASAMBEG, Viceroy of Tunis. Iohn Blanye. MVSTAPHA, Basha of Aleppo. Iohn Sumner. VITELLI, A Gentelman of Venice disguis'd. Michael Bowier. FRANCISCO, A Iesuite. William Reignalds. ANTHONIO GRIMALDI the Renegado. William Allen. CARAZIE an Eunuch. William Robins. GAZET seruant to Vitelli. Edward Shakerley. AGA.   CAPIAGA.   MASTER.   BOTSVVAINE,   SAYLORS.   IAILOR.   3. TVRKES.   DONVSA, neece to AMVRATH. Edward Rogers. PAVLINA, Sister to Vitelli. Theo. Bourne. MANTO, seruant to Donusa.  
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NOVRABLE GEORGE HARDING, Baron Barkley, of Barkley Castle, and Knight of the Honourable Order of the BATHE. My good Lord. TO be Honoured for old Nobility, or Hereditary Titles is not alone proper to your Selfe, but to some few of your rancke, who may chal∣lenge the like priuiledge with you: but in our age to vouchsafe (as you haue often done) a ready hand to rayse the deiected spirits of the contemned Sonnes of the Muses, Such as would not suffer the glo∣rious fire of Poesie to be wholly extingui∣shed, is so remarkable, and peculiar o your Lordship, that with a full it is acknowledged that the Protection of the Dramatique , is yours, and almost without payre not therefore, but to present my your clemency pretation.
Your gracious acceptance of this trifle, in which if I were not confident there are some peeces worthy the perusall, it should haue beene taught an humbler flight, and the writer (Your Countrey-man) neuer yet made happy in your notice, and fauour, had not made this an aduocate to plead for his admission among such as are wholy, and sincerely deuoted to your seruice. I may liue to tender my humble thankefulnesse in some higher strayne, and till then comfort my selfe with hope, that you descend from your height to receiue. Your Honours Commanded Seruant PHILIP MASSINGER
To my Honourd Friend, Master PHILIP MASSINGER, vpon his RENEGADO. DAbblers in Poetry that onely can, Court this weake Lady, or that Gentleman, with some loose witt in rime; others that fright the time. Into beliefe with mighty words, that teare a Passage through the eare; or Nicer men, That through a Perspectiue wil see a Play, and vse it the wrong way, (not worth thy Pen) Though all their Pride exalt 'em, cannot bee Competent Iudges of thy Lines or thee. I must confesse I haue no Publike name To rescue iudgement, no Poeticke flame to dresse thy Muse with Praise, and Phoebus his owne Bayes; Yet I commend this Poem, and dare tell the World I lik'd it well, and if there bee A tribe, who in their Wisedomes dare accuse, this ofspring of thy Muse, let them agree, Conspire one Comedy, and they will say Tis easier to Commend, then make a Play. IAMES SHIRLEY.
To his worthy Friend Master PHILIP MASSENGER, on his Play, Call'd the RENEGADO. THE bosome of a friend cannot breath oorth A flattering phrase to speake the noble Worth Of him that hath lodg'd in his honest brest, So large a title: I among the rest That honour thee, doe onely seeme to prayse Wanting the flowers of Art, to decke that Bayes Merit has crown'd thy Temples with. Know friend Though there are some who meerely doe commend To liue ith Worlds opinion such as can Cenure with Idgement, no such peece of Man, Makes vp  where desert doe's liue, There will I plant my wonder, and there giue My best indeauours, to build vp his story That truely Merits. I did euer glory To behold Vertue rich, though cruell Fate In scornefull malice doe's beate low their state That best deserue, when others that but know Onely to scribble, and no more, of't grow Greate in their fauours, that would seeme to bee Patrons of Witt, and modest Poesie: Yet with your abler Friends, let me say this Many may striue to equall you, but misse Of your fayre scope, this worke of yours men may Throw in the face of enuy, and then say To those that are in Great-mens thoughts more blest, Imitate this, And call that worke your best. Yet Wise-men, in this, and too often, erre When they their loue before the worke preferre, If I should say more, some may blame me for't Seeing your merits speake you, not report. DANYEL LAKYN.
THE RENEGADO. The Scene Tunis. Actus primus. Scena prima. Enter Vitelli and Gazet. Vitelli. YOu haue hirde a Shop then? Gazet. Yes sir, and our wares (Though brittle as a maydenhead at ix∣teene) Are safe vnladen; not a Christall crackt, Or China dish needs sodring; our choice Pictures As they came from the workeman, without blemish, And I haue studied speeches for each Pee, And in a thrifty tone to sell 'em off; Will sweare by , and , That this is Mistris to the great Duke of Florence, That Neece to old King Pippin, and a third An Austrian Princesse by her Roman nose, How ere my conscience tels me they are figures Of Bades, and common Courtezans in Venice.
Vitel. You make no scruple of an oath then? Gaz. ie sir Tis out of my Indentures, I am bound there To sweare for my Masters profit as securely As your intelligencer must for his Prince, That sendes him forth an honourable spie, To serue his purposes. And if it be lawfull In a Christian shopkeeper to cheate his father, I cannot find but to abuse a Turke In the sale of our commodities, must bee thought A meritorious worke. Vitel. I wonder sirra What's your Religion? Gaz. Troth to answere truely I would not be of one that should command mee To feed vpon poore Iohn, when I see Pheasants And Partriges on the Table: nor doe I like The other that allowes vs to eate flesh In the Lent though it be rotten, rather then bee Thought superstitious, as your zealous Cobler, And learned botcher Preach at Amsterdam Ouer a Hotchpotch. I would not be cofin'd In my beliefe, when all your Sects, ectries Are growne of one opinion, if I like it I will professe my selfe, in the meane time Liue I in England, Spaine, France, I am of that Countryes aith, Vitel. And what in Tunis, Will you turne Turke heere? Gaz. No! so I should loose A Collop of that part my Dll inoyn'd mee To bring home as she left it; tis her venture, Nor dare I barter that commoditie Without her speciall warant. Vitel. You are a Knae sir, Leaing your Roguerie thinke vpon my businesse,
It is no time to foole now Remember where you are too! though this Mart time, Wee are allowde free trading, and with safetie. Temper your tongue and meddle not with the Turkes, Their manners, nor Religion. Gaz. Take you heede sir What colours you weare. Not two houres since there Lan∣ded An English Pirats Whore with a greene apron, And as she walk't the streets, one of their Mufties Wee call them Priests at Venice, with a Razor Cutts it of Petticoate, Smocke and all, and leaues her As naked as my Nayle: the young Frie wondering What strange beast it should be. I scap't a scouring My Mistres Buskepoynt, of that forbidden coloure Then tyde my codpeece, had it beene discouer'd I had beene caponde. Vitel. And had beene well seru'd; Haste to the Shoppe and set my Wares in order I will not long be absent? Gaz. Though I striue sir To put of Melencholy, to which, you are euer Too much inclinde, it shall not hinder me With my best care to serue you Exit Gazet. Enter Francisco. Vitel. I beleeue thee. O wellcome sir, stay of my steppes in this life, And guide to all my blessed hopes heereafter. What comforts sir? haue your indeauours posper'd? Haue wee tirde Fortunes malice with our sufferings? Is she at length after so many frownes Pleas'd to vouchafe one cheerefull looke vpon vs? Fran. You giue too much to fortune, and your passions, Ore which a wise man, if Religious, tryumphs. That name fooles worship, and those tyrants which Wee arme against our better part, our reason, May add, but neuer take from our afflictions:
Vitelli. Sir as I am a sinfull man, I can not But like one suffer. Fran. I exacte not from you A fortitude insensible of calamitie, To which the Saint's themselues haue bowde and showne They are made of flesh, and bloud, all that I challenge Is manly patience. Will you that vvere train'd vp In a Religious Schoole, where diuine maximes Scorning comparison, vvith morall precepts Were daily taught you, beare your constancies triall Not like Vitelli, but a Village nurse With curses in your mouth: Teares in your eyes? Hovv poorely it showes in you? Vi. I am School'd sir, And will heereafter to my vtmost strength Studie to bee my selfe. Fran. So shall you find mee Most ready to assist you; Neither haue I Slept in your greate occasions since I left you I haue beene at the Viceroies Court and presde As far as they allovve a Christian entrance. And something I haue learn't that may concerne The purpose of this iourney. Vi. Deere Sir vvhat is it? Fran. By the command of Asambeg, the Viceroy: The Cittie swels vvith barbarous Pompe and Pride For the entertainement of stout Mustapha The Basha of Aleppo, vvho in person Comes to receiue the neece of Amurah The fayre Donusa for his bride. Vitel. I find not Hovv this may profit vs. Fran. Pray you giue mee leaue. Among the rest that vvayte vpon the Viceroy, (Such as haue vnder him command in Tunis.) Who as you haue often heard are all false Pirats,
I savv the shame of Venice and the scorne Of all good men: The periurde Renegado Antono Grimaldy; Vitel. Ha! his name Is poyson to mee. Fran. Yet againe? Vitel. I haue done sir. Fran. This debauchde villaine: whom we euer thought (After his impious scorne done in Saint Markes To me as I stood at the holy Altar) The theefe that rauish't your fayre sister from you, The vertuous Paulina not long since, (As I am truely giuen to vnderstand) Sold to the viceroy a fayre Christian Virgin, On whom, maugre his fierce and cruell nature Asambeg dotes extreamely. Vitel. Tis my sister It must be shee, my better Angell tells me Tis poore Paulina. Farewell all disguises Ile show in my reuenge that I am Noble. Fran. You are not mad? Vitel. No sir, my vertuous anger Makes euery veyne an arterie, I feele in mee The strength of twenty men, and being arm'd With my good cause to wreake wrong'd innocence I dare alone run to the viceroys Court And with this Ponyard before his face. Digge out Grimaldies heart. Fran. Is this Religious? Vitel. Would you haue me tame now; Can I know my sister Mewde vp in his Serragli, and in danger Not alone to loose her honour, but her soule, The hell-breed Villaine by too? that has sold both To blacke destruction, and not haste to send him To the Deuill his tutor? to be patient now,
Were in another name to play the Pandor To the Viceroyes loose embraces, and cry aime While he by force, or flaterie compels her To yeeld her fayre name vp to his foule lust, And after turne Apostata to the faith That she was breed in. Fran. D'oe but giue me hearing. And you shall soone grant how ridiculous This childish fury is. A wise man neuer Attempts impossibilities; 'tis as easie For any single arme to quell an Army. As to effect your wishes; we come hither To learne Paulinas faith, and to redeeme her, (Leaue your reuenge to heauen) I oft haue tould you Of a Relique that I gaue her, which has power (If we may credit holy mens traditions) To keepe the owner free from violence: This on her breast she weares, and does preserue The vertue of it by her daily prayers. So if she fall not by her owne consent Which it were sinne to thinke: I feare no force. Be therefore patient, keepe this borrowed shape Till time and oportunitie present vs With some fit meanes to see her, which perform'd, Ile ioyne with you in any desperate course For her deliuery. Vitel. You haue Charmde me sir And I obey in all things; Pray you pardon The weakenesse of my passion. Fran. And excuse it. Be cheerefull man for know that good intents Are in the end Crownd with as fayre euents. Exeunt.
Actus primus. Scena secunda. Enter Donusa. Manto. Carazie. Donusa. Haue you seene the Christian Captiue, The great Basha is so enamourd of? Manto. Yes an't please your Excellency I tooke a full view of her, when shee vvas Presented to him. Donu. And is she such a wonder As tis reported? Mant. She was drown'd in teares then, Which tooke much from her beautie, yet in spite Of sorrow, shee appeard the Mistresse of Most rare perfections; and though low of stature, Her well proportion'd limbes inuite affection; And when she speakes, each syllable is musique That does inchaunt the hearers. But your Highnesse That are not to be parallelde, I yet neuer Beheld her equall. Donusa. Come you flatter me, But I forgiue it, we that are borne great Seldome distast our seruants, though they giue vs More then wee can pretend too. I haue heard That Christian Ladies liue with much more freedome Then such as are borne heere. Our iealous Turkes Neuer permit their aire wiues to be leene But at the publique Bannias, or the Mosques And euen then vaylde, and garded. Thou Carazie Wert borne in England, what's the cust me there Among your women? Come be free and merry I am no seuere Mistres, nor hat thou met with A heauie bondage. Car. Heauie? I was made lighter By two stone waight at least to be fit to erue you.
But to your question Madame, women in England For the most part liue like Queenes. Your Countrey Ladies Haue libertie to hauke, to hunt, to feast: To giue free entertainement to all commers, To talke, to kisse, there's no such thing knowne there As an Italian girdle. Your Cittie Dam Without leaue weares the breeches, has her husband At as much command as her Prentice, and if need be Can make him Cuckold by her Fathers Coppie. Donusa. But your court Lady? Car. She, I assure you Madame, Knowes nothing but her will, must be allovv'd Her Foot-men, her Caroch, her Vshers, her Pages, Her Doctor, Chaplines, and as I haue heard They are growne of late so learn'd that they maintaine A strange Position, which their Lords with all Their witt cannot confute. Donusa. What's that I prethee? Car. Marry that it is not onely fit but lavvfull, Your Madame there, her much rest, and high feeding Duely considered, should to ease her husband Bee allow'd a priuate frien. They haue drawne a Bill To this good purpose, and the next assembly Doubt not to passe it. Donu. Wee enioy no more That are of the Othman race, though our Religio Allovves all pleasure. I am dull, some Musicque Take my Chiapines off. So, a lustie straie (a Galliard. Who knockes there? Mant Tis the Basha of Aleppo Who humbly makes request he may present His seruice to you. Donu. Reach a chaire. Receiue him like our selfe, and not depart vvith One peece of Ceremonie, stare, and greatnesse That may beget respecte, and erence
In one that's borne our Vassall. Now admit him: Enter Mustapha, puts of his yellow Pantophles. Musta. The place is sacred, and I am to Enter The roome where she abides, with such deuotion As Pilgrims pay at Macha, when they visit The Tombe of our great Prophet. Donu. Rise, the signe (The Eunch takes vp the Pantophles. That wee vouchafe his presence. Musta. May those Powers That rais'd the Othoman Empire, and still gard it, Reward your Highnesse for this gratious fauour You throwe vpon your seruant. It hath pleasde The most invincible, mightiest Amurath (To speake his other titles would take from him) That in himselfe does comprehend all greatnesse, To make me the vnworthy instrument Of his command. Receiue diuinest Lady (Deliuers a letter. This letter sign'd by his victorious hand, And made Authentic by the imperiall Seale. There when you find me mention'd, far be it from yo To thinke it my ambition to presume At such a happinesse, which his povverfull will From his great minds magnificence, not my merit Hath showrd vpon mee. But if your consent Ioyne with his good opinion and allovvance To perit vvhat his fauors haue begun, I shall in my obsequiousnesse and dutie Endeuour to preuent all iust complaints, Which want of will to serue you, may call on mee. Donu. His sacred Maiestie writes here that your valour Against the Persian hath so vvonne vpon him That there's no grace, or honour in his guift Of which he can imagine you nworthy. And what's the greatest you can hope, or aime at, It is his pleasure you should be receiu'd Into his Royall Familie, Prouided
Forso far I am vnconfind, that I Affect and like your person. I expect not The Ceremonie which he vses in Bestowing of his Daughters, and his neeces. As that he should present you for my slaue, To loue you, if you pleasde me: or deliuer A Ponyarde on my least dislike to kill you. Such tyranuie and pride agree not with My softer disposition. Let it suffice For my first answer, that thus far I grace you. Giues him her hand to kisse ereafter some time spent to make enquire Of the good parts, and faculties of your mind You shall heare further from mee. Mus. Though all torments Really suffer'd, or in hell imaginde By curious fiction, in one houres delay Are wholy comprehended: I confesse That I stand bound in dutie, not to checke at What euer you command, or please to impose For triall of my patience. Donu. Let vs find Some other subiect, too much of one Theme cloyes me Is't a full Mart: Mus. A confluence of all nations Are met together? There's varietie too Of all that Marchants trafficque for. Donu. I know not. I feele a Virgins longing to descend So far from mine owne greatnesse, as to be Thoughnot a buyer, yet a looker on Their strange commodities. Mus. If without a trayne You dare be seene abroad? I'le dismisse mine. And waite vpon you as a common man, And satisfie your wishes. Donu. I embrace it. Prouide my vayle; and at the Posterne Gate
Conuey vs out vnseene: I trouble you. Musta. It is my happynesse you daine to command me. Exeunt. Actus primus. Scena tertia. A shop discouerde, Gazet in it. Francisco, and Vitelli, walking by. Gaz. What doe you lacke, your choyce China dishes, your pure Venetian Christall, of all sorts, of all neate and new fashions, from the mirror of the madam, to the priuate vtensile of her chamber-maide, and curious Pictures of the rarest beauties of Europa: what doe you lacke Gentle∣men? Fran. Take heed I say, how ere it may appeare Impertinent, I must expresse my loue: My aduise, and counsell. You are young And may be tempted, and these Turkish Dames Like English mastiues that increase their fiercenes By being chainde vp, from the restraint of freedome If lust once fire their bloud from a faire obiect Will runne a course the fiends themselues would shake To enioy their wanton endes. Vitel. Sir, you mistake mee I am too full of woe, to entertaine One thought of pleasure: though all Europes Queen Kneel'd at my feete, and Coured me: much lesse To mix with such; Whose difference of faith Must of necessitie: (or I must grant My selfe forgetfull of all you haue taught mee) Strangle such bae desires. Fran. Be constant in That resolution, I'le abroade againe, And learne as far as it is possible
What may concerne Paulina? Some two houres Shall bring me backe. Exit Francisco. Vi. All blessings vvaite vpon you. Gaz. Cold doings, Sir, a Mart doe you call this? Slight A pudding wife, or a Witch with a thrumbe Cappe That sells Ale vnder grownd to such as come To know their Fortunes, in a dead Vacation Haue ten to one more stirring. Vitel. Wee must be patient Gaz. Your seller by retayle ought to be angry But when hee's fingering money. Enter Grimaldy, Master, Botesaine, Saylors, Turkes. Vi. Heere are company; Defend me my good Angell, I behold A Basiliske! Gaz. What doe you lacke? what doe you lacke? pure China dishes, cleere Christall glasses, a dumbe Mistres to make loue too? What doe you lacke gentlemen? Gri. Thy Mother for a Bavvde, or if thou hast A hansome one thy sister for a Whore, Without these doe not tell me of your trash Or I shall spoyle your Market. Vitel. —Old Grimaldy? Gri. Zoundes wherefore doe wee put to Sea, or stand The Raging windes aloft, or pisse vpon The Fomie waues vvhen they rage most? deride The thunder of the enemies shot, boorde boldly A Marchants shippe for prize, though we behold The desperate Gunner ready to giue fire And blow the decke vp? Wherefore shake vve off Those scrupulous ragges of charitie, and conscience, Inuented onely to keepe Churchmen warme, Or feede the hungry monthes of famished beggers; But vvhen we touch the shore to wallovve in All sensuall pleasures. Master. I but Noble Captaine
To spare a little for an after clappe Were not improuidence. Gri. Hang consideration: When this is spent is not our shippe the same? Our courage too the same to fetch in more? The earth where it is fertillest returnes not More then three haruests, vvhilst the glorious Sunne Posts through the Zodiacke, and makes vp the yeere: But the Sea, vvhich is our Mother, (that embraceth Both the rich Indies in her outstrecht armes) Yeeldes euery day a croppe if vve dare reape it. No, no my Mates, let Tradesmen thinke of thrift, And Vsurers hoord vp, let our expence Be as our commings in are vvithout bounds: We are the Neptunes of the Ocean, And such as trastique, shall pay sacrifice Of their best lading; Ile haue this Canuas Your boy vveares linde vvith Tissue, and the cates You taste, serude vp in gold; though vve carouse The teares of Orphanes in our Greekish vvines, The sighes of vndone Widowes, paying for The musique bought to cheere vs; rauishde Virgins To slauerie sold for Coyne to feede our riots, We vvill haue no compunction. Gaz. Doe you heare sir, We haue payde for our Ground? Grim. Humh. Gaz. And humh too, For all your bigge vvords, get you further off, And hinder not the prospect of our shoppe Or— Gri. What vvill you doe? Gaz. Nothing sir, but pray Your worship to giue me hansell. Gri. By the eares, Thus sir, by the eares. Master. Hold, hold.
Vitel. You' still be prating. Gri. Come let's be drunke? then each man to his whore, Slight how doe you looke, you had best goe find a Corner To pray in, and repent. Doe, doe, and crie It will shew fine in Pirats. Exit Grimaldi. Master. Wee must follow Or he will spend our shares; Boteswaine. I fought for mine. Master. Nor am I so precise but I can drab too: Wee will not sit out for our parts, Bot. Agreed. Exeunt Master, Boteswaine, Saylors. Gaz. The deuill gnaw off his fingers, if he were In London among the clubs, vp went his heeles For striking of a Prentice. What doe you lack, What doe you lacke gentlemen. 1 Turke. I wonder how the Viceroy can indure The insolence of this fellow. 2 Turke. He receiues profit From the Prizes he brings in, and that excuses What euer he commits? Ha, what are these! Enter Mustapha, Donusa, vayld. 1 T. They seeme of ranke and qualitie, obserue 'em. Gaz. What doe you lacke! see what you please to buy, Wares of all sorts most honourable Madona. Vitel. Peace sirra, make no noyse, these are not people To be iested with. Donu. Is this the Christians custome In the venting their commodities. Mus. Yes best Madame But you may please to keepe your way, heere's nothing, But toyes, and trifles, not worth your obseruing. Donu. Yes, for varieties sake pray you shew vs, friends, The chiefest of your Wares. Vitel. Your Ladiships seruant; And if in worth or Title you are more, My ignorance pleade my pardon.
Donusa. Hee speakes well. Vitel. Take downe the looking glasse: here is a mirror Steelde so exactely, neither taking from Nor flattering the obiect, it returnes To the beholder, that Narcissus might (And neuer grow enamourd of himselfe:) View his fayre feature in't. Donusa. Poeticall too. Vitel. Heere China dishes to serue in a Banket, Though the volouptus Persian sate a guest. Heere Christall glasses, such as Ganymede Did fill with Nectar to the Thunderer When he dranke to Alcides, and receiu'd him In the fellowship of the gods: true to the owners Corinthian plate studded with Diamonds, Conceald oft deadly poyson; This pure metall So innocent is, and faithfull to the Mistres Or Master that possesses it: that rather Then hold one drop that's venemous, of it selfe It flies in peces, and deludes the Traytor. Donu. How mouingly could this fellow treat vpon A worthy subiect, that findes such discourse To grace a trifle! Vitel. Heere's a Picture Madame The master pecce of Michael Angel, Our great Italian workeman; heere's another So perfit at all parts that had Pigmalion Sene this, his prayers had beene made to Venus, To haue giuen it life, and his Caru'd iuory Image By poets nere remembred. They are indeed The rarest beauties of the Christian world And no where to be equal'd. Donu. You are partiall In the cause of those you fauour I beleeue, I instantly could shew you one, to theirs Not much inferior. Vitel. With your pardon Madame I am incredculous.
Donu. Can you match me this! (Vnvailes her selfe. Vitelli. What wonder looke I on! I'll search aboue And suddenly attend you. Exit Vitelli. Donu. Are you amazde e bring you to your selfe. Breakes the glasses. Musta. Ha what's the matter! Gaz. My masters ware? We are vndone! O strange! A Lady to turne rorer, and breake glasses Tis time to shut vp shop then. Musta, You seeme mou'de. If any Language of these Christian dogges Haue call'd your anger on, in a frowne shew it And they are dead already. Donusa. The offence Lookes not so farre. The foolish pultrie fellow Shew'd me some trifles, and demanded of me For what I valew'd at so many aspers, A thousand Duckets. I confesse he mou'd mee; Yet I should wrong my selfe should such a begger Receiue least losse from mee. Mus. Is it no more? Donu. No, I assure you. Bid him bring his bill To morrow to the Palace and enquire For one Donusa: That word giues him passage through all the guard; Say there he shall receiue full satisfaction. Now when you please Mus. I waite you. Exeunt Mustapha, Donusa, 2. Turkes. 1 Turke. We must not know them, lets shift off & vanish. Gaz. The swines Pox ouertake you, theres a curse For a Turke that eates no Hogs flesh. Vitel. Is she gone: Gazet. Yes you may see her handy-worke. Vitel. No matter. Said she ought else? Gaz. That you should wait vpon her And there receiue Court payment, and to passe
The guards, she bids you onely say you come To one Donusa. Vitel. How! remoue the wares Doe it without reply. The Sultans neece! I haue heard among the Turkes for any Lady To shew her face bare, argues loue, or speakes Her deadly hatred. What should I feare, my fortune Is suncke so low: there cannot fall vpon mee Ought worth my shunning. I will run the hazard: She may be a meanes to free distres'd Paulina. Or if offended, at the worst, to die Is a full period to calamitie. The end of the first act. Actus Secundus Scena prima. Enter Carazie, Manto. Car. In the name of wonder! Manto, what hath my Ladie Done with her selfe since yesterday. Manto. I know not. Malicious men report we are all guided In our affections by a wandering Planet? But such a suddaine change in such a person, May stand for an example to confirme Their false assertion. Car. Shee's now pettish, froward, Musique, discourse, obseruance tedious to her. Manto. She slept not the last night: and yet preuented The rising Sun in being vp before him. Call'd for a costly Bath, then willd the roomes Should be perum'd; Ransackde her Cabinets For her choyce, and richest Iewells: and appears now Like Cihia in full glory, wayted on By the fairest of the Stars. Car, Can you guesse the reason,
Why the Aga of the Ianizaries, and he That guards the entrance of the inmost port Were call'd before her. Manto. They are both her creatures, And by her grace prefer'de, but I am ignorant To what purpose they were sent for. Enter Donusa. Car. Heere shee comes. Full of sad thoughts: we must stand further off. What a frowne was that! Manto. Forbeare. Car. I pittie her. Donu. What Magicque hath transform'd me from my selfe? Where is my Virgin pride? How haue I lost My boasted freedome? what new fire burnes vp My scortched intrailes. What vnknowne desires Inuade, and take possession of my soule; All vertuous obiects vanish'd? Haue I stood The shocke of fierce temptations, stopte mine eares Against all Siren notes lust euer sung, To drawe my barke of chastitie (that with wonder Hath keept, a constant, and an honourd course.) Into the gulfe of a deserude ill fame? Now fall vnpittied? And in a moment With mine owne hands digge vp a graue to burie The monumentall heape of all my yeares, Imployde in Noble actions? O my fate! But there is no resisting. I obey thee Imperious god of loue, and willingly Put mine owne Petterson, to grace thy tryumph; Twere therefore more then crueltie in thee To vse me like a tyranne. What poore meanes Must I make vse of now? And flatter such, To vvhom; till I betrayde my libertie, One gratious looke of mine, would haue erected An altar to my seruice. How now Manto!
My euer carefull woman, and Carazie Thou hast beene faithfull too. Car. I dare not call My life mine owne since it is yours, but gladly Will part with it: when ere you shall command mee, And thinke I fall a Martir, so my death May giue life to your pleasures. Manto. But vouchsafe To let me vnderstand what you desire Should be effected: I will vndertake it And curse my selfe for Cowardice if I pausde To aske a reason why. Donu. I am comforted, In the tender of your seruice, but shall be Confirm'd in my full ioyes, in the performance Yet trust me: I will not impose vpon you But what you stand ingagde for, to a Mistres, (Such as I haue beene to you.) All I aske Is faith, and secresie. Car. Say but you doubt me, And to secure you I'le cut out my tongue I am libde in the breech already. Manto. Doe not hinder Your selfe by these delayes. Donusa. Thus then I Whisper Mine owne shame to you.—O that I should blush To speake what I so much desire to doe! And further— Whispers, and vses vehement actions. Manto. Is this all. Donusa. Thinke it not base Although I know the office vndergoes A course construction. Car. Course? 'tis but procuring A smocke imploiment, which has made more Knights, In a Countrie I could name, then twenty yeares Of seruice in the field.
Donu. You haue my ends. Manto. Which say you haue arriu'de at, be not wanting To your selfe, and feare not vs. Car. I know my burthen I'le beare it with delight, Manto. Talke not, but doe. Exeunt Carazie, Manto. Do. O Loue what poore shifts thou dost force vs too! Exit Donusa. Actus Secundus, Scena Secunda. Enter Aga, Capiaga, Ianizes. Aga. She was euer our good Mistres, and our maker, And should we checke at a little hazard for her, Wee were vnthankefull. Capiaga. I dare pawne my head, Tis some disguised Minion of the Court, Sent from great Amurath, to learne from her The Viceroys actions. Aga. That concernes not vs: His fall may be our rise, what ere he bee He passes through my guardes. Cap. And mine, prouided Hee giue the word. Enter Vitelli. Vitel. To aynt now being thus far, Would argue mee of Cowardice. Aga. Stand: the word. Or being a Christian to presse thus far, Forfeits thy life. Vitelli. Donusa. Aga. Pase in peace. Exent Aga, and Vi What a priuiledge her name beares. Tis wonderous strange!
(The Captine of the Ianizies,) If the great Officer The guardian of the inner port denie not, Cap, Thy warrant: Speake, Or thou art dead. Vitel. Donusa. Capiaga. That protects thee, without feare, Enter. So: discharge the watch. Exit Vitelli, Capiaga. A Secundus Scena tertia. Enter Carazie, Manto. Car. Though he hath past the Aga, and chiefe Porter This cannot be the man. Manto. By her description I am sure it is. Cara. O women, women What are you? a great Lady dote vpon A Haberdasher of small vvares Manto. Pish, thou hast none. Cara. No, if I had I might haue seru'd the turne: This tis to want munition vvhen a man Should make a breach and Enter. Enter Vitelli. Manto. Sir, you are vvellcome: Thinke what tis to be happy and possesse it. Car. Perfume the Roomes there, and make way. Let Musique with choyce notes entertaine the man, The Princesse novv purposes to honour. Vit. I am rauish'd: Exeunt. Actus Secundus Scena Quarta. A Table set forth, Ieels and Bagges vpon it: loude Music Enter Donusa, takes a chaire, to her Carazie, Vitelli, Manto. Donusa, Sing ore the Dittie, that I last composde
Vpon my Loue-sicke passions sute, your Voice To the Musique thats plac'de yonder, we shall heare you With more delght and pleasure. Car. I obey you. Song. Vitel. Is not this Tempe, or the blessed shades, Where innocent Spirits reside? Or doe I dreame, And this a heauenly vision? Howsoeuer It is a sight too glorious to behold For such a vvretch as I am. Stands amazde. Car. He is daunted. Mant. Speake to him Madam, cheere him vp, or you Destroy what you haue builded. Car. Would I were furnishde With his artillerie, and if I stood Gaping as he does, hang me. Vit. That I might euer dreame thus. kneeles. Donu. Banish amazement, You, wake; your debtor tells you so, your debtor, And to assure you that I am a substance And no aaeriall figure, thus I raise you. Why doe you shake? My soft touch brings no Ague, No biting frost is in this palme: Nor are My lookes like to the Gorgons head, that turne Men into Statues, rather they haue power (Or I haue been abusde) vvhere they bestow Their influence (let me prooue it truth in you) To gue to dead men motion. Vitel. Can this be? May I beleeue my sences? Dare I thinke I haue a memory? Or that you are That excellent creature, that of late disdain'de not To looke on my poore trifles. Donu. I am shee. Vitell. The owner of that blessed name Donusa, Which like a potent charme, although pronounc'de By my prophane, but much vnworthyer tongue,
Hath brought me safe to this forbidden place, Where Christian yet ne're trode. Donu. I am the same. Vitell. And to what end, great Lady pardon me, That I presume to aske, did your command Command me hither? or what am I? to vvhom You should vouchsafe your fauours; nay, your angers? If any wilde or vncollected speech Offensiuely deliuer'd, or my doubt Of your vnknowne perfections, haue displeasde you, You wrong your indignation, to pronounce Your selfe my sentence: to haue seene you onely, And to haue touchde that fortune-making hand, Will with delight waigh downe all tortures, that A flinty hangmans rage could execute, Or rigide tyranny command with pleasure. Donu. How the aboundance of good flowing to thee, Is vvrongde in this simplicitie: and these bounties Which all our asterne Kings haue kneeld in vaine for, Doe by thy ignorance, or vvilfull feare, Meete vvith a false construction. Christian, know (For till thou art mine by a neerer name, That title though abhord here, takes not from Thy entertainement) that tis not the fashion Among the greatest and the fairest Dames, This Turkish Empire gladly owes, and bowes to: To punish vvhere theres no offence, or nourish Displeasures against those, vvithout whoe mercie They part vvith all felicity. Prethee be vvise, And gently vnderstand mee; Doe not force her That ne're knew ought but to command, not ere read The elements of affection, but from such As gladly sude to her, in the infancie Of her new borne desires, to be at once Importunate, and immodest. Vitel. Did I know.
Great Lady your commands, or to what purpose This personated passion tends, (since twere A crime in mee deseruing death, to thinke It is your owne: I should to make you sport Take any shape you please to impose vpon me: And with ioy striue to serue you. Donu. Sport? thou art cruell, If that thou canst interpret my descent, From my high byrth and greatnesse? But to be A part in which I truely acte my selfe. And I must hold thee for a dull spectator If it stirre not affection, and inuite Compassion for my sufferings. Be thou taught By my example, to make satisfaction For wrongs vniustly offer'd. Willingly I doe confesse my fault;  iniurd thee In some poore pettie trifles; Thus I pay for The trespasse I did to thee. Here receie These baggs stuft full of our imperiall coyne, Or if this payment be too light, take heere These Iems for which the slauish Indian diue To the bottome of the Maine? Or if thou scorne These as base drosse (which take but common minds) But fancie any honour in my guift (Which is vnbounded as the Sultans Power) And bee possest of't. Vitel. I am ouerwhelm'd: With the weight of happinesse you throwe vpon me. Nor can it fall in my imagination, What wrong I ere haue done you: and much lesse How like a Royall Marchant to returne Your great magnificence. Donu. They are degrees, Not ends of my intended fauors to thee. These seeds of bountie I yet scatter on A glebe I haue not tride, but be thou thankefull The haruest is to come.
Vitel. What can be added To that which I already haue recieu'd, I cannot comprehend. Donusa. The tender of Myselfe. Why dost thou start! and in that guift, Full restitution of that Virgin freedome Which thou hast rob'd mee of. Yet I professe I so farre prize the louely theefe that stole it, That were it possible thou couldest restore What thou vnwittingly hast rauisht from me, I should refuse the present. Vitelli. How I shake In my constant resolution and my flesh Rebellious to my better part now tells me, As if it were a strong defence of frailtie. A Hermit in a desert trenchd with prayers Could not resist this batterie. Donu. Thou an Italian? Nay more I know't, a naturall Venetian, Such as are Courtiers borne to please fayre Ladies, Yet come thus slowely on? Vitel. Excuse me Madame, What imputation so ere the world Is pleasde to lay vpon vs: in my selfe I am so innocent that I know not what tis That I should offer. Donusa. By instinct I'le teach thee, And with such ease as loue makes me to aske it. When a young Lady wrings you by the hand thus, Or with an amorous touch presses your foote Lookes babies in your eyes, playes with your locks, Doe not you find without a tutors helpe What tis she lookes for. Vitelli. I am growne already Skilfull in the mysterie. Donu. Or if thus she kisse you, Then tast's your lips againe.
Vitel. That latter blow Has beate all chaste thoughts from me. Donu. Say she poynts to Some priuate roome, the Sunne beames neuer enters, Prouoking dishes, passing by to heighten Declined appetite, actiue Musicque vshering Your faynting steps, the wayters too as borne dumbe, Not daring to looke on you. Exit, inuiting him to follow. Vitelli. Though the Diuell Stood by, and rorde, I follow: now I finde That Vertue's but a word, and no sure garde If set vpon by beauty, and reward. Exeunt. Actus Secundus, Scaena Quinta. Enter Aga, Capiaga, Grimaldi, Master, Boteswaine, &c. Aga. The Diuels in him  thinke. Gri. Let him be damn'd too Ile looke on him though he stard as wild as hell, Nay Ile goe neere to tell him to his teeth If he mends not suddenly, and prooues more thankefull, We doe him too much seruice, were't not for shame now I could turne honest and forsweare my trade, Which next to being trust vp at the maine yard By some low cuntrey butterbox, I hate As deadly as I doe fasting, or long grace When meate cooles on the table. Capi. But take heede, You know his violent nature. Gri. Let his Whores And Catamites, know't, I vnderstand my selfe, And how vnmanly tis to sit at home And rayle at vs, that run abroad all hazards: If euery weeke we bring not home new pillage, For the fatting his Serraglio. Enter Asambg, Mustapha.
Aga. Heere he comes. Capi. How terrible he lookes? Gri. To such as feare him: The viceroy Asambeg were he the Sultans selfe He will let vs know a reason for his fury, Or we must take leaue without his allowance To be merry with our ignorance. Asam. Mahomets hell Light on you all, you chrouch, and cringe now, where Was the terrour of my iust frownes, when you suffered Those theeues of Malta, almost in our harbor To board a ship, and beare her safely off, While you stood idle lookers on? Aga. The ods In the men and shipping, and the suddainnesse Of their departure yeelding vs no leasure To send forth others to relieue our owne, Deterd vs mighty Sir. Asam. Deterde you cowards? How durst you only entertaine the knowledge Of vvhat feare vvas, but in the not performance Of our command? in me great Amurah spake, My voyce did eccho to your eares his thunder, And wild you like so many Seaborne-Tritons, Arm'd onely vvith the Trumpets of your courage, To swimme vp to her, and like Remoras. Hanging vpon her keele, to stay her flight Till rescue sent from vs, had fetcht you off, You thinke you are safe now; who durst but dispute it Or make it questionable, if this moment I charg'd you from you hanging cliffe, that glasses His rugged forhead in the neighbour lake, To throw your selues downe headlong? or like fagos To fill the ditches of defended Forts, While on your backs we march'd vp to the breac Gri. That vvould not I. Asam. Ha? Gri. Yet I dare as much
As any of the Sultans boldest sonnes, (Whose heauen, and hell, hang on his frowne, or smile,) His vvarlike Ianisaries. Asam. Adde one syllable more Thou doest pronounce vpon thy selfe a sentence That earthquake-like vvill swallow the Gri. Let it open, Ile stand the hazard, those contemned theeues Your fellow Pirats Sir, the bold Malteze Whom with your lookes you thinke to quell, at Rhodes Laugh'de at great Solymans anger: and if treason Had not deliuerde them into his power, Hee had growne olde in glory as in yeeres. At that so fatall siege, or risne with shame His hopes, and threates deluded. Asambeg. Our great Prophet How haue I lost my anger, and my Power Grima. Find it and vse it on thy flatterers: And not vpon thy friends that dare speake truth, These Knights of Malta but a handfull to Your armies that drinke riuers vp, haue stood Your furie at the height, and with their crosses Strooke pale your horned moones; These men of Malta Since I tooke pay from you, I haue met and fought with. Vpon aduantage too. Yet to speake truth By the soule of honor, I haue euer found them As prouident to direct, and bold to doe As any traynde vp in your discipline: Rauishde from other nations. Mus. I perceiue The lightning in his fierie lookes, the cloude Is broke already. Gri. Thinke not therefore sir, That you alone are Giants, and such Pigmies You war vpon. Asam. Villaine Ile make thee know Thou hast blasphemde the Ottoman power, and safer
At noone day might haue giuen fire to St Markes Your proud Venetian Temple. Ceize vpon him; I am not so neere reconcild to him To bid him die: that were a benefit The dog's vnworthy off, to our vse confiscate All that he stands possesde of: Let him tast The miserie of want, and his vaine riots Like to so many walking Ghosts affright him Where ere he sets his desperate foote. Who is't That does command you? Grimal. Is this the reward For all my seruice, and the rape I made On fayre Paulina. Asam. Drag him hence, he dies That dallies but a minute. Botes. What's become Grimaldi dragde off, his head couered. Exeunt Master and Boatswaine. Of our shares now Master. Must. Would he had been borne dumbe: The beggers cure, patience is all that's left vs. Maust. Twas but intemperance of speech, excuse him Let me preuaile so far. Fame giues him out For a deseruing fellow. Asam. At Aleppo I durst not presse you so far, giue me leaue To vse my owne will and command in Tunis And if you please my priuacie. Musta. I will see you When this high wind's blowne ore. Exit Mustapha. Asam. So shall you find me Ready to doe you seruice. Rage now leaue me Sterne lookes, and all the ceremonious formes Attending on dread Maiestie, flie from Transformed Asambeg, why should I hug plucks out a guilt key. So neere my hart, what leades me to my prison? Where she that is inthrald commands her keeper, And robs me of the fiercenesse I was borne with. Stout men quake at my frownes, and in returne
I tremble at her softnesse. Base Grimaldi But only nam'd Paulina, and the charme Had almost chok'd my fury ere I could Pronounce his sentence. Would when first I saw her Mi eyes had met with lightning, and in place Of hearing her inchanting tongue, the shrikes Of Mandrakes had made musicke to my slumbers, For now I only walke a louing dreame And but to my dishonour neuer vvake, And yet am blind, but vvhen I see the obiect, And madly dote on it. Appeare bright sparke opens a doore, Paulina discouerd comes forth. Of all perfection: any siile Borow'd from Diamonds, or the fayrest stars To helpe me to expresse, how deere I prize The vnmatcht graces, vvill rise vp and chide me For poore detraction. Pau. I despise thy flatteries Thus spit at'em, and scorne 'em, and being arm'd In the assurance of my innocent vertue I stampe vpon all doubts, all feares, all tortures Thy barbarous cruelty, or vvhat's vvorse, thy dotage (The vvorthy parent of thy iealousie) Can showre vpon me. Asam. If these bitter taunts Rauish me from my selfe, and make me thinke My greedy eares receiue Angelicall sounds, How vvould this tongue tunde to a louing note Inuade, and take possession of my soule Which then I durst not call mine owne. Pau. Thou art false, Falser then thy religion. Doe but thinke me Something aboue a beast; nay more, a monster, Would fright the Sun to looke on, and then tell me If this base vsage, can inuite affection? If to be mewde vp, and excluded from Humane society; the vse of pleasures; The necessary, not superfluous duties
Of seruants to discharge those offices, I blush to name. Asam. Of seruants? can you thinke That I that dare not trust the eie of Heauen To looke vpon your beauties, that denie My selfe the happenesse to touch your purenesse Will ere consent an Eunuch, or bought handmaid Shall once approch you? there is something in you That can worke Miracles, or I am consende, Dispose and alter sexes. To my vvrong In spite of nature. I will be your nurse, Your woman, your physitian, and your foole, Till with your free consent, which I haue vowde Neuer to force, you grace me with a name That shall supplie all these. Paul. What is't? Asa. Your husband. Pau. My hangman when thou pleasest. Asam. Thus I garde me, Against your further angers. Puts to the doore and lockes it. Paul. Which shall reach thee Though I were in the Center. Asam. Such a spirit In such a small proportion I nere reade of Which time must alter, rauish her I dare not The magique that she weares about her necke, I thinke defends her, this deuotion payde To this sweete Saint, mistresse of my sower payne Tis fit I take mine owne rough shape againe. Exit A∣sambeg. Actus Secundus, Scaena Sexta. Enter Franciso, Gazet. Fran. I thinke hee's lost. Gazet. Tis ten to one of that,
I nere knew Cittizen turne Courtier yet, But he lost his credit, though he sau'd himselfe Why, looke you sir, there are so many lobbies, Out offices, and disputations heere Behind these Turkish hangings, that a Christian Hardly gets off but circumcised. Fran. I am troublde Enter Vitelli, Carazie, Manto, Troublde exceedingly. Ha! vvhat are these? Gaz. One by his rich sute should bee some french Em∣bassador For his trayne I thinke they are Turkes. Fran. Peace, be not seene. Cara. You are now past all the gards, and vndiscouerd You may returne. Vitel. There's for your paynes, forget not My humblest seruice to the best of Ladies. Manto. Deserue her fauour sir, in making haste For a second entertainement. Vitel. Doe not doubt me, Exeunt Carazi, Manto. I shall not liue till then. Gaz. The trayne is vanish'd They haue done him some good office hee's so free And liberall of his gold. Ha, doe I dreame, Or is this mine owne naturall Master; Fran. Tis he, But strangely metamorphosde. You haue made sir. A prosperous voyage, heauen grant it be honest, I shall reioyce then too. Gaz. You make him blush To talke of honesty, you were but now In the giuing vaine, and may thinke of Gazet Your worships prentice. Vitel. There's gold, be thou free too And Master of my shop, and all the wares Wee brought from Venice. Gaz. Riuo then. Vitel. Deere sir This place affords not priuacie for discourse
But I can tell you wonders, my rich habit Deserues least admiration; thers nothing That can fall in the compasse of your wishes Though it were to redeeme a thousand slaues From the Turkish gallies, or at home to erect Some pious worke, to shame all Hospitalls, But I am master of the meanes. Fran. Tis strange. Vitel. As I vvalke Ile tell you more. Gaz. Pray you a word Sir, And then I will put on. I haue one boone more. Vitel. What is't? speake freely Gaz. Thus then, as I am Master Of your Shop, and vvares, pray you help me to some trucking With your last shee customer, though shee cracke my best peece I vvill indure it with patience. Vitel. Leaue your prating. Gaz. I may, you haue beene doing, we will doe too. Fran. I am amazde, yet will nor blame, nor chide you, Till you informe me further. Yet must say They steere not the right course, nor trafficke well, That seeke a passage to reach Heauen, through Hell. Exeunt Actus Tertius. Scaena prima, Enter Donusa, Manto. Donusa. When said he, he vvould come againe? Manto. He swore, Short Minutes should be tedious Ages to him, Vntill the tender of his second seruice, So much he seemde transported with the first. Donu. I am sure I was. I charge thee Manto tell me By all my fauors, and my bounties truely
Whether thou art a Virgin, or like me Hast forfeited that name. Manto. A Virgine Madame? At my yeeres being a wayting-woman, and in Court to? That were miraculous. I so long since lost That barren burthen, I almost forget That euer I was one. Donu. And could thy friends Reade in thy face, thy madenhead gone, that thou Hadst parted with it? Manto. Noe indeed. I past For currant many yeeres after, till by fortune, Long and continewed practise in the sport Blew vp my decke, a husband then was found out By my indulgent father, and to the world All was made whole againe. What neede you feare then That at your pleasure may repayre your honour Durst any enuious, or malitious tongue, Presume to taint it? Donu. How now? Enter Carazie. Cara. Madam, the Basha Humbly desires accesse. Donu. If it had beene My neate Italian, thou hadst met my vvishes. Tell him we would be priuate. Cara. So I did, But he is much importunate. Manto. Best dispatch him His lingring heere else will deter the other, From making his approch. Donu. His entertainement Shall not inuite a second visit, goe Say we are pleasde. Enter Mustapha. Musta. All happinesse. Donu. Bee suddaine
T'was sawcie rudenesse in you sir to presse On my retirements, but ridiculous folly To vvast the time that might be better spent In complementall vvishes. Cara. There's a coolling For his hot encounter. Donu. Come you heere to stare? If you haue lost your tongue, and vse of speech, Resigne your gouernment, there's a mutes place voyde In my vncles Court I heare, and you may worke me To vvrite for your preferment. Musta. This is strange! I know not Madam, what neglect of mine Has calde this scorne vpon me. Donu. To the purpose My will's a reason, and we stand not bound To yeeld account to you. Must. Not of your angers, But with erected eares I should heare from you The story of your good opinion of me Confirmde by loue, and fauours. Donu. How deseru'd? I haue consider'd you from head to foote, And can find nothing in that waynscote face, That can teach me to dote, nor am I taken With your grimme aspect, or toadepoole-like complexion, Those scarres you glorie in, I feare to looke on; And had much rather heare a merrie tale Then all your battayles wonne with blood and sweate, Though you belch forth the stincke too, in the seruice, And sweare by your Mustachios all is true. You are yet too rough for me, purge and take physicke, Purchase perfumers, get me some French taylor, To new create you; the first shape you were made with Is quite worne out, let your barbar wash your face too, You looke yet like a bugbeare to fright children,
Till when I take my leaue, wayte me Carazie. Exeunt Must. Stay you my Ladies Cabinet key. Donu. Car. Mant. How's this sir? Must. Stay and stand quietly, or you shall fall else, Not to firke your belly vp flounder like, but neuer To rise againe. Offer but to vnlocke These dores that stop your fugitiue tongue (obserue me) And by my fury, I'll fixe there this bolte To barre thy speech for euer. So, be safe now And but resolue me, not of what I doubt But bring assurance to a thing beleeu'd, Thou mak'st thy selfe a fortune, not depending On the vncertaine fauours of a Mistresse, But art thy selfe one. I'll not so far question My iudgement, and obseruance, as to aske Why I am slighted, and contemnde, but in Whose fauour it is done. I that haue read The copious volumes of all womens falsehood, Commented on by the heart breaking groanes Of abusde louers, all the doubts washde off With fruitlesse teares, the Spiders oobweb vayle Of arguments, alleadge in their defence, Blowne off with sighs of desperate men, and they Appearing in their full deformitie: Know that some other hath displanted me, With her dishonor. Has she giuen it vp? Confirme it in two sillables? Manto. She has. Musta. I cherish thy confession thus, and thus, giues her iewels. Bee mine, againe I court thee thus, and thus Now prooue but constant to my ends. Manto. By all— Must. Enough, I dare not doubt thee. O land Corco∣diles Made of AEgyptian stime, accursed women! But tis no time to rayle: come my best Manto. Exeunt
Actus tertius, Scaena Secunda. Enter Vitelli, Francisco. Vitel Sir, as you are my confessor, you stand bound Not to reueale what euer I discouer In that Religious way: nor dare I doubt you. Let it suffice, you haue made me see my follies, And wrought perhaps compunction; For I would not Appeare an Hyppocrite. But when you impose A penance on me, beyond flesh, and blood To vndergoe: you must instructe me how To put off the condition of a man: Or if not pardon, at the least, excuse My disobedience. Yet despayre not sir, For though I take mine owne way, I shall doe Something that may hereafter to my glory, Speake me your Scholler. Fran. I inioyne you not To goe, but send. Vitel. That were a pettie triall Not worth one so long taught, and exercisde Vnder so graue a master. Reuerende Francisco My friend, my father, in that word, my all; Rest confident, you shall heare something of mee That will redeeme me in your good opinion, Or iudge me lost for euer. Send Gazet (Shee shall giue order that hee may haue enterance) To acquaint you with my fortunes. Exit Vitelli. Fran. Goe and prosper, Holy Saints guide and strengthen thee. Howsoeuer As my endeauours are, so may they find Gracious acceptance. Enter Gazet, Grimaldi, in raggs. Gaz. Now you doe not rore sir
You speake not tempests, nor take eare-rent from A poore shopkeeper. Doe you remember that sir, I vveare your marks heere still. Fran. Can this be possible? All vvonders are not ceas'd then. Grimal. Doe, abuse me, Spit on me, spurne me, pull me by the nose, Thrust out these fiery eies, that yesterday Would haue lookde thee dead. Gaz. O saue me sir. Gi. Feare nothing, I am tame, and quiet, there's noe vvrong can force me To remember vvhat I vvas. I haue forgot, ere had irefull fiercenesse, a steelde heart, Insensible of compassion to others, Nor is it fit that I should thinke my selfe Worth mine owne pittie, Oh. Fran. Growes this deiection, From his disgrace doe you say? Gaz. Why hees cassherde sir, His ships, his goods, his liuery-puncks confiscate, And there is such a punishment laid vpon him, The miserable rogue must steale no more, Nor drinke, nor drab. Fran. Does that torment him? Gazet. O Sir! Should the State take order to bar men of acres, From those two laudable recreations, Drinking, and vvhoring, how should Panders purchase, Or thrifty Whores build Hospitals? slid if I That since I am made free, may write my selfe, A Citty gallant, should forfeit two such charters I should be ston'd to death, and nere be pittied, By the lieries of those companies. Fran. You'll be whip'd sir, If you bridle not your tongue. Haste to the Palace Your Master lookes for you. Ga. My quondam Master,
Rich sonnes forget they euer had poore fathers, In seruants tis more pardonable; as a companion, Or so, I may consent, but is there hope sir, He has got me a good chapwoman? pray you write A word or two in my behalfe. Fran. Out rascall. Gaz, I feele some insurrections. Fran. Hence. Gaz. I vanish. Exit Gazet. Gri. Why should I study a defence, or comfort? In whom blacke guilt, and misery if ballanc'd, I know not which would turne the scale, looke vpward I dare not, for should it but be beleeu'd, That I (dide deepe in hells most horrid colours,) Should dare to hope for mercy, it would leaue No checke or feeling, in men innocent To catch at sinnes, the diuell nere taught mankind yet, No, I must downeward, downeward, though repentance Could borrow all the glorious wings of grace, My mountainous waight of sins, would cracke their pini∣ons, And sincke them to hell with me. Fran. Dreadfull! heare me, Thou miserable man. Grima. Good sir deny not, But that there is no punishment beyond Damnation. Enter Master, Boteswaine. Master. Yonder he is, I pitty him. Botes. Take comfort Captaine, we liue still to serue you, Gri. Serue me? I am a diuell already, leaue me, Stand further off, you are blasted else, I haue heard Schoolemen affirme mans body is compos'd Of the foure elements, and as in league together They nourish life; So each of them affords Liberty to the soule, when it growes wearie Of this fleshie prison. Which shall I make choice of? The fire? n (I shall feele that heereafter) The earth will not receiue me Should some whirlewind
Snatch me into the ayre: and I hang there, Perpetuall plagues would dwell vpon the earth. And those superior bodies that powre downe Their cheerefull influence denie to passe it, Through those vast regions I haue infected. The (Sea) I that is iustice there, I ploude vp Mischiefe as deepe as Hell there: there l'le hide This cursed lumpe of clay may it turne Rocks Where plummets weight could neuer reach the sands. And grinde the ribs of all such barkes as presse The Oceans breast in my vnlawfull course. I haste then to thee, let thy rauenous wombe Whom all things else denie, be now my tombe. Exit Gri. Master. Follow him and restraine him. Fran. Let this stand For an example to you. I'le prouide A lodging for him, and apply such cures To his wounded conscience, as heauen hath lent mee. Hee's now my second care: and my profession Bindes me to teach the desperate to repent As farre as to confirme the innocent. Exeunt. Actus tertius, Scaena tertia. Enter Asambeg, Mustapha, Aga, Capiaga. Asambeg. Your pleasure, Mus. I'will exact your priuate eare, And when you haue receiude it, you will thinke Too many know it. Exeunt Aga, Capiaga. Asambeg. Leaue the roome, but bee Within our call. Now sir, what burning secret brings you (With which it seemes you are turnde Cynders) To quench in my aduise, or power? Mustapha. The fire Will rather reach you.
Asam. Mee? Musta. And consume both, For tis impossible to be put out But with the blood of those that kindle it: And yet one viall of it is so pretious, It being borrow'd from the Ottoman spring, That better tis I thinke, both vve should perish Then proue the desperate meanes that must restraine it, From spreading further. Asam. To the poynte, and quickely. These vvinding circumstances in relations Seldome enuiron truth. Musta. Truth Asambeg? Asam. Truth Mustapha. I sayd it, and adde more You touch vpon a string that to my eare, Do's sound Donusa. Musta. You then vnderstand Who tis I aime at. Asam. Take heed Mustapha, Remember what she is, and whose we are; Tis her neglect perhaps, that you complaine of, And should you practise to reuenge her scorne, With any plot to taynt her in her honor, Musta. Heare mee. Asam. I will be heard first, there's no tongue A subiect owes, that shall out thunder mine. Musta. Well take your way. Asam. I then againe repeate it If Mustapha dares with malitious breath (On iealous suppositions) presume To blast the blossome of Donusas Fame Because he is denide a happinesse Which men of equall, nay of more desert, Haue su'd in vaine for. Musta. More? Asam. More. Twas I spake it, The Basha of Natolia and my selfe
Were Riualls for her, either of vs brought More Victories, more Trophies, to pleade for vs To our great Master, then you dare lay claime to, Yet still by his allowance she was left To her election, each of vs ow'd nature As much for outward forme, and inward vvorth To make vvay for vs to her grace and fauour, As you brought with you. We vvere heard, repuls'd Yet thought it no dishonour to sit downe, With the disgrace; if not to force affection, May merit such a name. Musta. Haue you done yet? Asa. Be therfore more then sure the ground on which You rayse your accusation, may admit No vndermining of defence in her, For if with pregnant and apparent proofes Such as may force a iudge, more then inclin'd Or partiall in her cause to sweare her guilty; You win not me to set off your beleefe, Neither our ancient friendship, nor the rites, Of sacred hospitality (to which I would not offer violence) shall protect you: Now vvhen you please. Must. I will not dwell vpon Much circumstance, yet cannot but professe With the assurance of a loyalty, Equall to yours, the reuerence I owe, The Sultan, and all such his blood makes sacred; That there is not a veyne of mine vvhich yet is Vnemptied in his seruice, but this moment Should freely open, so it might vvash off The staynes of her dishonor, could you thinke? Or though you saw it credit your owne eyes? That she, the wonder and amazement of Her sex, the pride, and glory of the empire, That hath disdain'd you, sleighted me, and boasted A frozen coldnesse which no appetite,
Or height of blood could thaw, should now so far Be hurried vvith the violence of her lust, As in it burying her high birth and fame, Basely descend to fill a Christians armes And to him yeeld her Virgin honour vp, Nay sue to him to take't. Asam. A Christian? Must. Temper Your admiration: and vvhat Christian thinke you? No Prince disguis'd; no man of marke, nor honour, No daring vndertaker in our seruice, But one vvhose lips her foote should scorne to touch, A poore Mechanicke-Pedler. Asam. Hee? Must. Nay more, Whom doe you thinke she made her scout, nay baude, To finde him out but me? What place makes choyce of To wallow in her foule and lothsome pleasures, But in the pallace? Who the instruments Of close conueyance, but the captaine of Your gard the Aga, and that man of trust The warden of the inmost port? I'll proue this, And though I fayle to shew her in the act, Glew'd like a neighing Gennet to her Stallion, Your incredulity shall be conuinc'd With proofes I blush to thinke on. Asam. Neuer yet, This flesh felt such a feuer, by the life And fortune of great Amura'h, should our prophet (Whose name I bow to) in a vision speake this, T'would make me doubtfull of my faith: leade on, And when my eies, and eares, are like yours, guilty, My rage shall then appeare, for I will doe Something; but what, I am not yet determin'd. Exeunt.
Actus Tertius, Scaena Quarta. Enter Carazie, Manto, Gazet. Carazie. They are priuate to their wishes, Mant. Doubt it not. Gaz. A prettie structure this! a court doe you call it? Valted and arch'd: O heere has beene old iumbling Behind this arras. Car. Prethee let's haue some sport, With this fresh Codshead. Manto. I am out of tune, But doe as you please. My conscience tush the hope Of liberty throwes that burthen off, I must goe watch, and make discouery. Exit. Cara. He's musing, And vvill talke to himselfe, he cannot hold, The poore foole's rauish'd. Gazet. I am in my masters clothes, They fit me to a hayre too, let but any Indifferent gamester measure vs inch, by inch, Or vvaigh vs by the standard, I may passe I haue beene prou'd, and prou'd againe, true mettall. Car. How he suruayes himselfe. Gaz. I haue heard that some Haue feol'd themselues at Court into good fortunes, That neuer hop'd to thriue by wit in the City, Or honesty in the Countrey. If I doe not Make the best laugh at me, he weepe for my selfe, If they giue me hearing. Tis resolud I' trie What may be done. By your fauour ir, I pray you Were you borne a Courtier? Cara. No sir, vvhy doe you aske? Gaz. Because I thought that none could be preferd,
But such as were begot there. Car. O sir! many, and howsoere you are a Citizen borne, Yet if your mother vvere a handsome vvoman, And euer long'd to see a Maske at Court, It is an euen lay but that you had A Courtier to your Father; and I thinke so; You beare your selfe so sprightly. Gaz. It may be, But pray you sir, had I such an itch vpon me To change my coppy, is there hope a place May be had heere for money? Car. Not without it That I dare vvarrant you. Gaz. I haue a pretty stocke, And vvould not haue my good parts vndiscouer'd, What places of credit are there? Car. There's your Beglerbeg. Gaz. By no meanes that, it comes to neere the begger And most prooue so that come there. Car. Or your Sanzacke. Gaz. Saus-iacke fie none of that. Car. Your Chiaus. Gaz. Not that. Car. Chiefe Gardiner. Gaz. Out vpon't, Twill put me mind my Mother was an herb-woman, What is your place I pray you? Car. Sir an Euenuch. Gaz. An Euenuch! very fine, I faith, an Euenuch! And what are your employments? neate and easie. Car. In the day  waite on my Lady when she eates, Carry her pantophles, beare vp her trayne Sing her asleepe at night, and when she pleases I am her bedfellow. Gaz How? her bedfellow, And lye with her? Car. Yes, and lye with her.
Gaz. O rare! Ile be an Eunuch, though I sell my shop for't And all my wares. Car. It is but parting with A precious stone or two. I know the price on't. Gaz. Ile part with all my stones, and vvhen I am An Eunuch, Ile so tosse and towse the Ladies; Pray you helpe me to a chapman. Car. The court Surgion Shall doe you that fauour. Gaz. I am made! an Eunuch! Enter Manto. Manto. Carazie, quit the roome. Car. Come sir, wee'll treat of Your businesse further. Gaz. Excellent! an Eunuch! Exeunt. Actus Tertius. Scaena Quinta. Enter Donusa, Vitelli. Vitelli, Leaue me, or I am lost againe, no prayers, No penitence, can redeeme me. Donusa. Am I growne Olde, or deform'd since yesterday? Vitel. You are still, Although the sating of your lust hath sullied The imaculate whitenesse of your Virgin beauties, Too fayre for me to looke on. And though purenesse, The sword with which you euer fought, and conquer'd, Is rauish'd from you by vnchaste desires, You are too strong for flesh and blood to treat with, Though iron grates were interpos'd betweene vs, To warrant me from treason. Donusa. Whom doe you feare? Vitel. That humane frailety I tooke from my mother,
That, as my youth increas'd, grew stronger on me, That still pursues me, and though once recouer'd In scorne of reason, and what's more, religion, A gaine seekes to betray me. Donusa. If you meane sir, To my embraces, you turne rebell to The lawes of nature, the great Queene, and Mother Of all productions, and denie alleageance. Where you stand bound to pay it. Vitel. I will stoppe Mine eares against these charmes, which if Vlysses Could liue againe, and he are this second Siren, Though bound with Cables to his Mast, his Ship too Fasten'd with all her Anchors, this inchantment Would force him in despite of all resistance, To leape into the Sea, and follow her, Although destruction with outstretch'd armes, Stood ready to receaue him. Donusa. Gentle sir, Though you deny to heare me, yet vouchsafe To looke vpon me. Though I vse no language The griefe for this vnkind repulse, will print Such a dumbe eloquence vpon my face, As will not onely pleade, but preuaile for me. Vitelli, I am a cowar'd, I will see and heere you, The triall else is nothing, Nor the conquest, My temperance shall crowne me with heereafter, Worthy to be remembred. Vp my vertue And holy thoughts, and resolutions arme me, Against this fierce temptation; giue me voyce Tun'd to a zealous anger to expresse At what an ouerualue I haue purchas'd, The vvanton treasure of your Virgin bounties, That in their false fruition heape vpon me Despayre, and horror; that I could with that ease Redeeme my forfeit innocence, or cast vp The poyson I receiu'd into my entrayles,
From the alluring cup of your inticements As now I doe deliuer backe the price, returnes the Casket. And salarie of your lust: or thus vncloth me Of sins gay trappings, (the proud liuery Throwes off his cloke and doublet. Of wicked pleasure) which but worn, and heated With the fire of entertaynement, and consent, Like to Alcides fatall shirt, teares off Our flesh, and reputation both together, Leauing our vlcerous follies bare, and open, To all malicious censure. Donu. You must grant, If you hold that a losse to you, mine equals, If not transcends it. If you then first tasted That poyson as you call it, I brought with me A palat vnacquainted with the rellish Of those delights which most (as I haue heard) Greedily swallow; and then the offence (If my opinion may be beleeu'd) Is not so greate: how ere, the wrong no more Then if Hippolli and the Virgin Huntresse, Should meete and kisse together. Vitel. What defences Can lust rayse to maintaine a precipice Asambeg and Musta. aboue To the Abisse of loosenes? but affords not The least stayre, or the fastening of one foote, To reascend that glorious height we fell from. Musta. By Mahomet she courts him. Asam. Nay kneeles to him; Obserue the scornefull villaine turnes away too, As glorying in his conquest. Donu. Are you Marble? kneeles If Christians haue mothers, sure they share in The tigresse fiercenesse, for if you were owner Of humane pitty, you could not indure A Princes to kneele to you, or looke on These falling teares which hardest rocks would soften, And yet remaine vnmou'd. Did you but giue me
A tast of happinesse in your embraces That the remembrance of the sweetenesse of it Might leaue perpetuall bitternes behind it? Or shew'd me vvhat it vvas to be a vvife, To liue a vvidow euer? Asam. She has confest it; Enter Capiaga, Aga, with others. Ceise on him villaines. O the furies. Donusa. How! Asambeg and Mustapha descend. Are we betray'd? Vitel. The better, I expected A Turkish Faith. Donu. Who am I that you dare this? Tis I that doe command you to forbeare A touch of violence. Aga. We already Madam Haue satisfied your pleasure further then Wee know to answere it. Capi. Would we vvere vvell off, We stand too far ingag'd I feare. Donu. For vs? We'll bring you safe off, who dares contradict What is our pleasure? Enter Asambeg, Mustapha. Asam. Spurne the dog to prison, I'll answere you anon. Vitel. What punishment So ere I vndergoe, I am still a Christian. Ex. with Vitel. Donu. What bold presumption's this? vnder what law Am I to fall that set my foote vpon Your Statutes and decrees? Musta. The crime committed Our Alcoran calls death. Donu. Tush, vvho is heere That is not Amurahs slaue, and so vnfit To sit a iudge vpon his blood? Asam. You haue lost And sham'd the priueledge of it, rob'd me to Of my soule, my vnderstanding to behold
Your base vnworthy fall, from your high vertue. Donu. I doe appeale to Amurah. Asam. We will offer No violence to your person, till we know His sacred pleasure, till when vnder gard You shall continue heere. Donusa. Shall? Asam. I haue said it. The Gard leades off Donusa. Donu. We shall remember this. Asam. It ill becomes Such as are guilty to deliuer threats Against the innocent. I could teare this flesh now, But tis in vaine, nor must I talke but do: Prouide a well made galley for Constantinople, Such sad newes neuer came to our great Master; As hee directs, we must proceed, and know No will but his, to whom what's ours we owe. Exeunt. The end of the third Act. Actus Quartus, Scaena Prima. Enter Master, Boteswaine. Master. He does begin to eate? Botes. A little, Master, But our best hope for his recouery, is that His rauing leaues him, and those dreadfull words, Damnation, and despayre, with which he euer Ended all his discourses are forgotten. Mast. This stranger is a most religious man sure, And I am doubtfull whether his charity, In the relieuing of our wants, or care To cure the wounded conscience of Grimaldi,
Deserues more admiration. Botes. Can you guesse What the reason should be that we neuer mention The Church, or the high Altar, but his melancholie Growes, and increases on him? Maist. I haue heard him (When he gloried to professe himselfe an Atheist,) Talke often and with much delight and boasting, Of a rude prancke he did ere he turn'd Pirat, The memory of which, as it appeares, Lies heauy on him. Botes. Pray you let me vnderstand it. Maist. Vpon a solemne day when the whole City Ioyn'd in deuotion, and with barefoote steps Pass'd to S. Markes, the Duke and the whole Signiory, Helping to perfit the Religious pompe, With which they were receaued; when all men else Were full of teares, and gron'd beneath the waight Of past offences (of whose heauy burden They came to be absolu'd and freed,) our Captaine, Whether in scorne of those so pious rites He had no feeling of, or else drawne to it Out of a wanton irreligious madnesse, (I know not which) ranne to the holy man, As he was of doing the worke of grace, And snatching from his hands the sanctifide meanes Dash'd it vpon the pauement. Botes. How escaped he? It being a deede deseruing death with torture. Mast. The generall amazement of the people Gaue him leaue to quit the Temple, and a Gundelo, (Prepar'd it seemes before) brought him aboard, Since which he nere saw Venice. The remembrance Of this, it seemes, torments him; aggrauated With a strong beleefe he cannot receaue pardon For this fowle fact, but from his hands against whom It was committed.
Botes. And vvhat course intendes His heauenly Physitian, reuerend Francisco, To beate downe this opinion. Mast. He promis'd To vse some holy and religious finenesse, To this good end, and in the meane time charg'd me To keepe him darke, and to admit no visitants But on no termes to crosse him. Heere he comes. Enter Grimaldi, with a Booke. Gri. For theft! he that restores trebble the value, Makes satisfaction, and for want of meanes To doe so, as a slaue must serue it out Till he hath made full payment. Ther's hope left heere O vvith vvhat vvil ingnesse vvould I giue vp My liberty to those that I haue pillag'd And vvish the numbers of my yeeres though wasted In the most sordid slauery might equall The rapines I haue made, till with one voyce My patient sufferings, might exact from my Most cruell creditors, a full remission, An eies losse with an eie, limbs with a limb, A sad accompt! yet to finde peace within heere, Though all such as I haue maim'd, and dismembred In drunken quarrells, or orecome with rage When they were giu'n vp to my power, stood heere now And cride for restitution; to appease 'em, I vvould doe a bloody iustice on my selfe; Pull out these eies that guided me to rauish Their sight from others; lop these legs that bore me To barbarous violence, with this land cut off This instrument of wrong, till nought were left me But this poore bleeding limblesse truncke, which gladly
I vvould diuide among them. Ha! what thinke I Of petty forfeitures, in this reuerend habit, (All that I am turnd into eies) I looke on A deede of mine so fiendlike, that repentance, Though with my teares I taught the sea new tides, Can neuer wash off; all my thefts, my rapes Are veniall trespasses compar'd to what I offer'd to that shape, and in a place too Where I stood bound to kneele to't. kneeles Enter Francisco in a Cpe like a Bishop. Fran. Tis forgiuen, I with his tongue (whom in these sacred vestments With impure hands thou didst offend) pronounce it, I bring peace to thee, see that thou deserue it In thy fayre life heereafter. Gri. Can it bee! Dare I beleeue this vision, or hope A pardon ere may finde me? Fran. Purchase it By zealous vndertakings, and no more T'will be remembred. Gri. What celestiall balme I feele now pour'd into my wounded conscience? What penance is there Ile not vndergoe Though nere so sharpe and rugged, with more pleasure Then flesh and blood ere tasted, shew me true sorrow, Arm'd vvith an iron vvhip, and I vvill meete The stripes she brings along vvith her, as if They vvere the gentle touches of a hand, That comes to cure me. Can good deeds redeeme me? I vvill rise vp a vvonder to the vvorld, When I haue giuen strong proofes how I am altred,
I that haue sold such as profest the Faith, That I was borne in, to captiuity, Will make their number equall, that I shall Deliuer from the oare; and vvinne as many By the cleerenesse of my actions, to looke on Their misbeleefe, and loth it. I will be A conuoy for all Marchants: and thought vvorthy To be reported to the vvorld heereafter, The child of your deuotion, nurs'd vp And made strong by your charity, to breake through All dangers Hell can bring foorth to oppose me; Nor am I though my fortunes were thought desperate, Now you haue reconcil'd me to my selfe, So voyd of vvorldly meanes, but in despight Of the proud Viceroyes, vvrongs I can doe something To vvitnesse of my change; when you please trye me, And I will perfit vvhat you shall inioyne me, Or fall a ioyfull Martyr. Fran. You vvill reape The comfort of it, liue yet vndiscouer'd, And vvith your holy meditations strengthen Your Christian resolution, ere long You shall heare further from me. Exit Francisco. Grimal. I'll attend All your commands with patience; come my Mates, I hitherto haue liu'd an ill example, And as your Captaine lead you on to mischiefe, But now vvill truely labour, that good men May say heereafter of me to my glory, Let but my power and meanes, hande vvith my vvill, His good endeuours, did waigh downe his ill. Exeunt Grimaldi, Master, Boteswaine. Enter Francisco. Fran. This penitence is not counterfeit, howsoeuer Good actions are in themselues rewarded, My trauailes to meete vvith a double crowne, If that Vitelli come off safe, and prooue
Himselfe the Master of his vvilde affections, Enter Gaz. O I shall haue intelligence, how now Gazet, Why these sad lookes and teares? Gaz. Teares sir? I haue lost My worthy Master, your rich heyre seemes to mourne for A miserable father, your young vvidow Following a bedrid husband to his graue, Would haue her neighbours thinke she cries, and rores, That she must part vvith such a goodman doe nothing, When t'is because he stayes so long aboue ground, And hinders a rich suitor: all is come out sir, We are smok'd for being cunnicatchers, my master Is put in prison, his she customer Is vnder garde to, these are things to weepe for; But mine owne losse considerd, and vvhat a fortune I haue, as they say, snatch'd our of my chops, Would make a man runne mad. Fran. I scarce haue leasure, I am so wholy taken vp vvith sorrow, For my lou'de pupill to enquire thy fate, Yet I vvill heare it. Gaz. Why sir, I had boght a place, A place of credit to, and had gone through with it I should haue beene made an Eunuch, there was honour, For a late poore prentice, when vpon the suddaine There was such a hurleburley in the Court, That I was glad to runne away and carry The price of my office with me. Fran. Is that all? You haue made a sauing voyage, we must thinke now, Though not to free, to comfort sad Vitelli, My greeu'd loule suffers for him. Gazet. I am sad too; But had I beene an Eunuch Fran. Thinke not on it. Exeunt.
Actus Quartus, Scaena Secunda. Enter Asambeg. vnlocks the doore, leades forth Paulina. Asam. Be your owne gard; obsequiousnesse, and seruice Shall winne you to be mine. Of all restraint For euer take your leaue, no threats shall awe you, No iealous doubts of mine disturbe your freedome, No fee'd spies, wayte vpon your steps, your vertue And due consideration in your selfe, Of what is Noble, are the faithfull helps I leaue you as supporters to defend you, From falling basely. Paul. This is vvondrous strange Whence flowes this alteration? Asam. From true iudgement, And strong assurance, neither grates of iron, Hemde in vvith vvalls of brasse, stricte gards, high birth, The forfeiture of Honour, nor the feare Of infamie, or punishment, can stay A woman slaude to appetite from being False, and vnworthy. Paul. You are growne Satyricall Against our sex, vvhy sir I durst produce My selfe in our defence, and from you challenge A testimony not to be deni'd, All fall not vnder this vnequall censure, I that haue stood your flatteries, your threats Bore vp against your fierce temptations; scorn'd The cruell meanes you practis'd to supplant me, Hauing no armes to helpe me, to hold out But loue of piety, and constant goodnesse, If you are vnconfirm'd, dare againe bouldly
Enter into the lists, and combat vvith All opposites mans malice can bring forth To shake me in my chastetie built vpon The rocke of my religion. Asam. I doe vvish I could beleeue you, but vvhen I shall shew you A most incredible example of Your frayletie in a Princesse, su'de and sought to By men of worth, of ranck, of eminence; courted By happinesse it selfe, and her cold temper Approou'd by many yeeres; yet she to fall, Fall from her selfe, her glories, nay her safet, Into a gulfe of shame, and blacke despayre, I thinke you'll doubt your selfe, or in beholding Her punishment for euer be deterde From yeelding basely. Paul. I vvould see this vvonder; Tis sir my first petition. Asam. And thus granted; Aboue you shall obserue all. Paul. steps aside. Enter Must. Must. Sir I sought you And must relate a vvonder, since I studied And knew vvhat man vvas, I vvas neuer vvitnesse Of such inuincible fortitude as this Christian Showes in his sufferings, all the torments that We could present him vvith to fright his constancy Confirm'd, not shooke it; and those heauy chaines That eate into his flesh, appear'd to him Like bracelets made of some lou'd mistrisse hayres We kisse in the remembrance of her fauours. I am strangely taken vvith it, and haue lost Much of my furie. Asam. Had he suffer'd poorely It had call'd on my contempt, but manly patience And all commanding vertue, wins vpon An enemy. I shall thinke vpon him, ha! Enter Aga with a black box. So soone return'd? this speede pleads in excuse
Of your late fault, which I no more remember. What's the grand Signiors pleasure? Aga. Tis inclos'd heere The box to, that contaynes it, may informe you How he stands affected: I am trusted with Nothing but this, on forfeit of your head She must haue a speedy triall. Asam. Bring her in In blacke as to her funerall, tis the colour Her fault wils her to weare, and which, in iustice I dare not pitty, sit and take your place, Howeuer in her life she has degenerated May she die nobly, and in that confirme Her greatnesse, and high blood. A solemne musicque. A garde. The Aga, and Capi∣aga, leading in Donusa in blacke, her trayne borne vp by Carazie, and Manto. Musta. I now could melt; But soft compassion leaue me. Fran. I am affrighted With this dismall preparation. Should the enioying Of loose desires finde euer such conclusions, All Women would be Vestalls. Donu. That you cloth me In this sad liuery of death, assures me Your sentence is gone out before, and I To late am cald, for, in my guilty cause To vse qualification, or excuse— Yet must I not part so with mine owne strengths, But borrow from my modesty boldnesse, to Enquire by whose authority you sit My iudges, and whose warrant digs my graue In the frownes you dart against my life? Asam. See heere This fatall signe, and warrant this brought to
A Generall fighting in the head of his Victorious troopes, rauishes from his hand His eu'n then conquering sword; this showne vnto The Sultans brothers, or his sonnes, deliuers His deadly anger, and all hopes lay'd by Commands them to prepare themselues for heauen. Which would stand with the quiet of your soule To thinke vpon, and imitate. Donusa. Giue me leaue A little to complayne, first of the hard Condition of my ortune, which may moue you Though not to rise vp intercessors for me (Yet in remembrance of my former life, This being the first pot, tainting mine honor) To be the meanes to bring me to his presence; And thou I doubt not, but I could alleage Such reasons in mie owne defence, or pleade So humbly (my teares helpinge) that it should Awake his sleeping pitty. Asam. Tis in vayne. If you haue ought to say you shall haue hearing, And in me thinke him preent. Donusa. I would thus then First kneele, and kisse his feete, and after tell him How long I had beene his darling, what delight My infant yeeres afforded him; how deere Hee prizde his sister, in both bloods, my mother; That she like him had frailety, that to me Descends as an inheritance, then coniure him By her blest ashes, and his fathers soule, The sword that rides vpon his thigh, his right hand Holding the Scepter and the Ottoman fortune, To haue compassion on me. Asam. But suppose (As I am sure) he would be deafe, what then Could you inferre? Donusa. I then would thus rise vp,
And to his teeth tell him he was a tyrant, A most voluptuous, and insatiable Epicure In his owne pleasures: which he hugs so deerely, As proper, and peculiar to himselfe, That he denies a moderate lawfull vse Of all delight to others. And to thee Vnequall iudge I speake as much, and charge thee But with impartiall eies to looke into Thy selfe, and then consider with what iustice Thou canst pronounce my sentence. Vnkind nature, To make weake women seruants, proud men Masters Indulgent Mahomet, doe thy bloudy lawes Call my embraces vvith a Christian, death? Hauing my heate and May of youth to pleade In my excuse? and yet want power to punish These that vvith scorne breake throgh thy Cobweb edicts And laugh at thy decrees? to tame their lusts There's no religious bit, let her be fayre And pleasing to the eye, though Persian, Moore, Idolatresse, Turke, or Christian, you are priueledg'd And freely may enioy her. At this instant I know, vniust man, thou hast in thy power A louely Christian Virgin; thy offence Equall, if not transcending mine, vvhy then We being both guilty doest thou not descend From that vsurp'd Tribunall and vvith me Walke hand in hand to death? Asam. She raues, and vve Loose time to heare her: reade the Law, Donusa. Doe, doe, I stand resolu'd to suffer. Asa. If any Virgin of what degree or quality soeuer, borne a naturall Turke, shall bee conuicted of corporall loosenesse, and incontinence, with any Christian, she is by the decree of our great Prophet Mahomet to loose her head. Asam. Marke that, then taxe our iustice.
Aga. Euer prouided that if shee, the sayd offender, by any reasons, arguments or perswasion, can win and preuaile with the sayd Christian offending with her, to alter his religion, and marry her, that then the winning of a soule to the Mahometan sect, shall acquit her from all shame, dis∣grace and punishment whatsoeuer. Donu. I lay hold on that clause and challenge from you The priueledge of the Law. Musta. What will you doe? Donu. Grant me accesse and meanes, I'l vndertake To turne this Christian Turke, and marry him: This triall you cannot denie. Must. O base! Can feare to die make you descend so low From your high birth, and brand the Ottaman line With such a marke of infamy? Asam. This is worse Then the parting with your honour, better suffer Ten thousand deaths, and without hope to haue A place in our great Prophets Paradice, Then haue an acte to after times remembred So foule as this is. Musta. Cheere your spirits Madam, To die is nothing, tis but parting with A mountaine of vexations. Asam. Thinke of your honour; In dying nobly you make satisfaction For your offence, and you shall liue a story Of bould Heroicke courage. Donu. You shall not foole me Out of my life, I claime the Law and sue for A speedy triall; if I fayle, you may Determine of me as you please. Asam. Base woman! But vse thy wayes, and see thou prosper in 'em For if thou fall againe into my power Thou shalt in vaine after a thousand tortures
Cry out, for death, that death which now thou fliest from Vnloose the prisoners chaynes, goe leade her on To try the Magique of her tongue; I follow: I am on the racke, descend my best Paulina. Actus Quartus. Scaena Tertia. Enter Franciso, Iaylor. Fran. I come not empty handed, I will purchase Your fauour at what rate you please. There's gold. Iaylor, Tis the best oratory. I will hazard A checke for your content below there? Vitelli, Welcome. Vitelli vnder the Stage. Art thou the happy messenger that brings me Newes of my death? Iay. Your hand. Vitelli plack'd vp. Fran. Now if you please, A little priuacie. Iay. You haue bought it sir, Enioy it freely. Exit Iaylor. Fran. O my deerest pupill, Witnesse these teares of ioy, I neuer saw you Till now looke louely; nor durst I ere glory In the mind of any man I had built vp With the hands of vertuous, and religios precepts, Till this glad minute. Now you haue made good My expectation of you. By my order, All Roman Caesars, that ledde kings in chaines Fast bound to their triumphant chariots, if Compar'd with that true glory, and full luster You now appeare in, all their boaste honors Purchas'd with blood, and wrong, would loose their names And be no more remembred. Vitelli. This applause
Confirm'd in your allowane ioyes me more, Then if a thousand full cram'd Theaters Should clap their eager hands to witnesse that The Scene I act did please, and they admire it. But these are (father) but beginnings, not The ends of my high aimes. I grant to haue master'd The rebell appetite of flesh and blood Was far aboue my strength; and still owe for it To that great power that lent it. But when I Shall make't apparant, the grimme lookes of death Affright me not, and that I can put off The fonde desire of life (that like a garment Couers, and clothes our frailty) hastening to My Martirdome, as to a heauenly banquet, To which I was a choyce inuited guest. Then you may boldly say, you did not plough Or trust the barren, and vngratefull lands With the fruitfull graine of your religious counsels. Fran. You doe instrct your teacher. Let the Sun Of your cleere life (that lends to good men light) But set as gloriously, as it did rise, Though sometimes clouded) you may write il vltra To humane wishes. Vitel. I haue almost gain'd The end of the race, and will not aynt, or tire now. Enter Aga and laylor. Aga. Sir by your leaue (nay stay not) I bring comfort; The Viceroy taken with the constant bearing Of your afflictions, and presuming to You will not change your temper, does command Your irons should be tane off. Now arme your selfe With your olde resolution, suddenly the chayne taken off. You shall be visited, you must leaue the roome to And doe it without reply. Fran. There's no contending, Bee still thy selfe my sonne. Exit Francisco. Vitel. Tis not in man Enter Danu. Asam. Musta. Paul.
To change or alter me. Paul. Whn doe I looke on? My brother? tis he! but no more my tongue, Thou wilt betray all. Asam. Let vs heare this temptresse, The fellow lookes as he would stop his eares Against her powerfull spels. Paul. He is vndone else. Vitel. I'll stand th'incounter, charge me home. Donu. I come sir, bowes her selfe. A begger to you, and doubt not to finde A good mans charity, which if you denie, You are cruell to your selfe, a crime, a wiseman (And such I hold you) would not willingly Be guilty of, nor let it find lesse welcome Though I (a creature you contemne) now shew you The way to certaine happinesse, nor thinke it Imaginarie, or phantasticall, And so not vvorth th'acquiring, in respect The passage to it is nor rough nor thornie; No steepe hills in the way which you must climbe vp; No monsters to be conquer'd; no inchantments To be dissolu'd by counter charmes, before You take possession of it. Vitel. What strong poyson Is wrap'd vp in these sugred pills? Donu. My suite is That you vvould quit your shoulders of a burthen Vnder vvhose ponderous vvaight you vvilfully Haue too long groan'd, to cast those fetters off, With vvhich vvith your own hands you chaine your free∣dome Forsake a seuere, nay imperious mistresse, Whose seruice does exact perpetuall cares, Watchings, and troubles, and giue entertainement To one that courts you, whose least fauours are Variety, and choyce of all delights Mankind is capable of.
Vitel. You speake in riddles. What burthen, or what mistrisse? or what fetters? Are those you poynt at? Donu. Those which your religion, The mistresse you too long haue seru'd, compells you To beare with laue-like patience. Vitel. Ha! Paul. How brauely That vertuous anger showes! Donu. Be wise and waigh The prosperous successe of things, if blessings Are donatiues from Heauen (which you must grant Were blasphemy to question) and that They are call'd downe, and powr'd on such as are Most gracious with the great disposer of 'em, Looke on our flourishing Empire; if the spldor, The Maiestie, and glory of it dimme not Your feeble sight; and then turne backe, and see The narrow bounds of yours, yet that poore remnant Rent in as many factions, and opinions, As you haue petty kingdomes, and then if You are not obstinate against truth and reason, You must confesse the Deity you worship Wants care, or power to helpe you. Paul. Hold out now And then thou art victorious. Asam. How he eies her! Musta. As if he would looke through her Asam. His eyes flame too, As threatning violence. Vitel. But that I know The Diuell thy Tutor fills each part about thee, And that I cannot play the exorcist To dispossesse thee, vnlesse I should teare Thy body limbe by limbe, and throw it to The furies that expect it, I would now Plucke out that wicked tongue, that hath blasphem
That great omnipotency at whose nod The fabricke of the World shakes. Dare you bring Your igling Prophet in comparison with inscrutable, and infinite essence made this all, and comprehends his vvorke? The place is too prophane to mention him Whose onely name is sacred. O Donusa! How much in my compassion I suffer, That thou, on whom this most excelling forme And faculties of discourse, beyond a vvoman, Were by his liberall guift confer'd, should'st still Remaine in ignorance of him that gaue it? I vvill not foule my mouth to speake the Sorceries Of your seducer, his base birth, his vvhoredomes, His strange impostures; nor deliuer how He taught a Pigeon to feede in his eare, Then made his credulous followers beleeue It vvas an Angell that instructed him In the framing of his Alcoran. Pray you marke me. Asam. These words are death, were he in nought else guilty. Vitelli. Your intent to winne me To be of your beleefe proceeded from Your feare to die. Can there be strength in that Religion, that suffers vs to tremble At that vvhich euery day, nay hower vvee hast to? Donu. This is vnanswerable and there's something tells mee I erre in my opinion. Vitelli. Cherish it It is a Heauenly prompter, entertaine This holy motion, and weare on your forehead The Sacred badge he armes His seruants vvith, You shall, like mee, vvith scorne looke downe vpon All engines tyranny can aduance to batter Your constant resolution. Then you shall Looke truely ayre, vvhen your minds purenesse wers Your onward beauties. Donusa. I came heere to take you,
But I perceiue a yeelding in my selfe To be your prisoner. Vitelli, Tis an ouerthrow That will outshine all victories. O Donusa, Dye in my faith like me, and tis a marriage At vvhich celestiall Angels shalt be vvaiters, And such as haue beene Sainted vvelcome vs, Are you confirm'd? Donu. I vvould bee; but the meanes That may assure mee? Vitelli, Heauen is mercifull, And vvill not suffer you to vvant a man, To doe that sacred office, build vpon it. Donu. Then thus I spit at Mahomet. Asam Stoppe her mouth: In death to turne Apostata! I'll not heare One sillable from any; wretched creature! With the next rising Sunne prepare to die. Yet Christian, in reward of thy braue courage, Bee thy faith right, or vvrong, receiue this fauour. In person Ile attend thee to thy death, And bouldly challenge all that I can giue But what's not in my grant, which is to liue. Exeunt. The end of the fourth Act Actus Quintus, Scaena Prima. Enter Vitelli, Francisco. Fran. You are wondrous braue, and iocound. Vitelli. Welcome Father. Should I spare cost, or not weare cheerefull lookes Vpon my wedding day, it were omenous And shew'd I did repent it, which I dare not, It being a marriage, howsoeuer sad
In the first ceremonies that confirme it, That will for euer arme me against feares, Repentance, doubts, or iealousies, and bring Perpetuall comforts, peace of minde, and quiet To the glad couple. Fran. I well vnderstand you; And my full ioy to see you so resolu'd Weake words cannot expresse. What is the howre Design'd for this solemnity? Vitel. The sixth, Something before the setting of the Sun We take ur last leaue of his fading light, And with our soules eies seeke for beames eternall, Yet there's one scruple with which I am much Perplex'd, and troubl'd, which I know you can Resolue me of. Fran. What is't? Vitelli. This sir, my Bride Whm I first courted, and then wonne (not with Loose layes, poore flatteries, apish complements, But Sacred, and Religious zeal) yet wants The holy badge that should proclaime her fit For these Celestiall Nuptialis; vvilling she is, I know, to weare it, as the choicest iewell Or her fayre forehead; but to you, that well Could doe that vvorke of Grace, I know the Viceroy Will neuer grant accesse. Now in a case Of this necessity, I vvould gladly learne, Whether in me a layman, vvithout orders, It may not be religious, and lawfull As vve goe to our deaths to doe that office? Fran. A question in it selfe, vvith much ease answer'd; Midwiues vpon necessity performe t, And Knights that in he oly-and fought for The freedom of Hierusalem, vvhen ful Of sweat, and enemies blood, haue made their Helmets The fount, out of vvhich vvith their holy hands
They drew that heauenly liquor, 't vvas approu'd then By the Holy Church, nor must I thinke it now In you a vvorke lesse pious. Vitel. You confirme me, I vvill find a way to doe it. In the meane time Your holy vowes assist me. Fran. They shall euer Be present vvith you. Vitel. You shall see me act This last Scaene to the life. Fran. And though now fall, Rise a bles'd Martyr. Vitel. That's my end, my all. Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena Secunda. Enter Grimaldi, Master, Boteswaine, Saylors. Botes. Sir, if you slip this opportunity, Neuer expect the like. Mast. With as much ease now We may steale the ship our of the harbor, Captaine, As euer Gallants in a vvanton brauery Haue set vpon a drunken Constable, And bore him from a sleepy ruggown'd vvatch: Be therefore vvise. Gri. I must be honest too And you shall weare that shape, you shall obserue me, If that you purpose to continue mine, Thinke you ingratitude can be the parent To our vnfayn'd repentance? doe I owe A peace vvithin heere, Kingdoms could not purchase, To my religious creditor, to leaue him Open to danger, the great benefit Neuer remembred? no, though in her bottome. We could stow vp the tribute of the Turke,
Nay, grant the passage safe too: I will neuer Consent to waigh an Anchor vp, till hee, That onely must, commands it. Bsw. This Religion Will keepe vs slaues and Beggars. Mast. The Fiend prompts me To change my coppy: Plague vpon't, we are Seamen, What haue we to doe with't, but for a snatch, or so, At the end of a long Lent? Botesw. Mum, see who is here? Enter Francisco. Grim. My Father! Fran. My good conuert. I am full Of serious businesse which denies me leaue To holde long conference with you: Onely thus much Briefely receiue; a day, or two, at the most Shall make me fit to take my leaue of Tunis, Or giue me lost for euer. Grim. Dayes, nor yeares, Prouided, that my stay may doe you seruice, But to me shall be minuits. Franc. I much thanke you: In this small scrole you may in priuate reade What my intents are, and as they growe ripe I will instruct you further. In the meane time Borrow your late distracted lookes, and gesture; The more deiected you appeare, the lesse The Viceroy must suspect you. Grim. I am nothing, But what you please to haue me be. Franc. Farewell sir, Be cheerfull Master, something we will doe That shall reward it selfe in the performance, And that's true prize indeede. Mast. I am obedient. Exeunt. Grimaldi. Botesw. And I, there's no contending. Mast. Botsw. Fran. Peace to you all. Prosper thou great Existence my endeauours,
As they religiously are vndertaken, And distant equally from seruile gaine, Enter Paul. Carzi. and Manto. Or glorious ostentation. I am heard In this blest opportunity, which in vaine I long haue waited for. I must show my selfe. O she has found me. Now if she prooue right All hope will not forsake vs. Paul. Farther off, And in that distance know your duties too. You were bestowed on me as slaues to serue me And not as spies to prie into my actions, And after to betray me. You shall finde If any looke of mine be vnobseru'd, I am not ignorant of a mistresse power, And from whom I receiue it. Cara. Note this, Manto. The pride, and scorne, with which she entertaynes vs Now we are made hers by the Viceroyes guift. Our sweete condition'd princesse, fayre Donusa, Rest in her death waite on her, neuer vs'd vs With such contempt. I would he had sent me To the Gallies, or the Gallows, when he gaue me To this proude little diuell. Manto. I expect All tyrannous vsage, but I must be patient; And though ten times a day, she teares these locks, Or makes this face her footstoole, tis but iustice. Paul. Tis a true story of my fortunes, father, My chastity preseru'd by miracle, Or your deuotions for me; and beleeue it, What outward pride so ere I counterfeite, Or state to these appoynted to attend me, I am not in my disposition alter'd, But still your humble daughter and share with you In my poore brothers sufferings, all bels torments Reuenge it on accurs'd Grimaldies soule That in his rape of me gaue a beginning
To all the miseries that since haue follow'd Be charitable, and forgiue him gentle daughter; Hee's a chang'd man, and may redeeme his fault In his faire life heereafter. You must beare too Your forc'd captiuity (for tis no better, Though you weare golden fetters) and of him, Whom death affrights not, learne to hold out nobly. Paul. You are still the same good counsellor. Fran. And who knowes (Since wat aboue is purpos'd, is inscrutable) But that the Viceroyes extreme dotage on you May be the parent of a happier birth Then yet our hopes dare fashion. Longer conference May prooue vnafe for you, and me, howeuer Perhaps for triall he allowes you freedome. deliuers a paper. From this learne therefore what you must attempt, Though with the hazarde of your selfe, heauen gard you, And giue Vitelli patience, then I doubt not But he will haue a glorious day since some Hold truely, such as suffer, ouercome. Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena Tertia. Enter Asambeg, Mustapha, Aga, Capiaga. Asam. What we commanded, see perform'd, and fayle not In all things to be punctuall. Aga. We shall sir. Exeunt Aga, Capiaga. Must. Tis strange that you should vse such circumstance To a delinquent of so meane condition. Asam. Had he appear'd in a more sordid shape Then disguis'd greatenes euer dain'd to maske in, The gallant bearing of his present fortune Aloud proclaimes him noble. Musta If you doubt him, To be a man built vp for great imployments,
And as a cunning spie sent to explore The Cities strength, or weakenesse, you by torture May force him to discouer it. Asam. That were base; Nor dare I doe such iniury to Vertue And bold assured courage, neither can I Be wonne to thinke, but if I should attempt it, I shoote against the Moone. He that hath stood The roughest battery, that captiuity Could euer bring to shake a constant temper, Despis'd the fawnings of a future greatnesse, By beauty in her full perfection tender'd; That heares of death as of a quiet slumber, And from the surplusage of his owne firmenesse Can spare enough of fortitude, to assure A feeble woman; vvill now, Mustapha Be alter'd in his soule for any torments We can afflict his body vvith? Musta. Doe your pleasure, I only offer'd you a friends aduice, But vvithout gall, or enuy to the man That is to suffer. But vvhat doe you determine Of poore Grimaldi? the disgrace cal'd on him I heere has ran him madde. Asam. There waigh the difference In the true temper of their minds. The one, A Pirat sould to mischiefes, rapes, and all That make a slaue relentlesse, and obdurate; Yet of himselfe vvanting the inward strengths That should defend him, sinckes beneath compassion Or pitty of a man; vvhere as this marchant, Acquainted only vvith a ciuill life, Arm'd in himselfe; intrench'd, and fortifide With his owne vertue, valewing life and death, At the same price, poorely does not inuite A fauour, but commands vs doe him right, Which vnto him, and her (we both once honour'd
As a iust debt I gladly pay'm; they enter, Now sit wee equall hearers. A dreadfull musicke, at one doore; The Aga, lanizaries, Vitelli, Francisco, Gazet: at the other, Donusa, Paulina, Carazie, Manto. Musta. I shall heare And see, sir, without passion, my wrongs arme me. Vitel. A ioyfull preparation! To whose bountie Owe vvee our thankes for gracing thus our Himen? The notes though dreadfull to the eare, sound heere As our Epithalamium were sung By a Caelestiall quire, and a full Chorus Assurde vs future happinesse. These that leade me Gaze not with wanton eyes vpon my bride, Nor for their seruice are repayde by me With iealousies, or feares; nor doe they enuy My passage to those pleasures from which death Cannot deterre me. Great sir pardon me; Imagination of the ioyes I haste to, Made me forget my duty, but the forme And ceremony past, I will attend you, And with our constant resolution feast you, Not with course cates, forgot assoone as tasted, But such as shall, while you haue memory, Be pleasing to the palate. Fran. Bee not lost In what you purpose. Exit Francisco. Gaz. Call you this a marriage? It differs little from hanging, I cry at it. Vite. See where my bride appeares! in what full luster? As if the Virgins that beare vp her trayne, Had long contended to receiue an honor Aboue their births, in doing her this seruice. Nor comes she fearefull to meete those delights, Which once past ore, immortall pleasures follow. I need not therefore comfort, or encourage
Her forwarde steps, and I should offer wrong To her minds fortitude, should I but aske How she can brooke the rough high going Sea, Ouer whose foamie backe our shippe well rig'd With hope and strong assurance must transport vs. Nor will I tell her when we reach the Hauen (Which tempests shall not hinder) what loud vvelcom Shall entertaine vs; nor commend the place, To tell vvhose least perfection vvould strike dumbe The eloquence of all boasted in story, Though ioynd together. Donu. Tis enough my deerest; I dare not doubt you, as your humble shadow Leade vvhere you please, I follow. Vitelli. One suite sir, And vvillingly I cease to be a begger, And that you may vvith more security heare it, Know tis not life Ile aske, nor to deferre Our deaths, but a few minutes. Asam. Speake, tis granted. Vitel. We being now to take our latest leaue And growne of one beleefe, I doe desire I may haue your allowance to performe it But in the fashion vvhich vve Christians vse Vpon the like occasions. Asam. Tis allow'd of. Vitel. My seruice; haste Gazet to the next spring, And bring me of it. Gazet. Would I could aswell Fetch you a pardon, I vvould not run but flie, And be heere in a moment. Musta. What's the mystery Of this? discouer it? Vitel. Great sir, I'll tell you, Each countrey hath it's owne peculiar rites, Some vvhen they are to die drinke store of vvine, Which powr'd in liberally does oft beget
A bastarde valour, with which armde, they beare The not to bee declined charge of death With lsse feare, and astonishment; Others take Drugs to procure a heauie sleepe, that so They may insensibly receie the meanes That casts them in an euerlasting slumber; Others—O welcome. Enter Gazet with water. Vitelli. Now the vse of yours? The cleerenesse of this is a perfit signe Of innocence, and as this washes off Staines, and pollutions from the things we vveare, Throwne thus vpon the forehead, it hath power To purge those spots that cleue vpon the minde, (Throwes it on her face. If thankfully receiu'd. Asam. Tis a strange custome! Vitel. How doe you entertaine it my Donusa? Feele you no alteration? No new motiues? No vnexpected ayds that may confirme you In that to which you were inclinde before? Donu. I am an other woman, till this minute I neuer liu'de, nor durst thinke how to dye. How long haue I beene blinde? Yet on the suddaine, By this blest meanes I feele the filmes of error Tane from my soules eyes. O diuine Physitian, That hast bestowde a sight on mee, which death, Though readie to embrace me in his armes, Cannot take from me. Let me kisse the hand That did this miracle, and seale my thanks Vpon those Lips from whence these sweet words vanishde That freede me from the cruellest of prisons, Blinde ignorance, and misbeliefe: false Prophet, Impostor Mahomet. Asam. I'll heare no more; You doe abuse my fauors, seuer 'em: Wretch if thou hadst another life to loose, This Blasphemie deseru'de it, instantly Carry them to their deaths.
Vitelli. Wee part now, blest one, To meet hereafter in a Kingdome, where Hells malice shall not reach vs. Paul. Ha, ha, ha. Asam. What meanes my Mistres? Paul. Who can hold her spleene, When such ridiculous follies are presented, The Scene too made religion: O my Lord, How from one cause two contrary effects Spring vp vpon the suddaine. Asam. This is strange. Paul. That which hath foolde her in her death, Winnes me, That hitherto haue barde my selfe from plea∣sure, To liue in all delight. Asam. There's Musicke in this. Paul. I now will runn as fiercely to your armes As euer longing woman did, borne high On the swift wings of appetite. Vitel. O Diuell! Paul. Nay more, for there shall be no ods betwixt vs, I will turne Turke. Gazet. Most of your tribe doe so When they beginne in whore. Aside. Asam. You are serious Ladie? Paul. Serious? but satisfie me in a suite That to the world may witnesse that I haue Some power vpon you, and to morrow challenge What euer's in my guift, for I will bee At your dispose. Gazet. That's euer the subscription To a damn'd whores false Epistle. (Aside Asam. Aske this hand, Or if thou wilt, the heads of these. I am rapt Beyond my selfe with ioy, speake, speake, what is it? Paul. But twelue short houres repriue for this base couple. Asam. The reason, since you hate them?
Paul. That I may Haue time to triumph ore this vvretched vvoman: I'll be my selfe her guardian. I will feast, Adorned in her choice and richest Iewells, Commit him to vvhat gards you please. Grant this, I am no more mine owne, but yours. Asam. Enioy it; Repine at it who dares: beare him safe off To the blacke Tower, but giue him all things vsefull, The contrary vvas not in your request. Paul. I doe contemne him. Donu. Peace in death deny'd me? Paul. Thou shalt not goe in liberty to thy graue, For one night a Sultana is my slaue. Musta. A terrible little tyrannesse. Asam. No more; Her vvill shall be a law. Till now nere happy. Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena quarta. Enter Francis. Grimal. Mast. Botesw. and Sayl. Grim. Sir, all things are in readinesse, the Turkes That seas'd vpon my Ship stow'd vnder hatches, My men resolu'd, and cheerefull. Vse but meanes To get out of the Ports, vve vvill be ready To bring you aboard, and then (heauen be but pleas'd) This for the Viceroyes fleete. Fran. Discharge your parts, In mine I'll not be vvanting; feare not Master, Something vvill come along to fraught your Barke, That you vvill haue iust cause to say you neuer Made such a Voyage. Mast. We will stand the hazard. Fran. What's the best hower?
Botes. After the second vvatch. Fran. Enough; each to his charge. Grim. We will be carefull. Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena quinta. Enter Paulina, Donusa, Carazie, Manto. Paul. Sit Madam, it is fit that I attend you; And pardon, I beseech you, my rude language, To which the sooner you will be inuited, When you shall vnderstand, no way was left me To free you from a present execution, But by my personating that, which neuer My nature was acquainted with. Donu. I beleeue you. Paul. You will when you shall vnderstand, I may Receiue the honour to be knowen vnto you By a neerer name. And not to wracke you further, The man you please to fauour is my brother, No Marchant, Madam, but a Gentleman Of the best ranke in Venice. Donu. I reioyce in't But what's this to his freedome? for my selfe, Were he well off, I were secure. Paul. I haue A present meanes, not plotted by my selfe, But a religious man, my confessor, That may preserue all, if we had a seruant Whose faith we might relie on. Donu. She that's now Your slaue was once mine, had I twenty liues I durst commit them to her trust. Manto. O Madam,
I haue beene false, forgiue me. I'll redeeme it By any thing howeuer desperate You please to impose vpon me. Paul. Troth these teares I thinke cannot be counterfeit, I beleeue her, And if you please vvill try her. Donusa. At your perill; There is no further danger can looke towards me. Paul. This only then, canst thou vse meanes to carry This bakemeate to Vitelli? Manto. With much ease, I am familiar vvith the gard; beside, It being knowne it vvas I that betrayde, My entrance hardly vvill of them be question'd? Paul. About it then, say that it vvas sent to him From his Donusa, bid him search the midst of't He there shall finde a cordiall. Manto, What I doe Shall speake my care and faith. Exit Manto. Donu. Good fortune vvith thee. Paul. You cannot eate. Donu. The time vve thus abuse We might imploy much better. Paul. I am glad To heare this from you. As for you Carazie, If your intents doe prosper, make choyce whither You'l steale away with your two Mistresses Or take your fortune. Cara. I'll be gelded twice first; Hang him that stayes behind. Paul. I waite you Madame, Were but my brother off, by the command Of the doting Viceroy there's no garde dare stay me. And I will safely bring you to the place Where we must expect him. Donu. Heauen be gracious to vs. Exeunt.
Actus Quintus, Scaena Sexta. Enter Vitelli, Aga, and a Garde. Vitel. Paulina to fall off thus? tis to mee More terrible then death, and like an earthquake Totters this walking building (such I am) And in my suddaine ruine would preuent, By choaking vp at once my vitall spirits, This pompous preparation for my death. But I am lost; that good man, good Francisco Deliuered me a paper which till now I wanted leasure to peruse. reads the paper. Aga. This Christian Feares not, it seemes, the neere approching Sun Whose second rise He neuer must salute. Enter Manto. with the Bak't-meat. 1. Gard. Who's that? 2. Gard. Stand. Aga. Manto. Manto. Heere's the Viceroyes ring Giues warrant to my entrance, yet you may Partake of any thing I shall deliuer; Tis but a present to a dying man Sent from the princesse that must suffer with him. Aga. Vse your owne freedome. Manto. I would not disturbe This his last contemplation. Vitel. O tis well! He has restor'd all, and I at peace againe With my Paulina. Manto. Sir, the sad Donusa Grieued for your sufferings, more then for her owne, Knowing the long and tedious pilgrimage You are to take, presents you with this cordiall,
Which priuately she wishes you should taste of, And search the middle part, where you shall find Something that hath the operation, to Make death looke louely. Vitelli. I will not dispute What she commands but serue it. Exit Vitelli. Aga. Prethee Manto How hath the vnfortunate Princes spent this night Vnder her proud new mistresse? Manto. With such patience As it orecomes the others insolence Nay triumphs ore her pride. My much hast now Commands me hence, but the sad Tragedy past, Ile giue you satisfaction to the full Of all hath pass'd, and a true character Of the proud Christians nature. Exit Manto. Aga. Breake the watch vp, What should we feare in the midst of our owne strengths? Tis but the Bashas iealousie. Farewell souldiers. Exeunt. Actus quintus. Scaena Septima. Enter Vitelli, With the bak't-meates, Aboue. Vitelli. There's something more in this then meanes to cloy A hungry appetite, which I must discouer. Shee, will'd me search the midst. Thus, thus I pierce it: Ha! what is this? a scrole bound vp in packthread? What may the misterie be? The Scrole. Sonne, let downe this packethread, at the West win∣dow of the Castle. By it you shall draw vp a Ladder of ropes, by which you may descend, your deerest Donusa with the rest of your friends, below attend you. Heauen prosper you. Francisco. O best of men! he that giues vp himselfe
To a true religious friend, leanes not vpon A false deceiuing reede, but boldly builds Vpon a rocke, which now with ioy I finde In reuerend Francisco. Whose good vowes, Labors, and watchings in my hopd-for freedome Appeare a pious miracle. I come, I come, good man, with confidence, though the descent Were steepe as hel, I know I cannot slide Beeing cal'd downe, by such a faithfull guide. Exit Vitelli. Actus Quintus, Scaena Vltima. Asambeg, Mustapha, Ianizaries. Asam Excuse me Mustapha, though this night to me Appeare as tedious as that treble one Was to the world, when oue on faire Alcmena Begot Alcides. Were you to encounter Those rauishing pleasures, which the slow pac'd howres (To me they are such) bar me from, you would With your continued wishes striue to impe New feathers to the broken wings of Time And chide the amorous Sun, for too long dalliance In Thetis watry bosome. Musta. You are to violent In your desires, of which you are yet vncertaine Hauing no more assurance to enioy 'em Then a weake womans promise, on vvhich vvisemen Faintely relye. Asam. Tush she is made of truth And vvhat she says she vvill doe, holds as firme. The chamber shot off. As laws in brasse that know no change, what's this? Some new prize broght in sure. Why are thy looks So ghastly. Villaine speake. Enter Aga. Aga. Great sir heare me
Then after kill me, vve are all betrayde, The alse Grimaldi suncke in your disgrace With his confederates, haue seas'd his ship And those that garded it stow'd vnder haches With him the condemn'd Princesse, and the Marchant That vvith a ladder made of ropes descended From the blacke Tower in which he was inclos'd, And your fayre mistresse, Asam. Ha! Aga. With all their trayne And choysest iewels are gone safe aboard, Their sayles spread forth and with a fore-gale Leauing our cost, in scorne of all pursuite As a farewell they shew'd a broad side to vs. Asam. No more. Musta. Now note your confidence. Asam. No more. O my credulity! I am too full Of griefe, and rage to speake. Dull, heauy foole Worthy of all the tortures that the frowne Of thy incensed Master can throw on thee Without one mans compassion, I will hide This head among the desarts, or some caue Fi'd with my shame and me, where I alone May dye without a partner in my mone. Exeunt. FINIS.
