18250 99848167 13245
THE FIRST PART OF THE ELEMENTA∣RIE VVHICH ENTREA∣TETH CHEFELIE OF THE right writing of our English tung, set furth by RICHARD MVLCASTER. Imprinted at London by Thomas Vau∣troullier dwelling in the blak-friers by Lud-gate 1582.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERIE GOOD LORD, THE L. Robert Dudlie Earle of Leicester Baron of Denbigh, knight of the most noble order of the garter and S. Mi∣chaëll, master of hir maiesties horses, and one of hir highnesse most honora∣ble priuie counsell. RIGHT honorable and my ve∣rie good Lord, as the consi∣derations, which enforced me to offer hir maiestie the first frutes of my publik writing, were exceding great, so those reasons, which induce me now to present to your honor, this my second labor, be not verie small. Hir maiestie representeth the personage of the hole land, and therefor clameth a prero∣gatiue in dewtie, both for the excellencie of hir place, wherewith she is honored, as our prince, and for the greatnesse of hir care, wherewith she
is charged, as our parent. If honor be the end of that, which is don, hir place is to clame, if the common good, then hir charge is to chalenge. VVhich both clame in honor, and chalenge in charge, did concur in one aspect, when I offered hir my book. For mine own purpos was to ho∣nor hir place, with the first of my labor, and my book pretended to benefit hir charge with som generall profit. Again being desirous both to procure my book passage, thorough hir maie∣sties dominions, & to laie som ground for mine own credit, at the verie fountain, how could I haue obtained either the first, without hir suffe∣rance, or the last, but with hir countenance? VVhose considerate iudgement if my book did not please, my credit were in danger, whose gra∣cious permission if it were denyed, my successe were in despare. So that both my dewtie to∣wards hir maiestie, as my souerain prince, and my desire of furtherance by hir maiestie, as my surest protection, compelled me of force to be∣gin with hir highnesse, by satisfying of my dew∣tie, to com in hope of my desire, if the matter, which I offred should deserue liking, as the course, which I took shewed desire to please. Now my dewtie in that behalf towards hir ma∣iestie being so discharged, whom the presenting
of my book makes priuie to my purpos, doth not the verie stream of dewtie, & the force of de sert carie me streight frō hir highnesse vnto your honor, whether I haue in eie your general good nesse towards all them, which be learned them∣selues, or your particular fauor towards my tra∣uell, which teach others to learn? For in com∣mon iudgement is not he to take place next af∣ter the prince in the honor of learning, which all waie by the prince most preferreth learning? wherein I do not se, that there is anie one about hir maiestie (without offence be it spoken, either to your honor, if you desire not to hear it, or to a∣nie other person, which deserues well that waie) which either iustlie can, or vniustlie will cōpare with your honor, either for the encouraging of students to the attainmēt of learning, or for hel∣ping the learned to aduancement of liuing. VVhich two points, I take to be most euident proufs of generall patronage to all learning, to nurish it being grene, to cherish it being grown. Of which your honors both first nurishing, and last cherishing of ech kinde of learning, there is no one corner in all our cuntrie but it feleth the frute, and thriues by the effect. For how manie singular men haue bene worthilie pla∣ced, how manie nedefull places haue bene sin∣gularlie
appointed by your either onelie or most honorable means? with this generall con∣sideration whereby all men ar bound to your honor in dewtie, who either like of learning, or liue by learning, mine own particular doth ioyn it self, with all officiousnesse, and desire to do honor, where it hath found fauor. For I do find my self excedinglie indetted vnto your honor for your speciall goodnesse, and most fauora∣ble countenance these manie years. VVhereby I am bound to declare the vow of my seruice vnto your honor not by the offering of a petie boke alone, such as this is, but by tendring what∣soeuer a thankfull minde can deuise in extremi∣tie of power for so excellent a patron. And tho I begin the shew of my deuotion with a verie mean sacrifice, for so great a saint, (as what a simple present is a part of an Elementarie, or an English ortografie to so great a person, and so good a patron?) yet am I in verie good hope, that your honor will accept it, and measur my good will, not by the valew of the present, but by the wont of your goodnesse. For dewtie will break out, and an ishew it will find, which tho it stream not great, where it springeth first, yet is it as pure, as where it spredeth most. Mo offerings, hereafter of the like sort, maie giue it greater
shew, but none of anie sort can shew more good will. And so I desire your honor to take it, in waie of euidence to the world, that your desert hath bound me: in waie of witnesse to your self, that I would return dewtie. Mine own good will I know my self, of your good liking I nothing dout, whose honorable and ordinarie dispositiō is, to take things well, which taste of goodwill. I offred to hir maiestie the prime of my pen, I offer to your honor the prime of right penning, not handled thus before, as I can perceiue by a∣nie of my cuntrie, tho I se diuerse, that haue bene tampering about it. And as the difference of state betwene hir maiestie, & your honor made me of mere force to begin with hir, and to dis∣cend to you: so the matter of that book, which I presented vnto hir, is the occasiō of this, which I offer vnto you. In that book among other things, which the discourse enforced, as it enfor∣ced manie, (bycause it doth medle with all the nedefull accidents, which belong to teaching.) I did promis an Elementarie, that is, the hole matter, which childern ar to learn, and the hole maner how masters ar to teach them, from their first beginning to go to anie school, vntill theie passe to grammer, in both the best if my o∣pinion proue best. This point is of great mo∣ment
in my iudgement, both for young learners to be entred with the best, and for the old lear∣ned to be sound from the first. This Elementa∣rie am I now to perform. VVhose particular brā∣ches being manie in number, & the book there∣by growing to som bulk, I thought it good to de uide it into parts, vpō sundrie causes, but chefe∣lie for the printer, whose sale will be quik if the book be not big. Of those seuerall parts, this is the first, wherein I entreat (tho that be but litle) of certain generall considerations, which con∣cern the hole Elementarie, but I handle speci∣allie in it the right writing of our English tung, a verie necessarie point, and of force to be handled, ear the child be taught to read, which reading is the first principle of the hole Elemen∣tarie. For can reading be right before writing be righted, seing we read nothing else, but what we se writen? or can writing seme right, being cha∣lēged for wrong, before it be cleared? I account the print as a statarie writing, and therefor inci∣dent to the same term. I haue trauelled in this point of our English writing, somwhat more thē ordinarie. VVherein what my iudgemēt is, your honor maie perceiue euen by this my thus wri∣ting, which is as the common, tho more certain then the common, as my precepts will shew: by∣cause
I write nothing without cause why, and most certain groūd. For I haue soūded the thing by the depth of our tung, and planted my rules vpon our ordinarie custom, the more my frind, bycause it is followed, nowhere my fo, bycause nowhere forced. VVhereby I do perceiue, why we ought to write thus, as the common currant is, without the alteration of either custom, or charact, tho with som correction of certain wāts, and generall direction for the hole pen. I be∣gin to teach this low, bycause I wold not leap, but rise by degrées entending to mount higher, as my argument growes higher. Now this book being parcell of the Elementarie, seuered vpon this cause, presenteth it self first, as a leader to the residew, vnto your honor, making publik shew of my priuat dewtie, and pretending an argu∣ment verie pertinent to my profession, tho se∣ming not so proper to your estate. And yet I take it not alltogither vnproper, considering your honor both handle the pen your self ex∣cedinglie well, and far aboue the common of most nobilitie not onelie with vs, but also els∣where, and besides that you can iudge of the ve∣rie best penning, with as great skill, as your self can vse the pen excedinglie well, which two sin∣gular properties do argew in mine opinion no
great improprietie in the offring such a present to such a personage, so rarelie qualifyed, tho of meruellous height aboue, either the matter, which is offred, or the partie which offereth. And therefor I am in hope that your honor will take this simple treatis concerning the right writing of your cuntrie speche, with a verie goodwill, as your dailie trauell is to work your cūtries good, with your hole endeuor. Further, I do not take it to be anie disparagemēt to your honorable cō∣ceit to seme to fauor so mean a thing, as an orto∣grafie is, considering verie great states and prin∣ces to, in the places, where theie liued, did not think meanlie of it, but were dealers therein, and writers themselues, as M. MESSALA the graue counsellor, M. CICERO the great ora∣tor, C. CAESAR the famous conquerer, who delt this waie in the Latin tung, and thereby did win, both credit to themselues, and coun∣tenance to their cuntrie. I will vse no mo exam∣ples, where there is no more nede, neither prouf of other tungs, where the Latin is enough. The profitablenesse of the thing maie moue your honor to fauor it, as a furniture to know∣ledge, the honorablenesse of such personages maie persuade you to further it, as a brood of nobilitie. As it cannot but yeild most hono∣rable
matter for historie to work on to euer∣lasting memorie, that hir most excellent ma∣iestie amongst other hir affaires, vouchsafed to consider of the state of learning in hir time, that it went in right course, for the right maintaining of a peaceable gouernment, which peaceable∣nesse is the end of all gouernment, as learning is the mean: so it cannot but withall sound to your perpetuall honor, if it shall please you to moue hir maiestie to so honorable a considera∣tion, that all learning maie testify to posteritie, that such a prince did it, such a counsellor moued it. Perfitnesse in learning which cōsisteth in right educatiō of chosen wits, in right method of best matter, in full time both to learn & digest, when it coms to deal abrode, is the instrumēt of quiet∣nesse, considerate in publishing hir own opi∣nion, with warrant for truth, with warinesse for peace: the contrarie corrupts, where it cannot gide: it worketh dissension, when it is not resol∣ued, and in imperfection, vttereth the first con∣ceiued heat, which sufficiencie in time, and digestion in studie, wold either not haue vtte∣red, or haue otherwise qualifyed. And tho after∣ward it reclame it self, vpon better aduise, it cannot staie the quiksiluer, which at the first push it hath poord in peples heads, an enemie
to concorde, which learning pretendeth, as the Art of peace, from the highest diuine to the low∣est infant. The most mightie, and most mercifull God preserue hir most excellent maiestie with long and happie life, to work this and manie such effects, to his honor, hir own renoun, and hir peples good, and the same good God pre∣serue your honor, as a counseller of most trust, to a prince of most wisedom, to beawtify nobili∣tie, to auance knowledge, to assist your cuntrie, in both trew religion, and politik rule: and a∣mongst other things, not of least honor, to fur∣ther our schools: that euen the young infant tho∣rough this hole realm, maie learn to know, how much he is bound to your honorable furtherāce for his good bringing vp in the Elementarie principles of all learning, before he do remoue to anie vniuersitie: as all those students, which ar of the vniuersities, do both praise and praie for your honorable prosperitie, for that great en∣couragement, which theie receiue by you, both while theie studie there, and when theie serue a∣brode in publik functions of the common weal. Your honors most bound in all devvtifulnesse. RICHARD MVLCASTER.
Autoris ipsius ad librum suum. Naetu parue liber, non debes tristior ire, Quod frontem decorent carmina nulla tuam: Nec, quia nulla tuas exornant nomina valuas Credere nulla ausis corda fauere tuis. Conueniunt illis numerosa encomia libris, De quorum certa commoditate liquet: Quorum sensit egens solidos Respublica fructus, Euentu verbis adijciente fidem. Tu quia spe sola sitientia pectora lactas, Sola decet vultum patria Musa tuum, Quaefacilem dulci veniam pro laude precata Lectori eliciat candida verba tuo. Crescet ab euentu cum iam fiducia certo, Totus amicorum carmine tectus eris. Ambiguo, qua fronte potes vix liber ab herba Alterius dubia messe ligare fidem? Interea nullam laudem venare, triumphus Sittibi lectoris gratia solatui. Nam praestare nequis culpam, quia noster es, atqui Nec potes ingentis criminis esse reus Sunt adeo tenues, quas tu moliris habenas, Nelapsicaedes Autumedontis erit Nam quid habet magnipuerorum elementa referre, Si species rebus corporis instar erit? Ergo tibi fortunacaput si torua ferire Caeperit, exigui vulnerisictus erit. Nec laetalis erit, si collidare, ruina, Qui toto pronus pectore serpis humi. Quae docet aeterni feruens miracula patris, Quae tractat multa condita iura fide
Quae grauium versat metuenda negotia regum, Errores caueat prouida turba suos: Nos faciles nostras quacunque retexere nugas, Viso praesentes angue referre pedem. Quisi corruimus, non vná corruit orbis, Publica nec nostro vertitur axe salus. Nec tam nostra nocent, quae chartis credimus. Illa Ingenti torquent saucia corde malo, Quae legum, regúmque truces paritura ruinas Caetera prosternunt omnia strage pari. Tulento pueros buxum torquere flagello, Primáque musarum claustra subire doces. Nulla tibi grauior puerili in turbine turba Si non hoc, alio Musa petenda modo, In quo si quis erit male cepti tramitis error, Non vitae, verumres erit illa viae. Hijs ego me voueo, quia primi fontis ab vnda Sic solet ingentes voluere flumen aquas Quique minaturas caelo meditabitur arces, Sollicita primum praeparat arte solum. Et mihi, si magni moles operosa laboris Ad sua tardantes traxerit ora manus, Non erit indecoris curae, vanique laboris, Si verus veras audit Apollo preces, Mollia cum tenero formare crepundia lacte, Atque vel infanti iura tenenda dare. Hinc{que} vel Iliacos traducere carmen ad actus, Vel quicquid rerum seria cura iubet. Ergo meos siquis vocat ad maiora labores, Ille mea, quaeso, me sinat ire via. Et tu parue liber sic excusare parentem Disce tuum, si quis, cur parit ista? roget. Vtque tuis parcat clemens erroribus ora, Si non hic, alibi sic habet ille suos,
Et tibi fortassis vel sponte pepercerit, vtqui Dum te errare videt, se quoque posse videt. Vna meos multum solatur causa labores, Quos sibi deuotos Anglia nostra videt. Cnra mihi commune bonum, miserebitur omnis, Si quis speratifaenoris error erit: Perge liber, fratremque tuum comitare, minores In procinctu alij iam meditantur iter. R. M. The titles handled in this book. Why I begin at the Elemētarie, & wherein it consisteth. pa. 1. That this fiue brāched Elemētarie is warranted by generall  autoritie of all the grauest writers. & the best cōmō weals. pa. 5. The opinion of the best writers concerning the choice of  wits fit for learning. pag. 11. That this Elementarie and the profitablenesse thereof is cō∣firmed  by great reason and most euident proufs. pag. 18. That this Elementarie seasoneth the young mindes with the  verie best and swetest liquor. pag. 20. That this Elementarie maketh the childe most capable of  most commendable qualities. pag. 24. That this Elementarie resembleth natur both in number of  abilities, and in maner of proceding. pag. 27. That this Elemētarie riddeth the course of the after learning  from all difficultie and hardnesse. pag. 37. That this Elementarie by auoiding of ignorance auoideth all  misliking. pag. 44. That the entrie to language and iudgement thereof by grā∣mer  is the end of the Elementarie. pag. 49. The generall platform & method of the hole Elemētarie. p. 52. The method which the learned tungs vsed, in the finding out  of their own right writing. pag. 61. That the English tūg hath in it selfe sufficiēt matter to work  hir own artificiall directiō for the right writing thereof. pag. 77.
An answere to som pretended imperfections in the writing of  our tung. pag. 83. What right in writing is, and of what force consent is in vo∣luntarie  inuentions. pag. 100. The seuen means to find out, and ascertain the right writing  of English. pag. 104. Of generall rule, wherein the natur, and force of euerie par∣ticular  letter is examined. pag. 108 Of proportion. 2. pag. 124. Of composition. 3. pag. 140. Of deriuation. 4. pag. 144. Of distinction. 5. 148. Of enfranchisment. 6. pag. 152. Of prerogatiue. 7. pag. 157. The vse of the generall table. pag. 162. The table. pag. 170 The conclusion of this treatis concerning the right writing  of our English tung. pag. 226. Of the natur of an Elementarie institution. pag. 227. THE PERORATION. To my gentle readers, and good cuntrimen, wherein manie things ar handled concerning learning in generall: the natur of the English, and foren tungs besides som particularities concer∣ning the penning of this, and other books in English. pag. 229.
THE FIRST PART OF THE ELEMENTARIE. Cap. I. Why I begin at the elementarie, and wherein it consisteth. THere be two causes, which moue me to the penning of this Elemen∣tarie, whereof the one is mine own promis, the òther is the argument it self. The argument it self persua∣des me to the penning thereof, by∣cause it is so fit for the training vp of childern, as nothing can be fitter: and the stream of discourse in my former book, which I name Posi∣tions, did carie me on to promis it, and binds me to perform it. But for the better linkking of this book to that, seing this is nothing else, but the performing of one pece, which I pro∣mised in that, I must nedes shortlie run ouer the main bran∣ches of that, ear I enter into this. The matter of that book con∣sisteth A short repeating of the for mer book en∣titled Positi∣ons. chefelie in two generall points, the one proper, the other proceding. I call that argument proper, which is the naturall subiect of that same book, & being once handled there desires no further speche in any other treatis. I call that proceding which being but named there as a thing most necessarie to som further end, requireth more handling, then it hath there, to be better fitted for so profitable an end. Of the first sort, which is the proper inhabitant of that same book, and to be enquired The proper argument of the Positions. for there, all those discourses be, which concern the teacher,
or the learners person, which concern the place to teach or learn in, which concern the time, both when to begin, & how long to continew, and such other circumstances, which being once entreated of, discharge my pen from dealing with them further, tho theie do not discharge the magistrates of my countrie, from heding of them better. Bycause theie be verie full of profit, tho somwhat hard of performance, thorough those naturall difficulties, which professe enimitie to all good things, and would shoulder them out, for taking anie place, either at their first planting, when theie ar to be receiued, or vpon default, when theie ar to be redressed. Good things The cause why good things ar hardlie plan∣ted at the first grow on verie hardlie at their first planting, bycause that profit, which theie promis at their entrie, hath not yet bene proued, and therefor wanteth the commendation of triall, which is the verie best mean to enforce persuasion: and their pretence to be profitable, vpon som probabilitie in sequele, is a great inducement in dede, but to those peple, which can forese ear theie fele, but of small importance to them, which cānotse till theie fele. Good things finde hard footing, when VVhy refor∣mation is hard lie won. theie ar to be reformed after a corruptiō in vse, bycause of that enormitie which is in possession, and vsurpeth on their place, which hauing strengthened it self by all circumstances, that can moue retaining, and with all difficulties, that can dissuade alteration, fighteth sore for it self, and hard against redresse, thorough the generall assistēce of a preiudicate opiniō in those mens heds, which might further the redresse. Which preiu∣dice in opinion being grounded vpon contentment with the acquainted euill, & loth to enter danger for a change of som truble, so bewitcheth the reason of the parties seduced, as drink doth that fellow, which will rather ly in a ditch all night & call for more clothes when he feleth more cold, and bid put out the candle, when he seith the moon shine, then he will ci∣ther be persuaded, that he is drunk at all, or else be entreated to get vp & go home: Tho yet at the last som of his wise frinds forseing the danger of som sicknesse like to follow, if he ly there long, get him home perforce. Such a strength is error of being bakt with long ease, which brings ignorance a slepe: and with securitie in persuasion, which neuer bredes but ill.
Howbeit for that book, and those persuasions, I must praie my good cuntrimen, to think vpon them well, euen for their own sakes. It is the generall good that hath enforced me to that par∣ticular wish. Neither do I repent my self for the wishing therof, tho the speding be far of: as I am also most redie with all pa∣cience to digest all such difficulties, all such thwartings, all such tungstings, as that kinde of wish, being frutelesse for the time, vseth to bring with it, to chek and choke a writer. For I fear not in the end, but that the extremitie of som euill, tho That refor∣mation come once tho most∣what late. not the excellencie of som good will enforce a reformation by them, which haue power and autoritie to redresse. At which time my labour shall find frute, tho my self be not found: and my wish shall take effect, tho my self be no partaker. The old man planteth with the one foot in his graue, whose honest labour, tho it yield himself no frute, sauing the bare hope to profit his posteritie, yet God doth so prosper, as the effect fol∣loweth, tho he be not to vse it. And the natur of euills, not na∣turallie euill, which will neuer be better, but euill by abuse, which right vse will better, is so loth to be amēded, and so long ear it harken to the voice of redresse, as at the first attempt to haue som redresse, the partie attempter is more wondred at for the wish, then estemed of as wise. Homer the great Greke poët deuiseth a monster, which he nameth Até, and giueth her for 10. Iiiad. surname the Ladie of harm, with whom he ioyns in fellow∣ship thre other staied matrones, which he calleth Litae, and the Ladies of redresse, after harms be receiued. This Até, saith he, is so swift of wing, so strōg of bodie, so stirring to do il, as she flyes far before, & harmeth where she lighteth. But the thre good Ladies, being halt & lame, old and crooked, not a step with∣out a staf, cannot foot it so fast, as their fellow can fly, where∣vpon it falleth out, that harms be soon caught, but healed at leisur, when the old creping Ladies come to present a pla∣ster, as theie will com at last, tho it be verie long first. This hope haue we wishers, tho we waite long for it. And that good God who made all these things, which we so mar, as he promiseth a renewing, so is he able to perform it, whose pacience in our The cause of this book grounded vpō the former. misses we must follow in our mends. Thus much concerning those arguments, which ar proper to my book, that I name
Positions. The other kinde of matter, which is begon in that book, tho not ended there, is such as laieth open, what things ar to be followed in the course of learning, and what I my self do promis to do for the auancement there∣of. Those things, which concern the course and training vp to learning, laie their first ground work in the young infants. For whom it is there considered both how to frame their tender wits for the matter of their learning, and how to train their weak bodies for the maintenance of their health. For the preseruing of their helth, there be thre speciall things noted there, as most necessarie thereunto, small diet, thin appa∣rell, 1. health. diet. apparell. exercise. much exercise. Of the which thre I recommend two, their apparell, and their diet, to the parents care, as most proper to their charge, bycause theie concern home most: the third, which is exercise, I handle there at full, both bycause it is a se∣uerall branch from the matter of learning; and therefore re∣quireth a seuerall treatise: and also because I would haue that book to haue somwhat worth the seking, euen for present necessitie, besides those discourses of the generall accidents, that belong to learning, which is the verie subiect of those Po∣sitions. 2. Learning. know∣ledge behaui∣our. For the matter of their learning, that is there deuided into two parts, the one whereof is knowledge, to encrease vn∣derstanding, the other is behauiour to enlarge vertew. As for behauiour the precept and teaching thereof is reserued to Behauiour. the master, whose profession smels of iudgement, and giues abilitie to direct: but the chefe performance & practising there of is cōmitted vnto parents, as of nearest care & most certain autoritie ouer their own children. For the moning childe hath verie manie waies to shift from his teacher, vpon verie many small and verie light occasions, God he knoweth: but he hath no mean at all to shake of his parents, without losse of his liuing. Wherfor as often change doth weaken autoritie in ma∣sters at will, so necessarie obedience doth strengthen autoritie in parents perforce, and thereby chargeth them with their childerns maners. And yet euen that tiklish obedience, which masters haue, which is roming still, and neuer but remouing dischargeth not them, so far furth, as their commandment will reach. As for knowledge, whereby to encrease the childes vn∣derstanding,
Knowledge. that is assigned to the teacher alone, as proper to his office without participation of anie parent, tho a wise and a learned parent be the verie best part of the verie best teacher. Now both to help parents in their vertewous performance, My promis. and to assist teachers in their learned direction, that both de∣liuerie in the one maie procede with order, and receit in the other, maie profit with delite, I profered my seruice in gene∣rall to them all, but first of them all to the elementarie tea∣cher and his tall scholer, as whose labour doth first call for aid, to whom I promised this Elementarie institution, wherein I entēd to handle all those things which young children are to learn of right, and maie learn at ease, if their parents will be carefull, a litle more then ordinarie. The thinges be fiue in number, infinite in vse, principles in place, and these in name, reading, writing, drawing, singing, and playing. Why & where∣for The Elemen∣tarie matter. these fiue be so profitable and so fit for this place, it shall appear hereafter, when their vse shall com in question. In the mean while this is most trew, that in the right course of best education to learning and knowledge, all these, & onelie these be Elementarie principles, and most necessarie to be delt with all. Whatsoeuer else besides these is required in that age, either to streng hen their bodies, or to quiken their wits, that is ra∣ther incident to exercise for helth, then to Elementarie for knowledge. Thus I haue shewed both why I begin at the Ele∣mentarie, and wherein it consisteth. Cap. II. That this fiuebranched Elementarie is warranted by generall autoritie of all the grauest writers, and all the best common weals. IN persuading & admitting euen the verie best things, there be two other points, besides the pretended goodnesse in the thing, which theie haue still in eie, that ar to be per∣suaded. Whereof the one is, what coūtenaūce he carieth, which is the persuader, and what mean he vseth to work his per∣suasion. For both the thing, which is in question, must make shew of some good, ear it will be receiued: and the partie that
persuadeth, must be of good credit, if he think to be beleued: and the mean whereby his persuasion must take place, must be stronglie appointed with the best kinde of proufs, both for autoritie in persons, and probabilitie in things. For who will allow, but where there is a why? or who will hear him, which is, he knoweth not who? or what force can that haue to pro∣cure it self place, which neither wise man praiseth, nor wise reason proueth? That this fiue branched Elementarie, which The goodnesse of the thing. I seke to persuade, is verie profitable and good, there be manie priuat presumptions in our cōmon experience, besides the ge∣nerall proufs, which shall follow hereafter. First, bycause the most of these principles be in vse with vs alreadie, tho not with all persons, yet sure in all places, where the liking of these things, and the abilitie to bear charge do concur in parents. Secondly, bycause euen those which haue them not, yet do wish theie had them, when theie fall in thinking of them, vpon som either pleasant or profitable obiect, which theie finde wrought by them: tho vpon som priuat respect either to spa∣ring or to precise, some kinde of people either care not for get∣ting them at first, or for wishing them at last, least theie might seme to condemn their own selues, if theie did wish for that, which theie wold not once, as contemning that of passion, which theie allow of in iudgement. Besides these two, there be The autoritie of the persua∣der. a number mo, which our dailie experience doth bring furth, whereby the goodnesse of this argument, is euidentlie confir∣med. And maie it not seme likelie to anie resonable censur, that I my self wold not so force them on publiklie, if theie were not in dede excedinglie well warranted, with more thē mine own autoritie? For who am I to persuade the liking of so full an Elementarie, not allowed of the most, neither tried of the best? A simple teacher. And yet that teaching name is not plane nothing, in a matter of school. A mean companion. That is a great somthing, where the persuaders countenance, is to carie awaie the thing. Nay a newfangle. That is very odious, where the old currant will not lightlie be changed, and the opinion of right hath both the countenance of the best, and contentment of the most, wherevpon to make staie. To me it maie be replied, you medle in this matter alone, you do but
truble your self: you can not turn the course, which is ordi∣narie & old, and therefore verie strong for you to striue against: this thing which you commendis not euerie mans ware: it will not be compased: do you let it alone: if you will nedes write, turn your pen to other matters, which the state will better like of: which this time will soon allow: which you maie per∣suade with credit, if theie be new, and sutable: or confirm with prase, if theie be old, and nede the file. If these and such ob∣iections were not allwaie ordinarie euen to euerie one, in all at∣tempts of turning, either from the ill to good, or from the good to better, I wold answer them with care, but now I nede not, bycause to win a resolute good, he that wisheth to haue it must think to wrastle for it, both with words and writing, a∣gainst corruption of time, against the alonenesse of attempt, a∣gainst the preiudice of parties, against the difficulties of per∣formance, & whatsoeuer else. Neither must he be discouraged with anie ordinarie thwarting, which is a thing well known to well trauelled students, and of least account where it is best known, how fearfull a thing soeuer it seme to weak fantsies, by crossing of corruption to striue against the stream. For both the stream will turn, when a stronger tide returns, and if there be no tide, yet an vntired trauell will still on a∣gainst it, vntill he be aboue it. And more honorable it were for som one or som few to hasard their own credit and estima∣tion for the time in fauour of such a thing, as theie know to be of credit, tho not in account, then by to timorous a con∣ceit, to sore afraid of a popular opinion, not alwaie the soun∣dest, tho most of most swinge, to leaue excellent arguments ei∣ther destitute of defence, if theie be pleaded against, or defeated of deliuerie, if theie fortun to be cald for. For maie it not fall out, that such a thing, as this is, maie be cald for hereafter, tho presentlie not cared for thorough som other occasion, which hath the rudder in hand? I had therefor rather that it were redie then, to help when it were wisht for, then for fear of misliking at the first setting furth, to defraud the posteritie of a thing so passing good. And what if the want of conuenient books, appropriate to persons, applied to things, apt for ech purpos, both hath bene, and be the hinderer of such helps,
which would be ventered on, if men had such volums? And in good sooth, I know not anie book in this Elementarie kinde so thoroughlie fitted for such a purpos, as I hope this shall pròue. What there be in other kindes I will then shew mine opinion, when I com to their placing. But for this present, bycause there maie be such counterbufs, as I haue said before, against my countenaunce in this persuasion, notwithstanding the good, which is more then half confessed to be in the thing, I haue therefor by waie of mean to work persuasion, fenced my hole The mean to work persuasiō choice in all these principles, with the best autoritie of most al∣lowed writers, who cōmend the vse of them in one hole traine, and with the greatest weight of most apparent reasons, which maie persuade vs thoroughlie to entertain them so, as their de∣sert is worthie, and as their worthinesse deserues. Which two proufs, I thinke maie verie well persuade anie reasonable man, both to beleue me, and to embrace them. But will ye hear the writers them selues speak? theie shall not nede to be ma∣ny bycause the testimonie of a few is sufficient enough, where the truth of a thing is called in question, and those few in that kinde be held for most trew, the kinde it selfe being such as cō∣cerneth not religion, but onelie common policie, tho the poli∣cie be but simple, where the religion is but small. Besides this all such writers as saie the same with them after their time, be but quils of that cundit, whereof theie ar the head: or if theie were before them, theie are so confirmed by them, as the second cō∣firmers be of more estimatiō then the verie first founders, both for their owne valew, for the credit of their countries, and the euidence of their time. For when theie liued, there were so great broods of most learned men, as would not haue let them go vncontrolled, if theie had missed the cussion. Therefore I must nedes think, that theie did not misse, and so much the ra∣ther, bycause theie name all the principles, which argeweth ad∣uise: & shew, for whō theie fit, which proueth a good forecast. Whereby theie direct vs also not onlie in the choice of matter to The best wri∣ters opinion concerning these princi∣ples. Plato 2. & 3. Polit. learn, but also in the choice of wits fit to learn. First of all Pla∣to a man in these arguments verie well thought of among those that be learned examining of purpos what things be nedefull for the first education of young children, findeth out
gymnastik for the bodie and Musik for the minde, where he constreweth Musik a great deall larger then we common∣lie do, comprising vnder that name speche, and harmonie: and therewithall implicatiuelie he comprehendeth writing & rea∣ding for the benefit of speche, as singing and plaing for the vtterance of harmonie. A thing not gathered in him by me in natur of anie consequence, but vttered by himself, in the waie of his discourse. In the same place freing poetrie from fabu∣lous and vnsemelie arguments, and pictur from wanton & lasciuious resemblances, which two be the generall branches of naturall imitation, where he fineth both he refuseth neither: but as by clensing poëtrie he proueth grammer to be but an E∣lementarie principle, so by clearing pictur, he proues drawing to be another. Whereunto he might be the sooner moued, by∣cause Pamphilus master to A∣pelles. Pamphilus the Macedonian, master to the famous Apelles about the same time procured throughout al Grece, that draw∣ing should be held for the first degre of liberall science in the training vp of childern, and that no bondman should be ad∣mitted to vse the pencill. Wherevpon Plinie saith, that he neuer red of, neither yet euer saw anie excellent pece of work pain∣ted Plin. lib. 35. Cap. 10. by a bondman, tho manie by wemen. It should also seme that Aristotles plane speche concerning drawing did take hold of that act procured by Pamphilus, who examining, as Pla∣to Aristotle. 7. 8. Polit. did, in what things childern were to be trained vp, setteth down all the fiue principles by name and allegeth great rea∣sons, why the minde is to be fashioned by them for learning, as the bodie is by gymnastik for exercise. He spendeth also the most part of the eight of his politiks to clear Musick from blame, and to proue it nedefull euen for bettering of maners besides vndouted pleasur. Quintilian also a Rhethorik master Institut. Or. 1. among the Romanes, and of no lesse account in his cuntrie then he was of cunning, and so estemed of among vs, in the fra∣ming of his best orator, first nameth writing and reading, and with som earnest chalenge taketh vpon him the protection of Musik, whose two arms singing and plaing be. And in the same place vsing the same fauour to Arithmetik and Geometrie, which perfit the pen and pencill in Apelles his opinion, as the pen and pencill be their principles in common sense, he could
not but allow the one, admitting the other, as Plato did before him not refusing where he fined. I will rest content with the assured credit of these thre onelie, as principall among all, whe∣ther philosofers, or other, whereof there is none, but he doth allow of those principles, which these thre appoint, and I haue chosen. Neither is there anie other of either valew or account, which handleth this argument of childrens foretrain, whether in Greke or Latin, whether of purpos or by passage, whether Christian or prophane writer, but he ioyneth with them and me herein, tho in som after learning, and fear of som misuse, theie somtime dissent, and wish rather that the principles were wanting then the perills should take place, which vnwise peple seme to be subiect vnto, by dealing to far with them, a false slander to good principles, tho a iust reproche to ill peple. The best appointed common wealls also, in the best & most florish∣ing times for all kinde of learning embraced the same train, a thing as easie to be proued, by all the best writers, in most plane terms, if I thought it nedefull, as it is roundlie said in these few words. For it is not my resolution to vse manie names, tho I know the men, saue in those cases, where I must haue som com∣panie of known note, to satisfie som humors, or else seme my self to be of either none, or but of verie small account. Nei∣ther is it anie discredit for a Christian writer in cases of learning and education, such as these be, where Christianism maie fur∣nish the matter, tho prophanism yeild the form, to follow the president of prophane common wealls, & to cite the testimo∣nie of old philosophers, from whence we fet the most part of our learning. Neither can anie Christian state, or anie relligious consideration tho neuer so precise, but think verie well of these Elementarie principles, which the panims do, allow if theie be aduisedlie considered, and not he dilie renounced, by either raptnesse in conceit, or rashnesse in iudgement, before theie be well weied. For the same principles of learning, & the same fa∣culties being learned, did arm the Christians to ouerthrow, which armd the infidels to assail, as the learned diuines know to be most trew, by both the old greke writers, as Iustine the mar∣tir Eusebius the storier, and who not of that race? & by the old latin autors to, as Lactantius and Austen, and who but of that
crew? whose names I wold not spare, if that were best for spede. And why not Agar beloued in obedience to hir mistresse, as banished for hir stomak? seing it pleased Philo to make fre Sara the type of right religion, & bond Agar the type of other leaning. For the ills which ar pretended to come by them which be the chefe, naie the onelie causes why som honest but to credulous naturs do mislike som of them: the common wealls which shall admit them & the parties which will learn them for their profit sake, must take hede therevnto, least a more perillous harm do chance to crepe in vnder the colour of profit: seing the falts wherewith theie ar charged procede not from the things as naturallie euill, but from the persons, as na∣turall abusers, euen of what so is best. Which point in waie of their iustification shalbe laid verie plane in the particular dis∣courses of euerie principle. Well then, thus do all writers, thus do al estates, thus do all relligions esteme of these principles for the number, & goodnesse thereof, for where allowance of num∣ber is, the allowance of their good is granted before hand. Cap. III. The opinion of the best writers concerning the choice of wits fit for learning. I Said before that the best writers did not onelie agre vpon the number of principles, but also did appoint for what kinde of wits it were most agreable to be trained vp in thē. Of the principles I haue spoken sufficientlie: now let vs se, what their opinion is concerning the choice of wits. Which choice is a The necessitie of choice at this time. thing to be verie much thought on at all times, & in all places, but in these our daies, and this our cuntrie vpon speciall causes to be narrowlie looked vnto, as I haue said more then once, & that in places mo then one. For the consideration is weigh∣tier to whom ye commit learning, when ye haue found what to learn, then to find what to learn, before ye cōmit it. Bycause the best instrumēt wold all waie be hādled by the fittest person, & not by euerie one, that hath a fantsie to handle it. The wāt of this choice while priuat liking, & not publik order giues lear∣ning hir student; doth cause more mischefe, then the ground
whereof is yet not found, tho the smart thereof be felt. And to saie the truth why is it a question, what wits be fittest to be set to learning, if there be no choice made, whē the questiō is de∣cided. The old writers declare the necessitie of this choice to be exceding great, euē in that theie thēselues be so curious care full to finde out such wits, as ar to be trained that waie. Which their carefullnesse doth seme as it were to saie, what can anie thīg, be it neuer so good auaill the estate, for the which it should serue, if it be not cōmitted vnto such persōs, as be fit to execute? Which commission taking hir beginning in the young childe, for matters of learning, ought not good choice to go before, where such an effect is to follow? In ane vniust man doth not the commission for iustice wrong a number of people? In a rash captain doth not the charge ouer soldiers bring a number to their end? And to Philosophie (which is a generall name to all learning among the old writers) can there possiblie be anie greater dishonor saith Plato, thē to be cōmitted to bastard wits, and not of hir own kinde? Naie can there be anie greater plage to anie cōmon weall, then to haue that mean, which is naturallie hir best and of most profit, if the person, which shall vse it, be well appointed, to proue to be her worst, and hir greatest hinde∣rer, by either the no choice, or else the verie ill choice of that same person? Wherefor in the choice of wits allyed naturallie to The end wherefor choice is made. learning, theie first consider the end, wherefor theie ar to serue, whē theie ar once learned, & then their qualities, whereby theie ar proued to be fit for learning. In the end theie consider, whe∣ther he, that is learned do liue priuatlie to him self, or publiklie for others. For as those, which serue in publik function do turn their learning to publik vse, which is the naturall vse of all The priuat end of studie. learning: so such as liue to themselues either for pleasur in their studie, or to auoid foren truble do turn their learning to a priuate ease, which is the priuat abuse of a publik good. For the common weall is the measur of euerie mans being, which if anie one respect not, he is not to liue in it. If he be able to serue and do not, his choice condemns him: if infirmitie let his choice his infirmitie is his pardon: if he studie tho priuatlie to a publik end, his end is his warrant, tho his mean be mistaken. Wherein Tullies opinion semeth to be sounder then Platoes for the not
leauing of philosophers to their priuat studie, if theie were fit to serue in anie publik roum. But I do take it that Plato ment the higher publik seruices, such as the chefe magistrates & hed of∣ficers be, which places he still reserueth to his chefe philoso∣fers, and in the Monarchie he saueth euen the verie croun and principaltie for them. Which so great a charge in anie estate the philosofers did seke allwaie to auoid, as being either to trublesom, or to much subiect to the peples furie, chefelie in a popular gouernmēt, such as that of Athens was, where the most philosofers were. In the choice of these wits for this priuat end, bycause theie could not gesse aforehand, what their end wold be, theie vsed the same mean for their first train, and fitting of their wit, which theie did vse for the best, and the most publik end. In those which learn to that end, that theie maie be profi∣table in publik, and proue so in the end, theie chefelie consider The publik end of studie. the principall and subaltern magistrates. I call those magistates principall, which ar not subiect to account of their gouernmēt by anie common order, tho in conscience and religion both to∣wards God and men theie be euerie one subiect, as stewards Magistrates principall and subaltern. by commission, whether theie be Emperours, Kings, or what∣soeuer prince of absolut soueraintie, not vassall to anie higher. I call those subaltern which ruling other yet ar subiect to other, as in a Monarchie all the mean and inferiour magistrates, and generallie as in anie estate those officers be, which be accoūtant for their doings. These magistrates be theie, whom all their precepts tend vnto, as the principall springs of most good or e∣uill in anie estate. Bycause theie be the life & soul of their lawes for reward and punishment: the onelie president in all doings, to the common subiect, whether themselues be in principall roum, or but in subaltern. The principall magistrate is a great president as most profitable in good, so most perillous in ill: by∣cause his vertew, is the generall allurement, to resemble the like by, as his vice is the generall couert, for impunitie to offen∣ders. The subaltern magistrates make a stae verie lothsom by euill execution, as theie make it verie lightsom, by the contrarie dealing. Their own obedience towards their superiors is more then a lure to reclame the peple, bycause their obsequiousnesse to those that ar aboue them enforceth their vnder ones offici∣ouslie
to obay, both the chefe souerain, & also thē thēselues. And therefor in the choice of their chefe, where the chefe is of choice, theie be meruellous vigilant, and chuse most what for time, and not for perpetuitie, for fear of ill successe in a ve∣rie good choice, where assurāce of time bredes securitie in time, and securitie no good. Likewise in these subaltern magistrates theie be no lesse carefull, bycause their places and functions concern euerie particular sinew, euerie particular vein, euerie particular arterie, naie euerie small filet, and finest string or strip in the hole bodie of anie common weall. Here lieth their choice of their learned wits, bycause theie take learning to be a leading qualitie, and therefor beseming the place, if it be fit∣ted in person. These theie will haue fed and cherished with best matter, from the first time that theie be able to take anie pains either for bodilie exercise, or for trauell in learning, vntill theie be able to serue that publik turn, wherevnto theie at destinate, & wherefor theie were so trained by publik foresight. In these theie consider the maintenance of the state, & therefor in their choice their chefe regard is, what wit is most fit in euerie kinde of state, bycause the like as it loueth the like best, so bycause of that loue it preferreth it most. Thus much concerning the The qualities of the bodie and the minde which lead this choice. end wherefor the choice is made. In the qualities which be∣wraie fitnesse for learning, theie haue regard to both the bodie and the minde. In the bodie theie require, that it be able for strength, and health to abide exercise the preseruer of thē both: that it be of good proportion and correspondent to the minde for trauell in studie, & if it maie be, to haue it personable with∣all, The choice in bodie. bycause personablenesse is an allurement to obedience, a gracious deliuerer of anie inward vertew, & somtime was este∣med a thing most worthie of the principall seat. Was not Saul noted in his election to be king, to haue bene taller and more personable, thē the rest of the peple? Did not Thalestris the A∣mason Quene half contemn Alexander the great: when she saw his person to be of no great shew, whose name was so renou∣med, as the report therof did cause hir com to se him? Doth not Euripides saie & Phorphyrie vpon his word, that a bodie of pre∣sence is best worthie to rule? In the minde theie consider first The choice in minde. the means to conceiue well, and to kepe fast, and then those
qualities, which be fittest for performance, when the habit is had. In conceiuing well, first theie require a sharpnesse of wit to A quik con∣ceiuing. perceiue soon, without taint of dulnesse or difficultie by hard learning: bycause wits shrink and recoill sooner, at a thing hard to learn thorough their own dulnesse, then theie do at anie la∣bor in the greatest exercise. For in learning the burden is the mindes alone, in exercise the bodie bears part with the minde. Secondlie theie seke for an inuincible & laborious courage to go thorough with al paines. For without such a courage & that naturallie had, what wit could awaie with so much trauell of bodie, so much toill of minde, so much tiring of both in medita∣tion & studie? Theie regard also a desire to be asking, and de∣manding of others, which be better learned, and a delite to re∣semble the best, & therefor to be praised: neuer to be idle, but euer well occupied, tho it be in plaie, so it be worthie praise. In the retaining of that, which theie haue conceiued theie require A fast retai∣ning. a fast memorie to kepe well, and a good foresight to continew it well, and by the same means, whereby theie first learned, with all those exercises which confirm memorie, & make waie to further knowledge. In both these qualities, to conceiue soon, & to kepe fast, theie vse to consider certain other signes which be ordinarie companions to anie toward wit, as to be natural∣lie well giuen, to be curteous in behauiour, & such of that sort, as Quintilian bids giue him that boy, which wilbe quikned with praise, which wilbe aloft with honor, which will wepe at a foill. This boy saith he must be fed with braueries, him cherish∣ing will encourage, in him I fear no loytering. In stede of that weping at a foil Xenophō in the person of Cyrus, whō he deuiseth Cyrus in Xe∣nophon. so perfit, as the best boy for a patern to bring vp, & the best price for a presidēt to princes, semeth rather to like of laughing himself at himself, thereby neither to take laughter in the loo∣kers on for anie kinde of mok: neither to lease anie courage, but furthwith to amend the thing, wherein he missed. Whereas we∣ping might bewraie a pusillanimitie, and a faint of stomak. But Quintiliā no dout ment, as if that weping cā of an inward grefe, not quēching but kindling the natural courage, to burst out to the better. So Liuie saith that the hāging of the head, & the loo∣king The Romaine soldiers in Li∣uie. down of the Romane soldiers, whē theie returned home∣ward
after their foill at Caudium, where the gallous was their gate, tho theie wēt vnder it like gese, was no argumēt of corage vanquished & oppressed by so shamefull a despite, but of a sup∣pressed choler & a boiling grefe, which lōged for occasiō, wher∣by to work reuēge, & was thoroughlie ashamed, till theie had chāged ye shame with their enemie for honor, & had died their swords in the deceiuers blood, their foill cōming not thorough their own defalt, but by folie of their leaders. As for Quintilianes cokking boy stil perching, still aspiring: such a pert cōceit maie be good for his oratour, bycause he limits him no place, but it is hard for a subiect, whose humilitie is his honor. For the aspiring wit, which wilbe still a mounting, giues som euidēt suspition of a restlesse head, in anie kinde of state, least fit for a Monarchie, & lesse profitable to it self. Bycause desiring stil to be the best, if he misse, he moills other, if he hit, he harms himself, by insolence of thought, not cōtent with a mediocritie, as to far beneath him, nether able to get much, as not fit for his humor, where the state is to distribut, as it thinks of the person, and not the person to receiue as he thinks of himself. In the generall learner I like Pamphilus in Terence. that disposition best, which Terence doth attribut to young Pamphilus in his comedie called Andria: in whom I obserue two seuerall properties, the one for learning, the other for be∣hauior. For his learning he was neither to excellent to be en∣uyed, neither to mean to be contemned, but as not aboue all in anie thing, so not beneath all in anie: that much allowed mediocritie being the rule of his learning. In behauior to∣wards other he had acquainted himself to bear with all com∣panies in most varietie of behauior, to yeild himself to them in honestie of delite, contrarying none, contemning none, neuer bragging of his birth, neuer vanting of his welth. For certain∣lie in wits this moderate kinde is most contrarie to the worst. If anie one be to singular od, he is fit either for valew aboue all to be sent vp to heauen, as to good for the earth; or for vice be∣neath all to be wisht somwhere else, as the earth to good for him, as Plato dalieth with the like speche in the like case. But those mens chefe consideration in their chusing of wits is, what affection to learning the childe hath by natur. Bycause it is hard to haill against the stream, as it is wonderous easie to row
down with it. Finallie theie knit vp all their choice with this no fantsie, tho a fable of Platoes Protagoras, that Iupiter sent Mer∣curie down into the world, to distribut learning and vertew amōg those of the world. In which his distributiō he gaue lear∣ning to peple, according as theie were inclined by natur: but he gaue them vertew, which he deuided into a remorse to do ill, and a desire to do right, according to necessitie, which was to haue few men learned, and as theie were inclined, but to haue all mē vertewous, as theie ought to be inclined. Bycause one learned man, as one physician, will help a great number: but it is necessarie for all men to be ashamed to do ill, and to be redie to do good. And with all, there saith Iupiter to Mer∣curie make this proclamatiō thoroughout the hole world, that theie furth with kil him, as a disease in a state, who so euer is not capable of shame to do wrong, and will to do right. Whereby theie do mean, that there wold not be to manie brought vp vnto learning, where both natur restrains being not fit in most, and our vse doth not nede them, where some few will serue all. Which two considerations natur in most, & nede in all, be the chefe grounds of this choice for learning. But vertew & good∣nesse be required in all, as necessarie for all in this our generall nede, & corruptiō of natur, whereby most be euill, whereas all should be good. But I haue said much allredie concerning this choice in diuerse places of my former book, which I call Posi∣tions, and speciallie in that title, which handleth the stripping of, of too manie bookmen. In the qualities that declare a wit The qualities in choice for performance. verie likelie to perform well afterward, when learning is ob∣tained, theie commonlie consider the honest disposition, and the parties zeall towards morall vertew, and ciuill societie e∣uen for honesties sake without hope of anie profit. Then theie mark next the forsight of conceit, which must be neither easie to be deceiued, nor soon to be remoued from a right opiniō, by either passion in thēselues, or persuasion of others. And general∣lie whatsoeuer vertew is like to bewraie both a good man, and a good subiect, that theie call to councell in making of their choice, to haue their learner make shew, both of capabilitie, & Libertie and abilitie two great respects in choice. keping, in matters of learning, and of towardnesse and constan∣cie, in matters of liuing. In all these wits theie still respect li∣bertie
and not bondage, abilitie and not pouertie, to haue lear∣ning liberall, where learners be no slaues, and the execution vncorrupt, where nede is not to festur. Yet theie do not exclude nede in excellent naturall wits, but theie prouide for their abi∣litie, that theie be not subiect to nede. And tho slaues be som∣times learned; yet learning is not slauish: neither when the par∣ties demeanor doth procure his fredom, is learning manumi∣sed, which was neuer bond. Which two reasons, for libertie, and nede, the old wisdom, whereof I intreat now, must nedes confesse, if ye look but to Aesop among slaues; & Plato among writers: whereof Aesop fought still for fredom against seruilitie, & Plato for natur against mutable fortun, measuring not euen princes by their place, but by their propertie, by naturall power, and not by casuall euent. The cause why theie think so much of abilitie is the respect of the peple, which will obeie best, where theie be ouer topt most: as the cause why theie think so much of fredom is, for that slaues haue no voice nor part in the state, being held but for catle, tho reasonable withall: whereas learning hath best voice in anie estate, and therefor requireth the help of such an vtterer, as is part of the state, and capable of best state. Thus much for both the number of the Elementarie principles, and the choice of wits most fit for learning, accor∣ding to the iudgement of the eldest, and best writers. Cap. IIII. That this Elementarie and the profitablenesse thereof is confir∣med by great reason, and most euident proufs. AS for the reasons, which confirm the choice of the Ele∣mentarie principles, I find them to be both manie, and well appointed, & such, as moue me to think, both that these fiue, and that not fewer then these fiue, neither anie other then these fiue do make a perfit Elementarie, and that a perfit Elementarie is a most excellent thing, and so most excellent, as without the which, if it be not either anie at all, or not such as this is, there will great defects ensew in yeares, which might be preuented in youth. For as the wise Cato being demanded Cic. 2. de Off. what was the chefe point, that did belong to husbādrie, answe∣red
to fede well, & dubled the point. And the eloquent Demo∣sthenes being demanded, what was the chefe point that did be∣long Cic. de clar. Or. to an orator, answered to gestur well, & dubled the point: so my self, tho neither a Cato for wisdom, nor a Demosthenes for eloquēce, yet am so resolued in this matter, as if I were deman∣ded what I thought to be of chefe force in the hole course, and matter oflearning, I durst boldlie answer a good Elementarie, and duble the point. Cato answered in that argument, where∣with he was acquainted, being a great husband, Demosthenes in that, wherefor he was estemed, being a great orator. And why not I in that, which methink I know being a long teacher? That Cato answered wiselie, what better reason can you re∣quire, then the effect thereof in the catle themselues, and the catlelike creaturs, which being the husbandmans charge, and staruing without stouer, defeat the ill feader of his conceiued stok. That Demosthenes his action was the soull of his orations, and assured the truth of his iudiciall answer, who is better wit∣nesse then euen Aeschines his enemie? Who being banished his∣cuntrie, by the onelie mean of Demosthenes his tung, did con∣fesse in his exile, that he was sorer wounded with the force of his action, which gaue life to his words, then with the strength of his words, that foūd work for his action. That this my opiniō concerning the infinite commoditie of a good and perfect E∣lementarie, is as trew in the train to learning, as either Catoes was in husbandrie, or Demosthenes his in oratorie, there be six speciall and principall causes, which by the greatnesse of their own good effects, do vnfalliblie conclude, the excellent bene∣fit therof, euen by cause ech of the principles is so excellēt good. All which cōcurring, & meting in the generall end of the hole Elementarie, must nedes import a meruellous treasur, to be in the hole, where euerie particular, which maketh vp that hole, doth proue to be so profitable. The six reasons which by their The six rea∣sons that proue the goodnesse of this elemē∣tarie. 1 2 own priuat goodnesse confirm a generall profit in the main E∣lementarie be these. If the Elementarie do season the grene vessell with the swetest liquor, and the vntrained minde with the holsommest humor, is the goodnesse thereof doutfull, where the substance is so precious? If it make the childe most capable of most commendable qualities, which without it he
could not aspire vnto, deserueth it not embracing, which makes so plane a waie to so excellent a thing? If it resemble natur in the multitude of hir abilities, and procede so in teaching, as she 3 doth in towarding, can the currant be but good, which follow∣eth such a gide? If in place of hardnesse, it plant facilitie, doth it 4 not help students to saill with a forewind, without fear of ship∣wrak, where all roks be remoued, that theie nede not to be fea∣red, or so laid in sight, as theie maie easilie be auoided? If where there is now verie great misliking of manie good things, by 5 mean of ignorance, which cannot conceiue them, it do cause allowāce by the mean of knowledge, which of iudgement will allow them, is not learning much bound to it, for clearing hir frō blemish? Naie, if within the Elementarie cōpas it cōprehēd 6 also the entrie to language, and the grammer trauell, which is the keie to all cunning, maie it not then well be said to be perfect in all points, which belong to ane Elementarie? seing in course of studie, where language doth end, there learning doth begin? and all that goeth before that, as in order it is a principle, so in natur it is Elementarie? Now that it is of such ef∣ficacie, for seasoning with the best, for conceiuing of the most, for resemblāce of natur, for exile to hardnesse, for maim to misli king, for entrie to speche, it shalbe proued verie planelie, and withall so; as no other Elementarie cā possiblie compare with it. For as I am thoroughlie persuaded, that the first Elementa∣rie, being well perfited is the onelie furtherer to all kindes of learning: so am I likewise resolued, that this Elementarie, not deuised by me, tho reuiued by me, is the perfection of the Ele∣mentarie, and so consequentlie the chefe promoter of the after learning, which the effect will shew in prouf, as the reasons will in prouing. Which I therefor set down, as diligentlie as I cā, that my good readers perceiuing thereby the profit of the thing, maie the sooner procure the effecting thereof, by subscri∣bing to that, which theie se so well warranted. Cap. V. That this Elementarie seasoneth the young mindes with the ve∣rie best, and swetest liquor.
OF those six reasons, whereby I take the great vse of this Elementarie to be vnfalliblie confirmed, the first is, by∣cause it doth season the tender, & vntrained minde with the best & swetest liquor. Which that it doth, who will deny, whē he shal euidentlie se, nothing to be propoūded therein, but that, which is most pure & picked? Plato Aristotle & Quintiliā tho not theie alone, in those places of their fortrain, where theie Plato. 2. 3. Pol Arist. 7. 8. Pol. Quint. 1 Inst. wish a childe, that is to be brought vp well, neither to hear, nor to read, nor to se anie thing at all in his teaching kinde, & of set purpos, but onelie that which is most agreable in opi∣nion with truth, in behauiour with vertew: by that their so sa∣ing declare vnto vs the qualitie of those things, which ar best for childern to deall withall at first. And our own relligiō, which best knoweth of what importance it is, to haue youth embrew∣ed with the best at the first, is meruellous carefull, both to win them to it by precept, and to work it in them by practis. For the necessitie of beginning at the best, in euerie argument, which hath a beginning, and is to procede by order, I shall not nede to saie much either for the good which it bringeth, or for the ill which it blemisheth. One Theodorus a plaier of Trage∣dies, belike such a one, as Roscius was at Rome both excellent men in that kinde of action, wold neuer let anie mean or vnskil∣full actor enter the stage before him, as Aristotle reporteth, by∣cause he himself wold work the first delite, euen with the verie best, for that he knew the force of the first impressiō, which be∣ing laid with pleasur in the beholders minde wold cause them procede on with cōtine wāce in like pleasur, wheras sō vnswete∣nesse at the first might cause harshnes thoroughout. Wherein I note also (tho the first planting of best sciences be our gard∣ning here) that by his so doing, he either enforced his fellow∣plaiers to be like to him, & so partakers of the praise: or else he alone bare awaie all the praise, as deseruing it alone. Could one Theodorus a Tragedie plaier espy that in the stage, which was somtime allowed as tolerable, outlawed somtime, as vnlawfull, & maie not a scholer spy the like in the course of learnig, which is still vpō the stage, as most profitable still? When the childe shall haue the matter of his Reading, which is his first principle Reading. so well proined and so pikked, as it shall catechise him in relli∣gion
trewlie, frame him in opinion rightlie, fashion him in behauior ciuillie, and withall contain in som few leaues the greatest varietie of most syllabs, the chefe difference of most words, the sundrie pronouncing of all parts, and branches of e∣uerie period, doth not Reading then which is the first principle seme to season verie sure? enriching the minde with so precious VVriting. matter, and furnishing the tung with so perfit an vtterance? When the argument of the childs Copie, and the direction of his hand, whereby he learns to write shalbe answera∣ble to his reading, for choice of good matter, and reuerence to young yeares, neither shall offer anie thing to the eie, but that maie beawtifie the minde, and will deserue memorie, will not writing season well, which so vseth the hand, as it hel∣peth Drawing. to all good? When the pen and pencill shalbe restrained to those draughts, which serue for present semelinesse, and more cunning to com on, for the verie necessarie vses of all our hole life, doth not that same liquor, where with theie draw so, deserue Musik. verie good liking, which will not draw at all but where vertew bids draw? When Musik shall teach nothing, but honest for delite, and pleasant for note, comlie for the place, and semelie for the person, sutable to the thing, and seruiceable to circum∣stance, can that humor corrupt, which bredeth such delite, be∣ing so euerie where armd against iust chalenge, of either blame Grammer. or misliking? For the principle of Grammer, I will not tuch it here, bycause I entend not to deall with it here, but wheresoe∣uer I shall tuch it, I will tuch it so, as it shall answer to the rest in all kinds of good. In the mean time till the grammer princi∣ple do com to light, that Reading shalbe so relligious, Writing so warie, Drawing so dangerlesse, Singing so semelie, plaing so praise worthie, the euent shall giue euidence, and the relice it The parents charge at home. self shall set surth the seasoning. But by the waie, as the Elemē∣tarie professeth it self in the course of learning, and in trade of school to be the first & best seasoner of the vntrained minde: so ought parēt, also for their ówn part both before & during all the Elementarie time, to prouide so at home, as there be no ill liquor inconsideratlie powred into the grene cask, which maie so corrupt it, as it will either quite refuse the good Elementarie humor, or vnwillinglie receiue it, and not to such a good, as it
vseth for to work, where the cask is not corrupt. For if the yoūg eies be acquainted at home with vnsemelie sights: if the tender ears be more then half trained to vncomlie hearings, if the pliable minde be vnwiselie writhen to a disfigured shape, if the hole conceit be vnaduisedlie stained with a contrarie dy, how can that countenance be liked on in school, whose contra∣rie fauor is most honored at home? Those parēts therefor which will look for the best liquor in schools, must not in anie case vse corrupt humor at home. For that is most trew, which is vttered by manie, but most oraclelike by Plato, cōcerning the strength of that iuyce, which the young wits at first seasoned withall. I will set down Platoes words first in Greke, where theie be most pithie, and then in English, where theie shalbe as plane.  2. Polit.  4. Polit. . Which is to saie in English, that the beginning of euerie thing is of most moment, chefelie to him, that is young and tender, bycause the stamp is then best fashioned, and entreth deapest, where with ye mean to mark him, and the sequele will be such, as the fore∣train shall lead, whether soeuer you march, bycause naturallie the like still draweth on the like. These words, as theie ar wise∣lie vttered by the graue philosopher, so ought theie to engraf both in parents and masters a depe inpression to obserue them as carefullie, as theie be spoken trewlie. This concordance be∣twene the parent at home, and the teacher in school for the vertewous training vp of their litle young ones, is in verie dede, to bring them vnto Christ, as we be bid in scriptur. For what else is it, I praie you, for a childe to com to Christ? or of what other force is it to be a Christian childe? Sure not to be baptised onelie in the name of Christ, but both for truth in rel∣ligion, and matters of knowledge, both for vertew in demeanor, and matters of liuing, to be brought vp so, as he maie trewlie resemble him, whose name he beareth, & faithfullie serue him, whose conusance he carieth. Hereby it semeth to me to be ve∣rie plane, that a good Elementarie thus appointed, as it seaso∣neth first, and continueth longest, so it doth both best.
CAP. VI. That this Elementarie maketh the childe most capable of most commendable qualities. THose means make one capable of som further qualitie, by whose helpe that partie, which is to com by such a The helps to further capa∣citie. qualitie, both conceiueth it quiker, retaineth it faster, and executeth it better. Now those means be in vs either natu∣rallie ingenerate, or artificiallie emplanted, and that so, as theie shew themselues, both in our bodies, and mindes. Concerning Naturall helps to further ca∣pacitie. The minde. the naturall helps, which by the verie inclination be wraie a minde made naturallie fit, either to conceiue, or to retain, or to execute anie learned qualitie well and therefor the better, by∣cause the more naturallie, I haue spoken enough in the questiō of choice, where I wish by the autoritie of the best writers, that such wits onelie were set to learning, as naturallie bear som fa∣uor that waie. Concerning such naturall properties, as will The bodie. discry a bodie fit for anie exercise, either to kepe the bodie it self in helth in one, that is no student: or to assist the minde in all hir executions, in one that is a student, I haue said enough in my book of Positions, where I handle exercise. Neither is the question at this time of anie naturall inclination, but of ar∣tificiall helps, and those not for the bodie, which point is for Gymnastik and exercise of the bodie, but onelie for the minde, tho wrought by the bodie, which is for these principles, and the Elementarie learning: I saie therefor that these fiue principles, reading, writing, drawing, singing, and playing, which make this Artificiall helps to fur∣ther capacitie. hole Elementarie, besides exercise, which is Elementarie to, tho handled elswhere, be the onelie artificiall means to make a minde capable of all the best qualities, which ar to be engraf∣fed in the minde, tho to be executed by the bodie: which best qualities be two, vertew for behauior, and knowledge for cū∣ning. Vnder the name of behauior I comprise all those quali∣ties, The best qua∣lities of the minde. Vertew. whose honor is in action, as vnder the name of knowledge I imply all those, whose soueraintie is in skill, tho either of them both both know ear theie do, & do as theie know. For vertew and the planting thereof, it hath no cause to complain of this Elementarie, which giueth precepts vnto children how to learn
to do well, and so preserueth vertew, as much as direction can. What furtherance else is to be had there vnto by practising that in dede, which is commanded in word, that is reserued also, & most earnestlie recommended euen by this Elementarie to all parents and teachers, according vnto the distinction of that autoritie, which theie haue ouer childern. Doth not this Ele∣mentarie then make childern most capable of vertew in elder years, for whose growing it is so carefull in their tender age, both by precept and performance? As for knowledge which ten∣deth Knowledge. directlie vnto cunning these fiue principles serue directlie therevnto. For by them the minde is prepared and made fit to receiue and vnderstand all things, which either natur doth be∣queath vs, or labor prouides for vs: By reading we receiue what antiquitie hath left vs, by writing we deliuer what poste∣ritie craues of vs: by both we find great ease in euerie occasion of our dailie vse: By resembling with pencill what a spectable thing is there, and subiect to the eie, either brought furth by natur, or set furth by art, whose knowledge and vse we attain not vnto? By the principle of musik besides the purchace of a noble science, so certainlie platted by Arithmeticall precept, as no one better, so necessarie a step to further knowledge, as no one more, such a glasse wherein to behold both the beawtie of concord, and the blots of dissension euen in a politik bodie, as no one surer: how manie helps and how great ease receiueth our naturall infirmitie either in care for comfort, or in hope for courage. Not here to tuch the skilfull handling of the rude voice, nor the fine nimbling of the raw fingers, things not to be refused where theie maie be well had, and naturallie requi∣red, where imperfection is to be perfited by them. Againe doth not all our learning conceiued by the eie, and vttered by the tung confesse the great benefit which it receiueth by reading? Doth not all our deliuerie brought furth by the minde, and set furth by the pen acknowledge a dewtie to the principle of wri∣ting? Doth not all our descriptions, which figur in the thought, and pictur to the sense both preach & praise the pencill, which causeth them be sene? Doth not all our delite in times not bi∣sied (as all our labour is for rest, all our trauell for ease, all our care to auoide care) protest in plane termes, that it is wonder∣fullie
endetted to either part of Musik, both by instrument and voice? the naturall sweter of our sour life in anie mans iudge∣ment, that is not to sour? Now what learned qualitie is there of anie commendation, but it falleth within this number, and is furthered by these principles, whether it be chefe profession of greater note, or meaner facultie of lesse account, or necessa∣rie trade of vnforbearable vse? And not to leaue exercise quite Exercise the cause of capa∣citie in the bodie. vntuched, seing it is mere Elementarie, & alwaie to ioyn with ech ascent in learning, as the bodie growing in strength or in years requireth more or lesse stirring: by the artificiall bene∣fit thereof the fete excell in swiftnesse, if natur be according, the arms in strength, the hole bodie in ech part, for all gifts in ech part, which either concern helth or cause actiuitie. And as so manie principles appointed for the minde being cunninglie applied thereunto, do make it most able both to conceiue with the soonest, and to deliuer with the fairest: euen so the one prin∣ciple of exercise being skilfullie applied according to right cir∣cunstance maketh the bodie most actiue in all parts, to execute all functions both of necessitie and praise with a meruellous nimblenesse. All qualities therefor whether belonging to the bodie, bycause their excutiō is by it, or partaining to the minde, bycause their seat is in it, must nedes cōfesse themselues to be so auanced by this Elementarie, as in dede theie were nothing, if it were not. Take exercise awaie, what then is the bodie, but an vnweildie lump? what vse of it hath either cūtrie in defence, or it self in delite? Remoue precept and practis, and where then is vertew, which neither knoweth, what to do, if it be not direc∣ted, neither doth when it knoweth, if it faill of practis? Set these fiue principles apart, what can the vnlearned eie iudge of? the vntrained hand deall with? the vnframed voice please with? If all the principles want, then all the qualities faill, if som cer∣tain wāt, then so manie faill, as procede frō them that wāt. If all the principles be had, then all the qualities will follow. Where∣for I conclude, that if all commendable qualities do fall within this compas, if these principles auance them all, if want in the one cause defect in the other, that then this Elementarie must nedes cause the childe being so well trained, to be most capa∣ble of most commendable qualities, and that the defect in these
must of mere necessitie cause defect in those. Whereof theie can best iudge, which when theie grow in years, then perceiue their own lak, which commeth for want of such a foretraine. At which time one of these things streight waie enseweth. Either theie condemn that, which theie know not, thorough ignorance: or theie contemn that, which theie dispare of, tho∣rough insolence: or theie mone that, which theie misse of, tho∣rough negligence, most comonlie offrinds, which regarding litle else, but the waie to welth, desire rather a compendious path to compas that, then a longer circuit to com by a better, tho in the end theie perceiue, that at the first theie might well haue obtained both, with verie small ado. Wherefor the E∣lementarie being so absolut, and yeilding so great a capable∣nesse to further qualities, it were to great an ouersight in those parents, which haue oportunitie at will, to neglect it in their childern, & in stede of knowledge in all, to leaue them ignorāt in som, and cause them in years to mislike, where theie cannot iudge, contemn where theie cannot compas, bewaill where theie fele want, chefelie considering, that as it will make chil∣dern capable of the most, so it self is compassable, well nigh by the meanest. Cap. VII. That this Elementarie resembleth natur, both in number of a∣bilities and in maner of proceding. THe third prouf of a good Elementarie was to resemble natur in multitude of abilities, and to procede so in tea∣ching, as she doth in towarding. For as she is vn∣frindlie, wheresoeuer she is forced, so is she the best gide, that anie man can follow, wheresoeuer she fauoreth. Wherefor if natur make a childe most fit to excell in manie singularities, so theie be furthered and auanced by Elementarie train in the younger yeares, is not that education much to be blamed, by whom the falt coms, and the infant is defeated of that same ex∣cellencie, which natur voweth, and negligence voideth? Again, when there is nothing ment vs by natur, but train will help it forward, is not train it self to be thought most perfit, and the mean of the train to be held most absolut, which spre∣des
with natur, where she splaieth most, as manifold in prefer∣ring, as she is in profering. Whē I vse the name of natur, I mean that power, which God VVhat is ment by the name of natur. hath emplanted in these his creaturs both to cōtinew their own kinde, that it do not decaie, & to answer that end, wherefor these were made. The continewance of their kinde is the prouf of their being, but the answering of their end, is the frute of their being. This latter part is that point, where vnto education hath a speciall eie (tho it contemn not the other) that the young fry maie be brought vp so, as theie maie proue good in the end, and serue well in that place, wherevnto theie shalbe loted, for the benefit of their countrie, when theie com to years, and full state of prouf. For the performance whereof that theie maie proue such in dede, I take it, that this Elemētarie in his kinde is most sufficiēt, as being the best mean to perfit all those abilities, which natur endoweth our kinde withall, by those same princi∣ples, which art and consideration appointeth it withall: and by vsing such pollicie in the waie & passage to artificiall perfectiō, as natur hir self doth vse in hir ascending to hir naturall height. Bycause the end of education, and train is to help natur vnto hir perfection, which is, when all hir abilities be perfited in their habit, wherevnto right Elements be right great helps. This is that resemblance of natur, which I do mean, not to counterfeat hir in som other work, as fondlie comparing, or VVhat it is to resemble na∣tur in train. frowardlie bragging with the effects of natur, like som Apelles in purtrait, or som Archimedes in motiō, but when consideratiō & iudgemēt wiselie marking, whereunto natur is either euidēt∣lie giuen, or secretlie affectionat, doth frame an education con∣sonant therevnto, to bring all those things to perfection by art, which natur wisheth perfit, by franknesse of hir offer. If natur do offer a towardnesse to write, and no impediment let, but it maie be well applied, is not consideration vntoward, if that a∣bilitie want forwarding? If with som small help a childes voice maie be made swete, tunable and cunning, is not education lame, if it continew harsh, vnpleasant, and rude? If by benefit of natur, we be made fit for mo qualities, then ordinarie edu∣cation doth help vs vnto, do we not blame them, who hauing gouernment ouer vs, leaue vs ignorant in that, which in ripe∣nesse
of years we want in our selues, and wonder at in others? whose train being better then ours, tho perhaps neither wit quikker, nor bodie nimbler, doth serue for a prouf, that cur∣teous natur is oftimes verie frank, where vnkinde fortun shew∣eth verie small frindship: naie that either negligence or folie inconsideratlie cutteth of, that naturall abilitie, most liberallie bestowed. Whereupon I ground my argument that this must nedes be a verie good Elementarie, bycause it preferreth all things which natur offereth to a commendable end, and shew∣eth it self as considerat a teacher, as natur doth hir self an ex∣cellent towarder. But for the better vnderstanding of my conclusion, and this The generall diuision of this title for naturall abi∣lities and ar∣tificiall prin∣ciples. great concordance, which I note to be betwene natur in fra∣ming, and art in training, both for number of abilities, and for maner of proceding, I will first examin the naturall abilities, which ar to be perfited, & how natur hirself doth forward the perfectiō: thē I will shew, how those principles, which art hath deuised for the furtherance of natur, do answer vnto those a∣bilities of natur, both for sufficiencie in number, and fitnesse to perfection. For where there be verie manie effects, which ar to be wrought, there must nedes be manie, means, to bring the effect about. Where natur hir self offereth verie good hold, there art must be at hand and redie to take it: where natur is frutefull, and plaieth the good mòther, there art must be care∣full and proue a good nurse. For it is most trew, that most ex∣cellent gifts, and endowments of natur, be verie oftimes spoi∣led by the onelie mean of negligent nurtur. I call those naturall abilities, which natur planteth in our mindes and bodies, prepared by hir self for vs to vse, but to be VVhat natv∣rall abilities ar. perfited by our selues, to our own best vse, whereunto that power of our minde, or that part of our bodie doth speciallie serue, in which that abilitie is naturallie placed: As for exam∣ple, natur planteth in the hand an abilitie to catch and hold, which that it maie do to the best effect, and to that vse for the which we haue our hand, our own pollicie and practis must be our best mean. Natur plāteth in our minde an abilitie to forese such things, as be to com, which that it maie do to our greatest profit, our own wisdom, & our own cōsideration, must be our
best mean. Whereby it will fall out, that we our own selues do cause our own want, if we do not our endeuor, to further those helps, which the goodnesse of natur, naie, which the good∣nesse of God, the Lord and prince of natur, of his own mere gift doth so bestow vpon vs, as we maie frelie haue them, if we list to apply them. If the case were such, as we our selues were willing to vse them, if we had them, and had them not, the complaint might tuch natur, for not answering our will, but now that we haue them, if we do not vse them, the blame will tuch our selues, for not answering hir goodnesse. I call those Artificiall principles, which mans wisdom ha∣uing VVhat artifi∣ciall princi∣ples be. considered the entendment of natur doth deuise for himself, so manie in number, and so fit in qualitie, as these maie take sure hold of all naturall inclinations and abilities, & bring them to perfection by the like mean, and the like as∣cent, in training them to that end, which pollicie doth shout at, as natur sheweth hir self to be verie well willing to fol∣low the hand of anie such a trainer, by such a mean as is deuised, to such an end, as she desireth: As in the former examples of the hand to hold fure, & the minde to forese, which be naturall abilities, artificiall principle is to vse such exercises, and so cō∣siderate experiments, and with such precisenesse in the vse of them both, as the hand maie hold best, and surest with all the minde forese most, and furthest withall. Where natur grounded onelie bare holding, and simple foresight, direction entended the best in them both, as natur did not seme to be verie frow∣ard in either, whose perfection lyes in both. By these discriptions it appeareth, that of these naturall qua∣lities som concern the bodie and som the soull, and that both The generall diuision of a∣bilities, by the soull and bo∣die, by our be∣ing onelie and our being well theie help either to our mere being onelie, or to our well being withall: and also that the mean both to work our being in the one kinde best, and our welbeing in the other kinde as well, must be so applied, as natur hir self shall seme to be most pli∣ant, which pliablenesse of natur will shew it self, both by ease in the working, and by vse in the work. But forsomuch as the handling of all these qualities, first of the bodie, and then of the minde, next of our being, and then of our well being, whether imperfit in nature, or perfit in
train, wilbe somwhat tedious to deal withall seuerallie, and the things thēselues maie be wel enough vnderstood being hādled together, seing in all our executiōs both the bodie & minde do alwaie concur, tho either more or lesse, as the thing that is don, procedeth in proportion from either of their parts: I will there∣for handle them ioyntlie in one treatis, as theie themselues do ioyn allwaie in one practis, & that chefelie in respect of our be∣ing, first mere, and then well. Whereof the first, which concern our mere being, be altogether naturall, tho principles to the last, by mean of education the latter which concern our well being, be mere artificiall but bilding vpon natur by waie of fundation, and proue so much the finer, where theie haue hir fauor, as either nothing at all, or but of small account, where she semeth to froun. Those abilities therefore belong to mens being, without the VVhich be the abilities of our being, and which of our well being. which theie could not once so much as liue, or bear the name of men in the naturall sense of their first humanitie: Those be∣long to their well being, without the which tho theie maie liue and continew men, yet ar there extreme rude, and in dede no bodie, in the principall sēse of their best humanitie. Without the abilitie to receiue sustenance, & to haue it tendered, when natur doth command it, a man cannot liue. Wherefor that abilitie & such other like, cōcern his mere being, tho by his so being he be but half a beast, which fedes, as wel as he doth, tho not with like change. Whithout the abilitie to conceiue and vnderstand, what is most semelie in everie circumstance, and to haue it fi∣ned, to the most ciuill vse, a man maie liue tho exceding rude, and therefor that abilitie, and such other like concern his well being, whereby he is likest him, of whom he hath his being, and most sociable with them, among whom his being is. Now as I finde in natur both by the effects, which these a∣bilities work, and by the places, wherein their ar bestowed, that she means vs verie much, and verie manifold good: so for the That this Ele∣mentarie an∣swereth euerie particular abi∣litie in natur. auancing of euerie of them to the same effects, which natur entendeth, I find also in this Elementarie, that it hath seuerall branches, wherewith to supply their seuerall turns, as it shalbe proued first in the abilities of our mere being, and then in those, which concern our best being. Whereby it shall also appear,
that neither natur, nor we haue anie cause to complain: Natur, that she is but sklenderlie furthered, where she meaneth great matters: we, as missing of that by insufficiencie of train, which natur ment vs by varietie of gifts. And that therefor this Ele∣mentarie being so well appointed by so wise men, as the first deuisers thereof were, deserueth the embracing, which so an∣swereth naturs liberalitie in endoument, by sufficient varietie in artificiall principle. For the being of man, to maintain and encrease his bodie in euerie part and parcell thereof, and so afterward to sprede the The first and primitiue na∣turall powers in our bodie. like to it self, in euerie kinde thoroughout, natur hath planted in our bodies, which is hir first subiect, a liuer, the first and formost part of hir frame, and our main, which liuer receiuing an eager humor from the milt, wherewith our appetite to meat is stir∣red, fetcheth the same meat down from the mouth thorough the throte into the stomak, wherein it retaineth it, vntill tho∣rough heat and humor, it be well digested, and perfitlie distri∣buted by the veins thoroughout the hole bodie, the superflui∣tie thereof being expelled, and the purest being reserued, to fede the bodie for fainting, to enlarge it for encrease: to make matter for succession and continuance of the kinde. Again besides the preseruing of our bodies by that norish∣ing mean we haue also a perceiuing by outward sense to fele, 2 to hear, to se, to smell, to tast all sensible things, which qualities of the outward, being receiued in by the common sense, and examined by fantsie, ar deliuered to remembrance and after∣ward proue our great and onelie grounds vnto further know∣ledge. Moreouer we haue also a certaine force to moue and stir either by commandment of passion, or by enticement of de∣sire, either by the waie of prosecuting for the vse of life, by pulse and breathing, or by waie of proceding to do somwhat else, by going, running, leaping and such like actions. To serue the turn of these two both sense and motion, natur hath plan∣ted in our bodie a braine the prince of all our parts, which by spreding sinewes of all sorts, thoroughout all our parts, doth work all those effects, which either sense is sene in, or mouing perceiued by. Furthermore our soull hath in it a desire to obtain that, which 3
it holdeth for good, & to auoid that, which it estemeth for euill: which desire worketh, either by quiet alluring, or by insolēt in∣flaming, and when the first motion thereof is once set on foot, either by calm persuasion, or by vehement heat, it hath a fur∣ther stirring to attain vnto that in effect, which it conceiueth in desire. To satisfy this vse, natur hath placed in our bodie, as a liuer to tikle desire, so an hart to kindle heat: and as the sense is moued by the qualitie of his obiect, & that motion serued by mean of sinewes: so appetite being stirred by his good or ill ob iect, hath both his prosecuting & refusing supplied by sinewes. Last of all our soull hath in it an imperiall prerogatiue of vnderstanding beyond sense, of iudging by reason, of directing 4 by both, for deutie towards God for societie towards men, for conquest in affection, for purchace in knowledge, and such other things, whereby it furnisheth out all maner of vses in this our mortall life, and bewraieth in it self a more excellent being, then to continew still in this roming pilgrimage. To serue this so honorable a turn of vnderstanding, and reason, natur tho she haue no place worthie enough within this our base and simple bodie, wherein to bestow so great & so statelie gests with their hole retinew, yet she doth what she cā, & being her binger hirself assigneth them for lodging hir principall chamber, the verie closet of the brain, wherein she bestoweth euerie one of reasons vnderstanding friends, seuerallie ech one according vnto their seuerall degrees, and singular dignities. All those abilities in their first naturall kinde concern but the being of a rude man, but when there ar fashioned to their best by good education, theie procure the being of a perfit and an excellent man. For, to liue, to fede, to multiplie, to haue sense, to desire, to haue the vse of naturall and vnrefined reason. The perfectiō of these quali∣ties for our best being. What great thing is it, tho it be somwhat more then brute beasts haue, if the other diuine qualities, which bild vpon these be not diligentlie followed? Which as theie rise out of these at the first, so theie honor them in the end, as much as the best frute can honor his first blossom, or as the cunningest work can grace the first ground, whereupon it is wrought. Besides that, theie shew themselues to be those most excel∣lent ends, which natur ment first, tho she hirself made but a
weak shew, and yet verie pliable for mans industrie to work on for his own commoditie. He that liueth not at all, cannot liue well, he that fedeth not at all, cannot fede moderatelie, he that multiplieth not, cannot multiply continentlie, he that hath no sense, cannot vse it soberlie: he that desireth not, can∣not desire consideratlie: he that vseth no reason cannot vse it aduisedlie. But he that liueth, fedeth, multiplieth, hath sense, hath desire, hath reason, he hath withall, all those abilities, which natur can afford him, to vse them all well, food with moderation, encrease with continence, sense with sobernesse, desire with consideration, reason with aduise, and so will he vse them, if iudgement maie rule the last, to haue them well, as necessitie will the first, simplie to haue them. For as the first abilities work their naturall feats by commandment of neces∣sitie, so the latter abilities work their laudable feats by direc∣tion of reason, which reason as it is our difference in compari∣son with beasts, tho we vse it but meanlie: so is it our excellēce in comparison with men, if we vse it to the best. The abilities therefor of that reasonable and vnderstanding How educatio and train work in the particu∣lar abilities. part in man being handled workmanlike, and applyed to their best by such deuises and means, as ar thought fittest to work such an effect, do order and direct the diet for food, & the de∣lite for encrease, to the health of those parts which ar appoin∣ted for them, and the help of the hole bodie, which is com∣pound of those parts. Theie fine the senses, and the instrumēts thereof to their best perfectiō, & their longest endurāce. Theie restrain desire to the rule of reason, and the aduise of foresight Theie so enrich the minde and the soull it self, as theie laie vp in the treasurre of remembrance, all arts, all forecast, all know∣ledge, all wisedom, all vnderstanding, whereby either God is to be honored, or the world to be serued in honest & wise sort, which so heauēlie a benefit is begō by education, cōfirmed by vse, perfited with cōtinewance, which crouneth the hole work. Now all these abilities, whether of the first, and in most of most naturall sort for our being onelie, or of the second and The applying of the artifici∣all principles to the naturall abilities. in most of most iudiciall sort, for our being well, I thinke to be perfitlie furthered by this same Elementarie, in the natur of in∣ducement to further encrease: and that for euerie abilitie in
natur to haue vs to be such, there is som principle in this Ele∣mentarie to make vs to be such. For those points, which most concern the bodie, & the helth thereof, whether motiuelie in managing it: or morallie in ma∣nering it, what is ouerlept either in exercise, for practis: or in precept, for behauior? Whereby whatsouer abilitie there is in the bodie, it is stirred and quikned to the verie best vse. As for the minde and the abilities thereof, which ar after∣ward to be brought to som perfection of habit, there is none so blind, but he planelie seith the ground to be laid to all professi∣ons, & all matters of iudgement, all the parts and powers of the soull to be made most fit for most exquisit perfection, when those principles be obtained, which this Elementarie doth set down, the things themselues tending to the auancement of cunning, and the matter of cūning to the furtherance of vertew. But who shall iudge of this, that this Elementarie laieth hold vpon all those naturall abilities? he shall be able to saie exceding much to it, which being but brought vp well in the ordinarie train shall but consider this book aduisedlie in euerie branch thereof. But he shall iudge best of it, who hath bene brought vp by it, and by his own sufficiencie shall both be able to pronounce himself, and to cause others pronounce, by seing him so sufficient, that there is no point for either actiuitie in bo∣die, or capacitie in minde, whereto natur makes him toward, but that nurtur sets him foreward. Is the bodie made by natur nimble to run, to ride, to swim, to fense, to do anie thing else, which beareth praise in that kinde for either profit or pleasur? And doth not the Elementarie help them all forward by precept and train? The hand, the ear, the eie be the greatest instruments, whereby the receiuing and de∣liuerie of our learning, is chefelie executed. And doth not this Elementarie instruct the hand, to write, to draw, to plaie? The eie to read by letters, to discern by line, to iudge by both. The ear to call for voice, & sound with proporcion for pleasur, with reason for wit? and generallie whatsoeuer gift natur hath be∣stowed vpon the bodie, to be brought furth or bettered by the mean of train, for anie profitable vse in our hole life, doth not this Elementarie both find it, and forese it? As for the qualities
of the minde, whether theie tuch vertewousnesse in liuing, or skilfulnesse in learning, as arts, sciences, professions, or what∣soeuer else, by whatsoeuer term or title else, do theie not euerie one most apparentlie procede from reading and writing, as from their naturall principles, the one for deliuerie, the other for receit? whether theie trauell in language for it self, wherein grammer, rhetorik logik, and their deriuatiues clame interest, or shew knowledge by language in anie other facultie. Where vn∣der be contained in generall terms, all the parts of philosophie both morall and naturall, the thre professions diuinitie, law, physik, all the branches of them all, all the ofsprings of ech, whose instrument speche is. If the mathematiks be the end, or anie particular else, which clameth kinred of them, whose na∣turall end is to direct manuarie science, tho their translate vse be to whet a learned minde, can theie lak anie footing, where number, figur, motion and sound be practised in principle? where the mathematiks & their frinds be thus induced, whose necessarie reason doth force their own place, can anie other facultie, whose but probable apparēce doth entreat for a roum, but find how to enter? Whatsoeuer else concerneth either delite to comfort our weakenesse, or delitefull vse to serue our neces∣sitie, with cunning of praise, or handling of art, all that is fore∣sene either by drawing for the eie, or by musik for the ear. So that in my opinion, the fathers and founders of this Elemen∣tarie, whereof I am but collector, tho as fauourable a collector, as so good a thing deserueth, haue vsed great foresight to laie such foundations therein, as maie both nusle vp all naturall a∣bilities, while theie ar sprooting in train, and perfit them at full, when theie ar ripe for the reaping. For the multitude & varietie of those principles, which I ap∣point Themultitude of principles. the young scholers to deall with, that is confirmed euen by natur hirself, which making hir own abilities to be so manie, requireth as manie principles to bring them to perfection, eue∣rie one helping forward his cosen and frind. And those wise mē also, which did both deuise them, and execute them in such a number, and of such varietie, bycaus theie wold not haue yoūg wits to be ouerburdened with multitude vnwisely applyed, did help them in train thorough distinction in time: as the learned
Quintiliā doth shew in a particular discourse, where he exami∣neth this question, whether young childern be to learn diuerse things at one time or no. Where he concludeth that theie maie, as a thing of no truble, if it be well deuided, bycause the young∣er the wits be, the better theie be fed with varietie: & if theie be trubled somtime, or fail in somthing, yet it is with their mindes, as it is with their bodies, soon down and soon vp again, & light∣lie without harm, if their nurses and trainers be redie at their hand. For the childern, which whē theie be from their ouerseers must deall of themselues, ar by litle and litle to be committed to thēselues to learn to do that betimes, which theie must deall with euer after, yet while theie ar yoūg, & hollie vnder charge, their falts com rather by negligence of such, as haue charge ouer them, then of their own selues, which cannot rule them∣selues. If natur in som childern be not so pregnāt, as theie maie take the full benefit of this hole train, yet by applying it wiselie, there maie be som good don, euen in the heauiest wits, & most vnapt bodies, tho nothing so much as in the verie quikkest. If anie parēt again finding the naturall defect in his childe do for∣bear his pains, & spare his purse, where he hopes for smal profit, he hath natur to warrāt him, which semeth euē as it were direct lie to warn him, not to lose his labor, where she list not to fauor. Again if anie one wanting oportunitie cannot compas all, or hauing oportunitie will not medle withall, which education & natur seme ioyntlie to promis, he hath no cause to blame either of them, whereof the one offered that, which he wold not vse, the other that, which he wold not take. But to knot vp this argument, me think it is plane, that seing natur offreth varietie of gifts, industrie ought to vse both hir hāds to take that, which is offered. Which diligence in taking seing this Elemētarie pro∣fesseth, as it letteth nothing fall, which natur holdeth vp: so I take it therefor to be most absolut, in that it doth answer so frind lie a mother as natur is, and ioyns with hir in working. Cap. VIII. That this Elementarie riddeth the course of the after learning from all difficultie and hardnesse.
THe fourth prouf of a good Elementarie was, in place of hardnesse to plant facilitie, and to lighten the course of studie by making of it plane. For what thing is it but hardnesse alone which most appalleth young mens courages, and abateth their diligence, in a maner fraing them to go anie That hard∣nesse is a chefe hindrer of learning. further, when theie are verie well minded, towards the obtai∣ning of sound, and substanciall knowledge? And what but hard∣nesse is the chefe and originall cause, why so manie rest con∣tent with simple and superficiall skill, being vnwilling to toill themselues with the difficulties of studie, and that ear theie com to fele, that small learning will serue well enough to com by a great liuing? which might haue bene alledged for a verie great impediment to greater learning, if it had gone before the feling of hardnesse: but the course is this. Young men desire to get learning to liue by, and while theie are in place of learning, as in vniuersities, by cause there theie se learning in best credit, theie ar in dede desirous to be noted for learning, which when theie cannot com by, being chekt thorough hardnesse, in the matter of studie, as theie think, but in dede thorough weak∣nesse in their first train, as I know, then theie deuise, how to turn that litle, which theie haue, to the best commoditie that theie can, and so in seking of preferment, theie ioyn great prac∣tises with som simple learning, as their best mean to obtain greater liuing. Whereas in verie dede if difficultie had not cros∣sed them, theie wold haue ioyned worthinesse in themselues, with admiration in others, and so haue bene called by others, and not haue craued themselues. This hardnesse certainlie com∣meth by cause such students haue not bene brought vp in the knowledge of these Elements, which being well laid while children ar yet vnder the rod, and learn as it were more by rote then by reason, without feeling themselues, either much pains or anie profit, will cause an easie and a pleasant course in the further learning, when theie can iudge what theie do, tho theie did it not in doing. For childern as theie be still in doing, so theie know not In what ma∣ner and how this Elemen∣tarie expelleth ignorance. what theie do, much lesse wherefor theie do, till reason do grow vnto som ripenesse in them. And therefor the matter of their train is such, as theie profit more by practis, then by know∣ing
why, till theie fele the vse of reason, which teacheth them to know considerations and causes. The foresight for their well doing in the mean time remains in their parents, teachers, and frinds, who prouide so for them in youth, as theie maie praise them again, and praie for them in age. But when theie them∣selues do grow to iudgement, hauing bene so brought vp, then theie do find what a great deall of good theie haue all∣redie don, and how beneficiall their frinds haue bene vnto them, for helping them so much. Then theie se, where other not so trained do proue stark blind. Then make theie no bones, where euerie litle let, is a verie great log to anie of the other: then march theie one at pleasur, like soldiers of courage, whose waie is made plane by pioners sent before, where the other, which ar not so well prouided for, will rather cast awaie their armor, then wrastle with the difficulties of vnknown and vn∣easie passages. I cannot compare the foredeall by which childern ar at, their first education to anie thing better, then to the pictur of Timo∣theus The descrip∣tion of Timo∣theus the A∣thenians victo ries applied vnto childern. son to Conon the Athenian captaine, and his victories, as som his ill willers did cause them, and him to be painted out, as Plutarch reporteth. For theie made Timotheus himself lying fast a slepe, and fortun bringing cuntries, towns, and victories vnto him in a net, meaning thereby; that he became such a con∣queror; more by hap then by cunning, more by his enemies wāt, then by his own wit. Childern which be well trained in their youth be like to sleping Timotheus, preferred by their frinds, ear themselues can perceiue it: and their frinds like to fortun, which furnish them so well, ear themselues can discern, what good is don vnto them. But when theie com to years, and ar once awaked, then with open eies theie behold, their frinds care, their own conquest, and fortun fishing for them, naie Gods prouidence verie carefull for them, by the ministerie of parents, masters, and frinds, while theie were fast a slepe, and could not themselues, either help themselues, or iudge right of their helpers. If this Elementarie then be the great benefit of foreseing frinds, the great conquest of frindlie fortun, naie the great munificence of a louing God, who wold haue his litle ones go thorough stitch where ignorance makes hirs stik, is the
thing of small regard, which hath so great patrons? is it of small importance, which foileth such a fo, as ignorance is? But to go more particuiarlie, is the compassing of tungs hard? sure so it is, to one of no foretrain, that neuer learned grammer, that neuer red writer, that neuer proued his stile, that neuer vsed the tung. Be the mathematiks hard? sure so there be to one not prepared, that neuer did number, that neuer drew line, that neuer knew note, that neuer markt motion. Be the abilities of the bodie laborious and hard? sure that theie be, where no exercise goeth before, where the ioynts be stif, where it is painfull to proue, what the bodie can do, being ne∣uer put to it. But where foretrain is, there case will follow, where the bodie is prepared, the purgation worketh: where ex∣ercise leadeth, actiuitie will follow, both in those and the rest. Theie that haue these helps well grounded in their youth, as I said before, maie go forward with ease, and stand verie fast, where other must nedes stumble, which haue no such help. Which stumblers, tho by their own exceding great, and there∣for exceding commendable trauell, theie oftimes in the end excell those, which were better brought vp then theie were, yet the train was well appointed, whatsoeuer negligence dis∣appointed the effect in those, which hauing wings to fly vouch∣safed scant to flutter: and the blame resteth in them, which might haue don well and wold not, the praise in them, which did so well, tho theie wrastled sore for it. Therefor the tender minde of the young infant being first embrewed with these principles as the best, for the first liquor: and then furnished with their store, as the most, for all helps, fa∣cilitie must nedes follow in all that doth succede. The opinion mentioned in Platoes Phaedon, that all our learning is but a calling to remembrance of fore acquainted The force of Platoes note, that all lear∣ning semeth to be of som fore acquaintance to vs. skill, the soull hauing in it naturallie, and from hir first being all maner of learning, tho neuer vttering it, but when it is moued by foren occasion, confirmeth this opinion of facilitie in lear∣ning, after these principles be once laid. For if the generall con∣ceit in natur by waie of principle do make all knowledge to seme of old acquaintance, and the things thimselues to be no sooner named, thē streight waie perceiued, as of no new famili∣aritie,
no sooner hard but streight cald to remembrance, as the known inhabitants of naturall memorie (which kinde of per∣ceiuing Aristotle calleth a knowledge within vs a forehand, which knowledge leadeth the strongest and the best demon∣stration .) sure when difficultie is past in the first planting, which is rightlie termed the better half of the hole, facilitie must nedes follow in all the residew, which seme to the principles, as of their acquaintance, theie follow so frindlie. So sharp an eie hath he to se further, whose sight is made steddie by such a pre∣paratiue. He that in his Elementarie train can read and write well, he that handling the pen or pencill can vse them both wel by nunber, and with line: and dealing with musik can iudge well of sounds, & handle instruments right, what can he think hard in his after studie, if studie be his choice? Naie what shall he find hard, tho handicraft be his end? for he maie well haue all these principles, yea and the mathematiks to, and yet aspire no higher, then the plane workman: bycause those helps be pe∣culiar to such peple, tho for som quiknesse to wit, and constant∣nesse in prouf, theie be vsed for book learning. Now if he be entred into language, so far as grammer goeth, which is the tip of the Elementarie, will there be question of difficultie? Then all hardnesse being remoued in the Elementarie, before the learner can discern, what a foredeall he is at, and facilitie being won, where the student might haue stumbled, if his waie had not bene planed, what a pleasant feild hath studie to rāge in, where nothing can hinder, if loytring do no harm? Which loytring and negligence is allwaie excepted, as a thing that thwarteth euen the best deuises, & commonlie cuts of all good successe, in euen the fairest attempts, tho it fre the thing from blame, whose furtherance it stoppeth, and cast the falt on him, whose hinderance it helpeth. For the thing remaineth one, tho the partie haue it not, the partie is the worse, bycause he hath not the thing, and so much the worse, bycause he is worse then him self, thorough his own negligence, which might haue passed himself, thorough his own diligence. VVhat a toill good students ar driuen vn∣to for want of their first train I do oftimes se, and as oftimes pitie a great number of verie good students, which be more then half discouraged from their further proceding, when either theie find their own want, not
hauing this foretrain: or being desirous to go forward ar en∣forced to trauell in these Elementarie minuts, somtimes with effect tho extreme painefull, oftimes with dispare and losse of all their labor. And tho theie do learn them, yet that their lear∣ning is nothing so sound, as vnder a teacher, bycause no one mans labor, in anie argument whatsoeuer, much lesse in these Elementarie principles, is comparable to the help that coms by a teacher, or a cunning reader. For is it not an incredible be∣nefit, to haue the verie flour and pith of another mans studie, naie of all the best writers, concerning that matter wherein your trauell lyeth, to be vttered vnto you in order, by one that hath digested it in time, beside his painfulnesse in studie, to ga∣ther it from the best, and most allowed writers? I will dwell no longer vpon this point, bycause I haue handled it in my book of Positions, where I shew what benefit an vniuersitie receiueth by excellent readers. To my present purpose therefor. While either tediousnesse by the waie doth terrifie good students, or vnskilfulnesse in the end giueth idlenesse a fair color, to cōtemn where it knoweth not, the most of our best learning which we ought to haue (tho som fresh heads do think themselues to know enough and enough, when theie can saie more then enough, how small enough so euer theie haue) is either suppressed by difficultie or oppressed by ignorance. I do not here tuch the want of reward, as being a foren tho a forcible let, to the furtherance of learning, but onelie such stops, as be within the parties, & students themselues, which were in good waie to proue excellentlie sufficient, if such lets were remoued, and themselues in loue with learning euen for learnings sake, tho theie lookt for no dowrie. Now difficultie is a fair pretence to diuert one from knowledge, whom either much trauell will toill sore, or verie litle will soon tire: and ignorance wilbe bold to set light by such things, as it doth not se, bycause it is stark blind. Wherefor I must nedes commend this Elementarie, as most profitable for redinesse without difficultie in the rest of our stu∣dies, & the onelie mean to make a pleasant passage, where such students, as be not acquainted therewith, ar either miserablie tormented ear that theie can passe at all, or quite discomfited
without hope to passe. For the triall hereof I do appeall to the iudgement of two sorts of men, whereof either hath good feling in this matter. The one is such, as haue bene verie well and perfithe brought VVho can best iudge of this question con∣cerning the difficultie in proces of stu∣die. vp in either all, or in most of all those things which I do require: Of whom I ask whether theie find not in themselues a comfor∣table encouragement to go forward in learning, thorough the help of their foretrain, and whether theie be not able, if theie will vse their abilitie, to go forward with great ease? The other sort is such, as haue bene brought vp either in none of these, or not in all, or but verie vnperfitlie in whatsoeuer, and be them∣selues verie willing to learn: Of whom I ask whether theie find not themselues either quite discouraged in their honest de∣sire, if theie haue had no train at all or not more then half lame, iftheie haue had it but by halues: or not both lame and discou∣raged to, being vnperfitlie, and therefor ill trained: and whether theie do not striue miserablie against the stream, when theie seke to go forward without these helps. Dionysius the Siracusian tyran being at Lacedaemon and exer∣cising Dionysius and his cook. himself by the riuer of Eurotas, as other peple did, found his appetite still exceding good, and the relice of his meat ex∣ceding pleasant. Whereupon when he was to return to Syracu∣sae imputing the goodnesse of his stomak and the sauorinesse of his meat, to a wrong cause, as if theie had com of his cooks handling, & not of his own stirring, he took with him a Lacedae∣monian cook as liking of their diet, and allowing of their cook tie. But when he came home he took himself to ease, and vsed no more exercise, whereupon finding neither in his stomak such an appetite, nor in his meat such a relice, as he did at La∣cedaemon, he fell out with his cook, as if the falt had bene in him, not dressing the meat so, as he did at Lacedaemon. But the cook who wittilie espyed the cause of this change, told him that the falt was in himself, who neither vsing the exercise, which he did at Lacedaemon, neither bathing himself, as he did in Euro∣tas, could not haue that stomak which he had doing both. So must I saie by the difficultie in learning, that it will seme verie harsh and verie vnsauerie, to procede in depe studie, where this Elementarie help is not at all had; but exceding easie and
verie delitefull, wheresoeuer it is. And tho som peple think that, there is no such nede of anie such train, by cause all roums be ser ued sufficiētlie without it: I must cōfesse the seruice, tho I cānot the sufficiencie, which is but sufficient, in comparison of the lesse but mere infirmitie, where it might be full, & perfitlie perfor∣med, ear the pains can be felt by train in young years. Thus much concerning the facilitie which this Elementarie promi∣seth to the course of studie, and therewithall encreaseth com∣mendation to it self. CAP IX. That this Elementarie by auoiding of ignorance auoideth all misliking THe fist praise of this Elemētarie was, bycause it is the best mean to auoid generall ignorance, the mother to misli∣king, and to com by generall knowledge, which is the cause of allowance. A circumstance of great momēt in the pro∣uince of learning, as it is generallie also in all other dealings. For that which is misliked, is still vnder foot, and that which is allowed is allwaie aloft. Now all misliking commeth either Misliking ri∣seth either vp on desert, or vpon opinion miscaried. vpon desert, when the thing is such, as for verie naughtinesse it is to be misliked, or vpon opiniō, when error in the partie misli∣keth that thing, which is of it self well worthie the liking. Opinion falls in error either thorough mere ignorance, when he that misliketh, knoweth not what the thing is, which he doth mislike, or else thorough preiudice, when he that misliketh doth know the thing well, but is so wedded vnto, naie rather so be∣witched with his own fantsie, which it self is seduced by som foren allurement, as he will rather mislike against knowledge, then withstand against fantsie. That the mat∣ter of learning is not to be misliked vp∣on desert. As for the matter of learning, wherein our studie consisteth, and whereunto these principles make a redie entrance, our ne∣cessarie vse both bred it at the first, and contineweth it still, in verie good credit. And what man is so simple, but he knoweth it to be such, as deserueth good liking: both for the seruice that it doth vs, which is the naturall end of it, and for the proprietie in handling, which is an artificiall mean to it? Wherefore if with out cause it be otherwise charged by anie color of blame either
in all or in part, opinion is the charger, which opinion in so do∣ing is either blinded by ignorance, or corrupted by fantsie, the verie worst branch of anie kinde of error, not minding to amēd and still waxing worse, as both the two be verie great enemies to all right iudgement. If anie kinde of writer for vaunt, not for want of wit, or vpon som particular cause else, do practis his pen or whet his tung against the good in learning, as Lucian doth in most places of hole works, as Agrippa doth in his vane book of vanities in science, theie cannot wound learning, tho theie strike at the wants, which be in som professors. Bycause tho the two qualities, one of good note, and to be well vsed, as learning and knowledge, the other of ill note, and neuer but naught, as vice and misdemeanor, be in one & the same partie, yet as the good qualitie cannot transubstantiate the euill, so can not the euill change the others substance, tho it foullie disfigur the form thereof, which is so much the worse, bycause of such a companion, whom the qualified partie, as subiect vnto both hath matched so togither, being in natur most different, thov∣nited in the person, as a cōmon harbour to two great enemies, whereof the one seketh the subuersion of the other. Syphax the king of Barbarie, as Liuie reporteth, lodged both Scipio & Hasdrubal in one palace, being two mortall enemies, and euen at that time in most cruell war, Scipio for Rome, Has∣drubal for Carthage. But what came of it? the king being per∣suaded by Scipioes presence, & his graue speche, began to falter in his amitie with his old frinds, the peple of Carthage, & pro∣ceding so forward in that his mutabilitie, at the last chused the worst. For being the first mouer to haue the Romanes armie passe ouer into Asrik, he wrought the ouerthrow to Carthage & reuolting again from the Romanes frindship to the peple of Carthage he ouerthrew himself, & lost kingdom & all. Such a thing it is to harbor two enemies, & to geue ear to both, where the infirmitie of our natur, either cannot well iudge of them, or if it can, yet is lightlie conquered by the worst of the two, how∣soeuer it promis the more honorable gest, to ioyn with the better. If learning and vice do lodge in one room, the allure∣ment of vice will lightlie preuaill against the allegation of learning, and enforce the learned to do against his know∣ledge,
& yet learning is still good, tho the professor go awrie, and tho cauilling wits do translate crimes from the offender to the innocent. But such fellowes bewraie their own folie, euen in ieast to turn their heles against their own helps, and by their fond doing to stir som fond heads, to mislike that in earnest, which theie ment but in ieast. This doing of both Lucian and Agrippa, and anie such else, which ieast so with good things, to the shaking of their credit, so much as lyeth in them, maie be iustlie comprised vnder error in opinion not erroniouslie but wantonlie seduced. But what if that wanton seduction be the worst of all other, and worthie to be punished? whereas of the other two, the one is moned in ignorance, the other but bla med in error. But to return to my former argument, what greater enemies Ignorance & preiudice the greatest ene∣mies and mis∣likers of sound learning. hath learning euen in natur, then preiudice & ignorāce? whence is there more opē shew of implacable hostilitie to knowledge, then from preiudice and ignorance? Ignorance knoweth no∣thing, and therefore is no friend to ane vnknown good: pre∣iudice knoweth and will not, and therefor is a great fo to a not fauored good. Ignorance yet in part deserueth som excuse for all hir disfrindship, bycause infirmitie is hir falt, not bolste∣red with ill will, and the worst is hir own, ane ordinarie case, where euen enimitie pityeth. But preiudice is a poison to anie common weall, so far as it stretcheth, which being at the first infected with the incurable disease of a cankred and a corrupt opinion gathered by confluence of sundrie ill humors will nei∣ther it self yeild to a right iudgement, nor will suffer anie other, where hir persuasion can take place. For by yeilding hir self she feareth the emparing of hir misconceiued estimation, and by suffring other to yeild, she feareth the encrease of know∣ledges frinds; whereby hir self shall com in dāger to be oppres∣sed, both with truth of matter, and number of patrons. Where∣for she opposeth hir self, she bendeth all hir eloquence, she mu∣reth vp all passages, so much as she maie, both by persuasion and entreatie, that none shall iudge right, which will hear hir speak, & regard hir autoritie, but shall take that musik to sound the swetest, which commeth from hir, tho she be but a mear∣maid, which by offring of delite endeuoreth to destroie.
Ignorance is violent and like vnto a lion, when it encoun∣treth Ignorance & hir grounds. with knowledge, still in furie without feling, in rage with∣out reason, and riseth of two causes, either infirmitie in natur, or negligēce in labor. Whereof the one could not, the other wold Negligence. not conceiue at the first, when knowledge was in dealing. Both enemies to knowledge, but negligēce the greater, which either fearing disdain for hir first refusall, or enuying him which lo∣ueth where she left, will not seme to fauor, where she once for∣sook, and stomaketh him, which embraceth hir leauings, awra∣king hir malice in shew vpon knowledge, in dede vpon folie. Which folie being lodged within hir own breast, beside that negligent ignorance, vseth to call in a dangerous opinion, the contempt of that good, which she ought to commend, rather then she will by change of opinion and altring hir hew bewraie hir own error, which all men se sauing she that should: being at defiance with knowledge, not by simplicitie of natur, which offered, but by naughtinesse of choice, which refused the attai∣ning thereof. Infirmitie. Now naturall infirmitie the other and more gentle mean of ignorance wold perhaps, naie wold in dede change hir blind opinion, if she could once change hir ingenerate heauinesse: she wold reuerence learning, if she might se hir beawtie, where with to be rauished, being enemie vnto hir, not of malice but of weaknesse. That which I speake of infirmitie in natur, and negligence in choice is to be entended by such of both sorts, as continew in their worst without remorse of euill, or recourse to good. For if anie man whether naturallie dull or negligentlie rude in ri∣per years vpon better aduise do change his currant: the naturall weak to loue that in others, which he hath not himself: the neg∣ligentlie rude to wish that in himself, which he seith to be in o∣thers, he then becoms frind to iudgement, and will rather con∣tinew in suspense, then pronounce rashlie, till he be thorough∣lie enformed. Preiudice & hir grounds. But that same peruerse preiudice is a sutle fo to knowledge like a manieheaded hydra, and as the venim of his autoritie is gathered of diuerse grounds, so the sting of his poison infecteth diuerse waies. The person himself which is thus caried awaie
by a peuish opinion is commonlie no heauie head, but either superficiallie learned, and yet loth to seme so: or enuiouslie af∣fected and still carping at his better: or ambitiouslie giuen and presumeth vpon countenance: or he measureth knowledge by gain, and setteth naught by ante more, that himself shall nede, to compas that he coueteth, where a litle cunning will compas much more then reason thinks enough in corruptiō of mindes. All which four causes mean learning glad to make great shew, enuious affection glancing at good things: vane presumption plaing the peicok: couetous desire carelesse of great cūning, as theie corrupt the iudgemēt, so theie maintain preiudice, while the partie so corrupted will seeke by all means to continew his credit: so much the more a deadlie enemie to knowledge, bycause preiudice must giue place, if knowledge com in place, and therefor that it maie not com, he emploieth all his forces, by all cunning, and all well colored shifts to shoulder it out: a professed so, and so much the shrewder, bycause he supplan∣teth knowledge vnder the opinion of knowledge. Now considering these so firie and so furious enemies to knowledge, ignorance and preiudice with their hole families How this Ele∣mentarie pre∣senteth misli∣king by plan∣ting of know∣ledge. be the causes why, that the best things & matters of most cun∣ning be oftimes misliked, where theie be vnknown; either sim∣plie or shrewdlie, doth not this Elementarie a great pleasure to knowledge, by planting skill in all, to auoid misliking in anie? that euerie part of knowledge maie be so estemed of, as it iu∣stlie deserues? and ech of these mislikers maie be so entreated, as o becom frinds of foes? Misliking was said to com either of deseruing ill, whereof learning is cleare, bycause it deserues well, or else by error, from which kinde of misliking anie sound knowledge will verie hard lie scape. For ignorance supported by infirmitie in natur, and negligence in labor, and preiudice maintained by four craftie companions, superficiall learning, enuious affection, vainglori∣ous conceit, and couetous desire will still haue a fling at hir. How be it if naturall infirmitie be helpt by diligent education, it will either proue a frind or no bitter fo, for that good which it hath goten. If negligence it self be so entreated in the training, as it will be content to take pains to learn, it will fa∣uour
at the last, tho it frown at the first. If preiudice in generall maie compas and kepe that credit, with sound and substantiall knowlege, which it aspireth vnto by superficiall shew and si∣nister means, were not he worse then mad, that wold hang vp∣on the shadow, where he might haue the bodie, being still in dāger to haue his vnskilfulnesse discouered at euerie encounter with a learneder man? at euerie dealing with anie such matter, as will bewraie a smatterer? By help of this Elementarie will this substance be goten, that the shew shall not nede. For this kinde of training vp in youth doth crepe on to knowlege, ear the feling of labor can take anie place, and encrocheth so sore vpon blind ignorance, as it cannot be painfull, no not to negli∣gent heads, being so well set forward, to passe quite thorough without either difficultie or danger, if he set no man to work but good will alone. Which being don will not misliking be ba nished, and liking be cald home? will not ignorance stowp when knowlege is in state? when the end is well wrought, and by right means, which was sought for before by a verie wrong waie? I shall not nede to repeat here again, to what kinde of knowlege euerie principle helpeth. For in that theie expell ig∣norance euerie where, that serues for this purpos, as, that theie help knowlege euerie where, it is a thing proued all redie. Both which, the help to knowledge, and exile to ignorance, sound much to the praise of these fiue principles; wherewith theie pro∣cure liking to learning, and valur to vertew. CAP. X. That the entrie to language and the iudgement thereof by grā∣mer is the end of the Elementarie. THe sixt and last prouf of perfitnesse in this elementarie was, bycause the entrance of language, and the iudge∣ment thereof, which is wrought by grāmer, is the conclu∣sion and height thereof. Which how profitable a thing it is, the effects themselues will euidentlie declare. For by course of natur and vse of antiquitie, grammer trauelleth first to haue the naturall tung of ech cuntrie fined to that best, and most certain direction, which the ordinarie custom of that cuntrie
which vseth the tung, can lead hir vnto: As how to reduce our English tung to som certain rule, for writing and reading, for words and speaking, for sentence and ornament, that men maie The duble vse of grammer. know, when theie write or speak right. Which direction was both the first, and the most ancient vse of the originall grammer. Whose professors bycause of their iudgement were called Critici, as Aristarchus among the grekes, Palaemon amōg the Romanes. Secondlie grammer, as it hath bene vsed sence, se∣keth to help vs to the knowledge of foren language, as the 2. Latin, the Italian, and such other tungs, which at this daie is the principall vse thereof. Whereit serueth in the natur of an ana∣tomie, for the resoluing of the writen speche: in the natur of an interpreter, for turning the foren into the naturall: in the natur of an artificer, for making vp the habit of a foren tung in the studious learner, by writing and speaking. Now in either of these kindes, whether to fine our own tung, or to learn a foren, we ar much bound to grammer, euen for it self alone, but a great deall more in respect of hir professor, which must perform the thré things, that I named before of his own abilitie. For gram∣mer of itself is but the bare rule, and a verie naked thing, but the professour must haue somwhat more then his rule. And (not to medle here at this time with anie forē tūg, for ei∣ther the one or the other part of grāmer) doth it not I praie you, That gram∣mer pleasureth vs euen for the fining of our own spech alone. shew vs Englishmē a verie great pleasur, if it help to the fining of our own English tung, & thereby to make it to be of such ac count, as other tungs be, which be therefor of best account, by∣cause theie be so fined? whereby we our selues also shall seme not to be barbarous, euē by mean of our tung, seing fair speche is som parcell of praise, and a great argument of a well ciuilled peple. But it pleasureth vs a great deall more, as the course of our studie now lyeth, for helping of vs to foren language, by such good helps, as it ioyneth to it self, bysides the bare Anato∣mie of a plane rule. For a mere grammarian is but a poor mean to do anie thing well, euen where he professeth most: as Quin∣tilian saw verie well, which for the latin tung, and the gramma∣rian therein said, that it is was one thing to speak like a gram∣marian, and another thing to speak like a latinist, as if grammer latin were but latin by dispensation: & he onelie hit the right in
euerie tung, which could both waie the rules, and pease the force of speche according to that grace, which euerie tung hath. But forasmuch as grammer is vsed for one degre in help to forē language, it furthereth vs verie much that waie, bycause all our learning being fet from the foren, as regestred in their tungs, if we want the knowledge of the one, we want the hope of the other. When learning, and knowlege came first to light, those men, which were the autors thereof, vttered their mindes in that same speche, which theie then vsed, when theie bred the things. And as theie neded no foren tung for the matter bred at home, so had theie no other vse of anie grammer, but onelie that, which endeuoured to fine their naturall speche at home. But after that the same their deuises, being first set out in their own tungs, were afterward sought for by foren students, to encrease their learning, and to enrich their cuntrie with foren wares, the foren students were then driuen to vse the assistence of gram∣mer in the second kinde, bycause theie could not vnderstand those things, which were writen in a foren tung, without the knowlege of the tung it self. In the primitiue grammer children being framed so, as I re∣quire now; went straight waie from the Elementarie to matter of learning, and the mathematicall sciences, which ar so ter∣med, bycause in dede the whole scholers learning (which scho∣lers in greke ar called ) consisted in them, as in the first degree of right studie. For whatsoeuer goeth before them in right studie, is nothing else at all, but mere Elementatie: and whatsoeuer goeth before them in wrong studie, as it is wrested in natur, so it worketh no great wonder. But in the second vse of grammer, we are enforced of necessitie, after the Elemen∣tarie howsoeuer hudled vp, and how simple soeuer, to deall with the tungs, ear we passe to anie matter, which help of tungs, tho it be most necessarie for the thing, as our studie is now platted, yet it hindreth vs in time a thing of great price, naie it hindreth vs in knowlege a thing of more price. For by the lingring about language, we are remoued and kept bak one degre further from sound knowlege, which is so great a degre, being in our best learning time, while we be vnder masters and
readers, of whom we maie learn far better, then of our selues, if that regard be had to thē in choice, which elswhere I haue wish ed were caresullie had. But I will not deall anie further with grāmer in this place, cōsidering that hole argumēt will follow this Elementaric, and hath so manie branches, as we deall with tūgs: neither yet will I procede with this discourse, which offe∣reth it self here cōcerning the let of studie, by the studie of tūgs, which tungs seme to be the onelie mean to all our studie, as we vse it at this daie, bycause I haue handled that argument alreadie in the preface to my learned and curteous reader, besides that I haue tuched it in my book of Positions. For this time this maie suffise, that this our Elementarie is verie be∣neficiall vnto vs, by the mean of grammer also, which is the honor and perfection of the Elementarie in both hir naturs, but chefelie in the course of our learning now, whereby we ar entred into language, and withall into knowledge, while our own tung remaineth but poor, and is kept verie low thorough som reasonable superstition, not to haue learning in it. But here to conclude the generall vse of this present Elemē∣tarie, which hath bene thus far my particular argument, I must nedes continew my first opinion, which was and is this, that in the matter of learning, a good Elementarie is more then the half, bycause it is the first: & that in the first it is mere the best, bycause the wisest men, the greatest reasons, the best gouer∣ned common wealls did so pronounce of it, the one by their pen, the other by their practis. Cap. XI. The generall platform and method of the hole Elementarie. I Will set down the purtrait of the hole Elementarie, and how I purpos to deall therein, before I medle with anie par∣ticular principle, that my reader seing my hole plat in so small a form, and no parcell thereof but within his compas, maie the sooner perceiue the drift of my labor, and according∣lie frame his hope of the thing, and the good like to com by it, & staie his memorie the better, by the method & order which I promis to kepe in it. I deuide the consideration of the hole E∣lementarie
into two parts, whereof the first concerneth the mat∣ter and substance thereof, and how I entend to deall therein: the second concerneth the maner and form of teaching it, and how I wish that euerie circumstance were handled, that both the teacher maie deliuer planelie with order, and the learner receiue quiklie with profit. Wherefor the first part of this my The matter of the Elemen∣tarie and the maner of tea∣ching it. generall plat shall shew the matter of the Elementarie, and the handling thereof: the second shall shew the maner of tea∣ching, and the circumstances therein. The matter of the hole Elementarie cōsisting in fiue points: reading, writing, drawing, singing, & plaing, I will so handle them The matter of the Elemen∣tarie. in rew, as, I marshall them in order, and begin first at reading. But by cause I take vpon me in this Elementarie, besides som frindship to secretaries for the pen, and to correctors for the print, to direct such peple, as teach childern to read and write English, and the reading must nedes be such, as the writing leads vnto, thererfor, befor I medle with anie particular pre∣cept, to direct the Reader, I will thoroughlie rip vp the hole The plat and method of the English orto∣grafie. certaintie of our English writing, so far furth and with such as∣surance, as probabilitie can make me, bycause it is a thing both proper to my argument, and profitable to my cuntrie. For our naturall tung being as beneficiall vnto vs for our nedesull deli∣uerie, as anie other is to the peple which vse it: & hauing as pre∣tie, and as fair obseruations in it, as anie other hath: and being as readie to yeild to anie rule of Art, as anie other is: why should I not take som pains, to find out the right writing of ours, as other cuntrimen haue don, to find the like in theirs? & so much the rather, bycause it is pretended, that the writing thereof is meruellous vncertain, and scant to be recouered from extreme confusion, without som change of as great extremitie? I mean therefor so to deall in it, as I maie wipe awaie that opiniō of ei∣ther vncertaintie for cōfusion, or impossibilitie for directiō, that both the naturall English maie haue wherein to rest, & the de∣sirous stanger maie haue whereby to learn. For the performāce whereof, and mine own better direction, I will first examin those means, whereby other tungs of most sacred antiquitie haue bene brought to Art and form of discipline for their right writing, to the end that by following their waie, I maie hit vpō
their right, and at the least by their president deuise the like to theirs, where the vse of our tung, & the propertie of our dialect will not yeild flat to theirs. That don I will set all the varietie of our now writing, & the vncertaine force of all our letters in as much certaintie, as anie writing cā be, by these seuē precepts, Ge nerall rule, which concerneth the propertie and vse of ech letter: 1. Proportiō, which reduceth all words of one soūd to the same wri 2. ting: Composition, which teacheth how to write one word made 3. of mo: Deriuation, which examineth the ofspring of euerie ori∣ginall: Distinction which bewraieth the difference of sound, and 4. force in letters by som writen figure or accent: Enfranchisment, 5. which directeth the right writing of all incorporat foren words: 6. Prerogatiue, which declareth a reseruation, wherein common vse will continew hir precèdence in our Enlish writing, as she 7. hath don euerie where else, both for the form of the letter, in som places, which likes the pen better: and for the difference in writing, where som particular caueat will chek a common rule. In all these seuen I will so examin the particularities of our tung, as either nothing shall seme strange at all, or if anie thing do seme, yet it shall not seme so strange, but that either the self same, or the verie like vnto it, or the more strange then it is shal appear to be in those things, which ar more familiar vnto vs for extraordinarie learning, then required of vs for our ordi∣narie vse. And forasmuch as the eie will help manie to write right by a sene president, which either cannot vnderstand, or cannot entend to vnderstand the reason of a rule, therefor in the end of this treatis for right writing, I purpos to set down a generall table of most English words, by waie of president, to help such plane peple, as cannot entend the vnderstanding of a rule, which requireth both time and conceit in perceiuing; but can easilie run to a generall table, which is readier to their hand. By the which table I shall also confirm the right of my rules, that theie hold thoroughout, & by multitude of exāples help som maim in precepts. Thus much for the right writing of our English tung, which maie seme for a preface to the prin∣ciple of Reading, as the matter of the one is the maker of the The plat and method of the principle of reading. other. In reading I will kepe this order, bycause the treatis of right
writing doth pretend som help to the right in reading, I will first giue certain rules, to be obserued in reading and spel∣ling, according to those precepts, which I gaue in writing. And forsomuch as the goodnesse and vertew of matter is most fit for the young childe in the first seasoning of his tender minde: and the matter it self is spred into two branches, consonant vnto the main distinction of the ten commandements, either for religion towards God, and right opinion in faith: or for ciui∣litie towards men, and right iudgement in behauior: I will therefor cast the matter of reading so, as it shall answer at full both to religion in faith, and to ciuilitie in frindship. Wherefor to laie the first ground of learning, which is to learn to read, in religion towards God, and in religion it self to obserue the law and ordinances of my cuntrie, I will after the A b c, set down the ordinarie catechism set furth by my prince, and the state of my cuntrie, with all such appendants for graces, and o∣ther praiers, as shall se me most pertinent to the Elementarie traning of a christian child. Therevnto I will ioyn som other pretie short treatis concerning the same religious argument being of good importance for those years to vnderstand: and as warilie appointed, as God shall appoint me. Then will I set down som other well pikt discourse, which shall concern mo∣rall behauior, and right opinions that waie. In all which I will haue both a speciall, & a continuall regard to these four points in the childe, his memorie, his delite, his capacitie, and his for∣warding. For his memorie I will forese, that as he must practis it euen 1. from the first, so he maie also practis it euen vpon the best, both for pleasur in learning, and for profit after learning. For his delite, which is no mean allurement to his learning 2. well, I will be as carefull that the matter which he shall read, maie be so fit for his years, & so plane to his wit, as whē he is at schooll, he maie desire to go forward in so comfortable an ar∣gument, and when he commeth home, he maie take great plea∣sur to be telling of his parents, what pretie petie things he doth find in his book, and that the parents also maie haue no lesse delite to hear their litle one speak: In so much as either of them shall rather seke to preuent the other, the childe to be telling
somwhat, and the parent to be asking somwhat, then to be so slow, as to tarie for the mouing. For his capacitie I will so prouide, that the matter which he shall learn, maie be so easie to vnderstand, and the phrase which 3. I will vse, so euident to perceiue, as both the one and the other shall cause nothing but courage. For his forwarding I mean to be somwhat curious, that there be such consideration and choice for syllabs words and senten∣ces, 4. and for all their accidentarie notes, as there shall want no∣thing, which maie seme worth the wishing, for the full help of either spelling trew, or reading sure: that what childe soeuer can read them well, maie read anie thing else well, if the rea∣ding master will kepe that order in his teaching, which I en∣tend to giue him in my precept, and do his infant no harm by hasting him on to fast, & by measuring his forwardnesse not by his own knowlege, but by fantsie of his frinds. If oportunitie serue me & cause require that labor, I will pen the same things in the latin tung also, to satisfie som peple, which wilbe best pleased so, as in verie dede sauing for the ortografie, which is proper to our tung, there is nothing in the Elementarie, but it maie well be communicated with anie foren nation, which must likewise prouide for their peculiar ortografie, as I do for ours, if theie mean to vse the like Elementarie to this. The treatis of reading being thus ended, then will I on to the The plat and method of the principle for writing. principle of writing, wherein I shall nede neither tobe curious, ne yet long, by cause the hole ortografie, which concerneth the right writing of our tung, will both help the writing master, & ease my labor in that behalf. Howbeit whatsoeuer shal be nede full to that end besides the rules, which ar giuē in the ortografie (as there be manie pretie notes, for the writers profession, both to frame the childes hand right, to form & ioyn letters well, & to fit those instruments, which he must nedes vse in the mana∣ging thereof) all that I will set furth most planelie, and as short∣lie, for both the English and the latin letter. I ioyn the latin letter with the English, by cause the time to learn the latin tung is next in order after the Elementarie, and the childes hand is thē to be acquainted with the latin charact, which is nothing so combersom as the English charact is, if it be not far more easie.
And tho we vse to learn som other tungs afterward, as well as latin, which haue their peculiar characts, as the greke and hebrew, yet he that can write English and latin well, will learn those hands both soon, and of himself. So that the Elementarie writing shall not nede to truble it self anie further in the Ele∣mentarie time of learning, then with those two tungs, the Eng∣lish and the latin. If other ordinarie trades do require mo hands, as for the vse of som court, and such other like, the writing ma∣ster maie help him self, with the particular form of the had, that is sought for, as I will help him with rules in anie writing at all, of whatsoeuer form, tho I make choice but of two onelie. But here methink I find honest mens diligence verie sore mismat∣ched, with an intricate waie and most wearisom to themselues. For theie spend their hole time about setting of copies, whereas fewer copies, and more loking to his hand wold help the childe more, as the number of copies occupying the hole time, is mere enemie to amendment, and direction of the hand. I will there∣for, bycause I like that best, set down two tables of the English & the latin tung, with the letters ioynings, & what so else shal∣be necessarie for one perpetuall copie. The argument whereof shalbe such for choice, as it shall deserue the remēbring, which the oft writing will easilie procure, & the warinesse shalbe such for certaintie of letter, for varietie of form, for all kindes of ioy∣ning, as he, that cā write & resemble those two copies well, shal think nothing strange, that doth concern writing. Somuch dili∣gence shalbe vsed in the choice of a few lines, which must plāt an habit. Further because it shalbe good for the writing master, to haue tables in store, tho he occupie them not allwaie, I will set him down two other tables, of the like choice for the greke and hebrew. And if I shall think it conuenient to translate my English reading arguments into latin, I will also help the Ele∣mentarie latin master, with all such notes, as maie teach to read latin, that in great ignorance of the tung, yet he shall not light∣lie fail, either in tuning or timing euen of vnknown words. Why I do like these tables better, thē the multitude of copies, I will shew more at large in the particular handling of the wri∣ting principle, bycause in that point I am somwhat contrarie to manie of those, which teach children to write, whose commo∣ditie
I hinder not, tho I help their scholers more, whose labor I lessen not, tho I releace it frō copies. This don I must teach The plat, and method for the principle of drawing. how to draw. Which drawing bycauseit is not so euidētlie pro∣fitable, nor so generallie receiued, as writing & reading be, I will therefor proue in a pretie short discourse both how profitable it is, & how it deserueth the learning, euē for profit sake, besides manie petie plesurs. Then bycause drawing vseth both nūber & figur, wherewithall to work, I will cull out so much nūbring frō out of Arithmetik the mistresse of nūbers, & so much figuring out of Geometrie the ladie of figurs, as shall serue fit for an Ele∣mentarie principle to the childes drawing, without either hard∣nesse to fraie him, or lēgth to tire him. Whatsoeuer shall belōg to coloring, to shadowing, & such more workmanlie points, by cause theie ar nearer to the painter, thē to the drawing learner, I will reserue thē to the after habit, & to the studēts choice, whē he is to diuert, & to betake himself to som one trade of life. At which time, if he chaūce to chuse the pen & pēcil to liue by, this introduction then will proue his great frind, as he himself shall find, when he feles it in prouf. Last of all forsomuch as drawing is a thing, whose thorough help manie good workmen do vse, which liue honestlie thereby, & in good degre of estimation & welth, as architectur, pictur, embroderie, engrauing, statuarie all modelling all platforming, & manie the like: besides the learned vse thereof, for Astronomie, Geometrie, Chorographie, Topographie and som other such, I will therefor pik out som certain figures proper to so manie of the foresaid faculties, as shall seme most fit to teach a child to draw, & withall I will shew how theie be to be delt with euen frō their first point, to their last perfection, seing it is out of all controuersie, that, if drawing be thought nedefull, as it shall be proued to be, it is now to be delt with, while the finger is tēder, & the writing yet in hād, that both the pen & pēcill, both the rule & cōpas, maie go forward together. As for Musik, which I have deuided into voice and instru∣ment, The plat and method for the principles of Musik. 1. 2. 3. I will kepe this currant. The training vp in musik as in all other faculties, hath a speciall eie to these thre points: The childe himself, that is to learn: the matter it self, which he is to learn: and the instument it self, whereon he is to learn. Where∣in I will deall so for the first and last, that is for the childe and
the instrument, as neither of them shall lak, whatsoeuer is nede∣full; either for framing of the childes voice, or for the righting of his finger, or for the prikking of his lessons, or for the the tu∣ning of his instrumēt. For in the voice there is a right pitch, that it be neither ouer nor vnder strained, but delicatelie brought to hir best ground, both to kepe out long & to rise or fall with∣in dew compas, and so to becom tunable, with regard to helth, and pleasant to hear. And in the fingring also, there is a regard to be had, both that the childe strike so, as he do not shufle, nei∣ther spoill anie sound, and that his finger run so both sure and sightiie, as it cumber not it self with entāgled deliuerie. Where of the first commōlie falleth out by to much hast, in the young learner, who is euer longing vntill be a leauing: the second falt coms of the master himself, who doth not consider the naturall dexteritie, and sequele in the ioynts, which being vsed right, & in a naturall consequence, procureth the finger a nimblenesse with ease, and helpeth the deliuerie to readinesse without pain, as the vntoward fingring must nedes bring in corruption, tho corrupt vse do not vse to cōplain. For the matter of musik, which the childe is to learn, I will set it down how, and by what degres & in what lessons, a boy that is to be brought vp to sing, maie & ought to procede by ordinarie ascēt, from the first term of Art, & the first note in sound, vntill he shalbe able without anie oftē or anie great missing, to sing his part in priksōg, either himself a∣lone, which is his first in rudenesse, or with som cōpanie, which is his best in practis. For I take so much to be enough for an Elemē tarie institution, which saluteth but the facultie, tho it perfit the princple, & I refer the residew for setting & discāt to enciease of cūning, which dailie will grow on, & to further years, whē the hole bodie of musik wil com, & craue place. And yet bycause the childe must still mount somwhat that waie, I will set him down sō rules of setting & discāt, which will make him better able to iudge of singing being a setter himself, as in the tung, he that v∣seth to write, shal best iudge of a writer. Cōcerning the virgi∣nalls & the lute, which two instrumēts, I haue therfor chosen, by∣cause of the full musik which is vttered by thē & the varietie of The virginals and lute. fingring, which is shewed vpō thē, I will also set down so manie chosen lessons for either of them, as shall bring the young lear∣ner
to plaie reasonable well on them both, tho not at the first sight, whether by the ear, or by the book, allwaie prouided that priksong go before plaing. All which lessons both for instumēt & voice, I will not onelie name, and set the learner ouer to get them, where he can, in the writen song books set furth by mu∣sik masters, but I will cause them all to be prikt and printed in the same principle of musik, that both the reader maie iudge of them, and the scholer learn by them. Which thing as well as all the rest, that I haue vndertaken to perform in this Elemen∣tarie, I hope by Gods help to bring to such effect thorough cō∣ference with the best practicioners in our time, and the counsell of the best learned writers in anie time, in euerie of the princi∣ples, besides mine own trauell, and som not negligent experi∣ence, as I shall discharge my promis, and content my good cuntrimen. What thing soeuer else besides this that I haue named, shall seme to be nedefull for the better opening of anie particular point, I will se to it there, tho I saie nothing of it here. This is the sō of my Elemētarie platform for the matter thereof. For the maner of teaching and consideration of circum∣stance in executing thereof, which was the second part of my The plat, and method for the maner of teaching and training, accor ding to this E∣lementarie. generall plat in my first diuision, & hath the same place, if not a greater in the particular performāce of anie executiō (for what auaileth precept, if it be not performed? or what performance is it, that procedeth not in order?) I entend to do thus. Bycause all these things tho neuer so good of themselues, tho neuer so commended by writers, tho neuer so well liked of parents, yet maie miscarie in the handling, if theie be not well followed with all dew circumstances, I will therefor set down a particu∣lar direction for euerie principle, when to begin, and in what degre of ripenesse to ioyn with another, and that so as neither to soon mar, nor to much confound: how to handle the young wit: how to ioyn exercise of the bodie with these principles for the mind: what method in teaching them maie seme to be best: what pretie deuises must be vsed to cause the childe of himself shew what he can do, and what metle there is in him, with all such considerations as be naturallie incident to such an execu∣tion, that the young learner maie both thank me for his helth, and think well of me for his learning, as a willing instrument
to do him som good, if it shall please God, the giuer of good, to blesse mine endeuor. Thus much for my generall plat. In the performance whereof, tho I do somtimes enterlace dis∣courses, that be not for children, either to conceiue or cun, yet theie be not impertinent to the matter, neither improper to me, somtime to open some further point necessarie to my pur∣pos: somtime to enstruct the masters, which might either mis∣conceiue me, or misorder the teaching: somtimes euen to se how our English tung will plaie with these arguments, which ar thought so vncouth, and not expressible in our tung. But what so euer shal be necessarie for the childes trauell alone, I will so appoint that, as it shall stand alone, and maie be printed alone, the larger discourses seruing for more years, and such as will vse them. For that I take to be the best method in penning anie thing, wherof the student is to commit part to memorie, & to studie the other part, to make the remembring part, pithie, short, and apart, and in the other to handle the rest at large, & yet no more then nedefull. Which two points of largenesse, without to much for more years, & shortnesse without to litle for lesse years, ar in this Elementarie to be speciallie conside∣red. Bycause the Elemētarie master is not commonlie the cun∣ningest, and the Elementarie scholer is vnder twelue years. For a childe thus trained, shall learn the tung sooner, and do more betwene twelue and sixtene, then from seuen to seuentene if he begin without this traine. But the ortografie calls for me. CAP. XII. The method which the learned tungs vsed in the finding out of their own right writing. I Begin the Elementarie at the argument of right writing, VVhie I do begin at the right writing of English. because reading, which is the first Elementarie principle, must be directed both in precept and practis, thereafter as the thing, which is to be red, is writen or printed. And consi∣dering the right writing of our tung is yet in question: som, but those to forward, esteming it quite vnproper: som, but those to bakward, thinking it perfit enough: som, & those the soundest iudging it to be in most well appointed, tho in particulars to be
helpt: is it not a verie necessarie labor to set the writing certain, that the reading maie be sure? Now in examining the right of our writing, I begin at that method, which the learned tungs v∣sed, VVhy in orto∣grafie I begin at this method to find out the like right in their own writing, whē it was in like question, that ours now is, for these two reasons. First by following their president, and marking that course, which was 1 vsed in them, I shall both haue good warrant against anie such, as shall mislike of my currant, and dream of new deuises: and withall, I shall be abler to work the like in English, by vsing the like precept, in the like obseruation. For all tungs kepe one, and the same rule for their main, tho euerie one haue his propertie in part, which particular propertie, as it is noted in the best tungs, (which ar so termed, bycause they are so este∣med, for the prerogatiue of that vse, which we find to be in them) so it is warranted in ours, euen by president frō them. So that hereby I shall not seme, I hope, to anie aduised reader, but to haue vsed a verie good mean, for the finding out of that, which is to be decided in the right of our writing: and if anie other, either of peuishnesse, or of ignorance, shall mislike my proceding, the honor of my president, being rightlie followed, (which I hope to perform) will both defend me, and condemn them, if it cannot content them. The second cause, that mo∣ued me to begin at this method, is, thereby to answere all those 2 obiections, which charge our writing with either insufficien∣cie, or confusion: and also to examin by it, as by a sure tuch∣stone, all the other supplements, which haue bene deuised heretofore, to help our writing, by either altering of the old characts, or deuising of som new, or encreasing of their num∣ber. For if the other so estemed tungs, when theie were sub∣iect to, and charged with these same supposed wants, where∣with our writing is now burdened, did deliuer them selues by other means, then either by altering, or by innouating, or by encreasing their characts, and made the stuf of their own cu∣stom, to be stear of their direction, as this method will shew, why should we desire to seke foren means, and impertinent to our tung, by deuise of new forge, hauing such a pattern to perfit our writing, by a so well warranted president? That the That the first tungs were once rude. finest tung, was once in filth, the verie course of natur pro∣ceding
from weaknesse, to strength from imperfection to perfitnesse, from a mean degré, to a main dignitie, doth giue vs to behold, yea tho neither Marcus Uarro, nor yet Quintilian, nor anie such as Priscian did shew the like in the Latin, and by example in that one, confirmed the like in all: which I will not rip vp, as a thing of more vaunt for reading, then of help to writing, where one generall reason, proued by one particular, of perpetuall sequele, like a geome∣tricall demonstration, will serue well enough. Well then, what meanes did those languages vse, which haue won the opinion, that theie be right writen, tó com The originall & secondarie fining of tungs by that right, which wrought that opinion? There be two considerations in speche, concerning the waie, which hath bene vsed in the fining thereof. For if we look into the first degré of fining, before which, no tung at all had anie beaw∣tie in the pen, we ar to consider, how the verie first tung did procede from hir first rudenesse, to hir best perfection: Again if we look into the next degré, wherein the like fine∣nesse ensewed in other tungs, by following the like course to that which the first refiners took, then we ar to consider, how other secondarie languages haue proined and pikt them selues, by following that method, which the primitiue did vse. But by cause I desire to be warranted by them both, that is, both following the first finers, & the second presidentiaries, in this my course, (which no man hath yet kept in this argument, as I can perceice, tho diuerse write ortografies,) and my o∣pinion is, that it best besemes a scholer, to procede by Art in anie recouerie, from the clawes of ignorance: Therefor I will rip vp, euen from the verie root, how and by what de∣grées, the verie first tung, doth seme to com by that her perfe∣ction in writing, & what order was taken to continew that per∣fection, euer sence the time that anie tung is perfited. Allwaies reseruing so much to his consideration, which entendeth the fining of anie speche, as concerneth the propertie of anie particular tung, which particularitie will not be compri∣sed vnder generall precept with anie other tung, but must be directed by priuat obseruation, and particular exception
against the common rule. And yet euen this so particular a cir∣cumstance is not omitted in the generall method of the first fi∣ning, and thereby it is commended vnto vs by waie of transla∣tion, which com in the third degré, and fine after the first, by fol∣lowing of the midle. Now in this long waie from the first soilth of extreme rudenesse, to the last neatnesse of most cunning, I The 3. seue∣rall gouern∣ments ouer writing. will apoint thre rests, euerie one naturallie succeding the other, where the readers cōceit maie light & go on foot, if it be wea∣ried with riding, I do not saie with reading. The first is, while 1. the soūd alone bare the swaie in writing. The secōd is, while cō∣sent 2. in vse did transport the autoritie, from sound alone, to rea∣son, custom, and sound ioyntlie. The third, which presentlie rai∣gneth, is, while that reason & custom, do assure their own ioynt 3 gouernment with sound, by the mean of Art. For sound like a restrained not banished Tarquinius desiring to be restored to his first and sole monarchie, and finding som, but no more then sounding fauorers, did seke to make a tumult in the scriueners prouince, euer after that, reason and custom were ioynd with him in comission. I will therefor first deal with that regimēt in writing, which The gouern∣ment of right writing vnder the autoritie of found alone was vnder sound, when euerie thing was writen according to the sound, tho that kind of gouernment be long ago worn out. I should begin to high in seking out the ground of right writing, (as he that fetcht the batle of Troie frō Ledaes two egs, or as she that was angrie with felling the first tre, bycause she took vnkindnesse with him that came by ship, to that place where she did dwell) If I should make enquirie either who de∣uised That it is an idle enquirie to seke either who wrote first, or who deuised letters first. letters first, or who wrote first, a thing as vncertain to be known, as fruteles if it were known. For Herodotus in his Mu∣ses, Diodorus, in his librarie, Eusebius in his preparatiue, Plinie in his historie, Flauius Iosephus in his antiquities of Iurie, Dio∣nysius Halicarnasseus in his antiquities of Rome, Coelius Rhodigi∣nus, in his antiquitie of reading, Polydorus Uirgilius in his in∣uentors of things, and manie seuerall writers mo, in as manie seuerall places mo, seking to learn out either the first foūder of the generall charact, or the first deuisor of the particular, for par ticular nations, ar as new to seke, when they haue sought all, as theie were at first, before theie sought anie. For what certaintie
can there be had of so old a thing? or what profit can rise by som one mans name, if one were the founder, as it cannot be. Who tho he be honored for the frute of his inuention, yet doth his autoritie small good, wher the matter in question is to be confirmed, not by the inuentors credit, who dwells we know not where, but by the vsers profit, which euerie one feles. And therefor as theie, whosoeuer deuised the thing first (for it was no one mans inuention, nor of anie one age) did a maruellous good turn to all their posteritie: so we, which be their posteri∣tie, ar to think well of the inuentors, and to iudge thus of their inuentions: that verie necessitie was the foundresse of letters, and of all writing, as it hath bene onelie the generall breder of all such things, as our life is better by, when nede and want en∣forced mens wits, to seke for such helps. For the tung conuey∣ing speche no further thē to those, which were within hearing, and the necessitie of conueiance oftimes falling out betwene som persons that were further of: a deuice was made to serue the eie a far of, by the mean of letters, as natur did satisfie the ear at hand by benefit of speche. For the deliuerie of learning by the pen to posteritie, was not the first cause that found out letters, but an excellent vse perceiued to be in them to serue for perpetuitie, a great while after theie had bene found by ne∣cessitie. The letters being thus found out, to serue a nedefull turn took the force of expressing euerie distinct sound in voice, The sound & force of letters by natur vo∣lunntarie. not by them selues or anie vertew in their form (for what like∣nesse or what affinitie hath the form of anie letter in his own natur, to answer the force or sound in mans voice?) but onelie by consent of those men, which first inuented them, and the pretie vse therof perceaued by those, which first did receiue them. Whereby the peple that vsed them first, agréed with those, that found them first, that such a sound in the voice should be resembled by such a signe to the eie: and that such a signe in the eie should be so returned to the ear, as the aspecta∣ble figur of such an audible sound: whereunto these subscribed their names, and set to their seals the daie and year, when their consent past. Herevpon in the first writing, the sound alone did lead the VVhy the sound led the pen at first. pen, and euerie word was writen with those letters, which the
sound did commaund, bycause the letters were inuented, to expresse sounds. Then for the right in writing, who was soue∣rain and iudge, but sound alone? who gaue sentence of pen, ink, and paper, but sound alone? then what was sound in the set∣ting down, but that which was awarded by sound alone? Then Sounds height euerie one of the peple, thē euerie one tho most vnskilfull, was partaker in autoritie, & sound fellowes in that soūd gouernmēt. And good reason why, that sound should rule alone, & all those haue a stroke, in the gouernmēt of found, whosoeuer were able but euen to make a sound. You deuised all this to expresse me, why should not I then iudge, when I were expressed, seing, you your self told me, that such a litle note in sight, was to resemble such a thing in sound? In those daies, all those arguments, which cleaue so sore vnto the prerogatiue of sound, & plead so for his interest, in setting down of letters, were most estémed of, as most agreable to the time, & most officious to the state. But af∣terward when sound vpon great cause, was deposed frō his mo∣narchie, as no fit person to rule the pen alone, and had others ioyned with him in the same commission, of as good counte∣nance as he, tho not to deall without him, then their credit was nothing so absolut, tho reasonable good still, as anie of soūds ad uised fauorers, maie both well perceiue, and be well content with, if he will but mark the restraint of sounds autoritie, & the causes why, & withall consider, that all opinions which cōcern his sole autoritie, & tend to that end, as theie were of most ac∣coūt, while he was in that ruf, ar now but verie weak, whē he is in the wain, & ar to be qualified, according to that state, where sound is now ranged. For great inconueniences following, and Sounds fall. the writing it self, prouin mgore false then trew, while the pen set down that form, which the ear did assure, to answer such a sound, & the soūd it self being to imperious, without anie either mercie or pitie, but death for disobedience, no pardon, no for∣giuenesse, no misericordia, what equitie soeuer the cōtrarie side had: men of good wit, & great vnderstanding, who perceaued & misliked this imperiousnesse of soūd, which yet was maintai∣ned, with great vncertaintie, naie rather with confusion, then ao nie assurance of right, assembled them selues together to com∣mon vpon so common a good, and in the end after resolut and
ripe deliberation theie presented them selues before sound, vsing these, rather persuasions, then compulsions, to qualify his humor. That it wold please him, to take their speche in good part, The reasons and grounds why sound was displaced of his sole go∣uernment. considering it tuched not their priuat, but the generall good of the hole prouince of writing. That he wold call those reasons to his remembrance, which moued them at the first, to giue him alone the autoritie ouer the pen, as one whom theie then thought, to be most fit for such a gouernment, naie onelie most fit to gouern alone. That theie now perceiued, not anie defect in him, who vsed that like a prince, which was his peculiar, by their own commission: but an ouersight in them selues, who vnaduisedlie ouercharged him, with such an estate, as he could not weild alone, without his great dishonor, whereof theie were as tender, as of their own soules. That their request there∣for vnto him, was; to praie & beseche him, not to esteme more of his own priuat honor, then of the hole prouinces good. That theie might with his good leaue, amend their own error, which tho it concerned his person, yet should it not tuch his credit, the falt being theirs in their first choice. Theie paused a litle while, before theie vttered the verie main cause of this their motion, for that theie spyed sound to begin to change colors, and half readie to swond. For the fellow is passionat, in autoritie tyrannous, in aw timorous. Howbeit seing the common good did vrge them to speche, theie went on, & told him in plane terms, that he must be con∣tent to refer himself to order, and so much the rather, bycause their meaning was not to seke either his depriuation, or his resi∣gnation, but that it wold please him to qualify his gouernmēt, and to vse the assistence of a further councell, which theie ment to ioyn with him, a thing of great frute, & of good example in manie such cases, where euen great potentates, acd considerat princes, for the generall weall of their naturall states, (his being but voluntarie, and of their election) were verie well content, vpon humble sute made to them, to admit such a councell, and to vse them in affaires. That the reasons which moued them to make this sute, and might also moue him, to admit the same were of great importance: That bycause letters were first
found onelie to expresse him, therefor theie had giuen him one∣lie and alone, the whole gouernment therein, and were well contented therewith, vntill such time, as theie had espied, not his misgouernment, but their own mischoice: that the bare & primitiue inuentions, being but rude, and accordinglie ruled, and experience now in time, growing to more finesse, why should theie not yeild to that in finesse, vpon better cause, wherevnto theie did yeild in rudenesse vpon mere nede? That no man hauing anie sense in the right of writing, which expe∣rience had commended, wold yeild the direction to sound a∣lone, which altereth still, and is neuer like to it self, as either the partie pronouncer is of ignorance or knowledg: or the par∣ties that pronounce, be of clear or stop deliuerie: or as the ear it self is of iudgement to discern. That considering these de∣fects, which praie for reformance, and the letter it self, which desireth som assurance of her own vse, it might stand with his good pleasur, to admit to his counsell, two graue and great personages, which theie had long thought on, thorough whose assistence he might the better gouern the pen prouince. Bycause theie praised the parties so much, he desired their names. Theie answered Reason, to consider what wilbe most a∣gréable vpon cause, and Custom to confirm that by experience and prouf, which reason should like best, and yet neither to do anie thing, without conference with sound. The personages pleased him for their own worthinesse, but the self same thing, which recommended them to him for their own valur, did fraie him to like them, for his own dan∣ger. For is not either reason or custom, if it please them to a∣spire, more like to rule the pen, then sound, said he to him self? Howbeit after that theie had charged his conscience, with all those reasons in one throng, which theie had vsed particularlie before, that it were no dishonor to yeild a litle vnto them, which had giuen him his hole rule: that it were no reason, but theie might haue leaue, to amend their own error, in ouerchar∣ging him, being their falt and his ease: That tho theie semed to empare his estate, yet theie did not seke to defraud him of his own: That the wrongs don to writing, which theie pre∣sented vnto him were matters worth redresse: That the coun∣sellers,
which theie appointed were honorable, and honest: that the common benefit of the hole writing prouince did ear∣nestlie sew for it, wherevnto theie were verie well assured, that so good a father, as he was, to that poor estate, wold neuer be vnwilling but rather voluntarilie condiscend, without anie request, as being half dishonored, in that he taried the re∣quest, but that he knew not of the greiues. After that theie had pressed him so near, tho he were verie loth, being once a sole monarch, to becom half priuate by admitting of controullers, as he thought, rather then counsellers, as theie ment, yet percei∣uing that their power was such, as theie might enforce him to that, which theie praied him to graunt, if he should stand in terms with them, he was content to yeild, tho with som shew ofmiscontentment in his verie countenance, and to allow of Reason and Custom as his fellow gouerners in the right of wri∣ting. For in verie dede concerning the autoritie of these mouers, wise and learned peple, what so euer theie lend ignorance to plaie with for a time, theie reserue to themselues both iudge∣ment and autoritie, wherewith to controull, when theie se want of skill plaie the fooll to much, as in this same quarel for the al∣teration of sounds to presumptuous rule, theie had verie great reason. For as in faces, tho euerie man naturallie haue two eies, two ears, one nose, one mouth, and so furth, yet there is all waie such diuersitie in countenances, as anie two men maie easilie be discerned, tho theie be as like as the Lacedaemonian princes, and brethern were, of whom Tullie speaketh: so likewise in the voice, tho in euerie one it passe thorough, by one mouth, one throte, one tung, one fense of tethe, and so furth, yet is it as dif∣ferent in euerie one, euen for giuing the sound, by reason of som diuersitie in the vocall instruments, as the faces be different in resembling like form, by som euident distinction, in the naturall purtrait. Which diuersitie tho it hinder not the deliuerie of e∣uerie mans minde, yet is it to vncertain to rule euerie mans pen in setting down of letters. And again, what reason had it to follow euerie mans ear, as a master scriuener, and to leaue euerie mans pen to his own sound, where such difference was, as theie could not agré, when
where the right was, euerie one laing clame to it? & why not my ear best? Again why should ignorance in anie respect be taken for a gide in a case of knowledge? bycause of their voices? that were to popular, where the argument is singular. Bycause of their wills? that were to willfull, where wisdom should war∣rant. And therefor if anie multitude, tho of neuer so few, deserue to be followed, theie onelie were, which could both speak best, and giue best reason why. But that kinde of peple were to few at the first, to find anie place against a popular gouernment, where the ear led the ear, and why shall sound giue ouer his in∣terest, seing letters were deuised to expresse sound in euerie one of vs, and not the conceit of these, and those few goodlie wise fellowes? And yet when corn was once in prouf, acorns grew out of place, tho a iollie mastie meat in a hoggish world. For naturallie the first serues the turn, till the finer and better do com in presence. And as somthing gat place worthilie of no thing, so must that somthing again, giue place to his better: As sound did somthing to expell rudenesse, tho it maie not bend it self, to kepe out finesse. Hereupon wise men wold stand no longer to that diuersitie in writing, which necessarilie did follow, when euerie one did spell so, as the instruments of his voice did fashion his sound, or as his cunning gaue him, or as his ear could discern. All which means be full of varietie, and neuer one in all, as it doth appear by hole nations, which cannot sound som letters, that som other can, as the Ephramite in scriptur, which could not sound the first letter in Shibboleth being in hebrew the same chract with the first in Sibboleth: or as the witnesse in Tullie, which by propertie of his cuntrie, could not sound the first let∣ter in Fundanius, against whom he cam. Vpon these miscontentmēts, and by consent of those, which could iudge, and vtter best, theie grew to a certain, and a reaso∣nable custom, or else to saie truth, to a customarie reason, which theie held for a law, not vnaduisedle hit on, by error and time, but aduisedlie resolued on, by iudgement and skill. Neither yet, (which had ben contrarie to their promis) depriued theie sound of all his rialtie, which was dictatorlike, before, but theie ioyned reason with him, & custom to, to begin then in
right, and not in corruption after, as a Caesar and a Pompeie, to be his colleges in a triumuirate. From that time forward sound could do much, but nothing so much, as he could do before, being verie manie times, verie iustlie ouerruled by his conside∣rat companions, and fellowes in office. Thus ended the monar∣chie of sound alone. We ar now com to that regiment in writing, which was vn∣der The gouern∣ment of right writing vnder the autoritie of, sound, rea∣son, and custō. sound, reason and custom ioyntlie togither, and proceded in this sort. Reason as he is in reason the principall director, of all best doings, and not writing alone, so he began to plaie the master, but wiselie withall, and with great modestie. For consi∣dering the disposition of his two companions, first of sound, which the letters were to expresse of dewtie, as therfor deuised: then of custom, which was to confirm, and make the waie to ge∣nerall allowāce, he established this for a generall law in the pro uince of writing. That as the first founders, and deuisers of the letters, vsed their own libertie, in the assigning of such a charact in the eie, to such a sound in the voice, which assignation was mere voluntarie, & of the foūders choice: so it should be lawful for the said founders, and their posteritie, according as the neces sitie of their vse, & the dispatch in their pen did seme to require it, either to encrease the number of letters, if the insufficiencie in them did seme not to answer the varietie in sound, or to apply one and the same letter to diuerse vses, if it might be don with som pretie distinction, to auoid multitude of characts, as we ap∣ply words which be within nūber, to things which be without: & generallie like naturall and chefe lords in a tenancie at mere will, to make their own nede the leuell of all letters, of all wri∣ting, of all speaking, to chop, to change, to alter, to transport, to enlarge, to lessen, to make, to mar, to begin, to end, to giue autoritie to this, to take it from that, as themselues should think good. This decre being penned by reason, both sound and custom did presentlie allow: sound bycause there was no remedie, tho his hart longed still for his former Monarchie, which was now inth'Eclipse: Custom, bycause that did serue his turn best. For if necessarie vse, and dispatch in the pen, might haue autoritie, which was giuen them in law, by consent of those men, which were successors to them, who
first founded the letter, which men were of the learneddest and wisest sort, then were Custom in dede, hauing reason to frind, & sound no fo, a verie great prince in the hole prouince of both writing and speaking. And good reason why. For Custom is not that which men do or speak commonlie or most, vpon what∣soeuer VVhat custom is naturallie. occasion, but onelie that, which is grounded at the first, vpon the best and fittest reason, and is therefor to be vsed, by∣cause it is the fittest. Which if it take place according to the first appointment, then is custom in his right, if not, then abuse in dede doth seme to vsurp vpon custom in name. For in Lord∣ships and maners is that custom, which the tenants do vse vpon their own surmise, or but that onelie, which the first Lord gran∣ted, vpon som speciall cause, and his posteritie confirms, vpon the like respect, either to their auncetor or to the thing? So that I take custom to bild vpon the cause, and not to make the cause. After that reason had brought both sound to this order, and custom to this autoritie, then was there nothing admitted in writing, but that onelie, which was subsigned by all their threé hands. If the sound alone did serue, yet reason and custom must nedes confirm sound: if reason must take place, both sound and custom must nedes approue reason: if custom wold be credited, he might not passe, onelesse both sound did sooth him, & reason did ratifie him. For the better continuāce of this wise triumuirate, ech of the The retinew belonging to the triumui∣rate in their gouernment of the pen. Sounds reti∣new. thrè entertained such peple, as were fittest for their families. Sound, bycause he presumed onelie vpon his old autoritie not extinguished, tho restrained, and neded no great train now in that his restraint, he therefor contented himself with such of his old retinew, as knew his first commission, which was gran∣ted vnto him, when the deuise of letters cam first to light. Who still had an eie to sound, and set down that letter, which was ap∣pointed thereunto, onelesse reason and custom had put in a ca∣ueat, that in such a case the commission must be altered. Reason again took into his seruice, obseruation and compa∣rison: Resons reti∣new. Obseruation to mark what were fairest in sense, what were readiest in pen, what where currantest in vse: Comparison to confer that, which he allowed in one, with that proportion,
which he found in another, that the hole might be sutable. Custom besides that he made verie much of both sound and Customs reti∣new. reasons retinew, as his verie good frinds, whereby he was comē∣ded to generall practis, of himself & for himself, he entertained warinesse, to be still like himself, and tho he altered vpon cause, as reason should enform him, yet to behaue himself so, as he might easilie be discerned from corruption in vse, which was his naturall enemie, and was alwaie bakt by the ignorant mul∣titude, as custom it self was by those, that were of skill, both at his first planting, and thoroughout his performance. So had right sound, missounding to fo, so had right reason, a slight shew of apparence to aduersarie, which still caried the wea∣ker branes, but could neuer moue, either iudgement or cunning. During this compound gouernment of these thre, the mat∣ter The effect of this triūuirat. of all our precepts, that belong to writing, did first grow to strength, then were rules grounded, then were exceptions laid, when reason and custom perceiued cause why. But none of all these were yet commended to Art, and set down in writing, but fleting in the memorie, and obseruation of writers, ha∣uing sufficient matter to furnish an institution, and the bodie of an Art, tho not yet in method, which cam next in place, & ioy∣ned it self with the other thre vpon this occasion: All this time, while reason and custom gouerned the pen, as The occasion why Art was called to aide. well as sound, sounds malcontented frinds did neuer rest, but all∣waie sought means to supplant the two other, euer bussing in∣to the ignorant ears that of sounds autoritie, and his right to his own deliuerie: and the same errors, which troubled the pen, while sound alone was the setter down, began to crepe in again, and cause a new truble, in so much as all the ignoranter sort were clear of opinion that the verie sternesse of sound was onelie to be accepted without all exception, tho those of lear∣ning and wisdom, which had both first set vp reason and custom, as companions to sound, and still continewed in the same minde, could verie well discern vsurpation from enheritance, and right from wrong. Wherefor reason finding by this creping error both him∣self to be iniuried by senslesse time, and his good custom to be
sore assailed by counterfeat corruption, perceiued the falt to be for want of a good notarie, and a strong obligation, where∣with to set that in euerlasting autoritie, by right rule and trew writing, which he and custom both, by the consent of sound, had continewed in vse, tho not put down in writing, which wold euer be in danger of continuall reuolt, from the best to the worst, by the vncertaintie of time, and the eluishnesse of error, oneless it were set in writing, and the conditions subscribed by all their consents, for a perpetuall euidence against the repi∣ner. For that is the difference, betwene a reasonable custom and an artificiall method, that the first doth the thing for the second to assure, and the second assureth, by obseruing of the first. While nothing was set down in writing, sound and his com∣plices were in hope of som recouerie, which hope was cut of, when the writings were made, and the conditions set certain. The notarie to cut of all these controuersies, and to brede a per∣petuall quietnesse in writing, was Art, which gathering al those roming rules, that custom had beaten out, into one bodie, dis∣posed them so in writing, as euerie one knew his own limits, reason his, custom his, sound his. Now when reason, custom and sound were brought into order, and driuen to certaintie by the mean of Art, and artificiall method, then began the third the last and the best assurance in writing. Art being hirself in place perceiued the direction of anie hole tung to be verie infinite and hard, naie to be scant possible in The gouern∣ment of right writing vnder Art. generall, considering the diuerse properties that the thre ru∣lers, reason, custom, and sound haue, which alter still with time. For what peple can be sure of his own tung anie long while? doth not speche alter somtime to the finer, if the state where it is vsed, continew it self, and grow to better countenance, for either great learning, or other dealing, which vse to proin a tung? And doth it not somtime change to the more corrupt, if the state where it is vsed, do chance to be ouerthrown, and a master tung comming in as conqueror, command both the peple, and the peples speche to? Vpon this considerati∣on, what an infinit thing it were to chuse out such a subiect, as is so vncertain, Art took hirself to som one period in the
tung, of most and best account, and therefor fittest to be made a pattern for others to follow, and pleasantest for hir self to trauell and toill in. Vpon which period she did bestow all those notes, which she did perceiue by obseruation (which is secretarie to reason) to be in the common vse of speche, and pen, either clear with sound, or sutable to reason, or liked in custom, but still bakt by them all. Such a period in the Greke tung was that time, when De∣mosthenes liued, and that learned race of the father philoso∣phers: such a period in the Latin tung, was that time, when Tul∣lie liued, and those of that age: Such a period in the English tung I take this to be in our daies, for both the pen and the speche. Art chusing such a period in the primatiue tung, and ha∣uing all the stuf gathered into notes, wherewith to set vp hir hole frame, and bilding of method, distributed them so, as there was not anie one thing necessarie for right writing, but she had it in writing, sauing som particulars, which will be still vnrulie, and make fresh matter for an other period in speche: tho that, which is now made so artificiall and sure, com neuer in danger of anie alteration, but be still held for a president to others, as most perfit in it self. For a tung once enrolled by the benefit of Art, and grown to good credit, is thereby first setled it self in such assurance, as the right thereof can∣not be denied, the contrarie to right wold be soon espied, howsoeuer it wrangle: then is it made a common example to other languages, which haue stuf for such a method, and de∣sire to be fined, whereby to fine them. This course kept the first tung that euer was fined, from the first inuention of anie letter, which was least in act, but greatest in power, vntill corruption slilie goten in, but wise∣lie perceiued did cause a reformation. Which reformation grew again to corruption in natur of a relapse, bycause tho it were soundlie made, yet was it not well armed with sufficient suretie against the festuring euill of error & corruption. Where∣for when it felt the want of such an assurance, it praied aid of Art, which like a beaten lawyer, handled the matter so, and
with such a forecast in the penning of his books, as euerie of them, which had anie interest were taught to know what was their own. Other tungs beside the first refined, marking this currant applied the same to their own seuerall writing, and were verie glad with great thanks, to vse the benefit of those mens labor, which wrastled with the difficulties, of sound, er∣ror, corruption, and the residew of that ill humored peple. This originall president in the first, and translated patern in the rest, I mean to follow in the finding out of our right En∣glish writing, which whether it will proue to be fashioned ac∣cordinglie, and framed like the patern, it shall then appear whē the thing it self, shall com furth in hir own naturall hew, tho in artificiall habit. I haue not vsed anie autors name in this discourse either to confirm, or to confute by credit of autoritie. For anie man all∣most of anie mean learning, maie quiklie espy, that these mat∣ters VVhy I vse no autoritie to proue this me∣thod. ar not without autors. For can reason, custō, art, sound, error, corruption, and such other qualities, as plaie their parts in this so ordinate a plat, lak testimonie of writers being so much writen of? But I did onelie seke to satisfie nede and to polish no fur∣ther. To conclude and knit vp the argument, this method and this order vsed the first tung, that euer was brought to anie right in writing, by the help whereof vnder the direction of Art, all those tungs which we now call learned, ar com to that certaintie, which we se them now in, thorough precept and rule. The same help will I vse in my particular method. Which before I deall with, I must examin two principall points in our tung whereof one is, whether our tung haue Of the artifi∣ciall stuf in our tung. Of the imper∣perfections laid vnto our tung. stuf in it for art to bild on, bycause I said, that Art delt where she found matter, sufficient for hir trauell: The other is, whe∣ther our writing be iustlie chalenged for those infirmities wherewith it is charged in this our time, bycause I said that this period in our time, semeth to be the perfitest period in our English tūg, & that our custom hath alredie beaten out his own rules redie for the method, & frame of Art. Which two points ar necessarilie to be considered. For if there be either no matter for Art in extreme cōfusion: or if our custō be not yet ripe to be reduced vnto rule, then that perfit period in our tung is not yet
com, & I haue set vpon this argument, while it is yet to grene. Howbeit, I hope it will not proue to timelie, and therefor I will first shew, that there is in our tung, great and sufficient stuf for Art: then that there is no such infirmitie in our writing, as is pretended, but that our custom is grown fit to receaue this artificiall frame, and that by this method, which I haue laid down, without anie foren help, and with those rules onelie, which ar, and maie be gathered out of our own ordinarie wri∣ting. CAP. XIII. That the English tung hath in it self sufficient matter to work her own artificiall direction, for the right writing thereof. IT must nedes be that our English tung hath matter enough in hir own writing, which maie direct her own right, if it be reduced to certain precept, and rule of Art, tho it haue not as yet bene thoroughlie perceaued. The causes why it hath not as yet bene thoroughlie percea∣ued, The causes why our right writing is not yet certain. ar, the hope & despare of such, as haue either thought v∣pon it, and not dealt in it, or that haue delt in it, but not right∣lie thought vpon it. For som considering the great difficultie, which theie found to be in the writing thereof, euerie letter almost being deputed to manie, and seuerall, naie to manie and wellnigh contrarie sounds and vses, euerie word almost either wanting let∣ters, for his necessarie sound, or hauing some more then neces∣sitie 1 Despare. requireth, began to despare in the midst of such a confusio, euer to find out anie sure direction, whereon to ground Art, and to set it certain. And what if either theie did not seke, or did not know how to seke, in right form of Art, and the com∣pòsing method? But whether difficultie in the thing, or infir∣mitie in the searchers, gaue cause thereunto, the parties them selues gaue ouer the thing, as in a desperat case, and by not medling thorough despare, theie helped not the right. 2 Hope. Again som others bearing a good affection to their na∣turall tung, and resolued to burst thorough the midst of all these difficulties, which offered such resistēce, as theie misliked
the confusion, wherewith the other were afraid, so theie de∣uised a new mean, wherein theie laid their hope, to bring the thing about. Wherevpon som of them being of great place and good learning, set furth in print particular treatises of that argument, with these their new conceaued means, how we ought to write, and so to write right. But their good hope by reason of their strange mean, had the same euent, that the others despare had, by their either misconceauing the thing at first, or their diffidence at the last. Wherein the parties them selues no dout deserue some praise, and thanks to, of vs and our cun∣trie in both these extremities of hope and despare, tho theie helped not the thing, which theie went about, but in common apparence, did som what hinder it rather. For both he, that de∣spared in the end, took great pains, before diffidence caused him giue ouer to despare: and he that did hope by his own de∣uise to supply the generall wāt, was not verie idle both in brain, to deuise, and in hand to deliuer the thing, which he deuised. Which their trauell in the thing, and desire to do good, de∣serue great thanks, tho that waie which theie took, did not take effect. The causes why theie took not effect, and thereby in part The causes why som deui∣sed ortogra∣fies toke no place. did hinder the thing, by making of manie think the case more desperat then it was in dede, bycause such fellowes did so faill, were these. Their despare, which thought, that the tung was vn∣capable of anie direction, came of a wrong cause, the falt rising in dede not of the thing, which theie did cōdemn, as altogether rude and vnrulie, but of the parties them selues, who mistook their waie. For the thing it self will soon be ordered (our cu∣stom is grown so orderable) tho it require som diligence, and good consideration, in him that must find it out. But when a writer taketh a wrong principle, quite contrarie to common practis, where triall must be tuch, and practis must con∣firm the mean, which he conceaueth, is it anie maruell if the vse of a tung ouerthwart such a mean, which is not confor∣mable vnto it? Herevpon proceded the despare to hit right, by∣cause theie missed of their minde, whereas in dede theie should haue changed their minde, to haue hit vpon that right, which as it is in the thing, so will it soon be found out, if it be right∣lie
sought for. Again the others hope deceiued them to as much. For theie considered not, that whereas common reason, and common custom haue bene long dealers in seking out of their own cur∣rant, themselues wilbe councellers and will neuer yeild to anie priuat conceit, which shall seme euidentlie either to force them or to crosse them, as theie themselues do, neuer giuing anie precept, how to write right, till theie haue rated at custom, as a most pernicious enemie to truth and right, euen in that thing, where custom hath most right, if it haue right in anie. Wherefor when theie proceded on in a customarie argument, with the enemitie of him, which is Lord of the soill, was it anie wōder if theie failed of their purpos, & hindered the fin∣ding out of our right writing, which must nedes be compased by customs consent, and reasons frindship? So in the mean time, while despare deceiues the one, and hope begiles the o∣ther, the one missing his waie, the other making a fo, and both going astraie, theie both lease their labor, and let the finding out of our right in writing, by their ill led, and worse laid labor, bycause the artificiall course, in finding out such a thing, hath another currant, as I haue shewed before in the last title. Yet notwithstāding all this, it is verie manifest, that the tung it self hath matter enough in it self, to furnish out an art, & that That our tung hath in it self matter enough for Art. the same mean, which hath bene vsed in the reducing of other tungs to their right, will serue this of ours, both for generalitie of precept, and certaintie of ground, as maie be easile proued by these four arguments, the antiquitie of our tung, the peples wit, their learning, and their experience. For how can it be, but that a tung, which hath continewed manie hundred years, not onelie a tung, but one of good account, both in speche, and pen, hath growen in all that time to som finesse, and assu∣rance of it self, by so long and so generall an vse, tho it be not as yet sounded, the peple that haue vsed it, being none of the dullest, and trauelling continuallie in all exercises that con∣cern learning, in all practises that procure experience, either in peace or war, either in publike, or priuat, either at home or abrode? As for the antiquitie of our speche, whether it be measured
by the ancient Almane, whence it cummeth originallie, or e∣uē The ātiquitie of the English tung. but by the latest terms which it boroweth daielie from fo∣ren tungs, either of pure necessitie in new matters, or of mere brauerie, to garnish it self withall, it cānot be young. Onelesse the Germane himself be yoūg, which claimeth a prerogatiue for the age of his speche, of an infinit prescription: Onelesse the Latin and Greke be young, whose words we enfranchise to our own vse, tho not allwaie immediatlie from them selues, but mostwhat thorough the Italian, French, and Spanish: Onelesse other tungs, which be neither Greke nor Latin, nor anie of the forenamed, from whom we haue somwhat, as theie haue from ours, will for companie sake be content to be young, that ours maie not be old. But I am well assured, that euerie one of these, will striue for antiquitie, and rather grant it to vs, then forgo it themselues. So that if the verie newest words, which we vse do sauor of great antiquitie, and the ground of our speche be most ancient, it must nedes then folow, that our hole tung was weined long ago, as hauing all her tethe. For the account of our tung, both in pen and speche, no man will dout thereof, who is able to iudge what those thinges be, The account of the English tung. which make anie tung to be of account, which things I take to be thré, the autoritie of the peple which speak it, the matter & argument, wherein the speche dealeth, the manifold vse, for which the speche serueth. For all which thré, our tung nedeth not to giue place, to anie of her peres. First to saie somwhat for the peple, that vse the tung, the English nation hath allwaie bene of good credit, and great esti∣mation, The English peple. euer since credit and estimation by historie came on this side the Alps, which appeareth to be trew, euen by foren cronicles (not to vse our own in a case of our own) which would neuer haue said so much of the peple, if it had bene ob∣scure, and not for an historie, or not but well worthie of a per∣petuall historie. Next, for the argument, wherein it dealeth, whether priuat The matter of our speche. or publik, it maie cōpare with som other, that think verie well of their own selues. For not to tuch ordinarie affairs in comon life, will matters of learning in anie kind of argument, make a tung of account? Our nation then, I think, will hardlie be pro∣ued
to haue bene vnlearned at anie time, in anie kinde of lear∣ning, The English learning. not to vse anie bigger speche. Wherefor hauing learning by confession of all men, & vttering that learning in their own tung, for their own vse, of verie pure necessitie (bycause we learn to vse, and the vse is in our own) theie could not but enrich the tung, and purchace it account. Will matters of war, whether ciuill or foren, make a tung The English chiualrie. of account? Our neighbor nations will not deny our peple to be verie warrious, and our own cuntrie will confesse it, tho loth to fele it, both by remembring the smart, & comparing with som other, neither to vaunt our selues, nor to gall our frinds, with anie mo words. Now in offring matter to speche, war is such a bréder, as VVhat a fur∣nitur to speche war is. tho it be opposit to learning, bycause it is enemie to the Mu∣ses, yet it dare compare with anie point in learning, for mul∣titude of discourses, tho not commonlie so certain, ne yet of so good vse, as learned arguments be. For war (besides all graue and sad considerations about it, which be manie and wise) as somtime it sendeth vs trew reports, either priuatelie in proiects and deuises, that be entended, or publikelie in euents, which be blased abrode, bycause theie be don, so mostwhat it giueth out infinit and extreme, I dare not saie lies, but verie incredi∣ble newes, bycause it maie hatch them at will, being in no danger of controllment, and comonlie in such practises and places, as haue not manie witnesses, while euerie man seketh as well to saue him self, as to harm his enemie, besides som cur∣teous entertainment, which a deuising referēdarie hath euen by telling that, which is not trew, to such as loue to hear, and ei∣ther like or will like. All which occasions, and infinit mo, about stratagemes & engins, giue matter to speche, and cause of new words, and by making it so redie, do make it of renoun. Will all kindes of trade, and all sorts of traffik, make a tung of account? If the spreading sea, and the spacious land could The English traffik. vse anie speche, theie would both shew you, where, and in how manie strange places, theie haue sene our peple, and also giue you to wit, that theie deall in as much, and as great varietie of matters, as anie other peple do, whether at home or abrode. Which is the reason why our tung doth serue to so manie vses,
bycause it is conuersant with so manie peple, and so well ac∣quainted with so manie matters, in so sundrie kindes of dea∣ling. Now all this varietie of matter, and diuersitie of trade, make both matter for our speche, & mean to enlarge it. For he that is so practised, will vtter that, which he practiseth in his naturall tung, and if the strangenesse of the matter do so re∣quire, he that is to vtter, rather then he will stik in his vtte∣rance, will vse the foren term, by waie of premunition, that the cuntrie peple do call it so, and by that mean make a foren word, an English denison. All which reasons concerning but the tung, and the account thereof, being put together, as of themselues, theie proue the nations exercise in learning, and their practis in other dealings: so theie seme to infer no base witted peple, not to amplify it with more, bycause it is not for foulls to be so well learned, to be so warrious, to be so well practised. I shall not nede to proue anie of these my positions, either by foren or home hi∣storie: seing my reader stranger, will not striue with me for them, and mine own nation, will not gainsaie me in them, I think, which knoweth them to be trew, and maie vse them for their honor. Wherefor I maie well conclude my first position: that if vse and custom hauing the help of so long time, and continuance, wherein to fine our tung: of so great learning and experience, which furnish matter for the fining: offo good wits and iu∣dgements, which can tell how to fine, haue griped at nothing in all that time with all that cunning, by all those wits, which theie will not let go, but hold for most certaine, in the right of our writing: that then our tung hath no certaintie to trust to, but writeth all at randon. But the antecedent in my opi∣nion, is alltogether vnpossible, wherefor the consequent, is a great deall more then probable, which is, that our tung hath in hir own possession, and writing verie good euidence to proue hir own right writing: Which tho no man as yet, by anie publik writing of his, semeth to haue sene, yet the tung it self is redie to shew them, to anie whosoeuer, which is able to read them, and withall to iudge, what euidence is right in the right of writing. Wherefor seing I haue proued suffici∣entlie
in mine own opinion, that there is great cause, why our tung should haue som good right, in her own writing, and take my self to haue had the sight of that euidence, where∣by that same right appeareth most iustifiable, and am not alltogither ignorant, how to giue sentence thereof, I will do my best, according to that course, which I said was kept in the first, and generall fining of anie speche, which also hath bene translated to euerie secondarie, and particular tung, to set furth som certaintie for the English writing, by those notes, which I haue obserued in the tung it self, the pure best and finest therein, offering mean by comparison with them selues, both to correct, and to direct the worse and more grosse, without either innouating anie thing, as theie do, which set furth new deuises, or by mistaking my waie, as theie do, which despare, that our tung can be brought to anie certaintie, without som maruellous foren help. Thus much for the artificiall stuf in our tung, now to the obiections which charge it with infir∣mities. CAP. XIIII. An answer to som pretended imperfections in the writing of our tung. THis title tho it seme by the inscription to pretend som offence, yet is it nothing moodie at all, bycause it enten∣deth no defense, as against an enemie, but a conference, as with a frind. For those men, with whō I haue to deall therein, do wish their naturall tung, as well as I do, theie desire to se it right writen, no lesse then I do. Theie haue as good shew of iust enemitie to error, and corruption, as I haue assurance of right direction. And therefor I will rather endeuor my self to perswade them as frinds, then to confute them as foes, rather to ioyn with them in som points, then to defy them in all. The matter of this title, a∣gainst & for custom, multi∣tude of letters sound, and in∣nouation. In the hole matter of this conference with them, theie ei∣ther blame certain errors, which theie pretend to be in our writing: or else theie will seme to seke the reforming there∣of. In the blame of errors, theie rate at custom as a vile cor∣rupter,
and complain of our letters, as to miserable few. In their desire ofredresse, theie appeall to sound, as the onelie so∣uerain, and surest leader in the gouernment of writing: & fly to innouation, as the onelie mean, to reform all errors, that be in our writing. Which their particular branching, I will follow in my reply, and yet in no reply, but excuse, for the innocencie of our pen, where it is without falt, tho it be not without blame and in my plaine confession of som manifest error, where there is cause why. In their quarell to custom theie seke first to bring it into ge∣nerall The assailing of custom. hatred, as a common corrupter of all good things, and that naturallie, without anie exception, and therefor no mar∣uell if it abuse speche, which as it passeth thorough euerie mans mouth, and is resembled by euerie mans pen, so must it nedes gather much corruption by the waie, bycause manie and ill be all one in dede, tho deuided in term, as good and few, tho different in name, yet be the same in pith: And common corruption, which theie terme Custom, is an ill di∣rector to find out a right. Herevpon theie conclude, that as it semeth most probable, so it is most trew, that the chefe er∣rors, which ar crept into our pen, do take their beginning at the onelie infection of a naughtie custom. Which bycause it is naught, therefor ought it not so much as once to be named, in the direction to a right, in either pen or speche, being so manifest a falsarie, notwithstanding whatsoeuer anie either old or new writers can pretend to the contrarie, for either de∣fense or excuse thereof. Then theie descend two particularities, wherein theie proue that customarilie, we do somtime bur∣den our words to much, with to manie letters, somtimes we pinch them to near with to few, somtimes we misshape them with wrong sounding, somtime we misorder them, with wrong placing. And be not these maruellous great causes of mis∣contentment with Custom, which is the breder of them? Be∣sides all these which ar but points of penning onelie, to ag∣grauate the discredit wherewith theie charge custom, theie seke to make it odious, as an enemie to vertew, euen abu∣sing what is best. And will there anie that fauoreth vertew, protect Custom, being such a venim to all vertewes, and such
a poison to all vertewous effects? Or can there anie that frin∣deth his cuntrie conceiue well of that, which corrupteth hir pen, and poisoneth hir speche? Sure not I. For neither wold I haue vertew to hold mefor hir enemie, by defending of hir fo, nor yet my cuntrie to froun at me for fauoring hir cor∣rupters. Certainlie that custom is most vile, which doth but speak ill of good things: but to seke their corruption is a most villanous part. And to abuse speche in anie hir deliuerie whe∣ther by tung or pen, the good benefit whereof, doth serue most of our nedes, as vertew doth the best, is extreme beast∣lie. And therefor assuredlie, as those my good cuntrimen, haue most iust cause to be angrie with these corruptions: so might theie as iustlie turn their anger vpon me, if I should anie waie but so much as seme to excuse or but to extenuate so pernici∣ous a fact. Neither can anie writer, new or old, but hasard his own credit, if he do but seme to shew anie incling of fauor that waie. And yet if good writers seme to fauor custom, then the case For custom. is not so clear, as you take it to be, that there is nothing in custō, but an hell of most vile, and filthie corruptions: that it alone in∣fecteth all good things: that it alone corrupteth right writing. For if it were in dede and onelie so, theie wold not warrant it, as (now I remember my self) theie praise it verie often, and giue it great credit. Is there then not som error in the name, & maie not custom be misconstrewed? for sure the writers, when theie speak of custom, theie mean that rule in doing, and vertewous life, wherein good men agré and their consent is that, which these men term custom therein: as theie call that rule in speaking and writing the custom thereof, wherein the skilfull and best learned do agré. And is it likelie that either the honest in dede will mislead vertew in liuing, or the learned in dede will mis∣like right in writing? And again, those honest men, which al∣low of custom in matters of life, complain verie much of corrup∣tion in manners, and naughtie behauior: and the learned men, which allow of custom in matters of speche and pen, do com∣plain verie much of error in writing, and corruption in speche: and both the two, accuse the most peple as the leaders to er∣ror, and the common abuse, as the frute of a multitude. And
therefor it cannot otherwise be, but that the duble name is that, which deceiues. For theie, which accuse custō do mean false er∣ror, which counterfeateth custom, and is a great captain among the impudent for naughtinesse, and the ignorant for rashnesse, and yet directeth all the most. And theie that praise custom do mean plain truth, which cannot dissemble, which is companion with the honest in vertew, and with the learned in cunning, and directeth all the best. And will ye se? This mistermed cu∣stom in the pen, is that counterfeat abuse, which was the onelie cause, why sounds monarchie, whereof I spake before, was so dissolued, and was it self condemned, by those wise peple, which ioyned reason with sound: and the right custom which writers commend so, is that companion of reason, which succeded in place, when the counterfeat was cast out. Now ye se the error. So neither writers do allow of such a corruption, neither is custom your contrarie, but both writers, and custom, both you, and I will scratch out the eies of common error, for misusing of good things, and belying of custom. If good things be abu∣sed it is by ill peple, whose misnamed custom is right named error, and well blamed lewdnesse. If words be ouercharged with number of letters, that coms either by couetousnesse in such, as sell them by lines, or by ignorance in such, as besides the pestering them with to manie, do both weaken them with to few, and wrong them with the change, both of force and place, whose error as I mone, so I will'seke to amend it, and while I amend it, I will cōfute by correcting, and heall by com paring, that euerie one beholding the redresse, where he finds the falt, maie be able to iudge both of right, and wrong, by con∣ferring of contraries. Thus I take it my good cuntrimen, that you be deceiued in the name, and blame one for another. For custom certainlie in a matter of speche, is a great and a naturall gouernour, tho in other things it maie somtimes seme to be a sore vsurper. And yet good autors will hardlie graunt that, which still frè custom from all offensiue note, both in words and dedes, bycause theie ground custom not vpon error in deprauation at the last: but vpon iudgement, in direction from the first. And theie which entreat custom so hardlie, entertain it so, vnder an vnproper name, as vnworthie to be heard speak
in the right of writing, seing it semes to be the onelie occasion of all corruption therein, as theie surmise, taking custom to be grounded vpon the common confusion in practis of the most, and least iudiciall peple, which is mother to all wrong opi∣nions, concerning anie iudgement of right. Wherein theie nei∣ther mark that the ignorant multitude is not held for mis∣tresse, of that right and reasonable custom, which is the naturall custom, and which theie of the contrarie side do follow, as the best gide in right writing: neither yet consider theie, that their aduersaries, whom theie oppugn so, do confesse som errors in the ordinarie penning, proceding of that corruption, which theie wrongfullie term custom, which errors theie also seke to haue cut of, as the idle clogging of words with nedelesse letters, and such other ordinarie errors, which rise most of to much, by not knowing, what is right. Which errors I will handle there, where I amend them streight, as I will tuch custom somwhat more, when I com to that place, where theie appeal vnto sound from both reason and custom. When theie haue delt thus with custom, and their contra∣ries Against the in sufficiencie of our letters both for vse & for nūber. (which theie make contraries, by mistaking, being their frinds in dede) without marking their reasons, or by whose au∣toritie custom is established, which theie so impugn by sug∣gestion of a counterfeat, then theie begin to complain sore of the insufficiencie, and pouertie of our letters, which letters tho theie be as manie in number, as other tungs haue, yet theie suffise not, saie theie, for the full and right expressing of our sounds, tho theie expresse them after a sort, but enforce vs to vse a number of them like the Delphik sword, where of Ari∣stotle speaketh, to manie sounds and seruices contrarie to the natur of such an instrument, which was made at the first, this letter for that sound. Whereby it commeth to passe, that we both write vnproperlie, not answering the sound of that, which we saie, and ar neuer like our selues, in anie our writing, but still varie according vnto the writers humor, without anie certain direction. Whereupon forenners and strangers do wonder at vs, both for the vncertaintie in our writing, and the inconstancie in our letters. And is it not a great shame that so cunning a nation as the English
is, being of verie good note so manie yeares, either should espy, or wold not amend in all this time, the pouertie of their pen, and the confusion in their letter? but both to let their writing run thus still at riot, and them selues to be mokt at of foren peple? If foren peple do maruell at vs, we maie requite them with For the suffi∣ciencie of our letters. as much, and return their wonder home, considering theie themselues be subiect to the verie same difficulties, which theie wonder at in vs, and haue no mo letters then we haue, and yet both write still, and be vnderstood still, in the midst and in the spite of all these insufficiencies: as we also both write and be vnderstood, in this our insufficiencie, euen by their confession, which will nedes be offended, bycause of insufficiencie. But the common vse of writing among those strangers, which agre∣eth so with ours in our most vncertaintie, giues me to think, that this complaining of insufficiencie is not generall to all neither wth them nor with vs, but proper to som few, and par∣ticular among both, who misliking that theie know not, and not marking that theie cānot, therefor blame that theie should not. For if their blaming vpon cause, and marking vpon iudge∣ment did concur with their number, tho not so great, I should be afraid least theie had the better, bycause the fewer: but both the fewer and the weaker to, carie no great force, to condemn in iudgement. As other folks also, which se somwhat to, as well as theie, do not quite mislike of all their misliking, but desire som redresse, where there is cause in dede, tho theie agré not in the mean, how to perform the redresse, nor yet in the quātitie, that the error is so great, as these insufficienciaries pretend it to be. For we do confesse that this multiplicitie, & manifold vse in the force and seruice of our letters, wold haue som distinction, whereby to be known, if generall acquaintance with our own writing be not sufficient enough, to perceiue that in vse, which we put down by vse: but withall we defend and maintain the multiplicitie it self, as a thing much vsed euen in the best tungs, and therefor not vnlawfull, tho there were no distinction. And again, we do not think, that euerie our custom is a plaine corruption, wherein generall vse, euen of those same persons, which cannot be suspected, but to write with good iudgement,
laie the ground to precept, as the leader to som art, & assurāce to the pen. And we rest content with the number of our letters. Which number, while som kinde of peple do studie to encrease, theie do but cumber our tung, both with strange characts, & with nedelesse dipthongs, enforcing vs from that, which gene∣rall rule hath won, and resteth content with, in all the world. And why not but these letters? or why not to manie vses? This VVhy mo let∣ters? paucitie and pouertie of letters, hath contented and discharged the best, & brauest tungs, that either be, haue bene, shalbe, or cā be, & hath deliuered by thē▪ both in speche & pen, as great varie tie, and as much difficultie in all arguments, and as well percei∣ued of all posteritie thorough their means, as possiblie can, ei∣ther be deliuered, or be vnderstood, by the English tung, or yet be deuised by anie English wit. The peple that now vse thē, & theie that haue vsed them, haue naturallie the same instruments of voice, and the same deliuerie in sound, for all their speaking, that we English men haue, by cause theie be men, as we En glish folk be: and theie sent the vse of the pen to vs, and not we to them. And finding in their own vse this necessitie, which you do note, theie fled to that help which you think naught, and were bold with their letters, to make them serue diuerse turns, somtime with none, somtime with som pretie small note of euident distinction. Which kinde of distinguishing theie know to be verie trew, whosoeuer be acquainted with the fo∣ren letters, and with those writers which entreat of them, as I my self will shew, when I both mark, and amend at once, tho I deall no further in this place, to auoid repetition, both here & there. Neither is there anie difficultie, which theie ar not subiect vnto, either in the same, or in the verie like things, as wel as we: as I will proue elswhere, euen by comparing the particulars, so far and so manie, as nede shall require. And will strangers won∣der at vs? or do not our own peple that be learned perceiue these things? For in the ignorant I require no such discretion. Surelie I think that all peple hauing the same naturall instru∣ments to speak by, tho vpon priuat vse som harp more of som sounds then others, and som lean more vpon som one instrument of speche, then other do, as som the throte, som the tethe, and so furth, which varietie is popular euen to hole
nations, that yet naturallie all be made able, to sound all spe∣ches and all letters, if theie be accustomed vnto them, in that age and with those means, when and whereby theie be best to be learned: And that it is onelie education, and custom which maketh the difference, and therefor ruleth either all or most in speche, wherein if there be anie reason, it is not naturall and sim∣ple, as in things, but artificiall & compound as in speche, vpon such and such a cause in custom and consent. And tho the He∣brew grammarians onelie, do deuide their letters, according to that vocall instrument whereupon theie lean most, as som vpon the throte, som vpō the rouf of the mouth, som vpon the tung, som vpon the lips, som vpon the tethe: yet the Hebrewes alone haue not that distinction in natur, but euerie peple also which haue throte, tethe, rouf, tung, lips, and with those instruments vse the vtterance of sounds. Which is an argument to me, both that vse is the mistresse herein, and that he, which soundeth vpō anie one by cuntrie vse, maie be smoothed to som other by the contrarie vse, and that therefor the same letters will serue all peple, if theie list to frame themselues accordinglie. For other∣wise why do we persuade our peple to sound Latin thus, Greke thus, Hebrew thus, Italian thus, if it be not a thing to be made of acquaintance, by customarie vse? And being so, and in all nations so, what nede we mo letters to vtter our minde? se∣ing the vttering instruments be all one, and nothing can be vttered either for varietie more diuerse, or for difficultie more hard, then theie haue vttered, from whom we haue those let∣ters which we haue? neither is it anie discredit to our peple to rest content with those letters, and with that number, which antiquitie hath allowed, and held for sufficient. Is natur therefor baren in vs, which was frutefull in them, bycause we maie not inuent, and put somwhat to theirs? No forsoth. But all mankinde is but one, without anie respect of either this age, or that age, both to natur hir self, and to the God & Lord of natur, and therefor what is giuen to one man, or deliuered in one age of common seruice, that is ment to all men, & to all ages of mē, without further regard to whom, or for whom, but still to their benefit: neither is either God himself or natur his minister tyed to anie time, for deliuerie of their gifts, but when∣soeuer
mans necessitie compells him to seke, then theie help him to find. Whereupon we vnderstād, that as no one age brin∣geth furth euerie thing, so no one age can but confesse, that it hath som one or other particular inuention, tho not the self same, bycause it is enough to haue receiued it once to vse euer after. As in this case of letters, which perfited once, is neuer to be shaken, onelesse a better mean be found to vtter our speche, which I shall not se, neither can I forese by anie secret prophe∣cie. In these inuentions, tho the first receiuer haue the preroga∣tiue in taking, yet the hole posteritie hath the benefit in vsing, and generallie with greater perfection, bycause time and con∣tinewance do encrease and proin, which when it is full, it is a falt to seke further, as I take it to be in the course of penning. Neither is the restraint, for either innouating, altering, or ad∣ding to things allredie perfited, anie discourtisie in reason, or a∣nie discountenance in natur, but a bare deliuerie of a perfit thing to our elder brethern, to be conueied vnto vs: as we in like case, as the transporters to our posteritie, of such things as it pleaseth God to continew by our means, whether receiued of our elders, or deuised by our selues. But why maie we not vse all our four and twentie letters, e∣uen VVhy not eue∣rie letter to manie vses? to four and twentie vses euerie of them, if occasion serue, seing the characts being known be more familiar, and easier to be discerned, then anie new deuise, yea tho the old resemble mo, and the new do note but one? It hath bene sufficientlie declared allreadie, that those men, which first deuised letters, reserued the authoritie ouer them and their vse to them selues for life, and their successors, for euer, so to qualify and to vse them, as it should please them best vpon consent among them∣selues, and cause to content nede. And why not so, where both the inuention is their own, and the right vse thereof, as theie shall vse it, which made it for their vse? This generall reser∣uation is enrold allredie in all reason and antiquitie, and the particular consent for this writing of ours is proined al∣lredie, by our generall vse, and wilbe regestred also in ve∣rie good record, I hope, and that shortelie. And will you make that souerain, which is but subaltern? or will you take that, as not remoueable, like a steddie rok, which is roming by
natur, and to serue the finder? There is no such assurance in sound for the stablishing of a right, as you do conceiue, nei∣ther such necessitie in letters, to be constant in one vse, as you seke to enforce. The philosopher saith, that natur makes one thing to one vse, 1. and that euerie vse hath his particular instrument naturallie, but that our own inuentions, naie that euen the most naturall means in our application do, and maie serue to sundrie ends & vses. And will letters stand so vpon their reputation, as not to seme to stand to our applying of thē, for our own purposes, be∣ing both our creaturs, & by creation our bondmē? both to soūd and serue, as we shall think it good, and so manie waies, as we shall will them to serue? No surelie, theie do not think so, but theie ar most redie to serue at our appointment, both by crea∣tion, & by couenāt. The letters yeild redilie, but som letters seke to hinder that their dewtifull obediēce, threaping still vpon thē, that their substance is diamantish, and not born to yeild so. With the same pen we make letters, and with the same we mar them: with the same we direct, and with the same we dash: 3. which be contrarie vses, tho to compas one right, and will let∣ters seme to serue but for one vse, being pewnies to the pen, naie being but elues and brats of the pens breding? Theie will not so, but proue their own dewtifulnesse, to the pen their pa∣rent, by following his direction in verie manie points, as theie yeild to reason and reasonable custom in manie of their forces, whereby theie seme to praie som bodie not to contend, where themselues be content. The number of things, whereof we write and speak is infi∣nite, 2. the words wherewith we write and speak, be definite and within number. Whereupon we ar driuen to vse one, and the same word in verie manie, naie somtime in verie contrarie sen∣ses, and that in all the verie best lāguages, as well as in English, where a number of our words be of verie sundrie powers, as, letters, wherewith we write, & letters which hinder: A bird fli∣eth light, wheresoeuer she doth light: and to manie to stand on here. And will letters kepe a countenance and stand so alouf, as to sound still but one, and to serue still but one, where their great grandfathers euen the words themselues, ar forced to be
manifold? naie ar verie well content so to be, bycause of their founders statute? which is to be pliable, and at voluntarie com∣mandement, of wisdom and learning? letters stand not alouf, but allow of the seruice, whereunto you allot thē, be it neuer so manifold, seing without either cōfusiō or darknesse, customarie acquaintāce will work the distinctiō in them, & their manifold∣nesse: as a beaten disputer will sift out the difference of mani∣fold words, that the varietie of their sense, make no quarell in the question. If we write not allwaie one, thorough want of skill, & mere ignorance, then knowledge is the helper, and he that will vse right, must haue desire to learn right. If there want distinction, then accent must be mean to auoid confusion, or som such deuise, which maie distinguish with praise, and not pester the writing, with anie to od strangenesse. For it is most certain, that we maie vse our letters so, as we maie all other things else, whose end is in vse, and man is the mea∣sur. Neither is it anie abuse, when theie which vse, can giue a reason why, sufficient to the wise, and not contrarie to good custom. And tho som reply, as not so perswaded, yet when the act is past by diuision of the house, it is law by parlement. Then the repliers must relent, and follow, tho theie fauor not. Then must theie make the best of that, which theie thought worst, when as lawfull autoritie hath restrained their will. A thing fré before order being once limited by order hath cast of that fré∣dom, and must then kepe that currant, wherevnto it is limited, by orderlie mean, it self being such, as is subiect vnto man, and to be his at vse. Our letters be limited, their vsage is certain in their most vn∣certaintie, and therefor I take it, that we maie rest content both with their number and their vse. Thus much concerning that complaint of our pouertie in letters, and confusion in their powers, which I wōder not at, bycause I se it so in all tungs, & euer: & I se no cause why, but it maie be so in our own inuenti∣ōs & deuises, where we are to take knowledge of nothing else, but of our own consent, both by best iudgemets of the wisest men, and the right resemblance of least corrupt natur. For the auto∣ritie of sound When theie haue thus vttered their stomak against poor
niknamed custom, which is sore abused, both by them for bla∣ming it vndeseruedlie, and by corruption to, for counterfaiting it shamefullie: when theie haue moned our writing for much insufficiencie and bewailed our speaking for pouertie of let∣ters, then like good physicians, and tender harted cuntriemen, theie seke both to satisfie iustice in dewtie, and Art in help. As theie find a wrong, so theie seke to right it, as theie mark a sore, so theie mean to salue it. But who shall be the iusticiarie like som one Rhadamanthus, to pronounce sentence in this right? or who the physician like som graue Hippocrates, to o∣uersé this cure? forsooth sound, for whose vse letters were de∣uised first, when there were yet none, and by whose ear theie ar now to be reclamed, being corrupt and naught. And why not? Or if these that we haue will not serue sounds turn, why maie we not inuent or deuise mo, considering our want is no wonder? For we came but latelie to vse letters, in comparison of the old peple in other nations of the main continent, & felt not our want at the first wearing: but now that we fele it, why maie we not help our selues, with the deuise of som new let∣ters, as other peple did in the like cases by som Esdras, som Pa∣lamedes, som Cadmus, som Euander, som Carmenta, and such other? Custom is condemned allredie, as a false corrupter, and sound semes to be the surest, and the best gide euen by naturall direction, and the primitiue letter. And not so much as but e∣uen Quintilian that great writing, and speaking master wisheth sound to be obserued, as the surest teacher to write right, and not custom. And what a monstruous iniurie were it, to renounce the naturall Lord, and to becom subiect to a vile vsurper? To leaue sound the right master, and to cleaue to custom the right marrer? Sure the verie name of a naturall Lord is honorable, and the bare sound of vsurpation is extreme odious to anie ho∣nest ear: And right sound, as a right souerain were to be obeied, and corrupt custom, as an vniust intruder were to be expelled. But doth Quintilian plead for sound against custom I praie Against the autoritie of sound. Inst. 1. you? Sure either you be merie men, or my memorie faills me much. For Quintilian defineth custom verie solemnlie, and v∣pon great deliberation, as I remember, to be in writing and speaking, the consent of the skilfull, as in vertuous life, the con∣sent
of the honest. Of the which two kindes of peple, as nei∣ther be corrupters in dede: so either wold be angrie to be ac∣counted so in speche. Theie do both condemn all error and corruption. And Quintilian speaking of sound, saieth expres∣slie, and in plaine terms, that euerie thing is to be writen, not as the sound giues, but as custom hath won (which custom di∣recteth not sound, but the expressing of sounds) and he brin∣geth in for example, Caius Caesar, Cneius Pompeius, in whose forenames the eie beholdeth C, but the ear heareth G. which the Grekes vsing those names translate still by G. and the same he proueth also by manie mo the like. As why not so? To win Quintilian, naie to wring Quintilian to stand for sound a∣gainst custom, by falsifying of euidence & corruption of print, where both his examples trewlie printed, and his hole mea∣ning planelie printed, and his generall circumstances neuer but right printed bewraie his right opinion, argeweth som infirmi∣tie in the alledger, who will not sé what is ment euerie where about him, or cannot sé at all how to chek a false print, either by councell of cunning, if he haue it him self, or by comparing of prints, where the trewer maie be had. Naie saithnot Quinti∣lian Quintil. lib. 1. cap. 7. thus of ortografie in generall, that it is seruant to custom, and therefor is so oft changed? As for the autoritie, which sound alone had in the prouince of writing, and the vse of the letter, the date thereof is out long ago. Reason and right custom be ioyned vnto him in the same commission. Besides that, Art hath limited and bounded his regiment sence that time. Much he can do still, but not so much, as all, neither anie thing so much, as he could once haue done. But this argument, concerning the dissolution of sounds go∣uernment, hath bene allredie handled in the 12. title of this book. Quintilians custom is no corrupter, neither yet is sound but a naturall Lord, tho nothing so absolut, ne yet so imperiall, as you conceiue of him, and tho the letters were first deui∣sed for him, yet both the letters, and euen sound himself, must be ruled by them, which both sound letters, and vtter sounds. If nede be, the encrease of our number is not denied vs as
not to other peple, but the nede is denyed, bycause we entred vpon other peples most perfit inuentions, and tho later in time, yet so much the surer, bycause all things necessarie were deui∣sed to our hands: and bycause our nede can be no new nede. Whatsoeuer we nede to write, we are able to write it, & when we haue writ it, we ar able to read it. If there be anie falt, the remedie must be, not to seke that, which we haue not, but to mark that, which we haue, seing we haue all sufficient. The credit of sound being well established in their opinion, The mean to redresse all these defects in som mens opinion. as the naturall lord, and the leader to all our letters, and custom being condemned, as a cankard traitor, intruding against all right, vpon the territorie of sound, then theie turn to the cure of this diseased corruption, & praie Hipoorates to be iudge. To amēd that which is amisse in the writing of our tūg, their groūd work being laid in the shaken monarchie of the deposed sound, theie procede on in a full course of generall innouation, tho som more, som lesse. First theie encrease the number of our letters and diphthongs, as if it were not possible either hereto∣fore to haue writen, or at this daie to write anie word right, for want of som encrease in the number of our letters. For as the ouercharging of our words with to manie letters cum∣meth by vsing those to much, which we haue allredie: so the difficultie thereof by vsing them so diuerslie procedeth of mere want, not hauing wherewith to answer ech particular. Then theie change the form of our letters, and bring vs in new faces, of verie strange lineaments, how well fauored to be∣hold, I am sure I know: how vnredie for a penmā, wherewith to run, methink I forese. Which redinesse in the charact, that it follow the hand roundlie, is a speciall seruice belonging to the pen. Neither do I my self in these obseruations, so much re∣gard, what the print will stamp well, which will expresse anie thing well, whose form is reseblable, as what the pen will write well, and that with good dispatch, bycause printing is but a pe∣culiar, and a benefit impropriate: writing is our generall, and in euerie mans finger. A form that is fair to the eie in print, & cum∣bersom to the hand in penning, is not to passe in writing. For what but that causeth our English pen to vse z. so seldom, which we hear fo often? Bussing, hussie, dissie, go roundlie to the
pen with the duble ss, but verie vnredilie with the duble z, Buz∣zing, huzzie, dizzie. Vse hath won ss. & the pens redinesse, is the prouf to perswade it. To cōclude, this saie theie is the onelie help to amend all misses: for defect, to enlarge: for old & corrupt, to bring in new & correct: nede enforceth redresse, & dewtie thē. Sure a good care, and a cuntriemanlike affection, but me∣think Hippocrates, which was ouerséer, allowes not the re∣ceit. That this their mean is not the best. For what? must we then alter all our writings a new? or from what daie is this act of reformation to take full place? It is a strange point of physik, when the remedie it self is more dangerous then the disease. Besides that: I take this alteration in this sort, to be neither necessarie, where no such insufficien∣cie is, neither yet commodious, where such inconueniences fol∣low. For speche being an instrument, and a mean to vtter that, which the minde cōceiueth, if by the deliuerie of the mouth, the minde be vnderstood, the speche is sufficiēt, which so fullie an∣swereth so nedefull a purpos. If writing, where vnder I cōpre∣hend both the print & pen, do so fullie expresse the pith of the voice, as the reader maie, & doth vnderstād the writers meaning at full thereby, I maie not perswade him, that the letters which he readeth be not sufficient to expresse the writers meaning, which he is redie to confute by present triall, that both he vn∣derstandeth them, and withall most sufficientlie. But these insufficienciaries will saie, that this vnderstanding cums not by the right of the writing, but by the intelligent rea∣der, which vnderstāds that right, by the so vsuall, tho so corrupt writing, which is vnperfitlie, and vnproperlie writen: and that the proprietie in penning is ill refused, which maie be had easilie with verie small straning. I like the reason well, as I consesse som imperfection. But neither is the imperfection so great, as theie conceiue of it, nei∣ther is their reason so nere to redresse, as theie think it is. As for the imperfection, how it cummeth, and which waie to help it, my hole labor will proue that in euent. For their reason I can∣not sé that, which theie call a small straning bycause theie alter quite, or at the least, theie change the surface quite, which in this case, where the proprietie in writing is the possession of cu∣stom being so grounded as I haue allredie declared, is to great a
straning, chefelie, where custom being so sure and sound, will not be cōtent to be ouerruled in his own: or that anie reforma∣tiō shall ēter clame, where he is proprietarie, howsoeuer priuat mens conceits, vpon neuer so probable apparences, framed in their own opinion, shall offer assistence to the contrarie side. The vse & custom of our cuntrie, hath allredie chosen a kinde of penning, wherein she hath set down hir relligion, hir lawes, hir priuat and publik dealings: Euerie priuat man according to the allowance of his cuntrie in generall, hath so drawn his priuat writings, his euidence, his letters, as the thing sémeth vnpossible to be remoued by anie so strange an alteration, tho it be most willing to receiue som reasonable proining, so that the substance maie remain, and the change take place in such points onelie, as maie please without noueltie, and profit with∣out forcing For were it not in good sooth, to violent a force, to offer to ouerthrow a custom, so generallie receiued, so particu∣larlie setled, naie grounded so soundlie, and sure, as it shall ap∣pear shortlie, with altering either all, or most of our letters? Were it not an argument of a verie simple orator, to think that he could perswade custom, by so strange an innouation, to di∣uorse himself from so long, and so lawfull a match? Naie were it not a wonderfull wish, euen but to wish that all our English scriptur & diuinitie, all our lawes and pollicie, all our euidence & writings, were pēd anew, bycause we haue not that set down in writing, which our elders did wish vs, but either more, which theie ment not, or lesse, which we wold not, or not so as both theie mēt, & we wold? all this cūming of the insufficiēcie of our writing, which is not able, to set that faithfullie & fullie down, which the minde cōceiueth, but either wt the more, or the lesse, or disagréing in the maner? But theie willsaie that theie mean not anie so main a chāge. But theie must nedes mean it, bycause it must either presentlie follow vpon the admitting of this new alteration, which is to main in sense, or within som years, which is to main in thought. For a new writing cūming in vnder hād, & the old charact growing outof knowledge, all that euidence in whatsoeuer English kind, must nedes either com ouer to the new fashion, or be subiect to the frūp, & remain wormeatē like an old relik, & so to be red, as the Romain religion, writē vnder Numa Pōpilius was by thē of Tullies time, whē euerie word was
so vncouth & strāge, as if it had cum frō som other world, then where it was pēned. But am I not in hād with a nédlesse trauell, not allowing that, which I nede not fear, bycause there is no dāger in it, the verie vse of our cūtrie refusing it allredie? I grant I am. But yet I must saie somwhat, not to seme to contemn: as if I saie nothing, the contrarie then maie seme to haue said som thing. But sure I take the thing to be to to combersom, and in∣conuenient, tho it were like to be profitable, but where no like liehood of anie profit at all doth appear in sight, & the change it self semeth, neither necessarie as to the better, neither volun∣tarie, as to the readier, which be two principall respects in wri∣ting, I allow not the mean, tho I mislike not the men, which deserue great thanks for their great good will, tho their works take no place. For their labor is verie profitable to help som re∣dresse forward, tho themselues hit it not. For while diuerse men attempt to laie the thing in certain, som one or other will hit it at the last, whereas to the contrarie, the case were desperat, if it were neuer delt in. But this amendment of theirs is to far fet, and without the help thereof we vnderstand our print and pen, our euidence and other writing, in what kinde soeuer. And tho we grant som imperfection, as in a tung not yet rakt from hir trubled lées, yet we do not confesse, that it is to be perfited either by altering the form, or by ēcreasing the nūber of our ac∣quainted letters, but onelie by obseruing, where the tūg of her self, & hir ordinarie custom doth yeild to the fining, as the old, & therefor the best method doth lead vs. For it is no argument, whē falts be found, to saie this is the help & onelie this, bycause none other is in sight. But whēsoeuer the right is foūd by order∣lie séking, thē the argumēt is trew, that it was not thoroughlie sought, whē it was denied to be. And to speak indifferētlie be twen the letter & the soūd, of the one side, & custō & the letter, of the other side: letters cā expresse soūds withall their ioynts & properties, no fuller then the pēcill cā the form & lineamēts of the face, whose praise is not life but likenesse: as the letters yeld not alwaie the same, which soūd exactlie requireth, but allwaie the nearest, wherwith custom is cōtent. And therefor if a letter soūd not iūp as ye wish, yet hold it as the next, least if you chāge you cum not so near. And tho one letter be vsed in diuerse
naie, in cōtrarie sounds: or soundish effects, ye cānot auoid it by anie change that wilbe liked, séing no one else hath bene liked hitherto, but this which we vse, which custom doth allow in ours by continuance, and consent in other tungs confirmeth by allowance. Certainlie by so much as I haue obserued, I think we ar as well appointed for our necessities that waie, and as much bound to our generall custom, for the artificiall notes of our naturall tung, as anie other peple is, to anie other lāguage, whether ancient in books, or modern in speche. And whatsoe∣uer insufficiencie sémeth to be in the writing thereof, it will ex∣cuse it self, and laie the hole falt vpon the insufficient obseruer, for not séking the right in it, by a right waie, which will ap∣pear to be trew, when it shalbe sene, that by sufficient obser∣uation it maie be set clear, and pure, without anie foren help, of either altering the form, or encreasing the number of our ordinarie letters, but onelie by bare notes of hir own bréding, which being allredie in vse desire nothing else, but som di∣rection by Art, which I am in good hope to perform, accor∣ding to the plat of the best refiners, in the most refined tungs, with such consideration, as either brédeth anie generall rules, or else must bear with particular exceptions. I will mark what our customarie writing will yield vnto vs by waie of note, without dreaming of change, which change is a thing not pos∣sible to passe against so violent a fall, as custom runs with, tho that violence it self offer no kinde of wrong to anie other thing, being altogether full of hir own stream. I will there∣for do my best to confirm our custom in his own right, which will be easilie obtained, where men be acquainted with the matter allredie, and wold be verie glad to se wherein the right of their writing standeth, and a great deall more glad to find it so near, when theie sought it, and thought it to be further of. Thus haue I run thorough these pretended infirmities in our tung, whose physiking I like not this waie, and therefor I will ioyn close with mine own obseruation, to sé if that will help. CAP. XV. VVhat right in writing is, and of what force consent is in vo∣luntarie inuentions.
BY cause I pretend the finding out of a right in writing, and withall confesse that that right must bild vpon consent, I will therefor shew first, what a thing that is, which we call right both in speche and pen: then what force consent is of, to establish anie thing, where manie voices ar nedefull. Theodor Gaza, a great learned Greciā defineth that to be right in speche, . for euerie part & accident thereof, which is commonlie vsed in that kinde, and euer lightlie so, naie neuer lightlie but so, and allwaie the surest, and of the best warrant, notwithstanding particular exceptions, and priuate notes. For speche being our instrumēt at will, for our cōmon dealings, why should not that be the right therein, which is of commonest note, and best vn∣derstood? which kinde of common notice, who so euer he be, that shall follow in the right of his writing, besides the truth of the thing, confirmed by custom, and the autoritie of custom confirmed by consent, he maketh for him self a great partie, & by writing as the generalitie doth, he gaineth the generalitie to be of his side, which is redie to allow of their own choice, & vsuallie loue, where theie find them felues liked, hauing autori∣tie to establish both their own assurance, and the writers dire∣ction. Opposition to the common vpon fauor to the priuat, as The force of common vse preferring priuat fantfie before generall vse, or as if you alone had espyed, where all else be deceiued, assureth you of two things, the one, to be generallie misliked for our particular choice, where the generalitie is chefe: the other, neuer to be fol∣lowed for bewraing such a fantsie, which is alredie and altogi∣ther out of grace with the common. For why? when the custom of your cuntrie alloweth this as best, and therefor fittest for hir perpetuall seruice, doth she not then tell you, by seuering hir own generall, that she saw your speciall? For how could choice haue taken place, if both the extremities had not bene in sight? Therefor he calleth his own credit into som question, which ta∣keth his cūtrie to be blind, where both the matter of hir choice, and the maner of hir speche declaring hir choice most euident∣lie shew, that she séith what she saith. I know som men which haue contraried all our latin gram∣mer rules, as not so generallie trew that waie, which theie ar vsed, but euen as trew of the contrarie side, by cause theie haue
som examples in the tung, repugnant as theie think to the rules, which be giuen. Whose error is in that theie do not cōsider, that our commonlie so, and not their allwaie so, is right in such cases: and that such wise men, as gathered the rules, when theie pikt the finenest did laie out a drosse, and that he which resteth vp∣on the most and best, by comparison confesseth a lesse and a worse. Such peple dream that other men se not when them∣selues be aslepe, & by not comparing themselues with other, o∣uerwene their own abilities. But vpon this right most com∣monlie so, where choice hath found reason to ioyn withall in companie, must both speche be grounded, and their interest ex∣amined, which will ouerrule speche by their to much priuat reason. For he that pretendeth a falt against anie tung, & amē∣deth not that falt, but deuiseth a new right, of his own concei∣uing, helpeth not the old falt, but by tendering a new mean, of∣fereth more matter to the finding of new falts, while men will rather be content to embrase their old, with all knowen falts, then to ventur vpon a new, theie know not how good. I shall not nede to vse anie learned mās testimonie or name more thē Gaza alone, to proue that this most commonlie so, is the onelie right in writing and speaking, and what a great commā∣der custom is in it, by cause euerie where theie write nothing else concerning custom, when theie deall with him in this kinde, but of that his dominion ouer speche, and pen. And theie that be learned know, that all such, as deall in speche, whether pithilie with logik, or plausiblie with rhethorik, or purelie with grāmer, do laie it down in plain terms of vse and custom, that for speche and pen, the rule and resolution thereof goeth still so, as vse best alloweth, & as custom most commandeth, whose choice lyes in that which is commonlie so, vpō best shew & sharpest cause. The vnlearned also in their dailie experience, maie well perceiue, that the thing is so by the liking and misliking, by the ri∣sing and decaing of sundrie words, and phrases of speche, in their ordinarie dealings, as either youth, and fresh cause pre ferreth the new, and as age and ouerwearing displaceth the old. So that who so will enforce the contrarie to that, which custom and vse do take to protection, as practised by the most, and not disproued by the best, which is the reason of my
plat in fining of speche euen from the verie first, shall not possibile preuail, as maie be well perceiued by manie fair attempts, which can find no entrie, where theie haue attemp∣ted all. As for consent this I haue to saie, that it did both beget let∣ters Consent. and gaue them their forces, at the verie first, to expresse the sound of the articulate voice, and that from time to time it hath so altered, and vsed them vpon nedefull cause, by lawfull autoritie of it self, confirming it self, as theie haue followed that course, which consent hath commanded, and good reason why? For mens nede being the onelie cause, why theie fly to new deuises, whereby to supply that nede: if theie thēselues do confesse their own nede to be supplyed by such a mean, as theie haue found out, will you seke further prouf thereof, then their own confession, which both found the want, and fele the help? And if vpon som longer, and therefor better trauell, theie do find that the thing, which theie liked on at the first exceding∣lie well, while the misliking of their want persuaded the well liking of anie thing at all, which serued for supply, must af∣terward be qualifyed much otherwise, then it was at the first, to be so made proper to all performances, which their nede requireth, will ye not beleue them in that, which theie both find and fele? whether you do or no, the truth will, and pronounceth peremptorilie that custom doth, and must rule in all such cases, where manie ar to practis a thing, of their own procurement, but most of all there, where theie haue practised allredie, and ar most willing to continew in that, the which theie haue practised, as in this our writing. Where∣for it shall please my good cuntrimen to giue their con∣sent, that this is their right in writing, without further parle∣menting, it will proue so in dede. And why it should be so I will alledge verie fair, and yet nothing else, but that, which euen theie themselues vse in their dailie writing: wherein as theie maie be iudges of the matter vpon familiaritie with it: so will I frame the mean to ascertain the matter, according vnto the president of all the best tungs.
Cap. XVI. The seuen means to find out, and ascertain the right writing of English. IT hath bene not onelie said, but also proued allredie, and Cap. 12. that in euerie particular branch thereof, how the first mean, which was vsed for the fining of the first tung, and was after∣ward transported to the fining of other, to work the same effect in them by following the same president, did procede in wor∣king by these degres. First the sound alone did rule the pen, by∣cause 1. Sound. the letters were first deuised, onelie to resemble, and ex∣presse the sound by their aspectable figur. But verie manie inconueniences did follow while that sound alone did commād the pen, bycause of the differēce in the instrumēts of our voice, wherewith we soūd: bycause of the finenesse or grossenesse of the ear, wherewith we receiue sounds: bycause of the iudgemēt The inconue∣niences of ru∣ling the pen by the sound alone. or ignorāce in the partie, which is to pronounce, of the right or wrong expressing of the sound. For the auoiding whereof, the peple, which found these inconueniēces, and the causes why, to be in the imperfection of their gide, while sound alone was the 2. Reason, Custō, Sound. Reasons office in the pen. Customs office in the pen. How alterable anie vnwriten truth is, caried onelie in the heads of ordi∣narie & com∣mon vse. leader in writing, ioyned reason and custom in commission with sound: Reason to obserue where the sternnesse of sound were to be followed, and where to be qualified, bycause letters resem∣ble the ioynts in sound, but ar not the same with the things re∣sembled: Custom to confirm that by experiēce in the pen, which reason doth obserue, and note in the sound. But all these thrè the proprietie of sound, the qualifying of reason, the experi∣menting of custom, consisting as yet in the bare vnrecorded, and vnwriten vse, wherein euerie mans brain was euerie mās book, and euerie priuat conceit a particular print, diuerse and great corruptions began to encroche again, against both reason and 3. Art the esta∣blisher of rea∣son, custom, & soūd in speche custom, to restore sound to his first monarchie, & to force custom against the common currant. Which attempts of error and mis∣use (for these two be sounds principal frinds, in the maintenance of his vnlawfull autoritie) reason and custom vpon great causes did mightilie withstand, and praied help of Art, as an autorised notarie, to write all those things down in precept and method, wherein sound, reason, and custom all thrè had consented and a∣greid,
& were not to be shaken by anie insolence of corruption, if the bands of their consent & agrement were once made, sub∣scribed, sealed & deliuered, as all their thré dedes. Which being don all quarells were ended, and the rule of right writing was so enrold before such officers of state, as it was but vaine for sound, or for anie of his fauorers, euer to striue thēcefurth for a∣nie monarchie alone, tho he cōtinew stil in verie great autoritie. This course took the first finers to bring their pen to an arti∣ficiall right: this the rest followed, and this course will I take, by the grace of God, to bring my cuntrie writing to precept & method, by the help of Art, registring the argument of reason, custom, and sound in the writing thereof, with as good delibera∣tion and faith, as my cunning can compas, and as the natur of such an argument will admit assurance. Wherein I will lean vn∣to all the thre, for the matter, as to Art alone for the maner. The right writing of our English therefor by waie of discrip∣tiō VVhat it is to write English right. is, a certain reasonable course, to direct the pē by such rules, as ar most conformable, to the proprietie of sound, the cōsidera∣tion of reason, & the smoothing of custom ioyntlie, speciallie in those points of our writing where there is som difficultie & dis∣agrement both in opinion of the writers, & in natur of the let∣ters, concerning to much, to litle, or to diuerse. To much, as the To much. dubling of consonāts in the end of a word, as putt, grubb, ledd, for put, grub, led, and a thowsand such ignorant superfluities. Whereas the rule is, that no consonant must be dubled in anie word at all, or in anie place of the word at all, but onelie where either consonāt belongeth to seuerall syllabs, as in syl-lab. wit∣ting, sauing ss, and ll, in the end vpon great occasions, which shalbe noted hereafter. To litle, as fech, scrach, herafter, singlie for fetch, scratch, hereafter, singlelie: where for the first two the To litle. rule is, that, t, is to be writen before ch, in such deriuatiues, as haue t, in the primitiue, as set, scrat, which is so much vsed as it maketh a rule of it self allmost, and causeth t, be commonlie writen, euen where either there is no primitiue at all with t, or not anie in such a sense, as the deriuatiue semes to be of. For the last, the rule is, that our English compounds ar lightlie made of the hole simples, without leasing one letter: and that if anie be left out, it is figuratiuelie by either contraction, as single for sin∣glelie,
or for redinesse in writing without further reason, which is most sene in the silent e, whereof I will speak hereafter. As in therin, loftinesse, for therein, loftienesse. To diuerse, as in choice To diuerse. anoint, boùght, boúght, sòm, hóme, vse, vse òf òf, if, if, giue giue, lòue lóue, mòther, móther, recòrd, recórde, and a number mo such, which be the chefe causes why our writing is so charged with so great confusion. And yet all this great confusion is easi∣lie to be certained, without anie more ado, thē the mere follow ing of reason, custom, and sound, in our own tung, as shalbe plainelie proued. And if there nede anie difference, or distin∣ction to the eie, for directing either the English infant, which must learn, or the infantish stranger, which desires to learn, som litle note of distinction, or som known accent ouer the lesse v∣suall will auoid that confusion, which is so much pretended, and confirm it self by following the first tungs, in that kinde of distinguishing. The two points of to much & to litle wilbe soon redressed, as most what proceding frō the ignorant writer, which will reform himself, when he shall se cause why, and a corre∣cted president, the which he maie follow. The last for diuersitie is a matter of mere cumber, and yet shalbe so handled, as I do not fear, but to win both consent and allowance. For the hel∣ping of these vnrulie fellowes, and the certaining of our pen, I do follow these seuen precepts, Generall Rule, Proportion, Com∣position, Deriuation, Enfranchisment, distinction, and Prerogatiue. The causes why I haue reduced all the obseruatiōs of our right writing, to these seuen heads be these. The first thing, that is considered in anie compound matter, is the simples whereon the compound is made, which in this argument is the natur of ech letter. Whose generall examining, and ascertaining I haue recommended to the first of my seuen precepts, which I call ge∣nerall 1. Rule. rule. The next thing that is considered in a compound is the vse and handling of the simples, which make the compo∣sition, being put to their prouf in the thing compounded. Which prouf in this argument consisteth in words, bycause let∣ters do serue for the deliuerie of words. Now all words be ei∣ther mere English, or in corporate strangers, which either fol∣low one sutable sound in speche, and the like resemblance in pē, or agreing in the one, disagrè in the other. For the certaining of
this vncertaintie, I appoint two precepts of the seuen, Propor∣tion, 2. Proportion. and Enfranchisement. 3. Enfranchis∣ment. Again, all words whether naturall or denisons, be either sim∣ple or compound, either primatiues or deriuatiues. For the dire∣cting 4. Composition. whereof two other precepts serue, Composition and Deri∣uation. 5. Deriuation. Again, bycause the time and quantitie of syllabs, and the 6. Distinction. tune and qualitie thereof do cause somtime much controuersie & difference in the right vse of writing, I haue therefor ioyned the rule of distinction vnto these fiue. Wherein I handle the vse of all those characts, which the eie doth behold, either in pen or print besides the letters: bycause those characts, do help and qualify the expressing, and vtterance of words and sentences, as the letters alone do expresse and vtter them. Again, bycause both sound and custom will shew som one trik of their priuat autoritie, in the most pride of Art, which de∣pendeth altogither of reason, I haue therefor knit vp all the seuē with the rule of prerogatiue, where the generall direction of a∣nie of the other is somtime thwarted by natur of exception, oc∣casioned 7. Prerogatiue. somtime by the sound, somtime by custom, both being desirous to shew their own efficacie. All which my rules I refer to the writing, more thē to the print. For in the print the difficul tie is not so soon spyed, as it is in writing: bycause the printing charact being once cast in metle, what difficultie is there after∣ward? In the pen which is still to stamp, and to make new cha∣racts euerie foot, tho of the same form, the commoditie of the That these rules ar to the pen rather then to the print. hand is most to be considered, that the charact be fair to the eie, commodious to the ioynt, and swift to dispatch. And therefor he that will iudge of my opinion in this argument, wherein my speciall regard is, to the facilitie and right in writing, rather thē in printing tho the one help the other, when it is wel setled, must not mark what the print setteth down in the generall stā∣ping, where the printers, setters, and correcters ouersight som∣times plaieth a part, and letteth manie errors abide in their work: but what I my self do bind my self vnto by mine own precept. For that I will warrant, the other I cannot, tho I do what I can. The writing is my chefe care, which will be my chefe credit herein, if it proue to be currant, and actiue.
Cap XVII. Generall rule, wherein the natur, and force of euerie particular letter is examined. I Call the first of those means, whereby the right writing of our English tung is to be assured, according to that certain∣tie, which our common vse doth seme to haue chosen Gene∣rall rule, whose peculiar dewtie is, to ascertain our right writing, either by main grounds, reaching thoroughout the hole tung, VVhat gene∣rall rule is, and how it is deui∣ded. or by limiting the force of euerie particular charact, whether it be distinction to help our pronouncing, or else letter, whereby we pronounce. By this discription it appeareth, that the rules which belong to right writing in this kinde, be either generall to the tung, or particular to the charact. The former sort of the two do bak the latter, like the generall notiōs in Geometrie. The latter ground the generall truth of their main reason, vpon the former, & the particular credit of their own argumēt vpon thē∣selues. And yet theie both haue but that assurāce in natur, which reason, custom, and sound haue agreid vpon by consent, and wil∣led Art to set it down, as a couenant of theirs. The generall ru∣les, which be the main groūds of the hole tūg, be either known The generall and main grounds. conclusions, allredie handled and won, or such consequents as follow them of necessitie, as these be. 1 That the bodie of ech letter and distinction is creatur to de∣uise, and the vse thereof to our consent. 2 That reason, sound, & custo direct right writing ioyntlie, & ar not to be seuered, in giuing the cause, why words be so writen. 3 That the right in writing is a thing to be foūd out in our vse, as of acquaintāce, & not to be forced in vpō our vse, as a stranger. 4 That in reforming things of common practis the clearing of the old, which is abused, and not the breding of a new, which is vntried, is the naturall amendment. 5 That in common executions, the common fauor is the com∣mon furtherer. 6 That euen by reasons leaue the verie pen and dispatch in writing, will haue one ore in the right of writing, & serue it self with som priuat trik. 7 That to haue the most well, you must yeild to som particu∣larities
not of best reason. 8 That no rule of Art can deall so, but it must leaue manie par¦ticularities to dailie practis, to be learned by oft vsing, and such like obseruations, which be common staies both for Art to di∣rect Particular rule. by, and the pen to write by. The particular rule exami neth the force of all such characts, as we vse in writing, where∣of there be two kindes: the one signifying and sounding: the o∣ther signifying, but not sounding. Those characts which signify Characts ei∣ther sounding. or not. but sound not, ar certain notes, which we vse in the writing of our English tūg for the qualifying of our words, & sentences in their pronouncing, by that which is sene in the form of our wri∣ting, Characts which sound not. which be in nūber thirtene, in name & form these: Coma, Colon: Period. Parenthesis (.) interrogation? the longtime ¯ the short time ˘ the sharp accent the flat accēt the streight accēt the seuerer the vniter - the breaker = I vse the forē & originall names in most of these, bycause both the notes themselues be of a foren brede, and theie be commonlie best known by their own cuntrie names: I might darken more if I should deuise new names, then by enfranchising of the foren, a thing comon to all speches, which vse the translate terms of anie Art. Here it shalbe sufficient onelie to shew their number, names and form, I will handle their force & vse in the title of distinction, where∣vnto theie belong naturallie. Those characts which both sig∣nify Characts with sound. and sound be called letters, & concern both the substance and the deliuerie of our sounds, and are considered either a∣lone, as a. b. c. or in combination, as the diphthongs, ai. aw. ou. the coplemēts with h. ch. th. gh. the abbreuiations, wc. yt. wt. of all these I will note somwhat in particular, and first of the sin∣gle letters, whose names be familiar in our daielie vse, their nū∣ber 24. their form either great or small. great. A. B. C. D. E. F. The name, number, form, and place of our letters both great & small. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z. small, a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. s. e. t. v. u. w. x. y. z. In these letters there are to be considered, their place, and their form. As for their place, the great letters ar to begin full sentences, as. The kingdom of heauen is redie for the repen∣tant. And proper names, as. The cursed Cain killed the good Abell: And to write numbers with, where the letters be vsed in numbring, as, C. for an hundred. L. for fiftie, The small let∣ters
place is euerie where else, besides these thré, where the great ar to be writen. Som of the small letters, as s. and v. be of mo forms then one, and somwhat different therefor in place. The long s. serueth in all places, which be capable of the lesse form, sauing the verie last. The other two litle ones. s &  which is but cōuert to the small writē s, & no abbreuiatiō indede, com onelie in the end of a word, & that vpō such cause, as shalbe noted hereafter. V. begins the word or syllab, and is allwaie vsed v. u. cōsonantlike, as u. expresseth the vowell, & in the midle or en∣ding syllabs it is vsed for the other form of v. mostwhat for the dispatch in writing. This is enough for the number, name, form and place of both the great and small letters. Their force is to The force of our letters. be considerred either generallie by diuision, or particularlie by enumeration of euerie single letter. For their diuision all the 24. letters be either vowels, as. a. e. i. o. u. or consonants, as. b. c. d. f. g. k. l. m. n. p. q. r. s. t. x. z. or in som vses both consonants and vowells, as i. v. w. y. besides that h. is an aspi∣ration onelie in power, tho a letter in form, and a consonant in The deuision of our letters. som combination, as in the weak ch. chat, chip, change. For in the strong ch. as charact, archangell, Christian, it is but the a∣spirat. The consonants be either mutes and close the sound, as, b. c. d. g. k. p. q. t. or half vowellish as, f. l. m. n: r. s. x. z. which hauing the help of a vowell to begin their force continew it themselues a great while after. This is enough for the generall diuision of the letters at this time. Their enumeration sheweth the force and vse of euerie particular letter in order, as I will The enume∣ration of eue∣rie particular letters force. deall with them, first with the vowells, and then with the con∣sonants, and either of their combinations, diphthongs, cople∣ments, and abbreuiations. The vowells generallie sound either long as, compāring, reuēnged, endīting, enclōsure, presū∣ming: The force & vse of the vovells. or short as ransaking, reuĕlling, penitent, omnipotent, fortunat: either sharp, as mate, méte, ripe, hópe, dúke. or flat as: màt, mèt, rip, hòp, dùk. Which diuersitie in sound where occasion doth require it, is noted with the distinctions of time and tune, tho generallie it nede not, considering our daielie custom, which is both our best, and our commonest gide in such cases, is our ordinarie leader, as in the title of di∣stinction it shalbe handled at large.
A A Besides this generall note for the time and tune, hath no particular thing worth the obseruation in this place, as a let∣ter, but it hath afterward in proportion, as a syllab. All the o∣ther vowells haue manie pretie notes. E E Besides the common difference of time and tune, is a let∣ter of maruellous vse in the writing of our tung, and therefor it semeth to be recommended vnto vs speciallie aboue anie o∣ther letter, as a chefe gouernour in the right of our writing. Which e, tho it be somtime idlelie writen, either of ignorance, if the writer be vnlearned, and know not how to write, or of negligence, if he be learned, and mark not his hand, yet most times it is writen to great purpos, euen where it semeth idle, before the force of it be considered, and hath a verie great saying in ech of the seuen precepts, as shalbe declared in euerie of them particularlie. E in the for∣mer or the last syllab. And first for rule, the first of the seuen precepts, this is to be noted of E, that it either soundeth or is silent, and that either in the former or in the last syllabs. But first of the last, where it either endeth the syllab it self, or with som other consonant, or consonants after. Whensoeuer E, is the last letter, and soun∣deth, it soundeth sharp, as, mé, sé, wé, agré. sauing in the, the E sounding in the end. article, ye the pronown, and in Latin words, or of a Latin form, when theie be vsed English like, as, certiorare quandare, where e, soundeth full and brode after the originall Latin. Whensoeuer e, is the last, and soundeth not, it either qua∣lifieth E in the end and not soun∣ding. som letter going before, or it is mere silent, and yet in neither kinde encreaseth it the number of syllabs. I call that E, qualifying, whose absence or presence, somtime altereth the The quali∣fying E. vowell, somtime the consonant going next before it. It altereth the sound of all the vowells, euen quite thorough one or mo consonants as, máde, stéme, éche, kinde, stripe, óre, cúre, tóste sound sharp with the qualifying E in their end: whereas, màd, stèm, èch, frind, strip, or, cur, tost, contract of tossed sound flat without the same E, And therefor the same loud
and sharp sound in the word, calleth still for the qualify∣ing e, in the end, as the flat and short nedeth it not. It qua∣lifyeth no ending vowell, bycause it followeth none in the 2 end, sauing i. as in daie, maie, saie, trewlie, safetie, where it maketh i, either not to be heard, or verie gentlie to be heard, which otherwise wold sound loud and sharp, and must be expressed by y. as, deny, aby, ally. Which kinde of writing shalbe noted hereafter. It altereth also the force of, c, g, s, tho it sound not after them, as in hence, for that, which might 3 sound henk, if anie word ended in c. in swinge differing from swing, in vse differing from vs. I call that e, mere silent, which tho it neither sound, nor qualifie anie letter, yet maie it not be The mere si∣lente. spared from the ends of fiue kindes of words. First of foren de∣nisons, which ar deriued from originalls ending in s, tho being 1 not the last letter of their ending syllab, as, case, cause, verse, diuerse, repose, nose. Secondlie of those words, which end in▪ sounding like a z. and haue a vowell next before the s, as the 2 silent e, after, as cruse, excuse, abuse, snese, wise, amase. Third∣lie of words ending in v, the cōsonant, as. craue, deceiue, glòue, 3 lòue, thróue, móue, shróue. Fourthlie after l, in combination with anie consonant, as whistle, gristle, wrestle, wrangle, fri∣sle, 4 britle, trikle. sauing where v, the consonant cummeth be∣fore l, in the same proportion of sound like to these, where the e, is passant (whereof I will saie somwhat straight waie) and therefor is writen before the l. tho it shew the verie like fore, to the mere silent, e, after the l, as. diuel, riuel, rauel, shouel. In which words, both the ending l, is single, as not bearing the fall of e. like to well, knell, swell: and the proportion is like to rifle, wifle, snafle, snufle, shuffle. The consonant before l, is not to be dubled, for making two sillabs of one, bycause the e, sounds not, which it should do of necessitie, if it made a syl∣lab. But why maie not these also be writen, riule, driule, diule &c. letting the consonant v, answer hir cosin f. in wifle, trifle, rifle, the kinred betwene them being still so great, as it appea∣reth in wife, wiuè, thrift, thriuè, drift, driuè, and a number such. Fiftlie, after the duble ss, in the end, which why it is du∣bled, 5 it shalbe noted hereafter, as witnesse, worthinesse, re∣dresse. For wheresoeuer the long s, endeth the word, the siler
e, will follow, like to a silent Hebrew Scheua in the ending K, which theie call Caph. Now the form of s, in this dubling must nedes be long, bycause it must answer the first, which is long, and therefor must nedes haue the silent e. Som vse the same si∣lent e, after r, in the end, as lettre, cedre, childre, and such, where methink it were better to be the flat e, before r, as let∣ter, ceder, childer. and so childern rather then children, onelesse ye will form of childe, childer, childeren, and so by contraction children, cutting awaie the former e: or childern, cutting awaie the latter. E. when it endeth the last sillab, with one or mo consonants E passant. cumming after it, either soundeth flat and full, and maketh a syllab, as in rest, wretch, discent. or it is passant & soundeth quik like the fine gentle i, mostwhat not encreasing the number of syllabs as writen, goten, saieth. This e, passant and the gentle i, be of such affinitie, as theie do oftimes enterchange places, as indite, induce, intent, or endite, enduce, entent. Generallie words that end in the qualifying or silent e, when theie put s, vnto them in their deriuatiues, theie make the e, passant, as time times, wife, wiues, pipe, pipes. without encrease of syllabs, and ar therefor to be speld together. E, ending anie former syllab soundeth of it selfbrode, E in former syllabs. and longish, as, reprehend, delegate. onelesse it be a deriuatiue or compoūd of som sharp ending é, which answereth the pri∣matiue or simple in the first sound, as agréing, of agré, foreséeth, of foresé. If it end the syllab with anie consonant after, it is flat, as entending, repentant. It is neuer silēt in anie former syllab, but in cōposition, where the hole simple word is to be writen, as in wherefor, herevpon, E silent in compounds. hencefurth, in the two former, the prerogatiue of custom vsing e, in the end, where, here, contrarie to the proportion, in hear, wear, ear: in the last the qualifying e, accompanying hir sim∣ple hence. In the titles of distinction and deriuation there shal∣be more said of the silent and qualifying e, both where theie be to be vsed, and where not in the respect of the timing and tuning of words. I I, besides the time and tune thereof noted before, hath a I in his vow∣ellish natur.
form somtime vowellish, somtime consonantish. In the vow∣ellish sound either it endeth a former syllab or the verie last. When it endeth the last, and is it self the last letter, if it sound gentlie, it is qualified by the e, as manie, merie, tarie, carie, where the verie pen, will rather end in the e, then in the naked i. If it sound sharp and loud, it is to be writen with y, ha∣uing 1 no, e, after it, as neding no qualification, deny, cry, defy. If it end the last syllab, with one or mo consonants after it, 2 it is shrill when the qualifying e, followeth, and if it be shrill, the qualifying e, must follow, as, repine, vnwise, minde, kinde, fiste. If it be flat and quik, the qualisying e, must not follow, as, examin, behind, mist, fist. If it end a former syllab, 3 it soundeth lightlie sharp in spelling, and is so to, onelesse it be in a word of manie syllabs, where the midle time maie ea∣silie be descried by the vse of speche, as in pacient, penitent, e∣uident, whining, deuising. These words of manie syllabs be lightlie strangers, bycause our naturall English be most what but of one syllab. How it will fall out in the former of a word of two syllabs, or of som monosyllabs, which seme to be of two, as, crible, pible, trible, title, title, bible, bible, the pre∣cept of Analogie or proportion will shew hereafter. If there 4 seme another i, to follow next, the former of the two must be a y, as crying, denying, yea tho the primitiue end in the qualifyed i, as, carie, marie, hurrie, currie, carying, tary∣ing, hurrying, currying. where it is to be noted, that tho the primitiue word do end in y, yet the same y, in the former syllabs of the same words race in deriuation maie be the shrill i, onelesse another i, follow streight, as in supply, supplying, and yet supplied, denied be tolerable, tho the primitiue y, wold do well enough. If i, end a midle syllab, with a consonant 5 or mo after, it followeth the flat ending sound, as coincident, imprinting. If it be a deriuatiue of a sharp primitiue, it soun∣deth 6 sharp, and casteth his primitine consonant ouer to the next syllab. as, repine, requite, enquire, repineth, requiting, enquired, bycause a consonant cumming betwene two vow∣ells in anie simple word must be spelled with the latter. Som∣time the qualified consonant must kepe his own e, if the ad∣dition begin with a consonant, as entice, endite, enticement,
enditement, which in enticing, enditing, leaseth the e. bycause the addition beginneth with i. I, in the same proportion 7 soundeth now sharp, as giue, thriue, aliue, vviue, title, bi∣ble, now quik. as, giue, liue, siue, title, bible, which sounds ar to be distinguished by accent, if acquaintance will not seme in much reading: But this is a point, that the title of distinction hath taken to charge. The quik i, and the gentle passant e, 8 ar so near of kin, as theie enterchange places with pardon, as in descryed, or descryid, findeth, or findith, hir, or her, the error is no heresie. I is vsed consonantlike, when it leadeth a vowell in the same syllab, as Iak, Iames, iolie, iump, ioy. Where note, tho the qua∣lified, I in his conso∣nantish force. ge. as huge, rage, college, and this consonantish ie, be of som affinitie, that yet the i, tho with the e, after it, cannot com in place of that ge, bycause that ge, euer followeth a vowell in the same syllab, as page, drudge, grudge, whereas the consonantish, i, still leadeth the sounding vowell, and be∣ginneth the syllab. Againe e, after g, onelie qualifieth and neuer soundeth, as in reuenge, grange, bridge, trudge, and is the last letter of the word. E after i, the consonant, soundeth still, and is neuer the last, as, iet, ieast. bycause ie, in cherie, merie, carie, tarie, and such like, is i, the vowell qualifyed and quik. O O is a letter of as great vncertaintie in our tung, as e, is of direction both alone in vowell, and combined in diphthong. The cause is, for that in vowell it soundeth as much vpon the u, which is his cosin, as vpon the ó, which is his naturall, as in còsen, dòsen, mòther, which o, is still naturallie short, and, hósen, frósen, móther, which o, is naturallie lōg. In the diphthōg it soundeth more vpon the, u, then vpon the, o, as in found, wound, cow, sow, bow, how, now, and bów, sów, wróught, oúght, mów, tróugh. Notwithstanding this varietie, yet our custom is so acquainted with the vse thereof, as it wilbe more difficultie to alter a known confusion, then profitable to bring in an vn∣known reformation, in such an argument, where acquaintance
makes iustice, and vse doth no man wrong. And yet where dif∣ference by note shall seme to be necessarie the titles of propor∣tion & distinctiō will not omit the help. In the mean time thus much is to be noted of o: besides his time long and short, besides his tune with or without the qualifying e, sharp or flat, that when it is the last letter in the word, it soundeth sharp and loud, as agó, tó, só, nó. saue in tò the preposition, twò the numerall, dò the verb: his compounds as. vndò, his deriuatiues as dòing. In the midle syllabs, for tune, it is sharp, as here, or flat if a consonant end the syllab after o. For time the polysyl∣lab will bewraie it self in our dailie pronouncing: considering tho children and learners be ignorant, yet he is a verie simple teacher, that knoweth not the tuning of our ordinarie words, yea, tho theie be enfranchised, as ignorant, impudent, impotent. O varieth the sound in the same proportion, naie oftimes in the same letters, as lòue, glòue, dòue, shòue, remòue, and lóue, gróue, shróue, nóue. This duble sound of o, in the vowell is Latinish, where o, and u, be great cosens, as in voltus, voltis, colo. And vultus, vultis, occulo: in the diphthong it is Grekish, for theie sound their , still vpon the u, tho it be contract of oo, or , wherein as their president is our warrant against obie∣ction in these, so must acquaintance be the mean to discern the duble force of this letter, where we finde it, and he that will learn our tung, must learn the writing of it to, being no more strange then other tungs be euen in the writing. V V besides the notes of his form, besides his time and tune, is to be noted also not to end anie English word, which if it did V vowellish. it should sound sharp, as nú, trú, vertú. But to auoid the naked∣nesse of the small u, in the end we vse to write those terminati∣ons with ew the diphthōg, as new, trew, vertew. It is vsed cōso nantlike also as well as i, when it leadeth a sounding vowell in the same syllab, as vantage, reuiue, deliuer. or the silent e, in the v, consonātish end, as beleue, reproue. This duble force of both i, and v, is set from the latin, and therefor it is neither the vncertaintie of our writing, nor the vnstedfastnesse of our tung, for to vse anie let∣ter to a duble vse.
W. The duble w, is a letter that hath accompanied our tung frō VV. the originall Germane, and is vsed somtime as a vowell, som∣time as a consonant. It is neuer vowell but in the diphthongs as, VV, the vowell draw, knew, throw, neither is it to enter the midle syllab of anie word, sauing in thré cases. The first whereof is, with the deriua∣tiues of those finall dighthongs, as of know, knowing, knowledge, 1. unknown. The second is, when custom will frame another pri∣mitiue 2. after the proportion of one of these, as ówn, like vnknówn The third is som manifest difference, where the single u, 3. might easilie be mistaken, and ioyned to the vowell following, as in vouell, couard, like houell, couert, and therefor, theie be to be written vowell, coward, with the duble w. W. is consonan∣tish, VV, the conso∣nant. when it leadeth a vowell in the same syllab, with either a consonant before it self, as in swine, swim, betwene, or it self the first as want, winter, what, wrong, It is also consonantish in ab∣breuiations 1. vpon like reason, as wc, wt. When it followeth a con∣sonant, the latin enfranchisement vseth oftentimes the single u, 2. as persuade, language, bycause the latins vse no double w: the English words kepe their naturall w, as twinge, swinge. General∣lie 3. 4. the ending u, wold euer be the duble, as both the naturall form thereof, and the right vse thereof in the diphthongs do let vs vnderstand. Y. Y, likewise is somtime consonantish, somtime vowellish. Consonantish, when it leadeth a vowell, as, yonder, young Y. Y, the conso∣nant. yonker, beyond, that your, yard, both in abbreuiation & without. Vowellish either to expresse Greke enfranchisments, as syl∣labs, polysyllabs, tyran: or English naturalls, which is in thré pla∣ces. Y, the vowell. First when onei, followeth another immediatlie in the midle of a word, the former is to be expressed by a y, as reply∣ing, 1 multiplying, denying, bying. Secondlie the shrill ending i, ought to be a y, as deny, aby, defy. which y maie passe with them in 2 their deriuation, as denyeth abying, defyance, tho where ano∣ther i, followeth not, the shrill i, of it self maie suffise, as, denied, defiance. Thirdlie, oi, the diphthong sounding vpon the o, for difference sake, from the other, which soundeth vpon the u, 3
wold be written with a y, as, ioy, anoy, toy, boy, whereas anoint, appoint, foil, and such seme to haue an u. And yet when, i, go∣eth before the diphthong, tho it sound vpon the u, it were bet∣ter oy, then oi, as ioynt, ioyn, which theie shall soon perceiue, when theie mark the spede of their pen: likewise if oi with i, sound vpon the o, it maie be noted for difference from the o∣ther sound, with the streight accent, as, boie, enioie. Hereby we find that y, in the natur of a consonant is mere English in the natur of a vowell a mungrell, half Greke, halfe English, to ex∣presse those enfranchisments, which we borow of the Grekes, when we leaue som signe of their originiall writing. Diphthongs. I called the diphthong a combination of vowells, where∣of there be onelie twelue, and no mo nedefull for our English Diphthongs. writing. ai, decaie, ea, meat, oo, good, ou, about, au, audience, ei, sleight, oi, anoint, ow, allow, aw, withdraw, ew, vertew, oy, enioy, uy, buy, iuyce. For the right vse of these twelue diphthongs there be thre speciall notes to be obserued. The first is, that those diph∣thongs, which ar writen with the single u, serue properlie 1. for the former roomes, as, auditor, rebounding, and those, which haue the duble w, be peculiarlie to be vsed in the end, as, law, drew, auow. Which continew also with their com∣pounds, and deriuatiues in the former syllabs, as, withdrawing, endewed, endowing, auoweth. If the duble w, in hir vowelish na∣tur be found in anie former syllab, but vpon one of thré causes, which I noted in the duble w, it is a corruption, for all it be vsed. The second is, that of oi and oy, allredie noted in y. The 2. third is, that of ou, and ow, alredie noted in o. If there be cause 3. of distinction, that title shall dispatch that nede: if the conside∣ration ly in the writing, proportion will laie that certain. I se no cause why we should nede anie mo diphthongs or That there nede no mo diphthnogs then twelue. complexions of vowells, by whatsoeuer name, then these twelue. For oa, and ee, be helpt in our ordinarie writing by the qualifying e, as, móne, bóne, cóte, lóte, bote, quéne, séne, wéne, betwéne. Neither is there anie duble e, to be vsed in our tung
saue in the deriuatiues of those words, which end in the sharp e, as, tré, trées, agré, agrées, sé, sées, of which second e, we shall saie more in the title of deriuatiō, eo, is vsed in yeomē, people ieopard, eo. and why not yemen, peple, iepard, as wemen, steple, Ienkin, of the like analogie? Ai, is the mans dipthong, & soundeth full: ei, the womans, and soundeth finish in the same both sense, and vse, ai. ei. a woman is deintie, and feinteth soon, the man fainteth not bycause he is nothing daintie. This is enough to shew the force of the vowells and diphthongs, the titles that follow will shew their places and vse, as particular cause shall offer occasion. Of the consonants. This is a generall note to be obserued in writng of all the cō No consonāts dubled but for two syllabs. sonants, that none of them is to be dubled, but where theie ar referred to diuerse syllabs, the former ending the former syllab, & the latter beginning the next, asin bud-ding, strip-ped, buf-fet∣ting, begin-ning, &c. Whereby it appeareth, that no consonant can be dubled in the end of a word, bycause there is no syllab to follow: and that therefor the dubling of the last syllab is mere ouersight. For if ye write putt with a duble, t, is not the syllab ended in the first put? and wherefor then serueth the latter, t? Some when theie haue dubled the consonāt, will put an e to it, which is to make two syllabs, where theie mean but one, as putte: bycause of the rule, that the dubled consonants ar refer∣red to diuerse syllabs. Why ll, & ss, be dubled in the end contra∣rie to this rule, it shall be shewed in the hādling of those letters. Where, by the waie it is to be noted, that the e passant after a duble ss, as in lessen, to make lesse, or a duble ll, as fallen, & such like, encreaseth no syllabs, and that therefor the duble ss, is not deuided, tho a vowell follow. B, is allwaie one in whatsoeuer place, as brabling, lubber, crab B. C, is strong like to k, before a, o, u, either simple vowells, or C. combined in dighthongs, as cankard, cautele, concord, coward, C, strong. cunning, or when it endeth a foresyllab before anie other conso∣nant as c. q. k. t. as in succede, acquaint, acknowledge, expecting. C, is C weak. weak like, s, before e, &, i, either alone or in diphthong, as ceasse, deceit, surcingle, or before the qualifying silent e, in the end, as acceptance, whence, once.
F, hath two forces, whereof the first is generall for the Greke F. ph, in whose place, we maie vse our f, still, if we will measur our 1 writing by an English ear, as the Italians do in their writing, commonlie setting down, filosofie, ortografie, and such like with the latin f, as why not? For thereby we deliuer our peple, which know no foren learning, from seking of enfranchisments & yet we leaue the learned, which know them, to the libertie of that, which theie know. The second force off, is like to v, the conso∣nant, 2 which I vse to call cosens, by cause of their correspondēce in change, as, bereue, bereft, leaue lest, cleaue cleft. In if, and of, tho we se f, we here u, iue, oue, yet the aduerb of distance vseth the f, still, like ph, as I speak of him, which commeth a far of. G, is all waie strong befor a. o. u. whether single vowells or in G. G, strong, diphthongs as, gaie, gant, god, good, gout, gut, gulling. Like∣wise before r, or l, as graue, grant, glance, glew. And in the end of anie syllab, where the qualifying e followeth not, as in long, tung, onelesse the qualifying e, be left out, for som addition, which beginneth of a vowell, as, range, ranging, swinge, swin∣ging, for in that place g, is weak. As it is also and all waie before the qualifying e, as, cage, huge, drudge, snudge, hedge, dodge. It is G, weak. somtime strong, somtime weak before i, and e, contrarie to G, of duble force before i, and e. the latin, where it is all waie weak before the same vowells, tho not contrarie to the Greke and Hebrew. This varietie of force before these two letters semeth to giue som matter to confu∣sion in our writing. For as it is weak in these, gentle, ginger, gin, germain, and such: so is it strong in these, geld, gesse, gilt, begin, gig, gét and such, and therefor no maruell if we write, college of collegium, and college of collega, with the same let∣ters, seing our g is capable of both the forces before the same e. The necessarie distinction here of shall appear in the title of VVhether u, be to be writ∣ten after the strong g. distinction. But why do som vse to put an u, after the strong g, in som places, as in guise, guide, guest, beguile, and not write them all without the u, and with the g onelie, as, girde, girth, girdle, getting? And why maie not these words be writen, gise gest, gide, begile, as well as begin, beget, seing both our g, is strong before these vowells, and the difference noted, and g, with the u after is of another propertie in vse, as language, guise, Guichiardine, Guin, guerdon? I se no cause why, but that the u,
maie well enough be left out. H, is an aspiration, whose force before all vowells and diph∣thougs H. is easie to be perceiued, as, Henrie, hunter, haue, him, home, hauthorn, how, hew, holdaie. Somtime it is writen, without anie force in vtterance, as in manie enfranchised words, as, ho∣nest, humble, hoste, hostice. Where the vowell after h, is heard, as if there went no aspiration before. What force the h, is of af∣ter consonants in combination, I will shew streight waie. K, serueth for the strong c, before e, and i, as in Kent, kit∣chin, K. kin, King. It goeth before no consonants but n, as knaue, knop, and l, with the e silent after, as pekle, pikle, trikle, cakle. Which ar to be writen with k, before the l, bycause the sim∣ples be pek, pik, trik. Whereby it appeareth that the Greke ch, must of force be vsed in Christ, Christian, christen, &c. bycause k leadeth no mo consonants, but n, and l, with the silent, e. K followeth s, where c, wold be weak, as in skirmish, skirt, skrap, otherwise c, as scape, scope, scour, sculler. Where the same force is dubled, the former also must be k, if the simple end in k, quikker, thikker, thwakker, of, quik, thik, thwak, otherwise c, maie serue and supply the room. L, is still of one force in it self, as laudable, willing. Howbeit in respect of a, and o, going before it, and sounding like diph∣thongs L. it is dubled in the end of such words, as small, call, brall, boll, roll, troll. But when anie other consonant followeth l, the a, and o sound still like diphthongs, and yet the l, is but single, as in false, salt, malt, halt, cold, old, colt, dolt, rolf, bold, bolt. Hereupon, all, in composition before a naturall consonant, hath but a single l, as albeit, also, almost, otherwise a duble, as in allwaie, allhail, allone. Where it maie be dowted whether the president of these two, all, and oll, maie not induce the dub∣ling of all other terminations in l, as well, bell, shrill, still, full, scull, which dubling of the last ll, semeth most agreable both to reason and vse, where the vowells sound hard vpon the l, as it doth in these. But if the vowell sit not so hard, as in diphthongs, where the length of the vowells sound brea∣keth the force, that should light vpon the l, as in mail, fail, hail, recoil, foil, and such as, diuel, euil, riuel, why should the l, be dubled? It is the swiftnesse of the pen sure, which
can hardlie staie vpon the single ending l, that causeth this dubling. M, and n, of themselues continew in the same force still, how∣beit som negligence in writing giueth occasion of this note. M, n, p. That whereas both m, and n, be somtime signified by a title, that title▪ answereth the m, & n, onelie, which endeth the syllab, and not the other, which beginneth, as in begin-nīg, benū-med, sō-mo-nīg. And therefor that title, which will represent m, or n, aforegoing is mere false, & ill abused. P, is euer one, ph, shalbe streight spoken of. Q. serueth onelie in the natur of k, or the strong c, to go before the single or duble w, both cosonantlike in force, and in∣different Q. in place, as quill, quail, acquaint, quince, squint, squall squat, squese, or with the duble w, qwail acqwaint, qwik, qwince, saue where the enfranchisment requireth the single u, as in qua∣litie, quantitie, require, quintessence. S, besides the varietie noted to be in his form, somtimes forceth full like the weak, c, as in all beginnings of anie syllab, S. either before vowell, diphthong, or consonant, saie, seke, sift, soft, substance, sow, small, shrike, shrimp, somtime it yeildeth weaklie to the z, and that either betwéne two vowells, as in wise, nose, amase, vse, excuse, or after one of the half vowells, l, m, n, r, wells, trims, hens, hirs, or after the e passant, as, times, rimes, games, names. Which sounds where theie com, propor∣tion and deriuation will bewraie: how theie ar to be distin∣guished in places of cause, the title of Distinction shall not for∣get. When the vowell sitteth hard vpon the s, in the end, s, is dubled frenchlike, as in passe, grasse, finesse, nedelesse, disinesse, blisse, grosse, crosse, discusse, if not, it is single, as in fines, nedles, promis, treatis, purpos, compas and such. Where custom vpon good reason, not vnproper to the sound, causeth the dubling. T, kepeth one force still sauing where a vowell followeth after, i, as in action, discretion, consumption, where as, t, soundeth T like the full s, or strong c, so the words where it is so vsed, be al∣together strangers. X, beginneth no English words, but endeth manie, as wax vex, yex, and goeth into the midle of their deriuatiues, as wax∣ing, X. vexeth, yexing, and with the qualifying e, iaxe, without, ax,
pax, wax. Which words be seuered from those that end in ks, bycause ks, endeth plurall numbers as pak, paks, rak, raks, whereas the singulars, or primitiues, haue in the plurall number and deriuatiues, es, or en, as fox, foxes, fixen, vexes, yexes, oxen iaxes. Z, is a consonant much heard amongst vs, and seldom senc. Z. I think by reason it is not so redie to the pen as s, is, which is becom lieutenant generall to z; as gasse, amase, rasur, where z, is heard, but, s, sene. It is not lightlie expressed in English, sauing in foren enfranchisments, as azur, treasur. In the same proportion is s. and as, is as strangelie vsed. The combination of consonants, which I called coplements Coplements. be of two sorts, either consonants copled to them selues, as thw, in thwak, shr, in shrink stl, in whistle, & such, which neuer chāge their force: or consonants with, h, the aspiration, as ch, gh, ph, ch sh, th, wh. Whereof, gh, ph, ch, sh, wh, neuer change their force but continew still one, as cough, rough, philip, diphthong, rhetorik, shame, shrewed, whence, which. Whereof ph, and th be Grecians, the rest English. Ch, forceth somtime strōg like k, as in Christ, chrism, christian, Ch. charact, archangell, monarch, stomach, somtime weak, as in arch∣deacon, wretch, chirch, which semeth originallie to be of a du∣ble k, kirk. Our English ch, commeth from the latin c, as, chaplain, chancellor, chaste, of capellanus, cancellarius, casta. like the Italian force of c. Likewise, th, holdeth somtime stronglie, vpon the aspira∣tion, Th. as in thin, thik, somtime it yeildeth like a temporiser to a meaner weaknesse, as thine, thither. Neither, ch, nor th, hath anie e, after them, but when the vowell before is to be qualified in soūd, as eche, beseche, beche, breche, ache, leche, speche, bathe, scathe, sithe, otherwise flat, without e, as, sith, ech, bath. What prerogatiue in custom will ouerrule in these points, it shalbe noted in the titles of prerogatiue and proportion. Abbreuiations. W. and y, in their consonantish natur lead the most of our abbreuiations, wt, wc, yt, yu, ye, besides these and their fellowes the residew be but verie few, as {pro}ronounce, {per}erpetuitie, and som
other few with the, m, or, n, titles. Thus much of rule both generall for the hole tung, and par∣ticular for the force of euerie letter, and charact, whether for The diuerse force of, i, o, oi, oy, ou, ow, c, g, s, ch, th, is the difficultie of our writing. the qualitie, or for the sound of our voice. Whereby methink that the greatest difficultie in our writing riseth about the vn∣certaine force of, i, and, o, the vowells, oi, oy, ou, ow, the diphthongs, c, g, s, the consonants, ch, and th, the coplements, all which shall be directed sufficientlie, in the title of distinction. Cap XVIII. Of proportion. I Call that proportion, when a number of words oflike sound ar writen with like letters, or if the like sound haue not the VVhat propor∣tion is like letters, the cause why is shewed, as in hear, fear, dear, gear, wear, the like proportion is kept: in where, here, there it faileth by prerogatiue, bycause our custom, hath won that writing in such aduerbs of place: in mere it faileth by enfran∣chisement, bycause it commeth of the latin merus, ra, rum. And therefor proportion, as all other rules, consisteth vpon gene∣rall precept and priuat exception. This rule of proportion, hath allwaie bene of great account, The vse of proportion. for directing of speche and pen, as theie that be learned in the matter of speche, and the writers of that argument, do know of themselues, without my alleging of anie Analogi∣arie autors of anie foren tung, Latin or other. And in the ordering of our tung, it serueth vs, as it were for another ge∣nerall table. For as in the generall table, where euerie par∣ticular word is set down by order of the alphabete, we haue regard to the first letter, and thereby serue our own necessi∣tie in case and cause of serch: so in the rule of proportion, where we set down all words of one sound, vnder one form of writing, with particular note when the proportion fai∣leth, we regard that syllab which leadeth the proportion, and the vowell or dighthong in it, which giueth the life and sound to the syllab, and respect som multitude of words of one sort and sound, as in the alphabete we regard euerie particular, without eieing anie mo, then that, which we seke. All the words
in our English tung com within the compas of proportion, vpon som occasion or other: either bycause there is none but it hath mo of the same sound, or but it maie haue mo in time, seing new occasions brede new words. Again, all the words which we vse in our tung, be either monosyllabs, that is but of one syllab, which be the most of our naturall English: or words monosyll. Byssyll. polysyll. bissyllabs of two, whereof there be som certain English, & as manie strangers: or polysyllabs, of mo then two, which be alltogether enfrauchised, sauing som certain English deriua∣tiues or compounds, which fall not within this rule, bycause theie haue titles of their own. Wherefor cōsidering our mere English words be mostwhat monosyllabs, I wil deall with them first, then with the bissyl∣labs, last of al, with the polysyllabs, by order of the vowell or diphthong, which leadeth the syllab, & therefor the proportiō. I call that a syllab, which hath one sounding vowell in it, how VVhat a syl∣lab is. manie consonants soeuer either go before or com after it, as, no, one, able, whistle, driuen, raken, thoughts, thrise, frok, shritch, strength, staruedst, frumpst. For the qualifying and silent e, encrease no syllabs, as neither the passant in most places, which shalbe noted hereafter. All which letters children wold be taught to spell togither, holding such a filling, e, as no soun der, to make a new syllab thereby, as har-den, wri-ten, for har den, writen, two syllabs by misspelling for, two monosyllabs in natur. Here by the waie the reader shall vnderstand that in this rule of proportion I will not medle with anie deriuatiue which coms of other, whether contract, as scratcht, of scratched, or plurall numbers, as matches of match, or anie such else, where the putting to of one letter or mo, doth cause the difference: sauing onelie where the deriuatiue in sense, semeth a primatiue in form, as the pluralls of man, mous, hous, foot, cow, be, men, mice, lice, fete, kine. which form semeth rather to be originall, then deriued of anie other. A No English word ēdeth in, a, but in aie, as decaie, assaie, which Of monosyl∣labs and their proportion. writing & sound our vse hath won. A, alone is the English arti∣cle,
which cometh generallie next before substātiues, as a mane, a man, onelesse som adiectiue part them, as, a tall man, a long mane. This a ioyning with substantiues by waie of composi∣tion, so altereth their force, as theie signifie in dede, quite ano∣ther thing. For whē we saie, he cums apase, he goes aside, he looks aloft, he went along, we mean not the same, that we do in these speches a swift pase, a sore side, a windie loft, a lōg waie. The presi∣dent of this cōpound a, causeth vs oftimes to write forē words, with single consonants, which duble the same in their own tung as abbaie, abbandon, abbase, abbate: with one b, abaie, abandon, abase, abate, bycause of their analogie & proportiō with a baie a bādie, a base, a bate, which be known English terms, & being vttered quik bring furth the same soūds. Neither is it anie won∣der that our tung vseth a single consonant, where the originall dubleth, as báse, of bassus, pase, of passus. This, a, before vow∣ells, diphthongs, and the aspiration h, is an, as an epistle, an auditour, an honest man. Where the question is, whether e, in ane be nedefull, considering in our speaking the, n, semeth to ioyn with the vowell that followeth, according to that rule which teacheth vs, that a consonant cumming betwene two vowells must be spelled with the latter, as be-ne-fi-ci-all one∣lesse the words be compound, as an-ò-ther, ab-o-lish. bycause then the simple syllab kepeth hir own combination still, as in the examples before. And bycause it semeth to be so in these words, an-other, an-hell, an-honest man, as if theie were but one word compounded of two, the qualifying e, doth seme nede∣lesse, as it is in those words, which be deriued from the quali∣fied terminations, and begin their addition with som vowell, as praie, praing, amase, amasing, repute, reputing, depraue, depra∣ueth, where the qualifying e, is left out, and the consonant be∣fore it is put to the next syllab. And semeth it not to be so in all those words, which end in the qualifying e, before another word beginning with a vowell, as mine own? Blab, drab, grab, hab, nab. and with the qualifying e, babe. Ab. Able. Băble, răble, brăble, dăble: and bāble, stāble, āble, sāble, where I make the difference by the notes of the long and short time, not daring to duble the b, for making of two syllabs, by dubling the b, which maie not be here, the silent e, sounding
not, and the words therefor being monosyllabs, bycause there be not two sounding vowells or diphthongs, which are requi∣red in the making of two syllabs. Ace. C, alone endeth no syllab but with the qualifying e, after it, as ace, trace, race, face, which termination by ce, I take to be most naturall for this sound in our tung, both bycause manie enfranchised words haue the same end, as face, grace, space, and ase, with the s, and it is lightlie the termination of enfran∣chised words, case, pase, base, so it turneth verie much to the, z, as amase, rase, crase, whereas ace with the, c, soundeth still one like the naturall full, s. Monosyllabs, that is naturall English words of one syllab, Acle. seme to be writen with c, as the enfranchised polysyllabs be, tabernacle, barnacle, triacle, spectacle, but theie ar indede wri∣ten with, k, as hakle, cakle, takle, shakle, both bycause of their primitiue, hak, take, shake, and also bycause k, goeth before l, after a vowell, but not before, as in clamp, cling, clout. where c, leadeth and not k. Act, fact, contract. and such com from the Latin, and be Act. Akt. Akte. therefor writen with ct. but bakt, pakt, thwakt, rakt, crakt, and such be English words contract bakt of bakked, pakt of pakked &c. and be therefor writen with k, after their primitiue, ha∣uing their a, short and quik, whereas nākte, bākte, rākte, cum∣ming of rake, nake, bake, ar to be writen with the qualifying e which kepeth the originall a, sharp. Som write backt &c. with c, before the k, but wrong, bycause c, cummeth not before k but when theie be to be referred to diuers syllabs, as ac-know∣ledge, like accompanie, where the same consonant being du∣bled emporteth two syllabs. Ach, Ache. Ache, brache, with the qualifying e, for without the e, t, go∣eth before ch. as patch, snatch, catch, smatch, watch. The strōg ch. is mere foren, and therefor endeth no word with vs, but is turned into k, as stomak, monark (whose originalls be stomach, Ad. Adle. monarch with ch. in the Greke.) Bad, swad, glad, and with e, glade, made, shade. Adle, crādle, lādle, stādle with ā long: swădle, sadle, fadle, with ă short, the single syllab admitting the distin∣ction by time, and not by dubling the letter, for dubling the Adge. syllab withall. Badge, madge, fadge, where d, is necessarie by∣cause
otherwise, ā, wold sound long and sharp, as in page, age, rage, asswage. If, e, followed not the, g, the, a, were flat, & the, g, strong, as nag, bag, swag. In words of two or mo syllabs the, d, before, g, is not allwaie so nedefull, bycause the tung staieth not so sore vpon their last syllabs, as it doth vpon the monosyllab. Chaf, staf, graf, draf, and with, e, chafe, safe, rafe. Af. Afe. Aft. Afle. Ag. Age. Agle, Agh. Ak. Akle. Ale. Acle. Craft, shaft, graft, waft. Snafle, with a single, f, being but one syllab. Drag, brag, lag, and with, e, cage, wage, sage, age. pāgle with ā long, dragle with, a, short. Armagh, slagh, bagh, is a fo∣ren termination. Smak, pak, trak, crak, and with, e, take, rake, wake. akle was tuched before in acle. Ale, male, pale, dale, with the qualifying, e, is an ordinarie and a common termination, with vs. But where, a, in the end before a fingle, l, soundeth plane, al, I find none but certaine childish terms, as Mal for Marie, Lal, Dal, & som such. Bycause, a, in the end hath comon lie a duble, ll, after it, & soundeth on the diphthong, as thrall, crall, wall, which it doth also before a single, l, when a conso∣nant followeth next, as thraldom, walking. Shall, our common term foundeth not vpon the diphthong, and yet for companie sake will haue a duble, ll, whose force, that it is not diphthong∣like, it appeareth in the deriuatiue, l, cumming before, t, & not sounding in shalt, as in malt, halt. Alb. which in our ordinarie Alb. speche we sound, aub, turning the, l, into, u, and so we enter∣tain, l, generallie before most of our consonants. For tho we write calm, balm, talk, walk, chalk, calf, calues, salues: yet we pronounce them so as if theie had no, l, but onelie the duble, w or single, cawm, bawm, taulk, waulk, chauk, caulf, cawues sawues Ald. is the comon termination of participles contract, as cald, for called, apald, for apalled, gald, for galled. Yet som few there Ald. be of that ending, which ar mere originalls, as scald, bald, ald. Calf, half, walk, talk, calm, shalm, palm, faln, a contract for fal∣len. yalp, scalp, false, halse, with the silent, e, which is familiar to Alf. alk. alm. Aln. Alp. Alt. Alte. the enfranchised words and their followers. Malt, salt, falt, salue, salues, calf, calues, the, f, still bewraying his kinred with v, the consonant. Dram, cram, dam, and with, e dame, name, Am. Amble. Amp. shame, blame. Amble, shamble, scramble, scamble. Cramp, stamp lamp. Ample, strample. Lamb. And why not lam, as Lammasse, daie? and not lambmasse, with the b? Chams, champs, lamps, de∣tiues, Ample. Amb. Ami. Amps.
Man, can, bran. And with the qualifying, e, mane, cane, An. Ance. brane. Glance, france, chance. Where, a, before the, n, soundeth like a diphthong, tho, u, be not to be writen. An∣cle, rancle, and why not ankle, rankle, seing rank is a simple? Ancle. Anch. Ang. Andle. And Hanch, stanch, panch. Brand, hand, sand. Handle, dandle, candle, rang, bang, swang, and with the qualifying, e, range, grange, strange, wrangle, strangle, angle, frank, crank, rank, bank, scant, Angle. Ank Ant. Antle. pant. Scantle, scantling. I vse no example of anie combination with, re, bycause I take it better to end in er, as falter, rather thē faltre &c. Scrap, lap, hap, clap, rap, & with, e, ape, rape, scape, Ap. Ape. Aple. Apt. tape. Māple, stāple, with the a lōg, aple, grable, with the a, short. apt is ā originall strāger, our words in apt be deriuatiues, as hapt trapt, capt, flapt, for happed, trapped, capped, flapped. Iaques for Aq. Iakes the, e, passant falling vpon the, s, is an enfranchised word. We vse not, q, in the end, but still in the beginning of a syllab, bycause, u, followeth him of necessitie, as quagmire, quilt, re∣quire, squint. War, far, car. and with the qualifying e, ware, Ar. Arble. Arkle. Arce. fare, care. Marble, garble, warble. Sparcle, and why not sparkle bycause of spark? Sarce, parce, with the shrill and long ā farse, arse, with the short and flat a, e, cumming in, not as a qualifi∣er, but as incident to the long, s. by natur of enfranchisement. Arch. Ard. Ardle. Arge. Argle. Arf. Ark. Arle. Arus. Arn. Arp. Art. Arch, parch, starch. Hard, mard. Scarde, larde, garde, warde, with the qualifying, e, to lengthen the, a. Hardle, fardle. Barge large, targe, charge, without d, before g, gargle. wharf, scarf, dwarf. Bark, park, mark, cark, chark. Marle, carle. Warm, harm charm, farm, barm. Barn, warn, and with the qualifying, e, barne, yarne, scarne. Scarp, harp, sharp, warp. Art, smart, cart, wart, thwart, and with the qualifying e, tarte, parte, darte. Startle, starue, swarue, carue. As and was sound as oft vpon Artle. Arue. As. Ass. the, z, as vpon the strong, s, and therefor the duble ss, with the silent e, is vsed in our tung to expresse the vowell which sit∣teth hard vpō the, s, as passe, glasse, grasse. Whose dubling, as that also of ll, maie be found out by the deriuation, as in passe, pas∣sing, misse, missing. grasse, grassie &c. in promis, promising, pur∣pos, purposing. Otherwise the qualifying e, helpeth to reduce the single s. as case, casing, wise, wiser, repōse, reposing, blase, rase, amase. Ask cask, flask, mask. Hāsle, tāsle, dāsle. Swash, slash, Ase. Ask. Asle. Ash. dash, pash, Spasm, enfranchised Greke. Clasp, hasp, wasp, grasp,
past, last, fast, and with the qualifying e, paste, taste, waste, Ast. Astle. At. wrastle, castle, pastle. Squat, scrat, plat and with the qualifying e, strate, late, plate, prate, pratle, tatle, ratle, satle. Wax, axle. Waue, slaue. Bath, path, wath, & with e, bathe, scathe, and hath Atle. Ax. of the same sound without e, an ordinarie word won by prero∣gatiue. Where this is to be noted in generall of, th, that nounes ending in th. sound strong, as bath, south, mouth, touth, breth: Th. Ath. but verbs weak, as bath, south, touth, mouth, breath. E What e, soundeth in the end, when there be no mo vowells in the syllab, then it self, and that it is somtime silēt, but to good purpos, somtime passant, scarse perceptible, & thē like the quik i, it hath bene tuched allredie. VVeb, neb, eb. Keble, treble. Gréce, pece, flece the right English termination. For, ese with s, altereth, Eb. Ece. as these, & exception from ease, seas, cease, where the ods of our writing, tho it seme verie hard, is easilie made euen. for ease is the naturall termination, as please, disease: seas is the natu∣rall plurall number of sea: cease is the naturall enfranchise∣mēt of cesso the latin. Speche, beseche, eche, breche, leche, with the Eche. qualifying e, all the other that be writen without, e, haue a, t, as fetch, stretch, retch, saue ech the common distributiue. Ecle, better with k, as spekle, frekle, bycause of the primiue frek, spek. Ecle. Ect. Detect, elect, and such be Latin enfranchisements. pekt, chekt, nekt, be English contracts, of pek, pekked, chek, chekked. Tred shred, sled, and with the qualifying e, brede, lede, nede, spede. Ed. Edge. Hedge, sedge, ledge, the polysyllabs enfranchised kepe their origi∣nall, as priuilege, college, neither doth the last syllab pitch so hard in anie word of two or mo syllabs, as it doth in a monosyl∣lab, and therefor no maruell if the pitching letter be left out. Medle, nédle. what difference in proportion? as in nedles, the Edle. plurall of nedle, and nedelesse the adiectiue? Bredth of brode. All the primitiues whose ēding diphthong is, ea, as bread, tread, Edth. weal, heal, steal, in their deriuatiues form lightlie vpon the bare e, as bredth, tredth, welth, helth, stelth. Thefe, lefe, chefe, befe. Theft, cleft, reft, of cleue, theue, reue. Where besides other notes Ef. Eft. Eg. Ege. the kinred betwene, f, and u. appeareth still, Eg, leg, peg, meg,
and with the qualifying e. lege, sege. Nek, brek, chek, pek, and with the qualifying, e, meke, cheke, leke, shreke, weke, pekle kekle. Ege. Ek. Ekle. El. E. falleth somtime hard vpon the l, & then the ll, is dubled, as shell, spell, knell, fell, somtime sharp, as fele, rele, knele, with the qualifying e, sometime light with the, e, passant before, l, as driuel, riuel, sniuel, rauel, which in the like proportion, is the silent e, after l, as wifle, snafle &c. in which words the e, is so quik as I dare not hold them for bissyllabs. Belch. Held, keld. Elch, Eld. Elf. Elk. Elf, shelf, pelf, self. Yelk. Kelk. Elm. VVhelm. Teln, feln. be out worn English words for tell, fell. Else, as bells, fells, nells be deri∣uatiues. Felt, swelt, smelt. Where se the proprietie of our tung, in Ells. Els. the duble sense of smelt, the primitiue of the fish, and the con∣tract smelt for smelled of smell. Welth, stelth noted before. Delue, Elth. Elue. Em. Emble. Emp. En. shelue. Stem, kem, nem, wem. and with the qualifying, e, steme, seme, deme, eme. Trēble. Hemp. Kemp. tēpt. Tems. E, falleth vpon the, n, somtime full, as Then, ten, when, men, ken, somtime shrill with the qualifying e. as Quene, kene, sene, grene, somtime pas∣sant, where it encreaseth no syllab, in my opinion, as writen, driuē, shriuen, gotē, shoten, threaten. And why maie not so manie letters be spelled together for one syllab, as well as in thwakst? Whence, hence, sence for sithens. Ense with s. is enfranchised, as Ence Euse. End. Enge. sense, fense, spense. End, mend, lend, send. Tench, wench, quench bench, wrench. Henge, reuenge. I find no termination in eng, without e, if anie hereafter fall out, ing, wilbe the leader in proportion, as wing, thing. Pence the plurall number of penie. Ence. ent. Ep, Pens the plurall number of pen. Shent, pent, ment. Gentle. Step, skep, & with, e, stepe, kepe, crepe, wepe, depe. Threap, thrept. Steple, peple. Kept, precept. Er, is commonlie the end of such words, as haue mo syllabs then one, where it sounds quik, as thither, hi∣ther. Aker, taker. Falsifyer, cunninger, anger. Er, to go astraie: & with the qualifying e, bere, mere, where, there, here, which be Er. exceptiōs from the terminatiō in ear, the diphthong. Her the feminine and hir, be so enterchangeable frinds, as theie maie be vsed indifferētlie. This word enterchāgeable giueth me to make this note, that, g, in hir weak natur with the qualifying, e, after, in cōpositiō or deriuation, kepeth, e, still, onelesse the additiō fol lowing begin either with e, or i, with the which vowells, g, is gentle, as with a. o. u. it is not. Herb with the h. not herd, ferce,
serch, perch: Berd, ferd, herd, serge. without a. Term, ferm, and Erb. Erce. Erb. Erd. why not lern without a? seing ea, in the deriuatiues fauoreth e, so much, as threap, thrept, lear, lerning? verse, reherse. the prouf by rehersall, perse, herse Pert, desert, the most of these sorts be bissyllabs or aboue: Erse. besides that, a, dealeth verie much before the r. By deserue, pre∣serue, conserue, it should appear that either we strain the Latin Ert. s, to our sound, or that theie had som sound of the z, expres∣sed by s, as well as we. Which is trew, and appeareth in their deriuatiues from the Greke {is}. Finesse, contract for finenesse, by∣cause nesse is the addition, as in holinesse, sumptuousnesse, glad∣nesse, with the duble ss. bycause the e. sitteth hard vpon the ss. Esse. Besides that we borow the form of the french, tho in the sound of the silent e, we differ from them. Frese, chese, gese. Desk, fresh, flesh. Brest, nest, chest. Nestle, pestle, tresle. Fet, net, let, Ese. Esk. Esh. Est. Estle. Et. Etch. Etle. whet, and with the qualifying e, fete, strete, lete, nete, mete. Fetch, stretch. Netle, setle, ketle, bétle, bédle. Sleue, reue, greue, yex, vex, next, text, téthe, séthe. I I said before that i, ending the last syllab, and sounding loud was expressed by y. as qualify, exemplify, for manie good cau∣ses, considering we haue admitted y, for a vowell: And that the quik ending i, is allwaie qualified by e, as verilie, trewlie. In which kinde of coplement ie, is euer vowellish, & neuer con∣sonant, like the weak ge: tho in the beginning of syllabs as ién∣king and such, ie, and ge, be all one, as in Latin peiero, & ege∣ro. Before consonāts in the last syllab i. soūdeth thus. Squib, rib, crib, and with the qualifying e, bribe, scribe, gibe. Crible, pible, trible, bīble, bible. Ice, mice, slice, nice, vice, spice. (which word Ib. Ibe. Ible. Ice. is vsed much with vs for spece, as a spice of an agew, for a kind of an agew, species) In wise & such, the s. is ēforced by verie deriua∣tiō & cōpositiō, besides the zeddish sound, as wisdom, where, c, before the, d, wold haue sounded vpō the, k. I find none of this Ich. sort, but which, rich, & shriche, with, e. The rest haue, t, before ch as stitch, pitch, fitch, witch, Strict, conuict, & such be latin enfran∣chisments. Ict Pikt, likt, kikt, be English contracts, of pik, lik, kik, likked, kikked: as likte, slikte, of like slike, with the qualifying, e, in
both: Icle, as pikle rather with k, vpon cause alledged in akle, and Ikle. Id. Idge. idle. Iden. if. Ift. ifle. Ig, igh. ight. Igle. Ike. Ikle. Il. Ilk. Ilt. im. Mible. ni. ekle. Bid, kid, hid, & with the qualifying, e, wide, ride, stride. Fridge, bridge, ridge. Ridle, fidle, with, i, short, iādle brīdle, with i, long, biden, riden, hiden. Stif, if, skif, and with the qualifying e, wife strife. Shift, lift, clift, shrift. Trifle rifle, & with the i, short, misle whistle. Twig, swig, prig, gig, gig, nigh, high. Night, might, right, slight, lighten, gigle, giglet, prik, tik, stik, & with the qualifying e, like, tike, prikle, sikle; sicle, enfranchised. Thiken, chiken, quiken. I, lighting full vpon the, l, dubleth it, as shrill, spill, will. The sin∣gle, l, with the qualifying e, after, while, begile, bile, filch, milk, silk. Quilt, tilt, spilt, hilt, filth. Swim, grim, brim, and with the qua∣lifying, e, grime, slime, time, lime. Thimble, nimble. Simple, pimple, Ince. inch. Inkle. Ind. Incle. ing. Ingle. ink. Int. Iple. Ir. Shrimp, imp. Win, twin, pin, chin, and with the qualifying, e, wine, twine, pine, chine, quince, ince, rince, wrinch, winch, stinch, clinch, not, cumming betwen ch, and the consonant before. Twinkle, inkle, pinkle, pinkt, winkt, deriuatiues contract. Wind, frind, bind, and with the qualifying e, kinde, finde, minde, hinde, trindle, kindle, spindle. Thing, swing, wring, & with the e, twinge, singe, swinge, cringe. Swingle, ringle, single, surcingle, tingle. Drink, ink, shrink. Squint, flint, stint, and with e, pinte, lintle. Strip Irch. irk. Ird. Irle. whip, slip, and with the qualifying e, stripe, wipe, ripe. Triple, criple. Whipt, stript, hipt, wipte, stripte, with the originall e. Stir, fir, sir, and with e, Sire, fire, tire, mire, desire, require, hire, wire. Irst. Iss. is. Ise. Circle enfranchised. Chirch, of kirk, birch. Yirk, girk, irk. Bird, gird, girdle, girle. Whirle, firm, chirm, girn, chirp, Birt, flirt, squirt mirtle, kirtle. Birth, mirth, girth, first, thirst. I, lighting hard vpon the s, dubleth it ss, as, hisse, misse, kisse, sauing, is, this, yis. With e after s, it soundeth most what vpon the z, as wise, sise, yet in the same form we write thrise, of another sound, but why not thrice, which termination neuer acquainteth it self with z? The e, passant and this gentle i, before s, haue oftimes great al∣liance togither. If it light som what quiklie vpon the s, then the s is single, as promis tretis, amis, aduertis, enfranchis, misle, fisle, Isle. istm. Isp. Istle. ish. ist. It. ile. Iue. drisle, pisle. Chrism, baptism. Wisp, crisp, whistle, gristle, fish, wish, dish, mist, twist, fiste, with e. Whit, fit, hit, and with e, white, mite, delite, spite, Tītle, title whitle, britle, witch, stitch, pitch, quitch; itch, with, sith, kith, & with the qualifying e, writhe, sithe. Striue, wiue, thriue, and liue, giue, siue, Flux, pix.
O O, in the end is said to sound lowd, as go, shro, fro, sauing, tò, dò, two, &c. Hob, cob, bob, rob, and with the qualifying e, robe, Oboch. noble, roche, cocle, and why not cokle? God, od, plod, rod, and with e, rode, gode, bode. Nodle, troden. Dodge, hodge, podge. Of, cof, with Od. Of. Og. oge. Ok. e, lose. Oft, soft, croft. Hog, dog, frog, log, clog, roge, voge, seing our, g, is strong and our accent will help. Ogle. Smok, sok knok, and with the qualifying e, smoke, oke, soke, yoke, poke, goge an interiection of wondring, Nol, gol & with the qualifying, e, hole, , the Greke adiectiue in the same sense, gole, fole, stole, sto∣len. O, before, l, sounding like a dipthong causeth the ll, be dub∣led, as troll. And if a consonant follow, l, o, commonlie hath the Ol. om. same force, tho the l, be but single, told, cold, bold, colt, dolt, colf, rolf, bolt, holm, scold, dissolue. O, before m, in the beginning, or midle of a word, leading the syllabs soundeth flat vpon the o, as omnipotent, commend, but in the end it soundeth still vpon, the u, as som, com, dom, & therefor in their deriuatiues, and compoūds as welcom, trublesom, newcom, cumbersom, kingdom. With e, after the m, as home, mome, rome, & yet whom, from, haue no, e, by pre∣rogatiue of vse, tho theie haue it in sound & seming. But were it not better, that all such exceptions were reduced to their Ana∣logie? Ome. If euerie tung had not the like exceptiōs, I might happilie think, that that were the best. On, likewise in beginnings & mi∣dles soundeth vpon the o, in the ends, chefelie of enfranchismēts vpon the u, as disposition, circumspection, action. In som few words On. of one or two syllabs, it soundeth vpon the o, as on, anon, vpon, & with the qualifying, e, gone, mone, alone, throne, one: on, in som words answereih the proportiō of the, e, passant, without increa∣sing One. Once. of syllabs, as capon, weapon, answer to cheapē, threapen. Once nonce, nonst. Bond, beyond, fond. Top, stop, crop, knop, and with the qualifying e, rope, cope, grope, sope. Tople, throple, pople. Hops, tops, be plurall nūbers. Or is a termination of som truble, when a con sonant followeth, bycause it soundeth so much vpon the u, as worm, form, sword, word, & yet the qualifying e, after wil bewraie an o, as the absence thereof will bewraie an u, storme, o, worm, u, lorde, o, hord, u. Or, for nor, & with the qualifying e more, gore bore, pore, sore, fore. Where note that for, & his compounds sig∣nify the cause, fore and his, the time, as Before, afore. Wherefor,
therefor. Forthink, forfet, forethink forestall, foresaid, foresé. Force, horce, scorce, the naturall english. Corse, French of corps. Proch, torch, Scorch, without t, before, as Arch, serch, burch, lurch. Corde lorde, accorde, with the e. Word, sword, aford, without. In former Orch. Ord. Ordle. ork. syllabs, where or is of it self, it soūdeth vpō the o, still, as organes, ordure, order. Worldle, gorge, George. Porke, Yorke, with the e, Stork, cork without the e. Worm form, without e, vpō  u. Forme Orm. Orn. Ort. Oss. storme, with e, vpō the o. Corne, horne, torne, forlorne. Thorp, horse corse, remorse. Dort, & with e, forte, porte, O, sitting hard vpō the s, dubleth it, as Crosse, losse. mosse, if not single as purpos. With the qualifying e, Nose, repose, close: and close, the nown vpon the s, the verbe, vpō the z, which is lightlie generall in the like cases, Os. of the duble sound of s. Poste, hoste, toste, roste, coste, with e, and without e, Lost, tost, contract for tossed. Most by prerogatiue Ost. Sh. otch. Ot. soundeth vpon the e, and yet setteth it not down. Losh, cosh, posh. Hotch, potch, notch. Potle, botle, throtle. Pot, sot, not. and with the qualifying e, cote, note, throte. Othe, lothe, wrothe, Oth. and without the e, broth, moth. We sound both like the first, and write it like the last. Roten, frosen, rosen, dosen, where en, is Oten. Oue. Ox. passant, and the words monosyllabs. Groúe, throúe, lóue and loùe, moùe, abòue. Ox, box. V. V, & o, be so great còsens euen in còsinage, as the one enter∣medleth with the others soūd verie much. V, endeth no English word, but ew, as trew. And tho truth be the substātiue, yet that is no more maruell, then that we, set constrew, and construction, from diuerse grounds, congrew, congruitie, abound, abundance, pronounce, pronunciation. Club, rub, grub, and with the e, Cube Duble, puble, buble, ruble. Sluce, nuce, the naturall English termi∣nation. Vb. vble. Vnce. Vkle. Vtch. vd. Vs. Vng. Vnk. Vll. Use, excuse, refuse, and such enfranchised latin. Pu∣kle, bukle, hukle, sukle, with k. Hutch. Much, and such seme to be exceptions. Mud, bud, cud, rud, and with the qua∣lifying, e, Delude, rude. Hudle, pudle, crudle. Ruf, stuf, snuf, rufle, shufle, Shrug, rug, hug, and with e, huge, deluge, re∣fuge. Iugle, tugle, hugle, bugle. Duk, muk, luk, and with e, duke, puke, luke, fluke, huke. Full, dull, scull, trull, and single l, with the qualifying e, rule, crule, pule, tule, vlp, gulp, gulf, wulf. Hulk, pulse, enfranchised, gulch. Thrum, drum, crum,
broum, loum. Noun, croun, cloun, doun. Own, grown, vpon the Oun. Oup. ounce. Ound. Our. deriuatiue. Stoup, loup, droup, coup. Sound, ground, found. Our domonlie abreuationlike as our, the termination for enfranchis∣mēts, as autour, procur atour, as, er is for our our, as suter, writer: Bour, lour, flour, four, alone vpon the,  Mourn, adiourn. Howse, lowse, mowse, the verbes and deriuatiues vpon the, z, as House, louse, mouse, the nounes vpon the, s, Ous, our English cadence for Ous. Latin words in osus, as notorious, famous, populous, riotous, gor∣geous, being as it were the vniting of the chefe letters in the two syllabs, o, and, u, osus. Clout, lout, dout. Buy, iuyce, If I haue ei∣ther Out. uy. forgoten, or not remembred anie termination, or if there be no mo yet extant in the vse of our tung: yet the president of these will bytheir proportion fashion all the like. I haue bene thus carefull and curious to run thorough all these mono∣syllab terminations, bycause I find the like don in other tungs, which vse to rip vp all, thereby to find assurance, wherewith to rule all. This being thus ended concerning the monosyllabs, I must saie somwhat also of the bisyllabs & polysyllabs. The proportion of bissyllabs. I call that a bissyllab, wherein there be two seuerall soūding vowells, as Asùr, rasùr, masùr, and why not lasur? farow, bo∣rough, thorough. Writing, biting. The proportion in this kinde also is verie commodious, bycause when ye haue found out one certain head all of the like sound maie be easilie reduced thereunto, onelesse som prerogatiue of priuat custom, or som respect to the originall stranger do interrupt the rank. If there be but one word in anie kinde, that one will serue for a gide, when anie mo afterward shall craue the help of the like con∣duct, as Whisper, bussard. If there be no president of the same sound, yet the like proportion in som other vowell, will lead his cosen soūd, as if there were no such word as badger, yet hed∣ger, wold lead vs to the like writing. Wherein I haue regard still to the English ear, reseruing the writing of enfranchised words in their own colours, to such as be skilfull. I will write for the common man, Aumner, aumrie, naie euen filosofie, and ortografie, and leaue Almoner, almonarie, naie Eleemosyner, & Eleemosynarie, philosophie and ortographie, to the discretion,
of such, as be learned, to vse or refuse as theie list. Wherein I follow the autoritie of a great master in speche, euen Tullie him self, who reseruing the misterie of speche and pen to himself, and his peres, did lend the peple, the vse and customarie there∣of. Now these bissyllabs be either naturall English as, ba∣uin, Bissyllabs. English. Foren. crauin, rauin, or enfranchised foren, as Pallet, mallet, bal∣let. And again in both the kindes theie be either simple, as canell, panell, chanell, or compound, as waieward, toward, fro∣ward, Bissyllabs. Simple. cōpound aside, asquint, astraie, except, reiect, conceiue, detaine. As for the compounds and enfianchisments theie haue the help of particular titles to direct them: for the simples and na∣turall English I am to deall in this place. Whereof I will set down but certain generall notes, bycause the table which fol∣loweth, shal contein so manie of ech sort, as I can well remēber, and euerie one of them so proportioned to my note in rule, as theie shall one answer another thoroughlie, as Cancell, chancell, hancell. Chalice, malice, Calice, amice, office. Lauer, fauer, sa∣uer. Iaueling, graueling, shaueling, raueling. Natur, statur, Measur, treasur. But I shall not nede to vse anie further enu∣meration, seing the endings be all one, and the former syllab is that which moueth matter of question in this place, which hath verie manie helps hereafter, whereby it maie be throughlie vn∣derstood deriuatiō somtime breading bissyllabs, as of time, time∣lie, witie, of wit, writer, of write, composition somtime, as break∣fast, thraldom, vauntgard, lastage, pondage, enfranchisment somtime, as Excuse, abuse, abase, reiect: distinctiō somtime no∣ting, them, as Amis, and amisse, ascent, assent, desert, and desért, and what not? Therefor the bissyllabs for this place shall contēt thēselues with these few notes. First that the silent, e, after, l, en∣creaseth not the number of syllabs, & that therefor Brable, sorā∣ble, 1 strample, wrangle, circle, whistle, gogle, trouble, & a nuber such be but monosyllabs. Barnacle, triacle, chronicle, tunicle, & manie such be but bissyllabs, Agreable, auailable, penetrable & a nūber, such be but of thré syllabs. Again, that the, e, passant in such words, as hastē, writē, bidē, threatē, frosen, cosen & such encreaseth 2. not the syllabs, & that therefor these, which I haue rehersed & such other be but mere monosyllabs. Abiden, forgoten, vnwriten, & such but bissyllabs. Again, that the English tūg is not length∣ned 3.
eueriewhere for position, & cōcourse of two or mo conso∣nants, and that therefor, the quikker time mostwhat dubleth the consonant in bissyllabs, as Fallow, sallow, yallow, tallow, swal∣low. Matter, platter, batter. Marie, tarie, carie, quarie, with the shorte time. Marie, charie, farie, with the long time, tho in neither the consonant be dubled. That both in bissylabs, 4. and polysyllabs tho the same writing be in the end which is in the monosyllab, yet the sound is far quikker, as in either of them the ending, ow, runneth but like a single, u, where as in the monosyllab, it wilbe heard full, as in Lów, knów, and bellow, mel∣low, yallow, the difference is sene. As concerning polysyllabs, theie be either English compounds or foren Enfranchisments, which will bewraie themselues in their own places, the simple words bringing their hole furniture in composition, as, ouerse∣ing, vndoing, whereupon, eueriewhere. And the foreners euer ap∣pealing Of polysyllabs to their originall grounds, euen when theie be most fashioned to the English ear, as originall, to originalis, enfran∣chisment, chastisment to their own cuntries. And therefor I do not entend to saie much of them in this place, otherwise then by genenerall note, bycause both the comon table, and all the titles that follow concern bissyllabs, and polysyllabs most: as the generall rule, and the first part of proportion do most con∣cern monosyllabs. In which monosyllabs the naturall force of euerie letter is best perceiued, bycause the sound and strength thereof appeareth there fullest, where there is none to partici∣pat with them in sound; but themselues, which cannot be sene so well in words of mo syllabs, bycause theie hudle on euerie sound with more quiknesse, saue where the time or tune will command verie roundlie. The polysyllab therefor for the chefe girk of his sound riseth vpon the third syllab from the end, as the bissyllab doth of the second. And bycause the large doth al∣waie comprise the lesse within it, therefor the rules of the first & second syllabs, hold in the polysyllabs, where the companie of 1. mo syllabs causeth anie one to be the lest noted: onelesse som speciall occasion for difference sake make the verie last, or the last saue one to be thought on and noted, as in concordance, sur∣fitting, grassehopper and such, the second syllab short is a pro∣pertie of our tung contrarie to the commō rule of time, tho not
to the rule of tune. (For the Grekes do so in the like positions) and therefor causeth the last syllabs saue one in these words & in the like to be better noted. Again, in abiuring, adiuring, coniu∣ring, 2. periurie, the ods in the midle time maketh the deriuatiues of the same primitiues to be markt for that syllab. And again, on, 3. in the simple monosyllab, naie euen in the bisyllab soundeth vpon the, o, most, in the polysyllab vpon the, u, bycause the en∣franchising of such words, as circumscription, deuision, partition, comparison, declineson, kepeth the naturall, o, but giueth it the en∣franchisers, dy, in, u. But to knit vp this title of proportion, (which is the great ma∣ster leader to all our whole tung, as Rule is the great Anatomist 4. of all the sounds and forces of our letters) when we haue don all that either sound maie require, or reason can enioy n, custom will haue a great stroke, and must make vp the trinitie in dire∣ction of speche. For what but custom hath won, in nation, deriua∣tion, deliberation, inclination, to kepe a, still, and to go so near the originall: and in declinson, comparison, duowson, and such to go so much astraie from the originall, declination, comparation, aduocation? Wherefor as sound hath somwhat to saie in our or∣tographie, and reason not nothing, so the custom of our cuntrie will try mastries for hir interest, which she must haue at his hand who so entendeth to handle this argument with liking, as who so douteth to write a word in English, must seke out the like sound in proportion. Cap. XIX. Of composition. THe force of euerie letter being opened by Rule, and the place of euerie one being limited by proportion, the next point in naturall method is to examin, whether the words, whose force is this, and roum is thus, be simple but for pure syllabs, or compound of mo words. For the bare word, which is handled in proportion, is somtime set down by it self Proportion. without further addition of anie either significant word, or not significāt particle, as after, doom, kin. Somtime it hath one or mo Composition. significant words ioyned vnto it, which yet in dede make but
one word, when theie ar so linked, howsoeuer theie signify in their seuerall vses, as Afterdeal, whereabout, howsoeuer, dooms∣daie, kinsmā, somtime it hath som more put to it, tho that, which Deriuation. 3 is put to, being set alone signify nothing, and yet in the addition alter the significatiō of the originall word, as Finenesse, thraldō, firerie, desirous, kings; woes, agreith, sees, witches. Of these thré kindes the first is dispatcht in proportion, the last hath a proper title of deriuation, the midle and compound is to be handled in this place. Therefor that word is called compound, which is made of VVhat a com∣pound word is. two or mo simple words, whereof euerie one signifyeth som∣what agreable to the cōposition, euen when theie arvsed alone, if theie be euer vsed all alone. For, as catchpoll, chirchyard, out law, signify by their particular words vsed alone, so beched, gainstand, awry, vnbind, be made of two words, whereof the former thré be, gain, a, be neuer vsed alone in anie such such sense, as there imply in their composition, the last, vn, is neuer vsed at all alone and answereth the Latin priuation, in as indoctus. Now these compound words be either mere English, or clear strangers: mere English as whē theie & their parcells be altogi∣ther English words, as comecase, headstall, beadman, cupbord. Compounds. Enlish. Enfranc. Mūgrell. Clear strangers, when their substance is mere foren, tho their li∣uerie be English for som maner of their writing and vtterance, squared to our soūds in the like proportion, as presuppose, infringe, circunstance, ortografie, filosofie. Ye shall somtime haue a word mungrell compound, halfforen, half English, Headlong, whar∣fage, princelike. The knowledge of composition is verie necessa∣rie for the right writing of our tung manie waies. First bycause the compound lightie bringeth in his sin∣gle partes with all their letters, as fearefull, neuerehetesse, hare∣braine, The vse of composition in our writieg. Four causes which alter the form of composition. carefull, carfull. Saue where some necessarie cause ei∣ther putteth in som letter, or putteth out som, or changeth som, or misplaceth som, as in kinsman, kingsland, s, is added to bewraie som qualitie possessionlike. In wilfull, husband, parta∣ker, pastime. The single, l, and, s, in will, & passe, do serue be∣fore a consonant in composition and sound, as strong as the du∣ble doth in the simple word. Again in husband, the verie smooth nesse of the word, putteth out, o, in ow, and the, e, after, s, and
chāgeth the duble, w, into the single▪ In partaker, one, t, is com∣mon to both the simples in composition, part, and taker, and is spelled with the latter, a point of great vse in our right writing, for not dubling common letters. Generallie here is to be noted, that there is no figur lakking in our words, which is receiued in the learned tungs, and ar by them called metaplasms, or altera∣tions of the words form and fauor. Bycause the finer English peple vse to pronounce their words with a delicacie euen com∣parable to the gallant speches, which delicacie being set down in writing, sheweth the vse of those metaplasms, to be no lesse in ours, then it was in theirs. Secondlie we ar oftimes enforced to break our words in the 2. latter end of out lines, and to write out that in the beginning of the next line, which we left vnwriten in the former. For tho it be said of Augustus Caesar, that he vsed to write the remnant of his word in the end, vnder the same line with a croked stroke about it, yet it is handsomer to write it in the next line, bycause we vse not Augustus Caesar, for an example in learning tho we do it in gouernment. Wherefor it is good to know not onelie how manie letters go to a syllab in euerie simple and vncom∣pound word, but also which be the full partes of euerie com∣pound, that the hole words in composition maie be deuided to∣gither, as all the letters of one syllab ar to go togither, as in cramp-ring, not cram-pring, in dis-honest, not dish-onest, like dish-clout, in as-well, not a-swell, in as-much, not a-smuch, Which consideration tucheth not onelie such as write, but also such as spell out of writing, bycause those letters ar to be spelled togither which ar to be writen togither. Thirdlie the knowledge of cōposition is good to discern the 3. difference of meaning, which is to be expressed in writing. For when the same words be so placed, as theie maie be cōstrewed simply or ioyntly theie brede the fallax, which is called the error by deuiding those words, which ar to be vnited, or by vniting those which ar to be deuided, as a-wry, a-waie, be-long, begin, & such other, haue great diuersitie in their force being compound from that which theie haue when theie be single. Fourthlie the composition verie oftentimes altereth the quantitie & tuning 4. of the words as showmaker, & partaker, be not of the same tuning
and yet maker, and taker be. Likewise soothsaier, neuerthelesse, forasmuch. Wherefor so necessarie a point deserueth the know∣ledge. Fiftlie composition must be well considered for two other speciall points, both in writing and spelling, besides these, by∣cause 5. it shaketh two generall rules in spelling and so conse∣quētlie in breaking of the syllabs. Whereof the first is, that if a 1 cōsonant com betwene two vowells, it is to be spelled with the latter, as in me-mo-rie, se-di-ti-ous. The second is, that those 2. consonants must be spelled togither, which maie begin a word in the same combination, as be-smear, bycause we saie smart, smatch. Now composition, breaketh both these rules, for against the first it will saie, red-olent, ab-olish. And against the second it will saie. Trans-pose, not tran-spose, tho we saie spent, spoun, by∣cause in distribution, which spelling doth imply, euerie parcell must haue his own letter. Now as the knowledge of composition, is verie necessarie for the right writing of our tung, vpon these and such other cō∣siderations, so it is no hard thing to com by, bycause neither the naturall English compounds, nor yet the enfranchised stranger do offer anie difficultie in their knowing. For the general table which followeth conteining all our simple words either there named, or by their proportiō to be easilie reclamed to the same cadence, whensoeuer two or mo of those simples go into one, it will saie itself, that this word is a compound, which maie easi∣lie be proued by comparing the compound with the simples, if anie be so simple, that he cannot discern a compound which bringeth all his simples with their own letters, without the help of a table. Farewell, warfare, waiward, toward, be com∣pounds, whose simples be, fare, war, well, waie, or awaie, ward, to, and ar to be found in the table. As for the foren compositions theie be enfranchised hole, & be also most of them in the table, tho with som English hew, yet so as their strangership maie appear. And such as be com∣pounded with the latin prepositions, haue them also clear most what. Which latin prepositions when we vse before our words, we fashion them to clasp with our letters following, as the La∣tins do in the like cause, as displease, disease, disworship, complain,
contein. Affaires, afford. Incom. Howbeit we vse their pewfel∣lowes, The English proposition, commonlie set after the words. English prepo sitions onlie in composition. which answer to them in our tung commonlie after the words: As go before, com behind, sit beneath, speak of, run from, stand betwene. The foren prepositions be generallie known to euerie childe in euerie Accidence. Our chefe prepositions, and those not significant, but in composition be these, A. as, ago, agre, ado, abide, aswash. Be, as besmutched, bespit, bethump, behead, betake. For, as forthink, forfet, forshow, forsake. Fore, as fore∣cast, forestall, foretell. Gain, as gainsaie, gainstand. Mis, as misdemeanor, misuse, mishap. Vn, as vnkinde, vnfrind, vntrew, vnpleasant, vnthrift. Thus much concerning composition, which I take to be a verie necessarie instrument for vs to vse, in the finding out of our right writing, bycause it bringeth in the sim∣ple English words hole, without anie either losse or increase, or other metamorphosis, then vpon such allowable causes, as I haue alledged: & as for strangers enfranchised, it bringeth them in so hole, as the originall is soon bewraied, tho theie lean som what to the English shore for their demsonship. Cap. XX. Of Deriuation. Deriuation naturally succedeth composition. For as com∣positiō handleth the coplements of seuerall hole words which by their vniting make a new one: so deriuation handleth the coplements of one hole word, and som addition put to it, which addition of it selfe signifieth nothing alone, but bing put to the hole word qualifyeth it to som other vse, then the primitiue was put to, as frind, being a primitiue receiueth manie additions, which yet signify nothing in the sense of their addition, tho theie change the force of frind, as frindship, frindlie frindlinesse, frinds, frindeth, frinded, frinding, frindedst, &c. For I do not entend to deall with anie point of deriuation in this place, but where the right writing maie com in question, which is in addition onelie, either direct, or contract, which contrac∣tion shortenerh the word vpon cause, that is to be resolued to 1. Contracts. the originall, as monthlie, for monethlie, cifring, for cifering, learnd, for learned, children, for childeren, past, for passed. A fi∣gur
of great and common vse in our tung, euen where it is not perceiued but to the verie curious obseruer. The diminutiues with vs enlarg not, but as in sense theie lessen 2. Diminutiues. the thing, so in speche theie shorten the word, and cut of the primitiue length, & therefor I hold them among primitiues for their first term, tho for som accidentarie points, which shalbe noted hereafter, theie fall within compasse of this title, as by diminution we call Iohn, Iak, Richard, Dic, Ione, Iug, Barptho∣lomew, Bat, Christofer, Kit, Elisabeth, Besse, Catherin, Cate. Which deriuations in respect of som plurall numbers & posses∣siues, ar subiect to the rule of such words, as be of like cadence. Pak, pik, dug, rat, fit, chesse, pate, but of themselues theie be pro∣portion ate originalls. Wherefor I define that word to be a deriuatiue in this place which altereth from the primitiue or first head, by som additiō, VVhat a deri∣uatiue is. which addition of it self signifieth nothing alone, tho in additiō it qualify the primitiue, to som other vse, then it is of it self, as God, godlie, godhead, good, goodlie, goodnesse, wasp, waspish, fel∣low, fellowship, fine, finenesse, win, winning, pine, pineth, &c. All Deri. English. Foren. deriuatiues be either English, as heauinesse, woddish, wisest, wit∣tie: or theie be strangers enfranchised, as temperance, continencie, argument, admonition. As for the stranger enfranchised deriua∣tiues, the title of enfranchisment will examin them, besides that the generall table will set them furth plane, bycause theie be transported vnto vs holelie, tho with som English habit, as the conusance of their enfranchising. The English deriuatiues be either perfit, when the vowell of the primitiue is not clipt awaie by the addition, as in holelie, wor∣thienesse, Deri. Perfit. Vnperfit. cosinage, singlelie, simplelie: or vnperfit, when it is, as in fine, fining, dare, daring, carie, carying. Again, all our English Deri. Sustanti. Accidēt. deriuatiues be either substantiarie, or accidentarie. I call those deriuatiues sustantiarie, which tho theie do com of som other, yet theie themselues serue again for heads to other, such as the grāmarians in our learned tungs cal possessiues, localls, materialls, aduerbialls, &c. As tré, treén, vpland, vplandish, war, warrious, warlike, martiall, martialist, vertew, vertewous, vertewouslie, England, English, &c. I call those accidentarie deriuatiues, which concern numbers tenses, persons, and such properties as
we call accidents in the learned handling of such words, as wo, woes, cry cryes, word, words, fish, fishes, tre, trees, agré, agrees, write, writen, wrate, wrote, writeth, wrotest, writest, scrible, scriblest, contract for scribledest, hadst, contract for haueddest. I shall not nede to stand much vpon prouf, that deriuation is a verie nedefull instrument, for the furtherance of our right writing, considering the thing it self, being set down doth in∣fer Of the vse of deriuation in ortogrofie. the profit therewithall, euen to euerie mans sense, which is willing to se it. Wherefor leauing the profitablenesse there∣of to their iudgement, which shall proue it, I will first handle the Sustantiarie, and then the accidentarie deriuations, which both ar much bound to the rule of proportion, bycause their deriuatiue addition claspeth with the cadence and end of the pure originall. For the better performance whereof this is to be noted that euerie deriuable word endeth either in a vowell or in a consonant. As for the consonant ending, the addition to it is allwaie one. In the vowellish ending, there is more va∣rietie, bycause the end thereof is somtime in a single vowell, somtime in a diphthong, and the single vowell is somtime silent, somtime sounding, all which giue cause of obseruation in the putting to of the additions, as shall appear when the addi tions be known, which somtime bring furth adiectiues, som∣time substantiues, somtime different numbers, somtime dif∣ferent persons. The deriuate substantiue terminations be com∣monlie Substantiue terminations. these, nesse, as madnesse, ship, as workmanship, age, as cosinage, dom, as fredom, kingdom, th, as length, strength, welth, helth, truth, let, as chaplet, hood, as womanhood, rie as knauerie, all, as refusall, denyall, ance, as defiance, in g, as cham∣bring, tie, as frailtie, onelesse that com of the enfranchised sub∣stantiues, ment, as punishment, yer, as lawyer, er, as writer, our, as demeanour. The deriuate adiectiue terminations be commōlie Adiectiue ter minations. these, lie, as fatherlie, monthlie, wiselie, an, as Italian, Grecian, Roman, ish, as Scotish, campish, kentish, where the single conso∣nant serueth both the syllabs, without dubling, ie, as witie, bau∣die, sandie, without dubling the consonant, also the simple pos∣sessiue, s, as Kings, Quenes, mothers. Neither do I se anie cause where tovse his, sauing after words which end in s, as Socrates his councell was this, Platoes that, Aristotels this, er, as wi∣ser,
est, as wisest, ing, as louing, ed, as loued, ght, as taught, thought, en, as writen, threaten, slain, contract for slaien, ashen, oken, bir∣chen, the first participialls, the second materialls, ous, as vertew∣ous. The deriuatiue number terminations, es, s, n, as muses, wiues, words, tops, oxen, howsen. The deriuatiue person termi∣nations, Number ter∣minations. Person termi∣nations. est, as louest, eth, as loueth, ith, as seith. Which is when the simple endeth in the sharp, e, which maie not be exstinguis∣hed, as the silent is in thriue, wiue, thriueth wiueth, edst, as louedst. Now all these additions ar to be measured according to the ending of those words whereunto theie clasp, & be allwaie one, but where contraction shortneth them, and allwaie hole but for the silent, e, which is somtime drouned, when the addition beginneth with a vowell. The sustantiue and adiectiue termi∣nations serue for those deriuations, which I call substantiarie, the number and person, terminations for the accidentarie. In both which these notes take place, first if it maie be that the primi∣tiue 1 be writen hole, & then the addition put to it, nothing being like to let it, saue contraction which shortneth, and the begin∣ning vowell in the addition defacing the ending, e, silent in the simple. Second, that where the addition is but a simple, s, af∣ter 2. consonants, we maie vse either of the finall esses, s, or, e, as the pen shall require, wrings, or wringe, trips, or tripe. Thirdlie 3. that vowels, diphthongs, and the ending, h, or, s, haue es in their deriuatiues, as daies, sees, pyes, varies, does, foes, trewes, newes, bowes, dawes, dishes, fetches, matches, howses, horses. Fourth, 4. that such plurall numbers as bear no additions, be no naturall deriuatiues, as lice, mice, fete, men, of lowse, mouse, foot man. That 5. foren deriuations haue respect allwaie to their own originalls, as cōstruction, persecution, argument, abundance, com not of constrew, persew, argew, abound, but of their own latin primitiues. That 6. the plurall, e, encrcaseth no syllabs, but in the qualifyed, s, c, g, & sh, as vses, cases, causes, graces, spaces, spices, scurges, surges, wishes, rishes, aches. Where the passant, e, still resembleth the quik, i. That for the right taking of our termination in shon, we ar to mark the naturall foren deriuation verie carfullie, as action, 7. passion, reflexion, pronuntiation, all which sound like to our shon. The deriuatiues of words ending in the qualifying, e, kepe their forevowells sound, as bake, baking, take, taking. A number
of such notes ar there in our tung, which I cannot intend to dwell on, bycause, I shew but the waie herein to others, if theie list to beat the path, my self minding a further labor. In these and such like considerations doth deriuation shew it self verie seruiceable for the right writing of our English tūg, which will appear more particularlie in the generall table. Cap. XXI. Of Distinction. THis title of distinction reacheth verie far, bycause it con∣teineth all those characts, and their vses, which I called before signifying, but not sounding, which help verie much, naie all in all to the right and tunable vttering of our words and sentences, by help of those characts, which we set down, and se in writing. The number of them be thirtene, and their names be Comma, Colon, Period, Parenthesis, Interogatiō, long time, shorte time, sharp accent, flat accent, streight accēt, the se∣uerer, the vniter, the breaker. Whose forces, & vses I will run tho∣row in order as theie ar named. Cōma, is a small crooked point, Comma. which in writing followeth som small branch of the sentence, & in reading warneth vs to rest there, and to help our breth a litle, as Who so shall spare the rod, shall spill the childe. Colon is noted Colon. by two round points one aboue another, which in writing fol∣loweth som full branch, or half the sentence, as Tho the daie be long: yet at the last commeth euensong. Period is a small round Period. point, which in writing followeth a perfit sentence, and in rea∣ding warneth vs to rest there, and to help our breth at full, as The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. Parenthesis is expres∣sed Parenthesis. by two half circles, which in writing enclose som perfit branch, as not mere impertinent, so not fullie concident to the sentence, which it breaketh, and in reading warneth vs, that the words inclosed by them, ar to be pronounced with a lower & quikker voice, then the words either before or after them, as Bycause we ar not able to withstand the assalt of tentation (such is the frailtie of our natur) therefor we praie God, that our infir∣mitie be not put to the hasard of that triall. Interogation is expres∣sed by two points one aboue another, wherof the vpper is som∣times Interogation.
croked which both in writing & reading teacheth vs, that a question is asked there, where it is set, as Who taught the popin∣iaye to speak? the bellie: These fiue characts, that I haue allredie named, ar helps to our breathing, & the distinct vtterance of our speche, not ruling within the word, as al those do which follow, but by the word, & therefor com here in note, by cause theie ar creaturs to the pen, & distinctions to pronoūc by, & therefor, as theie ar to be set down with iudgement in writing, so theie ar to be vsed with diligence in the right framing of the tēder childes mouth. The two next concern the time, that is, the long or Time. short pronouncing of syllabs, and ar not allwaie to be marked ouer that syllab, whereon theie shew their force, but with discretion & vpon great cause for som manifest distinction, which rule we haue of the Latins, who vse their accents in that sort, and truble not their writing therewith, so much as the Grekes do, much lesse so much as the Hebrewes. The long time, is expres∣sed Long time. by a streight outright line, which being set ouer anie vowell or diphthong, telleth vs, that the same vowell or diphthong, must be pronounced long, as repining, perūsing, repēnting. The Short time. short time, is expressed by an half circle opening vpward, which standing aboue anie vowell or consonant, signifieth that the same is to be pronounced short and quik, as perfiting, natŭrall, periŭrie, tormĕnter, carpĕnter. In the other fiue I gaue no further note then that theie were to be well markt, euen for that theie were writen to such an end, by cause the matter of their periods and branching, whereof manie learned men haue writen hole treatises, belōgeth not to this place, but onelie their form to the eie, and their vse to the ear, which tendeth to the qualifying of our voice. For these two distinctions of time, which shew their force in words of two or mo syllabs, as the accēts do in monosyl labs, I haue at this time to giue onlie som certain rules gathered vpon the dubling of our consonants, & the qualifying, e, which qualifying, e, is a great leader in the certaining of our tung, for manie vses, but chefelie for the time: My first rule is, that a nūber 1. of our deriuatiues ar short in their last syllab saue one, euen where the vowell cummeth befor two consonants whether the same or other, as perfitnesse, trauĕlling, peuishnesse, which argwe∣eth that their simples be such in natur as we call trochees, hauing
the first syllab long and the latter short, or rather pirrichies ha∣uing both short, perfit, peuish, trauĕll, record, which differeth much frō recōrding, and recōrder, of recōrde, the spondè. Again 2. those primitiues which end in a quik diphthong do shorten the same dipthong in their deriuatiues as fĕllow, follow, hăllow, fel∣lowship, follower, hallowed, whereas allow, endow, delaie, enioy, bring furth, endewed, allowance, anoyance. Again if the primitiue 3. simple word haue the qualifying, e, in the end, as the vowell before it is sharp and long, so is it in the deriuatiue, as pre∣scribe, prescribing, endure enduring. If the primitiue or simple word haue not, e, in the end, the vowell before the last conso∣nant is short & quik in both the primitiue & the deriuatiue, as perfit, perfiting, fortun, fortŭnat, natur, natŭrall, onelesse the primitiues single ending consonant be dubled in the deriua∣tiue, as concur, concurring. In which case either of dubling the same consonant, or of position by diuerse, the syllab is somtime lōg, as forbid, forbidding, transport, transpōrting, somtime short, as gospell, gospĕller, cōfort, cōforting. This shortnesse or lēgth of time in the deriuatiues is a great leader, where to write or not to write the qualifying, e, in the end of simple words. For who will write, natur, perfit, measur, treasur, with an, e, in the end knowing their deriuatiues to be short, natŭrall, perfitlie, measŭred, treasŭ∣rer? & who will not write, procure, endure, allure, endite, requite, The qualify∣ing. e. with an, e, finding their deriuatiues, procūrer, endūrance, allūre∣ment, endīting, requītall, to haue the last saue one long? whereby the vse of the qualifying, e, is more then most euident. Whence also this generall rule for the writing thereof is to be gathe∣red, that if ye desire to know whether the qualifying, e, be to be writen in the end of anie word or no, ye must vse the help of som deriuatiue, whether of two or of mo syllabs, whereby the time and tune of the deriuatiue, the, e, or not, e, in the ori∣ginall is perceiued. For if the deriuatiue be long and shrill, the primitue hath, e, as presuppose, conclude, remoue, prepare must be writen with, e, bycause the last syllab saue one in presuppōsing conclūding, remōuing, prepāred, is long. And again, fortun profit, comfort, must haue no, e, bycause fortŭnat, profiting, comforter, haue the last saue one short. So likwise in bissyllabs pine, pining, pin, pinning, mate, mating, mat, matting. The like rule by conuersiō 4.
will serue for time, that where the last saue one in the deriua∣tiue is short, the last in the primitiue is also short, as comforting, ransăking, comfort, ransăk, and the contraries long. The other syllabs besides these for both time and time in natur, follow the direction of the last syllab, as theie do also for the force of euerie vowell, diphthong, consonant or combination. Thus much cō∣cerning time at this time. The sharp accent is a streight line ri∣sing toward the right hand, which sheweth that the vowell or Accents, sharp. diphthong, ouer which it is, must be sounded sharp and high, as ráge, crépe, mine, hóme, púre. The flat accent, is a streight line rising towards the left hand, Flat. which sheweth that the vowell or diphthong ouer which it is must be sounded flat and quik, as ràg, stèp, thin, fòr, stùr. The streight accent, is an vpright perpendicular line falling vp∣on Sreight. som letter of duble force to shew in whether kinde it is to be vsed, as charact, thin, giue. For euerie of these thré accents, these rules ar to be obserued. That for cumbring of the lines and 1. shew of difficultie, no accent is to be vsed but where nede is, and therefor where the accent is sene, the place is to be noted. That the sharp & flat accents ar onelie to be set vpon the last syllab, 2. where the sharp hath manie causes to presēt it self: the flat onlie vpon som rare difference, as refùse, refúse, presènt, presént, recòrd, recórd, diffèr, différ, seuèr, seuére, and certain other of that sort, which ar noted in the generall table. The streight perpendicu∣lar accent, serueth onelie for those letters, diphthongs and co∣plements 3. which be of duble forces, and is set vpon them in their lesse vsuall force: bycause their common and vsuall is more thē their half naturall, and therefor not to be distinguished with anie accent. The duble forced letters be these, i, o, ou, ow, c, f, g, s, ch, th. Whereof c, f, and t, shall not nede anie expresse accent at The dubled forced leters. &c. C. all, bycause c, in hir weak force either goeth befoer i, or, e, or hath the qualifying, e, following hir, as hence, auance, once, pro∣nounce, which wilbe sufficient notes for, c. F, soundeth vpon F. the consonantish u, onelie in, if, the abuerb conditionall, and of, the preposition. T, is cosen to, c, onelie in enfranchised words, T. where a vowell followeth after, t, as condition, faction, molestati∣on. Neither is, s, to be noted with anie accent, after, l, m, n, r,
or the silent, e, tho after them it sound still vpon the z, as hills, brims, guns, cars, times, lines. The chefe pla ces of nedefull accents. I. O. Therefor the chefe residence of the streight accent is ouer, i, in terminations in iue, as giue, aliue, thriue. Where the contrarie sound cheks, as giue, liue, siue, shriuen. Ouer, o, in terminations in oue, where, o, soundeth strong, as lòue, gròue, thróue, where the contrarie sound cheks, as loue, houe, aboue, moue. If, o, com in anie place not allredie noted for, u, and of anie difficultie for distinction, the streight accent is to be set ouer it, as móther for a girle in difference from mòther. Ou, and ow, sound most com∣monlie Ou. ow. vpon the, u, and therefor if the streight accent be put vpon the, o, as in doutfull cases it wold be, it is to be sounded full vpon the, o, and not, u. G, before, a, o, u, is out of contro∣uersie G. strong, and therefor the difference is, when, g, cumming before, i, or, e, soundeth strong, which is contrarie to the natu∣rall, or rather the Romane vse thereof, as in gig, begin, giue, geld, gird, gek, gilt and such other, where g, is somwhat man∣nish, and therefor is to be noted with the strong accent, and thereby expelleth the, u, which is made for hir strong supple∣ment, in guy, guide, and yet hath another note of hir own, which must haue som accēt, if this be vsed. For languish, anguish language, and such differ from guy, and guesse. But he that is ac∣quainted with the Hebrew tung, will not meruell that a sillie point maketh a great distinction in the force of the same letters. S, betwene two vowells, is a maruellous deputie for, z, and S. therefor wold haue som handsom note, which will fall som∣what vnhandsomlie, the, s, being such a gangrell, onelesse the streight accent maie be conuenientlie set within the vpper bought, whereof, f, hath the like, thorow his verie hart. For in notes of distinction the most commodious charact is best cur∣rant. For ch, where it is strong the number is not manie, and Ch. therefor it maie well abide the perpendicular accent ouer the coplement, as charact, archangell. Th, is maruellous generall, Th. and therefor in such generall words, as the, this, that, therefor, thence, and mo of that race, it nedeth not anie sensible distin∣ction, where common vse will streight waie be the teacher. Howbeit in manie places it will proue nedefull to note the weak, th, with this streight accent, tho som generall rules maie
oftimes case it. As that when anie word, which is both a noun and a verb endeth in th, the noun soundeth strong, as breath, mouth, and the verb weak, as sooth, breath, mouth. And again o, before, th, with, e, following next, soundeth vpon the weak side, as mother, other, brother. Therefor the perpendicular ac∣cent sitteth vpon the weak, s, and, th, vpon the strong, i, ó, óu, ów, g, ch, where nede doth requite. If anie wold haue two cō∣tinent letters both to be noted with the streight accent, as giue, one betwene them both maie serue the turn by learned presidents in the like case. This rule of distinction must be som what curiouslie kept in the generall table, as the common ma∣ster, & in the elemētarie reading, as the common introductorie. Thus much for the thré accents. The seuering note is expressed by two points, the one following the other, which being set o∣uer The seuerer. two vowells or the latter vowell in a diphthong declare that theie be to be referred to diuerse syllabs, whereas otherwise theie might belong to one, as going, variëtie, alliëd, vowëll follow∣ing. The vniting line is expressed by a long stroke betwene two syllabs, whereby it is ment that those two syllabs ar par cells of The vniter. one word, being seuered so either by chance thorough the wri∣ters ouersight, or vpō som particular consideration, as for-think, fore-think. The breaker is expressed by two outright strokes one The breaker. vnder another in the end of a line, and giueth vs to wit, that the word which it so breaketh is parted by full syllabs, whereof som be writen in the line before: som in that which followeth, as con-tr-rie, ma-gi-strate. Here is the rule of composition and right spelling to be considered. These points be theie, which I think most worthie the consideration in the matter of distinction, tho the particular argumēt maie sprede further. Cap. XXII. Of Enfranchisment ALL the words which we do vse in our tung be either na∣turall English, and most of one syllab, or borowed of the foren, and most of manie syllabs. Whereby our tung se∣meth to haue two heds, the one homeborn, the other a stranger where of either hath a great train following it. The causes of ei∣ther
be these. While the inhabitants of our cuntrie neither en∣cūbred The cause why our words be so much borowed of the strāger. their braines with much studie, neither bissied their heds with great trafik, neither pleased their fantsies with far trauell, theie vsed no other terms, thē such as their own nede enforced them vnto, which being all waie fed with home occasions desi∣red no help of forē tungs, to vtter those things with their words which were deuised without their wits. But after that the desire of learning enflamed studie, the longing for gain brought in great traffik, the delight to range, did cause men trauell, new oc∣casions brought furth new words, as either more cunning made waie to more terms, or as strange deuises did seke strange deli∣ueries. For when the minde is fraught with matter to deliuer, it is still in pain vntill it haue deliuered, and therefor to haue the deliuerie such, as maie discharge the thing well, and content all parties, both by whom and to whom the matter is deliuered, it seketh both home helps, where theie be sufficient, and signifi∣cant, and where the own home yeildeth nothing at all, or not pithie enough, it craueth help of that tung, from whence it re∣ceiued the matter of deliuerie. Hence commeth it that we haue our tung commonlie both stored and enlarged with our neigh∣bours speches, and the old learned tungs. A thing not proper to vs alone, but commō to all those, which vse anie speche in mat∣ters more then ordinarie, naie in matters aboue the brutish. The necessitie of these foren words must nedes be verie great bycause the number of them is so verie manie, as it doth ap∣pear most plainlie by the generall table, where hole ranks of enfranchised terms do match togither in one front. To whom we ar much beholden, for that theie vouchsafe to be com English to serue our nede, as their peple ar to thank our tung, for returning the like help, in cases of like nede, tho their occasions to vse ours be nothing so often, as ours to vse theirs. This benefit of the foren tung, which we vse in ma∣king VVhat enfrā∣chisment is. their termes to becom ours, with som alteration in form, according to the frame of our speche, tho with the con∣tinewing in substance of those words, which ar so vsed, that it maie appear both whence theie com, and to whom theie com, I call enfranchisment, by which verie name the words
that ar so enfranchised, becom bond to the rules of our writing, which I haue named before, as the stanger denisons be to the lawes of our cuntrie. And tho the learned enfranchiser maie somtime yeild to much to the forē, either for shew of learning, or by persuasion, that it is best so, yet he doth not well, conside∣ring that the verie natur of enfranchisment doth enforce obedi∣ence to the enfranchisers lawes, not to be measured by his bare person, but by the custom, reason & sound, of his cuntries speche. That foren words enfran∣chised ar to yeild to our writing. And as vnaduised cunning, or not sufficiētlie aduised, doth plaie to much vpon the foren string, being verie loth to leaue out anie one letter, as eleemosinarie, for amner, hospitall and victuall for spitle vitle and such other. So mere ignorance and not wil∣ling to learn, but presuming vpon it self writeth so vnwarilie, as as whole, for hole, which is manifest greke, & to begin with h, &c. And as it is verie good for our English man to know the force of his own naturall words, so it cannot be but good to know the foren, if the right in writing, be anie right worth waing, signet, for a litle signe, or seall, and cygnet, for a young swan, ar descried that waie, In signe, g, soundes not, in signify it doth. Wherefor I think it best for the strange words to yeild to our lawes, by∣cause we arboth their vsuaries & fructuaries, both to enioy their frutes, and to vse themselues, and that as near as we can, we make them mere English, as Iustiniā did make the incorporate peple, mere Romanes, and banished the terms, of both latins & yeildlings. The vse of this enfranchisement is as large in our tung, as our nede is in deliuerie, which being capable of all arguments, makes vs subiect to all words. I know no other diuision of en∣franchised, That it is best to write foren words, with the English letters after the English sound. words, then after the tungs fom whence we borow them, as Latin, Greke, Hebrew, Italian, French, Spanish, Dutch, Scottish, &c. Which ar freid amongst vs, as the present nede of either them with vs, or vs with them, doth sew to be in∣corporate. Which we haue from which, it is not here so nedefull to de∣clare, where the question is not of the substance & sense of the word, but of the right writing. And yet the generall table will Rules to be ob serued in en∣franchising of foren words. shew that I haue not bene verie negligēt that waie. But concer ning the writing, me think the cōmō mē ought to yeild therein
to the vse of those that be learned, least if theie will not, theie misse as foullie in the writing of them, as theie vse them mad∣lie, in mistaking their meaning. And again the learned in their enfranchising them must nedes haue their eie, vpon our proportiō our accent, our deriuation and such other, according to the reason, custom, and sound of our speche, reseruing that to the stranger which our tung cānot rule, as if ye once passe the third syllab, our tung is husht. To proue anie of these things by ex∣amples, which be euerie where so commō, it shall not nede. In this verie chapter of enfranchisment, tho I do not affect anie ex∣traordinarie forenism, yet how manie foreners am I constra∣ned to vse? Uerie, chapter, enfranchisment, affect, extraordina∣rie, foren, forenism, constrained, vse, in this last sentence do easi∣lie proue, that it were to foren from the matter, to seke exam∣ples offoren words. Wherefor to knit vp this note of enfranchis∣ment in few words, the English rule for writing, must be the right thereof, tho it kepe still manie signes of a stranger, tho yet incorporat with vs, which rule the Italiā semeth to obserue both wiselie and well. If ye write philosophie, ye write to much vpon the foren, if filosohie, not to much vpon the English. If ye will nedelie kepe the clear foren, it were good to vse the ordi∣narie premunition, (that it is so writen in the primitiue tung.) And whereas the learnedder sort, as Tullie him self, allow not the enterlacing of Greke words in Latin, the meaning of that their saing tendeth to this my conclusion. For if we haue of our own, as significant and as proper, what nede a rich man to be a thefe? If we haue either none or not so toward, why in our own nede, shall we not enfranchis forenners? If we mean to vse them but for a time, or to som end the premunition will be our warrant. If we mean to make them ours, then let them take an othe to be trew to our tung, and the ordinances thereof. If this point be not agrëid on, great inconueniences will follow, and all the rules, which be kept in our tung, must take exception against the foren, or the foren against them, when theie com to the writing. Wherefor it will proue best for all parts, that our tung, & the rules of hir right writing be made the generall right. For the naturall words, the propertie is hir own, for the foren the vse
is hirs, and therefor the handling of them to hir own best. Neither must anie learned man think it strange to write fo∣ren Englished terms after an English ear, tho it be contrarie to his acquaintance, seing it is not contrarie to the custom of his cuntrie. Neither is it anie embasing to learning, to lend the common man the vse of his learning, tho he kepe the sub∣stance: neither yet both to se, and suffer the learneddest terms that he hath, to com vnder an English hand, seing there is no dishonor ment them, where there be made peres to our own. Thus much at this time concerning the right writing of foren words, when theie becom ours to vse, and attire themselues to the English complexion, which we ourselues think reaso∣nable well of, and I as well as anie, what account soeuer my thinking maie be of, in such an argument, as I haue thought thus much of. Cap. XXIII. Of Prerogatiue I Said before, that those men, which will giue anie certain direction for the writing of anie tung, or for anie thing else, which concerneth anie tung, must take som period in the tung, or else their rules will proue vnrulie. For euerie tung hath a certain ascent from the meanest to the height, and a discent again from the height to the meanest, the one in the remouing kinde, as the other was in mounting. And as in the ascent it is not yet com to the assurance of note, bycause it is not thorouglie artificiall, so in the discent it growes not worth the noting, bycause it becoms rude again, and in a maner withered. Hence commeth it, that Demosthenes his age is the prince of Grece, Tullies age the flour of Rome, whose tungs if learned writing had not commended to the tuition of books, theie had ben of small worth, naie of no remembrance, long before this daie: as the spokē tungs of the same soils beginning in their daies to change, be now quite altered, or at the least nothing like that, where the carnation grew, tho full of good flowers in an other kinde. So that kooks giue life where bodies bring but death. Mark the Greke or Latin writers before, and
after those mens ages, and by comparing them with these, ye shall se the ods that I speak of, and the one to rude to be ru∣led, the other departing from their rule, and yeilding to a change. This period of mine, and these risings to mount, as the dismounting again, till decaie ensew, do giue vs to wit, that as all things else, which belong to man be subiect to change, so the tung also is, which changeth with the most, and yet conti∣neweth with the best. Whereupon it must nedes be that there is som sóulish substance in euerie spoken tung, which fedeth this change, euen with perceptible means, that pretend altera∣tion. For if anie tung be absolute, and fré from motion, is is shri∣ned vp in books; and not ordinarie in vse, but made immortall by the register of memorie. This secret misterie, or rather quikning spirit in euerie spo∣ken VVhat prero∣gatiue is. tung, and therefor in ours, call I prerogatiue, bycause when sound hath don his best, when reason hath said his best, when custom hath effected, what is best in both, this prerogatiue will except against anie of them all, and all their rules, be theie ne∣uer so generall, be theie neuer so certain. Whereby it maketh a waie to a new change that will follow in som degré of the tūg, if the writers period be chosen at the best. I cannot compare this customarie prerogatiue in speche to anie thing better, then vnto those, which deuise new garments, and by law ar left to the libertie of deuise. Hence cummeth it in apparell, that we be not like ourselues anie long time, tho the best & most semelie (like an artificial rule) do best please the wisest peple. But by the waie is it not a maruell, that the period of a tung, being so quik an in∣strumēt, shall continew lōger, then the fashiō of apparell, being a thing so thought on, & sadlie misformd? Vpon the like libertie in speche, to be hir own caruer, com our exceptions against our generall rules. Hēce coms the writing of com, the simple with, o, the compound with, u, cumfort cumpasse. Hence, whom, & most sound lik, rome & roste, tho not qualifyed with, e. Hence cometh it that, enough, bough, tough & such other primitiues be so strāglie writen, and more strangelie sounded. Whereby prerogatiue se∣meth to be a quiksiluer in custom, euer stirring, and neuer staied tho the generall custom, as a thing of good staie do still offer it self to be ordered by rule, as a nere frind to reason. This stir∣ring
quintessence the leader to change in a thing that is natu∣rallie changeable, and yet not blamed for the change, som not verie well aduised peple, esteme as an error, and a priuat misuse contrarie to custom, bycause it semes to be a verie imperious controller, but theie ar deceiued. For in dede this prerogatiue, tho it chek generall conclusions, thorough priuat oppositions, yet that opposition came not of priuat men, but it is a priuat thing it self, and the verie life blood, which preserueth tungs in their naturall best from the first time that theie grew to accoūt, till theie com to decaie, & a new period growen, different from the old, tho excellent in the altered kinde, and yet it self to de∣part, and make roum for another, when the circular turn shall haue ripened alteration. I take this present period of our English tung to be the verie height thereof, bycause I find it so excellentlie well fined, both for the bodie of the tung it self, and for the customarie writing thereof, as either foren workmanship can giue it glosse, or as homewrought hanling can giue it grace. When the age of our peple, which now vse the tung so well, is dead and departed there will another succede, and with the peple the tung will al∣ter and change. Which change in the full haruest thereof maie proue comparable to this, but sure for this which we now vse, it semeth euen now to be at the best for substance, and the brauest for circumstance, and whatsoeuer shall becom of the English state, the English tung cānot proue fairer, then it is at this daie, if it maie please our learned sort to esteme so of it, and to be∣stow their trauell vpon such a subiect, so capable of ornament, so proper to themselues, and the more to be honored, bycause it is their own. The force of prerogatiue is such as maie not be disobeied tho it seme to disorder som well ordered rule, and cause som peple wonder which weie not the cause. Wherefor when anie note shall com in place quite contra∣rie to the common not custom, but precept, then must we nedes think of prerogatiues power, a great princesse in proces, and a parent to corruption, but withall intending to rase another Phenix from the formet ashes. Which prerogatiue, who soeuer he be, that will not graunt to anie tung, denyeth it to haue life, onelesse his meaning be, by registriug som period in it of most
excellent note to restraine prerogatiue, and to preserue the tūg, which he enrolleth by writing from the peples prophaning, by making of it learned, and exempting it from corruption, as our book lāguages be, whose rule is so certain, as theie dream of no change. This prerogatiue and libertie, which the peple hath to vse both speche and pen at will, is the cause, and yet not bla∣med therefor, why the English writers be now finer, then theie were som hundreth yeares ago, tho som antiquarie, will take the old writing to be finer. But the questiō is wherein finenesse standeth. So was Salust deceiued among the Romans, liuing with eloquent Tullie, and writing like ancient Cato. But in one generall word to tuch both this prerogatiue, and That the lear∣neddest tungs agre with vs in this kinde of precept. my other six rules, with the verie generall method, where with I haue traced the right of our writing, I do take them all to be verie well grounded, neither is there anie thing at all, set down by me in waie of obseruation concerning the tung, be it neuer so strange, or rather seme it neuer so strange, but it is as artifi∣ciall, and of as sure note, as the best language is. Which I shall not nede in this so petie a principle to proue by particulars, nei∣ther to raise vp again a sort of horieheded writers, both gram∣marians and greater in the verie best speches, from out of their graues to subscribe to my rules. It is enough for me that the learned find this trew in their own trauell, and that the vnlear∣ned be content to beleue the learned, that I vtter a truth, tho I bring not in a Priscian, or anie Priscianlike ortografer or anie of the twelue old grammarians likned to the nine muses and the thre graces in the Latin tung. Which tung I rest still on, as commonlie best known to our bookish peple. That my cuntrie custom doth fight stoutlie for me, that euen sound it self is sound of my side, and that the best reason, is my greatest frind, naie my verie good Ladie, no man I hope will deny me, being so redie to content him, but more redie to procede, and perform mine enterprise. In this writing prerogatiue, the verie pen it self is a great doer That the pen will haue a stroke in both fashoning & vsing the let∣ters. and of maruellous autoritie, which bycause it is the secretarie a∣lone, and executeth all, that the wit cā deliuer, presumeth there∣for much, & will venter as far, as anie counseller else, of what soeuer calling, tho neuer against reason, whose instrument it is
to satisfie the sight, as the tung doth the ear. Custom, (whose charge prerogatiue is, as the pen is his conueier) fauoreth the pen excedinglie much, and will not stik to stand to it, that a dash with a pen maie hold for a warrant, where both dis∣patch for spede, and grace for fair letter bid the pen be bold. Hence cummeth it that so manie zeds in our tung ar herd, & so few sene, for dexteritie and spede in the currantnesse of writing And as the pē can do this, so I do take it that our verie tung vpō prerogatiue for smoothnesse, vseth the z, so much for, s, & the weak, th, the vwish, o, and such others of the duble sounds. But it maie be said that all our exceptions of most reasona∣ble prerogatiue, maie be well reduced to the generall form, as why not whome, moste, whear, thear, hear, and a number such, as well as, home, coste, fear, and such, which I contra∣rie not at all, tho I se som difficultie in altering that, which our custom hath so grasped. And it were to much almost to re∣quire that of anie wise and learned man, so to arrest exceptions, chefelie in such a thing, as will not proue a standard, tho he that wisheth this, seme to conceiue such a thing, which tho it were granted, yet wold it break out again furth with som other waie, and cause a greater gap. Bycause no banks can kepe it in so strait, bycause no strength can withstand such a stream, bycause no vessell can hold such a liquor, but onelie those banks which in flowing ar content to be somtimes ouerrun, onelie those staies which in furie of water will bend like a bulrush, onelie that vessell which in holding of the humor, will receiue som it self, as allowing of the relice. If anie ignorant pen, either ig∣norantlie, or vpon ignorant ground, tho pretending knowlege and good resolution, do offend against reason, and intrude vpon prerogatiue, that is no right quill, neither auowed by me, as nei∣ther that currant is to be called custom, which holdeth by vsur∣pation, neither that cause to be coūted reason, which hath other beginning, then right knowlege, or other ending, then the natur of that thing, wil seme to admit, for whom that reason speaketh. And certainlie whē I cōsider the thing depelie, as my thoughts in this case haue not bene slight, neither mere superficiall, I can∣not se, when these imperfections be remoued, which still com∣panie perfection, and by easie notes maie easlie be remoued,
with cōtentmēt of the wise, tho with the wonder of som, which ar blinded with their own, but that our tungs prerogatiue maie full well take place, & the pen also his, considering our custom is becom so orderlie, as it maie well be ruled, without either chop∣ping or changing of anie letter at all, or otherwise praing aid of anie forē inuentiō, more thē I haue set down, & said enough of. These be the notes which I promised to giue for the ordering of our tung, & the right writing thereof, wherein if I haue hit right, the right will be my warrant, yea tho it seme not right to som, wherein I comfort my selfe tho I content not all. Aristides once made an oration to the peple of Athens, and was wonder∣fullie well liked, euē with som clapping of hands, or som popu∣lar shout, which generall liking he so misliked, as he asked som frind, who stood next vnto him, what ill he had spoken, bycause it was so liked, as if it were not possible for anie good thing to win general liking, tho the right be rightlie honored of hir own children, as our greatest & best orator in scriptur speaketh. But as it shall please God, so shall my trauell take place if it please, I will be glad, if it please not I will not fear, so the displeased partie be no principall best. I wold neither be an Herod to be eaten with lice for the puf of great allowance, neither yet a Ci∣cero to shrink in Miloes right, for either crashing of armor, or craking of speche, my argumēt being such, as wil bear it self out, & my pacience such, as can abide time till either other mē se me & allow if I deserue, or my self se my self, and amend mine own misse. It is an easie thing to find falt, & therefor much vsed, it is hard to iudge right, and therefor not ordinarie. If learned secre∣taries will hede their pē, & skillfull correctors be charie of their print, neither will these things seme strange, neither prerogatiue be pointed at, but euerie right in writing be mesured by right in iudgement. And in verie dede as I said before, all my notes do more concern the pen, and the dispatch there, then the print and his statarie form. Now will I set down the generall table, which will supply all that by particular words, whatsoeuer is wanting in my generall precept. Cap. XXIIII. The vse of the generall table.
AS I promised before, so now I will knit vp this argument of right writing with a generall table, wherein I haue gathered the most of those words, which we common∣lie Six causes to proue the vse of the table. vse  our hole speche. Which table I take to be verie proper to this purpos, and vpon sundrie causes. First for the confir∣ming of my rules, with multitude of examples, which I proued 1. Multitude of examples. with som few naie oft with som one, when I set them first down: a thing both plane, to enstruct a reader, & also pithie, to enforce a rule by vertew of number. Secondlie, for the perfiting of proportion, a great officer in di∣recting 2. Perfiting of proportion. the pen, as being chefe marshall to set words in araie, according to their sounds. Which sounds bewraing themselues best in the last syllabs, as being therefor best hard, bycause theie ar last said, recommēd themselues therein to the rule of propor∣tion, tho not without both nede, and hope of further help, for the first and midle syllabs, to haue their proportion thereby full and sutable in all. Which help this table promiseth, as precise∣lie examining the beginning of words by order of the letter, as proportion sought out the ending thereof, by likenesse in sound. Which two syllabs, the first and last being certainlie known, if there be no mo, then all be known. But if there be mo, where the extremities be certain, the midle maie be sene. Thirdlie the enfranchised words, which we borow of the fo∣ren, being a great parcell of our ordinarie speche, bycause we 3. A catalog for enfranchismēt deal so much with such matters, as enforce vs thereunto, while we vtter that which we learn, as theie do of whom we learn, not hauing of our selues to expresse that in speche, which we haue but of others to execute in dede: such a generall table is a con∣uenient gide to deliuer them to our eies. Wherewith to cloie the rule of enfranchisment, where som few maie serue by waie of example, were either to duble them, if theie be in both, or to lame the table if theie be but in the rule: both great ouersights. Wherefor contenting the rule with sufficient number, to make it plane, I haue vsed the table for a common treasurie where to laie vp all. Fourthlie the affinitie betwene the rule, which examineth the 4. A supply to manie wants. generall direction by particular proufs & the particular poufs, which range themselues in order, by generall directiō, is so near
& so great, as it cannot otherwise be, but that manie things will fall out in examining the table, which proues by particular, whereby the rules shalbe helpt: besides their confirming in na∣tur of example: as the rules themselues, which direct in generall do offer that assurance, whereby the table shalbe staied, besides the sorting of particular words, into proportionat ranks. Fiftlie and last, the generall table is a mean to help ignorāce, and a waie to ease cunning. For the ignorant man, which can∣not 5. An help for ignorance and an ease for knowledge. iudge of sounds by finenesse of his ear, will soon discern forms by sharpnesse of his eie, & quicklie finde out the vse of a table, tho he seldom fele the sense of a rule. And the skilfull mā also, which can iudge of a rule, if he haue time to read it, in want of leisure to read, maie haue recourse to his table, and so satisfy the sudain, till conuenient time will giue him leaue to studie. The table therefor being a thing of such commoditie, to con∣firm rules, to perfit proportion, to discouer enfranchisments, to supply all wants, to help ignorance, and to ease knowledge: I haue so framed it, I hope, both for store of words, and choice of notes, as it shall perform all this, whereunto it is said to be so profitable. For the words, which concern the substance thereof: I haue gathered togither so manie of them both enfranchised and na∣turall, Of words in the table. as maie easilie direct our generall writing, either by∣cause theie be the verie most of those words which we com∣monlie vse, or bycause all other, whether not here expressed or not yet inuented, will conform themselues, to the presidencie of these. If my leisur wold haue serued, I wold haue sought out mo, but these maie seme enough, which both serue the thing, & discharge me. Who entending at the first to deal no lower, then the entrie to speche, vpō great occasiō haue bene forced further to deuise an Elementarie, a thing as different from my first pur∣pos, as it is verie pertinent to the common profit. For the notes, besides the beginning letter, which I haue cu∣riouslie Of notes in the table. obserued, both to find out most words by that kinde of method, and withall to perform that, which is required in a ta∣ble, to direct him that sekes by order of the letter, I haue had speciall regard to mine own rules, that both table & rule agre∣ing in one, my labour thereby maie sooner win allowance.
Therefor when soeuer anie great cause of note doth offer it self, either in accent for distinction, or in change for propor∣tion, or in strangenesse for deriuation, or in writing for enfran∣chisment, or in propertie for custom, either in penning or pro∣nouncing, bycause it reigneth in both: the accents ar set o∣uer the consonants or vowells, which require distinction: the changing of proportion, the strangenesse of deriuation, the pro∣pertie of custom is presentlie noted: and the enfranchised words be first set down in their naked and naturall colors, and after writen so as our cuntrie doth clothe them, and our custom doth allow them. This haue I don, and thus, which whether it be the right waie, That this is the right waie to certain the trew writing of our English tung. to direct our writing or no: that I leaue to other mens iudge∣ment, contenting my self with these two reasons. First bycause I se those writers, which haue trauelled in other tungs, for the right writing thereof, whose labor also hath taken good ef∣fect, and euen at this daie doth gide all our studies, bycause 1. The president of best writers. their successe proueth the rightnesse of their waie, to haue cut this same course, and by examining ech syllab to haue certained all, not by rasing new characts, but by ruling old custom. Second, bycause he which quite altereth the natur of such 2. The amend∣ment ought not to alter substāce quite. a thing, as is said to be corrupted, doth not amend the old falt but tendereth vs a new substance, as subiect to blame, as the former was, naie oftimes more, the deformitie thereof appear∣ing in the face, and the infirmitie thereof not able to bear age, as the other did, in whose roum it cummeth. Whereas in dede in such a case, where the substance maie remain, tho som er∣ror be stript, a good director will first sift the certain right from the supposed wrong, and in ruling them both call custom to counsell, from whom the right came, as all men know, and by whom the wrong must be helpt, as theie that mark, maie se. But not to tary long in a matter so plane, and so examined before, this is most trew, that long and waking custom, in the matter of speche, wherein she commandeth without vsurpa∣tion, wherein she hath propertie without intrusion, and where∣in she deals not without consideration, of force must haue hir
imperiall voyce, when the question is, what currant were best, for directing of the pē. For that is no correction which wasteth the substance, but that washeth the accidents, and that in such sort, as the cuntrie custom will best admit, vpon former ac∣quaintance. Thus much haue I don for the right writing of our English tung, desiring my cuntriemen to think well of my labor, and themselues to trauell in furnishing out the rest, which I can∣not deal with, if theie like of that which I haue hitherto don: if not, I wold be glad to be directed my self by som president of another, which shall taste of iudgement. Mine own course doth carie me quite another waie, from medling with such things, as this argument is: & yet not altogi∣ther so, but that where good cause shall offer occasion, and fit circumstance shalbe answerable to such cause, I wilbe verie redie to pleasur mine own cuntrie, to the vtmost of my power, yea euen in the middest of anie foren learning: Tho my drift be such, as I maie sooner minister occasion of much matter to such as will dwell vpon particular discourse, then my self digresse from that plat, which is alredie laied, being more then enough, to occupy anie one. It were a thing verie praiseworthie in my opinion, and A perfit En∣glish dictiona∣rie wished for. no lesse profitable then praise worthie, if som one well lear∣ned and as laborious a man, wold gather all the words which we vse in our English tung, whether naturall or in∣corporate, out of all professions, as well learned as not, in∣to one dictionarie, and besides the right writing, which is in∣cident to the Alphabete, wold open vnto vs therein, both their naturall force, and their proper vse: that by his honest trauell we might be as able to iudge of our own tung, which we haue by rote, as we ar of others, which we learn by rule. The want whereof, is the onelie cause why, that verie manie men, being excellentlie well learned in foren speche, can hardlie discern what theie haue at home, still shooting fair, but oft missing far, hard censors ouer o∣ther, ill executors themselues. For easie obtaining is e∣nemie to iudgement, not onlie in words, and naturall speche, but in greater matters, and verie important. Aduised &
considerat cumming by, as it proues by those tungs, which we learn by Art, where time and trauell be the compassing means, emplanteth in wits, both certaintie to rest on, & assurance to rise by. Our naturall tung cummeth on vs by hudle, and therefor hedelesse, foren language is labored, and therefor learned, the one still in vse and neuer will known, the other well known and verie seldom vsed. And yet contine wall vse should enfer know ledge, in a thing of such vse, as the naturall deliuerie of our minde and meaning is. And to saie the truth what reason is it, to be acquainted abrode, and a stranger at home? to know fo∣ren tungs by rule, and our own but by rote? If all other men had ben so affected, to make much of the foren, and set light by their own, as we seme to do, we had neuer had these things, which we like of so much, we should neuer by comparing haue discerned the better. Theie proined their own speche, both to please themselues, and to set vs on edge: and why maie not we by following of their presidents be partakers of their praise? cōsidering the thing which we ar to deal in, of it self is so good, & the presidents, which to follow, to be so manie & so plane: as we can neither alledge anie want for direction, ne yet basenesse of argumēt, to diliuer vs from trauell. For the matter of speche That the mat ter of speche is worth the handling. The pen and voyce. is a thing well thought of, whether ye waie the words and the forces which theie haue, or the vttering thereof by pē & voyce. Naturall nede vpon mere vse, commendeth the voyce, delite in mere vse commendeth fair speaking. And voluntarie nede vp∣on more vse commendeth the pen, delite in more vse commē∣deth fair writing. Which both ar so well estemed of, as there be particular Arts, verie cunninglie deuised to beautify them both. We nede not toproue by Platoes Cratylus, or Aristotles proposition as by best autorities, (tho men be sufficiēt to proue The propertie of words. their own inuentions) that words be voluntarie, and appointed vpon cause, seing we haue better warrant. For euen God him∣self, who brought the creatures, which he had made, vnto that first man, whom he had also made, that he might name them, according to their properties, doth planelie declare by his so doing, what a cunning thing it is to giue right names, and how necessarie it is, to know their forces, which be allredie giuen, bycause the word being knowen, which implyeth the proper∣tie
the thing is half known, whose propertie is emplyed. There∣fore the argumēt of words, speche, & pen being so necessarie, & the trauelling in them being no lesse comendable, he that will deal in that which I haue said, shall both help nede in others, & heap praise to himself, & yet do nothing without manifold presidēt. For amōg the Hebrewes, Ionas, Iudas, Kimchi, among 3. The presiden∣cie of like dea∣ling. the Grekes, Eustathius, Fauorine, Pollux, amōg the Latins, Mar∣cus Varro, Nonius Marcellus, Festus Pompeius, tho not these a∣lone, nor in these tungs alone, endeuored themselues to do that in their tungs, which I wish for in ours, expounding their own words by their own language. The Italian, the Frenche, the Spanish, at this daie vse the like naie theie go further, and make particular dictionaries euen to particular books, as Iohn Boccace alone hath a dictionarie for himself in the Italian tung. Now if such like English wits, in whom both learning and labor do concur, wold do so much for our tung, as these and the like haue don for theirs, naie as euen learners haue don, for those same tungs, which theie haue gained by labor, as Stephanus, Pe∣rot, Calepine, for the latin and others for other: we should then know what we both write and speak: we should then dis∣cern the depth of their conceits, which either coined our own words, or incorporated the foren. Whereas at this daie: we be skillfull abode and ignorant at home, wondring at others not waing our own. Thus much at this time cōcerning these things, now must I to my table.
THE GENERALL TABLE. CAP. XXV. A. Abaie. abandon. abase. abash. abashment. abate. abatement. abbacie. abbesse. abbie. abbot. abbreuiate. abbreuiation. abbridge. abbridgement. abllridgest. abbridgst. Contr. abbridgeddest. abbridgdst. Con. abbridged. abbridgd. Contr. The gin contraction conti∣nevving vveak, from thè qualifying. c. abbut. abbuttting. abce. abecedarie. abet. abettor. abdicate. abhor. abhorrest. abhorst. Contract. abhorreddest. abhordst. Contr. abhorreth. abhorring. abide. abidst. Contract. abid. abidst. Contract. abiden. abiect. abilitie. abiure. abiuration. able. ablenesse. abode. abodest. abodst. Contr. The originall sound conti∣nevving in the contract. abolish. abolished. abolisht. Contr. abolishment. abominable. Enfr. Of omen vvithout, h. abomination. about. abound. aboue. abricot. abrode. abrogate. abrogatest. abrogatst. Contr. absence. absents. absent. Distinct. absent. absolue. absolute. absolution. absolutelie. absolutenesse. abstain. abstinence. abstinent. abstinencie. abstract. absurd. absurditie. absurdnesse. abundant. abundantlie. abundance. abùse. Contract. abúse. abùsed. abúsd. Contract. aby. abying. Accent. accenting. accept. accepting. acceptable. acceptance. acceptation. acception. accesse. accessarie. accessorie. accessible. accession. accidence. accidences. accidentarie. accident. accidents. accommodat accompanie. accompanying. accomplish. accomplishment. accomplisht. Cont. for. accōplished. account. accountant. accountable. accord. according. accordinglie. akecorn. Of an ake, or an oke. accrew. Enfran. accurse. accursed. accùse. accùsation. accusatiue. accusatorie. accustom. accustomable. ace. ache. achiue. acknowlege. acquaint. acquaintance.
acquite. acquit. acquittance. act. action. actiue. actiuitie. actuall. actuarie. Ad. adamant. added. adder. addict. addis. addresse. adiacent. adiectine. adiure. adiurement. adiurd. Contrac. adiourn. Enfran. adiournment. adiournth. Con adle. admeasurment. administer. administration. administrator. admire. admiration. admirall. admiraltie. admissarie. admission. admit. admittance. admixtion. admonish. admonition. adnihilate. adò. Distinct. a-dó. adiew. Enfranchis. adew. adopt. adoption. adore. adoration. adorn. adorned. aduance. aduancement. aduantage. aduantagious. aduentur. aduenturous. aduerb. aduerbiall. aduerse. aduersarie. aduersitie. aduertis. auertis-ment. D. aduise. Distinct. aduise. aduised. aduisedlie. adulation. adulterie. Enfr. adulteror. aduoutrer. aduoutrie. adulterate. aduocate. aduocatiō. Enfr. aduouson. aduow. Afaire. Enfranc. affaires. aferd. affable. affabilitie. affect. affection. affectate. affectation. affinitie. affirm. affirmation. affirmatiue. affirmance. afflict. affliction. afford. affy. affyance. affyanced. afraie. afraid. Contr. afraied. afresh. after. afterdeal. afterward. afterwit. afterwise. Again. against. agar. agást. age. aged. agent. agéw. agewish. aggrauate. aggrauation. àght. agilitie. aglet. agnail. ago. agonie. agreat. agré. agrëable. agrément. agrées. agréued. Ah. Aid. ail. ails. ailwood. aimount. air. Ake. aker. aking. Comp. a-king. aketh. Comp. i quik. a-kith. a-kin. Alabaster. alate. alacritie. al-arm. Enfran. Helas. Enfran. alas. alb. albeit. aldertré. alderman. aldermanbērie. ale.
alehouse. alepot. alepoll. alestake. aleworm. alength. alegant. alien. alienation. aliened. aliend. Contract. alienate. alice. alce. Contract. alike. aliue. all. allin although. alwaie. allmost. alnage. alnager. aln. aun. alhail. alphabet. allege. allegorie. allegoricall. allegiance. allegation. allie. allote. allotement. allow. allowance. allure. allurement. ally. allyance. almanak. almarie. Enfran. aumrie. almesse. Enfran. aums. almoner. Enfran. amner. aloft. alom. alone. alónesse. along. aloud. alouf. alter. alteration. altercation. Am. ame. amase. amased. amber. ambergreace. ambition. ambitious. ambiguitie. ambiguous. amble. amen. amend. amends. amendment. amerce. amercement. amiable. amiabilitie. āmis. amisse. Distinct. amitie. among. amongst. amorous. ample. amplify. amplification. An. ane. anatomie. anatomicall. anchoue. ancient. ancientie. ancle. ancom. and. andiron. aneal. anger. angell. angine. angle. angler. angerlie. angrie. angrilike. anguish. anchor. Enfranch. anker. ane. annis sede. animate. anniuersarie. annuitie. annuall. anoie. anoiance. anoint. anon another answer answerable. antem antichriste. antidote. antedate. antique Enfranc. antik antiquitie antiquarie anuile Ape. apase apaid apart apish. āple apostat apostacie aposteme. apostemation apostle apostleship. apostlelike Compo. apostolik Deriuat. apothecarie appall appald Contatct. appalled apparell appare apparent apparence appeach appeal appear
appearance appertain appertinence appertinents E. appurtnance appetite apply application▪ appoint appointment appose apposour Enfran. apposer apposition approbation approche appropriation approue approuements apt aptnesse apern Arbor arbiter arbiterment arbitrarie arche ar'changel Enfr. arkangel archbishop archbishoprik archduk archer archerie archpirate argent argew argument argumenting arise arithmetik arithmeticall arke arling arm The qualifying e, arme armd Contract. armed armehole armepit armor armorer armarie Enfranc, armorie arraie arraign arras Enfran. arrasse arrerage arrest arriue arrow arriuall ars arssmart Com. arsieuersie arseter arte A noun. art A verb. artichok artificer artificiall article articulate artillerie As soon as Distin s, z, ascend ascension ascent Distinct. assent ascertain ash ashen ashes ashd Contra. ashamed asked axt Contract. askew a-skew Comp. aside a-squint asquare aslepe asmuch a-smuch Comp. asp aspen aspire aspiration aspirat aspirt asunder assure assail assalt asse assehead Comp. assemble assemblie assents assentation assets Enfran. assiduous assiduitie assigne assignation assignement asseidge assise assistence assistants asswage associate association assomon assoon assouth assure assurance astonish astond Contract. astonied astraie astrolabe astronomie astronomicall At at-once Comp. atonement attach. attachement attainder attaint attempt attend attendance attendant attendants attēntiue attire atturnie atturnment attribute attrap
Auail. auailable. auance. auant. auāntage. auarice. auburn. audience. auditor. audit. auditorie. audible. auenge. auengement. auentur. The qualifying, e. vvanting. auentured. auer. Enfrá. auermēt. augment. augmentation. aunt. auoyd. auoydance. auow. auouch. auowrie. autor. autoritie. autentik. Ensran∣th autēticall Aw. awaie. await. awake. awares. award. a-wry Ax. axt. Contract. axletré. Azure. Enfran. azuré. B Baie. bab. babe. babie. bable. Distinct. bāble. bablatiue. bablest. babledst. Contract. bach. bachiler. bacon. baken. bad. bdst. Contract. baddest. badge. badger. bag. bagd. Contract. baggage. bagpipe. baiard. bail. bailif. bale. bain. bat. bate. bak. bake. baker. bakbite. bakfrind. bakster. bakt. Contr. bakward. balace. balad. bald. balk. balm. ball. ballet. balance. baldpate. bamberie. ban. bane. band. banddog. bandog. bandie. bang. bandgdst. Contract. bank. banket. bankrupt. Enfran bankrout. banner. bannish. bannishment. baptism. Eufranch. baptim. baptise. baptist. bar. bare. barb. barbarie. barbarism. barbarous. barbell. barber. barbd. Contract. bard. bardge. bardgemen. barenesse. bargin. bark. barker. barking. barlie. barelie. baron. barn. barnacle. barrell. barren. barriers. barrister. barretter. barrow. barter. basse. base. bashfull. bashfulnesse. basill. basilisk. bāsin. basket. bastard. bastardie. bāste. bastid. bāsting. bat. batting. bate.
bating. battable. batable. battell. batle. batlemente. batter. battered. batterd. Contr. as. children battred. battring. battrie. bath. bathe. batfoul. batsoulling. Dist. batfoūlling. bauin. baubê. baud. baudie. baudrie. baudkin. baudrik. baw. baw, waw. baum. bauk. Bé. bées. beach. beads. beadle. beagle. beak. beaken. beam. bean. bear. bearbreche. beard. bearfoot. beast. beastlie. beat. beaten. beautify. beautifull. became. beche. bechap. bechapt. bechid. bechide. bed. bedding. bedred. bedlem. Dist. bedlame. bethlem. befe. befall. befell. befallen. befaln. Contr. befile. befilth. before. beg. begd. began. beget. begile. begger. beggerie. begon. begummed. behalf. behaue. behauior. behead. beheaded. behilt. behind. behold. behap. behoof. behòue. being. bek. bell. bellweather. belch. beldame. belefe. beleue. bellie. bely. bellous. bellow. belong. he-long. belów. bells. belt. beloued bench. bencher bend. beneath. benet. benefice. beneficiall. beneficiarie. benefit. beniamin. benign. benignitie. bent. bequeath. bequean. bequiken. berate. bere. bereue. bereft. bĕrie. beriall. beuerwik. berwik. tract bereued. berent. beseche. beseme. beset. beseidge. beside. besides. beshrew. besmear. besom. besought. bespit. bespew. bespoild. best. bestad. bested. bestow. bet. bete. betanie. betake. bethink. betoken. betook.
betle. betroth betrothed betraie better betwene beuie beware bewail bewitch Deriuat bewraie bewrap beyond Biace bib bīble Distinct. bible bich bichrie bid bide biden big bigamie Enfran bigger biggin bignesse bikker bikkering bikring Contract. bill bile billet billement Enfran billing bin bind bindding bing birch bird birder birdlie birt birth bissie biscot Enfran. bisket bishop bit bite bitter bitterlie bitternesse bittor Blab blabberlip blade bladder blake blak blakkish blame blame whorthie blane blanche blank blanket blase blasing blaspheme Enfr. blasfeam. blasphemie blast blasted bleath bleacht Conract. bleaching bleak blear bleàreje bleat bled blede blek bleke blemish blend blew blind blindnesse blindfild blink blinks blirt blisse blissing blister blok blokkish blood, bloodie blossom blot blote blow blòun blubber blunt blur blush bluster blustering blustring Co Bob bobbins bode bodie bodkin boisterous bold bolt bolster bolstered bone bonet bond bondage book boot bootie bore borne borrow bo bosom bosse boste e, Orignal bosting bot bote both botes boteman botche botcher. botle bottom bottomlesse bountie bountifull boun boult bourd bourder bour
bouth bóught Distinct. bòught bòw Distinct. bów bòwes Distinct. bówes boll boùl bòwells bowlls bówcase bòwling bounsing box boxtré boy boyrie boyer Brable brabler brace bracer bracelet brache brag bragget braid braie brain brainsik brak brake brakkish bramble bramlin bran brancb brand brandish brankursine brasen brasier brasill brasse brast brat braue brauerie brall braun breach bread break breakfast breast breastplate breath bream brear breche brechelesse bred bredth brede brefe brend brent breth breuitie brew brewer brewhouse brewïs bribe briberie brible brable bride bridegroom bridemaid bridge bridgehouse brīdle brigandine bright brightnesse brik briklaier brikle briklenesse britle britlenesse brim brimstone brine bring brink brionie bristle broche brode broderie broil brok broke broker broken brokket brooch brood brook broth Distinct. brothell brother broúght brow broun brouse bruse brùsed brush brust brusten brute brutish Buble bucle k. bucler bucled bud budge budget buf buffet bufle bug buggerie bùgle buglosse buk bukket bukstall bull bullace bulbating bulfinch bullion bulls bullok bulrush bulwark bum bums bumbase bumbaste bumbacie
bun bunch bundle bungle bungler bungerlie bunting bur burden burgen burgesse burn burnd burnt burnell burnet burnish burrage burrough burst bursten bush bushell buskin busse bŭssard bustard but buts butcher bŭtler butter butterie butterflie buttresse buttok button butwin buz By byer bypath bywaie byword C Cabin cabinet cabbish cable cade cadence Enfran. caf caffaie cage cagebird cake cak call calamitie caldron calender calf calm cam came cambell camell camfear camomile camp campish campion can cane canell cancell canker cankerd Contra. cankered candle candlestik canon canonise canopie Enfran. conopie canuasse Contract. canuast canst Contract. cape cap capemerchant capăble capabilitie capacitie capers caper capparison capper capering Contract. capring capitall capitulate capon O, passant caponise capitane Contract captan captious captiue captiuitie captiuate cappid Contract. capt capricorn car care carbonarie Enfr carbuncle carcasse card Contract carde Deri. carding cardinall carefull carfull carefulnesse carell carĕn caret cark carkenet carie carier cariage carle carmelite carnage carnall carnalitie carnation carawaie carowaie carp carpet carpetknight Com carpenter carpentarie cart cart carting carter carterlike carterlie carue caruer
caxton case cased cast Contact. cast cash casht cask casket cassok castrel keistrell castle casuall casualitie Contra. casualtie cat cate catch catchpoll cater caterpiller caterwalling cătle caudron caue cauetie cauill cauillation cauiller caucob caudle Enfran. chaudale cause causer causie cautele cautelous caution Cease ceder cell cellar cellarage celestiall celebrate celebration celebritie celeritie celibate censure censor censer center centrie centurion ceremonie ceremoniall ceremonialitie certain certained certify certifying certificat certification certiorare Enfra cesment Of census Enfran. cestern Enfran. chaf chafe chafer chafing dish chafering house chain chalice chalenge chalenger chalk chalk pit. cham chamber chamber lane chamlet. champ champertie champion chamfering chandler change chanell chanon chance chancell chancemedlie chancellor chaw chauntrie chaunter chaunt chap chape chăpell capellan Estfran chaplane chaplet chapman chaps chapiter Contract. chapter chair charact charcole chard Enfr. chārd charitie charitable charge charger chark charie chariot charet charetter Contra. charter charm charter charterhouse charterpatent charnell chaste Contr. chāst chastitie chastis chastisment chat chatter chaufinch chaldron cheap cheapen chear chearfull chearfulnesse chearie cheat cheat bread chefe chefetain Enfran. chek cheke chekker chekmate cherie cherish cherubin cheripin Enfran.
chese chesse chesnut Enfran. chestane chest chested cheuen cheuorn chew chewed Contract. chewd chewet chibboll chichlie chid chide chiden chik chiken chiks chikens chikwede chill childe childish childer childeren Contra. children childern chiltern chiluer chime chimer chimere Enfran. chin chine chincowgh chink chip chipt Contr. chipax Conf. chirch chirchyard chirchwarden chirching chirograph Enfran. chirp chirn chit chitterling. chittie wren chok choke choler cholerik cholericall chough chop chose choyce choks choplotche choplogik. chomlie chrism Christ christiane christned Contract for christened chronicle chub chuf chuk chune churle churlish chuse. chux Ori chuks Plurall Cicle cygnet Enfran. cifer cifering cimball Efran. cinamon cipresse cypresse Enfran circle circuit circumlocution circumcise circumcision circumference circumspect circumstance cisers cite citie citation citisen citern citron ciuil ciuilitie Clad clak claker claie clame clam clammie clamor clamorous clamp clampor clang clap clapper claret clarion clarify clark Enfran clerk clasp clash clat clatter clatter basket claue clauicord claw clawbak clause clean clemencie clenlie cleanlinesse clear cleared cleaue cleft cleg clense clergie clew client clif clift clim clime climate clinch cling clinge clink
clip clister Enfran. glister clod clog cloie cloied cloyster clok cloke clòse close closet clot cloth clothe clothès clothyèr cloue clouen cloun clounish cloud clout club clubbish clubhead clung clumperton cluster clutter Cob coble cobler cobhead cobunt cobweb cocatrice cokle cod codpece cof coffin cofer cofret coferer. cog cogger coif quaif quait coyt coin coiner cok coks Plural Sing. cokes cokall cokker cokkering cokkrell cokkish cokfight coknie cokneg colander colap culler cole cold collet. Enfran. collect colerak. colyer col collect collector college collegiate college collection collectarie collation collusion colmouse colt coltish columbine colie colebrand colewort còm come comecase command commandment combat vvithoute. combătting comedie commence commencement commend commendation commendable comment commentarie comete commit commission commissarie commodious commoditie common commonaltie communitie communicate communication compact compare camparison compassion compatible compatibilitie compear compell compendious compendiarie competitor compile complain complaint complexion complices compound compose compost composition comprehend comprehension comprehensible comprise compromit compromis compulsion conceal concealment conceit conceiue concent consent concern concerning conception conclude conclusion concord concordance concubine
concupiscence concur condemn condemnation condiscend condition conditionall conditionally conduct Enfran. cundit   confection confects Enfran. cumfits   confederate confederacie confer conference confesse confession confidence confirm confirmation confiscate confiscation conflict confound confute confutation confuse confusion congeal congeald Cont. congregate congregation congrew congruitie congrewence coniure Distin. vvithout e, coniur   coniurer coniuration coniurate coniect coniectour coniectur coniecturall conquest conquer conscience consecrate consent consequence conserue conseruation consider consideration consist consistorie consolation consorte consort conspire conspirator conspiracie constant constancie constrew conster Contr. constrain constraint construction consume consummation consumption consult consultation contagion contagious contain contents contend content contentation contentment contempt contemn contentions contention contemptuous contemptible continew continewance continent continence continencie contract contraction contradiction contrarie contrarie contrariëtie contribute contribution contriue contrite contrition controuersie controll controller conueie conueiance conuèrt conuért conuersion conuertible conuict conuent conuention conuenticle conuocation conuocate convulsion cook cookold coop cooper cop copt cope coped copt Contf. copartner coparcener coparcenerie copie cople coplement copihold copious copper coppresse coptank corall corage core corde cordwaner coriander cork cormerant corn corner cornet cornish coronall
corps corse corporall corporation corpulent correct correction correspondent correspondence corroborate corslet corrupt corruptor corruption cosen cosinage coste costemarie costif costifnesse costard costerdmunger cotage cote coten couch couent couin coueie couenant còuer couert couerlet couet couetous coul could couler counsell councell counsellor count counter countenance counterfeat counterfet counterpoys counterpoint counterchange countercharge counterchek countermand countermure countrie cour course court courtyer cow coup cout coward cowheard cowslip Crab crable cradle craft craftie craftsman crak crake craknell crakle crag craggie cram cramp crampiron cramok campring crank crane cranecolr craneshank crash crase crased cratch craue crauen Monosyl issillab. crauin   crall creast creak crede credence credit creditor credible credulitie credulous crepe creper crept cresses creuis crew crewell creuet crib crible criell criket crikle crime criminatorie crimosin criple crisp cristall cristalline cringer cringe crok crocodile crop cropt croke croked crosse crosbow crowtoes cro crów croud crouder croup crouk croun crouner crouch crucify crucifix cruches crud cruds crule crum crup crupper cruse crush chrusht crust cry
crying cryer Cub cube cubit cucumber cudgel cud cuf cukcow cull culpable culuer culuering cum cumlie cumber cumbersom cumlinesse cumfort cumfortable cumpanie cumpanion cumpas cumpases cumpassed cumpast Cun cunning cunger cup cupboord cur cure curb curle curate curace curious curifauor currie currier currant currish cursed curst curtesie Deri. curtsie   curtin curtain curtall custard cushion custom. customer. customarie cut cute cutpurse cutthrote cutler cutlerie cursorie D Dab dable. dace dad daddie daffadill dag dagle dagtail dagletail daie dailie daintie dale dam dame damn damnation damp. dampt Con damask damosel Contract damsel   damosen Enfran. Contract damson   dampish dammage dance dancing dandie danger. dandle dank dankish dapper dar dare dark darknesse darling dearling darnell darte dasle dash dasie dastard date daw daub daunt daughter daun dauniug Deacon deaf deafnesse deal dean deanrie dear dearling death debate debase. debar debonair decaie decadence Enfran. deceiue deceit decease deceased decaiuer decemrat decent decencie decide decision decifer decifring Contra. decifering   declame declamation declamatorie declare declaration dicline declination Ensra. declenson   decoct decoction
decease decrease decrè decrees dede ded dedicate dedication deduct deduction deface defalt defame defamation defamatorie defeat defeasance defect defend defence defensible defile deflour defraie defraud deformd deformitie defy defyance define definite definitiue degrè degrees degrade degradation deïtie deïfy deification deirie deintie a dekt dek delt dele delite deliuer delaie delicate delectable delectation delegate delue deluer delude deluge Enst delusion deme demain demand demean demeanor demolish demur demure deme den denison denounce denuntiation dent dented deny deniall depe depth depart departure depend deponent depose deposition depraue depriue depriuation deputie depute dère deride derision deriue deriuatiue deriuation derth descant describe description desèrt Distinct desért   deserue desire desirous desist desk desolate despare desperate desperation despise despite despitefull destinie destinate destitute destroie desultorie det detain detect detection detinew determ determin determination detest detestable detract detriment deuide deuise Distinct deuise   deuil deuotion prop. deuour deuout dew dewtie dewie dewlap dexteritie Diademe diall diamond diamant diameter diaper dialog dible dy Deri. dice   did didopper diet différ Distinct. diffèr   difference
different difficultie diffue diffuselie dig digest digestion dignitie digresse digression dill dilate dilatorie dilatation dilapidation diligence diligent dim dimmie dimnesse diminish Der. diminution dimilance din dine dingle dint diocesse diocesiane dip diphthong Enfran. difthong direct direction dirige Enfran. dirt disagre disagrement disallow disanker disanull disard disappoint disburden discend discent dissent dissension discharge discern disciple disple discomsort discumfit discumfiture discord discrete discretion discontinew discontinuance discountenance discourse discourage discouragement discusse disdain disdainfull disease disenherit disfigure disfigured disfranchis disgrace disgise dish dishclout dishonest disloyall disloyaltie dismisse dissinisse dismes Enf. decimae dismaie dismaldaie dismantle dismember disobeie disobedience disorder disparage disparagement dispatch dispark dispend dispense dispensation disperse disperple dispeple dispaie dispose disposition displease dispraise dispossesse dispute disputation disquietnesse disquiet dissemble dissimulation dissolue dissolute dissolutenesse dissonant distaf distance distill distinguish distinct distinction distresse distrain distribute distribution dissuade disuse disunion disuniting dissie dizzie disworship ditie diue diuerse diuersitie diuerticle diuine diuination diuinitie diuorce diuorcement diuision Do dò dok dokket doctor doctrine docilitie dodg dog dodkin dole dolt
dolfin dominion dook doom doomesdaie dòn door dor dormouse dortor dormitorie dosen dote doterell Contract. dotrell doth dotage dorniks dòue dow dowrie dout doulasse doun dounward dòught doughtie Drab draf drad drag dragon draiman drake drawe drank dram draper draw draught drawlatch dread dream dred dredge dregs drench dresse dresser drigh driue driuil drift drink drip drippingpan drone drop dropsie drosse droue droun drousie drought drunk drunken drudge drumbledorie drum drumslade dry Dub duble dublet duk duke dug duchie dull dulcimer dullard dump dumpish dun dunstable dung dunghill dungeon dure durance during dust dustie dusk duskish Dwarf dwell dweller dwale Dy dyer E E, making the first sillab alone is a latin prepo∣sition, as edict, e∣uēt. The affinitie betwene, e, and ye quik i, causeth a duble serch in the table, intent, or entent Eager eagerlie eagle ean earlie earle earn ear earnest earth earthie ease easie easment east easter eat eaues eawe Eb Ech echone eche echer eclipse ecclesiasticall Eddie edgeling edict edify education Effect effectuall effeminate efficacie eftsoon Eg eglantine egresse Eie eien eiebrie eight
eightene eightie either Ell ele elbow elder elect election electuarie elegant elegancie elephant Enfran. elefant eleuen element elementarie elicampane elm elf elues eluish eloquent eloquence else elsewhere Embassador embassage embasie embosse embrace embrew embroder embroderer embush embushment embuscado emrods Enf aimorhords emmet empare emperor empire empeach emplant employ employment emply empouerish empouerishment empoison emprison emptie emptinesse Enchant enchantour enchantment enclose enclosure encline encounter encourage encrease encroche end endlesse endeuor endew endif endite endited enditement endow endowment enduce enemie enimitie enforce enform enfranchis enfranchisment enflame engender engine engrate engraf engrosse engroser enlarge enioin enough enioy enquire enquest enrage enrich enroll enrolment ensample enseam entangle entend entent entèr Enfran. entér enterred entĕred entire entred enterfear entermedle enterprise entertain entice enticement entrance entrap entralls entreat entreatie enuiron enure enuie enuious Epitaph epitome epistle epicure Equitie eqnall equalitie Er erand erect erection error erronious escape escheat escheater eschew especiall espy esquier establish estate esteme estimation estimate estrange Eternall eternitie Euangelist euangelicall eue euen
euensong euening euer euerlasting euerie euirate euict euiction euocation euident euidence euill Ew ewbów eawer Enfr. eawrie euet Contr. eut Exact exaction exaltation examin examination example excede excell excellent excellence excellencie except exception exchange exchekker exclame exclamation excommunicate excommunicatiō excùse excúse execrable execute execution execūtour execŭtour exempt exemption exemplify exemplifycation exercise exhibit exhibition exhort exhortation exigent exile expedient expedition expell expend experience expert expect expectation expenses expire expiration explicate explication expound exposition expresse expulsion exquisite extend extenuate extenuation extoll extort extortion extract extraction extreme extremitie F Fable face fact factor faction factious facilitie fade fadom fadge fafle fagot fail fain faint fained Contr. fair fairing farie faith faithfull faithfulnesse fall falconer false falsify falsehood fallow falter falt faltlesse fame famous familie familiaritie familiarlie familiar famin famish fan fane fantsie Contract. Eufran fantasie fantastik Enfra. fantasticall And vvhy not vvith f, & yet the originalls be vvith ph? farse farding fardle farcie fardingale Enfr. verdingale far fare farewell farrow farm farmor fashion fast fasten fastning fasting fat fate fates fatall fact farther fawcet fauor
fauorite fauburg faun Fè fees fealtie feather feasant ph. Enfran fear fearfull feast festiuall festinitie feat feauer feauerfew feble fed fede fefment feild fell fele feldifare felmonger felon felonie fellow fellowship fells felt female feminine fen fend fenell fenelstalk fense feodarie fern ferret ferrar ferie fertle Enfran. fertil fertilitie feruent feruencie festew festur fet fete fetter fetch few fewterer fewell Ficle fidle fidlingstik fier fierie fierce fift fiftene fiftie fig figur figuratiue fight fill filberd file filet fillie filch filth filthie filthinesse filthilie fin fine fines sse. finesse finers finallie finch find finder finger finish fir firm firmament first fish fishmonger fist fiste fisle fit fitches fitchew fiue fixt Contra. flag flagon flake flaile flame flamflew flanell flank flang flap flaps flash flatter flask flasket flaw flawn flax flé flées flea fleam flear flece flecher fleming flesh fleshook Con. flete fleting flexible flie flew flidge flight flikkering fling flint flindermouse flitch flit flite flitting fliting flix flok flote florish flounder flout flour
flow flud fluke flute flux fly Fo foder fog foggie foil foin foins foist fole folie folk fold follow four fond fondnesse food footman foot for fore forbear forborn forbid forthought forethought forfit forfiture forget forgiue forgiuenesse forgiuen forsake forsaken forsoot'h for-soot'h forspeak forslow forthink forward forswear forsworn fore foren forecast forethought forehead foredeal foresé forespeak forestall foretell forethink foreward forage force forceable forcible forcet fork forell form forme former formall formalitie forest forester fornication forman foreman foreset forced fort fortie forth fortresse fortify fortification fortun fortunate fortnight foster fostered foul foùr found founder fountain fox Fraie frail frailtie fragments frait frame frank franion franch franchis franchisses frankincense frantik fraternitie fraud fraudulent fraught frè frehold frekle frekled fredom frensie frese fretish frend frequent fresh fret freat fridaie fringe frind frindship frisle frisk friskaie friter friuolous fro frog frok frolik from front frontlet froun frounce froward frost frosen froth frustrate frute fruterer frump fry fryingpan Fugitiue
full fulfill fuller fulmart fulsom fume fumble fumish fumitorie funerall fundation funell furbish furbisher furth further furmentie frumentie fur furnish furniture furie furious furlong furnace furnesse furrow furtherance fustiane future G The strong g, before, e, and i, in English is warrāted by the like in the greke tung Gaie gaie gable gable gab gag gage gagle gain gainfull gainstand gainsaie gale galedeliuerie galerie galiemaufrie gallant gallous galie galon gallop gall gald galdbak game gambold gamon gander gant gap gape garbage garbish garble garboil garden gardiner gardian gargle garish garland garlik garment garnish gardnape garnet garner garter gaunt gauntlet gase gash gasp gat gate gatehouse gather gangrell gaue gaud gaudie Geat gek geld gelding gelie geloflour gelosie gentle gentleman gentlenesse gentilitie gentrie generall generalitie generation genet gender genealogie germaine germander gesse gest gesture gese gesling Gib giblet gibe giant gide giddie giddinesse gift gill gill gig gig gigle giglet gilt giltie gild gimlet gimew gin ginger gird girdler girdle girk girle girn girkin girth girdiron gise
gittern giue 1 Gen. giue Glabber glad glade glase glasse glance glaiue glean glé glede glide glister glitter glorie glorious glose glosse gloue glouer gloom glòw gloworm gluton O, passant glut glutonie Gnash gnat gnaw gnawing gnible Go gobet goblet God gode goddesse godlie godlinesse godfather godmother gogs gogleeie gold goldsmith good goord gouse gorbellie gore gorgeous gorget gosse gosehauk gosling gossip Enfran. gospell gospeller got gote goten gole goste gouern gouernour gouernment goun Grab grable grace gracious gradation grade graduate graf graie grain grammer grandam grandfather grape graper graple grasse grashoper grase grasp grate grater gratify gratification graue grauie grauell grauitie grand grant grease great greihound gredie gredinesse grefe greke grece grene grenesse grete greue greuous grew grewell grig grim grime grin grind grindstone gripe griffin grisle grisling grieslie groce grone groom grope grote grów grósse groue Distinct gròueling ground groundsell grub grudge gruell grunt gruntle Gubbins gudgin gull gullie gulf guerdon Enfran. gulliegut gum gun gunshot gunner gunpowder gurnard gut gutter
H H, is so gentlie pronounced, or rather so not pnoūced in our tung, as manie words, which begin with it, maie be sought for by ther first vowell, rather then h, onelesse the originall be well known, as honest, humble, honor, hostage, &c. which soūd vpon the, o, not aspirate Hab or nab habit habitable habitation habergen had hadst haddok hag haggesse hak hake haknie haie hainous haifer Enfran. haidow hail hailstone hat hate haiting hating hale hallow half halfpenie halt halter haltersik halting hall hallowes ham hame hammer hamper hanch hand handidandie handle handsom handfull handmaide handicraft handgun hang hanger hangman hap happie happen hapt Contract happed   harbour hard hardnesse hardie hardinesse hardlie hardilie hardhead hare harebrain hark harlot harletrie harm harmfull harmonie harnesse harp harper harsh hart hartie harold harth harrow harrower haruest haste hāst Con. hastie hastier hasp hasle hasard hasardous hassok hastings hastinesse hatch hatchet hatching hat hate hatred hated haue hauen hauok haunt haw hawes hauk hauberd halberd hautie hawthorn He hebrew head headdie headstall headpece headlong heal heap hear hearsaie heard heardman hearing heat heath heathen heauen heaue hede hedelesse hedge hedgehog heir height hell
hele helth helthfull helm helmet help hem hemlok hemp hen hens Plural hence   henhouse henbane henceforth herb herbinger herbage here heresie hereticall hĕring heritage hern hernshaw heuie heuinesse hew Hichel hikwaie hikòw hire hireling hid hide hiden hideous high highnesse highwaie hikop hill hills hilding hilt him hymn Ensran. himn   hind hinde hinder hinge hingel hip hipache Co hipocrite Enfran hipocrase   hipocrise   hisope hisse his   hist historie hit hither hitherward hiue Ho hob hobbie hoble hodge hog hogrell hoist hoistings hole holie holinesse hollow holsom hold holt home homage homelie homelinesse honie honicome honisucle honest honor honorable honorablenesse hood hoodmanblind hoof hook hookvnhappie hoop hooping hoor hoors hop hope hops hopper hopping hoping horehound horie horinesse hórse hors horsman horsleche horn hornet horrible hose hosen hospitall hostage hostice hospitalitie hoste hostilitie hot hote hotchpot hòvel houl hoùse hoúse houses houer houering houseleke how hound houlet Hukle huklebone hukster hudle huge hug humble humilitie hum hah hung hunger hundred hunt hunter hunting
hurle hurdle hurlieburlie hurlewind hurlepoul hurlepit hurlebat hurrie hurt hurtefull husband husbandrie husshir hush husht husse vs hutch Hy I The first person alvvaie great There is great kindred betwen the weak, g, & i, the consonāt & therefor theie enterchāge of∣times both soūd & place, & so in the table maie cause searching in both the let∣ters. Iaie iade iacinct iag iak iakdaw iakket iakes iail iailor iangle iangling iar iarring iauelin iaundis iawbone iauell iaw Idiot idle idlenesse idolatrie Ieat ieloous ielosie iepard iepardie iepardous ieast Iocus. ieaster   ieasting   iesses iet ietter iew iewell iewish If Ignorant ignorance ignominie ignominious Ill Contr. euill ile   I will ild illed illegitimate illegitimation illation illure illurement illusion ilnesse Image imagin imagination imbers imbring imbard imbarg immediate immediatlie imitate imitation immoderate immortall immortalitie immunitie imp impacient impacience impatible impediment imperiall imperfit imperfection impenitent impertinent impertinence implement impietie import importance impose imposition impost impossible impossibilitie impostume Enfra▪ aposteme   impostumation impouerish imprenable imprison imprisonment impudent impudence impure impugn impute impunitie impropre improprietie improperation immanitie importun importunate importunitie implicate implicatiuelie imperious In Great affinitie betwene, en, in & vn, enquire, in quisitiō vnquiet. incènse' incénse inch incident incle incling incline inclination
incommodious incommoditie incompatible incompatibilitie incongrew incongruitie inconstant inconstancie incontinent inconuenient inconuenience incur incumber incurable indet indemnitie indentur indent indignitie indifferent indifference indignation indite inditement induce inducement indurate induct induction inequall Com inequalitie   inexcusable infamie infamous infancie infant infect infection infer inferior inferioritie infernall infirmitie inflammation infinit infinitie influence information ingredience inhabit inherit Enf. inheritance iniquitie inhibition inhibit inholder iniunction iniurie iniurious ink inmost Cont. innermost   inmate inner innocence innocencie innocent innouate innouation inordinate inordinatelie inquire inquisition inrode inspire inspiration instigation înstitute institution instruct instruction instrument intention intercede intercession interchange interchangeable inter interring interest interlace interline intermedle intermingle interpret interpretor interrupt interuption intitle intricate introduction intrude intrusion inuade inuasion inueagle inuent inuention inuentorie inuincible inward in-ward Iohn Ione Ionas iog ioin ioint iolie iolitie ioll iolt iournie iouk iounse ioy ioyous Irchin iron irruption irreuocable irreprehensible Is ise Israell israelit ishew It itch itching Iudge iudgement iudiciall iudiciallie iug iuggler iugglerie iuyce iunket iump iumper iurate iurie iurers iust iustice iustify
iustify iustification iustificatorie iusting iuie iuorie K Keie keam kearsie kele ken kenell kecle kepe kept keper kerchefe ketle ketler kibe kibie kid kidgell kidnie Kik kill kilderken kin kinred kinsman kinde kindeship kine kindenesse kindle king kingdom kirchian Enf. Christian kirnell kirtle kisse kit kite kith kitling kitching kiuer kiuering Knab knable knak knag knap knaue knauerie kné knede knele knell knew kneuet knife knight knit knok knoll knot know knowlege known knukle knur knurrie L Labell labor laborer laborious laborsom lace laces lad lade ladie ladle laden lag laie laitire laid lak lake lam lame lament lamentation lamentable lamp lamprie lampurn lane land lank language languish lantern lap lapper lapwing lapidarie large largenesse largesse largis lard larder larderhouse lark larding lare lasie lasinesse lasciuious lash lashes lask last lasting lastage late lately lat lath latin lat-in latch latchet latter later lauer lauish lauender laue laun launce launceknight launcher laundresse laundrie law lawyer lawlesse
laud laugh laughter laurell lax laxatiue laskatiue Le lead leading lease leace leaf leag leak lean leam leap leapyere learn learning least leather leare lecherie lecherour lecherous led lefe left leg legion legionarie legier dumain leg acie legate leke lemon leman leither leugth lent leper leprosie leperhouse lese lesse lesing lessen let lete lettis letter lettern leuin leuell leuie leuitie leueret lewd libell libard liberall liberalitie libertie libertine librarie lice licence licencious licenciousnesse licoras licorish licorishnesse life lift lifter light lightning lightnesse lik like likewise likenesse likelihood likelie lightlie lilie limbek lim lime limetwig limit limitacion limiter limp lin line lingell linen lining ling link linet lint lion lionesse lip lipsalue list listen lether litle lite liter liue lend liuer liuerie liuelie liuelinesse liuing liuering liuerwort lisard Ly lyer Lo lob lobcok lobie lobster loche locust lode lodestone loden lodge lodging lofe loft loftie loftinesse log logiciane logik lok lokeram loin lol lome lone long longing longer look
look loop loom lop lope loophole lorde lordship lording lose losenge losse lossell lost lot lotarie lo▪ the Dist. lo the loue Dist. loùe louing Dist. loùing loun lout loutish lówlie lów lówlinesse loud loudle lour louse Par Verb. louse loyall loyaltie loyter loytering lubber long lugpudding luk lukkie luke lukewarm lull lullaby lumber lump lumpish lúnatik lungs lung sought lurdon lurch lurcher lurk lust lustie lusk luskish lustinesse luskishnesse lute M Maie mace macrell mad made madder madnesse maid maidenlie mail maim main mainlie maiestie mairaltie maior Enf. mair maintain maintenance mainprise mahound magik magicien magicall maioram magistrat magnanimitie magnificall magnificence make maker mal mall male mallet malapert malice malicious maliciouslie malcontent malefactor malt maltworm malmesie mam mammering man mane manch mangepresent mannish manlie manlinesso manchet mandilion mandrag mankiller maner manicle manifest manifold manger mangler manor manure manering Di. manuring manuarie mantle manumise manumission maple mar mare marble marte march marches marie mariage marigold mariner marie marmset mark market marlin marchpane margent marginall marle
marle marmelade marquesse marsh Cont. marish marshes marshall marshalled martiall martnet martir martirdom maruel maruellous mash mase maser masse massie mason O passon. master Enf. the i not o or vvhat if best vvith? master mistresse mastirship mistresship màst Conf. màst masterfull mat mate mater materiall materialitie matrimonie matrimoniall matresse matrice mattok match maw mawworm mauks maukin maund maundie Me meacok mead meal mean meanlie measles measur measured mease meat mear mearce mearsauce mearmaid mearstone meager meanaltie mede mediocritie medicin C. medcin medle medler medlie mediator mediation meditate meditation medow meke mekenesse melancholie melodie melodious melow melons melt member memorie memoriall men mend ment mention mere Enf. merie mercie mercifull mercifulnesse mercer mercie mercerie merit meritorious merchant merch andise message messager mesling met mete metle meke mere mewe Cat Ha mew mible mid midle midst midnight midrif midwife midwaie mice micher mightie might mightinesse mill mile milion miller mi lt milde milk mildew mince mine min mining minerall minde mindefull mingle minikin minish minister ministrie minoritie minstrell E. minstrelsie minster C. monasterie mint minut mir myrrha mire miracle
miraculous mirror mirth mirtle misse misaduentre msbeseme misle misletó mischance mischefe mischeue misconster mischeuous misdede misfortun misfashion mishapen misprision miser miserie miserable mises mist mistie mistake misticall misterie misdemeanor mistrust misúse Dist. misùse mite miter mitigate mitigation mixt mixture my Mo mobs mobilitie modest modestie modell moderate moderation modern modulate moh moyst moystur moystnesse moil moild mole mold moldie molten mome moment mone monie moneth Co. month monster monstruous mondaie mood moodie moon moonish moot mooting moorn more morgage moorning morning morfew morsell morter mortall motalitie mortuarie mortify mosse mossie most mote moth motlie mòther Dist▪ móther mòtherwort mount mountain mòue moùse Dist. moùse moùser moúsetrap moùsehole moúth mouthing mouth mòw Dist. mòwing mow mowing mòwers mòwers much mud muddie mug mugwort musle mukender muk mule mullet muletter mulberie multitude multiply multiplication mum mumchaunce mummerie mun mungrell munk munkie munkish mure murder murrie murren murrion murmur muse muses musing muscadell musk muscle mustard must mustie mustinesse musik musicall musician muster mutable
mutabilitie mutter muttering mutation N Naie nab nake naked nakedensse nail nall name namelie nape napery napkin narrow nation nationall natiue natiuitie natur naturall natch naue nauie nauicularie nauigation nauil naught naughtie naughtinesse Neb ned near nearnesse neat neatnesse nedie nede nedelie nedelesse nedle nedles nedes nece necessitie necessarie necessarilie nek nekband nekkeirchefe negligence neglîgent neighbour neighbourhood neither nether nest nestie nestle nestlecok nese nesing netle net nete neuer neuew neuerthelesse new newfangle newnesse next Nib nible nice nifle nigh nighole night nightcap nightrail nightingale nim nimble nip niple nimblnesse nit nits nine ninetie nineth No noble nobilitie nobs nodie noie noisom noiance noint nok non none nonage nonste nonsuit north northerlie northeast nose nosegaie nosethrill not note notable notorious notarie nothing notting notify nouic noueltie now noun Num number numbles nurse nurice nurrish nurriture nurture nusle nun nut nutriti O Obaie obedience obeisance obedient obiect obiection oblation obligation oblique obserue obseruation obstinate
obstinacie obstacle obscure obscuritie obtain Occasion occasioned occupy occupation occident occidentall Od odious Of offall offence offend offensiue offer offering office officiarie officiall officious officiousnesse ofspring oft often oftentimes Oh Oil oilie oiace ointment oke okar Old olif oliues Omit omnipotent omnipotencie Onset on one onelie once ones onelesse vnion Open openlie operation opinion opitulate oportunitie oppose opposition oppresse oppressed oppression Or ore orchard ordain order ordinarie ordinance ordure orenge organes origin originall ornament orphan orphanism Osier ospraie ostridge estridge Othe other otherwise otherwhere otes oten otemeal otepite otter Ouer oueragainst ouerchàrge ouercòm ouercame ouercast ouerflòw Distinct. òuerflów ouergrówn ouerchastice ouerlaie ouerly ouerlook ouermost vppermost ouermuch ouerplus ouershoot ouerskip ouerleap ouerthwart ouertake ouerthrów ouerthròw ouerwhelm òught òw òwing oul own ounce our ours out outch outlaw outlawrie outwardlie outrage ouslie Ox oxen Oyster P Paie pase pacience patient pacify pacificatorie paid page pageant pak pakker pail paiment paiable pain painfull paint painter pale pallace palat pallet palm
palmistrie palfrie palfrieman palsie pamper pamflet pan pancake panell panyer pang pant pantrie panthere pantofle pap pape paper pare parcell paradise paramour parchement parch parable parabilitie pardon O passant parent parentage parget pargetter parish parishioner park parlé Esr. parlement parret part partiall partialitie partialist partake partaker parting partisan partlet particular particularitie partition partner partridge pash pasht passe passage passion passeouer pasport past paste pastime pastie pastur pat pate patch patern patens patent path pathwaie patriarch patrimonie patrimoniall patron patronage paue pauiour pauement pauilion paw pawes pause paucitie Peace peach pease pear pearce pearcer pearcher pearle peal pearlesse peak peat peche pecok peculiar pecuarie pece pedle pedler pedigré pek peg pele pelf pellet pelt pellitorie pellicane pen pendhouse penthouse penaltie penie pence pens pencill penknife pennar peple pensif pensiue pensifnesse pensifull pensifulnesse pension pensioner pensionarie pent penticost peper pere perbrak perboil perelesse paraduentur perchance peremptorie perfect perfit perfitnesse perforce perform performance performd Con. perill perillous perish periurie periured permit permission perpetuitie
perpetuall perplex perplexitie persecute persecution perslie persian person personage perswade perswasion peruert peruerse peruersitie peruersnesse peruse pestle pestur pestilence petie petiecote peuish peuishnesse pettrel petition pew pewet pewter pewterer Phantasie E vvhy not all these vvith f? phantasticall pheasant phisician pharisie phisiognomie philip phrensie philosophie phenix Pible picture pidler pidle pig pigeon pik pike pikax pikle pikler pikerell Co. pikrell pikthank pilate pilote pill piles piller pillerie pilgrim pilgrimage pilgrimsalue pild pillow pilloubear pimple pimpernell pin pindust pine pineoke pine-aple pine-tre pinacle pinsers pinch pinchcrust pincase pinion pink pinsons pinace pinte pintepot pip pipe pipkin pir pirate piracie pisse pismere pispot pit pittance pitch pitchfork pitcher pitfall pith pithie pietie Co. pitie piteous pitifull pitifulnesse py pyed Placard place plage plagie plaie plaing plaint plaice plane planelie plaintif planet plank plant plantane plash plashie plaster plasterer plat plate platter platform plea plead please pleasur pleasant pledge plentie plentifull pleurisie pliant plight plite plouer plough plod ploche pluk plum plume plummer plunge plurall pluralitie ply Poet poetrie
poeticall pok poke poks pokes pokkie pokket point poison poll polcat polish pollicie pollute pollution pomander pomell pomewater pomegarnet pomegranet ponds pondering ponder pooll poor pope popish poperie poppie poppisede popiniaie populous pore pork porkpine porche porpace portion porte portcullis porter portall portraict portrature pose posnet posset possesse possession postern poste pot potinger potage poringer porrage potle Deriuat Compound potled potlid potluk poutch pouertie pound póul power pout pouder pounse poyse Practis practicioner praie praier praise prank prat prate pratle prating preach preamble prease prebend prebendarie precious preferment prefixed predestinate predestination predominant preiudice preiudiciall preeminence prelate prenumire prepare preparation preparatiue preposterous preposition prerogatiue presént Distinct. present presence presentment presentation prescribe prescription preserue preseruation president presidence presume presumption presumptious presse pretend pretence pretie preuail preuent price pride prig prik prikle prikket prime primer primitiue primerose prince principall phincipalitie principle princelie print printer prioritie prison prisoner priuate priuet priuie priuiledge priuilie priuitie pry probation probationer probate procede proceding proces procession proclame
proclamation procter procure procuration procurement prodigall prodigalitie profer profit profitable professe profession professor profound prognosticate prognostication progenitors progenie prohibit prohibition proin prolong prolongation promis promising promote promotion prompt promptnesse promptuarie prone pronounce pronunciation prop proper propertie proportion proprietie prophane And▪ vvhy not f. prophanism prophanatio prophet prophecie prophetisse prose prosper prosperitie prosperous prostrate protect protectour proue prouf prouerb prouerbiall prouide prouision prouoke pronocation proud prouander proxie prowesse prouident prune prudence prudent psalter psalm psalmist Puble publish publicatiou pudle pudding puf puft pug puissant puke pull pullet pullen pulter pullie pulpit pulse pump pumpion punie punch punish punishment puppet pur pure puritie purblind purchase purchaser purfle purge purgatorie purgation purple purpos purse purser pursue purslaine purseruant Enf. pursiuant pursew persew pursuit purueie purueance purueier push ptush puttok put putrify Q Quaf quaif quail quailer quaint quak quake quagmire qualitie quantitie qualify qualification quarell quareller quarrie quarter quart quartern quartan quartpot quartered quash quasie quaum quear quean quene quench quern querister
quest question questionist quib quible quiddenie quiet quik quiken quiklie quikbeam quikned quill quilt quince quinsie quintessence quip quit quite quitch quittance quippè quiuer R Raie rabbet rable radish radiant race rafter rag ragged raggednesse rage rail rale railour rain rainment rainbow rak rake raker rakehell rakket ram rammer ramp rampire ran rane rancor rankle range ranger ransak ransom rape raper rap rapt rapacitie ráse ràse ràser rasen rascall rascalion rash rashnesse raspis rat rate rather ratify ratification ratle ratling raue rauen rauin rauelin rauish rauishment raw rawnesse rawhead Reach rëall rëaltie realm ream read reap reason reasonable restie rebate rĕbek rĕbell rebellion rebellious rebound rebuke recant recantation rechlesse receiue receit recognisance recomfort recommend recommendation recompense reconcile reconciliation recòrd recórd recorder recouer recouerie recourse recount recognise recoil recoiling recreate recreation recuse recusant red redie redinesse redeme redemer redemption redresse redisseason refection reflection refer reform reformation refrain refresh refuge refùse refúse refusall refine referendarie regard regent
register regiment regrate regrater reherse rehersall reiect reioyn reioynder rëiterate rëiteration reign reke reken rekning relation relapse relatiue rele release relent rely relefe relice religious religiousnesse reliks remain remainder remanent Enfran. Contra. remnant remedie remediable remember remembrance remembrancer remit remission remedie remedilesse remorse remoue remount rend render rent rentall renet renate renegate renew renewing renouate renouation renoum renounce repaie repaiable repare reparation reparatiue repaste repeal repell repent repentance repine replead replenish reply replication report repose represent representation reprehend reprehension represse repriue reproche reprobate reproue reprouf repulse repugnant repugn repute reputation request require requisit requite requitall resemble resemblance reserue reseruation reskew resigne resignation resist resistence residew residence resolu resolute resolution resort resound respect respit respectiue rest restie restitute restitution restauratiue restoritie restrain restraint retail retain retainer retentiue retire retinew retreat retriue return reaue reueal reuell reuells reuelling reuenge reuerence reuerse reuersion reuile reuiue reuince reuolue reuolution rew rewm reward Rib ribald ribaldrie ribaud rice rich riches rid ride
ridle ridge rife rifle rift rig right righteous righteousnesse rigor rigorous rim rime rinch rinde rine ring ringtail ringleader ringworm ringdow riot riotous rip ripe ripenesse rite riue riuer riuel riueled rise Ro robuk robberie rob robin readbreast robe roche rochet rok rokket rod rode roge roging roist roister roial roialtie roll rolf rome roming rope roper rore roring rose rosen rosemarie roste rostemeat rot rote roten roue rouers rów rowl ròwell rout round rough rouse rousle roust Rub rubbish rubber ruble rud rude rudder rug rugd ruffiane rufle ruin ruinous rule ruling rumble rumour rump run runt rusht russe rust rusticall rustling S saie sables sabboth sachell sacage sacced sacrify sacrament sad sadle sadler safe safeconduit safron safetie sag sage sagenesse said sail sainct sak saker sakker sakcloth sale sallet salmon salt salter salue saluation same sampier sand sandblind sanctuarie sap sappie sarcenet sat sacietie satisfitie satisfaction saterdaie saturitie saturnine saue sauage saued saunders sauiour
sauor sauerie sauin sauing sauce saucie sausage saw saucer Scab scabbed scabbie scabbard scaffold scale scald scalingladder scallion scalop shalop scant scantling scape scathe scar scare scarf scarce scarcitie scarp scatter scattered school schoolmaster scholer schoolfellow scold sclander sclanderer score scof scorce scoffer scope scorn scotfré scrape scrap scrat scratch scrall scribe scrible scribler scriuener scrip scripture screke scroll scrupulous scruple scum scull sculler scullion scurf scurge scuruie scurrilitie scutchion scutle Se sea seal seam seamster search searcher sear season seat second secundarie secondlie secret secrecie secretarie secretelie sect sectarie sede sedentarie seidge sedge sedition seditious seke sell self seller seller seldom seluage selfwill seme semblance semblable sene send sence Contract of sithens sense sent senat senatour senser i censer sensuall sensualitie separate sepulker sepulchre sequele sequester sequestration sergeant sermon serpent serue seruice seruant session sesment set setle setled sethe seuen seuentie seuentene seuer seuere seuered seueritie seuerall seueraltie sew sewes sewet sextane Shad shade shadow shaft shak shakle shall
shale shallow shales shambles shame shamefull shamelesse shank shap shape share sharp shaue shaueling shauen she sheare sheaf sheath shed sheild shell shelf shepe shepish shent shew shete shift shine shin shingle ship shirt shitle shire shirif shriualtie shit shite shiue shiuer Sho shog shok shop shore short shòue shout shour shòw showes showmaker shoueler Diy. shoule shoot shòw shòwing should shoulder shreke shred shrew shrewed shrewdlie shrike shrill shrimp shriche shrink shrine shrive shriven shrift shrood shrove shrovetide shraftide shroud shrub shrug shufle shun shut shutle Sib sise sicle side sider sift sifter sifting sidder sik siklie signe signet Ef. cygnet signify signification sigh sight silk silkworm sillie silence sillibub syllab Enf. sillab siluer simple simplicitie sing▪ singe sin sine sinople sinfull since sinew single Co. singlie singlelie singuler singularlie singularitie sink sip sir sire sister sit sith site situation situate siue six sixtifold Skape skalp skars scarce skew skull skullet skim skin skink skip skipper skirm skirmish skirts
sklender sklise skout skoutwatch Slab slabbie slabber slade slain slaie slak slake slang slash slaue slauer slauerie slauish slaughter slea sled sledge sleight slight slekestone slepe slepie sleke slew slice slid slide slike slik slight slime sling slinge slip slipper slipperie slit slo slop slouth slóuer slownesse slubber sluce slug slut sluttish sluttishnesse sluggish sluggishnesse sluggard slumber sly Smak smake small smalnesse smallage smatch smatter smatterer smate smat smear smell smelt smile smit smite smit'h Con. smit'hie smok smoke smoot'h smote smug smudg smutch Snafle snail snak snake snap snapper snape snapharunce snar snare snatch snese snew sniuell snip snipe snore snort snow snout snuf snuffing snufle So sob sober soberlie sobernesse sobrietie sociable societie sod soden soft sok soke soil soilth soiourn soiourner sole solace solemn sollen solemnitie solitarie solicit solicitour sold soldyer som somer sòn song sondaie soon sooner soòth sooth sop sope sopemaker sore sorie sorow sorowfull sorcerîe sorcerer sorceresse sorell sort sosse sot
sotherie sothernwood sout'h sout'h soueraign soueranitie sóul sowder sowse sousing sòw sów sout soul sound sòught southsaier Space spade spak spake span spangle spanel spar spare spark sparkle sparrow sparrowhauk spaun speak spear speche specify speciàll specification specialtie spectacle spekle spek sped spede spedie spedes spell spend spent spére spice spicérie spider spin spinner spirt spirit spirituall spiritualitie Con. spritualtie spires spirt spite spit spight spigot spinage spindle spitefull spitefulnesse spitter spitle spitlehouse splaie splaiefoot splene splent spoyl spoke spok spoken sporte spot spouse spout spoun spounfull sprall sprat spred sprede sprig sprint sprinkle spring springe sprot sprout spruce sprung spurn spun spurge spume spurlong Spy spyes Squab squach squad squak squall squaltor square squaring squat squatter squeal squeak sqeamish squease squese squib squint squirel squirt squib squiterbuk squitch Stare stab stable stablish stabilitie stag stage stagér stain staf staues stak stake stall stale stalwin stammer stand standard stanche stalk staple star stare startle starlight starch
stark startop starue starueling state station stationer stationarie stature statuarie statute stature steak steal stear sted stede steddie stele stelth stem steme step stepe stepmòther steple stern stew steward stewhouse Con. stewes Stik stikle stikler still stile stillàtorie stilt sting stink stint stir stirrup stithie stitch Stok stoke stokefish stokes stokdoues stole stomach stomacher stone stood stool stoop stop store stork storehouse storie storm stout stoutlie stóue stòuer straiè stradle strait strain stragle stragler strake struk strainger stranger straner straw strawberie streak stream streat strength stresse stretch strew strict stride strid strife strike string strip stripe stripling stript striue stroke strów stroud stroue strong strout strumpet strugle stub stuble stubburn studie student studious stuf stumble stump stur sturdie sturgeon stuk stutter Sty Subdew sudain subiect sukle submit submission suborn subscribe substitute subsidie substance substanciall subuert subuersion suburbes such succede successe succession succor succorie sugar suggest suggestion suffise f sufficient sufficiencie suffer sufferance suffragane suk sukle sukling sum summer
summarie sumner Con. summoner sumptuons sunder sundrie sup supply suple supplication supper superfluou supporte suppose supposition supposall suppresse supreme supremacie superior supérioritie surcease surcharge surcingle surfet surge surgeon surmise surmount surname surplesse surplus surplussage surrender suretie suruiue suspect suspition sustain sustinance swad swade swadle swadlingclootes swag swage swaie swallow swam swan swane sware swarth swarue swash swear sweal swell swelt swepe swept swete swet swist swill swilboll swim swine swing swinge soon sword sworne T Taber tabret tabernacle table tablet tache taffatie tag tak take takling takle tail tailor taint tainterhooks tainter tall tale talent tallow tamper tampering tame tane tan tanner tankard tansie tap tape taper tapistrie Con. tapstrie tapster tar tare tares tarie tarte tatle tatch taste taster tauern tauernour taunie taw tawyer taunt tax task taught Teach teal team teat teastur teastie tedious tediousnesse tell tele temse teme temeretie temper temperance temperature temperate temperatenesse tempest tempestuous tempestuousnesse temple templer tempt temptación tend tench tent tenement tender tendernesse tendring
tendering Cont. tendring ten tene tenth tendeth tenure term termour terrible terrifie territorie testimonie testify testament tèthe tester tetter teusdaie thank thaw thatch the thé thence thefe there therefore theuish theft thigh thik t'himble t'hine thin think thing third thirtene thirtie thirst thirstie thistles thither thitherward though thong thought thòther thorn thornebak thousand thów thòw thread threap threat thresh threshold threw thrist thristie throne throng throte throtle thrust thrush thrum thum thump thunder thwart thwak thwakt thwart thursdaie thy Tib tide tidings tik tike tikle tikling ti'll tile tillage tilt tiltyard tilesharde time timber timelie timorous timorousnesse tin tine tinker tinkling tinder tinderbox tinsell tip tipe tipet tipling tipler tiple tire tishew tit title tĩtle titmouse tithe Tò to toes tod tode together toy▪ tòious toyous toil token toll toungs tout'h toùth touthake top topnet torche torment torne tosse tost Con. toste totter tòw tòward towell tough touse tour toun Trace tract tractable trade trad tradition traie train traitour traiterous tramp
trample tramell traneoil transitorie transitiue transom transform transformation transgresse transgression translate translation transport transportatión trap trapping traunce trauerse trauersing tread treatable treacherie treacherous treason treasur treasurie treasurer treat treatie treatis tred tremble treendish trench trencher tresle trespasse trewant trew triacle triall tribe tribut tributarie tribulation trik trikle trifle trim trindle trip tripè triple triuet triumph trod troden trot troup tróugh tròw tròwell tròwt truble trub truce trulliebub trump trumpet trunchion trunk trust trusse truth try Tub tuk tukker tuf tuft tumbe tumbler tun tune tunage tung tunell turf turk turcasse turn turpentine turret turnep turtle tush tusk Twain twang twelft twelue twentie twible twig twitch twylight twinkle twin twine twinǵ twinge twins twise twist twò twagger tmy tyed V Uacant vacation vagabond vain vanitie vales varlet valleie valor valure valiant van vainglorióus vanish vanitie vanquish vantage vapor varie varietie varnish vaunt vawt vawter vauntgard Vdder veal vehement vehemencie venim venimous vengeance venison vent ventur verdit verdingale verie veritie verilie
vermin vermilion verse versify vertew vertewous vessell vesture vestrie vestiment Cont. vestment vex vexation Viage vice vicious victorie vctorious vicar vicarage vicount view vile vilite vilenesse village villan villanous villanage vine vineager vineyard vintner violet violin violent violence virgin virginitie virginalls visard visit visitation vision vitail vitalor Cont. vitler vmpier Unaduised vnaduisedlie vnbend vnbent vnbelefe vnblamed vnbucle vnburden vnaccustomed vnacquainted vnarmed vnburied vnchast vncle vnclean vnclenlie vncleanesse vnclenlinesse vncurable vncuple vncouer vncurteous vncouth vnderprop vnderset vnderstand vnder vndertake vndermine vndiscrete vnequall Der. inequalitie vneth vnfit vnfold vnfetter vnfortunate vnfrutefull vngentle vngodlie vngentlenesse vnhorse vnhonest Deri. dishonest vnhappie vnhappinesse vnhallow vnknit vnknown vnlawfull vnlearned vnlike vntwine vntwist vnty vnlok vnlode vnlukkie vnlustie vnmanerlie vnmercifull vnion vnite vnitie vniuersitie vneuersall vneuersalitie vnicorn vnsauerie vnperfit vnprofitable vnsatiable vnrighteous vnsearchable vnstedfast vntill vntile vntild Der. Co. vntilde vnwise vnwilling vnwildie vnwittie vnwtiting Vocation vocatiue vomit voluntarie volum voluptuous voluptuarie voluptuousnesse vow vouch vouchsafe vowell voyd voyder voydance voyce vp vpbraide vpon vpper vpmost vppermost vphold vpholster vprore vs vse vse
vsurie vsuall vsher vsurp vsurpation vsuallie vtter vtterance vtterlie vtmost vttermost Vy VV Wad wade wadmoll wafer wag wages wager wagon wagtail waie weight waight waiward waiefaring wain wainman wait wale wallow wake waken walk wall wallop wallot wan wane wander wandring wand want wanton wantonnesse warble ward warde wardenship warrant warrantie waraen wardon wardrobe war ware warlike warfare warrious warie waren warm warmth warmnesse wart was wast waste wastecote wash washt wassell wat water waterman watle wasp waspish watch watchman waue wax We weak weal weapon wearie wear weather weaue weauer wet wert web wed wedge wedensdaie wein weinlings weak wele well welcom welt welkin welfauord welsh wen wene went wench wend wepe wept were wert west wesle wet wetshd wevil whall Whale wharf wharfage what wheal wheat whele wheler whelm whelp whence where wherefor whereunto wheresoeuer wheather whet whetstone which while whin whine whinch whip whirle whirlewinde whisk whistle whisle whisper whister whit white whiting whither whitle
who whosoeuer whose whow Wid wide wider widoer widow widowhood wisle wikked wikker wife wiues withie wikket wilde wild wilding wildernesse wildfoul wilie wilienesse wilfull wilfulnesse will willow wig wigeon wimble wimple win wine wineceller window winow wind winch wing wink winter wipe wise wisedom wisp wish wit witch wittie wite with withie wither witnesse witlesse witall Com. Wo womb wont woman wonder wod word worlde worldling work worm worne wort worse worship worth worthinesse worthie wolf wound worsted wòw wowed wold wower wote Wraie wrat wrate wrangle wrangler wrak wrake wrall wrap wrastle wrastler wrathe wreak wreath wren wrench wret wretch wrig wrigle wrisle wrincle wring write writ writen writing wrong wrongfullie wrote wrought wrout wrung wry wull X Xpmasse xpian Y Yard yalp yarne yarrow yaw yaun Ye yea year yeast yellow yeild yelk yirk yesterdaie yet yit yemen yew yex yorke yonder young younker yow youth youthfull yearlie Z Zelous zeale zealousnesse. FINIS.
CAP XXVI. The conclusion of this treatis concerning the right writing of our English tung. THis is that, which I had to saie concerning the right wri∣ting of our English tung, both for the rules, which I haue obserued in dailie experience, and for the table, which I haue collected to confirm that experience. As for the right of my rules, I maie not take vpon me anie more certaintie, then the naturall force of such probable directions doth ordinarilie infer, which is to hold commonlie trew, and euer most likelie, from which probabilitie I wander not far, if my self maie be iudge. As for the table I sought in it, to write all the words ge∣generallie That I do but enter and passe leauing the perfiting to who will. after an English ear, neuer yeilding much to anie foren letter sauing onelie where som pretie occasiō recōmēded vnto me, the duble writing of both the naturall English & the the incorporate strāger. And yet I haue diligētlie examined the originall groūds of our enfranchised terms, which be one third part of our hole speche, tho I hold altogeather with our own writing, & follow not their primitiue. For if the word it self be englishin dede, thē is it best in the natural hew, if it be a strāger, & incorporate among vs, let it wear our colors, sith it wil be one of vs. In both the rules & table, I haue rather sought, by such an inductiō to stir vp som other to perform the enterprise, then ho∣ped my self to leaue it cōplet. For it maie so fall out, that I haue hit vpon som truth, tho not vpō all, & again it maie so be, that I haue missed quite, & cut a wrong course, & yet by so doing, that I haue opened a waie vnto som other, by giuing such a light, either to amend my course if it like in part, or to shape a better by it, if it hollie mislike. Further, in both I haue bene verie care∣full neuer to depart frō the custom of my cuntrie, bycause I de∣sire either to please with liking, or to mislike without displea∣sing. For where ane ordinarie custom doth seme of long time to haue made hir own choice, and that vpon good shew, she will either like him that cleaues to hir allowance, or not be displeased, where hir self is not misliked. And if there be anie hope to procure liking in such a thing as custom is to rule, it must nedes com by following, and not by for∣cing. He enforceth, which quite altereth the common cur∣rant
allredie admitted in generall vse, both of ordinarie letter, and customarie writing, he foloweth, which marketh that waie wherein custom is most conuersant, and pleaseth it self best vpon likeliest presumptions: and withall obserueth where∣in anie error intruding vpon custom, by ignorant hands, maie be easilie stript, and yet custom left clean to hir allowed direction. This following of custom, with considerate obseruing is a case of great hope, that the thing maie like, which is so laid down, bycause in like attempts it hath allwaie taken place, and be∣wraid hir successe by winning hir desire. Enforcing to the con∣trarie, or altering to far is almost desperate, if not altogither, bycause it hath alwaie mist, with losse of labor where it offered seruice. What my self haue won, by desiring to follow the cu∣stom of my cuntrie, & no where to enforce it, it must appear in time, which while it do, I must craue relefe of curteous constru∣ction, & submit my self to iudgemēt of those which can discern. CAP XXVII. Of the natur of an Elementarie institution. AS in dealing with the ortografie of our English tung, I haue dwelt verie long, bycause the argument is new, tho the handling be old, so in all the rest, I purpose to be short, bycause the arguments be old, tho the handling be new. Wherein I will kepe that same course whereunto I am led by the natur of an institution, which is, to enter the learner so far, as he maie cumpas with ease all that which followeth in the same kinde, if his institution be perfited. Hence cummeth it that so manie books in the latin tung bear the name of institutions bycause theie enter the young and vntrauelled student into that profession whereunto theie belong. Now in the framing of a good and proper institution, which must be both naturall to the profession wherevnto it entreth, and appropriate to the learner, which it must enter: there be two considerations chefe∣lie to be had, the one is of what cumpas the profession maie be, whom the institution leadeth, the other of what kinde. In the cumpas, we consider the vse thereof to direct our life, whether it stretch far, or but som small waie. In the kinde we consider
whether it be more in action, and lesse in contemplation, or contrarie wise. For according to these two considerations the institution must be fashioned. Bycause the professions of diui∣nitie, law and physik, be of themselues verie large, for varietie of matter, and in vse verie nedefull, for their generall seruice, their institutions therefor ar commonlie great, as a fair gate doth best beseme a sumptuous pallace. The other faculties and Arts, as of argument vnder these, so of consequence lesse then these, nede but short institutions, as a litle dore doth best fit a pretie small bilding. Again, where the end of anie art, is hollie in doing, the institution wold be short, for hin∣dering of that end, by holding the learner toto long in musing vpon rules, as in our grammer, which is the institutiō to speche, there wold be no such length as is commonlie vsed, bycause the end thereof is to write and speak, which when we do most, we learn our grammer best, being applyed to matter, and not clogd with rules. As for the vnderstanding of writers: that cums by years and ripenesse of wit, not by rule of gram∣mer, anie otherwise then that grammer helpeth to the know∣ledge of tungs, whereby we vnderstand the arguments hid in them. But I will then handle these things, when I deal with grammer, next after mine elementarie. In the mean while that rule of Aristotle must be preciselie kept, whereby we ar taught, that the best waie to learn anie thing well, which must after∣ward be don, when it is learned, is still to be a doing, while we be a learning. In this last kinde, whose rule is, to be short in precept, and much in practis, is this hole Elementarie, and therefor, I am to deliuer som pretie and few rules, pikt out of the verie substance of ech principle, which to kepe in practis, and then to set down, som well chosen presidents, whereupon to practis, neither laing on to much, to passe an institution, neither leauing out to much, to com to short of it, neither v∣sing but the best, to work the best effect. For an institution ought to be in lineament like the hole, as the infant to his pa∣rent, tho not so full grown, in working forcible as a strong renet in ech part pithie to sprede full in all, without anie defect, when it is to perform, least it proue it selflame, for not preuen∣ting that, where the lamenesse appeareth: which wold not ap∣pear
if either the institution it self had bene perfit, or the fol∣lowing of it full. For the failing that waie is oft in the institu∣tion, being not perfitlie made, but either swelling to much, or pent in to small, or not properlie cast: but it is more oft in the trainer himself, which cannot perform that, that is perfitlie set down. But least I proue long while I promis shortnesse, I will streight waie in hand with my first principle, which is that of Reading, wherein I will first appoint certain notes to direct the reader, and after som presidents, which seme fittest to be red. This treatis concerning the right writing of our English tung, tucheth the teacher and grown men more, out of the which I will still collect by waie of precept, and a short epitomé so much as shalbe necessarie for the young reader, to help his spelling, or the young writer to direct his hand right, ear I deal with the two principles. THE PERORATION To my gentle readers & good cuntriemen VVHEREIN MANIE THINGS AR HANDLED, CONCERNING LEAR∣ning in generall, and the natur of the english and fo∣ren tungs, besides som particularities concer∣ning the penning of this and other books in English. MY good cuntriemen and gentle readers, you cannot possiblie haue axie more certain argument of the great desire, which I haue to please you, and the earnest care, which I haue to win your liking, then this verie speche directed vnto you, and that of set
purpos. For if I had trusted vnto my self alone, and had thought mine own iudgement sufficient enough, to have bene the rule of my right writing, which when I had pleased, I should nede no further care, to content anie other, I might haue spared this pains in re∣quiring your frindship, and have left curtesie to som hope, tho it were in som hasard, which seing I do not, but sew for your fauor and frindlie construction, my earnest care in sewing therefor, as in me it voids contempt of your iudgement, and confidence in mine own, so in you it maie work curtesie, and a fauorable minde towards a man so affected, and so desirous to please you, as I dont not but it will, seing care is my sollicitor, and curtisie yours. If I feared not that inconue∣uience which commonlie enseweth, where two speak in an vnknown tung, and the third standing by thinks himself despised, bycause he vnderstands not, I wold haue sollicited my request in the latin tung, bycause the kinde of people, which I reuerence most, and whose frindlie opinion I do couet most, both desireth and deliteth to be dealt with in that tung, as being learned themselues. But the vnlearned stander by must help with a smile, and is therefor to vnderstand the matter which is handled. Wherefor to content both, by contemning neither, I will go on in that tung wherein I first began, and by a mean known to both, seke frindship of both: seing my desire is, as to profit the ignorant, so to please the cunning. But before I do moue anie particular request to anie or all of you my good cuntrimen, I must nedes enform you in the state of my cause, that perceiuing all circumstances you maie yeild with more fauor, when the motion shalbe made. The verie first cause, which moued me first to deal in this argu∣ment, The cause which mo∣ued me first to deal thus publikelie in this argu∣ment and to venter vpon the print, whereof I stood in aw for a long time, and neuer durst com near it, till now of late, was to do som good in that trade onelie, wherein I haue trauelled these manie years, and by vttering my experience in the train to learned tungs, to lighten other mens labor, bycause I had espied som defects that waie, which craued som supply. But the consideration thereof be∣ing once entered my head, did sprede a great deal further then I dreamed on at the first, and wrought in me the like impres∣sion, for the right teaching of the learned tungs, that the in∣quirie What course Plato took to find out what iustice was. for iustice in things of common life did somtime work in that renouned Plato. For Plato seking to define Iustice, and
what that is, which we call right in ciuill doing, could not de∣uise how to set them down in certain, by waie of definition, by∣càuse theie were respectiue, and stood vpon circumstance in re∣gard to other, before he had described a form of common gouern∣ment; which when he had don, he strèight waie found out, that that was iust, which was iump with ech state, as the state was ap∣pointed, whether perfit or vnperfit (tho the perfit were the best) and that procured in the state both tranquillitie and successe, as that was vniust, which iard with the state, & proued to be an instrument of discord and decaie. The execution of the first, which preser∣ueth the state, he termed iustice: the enormitie in the second, which seketh to vndo, he called iniurie and wrong. The reason which mo∣ued him to take that course in finding out of iustice, and to make Platoes rea∣son to take that course the anatomie of ane hole gouernment the mean, to know that rule, which leadeth ech gouernment, was, bycause the proportion, the vse, naie the verie substance of anie particular member, is ne∣uer so known, as it maie be throughlie perceiued, and precise∣lie surueied vntill the hole it self, be exactlie known, whereunto the part answereth in proportion, in vse, naie in the verie substance. Iustice concerneth euerie two, betwene whom there maie be en∣tercourse, traffik, dealing, or doing anie kind of waie, whether prince and prince, prince and subiect, or subiect and subiect, whe∣ther one with one, or one with mo, or mo with mo. Naie it tu∣cheth nearer. For where respects maie take place, there one maie do wrong to his own soul and bodie, as in pining the bodie, and en∣treating it euil, in tormenting the minde, and wringing it to the worst, contrarie to the rule of both religion and reason. Where∣for that hole bodie, which comprehendeth these circumstances, and respects in ech part, was nedelie to be described, before the parti∣cular effects, and the regiment thereof could possiblie de defined. This course took Plato and thereby found out that, which he desi∣red to know My self entending at the first to deal but with the tungs, and the teaching thereof in the grammer school, (as he thought My course to find out the right method in teaching the tungs. of his iustice in ciuill doings,) was likewise enforced by swaie of meditation to enter in thought of the hole course of learning, and to consider how euerie particular thing did arise in degre, one after another. For without that consideration, how could
I haue discerned where to begin, how to procedè, and where to end, in anie one thinge, which dependeth vpon a sequele, and mar∣cheth from a principle, seing the matter which I deal with, is a matter of ascent, wherein euerie particular, that goeth before hath contine wall respect to that, which cummeth after, if the hole plat be artificiallie cast? As in this course of mine, the E∣lementarie principles maie resemble the first groundwork: the tea∣ching of tungs the second stories: the after learning the vpper bil∣dings. Now as in Architecture and artificiall bilding, he were no good workmā which wold not cast his frame so, as ech of the ascents might be conformable to other: so in the degrees of learning, it were no masterlie part not to obserue the like, which cannot be obserued, before the hole be thought on, and thoroughlie fashioned in the par∣ties minde, which pretendeth the work. Plato in his platform for the finding out of iustice hath two great vantages of me. For both himself was so learned, as he is left to wonder, and his plat is in form, not fashioned for practis: whereby both his own autoritie gi∣ueth credit to his work, and his work kepes countenance, being not chekt by practis, which is able to ouerthrow euen the best medi∣tations, being vnfit for performance tho bewtifull to behold by waie of contemplation. My knowledge being but of ordinarie compas is subiect to controllmēt of euerie better learned, naie it is not exempt from the round carping, euen of the verie meanest, from whose sting not euen Plato himself was able to escape. My labor is so laid, as it professeth practis, and is so to be reproued if it bide not the per∣formance. Again his great sufficiencie laid all down at once, and gaue a full view of his hole platform, tho but in generall shew: this The diuersi∣tie in setting dovvn thigs of orer and of staie. enterprise of mine cannot procede in that order, tho I could perform it as well as Plato could his bycause it mounteth still vp by waie of progression from one pece to another & multiplieth infinite bycause of varietie in parts, which kinde of attempts abideth no one form aspectable at once, as Aristotle reasoneth, bycause of first & last, which fal not in view togither at one time. Thĩgs of order be known by degrees, matters of staie ar to be sene at once, which cannot be in this argumēt, being in order of consequence, in number of multi∣tude. For when year once past the Elemētarie train, be not tungs of som number, where the learner hath desire, not to rest vpon som certain? when ye ar past the tungs, is not the after learning of infi∣nit
branches, tho the main be within compas? Wherefor as in depe∣nesse of meditation I drew like to Plato, tho in depth of iudgement but his fleting follower: So in order of deliuerie I depart from him and vtter my wares by retailing parcels, which he did ingrosse: when I had considered the generall ascending method of all learning, which while it is in getting, mounteth vp by degrees, but when it is gotten, doth sprede through out the state as sinews, veins, and arte∣ries do through a naeturall bodie, and withall maintains the state in full proportion of his best being, no lesse then the other do main∣tain the bodie, me thought I did perceiue some great blemish in the hole bodie of learning, as Plato no doubt, in the ripping vp, of right did find to be in gouernment. And as Plato himself by his own teaching did confirm his own precepts, whereby he brought forth a nūber of rare men, as euen the sharpe Aristotle, & the elo∣quent Demosthenes, and by his singular plat of chosen gouern∣ment, tho not all waie pleasing our religion and practis, did direct the best conceits of the most studious people: So for my simple skill in the same course, I haue armed my self, what so euer I shall set down by waie of precept, for the furtherance of learning, and hir recoue∣rie from blemish, to practis it my self, with that successe in schooling which it shall please god to blesse in me and mine, for president to o∣thers, who will follow the plat, and with that allowance in writing, which my gentle reader shall bestow vpon it. For the plat of mine E∣lementarie, and what I haue vndertaken for the penning thereof, it is sullie declared in the eleuenth title of this same book: For the performance thereof in the bringing vp of children, I haue all the principles there named on foot, within mine own house, vnder ex∣cellent maisters. Wherein I do more then mine Elementarie requi∣reth. For mine Elementarie course is to haue the principles perfi∣ted, before the childe deal with grammer: Mine execution now is by finding out of times, without losse of learnĩg (which I maie easilie do hauing the hole train within mine own sight) to help those prin∣ciples forward in such children, as wanted them before, or had som vnperfit, & ar willing to learn them by apointmēt of their pa∣rents, and my prouision. Which doing maie serue me for two proues, first, that all the principles maie be well learned singlelie, in their naturall order, when by waie of prouision theie maie be well com∣pased iointlie with the tungs. Secondlie, that it is a great thing,
which maie be performed in the Element arie train, where, conue∣nient place continueth all the doings within the masters sight, and the not chaunging of schools for diuers things, doth assure the profit without losse of time, or lingring by the waie. But to leaue speaking of the Elemētarie execution and to return to the pen and the plat∣ting of this my writing course: vpon this consideration, which caried me thus on after I had conceiued both where the blemishes laie: which disfigured learning, & how to redresse thē by waie of aduise to others, but in effect & dede for mine own charge, I cam down to particulars: And began to examin, euen from the verie first, what went before the tungs in their orderlie trade of bringing vp chil∣dren frō there first schooling: which thing alone was my first impres∣sion in conceit, ear I fell to further thoughts: and my last resolution to tho with more aduice, when I had thought vpon the most. This examining of the hole fore train I took vpō me so much the rather bycause I perceiued a great vntowardnesse in the learning of tūgs, thorough som infirmities in the Elementarie grounding, which wēt before them. As what a toil is it to a grammer maister when the young infant which is brought him to teach, hath no Elementarie principle so grounded in him, as it maie bear a bilding? Wherefor considring the learned tungs do require a fundation, and carefull teachers som help of foretrain, I vndertook to rip vp all those things which concern the Elemētarie, a degre in teaching before the grā∣mer train, by mine own trauell to ease a multitude of masters. Which Elemētarie degre, bycause it tucheth such learners as ar not entred into latin, & wisheth well to such teachers, as be lightlie vnlearned, but in their own mediocritie: I thought it my best to publish it in that tung which is common to vs all, both before & after that we learn the latin. Vpō which resolutiō I begā with my first book, which I call Positions in the english tung, & so procede in this next, which I term an Elementarie, as it is in dede, bycause it conteineth al those Elemēts or principles, which childrē ar to deal with ear theie passe to grāmer, & the learning of tungs, a book deuided into parcels, to lighten the price, tho but one in volū, distinct for execution of seue∣rall argumēts. For these occasions, & to this end I ventured vpō the print to help the course of learning, in this my cuntrie, by helping of the trade which is vsed in teaching & to help the trade of teaching, by beginning at the Elementarie grounds, and to help the Elemen∣tarie by vttering it in English. In which my attempts, these thre questions, I do not saie ar,
but I suppose maie, peraduenture be demaunded: first what those 1 blemishes be, which I haue espied in the main bodie of learning ane argument at this daie so narrowlie sifted by so much varietie, and so great excellencie of learned wits, as euerie kinde of learning, is now thought to hauè recouered that worship, which it was in, euen then whensoeuer it was highest. Secondlie, why in thè trade of teaching I do not content my self, with the president of som other, which in great number haue writen 2 learned treatises to the same end, but toil my self with a priuat tra∣uell, whose euent is vncertain, whereas the writers of this argumēt be both learned themselues, and therefor to be followed, and their successe known, which maie warrant assurance Thirdlie, if it be my best to handle a learned argument in the english tung, why I take so great pains, naie so curious a care in the 3 handling thereof as the weaker sort, whose profit I pretend, naie as oftimes som other also of reasonable studie, can hardlie vnderstand the couching of my sentence, and the depth of my conceit. While I answer vnto these thy motions, I must praie your paci∣ence, good my masters, bycause the things maie not be slightlie past ouer, and the satisfying of them, maketh waie to that sute, which I haue vnto you. First for my generall care to the hole course of learning, I haue A generall note for the hole course of learning. thus much to saie. The end of euerie particular mans doings, for his own self: & of the hole common weal for the good of vs all, is so like in consideration, and so the same in natur, as the one being sene, the other nedes small seking: Euerie priuat man traueleth in this world to win rest after toil, to haue ease after labor, and not to trauell still The end of euerie parti∣cular mans doings, and of euerie cō∣mon state is rest after la∣bor as being a thing exceding vncomfortable, if so be it were endlesse. The soldyer warreth in priuat conceit perhaps for ease by welth, which he maie win by spoil: in publik shew he trauelleth for the ease of his cuntrie by waie of defense, and pretending peace. The mer∣chant traffiketh in priuat conceit, to purchas piuat ease by procu∣ring priuat welth▪ in publik shew hetrauelleth for the common ease, to satisfy som wants in necessarie ware for the common nede. Gene∣rallie all men of what profession soeuer, as theie seke there own rest by the priuat in their doings, so theie pretend the publik by the ge∣nerall end, wherein theie all concur. Whereby it appeareth that ease after labor is the common end of both priuat and publik, of both all
and: som bycause euerie one in the naturall currant of all his doings hath as well a generall respect to the common quiet, which maintai neth his (priuat as a stròg bodie doth a febler persō) as vnto himfelf for to work his own rest, which is parcell of the publik, and not to part frō it, for fear of further harm. Naie is our hole life here in this miserable world, anie other thing, then a toilsom course, to com to som rest? or is the life after this in gods blessed kingdom anie other thing, then an endlesse rest, after ending trauell to such peple as seke for it by the right means to com by it? And as in that rest the hole assemblie of the chosen faithfull is all at rest, as euerie particular: so in this trauelling course, the generall end of anie hole state is a blessed peace, the great benefit of a mightie protectour, as in the same state the particular end of euerie priuat person is a blessed contentment, the great benefit of a mercifull god. Whereby I take it to be most euident both in Philosophie, whence the sirfi ground is and in Diuinitie whēce the second is, that honest contentment and rest, is the priuat mans hauen, as an honorable quiet peace is the publik harbour. Now as both the priuat and publik end doth pitch in quietnesse after stir, so theie both haue the like means to compas their own The right means for both priuat men & com mon weals to com to their quiet quietnesse, which meanes if theie vse right, theie obtain their right end, if theie vse them wrong, as they wring by the waie, so theie work their own worst, by missing of their end. And in good sooth, were he not vnwise, which seing the mark, whereat he is to shoot, will of set purpos, shoot another waie? Who hauing mean to com to heauē, which he dailie wisheth, will hedlong to hell, which he semeth to abhor? The right mean vsed right is the waie to this good, as awrong mean, or a wrōg right work the cōtrarie effect. As to cōtinew in my former particulars, the soldiers mean to com to his end & right quietnesse, is to vse honest wisdom, & pollicie, for the sauing of himself from danger and death, to vse honest and wise means, such as law of arms doth admit, to better himself in bootie & spoil, with continewall eie to defend for whō he fighteth, to driue to peace and ease, after war and blood. The merchāts mean to com to his end and right quietnesse is to vse honest deuises and trades, for enriching himself without infamie to the world, or taint to his conscience: to rest content with so reasonable a gain, which is the hire of his trauell, as his countrie maie allow, and good conscience
not condemn, with continewall eie, neither to afflict the peple, and surcharge the state with the bringing in, of anie nedelesse to much, nor to rob the poor, and to rak the state, with the carrying out of anie nedefull to much. Generallie all mens mean to com to their right and resting end is, to vse that profession and calling, whereof theie haue made choice, after that rule in priuat, which ane honest reli∣gious conscience leadeth, and after that direction in publik, which in honest plaine truth procureth ech mans right ease, by helping to pre∣serue the generall peace. If these means do not procede thus, neither hath the soldyer his rest in the end, but falls in blood or anguish, nei∣ther hath the merchant his end, but dwells in hatred or miserie, nei∣ther hath anie profession the hoped end, but such publik blemishes, and such priuat corrosiues, as vniust dealings in euerie kind deserue to receiue, and mete with in the end. Now as all these particulars by their priuat mismeaning, work their own mischiefe, so by the same means they be mortall enemies to the common peace, which is supported in dede, by priuat good de∣meanour. That learn∣ing is the mean to pre∣serue peace, which is the naturall end of euerie go∣uernment What the particular mean of euerie trade is, to com to the right end, I am not to shew at this time, let them look vnto it, whom it particularlie tucheth. My consideration is generall, & the publik mean is my care, which must be measured by the proper end. The publik end is said to be peace, gods great benefit in his most mer∣cie, and his chiefe, naie his onelie charge in his new and last com∣mandement, to them that loue him. Then those means both first to com by this end, & whē it is cō by, to maintain it in state, must nedes be such directions, as ar for peace, and the quietnesse of a state, for the keping of concord and agrement, without anie main publik breach, both priuatlie in houses, publiklie in cuntries, & generallie throughout the hole gouernment. These peaceable directions I call, and not I alone, by the single name of generall learning, comprising vnder it all the arts of peace, and the ministerie of tranquillitie, a matter of great moment, being the onelie right mean to so blessed a main, as fortunat peace is, imparting the benefit of publik quietnesse, to euerie particular, as a generall fountain seruing euerie mans ce∣stern by priuat quills and pipes, whose bodie if it be blemished it hin∣dreth not a litle, as the infected water of a primitiue fountain, is not holsom where it is vsed, naie as the corrupt blood passing frō the li∣uer poisoneth the hole carcasse. By the benefit of learning euen war
it self a professed enemie to learning, bycause it is in fede with peace, is handled verie iustlie, and worketh peace at home by vniting of mindes against a common fo. So much the more deadlie enemies, to all humanitie, naie verie diuells in dede to all common good ar theie to be estemed, which working sedition within the bowells of a state disioint it at home, & make it to to feble, either against out∣ward fo, by waie of resistence, or to recouer it self by reconcilement at home. By this learned mean in ech kinde, all princes gouern all states: the main and generall by considerat & graue counsellours, by wise & faithfull iusticiaries: & the particular branches for relligion & souls by diuines, for diseased bodies, by physiciās, for maintenāce of right, & voiding of wrong, by lawyers, for euerie particular help, by euerie particular professour, from euerie greatest to euerie mea∣nest thoroughout the hole gouernmēt. A most blessed mean to a most blessed end, a learned maintenance of an heauenlie happinesse, in ane earthlie state, of an heauenlie cōstitutiō. And therefore anie error in this mean is a maim in dede, and deserueth to be thought on, as an hindrer to peace, and a pernicious defeater of the best publik end, beginning perhaps at a small sparkle, but encroching still and gathe∣ring strength, by confluence of like infection in som other parts, till at the last, it set all on fire, and brust out in confusion, the more to be feared, bycause it festureth ear it flame, and shroudeth it self vnder shew of peace, and so consumeth without suspition, wheras it might be staid if it professed enemitie, and stood with vs in terms. The misses and blemishes herein, as in all other goods, which pro∣fit vs by vsing them, consist either in to much, or in to litle, or in The blemi∣shes in lear∣ning com four waies. to diuerse, or in to dissensious, if dissension be not the greatest di∣uersitie, tho for teaching sake theie be seuered in terms: Shall I saie in my thinking of this argument for the ascent in learning from the first Elementarie, that methought I found all these four imperfections in the hole bodie of learning somwhere to much, som∣where to litle, somwhere to different, somwhere to dissensious, four great enormities in a peaceable mean, to brede great diseases, and defyance to quietnes, first, with in a state in the gouerning dirrectiō, and then without by euident inflammation, a thing therefore to be thought on, not onelie by particulars in waie of mouing, but also by magistrates for mean to amendment.
For to much thus I conceiue, that as in euerie naturall bodie, the number of sinewes veins and arteries, for the quikning and mo∣tiue To much in learning vse thereof is definite and certain: so in a bodie politik, the distributiue vse of learning, which I compare to those parts, is eue∣rie where certain. And what soeuer is more then natur requireth in either of them, as in the one it bredes disease, so in the other it doth destruction, by breach of proportion, and so consequentlie of peace. In naturall bodies this to much appeareth, when one or mo parts engrosse them selues to much, & feble the remnant: In a cō∣mon bodie this to much for learning, is then to be espied, when the priuat professions do smell to much, and so weaken the hole bodie either by multitude of the prefessors, which bite sore, where manie must be fed, and haue but litle: to fede on: or by vnnecessarie profes∣sions, which choke vp the better, and fill the world with toies: or by infinitnesse of books, which cloie vp students and weaken with va∣rietie: or by intolerable swelling in the verie handling, which fatteh the carcasse, and febleth the strength of pithie matter. Be not all these surfets at this daie in our state? Be there not enemies to the common end, being growen out of proportiō? be theie not worth the weing, & wish theie no redresse? I saie no more, where it is to much euen to saie so much in a sore of to much. For to litle thus I cōceiue. In a naturall bodie there is then to litle, when either som necessarie thing wanteth, or when that which is not To litle in learning. wāting is to weak to serue the turn: And be not the same defects di∣seases in learning, and disquieters to a state? when necessarie profes∣sours wāt, either for number as to few, or for valew, as to feble? whē shew is shrined, where stuf should be enstalled? when sound learning is litle sought for, but onelie sursace, sufficient to shift with? When som necessarie professions, ar quite contemned, and laid vnder foot, bycause the cursorie student is to passe awaie in post? When want of nedefull books, bycause theie be not to be had proues a forcible let to greater learning: when such as we haue, be as good not had for insufficiencis in handling, and lamenesse to learn by? This corruption in learning anie man maie se, who is desirous to seke both for the maladie and the amendment. A breach of proportion, and there∣fore of peace to a publik bodie, which ought to be proportionate, a pining euil, which consumeth by staruing. For diuersitie in masters of learning, thus I think, that as it
self procedeth from diuersities in abilitie, for bringing vp; for wit, for iudgement, for perfection, bycause either all or som of these four be a great deal finer in som then in som: so it worketh verie much harm in the peace of anie state, chefelie where the leaders thereof, tho theie fall not out, and do but vtter their opinions, yet deuide stu∣dies according to their fauorites, which consider not so much the weight of the arguments, as the liking of the autors. If this diuersitie do break out in carnest, as it hath commonlie 4 Dissension in matters of learning. don in our time, while the verie print it self being the instrument of necessitie, and the deliuerer of learning in the naturall and best vse, becommeth verie often to fré a mean for ambition in brauerie, for malice in enuie, for reuenge in enimitie, for all passions in all purpo∣ses, what a sore blow doth the cōmon quiet receiue, whose mean to quiet, is made an instrumēt to distemper? For will not he fight in his furie, which brauleth in his books? seme not those mindes armed, naie arm theie not others to, by egging enimitie forward, to an o∣pen cōflict, which in priuat studies enter combats with papirs? which by to much eagernesse make to much a do, in a stir better quenched to dy, then quikned to liue? which whet their wits before, to be wranglers euer after, and as much as lyeth in them, disturb the common ease? nedelesse combats in matters of learning, be those which I mislike, the nedefull maie go on & yet with no more passion, then common ciuilitie will allow, and christian charitie not condemn. To much ouerburdeneth, to litle consumeth, to diuerse distracteth, but to dissensious destroies. Your selues know my learned readers, what a wonderfull stir there is dailie in your schools thorough the dissenting opinions of som in logik, som in philosophie, som in the mathematiks, Physik is not fre, tho Paracelsus were no fo, to those his humorists. The lawyer generallic is most quiet for contradicto∣rie writing, bycause he gains not by it the thing which he sekes for: contrarie pleading at cōmon bars, is a better pastur for a lean purse then a bissie pen to publish controuersies. The dissension in diuinitie is fierce beyond Gods forbid, & so much the more, bycause it falls out often, that the aduersarie parties entermingle their own passions with the matters, which theie deal in. For as our arguments of con∣trouersie in cases of relligiō do somtimes require a necessarie defense, so thee be oftimes such, as maie be well compounded, if mens affec∣tions would abide as much water to coul, as theie bring fire, to en∣flame.
But in the mean while how is the common peace disturbed, by the dissensious writhing of a worthie mean, to maintain a wrong, and to becom slaue to som in ordinate passion? I enter not this argu∣ment, to stand long about it, but in natur of a passage to let my good reader vnderstand, how much my desire was encreased, to the furtherance of learning, after I had markt these inconueni∣ences, wheras at the first I ment no more but onelie the help of tea∣ching the learned tungs. The agrement of the learned generallie, is mother to contentment generallie: By carping or contrarying, theie trouble the world, and taint themselues, bearing the name of Christians, which verie title enioyneth a serch to avoyd contentiō, e∣uen by submission of the wronged: neither chargeth it vs to defend our religion with passionat mindes, but with armor of pacience, and appointment of truth sufficient to confute, euen bycause it is trew, not neding our affections, wherewith it is trubled. These were the blemishes which I saw by the waie in the bodie of learning, which as I did mone, so I wished the amendment, which That the re∣formation of learning con sisteth in the aduised ma∣gistrate and the learned professour. amendment resteth vpon two great pillers: The professours of lear∣ning to giue intelligence of the error, and the principall magistrates, naie the verie souerain prince, to cause the redresse in so necessarie a pece, as the course of learning is, being Gods great instrument to work our quietnesse for souls, bodies, goods, and doings. The prince maie take order to cut of that is to much; to make vp that is to litle, to vnite diuersities, to expell dissensions, whose law∣full autoritie is a great cōmander, and no where more then in a ge∣nerall good, where euerie one will follow, bycause euerie one is bet∣tered. If it com not frō the prince, the mone maie continew, the amēd ment is consumed. Which proueth Platoes sentence, to haue kings Filosofers, that is, all magistrates learned, to be mauellous requi∣site in anie good gouernment. It is a great corrosiue to the hole prouince of learning, which is the regiment of peace, where such as must direct, ar but experienced wise, tho that be verie much, but yet both experience, and learning togither make the better con∣sent. It is an honorable conceit besides the incredible good, for a learned vertewous prince by the assistence of a like counsell, to re∣duce the professours of learning, by choice in euerie kinde to a cer∣tain number, to make choice in points of learning necessarie for the state, to appoint out books for learning, both in multitude not to ma∣nie,
and in method of the best. The president is princelie, in euerie profession, & not onelie now moued. There hath bene stripping here∣tofore in all these kindes, both by consent of the learned and, by commandement fr good princes. Our cuntrie is small, the thing the more easie our liuings within compas, the thing the more ned∣full: the enormitie great, the lesse able we to beare it: our prince lear∣ned, the liker to giue ear: our peple of vnderstanding, the better a∣ble to enform her. But neither doth the physician thriue so, by the preseruing part of physik, nor the lawyer grow rich so, by taking vp of contentions, nor the diuine prosper so in a heauen, where all is good, as he doth in earth where, all is euill, tho the best in ech kinde do honor them most: And therefore profit wilbe followed, tho it be with confusion, redresse will not stir, bycause it iudgeth the world, to be in som falt, which it is loth to confesse. Howbeit to procure som redresse and help this waie, at the Princes hand, it standeth all them in hand, which make profession of learning, if theie do but consider the reputation of learning in these our daies, whether by insufficient professours, or contemned professions. In the professours of learning, to whose solliciting this point is re∣commended, there be two things chefelie required. First that theie 1 studie soundlie themselues vpon stuf worth the studie, in order of right ascent, with mindes giuen to peace. For sound learning will not so soon be shaken at euerie eager point of controuersie, as the fleter will. Orderlie ascent groweth strong verie soon, & a pacifik conceit is a furtherer to that end, which is both priuatlie minded, and publiklie intended. The consent of the learned, and their quiet inclination is a great blessing to anie common weal, but chefelie to ours in this contentious time, where the ouerwhetted mindes work verie small good to sons worthie professions. The distrac∣tion of mindes, into sects and sorts of philosophie, did a might ie great displeasur to the quietnesse of that people, where the destrac∣tion Grece fell as it did our religion more, which spreding in that cun∣trie, where those sorts were nurished, was neuer in quiet sence. The second point required in a learned student is not so much to 2 seke his own auancement, as the things, which he professeth, which if it take place, himself coms forward, bycause he hath the things. If he seke his own auancement, and either forget the thing, if he haue it, or care not for it, if he haue it not, the want of the thing
will weaken his credit, tho it encrease hir own, as where the igno∣rant is blamed, there knowledge is allowed, tho the allower be not learned. He that studieth soundlie recommendeth good letters, by his own example: he that solliciteth other, who haue autoritie to fur∣ther, aduaunceth them by aduertisment, he that exerciseth his pen to help the best currant, confirmeth his desire by the doing there∣of. In this last kinde mine own labor trauelleth to seke for vnifor∣mitie, to strip awaie the nedelesse, to supply som defects, to do mine en∣deuor to help euerie one in as quiet a course, as I can temper my stile vnto. And tho somtimes I do sprede vpon cause in length of discourse, yet for the matter it self, which I will commend to the lear∣ner, I wilbe short and sound enough, and leaue more to practis, then I will laie in precept. Thus much for the generalitie of learning, and the learned, to whose considerations I commit the solliciting, as to the magistrates the amendment. The second question, which I said might be demanded of me, why 2. Why I fol∣low not som of the tea∣ching plats allredie laid by learned writers. I do not follow som learned president of those writers, which haue delt this waie with great admiration, maie be answered verie soon. I confesse the number of them, which haue writen of the training vp of children, to be so manie in number, as either priuat cuntrie or priuate cause might moue to deal in it. I confesse the excellencie of manie in that kinde, as Bembus, Sturmius, Erasmus, and diuerse other. But we differ in circumstance. Afré citie, a priuat frind, and an hole monarchie, haue diuersities in respect, tho theie agré in som generalls, wherein those writers dissent not from me. Neither do I but follow good writers, fetching my first patern from such writers, as taught all those to write so well, a thing alredie proued in the se∣cond chapter of this book. I am seruant to my cuntrie. For hir sake I trauell, hir circumstances I must consider, and whatsoeuer I shall pen, I will se it executed by the grace of God, mine own self, to per∣suade other the better by a tried prouf. The third question for my writing in English, and my so carefull, (I will not saie so curious writing,) concerneth me somwhat, bycause it 3. Of the En∣glish tung & the penning in English. beareth matter. For som be of opinion, that we should neither write of anie philosophicall argument, nor philosophicallie of anie slight argument in our English tung, bycause the vnlearned vnderstand it not, the learned esteme it not, as a thing of difficultie to the one, and no delite to the other. For both the penning in English generallie,
and mine own penning in this order, I haue this to saie. No one tung is more fine then other naturallie, but by industrie of the speaker, which vpon occasion offered by the kinde of gouern∣ment wherein he liueth, endeuoreth himself to garnish it with elo∣quence, & to enrich it with learning. The vse of such a tung, so elo∣quent for speche, and so learned for matter, while it kepeth it self within the naturall soil, it both serues the own turn with great ad∣miration, and kindleth in the foren, which com to knowledge of it, a great desire to resemble the like. Hence came it to passe, that the peple of Athens, both bewtified their speche by the vse of their pleading, & enriched their tung with all kindes of knowledge, both bred within Grece, and borowed from without. Hence came it to passe, that peple of Rome hauing platted their gouernment, much what like the Athenian, for their common pleas, became enamored with their eloquence, whose vse theie stood in nede of, and transla∣ted their learning, where with theie were in loue. Howbeit there was nothing somuch learning in the latin tung, while the Romane florished, as at this daie is in it by the industrie of studēts, thorough∣out all Europe, who vse the latin tung, as a common mean, of their generall deliuerie, both in things of their own deuise, and in works translated by them. The Romane autoritie first planted the latin among vs here, by force of their conquest, the vse thereof for mat∣ters of learning, doth cause it continew, tho the conquest be expired. And therefor the learned tungs so termd of their store, maie thank their own people, both for their fining at home, and their fauor a∣brode. Wherevpon it falleth out, that as we ar profited by the mean of those tungs, so we ar to honor them euen for profit sake, and yet not so but that we maie cherish our own, both in such cases, as the vse thereof is best: and in such places, as it maie be bettered, tho with imparing of them. For did not those tungs vse euen the same means to braue themselues ear theie proued so beawtifull? Did the peple strain curtesie to pen in their naturall, euen these same arguments which theie had frō the foren? If theie had don so, we had neuer had their works, whereat we wonder so. There be two speciall considerations, which kepe the Latin, & o∣ther learned tungs, tho chefelie the Latin, in great countenance a∣mong vs, the one thereof is the knowledge, which is registred in them, the other is the conference, which the learned of Europe, do
commonlie vse by them, both in speaking and writing. Which two considerations being fullie answered, that we seke them from profit & kepe them for that conference, whatsoeuer else maie be don in our tung, either to serue priuat vses, or the beawtifying of our speche, I do not se, but it maie well be admitted, euen tho in the end it displa∣ced the Latin, as the Latin did others, & furnished it self by the La∣tin learning. For is it not in dede a meruellous bondage, to becom seruants to one tung for learning sake, the most of our time, with losse of most time, whereas we maie haue the verie same treasur in our own tung, with the gain of most time? our own bearing the ioy∣full title of our libertie and fredom, the Latin tung remembring vs, of our thraldom & bondage? I loue Rome, but London better, I fa∣uor Italie, but England more, I honor the Latin, but I worship the English. I wish all were in ours, which theie had from others, neither offer I them wrong, which did the like to others, and by their own president do let vs vnderstand, how boldlie we maie ventur, not withstanding the opinion of som such of our peple, as desire rather to please themselues with a foren tung, wherewith theie ar acquain∣ted, then to profit their cuntrie, in hir naturall language, where their acquaintance should be. It is no obiection to saie, well ye rob those tūgs of their honor, which haue honored you? or which if theie had not bene to make you learned, you had not bene to strip them of frō learning? For I honor them still, & that so much as who so doth most, euen in wishing mine own tung partaker of their honor. For if I had them not in great admiration, bycause I know their valew, I wold not think it to be anie honor for my cuntrie tung to resemble their grace. I confesse their furnitur and wish it were in ours, which was taken from other, to furnish out them. For the tungs which we studie, were not the first getters, tho by leerned trauell the proue good kepers, and yet readie to return and discharge their trust, when it shalbe demanded in such a sort, as it was committed for term of years, and not for inheritance. And therefor no dis∣grace where theie did receiue with condition to deliuer, if theie do deliuer, when theie ar desired. But a dishonor to that tung, which hath a deliuerie both deuised and tendered, and will not receiue it. From which dishonor I wold English were fré, and that learning receiued, which is redie to be deliuered. I confesse their good fortun, which had so great a forestart, before other tungs as theie be most
welcom, wheresoeuer theie set foot, & allwaie in wonder aboue anie other for their rare worthinesse: which haue all mens opinions con∣cerning other speches, in such a captiuate preiudice of their own ex∣cellencie, as none is thought anie, but when it is like to them, and yet the most like to be maruellouslie behind. The diligent labor of learned cuntriemē did so enrich these tungs, and not the tungs them selues, tho theie proued verie pliable, as our tung will proue, I dare assure it of knowledge, if our learned cun∣triemen Why not learning in English? will put to their labor. And why not I praie you, as well in English, as either in Latin or anie tung else? Will ye saie it is nedelesse? sure that will not hold. If losse of 1. It is not nede full time while ye be pilgrims to learning by lingring about tungs, be no argument of nede: if lak of sound skill, while the tung distracteth sense, more then half to it self, and that most of all in a simple student or a sillie wit, be no argument of nede, then saie you somwhat, which pretend no nede. But bycause we neded not, to lease anie time one∣lesse we listed, if we had such a vantage, in the course of studie, as we now lease, while we trauell in tungs: and bycause our vnderstanding also, were most full in our naturall speche, tho we know the foren ex∣cedinglie well, me think necessitie it self doth call for English, where by all that gaietie maie be had at home, which makes vs gase so much at the fine stranger. But ye will saie it is vncouth. In dede being vnused. And so was 2. It is vncouth. it in Latin, and so is it in ech language, & Tullie himself the Ro∣mane paragō, while he was aliue, & our best patern now, tho he be dead, had verie much ado, and verie great wrastling against such wranglers, and their nice lothing of their naturall speche, ear he wan that opinion, which either we our selues haue now of him, or the best of his frinds did thē cōceiue by him. Is not euerie his preface before all his philosofie still thwakt full of such conflicts, had against those cauillers? our English wits be verie wel able, thāks be to God, if their wils were as good, to make those vncouth & vnknown lear∣nings verie familiar to our peple, euen in our own tung, & that both by president & protection of those same writers, whom we esteme so much of, who doing that for others, which I do wish for ours, in the like case must nedes allow of vs, onelesse theie wil auouch that which theie cānot auow, that the praise of that labor to cōueie cūning frō a foren tung into a mans own, did dy with them, not to reuiue in vs.
But whatsoeuer theie saie, or whatsoeuer theie can saie to continew their own credit, our cuntriemen maie not think, but that it is our praise to com by that thorough purchace, and planting in our tung, which theie were so desirous to place in theirs, and ar now so loth to forgo again, as the farest flour of their hole garland, which wold wither soon, or else decaie quite, if their great cunning, were not cause of their continewance: and if our people also, were not more willing to wonder at their workmanship, then to work their own tūg, to be worth the like wōder. Our English is our own, our Sparta must be spunged, by the inhabitants that haue it, as well as those tungs were by the industrie of their people, which be braued with the most, and brag as the best. But it maie be replyed again, that our English tung doth nede no 3. Our tūg is of no compas for groūd & autoritie. such proining, it is of small reatch, it stretcheth no further then this Ilād of ours, naie not there ouer all. What tho? Yet it raigneth there, and it serues vs there, and it wold be clean brusht for the wearing there. Tho it go not beyond sea, it will serue on this side. And be not our English folks finish, as well as the foren I praie you? And why not our tung for speaking, & our pen for writing, as well as our bodies for apparell, or our tastes for diet? But our state is no Empire to hope to enlarge it by commāding ouer cuntries. What tho? tho it be neither large in possession, nor in present hope of great encrease, yet where it rules, it can make good lawes, and as fit for our state, as the biggest can for theirs, and oftimes better to, bycause of confusion in greatest gouernments, as most vnwildinesse in grossest bodies. But we haue no rare cunning proper to our soil to cause foren∣ners studie it, as a treasur of such store. What tho? yet ar we not ig∣norant 4. No rare cun∣ning in En∣glish. by the mean thereof to turn to our vse all the great trea∣sur, of either foren soil, or foren language. And why maie not the English wits, if they will bend their wills, either for matter or for method in their own tung be in time as well sought to, by foren stu∣dents for increase of their knowledge, as our soil is sought to at this same time, by foren merchants, for encrease of their welth? As the soil is fertile, bycause it is applyed, so the wits be not barren if theie list to brede. But tho all this be trew, yet we ar in dispare, euer to se ours so 5. No hope of anie great∣nesse. fined, as those tungs were, where publik orations were in ordinarie trade, and the verie tung alone made a chariot to honor. Our state
is a Moanarchie, which mastereth lāguage, & teacheth it to please: our religion is Christian, which half repines at eloquence, and li∣keth rather the naked truth, then the neated term. What tho? Tho no English man for want of that exercise, which the Roman had, & the Athenian vsed in their spacious and great courts, do proue a Tullie or like to Demosthenes, yet for sooth he maie proue verie comparable to them in his own common weal and the eloquence there. And why not in dede cōparable vnto them in all points tho∣rough out for his naturall tung? Our brains can bring furth, our cō∣ceits will bear life: our tungs be not tyed, and our labor is our own. And eloquence it self is neither limited to language, nor restrai∣ned to soil, whose measur the hole world is, whose iudge the wise ear is, not in greatnesse of state, but in sharpnesse of peple. And tho foren excellēcie were half in dispare, must our own best be therefor vnbeautified? It should not sure, it should pearch to the height, if I could help it. We maie aspire to a pitch, tho we passe no further. The qualitie of our monarchie wil admit trew speaking, wil allow trew writing, in both with the brauest, so that it do please, and be wor∣thie praise, so that it preach peace, and preserue the state. Our rel∣ligion condemns not anie ornament of tung, which doth serue the truth, and presumeth not aboue. Naie is not eloquence, which cō∣monlie is caried from weight of matter, to folie in words, the great blessing of god, and the trumpet of his honor, as Chrysostom calleth S. Paule, if it be religiouslie bent? Theie that haue red the old church storie, do find that eloquence in the primitiue church, o∣uerthrew great forces, bent against our faith, & enflamed nūbers to embrace the same, when strength from the truth, ioyned with force in the word. Seke it to serue God, shun it to serue thy self, but where it serues thine own turn, with warrant from him. But will ye thus break of the common conferēce with the learned 6 It will let the learned com munitie. foren, by banishing the Latin, and setting ouer her learning to your own tung. The conference will not cease, while the peple haue cause to enterchange dealings, & without the Latin, it maie well be cōti∣newed: as in som cūtries the learnedder sort, & som near cosens to the latin it felf do alreadie wean their pens and tungs from the vse of Latin, both in writen discourse, & spoken disputatiō, into their own naturall, and yet no dry nurse, being so well appointed by the milch nurses help. The question is not to disgrace the Latin, but to grace
our own. And why more a stranger in honor with vs, then our own peple, all circumstances serued? And tho no stranger, nor foren natiō, bycause of the bounder & shortnesse of our language, wold deal so with vs, as to trāsport frō vs as we do frō other, bycause we deuise no now, tho we denison the old, yet we our selues gain verie much there by in the course of studie, to be set at the first in the priuie chāber or closet of knowledge, by the mere frindship of our cūtrie tung: as Iusti∣niā the Emperour saith to the studēts in law, whē he made his insti∣tutiōs to be of imperial force, that theie were most happie for hauing such a foredeal, as at the verie first to hear the Emperours voice, which those of elder time, did not attain vnto so soon, by the full term least of four hole years. And doth not our lāguaging hold vs tak four years, & that full think you? If it hindered vs no more, tho it help vs verie much, the losse were the lesse. For the time it is most certain, that we ar hindered by tungs, tho we must harken vnto them, till we haue help at home. And that our best vnderstāding is in our naturall tūg, if we minde & mark it, who can deny, which is able to se, that all our forē learning is applyed vnto vse thorough the mean of our own & without the applicatiō to particular vse, wherfor serues learning. But it is pitie to deface such honorable antiquitie. No pitie forsooth to honor our own, doing no worse to them, then theie did to vs, by ei∣ther Will ye de∣face the La∣tin tung? spoiling our cūtrie, as all histories witnesse, or defacing our lear ning if the Celtopadie saie trew. O spare Babilon it is a fair town, saue Dianaes chirch, it is a fair temple, worship forē speche, for that ye maie take frō it. Then be bōd still to Babilō, then be paganes still with Ephesus: thē be still borowers of the borowers thēselues. If this opinion had bene allwaie maintained, we had allwaie worn old Adās pelts, we must still haue eaten, the poëts akecorns, & neuer haue sought corn, we must cleue to the eldest and not to the best. But why not all in English, a tung of it self both depe in conceit, & frank in deliuerie? I do not think that anie language, be it what∣soeuer, is better able to vtter all argumēts, either with more pith, or Why not all in English? greater planesse, then our English tung is, if the English vtterer be as skilfull in the matter, which he is to vtter: as the foren vtterer is. Which methink I durst proue in anie most strāge argument, euen mine own self, tho no great clark, but a great welwiller to my natu∣rall cuntrie. And tho we vse & must vse manie forē terms, whē we deal with such argumēts, we do not anie more thē the brauest tūgsdo
& euē verie those, which crake of their cūning. The necessitie is one betwene cūtrie & cuntrie, for cōmunicating of words, for vttering of strāge matter, & the rules be limited how to square thē to the vse of those which will borow thē. It is our accident which restrains our tung, & not the tung it self, which will strain with the strongest, & stretch to the furthest, for either gouernmēt if we were cōquerers, or for cūning, if we were treasurers, not anie whit behind either the subtile Greke for couching close, or the statelie Latin for spreding fair. Our tūg is capable, if our peple wold be painfull. The verie Gre kish soil, as it is noted by som, did fine Philelphus beyond all accoūt, being an Italiā born. The same Italie saith Erasmus, wold have don the like in our Sr. Thomas More, if he had bene trained there. And maie not labor & emploimēt, work as great wonders in the English wits at home, as the air can do abrode? Is the alteration of soil, the best mean of growing, & onelie the best? Naie sure, wits be sharp enough euerie where, tho where the trading is lesse, & the air more grosse, the labor must be greater, to supply that with pains, which is wanting in natur. Which when ye haue don, thē maie you be bold to take that twoworded & thriseworthie questiō, Quid non? to be your posie. But grant it were an heresie, seing our traning vp is in the forē tungs, euē to wish all in English. Certainlie it is no falt to hādle that in English, which is proper to Englād tho the same argument well handled in Latin were like to please Latinists. But an English profit must not be measured by a Latinists pleasur, which is not for studies to plaie with, but for students to practis, & there the better where euerie one cā iudge: the prĩcipal benefit of our English pēnĩg. Besides all this to cōfirm a trew groūd with a triall as trew, how ma∣nie sklēder things, ar oftimes vttered in the Latin tung, & other fo∣ren speches, which vnder the bare vail of a strāge couert do seme to be somwhat for to coūtenāce studie, which if theie were Englished, & the mask puld of, that euerie mā might se thē, wold seme verie mi serable, & make a sorie shew of simple substāce, & be soon disclamed in of the parties theselues, with som thought at the least, of the old sa ing. Had I wist, I wold not. And were it not thē better to gain iudge mēt thoroughout in our own english, thē either to leaseit, or to lame in the forē Latin, or anie tūg else? To be led on a lōg time with the o∣pinion of somthing which in the end will proue plane nothing, or but a simple somthing? These and such considerations concerning the foren & our English tūg make me thank the foren for my furtherance in
points, but withall to think how to further my naturall. And there∣for when occasion doth offer, as in these Elemētarie points, I am verie well content to deal in English, not renouncing either Latin or other learned tung, when my ascent in writing shall require their vse. Now as this penning in English maie seme not impertinent to the 3 For this kinde of pen ning. vse of my cuntrie, vpon these and such grounds, so my to carefull penning maie perhaps offend fom, as seming to obscure, and hindring my pretence by either writing to hard matters, for the ignorant to perceiue, or in to close a stile for mean heads to enter, or into rare terms, for plane folks to reach at. All which difficulties be verie great foes to the cōmon mans perceiuing, who cānot vnderstand but where he hath bene traned, and no good frinds to my purpos, who pretēd that I write to profit the most, which is that of the vntraned and vnskilfull multitude. But tho these obiections make a verie pro∣bable shew, yet theie must giue me leaue to plead mine own cause, for both matter, maner, and term, bycause the thre difficulties be grounded vpon these three, and yet in all these, the answer is half made, bycause I mean my cuntrie tung well, and therefor tho I did try som conclusions, to work that in the hardest, which is easie in the softest, euen som insufficiences might seme pardonable, for that all which I do, concerneth my cuntrie youth and tung, it entertai∣neth hir profit, and enuieth not hir pleasur, and desireth to se hir en∣riched so in euerie kinde of argument, and honored so with euerie ornament of eloquence, as she maie vy with the foren, if I maie work it with wishing. But first to examin that of hardnesse in matter, which the rea∣der Of hardnesse in argument. is said somwhat hardlie to vnderstand, and so'after to the other, for the maner and word. Wherein I praie you doth that hardnesse consist, which is fathered vpon matter? Or rather doth not all hard∣nesse procede from the person, and none from the thing, not onelie in this case, but eueriewhere else? If that person which vnderta∣keth to teach, do not know the matter well, which he is to teach to laie it so open, as it maie well be vnderstood, seing the best and first mean to plane opening, is perfit vnderstanding, is the thing there∣for hard, which is not thoroughlie had? Or if that person, which should vnderstand, either do not in dede thorough mere ignorance, or cannot in dede through small knowledge, or will not of a will tho∣rough som corrupt affection, is the thing therefor hard, which is so
strangelie crost by infirmitie in the partie? Sure there is not. Sure there is no hardnesse in anie thing at all, which is to be deliuered by a learned pen, be it neuer so strange from the common vse, how∣soeuer it be vnrightlie charged, to sheild negligence, if the partie deliuerer do know it sufficiētlie, & the partie receiuer be willing, & not weiward. For what be those things, which we handle in lear∣ning? Ar theie not of our own choice? Ar theie not our own inuenti∣ons? Ar theie not the supplyes of our own nede? And was not the first inuentour, verie well able to opē the thing, which he did inuent, be∣fore he did persuade it? Or did those men, which admitted the thing being inuented, make choice thereof before theie were instructed, wherefor it wold serue? Or could blunt ignorance haue won such a credit in a doutfull case, tho it pretēded profit, to haue bene beleued, before it had perswaded by plane euidence? To haue the thing pro∣ued, ear it were perceiued, that it wold be profitable, not onelie for the present, but in time to com also, and that in euerie mans eie, which had anie foresight? If the first could do so both in finding and perswading, both in first admitting, and still continewing, his follower must do so, or be in falt himself, and deliuer the thing from opinion of hardnesse, which riseth of himself, being not well appointed for sufficient deliuerie. If the partie which readeth do not conceiue the thing well, bycause he is ignorant, he is to be pardoned, the disease proceding from mere infirmitie: But if he do not, bycause he will not, hauing abilitie to do, tho not with the most, he is punished enough by being peuish ignorāt: if he can do with the best, & will deal with the worst, blinded vnderstanding is the greatest darknesse, & punisheth the ill humor with deprauing of reason, which should iudge right. If the partie deliuerer be himself weak, where mine own part coms in, being a deliuerer my self, he is either vnaduised, if he write ear that he know, or not well aduised if he mēd not, where he misseth so he know wherein, and can tell how. Yet the readers curtesie is som couert against error, for him that writeth, as his pardon is protecti∣on for him, that readeth, if simple ignorance be their onelie falt, without further want or defect in good will. It fareth oftimes with readers in the iudging of books, as it doth with beholders in iudging of fauor, as it doth with tasters in iudging of relice. In the matter of fauor where louing is, all things be amiable, where lothing is, there nothing is liked, no not beawtie it self. But where affection is
voided and reason in place, being able to iudge, there beawtie is beawtie, and deformitie is ill fauored, and euerie thing so weighed, as it is worth in dede. The like varietie is in matters of diet, a sik∣kish humor can relice nothing well, an ouergiuen delite likes no∣thing at all, but his own choice: an healthfull humor, and a right taste neither ouerlothes with siknesse, nor ouerloues with fant sie, but measureth what he tsteth with a right sense. And therefor in iudge ment of fauor the corrupt opinion must be freid from passion: in dis∣cerning of iuyces the corruption of taste must be cleared from distem per: & in matters of reason right information must be mean to right iudgement, or else that passion is to imperious, whom information cā∣not rule. Howbeit I fear not anie so strong a passion in anie my rea∣der, and therefor I will on with my argument of hardnesse. Admit this diuision to be trew, that the hardnesse about matter either riseth of the thing it self, or of the handling. Is the thing hard Is the thing hard? saie you? Then is it such as is strāge to the reader, either for differēce of trade betwene the readers profession and the thing which he rea deth, or for want of full studie, which marreth that in hādling, that was neuer so studied, as it could be well handled. For the first, what affinitie is there in respect of their profession, betwene a simple plow∣man, a warie merchant, and a subtill lawyer? betwene manuarie trades, and metaphysicall discourses, either for the mathematiks, for physik, or for diuinitie? Again can anie thing at all be easie euē to stu∣dents, who professe allyance, with the thing which theie studie, as the other do not, whose trades be mere fremd, if theie haue not trauel∣led sufficiētlie therein? I nede saie no more but onelie this, that where there is no acquaintance in profession, there is no ease to help vnder∣standing, where no familiaritie, there no facilitie where no cōferēce, there no knowledge. If the man delue the earth, & the matter dwell in heauen, there is no mean to vnite, where the distance is so great without compatibilitie. And whereas the vnderstanding in affinitie of trade is clear insufficient, there is far more hardnesse then in diffe rence of professiō, bycause vain persuasiō in such imperfitnesse brings much more error, then weak knowledge can work vnderstanding. In the ignorant vnacquaintd there maie som good follow, if he begin to like, but the lukewarm learned doth mar his own waie by preiudi cat opinion. But all this while, if there be anie difficultie about the matter, the mean is cause of hardnesse, which is in the man, and not
the propertie, which is in the matter, and maie easilie be had, if it be carefullie sought. I am quik in teaching, and so hard to vnderstand, but to whom and why? To him forsoth that is not acquainted with such a currant, neither yet familiar to the matter so coursed. Well then, if want of acquaintance be the cause of difficultie, and supposed hardnesse, acquaintāce once made and frindlie continewed will reme die that complaint, if the matter seme worthie the mās acquaintāce in his naturall tung, for that is a question in a conceit blinded with the foren fauor, or if the partie be desirous to be rid of such a gest, as ignorance is, for that is another question, in a vain opinion ouerwei∣ning it self. For ane hole book being writen in English, and so ma∣nie Englishmen being so well able to satisfy euen at full the most ig∣norant reader in anie case of a book in that tung, it were to great discourtesie, not to lighten a mans labor with a short question, and as long an answer, but to pretend difficultie as a shadow not to seke, where the matter it self being no pleasant tale, nor anie amorous de uise, but an earnest argument concerning sober & aduised learning, not acquainted with all readers, nor yet with all writers, doth protest no ease before it be sought, and deseruing to be sought, either for knowledge sake to instruct our selues, or for cuntries sake to enlarge hir speche, if it be not sought at all, and thereby not found, it doth be∣wraie an vnnaturall idlenesse, which desireth rather to find salt thē ease. For what reason is it for one to labor to help all &, none to list to help that one? naie for anie to list not to help himself frō the danger & bondage of blind ignorance? If the book were all Latin, & no one word of the readers acquaintāce, thē the thing were desperate for a mere Englishmā to compas. Where as now anie man maie do it with verie small enquirie of his skilfull neighbour. Wherefor if anie thing seme hard to such an ignorant, as desireth to know, & doth not know thorough the argument it self, being mere strang to his kinde of life he must handle the thing often, and so make it soft, where it semeth to be hard: and in questions of dowt confer with those, which ar cū∣ning allredie. He must take acquaintāce & make the thing familiar if it seme to be strange. For all strange things seme great nouelties, & hard of entertainmēt at their first arriuall, till theie be acquain∣ted: but after acquaintance theie be verie familiar, and easie to en∣treat. And words likewise, which either conueie strange matters, or be strangers themselues, either in name or in vse, be no wilde beasts,
tho theie be vnwont, neither is a term a Tiger to proue vntracta∣ble. Familiaritie & acquaintance will cause facilitie, both in matter and in words. If the handling do seme to make the hardnesse, & that doth pro∣cede from him which deliuereth & penneth the argument, not one∣lie Is the hand∣ling hard? by opiniō of the mistaking reader, but in verie plane truth also, & the soūdest iudgments in that, whereof theie iudge, he is worthie to be blamed, which seketh to deliuer withowt sufficient studie: as again if it be not in him for insufficient handling, but in the corrupt rea∣der for the plane misconstrewing, it deserueth small praise in him, that misconstreweth without either regard to curtesie, or reue∣rence to truth, or his own credit, if it proue contrarie, the partie misconstrewed being verie well able to be his own orator. Concerning the maner, which I vse in writing, bycause the ma∣ner and the handling be so near cosens, as theie both be the pencills to deliuerie, if there be anie falt for hardnesse therein, that also pro∣cedeth of choice, being carefull to shew from whence I com, that is from the students forge, who being still acquainted with strong stele, and pithie stuf in reading of good writers, cannot but resemble that metle in my stile. In penning to proue close and allwaie with cause, and to cause that, which followeth to be sutable to that, which went before, to seke more for sinewes and sound strength, then for waste flesh, is semelie for a student, and chefelie there, where he penneth for perpetuitie, where the reader maie at leasur, either look vpon the book, or laie it down by him, neither is so straited, as to read all at once, or to forgo the book: or to hear all at once, or to hear it no more, which is cōmōlie so in things but once handled in speche, & in books that be vnwilling to bewraie their writer. Such discourses as be altogether popular, or vpō present dispatch, & soon after to dy, maie well abide slight, bycause their life is short. And where theie ar to passe streight waie from the pen to present vse, and make no longer tariance then for such and such a feat, or when thei salute but the ear, and so to execution, without further delaie, then the more plane at sodain, the more plausible in dede, and therefor in their kinde verie excellent perfit. Bycause the matters being such as serue to that end, the vtterance must be such as maie work to that end, without anie thing to muse on, where there is no time to muse in. But where musing must be, & the matter is no currier to passe a∣waie
in poste, ànother currant must be kept, & yet the maner of deli∣uerie must not be thought hard, nor be cōpared with the other, which is of anie other kinde, cōsidering it teacheth, & with such planenesse, as the subiect doth permit. Doth anie mā of iudgement in learning, & the Latin tung, think that Tullies orations & his discourses in philo sofie, were of like known, or of like planesse to the peple of Rome, tho either in their kinde, were allwaie like plane, as theie be to vs, which, know the Latin tung better then our own, bycause we pore vpon it, and neuer mark our own? no sure. To them theie were not, as it doth appear by verie manie places in Tullie himself, where he noteth the difference, & cōfesseth himself that the newnesse of those argumēts, which he transported from Grece, were cause of som darknesse to his common reader, and of som contempt to them, that were cunning, bycause of the Greke which theie fantsied more. Yet neither igno∣rance in the common reader, nor contempt in the learned could dis∣courage his pen from the benefit of his tung, by translating their learning, which the other wished still to continew in Greke, he was desirous to conueie it to Rome, & passed thorough with all, & gaue time the turn, which in time turned to him, & gaue him that credit which he still enioyeth vntill this daie. And that this was not onelie for the matter, which he wrote of, but also for the maner, which he vsed in writing, naie euen for the words, which the common man knw not, being artificiall and strange, he himself witnesseth. Tullies opi∣nion in this case of mine and his own person. I could write of these things, (meaning the arguments of philoso∣fie) saith he like to Amafanius, naming som obscure apophthegma∣tarie discourser, but then not like my self, and as plane as he, but not to please my self, nor to satisfie the argument, as I should handle it. I must define, deuide, distinguish, vse Art, vse terms of Art, vse iudge∣ment. I must as well mark from whom I fet my transported learning, that theie maie saie theie ment so, as for whom I fet it, that theie maie saie theie vnderstand it. Whereof he doth not anie, and is there for thought plane, and soon sene of them, which se nothing far. For if plane humors must still be pleased, and be delt withall, so daintilie, as theie be put to no pains, to learn and enquire, where theie find difficultie, thorough their own not knowing: If theie must be made a lure for learning to discend to, in euerie kinde, and rather to dege∣nerate hir self, then to desire them, to learn to look vp, what state standeth skill in? He that made the earth made hills and dales, made
heights and planes, made smouthes and roughs, and yet euerie one good in their seuerall kinde. Planenesse is good for a pleasant course, and a popular stile in ordinarie argument, where no Art nedeth, by∣cause the reader knowes none, neither the matter is such, but it maie be so vttered, as being then in hir best colors, when she is drest for the common. Likewise this pretēded hardnesse, tho it be proper to the matter, and the man which writeth without hardnesse in dede, hath hir peculiar good, to whet a wit withall, and to print depe euen bycause it semes dark, and contains a matter, which must be thrise lookt on, ear it be once gotten. Trauell is the coin, which is currant in heauen, for which and by which almightie God doth sell his best wares, tho of his great goodnesse, he do somtime more for som kinde of wits, in quiknesse and cunning, euen without great labor, tho not without anie, then anie labor can work in som other, to giue vs to wit, that his mercie is the mistresse, when our labor learns best. But in our ordinarie, if carpetting be knighting, where is necessarie de∣fence? If easie vnderstanding be the rediest learning, thē wake not my Ladie, she learns as she lies. If all things be hard, which euerie one thinks hard, where is the prerogatiue and benefit of studie? What helps it vs to studie, if what we get by trauell, be condemned as to hard for thē, which studie not. I will not alledge, that the old learned men vsed darknesse in deliuerie in matters of relligion to win reue∣rēce to the argumēt, as of another world, & not of ordinarie speche neither that the old wisedom, was expressed by ridles, prouerbs, fa∣bles, oracles, and oracle like verses, to draw on studie, and set that sure in memorie, which was soundlie studied for, ear it was so vtte∣red. Be anie of our best and eldest writers▪ which we studie at this daie, & haue ben thought the best, eche in their kinde, euer since theie wrote first, vnderstood at once reading, and at the verie first, tho he that studieth them do know their tung as well, as we think we know English, naie and better to, bycause it is more labored? or is their manner of penning to be disallowed as dark, bycause the igno∣rant reader, or the nice student maie not streight waie rush into it. That theie fell into that short & close kinde of writing, euen for ve∣rie pith to saie much, where theie speak least, the commenting of thē declareth, which openeth that with great lēgth, which theie set down in som short sentēce, naie in som short cut of no verie long sentēce. Be not all the chefe paragons & principall leaders in euerie profession of
this same sort, vnpearceable for the commō, tho in their common tūg, but reserued to learning, as to store them that will studie? But maie not this dark falt, be in him that finds it, & not in the Of such as giue sentēce of other mēs trauell. matter which is plane of it self, and is plainelie vttered, tho it be not so to him? Our daintinesse deceiues vs, our want of good will blinds vs, naie our want of skill, is the verie witch, which bereueth vs of sense, tho we pretend cunning & countenance for learning. For eue∣rie one that bids a book good morow, is not therefor a scholler, nor a sufficient iudge of the book arguments. What if he haue studied ve∣rie well, but neither much nor long? nor once medled or not soundlie medled, with the argumēt whereof he wilbe iudge? What if desire of prefermēt haue cut of his studie in the midst of his hope, & greatest towardnesse? Naie what if what not, where the means be so manie to work infirmitie? notwithstanding either countināce in the partie, or opinion in the peple, do muster verie fare, for som shew of learning? Euerie man maie iudge well of euerie thing, which he hath studied well, & practised full, (if the studie require practis), with all the cir∣cumstances that belong thereto. Pretie skill som one waie, and in som one thing, will somtimes glance at further matter, and shew som smak of further cunning, but no more then a smak, no further then a glance. And therefor in my iudging of another mans writing, so much of my iudgement is trew, as I am able to proue soundlie, if I were sadlie apposed by those, that can iudge: and not so much as I maie carie vncontrolled, either by pleasing my self, or som as ignorāt as my self. Apelles could allow the coblers opinion, where his clou∣ting was his cunning, but not an inch further. For my maner of wri∣ting, if I misse in choice, I misse with warrāt still, rather minding the matter with substance, then the person with surface. For howsoeuer it be in speche, in that kinde of penning, which wilbe like to speche plane for plane argument, where performance must be present, & de∣liuerie without delaie, certainlie where the matter must bide the tuch, and be tryed by the hāmer of a learned resolution, there wold be precisenesse, there wold be ordinat method, and deliuerie well coucht, euerie word bearing weight, & euerie sentēce being well, & euen that well well weighed, where both time doth lend weing, and the matter deserues weing. Which kinde of writing tho it want esti∣mation in som one age, by sleightnesse of the time, yet maie win it in another, when weight shalbe in price, as som hundreth years be wri∣ten
both to shrine saincts and to autorise books. For the generall penning in the English tung, I must nedes saie this much, that in som points of handling by the tung, there is none Som general properties of the En∣glish tung. more excellent then ours is. As in the teaching kinde no work memo∣rie with delite, like the old leonine verses, which run in rime, it doth admit such daliance, with the letter, as I know not anie. And in that 1. kinde, where remembrance is the end, it is without blame, tho o∣therwise not, if it com in to often, and bewraie affectation not sound but followed. In the staie of speche, & strong ending, it is verie 2. forcible and stout, bycause of the monosyllab, which is the chefe ground & ordinarie pitch of both our pen & tung. For fine transla∣ting in pithie terms, either pere to, or passing the foren quiknesse, I 3. find it wonderfull pliable, and redie to discharge a quik conceit, in verie few words. For close deliuerie of much matter in not manie words generallie, it will do as much in the primitiue vtterance, as in 4. anie translation. Which close deliuerie in few words maie seme hard somtimes, but onelie there, where ignorance is harbored or idle∣nesse is the idoll, which will not be entreated to crak the nut, tho he couet the kernell. I nede no example in anie of these, whereof mine ownpenning, is a generall patern. Neither shall anie man iudge so well of these points in our tūg, as those shall, which haue matter flow∣ing vpon their pen, that wilbe so vttered, or will vtterlie refuse him, which refuseth that vtterance. For as in other tungs there is a cer∣tain propertie in their own dialect, so is there in ours, for our deliue∣rie, both as pretie and as pithie, as anie is in theirs. In the force of words, which was the third note and pretence of Is the hard∣nesse in words? obscuritie, there ar to be considered. Commonesse for euerie man, beawtie for the learned, brauerie to rauish, borowing to enlarge our naturall speche, & rediest deliuerie. And therefor if anie reader find falt with anie word, which is not sutable to his ear, bycause it is not he, for whom that word serues, let him mark his own, which he knoweth, and make much of the other, which is worthie his knowing. Know you not som words? why? no maruell. It is a metaphor, a lear∣ned translation, remoued from where it is proper, into som such place where it is more properlie vsed, and most significant to, if it be well vnderstood: take pains to know it, you haue of whom to learn. It is not commonlie so vsed, as I do vse it, but I trust not abused, naie per∣aduentur in a more statelie calling, then euer you herd it. Then mark
that the place doth honor the parson, and think well of good words, which tho you hādle but with ordinarie lips, & those somtimes foul yet in a fairer mouth, or vnder a finer pen theie maie com to honor. Is it a stranger? but no Turk. & tho it were an enemies word, yet good is worth the getting, tho it be from your fo, as well by speche of wri∣ters, as by spoill of soldiers. And when the foren word hath yeilded it self, & is receiued into fauor, it is no more foren, tho of forē race, the propertie being altered. But he nede not lak words, that will speak of words. Howbeit in this place, there nedeth not anie further speaking of them, neither which be common, neither which be bewtifull, nor which be braue, nor which be borrowed, nor that for anie ornament therein we giue no place to anie other tung. For mine own words and the terms, that I vse, theie be generallie English. And if anie be either an incorporate stranger, or otherwise translated, or quite coind a new, I haue shaped it as fit for the place, where I vse it, as my cunning will giue me. And to be bold that waie for either enfranchising the foren, or translating our own, without to manifest insolence, & to want on affectatiō, or else to inuent new vpon euident note, which will bear witnesse, that it fitteth well, where it is to be vsed, the word following smoothlie, & the circumstance about bewraing, what it meneth, till oft vsing do make it well known, we ar sufficientlie warranted both by president & precept of them, that can iudge best. Wherefor to saie that in plane terms, which I mean as planelie, he that is soundlie learned, will streight waie sound a scho∣ler: he that is well acquainted with a strong pen, whether in autors or in vse, will soon sift a close stile: he that hath skill in language, whether learned & old, or liked and new, will not wonder at words which he knoweth whence theie ar, neither yet maruell at a conceit quiklie deliuered, the like whereof he meteth oft abrode. And there∣for such skilfull men, as I fear not their iudgement, bycause cunning is curteous, so I praie their frindship, bycause their countenāce is cre∣dit. For those that want of this, and cannot iudge right, tho theie be sharp censors, and commonlie vttering their talking talent, I must craue their pardō, if I passe not for their censuring, which I take for no iudgement. And yet I am content to bear with such fellowes, and pardom them their errors in my behalf, so theie that can iudge will pardon me mine in their curtesie. Those that neither cāiudge right for wāt of cunning, nor maie seme to iudge wrōg, for bewraing their
own weaknesse, if theie desire to learn in anie case of dout, theie haue the learned to counsell, as the smatterer to corrupt. If theie like and allow, the profit is theirs, but if theie do not, theie fraie me not from writing, wherein I hope at length either to win their fauor, by deseruing well, or at least their silence, by cumbring them to much, tho I win not their fauor. Here to conclude in generall for the maner of writing & words in our English tung, this is my opinion, that as for choice of argument to proue with, som verie near to the substāce it self of that, which is in question, som further of, tho of probable seruice, there is regard to be had by him that proueth, & if he do his dewtie, the thing is discharged, howsoeuer it be charged: so in the hā dling & maner thereof, the like respect being had for both perspicui∣tie & propertie to the thing, tho som one point seme strāge, to the mā that will iudge, the deliuerer is discharged. For either inuention of matter or elocutiō in words, the learned know well, in what writers theie ly: and those that be vnlearned must learn to think of them, before theie think to iudge, least by missing the leuell, which the wri∣ter vseth, theie misse of that right, whereby theie should iudge. For the matter it self, which shalbe the subiect of anie learned method, as I haue said allredie, acquaintance will make it easie, tho it seme to be hard, as the maner also, tho it seme to be strange, if the thing it self, maie deserue acquaintāce, which wil not appear before acquaintāce. And a litle hardnesse yea in the most obscure, & most philosoficall cō∣clusions, maie neuer seme tedious to a conquering mind, such as he must haue, which either sekes himself, or is desirous to se his cūtrie tung enlarged, & the same made the instrumēt of all his knowledge, as it is of his nedes. But I haue bene to tedious, my good cūtriemen & curteous readers, & yet not so, where no hast is enioyned, but to read at leasur, & not all at once: now am I to moue my request vnto you, A request for curtesie. which I mentioned at the first, or your frindlie construction & cū∣trimālike fauor. The reuerence to learning, which allureth the good student to embrace hir in his youth, & auanceth him to honor, by hir presence in his age, will entreat the learned in generall for me, for endeuoring my self to recouer hir right, by whose onelie autoritie thēselues be of accoūt. The samenesse inprofession will work me more Hesiod. . fauour among my fellow teachers, then found emulatiō can work me discountenance: the fauorable side discouering good natur, and lear∣ning in dede: the peuish detracting, a beggerlie spite, & som want of
skill. The consideratiō of mine own present profession & this last con∣ceiued hope of the learned teachers doth put me in minde, to aduertis them in generall, of one speciall point, which in dewtie must moue thē no lesse then me, to the carefull thought of redresse in our schools, which maie abide the amendmēt. I pretend not here relligion, which chargeth in conscience, neither yet priuat maintenance, which enfor∣ceth trauell, but onelie the munificence and that extraordinarie of our princes and parlements, towards our hole order in our cuntries behalf: who partlie by suffring vs to enioy old immunities, partlie by graunting vs diuerse other exemptions from personall seruices & ordinarie paiments, wherewith our fellow subiects ar cōmonlie char∣ged, both encourage vs to labor, & binde vs to requite them. For the continuāce whereof, & the assured enioying, all the teachers in Eng∣lād haue great cause to honor the right honorable. Sr. Walter Mild All schoole∣masters boūd to these fiue personages. maie knight chancellor of hir maiesties court of exchequor & one of hir maiesties most honorable priuie counsell. The right honorable Sr. Roger Manwod knight Lord chefe baron of hir maiesties court of Exchequor, the right worshipfull master Robert Sute, master Iohn chlinch, master Iohn Sotherton, Esquiers & barōs of the same hir maiestes court, the two first Sr. Walter & Sr. Roger great founders to learning both within the vniuersites, & in the cuntries about thē: the other thre Esquires great fauorers to relligion & learning eue∣riewhere. For the small cōsideration, or rather the ouersight of som to passionat sessors in the last subsidie making that a priuat question, which was a generall priuilege, & scant charitablie seking the dam∣mage of a number, by quarell to som few, it pleased these honorable & worshipfull personages vpon humble sute for the common benefit of a number of poor men, to take the cause to protection, and to conster the statut, both as the parlaments did mean it, and as we haue still enioyed it, to the common benefit of our hole companie. Which their great goodnesse to the fauor of our order, as it deserueth at our hāds an honorable remembrance, so it bindeth vs further to the common care, for the which we were fauored. Whereunto as I find my self to be maruellouslie affectionate, so dout I not but there is the like affe∣ction in manie of the same liuerie, whose frindship I craue▪ for fauora∣ble construction, whose conference I desire for help in experience: be∣ing thankfullie redie in this common course, either to persuade or to be persuaded. Of those that ar not learned I praie frindship also, e∣uen
more then half of right: by cause I labor for them, in whō vnthāk fulnesse is a falt, if my good will be none. In generall I desire but to win so much of all men, a Dauus in Terente desireth of his master whē his good coūsell had no good successe. Bycause I am your bōd mā (saith the slaue to his master) my dewtie is, to trauell hand & foot, night and daie, yea with danger of my life to do you good, as common curtesie on the other side binds you, to hold me excused, to pardō and forgiue me, if anie my good meaning haue contrarie is shew, that I do maie misse, but yet I do my best. I am bond to my cuntrie, and boūd to hir peple, I will do my best endeuor, and craue pardon with poor Da∣uus, where my best is begiled. Common curtesie is naturall, where there is no desert: forgiuenesse is relligious, euen where there is a falt: but where good will deserueth well, tho it fortun to fail, if fauor be not shewed, will not curtesie condemn, will not relligion repine? God blesse vs all to the auancement of his glorie, the honor of our cuntrie, the furtherance of good learning, the good of all degreés, both prince and peple. FINIS. An aduertisement for the print BYcause the end of ortografie is the directiō of the pen, therefor, where the print hath not sufficientlie expressed my forms, the writer will con∣ceiue them soon, and vse both distinction by accent, and dispatch by cha∣ract to his most auantage according to the rules. But I must craue pardon generallie, for both mine own and the printers errors, which will not be auoided, where manie ar to work, and negligence will make one. Small falts, tho manie, be soon perceiued, and as soon supplyed by anie ordina∣rie reader, but such as these be, require a verie intelligent minde. Pag. 12. lin. 1. Not must be left out. Pag. 12. lin 13. wrong must be wring. Pag. 33. lin. 31. vnrefined reason, what great &c. the sentēce continued. Pag. 39. lin. 18. the foredeall which childern ar at by their education. &c. Pag. 48. lin. 6. anie more then himself shall nede. Pag. 51. lin. 37. which is to great a degré Pag. 60. lin. 1. resona∣blie well. Pag. 66. lin. 29. prouing more. Pag. 68. lin. 13. parts not parties. Pag. 69. lin. vlt. when put out. Pag. 84. lin. 26. theie discend to particularities. Pag. 99. lin. 18. ar the transporters. Pag. 101. lin. 24. for your particular choice. Pag. 12. lin. 35. or as age and ouer wearing. Pag. 103. lin. 29. Wherefor if it shall please. Pa. 258. lin. 23. Celtopadie for Celtopaedie Pag. 268. line 3. this for thus lin. 4. no for to lin. 8. sound for found. &c. But I leaue the vnresonable reside to the gentle and considerate reader.
