19176 99855321 20808
A Dialogue agaynst the Tyran∣nye of the Pa∣pistes. Translated out of Latin, into Englyshe. by E. C. 17. Septembris. 1562. VV. S.
A Dialogue agaynst the Tyrannye of the Papistes. The speakers names. Auls Cecinna. Cneus Heluidius. Cecin. HOwe goeth the woorlde Heluidius? al well? why are you thus sad and pensiue? Heluidius I do well inough (I thanke God) my selfe Cecinna, Marye in these so lamētable times, wherin Sathan so ra∣geth, and his Ministers bestirre them wt fier & sword, most pitifully tormenting Chryst in his poore members, spoilinge and murtheringe them by all meanes most cruelly, how can any good man be eyther pleasant or mery? Cecin It is verie true that you saye, notwithstan∣dinge we must haue pacience ithall. For almighty God will wh  seeth his time, succoure his afflicted people, and ouerthrowe with the breath of his mouth, the Trowpes and bandes of our enemies, be they neuer tragi∣ous
or many in number. Heluid. God wil assist in very dede those that be his, and both hath alreadye done it, & doeth it daily. How be it he doth not alwaies geue them the victory. King Pharao, he helde the Israelites long in captiuitye: The Philistines vanquished them ofte in battaile: Nabuchodonosor banished them out of their Countrey: And An∣tiochus slew the people of god most la∣mentablye in the holye Temple, offe∣ring them vp euen vpon the verye aul∣ters for a sacrifice to their Idols. Euen as therfore by reason of this destruction of Gods people, and decaye of all good and godly thinges, Moses, Samuel, Tobias, Mathathias, and a number of other good men made continuall mone and lamen∣tacion: So were it very hard for vs, se∣ing so many most constant men of god, partly in great hazarde and daunger, and part moste miserablye wounded, lifting their handes vp to the heauens: Not to haue oure hartes dieplie perced therwithall, and to sighe and grone to our selfes for their so great calamities. Which as we do now but onelye heare of, so may we perhappes feele them ere it be longe our selues. You are not ig∣noraunt, howe that we are but verye
lately by the speciall goodnesse of God, crept out of the like miseries, the burnt bones of oure owne people euen smo∣king well nere to this day. Wherefore seing our enemies, and those so nighe, so cruell, and so bloudy, doe beginne as you would saye to thunder and lighten a fresh, I can not but tremble & quake for feare. For howe will they spoile o∣ther Nations trowe you, that so wil∣lingly spill their owne peoples bloud? Cecin. Your talke I wot nere how, be∣ginneth to make me very much afraide also, it is so feareful and terrible. But I pray you tel me: Doe the papistes vse such cruelty still in Fraunce? Heluid. Yea truly, in so much as their violence and tirannie doeth daily encrease more and more. And hereof first and fore∣most maye the Towne of Wassy be a The a ter at  witnes. Wherethorowe as the Duke of Guise passed with certeine bandes of armed men, finding the people seruing of God with psalmes and hies: He commaunded his souldiars to set vpon the sely vnarmed creatures, who woun¦ded and slew the poore innocentes, euen in the middest of their prayers. Hereof may also be a witnes, that same cruel, yea that horrible, and bloudye decree,
which all ages shal speake of and hate, the remembraunce whereof al our pos∣teritie, e Edict clamed  last. shall detest and abhorre. For it is a horryble and straunge kynde of crueltye to take those that be quiet and peceable citizins, & without cause, complaint, or yet suspicion of crime, to hale and drag theim vp and downe the strete, to stab them thorow with their weapōs, to drown them in the riuers, & so to put them to most terrible execu∣tion, euen onely for y• they are thought to be professors of the gospel. The fore of this most mōstrous edict, diuerse god ly citizins of Paris felt, and a nūber of Paris. . other good people that dwelt there a∣bout, which were most shamefully mur thered. The riuer of Seyne felte it also, brued wyth y• bloud of the dead that swam vp & down the chanel, and were caried with the streame from the town of Seyne, to the City of Paris. And no Towne yne.  ecourt. lesse did the Captaine of Abbeville fele the same of late, whom, together with his Sonne, and certayne other Noble∣men of his family, these fierse and wic∣ked bloude suckers by pretence of the said cruel edict, mangled and murthe∣red contrarye to all right and equitye: Because thys worthye Gentilman, a
stout & worthy gentilman in dede, spake somwhat boldly & frankly, of an vnity & agrement to be cōcluded betwirt them. Besides this, Rhoane, that famous and florishinge Citye can witnesse the Rhoan same: Where the forte that was thon∣ly defence of the Citie was continually shaken with the roaring shot of y• Can∣non, the Countrey about daily spoyled with Trowpes of horsmen, & the city∣zens lay rounde about miserably slaine in defending their Countrey. Neyther had this most worthy Citye stoode till this daye, ne hadde▪ there bene anye li∣uing creature left therein aliue, vnles almightye God taking pitie vppon the besieged and distressed▪ people, hadde through the singular manhoode of the Citizins and Townes men, putte the Daumale to the foyle, that laye batte∣ringe the walles, compellinge him al∣so at length for all his wrath and furie to depart with great dishonour. But what talke I of the Duke Dawmale a∣lone? Let the rest of the princes and no∣ble men be cowpled with him, which be not onely felowes and cooperteners of hys factyon, but also chyefe Au∣thoures & captaynes of this cruelty, the Duke of Guise I meane, the Constable
and the Mareshall Saint Andrew: who marchinge to the Towne of Bloys with oys. moost terrible force of Warre, full of threates, and gaping after bloude, met before they came to the gates, a pitifull company of the Townes men fallinge downe vppon their knees before them, offering them the keyes of their gates, committinge them selues and all that they had, into their handes, criynge to them for morcye, and humblye entrea∣ting them to spare their owne, and the rest of the Citizins liues. Howe be it these proude and stately Lordes, besy∣des that, they refused to heare the re∣quest of this meeke and miserable mul∣titude, added also to their bloudy pour∣pose most spitefull and bitter wordes: Telling them that their Canons shuld serue in stede of keyes, and wyth their swordes, would make their entrye into the towne. Wherin they deceiued them neuer a whit, for both they bet downe their walles with their artillerye, and put the townes men of al sortes some, to most cruell and sodaine death, being giltye of no offence at all, but onely for that they had embraced that fourme of religion whiche was afore establyshed by a solemne Edict and decree made in
the moneth of Ianuary last past. And nowe to retourne againe to the Duke Daumale, whose madnesse pas∣seth all measure, when as the naked and innocent inhabitauntes of Pont Du Mer, laying awaye their weapons, fell Pont du  flat downe afore him, askinge pardon, requesting mercy, and offering him the keyes of their town: He like a famished and hungry wolfe, rushing in amongst the poore seely sheepe, first and formost not without great impietie, commaun∣ded their chiefe preacher or Minister to be apprehended and hanged, and after∣ward, without anye respecte eyther of kinde, or of age, slewe moste shameful∣lye and wickedlye, the rest of the com∣mon people. The Mareshall Saint Andrew folo∣wing the crueltye of Thaumale, thin∣king his confederates hadde not spilt bloude inoughe at Poityers, highinge him thither in great post, with sworde, shot, and sundrye other tormentes, op∣pressed and destroyed a sely company of innocent women, and yonge folke, that had escaped the handes of the foremer butchers (who belike had had their fyll of them afore, or elles were ouerweried with to much bloudshed): Whose acte
was so much more detestable then the rest, because not contented with the crueltye of others, he heaped mischiefe vppon myschyefe, and bloude vppon bloude. There is another acte committed be∣sides this, against al order, nature, law & humanity: wherof albeit I name not the Aucthor, yet is it true: yea, alas to trewe, and so shamefull a matter, as of the same Countreimen, it is scant to be beleaued. For when as the Counte Palatine, one of the Princes of the Empire, hadde deliuered to one of the Gentlemen of his Courte certaine pac∣kettes of letters, to carye to the Prince of , there was layed for him by the waye a Popish murtherer, that in∣tercepted the Messenger, lew him, toke his letters frō him, and brought them to the Guise, and his complices. Lo in one offence howe manye enormi∣tyes? in one wickednesse, howe manye detestable crueltyes? But here an ende of these particuler calamities, for these same menne daylye offende more and more and ware more cruell, yea, and so cruell (all the whole companye of theym) as a man can scarce imagine. Cecin. These thinges be horrible if so
be they be true. The greate Turke him selfe coulde not deale in these matters more cruelly. Heluid Naye if al thinges be dulye considered, this fu∣rye ercedes the rage and broyles of all tymes. At the begynnynge of the common wealthe of Roome, it was a verye lametable season to see to, when as the Comminalty seuered from the Nobility, by reason of sundry great wronges receiued at their handes, as∣sembled themselues in Mount Auentine: Notwithstandinge, they bridled them selues so in that rage, that they vsed no force of weapon against their aduersari es. Mary now when the cōmon wealth was growen to more perfection and ri∣ches, the male of the people growinge also greater, there folowed verye sore dyspleasures betwene sundrye sortes of the Citizins. Amongst the which if you consider the horrible Stirre of the Triumuiri, ye shall not finde it was so full of crueltye, as this present broyle A state in  commen  welth w in three  haue equ aucthorit together. of the Papistes is. For in that deso∣lation of the Common wealthe, the nobles only were inuaded, neither was there any touchid but they, & they alone were held & taken as condēned persons. But this faction of the Papistes rūneth
hedlong vpon al sortes of men, neyther respecting the kinde nor age of any, nor yet waiyng eyther the desertes or ver∣tues of anye: But doe condemne all to death, that accordinge to the rule of the gospel, doe truly and sincerely worship God the Father, and his Sonne Iesus Christ. Greece when as it had bene a longe time tossed & turmoiled with most cruel Greece. dissentions, was content at last to lette go & forget al wrongs, which was both an wholesome medicine for their sicke myndes, and also a good meane to re∣dresse all their ciuil hurly burlyes. The Popish prelates, they wil neyther geue nor take any other condiciōs of concord and vnitie, but that the Idol of Roome may still be adored and kneeled to, and that all other powers, states and cau∣ses, finallye all maner of holye or pro∣phaine matters, may be vnder his auc∣thoritie and iurisdiction. The Turke albeit he maketh Christian menne his slaues and bondemen, yet suffreth he them to liue after their owne religion. But the professours of the gospell, they must either worship the greate God of Roome without exception, or els they must haue their throtes cutte, and leese
their lifes. Cecin. These thynges be to true, that you talke of. And it hath ofte ben my chaūce to muse very much, how it commeth to passe, that thys opinion is so surely setled, and almost grounded in the peoples mindes, that there ought to be had so great and so due reuerence to the B. of Roome, as it were to an o∣ther God in earth: that eche worde that commeth out of his mouthe, shoulde be taken for an Oracle: And finallye that all maner of meetynges together and Councelles, be they neuer so solempne and generall, shoulde be inferiour and subiect to his aucthoritie. Heluid. There may be hereof alledged many and sun∣drye causes, but the chiefest of them all and of greatest force is Euyll Custome. Which Cipriane doeth verye aptelye terme A Contynuance of Errour. It is this same continuance of Errour O Cecinna whiche hauinge ones bene planted by custome, and in proces of yeares taken roote, doth exercise great Tirannye in mens mindes, and can hardly of a long season be forgotten. Moreouer thys same great Potentate of Roome, hath ordered the matter so, that he hath brought and conueyed vnto hym selfe the fruytes, profittes, dignities, prefer∣mentes
and promotions of all quarters of the world, which he doth verye libe∣rallye dispose amonge his adherentes, wher withall they being so largely re∣warded and benefited, can not but ho∣nour so good a benefactour, hang al to∣gether on his sleeue, cleaue to him lyke burres, and rather hee content to loose their lifes, then forgo so great commo∣dities: There may be added hereunto a thirde cause (which is also very much materiall) how that the Sea of Roome geueth oute great store of pardons, and graunteth almost a free liberty both to saye and doe all maner of euill: and as for mens maners there is small hede or regard taken therto. But if there chaūce any fault or trespasse to be committed, money will strayte heale all the mat∣ter, and vnder Benedicite thoffender shalbe absolued. Wherfore, where for∣geuenes of sinnes may so easily be pro∣cured, and where be so liberall rewar∣des stirring for the pleasures receiued, it is no maruaile at all, though there be both a great number of ambitious and couetous men abrode in the world, and also as great routes & swarmes of wic∣ked offendors, that be nothing ashamed of their euill doinges, wherof they loke
for litle or no punishment at al, and frō whēce they can as oft as they lust, be so easilie quit and discharged. Cecin. Your talke seemeth vnto me verye probable. How be it the Popish propsters as you knowe, make theyr reckeninge from Peter, and they doe deriue a certeyne continuance of theyr religion from the auncient sea of the Bishops of Rome, whiche they haue also at lengthe got∣ten confirmed with the opinions of cer∣taine deuines: and therefore suppose it not lawful to swarue fro a trueth that is so olde, so manifest and so well pro∣ued with the Testimonyes of so great clarkes. Heluid. These thinges that you talke of they bragge in deede, and they be the chiefest groūdes they allege The Pap chief gro to establish their popish aurthoritie vp∣pon. Wherefore, althoughe I haue no leasure to stand long vpon euery point, yet will we lightly runne them ouer, vnlesse you bee other wyse dysposed. Cecin. Naye verelye, it is the thynge I most desire, neyther lyke I any thing better, then thys kinde of discourse and communycation. Heluid. First of all this same Monarchy, or rather. Hierar∣chye, The goue ment of a Priest. if it tooke: beginning of Peter, it muste nedes haue bene ones settled in
his person. Let vs therfore resort to the holy Scriptures, and by them examine Peters aucthority. S. Paule calles him as he doth also Iames and Iohn, a pil∣ler of the Church. And as for the rest of his felowe Apostles, they ascribe vnto him no maner of specyall name or pre∣rogatiue aboue the rest. Yea, but (saye they) our Lorde Iesus Christ vsed hym very louingly and familiarly. I graunt that, but so as he did the like to Iames, and much more to Iohn. And in plan∣ting of the Churche (whiche point the Romish Doctours take to be their chief holde) Peter is for no other cause speci∣ally and by name spoken to, but for that he alone in the name of his felowes had made answere to that our Sauiour de∣maunded of all the rest of thapostles as wel as of him. And as for the rest of our Sauiours talke concerning the Rocke, where against the gates of hell should not preuaile, it prooueth no special pre∣emynence to be in Peter more then in the rest, but betokeneth the publick pro∣fession of our faith that should be in the Church of Christ. Which opinion and interpretacyon the auncyent Fathers haue left to vs in writinge. And if so be it were not true, our most louing sa∣uiour
would not in the selfe same com∣munication, haue so sharplye rebuked Peter calling him Sathan, and repro∣uing his ignoraunce in the Scriptures. But why do we argue in a matter that is out of all doubte? howe ofte is it re∣peated in holye wrytte, that God hath no respecte of persons? but if thys oppinion of the Romishe Deuynes be allowed, not onelye Peter shoulde be highly aduaūced aboue al his felowes, but also he alone should haue a celestial prerogatiue of goddes power, an inuin∣cible faith and an aucthoritie not to be spokē against. Peters cōpanions neuer acknowledged this great authoritie. Peter hym selfe, neuer chalenged so strange a dignitye. Paule commending vnto our prayers, Christian magistra∣tes, placeth first Kinges, and then Ru∣lers. Peter framing our life with hole∣some doctrine, willeth vs firste, to feare god, & next him honour the king. Why nameth not he hym selfe who was al∣ready vested in his dignity? Why spea∣keth not he of his successours, the Bis∣shoppes of Roome? For if he shoulde so haue done, it could haue semed no pride in him, for so much as he might do it, by the institucion and ordinaunce of oure
sauiour. But of this extraordinary iu∣risdiction, was no mention made in the beginninge of the primatiue Churche. Likewise, not a word spoken of it a lōg time after. For at those daies ye Empe∣rors of Roome shrewdly persecuted the church of Christ, & also some of the Bis∣shops of Roome they slue, who were in that time chief spectacles of godlines, & occupied in all holy exercises, & besides valiaunt witnesses of the death and re∣surrection of our sauiour Iesus Christ. For the churche of Roome had not su∣che an hard hap as to haue no commen∣dable Bishoppes in it, amonge whom we confesse some of theym in deede, of auntient tyme, were excellente, and singuler fathers. And as long as that simple and innocent age endured with out pride, and ambition, so longe was that Popish gouernement vnknowen, so longe the Byshoppe of Roome coueted no especiall dignity aboue the rest, except perhaps because he was an example of the flocke, he sought to win the crowne of Martirdome from them. Wherof Gregory may be a very good witnes, who pronounceth that Bishop of Roome accursed, who wil take vpon him to be called the vniuersal prelate of
the whole church. Such was ye modestie of men in those daies. Mary by proces of time vice grew, & when as by the proui∣dēce of god, ye Emperors of Rome were now quiet & wel pacified, there was not only peace planted in ye church, but also it was endowed with manye goodly & large possessions. Since that time the bishops of Roome (as it cōmonly com∣meth to passe,) corrupted with idlenes, & aboundance of all thinges, forgat by litle and little, the discipline and fru∣galitye of their former life, & at last de∣generated into this monstrous tyran∣ny. By meane wherof they do not only make ye whole world to quake for feare of them, but also sel heauē & hel at their owne pleasure & disposition. And nowe when their pōpe & excesse grewe to the highest degree it could come to, there a∣rose a number of feed men, & flatterers, who hauing tasted of y• goldē streames that issued frō ye precious sea of Roome, being dronken therwith, built this po∣pish kingdome for ye false successours of Peter. Herupon came this notable suc∣cession foūded with possessions & riches, enlarged with pride and ambition, con∣tinued with terrour and tirannye, not once named in holy scripture, not kno∣wen
to Peter, nor vnderstoode in those auncient times. Hereof sprange those monstrous maximes of the Popes bond men. That the Pope can not erre, that the Pope is aboue a Counsell, that the Pope doth kepe all the decrees of the lavv closse vvythin hys bosome,  mon∣ous opi∣ons of the pistes. that the Pope yf he dravve [I can not tell hovve manye thousandes] to hell, he is not therein to be reproued, and last of all that all men must be iud∣ged by th Pope, and he iudged of no man. To these strange sayinges & opinions, were applied those most licentious keies, vn∣der colour wherof, they make must wic∣ked sales of pardons & bulles, not wt out great iniury to ye most precious bloud of oure sauiour shed vpon y• crosse, where∣wt only we are washed frō the filthines of our sinnes, most shamefullye against holy scripture, by which we are prohibi ted to make any marchaundise in mat∣ters of religiō, & most absurdly against al reason. For how can mā that is but earth and ashes for mede, pardon offen∣ces, I cannot tell of how many yeares to come? God himselfe giueth vs not so great hope, no not of his owne mercy. Upon the neck of this is heaped ano∣ther most sharp scourge of godly cōsci∣ences, that is, thadministracion of cō∣mon prayer, and holye sacramentes, in
a tong vnknowen, contrary to y• many∣fest doctrine of the holy ghost, cōtrary to the syncere custome of the prymatyue Churche, against the soules healthe of those that do pray, & quyte against the nature & ordinance of prayer, in which thinge alone as in a most deepe tombe & Sepulcher, the hole sence and sauour of al our religiō, & euen as y• would say the soule of all godlines lieth hid. The time would fale me if I should recite the residue of all the detestable abuses of the Popish kingdome, al which thin∣ges, yet custome hath made so familier, vnto the vnskilfull cōmon people, that scarce, (Or not at all) they can be pul∣led from them. But euen in like maner as they whose eyes be heauye laden with sleepe, are lothe to be raised, and would not by their wils loke vp to the light, euen so, a great parte of Christes Churche, hauing slumbred and slept as it were by the meanes of Popy seede in the domme dregges & traditions of the Romish Ceremonies, do as yet rout in darknes, & when as the cleare light of the Gospell is offred to them they lepe back in an anger, yea, and are ready to fight for the matter to, rather thē they would be drawen out of those mistye
caues & dongeons. And now that god y• father of all mercye, hath raysed vp in this our time a certayn godly & deuout cōpany of christian people, who hauing respect vnto y• primatiue church i which christ himself lyued wt his Apostles, de∣sire to call home again ye pure worship∣ping of god, foūded in the gospel, vsed of aūcient tyme, and now many yeares o∣mitted, this Romish hell hoūd fareth as he were wood, whetting his teeth, cas∣ting out his thicke smoky threatnings, shaking his fire brandes, yea kicking & spurning on euery side, y• he might not be cōstruined to go out of his murk den, and maugre his head, beholde the newe light of the Gospell. But god shal raise vp an Hercules, who shal pull this Ca∣cus uge Gi∣ vvhome rcules slue Italy. fatted & pampred with the bloud of innocentes, out of his nest, draw he ne∣uer so farre backewarde, striue he and struggle he neuer so muche, vnlesse he spedelye (whiche wee looke not for) shall correct and amend him self. Cecin. There is very smal hope of his amend∣mēt hitherto shewed: In so much as his adherentes at this present, be very sore bent against the light of y• gospel, vsing such cruelty, as we can not remember y• like. For afore this time they were of
the basest sort whom they medled with∣all, pullinge vppe here and there one for the moste parte. Again they procea∣ded, against those that were accused by a certayn ordinary cours of the Popes lawe: Nowe whole townes, yea, whole cities, and almoste whole kingdomes be cōdempned. The field is the place of iudgemēt, the iudge is the sword or the halter. The lawes be y• proud presump∣teous cōmaundementes of the Popishe potestates: nothing is done by law, no∣thing is done by order, thei procede on∣ly by violence. Wherfore either their ti ranny must be out of hand repressed, or elles the Gospell muste needes quaile. Hl. Naye sure, vnles we take the better hede, y• gospel wil be quite ouerthrowē & al y• professours therof vtterly perish. For sith ye Deuil hath fastened so depe∣ly, euen in the bottom and roote of the popishe mindes, the hatred of true reli∣giō, y• his ministers cā find in their har∣tes, to beseage their own Cities, to slay their own Citizins, to woūd their own bowels, to be cruell vppon their owne bloud, & (to be short) to bring in forrein power and aid to ouerthrow their own natiue Countrie: what trowe you wil they do to other, which teare their own
in peces? What outrages will they make in straunge landes, who so spoile and waste their owne countrey? Cecin. What then is best to be done? or what shalbe thende of these miseries? Heluid. we must referre thend to God, who wil maintain his owne quarel himself, and defend his owne seruauntes, though al the world, & al the diuels in hel say▪ nay to it. In the mean time we must loke y• we lay good foundations, and must dili gently way these matters. Let vs then before al things cal vpō god the father, & his Christ our sauiour. Let vs lift vp our handes to heauen, Innocent hands I meane, not bloudy, pure handes, not corrupted, lowly, not proud, meke, not cruell, & from thence let vs craue ayde, where the prayers of the iuste be al∣waies auaylable. Moreouer since that the kingdome of Antichrist doeth thus conspire againste the trothe of Christes religion, let vs lykewise agree amongst our selues to defende the gospell, not to prouoke, but to resist, not to bring iniu∣rye in, but to driue it awaye, not to of∣fend any other mans estate, but to pre∣serue our owne, to preserue oure owne liues, and the liues of our Wyues and children. For both nature commaūdeth
and all lawe, both of God and manne, permitteth, to resist open violence. Mat∣tathias, that famous and worthy Cap∣tain, Matathy when Antiochus Souldiers fiers∣lye inuaded him, and profaned al ho∣lye thinges, being required to tast swi∣nes fleshe, he put on armour, (and that vpon the Sabboth day) transgressinge one commaundement, to the intent he might kepe the rest. And the fathers ex∣ample folowed his Sonne Iudas Ma∣chabeus. Iudas Ma chabeu. Since the y• most noble fame∣ly had rather dye then eat the flesh of Swine, how feruently ought we to be bent to maintaine and defend the pure light of the Gospel, wherin god the fa∣ther, with our sauiour Iesus Christe is so liuely portiered & epressed that we haue nothing els to quiet our conscien∣ces withal? The holy ghost in the gos∣pel aloweth wages to Souldiars, and also geueth preceptes howe they should liue. And if so be any war at al be law∣ful, surely that is lawful, wherein thou dost not assault an other mans life, but defendest thine owne, thou doest not spoile other mens goods, but preseruest thine owne. Thou doest not seke a kingdom or dominion, but to serue god and thy conscyence wherein there is
ment, no reuenge, but necessity obeied. For war is not to be taken in hād or al lowed, but when ther can be foūd none other remedy els: especially, against a lawful maiestrate, whom y• holy ghost hath apointed to be had in such estima∣tiō, y• he ought no waies to be touched, or misused. Wherefore my talk tendeth nothing to him, but to y• extraordinary vprores of y• Popes warriers: whose gre dye appetites if by any lawful meanes they could be pacified, I would prefer a hard peace before a iust war: But sinc thei haue no respect to god, non to their brethrē & citizins, none to their own na tiue coūtry, if seruing a forrein priest, they wil without y• wil of their prince, & euē against a law oppresse al▪ wt tiran∣ny, if none can be in rest for them vnles he first becom wicked, if we must nedes eyther be ouerthrowen & troden vnder fote of our enemies, or els setle our sel∣ues to defēd: I se no cause why in so vn∣natural, so cruel, so manifest a violēce, al honest means are not left vnto vs, to prouide for our safety. For why shoulde not necessitye preuaile asmuch with vs to defend our life, as their vnlawful vi∣olence preuaileth wyth them to ouer∣throwe oure estate? And yf we be in
fault that dryne away this tiranny frō our heades, how horrible is their mys∣chiefe, that persecute oure lyfe with fi∣er and swoorde? We muste therefore beware and take great hede, sythe our aduersaryes bee so subtil and wilye, so cruellye and myscheuouslye mynded, so mighty and stronge on euerye side. Their atttemptes must be stayed, and preuented in time. For if Fraunce be in this heat, the Realmes that be nere about cannot long be in peace. Let vs then assmble our selues together, to quenche thys common fyer: wyth whi∣che, yf Fraunce shall once burne and flame, so many Christian Nations shal be in hazard of like destruction, as An∣tichrist can anoy with al his members. (Thou chieflye O Englande) looke aboute thee, and take dilygent heede, Engla for besydes the common quarrell of Relygion, thou hast certaine Popysh Prynces, dwellinge at the nexte doore to thee, that be euen sworn & fully bent to doe thee a mischiefe: who afore this time, whē as they were not in armour, went about (as much as in them lay) to spoile & bereue thy most excellēt queene of her lawefull Crowne and Diademe. The Q nes ma They y• deuysed such iniuryes in peace,
what will they doe in warre, we must stand stoutly to our cause, we must for∣see, al thinges diligently, lest this plage fall vppon vs, before we knowe from whence it commeth. Where there is leaste feare, there the Enemy doth most anoy, specially being so hainous, so craf ty, and deadly an enemy. Therfore it is more wisedome, to feare, then to liue in hope, for feare encreaseth hede taking, but hope causeth vs to be negligent. Cecin. You doe verye well require a care in this matter y• only thing that is most precious in al worldly affaires wt∣out which no notable exployt was euer done worthy cōmendation. The genti∣les in the olde time honoured the same as a stay and Buttresse of their whole life. The holye Scripture doeth de∣test that person (who euer he bee) that is negligent, and slowe in the wor∣kes of the Lorde. The Authour and penaltie of whiche curse, yf mise∣rable mortal men would inwardly and diligently ponder, they would lay aside all vaine desires, they would cast away the workes of darkenes, and would be enflamed with the heate of godlines, in such sort, as neither fier nor famin, nor sworde, nor anye violence from Hell or
heauen may hale or drawe them awaye from the loue of god. So feruent was Paule that elect and chosen Uessell of God. So earnest was Dauid the kinge and Prophet. Who professeth hatred a∣gainst the enemies of God. So zelous was Ieremye, who couched in a deepe dongeon, and afflicted with moste bitter tormentes, did Thunder out hys sayings and prophecies against the fro∣wardnes and ignorance of the people. But we which would seme to worship and reuerence the restored truthe of the Gospel, we do it so faintly and coldly, that it had bene much better for vs ne∣uer to haue knowen so deuine and re∣uerent treasures, then suffer theyn so shamefullye to be taken from vs. Heluid. You iustlye complaine of thys matter, and surely it is a heauy case. It is to much rest & ease in dede that hath made vs so negligent, & recheles. Now God geueth vs these troublesome sea∣sons to stirre vp our flouth, to wake vs out of our slepe, to whet our wits, and to make vs more diligent. It is time therefore to rise vppe from eepe, it is time for vs to play the menne, yea it is high time for vs to remoue by commen aduyse, the commen disturbers of all
godlines, about which matter, that we maye vse suche courage of mynde, and cherefulnes of harte, as the weigh∣tynesse of the cause requireth, twoo thinges especiallye ought to be consy∣red of vs: The first and the chiefest is, that it is gods quarrel whiche we take nowe in hande, by whome we lyue, moue, and haue oure beinge. And se∣ing by his aboūdant goodnes & mercy, we are come to this estate wherein we now stand, let vs restore to him again al that we haue, syth we receyued it of him, when he demaūdes it. Of him on∣ly, and alone, cometh whatsoeuer wee haue, had, or maye haue. To this eter∣nall, terrible and almightye God, lette vs consecrate the temples of oure min∣des, & dedicate the tabernacles of our bodies, and let vs goe with a sure con∣fidence of mynde (yf neede be,) euen to death: for the honor of him who sent vs, his only begotten son Iesus Christ, to die for vs, to thyntēt he might make vs a waye to euerlastinge life. And in this hathe the holye ghoste decreed to con∣syste eternal life, trulye to knowe God, and whome he sente Iesus Christ. To thende therfore that we may kepe purelye and sincerely this profession of
Gods holye name, and power, there is no labor to be forsaken, no perill to be shonned: For if al thinges, whyche we would euen wish and deuise, were hea∣ped vpon vs, if our soule perishe, there is no hope nor comfort remaininge. Therfore let vs eyther clerelye refuse the name of Christians, or els let vs for y• glory of Christ, aduenture any maner of thing, how difficult so euer it semeth to be: yea what etremity so euer is of∣fered vnto vs, lette vs arme oure selues pacientlye to endure it. For Christ wil forsake vs in heauen if we forsake him in earth. When after this sort we haue lifte vppe oure mindes to heauen, and ioyned our selfes with God, then let vs come down again to the earth, & ther let vs loke about vs, what kind of men thei be, wt whō we be at variance, what they tēd to, what mark they shote at, & what end they would haue of their matters: And if we list to loke so far back as mās remēbrance is well able to reach to, we shal find them a cruel & bloudy broode, lyke vnto their Graunde and greate Graundefathers, who haue alwayes gone aboute to scatter and spoyle the meeke and innocente flocke of Christe. The Deuyll hathe bene a murtherer
from the beginninge both him self, and also sturred vp Caine in the first crea∣tion of the worlde to kyll his brother Abell, makynge sacrifice to God, and beinge holilye occupied. The aunci∣ent Prophetes when they lyued the best and quietest life that might be, and tooke vppon them none other charge, but only to declare the will of god vnto his people, were afflycted with al kind of spite and punishment. Our Lorde Iesus Christe liuinge a most peaseable life, & entermedling with nothing, but with the sincere worshippinge of God his father, was most shamefully railed vpon, was most cruelly torne with all kindes of tormentes, & last of all nailed vpon the Crosse. The disciples folowed their masters steppes, beinge like both in life, and not much vnlike in death. The auncient Martirs that did succede them, when as euen theyr aduersaries bare witnesse of their vertue and inno∣cency, and in this thinge only reproued them, that they risinge betimes in the morninge, worshipped in greate assem∣blies a certein God of theirs, and songe Psalmes to him, yet in this tranquility and synceritie of life, coulde they not escape the tormentes of Heathen Ty∣rauntes.
The same state stande we nowe in at this daye, wherein God ha∣uing reserued to himself a certaine god∣lye sorte of people, that refuse to fall down afore the Romish Baall, lyuing according to the lore of Christ, and his Apostles, laying handes vpon no man, troublesome to none, nor attemptinge any thing sediciouslye against any per∣son, but do both geue them selfes to the true worshipping of god, and do exhort also their brethren to the like vnitye and concord in Christ, voyde of all con∣tēcion, free from al force and violence, and continuall mouers of the people in their sermons to pacience & quietnesse: Yet this Romish Haman and tyraunt, because he sees hymselfe not crowched and kneled to, he commaundes not on∣ly gallowes to be sette vp for the poore Mardocheans, the most pacient and in∣nocent seruantes of god, but also mur∣thereth them with swordes, strangles them with halters, whirles them vpon wheeles, and broyles them in the fire. So as if the Tyrannye of all times and ages were well wayed and con∣sidered, it can not bee compared with this most horrible crueltye, that these Romish Tetrarches haue vsed toward
this godlye people of Christ. For the etrarch is ler of a arte of a me. heathē persecuted that they knew not, but the Papistes, wittinglye, and wil∣lingly, doe teare and rent in pieces Ie∣sus Chryste in hys myserable mem∣bers, whom with mouth they professe as well as we. The heathen moreo∣uer contended them selfes with taking away the lifes of Christian men (for we reade not, that either Nero or Maxentius, went any farther.) But the crueltye of this our Romish Nero, (far passing Max∣entius & the madnes of all the tyranntes of the world) is suche, that it extendeth euen to the ashes of men, disquietinge their dead carcasses, that haue of longe time bene buried in the earth, and (as much as lieth in him) suffring them ne∣uer to dye. O barbarous brutishnes of this proud purpled prelate. O mōstrous vsurpers vpon Peter. O most cruel and bloudy seat. And shal we now cōpassed about with such enemies, winke at the matter▪ Plounged in such perilles, shal we slumber stil as we do? So malicious foes thundring about vs on euery side, with threatninges & sword, shal we lye styl & holde oure peace? Who shal take our partes if we helpe not oure selues? Yf eche manne particularlye refuse to
fight, we shalbe ouercōmed all the sort of vs together. If we get vs not out of our doores the rather, we shall euerye mothers son of vs bee slaine at home in our owne coūtrey, yea in our own hou∣ses, when there shall bee none to helpe vs. If we drawe backe and make cour∣tesye in this quarrell of Relygion, we shall ere it be longe, lese not onlye oure religion, but forgo all that we haue be∣sides. Althoughe we be neuer so loth to fight, yet very necessity forces vs there to. And the farther we flye from it, the nearer it commes: Yea, and the closer a man kepes him selfe in, the more daun∣ger vndoubtedly hanges ouer his head. Wherfore against such conspiratoures we may lawfully arme our selfes. Ui∣olence (if neede so require) maye be en∣countered with violence. I meane not, to stande against lawfull Magistrates, (whom I made exception of afore) Nor yet for the gospels sake onelye, whiche the prouidence of God hathe defended heretofore, and wil defend it hereafter, albeit the Pope bestirre hym neuer so much: But against the wycked & vniust furles of the Romish rable, that would ouerthrow and destroy vs and all ours, without hearing of our cause, & with∣oute
all lawe and aucthoritye. This quarrell is a cōmon quarrel to vs al (my brethren) for as much as we haue all one God our father in heauen, and al one sauiour Iesus Christ his son. How be it to thee most peculiarly O noble Germany, ought the praise of the manye. preseruation of the Gospell be geuen, for asmuche as thou haddest speciallye the glorye of the restoring of it. Gather O daughter Sion thy Systers aboute thee, cal vnto thee thy kinsfolks, which do partly dwell within thy Territorie, and partly border vpon thee. The vine∣yard of the Lorde ones purged by thee, behold the Romish Boare beginnes a freshe to treade downe, and spoyle. He beginnes fiersly to assayle it, vanquishe him therfore in time, calling to minde, thine olde worthy praises, thy forpassed woundes, and the present daunger that hanges ouer thy heade. When I speake of Germany, I speake of thy great courage and stowtnesse, O worthye Svvycherlande, whom almightye vvycher∣nde. God hath for a great part of thee made in these last times, a famous witnesse & Trompet of Iesus Christ. Let thy ende therfore be like thy beginning, and run fourth thy race boldly which thou haste
a great while agoe courageouslye ente∣red into, against this Romyshe Prince of darknes. Neyther must thou O valiaunt Den∣marke be vnlike thy selfe, whiche hast by Denma Gods prouidence bene an harbourer of the professoures of the Gospell, so as, though the deuil raued neuer so much, yet was there alwayes one shepefolde left for the afflicted and scattered flocke of Christ to resort to. Thou therfore that hast bene as a man would saye an hostesse, & an entertayner of gods peo∣ple, put awaye from thee the ennemies of the same, and suffer not the blessed state of thy Churche, that is planted in true godlinesse, to be defiled wyth the Romish dregges. And thou O Scotlande, our owne fleshe and bloude, knyt to vs afore by nature, Scotla but lyncked nowe also vnto vs by the profession of the Gospell, holde thou also fast the worde of God, lately graf∣fed into thee, whiche will at laste pur∣chase vs the saluation of our soules. Thou hast a florishinge nobilitye, and a worthye companye besides amongest the rest of the people, the number wher∣of God will augment, when it shall please him. With these therfore conti∣nue
stronglye in the faith to the ende, and fight out lustelye the noble fighte thou hast begonne, that when thy god∣ly conflict is ended, thou mayest receiue of thimmortall God an euerlastinge crowne and reward. And now to come to thee O Swethland, thland. although thy kingedome be far distant from vs, yet hath the bright sonne and cleare light of the holye scriptures, des∣cending downe from aboue, lightened thee also with the beames of true god∣lines. Wherfore if nede require, gather thou thy force also together, & employe al the power and strength thou mayest make, to maintain the glory of the ma∣iestye of God. Finallye albeit I name not all, yet doe I speake to all those Nations and countreyes wherein the Gospell floris∣sheth, and the true seruice of God hath taken place. Awake my brethren, and consult all of ye together against this Romish foxe. He hath layde snares and baytes to hurte and harme youre com∣mon weales: He seeketh all the corners he may, to entre into you: He thyrsteth after youre bloude, and woulde (if he wist howe) roote quite out of the earth, both your name, & al maner of remem∣braunce
of you. Whereunto he hath many assistauntes, and also great aides and succoures of vyle and naughtye men. And as for your selfes, nexte vnto God, ye haue this one onlye refuge left you, or elles none at all. Which is, that ye loue together, agree together, holde and take parte together. Ech of youre Nations seuered one from ano∣ther, the Romishe force maye easilye o∣uerthrowe, but ioyned all surelye toge∣ther, it can neuer hurt. Our life bre∣thren, thoughe it be an hundred yeare longe, is in dede but a short and a mise∣rable time, as Iacob witnesseth of him selfe, and this same being so vncertaine and so quickly run out, to howe manye perilles of fortune besides, is it subiect? with how manye daungerous diseases also is it wasted? Let vs therefore take bolde and stout stomackes vnto vs, ad∣uauncynge oure selues, and lyftynge vppe oure heartes vnto heauen. In a good quarrell it is better to dye man∣fullye, then to yeld cowardlye. And as for the goodnesse of the quarrell, what eyther is, or can be a better quarrell, then that that is for the defence of ver∣tue, truth, & the Gospel? Or how on the other side, can there be a worse compo∣sition
or yelding, then when the truth shal yeld to lyes, the light to darkenes: and the eternall wisedome of God to mens traditions. Thus haue I cōmunicated with you frend Cecinna all my griefes, and cares, so farre fourth as my busines woulde permit. There is nought remaininge nowe behinde, but that with most ear∣nest prayers we cōmit our whole cause vnto God, requiringe him to looke fa∣uourablye vpon this his troubled and afflicted Churche, hallowed with the precious bloude of oure Sauiour Iesus Christ, that put their truste and confy∣dence in him, that liue (as nere as mans frailtye wyll suffer) accordynge to hys lawes, that hang altogether vpon him, and finallye do referre them selfes and all that they haue wholy to his singu∣ler goodnes and mercy. Arise, O god, and put to flight thine rayer. enemies. They be thine ennemies, and thine is the quarrell that we haue in hand. It is for thy glory that we fight, it is thy maiestye that oure aduersaries assaile, and the honour of thy Godhead that they impech. And though they pre∣tende neuer so much the name of christ, it is the Sea of Roome wherunto they
would bringe and conuay all maner of honour and reuerence due to thy holye name. We might easily be at one with them, if we would suffer thy people to be plucked away from thy Gospel, and to be fast bounde to their fond and wic∣ked traditions: winking also besides at the great slaughter of thy seruauntes. In fine if we woulde forsake the true sound, sincere, and Apostolicke church, & woulde ioyne our selues to this same fonde, fayned and counterfeit vysarr of the Romish church, alto corrupted with supersticion, & defiled with most fowle errours. But O most louinge Saui∣our, we can not departe from thee, nor neuer shal. Thou art Iesus Christ, the sonne of god the father, hauing the wordes of eternall life, which we haue belieued. We be thy shepe, and therfore we heare thy voyce. Thou art the true and only pastour of oure soules. And therfore we acknowledge thee onlie, as for that same hired shepehard of Rome, we can not skill of him, but doe rather hate him as a thiefe & a murtherer, be∣cause he entred not in by the doore, but thrust him self in a by way. This cruel and bloudye wolfe raungeth vppe and downe spoiling thy flocke. Kepe him of
O God, represse his furye, strayne his iawes, with bit and bridle, and tourne awaye at length his mischeuous ban∣des of souldiars from cutting our thro∣tes. Which doe nothing els but lye ga∣ping to deuour vs, and seke by all mea∣nes they can, to sucke the bloude of thy Lambes. O father, helpe thy children. O Lorde assist thy seruauntes, O God ayde thy people, and thou O Sauioure succoure thy Supplyauntes, and those that call vpon thee. For we haue none other that fighteth for vs, but thee one∣lye O Lord god, and Iesus Christ thy sonne and our redemer, who sitteth a∣boue in heauen on thy righte hande in glory euerlasting. Cecin. You haue made Heluidius a very good conclusion. And where I estea∣med you afore for youre learnynge and witte, I shall from henceforth loue you for your godlynesse and reli∣gyon. And now let vs ryse if you please, for I must goe visite a frynd of myne, that lyeth verye sore syck. Hel. And I must to the Court to talcke wyth my frende C.
¶ A Prayer Surge Deus, Dextra, seruos attolle cadentes &c. VV. S. O God arise, with thy right hand, Lift vp thy fallinge flocke, The wicked fende, wt wrathfull moode Doth threatē sore this stock. These irksome daies, wt vprores fierce, In feareful sort are toste, With force is vertue rent and torne, And fury armes an hoste. Lawe opprest, is laide full lowe, And lust for lawe beares swaye, And puffed pride, with raging threates Against the skyes doeth braye: But we thy ofspringe poore, that care, Taduaunce Christes glory due, That do extoll thy blessed name, With praise and honour true, Afflicted are full sore, and in A thousande perilles lyue, And bloodye force doth on eche side, From place to place, vs driue. Lo, some the strangling rope doth kill, Some, Yron wheles do wrast, Some are consumde in fierye flames, Some into floodes are cast,
Here swordes, there guns, the tyrantes shake, And force the fearful sound, By sundry slaughters they make red With bloud, the luke warme groūd. What furye nowe (O brethren dere) Doth sturre, these rancors woode? From whence proceadth this gredye thirst And wish to spoyle our bloud? One father we haue, in heauen all, One sauiour and no moo, One flesh we be, One name we beare, One faith we haue also. But mothers discorde (alas for woo) Doth breake the bandes of peace, Out of thys spring, these sundry illes, To flowe still do not cease. The mother, which our god hath made e Prima∣ Church. In reuerence due we haue, Whom christ to him as his dere spouse To couple did vouchsafe. Out of whose brestes, the prophets old, Their wordes by sucking drue, Whose infants were thaūcient troupe Of all the fathers true, This spouse did Christ, with tēder loue Bring vp, when he was here, To his disciples, care was left, Of this his spouse moste dere. Of this mother did witnesse beare,
Thappostles euery one, And whosoeuer Martir was, In times that nowe are gone. The keper of this spouse remaynth, The sacred Bible olde, Which without spot, doth former faith In firme estate still holde. This mother of corruption voyde, In godly life did shine And had respect vnto her spouse, Alwayes and to his line. Holy, gentle and milde, she was, A shamefaste faithfull wife And kept her dutye still in minde, And loued vp right life. In almes large, forgeuynge all, Of truth a perle moste pure, Unmindfull of displeasures past, But good thinges noting sure. And to be short, this mother first, Of vertue founde the vayne, And so she dothe, a piller firme, Of vertues life remayne. The R Churc Thother Romishe stepdame proude A mothers name hath got, An ouglier monstrous beast then which The sonne nowe seeth not.
Putt vp with pride, In lust she flowes, And hunteth honours gayne: No care of good, nor feare of God, There dothe in her remaine, Smoky wordes, and shadowes vayne, Of thinges to sale she settes, No godlynesse at all she hath, But craftes that money gettes. Lawes she dothe, to her selfe appoint, And breake them as she will, Of gold a greedy gut she is, And bribes deuoureth still. Her to adore, she all commaundth, And flat on ground to fall Before her fight althoughe they beare, The Princely mace and Ball. This misbegotten beast, in bloude Of Saintes hath great delyte, And doth the members wound of God, With poysond mouth and spyte. O father dere, driue backe this wolfe, Who with embrued Iawes Doth tug & feare, this scattered flocke, And neuer hath full pawes. We followe thee, and eke thy spouse, All thy preceptes we loue, Our hope, and helpe doth euer come, From thy great Throne aboue. O mighty God thy mercye great,
Us simple wretches kepe, Thou art our only shephard chief, and We thy flocke of shepe. Loke down frō heauen, disperse y• rage Of all these Giantes proud, For sacriledge is their desier, Thy temples spoyle they haue voud. And although we vnworthy be, Yet worthy Christ beholde, Who wt his bloud, hath washed clean, Our sores and festers olde. The cruel stepdame frettes, wc troupes Of vices compast round, And vs thy seely sheepe she kilth, No helpe at all is found. O God, caste downe thyne eyes vnto Thy seruauntes wracke not small, And let the wicked armies force, In midddes of threates downe fall, Or let thy grace them all forgeue, Their former fault nowe past, So that we haue (as once we had) One mother at the last. And thus of Saule, there shalbe Paul, Thus cruell warre shal ceasse, And than shall folow, wished rest, Of ioyfull quiet peasse. O that thou wouldst, vs worthy think, Of this league in our dayes,
O father, O our god, O one And three, most worthy prayse. FINIS.
