19830 99856101 21623
AN ANSVVERE MADE BY ONE OF OVR BRETHREN, A SE∣cular Priest, now in prison, to a fraudulent Letter of M. George Blackwels, written to Cardinall Caietane, 1596, in commendation of the Iesuits in Eng∣land. Newly imprinted. 1602.
The Preface. I Here commend vnto you, (good Catholicke Reader) this Treatise following, pen∣ned by a Catholick Priest, in answere of a letter written by M. Blackwell, about fiue years since, to Car∣dinall Caietane. In which treatise, the authour amidst many of his greefes, a little to sollace himselfe, doth play with the said M. Blackwel; but vvith such modestie as well becommeth his calling, the vanitie and falshood of the partie he dealeth vvith, considered. Which two qualities, together vvith his rude pre∣sumptuous Epistolizing to Graces, doe so anatomize the man, as I could not let him passe vncoated vvith a Preface, agreeing to the treatise: as not knowing, neither hauing euer been taught, to call a tree by any other name than a tree; a gull, a gull; a Coridon, a Coridon, Et sic per omnies casus cum stulto∣rum
plena sunt omnia. I can say no more, but that of Iesuitisme there is too great plentie in England, the more is the pittie, and the greater is like to be our miserie. For as I hear say, Tom Long Carier is comming on his ior∣ney (in the vvide vvay to perdition) vvith Antichrist: and it is further reported, That the Iesuits, Puritanes, Iews, Turks, Maho∣metans, & others of that rable, striue for the supremacie, vvhich of them should first own him, to make him the great Muster-maister vnder Damp-Sathanas, in his dismall march to make the conquest ouer the kingdom of Iesus: which is the mark al these do shoot at. Well, it is a strange case, that the Iesuits should bee such fellowes; but much more strange, that good M. Blackwell is become so rude ruricall courtly, insalutatiue scrib∣ling to princes: or rather Caesar-like take vp∣on him vvith Vene, vide, vici, to send abrupt apostrophall congratulations to Cardinals: but most strange of all, is this, That a con∣densed multitude of populorums, vvil not or cannot see vvood for trees; but vvill still call chalke, cheese; beasts, men; moldhils, moun∣taines: and so backward againe, and all by
contraries. But seeing it is so, Pian piano, I haue here laid down before your eyes the Crow Black well suited in sables, set vpon a stake, in pale proper, pinyoned, as it vvere the vvhile, vntill you may blazon the Cras croaking foule in her owne pure naturals. And to complie a little more formally with the text, you shall (gentle Reader) vn∣derstand, that this Black-wel-mand-Statist in comporting of Cardinals vvith vncourtly complements, was (as it seemeth) in such a sweuen vpon the suddain, of an odde cōcei∣ted Monarchie, as he imagined himselfe to be Monos; though in very deed hee is but a Iesuits Spanified Monopolos: that is in plain English (abstract from all Hyperboles and Rhetoricall figures) the extortionall tythes and imposts, or rather the very dregs, or a grosse Chaos, Rudis indigestaque moles, non bene iunctarum discordia semina rerum of all the Iesuits Machiauelian drifts, Prothenian plots, and Catelinian countermined con∣spiracies, for a conquest. Which vaine con∣ceit of that matter in these men, is now made so apparent, as a very Ninnie cannot but perceiue it, and the blind tankerd-bea∣rer, with helpe of his dogge and his bell,
may smell it out at midnight. For otherwise why doe they of the Spanish faction gape so much after newes out of Ireland? Why doe they linger and dally off the time in the Low countries, without comming to any se∣rious parle, or consent to make satisfaction for their misdeeds, and restitution of Priests and Princes good names, and other wrongs done by them? Why doe they band it out with Spanish souldiors at Kinsale and other places, new fleets stil flocking afresh thither? yea, and giue it out in plaine tearmes both by vvord and vvriting, That they vvill neuer come to anie agreement, peace, and con∣cord, vntill they heare an end of the Irish vvarres? Why should they bend all their vvits to these desperate traiterous courses, vnlesse their stratagemicall instigators, vn∣derstanding that M. George Blackwell is of late summoned to appeare vvhere he vvould not; they thereby saw their Arche readie to fall, and their Top-gallants in daunger to break their necks from off their loftie stand: the verie imaginarie opinion vvhereof, hath amated them with so desperat amazements; on the one side, their guiltie conscience tor∣menting them, for banding a bad cause; and
on the other side an enuious feare of a hap∣pie successe to the secular cleargie, in their appeale to the supreme Patriote of the Apo∣stolick See, and mother citie; causing them in defence of the Catholick Roman church and Common-wealth of Christendome in generall, and of Englands little church Ca∣tholicke, and vveale publicke, in speciall: as that hereupon, and for and through their many other practises their heads are stuffed vvith so many quiddits, as they quarter and braue it out euery where (but especially be∣yond the seas) with the great hopes they haue of making England a Iaponian Island by conquest of Ireland, according to the old prophecie, He that England will win, through Ireland he must come in. What man, Ireland? Yea, I say Ireland. What, Ireland woon from her Maiestie? yea, and from Teron too? Tush man, it is a ieast. Well, a ieast it may be tear∣med, in respect of the Iesuits fantasticall assurance: but they goe about it in such sad earnest, as all the vvorld may now dis∣cerne them to bee ranke traitours: and they so persuade their fautors, as all the Iesuited faction stand so much vpon their puntoes, in hope of these Lucian tow∣ers, that they vvill neuer yeeld to the ap∣pellants
(as some of thē haue alreadie blabd it abroad) vntill Ireland be vvholly theirs, or else all the poore Spaniards haue an Irish tricke plaied them in a triple turne betwixt their heads and their shoulders. But vvhat said I, will they be desperate? Yes verily, for they haue no other meanes in the vvorld to feed their faction with, but the hope of Ire∣land onely, as their case now stands. O huge! be these religious Iesuits? Well, well, I see all is not gold that glisters, nor all pure Saints that haue Puritanes faces: but, &c. and there leauing these martiall Iesuits to their pikes, let me returne my pen vpon good Maister George his Epistle to Cardinall Caietane; vp∣on which, according to the ensuing Com∣mentarie, I haue made a Preface as you see, from point to point vnlacing it in forme following. I haue deducted, or rather reducted, all the lines of this spruze Black-well-beseene-Oratours Letter, gradatim; not oblique, but direct, comformable to the Epistle it selfe▪ euen from the circumference thereof, to the centre: that by the exenterating of it, you may peruse and see (as it were in hearing the Anatomie lecture of this new Legifer, read vnto you, brought forth to be vncased and
bowelled before your eyes, in open sight) from vvhat manner of braine and vaine the stately stile of this vvorthie Vlisses dooth proceed; as also the Longum, Latum, & Pro∣fundum of this tropicall Rhetoricians ca∣pacitie, and by consequent the Quantum of the whole Compositum, I meane good master Blackwel the protonotorious Arche of En∣gland. The Longum doth consist in this, viz. That he thinketh it long, long, long, & eue∣ry minute a summers day long, vntill he be such another State, as to whom he writeth: the Latum is limited to this, viz. That al must thinke him worthy of so princely a dignitie, far and neere ouer the whole latitude of Al∣bion: the Profundum is the ditch that Thales slid into by gazing too much vpō the stars: Into this ditch his admirators are suncke downe dead like stones, by staring on Me∣dusaes head too too profoundly: and by consequent (as a man might say by meere chance) they there haue foūd out the Quan∣tum of the man, in, O quanta est inscitia viro. But will you know the Quantum of the man indeed: or rather, his Tantum by his Quantum: or his Tantillū by his Quantillum: at a word, he is a quilibet to a Iesuits quodlibet, vvherein he doth so quadrate with them, as
Tantum deest quantum est: and so shall you see the Tantillum of his mind, in the Tantum of his fellow-like tearmes to so great a mag∣nificall Mecaenas and princely Prelate in the church, as is a Cardinall. And by inference of corolaries, himselfe being no better than a Pewterers son, and but the Apostolick No∣tarie or Scriuener (of matters from England to Rome; or els, where the great Emperors, Parsons, Creswel, and other Presbiter-Iohns or great Chams or Mogors do soiourne & abide) besides his Priesthood, you shall onely find the Iesuits sauors extended towards him, to consist in this, scil. in erecting to his function a goodly new glorious-seeming Arche; vp∣on which they meane to set a stately Pyramis of Pan, with a dedication, not to that Paxi∣um god (as I imagine) but to their owne po∣pular societie with the Ariopagians inscrip∣tion, Ignoto deo; or vvith this Imprese, Sic pro Iesuitis. And last of all, you may hereby see, the Quantum of the Iesuits pride; the Quan∣tillum of the Archpriests vvit; and the Quan∣tunculum of both their drifts, practises, and deuises. Now read on, and Iesus blesse you from Iesuits and Arches. Amen.
Reuerend Sir, A Letter of yours written 1596, to Cardinall Caietane, came not long since to my hands. At the writing of it, you were not so great a person as now you ac∣count your selfe: a man might then haue ben acquainted with you vnder a couple of Capons: Fellow and fellow-like you were that yeare, with as meane a man as my selfe. And therefore hauing something to talke with you of, concerning the sayd Letter; I will deale with you, as then you were, Mai∣ster George Blackwell, a good ordinarie plaine Priest, and an English man. As for that great Monsignor, Multarum literarum homo, Georgius Blackwellus Ar∣chipresbiter Angliae, & Protonotarius Apostolicus, borne in Latium, I will admire his shadow: It were sacriledge no doubt, to inter-meddle with him, except it were to fall down before his footstoole, and to wor∣ship his excellencie. Marry for you, my old acquain∣tance, and fellow Priest, gentle maister George Black∣well, if I may intreat you to forget your greatnes for a
time, and to remember with me, what you writ to the sayd Cardinall; I shall be much indebted vnto you. May it please you therefore now, to heare your selfe what you writ then. B. LEt your amplitude pardon our iust greefe; we con∣fesse surely, that it is a regall thing to heare euill, when thou doest well. We know notwithstanding (which is to be lamented) that verie great detriment may come to our progresse in the businesse of religion, by the fayned calumniations of euill willers towards vs. Let it be lawfull therefore vnto vs, to stirre the hornes of the false accusation made against vs. For if it be sufficient to accuse, who shalbe innocent? P. It seemed strange to me, when I saw so loftie a stile, to so great a Cardinall, subscribed with your name. You and I might haue written our hartie commenda∣tions to our friends in England, for some releefe, and neuer troubled our heads with the cogitation of so worthie prelates. But I see, that euery man falleth out according to his owne mould. It should seeme, that my father was of kinred to some Plummer, who dealt but with lead: that is a heauie mettall, and yeeldeth but little sound, which maketh me so heauie headed. But your father was indeed a Pewterer by Newgate in London, a man of an honest occupation, it is most true, but not the best neighbour to dwell by. Now (as it is commonly said) That he is a loud speaker, who is
brought vp in a Mill; so may it bee affirmed of you, that being nourished in such an vnpleasing dinne, no meruaile if remoter places ring of you. It may bee said, That this scornefull jeasting becommeth not a priest, and I would confesse it (were it not for some cir∣cumstances) to bee true. But wormes when they are troden on, will looke backe; loosers (we say) may haue their words; and it is not amisse to put sometimes a Peacocke in minde of his feet. Your Letter soundeth better in Latine, than as it is in English. I found it translated to my hands, and I ought you not so much seruice, as to amend it. I sup∣pose the Translatour tyed himselfe to your words, least you shold haue charged him to haue peruerted your meaning: For a verie small occasion, (as the world goeth with you) will put you into a chafe. You begin your Letter with some maiestie: Iusto dolori nostro: Pardon our iust greefe. Whose greefe I pray you? yours and the Iesuites? or your owne alone? or ours the secular Priests, and yours together? If you meant the first, you were partiall; if the second, you shewed your arrogancie; if the third, you did vs great injurie. For the reports you dislike of, they were made by some of our selues, and will be justified against you, or any Ie∣suiticall Proctor whosoeuer. It was but a bad, and a sawcie part of you, to make your selfe our Proctor, before we entertained you: such dealing in West∣minster hall, deserueth sometimes the casting ouer barre. Regium est: It is a Regall thing or accident (you say) to heare euill when thou doest well. A platter for a pewterers Son to talke of: Must you be medling with kingly prouerbs? was it not conuenient to tell you of
your parentage? How like a Prince you proceede in your matters? The saying we acknowledge to be true, and fit for Kings, when they see cause: but if the Ie∣suites may haue their willes, and shall be suffered to goe on forward as they haue begun, they will altoge∣ther turne it top-side-turuey. For the King that plea∣seth them, and serueth their turnes, bee hee neuer so wicked, they will make him a Saint; whereas another, if he crosse them, let him bee as religious and sincere as the Pope himselfe, they will make him a Lutheran. So as alreadie, by the rules of Iesuitisme (which tend to blood, and confusion, wheresoeuer they come) Kings that doe worst in following their designements, must bee most commended; and the rest are to bee slaundred, murthered, and assayled with violent hands by their owne subiects, for neglecting, or discounte∣nancing of their right worshipfull Maisterships. No∣vimus, We know, quod est dolendum, which is lamenta∣ble. If you had here broken off your sentence, you had done well. It is great folly to put a sworde in a mad mans hand. Better had it been, that you had neuer been borne, and so haue knowne nothing; than to haue employed your wit, and pen, as you haue done. The Reports made in Rome against the Iesuites are true, and no calumniations. No man liuing (to speak for my selfe) was more greened (as I thinke) with their insolencies amongst vs: and where should we haue complayned with lesse offence, than in Rome? If wee had been better regarded, when some of vs complay∣ned there; the great mischiefes which since haue en∣sued, had been preuented. The detriment therefore that you mention, is wholly to bee ascribed to you, and to such like Parasites; who in hope of preferment
haue sould your selues, as bond slaues to the Iesuites, and by fostering them in their follies, and applauding to their enterprizes (be they neuer so vile, and vn∣priest-like) haue set them so agogge, as they are rea∣die to burst with pride. It is true that you say: Si accu∣sare: If it be sufficient to accuse, who shall be innocent? But by your leaue it is as true, that if all lewd persons (such as our English Iesuites are) shall euer meet with such a consciencelesse Proctor, as you your selfe haue been to them, what wicked men should be punished? B. There are (as I heare) little aequall, or altogether igno∣rant esteemers of our matters, who haue not gently whetted the edge of their wit, and stile, and the sharp∣nesse of their voice against vs. P. Sunt vt audio: There are (as I heare.) God blesse vs from all Bugs. What man, as you heare? Why, durst any man report that, which might bee offensiue to your great eares? Alacke, alacke, I per se I, doe heare. There are (as I heare.) Good Sir, things will be whispered of (as you know) in any family, some∣times amongst the seruants, before they can come to their masters eares. They were much too blame, that did not acquaint you at home with their com∣plaints: but that you should bee driuen to write to a Cardinall vpon heare-say. And yet to see, how all things sort themselues for your reputation. For whence must this your intelligence come? forsooth
from Rome. Who doth not presently then admire the man, that is daily fed with occurrents from Rome? But yet Master Blackwell, out of question your phrase of speech was much too blunt. The world now adayes aboundeth with more Italian, and courtly speeches than these are (as I heare) to so eminent a person in the Court of Rome. Indeed, I am sorie to heare your simplicitie, I had almost sayd your folly. It might haue become wel inough a man of your state, then, to haue written after this, or such like a manner: It may please your excellencie to giue mee leaue, a poore simple Priest to shew my smal discretion in presuming to sig∣nifie vnto one of your high place in the Church, that there are news in England, of a report made in Rome. Sunt vt audio: There are as I heare. A style for King Phillip (while he liued) to such a Cardinall. But what is it that you heard? Forsooth: parum aequi, Men of little equitie, or at the least ignorant of our affaires. Name them Sir, if it may stand with your good discretion: or if you will not, yet this I can say for them, that if you know them, you are not igno∣rant, that they are men euerie way as learned, and honest, as your selfe; and at the time, when you writ this Letter, by some degrees, in age, in paines, in suffe∣ringes, and in many other respects, much your bet∣ters: and such as through their graue and great expe∣rience, both at home and abroad, did vnderstand the affaires amongest vs heere, much more throughly than you could possibly doe, liuing in such priuat sort, as then you did. You did them therefore great jniurie in writing so of them, as if they had been men void both of conscience and consideration. There is a certaine saying, auoyd it as you can: abominatio
est Domino, labia mendacia. But what did these simple light fellowes? Tell vs Master Blackwel, without any allusion to a whetstone, the fittest reward that I would afford you for this your Letter. Exacuerunt: They did throughly whet the edge of their wit, and style, and the sharpnesse of their voice against vs. Well, by the way whilest you play∣ed in this sort like a iolly Warriour, with your Mar∣tiall metaphores, you remembred the instrument that men sharpen their tooles with. You are much behol∣ding vnto me, Master Blackwell, that I am disposed to be merrie with you, but in this sort. For I could trace you by the hot sent of your bitter gall, and malice, or rather indeed of your folly, through a certaine Psalme, where the spirit of God that cannot erre, (speaking of the wicked, and of their hatred against the godly) telleth vs, That they whet their tongues as if they were swords, and shoot bitter words for their arrowes. Such translations, and insinuations, from a man of your corruptions, thereby to guird at your brethren, (who I dare sweare for them, neuer thought vpon you, when they complained in Rome of the Ie∣suites) become you not assuredly, good Master Black∣well. But still it sticketh in my teeth, that you say a∣gainst vs: did any of vs that were secular Priests write against our selues? or will you seperat your selfe from vs, and become a Iesuit? If I could haue conceiued by your Letter, that some heretiques had written to Rome of purpose to haue slaundered vs all, whether Priests, or Iesuites; your wordes had been verie well mustered together, and might haue marched on for me, like verie tall Souldiers. But there being no such matter I would be right glad to vnderstand, how farre
the word (vs) extendeth it selfe. B. They say (but rashly) that we Priests in England are tossed with diuers dissentions amongst our selues, and with the Fathers of the societie of Iesus: and that more free∣ly in lying they might wander, they report the sayd Fathers to seeke no other thing almost amongest vs, than how by the contempt of the rest of the Priests, greater authoritie & dominion in the Cleargie might dayly grow vnto them. A heauie accusation, but most full of falshood, and therefore (as I trust) it will be silent, being ouercome with this my testimonie, al∣though verie slender. I, hedged with the diuine mer∣cie, haue now fulfilled more than 20 yeeres in the cure of soules amongst vs English men, and in preaching the Catholike Romane truth: and hetherto I remem∣ber not any dissention amongst vs, the breath wher∣of did at any time a little more grecuously mooue vs. Men surely we are, compassed with many infirmities: but (praise be to God) in so great a course of most wic∣ked time, we haue been so couered with diuine grace, that nothing (that I know) hath hapned which at any time hath cast vs from the state of mutuall peace, and brotherly concord. P. Deinde expergiscebar. And then I awaked. A man might dreame as here you write Master Black∣well: because for the most part dreames goe (as they say) by contraries. But for a Catholike priest broad∣waking
to write in this sort to a Cardinal, & to Rome, the citie of God, it is most abhominable. Is all your whetting come to this? If in so many materiall points as here you haue touched, any one had been true, I could haue borne with you more willingly: but all of them being so notoriously false, I blush on your be∣halfe to consider your impudencie. First therefore, whereas you say in such generall tearmes, That some of vs, that bee secular Priests (for I cannot see how you can meane any other) men ignorant of the state of things here, haue affirmed; that wee (the secular Priests in England) are at warres amongst our selues: I dare be bold to say it, that you write therein vntruly. I am somewhat better acquainted with this matter, than many of my Brethren, being peraduenture my selfe then in Rome; or knowing at the least, whom you did then ayme at. If any did so write or report, as here you affirme, hee was either a Iesuit, or such another hyreling as your selfe, suborned by the Iesuits to write in that maner, of purpose to work their designments, against our credits, vtterly to subuert vs. Of which kind of persons, we hold this opinion, That they haue separated themselues from vs, and continuing in their Iesuitisme, are no right secular Priests, but Mongrels betwixt both, and therefore to be no better esteemed, or beleeued in their speeches, than the veriest Iesuit a∣mongst vs. Againe, if you meane by your words, Sed temerè aiunt, They speake rashly &c▪ that there was then no contention at all amongst sundry of vs, that were Priests imprisoned then; that is also most false. For you know the stirres that were then at Wis∣bich (few men better) amongst the secular Priests, for the setting vp of a certain Geneua platforme, tearmed
an Agenage. So that, if any of vs about that time did write to Rome, how the Iesuits laboured to set some of vs together by the eares, amongest our selues for their aduantage; hee writ therein most truly, and you haue not any sparke of grace left in you, if you denie it. Furthermore, in that you denie, that wee the secu∣lar Priests were then at a iarre with the Iesuits, you are therein so false, as I want a fit word to taxe you for it. Had not Master Garnet, and Master Weston attemp∣ted then to haue brought all our necks vnder their yoaks? Did they not tell vs plainly, that they saw no reason, why the Iesuits in England, should not as well rule vs all here, as the Iesuits in Italy did rule the Eng∣lish Seminarie in Rome? Were there not most vn∣true reports made by them against vs, of purpose to withdraw all the Catholikes hearts from vs? Was ther not in this our contention, great partaking, some holding with vs, and some with the Iesuits? You know it full well, and thrust your selfe as a stickler amongest vs, with great hypocrisie God he knoweth. Where∣as therefore you further say, that the Fathers sought not to bring vs seculer Priests into contempt, where∣by they might beare all the sway ouer vs, and that for 20 yeeres, you knew of no such contention amongest vs, Priests with priests, or Priests with Iesuits, as ten∣ded to the breach either of peace, or concord: you are in danger to become one of his crue, who is tear∣med by the Apostle, to be the father of all lyes. Homi∣nes sumus, We are men you say: but you might here∣in more truly say, Daemones sumus, we are Diuels; vn∣derstanding your selfe and them that set you to this shamefull worke. I protest before God, that I was at
the writing hereof, in a kind of agonie, to thinke that euer a Catholike Priest of my reputation, should dare to write in this impudent maner. Why Master Black∣well, how commeth this to passe? If men saw you not, yet God you know is not ignorant of this Machia∣velisme. Shake hands therefore with Iesuitisme, re∣pent you of these courses, and returne againe vnto vs. You were not wont, (when you and I were first ac∣quainted) to be so immodest. Let me obteine of you for our old acquaintance, Master Blackwell, to tell me here this one thing: With what face durst you write, that you hoped the sayd accusation of the Iesuits in∣solent pride, in seeking dominion ouer vs, would for euer be dashed hereafter, as conquered and suppres∣sed, tuo valde exiguo testimonio, By your verie slender te∣stimonie? Or if your face was hard inough: what said your conscience? Or if that were seared, where was your wit, learning, judgement & common sense, were they all gone a wooll gathering: you might haue re∣membred, that you your selfe did tax them, for see∣king dominion ouer their brethren at Wisbich. But a man puft vp with pride, hath no vnderstanding: but is become like a beast of the field. Your testimony? If the Cardinall had knowne you indeed, as we doe, hee would not haue esteemed your testimonie worth two chips. B. As touching the other part of the Accusation, which is built vp more iniuriously, against the reuerend Fa∣thers of the societie of Iesus: that surely will most easi∣ly shrinke, being pressed with it own waight of falshood.
nesse, & charitie than Master Parsons: and I warrant you, he will giue you a low beck, and with his eyes & hands lift vp to heauen, yeld by many degrees to that worthies perfection. And then remember I pray you, good Master Blackwell, the old saying; Caelum non a∣nimum mutant, qui trans mare currunt. If Maister Parsons bee the best of that crue, then assuredly bad is the best. And howsoeuer now you flourish for a time, through his good fauour, yet when hee shall know, what once you thought, and spake of him, since hee was a Iesuit, downe you must as fast, if he himselfe can keepe his owne footing. Although indeed he neuer preferred you to your high estate for any other true cause, than that knowing your weaknes, hee was sure you would bee at his commaundement: so as the pre∣ferring of you to your Archpresbitership, was in ef∣fect, as if hee had preferred a Iesuit. But yet downe you must. If the waight of your owne folly break not your own neck, by the insolent abusing of your place, yet the blasphemie, which you haue vsed against him, will neuer be forgiuen. B. Surely we should bee verie vnthankfull, if wee should not prosecute them with honour, as our Fathers; embrace them with loue, as our friends; worship them with du∣tie, as beneficiall; imitate them by studie, as Masters; acknowledge them with affection of godlynesse, as the chiefe helpers, and most fierce defenders of the health of our Countrey, and of the Church tossed with vs by diuers tempests.
P. Mentiuntur multa Cantores. If I had not knowne your parentage & bringing vp, I should haue gessed by this your Letter, that you had ben apprentise with some of our common fidlers, that haue certain old & long songs in commendation of Flodden field, and Cutty Musgraue; what noble fellows were then in those dayes, and how they fought in blood vp to the knees. All shame to the Diuell, Maister Blackwell, of proud wretches, you will make them mad men, and prooue your selfe no better in the end, if you hold on this course. Our Fathers; our Friends; our Benefactors; our Maisters; louers of their Countrey, and cheefe Bulwarks of the Catholike faith? Fathers of mis∣chiefe, friends to themselues, benefactors to seditious persons, Masters of Machiauelisme, Traitors to Eng∣land, and to their Prince: & the chiefe impediments, wherby I am persuaded, that both the common cause of Religion, and of all that truly seeke the promoting of it, are so hatefull and odious to the present State. Some of vs (to say nothing of my selfe) are all their ancients, and were spirituall Fathers of many ghostly children, before their name was knowne in England: they thrust their sickles into our haruest, & haue rea∣ped where they neuer sowed. And the brood which since they haue hatched, I feare will proue too mon∣strouse, if it proceed to a head. And for their friend∣ship towards vs: we may say with the Poet, That they loue vs so derely as they cannot endure vs. They haue sought to cast vs out of the dores, wheresoeuer they haue found vs placed: we haue nothing (forsooth) in vs, worthy to be accounted of; the spirit of guiding of
soules is gone from vs to them. They laugh vs to scorne, and doe set vp their puppets, to giue vs Three farewels. Call you this frendship, louing Maister Blackwell? Assure your selfe, if wee bee driuen to bid England farewell (as they by their farewels to vs would haue it) you may shortly after bid your Country fare∣well, the Catholike saith, and all your comfort fare∣well, farewell. Of their bountie towards vs, you shall heare anone. But they are you saie, our Masters. Wherein Master Blackwell? I praie you peruse Ma∣ster Charles Pagets booke against Fa. Parsons, & there you shall find the rules of their schoole: such (I am sure) as neuer came out of Gods sanctuary. If dissimu∣lation, lying, perjurie, disguised with equiuocations, deprauing of Princes, instigations to Rebellion, stir∣ring vp of subiects against their Soueraigns, extolling of the people to lewd purposes, oppositions against lawfull authoritie, and many such prodigious mon∣sters be good Diuinitie, and agreeable to the Catho∣like saith: (as they are wicked wretches that affirme it) then honour them, worship them, imitate them, let them be your Masters, & do what you will with them. But yet I tell you plainly Master Blackwell, if you bee one of their schollers, and seasoned with these docu∣ments; I wish with all my heart, that you were honest∣ly in your graue. And where you tell the Cardinall of their loue to our Country, except you meane such loue, as Puttocks haue to their prey, wee vnderstand you not. Haue those men loue to their Countrey, that for many yeeres haue sought the vtter subuersi∣on of it? What rebellions, inuasions, secret com∣plots of murther, and most barbarous crueltie, haue ben executed or attempted since her Maiesties raign
almost, whereof the Iesuits haue not been the chiefe instigators? Their books and writings doe partly te∣stifie it, the Kingdome knoweth it, & we poore Priests (that doe most condemne all such Iesuiticall design∣ments) doe most feele the smart of it. It is true that some of our Iesuits are commendably learned, but name the man in England, and joine Master Parsons, and all the English Iesuits, either in Rome, or Europe with them, and yet I dare be bold to match them with some of our number, that be no Iesuits, nor any way Iesuited. I will not thinke or say, but that they haue a good intent, to aduance the Catholike sayth: but surely they take a wrong course; nay a most prophane and heathenish course, or rather a more prophane and wicked course, than euer the heathen approoued or liked of. And therefore being persuaded that God will neuer blesse it, I wish they would leaue it; & that you, Master Blackwel, should either professe yourselfe a Iesuit, that wee might account of you accordingly: or else renounce Iesuitisme (as I sayd before) and be∣come in your doctrine, and practise, a right secular Priest, that we may conceiue some little better hope of you. But Perge mentiri, tell on your tale. B. They that discommend them, know neither themselues, nor them. For who are they amongst vs, which helpe priests comming from beyond the seas, but the Fathers of the societie of Iesus? Being cast without the dores, by them they are receiued: being in ragged apparell, by them they are cloathed commodiously, and trickly: wanting both meat, and drinke, and money, by them they are vpheld: and not knowing where to remaine,
(because they are strangers) they haue from them hor∣ses, and other things necessarie for their iourney, most readily prepared, and places also most prudently ap∣pointed, where, in recouering the lapsed, in confirming of Catholikes, and in spreading abroad the worship of God, they may labour laudably. P. As it is sayd in the Schooles, That one absurditie graunted a number will follow; so it falleth out with you, M. Blackwell; one vntruth begetteth another. That which is false, you affirme to be true: and that which is true, you say it is false. You might remem∣ber who pronounceth a Woe against euerie one, that shall call good, euill; and euill, good; light, darknesse; or darknesse, light. It is a great offence to slaunder a∣ny man, be he neuer so euill: and you know the flatte∣rer, is likewise verie detestable in Gods sight. Vir im∣pius lactat amicum suum, & ducit eum per viam non bo∣nam. A wicked man doth flatter his friend, & draw∣eth him along in the way that is not good. Woe be to them (sayth the Prophet) that sow pillowes vnder mens elbowes: which place St. Gregorie applyeth vn∣to flatterers, and addeth this rule: Nihil est quod tam facile corrumpit mentem, quam adulatio. There is no∣thing that doth so easilie corrupt a mans mind, as flatterie. And it is tearmed by another, the Nurse of Sathans children. I know you can say these, and ma∣ny other sentences by heart: but you should not wil∣fully oppose your practise against them. For therein you hurt the Iesuits, by increasing their pride. You abused the Cardinall; and your end (for ought wee coniecture) was either malice, or gaine, or both.
That which you write of their liberalitie, is little truer than the rest, concerning their former vertues. You are not ignorant, that by our meanes these fel∣lowes had their first credit here: and that now they haue so supplanted vs, as all contributions and almes commeth into their hands, to be distributed amongst vs at their discretions. Now (say you) when any Priests come from beyond the seas, who doe receiue them, cloath them, hyre them horses, prouide them places to remaine in, but the Iesuits? whereas indeed, they are but collectors (as I may tearm them) or deacons, that carie the purses of charitable Catholikes, to our vses: and if they should not so dispose of these goods, they were no better than theeues and robbers. Vn∣to the mercifull Catholikes therefore, of right this commendation is to be ascribed. Their almes main∣taine vs: and we doubt not, but God will repay all in∣to their bosomes againe, with a most joyfull increase, and blessed reward. You deale therefore with our true benefactors indeed, as if the bountie of a great house∣keeper, should be attributed to his Steward, who dis∣penseth his Masters goods, but as he is directed. Nay wee wish with all our hearts, that the Iesuits dealt no worse with our sayd deere friends, or rather (through their goodnes) with vs. For besides that the bestowing of other mens almes, is made an argument of their singular liberality, & the contributors are neuer men∣tioned: the truth is, that they deceiue both them & vs. For notwithstanding all that here you say of them: that which they doe is performed verie beggerly, ex∣cept it be to one of their owne societie, or vpon such a Parasite, as you are, that is made an instrument to set forward some of their deuices. The chiefe part of
the liberalitie and bountie, that is bestowed for our vses, is either sent beyond the seas, to make friends for the better maintenance of their tyrannie, and ambiti∣on here amongst vs: or spent vpon themselues, some one of them bestowing more vpon himselfe, and his seruants in one yeere, than would serue twentie of vs poore men, either in prison, or at libertie. And tou∣ching the placing of such as come ouer, they do ther∣in but their duties, part of the said contribution being committed vnto them for that purpose. Howbeit for ought I see, they rather trouble themselues with dis∣placing of good men (as it is before expressed) than otherwise. For be he neuer so graue, honest, and re∣ligious a man; placed alreadie with any Catholike, yet if he will not depend vpon the Iesuits, he must be gone, if they may haue their wils. Some false accusa∣tion or other must be deuised against him; either he wanteth pollicie, or zeale, or learning, or certaine il∣luminations, or something is amisse, that another (peraduenture a verie silly man God knoweth) must haue his place, and all is well, if he haue a relation (as they tearme it) to the holy Fathers. You may knowe (Master Blackwell) by some circumstances, that I were able, if I were disposed, to giue you some examples hereof. And for your wise axiome following (that justifieth Master Charles Pagets report of the Iesuits) the Vicar of Saint Fooles (as the merrie saying is) be your ghostly Father. Must you at vnawares be∣wray their secrets? Master Paget telleth vs, that they labour chiefely, to beat this ground into the heads of their disciples, and such as will beleeue them, That whosoeuer disliketh, & opposeth himselfe to Fa. Par∣sons, and his societie, is to bee eschewed, as a man in∣clining
to Lutheranisme, and no sound Catholike. And now it pleaseth you to say in effect, as much your selfe. Qui illis detrahuut, nec seipsos, necillos norunt. Hee that discommendeth them, doth neither know them, nor himselfe. If your rule will hold backward, what a man are you, M. Blackwell? we haue then the sage, and great wise person, that knoweth himselfe; for you can well commend them. But in good sooth Sir, are you persuaded that none, which haue blamed and reprooued the Iesuits, did know them? What say you by Card. Alane, and by the Bishop of Cassane? Did neither of these two worthy persons, know either them, or themselues? Surely the one was much grie∣ued, that euer the Iesuits came into England; and the other (as some of you say) that euer they obtained the Rectorship of the English Seminarie in Rome: & this was not for their vertues, as I suppose. To put you in mind of the Vniuersitie of Paris, will litle auaile, your own graue censure is able to ouer-weigh two or three such witnesses. Surely you blest your selfe well that morning, and rise vp vpon your right side, when first you knew the Iesuits: they haue made you now, so ab∣solute a person. They know you, and you know them: you commend them, and they commend you: here is, Claw me, and I will claw thee: virum vir: men con∣federate together, by facing and falshood, to aduance themselues, and oppresse their brethren. B. Neither is their charitie concluded within these bounds: for we our selues (who now for many yeeres, haue borne
the waight of the day, and heat) liberally professe, that wee haue had much ease and consolation out of their Fountaines, in our necessitie. If your amplitude knew, how much money these Fathers haue spent of their owne patrimonies (for most little things those are, which come vnto them by almes) in such and other of∣fices of godlynesse; and how promptly they alwaies run to refresh the Saints that are kept in prison, & others inwrapped and oppressed with diuers difficulties of thinges, and times: I doubt not but the same would presently restraine the vnbridled boldnes of these men, who being tossed with the pricks of enuie, haue dimi∣nished any thing from the estimation and charitie of the Fathers. P. Qui semel verecundiae sines. Hee that once excee∣deth the limits of modestie, will easily grow to be im∣pudent. I would I were in debt of a Crowne, as poore a man as I am, (M. Blackwell) that you would tell me truly, whether you shewed not this Letter to Fa. Gar∣net, before it was sent to Rome. I doe verily suppose, that he had first the perusing of it: & that thereupon the good Prouinciall did stroake your wise head for your paines, you haue set them out so gloriously. If the Iesuits had not this pollicie, to procure by their sleights, certain woodcocks from amongst our selues, that bee secular Priests, to extoll and magnifie them in this manner; that so by our credits their most in∣tollerable insolencies, & Machiauelian fetches, might bee the better cloaked; it had not been possible in
mine opinion, that their reputation should haue con∣tinued so long. But touching their charitie. To be liberall of another mans purse is no great matter, you know M. Blackwell: marrie to be so exceeding bounti∣full, as to sell their owne patrimonies for our releefe, that are captiues, & in bonds for the Catholike faith, I must needs admire it, and if there be any such, adore them with you. I know what Iesuits of any name haue been yet in England, and I am much deceiued, if you can tell me of any one that had any great patrimonie left him. Such a matter must needs haue been noto∣rious. It was not your great Master Fa. M. Parsons, as I suppose; how say you was it? If not he, who then? Let the man bee knowne, that Gods name may bee thereby glorified. Those great works would not bee concealed. I haue heard indeed of a certaine verie admirable excercise, which the Iusuits haue, to cousen young Gentlemen, and get from them that which their friends haue left them, & I could name the par∣ties; but you meane not them, M. Blackwell, doe you? Surely except you haue the parties names on your fingers ends, you were much to blame to write thus to the Cardinall. Or otherwise M. Garnet of likelihood told you such a tale, & you verie wisely beleeued him. But that will not serue the turne; for you pretend to write the matter vpon your owne knowledge, and pro∣fesse, that you your selfe haue receiued much ease, & consolation out of their fountaines; and that many o∣ther Saints in prison, haue been refreshed by them. It was surely well done of them. I, and some others, could say somewhat for the secular Priests that haue ben long in prison, now here, now there; and yet I do
here avow it vnto you, M. Blackwell, in the word of a priest, that I neuer heard of, or receiued any one pen∣ny, of any Iesuits patrimonie vnder that name, or as giuen out of a Iesuits owne purse, to me, or any other, for ought I know, or can remember: and (I thank god) I haue not hitherto forgotten in my praiers, my good benefactors. I, and others with me, haue oftentimes felt some want in prison, and were assuredly verie vn∣fortunate, Sitam adsanctos refocillandos in carcere detentos occurrerint, if they were euer so readie to helpe vs (as these your words import) that they ne∣uer came by our dores. Out of question, if the Iesu∣its haue been so liberall, as you informed the Cardi∣nall, you that were abroad still in the sunne-shine, de∣uoured it all; we that were in the shadow of prisons re∣ceiued nothing. But in good sooth, M. Blackwel, to commune a word or two with you, as concerning the great burthen of the day, and heat you speak of; What hath your bur∣then beene, that you should thus brag of it? About 20 yeeres since, to my remembrance, you were impri∣soned in London: but your brother, being the Bishop of Londons Register, by fauor procured your release verie shortly after. Since which time, the greatest heat that (for ought I know) you haue endured, hath ben by the Sunne in the heat of Summer, in troubling your walkings; and by the fire in winter, when you sat too neer it; or by your soft bed, when you had too ma∣ny cloaths vpon you: For many Priests that way (M. Blackwell) haue not had your good fortune: such hath been the liberalitie of a right good Gentlewoman to∣wards you. I write not this to diminish their merits,
who haue had their measure of afflictions heaped vp vpon them, though they haue escaped imprison∣ment: but of all that number, none haue had lesse cause (as I thinke) to complaine, than your selfe. And therefore if you that had no greater need, did draw from the Iesuits Fountains such store of comfort: you did poorer men great injurie, and it was surely Be∣neficium male collocatum: Almes euill bestowed. But all you write hereof, are meet fictions, and shamelesse vntruths, such as few men but your selfe in England, would haue presumed to haue vttered, much lesse to haue written to Rome: where many wise men could easily discerne your folly, or rather dishonestie, or at the least could not bee long deceiued by you. Wee know you are a man, that if you bee clapped on the backe, and encouraged, you dare write anything; but otherwise a checke doth daunt, and deject you. We doe therefore beshrew the Iesuits, that haue put this lying spirit and this audaciousnesse into you. Marrie, I doe much marvaile, that you should bee so grossely bewitched by them, as not to spare the Ca∣tholikes generally throughout England, and involue them also within the compasse of your childish ca∣lumniations. It might haue been sufficient for you (M. Blackwell) to haue defamed vs, and magnified the Iesuits at your pleasure, though you had not pinched at them. Alas, if they forsake vs, what shall we doe? It seemeth, that the Iesuits with their owne patrimo∣nies will be good vnto you, but what will become of vs? Wee must sticke to the lay Catholikes, and relie vpon their pitifull compassion of our necessities, or else we must perish. After you haue amplified the Ie∣suits
liberalitie in receiuing of Priests from beyond the seas; in feeding, cloathing, horsing, and placing them; and therevpon doe further adde, how they re∣leeue all sorts of distressed poore Catholikes, both in prison, and out of prison: you doe by the way in a short parenthesis, preuent this obiection, which might haue been made to the no small blemishing of your ridiculous commendation of their said sup∣posed liberalitie. For simple men might haue said, or thought, that by the exceeding bountie of the laie Catholikes, there were dailie supplies of money for such godlie vses, and that all the Iesuits commenda∣tion is, or can bee, that they deale faithfully in the di∣stributing of it without anie partialitie, but as euerie mans necessitie doth require. All this you wisely fore∣saw, and therefore you prepared an answeare readie to meet with any such ignorant men of the affaires in England, and with their dull conceits, that should so much as dreame of anie such matter. Tush it is a toy. Nam minima sunt, quae ex eleemosynts illis obueniunt. for they are scarce mites, that by almes doth come to their hands: it is their owne patrimonies which they imploy to these good purposes. It is verie well saide of you (good Master Blackwell) and like a tall cham∣pion. And yet shall I be a little bold with you? I knew one Catholike, that delivered to the Iesuits for such vses as is before expressed, 2200 pounds at the least, at one time; set me such another Iesuit by him, gentle Master Blackwell. There bee of our companie (as I heare) that would proceed in this course with you, to the value of ten thousand pounds almost, within few yeeres, which the godlie Catholikes haue deliuered
vnto them. And could you answere them, summe with summe, man with man, a Iesuit for a Catholike, to so great a rate? It is wel known, that not long since, the Iesuits sent for Flanders 2200 pounds, which ar∣gueth, that if you say trulie, that they are but mites which they receiue of the laytie here; & that besides all their said gifts in England, they are able to send so round a summe into Flanders; their patrimonies thus imploied, were exceeding great. I praie you Sir, in what Countries lay they? But you are so hard har∣ted, as I maie aske you what I will, for you will be sure to answere me nothing. These grosse lies serued in Rome for the time, and that was all that your Abet∣tors expected: leauing you in the briers (poore fel∣low) to scamble out as you can. B. Enuie is the companion of vertue: but as smoake, so shee preuaileth indeede in the beginning, and by and by vanisheth, the things being lightened, wherby she was enuied. Therefore I am led into great hope, that it will come to passe, that the beames of your amplitude, will most willingly dissipate (by the truth of things now opened) those clouds which malitious men haue cast vpon the shining brightnes of our Countrey. In explicating of these our iniuries, these my silly letters haue proceeded further thā I had determined, but not more sharply than I ought. I am made vnwise, but they that are accusers of their brethren haue compel∣led me, for we should rather haue been commended of them: but we goe not a birding for humane praise, he
shall bee allowed whom God shall commend. That vvhich resteth, is, vve submit vvith the greatest hu∣militie of mind that vve can, the defence of our cause, against all assaults of men that thinke not vvell of vs, to your protection: hoping that your amplitude vvill , that the licence of slanderers, may not so freely run vp and dovvne vn punished, as hetherto it hath done, to our ignominie, the offence of good men, & the losse of the Catholike faith; whose immouable strength (that I may vse S. Cyprians words) hath hether to remaned by Gods grace amongst vs, and her stable and vnshaken vertue against all the incursions of bking floods against it. God preserue your ampli∣tude most long in safetie and health. At London the tenth of Ianuarie, 1596. The most humble seruant of your most illustrious Lordship, George Blackwell. P. Vanitas vanitatum, & omnia vanitas. You are in great hope (you say) that by this your relation, the Cardinall will rest satisfied, as well concerning the deserts of the Iesuits, as also the aforesaid injurious reports, made by some against them. Why (Maister Blackwell) who were you then, that you should once imagine, that your letter should bee of such credite with his excellencie? If you had then been aduaun∣ced to the Archpriestdome, such a conceit had beene
more tollerable. Shall wee thinke so basely of the Cardinals in Rome, as that they will be led this way, and that way, vpon euerie simple priests letter? It is certainely a verie shallow imagination, or rather (if you were a man of any substance) verie injurious and scandalous. Hope, you know (Maister Blackwell) is fed with promises: Either then you had no such hope, as you write of, or a vaine hope, or els you were told of some promise, that the Cardinals mind was so vnderstood alreadie, that whatsoeuer you should write vnto him in commendation of the Iesuits, hee would beleeue you. But that which followeth, pas∣seth all the rest. Consider with me, I pray you, how discreetly you allude to the Apostles words. S. Paule 2. Cor. 12. after his painefull preaching amongst the Corinthians, was in his absence greatly depraued by certaine false Prophets, who blaming him and his doctrine in sundrie points, hee justifieth both, and thought it conuenient (in respect principally of the weaker sort in that citie) to enter into a discourse con∣cerning some mercies of God, bestowed vpon him for their good. I know a man (saith he) that was ta∣ken vp into the third heauen, and into paradice, and heard secret words; which are not lawfull to bee vtte∣red: and thereupon, after some other speeches, hee commeth to these words, Factus sum insipiens, vos me coegistis, ego enim a vobis debui commendari. And now let vs see (Maister Blackwell) how substantially you knit your matters together, that so you might bee countenanced a little with the Apostles words. I am become vnwise, say you: and indeed (to take away your allusion) they are the truest words in all your
letter. But you should rather haue said, I am become a mad man, or a dishonest man, or a man bewitched by the Iesuits: and not to excuse your bad dealing, so grossely, to haue abused the Apostles words. When Saint Paule vsed that speech, he did not taxe the spi∣rit of God (which was the authour of them) but a little reproueth thereby the weakenesse of some, who by his former speeches hee foresaw might deeme a∣misse of him. Now it might be demaunded, whether you (Maister Blackwell) ascribed the like weakenesse to the Cardinall, as suspecting that hee might by your letter think you not the wisest man in the world, whereas all that you haue said, did proceed from the Holy ghost: which were a great imputation, and to the Cardinals discredite. And yet if you did not wil∣fully or foolishly abuse the Apostles words, you could haue no other apt meaning. Sed illi me coegerunt: But they compelled me. Who (Maister Blackwell) dealt so roughly with you? Speake the truth man, Was it not Master Garnet that vrged you to write this letter? or did some other Iesuit in his name, or by his procurement, so greatly misuse you? If you mean that some of vs (the secular Priests) had so written of the Iesuits; wee confesse it (as I haue said before) we did so, and that most truly. But then you doe vs great injurie to say, that we compelled you. For wee haue beene euer so farre from vrging you to com∣mend the Iesuits, as in truth, now that you haue done it so eagerly, we condemne you for it, as hauing lent your penne all the while to Sathan, who is the authour of all those glauering vntruths, wherewith you meant to haue adorned them. But who they
were that compelled you, it is a point wee care not for, and therefore wee will omit it. Onely giue vs leaue to conjecture how it came to passe, that you amongst all the secular Priests in England, should be compelled to take this office vpon you. There was nothing laid to your charge (for ought wee know) that might haue drawne you vnto it. You were not then (in our opinions) a man worth the whistling, and a little otherwise regarded of, than as of an ordinarie priest amongst vs. Besides, you write nothing in your owne defence, as of your bee∣ing in any supercoelestiall places, or of any such your diuine illuminations, wherewith your wise friend hath told you (in his Metaphisycall Treatise of his Three farewels) that the Iesuits are so fully repleni∣shed. Againe, you were not then our Apostle, nor any mans else; the paines you haue taken for twen∣tie yeares, hath been cheefely with a Gentlewoman or two, which cannot demerit the name of an Apo∣stle. But peraduenture we haue found you. In tur∣ning ouer a chapter or two of Saint Paule, to find some vaile to couer your folly with, you did out of doubt, light on that place where hee saith, That the care of the whole Church did lie vpon his shoulders: Instancia mea quotidiana, solicitudo omnium ecclesia∣rum: and so you tooke vpon you (as a most principall person, that stood in the gap against our enemies) to commend the Iesuits, euen for conscience sake. If still we misse your intent, then tell it vs plainly, to ease vs of further trouble, for we will haue it out before we leaue you. Why should you bee compelled to this lying course, more than any other? Did either ,
or any for him, promise you for your paines the the place, that now you haue attained vnto? Well, to trouble you (good man) with no more questions at this time. Out of doubt the Iesuits finding you a fit man for their purpose, did put courage and spirit in∣to you, assuring you, that they would by their priuate Letters to the Cardinall, so magnifie and extoll you, as that you should be iudged in Rome, the onelie wor∣thie Priest in England to be had in principall estima∣tion. And it stood them vpon at that time so to doe, for their credits then were greatly cracked, except they had gotten some singuler person of name, to haue written in their behalfe: such a man as they made the Cardinall to beleeue that you were. Wher∣vpon it pleased your Mastership to write to the Car∣dinall, in so stately a manner, and with so high a stile: There are as I heare: I hope by my relation: Factus sum insipiens sed illi me coegerunt: and most grauely: Nos debuimus ab illis commendari. We ought to haue been commended by them. Indeed Saint Paule deserued singular commendations; therefore you M. Black∣well? He was compelled to speake for himselfe; ther∣fore you for the Iesuits? The Apostle excused by those words, Factus sum insipiens, the commending of himselfe, and the mercies of God towards him: but you by the same, the length of your lying and foolish Letter? And yet you shall not loose all by your Apo∣stolicall allusions: for I will giue you this commenda∣tion, and doe thinke indeed that you haue deserued it. If your wisedome and pollicie were answerable to your pride, boldnesse, and lying; you were in mine opinion a verie fit man to be an ordinarie English Ie∣suit.
For the rest of your Letter, when I find you har∣ping still vpon one false string, Non bene de nobis sen∣tientium: Not thinking well of vs: we submit our selues: the defence of our cause: Ad nostram ignonimiam: To our dishonour. Were I a man of a collericke or a quea∣sie stomacke, had I not just cause to crie out, as it is in the proverbe, Date mihi peluim? We haue a saying in England, that when men speak to no purpose, at Ran∣don, and besids the matter, they talke ad Ephesios. But I cannot say so of your Letter, (Master Blackwell) you had counsell inough, (I doubt not) to prosecute your instructions, which were to abuse our names that were secular Priests, for the Iesuits aduantage, and our owne disgrace: as though we had spoken by your spi∣rit, (according to that which here you haue written) these intollerable falshoods, which in our hearts wee abhorre. And therefore although I will not say, you write ad Ephesios, yet I may justly call your Letter, lit∣teras Ephesias, Ephesian Letters; that is, a scroll of jug∣ling, and incantations, a packe or fardell of fictions and vntruths. I told you in the beginning (Master Blackwell) that I would not know you in the answe∣ring of your Letter, as now you are aduaunced, and frankely rewarded for your writing of it: but deale on∣ly, not with the Latinus Georgius, but with my old companion, plaine Master George (according to the scottish phrase) and with those bad humours that raigned then in you. Since that time it may be, that you are changed, and are become another man: Honores mutant mores, sed raro tamen in meliores. And so I commit you to God, desiring his di∣vine
Maiestie, from the bottome of my heart, that hee will pardon your course thus begun, and still continued by you, amongst vs poore Priests, and other Catho∣likes, our Consorts in England. Your ancient acquaintance and louing Friend, Andreas Philalethes. FINIS.
