19857 99854387 19805
THE EMBASSAGE OF Gods Angell. By George Phillips. Malachi. cap. 3. verse 1: Behold I will send my Messenger, and hee shall prepare the waie before me. VERITAS TVA ET VSQVE AD NVBES printer's or publisher's device AT LONDON Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Churchyarde at the signe of the Greyhound. 1597.
The Embassage of Gods Angell. The Text is in the 5. Chapter of the Actes of the Apostles, the 20. verse, &c. 20 Go your way, and stand in the Tem∣ple, and speake vnto the people, al the words of this life. 21 So when they heard it, they entered into the Temple earlie in the Mor∣ning, and taught. And the chiefe priest came, & they which were with him, and called the counsel together, & al the elders of the children of Is∣rael, and sent to the prison, to cause them to be brought. IN this speech, wee must ob∣serue the charge that was gi∣uen to the Apostles by the
Angell, and then how the Apostles executed the same. If wee consider these thinges more particularlie: Goe your waie, is the incouragement that the Angell giueth to these apostles. Stand in the temple, admonisheth to haue recourse to the ordinarie place of teaching and hearing Gods word. Speake to the people, is Gods generall calling of al people to the knowledge of his truth.1 Tim. 2, 4 Al the wordes of this life, doth signifie the subiect of our pea∣ching, viz. the Gospell of Iesu Christ which bringeth eternall life. But whē the angell calleth them the words of this life, hee hath relation to a life, which the apostles had preached be∣fore their imprisonment, as in Actes the 4, and 12. verse. Text. Goe your waies. God saith of the wicked (viae meae, non sunt viae vestrae) My waies are not your waies. But here the Angel saith,
Go your waies. &c. which was a nota∣ble argument to these men that their authoritie was good. This must needs concerne vs of the Ministery verye neerelie,Psal. 39.1 that wee looke to our waies like Dauid, whether they bee such as may incourage vs to proceed therein with a safe conscience. For it is que∣stionlesse, that because the spirites of the Prophets are subiect to the Pro∣phets:1 Cor. 14, 32 therefore saint Iohn vvilleth vs to trie the spirites, teaching vs like wise to knowe, vvhat spirits we must acknovvledge for fit leaders of Gods people.Acts. 8.9 In Symon the Sorcerer was the spirite of inchauntment, wherewith he seduced the Samaritanes. In Iason the highe priest,2 Maca. 4, 7 vvas the spirite of Briberie, whilest hee corrupted (for that office of the priest hoode) Antiochus, vvho vvas cor∣rupted againe by Menelaus. Our sa∣uiour Christ himselfe telleth vs,Iohn 10, 1 That euery one that commeth not in
by him the doore,Neh. 13, 29 entereth in by a wrong way. And zealous Nehemia curseth such, as prophane polluters of Gods holie house, and defilers of his sacred Priesthood. And yet some haue taken this calling vppon them, before they coulde discharge it any better then Nicodemus could reason of regeneration:Iohn 3, 9 and other haue gon the wrong waye to discharge theyr charge:Ionas. 1, 3. as Ionas fled to Tarshish, when he should haue gone to Niniue. And the Grandbishop of our soules,1 Pet. 2, 25 hath ordained this for a perpetuall and an infallible note of a true minister of Iesus Christ:Iohn 10, 9 By me if any man enter, he shall goe in and out, and shall find pa∣sture, and shal bee safe: meaning, that they whose pastures are bare, like the mountaine of Gilboa,2 Sam. 1.21 haue climed o∣uer the hurdles, or come in by some by-waie, and not by the right doore. And as no learning hath let them in, so a lawfull autoritie might shut them
out, that they might returne to theyr olde occupations againe, whereof they haue more skil,2 Tim. 4, 10 and wherin they haue most delight (as Demas in this Worlde) whoe haue taken so large a leape, as it is from the shop boord, to the sheepefold. They only must build in Gods house, whom he hath com∣manded so to doe, and inabled there∣unto, as when he said to the apostles:Math. 28, 18 19 All power is giuen vnto me in heauen and in earth: Goe therefore and teache all Nations, &c. for God euer indu∣eth them with a greater measure of his grace, then the common sorte of his people: (As Iacob said of his elder sonne Ioseph, when hee blessed him: moreouer,Gen. 40, 22 I giue to thee one portion aboue thy brethren, which I gate from the Amorites with my sword & bow) That the minister may be a leg to the lame, an eie to the blinde, a staffe to the aged, a teacher of the ignoraunt, and a guide to the wandering: else,
how shall he lifte my feete out of the mire that is as deepely plunged in it as I am? What hope haue I to escape the pit, when my guide is as blinde as a beetle? How shall he vpholde and strengthen my weaknesse, who is an vnstaid man himselfe? how shal other be taught by him whom God himself vnder the person of Nicodemus repro¦ued for his ignorāce long since?Iohn 3, 10 Thus did the people wander in that maze of poperie, as in a midnight of igno∣rance in the daies past. But (blessed be God) we may now see hovve truelie Paule said sometimes to the saintes at Ephesus,Ephes. 5, 8 ye were darknes, but nowe are you light in the Lord, meaning yt when they were gentiles they walked igno∣rantlie as they that were in darkenes, but it pleased God to giue them his sonne, who is the true light to inligh¦ten euery one that commeth into the world. Iohn 1.9Iohn the Baptist beeing asked
of the priests & Leuites, what he was,Iohn 1.23 saide not I am a crier, but hee ansvve∣red: I am the voice of a crier. Manye haue taken the title of the Lords cri∣ers vpon them, whose voices haue sil∣dom been imployed in preparing the pathes of the Lorde. Whoe (if they omitted their duety of ignorance) might learne of Esay to inquire of the Lorde: What shall I crie?Esay 40.6 And they vvhich knovve it might imitate the same Prophetes example, who saide that For Sions sake hee woulde not bee silent, that Iacob may knovve Gods iudgementes, and Israel his Lavves.Rom. 10, 14 15 For hovve shall the people heare without a preacher, and hovv shall they preache except they bee sent? Lorde, howe many were there pos∣sessed vvith dumbe Diuelles, vvhi∣lest ignoraunce was the reputed mo∣ther of Deuotion! but in this our soule sauing knovvledge of Iesus CHRISTES Gospell, it hath
pleased him to open the mouthes of such as soundlie teach vs, yt to knowe the true God and Iesus Christ, whom he hath sent to saue vs, is eternal life. Wherfore we are as greatlie bound to praise God,Marke 7.31 for opening ye mouths of such men, as those Galileans who saide: He hath done all things well, he hath made the deafe to heare, and the dumbe to speake.2 Chr. 13, 9 Blessed be God, the daies which Ahia ye Prophet complai¦ned of, are worne out of date: whoe said, We haue such priests as the Na¦tions that be Idolatrous round about vs, as though we should sacrifice with a bullock and seauen Rams, to them which are no Gods. Then coulde men bee contented to see and suffer Gods sanctuary to bee a stable for the ignorant asse. Surely it argueth that men could bee contented to pro¦fes wel, whatsoeuer they performed: and to haue all thinges well, so that it were not effected by their means. For
had they regarded Gods true religi∣on, then should not a company of vn∣worthy men, haue caried avvaie the churches reuenues for an olde song, as Baals priestes consumed the kings cost, for saying O Ball heare vs:1 Reg. 18, 26 blind Prophets shuld not lead the blinded people (hand in hand) vnto hell, nor the Diuell lead captiue both the sedu¦cers, and the seduced, as the Phili∣stines ruled Samson,Iudg. 16.21 hauing cut off his haire, and bored out his eies. Text. And stand in the Temple. This is added, to prooue that God hath appointed a setled and certaine place, wherein he will haue his name called vpon of his people:Deu. 12, 5, 6 and it hath beene so euer sithence that Temple at Ierusalem was first builded by king Salomon.1 Reg. 6 As the Psalmist ment when he said: Thither the tribes go vp,Psal. 122, 4 euen the tribes of the Lord, &c. And it see∣meth, that in diuers ages, there were
ordinary places of assemblie, as well to the sacriledge committed with I∣dols, as for the seruice of the true god. For as the vvoman of Samaria saith, yt her predecessors worshipped vppon the mount of Samaria,Iohn 4, 20 and Christe said, that Ierusalem was the ordinary place where Israell shoulde worship:2 Reg. 5.18 So Naaman the Syrian, worshipped in the house of Rymmon, and Ierobo∣am sometimes at Bethel,1 Reg. 12 and other∣whiles at Dan. But it is saide heere vnto the Apostles, stand in the Tem∣ple: for that the Christian Religion being an open faced Religion, doeth likewise require a publike profession. According as our Sauior Christ said to the Disciples,Math. 10.27 Quod dico vobis in te∣nebris, praedicate in luce. What I teach to you priuately, that preache you publikelie. For it is not enough, say∣eth saint Paule, that your heart doeth beleeue vnto saluation,Rom. 10, 10 but your mouth must also make confession to
iustification. Ne coelico fallaci vene∣rentur numina cultu, least all (like Saule) shoulde worshippe God for a fashion, and not of Deuotion.Supra Math. cap. 21, 12 Saint Gregorie in his Morals vpon Christes going into the Temple, so soon as he came into the City saith, yt this true reformer of his church, had tvvo speciall respectes therein. The first, to shewe that the negligence of the people doeth much arise of the carelesnesse of the Pastor, who com∣meth not there so often as he ought. And therefore was it a part of Paules care to saie to the Colossians, Ad∣monishe Archippus to looke to his charge.Colos. 4.17 Next, to aduertise all higher po∣wers, to procure the good of GODS house by all the lawfull meanes they may: and in this sence Esay said, that Kinges shoulde bee nurcing fathers,Esay 49, 23 and Queenes nurcing mothers vnto it.
Text. And speake vnto the people. As the Apostles mightie deliuerance out of the common prison, was a de∣monstration of Zorobabels conclusion,1 Esdr. 4, 41 viz. that trueth is strongest: So this freshe charge and newe commission giuen to them, must teach vs, that we prise not the worde of God by that estimation that men of sinne do value it.Math. 7, 6 Matt. 15.25 For as swine cannot prize pearles, so the crums of this foode, are sought for by such, as know what it is worth. When the Apostles aunswered the counsel at Ierusalem with,Acts. 4, 19 Whether it is better to obey God or man, iudge you; their speech hath relation to the com¦mandement of God (wee see) as to a rule and compasse, whereby his ship the Church is safe conducted in the sea of this world. For right so as God said to Moses:Exod. 5, 40 See that thou makest the Arke, according to the patterne that I shewed thee on the Mounte:
In like maner, ought all the enterpri∣ses of a Christian life, to bee leuelled by the worde of Gods prescription. Christ saith, that when the shepherd is stricken, the flocke flyeth & is scat∣tered.1 Reg. 22, 17 And so Micaia did prophecie against Ahab the wicked king of Isra∣ell. But Christ neuer saide: that the good shepheard doeth fly from the flocke, though himselfe be stricken: but that he ventureth his own life,Iohn. 10, 11 to saue theirs, as appeareth by these a∣postles, whoe cease not to doe that which God commandeth, though it bee with daunger of life. As the two good midwiues of Egypt woulde not kill the infantes, because GOD hath said, Thou shalt do no murder. It was said to the sinfull man in the Gospell,Iohn 5, 14 Goe thy waie and sinne no more, least a worse thing befal thee. But when the Apostles are inlarged by the Angel of the Lorde, they are bidden to doe a∣gaine as they did before. Then this is
the cause vvhye GOD is so present a helpe in our troubles,Psal 46, 1 Psal. 50, 15 in deliuering vs when wee call vppon him, euen that wee might magnifie him the more.Acts. 4, 18 We charge you that you speake no more in this name, saieth the coun∣sell of Ierusalem to these Apostles: But I commaund you, that ye speake the more in this name, sayth the an∣gell of the Lorde (novve yee are at libertie.) Therefore is the zeale of GODS Saintes figured in the sacrifi∣cing fire, vvhich might not goe out but must burne both daie and night (by the Leuiticall Lavve) and as our seruice of GOD must bee perpetu∣all,Leuit. 6, 13 so muste it bee without feare or doubting. Shoulde such a manne as I am fly?Nehe. 6, 11 (said Nehemiah.) If the husband∣man shoulde waite vntill there vvere no vvinde,Eccles. 11.4 hee shoulde neuer sovve. Or if hee woulde not reape, till there be no clouds that threaten rain,
he shoulde neuer haue haruest while he liueth. In that these Apostles are commanded to speake vnto the peo∣ple; occasion is offered to saie some∣thing of those simples whereof gods catholike church is compound: viz. of the people. New Ierusalem hadde twelue gates, not onely to signifie the xii. Tribes of Israell,Apoc. 21.12. but further to teach that GOD woulde choose his church from all parts of the worlde. And this is that which our sauior said long sithence: I haue other sheep which are not of this folde,Iohn 10, 16 them also muste I bring, and they shal heare my voice, and there shal be one sheepfold and one sheep heard. Whereby he meant, that hee would be one day as common to the Gentiles (thorough the preaching of his gospell) as then he was proper to the first elected Iewes. For S. Iohns vision must bee effected (or else the scriptures are not fulfilled) he saieth: he saw an angell flying thorough theApoc. 14, 6
middest of heauen, hauing an euerla∣sting gospell to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to euery Na∣tion, and kindred, and tongue, & peo¦ple. So that howsoeuer that bee true, that the Israelites were the peculiar people of God, to whom only pertai¦ned the promise, the adoption, & the couenant of God (as saint Paule say∣eth) yet now God vouchsafing a new couenant,Rom. 9, 4 Iere. 5, 31 hath comprehended all Nations therein,Acts. 2, 39 as saint Peter saith, Vnto you is the promise made and vnto your seed, & vnto all that are yet a farre off,Ose. 2, 23 euen so manie as God will call. And as Ose the Prophet said: god calleth thē his people who were not his peo∣ple heretofore, and they (novv) do cal him their God, whose God hee was not in times past: For we were as sheep going astraie,1 Pet. 2, 25 but nowe returned to the sheepeheard and bishop of our soules, &c.Acts 10, 15 So that Saint Peters vision being accomplished, that which God hath
cleansed, manne may not count it vncleane:Actes 10, 28 for (novv) GOD hath shewed me that I shoulde not count any man polluted, or vncleane, saith hee. Text. All the wordes of this life. This doth subscribe to the truth of him, whoe beeing the life it selfe,Iohn 14, 6 Matth. 4, 3 saide sometimes, that There is not one worde in the booke of God, but it hath his Emphasis, or powerfull effect vnto eternall life. Therefore, as Saint Paule founde by his ovvne experience,Rom. 1, 16 that the wordes of the Gospell tende all to the sauing of Faithfull beleeuers: so hee protesteth to the Church of E∣phesus, that hee kept not backe anie part of the Counsell of GOD, that was fitte for theyr saluation,Acts. 20, 20 but de∣liuered vnto them all that Counsell of GOD. Yet we, who are the Gen∣tiles, must saie like Ieremy ye prophet:
Thy words were found by mee,Iere. 15, 16 and I did eate them, and thy worde was vnto mee the ioy and reioicing of my hart. Or as Dauid said:Psal. 132.6 Loe wee heard of the same at Ephrata, and found it in the Wood. When we come to Gods house, wee must attende rather what is spoken, then who speaketh, because if we re∣gard who teacheth, we shall oft hear the successors of the Scribes & Pha∣risies, who onlie would say well: and bicause they hold in capite (so long as they teach the truth) wee must heare them,Matth. 23, 2 and hold with them in that. Ei parti fauendum est quae rectum sentit in veritate. We must leane to that side, which relieth vpon the truth: There∣fore said Christ: Quod dicunt facite, You must doe as they saie. If you attend what they say, you shal find them like the Apostles, for they speak vnto you all the words of this life. And it is not only the word of life, because it is spo¦ken as from the Author of life, or be∣cause
it tendeth to eternall life, but (quia creditur) because it is beleeued. And therefore saieth Paule:Rom. 1, 16 It is the power of God able to saue euery beleeuer And when Esay said,Esay 53, 1 Lord who belee∣ueth our preaching? hee meant, that the want of beliefe is want of life. The wordes of the Gospell are also called the words of life,Iohn 14, 6 because they treate of Iesus Christ, who is the life of life: for in him we liue, moue,Actes 4, 12 & haue our being. And not only Peter saith:Acts 10, 43 Non est salus in vllo alio, but huic testātur om¦nes prophetae. To him doe all the Pro∣phets beare witnesse, that through his name al that beleeue in him, shal receiue remission of sinnes. The wordes of the Gospell are called the wordes of life also, because the subiect of the gospel is to beget soules to euerlasting life: as our Sauiour himselfe saieth,Iohn 20, 31 These things were written that you might be∣leeue, and in beleeuing yee might haue life through Christs name.
Text. So when they heard it, they entred in∣to the temple early in the morning and taught. This sequele sheweth how faithful¦ly the Apostles did execute the An∣gels commandement; First they doe heare it,Ezec. 33, 7 then they teach it: like that rule of God to Ezechiel, Sonne of man thou shalt heare the word at my mouth, and thou shalt giue the people warning from me.1 Pet. 4, 11 Or that of S. Peter, If anie man minister, let him do it as of the a∣bilitie that God ministreth to him. For our sauiour saith,Math. 13.52 Euery Scribe learned in the kingdome of God, is like a good housholder that bringeth out of his trea¦sure, things both new and old. Thus the meanes are directed to the ende, as Moses receiued the lawe, to deliuer it to the people. The eare to heare, and the eie to see, the Lorde hath made them both saith the Wise man.Prou. 20, 12 Salo∣mon teacheth vs both the vse and the
author of our senses: by both ye which he affirmeth that we are gods factors vpon earth, and that the gifts of God are talents committed to vs, to trade them ouer in our life, to the honor of the right owner of them.Luke 4, 16 The Euan∣gelist Luke saith, that when our Lord came into ye synagogue of Nazareth, (according to his custome) hee gaue them a sermon: And so doeth hee saie likewise of ye Apostles,Luke 24, 53 that they were vsuallie conuersing in the Temple, in the time of their libertie, and novve also after their imprisonment. This is one great comfort to the man of god, that howsoeuer men may be bounde for the worde of God,2 Tim. 2, 9 yet the worde of God it selfe is not bound. And let them further vnderstande, that as Gods iudgments are compa∣red to a great deep,Psal. 36, 6 so he wil not make it known vnto vs, why he suffereth mē to ride ouer our heads, but only thus far forth, that we may finde him most
helpefull, when we feele our selues to be most helplesse,Psal. 37, 25 and say like Dauid, I neuer sawe the righteous forsaken. And thereby learne, that bicause God is mercifull, therefore he ought to be feared more then men, who are for the most part cruell. When it is said, that the Apostles En¦tred earlie into the temple and taught. This is spoken for the imitation of their successors: for euen as the sun imparteth his light vnto the moone and starres, so these moouing candle∣sticks bee not put vnder a bushell, but set in an open place, to inlighten all that are in Gods house.Iohn 5.35 According as the scripture saith of S. Iohn, That hee was a burning and a shining light: meaning that he consumed himselfe to giue light to other. In some place the minister earlie is vp, but the peo∣ple neuer the nearer: yet these apo∣stles enter betimes into the temple, & doe teach. Iesus Christ is called the
day spring, or the breake of the daie.Luke 1, 78 And so is his worde comparable to the star that conducted the wise men vnto him.Math. 2, 9 Cant. 3, 1 The church wanted this light in Salomons time,1 Sam. 3, 1 but specially in the daies of Samuel. Miserable is their state who liue in ignorance, for the blinde eateth many a flie, as the Pharisies are saide to swallowe whole Camels.Mat. 23, 24 Wherfore we are very hap∣py men,2 Titus 21 to whome the grace of GOD hath appeared. Text. And taught. Bicause the word of God hath parted the whole worlde into a vineyarde of worke, and a market place of Idlenes,Mat. 20.1, 3 and God hath aswell forbid loytering as commanded labouring:2 Thes. 3, 10 therefore he taketh men from Idlenes,Math. 20, 7 and sen∣deth them to their occupation, to teach that they onely are worthie of their calling which walke according to the same: as Esay saide,Esay 50, 4 The Lorde hath giuen me a tongue of the learned,
that I shuld kno how to minister a word in due season to him that is weary. And as Paule commanded yt he which wil drinke wine, should help to plant the vine,2 Cor. 9 and him that liueth of the altar, to minister at the altar: and him that wil eate the milke, to feede the flock. I alledge not this, as though I thoght them to bee ignorant of this point of Discipline, to whom it specially per∣taineth, but as knowing that they which shoulde speciallie remember it, doe chiefely forgette it. There is one lesson in the scripture that manie one in the ministerie re∣membreth one halfe of it, and for∣getteth the other halfe: and it vvas spoken by our Sauiour to his Disci∣ples, immediatly after that he heard of the death of Iohn the Baptist. The wordes are Come aside,Mark. 6, 31 and reste a while. Euery one vpon the least occa∣sion, very readily commeth apart frō labor to loiter, and is prest to take his
rest: but they either forget that it is said, Rest a while, or else think a whole yeares ease to be but a while. But they should rest as Christ did,Iohn 4, 6 sitting vpon Iacobs well: viz. vntill they are refre∣shed,Iohn 5, 17 and then to it againe by Christs example: for my father worketh hi∣therto and I worke, saith hee. And by Iacobs sleeping in the land of Haran: for he laide a stone vnder his head, in steed of a soft pillow,Gen. 28, 11 & in ye next mor¦ning was packing on toward Bethel: teaching men to measure their ease, as well as their paines. So God allo∣weth intermission, for hee will haue line after line,Esay 28, 10 and precept after pre∣cept, but alloweth no Idlenesse: and therefore hee saide to those loyterers in the market place:Math. 20, 6 Why stande yee idle? And therefore Paule calleth the Office of a bishop a good worke,1 Tim. 3, 1 in that they taught the people. It ma∣keth as much to our folkes condem¦nation, as for their peoples commen∣dation,
euen as Christ saieth yt Sabaes comming to hear Salomons wisdom shall condemn the Iewes in the iudg∣ment daye.Math. 12, 42 Our Sauiour hath also taught, what is the cause of our slow assemblies,Luke 12, 34 when he telleth that mens harts are only there, where their trea∣sure is. But yet euen in pollicie, wee know that wise marchants wil traffike into diuers countries, yea and sende their chiefest wares into those partes where there is like to be longest peace and safest trauaile: Why then should not the spirituall marchant laye vppe treasure in heauen, where is all good hope of endles happines, seeing the scripture saith (and therefore ye trueth saieth) that there theeues cannot break through and steale,Matth. 6, 19 20 & by stealing make vs bankerout of euerlasting blessed∣nes? Text. Then the chiefe priest came, & they that were with him, and called the coun¦cell together, and all the Elders of the
children of Israel, and sent to the pri∣son to cause them to be brought. If wee regard the outward persons in this assemblie, it may seeme that it was very lawful: but if we consider the conditiō of their comming togither, we shall finde it most vngodlie: for it is a consūmation of king Dauids pro¦phesie,Psalm. 2, 2 vvho saide that mightie men should assemble themselues againste the Lord, and his annointed, which is his Christ. The scripture giueth in∣stance of diuers assemblies, whereof some haue come together for good endes, and some haue mustered for bad intents. The godly assemblies are expressed in that of Cornelius and his companye,Acts. 10.33 Acts 2, 1 and in that cloude of witnesses, the apostles assemble at Ierusalem, being al together with one accord, in one place. Vnhallowed as∣semblies, are such as those in ye booke of Numbers, when Korah Leuies son,Num. 16, 1 conspired with Dathan and Abiram,
the sonnes of Eliab, against Moses and Aaron.Numb. 14, 2 And when the whole congre¦gation of Israell assembled againste these two at another time. Fiue kings againste Captaine Iosuah,Iosua 10 and these counsellers at Ierusalem against the men of God. Then out of this place wee are aduertised, howe little hope there is of concluding any good, whē the assemblie hath neither feare nor knowledge of God. For as menne in chiefest seats do commit the chiefest sinnes, so may wee thinke that Com¦monwealth to bee in the afternoone of her age, viz. in a declining state where iudgement is committed vnto such, as should rather bee iudged. It is neither heere nor there,Psal. 58, 1 vvhoe are assembled, except their mindes are sette vppon righteousnesse, to iudge the thinge that is equall. The great∣nesse of the assemblie prooueth not the goodnesse of it, for then the fiue kinges hadde foyled Iosuah,Iosuah 10 and the
Councell of Ierusalem muste needes haue swallovved vppe these sillie A∣postles. But it is true, that thorough Gods permission, the mightie often times surprise the meaner sort: and that made the Philosopher laughe in his sleeue, to see great theeues leade little theeues to prison. Christ muste be crucified to the vvorlds end,Amos 2.13 euen as cartes are pressed with sheaues so long as there is any haruest. Aske the shower of the Saints bloud els,Mat. 23, 35 which began with the bloud of Abell, and helde on to the bloud of Zacharias the sonne of Barachias. Aske the riuer of bloud, which the enemies of Gods truth haue shed in warre. And aske the vvorde of trueth,Matth. 2, 16 howe much in∣nocent bloud hypocrisie hath broa∣ched, and it will aunswere you like Saule:Act 22, 4 I persecuted this way vnto the death, &c. Howbeit, whensoeuer (thorough GODS grace) we change our nature, hee also vouchsafeth vs
a new name, as he did turne Saule in∣to Paule, Abram into Abraham, & Iacob into Israell. But that which is here said, That the chiefe priest came and they that were with him,❀ giueth vs warning, how we come in companie with euill associates, like Peter vvith the high priests seruants.Luke 22, 55 But special¦lie that we consent not to their euils, as accessaries thereto, as Saule did to Stephens death,Acts 8, 1 Luke 22, 4 and Iudas to that trea¦son against Christs person, and He∣rod with Pilate to his arraignment.Luke 23, 12 If we haue intent to doe it, it is euen as bad as if we had done it. Christ sayth, that whoe so lusteth after a woman hath sinned in his hart. And hee cal∣leth the Pharisies murderers,Iohn 8, 44 when they only intended his death (& had not crucified him) because although their power coulde not performe his death assoone as they would, yet their will was not wanting: and so are all they no lesse guiltie of euill, who wil∣linglie
giue consent to it, although they act it not in their owne persons. When olde Iacob blessed his sonnes he saide of Simeon & Leuie:Gen. 49, 6 Acts. 8, 1 Into their counsel come not my soule. Paule cast not one stone at Stephen: but yet in consenting to his death, he sinned as greeuously. Ahab stoned not Na∣both, but yet hee consented thereto, and sealed the proclamation of his death, which was as bad. So the car∣penters made the Crosse, the Ievves receiued it, Simon bare it, but Christ was crucified vppon it, and so they made an end of him, and them. Mag∣nis magni malis, sunt obnoxii great men do offend in great matters. Ther¦fore be wise O Kinges,Psal. 2, 10 and learned yee iudges of the earth, saith the wise kings father. God refuseth zeale without knovvledge, al your good intents are but as blinde men, that will venter to goe without a guide.Rom. 10, 2 If you set good meaning before knowledge; you set
the blinde to lead the seeing, or the cart to dravv the horse. These magi∣strates consult againe and againe, a∣gainst the messengers of GOD, for wickednes laboureth the downfall of goodnesse, as the Ievves hacked at the greene tree.Luke 23, 31 The scripture auou∣cheth, that a mannes death may bee sought sixe waies. First by deceiuing him in a case concerning his life, as the diuel did Adam. Secondly, by of∣fering violence to himselfe,Gen. 3, 1 as Saule and Iudas did. Thirdly, by denying nourishment, to hold life and soule to¦gether, as the rich man did to Laza∣rus. 4. By forbearing to comfort the weake, as the Leuite did not regarde the wounded Samaritane. 5. By com¦manding, as Iesabel to put Naboth to death for his Vineyard. And lastly, by giuing counsell, as Herodias daughter being aduised by her mother, begged Iohn the Baptistes head: and as the high priest and Saduces held a coun∣cell
against the Apostles. The pro∣uerbe saieth, that the fiercest lighte∣nings do beat vpon the loftiest tow∣ers. And the author to the Hebrues,Heb. 1, 7 Actes 5, 19 That God maketh his Angels spirites: as is prooued by the spirituall deliue∣rance of these men of god, by the an∣gell of God. And further, that God maketh his ministers a flame of fire, and it is dangerous to deale with fire: Yet these magistrates muster togither, as to the putting out of a daungerous fire: and are as much troubled in re∣sisting the truth,Math. 2.3 as Herod was to hear of Christes kingdome and all Ierusa∣lem with him. Wel, they were decei∣ued: for this fire is none other but that which was figured in the Leuiti∣cal law, and must burne vnquenched.Leuit. 6, 13 For so Christ saith:Luke 12, 49 I am come to set fire on the earth, and what is my de∣sire, but that it should burne. As the emptiest vessels make the loudest lum¦bring, so the most irreligious are e∣uer
most officious: but as it is errour to affirme an vntruth, and heresie to vphold it: so is it cruelty to imprison without iust cause, and tyrannie to prosecute that sute: and as Thornes were the matter whereof Christes crowne was platted,Math. 23, 29 so affliction is the crowne wherevvith our mother the church honoreth vs her children. Spina Christi corona nostri,Cant. 3, 11 Christes thorne is our Crowne. Text. And sent to the prison, to cause them to be brought, &c. The voice which stroke Saule to, the ground,Acts. 9, 3, 1 came not vntill hee vvas neere to Damascus, where hee meant to make hauocke of the church. And the wordes were,verse 4, 5 Saule, Saule, whie persecutest thou me, &c. First to signi∣fie, that there is no more honourable victorie, then to vanquish when men are in the very pitch of their purpose: and secondly, to signifie how bootles that battaile is, that is waged against
God. Quid me persequeris? Why per¦secutest thou me? Is as much as God had saide: That there is no reason to be angry with God, the author of our good. It is hard for thee to kick against the prickes: signifieth, the meere follie of such, as enterprise so bootelesse at∣tempts, as doe hurt themselues more then harme them whom they resist. For he that kicketh against a pricke, hurteth himselfe, and not the goade: Like the mad man that did cut him∣selfe with flintes.Exo. 14, 27 While Pharao pur∣sueth Israel, he perisheth. Absolon hunting after his father,2 Sam. 18, 9 is hanged vp in an Oake. Arams hoast labouring to get Elisha the prophet, are led into Samaria by Elisha himselfe,2 Reg. 6. where (of al the places of the world) they would not be.Prou. 21, 30 There is no consulting against God, saith the vvise man, for he ouer∣commeth the wise in his owne witte. Therefore saith Salomon,Pro. 26, 27 He that dig∣geth a pit shal fall therein.
1 Esd. 14, 16Wee see, that it is true that Esdras hath said, That the world will increase in euil as it groweth in age.Susan. 52 Like the Iudge to whom Daniel said: So thou that art olde in euil. The councell had first imprisoned these Apostles, and then they proceede to iudge them, that they may growe from one wic∣kednes into another.Gen. 19, 33 Like Antiochus Elephants,Maca. 6, 34 that at the sight of bloud were mooued to seeke bloud: Or as Herod, who seeing that the death of Iames delighted the Iewes, procee∣ded to serue Peter so to: Or like the Foxes,Acts 12, 3 which for desire of bloud, kill more carcases then they can deuour. The scripture mentioneth three He∣rods, and they were al murderers. For the first killed the infantes at the birth of Christ, the second (in his cups) beheaded Iohn the Baptist, and the third (to curry fauour with the Iewes) slue Iames with the sword, and inten∣ded the death of Peter to, but God
did preuent him therein, as hee did these in their purpose. There bee too many such Herods, who hadde rather pleasure men by committing euil, thē please God by doing good. I speake it not to declaime against impiety, for that (I feare) were boot∣lesse, but to reclaime al to pitty. God grant it may not bee fruitlesse. Wee haue many demonstrations of Gods snaky pace to reuenge, vvho suffereth his owne to be (as Dauid saieth) euill intreated of Tyrantes, and yet yt God that threw downe the Angels when they abused their good state,Iude 6 as saint Iude witnesseth, is patient with men, whetting his sword as threatning to strike vs, and bending his bow,Psal. 64.7 as in∣tending to shoote at vs with a very swift arrow, so that we shalbe woun∣ded, if we returne not in time. He see∣eth Saule while hee is not contented to persecute at Ierusalem,Acts. 9.1 but procee¦deth to Damascus too. This, I saie,
God seeth, & yet he suffereth it. But a the scripture saith of Saule, first yt Ser¦uauit vestes, he held their clothes who were the tormentors, meaning that hee woulde playe small game, rather then want a part in such actions. Se∣condlie, that hee consented to Stee¦uens death: signifying, that then hee came to sinne in a second degree a∣gainst the Saintes: and thirdlie, that he made hauocke of the Church of God.Acts 9, 4 Thus shewing how hee sinned by degrees. So when God called him, he fell downe in hast,Luke 19, 6 as Zacheus po∣sted downe from the wild Figge tree. FINIS.
