19976 99839194 3596
portrait of a lady
pictures of a lady in domestic settings THE Accomplisht-Ladys Delight In Preserving, Physick, Beau∣tifying and Cookery
TO ALL Ladies and Gentlewomen. Ladies, THough there have been many Books Extant of this kind, yet I think something have been Deficient in them all. I have there∣fore adventured to make another, which, I suppose, comprehends all the Accomplishments necessary for Ladies, in things of this Nature. For you have here, 1. The Art of Preserving and Candying all Fruits and Flowers; as also of making Conserves, both Wet and Dry; and also the preparing of all sorts of Syrups, Jellies, and Pickles. 2. Here are some Excellent Receipts in Phy∣sick and Chirurgery, for Curing most Diseases in∣cident to the Body: Together with some Rare Beautifying Waters, Oyls, Oyntments and Powders, for Adorning the Face and Body, and to cleanse it from all Deformities that may render Persons Ʋnlovely. 3. You may have here a Guide to all manner of Cookery, both in the English and French Mode, with the preparing all kind of Sallets and Sauces proper thereunto.
4. Directions for making all sorts of Pyes, Pa∣sties, Tarts and Custards, with the Form and Shape of many of them, to help your Practice; ith Bills of Fare upon all Occasions. 5ly, and Lastly, The Lady's Diversion in her Garden. Containing, A handful of Choice and Novel Curiosities and Observations, relating to Plants and Flowers. Together, With brief Dire∣ctions for the Nice Adorning Balconies, Turrets, and Windows, with Flowers, or Greens, every Month in the Year. So that in the whole, I hope it may deserve the Title of the Accomplish'd Ladies De∣light, and may Acquire Acceptance at your Fair Hands, whereby you will very much Encourage and Oblige, Ladies,  Your very Humble Servant, And Admirer, T. P.
The Art of Preserving, and Candying Fruits and Flowers, as also of making all sorts of Conserves, Syrups and Jellies. 1. To make Quince Cakes. BAKE your Quinces in an Oven with some of their own Juice, their Cores being cut and bruised and put to them, then weigh some of this Juice with some of the Quinces, cut into small Pieces; with their weight in Sugar, and with the Quinces some quantity of the Juice of Barberries, take the clearest Syrup, and let it stand on the Coals 2 or 3 Hours, let them Boyl a little on the Fire, Candy the rest of the Sugar very Hard, and put them together, stirring it while it is Cold, and put it into Glasses. 2. To make Conserve of Barberies When the Stalks are pickt off, Boyl them in fair Water till they Swell and be very soft, then Bruise them in a Mortar, Strain them, and Boyl them by themselves, then take for every Pound of them, 2 Pound of Sugar, and Boyl them together, but not too long, for then it will Rope. 3. To make Conserve of Roses. Take the Buds of red Roses, and Slip away the white Ends, then Slip the rest of the Roses as small as you can, and beat them fine in a Marble Morter; and put to every Pound of Roses, three Pound and a half of Sugar, then but it up in a Gally-pot, and set it in the Sun for a Fortnight. 4. To Make Cinamon Water. Take a Quart of White-Wine, a Quart of Rose Wa∣ter, a Pint of Muscadine, half a Pound of Cinamon Bruised, lay the Cinamon to Steep in the Wine 12 Hours, stirring them now and then, afterwards put them into an Alembick, and Still them with a gentle Fire, and you may draw off from it three Pints: But if you will not have it Strong, instead of Muscadine ut in so much Rose-water or White-wine.
5. To preserve Quinces White. Take to every Pound of Quince, a Pound and a Quar∣ter of Sugar, Clarifie the Sugar with the white of an Egg, Core your Quinces, but not too much, put this Sugar, and Water, and Quince, being Raw together, and so make them Boyl so fast that you can see no Quince, forget not to turn them, take off what Scum you can, keep them Boyling thus till they are enough. 6. To preserve Raspices. Take the Fairest well Coloured Raspices, Pick off their Stalks very Clean, then Wash them, Besure not to Bruise them; Weigh them, to every Pound of Raspices, put 6 Ounces of hard Sugar, 6 Ounces of Su∣gar-Candy, Clarifie it with half a Pint of fair Water, and 4 Ounces of Juice of Raspices, being Clarified, Boyl it to a Weak Syrup, then put in your Raspices, Stirring them, and let them Boyl till they are enough. 7. To make Mackroons. Take Almonds, Blanch them, Beat them in a Morter, with Serced Sugar mingled therewith, with the white of Egg and Rose-water, then Beat them altogether till they are as Thick as Fritters, then Drop it upon your Wafers and Bake it. 8. To preserve Cherries. Take some of the Worst Cherries and Boyl them in fair Water, and when the Liquour is well Coloured, Strain it, then take some of the best Cherries you can get, with their Weight in Beaten Sugar, then lay one laying of Sugar and another of Cherries, till all are laid in the Preserving Pan; then pour a little of the Liquor of the Worst Cherries into it, Boyl your Cher∣ries till they be well Coloured, then take them up, and Boyl the Syrup till it will Button on the side of the Dish, and when they are Cold, put them up in a Glass Covered Close with paper, until you use them. 9. To make Conserves of Oranges, Lemons, Pippins. Boyl any of these Fruits, as you would do to make Paste thereof, and when it is ready to Fashon upon the it into your Gally-pots, and neve
dry it; and this is all the Difference betwixt Conserve and Paste, and this serves for all hard Fruits, as Pippins, Oranges, and Lemmons. 10. To make Symballs, Take fine Flower dry'd, and as much Sugar as Flower, then take as much whites of Eggs, as will make it Paste; put in a little Rose Water, with a quantity of Corian∣der-seed and Anniseed, then Mould it up in the Fashion you will Bake it in. 11, To make Syrup of Clove-gilly Flowers. Take a Pound of Clove-gilly-flowers, the White; being Cut off, Infuse them a whole Night in a Quart of fair Water, then with 4 Pound of Sugar dissolved in it, make it into a Syrup without Boyling. 12. To make Syrup of Violets. Take of Violet Flowers fresh, and pick a Pound, put them into clear Water Boyling, 1 Quart, shut them up close together in a New Glazed Pot, a whole day, then press them hard out, and in 2 Pound of the Liquor Dissolve 4 Pound and 3 Ounces of white Sugar, take a∣way the Scum, and make it into a Syrup, without Boyling. 13. To make Marmalade of Quinces. Take a Bottle of Water, and 4 Pound of Sugar, let them Boyl together, when they Boyl, Scum them Clean take the Whites of 2 or 4 Eggs and beat them to Froth, put the Froth into the Pan to make the Scum rise, Scum it Clean; take off the Kettle, and put in the Quinces and stir them, when Boyled enough put them into boxes. 14. To make Hippocras. Take a Gallon of White-wine, 2 Pound of Sugar; and of Cinamon Ginger, long Pepper, Mace not bruised, Grains, Galingal, Cloves not Bruised, of each 2 penny Worth, Bruise every kind of Spice a little, and put them together in an Earthen Pot for a day, then Cast them through your Bags 2 or three times, as you see cause, and so Drink it. 15. To make Almond-Butter. Take your Almonds and Blanch them, and beat them in a Mortar very small; and in Beating put a littl,
Water, when they are beaten pour in water into two pots, put half into one, and half into another, put Sugar to them, and stir them, let them Boyl a good while; strain it and so dish it up. 16. To preserve Quinces red. Pare your Quinces and core them; take as much Su∣gar as they weigh, put to every pound of Sugar 1 quart of Water, boyl your Quinces very Leisurely close Cov∣ered, turn them to keep them from spotting; when they are very tender and well coloured, boyl the Syrup till it will button on a dish, and so put your Syrup to them. 17. To pickle Cucumbers. Wash them and dry them in a Cloth, take Water, Vinegar, Salt, Fennel-tops, some Dill-tops, and a little Mace, make it sharp enough to the taste, boyl it a while, and take it off, and let it stand till cold, then put in the Cucumbers, and keep them down close, and within a week they will be fit to eat. 18. To Candy Pears, Plumbs, Apricocks, clear as Amber. Take your Apricocks or Plumbs, and give every one a cut to the Stone in the Notch, then cast Sugar on them and bake them in an Oven as hot as for Manchet close stop, let them stand half an hour, then lay them one by one upon Glass-plates, and so dry them: In this, manner you may Candy any other Fruit. 19. To preserve Oranges. Take a pound of Oranges, and a pound of Sugar, Peel the outward Rind, and the inward white skin off, then take juice of Oranges and put them into the juice, and boyl them half an hour, and take them off. 20. To make Oyl of Violets. Set the Violets in sallad Oyl and strain them, then put in other fresh Violets, and let them lye twenty days, then strain them again, and put in other fresh Vio∣ets, and let them stand all the year. 21. To make Cream of Quinces. Take a roasted Quince, pare it, and cut it into thin Slices to the Core, boyl it in a pint of Cream with a little whole Ginger, till it taste of the Quinces to
your liking, then put in a little Sugar and strain it, and always serve it cold to the Table, 22. To make a March-Pane. Steep 2 pound of pickled Almonds one day and 2 nights in fair Water, and Blanch them out of it, then beat them well in a Morter, and bedeck them with Rose-water, put it to your Almonds so many pound of Sugar, beat it with your Almonds, then make fine Crust of Paste, and sprinkle it with Rose-water, and Sugar; then spread the Stuff on it, and bake it at a very soft fire, always bedewing it with Damask Water, Civet, and Sugar; and lastly with a gut of Dates gilt, or the Kernels of Pine-apple, and so set it forth. 23. To make Almond Milk. Boyl French s Barly, as you boyl it, cast away the water, till you see the water leave to change Colour; as you put in more fresh water, then put a bundle of Strawberry leaves, and as much Cullumbine leaves, and boyl it a good while, then put in beaten Almonds and strain them, and then strain it with Sugar and Rosemary, then strew some Sugar about the dish, and send it to the Table. 24. To preserve Apricocks, or Pears, Plumbs, when green. Take the fruit and scald them in water and peel them, scrape the spungy substance off the Apricocks, or Quinces, boyl them very tender, taking their weight in Sugar, and as much water as to cover them, boyl them very Leasurely; then take them up and boyl the Syrup till it be thick; and when they are cold put them up with your Syrup, into your preserving Glasses. 25. To pickle French Beans. Take your Beans and string them, boyl them tender; take them off, let them stand till they are cold, put them into pickle of Beer Vinegar, Pepper, Salt, Cloves and Mace, with a little Ginger. 26. To make an Excellent Jelly. Take 3 Gallons of Water, boyl in it a knuckle of Veal, and Calves feet slit in two, with all the fat clean taken from between the claws, let them boyl to a
very tender Jelly keeping it clean scum'd, and the edge of the pot always wiped with a clean Cloth, that none of the scum may boyl in, strain it from the meat, let it stand all night, the next morning take away the top and the bottom, and a quart of this Jelly, half a pint of Sher∣ry Sack, half an ounce of Cinamon, and as much Sugar as will season it, 6 whites of Eggs well beaten, mingle all these together, then boyl it half an hour, and let it run through your bag. 17. To make Aqua Mirabilis. Take of Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamums, Nutmegs, Ginger, each 1 dram, juice of Celandine half a pound, Spirit of Wine 1 pint, White-wine, 3 pints in∣fuse them 24 hours, and draw off a quart with an Alembik. 28. Dr. Stevens's Water. Take of Cinamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains of Paradise, seeds of Annis, Fennel, Caraways, of each 1 dram; herbs of Time, Mother of Time, Mint, Sage, Penny-royal, Pellitory of the Wall, Rose∣mary, Flowers of red Roses, Cammomile, Origanum, Lavender, of each one handful, infuse them 12 hours in 12 pints of Gascoign Wine, then with an Alembick draw away 3 pints of the strong. 29. To make good Cherry Wine. Take the Syrup of Cherries, and when it hath stood while, bottle it up, and tye down the Cork, and in short time it will be pleasant Wine. 30. To make Wafers. Take a pint of Flower, a little Dram, the yolks of 2 Eggs, a little Rose-water with some searced Cinamon and Sugar, work them together, and bake them upon hot Irons. 31. To preserve Grapes. Stamp and strain them, let it settle a while, before you wet a pound of Sugar or Grapes with the Juice, stone the Grapes, save the Liquor, in the stoning take them off and put them up. 32. To pickle Purslain. Take Purslain and pick it into little pieces, and put
it into a pot or Barrel,, take a little water, Vinegar, and Salt, to your taste, it must be pretty strong of the Vinegar and Salt, and a little Mace, and boyl all these together: And pour this Liquor boyling hot into the Purslain, and when it is cold tye it close down, and in a Week or two, it is fit to eat. 32. To preserve green Walnuts. Boyl your Walnuts till the water taste bitter, then take them off, and put them in cold Water, and peel off the Bark, and weigh as much Sugar as they weigh, and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on the fire, and when they boyl up take them off, and let them stand 2 days, and then boyl them a∣gain once more. 34. To preserve Currants. Part them in the tops, and lay a laying of Currans, and a laying of Sugar, and so boyl them as fast as you do Rasberries, do not put them in the Spoon but Scum them, boyl them till the Syrup be pretty thick; then take them off, and let them stand till they be cold, and put them in a Glass. 35. To make Goose-berry Cakes. Pick Goose-berries, and put them in an earthe Pitcher, and set it in a Kettle of water till they be soft, then put them in a sieve, and let them stand till all the juice be out, and weigh the juice, and as much Sugar as Syrup, first Boyl the Sugar to a Candy; and take i off, and put in the juice, and set them in the press till they be dry. 36. To make excellent Broth. Take a Chicken and set it on the fire, and when it boyls Scum it then, put in a Mace, and a very little Oatmeal, and such herbs as the party requires, and boyl it well down, and bruise the Chicken and put it in again and it is good broth: And to alter it you may put in 6 Prunes, and leave out the Herbs or put them in as you please, and when it is well boyled, strain i and season it.
37. To make Angelets. Take a quart of new Milk, and a pint of Cream and put them together in a little Runnel, when it is come well, take it up with a spoon, and put it into the Vate softly, and let it stand 2 days till it be pretty stiff, then slip it out and Salt it a little at both ends, and when you chink it is salt enough set it a drying and wipe them, and within a quarter of a year they will he ready to eat 28. To make Jelly of Harts-horn. Take 4 Ounces of shavings of Harts-horn, of the in∣side, and 2 Ale-quarts of Water, put this in a Pipkin, and boyl it very gently till it come to a quart, the Harts-horn must be steeped 3 or 4 Hours first, after∣wards put a little into a Saucer till it be cold, and if it jellieth, it is boyled enough, then being warm take it off the fire, and strain it hard through a Cloth, and set it a cooling till it be a hard Jelly, then take 2 whites of Eggs, and beat them very well, or with a sprigg of Rosemary or Birch, (but not with a spoon) till a Wa∣ter come in the bottom, then put these beaten Eggs, and the Water thereof into a Skillet, and all the Jelly upon it with 3 Spoonfuls of damask Rose-water, and a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and when it boyls, stir and lay it pretty well, then strain it through a Cloth, and let it cool: And of this take 4 spoonfuls in the morn∣ing fasting, and at 4 a Clock in the Afternoon, and this is excellent good for the weakness in the Back. 39. To preserve Damsons, Red, or Black Plumbs. Take their weight in Sugar, and Water enough to make a Syrup to cover them, so boyl them a little therein being close covered, turning them from spot∣ing, let them stand all night in their own Syrup, then set them upon a pot of seething Water, and suffer your Plumbs to boyl no faster, than the Water under them, and when they are both sweet and tender take them up, and boyl the Syrup again till they be thick, then put your Plumbs and it together in your Preserving aes.
40. To make Rosemary-water. Take Rosemary and the flowers in the midst of May before the Sun rise, strip the Leaves and the Flowers from the stalks, take 4 or 5 Elecampane Roots, and a handful or 2 of Sage, and Roots together, till they be very small, then take 3 Ounces of Cloves, and so much of Mace, and half a pound of Anniseeds, and beat all these Spices every one by themselves, then take the Herbs and the Spices, and put thereto 4 or 5 Gallions of good White-wine, then put in all these herbs, and Spices and Wine into an earthen pot, and put the Pot into the ground about sixteen days, then take it up and distill it with a very soft fire. 41. To make Pomatum. Take fresh Hogs suet cleansed from the films, and washt in White-wine one pound and as much sheeps suet washt in White-wine, then take about 16 Pom∣water apples cleansed and boyled in Rose-water; add to these Rose-wood, Sassafras, Roots of Orrice, Floreir∣tine of each six Drams, of Benzoin, Storax, Calamita, half an Ounce of each, and so make it into an Oyntment. 42. To make Oyl of sweet Almonds. Take dryed sweet Almonds as many as you please beat them small, and put them in a hempen cloth, and without fire by degrees press out the Oyl. 43. An Excellent Water against fits of the Mother. Take Briony-roots, Elder berries ripe, drest at a gentle heart in a Furnace, and cleans'd from their stalks of each 2 Onnces; leaves of Mugwort, Bittany, Pea∣therfew, Nep, Basil, Penny-royal, Rue, Sabine, all dryed in the Sun, of each half an Ounce peels of Oran∣ges, the out-side dry'd, and Ounce and a half Mirrh Castoreum, of each 3 drams, Saffron 1 dram, pouder them and steep them 8 days in 2 quarts of the Spirit of Wine; then strain them through a very quick Hair∣strainer, keep the Liquor in a glass very well stopt. 44. To make Syrup of Wormwood. Take Roman Wormwood, or Pontick Wormwood half a pound, of red Roses 2 Ounces, Indian Spike
drams, old White-wine and juice of Quinces of each 2 pints and a half, bruise them in an earthen Vessel 24 hours, then boyl them till half be Wasted, strain it, and put to the straining two pounds of Sugar, and boyl it to a Syrup. 45. To make Conserve of Quinces. Take 3 quarts of the juice of Quinces Clarified, boyl it until two parts be wasted; then put to it 2 pounds of white Sugar, then boyl them to the thickness of Honey. 46. To make Syrup of Poppies. Take the heads and seeds of white Popy and of black, of each 50 drams, Venus hair, 15, Licorice 5 drams, Jnjubes 30 drams, Lettice seed 40 drams, add of the seeds of Mallows and Quinces tied up in a fine rag, of each 1 dram and a half; boyl them in 8 pints of Water, until half be wasted, strain it, and to 3 pound of Li∣quor put thereto Perides and Sugar, of each 1 Pound; boyl them to a Syrup. 47. To make Honey of Roses. Take of white Honey despumed, fresh juice of red Roses one pound, put them into a Skillet, and when they begin to boyl, throw into them fresh red Rose-leaves picked, 4 pounds, and boyl them till the juice be wasted; always stirring it, then strain it and put it up in an earthen Pot. 48. To make Syrup of Lemons. Take of the juice of Lemons purified by going thro' woolen strainer, with crushing, 3 quarts and a half, nd of white Sugar 5 pound, boyl them with a soft ire to a Syrup. 49. To make Spirit of Wine, Take of good Claret, or White-wine, or Sack enough fill the Vessel wherein you make your distillation a 3d part, then put on the Head furnished with ose or Pipe, and so make your distillation first in shes, drawing about a 3d part from the whole as for ample, 6 or 8 pints, out of Twenty-four, then ll it again in B. M. drawing another 3d part which  a pints, so that the oftener you distill it, the less
Liquour you have, but the more strong, some do rec∣tifie it 7 times. 50. To make Syrup of Maiden-hair. Take of the herb Maiden-Hair fresh gathered and out a little 5 Ounces, of roots of Liquorish scraped 2 Ounces, steep them 24 hours in a sufficient quantity of hot water, then boyl them according to Art. Add 4 pound of Sugar to 5 pints of the clarified Liquor and boyl them to a Syrup. 51. To make Syrup of Licorish. Take of the roots of Licorish scraped 2 Ounces, of Colts foot 4 handfuls, of Maiden-hair 1 Ounce of Hysop half an Ounce, infuse them 25 hours in a sufficient quantity of Water, boyl them till one half be wasted, add to the strained Liquor a pound of the best clarified Honey, and as much white Sugar, boyl them to a Syrup. 52. To make King William's perfume. Take 6 spoonfuls of Rose-water, and as much Am∣ber-grease as weigheth two Barley Corns, and as much Civet, with as much Sugar as weigheth 2 pence, beaten in fine pouder, all these boyled together in a perfu∣ming Pan, is an excellent perfume. 53, The Late Queens Perfume. Take 4 Spoonfuls of Spike-water, and 4 spoonfuls of Damask-water, 30 Cloves, and 8 Bay-leaves shred, as much Sugar as weigheth two-pence, all these boyled make a good Perfume. 54. King Edwards Perfume to make your house smell like Rosemary. Take 3 spoonfuls of perfect Rosemary, and as much Sugar as half a Walnut beaten in small pouder, all these boyling together in a perfuming Pan upon hot Embers, with a few Coals. 55. To make Conserve of Rosemary. Take your Flowers of Rosemary, which you may gather either in March or Sep. when you have beaten them to pap, take three times their weight in Sugar, pound them altogether and set them in the Sun, and so use them.
56. To make Syrup of Cowslips. Take the distilled water of Cowslips, and put there∣to your flowers of Cowslips clean pickt, and the green knobs in the bottom cut off, and boyl them up into Syrup, take it in Almond Milk, or some other warm thing; it is good against the Palsie and Frensie, and to procure Sleep for Sick. 57. To make Marmalade of Lemons and Oranges. You may boyl 8 or 9 of either, with 3 or 4 Pippins, draw them through a strainer; then take the weight of the pulp altogether in Sugar, and boyl it as Marmalade of Quinces, and box it up. 58. To make Angelica Water. Take a handful of Cardus Benedictus, and dry it, and 3 Ounces of Angelica-roots, 1 dram of Myrrh, half an Ounce of Nutmegs, Cinamon and Ginger, 4 Ounces of each, 1 Dram and a half of Saffron, of Cardamons, Cubebs, Galingal and Pepper, of each a quarter of an Ounce, 2 Drams of Mace, 1 dram of Grains, of Lignum Aloes, Spiknard, Junius Odoratus, of each a dram; Sage, Borage, Buglos, Violets, and Rosemary flowers, of each half a handful, bruise and steep them in a pottle of Sack 12 hours, and distil it as the rest. 59. To make Quiddany of Cherries. When your Cherries are fully ripe, and red to the stone, pull out the stones, and boyl them till they be all broken, then strain them, take the Liquour and boyl it over again, and put as much Sugar to it as you think convenient, and when it is boyled, that you think its thick enough, put it in Boxes. 60. To dry Cherries. Take 6 pound of Cherries and stone them, then take a pound of Sugar and wet it with the juice of the Cherries, boyl it a little, then put in your Cherries, and boyl them till they are clear, let them lye in the Syrup Week, then drain them from the Syrup, and lay them n thin boards to dry in a Stove, turn them twice a y till they are dry, wash off the claminess with warm ater, and dry them a little longer.
61. To make brown Metheglin. Take strong Ale-wort, put as much Honey to it as will make it strong enough to bear an Egg, boyl them well together, set it a cooling, when it is almost cold put in some Ale-yeast, then put it in a strong Vessel when it hath done working, put a bag of Spices into the Vessel, and Lemon-peel, stop it up close, in a few days it will be fit to drink. 62. To Candy Oranges or Lemons after preserv'd. Take them out of the Syrup, drain them well, then boyl some Sugar to a candy heighth, and lay your Peels in the bottom of a sieve, pour your hot Sugar over them, then dry them in a Stove, or warm Oven. 63. To preserve Oranges after the Portugal Fashion. Open your Oranges at the end, take out all the meat then boyl them in several waters, till a straw may go through them, then take their weight and half in fine Sugar, and put to every pound of Sugar a pint of wa∣ter, boyl it and scum it, put in your Oranges and boyl them a little more, then take them up, and fill them with preserved Pippins, and if you will have them Jelly, make a new Syrup with the water wherein slic∣ed Pippins have been boyled, and some Sugar, and that will be a stiff Jelly. 64. To make good Ʋquebagh. Take 2 Gallions of Aquavitae, 4 Ounces of the best Liquorice bruised, 4 Ounces of Anniseeds bruised, put them into a Glass, or stone Vessel, and cover them close, and so let them stand a week, then draw of the clearest with Molosso's, and keep it in another Vessel, and put in some Dates, Raisons ston'd; keep it close from the Air. 65, To make Italian Bisket. Take serced Sugar, and a little of the white of an Egg, with some Ambergrease and Musk, beat them all to a paste in an Alabaster Morter, mould it into a little Anniseed finely dusted, then make it up in Loves, and cut them about like Manchet, then bake them in an oven as hot as for Manchet, and when they are risen
some what high upon the Plates, take them forth and remove them not off till cold, for they will be apt to break. 66. To make French Bisket. Take half a peck of flower, with 4 Eggs, half a pint of Ale-yeast, one Ounce and half of Anniseed, a little sweet Cream, and a little cold Water, make all into a Loaf; and fashion it something long, then cut it into thick slices like Toasts, after it hath stood 2 days so, rub them over with powdred Sugar, and lay them in a warm Sun, and so dry them, and Sugar them as you dry them 3 or 4 times, then put them into Boxes for use, 67, To make Sugar Plates. Take serced Sugar, and make it up in a paste with Gum-Dragon steeped in Rose-water, and when you have brought it into a perfect Paste, rowl it as thin as e're you can, and then print it in moulds of what fa∣shion you please, let them dry. 68. To make Pomander. Take half an Ounce of Benjamin, and as much Storax and Labdanum, with 6 grains of Musk, and as much Civet, and 2 grains of Ambergreese, and one dram of sweet Balsam, then ronl it up in Beads as big or as little as you please, and whilst hot, make holes in them for your use. 69. To make Conserve of Damsons. Take ripe Damsons and put them into scalding Wa∣ter, and half an Hour after set them over the fire till they break, then strain them through a Culender and let them cool, then strain them through a piece of Canvas from their stones and skins, then set them over the fire again, with a good quantity of red Wine, so boyl it, stirring it till it be thick, and when it is even boyled enough, put in a Convenient proportion of Su∣gar, stir it well together, and put it into your Gally pots. 70. To Bake Oranges. Peel the Bark off, and boyl them in Rose-water and Sugar till they are tender, then make your Pye, and et them whole in it, and put the Liquor they were
boyled in into the Pye, season it with Sugar, Cinamon and Ginger. 71. To preserve Peaches. Take a pound of your fairest and best coloured Peach∣es, and with a wet linnen cloth wipe off the white coar of them, then parboyl them in half a pint of White-wine, and a pint and a half of running Water, and being parboyld, peel of the white skin of them and then weigh them; take to your pound of Peaches 3 quarters of a pound of refined Sugar, and dissolve it in a quarter of a pint of white-wine, and boyl it almost to the heighth of a Syrup, then put in your Peaches and let them boyl in the Syrup a quarter of an hour or more, then put them up and keep them all the Year. 72. To preserve Goosberries. Take Goose-berries, or Grapes, or Barberries, and take somewat more than their weight in Sugar beaten fine, lay one laying of Fruits, and another of Sugar, till all are laid in your preserving Pan, then take 6 spoonfuls of fair Water, and boyl your Fruits therein as fast as you can, untill they be very clear, then take them up, and boyl the Syrup by it self, till it be thick; when they are cold put them into Gally-pots. 73. To preserve Angelica Roots. Wash the Roots, slice them very thin, and lay them in Water 3 or 4 days, change the Water every day, then put the Roots into a pot of Water and set them in the embers all night, in the morning put away the Water, then take a pound of Roots, 4 pints of Water, and 2 pound of Sugar, let it boyl, and Scum it clean, then put in the Roots, which will be boyled before the Syrup, then take them up and boyl the Syrup af∣ter, they will ask a whole days work very softly, at St. Andrew's time is the best time to do them in all the Year. 74. To make Syrup of Quinces. Take of the juice of Quinces, clarified 3 quarts boyl it over a gentle fire till half of it be consumed, scum it, and add to it three pints of red Wine, with four pound of white Sugar; boyl it to a Syrup, and Per∣fume
it with a dram of Cinamon, Cloves, and Ginger of each 2 Scrupels. 75. To make Walnut Water. Take of green Walnut a pound and a half, Garden Radish-roots 1 pound, green Asarabacca 6 Ounces, Radish-seeds 4 Ounces, bruise them and steep them in 3 pints of White-wine Vinegar for 3 days, then distil them in a leaden Still till dry. 76. To make Treacte-water. Take of the juice of green Walnuts 4 pound, juice of Rue 3 pound, juice of Carduus, Marigolds and Balm, of each 2 pound, green Petasits Roots 1 pound and half, Roots of Burrs 1 pound, Angelica and Masterwort of each half a pound, Leaves of Scordium 4 handfuls, old Venice-treacle and Methridate, of each 8 Ounces, Canary 6 Quarts, Vinegar 3 quarts, juice of Lemons 1 quart, digest them 2 days, either in Horse-dung, or Bath, the Vessel being close shut, then distil them in Sand, in which you may make a Theriacal extraction. 77. To make Syrup of Cinamen. Take of Cinamon grosly bruised 4 Ounces, steep it in White-wine, and small Cinamon-water, of each half a pound, 3 days in a glass by a gentle fire, strain it, and with a pound and a half of Sugar, boyl it to a Syrup. This Syrup refreshes the vital Spirits, and cherisheth the Heart and Stomach, helps digestion, and cherisheth the whole Body exceedingly, 78. To make Syrup of Citron-Peels. Take of fresh yellow Citron Peels, 5 Ounces, the berries of Cherms, or the juice of them brought over 2 drams, spring water 2 quarts, steep, them all night, boyl them till half be consum'd, take off the Scum, strain it, and with 2 pound and a half of the whitest Sugar boyl it into a Syrup; let half of it be without Musk, but Persume the other half with 3 grains of Musk tied up in a Bag. 79. To make Syrup of Hartshorn. Take of Harts-horn, 3 handfuls, Polypodium of the Oak, the roots of both sorts of Bugloss, barks of the
roots of Capers and Tamaris of each 2 Ounces, Hops, Dodder, Maiden-hair, Balm, of each 2 handfuls, boyl them in 5 quarts of spring-water till it comes to four, strain it, and with 4 pound of Sugar make it into Sy∣rup, according to Art. 80. An everlasting Oyl Perfume, for Gloves. Take Benjamin two Ounces, Storax and Calamint each an Ounce, the 2 first must be finely beaten by themselves: then take a pound of sweet Almonds and mix it with the Storax and Benjamin upon a Marble stone, then put it into an earthen pot with more Oyl, then put in your Cloves poudered, so let it stand close covered, and when you will perfume a pair of Gloves, take a little fair Water in a spoon and wipe your Gloves fine with it, take another spoon, and dip it in your Oyl, and rub it on your Gloves, and let them dry. 81. An excellent water for a Consumption. Take 3 pints of Milk, and one pint of red Wine, 24 yolks of Eggs, beat them very well together, then add so much white-bread as will drink up the Wine, put to it some Cowslip Flowers and distill them. Take a spoonful of this Morning and Evening, in Chicken or Mutton Broth, and for a Month it will cure any Consumption. 82. To make Barley Water. Take a penny-worth of Barley, a penny-worth of Raisins of the Sun, a penny-worth of Anniseeds an half penny-worth of Licorish, about 2 quarts of water, boil all together till half be consumed, then strain it, when it is cold drink it, your Licorish must be sliced into small pieces. 83. Dr. Deodate's Drink for the Scurvey. Take Roman Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, Scur∣vey-grass, Brook-lime, Water-creeses, Watertrifoil, of each 1 handful, Dodder, Cetrach, Scolopendria, Burrage, Bugloss, Sorrel, Vervain, or Speedwell, of each half a handsul, Elicampaine Root one Ounce, Raisins of the Sun 3 Ounces, slices of Oranges and Lemons, of each 13, insuse these in a double glass with so much
White-wine as will make a pint and a half of liquor when done. 84. A Conserve to strengthen the Back. Take Eringo roots, and conserve them as you do Damask white and red Roses, in every respect the pith being taken out; one pound and a half of Sugar is enough for every pound of Roots, with 3 pints of Water, stew them closely at first as you do your Roses; if you add to them 5 or 6 grains of Amber∣greese, beaten to fine pouder it will be much more Cordial. 85. An excellent Aqua Composita for a Surfeit. Take a handful of Rosemary, a root of Enulacam∣pane, a handful of Hysop, half a handful of Tyme, 6 handfuls of Sage, as much Mint, and as much Penny∣royal, half a handful of Hore-hound, 2 Ounces of Li∣quorish well bruised, and as much Anniseeds, take two gallions of the best strong Ale, and all the herbs afore∣said, and wring them asunder, and put them into an earthen pot well covered, and let them stand a day and a night; from thence put it into a brass pot, and set it on a fire, and let it stand till it boyl, then take it from the fire, and set your Limbeck on the pot, and stop it close with paste that there come no air out of it, and still it out with a soft fire, add to it a little Red Fennel. 86. To make Balm-water. Take 4 gallons of strong stale Ale: half a pound of Liquorish, 2 pound of Balm, two Ounces of Figs, half a pound of Anniseeds, one Ounce of Nutmegs, shred the Balm and figgs very small, and let them stand steep∣ing 4 and 20 hours, and then put it in a still as you use Aquavitae. 87. To pickle Broom-buds. Take Broom-buds, put them into linnen bags, and tye them close, then make some brine with vvater and salt, and boyl it a little, let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the bags in it, and lay some vveight on, let it lie till it look black, boyl
them, and put them in Vinegar a Week or 2, and they will be fit to eat. 88. To make good Rasberry-wine. Take a Gallon of Sack, in which let 2 Gallons of Rasberries stand steeping the space of 24 hours, then strain them, and put to the Liquor 3 pound of Raisons of the Sun stoned, let them stand together 4 or 5 days, being sometime stirred together, then pour off the clearest and put it up in Bottles and set it in a cold place, if it be not sweet enough you may put Sugar to it. 89. To make excellent Hipprocas in an instant. Take of Cinamon 2 Ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each half an Ounce, Cloves 2 Drams, bruise these small, then mix them with as much Spirit of Wine, as will make them into a paste, let them stand covered in glass the space of 6 days in a cold place, then press out the Liquor and put it in a glass. A few drops of this Li∣quor put into any Wine giveth it a gallant relish and Odour, and maketh it as good as any Hippocras what∣soever in an instant. 90. To make Artifical Malmsey, Take 2 Gallons of English Honey, put into it eight Gallons of the best Spring water, set these in a Vessel over a gentle fire, when they have boyl'd gently an hour take them off, and when they be cold put them into a small Barrel or Runlet, hanging in the Vessel a bag of Spices, and set it in the Cellar, and in half a year you may drink of it. 91. To make Artificial Claret-wine. Take 6 Gallions of water, 2 Gallions of the best Cyder, put thereto 8 pound of the best Malaga raisins bruised in a Morter, let them stand close covered in a warm place the space of a Fortnight, every two days stirring them well together. Then press out the Rais∣ins, and put the Liquor into the said Vessel again, to which add a quart of the juice of Rasberries, and a pint of the juice of black Cherries; cover this Liquor with bread spread thick with strong Mustard, the
Mustard, the Mustard-seed being downward, and so let it work by the fire side 3 or 4 days, then turn it up and let it stand a Week, and then bottle it up, and it will taste very pleasant, far better than our Common Claret. 92. Ta make Spirit of Ambergreese. Take Amber-greese 2 drams, of Musk a dram, cut them small, and put them into a pint of Wine, close up the Glass Hermetically, and digest them in a very gentle heat till you perceive they are dissolved, then you may use it; 2 or 3 drops or more if you please of this spirit put into a pint of Wine, gives it a rich Odour, or if you put 2 or 3 drops round the brims of the Glass it will do as well, half a spoonful of it self or mixt with specifical liquor is a rich Cordial. 93. An Excellent sweet water. Take a quart of Orange-flower water, as much Rose water, 4 Ounces of Musk, Willow seeds grosly bruised, or Benjamin 2 Ounces, of Storax an Ounce, or Labda∣num 6 drams, of Lavender flowers 2 Pugils, of sweet Marjoram as much, of Calamus Aromaticus a dram, distill all these in a Glass Still in Balneo, the Vessel being very well closed that no vapour breathe forth; Note that you may make a sweet water in an instant, by putting in a few drops of some distilled Oyls together into some Rose-water, and brew them all together. 94. Dr. Burge's Plague water. Take 3 pints of Muscadine and boyl in it Sage and Rue, of each a handful till a pint be wasted, strain it, and set it over the fire again, put thereto a dram of long Pepper; Ginger and Nutmeg, of each half an Ounce, being all bruised together into some Rose-water, and brew them all together. 95. To make Syrup of Hysop. Take of Hysop 1 handful, of Figs, Raisins, Dates, of each an Ounce, boyl these in 3 pints of water to a quart, then strain and clarifie it with the whites of a Eggs and 2 pound of Sugar, and so boyl them to a Sy∣ and being boyled enough keep them all the year.
96. To make Rosa-Solis. Take Liquorish 8 Ounces, Anniseeds and Carraway of each an Ounce; Raisins ston'd and Dates of each 3 Ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, Mace, of each half an Ounce, Galingal a quarter of an Ounce, Cubebs 1 dram, Figs 2 Ounces, Sugar 4 Ounces; bruise these and dis∣till them with a Gallon of Aquavitae as the rest, when it is distilled, you must colour it with the Herb Rosa∣solis or Alkanet Root. 97. To make Museadine Comfits. Take half a pound of Musk, Sugar beaten and sear∣ced, then take Gumdragant steeped in Rose-water and 2 grains of Musk, and so beat them in an Alabaster Morter till it come to a perfect Paste, then roul it very thin and cut it in small diamond pieces, and then bake them, and so keep them all the year. 98. To make Conserve of Burrage flowers. Let your flowers be well coloured, and pick the blacks from them, then vveigh them, and to every Ounce of flovvers you must take 3 Ounces of Sugar, and beat them together in a stone Morter vvith a vvooden Pestle till they be very fine, then take them off, and put the Conserve into a Pipkin, and heat it thorovv Hot, put them up, and keep them a year. 99. To Candy Ginger. Take fair large Ginger and pare it, and lay it in vva∣ter a day and a night; then take double and refined Sugar, and boyl it to the height of Sugar again, and vvhen your sugar begins to be cold, take your Ginger and stir it vvell about vvhile your sugar is hard to the Pan; then take it out piece by peace and lay it by the Fire 4 hours, then take a pot and warm it, and put the Ginger in it, tye it up close, and every other Morning stir it about throughly and it will be Rock-Candyed in a little time. 100. To make Manus Christi. Take half a pound of refined Sugar, and some Rose∣water, boyl them together till it come to Sugar, then stir it about till it be some
Gold and mingle with it, then cast it into round Gob∣bets, and so keep them. 101. To make Conserve of Pruants. Take the best Pruants, put them into scalding Wa∣ter, let them stand a while, then boyl them over the Fire till they break, then strain out the water through a Cullender, and let them stand therein to cool, then strain the Pruans through the Cullender, taking away the stones and skins, then set the pulp over the fire a∣gain, and put thereto a good quantity of red Wine, and boyl them to a thickness, still stirring them up and down, when they are almost enough, put in a sufficient quantity of Sugar, stir all well together, and then put it up in your Gally-pots. 102. To make Chrystial Jelly. Take a Knuckle of Veal, and 4 Calves-feet, put them on the fire with a gallon of fair Water, and when the stesh is boyled tender take them out, then let the liquor alone till it be cold, then take away the top and bot∣tom of the Liquor, and put the rest into a clean Pipkin, and put it into one pound of refined Sugar, with 4 or 5 drops of Oyl of Cinamon and Nutmegs, and a grain of Musk, and so let it boyl a quarter of an hour Lea∣surely on the fire, then let it run thro' a Jelly bag into a Bason, with the whites of 2 Egs beaten, when it is cold cut it into lumps with a spoon, and so serve 3 or 4 lumps upon a Plate. 103, To make Jelly of Strawberries, Mulberries, &c. Take your Berries and grind them in a stone Morter with 4 Ounces of Sugar, and a quarter of a pint of fair Water, and as much Rose-water, boyl it in a Skillet with a little Ising-glass, and so let it run through a fine cloth into your Boxes. 104. To Candy Rosemary-flowers. Pick your flowers very clean, and put to every Ounce of Flowers 2 Ounces of hard Sugar, and one Ounce of Sugar-candy, and dissolve them in Rosemary flower water, and boyl them till they come to a sugar again, when your sugar is almost cold, put in your Rosmary
flowers, and stir them together till they be enough, then take them out, and put them in your Boxes, and keep them in a stove for use. 105. To Candy Burrage-Flowers. Pick the flowers clean and weigh them, and do in every respect as you did your Rosemary-flowers, only when they be Candyed, you must set them in a Still, and so keep them in a sheet of white Paper, putting every day a Chafing-dish of Coals into your Still, and it will be excellently Candyed, in a small time. 106. To make Bisket Cakes. Take a peck of Flower, 4 Ounces of Corianderseed, 1 Ounce of Anniseed; then take 3 Eggs, 3 Spoonfuls of Ale Yeast, and as much warm Water, as will make it as thick as paste for Maunchets, make it into a long Roul, and bake it in an Oven an hour, and when it is a day old, pare it and slice it, sugar it with searced Sugar, and put it again into the Oven, and when it is dry take it out, and new sugar it again, and so box it and keep it. 107. To make Paste-Royal. Take a pound of refined Sugar, beaten and searced, and put into a stone Morter, with an Ounce of Gum∣dragant steeped in Rose-water, and if you see your paste be too Weak, put in more Sugar, if too Dry, more Gum, with a drop or two of Oyl of Cinamon, beat it into a perfect Paste, and then you must Print it in your Moulds, and when it is Dry, Gild it, and so keep them. 108. To make Apricock Cakes. Procure the fairest Apricocks you can get, and let them be Parboyl'd very Tender, take of the same quantity of sugar, whereof the pulp is, and boyl them together very well, always keeping them stirring for fear of burning to; when the bottom of the Skillet is Dry, they are enough, then put them into ittle Cards sowed round about, and Dust them with fine Sugar, and when they are cold, stone them and n them up with some more of the same stuff, but let them
stand 3 or 4 days before you remove them from the first place; when you begin to find them Candy, take out the Cards and dust them with Sugar. 109 To make Conserves for Tarts all the year. Take Damsons or ripe Plums, and peel of their skins, and so put them in a Pot, to Pippins Pared, and cut in pieces, and so bake them, then strain them through a piece of Canvas, and season them with Cinamon, Sugar, Ginger, and a little Rose-water: Boyl it upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, till it be as thick as a Conserve, and then put it into your Gally-pots, and it will keeps all the Year. 110. To dry Pippins. Take the fairest yellow Pippins, pare them, make a hole through every one, then barboyl them a little in fair water, then take them up, and put them into as much clarified Sugar as will cover them, let them boyl gently a little while in that Syrup, then take them out and put them into an Earthen Platter, and cast fine sugar upon them, and set them into the Oven half an hour, then take them out, and cast some more sugar on them, (being turned) and so three times, and they will be well dryed. 111. To make Paste of Genua. Take 2 pounds of the Pulp of Quinces, and as much of Peaches, strain it, and dry it in a dish upon a chaf∣ing-dish of Coals, then weigh it, and boyl it to the heighth of Manus Christi, and then put them together and so fashion it upon a Pye-plate, and dry it in an Oven with a Chafing-dish of Coals till it be thorow dry, and you may spot them with Gold. 112. To make Leach. Make your Jelly for your Leach with Calves-feet as you do your ordinary Jelly, but a little stiffer; and when it is cold take off the top, and the bottom, and set it over the Fire with some Cinamon and Sugar, then take your Turnsole being well steept in Sack, and crush it, and strain it in your Leach, boyl it so thick as you may slice it.
113. To dry any kind of Fruits, after Preserv'd. Take Pippins, Pears or Plums, after they are preserv∣ed, out of the Syrup, and wash them in warm Water, and then strew them over with sugar, finely Searced, as you do flower upon Fish, to fry, and set them into a broad earthen Pan, and lay them one by another; then set them into a Warm Oven, until they be dry, and turn them every day, until they be quite dry; and you may if you please, Candy them therewithal, cast Sugar 3 or 4 times as you dry them. 114. To make Quiddany of Quinces. Take the Kernels out of 7 or 8 great Quinces, and boyl them in a quart of Spring-water, till it come to a pint, then put into it a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, one pound of fine Sugar, and let it boyl till it come to be of a deep Colour, then take a drop, and drop it into the bottom of a Saucer, and if it stand, take it off, then let it run through a Jelly-bag, into a Bason, then set it over a chafing-dish of Coals, to keep it Warm, then take a Spoon, and fill your Boxes as full as you please; when they be cold, cover them, and if you please to print it in Moulds wet your Moldswith Rose∣water, and let it run in, and when it is cold, turn it into Boxes. 115. To make sweet Cakes without Spico or Sugar. Take Parsnips, and scrape them clean, slice them Thin, and dry them well, beat them to Pouder, mix∣ing one third part thereof, with two thirds of fine Wheat-flower, make up your Paste into Cakes, and you will find them very sweet and Delicate. 116. To make Worm wood Wine. Take small Rochel or Camahe-wine, put a few drops of the extracted Oyl of Wormwood therein, brew it together, out of one pot into another, and you shall have a more wholesome wine for your Body than that which is Sold for right Wormwood-wine. 117. To make Sweet-bags to lye among Linnen. Fill your bags only with Lignum and Rhodum finely beaten, and it will give an excellent Seent.
118. To make Spirit of Honey. Put one part of Honey to five parts of Water, when the Water boyleth, Dissolve your Honey therein, Scum it, and having boyled an Hour or two, put it into a Wooden Vessel, and when it is blood-warm, set it on the fire with Yeast, after the usual manner of Beer and Ale, tun it; and when it hath lain some time, it will yield a Spirit by Distillation, as Wine and Ale. 119. To preserve Artichoaks. Cut off the stalks of your A'rtichoaks within two Inches of the Choak, and make a strong Decoction of the rest of the stalks, slicing them into Thin small pieces, and let the Artichoaks lye in this Decoction, and when you use them, you must put them first in Warm-water, and then in Cold, and so take away the bitterness of them. 120. To make Syrup for a Cough of the Lungs. Take a Pottle of fair running Water in a new Pip∣kin, and put into it half an Ounce of Sydrack, half an Ounce of Maden-hair, and a good handful of Elecam∣pane Roots sliced, boyl all together, until half be boyl∣ed away, even to Syrup, then put into it the whites of Eggs, and let it boyl two or three Walms, and give the Patient a spoonful Morning and Evening. 121. To make Baubury Cakes. Take 4 pound of Currants, wash and pick them very Clean, dry them in a Cloth, then take three Eggs, and put away one Yolk, and beat them, and strain them with Yeast, putting there to Cloves, Mace, Cinamon, and Nutmegs, then take a pint of Cream; and as much Mor∣nings Miilk, and let it Warm, then take Flower, and put it in good store of cold Butter and Sugar, then put in your Eggs, Yeast, and Meal, and work them altogether an hour or more, then save a piece of the Paste, and break the rest in pieces, and work in your Currants, then make your Cake what quantity you please, and cover it very Thin with the Paste wherein were no Currants, and so bake it according to the big∣ness.
122. To make Ginger-bread. Take a quart of Honey, and set it on the Coals and Refine it, then take Ginger, Pepper, and Licorise, of each a Penny-worth, a quarter of a pound of Anni∣seeds, and a penny-worth Saunders; beat these and Searce them, and put them into the Honey, add a quarter of a pint of Claret, or old Ale, then take three penny Manchets finely Grated, and strew it amongst the rest, and stir it till it come to a stiff Paste, make them into Cakes, and dry them gently. 123. To make Wormwood-Water. Take two Gallons of good Ale, a pound of Anni∣seeds, half a pound of Liquorise, and beat them very fine, then take 2 handfuls of the crops of Wormwood, put them into Ale, and let them stand all Night, and let them stand in a Limbeck with a moderate Fire. 124. To make Paste of Quinces. First boyl your Quinces whole, and when they are soft, pare them, and cut the Quince from the Core, then take the finest Sugar you can get, finely beaten or searced, and put it in a little Rose-water, and boyl it together till it be stiff enough to Mould, and when it is cold, roul and print it. A pound of Quinces will require a pound of Sugar, or thereabouts. 125. To make thin Quince-Cakes. Take your Quince when boyled soft, and dry it upon a Pewter-plate, with a soft Heat, and stir it with a slice till it be hard, then take searced sugar to the same weight, and strow it upon the Quinces as you beat it in a Wooden or stone Morter, and so roul them thin and print them. 126. To make fine Cakes. Take a Pottle of ine Flower, and a pound of Sugar, a little Meal, and good store of Water, to mingle the Flower into a stiff Paste, with a little Salt, and so Knead it, and roul out the Cakes thin, and bake them on Paper. 127. To make Suckers. Take Curds, and the paring of Lemons, Oranges, or
Pome-Citrons, or any half ripe green Fruit, boyl them till they be tender in sweet Wort, then take 3 pound of Sugar, the whites of 4 Eggs, and a Gallon of water, beat the water and Eggs together, and then put in your Sugar, and set it on a gentle Fire, and let it boyl 6 or 7 walms, then strain it through a Cloth, and set it on again, till it fall from the Spoon, and then put it into the Rinds or Fruits. 128. To make Leach Lombard. Take half a pound of blanched Almonds, 2 ounces of Cinamon beaten, and Searced, half a pound of Su∣gar, beat your Almonds, and strow on your Cinamon and Sugar, till it come to a Paste, then roul it, and print it as aforesaid. 129. To make rare Damask-water. Take a quart of Malmsey-Leaves, or Malmsey 1 handful of Marjoram, as much Basil, 4 handfuls of Lavender, 1 handful of Bay-leaves, 4 handfuls of Da∣mask-Rose-Leaves, as many red Roses, the Peels of 6 Oyanges, or else one handful of the tender Leaves of Walnut-trees, half an Ounce of Benjamin, Calamus Aromaticus as much, Camphire 4 drams, Cloves an ounce, Bildanum half an Ounce, then take a pottle of running Water, and put in all these Spices bruised, into your water and Malmsey together, in a Pot close stopped, with a good handful of Rosemary, and let them stand for the space of 6 Days, then Distill it with a soft Fire, and set it in the Sun 16 Days, with 4 Grains of Musk bruised, this Quantity will make 3 quarts of Water. 130. To make Wash-halls. Take Storax of both kinds, Benjamin, Calamus, Aroma∣ticus, Lapdanum, of each alike, bray them to pouder, with Cloves and Orris, beat them all with a sufficient quantity of Soap, till it be stiff, then work them like Paste, and make round balls thereof. 131. To make a Musk Ball. Take Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Saffron, and Cinamon, of each the weight of Two-pence, and beat it to fine Pouder, add as much Mastick, of Storax the weight of
Six-pence, of Lapdanum the weight of Ten-pence, of Ambergreese the weight of Six-pence, and of Musk 4 Grains, dissolve and work all these in hard sweet Soap, till it come to a stiff Paste, and then make balls thereof 132. To make Imperial Water. Take a Gallon of Gascoign Wine, Ginger, Galingal, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, Caraway-seeds, of each one Dram; Sge, Mint, red-Roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Thyme, Camomile, and Lavender, of each a handful, then beat the Spices small, and the Herbs also, and put altoge∣ther in the Wine, and let it stand so 12 Hours, stirring it divers times, then Distill it with a Limbeck, and save the first Water, for it is best: Of a Gallon of Wine, you must not take above a quart of Water. This water Comforteth the vital Spirits, and Heleth the Inward Diseases, that come of Cold, as the Palsie, and Contraction of Sinews, it also Killeth Worms, and Comforts the Stomach, it Cureth the Cold Dropsie, helpeth the Stone, and stinking Breath, and maketh one seem Young. 133. To make Verjuice. Gather your Crabs, as soon as the Kernels turn Black, and lay them a while in a Heap, to Sweat, then Pick them from the Stalks, Blacks and Rotteness, then Crush and beat them all to pieces in a Tub, then make a Bag of Course Hair-cloth, as big as your Press, and Press it as long as any Moisture will drop out, having a clean Vessel underneath, to receive the Liquor, then Tun it up in sweet Hogs-heads, and to every Hogs-head, put 6 Handfuls of Damask Rose-leaves, then bring it up, and spend it as you have occasion. 134. To make dry Sugar Leach. Blanch your Almonds, and beat them with a little Rose-water, and the white of an Egg, and then beat it with a good quantity of Sugar, and work it as you would work a piece of Paste, then Roul it, and Print it▪ only be fare to strew Sugar in the Print, for ferr of Cleaving to.
135. To make fine Jumbals. Beat a pound of Sugar fine, then take the same quantity of fine wheat Flower, and Mix them together, then take 2 Whites, and 1 Yolk of an Egg, half a quarter of a pound of Blanched Almonds, then beat them very fine all together, with half a pound of sweet Butter, and a spoonful of Rose-water, and so work it with a little Cream, till it come to a stiff Paste, then oul them forth as you please; you may add a few fine dryed Anniseeds finely Rub'd, and strewed into the Paste, with Coriander-seeds. 136. To make Spirit of Roses. Bruise the Rose in his own Juice, adding thereto, being Temperately Warm, a Convenient Proportion either of Yeast, or Ferment, leave them a few days to Ferment, till they get a strong and Heady smell, near like to Vinegar, then distill them, and draw so long as you can find any scent of the Rose to come, then distill it again, so often till you have purchased a perfect Spirit of the Rose. You may also Ferment the Juice of Roses only, and after Distill it. 137. To make Syrup of Elder. Take Elder Berries when they are Red, bruise them in a stone Morter, strain the Juice, and boyl it away to almost half, Scum it very Clean, take it off the Fire, whilst it is Hot, put in Sugar to the Thickness of a Syrup, put it no more on the Fire, when it is Cold, put it into Glasses, not filling them to the Top, for it will work like Beer. 138. To make Oranges of Water, Take 2 quarts of the best Malaga-Sack, and put in as many of the Peels of Oranges as will go in, Cut the White clean off, sleep them 24 Hours, then still them in a Glass-still, and let the water run into the Receiver, up on fine sugar Candy. You may still it in an ordinary Still. 139. To make a Cordial of great virtue. Take a pint and a half of the strongest Ale, as may be gotten, 20 Jordan Almonds clean Wiped, but nei∣ther
Wash'd nor Blaunch'd, with 2 Dates Minced very small, and Stamped; then take the Pith of Young Beef, the length of 12 Inches, lay it in Water, till the Blood be out of it, then strip the Skin off it, and stamp it with the Almonds, and Dates, then strain them altoge∣ther into the Ale, boyl it till it be little Thick, give the party in the Morning 6 Spoonfuls, and as much when he goeth to Bed. 140. An excellent Surfeit-Water. Take Cellandine, Rosemary, Rue, Pellitory of Spain, Scabious, Angelica, Pimpernel, Worm-wood, Mug∣wort, Bettony, Agrimony, Balm, Dragon, and Tor∣mentile, of each half a pound, shred them somewhat small, and put them into a narrow Mouthed Pot, and put to them five quarts of White-Wine, stop it close, and let it stand 3 Days and Nights, stirring it Mor∣ning and Evening, then take the Herbs from the Wine, and distil them in an ordinary Still, and when you have distilled the Herbs, distill the Wine also, wherein is vertue for a weak Stomach. Take three or four spoonfuls at any time. 142. To make Syrup of Sugar-Candyed. Take Sugar-Candied, and put it into a clear Blad∣der and tie it, but so that it may have some Vent, then put it into a bason of Water, so that the Water come not over the top of the Bladder, and cover it with a Pewter Dish, and let it stand all Night, and in the Morning take of it with a Licorse-stick. 143. To make an Excellent Syru against the Scurvey. Take of the Juice of Garden Scurvey-grass, Brook∣lime, and Water-cresses, of each 6 Ounces, and after it hath stood till it is clear, take 16 Ounces of the clearest and put to it 4 Ounces of the Juice of Oranges and Lemons, make it a clear Syrup, with so much fine Sugar, as will serve the turn. 144. To make Syrup of Roses. When your Liquor is ready to boyl, put as many Roses as will be well steept into it, cover it close, and when the Roses are throughly White, then strain it,
and set it on the Fire again, and so use it 13 times, and to every pint of your water or Liquor, you must put a pound of Sugar, and let it stand together steep∣ing for the space of one Night, then Scum it clean and seethe it over a quick Fire, a quarter of an Hour, then take some whites of Eggs, and beat them well together, take off your Pot, and put in the Whites, and then set it on the Fore again; and let it boyl a good while, then let it run through a Jelly-bag, till it will stand still upon your Nail. 145. To make a comfortable Syrup. Take a handful of Agrimony, and boyl it in a pint of Water till half be Consumed, then take out the A∣grimony, and put in a good handful of Currans, and boyl them till they are ready to break, then strain them, and make a Syrup of them, then set it on a Chafing-dish of Coals, and add thereto a little white Saunders, and Drink it hot or cold, 146. To make Almond Caudel. Take 3 pints of Ale, boyl it with Cloves and Mace, and slice Bread in it, then have ready beaten a pound of Almonds blanched and strain them out with a pint of White-wine, and Thick the Ale with it; sweeten it if you please, but besure scum the Ale when it Boyls. 147. To Caudy Cherries. Take your Cherries before they be full Ripe, take out the Stones, put Clarified Sugar boyled to a height and then pour it on them. 148. To make Rose-water, Take a pint of Endive-water, 2 Ounces of Saffron finely beaten, then sleep it therein all Night, the next day boyl it and strain out the Safron, then with Sugar boyl it up to a Syrup. 149. To make Syrup of Saffron. Stamp the Leaves, and first distill the Juice, being squeezed out, and after distil the Leaves, and so you may dispatch more with one Still, than others will do with 3 or 4, and this Water is every way as Medici∣nable
as the other, serving very well in Decoctions and Syrups, &c: Though it be not altogether so plea∣sing to the smell. 150. To make Suckets of Green-Walnuts, Take Walnuts when they are no bigger than the largest Hasel-Nut, pare away the uppermost Green, but not too deep, then boyl them in a pottle of Water, till the Water be boyled away, then take so much more fresh Water, and when it is boyled to the half, put thereto a quart of Vinegar, and a pottle of Clari∣fied Honey. 151. To make white Leach of Cream. Take a pint of sweet Cream, and 6 spoonfuls of Rose-water, 2 grains of Musk, 2 drops of Oyl of Mace, and so let it boyl with 4 Ounces of Ising-Glass, then let it run through a Jelly-bag, when it is Cold, slice it like Brawn, and so serve it out. This is the best way to make Leach. 152. To preserve Pome-citrons. You must take a pound and a half of Pome-Citrons, and cut them in Halves and Quarters, take the Meat out of them, and boyl them tender in fair Water, then take 2 pound of sugar Clarified, and make Syrup for them, and let them boyl therein a quarter of an Hour, very Gently, then take them up, and let your Syrup boyl till it be Thick, then put in your Pome-Citrons, and you may keeep them all the Year. 153. To pickle Clove Gilly Flowers for Sallats. Take the fairest Clove Gilly-Flowers, clip of the Whites from them, put them into a Wide-mouthed Glass, and strew a good deal of Sugar finely beaten among them, then put as much Wine Vinegar to them as will throughly Wet them, tye them up close and set them in the Sun, and in a little while they will be fit for use. 154. To make Leach of Almonds. Take half a pound of sweet Almonds, and beat them in a Morter, then strain them with a pint of sweet Milk from the Cow, then put to it one grain of Musk,
two spoonfuls of Rose-water, 2 ounces of fine Sugar, the weight of 3 Shillings in Isinglass that is very white, boyl them together, and let it all run through a Strai∣ner, then still it out and serve it. 155. To Candy Marigolds in Wedges, the Spanish Fashion. Take of the fairest Marigold Flowers, 2 ounces, and shred them small, and dry them before the Fire, then take 4 ounces of Sugar, and boyl it to a Height, then pour it upon a Wet Pye-plate; and between hot and cold cut it into Wedges, and lay them in a sheet of White-paper, and put them in a Stove. 156. To Candy Eringo Roots. Take your Eringo's ready to be Preserved; and weigh them, and to every pound of your Roots take of the purest Sugar you can get, 2 Pound, and Clarifie it with the whites of Eggs, exceeding well, that it may be as clear as Christal, for that will be best; it being Clarified, boyl it to the height of Mauus Christi, then dip in your Roots 2 or 3 at once, till all be Can∣dyed, and put them in a Stove, and so keep them all the Year. 157, To Candy Elecampane-Roots, Take of your Fairest Elecampane Roots, and take them clean from the Syrup, and wash the sugar off them, and dry them again with a linnen Cloth; then weigh them, and to every pound of Roots take a pound and 3 quarters of sugar. Clarifie it well, and boyl it to a height; and when it is boyled, dip in your Roots, 3 or 4 at once, and they will Candy very well, and so stove them, and keep them all the Year. 158, To make Cinamon Sugar: Lay pieces of sugar in close Boxes, amongst sticks of Cinamon, or Cloves, and in a short time it will have the taste and scent of the spice. 159. To make a Trifle. Take Cream and boyl it with a cut Nutmeg, add Lemon-peel a little, then take it off; Cool it a little, and season it with Rose-water and Sugar, to your
Taste, put this in the thing you serve it in, then put in a little Runnet to make it come, and serve it up. 160. To Candy Barberies. First preserve them, then dip them quickly into warm Water, to wash off the ropy Syrup, then strew them over with searced Sugar, and set them into an Oven or Stove 3 or 4 Hours, always turning them, and casting more fine sugar upon them, and never suffer them to be cold, till they be dryed, and begin to look like Diamonds. 161. To make Cream Apricoks, First boyl your Apricocks with Water and Sugar, till they are Tender, and afterwards boyl them in Cream, then strain them and season it with Sugar. 162. To make Quince Cream. Take a roasted Quince, pare it and cut it into Thin slices to the Core, boyl it in a pint of Cream, with a little whole Ginger, till it taste of the Quince to your liking, then put in a little sugar and strain it, and al∣ways serve it cold to the Table. 163. To Preserve Barberries, Take one pound of Barberries pickt from the stalks, put them in a pottle Pot, and set it in a brass pot full of hot Water, and when they be Stewed, strain them, and put to them a pound and a half of Sugar, and put to them a pint of Red Rose-water, and boyl them a little, then take half a pound of the fairest: Clusters of Barberries you can get, and dip them in the syrup while it boyleth; then take the Barberries out, boyl the syrup while it is Thick, and when cold, put them in the glases with the Syrup. 164. To make Cullice. Take a Cock and dress him, and boyl him in White∣wine, Scum it clean, and clarifie the Broth (being first strained) then take a pint of sweet Cream, and strain it, and so mix them together; then take beaten Ginger, fine Sugar, and Rose-water, and put them altogether, and boyl it a little more.
165. To make a Cordial strengthning Broth. Take a Red-Cock, strip off the Feathers from the Skin, then break his Bones to shivers with a Rolling pin; set it over the Fire, and just cover it with Water, put in some Salt, watch the scuming and boy∣ling of it, put in a handful of Harts-horn, a quarter of a pound of blue▪ Currans, and as many Raisins of the Sun stoned, and as many Pruans. 4 Blades of large Mace, a bottom Crust of a white Loaf, half an ounce of China-Root sliced, being steeped three Hours be∣fore in Warm-water, boyl 3 or 4 pieces of Gold, strain it; and put in a little fine Sugar, and Juice of Orange, and so use it, 166. To make Sugar-Cakes Take one pound of fine Flower, one pound of Su∣gar finely beaten, and mingle them well together, then take 7 or 8 Yolks of Eggs, then take 2 Cloves, and a pretty piece of Cinamon and lay it in a spoonful of Rose-water all Night, and heat it almost Blood-warm, Temperate it with the rest of the stuff, when the Paste is made, make it up as fast as you can, and bake them up in a soft Oven. 167. To take spots and stains out of Cloths. Take 4 ounces of white hard Soap, beat it in a Morter with a Lymon sliced, and as much Roch-Allom as an Hasel-Nut, Roul it up in a Ball, Rub the stain therewith, and after fetch it out with Warm-water, if need be. 168. To make Cucumbers Green. You must take 2 quarts of Verjuyce or Vinegar, and a Gallon of sair Water, a pint of Bay-salt, and a handful of Geeen Fennel or Dill, boyl it a little, and when it is cold put it into a Barrel, then put in your Cucumbers to that Pickle, and you may keep them all the Year. 169. To make Cakes of Lemons. Take of the finest double refined Sugar, beaten very fine, and searced through fine Taffany▪ and to half a porringer of Sugar put two spoonfuls of Water and
boyl it till it be almost sugar again, then grate of the hardest Rinded Lemon, and stir it into your sugar put it into your Coffins, and a Paper, and when they be Cold, take them off. 170. To make Black Cherry Wine. Take a Gallon of the Juice of Black-Cherries, keep it in a Vessel close stopped, till it begin to work, then filter it, and an ounce of Sugar being added to every pint and a Gallon of White-wine, and keep it stop∣ped for use. 171. To make Rose Vinegar. Take of Red-Rosebuds (gathered in a dry time, the whites cut off, then dry them in the shade 3 or 4 Days) one pound, of Vinegar 8 Sextaries, set them in the Sun 40 days, then strain out the Roses, and put in Fresh, and so repeat it 3 or 4 times. 172. To make Syrup of Vinegar. Take of the Roots of Smalledg, Fennel, Endive, of each 3 ounces, Anniseeds, Smalledg, Fennel, of each one ounce, Endive half an ounce, clear Water three Quarts, boyl it gently in an Earthen Vessel, till half the Water be Consumed, then strain and Clarifie it, and with 3 pound of sugar, a pint and a half of White∣wine-Vinegar, boyl it into a syrup. This is a gal∣lant syrup for such whose Bodies are stuffed either with Phlegm, or tough Humours, for it opens Obstructions or stopping, both of the stomach, Liver, spleen, and Reins, it cuts and brings away tough Flegm and Choler. 173. To make Syrup of Apples. Take 2 quarts of the juice of sweet-scented Apples and the juice of Bugloss, Garden and Wild, of Violet leaves, and Rose-water, of each a pound, boyl them together, Clarifie them, and with 6 pound of very fine sugar boyl them into a syrup. 174. To make the Capon-water against a Consumption. Take a Capon, the Guts being pull'd out, cut it in pieces, and take away the Fat, boyl it in a close vessel in a sufficient quantity of spring-Water. Take of this
Broth 3 pints, of Burrage and Violet-water, a pint and half, White-wine one Pint, red Rose-leaves two drams and a half, Burrage-flowers, Violets, and Bugloss, of each one dram, pieces of bread out of the Oven, half a pound, Cinamon bruised half an ounce. Still it in a glass Still according to Art. This is a Sovereign Re∣medy against Hectick Fevers and Consumption: Let such as are subject to those Diseases, hold it as a Jewel. 175: To make Elder Vinegar. Gather the flowers of Elder, pick them very clean, dry them in the sun, on a gentle heat, and to every, quart of Vinegar, take a good handful of Flowers, and let it stand in the sun a Fortnight, then strain the Vi∣negar from the Flowers, and put it into the Barrel a∣gain, and when you draw a quart of Vinegar, draw a quart of Water, and put it into the barrel Luke-warm 176. To maka China Broth. Take an ounce of China-root clipp'd Thin, and steep it in 3 pints of Water all Night, on Embers Co∣vered, the next day take a Cock-chicken clean Pickt and the Guts taken out, put in it's belly Agrimony and Maiden-hair, of each half a handful, Raisins of the sun stoned, one good handful, and as much French Barley, boyl all these in a Pipkin, close covered on a gentle Fire, for 6 or 7 Hours, let it stand till it be cold, strain it, and keep it for your Use: Take a good Draught in the Morning, and at 4 in the Afternoon. 177. To make paste of tender Plumbs. Put your Plumbs into an Earthen pot, and set it into a pot of boyling Water, and when the Plumbs are dissolved, then strain the thin Liquor from them, through a Cloth, and reserve that Liquor to make Quiddany, then strain the pulp through a piece of Canvas, and take as much sugar as the pulp in weight, and as much water as will Wet the same, and so boyl it to a Candy-heighth, then dry the pulp upon a Cha∣sing-dish of Coals, then put your syrup and the pulp so hot together, and boyl it, always stirring it till it
will lye upon a Pye-plate, as you lay it, and that it run not abroad, and when it is somewhat dry, then use it, but put to it the pulp of Apples. 178. To make Cream of Coddlings. First scald your Codlings, and so peel off the Skin, then scrape the pulp from the Core, and strain them with a little Sugar and Rose-water, then lay your pulp of Codlings in the middle of the Dish, and so much raw Cream, round it as you please, and so serve it: 179. To make Sugar of Roses. Take of Red-rose-leaves, the whites being cut off an Ounce, dry them in the Sun speedily, put to it a pound of white Sugar, melt the Sugar in Rose-water, and Juice of Roses, of each two Ounces, which being consumed by degrees, put in the Rose-leaves in pou∣der, mix them, put it upon a Marble, and make it into Lozenges according to Art. 180. To make a Cream Tart. Cut the Crust of a Manchet, and grate it small, and mix it with thick Cream, and some sweet Butter, then take 24 Yolks of Eggs, and strain them with a little Cream, putting thereto a good quantity of Sugar, mix these very well, and set it upon a small fire, and so let it boyl till it be thick, then make 2 sheets of Paste as thin as you can, and raife the sides of one of them the heighth of one of your fingers in Breadth, and then fill it, and cover it with the other sheet, then bake it half a quarter of an hour, then put Sugar on it, and so serve it. 181. To make Poppy-water. Take of red Poppies 4 Pound, put to them a quart of White-wine, then distil them in a common Still, then let the distil'd water be poured upon fresh Flow∣ers, and repeated 3 times, to which add 9. Nutmegs sliced, Red Poppy-flowers a Pugil, white Sugar two ounces, set it to the Fire, to give it a pleasing Sharp∣ness, and Order it according to your Taste. 182. To make Mathiolus Bezoar's Water. Take of Syrup of Citron-peels a quart, and as much
of Dr. Mathiolus great Antidote, with 5 pints of the Spirit of Wine five times distill'd over, put all these in a Glass, that is much too big to hold them, stop it close, that the Spirit fly not out, then shake it toge∣ther, that the Electuary may be well mingled with the Spirit, so let it stand a Month, shaking it together twice a Week (for the Electuary will settle at the bottom) after a Month pour off the clear Water into another Glass, to be kept for your use, stopping it very close with Wax and Parchment, else the Strength will easily fly away in Vapours. 183. To make Marmalade of red Currans. Take the juice of red Currans, and put it into a pretty quantity of white Currans, clean pickt from the stalks, and Buttons at the other end; let these boyl a little together, have also ready some fine Sugar boyl'd to a Candy-height, put of this to the Currans, according to your Discretion, and boyl them together till they be enough, and bruise them with the back of your spoon, that they may be as thick as Marmala∣de, and when it is Cool put it into Pots: You need not stone the whole Currans, unless you please. 184. To make a Syllabub. Take a pint of Verjuice in a Bowl, milk the Cow to it, then take off the Curd, and take sweet Cream and beat them together with a little Sack and Sugar, put it into your Syllabub-pot, strew Sugar on it, and serve it. 185. To make pleasant Mead. Put a quart of Honey to a Gallon of Water, with about 10 sprigs of sweet Marjeram, and half so many tops of Bays, boyl all these well together, and when it is Cold, Bottle it up, and in 10 days it will be ready to Drink. 186. To make Steppony. Take a Gallon of Conduit-water, a pound of blew Raifins of the Sun stoned, and half a pound of Sugar, Squeese the juice of 2 Lemons upon the Raisins, and Sugar, and slice the Rhinds upon them, boyl the
Water, and pour it boyling hot upon the Ingredients of an earthen Pot, and stir them well together, so let it stand 24 Hours, then put it into Bottles, having first let it run through a strainer, and set them in a Cellar, or other Cool place. 187. To make Syder, Take a peck of Apples and slice them, and boyl them in a Barrel of Water, till the third part be Wasted; then Cool your Water, as you do Wort, and when it is Cold, you must pour the Water upon 3 Measures of grown Apples. Then draw forth the Water at a Tap, 3 or 4 times a Day, for 3 Days toge∣ther, then press out the Liquor, and Tun it up, when it hath done working stop it up close. 188. To make Cock-Ale. Take 8 Gallons of Ale, then take a Cock and boyl him well, with 4 pound of Raisins of the Sun, well stoned, 2 or 3 Nutmegs, 3 or 4 Flakes of Mace, half a pound of Dates, beat all these in a Morter, and put to them 2 quarts of the best Sack, and when the Ale hath done Working, put these in, and stop it close 6 or 7 Days, and then Bottle it, and a Month after you may Drink it. 189. To make a Caraway-cake. Take 3 pound and a half of the finest Flower, and dry it in an Oven, one pound and a half of sweet Butter, and Mix it with the Flower very small, that none of it be seen, then take 3 quarters of a pint of new Ale-Yest, and half a pint of Sack, and half a pint of New-Milk, with 6 Spoonfuls of Rose water, and 4 Yolks, and 2 Whites of Eggs, then let it lye before the fire half an hour or more, and when you go to make it up, put in 3 quarts of Carawey-Comfits, and a pound and half of Biskets. Put it into the Oven, and let it stand an hour and half. 190. To make Strawberry-wine. Bruise the Strawberries, and put them into a Linnen∣bag, which hath been a little used, that so the Liquor may run through more easily, then hang in the Bag, at
the Bung, into the Vessel. Before you put in your Strawberries, put in what quantity of Fruit you think good, to make the Wine of a hgh Colour; during the Working, leave the Bung Open, and when it hath Worked enough, stop your Vessel. Cherry-wine is made after the same Fashion, but then you must break the Stones. 191. To make a Cordial Water of Clove-gilly-Flowers. Put Spirit of Wine or Sack, upon Clove-gilly-Flowers, Digest it 2 or 3 Days, put all in a Glass-body, laying other Clove-gilly-Flowers at the Mouth of it, upon a Cambrick or Boulter-cloth; that the Spirit rising, and passing through the Flowers, may Ting it self of a beautiful Colour) add a head with a Limbeck, and Re∣ceiver: Then Distil the Spirit as strong as you like it, which sweeten with Syrup of Gilly flowers, or fine Sugar. 192. To make an excellent Surfeit-water. Take Mint and Carduns 4 parts, Angelica one part, Wormwood 2 parts; Chop and Bruise them a little, put a sufficient quantity of them into an ordinary Still, and put upon them enough New Milk to soak them, but not to have the Milk swim much over them. Distil this as you do Rose-water, stirring it sometime with a Stick, to keep the Milk from growing to a Cake. 193. To make Mint-water. Take 2 parts of Mint, and one part of Wormood, and 2 parts of Carduus, ptt these into as much New Milk as will soak them: Let them Infuse 5 or 6 Hours, then Distil as you do Rose-water, but you must often take off the Head, and stir the Matter well with a Stick: Drink of this Water a Wine-Glass full at a time, sweet∣ned with fine Sugar to your Taste. 194. To Pickle Artichoaks. Take your A'rtichoaks before they are Overgrown, or too full of Strings, and when they are pared Round, that nothing is left but the bottom, Boyl them till they be indifferent Tender, but not full Boyled, take them up, and let them be Cold, then take good Stale-Beer
and White-wine, with a great quantity of whole Bepper, so put them up into a Barrel, with a small quantity of Salt; keep them close, and they will not be Sowre, it will serve for Baked and Boyl'd Meats, all the Winter. 195. To make Rasberrie-Cream. When you have boyled your Cream, take 2. Ladle∣fuls of it, being almost cold, bruise the Rasberries to∣gether, and season it with Sugar and Rose-water, and put it into your Cream, stirring it altogether, and so dish it up. 196. To make Snow Cream. Break the whites of 6 Eggs, put thereto a little Rose-water, beat them well together, with a Bunch of Feathers, till they come perfectly to resemble Snow, then lay on the said Snow in heaps, upon other Cream that is Cold, which is made fit for the Table: You may put under your Cream in the bottom of the Dish, part of a Penny-Loaf, and stick therein a branch of Rosemary, or Bays, and fill your Tree with the said Snow, to server it up. 197. To make Hodromel Take 18 quarts of Spring-water, and one quart of Hney; when the Water is Warm, put the Honey into it, when it boyls up, Scum it very well, even as long as any Scum will rise; then put in one Race of Ginger, Sliced in thin slices, 4 Cloves, and a little Sprig of Green Rosemary, boyl altogether an Hour, then set it to Cool, till it be Blood-warm, and then put to it a Spoonful of Ale-Yeast, when it is Work'd up, put it into a Vessel of a fit Size, and after 2 or 3 Days Bottle it up; you may Drink it in 6 Weeks, or 2 Months. 198. To make Whipt Syllabub Take the Whites of 2 Eggs, and a Pint of Cream, with 6 Spoonfuls of Sack, and as much Sugar as will sweeten it, then take a Birchen rod and Whip it, as it riseth in the Froth scum it, and put it into the Sylla∣bub Pot, so continue it with Whipping, and Scuming, till your Syllabub Pot be full.
199. To make Marmalade of Cherries. Take 4 pound of the best Kentish-Cherries, before they be stoned, to one pound of pure Loaf-Sugar, which beat into small ponder, stone the Cherries, and put them into a Preserving-pan, over a gentle Fire, that they may not boyl, but dissolve much into Li∣quor. Take away with the Spoon much of the Thin Liquor, leaving the Cherries moist enough, but not Swimming in clean Liquor; then put to them half your Sugar, and boyl it up very quick, and scum away the Froth that riseth, when it is well incor∣porated and clear, strew in a little more of the Sugar, and continue so by little and little, till you have put in all your Sugar, which will make the Colour the Fairer; when they are boyled enough take them off, and bruise them with the back of a Spoon, and when they are Cold, put them up in Dots. 200. To make a Flomery-Caudle. When Flomery is made, and cold, you may make a pleasant and wholsom Caudle of it, by taking some lumps and spoonfuls of it, and boil it with Ale and White-wine, then sweeten it to your Taste with Sugar. There will remain in the Caudle some lumps of the congealed Flomery, which are not ingrateful. 201. To Preserve Fruit all the Year. Put the Fruit into a fit Case of Tin, and soder it to∣gether, so that no Air can get in; then lay it at the bottom of a cold Well, or running Water. 202. To make a most Rich Cordial. Take Conserve of Red Roses, Conserve of Orange-Flowers, of each 1 Ounce; Confect. Hyacinthi, Bezoardick, Theriacal Powder, of each 2 Drams; Confection of Al∣kermes 1 dram; of Powder of Gold one scruple; mix all these well together in the form of an Opiate, and if the Composition be too dry, add to it some syrup of Red Currans, as much as is needful; take of this Com∣position every Morning the quantity of a Nut. 203. To make Red, Currans Cream. Bruise your Currans with some boiled Cream, then
strain them through your strainer for sieve and put the liquid substance thereof to the said Cream being almost cold, and it will be ready; so serve it up. 204. To Preserve Medlers. Take the weight of them in Sugar, adding to every Pound thereof a Pint and a half of fair Water, let them be scalded therein, till their skin will come off, then take them out of the Water, and stone them at the Head, then add your Sugar to the Water, and boil them together, then strain it, and put your Medlars there∣in, and let them boil apace till it be thick; take them from the Fire, and keep them for use. 205. To make White Mead. Take 6 Gallons of Water, and put in 6 Quarts of Ho∣ney, stirring it till the Honey be throughly melted, then set it over the Fire, and when it is ready to boil, scum it very clean, then put in a quarter of an ounce of Mace, and as much Ginger, half an ounce of Nutmegs, sweet Marjoram, broad Thyme, and sweet Briar, of all together a handful, and boil them therein, then set it by till it be throughly cold and then barrel it up, and keep it till it be Ripe. 206. To make Naples Bisket. Take of the same stuff the Makroons are made of, and put to it an Ounce of Pine-Apple seeds, in a quar∣ter of a pound of stuff; for that is all the difference between Mackroons and Naples Bisket. 207. To make Chips of Quinces. Scald them very well, and then slice them into a Dish, and pour a Candy syrup to them scalding hot; and let them stand all Night, then lay them on Plates and searce Sugar on them, and turn them every day, and scrape more Sugar on them till they be dry. I, you would have them look clear, heat them in Syrups but not to boil. 208. To make Lozenges of Roses. Boil Sugar to a hight, till it is Sugar again, then beat your Roses fine, and moisten them with the Juice of Le∣mons, and put them into it, let it not boyl, till your
Roses are in, but pour it into a Pye-plate, and cut it into what sorm you please. 209. To make Conserve of Bugloss-Flowers. Pick them as you do Burrage-Flowers, weigh them, and to every ounce, add 2 ounces of Loaf-Sugar, and 1 of Sugar-Candy, beat them together, till they become very fine, then set it on the Fire, to Dissolve the Sugar, and when it is so done, and the Conserve Hot, put it into your Glasses, or Gally-pots, for your Use. 210. To Pickle Lemon and Orange-peel. Boyl them with Vinegar and Sugar, and put them up into the same Pickle, you must observe to Cut th into small Thongs, the length of half your Lemon, be∣ing pared, it is a Handsome Winter Sallet; boyl them first in Water, before you boyl them in Sugar. 211. To make Goose-berry Paste. Take Goose-berries, and Cut them one by one, and Wring away the Juice, till you have got enough for your Turn, boyl your Juice alone, to make it some∣what Thicker, then take as much fine Sugar as your Juice will sharpen, dry it, and then beat it again, then take as much Gum-dragoon steeped in Rose-water, as will serve, then beat it into a Paste, in a Marble-Morter, then take it up, and Print it in your Moulds, and dry it in your Stove, when it is Dry, Box it up for your use, all the Year. 212. To wake Suckets of Letuce-stalks. Take Letuce-stalks, and Peel away the out-side, then Parboyl them in sair Water, and so Boyl it to a Syrup, and when your Syrup is almost cold put in your Roots, and let them stand all Night, to take Sugar, then boyl your Syrup again, because it will be Weak, and then take out your Roots. 213. To make Musk Sugar. Bruise 4 or 5 Grains of Musk, put it in a piece of Cambrick or Lawn, lay it at the bottom of a Gally-pot, and strew Sugar thereon, stop your pot close, and all your Sugar in a few days will both smell and Taste of Musk, and when you have spent the Sugar, lay more Sugar thereon, which will also have the same Scent.
214. Do Preserve Roses or Gilly-Flowers-whole. Dip a Rose that is neither in the Bud, nor Over∣blown, in a Syrup, consisting of Sugar double Refined, and Rose-water, boyled to its full Height, then open the Leaves, one by one, with a fine smooth Bodkin, either of Bone or Wood, then lay them on Papers, in the Heat, or else dry with a gentle Heat, in a close Room, Heating the Room before you set them in, or in an Oven, then put them up in Glasses, and keep them in dry Cup-boards, near the fire. 215. To make Syrup of Mint. Take the Juice of sweet Quinces, and between sweet and sour, the Juice of Pomegranates, sweet, and between sweet and sour, of each a pint and Half, dryed Mint half a pound, red Roses 2 ounces, let them lye in sleep one day, then boyl it half away, and with 4 pound of Sugar boyl it into Syrup, according to Art. 216. To make Honey of Mulberries. Take the Juice of Mulberries, and Black-berries, before they be Ripe, gathered before the Sun be up, of each a Pound and Half, Honey 2 Pound, boyl them to their due Thickness. 217. To make Syrup of Purslain. Take of the Seed of Purslain, Grosly Bruised, half a Pound, of the Juice of Endive Boyled and Clarified, 2 Pints, Sugar 2 Pound, Vinegar 9 Ounces, Infuse the Seeds in the Juice of Endive, 24 Hours, afterwards boyl it half away, with a gentle Fire, then strain it, boyl it with the Sugar, to the consistence of a Syrup, adding the Vinegar towards the latter end, of the De∣coction. 218. To make Honey of Raisins. Take of Raisins of the Sun cleansed from the stones, 2 Pound, steep them in 6 Pints of Warm Water, the next day boyl it half away, and Press it strongly then put 2 Pints of Honey, to the Liquor that is pressed out, and boyl it to a Thickness: It is good for a Consump∣tion, and to loosen the Body.
219. To make a Syrup of Comfry. Take the Roots and Tops of Comfrey, the greater and the less, of each 3 handfuls; red Roses, Bettony, Plantain, Burnet, Knot-grass, Scabious, Colts-feet, of each 2 handfuls; press the juice out of them, all being green and bruised, boyl it, scum it, and strain it, add to its weight of Su∣gar, and make it into a Syrup according to Art. 220. To Pickle Quinces. Boyl your Quinces in Water till they be soft, but not too violently, for fear of breaking them, when they are soft take them out, and boyl some Quinces pared, quar∣tered and cored, and the paring of the Quinces with them in the same Liquor, to make it strong; and when they are boyled, that the Liquor is of a sufficient Strength, take out the quartered Quinces and parings, and put the Liquor into a Pot big enough to receive all the Quinces, both whole and quartered, and put them into it when the Liquor is thorough cold, and keep them for use close covered. 221. To make Plague water. Take a pound of Rue, of Rosemary, Sage, Sorrel, Celan∣dine, Mugwort, of the Tops of red Brambles, Pimpernel, wild Dragon, Agrimony, Balm, Angelica, of each a pound; put these Compounds in a Pot, fill it with White-wine above the Herbs, so let it stand 4 Days; then distill it for your use in an Alimbeck. 222. To make clear Cakes of Quinces. Prepare your Quinces and Barberries as before, and then take the clearest Syrup, and let it stand on the Coals 2 or 3 Hours; then take the weight of it in Su∣gar, and put near half the Sugar to the juice, and so let them boyl a little on the Fire, and then Candy the rest of the Sugar very hard, and so put them together, stir∣ring it till it be almost cold, and so put it into Glasses. 223. To make all sorts of Comfits, and to cover Seeds, or Fruits, with Sugar. You must provide a Bason very deep, either of Brass or Tin, with 2 Ears of Iron, to hang, with a Rope, over an Earthen Pan with hot Coals, then provide a
broad Pan for Ashes, and put hot Coals upon them, and another clean Bason to melt your Sugar in, or a Skillet; as also a Ladle of Brass, to run the Sugar up∣on the Seeds, together with a slice of Brass, to scrape away the Sugar from the Bason that hangs, if there be occasion; then take some of the best and fairest Sugar you can get, and beat it into Pouder, cleanse your Seeds well, and dry them in the hanging Bason, put a quarter of a pound of Seeds, whether An∣niseeds, or Coriander-seeds, to every 2 pound of Sugar, and that will make them big enough; but if you would have them bigger, add the more sugar, which you must melt thus; put 3 pound of Sugar into your Bason, adding to it one pint of clean Running-water; stir it well with a brazen Slice, till it be well moistened, then set it over a clear Fire, and melt it well, and let it boyl mildly till it Ropes from the La∣dle, then keep it upon hot Embers, but let it not boyl, and so let it run upon the Seeds from the Ladle: If you would have them done quickly, let your Water be boyling hot, and putting a Fire under the Bason, cast on your Sugar boyling hot; put but as much Wa∣ter to the Sugar as will dissolve the same, neither boyl your Sugar too long, which will make it black; stir your Seeds in the Bason as fast as you can, as you cast on the Sugar; at the first, put in but half a Spoonful of the Sugar, moving the Bason very fast, rubbing the Seeds very well with your Hand, which will make hem take Sugar the better, and let them be very well dryed between every Coat, repeat this rubbing and drying of them between every Coat, which will make them the sooner rot; for this way in every 3 Hours, you may make 3 pound of Comfits. A quarter of a ound of Coriander-seeds, and 3 pound of Sugar, will make very large Comfits; keep your Sugar always in ood temper, that it run not into lumps. When your Comfits are made, lay them to dry on Papers, either efore the Fire, or in the hot Sun, or in an Oven▪ hich will make them
224. To Candy Nutmegs or Ginger. Take a pound of fine Sugar, and 6 or 7 spoonfuls of Rose-water; Gum-Arabick, the weight of a Six-pence, but let it be clear, boyl all these together, till they Rope; put it then out into an earthen Dish, put to it your Nutmegs or Ginger, then cover it close, and lute it with Clay that no Air enter in; keep it in a warm place about 20 Days, and they will Candy into a Rocky Candy; then break your Pot, and take them out: In the same manner you may Candy Oranges and Lemons. 225. To make Curran-Wine. Pick a Pound of the best Currans, and put them in a deep strait mouth'd earthen Pot, and pour upon them about 3 quarts of hot Water, having first dissolved 3 spoonfuls of the purest and newest Ale-yeast, stop it very close, till it begins to Work, then give it Vent, as is necessary, and keep it warm for about 3 days; it will work and ferment, taste it after 2 days, to se if it he grown to your liking; then let it run throug a strainer, to leave behind all the Currans and Yeast and so bottle it up; it will be very quick and plea∣sant, and is admirable good to cool the Liver and cleanse the Blood; it will be ready to drink in 5 or 6 days after it is bottled, and you may drink it safely. 226. To make a Sweet-Meat of Apples. Make your Jelly with slices of John-Apples, but first fill your Glasses with slices cut round ways, and pou in the Jelly to fill up the Vacuities; let the Jelly b boyled to a good stiffness, and when it is ready to tak from the Fire, put in some juice of Lemon and Orang if you like it, but let them not boyl, but let if sta upon the Fire awhile, upon a pretty good heat, th the juice may incorporate well; a little Amber-gre added doth very well. 227. To make Conserve of Sage. Take a pound of Flowers of Sage fresh blown, an beat them in a Mortar, afterward put them in a Gh
or in the Sun, and be sure to stir them once a Day at least, and it will keep good a Twelve-month at least. 228. To make Paste of Cherries. Boyl some fair Cherries in water till they come to pap, and then strain them through a sieve, then boyl some good Pippins unto pap, also put a quarter of a pound of the Apple-pap to a pound of the pap of Cher∣ries, and mingle them together, then dry it, and so make it up into Paste. 229. To make Marmalade of Oranges. After you have pared your Oranges very thin, let them be boyled in three or four waters, even till they grow very tender, then take a quarter of a hundred of good Kentish Pippins, divide them, and take out the Cores, boyl them very well to pap or more, but let them not lose their colour, then pass your Apples through a strainer, and put a pound of Sugar to eve∣ry pint of Juice, then boyl it till it will Candy, then take out the pulp of the Orange, and cut the peel into long slices very thin, put in your peel again adding to it the Juice of 2 or 3 Lemons, and boyl it up to a Candy. 230. To make a Paste of Apricots. Let your Apricots be very ripe, and boyl them, then put them into a skillet, and set them over the Fire without water, stir them very well with a skimmer, and let them be over the Fire till they be very dry, then take some Sugar and boyl it into a Conserve and mix an equal quantity of each together, and so makeii tuto Paste. 231. To Pickle Artichoak-Bottoms. Take the best Bottom of Artichoaks, and parboyl them, and when they are cold and well drained from the wa∣ter and dryed in a cloath, take away all the moisture, then put them into pots, and pour your Brine upon them, which must be as strong as you can make it, which is done by putting so much Salt to it as will receive no more, so that the Salt sinks whole to the bottom; cover over your Artichoaks with this water, and pour upon it some sweet Butter melted to a thickness of two Fingers, that no Air may come in, when the
Butter is cold, set up your Pot in a warm place, co∣vered close from Vermine. Before you put the bottoms in a Pot you should, pull off all the leaves and choak, as they are served at Table: The best time to do this is in Autumn, when your plants produce those which are young and tender, for these you should pickle before they open and flower, but not before their Heads are round, when you would eat them you must lay them in water, shifting the water several times, then boyl them once again, and so serve them again. 232. To Pickle Cornelians. Gather the fairest and biggest Cornelians when they first begin to grow red, and after they have lain a while, put them up into a Pot or Barrel, filling them up with Brine, as for Artichoaks, and put to them a little green Fennel, and a few Bay-leaves to make them smell well, then stop them up very close, and let them stand for a Month, if you find them too salt, make the Pickle weaker before you serve them to Table. 233. To make Jelly of Apples. Take either Pippins or John-Apples, and cut them in∣to quarters, either pared or unpared, boyl them in a good quantity of water till it be very strong of the Apples, take out the clear Liquor, and put to it a suffi∣cient quantity of Sugar to make a Jelly, with the slices of Apples, boyl all together, till the Apples be enough, and the Liquor like a Jelly; or else you may boyl the slices in Apple Liquor without Sugar, and make Jelly of the other Liquor, and put the slices into it when they be Jelly and it is sufficiently boyled, put to it some Juice of Lemon and Amber, and Musk if you will. 234. To make Jelly of Gooseberries. Let your Gooseberries be full ripe, then strain them through a Strainer, and to every Two pound of Juice put Three quarterns of Sugar, boyl it before you mix it and then boyl it again together; when they are mixed try them upon a plate; when its enough it riseth off.
235. To make Bragget. Put 2 bushels and a half of Malt to 1 Hoshead of wa∣ter, the first running makes half a Hogshead very good, but not very strong, the second is very weak: Boyl but half a quartern of Hops, put your water to the Malt the ordinary way; boyl it very well, and work it with very good Beer yeast: Now, to make Bragget, take the first running of this Ale, but put less Honey in it then you do for your ordinary Mead, put twice or thrice as much Spice and Herbs, then put it in a Vessel, after its working with the Yeast, hang within it a bag of bruised Spices, rather more than you boyled it with, and let it hang in the barrel all the while you draw it. 236. To make a Syrrup for one short-winded. Take a good handful of Hyssop, and a handful of Hore∣hound, and boyl them in a quart of spring water to a pint, then strain it through a clean Cloath, and put in Sugar to make it pleasant. Stir it Morning and Even∣ing with a Liquorise stick, and take about three spoon∣fuls at a time. Excellent Receipts IN Physick and Chirurgery. 1. A true Receipt for making that famous Cordial-Drink; known by the Name of Daffy's Elixir Salutis. As it was given by him to Sir Richard Ford, when Lord-Mayor of London. TAke of Anniseeds, Coriander-seeds, sweet Fennel∣seeds, Parsley-seeds, of each 2 Ounces; of Spanish Licorise 2 Ounces; Senna 2 Ounces; Rhubarh 2 Ounces; Elecampane 2 Ounces; Guaicum 2 Ounces
Six penniworth of Saffron; and one pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned: Mix these all together, and put them into 3 quarts of the smallest Aqua-Vitae, in a Stone or Glass Bottle; let it stand and infuse fourteen days, (at least, but the longer the better) near the fire, that it may receive some warmth, for it will infuse the better and sooner; then pour off your Liquor in∣to a Vessel, and take your drugs and press them as dry as you can, and put the Liquor you squeeze out to the other; and so bottle it up for use. 2. An Approved Medicine for the Stone and Gravel. Take the hard Roe of a Red Herring, and dry it upon a Tile, in an Oven, then beat it to powder, and take as much as will lye upon a Six-pence every Morning, fasting, in a Glass of Rhenish-Wine. 3. An Excellent Drink for the Scurvy. Take a pound of Garden Scurvy-Grass, six handfuls of Wormwood and Elder-tops, one Ounce of Caraway-seeds, and an Ounce of Nutmegs, put them all together into 6 Gallons of New Ale, and let them work together, and after a convenient time of working, drink of it every Morning fasting. 4. A Receipt for the Gout, known to be very helpful. Take 5 or 6 Black Snails, and cut off their heads, then put to it one Penny-worth of Saffron, and beat them together, spread them on a woolly side of a piece of Sheeps Leather, and apply it to the soles of the feet, anointing the sore place with the Marrow of a Stone-horse. 5. For Griping of the Guts. Take Anniseeds, Fennel, Bay berries, Juniper-berries, Tor∣mentil, Bistort, Balaustius, Pomegranate-Pills, each one ounce, Rose leaves a handful, boyl them in Milk, strain it, and add the Yolk of an Egg, six grains of Laudanum, dissolved in the Spirit of Mint, prepare it for a Glister, and give it warm. 6. A Sovereign Medicine for any Ach or Pain. Take Barrows-grease, a lapful of Arch-Angel-leaves, flowers, stalks and all, and put it into an Earthen-pot,
and stop it close, and paste it, then put it in a horse dung-hill nine days in the latter end of May, and nine days in the beginning of June, then take it forth, and use it. 7. For the Sciatica, and Pain in the Joynts. Take Balm and Cinquefoyl, but most of all Betony, Nep, and Featherfew, stamp them, and drink the Juice with Ale and Wine. 8. For an Ague. Take the Root of a Blew Lilly, scrape it clean, and slice it, and lay it in soak all night in Ale, and in the morning stamp it, and strain it, and give it to the Pa∣tient Luke-warm, to drink, an hour before the Fit cometh. 9. For all Fevers and Agues in sucking Children. Take powder of Christal and steep it in Wine, and give it to the Nurse to drink, also take the Root of Devils-bit, with the Herb, and hang it about the Child's Neck. 10. A good Medicine to strengthen the Back. Take Comfrey, Knot-grass, and Flowers of Arch-Angel, boyl them in a little Milk, and drink it off every Morning. 11. For the Head-ach. Take Rose-Cakes, and stamp them very Well in a Mot∣ter with a little Ale, and let them be dryed by the Fire on a Tile sheard, and lay it to the Nape of the Neck to Bed-ward. 12. For the Yellow-Jaundice. Take a great white Onion, and make a hole where the blade goeth out, to the bigness of a Chesnut, then fill the hole with Treacle, being beaten with half an ounce of English Honey, and a little Saffron, and set the Onion against the Fire, and roast it well that it do not burn, and when it is roasted, strain it through a cloth, and give the Juice thereof to the sick three days toge∣ther, and it will help them. 13. For the Black-Jaundice. Take Fennel, Sage, Parsley, Gromwel, of each much a∣like, and make Pottage thereof with a piece of goo
14. For Infection of the Plague. Take a spoonful of Running water, a spoonful of Vi∣negar, a good quantity of Treacle to the bigness of a Hasel-nut, temper all these together, and heat it luke∣warm, and drink it every four and twenty hours. 15. For the Cramp. Take Oyl of Camomile, and Fenugreek, and anoint the place, where the Cramp is, and it helpeth. 16. For the Ach of the Joynts. Take Marshmallows and sweet Milk, Linseed, Powder of Cummin, and the Whites of Eggs, Saffron, and White Grease, and fry all these together, and lay it to the ach∣ing Joynt. 17. For an Ague. Take a pottle of thin Ale, and put thereto a hand∣ful of Parsley, as much Red Fennel, as much Centory, as much Pimpernel, and let the Ale be half consumed a∣way, and then take and drink thereof. 18. To make the Countess of Kent's Powder. Take of the Magistery of Pearls, Crabs Eyes, prepared, Hartshorn, Magistery of White Coral, of Lapis contra Yarvum, of each a like quantity, to these Powders infused, cut off the black tops of the great Claws of the Crabs, the full weight of the rest: Beat these all into a fine Powder, and searce them through a fine Lawn Searce. To every ounce of this Powder add a dram of Oriental Bezoar, make all these up in a lump or mass with Jelly of Hartshorn, and colour it with Saffron, putting there∣to a scruple of Amber-Grease, and a little Musk finely powdred, and dry it in the Air, after they are made up into small quantities, you may give to a Man twenty Graints, and to a Child twelve Grains. It is excellent against all malignant and pestilent Diseases, French Pox, Small Pox, Measles, Plague, Pestilence, Malignant, or Scarlett Fevers, and Melancholly, twenty or thirty Grains thoreof being exhibited (in a little warm Sack, or Hartshord Jelly) to a Man, and half as much, or twelve Grains to a Child,
19. For the Falling Sickness, or Convulsions. Take dung of a Peacock, make it into Powder, and give so much of it to the Patient as will lye upon a Shilling; in a little Succory-water fasting. 20. For the Pleuresie. Take the round Balls of Horse-dung, and boyl them in a pint of White-wine till half be consumed, then strain it out, and sweeten it with a little Sugar, let the Patient drink of this, and then lye warm. 21. To prevent Miscarrying. Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on black brown Paper, the bredth and length of an hand, and lay it to the small of her back, and let her drink a Caudle made of Muscadine, putting into it the Husks of about 20 sweet Almonds dryed, and finely poudered. 22. For the Worms in Children. Take Worm-seed boyled in Beer and Ale, and sweetned Clarified Honey, and then let them drink it. 23. For the Whites. Take white washed Turpentine, and make it up in Balls like Pills, then take Cinamon and Ginger, and roul the Balls in it, and take them as you would do Pills, Morning and Evening. 24. For a dry Cough. Take Anniseed, Ash-seeds, and Violets, and beat them to Powder, and stamp them, of each a like quantity, then boyl them together in fair water, till it grows thick, then put it up, and let the Patient take of it Morning and Evening. 25. To make Ʋnguentum Album. Take a pint of Oyl-Olive, and half a pound of Diacu∣lum, Anniseeds a pretty quantity, and put them toge∣ther, and put thereto a pound of Ceruse, small grounded, boyl them together a little, and stir them always till it be cold, and it is done. 26. To destroy the Piles. Take Oyl of Roses, Frankincense and Honey, and make an Oyntment of them, and put it into the Fundament, and put Myrrh unto the same, and use often to anoint
the Fundament therewith, and let the Fume thereof o into the Fundament. 27. For the Canker. Take a handful of unset Leeks, with the roots, and a small quantity of Yarrow, and boyl them in White∣wine, till they be very soft, then strain and clarifie them, and let the Patient drink thereof, Morning and Evening blood warm. 28. For the Itch. Take the Juice of Penny-royal, the Juice of Savin, the Juice of Scabius, the Juice of Sage, the Juice of Pellitory, with some Barrows grease, and Black Soap, tem∣per, all these together, and make a Salve for the Itch. 29. For the King's Evil. Take 2 ounces of the water of Broom Flowers distilled, and give it in the Morning to the Patient fasting, and i will purge the Evil Humour downwards, and wast∣eth, and healeth the Kernels without breaking them outwardly. 30. To break an Imposthume. Take a Lilly Root and an Onion and boyl them in Wa∣ter, till they be soft, then stamp them, and fry them with Swines grease, and lay it to the Imposthume as hot as the Patient may suffer it. 31. For biting of a Mad Dog. Stamp large Plantain, and lay it to the grieved place, and it will cure the Sore. 32. The Green Sickness. Take the Keys of an Ashen-tree, dryed and beaten to powder, and take of Red Fennel, of Red sage, Marjo∣ram, and Bitony, and seeth them in Running water, from a pottle to a quart, then strain them, and drink there∣of a good draught with Sugar, Morning and Evening luke-warm. 33. For Deafness. Take Wild-Mint, mortify it, and squeeze it in the Hand till it reteth juice, then take it, with its juice, and put it into the Ear, change it often, this will help, the Deafness, if the Person hath heard before.
34. For the Dropsie. Take a Gallon of White-wine, and put into it a handful of Roman Wormwood, and a good piece of Horse∣radish, and a good quantity of Broom Ashes tyed in a Cloth, then take a good Bunch of Dwarf Elder, beat it in a Morter, and strain out the Juice, and put into the Wine when you will drink it, but if the Elder be dry, you must steep a good quantity in the Wine. Take of this half a pint Morning and Evening. 35. For a Sprain in the Back, or any other Weakness. Take a quarter of a pint of good Muscadine. a spoon∣ful of Madder, incorporate them well together, then give it to the Patient to drink for three Mornings to∣gether, and if need requireth, you may use it often in a day, this will strengthen the back exceedingly. 36. An Excellent Remedy for sore Eyes. Take a Gallon of pure Running Water, and eight drams of White Copperas, and as much of fine White Salt, mix them together, and let it simper half an hour over a slow Fire, and then strain it for use. 37. Catholicon; a most excellent Cordial. Take half a peck of Ripe Elder Berries, pick them clean and let them stand two-or three days in an Earthen pan, till they begin to hoar or mould, then bruise and strain them, and boyl the Liquor till half be consumed, then putting a pound of Sugar to every pint of Liquor, boyl them to Syrup. 38. A Medicine for an Ague. Take a quart of the best Ale, and boyl it to a pint, and let the Party take it, and then let the Patient lye down upon a Bed, and be covered warm, when the first sit grudges, and let a Bason be ready to vomit in. 39. Another for an Ague. Take a large Nutmeg and slice it, and so much Roch-Alom, beaten to powder, and put them both into one pint of White-wine and incorporate them well toge∣ther, and let the Patient take one half thereof about half an hour before the Fit, and then walk a-pace, or use some other Laborious Exercise, and when the fit
begins to come, take the other half, and continue Ex∣ercise. Both these I have known to cure to Admi∣ration. 40. For a great Lax or Looseness. Take one quart of New Milk, and have ready one half pint of distilled Plantain water, and set your Milk over the Fire, and when your Milk by boyling rise up, take two or three spoonfuls, as occasion shall be, to allay the rising, and when it rises again, do the like, and so in the like manner till the Plantain wa∣ter be all in, and then boyling up as before, let the Patient drink thereof warmed hot, or how else he likes it; I never yet have found it fail of Curing. 41. For Curing of Deafness. Take Herb of Grace, and pound it, then strain it, and take two spoonfuls of the Juice, and put thereto one spoonful of Brandy-wine, and when it is well evapo∣rated, dip therein a little Black wool or fine Lint, be∣ing first bound with a silk thread, and put it into your Ear. 42. For the Scurvy. Take half a peck of Sea-scurvy-grass, and as much Water-cresses, of Dwarf-Elder, Roman Wormwood, Red sage; Fumitory, Harts-Horn, and Liver-wort, of each one hand∣ful, wash the Water-cresses, and dry them well, the o∣ther Herbs must be rubb'd clean, and not washed, then add one Ounce of Horse-Raddish, and a good handful of Madder Roots, beat these with the Herbs, and strain the juice well out, for the last is best, then set it on a quick fire, and scum it clean; then let it stand till it is setled, and when it is quite cold, bottle it up, and keep it in a cold place, you must take four or five spoonfuls with one spoonful of Syrup of Lemons put into it, each Morning fasting, and fast one hour after it. 43. To Procure Conception. Take of Syrup of Mother-wort, Syrup of Mugwort half an Ounce, of spirit of Clary 2 drams, of the Root of English snake-weed in fine powder one dram, Purslain-seed, Nettle-seed, Rochet-seed, all in subtle powder of each
two drams: Candied Nutmegs, Eringo-roots, Satyrion-roots, preserved, Dates, Pistachoes, Conserve of Succory, of each 3 drams, Cinamon, Saffron in fine powder, of each a scruple, Conserve of Vervain, Pine-apple Kernels, picked and peeled, of each 2 drams, stamp and work all these Ingredients in a Morter, to an electuary, then put it into Gally-pots, and keep it for use: Take of this Ele∣ctuary the quantity of a good Nutmeg in a little Glass full of White-wine, in the Morning fasting, and at four a Clock Afternoon, and as much at night going to Bed, but be sure do not use violent exercises. 44. For a sore Breast not broken. Take Oyl of Roses, Bean-flower, the Yolk of an Egg, a little Vinegar, temper all these together, then set it be∣fore the Fire that it may be a little warm, then with a Feather strike it upon the Breast morning and even∣ing, or any time of the day she finds it pricking. 45. To heal a sore breast when broken. Boyl Lillies in new Milk, and lay it on to break it, and when it is broken, Tent it with a Mallow-stalk, and lay on it a plaister of Mallows boyled in sheeps Tallow: These are to be used if you cannot keep it from breaking. 46. For a Consumption. Take a pound and half of Pork, Fat and Lean, and boyl it in water, and put in some Oatmeal, and boyl it till the heart of the Meal be out, then put to it two quarts of Milk, and boyl it a quarter of an hour, and give the Patient a draught in the Morning, Afternoon, and Evening, and now and then some Barley-water. 47. For the Falling-sickness. Take powder of Hartshorn, and drink it with Wine, and it helpeth the Falling Evil. 48. For the Tooth-Ach. Take Featherfew and stamp it, and strain it, and drop a drop or two into the contrary Ear to the pain, and lye still half an hour after. 49. For a Wen. Take Black-soap and mix with unslaked Lime, made
50. For the Wind. Take the Juice of Red Fennel, and make a Posset of Ale therewith, and drink thereof. 51. For the Dropsie. Take two Gallons of New Ale, then take Serwel, Calamus, Aromaticus, Galingale, of each two Penny worth, of Spikenard four Penny-worth, stamp all toge∣ther, and put them into a bag, and hang it in the Vessel, and when it is four days old drink it Morning and Evening. 52. For a scald Head. Wash thy Head with Vinegar and Camomile stampt and mingled together; there is no better help for the Scald, or grind white Hellebore with Swines Grease and apply it to the Head. 53. To make Plague-Water. Take a handful of Sage, and a handful of Rue, and boyl them in three pints of Malmsey or Muscadine, till one pint be wasted, then take it off the Fire, and strain the Wine from the Herbs, then put into the Wine two penny-worth of long Pepper, half an ounce of Ginger, and a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, all grosly bruised, and let it boyl a little again. Then take it off the Fire and dissolve it in half an ounce of good venice-Treacle, and a quarter of an ounce of Me∣thrido, and put to it a quarter of a pint of strong Ange∣lica water, so keep it in a Glass close stopped, for your use. This Water cureth Small-Pox, Measles, surfeits, and Pestilential-Feavers. 54. A precious Eye-Water. Take of the best White-wine half a pint, of white∣rose-water as much, of the Water of Celendine, Fennel, Eye bright, and Rue, of each two ounces, of prepared Tutia six ounces of Cloves as much, sugar Rosate a dram, of Camphire and Aloes, each half a dram, wash the Eyes therewith. 55. A Cordial Julep. Take water of Endive, Purslain, and Roses, of each 2 ounces, sorrel water half a pint, Juice of Pomegranats,
and for lack thereof, Vinegar 4 ounces, Camphire 3 drams, sugar 1 pound, boyl all these together in the form of a Julep, and give 3 or 4 ounces thereof at a time. 56. To make Green Oyntment. Take a pound of Swines Grease, 1 ounce of Verdi∣grease, half a scruple of Sal Gemmae, this oyntment may be kept 40 years, it is good against Cancers and Running sores, it fretteth away dead flesh, and bringeth new, and healeth old Wounds, put it within the Wound that it fester not. 57. For Fits of the Mother. Take a brown Toast of four Bread, of the nether rast, and wash it with Vinegar, and put thereto Black-soap, like as you would butter a Toast, and lay it under the Navil. 58. For Rickets in Children. Take of Fennel-seeds and Dill-seeds, but most of the last, boyl them in Beer, and strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar, and let the Child drink often. Probatum. 59. For the Shingles. Take the Green leaves of Colts-foot, stamped and min∣gled with Honey, apply it, and it will help. 60. To heal a Fistula or Ʋlcer. Take Figs and stamp them, with Sho-makers Wax, and spread it upon Leather, and lay it on the Sore, and it will heal. 61. For a Woman in Travail. Take 7 or 8 leaves of Bettony, a pretty quantity of Germander, a branch or two of Penny-royal, 3 Mary∣golds, a branch or two of Hyssop. boyl them all in a pint of White wine, or Ale, then put into it Sugar and Saffron, and boyl it a quarter of an hour more, and give it to drink warm. 62. To make a Woman be soon delivered, the Child being dead or alive. Take a good quantity of the best Amber, and beat it exceeding small to powder, then searce it through a fine piece of Lawn, and so drink it in some Broth or Caudle, and it will by God's help cause the Patient to be pre∣sently delivered.
63. For Infants troubled with wind and Phlegm. Give them a little pure sugar-candy, finely bruised in saxifrage water, or scabrous water, in a spoon well min∣gled together. 64. A most excellent Medicine to breed their Teeth easily. Take of pure Capons Grease very well clarify'd the quantity of a Nutmeg, and twice as much of pure Ho∣ney, mingle and incorporate them well together, and anoint the Childs Gums therewith three or four times a day when its Teething, and they will easily break the Flesh, and prevent Torments and Agues, and other Griefs which usually accompany their coming forth. 65. For Agues in Children. Take a spoonful of good Oyl of Populeon, and put thereto 2 spoonfuls of good Oyl of Roses, mingle them well together, and then warm them before the Fire, a∣noint the Childs Joynts and Back, also his Forehead and Temples twice a day, Chasing the Oyntment well in. 66. To cause a young Child to go to stool. Chafe the Childs Navel with May Butter before the Fire, then take some Black Wool and dip it in the But∣ter and lay it to the Navel, and it will procure a stool; this is also good for one in years, that can take no o∣ther Medicine. 67. For Worms in Children. Take of Myrrh and Aloes very finely powdered, of each a Penny-worth, and put thereto a few drops of Chymical Oyl of Wormwood or savine, and a little Tur∣pentine; make these up into a Plaister, and lay it to the Childs Navel. 68. To help one that is blasted. Take the White of an Egg, and beat it in a Mortar, put to it a quarter of an ounce of Coperas, and grind them well together till it come to an Oyntment, and therewith anoint the sore Face, and it will ease the pain, and take away the swelling; and when it is well nigh whole, anoint the place with a little Populeon, and that will make the skin fair and well again.
69. An Excellent salve. Take a pound of Bees-Wax, a pint of sallet-oyl, three ounces of Red-Lead, boyl all together in a new earthen Pipkin, keeping it stirring all the while till it grows of a darkish Colour, then keep it for use, or make sear∣cloaths of it while it is hot. It is most approved against any Pain, sore, scald, Cut, Burn; to stregthen the Back, or remove any old Ach whatsoever. 70. A Julep of Doctor Trench for the Fits of the Mother. In the time of the year distill Black Cherry-Water, Pio∣ny flower-water, Cowslip-water, Rue, of Herb-grace-water; then take of the Waters of Cowslip, Black Cherries, Piony, Rue, of each an ounce, and add to them water of Castor, half an ounce, of Cinamon-water one dram, Syrup of Clove-gilly flowers three drams, mix all these together, and take two spoonfuls at a time of it, as often as you please. 71. For a Tympany. Take a handful of the blossoms of Marygolds, stamp them, and strain them, and give the juice thereof to the Patient in a draught of Ale fasting. 72. To provoke Terms, a good Medicine. Take Wormwood and Rue, of each one handful, with five or six Pepper-corns, boyl them all together in a quart of White-wine, or Malmsey, strain it, and drink thereof. 73. For the Bloody Flux. Take a great Apple and cut out the Core, and put therein pure Virgins Wax, then wet a Paper and lap it therein, then rake it up in the Embers, and let it roast till it be soft, then eat of it as your stomach will give leave. 74. For a Rheumatick Cough or Cold. Take a pint of Hyssop-water, Syrup of Gilliflowers, Sy∣rup of Vinegar, Syrup of Maiden-hair, Syrup of Coltsfoot of each an Ounce, mingle all together, and drink it when you please.
75. To kill a Fellon. Take an Egg and roast it hard, and take out the Yolk thereof, then roast an Onion soft, and beat the Yolk and the Onion together, and lay it the sore, and it will kill the Fellon. 76. For the white Flux. Take the powder of the flower of Pomegranates, and drink it in Red Wine. 77. For the Red Flux. Take Sperma Ceti, and drink it, and truss up your self, with a piece of black Cotten. 78. For the Cancer in a Womans breast. Take the Dung of a Goose, and the Juice of Celendine, and bray them well in a Morter together, and lay it to the sore, and this will stay the Cancer, and heal it. 79. For an Ague in the Breast. Take Grounsel, Dasie-leaves and Roots, and course Wheat sifted, make a Poultess thereof with the par∣ties own Water, and lay it warm to the Breast. 80. For bleeding at the Nose. Take Bettony, and stamp it with as much Salt as you can hold betwixt your two Fingers, and put it in∣to your Nose. 81. For spitting of Blood. Take Smallage, Rue, Mints, and Bettony, and boyl them well in good Milk, and drink it warm. 82. To stanch the bleeding of a Wound, or at the Nose. There is no better thing than the powder of Bole-Armoniack, to stanch the bleeding of a Wound, the powder being laid upon it, or for the Nose, to be blown in with a Quill. Or take the shavings of Parchment, and lay it to the wound, and it stancheth and healeth. 83. To make the Gascoign Powder. Take of Pearls, white Amber, Harts-Horn, Eyes of Crabs, and White Coral, of each half an ounce, of black thighs of Crabs calcined, two ounces; to every ounces of this powder put in a dram of Oriental Bezo∣ar, reduce them all into a very fine powder, and searce
them then with Harts-horn Jelly, and a little Saffron  therein, make it up into paste, and make therewit Lozenges, or Trochises, for your use. Get your Crabs for this powder about May or September, before they be boyled, dry your Lozenges in the Air, not by Fire nor Sun. 84. For the Megrim or Imposthume in the Head. Take four penny weight of the Root of Pellitory of Spain, a farthing weight of spikenard, and boyl them in good Vinegar, and when it is cold, put thereto a spoon∣ful of Honey, and a Saucer-ful of Mustard, and mingle them well together, and hold thereof in your mouth, a spoonful at once, and use this eight or nine times, spit∣ting it out continually. 85. For Pain in the Ears. Take the juice of Wild Cucumbers, and put it into the Ears, and. it assuageth the Pain. Also put the Wood of Green Ash in the Fire, and save the Liquor that cometh out at the end, and put it into the Ears, it causeth the pain to cease, and amendeth the Hearing; Also beat the juice of Wormwood, and drop it into the Ears. 86. A precious Water for the Eye-sight, made by King Edward the Sixth. Take Smallage, red Feunel, Rue, Vervain, Bettony, Agrimony, Pimpernel, Eufrane, Sage, Celendine, of each a little quantity, first wash them clean, then stamp them, and put them in a brazen pan, with the powder of 14 or 15 Pepper corns, fair searced into a pint of good White-wine, put them into the Herbs with 3 spoonfuls of Honey, and 5 spoon∣fuls of the Water of a Man-child that is sound; mingle all together and boyl them over the Fire, and when it is boyled, strain it through a Cloth; and put it into a Glafs, and stop it well and close, till you use it, and when you need it, put a little thereof into the sore Eyes with a Feather, but if it be dry, temper it with White-wine, and it profiteth much all manner of sore Eyes; This water was used by King Edward the Sixth.
87. My Lord Dennies Medicine for the Gout. Take Burdock leaves and stalks, cut them small and stamp them very small, then strain them, and cleanse them, and when you have so done put them into Glas∣ses, and put pure Oyl of Olives on the the top of them, and stop it stop it from the Air, and when you would use it for the Gout, pour in into a Porringer, and warm it, and wet Linnen Cloths in it, and apply it warm to the grieved place, warming your Cloths one after another as they grow cold that are on. 88. Dr. Steven's Sovereign Water. Take a Gallon of good Gascoin Wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Cancel, Nutmeg, Grains, Cloves, Anni-seed, Carra∣way-seeds, of each a dram; then take Sage, Mint, Red Roses, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild Thyme, Camomile, Lavendar, of each a handful, then bray both Spices and Herbs, and put them all into the Wine, and let them stand for twelves hours, divers times stirring them, then di∣stil in an Alembick. but keep that which you distil first by it self, for that is the best, but the other is good also, but not so good as the first. This Water com∣forteth the Vital Spirits, and helpeth inward diseases, which come from Cold; it helps Conception in Wo∣men that are Barren, and killeth Worms n the Body, it cureth the old Cough, and helpeth the Tooth-ach, it comforteth the Stomach, and cureth a stinking breath, it preserveth the Body in good liking, and makes them look young. 89. The Water called Aqua Mirabilis and Pretiosa, made by Doctor Willoughby. Take of Galingales, Cloves, Mace, Cucubes, Ginger, Car∣danum, Nutmegs, Mellilot, saffron, four ounces, and beat all these into powder, Agrimony water the quantity of a dram; and somewhat more; then take of the juice Celendine half a pint, and mingle all these toge∣ther with a pint of good Aqua-Vitae, and 3 pints of White-wine, put all these together in a Still of Glass, and let it stand all Night, then distill it with an easie Fire. This Water dissolveth the swelling of the
Lungs without any Grievance, and helpeth and com∣forteth them being Wounded, and suffereth not the Blood to putrifie; he shall never need to be let Blood that useth this Water, it suffers not the Heart to burn, nor Melancholly nor Rheum to have dominion above Nature; it also expelleth Rheum, and purifieth the Stomach. 90. To make Allom-Water. Take a pound of Allom, and beat it to powder, then take a Gallon of clean Water, and set it on the fire, let∣ting it boyl till all the Allom be melted, then take it off the Fire, and when it is cold, put it into a Glass, and keep it for use. 91. To make an Excellent Electuary, called the Electuary of Life. Take Scorlegio, Morre, Gentiana, Grandoret, and Jalaim, of each a little quantity, stamp them and mingle them with Honey, that hath been well boyled on the Fire, and scummed clean. This is excellent for Sickness in the Stomach, or pain in the Belly, Heart, or Head, or for those that are bitten with any Venomous Beast, or poysoned; it must be taken in water 3 or 4 spoonfuls at a time, in the Morning fasting; if the Disease be of any long standing, he must drink it fifteen days, toge∣ther, and he will be whole. 92. Against Heat of the Liver. Take Fennel, Endive, Succory, Plantain, of each alike, distil them with Red Wine and Milk, and use it every Morning, nine spoonfuls at a time, with a draught of Wine and Sugar, or else five spoonfuls thereof a∣lone. 93. For swooning fits. For swooning, and weakness of the Heart, in Fe∣ver and Sickness, or if it come from other Cause, stamp Mints with Vinegar, and a little Wine, if the Patient have no Fever, then toast of bit of Bread, till it almost burnt, and put it therein till it be well soaked, then put it in the Nose of the Patient, and rub his Lips, Tongue, Gums, Teeth, and Temples, and let him chew and suck the moistness thereof, and swallow it.
94. A Water for the Eyes, to make a Man see in forty days, who hath been blind seven Years before, if he be un∣der fifty Years of Age. Take smalledge, Fennel, Rue, Betony, Vervain, Agrimony, Cinquefoyl, Pimpernel, Eye-bright, Celandine, sage, of each a quartern, wash them clean, and stamp them, do them in a fair Marshing-pan, put thereto a quart of good White-wine and the powder of thirty Pepper-corns, 6 spoonfuls of live Honey, and 10 spoonfuls of the U∣rin of a Man Child that is wholesome, mingle them well together, and boyl them till half be wasted, then take it down and strain it, and afterwards Clarifie it, and put it into a Glass Vessel well stopt, and put there∣of with a feather into the Eyes of the Blind, and let the Patient use this Medicine at night when he goeth to Bed, and within forty days he shall see. It is good for all manner of sore Eyes. Wild-Tansie-water i good for the Eye-sight, and eating of Fennel-seed i good for the same. 95. For a Web in the Eye. The Leaves of White-honey-suckles and Ground Ivy, of each a like quantity ground together, and put every day into the Eye, cureth the Web. Or else Salt burnt in a Flaxen-cloath, and tempered with Honey, and with a Feather anointed on the Eye-lids, killeth worm that annoy the Eye-lids. 96. For the moist Scabs after the small-Pox. Take Lapis Calaminaris, Letharge of Gold and Silver of each two drams, Brimstone and Ceruse two ounces bring all these into a fine Powder, and then beat then in a Morter with so much Barrows-grease as is sufficient to make it up in an Oyntment, and anoint the places therewith Evening and Morning. 97. To bring down the flowers. Take of Alligant, Muscadine, or Claret a pint, burn it, and sweeten it well with Sugar, put thereto two spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl; then take a good Bead of Amber in powder in a spoon, with some of the Wine after it, take this Evening and Morning.
98. To stay the flowers. Take Amber, Coral, Pearls, Jeat, or each alike, grind them to a fine powder, and serse them, take as much as will upon a six pence with Conserve of Quinces, and drink a draught of New Milk after it: Use this e∣very Morning. 99. To Cure Corns. Take Beans and chew them in your Mouth, and tye it fast to your Corn, and it will help: Do this at Night. 100. To make Oyl of Roses. Take red Rose-leaves a good quantity, and stamp 'em in a Mortar, and put thereto Oyl-Olive, and let it stand in the Sun 12 days, and then put it in a Glass, and bind the Glass fast about with Ropes of Hay, and set it in a Pan full of Water, and let it boyl sortly two hours, and then let it cool, then put it in small Glasses, and put thereto the leaves of Red Roses all whole, and stop it fast, and set it in the Sun for sixteen days, and so use it at your need. 101. For any Itch, or Breaking out. Take Frankincense, and beat it small in a Mortar, and mingle it with Oyl of Bays, and therewith anoint all over, and it will destroy the Itch. 102. For the Piles after Child-birth. Make a Bath of Worm-wood, Southern-wood, Cina∣mon Rhind, and the bark of Cassia Fistula boyled well in Wine; when the woman delivered goeth forth of the Bath, put Bombace, or Cotten with powder of Alloes, mixed with Oyl of Peny-royal, unto her low∣er parts. 103. For a stitch in the side. Take three handfuls of Mallows, boyl them in a lit∣tle raw Milk, and put thereto a handful of Wheat∣bran, and let them boyl together, and then wring out the Milk, and lay it hot to the Stitch, apply it often: Or take a few leaves of Rue and Yarrow, stamp them to∣gether, and wring out the Juice and drink it with a little Ale.
104. For a Tertian, or double Tertian Ague. Take a good quantity of Celandine, a spoonful of salt and the bigness of an Egg in Leven, and as much Ab¦gant and spanish soap, stamp them well in a Morta and make a Plaister of them, and apply them to th Patients Feet one hour before the coming of the F add thereto 4 or 5 yolks of Eggs: Or take of Am seed-water the best as you can get, half a pound of O of Vitriol, shake them well together, and drink one two spoonfuls thereof an hour before the Fit come 105. For the spleen. Boyl the Rhinds and Keys of an Ash tree very tend in White-wine, and drink a good draught thereof for 6 7 Mornings together, and it will much ease the Pa¦ent; when you drink this, anoint the spleen with Ʋ¦guentum Dialthea, every Morning and Evening, appl¦ing also a Plaister of Mellilot to the place. 106. An Excellent Powder for the Green-sickness. Take 4 scruples of Gentian made into fine Powder rasp Ivory and Harts-born, of each 2 scruples; make th into fine Powder, give a spoonful hereof, with Whi¦wine, or the like, at once. 107. A drink that healeth all Wounds without any Plai∣sters or Oyntment, or without any Taint, most perfectly. Take Sanicle, Milfoil, and Bugle, of each a like qu¦tity, stamp them in a Mortar, and temper them wi Wine, and give the Person wounded to drink twice thrice a day, till he be whole; Bugle holdeth open t Wound, Milfoil cleanseth the Wound, and sanicle hea¦eth it; but sanicle may not be given to him that is in the Head, or in the Brain pan, for it is ange This is a good and tryed Medicine. 108. For Pricking of a Thorn. Take of Violet-leaves one handful, stamp them to¦ther, and take a quantity of Boars-grease, and of Wh bran one handful, set it on the Fire in clean Water,  make a Plaister thereof, and lay it to the Grief.
109. To make Oyl of St. John's Wort, good for any Ach or Pain. Take a quart Sallet-Oyl, and put thereto a quart of Flowers of St. John's Wort well picked, let them lye therein all the Summer, till the Seeds of the Herb be Ripe, the Glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun or the Water, all the Summer, till the Seeds be Ripe, then put in a quarter of St. John's Wort Seeds whole, and so let it stand 12 hours, the Glass being kept open, then you must boyl the Oyl 8 hours, the Water in the Pot full as high as the Oyl in the Glass, when it is cold strain it, that the Seed remain not in it, and so keep it for your use. 110. For the Ptisick. Take 2 ounces of Liquorish scraped and bruised, of Figs 3 ounces, of Agrimony, Horehound, Enula Cam∣pana, of each a handful, boyl them all together in a Gallon of Water, till half be wasted, then strain the Herbs from the Juice, and use it early and late. Also for the dry Ptisick, stamp Fennel-roots, and drink the Juice thereof with White-wine. 111. To make Oyl of Fennel. Put a quantity of Fennel between 2 Tile-stones, or Plates of Iron, make them very hot, and press out the Liquor; and this Oyl will keep a great while, for it is good for the Ptisick, dry Scab, Burning and Scalding. 112. To make the black Plaister for all manner of Griefs. Take a quantity of Oyl-Olive, a quantity of Red Lead, boyl these together, and stir them with a slice of Wood continually; till it be black and somewhat thick; then take it off the Fire, and put into it a penny-worth of Red-Wax, and a pound of Rosin, and set it to the Fire again, but do not blaze it, and stir it, then take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, and make it into a Lump. It is good for a new Wound, or to staunch Blood, pour a little of it in a Dish, and if it stick fast to the Dish's side, then it is enough, keep it for your use as need Requireth.
Directions for Nurses. LET there be given unto the Infant new born, Ho∣ney to lick, after let it be nourished with the Mother's Milk, which of all things best agreeth with it: But if by reason of some necessity it cannot enjoy it, a sound healthy Nurse is to be chosen, neither young∣er than 24 Years, nor elder than five and thirty, of a white and ruddy Complection, which is not infect∣ed with other Vices, nor yet hath too lately been brought to Bed, nor hath not long given Suck; let her not have sore Dugs or Breasts, nor too big, but a large Breast, and moderately Fat. Let her use choice Meats, of easie and light Concoction, engendring good blood or juice; let her abstain from hot aromatical Spices, as Pepper, Ginger, Cardamum, and such like; also from Leeks, Onions, Garlick, Salt, austere and tart things; Let her avoid strong Wines, as also cold Water: Let her eschew immoderate eating and drinking, for that corrupteth the Milk, and begetteth in Children leprosy or scurf, and other contagious Diseases: Let her ab∣stain from Cares and Vexations, and let her take heed, lest she provoke her menstruous Disease. She must not Sleep much, or be given to Sleep, for that maketh the Milk Flegmatick; she ought not to watch more than is meet, for from hence the Milk com∣eth to be more hot, sharp, and distastful to the Infant; she ought moderately to exercise her self, especially her Arms, to wit, either in sowing, spinning, or knitting for by this means evil humours are consumed, as by ease and sloth they are augmented. Also Copulation of the Nurse exceedingly offendeth, and hurteth the Child, as that which chiefly retracteth and deminisheth the Milk, and mketh it of an unfavo∣ry Taste, tasting hot and rank, or Goatish, which bring¦eth no small inconvenience, and hurt to the Child. But if the Milk decrease, Pultesses of Bean-meal, Rice, are meet to be used, also like Paps mae of Bread, with Milk and Sugar, to which may be added a little
And if the Milk be thick, it must be made thin with slender Diet, and subtil Wine, and Syrup of Vinegar, as also with exercises: But if it be too thin and waterish, gross and strong Meats, and longer Sleeps, will be con∣venient. For the Corruption of the Milk, a little Mug∣wort grosly bruised, and put into a linnen Cloth, and so into Broth, with a little Honey added thereto, will do very much good. The care of the Infant. And if the Child's Belly be loose, the Food ought to be the more gross and strong, and her Sleep longer; but Children may suck so long as till they have brought forth sharp and great Teeth; but if you suffer them to drink Wine or strong drink, or other Potions, before they have toothed them, they will be corrupted; but when they have gotten the Teeth, their Arms and back∣bones are gently to be rubbed after their Sleep. And 'tis not of little concernment in what Swadling∣cloaths Children are wrapped; for when they are not tied up at all, or the Clouts are too loose, they are sub∣ject to Fluxes, Imposthumes, apt to be crooked backt, and other discommodities; but especially when their Knees are too strictly tied and bound up, and their Thighs left at liberty, they are lamed. When they cry, or feel pain, or will sleep, they are to be pacified, either by shewing the Breast, or Sing∣ing, or by Rocking, either in Cradles or Hanging-beds, carrying up and down: But we must observe, that Children may lye strait whensoever they lye down, and ought not to be covered too much, or hot with cover∣ings, nor yet with too few, lest they may catch cold: Moreover, let the Linnen-cloth wherein they are wrap∣ped, be neat and clean, for Children are offended and in∣sected by foul and filthy Excrements. From three Years of Age till the seventh, they are to be Educated gently and kindly, not to be severely re∣prehended, chidden or beaten, for by that means they are made throughout their whole Life after, too timo∣rous, or too much terrified, astonished, and sottted.
Being yet in their first Years, they are not to be com∣pelled to going, for seeing all their bones are soft as Wax, and their body fall the heavier, they either become lame, or universally resolved in their Feet. Food must be daily given them thrice a day, till they are 3 Years old; for if they be much filled, they are sub∣ject and accustomed to be troubled with Convulsions, and other Diseases. In the sixth or seventh Year of their Age, they are to be sent to School, and committed to the breeding and instruction of courteous and temperate School-masters, who may not terrifie them. Before these Years, they are not to be compelled or forced to hard Labours, otherwise they will not thrive well, but stand at a stay and keep little, or else become Dwarfs. When as the Infant beginneth to grow sick, as for example, from a cold Disease, the Nurse is to be nou∣rished with hot and dry Meat and Drink, so that there∣by forthwith it may grow well again; so also if it be taken with other Diseases, as with an Ague, the Nurse shall use Plantain-water, and such like things. Paps made for Children of Crums, or Morsels of Bread bro∣ken or sliced, are more wholesome than made of Meal or Flower. Till 2 Years old give them Honey often, for that keep∣eth them from Convulsions, and Costiveness of the Belly, and that the Milk they eat hurt them not. When Infants cast up their Milk, a Corral should be hung about their Neck, down to their middle; for it is useful for them in teething; and Ivory also is good for the same purpose. What is to be Administred unto the Child after it is Born, for the first thing it taketh. ARnoldus de villa Nova, a most Learned Physitian, writeth, That if you give unto a Child half a
scruple of Coral, finely powdered with Woman's Milk first, before it taketh any other thing, after it is Born, that it shall never be troubled with the Falling-sickness. Also, I know Persons of good Quality in England, who give unto all their own Children (and advise all other Women, where they are desired to be assistant at the Birth, to exhibit unto the Children New-born, the first thing they take) a little Salt, well mingled in a spoonful of Saxifrage, or Hysop-water, to prevent the trouble of Frets, and other Diseases in Children following their Birth. For Infants troubled with Wind and Phlegm. Many Midwives advise the Nurses, to give them a little pure Sugar-Candy, finely bruised in Saxifrage-wa∣ter, or Scabious-water, in a Spoon, well mingled to∣gether. A most excellent Medicine, to cause Children to Teeth easily. Take of pure Capon's-grease very well Clarified, the quantity of a Nutmeg, and twice as much of pure Honey, mingle and incorporate them well together, and 3 or 4 times in a day anoint the Child's Gums when they are Teething, and they will break Flesh easily, and prevent Torments and Agues, and other Griefs, which usually accompany their coming forth. To cause a young Child to go to Stool. Take a good big green Mallow Sprig, and strip off the outward Skin, and anoint the Sprig well with fresh Butter, and put it up into the Child's Fundament, and let it stay a while there, and in a very short time it will procure a Stool. For an Ague. Take the Herb called Hartshorn, stamp it, then min∣gle it with Bay-salt, and 3 or 4 hours before the Fit comes, apply it, spread upon a Linnen-cloth, to the Child's Wrists, and when the Fit is past, apply a fresh one before the next Fit, and in a few Fits (God wil∣ling) it shall be cured.
Beautifying Waters, Oyls, Oyntments, and Pouders to Adorn and add Loveliness to the Face and Body. 1. To make the Hair very Fair. WASH your Hair very Clean, and then take some Alom Water warm, and with a Sponge moisten your Hair therewith, and it will make it Fair. 2. Another. Take the last Water that is drawn from Honey, and wash your Head therewith, and it will make the Hair of an excellent fair Colour, but because it is of a strong smell, you must Perfume it with some sweet Spirit. 3. To make the Hair grow thick. Make a strong Lye, then take a good quantity of Hyssop Roots, and Burn them to Ashes, and Mingle the Ashe and Lye together, and therewith wash your Head, and it will make the Hair grow; also the Ashes of Frogs Burnt, do encrease Hair, as also the Ashes of Goats-dung Mingled with Oyl. 4. To make the Hair Grow. Take Marsh-Mallows, and Boyl them, Roots and all, and wash the Head therewith, and it will grow in a short time; also take a good quantity of Bees, and dry them in a Sieve, by the Fire, and make Pouder of them, and Temper it with Oyl-Olive, and Anoint the place where the Hair should grow; also take the Oyl of Tartar, and warm it, and Anoint any Bald-Head therewith, and it will Restore the Hair in a short time. 5. To make the Hair Fair. Take the Ashes of a Vine Burnt, of the Knots of Barley-Straw, and Licorice, and Sow-bread, and Distill them to∣gether in Fair Water, and wash the Head with it; also sprinkle the Hair while it is Combing, with the Pou∣der of Cloves, Roses, Nutmegs, Cardamum, and Galingale, with Rose water; also the Head being washed with the
Decoction of Beech-Nut-Trees, the Hair will become Fair. 6. To make the Hair Grow. Take Hasle-Nuts with Husks and all, and Burn them to Pouder, then take Beech-mast, and the Leaves of Enula Campana, and stamp the Herb and them altogether, then Seeth them together with Honey, and Anoint the place therewith, and strew the Pouder thereon, and this will make the Hair Grow. 7. To take away Hair. Take the Juice of Fumitory, mix it with Gum-Arabick, then Lay it on the place, the Hairs first Plucked out by the Roots, and it will never permit any more Hair to Grow on the place. Also Anoint your Head with the Juice of a Glo-worm Stamped, and it hath the same Virtue. 8. For the falling of Hair Take the Ashes of Pidgeons-dung in Lye, and wash the Head therewith, also Walnut-leaves, beaten with Bears-Suet, restoreth the Hair that is plucked away. 2. To make the Face fair. Take the Flower of Beans and distill them, wash the Face with the Water. 10. For cleansing the Skin. If the Face be washed with the Water that Rice is sodden in, it cleanseth the Face, and taketh away Pim∣ples. 11. A Water to Adorn the Face. Take Eggs cut in pieces, Orange-peels, the Roots of Melons, each as much as is sufficient, in a large Vessel, with a long Neck, distil it by an Alimbeck, with a strong and careful Fire. 12. To Beautify the face. Take of Cuckow-pintle a prety Quantity, Bruise the thick parts with Rose-water, dry them by the Sun 3 or 4 days, then pouring more Rost-water on it, use it. 13 To make the face look Youthful. Take two Ounces of Aquavita, Bean-flower-water, and Rose wate each 4 Ounces, Water of Water-Lillies 6 oun∣ces, mix them all, and add to them one dram of the
whitest Tragacanth, set it in the Sun 6 days, then strain it through a fine Linnen Cloath: Wash your Face with it in the Morning, and do not wipe it off. 14. A Water to take away Wrinkles in the face. Take of the Decoction of Briony and Figgs, each a like quantity, and wash the Face with it. 15: An excellent Water called Lack Virginis, or Vir∣ginis Milk, to make the face, Neck, or any part of the Body fair and White. Take of Alumen, Plumosi, half an Ounce, and also add thereto of Camphire one Ounce, of Roch-Allom one Ounce, and a Dram, Sal Gemmi half an Ounce, of White Frankincense 2 Ounces, Oyl of Tartar one Ounce, and a half, make all these into most fine Pouder, and mix it with one quart of Rose-water, set it in the Sun, and let it stand 9 days, often stirring it, then take Lethagge of Silver, half a pound, beat it fine and Searse it, then Boyl it with one pint of White-wine Vinegar, till 1 third be Consumed, ever stirring it with a Stick, while it Boyleth, then distill it by a Philter, or let it run through a Jelly-bag, then keep it in a Glass Vial, and when you will use those Waters, take a drop of the one, and a drop of the other in your Hand, and it will be like Milk, which is called La Virginis; wash your Face, or any part of your Body therewith, it is most precious for the same. 16. To take away Sun-burn. Take the Juice of Lemon, and a little Bay-Salt, and wash your Face or Hands with it, and let them dry of themselves, and wash them again, and you shall find all the Sun-burn gone. 17. To make the face fair. Boyl the Flowers of a Rosemary in White-wine, with which wash your Face. 18. To Clear the Skin, and make it White. Take fresh Boars grease, and the white of an Egg, and Stamp them together with a little Pouder of Bayes, and therewith Anoint the Skin, and it will clear the Visage, and make it White.
19. To take away freckles in the face. Anoint your Face with Oyl of Almonds, and drink Plantain-water, or Anoint your Visage well and often with Hairs Blood. 20. To Smooth the Skin. Mix Capon's grease with a quantity of Sugar, and let it stand a few days close Covered, and it will turn to a clear Oyl, with which Anoint your Face. 21. To Blanch the face. Take the Pulp of Lemons, and take out the Kernels, and put to them a quantity of fine Sugar; Distill these, and keep the Water to wash your Face every Night. 22. To take away the Holes or Pits in the face, by reason of the Small-pox. For helping of this Accident I have tried many things, and the best means I have found, is to Wash the Face one day with the distilled water of strong Vinegar, and the next day with the Water wherein Bran and Mallows have been Boyled, and continue this 20 days or a Month together. 23. For the Redness of the Hands or the face, after the Small-pox. Take Barley, Beans, Lupines, of each one. Handful, bruise them all in a Morter grosly, and Boyl them in 3 pints of Water, till it grow thick like a Jelly, then strain it, and Anoint the Face and hands three or 4 times a day, for 3 or 4 days together, and then Wet the Face and Hands as often with this Water following. 24. Another. Take Vine-leaves 2 Handfuls, Bean-flower, Dragon, Wild Tansie, of either one Handful, Camphire 3 Drams, 2 Calves Feet, the Pulp of 3 Lemons, a pint of Row Gream, Shred the Herbs small, as also the Lemons, and Break, and Cu the Calves-feet small; then mix them together, and dis∣till it in a Glafs-Still, and use it. Also the Water of May-dew is excellent good for an high Colour, or Red∣ness in the Face. 25. For Pimples in the face Wash your Face with Warm Water when you got
Bed, and let it dry; Then take the white of an Egg, and put it into a Saucer, and set it upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, and put it into a piece of Allom; beat it together with a Spoon, till it become thick, then make a Round Ball, and therewith Anoint the Face where the Pim∣ples are. 26. For Morphew, or Scurf, of the face or Skin. Take of Brimstone beaten into Pouder 2 Ounces, mix it with as much black Soap that stinketh, and tye the same in a Linnen-cloth, and let it hang in a pint of strong Wine-Vinegar, or Red-Rose-Vinegar, for the Space of 8 or 9 Days, and wash the Scurf, dipping the Cloth in the Vinegar, Rubbing it therewith, and let it dry of it self. 27. For heat and swelling in the face. Boyl the leaves or blossoms of Rosemary, either in White-wine, or fair water, and use to wash thy hands and face therewith, and it will preserve thee from all such inconveniences, and also make both thy face and hands very smooth. 28. For a Red face. Take Brimstone that is whole, and Cinamon, of either of them an even proportion by wight, beat them into small powder, and searse it through a fine cloath upon a sheet of white Paper, to the quantity of an ounce or more, and so by even proportions in weight, mingle them together in clean clarified Capons grease, and tem∣per them well together till they be well mollified, and put to it a little Camphire to the quantity of a Bean, and so put the whole Confection into a Glass and use it. 29. To take away Pimples. Take Wheat-flower mingled with Honey, and Vine∣gar, and lay it upon them. 30. An Excellent Oyntment for an inflamed Face. Take an ounce of the Oyl of Bays, and an ounce of Quick-silver, and put them in a Bladder together with a spoonful of fasting spittle, and then rub them well toge∣ther, that none of the quick-silver be seen, take this Oynt∣ment▪ when it is made, and anoint the face therewith, nd t will heal it well and fair, Proved true.
31. For a rich face. Take 3 yolks of Eggs raw, as much in quantity of fresh butter, or Capons grease without salt, Camphire two penny worth, Red Rose-water half a pint, two Grains of Civet, and boyl all these together in a Dish, then strain them through a clean Cloath, and set it to cool, and take the uppermost, and use it. 32. To make the Skin white and clear Boyl two ounces of French Barly in three pints of Conduit water, change the water and put in the Bar∣ley again; and do this till your Barley do not disco∣lour the Water, then boyl the last three pints to a quart, then mix half a pint of White-wine therein, and when it is cold, wring the juice of 2 or 3 good Lemons therein, and use it for the Morphew, heat of the Face, and to clear the Skin. 33. An excellent Pomatum to clear the Skin. Wash Barrows-grease or Lard oftentimes in May dew, that hath been clarified in the Sun till it be exceeding white; then take Marsh-Mallow-roots, scraping off the out-sides, make thin slices of them, and mix them, set them to macerate in a Balneo, and scum it till it be cla∣rified, and will come to rope, then strain it, and put now and then a spoonful of May dew therein, beat∣ing it till it be thorough cold in often change of May-dew, then throw away that dew, and put it in a Glass, covering it with May-dew, and so keep it for your use. 34. To take away Spots and freckles from the face and Hands. The Sap that issueth out of a Birch-tree in great abundance, being opened in March or April and a Glass Receiver set under it to receive it: This cleanseth the Skin excellently, and maketh it very clear being wash∣ed therewith. This Sap will dissolve Pearl, a Secret not known to many. 35. To take away freckles and Morphew. Wash your face in the wain of the Moon with a Sponge, Morning and Evening with distilled water of
Elder-leaves, letting it dry on the Skin; you must Distil your Water in May. This I had from a Traveller, who hath cured himself thereby. 36. To make the Teeth White and Sound. Take quart of Honey, and as much Vinegar, and half so much White-wine, boyl them together, and wash your Teeth therewith now and then. 37. A Dentifrice to whiten the Teeth. Take of Harts-horn and Horses teeth, of each 2 ounces, Sea shells, common Salt, Cypress-Nuts, each 1 ounce, burn them together in an Oven, and make a powder, and work it up with the Mucilage of Gum Tragagant, and rub the Teeth therewith. 38. To make the Teeth as white as Ivory. Take Rosemary, Sage, and little Allom and Honey, and boyl them together in fair Running water, and when it is well boyled strain out the fair water, and keep it in a Glass, and use it sometimes to wash your Mouth and Teeth therewith, and it will make them clean: Also wash your Teeth with the Decoction of Lady Thistle-Root, and it will cleanse and fasten the Teeth, and the sore Gums make whole: also the Root of Hore-hound drunk or chewed fasting, doth quickly heal the Gums, and maketh the Teeth clean; Strawberry-leaves also cleanseth the Teeth and Gums, a sure and tryed Ex∣periment. 39. To make the Teeth White. Take one drop of the Oyl Vitriol, and wet the Teeth with it, and rub them afterwards with a course Cloth; altho this Medicine be strong, fear it not. 40. For a stinking Breath. Take two handfuls of Cummin, and stamp it to pow∣der, and boyl it in Wine, and drink the Syrup thereof Morning and Evening for fifteen days, and it will help. Dred. 41. To make Breath sweet. Wash your Mouth with the Water that the Shells of Citrons have been boyled in, and you will have a sweet Breath.
42. To sweeten the Breath. Take Butter and the juice of Featherfew, and temper them with Honey, and take every day a spoonful. Al∣so these things sweeten the Breath, the Electuary of Aromaticks, and the peel of Citrons. 43. To cleanse the Mouth. It is good to cleanse the Mouth every Morning by rubbing the Teeth with a Sage leaf, Citron peels or with powder made with Cloves and Nutmegs; for∣bear all Meats of ill Digestion, and raw fruits. 44. For running in the Ears. Take the juice of Elder and drop it into the Ear of the party grieved, and it cleanseth the Matter and the Filth thereof, also the juice of Violets used, is very good for the Running of the Ears. 45. For Eyes that are Blood-shot. Take the roots of Red Fennel, stamp them, and wring out the juice, then temper it with Clarified Honey, and make an Oyntment thereof, and anoint the Eyes therewith, and it with take away the Redness. 46. To make the Hands White. Take the flower of Beans, of Lupines, of Starch-Corn, Rice, Orice, of each six ounces, mix them and make a pow∣der, with which wash your hands in Water. 47. A delicate Washing-ball. Take 3 ounces of Orice, half an ounce of Cypress, two ounces of Calamus Aromaticus, 1 ounce of Rose-leaves,  ounces of Lavender-flowers; beat all these together in a Mortar, searsing them through a fine searse, then scrape some Castle soap, and dissolve it in Rose-water, mix your powders therewith, and beat them in a Mortar, then make them up in Balls. 48. For the Lips chopt. Rub them with the Sweat behind your Ears, and this will make them smooth and well coloured. 49. To prevent marks of the Small-Pox. Boyl Cream to an Oyl, and with that anoint the whales with a Feather as soon as they begin to dry and keep the Scabs always moist therewith; let your face be anointed almost every half hor.
50. To take away Child-blains in hand or feet. Boyl half a peck of Oats in a quart of Water till its dry, then anoint your Hands with Pomatum, and after they are well Chased, hold them within the Oats as hot as you can endure them, covering the bowl where∣in you do your hands with a double cloath to keep in the stem of the Oats, do this 3 or 4 times and it will do. 51. To take away Pock-holes or Spots in the Face. Wet a Cloath in White-Rose-water, and set it all night to freeze in the winter, then lay it upon your Face till it be dry, also take 2 or 3 Poppies, the reddest you can get, and quarter them, taking out the Kernel, di∣stil them in a quart of Red-Cows-Milk, and with the wa∣ter wash your Face. 54. An excellent Beauty Water used by the D. of C. Take of white Tartar 2 drams, Camphire 1 dram, Cope∣ras half a dram, the whites of 3 or 4. Eggs, the juice of a couple of Lemons; Oyl of Tartar 4 ounces, and as much Plantain-water, white Mercury a penny-worth, 2 ounces of bitter Almonds; beat all these to powder, and mix them with the Oyl and some Water, and then boyl it upon a gentle Fire, strain it, and so keep it; when you use it, you must rub your face with a Scar∣let cloath, and at Night wash your face with it, and in the Morning wash it off with Bran and White∣wine. 53. Against a stinking Breath. Take a handful of Wood bine, and as much Plan∣tain, bruise them very well, then take a pint of Eye∣selt, and as much water, with a little Honey and Allom; keep all these waters together in a Glass, and wash your mouth well therewith, and hold it in your Mouth, and it will destroy all Cankers, and Cure a Stinking Breath, and preserve the Teeth from Rot∣tenness.
54. To Procure an Excellent Colour and Complection to the Face used by the C. of S. Take juice of Hyssop, and drink it in a Morning fa∣sting, half a dozen Spoonfuls in Ale warm, it will pro∣cure an excellent colour, is good for the Eye-sight, de∣stroyeth Worms, and is good for the Stomach, Liver, and Lungs. 55. To keep the Teeth white, and kill Worms. Take a little Salt in a Morning fasting, and hold it under your Tongue till it be melted, and then rub your Teeth with it. 56. To procute Beauty, an Excellent Wash. Take 4 ounces of Sublimate, and one ounce of Crude-Mercury, and beat them together exceeding well in a Wooden Mortar, and Wooden Pestle; you must do it at least 6 or 8 hours, then with often change of cold Water, take away the Salts from the Sublimate, change your Water twice every day at least, and in 7 or 8 days it will be dulcified, and then it is prepared; lay it on with Oyl of white Poppy. 57. A beauty-water for the face, by Madam G. Take Lye that is not too strong, and put 2 pees of Oranges, and as much Citron-peel, Blossoms of Camo∣mile, Bay-leaves, and Maiden-hair, of each a handful, of Agrimony, 2 or 3 ounces, of barly-straw chopt in pieces a handful, as much Fenugreek, a pint of Vine-leaves, 2 or 3 handfuls of Broom-blossoms; put all these into the lye, and mingle them together, and so wash the Head therewith, put to it a little Cinamon and Myrrh, let it stand, and wash your face therewith every Even∣ing. It is good to wash the Head, and to comfort the Brain and Memory. 58. Against stink of the Nostrils. Take Cloves, Ginger, and Calamint, of each a like quan∣tity, boyl them in White-wine, and therewith wash the Nose within; then put the powder of Piritrum to provoke one to sneeze, If there be Phlegm in the head, you must purge the Head with Pills of Colchie, or of Hiera-picra: Or if the stink of the Nose come from the Stomach, Purge first.
59. To make the Hands white. To make the Hands White and Soft, take Daffodil in clean Water till it grow thick, and put thereto powder of Centarium, and stir them together, and put thereto raw Eggs, and stir them well together, and with this Oyntment anoint your hands, and within three or four days using thereof, they will be white and clear. 60. A sweet Water for the Hands. Take of the Oyl of Cloves, Mace or Nutmegs, 3 or 4 drops only, and mingle it with a pint of fair water, stirring them a pretty while together in a Glass, having a narrow Mouth, till they are well mingled together, and it will be very sweet water, and will cleanse and whiten the Hands very much. 61. For Heat and Worms in the Hands. Bruise a little Chick-weed, and boyl it in running water, till half be wasted away, and wash your Hands in it as hot as you can suffer it, for the space of six days, and it will drive away the Heat or Worms in the Hands. 62. To make the Nails grow. Take wheat-flower and mingle it with Honey, and lay it to the Nails, and it will help them. 63. For Nails that fall off. Take Powder of Agrimony, and lay it on the place where the Nail was, and it will take away the Aching, and make Nails grow. 64. For Cloven Nails. Mingle Turpentine and Wax together, and lay it on the Nail, as it groweth cut it, and it will heal. 65. For Nails that are rent from the flesh. Take some Violets and stamp them, and fry them with Virgins Wax and Frankincense, and make a plaister, lay it to the Nail, and it will be whole. 66. Another. Anoint your fingers with the ponders of brimstone, Arsnick, and Vinegar, and you shall find great ease.
67. For Stench under the Arm-holds. First pluck away the Hairs of the Arm holes, and wash them with White-wine and Rose-water, where∣in you have first boyled Cassia Lignum, and use it 3 or 4 times. 63. For the Yellow Jaundice. Take the Juice Wormwood, and Sorrel, or else make them in Syrup, and drink it at Morning. 69. To take away Warts from the hands or face. Take Purslain, and rub it on the Warts, and it ma∣keth them fall away; also the juice of the Roots of Rushes applyed healeth them. 70. To smooth the skin from Morphew and Freckles. Anoint the Face with the Blood of a Hare or Bull, and this will take away Morphew, and Freckles, and smooth the Skin. 71. For taking away Spots in the face, after the Small-Pox. Mix the juice of Lemons with a little bay-salt, and touch the spots therewith oftentimes in a day, for it is excellent good. 72. A good Oyntment for the same. Take Oyl of sweet Almonds, Oyl of White Lillies, of either one ounce; Capons grease, Goats tallow, of each 4 drams, Litharge of Gold one dram and a half, Roots of Briony and Ireos, of either one scruple, Su∣gar-Candy white one dram, make powder of all those that may be brought into powder, and searce them, then put them all in a Mortar together, beat them to∣gether, and in the working put thereto Roses, Bean∣flower, and white Lilly-water, of each a good spoon∣ful, put in by little and little, and so work them toge∣ther till they become an Oyntment; anoint your face; and hands with it every Evening, and in the Morning wash it away in water boyled with Barley, Wheaten bran, and with the seed of Mallows. 73. A beauty water. Take of Bean-flowers 6 handfuls, Lemon-water one pint, Lilly-roots 8 ounces, Bean-flower a pound, Gum
Arabick and Tragacanth of each one ounce, distill all these together, and wash the face therewith. 74. Another, Approved. Take of distilled Turpentine 2 pound, frankincense 3 ounces, Mastick, Dragon's-blood, of each half an ounce, powder them, and mix them with Turpentine-water, and distill them again, then take of fresh hogs-grease melted one pound, 2 drams of Cloves, 3 Nutmegs, Gold one dram, Silver 2 drams, powder them finely, and distill them in an Alembick. 75, To take away freckles and scars in the face. Take of Aque-vitae four times distilled 3 parts, the tops of Rosemary-flowers 2 parts, steep them together a day and a night, in a vessel well stopt, then distil them. 76. To make the face fresh and ruddy. Use the Shavings of Brazeel-wood dissolved in Rose-water, with a little Camphire added thereto, and you will find it very effectual to make a good Colour and Complection. 77. To make the face Youthful. Take 2 Calves feet, River-water 9 Quarts, boyl them till one half be wasted, then add 1 pound of Rice, the Crumb of a Penny-loaf softned in Milk, fresh Butter, whites of Eggs with their shells, mix them all, and boyl them, and distil all the water from them, to which add at last Camphire, and Sugar, each a little, and it will be excellent. 87. A Water to whiten the Skin, and take away Sun∣burn. Take of Rain-water, the juice of unripe Grapes, each a like quantity, boyl them together till one half be consumed, then whilst it boyls, add so much juice of Lemons as was boyled away before, when it is boyled then take it off, and add 4 whites of Eggs after it is cold, and keep it for use. 79. To clear the face. Take of Lilly-roots roots roasted under the Ashes, one pound, bruise them in a Mortar, to which add Su∣gar-Candy
3 ounces, make an Oyntment to apply to the Face. 80. To take away Ring-worms in the face. Take of Vinegar of Squills 2 ounces, Aloes, the juice of sower Dock; Oyl of Tarter, of each 3 drams, make a Leniment. 81. An Oyntment for beautifying the face. Take of Citron Oyntment fresh made 3 ounces, sweet Almonds, very well bruised, flower of Beans, of each 1 dram▪ the bone of the Fish sepia, Harts-horn, Barley-flower, each two drams, incorporate them all with Honey. 82. Another excellent beautifier. Take of Pomatum 2 ounces, Citron Oyntment 4 Ounces, mix and anoint the Face therewith Night and Morning, and afterwards wash your Face with Bean-flower-water. 83. An Oyntment to illustrate the face. Take the Oyl of the Marrow of a Hart 2 ounces, Oyl of Gourd-seed 1 ounce, Goats-fat, washt Turpen∣tine, each half an Ounce, new Wax 3 drams, melt them by the fire, then add Mastick, Borax burnt, each two drams, mix them and make an Unguent, with which a∣noint the face at Night, and in the Morning wash it off with bran-water. 84. To Curl the hair. Take a quantity of Pine-Kernels burnt and beat to powder, mix them with Oyl of Myrtles, make an Oyntment therewith, and anoint the Head. 15. To make the hair black. Take the juice of Red Poppy, the juice of Green Nuts, Oyl of Myrtles, Oyl of Costomary, each one part, boyl it a while, and anoint the Hair therewith. 86. An Excellent beautifier for the face, used by the Venetian Ladies. Take of burnt Tartar half a pound, powder it and dry it as they do Salt, then take that Salt, and put it within the whites of Eggs boyled.
87. To cure a Red face. Take 4 ounces of Peach-Kernels, Goard-seed, two Ounces, bruise them, and make an Oyl to anoint the Face Morning and Evening. 88. To increase the hair. Take the Seeds of Marsh mallows a sufficient quan∣tity, boyl them in common Oyl, with which anoint the Hair. Also the Oyl of Earth-worms doth increase the Hair. 89. To make the Breasts small. Take of Roch Allom powdered, and Oyl of Roses of each a like quantity, mix them together, and anoint the Breasts therewith. 90. To take away the wrinkles of the face. Take Oyl of Turkey-millet, and the decoction of the Berry of the same, and it will mollify and consolidate Wrinkles. Also Oyl of Nuts is very good for the same. 91. To cleanse the Body and make it comely. Take of Sage, Lavendar-flowers, Rose-flowers, each two handfuls, a little Salt, boyl them in Water or in Lye, and make a Bath not too hot, in which bathe the Body 2 hours before Meat. 92. A Sweet-scented Bath for Ladies. Take of Roses, Citron-peels, Citron-flowers, Orange-flowers, Jasimine, bays, Rosemary, Lavender, Mint, Penny-royal, of each a sufficient quantity, boyl them together gently, and make a bath, to which add Oyl of Spike 6 drops, Musk 5 grains, Ambergrease 3 grains, sweet Asa 1 ounce, let her go into the bath 2 hours before Meat. 93. To make the body fat and comely. Take of Milk and Spring-water each one pint, boyl them together till the Water be consumed, then add Su∣gar of Penedies, fresh Butter, each one ounce, Oyl of sweet Almonds, newly drawn half an ounce, give them one boyling more, and so let it be taken betimes in a Morning fasting, and sleep upon it.
94. To starch Tiffanies or Lawns. You must soap your Tiffany on the Hems or Laces only with brown Soap, then wash them very well in 3 Lathers pretty hot, and let your last Lather be made thin of the Soap, do not rince them, nor wring them hard, then dry them over brimstone, and keep them all the time from the Air, for that will spoil them, then make your Starch of a reasonable thickness, and blue it as you please, and to a quarter of a pound of Starch, put as much Allom as a Hasel-nut, boyl it very well and strain it, and while it is hot, wet your Tiffanies with it very well, and lay them in a Cloth to keep them from drying, then with your hands clean and dry them, then hold your Tiffanies to a good Fire till they be thorough hot, then clap them and rub them between your Hands from the Fire, till you see they be very clear, then shape them by a piece of Paper, cut out by them before they are washed, and Iron them with a good hot Iron, and then they will look Glossy like new Tiffany. And so you also starch Lawns, only remember to Iron them upon a Cloth wetted and rung out again, and turned on the wrong side, and instead of Starch, you may sometimes use Gum Arabick in Wa∣ter; and when it is dissolved, wet the Lawns in that instead of Starch, and hold them to the Fire as afroe∣said, clapping and rubbing them till they are very clear. 95. To make clean Gold and Silver Lace. You must pull off your Lace from your Garment, and being laid on a clean Table, take a little burnt Allom, beaten very fine, and with a small brush rub it all over very well, till you find it comes to its Colour, then shake it, and wipe it very well over oftentimes, with a clean Linnen Cloth. 96. To cleanse all sorts of Silver Plate. Wash your Plate in Soap-suds, and dry it very well, and if any spots remain, take Salt and Vinegar, and rub them out, then daub your Plate all over with Chalk and Vinegar, and lay it before the Fire, or in the Sun
to dry, then rub it off with warm Linnen Cloths very well, and it will look like new. 97. To Wash Silk Stockings. Make a strong Lather with Soap, and pretty hot, then lay your Stockings on a Table, and take a piece of such Cloth as the Seamen use for their Sails, double them up and rub them soundly with it, turn them first on the one side and then on the other, till they have passed through 3 Lathers, then rince them well, and hang them to dry with the wrong side outwards, and when they are near dry, pluck them out with your Hands, and smooth them with an Iron on the wrong side. 98. To make clean Points and Laces. Take new White-bread and pare off the Crust, then lay your Points upon a clean Cloth on the Table, and rub the White-bread all over upon them, and after∣wards rub it over again with a small clean brush, and the Crumbs of Bread, till you have rubb'd it very clean, then cleanse it from the Bread, and gently slap it over with a clean Linnen Cloth; in the same manner you may take off the Soil from Tabbey, Taffety, or white sattin, or any other Coloured, if it be not too much Soil'd and Greasy. 99. To get Ink-spots out of Linnen. As soon as any such Accident happens, lay it imme∣diately in Urin, and there let it lye all Night, and the next day wash it out again, and in so doing 2 or 3 times, you will find the Spots and Stains quite gone. 100. To take spots of Grease out of silk, stuff, or cloth. Wet a Linnen Rag in fair Water, and then put a live Wooden or Sea Coal upon it, and close it up about the Coal, and presently lay it upon the greasy Spot, whilst it is smoaking hot, and when you perceive it to cool, do so again till the Spots are taken out. 101. To take away the stains of Linnen-cloth, caused by any sort of Fruit. Take any of your Garments so stained before they are washed, and rub every Spot thereof very well with
a little Butter, then let it lye a little while in the scalding hot Milk, and when it is cooled, rub the spot∣ted places in the Milk till they are quite out, and then wash it out with Water and Soap. 104. To wash white sarsenet. First take your Sarsenet and spread it very smooth and strait upon a board, and spread Soap upon those places that are soiled, and afterwards take a hard brush that is small, and dip it in Water, and make an indiffe∣rent thick Lather, and with the brush rub your Sarse∣net well with it the right way of the Silk, and when one side is well washt, wash the other also, then make a clean Lather scalding Hot, and put in your Hoods double into it, and cover it up, and so fast as you wash them into it, give them 3 good Washes upon the board, and after the first Lather, let the rest be very Hot, and cast them in a Scald every time, then make up a Scalding∣hot Water, and after you have Steeped some Water of Gum-Arabick, put it therein, adding thereunto-some smalt to blue it a little, let the Hoods be doubled up therein, and close covered for an Hour, and when you take them out, dip them very well all over, and fold them up in a very small Compass, and smooth them very well betwixt your Hands, till they be more than dry, after you have smoothed them over Brimstone, then smooth them with Hot-Irons, the way you washed them, and upon the right side of the Sarsnet. 105. To wash black Sarsenets. Wash them, the same with the other, only Rince them in Small-Beer, without any Gum, and Iron them upon a Woolen-Cloth, on the wrong side. 106. To wash coloured Silks. They must be washt the same way with the White Sarsnet, only you must not use any blue with them, neither must you Smoak them over Brimstone but in all things else you must do as in the White Sarsenet. 107. To Embroider Belts, Bodices, or Petticoats. Get your Pattern drawn, and then form it about with what you like best, black Gimp or other, and fill up the
under parts and Leaves, with Saxen-stitch, some Light and some Darker, and let the upper parts and Seeds of Flowers be done with high Work, as Purple stitcht or others, and let the stalks be all alike, with a great Gimp Twisted, you may make your Flowers of what fan∣cy you please, in Shadows, and being well Shadowed, they will appear very Natural. 108. To Wash and Starch Points. You must first put your Points into a Tent, then take very good Soap, and make a strong Lather therewith, then take a small Brush and dip it therein, and there∣with rub your Point very well on both sides, and con∣tinue so to do, till you have washed it in 4 Lathers, and then wash it in fair Water only, and afterwards in blue Water, and then take some Starch that is made thin with Water, and wash it over on the wrong side, with your Brush, and so let it dry, then lay it upon a Table, and with an Ivory Bodkin made for that purpose, open it in the closest and narrowest parts thereof, then open the Gimp, and Overcast, and also the Islet-holes, and when they are thus opened, you must Iron them on the wrong-side, but before your Water be Warm, that you make your Lather with, and let not your Water, with which you wash them, be too Blue. The Compleat Cook's Guide, or Directions for the Dressing of all Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, both in the English and French Mode; with the preparing of all manner of Sauces and Sallets proper thereunto. Together with the making of all Sorts of Pyes, Pasties, Tarts, and Custards; with the Forms and Shapes of many of them. With Bills of Fare, both for Ordinary and Extraordinary: 1. To make a Lamb-Pye. FIrst, cut your Lamb into Pieces, and then season it with Nutmegs, Cloves, and Mace, and some Salt, with
Currans, Raisins of the Sun, and sweet Butter; and if you will eat it hot, when it is baked, put in some Yolks of Eggs, with Wine-Vinegar, and Sugar beaten together, but if you will eat it cold, put in no Eggs, but only Vinegar and Sugar. 2. To make a Rice Padding. Take thin Cream, or good Milk, of what quantity you please, boyl it with a little Cinamon in it, and when it hath boyled a while, take out the Cinamon, and put in Rose-water, and Sugar enough to make it sweet and good; then having your Rice ready beaten, as fine as Flowen, and Searced as some do it, strew it in, till it be the thickness of a Hasty Pudding, then pour it into a Dish, and serve it. 3. To make Cheese Cakes, the best way. Take 2 Gallons of New Milk, put into them 2 Spoon∣fuls and a half of Runnet, heat the Milk little less then Blood-warm, cover it close with a Cloth, till you see the Cheese be gathered, then with a scuming-dish, gently take out the Whey, when you have Dreyn'd the Curd as clear as you can, put it into a Sieve, and let it drain very well there; then to 2 quarts of Curds, take a quart of thick Cream, a pound of sweet Butter 12 Eggs, a pound and half of Currans, a Peny-worth of Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace beaten, half a pound of good sugar, a quarter of pint of Rose water; Mingle it together, and put it into Puff-paste. 4. To make an Egg Pye, or Mince Pye, of Eggs. Take the Yolks of 2 dozen of Eggs hard Boyled, shred them, take the same quantity of Beef-suet, half a pound of Pippins, a pound of Currans well wash'd and Dry'd, half a pound of sugar, a Penny-worth of beaten Spice, a few Carraway seeds, a little Candied Oringe el thred, a ittle Verjuice and Rose-water, fill the Coffin, and bake it with gentle heat.
5. To Carbanado Muttou. Broyl a Shoulder, or Breast of Mutton, then scotch them with your Knife, and strew on Minc'd Thyme, and salt, and a little Nutmeg; when they are Broyled dish them up: The Sauce is Claret-Wine, Boyled up with 2 Onions, a little Camphire, and Capers with a little Gravy, Garnish'd with Lemons, 6. To stew a Pheasant French fashion. Roast your Pheasant, till it be half Roasted, then Boyl it in Matton Broth, and put into the Broth whole Pepper, whole Mace, Onions and Vinegar, and make it sharp, and put in Pruans and Currans, and colour your Broth with bruised Pruans. 7. To make Bisket Bread. Take half a peck of sine flower, 2 Ounces of Anniseeds, 2 Ounces of Coriander-seed, the whites of 6 Eggs, a pint of Ale-Yeast, with as much warm Water as will make it up into a Paste, so Bake it in a long Rowl; when it is 2 days Old, pare it, and slice it, then sugar it, and dry it in an Oven, and keep it all the Year. 8. To make a Dish of Marrow, Take a pint of fine Paste, and Roul it very thin, then take the Marrow all as whole out of the Bones as you can, and Cleave it into 4 quarters, then take it and sea∣son it with a little Pepper, salt, sugar, and Dates small Minced, then lay one piece in your Paste, and make it up like a Pescod, so make half a Dozen of them, and fry them with Clarified Butter, scrape sugar on and serve them. 9. To make a Herring Pye. Put great store of sliced Onions, with Currans and Rai∣sins of the Sun, both above and under the Herrings, and store of Butter, put them into your Pye, and bake them 10. To make Black-Puddings Take a quart of sheeps-blood, and a quart of Cream, 10 Eggs, the Yolks and the whites beaten together, stir all this Liquor very well, then thicken it with grated bread and Oat meal finely beaten, of each alike quantity, Beef-suet finely shred, and Marrow in little Lumps, season it
with a little Nutmeg, Cloves, and Macc mingled with salt, a little sweet Marjorum, Thyme, and Penny-royal shred very well together, and mingle them with the o∣ther things: Some put in a few Currans, then fill them with Clarified Guts, and boyl them very carefully. 11. To make a good Spanish Olio. Take a Rump of Beef, or some of a Brisket or Buttock, cut it to pieces; a Loyn of Mutton with the Fat taken off, and a fleshy piece of a Leg of Veal, or Knuckle, a piece of Enterlarded Bacon, 3 or 4. Onions, or some Gar∣lick, and if you will, a Capon or 2, or else 3 great Tame-Pigeons. First put into the water the Beef and Bacon, af∣ter a while the Mutton, Veal, and Onions, but not the Capons or Pigeons, only so long till they are Boylled e∣nough, if you have Garavanza's put them in at the first, after they have been soaked with Ashes, all Night in Heat, wash them well in warm Water, or if you have Cab∣ba-Roots, Leeks, or whole Onions, put them in time enough to be sufficiently Boyled. You may at first put in some crusts of Bread, or Vension Pye-Crust, it must boyl in all 5 or 6 Hours gently, like Stewing: After it is well boyl∣ed; a quarter, or half an hour before you intend to take it, take out a Porringer full of Broth, and put to it some Pepper, and 5 or 6 Cloves, and a Nutmeg, and some Saffron and mingle them well in it, then put that into the Pot and let it boyl, or Stew with the rest a while, put in a bundle of Sweet-Herbs, Salt must be put to it when it is Scum'd. 12. To stew Venison. If you have much Venison, and do make many cold baked Meats, you may stew a dish in haste thus, When it is sliced out of your Pye, Pot, or Pasty, put it in your stewing Dish, and set on a heap of coals, with a little Claret wine, a sprig or two of Rosemary, half a dozen Cloves, a little grated bread, Sugar and Vine∣gar, so let it stew together a while, then grate on Nut∣meg, and dish it up. 13. To boyl a Leg of Veal and Bacon. Lard your Leg of Veal with Bacon all over, with a
little Lemon-peel amongst it, then boyl it with a piec of Middle-bacon, when bacon is boyled, cut it in slice season it with Pepper and dryed Sage mixt together Dish up your Veal with Bacon round about it, send up with it, saucers of green Sauce, strew over it Parsley and Barberries. 14. To make Furmety. Take French barley, and pick it, and wash it, lay it in sleep one night, then boyl it in 2 or 3 several wa∣ters, and so cover it, as you do Wheat, to make it smell, then take a quat of good Cream, and boyl it with a Race of Ginger cut in two pieces, one blade of Mace and half a Nutmeg all in one piece, then put thereto so much of the barley as will thicken it, and when it is almost boyled, stir in two or three yolks of Eggs well beaten, and so strained with a few beaten Al∣monds and Flower, or five spoonfuls of Rose-Water, then take out the whole spices and season your Fur∣mety with Salt, and sweeten it with Sugar, and so serve it. 15. To make a Pig pye. Flea your Pig, and cut it into pieces, and season it with Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, and large Mace, lay into your Caffin good store of Raisins of the Sun, and Cur∣rans, and fill it up with sweet butter, so close it, and serve it hot. 16. To make a Neats foot-Pye. First boyl your Neats-foot, and take out the bones, then put in as much beef-snit as in quantity thereto, and so mince them, then season them with Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Sugar, and Salt, and put into your Coffin with some Barberries, Currans, and Raisins of the Sun, then bake it and always serve it hot. 17. To make an Orangado Pye. Make a handsome thin Coffin, and hot butter'd Paste, slice your Orangado, and put over the bottom of it, then take some Pippins and cut every one into eight parts, and lay them in also upon the Orangado, then pour some syrup of Orangado, and Sugar on the top, and so
pie shapes. Double Border'd Cuslard. Ʋumble-Pie. Sturgeon-pie Custard. Carp-Pie. Custard. Oister-pie. Pye Orangado. goo berytar Custard
Lumber-Pie. Chicken-Pye. Mine'd-pie. Tongur-PYE. Lumber-Pye. Minc'd-Pye. Minc'd-Pye. Custard Preserv'd Tare. Custard.
make it up, and bake it, and serve it up with Sugar scraped on it. 18. To make a Pork-Pye. Boyl your Leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, and bake it five Hours in a round Pye. 19. To make a Fricacie of Veal. Cut your Veal into thin slices, beat it well with a rouling-Pin, season it with Nutmegs, Lemon, and Thyme, fry it slightly in the Pan, then beat 2 Eggs, and one spoonful of Verjuice, put it into the Pan, stir it together, Fry it and dish it. 20. To make a Quince-Pye. Take a Gallon of Flower, a pound and half of But∣ter, 6 Eggs, 30 Quinces, 3 pound of Sugar, half an ounce of Cinamon, half an an ounce of Ginger, half an ounce of Cloves, and Rose-water; make them into a Tart, and being baked, stew on double refined Sugar. 21. To make Goose-berry-fool. Pick your Goose-berries, and put them into clean Water, and boyl them till they be all as thick that you cannot discern what it is, to the quantity of a Quart▪ take 6 Yolks of Eggs well beaten with Rose-water, before you put in your Eggs, season it well with Sugar, then strain you Eggs, and let them boyl a while▪ put it in a broad Dish, and let it stand till it is cold, and serve it. 22. To make a tart of Green Pease. Boyl your Pease tender, and pour them out into a Cullender, season them with Saffron, Salt, sweet Butter, and Sugar, then close it, and let it bake almost an hour, then draw it forth and Ice it, put in a little Verjuice, and shake it well, then scrape on Sugar, and serve it. 23. To Souce an Eel. Souce an Eel with a handful of Salt, split it down the back, take out the Chine-bone, season the Eel with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and sweet Herbs mine'd; then lay a pack-thread, at each end, and the middle oul up like a Collar of Braw, then boyl it in Water,
Salt, and Vinegar, a blade or two of Mace, and half a ice of Lemon, boyl it half an hour, keep it in the same Liquor 2 or 3 days, then cut it out in round pie∣ces, and lay 6 or 7 in a Dish with Parsley and Barber∣ries, and serve it with Vinegar in Saucers. 24. To make a Bacon-tart. Take a quarter of a pound of the best Jordan-Almonds, and put them in a little warm Water to blanch them, then beat them together in a Mortar with 3 or 4 spoonfuls of Rose-water, then sweeten them with fine sugar; then take Bacon that is clear and White, and hold it upon the point of a Knife, against the Fire, till it hath dropt a sufficient quantity, then stir it well toge∣ther, and put it into the Paste, and bake it. 25. To make an Ʋmble-Pye. Lay Beef suit minc'd in the bottom of the Pye, or slices of interlarded bacon, and cut the Ʋmble as big as a small Dice, cut your bacon in the same form, and season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, fill your Pyes with it, with slices of bacon, and butter, close it up and bake it: Liquor it with Claret, Butter, and stripped Thyme, and so serve it. 26. To keep Asparagus. Parboyl your Asparagus very little, and put them into clarified butter, cover them with it, and when the Butter is cold, cover them with Leather, and about a Month after refresh the butter, melt it and put it on a∣gain; then set them under ground, being covered with Leather. 27. To roast a Haunch of Venison. If your Venison be seasoned, you must water it, and ick it with short sprigs of Rosemary; let your Sauce be Claret-wine, a handful of grated Bread, Cinamon, Gin∣ger, Sugar, a little Vinegar; boyl these up so thick, as it may only run like butter; it ought to be sharp and sweet: Dish up your Meat on your Sauce. 28. To Carbonado Hens. Let your Sauce be a little White-wine and Gravy, half a dozen of the yolks of Hard Eggs minced, boyled
up with an Onion, add to it grated Nutmeg, thicken it up with the yolk of an Egg or two, with a Ladle full of drawn Butter; Dish up your Hens, and pour over your Sauce, strew on your yolks of Eggs minced, and garnish it with Lemon. 29. To fry Artichoaks. When they are boyled and sliced, fitting for that purpose, you must have your yolks of Eggs beaten with a grated Nutmeg or two; when your Pan is hot, you must dip them into the Yolks of Eggs, and charge your Pan; when they are fryed on both sides, pour on drawn Butter; And if you will fry Spanish Potatoes, then the Sauce is Butter, Vinegar, Sugar, and Rose-water; these for a need may serve for second Course Dishes. 30. To make a Hedge Hog Pudding. Put some Raisins of the Sun into a deep Wooden Dish, and then take some graed bread, and one pint of sweet Cream, 3 Yolks of Eggs, with 2 of the Whites, and some Beef-suet, grated Nutmeg, and Salt, then swee∣ten it with Sugar, and temper all well together, and so lay it into the Dish upon the Raisins, then tye a Cloath about the Dish, and boyl it in Beef-broath, and when you take up put it in a Pewter Dish, with the Raisins uppermost, and then stick blanched Almonds very thick into the Pudding, then melt some Butter, and pour it upon the Pudding, then strew some Sugar about the Dish, and serve it. 31. To stew a Leg of Lamb. Cut it into pieces, and put it into your stewing-pan, being first seasoned with Salt and Nutmeg, and as much Butter as will stew it, with Raisins of the Sun Currans and Gooseberries; when it is stewed, make a Caudle with the yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs, and some Wine-Vinegar and Sugar, beaten together and put it into your Meat, and stew all a little longer together, then dish it; strew Sugar on the brims, and serve it hot. 32. To bake a Pickerel. Boyl your Pickerel, and pull out the ribs and bones then put it into your Pasle, and season it with Pep∣per
and Salt, and put in some Butter, and Raisins of the Sun, and so bake it. 33. To make a Haggess-Pudding. Take a fat Haggess, parboyl it well, take out the kernels, shred it small, and temper it with a handful or two of grated Manchet, then take 3 or 4 Eggs well beaten, Rose-water, Sugar, Cloves, Nutmeg, Cinamon, and Mace finely beaten, Currans and Marrow good store; tem∣per them altogether with a quantity of Cream, being first moderately seasoned with Salt. 34. To make a Dish of Meat with Herbs. Take Sives, Parsley, thyme, Marjoram, and roast 3 or 4 Eggs hard, and a quantity of Murton suet, Beef or Lamb, chop them fine altogether, and season it with Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Sugar, and Cinamon, and a little Salt, then fry them with a little sweet butter. 35. To make Cream of Eggs. Take one quart of Cream, and boyl it, then beat 4 Whites of Eggs very well with 2 spoonfuls of Rose-water; when the Cream is boyled enough, take it off the Fire, and when it is cool, stir in the Eggs with a little Salt, then garnish your dish with fine Sugar scra∣ped thereon, and serve it always cold, for a closing dish. 36. To make a fine Pudding in a Dish. Take a Penny White-loaf, and pare off all the crust, and slice it thin into a dish with a quart of Cream, and let it boyl over a Chafing dish of Coals, till the bread be alm st dry, then put in a piece of sweet butter, and take it off, and let it stand in the dish till it be cold, then take the yolks of 3 Eggs and the quantity of one with some Rose water and Sugar, and stirring them altogether, put it into another dish well butter'd, and bake it. 37. To boyl Scollops. First boyl the Scollops, then take them out of the hells, and wash them, then slice them, and season them with Nutmeg Ginger, and Cinamon, and put them into he bottom, of your Shells agin, with a little But∣er, White-wine, Vinegar, and grated Bread, let them e boyled on both sides; if they are sharp, they must
have Sugar added to them; for the fish is luscious, and sweet naturally; therefore you may boyl them with Oyster Liquor and Gravy, with dissolved Anchovies, minced Onions and Thyme, with the juice of Le∣mon in it. 38. To boyl Wild Ducks. First half roast them, then take them off, and put them in a shallow broad pan that will contain them, with a pint of Claret-wine, and a pint of strong broath, a dozen of Onions cut in halves, a Faggot or two of sweet Herbs, with a little whole Pepper, and some slices of Bacon; cover your Pan, and let them stove up, add gravy to part of the Liquor, at least so much as will serve to dish them: Garnish them with Bacon and Onions if you please. 39. To make a Venison-Pasty. When you have powdered your Haunch of Venison or the sides of it, by taking away all the Bones and Sinews, and the Skin or Fat, season it with Pepper and Salt only, beat it with your Rowling-Pin, and proportion it for the Pasty, by taking away from one part, and adding to another, your paste being made with a peck of fine Flower, and about 3 pound of Butter, and 12 Eggs, work it up with cold water into a stiff paste as you can, drive it forth for your pasty, let it be as thick as a Man's Thumb, roul it up upon a Rowling-pin, and put under it a couple of sheets of Cap-paper well flowered, then your white being already minced and beaten with Water, propor∣on it upon the Pasty to the breadth and length of the Venison, then lay your Venison in the said white, wash it round with your Feather, and put on a border, season your Venison on the top, and turn over your other leaf of paste, so close up your Pasty; then drive out another border for garnishing the sides up to the top of the Pasty, so close it together by the Rowl∣ing-Pin, by rowling it up and down by the sides and ends, and when you have flourish'd your garnishing, and edg'd your Pasty, vent it at the top, set it in the
Oven, and let it have 4 or 5 hours baking at the least and then draw it. 40. To make a Damson-tart. Take Damsons, and seethe them in Wine, and strain them with a little Cream, then boyl your stuff over the Fire till it be thick, and put thereto Sugar, Cinamon, and Ginger, but set it not in the Oven after; but let your Paste be baked before. 41. To roast a Rabbet with Oysters. Wash your Rabbet, and dry it well, then take half a pint of Oysters, wash them, and wipe them clean one by one, and put them into the Rabbet's belly, a cou∣ple of Onions shred, whole Pepper, large Mace, 2 or 3 sprigs of Thyme, sow up the belly; and for the sauce, as usual, the Liver and Parsly; and a hard Egg, shred them together, and beat some butter thick; put into the Dish, and serve it. 42. To stew Collops of Beef. Take of the Buttock of beef thin slices, cross the grain of the Meat; then hack them, and fry them in sweet butter; and being fryed fine and brown, put them in a pipkin with some strong broath, a little Claret-wine, and some Nutmeg; stew it very tender, and half an hour before you dish it, put to it some Gravy, Elder, Vinegar, and a Clove or two; when you serve it, put some juice of Orange, and 3 or 4 slices on it, stew down the Gravy somewhat thick, and put unto it when you dish it beaten butter. 43. To make a Beef-pasty like Red Deer. Take fresh beef of the finest, without sinews or suet, and mince it as small as you can, and season it with Salt and Pepper, and put in 2 spoonfuls of Malmsey, then take Lard, and cut it into small pieces, and lay a layer of Lard, and a layer of Beef, and lay a shin of Beef upon it like Venison, and so close it up. 44. To bake a Hare. Take the best of the Hare minced and seasoned with Pepper, Salt, and Mace, then make a proporti∣on of the Head, or Shoulders, as you make for an Hare
pasty, and lay in a layer of Flesh, and a lay of Lard, and butter a loft and beneath, and make a Gallentine for it in a Saucer, 45. To boyl a Salmon. Take as much water as will cover it, then take Rosemary, Thyme and Winter Savory, and Salt, boyl all these very well, and then put in some Wine-Vinegar, and when your Salmon is boyled, let him remain in the same Water always until you have occasion to eat of it. 46. To make an Oyster-pye. First dry your Oysters, and then put them into your Coffin with some Butter, and whole large Mace, and so bake it; then take off the Lid, and fill it up with more butter, putting some of the Liquor of the Oysters also thereunto, then season it well with Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table at the first Course. 47. To butter Eggs upon toasts. Take 20 Eggs, beat them in a dish with some Salt, and put butter to them, then have two large Rolls, or fine Manchets, cut them in Toasts, and toast them a∣gainst the fire, with a pound of fine sweet butter, being finely butter'd in a fair clean Dish, put the Eggs on the Toasts, and garnish your Dish with Pepper and Salt, otherwise half boy! them in the Shells, then but∣ter them, and serve them on Toasts, or Toasts about them. 48. To make a Fricacie of Chickens. Scald 3 or 4 Chickens, and flea off the Skin and Fea∣thers together, put them in a little water; take half a pint of White-wine, and 2 or 3 whole Onions, some large Mace and Nutmeg, tyed up in a cloath, a bundle of sweet Herbs, and a little Salt, and put them all in a Pipkin close covered; let them simper a quar∣ter of an hour; then take 6 yolks of Eggs, half a pound of sweet butter, 4 Anchovies dissolved in a little Broath; shred your boyled spice small, take a quarter of a pound of Capers, and shred them very
small, put the Anchovies dissolved into the Eggs and Butter, and Capers, and so stir it altogether, over a Chafing-dish of Coals, till it begin to thicken, then take the Chickens out of the Broth, and put lear upon them, serve them with Sippets, and Lemons sliced. 49. To make an Eel-pye with Oysters. Wash your Eels and gut them, and dry them well in a Cloth; to 4 good Eels allow a pint of Oysters well washed, season them with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg, and large Mace, put half a pound of Butter into the Pye, and half a Lemon sliced, so bake it; when it is drawn, take the Yolks of 2 Eggs, a couple of Ancho∣vies dissolved in a little White-wine, with a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, melt it, and mix it altoge∣ther, and make a lear of it, and put it into the Pye. 50. To make a Puff-paste. Break 2 Eggs in 3 pints of Flower, make it with cold Water, then rowl it out pretty thick and square; then take so much butter as paste, and divide your but∣ter in 3 pieces, that you may lay it on at 5 several times, oul your paste very broad, and break 1 part of the same butter in little pieces all over your paste, then throw a handful of Flower slightly on, then fold up your paste and beat it with a Rowling-pin, so rowl it out again, thus do several times, and then make it up. 51. To make Barley-broth. Put your barley into fair Water, give it 3 qualms over the Fire, separate the Waters and put it into a Cullender, and boyl it in a fourth Water with a blade of Mace and a Clove, and when it is boyled away, put in some Raisins and Currans, and when the Fruit is boyl∣ed enough take it off, and season it with White-wine, Rose-water, Butter and Sugar, and a couple of yolks of Eggs beaten with it. 52. To bake a Pig. Take a good quantity of Clay, and having moulded it, stick your Pig and blood him well, and when he is warm, put him in your prepared Coffin of Clay thick every where, with his Hair, Skin, and all his Entrails
drawn, and belly sowed up again then throw him in∣to the Oven, or below the Stock-hole under the Fur∣nace, and there let him soak, turn him now and then when the Clay is hardened, for 12 hours, and he is suf∣ficiently baked, then take him, and break off the Clay, which easily parts, and he will have a fine crispy Coar, and all the Juice of the Pig in your Dish, but re∣member to put a few leaves of Sage, and a little Salt in his belly, and you need no other Sauce. 53. A Grand Sallet. Take a quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun, as many blanched Almonds, as many Capers, as many O∣lives, as much Samphire, as many pickled Cucumbers, a Lemon shed, some pickled French Beans, a Wax tree set in the middle of the Dish, pasted to the Dish, lay all their quarters round the Dish, (you may also mince the flesh of a roasted Hen, with Sturgeon and Shrimps) and garnish the Dish with cut Beans and Turneps in several Figures. 54. To make a Sallet of a cold Hen or Pullet. Take a Hen and roast it, let it be cold, Carve up the Legs, take the Flesh and mince it small, shred a Lemon, a little Parsley and Onions, an Apple, a little Pepper and Salt, with Oyl and Vinegar, garnish the Dish with the Bones and Lemon-peel, and so serve it. 55. To boyl a Capon, Pullet, or Chicken. Boyl them in good Mutten-broath, with Mace, a Fag∣got of sweet Herbs, Sage, Spinage, Marygold-leaves and flowers, white or green Endive, Burrage, Buggloss, Par∣sley, and Sorrel, and serve it on Sippets. 56. To stew Ducks the French fashion. Take the Duck and half roast it, put half a score of Onions in the Belly whole, some whole Pepper, a bun∣dle of Thyme, and a little Salt, when it is half roasted, take it up and slash it into pieces, put it between two Dishes, and pierce the Gravy, mix some Claret-wine with that Gravy, and a little sliced Nutmeg, a couple of Anchovies, wash them and slit them, slice the Oni∣ons in the Ducks belly, cover the Dishes close, so let
them stew while enough, take some butter, beat i thick, and shred a Lemon in it, and serve it: Gar∣nish your dish with the Lemon-peel, and your O∣nions. 57. To make a Florentine. Take the Kidney of a Loin of Veal, or the wing of a Capon, or the leg of a Rabbit; mince any of these small with the Kidney of a Loin of Mutton, if it be not fat enough, then season it with Cloves, Mace, Nut∣meg, and Sugar, Cream, Currans, Eggs, and Rose-wa∣ter; mingle these four together, and put them into a Dish between two sheets of Paste, then close it, and cut the paste round by the brim of the Dish; then cut it round about like Virginal keys, and let the other lye, prick it, bake it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it. 58. To make Curd-Cake. Take a pint of Curds, 4 Eggs, take out a of the whites, put in some Sugar, a little Nutmeg, and a little Flower; and drop them in, and fry them with a little butter. 59. To roast a Leg of Mutton the French way. Take half a pound of Mutton, and a quarter of a pound of Suet, season it with sweet Herbs, and a lit∣tle Nutmeg, and 2 or 3 shallots; slice these very small, and stuff the Mutton round, then take some of the best Hackney Turneps, and boyl them in beef-broth very tender, then squeeze the Water from them a little, set them in a dish under the leg of Mutton, when it is half roasted, and so let the Gravy drop into them, and when the Meat is roasted serve them in the dish with it, with a little fresh Butter and Vinegar,: Gar∣nish your Dish with sliced Onions, and Parsley, and some of the Turnips slic'd. 60. To stew a Carp. Take a living Carp, and knock him on the head, o∣pen him in the belly, take heed you break not the Gill, pour in a little Vinegar, and wash out all the blood, stir it about with your Hand, and keep the blood safe; then put as much White-wine into a
Pan or Skillet, as will almost cover, and set it on the Fire; put to it an Onion cut in the Middle, a Clove, or less of Garlick, a Race of Ginger shred, a Nutmeg quartered, a Faggot or bundle of sweet Herbs, and 3 or 4 Anchovies; your Carp being cut out, and rubbed all over with Salt, when the Wine (into which you may put a little Water) doth boyl, put the Carp in, and cover him close, and let him stew up about a quar∣ter of an hour, then put in the Blood and Vinegar, with a little Butter, so dish up the Carp, and let the Spawn Milt, and Revet be laid upon it, the Liquor that boyled him with the Butter, is the best Sauce, and is to be eaten, as broth: Garnish the dish with Le∣mons and grated bread. 61. To make Marrow-Puddings. Take a pound of the best Jordan-Almonds, Blanch them, beat them fine in a Stone or Wooden Mortar [not in Brass] wilh a little Rose-water, take a pound of fine pouder Sugar, a Penny-loaf Grated, Nutmeg Grated, a pint of Cream, the Marrow of 2 Marrow-bones, 2 Grains of Amber-greese, Mingle them all together with a little Salt, fill the Skins, and boyl them gently as before. 62. To make a Sack-Posset. Set a Gallon of Milk on the Fire, with whole Cinamon and large Mace, when it boyls stir in a half, or whole pound of Naples-bisket, Grated very small, keeping it stirring till it boyls, then beat 8 Eggs together, casting of the Whites away; beat them with a Ladleful of Milk, then take the Milk off the Fire, and stir in the Eggs; then put it on again, but keep it stirring for fear of Curdling; then make ready a pint of Sack, warming it upon the Coals, with a little Rose-water, season your Milk with Sugar, and pour it into the Sack, in a large Bason, and stir it apace, then throw on a good deal of beaten Cinamon, and so serve it up. 63. To Hash a Rabbit. When your Rabbit is Wash'd, you must take the Flesh from the Bones, and Mince it Small, then put to it a little strong Broth, and Vinegar, an Onion or 2, with
a Grated Nutmeg, and let it Stew up together, the Mince a Handful of boyled Parsley Green, with a Lemon cut like Dice, and a few Barberries, put it into the Hash and Toast it altogether, and when it is enough, put a Ladle full of sweet Butter to it, and Dish it upon the Chines, and Garnish it with Lemons. 64. To make a Fresh Cheese. Take some New Milk, or Cream, and a Race of Cina∣mon, Scald it, then take it off the Fire, sweeten it with fine Sugar, then take a Spoonful of Runnet to 2 quarts of Milk, set it by, and keep it close covered, and so let it stand, when the Cheese comes, strew a little fine Sugar, and Grated Nutmeg, and serve it in with Sippets, Sops in Sack or Muscadine. 65. To make an Artichoak Pye. Take the bottoms of 6 A'rtichoaks Boyled very Ten∣der, put them in a Dish, and some Vinegar over them; season them with Ginger and Sugar, a little Mace whole, and put them in a Coffin of Paste, when you lay them in, lay some Marrow and Dates sliced, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom, with a good store of Butter, when it is half baked, take a Gill of Sack, being boyled first with Sugar, and a Peel of Orange. Put it into the Pye, and set it into the Oven again, till you use it. 66. To make Marrow-Pasties. Shred the Marrow and Apples together, and put a little Sugar to them, put them into Puff-paste, and Fry them in a pan with fresh Butter, and serve them up to the Table, with a little White Sugar, strewed on it: 67. To make Green Sauce. Take a good Handful of sorrel, beat it in a Mortar, with Pippins pared and quartered, with a little Vinegar and sugar; put it into Saucers. Or take sorrel, beat it and stamp it well in a Morter, squeeze out the juice of it, and put thereto a little Vine∣gar, sugar, and 2 hard Eggs Minced small, a little Nut∣meg Grated, and Butter, set this upon the Coals till it is hot, and pour it into the dish on the Sippets: This is Sauce for Hen, Veal, and Bacon.
68. To Pickle oysters. Take a quart of the largest Oysters, with the Liquor, wash them clean, and wipe them, add to them a pint of Fair-water, and half a pint of White-wine-Vinegar, half an Ounce of whole Pepper, an handful of salt, a quarter of an Ounce of large Mace, with the Liquor of the Oysters Strained; put all together in a Pipkin over a soft Fire, let them Simper together a quarter of an hour; when the Oysters are enough, then you may safely take them up, and also put them into a little Fair-water and Vine∣gar, till they be cold, the Pickle boyling a quarter of an hour, after the Oysters are taken up; both being cold, put them up together. When you use them, Garnish the Dish with Barberries and Lemons, and a little Mace and Pepper, and pour in some of the Pickle. 69. To make Scotch Collops of Veal. Cut out your Fillet into very broad slices, Fat and Lean, not too Thick: Take 8 Eggs, beat them very well with a little salt, grate a whole Nutmeg, take a handful of Thyme, and Strip it, then take a upond of Sausages, half a pint of stewing Oysters of the largest, wash and cleanse them from the Gravel, then half Fry your Veal with sweet Butter, then put in your Sausages and Oysters, then take a quarter of a pound of Capers, shred them very small, with 3 Anchovies dissolved in White-wine and Fair-water, so put in your Eggs, shred Ca∣pers and Anchovies, Butter and Spice, and mingle them, and strew them in the Pan, upon the Veal and Oysters, serve it with Sippets, with a little Butter and Vinegar, with Lemons sliced, and Barberries, with a little Salt. You must have a care to keep the Meat stirring, lest the Eggs Curdle with the heat of the Fire. 70. To make a Rare White-pot. Take 3 Pints of Cream, whole Cinamon, a little sliced Nutmeg, set on the Cream, and Spice, and Scald it, take a Penny-loaf, and slice it very thin, take a Couple of Mar∣row-Bones, lay the Marrow sliced, on the bottom of the Dish, upon the Mrrrow lay the Bread, then lay Reasons of the Sun over the Bread, and lay Marrow again as be∣fore:
To the 3 Pints of Scalded Cream, add 9 Yolks of Eggs, well beaten with Rose-water, sweeten the Cream with White Sugar, and take out the whole Cinamon, and beat the Cream and Eggs well, fill up a broad and Shal∣low Bason, and bake it, when it is enough scrape fine sugar on it, and stick it with Red and White Muscadoes, and so serve it. 71. To make a very fine Custard. Take a quart of Cream, and boyl it with whole spice, then beat the Yolks of 10 Eggs, and 5 Whites, Mingle them with a little Cream, and when your Cream is almost cold, put your Eggs into it, and stir them very well, then sweeten it, and put out your Custard into a deep Dish, and bake it, then serve it with French Com∣fits strewed on it. 72. To make Minc'd Pyes of an Eele. Take a fresh Eel, flea it, and cut of the Fish from the Bones, Mince it small, then Pare 2 or 3 Wardens, or Pears, Mince of them as much as of the Eel, Temper them together, and season them with Ginger, Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Salt, a little Sanders, some Currans, Raisins, Pruans, Dates, Verjuice, Butter and Rose∣water. 73. To Bake Rabbits, to be eaten Cold. When your Rabits are Parboyled, take out all the bones you can well take out, and Lard them, then season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs; with a good quantity of Savoury, and forc'd Meat; hen put them if to your prepared Coffin, put in Butter, and close your Pye, bake it, and when it is Cold fill it with Clarifi'd Butter. 74. To Take a Joll of Ling in a Pye. Let your Ling be almost boyled, and then Season it with Pepper only (the Skin being first taken off) strew the bottom of your prepared Coffin with an Oni∣on or 2 Minced small; close your Pye, and bake it; then take the Yolks and Whites of about a dozen Eggs, not boyled altogether hard, Mince them small with your Knife, and put them into drawn butter, Toss them
together, then draw your Pye, and pour in this Lear of Eggs all over, and shake it together, so put on your Lid, and Dish your Pye. 75. To Bake a Turkey. Boyl and Lard your Turkey, when it is parpoyl'd season it with Pepper, Salt, and a little Cloves and Mace, then put him into your prepared Coffin, lay on butter and close it: put the Head on the Top, with your Garnish, then bake it, and fill it with larified butter, when it is cold. 76. To Roast Calves Feet. First boyl them tender, and blanch them, and being cold, Lard them thick with small Lard, then Spit them on a Spit, and Roast them; serve them with Sauce made of Vinegar, Cinamon, Sugar, and butter. 77. To Bake a Goose. Break the bones of your Goose, and Parboyl him then Season him with Pepper and Salt, and a little Cloves and Mace, if you please, you may bake a Ribit or 2 with it, because your Stubble Geese are very Fat, and your Rabits dry, you need not Lard either, bake thin good hot Butter-Paste. 78. To make Apple-pyes to Fry. Take about 12 Pippins, pare them, cut them, and al∣most cover them with Water, and almost a pound of Sugar, let them boyl on a gentle Fire close Covered, with a stick of Cinamon, Minced Orange-Peel, a little Dill-seed beaten, and Rose-water, when this is cold and stiff, make them into little Pasties, with Rich Paste, and so fry them. 79. To make a Rare Dutch Pudding. Take a pound and a half of fresh Beef, all Lean, with a pound and a quarter of Beef-suet, both sliced very small, take then a Stale half-peny-loaf, and Grate it, a handful of Sage, a little Winter-savoury, and a little Thyme, shred all these very small, take 4 Eggs, half a pint of Cream, a few Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, and Pepper finely beaten; Mingle them altogether very well, with little Salt, Roul it all up together, in a Green Colwort-leaf,
and then tye it up hard in a Linnen-cloath. Gar∣nish your Dish with Grated Bread, and serve it up with Mustard in Saucers. 80. To make Sausages. Take Pork, more lean than fat, mince it exceeding small together, then take part of the Fleak of Pork, which is the Suet, in pieces, about the bigness of the top of your Finger, season each apart with Sage min∣ced, good store of Pepper and Salt, with some Cloves and Mace mixt in the seasoning each of them, then take small Sheep-guts and cleanse them, (some use Capon's∣guts) and fill them with your Funnel, always putting some of the Fleak between the minced, if you have it ready, you may sprinkle a little Sack on the top of the Sausage-meat, and it will make it fill the better. 81. To stew Beef in Gobbets, the French Fashion. Take a flank of Beef, or any part but the Leg, cut it into slices or Gobbets, as big as Pullets Eggs, with some Gobbets of fat, and boyl it in a Pot or Pipkin, with some fair Spring-water, scum it clean, and after it hath boyled an hour put to it Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, great Onions, some Salt, Cloves, Mace and whole Pep∣per; cover it close, and stew it till it be very tender; and half an hour before it's ready, put into it some Thyme, Parsley, Winter-savoury, sweet Marjoram, Sor∣rel, and Spinage, (being a little bruised with the back of a Ladle, with some Claret-Wine; then dish it on fine Sippets, and serve it to the Table hot: Garnish it with Grapes, Barberries or Gooseberries; or else use Spices, the bottoms of boyled Artichoaks put into beat∣en Butter, and grated Nutmeg, garnished with Bar∣berries. 82. To boyl a Capon or Chicken with Sugar-pease. When the Cods be but young string them, and pick off the Husks, then take 2 or 3 handfuls and put them into a Pipkin, with half a pound of sweet Butter, a quarter of a pint of fair Water, gross Pepper, Salt, Mace, and some Sallet-Oyl; stew them till they be ve∣ry tender, and strain to them 3 or 4 yolks of Eggs, with 6 spoonfuls of Sack.
83. To boyl Perches. Let your Liquor boyl, and your Pan be seasoned with a little White-wine, Gravy and Vinegar, with a grated Nutmeg, and almost boyl it over a Chafing dish, then pour sweet Butter over it: Garnish it with Barberries and sliced Lemons. 84. To boyl Eels. Cut the Eels and stew them; when they are half done, beat a little Ale with Vinegar and put to the Li∣quor with some Parsley and sweet Herbs; Dish them and serve them up in their Broth, with a little Salt. 85. A Turkish Dish of Meat. Take an inter-larded piece of Beef, cut it into thin slices, and put it into a Pot with a close cover, or stew∣ing-pan; then put into it a good quantity of clean pick'd Rice, skin it well, put into it a quantity of whole Pep∣per, 2 or 3 whole Onions, and set it boyl very well, take out the Onions, and dish it on Sippets; the thick∣er it is the better. 86. To boyl a Chine of Beef poudered. Take either a Chine, Rump, Surloin, Brisket, Rib, Flank, Buttock, or Fillet of Beef, and give them in Summer a weeks poudering, in Winter a Fortnight, you may stuff them, or let them be plain; if you stuff them, do it with all manner of sweet Herbs, with fat Beef minced, and some Nutmeg; serve them on brew is, with Roots, or Cabbage boyled in Milk, with beaten Butten. 87. To make a Hash of a Capon or Pullet. Take a Capon, or Partridge, or Hen▪ and rost them, and being cold, mince the Brains and Wings very fine, and tear the Legs and Rumps, whole to be Carbonaded; then put some strong Motton-broath, or good Gravy, grated Nutmeg, a great Onion and Salt, then stew them in a large Earthen Pipkin, or Snce Pan stew the Rumps and Legs in the same strong Broath in another Pipkin; then take some light French bread chipt, and cover the bottom of the Dish▪ steep the Breal in the same Broath, or good Mutton Gravy, then our te
Hash on the steeped Bread, lay the Legs and the Rump on the Hash with some fryed Oysters, sliced Lemon and Lemon-peel, the juice of an Orange, and yolks of Eggs strained, and beaten Butter, Garnish the Dish, with Carved Oranges, Lemons, &c. Thus you may Hash any kind of Fowl. 88. To dress a Cods Head. Cut off the Cods-head beyond the Gills, that you may have part of the Body with it, boyl it in Water and Salt, to which you may add half a pint of Vinegar, the Head must be little more than covered; before you put it into the Cauldron, take a quart of the biggest cleanest Oysters, and a bunch of sweet Herbs and O∣nions, and put them into the moath of the Head, and with a Packthread bind the Jaws fast, you must be sure to pick and wash it very clean: When it is boyled e∣nough, take it up and set it a drying over a Chafing-dish of Coals, then take the Oyster Liquor, four An∣chovies, and a sliced Onion, put to them a quarter of a pint of White-wine and sweet butter, and melt them together, and pour it on the Cods-head; stick all, or most of the Oysters upon the Head, or where they will enter, and Garnish it over with them; Grate on a little Nutmeg, and set it smoaking up; Gar∣nish the brim of the Dish with Lemon, and sliced Bay leaves. 89. To boyl Widgeons or Teal. Parboyl your Widgeons or Teal, and then stick whole Cloves in their Breasts, put into their bellies a little Winter-savory or Parsley; boyl them in a Pipkin by themselves, thicken it with Toasts, season it with Ver∣juice, Sugar, and a little Pepper; Garnish your dish with Barberries and Pruens, and so serve them. 90. To make a Veal Pye. When your Paste is raised; then cut your Leg o Veal into pieces, and season it with Pepper, Nutmeg, and Salt, with some whole large Mace, and so lay it in your prepared Coffin, with good store of Raisins o the Sun, and Currans, and fill it up with sweet Butter
then close it, and set it in the Oven, and when bak'd, serve it hot. 91. To make a fry'd Pudding. Take grated Bread, Currans, Cloves and Mace, with Beef Suet and Sugar, and one yolk of an Egg beaten, ix all well together, and make them into flat bowls, en fry them in Beef-Suet, and Garnish your Dish ith Sugar, serve them always at the first Course. 92. To bake a Breast of Veal. First parboyl it, and take out the long Bones, and so lay it in a Dish, in Vinegar two or three hours, hen take it out, and season it with Pepper and Salt, nd so lay it into a thin fine Paste, with good store of ne sweet Herbs, finely chopt, and good store of But∣er or Marrow, then bake it, then put in some juice of ranges, and serve it hot. 93. To make Paste for all manner of tarts. Take very sweet Butter, and put into fair water nd make it boyl on the Fire; then take the finest flower you can get, and mix them well together, till  come to a paste, and so raise it; but if you doubt at it will not be stiff enough, then you may mix me Yolks of Eggs with it, as you temper all your uff together. 94. To make a baked Pudding. Grate a penny-loaf, and put thereto more Suet than ead minc'd small, with some Nutmeg and Sugar, d two yolks of Eggs, tempering it only with Rose∣ater; then butter a little Pewter Dish in the bottom, d put your stuff after it is well tempered therein, en bake it, when 'tis baked, stir it up from the bot∣m of the Dish, and so turn the underside upper∣ost, then strew some Sugar upon the brims of the ish, and serve it first to the Table. 95. To boyl Sparrows, Larks or other small Birds. Take a Laddle full of strong Mutton-broath, a little hole Mace, and a handful of Parsley, put in a little uter-savory, season it with Verjuice, Sugar, and a lit∣ Pepper, thicken it with a spoonful of Cream, and olk of .
96. To boyl a Capon with Asparagus. Boyl your Capon or Chicken in fair water, and some Salt, then put in their bellies a little Mace, chopped Parsley, and sweet Butter; being boyled, serve them on Sippets, and put a little of the Broath on them; Then have a bundle or 2 of Asparagus boyled, put in beaten butter, and serve it on your Capon or Chicken. 97. To boyl a Chicken or Capon in white Broath. First boyl the Capon in Water and Salt, then 3 pint of strong Broath, and a quart of White-wine, and stew i in a Pipkin with a quarter of a pound of Dates, hall a pound of fine Sugar, four or five blades of large Mace the Marrow of 3 Marrow bones, a handful of white En∣dive, stew these in a Pipkin very leasurely, that it but only simper, then being finely stewed, and the broath well tasted, strain the yolks of ten Eggs, with some of the broath; before you dish up the Capons or Chic∣kens, put the Eggs into the broath, and keep it stirring that it may not Curdle, give it a Walm and set it from the fire: the Fowls being dish'd up put on the Broath, and Garnish the Meat with Dates, Marrow, large Mace, Endive, preserv'd barberries, Oranges, boyled Skirre. Pomegranates, and Kernels. Make a Lear of Almond paste and Grape Verjuice. 98. To boyl a Capon with Sage and Parsley. First boyl it in Water and Salt, then boyl some Par∣sley, Sage, 2 or 3 Eggs hard and chop them; then ha a few thin slice of Manchet, and stew altogether b break not the slices of bread; stew them with som of the broath wherein the Capon boyls, some larg Mace, Butter, a little White-wine, or Vinegar, wit a few Barberries, or Grpes; Dish up the Chickens o the Sauce, and run them over with sweet butter, an Lemon, cut like Dice, the Peel being cut like sma Lard, and boyl a little peel with the Chickens. 99. To fry Rabbits with sweet Sauce. Cut your Rabbit in pieces, wash it, and dry it we in a Cloath, take some fresh butter, and fry the Ra∣bit in it, when your Rabbit is little more than half fry∣ed,
take a little Vinegar, fresh butter and sugar; melt it together, and so serve it with Sippets, the Dish Gar∣nished with Flowers, &c. 100. To make French Pottage called Skink. Take a Leg of Beef, and chop it into 3 pieces, then boyl it in a pot with 3 pottles of Spring Water, a few Cloves, Mace, and whole Pepper: after the Pot is scum∣med put in a bundle of Sweet-Marjoram, Rosemary, thyme, Winter savory, Sage, and Parsley, bound up hard, some Salt, and 2 or 3 great Onions whole, then about an hour before Dinner put in 3 Marrow-bones, and thic∣ken it with some strained Oat-meal, or Manchet sliced and steeped with some Gravy, strong broath, or some of the Pottage; then a little before you dish up the Skink, put into it a little fine powder of saffron, and give it a walm or 2; Dish it on large slices of French bread, and dish the Marrow-bones on them in a fine large Dish, then have 2 or 3 Manchets cut into toasts, and be∣ing finely toasted, lay on the Knuckle of Beef in the middle of the Dish, the Marrow-bones round about it, and the Toasts round about the Dish brim; serve it hot. 101. To make Gooseberry Cream. First boyl, or you may preserve your Gooseberries; then having a clear Cream boyled up, and seasoned with old Cinamon, Nutmeg, Mace, Sugar, Rose-water, and Eggs, dish it up, and when it is cold, take up the Goose∣berries with a pin, and stick them on in rounds as thick as they can lye upon the said Cream; Garnishing your Dish, with them, and strew them over with the fin∣est Sugar, and serve them up. 102. To make a Quaking Pudding. Take a quart of sweet Cream, and near half a pound of Almonds blanched, and finely beaten, then strain them, and boyl it with large Mace, and season it with Rose-water and sugar, then take 10 Eggs, and 5 of their whites well beaten with small Cinamon, and 2 or 3 spoonfuls of flower, mix all well together, and make it of the thickness of Butter, then wet a Cloath and rub
it with Flower, tying your Pudding round therein, and boyl it in Beef-broath 2 hours; take it up, and put a little White-wine, Sugar, and sliced Nutmeg into a Pewter-dish, and put your Pudding into it; then scrape some Sugar on the brims, and serve it. 103. To make clouted Cream. Take New Milk and set it on the fire from Morning till Evening, but let it not boyl; And this is called my Lady Youngs Clouted Cream. 104. To souce a young Pig. Scald a young Pig, boyl it in fair water and White-wine, put thereto some bay leaves, whole Ginger and Nutmegs quartered, and a few whole Cloves boyl it throughly, and let it lye in the same Broath in an Earthen-pot. 105. To make Polonian sausages. Take the Fillets of a Hog, chop them very small with a handful of Red Sage, season it hot with Ginger Pepper; then put it into a great Sheeps Gut, let it lye 3 nights in Brine, then boyl it, and hang it up in a Chimney where Fire is usually kept. These Sausages will keep a whole year, and are good for Sallets, or to garnish boyl'd Meat, or to relish a Glass of Wine. 106. To keep salmon fresh a whole Month. First boyl your salmon as usually, then put it into an Earthen-pot, and cover it in good White-wine Vi∣negar, putting thereto a branch of Rosemary, and keep it very close covered, and so you may keep it, that it will retain its perfect taste and delicacy for one Month or more. 107. To make tender and delicate Brawn. Put a Coller of Brawn in a Kettle of Water, and set it into an Oven, as for Houshold-bread, cover it close, and let it stand as long as you would do bread, and it will be very excellent Brawn.
108. To keep powdered beef after it is boyled, sweet 5 or 6 Weeks. When your Beef hath been powdered about a fort∣night, then boyl it well, and dry it with a Cloath, and wrap it in dry Cloaths, and put it into some pot or Vessel, and keep it close from the Air, and it will keep sound 2 or 3 Months. 109. To dress Neats-tongues and Ʋdders. When they are boyled enough in Beef-broath, and scumm'd; von must have Turnips ready boyled, cut in pieces, and soak'd in butter, or else Colliflowers and Carrots, or all of them; then put the Turnips all o∣ver the bottom of a large Dish, then slice out the Tongues, and lay the sides one against another, slice the Udders, and lay them between, opposite to one a∣nother; Garnish the Colliflowers all over them, and the Carrots up and down between the Colliflowers, and Barberries and Parsley on the brim of the dish. 110. To make Pannado. Take a quart of Running-water, and put it on the fire in a Skillet, then cut a little Roul of bread in slices, about the bigness of a Groat, and as thin as Wafers, lay it on a dish on a few Coals, then put it into the Water, with 2 handfuls of Currans pick'd and wash'd, a little large Mace, when it is enough season it with Sugar and Rose-water. 111. To make Liver Puddings. Take the Guts of a young Hog, wash them very clean, and lay them 2 or 3 days in water, take the Liver of the same Hog and boyl it till it will grate; then grate it very small and fine, take to the weight of the Liver almost the weight of Beef-suit, season it with Salt, Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg finely beaten, a Penny loaf grated, a pound of the best White Sugar, 2 pound of Currans, a pint of good Cream, a quarter of a pint of Rose-water, 3 Eggs, mix all together to such a thickness, that you may fill the Guts, then prick them, and put them into boyling water, and keep an even fire for half a quarter of an hour; then take
them up, and lay them upon straw, you must have a care not to tye them too hard nor too slack, lest they break in boyling. 112. To make a rare Citron-Pudding. Take a Penny loaf and grate it, a pint and half of Cream, half a dozen of Eggs, one Nutmeg sliced, a lit∣tle Salt, an ounce of Candied Citron sliced small, a lit∣tle Candied Orange-peel sliced, 3 ounces of Sugar, put these into a Wooden dish well flowered, and cover it with a Cleath, and when the water boyleth, put it in, boyl it well, and serve it up with Rose-wa∣ter and Sugar, and stick it with Wafers or blanched Almonds. 113. To bake a Gammon of Bacon. Water it fresh enough, and seethe it as tender as you may to handle it, and then pull off the skin and stuff it with Parsley, Penny royal, Thyme, Marjoram, Marigolds, Camomile and Sugar, chop them small, and season them with Salt and Pepper, Cloves small Raisins, yolks of Eggs hard roasted, then sturf your Bacon, and cut off the lean of the Bacon, and mince it small, and take a handful of your Stuffing, and mingle it with 3 or 4 yolks of raw Eggs, and then put it upon the Gammon, then close on the skin again, and close it in paste. 114. To boyl Woodcocks or Snites. Boyl them either in strong Broth, or in Water and Salt, and being boyled, take out the Guts, and chop them small with the Liver, put to it some Crumbs of grated White bread a little Cock broth, and some large Mace, stew them together with some Gravy, then dissolve the yolks of 2 Eggs in some Wine Vinegar, and a little grated Nut∣meg, and when you are ready to dish it, put in the Eggs, and stir it among the Sance with a little Butter, dish them on Sippets, and run the Sauce over them with some beaten Butter and Capers, a Lemon minced small, Barberries or whole pickled Grapes. 115. To make a made Dish of Apples. Put on your Skillet of Water, with some Currans, a boyling, then pare about a dozen of Pippins, and cut
them from the Core into the said Water, when they are boyled tender pour them into a Cullender, when the Wa∣ter is drained from them, put them into a Dish, and season them (but stay till they are cold, least it melt your Sugar) with Sugar, Rose-water, Cinamon, and Carra∣way-seeds, then roul out 2 sheets of paste, put one into the Dish, bottom, and all over the brims, then lay the Apples in the bottom round and high, wet it round, and cover it with the other Sheet, close it, and carve it a∣bout the brims of the Dish as you please, prick it, and bake it, scrape Sugar upon it, and serve it up. 116. To make a Fool. Set 2 quarts of Cream over the Fire, let it boyl, then take the yolks of 12 Eggs, and beat them very well, with 3 or 4 spoonfuls of cold Cream, and then strain the Eggs in the Skillet of hot Cream, stirring it all the time to keep it from burning, then keep it still stirring for fear of burning, then take it off, and let it stand and cool, then take 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of Sack, and put it in the Dish with 4 or 5 Sippets, set the Sippets a drying and when they are dry that they hang to the Dish, sweet∣en the Cream, and pour it into the Dish softly, because the Sippets shall not rise up; this will make 3 Dishes: When it is cold it is fit to be eaten. 117. To boyl Flounders or Jacks the best way. Take a punt of White-wine, the tops of young Thyme and Rosemary, a little whole Mace, a little whole Pepper, seasoned with Verjuice, Salt and a piece of sweet Butter, and so serve it; you may do Fish in the same Liquor 3 or 4 times. 118. To boyl a Haunch of Venison. First stuff your Venison with a handful of sweet Herbs, and Parsley minced with a little Beef-suet, and yolks of Eggs boyled hard; season your Stufling with Pepper, Nutmeg, Ginger, and Salt; put your Haunch of Venison a boyling, being poudered before; then boyl up 3 or 4 Colliflowers in strong Broth, and a little Milk; when they are boyled, put them forth into a Pipkin,
add to them drawn Butter; and keep them warm by th Fire, then boyl up 2 or 3 handfuls of Spinage in the same Liquor, when it is boyl'd up, pour out part of the broth and put in a little Vinegar, and a Ladleful of sweet Butter, and a grated Nutmeg, your Dish being ready with Sippets in the bottom, put on your Spinage round to∣ward your Dish side; then take up the Venison, being boyled, and put it into the middle of your Dish, put in your Colliflowers all over it, pour on your sweet bttter over your Colliflowers, and garnish it with Barberries, and the brims of the Dish with green Parsley minced; Cabbage is as good, done in the same manner as Colli∣flowers. 119. To make an Eel-pye. Wash, Flea, and cut your Ecls in pieces, put to them a handful of sweet Herbs, Parsley minced with an Onion, season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg, and having your Coffin made of good Paste, put them in, and strew over them 2 handfuls of Currans, and a Lemon cut in slices, then put on Butter and close the Pye, when it is baked, put in at the Funnel a little sweet-Butter, White-wine and Vinegar, beaten up with a couple of Yolks of Eggs. 120. To bake Steaks the French way. Season the Steaks with Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt light∣ly, and set them by; then take a piece of the leanest of the Leg of Mutton, and mince it small with some Beef∣suet, and a few sweet Herbs, as tops of Thyme, Penny∣royal, grated Bread, yolks of Eggs, sweet Cream, Rai∣sins of the Sun, &c. Work all these together, and work it into little balls or puddings, put them in a deep round Pye on the Steaks; then put to them some But∣ter, and sprinkle it with Verjuice, close it up and bake it, when it is enough cut it up, and liquor it with the juice of 2 or 3 Oranges and Lemons. 121. To make a Warden or Pear-pye. Bake your Wardens or Pears in an Oven with a lit∣tle Water, and a good quantity of Sugar, let your Pot
be covered with a piece of Dough; let them not be fully baked by a quarter of an hour; when they are cold make a high Coffin, and put them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinamon, Sugar, with some of the Liquor in the Pot, so bake it. 122. To stow a Trout. Take a large Trout fair trim'd and wash it, put it into a deep Peuter Dish; then take half a pint of sweet Wine, with a lump of Butter, and a little whole Mace, Parsley, Savory and Thyme; mince them all small, and put them into the belly of the Trout, and so let it slew a quarter of an hour, then mince the yolk of an hard Egg, and stew it on the Trout, lay the Herbs about it, scrape on Sugar and serve it up. 123. To make Sauce for Pidgeons. Melt some Vinegar and butter together, and roast some Parsley in the belly of the Fowl; or else Vine∣leaves, and mix it well together, and pour it on. 124. A general Sauce for Wild-fowl. The most general Sauce for Wild-fowl roasted; as Ducks, Mallard, Widgeons, Teal, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plo∣vers, Puets, and the like, is only Mustard and Vinegar, or Mustard and Verjuice mixed together, or else an O∣nion, Water and Pepper. 125. To Roast a Cows Ʋdder. Boyl your Udder very well, then stick it thick all o∣ver with Cloves, and when it is cold spit it and lay it to the Fire, and baste it very well with sweet Butter, and when it is sufficiently roasted and brown, draw it from the Fire, and put some Vinegar and Butter on a Chafing-dish of Coals, and crumb in some White-bread, and boyl it till it be thick, then put to it good store of Sugar and Cinamon, and putting it into a clean dish, lay the Cows Udder therein, and trim the sides of the Dish with Sugar and so serve it. 126. To make a Spinge-tart. Take of good Spinage, and boyl it an White-wine till it be very soft as Pap; then take it and strain it all in a Pewter Dish, not leaving any unstrained; put to
Rose-water, good store of Sugar, and Cinamon, and boyl it till it be as thick as Marmalade, then let it cool, and afterwards fill your Coffin and adorn it, and serve it, it will be of a green Colour. 127. To make a Tart of Rice. Pick your Rice very clean, and boyl it in sweet Cream till it be very soft, then let it stand and cool; put to it good store of Cinamon and Sugar, and the yolks of a couple of Eggs, and some Currans; stir and beat all well together: Then having made a Coffin as for other Tarts, put your Rice therein, and spread it all over the Coffin, and break many small bits of sweet Butter upon it all over, and scrape some Sugar over it, then cover the Tart and bake it, and serve it as other Tarts. 128. To make a Codling-tart. Take Green Apples from the Tree, and Coddle them in scalding Water, without breaking, then Peel the skin from them, and so divide them into halves, and cut out the Cores, and so lay them into the Coffin, and do as in a Pippin tart, and before you cover it, when the Sugar is cast in, sprinkle a good store of Rsose-water on it, then close it, and do as in the Pippin-tarts. 129. To make a Pippin-tart. Take of the Fairest Pippins, and pare them, and then divide them just in halves, and take out the Cores clean, then Roul the Coffin flat, and raise a small verge of an Inch or more high; lay the Pippins with the Hollow side downward, close one another, then put in a few Cloves, a stick of Cinamon broken, and a little piece of Butter, cover all clean over with sugar, and so cover the Coffin, and bake it as other Tarts; when it is baked, boyl some Butter and Rose-water together, and anoint the Lid all over with it, and then scrape, or strew on it good store of sugar, and so set it in the Oven again, and then serve it up. 130. Eo make a cherry-tart. Take the Fairest cherries you can get, and pick them clean from Leaves and stalks, then spread out your Cof∣fin
as for your Pippin-tart, and cover the bottom with sugar, then cover the sugar all over with cherries, then cover these cherries with sugar, some sticks of cinamon, and a few cloves; then lay in more cherries, sugar, cina∣mon, and cloves, till the Coffin be filled up, then cover it and bake it, in all points as the codling and Pippin-tarts, and so serve it, In the same manner you may make Tarts of Goose-berries, strawberries, Rasberries, Bil∣berries, or any other Berry whatsoever. 131. To make a Mince-Pye. Take a Leg of Mutton; or a Neats-Tongue, and Parboyl it well, the Mutton being cut from the bone, then put to it three pound of the best Mutton-suet, shred very small; then spread it abroad, and season it with Salt, Cloves and Mace, then put in good store of Currans, great Raisins, and Pruans clean washed and Picked, a few Dates sliced, and some Orange-Peels sliced: then be∣ing all well mixt together, put it into a Coffin, or many Coffins, and so bake them, and when they are served up, open the Lids, and strew store of Sugar on the Top of the Meat, and Lid. 132. To make a Calves-Foot-Pye. Boyl your Calves-Feet very well, and then Pick all the meat from the Bones, when it is Cold shred it as small as you can; and season it with Cloves and Mace, and put in good store of Currans, Raisins and Pruans, then put it into the Coffin with good store of sweet Butter, then break in whole sticks of Cinamon, and a Numeg sliced, and season it with Salt, then close up the Coffin, and only leave a vent-hole, put in some Liquor made of Verjuice, Sugar, Cinamon, and Butter boyled together, and serve it. 133. To make a Tansie. Take a certain number of Eggs, according to the bigness of your Frying-Pan, and break them into a Dish, taking away the white of every third Egg, then with a spoon take away the little White Chicken-knots, that stick upon the Yolks, then with a little Cream beat them very well together, then take of Green Wheat-blade,
Violet-leaves, Strawberry-leaves; Spinage and Suc∣cory, of each a like quantity, and a few Walnut-Tree-Buds; Chop and beat all these very well, and then strain out the Juice; mix it then with a little more Cream, put to it the Eggs, and stir all well together; then put in a few Crumbs of fine Grated Bread, Cinamon, Nutmeg, and Salt, then put some sweet Butter into a Frying-Pan, and as soon as it is Melted put in the Tansey, and fry it brown without burning, and with a dish turn it in the Pan, as occasion shall serve, strew good store of sugar on it, and serve it up. 134. To slew a Pike. After your Pike is drest, and opned in the back, and laid flat, as if it were to Fry, then lay it in a large Dish, put to it White-Wine to cover it, set it on the Coals, and let it boyl gently, if Scum arise, take it off, then put to it Currans, Sugar, Cinamon, Barberies, as many Pruans as will Garnish the Dish, then cover it close with another Dish, and let it slew till the Fruit be soft, and the Picke enough, then put to it a good piece of sweet Butter; with your Scummer take up the Fish, and lay it in a dish with Sippets, then take a couple of Yolks of Eggs only, and beat them together well, with a spoonful of Cream, and as soon as the Picke is taken out, put it into the Broth, and stir it exceedingly, to keep it from Curdling, then pour the Broth upon the Pike, and Trim the sides of the dish with Sugar, Pruans, and Barberies, with slices of Oranges and Lemons, and so serve it up. 135. To Roast Vension. If you would Roast any Vension, after you washed it, and cleansed all the Blood from it, you may stick it with Cloves, all over on the out-side, and if it be Lean, Lard it with either Mutton or Pork-Lard, but Mutton is the best, then Spit it, and Roast it by a soaking. Fire, then take Vinegar, crumbs of Bread; and some of the Gravy that comes from the Vension, and boyl them well in a Dish, then season it with Sugar, Cinamon, Ginger, and Salt, and serve the Vension upon the Sauce, when Roas
136. To Roast a piece of fresh Sturgeon. Stop your Sturgeon with Cloves, then spit it, and let it roast very leasurly, basting it continually, which will take away the hardness; when it is enough, serve it up∣on the Vension sauce; with Salt only thrown upon it, 137. To Boyl a Gurnet or Roach. First draw your Fish, and then either split it, or Joynt it open in the back, and Truss it round; then wash it clean, and boyl it in Water and Salt, with a bunch of sweet Herbs, then take it up in a large Dish, and pour into it Verjuice, Nutmeg, Butter, and Pepper, after it hath stewed a little, thicken it with the Yolks of Eggs, then remove it hot into another Dish, and Garnish it with slices of Oranges and Lemons, Barberries, Pruans and sugar, and so serve it up. 138. To make a carp Pye. After you have drawn and wash'd, and scalded a fair large carp, season it with Pepper, salt, and Nutmeg, and then put it into a Coffin, with good store of sweet Butter, and then cast on Raisins of the sun, the juice of Lemons, and some slices of Orange-Peels, and then sprinkle on a little Vinegar, close it up, and bake it. 139. To make a chicken Pye. After you have trust your chickens, then break their Legs and Breast-bones, and raise your crust of the best Paste, lay them in a Coffin, close together, with their bodies full of Butter, and then lay upon them, and un∣derneath them, currans, great Raisins, Pruans, cinamon, sugar, whole Mace and sugar, whole Mace and salt, then cover all with good store of Butter, and so bake it; then pour into it White-wine, Rose-water, sugar, cinamon, and Vinegar mixt together, with the Yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs beaten amongst it, and so serve it. 140. To make Almond-Water. Take blanched Almonds beaten in a Mortar very small, puting in now and then one spoonful of Cream, to keep them from oyling: Then boyl as much Cream as you please with your beaten Almonds, together with a blade of Mace, and season it with Sugar; then strain it, and
stir it till it be be almost cold, and then let it stand till you serve it; and then Garnish your Dish with fine Sugar scraped thereon. 141. To make an Almond-Pudding. Take a Pound of Blanched Almonds, and beat them small; put therere some Rose-water and Ambergreese often thereinto, as you beat them, then season it with Nutmeg, and Sugar, and mix them with grated read, Beef-fuet, and 2 Eggs, and so put it into a dish, tying a Cloth round about, and boyl it. 142. To make Water Gruel. Take a Pottle of Water, a handful of great Oatmeal Pickt, and beat in a Mortar, put it in boyling▪ when it is half enough, put to it 2 handfuls of Currans, washed, a Faggot or 2 of sweet Herbs; 4 or 5 blades of large Mace, and a little sliced Nutmeg, let a grain of Musk be infused a while in it, when it is enough season it with Sugar and Rose-water, and put to it a little drawn butter. 143. To stew sausages. Boyl them a little in fair water and salt, and for sauce boyl some Currans alone, when they be almost tender, pour out the Water from them, and put to them a little White-wine, Butter and sugar, and so serve it. 144. To make a Rare Fricacie. Take young Rabbits, young Chickens, or a Rack of Lamb, being cut one Rib from another, and Parboyl either of these very well, in a Frying-pan, with a little Water and Salt, then pour the Water and Salt from it, and fry it with sweet Butter, and make sauce with 3 Yolks of Eggs beaten well, with 6 spoonfuls of Verjuice, and a little shred Parsley, with some sliced Nutmeg, and scalded Goosberries, when it is Fryed pour in the Sauce all over the Meat, and so let it thicken a little in the Pan; then lay it in a Dish with the sauce, and serve it. 145. To make an Oatmeal-Pudding. Take a pint of Milk, and put to it a pint of large Oatmeal, let it stand on the Fire till it be scalding hot,
then let it stand by and soak about half an hour, then pick a few sweet Herbs and shred them, and put in half a Pound of Currans, and half a pound of Suet, and about 2 spoonfuls of Sugar, and 3 or 4 Eggs; these put into a bag and Boyled, do make a very good Pudding. 146. To make an Almond Tart. Raise an excellent good Paste, with 6 Corners an Inch deep, then take some Blanched Almonds very fine∣ly beaten with Rose-water, take a pound of Sugar to a pound of Almonds, some grated Nutmeg, a little Cream, with strain'd Spinage, as much as will cover the Al∣monds Green, so bake it with a gentle heat, in an Oven, not shutting the door, draw it, and stick it with a Candied Oringe, Citron, and put in Red and White Mus∣kadine. 847. To Boyl Pidgeons with Rice. Boyl your Pidgeons with Matton-broth, putting sweet Herbs in the bellies, then take a little Rice, and boyl it in Cream with a little whole Mace, season it with Su∣gar, lay it thick on their breasts, wringing also the Juice of Lemon upon them, and so serve them, 148. To Barrel up Oysters. Open your Oysters, take the Liquor from them, and mix it with a reasonable quantity of the best White-Wine-Vinegar, with a little Salt and Pepper; then put the Oysters into a small Barrel, and fill them up with this Pickle, and this will keep them 6 Months, sweet and good, and with their Natural Taste. 149. To make a Cowslip Tart. Take the blossoms of a Gallon of Cowslips, Mince them exceeding small, and beat them in a Mortar, put to them a handful or 2 of Grated Naples-bisket, and about a pint and half of Cream, boyl them a little on the Fire, then take them off, and beat in 8 Eggs with a little Cream, if it do not thicken, put it on the Fire till it doth gently, but take heed it Curdels not, season it with Sugar, Rose-water, and a little Salt: Bake it in a dish, or little open Tarts; it is best to let your Cream be cold, before you stir in the Eggs.
150. To Bake a calves head to be eaten cold. You must half boyl a fair Calves-head, then take out all the bones on both sides, and season it with the afore∣said. Seasoning, and Lard it with Bacon, and a little Lemon-peel; then having a Coffin large enough, not very high nor thick, but make it Four-square, lay on some Sheets of Lard, on the Top, and butter, when it is bak'd and cold, fill it with clarified butter, 151. To make Pear-Puddings. Take a Cold capon, or half Roasted, which is much better, then take Suet shread very small, the Meat and Suet together, with half as much Grated bread, two spoonfuls of Flower, Nutmegs, Cloves, and Mace, Sugar as much as you please, half a pound of Currans, the Yolks of 2 Eggs, and the White of one, and as much Cream as will make it up into a stiff Paste: Then make it up in Fashion of a Pear, a stick of Cinamon for the stalk, and the Head of a Clove. 152. To make a Hotch-Pot. Take a piece of Brisket of Beef, a piece of Mutton, a Knucle of Veal, a good Cullender of Pot-herbs, half Minced Carrots, Onions, and Cabbage, a little broken, boyl all these together untill they be very thick. 153. To make a Tart of Medlers. Take Medlers that are Rotten, then scrape them, and set them upon a chafing-dish of Coals, season them with the Yolk of Eggs, Sugar, Cinamon, and Ginger; let it boyl well, and lay it on Paste, scrape on Sugar, and serve it. 154. To make a Lemon Caudel. Take a pint of White-Wine, and 2 pints of Water, and let it boyl, put to it half a Manchet, cut it as thin and as small as you can, put it in with some large Mace, then beat the Yolks of 2 Eggs to thicken it, then squeeze in the Juice of half a dozen of Lemons, and season it with Sugar and Rose-water. 155. To make an Italian Pudding. Take fine Manchet, and cut it in small pieces like Dice, then put to it half a pound of Beef-suet Minced small, Raisius of the Sun, Cloves, Mace, Dates Minced, Sugar,
Marrow, Rose-water, Eggs, and Cream, mingle all these together, put them in a butter'd Dish, in less then an hour it will be well baked, when it is enough, scrape on Sugar and serve it up. 156. To make a Gooseberry-Custard. When you have cut off the sticks and eyes of your Gooseberries, and wash'd them, then boyl them in water till they will break in a Spoon, then strain them, and beat half a dozen Eggs, and stir them toge∣ther upon a Chafing-dish of Coals with Rose-water, then sweeten it well with Sugar, and always serve it cold. 157. To make a Fricacie of Rabbits. Cut your Rabbits in small pieces, and mince a hand∣ful of Thyme and Parsly together, and season your Rabbits with a Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt; then take two Eggs, and Verjuice beaten together, then throw it in the Pan, stick it, and Dish it up in Sip∣pets. 159. To make Cracknells. Take 5 or 6 pints of the finest wheat flower you can get, to which put in a spoonful, and not more of good Yeast; then mingle it well with Butter, Cream and Rase-water, and Sugar finely beaten, and working it well into Paste, make it into what form you please, and bake it. 160. To make Pan-cakes. Put 8 Eggs to 2 quarts of Flower, casting by 4 whites, season it with Cinamon, Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, and Salt, then make it up into a strong Batter with Milk, beat it well together, and put in half a pint of sack, make it so thin that it may run in your Pan how you please, put your Pan on the fire with a little But∣ter, or Suet, when it is very hot, take a Cloath and wipe it out, so make your Pan very clean, then put in your Batter, and run it very thin, supply it with lit∣tle bits of Butter, and so toss it often, and bake it Crisp and Brown.
191. To make a Junket. Take Ews, or Goats-Milk, or for want of these Cows-Milk, and put it over the Fire to warm, then put it in a little Runnet, then pour it out into a dish, and let it cool, then strew on some Cinamon and Sugar, and take some of your Cream and lay on it, scrape on Sugar and serve it. 162. To make Excellent Marrow-spinage-pasties. Take Spinage and chop it a little, then boyl it till it be tender, then make the best rich light crust you can, and roul it out, and put a little of your Spinage into it, and Currans, and Sugar, and store of lumps of Marrow; clap the Paste over this to make little Pasties deep within, and fry them with Clarified Butter. 163. To make a Pine-apple tart. Beat two handfuls of Pine-apples with a prick'd Quince, and the pulp of two or three Pippins, when they are well beaten, put to them half a pint of Cream, a little Rose-water, the yolks of 6 Eggs, with a hand∣ful of Sugar, if it be thick, add a little more Cream to it, so having your thin low Coffins for it dryed, fill them up, and bake them; you may garnish them with Orangado, or Lozenges of sugar-plate, or what else you please. 164. To dry Neats-tongues. Take Bay-salt beaten very fine, and salt-peter, of each alike, and rub over your Tongues very well with that, and cover all over with it, and as it wasts, put on more, and when they are very hard and stiff they are enough, then roul them in Bran, and dry them before a soft Fire, and before you boyl them, let them lye one night in Pump-water, and boyl them in the same Water. 165. To stew Birds the Lady Buttlers way. Take small Birds, pick them, and cut off their Legs, fry them in sweet butter, lay them in a Cloath to dry up the butter, then take Oysters and mince them, and put them in a Dish, put to them White-wine and Cinamon, put in the birds with Cloves, Mace and Pep∣per; let all these stew together covered till they be enough, then put into it some Sugar, and some toasted
Manchet, and put it in the Dish, and so serve it up to the Table. 166. To make a sweet-Pye with Lamb-stones, and sweet-breads and sugar. Slit the Lamb-stones in the middle, and skin them, wash the Sweet-breads both of Veal and Lamb, and wipe them very dry; take the Lamb's Liver, and shred it very small, take the Udder of a Leg of Veal and slice it, season all with a little Salt, Nutmeg, Mace and Cloves beaten, and some whole Pepper, then shred two or three Pippins, and Candied Lemon and Orange-peel, half a dozen Dates sliced, with Currans, white Sugar, a few Caraway-seeds, a quarter of a pint of Verjuice, and as much Rose-water, a couple of Eggs, roul up all these together with the juice of Spinage, and lay a Pudding, then a sweet-bread, then a Lamb-stone, till you have, filled up the Pye, and cover them with Dates, and sliced Citron and Lemon. When it is drawn, take two or three Yolks of Eggs, beat them, and put to them a little fresh Butter, White-wine and Sugar, and pour it into the Tunnel, scrape some Loaf-sugar, upon the Lid, and so serve it. 165. To Roast Eels. When they are flea'd, cut them to pieces, about 3 or 4 Inches long, dry them, and put them into a dish, mince a little Thyme, 2 Onions, a piece of Lemon-peel, a little Pepper beaten small, Nutmeg, Mace, and Salt, when it is cut exceeding small, strew it on the Eels, with the Yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs, then having a small Spit, or else a couple of square sticks made for that purpose, spit through the Eels cross-ways, and and put a bay-leaf between every piece of Eel, and tying the sticks on a spit, let 'em roast; you need not turn 'em constantly, but let 'em stand till they hiss, or are brown, so do them on the other side, and put the dish, (in which the Eel was with the seasoning) underneath to save the Gravy, baste it over with sweet butter. The Sauce must be a little Claret-wine, some minced Oy∣sters with their Liquor, a grated Nutmeg, and an Oni
168. To boyl Cocks or Larks. Boyl them with the Guts in them in strong broath, or fair Water, and 3 or 4 whole Onions, large Mace and Salt, the Cocks being boyled make sauce with some thin slices of Manchet, or grated bread in another Pipkin, and some of the broath where the Fowl or the Cocks boyl, then put to it some butter, and the Guts and Liver minced, then take some yolks of Eggs dissolved with Vinegar, and some grated Nutmeg, put it to the other ingredients, stir them together, and Dish the Fowl in fine sippets, pour on the sauce with some sliced Lemons, Grapes, or barberries, and run it over with beaten butter. 169. To broyl Oysters. Take the biggest oysters you can get, then take a little minced Thyme, grated Nutmeg, grated bread, and a little salt, put this to the Oysters, then get some of the largest bottom-shells, and place them on the Grid-Iron, and put 2 or 3 Oysters in each shell, then put some butter to them, and let them simper on the fire till the Liquor bubbles low, supplying it still with butter, when they are crisp, feed them with White-wine, and a little of their own Liquor, with a little grated bread, Nutmeg, and minced Thyme, put as much only as to relish it, so let it boyl up again, then add some drawn butter to thicken them, and dish them. 170. To pickle Oysters. Take a quart of the largest great Oysters, with all their Liquor, wash them clean, and wipe them, add to them a pint of fair water; and half a pint of white-wine Vinegar, half an ounce of whole Pepper, an handful of Salt, a quarter of an ounce of large Mace, with the Liquor of the Oysters strained; put all toge∣ther in a Pipkin over a soft fire, let them simper toge∣ther a quarter of an hour; when the Oysters are e∣nough take them up, and put them into a little fair water and Vinegar, till they be cold; let the Pickle boyl a quarter of an hour after the Oysters are taken
up, both being cold, put them up together; when you use them, Garnish the dish with Barberries and Lemon, and a little of the Mace and Pepper, and pour in some of the pickle. 171. To make English Pottage. Make it with Beef, Mutton, and Veal, putting in some Oatmeal, and good pot-herbs, as parsley, Sorrel, Violet-leaves, and a very little Thyme, add sweet Marjoram, scarce to be tasted, and some Marygold-leaves at last; you may begin to boyl it over Night, and let it stand warm all Night, and make an end of boyling it next Morning, it is good to put into the pot at first 20 or 30 corns of whole Pepper. 172. To stew Beef. Take very good Beef and slice it very thin, beat it with the back of a knife, put to it the Gravy of some Meat, and some Wine, and strong broath, sweet Herbs a quantity; let it stew till it be very tender, season it to your liking, and garnish your dish with Marygold-flowers, or barberries. 173. To make excellent Minc'd-Pyes. Parboyl Neats-tongues, then peel and hash them with as much as they weigh of Beef-suet and stoned Raisins, and pickt Currans; chop all exceeding small, that it be like pap; employ therein at least an hour more than ordinarily is used, then mingle a very little Sugar with them, and a little Wine, and thrust it up and down, some thin slices of green Candied Citron-peel, and put this into Coffins of fine light, well reared crust; half an hours baking will be enough: If you strew a few Caraway-Comfits on the top it will not be amiss. 174. To Pickle Roast Beef, Chine, or Surloin. Stuff any of the aforesaid Beef with Penny-royal, or other sweet Herbs, or Parsley, Minced small, and some Salt, prick in here and there a few whole Cloves, and Roast it; then take Claret-wine, Wine-vinegar, whole Pep∣per, Rosemary, Bays, and Thyme bound up close in a bun∣dle, and boyled in some Claret-wine, and Wine vinegar;
make the Pickle, and put some Salt to it, and pack it up in a barrel that will but just hold it, put the Pickle to it, close it on the Head, and keep it for your use. 175. To make a Double tart. Peel codlings Tenderly boyled, cut them in halves, and sill your Tart; put into it a quarter of an hundred of codlings, a pound and half of Sugar, a few cloves, and a little cinamon, close up the Coffin and bake it. When it comes out, cut off the Lid, and having a Lid cut in flow∣ers ready, lay it on, and Garnish it with Preserves of Damsons, Rasberriess Apricots and Cherries, and place a preserved Quince in the Middle, and strew it with Sugar-biskets. 176. To make a Warden or Pear-pye. Bake your Wardens, or Pears in an Oven, with a little Water, and a good quantity of Sugar, let your pot be covered with a piece of Dough, let them not be fully baked for a quarter of an hour, when they are cold make a high Coffin, and put them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinamon, Sugar, with some of the Liquor they were baked in, so bake it. 177. To bake a Pig Court Fashion. Flea a small Young Pig, cut it in quarters, or smaller pieces, and season it with Pepper, Ginger and Salt, lay it into a fit coffin, strip and Mince small a handful of Parsley, 6 sprigs of Winter-savory, strew it on the Meat in the Pye, and strew upon that the Yolks of 3 or 4 hard Eggs Minced, and lay upon them 5 or 6 blades of Mace, a handful of Clusters of Barberies, a handful of currans well washt and Pickt, a little Sugar, half a pound of sweet-butter or more; close your Pye, and set it in an Oven, as hot as for Manchet, and in 3 hours it will be well baked, draw it forth, and put in half a pound of Sugar, being warmed upon the Fire, pour it all over the Meat, and put on the Pye-lid again, scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table. 178. To make a Pudding of Hogs-Liver. Boyl your Liver, and Grate it, put to it more Grated Bread then Liver, with as much fine Flower of either,
put 12 Eggs to the value of a Gallon of this Mixture with about 2 pound of Beef-suet Minced small, and a pound and half of Currans, half a quarter of a pint of Rose-water, a good quantity of Cloves and Mace, Nutmeg, Cinamon, and Ginger, all Mixed very small, Mix all these with sweet Milk, and Cream, and let it be no more thick∣er then Fritter-batter, to fill your Hogs-guts, you make it with the Maw, fit to be eaten hot at the Table; in your Knitting or tying the Guts, you must Remember to give them 3 or 4 Inches Scope: In your putting them in boyling Water, you must handle them round, to bring the Meat equal to all parts of the Gut; they will ask about half an hours Boyling, the boyling must be Sober, if the Wind rise in them, you must be ready to prick them, or else they will Flye and burst in pieces. 179. Olives of Beef Stewed and Roasted. Take a Buttock of Beef, and cut some of it into thin slices as broad as your hand, then Hack them with the back of your Knife, Lard them with small Lard, and season them with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg; then make a Farsing with some sweet Herbs, Thyme, Onions, the Yolks of hard Eggs, Beef-suet or Lard, all Minced, some Salt, Barberries, Grapes, or Gooseberries; season it with the former Spice lightly, and work it up toge∣ther, then lay it on the slices, roul them up round, with some caul of Veal, Beef, or Mutton, bake them in a dish in the Oven, or Roast them; then put them in a Pipkin, with some butter and Saffron, or none; blow off the Fat from the Gravy, and put it to them, with some Artichoaks Potatoes, Skirrets blanched, being first boyled, a little Claret-wine, and serve them on Sippets, with some sliced Orange, Lemon, barberries, Capers or Gooseberries. 180. To make French-barley Posset. Put 2 quarts of Milk to half a pound of French-barley, boyl it small till it is enough; when the Milk is almost boyled away, put to it 3 pints of good Cream, let it boyl together a quarter of an hour; then sweeten it, and
put in Mace and Cinamon, in the beginning, when you rirst put in your Cream, when you have done so, take White-wine a pint, Sack and White-wine together, of each half a pint, sweeten it as you love it with Sugar, pour in all the Cream, but leave your Barley in the Skillet; this will make an excellent Posset, nothing else but a tender Curd to the bottom; let it stand on the Coals half a quarter of an hour. 181. To bake Chucks of Veal. Parboyl 2 pound of Lean Flesh of a Leg of Veal, mince it as small as grated Bread, with 4 pound of Beef-suet: then season it with Bisket, Dates and Carraways, and some Rose-water, Sugar, Raisins of the Sun, and Currans, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs and Cinamon; mingle them altogether, fill your pyes, and bake them. 182. How to shew a Mallard. Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up and cut in little pieces, then put it into a Dish with the Gravy, and a piece of fresh Butter, and a handful of Par∣sley chopt small, with 2 or 3 Onions, and a Cabbage let∣tuce, let them stew one hour, then season it with Pepper and Salt, and a little Verjuice, and so serve it. 183. To stew a Rabbit. Half Roast it, then take it off the Spit and cut it into little pieces, and then put it into a Dish with the Gravy, and as much Liquor as will cover it, then put in a piece of Butter, and some Powder of Ginger, Pepper and Salt, 2 or 3 Pippins minced small, let these stew and hour, and dish them upon Sippets, and serve it. 184. To make a Pidgeon-Pye. Truss your Pidgeons to bake, and set them, and lard the one half of them with Bacon, mince a few sweet Herbs and Parsley with a little Beef-suet, the Yolks of hard Eggs, and an Onion or two, season it with Salt, beaten Pepper, Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg, work it up with a piece of Butter, and for the Bellies of the Pidgeons, season them with Salt and Pepper as before: Take also as ma∣ny Lamb-stones, seasoned as before, with 6 Collops of Bacon, the Salt drawn out, then make a round Coffin and
put in your Pidgeons, and if you will, put in Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads, and some Artichoak bottoms, or other dry Meat to soak up the Juice, because the Pye will be ve∣ry sweet and full of it; then put a little White-wine beat∣en up with the yolk of an Egg, when it comes out of the Oven, and serve it. 184. To Roast a Hare. When you Case your Hare, do not cut off his hin∣der Legs or Ears, but hack one Leg through another, and so also cut a hole through one Ear, and put it through the other, and so Roast him; make your Sauce with the Liver of the Hare boyled, and minced small with a little Marjoram, Thyme and Winter-savory, and the yolks of 3 or 4 hard Eggs, with a little Bacon and Beef-suet, boyl this all up with Water and Vinegar, and then grate a little Nutmeg, and put to it some sweet Butter, and a little Sugar; dish your Hare, and serve it. This may also serve for Rabbits. 185. A Rare Broth. Take a couple of Cocks, and cut off their Wings and Legs, and wash them clean, and parboyl them very well, till there rise no scum, then wash them again in fair water, then put them in a pitcher with a pint of Rhenish-wine, and some strong broth, as much as will cover them, together with a little China root, an ounce or 2 of Harts horn, with a few Cloves, Nutmeg, large Mace, Ginger shred, and whole Pepper, and a little Salt, stop your Pitcher close, that no steam may come out, boyl the pitcher in a great pot of water about 6 hours, then pour out the broth, and strain it into a Bason, and squeeze in it the juice of 2 or 3 Lemons, so eat it. 186. To bake Sweet Breads. Boyl your Sweet breads, and put to them the yolks of 2 Eggs new laid, grated bread, with some parboyl∣ed Currans, and 3 or 4 Dates minced▪ and when you have seasoned it sightly with Pepper, Sugar Nutmeg, and Salt, put to it the juice of a Lemon; put up all these together into puff paste, and so bake it.
187. To make Pottage of French-Barley. Pick your Barley very clean from dirt and dust, then boyl some Milk, and put it in while it boyls, when it is boyled, put in a little Salt, Sugar, large Mace, and a little Cream; and when you have boyled it pretty thick, dish it, and serve it up with Sugar scraped thereon. 188. To make a Florentine of Sweet-breads or Kidneys. Take 3 or 4 Kidneys or Sweet-breads, and when they are parboyled, mince them small; season it with a lit∣tle Cinamon and Nutmeg, sweeten it with Sugar and a lit∣tle grated Bread, with the Marrow of 2 or 3 Marrow-bones in good big pieces, add to these about a quarter of a pound of Almond-paste, and about half a pint of Malaga-Sack, 2 spoonfuls of Rose-water, Musk, and Ambergrease, of each a grain, with a quarter of a pint of Cream, and 3 or 4 Eggs, mix all together, and make it in puff-paste, then bake it; in 3 quarters of an hour it will be enough. 189. To make Pottage of a Capon. Take Beef and Mutton and cut it in pieces; then boyl a large earthen pot of Water, take out half the Water, put in your Meat and skim it, and when it boyls season it with Pepper and Salt; when it hath boyled about 2 hours, put in 4 or 5 Cloves, half an hour before you think it is enough, put in your Herbs, Sorrel, Purslain, Burrage, Lettuce and Bugloss, or Green-pease, and in the Winter, Parsley-roots, and white Endive, pour the broth upon light Bread toasted, and stew it a while in the dish covered. If your Water consume in boyling, fill it up with Water boyling hot. The less there is of the broth the better it is, though it be but a Porringer full, for then it would be as stiff as Jelly when cold. 190. To make a Pye with Pippins. Pare your Pippins, and cut out the Cores, then make your Coffin of Crust, take a good handful of Quinces sli∣ced, and lay at the bottom, then lay your Pippins a-top, and fill the holes where the Core was taken out with Syrup of Quinces and put in every Pippin a piece of O∣rangado, then pour on the top Syrup of Quinces, then put in Sugar, and so close it up, let it be very well baked, for it will ask much soaking, especially the Quinces.
191. To make a Pye of Neats-tongues. Parboyl a couple of Neats-tongues, then cut out the Meat at the Root-end as far as you can, not breaking it out at the sides, take the Meat you cut out, and min∣gle it with a little Suet, a little Parsley and a few sweet. Herbs, cut all very small, and mingled together, season all this with Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Salt, and a lit∣tle grated Bread, and as much Sugar, together with the yolks of 3 or 4 Eggs; make this up together, and season your Tongues, in-side and out-side, with your seasoning aforesaid, and wash them within with the yolk of an Egg, and force them where you cut the Meat, and what remains make into a forc'd; then make your paste into the fashion of a Neats-tongue, and lay them in with Puddings, and little balls, then put to them Le∣mon and Dates shred, butter on the top, and close it, when it is baked, put in a lear of the Venison sauce, which is Claret-wine Vinegar, grated Bread, Cinamon, Ginger Sugar, boyl it up thick that it may run like but∣ter, and let it be sharp and sweet, and so serve it. 192. To make a Sallet of Green-Pease. Cut up as many Green-pease as you think will make a Sallet, when they are newly come up about half a Foot high; then set your Liquor over the Fire, and let it boyl, and then put them in, when they are boyl∣ed tender, put them out and drain them very well; then mince them, and put in some good sweet Butter, Salt it, and stir it well together, and so serve it. 193. To make a Sallet of Fennel. Cut your Fennel while it is young, and about 4 Fin∣gers high, tye it up in bunches like Asparagus, gather enough for your Sallet, and put it in when your Water is boyling hot, boyl it soft, drain it, dish it up with Butter as the Green-pease. 194. To make a Tansie of Spinage. Take a quart of Cream, and about 20 Eggs without the Whites, add to it Sugar and grated Nutmeg, and co∣lour it Green with the Juice of Spinage, then put it in your Dish, and squeeze a Lemon or two on it: Garnish
it with slices of Orange, then strew on Sugar, and so serve it. 195. To make a Hash of Ducks. When your Ducks are Roasted, take all the Flesh from the Bones, and hash it very thin, then put it into your stewing-pan with a little Gravy, strong Broth and Claret-wine, put to it an Onion or two minced very small, and a little small Pepper, let all this boyl to∣gether with a little Salt, then put to them about a pound of Sausages, when you think they are ready, stir them with a little Butter drawn: Garnish it with Le∣mon, and serve it. 196. To make French Puffs with Green Herbs. Take a quantity of Endive, Parsley and Spinage, and a little Winter-savory, and when you have minced them exceeding small, season them with Sugar, Ginger and Nutmeg; beat as many Eggs as you think will wet your Herbs, and so make it up; then pare a Lemon and cut in thin slices, and to every slice of Lemon, put a slice of your prepared stuff, then fry it in sweet Butter, and serve them in Sippets, after you have put to them ei∣ther a Glass of Canary or White wine. 197. To stew a Dish of Breams. Take your Breams and dress them, and dry them well, and salt them; then make a Charcoal Fire, and lay them on the Grid iron over the Fire being very hot; let them be indifferent brown on both sides, then put a Glass of Claret into a Pewter dish, and set it over the Fire to boyl, put into it 2 or 3 Anchovies, as many Onions, and about half a pint of Gravy, a pint of Oy∣sters, with a little Thyme minced small, when it hath boyled a while put to it a little melted Butter and Nut∣meg: Then dish your Bream, and pour all this upon it, and then set it again on the Fire, putting some yolks of Eggs over it. 198. To boyl a Mullet. Having scalded your Mullet, you must save their Li∣vers and Roes, then put them in Water boyling hot, put to them a Glass of Claret, a bundle of sweet Herbs
with a little Salt and Vinegar, 2 or 3 whole Onions, and a Lemon sliced, then take some whole Nutmegs and quarter them, and some large Mace, and some But∣ter drawn with Claret, whenrein dissolve 2 or 3 Ancho∣vies; dish up your Fish, and put on your sauce, being first seasoned with Salt. Garnish your dishes with fry∣ed Oysters and Bay-leaves; and thus you may season your Liquor for boyling most other Fish. 199. To Farce, of stuff a Fillet of Veal. Take a large Leg of Veal, and cut off a couple of Fillets from it, then mince a handful of sweet Herbs and Parsley, and the yolks of 2 or 3 hard Eggs, let all these be minced very small, then season it with a cou∣ple of grated Nutmegs, and a little Salt, and so farce or stuff your Veal with it, then lard it with Bacon and Thyme very well, then let it be Roasted, and when it is almost enough, take some of your stuffing about a handful, and as many Currans, and put these to a little strong broth, a Glass of Claret, and a little Vinegar, a little Sugar, and some Mace: When your Meat is al∣most ready, take it up and put it into this, and let it slew, putting to it a little butter melted, put your Meat in your dish, and pour your Sauce upon it, and so serve it. 200. To make Pudding of Rice. Take a good handful of Rice beaten small, and put it into about 3 pints of Milk, adding a little Mace and Cinamon, then boyl it, keeping it always stirring, till it grow thick, then put a piece of butter into it, and let it boyl a quarter of an hour, then pour it out to cool, then put to it half a dozen Dates minced, a little Sugar, a little beaten Cinamon, and a couple of handfuls of Currans, then beat about ten Eggs, throw∣ing away 2 or 3 of the Whites, put in some Salt, but∣ter the bottom of your dish, pour in your Pudding, let it bake half an hour, put on a little Rose-water and Su∣gar, and serve it. 201. To make excellent white Puddings. Take the Humbles, of a Hog, and boyl them very
tender, then take the Heart, the Lights, and all the Flesh about them, picking them clean from all the si∣newy Skins, and then chop the Meat as small as small as you can, then take the Liver and boyl it hard, and grate a little grated Nutmeg, Cinamon, Cloves, Mace, Sugar, and a few Carraway-seeds, with the yolks of 4 or 5 Eggs, and about a pint of the best Cream, a Glass of Canary, and a little Rose-water, with a good quantity of Hogs-suet and Salt, make all into Rouls, and let it lye about an hour and half before you put it in the Guts, laying the Guts a steep in Rose-water before, boyl them, and have a care of breaking them. 202. To Stew Flounders. Draw your Flounders and wash them and Scotch them on the White-side, being put in a dish, put to them a little White-wine, a few Minced Oysters, some whole Pep∣per, and sliced Ginger, a few sweet Herbs. 2 or 3 Onions quartered, and Salt; put all these into your stewing Pan, covered close, and let them stew as soon as you can, then dish them on Sippets; then take some of the Liquour they were stewed in, put some Butter to it, and the Yolk of an Egg beaten, and pour it on the Flounders; Garnish it with Lemon, and Ginger beaten on the brims of the Dish. 203. To draw Butter for Sauce. Cut your Butter into thin slices, put it into your dish, let it Melt leasurely upon the Coal, being often stirred, and after it is Melted, put to it a little Vinegar, or fair Water, which you will; beat it up till it be thick, if it keep its colour White, it is good, but if Yellow and turn'd, it is not to be used. 204. To Roast a Salmon whole. Draw your Salmon at the Gills, and after it is scalled and washt and dry'd, Lard it with pickled Herring, or a Fat Eel salted, then take about a pint of Oysters par∣boyled, put to these a few sweet Herbs, some Grated bread, about half a dozen hard Eggs, with 2 Onions, shred all these very small, and put to it Ginger, Nutmeg, Salt, Pepper, clover, and Mace; Mix these together, and
put them all within the Salmon, at the Gills: Put them into the Oven in an Earthen Pan, born up with pieces of Wood; in the bottom of the Dish, put claret-wine, and baste your Salmon very well over with Butter, be∣fore you put it into an Oven, when it is drawn, make your sauce of the Liquor that is in the Pan, and some of the spawn of the Salmon boyled, with some Melted Butter on the top, stick him about with Tosts and Bay∣leaves fryed, take out the Oysters from within, and Gar∣nish the Dish therewith, 204. To make excellent Sauce for Mutton, either Chines, Legs or Necks. Take half a dozen Onions shred very small, a little strong Broath, and a Glass of White-wine, boyl all these well together; then take half a pint of Oysters, and Mince them with a little Parsley, and 2 or 3 small bun∣ches of Grapes, if in season, with a Nutmeg sliced, and the Yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs, put in all these together, with the former, and boyl it, and pour it all over your Meat, and then pour some Melted Butter on the Top, and strew on the Yolks of 2 or 3 hard Eggs Minced small. 205. Another good Sauce for Mutton. Take a handful of pickled Cucumbers, as many Capers, and as much Samphire, put them into a little Verjuice, White-wine; and a little strong Broth, and a Lemon cut in small pieces, and a little Nutmeg Grated; let them boyl together, and then beat them up thick, with a Ladle∣ful of Butter Melted, and a couple of Yolks of Eggs, and a little Sugar, Dish your Meat upon Sippets, pour on your Sauce, and Garnish it with Samphire, Capers, and Barberries. 206. To make Sauce for Turkies or Capons. Take a Two-penny White-loaf, and say it in soak in strong Broth, with Onions sliced therein, then boyl it in Gravy, together with a Lemon cut in small pieces: A little Nutmeg sliced, and same Melted butter, put this under your Turkey or Capon, and so serve it: You will find it excellent Sauce,
210. To Fry Salmon. Take a Jole, Chine, or Rand, and Fry it in Clarified Butter, when it is stiff and Crisp Fryed, make Sauce thereof with a little Claret-wine, sweet Butter, Grated Nutmeg, slices of Orange, and Oyster Liquor, stew them altogether, and pour on the Sauce, and on that Parsley, lisumder, and Sage-leaves Fry'd in Butter. Because many Books of this Nature, have the Terms, of Carving added to them, as being Necessary for the more Proper Nominating of things; I have thought good also to add them: As also some Bills of Fare, both upon Ordinary and Extraordinary Occasions. Terms of Carving, both Fish, Fowl, and Flesh. ALLAY a Pheasant. Barb a Lobster. Border a Pasty, Break a Deer or Egript. Break a Sarcel or Teal. Chine a Salmon. Culpon a Trout. Mince that Plover. Rear that Goose. Sauce a Capon or Tench. Cut up a Turkey or Bustard. Dismember that Heron. Display that Crane. Disfigure that Peacock. Fin that Chevin. Leach that Brawn. Lift that Swan, Timber the Fire, Tire an Egg. Tranch that Sturgeon. Sauce Place or Flounders. Side that Haddock. Splay that Bream. Splat that Pike. Unbrace a Mallard. Under-Tench a Porpuss. Un-joynt a Bittern. Unlace a Coney. Untach that Curlew. Untanch that Brew. Spoil that Hen. String that Lamprey. Tame a Crab. Thigh a Pidgeon, Woodcock, all manner of small Birds. Tanson that Eel. Truss that Chicken, Tusk a Barbel.
Particular Directions how to Carve, according to the former Terms of Carving. Ʋnlace that Coney. LAY your Coney on the back, and cut away the Vents, then raise the Wings and the sides; and lay the Carcass and the sides together; then put to your Sauce, with a little beaten Ginger and Vinegar. Thigh a Wood-cook. Raise the Legs and Wings of the Wood-cock, as you would do of a Hen, then take out the Brains, and no other sauce but Salt. Allay a Pheasant. Raise the Legs and the Wings of a Pheasant, as of a Wood-cock, as also of a Snipe, and a Plover, and only Salt. Display a Crane. Unfold the Legs of the Crane, and cut off his Wings by the Joynts, then take up his Wings and Legs, and make sauce of Mustard, Salt, Vinegar, and a little beaten Ginger. To cut up a Turkey. Raise up the Leg very Fair, and open the Joynt with the point of your Knife, but cut not it off, then Lace down the Breast with the point of your Knife, and open the Brest-pinion, but take it not off, then raise up the Merry thought betwixt the breast Bone and the Top, then Lace down the Flesh on both sides the brest bone, and raise up the Flesh called the brawn, and turn it outward upon both sides, but break it not, nor cut it off, then cut of the Wing-pinions, at the Joynt next the body, and stick in each side the Pinion, in the place you turned out the brawn; but cut off the sharp end of the Pinion, and take the Middle-piece, and that will fit just in the place; you may cut up a Capon or Pheasant the same way. Break a Sarcel, Teal, or Egript. Raise the Legs and Wings of the Teal, and no Sauce bu Salt.
Wing a Partridge or Quale. Raise his Legs and Wings, as of a Hen, and if you Mince him, make Sace with a little White-wine, and a little beaten Ginger, keeping him warm upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, till you serve him. To Ʋntauch a Curlew or Brew. Take either of them, Raise the Legs, as before, and no sauce but Salt. To Ʋnbrace a Mallard. Raise up the Pinion and Legs, but take them not off, and raise the Merry thought from the breast, and Lace down each side with your Knife, Waving it too and Fro. To Sauce a Capon. Lift up the right Leg of a Capon, and also the right Wing, and so lay it in the Dish in the Posture of Fly∣ing, and so serve them; but Remember that Capons and Chickens be only one Sauce, and Chickens must have Green Sauce or Verjuice. Bills of Fare for all times of the Year; and also for Extraordinary Occasions. A Bill of Fair for Spring Season. 8 A Collar of Brawn and Mustard. 2. A Neats-Tongue and Ʋdder. 3. Boyled Chickens. 4. Green-Geese. . A Lumbard-Pye. 6. A Dish of Young Ra∣bits. Second Course. . A Haunch of Venison. . Veal Roasted. . A dish of soles or smelts. 4. A dish of Asparagus. 5. Tansie. 6. Tarts and Custards. A bill of Fair for Midsomer. 1. Neats-tongue and Colli-flowers. 2. A Fore-quater of Lamb. 3. A Chicken Pye. 4. Boyled Pidgeon. 5, A couple of stewed Rabits. 6. A Breast of Veal Roas∣ted.
Second Course. 1, An A'rtichoak Pye. 2. A Vension-pasty. 3. Lobsters and Salmon. 4. A dish of Pease. 5. A Goose-berry-tart. 6. A dish of Strawberries. A Bill of Fare for Harvest. 1. A Capon and White-broth. 2. A Westphalia-ham with Pidgeons. 3. A Grand Sallet. 4. A Neats-tongue and Ʋdder Roasted. 5. A Powdered Goose. 6. A Turkey Roasted. Second Course. 1. A Potato or chicken-pye. 2. Roasted Partridges. 3. Larks and chickens. 4. A Made dish. 5. A Warden-pye, or Tart. 6. Custards. A Bill of Fair for Winter season. 1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. Lambs-head and White broth. 3. A Neats-tongue and Ʋdder. Roasted. 4. A dish of Minc'd-pyes. 5. A Vension, or Lamb-pye. 6. A dish of chickens. Second Course. 1. A side of Lamb. 2. A dish of Wild-Ducks. 3. A Quince-tart. 4. Two Capons Roasted. 5. A Turkey Roasted. 6: A Dish of custards. A Bill of Fair upon Extraor∣dinary Occasions. 1. A Coller of Brawn. 2. Two Pullets boyled. 3. A Bisk of Fish. 4. A Dish of carps. 5. A Grand boyled Meat. 6. A Grand Sallet. 7. A Venison Pasty. 8. A Roasted Turkey. 9. A Fat Pig. 10. A Powdered Goose. 11. A Hnunch of Vension Roasted. 12. Neats-tongue and Ʋd∣der Roasted. 13. A West-phalia-Ham boyled. 14. A Joll of Salmon. 15. Minced Pyes. 16. A Sir-loyn of Rost-beef. 17. Cold Baked Meats. 18. A dish of custards. Second Course. 1. Jellies of all sorts. 2. A Dish of Pheasants. 3. A Pike boyled. 4. An Oyster Pye. 5. A Dish of Plovers. 6. A dish of Larks. 7. A Joll of sturgeon. 8. A couple of Lobsters. 9. A Lumber-pye. 10. A couple of capons. 11. A dish of Partridges. 12. A Fricacy of Fowls. 13. A dish of Wild ducks. 14. A dish of cram'd chickens. 15. A dish of stewed Oysters. 16. A Murch Pane.
17. A dish of Fruits. 18. A dish of Tarts. A Bill of Fare for Fish days. 1. A dish of Butter and Eggs. 2. A Barrel of Oysters. 3. A Pike boyled. 4. A stewed carp. 5. An Eel Pye. 6. A Pole of Ling. 7. A dish of Green Fish But∣tered with Eggs. 8. A dish of stewed Oysters. 9. A spinage sallet boyled. 10. A dish of soles. 11. A Joll of Fresh salmon. 12. A dish of smelts Fry'd. Second course. 1. A couple of Lobsters. 2. A Roasted spitcheock. 3. A dish of Anchovies. 4. Fresh Cod. 5. A Bream Roasted. 6. A dish of Trouts. 7. A dish of Place boyled. 8. A dish of Peaches. 9. A carp Farced. 10. A Potato Pye. 11. A dish of Prawns buttered 12. Tenches with short broth. 13. A dish of Turbut. 14. A dish of Eel-pouts. 15. A sturgeon with short broth. 16. A dish of Tarts and custards A Bill of Fare for a Gentle∣man's House, about candlemas. 1. A Pottage with a Hen. 2, A catham Pudding. 3. A Fricacie of chickens. 4. A Leg of Mutton with a Sallet. Garnish your dishes with Barberies. Second course. 1. A chine of Mutton. 2. A chine of Veal. 3. A Lark Pye. 4. Two Pullets, 1 Larded. Garnished with slices of Orange. Third course. 1. A dish of Wood-cocks. 2. A couple of Rabits. 3. A dish of Asparagus. 4. A West-phalia-Gammon. Last course. 1. Two Oringe-tarts, one with Herbs. 2. A Racon-tart. 3. An Apple-tart. 4. A dish of bon Chrit∣en-Pears. 5. A dish of Pippins. 6. A dish of Pear-Manes. A Banquet for the same season. 1. A dish of Apricoks. 2. A dish of Marmalad of Pippins. 3. A Dish of preserved Cherries. 4. A whole Red Quince. 5. A Dish of Dryed Sweet-Meat.
A great FEAST made by Gerge Nevil, Chancellor of England, and Arch-Bishop of York, in the days of EDWARD the Fourth, 1468. And a Bill of Fare as it was taken out of the Records of the Tower of London. 0300 QUARTERS of Wheat, 0300 Tun of Ale. 0100 Tun of Wine. 0001 Pipe of Ipocras. 0104 Oxen. 0006 Wild Bulls. 1000 Muttons. 0304 Veals. 0304 Porks. 0400 Swines. 3000 Geese. 1000 Capons. 3000 Piggs. 0400 Plovers. 0100 Dozen of Quails. 0200 Dozen of Fowls called Rees. 0400 Peacocks. 0400 Mallards and Teals. 0234 Cranes. 0204 Kidds. 3000 Chickens. 4000 Pidgeons. 4000 Coneys. 0200 Bullers. 9400 Heronshaws. 0200 Pheasants. 0500 Partridges. 0400 Woodcocks. 0100 Curlews. 1000 Egrites. 0304 Stags, Bucks, & Roes 0103 Venison Pasties cold 0508 Pikes and Breams. 6000 Dishes of Jelly. 0103 Cold Tarts. 3000 Cold Custards. 1500 Hot Venison Pasties 3000 Hot Custards. 0013 Porresses and Seals. Besides abundance of Sweet-Meats The Great Offices. Earl of Warwick, Steward. E. of Northumb. Treasurer. Lord Hastings, Cup bearer. Lord Willowby, Carver. Lord John of Buckingham, Controuler. Sir Rich. Stanwig Surveyor. Sir William Worlly, Marshal of the Hall. Eight Knights of the Hall. Eighty Esqs; of the Hall. Two other Surveyors of the Hall. Sir John Malbury, Pantler. Two Esqs; Keepers of the Cubbard.
Sir John Pracenock, Super∣visor of the Hall. Estates sitting in the Hall. At the High-Table. The Arch-Bishop in his State, on his right hand, the Bishops of London, Dur∣ham, and Elie. On his Left hand, the Duke of Suffolk, the Earls of Oxford and Worcester. At the second Table. The Abbots of S. Maries. The Doctors of Halls of Rivones. The Choristers of Rivones. The Prownes of Durham, of Girgleu, and of Berlenton, of Gilerow, and others, the number of eighteen. At the third Table. The Deans of York, the Lords of Cornwell, York, Dur∣ham, with 48 Knights. At the fourth Table. The Deans of Durham and of Saint Ambroses, all the Prebends of the Min∣ster. At the fifth Table. The Mayors of York and Calice, and all the Aldermen. At the Sixth Table. The Judges of the Land, 4. Barons of Exchequer, and 26 Counsellors. At the last Table. Sixty nine Knights, wear∣ing the Kings Badges and his Arms. Estates sitting in the Chief Chamber. At the first Table. The D. of Glocester the Kings brother, and upon his right hand the Duke of Suffolk, and upon his left hand the Countess of West∣morland and Northumber∣land, and two of the E. of Warwicks daughters. At the second Table. The Barons of Greystock, with three other Barons. At the third Table. 18 Gentlewomen of the the said Lands. Estates sitting in the second Chamber. At the first table. The elder Dutchess of Suffolk, Countess of War∣wick and Oxford, the Ladies Hasting and Barwick. At the second Table. The Es. of Northumberland & Westmorland, and the Lds. of Fitshugh only with 2 Bar. At the third Table. 14. Gentlemen and 14 Gentlewomen of Quality. In the Low Hall. 412 of the Nobility with double service. In the Gallery. 200 No∣blemens servants. 1100 In∣ferior Officers with their servants. 1500 Other mea∣ner servants of all Offices. 62 Cooks. In all 2162.
THE Lady's DIVERSION IN HER Garden. CONTAINING A Handful of Choice and Novel Curio∣sities and Observations, relating to PLANTS and FLOWERS. Together, With Brief Directions for the Nice A∣dorning Balconies, Turrets, and Win∣dows, with Flowers, or Greens, every Month in the Year. By Thomas Harris, Gard'ner, at Stockwel, in Surrey. 1. Of the Garden's Form and Situation. HAving resolv'd upon a Garden, you must next pitch upon its Situation, which must not be incompass'd too close with High Buildings, but laid open to the Air, and Sun, with a convenient warm
Wall, or Fence, about it. As for the Earth, or Soil, if it be Unnatural, it must be made Natural by Art. If the Earth be Hot and Dry, then ought your Garden to lye upon a Level; If Cold and Wet, then it must lye Taporing or Shelving, something like the Ridge of a House. The Walks in your Garden are not to be Li∣mited, but rather drawn out to your Fancy, in some Shape or Figure. But be sure let there be a Fountain, Pump, or Rivolet hard by, to furnish it with Water upon Occasion. 2. Plants, when good, and how to Chuse them. After your Garden is fix'd, the borders and beds rais'd, the Walks roll'd with Gravel, (quite cross, from one bed to another, saving  foot with Turff, next the side of each bed) adorn it with Painting, &c. which will not only beautify it, but make it more durable and lasting: I say, after 'tis thus Fitted, and compleat∣ly Dung'd ready for Planting, you must consider what number of Plants you shall want; then repair to the Nursery-Garden to choose your Trees, (which is best to be done about the middle of September) and be sure you fix upon none, but what appear to be very sound, and without Gum: Let 'em be of a fair Bark; and see, that they have shot considerably that year. As for your Dwarfs and Wall-Trees, let 'em be straight, with one Stem, and one Graft. Let their buds be good, and seem to promise fair. 3. Their Diseases and Cures. Trees, like Mortals, are subject to many Distempers, which sometimes prove Deadly and Epidemical: But, as to Trees, the Distempers they are incident to, are chiefly caused by Earth-Worms, Canker, Gum, Robines, Emmets, Green Fles, Garden-Mice, Laires, Ear-Wiggs, Caterpillars, Snails, &c. The first whereof lye at the Roots, and gnaw so violently the Stem, that some∣times a Tree Sickens and Dyes immediately. Now to prevent and Cure this Disease, you must be sure (so soon as you perceive the Plant to droop) to uncover the foot thereof, shorten the gnaw'd Roots thereof,
search for, and pick carefully all the Worms out, and lay fresh wholesom Mold thereto; which will in a little time help.— But if your Tree hath a Canker, draw your Knife, and with the point thereof, cut it out clearly, and clap immediately some Cow-Dung or Hogs-Dung, and wrap it round with a Rag, and the Skin or Rhind will grow again. — If Gum hath fastned to the Bud, Graft, or Stem of your Trees, it is incurable; but if 'tis only fix'd on the Branch, the Cure may be effected, by cutting it off 2 or 3 In∣ches below the aggrieved part. — As for Caterpillers, Emmets, Robines, &c. they must be pick'd and carefully brushed off. But if your Tree sickens by reason it's Branches are too heavy, give it ease, by lowering the Top-branches, or those disorderly ones in the middle, and it will again produce fine shoots. Finally, the only way to prevent 'em from being gnaw'd or woun∣ded, by Garden-Mice, and Rats, is to set Traps and Snares to catch 'em. 4. Of Flowers. To set down the particular Names of every Flower, would swell too big for my intended Brevity, and be altogether insignificant to the design of this Manual. I shall only give a Catalogue of the Names of the Chief∣est of our English Flowers; which may easily be had and sufficient for adorning private Garden. And of the first, the Rose. The Damask and Cinamon Rose, the Rose of the World, the English Red Rose, the blush Belgick Rose, the dou∣ble Musk Rose, the great Apple-Rose. Tulip. Florisante, Fair Ann, Superintendant, Aurora, Ge∣neral Essex, Susanna, Rich Parrot, Royal Parrot, Eagle, Diana. Gilliflowers. K. Charles the Second, Q. Catherine, K. Solomon, a lovely Flower, Fair Hellena, Mayor of London, Fair Rosanna, Paramour, the Emperor, the Empress, Prince
of Orange, Princess of Orange, Giant Clove, Bir∣sha, Astragon, Double Stock Gilliflowers, Dou∣ble Strip'd. Lillies. The Fiery red bulby Lilly, Yellow Lilly, a tall fine Flower, the White Lilly of Constantinople, the Double White Lilly, the Persian Lilly. Primroses and Cowslips. The fair red Primrose, the Scarlet, the Red Prim∣rose, Hose in Hose, the single Yellow with the Hose divided, the Orange-colour'd Cowslip, the Twisted Cowslip, Double Green Cowslip, Red Cowslip, or Oxslip. Flower-de-Luce. Rubente, or the great pale-red or peach-coloured, is a fine Flower, with party-colour'd Spanish Flower∣de-Luce. Wall-Flower. The Double Red, the pale Yellow, the great sim∣ple Wall-Flower. Sweet-Williams. Of these, the double Sweet-Johns, and the Velvet Sweet-Williams, are the best; every slip of them set in the Spring, will grow, and flower in June. Auriculaes. Bears-Ears, the black Imperial, blazing-Star. Saffron. Crocus Verus, or the true Saffron, which is sold by Apothecaries, the Meadow-Saffron. 5. Having given you the Names of several Eminent Flowers, to Compleat your Garden, I will Enter∣tain you with a pretty Curiosity, which is, To change the Colours of several Flowers whilst in the Blossom. When you are dispos'd to shew Visitants your Flow∣ers; follow them, and after they have pass'd by a Flower of a purple Colour, take a Needle or Pencil
dip'd in Spirit of Vitriol, and streak the Leaves there∣with, and it shall immediately turn to a rich Scar∣let; to the Admiration of the beholders: but you may be sure, those Leaves so streak'd, will wither the next day. 6. The Method to be observed in making Hot-Beds. As to this Particular I will inlarge a little thereon, as knowing it to be an Art worthy of Observation. First then, it must be made in a place much expos'd to the Sun; where drive Stakes into the Earth, near 4 Foot distance, in breadth at the Ends, and for the length take your own Fancy, fill up both ends and sides, with Wooden Stakes, almost a Yard above Ground; let each stake be drawn a foot Distance, and wound about with straw Ropes; then Fling in your Horse-dung, and Wet Litter, till it rises 2 Foot upon a Level; then Tread it down, and Raise it so much more, and Tread down again, till it's almost the Heighth; next Nail some small Boards all round on the Top, to keep in the fine sifted Earth, which must be 5 Inches deep: Stick Hazle-Rods Arching over it, like an Arbour, strong enough to support Mats, or Hair-cloth, to make it Heat; and observe so soon as the Extream Heat is over (which you may observe by feeling it blood∣warm) to sow your Seeds. Note, if you are afraid, your Horse-dung wont Heat, fling it Light up, and Mix therein Sea-coal, and it will Heat at your Plea∣sure. Observe likewise in November, to stop all Crevises in your Green-houses, that no cold may come in, to which end, lay straw Mats, &c; and if it should happen to Freeze, set a Pan of Charcoal in the Middle. And if your Plants be very Dry, and the Weather is not Extream, water them Moderately; Mingling your Water in a little Sheeps Dung, Cow∣dung, &c. But besure you Wet not the Leaves there∣with; lest the Cold Chill and strike to the Heart thereof.
Directions for Adorning Balconies, Turrets, and Windows with Flowers and Greens ad the Year round. 1. Balconies. FIrst measure the length of your Balcony, that is, what Room there is, each sides the Doors, and if the bredth of your Balcony will allow of boxes, measure 'em out also, make your boxes 18 Inches deep; let the Corners be fasten'd with Iron plates, to preserve 'em from Warping, or Opening, with Iron handles at each end, to remove them upon Occasion: Which done, Paint 'em as you please, and lay them in Oyl, and clap your Mold therein, Now, I as for the Iron-work of your Balcony, over which you lean, it may be set off with fine Guilded pots 2 foot distance; in the mid∣dle let there be an Image fix'd, and at each end 2 larger pots, with Lawrel, Juniper, or striped Phillerea. In the boxes next your Balcony-doors, plant on each side a Cherry-tree, (or 2 Dwarfs) one to ripen in May, and the other in June; and let the other Vacances be suppli∣ed with Germander, Periwincle guilded and plain, Gilli∣flowers 2 pots, the best; and two boxes of Roses, set op∣posite to each other; And to Compleat the whole, if you can any ways contrive over your Balcony-doors, to set a Creeper, &c. it will not only beautify the Fron∣tispiece of the House, but be very delightful and pleasant to your Chamber-Windows. Of Turrets, or Leads. Your Turrets must be measur'd out as your Balcony, and at a Convenient Corner for Air and prospect fix your Arbour. In the middle of your Leads fix an I∣mage, Sun-Dial, or large Tree. Boxes of 5 Foot length, will be long enough, and 2 Foot high; between each box set a Guilded pot; and at the Corners let
there stand Dwarfs; then fix your battlements with Summer and Winter-Greens as you please, as Venus Cushion, Green-Lavender, Lavender-Spike, Stock-Gilliflow∣ers, Tulips, Violets, Sweet Williams, Crocus's, Sweet Johns, Flower-de-Luce, Cowslips, Auricula's, &c. Of Sash-Windows. Send for your Smith, and let him make Iron-work to hold as many pots as you think fit; and put there∣in nothing but Winter-Greens, as either Lawrus Tinus, Perecanthus Everlasting Thorn. Mezerion, Boxes, &c. In the Summer you may set Mint, Bawm, &c. Cowslips, Primroses, &c. if you please, but those Greens before-mentioned are the best for Windows. Notwithstanding all these Directions I have laid down, yet if your Gardens, &c. are not duely Water'd, it is all Labour in Vain; To prevent which, take these few Observations, viz. When you have a foresight of Drowth, begin to Wa∣ter before the Earth is too dry; but for Plants use not Well-water, for it is so strained thorough the Earth, or rather barren Sands or Rocks, and for want of the Sun so chill and cold, that having no Nourishment, ra∣ther the contrary, doth more hurt than good; Rivers that run quick and long on sharp Gravel are little better, but if you are forced to use such, let it stand some time in Tubs in the Sun, mixed with Dung. Let the quan∣tity and quality of the Dung mixed with the Water, be according to the Nature of your Plants; if your Plants be great growers and require heat, then put Horse-dung in your Water: If your Water be bad, then put Dung into it to help it; let it stand in the Sun and open Air uncovered: If your Plants be fine and tender, then put Sheep or Cows dung, Deer or Asses dung into the Water; the worse the Ground and more barren, be sure to put in the more dung. Take care you Water no Plants with standing stinking Ditch-wa∣ter, nor no Water that stinketh; for sweet Water (not too clear) and fresh Mould (not musty or tainted by
Weeds) is as proper for tender Plants, as sweet and good Food, warm and clean Lodging, for tender and fine bred Persons. Rain-water is very good if not too long kept, but if your Vessel be large, the oftener you stir it, the long∣er it will keep sweet. Large and Navigable Rivers, that receive much Soil by washing Streets, and the many sinks that run into it, and which, by its motion, doth cleanse it self from that which is Noxious, both to Man and Plants, is an excellent Water for all sorts of Plants. The larger the Ponds be, the better the Water is for Plants, the opener to the Sun the better, the more mo∣tion they have, by Horses washing in them, or Geese and Ducks swimming; 'tis so much the better. Water all Seeds with the smallest or Rain-like drops you can, and not to much at a time or too fiercely, lest you discover them. For Flowers and Plants whose Leaves lie on the Ground, water them at some distance, by making a hollow Circle about the Plant, and pouring Water in∣to it, by which means you avoid annoying the Leaves, by discolouring Water, or chilling the Roots by too sudden Coldness. In Summer-time, or all warm Seasons▪ the Evening is best for watering, because the Water will have time to sink in the Earth, and the Plant attract it, be∣fore the Sun's heat exhales it: But in Winter or cold Weather, the Morning is the most proper time, that the superfluous moisture may be evaporated 'ere the cold Night overtake you, and Chill perhaps kill a ten∣der Plant. A drooping Plant, that you think Water will pre∣serve, may be watered by Filtration, i. e. set an earthen or wooden Vessel on a Brick, full of Water, near your Plant, that all the Water may be higher than the Earth, wet a thick woollen List, put one end, with a Stone or bit of Lead, into the Water, that it may keep to the bottom; lay the other end on the Ground, near
the Root of the Plant, and the Water will distil out of the Bowl or Pot through the List. Monthly Observations for January. LAY bare the Roots of your Fruit trees, and if the weather open, ly well-digested Muck to them: transplant young Trees, prune the rest, and nail up your Wall fruit; cut your Vines close, cleanse your Trees of Moss, by singing it off with handfuls of bolting Wheat or Rye Straw held flaming to the boughs, first gathering your Cions for Grafts: turn over your be∣fore-mucked Ground in your Kitchin-Garden, also your heaps of mixed Earth and Cow-dung for Flower-Garden: Set Beans and Pease in open Weather to have early; sow Lettuce, Radish, Chervil, Spinage, and o∣ther Salading-plants in Hot beds. Preserve your best Gilliflowers and Auricula's from too much Wet or Snow, by laying down the pots they are planted in; or if in beds, by supported co∣verings, at a distance a foot or more: and what Ra∣nunculus or Anemonies are appearing: but give them as often as you can in suitable Weather, airings, by ta∣king off their coverings, but when Sun sets, on with them again. Keep your Conservatory close where the Greens and nice plants are housed: If it freeze very hard, put some clear lighted Charcoal in the middle of the Room, a little let into the ground: and if the Sun shine clear on the Windows or Doors thereof, open them to let in his Noon-beams, but be sure to shut them close again as soon as he declines the door.
Monthly Observations for February. Cover the Roots of your Fruit Trees that were be∣fore bare, and yet plant those Trees you could not the last Month; and still be cleansing Trees from Moss, and the Webs of Caterpillars from the tops of twigs. Begin to graft Apples, some Pears, Plums, Cherries, &c. Sow and set Beans, Pease, Asparagus, Radish, Parsnips, Carrots, Onions, Garlick. Plant Cabbage-plants, Po∣tatoes, Parsley, Spinage, and other hardy Pot-herbs. Transplant your Winter-Colliflowers, to have early, into rich Soil. Now you may be making Hot-beds to sow your Musk-mellon-seeds, and Cucumbers, at the full Moon in this Month, which must first be steeped in new Cows-Milk twenty four hours; then place three in a hole; When they peep, which will be in seven days, let in the Sun-shine, or clear Air, but cover 'em again at Night. Still keep close your Con∣servatory. Sow Auricula-seeds into Mallow Earth, and sow the same but one thick; place best Auricula in pots in the Sun; Secure your choice Flowers in Beds with Tiles, if they appear above Ground, and plant some Anemo∣nies, the Weather open, for later Flowers; place your Boxes sown with choice Seed, free from sharp winds, and secured from too much wet. Monthly Observations for March. BEstir your self now in grafting; and early on good Plum-stocks, graft Apricocks, Nectorines, and Peaches; Many may miss, but never all yet with me: Raise up Pots of Earth to convenient branches, which degg down therein, first slitting the underside where you lay them, they shall by October following, being
often water'd, put forth knobs or roots, and both grow when cut off, and well set in rich Earth; and one Tree so taking, is worth ten others, because each Sprout or Shoot from the Root is the same kind, when those of inoculated or grafted, are only the Plumbs grafted or inoculated. Steak and bind up weak Shrubs and Plants, slip and set Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Thyme, (except Mastick, being too early;) sow En∣dive, Succory, Leeks, Radish, Beets, Parsnips, Skirits, Parsly, Sorrel, Bugloss, Burrage, Chervils, &c. Sow Lettuce, Onions, Garlick, Purslain, Turnips, Pease, Carrots, Cabbages, Cresses, Fennel, Marjoram, &c. Transplant Medicinal Plants, string your Strawberry-Beds; cover your Musk-Millon-plants on your Hot-bed with Beer-glasses till you re∣move them. Sow Auriculaseeds as directed, at Michaelmas; also Sweet-Williams, Wall-Flower, Stock-July-Flowers, Venus Looking-glass, Candy-Tuffs, French Hony-suckles, Primrose and Cowslip-seeds, Lark-spurs, Rose-Campions, Lichnis, Campa∣nula, Indian Scabious, &c. also Pinks, or rather July-flow∣er-seeds; on your Hot-beds sow Flora Africanus, or French Marigolds, Amaranths, Nasturtium Indicum, or Indian Cresses, Marvel of the World, &c. Transplent July-Flowers, Auriculaes, if occasion, and all other Fibrous rooted Plants; new earthing up your unremoved July Flowers, Auriculaes, &c. Monthly Observations for April. In this Month you may Sow Scurvigrass, Carnations, Radish, Marjoram, Time, Winter-Savoury, Purslain, Marigolds, Hysop, and Lettice; You may also set Slips of Rosemary, Lavender, Time, A'rtichoaks, &c. Re∣move your tender Shrubs, and Slip them after gentle Showers; and also set French Beans. Fix Tiltings over your choicest Tulips. Open the Doors and Windows of your Green Houses, and use the Inhabitants to the Air. Shelter your young Seedling Auriculaes from the excessive Heat of the Sun; and con¦tinue
Hot-beds for Exoticks, and remove them into them, till the Earth is warm enough to preserve them abroad. Monthly Observations for May. BEgin to Inoculate in this Month, according as you find Buds ready, which take off the middle of your Sprouts. Fetch out your Greens, and transplant them into Boxes fill'd with good Earth, mix'd with one part of rotten Cow-dung, putting Sticks, Brick-bats, Rub∣bish, and Shells, to make the Earth lye light, and so make a Hole for the Water at the bottom; then set your Plants therein, but not deep, Water 'em, and set 'em in the Sun. Gather Seeds of Anemonies, as the Dew rises, or you will lose it by the Wind; sow hot and Aromatick Herbs, and in the full Moon plant Stock-July-Flowers in Beds; and still keep Weeding your Gardens, &c. Monthly Observations for June, WAter new planted Trees, and put rotten Fern a∣bout their Stems. Inoculate Apples, Pears, and Wall Fruit, &c. Lop off needless Branches from your Vines, and stop the Joint. Gather Herbs to keep in the full of the Moon; and Sow Radish, Lettice, Chervil, &c. Lay July Flowers, which will Root in Six Weeks, and what are now blown, of a good sort, keep for Seed, allowing them but few Layers to give Nourishment to, and but few Buds; you will find the Seed-pod to be fill'd with the fairer Seed. Take up Anemonies, Ra∣nunculus, keep them from Moulding: Monthly Observations for July. PRune Apricocks and Peaches, leaving the most like∣ly Shoots well plac'd. Water Young planted Tree and Layers; let Olatory Herbs run to Seed.
Clip Box out of Order, after Rain: Slip Stocks Plants and Flowers; Lay Mirtles, Jasemines, and other Greens. At the end of this Month, sift your Beds of Off-sets of Tulips, and for Anemonies, Ranunculus's, &c. Sow Anemonie Seeds, in fine sifted rich Earth in Beds or Boxes. Monthly Observations for August. PRune off superfluous Branches and Shoots of the se∣cond Spring. Pluck up Suckets. Inoculate early, if a tall, in this Month. Sow Colliflowers and Cabbages for Winter-plants. Sow Corn-sallet, Mary-golds, Let∣tuce, Carrots, Parsnips, Spinage, Onions, curled En∣dive, Angelica, Scurvygrass, Larks-heel, Columbines, I∣ron colour'd Fox-gloves, Holihocks, and such Plants as endure Winter. Transplant such Lettuce you would have abide all Winter; pull up ripe Onions, Garlick, &c. gather Olitory-seeds; clip such Herbs before the Full-moon, an handful high. Sow Purslain, Chervil, &c. Make Summer-syder, and Perry. Gather seeds of Shrubs, being ripe. Take Bulb roots of Lillies, &c. Bartholomew-tide, the only secure season for removing and laying Perennial Greens, Oranges, Lemons, Mirtles, Phylareas, Oleanders, Jasmine, Arbutus, and other rare Shrubs, as Pomegra∣nates, Roses, and whatever is most obnoxious to Frosts, taking the shoots and branches of the last Spring, and pegging them down with a hook-stick, in very rich Earth and Soil, perfectly consumed; Water them on all occasions in Summer; by this time Twelve-month they will be ready to remove into good Earth set in the shade, kept moderately moist: Three Weeks past, set them in some more airy place, but not in the Sun, till 15 Days more. Now put new Earth in your Pots of Auricula's, transplant and divid their Roots into a light rich Earth: Also your best Primroses and Oxlips: Also your Campions, or Lychnis Calcidonices. Trans∣plant seedling Anemonies; set Colchicums, Spiderworts▪
Monthly Observations for September. GAther your ripe Winter-fruit be sure in dry wea∣ther. You may yet sow Lettuce, Raddish, Spi∣nage, &c. and Winter-herbs. Transplant most part of eating, and physical Herbs, Artichoaks, and Asparagus∣roots, and Strawberries, &c. As the Weather directs, about Michaelmas, in fair Weather, be sure avoid a foggy day, retire your choice Greens, and rarest Plants (being dry) into the Conserva∣tory; as Oranges, Lemons, Indian and Spanish Jasmines, Oleanders, Barba Jovis, Amomum Plinii, Citisus Luna∣tus, Chamaelea Tricoccos, C'stus Ledan Clusii, Dates, Aloes, Sedums, &c. ordering them with fresh Mould, as taught in May, to nourish them all the Winter, leav∣ing as yet the Doors and Windows open, giving them much Air, so the Wind is not sharp nor the Weather foggy, till the Weather's more cold and sharp; and as that increases, the more enclose them, till wholly shut up, as the Weather gives occasion: Mirtles will endure abroad near a Month longer. The cold coming on, set such Plants as will not endure the House, into the Earth, the Pots 2 or 3 Inches lower than the surface of the Earth, under a southern exposure, covering them with Glasses, cloathed with sweet and dry Moss; but upon all fair Days, and in sunny and sweet Showers, take them off. Thus preserve your Marum Syriacum, Cy∣stus's, Geranicum, Nocte olens, Flos Cardina is, Mara∣coes, seedling Arburus, choice Ranunculus and Anemo∣nies, and thus covering them till April. Plant Tulips, and all bulbous Roots, but your choice of each defer till the latter end of the next Month. Sow Auricula's, Crocus, Primrose, and Cowslip-seeds, Frittary, and Tulip-seeds, &c.
Monthly Observations for October. NOW is the time for setting Fruit-stores; which if the Fruit soon ripe, keep them in Sand till now: set them 3 Inches deep, the sharp end uppermost, and cover them with Fern or Straw to keep them warm in the Winter: but at the Spring take if off. You may sow Lettuce, &c. for tender Salleting. Trench Ground for both: plant or transplant all sorts of Fruit∣trees, having lost their leaves: Wall-trees above a Years Grafting: lay bare the Roots of old unthriving, or over-hasty blooming Trees, their Fruit dry, the Moon decreasing. Remove your best and nicest July-flowers to shelter from much Rain or Wet, and where Snow may not be apt to fall on them, and brush it off gently, when fallen on those that are not capable of shelter. And this Month trim them all up with fresh Mould. Set your choice Tulips: you may now also sow their seeds. plant some Anemonies and Ranunculus's in prepared Earth, as directed in the Vade Mecum: but they must be covered, when they appear from the Frosts, that will otherwise kill them all: Therefore your best, set not till December. Monthly Observations for November. TRench and fit Ground for A'rtichoaks, and plant Trees for Standards, or Walls. Lay in your Cel∣lars, Carrots, Turnips, Parsnips, Cabbages, and Colli∣flowers, for Seed, to be Transplanted in the Spring. Furnish your Nursery with Stocks for Grafting, and turn up your Melon ground, mixing with it your rich∣est Earth, and lay it in ridges in the Spring. If the Weather require it, enclose your tender Plants and Perennial Greens, Shrubs, &c. in your Conserva∣tory, stopping all entrance of Cold, especially sharp Winds. Give not your Sedums, or Aloes, one drop of
Water all the Winter. Sow Auricula Seeds, and cover peeping Ranunculus's, &c. Likewise plant Fibrous Roots, Lilax, Syringaes, Peonies, Althea frutex, and Roses. If the Plants are very Dry, and it don't Freeze, Refresh them Sparingly, with Water mingled with Cow or Sheep's Dung. Monthly Observations for December. PRune Standard Trees, and prune and cut Wall-Fruit. Trench Ground, and Dung it for Bor∣ders, planting Fruit-Trees, Plant Vines, and Stocks for-Grafting; and Set early Peas and Beans. Now keep your Garden-house well secur'd against Cold; and preserve Anemonies, Ranunculus's, and best July-Flowers, from great Rain, sharp Winds and Frost.
The Table to the Art of Preserving, Conserving, and Candying. A ALMOND Butter, 5 Almond Milk 7 Apricocks preserv'd ibid Aqua Mirabilis 8 Angellets to make 10 Angelical water 14 Angelica roots preserved 17 Aqua Composita 20 Artificial Malmsey 21 Artificial Claret ibid Apricock cakes 25 A'rtichoaks preserv'd 28 Almond caudle 34 A'rtichoaks to pickle 44 A'rtichoak bottoms to pickle 53 B Barley Water 19 Balm water 20 Broom-buds pickled ibid Dr. Burges's Plague-water 22 Burage-flowers to candy 23 Bisket cakes to make 25 Banbury cakes 28 Barberries candyed 37 Barberries preserved ibid Bragget to make 55 C Conserve of barberries 3 Conserve of roses ibid Cinamon-water ibid erries preserved 4 Conserve of Oranges 4 Cucumbers to pickle 6 Cream of Quinces ibid Cherry-wine 6 Currans preserved 9 Conserve of Quinces 12 Conserve of rosemary 13 Cherries to dry 14 Conserve of Damsons 16 Conserve to strengthen the back 20 Conserve of burrage-flowers 23 Conserve of Pruans 24 Christial jelly ibid Conserve tarts for all the Year 26 Cordial of Vertue 32 Comfortable Syrup 34 Cherries to candy 34 Clove-gilly-flowers to pickle 35 Cinamon-sugar 46 Cream of Apricocks 37 Cullice to make ibid Cucumbers green 38 Cakes of Lemons ibid Capon water 39 China-broth 40 Cream of codlings 41 Cream tart 41 Cock-ale to make 34 Caraway-cake ibid Cordial-water of clove-gilly-flowers 44 Chips of Quinces 47 Conserve of bugloss-flowers 48 Comfits to make 50 Curran-wine to make 52 Conserve of Sage ibid Cornelians to pickle 54
D Dr. Deodates drink for the Scurvy 19 Damask-water 30 E Excellent broth 9 Excellent Hypocras 21 F French-beans to pickle 7 French bisket to make 16 Flomery caudle 46 Fruits preserved all the Year ibid G Grapes to preserve 8 Goose-berry-cakes 9 Goose-berries preserved 17 Ginger-bread to make 29 Goose-berry-paste 48 Ginger to candy 25 H Hypocras to make 5 Honey of Roses 12 Hydromel to make 45 Honey of Mulberries 49 Honey of Raisins ibid I-J. Jelly of Hartshorn 10 Italian-bisket to make 15 Jelly of Straw-berries 24 Imperial-water 31 Jumbals to make 32 Jelly of Apples 54 Jelly of Goose-berries ibid K K. William's perfume 13 K. Edw. perfume ibid L Late Qn's perfume 13 Leach to make 31 Leach Lombard 30 Leach of Almonds 35 Lozenges of Roses 47 Lemon and Orange-peel pick∣led 48 M Mackroons to make 4 March-panes to make 7 Marmalade of Quinces 5 Marmalade of Lemons and Oranges 14, 53 Metheglen brown 15 Muscadtne comfits 23 Manus christi 23 Musk balls to make 30 Marrigolds to candy 36 Mathiolus Bezoar's water 41 Marmalade of currans 42 Mead to make ibid Mint-water 44 Marmalade of cherries 46 Medlers to preserve 47 Musk-sugar to make 48 N Naple-bisket to make 47 O Oranges to preserve 6 Oyl of Violets ibid Oyl of sweet-almonds 11 Oranges and Lemons can∣dyed 15 Oranges preserv'd after the Portugal fashion ibid Oranges to bake 1 Oraneg-water 32 P Pear plumbs to preserve 7 Purslain to pickle 8
Pomatum to make 11 Pomander to make 16 Peaches to preserve 17 Pippins to dry 26 Paste of Genua ibid Paste of quince 29 Pome citron preserv'd 35 Paste of tender Plumbs 40 Poppy-water to make 41 Plague-water to make 50 Paste of cherries 53 Paste of Apricots ibid Quinces cakes 3 Quince preserv'd white 14 Quinces preserv'd red 6 Quidany of cherries 14 Quidany of Quinces 27 Quince cakes thin 29 Quince cream 37 Quinces to pickle 50 Quince cakes clear ibid R Raspices preserved 4 Rosemary-water 11 Rasberry-wine 21 Rose-Vinegar 39 Rasberry cream 45 Roses preserved whole 49 S Symbals to make 5 yrup of Violet, ibid Dr. Stephen's water 8 yrup of clove-gilly-flowers 5 yrup of Worm-wood 11 yrup of Poppies 12 yrup of emons ibid yrup of cowslips 14 pirit of wine 12 ugar plates to make 16 Syrup of Maiden-hair 13 Syrup of Licorish ibid Syrup of Quinces 17 Syrup of Hartshorn 18 Syrup of cinamon ibid Spirit of Ambergreese 22 Syrup of citron-peels 18 Syrup of Hysop 22 Sweet cakes without sugar 27 Spirit of Honey 28 Syrup for the Lungs ibid Sweet-bags for Linnen 27 Sugar Leach 31 Spirit of Roses 32 Syrup of Elder 32 Syrup for short-wind 36 Surfeit water 33, 44 Syrup comfortable 34 Syrup of Roses 33 Syrup of sugar-candy ibid Syrup against scurvy 33 Suckets of walnuts 29, 35 Syrup of saffron ibid Spots and stains out of cloathes 38 Sugar-cakes ibid Syrup of Vinegar 39 Syrup of Apples ibid Sugar of Roses 41 Syllabub to make 42 Steppony 43 Syder to make ibid Strawberry wine ibid Snow-cream 45 Suckets of Lettice-stalks 48 Syrup of Purslain 48 Syrup of Mint ibid Sweet-meat of Apples 52
T Trisle to make 36 Treacle water 18 V. U. Verjuice to make 31 Ʋsquebah to make 15 W Wafers to make 8 Water against fits of the Mo∣ther 11 Walnut water 18 Water for a consumption 19 Wormwood-wine 27 Wormwood-water 29 Wash-balls to make 30 Wipt-syllabub 45 White Mead 47 The Table to Physick and Chirurgery, Beautifying Waters, &c. A ACH or Pain 56 Agues to cure ibid Agues in Children 58 Ague in the Brest 68 Alom-water 71 B Black Jaundice 57 Bite of a mad Dog 60 Bloody-flux to cure 67 Bleeding at the Nose 68 Beautifying the Face 81 Breath to sweeten 86 Beautifying-water 88 Body to cleanse 94 Breasts to make small ibid Bath for Ladies 94 Body to make Fat ibid Belts to Embroider 97 Black sarsnets to wash ibid C Cramp to cure 58 Countess of Kent's pouder iid Cancer to cure 60 Conception to procure 62 Catholicon 61 Consumption to help 63 Children to go to stool 76 Cancer in a breft 63 Care of the infant 77 Chilblains to take away 88 Cloven Nails to help 89 Colour'd silks to wash 90 D DAFFY's Elixir Salutis to make right 55 Dry cough to help 59 Deafness to cure 6 Dropsie to help 64 Dr. Tench's Julep for fits of the Mother 67 Dr. Willoughby's Aqua Mira∣bilis 70 Drink that healeth all worunds 74 Directions for Nurses 76 Dentifrice for Teeth 86 E Eye-water to make 72 Excellent wash 89
Excellent beautifier 93 F Fevers in Children 57 Falling-sickness to help 59 Fits of the Mother 65 Fistula to heal ibid Fellon to Kill 68 Flowers to bring down 72 Flowers to stay 73 Falling off of Hair. 81 Face to make Fair ibid Freckles to take away 83 For nails that fall off 90 For cloven nails ibid Face to make youthful 92 Face to make Ruddy ibid Face to clear ibid G Gout to cure 56 Griping of the Guts ibid Green fikness to cure 60 Green Oynmen 65 Gascoign Pouder 68 Gold-lace to clean 95 H Help for blasting 66 Hair to make fair 80 Hair to make grow ibid Hair to take away 81 Holes or pits to clear 83 Heat in the Face 84 Hands to whiten 90 Heat in the hands ibid Hair to curl 93 Hair to make black 93 Hair to increase ibid I. J. Infection of Plague 58 Imposthume to break 60 Itch to cure ibid Infants troubled with Wind and Phlegm 79 Itch or breakings out 60, 73 Iuk-spots in Linnen 96 K King's-Evil to cure 60 L Loosness to stop 62 Lac virginis to make 82 Lips chopt help 87 Lawns to starch 95 M Medicine for the back 57 Medicine for aches 56 Miscarying to prevent 59 Medicine for agues 57, 58, 61 Medicine to teeth easy 66 Megrim in the head 69 My Lord Denies medicine for the Gout 70 Morphew to cleanse 84 N Nails to make grow O Oyl of Roses to make 73 Oyl of St. John's wort 75 Oyl of Fennel ibid Oyntment for an inflamed Face 84 Oyntment to take away spots of the small-pox 91 Oyntment for beautifying the Face 33 Oyntment to illustrate the Face ibid. P Piles to destroy 59 Plague-water to make 64
Pain in the Ears 69 Piles after child-birth 73 Pouder for the Green-sickness 74 Pricking of a Thorn ibid Pimples in the face 33 Pomatum for the skin 85 Pock-holes to take out 88 Pimples to take away 84 Point and Lace to clean 96 Points to wash 98 R Remedy for sore eyes 61 Rickets in children 65 Rheumatick cough 67 Red-flux to help 68 Redness of the face after the small-pox 83 Red face to prevent 84 Ring-worms in the face 93 Red face to cure 94 S Stone and Gravel 56 Survey drink ibid tica to cure 57 Sprain in the back 61 Scurvey to cure 62 Sore breast not broken and when broken 63 Scald head to heal 64 Shingles to cure 65 Spitting of blood 68 Swooning-fits to help 71 Scabs after small-pox 72 Stitch in the side 73 Spleen to help 74 Skin to cleanse 81 Sun-burn to take away 82 Skin to whiten 62, 85 Skin to smooth ibid Spots in the face to take away 85 Stinking breath to help 88, 86 Stink of the Nostrils 89 Stench of Armholes 91 Spots after small-pox 91 Scars in the face 92 Silver-plate to cleanse 95 Silk stockens to wash 96 Spot of greese out of sild, stuff, or cloth ibid Stains in Linnen, &c. ibid Sarsnet to wash 97 T To make a Woman be soon delivered, the child dead or alive 65 Tympany to cure 67 Terms to provoke ibid To staunch bleeding 68 Tertian Ague to cure 74 Tyssick to prevent 75 Teeth to make white 86, 87 U Ʋnguentum Album 59 W Worms in children 49 Whites to cure ibid Wens to cure 63 Wind to prevent 64 Women in Travail 65 White-flux to cure 68 Water for the eyes 69 Web in the eye ibid What is to be given the child, forthe first thing it tak∣eth 78 Waters for the Face 81 Wash-balls to make 87
Warts to take away 91 Water to whiten the skin and take Sunburn away 92 Wrinkles of the Face 94 Y Yellow-Jaundice 91 The Table to the Compleat Cook's Guide. A'Rtichoak's fry'd 107 Apple-pyes fry'd 119 A made dish of Apples 126 Almond water 135 Almond pudding 136 Asparagus to keep 106 Almond-tart 137 B Bisket-bread to make 100 Black buddings ibid Barley broth to make 112 Beef-stewed 120 Baked Puddings 123 Brawn made Tender 126 Birds stew'd the Lady But∣ler's way 140 Breams to stew 150 Butter to draw 152 C Cheese-cakes ta made 92 Carbanado Matton 100 Carbanado Hens 106 Cream of Eggs 108 Colleps of beef stewed 110 Capon boyl'd 113 arp to stew 114 Calves-feet to roast 119 hine of beef Poudered 121 ods-head dressed 122 Capon boyl'd with Asparagus 124 Capon boyld with sage, parsley Clouted cream 126 Citron Puddings 128 Cows Ʋdder Roasted 131 Codling-tart 132 Cherry tart 132 Carp Pye 135 Chicken pye ibid Calves-head bak'd 138 Cocks or Larks 142 Chuks of Veal bak'd 146 D Dish of Marow 101 Damson Tart 110 Dutch Pudding 110 Double-tats 144 E Eels to souce 105 Eggs butter'd on toasts 111 Eets boyl'd 121 Eel-pye to make 13 Eels to roast 141 English Pottage. 143 F Furmety to make 102 Fricacy of Veal 105 Fine Pudding in dish 108 Fricacy of chickens 111 Florentine to make 114 Fresh-cheese 116 Finè Custard 118 Fry'd Pudding 123 Fool to make 129
lounders to boyl ibid Fresh Sturgeon to Roast 135 Fricay of Rabits 136 Fennel-sllet 149 Fare'd Veal 151 Flownders stew'd 199 G Grseberry-Fl 105 Grand Slle 113 Gamon of aon 128 Gurnet boyl'd 155 Goseberry stard 139 H Herring-pye 100 Heg--pudding 107 Haggess pudding 108 Hash of cp 121 Htch-et to make 138 Hreto Reast 147 sh of  150 I Italian pudding 130 Frther to make 140 L Lamb-pye to make 93 Le caudde 140 Leg of Lamb stewed 107 M Mince-pye of Egs 98 Mine'd pies to make 133 Marrow spinage Pasties 140 Marrow Puddings 115 Mallard to stew 146 Mullet to boyl 150 N Neats: foot Pye 102 Neats-tongue and Ʋder dress'd 127 O Orangado 'Pye 102 Oysters to battel up 137 Oysters to pickle 142 Oysters to broyl ibid P Pheasant to stew 100 Pork-pye 105 Puff paste to make 112 Pig to bake ibid Paste for Tarts 123 Pig to souce 126 Pear-pye to make 130 Pippin-tart 131 Pear puddings 138 Pancakes 139 Peg bak'd court fashon 144 Pidgeon pye to make 146 Pottage of a capon 148 Pippin pye to make ibid Pudding of Rice 151 Polonian sausages 126 Q Quince Pye 105 Quaking Pudding 125 R Rice Pudding 199 Rabbit Rosted with Oysters 110 Rabits bak'd to be eat cold 118 Rice Tart to make 132 Rare fricacy 136 Roast beef Pickled 143 Rabit stewed 146 Rare broth 147 S Spanish Olio 101 Scollops boyl'd Salmon to boyl 111
