21500 99837986 2340
A Christian exhor∣tation taken oute of the holy Scriptures, for the great comfort of euery faith∣full person being in the agonie of deathe, before whome it must be oftē∣times red and reci∣ted (if neede be) euē to his last breath. Wherevnto is ioyned in the end a singular Pray∣er for the partie greeuously afflicted by sicknesse, dra∣vving tovvard his death. Therewith is a briefe Ca∣techisme, which is not only to instructe the sicke, but also to refresh his memorie vvith the greate mysterie of our redemption. Printed at London by Henry Bynneman. Anno. 1579.
Mathewe. 24.51. The carelesse and negligente seruante shall be surprinsed and cutte off, and haue his parte vvith the hypocrites, there shall be vveeping and gnasshing of teeth. Death is the end and beginning of life. Ecclesiasticus. 18.18. Before sicknesse vse medicine, and before thou come to iudgement examine thy selfe, and in the sight of God thou shalt finde fauoure. Apocalips. If thou doest not vvatch, I vvil come vpon thee as a theefe, and thou knovvest not at vvhat time I vvill come vpon thee. Apocalips. 16. Blessed is he vvhiche vvatcheth and keepeth his garmentes least he vvalke naked, and that men see his filthynesse. Mathew. 24. Luke. 12. Be ye readie, for yee knovv not in vvhat hour the sonne of man shall come.
To the very Honora∣ble his singular good Lord the Earle of Lincolne, Lord Clinton and Say, Lorde high Ad∣mirall of Englande, Knighte of hir Maiesties order, and one of the Lordes of hir Highnesse most honourable priuie Coun∣sell. THe greate and cunning workemai∣ster, yea, the maister of all mischiefe Sa∣tan, hath not ceased, euen from the firste creation of man, to molest and perse∣cute the same, lying euer in wayt to destroy him, as is playnely seene in his assaults, deliuered to our first pa∣rents Adam and Eue, very shortlye after their creatiō: he neuer
left them, vntill suche time as he hadde caused them to transgresse the commande∣ment of the Almighty, wherby they purchaced to themselues, and to all their posteritie eternall damnation. He continually putteth his cunning and Stratagemes in vse against seely poore man: Sometime by open bat∣taile, as causing him to commit mur∣ther, adulterie, theft, extortion, and such like grosse offences, against the commaundementes of the seconde Table. Another time, he solliciteth him to pride, Idolatry, blaspheming, vnbeliefe, lothing the word of God, contempte of the same, rebellion a∣gainste God, vnthankefulnesse to∣ward God, and such like, against the commandements of the first Table: whereby he deliuereth vnto vs ter∣rible and dangerous assaultes, other∣times he dresseth agaynst vs surprin∣ses, as when by meane of the ingraf∣fed
corruption whiche dwelleth in vs, he raiseth in vs horrible motions, thoughtes, affections, and consentes, yea, and that whiche most daunge∣rous of all is: he hath so banded oure eyes, that the greatest number of men doe thinke filthy motions, vn∣cleane thoughts, corrupt affections, and detestable consents to be no sin, vnlesse the acte do ensue. But indede the Eternall, which hath created the heart, seeth all these things in vs, and abhorreth and condemneth them, he is the searcher of the raines, which knoweth the thought before it bee hatched in vs. Wherefore, we haue great cause, to beg of God, his grace, that we may vnderstand and know the ruzes and deceiptes of Sathan, whereby to auoyde them, and when he shal at any time sollicite vs to any of the aboue named things, or suche like, let vs then know that the enimy is at hand, that he dresseth his scara∣muches againste vs: and that he pla∣ceth
his ambushes to cut betweene vs, and our saluation: wherefore, it behoueth vs to bee alwayes armed with the armour of God, whereof Sainct Paule speaketh in the Epistle to the Ephesians, 6. Chapter, and to bee well acquaynted with the per∣fect vse of our weapon: for oure eni∣mie is both strong and skilfull, and woulde soone make an end of man∣kind, if that God did not holde him in bridle: his cunnings are in maner infinite, he can transfigure himselfe sometime into the likenesse of an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 12.13.14. yea, into the likenesse of Christe himselfe, and alleage the Scriptures vnto vs, but it shall be al∣togither to cast vs downe with the weight of our sinnes, into desperati∣on, and so to damne vs: for he wyll alleadge vnto vs the iustice of God, the horrour of oure sinnes, and the Law, cleane contrarie
to Christe, for Christe is the nouriture, medicine, and consolation of afflicted soules, he will not breake the bruzed reede, nor quench the smoking tow, wher∣fore we must beware of this false and counterfetted Christe, he can make this day, that which is horrible sinne to seeme to me to be no sinne, and to morrow that whiche is no sinne, to be horrible sinne: thus can he am∣plifie and swell the least euill thing that is, and make it to seeme as great and huge as a mightie Mountayne. I haue spoken some thing of this cū∣ning aduersarie, whiche the sacred Scripture calleth the great Leuiathā and the redde Dragon: to the ende we might beware of him, and auoide his snares which he laieth aboue and beneath vs, before and behinde, on euery side, and within and with∣out vs, to the ende, that when wee shall feele our selues in any sort soli∣cited by him▪ we maye forthwith re∣paire to our Panacea and most
hole∣some medicine for al diseases, which is the word of God, in the which we shall finde all comforte: and hauing founde it we must lay sure holde on it in all humilitie and Prayer, the whiche word doth euen repulse and chase Sathan from vs. It is a lighte whiche lighteneth to our feete, it is a most pure thing, it cōuerteth soules, it is a faithfull witnesle, yea, it is the power of God to saluation to all be∣leeuers. Saincte Paule calleth it the Sword of the Spirit, the which wōu∣deth and putteth Sathan to flighte: it is that Sword, without the whiche we may not fight the battayle wyth that strong and mightie enimie, with whome wee must euerye one of vs fight a battayle, eyther in the time of oure healthe, or else in the article of our death, for then beginneth he to play sharply the accuser, then setteth he forth vnto vs the Lord Christe, as a lawgiuer
and exactor, then maketh he euery sinne to seeme twenty, to the ende he maye make vs to disho∣nour God through vnbeleefe, and so to fall into desperation: our aunswer must be to him, Satan thou canst not speake truth except it be to get cre∣dite, whereby afterward thou mayst the more boldly tel millions of lyes: but know thou, Hebr. 1.10. & 14. that my Lord Iesus Christe hathe payde my debt more than abundantly, for with one onely offering, he hath cōsecrated for euer thē which are sanctified. Nowe God is iust, yea iustice it selfe, wherefore he is contente with one (more than sufficient) paymente, for one thyng, wherfore thou canst in no wise hurt me, if he can not in this sort preuaile. Then commeth he in another lyke∣nesse; with his faire face, with flatte∣ring and entising words, to lift vs vp into pride and vayne glorye, and would
perswade vs that we haue de∣serued Heauen and eternall life by our workes, vnto whome we muste answere in this sort, O thou horrible enchanter, thou bearest me in hande that I am a Saincte, to the ende thou mightest make me a Diuell. Who is he that doth that which is comman∣ded him to doe? none; no not one, wher are then my deserts? I wil shew thee Sathan, my Lorde Christ hathe taken from mee all my sinnes, and hath nayled them to his crosse, 2 Cor. 5. d. Rom. 8. 1. Cor. 15. g. Ephes. 1.19. Ephes. 2.1.13 Coloss. 1.20. & 2.14.15 and hath cancelled the obligation which was againste me, yea, he hath done more for me, he hathe giuen mee all his deserts, to witte, his obedience, iu∣stice, righteousnesse, and innocencie, as to a member of his bodye, where∣fore I (being a member of his body) can no more bee damned than my Lorde Christe may. Now when hee seeth himselfe thus aunswered and proued a lyar by the sacred Scrip∣tures of God, whiche are the onely weapon wherewith to put him
to flight, he then yeeldeth all lost, ther∣fore we may easily see how needeful it is to be armed against Sathan with the most blessed word of God, wher∣with to quenche all his fierie dartes, and to repulse all his assaults. Wher∣fore I haue turned this exhortation into our english tongue, the whych was written in the French by a reue∣rend, worthy, learned, and godly fa∣ther, to a noble, martiall, and Chri∣stian Gentleman of France, his good Lorde and friende, wherewith in the time of his quietnesse he might fitte his armoure and weapons in suche sort, as by battayle, he might valiant∣ly fighting: obtayne a glorious and victorious Crowne For as your ho∣nor knoweth, he that will be a good Souldioure, must enter timely into the warres, therefore I saye, I haue turned into the Englishe the same exhortation, for the profite of the Churche of God heere
in Englande. And albeit that the wordes be not many, they be of singular valew and effecte, the whiche I haue published vnder your honors name, doubting not, but that you will take my poore trauel in this behalfe in good part. I haue added in the ende of it a Table of certayne consolatorie passages of Scripture, whiche I haue gathered out of the old and new Testament, for confirmation of oure faith, in the moste sweete and comfortable pro∣mises of the almighty. For when we shal come to the battayle, the which we must once sighte, eyther in the time of our health, or else in the ar∣ticle of deathe (for none is crowned that fighteth not, and a Christian life is a continuall warre) by the grace of God thys shorte exhorta∣tion shall greatly helpe as manye as shall make the same familiar vnto them, towardes the obteyning of the victorie agaynste the aforesayde
trayned, experimented, cunning, mightie, and cruell enimie. In London the twentith of Marche. Anno Domini. 1579. Your honours humble euer to commaunde. (I. S.)
To the faithfull Rea∣der saluation. FRiende Reader, take in good parte the exhor∣tation the vvhich I haue heere vvritten, for the great comfort and profit of al persons vvhich feare God, vvherevvith to serue them at neede, vvhen it shall please the Lord to call them. But note you, that to vse thys vvell, that of these three let∣ters B. S. N. the firste letter signifieth brother, if the
par∣tie be a manne, the seconde Sister, being a vvoman, and the third signifyeth the pro∣pre name of the person vvherby he must be named. For vve may not then honor them by names of vvorldlye honour and dignitie, but to stand firmely against Satan in the vertue of the Lorde. We must name thē by their proper names, vvhiche they haue receyued at the holye Sacramente of Baptisme. This doing, thou shalt obey God, vvhome I beseech to be merciful vnto thee in the secret day of his comming.
¶ To my Lorde, my Lord of Senarpont, Knight of the Kings order, Captayne of fiftie men at armes, and his Lieu∣tenant generall in Picardie. MY Lorde, hauing often∣times considered the be∣ginning, the continu∣ance, and the ende of mās life: I haue plaine∣lye knowen, as by an or∣dinarie experience, that men are more cu∣rious and carefull for the entertaynement and conseruation of this their life: than to prepare themselues to a more happie ende according to God: for man being in this bodily prison, as blinde, and not perfectlye regenerated, do the better loue the darke∣nesse of suche an earthly prison, than hee doth the heauenlye lighte: for the whiche cause it is written, that hee that is of the earthe, Iohn. 3. speaketh of the earth. As
beeyng like the sonnes of Agar, whiche soughte the wisedome of this worlde, Bac. 3. 2. Cor. 1. Eccles. 41. the whiche is foolishnesse before God. Howe manye bee there at this day, vnto whome the remem∣brance of death is very vnpleasaunt, yea rather detestable, so delighting them∣selues in their worldly pleasures, that they seeme to haue forgotten God, not caring any thing at all for Religion, Psal. 52.72. nor for the vengeance and iudgement of God, terrible and fearefull to all those which haue their names written in the earth, being scraped out of the booke of life. VVherefore my Lord, to the end you walke not in the large way which bringeth to destruction, Psalme. 68. Math. 7. Eccles. 7. being taught by the wise man saying: In all thy workes, see thou doe remember thy latter dayes, and thou shalt neuer sinne. I haue thoughte good to drawe out of the holye Scriptures a Christian exhortation, to bee recited with a loude voyce before euerie faithfull person, the whiche approcheth to this bodily death (couered with a casuall life) passing on to one muche better,
and more happie. For hauing this done, I will attribute to my selfe nothing, for I am but earth and durt: yet notwithstanding, I do not thinke to haue laboured in vayne, con∣sidering that the Lorde Iesus Christ do the admonishe vs, Luc. 12. Math. 24. 2. Pet. 3. 1. Thess. 5. Psal. 2. that we shoulde be alwayes readie, not knowing the houre: for the day of the Lord wil come suddainely as a theefe in the night. O how happie then shall they be, whiche shall put themselues into his safegard. VVherefore my Lord, I do pre∣sent you this little Christian exhortation, very humbly beseeching you to keepe the same to serue you at youre neede, at what time it shall please the Lorde God to call you. I know well, that when the same tyme shall come, you shall haue good meanes to haue with you some man learned, and fur∣nished with holy letters, to declare vnto you the worde of life, yet for all that, not knowing the time, nor the place, ne yet the oportunitie that we may haue, I dare boldly say without
beast, that hearing thys exhortation redde with a loude voyce, being in mortall agonie, it maye be vnto you as holesome as the Christian consola∣tion of the best learned Doctor of the Reli∣gion, for they might preach no more vnto you than the Prophets and Apostles doe preach vnto you in the sayd exhortation; the which I beseech you to receyue, with as good heart, as I do desire the supreme go∣uernour to giue you the grace my Lorde, to glorifie him as well in your life, as in your death, and in the meane time, that it maye please him to make you to prosper from good to better, and to giue me to perseuere in your seruice, as your very humble and very obedient ser∣uant for euer: ({inverted ⁂})
A Christian exhorta∣tion, the vvhyche must bee recited with a loude voyce before euery faithfull person being in the agonie of Death. HE that is of GOD, let him heare the word of GOD, Iohn. 8. Math. 7. and let hym not only hear it, but let him kéepe it, and put it in execution: Esay. 40. for all thinges shall haue an ende, and shall weare as a garmente, but the worde of the Lorde GOD remayneth eternally. Nowe séeing it is so, that by one man sinne is come into the worlde, Rom. 7. and by sinne death, and
consequent∣lye all afflictions and aduersities de∣pend of the same, therefore iustly the life of man is nothing else, but a continuall battell vpon the earth, in suche sorte, that the flesh sighteth a∣gainst the spirite, and the spirite a∣gainst the Diuell, the Worlde, and the Flesh, which are the enimies of our soules. Note. But following the coun∣sell of the Apostle, to obteyne victo∣rie in that spirituall battayle, you must constantly resist by Faith: for the victorie which ouercommeth the world, it is our faith, the whiche is a true and stedfast knowledge of the loue of God towards vs, Hebr. 11. according as by his Gospell he declareth him∣selfe to be oure father and sauioure, by the meane of Iesus Christ. Ha∣uing then suche a stedfast Faith for your principal foundation, acknow∣ledge and confesse without fayning, before the
Maiestie of God, that you are a poore and miserable sinner, conceiued and borne in iniquitie and corruption, Psalme. 51. Psal. 142. prompte to all euill do∣ing, vnapte to anye good thing, and that by youre vice you haue trans∣gressed without ende and withoute ceassing, the whole commaunde∣mentes of God. In which thing do∣ing, you haue drawen by hys iust iudgemente, ruine, and destruction vpon you: yet for all that you are displeased in your self, that you haue offended him, and do condemne your selfe and youre vices with true re∣pentance, desiring, that the grace of God doe help your calamitie. Praye then in such stedfast fayth: if you can not with youre mouth, pray wyth youre hearte, that God, our very lo∣uing and most mercifull father, doe not enter at all into iudgement, nor into accompt with you, but that hée will haue pitie vpō you, in the name of his sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, and that it may please him to blotte
out our vices and spottes by the me∣rites of the death and passion of the same Iesus Christe, in whose name presente you to him his holy Pray∣er, the whiche he hath taught vs, in saying with a pure hearte, Our Fa∣ther which art in Heauen, thy name be halowed. Thy Kingdome come. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heauen. Giue vs this day our dayly bread. And pardon vs our offences, as we pardon them whiche haue of∣fended vs. And leade vs not at all in∣to temptation, but deliuer vs from the euill. For thine is thy Kyng∣dome, the power, and the glorie, throughout all ages. So be it. B. S. N. Acknowledge with all youre hearte your vniustice, Math. 3. Tit. 3. Ephes. 2. Psal. 51. Rom. 8. Rom. 1. Math. 1. Philip. 2. be forse for your sinnes, repent you continu∣ally, and the Kingdome of God shal draw néere vnto you: acknowledge that there is no iustice nor innocen∣cie, nor anye good workes of
you or in you: but as a child of wrath, Acts. 3. Math. 27. Esay. 53. Apocal. 1. Hebr. 9. con∣ceyued & borne in the sinne of the old Adam, you do deserue eternall death and damnation. Yet for all that, let not the same, nor all the sinnes of the world, if you should haue committed thē, feare you at al: for Iesus Christ, the true and eternall sonne of God, is made verye man, conceyued by the holy Ghost, borne of a holy Vir∣gin. To sanctify and to cleanse you, he hath suffered vnder Ponce Pilate many afflictions, iniuries, 1. Pet. 1. and out∣rages, making himselfe a seruante and captine, to sette you into full li∣bertie. Iesus Christ was crucifyed vpon the woodde of ye Crosse, to dely∣uer you from the eternall cursse. Ie∣sus Christ dyed in sheding his preci∣ous blaud for youre redemption, to deliuer you fully from deathe, Rom. 6. Marke. 16. from Hell, and from the power of Satan Iesus Christ was buried in the Se∣pulchre, to burie all
youre sinnes, the which he hathe borne & blotted out. Iesus Christe is descended into the lower partes, 1. Cor. 15. Actes. 1. Coloss. 3. Hebr. 7. Math. 25. Psalme. 61. in suffering an ex∣treame anguish, to deliuer you from all paynes and griefes of death. Ie∣sus Christe arose agayne from the dead, to make you to rise agayne in your proper body, and glorious im∣mortalitie. Iesus Christ is gone vp into Heauen, to make you to go vp after him. Iesus Christ is set at the right hād of God his father almigh∣tie, being youre aduocate and inter∣cessor towardes him, and ye appoint∣ment of all your sinnes. We a waite for him, that he shall come to iudge the liuing and the dead, to yeèlde to euery one according to his workes: but to his faithfull ones whiche be∣léeue in him, he will not impute at all their sinnes, but hauing iustified them by his grace, will make them to raigne for euer with him in hys heauenly throne.
B. S. N. Such is the great miste∣rie of our redemption, the whiche by the helpe of the grace of the holye Ghoste, you oughte stedfastly to be∣léeue to baue bin wrought for youre saluation. And doubt not at all, but that by the merite of Iesus Christe the head of his Churche, you are made a member incorporate to the same, yéelding him thankes in great humilitie, that he hathe giuen you the grace to haue liued in the com∣munion and companye of his faith∣full, hauing nouished you with hy∣word, with his bodye, and with hys bloud: acknowledging as well assu∣red, the great mercie of God, Rom. 8. Math. 25. Ephes. 1. by the remission of all youre sinnes, the which he hath giuen you by Iesus Christ, who will make you to rise a∣gaine at the latter daye, to raigne with him in the life eternall, the which he hath promised to all those
whiche beléeue in him, being bapti∣sed in his name. Math. 4. 1. Cor. 11. An excel∣lent gifte. Rom. 5. 1. Cor. 15. Nowe B. S. N. séeing that you haue this Faith, doubt not at all to receyue the promise of Faith: for God is true, he is not a lyar as man is, rather Heauen and Earth shall passe, but the worde of God remay∣neth for euer. God is youre father and creator, Marke. 16. Rom. 3. Math. 24. Esay. 40. Genes. 1. 1. Tim. 2. Tit. 3. 1. Tim. 1. Actes. 4. Apocal. 1. you are hys creature, and the worke of his hands, he hath not made you to destroy you, for hée is the sauiour of all men, and wil∣leth not the deathe of a sinner, but that he conuert and liue: wherefore I declare vnto you, in the name of God, that of his great goodnesse and mercie he giueth you full pardon, and remission of all your sinnes, by the onely merite of his sonne Iesus Christe our Lorde, in the sheding of his pretious bloud, for he is the pro∣pitiation, not only of all your sinnes, but of all the sinnes of the whole world.
B. S. N. ☞ Iesus Christ sayeth with his owne mouth, that all things are possible to him which beléeueth, be∣léeue then without any doubte, that Iesus Christe, taking to him oure flesh, became very man: wherefore he dyed for you, hauing borne all your sinnes in his body, 1. Iohn. 2. Math. 17. Rom. 1. Philip. 1. 1. Pet. 2. Rom. 3. to blotte and put them out. Present vnto God the pretious deathe of his sonne Iesus Christ, and by the merit of the same death and passion, aske him mercie, in saying from the bottome of youre heart in great humilitie and repen∣tance: LOrd God Almightie, be merciful to me poore wretched sinner, for the loue of thy sonne Iesus Christe my Lord and Sauiour. And for the merite of his deathe and passion, it maye please thee to receiue my soule, the which I recom∣mend into thy hands.
B. S. N. Put your strong trust in God, for séeing that he is for you, none shall be against you: for Iesus Christ, Iohn. 14. Math. 26. Psalme. 30. Rom. 8. which is the Lamb without spotte, hathe ouercome all for you, he offered himselfe once onely for you, and by the same only oblation, hathe wholly wiped out all youre sinnes, he hath made of none effecte your folly, Esay. 55. Math. 11. imustice, abhomination, with thys good Lord Iesus Christ, God the father hathe giuen you all things. B. S. N. Fortifie your selfe in Ie∣sus Christ, the whiche calleth you; and iuuiteth you by his Prophets, Apostles, and Euangelistes, to ad∣dresse youre selfe fréely to him, say∣ing, all you which haue thirst, come to the great fountayne, Come to me all ye that laboure and are loden, and I will ease you. B. S. N. Beléeue stedfastly, that Iesus
Christ hath set you frée from all your sinnes, and hath reconciled you to God his father, to whome in great humilitie and repentance, 1. Iohn. 5. say you from the bottome of your heart. LOrd God Almightie, be merci∣full vnto mee poore wretched Sinner, Rom. 3. Iohn. 14. Math. 26. Psalme. 30. Marke. 16. for the loue of thy sonne Ie∣sus Christ my Lorde and Sauioure. And for the merit of his deathe and passion, it may please thee to receiue my Soule, the which I recommende into thy hands. B. S. N. Be of good chéere, for vndoubtedly he will receyue youre soule as his, for the loue of his sonne Iesus Christe our Lorde, whiche is the Sauioure and Redéemer of all those which beléeue in him. Deut. 18. Psalme. 2. Esay. 53. Genes. 3.3. Moyses and all ye Prophets haue borne wit∣nesse, that all people shal receiue sal∣uation and blessing by Iesus Christ. The Apostles and Euangelistes witnesse, that Iesus
Christe is not come to call the iust, but the sinners te repentance, and to giue his soule for the Redemption of many: for hée hath shedde his bloud for the remis∣sion of sinne. Math. 9. Iohn. 10. Luc. 22. Hebr. 1. Ionh. 5. Beléeue then and doubt not at all, for Iesus Christe hathe made the purgation of all youre sinnes, hauing promised, that all those which shal beléeue in him, and in his father, which hath sent him, shall haue eternall life, and shall not come at all into iudgemente, but shall passe from death into life. Go to now B. S. N. reioyce in Ie∣sus Christe, for he hathe loued you, and washed you from al your sinnes in his bloud. Esay. 53. Apocal. 1. Take this strong faith wherewith to fighte valiantlye a∣gainst the aduersarie, haue none o∣ther buckler to defende youre selfe withall, but this pretious bloud of Iesus Christ, Rom. 7. the which by the ver∣tue of his
deathe and passion, hathe reconciled you to God his father, vnto whome, from the bottome of your hearte, in great humilitie and repentance, presente this Prayer. LOrd God Almightie, Rom. 3. Iohn. 14. Marke. 26. shew mer∣cie vnto me poore wretched sin∣ner, for the loue of thy sonne Iesus Christe my Lorde and Sauiour, and for the merite of his death and passi∣on, it may please thee to receyue my soule, the whiche I commend into thy handes. B. S. N. Holde fast this hope, and stedfast fasth, that thy good God, full of all mercie, will receyue youre soule as his, into his handes, Psalme. 30. Iohn. 10. Actes. 4. Rom. 8. Rom. 10. for the loue of his sonne Iesus Christe, for there is none other name vnder the Heauen giuen to men, by the which we maye be saued, and there is no saluatiō in any other, than in Iesus Christ: arme you then well wyth this good Iesus Christe, for he hathe done all for you, he hath
fulfilled the Law for you, he hathe ouercome all for you. Now go too B. S. N. reioyce you in God, stand alwayes fast in thys liuely fayth. Hebr. 11. Followe and imitate the holy Patriarkes, Prophets, and Apostles, which are all saued in this faith, who do all assure you, that the aduersarie can in no wise hurt you, for youre cause is wonne by Iesus Christe, Iohn. 5. 1. Iohn. 2. whiche is youre Iudge and your aduocate both togither, where∣fore saye alwayes in this stedfast faith, Albeit I shoulde walke in the middest of the shadowe of deathe, I will feare no euill, Psalme. 22. for thou Lorde God art with me. B. S. N. Be you also neuer wée∣rie, to say from the bottome of youre heart, in great humilitie and repen∣tance: LOrde God Almightie, be merci∣full to me poore wretched
sin∣ner, for the loue of thy sonne Iesus Christe my Lord and Sauiour. Rom. 3. Iohn. 14. Math. 26. And for the merite of his death and passi∣on, it may please thee to receyue my soule, the whiche I commende into thy hands. So be it. A singular Prayer, for one whyche is greately afflicted wyth sicke∣nesse, the whiche is more lyke to dye, than to liue. With a little Catechisme made of purpose, to instructe the sicke per∣son, and to cause him to behold by Faith the greate misterie of oure Redemption. Ecclesiasticus. 18. Before the sicknesse vse medicine, and before thou come to Iudge∣mente examine thy selfe, and in the presence of God thou shalte finde fauoure. Nowe the Lorde admonisheth vs to pray alwayes, chiefely, when we
are touched with his rods. Math. 26. Where∣fore, all the faithfull parentes and friends, which visit the sicke person, shoulde not onely visit and comforte the body, but also should searche and enquire for spirituall medicine for his soule, whiche thing shoulde bée done by good Prayers, confession of sinnes, and Christian exhortation, according to the word of God, with∣out the whiche man can not liue, but is deade béeyng yet lyuing. And to the end that all these things may be done in good order, and wyth zeale, first it is néedefull to prostrate themselues before the Maiestie of God, and to pray vnto him, begyn∣ning in this sort: Our helpe is in the name of the Lord. &c. Then to presente vnto hym the generall confession of sinnes, and consequently thys presente Prayer as followeth.
O Lord God Almighty, Math. 18. Iohn. 14. and father of all mer∣cies, we are aēssbled in the name of thy wel∣beloued Sonne oure Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christe, in the fauour of whome we are bold to presente oure selues vnto thée, to call vpon thy most blessed name, ha∣uing oure onely resuge to thy soue∣raigne goodnesse, the whiche we doe not desire to féele and tast in oure selues only, but also in the necessitie of thy poore creature, being afflicted both with bodily sicknesse, and affli∣ction and calamitie of the spirite. Iames. 5. 1. Cor. 11. We know O Lord that thou doest iustly visit and chastice him wyth thy roddes, to cause hym to vnder∣stande thy fatherly affection: but thy great mercies, whiche thou hast vsed towardes oure fathers, Psalme. 74. Math. 26. are not yet quenched and consumed: for thou art the great eternall God, fa∣uourable
and mercifull, Psalm. 102. Iohn. 14. Hebr. 7. whiche ne∣uer changest. Thy holy worde tea∣cheth vs very playnely, that all the earthe is full of thy mercies, the whiche doe farre surmount thy Iu∣stice: wherefore, appease thy rigour towardes thy creature, haue pitie and compassion of him, for the loue of thy sonne Iesus Christ our Lord. Looke not vppon his sinnes, but be∣holde the face of thy Christe, who hathe sufficientlye satisfyed for the same, in offering to thée vppon the Crosse, the greate Sacrifice of hys body, we beséeche thée then most lo∣uing and mercifull God, to make him to féele thy grace, the whyche thou neuer denyest to thy Children. And for so much as thou art oure e∣ternall father, Math. 6. whiche knowest well what is necessarie and expediente for our saluation, we doe not pray thée to prolong or to shorten hys life, for we do repose our selues vpon
thy holy will, the which we doe on∣ly desire to do. Thou arte wise, Rom. 11. not néeding councell, to dispose of thy creature according to thy good plea∣sure, but if it please thée to call him, who is he that maye resist? and if thou wilt send him health, Rom. 8. Iohn. 1. which is he that maye controll thée? For all things are in thy hand, and nothing is done without thy will and holye Prouidence. Yet notwithstanding O Lord, if of thy mercie thou doest prolong his dayes, thy scourge shall serue hym for chastizemente, to a∣mende, and to turne to thée, and wée wyth hym shall yéelde vnto thée thankes and prayses. But if thou haue determined to passe him into a better life, we beséeche thée, for the loue of thy sonne Iesus, to forget all hys faultes and offences, the whyche thou hast willed to be blot∣ted out, and washed in the
shedding of his pretious bloud. That it maye please thée for the merit of the death and passion of thy sonne, to receyue his soule into thy hands, when thou shalte call him out of thys Worlde. O Lord God, Psalme. 30. Psalme. 71. Psalme. 51. despise not the worke∣manship of thy handes, for beholde héere thy poore creature, in manner vtterly beaten downe, the whyche calleth vpon thée from the deapth of all his euils, presenting vnto thée his sorowfull and penitente hearte, the whiche we beséeche thée to haue for acceptable, Iohh. 14. for the loue of thy sonne Iesus Christe our Lorde, for whose sake thou hast promised vs to heare our requestes. Wherefore O Lord, Math. 6. we beséech thée to receyue vs into thy holy conduct, lightning our heartes and vnderstandings, to ad∣dresse vs towardes thée, and to call vpon thy name, so as thy sonne Ie∣sus Christe our Lorde hath taughte vs to pray for all oure necessities, saying, Our Father whiche arte in
Heauen, &c. Lastly O God, and most mercifull Father, that it maye please thée euer to susteyne vs by thy grace and power, to the ende that through the weakenesse of our fleshe, we fall not. And for so muche as of our selues we are so féeble, that we are not able to stande fast the space of one minute, may it please thée to fortifie vs by thy holy Spi∣rit, and to arme vs with thy graces, to the end that we may constantlye perseuere in thy Fayth, without the whiche, it is not possible to please thée, it may please thée to confirme vs dayly in the same, Hebr. . whereof wée wyll make confession both wyth heart and mouth, saying: I beleeue in God the Father Al∣mightie. &c. The Prayers being ended, they may sée how the sicke person doeth, and enquire how he féeleth himselfe, with Christian
and gratious spéech: but if they sée that he decline, and that within shorte time after no to∣ken of recouerie doe appeare, they may chose some mete time to speake to the sicke person, and to aske hym if he do desire to heare spéech of God, and to hearken to his word, whi∣lest he hath yet good remembrance. Iohn. 8. For if he be of God, they maye then beginne thys little Catechisme, which followeth. ({inverted ⁂})
A shorte Catechisme, vvhiche is not onely to in∣structe the sicke, but also to refreshe his memorie, with the great mysterie of oure Redemption: for the good vnderstanding and remembrance whereof, in his latter dayes, Eccles. 18. he ought to make confession of his faith, be∣fore the company of the faythful, of the which one (in the ab∣sence of the Minister) hould demaund of hym as follovveth. The Minister. B. S. N. Euery man whiche kno∣weth well himselfe, and is not igno∣rante of his estate and qualitie, Genes. 1. Psalme. 51. cer∣taynely ought to acknowledge, that albeit he is created to the image and likenesse of God, yet notwyth∣standing, he is conceyned and borne in the sinne of the
olde Adam, wher∣by he is made a poóre and wretched sinner, Ephes. 2. Rom. 5. ignorant, inconstant, and full of iniquitie: and consequentlye, sub∣iecte to all miseries, afflictions, ad∣uersities, and lastly to deathe, the cause whereof is sinne, the whyche God not willing to leaue it vnpu∣nished, doth afflicte vs dayly, and to speake it playnely, he chastiseth vs in this world, to the end we shoulde not be damned wyth the worlde. Wherefore B. S. N. be patiente in your sicknesse, 2. Cor. 11. Psal. 31. and you shall possesse your soule in spiritual ioy: acknow∣ledge youre sinne, and accuse youre selfe before the Maiestie of God, whome you must looke vpon and be∣hold by Faith, making confession of the same, both with heart & mouth, before the whole company. For it is written, that man beléeueth wyth his hearte to iustice, and confesseth with his mouth to saluation. Rom. 10. Har∣ken then to the demaundes
whyche now I will make vnto you, and an∣swere me faithfully according to the vnderstanding that you haue recey∣ued of the Lord. But if you can not, bycause of your weakenesse and im∣peachment of your sicknesse, I wyll answere for you, and it shall suffice vs that ye giue vs to vnderstand by some token your heart, and cōstan∣cie of faith, in the whiche you must liue and dye. Now I aske of you. For what cause and to what end were you created in this worlde? The sicke. For to know God. Genes. 1. Minister. Was it necessarie for you to know God? The sicke. Yea truely, Psalme. 26. for so muche as hée is my soueraigne goodnesse, withoute the knowledge of him I
shoulde bée more miserable, than the brute beastes. Minister. Séeing that you know God, Genes. 1. 1. Iohn. 1. Luc. 1. 1. Iohn. 5. Genes. 18. you know well that he is an infinite po∣wer, wisedome, and goodnesse, one onely God in three persons, father, sonne, and holy Ghost. It is the on∣lye God, which Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob did worship in spirit & truth. It is the only eternall God, whiche hathe created Heauen and Earthe, as all the thyngs whyche are in them: the knowledge of GOD whiche you haue, is it not suche? The sicke. Yes. Minister. But coulde suche a simple know∣ledge of God bring you well to e∣ternall life?
The sicke. Very hardly: for it is eternall life, Iohn. 7. to confesse and knowe one onely God, and hym whome hée hathe sente, hys onely eternall sonne, oure Lorde and Sauioure Iesus Christ. Minister. For what cause is it necessarie for you to confesse and knowe the Lord Iesus Christ? The sicke. Bycause I must recouer in Ie∣sus Christe, all that whiche I haue lost in my self, Rom. 5. Psalme. 51. Luke. 24. Psalme. 21. by meane of the sinne of the olde Adam, wherein I was conceyued and borne. Wherefore, it was néedefull for my saluation, that Iesus Christe, very God and verye man, being clothed with oure fleshe, shoulde of his frée liberalitie and grace, giue me all that which I had lost in Adam.
Minister. It is very well sayde: that is the cause why Iesus Christe was con∣ceyued by the holy Ghost, Rom. 1. Math. 1. Luc. 12. Ephes. 2. Psalme. 51. Rom. 8. and borne of the Virgine Marie, to purge and sanctifie you, for cleane contrary to him you are, conceyued and borne in sinne, and of sinfull parents, where∣fore, do not you confesse that wyth∣out Iesus Christe you shoulde haue remayned a poore and wretched sin∣ner in eternall death? Rom. 5. The sicke. Yes verily, but I beléeue and confesse, that this good Iesus Christ hathe reconciled me to God his Fa∣ther. Minister. Yea, but how hath he reconciled you to God his father? The sicke. By his deathe and passion, in the sheding of his pretious bloud,
Math. 26. for to deliuer me from eternall paynes. Hebr. 7. Actes. 3. This good Iesus Christe hath suffe∣red for me vnder Ponce Pilate ma∣nie afflictiōs, iniuries, and troubles. It is Iesus Christ which was cru∣cifyed for me, as accursed vpon the woodde of the Crosse, to deliuer mée from the eternall cursse, wherevnto Adam had bound me. This my fa∣niour Iesus Christ was indéede bu∣ried, to burie all my sinnes wyth him, to the ende they shoulde not bée imputed vnto me before God. It is my Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ which is gone downe into the lower partes, suffering an extreame tem∣porall anguishe, to deliuer me from an eternall. Minister. All this whiche you haue nowe confessed of Iesus Christe, was it sufficient to saue you?
The sicke. No, but that the holy Scriptures should be in euery iote fulfilled: for what is it that Iesus Christ should haue profited me, to haue bin borne, crucifyed, dead, buried, and gone downe into the lower partes for me only, withoute being risen agayne. Wherefore, Bray. 53. Math. 26. Marke. 16. 1. Cor. 15. I beléeue and confesse, that my Lorde, my head and Saui∣our Iesus Christe, is risen from the dead, to make me to rise with hym, as one of his little members, into e∣ternall life. Minister. Consequently it is written, that he is gone vp into the Heauens, Actes. 1. be∣ing nowe set at the righte hande of God his Father. But what dothe this ascention profit you? The sicke. My Lord, my head and Sauiour Iesus Christe, is gone vp into
the Heauens, to make me to go vp after him, for there where the head is, the members are also, and I beléeue, that being set at the right hande of God his Father, Coloss. . he is mine Aduo∣cate, intercessor, and only mediator towards him, very wel assuring me, that none may be able to hurte me, séeing that Iesus Christ is mine ad∣uocate & my iudge togither, 1. Iohn. Rom. 8. Iohn. 5. where∣fore, I haue no occasion to feare the day of his iudgement, when he shall come to iudge the liuing and the dead, for I beléeue and confesse in steadfast Faith, that there is no iudgemente nor condemnation a∣gainste those whiche are faithfull members in Iesus Christ. Rom. . Minister. Who hathe giuen him the grace to vnderstande and knowe all these things?
The sicke. It is by the grace of the holye Ghost, 1. Iohn. 5. one onely God with the Fa∣ther, and the sonne, by whose meane we receyue all the good thinges and giftes whiche are offered vnto vs in Iesus Christ. Minister. Séeing that you haue alreadye confessed, that you are a member of Iesus Christ, it followeth then that you are also incorporate to hys Churche, the whiche ye ought to be∣léeue to be holy, Catholike, and vni∣uersall. The sicke. I beléeue certaynely the holye Church vniuersal, washed and clen∣sed in the pretious bloud of Iesus Christ: Ephes. 5. wherefore, I doe most hum∣bly thanke him, that he hath gyuen me the grace to be one of the little
members of his Church: and beyng baptised in his name, he hath made me to liue in the communion, vnitie, and charitie of the same, hauing in∣structed me with his holy word, and nourished me with his true bodye, Math. 4. 1. Cor. 11. hauing giuen me to drinke of hys most pretious bloud, in hope of the e∣ternall life. Minister. Nowe séeing that you are so well founded vpon ye liuely Rocke which is Iesus Christ, 1. Cor. 10. and knowing your selfe well, you must confesse and ac∣knowledge ye principall good things whiche you haue receyued of thys Lord Iesus Christ. The sicke. It is very méete, for I will not be ingrate, to acknowledge the good things and giftes that I haue recei∣ued of God, wherefore I consesse, that I wretched and miserable sin∣ner, haue infinitely,
and withoute ceassing, Psalme. 51. Luke. 17. offended the goodnesse and iustice of God, hauing transgressed his holy commandements. In doing whereof, I haue deserued eternall death and damnatiō. Notwithstan∣ding, I appealing to the mercie of God, 1. Tim. 1. Actes. 4. do aske him mercie, and beléeue and confesse vndoubtedly, that my sinnes are fully and wholly forgiuen me, by the only merite of the deathe and passion of my Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ, Apocal. 1. Math. 26. in the sheding of hys most precious bloud, wherein I doe assure my selfe, to be sufficientlye, and fully washed and purged, which is the greatest cōtentation, and good thing, that euer I mighte receyue, and such is my faith, in the whyche I will liue and dye, Math. 10. by the grace of the holy Ghost. Minister. Séeing that you haue receyued so great a good thing of
God, by the meane of his sonne Iesus Christe, Marke. 11. it behoueth you also to do hys com∣mandementes, for euen as he hathe pardoned and forgiuen you all your sinnes, euen so likewise must you fréely, and with a good heart, forgiue all those whiche may haue offended you, other wise, Math. 5. you shall not walke according to God. The sicke. Héerein haue I knowen the Law of Iesus Christ, Math. 16. to be the onely holy and perfect lawe, commaunding vs to loue our neyghbours, both friēds and enimies, as our selues: where∣fore, I beséeche all those, whome I may haue offended, eyther in worde or déede, to forgiue me with as good a heart, Luke. 23. as I doe forgiue all whyche haue offended me, desiring to doe them pleasure and seruice, as to my good bréethren and friends. Minister.
Now séeing that it is ordeyned of God, that all men shall dye, we may not resist his ordinance, but we must continually conforme our selues to his holy will: Hebr. 9. Genes. 3. wherfore my brother, you may not find it strange, if I doe declare vnto you that which the good Prophete Esay dyd declare to the King Ezechias, Esay. 38. saying vnto hym from the Lorde, Giue order to thy house, for thou shalt die, & shalt liue no longer. This good councel should stirre you vp, to dispose your self spi∣ritually well in your cōscience. Esay. 55. It is first to turne your selfe to God, and to bewayle your sinnes, as this good King did, to implore his mercie in asking him forgiuenesse, and saying alwaye in your heart: O Lord God be mercifull and haue pitie vpon me wretched sinner, for the loue of thy sonne Iesus Christ my Lord and sa∣uioure. This done, you maye not forget your house and familie, the why
he you ought so well to ordeyne, and dispose by good festamente, or other last will, that it maye be after youre deceasse, in peace and quietnesse: but to shew you the better to vnderstand howe to giue order, and to dispose of your house: it is that you giue vnto euery man that whiche is his due, withoute deceyuing any man: that you leaue youre wife, heire, youre childrē, and kinffolke, in good agrée∣ment and quietnesse, to the end, that after your deceasse, they haue no oc∣casion to be diuided. This done, you must forget al the cares and griefes of this worlde, the whiche passeth a∣way, with all his concupiseence, but he that doth the will of God remai∣neth eternally. Touching your chil∣dren, you are only their naturall fa∣ther for a time: but God is euerla∣stingly their spirituall Father, . ha∣uing them in his holy keeping and protectiō, to
kéepe and nourish them, and to preserue them from all euill, Math. 6. prouided, that they wyll walke in his wayes. For the rest, séeing that you are a Christian, regenerate at the holy Sacramente of Baptisme, it is long since that you did know, that we haue héere no permanente citie, for we looke for a better, which is euerlasting, wherefore I pray you, in the name of God, trouble not your selfe at all with anye kinde of worldly griefe, for we are héere but straungers as oure fathers were, Psalme. 38. when then our Lord God shall haue ordeyned, that you shall dislodge and marche before vs, will you not then submitte your selfe to his holy wyll and ordinance? Also, if he sée it expe∣dient for your saluation, to prolong your life, as he did to his good Kyng Ezechias, will not you be contented we it, Esay. 38. ye it shall please him to dispose of you? yes certainely, for he is Lord and maister, you are
but a seruant: he is your creator, you are his crea∣ture, and the worke of his hands. E∣uen so then will he dispose of you according to his wyll, wherevnto you shoulde humble and conforme your selfe, saying with a good heart, O Lord God, thou knowest my ne∣cessitie, if it be thy pleasure to pro∣long my life, thy will be done, if it please thee also to cal me vnto thee, thy will bee done, for thy creature O Lorde nathe none other will, but thine. Now my brother, comforte your selfe in God, who if he haue ordey∣ned to call you, your calling shall hée happie, for you must beléeue and trust with a strong faith, that hée will make you to rise in your owne body in a glorious immortalitie, to cause you to raigne with him in the eternall life, 1. Cor. 15. Apocal. 1. the whiche is wonne and giuen to you, in the vertue of the most pretious bloud of our Lord
and Sauioure Iesus Christe, in whose name, the Lord God blesse & conserue you, and cause hys counte∣nance to shine vpō you, and be mer∣ciful vnto you. The Lord God turne his face towardes you, and maine∣teyne you in good estate. So be it. This being done, if they sée the sicke person to impaire, and to draw néere his deathe, as willing to tende to his appoynted ende, forthwith in his mortall agonie, fayle ye not to recite wyth a loude voyce before him the Christian exhortation, the which is placed here before, thus do∣ing, God will giue him grace well & faithfully to dye in him. So be it. I Woulde desire héere to saye some∣thing more, but there is I can not tell what griefe in my heart, which maketh me to holde my peace in the middest: of my purpose, when I thinke vpon the blindnesse,
and hor∣rible darkenesse of the time passed. For the Monkes and Priestes, refu∣sing in this laste necessitie the com∣forts that the Scripture giueth, and the confirmations against the feare of Death, they brought forth of the one side, and of the other, I can not tell what trash? Firste beholde the faire exhortation whiche they gaue to those which were vpon the pittes brinke, to trust in ye Popes Bulles, wherein they did promise them for∣giuenesse of their sinnes, and tooke frō them all feare of the fire of Pur∣gatorie. Now all this, what was it, other than to leane againste a wall that was readie to fall, or to trust to a broken réede. Further, they exhor∣ted the poore sicke persons, to com∣municate, and to take part of ye good works whiche should be done in all their order, as fastings, abstinences, watchings, Prayers, and other such
lyke dayne thynges, and to haue theyr parte therein: they myghte in no wise spare anye siluer, no, if they woulde saue their soule. For it is in this forte, that these furred pawes, and hooded beastes, haue ac∣customed to set forthe their workes of superabundance that they might sell to others, leauing alwaye that whiche was prositable and necessa∣rie to obteyne saluation. And of this matter, men maye yet at this daye, bring forth faire obligations passed, which shall giue testimonie of these things. Note this blasphemie. The sicke persons then be∣ing néere deathe, were admonished to thinke, howe greate merits they had, for so muche as Heauen was due vnto them, howe manye good works they had, with the multitude whereof they were cleane couered, in suche forte, as a man coulde not knowe whether they had offended God or no. Behod there the goodly comforts
which they were wont to giue to poore languishing persons, and such as they do giue at this day vnder the Popes rayne. And aboue all the holynesses, beholde this great superstition which hath place, that if any man did dye, being clad wyth the habite of a Frier, the Diuell should haue no power ouer hym. A∣mong the whiche, manye Italians haue bin drunken with this foolishe superstition, yea men of renoune, and of great wisedome, the whyche woulde be receyued before they de∣parted out of this world, into the fa∣milie of S. Frances, and after their death, would be bursed in hys habit. Nowe I speake not héere at all of Obsequies, Vigilles, Anniuersa∣ries, Peligrimage, taken in hand for the saluation of the dead, nor of o∣ther suffrages of the liuing, nor of merits, satisfactiōs, and good works, wherein they did put their onely hope and trust, to obteyne
saluati∣on. And to auoyde the paynes of Purgatorie. I will not speake of the other things, which these idle bellies were wont to set forth, to poore sicke persons, to prepare them to death, I leaue to spoke of these blasphemies. Whē they shaped this goodly hunne to the Virgin Marie in ye Article of deathe. Marie mother of grace, mo∣ther of mercie, defend vs from the e∣nimie, and receyue vs at the houre of death. Now let vs acknowledge the inestimable benefites of oure onely God, and heauenlye Father, who in our dayes hath restored the doctrine of the Gospell, and hathe stirred vs vp to serue him in all purenesse, in true reuerence and honor, and hathe drawen vs out frō the deadly darke∣nasse, to bring vs to the knowledge of his sonne our Lord & only sauiour Iesus Christ. And euen as the good old mn Simeon (of whom S. Luke maketh mention) after that he had séene according to the promise made
Luke. 2. vnto him Iesus Christ, whome hee had wayted for, and desired of long time, blessing and praysing God, did say, Lorde thou lettest goe nowe thy seruante in peace, according to thy word, for so much as mine eyes hane séene thy saluation, the whiche thou hast prepared before the face of all people, a lighte for the lightening of the Gētiles, & the glory of thy people Israell, Euen so we, after that wée haue knowen the sonne of God oure mediator and Aduocate, after that we haue séene him with the eyes of our saith, with the good old Simeon, yea, he whiche is the Christ and a∣noynted of the Lorde, let vs gyue thankes with ioy and gladnesse, to the great liuing God, and let vs sing very Christian songs, prayses, and himites, in the holye company of the faithful, and let vs depart from thys life willingly, & with a glad hearte, at what time
soeuer it shall please this good heauenly father, yea, and being in good healthe, lette vs desire with S. Paule to be separated from this body, & to be leste in peace with Simeon, to the ende, that we maye lastly come to that only and eternal ioy of Angels and of men, whych is Iesus Christ, after whom, the faith∣full doe languishe with a burning zeale, to enioy his so amiable com∣pany with all the Saincts, God the author of euery good thing and bles∣sing, the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost, make vs partakers of this holye grace, vnto whome bée prayse euerlastingly. So be it. Hebr. 13. Remember those which are afflicted, as being your selfe of the same bo∣dye, and subiecte to endure as much. The end of the Catechismes
¶ Heere followe cer∣tayne consolatorie sentences concerning the loue of God towards man, and of the benefits of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christe, bestowed vpon vs, taken out of holy scripture, for the comfort and confirmation of the afflicted in mind, whome Sathan by all his cunnings would drawe in∣to desperation: and he that would e¦scape comforte of thys small collection, must haue the Bible by hym, and turne to the sentences heerein vvritten, and not onely reade the sentences heere cyted, but also that vvhich goeth next before it, and that also vvhich follovveth next after is. ({inverted ⁂}) FIrst, God is the God of loue and peace. 2. Cor. 11. God deliuereth vs frō o∣uil, Esa. 3. a. 63. & ye know ye he appeared ye he might take away our sins, & in him is no sinne, Ioh. 3. b but God
setteth out his loue toward vs, séeing that while we were yet sin∣ners Christ dyed for vs. Ro. 5. b. for those which he hathe predestinate to be made like to the image of his son, to the end he should be the first born amongst very many brethrē. Ro. 8. f. and that which I liue now in ye flesh, I liue in the faith of the son of God, who hath loued & giuen himselfe for me. Gala. 2. d, and walke in loue euē as Christe bath loued vs, & hathe gi∣uen hymselfe for vs to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sméet smelling sa∣uoure to God, Ephe. 5. a. Grace and Peace be vnto you, frō hym that is, that was, and that is to come, & from the seauen spirites, which are before his throne, & frō Iesus Christ, which is a faithfull witnesse, the first borne of the dead, and Prince of the Kings of the earth, vnto him that loued vs, and washed vs in his bloud frō oure sins. Apoc. a. b. for the Lorde doeth
chastice him that he loueth, euen as the father doth the childe, in whome he delighteth: my sonne despise not ye chastning of the Lord, neither fainte when thou arte rebuked, for whome the Lord loueth, he chastneth: and he scourgeth euery sonne, that he recei∣ueth. If ye endure chastizemēt, God offereth himselfe vnto you as vnto sons, for what sonne is he? &c. Hebr.  i. b. c. Prouer,  b. But Sion (sayd ye Lord) hath forgotten me: can a wo∣man forgette hir childe, and not haue cōpassion of the sonne of hir wombr? though they should forget, yet I will not forget thée. Esay. 49. d.e. I haue sound thée saith the Lord, with an e∣uerlasting loue, therefore with mer∣rie haue I drawen thée, Iere. 31. a. b. What shall we then saye to these things, if God be on our side, who cā be againste vs? who spared not hys owne sonne, but gaue him for all to deathe, howe shall he not with hym giue
vs all things also. Rom. 8. f. So we doe therefore loue him, bycause he loued vs first. Iohn. 4. d. as my fa∣ther knoweth me, euen so knowe I my father, and I lay downe my life for my Shéepe. Ioh. 10. b. c. the false Prophete, whiche woulde drawe vs from the loue and perfecte trust that we ought to haue in God, ought not to be heard, but slayne. Deut. 13. a. b. c. Call vppon me in the daye of thy trouble, and I will deliuer thée, and thou shalt glorifie me, Psalm. 50. c. for O Lorde thou arte good and mer∣cifull, & of greate kindnesse vnto all thē which call vpon thée. Psal. 80. . The Lorde is ful of compassion and mercie, flowe to anger, and of greate kindnesse, he will not alwayes chide, nor kéepe his anger for euer. Ps. 103. a. The Lord is gratious & merciful, flowe to anger, and of great mercie. The Lord is good to al, & his mercies are ouer al his works.
Psalm 102. At what time soeuer a sinner doth repēt him of his sin from ye bottome of hys hart, I wil put all his wickednes out of my remēbraunce (saith the Lorde) Ezechiel 18. g. A sorrowfull spirite is a sacrifice vnto God, dispise not O Lord humble and contrite harts. Ps. 51. Séeke the Lord whilst hée may be soūd, cal vpō him whilest he is néere, let ye wicked forsake his wayes, & the vnrighteous his own imaginations, & returne to the Lord, & he will haue mercie vpō him: & to our God, for he is very ready to forgiue. Esa. 55. b. c. Then shall ye crie vnto me, and yée shall goe and pray vnto me, and I will heare you, and yée shall séeke me and find me, bycause ye shal séeke me with all your hearte, and I wyll bée founde of you sayth the Lorde, and I will turne awaye youre captiuitie. Ierem. 29. c. Grace be vnto you, and peace from God the father, and from oure Lorde Iesus Christ, who gaue himselfe for our sinnes, to
deliuer vs from this presente wicked world, ac∣cording to the will of God dure Fa∣ther, to whome be glorie for euer. So be it. Galath. i. a. Amend your liues, for the kingdome of God is at hande. Math. 4. c. I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repen∣tance, Math. 9. b. Come vnto me all ye that are loden and wéerie, and I will ease you. Math. . d. If any man sinne, we haue an aduocate with the father Iesus Christe the righteous, and he is the re∣conciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of ye whole world. 1. Iohn. 2. a. ({inverted ⁂}) The Ende.
