21620 99851738 17029
THE HISTORY OF IOSEPH: A POEM. VVritten by Sir Thomas Salusbury, Barronet, late of the Inner Temple. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Roger Ball, and are to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the Golden Anchor in the Strand, neere Temple-Barre, 1636.
PErlegi hunc librum, cui titulus (the life of Joseph, &c.) in quo nihil reperio sanae fidei, aut bonis moribus con∣trarium. Tho. Weeks, Epis. Lond. Cap. domest.
TO MY HONOVRED Grand-mother, the LADY Middleton, Late Wife to the right Worshipfull Sir Thomas Middleton Knight and Alderman, somtimes Major of the City of LONDON. Honour'd Madam, I Have now unto your Ladiships acceptance, and the worlds censure, adventured these unripe fruits of a forced Muse;
which if you shall accept (as they are truly meant) in witnesse how ready an observer I am of your commands, I shall (arming my self with patience and humility the hand-maids of obe∣dience) humbly submit and patiently resolve to bear all just blame the world may lay upon my rudenes (however your Ladiship will be able to excuse) the betraying so worthy a subject to so weake a verse. It shall suffice mee that the world take notice, that my en∣devours are only ambitious, to satisfie the ingagements, whereby your La∣diships love hath obliged me unto you: by none so paraleld as by that of Iacob to his Grand-children: who made E∣phraim and Manasses, (as Iudah, and Simeon) his owne. The like from my youth hath beene your care and tendernesse over me, which I have no
way to requite but by my thankful∣nesse, respect and obedience to your commands. In observance whereof I commend this Poem to your patro∣nage, and my self to do you service. Your dutifull Grand-child, Thomas Salusbury.
To the Noble Barronnet, Sir THOMAS SALUSBURY, upon his Ioseph. I Must commend thy judgement, that could chuse A subject, so well fitted to thy Muse; That they adorne each other; that they share In equall glory: that thy Ioseph dare (And without danger) thus himselfe expose To th' envy of his friends, as well as foes, And (Confident of thy iust merit) slight His Brethrens malice, and the Ismaelite. Nay, thinke his time in Servitude well spent, Since now he is become thy Argument. Whereby he is advanced farre above What Aegypt could affoord, or Pharoh's love. So happily thou hast exprest his worth, And in such lively colours set him forth, That Putiphars wife is blamelesse: all confesse There was no guilt in her lasciviousnesse. And had that love sicke Lady us'd the Arte Which thy well languag'd Courtship doth impart Vnto her in this story: the assault Had conquer'd Ioseph, and excus'd the fault; The charme had beene so forcible, that he Must with his Cloake, quit his humanity:
Or condiscend, or had his Mistresse read This Poem; and observ'd how thou dost plead For thy chaste Ioseph, in as chaste a rime, In Detestation of so foule a Crime. She had abhor'd her selfe, and lou'd him more For's vertue now, then for his face before. So potent is thy verse: it doth suppresse And quench all looser flames of wantonnesse; And kindle in our breasts and cold desires, New heate reviv'd by thy Promethean fires. Be that thy sole reward, and doe not weigh The Censure of the world. Some will inveigh, Some will commend: but most proclaime by me, They envy Ioseph, that detract from thee. D. LL. Dr. I. C.
To my honoured friend, Sir Thomas Salusbury, my opinion of his IOSEPH. AS Iosephs Brethrens sheaves did all obay Young Iosephs straite and lofty sheafe, so may All other Poets not alone rehearse Thy prayses, but doe homage to thy verse. Not blasted with those Criticks breaths, who spit Malice: and throw thy Ioseph in the pit Of Envy; making their dull braines the Well To drowne thy fame, whose shallow pates excell Poore Iosephs Well for emptinesse: the pit Wanted not waters, as their heads doe wit. Some will be apt to say (when first 'tis knowne, Thy Muse doth bud) the Rose is over-blowne, The subject's stale: it is not good to see Men play and dally with Divinity. Thus will those Critickes talke, were but thy vaine Such as descended from a love-sicke braine. O that were rare, and excellent! how fine Were those thy verses, were they not divine?
When e're thy Ioseph's sold unto such wights, There's Ioseph sold unto the Ismaelites. But since thy Muse of Chastity doth sing, Thy Ioseph may finde favour with the King. T. Bayly, artium Magister.
IF newes of Ioseph's death o're Iacob have Such forch, to bring his gray haires to the grave With sorrow, sure with joy my tidings must As powerfull be, to raise him from the dust: Then Iacob rise and know thy darling Sonne Is yet alive; his glory but begunne, Then when thou left'st him was: he now is more A Favourite, then e're he was before. Not Pharoh's selfe, nor all the Sonnes of Nile Have so much grac'd him as thy lofty stile, My friend hath done: he in thy verse shall be Ev'n as in heav'n, above Mortalitie. O how divin's thy Muse then that can blesse, And adde to Saints departed happivesse. Io. Salusbury, Sen.
In Authorem, & Librum. I Know it's worth yet will I not commend Thy Book, I do not love to prayse my friend Unlesse some foule Detraction I should heare, Of him, or his; else to commend him were In friendship as absurd; as should I write Strong Arguments to prove that snow is white. Nor will I yet admire thy work, to mee It is a thing not strange at all to see, That what thou dost is excellent I know, Thy self art absolute, and thy works are so: Yet mayst thou meet some Censurers too unkind, But pity them, who punishment shall find Enough in their own errour: they condemne Thy work, whilst better judgments laugh at them. Io. Salusbury Iun.
To my ever honour'd Sir T. S. Barronet, upon his Joseph. SO the sweet singer did of Israel use, In holy Layes to exercise his Muse: Praysing his God, for wonders in the Land Of Egypt by his servant Moses hand. Then with Gods mercies sweetly closing there, The soule at once he ravish't, and the ear. But so long since is that, that there be those, Make scruple yet whether in Verse or Prose, The Prophet wrote, as if a measur'd line Were more unfit to treat of things divine. Such heretiques of Poetry by chance, Will in their censure shew their ignorance Of this thy labours worth, when they shall hold It as a fruitlesse work, if not a bold: Deeming the sacred flames that thus inspire Thy brests with holy raptures, a strange fire. And count thee as prophane, that dar'st rehearse, The majestie of Scripture in a Verse. Whilst men of abler judgments, that descry This last worst ages curious nicety
Such, that Gods sacred word, the heavenly bread Of life, by most is dully relished, Vnlesse in oyle or honey dipt, they know, He whom the holy Ghosts first penman so Extolled, as the type of Christ, and square Of vertues, for all graces singular; Had slept the subiect of our coy neglect, As buried in the Scribes grave dialect: And Iosephs goodnesse, such, some few alone Professors, and Precisians had knowne; Had not thy bounteous Muse thus set him forth In fashionable garbe, to speake his worth In moderne tone; now by thy helpe he may Converse with Courtiers, in a Coat as gay As er'st his Father made him; he may kisse Each coyer Ladies hand, nor can he misse Admission, or audience to tell His story to the best, or worst; so well He charmes attention: by his sweet and smooth Expressions, so pathetically soothes His hearers to receive his sugred pils, Whil'st at their ravish't eares and eyes he instils His modesty into their soules; and so Doth Ioseph's story told 'mongst high and low, With greater efficacy, vertue teach, By's paterne, then best precepts we can preach. In briefe, I iudge thy Poem to be such, So good, so pleasant, that I dare avouch, The reader that no profit reapes by it, Or pleasure, hath nor piety, nor wit. Hold on this godly course, thy talent spend By tickling thus our eares, our heart; to mend.
And when thy budding Springs, spare houres bring forth Such fruit, how great shall be thy harvests worth, When thy green youth could so exactly trace Good Iosephs' perfect wayes; well may thy grace In riper yeares, as his recorded be, A Mappe of vertues to posterity. T. LL. artium Magister.
Ʋpon the Author unknown, and his IOSEPH. IF fitnesse be a Poems excellence, When to the Subject, Stile combines with sense, Where lofty matter, lofty lines doe swell, Where lowly Theames, low words doe paralell; When under shadowed phrase, doth couched lye Sometimes a smile, sometimes a mystery: Still keeping chaste to chaste, and high to high, Glossing close secrets still with secresie. Then top of wit and masterpiece of skill, I here discover from a knightly quill. For in these sheets here swadled up, I spi'd The new borne Ioseph from his dust reviv'd: And from the Presses reaking leaden wombe, I saw so faire an Hebrew Of-spring come, So modest, chaste, so Ioseph-like it seem'd, As if againe faire Rachels wombe had teem'd. And h'an't you read, how Iosephs growing mite (By faire degrees) raise him a favourite.
So doth he here in such brave order rise, As may indeare him to his Pharoh's eyes. Next, as the rest their flagging tops did bend To Iosephs Sheafe, still mounting up an end; So you fond Bards (like their ungrounded sheaves) To this green Laurell, vaile your saplesse Reaves. Blast not his worthy fame, here newly blowne, But learne to mend the ruines of your owne. Loe here your President, where you may see How farre divine wit, passeth Surquedree. E. M.
THE DREAMER, OR The first Chapter of Ioseph. GEN. the 37. JOSEPH, a Sheep-heard, doth consort With's brethren; tel's their ill report: His Father loves him in extreames, For which he's hated, and his dreames: He's thrown into the pit, and sold Ʋnto the Ishmaelites for gold, Who to Aegypt having brought him, The second time a Courtier bought him. GOD, alwaies just, begins in Abrahams Seed, To ratifie his Promise with his Deed; Jacob holds fast, and hath by this time well Deserv'd the happy name of Izrael:Gen. 31.24. The Angell now would part, he (though disable, His thigh disjoynted, undefatigable) Tugs for his blessing; as when heretofore, For his lo'vd Rachel, he serv'd sev'n yeers more:
Yong Joseph's joyfull Mother now (with whom, A good portent!) God op'd her barren womb, Took from her, her reproach; Israel and she, Equally blest by importunity: He, for a blessing; She, for one to blesse; Both earnest sutors, both with like successe. Hence for all crosses arm'd, and black despayr, Learn; GOD himself is overcom by prayr: If thou as earnest be in seeking, as Un-tyred Izrael and his Rachel was: Who now, above the rest, doe love this boy, As one not gotten in the common way, But as a signe of God's continued love, A prayr-gain'd childe immediat from above: As, when the minde of Man some good conceives His hopes dare scarce attempt, and yet receives; In like degree he loves it (now it is) As if, he durst, he could have wish't it his: Or, as things held in long suspence before They're granted us, we ever prize them more Then easier purchases; As we prefer Miraculous, before things commoner: So they their Joseph, with whom God did blesse Old Israel's age, and Rachel's barrennesse; It was enough (he was her sonne) to move, His father, to a more then usuall love. A coate, of many curious colours wrought, He made for him; Joseph was all his thought; Joseph was his delight; but yet so far As hopefull children to wise parents are, He made no fondling of him; he could brooke The lov'd child's absence; nor was griev'd to looke
Upon his labors; nor was Joseph fed With finer meates, nor warm'd a softer bed With longer priviledge, nor was he spar'd From any paines wherein his brethren shar'd, Nor groan'd he for his burthen, nor did grumble, But with prompt will, and an obedience humble, Strove to performe his taske; He went to keepe (With Bilhah's and with Zilpah's sons) the sheepe, And whilst his brethren he did thus consort, He brought his father home their ill-report, Who joy'd, they griev'd, so yong a one to see Detest, and to detect their infamie: But Jacob who too wise, above the rest Fondly to love one, and for nothing best At least to shew it; yet he must approve And cherish virtue, with increase of love; Which now he cannot hide, being swel'd as high As Joseph's merits; Virtue first may lie Or Truth conceal'd, or the fel-brethrens hate, Ere his affection, now grown passionate. And they (who for a teltale heretofore, Now as their fathers-fondling) hate him more: Besides, nought renders one to envious hearts More despicable then excelling parts; So, nought more then his virtue did incense His brethren's rage; his fault was Innocence. Such Jacob's quarell was, such Joseph's fate, As 'twere to inherit thus his brethrens hate: The Fathers life, one Esau's hate pursu'de; The Son was troubled with a multitude: He got the blessing from them, and they spight Him, now, their God's, and father's favorite.
And where this hellish fury once is bred Of brethrens discord, there 'tis eas'ly fed By ev'ry new occasion; Joseph's minde Was then inlightned, when his body blinde With drowzie rest, in heavie sleep he wink't; Yet saw and learn't, by a divine instinct, Most strange events (such alwayes are the waies Whereby God was reveal'd in following daies Unto their of-spring) when, 'gainst all extreams, Their age saw visions, & their youth dream'd dreams Iosephs first dreame.So Joseph now; When as me thought all we Were binding sheaves of Corne, i'th field, quoth he Ʋnto his brethren, that my sheafe arose And stood upright i'th midst, When loe all those Of yours stood round, and with reclined head, As in obeysance, my sheafe worshipped. Scarce had he ended, when they murmuring all, Some with a Soule like-troubled as when Saul From the rais'd Prophet heard his sudden doome, And the sad ruin of his house to come: Some with a scorn; as when Goliah spide So weake a Champion come, t'afront his pride With staffe and sling; with like beleefe of fate Ensuing, they began to vent their hate. And are we born, fond-dreamer, to obey? Must we indeed thy vassalls be, cry'd they? Must we adore thine eyes, and seeke grace thence? Whom Time and Nature gave preheminence? What frantick pride transports thy fancy thus? Shall such a boy as thou reign over Ʋs? And thus they swel'd to a more high contempt Of him, because he told them what he dreampt:
Yet this informing Genius left him not, But newer fancies in his braine begot; Such, and of like presage, which mindles he Of all their bitter flouts and mockery Freely vents out, ev'n to his fathers eare, Not caring though his envious brethren heare.Iosephs second dreame. Me thought the Sun and Moone (did mee adore) And th'elev'n Stars, as did the sheaves before, Quoth he, with like obeisance: Now his Syre, In whose ag'd bosom rag'd th'un-usual fire Of indignation, this relation mov'd Him in this sort to check the childe he lov'd. What hast thou dreampt fond boy? What shall we all, Thy Father, Mother, and thy Brethren, fall In reverence to thee? Trust not these vaine And fond illusions of an idle braine: Shall then that blessing leave me that hath gon Still an inseparable companion Of comfort with me? That which Isaac gave, And that which purchas'd I with lamenesse have Of my touch't thigh, when all the night I strove With heav'nly powers, discended from above, Till I obtain'd? And shall my name, which men Us'd sacred, in their deepest Oaths, and when They speake to any unbeleeving eare, By Abraham, Isaac, Jacob's God they sweare? Shall this name stoope to thine? Must thou indeede Be only blest of all the promis'd seede? Thus chek't he him; Yet, ner'e the lesse, each part Of Joseph's tale he treasur'd in his heart; So did his brethren too, though their intent From their good fathers was farre different:
They store his sayings up, as fuel fit To feed their-hel-bred fire and nourish it, Blown to too great a height already, by Him that first chang'd the warmth and purity Of fire, to scorching heate, that it might be A meete reward to perpetuitie For his demerits; who, thus damn'd to flames, To make all partners of his torture aimes Here and for ever, and to that end he Tormenteth some with burning jealousie; Others, with flames of hate and rancorous ire Prepares as charcoales for eternall fire, 'Mongst all in generall (as they are inclin'd) He casts these sparks, which kindled once, a wind From any thing hee'l rayse, to fan withall The heate more furious, not a word can fall From harmlesse Joseph, which not somthing hath That ads to his incensed brethrens wrath By this time grown to such a hellish flame, That nothing but his blood can quench the same: Exod. 20But God, that's True and Gracious, pitty takes Ev'n unto thousands, for their fathers sakes; Their Sins cannot old Jacob's service blot, Nor may his oath to Abraham be forgot, But unto all their goods his love converts The ill meant spleene of their malicious hearts: Loe how to future times doth this foretell The childrens stubbornnesse of Jsrael From their beginning; ag'd but one discent, Their plot is murther of the innocent; So mischievous their minds, so bent on blood, They spar'd not those that did or meant them good.
'Twas early in the morn when they were gon Forth with their Fathers flocks, to feede upon The plaines of Sechem, where they not above A few short houres had spent, when Jacob's love Mov'd his desire to know what had befell Them since their parting, whether all were well Amongst their flocks and them, if they had found Good shades to rest in, or good feeding ground There for their sheep and heards, and thus inclinde He calls yong Joseph to him, bids him finde His brethren out, where they in Sechem are, See them and bring me knowledge how they fare The youth is soon commanded, which he shewes In quick obedience, forth he gladly goes On this kind errand, to perform the will Of him that sent him, never fearing ill Because he meant no harm; So innocent Was his great Master from his Father sent To their curst Of-spring; who, not only bred From cruell loynes, but more experienced In blood and murther; having slayn ev'n all That came and would them to repentance call, So wicked as they are, they send t'his grave Him that brought peace to all, and came to save. Who with an unmov'd soule as cheerfull went To give his Fathers will accomplishment Ev'n to the death, though hence the difference grew, He that his Fathers wisedome was, fore-knew His danger, Joseph went in little doubt Oth' sad event to finde his brethren out And comes by this to Sechem, cals and cries Aloud upon them, but there's none replies
Untill as in their quest he roving ran Thus through the spacious fields, he met a man, Who finding him, demanded what might be The cause of his so busie search; quoth he I seek my brethren Sir, can you I pray Direct my wandring steps, or tell where they Have led their flocks; I have to find them out, Traverst the vale of Hebron and about The plaines of Sechem runne with fruitlesse speed, Meeting with none could tell me where they feed. No (quoth the man) then in good time I may Give thee some ease at last: I heard them say Let us to Dothan hence; Scarce had he said Dothan, when Joseph but to thank him staid, Then with much haste, making this news his guide, Posts after them, whom when from far they spide, Their colours chang'd, and their distracted blood Eb'd to their hearts, and streight gush't like a flood Into their face and eys, and glowing there, Made their long carried coales in flames appeare: And then a murmur doth amongst them runne, Like the winds strugling ere the storm's begunne. When the foure Elements assembled are From all the corners of the Earth to warre In some great Tempest, when the Ayre and Fire Against the Earth and swelling-Seas conspire, Thunder's their trumpet, at whose noyse they fall In a rude conflict mixt, and threaten all Their poore inhabitants; Lightnings would dry The Seas, and they to quench heav'ns fires do try, And hel's flames too, where having falne, they rise With a new crotchet now to strike the Skies.
The earth and ayr mean while as 'twere dissolv'd Into one ill mixt body, look, involv'd. Thus altogether rude, and shapelesse as Old Chaos, ere the worlds creation was. Nothing but darknesse now, no light is found More then in wretched man, in passions drown'd: Reason extinguish't, man's a world compos'd Of all the elements which lye enclos'd In severall humours, from them bred whence flow Our passions which being bound and ordered so By reason, as the world by light (the best And first of creatures, made to rule the rest) Angels are in their kinde lesse blest then we That images of our Creator be. But that curb break, and passions ruling, then No storme, no Chaos, so deform'd as men. And thus with Joseph's brethren 'twas that stood Now like so many Cains, in wait for's blood. See where yond dreamer comes (say they) let's kill, Let's make an end of hm, and see what will Become of all his projects, and his visions, His idle fancies, and fond aparitions, And for a good excuse we can not misse Wee'l say, Some beast devour'd him, true it is. Most savage beasts they were that thus did plot To ruine him, their rage considered not His fathers care who sent, whose love him brought To hearken of their healths, this they nere thought. All seek his death but Ruben, who more milde Then were the rest, labours to save the childe, The boy is yong, and childish, he in vain Urg'd, and for dreams deserv's not to be slain.
Then with his fathers weaknesse intercedes, His years, and his great love to Joseph pleads, Joseph's the staffe, and prop of Israels age, Thus he persists, but they still deafe with rage, Give him no eare, his words can do no good: Which when he sees, oh yet let's shed no blood He cries, my brethren, I'le direct a way To your revenge, and yet we will not slay, Nor lay our hands on him, not farre from hence Ith'desert is a hollow hole, and thence Down to the bottome the discent so steep, That tis impossible he ere should creep Again above ground, there's no water there, And tis so steep withall that none can heare His cryes, and if by chance he there be found, It may be said, he fell into the ground. Then can it nere be told, we took his breath, Although indeed we left him to his death: None of his bloud can on our heads be laid: For none of it we shed, all this he said To rid him from their hands, and if he might, To bring him to their father home at night. At last more pacified, they take for sence His words; and give him freer audience. Reuben, say they, speaks truth, then let's not strive, We will not kill, but bury him alive. Their plot concluded on, and Joseph come, They fall upon him altogether: some Rip off his many colour'd coat (the signe Of Jacobs love) others make fast a line About his tender waste, and ripping thence All but his shirt, white like his innocence,
They hale him forwards, whilst his grief, and fears, Can vent it self in nothing, but in tears: They will not heare him speak, nor are they mov'd, Nor once consider'd how their father lov'd Those blubber'd eyes; nor what hold grief would take On his gray hairs, for his lost Josephs sake: Mindlesse of this, with other thoughts then whet Their fury on, and more on edge did set Their vengeance, being by this come to the pit, They rudely take and cast him into it: And in the ground they bury (O vild deed) Gods promise, and the hopes of Isacque's seed. But see his power, that from the loose stones can, Or looser dust, raise Abraham sonnes, made man Of nought, can cause new quickned bodies come From the graves barren, and unfruitfull wombe. He that shall make all deeps, and seas at last, Their dead from forth their silent mansions cast, That power can Israels seed so deeply sowne, Cause sprouting thence, to flourish in a throne. Ev'n he that puls the mighty from their seat, Shall make the lowest highest, Joseph great, Who left thus deep, now to his deeper thoughts, More then his own fate, wails his brethrens faults, Thinks on their impious rage, and what a curse Must follow their offence, this griev'd him worse Then his own suffrings, they mean while the feat Long plotted on perform'd, sate down to eat On th'earths green carpet, but what ere their food, I dare presume, their cheer was not so good, It cannot be the guilt of their offence Could sit so light upon their conscience.
Some anxious thoughts of their great God displeas'd Poore Joseph left to cold, and hunger, seised Sometimes upon them all, as there they led It seems they mu'd, for lo they lift their head, And looking round, behold upon the sight Of certain Merchants, that were Ishmaelites, Whose camels loden (towards Aegypt bent) With balme, and mirrh, and spice, from Gilead went▪ Judah cries out, what will it do us good To kill our brother, and conceal his bloud? He is our brother, and our flesh, 'twere well We layd no hands upon him, let us sell Him rather to you Merchants, and being sold, We are reveng'd, and our reward is gold. The saying pleas'd them all, and up they rose (Whilst absent Reuben nothing of it knows;) And coming to the pit, cast in a rope To hale up weeping Joseph, now in hope Some pity came upon them, when he found Worse mischiefs gaping for him then the ground, He in the narrow confines of the cave Was King, there being none else, but now's a slave, For th' Ishmaelites being come, to them they brought him, Who having lookt upon, and lik't him, bought him, For twenty silver peeces, a good rate Judas but thirty for his Master ga: Joseph thou highly valued art to rise Within ten peeces of thy Saviours price, Thy brethren I'm assur'd, thought 'twas good gain To have revenge and silver for their pain. Two pieces ev'ry man, but now th'art gone A cloak to hide their fault, they think upon,
And here the worst of all their malice noat, Their infamy, they cover, with thy coat. Gods finger's in't, a ramme's for Isaac slain, A kid for Joseph, with whose blood they stain His colour'd rayment, mean while to the pit Reuben makes haste, and being come to it Bows him there down, and whispers, brother rise, I come to free thee from the cruelties Of them that hate thee, as from being slain I sav'd, so now Ile bring thee home again Unto thy father: but when none replyes He doubts, and louder, and yet louder cryes: At last, with out-stretcht throat, he lifts his voyce, So have I often heard the climbing noyse Of some exact Musitian that begins So low, 'yould scarce beleeve he toucht the strings: Then by degrees mounts to a tone so high That each eare tingles as in sympathy, Or like the tune oth'winde, that calmly blows At first, then swels, and by degrees it grows Higher, and higher yet, and is at last Able to deafe the hearers, ev'ry blast: Such and so fruitlesse, is th'exalted voyce Of Reuben now he hears no answring noyse But his own eccho, willingly beguil'd, He takes that as an answer from the childe, And cals again, till reason makes him know It is not, though (God wot) he wish it so. He finds his error, and with tears laments His brothers losse, then passionatly rents His cloaths, and with redoubled haste he makes After his brethren, whom he over-takes,
First with lamenting voyce, which to them cries, And coming near with teare-bedewed eyes, Joseph is gone, what shall become of me, He was not in the pit, then farewell he, They all replide, we need not fear his spight: Now, to bring home t'our father tales at night, You have not slain him then, good God defend; He from his brethren, this untimely end Should have, (quoth Reuben) no, be thou content, No violent hands we laid on him, yet sent Him far enough from troubling us again, Nor is our quietnesse the onely gain W'have made, nor yet our just revenge: but see, All this w'had for him, here's a share for thee. Who when he saw no remedy, at last He purg'd himself oth'guilt, and forward past: Whilst they applaud their doings and device, Th'ave found to blinde their fathers aged eyes, Who wisht them blinde indeed, when they the coat Present unto him, and ask him if he know't, He takes and views, and seeing it all ore Dipt in his best lov'd sonnes supposed gore, He faine would not beleeve his eyes, on them He looks that brought it, then on it agen; He knows the work, and as he well may do, The making, and the curious colours too. So God the rain-bow cloath'd, which of his love And future pitty was the pledge, so 'bove His other brethren, this as a delight Did witnesse Joseph was in's fathers sight. But here th'unhappy difference did prove, That shows Gods pitty, this mans pitty move.
Who having seen? a crimson that out-shines The well prest fruit of cluster bearing vines, Or any thing of Nature well set by; To shadow forth the purple Syrian dye, Close unto which another colour's layd, Pure as the modest blushes of a mayd, And sundry other reds by a well taught, And curious needle-woman finely wrought Into one piller; in another's seen As many sorts of well disposed green, The next of yellow, and between them lay The fether of the prating Popingay, Flame colour then, and saffron you behold, Compared with the pleasing hue of gold, And in like well mixt method you might finde Blacks, blues, and whites, divers of ev'ry kinde In severall pillers wav'd, and neatly wrought Into one peece of stuffe, one curious coat: If I that artificiall work should see Spoyl'd, and bestain'd with bloud, 'twould pity me, How much is he mov'd then? that is perswaded 'Twas with his bloud, and death for whom he made it▪ He that his passions wil expresse aright, Must be as he was in the self same plight. His brows are cloudy, from his eyes it rains Salt showres of tears, as t'were to wash the stains From off the slubber'd coat, then with a groan, Because that's spoil'd, hee'l likewise spoyl his own. He rends his garments, and in sack-cloth cloth's His aged loyns, then weeps afresh and loaths All words of comfort, Joseph thou art gone, Torn as my garment, bloudy as thine own,
Some evill beast, some bear, or lyon wilde Have fil'd their greedy panches with my childe: And now though all his sonnes and daughters rise To comfort him hee'l none: his big swoln eyes Will take no truce from tears, they banish sleep, And as 'twere made for nothing, but to weep. The day he in no other task out-wears, And all the night waters his couch with tears. Now thou art gone, what comfort can I have? Ile follow thee, my sonne, into the grave, With sorrow Ile descend, thus grief prevail d Ore the old man, and thus he long bewail'd The prosperous youth, who is by this time brought To Aegypt with those Marchants, and there bought By Putiphar, an officer by place Chief Marshal, and a man in Pharohs grace.
THE PRISONER: OR, The second Chapter of Joseph. GEN. the 39. JOSEPH his Master puts in trust, His Mistresse tempts him to her lust, Faire words, and threats, in vain she usde, Then in disdaine to be refusde: Complains of an intended rape, Alleadg'd her out-cry, his escape; So Joseph is in prison cast, An uncouth fault, for being chast. But still God blest him: to his care, The prisoners all committed are. THe great Creator whose all piercing eye The secretst corners of our hearts can trie. He that their future inclination knows Being growne to men, that now art embrioes. Elected Isaac, ere good Abraham thought Old barren Sarah should a sonne have brought.
And Joseph sure, whom God a blessing gave To weeping Rachel, part of it must have Himselfe; the Lord nere blest a barren wombe, And not the issue that should from it come. Josephs belov'd, and blest, even from his birth, Blest in the hollow cavernes of the earth, Where being cast, and then again hal'd thence, And by his brethren sold for twenty pence Of silver, to those Marchants, who him bare To Aegypt, to the house of Putiphar. There sold the second time; God in the place Of bondage, with his Master gives him grace. Who, Joseph Steward of his house, doth make, And all he hath, and all for Josephs sake Is blest, and prospers, Joseph is found just, As seemes by Putiphar, his Masters trust: All's under Josephs hand, nor doth he know Ought that he hath, but what he eats, or so. Nor doth he loose by't, Joseph keeps true counts, And Putiphar to wealth, and honour, mounts By his just care; but see, the devill would show A little kindnesse unto Joseph too. A descri∣ption of Joseph.Joseph's a proper man, faire to behold, Of goodly stature, and a handsome mould, His sparkling eye quicke with attentive care Shoots pleasing beames, yet those, not wanton are; His smooth white forehead, and unclouded brow The open plainnesse of his heart did show Sweet and good natures read, not crafty wiles Are hidden, in his undissembled smiles. His long dishevel'd locks, of curled haire From obscene speeches guard his deafned eare,
His lips faire Rachels were, his looks so meek, His modesty gave colour to his cheek. His head, and heart, were Jacobs, just, and wise, All this the fiend pleads, and in's Mistris eyes, Gives him not grace, but liking, not with loves▪ But with her hot lusts strong temptation proves His youth, so forcibly as might enrage The cold, decayed bloud, of wrincled age. Yet Joseph is unmov'd, a wonder past Moderne beleefe, hee's tempted, faire, and chast. Had many women been so, t'would from spight Redeem'd the sex, and common epithites: His no forc'd vertue was, like theirs that be Best guarded by their owne deformity From sinne, whose face is able to deter Lust from themselves and the adulterer. Whose looks no more temptation in them have Then that they're like the devils, nor to save Charge or expences was it, nor was he To buy his sinne, or loose his chastity At so deare rate; his manhood to controule, As (sinners now) with money, and their soule. Nor lacks he boldnesse, for his Mistresse she Becomes the tempter, and where modesty Most hinders lust, me thinks that grace I finde Like Gods restringent power, which to mankinde The devill doth as 'twere in chains withhold From doing of the mischiefe, that he would; Nor wants he youthfull heat, being in the prime And flower of his age, the aptest time For such employments, nor wants ought to move That might seduce him to unlawfull love.
But he that chast, and can't be otherwise, Offers himselfe a wretched sacrifice To God, when all his bones of sap are drie, As Cains lean eares of corne, which in Gods eye Was not of all accepted: the most high Delights not in such barren piety. Eccl. 12.1.But Joseph full of vertue, full of truth, Remembers his Creator in his youth, E're the dayes come which bring him of his grave In minde, those dayes, wherein men say they have No pleasure: would that grace that sav'd him then From hir inticements, were not lost 'mongst men Of these last dayes, she was not foule, nor mean, Nor was she old, nor yet a common quean, When had she beene all these 'ere giv'n a nay, How many a youth had cast his soule away To such a proffer, they had beene lesse nice Then to deny, more ready to entice. She was his Masters wife, and this offence They would have colour'd with obedience Still due to her commands: who would have thought, I mean what worldly man, but this had brought Him to preferment in a way more nigh Then his deniall, and fidelity? She sole commandresse was in ev'ry thing, She could her husband sway, and he the King, But wretched men! and yet Ile nothing say, Ile not prophane my story, to inveigh Or scarce to mention them that do not know What sweet content doth with good conscience flow. But from them to the Devill I'le proceed Observe his plots, see with what cunning heed,
And how industrious he his worke doth ply, And gives what she could wish, conveniency. When all abroad, none's left but she at home, Joseph bout's businesse in the house doth come. The fiend doth finde his plot may well be crost, That Joseph's bashfulnesse would nere accost His amourous Mistresse, she'l not be withstood, The devill will finde more wayes unto the wood. Her plyant bosome with more heat he moves At Josephs sight boldly to breake her loves In these broad tearms, whom when she first doth see, She runs to embrace, and cryes, Come lye with me. Ev'n as a man that in the dead of night Some apparision meets, or ghastly sight, He cannot fly, but trembles, and stands mute, So blushing Joseph, at this shamelesse suite: Whilest she more bold, commends his matchlesse shape, Then on his corrall lips commits a rape. And if before her words your wonder breeds, She is as plaine, or plainer in her deeds: Wealth is her promise, and her pledge a kisse, Alas poore Joseph! what a conflict's this? The world, the flesh, the devill, all at once, Thou art beset, by hels fierce champions. They strike his eares with flatt'ries, and they thrust Ev'n at his soule with fiery darts of lust: Who arm'd with vertue, in his heart that dwels, Makes vaine their malice, and their force repels, With flat refusall, giv'n with due respects, He reverences his Mistresse, but rejects Her impudent entreaties, and with eyes Cast where she may not see them, thus replyes:
(Lady) you know that in my hands there are More then my Master wots, unto my care All is entrusted that he hath to lye; There is none greater in the house then I: Of all his goods he hath detained none From me, except your selfe, his wife alone. Such was old Adams case, one fruit forbad, Ev n all the world besides he might have had, And that he long'd for, oh unhappy nice To save his longing, lost his paradice! And shall not his example give to me Warning enough from the forbidden tree? When to my Master I was sold a slave, His goodnesse trusted, and securely gave His whole state to my keeping: oh 'twere shame My cos'nage should begin upon his fame! Besides I pray that God my works may blesse, How can I then do this great wickednesse, And sinne against him? 'twas I hope to try Your servants truth, and his fidelity, My honour'd Mistrisse, whence these words proceed Not any meaning to so foule a deed: Which said, quicke rev'rence made with busie haste, Not staying for her answer forth he past: And left her more amaz'd, then he at first When she into her lustfull passions burst: A modest blush did Josephs cheek bestaine, But in her angry looks all colours raigne; All passions in her brest, first raging ire Inflames her eyes, they set the rest on fire Of her swolne face, but: oh her lost delight! She fears, and changes, now again shee's white.
She grievs, laments, despairs; hee'l nere come back She cryes, and now shee's melancholly black; She frets, and frowns, and then as in disdain To be refus'd, she scorns, and smiles again: Now in distraction all her passions met, Proteus himself could never counterfet So many severall colours, till at last This mad fit of her contemplation past, She coms t'her self, and thinks what's done, and sed, And what's the cause that she no better sped: Then she considers that he was but yong, And must be suppled with a smoother tongue: She was too rough, thence came her ill successe; Flattry must winne the heart of bashfulnesse. She studies now encomiums for the rare Perfections he's indu'd with, such as were Excuse, she thought, for lust of worse degree Then hers, for incest, or damn'd Sodomie. Nature (saith she) did nere a body frame So excellent; onely to beare a name, And to be lookt on, nor will I perswade Thee unto ought, but that for which th'art made, Which was not for thy self; thou art not yong, Nor deck'd with comelinesse, nor wise, nor strong, For thine own onely good, but unto thee Nature imparted these, that thou mightst be Her steward of them; youth and strength are thine, (But for her use) oh do not thou decline From her commands that gave them, she did frame All for each others good, and what I claime Is by her laws, who never sure combin'd So smooth a body, with so harsh a minde,
As pretend'st to have, all thou canst say Is of thy Masters goodnesse, canst thou pay His courtesie with greater, all thy life. Then this thy kindnesse to his dearest wife? And i'st not meer dissembling if thou tell Thou lov'st him, and not her he loves so well? Ile foure legg'd dwellers in the woods, and hils, Both male, and female, whilst nought curbs their wils enjoy their sweet variety with peace: Nature commands them nothing but increase. Yet still do'st urge a matrimoniall tye Why canst thou think wise she would ere deny To man whom she of all things hath possest Those priviledges she hath given a beast? But more and stronger charms she doth invent, And so the fiend had made her eloquent. Her words an aged Hermit from his cell Might have intic'd, and made him sue for hell. But Joseph's still unmov'd, he gives no eare He's full of businesse, and wants time to heare Her flattries (in his carriage thus to her Were little hopes of being a Courtier). Still she assayes him whilst the dev'll her friend Makes daily opportunities attend Her newer plots, how can they chuse but hit Between the devils and the womans wit So closely follow'd? for she day by day As Samsons wife, or his false Dalila, Importunate, persues him with her lust, And day by day hath the same answer just. At last impatient of her oft denyall, She now resolves upon a finall triall:
And either in her vile attempts shee'l speed Or on revenge, if not on lust shee'd feed. What foule effects do such suits propagate, If granted, shame; and if not granted, hate. Thus arm'd in both hands, brings she sword, and fire. Swords of revenge, and flames of foule desire. Here let him chuse to which he is inclin'd, The fiend and she are of the self-same minde. If with the sinne he cannot be content, Let him resolve to beare the punishment. The folks i'th field, and Putiphar at Court, Joseph comes home: oh how do all consort To her vile purpose? whilst his serious thought Mus'd on his businesse, she his garment caught: Speaks her old language, now she tels him plain He's fast, and shall not part with her again Till she hath had her will: if he refuse her, She'l swear that he attempted to abuse her. He thus put out on's dumps, this troubled more His thoughts, then all he mus'd upon before, And as for such encounters ill prepar'd, He's mute, and struggles as a bird ensnar'd: Such were his looks, as when Susanna saw The wicked Elders from their covert draw. Their case not much unlike, the same they cry, His Mistrisse and the Elders, do or dye. As a ruft fowl, that gladly leaves her plumes In the hawks eager talents, and assumes New wings of fear, from her late danger past Vntill her safety she hath wonne at last. The like our troubled Joseph forc't to do, Forsakes his garment, and his Mistrisse too.
Who thus forlorn, of all her hopes bereft Nothing of Joseph, but his rayment left, And that she kept, a pledge of hir disdain, Not as a pawn, he would return again. His father Jacob was not troubled more When he his colour'd coat had lost before. Then she's now vext, and fretted, she could tear The cloak for anger, yet she will forbear, And keep it for revenge, her hopes beguil'd Makes her to weep, and anger makes her wilde, With looks distracted now she doth arise, And with a loud and troubled voyce she cries Unto her people, and whilst they amaz'd Upon her ill presaging count'nance gaz'd, She cries out help, as if some foe were by The Hebrew slave hath offer'd villany To me his Masters wife; he that's so just, In whom his Master doth repose such trust, 'Twas he came in to mock me, till affright By my rais'd voyce, he took himself to flight, And left for fear, or shame, or both you see This coat, the witnesse of his lust with me. Fine Devill still, what plot hath ever been yet Crost with th'old instrument the woman wit, Whom he thought fittest 'mongst the creatures all To compasse a damnation generall, In Adam's ruine; she so serv'd him then That he hath us'd the self same hand agen, In most of's plots e're since, upon just Lot By wine, and women, he a conquest got No pow'r but womans ever could subvert David, a man chose after Gods own heart;
Then which successe he chose to set upon The strong, and wise, Samson, and Solomon: So holy Job was tempted: women are Like Angels, and the good may half compare With them for glory, did heav'ns brightnesse shine As oft upon them, they were as divine. The bad ones are the flesh that tempt to evill, And almost do more mischiefe then the devill. Fit instruments for him, to death they lead, The Wiseman saith, her paths unto the dead.Prou. .18. They're like mans evill genius, and attend As his bad angel for some wicked end. The best things when they from their goodnesse fall, And be corrupted, prove the worst of all. 'Angels that fell are devils since their curse, But beauteous woman falne from vertue, worse. Such was this dame, who seeking to betray Poore Joseph for his innocence doth lay His cloak safe, till his Lords return, to whom She thus presents it at his comming home. Such are the servants you for me provide, Your Hebrew slave o'refraught with lust and pride, Came in to mock me, till my shreiks for fear Made him forgo his cloak, and leave it here. Me thinks with such a brow vext Samson ey'd His father that restrain'd him from his bride. So Josephs angry brethren, did behold him, When they against him rose, before they sold him: As now his Master doth, who will not stay To heare him what he for himself can say. Anger contracts his brow, his eyes shoot fire, His wroth is kindled, will the slave aspire
To all I have? Is there not in his hands Enough already? and with that commands Him to perpetuall prison, too unjust A guerdon for inviolated trust. Yet in his anger did some love appeare, 'Twas to a place where the Kings prisoners were. But God thats ev'ry where is there likewise, And gives him favour in his keepers eyes; Who a new charge commits unto his care, Ev'n all the prisoners that in prison are. Joseph doth all, the keeper takes his rest, And looks to nothing, but still Joseph's blest. For see the Lord his own that nere forsakes, Makes all to thrive that Joseph undertakes. Who cheerfull still, and no way discontent For his lost liberty, or punishment: His cleare soul knowing, that for no offence He suffer'd, onely for his innocence. And cheerfull well he may be, each place proves A heaven unto him, wheresoe're he moves. By God's dread presence, as by Kings resort, Each petty cottage doth become a Court. As was the house of Obed-Edom blest, Whilst in his walls the sacred Ark did rest: So Joseph now in jayl (no doubt) it were A happinesse to be a prisoner there. The keeper finds his blessings whilst he sees With admiration his encrease of fees. Great prisoners daily flock, like Labans sheep, Whilst Jacob did his pastures keep.
THE SOOTH-SAYER: OR, The third Chapter of Joseph. GEN. the 40. The Butler and the Baker, both To prison sent in Pharoh's wroth. They severall dreams to Joseph told, Who their meanings did unfold. The Butler whom his news restor'd He in his own behalf implor'd: But with him thanklesse, and unkinde, Being out of sight, is out of minde. ANd after these things, lo, it came to passe, Pharoh offended with his Butler was: And his chiefe Baker, whom (being wroth) he sent Together both, to close imprisonment: Ev'n to the place where Joseph was in ward, Ʋnto whose charge the Captain of the guard
Committed them, where for a season he Did serve them both, and bare them company. There they continued, till some days were past, Impatient with their durance both: at last With froward vexing they out weare the light, And in unquiet slumbers spend the night, Untill as wearied both, a nap they take Each with a severall dream i'th'morne doth wake. When Joseph early comming to salute His charge, he finds them sullen both and mute. Sure mans eternall soul, hath here some sence (As other spirits) oth'pleniscience Which unto them hereafter shall be given (Their fleshly drosse being purg'd away) in heav'n. And did not our grosse bodies it deny Undoubtedly each man might prophecy. Whilst our dull carcasses, are charm'd with sleep, Still as in death: our soul his watch doth keep: No outward objects interpose, to hale Included fancy forth; the naturall Thoughts of our souls presented, then we finde, And dream the fears, or wishes of our minde. The knowing soul, then, privy to th'entent Of following fate, discover would th'event To th'corps, and wanting pow'r to do't at full Speaks in the language of an oracle. With which the body waking from his trance Is more afflicted then with ignorance. So 'twas with these, who understood the news, Mat. 13.14.Their dreaming fancies brought them; as the Jews Christs parables: and no more, then th'Eunuch did Esay's misterious prophecy, as he rid
Before hee met with Philip,Act. 8.30. this did vexe Their troubled sences, and so much perplexe Their mind with doubts; as should a pardon come To one condemn'd, he might misdoubt his doome, And sentence in it, till it were unseal'd, And the glad news, with the contents reveal'd: Such were their fears, they always us'd to be A little cheer'd with Joseph's company. But now when he his morning wishes had Giv'n, still he finds them discontent and sad. Their pale aspects, which with an o're clowded brow, And wrinckled forhead, made them seem as though Th'unpleasing fancies not with sleep forsaking Their troubled thoughts, still wrought upon thē waking. Such was wretch't Hamans face,Hest 6. when he descride The strange catastrophe of all his pride So look't Caldeas King,Dan. 5. when midst of all His jollity, he spide upon the wall The characters unknown, the dreadfull hand Which all the sages could not understand. So pensive were these prisoners till some pause Past, Joseph silence breaks and asks the cause. What mean these heavy looks? they both reply Yong man, tis more then our lost liberty That now afflicts us, we have each this night, Dreampt severall dreams, and here is none that might Discose the hidden meaning, or make knowne To us the right interpretation. Perchance they may devine some good event, Some ease, or end, of our imprisonment. Be not dismaid, replide the holy youth,
Come not such secrets from the God of truth? Cheer up your down-cast hearts, and you shall see God makes his servants wise: pray tell them me To whom the Butler as a good portent Of's lucky fancy and the good it meant, First clears his clouded face, and taking heart, He thus to Joseph doth his dream impart. The Butlers dreame,Me thought my fancy gave unto my sight A fruitfull vine which spread it self forth right Into three branches, on whose boughs appeare The three most pleasant seasons of the yeare: It springs, and buds, and then it blossoms bore, At last with ripn'd grapes all clustred ore, I gather'd some, which as I then did think I crush't in Pharaohs cup, and gave him drink. To whom good Joseph being loath to hide Such welcome news from him, thus replide. interpre∣ted.The fruitfull branches that were spread three ways, By their interpretation are three days: Let not those houres seem tedious, which being spent Are the last days of thy imprisonment. The King shall lift thine head, and shall restore Thee then to fill his cup as heretofore. But when as I foretell you finde it so, Remember Joseph, and some kindnesse show. Mention my name to Pharoh, free me hence, And my good tydings have full recompence. I from the Hebrew land was stoln a childe, Nor hath my youth committed ought so vilde As to deserve the rigor that thus stays Me here to languish out my best of days,
In obscure lazinesse; with so small scope, Able to breake the very heart of hope. All that my worst accuser e're could lay Vnto my charge, I once did disobey My Masters wife, in a command that went Against my conscience; and was therefore sent Here where you see me; 'twas no other fault That damn'd me to this melancholy vault, Where were that axiom true, that some doe hold, Griefe makes men gray, I had ere this grown old. Now as you finde my truth, remember me By the prediction of your liberty. Your dreame expounded, I have clear'd your doubt▪ But dreame not when I shall my selfe come out: Vnlesse your kinde remembrance quit me well, By giving me what I to you foretell. The Butler like a Courtier promis'd where Sad Ioseph makes his period with a teare. By this the Baker having understood, To'thers interpretation was good, Rous'd up himselfe, and herewith comforted.The Ba∣kers dreame interpre∣ted. Thus told his dreame, behold upon my head Were three white baskets, th'uppermost me thought With all choyce kindes of Pharoh's bake-meats fraught, Where loe the birds, that round about me fled, Did cat them out o'th basket on my head. To whom, thus Ioseph, (loathing with delays, Worse to torment him) telleth that three dayes His three white baskets are, whose short time spent, Thou shalt be free from thy imprisonment; And then an end of all thy cares shalt make, Then shall the King thine head from off thee take;
And cause thee to be hang'd upon a tree, And birds shall eat thy flesh from off of thee. Thus Ioseph ends, whil'st they with hope and feare, True picture of those different passions were. Nor will I otherwise describe their station, But each was like his dreames interpretation: Th'one full of hope, the other of despaire; But all proves true, as Ioseph did declare. For the third following morne it came to passe, That Pharoh's birth day then solemniz'd was: Mirth and the voyce of joy the heavens invade, Whilst he feast for all his servants made. To which the prisoners call'd, he lifts their head, The one's restor'd, the t'other punished With shame, and verifying Iosephs words, Hang'd, and his flesh devoured by the birds. Meane while, th' advanced Butler, too ingrate, Forgets poore Ioseph, and his wretched state. Courtiers have busie heads, the breath of Kings Takes from them cleane the sense of meaner things Th'have other thoughts to thinke on, then to know Friends low in state, when their high fortunes flow. Th'have all faire language, and that's freely spent; Their promise too is but a complement. No strangers businesse in their heads can stand, Without some memorandums in their hand. But pardon me, you noble soules, that be Attendants fit for sacred Majesty. Men farre above my Muse, weake to set forth Your praise: lesse able to impayr your worth. I know the Court's the onely Shoole to teach Humanity, and to attain the reach
Of wit: it is, what need more words be spent? Under the Kings immediate government: Where brave mindes, that from glories of the place, Vertue and worth derive, their Princes grace Abusing not, but studying to confer't To his increase of love, upon desert: Have all those Angels plac'd by heav'n t'attend The King, (his state and person to defend) So many better geniusses to tell, And prompt them, both to live, and counsell well. But to conceive there be 'bout honours seat, Courtiers like this i'th story, it would whet The dullest Muse, and make milde patience strain For Satyres, being inspired by disdain Of such a thanklesse wretch, that hath forgot His comforter in prison, minding not Who rais'd his drooping head, and hopes descry'de To him, that else might there for griefe have dyde.
THE COVRTIER: OR, The fourth Chapter of Joseph. GEN. the 41. Pharoh dreamt, the Sages sent For, cannot tell him what it meant. Ioseph called for, declares Th' approaching Famine, and prepares Against it. Pharoh doth him grace, And yeelds in Court a second place To him; his blessing's well begun, The King a wife, God gives him Sonnes. POore Ioseph still a prisoner, looks to heare From his inlarged friend, with patient eare For two years space: and freedome he expects From him, whose life and practice are neglects. But now he findes his error, knowes it can Nothing availe him to confide in man.
Man nere so mindfull, 's but a means to do What God thinks fit, and gives his blessing to. This the Bethulians knew, whose state more bad Then Ioseph's and an Advocate they had Carefull as being a party in the case, Hopefull as beauty, or her pleading face.Iudeth. Yet they no confidence, repose she, They hope a happy means from God may be For their deliverance: from hence they take Some courage and their joint petitions make That God would blesse her with successe as faire, As was the undertaker. Samsons haire Gave but small hope to Israel of defence,Iudg. 16 When as the Spirit was departed thence.Isay 38.21. King. 20 7. What power is in dride figs to heale the fore Of Iudah's King: are Israels waters more Healthfull then those of Syria, that they can, By washing clean the Leper Naaman? What vertue hath unlesse God blessing meet The Prophes salt, to make the waters sweet? The greatest means in misery to redresse it As fruitlesse is, except our God do blesse it. Men have not powre to think of what they see Unlesse the Lord instruct their memory. As now in his good time he brought to passe, The Butler mindfull of poor Ioseph was. Though late, when Pharoh, (for crowns cannot keep Care from Kings heads) was troubled in his sleep. Fancies disturb'd work on his restlesse brain He dreamp't, and wak't, & slept, and dreampt again, Again affrighted wakes: and sends to call His Sages, and Magicians, and for all
That used to descant on such mistique theams But none can tell the meaning of his dreams. Long had they mus'd, and heer one walk't alone Biting his nailes in contemplation. There t'other scratch't his head as if he were Assur'd without all doubt to find it there. One waves his hand, another stroaks his beard, A third sit still, and with his face uprear'd, Looks whence it came; and sure hee'l fetch it far That to a strict account calls star by star, The host of Heaven, inquiring the effects Of the close vision from their aspects But hearsalike, that questions powr's so high The musique of the sphears, and their reply. Heer one more serious plodding then the rest Falls fast asleep, whether his minde opprest, With too much study were, or his intent By his own dream to what Pharoh's meant, He like the rest succeeds: their heads they joyn'd, But still so many a head, so many a mind. Now like the Philistims that undertook Samsons dark riddle, so the Sages look. They greatly troubled are, but Pharoh more, His looks are like his Butlers heretofore, Who happily was thus by Pharoh's face Made mindfull of his own and Iosephs case: And whether's pity, or promise were the thing That moved him if to please, or ease the King, It were I know not: but he thus began With reverence made, This day, ô King, I can Remember well my faults, Pharoh was wroth With his two servants, and most justly both
My self, and his chief Baker put inward Into the Captain's prison of the Guard. Where being at once orecome with grief extream, And troubled thoughts, each of us dreampt a dream, I'th' self-same night our sleeps imaginations According just to their interpretations. We wak'd and sadly mus'd, till a young man Putiphars servant, prisoner with us than An Hebrew captive, unto whom we told Our dreams, their hidden meanings did unfold. And as unto us both he did foretell According to our dreams it so befell Me he restor'd unto my former place, But him he hang'd, and so it came to passe. He had not fully ended, when as one Quick in obedience covets to be gone Ere he knowes half his errand, Pharoh so Would ere whether or for whom he know, But now the tale is ended, when in hast, He calls a messenger that comes as fast. He sends him to the prison out of hand And thinks the time long whilst he gave command. The post upon the wings of speed doth fly, And come, calls out for Ioseph hastily. Now the delay is his, here lyes the sport, Hee'l shave and shift himself ere come to Court And all into a comely order bring, May make him fit to stand before the King: 'Twas a good omen sure, a lucky signe Which did his future Courtiership divine: That he so much of sprucenesse then bethought him When news of freedom from the King was brought him.
Who the mean while impatient of delay, Begins to wonder at the pris'ners stay; But now's appeas'd Ioseph by this is there And Pharoh bent to speak as he to heare. I dreampt a dream, and here is none that can Interpret it, but I have heard, young man, Of thee as one that is well seen and wise, In knowledge of such hidden mysteries. To whom with a submissive bending knee, Ioseph replyes, 'tis not ô King in me: But God shall give to thy joyes increase, By his poor servant a reply of peace. Pleas'd with his gracefull modesty the King Reviews his ingenious face as promising, As to our Harvest hopes when one espies The setting Sun with rednesse leave the Skies. And with this answer cheer'd he now thinks long To hear more comfort from so sweet a tongue, Pharohs dream.And therefore thus: When as me thought I stood, Vpon the rivers bank behold sev'n good, Fat, and wel-favor'd kine, from thence did rise, And graz'd i'th medow, but whilst my pleas'd eyes Viewd their broad back that did with smoothnesse shine, The troubled waters sent seven other kine So poor, lean fleshed, as I never ey'd Meer bare anatomies cover'd with a hide, There's none in Egypt such, I took them sent As foyles the others goodnesse to present By their deformities, for neer till now Did I observe such beauty in a Cow As in the other seven, on whom they set And cleand devour'd, but nere the fatter yet.
Me-thought in killing them the ugly beasts Look't like so many death in their arrests, But in devouring they resemblance have To the insatiate and unfruitfull grave. Which having seen, my labouring fancy broak, Sleep left my wearied eyes, and I awoak, But whilst my thoughts were fixt upon this theam, I slept again, and dreampt another dream. And then behold there came into my view A sprouting stalk, wherin sev'n ears there grew Good, rank, and full of corn,Pharohs second dreame. but whilst I hung My eyes on that fair object, lo there sprung Close to those ears sev'n others, thinne, and pin'd, Wither'd, and blasted by the Eastern wind. And these devour'd, the swoln fruit burdned ears Whilst yet no change at all in them appears: All this have I to the Magicians told, But none the hidden meaning can unfold. God hath to Pharoh his entents made known Then answer'd Ioseph, Pharoh's dream is one.Inter∣preted. For by the seven good kine, sev'n yeers are shewn, So by the sev'n good ears, the dream is one. And the sev'n leaner kine, and empty ears That came up after, are sev'n other yeers. The first being good, and full, betoken plenty, But famine's threatned in the leane, and empty. The thing that I have spoken to the King Not I, but God hath spoken, and shall bring Shortly to passe, sev'n yeares of plenty shall Crowne all your harvest hopes ev'n throughout all The fruitfull Land of Egypt, after then In vain the labour of the husband-men
Shall till the earth, whereon no corn shall stand, Plenty shall be forgotten in the land. From which, as from plow'd sands, expect no crop, For seven yeers famine shall consume it up, And for it doubled twice to Pharoh was, Tis stablisht, and shall shortly come to passe, God hath establisht it, let Pharoh than Throughout his territories find a man, Wise, and discreet, and let it be his care To see that officers appointed are To take the fift part up, throughout the land, And lay the corn all under Pharohs hand. And let the Cities be well stor'd with food, By the neighbouring countrey whilst the yeers are good, Since God the bad ensuing hath declar'd Let not the famine find us unprepar'd. But so let Pharoh gainst those barren yeers Provide, that not a soul may perish heer, For want: let forrain Lands the better fare By us, and owe their safeties to our care. Heer Ioseph ends, and lo the thing seem'd good In Pharoh's eyes, and in their eyes that stood About him, to whom thus the King began. Is there in all the Land a fitter man? To whom Gods Spirit shews such hidden things, He keeps Gods secrets, and is fit for Kings. Then turning him about to Ioseph said, Since of thee God hath 'bove all others made His choice, these holy counsels to disclose That proves thee fittest, I have therefore chose Thee as the only man, discreet, and wise, To do according to thine own advice.
Thou shalt be o're my house, what thou thinkst fit, Shall be my peoples law, who unto it Shall yeeld obedience, great as is mine own Shall thy command in Egypt be, i'th' throne Ile only be above, the voyce is thine Of power, the eyes of Majesty be mine. Now have I set thee over all my Land, Witnesse this Ring, which taking from his hand He put on Ioseph's finger, and array'd Him in rich vestures of fine linnen made, Such as the Egyptian Princes wore of old, And on his neck he put a chain of gold. Then in his second chariot made him ride Whilst bow the knee before him, people cry'de: For Ruler he, ore all the Land doth make him, Which to confirme he turn'd, and thus bespak him. 'Tis I am Pharoh; nor without thee shall A man lift up his hand or foot through all My Realme of Egypt, then to crown his life With true content, he fits him with a wife, Fair Asenath, a goodly prize alone, She was Potipherahs daughter, Priest of Un. Thus Ioseph's rais'd unto the height of powre, In shorter space, then the quick springing flowre: That asks but one nights growth, he that of late Wayl'd in a dungeon, fils a chair of State, Oh what a bounteous King found he to do it! Nay, what a bounteous God that mov'd him to it! Then think on Ioseph's case what ere thou be, Dispair not, art in prison? so was he, Perhaps, thou'lt say, thou hast no skill in dreams, No revelations, God hath other means.
Doubt not his power, nor providence, he can That hath created all, sure helpe a man More wayes than one: dost thou complaine th'art poore, And suffer'st want? Iob surely suffred more. Doe crosses vexe thee? or afflictions rod Torment thy soule? have patience still in God: Wayt on, pray to, trust in him, onely he Can cure, and cleanse, and ease thy malady. Do'st strive with strong temptations, to him then God cast seven divels out of Magdalen? Art sicke, or sinfull? pray'r a cure did winne For Hezekiah's sore, and Davids sinne. Perchance th'ast trusted, praid, and waited long; Looke backe to Ioseph, he was sure but young When first he tasted sorrow, vext between Bondage, Lust, Prisons, and his Brethrens spleen: Ev'n from his very cradle, yet he stayd, He waited long with patience, long he prayd Ere comfort came; for loe when he appears Before the King, his age was thirty yeers; Out of whose presence, to his charge he went, And overseers throughout Aegypt sent In the seven plenteous, whilst all their grounds Brought forth by handfuls, ev'ry place abounds With goodly crops, the sight whereof began To cheer the Clowne, and glad the Husbandman. They ply their trust, their labours never cease To treasure up the fruitfull earths increase. Me thinks I see them, like the busie swarme, When their commander hums, and gives th'alarme: They issue forth, and their dispersed powre Coasts every field, and light on ev'ry flowre,
To make their sweet extractions, and they strive Who shall unlade him oftnest at the hive: They fill their bags, and gladly homewards flye With pleasant burdens in their painfull thigh: Onely this diffrence makes 'twixt them and these, The gatherers went not murmuring as the Bees. But with their silent paces all along They trudge like Ants, a people wise, not strong,Pro. 30.25. Preventing want in plenty, with their paine, So each of these came laden home with graine. They glean'd apace, whilst corn like sāds they found, And stor'd the Cities frō the neighbouring ground: Th'y have gathred much, the Granaries are fild With all th'abundance which the land doth yeeld. Aegypt is now provided 'gainst her fears, Should all the world besiege her for seven years; Were they wal'd strong enough, it were no doubt But they'd by that, starve the besiegers out. His worke now ending, Ioseph takes his rest, And with two sonnes, is ere the famine blest, Two goodly sonnes, which Asenath the fayre, Vn's Priest and Princes daughter to him bare: The first he call'd Manasseh, for he said, God of my toyle hath me forgetfull made, Past in my Fathers house: the second he Nam'd Ephraim, for God hath caused me Here to be fruitfull, whither I was sent, As the place for my affliction meant. But now the time is come that must attone The dreams with their interpretation: Now Pharoh findes that Iosephs words are true, The good years gone and past, and bad ensue:
Egypt expects, and now the time appears The full are swallowed by the blasted ears. Pin'd, famine from all lands comes flocking thither, And from all countries men come flocking with her. Egypt alone hath bread, yet some of those That were ill husbands, or that did repose No trust in Ioseph's words, by this halfe dead For their late unbelief, cry out for bread. But still to Pharoh when the people cry'de, They were to Ioseph sent to be supply'de. What he shall bid you do, to him they went, Who sold them corn, when all their store was spent. The granaries he set ope, for there was dearth And famine ore the face of all the earth, Nay, now in Egypts selfe it waxed sore, Till he supply'd their daily wants with more, It rag'd in all lands and all Countries came Thither for corn, and ask for Ioseph's name.
THE STEVVARD: OR, The fifth Chapter of Joseph. GEN. 42. To Ioseph from all Countries come Th'inhabitants for food mongst whom His brethren came plagued with the dearth, To him as Steward of the earth, For by him are all Nations fed Egypt alone abounds in bread. Blest with his care, which none denies, Save them, he challenged for spies. To prove their trust, they must agen Returning bring young Benjamin. Simeon mean-while in hold remains, And they releas'd go home with grain. LIke that mysterious Book the Angell gave To Iohn, are worldlings fond delights, they have A smack of pleasure which affects the sence At first, but ends in bitter penitence.
Prov. 5.3, 4, 5.The whore hath honied lips, her perfum'd breath Utters words smooth as oyle, but unto death Her feet make haste, her steps to hell doe tend, Sharpnesse and bitternesse are in her end. Such in all earthly pleasures, they whose mindes Swell with vaine-glory, or whom Mammon blinds, The god of this world, that they thinke to be, In riches onely true felicity; Dan. 2.Like the forgotten dreame of Babels King, (Which did confusion to the Sages bring) A head of gold, a breast of silver, they, With thighs of brasse may have, but feet of clay. Their glory, riches, joyes, wherein they trust, Being past away, their end shall be in dust. The world like a fond Mother is, and smiles Upon her own, whom she a time beguiles With pleasures, fading like her selfe, (for she That hath not, cannot give eternity To them) whose first, and better dayes being past, Must grieve the rest, and thinke upon their last. GOD like a gratious Father, but austere; First, by corrections teacheth his to feare, And to be humble, which being taught them, he I'th end rewardeth their humility Iob 1.With choycer blessings, Iob he first did try, By taking of his wealth, his misery Increas'd by sore diseases, soule, and sense, Vext to the utmost of his patience. Abram from God receives a strict command Gen. 22.2.To sacrifice his Sonne; with his own hand To kill his Childe, having as yet but one. Iacob an heyr to his affliction,
Hath lost his best lov'd boy: Gods blessings here T' his children, diffrent from the worlds appear▪ Whilst heers a little time, the world doth blesse, Their end is crownd with endlesse happinesse. Nor doth the God of earth and heaven give Us onely future hopes, but whilst we live,Iob 42. Feeds us with daily blessings: Iob increas't In wealth; againe, is richest of the East. Nor doth good Abram like contentment lacke, Isack is with a blessing giv'n him backe: And Iacob shall, the dayes are now begun,Gen. 22.20. Finde to the safeguard of his life, his Sonne. The generall dearth that through all nations ran, Hath shown his lean aspect in Canaan; And pinch'd the holy Patriarks: ten are sent Of Iosephs brethren, all their store being spent, For new supplyes of corne; for it was sed, That onely Aegypt did abound in bread. Forwards they set, now the first motion stirres, And they prove Iosephs best Interpreters. The time is come, the sheaves begin to bend, Ten of the starres already doe descend, The rest must follow: Iacob now shall see His rays'd Sonne, and his sleeping prophecy: And he to whom so many dreames were known, God now declares, and brings to passe his own. For loe his brethren that were come before him, Bowing their faces to the earth, adore him. He's put in minde of's vision, at first view, Though none of them knew him, yet them he knew: And this gives me more wonder then their change, His strange remembrance, their oblivion strange.
It is not commonly the poore forgot, To claime alliance from their friends grown great. Nor is't the usuall way o'th world, that men Of rising fortune should remember then Their meane, though neerest kinne, & much the lesse To be expected, comming in distresse. Looke on their natures, and there sure should be Between them some prompting antipathy Should make them know, however high estated, So great an eye-sore Ioseph whom they hated. Who on the other side, as soone as spide them, (Nor was his memory malice) he descride them. He found them as he left them, but their eyes Were doubtlesse dazl'd with his dignities: Whilst no revenge, (therefore let none mistake him) Did so quick sighted, but his meeknesse make him: He meant no harme unto them, though he spoke In a sharpe key, and with a rougher looke, Askes whence they came, when humbly one replyes, From Canaan, to buy corne; he cals them spyes. Canaan upon a fruitfull soyle doth stand, Flowing with milke and honey: Yee our land Are come to pry into, to what distresse Famine hath brought it, and what nakednesse. When trembling, with one sudden voyce they cry, Thy servants true men are, and come to buy Food for our aged Father, we were borne All one mans sonnes, and hither come for corne; Our alter'd soyle doth not afford us graine; Twice hath the reaper lookt for worke in vaine. Twich have the Plowmans toyle and seed inhum'd Untimely frosts, unkindely heats consum'd.
Our store is spent, nor have we hope to live, Unlesse your goodnesse do our wants relieve. Still Ioseph, who but what he knew did heare, Chang'd not his noat, but bids observe their feare, Their trēbling joynts, faint voyce, & down-cast eys, True signes of guilt, discovered them for spyes. They know not how to look, nor what to say? Their postures, ev'ry thing seem'd to betray Them to his jealous fury: if they muse Or whisper, then they'r forging an excuse; If they be silent, that their guilt implyes; Their boldnesse impudence, their language lyes. Yet still considering that no such they were As he suspected them, they persevere More confident as in their tale begun. They were twelve brethren, and the yongest sonne Their aged Fathers fondnesse did detaine At home with him: the twelfth alas was slaine, By what mischance unknowne: they stoutly stand Vpon't, they came not to descry the land. Their honest errand serv'd not to disguise So bad intents: but still I call'd you spyes, Answer'd the subtile Ioseph; thus you shall Prove my surmises vain: choose one of all That may goe up with a supply of graine, The rest with me in prison shall remaine. Yee shall not hence by Pharohs life I sweare, Vntill I see your yongest brother here. This is the way to prove my doubts untrue, And whether there be any trust in you. Let one then fetch him, here your safety lyes, For by the life of Pharoh, else y'are spyes.
At this with feare and trouble sore dismaid, Not knowing what to say, they nothing said. But as they musing on each other star'd, Ioseph for three dayes put them all in ward: Then calling them before him, they appeare, He bids doe this and live, for loe I feare God; and if as ye say, ye true men be, Let of your brethren, one stay here with me; The rest goe home in peace, with good supply, To stave off famine from your family: But see your yongest brothers presence prove Your truth returning, so no hand shall move Against your lives, or safeties, or withstand Your peacefull traffique with us in the land This said, when seeing no way to prevent, Of sad necessity they were content. Yet with their captive brother, ere they goe, They take a little time to vent their woe. Guilt surely hangs upon us, and our God That saw our sinne, now threatneth with the rod Of vengeance, timely had our griefe bin spent, Ere we our harmelesse brother, hither sent. We turn'd him pittilesse, and deafned eares, When he in anguish of his soule, and teares, Gently besought us, but alas, too late, We nere repent us of our cursed hate, Whence all these mischiefes their beginnings take: We justly punish't are for Iosephs sake. For Aegypt, ev'n the place where we him sent, God hath ordained for our punishment. Alas cryes Ruben, had you bin so wise, As t' have given any eare to my advice,
This had not bin, when I with language milde, Disswaded you from sinning 'gainst the childe; But following then your rash and furious mood, Behold th'event, God hath requir'd his blood. Little thought they that Ioseph was so neare, The other party to these presents there. For he dealt subtly with them▪ and as one That makes himselfe the slye companion Of theeves, or traytors, or perchance would be More satisfide in some home jealousie. He fains long deafnesse, or it may be, can Translate his tone, like some outlandish man. Meane while securely they their mischiefes vent, And hee's made privy to their close intent. As farre deceiv'd here, Iosephs brethren were, He spake no word but by Interpreter, At all unto them, and much did seeme A stranger to their language, as to them. Now he hath halfe his plot, and well content, Freely forgives them, whom he sees repent. And in true token, he beginnes With teares to helpe them to bewayle their sinnes. He weepes, returnes, and then as if he thought 'Twas not enough they see and wayle their fault, As doth the grave Confessor use to doe; He means to put them to some pennance too. For having kept them three dayes in distresse, Their comp'ny he dismist, by one made lesse. For Symeon before their eyes he sent Bound backe againe to close imprisonment. Yet sure, this punishing of them did prove The truth of his forgivenesse, and his love,
As did his acts of love in kindnesse meant, Appeare to them a kind of punishment. For having given command that each mans sack Be fil'd, and each mans coin restored back In their sacks mouths: and likewise that they may Be furnish'd with provision for their way. Forwards they set though with an heavy pace Clogg'd with their grief, and lamentable case. Sure tedious are their steps, who cannot stir But sorrow is their fellow travellour. Sore griev'd in heart their journey they begun At their first lighting is confusion. For Ruben, that for provender unbinds His sack the money in the mouth of't finds. And as the clown that doth through medows passe Espying some glorious colours in the grasse, Stoops down to reach them, being in hope to take: A goodly prize, when lo, he clasps a Snake. As pale as he was Reuben, when he saw His coyn in the sacks mouth he doth withdraw His trembling hand, and in as great a feare As had he met the God of money there. See heer my coynes restor'd! cryes he, some train Tis for our lives, and we shall all be slain. As in a field of standing corn we find One end being shaken by the whisking wind, Those which receive the gust, declining fall Upon their neighbours, till clean thorough all Quivering runs; like to those troubled ears, They shaken are with one anothers fears. Oh most unusuall fright, For were not it Uoucht by Antiquity, and holy Writ,
Who would in these our times of God ador'd Believe their fear: to see their gold restor'd. Had Achan's heart upon th' accursed touch Of the forbidden gold, faild half so much, Had his Fore-father's fears upon him fell T'had sav'd a family in Israel? He fear'd not punishment, but it appears That they, alas! were punisht with their feares, 'Twas all God us'd as the correction mild, Of a good father to a loved child. And twas enough for he but shakes the rod, And strait they fear, but 'twas the fear of God. Alas! what ist that God hath done they cry Vnto his servants: in this extasie, They hom return to Canaan, and their tell Vnto their father all that them befell, Saying, the man that is their Lord bespake us In a rough language, and for spies did take us. When sorely troubled we, in humble wise Answer'd, thy servants true men are, not spies, We of one aged father were begot, And were twelve brethren, whereof one is not. The youngest as the comfort of his dayes At home in Canaan with our father stayes: Whereat the Lord unsatisfide replyes Thus shall your truth be prov'd to me, arise, Prevent your houshold famine and be gone With food sufficient for you, leave but one Behind, but see that your return bring heer Your younger brother so shall it appear, You true men are, not spies, then Ile restore Your now detained brother, not before.
And if to tryall of your truth you'l stand, Do this and traffique with us in the Land, Iacob as yet stands mute, while they go on Emptying their sacks of their provision. But when their money with their corn appears They start, not having yet o'recome their fears: And lo this object, nothing lesse dismaid, The sonnes, then now the sire, they're all affraid. Then Iacob first the silence break, as one That in the grief challeng'd chief portion. He for his childrens losse, felt greatest smart Which thus breaks forth, in agony of heart. How hath your malice of my sonnes bereft me Ioseph is not, nor Simeon is not left me. Poor Benjamin you practice to betray, And with him take my souls delight away. All these things are against me, heer he staid And gave his grief some vent: when Ruben said Tis a hard strait, we must for famine die, Or bring our brethren in this jeopardie. Yet let not Israel fear: let him but giue The Child into my hands, and we shall live Let me ensure his life, and if he runnes In any hazard, let it to my sonnes Be ev'n alike; his safe return again Redeems their lives, or else let both be slain. More spake he, but in vain, Iacob is loth For his lov'd Benjamin, to accept them both A pledge, but with a discontented frown, He tels them flat, my sonne shall not go down Along with you, of Ioseph I'm bereft This, only this, is all my comfort left And sure 'twill bring (if any harm he have) My gray hairs down with sorrow to the grave.
THE FREE-MAN: OR, The sixth Chapter of Joseph. GEN. the 43. Famine, that Mothers hath to kill Their sonnes enforced, with a will As bad, doth Israel constraine To send his children downe againe With Benjamin: whose sight hath wonne Liberty for Symeon. Who now a free man with the rest, At Iosephs house partakes the feast. TWas a hard choyce,2 Sam. 24. David for his offence Had; between famine, Warre and Pestilence. Not better much, was this of Iacobs here, To famish, or to part with what most deare Was to his soule: than which, no plague could be Of greater torment, not the misery
Warre brings along, not death, which as the chiefe Of humane terrors; so to dye for griefe, The worst of deaths (as doubtlesse he had done) His life ranne equall hazard with his sonne. Meane while, the brethren urging his consent That Benjamin might goe, are discontent, Doubly to be refus'd, it did appeare First, in his Fathers eye, that he more deare Was held than they; the ancient cause that bred Their hate to Ioseph, he inherited As next of kinne: yet hence their ire did grow On better grounds, their brother might not goe, Though to save all their lives: in their distresse Their of-spring murmur'd in the wildernesse, Not more 'gainst Moses, then (their corn neer spent) They 'gainst their Syre, who when he would have sent Them down again: thus Iudah makes reply: The man protested to us solemnly, To bring our brother, as we hop'd for grace Or favour, else we must not see his face. So if you'l send him with us, well and good, We also will goe downe, and buy you food; Or else we will not: for he told us plaine, Without your brother, see me not againe. Iudges 77. King. 6.A shrewd Dilemma! Iacob full as loath As the rash Iephtah was to keepe his oath: Or as Samarias starv'd Wyves, griev'd in heart To kill their sonnes for food; was he to part With his lov'd Benjamin: oft they withdrew Their trembling hands, relenting ere they slew Their harmelesse babes, and oft they fild the skyes With bitter exclamations, and lowd cryes.
So Iacobs love ere he could send his sonne, Oft chang'd his wavering resolution. His tendernesse and reason are at strife, He shall not goe in perill of his life, The one alledgeth, t'other makes reply, If he goe not, he must for famine dye. Hee's now resolv'd, yet ere he let him goe, He first takes liberty to vent his woe, And as an angry gamester hastily, Imputes ill fortune to the standers by: So Iacobs wroth is for his losses bent On them for ought he knew were innocent. Why have you dealt so ill with me, in giving Him knowledge you had yet a brother living? Perhaps as desperate men at point to dye, Thinke lesse their danger, when with company, So you unto your fears could finde no other Ease or excuse, but that you had a brother Yet to pertake your suffrings, if not so, What reason had you else to let him know? The man did strictly of us they replide Aske of our state, and how we were allyde, If w'had more brethren or a Syre alive? His jealousie made him inquisitive, Whil'st in the humblest way, our fear affords Him answer to the tenour of his words: For how alas! could we for truth have known He would have bid us bring our brother downe? Then Iudah further to his father spake, And doth in feeling manner undertake His brothers safety, and more boldly pleads Their generall want of bread, which intercedes
A bad, but powerfull Advocate: O shall Your fonder love of one, destroy us all! Let the Lad goe, that we some food may bring, To save our little ones from famishing: And if into your hands I don't resigne Him safe, his danger, and the blame be mine. Had we not through your scruple lingred here, We had return'd ere this, and quit your feare. 'T hath been a common and approved saw Throughout the world; Necessity hath no law, Yet I'me assur'd no Rhetorician can Plead halfe so well, for could there be in man, Till this his so necessitated tryall, An obstinater spirit of denyall Than was in Iacob: who now yeelding, spake To Iudah thus; if't must be so, then take A Present of the best fruits of the land, And each mans money double in his hand, For that which was return'd, which haply might Have onely bin in you some oversight. And take your brother also: rise, and goe yee, And God Almighty give his mercy to yee Before the man, that ye may bring agen Your other Brother, and my Benjamin: For of my children, if I be bereav'd, I am beeeav'd. Here stopt he, they receiv'd Their charge with gladnes: cheerful now they went Without reply, their Father being content To send their brother with them, whom they hold A safeguard better, then the coyne twice told They brought along their honey, nor their spice, Their mirrhe, nor was their pretious Balm the price
Of Simeons ransome: nothing else could be A witnesse 'gainst the Rulers jealousie, Save Benjamin alone, 'gainst Iacobs love Iudah prevayles, when Ruben cannot move, Though better minded: as it doth appear By his first proffer of a pledge so dear As were his two sonnes lives, which Iacob takes Of Iudah, but at Rubens hands forsakes. It sure must grieve, him thus to be denide, That labour'd most against the fratricide, And sale, th'imputed cause of all their wo: But 'tis no matter; so their brother go, Whose happier tongue perswades; for him alone They for their peace and freedom build upon. Now they are confident, and travell fast As hungry men for meat, then, midst their hast They make a sudden stop: they see the Inne, Where when they last return'd, they'd frighted bin, In op'ning of their sacks: they doubtfull are Lest to their golden bait, some dang'rous snare Be fixt; and their coyn hidden in the sack To pick a quarrell with them comming back. When having prov'd themselves no spies to be, They might be charged now with thee very. Nor seems their Benjamin: but as one more (To be a bondman) then they brought before. For him doth Iudah's heart misgive, his mind Is troubled for his pledges left behind, And for his fathers losse; and still their fear Grows greater as to Egypt they draw near. At last considering that no ill they meant, Nor theft, nor falshood was in their intent,
As by their brothers comming is made plaine And bringing double money down again. Clearnesse of conscience doth a while beg in To comfort them: when lo their ancient sinne Is interpos'd: me thinks, I cannot see Cryes one, yon Ruler, but my memory Afflicted is with Ioseph: all his words Are full of terrour, and his eyes as swords Ev'n pierce my soule with fear: at ev'ry sight Of him I tremble: so his looks affright, As had our brothers wronged ghost possest His brow, infusing vengeance in his brest. The same conceit troubles them all, they could Almost turn back: but hunger makes them bould, So that a little ha'ing o'recome their fear, Once more before the Ruler they appear. 1. Sa. 25As the hot wroth of David at the sight And soft perswasion o' th' fair Carmelite, Melted away, when churlish Nabal's life Was spar'd for the sweet carriage of his wife. So Ioseph's garbe is alt'red when he sees Lov'd Benjamin, no shape of cruelties Can then usurpe his brows: he bids prepare For now his brethren all invited are To feast with him at noon, yet still their fear Misconsters kindnesse, sure some plot is there They yet suspect, and as they thought before Danger ith' coyn restor'd, now dread they more In this invitement, therefore to prevent (What they much doubted by this love was meant) Bondage: they to the Steward drawing neer Relate their story, so in hope to clear,
And purge themselves from guilt of all offence That might the anger of his Lord incense, And tendring double mony, they deny All knowledge by what means it came to lye In their sacks mouths: when he that well did know His masters mind, put on a fained show Of wonder and saluting them with peace, Tels them their Fathers God gave that increase And treasure in their sacks; then going on To Ioseph's house, he brings forth Simeon They all are kindly us'd, as doth appear, Their feet are wash'd, their beasts have provender, Two signes of welcome, yet amidst their Feasts They wanted some contentment of their beasts. The silly jades seeing their racks stuft with meat Better then Canaan us'd them to, they eat Dreadlesse of worse event, when lo a fear Attends their masters trenchers, drawing neere To Iosephs table, they observe the noats Of the wise King, their knives are at their throats.Prou. 23 2. But now they find their entertainment free, Their brother Simeon too, at liberty, Their present well accepted, Ioseph kind, Questions their welfare, satisfies his mind With news of Iacobs health: but when he sees Young Benjamin strange loving extasies Possesse him: now with hands imposed on Him cryes he, God be gracious to my sonne: His bowels yearn, natures strong sympathy Works out his melting heart into his eye. This was excesse of joy, that when he came From his loath'd prison was not sure the same.
We read that then his face but once he clears, Which now twice washt in water is and tears. He spake them fair, whilst they as he foresaid With lowly reverence, their obeysance made. Much kindnesse past, Ioseph 'twould seem intends For his late churlishnesse to make amends. His servants he commands to set on bread, Now are three tables with all plenty spread, One for the Hebrews, one a board of state, Where Ioseph all alone in's glory sate, One for th' Egyptians, who to eat refuse As an abomination with the Iews. The brethren sate in order, to their birth, And to their youth, the place was fild with mirth, But Benjamin the best beloved guest, Had his messe seven times bigger then the rest.
THE PLEDGE: OR, The seventh Chapter of Joseph. GEN. 44. Fraid as their off-spring when pursude, By Pharoh and his multitude When they no means of scape could find The Sea before, the foe behind The Israelites are overtane, Iourneying homewards; theft was laine Vnto their charge: whilst they deny In thought the guilt of felony, But when their sacks they have unbound, With Benjamin the cup was found. They all return, and Iudah moves In his behalf, his fathers loves And life built on him, doth alledge, Offring himself to be his pledge. THe Feast is ended: they with joy repleat (Their hearts wel cheer'd with welcom & good meat
Think themselues fit for travell, all their fears Forgot, none whispers in his brothers ears. Dreadlesse of danger now they take their leaves Lowly submissive, like the bowing sheaves. And part to lade their beasts: while Iosephs's brain, Is plotting how to bring them back again. In every sack the steward must restore Again their moneyes as he did before. But Benjamin, as was his share i' th' feast His sack sev'n times more silver then the rest Is chardg'd with all: for there they had conveyd The Rulers silver Goblet, which betray'd Them to their fears a new, the diff'rence strange Twixt his exceedings is: and sad the change. He at the table sitting down a guest Receiv'd a seven-fold portion of the feast, As of his brethrens terrour now, he bare The love away then, now the sorrows are In as full measure given to him: but why, Youle wonder, the pretended felony To him alone was laid, or why should he The greatest sharer in their torment be That was not guilty of their crime? to try Heer Ioseph wisely meant their amity, Theod. q. 105. in Gen.Or if their love was greater that they bore To's brother now, then to himself before; How they that had him thither sold could be Content with Benjamins captivity. Whether twere so, or whether for the grief They put him to, or for their unbelief He meant this purgatory, the same pains Of soule that there are faign'd to purge the stains
Of bad mens lives afflicts them, their offence Gnaws them with the same worme of conscience. For still as oft as they have cause to fear Poor Ioseph is remembred with a tear And still he gives them cause, a punishment As great, as just revenge could ere invent, Is such a fear, the quintescence and chief Of woe, the very soule and sence of grief. The plagues of Hell are horrour,Greg. ho. 22. in Ezek. and mans fear Is a perspective through which leen appear, All dangers greater, death it self 'tis clear Brings no more tetrour with it then our fear. Torment of mercy! thus our maker proves His childrens patience, vexing whom he loves, As Ioseph did his brethren; who the day Of their departure broak, now take their way Towards Canan with their loads: scarce had they past The City walls: when lo in all post hast Their friend the steward or' takes them with a face Bewraying choller, bids them slack their pace. They in obedience answer'd him, and stood Whilst he, why have you thus paid ill for good Eagerly charg'd them? ist not that (quoth he) The cup he drinks in, 'tis a robbery Most sacrilegious (not to be excus'd) It was the same he in divining us'd. Ill have yee done: alas! what could they say What could they think, when he that yesterday Us'd them so well? should to their charge impute Theft now; and make a slander his salute. Lo heer an Embleme of man's life! their fears Give way to comfort, and anon appears
Mat. 5.4New cause of trembling: joy succeedeth sadnesse, And unto them that grieve, is promis'd gladnesse. Possest with wonder, now their looks descry 1. Kings. 21.Them like good Naboath, charg'd with blasphemy. Why, saith my Lord, these words? our God forbid, We ere should do this thing: the money hid In our sacks mouth from Canaan we brought back How should we then, or gold, or silver take By stealth from thy Lords house? so let it be With whom soe're of us 'tis found, that he May die the death, and we do all accord To yeeld our selves as prisoners to thy Lord. The motion's good, right did his purpose speed That well knew where 'twas laid, and soon agreed, Only the man with whom tis found shall be My servant: all the rest of you go free. All parties are well pleas'd, when not afraid But full as confident of what they said, 2. Sa. 12.As David answering Nathan: or that wretch That made of councell 'gainst himself did teach Hester 6.His foes preferment: speedily they take Their sacks down to the ground, and make A busie search, with th' eldest they begin And end where it was found with Benjamin. Who blusht, though not for guilt, his face the same Was as his brothers courted by his dame. So look'd they all as the stones rol'd away The five Kings hid ith' cave of Mackedah, Beheld the victor: shame of their disgrace Sits heavy on their brow, and burns their face They plead not guilty: and as if they meant To shew their hearts how true they were, they rent
Their cloaths to their bare breasts: but 'tis no season To vent their passions, now, they yeeld to reason, How to redeem their brother, each mans sack Burthens his Asse, and all to town go back. By this is Iudah and his brethren come To Iosephs house, (for he was yet at home) Before him to the ground they fall, when he As one unkindely dealt with: why have ye Thus us'd me asks? or what is this y' have done In recompence of my affection? Had you a hope you might escape me so, Or could you be so ign'rant not to know I could divine? what answer have you left? Or may so vilde and impudent a theft Finde an excuse? or have you yet the face To use denyall in so plaine a case? Iudah replyes, (my Lord) what can we say? What shall we speake? how may we wipe away This guilt? (and then as men in feare confesse More then they know, so they seeing no redresse In justifying of themselves, they yeeld To the apparant proofes) God hath reveald Th'iniquity of thy servants; we are bound Thy servants, we, and he with whom 'twas found. Nay, God forbid, saith Ioseph, onely he With whom the Cup was found, is bound to me; With you I've nought to doe, you fears may cease, You to your Father may returne in peace. Mercy is that whereby Gods goodnesse bends To humane conference; God by that extends Mans boldnesse to sollicit him, and so As Abraham, when God gracious made him know
Counsels divine, and the allotted fate Gen. 8.Of cursed Sodome, growes importunate. In like sort Iudah at the soft reply Of milder Ioseph, courage takes thereby: His case addes boldnesse too, for's brothers sake, His Fathers, and his sonnes lives, all at stake: My Lord (saith he) and freely drawing neere, Craves leave to tell his story in his care. Prov.The wise Proverbialist compares the ire Of moved Kings, to a consuming fire. No lesse did Iudah take it for, oh thou That eu'n as Pharoh art! ah let not now Thine anger burne against thy servants! we When we last came were asked, have not yee A Father, or a Brother? when in briefe, We told the truth of all (alas the griefe!) We said we had a Father, whose gray head Was by a tender stripling comforted: The sonne of his old age; and this alone Did make him youthfull; having now but one, (Endeared him the more) of his loved Mother, This the sole relict, having lost his brother: Thou badst thy servants bring him downe to thee, That thou might'st see him, when (my Lord) said we, He may not leave his Father, should they part, It were enough to breake the old mans heart. Still layd'st thou thy commands, to see thy face No more, unlesse our brother were in place. So to our Father we delivered plaine Thy words, and when he bad us goe againe To buy a little food, we let him know, Without our brother, that we could not goe.
To which thy servant, the old mans oplyde, Ye know my wife bare me two sonnes, one dy'de, He went out from me, but return'd no more; Some beast I therefore said, in pieces tore That comfort from me, if you therefore take His brother too, and any harme o'retake The Lad, 'twill bring (but heav'n him shield and save,) My gray hayres downe with sorrow to the grave. Those twayne his ages play-fellowes, as deare And pretious to him as his eye-bals were: Whereof one gone, if t'other lose it's light, Then is it time to bid the world good-night. And well might Iacob love him, whom the paine And hardest labour of his youth did gaine: Twice seven cold winters, twice seven summers heat, With patience he endur'd, ere he could get Their much lov'd Mother, and as long againe It was, ere could his prayrs and teares obtaine This of-spring more then all their brothers priz'd For them his faith, and works were exercis'd, Their purchase was not by his toyle alone, They were the fruit of his devotion. If we returne without him, 'twill destroy Our Fathers life, that's bound up in the boy. So to the grave, downe shall thy servants bring Their Syre thy servants grey-head sorrowing. Thy servant surety for the Lad became Vnto my Father, mine shall be the blame For ever if I bring him not againe, Then let thy servant so much grace obtaine, That I may for the Lad thy bondman be, And he with's brethren goe, instead of me.
For how shall I goe up without the Lad? To be a witnesse, and spectator sad There of my Fathers suffrings for my sake, Who for the childes returne did undertake.
THE DISCOVERY: OR, The eighth Chapter of Joseph. GEN. the 45. Here like a reconciled Lover, Ioseph weeping, doth discover In teares of kindnesse to his brother Himselfe, unable yet to smother His passions longer; five he brings Of them to Court, who by the Kings Directions, and commandement, With Chariots are for Iacob sent. THus long good Ioseph with an unmov'd eare, The dolefull story of himselfe did heare His Fathers love and teares: he that denyes The strength of nature in her sympathies: Had he seen Ioseph here sad burthen keep, To his griev'd fathers groanes, or heard him weep
For love to Benjamin, his error he Had sure detested as an heresie. Ioseph a naturall sonne appeares in this, Old Iacobs griefes are parents unto his. So like his passions, to his Syres, I finde, As had he with his body, got his minde. He cannot of his Fathers sorrowes heare, But as sad issue, it begets a teare. ow dull were all his brethren? not to know Him weeping now, as he was wont to doe: He look'd as when they sold him; salt drops shrowd The Majesty of's eyes, as when a clowd So dimmes the radiant brightnesse of the Sunne, That weakest sights may boldly gaze upon His beames: what mists doe passions cast before Our eyes? their envy did not blinde them more From knowing of their brother, that in teares Beg'd for his life; then now again their fears Darken both soules and bodies, both their eyes, Their understandings, and their memories; They think not what his dreams foretold, his place Of promis'd greatnesse, nor their humble case. Mens hearts 'gainst dangers oft misgive, and some Are light before against a joy to come: But no such motions in their hearts doe stir, To make them know this their deliverer. Blinde fathers of as blinde a race! whom so Not all the Prophecies could make to know Their deare redeemer, whom they us'd with more Malice than did their Syres his type before. To shew his love, Gods ever blessed Sonne Shed teares of griefe, and of compassion:
We never read he smild: so Ioseph here Cannot expresse his joy, but with a teare. Both passions finde one vent, both flowing ran From's eyes, as if they melted had the man. So strove they for precedence, and t' o'recome Each other, as the twins in's Grandames wombe, Which first should issue forth, he hears with griefe His Fathers fears and sorrows, and beliefe Of his decease; but now o're-joy'd agen, He weeps to see his brother Benjamin. The eye is the soules index; had you seen The Brethren plotting a revenge, their spleen Did in their eyes appear, and you might spy The innocence of Ioseph in his eye, As here his love: could their hard hearts have so Melted as Iosephs, to conceive the woe Of their sad Father, or their bowels yearne, And nature, spite of spleen, made them discern Their brother, it had sav'd their present fears, Old Iacobs sorrows, and good Iosephs tears; Which now as Lectures are to them; and all That disobedient, or unnaturall Unto their Parents, or their brethren be, Instructing them in love and piety. The goodnesse of his nature, is a plaine Doctrinall president, he can't refraine Before the standers by, some drops must slide E're he commands convenience; none abide Now with him, but his brethren, when in tears He makes them know their Ioseph, and appears, How ever their demerits might him move In his own likenesse, and a brothers love.
He weeps aloud, till all that present were In Pharohs house, and all th' Egyptians heare. Kings 19.God comforting Eliah, first with flame, Strong tearing winds, & hideous storms, there came, Ere the still voyce was heard; so if I dare Th' immediate actions of the Lord compare With those he works by agents; comfort here Came to the brethren, as t' Eliah there. For after frownes, high words and cryes were past In milder tearmes he lets them know at last 'Tis I am Ioseph, doth my Father live? When loe his brethren could no answer give, And can you blame them for it? should you see One long deceas'd, at least so thought to be, Appeare before you, full as much remaine They troubled at his presence; who again Cals them, come neer I pray you, and being come Tells them, I am your brother Ioseph, whom You into Aegypt sold: yet doe not grieve, Nor be you angry with your selves, beleeve By Gods decree you sold me, I was sent Before you to provide you nourishment, And to preserve your lives: but two yeers past Are of the famine, which as yet must last Five more, in which by Gods most firme decree, There neither earing shall, nor harvest be: Haste therefore to my Father, say thus said Ioseph thy sonne; God me a Lord hath made O're Aegypt, wherefore come thou downe to me, And tarry not, so shall thy dwelling be In Goshen, where the land is fat and good, And for convenience in my neighbourhood.
There shall thy sonnes and thy sonnes sonnes be plac'd, Thy numerous flocks and heards and all thou hast. There will I nourish thee, for yet remayn Five years of famine; lest for want of grain, Thou and thy houshold all the soules that be Born of thy loyns should come to poverty. My brothers eyes have seen, so likewise see yee It is my mouth that speaks these words unto yee▪ Yee therefore to my Father shall relate The glory yee have seen, and all my state, In Egypt; yee shall hasten and be gone To bring my Father down unto his sonne. To exemplifie Gods love, the holy writ The love of woman doth compare to it. Which love is full of fervency, so this Heer Benjamin, and he embrace, and kisse, And weep, and on each others necks they fall He weeps again, and now he kist them all Between these loves this difference may suffice That love hath melting lips, this melting eyes. In teares they held their conference, whilst report Had noys'd the fame thereof through all the Court. Tis news in Pharoh's house; and lo the thing Pleas'd all that heard it, for it pleas'd the King. Who thus bespake him: to thy brethren say Go lade your beasts, get home, and bring away Your father and your housholds: I will give The fat of Egypt to you, cat and live. I have commanded you, now therefore take▪ Waggons throughout the land of Egypt, make All fit for travell, now forget your home, Bring father, wives, and little ones, and come.
Hasten away, regard you not your stuff, The good of Egypt's yours, be that enough. So Israels children went, and Ioseph made Waggons, and all things fit (as Pharoh bad) For them to travell with, he cloah'd them in New change of rayment; but to Benjamin Three hundred pieces he of silver gave Besides five change of rayment, much more brave Then were the rest, and to his Father he In this wise sent: ten Asses laden be With the good things of Egypt, besides corn, And bread, and meat, by ten she-asses born To serve his Father by the way, and so He set his brethren forth; but ere they go He gives a peacefull caveat: bids them see That by the way they do not disagree. Well might he give the charge, whom once their hate Left to his death, or to a worser fate: But that great Providence that rules each starre Who gave to them their influence, whose are All powers of Heav'n and Earth, whose firm decree Is Natures Law, and humane destiny. That power him serves, did not pow'r him save, Poor Ioseph might have liv'd and dy'de a slave. But now as men that truly did repent, Of what they'd done, they heard his words, and went Forth out of Egypt, and by this they gather Neer to the land of Canaan, to their Father. Where as the bringers of good news they striue Which first shall make it known, Ioseph's alive, And governs Egypt; then at large they speak Of all his state; but Iacobs faith is weak.
As men to melancholly giv'n delight In sadder tales, to feed the appetite, Of their dull humour; so was his belief To all things hard, that did gainsay his grief, Now grown in him a habit: since he deem'd This his dear Ioseph lost; for heer it seem'd He thought his childrens meaning was t'abuse Him with vain hopes; and fainteth at the news. But then declar'd they to him Iosephs words, And all he said unto them, this affords Some better ground for hope; but when he sees The waggons that were sent, as by degrees His fainting spirit in him did revive So his beleef encreast, Ioseph's alive! Ioseph's my sonne, it is enough; for I Will yet go down, and see him ere I die.
THE MEETING: OR, The ninth Chapter of Joseph. GEN. 46. Iacobs sacrifice and prayers, God by night to him appears With comfort; fearlesse he along Iourneys; seven and threescore strong Of his own loyns begot; their meeting, And passions of their joyfull greeting: Ioseph his brethren doth advise, How to the King to make replyes. NOw do the tents of Israel abound With mirth and gladnes, Ioseph lost is found. So the stray'd sheep which lōg the shepheard sought, Did cheer the finder; so the womans groat: So pleas'd our heav'nly Father is to winne A sonne to mercy, that was lost by sinne.
Old Iacob heard not with a greater joy Rachell had made him father of a boy Then now this news; when with a gladsome heart, He with his sonnes, and substance did depart Towards the land of Egypt; heretofore, He long'd not to embrace the mother more, Then now to kisse her sonne: yet can no hast, No strong desire hurry him on so fast, But to his fathers God heel make some stay He offer'd sacrifice, when in his way He took Beersheba; where the Lord appear'd In visions of the night, and Iacob heard His Name twice cald upon; he makes reply Vnto the holy voice, lo heer am I, So holy Abraham answer'd;Gen, 32.11. Ioh. 10.4. Gen. 3.19. Ion. 1.3. so should all Gods servants be as ready at his call. Christs sheep do his voice, and him pursue And 'tis undoubtedly a signe most true Of guilt, or disobedience, when wee With Adam hide us, or with Ionas flee When he cals on us, first at the last day The just shall rise; and answer here are they.Thess, 4. They that expect good tydings, give good eare, And ready are, as Iacob was to hear What God spake further to him; I am hee Thy father serv'd, and I will make of thee A mighty Nation: therfore do not fear, Go down to Egypt, I will blesse thee there: With thee will I go down, with thee remayn And I will also bring thee up again. I'le blesse thee whilst thou liv'st, and when thou dies Ioseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
Heer Iacob rose with comfort, when his sonnes Had plac'd him with their wives and little ones In Pharoh's chariots, then with all their store, Their goods and cattle they from Canaan bore, They left Beersheba, Iacob and his seed, His sonnes, and his sonnes sonnes, and all their breed A goodly progeny to Egypt came Where God made good the blessing of hisGen. 17.12. name, He brought down with him as the text enrowls Of his own loyns begotten threescore souls And six, which were in Egypt made up ten, By Ioseph and his wife and children. Had Sarah liv'd to see this fair foundation, Her self the root of this so forward Nation, Israel.She that misdoubting smil'd, would at this sight So farre above her faith, have laught out-right. Israel is well increas'd that went but one, To Padan Aram, with his staffe alone, Returns inricht with wives, and concubines, Twelve hopefull sonnes begotten of his loyns Children, and flocks, and heards, all that his eye Could wish to see, a goodly progenie, But they by this are to so many grown As nature could by propagation Bring forth, twelve families are made of one. Lo heer, and see with wonder the increase, Of them, whom God hath once begun to blesse, Full well deserves it, Moses for a Scribe, They go by families, but return by Tribes. Yet still observe how God his word doth keep And what he promis'd Ioseph in his sleep,
Payes to him waking; all the sheafs must bend The Sun, the Moon, and the 'lev'n stars descend To do him honour: they by this draw neer To Egypt, Iudah is their harbinger. He to prepare a place doth foremost go, And comes to Ioseph's house whom he lets know, Their fathers neer approch, who at the news Sets forth to meet him: mark their interviews, They study no set speech, their love prevents Common salutes, and formall complements: But like two foes, who long at deadly fewd With zeale of hate each others lives pursude, Now well appointed meet, their eager spight Admits no parly to delay their fight. Their bloudy thoughts are painted in their face And shown with terrour in a rough embrace. The passions differ, would I could as well Find love enough to make a paralell: But seldome doth that better passion move Two friends, to such an extasie of love As these: so shall the joyfull bodies come To meet their blest souls in Elizium, Save that such perfect happinesse could ne're Admit the badge of sorrow; we in tears Expresse the height of gladnesse, as if 'twere To intimate, no Joy is perfect here. As in the bodies temper it hath bin Truly observ'd which are then most hot within When outwardly we freeze; ev'n so we find As much deceit in symptomes of the mind, Great sorrows seldom weep, and yet appears In the excesse of humane gladnesse, tears.
Iacob that ever since his sonne was lost Had us'd his eyes to nothing else, accosts Him with a wonted showre, which from his eyes Dropt on his neck; he that did sympathize In all his father's passions can't refrain But pays him with as many tears again They breath their souls in sigh's, their kisses dry Their moystned cheeks; then in an extasie Iacob cryes out (prest with his sonnes embrace) Now let me die, since I have seen thy face And thou art yet alive: So holy Paul In heavenly contemplation, fil'd with all Those joyes his faith presented him, desires Philip 1.23.To be dissolv'd; his soule to Heav'n aspires Or would before its time; but that kept in It cannot for the fleshly walls of sin, From whence he prayes for freedom; Iacobs thought Rom. 7.24. Gen. 28.12.From earth to heaven sure like his ladder wrought. As twere made mindfull by this happinesse Of what unspeakable delights do blesse Good soules departed, he with Paul doth cry Transported with his joy, now let me die. Twas a good wish, he, when what most on earth Might glad his soule (and make him wish new birth, To live another age) befell, doth crave. A peaceable departure to his grave. Whence learn, no blessing may on earth be given But a good man hath better hopes in heaven. Ioseph whose passions could not else be orecome Turns from his Father to his brethen, whom He thus bespake; I will to Pharoh go To whom my fathers comming I will show,
And yours▪ I'le tell him that ye shepheards are, Men that have ben train'd up to have the care Of Flocks and Heards, which ye along have brought To save from famine, if he aske you ought When ye before him come, be my words made The same: thus shall ye say, thy servants trade Hath been 'bout cattell, from our youth till now: Ours, and our Fathers; so shall he endow You with the Land of Goshen, a good place Free to your selves, and to your flocks to graze Without disturbance; yours shall be alone The land: for an abhomination Your trade is to th' Egyptians, so shall ye Have to your selves the fruitfull Goshen free.
THE PVRCHACE: OR, The tenth Chapter of Joseph. GEN. 47. By his Favourites endearement, Pharoh welcome, and preferment Gave to Iacob and his sonnes: To them, their wives, and little ones, He doth the land of Goshen give, There with their Flocks and Heards to live. They onely of the famine stand Fearlesse, whil'st th' Egyptians land, Cattle, and ev'ry pretious thing, Ioseph purchas'd for the King: Except o'th Priests, whom he allowd A daily competence of food. IMagine Ioseph hath by this time told His Fathers comming, to the King: behold
My Brethren with their flocks, and the old man Our Father, are come downe from Canaan, Driv'n thence by famine, late they did arrive In fruitfull Goshen, here of them are five. Then to the King he brought his brethren on, Who questions them their occupation: As Ioseph taught them, they their answer made, We Shepheards are, 'thath bin our Fathers trade Time out of minde, encourag'd by the soyle, Which like to Eden Garden, without toyle, Yeelded content and plenty, but distrest With famine now, seems cursed, as the rest Of the whole earth, for our first Parents sinne. 'Tis thou alone art happy, that within Thy realmes, men onely of Gods mercies sing Psalmes, and not Lamentations: Let O King! His goodnesse teach thee pitty us, whil'st we Thy servants and thy subjects crave to be. We are come downe to sojourne in thy land, Humbly desiring thou wilt give command, We may in Goshen live. The King replyes, Ioseph, thy Father is come downe, thine eyes Behold the land, see where thou find'st the best, There let thy Father and thy brethren rest: Let them in Goshen dwell: and if there be Amongst them, any whose activity Surmounts their fellows, skilfull in their trade, Let them be rulers o're my cattell made. At first sight, good encouragement they heard, Not onely being admitted, but prefer'd For Iosephs sake, who now his Father brought, And set him before Pharoh: so we ought
When God doth blesse us thankfull hearts to bring And blesse again, as Iacob blest the King, Who tooke good notice of him, it appears By his demands, he questions him his years. To whom thus Iacob, in whose sober eye Did reverence appeare, and gravity. The dayes and yeares of this my pilgrimage, A hundred are and thirty, a short age Compar'd to that my Fathers lived in, But few and evill, all my dayes have bin. He first was sensible how life began Gen. 6.3To shorten, since God left to strive with man: For he the first of all to me appears, Complaining for the fewnesse of his yeares. How should we scan our lives, if Iacob doe Confesse his dayes but short and evill too? Whom God chose in the womb, who by his mother The blessing gate, and birth-right from his brother, Whom God so oft confer'd with, who did stand On his lam'd legge, and with a clasped hand, Graspt't God himselfe, and wrastling overcame, Winning the prize, a blessing, and aIsraell. name; If he found ill in his dayes, how shall we Lift up eyes, most gratious God to thee? Yet thou like Pharoh us that strangers are, Nay worse, thine enemies; dost not onely spare Succour, and cherish, but promot'st us high To crowne and Kingdomes of eternity. Grant then, O God, that for thy mercy, we May ever more continue praysing thee: As holy Iacob with a loyall heart, Did blessing Pharoh till he did depart
Out of his presence, and with Ioseph went Who'cording to the Kings commandement Gave him and his the best part to possesse Of Egypt, ev'n the Land of Ramases. Where them he plentifully stor'd and fed According to their families with bread Which every where was scarce; in Egypt, and Canaan that milk and hony flowing land, The famine rageth sore, still Pharoh blest In Iosesph is: the treasury increast And where but titulary Kings the throne Held heretofore, Egypt is Pharohs own. For yet the famine lasting and the soyle Ingratefull to the painfull husbands toyle, Whilst slymy Nilus could not make it bear Their purses empty as their bellies were: Coyn was as scarce as corn, when wanting gold For food, their horses, and their herds they sold, Which in one consum'd to Pharoh's hands Being masters now of nothing else, their lands And their poor selves they do as bondmen yeild, And every man for corn doth sell his field Till Egypt all was Pharohs: they forsake Their Country-houses, and themselves betake To dwell in Cities, save the Priests alone, To whom the Kings assign'd a portion They therefore sold no lands: then Ioseph gave Others their ground and seed, but the fift thrave To Pharoh's use reserv'd and this did bring Thanks from the subject, profit to the King. Thus the Almighty doth his servants blesse Giving to all their works a good successe.
Ioseph's the King's right hand, the people they As much in admiration of him, say, Tis thou hast sav'd our lives, now let us find Grace in thy sight my Lord, so shalt thou bind, Vs Pharohs servants, then a Law was made By Ioseph to this day, and Pharoh had The fift of all their corn except alone The Priests that sold no lands, did pay him none. And happy Israel who in Goshen dwelt Pleas'd with their new possessions, never felt The force of famine, nor the plague of want Was known among them, nothing there was scant, Bread for the man, and fodder for the beast, Ioseph provided them; and they increast For they whom God doth blesse, shall multiply In spight of famine, or the tyranny O'th' worst oppressors: all the harsh commands Of t'other Pharoh, nor the heavy hands Of their task-masters, nor their loads laid on Could let at all their propagation; The hard prest Grape yeelds most, and so the fire The greater load of woods it bears the higher The flames ascend, as they oreburdned grow Whilst Pharoh's hate doth but his weaknesse show. Such care had God, then, of his Israel, Mat. 16 18. Philip. 1 21.As of his Church, 'gainst which the gates of Hell Shall not prevayle: as death is made a gain To them that die in Christ, whose thought is pain, To worldlings minds, so here this plague befell Losse to the world, but gain to Israel. Who in their giv'n possessions joy'd, and there Old Iacob with his sonnes liv'd sev'nteen yeere.
So all the days that he on earth had liven By computation, sevenscore were and seven. But when the time drew neere that he must die Ioseph he call'd and underneath his thigh, (So Abraham gave the oath) his hand did place And said if in thy sight I have found grace,Ge. 24.2. Bury me not in Egypt, let me sleep Amongst my Fathers bones, that who so keep My name or theirs in memory may be Pertakers of the self-same obsequy. To this though Ioseph plighted had his troth, Yet Iacob bound him further by an oath. Those happy counted are in their decease, Who to their fathers gather'd were in peace. Israel made this appear, who did interre None but good Kings in Davids sepulcher So taught by Iacob, who in this being Worshipt, his God, and turn'd him on his bed.
THE BLESSING: OR, The eleventh Chapter of Joseph. GEN. the 48. The thread of Iacob's life neer spun, He blesseth Ioseph, and his sonnes. Iacob was the second born Ioseph his brethrens hate, and scorn, Youngest of ten: yet was he blest, And more beloved then the rest. So Ephraim heer the youngest lad, The blessings of the right hand had. A Greater love those blessings more endears To us, which we have purchased with tears. Hence comes it, women love those children most For whom they felt great'st pain: Iacob it cost Many a zealous groan, ere he could gain The fruit of Rachels wombe, and long again
He wayl'd that losse with teares, as from the houre Her sonne was borne, his love it selfe did showre More upon his, than on his brethrens head, So for his losse he many tears ha'ing shed For him now found, he in an extasie, As cloy'd with earthly joy, desires to dye. The strength of gladnes! were the world mine own, And I not wish it, sure the blisse were none. But when the powres of the minde are bent Vpon one hope as 'twere the whole content Of mans desire; and God shall thinke it fit To grant; no joy but heav'n is like to it. His wish on earth was, oh had Ioseph liven! And that wish granted, now he wisheth heaven, For which he doth prepare; his mastred flesh Yeelds to his conquering soule, which now afresh Assaults the breach, weakenesse and age had made In his fraile body, those old wals decaid, His spirit's halfe got forth, and doth foresee By faith's cleere eye, heav'ns true felicity; Where all the fulnesse doth of knowledge dwell, With which the Patriarch inspir'd, doth tell His childrens following fates, and ere he dyes, Of all that must betide them, prophecies. But i'th meane time, conceive the news is quick, And one brought Ioseph word, his Fathers sicke: He therefore hastning, brings along with him His Sonnes, Manasses, and young Ephraim. Of whom, when Iacob heard, he rais'd his head, Strengthning himselfe, and sate upon his bed: Where thus to Ioseph, he his speech began; God did to me appeare in Canaan.
At Luz, and blest me, promising increase To me, and to my seed, whose fruitfulnesse Shall fill the land, which for an habitation, They shall enjoy, and grow a mighty nation. As for thy sonnes which were in Aegypt thine, Before I came, those I doe claime for mine. As Ruben are, and Symeon, they shall be Mine owne; thine after issue, all from thee Shall take their names; and with their brethren share, Where they in their possessions setled are. When I from Padan came, my Rachel dyde With me in Canaan by the high way side: 'Twas short of Ephrath, there I in the way Of Ephrath Bethelem, her bones did lay. But who are these said Israel? for his eyes Were weake and dimme with age; Ioseph replyes, These are my sonnes, with whom God blest me here; Then Iacob bade, and Ioseph brought them neer For him to blesse them, who first with a kisse, Then clasping of their bodies close to his, Began the blessing: In that posture Paul Acts 20.9.Rays'd Eutychus to life, who by his fall, Was doom'd to sleepe for ever else: if there 2 King. 13.20.In the dead Prophets bones such vertue were, To raise men from their graves, what vertue is Then in a living Patriarks holy kisse? Or if th' Apostles gave the spirit of grace, Where they impos'd their hands, sure this imbrace Of a good man, some blessing brings along: 'Tis a more full expression then the tongue. Num. 22Differing as deeds from words. Balaam must blesse Against his will: desiring nothing lesse.
But Iacobs blessing, for its truth affords Apparant proofes, his deeds precede his words, Which with Gods mercies he began. I thought Nere to have seene thy face, but God hath brought Things to my most content, and hath decreed I should not onely see thee, but thy seed. Then Ephraim he preferd his right hand stayd Upon his head, the left athwart was laid On t'others, let none take offence to heare That Iacob blest his sonnes, and crost them there. Nor was't a thing of chance, but reade and see, He laid his hands acrosse them,Vers. 14 wittingly. Though Ioseph on his knees, presents them quite Contrary, and Manasses to the right Hand offered first. So God 'mongst Iesses sonnes,1 Sam. 16. Chose not for face or faire proportions, But what he saw within: he understands All hearts, and sure he guided Iacobs hands. Who thus proceeds in blessing them, and said, The God from whom your Fathers never straid, Abram, nor Isack, God that me hath fed All my life long till now, with daily bread, And the good Angell which such care hath had, Me to redeeme from evils, blesse the lads; Be they by mine and Abrams sacred name, And Isacks cal'd the blessing of the same.Revel. 7. As in Iohns vision, those that stamped were, And in their fronts the holy seale did beare, Were sav'd from ruine, so God those did blesse, That bore the Name of promise with increase. Iacob pronounc'd the blessing well: said he, May they increase on earth, and multiply:
So God first blest the world, when time began, Using those words to new created man. But Ioseph not well pleas'd that Iacob laid His right hand on the head of Ephraim, said, Not so my Father, this the eldest is: O be the choysest of thy blessings his! Then to remove his resolute hand, he tryes, But the attempt is vaine. Iacob denyes: (His mother could not cozen him, nor get The blessing, with another counterfeit,) I know it well my Sonne, he also shall A people be, said he, and great withall; Yet shall his yonger brother him exceed In greatnesse; many nations from his seed Shall be deriv'd: so blest he them that day, And said, in thee shall Israell blesse, and say In a Proverbiall wish; all good o'retake him, God like to Ephraim and Manasses, make him Happy and fruitfull; but in all that passes, Still Ephraim he prefers before Manasses. The blessing giv'n; the time which then drew nigh, He antedating tels them, loe I dye: Yet feare not, for with you shall God remaine, And bring you to your Fathers land again. Yet one thing on thee more I will bestow Above thy brethren, which with sword and bow I wan, that I might adde it to thy right, From the possessions of the Amorite.
THE PROPHET: OR, The twelfth Chapter of Joseph. GEN. 49. Iacob foresees, and antedates His sonnes returne, and following fates. Then having charg'd them to interre Him in his Fathers Sepulcher: Shilo's comming prophecies, Binds Ioseph with an oath, and dyes. NOw Iacob hastening to his owne, relates, Calling his children to him, all their fates Which his prophetique soule had then descryde, Should unto them in their last dayes betide.
Harken ye Sonnes of Israel, and gather Your selves (said he) together to your Father. Ruben, my first borne Sonne unto my sight Reuben.Gives the beginning of my strength and might. The pow'r of dignity and excellence, In him should dwell, but that his foule offence Deprives him of it, therefore shall not he Excell, but as th'unconstant wave shall be, For to his Fathers bed (an act most vilde,) Did he goe up, and he my Couch defild; Symeon and Levi, brethren in offence, Symeon and Le∣vi.Have in their dwellings, swords of violence. Let not my soule into their secrets see, Nor let my honour e're united be To their assemblies, from whose angry breath, Issues revenge, with ruine arm'd, and death. Fierce was their anger, cruell was their wrath; Bloudy, revengefull, and accursed both Therefore in Iacob they divided dwell, And I will scatter them in Israell. Judah.But Iudah thee thy brethren shall commend, Vnder thy hand, thine enemies necke shall bend; Thou shalt prevaile, and still a victor be, And all thy Fathers sonnes shall bow to thee. Iudah's a Lyons whelpe, so from the prey, My Sonne ascends, so downe againe doth lay His conquering limbs, so doth th'old Lyon couch him To take his rest, whiles none dares rouse or touch him. The Scepter shall not, nor the Law goe from Between his feet, untill that Shiloe come: To whom a gathering shall of people be, Whose Foale shall to the cluster-bearing tree,
And his Asse Colt be bound unto the Vine, Whose cloaths in bloud of grapes are washt, in wine His garments steept, thence shall his inflam'd sight Take tincture, and his teeth with milke grow white. But Zebulun at the Sea heaven shall rest,Zebulun To him the Pilot flyes, with stormes distrest, And findes a haven his ships may safely ride on, For loe his border shall be unto Zidon. Like a strong Asse is Issachar,Issachar. between Two burdens couching downe, who having seen That rest was pleasant, and the land was faire, His tributary shoulders bow'd to bear. Dan midst his people, he a Iudge shall dwell,Dan. And as one o'th Tribes of holy Israell. Dan shall be like a Serpent in the way, And like an Adder in the path shall lay Wayte to doe mischiefe; slily, as they sting The horses heeles, till they their riders fling. But I O Lord have ever waited on The happy meanes of thy salvation. Gad by a troop shall be o'recome, but he Shall over them at last a victor be.Gad. Ashur his bread shall be o'th fat o'th field, And Ashurs cup shall royall dainties yeeld,Ashur. Like to an Hinde let loose is Nepthali,Neptha∣li. He also shall a goodly speaker be. Ioseph's a fruitfull bough, whose branches grow By a Well side, topping the walles:Ioseph. 'twas so That David did the blessed man compare To trees that by the waters planted are.Psal. 1 3. So envy shoots at vertue, some did hate him; The Archers sorely griev'd him, and shot at him.
But still his bow abode in strength, the armes Of his hands were made strong, against all harmes, By Iacobs mighty God; all power is his, From thence shepheards stone of Israell is E'vn by thy Fathers God, whose help's on thee, And by th' Almighties blessing, which shall be Still on thy head, blessings from heav'n on high, And blessings from the deeps which lower lye. On thee shall blessings from all places come, The blessings of the brest and of the wombe. The blessings of the Father hath prevaild. 'Bove those of my progenitors, and avail'd, More than their blessings, to the utmost bound O'th everlasting hils, they shall abound On Iosephs head, and on his crowne, that hated Of's brethren was, and from them separated. Benja∣min.Like to a ravening Wolfe, shall Benjamin I'th morning to devoure the prey, begin; And when at night he ceaseth from his toyle, He shall take time then to divide the spoyle. All these are Israels tribes, whom thus he blest, According to their blessings, from the least Vnto the greatest: then he charg'd them all To give him with his Fathers buriall. When I shall gathered to my people be, In Ephrons field the Hittites bury me, I'th Cave that is at Macpelah, that lyes 'Against Mamre, t'ath by Abram with a price, With Ephrons field the Hittites purchas'd bin, As a possession for to bury in. His sacred bones, with Sarahs were laid there, There Isack and Rebeckah buried were.
There I my Leah laid, and there would I In the same cave with those lov'd ashes lie. That as one flesh and bloud we living were, In like alliance in the Sepulcher We might consume united thus in death The field and cave was bought o'th sonnes of Heth. This having said, thus ending his commands Unto his sonnes, then he withdrew his hands And feet, yeilding his ghost up into bed, And was unto his Fathers gathered.
THE FVNERALL: OR, The thirteenth Chapter of Joseph. GEN. 50. Ioseph and his brethren all, Attend their Fathers funerall. They humble supplyants shew their fears, To him who comforts them and chears Their heavy spirits: all their rage, Forgot, in peace, and full of age, In Egypt he lamented dies And there embalm'd and coffind lies. IAcob, his Fathers imitates in death And in a blessing spent his latest breath; Sure good cōmission for 't from God was given, For he no sooner ended but to Heaven His soule was carried; as if that the last Were of his businesse here on earth, which past
He leaves it: having then no more to do, And on his journey forwards sets, when lo As the Ephesians loath to part with Paul,Acts 20.28. To the ship sides with grief they brought him all; So Iacob's sonnes their spirits overcome, With sorrow; left a while their earthly home And as men struck with the same fate; they lay As dead as he; they sure brought on his way Their fathers soul towards heav'n, for long 'twas e're Ioseph recovered strength to shed a tear, Lumpish as lead: i'th' fire which melted powres And flowes about, he lay, but now he showres His dead trance broken, on his Fathers face A floud of tears, then with a sad embrace He escaps his grief, such streams of sorrows fall As if his moysture were dissolved all Into his eyes: then with a pious kisse Strives to supply the breathlesse trunk with his Which he in sighing vents: but seeing his breath Vain as his wishes to recall from death; To the Physicians he converts it, whom (To fit the body for a forreign tomb) He gives command that they embalm it well So they perform'd their charge, on Israell Then after forty dayes were fully past, So long the dayes of men embalmed last. The lamentation for him sure was sore Th' Egyptians they bewayle him seventy more. But when the times of mourning ended were And Ceremoniall rites, he drawing nere To Pharohs house, requests if I have found Grace in your sight's, thus tell him, Ioseph's bound,
To 's father by an oath, he may be laid Ith' sepulcher, he for himselfe had made In Canaan. Let me therefore go I pray According to my vow, that I may lay My father in his grave: I shall remayn, But few dayes absent, e're I come again. Pharoh that never any suit deny'de, His Favourite Ioseph moved for, thus replyde: Go up in peace thou hast free leave, and there Bury thy father, as he made thee sweare. So Ioseph with the servants of the King, Went with his fathers coarse; with tears they bring Him to his grave, the Elders of the Land, And of the Court, his house, his brethren, and His fathers house; behind they left alone Their sheep, their cattell, and their little ones. As from some Town, fire, or the hand of fate, Hath clean demolish't and made desolate, The grieved Citizens march to forsake, Her ruin'd walls, such lamentations make The sad Egyptians, and their tears let fall As had old Iacob father been to all. Fierce is the battle when the dreadfull sound Of groans and shreeks of men departing, drown'd The Drum and Trumpet, such the wofull voice Of the sad mourners, overcame the noise Of all the Chariot wheels, the trampling steeds, Though they were many, such sound proceeds, From their high spokē griefs, men scarce could hear, Tears fild their eyes, their cryes fild ev'ry ear. Their cryes were strong and lowd enought t'have given A summons back from any place, but heaven,
Or the deep pit of Hell, where shreeks and howles, Are lowder of the there tormented soules. In Goren Arad, deafnesse strikes their ears Wonder their eyes, to see salt showres of tears Adde streams to Iordan, which seven days oreflow'd With Ioseph's mourning, whilst he there aboad. The Cananites and dwellers round about Take pitious notice of it, such a shout Of sorrow, nere was heard there, therefore they Thence nam'd it Abel Misraim, to this day. So the performance answer d his command, His sonnes have carried him into the land Of Canaan, and there laid him in the Vault Of Machpelah, which with the field was bought By Abraham, of the Hittite, Ephron all Intended for a place of buriall. And now a new, having hallowed the Cave Adding the sacred body to the grave, Of his forefathers, they tow'rds Egypt hye, Ioseph, his brethren, and his company. One mischief seldome comes alone; the losse Of Iacob to his sonnes, hath yet a crosse Adds terour to their grief should Ioseph be Mindfull of their old grudge, and misery He had sustain'd, and now the mourning days For their dead Father ended, he might rayse His spirit to revenge, but that fears done They find him Israels not rough Esau's sonne. For when they joyntly had advis'd and sent, To Ioseph an attoning complement, In Iacobs honour'd name, this do we say By his command'ment now forgive I pray,
The trespasse of thy brethren, and their sinne Wherby thou hast so ill rewarded bin. The servants of thy Fathers God we are Forgive our trespasse then we pray thee, spare Further entreaties answer'd he, in tears Seeking to drown or wash away their fears. When altogether they thus speaking kneel'd We are thy servants, use us thou wilt, To whom thus Ioseph, fear not (makes reply) Not so w'are all Gods servants, am not I Vnder him too, and when yee sought my blood Did not he then convert it all to good? That he as 'tis this day might it contrive, And I much people might preserve alive, Fear nothing then, these words his tears assures I will a comfort be to you, and yours, And so prevail'd these speeche's that they gate His love now firmer then their former hate, How blest a sight when brethren thus agree? A happy change ends Iosephs Comedy. This makes a peacefull exit, true content Crowns their remayning days, in Egypt spent. No more tormented now with griefs or fears, Till Ioseph having liv'd an hundred years And ten, perceiving that the time drew nigh, Calling his brethren, told them he must die, His sonnes were present, Ephraims seed he sees Vnto the third descent, and on the knees Manasses grandchild holds, a joy to blesse A Patriarch party to Gods promises. He kept Gods secrets living, now he dyes Which leave make some known he prophecies.
God will his brethren visit, and recall Them from this place, to that land wherewithall, To Abraham and to Isack heretofore, And Iacob he to blesse their of-spring swore. This said, he ministred his Fathers oath Vnto his children, and gave charge to both, He might be buried by his Fathers side, An hundred then and ten yeers old he dy'de. So much bewail'd, that my unskilfull pen, Might by their griefes inspir'd, force tears from men Of this last age, whose flinty hearts deny, Should all the world, themselves excepted dye, To weep: unlesse for want of company. Should they but witnesse here, what showrs were spent, Rivers of melted sorrowes to lament This Hearse; as when black clowds threat drops of raine, Strong sympathy from stony wals doth draigne Distilling moysture, all those weeping eyes Would force from their hard hearts like pitty rise, Should they but heare their waylings as they went To Canaan with his bones; but what was meant Here for a Comicke story, lest that I By this relation, make a tragedy. Embalm'd in Egypt, I shall let him rest, Fitted with costly odour, for his Chest. FINIS.
