24481 S102649 99838421 2799
SEMPER EADEM
A DISCOVRSE concerninge the Spanishe fleete inuadinge Englande in the yeare 1588 and ouerthrowne by her Maties: Nauie vnder the conduction of the Right-honorable the Lorde Charles Howarde highe Admirall of Englande: written in Italian by Petruccio Vbaldino citi∣zen of Florence, and translated for A Ryther: vnto the wch discourse are annexed certaine tables expressinge the seuerall exploites, and conflictes had with the said fleete. THESE bookes with the tables belonginge to them are to be solde at the shoppe of A. Ryther beinge a little from Leaden hall next to the signe of the Tower.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHARLES, LORD HOWARD, BARON OF EFFINGHAM, KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, LORD high Admirall of England, and one of hir Ma∣iesties most Honorable priuie Councell: A. R. wisheth long life in perfect health, with great in∣crease of ho∣nor. I AM BOLD, RIGHT Honorable, to present this booke vnto you & to craue your fauora∣ble patronage therein, bicause there are many reasons which mooue me so to do. First, the subiect matter of the booke, which is your selfe especially, and the rest of the leaders, vnder whose happie conduction hir Maiesties nauie preuailed against the Spanish fleete. Second∣ly,
the time, which I haue spent in the grauing of the seueral Tables belonging to the booke, whereby the reader shall haue not onely the report, but the sight as it were of what notable thing soeuer was performed by your Honor in that high and honorable seruice. Thirdly, the booke it selfe, which as it hath beene kept backe these two yeeres almost from our men in an vnknowen toong, so (as I gesse) it had lien hid for euer, had not the good foreseene giuen iust occasion of the publishing thereof. Last of all, the time it selfe doth mooue to that which I haue done, which being the beginning of the new yeer, calleth for by custome a NEW YEERES GIFT, that is, as I construe it, a signe as abilitie permitteth, of that dutiful thankful∣nes, which I acknowledge my selfe to owe vn∣to your Honor. The which my thankfulnes, bicause I had none other more conuenient signe, I was inforced to shew in presenting you this booke. Forsomuch therefore as it is now come abroad to the view of the world, trans∣lated and printed at my cost, I was mooued by the reasons aforesaid, to craue your Ho∣nors patronage, that thereby I might the bet∣ter
withstand, both the malicious toongs of such as carpe, and the manifest iniurie of such as are readie vnaduisedly to counterfet ano∣ther mans worke: The which your Lordships fauor obtained (as my hope is) shall binde me foreuer to praie for your Ho∣nors daily increase in all good things. Your HONORS most humble, A. RYTHER.
To the Reader. Who list to heare and see what God hath donne For vs, our realme, and Queene against our foe, Our foe the Spaniard proud, let him o'rerun This little booke, and he the truth shall know: The place, the time, the means expressed be In booke to read, in grauen maps to see. Which when you read, and see, retaine this thought, That howsoe're the meane deserued well, T'was chiefly God against our foe that fought, And sent them quicke through middest of sea to hell. Whether both quicke, and thicke let them go downe, That seeke to alienate the title of our crowne. T. H To the Reader. I could haue wished curteous reader, that this booke with the tables belonging thereto, might haue come to thine hands immediat∣lie after the repulse of the Spanish fleete, but seeing it could not be so, I must count it bet∣ter late then neuer. Though it come some∣what late, I doubt not but it will breed some pleasure, bicause the remembrance of plea∣sures passed are alwaies delightsome. If in the grauen tables there be any thing which doth not please thee in regard of the worke, I craue pardon for it, bi∣cause I count my selfe as yet but a yoong beginner, do but yet striue to attaine to that excellencie, which I wish for. In the booke it selfe the truth of euery thing is set downe so neare as might be, and therefore it is so much the more to be regarded, being also by my friend translated faithfully, onely the Italian flourishes were here and there omitted, bi∣cause in our English toong they could not sound well without suspicion of flatterie. Farewell. Thine A. Ryther.
A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE SPANISH FLEETE, INVADING ENGLAND IN THE YEERE 1588. ouerthrowen by hir Maiesties nauie, vnder the conduction of the Right honorable the L. CHARLES HOWARD being high Admirall of England, written in Italian by Petruccio Vbaldino citizen of Florence. THE Quéenes Maiestie hauing di∣uerse waies vnderstood the great and diligent preparation of the king of Spaine, in diuerse parts both by land and sea, not only of the strongest ships of all places within his domi∣nions: but also of all sorts of proui∣sion and munition necessarie for a mightie fléete, which was to come from Spaine and Portu∣gall (for the furnishing and better direction wherof he had drawen together into the places aforesaid, the most princi∣pall and ancient captaines and soldiers, aswell of the king∣doms of Naples and Sicilie, as of Lombardie and other parts of Italie, and the more remote parts of India, as by euery one was long before verie euidently perceiued, by reason that the preparation of these things togither with the number of the ships, mariners and soldiors, the diuerse sorts and quantities of victuall, the great number and di∣uers kinds of artillery, with the sum of euery seueral kind, were sufficiently specified vnto all countries by certaine Pamphlets, laieng foorth at large his whole intent: the which Pamphlets were printed and published in Spaine and Portugall, and other prouinces of Christendome, with this title; The most puissant and most happie fleete of the king of Spayne, against the Realme of England:) Her maiestie, I say, hauing in this maner receiued so open and manifest information hereof, as also certaine intelli∣gence
of horsemen and footemen sent in so great num∣ber, that they were sufficient for the furnishing of diuerse camps in the lowe Countries, vnder the gouernment of the duke of Parma his lieutenant generall for those prouin∣ces, & withall knowing the multitude of the ships of war, and the possibilitie that the said king had to transport his soldiers out off Flaunders, and land them in England, not sparing to giue out therevpon open and frée report, that all that prouision was for the inuasion and conquest of Eng∣land: And forsomuch also as at the same time the king him∣selfe by means of his aforesaid Generall the duke of Par∣ma, pretended a certaine treatie of peace to be made with her Maiestie (albeit this offer was in truth knowne in England, not to haue béene made but onely to take ad∣uantage of the time, and to make her Maiesty negligent in preparing for her defence, although she notwithstāding de∣sirous openly to declare her good inclinatiō vnto that, which is a iust & christian commendation in a prudent Princesse) refused not in any point this treatie & offer of peace, greatly desired of all christian people: and therfore for that purpose gaue commandement to certaine noble men of her priuie Counsell & others, with certain Gouernors of her forces in Flaunders, to deale in this matter with the commissioners that should be there appointed in the name and behalfe of the said king: And our commissioners after their departure and manifest declaration that they began to parle to some purpose concerning this treatie, being driuen off a long time to small effect, and without any manifest hope of a∣gréement likely to ensue, vntill such time as the Spanish fléete was not onely discouered in the English chanell, but also withheld and brideled from their purpose in ioyning with the forces of the duke of Parma, and transporting an armie into England: and finallie vntill such time as it was inforced to withdraw it selfe and séeke some better fortune in the northren seas, being euery where else vna∣ble to make anie forceable resistance: Therefore her Ma∣iestie
as well to declare her propense readines, if on their part any sincere intent of peace had béene, as her vigilant prouidence not to be deluded by so subtile and malicious an enemie, furnished her selfe by sea with a mightie fléete, and by land with no lesse diligence to resist so great forces as by all nations were reported to come against her: For it was neuer knowne in the memorie of man, that so great prepa∣ration was euer heretofore at one time made out, either by king Phillip himselfe, or yet by the emperor Charles the 5. his father, although his power were much more and his occasions of warre far greater. The diligence therefore of the Englishmen, answerable vnto the care of the Prince, was such and so great, that her Maiestie was prouided of a mightie fléete to defend her by sea from the enimie, betwéene the first of Nouember 1587. and the 20. of December next ensuing, a time in truth very short for such a prouision, in regard of so many yéeres spent by the said king in preparing of his fléete, which notwith∣standing did shew of what force it was by experience after∣wards made thereof against the English nauie, gathered togither within 50. daies, and prouided and most excellent∣lie furnished of all things necessarie for such a purpose. The care & charge of this nauie was commended vnto the right honorable Charles L. Howard, Baron of Effingham, L. High Admiral of England, who for his place & office, no∣ble courage, experience in martial affaires, and nobilitie of blood and descent, was thought most fit & woorthy to be em∣ploied in that seruice. He had in his companie a sufficient number of honorable, worshipful, and valiant personages, famous both in respect of their birth & the gifts of mind, de∣sirous to serue their Prince and Countrie in such a cause as this, being iudged of the whole English nation both iust and necessarie: likewise of sea-faring men and priuate sol∣diors so competent a number, as might be answerable vnto the power of so great a Prince in so weightie a cause. The L. High Admirall therefore with these forces kéeping for a
season the narrow seas and chanell betwéene England and Flaunders, sir Francis Drake knight, mentioned here also in honor of his good deserts, was by the aduice of the Lords of the counsel & his honor so commanding it, sent towards the west parts with certaine of the Quéenes ships and o∣thers from certaine ports of England thereabout, be∣ing in al not aboue the number of 50. saile of all sorts, there to attend the L. high Admirall his comming with grea∣ter forces, if occasion should so require. In the meane season the L. Admirall with his Vice admirall the L. Henrie Sey∣mer, kept the narrow seas, accompanied with 20. ships more, verie well furnished at the charges of the citizens of London, besides manie other from diuerse parts on that side of the Realme, that lieth from the towne of Douer vp to the northward, which met all togither in good order, and well appointed for the warres. And here the Lord Admirall vnderstanding for a cer∣taintie, that the fléete of the enemie was alreadie lanched and at the sea, he weighed ancre, and leauing the L. Seymer with sufficient forces of the Quéenes ships and other ves∣sels to watch what the duke of Parma would do, or was able to vndertake by sea, and parting from thence the 21. of Maie 1588. to the westward with her Maiesties nauie, and 20. ships of London, with some others, he arriued at Plymouth the 23. of the same Moneth: where sir Francis Drake with 50. saile which he had vnder his charge, met with the L. Admirall in very good order. And then the two nauies being ioyned togither into one, the L. Admirall made sir Francis Drake his Viceadmirall. Arriuing then at Plymouth, his Lordship presently gaue order for prouision of victuall for the whole nauie, that it might want nothing, that should tend to the necessarie ser∣uice ensuing. The whole nauie was at this present about 90. saile of all sorts. This prouision being complet, he resolued with himselfe to put foorth to the sea againe about the 30. of Maie afore∣said.
But the winde not seruing his turne, he kept himselfe abroad, sailing vp and downe within the Sléeue betwene Vshant and Sillie, attending some sight or report of the enemies fléete. Where hauing waited a certain time, som∣whiles drawing neare to the coast of France, & somtimes to the coast of England, he returned, being thereto inforced by a great tempest, with his whole nauie into the Port of Plymouth the 6. of Iune to refresh his companie there. In the meane season there were discouered betwéene Vshant and Sillie certaine ships of the Spanish fléete, not aboue the number of 14. which were knowen to be seue∣red from the whole fléete by violence of the aforesaid tem∣pest. But before they could be encountred withall by any of the English nauie, the wind came about, whereby they had opportunitie to returne backe againe, sauing them∣selues from all perils in their hauen called the Groine, into the which also the rest of the Spanish fléete was put to pro∣uide themselues anew of other things which they wanted, and specially of fresh water. Of this thing the L. Admirall had intelligence and aduertisement from sundry parts, as also that the Spanish fléete was by great fortune dispersed & seuered into diuers places, through penurie of many and those necessarie things, through diseases and mortalitie of men, although the report hereof could not afterwards be verified, whereof the certain truth was, that being troubled with tempest, they were commanded to come a shoare at the Groyne. The L. Admirall therefore séeing the coast of England and France cléere and frée from all danger, as by diligent search it was vnderstood, resolued by the aduise and opinion of his counsell, to take the aduantage of the next wind that should blow from the North, that passing to the coast of Spaine he might finde the enemies fléet so dispersed in the Groine, and in other parts of Galitia where they had driuen by the storme. This was put in execution betwéene the 8. and 10. of
the same moneth, the wind being then at the North, which within a while changing vnto the South, after that he was come within 40. leagues or there about of the coast of Spaine, made him to cast a doubt of that which afterwards hapned indéed. For laying this before him as his principall care, according to the charge laid vpon him by her Maiesty, to be diligent and carefull for the defence of the coast of England, and considering that with the wind which was now changed and very good to make for England, the ene∣my might set out and passe for England without discouery of his fléete, he returned back with the whole nauy, and the 12. of the same moneth he arriued at Plymouth, there ac∣cordingly to prouide himselfe of all that was necessarie. The 19. of Iune his honor had intelligence by a barke or pinnis, whose captaine was Thomas Fleming, amongst other behinde him in the Sléeue for discouerie, that the Spanish fléete was discouered neare vnto the Lyzarde,As appeereth in the 1. table. the wind being then South and by West. And therefore albeit that by reason of the great number of English ships which were in Plimouth, it was with that winde very hard to bring them foorth from thence (as the militarie art of the Sea and the condition of their affaires required) yet was there such diligence vsed by the L. Admirall and the rest by his example, as they indeuored therin with such aduise and earnestnes, that many of the ships at the length warped out of the hauen,As appeereth in the 2. table. as if the winde had béen wholy fauoura∣ble vnto them: which thing could not haue fallen out but through the long and certaine skill which the English Ma∣sters generally haue in marine discipline. To the which reason this may be added, that they were all of one nation, of one toong, and touched with a greiuous and equal hatred toward their enemies, being mightily perswaded of their forces. Whereupon we may in such cases assure our selues of what importance it is in seafaring matters, for a fléete of any prince whatsoeuer, inuading any forraine state or kingdome, to encounter with a fléete ready for defense in
such maner as the English nauie was, for so much as the fléete inuading being prouided diuersly of Masters and Of∣ficers differing one from another in custome, language, and conceit, cannot in any measure giue any assured hope of certain victorie, how honorable soeuer the commander be. Many of the ships therefore came foorth, by reason that the men were mooued in the foresaid respects to labor diligent∣ly, and so much the rather, by how much the captaines and chéefe officers both by counsel and hand, shewed themselues more diligent and industrious. By these meanes the 20. day of Iune the L. Admirall accompanied with 54. ships, came foorth with the same winde that the enemie had from the southwest: Which thing certainly was not estéemed a small thing to be done, in regarde aswell of the winde as of the narrownes of the place it selfe. The Spanish fléete being manifestly discouered about 140. miles from Edestone, and cléerely séene of euery one toward the west, and so far off from Foye as the English fléete was, that is 25. ordinarie English miles: the next morning being the 21. of Iune, all the ships which were now come out of the hauen, had gotten the winde of the Spaniards, and approching somewhat nearer, found that their fléete was placed in battell araie, after the maner of a Moone cressant, being readie with her horns & hir inward circumference to receiue either all, or so manie of the En∣glish nauie, as should giue her the assault, her hornes being extended in widenes about the distance of 8. miles, if the information giuen haue not deceiued my pen. The reason of their arraunging in this order, arose vpon the foresight of the duke of Medina Sidonia general of the Spanish fléet, who approching the coast, sent out a smal ship to espy some∣what concerning the English fléete, and hearing by certain fishermen taken prisoners, that our fléet was in Plymouth, he prepared himselfe as aforesaid, for the auoiding of all such chances as might after befall. Whereupon about 9. of
the clocke before noone the L. Admirall commanded his Pinnesse called the Disdaine, to giue the defiance vnto the duke of Medina: after which he himselfe in the Quéenes ship called the Arcke went foremost,As appeereth in the 2. table. as was conuenient, and began hotlie to fight with a great ship which was ad∣mirall of the Spanish fléete, in which ship he thought by reason of certaine likely coniectures the duke of Medina to be, considering also the said ship was so well accompanied by others. The fight with hir continued so long and so hot, that diuers other ships, yea the most part of the Spanish fléete came to her succour. As appeereth in the 3. table.In the mean season the Viceadmirall sir Francis Drake, with master Iohn Hawkins, and master Martin Frobisher fought with a Galeon of Portugall, wherein they thought Don Martin de Ricaldes the Viceadmirall to be. This fight was so well maintained for the time it conti∣nued, that the enemie was enforced to leaue his place, and to giue waie gathering toward the East. In the which point of remouing,As appeereth in the 3. table. a great Galeon wherein Don Pedro de Valdes went as captaine, falling foule with another ship of their fléete was depriued of hir foremast, so that she could not follow the bodie of the fléete that forsooke her, to the great maruel of the English men themselues, whereby Don Pedro became prisoner, as afterward shall be de∣clared. As appeereth in the 4. table.Furthermore also there was at this time a great ship of Biscaie about 800. tunne in burthen, that was spoiled by fire vpon this occasion: The captaine of the soldiors that went in her hauing small regard (as is reported) of an or∣derly and ciuill life, did insolently beat a certaine Flemish gunner: what cause he had I know not, whether vpon oc∣casion of words touching his charge, or by meanes of the gunners wife, whom he had abused according to the custom of that nation. Whereupon the perplexed man séeing him∣selfe among such a kind of people, as not onely made him serue their turnes at their owne pleasure, but disgraced
him in as vile maner as if he were a slaue, despairing both of life, wife, and his yoong daughter, and perchance rather mooued with the dishonor of them then by his owne misfor∣tunes, (which minde is many times in men euen of meane condition) he set himselfe on fire in a barrell of gunpowder, procuring therby through the losse of his owne life, and the extréeme hazard of those that belonged vnto him, & the losse of many mens liues besides, a cruell reuenge of his iniu∣ries receiued by one onely man. This example may serue to instruct such as command ouer others, how they ought to behaue themselues with lesse insolencie: inasmuch as the minde of man is alwaies readie to reuenge, after the cu∣stome of this our bloodie age, if he be not borne vtterly void of a quicke wit and liuely spirit. Through this mischance of theirs all the vpper decks were blowen vp, all hir furniture marred, and much other spoile done, besides the death and maiming of her men, so that being vtterly vnable all that night to helpe her selfe, she was succored by the galliasses, and for the time saued in the bodie of their fléete. But to returne vnto our purpose. This first skirmish continued not aboue two houres, bicause the L. Admirall considering that he wanted as yet 40. ships which could not so readily come foorth of the hauen, thought he should do better seruice if he staied their comming before he pro∣céeded any further, beating behinde vpon the enimie, least he should bring the rest too much in hazard, and therfore he thought it not profitable too much to embolden and pricke those forward that he had with him in a matter that was not greatly conuenient, either for the honor of the Realme, or his owne person, neither did the militarie discipline of the English nation purchased by long experience at the sea giue him leaue to do it. And therefore he put foorth his flagge to call the other captaines to counsell, who agréeing vnto his determination, receiued instructions concerning the order that they were to kéepe in following the Spanish
fléete. Then hauing giuen libertie to euery man to returne to their charge, he gaue order likewise to his Viceadmirall sir Francis Drake to appoint the watch for that night, and to beare out the light. The same night the Spanish fléete lay about 14. miles off from the Stert. The next day following early in the morning it was vnder the winde not so far off as Berie. As appeereth in the 4. table.In the mean time the English fléete wanting light, be∣cause the Viceadmiral sir Francis Drake leauing his place to follow 5. Hulkes which were discouered in the euening very late, it came to passe that all the other ships staied be∣hinde, not knowing that they were to follow, or whither to direct themselues: so that there might haue followed some great inconuenience had they had to do with an ene∣mie more practized in our seas. But as it séemed by re∣port, the said Viceadmiral was moued to do this by means of a certaine curious diligence and a militarie suspicion, growing in his mind vpon certaine and very probable con∣iectures, grounded on circumstances of matter considered in his mind: and therefore he gaue them the chase, thinking that they had béen enemies. But being ouertaken and their officers examined, and being knowen to be friends, or at the least wise not ene∣mies, he permitted them to go their way, returning him selfe vnto the fléete the day following. The L. Admirall notwithstanding accompanied with the Beare and the Marie Rose comming a little behind his sterne,As appeereth in the 4. table. by reason of the cléerenes of the aire (which at that time of the yéere is ordinarilie very great through out all England) followed the enemy all that night within a Cul∣uerin shot. By occasion whereof the rest of the fléete was cast so far behind, that the morning after the nearest part thereof could hardly descrie the tops of the other ships,As appeereth in the 5. table. and many of them were cleane out of sight, so that with all the force of their sailes they could hardly come all together the whole day following vntill the euening.
The next day the Viceadmirall sir Francis Drake be∣ing in the Quéenes ship called the Reuenge, hauing also the Roebucke and a Pinnesse or two in his company, tooke Don Pedro de Valdes, who as was said before, had lost the foremast of his ship: and hauing receiued the said Valdes as his prisoner, and certaine other gentlemen of most ac∣count that were therein, he sent the ship togither with the prisoners vnto Dartmouth, vnder the conduct of the Roe∣bucke, and he himselfe made toward the L. Admirall, vn∣der whose lée he came that night. The same daie being the 22. of the moneth, a little be∣fore the Viceadmirall sir Francis Drake was returned vnto the fléete, the Spaniards forsooke the ship which the day before was spoyled by fire. To the which ship the L. Admirall sent the L. Thomas Howard, and with him M. Iohn Hawkins, who being in the cockboate of the Vic∣torie went a boord her, and there found a lamentable sight. For all the vppermost decks of her being torne and spoyled by the fire, there were in her 50. men miserablie burnt with the powder. The stinke in her was so great, and the ship it selfe so filthie, that the L. Howard departed present∣ly from her: and returning with M. Iohn Hawkins to the L. Admirall, they informed him of that they found and saw there. For which cause there was presently comman∣dement giuen, that the little pinnesse of captaine Fleming should conduct her vnto some port of England, where they might most cōmodiouslie helpe themselues. Wherevpon it was carried to Waymouth the next day following. For al the mishap that befell this ship, they vnderstood that the Spaniards had taken out of her al the best things that they could, casting off the bulke of her togither with certaine grosse stuffe therein, as for that time altogither vnprofi∣table. About this time her Maiestie séeing that all hope of peace was frustrate, called home againe her Cōmissioners from Flanders, who were by the duke of Parma most cur∣teously
dismissed, very honorablie accompanied, and them∣selues and their cariages safe conducted to the marches of Calis, which way they tooke their iourney. But to the matter: the night last before mentioned there befell a great calme, and therevpon 4. Spanish Galliasses seuered themselues from the rest of their fléete. This thing made the Englishmen to doubt that that night they had re∣solued to giue the onset vpon some of their lesser ships, ima∣gining that they might annoy them the rather for that they were the rereward of the fléete. But afterwards the Gal∣liasses (whatsoeuer the occasion was) enterprised nothing, either for that they saw they could not safely do it, or else bicause their mindes were not throughly setled vpon that which before they thought to do: a thing many times fal∣ing out in such persons as are but poore in counsell and re∣solution, that they continue in their perplexed conceites without any effect or commoditie ensuing thereof. As appeereth in the 5. table.The morning following being Tuesday the 23. of the moneth, the wind was at North East, wherupon the Spa∣niards came backe vpon the Englishmen with the aduan∣tage of the wind, directing their course toward the land: the which course was not profitable for the Englishmen. Therefore to take the aduantage of the Enemie, they cast about toward the west with a reasonable compasse, their ships being very good both of saile and stirrage, that they might bring about their purpose. Now the Spaniards to hinder their intent,As appeereth in the 5. table. after they perceiued it, offered to come néere aboord to fight with them, trusting in the huge great∣nesse and height of their ships. The which offer of theirs the English men refused not, but began presently to bring themselues into battell aray, which the enimie perceiuing he also did the like. In this case the Arke, the Lyon, the Beare, the Eliza∣beth Ionas, the Victorie and certaine other ships were con∣tent to follow the ship called the Non Pariglin. In the mean season the Triumphe with other 5. ships
of London, namely the Merchant Roiall, the Centurion, the Margerie Ioan, the Marie Rose, and the Golden Lion were so far to the rereward, and so far seuered from the rest of the fleete, that the Galliasses vndertooke to giue them an hard assault. But they were well intertained by the ships for the space of an hower and an halfe, vntill at the length some of the Quéenes ships, comming to succor the Tri∣umph and the Londoners, dealt so well in the matter, that the Galliasses were driuen to retire. The wind came about at this present to the South east, and afterwards to the South west and by south, at which time a certaine number or Squadron of the Quéenes together with other Mer∣chants ships gaue assault vnto the Spanish fléete,As appeereth in the 6. table. and that so furiously to the westward of them, that the Spaniards were all enforced to giue them waie: For which cause the Lord Admirall considering both the discommoditie and danger, whereinto the Triumph and the other fiue ships were come, he called other of the Quéenes ships that were not far off, and gaue them streight commandement to fol∣low him, and to charge the enimies which were to the west ward with all their force: giuing further order to them all, not to discharge any one péece of ordinance before they should come within a musket shot of the enemy, in as much as that was the onely way to succour the ships of their friends with the greater damage of the enemie. This was well performed by the Arke, the Elizabeth Ionas,As appeereth in the 6. table. the Galeon Leicester, the Golden Lyon, the Victorie, the Marie Rose, the Dread-nought, and the Swallow. Which thing the duke of Medina perceiuing, he also came foorth with 16. of his best Galeons, to hinder and impeach the Englishmen in the defence of the Triumph, séeming in this case to pretend, that the reason of the fight did so require; whereas the regard of his honor did no lesse inforce him vnto it: bicause it séemed vnconuenient that he should in euery thing be inferior to the Englishmen: and therefore he made large promises vnto those by whose meanes the
victorie should be gotten. Howbeit that fell out in the ende that was prefixed by the starres, that is, that the successe of the conflict falling out on his side as hardlie as in such a case might be, the Spaniards in the ende were enforced to giue place and to retire vnto their array of battell. In this con∣flict one William Cocks captaine of a little pinnesse called the Violet, belonging vnto sir William Winter, behaued himselfe very valiantly against the enemie in the greatest heate of this incounter: but within a little while after, he lost his delight wherewith he was not very well acquain∣ted, and his life by a great péece of ordinance, fortune not be∣ing correspondently fauorable vnto his courage, which therefore was not whit profitable to the perfection of his purpose. As appeereth in the 6. table.Toward the euening 4. or 5. Spanish ships came out from the rest of the fleete from the south eastward, against whom certaine of the English ships came, and namely the Maie flower of London, which discharged certaine pieces vpon the enemie with a very honorable declaration of the Marine discipline, and being accompanied by other ships that were there found they all behaued themselues no lesse diligently (which thing was not at the first hoped for) shewing their desire tempered with a wish of other com∣panie. The conflict continued from the morning vnto the euening, the L. Admirall being at all times ready and vi∣gilant in all aduentures that might fal out: And thereupon he was sometimes more, and sometimes lesse eger in the conflict as necessity required, giuing thereby euident exam∣ple how others should behaue themselues. It might well be said that for the time it was not possible to sée before this battell in this sea so hard a conflict, nor so terrible a spoile of ships, by reason of the pellets that flew so thicke euerie way: to conclude, there was neuer séene so vehement a fight, either side indeuoring through an headstrong and deadly hatred the others spoile and destruction. For albeit the musquettiers and harquebusiers were in either fléete
many in number, yet could they not be discerned or heard, by reason of the more violent and roaring shot of the grea∣ter ordinance, that followed so thicke one vpon another, and plaied so well that day on either side, that they were thought to be equall in number to common harquebusiers in an hot skirmish. The battell was not onely long, but also néere at hand within halfe a musket shot, and that to the great aduantage of the Englishmen, who with their ships, being (as was aforesaid) excellent of saile and stirrage, yet lesse a great deale then the Spanish ships, and therfore more light and nimble, sought not at all, according to their maner otherwise, to boord them, but kéeping themselues aloofe at a reasonable distance, continually beate vpon the hull and tacklings of their enemies ships, which being a great deale higher could not so conueniently beat the En∣glish ships with their ordinance. This long conflict being finished and euery one retiring vnto his part, the next daie following (which was wednesday the 24. of the moneth) was passed without any thing done, bicause by reason of the fight that day before there was spent a great quantitie of powder and shot: whereupon the L. Admirall sent diuers barkes and pinnesses to the shore for a new supplie of such munition. For her Maiestie prudently foreséeing ech thing necessary for her men, ordained that there should be suffici∣ent prouision made, according as should be néedfull, aswell of victuals as of munition. It séemed moreouer that daie that the Spanish fléete was nothing gréeued with that dais respite, but were all of them indifferently glad of that brea∣thing, inasmuch as thereby they had good oportunitie to looke to their leaks, wherof no doubt they had a great num∣ber, for they had carried away many shrewd stripes from their enimies, their hurts being of great likelihood so much the more in that the Spaniards were pend vp in a narrow roome.As appeereth in the 6. table. This day the L. Admirall for certaine conuenient reasons, deuided the whole body of the fléete into fower squadrons, by meanes of which diuision the enimy might
be greatly and more continually troubled. The first squa∣dron he kept for himselfe: the second he assigned vnto sir Francis Drake his Vice admerall: the third to M. Iohn Hawkins: the fourth to M. Martin Frobisher, and after noone he gaue order, that in the night fire of the merchants ships in ech squadron (for that as they were of sundry parts of the Realme, so they were equally diuided into ech squa∣dron) should charge the Spanish fléete in as many parts at one and the same time, that at midnight the enimie might be kept occupied. This order taken (as it was verie likelie) might haue had as good effect as it was wisely giuen: but by reason of a great calme which fell out, no part of this aduisement could be accomplished, fortune interrupting good counsell. The next day being the 25. of the moneth and Saint Iames his day, there was a great Spanish Galleon left be∣hind her companie to the South ward néere to the squadron of Master Iohn Hawkins:As appeereth in the 7. table. so that the barkes belonging vnto the greater ships, were within Musket shot of hir. By reason hereof 3. of the Galliasses and another ship that was in maner of a Galleon and well appointed, came from the Spanish fléete to succor this Galleon. Against whom went out the L. Admirall in the Arke and the L. Thomas Howard in the golden Lion, and drew so néere being towed by their boats, that they did them much harme, whereby one of them requiring the helpe of the rest, being succored by them returned vnto the fléete: And from another, by means of a shot comming from the Arke, there was taken away her light and throwen into the Sea; the third lost hir becke. Whereby these 2. ships the Arke and the golden Lion declared this day to each fléete, that they had most di∣ligent and faithfull Gimners, desirous aswell of the com∣mon good, as of the priuate honor of their leaders the Lord Admirall and the L. Thomas Howard which went in them: which commendation might rightly be imparted with them concerning this happie euent, bicause the calme
was so great, that albeit the two fléets were well able to behold the fortune of ech of their friends, yet notwithstan∣ding they could not helpe them at all: at the length the winde beginning somewhat to arise, the Spaniards tooke the opportunitie thereof, and put themselues foreward to helpe those of their side, and succoured them honorablie. After this time the Galliasses in whose puissance the grea∣test hope of the Spanish fléete was founded, were neuer séene to fight anymore, such was their interteinment that daie. The two fléetes notwithstanding approching nigh one vnto another began a conflict, but they continued it but a while, except one ship called the Non Pariglia, & another called the Marie Rose, which hauing taken in their top∣sailes staied themselues there, to make as it were a certain experience of their manhood vpon the Spanish fléete, beha∣uing themselues honorably for a season. In which time, the Triumph being to the northward of the Spanish fléet, was so far off, that doubting that certaine of the Spanish ships would assault her to the windeward, they succoured her with diuers boates that got the winde easilie: for the Beare and the Elizabeth Ionas euen at one instant ha∣uing knowledge of the danger wherein the other were, drew néere vnto them,As appeereth in the 7. table. desiring both in regard of the honor of their common-wealth, and also for the preseruation of their friends and countrymen, to be partakers of the like danger and difficultie. Whereupon ech ship doing her dutie they iointly saued the Triumph from all harme, and recouered the winde. And thus this daies worke ended: whereof I may say, that the conflict was no whit shorter then the day it selfe. At this present the Englishmen considering the great wast of powder and shot that had heretofore béen made, the L. Admirall determined not to assault the enemie any more, vntill he were come nigh vnto Douer, in which place he knew he should find the fléete vnder the charge of the L.
Seymer, and sir William Winter, who were ready to ioine with him, that thereby he might both fortifie himselfe with a greater number of ships, and in this maner prouide them selues of munition from that part of the Realme. Vpon friday therefore being the 26. of the moneth ceasing from fighting, the L. Admirall (aswell for their good deserts and honorable seruice, as also to encourage others to like valor) was desirous to aduance certaine personages to the degrée of knighthood, for that behauing themselues manfully as∣well with their ships as their good aduise, they were woor∣thie that degree of honor: and so much the more woorthie in that being farre separated from all courtly fauour, which many times imparteth the chéefest honors vnto the least deseruing men,As appeereth in the 8. table. they declared their valor in the eies of ei∣ther fléete. Therfore the two Lords, viz. the L. Howard, and the L. Sheffeild: Roger Townsend, Iohn Hawkins and Martin Frobisher were called foorth, and the order of knighthoode giuen them by the L. Admirall as their generall. This day there came to the seruice of her Maiestie in her fléete diuers Gentlemen, honorable both by blood and place, but much more in respect of their courage and vertue, for that in these publike affaires and so necessary seruice of the wars, they willingly offred their seruice in the defence of their countrey and honor of her maiestie. This day also and the next being the 27. the Spaniards followed their course quietly before the English fléete. In which time the E. of Sussex, the L. Buckhurst, sir George Carie knight, and the captaines of the fortes and castels thereabout, sent their men with powder, shot and victuals, to the L. Admirall to assist and helpe the armie. The same Satturday towards the euening the Spaniards drew nigh to Calis vnder the coast of Picardie,As appeereth in the 9. table. and there sodenly cast anker almost right against the left hand of the hauen to the westward, a little lesse then fiue miles from Calis cléeues. The English fléete also cast anker within a culuerin shot of
the enemie to the westward. In the meane season the L. Seymer and sir William Winter ioined with the L. Admirall, wherby the English fléete increased to the number of 140. ships of all sorts. But the Spaniards with all spéede sent tidings vnto the duke of Parma of their arriuall, who at this present was at Bruges, who hauing retained with him all his seafaring men many daies before to this purpose, yet procéeded no farther in the matter for that time, although for such time as the king had limited him, he for his part tooke as much care as might be looked for at his hands. For hauing alrea∣die imbarked a certaine number of his soldiors, he was carefull in like maner to dispatch the rest as soone as they should be ready, that they might take oportunitie to come foorth, furnishing them abundantly with victuall and mu∣nition. But in the meane time such a chance fell out as made frustrate not onely his, but the conceite also of the duke of Medina, and wholie ouerthrew their enterprise, in that her Maiestie was not a little carefull and troubled in minde concerning the successe of these affaires, albeit she herselfe had committed her whole fortune into the hands of almightie God. Moreouer also the L. Admirall hauing by certaine no∣tice vnderstoode, that the duke of Parma had prepared a great number of tunnes of water, and ten thousand chosen footemen to be embarked for the ioyning with the fléete, which could not be auoided if the duke of Medina were not compelled to auoide that place, knowing also the euident perill that was to be feared, if the Spanish fléete should be suffered to refresh it selfe, and to be furnished with so many soldiors, he applied his wits so in the deliberation of these matters of waight and importance, hauing the consent of others more practised, that no time might be lost for the furtherance of this seruice: and for so much as the forces of the enimie were not yet vnited and ioined togither, there∣fore the 28. of this moneth at midnight he prouided eight
small ships dressed with artificial fire, to the intent to driue the same vpon the Spanish fléete.As appeereth in the 9. table. This thing was dili∣gently and effectually brought to passe vnder the charge of captaine Yoong and captaine Prewse, two valiant and couragious men. By reason hereof the enimie was not onely enforced to breake his sléepe, but the fire comming so sodenly vpon him (not remembring himselfe at the verie instant time of any other remedy, either more safe for him∣selfe, or more excusable) to cut his cables, to let slip his an∣kers, and to hoyse vp sailes as the onely way to saue his fléete from so imminent and vnexpected a mischiefe. Fur∣thermore by meanes of this tumult and confusion (which in truth was very great) the chéefe Galliasse fell foule with another ship, vpon the cable of whose anker her sterne was set so fast, that they could not loose her al the night long, so that the next day following she was enforced with her oares to make toward the land, and to draw nigh to the ha∣uens mouth of Calis, to saue hirselfe in that place: but not knowing that water, and hauing no profitable and con∣uenient counsell for the time, she fell vpon a shelfe. This thing being in good time espied by the L. Admirall,As appeereth in the 10. ta∣ble. he sent thither his greatest boate vnder the charge of Amieus Pre∣ston his lieutenant, and togither with him Thomas Ge∣rard and M. Haruie two of her maiesties Gentlemen and seruants, and others of the court, and of his own seruants, who fought with her, but vnequally, for that the ship being graueled could with her force preuaile but little. In this conflict it chanced that a musket shot stroke Hugo de Mon∣cada chéefe captaine of the Galliasse, a noble and valiant man, in the head. The which mishap ioined with the diffi∣cultie of stirring themselues in their defence, bred such a despaire in euery man, that the greater sort lept into the water to saue themselues by swimming into the hauen, al∣though many of them perished in the water. By this dis∣order of the enimy, the Englishmen being more secure, tooke her and sacked her to their great commoditie, aboue
an hundred men being entred into her, and their company increasing more and more. Wherevpon Monsieur Gordon gouernor of Calis, a man of good estimation in respect of his prerogatiue in that place, sent his nephew to giue the Englishmen to vnder∣stand, that they should content themselues with the ordina∣ry spoile, and that they should leaue behind them the great ordinance, as a thing belonging vnto him by vertue of his office. The which embassage sent the second time vnto men more intentiue vnto their pray then other mens rea∣son, made the Gentleman to be euilly intertained by our men, in such sort, that they would haue forceably taken from him some trifeling things about him, thinking him to be a Spaniard. Wherat M. Gordon being offended, cau∣sed certaine péeces of ordinance to be discharged from the Towne, and then the Englishmen departed, leauing the Galliasse at his pleasure after the losse of some soldiors, ha∣uing notwithstanding sacked 22000. duckets of gold, ap∣pertaining vnto the king, and 14. coffers of mooueables of the duke of Medina, with some other both money and mooueables of other particular men, and some prisoners, among whom was Don Roderigo of Mendoza, and Don Iohn Gonzales de Solerzauo vnder captaine of the Gal∣liasse. During the time of surprising of which Galliasse, sir Francis Drake Vice admirall being in the ship called the Reuenge,As appeereth in the 10. ta∣ble. accompanied with Tho. Fenner captaine of the Non Pariglia, with the rest of that squadron, set vpon the Spanish fléete, giuing them an hot charge. Within a while after sir Iohn Hawkins in the Victorie accompanied with Edward Fenton captain of the Marie Rose, with George Beeston captain in the Dread-nought, and Richard Haw∣kins in the Swallow, with the rest of that squadron, put themselues foreward and brake through the midst of the Spanish fléete, where there began a vehement conflict con∣tinuing all the morning, wherein euery captaine did verie
honorable seruice: among the rest captain Beeston deserued special praise. Vnto this fight came the L. Admirall accom∣panied with the Earle of Cumberland, thei L. Thomas Howard, the L. Sheffeilde, and in that place where the fight was made, and the victory was gotten, they were publike∣ly commended, that of their owne accord had made shewe of the fruits answerable to the hope before conceiued of them. Not far from this place there was a great Spanish galeon séen, which was set vpō on the one side by the Earle of Cumberland and George Ryman in the Bonaduen∣ture, and on the otherside by the L. Seymer, in the ship cal∣led the Raynbowe, and sir William Winter in the Vant∣gard, yet she saued her selfe valiantly, gathering into the body of the fléete,As appeereth in the 10. ta∣ble. although with ill successe: for she was so beaten and so terribly rent and torne with our great ordi∣nance, that the night following in the sight of her owne fléete, she sunke, her men, as is thought, being saued. After this captaine Fenton in the Marie Rose, and a Spanish Galeon met togither, being east and west one of another, yet no nigher then that their shot might plaie safelie, and flie betwéen them without any great hurt. Captaine Fen∣ton notwithstanding and those that were with him, were woorthilie commended for their seruice begun and accom∣plished with such prosperous boldnes. The same day the déedes of sir Robert Southwell were euidently séene: for being a man borne to vertue and commendation, and desi∣rous to purchase honor, to the end that he might not make frustrate the iudgement of his Soueraigne, who before time had made him knight, diuining how much in time to come he would further the profite of the common wealth of England, he enforced himselfe not onely to satisfie either in counsel or paines the publike intent, but also the priuate commoditie of the L. Admirall his Father in lawe, in that he had dutifully promised him sure and faithfull seruice, whereupon for the same he receiued condigne praise of eue∣ry man. Ther was also particularly praised Robert Crosse
captaine, who in the ship called the Hope, gaue a signe of fruite to be looked for in him, not inferior vnto that which the ship wherein he went did by the name it caried, cause vs to hope for. It fell out also the same day, that the L. Henrie Seimer and sir William Winter did so throughly beate two Spa∣nish Galeons, although they were of the chéefest of them and the best prouided, that they were inforced to withdraw themselues to the coast of Flanders, where forsomuch as they were in a very euill taking, as well in respect of the murther of their men, as the manifolde leakes of their ships, they were surprised, and without fight rifeled by the Zelanders, and with all the men in them caried as priso∣ners vnto Flushing. Among these, the chéefest was Don Diego Pimentello, a man very famous among his coun∣trey people. It séemeth héerby that we may with reason gather, that in these conflicts many of the Spanish ships perished, albe∣it that most men thinke that few of them miscaried. After this battell which was made the 29. of the moneth, the L. Admirall the 30. day ordained, that the L. Seimer and sir W. Winter should returne with their fléete vnto their ap∣pointed office in the chanell, which was to kéepe the coast from the danger that the duke of Parma séemed to threa∣ten. The which duke had already lost the opportunitie of being able to do any thing for the accōplishing of the com∣mon intention of the Spaniards, or according to the in∣structions receiued from the Spanish king whatsoe∣uer they were: Bicause the sudden and vnlooked for de∣parture of the duke of Medina with the whole fléete from the coast of Calice, and his small aboade vpon any other coast, caused the whole care of the aforesaid duke that he tooke vpon the maine land, to become voide, so that he did not imbarke the rest of his men to ioine with the duke of Medina. The Lord Admirall therefore determined to follow theAs appeereth in the 11. tabl.
Spanish fléete onely so long vntill they might be shot vp to the Northward, whither the Spanish fléete directed hir course, but to what end it was not knowen. And that he with the same winde might come to the Fyrth, which is vpon the coast of Scotland, if so be that he saw the enimie passe those parts. Whereupon he thought moreouer, that it was good to stay his fléete from attempting ought vpon the Spaniard, vntill he should haue good intelligence of their purpose, thereby to worke a meane vtterly to dis∣perse and otherthrow them. But the Spaniards kept their course about the Ilands of Orknay, declaring thereby, that they minded to returne that way into Spaine along by the North coast of Scotland, which as skilfull men coniectu∣red, would be to their euident danger, as it fell out after∣ward.As appeereth in the 11. ta∣ble. Perceiuing therefore the purpose of the enimie, when he was shot vp 55. deg. 13. min. to the Northward, and 30. leagues of from Newcastell, the L. Admirall re∣solued with himselfe to let the Spanish fléete kéepe on hir way: Albeit at the first he was minded to giue them a strong assault vpon the second of August: but persuaded otherwise by a more safe aduise and counsell, he wisely staied himselfe from that action, leauing the euent that should insue vnto fortune, who might worke some farther matter vpon them: séeing the enimie had taken that way to saue himselfe. Moreouer, he considered the scarcitie of munition, wherof at that present he had but litle, and that vpon this occasion, for that the ships that lay on the coast appointed by order from hir Maiestie to carrie such proui∣sion, knew not where to finde our fléete in time conue∣nient. The Spanish fléete therefore, as for hir owne welfare it was requisite, hauing gon on so far before, the L. Admi∣rall resolued to put into the Fyrth in Scotland, as well to refresh himselfe with new victuals, as also to dispatch cer∣taine other matters which he thought necessarie. But the winde being much westward and against him, the day fol∣lowing
he changed his course, and returned into England with his whole fléete the 7. of August, although by reason of a tempest which befell them, part of the ships put into Douer, part to Harwich, the rest into Yarmouth. Hitherto I haue described, according to the instructions and direction which I receiued of those things that fell out betwéene the Englishmen and the Spaniards, adioining thereunto such particular discourses as I thought to be ne∣cessarie, and such ornaments of spéech as the matter and the Italian toong did specially require: Now therefore it remaineth for the finishing of our former discourse, brief∣ly and euidently to set downe the issue of all the things be∣fore mentioned. THe Spanish fléete passing (as aforesaid) into those seas, which for the most part are quiet and calme inough, whether it were driuen too and fro in them with contrarie winds, or by some other fatall accident that fell out, it con∣tinued therein tossed vp and downe vntill the ende of Sep∣tember,As appeereth in the 11. ta∣ble. with fearefull successe and deadlie shipwracke a∣long the whole coast of Ireland: so that the duke of Medi∣na Sidonia was enforced to leaue there behind him about the number of 17. good ships, besides those 15. that were thought to be lost in the monethes of Iulie and August, and so to returne into Spaine. The persons lost in Ireland were estéemed to be about 5500. So that all being accounted togither, it is certainlie auouched, that al the ships that were lost amount vnto the number of 32. and the men accounted one with another a∣rise to the number of 13500. or more. The prisoners also of all sorts in England, Ireland, & the low Countries arise to the number of 2000. and more. As for the losse of the ordi∣nante, & the common or priuate treasure, or whether the duke after he was preserued from the former fearefull and mortall dangers lost any more ships, or no, or last of all, how many he brought home with him againe into Spain,
I meane not to occupie or trouble my pen with any such superfluous curiosities, being willing to leaue that matter vnto such as haue receiued certaine tidings therof: bicause I studie (so farre foorth as is possible) for breuitie without procuring vnto any man either hatred or euill report. And therefore to knit vp this present treatise, this is re∣ported, that after her Maiestie was throughly assured of the returne of the duke into Spain, and that her seas were cléere and free from al her enimies, and hauing called home the L. Seymer with his fleete, it seemed good vnto her (as a conuenient thing) that her people should render vnto al∣mightie God as great thanks as might be, for that it had pleased him thus to work and bring about the deliuerance of them all. And therefore the 19. of Nouember, by pub∣like edict and order from her Maiestie, there was general∣ly made throughout the whole Realme, a most frequent assemblie of all sorts of people publikely to giue thanks vnto God all the day long, for so singular a benefit recei∣ued, with this intention, that the remembrance of the said benefit, should vpon the same day of euery yéere to ensue, be renued in the minde and eies of all men throughout the whole nation, with an euident and religious acknowledg∣ment, that the common safetie of them all was accompli∣shed by the speciall fauor of God, the Father of all good things. Her Maiestie also being afterwards desirous to do the like in her owne behalfe (as it was conuenient) came into Paules Church in London on Sonday being the 24. of the same moneth, with a most decent order and assemblies of al the Magistrates and companies of the Citie standing in a ranke in the stréet, replenished most abundantly with people, through which her Maiestie was to passe, being accompanied with such a princely traine of all those that had béene instruments of that notable victorie, that it sée∣med her Maiestie togither with the rest, hauing gotten the victorie, was desirous in triumphing maner to shew her
thankfull minde vnto the Londoners also, for the charges and paines they had vndertaken all the yéere before, in the seruice of the Crowne and the common-wealth, toge∣ther with the increase of their owne reputation, being ac∣counted the foundation and cheefe staie of all the other parts of the Realme. Wherein her Maiestie followed the example of diuers kings her predecessors, who vpon special fauor, according as good occasions mooued them thereunto, haue giuen many large priuiledges and liberties vnto the said Citie, which at this day is doubtlesse more popu∣lous, more wealthie, more mightie, and more frée, then euer it was héretofore. FINIS. Imprinted at London, by A. Hatfield, and are to be sold at the shop of A. Ri∣ther, being a little from Leaden hall next to the Signe of the Tower. 1590.
