3204 99855817 21320
A Pronostica¦tion for diuers yeares, ryght vtyle and profytable to al sortes of people, wherin is declared what persons hath mooste and leaste dominacions ouer the starres and elementes, whereby the iudgementes of the Astrologiens be scarsely true, geuynge together great consolation to those who muche fear the constellations. Also of the fourth and laste Monarchie, the whiche Charles the .v. ryghte victorious Emperoure of the Romaynes, and Edwarde the .vi. mooste noble Emperoure of great Bryttayne, by the grace of God, gouer∣neth, comprehen∣dynge also brief¦lye some words of the last age of the world, gathered together by Master Arnold Bogarde doctour in medecyne, resident in Bruxels And translated into Englysh oute of Frenche by Iohn Coke, clarcke of the Re∣cognysances, or vul∣gerly called clark of the Sta∣tutes. The yeare of oure Lorde God. M. D. LIII.
Iohn Cooke to the Reader. IN semblable manner, as people beynge free of infir¦mities, customably are not desyrous of Phisicke, so those as lyue prosperously seke scarcely remedies in tribulation. But if it be discretion among world∣ly people, in peace tyme to be in a redines for the battayle, and to exercyse ar∣mours before the daunger approche, it is no lesse necessary for all Christians, beyng borne to haue no peace, but a dayly conflycte whyles they abi in this fleshe, to preuent in prosperitie,  suffre afflictions, and to put in a redines wpon agaynst aduersitie, considerynge we be subiecte to aduersitie, troubles, persecutions, miseries, in firmities, and death. And albeit in holy scripture haboundaunce is left to vs of such furniture, yet our slouth and negligence is suche, that we reste peaceably, as if we were in assuraunce, we take no sorow, as thoughe we were cleare withoute daunger, and not mynded to searche and prouyde municions of warre for vs defensible, whiche causeth vs in tyme of affliction or death (sodenly approchynge) for the more parte to be founde slomberynge, naked, and out of a redines, & thus withoute resistence constrayned shamefullye to yelde our selues vnto dispayre. Agaynst the whi¦che stormes, let vs fortifye our selues with holy scripture, and walke in the commaundementes of God, that by the grace of his holy spirite, we may he conforted in suche wyse in our couraiges
that we may feare no daungers, perylles, nor yet death. Although thende of the worlde approche at hande, as by this moost necessarye and godlye pronostication, set forth by the worshypful clark maister Arnolde Bogarde, doctour of Phisicke resident in Bruxelles maye appeare, which pro∣nostication beyng in Latyn, Frenche, & Dutche was delyuered vnto me by a louynge frende of myne, to be translated out of Frenche in∣to Englysh, whiche I haue gladlye done. Desyringe the gentle reader to accepte my good wyll. And in the translation, though I haue not curiously folo∣wed the letter, I haue very litle or nothynge varied from the mynde of the aucthour. Fare you well. (?)
LOnge tyme ami∣able reader. I thought howe I myght not onely heale the cōmon people (half blid) but also those which haue know∣lege, to take away theyr errors, desyrynge that it may profyte al men, pryncipally to witnes, and shewe my good wyll towarde the magistrates and Senate of Bruxelles, seynge then that in these present tumultes, destruc∣tions of townes, robbyng of vil∣lages, and euyll reportes on all sydes, all persons (excepte suche as be madde) gladly trust of bet∣ter tyme, the which thing the cō∣mon people were wont to looke for in the yerely pronostications as of ye Oracles of Apollo, wher∣vnto dyuers gaue more fayth, then in tymes past to ye sayinges
of the Sibelles. Neuertheles of tentymes they varied farre frō the truth, as they maye knowe whiche wyll take payne to rede our opinion herein the fartilitie of the yere is desired by the pay∣sant or husband man, Dyuers be curious to knowe yf the yeare shalbe subiect to many maladies or not, and principally the phisi∣tions and Apotecaries, the man of warre enquyreth whether the confederation of the peace shal∣be kept or not. Of the succes of townes, and gouernemente of the same, enquyreth the Citezyn and handycraftman. Fynally by the pronosticatours, ye fortunes and encombraunces of Empe∣rours and kynges be loked for, but therin they speake soberlye: for by experyence princes desyre no euyll tydynges. All this is treated diuersly of many, & that
coldly and doubteously, wytnes the yere precedent. M. D .lij. for of the great fluddes there chaū∣sed two or thre tymes not with∣out great damage of Selande & Brabant, no man declared. Ne∣uerthelesse it had ben profytable to haue knowen it, for thynges foresene receaueth not so muche hurte, as thinges not foresene. Of the warres not loked for, & so secretelye wroughte by the Frenche kynge agaynst thempe∣rour, who aduertised his maie∣stie? Of ye tumult of ye Iarmanes who pronosticated? Of the laste weat & rayny wether beyng som what damageable, no man made brute. If in these litle things (as dayly rayne and tempestes) men fayle, then by a more stronger reason, in thinges more secrete, Thastrologiens fayle. Cardanus sayth how no man
can pronostike of thynges secret, whiche knoweth not the daylye disposicions of the ayre. We con∣lesse Astronomye as thother ar∣tes to be a gyfte of God, amon∣gest whom Astronomye occupy∣eth not the least place, for sondry vtilities that they haue necessa∣ry to the life humayne. She dis∣poseth the measures, ordre, nom¦bre of dayes, monethes and yea∣res by the circuyte and mouing of the Sonne, and the Mone, by the whiche we knowe that the worlde lasteth not alwayes, for if this good ordre of yeares were not knowen, thentendement ra∣uyshed from thyngs of time past shulde fall into innumerable er∣rours and darckenesse. And shoulde not awayt after certayn yeares, thend of the generation humayne, nor also of the deade retourned to lyfe shalbe of God
seperated, nor his holye churche from other, and adourned with the rewardes perpetual. There is further in the hystories & day¦ly businesses ryght great vtilite, of the whiche he that maketh no compte, disprayseth the common welth, and lykewyse that whych to the lyfe of man is moost excel∣lent. In the same Astrologie we haue aboundantly proposed cer∣tayne great and true signes, sig∣nyfyinge many thynges, yet ne∣uerthelesse they be not to be fea∣red, nor credited as goddes: but to thende that by deuyne signes we be admonyshed to know our selues, and from euyll thretenin∣ges to kepe oure selues. Y et al∣wayes trustynge in the goodnes of god, we slepe in pleasures, and delites, which therby prouoketh his wrath towardes vs, yet he chastiseth vs from our excessiue
euils by some discipline, as war∣res, sterilitie, inuudation, sicknes burninges, takyng our riches & goodes, and by these meanes, as by men of warre (as sayth Theo philacte) distresseth vs of our pu¦issances, to thende that recogni∣syng our euyls, we shuld not pe∣rysh, by the which chastisemente, he wyll correcte vs. Dyuers by tharte of Astronomy, wold make certaine aduertisementes, albeit that they know not the pleasure of God. Ecclesiasticus sayth: I regarde all the worke of god, se∣yng that man cannot fynde anye reason of that which is done vn∣der the sonne, and the more he trauayleth therein, the lesse he shall fynde, and if the sage saye that he knoweth, yet he cannot fynd it. And in Ecclesiastici, serch not thynges excedyng thy inten¦dement, but to that whiche God
hath commaunded the, vpō that only thinke alwayes, for the in∣quisitour of the maiestie shall be thrust downe from glory. These thynges shalbe more clere, when we haue declared what men be least gouerned by the constellati¦ons, as fyrst Emperours and all kynges be not subiectes to ye star¦res. Of themperour of Thassuri¦ns, Iulius Firmicus in the se∣conde boke, the .xxxiii. cha. sayth that some Mathematicien can not say truth, nor discerne of the fortune of Emperours. Thempe¦rours sayth he be not subiecte to the course of the starres, for they be only of whom ye starres hathe no maner of puissaunce, for to des¦cerne theyr fortunes, forsomuch as they be lordes of al the world, theyr fatale fortunes are gouer∣ned by the onlye iudgemente of God. Hitherto be the wordes of Firmi∣cus.
Of the kynges the holy scri∣pture testifieth, how theyr harts ben gouerned of the hand of god And in Prouer, xxv. the heauen is the heyght, and the erth is the lowe part, but the hart of a kyng is inscrutable. All thynges then, onelye of kynges be made to vs, (yet though to our iudgemente they seme euyll) it is necessarye that they be good, for god indiffe¦rently vsyng kynges as instru∣mentes, for ye most parte geueth them to vs for oure synnes, and enormities, for there is no euyll in the citie whiche the lord hath not geuen, the which Citie if god kepe it not, they labour in vayne that kepeth it. Thys is a greate consolation to all Chrysten men, to the ende that for mourmu∣rynge and resystynge the worde of God, there come not vppon vs thinges more greuous. This
opinion confyrmeth Firmicus, howe there is no man vnto thys presente tyme hath sayde other thinges then incertayne of them perour Charles the .v. and of o∣ther kynges: but we shal declare thynges veritable of the maiesty of this sayde Emperoure, when we shall make mencion of the. iiij Monarchie. We maye saye some thinge by his reuolution, but for certayne respectes we wyll not touche it. The wyse men not af∣ter this present world, (as some be, disguising theyr vysages and apparell resemble wyse) haue do mination ouer the starres and e∣lementes. Of this true wysdom is the begynnynge of the fear of god, the whiche surmounteth in the heartes of them that trulye knoweth hym. The true know∣ledge is to embrase hym, as be∣ynge onely ye fountayne of truth,
wysdome, bountie, iustice, iudge¦ment, mercy, pitie, puissance, and helth, and that we should do re∣uerence to his fatherly bountie, by a loue the whiche the Sonne ought to haue towardes his fa∣ther, for to the louers of the lord all thinges turneth to goodnes. This knowledge thus aduaun∣sed enstructeth vs in a true fear, and reuerēce, that he maketh vs beleue (and truth it is) howe all goodnes commeth from hym. They knowe alsoo (as we haue sayde before) howe of God com∣meth peace, warre, lyfe, & death, lyghte and darckenes, peste, fa∣myne, haboundaunce, helth, and dyuers innumerable other thin ges, wherby he sheweth vnto vs his wyll to our welth, or the se∣uerytye of his iust iudgementes with vengeannce. Those be thei the whych nothyng so difficile or
be so maleheureux, that departe from the charitie of Iesu Christ. Those I saye, haue dominacion ouer thelementes, and haue ar∣mures, that is to say the buckler of fayth. The contrary, the debi∣litie of fayth maketh the courage ryght feble in tymes of afflycti∣on, wythout remembryng God. Thempyres and dominations of kynges be thereby augmen∣ted and demynyshed, he molify∣eth our dolour, yfwe beleue S. Paule, the whyche admonisheth vs of the perylles that shal come vpon vs at the laste dayes, not onelye as to the bodye, but also to the spirite, to thende that we shall learne to defend our selues, and in so greate calamytye, all thynges to aske of the onelye GOD, ayde and consolation, and to obteyne the same lette vs not doubte.
In this last age of the worlde we be fallen into suche time that one brother aryseth agaynste thother, one countrey agaynste an other so that the geste shall not be sure of hys hoost. Euerye man studieth for his perticuler welth, one wyll take no payne for his brother, yet alwayes af∣ter the sentence of Saynt Au∣gustyne, he lyueth well and ho∣lylye, whiche the leaste that he maye, lyueth for hym selfe. Lette vs not thynke that the fyrste par¦tes be premysed to the loue of hym selfe, and the seconde to the charity of his neighbour. Saint Paule teacheth vs by thaffinitie composicion connexion, proporti¦on, and beaultie of our members that whyche one member oweth to thother, here by the offices fraternelles be geuen to vs to knowe that we haue a father in
heuen, to whom all that we thin∣ke to be secrete, is knowen. But alas our confidence is returned from vs, the whiche is fyxed in our rychesse, but the knowledge therof profiteth litle to thē whi∣che dayly attende affliction, as all Christen men do, which haue no warre with heauen, but with the worlde, the Deuyll, and the fleshe, what more, all theyr lyfe is but warre. Lykewyse also the saige falleth not here, for by dy∣uers sciences, as Philosophie, Theologie, the sciences of the la¦wes, Phisicke, Astrologie. &c. we be eleuated and come to the wys∣dome of God, the whiche is pro∣foundly reueyled in these artes and sciences, to thende that we may be reduced to his knowlege For the heauens manyfeste the glory of God, and the workes of his hande sheweth the fyrma∣ment.
Who shalbe he that regar¦dyng man (the which of the phi∣losophers is called ye litle world) shal not be rauyshed in great ad∣miration of his maker and crea∣tor. If you looke on hyghe, you shall see the dyuers mouinges of the starres and elementes, lyke∣wyse theyr situations, distaunce, propertie, and yet so manye lam∣pes burnyng, & two greate ligh∣tes, as in the day the Sonne, in the nyght the Moone, the why∣che shynynge and illuminynge ouer all the worlde, be created for the vsaige of man, and to ma∣nifeste the glory of God. These be creatures and instrumentes wherby God enspireth his na∣tural puyssance accordyng to his wyll, and conuerteth to accions suche as he hath predestinate. We haue of no creature more greater and maruelous vertue
then o the sonne, the which  ¦uers for that cause hath bene ho∣nored for a god, by reason wher∣of the Lorde (to thende that all prayse redounde to his glorye) hath made the lyghte, and hathe fylled thearth with all kindes of herbes, before the creation of the Sonne. Man then (as sayth A∣ristotle) maketh not the sonne ye pryncipall and necessary cause of thynges that hath ben created before that, but it is an instru∣ment wherewith God vseth his pleasure. For withoute that he myght worke by hym self, this cō¦sideration deliuereth vs of a su∣persticious feare, and is made of the creatures, ye which we think is contrarye vnto vs, as amon∣geste the planettes Mars and Saturne, the contrary retyreth vs from an euyll admyration of thynges semynge to vs whole∣some
and salutaire, and maketh vs turne to the Auctour of the same, whiche is onely God, this wytnesseth Ieremy which saith, feare not the starres and signes of heauen as in tyme past the wic¦ked Ethnyckes and Paynyms dydde. The prophete condemp∣neth not here all feare, but when thynfydeles transported the go∣uernement of the worlde, to the Starres and Elementes, they thoughte howe theyr felicitie or miserye was in the iudgemente of them, and not in the wyll of God. Yf so be that the starres & elementes threateneth any thin∣ge (as apte to vices) euyl inclina∣tions, and other lyke thynges, our maners ought to be gouer∣ned with a dylygent and meane temperaunce, to the ende that the euyll inclynations be not vanquysshers.
In aduersites we must cloth our selues with force and magnani∣mitie. In thynges prosperous and equall the starres geueth vs inclination to some vertue or good maners, enforce our selues to be aided by studie and know∣ledge kepynge vs not to passe a meane in our courage, callyng al way aide of God to be gouerned by hym. Lette vs not glorifye in our gyftes, as the stronge man was wonte to do in his force, the ryche man in his ryches (yet in vayne) but let our reioysynge be to vnderstande and knowe that it is the Lorde that doth mercy, iudgemente, & iustice in thearth, the whiche in greate libertye by his wysedome maketh that whi∣che he purposed to make from ye begynnyng of the worlde, and by his incomprehensible and migh∣tye puissaunce putteth in execu∣tion
that whiche he predestina∣ted to make. It foloweth then, that by his prouydence not only the heauē, thearth, or creatures be gouerned (as aboue is sayde) but also the wylles and councels of men, ben gouerned to come to thende to haue knowen hym be∣fore. To fortune or good aduen∣ture we ought not to attribute any thynge, as the paynyms do. If good succes be blessynge of God, clamitie and aduersitie be contrary, these wordes be by for tune, or at aduenture, and agree to the pouidence of God: but for so muce that by thordre of rea∣son, thnde and necessitie of thin∣ges wiche commonlye cometh vpons, be hydden in the coun∣cell o God, and by humayne opi∣nion incomprehensible, menne calle them fortunes, albeit that they pede from ye wyl of god.
Like reason is to be geuē of thin¦ges to come, this is confyrmed by the holye Scripture, wherof all those that trauayle and tur∣ment them selues in the thinges abouesayde, maye take a reme∣dye. Dauid sayth in ye .liiij. psal. Caste your solicitude vppon the Lorde, and he wyll nourysh you. And in the fyrste of Saynt Pe∣ter the .v. Humble youre selues vnder the puyssant hand of god, to thende that he exalte you in the tyme of visitation, castyng all solicitude in him, for he soroweth for you. And Saynt Mathewe in the. vii, Chapiter, He soro∣weth for vs as the mother doth hyr chylde. Hereby it is euidente howe muche and howe great is the solicitude and beneuolence of God towardes vs. The Astro¦logiens make obiectiō, esteminge howe the starres and elementes
be ordeyned to infallible moue∣mentes, as apparaunce, or rising and goynge downe of the same elementes, coniunction of lumy∣res and planetes, appositions, and other aspectes, Eclipses, by the cognysion, congression, con∣sentment, discordant, and regres¦sion of them, men maye predicte diuers accidentes commynge to the worlde, as warres, mortali∣ties, famines, contagious sicke∣nesses, peace, haboundaunce of goodes, mutacions of realmes, and sectes, death of Princes, tu∣multes of people, perturbations of publyque thynges, inundaci∣ons, earthquakes and lyke thin∣ges, the whyche by the influence celestyall vertue of the Elemen∣tes, and puyssance of the starres we se folowe and fall on vs. These thynges (as we con∣fesse) be made, and depende
by the stable and constante mo∣uynge of heauen, and the coning Astrologien in predestinatynge these thynges is only God. Let vs beleue, and we muste confesse that God may by his mercy and pitie turne these ryghte horrible thretenynges of the starres, and present euylles, and of his boun∣tye, and by prayers of good peo∣ple, chaunge & turne his sentence from vs. We rede that this chaū¦sed to the Niniuites, to whome was declared by Ionas the pro∣phete, howe within fortye dayes they shoulde peryshe. Lykewise the furnace of Babylon burnyng aboue the accustomed fashion, by the commaundemente of kynge Nabuchodonosor, coulde not burne the chyldren beinge putte therein. The death of Ezechie, pronounsed by the mouth of Ie∣saie, was by compassion diuyne
prolonged bycause of his lamen∣tation and prayers▪ God is not nowe abriged, what thyng shuld lette, but that the euylles which the starres threateneth maye be chaunged by this remedye? We haue seen in yeares paste ryghte cruell warres shortlye appaysed, agaynst the opinion of dyuers. Nowe we muste praye God to geue vs the same succes and for∣tunes in those thynges that in this troubelous tyme they maye be profytable to his honour, and to the increase of his church▪ Fi∣nallye in thynges that be more worthy then the heauen, thacci∣on of the starres is of no puissāce, as the soule reasonable enspired of God, and the which worke by his wyll is more noble then all o∣ther creatures, for she beareth with hyr the ymage of God, and to the vtilitye of the same, by the
ryghte haboundaunte larges of God, the other creatures be ge∣uen to vs, this confyrmeth Pto∣lomee in Centiloque, ye .viij. cha∣piter, the soule (sayth he) of the wyse man aydeth the celestiall vertue, as the good paisaunt or husbandman labouryng and cul∣turynge ye earth, aydeth nature. Yf then the soul be cause, ayding to thynges celestiall, she semeth to be free, seynge that she is more noble then the heauen. Also the vertue of the starres be muche ayded by the complexions of the people, the whiche be causes of maladies, for these complexions chaungeth by the disposition of the starres, and lykewyse doth thynclinations, that by tharte medicine & grace of god, we easly vanquysh, which to the Luciani∣stes, Atheistes and Epicuriens▪ is impossible, who maketh a con∣fusion
of the soule, and of the com¦plexion of the body, & herin they be greate imitatours of Galien, whereof is the religion to eate, dryncke, play, and after this lyfe ther is no ioye, but let vs relyn∣quysh these foles which haue no god. And seyng the benefytes of God be so great, let vs demaund his succoures and aide, he wyll geue it vnto vs oftentimes, as he shewed to Moses in the readde sea, and to Iosue likewyse, he re∣tarded the sonne manifestly, ge∣uyng ayde against thumayne es∣perāce. This honor perteineth & ought to be referred only to god to thend that we shulde beleue yt god may & wil succor & aide vs, wtout lokīg for it. Also thastrolo∣giē must regard ye causes vniuer¦sal, as warres, cōtagious maladi¦es, ye which haue more strēgthehē ye causes perticulers, as techeth Ptolomee
in the fyrst Centiloque, hereby it is euident howe dyuers men be subiectes to the constellations, as those be the whiche by studye education, and institution coue∣nable, maye not surmounte, nor chaunge theyr affections and ma¦ners, And to those herevnto con¦trary, as those the whyche by stu¦dye, education, disciplyne, institu¦tion, science, or otherwayes may surmounte and vanquyshe theyr affections, it is notarye that to them the starres beareth lytle or no damnaige. Neuertheles we wyll not susteyne with the Stoi¦ciens, that men be without affec∣tions, for euery manne foloweth the nature of his seede: but those whiche be more wyse, may by in∣dustry, art, and maner of meates chaunge theyr complexions, for the natures and entendementes of some chaungeth more easelye
then those of other: wherefore, this celestiall worde serueth, knowe thy selfe. This studious prouidence is greatlye necessarye to oure lyfe, the mooste parte of this philoso∣phye is comprehended in decent and couenable education, the whiche (as wytnesseth Quintili∣en) muste begynne in youth, by thys reason, it maketh that the moost noble, and those which ea∣teth beste meate, be more ingeni∣ous then the other. The ayre is aswell ryghte couenable to the prudence and industrye of man, as the bloude, wytnesse Hyppo∣crates in the boke of thayre and waters. &c. To make couenable and decente education or noury∣shment, we muste consulte wyth the Phisition, which knoweth a good part of Astronomye, beyng a parte of Phisicke, for that is as
muche couenable to a Phisicion, as necessary, as sayth Hyppocra¦tes in hys sayde booke of thayre and waters. &c. For thereby the varyacions of tyme and mutaci∣ons of the stomacke is knowen. And after there muste be consi∣dered the rysynge and goynge downe of the Elementes, pryn∣cypally of the Canycle, after Arc¦tures, and thoccident of Pleia∣des or Porceletes, for the disea∣ses in these dayes commonlye make theyr Iugementes and shewynges, the other maketh the personnes to dye, and other chaunge into other kyndes of maladies, this sayth Hyppocra∣tes. These rysynges and occi∣dentes of the Elementes, we haue putte in oure Almanackes, wherwithall euery man that wil may ayde hymselfe: these thyn∣ges be almoost forgotten of the
phisicions, whiche neuerthelesse wyll be of great estimacion, and not onely be forgetfull but dys∣praysers, whiche is worse. I feare that the igno∣raunce of diuers is cause of enuye whiche is al∣wayes hurtefull to al good artes: but of these thin∣ges we shal speake at an other tyme more amply. (?)
¶ Of the laste Monarchie, whiche is of the Romaynes, presentlye gouer∣ned by the grace of God, by Charles the .v. Empe¦roure, ryght vy∣ctorious. DYuers haue prescribed thyn∣ges muche varia¦ble of ye last Mo∣narchie, and of Charles the fyft Lorde there of: but for that the most parte be fables, we let them passe, takynge onelye that which sayde by Daniell the Prophet his prophecye, the whiche is e true cronicle of this worlde, ytynge of this Monarchye,
sayth as herafter foloweth. The fyrst is the moost noble of al tho∣ther, beynge of the Chaldeens, and Assiriens, the whiche is re∣presented by the head of gold, of the stature of Nabuchodonosor. And by the Lyons hauyng wyn¦ges of an Egle, the whiche amon¦gest all other beastes is the most noble, so is this Monarchie, whervnto is ioyned for the na∣ture of the beastes crueltie and rauyne. The seconde hath bene of the Mediens and Persiens, lykened to the poictryne & arme of syluer of the stature aforesayd like vnto a beare, and stode vpon the one syde. Amonge his teethe in his mouth he had thre greate longe tethe, and it was sayd vn∣to hym, aryse eate vp much flesh. The thyrde was lyke vnto a leo∣parde, this hadde wynges as a fowle, euen foure vpon the back,
this beast had fowre heades, and there was power geuen hym, this was of the Grekes and Ale¦xandre the great, kynge of ye Ma¦cedonians, by the nature of the beaste this Monarchye is kno∣wen, yf it be not sufficiently kno∣wen of al men, gentle reader loke on the historye of Gesnerus of fowre foted beastes, she hath al∣so ben likened to the bely and cu∣ysses made of brasse. Of ye fourth sayth Daniel, that it is the last of the Romaynes, and of ours now present. After Daniell sawe in a vision by nyght, and beholde the fourth beaste was grymme and horrible, and maruelous strong, it had great yron teeth, it deuou¦red and destroyed and stamped the resydue vnder his feete, it was farre vnlyke the other bea∣stes that were before it, for it had tenne hornes. &c.
It is also compared to the leg∣ges of Iron in the stature of Na buchodonosor, to the which par∣tes of the feete, one was of yron and thother of earth. Of these Monarches reade Iosephus, Sabelliq. Canon, Sebastian Munstre. The historye of Alex∣andre the great, and Daniel the Prophete in the seconde and. vij Chap. of his Prophecie, & other Historigraphes worthy of fayth. By this is sufficientlye kno∣wen the shortenes of the world. To whom our Sauiour Iesus Christe, the onelye Messias (so much desyred) is borne, reigning Cesar August, & there is comon yeares passed synce thincarnati∣on. M .ccccc. lij. yet from ye houre of the Natiuitie, the sayde Ro∣mayne Empyre hadde longe en∣dured, that is to saye, XLVII yeres, when Iulius was made
Consul. It is shewed vnto vs further, how god toke great cure and solicitude ouer vs, & that the mutatacions of Realmes been made and predicte dyuynelye, to thende that beynge admonished by good counsayle, we maye a∣uoyde euilles, further by thinter pretation of Daniel, it is euident that this Empire shalbe deuided and departed, whiche the tenne hornes sheweth, diuers partes of hyr be seperated, as Englond, Fraunce, Denmarke, Espaigne, Pole, and other, Saynte Paule testifyeth that before the coming of the defection of the laste tyme they shuld not come. And becau∣se the same is passed longe tyme, it is lykewyse true that the daye of the lorde approcheth, that the Empyre is come to ye Almains. Cardanus referreth the greate beare to the last starre of the taile
when she passeth (sayth he) ouer Constantinople, she geueth ouer thempyre. After she is come vpō Fraunce to the Galles, and laste she is come to the Almaynes, to whom she trāsported thempire. The tayle of the beare sygnyfy∣eth force withoute comparison, and she is yet situate vpon the Al¦maynes, hitherto be the wordes of Cardanus. The nature of this starre is like and semblable to the strength of the beaste, pro∣posed in the fourth Monarchie. The fortune of this Empyre shal not be alwayes vnanime, but sometyme habound in puisance, sometyme weake and affeabled, whiche is shewed by the legges parte Iron and parte earth. This Romayne Empyre hathe hadde some magnifique and no∣ble Emperours of greate vertue and felicitye, as Arthure, Maxi∣mian,
Constantyne the greate, Charlemayne, and at this pre∣sent Charles the .v. Hitherto in some thynges victorious, other Emperours they haue had with out any vertue, and in feates of warre infortunate, and in dy∣uers batayles vanquysshed. By this it is euident and clere, that the victories come of God, and that the Romayne Monarchye shalbe the laste, and shall not be vanquysshed, destroyed, nor re∣uersed, then only of God, and by the Roialme of Iesus Christ. Dyuers haue attempted to sub∣uerte the same, pryncypallye the Turkes, the whiche (albeit they haue obteyned certayne vycto∣ryes agaynste Themperoure) yet shall not this last Monarchi be put in subiection, nor broken, as by longe experyence it hath ben hytherto approued: but it
shall abide one tyme in greate augmentacion, and another time with discresemente, vnto suche tyme as of the Mountayne is cutte a stoone withoute handes, and vntyll she haue brused the stature of Nabuchodonosor, the whiche representeth the Monar¦chye of the worlde, and the face falle entierlye, and this stone be∣come a greate mountayne, that is to saye the great Roylme du∣rynge the worlde. This we haue wylled to putte to, to the ende that all Chrysten people shoulde knowe that the Monar¦chies be gouerned diuynely, and that they rule ouer the configu∣rations celestialles. And thys laste Monarchye (the whyche Charles the fyfte gouerneth at this presente) shall not be brused nor affeabled by humayne puy∣saunce, althoughe dyuers be
of the opinion and sentence that the Roialme of Turques shulde abate it, but by the onelye stone whiche is Chryste, it shal perysh, when he shall come to iudge the quycke and the dead, but the day and howre when he shal returne to iudgemente, is not knowen of any creature nor of thaungelles, but it is in the only wyl and iud∣gement of the heauenlye father, the whiche clearelye rehearseth S. Mathew in the .xxiiij. Chap Neuerthelesse it is permytted by holye scripture to enforce by some coniectures & similitudes, to attayne and come to the age or year of his comming (always the day and the houre abydyng vnknowen) Our Lorde hath in∣uited and drawen vs for to serch and obserue by a couenable simi∣litude or parable of a fygge tre, when the braunch is tender, and
his leaues be out, you know that Somer is approchynge. You al¦so lykewyse when you se the thin¦ges aboue sayd in the .xxiiij. cha. Lyfte vp your heades, knowing that youre redemption and the kyngdome of God is next to the gates. By these wordes, and by the fashyon of thynges, future & nowe presente, whereof also ma∣ny be past, he that diligently sear¦cheth thē, may easely coniecture somethinge for vs, of this which dyuers auctours haue lytle re∣culed of the breuite and small en∣duryng of this worlde, we shall briefely resite. Fyrste we wyll set forth the wordes of Elie, where∣by the Iewes confounde them selues, which haue set fourth (as they saye) howe the worlde shall endure syxe thousande yeares, that is to saye, two thousande yeares without lawe, two thou∣sande
yeares with the lawe, and two thousande yeares after the dayes of Christe. To these wor∣des it semeth Saynt Peter con¦fyrmeth in his seconde epistle in the thyrd chapitre, sayinge that one daye to the Lorde is as a M, yeres, and a thousand yeres as one day. Of the lyke that fo∣loweth, that as the Lorde in syx dayes created al, and the vij. day he reposed him self, lykewise sixe m. yeres he gouerned this worl∣de, subiect to generations & cor∣ruptions, & in the. vii, M. he be∣ganne repose perpetual, & as the syxt day was not in all permyt∣ted to worke and trauayle, but that a good part of the same day drawynge towardes euenynge was laide to the saboth, likewise the sixte thousande shall not be holye suffred nor graunted as it is wrytten in other passage that
the Lorde shall abrydge ye dayes for the chosen, as the sixe first ge¦nerations, that is to say, of Adā, Seth, Iared, Cainan, Malaleel & Iared, be trespassed or depar∣ted, and the seuenth whiche is of Enoch, is immortall, Lykewyse sixe thousande yeares shall rege∣nerate death, & in ye seuenth shall haue the fortunate immortalitie, his vigour. Item in S. Math .xxiiij. S. Marke .xiij. sayth the Lord, of this daye and houre no creature knoweth, nor yet thaū∣gelles of heauen, but my father onlye. And as the dayes of Noe were, lykewyse also shalbe the comynge of the sonne of man, for as they were in the dayes before the deluge, eatynge, drynckynge maryinge and geuynge in mari∣age, vnto the daye that Noe en∣tred in the arcke, they knewe nothyng, nor vnto the time yt the
deluge came & toke them awaye all, Lykewyse shall be the com∣mynge of the sonne of man. By these wordes it semeth Iesus Chryst to haue taken not onlye the similitude of the qualitie, but also of the quantitye of thynges, I call qualities manners of this corrupted worlde, wherof there is no doubte, for S. Luke confir¦meth it in his. xvij, Chapter, the quantitie is called the nombre of yeares. The sentence is some∣what more obscure, but Saynt Mathewe declareth it, when he sayth: Lykewise as the dayes of Noe were, so shalbe the cominge of the sonne of man. And Saynt Paule to the Romaynes in the v. Chapter, affyrmeth how Adā was the fourme and figure of the commynge of Iesu Christ. As al¦so he sayth in the fyrst to the Co∣rinthiens, the .xv. Chapt. The
fyrst man Adam in soule  and the last in spyryte  the fyrste man of thearth , the seconde manne that is to saye the Lorde, is of heauen. Yf then Iesus Chryste is the other Adam of whome the fyrste hath ben the fygure, and that the cō∣mynge of Iesus Christ shalbe as the dayes of Noe before the de∣luge, who wyl not beleue that so longe tyme that is passed from Adam terrestre, vnto the dayes of Noe & the deluge, that it shall not passe so muche from Adam celestiall, the whiche is our lorde Iesus Christ, vnto thende of the worlde or deluge of fyre. Saynt Peter sayth in his seconde Epi∣stle in the thyrd chapter, the day of the Lord shall come as a thefe in the nyght, wherby the heuens shall passe in maner of a tempest, and the Elementes beynge cha∣fed
the earth shall founder,  thonerages or workes  in them shall burne, and by and by after the same sayth, whereby the heauens beyng on fyre shalbe defayted, and the ele∣mentes beyng burned shal foun∣dre. Nowe it is euydent oute of Genesis, the .v. Chapyter, that from Adam vnto the deluge be passed. M. CCCCCC .lvi. yea∣res, it is lykewyse true howe the ende of the world shalbe appro∣chynge to like yeare of our lorde thousande syxe hundred fyftye and syxe. It is nere at hande, for there remayneth nowe no more but. C. and foure yeares. Yet alwayes for so muche that none knoweth the abreuiation of the sayde tyme, the whyche is pur∣posed for the electe, for this rea∣son it semeth ryght difficyle pre∣cisely to knowe the tyme.
There is other that saye how the yeares of the Lord ought to be accompted, not from his Na∣tyuytye: but from his resurrecti¦on, Ascencion, or sendynge of his holye spyryte, whyche shoulde make greate variation and mu∣tacion of the yeares. And as Noe knewe not the daye nor the howre of the deluge, (yet alwais of the yeare not ignoraunte) Lykewyse to vs is permytted by the holye Scryptures to searche the yeare, albeit that the daye and howre remayne vnkno¦wen. Some also coniecture the ende of the worlde, from ye birth of Chryste vnto his passion and resurrection whiche cometh to xxxiij. yeares and certayne day∣es, whose nomber is vnknowen. And for euerye yeare of Iesus Christe they accompte so manye great yeares Mosaiques, yt is to
say, Iubilaires, and make euery yeare fyfty yeares, the which iu∣biles semeth ryght wel to accord together, for .xxxiij. Iubiles be of our Ciuile yeares. M .cccccc. and. L. wherevnto adde cer∣tayne fewe yeares for the porti∣on and rest of the dayes yt Chryst lyued amongest vs, more thenne the sayde .xxxiii. yeares. It shulde be more euident yf euerye one of the sayd yeares of the life of Iesu Christe, we shulde make comparison and similitude to e∣uery iubile of the churche then be¦gynnynge. And if the symilitude of thynges make so many yeres of Christ, as of the Iubilaires of the churche, it shulde be the more to accoumpte of the ende of the world: but forsomuch that these thynges deuines, oughte to be more subtyly and at length trea¦ted, and that it pertaineth more
vnto Theologiens then to mede¦cynes, we wyll make here no fur∣ther mention. There is other thynges that would a litle serue to this purpose, as thaccompli∣shment parfytte of the escriptu∣res and Prophecies, insomuche that one iote is not wrytten in the holy scrypture that shall not be▪ accomplysshed before thende of the worlde. By these wordes we maye certaynelye perswade that the worlde is nowe lame, and very aūcient, and in maners and fashions falleth, and greatly halteth. Nowe lette vs pray the eter∣nall father of oure Lorde Iesu Christ maker of thumayne gen∣dre, that to this tyme so euil and daungerous (by whom meruey∣lous sygnes sheweth vs greate calamyties) for the loue of hys sayde sonne▪ oure sauiour, whom
he woulde to be offered for oure synnes, that he kepe his church, and so by the vertue of the grace of his holye spirite, he confyrme, and conforte in suche wyse oure couraiges, that we feare not a∣ny daungers or peryls, nor alsoo the death. Here we haue finished our pronostication, yf the reader had not attended some thyng of the warres, peace, fruites of the earth, and suche lyke thynges as men were accustomed to put in pronostications. Our pronostica¦tion forsomuche as it is vtile and continuall of dyuers yeres ma∣keth of suche thinges no mentiō, addynge neuerthelesse that the warres whiche hathe happened in the churche in the laste dayes of the worlde, that is to say, dis∣centions, sectes, dyuers factions and lyke thynges, be more to be had in horreur, then the discor∣des
of Emperours and kynges, and what is worse, they be more hurtefull then shoulde be warre turquoyse. Let vs praye to god that it wyl please him to be peace and accorde in his churche, and as he is the selfe same veritie, so to declare and manyfest the only verite, and in suche wyse to ac∣corde the hearts of prynces, that they maye with one minde resist the cruell beast whiche alwayes is thursty of the Christen bloud. The Lorde shall geue largelye the fruites of the earth, yf we fo∣lowe the counsayle of Moyses, Deutero .xi. Chap. and Leuitic .xxvi. The Lorde sayth: yf you walke in my ordinaunces, and kepe my commaundements, and do them, I wyll geue you the rayne in his tyme, the earth shall geue fruyte, the thresshynge shall reache vnto the vyne harueste, and
the vyne haruest shall reache vn∣to the sowynge tyme, & you shall eate your meate in plenteousnes and dwell in your landepeacea∣bly, and I wyllsende peace in the earth, and you shall slepe with∣out any man to make you afeard These thynges we must daylye remember to thend that GOD turne not his wrathe vpon vs, and shette the heauen. But lette euery man walke so in his voca∣cion, that he asmuche as he may kepe hymselfe from offendynge God, and lette vs at his hande, attende his greate munificence, the whiche to his owne he neuer denyed. ¶ Conclusion. ¶ Gentle Reader seynge that pronostications comonlye be not welcome, and that men call them the bokes of lyes, we wil asmuch as i vs is possible, preserue ours from
that vyce, and haue fortified it by holy scripture, and with the say∣inges of the good philosophers, more then by the doubteous opi¦nions of thastrologiens, this ma¦ner hath not ben longe vsed: but when it shalbe in vsaige, it shall haue the moore swetenes and grace, for euerye tyme hath his guyse and vse of his methode or practike what he wyll, we haue folowed oures, semynge to vs mooste conformable and nereste the trueth. And to thende that those whiche haue almooste loste theyr corage, and be ouermoche fearefull, we maye delyuer from theyr feare, and that they shulde not fall (as dyuers dyd the year past) into desperation. Fynallye, this calamitie and myserye the whiche was wonte to come by pronostications, toke his begyn∣nyng of the phisicions, for leuing
the counterpois, they meddled thynges agaynste the deuoir of Phisicke. Reade and geue no more fayth to pronostications then they meryte, and con∣fyrme your harte in such sorte agaynst al thin∣ges, that you may lyue ioyousely, and in the ende dye in the fayth of Christ our Lorde. Amen, ¶ Imprynted at London in Paules churcheyarde by Myllyam Awen.
