3929 99841666 6264
PRAXIS MEDICINAE, OR, The Physicians Practice VVherein are contained inward Disease from the Head to the Foote: Explayning the nature of each disease, with the part affected: and also the Signes, Causes, and Prognostiques, and likewise what temperature of the ayre is most requisite for the Pati∣ents abode, with direction for the diet he ought to obserue, to∣gether with Experimen∣tall cures for euery Disease. Practised and approued of: and now published fo the good, not onely of Physicians, Chirurgions, and Apothecaries, but very meete and profitable for all such which are solicitous of their health and welfare. Written by that famous and worthy Physici VVALTER BRVEL. Principijs obsta, serò medicinae paratur, Cum mala per longas conualuêre moras. LONDON, Printed by IOHN NORTON, for WILLIAM EA and are to be sold at his shop, at the great South doore of Pauls: and in Chancery-lane, neere Serieants-Inne, 16
To the Reader. COurteous Reader, this little Bark which is set to sayle in the vast Ocean of this world, is likely to vndergoe many sharpe stormes and violent tempests: neuerthe∣lesse if it haue but Sea-roome, although the Seas oare and rage, and the billows arise, yet  is no danger of shipwracke, because the Pi∣t steeres her, is Walter Bruell, a man very ractised, and experienced in these affaires: ecause you should not thinke that it is lanched he deepe, onely with ballasting, or else with ading as is of small value; bee pleased there∣to goe vnder the decke, and take a suruey of e commodities, wherewith shee is fraught. If  bee an Apothecary, there you may bee
prouided with all manner of Drugges. If a Chirurgian, there also you may bee furnished with powders, oyntments, and emplaisters, without which a man cannot excell in the art of Chirur∣gery; lastly, there are medicines for inward disases, of what age, sex, or complexion so∣euer the patient bee: neither are you brought hi∣thr only to take a suruey of these traffiques, but ech medicine doth offer it selfe vnto thee with  ℞: imbrace their kind proffers, and be not crupulous in receiuing them; for you may aduen∣ture on them with security, because they haue beene often experienced without danger. God grant they may hereafter haue the like successe. J. A
THE PHYSICIANS Practice. A method seruing for the know∣ledge of the HEAD-ACHE; called in Latine Cephalagia. THe Head-ache is a painefull griefe of the head, by reason of some dangerous and sad change thereof. This name is giuen to it, eyther in regard of the effect it wor∣keth, as also in regard of the part affected. And it so happens, that the head is more tormented with paine then any other part of the body: which is partly caused by the location of the head; for sharpe vapors, and swelling humours ascending from the lower Parts, doe assault the head, partly because the braine is of a cold and moyst temperature, superfluity of excre∣ments
are therein generated, which if they increase, and be not auoyded by the expulsiue faculty in their due season, are wont to disturbe the head with aches. This payne is some∣time outward, and then the haires of the head feele a kinde of smarting paine, which is not vsuall if the paines bee in∣ward. If this paine hath beene of long time, and often come vpon the patient, and continues long, and runnes ouer the whole head, or the greater part of the head; it is called in Latine Cephalea, if onely one side of the head bee affected, it is called by the Latines Hemicranea; and this hath his be∣ginning from the lower parts, but Cephalea is caused by the heads peculiar and principall affect: and as these two kinds, so likewise the Headache occasioned by an ague, or by quaf∣fing, or by some other externall cause, is called generally by the Latines Cephalagia. The part affected. The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them. But the sub∣stance of the braine is somewhat grosser, so that the paine that doth seaze thereon, is farre duller, and more loading. This paine when it doth trouble the braine, hath a double cause, the first from it selfe, and then the paine is of longer continuance, the second proceeds from the lower parts, from which light humors doe ascend, and are easily enter∣tained by the braine. Most commonly the cause proceedes from the stomacke, by reason of the sixe couple of sinews neere adioyning thereto, and then the paine is not so du∣rable, but doth rather goe away and returne againe, hauing giuen ouer for a time: and euen as the stomacke doth a∣bound with ill humors, so the braine doth likewise abound therewith. This paine is somewhat mitigated after the patient hath eaten, and exasperated by too much fasting: for the stomacke being empty, raw and sharpe humors are therein resident, which come from the neighbouring parts, and the braine doth partake of these vapours: oftentimes
the fault is in the womb, and then the paine is chiefly in the hinder part of the head, for then the paine is conueyed thi∣ther thorow the marrow of the backe-bone. Sometimes it spreads it selfe ouer the whole head, which is caused by the corruption of the seede, and suppression of the month∣ly tearmes. If the paine doe proceed from any other cause, it may be discerned by his proper signes. Vsually the braine being corrupted by other parts, at the length the cause of its paine may bee sayd to come from the essence of the braine; and it so happens, that the braine being weakened by the long continuance of paine, that it will with ease admit of the superfluities of the other parts; hence is it that the spi∣rits are dissolued, the digestiue faculty, weakened, and the temperature of the whole body changed, which is the cause that so many excrements are generated in the braine. (The Signes.) This disease is knowne by the patients complaints and answeres. The Causes. Sometime it is caused by a cold and phlegmy matter, and then the paine is duller and more vehement if it surprize them suddenly; withall there is palenesse in the face, moyst and cold meats was his former diet, whereby his tempera∣ture is become moyst and cold: vsually this matter by rea∣son of his grossenesse and slyminesse, doth stop the narrow passages of the head, thereby causing paine: another while it is caused by the plenty of blood, and fulnesse of the whole body, which are manifested by the patients diet, tempera∣ture, age, state and condition of the Heauens, and many o∣ther things which do increase blood. Againe, it is caused by the stopping of the monthly termes, or hemeroyds, as al∣so of the blood at the nose, which vsually doth gush out at its proper seasons, and then the paine is in the forehead for the most part. The vrine is of an high colour, and rednesse sitteth vpon the face and about the eyes. Another while it is caused by thinne and cholericke blood, whereof a small quantity doth breede great paine, not so dull as the former,
but sharpe and piercing, vehemently beating, and gnawing, chiefly on the right side of the head; bitternesse in the mouth; want of sleepe, and extreme heate of the head doe accompany the former symptomes: another while it is caused by the superfluity of spirits, or by too much windy matter, which will pierce thorow the narrowest passages, and will wind it selfe by degrees, thorow the veines, the fylmes, arteries, and sinews, and sometimes within the fylmes and bones, that so by dispercing it selfe thorow all parts, it may make a separation betweene those that are most vnited, and then the paine doth runne ouer the whole head without any dulnesse, but with a certaine ringing in the eares, which at certaine houres of the day, returnes in∣to its cauernes. This may bee sayd to come by the consent of the other parts. Otherwise this paine of the head is caused by some great distemper, eyther hot or cold, and yet they are not so durable that onely come by a distemper; onely plenty of humors are thereby gathered; and this doth happen, if the paine last long, and the body bee full, or ill iuyced. The paine that comes by a hot distemper, is more vehement then that which comes by a cold distemper: A great burning in the head, and rednesse about the eyes, ac∣company this paine, which is eased by the applying of moyst things. On the contrary, the paine that is caused by a cold distemper, is strong and doth last longer then the former. Paines caused by too much drinesse that distemper the body, are not so strong, because they come not sudden∣ly, but as it is slow in comming, so it is very slow in leauing them; heere heate doth not much trouble the head, but the skinne of the head is somewhat dry. Moyst medicines ease this paine; and dry, very much increase it: moystnesse cannot properly bee sayd to bee the cause of paine in the head, because it cannot make a violent and sudden change in the similar parts, nor breake the closenesse of these parts, vnlesse plenty of humors doe concurre.
The Prognostiquis. An old paine, caused by a cold matter, is hardly to bee cured; especially in old men: but a Head-ache continually vexing, and depriuing the patient of rest, is not without danger; for it is the forerunner of madnesse, especially if his vomit appeare somewhat rusty. Likewise a head-ache, if it pinch sore, and by curing doth not mend, but rather is augmented, doth presage Deafenesse, Phrensie, Impo∣stumes, Conuulsion; if the head be greatly pained, and with∣all the sinews stretched, great danger is at hand: if a head∣ache doe suddenly surprize a man, and hee become mute therewith, and snort in his sleepe, he cannot outliue seuen dayes, except a feauer in the meane space take hold of him. When the headakes in any part, or the whole head bee paind, if snot, water, or blood, come out of the nose, mouth, or eare of the patient, the danger is then past: the headache also that was not from the beginning, is a sure token of a future Crisis eyther by vomiting, or bleeding at the nose, and no cure must be attempted for that paine, lest we stop the bleeding which is by natures forecast intended, and it will eyther quite free them from the disease, or at the least ease them. A method seruing for the cure of the cold Headache. IT is effected by these kinds of remedies following. Let the aire bee hot and dry, either by art or nature, let his meate bee of Hens, Capons, Birds of mountaines, reare egs, rost flesh better then boyld; with his meate boyle Betony, Maioram, Serpillum, amongst fruits, sweet Almonds, Pista∣cium, Raisins are good: after meate let him take a little Dia∣cidonites, with the spices. Let his drinke bee weake Wine, and a little quantity of strong Wine may bee tolerated. Sometimes hee may drinke a draught of Muskadell, with a little Nutmeg and Pepper. Let not his motion and exercise be too violent. Let his sleepe be moderate: let him lie with his head raysed vp, and somewhat couered. He must auoyd
vomiting, vnlesse the head doe ake by the consent of the stomacke. Let euill affections of the mind bee auoyded; but slight thoughts are not heere so hurtfull as in the cho∣lericke Cephalea. Preparers.Sirupe of Isope, of Acorus, of Betony, of Mel rosatum, of Staechas, the sirupe of Acetosus Simplex, Oxymel Simplex, Squilliticum▪ and Compositum, the Water of Hysop, Betony, Maioram, Sage, Parsely, the decoction of Wood Guaiacum with capitall things, the decoction of Betony, Sage, Hysope, Fenill, Smallage, Maiorame, Parsely, Pennyroyall, the decoction of the flowers of Staechas with hony. The cause of the disease will be many dayes digested, before it be cleane rooted out; for grosse, viscous and slymy humors do nourish a more grieuous and rebeliious disease. Yet if the patient bee vnreasonably afflicted, then shall eua∣cuation bee attempted, not expecting a perfect concoction. Emptiers. A veine shalbe opened, if the body bee full, but in grosse, viscous and cold humors, a veine shall not bee opened: for it is to be feared, that the disease being of its owne nature cold, should by that meanes increase. But if any veine be opened, that of the right arme shall be opened; and if the disease continue after that, we will open a veine in the fore∣head, especially if the paine bee in the hinder part of the head: & because the humors are grosse, a large wound shall be made. Electnarium Indum, Diactholium, Diaphaeni∣cum, the powder of prepared Sene is of great force, Hierae Simplex, Diacolocynthidos, Logodali of Agaricke made in∣to a trochiske, Pills of Agaricke, Alephanginae, Cocciae, Ara∣bicae, Faetidae Mastichine, Assageret, Agoricus, Turbith, A potion of Acoruse oots, Betony, Hysop, Rosemary, Staechas Anyseed, Fennyll seeds, Raisius, Liquorice, the flowers of Violets, of Buglosse, Polipody, Sene, Nutmegge, Cynamon, Diaphaenicum, a decoction of Guaiacum Wood with capi∣tall things, Sene, Polipody, a clyster of the decoction of Betony, Maioram, Siaechas, leaues of Mellilote▪ Mallows, Colewort: to these adde some Mel rosatum, Diaphenium, Oyle of Roses, Salt, Hiera, Diacolocynthidos: it is requisite
for such that are sicke of this disease, to purge not once, but twice or thrice: for by such purging, the humours by de∣grees are mastered by the medicines; for grosse and tough humours will not bee expelled by a sudden purgation. Pils are more preualent then electuaries in this disease, because they haue a more attractiue power, and can draw ill hu∣mours, euen from the most remote parts of the body. Auerters. Wee will vse that which was prescribed in the former clyster, in steade of a purging medicine, for therewith shal we draw backe the matter downeward, and shall asswage the paine which is stirred vp by the vapours carried to the head, by reason of costiuenes. Let a veine be opened, the legs washed in hot water, Horseleeches shall be applied to those veines which swell about the part affected: or to the end of the nose, strong suppositors, painefull ligatures of the opposite parts, as also strong frictions of those parts, fo∣mentations likewise, with the decoction of Sage, Hysope, Maioram, and other capitall herbes: a sneeze of ba∣stard Pellitory, Pepper, Oyle of Beuers stones, of Pep∣per-wort, Ling-wort, the iuyce of Maioram, Betony, Hogs-bread a nasaor errhine of Staues-acre, Pepper-wort, Hie∣ra-piera, the iuyce of Flower-deluce, Pepper, aureae Alexan∣drina, Lingwort, Euforbij, Bastard-Pellitory, Oyle of Beauer stones, Hoggs-bread, Mustard-seed, water of Maioram. An Apophlegmatisme, by chewing of Hysope, of conser∣ued Pellitory, Pepper, Staues-acre, Licorice, Mastique, Rai∣sins, Maioram, with a little Honey, a Gargarisme of red Wine, wherein boyle the rootes of Pellitory, of Liquorice, leaues of Hysope, of Betony, mustard, and a little Mel rosa∣tum: all turnings aside are very conuenient by what cause soeuer the malady is cherished. Gargarismes and apophleg∣matismes are to be vsed, not without great care & circum∣spection: for if the patient bee subiect to the disease of the lungs, or be very rheumatick, they may proue hurtfull. But we will begin with the neerer parts, and by degrees pro∣ceede
to those that are remote. Diacuminum, Aurea Alex∣andrina,Strengheners. Diacastoreum, Triacle, Mithridate, with Be∣tony-water, Conserue of Roses, Diacorum, Pleresarconticum, Diamhrae, Diamuscum, both sweete and bitter. A bag of Maioram, Betony, Rosemary, Conserue of Rosemary Flow∣ers, Aorus conserued; the decoction of the Wood Guai∣acum with the Flowers of arduus Benedictus, are me∣dicinable as well for the Cephalea, as Hemicranea; Cubebs, Musk, Maioram, Ambre, Nutmegge, Cinamon, An epi∣theme for the forehead of the liquor of Wine distilled, washing the head with lye wherein Betony and Maioram leaues, Flowers of Mellilote and Cammomill for some few howres haue beene infused. Irrhigations of the head with the decoction of Bay-leaues, Betony, Maioram, Mel∣lilote Flowers; Pepper-Baths doe very much comfort headaches. An odoriferous ball of Cynamon, Cloues, Stae∣chas, Bay-leaues, Maioram, Mastik, Nutmeg, an oyntment of the Oyle of Flower-de-luce, Oyle of Rew, of Lillies, of Annis seed, of Camomill, wherewith anoynt the forehead & nose∣thrill holes; emplaysters made of the Root of wild Cucum∣ber with Wormewood; a cerate of Euphorbium: this is an approued medicine by the ancient Physician, for an old head∣ache. These medicines do very much strengthen the braine, by taking away cold distempers, and then are they of grea∣test force, when the stomacke is empty. This is likewise the fittest time to apply outward remedies, otherwise they doe draw vapours from the lower parts: but when the disease doth beginne to decline, digestiue and strength∣ning remedies may be applied. The cure of the cold HEAD-ACHE more particularly. Take of the leaues of Betony, Sage, Rew, Maioram, ana, 1 handfull of the flowers of Stachas, of Feauerwort, ana, P. 1. of garden Mallowes, Mellilote, of wild Mallowes, ana, 1
handfull and halfe, Anni-seeds, Fennel-seede, ana, ℥ ss, of Nut∣meg, Cinamon, ana, ʒ ij. Colocynthi. ʒ ss. Let them be boy∣led in water as much as sufficeth to lb i. ss, adde to the strayning, of the Electuary of Elescopi ℥ ss. Sp. Benedictae Laxatiuae, ʒ i. Diaturbith cum Rhabarbaro, ʒ iij. Mellis rosa∣ticolati ℥ i. oyle of Rew and Bays, ℥ i. ss, of white Salt, ʒ i. of this make a clyster, which must bee administred before dinner. ℞ Oxymellis compositi ℥ iij. sir. of Staechas,A potion. ℥ i. of the de∣coction of Staechas, Betony▪ Rosemary, ana, ℥ x. for certaine daies. Let him take ℥ iii. hereof. ℞ of the roots of the hearb dogstooth, of Sperage,A Potion. of Parsly ana, ℥ i. of Sage leaues, of Betony leaues, of Hysope leaues, Veruin leaues, ana M i. of Endiue M i. ss, of Licorice scra∣ped, ℥ i. ss, the seede of Parsley, Anni-seedes, ana, ʒ vi. the flowers of Rosemary, of Staechas, ana, p.i. of Nutmegs, no. ii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss. adde to the strayning Oxymellis squillitici, ℥ ii. of the sirrupe of Stae∣chas ℥ 1. ℞ of the rootes of Acorus ℥ i. of Sperage, Parsley, ana,A potion. ℥ i. ss, of Betony, of Maioram, ana, M i. of Raisons the stones being taken out, ℥ i. the seedes of Smallage, and Fennell, ana, ʒ iiij. of Buglosse flowers. M i. of Rosemary, M ss, Seae Alexandriae, ℥ i. of the whitest and lightest part of the mushrome ʒ vi. turbith albi et gummosi ʒ i. of white Ginger ℈ ii. ss, boyle these in a sufficient quantity of water to lb i, to the straining adde Mellis rosati sirrup Byzantins, ana, ℥ i. of fine white Sugar, q. s. drinke of this morning fasting ℥ iii. ℞ Pillul. de agarico cochiar. ana ʒ ss, Diagridij gr. iij the sirrupe of Stoechas q. s. make 7. or 8. Pills of this.Pils. ℞ A garici Trochiscati, Hier, Diacol. ana, ℈ i. ss of Nut∣meg gr. 8. of the sirrupe of Stachas, of Worme-wood,Pills. ana q. s. make 8. pills of this. ℞ Diacatholic. Electuarij Indi, ana ʒ iij ss,A draught. drinke this with the water of Betony.
A draught.℞ Diaturbith cum rhabarb: Electuarij eles copi Dia∣catholic. ana ʒ ii. ss syrrupe Staechados, Oxymel, Simp. ana, ℥ ss of the decoction of Betony, and Sage, q. s. drinke this in the morning. Lozenges.℞ Diamusci dulcis ʒ 1. Diamargiriti calidi, ℈ ss, Diam∣brae ℈ ii. of Betony-water, and white Sugar, q. s. make this into Lozenges; whereof, let the patient eate one, after the sirrupe is taken. An Opiate.℞ Sp. Pleresarcontici Diagalanga, Diamusci dulcis, ana, ℥ ii. ss, of the rootes of Elecampany, ʒ i. ss, conserue of Rosemary flowers ℥ i. sirrupe Staechados, q. s. make an Electu∣ary in forme of an Opiate. A mixture.℞ the conserue of Rosemary-flowers ℥ 1 ss Acori ℥ ss aureae Alexandrinae, Aromaticirosati, of Mithridate, ana, ʒ 1 sir. Staechados q. s. mixe these together, and giue the patient ʒ 1 thereof with Betony-water. Lozenges.℞ Sp. Dia musci dulcis, diambrae ana, ʒ 1. Dianthos, Cy∣namon of the best, ana, ℈ ss Nutmeg, Mace, Fennell-seede, ʒ i. of the finest Sugar dissolued in Betony water, and water of Rosemary, ana, q. s. make an Electuary in Lozenges, whereof eate one 3. houres before dinner. ℞ Sp. Diambrae, Diamusci dulcis, ana, ʒ 1. conserue of Rosemary, the flowers of Sage, of Acorus, ana, ℥ ss of Ma∣sticke,An Elec∣tuary. Cinamon, Orange rinds, ana, ʒ ss sir. Stechados q. s. make a soft Electuary of this. ℞ of Nutmegs ℈ ii. of Lingwort, of bastard Pellitory, ana,A powder to cause sneezing. ℈ ss of Pepper-wort, Maioram, ana, ℈ . ss oyle of Bea∣uers stone, ℈ 1. of Muske, gr. 1. make a sneezing powder hereof, and blow some of it into the patients nostrils with a quill. ℞ of Hysope, Maioram, Betony, ana, M 1. of Staues-acre, ʒ vi. of Mustard seede,A Garga∣risme. long Pepper, bastard Pellitory, ana, ʒ 1. ss; boyle these in a sufficient quantity of water: vn∣to lib. 1. of the decoction, adde Oxymellis simp. Mllis rosati, ana, ℥ 1. make a Gargarisme hereof, and vse it in the
morning before the patient eate any thing. ℞ of the powder of the seeds of Staues-acre, Pepper-wort, ana, ℈ 2. Nutmegs, Pepper, ℈ 1. hearb of Scammony ℈ , the iuice of Maioram, of clarified Hony, ana,A Lini∣ment. q s. make a Liniment therewith, and anoynt the inward part of the nostrils. ℞ of Rosemary, M 2. Betony, Maioram, M 1. Cammo∣mile, Mellilot, Origan, ana, M 1. ss, boyle these in water,An Em∣broch. vn∣till the third part bee consumed, and in conclusion adde a little distilled wine. ℞ the oyle of Camomile, of Lillies, ana, ℥ 1. de Euphor∣bio, ʒ 1. of Nutmegs, of the flowers of Staechas, ana,An Oynt∣ment. ℈ 2. ss with a little Waxe; make hereof an Oyntment: when∣soeuer occasion shall serue for the vse of this Oyntment, all the aforesayd ingredients must bee dissolued in Aqua Ʋitae, wherewith the head likewise should sometimes bee moystned. ℞ the oyle of white Lillies, ℥ 1. of Annis,An Oynt∣ment. ℈ 1. Nut∣megs, ʒ ss dip Cotton in them, and apply to the eares nigh the chinne. ℞ the oyle of white Lillies, Bayes, Rew,An Oynt∣ment. ʒ vi. Ʋi∣trioli Romani, somewhat burnt ℈ iiii. of VVaxe and Saffron a little, make an Oyntment of these, it is of great force, when as the disease is stubborne and re∣bellions. ℞ the flowers of Staechas, of Rosemary, Sage, Be∣tony, Maioram, Origan, dried Worme-wood, ana,A Quilt. M ss of Nutmegs, Mace, ʒ 1. Let them bee beaten toge∣ther and sewed into a red cloth, where of make a bagge in the forme of a cap, let the patient weare it for the space of 2 or 3 moneths, which must sometime be sprinkled with∣distilled Wine.
An appendix or addition seruing for the cure of cold HEAD-ACHE. FIrst of all the belly must be purged with a clyster, if the matter of the disease be tough, and viscous; it may be made subiect to nature by sharpe medicines, afterwards the other humors may bee expelled, when their course is turned from the head. Which being done, the head may be strengthned, and the reliques destroyed, which is easily brought to passe by the former medicines, if vniuersals be in right manner sorted with particulars: and here is to bee noted, that the former medicines may serue eyther for the Cephalea or Hemicranea. Sometime they may bee made stronger, but specially such medicines as are locall, because then the mischiefe is most rebellious. Amongst the other diseases of the head-ache, eyther an actuall or potentiall caution may doe some good. The head-ache which is cau∣sed by the French poxe, we will handle in his peculiar place. If the paine happen by a feauer, that shall first bee cured; if by staying too long in the sunne, mixe oyle of Roses, and Vineger, as also Rosewater, wherein dippe a linnea cloth, and apply it to the head. Let the patient sleepe without disturbance. A method seruing for the knowledge of the PALSEY or PARALISIS. A Palsey is a depriuing of sence and motion, not of the whole body, as in an Apoplexy, but when one side or all parts of the body vnder the head, or any other limbe is depriued of sence and motion, as Iaw, Tongue, Eye, Foote, Hand, Arme, Lippe. It also fals out that some part is depriued of the sensitiue faculty, the motiue faculty not being hurt; and contrarywise the motion dies, when as the sensitiue faculty remaines sound. Sometimes it hap∣pens, that neyther sense nor motion is quite taken away,
but onely waxeth dull, and is numbd. Physicians call this an imperfect Palsey, and the harbenger of a Palsey. And seeing that motion and sense is diuided but by one sinew, it doth so chance, that the motion is taken away, when as the sence remaines: because hard sinews are grafted in the limbes, which if they suffer but a small paine, pre∣sently feele it; because to the perfection of sense, a small portion of the sensitiue faculty is sufficient; for the sense of feeling doth rather seeme to suffer, then to bee an a∣gent. But to the perfection of motion, great store of a∣nimall faculty is required, whereby small hurt will sooner destroy the motion, then the sense. But why the sense doth sometime perish, and motion abids, this happens, because some parts doe participate of a twofold kinde of sinews. This mischiefe hath great affinity with the Apoplexy, and sometime is caused by a weake Apoplexy; and then it is called Paraplexia; and herein they differ; the Apoplexy seizeth vpon all parts of the body, depriuing them both of sense and motion; the Palsey seldome or neuer leaues the head without motion and sense, but the other parts of the body loose both motion and sense, and after a diffe∣rent manner: for if the beginning of the marrow of the backe-bone bee affected, all parts vnder the face doe sim∣pathize with it: if but one halfe of the backe-bone be affect∣ed, all parts hauing relation to that side, suffer in like man∣ner. But if the before mentioned parts are not hurt, but some particular sinew of some part of the body is loosed, that part whereof this nerue is ioyned, shall likewise loose sense and motion. The part affected. The beginning of the marrow of the backe-bone, which is the originall of all other sinews, is more grieuously an∣noyd then the braine; and then the face being vnhurt, all parts vnder the head are hurt: sometime it doth take hold on the left, or right side of the marrow of the backe-bone,
whereby the right or left side of the body is destitute of motion and sense, because the marrow of the backe-bone, euen as the braine, is deuided into two parts through∣out the whole length of the backe-bone, whereby the si∣newes on the right side, are separated from those of the left by a certaine filme, though very obscure, and so thereafter as the stopping of the sinews is in the right side or left, or both, the Palsey in like manner will seaze on the right, or left side, or the whole body. Sometime the braine is affected, but not the whole substance of the brain, for then an apoplexy would be caused, but the right or left side of the braine, and then that part of the face as also that side of the body, whether right or left, doth suffer with the braine, and when as any part of the face is bereft of sense and motion, the rising of the sinews, from the third coniugation of the braine, are affected. Sometime one part of the body is voyd of sense and motion; which is caused by the resolution of a sinew comming from the braine, or from some part of the marrow of the backe-bone, from which, the part affected doth take sense and motion. Wherefore we ought to take paines in the Anatomy, that wee may know where this mischiefe keepes its first re∣sidence, as also the distributions of the sinews, and from what part of the marrow of the backe-bone, euery part hath its sinews. For this is an affect, belonging to the offended action of the animall faculties, sensitiue, and motiue. The Signes. The palsied part, if it bee lifted vp, falleth backe againe; it is soone coole, and in time withers; their vrine for the most part is white, and sometimes inclining to rednesse, by reason of the great paine in the Kidneys, or because they cannot separate blood from the whayish moisture, by reason of their weaknes; if one side be affected, that is cold, the other hot, and the eye of the affected side is abated; if the iaw, or any other part of the face bee seazed on by
the Palsey, it is wrested toward the contrary sound part. In this mischiefe, sense perisheth, the motion being per∣fect: sometime motion is taken away, and sense doth re∣maine: oftentimes both are gone, and then this mischiefe is at his full height, the pulse is faint, slow, little, and soft. The causes. It is caused by a cold and moist distemper, sometime by an impostume, or some other tumor crushing the sinews, or marrow; also it is caused by a wound, a fall, a fracture, too straight a ligature, luxation of bones in the backe by a stroke; but it is caused for the most part by thin and wa∣terish humors, deriued from the braine, which doe in∣sinuate into the pores and substance of the sinews, and so the sinews being made too soft, are loosned and slackned, and doe sucke in so much moysture, that they stop the head of the sinews, whereby the passage of the animall Faculty is hindered: which hath his originall from the braine, as from its first originall, and like a sunne-beame, doth thence breake forth, and is spread abroad in the lower parts, and distributes both sense and motion to those parts; when a part is bereft of the animall Spirits, it falleth down as though it were withered, and is immoueable: hereof this shall be a signe, that it comes suddenly. But if any part, by reason of great abundance of thinne humors doe swell very much, then will follow a conuulsion in that part. It is also as often caused by grosse humors, which being driuen vpon the sinews, doe cause obstructions, and oftentimes such, that the passage of the animall Spirits is stopped: which is the reason of the sinews withering and falling. It is some∣time caused by grosse Spirits, because they haue some euill quality, eyther hid, or apparent. Prognostiques. A Palsey which is caused by the cutting of a sinew ouer∣thwart, is incurable. A Palsey is oftner caused in the win∣ter; and in old men is neuer, or hardly cured; because na∣tiue
heate is deficient in them, whereby, cold, and grosse humours are generated in them: the Palsey which is onely in some part, is neuer sharpe, but of a long continuance. A Palsey is occasioned by a weake Apoplexy and is to bee feared, lest it should returne to that againe. There is better hopes for the cure of it in the spring, and summer seasons, then in the Autumnall and winter; if an ague, and a shaking come vpon the party affected, it doth presage health. Generall directions seruing for the cure of the PALSEY. Let the Aire bee hote and dry, procured by a fire, if the season of the yeere require it, or by a perfume of Cloues, and Rosemary. His meate must likwise bee such as heat, and dry, let him eate rosted Chickens, Capons, Hens, small Birds, reere Egges. Hee must abstaine from swines flesh, fish and broaths; or at the least let them bee amended by art. Let his diet bee slender vntill the 14th. day. For it is very good for the patient to bee ab∣stemious; let his drinke bee small, and hee may drinke Water sweetned with Hony, or Cynamon-water, or hyp∣pocras. It is very expedient that hee moderatly exercise the part affected. Sleepe in the day time must bee auoy∣ded, his meate must bee such as is answerable to his belly, and he should not any way be troubled in mind. Preparers. Hydromel, Oxymel, the decoction of the Roots of Flowers-de-luce, of Sage, Staechas, Nutmegs, Cinamon. Syr: Staechados, Hysop, Acetosus Simplex, Byzantinus, Mel rosatum, Oxymel Squilliticum. The water of Sage, of Rosemary, Betony, Maioram, Baulme, Primrose, a potion of the decoction of Sage, Betony, Hysope, Nutmegges, Cloues, Cynamon, Staechas Flowers, and Rosemary Flow∣ers, with the roots of Acorus; to which adde some of the former sirrupe. For the space of 5 or 6 dayes the humors
must bee extenuated, and preparation made for ex∣pulsion first of all by gentle medicines; then wee will euacuate and vse stronger; but such as are compounded with Vineger, are obnoxious; for Vineger is an enemy to the sinews: wherefore if wee doe vse Vineger, wee will mingle with it such simples as doe strengthen the si∣news. The Cephalica veine shall bee opened on that side that is sound, if the Palsey bee caused by blood,Emptiers. and the body bee full, a small quantity of bloud shall be taken away, lest the naturall heat in a cold body, and by a cold disease, should be extinguished. A potion of the roots of Acorus. Flower-de-luce, Sage, Rosemary, Betony, Flowers of Staechas, Senae, Agaricke, Turbith, Ginger, Nutmeg, Cy∣namon, Hony, Sugar. Pills of Coccia, Assaiaret, Aga∣ricke, Alephanginae Fetidae, Mastichinae, de Sagapeno, de Opopanace, de Euphorbio, Hyera-Diacolocynth. Hiera, Picra Galeni, Hiera Logodali, Diacatholicum, Aga∣ricke made into Trochiskes: Vomits and clysters once in euery weeke are permitted. In this disease we will rather vse pills then Electuaries; because they draw the corrupt matter from the parts of farthest distance, wee must beginne the cure with gentle purging medicines, especially in a dull palsey, and the foureteenth day after, wee will vse stronger, fearing that the gentler medicines should not preuaile. Clysters of Sage, Betony, Staechas, Origan, Mallowes,Auerters. Cammomile, Maioram, Centory the lesse, Hollihock, Rew, Mercury, the Electuary of Elescopi, Hiera-picra, Benedicta Laxatiua, Diacatholicon, oyle of Cammomile, Lillies, by lit∣tle and little we will vse stronger. Let cupping-glasses with∣out scarification be fastned to the roote of the sinews, and so leisurely bee remoued to the part affected, that the natu∣rall spirit and heate may bee drawne to it, and the drowsie faculty bee awaked; but lest the strength bee dissolued, let the cupping-glasses remaine thereon but a short time.
An Apophlegmatisme of Nutmeg; Gargarismes; Er∣rhnes; Sneezes; dry frictions; eyther with the hands or a warme cloth, are excellent; let a plaister of mustard-seede bee layed to the nape of the necke; wee will not vse these drawing medicines before the patient bee 3. or 4. times purged. Such as doe strengthen the braine, and that doe digest the reliques, and amend the distemper, must now bee vsed. It is apparent, that Triacle and Mithridate doe much good in his case, Aurca Alexandrina, and Tria∣cle water, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Pliris arconticum, Dia∣muscum dulce, Diambra, new Conserue of Roses, Confectio Anacardina, Preserued Acorus, Preserued Ginger, and Bastard Pellitory preserued. Diacastoreum, Aqua msa∣lis of our description, is herein of great force. Conserue of Sage, Betony, Rosemary-flowers, Flowers of Staechas, Ele∣campana, Galingal. Let pils be made of the oyle of Beauer∣stone Assa Faetida, Nutmeg, and the ayre of a Douehouse is good by a secret property; let him hold a Nutmeg in his mouth and chew it, a Hares braine rosted is good; the decoction of the wood Guaiacum, Sarsaparilla, Cyna with Honey, if the disease bee stubborne: A decoction with the roots of Acorus, Flower-de-luce, Worme-seede, Ginger, Staechas, Sage, dried Hysop, Maioram, Rosemary, Ground pine, Nutmeg, Cloues, Rootes of Cyna, Guaia∣cum wood, Honey: make a Fomentation for the part affect∣ed, with the decoction of Milke-thistle; let the whole decoction bee applyed to it: make also a bath for the part affected of the decoction of a Fox, and couer the place affected with the warme skinne. But first of all anoynt the place with the Oyle of a Foxe, and let that bee done af∣ter the bath hath beene vsed, or in the stead of this bath, let him vse a bath of Brimstone or Nitre, and that which doth settle in the bottome, shall bee taken out, and applied to the part first affected: make likewise a hote-house with a meete vessell therein, wherein let the patient enter morning and euening: it is not amisse, if stones were
heat red hot, and a little hot Wine sprinckled vpon them, which must then bee so neere layd to the patient, that the smoake may ascend to his nostrils. As soone as the patient is come out of the stew, or hot-house, he must goe to bed, & therein sweat; which that he may the better doe, let him drink of old triacle, ʒ i. and anoynt the roots of his sinews with some oyntment. Likewise a dry bath may bee made with a conuenient decoction, which must bee put into a vessell, and vnder this make a fire, and a pipe must be soe fastened to this vessell, that the vapour may bee conuey∣ed to the patient. An oyntment of Agrippa, Martiatum, Bdellium. An oyntment of the oyle of Foxes, of the oyle of Beuer stones, Nutmeg, oyle of Spiknard, oyle of Pepper, Camomile, Lillies, powder of Wormes, Galingale, Pep∣per, Hony, oyle of Rew, of Philosophers, of St-Iohns wort, of Bays, of Turpentine, Costini, Aquaevita, oyl of brimstone. Too much vse of hot medicines doth bring a resolution: wherefore Oyles that too much heate and dry, may not safely be permitted: such medicines as are resoluing may not bee vsed, vntill the patient bee purged at the least 4. times, amongst which medicines frictions may bee very well reckoned. Also an especiall care ought to bee had in applying outward remedies, and seeking out the part primarily affected, whereunto wee must minister helpe, and not vnto those that are secundarily affected. The cure of the Palsey more particularly. ℞ of Sage, Maioram, Hyssop, Calaminth, of Centory the lesser ana, M i. ss, of white, and light Agaricke ℥ ss,A Clyster. flowers of Camomile, Staechas, Mellilot, ana, M i. Boyle these in a suffi∣cient quantity of water, vnto lb i. add to that which is strai∣ned forth Benedictae laxatiuae, Electuarij Elescopi, ana, ʒ vi. of oyle of Lillies, ℥ iij. of Malmesey ℥ iij. ss, of Salt, ʒ ss. Mixe these together, whereof make a Clyster; the which hee may vse twice in a weeke, vntill hee bee recouered. ℞ syr. Staechados ℥ ii. Mellis rosati, syr. of Hysope, ana,Iulep. ℥ i. the decoction of Sage, the water of Hysope, and Rose∣mary,
ana, ℥ iii. hereof make a Iulep. A pleasant water for the pallate, and no lesse wholesome.℞ of Hysope M iii. ss, of Sage, Rosemary▪ ana, M i. boyle them in water as much as doth suffice, vntill the third part bee consumed. Adde to the straining of Hony, as much as is sufficient, whereof make a pleasing water to drinke, for the space of a moneth and halfe. ℞ of the rootes of Angelica, ℥ ss, Aristolochia rot. ʒ iii. Acri ℥ i. of Sage,A Potion. Maioram, Betony, ana, M i. ss, the flow∣ers of Staechas M ss, Snae Alexandrin, ℥ i. ss, white and light Agaricke, ʒ i. ss, of Cynamon, Ginger, ana, ʒ i. boyle these in a sufficient quantity of water, adde to the straining the syrrupe of Staechas ℥ iii. make a potion hereof. Pills.℞ of the pils de Euphorbio, Fetidarum, ana ℈ ss, Cochia∣rum, of the best Turbith, ana ℈ i. of the oyle of Beauers stones, ℈ ss, the iuice of the hearbe Scammony, gr. iii; of these make pils, which hee must take when hee goes to bed. ℞ of Agarick, made into a Tochisk, ℈ i. Hierae diacolocyn∣thidos ʒ i. ss,A morsell. of Nutmeg, ℈ ss▪ conserue of Rosemary flowers q. s. make hereof a morsell. Pills.℞ the pills de Opopanace ℈ ii. Fetidarum, of the oyle of Beauers stones, ana gr. xii. hereof make pills, the which hee may vse twice or thrice in a weeke. ℞ of Mustardseed, of Staues-acre, ana ʒ i. of bastard-Pel∣litory,A Garga∣risme. ʒ i. ss, of Turbith ℈ iiii. of Rew, of Sage, of Hysope ana M ii. ss, make a decoction with a sufficient quantity of water; vnto lb i, ss, adde Oxymellis simplicis, Squillitiei, Mellis rosati, ana ℥ i. hereof make a Gargarisme. A Sternu∣tation.℞ of Pepper-wort, ʒ i. Cyclaminis ʒ ss, of white Pepper, of the oyle of Beauers stone, ana ℈ i. mixe these with Hony, and anoynt the Nostrils, that sneezing may bee prouoked. A Mastica∣tory.℞ of Nutmeg, bastard Pellitory, of the seede of Staues-acres, ana ʒ i. ss, of Hysope, ʒ ii. white Pepper, Raisins, ana ʒ i. as much Hony as is sufficient, make hereof little lumps to be chewed. A Vomit.℞ Oxymellis squillitici ℥ ii. of the decoction of Radish-roots,
sweete Maioram, ℥ vi. oyle of Spikenard, ℥ i. ss min∣gle these, and make a vomit thereof, if necessity require, you may helpe the patient with a feather dipped in oyle. ℞ of the conserue of Acorus, Rosemary,A mixture. ana ℥ i. Dia∣castorei ʒ ii. of old Triacle ʒ ii. ss, Confectionis anacardinae, Diamusci dulcis, ana ʒ iiii. mixe these together, and let the patient take euery morning and euery other night the quantity of a Chestnut. ℞ of Triacle ʒ i. Aquae vitae, the iuyce of Betony,A Potion. ana ℥ i. Let him take it twice in a weeke. ℞ conserue of the flowers of Sage, Rosemary flowers,A Compound. ana ℥ i. of the rootes of Elecampany preserued, Ginger pre∣serued, ana ℥ s, of the Triacle of Andromachus, Mithri∣date; ana ʒ i. ss, Nutmeg ʒ i. sirrupe of Stoechas, q. s. make a compound hereof and let him take ℥ ss when hee goes to bed. ℞ of the conserued Sage flowers, ℥ i. of Rosemary,Another. the roots of Acorus ana ℥ ss, of Nutmeg, Pepper, Cloues, ana ℈ ii. sir. of Staechas, q. s. make a mixture, and after dinner let the patient take thereof ʒ i. ℞ of Mithridate ℈ i. of Triacle ʒ i. of Sage water ℥ iiii. hereof make a draught.A draught. ℞ of the oyle of Turpentine, petrolei, oyle of Bricke,An Oynt∣ment. of Foxes ana ℥ ss, oyle of Beauers stones, of Wormes ana ʒ iii. Mastichini ʒ i. ss, of bastard Pellitory, ʒ i. of Sage, Nut∣meg, ana ℈ i. ss, Gummi ammoniaci ʒ i. ss Castorei ʒ ss, dissolue these in Wine, and adde to these a sufficient quantity of Waxe, so that the Oyntment bee soft: with this anoynt the parts affected, and the ends of the sinews; and the parts of the backe, and necke shall bee well chafed with a rough cloth, but before all other, the following Oyntment may be vsed. ℞ of the oyle of Cammomile, of Spikenard,An Oynt∣ment. ana ʒ vi. Lil∣lies, Turpentine, the grease of Foxes, oyle of wormes, ana ℥ ss, Aqua vitae ʒ vi. of wax, q. s. make an oyntment of this
and anoynt those parts therewith that haue lost all sense, as also those parts which doe impart to them the sense of feeling, and they must all bee kept very warme with clothes. An Oynt∣ment.℞ the oyle of Cammomile, ℥ iij. of Lillies ℥ i. and with that alone anoynt the top, or beginning of the sinews, the body being purged. It is likewise good to wash the parts affected with hot water, if it bee done with great strength. ℞ of Pepper, Iuniper, Mustard seede, ana, ℈ ii. of the fruite of Anacardium,A soft oynt∣ment. ʒ ss, of the rootes of wilde Pellitory, Salis ammoniaci ana▪ ʒ i. ss: boyle them in ℥ iiii. of white Wine, of Malmsey ℥ viii, oyle of Turpentine, of Bayes, Petro∣lei, ana, ℥ ii: boyle them vntill the Wine be consumed: adde then thereto the oyle of Beauers stone, Euphorbij, Galbai, Myrrhe, bdellij, ana, ʒ i. ss, of Waxe q. s. make hereof a soft oyntment, and after the part affected is anoynted therewith couer it with a Foxe skin, so that the oyntment bee well rub'd in with a hot cloth. Let a bath likewise be made of a Foxe, or the whelps, but first flay them,A Bath. and take out their guts; in this bath, the resolued parts, as also the marrow of the backe bone must bee bathed; adde thereto Sage, Hysope, Bay leaues, Staechas; Rosemary, Rew, the roots of Pellitory, of Acorus, of Flower-de-luce, Elecampane, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot. A Fomen∣tation.℞ the oyle of St. Iohns-wort, of Lillies, Cammomile, ana, ℥ ii. oyle of brickes, of Turpentine, of Foxes, ℥ i. ss, dippe toosed Wooll herein, and first wash the part affected, then lay it thereon. This Fomentation must bee done by the fire. ℞ of Bay leaues, Sage, Hysope, ana. M ii. boyle these in Wine,A dry Bath. then take some stones, and heate them as hot as may bee, being hot, cast them into some conuenient vessell, and besprinckle them with the decoction; the vessell must bee so placed, that the patient may receiue all the fume, and
ayre that ascends: the fittest place for this purpose is in some hot-house, as was shewed before; and this must bee done morning, and euening as long as he can well indure it; and when hee doth come out of this hot-house, let him take of Triacle, ʒ i. and so goe into his warme bed, and sweat after it. After 3. houres the beginning of the marrow of the backe bone must be anoynted with the aforesayd oynt∣ment. ℞ of Rew leaues, Bay leaues, Hysope, St. Iohns-wort,A Quilt. Sage, ana, M i, ss, of the flower of Staechas, Spica, ana, M ss, of Beauers-stone ʒ i. Nutmeg, Cloues, Mace, ana, ʒ s; beate these into a powder, and put them into a Quilt. An appendix or addition seruing for the cure of the PALSEY. FIrst, the belly must be purged by a clyster: and after 5. or 6. dayes, hee may take such things, as will prepare the matter; and then againe, gentler purges must bee pre∣scribed, before the humours bee carried another way; for some few dayes he must abstaine from preparing and pur∣ging medicines, and in the interim, let the humours that runne to the part affected, be dissolued by Clysters, Garga∣rismes, Sneesings, and medicines that prouoke vomiting. Then againe there may be vsed such medicines as will make the humours more plyable, and expell them being well concocted, by which meanes stronger medicines may with more safety be vsed; after that, shall the palsied part be strengthned, and the reliques consum'd: and then againe, let him for a while forbeare taking medicines, onely once euery weeke, or at the most, twice, let him haue a clyster, and then wee may vse such as doe prepare, and purge the body; and in the meane space, cupping-glasses must be fast∣ned to the roote of the marrow of the backebone; for by these meanes we shall bring backe the sense to the affected part. For the cure of the particular palsied part, an especiall
care must bee had, that the locall medicines bee applied to that part, from whence the palsied sinew doth arise, not vpon the whole backe-bone, or braine. Likewise care ought to bee had, that those things that will draw spirits, and blood to the part affected, may bee applied. Play∣sters of Pitch, Salt, and Mustardseede are excellent for this purpose, and after the aforesayd manner wee will cure the dulnesse, if it so oppresse any part of the body, that it may seeme to bee as it were a broken, or diminished palsey: if the palsey bee caused by a cold and ill consti∣tution, wee will not vse purging medicines, but onely such as are hot, and haue an alteratiue power. A method seruing for the knowledge of MELAN∣CHOLY, or BLACKE CHOLER. MElancholy is a kinde of doting without a feauer, ari∣sing from a melancholy humour, which so disturbes the seate of the minde, that they speake, and doe things repugnant to reason, and that with feare and sadnesse; this name is giuen to this disease from the matter, and cause thereof. 3. kinds of melancholy.There be three kinds of Melancholies. The first com∣meth of grosse Melancholy blood, being full of dregs, ga∣thered together in the braine: for Melancholy iuice is more  boyld then it should, all the other blood in the body remai∣ning pure. The second happens, when as all the veines of the bo∣dy  are bedewed with melancholy blood, caused for the most part by the corruption of the liuer, which doth in∣gender grosse and faeculent blood; or else by the spleene, when as eyther by weakenesse, or obstruction it cannot clense the liuer from such dregs. The third kinde is called hypocondriacall melancholly; of which in the next chapter wee will say somewhat more largely.
The part affected. The part affected is the braine, which is hereby knowne: because some principall facultie of the braine is hurt; for from the braine, all the soules principall faculties do spring: and it so chances, that the braine in this disease is tainted, because it is a similar part; for the whole temper of the braine is changed into cold and dry by the melancholy hu∣mour; and herein it appeares, because it neyther sud∣denly comes, neyther is the party suddenly ridde of it. The whole essence of the braine is sometime hurt, and then it cannot appeare that the sides vnder the short ribs, or the stomacke, or any other part is annoyed. But sometimes the symptomes of melancholike men are more apparent, because they be more increased, and then a leaden hiew doth appeare in the face: sometime it is hurt by con∣sent of the stomacke and Mirach. Sometime through the corruption of the whole body; and then the face is of a blackish colour. Lastly, there is a suppression of monthly tearmes, or of pyles, or of some vsuall excrement, viz. the superfluities of the liuer, and spleene. The habit of the bo∣dy is leane, hairy, and inclining to blacknesse, and the veines are larger then they should be. By this that is sayd, wee may vnderstand this effect to bee nothing else, then a deprauing of the function of the principall faculty; and therefore wee may rather call it a symptome, then a disease. The imaginary faculty is offended, but the memory and thoughts are free. In conclusion, wee will say that melancholy is a symptome seeking the ruine of the principall faculties action, viz. ima∣ginatiue. The Signes. The signes of melancholy are feare and sadnesse, euill thoughts without any manifest cause, for vapours ari∣sing from blacke choler, doe darken the minde; and the braine is as it were clowded all ouer, inioying small light of reason, which may appeare by their actions.
They are toucht with a wearinesse of life, and with ill and deepe thoughts of minde. At length they talke very idlely. Oftentimes you shall finde them crying; and now they de∣light in solitarynes, within short time, they will as much condemne it; they are euer musing, and thinking that they are beguiled, or that some plots are working against them; their sleepe is short, and oftentimes they are therein dis∣quieted with troublesome dreames: besides these affects, which are alwaies common to melancholy men, some are euer laughing, others euer weeping; some imagine them∣selues to be prophets, foretelling much of things to come; some haue such an imagination, that they are mighty men; others suppose themselues to bee transformed into some strange shape, whereby they counterfeit the voyces and actions of Cuckoes, some of Cocks, or of some other beasts; some thinke they are earthen vessels, and by that reason go aside, lest they should be hurt or broken by them that meete them; some, though they dread death, yet doe they wish it, and sometime kill themselues; some thinke they be without heads, others without legs; some, armelesse; some refuse meat, supposing the terme of their liues to be at an end: some do imagine theeues are come, and that officers wait for them to carry them to prison, some feare that the earth will swallow thē vp; some are disquieted with other imaginations, euen as his former course of life was: some are busied with warlike affaires, strifes, studies, prayers, or other courses whereunto they were addicted: in a word, these dreame waking. The Causes. The cause of this, is the cold and dry distemper of the braine, whether it doth happen by nature, or accidentally by a melancholy humour, and ill vapors generated in the o∣ther parts, or of old time left there: from hence it is, that blacke and dreggish vapours doe creepe into the seate of the mind, wherby the braine is darkned. It is also caused by
too much heate in the head, so that the blood is burnt vp, and from thence come melancholy vapours, which some∣time is obserued in feauers. A continuation of sadnesse, su∣perfluous watchings, solitarynes, and the staying of monthly tearmes and piles, brings this disease; for maligne vapour carried vp by the corrupt blood, doth vitiate the minde. Againe, the vse of such things that doe not nourish well, especially if they bee not well digested, oftentimes cause this disease; to widdows, and such as are deepely in loue, this doth commonly happen; because the minde is spent with care and griefe; sometime the liuer is in fault, when by reason of some great distemper, it doth beget store of blacke blood. Sometime it is caused by the spleene, when as it doth draw great store of that blood, and doth not expell it; for hereby in time the whole body is bedew∣ed with melancholy blood. Prognostiques. Melancholy, which doth seaze vpon the essence of the braine, and continues long, making the affect as it were na∣turall, is altogether incurable: yet if it were taken at the be∣ginning, the cure would be easier. Too much sadnes, and im∣moderate feare is a signe of melancholy: but if they that are troubled with this affect, are troubled with the pyles, there is hope of cure. And it is to be feared, that it should grow to an Apoplexy, or conuulsion, or madnesse, or falling sick∣nesse, and therefore this mischiefe must presently be cured. Melancholy is troublesome to men, but especially old men, but to women it is dangerous. Melancholy caused by the corruption of the whole body, as also that which is caused by the default of the braine, is hardly cured. A method seruing for the cure of MELANCHOLY. IT is wrought by these remedies following. Let the aire be cleare, of a wholesome smell, moyst, and in the rest
temperate; his diet must bee such as doe moysten in a meane, and such as is of good iuyce, and easie digestion, not breeding wind: reere eggs, flesh of Hens, Capons, Chickens, Partriges: Fish of tender substance. Parsely, Raysins, Endiue, Borage, Buglosse, Lettuce, Mallowes, Spinage, may be vsed in broths: let him drinke white Wine, and exercise himselfe moderately, and walke in pleasant places; hee may sleepe somewhat longer then ordinary; if nature cannot expell the excrements, art must bee vsed: perturbations of the minde must chiefely be auoyded, especially feare and sadnesse, and in stead thereof the minde must bee cherished with mirth, stedfastnesse and good hopes. Preparers. The sirrupe of the iuyce of Borage, Buglosse, or Violets, of Epithymon, of Apples, Quinces, Fumitory, Hops, Oxymel simplex; waters of Buglosse, Hops, Fumitory, Endiue, Suc∣cory, and Baulme. A decoction of Fennill-roots, rootes of Parsely, Capers, Licorice, the rindes of Tamariscus, Epi∣thymi: Thyme, Fumitory, Scolopendria; flowers of Borage, Buglosse, and Violets, Raysins: the sirrupe of Epithy∣mum, Licorice, Fumitory, Buglosse, Violets; those that doe moysten, and moderately heate, especially are to bee made choyce of; for the faulty humor is made cold and dry by reason of adustion. Emptiers. The former decoction, whereto adde damaske Pruines, Polipody, Sene, Mirabaloni Indi, Emipelitici, Diasena, Cassia; the infusion of Sene leaues, and Epithymon are very good. Confectio Hamch, Hierae Diacolocynthidos, Logodali. Diase∣nae, N. Pillulae Indae, de lapide Lazuli, lapis armenus, Cyaneus, Polipody, Epithymon, Sene, Mirabolani kebuli, nigri, Beares-foote; the Helleborisme of Mathiolus. Let the median veine bee opened; if the whole body abound with melan∣choly blood, if the median appeare not, wee may open a veine in the anckle, especially in women, whose monthly
termes ae suppressed, or in men, who formerly had the piles; but if the braine be in fault, it is not so requisite, vn∣lesse it cannot bee cured by other meanes, and then the C∣phalica veine shall be cut; if this will not preuaile, we must cut a veine in the forehead. Wee must begin with milder medicines, and seldome vse purgers, because they will dry more then is required; and also the matter must bee empti∣ed by distances of time, that nature may bee releeued. Al∣wayes moystners shall bee mingled with laxatiue medi∣cines, and such as may comfort the spirits, and principall parts. Auerters. Clysters of the decoction of Anni-seeds, Fennell-seedes, wilde saffron, Hops, Thyme, Epithymon, Mallowes, Mercury, Fumitory, Buglosse, Polipody, Sene, Diasena, confectio Ha∣mech▪ Dacatholicon, Hiera Logodali, cassia; oyle of Violets, of sweet Almonds. Suppositers; Frictions of the extreme parts; Ligatures also of those parts, and bathing with hot water; sternutatories; and masticatories. We must endea∣uour to bring downe the monthly tearmes, and pyles, if this disease did take the originall from them. Cupping-glasses without scarification, may bee layd to his rib-gri∣stles. Horse-leeches may bee set to his forehead, and other parts. Let Cauteries be made in the coronall seame, and the thicknesse of the skull may bee diminished by a Trepan, that a conueyance may bee made for smoaky and sutty va∣pours. Strengtheners. Electuarium laetificans Galeni de gemmis, Diamargaritum frigidum, Dianthos, plere sarcotium confectio de granis tincto∣rijs▪ Diagalanga, Diacuminum, diabuglossatum, diaboragina∣tum. Diambra, Electuarium conciliatoris, diamuscum sweet and bitter; sir. of Quinces, of Apples; the great conserue of our description; Borage, Buglosse, Violets, Roses, Fumitory, Orange-rinds, cōserue of Elecampane, Satyrion, the decoctiō of
Saccharum violatum, rosatum, manus Christi; an odour of Rosewater, violets an irrhigation of the head being shaued, with the decoction of the flowers of Nymphaea, Lettuce, Mallowes, Staechas, Violets, Camomile, Holyhokes, and Weathers-head, which hee shall vse many dayes in the morning. An epitheme for the heart; of the water of Bug∣losse, Borage, Water-lillies, Violets, odoriferous Wine, Bawlme leaues, Nutmeg, both Behens Cloues, Sorell-seede, a fomentation of the belly, made with oyle, wherein Cum∣mine, Rew, Carrot, and Dill seed haue bene boyld. An oynt∣ment for the backe-bone, of the oyle of Violets, of sweet Almonds, Dill, Camomile, and Water-lillies: often bathing in sweete water, is very wholesome, especially if the leaues of Mallows, Violets, Roses, Water-lillies, Weathers-heads Linseede, Fenegreeke Buglosse, Cammomile, Melilote flow∣ers haue bene boyled. Correctors of accidents. Sirrupe of Poppy, of Violets, with Lettuce water, Philonium Romanum, Triphera magna, pills of Hounds-tongue; a lotion for the head, of the decoction of the flow∣ers of Water-lillies and Violet-flowers, and rootes of Man∣drake, Henbane, white Poppy; an oyntment of the oyle of Dill, Water-lillies, Popler, Violets, Opium, and Saffron. Wee must vse such as will procure sleepe, for this is great ease to the patient; whereas watchings are hurtfull, but Opiates must not be administred, vnlesse necessity requires. A more particular method for the curing of the MELANCHOLY. ℞ of the leaues of Beete, Mallowes, Violets, Mercury, Hops,A Clyster. ana M i. ss, Borage, M ij. Epithymi, ℥ ss, of the flowers of Elder, M i. ss, of Anni-seed, Lini, ana ℥ i. of the seede of Bastard Saffron beaten, Polipodij quecini, ana ℥ i. ss, Senae Alexandrinoe, ℥ i. the rinde of Beares-foote, ʒ i. Boyle these in Whey, q. s, vnto lb i. ss, adde to that which is strai∣ned
forth, Sp. Hierae logodali, ʒ ss, oyle of violets, Lillies, ana ℥ i. ss, of Salt ʒ i. hereof make a Clyster which may bee vsed twice euery weeke. ℞ Syr. de Epithymo, the sir. of Apples, of Violets,A Sirrupe. ana ℥ i. Buglosse▪ Fumitary, ana ℥ ss, of the water of Borage, Fumi∣tary, Violets, ana ℥ iiij. hereof make a sirrupe. ℞ of Anni-seeds, ʒ iij. of the leaues of Sene ℥ i. ss,A draught. Epi∣thymi ℥ ss Damaske Pruines, no▪ x. Let them be grossely bea∣ten, and infused one day in the whey of Goates milke, q. s. hereof make a Potion. ℞ of the roots of Fennell, of grasse, ana ℥ i. ss,A potion. Borage-flowers, of Violets, Epithymi, ana M i, ss, of Hops, Fumi∣tary, M i. Anni-seede, ℥ ss, Raisins, the stones being taken out, of pure Barley, ana ℥ i. of scraped Licorice, ʒ iii. of Tammariscus rinds, ℥ ss, Senae Alexandrinae, ℥ i. ss, Rhabarb. Indorum Myrobalonarum, ana ʒ ii, Polipodij quercini, ʒ x. Boile these in a sufficient quantity of water, vnto lb i. ss, adde to the straining, sir. de Epithymo, of Fumitary, ana ℥ i. ss, hereof make a potion. ℞ Confectionae hamech. ʒ v. Pulueris sancti ʒ i. sir. Epi∣thymi, ℥ i. the water of Fumitary, of Borage, ana ʒ i. ss,A draught. make a draught hereof. ℞ Confect. hamech, Diaptuni compositi,Another. ana ʒ iiii. sir. of Succory with Rhabarb. ℥ i. of the common decoction q. s. hereof make a draught. ℞ Pillularum Indarum, ℈ ii. Pul. Hierae logod:Pills. ℈ i. trochisci alhandal. gr. iii. sir. de Epithymo q. s. make pills hereof. ℞ Massae pillul. de Hiera composita, ʒ ss Cochiarum,Pills. ℈ i. trochi scorum alhandal. gr. iiii. sir. of Staechas, of Violets, ana q. s. make it into Pills. ℞ Pillularum de lapide lazuli, aggregatiuarum, Indarum,Pills. ana ℈ i. diagr. gr. iii. sir. de Epithymo q. s. ℞ Hierae logodali, ʒ i. Hìerae diacolo. ℈ i. Sena Alex. ℈ i. ss sirrupe of Violets, ℥ i. ss,A purging potion. Violet-water ℥ iii. make a draught hereof.
A vomiting Potion.℞ of the roots of Radishes of an equall bignes, bore holes thorow thē, fasten small pieces of Lingwort to them: and on the third day, when as the Radish roote shall haue drawne the strength from the Lingwort, boyle it in Oxy∣ml Squillit. the Lingwort being quite taken away: hereof giue the patient ℥ ii with ℥ iiij of warme water. Another.℞ of the roots of Lingwort ʒ iiij. infuse them in lb ss, of the water of Buglosse ouer hote embers; strayne it, and make a syrupe thereof with clarified Hony: giue to the patient one spoonfull hereof in broth that is somwhat fat; whereunto adde Hierae Logod. ℈ ii. A conserue.℞ the Conserue of Violets, of Buglosse ana ℥ i ss Sp. Laetificantis Galeni, ℈ ii. Dianthos, Diamusci dulcis, Electi. de Gemmis, ana ʒ ii Diamargariti. Frigid. Diatraga∣canthi frigidi, ana ʒ i ss, syr. of violets, of apples ana q. s. 2. howres before dinner or supper the patient may take ʒ i. A soft elec∣tuary.℞ Elect. Laetificantis Gal. ℥ ss, Corticum Conditorum Citri, ʒ iij Sacchari Violarum, Rosarum, ana ℥ ss syr. of the iuyce of Borage q. s. ℞ Plerisarcont. Laetificantis Galeni, ana ʒ ii Sacchari, Violace,A comfor∣ting Potion et Rosacei, ana ℥ i: let ʒ iiij bee giuen with strong Wine. An Opiate.℞ the Conserue of Buglosse ℥ i ss Sp. Laetificantis Galeni ℈ i Sp: Diarrh abbatis Sine Mosco, ℈ ss. the seede of Citrines, of the best Cinamon, ℈ ss. syr of Violets, Buglosse, ana, q. s. Lozenges.℞ Sp. Electuarij de gemmis, ʒ i ss Dianthos, Dambrae, ana ℈ ii: of the purest Sugar dissolued in Violet water, and Bug∣losse water q. s. let this electuary bee made into Lozenges. A bath.℞ of the Flowers of water Lillies, Borage, Buglosse, Vio∣lets, ana M ii: of Camomill, Melilote, ana M iij. of the leaues of Mallows, Altheae, ana M ii of the seeds of Linus, Fen∣greeke, of barley ana ℥ iij, of Cowcumber, Gourd ana ℥ ii. 2 or 3 heads of Wethers. Boyle them in water q. s. make a bath of it, wherein put new Cows milke, of fresh butter
lb iij. bathe the body herewith 6 houres before meales. ℞ of the flowers of Cammomile M ii. ss, of Staechas,An Em∣broch. of water Lillies, ana M i. of Lettuce, Mallows, Violets, wild Mallows, ana M i, ss, 2 heads of weathers, boyle them in wa∣ter, q. s. to the third part, hereof make an irrhigation, where∣with besprinckle the patients head, being newly shaued, and then apply the lights of a Ram as hot as they come out of the belly, vnto the head. ℞ the oyle of Violets, ℥ i. of sweete Almonds,An Vn∣guent. of Cam∣momile, ana ℥ ss, of Annis, oyle of Mace, ana ℥ ii. make an vn∣guent, with which the head after lotion shall be anoynted. ℞ the oyle of Violets, of Lillies,Another. ana ℥ i. of sweete Al∣monds, of Capons grease, of mans fat ℥ ss, wherewith the backe must bee anoynted after the patient doth come out of the bath. ℞ sir. de Papauere ℥ i. ss, of Violets,A sirrupe to cause sleepe. ℥ ss, the water of Vi∣olets, of Lettuce, ana ℥ i. ss, make a sir. to procure sleepe. ℞ Oyle of Violet, of mandrake, of water Lillies ana ℥ ss,An Oynt∣ment. of Nutmeg, ℈ ss. saffron gr. v. of Opium, gr. iii. of waxe q. s. make an Oyntment to cause sleepe, wherewith anoynt the temples, wrists, & soles of the feete. ℞ of Vine leaues, of Violets▪ of Lettuce, ana M ii, of willow,A bath. flowers of Violet, Buglosse, water Lillies, ana M i. the heads of white Poppy, no▪ iiij. boyle these in a sufficient quantity of water. It is approued to bee excellent for the causing of sleepe, if the hands and feet be bathed therein. An Appendix, seruing for the cure of the MELANCHOLY. FIrst the belly must bee loosned by a softning Clyster, such as discusse windines, and concoct the humors; then a veine shall be cut, and the humors made pliable to nature; at the lēgth the body shalbe purg'd of them; mildly at the first, lest wee do ouerheate and dry the body; afterward we may vse stronger. Purging potions are better then pills, because pills dry more then liquid things; afterwards turne the
humours from the braine, with Ligatures, Frictions, stronge clysters, suppositers, and cupping-glasses; then we will strengthen the principall parts of the body, chiefe∣ly the braine, and heart, and resolue the reliques; then ad∣minister such medicines as will procure sleepe; all which we will effect by the former medicines, so that vniuersals in due sort, bee applied to particulars; and aboue all, wee will adde such things as doe moysten, because that the dis∣ease is caused by a dry distemper. Some there bee that are very serious, and are verily perswaded that they haue frogs, serpents, or such like in their bowels, whereof some haue beene healed, because some such things, vnknowne to the patients, were cast into their excrements, when purging medicines were ministred: for seeing them, they layd aside their false imagination. A method seruing for the knowledge of the Hypocon∣driall MELANCHOLY. THe Hypocondriall, or windy melancholly is often cau∣sed by the ouerboyling of dreggish blood, which was settled neere vnto the stomack, or gristles of the short ribs, by a distemper of the liuer, stomacke, or miseraicall veines; hence it is, that grosse and burnt humours, are carryed vp to the principall seate of the braine▪ and so doe disquiet it, and stirre vp Melancholy. By the selfe same cause, as in a suffusion, the symptomes of that mischiefe are stirred vp by sharpe, and smoky vapours, proceeding from the lower parts: for it so happens, that the temperature of the braine is altered by darke and foggy vapors arising from the sto∣macke, liuer, mesentary, or from some other adiacent part neere vnto them; whereby the imagination is hurt, me∣mory and cogitation remayning perfect. The matter of this disease, viz. a melancholly humor, partly is derived from the liuer, partly from the spleene, but most commonly from the liuer; and when the spleene doth not draw this
humor vnto it by reason of some fault in that bowell, then this humor doth stay in the miseraicall veines. The part affected. The part affected is the braine, and that eyther by con∣sent of the stomacke; or the gristles of the short ribs; for in these places, as it were in an inflamed part, the melan∣cholly blood is gathered together: sometime it is sent from other parts neere vnto the stomacke being ouerheated, for hereby the neyghbouring blood waxeth hot, and is turned into melancholy; at length it so happens, that the braine doth sympathize with these parts. Signes. Besides the ordinary signes of melancholyans, by the excessiue heate of the humors, the parts about the heart are inflamed, and seeme to be somewhat mitigated by cold meates: oftentimes the patient doth feele paine in his sto∣macke, and short ribs, after he hath eaten such meates that are not easie of digestion, for from hence much crudity is caused, whereof the more plenty there is, by so much the more doth this mischiefe rage. They doe eate much, but in the meane while they haue their bellies bound: they breake winde often, and belch very much, which is caused by raw and melancholly humors contayned in the aforesayd places. In those places are very frequent rumblings, & mur∣murs heard; and this is an especiall signe of this disease. Sometimes they haue paines in their shoulder, the Midrife is drawne vpwards, the arteries beate strongly, and disor∣derly; Ringing in the eares, and inflamations of veines and eyes, are caused by vapours which are carried vp thither. Their sleepe is short and troublesome. They are troubled with a dizzines, and palpitation. Vomit of crude phlegme is caused, wherewith choller is sometime mixed. They are eased of their paine, after they haue digested that which they haue eaten, after stooles, vomits, and belchings.
The Causes. It is caused by the default of the spleene, when it doth not draw away the melancholy blood made by the liuers distemper. Sometimes it doth happen, that the blood, which is in the veines of the stomacke, mesentery, spleene, bowels, guts, and adiacent parts, is burnt vp by too much heate, caused by some obstruction, or some other cause; and then the blood doth degenerate into blacke iuyce which runnes ouer the mesentery, spleene, and other parts thereto adioyning, whereof followeth a great heate of the bowels, and from thence vapours are conueyed to the braine, from whence these Symptomes breake out. Prognostiques. This affect is not so violent as the former, yet in time it will degenerate into the former kinds. And as the pati∣ent is eased by due concoction of his meate, so the disease is much exasperated by crudities. If this disease take deepe roote, sometime madnesse, sometime a feauer not vnlike the hecticke will follow. But at the first it is soone cured: if it waxe old, it is hardly to be cured. A method seruing for the cure of the Hypocon∣driall MELANCHOLY. IT is wrought by these kinds of remedies following, a hot and moyst ayre is good. Let his diet bee such as are moyst, as Hens, Chickens, Capons, Veale, Partriges, a small quantity of broth is good, whereas if they bee giuen in great abundance, they cause a fluctuation, and crudity in the stomacke. Raysins, sweete cherries, Pruines, rost Apples, wherewith mixe a little Su∣gar, let them be coold, and they will be both medicine and nourishment. His drinke must bee the Creame of huld Barley, with a little Cynamon and seed of Annis, white Wine mixed with water, Whey, but that of Goates milke is best. Let violent motion be auoyded; riding, say∣ling, walking, swimming in an artificiall bath is good.
If the patient doe not sleepe well, such meanes as are layd vp in arts storehouse for the procuring of sleepe must bee administred, all disquietnesse of minde must bee banished, and they must bee recreated with musicke, and delightfull songs: Sirrupe of the iuyce of Fumitory, Violets, Mayden-haires, of odoriferous Apples, the iuyce of Bourage,Preparers. En∣diue, Epithymon, Orange pils, Wormewood, sirrupe Byzan∣tini without Vineger, water of Hops, Buglosse, Fumitory, Bawlme, Borage, Violets, Endiue, Scabious: a decoction of the rootes of Asarum, Fennill, Parsley, Asparagi knee-houlme, grasse, Valeriana, cyperi, Succory▪ a decoction of Pen∣ny-royall. Centory the lesse, and Wormewood, are taken by many with good successe: those which take away stopping and comfort the stomacke, ought to be mingled with pre∣paring medicines. Confect. Hamech, Diacatholicon, Diaphenicum,Emptiers. Dia∣fena, puluis sanctus, Eleborismus, Matthioli, Hiera logodals, Diacolocynth. Pills lazuls lapidis, Fumitory, Idae. sirrupe of many infusions, of Roses, Sene, Polipody, blacke Hellebore, Epithymon, Manna. Vomit doth much good, if the affect be of long continuance: if he vomit with much ease, it is best, especially if the stomacke be ouerchar∣ged with raw vndigested humors. After meat with warme water simple Oxymel, or with the infusion of Radish roots, of blacke or white Hellebor, the residue shall bee stirred vp and auoyded. With a clyster of the decoction of Ca∣momile, Betony, Mugwort, Centory the lesse, Beet, with wind, Hops, Fumitory, wild Saffron, Epithymon, Polipody, Sene leaues, whereto adde Hony, Hiera picra, Logodal. oyle of Lillies and Violets. The liuer veine of the left arme must be opened, if there bee great fulnesse, or the Saluatella, if months or piles be staid, and if the disease be stubborne, a veine in the forehead shall bee opened; and as it is ex∣pedient that preparing medicines bee renewed, so is it likewise fitting to renew purging medicines, be∣because
humors causing this disease, are for the most part eathy: and from hence rebellious diseases for the most part arise. Auerters. Lotions, Frictions, Ligatures of the legs are auayleable: Clysters, prouocation of pyles, and monethly termes, cup∣ping-glasses with scarification, must bee applyed to the gristles of the short ribs, if there bee no paine, for they fetch out winds. Such medicines as turne away the hu∣mors that loade the head are of great force. Strengthners, and such as doe amend the distemper. Triacle, Diacuminum, Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamar∣garitum frigidum, Electuarium de Gemmis, Diamuscum dulce, Diagalanga. Conserue of the flowers, and rootes of Buglosse, of Violets, the great conserue. a decoction of the lesse Centory, Penny-royall, Worme-wood, Ground-pine, Germander, Anni-seeds, Fennill and Parsely▪ sir. of Asarum roots, with Borage, Buglosse, Succory, Roses, Centory the lesse, Camomile, the leaues of Fumitory, Wormewood, Germander, Ground-pine, Harts-tongue, Borage, Hops, Hysop, Betony, Anni-seeds, Fennell & Caret seed, Raysins, sir. of Pomegranat, of sweete and sowre Apples. An oynt∣ment for the sides and belly, of the oyle of Capers, Lillies, Camomile, Rew, sweete Almonds, Broome flowers, seeds of Nigella Romana, Cynamon, Ammoniacum, Vineger. An odour: Make a fomentation of water and Wine, where∣in boyle Sotherne-wood, Mellilot, Danewort, Camomile, Epithymon, Thyme, Mugwort, Sene, Polipody, whereto likewise adde some Vineger. A bath of sweet water is very good, being made of Mallowes, Violets, Beet, Roses, Cam∣momile, Fennell, Butter, and Milke. Medicines that heate and dry too much, are forbidden, such as are Aurea Alex∣andrina, and many more▪ and we will vse the assigned cor∣diall
powders very moderately, because they dry the hu∣mors, and body, and by that meanes increase the malady. Correctors of accidents. These following doe correct accidents: Cupping-glas∣ses without scarification do resolue winds; a fomentation of the sides with the decoction of Penny-royall, Dill, Rew, Wormewood, Bay leaues, Serpillum; or else let it bee made of Vineger, wherein the seeds of Cummin, Annise, and Penny-royall were boyled. A bag of Cammomile flowers, Roses, Anni-seeds, Cummin, Fennell, Fengreeke, Bay leaues, Serpillum, Rew, Wormewood, Penny-royall. Moysten it with Vineger, and let it bee hot when it is applyed vnto the stomacke. An oyntment ex oleo nardino, Wormewood and Rew; a cataplasme of Cyperus roots, flowers of Camo∣mile, seeds of Fennell, Annis, Cummin, Fengreeke, Mug∣wort, Danewort, Rosemary, and Wormewood-leaues. Make an irrhigation for the head with sweete water, de∣scribed in the bath: it is very good to procure sleepe; some of these that are prescribed, doe asswage paine, others scatter the winds that are offensiue to the body, others doe procure sleepe. A more particular manner of curing the Hypo∣condriall MELANCHOLY. ℞ Mercury leaues, Mallows, Pennyroyall,A Clyster. flowers of Elder, Cammomile, Mellilot, Centory the lesse, ana M i. of broome, M i. ss, Beet leaues, Coleworts, Hops, ana M ss, of Dodder M i. Anni-seede, of Fennell, of bastard Saffron, ana ʒ vi. Polypodij quercini ℥ . ss, Senae Alexandrnae, ℥ i. Epithy∣mi ʒ v. boyle these in a sufficient quantity of water vnto lb i. ss, adde to the straining, Hierae logodali, pulueris sancti. ʒ i. ss, Confectionis hamech. ʒ iij oyle of Lillies, of Violets, of Dill, ana ℥ i. Mellis violacei, ℥ i▪ ss, of Salt ʒ i, hereof make a Clyster, which he may vse once euery weeke, and the re∣mainder
of the Clyster, will serue to make a cataplasme for the spleene.A cata∣plasme. A Potion to expell poy∣son.When the Clyster is come downe, the next day the patient must drinke of the best Mithridate, of the great Triacle, ana ℈ ii, of Hyppocra ℥ iiij. ℞ of the syr. of Epithymon, of Violets ana ℥ i. of the iuyce of Borage,A Iulep. Byzantini without Vineger ana ℥ i ss, wa¦ter of Violets, of Borage, of Hops, ana ℥ iiij. A potion.℞ of Fennell Roots, of Grasse, ana ℥ i, of Borage ℥ ii of Betony leaues, Penny-royall, Hyssop, the lesse Centory, ana M ss, Anniseeds, of Fennell, of Caroots ana ʒ iii-Fumitary, of the tendrels of Hops ana M. i. Epithymi, ℥ ss, Nutmeg ʒ iii, Orange Pills ʒ. v. of Raysins the stones being taken out ℥ i, of scraped Liquorice ʒ v. of Cowcumber seedes ʒ vi. of the Flowers of Woodrowell, ana M i. boyle them in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed▪ adde to the stray∣ning of the syr. of Pomegranats, sweet and sowre apples, iuyce of Borage ana ℥. i. A potion.℞ the Roots of Borage, ℥ i. ss. of Centory the lesse, Pen∣ny-royall ana M i. ss. of Annise and Fennell seeds ana ʒ iii of Raysins ℥ i. ss. of sene leaues, Polypodij quercini, ana ℥ i. Epithymi, ℥. ss. Flowers of Woodrowell M ss. boyle them in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss. adde to the strayning Diacatho∣liconis, ℥ i. Sp: hierae Logodali, ʒ i. Syr. Byzantini, de Epithymo, ana ℥ i. ss. make a potion hereof, which the Patient may vse frequently. A bole.℞ Confect. Hamech, ʒ iii, Pulueris Sancti, ʒ i Dia∣catholiconis ʒ ii: a bit or morsell must be made hereof. Pills.℞ Pulueris hierae logod; ℈ i. ss. Sp: hierae Picr Gal: ℈ ii. syr: of Wormwood q. s. make Pills hereof: about an howre after he hath eaten the pills, let the Patient drinke the decoction of huld Barley with a little Sugar. After that, he must vomit, which must be caused by ℥ vi, of warme wa∣ter,A vomit. wherein ℥ ii. of Oxymel were dissolued, or with the iuyce of a Radish that hath receiued the strength of white helle∣bore, which may this way be effected take of white helle¦bore
ʒ i, which must bee thrust into the Radish, and there remayne for the space of three dayes, and then the iuyce of the Radish being pressed forth, is for the purpose. ℞ the conserue of Buglosse roots, ℥ i. ss, of Violets, ℥ ss,An Electu∣ary. Diamusci dulcis, Rosatae nouelloe, ana ʒ ii. Laetificantis Gale∣ni, ʒ ii. ss, sir. of the iuyce of Borage, of Orange-pills, ana q. s. a soft Electuary of this. ℞ Sp. Darrhod. abbatis ℈ ij, Rosatae nouellae,A cordiall opiate. Aromatici ro∣sati Gabr. ana ℈ i. of Buglosse flowers ℈ i. ss, of Orange-pills, ʒ i. of Anni-seed, ʒ iij. Sacchari violaci, rosacci, conserue of Buglosse roots, ana, ℥ i. sir. of the iuyce of Borage, q. s. an Electuary in forme of an Opiate. ℞ of Borage roots, ℥ ii. of Polypody, ℥ ss, the barkes of the roots of Capers, ʒ ii. of Annis and Carraway-seeds,Cordiall Hypocras. ana ʒ iii, flowers of Violets and Buglosse, ana M i. ss, boyle them in two pints of water vntill halfe be consumed. Then adde Ʋini odorati lb i. let them simper a while together; adde to the strayning of Nutmeg, Cinamon, Rosatae nouellae, ana ʒ ss, of fine sugar q. s. make hereof Hyppocras. ℞ of Penny-royall of Sowthern-wood, ana M i. ss,A Fomen∣tation. flow∣ers of Camomile, Mellilot, ana M i. Cummin, & Anni-seeds, ana ℥ i. Epithymi, polipodij quercini ʒ vi. of Centory the lesse, Rew, ana M ss, boyle them in equall portions of Wine and Water, vntill the third part be consumed, then adde A ceti squillitici q. s. make a fomentation for the belly. ℞ oyle of Capers, of Lillies, sweete Almonds, ana ℥ ss,An Oynt∣ment. of the seeds of Nigella, anethi, of the best Cinamon, ana ℈ ss of Saffron, gr. xii. ammniaci ʒ ii. of Waxe, q. s. make a soft oynment of this, wherewith anoynt the parts vnder the stomacke morning and euening. ℞ oyle of Rew, wherein the seeds of Annise, Cummin, and Centory the lesse haue beene boyled, ℥ i. of ship pitch, ℥ iii. mixe these, and apply them to the belly if hee be trou∣bled with winde, but let the stomacke bee anoynted with the oyle of Masticke, and Mace. ℞ of red Roses, of Camomile flowers,A Quilt. ana M i. of the
lesse Centory leaues, Pennyroyall, Wormwood, ana ℈ iiii. of the seeds of Rew, Annis, Fennell, Cummin, Fengreeke, ana ʒ i. ss, bruise these grossely, make a quilt hereof for the sto∣macke, and besprinkle it sometime with Vineger and Wine, and apply it warme to the stomacke. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of the roots of Danewoort, ℥ i. of leaues of Rew, of Elder, Anethi, ana M ss, of the seeds of Annis, Cummin, and Caroots, ana ℥ i, of Cynamon, ʒ ss, boyle these in an equall quantity of water and wine, being first grosly bruised: make a fomentation hereof for the belly where the winde did vsually rumble. A Bath.℞ of Danewort ℥ ii. of the leaues of Bete, Violets, Mallows, Mercury, Coleworts, ana M ii. of Hops, Fumitary, Centory the lesse, ana M i. ss, flowers of Camomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. ss, Seminum lini, of Fengreeke, ana ℥ iiij. boyle them in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed, where∣in powre some milke, and of fresh Butter, lb iij. Let a bath be made. With Figs, Leauen, Mustard-seede, Cantha∣rides, and Vineger, let a strong Cautery or blistering medicine bee made hereof, which must bee applyed vnder the left side. An appendix or addition seruing for the cure of the Hypocondriall MELANCHOLY. THe belly must bee euacuated by a clyster, then a veine shalbe opened, and the humors made plyable to nature, at the last all such humors as doe offend the body, shall bee expelled, and presently after such things must be prescribed as will comfort the braine, Liuer, and spleene, and will also disperse the reliques. Then againe, because of the stubbornes of the disease, wee will concoct and purge humors, and will strengthen the aforesayd parts: and then againe driue out the matter of∣fending. All which we may effect with successe by the for∣mer medicines.
Such as heate and dry much, are to be auoyded, whether they bee medicines or nutriments: whereupon some vsing such medicines and nutriments to allay windynes, and rum∣bling, doe very much encrease the disease▪ yet the medi∣cines must not altogether be hot or cold, but as the circum∣stances, namely the matters and accidents shall require; those medicines likewise that may breede winds or de∣tayne them in the body, must not be permitted. A method seruing for the knowledge of the VER∣TIGO or GIDDINES. GIddinesse is a disease, whereby the head, and all other parts of the body seeme to bee turned about, so distur∣bing the braine and sences, that the patient oft falleth downe, vnlesse hee bee held vp by some stay neere at hand. And it doth so happen, that they that are sicke of this disease, now and then fall downe on the earth, with a turning, euen as those that runne in a ring, and if rhey doe attempt to turne round, presently are they brought to the ground, whereas they that are sound, will indure many turnes. Sometime they will fall downe, if they see another man turne round, or any thing else that doth moue with a circular motion. In this disease the sight, common sence, and imaginations are hurt. This disease is of neerest kin vnto the falling sicknesse, onely herein they differ, that the gid∣dy party is not depriued of his sences, neyther is he hurri∣ed this way and that way, as conuulsions deale with their patients. The part affected. The part that is affected, is the braine, which doth ap∣peare by the functions that are hurt, for the animall facul∣ty is grieued. But chiefely the braine is affected, and then a headache was the forerunner, as also heauinesse and dul∣nesse thereof, annoyance of smell and taste, a ringing in the
eares, and yet neuer was it obserued that the lower parts were endangered. But one while the braine is affected, be∣cause it is agreeable to the stomacke, heart, and other infe∣riour parts, for therein vicious humors are gathered toge∣ther, or else corrupt nourishment is therein contayned, and hurtfull crudeties generated; and then queisinesse and gnaw∣ing of the stomacke doth very much trouble him; the ap∣petite is quite taken away, and the heart is very much fret∣ed. If it bee caused by some other part of the body, or by staying of moneths, it shall appeare by his proper signes; but giddynesse is an accident appertayning both to the sight and imagination, for both faculties are thereby hurt. The Signes. They will not endure the sight of those things which turne swiftly about. Their sight is likewise depraued: or to their sight all things seeme to turne round, and darknesse is oft spred before their eyes, and they are very apt to fall, and if they turne but a little, they presently fall to the ground: for the action of the animall and sensitiue soule is hurt, the ima∣gination likewise goes not scot-free, and the head is dull; these accidents will be of longer continuance, if the braine bee chiefly in fault, and if no affect of any other part is knowne to be resident there. The Causes. It is caused by the abundance of boyling blood, and plen∣ty of spirits, if it bee not auoyded at the nose, when it is ready to run out. This we doe commonly obserue in sharpe diseases, and it is oft caused by crude and raw humours, as also venomous, which are eyther generated in the head, or in some one of the inferiour parts, especially in the stomacke; because many crudities are therein generated. Also it doth take its beginning from the wombe, by reason of the communion these parts haue with the braine. Moreouer vsuall and accustomed excrements are
suppressed, (and that I may speake in generall) all humors, from whence vapours and windy spirits, grosse and hot, turbulent and maligne are generated, and lifted vp, for these by their motion doe moue the animall spirits (which is the soules wagon, chiefly that which is in the foremost ventri∣cle of the braine) in a round by some inordinate motion, and so earnestly, that a man doth imagine that to bee done outwardly, which is done inwardly; and so the iudgement of the imaginatiue faculty is peruerted; and oftentimes he doth imagine that hee turneth round, and falleth forward. And no wonder: for those vapours turne round like a flame, and as the smoake turneth round in an ouen, while they haue no way out, the passage of the braine being stopped▪ It is likewise caused by a hot distemper of the braine, which strongly draws in many vapours, and doth extenuate the humors, and puts them in rage: againe, all that may disquiet the braine, all that doth stirre vp and heate humors, as im∣moderate exercise, heate of the sunne, and other like, which may recall the fitte, doe cause this disease. Prognostiques. If giddinesse doe last long, it is next to an apoplexy, and falling sicknesse: the former age did terme it a little falling sicknesse. It must not therefore be neglected, seeing it may soone be changed into the most pernicious affect. A method seruing for the cure of the GIDDINES. LEt his aire be temperate, bright and cleare: that meat is good that breedeth good iuyce, and that which is easily digested, and is not windy but pleasing to the stomacke. Hunger must be auoyded as well as glutting: let his drinke bee waterish Wine; temperate motion and exercise is meete, yet rest is better for the head: moderate sleepe is wholesome; excrements must daily bee furthered, if they will not bee auoyded of their owne accord: no
perturbations of the minde must bee permitted, as wrath, griefe, sadnes, &c. Emptiers.Syr. of many infusions of Roses, of Diaprunum Solu∣tiuum, Diacatholicon, Electuarium de Psyllio, Hiera Logod. Hiera picra, Diacolocinth: Pillulae Cocciae, Aureae, Arabicae, Mastichinae, Aggregatiuae, of the v. kinds of Myrabolani, Tamarindi, Rhabarb: Manna, Sene, Polypody, Epithymon, Mirabolani Citrini, Agaricu trochiscatu. Vomit is good; if it doth take his beginning from the stomacke. we must chuse fit medicines for the offending humor, and yet it is not one onely humor that doth of∣fend: for choller is oft ioyned with other bad humors, and therefore such as purge choler, must bee mingled with them. Auerters.Let the Cephalica veine bee opened, and that often, if the disease be caused by bloud or other hote humors. sharpe Clysters in this case are good, especially if wee cannot let bloud; frictions of the fartherest parts with a hote cloth are commended, and wee may descend by degrees from the necke and armes, to the feet: wee must not touch the head, lest wee should offend it with rubbing, vnlesse the whole body bee well purged before: for it doth rather fill the head with vapors. Let cups with scarifications be first applied to the formost part, then to the hinder part of the head, and let the hemroid veines bee opened and moneths prouoked. sneezings, gargarismes, apophlegma∣tismes, a cautery of leauen, Cantarides, and Vineger, shalbe applied behind his eares, or in stead thereof, let an actuall cautery bee made in the crowne of his head: for by this meanes vapors are best resolued. Errhines of the iuyce of Cyclaminis, Aagallis, which shalbe drawne vp at his nostrills: or let Nigella with old Oyle and Niter mixed together,Allayers of trouble∣some moti∣ons. bee drawne vp into his nostrilles, after the manner and forme before; for that doth purge the head best by the nostrills syr: of Quinces, Pomegranates, Ro∣ses, Saccharum Rosaceum, iuyce of Berberies, Goose∣berries,
Diacydonium, sine Specibus. waters of Lettuce, Roses, Violets, Plantane, Baulme; make an odour of Cam∣phire, Roses, and Vineger, Oyle of Roses▪ an irrhigation of his head with Oyle of Roses and Vineger, after the patient hath fedde, let these be giuen him to that end that vapors bee not carried vp to the head. Strengthners. Syrrupe of Apples, Staechas, Buglosse, Conserue of Bug∣losse, Borage, Saccharum Rosatum, Diarrhodon Abbatis: Aromaticum Rosatum, Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diatrium Sandalorum, Diamuscum Dulce. a decoction of Betony, Rosemary, Eybright, Mints, Sage, Staechas, Centory the lesse, Galingale, Cynamon, Annise, and Fennill seeds, Licorice, an Odour, of Nigellae, Maioram Castoreum, an irrhigation of the head with digesting mat∣ters. A bath of the same, as also the aforesaid cautery. A more particular method for the Cure of the GIDDINES. ℞ of the Roots of Acorus, of Galingale, Angelica,A Clyster▪ ana ʒ iiij, of Sage, Origan, Mint, ana M.i. ss, of Betony flowers, Staechas, the lesse Centory, ana M.i. Annise and Fennill seede, Carawais, ana ℥ i of white and light Agaricke ʒ ii, of the seede of Bastard Saffron, ℥ ss, of Polypody, Senae Alexandrinae, ana ʒ vi. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb. i ss, adde to the straining Pulueris Diasenae, ʒ ii, Hierae Diacolocynth. ʒ i, Diacatho. ℥ i, hereof make a Clyster. ℞ of Succory cum Rhabarbaro, ℥ ii, syr:A Iulep. of the iuyce of Endiue ℥ i ss, of the waters of Wormewood, Cychory, Endiue ana ℥ iij. ℞ of the Roots of Grasse ℥ i ss, Endiue and Succory leaues, ana M i ss, Fennell and Anniseeds, ana ʒ iij,A potion. scraped Liquorice, ℥ ss. Polypodij Quercini, ℥ i, Rhabarb. Electi, ʒ iij, boyle them in water q. s. to lb i ss, adde to the stray∣ning
syr. Rosarum soltiui, ℥ iij. Pills.℞ Hierae picrae Galeni, aggregatiuarū, ana ℈ i ss, syr. of mints. q. s. make hereof Pills: when vapors arising from the stomacke doe trouble the braines Spirits, then shall these bee administred. Pills.℞ Pills Arabicarum, Sp: Hiera Simp. Gal. ana ʒ ss. Rhabarb. optimi, Agarici Trochiscati, ana ℈ ss, Diagridij, gr: iiij. syr. of Mint and Staechas. q. s. hereof make Pilles. let him take ʒ ss, one houre before Supper once in a weeke. A vomit.℞ of Betony-roots, Asari, ana ℥ i, of hulld-barley ℥ ss. of the seed of Radish, ʒ ii, boyle them in water q. s. to the consumption of the third part, take of the stray∣ning hereof ℥ v. vnto the which adde Oxymellis Squillitici, ℥ ii. take it in the morning, afterward let him take a good quantity of the broth of a Hen, and after that let him prepare to vomit, and then take some more broth. A Iulep.℞ the syr▪ of Pomegranates, Acetosi. simp. ana ℥ i ss, of the decoction of Barley, ℥ vi, of Endiue, Plantane and Lettuce-water ana ℥ ii ss, make hereof a Iulep. It doth hinder the vapors rising vp, and doth stay the moouing of the Spirits. A mixture.℞ the pulpe of a Quince ℥ ii, Conserue of Roses, ℥ i, of Rosemary flowers, ℥ ss. Aromatici rosati Gabr. ʒ i ss, sirupe of Roses, ℥ i ss, make a mixture of these, and let the patient take ʒ i, after supper and dinner. A potion.℞ of Sage-leaues, M iij, of the seeds of piony ℥ i. of Anni∣seeds ℥ ss, of scraped liquorice ʒ vi; of the Oyle of Beuers stones ℈ i, boyle these in a sufficient quantity of Wine, vn∣to lb i. An electu∣ary℞ of the Roots of Galingale, zedariae, ana ℈ iiij, of Sage ʒ ii ss, of preserued Ginger, ℥ i, Nutmeg, Cinamon ana ʒ i, Piony-seeds, ʒ i ss, of Iuniper, ʒ i, of Mint ℈ i ss, syr. of Roses q. s. make hereof a soft electuary. Lozenges.℞ Aromatici rosati, Diarrhod. abbatis without Muske ana ʒ i, of the finest Sugar and Wormwood-water, q. s.
make an Electuary in Lozenges. ℞ of the seeds of Nigella Romana ʒ ii. Nitri ʒ i. old oyle q. s. make hereof a head-purger.A purger for the head ℞ the iuyce of Bet, Maioram, ana, ℥ i. ss, the iuyce of the leaues of Cowcumbers, ʒ iiii, Nigella Romana ʒ i.A Sternu∣tatory. Let them bee mingled, and some portion thereof bee drawne to the nose. ℞ of Raysins the stones being taken out, ana ℥ ii. of Hy∣sope, Origan, ana ʒ i. Acoricònditi, Mustard-seed, ana ʒ i. ss,A Mastica∣tory. Pepper, Masticke, ana ʒ i. of Honey q. s. let a masticatory be made. ℞ of the roots of Asrm, ana ℥ ss, of Betony,A Garga∣risme. Sage-leaues, ana M i. Pyrethri, Mustard-seed, ana ʒ , boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed, to the stray∣ning adde Oxymel. squiliticum, ana ℥ ii. make a Gargarisme. ℞ oyle of Lillies, ana ℥ i. ss, oyle of Beauer stones, ℥ ss,An Oynt∣ment. Wine of a good sauour, ana ℥ iij. boyle these vntill the Wine bee consumed, then adde a little Waxe and Vineger, and make hereof an oyntment. ℞ of Betony leaues, flowers of Camomile, Roses,A bag. ana M i. of the seeds of Nigella, ana ℥ ss, of prepared Coriander, ana ʒ iij. being dried, let them be beaten a little, and let them be sewed in a linnen cloth like a pillow. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the GIDDINES. FIrst, we will euacuate with a sharpe clyster, then will we open a veine, if nothing hinder vs; then with a purging medicine, we will more fully empty humors offending, and breeding store of vapours: afterwards by frictions, vento∣ses, scarifications, clysters, we will driue backe the force of vapors into the opposite parts. Binders and such as doe stay the vapors from ascending shalbe applied, to wit, Rosewater ℥ ii, of Vineger▪ ℥ iii. last of all, wee will strengthen the sto∣mack
& head, and will disperse the reliques with masticato∣ries, clensers of the nose, and such like; all which wee will effect with the abouenamed medicines, so that vniuersals be rightly applyed to particulars. If this disease hath his beginning from the stomacke, as commonly it hath, then we will vse a vomit: if it bee caused by the wombe or o∣ther members, let it be cured as in those places is shew'd, & then let the braine be strengthned. If it be caused by things swiftly turned about, let him bee conueyed from the sight of them. If it be caused by long asting, let him take a crust soaked in strong Wine. If it doe arise from the staying of humours that were wont to runne, wee will stirre vp their wanted excretion. A method seruing for the knowledge of the INCV∣BVS or NIGHT-MARE. INcubus is a passion wherein a man doth thinke himselfe stifled with a great weight lying on him in his sleep; like∣wise difficulty of speech and breathing doe accompny it, his senses are amazed, not taken a way. It doth differ from the falling sicknesse herein, the matter causing the falling sicknesse is venomous, so is it not in the Hag or Mare, here is no conuulsion, as is in the falling sicknesse. The part affected. The part affected is the heart-walls, or part of the mid∣riffe. The man doth imagine himselfe stifled with some∣what that doth lye vpon him, and hee can scarce draw his breath: the brayne also in this disease is annoyed by the con∣sent of the lower parts. The sensitiue faculty is disturbed by vapours that doe ascend. All the senses are dull, motion is difficult, and the imagination euill. Signes. The signes are these: he moues with much difficulty, and
doth imagine that he is assaulted & opprest by some thing for hee thinks that somewhat doth sit vpon his brest; his sense in his sleepe is stupified, and he supposeth himselfe to be stifled, in so much that he cannot speake a word, although he endeauor to his vtmost power; and if hee doe vtter any voyce, it is vncertaine and not very distinct. Sometime hee groanes, as they doe that weepe, and his fancy is so offended, that hee doth thinke seriously that a Spirit is there; whereupon anguish of mind commeth withall, and hee hath a desire to cry out withall. From hence is caused the heating of his bloud, and as it were, boyling, and so the Spirits being attenuated, and the pores opened, the man suddenly starteth vp. The causes. It is caused by a grosse and cold Phlegme, as also from grosse and melancholy bloud settled about the heart and veines of the brest, from whence grosse vapors are belched out, wherewith, as often as raw vapors caused by glut∣tony are mingled, then in the aforesayd places, the parts of the midriffe are opprest, as also the lungs, where∣by difficulty of breathing is caused, and the imaginati∣on stifled; and when it commeth from hence into the throate, the voyce seemeth to be stopt. If it be conueyd to the braine, it doth molest the mind and sense with vgly sights. If the moneths or hemeroids be stayd in any, they doe send out such vapors. It is not, as some suppose, cau∣sed by an old Hagge riding vs. Prognostiques. He that vseth a slender diet, is seldome troubled with the Mare, but it doth frequent such as haue many crudities. It doth seldome seaze on them that lye on their sides. If this affect chance to bee of long continuance, it doth threaten an apoplexy, or falling sicknes, as also madnes, very often the hypocondriall melancholy, giddines, Palsey, conuulsion, a stretching of sinews, or sodaine death: for it is not vnusuall with many to haue died sodainly in their
beds in the depth of night; children, fat men, and such whose digestion is stopped, are very much troubled with this disease. If after the patient awake, panting of the heart, and cold sweat do happen, it is an ill signe. A method seruing for the cure of the NIGHT-MARE. LEt the ayre be temperately hote, and bright, cold, winds and sunshine must be auoyded. His meate must be such that may be easily digested, and of good iuyce, not windy; let him eate sparingly, especially at supper. He may drink white wine mingled with water; sleeping in the daytime, especially presently after meate, is vnwholsome. the excrements must bee auoyded by art or nature, at last the quietnes of minde must be procured.Preparers. To prepare the body, vse syr. of Staechas, Mints, Wormwood. Oximel Simplex, Melicratum, Wormwood-water, Maioram, Buglosse, Betony, Fumitary▪ a decoction of Fennell-roots, and Parsely, of Rosemary, Hyssop, Endiue, Borage, Buglosse, Fumi∣tary, with wind Ceterach, Succory, of the heads of hops, Maden-haires, Violet-flowers, the barke of the Roots of Capers, Liquorice, Raysins, Hony, and Sugar added syr. of Fumitary, Hops, Apples. When there is great store of phlegme, wee may vse the former; if abun∣dance of melancholy, we may vse the latter: let the same be obserued in purgers. Emptiers.A veine shall bee opened if the body bee full, or if moneths, or hemroids be stopped against custome. first the Saphena, next day the shoulder veine may bee opened, and the grosser the bloud is, the more must be drawne out: at the length, if the disease bee not driuen away by vsing the remedies prescribed, let a veine in the forhead be opened, or else that vnder the toung. Pillulae Cocciae, de Agarico, Mastichinae, Stomaticae, Hiera picra Galeni, Hiera Dia∣colocynthidos, Logodij, Ruffi, Cassia Fistula, Pill. de Lapide lazuli-Diacatholicon, Diaphaenicum, Diasena, Sena. Auerters▪By such medicines as draw, and conuey it to another
part of the body, this disease is to bee cured. Such Clysters as are not very gentle▪ Cupping-glasses, fastned to the calues of the leg, frictions of the head, especially the hinder part, frequent combings of the head. sight errhines. gargarismes. such as prouoke sneezng. light apophlegmatismes. The disease is likewise helped by such as stop the vapors from ascending to the head: As Diar∣rhodon Abbatis, Caro Cydoniorum sine Speciebus, Diamangaritum frigidum, Saccharum Rosatum, Corrall-Srenghnors. Triacle, Diambra, Diamuscum dulce, Aromaticum rosatum, Dianthos, Conserue of Rosemary-flowers, of Buglosse, Acorus, the blacke-seed & roots of Piony, Nutmeg. Anoynt∣ing of the head and brest and belly with the Oyle of Camo∣mill, the Oyntment of Anniseeds, hot wine: A fomentation of the head with the Oyle of Anniseeds, being somewhat hote; a Dropax must bee applyed to the head and sides: vnto fiue portions of Pitch, but one of the Oyle of Spike must bee added; or if that be wanting, as much of Masticke; It must bee reasonably heated when it is layd to the head, it must likewise be wrapped in a Linen cloth, lest it should sticke too close vnto the skinne. A bagge, with the flow∣ers of Roses, Buglosse, Violets, leaues of Baulme, which haue bene moystned in white wine and baulme-water, apply it vnto the heart somwhat hot. A Cucufa must bee made of Betony, sweet Maioram, Rosemary-flowers. Staechas, red Roses, Orange-pilles, Cloues, Nutmeg, the Roote of wild Galingale, Coriander, Oyle of Anniseeds. More particular medicnies for the cure of the NIGHT-MARE. ℞ of the decoction mentioned herafter lb. i therein dissolue Sp. Hierae Logodali ʒ i ss, Pulueris Sancti, ʒ ii ss,A Clyster. Oyle of Camomill, Anniseeds, Rue ana ℥ i, of Malmsey, ℥ iij. ℞ of the Roots of Acorus ℥ ss, Angelica, ʒ vi,A Cliyster. of the leaues of Betony, Perwinckle, Violets, M. i. of red Roses, Camomill, Mellilote, ana M ss. boyle them in flesh∣broth
q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Pulueris Diae∣senae ʒ ii. Hierae logodali, ʒ i. Diacatho. ℥ ss, oyle of Rew, of Camomile, ana ℥ i. ss, of Salt, ʒ i. A Iulep.℞ of the sir. of Staechas, Wormewood, ana ℥ i. ss, Oxy∣mellis simplicis, sir. of Mints, ana ℥ ss, the water of Worme∣wood, of Buglosse, Hop, ana ℥ iiij. Let the patient take hereof ℥ iiij. A potion.℞ Diasenae ʒ i. ss, Diaturbith cum rhabarb. ʒ vi. Oxy∣mellis simplicis. ℥ i. water of Hops, of Fumitary, ana ℥ i. ss. Pills.℞ Pillul. de agarico cochiarum, ana ℈ i. ss, Pulueris hierae logodali ℈ ss, sir. of Staechas, q. s. of this make eight pills, let it bee taken after midnight. Bolus.℞ of the Triacle of Andromachus, ʒ i. of Mithridate, An∣gelica roote, ana ℈ i. water of Angelica, of Carduus benedic∣tus, ana ℥ i. ss, make a bolus hereof which must be giuen the next morning. A vomit.℞ Oxymellis squillitici, ℥ ii. of the decoction of Radish ℥ vi. of sweet oyle ℥ i. ss, of this make a vomiting medi∣cine, wherewith you shall expell the crudities of the sto∣macke caused by surfet. A potion.℞ of the Roots of Acorus, Angelica, Piony ana ℥ ss, of Fennell, grasse, ana ℥ i. of Fumitary, Betony, Dodder, Hearts-tongue, of chaffe, ana M i, of Hyssop, Horehound, Endiue, Bo∣rage, ana M ss, of Cummin and Anniseeds, ana ℥ ss, of Raysins, ℥ i, eight damaske pruines, of the flower of Woodrowell M ss, Senae Alexandrina, Polypodij quercini, ana ℥ i, of white and light Agaricke, of Ginger, ana ʒ i ss. of Nutmeg, ʒ ii. Boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb .i. ss, adde to the stray∣ning of clarified Hony, of the finest Sugar, ana ℥ i. hereof make a potion, which may bee vsed when you haue ob∣serued by the vrine that the humors are perfectly conco∣ted: for the space of 4 or 5 dayes the patient must take hereof ℥ iiij. ℞ of the Conserues of Acorus, ℥ iij, let the patient after euery purging medicine take hereof ʒ i.An Elec∣tuary. ℞ Aromaitci Rosati Gabrielis ʒ iij, of old Triacle,
ʒ i ss. Pleresarcotici, ℈ iiij, Diamusci dulcis, ℈ ii ss, Con∣serue of Rosemary, of Rosemary-flowers, of Acorus, ana ʒ iiij, of Piony seeds ℈ iiij, of Coriander ℈ ii, Syri Staechados q. s. hereof make an electuary, and after meate let him take ʒ i. ℞ Diacimini, ʒ ii, of Anniseeds. the Roots of Eli∣campanie, of Angelica ana ʒ i ss,Another. Aromatici rosati Gab. ʒ ii ss, of Nutmeg, Cinamon, ana ʒ i, of Orange-pilles preserued ℥ i ss. syr. de Epithymo, q. s. make hereof an electu∣ary in the forme of an opiate. ℞ of the Oyle of Anethus, of sweet Almonds,An vn∣guent. ana ℥ i, of Camomill, ℥ ss, of Piony-seeds ʒ ss, a little strong Wine and Waxe, q. s. make hereof an vnguent for the brest and stomacke. ℞ of dried Betony, ʒ i, the flowers of Staechas, red Roses,A Cucufa. of Rosemary flowers, ana ʒ ss, Nutmeg, Cloues, ana ʒ ii, of the Roote of wilde Galingale, of the rindes of Lemmons, ℈ iiij, hereof make a Cucufa. ℞ Orange-pilles dried, ℥ ss, of wilde Galingale,A Powder. of Cloues, ana ʒ ii. Cocci infect. ana ℈ iiii. of Coriander, ana ʒ ii. ss, of dried sweet Maioram, dried Betony, ana ʒ ss, Staechados Arab. of red Roses, ana ℈ ii, make hereof a powder grossely beaten, put it into a bag, and lay it to the head, it doth very much comfort and refresh the braine. ℞ of the seeds and pilles of Oranges, the roots of Galin∣gale, ana ʒ iii. of Baulme leaues M i. Buglosse, Borage,A Quilt. Stae∣chas, and Rosemary flowers, ana M i. Electuarij de gemmi, ʒ i, ss, make a little bag and put these therein, and apply it to the heart, sometime you may sprinkle some Malmsey thereon.
An Appendix, seruing for the cure of the MARE or HAG. FIrst let the common matter bee extracted by a gentle clyster, then cause a veine to be opened, if blood doe a∣bound; then let the humours which doe molest the body, bee made subiect to nature, afterwards expell them forth the body with fitting medicines; the braine likewise shall be emptyed by a Gargarisme, or Apophlegmatisme, or with a sneezing powder, or by some other meanes before menti∣oned. Afterward such things may bee prescribed, which may hinder the ascending of vapours to the braine, and at the length the parts that were affected, shall be corrobo∣rated with strengthneres, & the reliques shalbe consumed: and all this may bee effected with most happy successe by these and the former medicines, if that vniuersals bee well sorted with particulars. A method seruing for the knowledge of the FALLING-SICKNES. THe Falling-sicknesse is a conuulsion of all the parts of the body, not continuall, but that which commeth by distances of time, the minde and sences being thereby hurt. It doth take its name from the great affect which doth op∣presse the patient. There bee three differences of Falling-sicknes. For it doth eyther happen, when the braine hath the cause of the disease in it selfe, which is vsuall, when the disease hath its beginning from thence. Sometime it is cau∣sed by the euill affect of the mouth of the stomacke, or some other part vnderneath, from whence venomous in¦fection creepeth into the brayne thorow secret passages. For some say that they shall bee sicke before the fitte doth come vpon them; because they feele the cause of the disease, like a vapour of cold winde, to bee carried to the
braine by the continuity of the other parts, from that part of the body wherein the disease is chiefely seated: and the cause of this mischiefe is for the most part a venomous va∣pour, carried vp from some lower part of the body into the braine, and then the patient doth suddenly fall with a Conuulsion. When the braine is first affected, the eyes are darkened, the head doth ake, and withall is heauy; their mind and senses are dull, their dreames are troublesome, and their fitte sudden. If the mischiefes cause taketh its beginning from the mouth of the stomacke, the patients, for the most part, are worse; a sharpe assault of the fitte will sooner come vpon the patîent, if hee bee fasting; and before this fitte commeth, they feele a queyinesse, gnaw∣ing, and disturbance of the stomacke, as also a panting of the heart, and a floating of ill humors about the stomacke; at the length they fall into a swound, and then they doe vomit phlegme or choler when the fitte is at an end. It doth differ from all sorts of conuulsions, because herein the conuulsion is not perpetuall. In conclusion the sensitiue and principall operations are hurt in the falling sicknesse: in conuulsions, the principall functions are not hurt at all. There is likewise a gentler kinde of falling sicknesse, which doth not much differ from Giddinesse. The part affected. The part affected is the braine, which doth appeare by those functions which are hurt; for all the faculties suffer alike, and are alike hurt. The braine is affected eyther by it selfe, or by consent of the stomacke or some other parts: the signes of the affected part appeare by that which was sayd before. When the fitte commeth suddenly, the braine as an instrumentall part, euen as the ventricle, but chie∣fly the middle ventricle is affected. For it is not affected as a similar part, because that cannot bee without dis∣temper: but the Falling sicknesse is a disease which hinders the action of the animall faculties: for sence, motion, and all
the principall faculties are as yet after a different manner, the motiue faculty is depraued, and they are depriued of the other faculties. The Signes. The fitt oftentimes comes suddenly with much fome, and fome is a peculiar and especiall note of this disease, which, because it is slimy, may bee drawne out at length, yet in a gentler falling sicknes this doth not appeare; and then, when hee is depriued of senses, hee falls to the ground with a violent shaking of his body, his face is wrested, his eyes turned vpwards, his chinne is sometime driuen to his shoulders, and oftentimes he voydeth seed, ordure, vrine against his will, his muskles are loosned: all these are signes of a strong fitte. Moreouer, they do often short, and cry out in their sleepe, and their voyces are faint, like vnto the voyces of such as are almost strangled. They oftentimes thrust out their toungs, and it is to bee feared, that some∣time they bite them with their teeth. Sometime their teeth are so fast closed together, that they are in danger of stifling: this fitte in some lasteth not long, and then they come to themselues againe, and rise of their owne accord. Very often, before the comming of this fitte, they breathe with difficulty: some feele a cold vapour ascend from the nape of the necke, vnto the crowne of the head; in some, windines doth trouble the belly and heart. Palenes of the face, inordinate motion of the tongue, paine and heauines of the head, forgetfulnes, sadnes, ficklenes of mind, troublesome dreames are vshers to this disease, then are they taken with a giddines: sometime darknes, and diuers dimme glisterings appeare before their eyes. The cause. It is most commonly caused by the abundance of phlegmy humors, frō whence corrupt, venemous, and stinking va∣pors break out, whereby obstructions are caused in the pas∣sage of the brain, & the passages of the spirits are hereby hin∣dered; by this means the braine, and the roots of the sinews
shrinke, and as it were tremble in the expelling of that which is obnoxious, whether it bee vapour or humour. Prognostiques. This disease for the most part doth frequent children, because they are of a moyster braine then yong men; next vnto these, men of full growth, and old men least of all. This disease is more incident to men then women, and vsu∣ally it doth sticke close to the patient, vnlesse it bee taken away by medicines in its minority, or at the least ripening age, or the first comming downe of monethly tearmes. For seeing there is an alteration in childrens bodies, when the haires begin to grow; if it be not then cured, it will not one a sudden depart from the patient. An old falling sick∣nesse is incurable, euen as that which we bring into the world, with vs. And euen as in the spring time it com∣monly doth frequent the patient, so is it at that time most dangerous. Againe, when the whole body is affected, and it doth so suddenly creepe vpon the patient, that hee doth not perceiue any sense of it in some part of the body sepa∣rated from the head: this is likewise incurable: if this dis∣ease be vehement, and the fits come often vpon the pati∣ent, and the symptomes bee dangerous, hee will in short time be freed of the disease by death: but if a quartane ague, or any other longer feauer surprize him, it portends health. A method seruing for the cure of the FAL∣LING-SICKNES. LEt his ayre be hot and dry, and his meat birds of Moun∣taines, Hens▪ Fish, Pulse, Swines flesh, Garlick, Mustard, Onions, Caroots, Nuts, and Dates must bee auoyded; but Capers are very good. Let his meat bee mixed with such things as doe dissolue and extenuate the humors. Of this
sort are wild Bettony. Hyssop, Penny-royall. His drinke must bee small waterish wine, not old Mulsa. Exercise of the body and frication of the head are preualent; and euen as the moderate vse of Venery is helpfull, so on the con∣trary, the immoderate vse thereof is hurtfull: sleepe in the day time must bee auoyded, and sleepe in the night season be moderately taken. Let the excrements be auoy∣ded in due time, and if nature is deficient herein, Art must bee vsed; cares, feares, and perturbations of the mind must bee auoyded. Preparers.Oxymel Squillit. Simplex, syr. of Hyssop, Staechas, Wormwood, and Apples, syr. Acetosus, Simplex et compositus. A decoction of Betony, Hyssop, Stachas, Roots, and seeds of Piony, Maioram, Rosemary, Worm∣wood, Fennell and the seeds of Annise, Cinamon, Licorice, and a little of Oxymel simp. Empiers.Let a veine in the ancle bee opened; then the Cephalica, at the entrance of the spring: if the disease be growne old, and if the cause proceed from the other parts, Diaphoeni∣cum Electuarium Indum. Agaricke made into trochisks in this disease is medicinable. Hiera Gal. Simplex, Logod. Hiera Diacolocynth. are very good. Pillulae aureae, Ale∣phanginoe, Assaiaret, of Hermodactyls; Pillulae Cocciae, Ftidae, Mastichinae de Euphorbio. Bears-foot. A decoction of the Roots of Piony, Sage-leaues, Hyssop, Betony, Primrose, Baulme, Staechas, Buglosse, Annise, and Piony seeds, Licorice, Cynamon, Nutmeg: whereunto adde Ele∣ctuarium Indum. Agaricke made into Trochiskes. Auerters.Clysters of the decoction of Aristolochia, Mercury, Camomill, Piony-roots, Betony, Thyme, Penny-royall, Centory the lesse, Agaricke, Calaminth; whereunto adde Hierapicra, Melrosatum, Hiera Diacolocynth. Oyle of Rew▪ Suppositors, Apophlegmatismes, of the seeds of Piony, Bastard Pellitory, Masticke, Masticatories, of Hyssop, Nutmeg, Beauers-stones, Roots of Piony, Ba∣stard Pellitory, Ginger, Masticke, Staues-acre, Raisins.
Nasals of the iuyce of the Roots of Piony, Rew, Mummy and Hony. Gargarismes, of wine and Vineger, wherein boyle the flowers of Staechas, the leaues of Origan, Hyssop, Betony, Maioram, Calamint, Mustard-seed, Bastard Pellitory, Nigella Romana: to this adde Oxymel squill. A sneezing of pepper, Hellebore, Beauers-stone, the Roots of Piony, Nutmeg, Cupping-glasses with Scarification, must bee applyed to the sides and shoulder-blade bone, as also to the hammes and ancles, if the cause doe pro∣ceed from the other parts: And then againe vnto the hin∣der parts of the head. But especially they shall be layd to the extreme parts: if the part cannot be bound, emplaysters must be applied, which are made of Mithridate, or Triacle, with rubifiers. Such extreme parts as are capable of liga∣tures, shall bee bound, that the vapors may be hindered in their progresse. Frictions shall bee vsed from the vpper parts vnto the nethermost. Hemcides shall bee opened with Horse-leeches; which must be applied to the head, or some other conuenient part of the head. But Cauteries must be made in the hinder part of the head, if the braine be of it selfe ill affected. But by no meanes must a cautery be vsed, when as the venemous vapors shall be communica∣ted to the head by some other part, vnlesse by long con∣tinuance of this communication the braines sessence should bee corrupted. Rubifyng medicines shall in like sort bee applied to the necke, and to that part from which the venemous vapour is sent, which may be made of mustard∣seed, Euphorbium, Pepper, Cantharides, strong Vineger and leauen. Triacle and Mithridate must bee very much vsed.Strength∣ners. The conserue of our description, and they are al of wonderfull ef∣fect. Plerisarcoticum, Diarrhodon abbatis, Diacorum, Dia∣muscum, sweet and bitter. Conserue of Rosemary, Stachas, Galingale, Sage. Orange rinds preserued, and preserued Pel∣litory. The water of the flowers of the tree Tlia, the scra∣pings of Iuory, Mistle-to. Harts-horne, the hoose of an asse,
mans-bones burnt. Assa Faetida, Bastard, Pellitory, Hysop, Cow-slips, Elicampany, the roots and seeds of Piony, Rew, the Emerauld-stone, the seed of Palma Christi, Agarick, the skull of a man, (if it be to be vsed about women, and a wo∣mans skull, if for a man) burnt vntill it be whit. By daily vse of this, some haue bin recouered of the disease; ʒ i▪ at one time hereof is sufficient. The bladder of a Bore taken very hot out with the stale must be put into a hot ouen, & dried vn∣till it may be beaten to powder, is very good. A medicine of squilla. a decoction of the wood Guaiacum, sarsaeparillae, cynae oyle of Philosophers; an oyntment of the oyle of Rew, Eu∣phorbij, Titles, Foxes. A cataplasme of tosted bread, & wheat, with Mithridate, Piony-roots, wild Betony, Honyed-wa∣ter. A bath, a cautery must bee made in the hinder part of the head, or in the fleshy part of the arme, if no good can be done with the former medicines; or else in the seame of the forepart of the head. The cure of the FALLING-SICKNES more particularly. A Clyster.℞ of the roots of Pyony, ℥ i: of Acorus, Aristolochiae, ana ℥ ss, of Rew, Centory the lesse, Wormewood, Sage, Hysop, Betony, ana M ss, of Anni-seeds, ℥ i. Pulpae colocynth. ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Sp. hierae logod. ʒ i. oyle of Cammomile ℥ iij. Diacatholi. ℥ i. ss, of Hony, ℥ ii. of Salt, ʒ i. Giue this before dinner as well in the fitte, if it doe last long, as also when the fitte hath left him. A Iulep.℞ of the sir. of Staechas, Hysop, Oxymel, squillit. ana ℥ i. ss, of the decoction of Staechas, Hysop, Calaminth, Sage, Be∣tony, Rosemary, ℥ x. for the space of foure or fiue daies the patient may take ℥ iiij. Pills.℞ Oxymellis squillit. lb ss, giue to the patient ℥ i. ss hereof, with the decoction of Sage, Piony, Hysop. Pills.℞ the pills of Faetida Eliphangina, Coccia, ana ℈ i, of
blacke Hellibore, gr, xi. sir. of Staechas q. s. giue these about the middle of the night. ℞ of the Roots of Acors, Angelica ʒ iij,A Potion. the rinds of the Roots of the Elder tree ℥ ss. seeds of Rew ʒ ss. Piony Roots, ℥ ss, leaues of Betony, Rosemary, sweet Maioram, Hyssop, Wormwood, Time, Sage, Parsely, M. i. Staechados Arab. ana, M ss, flowers of Buglosse, Borage, ana M, i. ss, the seeds of annise and fennill ʒ iij, of Licorice scraped ʒ v. of Raysins, the stones being taken out, ℥ i. of white and light Agaricke ʒ vi. seeds of Bastard Saffron, bruised ℥ ss, Polipodij quercini ℥ i ss, Ʋisci quercini, ʒ iij. Senae Alexand. ʒ vi. of blacke Hellebore ʒ i. of Ginger, ℈ i. boyle these in water q. s. to lb .i. ss, adde to the straining, of Nut∣meg, Cynamon ʒ i ss, the syr. of Hyssop, Oxymellis simplicis, ana ℥ i. ss. ℞ Hierae Diacolocynth. of the pills of Faetida,Pills. Agaricke made into a trochiske, ana ℈ i. of Beauerstone, gr. vi. sir, of Staechas q. s. ℞ of Agaricke made into a trochiske, ℈ ii. of blacke Hellebore, Nutmeg, Pepper, ana ℈ ss, of Beuer-stone,Pills. gr. viij. of Staechas. ℞ of Mithridate ʒ i, of Triacle ʒ ss, of Beauer-stone, gr. iiii. giue this to the patient in the day of his fitte, with the decoction of Hysop, as before. ℞ of the roots of Betony, Raddish,A vomit. ana ℥ i. the seeds of Cresses, Raddish, Orache, ana, ʒ ii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed. Giue to the patient ℥ ii. adde to the strayning oyle of Spikenard, ℥ i. ℞ of Nutmeg, roots of Piony,A powder to prouoke sneezing. ana ʒ i. of blacke Helle∣bore ℈ ii. of Bastard Pellitory, white Pepper, ana ℈ i. mixe these together. ℞ of Nutmeg, roots of Acorus, Piony, preserued Gin∣ger, ana ʒ iiij. Mustard-seed, Bastard Pellitory, ana ʒ i. ss,A Mastica∣tory. of Raysins, Masticke, ana ʒ i. ℞ of the rinds of Elder-roots ℥ i. bastard Pellitory,A Garga∣risme. Gal∣lingale, ana ʒ ss, the leaues of Betony, Orange, Baulme, ana
M i. of scraped Licorice ʒ iiij. of Anni-seed, ʒ iii. of Cubebs, ʒ i. ss, of Raysins, the stones being taken out, M i. boyle these in water q. s▪ vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning, Oxy∣mel. sqil. ℥ iiii. A mixture.℞ the conserue of Rosemary, Buglosse, ana ℥ i. Dia∣musci dulcis, ʒ ii. of Triacle, Mithridate, ana ʒ i. ss, seeds and roots of Piony, ʒ ii. of the hearbe Paralysis, rhabarb. ana ʒ i. bastard Pellitory, the seed of Sanctonicus, ana ℈ ii. ss, of Sage, ℈ ii, Visci quercini, ʒ i. of man or womans skull, ℈ ii. preserued Orange-rinds, ʒ ii. ss, sir. of Hysop, q. s. After the patient is purged, foure houres before dinner giue the pa∣tient ʒ i. and after this, drinke a little of the decoction of Hysope. Lozenges.℞ Sp. Diamusci dulcis ʒ ss, of Nutmeg, Myrrh, ana ℈ ss, of the graines of Piony, ℈ ii. the powder of mans-skull, burnt, scraped Iuory, Harts-horne, ana ℈ i. of the fi∣nest Sugar dissolued in Rosemary-water, and Hysop-wa∣ter, q. s. An Electu∣ary.℞ of the powder of mans-skull burnt, of the powder of the seeds and roots of Piony, ana ʒ i. ss, of Beauer stone, Oopauasis, of the best Mithridate, ana ʒ ii. make an Elec∣tuary of the sir. made with the decoction of Sage, Piony, Rosemary, Betony, Squinant. Pills.℞ Assae foetidae, of Beauer-stone, ana ℈ ii. of the roots and seeds of Piony▪ ana ʒ i. of Nutmeg, ℈ ii. Diagalan∣gae, ʒ ii, with the aforesady sir. make pills hereof, and giue them at night ℈ ss. ℞ of the roots of Flower-de-luce, Piony, Ciperus, ana ℥ ss,Cucufa. seeds of Piony, the skull of a man, ʒ ii. of Mace, Nut∣meg, ana ʒ i. of the flowers of Cammomile M ss. Pills.℞ Ʋisci quercini, seeds and roots of Piony, ana ʒ i. ss, Nutmeg, ʒ i. ss, of Anni-seeds, ʒ i. ss, Sacchari buglossati ʒ vii. in euery pill, ʒ i.
An appendix seruing for the cure of the FALLING-SICKNES. THe patient must forbeare taking such things as may breed vapors, and those things which doe stirre vp this disease by secret property, namely Parsely, Goates-flesh, Lettuce, Purslane, and all Coolers: when the fitte hath lost him, if hee bee stricken in yeers, it will be good to vse a Clyster, to drawe downe the matter offending; and then if the body bee full, a veine shall bee cut. Offending humors must bee expelled once euery weeke. Afterwards the humors that fly vp to the head, must bee driuen backe by frictions, and stronger Clysters then the former; the passages likewise of the venemous vapours shall bee hin∣dered by ligatures, if they may bee perceiued to hasten to the braine, from some other remote part. The ligatures shal be somewhat aboue that place, from whence the vapors arise, and then such things must bee prescribed, that nou∣rish and strengthen the head and body: all which may bee effected by the grace of God, if vniuersals bee in due sort applied to particulars: if the other aboue mentioned doe no whit preuayle, an actuall cautery must be vsed, or in stead of that, a deepe potentiall, of Cantharides, Leauen, and Vineger, in the coronall seame, if these venemous humors are in the braine. But in youths a cautery shall be made in the hinder part, which may runne for the space of 60 dayes. Likewise the skull may bee opened with a trepan, that blacke vapours may haue time to auoyd, and the matter whereby they are caused, by such means may bee consumed. These cauteries shall in like manner bee made in the lower parts, from whence these vapors at the first did come in the time of his fitt: if it doth last long, that it may the sooner bee ended, hee may bee called on with a loud voyce, his nose pinched, his fingers nipped, sneezings prouoked, painfull frictions and ligatures, his
teeth must bee parted with a stffe put betweene them, his tongue and chops rubd, and a rag must bee put to the tip of his tongue, the rag being first dipt in Rew, where∣in Triacle hath beene dissolued. Rub the tongue likewise o∣uer with Rew, Beauer stone, also mixe the seeds of Piony with them, and put them into the nostrils, for this must need shorten the fitte: if these vapors doe arise from the stomacke, a vomit is good; and then he may be purged with Hiera; then o ments, emplaisters, and other medicines which may comfort the stomacke, must be prescribed. A method seruing for the knowledge of SPAS∣MVS or CONVVLSION. SPasmus is a Conuulsion, or a shrinking of the sinewes, and is an effect which doth force the sinews, and muskles vnwillingly, to that same disposition of body, which they did enioy by the benefit of the animall faculty, when they were in perfect health: this I say is an vnuoluntary mo∣tion in the part which vsually did moue of its owne ac∣cord. Sometime the whole body is taken with a conuul∣sion, which sometime doth happen to such as haue the falling sicknes; in which accident, the Roots of the si∣news are hurt, and the braine being shrunke together, doth ioyne all its force together, for the expelling of that which is hurtfull. The mind is vitiated as well as the sence, be∣cause the braine is diseased. This disease doth trouble the patient by fitts, not afflicting them continually, as it doth happen in other diseases of like kind. Sometimes all parts of the body except the head, are shrunke together; but for the most part, this affect doth happen vnto some one part of the body, as the eye, the Roote of the tongue, the skin of the forehead, the Shoulders, Armes, Legs. But this depraued motion, which doth chance to molest the con∣uulsed part, doth in this sort differ from the naturall motion of the same part. The muskles and sinews are drawne toward the Roots from whence they come, as in a naturall
motion, only this is done not without much reluctation and paine▪ for naturall motion is voluntary, not compel∣led, and hath its seate by the Roote of the sinews in the braine, from whence the beginning of motion is bestowed on the chiefe sinews, and by their means on the muscles, and so are the muscles both stretched, and drawne backe to their owne Roote, drawing likewise that part of the body with them, wherein they are planted. There is a kind of conuulsion much slighter then the former, which is caused by grosse winds, winding themselues in∣to the substance of the sinews; and these cause a strong paine, but somewhat shorter which of its owne accord de∣parts; howsoeuer by much frication the patient is freed of it. This kind of conuulsion seldome lasteth longer then the space of an houre, and wee may perceiue this kind of crampe in our Legs, Fingers ends, and Toes, and in some the Legs, Armes, and hands are so shrunke together, that maugre the strength of many men, they cannot bee stretched out, vntill the fitte be ended. The part affected. Sometime the braine is heere affected first, and chiefly, and then the face with the whole body is shrunke vp to∣gether, no change of the body happening before. But for the most part, a conuulsion doth light vpon the muscles in deter∣minate parts, whereby the part affected plainly sheweth that the muskles are grieued. For the affection must euer bee referred to that muskle or sinew, which doth moue those parts that are hurt. For the muscle is the proper in∣strument of motion, which if it bee forcibly drawne vp to its Roote, may very well be sayd to be hurt; euen as in a conuulsion of the eye, which is called squinting, the muscles which moue the eye, are plucked together; and in like manner is it with the other parts; for in al such diseases, always on muscle, sometimes more are drawne backward, and they draw the part with them wherin they are set, and depriues them of motion, insomuch that either they
seeme crooked, or wrested. If the lips bee drawne toge∣ther, the broad muskle, from whence the muskles of the lips doe spring, are first affected: the same may bee sayd of the other parts of the body. The Signes. With all stretchings of the sinews, a vehement paine for the most part is ioyned, which if it remaine very long with the patient, doth exceedingly waste the strength. The part affected is so drawne toward his Root, by meanes of sinews and muskles (and that against their will) that it can∣not bee reduced to his former habit, and while all parts vnder the head are conuulsed, the body can either by no means be bowed, or else it is so bowed forward, that the chinne is fastned vnto the brest, or else the head is so wrest∣ed backward, that the head is, as it were fastned to the shoulder-blades. The face is ouerspred with rednes, and is troubled with paine. Teares gush out of their eyes, which are also wrested. The mouth can hardly be opened: the Back, Iaws, Hands, Armes, and Legs are stiffe. And when the disease is encreased, the patient is afflicted with such extre∣mity of paine, that he starteth out of his bed, and clasping his thumbe in his fist, cries out aloud, and like vnto a mad man talketh idlely, and sometime casteth out drinke at his nostrils. The Causs. The efficient cause is either fulnes, or emptines: fulnes is either caused by bloud, and then a conuulsion happeneth sodainly, euen vnto such as are sound; an idle life, gluttony, and drunkennes did goe before; it is in like manner caused by a phlegmy humour, which doth wind it selfe euen as the bloud doth, into the sinews and muskles: for sometime they so swell in breadth and thicknes, & necessarily shrinke in length, & hereby cause a conuulsion; but while the phleg∣my mater so pierceth the solid substance, that the limbs swell not, but are rather loosned by moisture, then as wee sayd before, a palsy is caused.
A phlegmy matter doth cause a palsie and conuulsion after a different manner. A conuulsion is likewise caused by an impostume, and the detaining of some accustomed vacu∣ation. It is sometime caused by grosse humors, and then as it doth come suddenly, so it is as soone gone. Emptines or drynesse of a sinew, is oft the cause of a Conuulsion, and then it doth take more deliberation in growing vpon the patient. There went before it immoderate labour and wat∣chings, a burning ague, hunger, solitarinesse, violent swea∣tings, vomit and a loosenesse of the belly; as also too much bleeding, excessiue Venery, inflamations and great bur∣nings, heate of sinewy parts: for by these causes the body and sinews are much dried, the radicall moysture of the sinews is quite wasted, and they drie and shrinke like vnto skins neere the fire. Prognostiques. A conuulsion which is caused by a wound, and of Hel∣leborus, is mortall; the disease is also incurable, if it bee cau∣sed by emptines: this conuulsion of all other kinds is the worst; and wee will endeauour to preuent it by taking a∣way the cause. If it bee occasioned by a burning feauer, it will likewise hardly be cured; and it is better for an ague to come vpon a conuulsion, then a conuulsion to come vp∣on a feauer. For he that is taken with a conuulsion or stret∣ching of sinews, is therof freed by an ague. Whosoeuer is taken with such a conuulsion, that he cannot stirre any away, within foure dayes there is danger of death, yet if he doe outliue them, he will recouer. Oftentimes the pati∣ent is aboue measure tormented with paine, and is fran∣ticke like vnto a mad man; and if then hee lose the vse of his voyce, and his strength fayle, or sweate very much, and doth cast beere out of his nostrils, these are all mor∣tall.
A method seruing for the cure of the CON∣VVLSION. LEt his ayre be hot and dry, Furmety, reare Eggs, flesh of Hens, Capons, and Chickens are good, but they should rather be rost then sod. Among pot-hearbs, Maio∣ram, Sage, wild Betony, Hysop: among fruits, Raysins and Almonds are good. When the disease doth first enter vpon the patient, he must abstaine from wine; in stead wherof, hee may bee permitted to drinke honyed water, wherein Sage and cinamon were boyled; motion must be auoyded; let the necke and backe-bones of the patient be rubbed. his sleepe must bee moderate, and his excrements answera∣ble to his belly; perturbations of the minde must bee shunned. Emptiers.Diaturbith cum rhabarb, Hiera logodij, Diaphanicum. Agaricke made into a Trochiske. The infusion of Agaricke. Pil. cocciae, faetidae, de Sagapen, de opopanaece, whereto wee will adde some Beauer-stone. The median veine shall bee opened, if the Conuulsion be caused by blood, whereof hee may spare a sufficient quantity, but it must bee done at sun∣dry times, because the strength is very much weakened by this disease. But first of all, the belly must bee brought downe by a mild clyster: we can scarce vse preparing medi∣cines, because the disease is very sharpe, yeelding no truce, and the strength in a short time is ouerthrown; wherefore at the first wee will vse gentle purging medicines, though the matte bee not concocted; but if the disease threaten no danger, then wee may vse the preparing medicines reci∣ted before in the Tractate of the palsey. Auerters▪Clysters of the decoction of Annise, and Fennell-seeds, Piony-roots, Sage, Betony, Maioram, Hysop, Penny-royall, Cammomile, Rosemary, whereunto adde some common oyle. Sneezings, Errhines, Masticatories, Gargarismes, Fric∣tions with warme cloathes are good; but chiefly if the dis∣ease
be caused by windines. Cupping-glasses with scari∣fications must bee applied to the beginning, or middle, not vnto the end of the sinews. The body being purged, and the disease continuing its course, at the length there is hope that it will bee vanquisht with the corrupt matter. The whole body must bee well purged, before wee intend to make vse of these present medicines. A bath of the decoction of the seeds of Linus, Fengreeke,Asswagers. Mallows, Holihockes, Cammomile, Sage, Betony, Staechas, the head of a Foxe, or Weather, whereunto adde a good quantity of the oyle of a Foxe; the patient must not stay long in the bath, because it doth resolue the stength too much; and because at the returning of the fitte, they must enter into the bath againe. Or if through weakenesse hee cannot indure a bath; irrhigations of the affected part must be made with this decoction. A bag stuffed with fryed Salt, and layd to the affected sinew, will asswage the paine. Make a Fomentation for the neck and neyghbouring parts, with wooll dipped in warme softning oyle, or oyle of Cammomile, that the naturall heat may bee kept in those parts. A bladder halfe full of warme oyle shall bee layd vp∣on the part, for it nourisheth naturall heate: and our na∣tiue heate is glad of that heate that comes most neere vn∣to it in likenesse. Oyle of Lilles, Foxes, Cyprinum. An Oynt∣ment of the oyle of Wormes, of the wood Guaiacum, Tur∣pentine, Lillies, Cammomile, the marrow of a Cows leg, mans grease, with this the necke, & backe bone of the pati∣ent shall be anoynted after he is come out of the bah: but if this disease bee caused by emptinesse, as soone as hee shall come forth of the sweete, and warme bath, the a∣foresayd parts shall bee anoynted with oyle of Roses, and Violets, that the moysture of the bath might not suddenly be dried vp. Make also a Cataplasme of Wormes, and oyle of Foxes; and because excessiue paine is common to this disease, wee must therefore vse these medicines
without any delay, because they must make loose the vehement shrinking of the sinews. By no meanes wee may vse such things as binde, whether liniments, or else fo∣ments; because by them the disease is rather augmented then mitigated. Strength∣ners.Confect. anacardina, Triacle, once in euery weeke Mithri∣date. The great conserue of our description, is an especiall medicine for all kinds of conuulsion. Diacorum, Diamus∣cum dulce. Acoru preserued, Beauer stone with honied water is a very good remedy against this disease. Opopanax, syr. of Calaminth, the water of Carduus benedictus, giuen in drinke is very good. An oyntment of the oyle of a Fox, of Lillies, Blellium, Hens fat, the fat likewise of a man, a Goose, and whelpe, oyle of Philosophers, de Euphorbio, oyle of Pepper. And a whelpe cut vp aline in the middest, or the lungs of beasts taken out when they are newly dead, if they bee layd to the conuulsed part, after the part is an∣oynted, is likewise wholesome. The skins of Cats, Foxes, Weathers, Wolues, wherein the conuulsed part must bee wrapped after the anoynting, and being once cold, must be dipped in hot oyle againe, and layd on the part conuulsed againe. An oyntment of the oyle of Turpentine, sweete Al∣monds, Lillies, Beauer-stones, of the wood Guaiacum. The iuyce of Crabs must also be duly applyed to the part affect∣ed. Make a perfume vnder a pauillion, of the decoction of such matters that doe serue for a clyster, and let hot stones bee cast into a cauldron couched vnder the pauillion for that purpose, so that the vapor and heate get not any way out of the pauillion. A bath of naturall brimstone, of Salt and Allom: and if these bee wanting, make this bath by art of brimstone, Salt, and Allom: or else of Sage, Beto∣ny, Mallows, St. Iohns-wort, Rew, Bay-leaues, Worme-wood, Sowthern-wood, Maioram, Penny-royall, Melli∣lot, Cammomile, rootes of Lillies, of Flower-de-luce, Linseed, Fengreeke; these baths are very good after the due purging of the body, because they resolue the
reliques from all parts alike; these baths the patient must vse twice or thrice euery day. At the last, Cupping-glasses with scarification must be appled to the necke, and hinder part of the head; but wee must forbeare them, so long as the body is ill iuyced, or full: for it is to bee feared, that greater store of excrements will fall downe vpon the part conuulsed. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the CONVVLSION. ℞ of the roots of white Lillies ℥ i. Aristolochiae rot. ʒ iij. leaues of Sage, Betony, ana M i. ss,A Clyster. flowers of Carduus bene∣dictus, Cammomile, Mercury, Centory the lesse, ana M i. of branne M ii. of white and light Agaricke, ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Sp. hierae picrae simp. ʒ i. ss, benedictae laxatiua ʒ i. Mellis rosati, ℥ i. oyle of white Lillies ℥ iii. a little Salt, hereof make a clyster. But first of all make an Enema of the decocton of Barley, Lillies, leaues of Mallows, Althea, Linseed, Fengreeke, oyle of Lil∣lies, and common oyle. ℞ Syrrupe of Calaminth ℥ ii. Oxymel. squillit. sirupe of Hysope, Staechas, ana ℥ ss,A Iulep. the water of Carduus bene∣dictus, ℥ vi. of the decoction of Cicer, Betony, Carduus be∣nedictus, lb ss. ℞ the flowers of Rosemary, Staechas, leaues of Sage,A Sirupe. Be∣tony, Origan, ana M i. of Hysope, M i. ss, make a decoction of these in water q. s, and boyle them vntill the third part bee consumed, boyle that which is strayned forth the second time with a sufficient quantity of Hony, vn∣to the consistence of a syr. hereof ℥ i. ss, must be giuen with the decoction of the leaues of Sage, Betony, Carduus bene∣dictus, ana ℥ iii. ℞ of new Cassia ℥ i. Turpentine ℥ ss, of Nutmeg,A Bolus. ℈ i.
A Potion.℞ of ancient triacle ʒ i. Oyle of Beauer-stone ℈ i ss, Oyle of sweet Almonds, of whit Lillies, ana ℥ i. mixe these, and giue the patient hereof in the morning. An Electu∣ary.℞ of the conserue of Acorus, ℥ iij. the frute of Iuni∣per tree ʒ i ss, of Beauer-stone, Assae Faetidae, ana ℈ i ss, syr. of Calaminth, Saetchas, ana q. s. A mixture.℞ conserue of Rosemary-flowers, of Betony ʒ vio Confect. anacardinae, ʒ ii. Diamusci dulcis ʒ iii. of the best Mithridate ʒ i. ss, of Beauer-stone, ℈ ii. syr▪ of Staecha q. s. A Mastica∣tory.℞ of Nutmeg, Mace, ana ʒ i▪ of the seede of bastard Pel∣litory, of Staues-acre, ana ʒ i ss, of Masticke, ʒ ii, preser∣ued Acorus, preserued Ginger, ana ℈ ii. ss, of the iuyce of Beete q. s. A vomit.℞ of Betony, ℥ i. of the seeds of Cresses, Rocket, ana ʒ ii. seeds of Radish ʒ i, ss, boyle these, vntill the third part bee consumed. Of the strained decoction take ℥ v. Oxy∣mel. squil. oyle of white Lillies, ana ℥ i. ss, giue this potion after meat. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of the leaues of Sage, Rew, ana M iii. seeds of Fen∣greeke lb ss, of common oyle and water q s. ℞ of the roots of Mallowes, and Lillies, white Daffadill, ana ℥ vi. leaues of Sage M iii. of Wormewood,A Bath. Origan, ana M ii. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Staechas, ana M ii. ss, Fengreeke, Linseed, ana lb i. boyle these in water q. s. adde to the decoction of common oyle, and oyle of Lillies lb i. vse this twice or thrice in a day, likewise with the former a Fox may bee boyld, and it would bee very good. An Vn∣guent.℞ of the oyle of Nutmeg, ʒ ii. Turpentine, Lillies, Nard, ana ℥ ss, of Beauer-stone, Wormes, St. Iohns-wort ana ʒ ii. A Lini∣ment.℞ the oyle of white Lillies, Turpentine, ana ℥ i. ss, of the oyntment made of Flowerdeluce ʒ iii. of the grease of a Fox,
of a man, Vnguenti Agrippae ana ℥ ss, the hinder part of the head, namely, the nape of the necke, and the whole backe∣bone, and the conuulsed part must be gently fomented, and anoynted therewith, which being done, couer the patient with wooll steeped therein. ℞ of the flowers of Rosemary, Staechas, wilde Betony,An Vn∣guent. wild Maioram, Hysop, ana M i. of Mace, Cinamon, Nutmeg, Cloues, ana ʒ ss, of Beauer stone ℈ i. boyle these in oyle of Lillies, and Flower-de-luce; vse this after hee hath done with the Bath, and let the parts anoynted bee wrapped in moyst wooll. ℞ of Salt parched and warme, fryed branne,A Quilt. the flowers of Cammomile, ana M i. Linseed, ʒ iii. ℞ of Mugwort, Rew, Cammomile, ana M ss,A Cata∣plasme. of Nut∣meg, the fruits of Iuniper, ana ℈ ii. boyle these in common oyle q. s. vnto this adde some meale, of Fengreeke, Lin∣seed, ana ℥ ii. of Barley, ℥ i. Galbani, ʒ ii. of Hony, Turpen∣tine, q. s. If the Crampe or Conuulsion shall bee caused by emptinesse. ℞ of the leaues of Mallows,A Bath. M iiij. foure or fiue Wea∣thers heads, boyle these a good while in water q. s. adde hereto of new Milke lb vii. of fresh butter lb ii. ℞ of conserue of Buglosse, of Violets, ana ℥ i. manu Christi ℥ ss, Diamargariti frigidi ʒ v. Pine-nuts ℥ ss,An Electu∣ary. syr. of Staechas q. s. ℞ of the decoction of a Capon, leaues of Violets,An Vn∣guent. Mal∣lowes, Barley, the heads of Weathers, adde likewise here∣to the oyle of Violets ℥ iii. ℞ of the oyle of Violets, ℥ iij. of Lillies ℥ ij,Clyster· of sweete Almonds, Masichini rosacei ana ℥ i. anoynt the back-bone and the part affected herewith: or the whole body may be anoynted after the comming forth of the bath; and then let him bee cloathed with a Foxe skinne.
An Appendix, seruing for the cure of the CONVVLSION. IF the Conuulsion be caused by fulnesse of cold humors, the belly shall first bee loosened with a clyster, then wee may prepare the humors with gentle medicines, (if the disease will afford so much time▪) and then endeauour to expell these humours. Likewise those remedies must bee prescribed, which may turne away, and expell the humors from the part affected. As Frictions, Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, Gargarismes, Clysters, Apophlegmatismes; at the length such as doe dissolue the reliques, and strengthen the sinews, whether they bee taken inwardly or outwardly, are very good, all which wee may effect with most happy suc∣cesse by these, and the former medicines, if vniuersals bee in due sort applyed to particulars. And this must bee espe∣cially obserued in this disease, that the oyntments, play∣sters, cataplasmes and other medicines that bee outwardly applyed, bee at the first moderately hot, and then by de∣grees hotter shall be permitted, as Beauer-stone. They must likewise soften, digest and resolue, if the disease bee caused by winde. The part must gently be rubd, if it bee caused by the biting of venomous beasts; let Scabious bee stampt and some Triacle, with the yolke of an egge: lay this on the part affected; if it be caused by the pricking of a sinew, because great paine for the most part doth accompany it, mixe some Turpentine with oyle of Roses, and apply them vnto that sinew that is hurt. For this doth very much asswage the paine: or else boyle Wormes in the oyle of Turpentine, and in the oyle of Wormes, whereof shall be made an effectu∣all fomentation, as also a good cataplasme.
A method seruing for the knowledge of the APOPLEXY. AN Apoplexy is a depriuing of sense and motion in the whole body, as also the principall animall functions; this name is giuen to this disease, by reason of the great passion which is common to it; this disease doth amaze both mind and body, and is so dangerous, that very few recouer, yet if any bee cured hereof, a Palsey will haunt them. Compare the danger of this disease with the losse of breath, which is the very life of man. For in an apoplexy, and such like diseases, although the patient bee depriued of sence and motion, yet still breath may remaine in his body; for this cause we say that the Apoplexy is most dan∣gerous, and the fault is in the braine: if we cannot perceiue the apoplecticke to breathe, in this he is not much vnlike a dead man; yet whether he do liue or die, we may trie and proue after this manner: Fill some small vessell with water, and set it vpon the patients brest, and if the water moue, it is a sure signe of breath, and by consequence, of life. Like∣wise we may proue the same by wooll finely carded, or by a cleare glasse, or a waxe candle. Put this very neere the mouth of the patient, and if he liue, the flame will stirre, the wooll will moue, and the glasse will bee couered with a mist: but if his breath dorh surcease for a while, or if he doth breathe with great difficulty, hee is certainly sicke of a strong, and sore apoplexy; but they that breathe not so vio∣lently as the former, though it bee done vnequally, yet are they not so sore sicke, but the disease doth deale more fauo∣rably with them: and in this latter there is sometime sence, sometime motion though much amazed, whereby a Palsey in some one part doth remaine. This disease doth not much differ from the strangling of the wombe, as will ap∣peare by the patients drawing of his breath; yet herein they differ, because in an apoplexy they breathe with difficulty,
but in the other disease their breathing is easy, and free e∣nough. The Part affected. It is perspicuous that the braine, which is the Roote of the sinews, is affected; because beside the motiue, and sensible faculties of the mind, the chiefe & principall facul∣ties are offended: & these all are deriued frō the brain; but the impediments are rather in the chiefe ventricle of the braine, then in the substance of the braine; because the corrupti∣on thereof is sodainly generated. But an apoplexy is such an affect, that doth offend all the faculties, when as sence, motion, and other principall faculties are not only dimi∣nished, but quite taken away, and it is handmaid to this disease, viz. the stuffing, binding, or stopping of the ven∣tricles of the braine. Signes. In a weake Apoplexy, there is a sodaine fall vnto the earth with outcries; and immediately doth follow such dif∣ficulty of breathing, that a man cannot discerne any life in the patient, but hee doth lie still like vnto one that is sti∣fled, the brest being in such sort as though it were tied with a bond, and could not bee raysed vp. The animall actions are taken away, and hee is depriued both of sense and motion; insomuch that the reasonable soule seemes to be quite extinct; their eyes are shut as though they were slee∣ping, and they differ from dead men onely in this, that they breathe, which is also done with great difficulty. A head-ache commeth sodainly, giddines, and coldnes of the extreme parts goe before an apoplexy; yet a strong and violent apoplexy taketh one sodainly, and none of these signes goe before. The Causes. An apoplexy for the most part is caused by slymy, grosse, and cold phlegme; for the ventricles of the braine, and the arteries, through which, Spirits are conueyed
from the heart into the braine, are fild, by which meanes, the Spirits and animall faculties are hindered, from giuing any reliefe to the instruments of sense and motion, whereby man is robd both of sense and motion. In like manner this disease is stirred vp by crudities, drunkennesse, too much strong wine, cold aire, and cold diet. Againe, a fall, a blow vpon the head, doth hasten the Fluxe of the humors of the braine, which if they fill the principall ventricles of the braine, they cause an Apoplexy: in some, the store of these humors is too small to stirre vp a strong Apoplexy. And some, after the manner of Apoplectickes, fall vpon a slight obstruction, which is likewise caused by grosse vapors, or some few humors driuen into the braines ventricles. Prognostiques. Such as are much addicted to surfettings, especially old men, are subiect to the apoplexy: also they, who are often taken with a heauy slumber, or with great lazines of body, and such, whose eyes are dimme, and who haue a short and narrow necke. This apoplexy, if it bee great, is scarce to bee cured: therefore it is needlesse to attempt the cure thereof by medicines; because of its owne nature it is mortall. And a weake apoplexy is with great difficulty cured. For although few escape death that haue this dis∣ease about them, yet they that do escape the danger of death, fall into a longer disease, viz. into a palsey of some part, or of the whole body, or else lose their memory, and especially old men, if they be phlegmy by temper, and haue vsed such diet as are most apt to cause this disease. And very few escape, because of the violence of this disease, and the vnweildinesse of their age. While cold and nip∣ping winds blow in winter, and thicke clouds beset the skie, this disease is most busy: the patient must haue a care of taking such medicines as may cause sneezing, because it is mortall.
A method seruing for the cure of the APOPLEXY. THe Aire must be hot. His meate, when the disease is somewhat eased, must be but little, it must likewise be hote, and such as may easily be digested; as Chickens, Hens, Capons; for sawce, he may vse Sage, Thime, Hy∣sop, Rosemary, Maioram. He must abstaine from wine, and drinke honyed-water. In stead of exercise, strong fri∣ctions, and ligatures of the extreme parts, and cupping-glasses must be fastned to the shoulders; they must also bee carried vp and downe in a hanging bed, or running bed, and after two or three weeks a bath is good. Empliers.Electuarium Indum the greater, Diaphaenicum, Trochis∣ de agarico, Alhandal. Pillulae Faetidae, Cocciae, de fumo terra, Arabic, de lapidelazuli, de Euphorbio, Hiera Dia∣colocynth. Picra, Logodi Pacchij. Vomiting medicines are fitter to be vsed when as the disease is growne stronger, rather then at the beginning. Also Clysters are good. If the body be full, a veine shall bee opened when hee doth begin to breathe better, and when his belly is loosned with a gentle Clyster, and then the head veins in both the armes shall bee opened, not all at once, but by degrees the bloud must be taken away: open the veyne the second time, if enough was not euacuated at the first; if the patient begin to recouer, and speake, we may vse purging medicines; but first wee will begin with gentle Clysters. Preparing me∣dicines are not heere to bee vsed, because the disease af∣fords no truce, yet towards the declining they may bee prescribed. Auerters.A Clyster of Betony, Sage, Rosemary, Stchas, Hy∣sop, Bay-leaues, Maioram, Rew, Centory the lesse, Penny-royall Annise, and Fennel-seed, Colocynth. Hiera Colocynth▪ Hicar pira, Logodij, Polypody, Sene, Salt, Oyle of Rew,
of Bayes, of Camomill. A veine must be opened  the belly must be loosned by a suppositor of Hiera Gal. , Agaricke, Hellebore: there must also be vsed strong▪ and painfull ligatures of the extreme parts, that the drowny faculty may be awakened; and that nature being prouoked by the vehemency of those pains, may driue out those ill humors that stop vp the passages of the braine. Many, and hard frictions with a coorse cloth must bee vsed, his body also must bee strongly stirred and shaken about the necke, in which place there is a row of veines and arteries. The whole body shall in like manner bee shaked, because many fall after the maner of apoplecticks by slight obstructions. And then it is to bee hoped, that those slight obstructions will bee discussed by the shaking of the body, naturall force awaked, the bloud, and humors spred ouer the body, and not bee permitted to congeale. The baire of his beard, and priuities shall bee plucked; likewise cupping-glasses shall be applied to the Loynes, Shoulders, Buttooks, veines of the throate, and vn∣to the lower parts, excepting the Hypocondriall part, which is vnder the short ribs, lest we hinder the muskles of the belly, which serue for breathing. Sometime gentle cupping-glasses without scarification must bee applied. If the strength of the patient bee such, that it cannot endure the opening of a veine, or if the veine bee so hid, that one cannot come at it, then cupping-glasses with scarification must bee applied: it would be better for the patient, if they were fastned to the throate veines, because sticking there, they turne away with greater force, then if they were applied to other places: a horsleech likewise shall bee ap∣plied to those places, and to the hemeroyd veynes with scarification. Errhines, Gargarisms, such as prouoke sneezings, viz. Beauer-stone, Pepper, Hellebore, and Euphorbium, for this doth very much cause sneezing, and doth purge the braine, by the nostrills; yet this must not bee vsed, vntill the body bee well purged.
An Apophlegmatisme of Pepper, bastard Pellitory, Beauer-stone, doth draw out the slimy stopping matter by the pal∣late, and wee will rub the pallate, and the inner part of the mouth with our fingers with some of the aforesayd pow∣der. A sapisme of Mustard seede, and figs, boyld in wa∣ter to the thicknesse of a playster. Awakers.An odour of Galbanum, Beauerstone, Opopanax. An oyntment of the same matter. Heate a frying-pan red hot and the head being shued, hold the pan some distance from the head, by this meanes heate is procured to the head, and grosse humors are abated, and turned into va∣pors. Mustard-seede ground small, and mixed with Salt, must bee cast into the patients mouth, and layd vpon his nose. Strength∣ners.Aurea Alex. Confect. anardina, Triacle, Mithridate, Dia∣muscum dulce. Diacorum, Diambra, preserued Acorus. Con∣serue of Betony, Maioram, Acorus, Sage Aqua vitae, where∣in soke some of the former medicine, or else Nutmeg, Bea∣uer-stone, the roots of Acorus, Sage, Masticke; or else drinke them with Aqua vitae. Beauer-stone is a soueraigne remedy against this disease. An irrhigation, and washing of the head, (being first shaued) with oyle and water, wherein were boyled the flowers of Staechas, the leaues of Origan, Bay, Rosemary, Sage, Cammomile, Mellilot, Penny-royall, Nutmeg, Rew, Sauory. A vesicatory emplayster rubifying with the oyle of Euphorbium, of Beauer-stone, with Aqua vitae. An oyntment of the oyle of Lillies, Flower-de-luce, Rew, Nard, Spike, and Nutmeg, Euphorbium, Beauer-stone, Pepper, Mustard, bastard Pellitory, Vineger, and Waxe, the head must bee shaued. After three weekes a bath is expe∣dient.
A more particular method for the cure of the APOPLEXY. ℞ of the rootes of Angelica, ʒ vi. of Sage, Rew,A Clyster· Mercu∣ry, Betony, Hysop, ana M i. flowers of Staechaes, the lesse Centory, ana p. i. seeds of Annise, Nettles, Cummin, Fennell, Bayes. ana ʒ iiij. white and light Agaricke ℥ ss, Colocinth. ʒ ii ss, make a decoction hereof in water q. s. adde to the strayning, Hiera logodij, Diacolocinth. ana ʒ i. ss, Benedicta laxatiuae, Diaturbith cum rhabarb. ana ʒ iiii. Oppopanacis, ʒ ii. Melli rosai ℥ ii. oyle of Beauer-stone, of Bys, ana ℥ i ss, of Salt ʒ ii. ss, make hereof a clyster; wherewith by distances of time wee shall euacuate the humors out of the body; vn∣till the patient shall bee able to take some solutiue physicke at the mouth, we will vse this clyster, if no danger appeare; it will bee good to leaue out Colocynth. and Hieram colo∣cynth. in the first time of giuing the clyster. But at the third it may bee vsed as is prescribed; for after that the first region of the body is emptied, then wee may vse stronger, that thereby the vpper parts may bee purged. Twice or thrice it will bee good to vse a gentle cly∣ster, that euacuation and turning away may bee procu∣red. ℞ of Nutmeg, ʒ i. of white Hellebore,A sneezing powder. bastard Pelli∣tory, Beauer-stone, ana ℈ ss, Nigellae, of white Pepper, ana ʒ i. blow a little quantity of this into the Nostrills, with a quill. ℞ Oxymll squillitici, of the decoction of Radish,A vomit. ana ℥ iii. of the oyle of Lillies, ℥ ii. ℞ of the roots of Asarum, ℥ i, ss, of the roots of Radish ℥ i. boyle them in water q. s. vntill one halfe be consumed;A vomit. vnto ℥ vi. of this strayning, adde Oxymel. squillitici ℥ ii. ss, oyle of white Lillies ℥ ii.
A Potion.℞ of Mithridate ʒ ii. of old Triacle, Confect. anacardinae, ana ʒ i, ss, of Beauer-stone, ℈ ss, Aqua vitae, wherein ℥ i. of Nut∣meg and Sage were infused, Oxymel. squil. ℥ ii. or of Nut∣meg boyld, Acorus, ℥ ii. A Potion.℞ Hierae logodij, hierae diacolocynth ana ʒ i. of Beauer-stone, ℈ ss▪ of old Triacle ℈ ii. of the decoction of Sage, Rosemary, Calendulae, Betony, Centory the lesse, q. s. giue this after the patient is eased by a clyster, and it may be put downe his throate with a squirt. A Supposi∣tor.℞ Hiera logodij ʒ i. Colocynth. ʒ ss, salis gemmae, of Bea∣uer-stone, ana ʒ i. Mellis cocti et concreti q. s. make hereof a suppositor, reliquum est supponendum. Another.℞ of blacke Hellebore, Hiera diacolocynth. ℈ i. ss, of Salt, ℈ ss, Mellis cocti et concreti, q. s. A draught.℞ of Mithridate, Triacle, ana ℈ ii. Hier diacolec. ʒ ii. of Beauer-stone ʒ i, of the best Wine ℥ iiij. Another.℞ of the pills of the Agaricke, of Mesa, de Euphorbio, ana ℈ i. Cochiarum, ℈ i. ss, of Beauer-stone, ℈ i, Diagridij g iii. of the decoction of Sage, Betony, Nutmeg, Angelica, ℥ iii. Aqua vitae ℥ i. Pills.℞ Pillul. faetidarum, Cochiarum, Aurearum, ana ℈ i. Dia gridii gr. v. of Beauer stone ℈ i, which may bee giuen to the patient, if hee can swallow, otherwise dissolue them as was shewed before. A Potion.℞ of Hysop, Sage, ana M i. ss, of flowers of Rosemary, M iij. of Nutmeg, ʒ i ss, steepe these in Aqua vitae lb▪ ss, for the space of 24. houres, then straine them forth, and put fresh simples into the liquor againe, renew these very often, and make a potion for the patient. An Opiate.℞ of the conserue of Betony, Maioram, Acorus ana ℥ i. Confect. anacardiae ʒ vi. Diamusci dulcis, Diambrae, ana ʒ ii. ss, of the best Mithridate, of old Triacle, ana ʒ iii, ss, of Nutmeg, Ginger, ʒ i▪ syr. Staechad q. s. make a mixture in the forme of an Opiate: of which, when the patient hath ea∣ten, a draught of the decoction of Hysop will do good; but it must bee drunke an houre after.
℞ of the leaues of Bayes, Hysop, Sage, Betony,An Irrhi∣gation. ma∣ry, ana M ii, the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot,  Betony, Calaminth, Maioram, ana M i. boyle these in a like quantity of water and wine, vntill the third part bee consu∣med. Make hereof an irrhigation for the head: dip a sponge in the liquor, and let it drop downe vpon his head in di∣uers places. ℞ of the roots of white Lillies,A Fomen∣tation. ℥ ii. of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, the leaues of Maioram, Pen∣ny-royall, Baulme, Rew, Origan, ana M i. of Anni-seeds, ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. make hereof a Fomentation for the head. Adde to these former, of the oyle of Rew,A Cata∣plasme. ℥ i. of the oyle of white Lillies▪ q. s. and a cataplasme may be made for the head. ℞ of the oyle of Nard, Petrolei, ana ℥ i. of Beauer stone,An Oynt∣ment. ʒ ii. Euphorbii, ʒ ss, first shaue the head, and anoynt it with this oyle. ℞ of the oyle of Brickes, of Beauerstone, of Bayes,Another. Iuni∣per, ana ℥ ss, in these dissolue Euphorbi, ℈ ss, adde thereto a little Waxe and Vineger, make a soft oyntment for the head and backebone, but especially the beginning of the backebone: anoynt also the inward parts of the nostrills with the oyle of Nard and Rew, wherein a little Nutmeg, and Beauerstone, haue beene dissolued. ℞ of the oyle of whit Lillies, ℥ ii. of Beauer-stone ʒ ss,Another. Eu∣phorbii, ℈ ii. oyle of Nard▪ ʒ iij make herof anoyntment for the head, and backebone, which may bee vsed, if the other will not preuaile. ℞ of the oyle of Nutmeg, Nard, ana ℥ ii. of Rew,A Lini∣ment. ℥ i. of Beauer-stone, ʒ vi. make hereof a soft Liniment with a lit∣tle Waxe, anoynt the whole backe-bone herewith, frō the beginning vnto the end, and then besprinkle it with the powder of the roote of bastard Pellitory, Mustardseed, Staues-acre, Saffron. Open likewise the patients mouth, and rub the tongue and pallate with Mithridate, Confect. anaca∣dina,
old Triacle, or else confect anacardina ℥ i. ss. may be put into the mouth of the patient. ℞ of oyle of Masticke, Nutmeg, Wormwood, ana ʒ vi. of Mint ℥ ss, of Mace, Nutmeg, Cinamon, ana ℈ i. make an oyntment for the stomacke. Apply a potentiall cautery vn∣to the coronall seame, and pricke the blister with a needle, and put a little round thing into the hole, to keepe it open for the space of two or three moneths. Or in the stead hereof, make an actuall cautery with a hot iron, which in like manner must be kept open, but first the scabbe must be taken away. Likewise in the stead of these cauteries, heat a frying-pan, or a skillet red hot, and hold it so neere vnto the head, that the haires in some sort may seeme to bee scorch∣ed; and this must bee done so often, vntill the patient bee awaked. ℞ Castorei ʒ vi. Euphorbij ʒ ss, of Mustard-seed, ℥ ii. the seeds of Nettles ʒ ss, of the best Figs gently boyld, and of dried Figs, ana o xii. make hereof an emplayster, which must bee applyed, the head being first shaued. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the APOPLEXY. A Strong Apoplexy is incurable, because it is a sharpe disease, and speedily kills a man. Wherefore at the first wee must make vse of strong medicines. First, strong cly∣sters must bee administred. Such medicines must be giuen also that may heate the body, and take away obstructions. first of all the patient must bee stirred and shaken, and his mouth held open by force. The humors also must bee tur∣ned away from the head by painefull ligatures and frictions of the remote parts, as also by Cupping-glasses, Supposi∣tors, Clysters, and by opening a veine. Likewise wee may empty the head of these humors by sneezings, Apophleg∣matismes, Gargarismes, and at the same time wee will
giue such medicines as shall purge the body; and then such as strengthen the whole body, and discusse the reliques. If the throat veine be opened, make a plaister of boal-a acke, aloe, the Haires of a hare, and the white of an Egg, and lay it vpon the orifice, lest it bleed too much. A method seruing for the knowledge of the LETHARGY. LEthargy is such a necessity of sleeping, that cannot by any means be with stood. Or, it is an obliuious disease caused by a cold Impostume of the braine. The disease called Caros, hath great affinity with this, onely herein they differ: Caros doth not bring a Feauer with it; and be∣sides, Caros causeth a deeper, and more profound sleepe then the Lethargy. For pricke them bot frequently, and to the quicke, and such as are vexed with that disease, will scarce bee awaked. And being asked questions when they are awaked, they make no answer. The Lethargy doth dif∣ferre from a phrensy herein; these sleepe very little, or not at all, and the contatry happens in the Lethargy. It doth also differ from the Apoplexy herein, (for in both, the sense and motion and function of the mind alike do perish) in the disease Caros breath is not taken away, for herein, they doe breathe, & that easly. In the Apoplexy with much difficulty; and by degrees the patients breath is diminished, opprest, and thereby he is at the length stifled. The part affected. The substance of the braine is heere affected, and chiefly the hinder part, but not the Ventricles, as may appeare by the offended functions of the braine. Experience tells vs, that the patient is depriued both of reason and memory, which are the principall functions of the braine. In a word it is such a disease, whereby reason, memory, the imaginati∣on, and the other senses are annoyed.
Signes. An vrgent necessity of sleeping with obliuion doth possesse the patient, a lingring and continuall Feauer com∣meth withall, neuerthelesse the Feauer is scarce perceiued seeing the phlegme easly rots. They answer slowly, though prouoked thereto: they lie with their eyes shut, some∣time they open them, if they bee called vpon with a lowd voyce; and then closing them againe, fall fast asleepe, in∣somuch that the patient doth not feele that paine which hee doth suffer by being plucked by the haire. These things happen, when as the substance of the braine is vitiated by an Impostume. In which cause, the eyes sticke farther out then vsually they were wont. Likewise they moue with paine and difficulty; also the tongue is white, they are as forgetfull as madde men; for if they aske for a vrinall to pisse in, they immediately forget for what end they did call for it. By this it may easily bee guessed, that reason and memory are banished, and that there is a defect in the imagination: they yawne often, and the pulses beat slow∣ly and faintly, euen as the Feauer comes vpon them very slowly, thereby making them faint: the bodies of some are loose, of others bound; in like manner is it in their making water, and their vrines are not vnlike the stale of beasts; and doe signifie a great disquietnes of spirits within the veines. In some sweat and trembling meete together; they breathe very much, though weakly. The whole body is lazy, and dull, but chiefly the head. Although such as stand by, turne the patient on the one side, yet of his owne ac∣cord he doth turne vpon his backe againe. The Causes. The causes are from a cold and moist distemper of the braine, and abundance of phlegmy humors so putrified, that they doe bring a Feuer with them: these humors flow in the substance of the braine, and cause a cold tumour: therefore it is no wonder, though motionand sense be
taken away, because motion commeth by heat, lazines by cold. Prognostiques. This disease doth speedily kill the patient, if it be not met withall in time: for the space of seuen dayes the patient is in danger of death, and if they doe escape then, they doe of∣ten recouer. As a true lethargy for the most part is mortall; so trembling is a sure messenger of great danger. Cold sweat about the head is another. They that doe recouer of this disease, haue an imposthume in their brest. But it: is best in a Lethargy, if an impostume arise behind the care the excre∣ments are for the most part liquid, and great plenty of liquid excrements threaten danger. A method seruing for the cure of the LETHARGY. THe ayre must be cleere, hote and dry, if otherwise, it may be rectified with Iuniper wood, Rosemary, and Bay leaues. his diet must be such, as may extenuate, viz: Capons, Hens, Chickens, Partriges, Feasants, birds of Mountains, sticke them with Cloues, and cast Cinamon vpon them. Flesh broth is also good wherein some Cina∣mon and Pepper haue beene strayned. Let his drinke bee small wine and ptisan, and let it bee made with Thime, Hyssop, honiedwater or Hydromel, he must haue a care of drinking water; sleepe must bee hindered as much as may bee, with pricking and pulling of the haire: or with the smoake of Brimstone, Beauer-stone, Galbanum, Saga∣penum. Place this vnder their noses, that they may bee for∣ced to draw the fume into their nostrills, for the same purpose the nose must be chafed & rubd with Vineger. The excrements of the belly must bee brought downe with a Clyster, or suppositor. In stead of exercise frictions and ligatures of extreme parts, viz. the hands and feet, must be vsed.
Preparers.A decoction of Sage, Hyssop, Time, Maioram, Betony, Penny-royall, Fennell, Smallage, Maydens-haire, Baulme, the Roots of Knee-holme, grasse; adde to the strayning Mel rosacum, or Oxymel. The sirupe of Staechas, Betony, Borage; Mlicratum, Hydromel, Oxymel Simplex & Compositum. The water of Maioram, Rosemary, Betony, Sage, Staechas. We may first vse these preparing medicines, if the euill happen to bee of any continuance; otherwise wee may resist the disease by purging medicines And if the patient bee vnwilling to take any medicines, wee must la∣bour to put them into him with a squirt. Emptiers.A Clyster of Mallows, Cammomill, Sage, Calamint, Ma∣ioram, Origan, Betony, Centory the lesse, Rosemary, seeds of Fennell, Colocynthis, Hiera Simplex, Agaricke, Hiera logodij, Archigenis, Electuario Indo, Diaphaenicum, Oyle of Cammomill, Rew, Melrosatum. Hieradiaco∣locynth▪ Logod. Picra, Diaphaenicum. Electuarium Indum maius. Agaricke made into a trochiske, Agaricke. A sup∣positor of Hiera picra, Benedicta laxatiua, Colocynth. Hony, and Salt. A Vomit of the decoction of Radish, Orache, Dill, Oxymel. Squillit. The Cephalica veine must bee first opened, because the body is full. Then a veine in the forhead shall bee opened. But first the excrements shall bee euacuated by a gentle Clyster. The order of me∣dicines shall bee renewed, and sharpe Clysters, and strong suppositors will be better then such medicines as are taken in at the mouth. Auerters.A veine must bee opened, a Clyster and suppositor admi∣nistred; the tongue and pallate must bee rubd with Vineger and Hony, wherewith Bastard Pellitory, Mustard-seed, Triacle, Mithridate, aurea Alexandrina are to be ming∣led. The extreme parts of the body would be rubd, vntill they wax red and smart. The aforesaid parts shall likewise bee pinched and pricked, and the haires of the head must now and then bee strongly puld, that the patients may be owzed from their lethargy. Cupping-glasses must bee set
to the hinder part of the head, or to the turning ioynts of the backe-bone, as also to the buttocks, and Legs, and of some of them with scarification, others without, yet with great store of flame. Errhins must bee made of Vineger, wherein Origan, Thime, and Penny-royall haue beene boy∣led; the vapors hereof receiued vp into the nostrils, doe dissipate the grosse humors. A suffumigation of Galba∣num, and Harts-horne awakens the patient. Gargarismes, Apophlegmatisms. Make an epitheme of Rew boyld in wine, sneezings of white Hellebor, Pepper, Beauer-stone. A fomentation of the head, which must be first shaued, especi∣ally the hinder parts; this must be made of the decoction of Rew, Origan, Sauory, wild Betony, Hyssop, Beauer-stone dissolued in Oyle. A sinapism of Mustard-seed, dried Figs, Pigeons-dung. Cantharides, whereto Pepper and Euphor∣bium may be added, i a stronger medicine be required: and when these medicines haue exercised their strength, then shall the place bee anoynted with hot Oyle, and the paine asswaged with the decoction of Roses, Mal∣lows, and Cammomill. His Legs also must bee rubd with nettles. An oyntment for the head, of Oxyrrhodina,Auerters. with a little Vineger. an oyntment of the Oyle of Roses and Cammo∣mill with a little Vineger: the first day the former oyntment must be vsed, and when it doth begin to increase, the second: or in stead of this, boyle Thime, Calamint, Penny-royall, the Roots of white Lillies and a little Beauer-stone, with the former oyntment; these must bee layed to the coronal feame. Triacle, Mithridate, with Aqua vitae▪ Diamuscum dulce,Strength∣ners. Diambra, Conserue of Sage, Betony, Maioram, Beauer-stone, with Oxymel, is of great force for the cure of this disease. An odour must be made of iuyce of Laserpitium, Pen∣ny-royall, Thime, Southern-wood, Origan, Galbanum, Sagapenum, Beauer-stone, Hearts horne, Vineger, and Rew. It is good for the patient to bathe in frst water. Anoynt∣ment
for the head of Beauer-stone, or the oyle of Bayes, Philosophers, of Pepper, Costini, Nard, Acetum squilliticum. An Embroch of Betony, Sage, Serpillum, Maioram. A Quilt put vpon the head, being first shaued, of Millet, and fryed Salt: heere strong resoluers are requisite, quite contrary to the custome of other impostumes; because the Impostume cannot by other meanes be resolued; because it doth cleaue close vnto the inside of the Cranium. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the LETHARGIE. A Clyster.℞ of the roots of white Lillies ℥ i. of the leaues of Rew, Sage, Maioram, Mallowes, ana M i. flowers of Rosemary, Cammomile, Mellilot, the lesser Centory, Betony, ana M ss, Linseed, Anni-seeds, ana ℥ ss, of white and light Agaricke, ʒ iii. Polipodii quercini, ℥ i. Colocinth. ʒ i. ss: boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning, Hierae logod. ℥ ss. Electuarij Indi, ʒ v. Mellis rosaci ℥ i. ss, oyle of Rew, ℥ iii▪ of Beauer-stone, ʒ i. ss, or in the place of this make a supposi∣tor of Honey, ℥ i. ss, Hierae logod. ʒ ss, of Salt, ʒ i. A Iulep.℞ Syr. Staechados, of Betony, ana ℥ i. of Borage, Oxy∣mellis simplicis, ana ℥ ss, the water of Hysop, Rosemary, Be∣tony, Maioram, ana ℥ iii. of this giue the patient ℥ iii. in the morning. A Potion.℞ of the rootes of Fennell, Parsly, Grasse, Angelica, ana ʒ vi. of Hysop, Thyme, Penny-royall, Baulme, ana M i. of Sage, M ss, of the flowers of Betony, Rosemary, ana M i. of Borage, Buglosse, ana M ss, of the seeds of Fennell, Annise, Smallage, ana ʒ iii. of Licorice scraped, ℥ ss: boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Mellis rosacei, Oxymellis simplicis, ana ℥ i. ss. Giue of this ℥ iiii. in the mor∣ning. A draught.℞ Electuarij Indi maioris, ʒ ii. Diacath. ʒ iiii. Diaphae∣niconis,
Diaturb. cum rhabarb. ana ʒ i. sirupe of Stae∣chas, ℥ i. of the waters of Betony, Sage, ana ℥ i. ss, mixe these. ℞ Pillularum hieroe picrae Galeni ℈ ii. Hierae Diacolo∣cinth. Pillularum cochiarum, of Beauerstone, ana ℈ ss,Pills. with a sufficient quantity of the sirupe of Staechas, hereof make 8. Pills, if he be not able to swallow these, dissolue them with ℥ iiii. of Betony water, Mellis rosati, ℥ i. Giue the patient this to drinke. ℞ Hierae logod. ℈ i. ss dia Hierae colocyn. ℈ ii. of the decocti∣on of wild Betony, Penny-royall, Betony, Calendula,A draught. ana ℥ iii. syr. of Staechas, ℥ i. ℞ of the decoction of Radish, Oxymellis simplicis, squillitici, ana ℥ ss, of common oyle ℥ ii. mixe these, and drinke it off luke-warme, if hee doe not then vomit,A vomit. dippe feathers in Oxymelle squillitico, and herewith mixe some Mustard, and rubbe the chaps and pallate of the mouth. ℞ Confect. anacardinae, of Mithridate, Triacle, ana ʒ ss,A Potion. of Nutmeg, Beauer-stone, ana ℈ ss, Aqua vitae, Calendule, ana ℥ i. ss. ℞ of the conserue of Rosemary flowers, ℥ i. Aromatici rosati Gabrielis, ʒ i. ss, of ancient Triacle, ℈ ii of Mithridate,An Opiate. ℈ i. syr. Staechados q. s. ℞ of the roots of Angelica, ℥ ss, of Sauory,A Potion. M iii. of Thyme, Penny-royall, ana M i. boyle these in white wine q. s. giue of this ℥ iii. for some few dayes euery mor∣ning. ℞ of Origan, Betony, Sauory, Bawlme, Penny-royall,A Fomen∣tation. Rew ana M i. flowers of Staecha, M i. ss, boyle these in an equall quantity of wine and oyle of Cammomile, vntil the Wine be consumed. It is for the head. ℞ of Nutmeg, Pepper, ana ℈ ii. of white Hellebore, Eu∣phorbij, ana gr. vi. of Beauer-stone, bastard Pellitory,A sneezing medicine. of Pepperwort, ana ℈ ss, hee must receiue a small quantity of
this into his nostrills after he hath beene well purged: Not before by any meanes. An apo∣phlegma∣tisme.℞ of Hysop, ʒ i. of Nutmeg, ʒ ss, of bastard Pellitory, of Mustard, ana ʒ i. ss, of Staues-acres, ℈ iiii. bruise these, and sew them in a fine cloth. A mixture.℞ Confect. anacardinae, of Mithridate, ana ʒ i▪ aureae Alex∣andrinae ℈ ii. of Mustardseed, the roots of bastard Pellitory, ana ℈ i. Hierae picrae Gal. ʒ i. a little Hony. Rub the tongue and pallate of the mouth with it. Or else the tongue alone may be rubd wih Mustardseed bruised, and mingled with Hony and Vineger. A Suffumi∣gation.℞ of Gumme Ammoiacke, Assae Faetidae, ana ʒ i. of Harts-horne, ʒ ii, Galbani, Beauer-stone, ana ʒ ss, of Frankin∣cense, ʒ i. ss. A Cerate.℞ of the oyle of Tiles, Bayes, Lillies, ana ʒ iiii. of Nutmeg, ʒ i. , of Beauerstone, ℈ ii. of Triacle, ʒ i. ss, of Waxe q. s. An Oynt∣ment.℞ of the oyle of Tiles ℥ i. de Euphorbio ʒ iii. oyle of flow∣er-de-luce, of Bayes, ana ʒ vi. of Beauer-stone, ℈ i. ss, Eu∣phorbi gr. x. of Nutmeg, ℈ ij. An Em∣plaister.℞ of Mustardseed, ʒ , of Cantharides, the wings and heads being taken off, no vi. of leauen, Doues dung, ana ℥ i. Euphorbii, , of a raw Onyon, ℥ , Emplastri apostolorum, ℥ iii. a little Vineger: make a red playster, which shall bee layd to the hinder part of the head, the haire being first ta∣ken away. An Oynt∣ment.℞ of the oyle of Flower-de-luce, Aceti squillitici, ana ℥ iii. wherein a little Thyme, Penny-royall, and Origan must be boyled: adde to that which is strayned forth, a small quantity of Beauer-stone, of the haires of a man burnt, ʒ . Mingle these, and apply them to the nostrils and fore∣head.
An Appendix, seruing for the cure of the LETHARGIE. FIrst of all, the Cephalica veine must bee opened, in the meane time a gentle clyster must bee giuen. The veine being opened, the surcharging matter shall bee euacuated by a stronger clyster, and it shall often bee renewed; be∣cause these humors are viscous and grosse, and naturall strength somewhat drowsie. In the meane time, and present∣ly after the beginning of administring medicines, we must administer such as may driue backe the matter, that it run not to the braine. viz. oyle of Roses, and Vineger, which we will apply to the coronall seame. After the fourth day we will adde resoluers to the former oyntment. viz. oyle of Lillies, oyle of Beauerstones, oyle of Rew, Cammomile, and a linnen cloth dipped herein, shall bee layd to the coro∣nall seame. But such as may draw backe, and turne aside the matter of the disease, and awaken the patient, are chiefly to be required. All this is effected by Clysters, Ligatures, Fric∣tions, Cupping glasses, which shall bee applyed to the shoulders with scarification, especially in the beginning of the disease. When the disease is somewhat qualified, they shall bee applied to the hinder part of the head, and then also it shall bee lawfull to purge. And because the dis∣ease is violent, and suddenly kills many, the former medi∣cines shalbe admininistred warily, although no signe of con∣coction appeare. Lastly, such shalbe giuen, that may strength∣en the body, and amend the distemper left behind: all which we may effect by these, and the former medicines, so that vni∣uersals bee well sorted with particulars.
A method seruing for the knowledge of CATALEPSIS or CONGEALATION. CAtalepsis is a sudden detaining both of soule and body, with the which, whosoeuer is taken, the same figure of body doth neuerthelesse remaine; hee abides sitting, or lying, if hee did either sit, or lie when the fitte tooke him; by some this disease is stilde An awaking amazement; be∣cause this disease takes away sence and motion from all parts of the body. Herein it doth agree with the apoplexy, for in both, sence and voluntary motion perisheth: but herein they differ; for in this disease, euen the spirits are affected, for they are as it were frozen, and they rest quietly in that part of the body, wherein they were when the fit begun to seize vpon the patient; but this happens not in Apoplexies; for they are only by stopping so hindered, that they cannot disperse themselues into the other parts of the body, whereby the parts are left as it were resolued, and loose; not cold and stiffe, as in a Catalepsis: and the mem∣bers change their former figure in an Apoplexy, because the Spirits are sound. Also in Apoplecticks, the eyes are shut. The Part affected. The braine is chiefly affected, as may appeare by the hurt of the animall faculty, as well imaginatiue as sen∣sitiue, and motiue, and the braines hinderpart is chiefly offended. Signes. The patient is dumbe, which doth appeare by his not answering: his body is bereft of sence and motion; and though he retaine the forme of one being awake, yet his mind and sences are asleepe, and that on such a sodaine, that the lookers on are amazed, and it so vehemently seizeth on them, that some thinke they are rather transported in∣to heauen, then dead. The mind is assaulted so strongly, that
they remaine in the same figure, wherein they were when they were stricken. He can neithet voyd excrements, nor make water, because of the sences dulnes. The pulse doth beae little and faint, and very equall. The Causes. This affect is caused by a cold and dry distemper of the braine, whereby the braine and animall spirits are congeald and dried vp, not only coold. A cold and dry matter causeth this disease, as melancholy, and the ayre cold and dry, and the mixture of phlegme and choler when both ouer flow: these causes do not only coole, but also wither, and freeze the braine, and animall spirits. Prognosticks. This affect is more common to cold regions, then hot, and they are in great hazard of life that are taken with this disease: wherefore present remedy must bee sought for, because vnlesse they be speedily cured, they die as it were maimed & killed with cold; yet if it be a strong Catalepsis, it will hardly, or neuer by cured. A method seruing for the cure of CATALEP∣SIS or CONGEALATION. THe ayre must be hot & moyst; his meat pisan, Creame, his drinke small white wine, and somewhat astrin∣gent. Sirupe of Epithymn. The iuyce of Fumitory, Staechas,Preprere. Bug∣losse; the water of Buglosse, Fumitory, Baulme, Hops, Betony, a decoction of Smallage, Dill, Fennil, Cala∣mint. A decoction of Fumitory, Hops, Polypody, Sene,Emptiers. Epithy∣mon. In this dissolue Diasena. Confect. hamech. Diacatholicū, Diasena. Hiera logodij, Hermetis, Hiera Diacolocynth. Sena,
Polypodium quercinum. Vomit must bee prouoked. Also a sharpe clyster must bee made of Stachas, Sage, Beete, Cala∣minth, Penny-royall, Epithymon, Camomile, Mercury, Bo∣rage, Thyme, Polipody, Sene, blacke Hellebore, Hiera logod. confect. hamech; ndum maius, oyle of Cammomile. If the patient be troubled with slimy phlegme, instead of the for∣mer purgers, giue Agarick, Colocynthes, an Electuary of bay-berries. Auerters.The Cphalica veine must bee opened; if it bee cau∣sed by great store of blood, and his strength fayle not; wee may likewise take away ore of blood. The clyster aboue mentioned, Frictions, Ligatures of the armes, backe, legges, feete; Hemriods, if they did flow before the comming of the disease, must bee caused to flow afresh, great outcries must be made about the patient, and sneezing medicines must bee giuen to him with blacke Hellebore. Strength∣ners.Triacle, Mithridate; Confect. anacardina, Diamuscum dulce, Latificans Gal. plerisarcoticum, Diambra, Conserue of Buglosse rootes, Malmesey▪ Hypocras. A foment for the hinder part of the head with Aqua vit. Vnguentum Mar∣tiatum et dialthaea. A decoction of Maioram, Staechas, Sage, Betony, flowers of Cammomile Mellilot, Wine: this must bee made for a fomentation. Likewise make a fomentation of the oyle of Lillies, Cammomile, sweet Almonds, Sesame But in time we may vse stronger, as the oyle of Bayes, Rew, Euphorbium, Spike, or else some Euphorbium may bee ad∣ded to the former. An oyntment for the hinder part of the head, of the oyle of Lillies, Cammomile Dill, Rew, Elder, Beauer-stone: in these wee may boyle Hysop, Thyme, Ser∣pillum, Epithymon, Fumitory, flowers of Buglosse, and Borage: dippe a linnen cloth in these, and apply to the head.
A more particular method seruing for the cure of CATALEPSIS, or CONGEA∣LATION. ℞ of the flowers of Camomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. of Mer∣cury, M i. ss, of Sage, Thyme, Penny royall, Epithymon,A Clyster. ana M i. sen Alex. Polipodij quercini, ana ʒ v. Epithimi, ii of back Hllebor, ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Confect. hamech ʒ iij. Hierae logod. ʒ vii. ss▪ Melli rosati, common oyle, ana ℥ ii. of Salt, ʒ i ss. ℞ of the best Triacle, ʒ i, Mithridate,A draught. ℈ i. of the water of Carduus benedictus ℥ iii. giue this after the clyster hath suffi∣ciently purged. ℞ Hier logod. ℈ ii. hier diacolocynth,A Supposi∣tor. ℈ i. Diagridij gr. vi. of Salt, ʒ i. of Hony, made hard by boyling q. s. a suppositor of this which must be giuen, if the clyster remaine not with the patient. ℞ Syrupe de Epithymon, Staechados, ana ℥ i. syrupe of Fumitory, Buglosse, ana ℥ ss, water of Hops, Betony, Borage,A Iulep. ana ℥ iii. ℞ Dias ʒ iii. Confect. hamech ʒ ii. de Epithymo ℥ i,A draught. the water of Betony, Carduus benedictus, ana ℥ i. ss, giue this in the morning. ℞ of the rootes of Buglosse, Borage, ℥ i, ss, flowers of Stchas, Buglosse, Carduus benedictus, Epithymon,A Potion. ana M i. of the seeds of Fennell, ʒ v. of the best Barley ℥ ii. of Raysins, the stones being taken out ℥ i. ss, boyle these in Buglosse and Betony water q. s. to lb i. when it is almost boyld, put in a little white Wine, wherein one Nutmeg hath bin infused for the space of 12 houres▪ to the strayning adde syr. Stae∣chados, ℥ iiij. syr. de Epithymo ℥ i ss. ℞ of the leaues of Sene ℥ ss, rhabarb. Electi. ʒ i. Polipodij quercini ʒ iiii, of the flowers of Staechas, M ss, of Nutmeg,A Potion. ʒ ii. ss, infuse them in lb i▪ of the aforesayd decoction 12.
houres to the strayning adde syr. Staechados ℥ iii. A draught.℞ Sp. laetificatis Galeni, ℈ ii. conserue of the roots of Bug∣losse, ℥ ii. of Nutmeg, ℈ i. ss, infuse these in lb i. ss, of Malmsey, for the space of 12 houres. This must bee giuen thrice in one day. Lozenges.℞ Diamusci dulcis, Laetificantis Galeni, ℈ ii. trochiscorum de Eupatorio, ana ℈ ii. of the roots of Angelica ℈ ss, the water of arduus benedictus, Angelica, and of fine Sugar q. s. make an Electuary in Lozenges, which must bee taken morning and euening vntill the patient doth begin to waxe strong. An Electu∣ary.℞ of old Triacle, ʒ i. Diamusci dulcis, laetificantis Gal. ana ʒ ii. ss, conserue of Buglosse, Rosemary flowers, ana ℥ ss, syr. Buglossati q. s. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of the leaues of Betony, Sage, ana M iii. of Fumito∣ry, Epithymi, Baulme, ana M i. of the roots of white Lillies, ℥ ii. of the flowers of Staechas, Carduus benedictus, Cammo∣mile, ana M i. ss, boyle these in an equall quantity of Wine and water, and wash the head with the strayning, and the other being warme, must bee put into a bag, and applyed neere vnto the fundament, the heate must be preserued with warme clothes. An Epithi∣me.℞ of the roots of Buglosse, Borage, ana ℥ ii. the diuers kinds of Diamuscum dulce, Laetificantis Gal. ana ℈ iiii. the flowers of Carduus benedictus ana M iii. boyle these in wa∣ter q. s. An Oynt∣ment.℞ of the oyle of Dill, Cammomile, Lillies, ℥ i. ss▪ boyle Hysop, Thyme and wilde Betony: adde to the strayning of Beauerstone, ℈ i. ss, make an oyntment for the hinder part of the head. An Oynt∣ment.℞ of the oyle of Lillies, Elder, ana ℥ i. of Beauer-stone, ʒ ii. Euphorij ℈ i. Aqua vit, ℥ ss, mixe a little waxe, and make hereof a soft oyntment.
An Appendix seruing for the cure of the CATALEPSIS. SVch medicines as are moderately hot, and moyst, are re∣quisite for the cure of this disease: the belly must be emp∣tied by a clyster, then with lowd outcries, Ligatures, paine∣full Frictions of the extreme parts the patient must bee a∣waked. And for this purpose, sneezing medicines shall bee prescribed; at that time also if necessity require, the patient shall bee let blood; at the length with strengthning oynt∣ments and resoluing, wee will endeauour to shake hands with the disease. The hinder part of the head chiefly shall bee anoynted: a bath of common oyle being made luke∣warme, is good for the former purposes. When the patient is againe come to himselfe, such medicines must be vsed as may make the humors obedient to nature, for the space of 4 or 5 dayes, then wee may driue them out of the body; and at the length prescribe such as may strengthen the body, and consume the reliques; all which we may effect by these and the former medicines; but we will begin with such as haue a resoluing force, and by degrees proceede with stron∣ger; at the first wee will rub the whole body with warme cloathes. Vineger, and other drying medicines are prohi∣bited. A method seruing for the cure of MANIA or MADNES. MAnia, fury, or madnesse, is an inclination of melan∣choly to great fiercenesse and alienation of minde, without feauer, feare, or sadnes: sometime, such as haue this disease, rage like beasts: for seeing that the humors offending are hot, it stirs vp dotings, and as long as this humor is in
the body, madde men cannot but rage: herein doth madnes differ from the phrensy; a Feauer is the compa∣nion of a phrensy; whereof madnes is freed. Lastly the phrensy is caused by the distemper of the braine alone. Madnes is caused by the distemper of the inferiour parts, and of the braine afterward. It doth differ from melancholy herein, madnes is caused by a hot distemper of the braine, melancholy is caused by a cold destemper, besides, melan∣cholians feare much and are sad: madde men do banish feare, and sadnes. In melancholians only imagination is hurt: in madde men imagination and reason cannot be found. The part affected. The braine is affected, which doth appeare by the hurt of the principall functions of the mind. Sometime the cause of the braines trouble is in it selfe, sometime it doth pro∣ceed from the lower parts. For blacke choller, whereby this euill is caused, is sometime caused by the heads dis∣temper, sometime it doth arise from the body, and some∣time is generated in the fylmes which couer the heart. In a word, madnes is such a passion, that doth plainly de∣monstrae the action of the principall facultie to be depra∣ued, not taken away. Signes. They are now laughing; anon they are sad; sometime (though but seldome) they are in great feare; on a sudden they are rash, furious, crying out, and theatening wonders, sometime they leape and skippe vp and downe disorderly, Another while they are so serious, that they hurt either friend or foe, by blowes, bitings, and other iniuries, and expresse most sauage manners. They haue eyes grimme, stout, and staring, and they are alwayes plotting some mischiefe. Sometime they are so madde, that they doe hurt themselues, and then they ought to be bound. They are very watchfull; and for the most part are not subiect to feauers. Their eyes in time grow hollow; vnusuall and violent wrath is the forerunner of madnes. Glisterings doe
appeare before the eyes of madmen, and a certaine ringing in the eares. They are poner to Venery then before, and are very much troubled about worldly affaires: all which increase by degrees. The Causes. It doth arise from a hote distemper of the braine. Some∣time it is caused by the presence of hote and biting humors, and of melancholy humors so much dried vp, that it doth turne to blacke choller, and then they dote with feare, and are silent by fits, and if once they doe begin to speake, they will scarce haue done. It is sometime caused by yellow choller ouer-burnt, and then they are furious, like wild beasts, and withall are very strong, offering iniury some∣times vnto all they meete with. It is sometime caused by the abundance of boyling bloud turned into blacke choller, which, if it doe get into the head, they doe commonly fall madde with laughter and singing. Sometime it is caused by immoderate watchings, care, & too much heating the braine. Prognostiques. Young men, and men of middle age, are most subiect to this disease; dotings which come with laughing, are lesse dangerous, then such as come with study, and there∣fore more dangerous, because of their rashnes. But of dotings, that is most dangerous, which is caused by the ouer-burning of yellow choller. If moneths, or hemroides runne, it is good. It is an ill signe, if the patient haue no stomacke. It is likewise no good signe, if vlcers arise in the face, and in a, and in the feete. A method seruing for the cure of MANIA, OR MADNES. The aire must bee temperate and somewhat inclined to mostynes, his diet must be liquid broths, & moystners of the body. viz. furmenty, the strayned broth of Chickens, Hens,
Partridges, such meats as do breed wind and choler must be auoyded. His drinke must be Barley-water, by no means wine, vnlesse the original of this disease did come by feare, or burnt melancholy, then the patient may be permitted to drinke a little quantity of thinne wine. Exercising the body moderately, is good; and it is expedient that hee sleepe more then is vsuall; and this must bee procured by inward and outward medicines. If nature be deficient in casting the excrements out of the body, then must art bee vsed; for it is expedient that the patient bee soluble. Such, with whom the patient is wel acquainted, may be admitted into his company, but strangers, and they that haue angerd him, must not come in his sight. Preparers.Sirupe of violets, Fumitory, Water-lillies, Acetous Simplex, sir. of Buglosse, Borage; sir. of Succory with Rha∣barb. The water of Violets, Hops, Buglosse, Water-lillies, Succory, Endiue, Sorrell. Emptiers.A veyne shall bee opened, if the disease bee caused by superfluity of hot bloud, whereof plenty shall bee taken away. The Saphena veine shall first bee opened, the next day the median shoulder-veine, after this, a veine in the fore∣head, vnlesse the disease be caused by burnt choler without fulnes of bloud. Sirupe of many infusions of Roses, Confect. Hamech. Diacatholico. Diasena, Nicholai, Hiera logodij. Hiera picra, Diacolocynthis. Pillulae Indae, de lapide Ar∣meno, Potion of Violets, Succhory, Fumitory, Endiue, Buglosse, Germander, flowers of water-lillies; the greater cold seeds; Licorice, Raisins, Epithimon, Manna, Cassia, Polipody, sene, Mirobalani citrini A Clyster of the leaues of Violets, Lettuce, water-mallows, Mallows the greater, cold seeds, Oyle of Violets. Auerters.The Saphena veine shall bee opened first of all, as was de∣clared before, horsleeches shal be applied to the fore-part of the head, and to the parts round about; means also must bee vsed that the moneths may runne, and the Hemroids bee opened.
An irrhigation shall be made for the head, of Roses,Repellers. iuyce of Knot-grasse, Vineger: dip a cloth in these, and apply it vn∣to the forepart of the head; the cloth must bee often dip∣ped in the liquor. A fomentation likewise for the head, with the decoction of the flowers of Stachas, Cammomile, Violets, Roses, Lettuce leaues, the heads of white Poppy, and some Vineger. Diamargaritum frigidum, Electuarium de gemenis,Strength∣ners. Diar∣rhodonabbatis; Diaten sandal. manus Christi; Conserue of Roses, Buglosse, water-Lillies, Borage, Violets, Ʋenus haire. An Epitheme for the liuer, of the water of Endiue, Roses, Sorrell, seeds of Purslane, Camphyer, Spikenard. An Epitheme for the heart, of the water of Buglosse, Roses, water-Lillies, Vineger, Camphyer made into Trochisks. Dia∣margaritum frigidum. A bath of the decoction of Cammo∣mile flowers, Mellilote, Violets; the leaues of Violets, Lettuce, Willow, Water-lillies, Mallows, Buglosse; the head shal herewith bee washed as long as the Patient is in the bath. An oyntment for the backe-bone and brest, of the Oyle of water-Lillies, sweete Almonds, Roses, Violets. When the patient is come out of the bath, hee may vse this oyntment. Cauteries must bee layed to the coronall seame. Diarrhodon, with the sirupe of water-lillies.Procurers of sleepe. An em∣broch for the head of the seeds of Poppy, the flowers of water-lillies, Roses, Violets, Lettuce. An oyntment for the brow and temples, of the Oyle of Violets, Mandrake, as also womans Mike. A more particular method seruing for the cure of MANIA or MADNES. ℞ of the leaues of Mallows, Lettuce, Violets, the flow∣ers of Violets, Borage, Endiue, ana M i. of Barley, ℥ i.
boyle these in flesh broth q s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the stray∣ning, Hitrae picrae simplicis, ʒ ii. ss, of new Cassia ℥ i. of the oyle of Violets, ℥ iii. A Iulep.℞ the syr. of Endiue, Actosi simplicis, of Violets, Bug∣losse, ana ℥ i. sir. of Fumitory, ℥ ss, the water of Endiue, Bug∣losse, Violets, Borage, ana ℥ iii. hereof giue the patient in the morning ℥ iii. A Potion.℞ of the roots of Buglosse, ℥ i. ss, the leaues of Endiue, Suchoy, Fumitory, Hops, ana M i. ss, flowers of Buglosse, Borag, Violets, ana M i. seedes of Melons, Cowcumbers, Gourd, ana ʒ ii. s, senae Alex. Polipodij quercini, ℥ i. Epithy∣mi, ℥ ss, rhabarb. ʒ i. ss, of scraped Licorice, ʒ iii. of Raysins, the stones being taken out, ℥ i. Tamarindorum ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Dia∣senae, ʒ vi. of new Cassia ℥ i. syr. of Roses ℥ ii. the patient must take hereof ℥ iiii. euery morning, vntill fiue dayes be expired. A Potion.℞ Confect. hamech ʒ ii. ss, Electuary of the iuyce of Ro∣ses ʒ ii. Diacatholici, ʒ iii. syr. of Violets, ℥ i. the water of Violets and Buglosse, ana ℥ i. ss. Giue this in the morning early. Pills.℞ Pillularum de lapide lazuli, Armeno, Indarum, ana ℈ i. with the syr. of Epithymon q. s. make 7 or 8 pills hereof to be taken after the first sleepe. An Electu∣ary.℞ Diarrhod. abbatis without muske, ʒ iii. Sp. Dia∣trion sandal. ʒ i. ss, Sacchari rosacei, sirupì violarum, ana ℥ i. ss. Another.℞ Sp. Diamargariti frigidi, ʒ ii. conserue of Violets, Buglosse, ana ʒ vi. conserue of Roses, ℥ ss, Lohoch of Pop∣py, ʒ iii. ss, sirupe of Violets, of Apples, ana ℥ i. giue vn∣to the patient ℥ ss, two or three houres before dinner, or supper. An Oynt∣ment.℞ of the oyle of Violets, of Roses, ana ℥ i. oyle of sweete Almonds, of water-Lillies, ana ℥ ss, anoynt the head with these, when the disease is but fresh, afterward the brest and backebone.
℞ of the water of Buglosse, Roses, water-Lillies,An Epi∣theme. ana ℥ v. of Vineger, ℥ ss. Sp. diatrion sandal. Datragacanthi frigi∣di, ana ℈ iiii. of Saffron▪ ℈ ss, hereof make an Epitheme, wherewith the heart will be strengthned. ℞ of the leaues of Lettuce, Violets, water-Lillies,A Bath. Mal∣lows, ana M iii. of the leaues of Willow, and Vines, the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, and let the patient enter into this bath, after hee hath beene well purged: also the head must be moystned herewith, so that it be first shaued. When hee comes out of the bath, he must be so layd in his bed, that he sweate not at all. ℞ of the leaues of Lettuce, Violets, Willows,An Irrhi∣gation. the flow∣ers of water-Lillies, Roses, ana M i. ss, of the flowers of Cammomile p. i. seeds of Lettuce, ℥ ss, of white Poppy, ʒ i. ss, two Weathers heads, vse this 4 or 5 times euery day for the space of a weeke. ℞ the syr. of Violets, Poppy, Diacodij, ana ℥ ss,A potion procuring sleepe. water of Lettuce, Ptisanoe, ana ℥ ii. giue this at bed time. ℞ of the oyle of Violets, Mandrake,An Oynt∣ment. ana ʒ iii. dippe a kercher herein; and apply it to the brow and tem∣ples. ℞ of the oyle of sweet Almonds, Cammomile, ana ℥ i. ss,Another. oyle of Violets, ℥ ii. make hereof an oyntment for the head. Yong whelpes and Chickens cut in two▪ or the lights of a Ramme being warme, may also bee applyed to the head. For these things doe strengthen the brayne, and doe resolue, and moysten the reliques with their temperate heate. An Appendix, seruing for the cure of the MANIA, or MADNES. FIrst of all the belly shall bee emptied by a clyster; and then a veine shall bee opened, with great care. The hu∣mors
likewise shalbe made subiect vnto nature; if not, they must bee expeld. In the meane time wee may turne them a∣side with such medicines as doe bring downe the moneths, and prouoke Hemroids, which may also bee effected if the saphena veine be opened: at the length such medicines must bee giuen, as may strengthen the brayne and heart, and di∣sperce the reliques: all which wee may effect by these and the former medicines, so that particulars and vniuersalls be rightly sorted: if the former medicines will not preuaile, an actuall or potentiall cauterie must bee made in the forepart of the head, where the coronall seame doth meete with the sagittall, and they must be made so deep, that the bone may appeare: wherof a quantity must be taken away, & so it must be kept open for the space of a moneth. Though the other medicines fayle, this is very seldome vsed in vaine. The cure of Mania or Madnes doth herein differ from the cure of the melancholy. For in the cure of Madnesse, especiall care must be had, that the sharpenesse of the humors may be mitiga∣ted: and this may bee effected by moystners, and moderate coolers. A method seruing for the knowledge of PHRENITIS or PHRENSY. A True Phrensie is an inflamation of the brayne, or of the fylmes thereof, bringing with it a sharpe feauer, doting, and alienation of minde. It is a kinde of Madnesse both dreadfull and dangerous; because the disease is gene∣rated in that part which is the chiefe feate of the faculties of the soule, and because a true Phrensie hath his beginning from a false, therefore we will heere treate of a false Phren∣sie. It is an alienation of mind with disquietnesse, and with∣out an impostume of the braine; and it doth follow a fea∣er caused by blood or choller. Dotings are not heere so much obserued, neyther doe they  and grieue so much,
as they doe that are possest with a true Phrensie, and euen as the feauer doth increase or decrease, so this fitte of Phrensie is increased or decreased, especially in the houre of the crisis, or conflict betweene nature and the disease: sometime this fitte doth come sooner then the feauer, and then the feauer doth increase, euen as the disease doth, and by this meanes it will bee more violent in the houre and day of the fitte of Phrensie, then in the houre of quiet∣nesse and rest; for in these feauers, dry vapours get vp into the brayne, whereby the animall spirits are disquie∣ted. Sometimes Impostumes are the causes of this disease; for from these, sore feauers doe arise. This cannot ab∣solutely be termed a disease, but rather the passion that doth follow the disease: And this is more frequent then a true Phrensie. The Part affected. The parts affected are Dura et tenuis mater, as may appeare by the hurt of such functions that come from hence. Oftentimes it is caused in this, and then it is lesse dangerous. And there is a principall, and proper affection appertaining to this disease, whereby the patient is con∣tinually molested. This Phrensie neuer goes alone: the tem∣perature of the patients body is too hot; and the disease too violent. Signes. There is a continuall and dry feauer; and as they sleepe very disqueitly, so their watchings are more trouble∣some, whereby they are very much disquieted; they rt out of their beds suddenly, they breathe by fittes, sel∣dome and vehement. The patients eyes are red, dry, and in a manner withered, and more quicke-sighted then vsually they were; yet of one of the eyes teares flow out, and the eye-veines swell with bloud; the pulse is thicke, quicke,
and great, there is also doting and alienation of mind; for being asked a question, they do answere nothing to the pur∣pose; and their memories being decaied, they neuer thinke of any thing they haue spoken, or done, whereby they vtter words without order and sence; they imagine strange things, and now they weepe, anon they sing; sometime they cry out, another while they are fiercely desperate; the tongue is withered, rough and blacke; they are very thirsty, they gather straws, and other trifles from the ground; their hands tremble, they breathe deepe, their vrine is thinne and fiery, sometimes it is white and thinne, and then there is great danger at hand. The Causes. It is often caused by too much bloud, and these are madde with laughter, yet they dote lesse, and are not so feauorous. But when it is caused by burnt choller, then are the pa∣tients impatient, and starke madde, and therefore they must needs bee bound; the phrenticke by the reason of drynes are very strong. A feauer is an vnseparable com∣painion of this disease. Prognostiques. It is a most sharpe, and dangerous disease, and speedily kills a man, if present remedy be not giuen. For all kind of phrensies are mortal, and doe breed in the place, wherein the soules principal part is resident, but such dotings which come with laughing, are lesse dangerous, then they that come by study: but that is thought to be worst of al, which is bred of burnt choller. If sleepe do appease doting, it is good, if otherwise, it is an ill signe. But continual doting and waking is mortall.
A method seruing for the cure of the PHRENSY. A Temperate aire, and somewhat bright must be procu∣red; no variety of pictures must remaine in his sight. His diet must be such as may moisten and coole the body, as ptisan. And as it is hurtfull for the patient to eate immo∣deratly, in like manner it is hurtfull to bee too long fasting: the one weakens the body, the other doth increase the disease. His sallets may be of Lettuce, Mallows, Endiue. In the declination of the disease, fishes that do breed in stony places, and scaly fishes may be giuen. His drinke must be barly-water, wherevnto it wil be good to adde some sirupe of Violets, Water-lillies, Roses. The decocti∣on of Cinamon shall sometime be prescribed. Inordinate motion must be auoyded, and rest desired, yet frictions of the lower parts must be vsed, especially when the disease is milder. Also sleepe must bee procured by locall medi∣cines, and such as are receiued in at the mouth: the excre∣ments of the belly must be euacuated. For if they be kept in, they doe increase the disease. Perturbations of the mind are very offensiue to this disease: wherefore such friends he best likes, must bee admitted to his presence, and some∣time they must speake him faire, another while chide him. A veine must be opened at the first if the patients strength will permit; in delay there is danger,Emptiers. neither is there any better means whereby this disease may bee cured, then by the opening of a veine: in gentler phrensies the belly must first be euacuated, then the shoulder veine shall bee first opened, and then the Cephalica. If the first do not appeare, and when the matter ruines, a veine in the forhead shalbe opened; and that it may be done aright, the necke must be tied with a scarse, hat the veine may rise, and appeare: at the first gentler Clysters of the decoction of Mallows, Beee
Violets, Lettuce, Barley, seeds of Cowcumbers, Gourd, Cassia fistula, the Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, Dia∣prunum solutiuum. Diacatholicon, Hiera picra, Oyle of Violets, Mel rosatum, Electuarium Indum, of the iuyce of Roses, Electuary of Roses, Diaprunum solutiuum, Sirupus Rosarum Laxatiuus. Pillul. Aggregat. Aureae. Tro∣chisci de Rhabarb, Rew, Cassia, Mana, mirablani, Rha∣barb infused in Endiue water. The cholericke matter must bee emptied in the beginning of the disease. In the meane space a gentle medicine that may turne away, must be pre∣scribed, lest the humors seeme rather to bee stirred vp then purged. Softening Clysters must also bee giuen euery third day. Auerters.A veine must be opened, as was sayd before, and gentle Clysters at the first, then stronger. The former purging medicine; for this, by turning aside the ill humors, is very preualent, and will hinder the making vp of Erysipelas. Cupping-glasses with scarification must be applied to the backe-bone, the hinder part of the head, shoulders and but∣tocks, if the cubit veine were not opened; if it were opened, then no scarification shal bee vsed: when the disease is at full height, bloud suckers shalbe set to the forehead, and temples of the patients. Bonds, Ligatures, and painfull frictions of the extreme parts, do serue to turne the hu∣mours from the head, because they stop, and plucke backe the humors arising vpward. The hands and feet may bee washed with the decoction of Lettuce, Violets, Barley, the heads of Poppy. Also the head shal bee moystned with this decoction by the meanes of a sponge. Repellers.Oxyrrhodum of Rose-water, Vineger, Oyle of Roses: dippe a cloth in these, and apply it to the forepart of the head and to the necke, and renew it often; and in time oyle of Cammomill shall be added. Rosewater, water of Plan∣tane, Vineger, Oyle of Roses. An irrhigation must be made of the decoction of the seeds of white Poppy, of Hen∣bane flowers, of water-Lillies, of Violets, Roses, the iuyce
of Plantane and Lettuce. Dippe wooll in these, and lay it vnto the forepart of the head, and aboue the necke, for this thickens the humors, & makes them vnfit for motion, because the passages of the body through which humors creepe to the braine, by the vertue of these hearbs are shrunke together. The iuyce of Lettuce, Plantane, Roses, water-lillies, Gourds. An odour of the water of Plan∣tane, Roses, Housleeke, Sorrel, Camphyre, flowers of Roses, water-lillies, a little quantity of tosted bread. An oynt∣ment of populeon not made after the manner of our ance∣stours. At the first wee may vse these medicines without resoluers, but towards the increase, state, or declination of the disease, wee may adde to them more or lesse, euen as reason shall giue directions. But as in the increase re∣pulsers must be aboue resoluers; so in its declination resol∣uers must be aboue repulsers; and when the disease is at the height, there must be an equal quantity of both. Ther∣fore the continuall vse of these mixed together must be auoyded, vnlesse they be mixed with skil; for they thicken the matter, and wil not let them bee resolued: insomuch that by continuall vse the Lethargy may bee procured: wherefore towards the state of the disease, wee must ab∣staine from such medicines as driue backe the humors, be∣cause it is requisite that the passages be opened, and the hu∣mors discussed. Diamargaritum frigidum, Beauer-stone. Sirupe of Pomegranates, Roses, with the waters of Roses,Strength∣ners. Bug∣losse, Plantane: After meate giue this, for thereby the force is better conueyed to the head. Conserue of Roses, and Violets, flowers of water-lillies and Buglosse; make an irrhigation for the head of water-lillie flowers, Lettuce, Cammomill, Poppy, Mellilote, Althaea. A warme bath of fresh water is good. A rammes Lungs or Liuer, or a Whelpe, a Capon, a Hen, a Cat, and other such beasts bowelled, shall bee cut along the midst of the backe-bone, and so they
shall be layd hote to the head; they are very good for the braine; bloodsuckers must be layd to the forehead and tem∣ples▪ but that the locall medicines heere prescribed, may with better successe be ministred to the head, and that the excrements may the better be auoyded, the patients head shal be shaued presently after meate, and when the fitte of madnes hath left him. Strength∣ners of ac∣cidents.Philonium Romanum, Philonium Mesus, with the wa∣ter of Lettuce, or sirupe of Poppy, doth greatly induce sleepe. syr. of Violets, Poppy, with the water of Lettuce. Broths wherein the greater cold seeds, or one head of white Poppy, or the leaues of Lettuce are boyld. The iuyce of Violets, of Poppy. The oyntment made of the buds of blacke Poplar, Roses, of the Oyle of Violets, water-lillies, Poppy, Mandrake, the seeds of Henbane, Saffron, Opium, Vineger. A lotion of the Head, Face, Hands, and Feet, with the water wherein the leaues of Lettuce, Violets, the flow∣ers of Roses, water-lillies, the seeds of white Poppy, Cowcumbers, Gourds, and Melons▪ were boyled. Dip a sponge in the aforesayd decoction, and it wil serue for an odour. A fomentation of the priuie parts and Perinaeum, with the decoction of Pellitory of the wall, the Roots of Asarum, and Parsely in wine. A Cataplasme also shalbe made of Pellitory of the wall boyld with a little white wine, whereunto adde the Oyle of Scorpions: apply this to the priuy parts and Perinaeum. Make an oyntment of the Oyle of scorpions and the oyntment of Agrippa, and an∣oynt the priuy parts. Sirupe of Violets, decoction of Barley-Fresh water whereto sirupe of the iuyce of oose-berries, and sirupe of the iuyce of Oranges must be added. In this disease there is great need of such as may procure sleepe, because the sicke is wasted with continuall watch∣ings: but lest the feeble heate which remains bee extingui∣shed, hote things must be mingled with opiates: for it is to bee feared, that a lethargy may be caused by too much vse of them. The passage of the vrine is sometimes stopt,
which euill may bee cured by such medicines as follow. The last of the former sort of medicines doe slacken thirst. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the PHRENSY. ℞ of the foure cold seedes, the seedes of white Poppy,Sirupe. ana ʒ ii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto ℥ iii. of this decoction, adde of the sirupe of Poppy, ℥ i. ss, a little of the best Vineger. Giue this in the morning and at night. ℞ of the leaues of Lettuce, Mallowes, Violets, Beete,A Clyster. Borage, ana M i. Barley, the tops of white Poppy, without seeds ℥ i. seeds of Cowcumber, Gourd, ana ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning oyle of Vio∣lets, ℥ iii. new Cassia, Diacath. ana ℥ i. of Salt ʒ i. ℞ of the sirupe of Pome-granats, Violets, Acetosi simpl. ana ℥ ii. let the patient take ℥ ii. with the decoction of Bar∣ley, Violets, Pruines, Licorice, seedes of Lettuce, Gourd, whereunto also adde a little Rosewater, or Buglosse water, also the sirupe of Poppy may bee added, that the patient may sleepe well. ℞ of new Cassia, ℥ i. syr. rosarum solut ℥ ss,A draught. of the waters of Buglosse, Borage, Violets, ana ℥ i. ℞ of the roots of Grasse, ℥ i. of the flowers of Wood∣rowell,A Potion. p i. of the leaues of Sorrell, Endiue, ana M i. ss, of Violets, M i. the seeds of Gourds, Melons, ana ʒ i. ss, of Ray∣sins, ℥ i. Polypodij quercini, ℥ ss, Rhabarb. Electi. ʒ ii. Tama∣rind. ʒ iii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde vnto the strayning of the sirupe of manifold infusions of Ro∣ses, ℥ iii. ℞ Electuarij de succo rosarum, ʒ ii. Diacath. ʒ ii. sirupe of Violets, of the manifold infusions of Roses, ana ℥ ss,A draught. of the decoction of Barley, ℥ iii. ℞ Hiera picroe ʒ i, Diagridij gr. vi. salis gemmae, ʒ ss,A Supposi∣tor. of Ho∣ny hardned with boyling, a small quantity.
An Electu∣ary.℞ of the conserue of Roses, Violets, ana ʒ v. conserue of Buglosse, water-Lillies, Diatragacanthi frigidi, ℥ ss, Dia∣margariti frigidi, ʒ i. the seeds of Sorrell, Purslane, ana ℈ ii. sirupe of Violets, q. s. at some time of the day the patient must take ʒ i. An Epi∣thme.℞ of the waters of Buglosse, Roses, Violets, ana ℥ v. Dia∣trion sandal. ʒ i. ss, a little Saffron, and Vineger: Sprinckle this vpon the stomacke. An Em∣broch.℞ of the flowers of Violets M ss, of Roses, M i. ss, the flowers of Lettuce, M ii. ss, seeds of white Poppy, Lettuce, ana ʒ iii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed then adde a little Vineger, and besprinkle the coronall seame with this decoction, but the head must be first shaued. A Lini∣ment.℞ of the oyle of Roses ℥ ii. of Rose-water ℥ iiii. of Vineger ℥ ss, dippe a cloth in these, and lay it vnto the row. A Iulep.℞ of the sirupe of Violets, of water-Lillies, ana ℥ i. ss, of the sirupe of Poppy, ℥ i. of the decoction of Violets, of the heads of white Poppy, ℥ ix. Giue this at bedde time. A broth.℞ the broth of a Hen boyld with the leaues of Lettuce, one or two of the heads of white Poppy. This is also good to procure sleepe. For the same purpose boyle Roses, Vio∣lets, the leaues of Woorm-wood, one head of white Pop∣py, Opij. gr. i. ℥ iii. of this must bee drunke with the broth of a Capon. A Decocti∣on.℞ of clensed Barley, M iii. of the seeds of Cowcumbers, ʒ iiii. of Poppy, ʒ i ss, of Lettuce leaues, M ii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed. For the same purpose the feete must bee washed with the decoction of the heads of white Poppy, leaues of Violets, water-Lillies, some Barley huld, and the rootes of Mandrake. Of this de∣coction also an odour may be made. A mixture.℞ of the oyle of Roses, ℥ iii. of Vineger ℥ i. Opij, gr. ii, apply these vnto the brow and temples. Anoynt also these
places with Creame, taken from the milke when it hath boyled: but the head must first bee shaued. Or doe the like with the oyntment following. ℞ of the oyntment of Roses,An Oynt∣ment. of Poplar ana ℥ i. oyle of water-Lillies, Mandrake, ana ℥ ss, of Vineger ʒ i. if all these cannot procure sleepe, adde vnto the aforesayd Opij gr. iii. or iiii. of Saffron, gr. v. mixe these with care and diligence, and anoynt the temples and hinder part of the head there∣with. ℞ of the leaues of Lettuce, M ii. the flowers of Roses,A Cata∣plasme. M i. the seeds of white Poppy. ʒ i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto a softnesse: adde hereto of wheat meale, ʒ vi. of the oyle of Violets q. s. ℞ of the oyle of Violets, ℥ i. of water-Lillies, ℥ ss,An Oynt∣ment. of Cammomile, Poppy▪ ana ʒ iii. some few drops of Vine∣ger, of Waxe q. s. if the other oyntment will not preuayle, then vse this. ℞ of Betony, Fennell, Mallows, ana M i. ss, the flowers,A Fomen∣tation. of Cammomile, Mellilot, Elder, ana M i. of Line-seeds, Fen∣nell, Fengreeke, ana ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed: wash the head with this, for when the disease doth begin to decline, this doth dissolue the re∣liques: Also a whelpe of a moneth old, cut in two parts, or a yong Pigion, or the bowels of a Ramme layd hot to the coronall seame. And when these doe begin to waxe cold, Roses, and put them into the decoction of Cammomile, and apply them as before: doe this often. ℞ Oxymellis squillit. syr. de duabus rad. ana ℥ ii. of the gumme of Pruines,A Potion. ʒ ii. of the decoction of the fruit Alke∣kengi, roots of Parsely, Saxifrage lb i. A potion to prouoke vrine.
An Appendix seruing for the cure of the PHRENSIE. SEing no good can bee done against this disease, if it bee growne to an Impostume, first a veine must bee ope∣ned, that it increase not; for this is the presentest remedy, yet the belly must first be brought downe by a clyster. At that time also wee must keepe backe humors and blood running to the head, with repelling medicines, and if ope∣ning a veine be for some cause omitted, we will apply Cup∣pinglasses with scarification, otherwise not. In Conclusion, that the blood bee not too hot (for it doth soone turne into choler) a cooling sirupe shall bee giuen, and also it shall bee so mixed, that it may cause the patient to sleepe. At the length with purging medicines wee may expell the sharpe humors out of the body, when they haue beene first turned from the head with Ligatures, Frictions of the extreme parts, and washings. And by this meanes at the last wee may strengthen the braine: all which wee may effect by these and the former medicines, so that vniuersals in due sort be ioyned with particulars. Thirst also must bee quen∣ched, because this doth not a little trouble the patient, for this purpose giue the patient ℥ i. of the iuyce of Gooseber∣ries in a conuenient decoction: Sleepe also must be procured by art, and the vrine must bee prouoked by medicines: with such medicines as are taken inwards, wee must mixe such as may helpe the parts affected, as well as the dis∣ease.
A method seruing for the knowledge of CATARRACTA or SVFFVSION. CAtarracta. or suffusionis, when the sight by little and little is duld by a slymy humor frozen like Ice, and dropping out of the eyes of the patient: sometime it sticks so fast ouer the ball of the eye, or betweene the christalline humour, or the tunicle Rhagois, thereby hindering the sight of such things as do present themselues to our view. This humour is conueyed thither from the braine by the op∣ticke nerue, and oftentimes so slowly, that it cannot bee perceiued at the first. Sometime it is sodainly carried thither, and then if that humour sticke close vnto the ball of the eye, the outward shape of things cannot be com∣municated vnto the cristalline humour which is the princi∣pall instrument of seeing. In this disease at the first there is sayd to bee an imagination, or fancy, in the increase, a mist obscuring the eyes. The part affected▪ Is the eye it selfe, and especially about the ball thereof; and sometime the cause doth come from it selfe, and then suffusion neither begins in both eyes, neither are they alike affected; for sometime one only eye is affected. But if it be caused by the default of the mouth of the stomacke, then such things as are represented to the sight, appeare to both eyes alike, and then neither dimnes nor congealed slymy humour can be discerned at that time chiefly doth the stomacke cause this disease, when as it cannot digest the meats and nourishments formerly receiued. Againe this may plainly demonstrate the fault to bee in the stomake, because after vomiting the paine of the eyes is asswaged; which is vsuall in the time of Crisis, when as nature expells that which is hurtfull vnto the body, or any part of the
body: these affections of the eyes do not alwayes appeare, for if the stomake can well and easily digest the nutri∣ment, then no affections do molest the eyes. For when it is caused by the default of the stomacke, as the stomacke doth better or worse concoct, so the eyes paine is either decreased or increased, neither for many moneths can any such defect of the eye be discerned, for it is long in breeding. Signes. In the beginning of this disease, cetaine fumes and breaths doe present themselues to the sight: other-while flyes and Gnats; sometime darksome bodies, then againe shining with vnstayed motion, are driuen vp and downe. Some imagine cobwebs, others thinke woollen threads are before their eyes. Sometimes round circles appeare about Candles, and such other vnaccustomed sights present themselues to their eyes. Their sight by degees waxeth dull euen as the thin vapour, or humor doth thicken, or congeale; and then there is as it were a clowd before their eyes. Last of all, by greater congealation it is turned into a skinne or Panicle, and then the Pupilla doth appeare muddy, and darksome; in processe of time the eye doth appeare as if it were of the same colur with the sea; at the length this mischiefe is so far extended, that the patient is depriued of sight, which then is, when all the holes of the Pupilla are stopped; And yet the patient doth then see light, though but very little. If that humour be spred be∣fore the Pupilla, and the parts round about it do remaine pure, the obiect of sight doth seeme to bee full of holes. At the last this mischiefe increasing, the Pupilla doth send forth no light, & is turned vnto whitenes; hereby the eyes of some are blue, others eyes are gray. This mischiefe for the greater part doth lighten but vpon one eye, and being once fastned, will not easily be remoued. The Causes. Cold and grosse humors falling vpon the opticke nerue,
or growing betweene the cristalline humors, or the tunicle Rhogois, cause this disease by stopping the holes of the Pupilla, whereby the shapes of externall things should be deriued to the sights faculty, and are hindered by the means of obstruction, that they can not bee communicated to the cristalline humours, which is the principall instrument of seeing. Prognostiques. Amongst the slighter suffusions, that is the worst of all, which is caused by grieuous diseases, and great paine of the head: this euill may be cured at the first, but if it continues long, and the suffusion waxeth gray, the eye is depriued of sight. But that suffusion which is without brightnes, and is somewhat white of colour, will admit of no cure. Againe if the suffusion be of a leaden colour, or blacke, or very yellow, it can neither be cured by phisicke, or Needles. In like sort the eye wherein no hardned matter doth appeare, is incurable; for though the eyes do seeme to be cleare, and faire, yet they see nothing; and this is tearmed a fayre drop∣ping; also medicines are not auayleable for that suffusion which hath changed the figure of the Pupilla. If the hu∣mours come to the consistence of a pannicle, there remains no other way for the cure of this, then by the thrusting a needle through the Cornea; and it is expedient that the humours by congealing, at length become firme, for vnles the needle may be put vnderneath the congealed humours, the cure is vncertaine: in fiue yeeres it is hardned, and fit for the needle, yet if it haue bene of long continuance, it cannot be cured. But if that which is congealed by rubbing be rent asunder, and doth not remaine so long, but grows together againe, and is of a sad white colour, there is some hopes of the cure hereof.
A method seruing for the cure of CATARRACTA, or SVFFVSION. THe aire must be hote and dry. The flesh of Hens, Ca∣pons, Pullets, Birds of mountains are good. Such things as moisten the body too much, are prohibited. Among pot-hearbs, Fennill, Betony, Sage, Serpyllum, Maioram, Penny-royall are wholsome: he may drinke the decoction of Cina∣mon, honyed water, but by no meanes wine. His exercise must bee moderate, and his lower parts often rubd; his sleepe shorter then ordinary, the excrements of the belly must be answerable, pertturbation of the mind, and other affections must be auoyded. Preparers.Oxymel simplex, Mel rosatum, Sirupus Staechados, sirupe of Hyssop, the water of Fennill, Betony, Hyssop, Maioram, Ey-bright. Emptiers.The Caphalica veine of that side the disease is, must be opened at the beginning thereof, if the body be full, other∣wise not; because hereby the braine is too much coold, whereby plenty of excrements are generated. Pillul. Aureae, Cocciae▪ de agarico, Luci maioris, Assaieret, Mastichinae, Pillulae sine quibus esse nolo. Hiera picra, Agaricus trochis∣chatus. The patient must be often purged of this watery matter which doth cherish the disease. Auerters.A veine must be opened in the brow, and bleeding at the nose must be caused. A Clyster of the Roots of Fennell, flowers of Staechas, Cammomill, Mellilote, Centory the lesse, Betony, Anniseed, Fennill seed, Colocynthis, Diacatho∣licon, Hiera Gal. Hiera diacol. Oyle of Cammomill, Lillies: Sope or bloud-suckers must bee layed behind the patients eares; Or in stead of these, a cautery, Frictions and foments of the extreme parts with hote water, as also painfull ligatures thereof: Apophlegmatismes, Masticatories of Cubebs, Fennell-seed, Masticke, Bastard, Pellitory. cup∣ping-glasses with scarification must be applied to the hin∣der
part of the head, sneezing medicines. Seto may bee fast∣ned to the necke. A cautery of Catharides, Leauen; Pi∣geons dung shall bee applied behinde the eare; rather then in the hinder part of the head, it shall be made in the coro∣nall seame, because it is neerer to the eyes; and then let the humors runne many moneths. A Collery of the water of Eye-bright, of Celandine,Strength∣ners. and Fennell, wherein some Honey, Pompholix, Sagapenum are di∣solued. The conserue of Gall mingled with Honey will a∣uayle much; because Gall makes the humors more subtill. The water of Hony distilled. The Gall of Swine, and Goats, dissolued in the iuyce of Fennell. Sagapenum dissolued in the water of Honey distilled, or in Rosewater: this may bee vsed for many moneths. A lotion for the head, of the de∣coction of the leaues of Betony, Maioram, Wormwood, Fennell, flowers of Staechas in lye. Mithridate, Triacle, Dia∣margaritum calidum. Diagalanga, Diarrhod. Abbatis, Dia∣muscum dulce, conserue of Buglosse. The decoction of Gua∣iacum with capitall things, or in stead thereof, a decoction of Fennell, Eye-bright, Betony, Cloues, Cinamon, Cubebs, Mace: drop the water of Honey in the patients eyes. A col∣lery of Honey, the iuyce of Fennell, Gall. The stale of infants by its drying faculty, doth cure moystnesse which doth nourish the disease. A lotion of the head with the decocti∣on of Maioram, Rew, Staechas, Fennell, Betony, Eye-bright, Wormwood. An oyntment of the gall of a Partridge, the iuyce of Fennell, Honey: a needle shall not bee vsed, vntill the matter be well hardned. A more particular method seruing for the cure of CA∣TARRACTA, or SVFFVSION. ℞ of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. of Betony, Eye-bright, Centory the lesse, Fennell, ana M i. ss, seeds of Annise, and Fennell, ana ʒ iii. of Agaricke, ʒ i. ss,
colocynth. ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. vno lb i. ss, adde to the strayning benedictae laxatiuae, ʒ vi. oyle of Rew, Lillies, ana ℥ i, ss, of Salt, ʒ i. once a weeke before dinner administer this. A Iulep.℞ the sirupe of Hysop, ℥ ss, sir, of Staechas, Oxymellis simplicis, squil. ana ℥ i, of the water of Eye-bight, Fennell, Betony, ana ℥ iiii. mixe these, and giue the patient ℥ iiii. in the morning 4. or 5. dayes. Pills.℞ Pillul. lucis, Cochiarum Aurarum, ana ℈ i. of Aga∣ricke made into a Trochiske ℈ ss, sir. of Staechas q. s. make hereof 8. or 9. Pills take these after midnight in the pulpe of an Apple. Pills.℞ Hierae diacolocynth. ℈ ii. ss, of Agaricke made into a Trochiske, ℈ i. of Nutmeg, gr. vi. of the iuyce of Centory the lesse q. s. make hereof pills, and giue twice or thrice of them in a moneths. An Electu∣ary.℞ of great Triacle, aureae Alex▪ ana ʒ i. of Nutmeg, Ci∣namon, Cloues, ana ʒ ss, the seeds of Fennell, Eye-bright, ana ʒ i. ss, conserue of Rosemary flowers, ℥ i. ss, sir. of Staechas, q. s. thrice in a weeke the patient may take ʒ i. 4. houres before dinner. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of the flowers of Cammomile, M ii. ss, the leaues of Mallows, Althaea, ana M ss, the seeds of Fengreeke, Lini, ana ℥ ss, bruise these, and boyle them in water q. s. make a fo∣mentation hereof for the eye, before the colleryes be drop∣ped in with a sponge. Another.℞ the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Fennell, Beto∣ny, ana M i. seeds of Fengreeke, ℥ i. boyle these in water and wine q. s. A Collery.℞ of decoction of Celendine, Betony, Roses, Tormen∣till, ana ℥ ii. of the iuyce of Fennell, Eyebright, ana ʒ iii. of Myrrhe ʒ i. Mellis despumati, q. s. make hereof a Collery: sharpe Colleries must bee layd to the eyelids. A Collery.℞ of the powder of Swallows heads, ʒ ss, the gall of a Pike, ʒ ii. Pompholycis, ℈ i. ss, of Myrrhe, ℈ ss, of the decocti∣on of Tormentill, Fennell, ℥ ii. of distilled Honey q. s.
℞ the water of Hony distilled certaine ounces; of Sugar-candy & Myrrhe a little, drop a little of this into the eye. ℞ of Turpentine, ℥ ii. ss, Sulfuris vni ℥ i. ss, Mellis rosati,Another. ℥ vi. of Salt, ʒ iiii. of the iuyce of Fennell, the vrine of In∣fants lb i. distill these for a Collery. If the eye bee pained with the Collery, mitigate the paine with the white of an egge, beaten, or womans milke, or Rose-water. ℞ of the water of Fennell, Eye-bright,Another. ana ℥ iii. Ʋitrioli albi ℈ ii. Aloes, ℈ i. ℞ of Centory the lesse, Maioram, Betony, Wormwood,A Lotion. ana M ii. of Fennell, M ss, of the flowers of Staechas, M i. of Nutmeg, no ii. boyle these in an equall quantity of wine and water; wash the head herewith. An Appendix, seruing for the cure of CATARRAC∣TA or SVFFVSION. THe superfluity of humors must bee expelled by a cly∣ster, the next day a veine shall be open, if the body be full, and then the offending humors shall bee made subiect to nature, & at the length driuen out by purging medicines, which must often bee renewed. A cautery must bee made of ʒ iii. of Leauen, of Cantharides the head and wings be∣ing cut off no vi. this must be applyed to the coronall seame, or behind the eares. Also Figs with Honey may bee layd to these places, and then blisters being opened must runne. A cautery behinde the eare is best: or in stead of this, a seaton may bee set vpon the necke, then shall the matter bee tur∣ned away with Ligatures of the extreme parts, sneezing medicines, Errhines, Friction, Apophlegmatismes, Cly∣sters, and sharpe suppositors: and lastly, such medicines as will strengthen the head and sight, and dissolue the reliques must bee prescribed, but milder medicines must first bee vsed: for by this meanes the body will the better indure stronger. Such also must bee vsed, which doe al∣lay the heate of the eyes. And seeing that suffusion may bee
caused by consent of the stomacke, therefore it is requisite that the stomacke be emptied of these crudities. But if the disease be so much increased, that mists doe clowd the eyes, then both head and stomacke must bee purged; then di∣gesters and discussers of reliques which offend the eyes, may be giuen in colleries. And it shall likewise be expedi∣ent to raise a cautery in the hinder part of the head, to keepe the humors from running to the eyes; for else the eye would be inflamed. That suffusion which is caused by the default of the stomacke, is often cured by a vomit, but care must be had that it bee not done when the head is full, lest the matter get into the Opticke Nerues. Pillul. mastich. are very good, if they be often vsed. But if the suffsision bee at an end, the humour which is before the Pupilla, must bee thrust backe with a needle vnto the little corner of the eye: also when this is to bee done, the humor must bee of a meane consistence, for if it bee liquid, the needle will not preuaile, and againe if it be too thicke, the tunicle will soo∣ner be rent, then that can bee taken away, and besides, the pa∣tient will be put vnto great paine. A method seruing for the knowledge of OPTHALMIA, or Inflamation of the Eyes. OPthalmia is an inflamation of the Tunicle or Mem∣brane growing close vnto the eye, spred ouer all the membrane from the corners of the eyes. This euill oft takes its beginning from the Pericranium, from whence veines are conueyed to the eyes thorow the forehead, and temples. The Part affected. It is chiefly the eye, and chiefly the Tunicle growing next the eye, which doth manifestly appeare to be affected, because the sight of the eye is offended, and the tunicles neere adioyning,
Signes. There commeth withall a tumor of the eye, rednes, and a loading paine; and it oftentimes so swelleth, that the tunicle, and the parts neere adioyning are sore stretched; sometime the eye is swollen, to the cheekes, and store of teares fall from them caused by vehement paine, and prick∣ing of the eye, which doth sometime accompany this dis∣ease. Such thinne humours do demonstrate from whence this disease did take its beginning, then doth follow filth, which doth sticke in the corner of the eye; and when this filth by degrees growes so thicke, that it doth as it were glew the eyes together, then is not only the disease increa∣sed, but also it is at full height. In this disease also the ar∣teries about the eye do beat strongly; and the small veines which before did lurke in the white of the eye, are now swollen, and easy to be seene, and that part which was wont to be white, is now red; the affect is answerable to the signes all manner of wayes. The Causes. There be three causes of this disease: the first by fulnes & great store of bloud, wherewith the membrane growing close vnto the eye, is filled and stretched. Then the tem∣ples beate much, and extreme paine is about the eye. The veines seeme broad, the face and tunicle next vnto the eye looke red, and the eye-lids are very often closed. Teares gush out of the eyes, which are neither sharpe, nor biting. Age, diet, temperature, the season of the yeere, the region hot and moyst may cause this disease. All the parts about the eye, as well as the tumicle are red. If it be caused by phlegmy bloud, these parts are not so stretched. And as it is often caused by bloud, so is it often caused by thinne and sharpe choler running from the temples and corner veines, secretly into the eyes veines, and then such hote and biting teares gush out of the eyes, that the next parts seeme also burnt, and are sometime exulcerate. Dry and rough excre∣ments
are gathered about the corners of the eyes. Age, season of the yeere, chollericke temperament are sufficient witnesses of these humours, the patients former diet did breed sharpe humours. Sometimes, though but seldome, it is caused by flatuous spirits, and ventosities, and then the next tunicle is so stretched, that it oft seems to burst, whereby it remains in great paine; and then only small teares run out of the eye; neither is there such a heauines of the eye, or heate, or gnawing, although rednes doe appeare. Prognostiques. Opthalmia, oftentimes destroys the Vtea, when as the Cornea tunicle is burst by corrosion, or putrefaction, if the disease do last long, and the gnawing matter doth still keepe its course toward the eye. Opthalmia, which doth come from the inward tunicles, and from the braine, is worse then that which cōmeth from the pannicle couering the Cranium, & the greater the store of tears be that runne, and the sharper they bee, the sooner is Opthalmia at his height. But the Pupilla is in danger of being exulcerated, if the teares that flow from the eyes be salt and hote. There is danger of blindnes, if Opthalmia cause continuall paine. If the patient be loose of body, it is a good signe, also a great dry swelling with little paine is none of the worst signes. But if the tumour bee great, and dry, and with much paine, the eye is in danger of being exulcerated. A method seruing for the cure of OPTHALMIA or INFLAMATION. THe aire must be cold, dry, and obscure, his meat some∣what cooling, and little nourishing, and he must take but a small quantity in the first dayes of the cure. His drink must be Barley-water, motion must bee auoyded, and rest permitted; his sleepe must be longer then ordinary; for it doth asswage paine, and hinders the stirring of hu∣humours.
The belly must bee euacuated by art or nature. Perturbations of the mind must be auoyded. Syrupus rosatus, de rosis siccis. sir. of Violets,Preparers. Pomegra∣nates, Sorrell, water-lillies, Acetosus simplex. The water of Sorrell, Endiue, Plantane, Roses, and Violets. Sirupe of manifold infusions of Roses, Diaprunum simplex,Emptiers. Diacath. Electuarium de succo rosarum, Pillulae Aureae, Aggregatiuae, Lucis, Hiera picra. Hiera Diacolocynth. Tamarindi, Mirabolani, Rhabarb, manna, Cassia, Diaphaeni∣con, Pillulae Cocciae, Alephanginae, Hierae picrae, Agarici, Faetidae. First let the head veine of the same side be opened; if the body be full, and the affect be great, plenty of bloud shall be taken away: for by opening of a veine, this euill for the most part is rooted out, yet if choler more then any other humour doth abound, so much bloud must not be taken away, as if the disease were caused by bloud, but we will effect the rest with altring and emptying medicines. Stronger medicines are prohibited; because the humors being disquieted therewith, would runne vnto the eye. The former medicines shall be vsed if the bloud bee cholerick: and the latter if it be watery o flegmaticke. The forehead veine must be opened. A clyster,Auerters. a supposi∣tor, friction, ligatures, lotions of the feet, Shoulders, Armes, Hips, and Legs, must be vsed. Cuppinglasses with scarifica∣tion must be applied to the Shoulders, Necke, tops of the Armes, and beginning of the chine. Bloud suckers must be layd to the veines of the forehead, or behind the eares, if opening of a veine for some cause be omitted. A cautery must bee made in the coronallseame, the haires being first shaued. A gargarism, a masticatory, a seaton by taken hold of the skin of the Necke, with the Fingers, and a needle hauing a great thread shall be thrust through, and the ex∣crements of the head shall runne forty dayes like a fountain, sometime drawing the seaton vp and downe; or the skin must be pinched with pincers hauing two holes, and the necke be bored with a hote Iron, then a needle shall bee
put into this hole, and a thicke twist of silke drawne after it, that it rots not too sodainly; this silke must remaine in the hole, and bee moued to and fro twice or thrice euery day. Auerters.A foment of warme water wherein were boyled Roses, Violets, flowers of water-lillies, the leaues and Roots of Plantane, the seeds of white Poppy, Myrtill, Roots of Man∣drake, when the disease begins to increase, the leaues of Mallows, Cammomill, and Mellilote must be added; and when it is at its full height, the seeds of Fengreeke may be added. Rose-water may be also dropped in the patients eye. A Collery of tragacanth, Pompholix, gumme Ara∣bicke, Masticke, bole Armoniacke, red Corall, whereunto Opium may be added (if the disease be not mastered by those medicines) for this stayeth the flux of humours. The liquor of an Egge mixed with womans Milke, may be ap∣plied to the eyes; or else the liquor of an Egge mixed with the decoction of white Poppy, or with Rose-water and womans milke. The water of Roses, night-shade, Plantane, wherein the seeds of Poppy must bee boyled, with which the liquor of the white of an Egge well beaten shall bee mingled. The white trochisks of Rasis dissolued in Rose-water, if the paine be great, are very good. A cataplasme of Poppy heads, Roses, the flowers of wild Pomegranates, Night-shade, Plantane, the rinds of Pomegranates, Bole ar∣moniacke, Sanguinis Draconis, must be applied to the fore∣head and temples, with the yolke of an Egge. A plaister of beane flowers, Linseed, Fengreeke, Vineger, the white of an Egge must be layd to the brow. If the humours runne thorow the veines and arteries without the skull, such as are too astringent must not be vsed about the eyes, for thereby the matter may bee driuen backe into the hol∣lownes of the eyes and sinews, and so bring a continuall catarract and blindnes; but this is more to be feared, if the matter runne thorow the veines in the Cranium; be∣cause the matter about the opticke nerues is more congealed
Such as bind much, shall be applyed rather to the circle of the eye, or else to the forehead and temples, and by no meanes vpon the part affected; if the paine be great, these shall be renewed twice or thrice euery day; and such medi∣cines as may dull the parts, are not requisite for the cure of this disease, because they doe offend the sight. VVhen the disease doth begin to increase, resoluing medicines shall be mingled with repellers, and the more the disease doth increase, the quantity of these medicines shall in∣crease. Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diamargaritum frigidum,Strength∣ners. a decoction of the roots of Cyna. The water of Fennell, dissolue a little quantity of Aloes, and it is very good. Wo∣mans milke, or Rosewater, wherein Sarcocolla is dissolued. A collery of the water of Eyebright, Fennell, Roses, Pom∣pholix, aloes: a Fomentation of the decoction of the flow∣ers of Mellilot, the seeds of Fengreeke washed is a very good medicine. Fengreeke washed twice or thrice in hot water, and then boyld vnto the thicknesse of Hony. Also an Egge layd hot vnto the eye, when as it is sod somewhat hard. A more particular method seruing for the cure of OPTHALMIA or INFLAM∣MATION. ℞ of the roots of Fennell, ℥ ii. of Barley,A Clyster. M ii. leaues of Mallows, Mercury, Violets, ana M i. ss, flowers of Cammo∣mile, Mellilot, ana M i. seeds of Cowcumbers, Melons, ana ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the stray∣ning of the Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, ʒ v. of the oyle of Violets, ℥ iii. ℞ Oxymellis simp. sir. Stachados, ana ℥ i. ss, Mellis rosati colati ℥ ss, the water of Fennell, Rosemary, Maioram,A Iulep. ana ℥ iii.
A Potion.℞ of new Cassia ℥ i. Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, ʒ i. ss, sir. of many infusions of Roses, ℥ i. the water of Lettuce, Vi∣olets, ana ℥ i. ss. Pills.℞ Pillul. sine quibus esse nolo, cochiarum, ℈ i. Pillul. lucis, ℈ i. ss, of the best rubarb, ℈ ss, Diagridij. gr. iiii. sir. Stachados q. s. Giue these after the first sleepe. Pills.℞ Massae pillul. de hiera cum Agarico, ℈ ss, Pillularum lucis, ℈ ii. Diagridij, gr. ii. sir. Staechados, and water of Eye-bright q. s. make hereof 6 or 7 pills. A mixture.℞ Diamargarit frigidi, ℥ ss, Diatragacanthi frigidi, ʒ v. sir. de rosis siccis violarum, ana ℥ i. Another.℞ of Rosewater, ℥ iiii. Macilaginis Fenugraeci, ℥ ss, of the white of an Egge beaten, ℥ ii. ss, Womans milk, ℥ i. mixe these and lay them about the eyes. This medicine is good in the beginning of the disease, for it doth not onely miti∣gate the paine, but also stop and resist the violent force of the humors. An Irrhi∣gation.℞ of Rosewater, of the decoction of white Poppy, ana ℥ ii. of the white of an Egge dissolued in water ℥ i. of Camphire, Saffron, ana gr. iiii. Opij, (if the paine bee great) gr. i. mixe these and drop them into the eye, and then wash it with the decoction of Mellilot. A Cata∣plasme.℞ of the pulpe of an Apple rosted in Cinders, ℥ iiii. of Camphire, ℈ i. ss. Saffron, ℈ ss, of Rosewater, Womans-milke, q. s. this may be vsed when the eye indures extreme paine. A water.℞ of Masticke, Olibanum, ana q. s. dissolue them in the white of an Egge, it is good against the humors, running vnto the eyes and teeth. An Em∣playster.℞ of Womans milke ℥ ii. the yolkes of three Egges, of the flowers of the seeds of Linu ℥ ss, oyle of Roses, ℥ i. mixe these together. Another.℞ of the flower of Barley, Frankincense, Oliba∣num, ana q. s. this doth hinder the falling downe of teares into the eyes. Another.℞ of Frankincense, the flowers of Pomegranats, san∣guinis
dracois, Bole Armoniacke ana ℥ i. of the white of an Egge q. s. to incorporate the aforesayd; when they are to bee vsed, dissolue them in Vineger, q. s. wherein Ro∣ses, Masticke, Olibanum, and red French Wheat haue beene boyled, and apply these to the brow and tem∣ples. ℞ of Bole Armoniacke, Masticke, Sanguinis draconis,A Cata∣plasme. Bar∣ley flower, ana ℥ i. ss, of red Roses, M i. the white of one or two Eggs, oyle of Roses, ℥ i. ss, a little Vineger. Apply this to the forehead and temples, if the humors runne through the veines without the head, which for the most part hap∣pens. ℞ of Masticke, Frankincense, Myrrhe, ana ʒ i. ss,A Front∣let. of Bole Armoniacke, of Beanes-flower, ana ℥ ss, of Saffron, ℈ i. with a little oyle of Roses, Vineger, and the white of an Egge, dippe a fine cloth herein and apply it to the forehead. ℞ of the roots of Mandrake, ʒ ii. leaues of Violets,A Fomen∣tation. the Blacke-berrie bush, Willow, ana M i. of Roses, p. i. of white Poppy, ʒ ss, of the seedes of Flebane, Quinces, ana ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consu∣med, this may bee vsed in the beginning, but when the dis∣ease doth increase, add to the former the leaues of Mallows, Alhaea, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Fengreeke, Lin∣seed, Sarcocolla, and increase these latter still as the disease doth increase. ℞ Tutiae praeparatae, and beaten into very small powder,A Collery. ʒ i. ss, of Camphire gr. xii. searce these together in a fine cloth. Wet them in ℥ iii. of Rosewater, and Wine; two or three drops are sufficient for one time. ℞ Barley-flowers, ℥ ii. of Saffron,An Em∣playster. ʒ ii. of the water of Roses, the whites of Egges, q. s. lay this softly about the eye it doth much helpe the inflamation, rednesse and paine of the eyes. ℞ of Womans milke warme, the decoction of white Poppy, the white of Egges beaten, ana ℥ ss,A Fomen∣tation. this stayes the fluxe of humors in the beginning, it doth asswage the paine, and induce sleepe.
A Collery.℞ Collyrij albi, ʒ ss, Mucilaginis Psyllij, ℥ iii. of Wo∣mans milke, ℥ iiii. mixe these well on a painters stone▪ ad¦ding thereto the white of an Egge beaten, ʒ i. Another.℞ of Rosewater, ℥ iii. of Eyebright, ℥ i. Mucilaginis Foenu∣graeci, ʒ ii. ss, of Camphire, ℈ i. a little quantity of the white of an Egge, Opij gr. i. Grinde these well on a painters stone, before the third day, no collery shall be dropped into the eyes. Another.℞ of the white of an Egge dissolued in water, ℥ ii. ss, of Womans milke, ℥ iiii. the iuyce of Cammomile, Rosewater, ana ℥ i. Opij, gr. i. if necessity require, drop it into the eye, but afterward dippe a soft cloth herein, and lay it aboue the eye. This must be often renewed. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of the flowers of Mellilot, M iii. Fengreeke grosly beaten, ℥ iii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed. Make a Fomentation for the eye, which must be vsed often euery day. A Collery.℞ Collyrij Rhasis, ʒ i. ss;, dissolue it in Womans milke, and drop it into the eye; at the length boyle the seeds of Fengreeke, in water, (but the seeds must be very cleane washed) then wash the eye with the strayning, or dippe a sponge in the liquor, and sometimes moysten the eye ther∣with, if by reason of the sharpnesse of the humours, there be any danger of exculceration. Another.℞ of the seeds of Fengreeke bruised, ℥ ii. the flowers of Mellilot, M ii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill they be soft, vse this as the former. Likewise seeth an Egge somewhat hard, and lay it hot vnto the eye, for beside that it doth concoct and digest the humors, it doth also take away red∣nesse. ℞ of the crumme of white bread ℥ i, moysten this in Rosewater,An Em∣playster. adde to this of sweet Apples, ℥ ii. of Womans milke q. s.
An Appendix seruing for the cure of the OPTHALMIA or IN∣FLAMMATION. FIrst the belly must be euacuated with a Clyster; the se∣cond day a veine shall be opened. Then such medicines as may driue backe the matter running vnto the eye, shall bee applied vnto the brow, and dropped into the eye, especialy when the disease is fresh. In the meane time we must indea∣uour to make the grosse and windy humours obedient to nature. When we haue effected this, we wil purge the body of them, and if they be so sharpe that they threaten to eate into the eye, without the vse of preparing medicines, we will empty the body of them, at the length with fri∣ctions, Clysters, and lotions we will turne backe the humor running vnto the eye. The fift day we will mixe such, as may resolue the humours, with such medicines as driue them backe from the eye, for then the disease doth begin to increase, but first wash away al the scurfe from the eye with Rose-water, and then wee may proceed vnto such as do digest the humours: all which may be effected by these, and the former medicines, so that vniuersals and particulars be rightly applyed. If the former medicines can nothing pre∣uayle, runne a silke thread twisted thorow the flesh in the hinder part of the head, so that it may sometime bee drawne vp and downe. If inflammation be caused by the paine in the head, first this paine must be taken away, for this paine doth stirre vp the humour, and thereby cause the disease. If inflammation be caused by a blow, wash it ouer with Rose-water, and the white of an Egge. If the inflammation be not great, it will bee sufficient to wash it with Rose-water, the water of the white of an Egge, wo∣mans milke, Psyllii mucago. Dip a linnen cloth in these, and drop them into the eye, as also lay it vnto the eye.
these medicines shal be often renewed euery day when the disease is at the height, some Sarcocolla must be dissolued in womans milke: for this doth both digest the humours, and driue them backe from the eye. A method seruing for the knowledge of the difficulty of hearing. SVch men are sayd to be dull of hearing, who cannot heare a low voyce, and scarce vnderstand loud voyces; such men as these we say are deafe: therefore thicknes of hearing, and deafnes differ in greatnes only. The part affected. The eares are chiefly affected. Sometime the cause of his affect is in it selfe, when as the chiefe instruments of hea∣ring are hurt. Sometime it is caused by another member, when as the braine, or the nerue, through which this faculty is conueyed, is by some meanes offended. If the braine be faulty, then the other sence likewise suffers. This disease is an affection which shows the faculty of hearing either to bee diminished, or taken away. This affection follows the dis∣ease at all times. The Signes. This disease is knowne by the patients complaints and answers. The Causes. Oftentimes it is caused by a cold distemper of the braine, or instrument of hearing: oftentimes it is caused by grosse and cold humours thrust into the eares, and there fastned; for such humours do amaze the senses, with their functi∣ons, which the dulnes of the head, and of the part affect∣ed do plainly demonstrate; also the other sences haue here∣by beene hindered: also cholericke bloud ascending vpward, doth stop the passage of hearing, because great store thereof falleth vpon the chiefe instrument of hearing, which doth often happen in the time of Crisis in sharpe Feauers.
It is also caused by the filth in the corners of the eare, Schirrho, thicke skin about the place, and a fleshy bunch, by an vlcer, impostume, & some other outward causes. Also hote vapors in great plenty get vp to the head and eares, from the bowels, and stomacke, whereby though the sence of hearing remaine perfect, yet the patient doth not heare very well: this is incident vnto many, but espe∣cially vnto such who haue a foule body, & euen as in the suf∣fusion caused by superfluity of excrements in the lower parts, the patients see not very well: so is it with hearing: the windy spirits do cause great paine by stretching the mem∣branes to get out. Also these are the signes of this disease: a great sounding in the eare, and stuffing thereof without either heate or heauines. Prognostiques. Difficulty of hearing is much suspected, especially if it do slowly increase, because in processe of time, it doth bring with it deafnes, but that deafnes that is either absolute from the birth, or afterward, is incurable. And that which is not absolute, if it be of long continuance, will hardly, or not at all be cured; but that which is caused by grosse hu∣mours, if it be neither absolute, nor of long continuance, is curable; deafnes also, caused by choler, is cured by such as draw downe choler, and sometimes of its owne accord it comes downe; if deafnes caused by a blow, remaine many moneths, it is incurable, especially if the sinews which appertaine to hearing, bee dissolued. Deafnes also caused by a secret impostume hardned within the eare, is incure∣able. A method seruing for the cure of the DIFFICVLTY of HEARING. THe aire must be hote, and dry, he must also vse slender diet, and sometime suffer hunger, such meats as doe breed grosse nourishmnts and vapors, as cheese, pulse, and
fruits must bee auoyded; and his meate may be seasoned with Anni-seeds, Cummin, Carrowaies, and Parsly. His drinke must be small wine and old. He must moderately ex∣ercise himselfe, and his belly must bee kept loose by art or nature. Preparers.Oxymel. squilliticum, sir. Staechados, the water of Elder, Betony, Baulme. The sirupe of Violets, Water-lillies, En∣diue. The water of Sorrell, Buglosse, Succory: when it is caused by grosse and cold humors, those in the first place shall bee vsed; if by hot humors, the latter, and so purging medicines shall be chosen. Emptiers.The shoulder veine of the same side shall be opened. The Electuary of manifold infusions of Roses, Pillulae aureae, Assaieret. Diaph, Rubarb, new Cassia; the water of En∣diue, water-Lillies. Pillul. cocciae, Arabicae, de Agarico. Dia∣catholicum Indum maiu. Hiera Gal. Agaricus trochiscatus. Purgers must often bee renewed, when as it is caused by grosse and cold humors. Auerters.A veine must be opened, Apophlegmatismes, of Pyre∣thrum, Masticke, and Pepper, tye these in a fine linnen cloth, and let them be chewed euery day; Errhines of Mustard∣seed, Pyrethrum, the iuyce of Maioram, with white Wine. A Gargarisme of the decoction of Staechas flowers, Mus∣tard seed, Origan, Calamint, Oxymel. squilliticum: a sneezing powder must be made of Ginger, Pyrethrum, white Pep∣per. Strength∣ners.Diamuscum dulce, Triacle, conserue of Rosemary-flow∣ers, of Staechas, a decoction of Guaiacum wood, Honey, wherein white Hellebore, or Beauer-stone is soked; and drop two drops into the eare. The iuyce of Rew mixed with Honey. The decoction of Stachas, Origan, Maioram, Woormwood, wilde Mints, the vapor of these shall bee drawne into the eare with a tunnell. The eares must also be fomented with the vapor of Vineger. Oyle of Petroleum, bitter Almonds, of Nard, the iuyce of an Onyon; one drop of these luke-warme must bee dropped into the eare mor∣ning
and euening. Oyle of Bay-berries, wherein some Ari∣stolochia hath been dissolued. A naturall bath, the Electuary of Diatrìon sandal. Conserue of Roses, Buglosse, oyle of wa∣ter-Lillies, Roses, Violets, bitter Almonds, the white of an Egge, with Womans milke, one or two drops must be put into the eare. If this disease be caused by grosse humors, we may vse the former: if by hot humors, the latter; but we must not exceed the quantity of two drops at one time. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the difficulty of Hearing. ℞ sir. Staechados, ℥ iii. Oxymellis squillitici,A Iulep. ℥ i. the water of Betony, Hysop, Maioram, ana ℥ iii. Giue of this ℥ iiii. in the morning for the space of sixe or seuen dayes. ℞ Diaturbith with Rubarb, Electuarij Indimaioris,A purging potion. ana ʒ iii. ss, sir. Staechados, ℥ i. water of Betony, ℥ iii. ℞ Pillul. Cochiarum sine quibus esse nolo, ana ℈ i. ss,Pills. Tro∣chisci alhandal, gr. vi. with the sirup of Staechas, make here∣of 7 pills. ℞ Pillul. assaieret, sine quibus esse nolo, ℈ i. Cochiarum,Pills. ℈ i. ss, sir. Staechados q. s. Giue these after the first sleep. ℞ of the best Mithridate,An Anti∣dote. ʒ i. of Triacle ℈ i. Giue this after the pills. ℞ of Staues-acre, bastard Pellitory, Mustard-seed. ℈ i. ss,An errhine the iuyce of sweet Maioram, ℥ iii. ℞ of bastard Pellitory, Mustard, Pepper, ana ℈ iiii. of Masticke, ʒ vi. An apophlegmatisme. ℞ of white Hellebore, gr. xii. of Ginger,A Stern∣tatory. bastard Pellito∣ry, ʒ i. ss, powder these and mixe them. ℞ the leaues of Calamint, Origan, Maioram, flowers of Staechas, ana M i. of bastard Pellitory, Mustard, ʒ i. ss,A Garga∣risme. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed; adde to the strayning Oxymellis squillitici, ℥ ii. ss. ℞ of Quinces, ʒ vi. of the best Cinamon, ʒ i. ss,An Electu∣ary. of Annise
Fennell and Coriander seeds ʒ ii. Electuarij anacardini, ʒ ii. ss, sir. Staechados, q. s. vse this after meate. To drop in∣to the eare.℞ the oyle of bitter Almonds, Bayes, Beauer-stone, ana ʒ ii. of Roses, ʒ i. of white Hellebore, gr. i. of Wine-vineger ʒ ss, boyle them together in an yron pan, vntill the Vineger be consumed, put one drop hereof into the eare, and stoppe the holes with wooll. Or this: Another.℞ of the oyle of Nard, bitter Almonds, ana ℥ i. of the iuyce of an Onyon, ℥ i. ss, of Beauer-stone, ʒ i, Drop this into the eare. Another.℞ of the oyle of Almonds, Cammomile, Roses, ana ℥ ss, Panis porcini, ʒ i. ss, boyle these a while on the fire, and drop of the strayning into the eare: vnto the remainder, adde Farinae Lini,A Cata∣plasme. Faenugraeci, ana ℥ i. oyle of bitter Almonds, fresh Butter, ana q. s. Another.℞ of Onions, no iii. rost them vnder hot embers, beate them in a morter, then adde of Saffron, ʒ ss, of fresh But∣ter q. s. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of Bay flowers, of Origan, Hysop, Maioram, ana M i. ss, of Worm-wood M ii. Mentastri, M ss, flowers of Stae∣chas M i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed, then adde a little Vineger, wash the eare with a sponge dipped herein, and let the vapour be con∣ueyed to the instrument of hearing, by some instrument for that purpose. A liquor to bee dropped into the eare.℞ the roots of Radish, ʒ iii. of white Hellebore, gr. ii. of Beauer-stone, bastard Pellitory, ana ℈ ss, boyle these a little in strong Wine, if the disease bee caused by a cold humour, one or two drops must be put into the eare with a wood∣den sticke: if it bee caused by hot humors, drop the iuyce of Pomegranats, wherein oyle of Roses, Vineger, and the iuyce of Lettuce haue beene mixed: also the oyle of Roses, wherein a little Vineger hath beene boyled and consumed in the boyling, put a little of this into the eare, which be∣ing
done, the patient must rest an houre or two vpon his sound eare, that the vertue of the medicine may be drawne to the inward parts; and then he must rest vpon the other eare as long, that the excrements may slide out the better. About sixe or seuen houres after, cleanse the patients eare from all the filth therein gathered together. The white of an Egge with Womans milke shall bee dropped into the eare in an hot cause, or else the water which runneth out of a vine which is pruned in its due season. An Appendix, seruing for the cure of the diffi∣culty of hearing. THe raw humors must bee brought downe with diges∣tiue medicines, and then turned out of the body by pills, and other medicines, which we will endeuour to effect twice in euery weeke, then must the matter be fetched out of the eares by Errhines, medicines prouoking sneezings, and Gargarismes. This being done, againe the braine must be purged from their superfluous humors by pills, and then such must bee administred as dissolue the reliques, and strengthen the braine. All which we may effect by these and the former medicines, so that vniuersalls and particulars be well sorted. Especiall care ought to be had in the putting of hot oyle into the eares, lest that paine and exulceration doe follow. Therefore the safest way would be this, to mixe a small quantity of these with the oyle of bitter Almonds. If there bee a filthy vlcer in the eare, somewhat must bee applyed inwardly that may clense the part affected. For which purpose make a medicine of Honey and the iuyce of wild Cowcumbers, or the gall of a Lambe. Then the vl∣cers shall be made sound by such as haue a drying vertue. For which purpose Tutia, the drosse of yron, Pompholix, white lead, may be boyld in wine, and one drop of the stray∣ning shall be put into the patients eare; vnto this likewise one drop of Vineger may be added. And as oyles are dan∣gerous,
and enemies to most vlcers, so are they especially obnoxious to the vlcers of the eares: wherefore wee must forbeare the vse of Oyles, when we perceiue that there is an vlcer in the eares. We must begin heere with mild me∣dicines at the first, and by degrees proceed vnto stronger, and we will rather apply outward medicines then inward; for in these there is lesse danger: if one medicine can do the patient any good, this neither ought to be changed, nor left of, vntill it hath effected the cure. But if any shalbe put into the eare, the quantity shal be very small, otherwise they will runne to the hearing nerue, and vnto os Petrosum, and by this meanes cause a greater dulnes of hearing. A method seruing for the knowledge of HAEMORRHA∣GIA or bleeding at the nose. HAemorrhagia in this place doth signifie bleeding at the nose, whether it doth come immediatly from the nostrills, carried thither by the veines of the pallate, through which for the most part nature doth expell the superfluous bloud in many; or else whether it comes from veines in the head farther off. But in generall it doth signi∣fie any bleeding, whether it be of Nose, Buttocke, or Sto∣macke, or any other part of the body. Out of the Nose bloud sometime doth gush out with so great force, that the patients for want of that bloud which is shed, fall into a swound, and in this kind it is alwayes hurtfull: whereas if it moderatly doth runne out in the beginning of any Im∣postume, Plewrisie, Quincy, Burning Feauer, small pocks, and Feauer, it is alwayes for the best; sometimes it doth but droppe out of the nose, sometimes it runnes out mode∣rately, This bleeding is sometimes criticall in other diseases, foreshewing death, otherwhiles it is a ioyfull messenger of life. The part affected. The nostrills are heere affected, but not alwayes the
essence of the nostrils; for sometime they are affected by the consent of the stomacke. The veines by which this bloud is cast out at the nose, runne from the pallate and mouth into the nostrills, and sometime from the head. Haemorrhagia is therefore such an affect appertaining vn∣to too much excretion, or vnto the expulsiue, and reten∣tiue faculties actions hurt. This follows another disease, viz. the opening of the mouth of the veines, or the diuision, and corrosion thereof. The Signes. If too much bloud be shed, the colour of the face is pale, and the body is of a leaden colour, the outward parts are cold, then follows a swounding, sometimes death. The Causes. Oftentimes bleeding at the nose is caused by nature, which doth by this meanes expell the excrements, and that which is troublesome to the body. This happens often in sharpe diseases, when as there is a great quantity of corrupt matter, and when it doth boyle vp like new wine hauing no vent. Sometime it is caused by the euil affection of the veines wherein the bloud is contained; and the bloud runnes out of the veins, first because the veines are open, which is caused by such a plenty of bloud, that the veines cannot containe it, and then rushing violently to the mouth of the veines, make a passage; sometimes, because the bloud hath some sharpe quality in it, or else is some other way pu∣trified, vexing the mouth of the veine, at the length it opens them. Sometimes the veines bleed, because they are diuided either by a bursting, wound, or bruise. Againe, the veines bleed, because some gnawing humour hath got thereinto, or else because some strong outward medicine hath beene applied to them; then may such things bee applied as may cause an asker. Lastly, they bleed, because the bloud is too much fined by exercise, or some other cause and the
veines tunicles are thinner, and rarer, and so they bleed by way of strayning. Heere those are good which do thicken the veines, and bloud, and do purge waterish humours. Prognostiques If bleeding at the nose haue continued long, swounding, weeaknes, and too much cooling of the liuer, Cachexia, or the dropsy is to be feared. Bleeding at the nose with coldnes of the outward parts, is mortall; if the patient by bleeding bee eased of paine, it is a good signe. If such as be newly taken with a Feauer, bleed on the fourth day it is suspicious; if it come after headaches in the time of Crisis in Feauers, it is good; and if it be not immoderate, the Feauer shall need no other cure. If in bleeding, either doting or conuulsion happen, this is a very bad signe: for a conuulsion by empti∣nes is deadly: if the nose bleed in suppression of tearmes, it may very well be permitted to bleed awhile, for nature being hindered, doth cast them to the vpper parts, which otherwise would haue offended the lungs and liuer. All superfluous bleeding, in what part soeuer, doth offend the liuer. From whence Cachexia, swounding, and the dropsy, sometimes death it selfe seizeth on the patient. A method seruing for the cure of HAEMORRHAGIA or bleeding at the nose. THe aire must be somewhat cold, his meate must be such as doth nourish well, and easy of digestion, as Chic∣kens rosted, or boyled; but let them be cold when he doth eate them; among Fruits, Quinces, Wardens; amongst hearbs, the two kinds of Endiues and Lettuces are good. His drinke must be red thicke wine, but he must abstaine from white and thinne wine. In stead of wine likewise hee may drinke water, wherein Cinamon hath beene boyled; he must auoyd all motion and exercise of the body, and speake very little, and the part vnderneath the head must bee
layd higher then his head: so that the head may hang downward. For by this meanes it is driuen into the con∣trary side of its former motion: He must auoyd all passions of the mind, especially anger. Syrupe of Myrtle, water-lillies. Of Roses, Pomegranates,Preparers. of the iuyce of Sorrell, Quinces, Poppy. The water of Sorrell, Plantane, Purslane; these asswage the heat of the blood, sharpnes and biting thereof, & also somewhat coole it, and by this meanes make it more vnmeet to stirre or runne vp and downe. Let the Basilica,Auerters. or Cephalica veine of the same side bee opened, if the patient be not faint, and by degrees be renu∣ed twice or thrice in a day, especially if bloud doe abound, and the disease be caused by the sharpnes hereof, and then no medicine is better; for this doth bring the bloud backe againe: yet this shall not bee applyed vntill a sufficient quantity of bloud bee gone. Painfull ligatures of the ex∣treme parts must be vsed, cupping-glasses with scarifica∣tion shall be applied to the shoulders and stomacke. Strong frictions of the armes and hands downward. Bloud-suckers shall bee applied behinde the eares, or buttocks, if the Hamroides cease which were wont to flow. The extreme parts must be dipped, & washed in water, sodaine feare and sodaine casting water vpon the patient, is sometime present remedy: For the bloud flyes inward with the spirits. In these consist all the hopes of the cure of this disease. Syr. of manifold infusions of Roses; infusion of Rubarb.Emptiers. A decoction of Rubarb, Mirabolanis, citrinis, Manna. A potion of the decoction of Epithymon, Polipody, Sene, Mira∣bolanis Indis; the flowers of water-lillies, Violets, the seeds of Plantane, Melons, Quinces, syr. de Epithymo, Fumitory, Agaricke. Sene, Myrobalani Kbuli, and a veine must bee opened as was before prescribed if the
bleeding at the nose bee stenched, and it doth appeare somewhat corrupt, we will vse these purging medicines, after the vse of such as stop and turne away the blood, or else this should haue beene our first taske, because it was caused of sharpe bloud. If this blood be cholericke, the former medicines shall be vsed; if watery and melancholy, we will vse the latter. Stopers of the bloud.Trochisci de terra sigillata, drunke with the water of Plantane; or else lay it vpon the temples, with the white of an Egge, and iuyce of Plantane. Trochisci de succino, de Spodia. Conserues of Roses, Violets, water-lillies, Quin∣ces, whereto adde Bole Armoniacke, Corall, Harts-horne burnt, the seeds of Plantane. Sir. of water-Lillies, dry Ro∣ses, Quinces, Poppy, Lemmons, Sorrell, Pomegranates, Myrtill, the waters of all these. A potion of Plantane wa∣ter, Purslane, Shepheards-purse, Caudae equinae, Bole Ar∣moniacke, Terra sigillata. A decoction of Lettuce, Mali∣coriae, Balaustijs gallis. Athanasia recens, Mycleta, Philoni∣um Romanum, with the iuyce of Plantane do procure sleep, and stop the fluxe of bloud. Opium, Poppy Camphire, the seed of House-leeke, and Lettuce do harden and congeale the blood. The roote of Equisetus beaten, and put in into the nose; or the iuyce of Porrus, Nettle, Plantane, Caud equinae, Basilici, shepheards purse Millefolij, Sanguina∣ri, dip a sponge in these, or in the best Vineger, and put it vnto the nose; or the vapor of sharpe Vineger, receiued vp into the nostrill; for this purpose sprinkle some Vineger vpon a hote stone, and let the patient hold his nose ouer. Irrhigations of the face and brow with Rose-water, or cold water. Or wash the brow with a sponge dipped in Vi∣neger. Moysten a sponge very well with Vineger, and then daube it ouer with moist pitch, and burne it in an earthen Vessell, vntill it doth waxe small like a powder: this may either be blowne into the nostrills, or else giuen in a moyst
medicine. A nasale of Aloes, Frankincense, Bole armoni∣acke, the doung of an asse burnt, the shells of Eggs, and threads of cloth burnt, dry Mints, Gypo, old cheese, San∣guis Draconis, the iuyce of Polygonium, Plantane, the white of an Egge, make pencils of the haires of a Hare, and put them into the nostrills, being first dipped in the a∣foresayd. Efcharotiea must be made of Caleanthum, Tar∣tar, Chalcitide, calce viua, whereunto some astringent me∣dicines should be aded, and so it wil better sticke. An oynt∣ment of the Oyle of Roses, Violets, water-lillies, Vineger, Cerato sandalino. A Cataplasme must be made of Bole Armo∣niacke, Cauda Equina, Shepheards-pouch, Purslane, Terra sigillata, Housleeke, Hematite, Rose-water, Vineger, and white of an Egge. This must bee made for the brow and temples. These present remedies shal be applyed to the sides of the necke, to the brow and temples, and to the remote veines from whence the blood principally issueth; but first the bloud must be turned backe againe to its proper and peculiar place, and by no meanes vse them at the begin∣ning of the Haemorrhagia, for there is danger of the blouds running into the Head, Arteries, Lungs, or Ven∣tricle: And so the ptient be either stifled, or assaulted by a conuulsion. Some of these formerly mentioned do stop the bloud running at the nose, by their astringent vertue: for they do thicken the bloud, and by that meanes hinder the speedy motion thereof. Others by a cold property do the like; as Lettuce, Poppy, Opium. Others do glue to ge∣ther the gaping orifice of the veines, as Frankincense, the whire of an Egge, Gumme Arabicke; some by a secret pro∣perty they haue, as the iuyce of Porrus mints. Some do ef∣fect this by bringing a kind of scabbe vpon the place, and by cauterizing, as Arsnicke, Calx vina, Ʋitriolum. By these fiue kinds of medicines, the running of blood out at the nose is stayd. Those medicines which are astringent, and do coole very much, may be taken in at the mouth, or put vp into the nostrills, or else cloaths dipped in them,
may bee layd to the necke, brow, crowne of the head and loynes. A more particular method seruing for the cure of HAEMORRHAGIA, or bleeding at the Nose. A Iulep.℞ Syr. of Violets, Water-lillies, Myrtill, Quinces, Pop∣py, ana ℥ i. the water of Plantane, Shepheards-pouch, ana ℥ iiii. of Sorrell, Roses, ana ℥ ii. ss, mixe these and giue ℥ iiii. of it for the space of three dayes morning and eue∣ning. A Potion.℞ of the roots and leaues of Plantane. M i. ss, of red Roses, Shepheards-pouch, ana M i. the seeds of Lettuce, Pur∣slane, Plantane, ana ʒ ii. boyle these in water, vntill the third part bee consumed; then adde to the strayning of the syrupe of water-Lillies, Quinces, Poppy, ana ℥ i. Giue ℥ iiii of this with ʒ ss, of the Trochiske de terra sigil∣lata. A Potion.℞ of the roots of Plantane, ℥ ii. Mirobal. Indorum, ℥ iii. white and light Agaricke, ʒ ii. ss, Epithymi, Fumitory, ana M i. Polipodij quercini, sena Alex. ana ʒ iii. of the best Rhu∣barb, ʒ ii. Sebestin, tamarindorum, ana ʒ ii. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed, adde to the strayning sir. rosacei Laxatiui, ℥ iii. A draught.℞ of water. ℥ iiii. of Vineger, ℥ ii. of Sugar, Rosewater, ana ℥ i. of this make a draught to be drunke at two seuerall times. A mixture.℞ of conserue of water-Lillies, Roses, ana ℥ i. Trochisc, de spodio, de terra sigillaa, Rosin, ana ʒ ii. ss, of Bole Armo∣niake, the seeds of Plantane, ana ʒ i. Sacchari rosacei, ℥ i. ss, sir. of Poppy, water-Lillies, ana q. s. A Powder.℞ of Blood-stone, Corrall, Gummi Arab. assati, ana ℈ i.
of red Roses, ℈ ss, rhabarb. modice assati, ℈ i. Diatra∣gacanthi frigidi, the weight of all these. Giue ℈ ii. of this with the sirupe of Quinces, ℥ i. of Plantane water, ℥ iii. ℞ Athanasiae, Nicholai, ℥ ss, Sacchari rofacei,A mixture. conserue of Roses, ana ℥ i. ℞ of the water of Roses, Purslane, Plantane, Sorrell,An Epi∣theme. En∣diue, ana ℥ iiii. of the seeds of Purslane, Sorrell, Endiue, ana ʒ i, of the trochiskes of Camphire, Sandal. citrinorum, ana ʒ ii. a little Vineger, make an Epitheme for the liuer; for cold medicines being warily applyed to the liuer, doe soone stay the force of bleeding at the nose, if so bee the blood did come from the liuer: as much may be sayd of the spleene. ℞ of the rootes and leaues of Plantane,A Fomen∣tation. of Shepheards-pouch, Polygonij, ana M iiii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb iii. adde vnto the strayning of the best Vineger, lb i. ss, wash the palme of the hand, and the soles of the feete, and the liuer with a sponge dipped therein, likewise wet cloaths herein, and apply vnto the veines of the throat, the temples and forehead. ℞ Trochisc. de carabe, ʒ i. of the roote of the hearbe Horse-taile, ℈ ii. ss; Bole Armoniacke, Sanguinis draconis,A Nassale. ana ʒ ss, of Frankincense, ℥ i. ss, of Aloes; ℈ ii. ss. incorporate these in the white of an Egge, make small pencils of the haire of a Hare. Dippe it in the aforesayd, and put it into the nostrils. This must be vsed after that a veine is opened, and after Cupping-glasses and ligatures of the extreme parts. For otherwise it is to bee feared, that the blood will runne to the row of arteries, or into the stomacke, or into the in∣ward parts of the head. ℞ Alloes, ʒ ii. of Frankinsence, ℥ iii. of Camphire, gr. v. Opij. (if necessity require) gr. ii. Incorporate these with the white of an Egge, and after the former manner put it
into the nose: or the dust of the shell of an Egge shall be blowne into the nose. ℞ of Horse-tayle, M ii. of Shepherds pouch, Plantane, ana M i. beate these, and adde vnto them Bole Armoniacke, ʒ i. ss. of Rosewater and Vineger a little, wrap this vp in a cloth and lay it to the temples. A Cata∣plasme.℞ of the ashes of an Egge-shell, ℥ iii. the flowers and rinds of wild Pomegranats, of Bole Armony, of Oake apples ana ℥ ss, seeds of white Poppy, ʒ ii. incorporate these with a little Vineger and the white of an Egge. A cataplasme: ap∣ply this vnto the brow, temples, and the veines of the throate. ℞ of the Blood-stone, Bole Armony, terrae sigillata, ana ℥ i. ss, of the iuyce of of Horse-tayle, Purslane, Poligonii, of House-leekes, ana ℥ ss, the whits of two Egges, a little Rose-water, and Vineger; apply this vnto the brow and temples and cods. An vnguent℞ of oyle of Roses, Quinces, sirupe of Quinces, ana ʒ i. Bole Armony, the flowers of wild Pomegranats, ana ʒ ss, of Pine apples, ℈ i. a little Wax and Vineger, make an oynt∣ment for the veines of the throate, forehead and temples: boyle the oyles and iuyces together, vntill the iuyce be con∣sumed. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the HAE∣MORRHAGIA, or bleeding at the Nose. OPen a veine at the first: but if blood do run so fast out of the nose, that it will be both dangerous, and need∣lesse to open the cubit veine, then Cupping-glasses shall be set to the shoulder, and necke, and sides of the patient: also Ligatures and Frictions shall be vsed: and by washing the
feete in hot water, the course of the blood will bee turned another way: at the length wee will stoppe it from going further, and strengthen those parts from which the blood did first of all come: and these we will apply vnto the nose, forehead, liuer and spleene; neyther medicines which are called Marcotici, or Escharotici must be vsed, vnlesse great necessity doe require; but we will giue Arthanasia, ℈ ii. ss or else we will make a powder of Ʋitriolum, playstering Morter, Masticke, and snuffe this vp into the nose. In all fluxes of blood out of the nose, moderate moystning medicines must be applyed to the liuer. But it is best if an Epitheme be made for the liuer of the seeds of Endiue, Sorrell, Sandalis, Rosewater, Succory; or to a Cerate of Sandals, some oyle of water-Lillies shall be added; and a soft Liniment shall be made hereof. A method seruing for the knowledge of CATARRHVS, or RHEVME. CAtarrhus is a distillation commonly taken, and is a deflux of humours and excrements from the head or braine into the other parts of the body: and because the braine is of a cold and moist nature, and doth want plenty of nourishment, by reason of the largenes thereof: so like∣wise it doth breed many excremenes; and the slight distem∣per being cold and moyst, will further it: for first vapours sent from the lower parts, get vp thither, and these being thickned, by reason of the braines thinnesse, are entertained; and euen as these superfluous excrements are sent backe a∣gaine to some one or other part of the body, so likewise doth the disease alter its name, for such excrements some∣time enter into the inner receptacle of the braine, often∣times in the first ventricle (if so be that they do not offend much in quantity) and then they are soonest purged by the pallate. Sometime they are spred thorow diuers places of
the braine, when they flow too much, and then are they auoyded partly at the nose, partly at the pallate, some at the eares, some at the eyes, and they do often fall into the in∣ward parts of the body, as stomacke and lungs, whereof come these diseases, viz. an impostume of the lungs, and Asthma, and they fall into the thrate, or wind-pipe▪ whereof commeth hoarsnes, sometime they do lghit vpon the stomacke, and the nourishment that was but lately re∣ceiued, is corrupted, the appetite, & concoction quite ouer∣throwne. Sometime they do cause a lientary, when as they do fall into the bowels, whereof commeth a laxe. Some∣time such excrements are gathered on the outside of the skull, vnder the skinne of the head, and that is often per∣ceiued in the crowne, where the ends of the veines creep∣ing along the face and temples, do meet; for if these vessels be laden with needlesse store of excrements, they do often vnloade themselues in these places for the space of many dayes; whereas by degrees, because of their thinnesse, they find some way out of the parts of the body, yet it doe softly thicken, by reason of the heate of the part wherein it is harboured; from whence come the paines of the Sides, Loynes, Armes, Shoulder-blades, Eyes, Teeth, Shoulders, Kernels, Hips, Legs, and sundry ioynts. But chiefly in this place wee do treate of that flux which doth fall into the Lungs, The part affected. The braine is most affected, as may appeare by the acti∣ons and faculties which are offended; as also by those things, that are voyded at the mouth, nose, and pallate; and then it is a more continuall disease, neither is any hurt of any other part perceiued, whereby it may be cherished, but while it is caused by other parts of the body, it will the better be knowne by its proper signes; this is an affecti∣on, which appertaines vnto immoderate excretion.
Signes. If the excrements of the head fall into the Lungs, it doth cause for the most part hardnes of breathing, and a great cough, and a certaine tickling is felt in the throate, and some portion of the humours fallen downe, is cast vp in spit∣tle, and in time faintnes of body, heauines of the head; heate and thirst cōmeth withal, the vrine for the most part is of a high colour. If it do fall into the throte, or windpipe, it doth bring with it a cough and hoarsnes, and those places are rough. The Causes. Sometime the hote distemper of the braine is the cause, which dissolueth, and fineth humours in the braine, & doth draw more vapors from the lower parts, then it can concoct, and expell by breathing; that there is this distemper in the braine, Age, region, season of the yeere, hot temperature, a∣red nose & face, the parts of the head being hot, the temples and arteries beating very much, a sharpe or thinne humor voyding at the mouth or the nose, Feauer oft comming with it, and a loathing of meate, do all signifie as much. But the great weaknes of the braine is oftner the cause of rheume, so is its cold and moist distemper, for then nutriments conueyed to the braine, are not well digested, whereby many super fluities are gathered, and store of excre∣ment are lodged in the braine. The signes of this consti∣tutions are age, the season of the yeere, diet cold tempera∣ture, the auoyding of phlegmy and grosse humours at the nose, and of those great plenty, also sleeping, distention, hea∣uines of the head, and forehead, palenes of the face, loading obstructions in the nostrills. His former diet was too moist and distemperd. This is caused by ill vapours that filll the head; for vapours being thickned, are thrust downe
into the lower parts. Surfet likewise, and too much fulnesse▪ especially of wine, increase this euill. It is also caused by too much sleepe; also by reason of the weaknes of the digestiue and expulsiue faculty of the braine, whether it were so from the patients birth, or by some long disease of the braine: for the nutriment brought thither, is left raw, and is in the body, because of the weaknes of the expulsiue faculty. Prognostiques. If the humour fall from the head to the nose, it is but a small griefe, if vnto the throate, a worse, if to the lungs, worst of all; for the lungs are in danger of being exulcerated, from whence cōmeth a Consumption. Short rhewmes, if they be let alone at the first, will at the length proue tedious; they are not free from danger, who are very much troubled with rheume. It doth threaten Apoplexy, Phrensy, Blindnes, Toothache, Consumption, Palsey, Deafnes, squinancy, sud∣den death, Impostume of the Lungs, Bladder, Kidneys, Liuer, eyes, Paine and weaknes of the stomacke, the Sci∣atica, Gowt, Laxe, and Collicke; such who haue a cold and weake braine, are most subiect to rheume, also rheume accompanyed with the paine of the head, is hardly to bee cured. The winter season is very obnoxious to this disease, because of the vncertainty of the weather. A method seruing for the cure of CATARRHVS or RHEVME. THe aire must bee moderately hote, rayny weather and northern and sowtherne blasts must bee auoyded. His meate must bee easy of digestion, and such as may breed good bloud, viz. reare Eggs, the flesh of Hens, Pullets, Ca∣pons Patridges, Veale; but he must eat moderately of these, and he must be more sparing of his diet at supper then din∣ner. After meate giue him some Quinces, for it doth hinder the rising of the vapors to the head. Amongst Fruits,
Pruines, Raisins, and sweet Almonds, are good: his drinke must be water and wine, or else honyed water, or else wa∣ter wherein Cinamon and Licorice were boyled: hee must drinke but a little of this, and sometime hee must indure thirst. His sleepe must be moderate, and not in the day time, his head must bee so couered, that neyther too much cold, or too much heate offend it; both heate and cold cause this disease; his body must dayly be emptied of the excrements either by art or nature: too much motion of the body and perturbations of the mind must bee auoyded. Sirupe of Violets, Licorice, Iiuba, dry Roses, Poppy,Perparers. water-lillies. A decoction of the foure common cold seeds, the flowers of Wood-towell, & white Poppy, water of Vio∣lets, Succory, Roses, Barley boyled in water, Mel rosatum, Oxymel simp. Squillit. Compositum. syr. of Betony, Staechas, Maiden-haire, Hyssop, Licorice, horehound. A decoction of the Roots of Licorice, Fennell, Acorus, cyperus, Cina∣mon, Betony, Hyssop, Maioram, Maiden-haire, Sage, Rose∣mary, Buglosse, Serpillm, flowers of Stachas, Nutmeg, and Figs. The water of Mayden-haire, Hyssop, Scabious, Sage, Betony, and Adiantum; the former of these must be vsed, when the humour is caused by heat, the latter, when by a cold. The shoulder or median veine shall bee opened,Emptiers. if there be any danger of a Pleurisy, Feauer, suffocation, or squinancy, or if there be plenty of bloud, and the strength of the pati∣ent will permit. Elictuarium de succo rosarum, Diaprunum scammoniacum, Diaphanicum, Pillul. Aureae, Aggregat. Assaieret, Mastichinae, Cochia, de agarico, de sarcocolla. Aga∣ric. trochisc. cassia, rubarb. Polipodium. Sirupe of manifold in∣fusion of Roses. Elect. Indum, Diacath. a strong Clyster is good, if there be great plenty of rheume, which doth threa∣ten suffocation, make it of the decoction of flowers of Stae∣chas, Maioram, Sage, Calamint, Origan, Mallows, Barley, Hiera picra, Mel rosatum, and Oyle of Violets. We must here forbeare strong purging medicines, lest we
should cause the surcharging matter to flow. Emptiers.A veine must bee opened: the former Clyster must bee vsed: also medicines that do euacuate. Cupping-glasses must be fastened to the Armes, Shoulders, and Buttocks. A sweat must be caused with the decoction of Salsa parilla. Frictions of the extreme parts, but especially of the head and feet; also continuall motion of those parts; for by these meanes the humour offending falls downe: painfull ligatures, a sneeze of hellebore, Castoreum, and Pepper. Yet this is not good at the first; for hereby the decoction of the humours is hindered. Apophlegmatisms of bastard Pel∣litory, Pepper, Hyssop, Masticke, the rinds of the Roots of Capers, Cubebs, Raysins. A gargarisme of Maioram, Hyssop, and Origan; but if the humours runne vnto the brest or Lungs, or if it bee thinne and moueth very much, gargarismes are dangerous; Nasalls of the iuyce of flower-de-luce, Beet, Sow-bread, bastard Pellitory, seeds of Ni∣gella, in a cold matter; but in hote, the iuyce of Violets in Barley-water. Lotions of the Legs and Armes. The nose must be often cleansed by blowing; for hereby thicke and thinne humours are more safely purged then by spittle; a cautery must be made in the coronall seame, the head being first shaued, or else behind the eare, and the sore shall bee long kept open; for which purpose hote Cabbage leaues and Swines greace shall bee layd vpon it. These auer∣ting and locall medicines purging the braine, shall not bee applied, vntil the matter bee well digested and emptied; otherwise the rheumaticke matter should onely bee stir∣red vp. Stayers of the rheume.Philonium Mesue with the decoction of Olibanum, rob. nucum, Conserue of ancient Roses, Saccharum violatum, Dianucum, Diacodium, Diapapauer. Diatragarcantum frigidum, & calidum. Pills of Hounds-tongue, a loch of coleworts: a loch of Poppy, bole armony, the iuyce of Licorice, a trochiske of Foale-foot, Masticke; syr. of Violets,
Poppy, Licorice, iuleb of Violets. A decoction of Plan∣tane, Purslane, Barley, white Poppy, Roses, Bole Armony, Gumme of the Iuniper tree, whereunto adde Diacodium. Pills of dry Roses, seeds of Poppy, Camphire, terra sigilla∣ta, they must bee held in the mouth. Spike held in the mouth at night time is good. Cummin and Nigella fryed and tied in linnen cloth, hereof make an odour: a fume with Nigella onely made into powder, and burnt. An oynt∣ment of the oyle of Roses. An Emplayster for the head be∣ing first shaued, of red earth, Roses, Plantane, Bole Armony; vnlesse great paines vrge, we will not vse these medicines, vntill the humors bee purged and turned away. But if the humours runne too fast vnto the Lungs, so that it doth threaten a troublesome cough, or a long waking, or dreames, or danger of choaking, or excoriation by rea∣son of the humours sharpenesse, wee will immediately vse these medicines that doe hinder the matter going any further, not waiting vntill the humours bee purged and turned aside; neyther can it bee expected that a thinne rheume falling vpon the Lungs, in such plenty and with so great force, can bee fetched out by pur∣ging medicines, or else bee turned aside: for pur∣gers and auerters doe rather increase the motion of humors. At that time a veine shall bee opened, and Cup∣ping-glasses applyed to the shoulder-blades. Therefore if great paines doe follow the rhumes, such medicines as may thicken the blood, and hinder the rhumes, shall be gi∣uen, though they hinder spitting, else there would be danger of choaking. Diamuscum dulce et amarum, diambra, Triacle,Strength∣ners. Mithridate not too ancient, Pliarisarioticum. Conserue of Sage, Betony, Rosemary, Acorus, Orange-pilles preserued, Nutmeg, Cu∣bebs, Nigella Romana, the roots of Cyperus, Cloues, Mace, Staechas, Gallia moschata, Lignum aloes, Ladanum. A sweet ball of Cloues, Gallia moschata, Nutmeg, Storax,
Calaminth, Ladanum, Cubebs, Tragacanth. water of Maio∣ram. Make a cap of the leaues of Bayes, Origan, Sage, Beto∣ny, Maioram, seeds of Nigella, Cammomile, Mellilot, Sta∣chas, Frankincense, Masticke, Cinamon, Mace, Nutmegge, Cloues, red Roses: wash the head, with the decoction of the former things, in Malmesey. Make a perfume of Cloues, Cinamon, Aloes, Rosemary, Sage, Bay-leaues, Maioram, Masticke, Frankincense, Gallia moschata, Muske. A Quilt with Salt, Millet, Branne, Sage, Maioram: an oyntment for the head being shaued, with the oyle of Rew and Dill: for the brest, oyle of Lillies, Cammomile, sweet Almonds, Lini, fresh butter. Frictions and Foments of the head, with a rough linnen cloth hot, which shall be perfumed with the vapors of Frankincense, Masticke, Storax, and Ladanum. A cauterie shall be made in the hinder part of the head, of Leauen, and Cantharides, if these former medicines cannot preuayle. A more particular method seruing for the cure of CATARRHVS, or RHEVME. A Clyster.℞ of Betony, Maioram, Sage, Rew, ana M i. ss, flowers of Rosemary, Staechas, Centory the lesse, Cammomile, ana M i. of Origan, Calamint, ana M ss, of Branne, M ii, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss. Adde to the strayning Electuarij Elescopi, ℥ i. Hierae picrae simp. ʒ i. Diaturbith, cum rhabarb. ʒ iii. ss, Mellis rosati, ℥ i. oyle of Rew, ℥ iii. of Salt, ʒ i. A Iulep.Mellis rosacei, Oxymel. simp. sir. Staechados, Licorice, ana ℥ i. water of Rosemary, Betony, ana ℥ iiii. of Hysop, ℥ ii. mixe these. Pills.Pillul. de Agarico, ʒ ss, Cochiarum, Faetidarum, ana ℈ i. Diagridij, gr. iii. syr. of Violets, q. s. make hereof 7. or 8. pills.
℞ Diaturbith cum rhabarb. ʒ v. Electuarij Iudi,A draught. Diaca∣tholic. ana ʒ i. sir. Staechados, ℥ ss, water of Maioram, Betony, ana ℥ i. ss. ℞ of Maioram, Nigella, Nutmeg, ℈ i. ss,A sneezing powder. bastard pelli∣tory, white Hellebore, ana ℈ i. ℞ of the iuyce of Brassica, Bete, ana ℥ i ss,A Nasale. iuyce of Cycla∣men, ℥ ss, of white Pepper, Nigellae, ana ℈ i. snuffe this vp at the nose. ℞ seeds of Staues-acre, Mustard, bastard Pellitory,A Mastica∣tory. ana ʒ i, ss, Acori conditi, of Cubebs, Mace, ana ʒ i. Nigellae Romanae, of Raysins, Masticke, ana ʒ i. ss, of Hony, q. s. mixe these and put them into a fine cloth. ℞ of Mustard-seed, of Pepper,A Garga∣risme. ʒ ii. roots of bastard Pelli∣tory, ℥ i. Ginger, ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed. This doth bring backe the rheume run∣ning to the lungs. ℞ sir. de rosis siccìs, ℥ iii. of Roses, Myrtle,A Iulep. ana ℥ i. of the water of Violets, Plantane, Hysop, ana ℥ iii. ℞ of red Roses, M i. seeds of white Poppy, Olibani,Another. ana ʒ i. ss. boile these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the stray∣ning of the sirupe of Poppy, ℥ iii. of Licorice, ℥ i. ℞ of the conserue of old Roses, ℥ i. Diacodij, ℥ ss,A Nasale. Diatra∣gacanthi frigidi, ʒ iii. sir. of Roses, q. s. ℞ Olibani, of Masticke, ana ℥ ss, of the pulp of Quinces,A draught. ℥ i. ss, Let him take ʒ ii. hereof when he gos to bed, and after it drinke one draught of wine. ℞ of Bole Armoniacke, of red Earth, of Masticke,A mixture. ana ʒ ii. the iuyce of Licorice, ℥ ss, conserue of Roses, ℥ ii. ℞ Diacodij, ʒ ss, sirupe of Poppy, ℥ i. water of Betony,A draught. ʒ iii. ℞ Diacodij, ʒ vi. sir. of Poppy, ʒ ii. of Bole Armoniacke ʒ ii. of Camphire, ʒ i. Let him take one spoonefull hereof in his mouth. ℞ of the seeds of white Poppy, of Lettuce, ana ℈ iiii.
amyli, Diatragacanthi frigidi, ana ℥ i. Gummi arabici, tra∣gacanthi, Bole Armoniacke, ana ℈ ii. Opij ℈ i. ss, Sacchari rosati, iuyce of Licorice, ana ʒ i. ss, mixe these, and make a lumpe hereof with the iuyce of Quinces, and water wherin Gumme tragacanth hath been infused. Let the patient hold a little of this in the mouth: this hinders the fluxe of the rhume. A Garga∣risme.℞ of the rinds of Pomegranats, ℥ ss, of Knap-weed, M ii. the roots of Plantane, Dane-wort, ana M i. of Pine apples, Frankincense, Mastick, ana ʒ i. of Roses, M i. the seeds of Pur∣slane, ℈ ii, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning of the sirupe of Myrtle, Staechados, Diaemori, ana ℥ i. A Nasale.℞ of Role Armony, Sanguinis draconis, Frankincense, ana ʒ i. of Storax, Masticke, ana ʒ ss, boyle these in lb ss of the water of Honey, put some of the strayning into the nose. A Cap.℞ of Frankinsence, Olibanum, ana ʒ i. ss. of red Roses, ʒ ii. the seeds of white Poppy, ʒ ss, Sandaracae, Masticke, ana ℈ ii. with a little wine, make pills, that must bee burnt to procure a smoaking. Let the patient hold the cap that he is to weare ouer these, and hauing well smoaked it, he must put it vpon his head. An Electu∣ary.℞ of the conserue of Rosemary, Betony, Sage, ana ʒ vi. Sp. Diamusci dulcis, ʒ iiii. of ancient Triacle, ʒ ii. Diambrae, ʒ i. Nutmeg, ʒ i. ss, sir. Stoechados q. s. ℞ Sy. Diamusci dulcis,Lozenges. Diambrae, ana ʒ ii. ss. of the best Sugar dissolued in Rosemary and Betony water q. s. make hereof an Electuary in Lozenges. A Powder.℞ of the roots of Aristolochia rot. bastard Pellitory, Spike, ana ʒ ss, of Aloes, Frankincense, Cloues, ana ʒ ii. of Masticke, ʒ i. ss. Make a powder hereof, and cast this vpon the fire, and receiue the smoake of this as was shewed be∣fore. A Quilt.℞ of the flowers of Betony, Roses, Staechas, Cammo∣mile, Mellilot, M i. of Frankincense, Masticke, Nutmeg,
Mace, Cloues, ana ʒ i. ss, the leaues of Bayes, Origan, ana M. ss. make a Quilt for the coronall seame. ℞ of Branne, Millet,A Cap. ana M i. of Salt beaten very small ℥ i. ss, fry these in a pan, make a little cap of this, and lay it vn∣to the coronall seame▪ this doth strengthen the brayne, and dryeth vp the humours. ℞ Nigelloe Romanae fryed, ℥ ss, roots of Cyperus ʒ i. ss,A Powder. flowers of Staechas, Roses, M ss, Nutmeg, Cloues, ana ℈ iii. cast this vpon the hinder part of the patients head, when he doth goe to bed. ℞ Nigelloe fryed, ℥ i. of Mustard seed fryed, Frankincense,An Em∣playster. ana ʒ v. of Masticke, ʒ iii. of Pigeons-dung, Barley flower▪ ana ℥ i. Oxymellis squillit. q. s. apply this to the coronall seame. An Appendix, seruing for the cure of CATARRHVS or RHEVME. THe body shall be first emptied by a gentle Clyster, and the humours made subiect to nature; then wee will purge the body of these loading humours. The head shall be purged by Errhins, Apophlegmatismes, and Masticato∣ries; actuall and potentiall cauteries shalbe made in the hin∣der part of the head, and when the blisters arise, they shalbe opened, that the watery humors may run out; for wch pur∣pose lay Cabage leaues vpon the broken blisters. And then such are good that doe stay the flux of the humors, which may be vsed at the first, if there be any danger of choaking by the vehemency of the Rheume. After all these, such shall bee appoynted that may strengthen the braine, and consume the reliques, which shall be effected both by out∣ward and inward medicines. There is danger in delay, ther∣fore pills shalbe giuen at the first, to preuēt danger of suffo∣cation. If the Rheume run vnto the nose, an yron must bee
het red hot and some Vineger besprinkled thereon, where∣to the powder of red Roses might be added; and the fume must be receyued into the Nostrills. A method seruing for the knowledge of ANGINA, or SQVINANCY. THe Squinancy is an inflamation of the throate, or of the highest parts of the Gullet, hindering breathing and swallowing, when as the fault is neyther in the brest nor lungs. This disease doth threaten present danger by stran∣gling, because the vpper part of the Winde-pipe or Gullet is cloased vp, whereby a man is depriued both of breath and sustenance. This disease doth vsually come suddenly, for the most part it is also caused by a fluxe. The part affected. The inner muscles of the throate, are oft affected, and then the patient is in great danger; these signes goe along with it, viz. vehement paine in the throate, sometimes a very strong feauer. When the patient breathes, hee doth hold his face vpward, also there is a defect in his voyce. No signe of heate or swelling doth appeare eyther in mouth or throate, or necke, but great straightnesse is felt in the throate, they doe breathe with their mouthes open, and are refreshed with cold ayre. Sometime they thrust out their tongues, their eyes are red, and sticke out of their head; the drinke that they take, runnes out at their Noses, in briefe, they are sundry wayes disquieted. Sometimes the outward muscles of the throate are affected, and this of all other is the milder kinde of Squinancy: for then the payne about the throate is not so great, neyther doth the patient breathe with such difficulty. But if the throate and the place where the Wind-pipes, and Gullets extreme
parts doe meete, bee affected, then the patient breathes with more ease. Moreouer, heat, swelling, and paine is more felt in the throate, and sometime these may be plainly dis∣cerned if the tongue be kept downe; this is with lesse dan∣ger then the former; sometime both inward and out∣ward Muscels are affected, then the paine is more vehe∣ment. The Signes. They breathe with difficulty, besides, the paine is sharp▪ and the face and necke is red. They swallow with paine all their meate, and that which they drinke, doth runne out at the nose, oftentimes the patient hath a Feauer, and desires to draw fresh ayre. Sometime when the disease is very great, they thrust out their tongues. The Causes. For the most part it is caused by bloud, which is car∣ried thither from the iugular veines, for in these veines there is plenty of bloud. The pulse will be full, and wauer∣ing; Oftentimes it is caused by their former diet, which was such as did generate much bloud. A temperate spring, hote and moist also went before. If it be caused by chole∣ricke bloud, a sharpe ague, and great burning, hardnes of breathing, and swallowing doth concurre, yet there is lesse straightnes: there is a bitternes of mouth; diet, age, temperament, region, all these concurre, because they doe generate cholericke bloud. If it be caused by a flux or cold humours, it is then a bastard squinancy. Then his mouth is very moyst and slymy, the Feauer eyther comes not at all, or else it is very gentle, the paine is lesse, the swelling not so hard, neyther is his face and other parts very red; those things went before, that did breed phlegmy bloud. This disease doth alwayes take its beginning of fluxes, which come thither from the head and iugular parts.
Prognostickes. If the inflammation bee in the inward muscles, within three or foure dayes it will kill the patient; & that squinn∣cy is most dangerous whenas no inflammation doth ap∣peare; when the paine is great, the Feauer vehement, and the patients tongue is thrust out, when the passage is so stopped, that hee cannot swallow, and when the drinke runnes out at the nose; when the eyes are turned like vn∣to them that are strangled, when they sticke out of the head, also when his spittle is foamy, the lips looke blacke, and he striues to leape out of his bed, and when his sight, hearing and wit is so dull, that he vnderstands not what is done about him, he dyes by a swound and strangling: yet there is some hope, when rednes and a tumour do ap∣peare, and as these accidents are diminished, so is the disease more mild, and the stronger these accidents are, the grea∣ter is the danger. It is no good signe, if the tumours are suddenly gone without any manifest cause: if there bee paine in the sides, numnesse of the whole body, and feeble∣nes, death is certainly neere at hand. and although the patient do thinke himselfe well, yet hee is taken away suddenly by a suffocation, or else it is turned into an im∣postume. A method seruing for the cure of ANGINA or SQVINANCY. THe aire must be bright, temperate; and free from winds, his meate must bee liquid, and soft, as reare Egges, Fur∣menty, the broth of Pullets, Hens. For the three first dayes his fare must bee slender, he must shunne those things that may heate his bloud, viz. Pepper and other spices. His drink must bee ptisan with Sugar, or the broth of a Chicken, any honied water: but hee must abstaine from wine, hee
must no way exercise himselfe, and speake very little; his sleepe must be shorter then ordinarily it was wont to bee, and sometimes they that stand by, must awake him out of it: for by too much sleepe this disease doth become worse; for then the humours do increase in the part affected: this head must be meanely couered, but by no means rubbed in the beginning of the disease. His belly must be kept loose by art or nature. Perturbations of the mind must bee auoyded. At the beginning of the squinancy a veine must be opend on that side the paine is;Emptiers. when he doth perceiue difficulty of breathing or swallowing, euen vntill he doth swound, if there bee great store of bloud in the body, and the pati∣ents strength is able to indure it, otherwise the bloud shall be taken away at sundry times. A woman with child shalbe thus dealt with, if her strength be not too much decayed; the Cephalica veine shall be first opened, and then the veine vn∣der the tongue, when the humor leaues running: but if this be opened at the first, inflammation will bee increased, because the matter is drawne to the part affected. In great fulnes the Saphena veine shalbe first opened, and whilest the veine vnder the tongue is opening, the toung shalbe tur∣ned vp to the palate of the mouth. Electuarium Eloscopi; syr. of the manifold infusions of Roses, Diacatholicum, Hiera picra, Pilluloe Aureae, de Agarico. Cassia, manna, Tamarindi. The matter of the disease must presently bee fetched out, especially if it bee cholericke; for that swells the tumor: for this cause, not exppecting digestion, it must presently bee euacuated. For this disease threatens danger. Also wee must abstaine from strong purging medicines, when the disease is but newly begunne, for they will stir vp the matter, therefore for this cause it shall be permitted to runne vnto the part affected.
Auerters.A veine shall be opened as was formerly perscribed; and cupping-glasses shalbe first applied to the lower parts, then vnto the vpper. Bloud-suckers may bee fastned to those places. The Feet and Hands must be washed with hote water; also painfull ligatures of the extreme parts must be vsed, as also strong frictions of those parts. A strong Clyster shalbe then, if the patient haue a Feauer, and a veine shall not be opened, first the excrements must be brought downe by a slight Clyster, euen on the first day, although the patients belly were loose before: the vse of Hiera piera is much commended for this intent. Repellers.A gargarisme of the decoction of Plantane, Roses, of the rind & flowers of Pomegranats, Lettuce, Lintells, Rose∣water, the iuyce of sowre Pomegranats, Diamoro, Diaco∣dio, syr. of the iuyce of Sorrell, Pomegranates, Roses. Sirrup of Poppy, the iuyce of Poppy. Diacodium, Diamo∣rum, syr. of the iuyce of Sorrell, Pomegrantes. The iuyce, of Lettuce, Ros, Plantane, Pomegranates, Night-shade, Mulbery; Sorrell. Water of Roses with the decoction of Sumach and Vineger. Repelling oyntments of the Oyle of Roses must bee applied outwardly to the part affected. In the beginning of the disease gargarismes may be vsed. Hee shall hold it so long in his mouth, vntill it bee hote, and shall wash the inward part of his throate as farre as may bee, it is good for this purpose, viz. that the humours runne not too fast vnto the part affected; the ways by this means being made straighter, and the substance of the parts strengthned, we may not so freely vse the former repel∣ling oyntment, nor any other outward repelling medicine, except it were in the beginning of the disease; for it is to be feared, that it will strike the matter of the disease inward. Neuerthelesse the places round about, and especially the vpper parts shall be anoynted therewith. Strength∣ners.A gargarisme of the decoction of Figges, Licorice, flow∣ers of Cammomill, Mellilote, Hyssop, Betony, Fengreeke, dogs tooth, Raisins, Diamor, albo graco, Mellerosate
syr. of Roses, Oxymelle squillit. A Gargarisme of water wherein a small quantity of white bread is boyld, and thn straine it. White Dogs-turd and yong Swallows burnt, and mixed with Honey, and scattered vpon the affected places of the throate. Let him drinke out of a Wolues throate: a thred burnt to ashes vntill it bee white, shall bee layde vnto the part affected: an oyntment of the oyle of Cam∣momile, Lillies, sweete Almonds, wherewith the forepart, and hinder part of the necke shall be anoynted, and then couered with fat wooll. A Cataplasme of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, leaues of Mallows, roots of Althaea, Brly flower, Linseed meale, Fengreeke, Dogs-turd, a Swal∣lows nest, with the dust thereof, oyle of Lillies, Lini, Camo∣mile, sweet Almonds; an emplaister of Mellilot, & Mucilag. The matter of these after the first day shalbe abated, euen as the disease doth increase; in stead of which, some resoluing medicines shall be administred, which are best if they bee outwardly applyed; for it is the best course to draw the matter outward. If the cure of the Squinancy be wrought by resoluing medicines, presently all the simptomes follow∣ing this disease, are without any more trouble asswaged and taken away. On the contrary, accidents doe in∣crease, viz. the payne of the Feauer, and difficulty of swal∣lowing. A more particular method seruing for the cure of ANGINA, or SQVINANCY. ℞ the seeds of Fennell, Parsly, ana ʒ v. of Sage, Betony,A Clyster. ana M i. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, white and light Agaricke, ℥ ss, Pulpacolocynth. ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning of new Cas∣sia, of red Sugar ana ℥ i. oyle of Lim, Violets, ana ℥ i. ss, of Salt, ʒ i.
A draught.℞ of new Cassia, ℥ ss, Diaphaeniconis. ʒ iii. water of Scabious ℥ iii. Giue this the next day after the opening of a veine. ℞ sirupe of Scabious, ℥ iii. Mellis rosacei, ℥ i. ss, wa∣ter of Scabious, VVoodbine, ana ℥ v. drinke this at three times. ℞ Diaturbith cum rhabarb. ʒ v. Diacath, ʒ i. ss, Electu∣ary of the iuyce of Roses,A draught. ʒ ss, sir. of Violets, Staechados, ana ℥ ss. the water of Betony, ℥ iii. Another.℞ of the sirupe of manifold infusion of Roses, ℥ ii. Sp. Diaturbith, cum rhabarb. ℈ ss. Water of Betony, ℥ iii. A Potion.℞ sirupe of Violets, ℥ ii. Diacodij, sirupe of Lico∣rice, ana ℥ ss, the water of Scabious and Violets, ana ℥ ii. A Garga∣risme.℞ of Hysop, Knap-weed, ana M i. of scraped Licorice, ʒ ii. of the rinds of Pomegranats, ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning of burnt Allome, ʒ i. ss, Mellis rosati, ℥ i. ss. ℞ of the rinds of Prmegranats, ℥ ss, flowers of Roses, M i. Sumach, of the yellow that growes in the middle of the Rose,A Garga∣risme. Plantane, Barberries, ana ʒ i. ss, of burnt Allome, ℈ i. of the flowers of Pomegranats, ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i, adde vnto the strayning sirupe of Myrtle, ℥ i. Diamori, ʒ vi. hee may hold this in his mouth vntill it bee hote. Another.℞ of the water of Plantane, Roses, Wood-bine, ana ℥ ii. ss, Diamori, ℥ i. sir. Acetosi, simp. Oxymellis simp. ana ℥ ss. A Potion.℞ of the decoction of the yellow that grows in Roses, Roses, the flowers of Pomegranats, Pomegranats, Sumach, Plantane, Night-shade, Oake-apples, lb i. of Rosewater, ℥ iii. of Vineger, ℥ ii. of the finest Sugar, ℥ ii. ss, hereof also a Gar∣garisme may be made.
℞ of the aforesayd liquor,A Potion. ℥ viii. bruise Poppy-seeds and put them therein, straine them out and giue the pa∣tient this. ℞ of the flowers of Pomegranats,A Powder. ʒ ii. the seeds of Roses, Plantane, the seeds of Sumach, Barberries, ana ʒ i. of Gumme Tragacanth. ʒ ii. salis Ammoniaci, Camphire, ana ʒ i. put a little of this into the throate, also of these, pills may bee made, one or two whereof may bee kept vnder the tongue: also with the water of Roses, Oymelle simp. Vineger, and Diamoro, a Gargarisme may bee made. ℞ syr, of Violets, ℥ i. ss, Diamori, ℥ i. Dianucum,A Loche. loch of Poppy, ana ℥ ss, Sacchari violati, ʒ iii. dippe a Licorice sticke in this, when the disease doth first trouble the pa∣tient. ℞ oyle of Lillies, Camomile, ana ℥ ss, of the fat of a Goate ℈ ii. a little Waxe: anoynt the necke herewith,An Vn∣guent. and couer it with wooll. ℞ V;nguent Dialthaeae, ℥ i. ss, oyle of Cammomile,Another. sweet Almonds ana ℥ i. oyle of Violets, fat of a Hen, ana ℥ ss, vse this as the former. ℞ of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot,A Garga∣risme. ana M i. leaues of Origan, Betony, Hysop, ana M ss. of Licorice, ʒ i, seeds of Linus, ʒ vi. Fengreeke, ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning syrupe of Roses. ℥ iiii. ℞ oyle of sweete Almonds, fresh Butter,A Lina∣ment. ana ʒ iii. of Waxe q. s. ℞ of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ,A Cata∣plasme. roots of Lillies, wild Mallows, ana ℥ i. Fengreeke, and Lin∣seed, ana ʒ vi. boyle these vntill they bee soft, then bake them, adding first vnto them a little Beane-flower, and flower of Barley, ana ʒ vi. Butter, oyle of Lillies ana q. s.
A Cata∣plasme.℞ of the flowers of Cammomile, ana M ii. ss, of Hysop, M i. of the flowers of Fengreeke, Barley, ana ℥ i. Lini, ℥ ss, leaues of Mallows, M ii. Albi graeci, ℥ i. roots of Alth, ℥ i. ss, of Figs, no x. oyle of Lillies, Cammomile, fat of a Hen, ana q. s. this may bee vsed when the disease doth begin to increase. A Garga∣risme.℞ of red Roses, M i. of Barley, M i. ss, of Licorice, ℥ iii· of Figs, no vi. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Mellis rosacei. ℥ i. ss. Another.℞ of the water of Wood-bine, of Roses, ana ℥ iiii. ss, Diamori, ℥ i. Oxymellis simp. Mellis rosati, ana ʒ vi. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the ANGI∣NA or SQVINANCY. MEes must bee vsed that the impostume increase not, for en it is come to its full ripenesse, it doth choak many men▪ for this cause at the very first wee must apply the best medicines: then the belly must be emptied by a gen∣tle clyster, afterwards by a stronger. Then shall a veyne bee opened without any delay, for this is a soueraigne remedy against this disease. The next day after the veine is opened; if there be plenty of humours, a gentle purge shall be giuen, neyther in this case the concoction of the humours should be expected. And if the patient bee not able to receiue any me∣dicine in at the mouth, then shall a stronger clyster be made. At the beginning of the disease we must endeauour to driue backe the humors from the part affected, rather by medi∣cines inwardly taken, then outwardly and applied; yet out∣ward in stead of repelling medicines: dippe new shorne Wooll in the oyle of Cammomile, and lay it on the affected part, and the more the disease increaseth, the lesse vse there will bee of repelling medicines. After the third day such medicines as doe resolue shall be applyed, which may
dissipat the matter that was cast vpon the part affected, viz. Dianucum, Diamorū, a decoctiō of Licorice or Figs. Then  so shall such things be prescribed as may mitigat the paine, for great paine draws the humors to that place where the paine is. For this purpose milke without any thing else is very good. In the meane time we will auert the humors by Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, Foments, Frictions, and such other instruments. Then a veine vnder the tongue may bee opened, and the matter of the disease bee subiect vnto na∣ture: if by these remedies wee cannot dissolue the matter, but that it will rather turne into corrupt blood, such things must bee giuen as may generate pure blood, and vnto such, bastard Pellitory, Mustard seed must be added, if the impostume bee broken, and the matter doth runne, This likewise shall be clensed by a Gargarisme made of Hy∣dromel. Lastly, the vlcer shalbe consolidated by such medi∣cines as can cloze it vp. A method seruing for the knowledge of the COVGH. A Cough is a violent breathing out, whereby plenty of breath speedily breaking forth, endeauours by its force to discharge sharpe excrements, wch doe molest the lungs, and hinder the passages, or which doe any other way offend the body. This motion is caused by nature, which doth force the instruments of breathing by some violent course, from whence the Cough is caused, and yet so gentle, that although a man doe cough often, yet may it bee stopped from comming out. It is often cured by heate, which is stir∣red vp in the instruments of breath, by holding of the breath which runnes thorow the narrow passages. The beginning of the Cough comes for the most part from the lungs, whereby the muskles of the brest are stirred vp, and the chest is crushed; by which meanes all things that are in
the way, are expelled, whenas the breath breaks out so strongly. The lungs haue this passion following it, euen as sneezing follows cold in the braine; and to bring this mo∣tion into act, first the lungs become wider, then a∣gaine they are shrunke; the midriffe also is an helpe to this motion. The part affected. The lungs are affected; and the cause of this is eyther, in and from it selfe, sometime the cause is in some other part, as midriffe or stomacke, sometime the liuer. For when the lungs feele the other parts to bee offended, presently they do bestirre themselues for the expelling of that which was noxious and hurtful it is a sufficient argument to proue that the lungs are affected, when as the breathing is offen∣ded. The cough is an accident appertaining to the hurt of the lungs: for neither the brest in the pleurisy, nor the liuer can any ways beget a cough, vnlesse also the lungs by their meanes are hurt. Sometimes a cough follows the stop∣ping of the passages through which breath is moued. Signes. The signes of this disease are manifest: for this cough is so strong, that maugre mans force he cannot forbeare cough∣ing; and it happens sometimes that there is a paine in the chest. This is the best way to purge the body of excre∣ments, by reason of the seats of those parts which serue for breathing. Oftentimes there is a kind of tickling in the inward part of the mouth. The Causes. It is oft caused by humour which falls from the head in∣to the windpipe and lungs, which if it do runne abundantly and with great force, the patient doth breathe with great difficulty. There is a kind of loading paine in the brest, and backe, whereto the lungs are fastned by fylmes, but these symptomes will bee light, when as the excrements that flow from the braine are few. If the distiation bee fresh, both the sides of the pallate are tickled, and the throate is
gald, and fretted with the sharpnes of humours, and often a cough comes withall, whereby very little is st vp, and that little is thinne. But if these humours be thinne, and often runne vp and downe, then they do delude nature, which is forced to stirre vp a cough, & though the patient cough strongly, yet doth he uoyd very little by spetting. Those men are deceiued, that thinke the cough to bee then caused, rather by a dry distemper then humours, because that by often coughing they auoyd nothing, supposing that there is no surcharging matter but this, as it doth happen when the matter is very thinne. In like manner it is when the matter is slymy, and glutinous, so that it cannot bee auoyded. Wherefore we shall stand in need of such medi∣cines as are refining, when the matter is grosse and slymy, which is in the brest and lungs; otherwise we shall haue need of such medicines as will thicken the humours. In both causes the surcharging matter deludes nature, by his thicknes & thinness whereby there cōmeth great feeblenes of strength: for weake strength takes great paines in auoy∣ding the matter that is within, that the breath may haue a passage to and from the heart, and at the length they cannot preuayle. Sometime the humours are mixed, which come thither from the head, or are detayned in those places, which is very frequent in plewrisies, consumption and in∣flammation of the lungs and the cough is the symptome of these aforesayd diseases, as may be perceiued by their pro∣per signes. Sometime it is caused by wormes, hurting the stomacke, or by a cold and dry distemper of the ayre, and then the cough is small, and very little is auoyded by spet∣ting. Sometime this is a symptome of the liuer, stomacke or spleene, to wit inflamation or hardnes of those parts, whereof ariseth a dry cough, whereby nothing is auoyded. Prognostiques. If the cough hinder sleeping, it is an ill signe, also a conti∣nuall and, vehement cough with distillation, is accounted very bad, because by this there is some danger of a con∣sumption:
sometime also it makes a rupture in the brest, and causeth spetting of blood. A cough with much ease, and quicke expulsion, is without danger; if the contrary happens, it is dangerous. Also a cough caused by an vlcer; or imposthume of the breathing parts, is most dangerous; and that cough is dangerous, which was once moist, and is suddenly made dry, a loading paine still remayning in the brest, for it threatens exulceration of the lungs. A continu∣all cough is caused by an old obstruction, or corruption of the lungs; not by rheumes: for when these stay, the cough in like manner stayes. A method seruing for the cure of the COVGH. THe aire must be temperate, and inclining rather to dri∣nes. His meat must be easy of digestion, and the quantity of meate and drinke must be moderate. Rosted veale, Pul∣lets, Hens, Hares, Birds of mountaines are good. Amongst fruits, Raysins, sweet Almonds, Figs, and Dates, are per∣mited. The patient must auoyd such things as are sharpe, salt, & bitter; with his bread annise and Fennell seeds may be mixed; for his drinke Barley-water, Hydromel. His exercise must bee moderate before meate. long and day sleepes are hurtfull. His belly must be kept loose by art or nature. He must auoyd wrath, feare, and other perturbations of the mind. Preparers.Sirupe of Hyssop, Hore-hound, Licorice, and Mayden-haire, syr. of Calamint, Staechados is good against an old cough; Oxymel. Compositum, Squilliticum, syr. Acetosus, Mel rosatum. A decoction of Figges, Raysins, Licorcie, Maidens-haire, Hyssop, Hore-hound. The water of Sca∣bious, Hore-hound, Maiden-haire, Hyssop, Fennell. Sirupe of Violets, Poppy, Iuiubinus, of water-lilles, Violets, Myrtle. Barley water also is very good. Those medicines
which aret in the first place, are extenuating, cutting, and wiping medicines, and may be vsed if the cough be caused by grosse, cold, and slymy humours; if by a hote and thinne humour, these in the second place shalbe vsed: for thinne matter, if it be made thicke, wilbe sooner voyded vp. They shall rather bee giuen by themselues, and againe hee shall rather licke them vp, then drinke them, for else they will not be carried so directly to the lungs. Diaturbith cum rhabarb. Hiera, Dicolocynth.Emptiers. Ele∣ctuarium Indum maius, Diaphanicum. Electuarium rosa∣tum, Hiera picra. Pillula Cocciae, Alephang. Aurea, Assa∣iret, de Sarcocolla, de Agarico, Masticina. Agaricus Trochiscatus, Manna, Cassia. A decoction of the Roots of Fennell, seeds of Annise, Smallge, Nettles, Licorice, Hyssop, Horehound, flower-de-luce, Dates, Mayden-haire, Sca∣bious, Elicampany, Raysins, Agaricke, Sal gemmae▪ Ginger, Diacath. Electuario Indo, Melle rosao. A Vomit. Although Auicenna would not haue purging medicines vsed, because there is no direct way through which the medicine should bee conueyed to the lungs; yet purging medicines are very good, because they do purge the head, from whence this mate did runne into the lungs. Lastly, if the lower parts be purged of the corruption, the head will sooner vnload it selfe of the superfluities therein con∣tayned. The Cephalica veine shalbe opened,Auerters. whether the matter be hote or cold if the body, be full▪ though the flux of humours be so troublesome, that the brest, and lungs haue no liberty to stirre; otherwise if cold matter abound, we may forbeare opening a veine. Clysters must bee made stronger or gen∣tler as occasion shall serue. Errhines must be made of Hony, iuyce of Maioram, Bete, Ginger. A cautery is also good, if the disease be violent. This cautery must bee made eyther on the shoulder, hinder part of the head or shoulder-blades. Sirupe of Licorice, iuyce of Licorice,Prouokers of Spettle. Diatragacan∣thum.
Lohoch sanum, of a Foxe lights, lohoch of Pines. Lo∣hoch de pillulis bechicis, Diatragacantho, iuyce of Licorice, syr. of Violets, Saccharo violaceo rosaceo, dry Roses, and Myrrh; Diapenidium sine Sp. Diaireos, Nicholai; iuyce of Li∣corice, Elicampane, Flower-de-luce: an oyntment for the brest, of the oyle of Linus, Flower-de-luce, fresh butter, oyle of sweet Almonds, Mucilage of Linus, Fengreeke, Saffron. Strength∣ners.Triacle, Mithridate drunke in Wine twice euery weeke, Diaireos Solomoni, Lohoc sanum, de poino. Diaireos sim∣plex, Diamuscum dulce, Diatragacanth. calidum, Diacala∣menthum, Diapenidium, eum speciebus: conserue of Mayden∣hayre, Betony, Hysop; Baulme, Loch ad Asthma: a decoc∣tion of the wood Guaiacum. An oyntment for the brest of the oyle of Dill, Cammomile, sweet Almonds, Flower-de-luce, Butter, Saffron, Goose or Hens grease. An oyntment, of oyle wherein the roots of Elecampane, Flower-de-luce, Hysop, the seeds of Linus, Fengreeke were boyled. A Cucusa of Roses, Cloues, Mace, Nigella Romana, Cyperus roots, Orange-pills, Ladanum, Storax, and Cala∣mint. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the COVGH. ℞ the roots of Elicampane, Angelica, ana ʒ vi. of clen∣sed Barley,A Clyster. M ii. of Horehound, Hysop, leaues of Nettles, ana M i. of white and light Agaricke, ʒ iiii. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. seeds of Annise, Fennell, ana ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i ss. adde to the stray∣ning Diaturb. cum rhabarb, ʒ vi. oyle of Linus, Rew, sweet Almonds, ana ℥ i. A Iulep.℞ sirupe of Hysope, Licorice, ana ℥ i. ss, syrupe Stoe∣chados, ℥ ss, water of Scabious, Hysop, Horehound, ana ℥ iiii. Giue ℥ iii. for the space of foure or fiue dayes, in the morning.
℞ of the roots of Licorice, ℥ i. of Scabious, Hysop,A Sirupe. Colts foote, Mayden-haire, ana M i. of Raysins, M ii. of Dam∣maske Pruines no x. of the best Figs, no vi. of Dates no iii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed, adde vnto the strayning sir. of Licorice. ℥ iii. Diaireos simp. ℥ ss, of the finest Sugar, ℥ iii. ℞ syrupe Iuiubini, ℥ ii, of Licorice, Mellis rosati,A Iulep. ana ℥ i. of the best Sugar, ʒ vi. water of Horehound, Violets, ana ℥ v. ℞ of the roots of Elecampane, ℥ i. ss, of clensed Barley,A Potion. M ii. of Horehound, Hysop, Betony, ana M i. of Scabious, M ss, of Licorice, ℥ i. seeds of Annise, ʒ vi. of Raysins the stones being taken out M i. of Figs, no x, boyle these in wa∣ter q. s. vnto lb i. ss, of Sugar q. s. ℞ Oxymellis squillit. ℥ i. ss, syr. of Licorice, ℥ i,A draught. of the former decoction, ℥ iii. ℞ of the roots of Fennell, Parsley, Dragunteae,A Potion. ana ℥ i. of the roots of Elecampane, Flower-de-luce, ana ʒ iii. May∣den-haire, Hysop, Horehound, ana M i. ss, seeds of Annise, ʒ iii. of Raysins, ℥ i. ss, of white and light Agaricke, ℥ ss, of Ginger, ʒ i. Salis gemmae, ʒ ss, seriae Alex. ʒ vi. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning, sir. of Li∣corice, ℥ iii. ℞ Diaturb. cum rhabarb. Electuarij Indi,A draught. ana ʒ iii. syr. of Licorice, of Horehound, ana, ℥ ss, of the decoction of Aga∣ricke, Hysop, Fennell, ℥ iii. ℞ Pillul. de agarico, aureae cocciae, ana ℈ i. Rhab. electi, ℈ ss,Pills. syr. Staechados q. s. make hereof 7 or 8 pills, and let him take of them about the middle of the night, and the next mor∣ning take of great triacle ʒ i. with the water of Dragun∣tea, ℥ iii. ℞ syrupe of Hysop, de Iuiubis, ana ℥ ss, adianth, ℥ i.A Loc Lohoch sani, of Pine, ana ʒ v. Sachari violati, ʒ iii. mixe these. ℞ Mellis rosati colati, Oxymellis simp. Liquorice,Another. ana ℥ i.
sir. of Violets, ℥ ss. of fine Sugar, ʒ iii. Diatragacanthi frigi∣di, ʒ ii. A Garga∣risme.℞ of the flowers and rinds of Pomegranats, ana ʒ iii. of Roses, M i ss, Iuiubarum sebesten, ana ℥ ss, boyle these in wa∣ter q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning syrupe of Poppy, ℥ ii, Myrtle, ℥ ss, mixe these. A draught.℞ Diacodij, ℥ ii. of Frankincense, ʒ i. ss, mixe these, and giue ℥ ss, thereof with ℥ iii. of the decoction of Barley, syr. of dry Roses, ℥ i. Pills.℞ Diatragacanthi frigidi, ʒ i. ss, pills of Hounds-tongue ℈ ss, Diacodij, ʒ iii. Bole Armony, iuyce of Licorice, ana ʒ i. ss, Amyli, sir. of Roses, Poppy ana q. s. hold one of these in the mouth. ℞ of red Roses, M ss, Sandalorum citrinorum, Masticke, Frankincense,A Perfume. ana ʒ ii. ss, Labdani, Storax, ana ʒ i. ss, morning and euening the patient must receyue some of this in his cap. A Potion.℞ sir. of Poppy, ℥ i. ss, of Roses, Myrtle, ana ℥ i. of the wa∣ter of Violets, ℥ iiii. of the decoction of Barley, Raysins, the 4. greater cold seeds, ℥ vi. mixe these, in a hot matter take of this. An Oynt∣ment.℞ of the oyle of Violets, ℥ i. ss, of sweet Almonds, ℥ i. oyle of Flower-de-luce, May butter, ana ℥ ss, of Saffron, ℈ ss. of Waxe, q, s. anoynt the brest herewith, also shaue the head, and anoynt it with the oyle of Cammomile, Roses, Dill. ℞ of the best Mithridate. Triacle of Andromachus, ana ℈ i. ss,A Potion. of the decoction of Licorice, roots of Elecampane, Mayden-hayre, Hysop, ana ℥ iiii. sirupe of Licorice q. s. for an old Cough, this is good. Pills.℞ of Myrrh, ʒ iii, Sagapeni▪ ʒ i. ss, of Hony and Aqua vitae, q. s, eache pill must be ʒ i: An Electu∣ary.℞ of the roots of preserued Dragant, ℥ ii. roots of Ari∣stolochia rot. ℥ i. seeds of Linus, Saffron, Frankincense, Ma∣sticke ana ℈ i. ss, syr. of Licorice q. s. A Suffumi∣gation.℞ Diasulphuris misu, ℥ i. ʒ i must be cast vpon the coales
that it may smoake, by this the reliques, o the offending matter may be taken away. ℞ of dry Roses, M i. ss, flowers of Cammomile, M ii. ss,A Quilt. of fryed Branne, M i. for the same purpose as the former was. ℞ of the seeds of Cresses scorched, ℥ i. Pigeons-dung,An Em∣playster. ʒ i. ss, of Cypresse nuts, ʒ v. with the water of the decoction of Cypresse and Staues-acre, make an emplayster for the head, this doth comfort the braine, and takes away superfluous humors. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the COVGH. A Cough comes by a matter which doth stop the passage of the lungs, whereto also some flux is ioyned, where∣by it is distinguished from Asthma. First we must make the superfluous humours obedient to nature: when we haue effected this, then they must be turned out by purging medi∣cines, & turne that matter aside that is running to the lungs, with Clysters, opening of veines, cauteries, bathings both of hands and feet. Then we may vse such medicines as stay the matter falling from the head vnto the lungs: if this accident concurre (yet it is not necessary that this must al∣wayes cause a cough.) Last of al, such medicines as bring the matter out that is in the lungs, must be prescribed. But if a cough bee caused by a plewrisie, or inflamation of the lungs, or a suppuration, or bursting some veine in the lungs, that it cannot well be cured, vnlesse these diseases bee first cured. And therfore vnlesse the cough doth very much paine the patient, the cure of those parts shalbe first sought after. How this shall bee effected, hath appeared The de∣coction of Barley with a great quantity of Sugr is very good, if the cough be caused by tickling in the throat. Like∣wise that a cough may bee stayed, some stupefactiues must be mixed with detergent medicines. ℞ of the iuyce of Li∣corice
ʒ ii. ss Farinae amili ʒ i ss, of Sffron, Myrrh. ℈ i ss Opij gr. iiii, of Storax, Calamint ana ʒ iii, syr. of Violets, q s. make Pills hereof; when the patient goeth to bed, giue the pati∣ent ℈ i. Or else ℞ Diacodij ℥ i. But when the matter is ri∣per, and thinner, a decoction of Figs, Raysins, Licorice, Hysop, Violets, seeds of Quinces, roots of wilde Mallows. Then ℞ oyle of Violets, ℥ i. ss Mucilaginum seminum Lini, Psyllij, ana ʒ ss, of Waxe q. s. an vngnt for the brest. A method seruing for the knowledge of ASTHMA, or shortnesse of breathing. ASthma is a thicke or fast breathing without a feauer, such as is common vnto them that runne. There bee three kinds of shortnesse of breath, for when it doth trouble vs so mildly, that there is no noyse of panting, and is with∣out a Feauer, it is called Dispnaea, Pursinesse. But when the patient cannot breathe without a noyse and panting, it is cal∣led Asthma. But if it so distresseth the patient, that he cannot breathe vnlesse hee hold his necke straight vp, it is called Orthopnaea, or straightnesse of breathing. The patient is as it were choaked by this latter, if hee doe lye downe. For the passages of breath in the Lungs, the Windpipe, and all the inner parts become straighter, and narrower then when they sit vpright, because the whole brest sinks as it were to the backe-bone. These three kinds are all contained vn∣der a thicke and quicke breathing, which is caused by grosse and tough humors stuft within the lappets of the lungs. We do not heere speake of that difficulty of brea∣thing which is caused by weaknes of body, and strength, for though all the brests muscles do then moue, yet it is done very softly, for if the strength be deficient, the patient ney∣ther breathes thicke, neither is there great widenes, and the breath doth rather goe and come thorow the nose. And this is a manifest signe whereby we may know that the
strength is decayed, when the gristles of the nose are shrunke by drawing breath. Neyther do we heere treate of that shortnesse of breathing which is caused by the great heate of heart and lungs, although the breath be necessari∣ly hote, great, frequent, and swift. So in a plurisy, or squi∣nancy there is both thicke and quicke breathing, and all these kinds, as they do require a different manner of cure, so they cannot bee brought vnder Asthma, euen as that shortnes of breathing which is caused by the greatnes of the spleene, or by plenty of water contayned in the belly, and the reason why by these shortnes of breath is caused, is this, because the midriffe is crusht. The part affected. The wind-pipes branches, scattered into the lungs sub∣stance are heere affected, for being made narrower by this disease, they are sooner offended by humours falling downe into them, by which meanes a greater straightnes is cau∣sed, whereby the quantity of aire which is drawne in, is not answerable to the widning greatnes, although the brest bee much widened; by this means they are for∣ced to breathe thicke and quicke, because a small quantity of breath is drawne in againe: but the contrary happens, when as the wind-pipes, and branches belonging thereto are no way offended. This shortnes of breath which wee do heere treate of, is an accident which doth follow the offended action of a voluntary faculty, viz. breathing, which is weake, and depraued. This accident fallowes a dis∣sease incident to the passages of breathing, viz. straight∣nes and stopping of the passages thorow which aire is drawne. Signes. Great and thicke breathing without a Feauer, some∣time with panting & a noyse, which doth happē vnto them rather lying then, sitting the brest is heauy, they do feele a
straightnes and shrinkings. They cough often, but voyd nothing. This disease sometimes is growne so farre vpon the patient, that they are forced to breathe with their necke straight vpwards,, that they may saue themselues from choaking. Palenes of face growes in time, and their shoul∣dersake. These accidents goe and come againe at certanie seasons. The Causes. The fume of quicke-siluer and the aire of mines from whence metals are digged, do cause this disease, for by these vapors, the lungs are too much dried; distempered diet, grossenes of body, whether it be procured by idlenes, or is naturall, causeth short windines. But for the most part it is caused by grosse and slymy phlegme, which doth sticke in the windpipes passages, or comes thither from some other place; at which time shortnes of breathing is caused▪ for the instruments of breathing, by reason of superfluities generated in them, haue the beginning, and cause of this disease in themselues; for these superfluities by heate are changed into phlegme, like vnto glasse or mortar. It is sometime caused by a raw bunch growing in the lungs, neere vnto the windpipe, or its branches; and these men, when they do exercise themselues in the time of their health, are shortwinded, and yet spet very little; this short∣windines comes vpon them sodaynly, and without a kind of wheesing, or rattling. Sometimes it is caused by the brests narrownes, or Conformation and euill sha∣ping. Prognosticks. Asthma in old men is neuer cured, and hardly in young men. Asthma by a dislocation of the ioynts of the backe∣bones, is neuer or hardly cured, vnlesse they be set in their places againe. This affect is oft sharpe, and by distances of time goes & comes again, & by his most vehement fis doth sometime strangle the patient, which then especially doth happen, whenas some heume doth fall from the head vpon
the lungs being before straightned; but especially this happēs, if the ayre be cold & moist, or if by many crudities, the mat∣ter be moistned, and spred abroad; for these concurring in an old Asthma, the fits are more dangerous; for hereby the stopping is doubled; but a cleare aire, sober life, rest of body cooles this disease. Hee that hath a straight brest, and little lungs, by nature is continually shortwinded. A swoun∣ding with softnes of pulse, vnequall, inordinate, and slow, is the worst. A kind of trembling breathing is dangerous, especially if the shoulders and shoulder-blades with the muscles betweene the ribs, by breathing out and receiuing breath in, be lifted vp, and fall downe againe, but especially if the strength doth begin to fayle. A method seruing for the cure of ASTHMA, or short breathing. THe ayre must be hote and dry; his meate Hens, Patrid∣ges, Chickens, birds of mountayns: hee must forbeare eating of such meats as may breed grosse and slymy matter. Amongst Pot-hearbs: Fennell, Thime, Hyssop, Calamint may be allowed. His drinke must be small wine or honyed water, wherein Hyssop, or Hore-hound haue beene boyled; his exercise must be little, as walking a little before meate, the lower parts must be rubbed. Sleepe in the day time must be auoyded, and in the night it must bee moderate. All per∣turbations of the mind must be aoyded. Sirupe of Mayden haire, Horehound, Licorice, Hyssop,Preparers. of the two Roots of Violets, Calamint, Staechas, Mel rosatum. Oxymel simp. Composium & squillit. Acetum squillit. A de∣coction of the rootes of Elecampane, Epithymon, Aristolo∣chia, rot. Barley, Linseed, Fengreek, Quinces, Nettles, Fennel, Annise, Maiden-haire, Hyssop, Hore-hound, Scabious, Be∣tony, Raysins, Figs, Dates, Barley water with Sugar. The water of Hore-hound, Betony, Hyssop, Barley, Fen∣nell, Violets. A decoction o Guaium wood. Very hot things heere are not very good, because they doe consume
that which is thinne, and leaue that behind which is grosse; and because the disease is long, and will scarce bee cured by medicines, therefore they must often be changed, for see∣ing there is no sence of accustomed things, at the last, na∣ture will not care for the continuall vse of them. To these before mentioned syrupe of Poppy, Quinces, Bole Armony must be added, if we doe intend to stay the rhume. Emptiers.Agaricus trochiscatus, diaturbith cum rhabarb. Diaphae∣nicum, Diacath. Electuarium Indum maius. Hiera colocynth. Hiera simplex & composita, Pillulae de hieracum Agarico, Pillulae mstichinae, Aggregatiuae, Assairet, Cocciae, Alephan∣ginae, Aromaticae, Agaricus, Cassia, Colocynthis. Vomit also shall bee caused, for that is better then a clyster, because it abides neerer the lungs, and emptieth the stomacke of phlegme. If clysters be vsed, make them of the pectorall de∣coction of Cassia, Hiera picra, Diaphaeniconis. A veine shall be opened if the body doe abound with blood. Or if the months, and Hemroides bee stayd, otherwise this labour shall be spared. In this disease pills are best, because they draw the offending matter from the remote parts: purging medicines in time of the fitt must not be vsed. For it is to be feared, that the matter being stirred vp too violently, should runne vnto the lungs; also when the fitte is past, purging medicines shall bee very seldome vsed, because the matter that stops the passages, is grosse and vicious. But the matter shall first bee made fit for expelling, before purging medi∣cines be vsed. Auerters.Nasals shall be made of Nigella Romana, Cubebs, Nut∣megs, the iuyce of Maioram, Beete, Honyed water, Wine. A Masticatory. The feete must bee washed in the decoction of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Betony, Sage, Ma∣ioram, leaues of Bayes, of Rosemary. Vesicatory medicines shalbe applyed to the coronal seame, if the disease be increa∣sed by rhume. Frictions and Ligatures of the extreme parts must be vsed, especially if there be any danger of suffocation. When the disease doth begin to increase, the brest shall be
well rubd with a coorse cloth, that the passges of those parts might be opened, & the vertue of the medicines may be better receiued into the parts affected. Cupping-glasses shall be layd to the shoulders, if there bee danger of suffo∣cation without scarification, or when the patient doth breathe very short; also Cupping-glasses shalbe layd vn∣to the reines, vnto that place whereon some portion of the lungs doth rest: this must bee done in the morning very often. Sirupe of Licorice, de Iuiubis, Hyssop, Hore-hound. Dia∣hyssopus, Diapenidion, loch sanum, of Cabages, of Pine,Prouokerts of spettle. Diairis, Diatragacanthum, with the Oyle of Annise; con∣serue of Elecampane, the broth of an old cocke with the syr. of Mayden-haire. The lungs of a Fox dried, sirupe of Licorice. Ericinus Syluestris. Millepeda, certaine creatures which lie vnder watery vessels. Squilla, Licorice, Brassica, Allium, Hysop, Elecampany, Aristolochia rot. The Root of serpentaria layd in hote Embers, with the syr. of Licorice, loch of the lungs of a Fox, of Pine, Raisins, dry figs, Linseed, Iuiuba, Scabious, Licorice. A decoction of figs, Hyssop, Fengreeke, Licorice, Raisins, Hony, Saffron. An oyntment for the brest of the Oyle of Linus, of sweet Almonds, Dill, Rew, flower-de-luce, Lillies, Cammomill, fresh Butter, Hens grease, the mucilage of Fengreeke, Althea, with Saffron, and the Roots of flower-de-luce. The oyntment of Agrippa. A Cataplasme of Barley-flower, figs, flower-de-luce, Hony and Raisins. The humours shall be emptied out of the passages and spongy matter of the lungs by these present remedies, rather then by purgng & vomiting medi∣cines, and we will the rather vse these, because the humors do abound in the body. Also with these we will endeauour to open the pores of the brest with gentle frictions, and then anoynt the brest with these oyntments, and after∣wards vse Cataplasmes. Triacle with old white wine, Alex. Diaireos simplex,Digesters. Mi∣hridate, Diamuscum dulce & amarum, Plirisarcotieum, loch
ad Asthma, Loche squilla. a decoction of Wood Guaiacum, Melicratum; powder of Beauer stone. A suffumigation with Brimstone, Frankincense, Masticke, Iuniper, Turpen∣tine: an oyntment of the oyle of Rew, Flower-de-luce, Dill, roots of Flower-de-luce, Elecampane, seeds of Linus, Hens grease. A more particular method seruing for the cure of short windynesse. ℞ of the roots of Aristolochia rot. Flower-de-luce, ana ℥ ss, of Centory the lesse, Hyssop, Calamint, ana M i. of white and light Agaricke,A Clyster. ʒ v. boyle these in water q. s. vn∣till the third part be consumed, adde to the strayning, Sp. hierae diacolocynth. ʒ i. ss, Diaturbith rhab. ʒ v. oyle of Lillies, Cammomile, Rew ana ℥ i. of Salt, ʒ i. ℞ of Licorice, Horehound, ana ℥ ss, of Hyssop, ℥ i. ss, Oxy∣mellis squillit. ℥ i. of the water of Horehound,A Iulep. Hysop, Colts-foote, Scabious, ana ℥ iiii. Giue of this ℥ iiii. in the mor∣ning, after which hee must take one morsell of Diaireos simp. A Sirupe.℞ of the roots of Elecampane, Flower-de-luce, ana ℥ ii. of Hyssop, Colts-foot, ana M ii. ss, of scraped Licorice, ℥ i, ss seeds of Annise, ℥ i. of Raysins the stones being taken out ℥ iiii. of the seeds of Fengreeke ℥ i. flowers of Violets, Thyme, ana M i. of Figs, no vi. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed; adde hereto a little Honey, whereof a sirupe must be made, and hee must take halfe a spoonefull hereof in his mouth. ℞ Oxymellis squillitici, ℥ i. drinke this with the former decoction. A Potion.℞ Elecampane, Colts-foot, Hysop, Mayden-haire, Hore∣hound, ana Mi. of scraped Licorice, ℥ i. seeds of Annise, ʒ ss, Let the patient take in the morning, ℥ iii. of this decoction,
if the disease will giue any ease or respit to the patient, with ℥ i, ss, of the former sirupe, afterwards when the former decoction is boyled, senae Alex. ℥ i. of white and light Agaricke. ℥ iii. seeds of Carthamus, ℥ ss, must be added, wher∣of a purging potion shall bee made, which may serue for two or three times. ℞ of Agaricke made into a trochiske,Pills. Hierae diacolo∣cynth. ana ℈ i. ss, Pillularum Elephanginarum, ℈ i, Oxymellis squillitici q. s. make hereof pills no 8. and they must be giuen after the first sleepe. ℞ Pillul. cochiarum, ℈ ii. Pillul. de Agarico,Pills. ℈ ii. Rha∣barb, ℈ ss. ℞ Diapheniconis, Cassiae, ana ℥ ss,Bolus. Agaricke made in a tro∣chiske, ℈ ss, of the finest Sugar q. s. ℞ of the roots of Radish, ℥ ii. of Betony, ℥ i,A Vomit. Seminis nasturij, Atriplicis, ana ʒ ii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed, vnto ℥ v. of this strayning, adde Oxymellis squillitici ℥ i. ss, Succi cepae domestic ℥ ss. Giue this after dinner, and the patient must walke after it: also a vomit may be made with the decoction of a Radish root and white Hellebore. ℞ Conserue of Violet, roots of Elecampane, ana ʒ vi. con∣serue of Rosemary flowers, ℥ ss, Sp. Diaireos Salomonìs,A Lohoch. Diatragacanthi frigidi, ana ℈ ii. ss, syr. of Violets, Mayden-haire, ana q. s. ℞ syrupe of Hyssop, of Horehound,A Lohoch. ana ʒ i. lohoch  scylla, of a Woolfes lungs, ana ℥ ss, the roots of Ele∣campane, ʒ ii. iuyce of Licorice, Sugar-candy, ana ʒ i. ss. ℞ sir. of Hyssop, of Horehound, Violets,A draught. ana ℥ i. Oxymel. simp. ℥ i. ss. take one spoonefull hereof with a draught of Barley water. ℞ sirupe of Licorice, ℥ ss, Oxymellis simp. ℥ i. ss, Lo∣hoch
of the lungs of a Foxe, ʒ vi. of Gumme Ammoniacke ʒ ss. A mixture.℞ of the roots of Elecampane preserued, Dragant, ana ℥ ss, Lohoch of the Lungs of a Foxe, Lohoc sani, ana ʒ v. roots of flower-de-luce, ℈ ii. sir. of Hysop q. s. mixe these, and the patient must take hereof very often. An Electu∣ary.℞ of the roots of Elecampane, Gentianae, Lungs of a Fox ana ʒ ii. Diaireos ℈ iiii. Mellis squillitici, q. s. giue ʒ i. hereof vnto the patient in the decoction of Scabious, Hysop, May∣dens-hayre. A Powder.℞ of Licorice scraped, ʒ ii. ss, of Hysop, ʒ i. of Saffron, ℈ i. the roots of Colts-foote, ʒ i. ss, of Mace, ℈ ii. season the meate with this powder, An Electu∣ary.℞ Lohoch of the lungs of a Fox, ℈ i. aurea Alex. of the best Mithridate, ana ʒ i. Squillae assae, ʒ i. conserue of the roots of Elecampane, ℥ ss, giue twice in a weeke ʒ ii. hereof in white Wine. Another.℞ preserued roots of Elecampane, ℥ ii. preserued roots of Flower-de-luce, ℥ i. Licorice, ℥ i. ss, iuyce of Hysop, ℥ i. of Pepper, seeds of Nettles, ℈ iiii, of Raysins, the stones being taken out, of bitter Almonds▪ ana ℥ ss, sirupe of Hy∣sop q. s. Pills.℞ of Bay berries, ʒ vi. roots of Dragant, ℥ i. Bole Armony, ʒ ii. iuyce of Licorice, ʒ i ss, sirupe of Hysop, q. s. Let the patient take 3 or 4 of these when hee goes to bed. A Suffumi∣gation.℞ of Frankincense, Masticke, ana ʒ i. ss, of Brimstone, ʒ ii. ss, of Iuniper, ℈ ii. of Storax, ℈ i. of Turpentine q. s. when there is any occasion for the vse of this, cast a piece of this lumpe vpon liue coales, and the smoake must bee conueyed vnto the mouth by a pipe, also a cap must be smoaked here∣with, and put vpon the patients head; this doth dry the su∣perfluous humidity. An Oynt∣ment.℞ the oyle of Cammomile, ana ℥ i ss, of Dill, ʒ vi. of
sweet Almonds, ʒ iii. Sp. Diaireos, ʒ ss, roots of Elicam∣pane, and Dragant, ana ℈ i. of Waxe and Vineger a lit∣tle. ℞ of oyle white Lillies, sweet Almonds, Lini, ana ℥ ss,An Oynt∣ment. oyle of Bayes, Cammomile, ana ℥ iii. of fresh Butter, Hens and Ducks greace, ana ʒ iii. iuyce of Hysop, Elecampane, ana ʒ ii. roots of Dragant, ʒ ss, of Saffron ℈ ss, of Waxe q. s. an oynt∣ment for the brest. ℞ of the roots of Flower-de-luce, Elecampane,A Cata∣plasme. ana ℥ ss, Farinae hordeaceae, Oleaceae, seeds of Linus, ana ℥ i. of Figs, no x. of Rosin, Turpentine, ana ℥ i. ss, Mellis despu∣mati, q. s. An Appendix, seruing for the cure of ASTHMA, or short windynesse. FIrst the belly must be purged by a conuenient clyster, the vse of these is approued to be good for this disease. And then if the disease will permit, the humors that offend and presse too much vpon the lungs, shalbe made obedient vnto nature. Then we must turne aside the humours that are running vnto the brest, with Errhines, Sneezing medi∣cines, Apophlegmatismes, Cupping-glasses, one shall bee placed vpon the backe neere vnto the heart, if the matter bee windy. Also the matter shall bee brought backe with Frictions, warme Baths, wherein the thighs shall bee ba∣thed. At the length we will administer such things as will bring out the corrupt matter lurking in the lungs. There∣fore such as doe procure spettle, amongst which, such may be added that will dissipate the reliques, and strengthen the lungs. But a care ought to bee had that such medicines bee not giuen that heat and dry too much. For else the humors would with more difficulty remayne. For seeing the hu∣mors are grosse and viscous, and remaine longer in the
lungs, if then the humour bee exposed to heat, it would be as it were baked, and so waxe hard; therefore they that heat and moisten moderately, shall bee mixed with cut∣ting medicines, abstergings, and allayers of paine. Againe medicines too cold must be auoyded as well as too hote, vnlesse that there be danger of suffocation, and exulceration by rhewme. And heere, as in other dayly diseases, the me∣dicines shall be changed, because too much vse of one sort of medicines doth but dull the patient. A method seruing for the knowledge of the PLEVRISY. A Pleurisy is an inflamation of the thinne & small skinne which clotheth the ribs on the inner side, called in Latine Pleura, from whence the disease doth take its name: whereby it appeares that euery paine of the side is not the Pleurisy, for there bee many pains of the side; yet in this place we treate of that paine that doth follow a sharpe dis∣ease by the inflamation of that thinne skin: for if the in∣flamation bee in the outward Muscles, or if the paine bee great, because of windines, this is a bastard Pleurisy, then are they without a Feauer, yet feele a paine in the brest, which onely by touching is very much exasperated; neuer∣theles this is not so constant as the other, but will bee mitigated if such things bee applied as will disperse win∣dines. The part affected. The part affected, as was declared, is a thinne small skinne, and the signes hereof besides difficulty of breathing, and a vehement cough, there is likewise a kind of pricking paine, which plainly doth demonstrate, that the mem∣branes, and some other tender parts are affected.
Signes. There is a pricking paine very troublesome which doth spread it selfe ouer the sides and brest; for this dilatation by crushing, stretching, and violently mouing the brest, doth augment the paine. Somtime the paine spreads it selfe euen vnto the short ribs, somtimes to the channell bone of the throate, necessity doth compell him to breathe short and thicke, yet it is small in regard of that paine which doth hinder the instruments of breathing to bee lift vp, and yet this is necssary by reason of great inflamation, whereby he is forced to double his breath, that by this meanes that heate might be refreshed, which before was ouerheated. Also there is a continual Feauer, because the inflamation doth border vpō the heart. The pulse is thick, not too great, hard and vnequall, and by that meanes rough and like vnto a saw. A cough also cōmeth withall, at the first day, and then nothing is voyded at the length spittle comes vp co∣loured according to the nature of the excrements, and it is also moister. Then he begins to voyd greater store, and sometimes it is red, and bloody, sometime yellow, at the length when the impostume is ripe, the spettle is martry: the patient finds greater ease when he lies on the sicke side, then on the other. But the patient must rather lye on his backe, then on that side, for if he lye on that side, the paine is increased; because the matter is more spred abroad by reason of their crushing: but if he turne himselfe vpon his sound side, the filme affected is more stretched, and the humours bend towards the sound part. This paine for the most part is most irksome toward night. Sometime this disease is at an end, if the matter by sweating fall vpon the lungs, for then it will bee driuen out with a cough, which is most to be desired. Sometimes it gets thorow the pores, but this is but seldome. Sometimes the matter is ripe∣ned and turned into corrupt blood, & when the impostume
is opened, vnlesse it bee auoyded by cough, the patient within 40. dayes doth spet corrupt blood: but when the matter doth begin to bee corrupted, paine and feauers are increased, he breathes more hardly, he auoyds little or nothing by cough, a great rednes breaks out in his cheeke, watchfulnes and thirst do much oppresse him; when the matter is ripe, paine and Feauers are slackned, he coughs more, and doth cast vp little. But when the impo∣stume is ready to breake, paine and Feauer againe increase, he breathes with more difficulty, his strength fayles, and he quakes and trembles with cold: but if at that time the patient is not weake, and his spettle is good, the best is to be hoped, and the greater that the Feauer paine and hard∣nes of breathing is, then the impostume will sooner breake, if these symptomes be milder, the longer it will be before it doth breake. We say that it is but the beginning of the disease, when he spets little, and that is vndigested: but if it doth appeare reddish, then is the disease past the beginning: when it is changed from rednes to white or leaden colour, and is voyded in great store, and the symp∣tomes increase, the mischiefe doth then increase, but spettle equally white, and the symptomes slackned, signifie that the state is come. When spettle with other symptomes are a∣bated, then the declination of the disease is expected. And sometime after the matter is digested, it is conueyed by veines to Chili and the guts, and so is voyded by a stoole, or else it is conueyed from thence to the vrine pipes, and so it goes away with the vrine. Sometime it is conueyed to the throate, braines, eares, and sinews, from whence impo∣stumes of the throate and eares, phrensy and palsey are ge∣nerated. Sometimes it falls downe into the ioynts and flanks; when the paine rather tends to the outward parts, the paine is duller, not pricking, and it is a bastard plurisy, and all the simptomes are milder. Also the paine doth grow greater by crushing; lying on the sound side is lesse trou∣blesome; his pulse is neither stretched nor hard, vnequall or
thicke, he is free from a Feauer. Yet sometime outragious pains are stirred vp by windines, and bring a true plurisy, also there is paine in the side when the liuer is inflamed, but it is not pricking; and the cough caused by the inflama∣tion of the liuer, is euer dry and little. The Causes. The cause for the most part is blood, running from the hollow veyns into the ribs thin veines; and sometimes it is simply good, which is signified by red spettle, the season of the yeere, youth, diet, beeding much blood, hote and moist temperament, and temperate region. Sometime it is caused by phlegmy blood, and then the disease is of longer continuance, and the spettle is frothy, and white. The sea∣son of the yeere which is Autumne, the cold constitution, and region of the aire, do signifie this, as also diet genera∣ting phlegmy blood; sometimes cold doth draw the blood out of the veines, or too much heate will do as much, too much drinking of cold water, a fall, the ouer-loading with a burden, sodaine cold after a sweat; sometime the blood is cholericke, and then a sharper disease is caused. Also suppression of the Hemroids or monethly tearmes wil cause a plurisy. Prognostiques. The Plurisy is dangerous vnto old men, women with child, and such as haue beene sicke twice or thrice of it. It doth vexe the patient more in the night then day. Who∣soeuer is sicke of a plurise, and are not clensed in xiiij dayes, they turne to suppuration. In that plurisy wherein somewhat is auoyded by spettle, and it doth then cease, the brest being pained, and heauy: in these there is great dan∣ger; for this is a crude disease, and doth either kill the pati∣ent presently, or else it will sticke by their sides a long time. Spettle bloody and yellow is bad; but much bloody at the first is not dangerous; for all spettle, the more humours are mixed with it, the greater the danger is. In a plurisy, if the pulse be little, very swift and hard, doth presage death; and
seeing that the disease is knowne by its proper symptomes, and the greatnes of the disease is weighed by the greatnes of the symptomes, therefore we say, a plurisy wilbe mild e∣nough, if paine, difficulty of breathing, & the Feauer do not much molest them, as also if any colored spettle be voyded by cough, and if lying on both sides be suffered with ease; in like manner the contrary will proue dangerous, It doth kill by choaking, or too much paine, or by some other great symptomes, or by the translation of the matter into the lungs, whereby the consumption of them is caused, and also vlcers. A method seruing for the cure of the PLVRISY. THe aire must be temperate, and somewhat inclining to heate. His meate of easy digestion, viz. Hens broth, Ptisan, Almond milke. In the beginning of the disease, a little nourishment is sufficient, afterward greater plenty may bee permitted. Raysins, Almonds, sweet apples are good a∣mongst Pot-hearbs Endiue is good. His drinke must be Pti∣san, the decoction of Cinamon, Licorice, flowers of Vio∣lets, he may not drinke wine vntill the disease be slaked, rest of body, and longer sleepe then vsuall, may be permitted, & the belly must be kept loose. Auerters.A veine must bee opened, and if necessity require, at mid∣night. For a sharpe Feauer, difficulty of breathing, and extremity of paine do threaten death. When the patient is somewhat amended, the Basilica veine shalbe opened; and if that do not appeare, the median opposite to that side that is affected: for this drawes backe, euacuates, and diuerts the matter another way: if strength do faile, & the body be not full of blood, the blood shalbe taken away at sundry times gentle Clysters shalbe giuen, if the belly be bound, or in stead of them a suppositor. Ligatures, frictions, and hto
fomentation of the limbs. Cupping-glasses shalbe fastned to the ribs, and flanks, then vnto the shoulders, for old men & children this is better then opening of a veine, vnlesse the patient, be strong. If a veine do not appeare, blood-suckers shalbe layd vnto the patient, and their tailes shalbe cut off, that they may draw the more blood. Sirupe of Violets, Iuiubes▪ Mayden-haire,Preparers. wherunto some Saccharum violacum must be added, for this is good to cause spetting. Sir. of Licorice with barley-water, water with Sugar, whereto a little Cinamon may be added. Water of Endiue, and sodde Barley. A decoction of Barley, Violets, Licorice, Iuiubes Sebesten, Cardius benedictus; and if it shalbe vsed for the slaking of thirst, the former sirupes shall bee mixed: it is also good to clense the body, and dissolue cor∣rupted matter. Diaprunum, Ienitiuum, Diacatholicum, Diaphaenicum,Emptiers. Syr. Rosarum laxatinus, agaricke with a pectorall decocti∣on; Rhubarbe with Manna. and syr. of Licorice; new Cassia. A Clysters is better then a purge: the Clyster must be made of the common decoction, Oyle of Violets, Cammomill, Cassia. If any other matter beside blood do offend, it must be cast out by a conuenient medicine. Yet heere care ought to be had, that the purging medicines (if any be administred) bee not too strong; especially if wee can guesse by any signes, that the matter runs. Also such medicines as are mix∣ed with hellebore and scammony, must be forbidden: for too many by these and such other strong medicines, haue beene depriued of life, the strength being by them weakned, for by these purging medicine the blood is more stirred vp. If the disease bee caused by rheume, or if, the pain tends vnto the short ribs, or lies in the bowels and sto∣macke, and other neere adioyning parts, we may easily perceiue that the humours bee at a stand, which cause this disease, and then these parts must bee emptied by a Clyster, or some other conuenient medicine; neuer∣thelesse a medicine that turnes away the humours; shall
not be vsed vntill 7. dayes be expired; for hereby we may hinder spetting, which by all meanes must be prouoked. Neither at the end of 7. dayes we will admit of that medici if the body be much abated, and the Feauer vehement; for it will more consume the body, then it can any other way do good. Prouokers of spettle.Syr. of Iuiubes, Licorice, Violets, with twice as much Barley-water, shall be giuen vntill the fourth day, then the quantity of the syr. of Violets shalbe lessened, and the syr. of Licorice increased. Sir. of Iuiuba▪ Saccharum. Ʋio∣lacrum, Candum. White Pills, Diapenidium, Diatraga∣canthum frigidum, with Iubeb of Violets, whereto a little Diireos Salomonis shalbe added. Lohoch de Pino, Lohoch sanum. A decoction of Figs, Barley, Violets, Iuiuba, Licorice, & ater the third day some sirupe of Licorice shall be added. Diabuglossatum shalbe mixed with the former, because it doth comfort the heart. An oyntment of the Oyle of Violets shall be prescribed against the fourth day, wherewith the brest shall bee anoynted, then the Oyle of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Camomill, shalbe added; or else only the Oyle of sweet Almonds may bee vsed. At the length, vnto the former the powder of flower-de-luce, or Hyssop shall be added. From such medicines as bind too much, we must abstaine, and in stead of them, we may vse such as do digest and loosen the hard parts. The best for this purpose is the Oyle of Violets; and besides, this quali∣fies the sharpnes of the heate, but we will vary these medici∣nes, according vnto the variety of time. Digesters.Diahyssopus, the former prouokers of spettle. A fomen∣tation of white wine, wherein are boyled the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote; the roots of wild Mallows, Lin∣seed, Fengreeke, Bran, Dill, Hyssop, leaues of Violets, gar∣den Mallows. Fil a bladder halfe ful of this decoction: being rightly applied, it is good against windines. If this disease were caused by blood, it will rather increase the disease then diminish it. Wherefore in the beginning it must be
vsed with caution, afterwards more freely. The oynt∣ment of Dialthaea, whereunto the powder of Flower-de-luce must bee added. An oyntment of the oyle of Cammo∣mile, Hens fat, oyle of sweet Almonds, Violets, the roote of Flower-de-luce. The leaues of Cabage dryed against the fire, and layd vpon the side, but first butter must bee layd vpon the place. Make a Cataplasme or Emplayster of oyle of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Linseede, and Cam∣momile, the mucilage of Linseed, Fengreeke, wild and garden Mallows, amongst which the powder of Mustard∣seed may bee added, as also of Cresses, make this soft, and apply it hot vnto the side, and when it is cold, it must be re∣moued. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the PLVRISY. ℞ of clensed Barley, M i. leaues of Mallows, Mercury,A Clyster. Violets, ana M i. ss of Damaske Pruines, no xii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde vnto the strayning of new Cassia, of course Sugar, ana ℥ i. oyle of Violets, Lini, ana ℥ i. ss, the yolke of an Egge: administer this euery other day. ℞ syr. de Iuiubis, Licorice, ana ℥ i. ss, syr. of Violets,A Iulep. ℥ i. water of Colts-foote, ℥ v. of the decoction of Barley, Figs, Maydenhaire ℥ vi. ℞ sir. of Violets, Licorice, Acetosi compositi, ana ℥ i. wa∣ter of Scabious, Coltsfoote, a decoction of clensed Barley,Another. ana ℥ iiii. ℞ of clensed Barley, M iii. of Raysins, ℥ ii. of scraped Licorice, ℥ i. of Hyssop, Colts-foote, ana M i. seeds of Annise,A Ptisan. Linus, Melons, ana ʒ i. flowers of Woodrowell, p i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb ii. adde to the strayning syr. viola∣i, ℥ iiii.
A Lohoch.℞ sir▪ of Violets, Licorice, Oxymellis simp. ana ℥ ss, Dia∣tragacanthi frigidi, Sugar-candy, ana ʒ iii. A draught.℞ of Cassia, Diacath. ana ℥ ss. of the common decoction q. s. Giue this in the morning. Another.℞ of Cassia, ʒ vi. Diapruni slutiui, ʒ ii. Rhabarb. electi ℈ ss, sir. of Violets, ℥ i. of the decoction of Barley, ℥ iii. Another.℞ of white and light Agaricke, ʒ ii. Rhabarb. electi, ʒ ii. ss, of Spike. gr. xii. infuse these in ℥ v. of flesh broth, adde vnto the strayning Diacath. ʒ iii. sirupe of Violets ℥ i. ℞ Sacchari violati, ℥ i. manus Christi, ʒ vi. Sugarcandy, ℥ ss Sp. Diatragacanthi frigidi,A Loch. ʒ ii. ss, sirupe of Violets q. s. licke this vp with the ongue, or else the patient may hold Sugarcandy, and Saccharum violaceum in his mouth, or else Diapenidian. A Lohoch.℞ sir. de Iuiubis, Violets, Licorice, ana ℥ i. of Mayden∣hayre,, ℥ ss, Sugarcandy, ʒ vi. Another.℞ sir. of Licorice, Hysop, Acetosi simp. ana ℥ i. Oxymellis squillit. ʒ vi. this may be vsed, if the spettle be so thicke that it cannot bee voyded. Also giue flesh broth where in a lit∣tle Sugar must be put: for this is good likewise for the same purpose. Another.℞ Diaireos simp. Pillularum bechicarum, ana ℥ ss, Diatra∣gacanthi frigidi, ʒ iii. Sugar-candy, iuyce of Licorice, ana ʒ ii. ss, sirupe of Violets, q. s. dip a Licorice sticke herein, and licke vp the mixture from the sticke. An Oynt∣ment.℞ oyle of Violets, sweet Almonds, ana ℥ i. a little Waxe, and Saffron when it is fit time to resolue the matter, the roots of white Lillies, Hyssop, and oyle of Cammomile may be added. A Lini∣ment.℞ Vnguenti pectoralis, oyle of Linus, sweet Almonds, and Capons grease, ana ʒ ii. oyle of Cammomile, ʒ iii. of Saffron gr. ii. of Waxe q. s. An Oynt∣ment.℞ oyle of Violets, ℥ i. of sweet Almonds, ℥ ss, dip a lin∣nen cloth in these, and anoynt the affected part herewith,
then binde the cloth vpon the place. ℞ of oyle of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Keirini,A Lini∣ment. vnguenti dialthaeae. ana ℥ ss, of Capons greace, fresh Butter, ana ʒ ii. of Vineger and Waxe, a little quantity. ℞ of the roots of Lillies, flowers of Cammomile,A Fomen∣tation. Mellilot, red Roses, leaues of Mallows, Scabious, ana M i. of Branne, Linseed, Fengreeke, ana M i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. dippe a sponge in it and wash the affected side herewith, but first a linnen cloth must bee put vpon the place, that it bee not too much moyst∣ned. ℞ of the oyle of Violets, sweete Almonds, ana ℥ ss,An Oynt∣ment. of Cammomile, May butter, Vnguenti dialthaea, ana ʒ i. oyle of Dill, Lillies, ana ʒ iii. roots of Flower-de-luce, ʒ i. of Waxe, a little quantity. ℞ of the roots of Flower-de-luce, Elecampane, ana ℥ i. roots of Althaea ʒ vi. of Thyme, Colts-foote, Sage, Betony,A Iulep. Hyssop, ana M ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed, adde to the strayning, Melli despu∣mati q. s. ℞ of the seeds of Cummin, ℥ i. Rosemary, Hyssop,A Bag. Ori∣gan▪ ana M i. of fryed Salt, M i ss, of fryed Branne, M ii. sprin∣kle white Wine vpon these in the frying. Put these in a bag and lay them vnto the affected side, and when it doth beginne to waxe cold, wette it agayne in hot Wine, and so apply it againe: After this keepe it warme by applying hot cloaths thereto, for it must neyther bee layd cold vnto the side, neyther should it remaine long cold when it is vp∣on the side. ℞ of Mallowes,A Cata∣plasme. water-Mallows, ana M i. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Mugwort, ana M ss, of Hyssop, p ii. of Wormewood, p i. roots of Althaea, ℥ ss. Boyle these in water q. s. vnto a thicknesse, beate it in a mortar and adde of Barley flower, ℥ i. ss, of the flower of Linseed, ℥ i. of Capons greace, fresh Butter, ℥ ss, oyle of Cammo∣mile q. s.
Another.℞ the roots of Alth, ℥ i. flowers of Cammomile, Dill, ana M i. of Barley flower, Linseed, Fengreeke, ana ℥ i. seeds of Annise ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto a softnes, bruise them well in a mortar together, and adde of the oyle of Cammomile q. s. A Sirupe.℞ sirupe of Violets, ʒ i. of Poppy, ℥ ss, of the decocti∣on of Barley ℥ iii. Giue this in the night time, if the pa∣tient cannot sleepe well: make also an oyntment for the brow and temples, with the oyle of Violets and Po∣plar. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the PLVRISY. FIrst the belly must bee euacuated by a clyster, after this a veine shall be opened, for this doth hinder the diseases perfection. Then againe gentler Clysters, Cupping-glasses, Frictions, Ligatures, Suppositers, shall bee vsed for the tur∣ning away the matter from the affected part, and the dis∣eases perfection bee hindred. And if plenty of matter doe surcharge the body, or if it rage much, or if it bee not as yet come to the part affected, neuerthelesse doth rage, and the paine inclines vnto the lower parts of the brest; some gen∣tle purge shall be giuen euen before digestion, that the dis∣eases increase may bee stopped, and also its perfection which by all meanes must be sought; then the matter of the Plurisie that sweats into the lungs, shall bee made obedient vnto nature, by such medicines as prouoke spetting. If by those meanes formerly recited, corruption of the matter cannot bee hindred, such medicines must bee prescribed as may bring downe snot. viz. The decoction of Figs, Dates, Barley, Lilly roots, Mallows, seeds of Cresses, Linseed, Fen∣greeke, Mustardseed, Licorice, Raysins. Also a Fomentation may bee made of the decoction of Mallows, Althaea,
seeds of Fengreeke, Linus, Quinces, Figs, A cataplasme with Mallosw, Althaea, Linseed, Fengreeke, Quinces, Dates, Figs, Butter, Hony, Hens, Duckes, and Swines grease. After wee haue perceiued by the agues paines asswaging, and by increase of heauines about the place affected, that the matter is ripe, then he shal endeauour to cough much, and shall lye on his sicke side rather then on his sound, and then the lower part of his throate shalbe tickled with a feather, to prouoke vo∣miting, and yet he must not vomit. When the impostume is broken, the patient may drinke honyed or sugard water, Barley water with sirupe of Hyssop. To clense the body, the part affected shalbe washed with the decoction of Hyssop, or Calamint. The brest shalbe anoynted with the Oyle of Cammomill, Lillies, and powder of flower-de-luce, the broth of an old Capon, wherein Hyssop, and Mayden-haire are boyled, shalbe giuen. Then the patient may drinke goates milke, and such things as shalbe spoken of in the next chap∣ter. If it bee a bastard plurisy, then shal they bee prescribed that do mildly resolue, for which purpose receiue of the flowers of Cammomill, M i ss. Leaues of rew, Dill, Violets, Mallows, ana M i. Let them boyle in water, vntil the third part be consumed: dip a sponge in the hote liquor, and lay it to the pained side with a hote cloth betweene, that heat may the longer be kept; this shal often bee renewed, continuing the first course stil. If there be no fulnes of body, and if the matter causing paine be windy, and doth consist of small quan∣tity of humours, and thinne, a bag shalbe layed to the side, wherein salt, Milium, and branne shalbe put; Or else a cata∣plasme of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, ana Mi. of the leaues of rew, Maioram, wild Pennyroyall, ana p i, seeds of annise ʒ ii, Bay-berries ʒ iij, Boyle these moderately, beatē the all together in a morter, and adde as much Hony, as is suffi∣cient. Make also an emplaister of the Oyle of Cammomill of Pitch; also Cupping-glasses are good to fetch out the mat∣ter of the disease.
A method seruing for the knowledge of the disease, which is commonly called, Spetting of blood. SPetting of blood is any voyding of the blood at the mouth: this affect is oftentimes the cause of most euill and long diseases. Blood is voyded from many places of the body, as shall appeare by that which follows; and here care ought to bee had in obseruing whether the patient was wont to bleed at the nose or no, for from thence it doth fall into the stomake and throate, and sometime into the lungs, but for the most part it doth turne and harden into a clod: if then one spet blood, and yet did not bleed at the nose formerly, thē it doth come from some inferiour part, which shall bee knowne by peculiar signes. The part affected. Blood is oft voyded from the gummes, and mouth it selfe, and then the spittle is of a bloody colour, and very little is voyded out, and that without cough; if it doe come from the throate, or weazell-pipe, then it is voyded by hemming, not by cough, and the continuated parts of those places doe appeare loosened if the tongue be thrust downe. But if it did come from the head, a paine of the head with heauinesse went before, and a noyse in the eares, the forehead veines rise, they haue a kinde of sence of heat and blood in the mouth, and a tickling is felt in the pallate: if it doth runne into the throate from whence by often hemming it is cast out, oftentimes, the patient hath a desire to cough and cannot. But if the blood doth come from the lungs, then is the blood foamy, and then it is voyded by frequen coughing, and without paine, and at sundry times. And as oft as blood is voyded, because some great veine is burst, then plenty of blood is cast vp, no cause except that knowne, it is as it were cast vp by vomit,
and whole basons full are voyded; but if the blood bee cast vp, because some veine in the lungs is gnawne, which is oft caused by a sharpe humour falling downe, then is it shed by degrees a little now and then, vnlesse some great veine be eate asunder: for then it runnes out in great abundance, and this is most dangerous: For then comes a dry cough, the spet∣tle is mattery or bloodish, of an ill colour and sent: which is neuer without a feauer, sometimes some part of the lungs being rotted is voyded vp by cough, and this is the surest signe of the lungs exulceration. Sometime blood is spet out onely by opening a veine, as may happen, if the diet bee too hot and moyst, and hen at the first it is voyded vp in a small quantity, and is both thinne and red; but if it be voyded from the brest, then it is not foamy blood, but blacke and thicke: sometimes it is mixed with matter, and comes vp with a stronger and frequent cough, because it must neede be drawne vp to the lungs before it can bee driuen out at the windepipe, and it is voyded in small quantity, and not with∣out paine of the brest. If it comes from the wind-pipe prin∣cipally, it is voyded with some paine, and little blood, and this is red and hot with a little cough. If it come from the stomacke, it will be voyded without coughing, or vomi∣ting, neyther will there be any great quantity hereof, because the veines in the stomacke are but small. But if it be brought from the liuer, spleene, or belly, a loading paine doth dis∣turbe the parts, and the blood is auoyded by vomit, and the other parts doe bestow a greater quantity vpon the sto∣macke, it will bee of a darkish colour inclining vnto the blacke∣nesse, it will also be clotted, if it be voyded from the spleene, therefore before any peculiar remedy is set downe, euery one of these peculiar manners of auoyding blood must bee marked. Spitting of blood is an accident appertaining to any thing issuing out, which is changed in kinde besides na∣ture.
The Signes. The signes of this affect and of the part affected appeare by that which was sayd before. The Cause. It is often caused by fulnes, and by a great quantity of bloud which doth offend the body, and some peculiar parts of the body more particulary; for heereby the vessels mouthes are opend; the signes of this is a good habit of body, immode∣rate vse of hote nutriments, and wine, suppression of tearmes, and then there is no paine, but rather a lightsomnes of the body, which before was dull; and then also there is but a smal quantity hereof, and it is not very foamy or red. Wo∣men without any danger of consumption haue beene eased by this shedding of blood in the suppression of their tearmes. Oftentimes a veine in the lungs is burst by a fall, or labour, or some lowd outcries, from hence blood issueth out: some∣times it doth happen by corrosion of the vessels, and the blood is then voyded by little quantities, & at sundry times; a sharpe rheume went before this. If the blood be mattery, it is a sure signe that somewhat is putrified in the lungs, as if some part of the veine or arteries in the lungs bee voyded. But it is certaine that some part of the lungs are eaten away. Prognostiques. If the lungs be vlcerated, there is danger, for then there is danger of suppuration, and of a consumption; for by the reason of continuall motion, the lungs cannot bee hardned: also in spongy substances blood will sooner sticke, and will with great difficulty bee cast out, whereby a greater sharp∣nes is caused, which doth exulcerate the lungs, also hereby the breathing is hindred, the heate in the body is increased, and the body consumed. When a veine in the lungs is opend or burst, yet there is some hope, if the substance of the lungs be sound: yet a consumption signifies danger, if the blood
which comes out of the rupture of a veine falling vpon the lungs, be there detained, by which meanes the lungs are inflamed and putrified; for at the length the substance of the lungs will bee corupted, and exulcerated. Also there is danger when either a great veine be opened or broke; for then the heart may bee suffocated; for sometime such plenty of blood hath beene voyded from thence, that hath fild whole basons. Spetting of blood if it bee caused by a corrosion of the lungs, is incurable. If it come from the brest, there is lesse danger. And when spetting of blood doth succeed spet∣ting of matter, this is a signe that the lungs are exulcerated. Spetting of blood, if it doth continue long, wil at the length be turned into a consumption. They which spett blood whilest they lie on their sicke side, do it more pleasantly. Yet spetting of blood is not always dangerous, for by this meanes an impostume of either liuer or spleene, is cured. A method seruing for the cure of spetting blood. THe aire ought to bee somewhat inclining vnto cold and dry, and the patient must auoyd the sunshine and a bright fire; his meate must be such as doth coole, dry, and bind, and they ought to bee of a slymy substance if it bee caused a burst of any of the veines of the lungs, viz. Milke, Feet of Calues, Hogs, or Kids, the gelly of fishes. Also the flesh of Hens, Pigeons, Cunnies, Fawnes, Partridges, Fea∣sants, Larkes, fishes that lye in stony places, and fresh water Crabs. Also the patient must eate sparingly. Hee may drinke wine and water mixed together. Sometimes hee may bee permitted to drinke red wine, if that strength should be∣ginne to fayle: and also goats milke is good for the patien. He must shunne all exercise, and giue himselfe wholly vn∣to rest. Hee must breathe very gently: For violent breathing is offensiue. He must not sleepe in the day time, and at night
his sleepe must be moderate. His belly must bee kept loose by art or nature. Preturbation of the mind must be auoyded but especially anger. Preparers.Sirupe of the iuyce of Sorrell. Syr. of Violets, Roses. Sir, of Myrtle, Quinces, iuyce of Pomegranates, Omphacini, water of Sorrell, Roses, Night-shade, Plantane, Purslane. These doe mitigate the paine of the body, and by their astringent faculty do hinder the flux of blood. Emptiers.Rhabarb. with the water of Plantane, Mirablan Citrini, Chebuli, Cassia, Turbith with Ginger. These purge the phleg∣my humors mixed with blood, as also sharpe cholericke hu∣mours, by which sometimes the veines are burst, or else gnawne asunder, and by consequent it doth also purge spettle of blood. Auerters.The inner or median veine shall be opened twice or thrice in a day, and if the blood bee pure, the lesser quantity shall bee taken away. On the contrary, if the disease hath but newly seized vpon the patient, or if the vessels be full, and but a lit∣tle bloud voyded, and the patient also be free from an vlcer, greater store shalbe taken away. But a veine shalbe opend on that side wherein we shall thinke the disease to be, whether the effusion of blood be caused by opening of a veine, or rap∣ture. If it be caused by the suppression of monethly tearmes, the veine of the ankle-bone shalbe opened. Cupping-glasses shalbe fastned to the Buttockes, Hips, Flanks, short ribs, and region of the liuer. Painfull frictions of extreme parts, and ligatures somewhat aboue the knee or ankle, as also the Armes, and Elbows. Also those parts shalbe washed with hoter water; for heate doth as well draw causeas paine. Blood-suckers must be layd to the brest, the hemroides must be prouoked, and the tearms brought downe. Whether the veine bee opened or burst, especiall care ought to bee had, that present remedies be sought for the turning away the current of blood.
Trochise de terra sigillata with the water of Plantane,Stanchers of blood. de spodi with the sirupe of Quinces, Athanasia, Phylonium, Persicum Romanum. Syr. of Pomegranats, Myrtle, Quinces, Roses. Saccharum rosatum, Conserue of old Roses. Diacydo∣nium, Harts horne burnt, white Corrall burnt, Terra Le∣nia, Sigillata, seeds of Quinces, Myrtle, Bole-armony, the rinde and flowers of Pomegranates, iuyce of Gooseberries. Masticke, Tragacanthum, Gumme Arabike. Plantane and Purslane are very good against this disease. Knotgrasse, the decoction of Barley with the sirupe of Roses, Quinces, dry Roses, sacchareum rosatum, Wine wherein Sage hath bin stiep∣ed, also Purslane chewed, Diatragacanthum frigidum. Loch è lapide hamatite, Bole-armony, the flowers and rinds of Pomegranates, Myrtles, Masticke, Aragacanth, Corall, Gumme Arabicke, Harts-horne burnt, Amylum, terra Le∣nia, Conserue of Roses, Diatragacanthum frigidum, syr. of Violets. A fomentation with the water of Scabious and wine, Oyle of Roses, Quinces, Myrtle. An oyntment of the Oyle of Quinces, Myrtle, Roses, sweet Almonds, Cammomill all these stanch blood by their astringent vertue, and as∣swage choller, and if they be vsed, they will consolidate  vlcer, and thicken the thinne rheume. They shall bee som while continued, although the flux be stayd; for otherwise i will quickly come againe. They must all be administred very cold. Also some things must be added that haue very thin parts, because the force of the other is not so piercing. Me¦dicines too much astringent and cooling, must be auoyded, because they driue the blood into the lungs, whereby the lungs are putrified, and vlcers are bredde in the lungs. But before the vse of auerters we will not vse these outwardly, for it is to bee feared, that they wil driue the bloud into the lungs, from whence comes great fulnes, and swelling of the internall veines. Oxymel simp. Compositum, Squillit. Oxycratum,Correctors of acciden or water so mixed with Vineger that it may be drunke; at the first it
is very good, if clods of congealed blood sticke vpon the lungs. Diacurcuma, Triacle with water of Scabious, the seed of a Hare, Stag, or Kid, is a soueraigne medicine, Mummia, iuyce of Sage cum Saccharo rosato, water of Sorrell, Sage, and Scabious. Triacle of one yeere old, Philonium Romanum cum succo polygonij, syr. of Poppy, Violets, seeds of white Poppy, the rinde of the roots of Mandrake. Flesh-broth that is strayned. Diarrhedon abbatis. Aromaticum rosatum▪ The former of these doe increase the hardning of blood comming out: the latter doth helpe the cough, and procu∣reth sleepe. If they be duely administred, they doe restore the strength. A more particular method for the cure of the bleeding at the mouth. A Iulep.℞ syr. of Myrtle, Purslane, Quinces, Violets, ana ℥ i. of Bole Armony, Bloodstone burnt, ana ʒ i. ss, of the water of Purs∣lane, Plantane, shepheards pouch, ana ℥ iiii. mixe these, and giue it vnto the patient. A Potion.℞ of clensed barley, dry Roses, ana M ii. seeds of Plantane, ℈ i. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consu∣med: vnto ℥ iiii. of the strayning, adde Sacchari rosacei, ℥ ss, sirupe of dry Roses, ℥ i. the patient may drinke of this very often. A Iulep.℞ of the sirupe of Poppy, of dry Roses, ana ℥ i. ss, of Quinces, ℥ i. the water of Shepheards pouch, Plantane, Vio∣lets, ana ℥ iiii. A draught.℞ of the roots and leaues of Plantane, ana M i. of scra∣ped Licorice, ʒ ii. Rhabarb electi ʒ i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed, take of the stray∣ning, ℥ ʒ iiii, and adde of new Cassia, sirupe of Violets, ana ℥ i. A Potion.℞ of the iuyce of Plantane, Purslane, Shepheards-pouch,
millefolij, ana ℥ i. ss, syr. of Violets, ℥ i. of Myrtle ℥ ss, Bole Ar∣mony, Bloodstone, ana ℈ ss. ℞ Sacchari rosacei, ℥ ss, iuyce of Plantane, Sage, ana ℥ i. ss, Bole Armony, Philonij Rom. of new Triacle, ana ℈ ss,Another. mixe these, and in stead of these the patient may drinke Triacle, if this Triacle bee old a little Opium shall bee ad∣ded. ℞ of the roots of Plantane, ℥ i. ss, of Purslane, Poligonij,A Syrupe. ana M i. of the fruite of Bramble not ripe, sowre Grapes, ana ℥ i. ss, of the flowers of Pomegranats, ℥ ss, of scraped Lico∣rice, ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed; adde to the strayning of the finest Sugar, q. s. boyle it againe vnto the consistence of a sirupe, whereof the patient may take ℥ ii. with the iuyce of Plantane and Purslane. ℞ Diatragacanthi frigidi, Sacchari rosacei. ana ℥ i. ss, Rob. berberorum, ℥ ss, Pills of Hounds-tongue, ℈ ii. syr. of Violets, ℥ ii. ss, licke this vp with the tongue, and vse it often. ℞ Sacchari rosacei, ℥ i. Terrae sigillata, Bole Armony,A powder. Mum∣miae, red Roses, Rhab. tosti ana ℈ i. ss, the powder of Foxes lungs dried, Cinamon, Bloodstone, ana ℈ i. seeds of Plantane, Poppy, Roses, ana ℈ ss, drinke ʒ i. hereof in water wherein hot iron hath beene put. ℞ of Bramble berries not ripe, and dried, ʒ ii. Harts-horne burnt, ʒ ii. ss, Bole Armony, seeds of Plantane,Another. ana ʒ i. Troch. de Carabe, ʒ i. ss. of Frankincense, Myrrhe, Masticke, ana, ℈ i. of Licorice, ʒ i. Giue of this ʒ i. in red Wine. ℞ Troch. de terra sigillata, ʒ ii. de Carabe ʒ i ss,Pills. of Hounds-toung ℈ i. with the sirupe of Violets, make Pills. Giue here∣of in the morning ʒ i. ℞ of dry Roses M i. of the fruite of Suach, Myrtle,An Epi∣thime. Hypocistidos, ana ℥ i. Sandalorum rubrorum, the rinde of Pomegranats, ana ʒ iii. boyle these in a sharpe Wine, vntill the third part bee consumed: wash the brest here∣with.
An Oynt∣ment.℞ oyle of Roses, Quinces, ana ʒ v, Bole Armony. ℈ i. Troch. de carabe, ʒ ss, of the flowers of Pomegranats, ʒ i. for the brest. A Cata∣plasme.℞ of Barley flower, Lentiles, Radicum simphiti, ana ℥ i. of the flowers of Pomegranates, ℥ ss, of the leaues of Blood∣wort, Purslane, Plantane, ana M i. boyle these in sharpe wine, then adde of Frankincense, Alome, ʒ i ss, Bole Armony, ʒ ii. ss of red Corall, ʒ i. oyle of Roses, Myrtle, ana q. s. An Em∣playster.℞ of Masticke, Frankincense, ana ℥ i. Bole Armony, ʒ iii. ss, Mummiae, ℥ ss, of Pitch and Waxe q. s. An Appendix seruing for the cure of spetting blood. THe internall veine shall be opened, and those things wch were formerly mentioned must bee obserued. Then the motion of the blood may be turnd away with Cupping-glas∣ses, Ligatures, Blood-suckers, and Frictions. Then medicines may be applyed that do stanch blood; but the best remedies are giuen in potions, rather then in locall medicines: After these, such must be giuen as glutinate, and congeale the parts separated, especially if the flux bee caused by the bursting of the sinew in the lungs, before the lungs bee corrupted. For then the cure will aske more labour, and besides it will be dif∣ficultly cured. Water mixed with Vineger is a knowne and approued medicine for this disease, for it doth coole and thicken the blood, and so hinder the flux; and yet it must not be drunke alone, because it causeth coughing, therefore such things shall be mixed with it as doe hinder coughing; stupe∣factiue medicines shall not be vsed at the first; but when we haue vsed slighter remedies in vaine, and still the disease persists, then we shall haue neede of them. If it may bee dis∣cerned, that blood is fallen from the head vnto the lungs, astringent medicines shall not inwardly bee giuen.
A method seruing for the knowledge of PALPITA∣TIO, or Panting of the heart. PAlpitatio is an immoderate rising and falling of the heart, troublesome, and beside nature stirred vp by the expul∣siue faculty, which striues to expell that which is hurtfull. The heart naturally doth moue, and of it selfe: but heere though the heart doth moue, and of it selfe, yet this motion is vnnaturall, stirred vp by expulsion, by which motion the heart in a manner doth quake and tremble, sometimes ex∣tending it selfe, and then shrinking together againe, that it might bee freee from such hurtfull vapors as are offensiue vnto the heart. This affect tooke the name from the part affected and the accidents that follow the disease. It doth differ from Cardiaca passio, for this is an effect of the mouth of the stomacke, and not of the heart, whereof wee now speake. The part affected. Is the heart with the membranes inclosing it, which ey∣ther is primarily, or immediately hath the cause in it selfe, or else it is affected by the stomacke, wombe, bowels, spleene, liuer, or some other parts, which happens, because ill hu∣mors and vapors lurking in them get into the heart: at the length, it is knowne eyther by the hurt of the parts now present, or else that were affected before the hearts panting. This panting of the heart is an accident, which doth apper∣taine vnto the depraued motion of the heart, because it is moued vnnaturally herein. Signes. Hee breathes little and seldome, the pulse doth beate vn∣equally, the heart as if it were strooke, trembles and pants, and so violently, that the physician may perceiue it at the
first, if he but lay his hand vpon the hearts region, and can easily discerne that motion from the naturall motion of the heart. The arteries of the whole body, especially they by the throate, beate very strongly; and in some there is such a trembling of the heart, that the cloaths which shield the brest from outward iniuries, are perceiued by the standers by to rise and fall, euen as the heart doth, and sometimes they heare a manifest noyse. The Causes. It is often caused by windy, fumy, maligne and grosse va∣pors and spirits for the most part inclosed within the filmes of the heart, and sometime within the hearts corners, which are eyther generated therein, or else are conueyed thither from some of the parts formerly recited. Sometime it is caused by watery and putrified humours, like vnto vrine, from whence an ill smell is sent, which hath so filled the filmes, that the heart cannot freely widen it selfe. This disease is sometimes caused by anger, venerie, surfeits, windy meats, frequent bathings, and violent labour; and the heart is freed from it by rest. For when it beats, there is a striuing to expell that which is hurtfull. The disease may likewise be caused by some watery, blood, or fleshy tumour in the filmes. Also the hote or cold distemper of the heart is the cause of this disease, sometimes sodaine euacuation, and breeding of child bring this inconuenience. Prognostiques. Though some haue beene free frō this symptome by opening a veine, and slender diet, and helpe of medicines, yet very many of them are troubled with it againe after some few moneths, and are brought vnto their graues hereby, before they are come to perfect age: but some of them being taken with a sharpe Feauer, others with a sounding, haue departed this life; so great is the danger of this disease, that it will kill the patient on a sodaine, if it doth often come vpon him
This disease hath some affinity with swounding▪ for it doth vsually go before it, and sometime turnes into it. It is also incident to those whose spleene is swolne with black and dreggish blood they also that are troubled with the hypo∣condriall melancholy, are vsually troubled with this disease. A method seruing for the cure of the panting of the heart. THe ayre must be somewhat hote and dry, and haue a plea∣sant sauour. Hee may eat Chickens, Partridges, Capons, Hens, Veale, and these may be seasoned with Cloues, Pep∣per, Cinamon, Fennell, Hyssop, wild Betony, whether they be sodde or rosted. Among Pothearbs, wild Betony, Hyssop, Maioram, Borage, Fennell, Sauory, Baulme, Penny-royall, are good. Hee may drinke wine mixed with water, wherein Borage, or Baulme is boyled: his exercise must be moderate, as also his sleepe. The excrement of the body must be auoy∣ded in due season. He must not be any way disturbed in mind, eyther by anger or sadnes, and besides ouer-ioying is not good. Syr. Acetosus simplex & Compositus de duabus Radicibus,Preparers. of Buglosse, Syr. Byzantinus, of Licorice, of Hore-hound. Mel rosaceum. Oxymel simplex, compositum & Squilliticum. Syr. of Hyssop, de duabus et quinque radicibus. Water of Betony, Hore-hound, Scabious. A decoction of Betony, Annise, Fennell, Galingale, Baulme, Hore-hound, Scabious, rocke Fen∣nell, Cloues, Mace. Syr. de Epithymo, of Hops, Sweet Apples. syr. of Fumitory, the iuyce of Borage, the water of Buglosse, Scolopendriae, Borage, Fumitory, Baulme, and Fennell. syr. of Violets, Atosus simplex. syr. of succhory with rhab. Of the iuyce of Almonds; of the iuyce of Sorrell. The water of Lec∣tuce, Violets, Buglosse, Roses, Succhory. The former may be vsed, if it bee caused by grosse and phlegmy matter. The latter may bee vsed, if it be caused by melancholy. The third shalbe vsed, if it be caused by heate.
Emptiers.Agaricus Trechiscatus, Electuarium Indum, Diaphaeni∣cum, Mirobalani Kebuli. Pills of Agricke. Diacath. con∣fectio hamech, Diasena, Pillulae Indae, de lapide Lazuli, Aureae Aggregatiua, sine quibus esse no lo. Hiera simplex. Miroba∣lani Indi, Sena, Epithymon. Syr. of manifold infusion of Roses. Myrobalani citrini. Rhabarb. If the body be ful, or that there be any danger of an impostume, or of it bee caused by the suppression of Hemrods or monthly tearmes, or by many watery humors inclosed in the films of the heart, the Bafilica veine shalbe opened in the right arme; for so the pati∣ent may bee freed of the disease. If the disease bee caused by melancholy, or melancholy vapors, a veine shalbe opened in the left arme. But if the cause of the disease do come frō the lower parts, the ankle veine shalbe opened. The later medi∣cines shal giuen, if the disease be caused by hote humors, if by cold and phlegmy humors, those in the first place, if by me∣lancholy humors, they that are in the middle. These pur∣ging medicines shalbe vsed, if the body bee ill iuyced; and if necessity require, they may be vsed before the preparing me∣dicines. And when it is caused by maligne humors con∣ueyed from the other parts, or else there bredde, or when much matter runnes sodainly to the heart, then wee must prepare humours, and empty them againe with stronger Clysters. Auerters.The anckle veine shalbe opened, Clysters, Cupping-glasses, painfull ligatures in the time of the fit; frictions with sweet linnen cloaths. Strength∣ners.Diambra, Confectio de granis Tinctoriis. Diarrhd. Abbatis, Aromaticum Rosatum, Triacle with Buglosse water. The great Conserue of our description is very good. Mithridate, confectio de ligno Aloes, electuarium de Hyacyntho, de Gem∣mis, sp. laetificantis Gal. Diacynnamomum, Diamuscum dulce, Dianisum, Diabuglossatum, Diaboraginatum, Diamar∣garitum calidum, Plirisarcoticum. Hippocras, iuyce of Buglosse, the rinds and seeds of preserued Citrines, Zedoaria, Doronicum. Muske, Ambre, Cloues, Nutmeg, Galingale,
the Roses of Hierusalem, Cinamon, Mace, Mints, Rosemary. Thinne plates of gold often heate, and then quenched in strong wine. an epithem of borage water, Baulme, Maioram, sp. Diambrae Diamuscum dulce, wood of Aloes, Orange seeds, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloues, Nutmeg, Vinum aromati∣cum. Diarrhod. abbatis, Diamargaritum frigidum, diatrion sandal. Syr. of the iuyce of Pomegranates, Sorrell, è floribus Persiae. the iuyce of Goose-berries, Camphire, Sandali, pre∣pared Coriander, iuyce of Pomegranates, Limmons, Apples, Quinces. An epitheme of the flowers of water-lillies, Ro∣ses. A bag of the same: whereunto adde Muske, Amber, and Buglosse flowers. A Pomander of the same; whereunto adde waxe and Labanum. An oyntment of the Oyle of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Spike, Saffron, Lignum aloes, Mace, Alipta moschata, and waxe. Baulme, Buglosse, Borage, Corall, Margarita, an Emerauld, Hyacinth, gold, Harte-horne, Vni∣corne horne, Iuory, the bone of the heart of a Hart. They in the first place shall bee vsed, if the diseases cause shalbe a cold distemper; if the disease bee caused by a hote distemper, they in the middle: for both these distempers, Baulme, Carduus benedictus, and Buglosse, and they in the last place may bee vsed. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the panting of the heart. ℞ of the Roots of Angelica, ʒ iii ss, of Buglosse, ℥ i ss. of Maioram, Baulme, Hyssop, ana M i ss. seeds of annise,A Clyster. Fen∣nell, ana ʒ iiij. Carduus benedictus, ʒ i. ss. of the rinds of Oran∣ges, and Limons, ana ʒ i. flowers of Carduus benedictus, M. ss. Senae Alex. ℥ i. rhab. ʒ ii ss. Myrobal. citrinorum, Ind∣rum, ana ʒ i. ss. of Cloues, ʒ ss. boyle these in flesh broth vnto lb i, adde vnto the strayning of the Oyle of sweet Almonds, of Lillies, ana ℥ i ss. Of the powder of Di∣sena. ʒ i.
A Iulep.℞ of the sirupe of sweete Apples, ℥ i. ss, of Buglosse, of the rinds of Oranges, Oxymel. squillit. ana ℥ i. waters of Buglosse, Borage, Carduus benedictus, ana ℥ iiii▪ make hereof three draughts for one morning. A Sirupe.℞ of the iuyce of Borage, Apples, Quinces, Sorrell, flowers of Persia, Pomegranats, ana ℥ ii. of fine Sugar, q. s. Giue ℥ i. ss, hereof with ℥ iiii. of the water of Carduus Be∣nedictus. A Potion.℞ of the roots of Fennell, Parsly, ana ℥ i. of Wormeseed, ʒ iii. of Rosemary, Mints, ana M i. Florum cordialium, M ss. seeds of Carduus benedictus, ʒ i. of Annise, ℥ i ss. of white and light Agaricke, ʒ ii. of Ginger, ℈ i. ss, Polypodij quercini, ʒ vi. senae Alex. ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss. adde to the strayning, Diaturb. cum rhabarb. ʒ vi. sir. of the iuyce of Sor∣rell, ℥ iii. Giue hereof ℥ iiii. in the morning. Pills.℞ Pillul. cochiarum, Agarici trochiscati, Pillul. de Rhab. ana ℈ i. Trochiscorum alhandal, gr. iiii. sirupe of Pomegranats, q. s. make hereof 7. or 8. pills, and giue of them after the first sleepe. A Potion.℞ of the roots of Angelica, Galingale, ana ʒ ii. seeds of Annise, ʒ i. ss, Carduus benedictus, ʒ i. Rhab. electi, ʒ i. ss, infuse these in water of Carduus benedictus, Fumitory, Buglosse q. s. and put them vpon hot embers for the space of 24. houres: then strayne them forth very hard, and adde vnto the stray∣ning, sir. of manifold iufusion of Roses, ℥ iii. Diacath. ʒ vii. drinke this at two times. A draught.℞ Confect. hamech, Electuarij Indi maioris, ana ʒ iii. ss, cor∣ticum myrabol. chebulerum, ʒ i. ss, sir. de Epithymo, Byzantiis, ana ℥ ss, water of Cardui benedictus, Borage, ana ℥ ii, Giue this 6 houres before dinner. ℞ of the best Mithridate, ʒ i. of roots of Angelica, Tri∣acle of Andro. ana ℈ i. roots of Wormeseede,Another. ℈ ss, of Hypo∣cras, ℥ iiii. Giue this the next morning after the patient is pur∣ged. Another.℞ the roots of Angelica, ℥ i. of Cloues, ʒ i. of Cinamon, ʒ ii, ss, infuse these in strong Wine for somefew houres, adde to the
strayning of the best Sugar q s. drinke a draught of this at supper and dinner time. ℞ Sp. Aromaticirofati, Diacinnammomi, ana ʒ ss,Lozenges. Sp. Dia∣masci dulcis, Diambra, ana ℈ ii. Dianisi of the best Sugar dis∣solued in Borage and Buglosse water, ana q. s. ℞ Conserue of Buglosse, Violets, ana ℥ ss, Sp. Diamusco dulcis, old Triacle, electuarij de gemmis, Diarrhod, abbatis,An Elec∣tuary. ana ʒ i. ss, Dianisi, ʒ i. of Cynamon, ℈ i. Sacchari rosacei, ℥ i. sir. of the rinds of Citrines q. s. ℞ of sweet wine, ℥ iiii. dissolue herein of Muske,A Nassall. gr. iiii. of Amber, ℈ss, put a little of it into the nose. ℞ of the water of Sorrell, Moioram, Rosemary, Borage,An Epi∣thime. Buglosse, Baulme ana ℥ iiii. of strong wine, ℥ iii. Sp. Electuarij de gemmis, Diamasci dulcis, Di ambrae, ana ʒ i. ss, Sandalorum, ʒ i. wood of Aloes, Mace, Doronisi, Saffron, ana ℈ ss, of Muske gr. ii. some few drops of Vineger, wash the region of the heart herewith. ℞ of the flowers of Baulme, dryed red Roses, Lauender,A Quilt. Rosemary, Buglosse, Borage Maioram, ana M ss. Bay leaues, no iii. Sandal. citrinorum, Cloues, Mace, Orange-pills, Cina∣mon, wood of Alloes, the bone in the heart of a Hart, Gallioe muschatae, ana ℈ ii, of Amber, Muske, ana gr. i. sew all these in a bag, which must bee made in the forme of a pyramis; when the patient must vse it, moysten it with Rosewater, the water of Buglosse, and sweete wine, appply his vn∣to the region of the heart, to conserue the strength therein contayned. ℞ the oyle of Nard, Lillies, Baulme, ana ℥ ss, of Roses, ℥ iii. seeds of Sorrell, Nutmeg, Cloues, Doronicum, Worme-seed,An Oynt∣ment. Mace, ana ʒ i. ss, of Saffron, gr. iii. of Waxe q. s. anoynt the heart herewith after the vse of the Epitheme. ℞ the oyle of white Lillies, ℥ i. oyle of Tiles, ʒ i. roots of Angelica, ℈i. Aqua vita, and Waxe q, s. anoynt the whole length of the backe-bone herewith, and rub it in with hands well warmed.
An Appendix seruing for the cure of panting of the heart. FIrst, a veine shall bee opened, if the strength will permit, and if the disease be caused by mixed humours or vapors, as commonly it doth happen; then if the body bee euill iuy∣ced, humors must bee made obedient to nature, and then ex∣pelled, but strong purgations must bee here auoyded. Then the offending matter must be brought downe, which may be effected by Clysters, Cupping-glasses, and Frictions. After∣wards the heart must be strengthned, and the distemper a∣mended. If the disease bee caused by Wormes, kill them, or expell them as shall hereafter bee declared. If by moysture in the hearts case, he must vse such meats as will breed good blood. If it be caused by the stomacke, twice in euery weeke he must take Hierae picrae Gal. ℈ i. ss before supper. If it bee caused by consent of an other member, the parts affected must first bee cured, then those medicines must bee admini∣stred which doe strengthen the heart and braine. A method seruing for the knowledge of SYNCOPE or SWOVNDING. SYncope is a sudden failing of the strength, and it comes neere vnto death, because it is the beginning of natures dissolution; faintnesse of heart goes before swounding, which is called in Latine Lypothymia, with which faintnesse there is no sweate, but the extreme parts of the body waxe cold with a sudden fayling of strength; and then eyther the spi∣rits are dissolued, or by some other meanes hurt, but the vitall spirit is not altogether dissolued. But beside the animall faculties, sometimes the heart, and the vitall fa∣culties are hurt, the heart cannot bee primarily sayd to bee hurt, although the other forces and faculties of the body
are hurt hereby. For all the parts of the body do sympathize with the heart, and by the hearts peculiar temper, or dis∣temper, doe performe, or else fayle in their actions. The part affected. Heere the heart is affected, as may appeare by the sudden failing of all the strength of the body, and smalnes, and weaknes of the pulse, and coldnes of the extreme parts. It is an accident belonging to the action of al the faculties hurt, and chiefly the vital faculties. The heart sometimes is affect∣ed by it selfe, when as no other affect went before, nor any signe of any other affected part could be discerned; which doth happen eyther in regard of the grear distemper there∣of, or else by reason of some venemous humours; sometime by an inflamation or tumour raised by some humour, and then for the most part they die suddenly therewith; some∣time it is caused by the consent of some other part, as the stomacke; and then it is called the stomacks swounding: the like may be sayd of all the other parts. The Signes. The patients face looks as though he were dead, because the blood flyes inward: the extreme parts of the body, by reason of faintnes, and loosnes of the body, doe wax cold; their sweate is ill sauoured by reason of the dissolution of the solid parts. Anxiety of mind suddenly arises and disturbs them; and then the heart fayles them, insomuch that the body being fast asleepe, is depriued both of sence and motion, and not one part hath so much force, as to performe any acti∣on. Visions appeare before their eyes, when the fit doth seize on them: they are suddenly speechlesse, and their breath is almost stopped their eylids fall, their pulse is thinne, obscure, and almost extinct. The Causes. It is caused by great watching, anger, sadnes, anxiety of mind great feare sharpe paine, sharpe and long Feauers.
Too much emptines of the body by fasting, sweating, labour∣ing, vomiting, emptying the belly by stools, or sudden eua∣cuation of water in a dropsy; for hereby immoderate eua∣cuations, and resolutions of the spirits are caused, by which means the heart cannot but be greatly ouerthrowne. Also it is caused by plenty of grosse, raw, putrified, sharpe and biting humours; the latter of these do pinch and bite the stomacks mouth; and the former doth stop the spirits wayes, so that their passage is intercepted. Neither may it seeme strange that the spirits can bee intercepted; for great plenty of hu∣mours is contayned in the lungs pipes, so that the patient cannot draw breath. Sometimes it is caused by the corrup∣tion of the ayre without vs, and venemous humours with∣in vs; also inflamation, or many things which may corrupt and alter the temperature of the heart, stomacke, or spi∣rits, and by that meanes cause a swounding, because the whole life, and strength of the body doth consist in the per∣fect constitution of those parts. The spirits being after the former manner hurt, do hurt likewise the other principall parts, and all appertaining thereto, and by that meanes vitiate a good and wholsome temper, whereby a swound∣ing very dangerous, and sometime mortall, followes, and that for the most part with great sweate. And this accident doth as it were inwrapt the best of the parts a dying. Also those forces do suddenly faile, which had dependance on the spirits, and solid parts temper. In conclusion, eyther the want of spirits, or their alteration and corruption, or the destruc∣tion of the solid parts temper, also long and sharpe diseases, do cause swounding. Prognostiques. If when they are in a swound, the head doth fall vpon the shoulders, and they neither breathe neither doth their pulse beate, & the face appeares greene, or of a leaden hiew, and if a sneezing medicine will no whit preuayle, present death is at hand. They who oft and suddenly swound, are in danger to die suddenly, when the causes of swounding are not strong;
they often cause but a quaking; if very strong, then a swoun∣ding; and if they grow stronger and stronger, they kil the patient. A swounding procured by the affections of the mind, is not mortall, if the strength do not fayle. And euen as swounding caused by the braines distemper, is more dange∣rous then that which is caused by the distemper of the liuer; in like manner, if it be caused by the distemper of the heart, it is more dangerous then if it were caused by the braines, or stomacks distemper. A method seruing for the cure of SYNCOPE or SWOVNDING. THe ayre must bee temperate, for hote or cold aire doth offend: his chamber must bee somewhat lightsome; and his meate easy of digestion, as flesh-broth and ptisan; his drinke must bee small wine, and Barley-water with a little Oxymel in the beginning of the disease for some few dayes: honied water may be giuen, wherein one or two handfuls of Hyssop haue beene boyled. Exercise & motion must be auoy∣ded, & rest permitted. His sleepe must be no longer then vsual∣ly it was wont to be. If swounding be caused by great paine, or labour, too much hunger, or of sore accidents of mind, he may sleepe longer. But a care ought to be had that a Phy∣sicion stand by, and obserue the patient in his sleeping and waking; for if while hee wake, his pulse, colour of his face, and breathing bee better or settled, his sleepe shall be broken: but those accidents being better while he sleepes, hee may continue sleeping; all perturbation of the mind must be auoy∣ded, and hee should giue himselfe vnto mirth. Syrupe of Orange-peels,Preparers. syr. Byzantinus. syr. of the iuyce of Pomegranates; syr. of Apples, Oxymel. simplex & Com∣positum. Oxy. saccharum Acetosus simplex. sirupes of Vio∣lets, Lemmons, Roses, Peaches, Quinces, the iuce of Endiue. de acetositate Citri, de pemis. Water of Borage, Buglosse, Violets, Roses, Sorrell. In a cold cause the former shall bee vsed, in hote the latter.
Emptiers.If swounding be caused by plenty of blood, a veine shalbe opened. Manna, Agaricke, Cassia, Diaphaenicum, rhab. Pillul. Alephang. Tamarind. A gentle clyster. A vomit with hote wa∣ter, syr. Acetoso sinplici, common Oyle: when it is caused of slymy phlegme, or rotten humours inclosed in the stomacke, or when there is suspition of poyson, the vomit shalbe giuen the second time. Strong purgers are not here fit, neither is opening a veine. Auerters.A veine shalbe opened. Frictions as well in the time of the fit, as out of it, from the shoulder downeward with a rough linnen cloth, and also the backe-bone shalbe so handled. The tongue shalbe rubd with Mithridate, and Triacle▪ Liga∣tures of the Armes & Legs, that the spirits thereby may be cal∣led to the outward parts, which before had taken sanctuary, euen the heart. Cupping-glasses, iniections of cold water, or Rose-water vpon the face, whereto some Vineger shalbe added, by this meanes also the spirits will come vnto the out∣ward parts. But this shal not be vsed, if the disease bee cau∣sed by loosnes of the belly, or by a cold cause: loud outcries and roarings must bee made about the patient; sneezing me∣dicines shalbe administred, if it be caused by a suffocation; or if it be caused by crushing of the Mouth, Nose, Fingers, and Hands. Frictions and Ligatures shall not bee vsed, if it be caused by too much euacuation: for then it is to be feared, that those spirits, which remaine about the heart, would bee brought out, and so dissolued. To these therefore rest is good, and at certaine times a draught of strong wine is good. Strength∣ners.Diamuscum dulce, Diambra, Triacle, Mithridate. Ele∣ctuarium de Gemmis, aromaticum Rosatum, diatrium pipe∣reon. Oyle of Chinamon, extracted by Cgimicall arte. syr. of Orange pilles, strong wine. An epitheme for the heart of Cloues, Sffron, Cinamon, Muske, Lignum aloes, Am∣ber, Orange pilles, the water of Rosemary, Roses, Me∣lissae, Maioram, and sweet wine. An oyntment of the Oyles of Cammomill, Dill, white Lillies, the backe-bone and
limbs shalbe anoynted herewith. An odour of the wood Aloes, Orange-peels, Citrangle flowers, Amber, Muske, Vineger, the waters of Roses, Maioram, and Melissae. A quilt of Cloues, Cinnamon, Lignum aloes, Orange-peeles, dry Roses, Saffron, Muske, flower of Rosemary, Maioram, Melissae, Serpilli. An emplaister of Barley-flowers, the fruite of Palme Trees, Masticke; Aloes, Saffron, Wine. Syrupe of Lemmons, Saccharum rosarum, Violarum, Diamargaritum frigidum, Diatrion sandali, Conserue of Buglosse, Oxysac∣charum, Dìabuglossatum. A potion of the decoction of Wormwood. An epitheme for the heart; of the wood Aloes, sp. sandalorum, Saffron, the bone of the heart of a hart, Orange-peels, Muske, red Corrall, water of Roses, Sorrell, Bo∣rage, Melissae, strong wine: a quilt of the wood Aloes, Sandalis Amber, Saffron, Orange-peeles, flowers of Roses, Violets, Borage, Water-lillies, Melissophylli. An odour ex sandal. Orange-peels, Red-corrall, Vineger, Muske, the waters of Water-lillies, Roses, Myrtle. If the disease bee caused by a cold matter, they in the first may be giuen; if by a hote matter, they in the latter place are good. But epithemes and vnctions shal not be vsed vnder the left teate. A more particular method seruing for the cure of SINCOPE or SWOVNDING. ℞ of the Roots of Angelica,A Clyster. Orange-peels ana ʒ vi. leaues of Maioram, Sorrell, Melissae, ana M i. flowers of Woodrowell, p i. of white and light agaricke ʒ iij, rab. ʒ ii, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning, Diacath. ʒ vii, Oyles of Roses, Lillies ana ℥ i ss. of Malmsey ℥ iiij. ℞ syr. of Orange-peels, Mellis rosati Colati,A Iulep. syr. Byzan∣tini, ana ℥ i. waters of Borage, Melissa, ana ℥ iiij, of sweet wine ℥ iij. ℞ syr. Actosi ℥ i ss,A vomit. of hote water ℥ vi. mixe these for a vomit.
A draught.℞ Diaphaenic. ʒ vi. Cassia, ʒ v. the water of Borage, ℥ iii. A Potion.℞ of the roots of Fennell, Parsely, ana ℥ i. of the roots of Angelica, ʒ iii, leaues of Melissa, the flowers of Borage, and Buglosse, ana M i. Orange pills, ℥ i. seeds of Annise, Licorice, ana ʒ v. of white and light Agaricke, ʒ ii. of Ginger, ʒ ss, rhab. ʒ i. of Nutmeg, Cinamon, ana ℈ ii. boyle these in water q. s. vn∣to lb i. adde to the strayning sirupe Byzantini, ℥ ii. of Orange pills, ℥ i. Diaphaenic. ʒ vii. A draught.℞ Diaphaenic. ℥ ss, Agaricitrochiscati. ʒ ss, rhab. Electi. ℈ i. of the decoction of the roots of Angelica, Maioram, Mellis∣sa, Orange pills, Nutmeg, ℥ iiii. Another.℞ of Mithridate, ʒ i. of Triacle Andromachus, ʒ ss, sirupe of Orange pills, ℥ ss, water of Carduus benedictus, Melissa, An∣gelica, ana ℥ iii. Giue this the next day after the patient is pur∣ged. It is good also when as poyson is suspected to lurke in the body. Bolus.℞ of Cassia, ʒ vi. Rhab. electi. Agarici trochiscati, ana ℈ ii. of Cinamon, gr. xii. sir. of Mints q. s. Pills.℞ Pillul. alephanginarum, ℈ ii. Agarici trochiscati, ℈ i. Rhab. electi. ℈ ss, sir. of the iuyce of Sorrell q. s. make 7. or 8. pills hereof. An Elec∣tuary.℞ Diambrae, Diamusci dulcis, ana ʒ ii. Sp. latificantis Gal. ʒ i. Aromatici rosati. Gal. ℈ iiii. sir. of Mints q. s. hereof the patient may take ʒ i. with ℥ iiii. of sweete wine, sixe houres before dinner. A powder.℞ Sp. latificantis Gal. electuarij de gemmis, ana ℈ i. ss, Aro∣matici rosati, Cinamon, Nutmeg, ana ℈i. Orange pills, ℈ i. ss, of Cloues, gr. xii. Giue this with broth, or any other nutri∣ments. A draught.℞ of Orange pills, ℥ i. of Nutmeg, ʒ i. ss, of Cloues, Cina∣mon, ana ʒ i. infuse these for the space of 24, houres in Malm∣sey▪ lb i. then strayne it forth, and adde to the strayning of the finest Sugar q. s. drinke one draught hereof at dinner and supper.
℞ Sp. Diamusci dulcis, ʒ ss, Plirisarcotici,Lozenges. ℈ i. Electuarij de gemmis, Cloues, Orange pills, ana ℈ ss, of the finest Sugar, dissolued in the water of Mints q. s. Giue of these often in one day. ℞ of Orange-pills, Cinamon, Nutmeg, ana ʒ i. of Ma∣sticke, Cloues, ana ʒ ss, of the best Mithridate, ʒ i. ss,An Elec∣tuary. E∣lectuarij de gemmis, ℈ ii. Conserue of Buglosse ℥ i, con∣serue of Rosemary-flowers, ℥ ss, syrupe of sweete Apples q. s. ℞ of Cloues, Cinnamon, ana, ℈ii. of the bone of the heart of a Hart, ʒ i. Orange-peels, Ligni Aloes,An Epi∣theme. ana ℥ i. of Roses, M i. Sp. Electuarij laetificantis Gal. ʒ ii. of Muske, Saffron, ana gr. iii. of sweete Wine, ℥ vi. the waters of Baulme, Carduus benedictus, Maioram, Buglosse, Malmsey, ana ℥ iiii. make of these an Epitheme for the region of the heart. ℞ Oyle of Cammomile, white Lillies ana ʒ iii. Electuarii de gemmis, Orange-peels, ana ℈ ss, Cinnamon water ʒ i.ss,A Oynt∣ment. a little quantity of Waxe, and vse it about the region of the heart. ℞ Ligni aloes, Cinnamon, Cloues, Orange-peeles,A Quilt. ana ʒ i. of Saffron, gr. xii. flowers of Roses, ℈ ii. of Rosemary, Baulme, Maioram, ana ʒ ss, after the heart hath beene anoyn∣ted with the former oyntment, then this shall bee applyed to the same place. It must bee layd hot thereto, and sometimes be moystned with strong wine. ℞ oyles of Nutmeg, Masticke, Lillies,An Oynt∣ment. ana ʒ iii. of Cammo∣mile, ℥ ss. of Cinnamon, Cloues, ana ℈ ss, anoynt the backe∣bone herewith.
An Appendix seruing for the cure of the SYN∣COPE or SWOVNDING. IF swounding be caused by humors stopping the passages, a gentle Clyster shall be first giuen, and the humors shall be then made obedient vnto nature, when the strength is some∣what restored; and then they shall bee brought forth by a gentle purge, but such purging medicines as doe resolue the vitall spirits, shall not bee administred. Then auerting medi∣cines shall bee vsed, and in the meane time the heart shall bee strengthned by inward and outward medicines. If swounding be caused by too much euacuation of blood, let him rest in his bed, and in the time of the fitte some Rosewater, or else riuer water shalbe cast in his face, by which meanes he may be stir∣red vp: also in the fitte the fingers shall bee wrung, to cause paine, and sneezing medicines be giuen for the same purpose. His mouth and nose must be stopped, that the breath may be kept in, for finding no way out, they doe returne in againe, and so stirre vp the vitall spirits. If it be caused by a long dis∣ease, because the spirits are consumed, things that nourish much, shall bee giuen; if from venomous vapors generated in the body, the great conserue of our description is good: for this helps all such diseases that are caused by ill vapors bred in the body: also it is an excellent antidote against al Feauers intermittent and rouing, against worms, or conuulsions. For this doth destroy the feminaries of this disease, and doth preserue the vitall spirits, and radicall moistnes, or the lifes subiect: also it is accounted for a very good remedy to pre∣uent diseases. If the stomacke, too much oppressed by sharpe humours, shall cause swounding, an oyntment shalbe made for the stomacke, of the Oyle of Roses, Quinces, Myrtle. If after a purging medicine, a swounding happens, giue to the patient of new Triacle ℈iiij, if the Triacle bee old, adde
thereto opij gr. ii. of strong wine ℥ iij: the patient must drinke this off at one time. If the disease be caused by suffocation of the matrix, odours shall not be applied to the nose, otherwise it may be lawfull. A method seruing for the knowledge of CHOLERA, or Choler. CHoler is an immoderate perturbation of the stomacke and bowels, wherein maligne humors breake forth vp∣ward and downeward: this disease is often so vehement, that it doth depriue a man of life within the space of a day or two, euen without a Feauer; or else in few days the substance of the body being consumed by vomits, and stooles; for ex∣crements ofentimes come downe with such force, that the spirits are also expelled with the humours: from whence thirst, faintings of the heart, and a languishing of the strength, at the length sweating, and death succeeds. This name is giuen to the disease, from the matter and efficient cause hereof. The part affected. The vpper and lower part of the stomacke is affected primarily; for the bowels are affected by the stomacks dis∣burdening it selfe through them. The signes which make knowne that these parts are affected, are vomit and eua∣cuation, paine in the bowels, a great wringing in the mouth of the stomacke, and a distention caused by windines. It is an accident that appertaines vnto the hurt of the action of the expulsiue faculty. The Signes. Cholericke, sowre and stinking geere is voyded vp∣ward and downeward for the space of many houres, as though the patient had drunke great store of such stuffe: and first more liquid, and lesse maligne stuffe is expelled, then
grosser and more coloured; for sometimes it doth appeare of citrine colour, then greene, sometimes blacke. At the first this disease is slight enough, but at the last, a paine and straightnes is felt in the stomacke, and vpper bowels, with a troublesome sweate ouer the whole body, whereby the patient is faint, his pulse is thicke, quicke, and little, and at the last falls quite away. When the disease doth increase, the muscles of the Legs, Hands, and Armes, are conuulsed, and it is an accident, most proper vnto this disease, and the rather if that the disease doth increase. At the length death doth seize vpon the patient, with swounding, and cold sweate, The Causes. It is caused for the most part by choller, whereof great store is gathered together in all the body, or in the galls blad∣der, or in the liuer, mesentary, or bowels, or in some part of the whole body, which in time is stayned with some maligne and venemous humour, which, if it bee cast vpon the sto∣macke by the surcharged part, by reason of the abundance thereof, is very offensiue vnto nature, and againe, the maligne quality, and the fretting of the mouth of the stomacke is troublesome vnto nature, wherefore it is driuen to and fro in the body, and at the length is voyded as was before specified. This disease is likewise caused by naughty and corrupt nutriments, or other humours putrified with choller in the body. Prognostiques. This is a sharp disease, and the strength in a short time is very much dissolued, for which cause present remedy is requi∣site. This is a dangerous disease vnto old men, though it doth but seldome seize on them; then is the danger greatest, when the patient doth sweate, and vomit, or when hee is trou∣bled with swounding, and that which is vomited forth, hath
an euill smell: for when eyther that which is voyded by vo∣mit or stoole hath no good sauour, and when the pulses faile with the strength; and the extreme parts are cold, then the disease is mortail; yet there is some hope▪ if the vo∣mit bee stayed, and the patient sleepe well. This euill sometimes turnes into heate of vrine, the matter being driuen downe into the bladder. A method seruing for the cure of CHO∣LERA, or CHOL∣LER. THe ayre must bee somewhat cold, and bright; for hu∣mours and spirits are disquieted by heate, and great light. He may eate ree Egges, Hens, Hares, Pigeons, Larks, Partridges, Turtles, and Fawnes. If he be strong▪ a little quan∣tity of meate must suffice him, and it would be better if he could forbeare eating for the space of two dayes. Hee may drinke strong wine, but it must also be thinne, that it may pierce the better; in this wine also thin plates of gold should bee quenched. The disease hath beene asswaged by this only remedy. In the beginning of the disease he must drinke but little, but he must wash his mouth with the iuyce of Pome∣granates and Quinces. Rest of the body must bee procured; and if he haue a desire to vomit, hee must vse such things as may cause a gentle vomit; he must sleepe only in the night season; passions of the mind, as anger, sadnes, and thoughts must be shunned. A Clyster of common Oyle, the water of Barley, Violets,Emptiers. red Sugar, the yeolke of an egge; when the Clyster hath done wor∣king, the patient may drinke a good draught of Barley-waters these must be often reiterated, that the sharp & biting matter may
bee qualified. A vomit with hot water of Barley, Oxymel simp. or the sirupe of the iuyce of Sorrell, or the decoction of Radish with Sugard water, wherein Cummin, and Niter haue beene boyled. He may drinke great store of this, for so the retentiue faculty being surcharged with too great a bur∣den, stirres vp the expulsiue. The patient may put his finger into his mouth, or dippe a feather in oyle, and thrust it downe his throate, that hee may with the more speed and ease vomit. Before any other medicine be giuen, he shall vse this often, and take hereof a great quantity. If the diseases cause be cold, then Cinamon may be vsed; if hot, then Su∣gar. Syr. rosati laxatinui, Pillulae de Hiera picra, Pillula aromaticae in a cold cause. Cassia fistula, Aloes, Manna, rhab. Decoction of Myrobal. If the offending matter may bee brought downe to the lower parts, Clysters or other pur∣ging medicines may be vsed; for hereby nature is easily hel∣ped. But vomit must bee furthered whilest the patient hath a propension that way, and yet cannot freely vomit. But strong vomits and loosenesse must bee eschewed, for hereby the stomacke may be too much weakened; and againe if the humors bee apt enough of themselues to bee voyded by vomit, then vomiting must bee hindred, and the corrupt matter shall rather bee euacuated, and voyded at the lower parts. Auerters.Painefull Ligatures of the hips and elbows, as also strong Frictions of those parts, and afterwards gentler. Cupping-glasses shall be fastned to the backe, shoulders, blade-bone, and the middle region betweene the nauell & stomacke: some∣time they may be applyed to the region of the liuer, & spleene, but they must not remaine thereon long, lest they stir vp too much paine. Also sweats shalbe caused, if strengh do remayne. A bath of hot water is also good, if the strength will permit, & when the concoction is perfect; but hee must not remaine long in it, least his strength bee ouerthrowne. If the matter be not too maligne, these medicines may be vsed, especially if he goe too often to the stoole.
Syrupe of dry Roses, of the iuyce of Pomegranats,Strength∣ners. Lem∣mons, Quinces, Oranges, Aquamensalis of our description. Rosata nouella, Daicodium, Troch. de Olibano. Orange-rinds preserued, the pulse of Quinces without the seeds, con∣serue of Roses, the iuyce of Crabs, three-leaued grasse, eyther applied outwardly, or else taken inwardly: and if they be layd vnto the stomacke, a double linnen cloth must be layd vp∣on them. A cup of cold water: and he must drinke of other drinke sparingly. Strong red wine may be permitted, but water wherein steele hath beene quenched, shall bee mixed therewith. A Clyster of the decoction of the heads of white Poppy, to which Amylum must be added. This hinders the motion of the humours, and doth prouoke sleepe. Cold water must be suddenly cast vpon the face of the patient, and this wil hinder voluntary vomiting: or else if we perceiue the patient inclining to vomiting, astringent fomentations shall bee vsed, for these wil quickly worke. An oyntment of the Oyle of Myrtle, Violets, Roses, Quinces, Worm∣wood, Mints, Mastike, Narde, flowers of Pomegranates, Hypocistide, red Roses, bole Armony, Sanguine Draconis, Frankincense, Sandals, Masticke, Acacïa, Corrall, Rh obsaniorum; a cataplasme of the former matters; a dropax of Pitch, and Oyle of Quinces, hinder vomiting. Ceratum stomachicum Gal. is good for the same purpose, in a cold cause. Emplastrum diaphaenicum, with crummes of bread, Em∣plastrum Mesuae for the stomacke, Mastichinum. These do bind the common passages, and do thicken the humours, and strengthen the stomacke and bowels, that the humours runne not too fast thither. Wee must not vse these, before the humors are corrupted, or else are voyded by stoole or vo∣mit, vnlesse there be danger of swounding, or conuulsion. For although the voyding of them be good, yet if it doth outstrip a meane, it is not without danger, because by too much casting downe of the strength, death doth presently attend, and seize on the patient. Locall medicines in this disease are best, for they that are taken inward, the belly
being troubled, are presently cast out, but when the disease is somewhat slackned, then medicines taken inward are pre∣ualent: in conclusion first of all the belly may bee kept loose, but the vomiting must be stopped, vntill it doth appeare that the humors are well expelled. Correctors of acci∣dents.Red wine, austere and fragrant; also strong wine that is allayed with water, is good, sirupe of Quince, an emplay∣ster of Roses, sandalis, Quinces, Vineger, this must be apply∣ed to the stomack. An oyntment of the oyles of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Flower-de-luce, Violets, Mans-fat, Beauer-stone. A Fomentation of the shrunke parts, with the same oyles, or else a Liniment consisting of hot oyles, may bee layd a∣bout the shrunke parts. A bath also of the same oyles is good for the conuulsed parts. A decoction of Lettuce, Gourd, En∣diue, Cowcumber, common water boyled, wherevnto sir. of Quinces, dry Roses, Oranges must be added. Sirupe of Pome∣granats, Quinces; also the iuyces of these, sir. of Roses, a Clyster with water, wherein Endiue, Lettuce, the heads of white Poppy, and Amylum haue beene boyled. They in the first place hinder the hicket, they in the middle helpe the conuulsion, they in the last place quench thirst, and procure sleepe. A more particular method seruing for the cure of CHOLERA, or CHO∣LER. A Clyster.℞ of clensed Barley, M ii. ss. leaues of Violets, Centory the lesse, Wormwood, Mints, flowers of Cammomile, Melli∣lot, ana M i. of white and light Agaricke, ana ʒ ii. rhab. electi, ʒ i. ss, Polypodij queroini, ʒ iii. boyle these in water q. s. vn∣to lb i. adde to the strayning, of the oyle of Rew, Cammo∣mile, ana ℥ i. ss, of strong wine, ℥ iii. Diacath. ʒ iii. A Vomit.℞ syr. Acetosi simp. ℥ ii. of the decoction of Barley, Ra∣dish, Figs, ℥ vi. The patient must take this off lukewarme,
and if he vomit with great paine, nature shall bee helped by a purging medicine. ℞ Rhab. electi. ʒ i. sirupe of Mints, ℥ i, Spike,A draught. gr. iii. water of Mints, ℥ iii. ℞ Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, Rhab. electi, ana ʒ i, ss,Another. of Spike, gr. iii. sirupe of Succory with Rhab. ℥ ss, wa∣ter of Woormwood, ℥ iii. this must bee giuen, if it may bee discerned that the corrupt humour is fallen downe, and the best way to bring them downeward, is by Cly∣sters. ℞ leaues of Violets, M i. of Roses, M ss, seeds of Purslane,A Potion. Plantane, ana ʒ i. flowers and rinds of Pomegranats, seeds of Barberies, ana ʒ ii. ss, Mirabol. citrinorum, ℥ i. of the best Cinamon, ℈ i. ss. Boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde vnto ℥ iiii. of the strayning, Rhab. electi, ʒ ss, sirupe of Roses, ℥ ss. ℞ sirupe of Quinces, Roses, ana ℥ i. ss, of Myrtle,A Sirupe. ℥ i. Cina∣mon, Nutmeg, ana ℈ ss, giue hereof two spoonefuls at a time, he may vse it very often, especially when the belly is loosned by too much moystnesse. ℞ sirupe de Agresta, Mints, ana ℥ i. ss,Another. iuyce of Pomegra∣nats, ℥ i. he must take ℥ i. hereof with ℥ iii. of Cinamon wa∣ter, twice or thrice in a day. ℞ Sacchari rosati, Conserue of old Roses, ana ℥ i. ss,An Elec∣tuary. pulpe of Quinces, ℥ i. of red Corrall, ℈ ii, ss, the rinds of preserued Oranges, ℥ ss, Harts-horne burnt, Bole Armony, ana ℈ i. ss sir. of the iuyce of sowre Orange, of the sir. wherein Mira∣bol. Citrini haue beene conserued q. s. this may be vsed, when the humors are somewhat voyded. ℞ leaues of Wormwood, dry Mints,A Fomen∣tation. ana M i. of red Roses, Cammomile, ana M ii. ss, flowers and rinds of Pome∣granats, ana ʒ ii. seeds of Myrtle, ℥ i. Sandalorum Rubro∣rum, ʒ ii. boyle these in a sufficient quantity of Wine, vn∣till the third part be consumed, and wash the stomacke here∣with. ℞ the oyles of Myrtle, Quinces, Roses, ana ℥ ss,An Oynt∣ment. of
Wormwood, Mints, ana ʒ ii. ss, seeds of Roses, Bole Armony, Frankincense, ana ℥ i. anoynt the stomacke herewith mor∣ning and euening: this doth strengthen the stomacke by its astringent power. An Oynt∣ment.℞ Cerati stomachici Mesuae, ℥ i. ss, of Masticke, Frankin∣cense, ana ʒ i. of red Corrall, Gallingale, Sandalì albi, red Roses, ana ℈ i. the flowers of Pomegranats, dry Mints, Wormwood, ana ℈ ss. oyle of Nard, Masticke, Roses, ana q. s. dippe a cloth in these, and apply it to the sto∣macke. A powder.℞ of Wormewood, Spike, Mints, Nard, ana ℈ ss, of red Roses, Cammomile, ana ʒ i. of Frankincense, ʒ i. ss, of Bole Armony, ʒ ss, sprinkle this powde vpon the sto∣macke, after it hath beene anoynted with the former oynt∣ment. An Em∣playster.℞ of Mint, Trifolij, Wormewood, ana M i. ss, red Ro∣ses, M i. of Cinnamon, Mace, ana ʒ ss, Troch. de Olibano, ʒ i. of bread tosted, and sopped in strong Wine, and some Vineger ℥ ii. or else dissolue Masticke, with the white of an Egge: adde vnto these, crummes of white bread, which are macerated in strong Wine, and a little Vine∣ger. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the CHO∣LERICKE PASSION. IN the beginning of the disease, when as it may be discer∣ned, that the offending humour is falling downe into the lower parts, and that the strength doth begin to fayle, a con∣uenient purging medicine shall bee giuen, wherevnto such things shall be added, as may mitigate the sharpnesse of the humors, namely Cassia fistula, Manna, Rhab. If the patient doe not vomit freely, some broth of a Chicken shall bee gi∣uen vnto him, or else Barley-water, or hot water where∣in
Annise and Cummine-seeds haue beene boyled: here∣vnto a small quantity of the syr. of acetosus simp. must bee added. Vnto the former vomiting medicines Oyles must not by any meanes bee added, because they do loosen the strength of the bowels and stomacke: care ought to be had that vomiting, and going vnto the stoole bee not at one and the same time, because it is dangerous to voyd the matter two manner of wayes. Therefore if the patient bee troubled with vomit, the matter shalbe drawne down∣wards by a Clyster. But when the matter is almost eua∣cuated, which may easily be done in 24 houres, then such things must be vsed, as may turne the humors into the stomacke; this may be effected by a Clyster, wherein such things shalbe put, that do lessen the sharpnes of the hu∣mours. Ligatures and frictions, and other meanes formerly specified will effect the like; at the length the flux of the humors may be stopped by astringent medicines, and the bowels and stomacke may therewith be strengthned, and because grieuous accidents do follow this disease, especially care ought to be had of the cure hereof, that it may be done with speed, and with a direct method; otherwise swound∣ing, and failing of strength are like to ensue. A method seruing for the knowledge of SINGVLTVS, or HICKET. SIngultus, or hicket, is a violent and vehement motion of the stomacke, whereby it doth endeauor to expell such things as do rest in the tunicles and in the body, and also such as do sticke fast thereto. But nature labours not by this conuulsiue motion to driue out those things which are containd in the hollownes of the stomack; for these are rather auoyded by vomit; and though it bee of the same kind as vomit is, yet by the hicket the stomacke is more violently moued then by vomit, because they that lie hid in the body, are with more difficulty driuen out, then
those that roue in the empty roomes of the body; for hu∣mors stuffed within the tunicles of the stomacke, disturbing the body with heate, coldnes, or biting, doe rather cause a desire to vomit then a yexing, so that they do not bite too vehemently. But a hicket is rather stird vp then vomit, when the humors bite strongly. The part affected. Sometimes the mouth of the stomacke, sometimes the whole stomacke, and it is an accident which appertaines vnto the hurt of the action of the retentiue and expulsiue faculty. Sometimes it is caused only by the default of the stomacke, sometime by the default of the liuer, as it happens in the inflamation of the liuer. In burning Feauers the whole body is in fault. The Signes. It comes often, and then for the most part by fits, that euen as the cough doth with a swounding, so this disease may voyd offending humours. The cause of the swounding in these diseases, is the straightnes of the passage of the ayre, which is contained in the stomacke. Causes. It is often caused by fulnes and superfluous muoisture, for thereby they are eyther loaded, or in a manner shrunke toge∣ther, which will appeare by signes of fulnes. Sometime it is caused by sharpe biting humours, whose maligne qua∣lity doth in a manner pricke the stomacke: this is knowne by their former diet: and if they cast this humour vp by vo∣mit, they are freed hereof. It is also caused by too much cooling the mouth of the stomacke; for seeing the body is sinewy, it is so thickned by cold, that such humors as get into them, cannot so easily get out againe: hereby fulnes is caused, & from thence yexing: and pernicious vapors being deriued to the mouth of the stomacke, do disturbe a man with a vehement hicket; as burning and pestilent agues can testify Also inflamation of the liuer, stomacke, and bowels do breed this disease, Sometimes it comes by corruption
of food in the belly, or neighbouring part, when as it doth beget a biting quality, sometimes it is caused by slymy phlegme fastned to the tunicles of the stomacke. Sometime by too much empitnes, and drynes, as it doth happen in great heats, and long feauers, which do pine away the body. It is also caused by too frequent going to stoole. It is also caused by too much emptines of blood, as happens in the immoderate flux of monethly termes, as also in the bloody flix, or by great wounds or immoderate vomitings, or long fasting. Those then that went before, wil tell vs whether the hicket come by emptines, or no. Prognostiques. When the hicket is caused by fulnes, if a sneezing come withall, the patient will soon be rid thereof: a hicket com∣ming vpon such that are troubled with wringing in the guts, commonly called in Latine Iliaca passio, is an euill signe. If a hicket follow doting, swounding, or conuulsion, it is mortall. Also if it followes an inflamation of the Liuer, Braine, Wombe, or or a great wound, it is dangerous; and for the most part it doth threaten death. Also in sharpe dis∣eases, burning, and pestilentiall Feauers, it is deadly: and if it bee caused by too much emptines, it is alwayes an euill signe; it is also bad, if it come vpon a vomit; because it doth threaten inflamation of the stomacke, and braine. If do∣ting or conuulsion doe follow the hicket, it is dangerous, if not mortall. A method seruing for the cure of SINGVLTVS, or HICKET. A Temperate ayre is best; but if it comes by cold humors, as it doth commonly, his ayre must bee hote and dry, his meate must be such as may heate and dry, and therefore may be sawed with Ginger, Cloues, Nutmeg, Pepper, and Galingale; a little quantity of strong wine may bee per∣mitted.
Preparers.Sirupe de duabus radicibus, of Staechas, Oxysaccharum sim∣plex. Oxymel simplex, Squilliticum, Mel rosatum, Mellicra∣tum, made with Hyssop, Acetum squilliticum. A decocti∣on of the Roots of Asarum, Galingale, Elecampane, Hyssop, Hore-hound, Calamint, Smallage, Penny-royall, and Cummin seed. Syrupe of Epithymon, of Thyme; syr. of Ap∣ples, Fumitary, water of Fumitary, Hops, Scolopendria. Syr. of Violets, Roses. syr. Acetosus simplex, of the iuyce of Endiue. The waters of Barley, Violets, Carduus bene∣dictus, Endiue and hote water. If the disease last long, the disease by these must bee concocted, before it bee euacuated by vomit or purgation. The former of these medicines shalbe vsed, if the disease be caused by slymy, and Phlegmy humours; the second sort may be vsed, if by melancholy hu∣mours, & the third sort shalbe vsed, if it be caused by short humors, deeply inclosed in the tunicles of the stomacke. Emptiers.A vomit with the warme water of the decoction of Bar∣ley, wherewith syr. of Endiue, Oxymel simp. or Squilliticum shalbe mingled: this is an excellent remedy, if the humors fly vpward; otherwise we may vse lenitiue Clysters, or take purgations at the mouth; the patient must hold the vo∣mit, after hee hath drunke it, for then the matter will the better be fetched out. Diaphaenicon, diacydonites solutiuus: Hiera picra; syr. of manifold infusion of Roses; Pillula aromaticae, Stomachicae Cocciae, whereto, if the disease bee caused by a cold matter, Castoreum may be added. Rhab, infusum, Manna, Cassia. These may be vsed, if the disease be caused by slymy and biting humours: but they may not bee permitted, if it be caused by emptines: for then, though it bee almost incureable, good nourishment will proue the best physicke. Auerters.Clysters are good almost in all causes; painfull ligatures, and frictions of the extreme parts must bee vsed, the middle finger of the right hand must be crushed. Cupping-glasses must be fastned to the backe, neere vnto the twelfth Ver∣tebra, shoulders, and nauill; afterward to the mouth of
the stomacke, with great store of flame; for this is very preualent, if the disease be caused by windines. Sneezing is good, for by shaking of the head, the belly, and whole body, the matter inclosed is often stirred, and so cast out. Meanes must bee vsed to affright the patient suddenly, and vna∣wares cold water should be cast in his face. The patient shall likewise hold his breath, if it be caused by windines, or a cold humour, and cold distemper of the stomacke; blis∣ters shalbe raised, if the disease cease by applying Cupping-glasses. The eares must be rubd, and the little finger put into the hollownes of them. The extreme parts of the body must be washed with a hote bath. Diagalanga, Electuary of bay-berries, Diacuminum,Srength∣ners. Dianisum, Diaalamintha, Triacle, Mithridate pre∣serued Ginger must bee giuen in strong wine, Aqua vita wherein Cinamon hath beene infused. Wine wherein infuse the seeds of Cummin, Bayes, Iuniper, Daucus, Ane∣thus, the Roots of Galingale, Beauer-stone, Cummin, the de∣coction of Anethum. Holding of the breath is good. Fasten a Cupping-glasse to the mouth of the stomacke, for by this means the paine will be mitigated, if not taken away. A fomentation of the decoction of the seeds of Anethum, Annise, Cummin, Fennell, Ameos, Barberries, Ga∣lingale, Mints, Abrotanum, Origan: these must be boyled in wine & water. Diatrion pipereon, Triacle, Diaglaanga, Aro∣maticum caryophyllatum, Diarrhod. Abbatis, syr. of Mints, Wormwood. Aqua mensalis of our description. Wine wherein Wormwood hath beene steeped, strong wine, wherein Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mastike, Galingale, Ginger, Asarum, Wormseed, wood of Aloes, and red Corrall haue beene boyled: Beauer-stone, preserued Ginger, preserued Acorus, and Cloues must be chewed. The holding of the breath doth helpe the natiue heate an: odor of the seeds of Anethum boyld in sweet wine. A fomentation of Galin∣gale, Cummin, Wormwood, Schaenanthum, Mints, Ori∣gan, Calamus aromaticus. An oyntment of the Oyles of
Masticke, sweete Almonds, Lillies, Violets, Mace, Beauer-stone. An oyntment of the oyle wherein Wormwood, Cummin, Rew, and Annise haue beene boyled; this must bee applyed to the stomacke. A Cerate of ancient oyle and Bea∣uerstone. Dìarrhod. abbatis, Diatrion sandali, Saccharum, vio∣laceum, rosacum. syr. of Violets, Roses, Endiue: a Cerate of andalum, with the oyle of Roses. A Fomentation of the backe, stomacke, and adiacent parts with the oyle of Vio∣lets. An oyntment of the oyles of sweet Almonds, Violets, for the aforesayd parts: they in the first place wil doe good, if the disease bee caused by windes; they in the second place shall bee vsed, if by cold humors: if by emptinesse, they in the last place shall be vsed. Philonium Romanum, with the iuyce of Endiue. These must not be vsed, vntill the cure be attempted by gentler medicines. Pills of Hounds-tongue, the dosis ʒ i. ancient Triacle, sirupe of Water-lillies, Violets, Poppy: giue two spoonefulls hereof with the water of Vio∣lets, Saccharum nymphaeae, violarum, rosarum. The Milke of Asses doth asswage the sharpnesse of the humors. The seeds of Lettuce, Purslane, Cowcumber, white Poppy, these must be beaten with the water of Lettuce, and also therein boyld. The patient must drinke a great quantity of water, yet it must bee done with caution; at the first gentler medicines shall be vsed, and then stronger. A more particular method seruing for the cure of SINGVLTVS or HICKET. A Clyster.℞ of the roots of Asarum, ℥ ss, Galingale, ʒ iiii. flow∣ers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii, of Mallows, M ii. ss, of Beete, M i. ss, of dryed Figs, no vi. of white and light Aga∣ricke, ℥ ss, seeds of Dill, ʒ v. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Hierae picrae Gal. ʒ ii. Diacath. ℥ i. Mellis rosati, ʒ ii. A Iulep.℞ Oxymellis simplicis, squillitici, ana ℥ i. Mellis rosati co∣colati,
℥ i. ss, waters of Mint, Wormwood, ana ℥ v. ℞ of the roots of Asarum, ʒ ii. Aristoloch. rot. Gallin∣gale, Elecampane, ana ʒ ii. ss, Calaminth, Thyme,A Potion. Penny-royall, Hyssop, Horehound, ana M ss, of Dill, Sea Onyons, ana ℥ ss, of Cinnamon, ʒ ii. boyle these in sweete Wine q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning Oxymellis simp. squillitici, ℥ i, ss. ℞ Pillul. stomachicharum, Hierae picrae Gal. Troch. de Aga∣rico, ana ℈ i. sirupe of Hyssop q. s. make hereof 8. pills,Pills. the patient must take some of these in the morning. ℞ Diagalangae, ʒ i. Elebori nigri, ℈ iiii. of Nutmeg,A draught. Cin∣namon, ana▪ ℈ ss, infuse these for the space of twelue houres in ℥ v. of Malmesey: giue this when the disease is at the height. ℞ of the roots of Gallingale, Wormeseede, ana ʒ ii. ss,A mixture. seedes of Dill, ʒ ii. of Nutmeg, ʒ i. ss, of Mithridate, ʒ iii. Mixe these, and giue the patient ʒ i. in strong wine. ℞ of Beauer-stone, ʒ ss, Cinnamon, roots of Ele∣campane, Angelica, Galingale, ana ℈ ss, of Hypocras,A draught. ℥ iiii. ℞ of the best Cinnamon, ʒ iii. of Ginger,Hypocras. ʒ i. roots of Galingale, ʒ v. seeds of Annise, Dill, ana ʒ ii. roots of Ele∣campane, Angelica, Wormeseede, ana ʒ i. bruise these grosse∣ly, and steepe them in sweete wine, afterwards strayne these, then adde vnto the strayning of fine Sugar q. s. Aceti squil∣litici, a small quantity. ℞ Pills of Hounds-tongue, ℈ ii. ss. Philonij Roma∣ni, ℈ i. make hereof 8. or 9. Pills,Pills. giue one of these at night. ℞ leaues of Wormewood, Rue, Mints,A Fomen∣tation. ana M i. seeds of Cummin, ℥ ss, boyle these in a sufficient quantity of common oyle, dippe a sponge, or else wooll herein, and wash the brest. ℞ oyles of Beauer-stone, sweete Almonds, Mace, Ma∣sticke, ana ℥ i. ss, the seeds of Dill, and roots of Galingale,An O¦ynt∣ment.
shall bee boyled herein, of each of these ʒ i. ss, and the sto∣macke must be anoynted herewith. ℞ Aristoloch. rotundae, Galingale, seeds of Annise, Bayber∣ries,An Em∣playster. Rew, Gentianae, ana ʒ iii. of Beauerstone, Myrrh, Cloues, ana ʒ ii. of red Roses, M i. of Masticke, ʒ iii. make hereof a playster with a little Honey, and water of sweete Maioram, if the disease chanseth without a feauer, this is very good. These may be vsed if the disease be caused by cold and windy matter. But if it bee caused by a hot matter, these following shall be vsed. A Iulep.℞ sir. of the iuyce of Sorrell, Oxysacchari simp. sir. of Ro∣ses, ana ℥ i. ss, the waters of Endiue, Sorrell, Purflane, ana ℥ iii. Or else Another.℞ sir. of Violets, Succory, with Rhab. Acetosi simp. ana ℥ i. sir. of Water-lillies, Poppy, ana ℥ ss, waters of Succhory, Let∣tuce, Purslane, ana ℥ iii. A draught.℞ the decoction of Succory, Endiue, Buglosse, Bar∣ley-seeds, of Carduus benedictus, ℥ iiii. infuse of Rhab. ʒ ii. for the space of 24. houres, then strayne it forth, and adde vnto the strayning sirupe of the manyfold infusion of Ro∣ses, ℥ i. ss. ℞ of clensed Barley, M iii. boyle it in water q. s. vntill halfe be consumed,A Vomit. vnto ℥ vi. of the strayning, adde sir, Ace∣tosi simp. ℥ ii. Pills.℞ Hierae picrae, Gal▪ rhab. optimi, ana ℈ ii. sirupe of Suc∣chory with Rhab. q. s. An Elec∣tuary.℞ Diarrhod. abbatis, without Muske, ℥ ss, Sacchari violati, Nymphaeoe, ana ʒ v. sirupe of Roses, Violets, ana q. s. ℞ of new butter somewhat salted, ℥ ii. of the decocti∣on of the seeds of Orache,A draught. Barley, sweet Almonds, ℥ iii. Oxy∣mellis simp. ℥ ii. An Vn∣guent.℞ Oyle of Roses, Water-lillies, ana ℥ v. of Poppy, Quin∣ces, ana ℥ ss, of Waxe, and Vineger, a little. A medicine for the sto∣macke.℞ Cerati sandalini, ℥ i. ss, of red Roses, seeds of Pur∣slane, ana ℥ ss, oyle of Roses q. s.
℞ Philonij Romani, Pills of Hounds-tongue,Pills. ana ʒ i. giue hereof one pill at night. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the SVN∣GVLTVS, or Hicket. FIrst of all, the matter of the disease, whether it be hot or cold, must bee made obedient vnto nature, and then cast out by a purging medicine, and then the flux of humors tur∣ned from the stomacke: then the stomacke may be strength∣ned, and the distemper amended by inward and outward medicines. If the disease be caused by drynes, or emptinesse, flesh broth, sir. of Roses, Barley water, Goats milke, and o∣ther moystning aliments must bee giuen. Also by chimicall art a liquor shalbe extracted from the decoction of Partrid∣ges, Hens, crummes of white bread, sir. of Violets, waters of Buglosse and Mints, and strong Wine; and when this li∣quor is to be vsed, a little Sugar may bee put into it. A bath of sweet water is good: the stomacke and backe bone shall be anoynted with the oyle of Violets: If it be causd by sharp humors, ptisan, oyle of sweete Almonds, or common oyle is good. If by the inflamation of the liuer, that must first bee cured. If by some venomous matter, Triacle, with the de∣coction of the seeds of Carduus benedictus, Dill, Gallingale, Borage, Cinnamon. If by coldnesse of the mouth of the sto∣macke, the patient shall hold his breath, for by this meanes, the heat will be gathered together. A method seruing for the knowledge of CARDI∣ALGIA, or paine of the stomacke. THe paine of the stomacke is a painefull sence of the mouth of the stomake caused by a biting matter. This disease hath affinity with the disease called Cardiaca passio,
which is in like manner a disease of the mouth of the sto∣macke, caused by corrupt humors, and such as are biting and virulent, which eyther came from some other place, or else were therein generated, and gathered together; from whence comes languishing; and faintnes of the body, and a resolution of the strength by sweate, and sometimes they fall into a swound, and the outward parts of the body are cold, whenas the Face, Brest, Head, and Necke, are be∣dewed with sweate. Cardiaca passio herein doth differ from this disease, because this is caused by biting humours, but that is caused, as was sayd, by virulent humors, and also venemous and so maligne, that a Feauer cōmeth withall, and that very hote and sharpe. These affections of the stomacke ought with great care & circumspection to be looked after, because the mouth of the stomacke hath relation to many other parts of the body, first with the heart, because of its neerues; with the braine, because of the nerues that are implanted there, and so goe from the one vnto the other, by whose vertue, the mouth of the stomacke hath a quicke sence. Seeing therefore that these parts of the body haue so great affinity with the stomacke, and it is its proper office to hunger after meate, euen as the hollownes of the stomacke doth concoct it: this disease therefore ought to be speedily remedied. This disease hath borrowed the name from the affect, and part affected, for in former times the physicians did cal the mouth of the stomacke Cardia, which is the heart, because when as the mouth of the stomacke is affected, such hainous accidents do follow, as if the heart it selfe where hurt. The part affected. The mouth of the stomacke is primarily affected, and the heart is hereby hurt, because of the neernes. For a pinching paine, with biting and freting, is felt vnder the brests gris∣tles; Cardialgia & Cardiaca passio, is an accident which doth belong vnto the hurt of the action of sensitiue faculties, viz. the sense of touching. Signes. In the Cardiacall passion, a faintnes and resolution of the
natiue heate doth follow, and also of the whole body. For the most part a sharpe Feauer, the pulse is thicke, and obscure, the extreme parts are cold, and yet slymy sweat do sticke about the face and brest, the body smells some∣what earthy; despaire, anguish, disquietnes of mind and body goes withall: but in the Cardialgia, there is a gnawing, biting, and pricking in the mouth of the stomacke. Some∣times the belly doth cast out cholericke stuffe, and some∣times he doth vomit choler; very seldome a Feauer comes with this; the strength is not dissolued with immoderate sweat, neither is the body so faint: there is a loading paine in the stomake, by reason hereof they do breathe with difficul∣ty, they are eased if belching aboue, or wind below bee voyded, and when the nourishment that is receiued, goes downe to the lower parts of the belly. Causes. Both these diseases are caused by sharpe and biting hu∣mours, which doe sticke about the mouth of the sto∣macke, whereby the appetite is abated, and they are in more paine before meate then after; in the cardiacll passion, besides the sharpe and biting humours, it hath a venemous and virulent quality; also Cardialgia, and Cardiaca passio are caused oftentimes by wormes, which will bee made knowne more plainly in the chapter which doth treate of wormes. They that fast too long when they are well, if the body be strongly stirred vp, Cardialgia is stirred vp withall. This disease is sometimes caused by sadnes: for by those cau∣ses choller comes into the stomacke, whereby bitings, and gnawings are caused. Sometimes it is caused by inflamati∣on, or by some vlcer, or swelling; sometimes, and that very often, it is caused by sharpe, and phlegmy humors, where∣by disquieting winds arise in the stomacke, which doth so stretch it, as the guts are stretched in Iliaca passio by winds inclosed. When it is caused by cold and sharpe humours, the appetite holds out well enough. and the paine is great. Cardialgia, if it come without a Feauer,Progno∣stiques. is lesse dan∣gerous;
but the Cardiacall passion, because it doth come with a sharpe Feauer, is dangerous. And if the disease bee caused by wormes, it is dangerous. This disease is incident vnto young men; and in sharpe diseases, it oft concurres about their increase. A method seruing for the cure of CARDIALGIA, or paine in the stomacke. LEt his ayre bee cold by art or nature. His meate easy of digestion, and such that is least subiect to corruption, as Larks, Partridges, Capons, Hens, Chickens, and flesh broth; his meate may be sawced with iuyce of Pomegra∣nates, Oranges, his drinke must be fine watery wine, or the decoction of Cinamon, and Barley-water: and as mo∣tion doth stir vp the disease, so rest doth asswage the paine. His sleepe must be moderate, and watchings are very hurtfull. The belly should bee made answerable to nature. Perturbations of the minde must be shunned; but especially sadnes. Preparers.Oxymel simplex & compositum; syr. of Mints, Oxymel squilliticum; syr. of Wormwood, Mel rosatum. Waters of Sage, Maioram, Betony, Wormwood, Fennell. Sirupe of Succhory with rhubarb; syr. of Violets, Roses; syr. of the iuyce of Sorrell, Acetositatis citri; of Pomegranates; water of Sorrell, Succhory, Plantane, Roses, Buglosse. If the paine bee not so great that it doth crosse the order of the cure, and the matter hath not taken too deepe root in the tunicles of the stomacke, these medicines may be vsed: if otherwise, such shalbe administred that do asswage paine; they in the first place shall bee vsed, if the matter bee cold; if by a hote matter, they in the second place shall bee vsed. A vomit must be made with hote water and Vineger, as also Oxymel simplex,Emptiers. and the patient must be helped either with the Finger, or a feather thrust into the mouth: A Cly∣ster
of the decoction of Cammomill, Mellilot, Mints, Mallows, Wormwood, Mercury, Diacath. benedicta laxa∣tiua. syr. of manifold infusion of Roses, Manna, Tamarindi, Cassia, Rhab. Myrobal. Citrini. Diaturbith with Rhab. Hiera picra simplex, Composita, Logodij. Pills, of Agaricke, Alephanginae, Mastichina, Diaphaenicum. The infusion, and decoction of Agaricke, Agaricus trochiscatus. The basilica veine of the right side shalbe opened, if the disease be caused by plenty of blood, and the paine be great. Gentle purging medicines shall at the first be vsed, and if the dis∣ease cannot be cured by gentle medicines, stronger may be vsed, otherwise not. A decoction of Cammomill, with Nutmeg,Mitigaters of paine. may bee giuen in drinke, or else the shauings of iuory. For these do mollifie the paine. Aristol. longa is good against all disease of the stomacke. A fomentation shall bee made of wines wherein the seeds of Linus Mints, Fengreeke, Fennell, Calamus aromaticus, haue beene boyled; a sponge must be dipped in this decoction, then applied to the stomake, and hote clothes must be layd vpon it, that the heat may be pre∣serued, An oyntment of the Oyle of Wormwood, Ma∣sticke, Spike, Nutmeg, Dill, Cammomill. A quilt of the flowers of Cammomil, Mellilote, Roses, Wormwood, Branne, Salt, Millium, flowers of Rosemary. An emplaister of the flower of Linus, Fengreeke, Rootes of wild Mallows, Oyles of Linus, Cammomile. Philonium Romanum; Atha∣nasia Nicholai; Zazanea. syr. of Poppy, water-lillies, Voilets, Roses. They in the last place shal not bee mixed with stupifying medicines, vnlesse the strength bee in hazard. Aromaticum rosatum, Diacuminum. Diagalanga,Strength∣ners. Diar∣rhodon Abbatis. The crust of bread infused in strong wine. An oyntment of the Oyles of Nard, Cammomile, mans fat, Wormwood, Mac, Mastike, Cloues, Ceratum Gal. Stomaticum. An emplaister of Ladanum, or storax Cala∣mita, Galingale, Masticke, Oyle of Wormwood. A
quilt for the stomacke, of Cinnamon, Mace, Cloues, Lada∣num, dry Mints, prepared Coriander. Rosata noella, Di∣arrhod. abbatis, Electuarium diatrion sandal. Conserue of Sorrell, Roses, Violets. The conserue of our descrip∣tion is good against this disease, sirupe of Roses, Pome∣granat, Saccharum Rosatum, the pulpe of Quinces, with∣out seeds. An oyntment of the oyle of Roses, Quinces, Ma∣sticke: An emplayster must bee made of Roses, Aloes, Ma∣sticke, Alome, Hipocistid. An odour must be made of Roses, and wine with Rosewater, Aceto rosato. If the disease bee caused by cold and windy humors, the former shall be vsed. If by sharpe humors, they in the latter place shall bee vsed. A more particular method seruing for the cure of CARDIALGIA, or paine of the stomacke. A Iulep.℞ sirupe of Wormewood, Mints, ana ℥ i. ss, Oxymelli compositi, ℥ i. the water of Mints, Maioram, Worme∣wood, ana ℥ iiii. Giue this three or foure times in the mor∣ning. Bolus.℞ Diaphaeniconis, ʒ iii. Rhab. electi, Spike, ana ℈ i. of new Cassia, Benedicta laxatiua, ana ʒ ii. ss, with fine Sugar q. s. ℞ Hiera picra Gal. ℈ ii. Pills of Masticke, Agaricke, made into a Trochiske, ana ℈ i. sirupe of Wormewood q. s. make hereof 7. Pills, and giue of them in the mor∣ning. A Potion.℞ Aristolochiae longae, ʒ ii. seed of Annise, Carro∣waies, ana ℥ , of Agaricke, ʒ ii. ss, flowers of Cammomile, Centory the lesse, ana M ii. of Saffron, gr. vi. boyle these in flesh broth, adde to the strayning, a little quantity of Sugar. A vomit.℞ seeds of Radish, Atriplicis, ana ʒ ii. roots of Asarum, ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the one halfe bee consu∣med,
adde vnto the ℥ iiii. of the strayning, Oxymellis sim∣plici, ℥ ii. oyle of Linus ℥ i. Giue this lukewarme in the mor∣ning. ℞ Diaphanic. ʒ vi. Philonij Romani,A draught ʒ i. the decoction of Cammomile, Fennell, Annise, ℥ iii. this may bee giuen in the extremity of paine. ℞ Sp. Diarrhod. abbatis, Aromatici rosati Gal. ana ʒ ii. ss,A mixture of preserued Ginger, ʒ i. Cinnamon, ʒ ss, Beauerstone, seeds of Ameos, ana ℈ ii. ss, Cummin, Galingale, ana ʒ i. ss, sirupe of Mints, Wormwood q. s. ℞ of Mithridate, ℈ i. the Triacle of Andromachus,A draught. ℈ ii. Aristoloch. longae, ℈ ss, of strong wine, ℥ iiii. ℞ roots of Aristoloch. longae, seeds of Ameos,A mixture Cummin ana ʒ ss, of Cinnamon, ℈ i. ss, preserued Ginger, ʒ ii. of Bea∣uer-stone, ʒ i. of Turpentine q. s. ℞ of red wine lb i. ss, macerated tosted bread herein,A draught. adde of Cinnamon, Nutmeg, ana ʒ i. strayne them forth very well, and then adde very fine Sugar. The patient may then drinke a good draught hereof often in the mor∣ning. ℞ Diagalangae, ʒ iii. Diacumini, old Triacle, Mithridate,An Elec∣tuary. ana ʒ i. sir. of Mints q. s. ℞ oyle of Nard, Mastike, ana ʒ ii. oyle of Mace,An Oynt∣ment. Cammo∣mile, Dill, ana ʒ iii. oyle of Rew, Mans far, ana ʒ iii. ss, Nut∣meg, ʒ ss. ℞ flowers of red Roses, Cammomile, Mellilot,A Fomen∣tation. ana M i. ss, leaues of Wormewood, M ii. seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana ℥ i. ss, seeds of Fennell, Annise, ana ℥ ss, boyle these in water vntill the third part be consumed. ℞ Aristoloch. longae ℥ ss, flowers of Cammomile,Another. Melli∣lot, ana M i. ss, red Roses, M ss, seeds of Cummin, Annise, Fennell, ana ℥ i. ss, seeds of Fengreeke, Linus, ana ℥ i. leaues of Wormewood, M i. boyle these vntill the third part bee con∣sumed. ℞ of tosted bread q. s. macerated in Malmesey,A Cata∣plasme. iuyce of Mints, and Wormewood, q. s, adde heereto of Nutmeg, ʒ ii.
this doth mitigate the paine, vomit and hicket. An Emplai∣ster for the stomacke.℞ Emplastri stomatici Gal. ℥ i. Cloues, Mace, Masticke, red Roses, seeds of Annise, Fennell, ana ʒ i. of Galingale, dry Mints, ana ʒ ss, Ladani, ℈ ii. ss, oyle of Nard, Masticke, q. s. A Quilt.℞ of the flowers of red Roses, dry Mints, Worme∣wood, ana ʒ ii. ss, Galingale, Cinnamon, Cloues, Mace, Ladai ana ʒ i. ss. sew these in a red cloth, and apply it to the sto∣macke. Another.℞ of Cummin infused in Vineger, Cinamon, ℥ ss, Aristo. longae, ʒ i. ss, of Nutmeg, no iii. Mace, ʒ ii, ss, Diarrhod. abba∣tis, ʒ iii. put these in a linnen cloth, and apply it to the sto∣macke. An Appendix seruing for the cure of CARDI∣ALGIA, or paine of the stomacke. FIrst, the humors shall be made obedient vnto nature, and then expelled out of the body, in the meane time such things must bee giuen as may mitigate the paine, new Tria∣cle is good for this purpose, or else, ʒ vi. Electuarij Diaphoe∣niconis must bee mixed with ʒ i. Philonij Romani. Then the stomacke shall bee strengthned, and the distemper a∣mended. The body shall bee anoynted with the oyle of Roses, Myrtle: If the disease were caused by wormes, first they shall bee killed, and then thrust out of the body. A method seruing for the knowledge of the weake∣nesse of the stomacke. THe crudity or weakenesse of the stomacke, is a disposi∣tion of the alteratiue faculty, wherein eyther the ali∣ment is not altred, or else not well concocted. In the former
there is a depriuation of the alteration of nutriments, in the latter a deprauation of the alteratiue faculty. For if the sto∣macke be in its right temper, the nourishment therein re∣ceiued will remaine pure, but if it bee oppugned by some cause contrary vnto nature, the action of the alteratiue faculty is depraued, and then the crudity of the stomacke doth follow. The part affected. The stomacke with its faculty is affected: for all men herein agree, that the stomake is the cause of the nutriments alteration; and then the faculty of the stomacke failing, and crudity of the stomacke doth follow by some externall cause, and sometimes this happens, though the faculty there∣of be not depraued. The Signes. Slow and difficult concoction, the stomacke doth no boyle after the accustomed manner, and the quality of the nutriment doth remaine in the stomacke; sowre belchings are frequent, and the stomacke is surcahrged with fumy vapors. The Causes. The stomacke of such as haue recouered of a long dis∣ease, is weake, and sometimes so weake, that it neyther is able to receiue nourishment, and yet if it doth receiue any, cannot well digest it. The reliques of the disease left behind, may be the cause of this, which may hinder the attractiue power that the stomake eyther hath, or ought to haue: some∣times it hath this attractiue power, the body being very leane, and for this only cause desires nurtiment, and cannot concoct it, by reason of the weaknes thereof. Sometimes they that are in perfect health (as most men may thinke) haue a weake stomacke, by reason of a hote or cold, dry, or moist distemper, which peraduenture may chance to come single, but it cannot long hold out, vnlesse other offending humors ioyne therewith. For the digestiue fa∣culty of the stomacke being weakned, raw humours must
needs bee gathered together eyther hot or cold, or else disturbing the stomacke by some outward quality, and then follows a loathing of meate, a loading of the stomacke, belchings and vomitings; and this is often caused by phleg∣my, and putrified humors; and then the rellish which is communicated vnto the pallate, is sweet, or watrish, and much spettle is voyded without coughing or hemming; his belch is sowre, his concoction is hindered, the sto∣macke is puffed vp, and stretched some houres after meate, great gripings, and paines are stirred vp therein, whereof the dropsy, collicke, Iliaca passio, are caused. Sometimes it is caused by choler, and a gnawing of the stomacke is felt, especially by fasting, a bitter humour is cast vp by vomit, whereby the mouth becomes bitter; and sometimes this disease is turned into the former, namely Cardialgia, or paine in the stomacke. If it be caused by a melancholy iuyce, a sowre taste is bred in the mouth. He is sad, fearefull, and disquieted with dreams, a panting is felt on the left side, the appetite for a time doth increase, and so it doth become an hypocondriall melancholy, or fal∣ling sicknes, the muscles also of the calues are shrunke. Some∣times there happens a crudity of the stomacke when the faculty is not hurt, but is hindred by some externall error, as too much waking, exercises presently after meate, more store of food taken in then can be well digested, or else some bad quality of these meats. Sometimes it is caused by vicious humours, sent vnto the stomacke from some other parts, as will happen by the suppression of moneth∣ly tearmes, and hemroides. Likewise in diseases of the ioynts, the matter is oft conueyed vnto the stomake, which is wont to be deriued vnto other parts. Prognostiques. That crudity is worst which is caused by ill nourish∣ment; and it is bad in those that do abound with choler, for it presently causeth an ague; but dayly crudity must bee auoyded; for sundry long and sore diseases are bred thereof:
it is in a word the mother of all materaill diseases, as dropsy, Colicke, Iliaca passio, flux of the stomacke, and many other diseases of the like kind. An euill complexion of the stomacke if it bee ancient, cannot be cured. They who spet much, and cast vp sowre water, haue a cold stomacke. A method seruing for the cure of the weaknes of the stomake. THe ayre must incline to heate, and it wilbe good, if the patient were well armed against iniuries of the cold. His meate must be easy of digestion, and of that, but a small quantity, for he must not take more then his stomake is able to digest; neither must he receiue any other meate in, vntil the former be digested. Venison, hard beefe and salt, all fat meates, dried fishes may not be allowed; they also that are presently corrupted, and are windy, and eyther very hot, or very cold, and of an euill sauour, are vnwholsome. Reare egs with Cinamon or Masticke are good. He may drinke good wine, but the vnseasonable vse thereof is bad. Exercise presently after meate is not good; his sleepe must not be vnquiet, and his head must be layd higher then the other parts of the body, affections of the mind must be auoyded, and hee must be so merry, that he do not trans∣gresse the limits of wisdome. Syr. of Wormoood, Hyssop, Calamint, Mint,Preparer. Oxymel compositum, squilliticum, waters of Mints, Wormwood, Fen∣nell, Betony. Syr. of the iuyce of Sorrell, Roses, Quinces, Gooseberries. waters of Sorrell, Plantane, Roses. If weake∣nes be caused by a cold distemper, they in the first place may the strength of the stomacke is hereby loosened; therefore bee vsed; if by a hot distemper, they in the latter place shall be vsed. He may not drinke lukewarme medicines, for whatsoeuer he takes, must eyther be hote or cold. The liuer veine shalbe opened,Emptier. if the disease be trouble∣some, and come vpon the patient on a sudden. Diaturb. with rhab. Hiera picra, Hiera de agarico. Pillul. Alophang stomati∣cae. syr. of the manifold infusion of Roses, rhab. cassia fistula,
Myrobal. Kebuli, Emblici, Bellirici, aloes washt, a vomit with Mulsa, or lukewarme water, wherein Radish hath bin boyled, and a little common Oyle must be mingled with it. He may vse sundry nutriments at one time. He may vse this vomit euery day for the space of 4 or 5 dayes, & then Oxy∣mel squillit. shalbe added; for hereby, the phlegmy, and other maligne humours mixed therewith, may be driuen out. Whilest there is any offending matter remaining, gentle medicines shalbe vsed: for strong medicines do weaken the strength of the stomacke. Auerters.Gentle Clysters, and sometimes sharpe, euen as occasion shall require, may be vsed▪ Strong ligatures of the legs aboue the knees. Ventoses must be applied to the buttock, hips, and sometimes to the nauill. Lotions of the feet and armes with hot water. Opening of the hemroide veine: sweate and vrine must be brought out. Hinderers.Syr. of Quinces, Pomegranates, Troch. de Olibano, de terra sigillata. Strength∣ners.Triacle, Mithridate; Diarrhod. Abbatis, Aromaticum rosatum, diatrion pipereon, Diaspoliticum, Diagalanga, Plirisarcoticum, Diaxyloaloes, Diacinnamomum, Diacy∣donium, diacalamintha. Syr. of Mints, Hyppocras, Worm∣wood, Aqua vitae, syr. of Wormwood. Orange-peels, preserued Ginger, preserued Galingale, conserue of Rose∣mary flowers, long Pepper, Cinamon, Mace, Cloues, Cala∣mus aromaticus, Roots of Cyprus, decoction of the wood Guaiaum, Wormwood, Mints, Nutmeg, Masticke, Raisins, the skin of a Hare, whelpe, Cunny: also the palme of the hand being very warme, may bee layd vpon the stomacke. When hee goeth to bed, hee must first lie on the right side, then on the left, and at the length againe on the right. A sponge may be dipped in strong wine, where∣with the stomacke must be washed: some of the medicines for the stomacke must first bee boyled in that wine. An oyntment of Dialthaea, of the Oyle of Wormwood, Mints, Mace, Masticke, spices may be boyled in these. A cap
made of the softest feathers of a Goose, a medicine for the stomacke of bombast well carded and dipped in strong wine, & then it must be dryed, at the length some Cinamon, Wormewood, Nutmeg, and the former spices may thereto be added. Ceratum stomatichum Gal. being made of Galin∣gale, Wormewood, Nutmeg, Cloues, Mints. Sirupe of the iuyce of Quinces, Gooseberries, Sorrell, dry Roses, Aceto∣sus simplex, vinum granatorum. Conserue of Roses, Violets, pulpe of Quinces, also the iuyce thereof. Diamargaritum frigidum, Diatragacanthum, Diatrion, sandal. ambra citrina, burnt Iuory, Harts-horne, Corrall, waters of Sorrell, Roses, Plantane, an oyntment of the oyle of Roses, Myrtle, Quin∣ces, an oyntment of Roses, Violets, Ceratum sandal. of flowers of Pomegranats, Corrall, Sandalis, Roses, Spodium, the rinds of Pomegranates. The former may bee vsed, if a cold matter bee left behind, and if a hot matter doe there re∣maine, the former. Things that are too cold, are dange∣rous. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the weakenesse of the stomacke. ℞ sir. of Mints, Quinces, Wormwood, ana ℥ i. Oxymellis squillit. Mellis rosati colati, ana ℥ ss, waters of Wormewood,A Iulep. Fennell, Mints, ana ℥ iiii. Giue ℥ iiii. in the morning, at foure seuerall times. ℞ of the decoction of Barley and Radish,A Vomit. ℥ vi. Oxymellis squillit. ℥ i. ss, oyle of sweet Almonds, ℥ i. drinke these off lukewarme. ℞ Diaturbith um Rhab. ʒ iii. of new Cassia,Bolus. ʒ v. of fine Sugar q. s. ℞ roots of Parsely, Buglosse, ana ℥ i. ss, Galingale, ʒ ii. ss,A Potion. leaues of Baulme, Mints, ana M i. ss, seeds of Annise, ℥ ss, of scraped Licorice, ʒ iii. of Raysins, the stones being taken out ℥ i. of Cinamon, ʒ i. of white and light Agaricke, ʒ iii. boyle
these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde vnto the strayning, Dia∣cath. ℥ i. ss, sirupe of Orange-pills, ℥ ii. Pills.℞ Pillul. Mastichinarum, Aloes, ana ℈ i. ss, of the sirupe of Mints q. s. make hereof 8. pills. Pills.℞ Hiera picrae, Gal. Pillularum stomaticarum, de Agari∣co, ana ℈ i. Rhab. electi, ℈ ss, sir. of Wormwood, Mints, ana q. s. make hereof 8. pills. ℞ Specierum aromatici rosati Gabrielis, ʒ ss, Dialangae, preserued Ginger, ana ℈ ii. Mastike, Cinnamon, ℈ i. ss, of Cloues, Nutmeg, ana ℈ i. of fine Sugar dissolued in the wa∣ter of Wormwood, and Mints, ana q. s. the patient must eate one of these one houre before meate, and after it drinke a draught of wine. Pills.℞ of Mastike, ʒ ii. Spikenard, ℈ ss, Aloes, ℈ iiii. Rhab. ʒ i. ss Agarici trochiscati, ℈ i. ss, sirupe of Eupatorium, and Mints, ana q. s. An Elec∣tuary.℞ Diamargaritē calidi, ʒ ii. Aromatici rosati Gal. of Mi∣thridate, ana ʒ i. Diacydonites cum speciebus, ℥ i. sir. of Mints, q. s. Pills.℞ of Mastike, Olibani, ana ʒ iii. make pills hereof, with the sirupe of Mints, Giue ʒ i. of this moystned in wine, in the morning, this doth heate and dry the stomacke, and hinders the rheume falling downe from the head, if he take it mor∣ning and euening. A mixture.℞ of the roots of Flower-de-luce, ʒ iii. of red Roses, ℈ iiii of dry Mints ℈ i. of Mastike, ʒ ii. ss, flowers of Nutmeg; Cin∣namon, ana ʒ ss, sir. of Pomegranats q. s. for the disease caused by moysture. An Elec∣tuary.℞ Sp. Aromatici rosati, ʒ ii, Diagalanga, ʒ i, of pre∣serued Ginger, ʒ i. ss, of Wormeeede, Nutmeg, ana ℈ ii. sirupe of Orange-pills, make this into a soft Electu∣ary. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of the roots of Galingale, ʒ ii. flowers of Cammomile Mellilot, ana M i. leaues of Wormwood, Mints, ana M ii. of the best Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmeg, ana ʒ i. bruise all these, and let them boyle together in sweet and strong wine, vn∣till
till the third part bee consumed, and wash the stomacke herewith. ℞ oyles of Nard, Mastike, ana ℥ i. oyle of Roses,An Vn∣gent. ʒ iii. oyle of Quinces, ʒ i. ss, of Waxe and Vineger a little. ℞ flowers of Cammomile, red Roses, ana M ss, leaues of Wormewood, Mints, ana M i. Cinnamon, Cloues,A Cerate. Mace, ana ʒ i. of Galingale, of the wood Aloes, Cala∣mi aromatici, ana ʒ i. ss, of Mastike, ʒ ii. oyle of Mints, q. s. ℞ of dry Mints, Maioram, Wormewood,An Em∣playster. ana M i. of Ma∣stike, Frankincense, ana ʒ i. of Mace, Ginger, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloues, ana ℈ iiii. Caami odorati, of Galin∣gale, of the wood Aloes, ana ℈ ii. Gallie musc. Ladani, ana ʒ ss, Turpentine and Waxe, q. s. make a soft playster hereof; this will likewise serue for a medicine for the sto∣macke. ℞ Ceroti stomatici Galeni, ℥ i. ss, roots of Ciperus,An Em∣playster. ℈ i. of Saffron, ℈ ss. of Cinamon, ℈ ii. of Mastike, ℥ ss, oyle of Worm∣wood q. s. ℞ of red Roses, M ss, of Wormewood, Mints,A Cata∣plasme. ana M i. ss, boyle these in strong Wine q. s. dippe a toast here∣in, and so apply it, if the disease bee caused by a hot mat∣ter. ℞ sirupe of Violets,A Iulep. Succory with Rhab. ana ℥ ii. waters of Endiue, Borage, Violets, ana ℥ iiii. ℞ sir, of Violets, ℥ ii. Roses, Pomegranats,Another. ana ℥ i. waters of Violets, Buglosse, ana ℥ v. ℞ Rhab. elect, ʒ i. Myrabol. citrinorum, ℈ ii. of Cassia, ℥ ss,Bolus. of Spike▪ gr. iii. ℞ of clensed Barley, M iii. of scraped Licoras,A Potion. ʒ vi. seeds of Gourd, Cowcumber, ana ʒ iii. of Sorrell, ʒ ii. of Licoras, ʒ iiii, of Raysins, M ii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed. ℞ sir. of Violets, Roses, ℥ ss, conserue of Roses, ʒ ii. ss,A mixture. con∣serue of Borage, Roses, Violets, ana ℥ ss, sacchari rosace, ℥ i. ss, sir. of Pomegranats, ℥ i.
Lozenges.℞ Diatragacanthi frigidi, Diamargariti frigidi, ana ʒ i. ss, of the finest Sugar dissolued in the water of Violets, make an Electuary. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of red Roses, M ii. leaues of Wormewood, M ss, seeds of prepared Coriander, Sandalorum, Oranges, red Corrall, ana ʒ i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed, wash the stomacke herewith. An Vn∣guent.℞ the oyle of Roses, ʒ v. of Quinces, Myrtle, ana ʒ vi. of red Roses, red Corrall, ana ʒ ss, sandal. citrinorum, ʒ i. of Waxe and Vineger a little. A Cerate.℞ Cerati refrigerantis Gal. sandal. ana ℥ i. oyle of Roses, Quinces q. s. An Appendix seruing for the weakenesse of the stomacke. FIrst of all wee must trie whether the matter will bee cast out by a gentle vomit. And if it bee affected, the humors shall be made obedient vnto nature. But rather the medi∣cines shall be giuen eyther cold or hot, but not lukewarme, at the length, when as it may bee discerned that the humors are concocted, the matter shall bee cast out with a purging medicine, and then such things shall bee administred as may strengthen the stomacke, and alwaies such things shall bee mixed with the former as may comfort the liuer, although it bee no way hurt, for that doth helpe the stomacke in all its naturall operations; for this is the very beginning, and seate of the naturall faculty. Alwaies a care ought to be had that nothing bee receiued into the stomacke, before the for∣mer be well digested, for this is good not onely for the cure of this disease, but also for preseruing health. If by consent of other parts, or if the matter bee conueyed vnto the sto∣macke by the whole body, that must first bee purged, then the stomacke: At the length astringent medicines may bee
vsed, for they doe hinder the fluxe of the humors, for this purpose sirupe of Poppy is good. If weakenesse of the sto∣macke bee caused by cold distemper, moyst medicines shall bee administred, viz. Milke, flesh broth, moyst baths, and such like. Yet a care ought to bee had, that the body bee not too much moystned, because the vertue of the sto∣macke may hereby bee dissolued. For diuersity of causes there bee diuersity of cures. If the disease bee caused by weakenes after a sicknesse, especiall care ought to bee had, that no more nourishment bee giuen vnto the patient then hee can well digest; for otherwise there would be danger of a relaps, or that hee bee violently seyzed on by this dis∣ease. A method seruing for the knowledge of the Obstructi∣on of the Liuer. OBstruction of the liuer is a binding, or straightning of the veines, or liuer passages: this disease is more com∣mon to this bowell, then vnto any other, and no maruaile, for the liuer is the storehouse of blood, from which all parts of the body draw nourishment, and together with pure blood, grosse and slimy humors are generated in the liuer, and seeing that the branches of the hollow veines are knit∣ted vnto the Vena porta, in such sort, that the knitting, and continuation doth not come within the compasse of our sight, and seeing the nutriments of all the parts of the body must bee conueyed thorow the port veines, and also the hollow veines ends, which as wee sayd before, are very small, where they end in the liuers substance, it is no wonder then, if by reason of the passages and straightnesse, obstructions bee oftener caused in the liuer, then in any o∣ther bowell, and this disease is the beginning of other dis∣eases. Wee doe not in this chapter treate of that obstru∣ction of the liuer, which is caused by an inflamation of that bowell, or by St. Anthonies fire, or any other vnnaturall
swelling, but heere wee treate of that disease which fol∣lows the obstruction of the veines ends, by the stuffing in of some substance, viz. windy or thickned spirits, or else some other ill humours. The part affected. This disease doth breed in the extreme parts of the ves∣sels of the hollow and port veines, and they are terminated in the liuers substance with thinne ends, and are knit one vnto another with little bones, neuertheles thorow these, the distribution of nourishment must be made throughout the whole body. This may bee perceiued by the quality of the paine, & also the seate thereof: for the patient feeles a kind of loading and dull paine in the liuer. This obstruction is not in the substance of the liuer, because no passages can there bee perceiued that may be stopped, although we do not deny but that there may bee some passages by reason obserued therein, yet these cannot be sayd to be stopped. The Signes. There is a heauines and stretching paine in the right side, and then most of all to be perceiued, when a man doth exer∣cise himselfe presently after meate. No ague or tumour comes with it, vnles it doth wax sorer by continuance, for euery old obstruction doth putrifie, & by that meanes cau∣seth a Feauer; he drawes breath with great difficulty, espe∣cially if he climbe hilly places; the colour of the face is turn∣ed into another hiew, because the remote parts depriued of their nutriment, the patients vrine is thinne and watery; If the stopping be in the hollow parts of the liuer, the parts of the liuer are heauy and dull presently after dinner; be∣cause the humours cannot so easily enter into the substance of the liuer, by reason of the straightnes of the passages. The belly is sometimes loose, sometimes it is costiue. The Causes. The narrownes of the liuers and veines passages is the
cause of this disease. And this happens vnto some from their birth, and then the disease is perpetuall, and some signe thereof may be perceiued at the infants birth, and then vpon euery slight occasion there is a stopping of the liuer. This disease doth hunt those most that are of a cold temper; yet for the most part obstruction of the liuer is caused by slymy and grosse humors, which wind themselues into the ends of the branches of Vena portae, from whence it is conueyed vnto the substance of the liuer. Then about the right side of the heart, a dull and loading paine is felt. This is likewise caused by grosse and viscous nourishments, when by immoderate vse of baths, or exercise presently after meate, they are caught into the liuer. This is also caused by grosse humours which fall from the braine, or else being gathered about the bowels, are in like manner conueyed vnto the liuer. Sometimes the vse of opening medicines, the stomacke being full of crudities, doth often cause this disease. Sometimes againe it is caused by thicke and fumy vapors, whenas they haue no way out, because of their thicknes; and the patient is troubled not onely with a stretching, but a heauines. Prognostiques. For want of nourishment, and because of the continu∣ance of this disease, the whole body is become thinne; and by long obstruction of the liuer many diseases are generated in the body: for by this, a hard tumour without paine doth arise, an inflamation, Feauer, putrifaction of hu∣mours, loosnes of belly, Iliaca passio, collicke, dropsy, and yellow aundice. When cold humors are too long retained in the liuer, the substance of the liuer is turned into a cold distemper, whereby the dropsy is caused. If obstruction of the liuer were at the birth by reason of narrownes of passages, it cannot be cured: yet by good ordering, the pa∣tient may be preserued from many diseases, which are wont to follow this disease.
A method seruing for the cure of the obstruction of the Liuer. THe ayre must bee hote and cleare, his diet such as may heate and ridde stopping; also those that do generate grosse blood, must be auoyded. In his broths, the roots of Fen∣nell, Parsly, Sperage with their seeds, the leaues of Hyssop, Succhory, Peny-royall, Endiue, Leeks, must be boyled. He must auoyd variety of meats; neither may he eate any thing, vntill that bee digested which was formerly receiued; and then also he must eate but sparingly. His drinke must be ptisan, thinne and ancient wine. Exercise presently after meate is vnwholsome, but especially bathings, but an houre or two after, exercise with moderation may be allowed. Sleeping in the day time, especially long sleeping is not good, and his sleepe in the night time may be the space of seuen houres. His belly must be kept loose. Accidents of the mind must be auoyded, chiefly anger, care and sadnes, and all meanes must be vsed that may delight him. Preparers.Syr. Byzantinus, Agrimony, Wormwood, Mayden-haire. Oxymel simp. Compositum Squilliticum, Oxysaccha∣rum. Mel. rosatum, waters of Fennell, Sperage, Worm∣wood, Agrimony, Parsely, Dodder. A decoction of the roots of Flower-de-luce, of the greater Rubia, Asarum, Parsely, sea onyons, Harts-tongue, Calamint, Sperage, Hore-hound, Hyssop, Succhory, seeds of Annise, Fennell, Mayden-haire, Wormwood, Dodder, Raisins; Cinnamon, Ciches, with a little Vineger, and Hony. Syr. Acetofus simplex. Of Succhory, with Rhab. Oxymel squilliticum, syr. de quin{que} ra∣dicibus. syr. of Endiue, and also the decotion thereof doth asswage the vnnaturall heate which alwaies followes the obstruction of the liuer. The water of Endiue, Suc∣chory▪ Hops, Dodder, the decoction of red Ciches, Hops, fruits of winter cherries, Dodder, Endiue, Squinanthy, Chamaepitis, roots of grasse, Fennell. The first opening, cut∣ting,
and cleansing medicines may be vsed, if the disease be caused by a cold, grosse and slymy matter, and if neyther ague, thirst, or burning come withall. They in the second place may bee vsed, if heate, thirst, or ague follow the obstruction of the liuer, from what cause soeuer this disease doth take its beginning, especiall care ought to be had, that the cure bee not begunne with strong opening me∣dicines, lest wee should force the matter backe vnto the Liuer. The liuer veine on the right arme shalbe opened,Emptiers. if the disease be not old, or if grosse matter be very much mingled with blood; for blood letting forceth this matter out of its place. But in the suppression of hemroides and moneth∣ly termes, a veine in the ankle shalbe opened. Electuarium Idum, Diaphanicum. Hiera picra, Agaricus Trochiscatus. Pillula Alophangina, Aggregatinae, of Agrimony, Pills of Rabarb, Agaricke. Rhab. Cassia, Manua. A decoction of the Roots of Parsly, Fennell, Sperage, the leaues of Wormwood, Hore-hound, Hyssop, Chamapitys, Chamadis, seeds of Annise, Epithymon, Sene, Agaricke, Rhab, Turbith, Oxymel. Trochiks of Rhab. Agrimony, Wormwood.Strength∣ners. Diarrhod. ab∣batis; Aromaticum rosatum. sir. of Agrimony, Diacurum, Dialaica; a confection of Annise, Amber, Pistacia, Raisins, the three kinds of Endiue. The liuer of a wolfe. Rhab. the iuyce of sowre Pomegranates, mixed with Oxymel, Worm∣wood, Dodder, Agrimony; Succhory, Spikenard, Fumi∣tary, Tarragon. Roots of Acrus, Kneeholme, seeds of Annise, Lupines, bitter Almonds. An epitheme of wine which is moderately astringent, wherein the roots of Cy∣perus, Asarum, the leaues of Agrimony, Wormwood, Mayden-haire, flowers of Spike, Cassia lignea, and Cinna∣mon, haue beene boyled. An vnguent of the Oyle of Spike, Wormwood, Cinamon, Waxe, Vineger, and Cassia lignea. An emplaister of Mellilote. The common Diachylum, ire∣atum. Such medicines as are slymy and stipticke, must bee
auoyded, for they doe rather increase then diminish the obstruction. The cure of the Dropsie, Collicke, Iliaca passio, and fluxe of the belly, which are accidents fol∣lowing this disease, may bee cured, if the Reader haue re∣course vnto the chapters which doe treate of them seue∣rally. A more particular method, seruing for the cure of the Obstruction of the Liuer. A Clyster.℞ of the roots of Asarum, Angelica, ana ʒ vi. of Agri∣mony, Wormewood, Hops, Dodder, ana M i. seeds of An∣nise, ℥ i. winter Cherries, ℥ ss, of red Ciches, ʒ iii. of white and light Agaricke, ʒ ii. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning, Diaturbith with Rhab. ʒ vii. oyle of Wormewood ℥ iii. Bolus.℞ the pulpe of new extracted Cassia, ℥ i. Rhab. electi, Aga∣rici trochiscati. ana ℈ i. ss, a trochisk of Agrimony, ℈ i. of the finest Sugar q. s. A Iulep.℞ sirupe of Succhory with Rhab. sir. Byzantini, Acetosi compositi, Agrimony, ana ℥ i. water of Dodder, sweete wine, ana ℥ vi. Or else Another.℞ Oxymellis compositi, ℥ ii. squillit. ℥ i. of the decoction of Agrimony, seeds of Endiue, roots of Fennell, Sperage, Parsly, Taragon, ℥ x. with Sugar q. s. A Potion.℞ of Gentian, Asarum, ana ℥ ss, Agrimony, Mayden-haire, Endiue, Dodder, Schamaedris, ana M i. seeds of Carrowaies, red Ciches, Fennell, ana ʒ iii. Cinnamon, Mace, Rhab. ana ʒ i. ss boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Oxymellis squillit. ℥ iii. This is good, if the disease be caused by a cold matter. Another.℞ the roots of Fennell, Parsely, Sperage, ana ℥ i. ss, Dodder, leaues of Wormewood, Agrimony, ana M ss, seeds of Fennell, Annise, ana ℥ ss, of scraped Licoras, ʒ iii. of Raysins the stones being taken out, ℥ i, Iuiubarum, Sebesten, ana no 8.
senoe Alex. ℥ i. of white and light Agaricke, ℥ ss, Rhab. electi. ʒ ii. of Ginger, sali gemmae, ana ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning sirupe Byzantini, ℥ iii. ℞ Radicum eringij conditarum,A mixture ℥ ii. preserued Orange-pills, ℥ i. preserued Galingale, flowers of Elder preserued, ana ℥ ss, Dìarrhod. abbatis, troch. de Rhab. ana ʒ ii. sir. of Agrimo∣ny, q. s. Giue hereof ʒ ii. or iii. before meat. ℞ Diacath. Diaphanic. ana ʒ iii. Agarici troch. Rhab. electi. ana ℈ i. sir. Byzantini, ℥ i. water of Endiue, Succhory,A draught ana ʒ i. ss. ℞ Pills of Rhabarb, ʒ i. of Agaricke, ʒ ss, Diagridij,Pills. gr. iii. sir. Byzantini q. s. make hereof 8. pills. ℞ Benedictae laxatiuae, ʒ iii. Rhab. ʒ i. sir. of Agrimony,A draught. ℥ i. water of Endiue ℥ iii. ℞ Sp. Dìarrhod. abbatis, ℈ ii. Troch. de Rhab. ʒ ss,Lozenges. roots of Aristol. rotunda, Asarum, ana ℈ ss, seeds of Fennell, Annise, Rhab. Cinnamon, ana gr. xii. of fine Sugar, dissolued in Dod∣der and Agrimony water q. s. ℞ Troch. de Rhab. ʒ iii. Dialaccae,A mixture. Diarrhod. abbatis Dia∣nisi, ana ʒ i. ss, roots of asarum, Licoras, ana ʒ ss, of a Woolfs liuer, ℈ iiii, seeds of Annise, ʒ i. iuyce of Fumitory made into the forme of a Trochiske, ʒ iii. ss, sir. of Agrimony, Byzantini ana q. s. ℞ leaues of Wormewood, M i. Dodder, M i. ss,A draught. Elder flowers, M ss, Rhab. elect. asarum, ana ʒ ii. infuse these for the space of 24 houres, in strong Wine, this may bee drunke euery other day. ℞ Troch. de rhab. of Agrimony, ana ʒ iii. Giue ʒ i. hereof with the iuyce of Endiue, Oxysacchari simp. ℥ i,A Powder. water of Agrimony, Dodder, ana ℥ ss. ℞ of the oyntment of Martiatus, oyle of Spike,An Oynt∣ment. Worme∣wood, ana ℥ ss, Spike, Cinnamon, ana ℈ i. of Vineger, and Waxe, a small quantity. ℞ flowers of Camomile, Mellilot,An Epi∣theme for the Liuer. ana M i. leaues of Agrimo∣ny, Wormwood, M . ss, roots of Cyperus, ℥ i. Cinamon, Spike
ana ʒ i. Cassia lignea, ʒ ss, Cummin, ℥ ss, Branne, ℥ i. boyle these in a sufficient quantity of Wine, vntill the third part be consumed. A Cata∣plasme.℞ flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, Worme∣wood, Agrimony, Dodder, Sothernwood, ana M i. red Ci∣ches, ℥ i. seeds of Endiue, Parsely, ana ℥ ss, Spikenard, ʒ ii. ss, boyle these in water q. s. and then adde thereto oyle of bit∣ter Almonds q. s. A Bath.℞ roots of wild Mallows, ℥ iii. Agrimony, Dodder, En∣diue, Maioram, Fennell, Fumitory, Violets, ana M iii. flow∣ers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. ss, seeds of Fengreeke, ℥ vi. boyle these a little while in water q. s. this doth mollifie the grosse humors which are the cause of the obstruction, and also makes them subiect vnto nature. A Cerate.℞ an Emplayster of Mellilot, ℥ i. ss, roots of Asarum, ʒ ss, of Mastike, ʒ i. of dry Wormewood, ℈ i. ss, oyle of El∣ders q. s. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the Obstruc∣tion of the Liuer. FIrst of all, the humor which causes this Obstructi∣on, shall bee made obedient vnto nature by subtile and cutting medicines, and as soone as wee perceiue that they are concocted, then they shall bee turned out of the body, by a purging medicine. Then wee will endeauour to take a∣way such things as doe stop the passages, and when they be remoued, the distemper shall bee amended, the bowels strengthned, and the corrupt matter that was left behind, shall be expelled, and the accidents, if any doe molest the bo∣dy, shall bee asswaged. These medicines must bee often vsed, because the disease is stubborne; also care ought to bee had, that the first and secod digestion be good, for which pur∣pose his diet shall bee thinne as well at dinner as supper.
They who are subiect vnto this disease, must eschew such meats as doe breed a clammy and grosse iuyce. If the disease bee caused by a hot and grosse matter, the decoction of En∣diue, Succhory, Sorrell, Rhab. also the sir. of Succhory with Rhab. may be giuen. Or else ℞ roots of Fennell, Kneeholme, Parsely, Grasse, ana, ℥ i. of Endiue, Succhory, Dodder, May∣den-haire, ana M i. seeds of Endiue, Cowcumber, red Ci∣ches, ana ℥ ss, of Dill, ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s vnto lb i. ss, adde vnto the strayning sirupe Byzantini ℥ iii. make hereof a sirupe. A method seruing for the knowledge of the weake∣nesse of the Liuer. THe weaknesse of the liuer commeth by distemper, with∣out any manifest euill in that bowell: the proper and principall faculty of the liuer is the blood, which doth come to it by a property of its owne substance, and cannot bee weakened on a sudden by any distemper; for the distemper must needes take deepe roote, before it can hurt the sub∣stance of the liuer, or dissolue the strength thereof; but by what distemper soeuer this is caused, the liuer doth not performe its proper duty, vnlesse it bee by halfes; for the excrements that are auoyded, doe resemble water, wherein flesh newly killed hath beene washed, and so long as the proper action, or substance of the liuer is not weakened, the action hereof will bee somewhat corrupted, but not ta∣ken away, so that we cannot say that the action of the liuer is hurt by euery distemper, but onely by that which by con∣tinuance of time hath weakened the substance of the liuer: and the reason why these excrements are voyded by stoole, rather then by any other way, is this, because it doth vsually expell the iuyce being imperfectly changed by the liuer, be∣cause of its weakenesse through the bowels, because it is a neerer way then by the passages of the vrine, thorow which
sometimes these superfluities, which do resemble the wa∣ter wherein flesh newly killed hath beene washt, are con∣ueyed; and such men are sometimes deceiued, that alwayes say the fault of this is in the stone. Sometimes cleare blood is voided by stoole, eyther without the bloudy flux, or any distemper of the liuer; and this doth chiefly happen. when as some veine is broken appertaining to the liuer. Sometimes blackish blood is voyded by stoole, which doth resemble blacke choller, and yet it doth differ from it, because the clothes that are dipped therein will be of a blacke colour: this is caused, when as some veine in the vpper parts is burst. Oftentimes also blood is voyded at the stoole, be∣cause some accustomed euacuation is stayed, or because some member is maimed, and as then it is suddenly auoy∣ded in great plenty, so it doth suddenly cease, comming a∣gaine at its proper seasons. Sometimes also it is voyded that way by the hemroides, and sometimes by an impostume of the liuer, or else some vlcer therein bredde. All which shall be spoken of in their peculiar chapters, for here we do not treate of such voydings, because they do not come through the onely default of the liuer. Therefore among all these excretions of blood, that alone, wherein the stoole doth resemble the water, wherein flesh hath beene washed, is heere to bee treated of, and shewes that the liuer is hurt in its owne essence, without any manifest hurt in the bowell. The part affected. The liuer is chiefly affected, as will appeare by his owne functions hurt, in the colour of those that are voyded. For by reason of the weaknes hereof, the blood is not well dige∣sted, and then the blood that is voyded by stoole, is wa∣terish: this shewes that the nutriment was well concocted in the stomacke, and begunne to be concocted in the liuer, but not perfected, because of the liuers weaknes. This dis∣ease is an accident which doth appertaine vnto the hurt
of the action of the liuers blood-sucking faculty, which is very much weakened. Signes. By what distemper soeuer weaknes of the liuer doth come, it is so rooted, that it doth scatter the spirits natiue heate, and dissolue the strength and actions of the liuer, insomuch that it doth send forth waterish blood, and halfe concocted without paine, and in great abundance. Always the collour of the patients body, especially the face, is of a sad hue, and somewhat stained with bleaknes and greennesse. The Causes. A cold distemper is the cause of the liuers weaknes: and if the distemper bee but slight; the colour of the face is white; that which is voyded, stinks a little, small store of excrements are voyded, the body waxeth cold, and swels, vnlesse the heate of the heart doe amend the cold distem∣per of the liuer; the patients vrine is thinne, and there is neyther Feauer nor thirst. Sometimes it is caused by a hote distemper, & if it be but flight, the excrements are stinking, and are mixed with thicke choler, and are of diuers colours, the vrine is redde, thirst, and also a Feauer ensueth: the tongue is rough, a yellow colour doth breake out in his face, all his body is too hote, especially the palmes of his hands, and soales of his feete, sharpe vapors are often felt to go ouer the skinne, and cholericke humours are voyded by vomit: their bellyes for the most part are bound, and the heate is the cause hereof. But as often as a cold distemper hath altered the substance of the liuer, hee seldome doth thirst, but rather moistnes is felt in his mouth; his stoole is great, watry and thin. The contraries of these do happen in a dry distemper▪ for the body is become drier and har∣der, and at the length the strength of the liuer is dissolued, and the face hereby is stayned with a sea palenes; his stoole at the first is liquid like creame, & besides other accidents, the flux of the liuer doth concurre, wherein, as was sayd before,
the excrements are waterish, and like vnto that water wherein raw flesh hath beene washed. And these excre∣ments are so often changed, as the distemper of the liuer is changed. Prognostiques. If weaknes of the liuer hath beene of long continuance, it is scarce to bee cured; and in time it is changed into an euill habit of body, from whence a weaknes of the whole body is caused, or else it doth turne into a dropsy, especi∣ally if this disease bee caused by a cold distemper. Hereof comes a melting away first of the humours, then of the flesh, and lastly the whole body. Sometime blood doth gush out at the Nose, sometime at the wound and hem∣rode veine, and sometimes thorow the passages of vrine. A method seruing for the cure of the weaknes of the stomacke. A Temperate ayre is good; meats that are easy of dige∣stion, and do moderately heate, as Capons, Hens, Pheasants, Partridges, Chickens, Larks, may be permitted. Amongst Pot-herbs, Fennell, Sage, Hyssop, Sauory, and Endue is good. His broth must be seasoned with Cloues, Cinnamon, Galingale: amongst fruits, Raisins are best. His drinke may be thinne and odoriferous wine: moderate exercise is better then ease. His sleepe must be moderate, and no perturbations of the mind must annoy him. Preparers.Syr. of Agrimony, of Wormwood, Endiue, Succhory, with Rhab. The waters of Succhory, Endiue, Agrimony, Dodder. A decoction of the roots of Asarum, Fennell, Parsly, Succhory, Endiue, Cyperus, flower-de-luce, Worm∣wood, Organ, Mint, Agrimony, Roses, Calamint, Dod∣der, Hyssop, seeds of Cummin, Annise, Barley, Ca∣lamus aromaticus, Cinnamon, Raisins, Hony, and Vineger.
Diaprunum solutinum, Electuarium Indum,Emptiers. Electuary of the iuyce of Roses. Hiera picra; Tamarindi, Sene, Rhab. Agaricke, Myrabol. If cold or chollericke humours ari∣sing by a cold or hote distemper of the liuer, sticke fast in the substance of the liuer, or in the veines neere-adioy∣ning, and if nature do not expell these, they must be eua∣cuated by conuenient medicines, whereto such shalbe ad∣ded that may strengthen the liuer. Diarrhod. Abbatis, Diamargaritum frigidum. Dialucca,Strength∣ners. Diacurcuma, with the water of Wormwood, syr. of Agrimony. Electuarium diatrion sandal. Troch. de Rhab. of Agrimony, of Wormwood, Saccharum rosaceum: Phylonium Romanum; Rhab. The liuer of a Wolfe; Snayles flesh, syr. of Wormwood, Agrimony, with their waters. Water distilled out of Snayles; water of Barley, where∣in Succory and Endiue must bee boyled. Dodder, Ray∣sins, Pistacium, Endiue, Succhory. Wormewood, Agri∣mony, Spike, Squinanthum. Cinnamon, Calamus aroma∣ticus, Myrrh, Vnicorns-horne, the shauings of iuory, Hony, and the water thereof. Turpentine, doth wipe away that which is venemous and putrified. An epitheme, which in the winter must be giuen hote, in the summer, cold, with the waters of Roses, Sorrell, Lettuce; Water-lillies, red Sandals, Diarrhod-Abbatis, Diatrion sand. Camphyre. A fomentation of the decoction of Roses, Sorrell, Cam∣momyle, Wormwood. An oyntment of the oyle of Roses: Water-lillies, Quinces, Masticke, Camphyre, red and white Sandals, Vineger and Oyle of Wormwood; dippe wooll in these, and lay it vnto the region of the liuer. Diaga∣langa, Dianisum, Diacalamintha, Diacinnamomum, Troch. de Rhab. Saccharum salui, the water of Hony distilled. syr. of Succhory, water of Endiue, Dodder, Succhory. Wormwood, Agrimony, Cassia lignea, Cinnamon, pre∣serued Acorus. The liuer of a Wolfe, Nardus, Celtica, Squinanthy; an epitheme of the decoction of Cloues, Cinnamon, Squinant, Agrimony, roots of Asarum, seeds
of Fennell, Annise, Amie, whereunto Diagalanga, Diacinna∣morum, the waters of Agrimony, Dodder, with a little Vi∣neger. An oyntment of the oyles of Nard, Masticke, Spike, Wormewood, the wood of Aloes, Mastike, Cloues, Cinna∣mon, iuyce of Agrimony. Ceratum stomaticum Gal. A Cerate of the roote of Asarum. Flower-de-luce, Squinant, Worm∣wood, Agrimony, Mellilot, Mastike, Myrrhe, the Flower of the seeds of Hops, Fengreeke, oyles of Masticke, Roses, Nard, oyle wherein the roots of Elecampane, Bitter-wort, wild Galingale haue beene steeped. Dialalca, Diacurcuma, sirrupe of Wormewood. The liuer of a Wolfe, Saccha∣rum rosatum, Spodium. An Oyntment of the oyle of Wormewood. Nard the rootes of Elecampane, Galin∣gale, and Fower-de-luce, must be boyled in the oyle. If the disease be caused by a hot distemper, the former shalbe vsed; and if any of them be too hot, they may be qualified with Endiue water. If the disease be caused by a cold distemper, wee may vse those in the second place: if it bee caused by moystnesse, they in the last place may be prescribed. Some of these aboue mentioned, may bee giuen, bee the cause eyther hot, moyst, or cold. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the weakenesse of the Liuer. A Iulep.℞ sir. of Wormewood, Agrimony, ℥ i. ss, of Endiue, Oxy∣mellis compositi, ana ℥ ss, water of Agrimony, Endiue, Cen∣tory the lesse, ana ℥ iiii. A Potion.℞ roots of Angelica, Fennell, Parsly, ana ℥ i. Aristolochiae rot. Galingale, ana ℥ ss, Agrimony, Sage, Fumitory, ana M i. ss, of Mints, Wormewood, ana M ss, of Licoras, ʒ v. Rhab. ʒ ii, senae Alex. ℥ i. of white and light Agaricke, ʒ ii. of Ginger, ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i, ss, adde to the stray∣ning sir. of Agrimony, ℥ iii.
℞ Pills of Agaricke, Cochiarum,Pills. of Rhab. ana ℈ i. of the sir. of Agrimony q. s. make hereof 8. Pills. ℞ Diagalaengae, ʒ i. ss, Trochiske, of Wormewood,Lozenges. ʒ i. seeds of Endiue, ℈ i. of fine Sugar, dissolued in Betony wa∣ter q. s. ℞ Trochisc. de rhab. ℥ ss, of Wormewood,An Elec∣tuary. ʒ li. Dia∣laccae, ʒ i. ss, aureae Alex. ʒ i. roots of Asarum, Aristoloch. rot. of the liuer of a Woolfe, ana ℈ i. ss, adde hereto sir. of A∣grimony q. s. ℞ roots of Asarum, ʒ ii. Licoras, seeds of Annise, Parsly,A Com∣pound. ana ʒ i. of Raysins, ℥ i. of bitter Almonds, ʒ vi. troch. de ab∣synthio, ʒ ii. sir. of Wormewood q. s. ℞ Aromatici rosati, Gab. Diagalanga, Diarrhod▪ abbatis,Another. ana ʒ ii. of Licoras, ʒ i. of Raysins, ℥ i. ss, seeds of Annise, ʒ i. ss, of the liuer of a Wolfe dried ʒ ii. ss, conserue of Rose∣mary flowers, ℥ i. ss, of preserued Orange-pills ℥ ss. sir. of A∣grimony q. s. ℞ leaues of Agrimony, Wormwood, ana M i. ss, of Spike∣nard, flowers of Cammomile, ana M i. ss, of Rosemary,A Fomen∣tation. M i. Cinnamon, ʒ i. ss, boyle these in an equall quantity of Wine and water. ℞ oyle of Wormewood, Mastike, ana ℥ ss, of Spikenard,An Oynt∣ment. Roses, ana ʒ ii. of Cloues, Cinnamon, ana ℈ i, ss, iuyce of Agri∣mony, ℥ i. of Waxe an Vineger q. s. ℞ flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, seeds of Lupines, ℥ ss, leaues of Wormewood, Agrimony, M i. ss,A Cata∣plasme. of of Roses, M ss, adde oyle of Wormewood hereto, and boyle them vntill they be soft. These are good, if the disease be cau∣sed by a cold matter. ℞ sirupe Violets, ℥ ii. Acetosi simp. et compositi,A Iulep. ana ℥ i. water of Endiue, Dodder, Agrimony, ana ℥ iii. mixe these. ℞ roots of Fennell, Sperag,A Potion. Parsly ana ℥ i. leaues of Groun∣sell, M i. ss, leaues of Succhory, Endiue, Chamepitis, Dodder, Agrimony, M i. seeds of Annise, ℥ ss, Licorice, ʒ iii. Raysins, ℥ i Rhab. ʒ ii. ss, Agaricke, ʒ i. ss, Cinnamon, ℈ iiii. boyle these
in a sufficient quantity of water vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning sir. of Succhory with Rhab. Another.℞ of clensed Barley, M iii. of Endiue, Succhory, Acri∣monij, ana M i. ss, of Lettuce, M ss, seedes of Endiue, Gourd, Melons, ana ℥ ss, of Licorice, ʒ v. flowers of Violets, M i. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consu∣med, adde vnto lb i. ss. of the strayning, sir. of Succhory, with Rhab. ℥ iii. Bolus.℞ of Venice Turpentine washed in Endiue water, ʒ ss, seeds of Endiue, ℈ ii. Rhab. electi▪ ʒ i. Conserue of Roses, ℈ ss, of Sugar q. s. Lozenges.℞ Conserue of Roses, ʒ ii. Diarrhod. abbatis ine musco, Diatragacanthi frigidi, ana ʒ i. ss. of a Wolfs liuer, ℈ ii. of fine Sugar dissolued in Betony water q. s. Opiates.℞ Diarrhod. abbatis, ʒ ii. Trochisc. de Rhab. seeds of En∣diue, Diatrion sandal. Diamargariti frigidi. ana ʒ i. ss, of Raysins, ℥ i. sir. of Succhory, with Rhab. q. s. A Powder.℞ of a Wolfes liuer, ʒ i. ss, roots of Succhory, ʒ ii. Sche∣nanthi, ℈ i. of Harts-borne, ℈ ss, Licorice, ʒ i. ss, Rhab. ℈ ii. ss, of Spikenard, gr. xii. Giue ʒ i. hereof with the water of Honey. Bolus.℞ of a Wolfes liuer ʒ i. Rhab. ʒ ii. Spikenard, ℈ ss, Venice Turpentine, washed in Endiue water q. s. hee must take one lumpe hereof euery other day. A Fomen∣tation.℞ of red Roses, flowers of Cammomile, Succory, Broad∣leafe, ana M i. ss, of the tops of Wormwood, M i. of red and white French wheate, ana ʒ vi. of Camphore, ℈ ii. ss, Succho∣ry, Endiue M i. ss, boyle these in water. ℞ oyle of Violets, ℥ i. of Roses, ℥ ss, of Cammomile, ʒ vi. of Wax and Vineger, a little quantity. These are good, if the dis- be caused by a hot matter.
An Appendix seruing for the cure of the weake∣nesse of the Liuer. VVEakenesse of the Liuer for the most part is cau∣sed by a cold distemper, when it doth succeed im∣moderate heate, whether the attractiue, retentiue, alteratiue faculty be made weake, or whether all at once be weakened, as for the most part it happens; because when the naturall faculty is weakened, all the other faculties are weakened: therefore this distemper shall bee moderated with such as doe moderately: and to the former medicines such shall bee added, as doe strengthen the liuer, and also open the ob∣struction. But if this distemper bee nourished by great plenty of raw humors, they shall be first made obedient vn∣to nature, and then cast out; and then the liuer shall bee strenghned, and the relques amended. But if it bee a dry distemper, such as restore naturall moysture, as baths and milke, may be vsed: but as concerning the weakenesse of the liuer that is caused by a tumour, as St. Antonies fire, Schirrus, adema, or inflamation, or else because of some great vlcer, or else by too frequent going to stoole, no mention hath beene made of them, because they shall be treated of hereafter, and the cure of them shall also be specified. Sirupe of Agrimony, Diatrion sandal are most in vse for the weakenesse of the li∣uer, because they doe strengthen the retentiue, attractiue, al∣teratiue, and expulsiue faculty of the liuer, and all these sympathize; for if one be affected, presently the rest suffer. A method seruing for the knowledge of the tumour of the SPLEENE both hard and soft. THe tumor of the Spleene is oft caused, when as the inflamation there of is not well cured. Sometimes it happens that the spleene is soone hardned, and swels euen as the liuer doth, (although it hath a thinner substance then
the liuer) because his nutriment is thicke, and besides the spleene must receiue the dregs of blood, and his more earthy and impure part. And because of the thinnesse of the substance of the spleene, it doth so grow and swell, that it doth fill vp all the left side of the belly, and so stops the mid∣riffe, that it cannot be raised vp, or thrust downe, when it should serue for breathing; whereby oftentimes great sighings are caused in the sleepe, as also difficulty of brea∣thing. Also the liuer is soone hardned; because it hath a close substance, and small veines, whereby it doth happen that they that haue a grosser substance, will with more ease sticke in their passages, and so in conclusion waxe hard. The part affected. The part affected is the spleene, which may be perceiued by the loading paine in the spleene region. Signes. A tumour and loading paine is felt in the spleens region, by reason of the plenty of matter. Sometimes this tumour is hard, sometime loose, which sometimes fills the whole side, and part of the matter is sometime spred abroad into the kell or cawle wherein the bowels are lapt; and some∣times it is inclosed in the spleenes roomes. If the patient doth runne much, or else exercise himselfe but moderately, he doth breathe with diffiulty; the like also happens, if he do rather lye on his right side then left; because this bowell hangs not so much, neyther is the Diaphragma so cru∣shed by the bignes of the bowell. They who are troubled with this disease, do not well concoct their meate, and yet they haue good stomacks: great store of spettle, and many windinesses are generated: the latter of these doe cause rumbling, and wauing in the left side; their bellies are stiffe; also layzines doth cocurre; their dreams are trouble∣some, and their heads heauy. From hence feare, and weari∣nes of liuing longer doth ensue. Their bellies for the most
part are bound, but when the matter is more corrupted, and doth begin to rage, as it were in the body, then all the aforesayd signs are more manifest. The colour of the face is vitiated, and the whole body is corrupted by them; whereby the mouth stinks, the gummes are eaten, and do part from the teeth, the place vnderneath the eylid swels, blood breaks forth, but chefly at the nose, the feeet swell, a little before night; many blacke spots, and euill vlcers scarce to be cured, do appeare vpon the Hands, and Legs; especially if blood hath not beene voyded at the nose: at the length he doth sleepe very disquietly, and the patient doth draw his breath with great trouble, and in the night time hee snorts much, especially at the forepart of the night. The Causes. It is caused for the most part by melancholy humours, which are the dregs of blood, and are caught into the spleene from the veines of the body, and there remaine for a long time. Or else it is caused, because all the veines of the body doe flow with such melancholy blood; for this bowell by nature is appointed to receiue it; or it is gathe∣red in the spleene in so great abundance, that the passages are stopped, thorow which this excrement is thrust out of the spleene into the stomacke, or belly. Sometimes such store hereof is gathered in the spleene, that it doth stretch the whole substance thereof: So that when such plenty is therein gathered, first a loose tumor is bredde, and then remaining long in the bowell, because of the weaknes of the expulsiue faculty, or else for some other cause, in time by force of heate it doth grow thicke and hard, whereby great abstruction of the veines and passages are caused, thorow which the spleene was wont to be purged: in time also this matter doth grow hard, and hereof is caused the Schirrhus of the spleene. This also happens in the infla∣mation of the spleene, whenas such medicines are applied, that are astringent aboue measure, or else dissolue the
strength too much. Sometimes it is caused by watry and phlegmy humours, deriued thither from some other place, as may bee perceiued in those who haue escaped long, cold and moist diseases. Prognostiques. At the first, while the tumour is increasing, the cure is not so bad: but if it be once ripened, he cannot be cured. Yet there is lesse danger in the tumour of the spleene then liuer, yet his euents are sundry; for in some somtimes it is dimini∣shed, and then againe it is increased, and they are disquieted with the aforesayd troubles; in some, the tumour conti∣nues hard, and that without any inconuenience, though it doth last for many yeeres, if it swell not vnto a great bignes. And it often turnes into a dropsy, slypperines of bowels, consuming of the body, and a quartane ague; all which griefs are not easily cured: so that at the length a consumption, a canker, scabs, and semi-tertian Feauer torments the patient. A method seruing for the cure of the swelling of the spleene. THe ayre must be cleere and bright, his meate must bee such, as hath an opening force, and that is soone con∣cocted, and doth breed good blood: but such as do breed grosse and slymy iuyce, must be eschewed, viz. Porke, Beefe, and hare. His diet must be slender, and hee may eate for his sawce, the flowers of Capors; his drinke must be fine wine, which must be allayed with water, wherein hote iron hath beene often quenched, and hee must abstaine from drinking water; moderate exercise is good before meate: not inferiour to this are bathings and sweatings. His sleepe must be moderate, and not presently afer meat. His belly must be kept loose; pertiurbations of the mind must be shun∣ned, because they do hinder concoction.
Syrupe of Epithymon, Fumitary, Scolopendria,Preparers Oxymel simplex, Compositum, Squilliticum. syr. Acetosus simplex, de calamintha. sir. de duabus et quin{que} radicibus, syr. of Ap∣ples. The waters of Endiue, Scolopendria, Tamariscus, the herbe Citarch. A decoction of Sarsaparilla. A decoction of the rinds and roots of broome, Tamariscus, Capons, Suc∣chory, Endiue, Danewort, Rosemary, the seeds of Parke-leaues, Purslane, Centory the lesse: he may for many dayes vse these present remedies, and those that follow; be∣cause this melancholy humour is with great difficulty purged. The Basilica veine of the left side shalbe opened by fits,Emptiers▪ if the patients strength can indure it; otherwise the veine that goes to the middle or little finger shalbe opened: yet if the disease be ancient, a veine shall not be opened; for here∣by the tumor would grow harder. Pillul. aureae Aggre∣gatiuae, Pills of Agaricke, Fumitary. Pillulae de lapide armeno, Cyaneo, confectio hamech, Hiera picra, Diacol. Diaphaenicum, Diacol. Diaphae. Diacath. diasena, N. Sene, Epith. Polypod. quercinum, Myrabol. Indi, Clysters. But they shall then espe∣cially be vsed, when the obstruction is in the lower part of the bowell, and the tumour sticks fast therein. Also di∣uersity of medicines must bee vsed, lest nature bee too much acquainted with one, and because of the stubbornes of this disease, purging medicines must be often giuen. A decoction of Sarsaparilla,Auerter. a fomentation of the leaues of Mallows, Tamariscus, Scolopendria, Citarch, roots of Caper-trees, seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, the flowers of broome. Anoyntment of Althaea, of Agrippa de, arthanita. An oyntment of the Oyle of Lillies, Capers, sweet Almonds, Hens and Goose-grease, Butter, the marrow of a Harts or Calues leg, the iuyce of Cyclamen, Brioniae, Gumme Am∣moniacke dissolued in Vineger, also an oyntment of the Oyle of Capers fat of Cammels. Squilla boyled in the Oyle of Capers, whereto the Roots of Lillies must
bee added. A Cerate of Hyssop, of the oyle of Tiles, Capers, sweete Almonds. A Cataplasme of the leaues of Danewort, Mallows, march Mallows, Beares foote, Figs, roots of white Lillies, Danewort. squilla, boyled in strong wine, and oyle. An oyntment of Gumme Ammoniacke, dissolued in Aceto squillit. the marrow of Harts and Calues, the fat of a Ducke, the grease of an Estrich, of a Cammell, with Waxe But∣ter and Vineger. An Emplayster compounded with Mel∣lilot, Diachylum simplex, Magnum, de Mucilaginibus. An Emplayster of the oyle of Tiles, and Gumme Ammo∣niacke. Strength∣ners.Diarrhod. abbatis, troch. of Agrimony, Capers, Canca∣mum, Triacle, Diamuscum dulce et amarum. Aromaticum rosatum, Diacàpparum. Electuary of Bay berries, a decocti∣on of Tamariscus, leaues of Willows, flowers of broome, Scolopendria, roots of Caper trees, Danewort, Broom seeds, Endiue, Rosemary, Epithymon. Sarsaeparillae ʒ i. with the pow∣der of Tamariskes, also Capers, and Scolopendrium. A Fo∣mentation with the flowers of Cammomile, seeds of Cum∣min, Rew, Annise, leaues of Penny-royall, Rew, Hops, Dill, Cammomile. A Bricke heat red hot, and quenched in very sharpe Vineger, the fume hereof must bee receiued, with a cloth, and so layd to the region of the liuer. An Vnguent of the oyle of Capers, Rew, Mastike: an Emplayster of leauen; Emplayster of Gumme Ammoniacke, Oppoponax, Cucumeris asinini, Capers, and Vineger▪ Cupping-glasses with scarifica∣tion shall be applyed vnto those veines, which looke blacke about the spleene. Or in stead of these, bloodsuckers shalbe applyed to those parts, and the veine shalbe opened. Also an actuall cautery may bee vsed. When the hardnesse of the spleene is softned by the former medicines, these discussing medicines shalbe vsed, and then softners must be againe v∣sed. But such medicines as resolue too much must not bee vsed.
A more particular method, seruing for the cure of the tumor of the SPLEENE. ℞ sir. Byzantini, Fumitary,A draught. Oxymellis simp. ana ℥ i. of Calamint, ℥ i. ss, water of Fumitary, Hops, Parsely, ana ℥ iiii. ℞ roots of Cyclamen, ℥ ss, roots of Willows, ℥ i. rinds of the roots of Capers, Tamariske, ana ʒ iii. of Dodder,A Potion. M i. of Sene, ʒ iii. of Licorice, ℥ ss, seeds of Annise, Fennell, ana ʒ iii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde the strayning sir. Acetosi comp. ℥ i. ℞ rinds of the roots of Capers; Tamariske, roots of Danewort, ana ℥ i. of Fumitary, Succhory, Hops, ana M i. ss,Another. of Maydenhaire, Thyme, Cetrach, ana M i. Epithymi, M ss, of Licorice, ʒ iii. seeds of Annise, ℥ ss, Fennell, ʒ ii. senae Alex. Polipodij quercini. ana ℥ i, ss, of white and light Agarick, ʒ iii. Ginger, ʒ i. flowers of Borage, Broome, ana M i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning sir. Acetosi compositi, ℥ iii. ℞ Confect. amech, ʒ iii. Diasenae, ʒ i. Diacath. ʒ i. ss,A draught sir. of Epithymum, ℥ i. water of Scolopendria, ℥ iii. ℞ Pillul. Indarum, foetidarum,Pills. Agarici troch. ana ℈ i. Pills of Rhab. ℈ ss, de lapide lazuli gr. vi. sirupe of Epithymum q. s. make hereof 7. or 8. Pills, and he may take of them twice in a moneth. ℞ Pulueris sancti, ʒ i. ss,A draught. Diacath. ʒ iii. of the common de∣coction, ℥ iii. ℞ Troch. of Capers, ℥ ss, flowers of Broome,Another. M ii. rinds of Tamariske, ℥ i. infuse these for the space of 24. houres in lb i. ss. of wine, hee must drinke of this strayning two houres after he hath taken some of the following Elec∣tuary.
An Elec∣tuary.℞ Diacurcumae, ℥ ss, Dianisi, Diacasteri, ana ʒ i. ss, of anci∣ent Triacle, ʒ ii. Opiates.℞ the rinds and roots of Capers, Broome, Tamariske, ʒ i. ss, Epithymi, Cetrach, ana ʒ ii. of Cinnamon, ℈ ii. conserue of Borage, ℥ i. ss Aromatici rosati Gab. of Mithridate, ana ℈ i. sir. of Fumitary q. s. Lozenges.℞ Troch. de Cappare, de Eupatorio, ana ʒ ss, rinds of the roots of Tamariske, Sarsaeparillae, ana ℈ ii. roots of Ruscus, ℈ i. Rhab. ℈ i. ss, of fine Sugar, dissolued in the decoction of Sarsaparilla, hee may take one of these in one day. A Fomen∣tation.℞ roots of Asarum, Cyclaminis, ana ℥ i. rinds of Tama∣riske, roots of Capers, ana ʒ iii. Menthastri, Wormewood, Origan, Centory the lesse, Mercury, Fumitary, Scolopendriae, ana p. i. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. seeds of Cummin, Carrowaies, ana ℥ ss, seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana ℥ i. boyle these in a sufficient quantity of Wine and wa∣ter, vnto a softnesse, dippe a sponge herein, and apply it to the region of the liuer. An Oynt∣ment.℞ oyle of Tiles, Rew, Capers, Iuniper, ana ʒ ii, oyle of Cammomile, ℥ ss▪ marrow of a Calfe, ʒ iii. Bryony, Ciclami∣nis, ana ʒ ss, of Gumme Ammoniacke, dissolued in Vineger, ʒ i. ss. Another.℞ Vnguenti arthanitae maioris, ℥ i. ss, Gumme Ammo∣niacke dissolued in Vineger, ℥ ss, oyle of Capers white Lillies ana q. s. Another.℞ Ʋnguenti Agrippae, arthanitae maioris, ana ℥ i. Gumme Ammoniacke, Oppoponax, dissolued in Vineger, ana ℥ ss, Oli cucumeris asinini, ℥ ss, this must not be vsed at the first, vn∣till the tumor be softned. A Quilt.℞ of Salt, seeds of Cummin, ana M i. ss, fry them together: flowers of Mellilot, M i. roots of Danewort, ℥ i. seeds of Rew, ʒ v. bruise these together, and sew them in a fine linnen cloth, and when this is to be vsed, some Vineger, wherein a bricke heat red hot hath beene cast, must bee sprinkled vp∣on the cloth two quilts must bee made hereof, and they must
be applyed vnto the region of the spleene, one after another. It doth soften dry and resolue. ℞ rinds of Tamariske, ℥ ss, roots of white Lillies,A Cata∣plasme. ℥ i. Dane∣wort, ℥ i. ss, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Wormewood, Rew, ana M i. seeds of Lupines, Linus, Fengreeke, ana ℥ ss, 8 Figs, boyle these in water q. s. vnto a softnesse, then bake it, then adde thereto of Barley flower, Fimi cappararum, ana ℥ i. of Gumme Ammoniacke, Sagapeni, ana ℥ ss, Oyle of Tiles, Capers, ana q. s. this may bee vsed after a Fomen∣tation. ℞ Diahyli magni, Emplastrum de mucilaginibus, de Melliloto composito, ana ℥ ss, Ʋnguenti dialthaeae, Aggrippae,An Em∣playster. ana ʒ iii. rinds of Tamariske, ʒ i. seeds of Rue, ʒ ss. ℞ Sagapeni▪ Gumme Ammoniacke, ana ℥ i. oyle of Lillies,Another. ℥ ii. roote of Flower-de-luce, ʒ ii. salis gemmae, ʒ i. ss, the Gumme must be dissolued in Vineger. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the tumor of the SPLEENE. FIrst of all, the stopping matter shall bee made obedient vnto nature, and that the force of medicines may be con∣ueyed to the spleene, lenitiue medicines shall bee giuen, and then vse preparing medicines. When this is done, the mat∣ter shall be fetched out of the body, by a purging medicine, and the bowels tumor must also be made soft; and with me∣dicines for this purpose, strengthners should bee mixed; in conclusion such may bee vsed as doe consume the reliques. It is great ease vnto the patient, if the Hemroids be opened, and after the receiuing of any inward medicine, the patient must lye on the left side: for eyther of these are helpefull for the cure of this disease.
A method seruing for the knowledge of ICTERITIA, or the yellow IAVNDISE. ICteritia, is an effusion sometimes of yellow choller, sometimes blacke, sometimes both ouer the whole body, and this is incident to maids: also this chollericke blood is spred ouer the whole body with the blood, be∣cause the excrements are not dayly, or not at all voyded. And this happens chiefly for these causes, eyther through the default of the whole body, or else of the liuer, or by some default of the passages by which it must be purged, or else by default of the excrements. This colour breakes out and appears chiefly in the white of the eyes, and about the temples. The part affected. In this disease the same place and part is not alwayes affected: for sometimes the liuer is in fault, when as it is too hote or else impostumed, and then both the vrine, and ordour are stayned with a yellow colour. Sometimes a Feauer doth concurre with a certaine paine in some part of the liuer, whereby the colour of the face is changed; sometimes the bladder of the gall is affected, & then heaui∣nes is felt in the right side of the hearts walls; the excre∣ments are for the most part white, but the vrine is yellow, also hee is freed from agues. Sometimes this disease doth happen through default of the whole body, and then very few of the signes formerly rehearsed will appeare, the skinne is more withered and combred with an itch, and the solid parts of the body are distempered with too much heate; this affect is an accident appertaining vnto the mutation of the qualiay of the body. The Signes. This euill is manifest to sense, but especially the colour of the eyes do witnes that a man is sicke of the Iaundise. The patients appetite is diminished, and bitternes of the
mouth doth increase because of heate, and yet for the most part it is without a Feauer, but headache, and loos∣nes of the body doth ensue: the vrine is like vnto Saffron, also muddy and thicke, and sometimes it is stopt. The excrements are white, if the bladder of the galls passage be stopped, and but little is auoyded, and that often and by little and little. A heauines without tumour is felt in the place of the liuer, the vrine is sometimes red and thicke, euen vnto blackenes: but if the yellow Iaundise be caused by plenty of gall by reason of the hot distemper of the liuer, and that the passages which reach to the blad∣der of the gall be opened, then the excrements will be blackish, because blacke melancholy is got into the belly, and also the patient is scarce sicke. If the Iaundise is caused by the default of the spleene, the body is not so heauy, as when it doth come by choller; yet there is sometimes a heauines, and hard tumour on the left side, the patients are more musing and sad then formerly they were, their bodyes are first died with a darke colour, then with a leaden, and very blacke; their bellies for the most part are bound, and the exrements that are voyded are very blacke, so also is their vrine. The patients for the most part are troubled with an itch, and they sweat but little: and if this disease hath beene of long continuance, the body at the last waxeth white with blaknes. The Causes. Sometimes it comes by increase of choller, through the liuers too hot distemper; for hereby such store of choller is generated, that the gall cannot containe it, and then a boy∣ling heate is felt about the seat of the liuer in the left side: the excrements are stayned with choller, the vrine is thicke, & like to Saffron, also lazines, and difficulty of breathing doth concurre, and then especially the latter two may be per∣ceiued, whenas the patient doth exercise himselfe. Of∣tentimes it is caused, because the liuer, or the passages that
goe from the liuer into the galls bladder, or from thence into the bowels, are stopt; for then the liuer cannot auoyd cholericke humours by those places which are destined by nature for that purpose, by which meanes, the blood must needs be impure: and the cholericke humor flying backe into the veines, is mixed with blood, and then doth spread it selfe ouer the whole body: a heauines is felt on the right side, and the excrements are white. Sometime this disease is caused by the default of the whole body when as the naturall heate in euery part of the body is made sharpe and biting, because of the parts too hot distem∣per; for then the humours do rather turne into gall, and sometimes into so great abundance, that the gall is mixed with blood enclosed in the veines, by which meanes the whole body is stayned with gall, and died with a golden colour; also a great itch breaks forth, and a dulnes of mind and senses, feeblenes and lazines doe concurre. Sometimes it is caused by cholericke Feauers, because the offending matter is thrust out of the body by the naturall force, into the vttermost parts of the body, and so leaues an impression in those parts thorow which it did passe, and the excre∣ments are then naturall: also the vrine retains the perfect colour, and hereby the patient may be ridde of his ague. The yellow Iaundise caused after this sort, doth arise sud∣denly. Sometimes it is caused by inflamation of the liuer, in which case the whole body is stained with gally excre∣ments, by reason of the great heate of the blood; and then the excrements and vrine are died with a very yellow colour; also a vehement ague concurs, the colour of the face is changed, the patient doth thirst much, and doth feele a loathing paine in the region of the liuer. In conclusi∣on, a venemous quality corrupting the blood, doth cuse this disease, which wilbe made knowne, if the colour of the patients face bee changed, when as no Ague doth ensue.
Prognostiques. If the yellow Iaundise continue long, it doth threaten danger of a dropsy; especially if the vrine be long time watry: for then a great obstruction is caused by the bow∣els coldnes. It is also dangerous, if the liuer waxeth hard; also it is an ill signe if the patients haue no appetite, if they be troubled with waking and doting, or if they speake with difficulty. If this disease be caused by default of the spleene, it doth last longer then if it were caused by the distemper of the liuer. And as the yellow Iaundise, so sometime the blacke choler is caused by the liuer, but the spleene ne∣uer causeth the yellow choler. It is dangerous if an ague follow the yellow Iaundise. But if it doth come vpon one in sharpe diseases, as the euill is doubtfull, so it is hardly to be shaked off. Yet if it be caused on the Criticall day, and good signes of concoction do appeare, and no hardnes doth arise in the Liuer, it is a good signe; for this shews that the expulsiue faculty hath got the victory; but if it be caused before the Criticall day, it is an euill signe. It is good that the hemroids runne in this disease. Also that man is in danger, who is sicke of a confirmed Iaun∣dise, and is neyther cured, neyther is the matter presently cast out; for at the last, eyther the heart, or some other noble part is oppressed. A method seruing for the cure of the IAVNDISE. THe ayre must be temperate; and their diet such as may coole, and moisten, and extenuate the humours, and may easily be digested; as Hens, Pullets, Birds of moun∣taines, fishes that doe liue in grauelly places; the patient may also eate Pruines, Apples, Cherries, Melons, yet with great moderation. His meate may be seasoned with the iuyce of Lemmons, and Oranges. Such nutriments as generate grosse and melancholly blood, and such, as binde, and multiply choler, must bee auoyded.
The patient may drinke ptisan, or wine allayed with the water of grasse, or Parsely. Also exercise in a meane may bee permitted. And baths and Frictions in the winter time are good. The sleepe in like manner must be moderate; and the excrements auoyded in due season. Such perturbations of the minde as doe inflame the spirits must be shunned, and pleasing obiects supply their place. Preparers.Sirupe of Violets, Endiue, Lemmons, of Roses, Sor∣rell, Pomegranats, of Succhory with Rhab. water of Sorrell, Succhory, Endiue, Eyebright, Lettuce, Plantane, sir. de Dua∣bus et quin{que} radicibus, Oxymel-simplex, sir. of Agrimony, Wormewood, Mel rosatum, sir. Byzantinus. Water of Agrimony, Hops, Dodder▪ Sperage, Fennell, Radish, Ruscus. A decoction of the roots of Angelica, Broome, Rubiae tin∣ctorum, Sperage, Parsely, Asarum, Fennell, Aristol. Fumitary, Mayden-haire, Serpillum, St. Iohns-woort, Calamint, Cha∣moepitys, Sorrell, Rosemary, Endiue, Succhory, Cinnamon, Sugar, Horehound. Because phlegmy and grosse humors are mixed with choller, openers and clensers are very good; but they must bee vsed, some distances of time comming be∣tweene; otherwise there would bee great danger. If the disease bee caused by hot humors, the former of these me∣dicines may bee vsed, and the latter may bee vsed in a cold cause. Emptiers.Electuarium epsyllio, of the iuyce of Roses, Diaprunum solutinum. Hiera picra, Diaphaenicum, Pillul. aggregatiuae, de Rhab. of Agrimony, Manna, Cassia, Rhab. Also the infusion hereof in the water of Endiue. Diaphaenic. Pillul. Alephangi∣na, Aureae, Hiera simp. Agaricus trochiscatus, Agaricke in∣fused with Rhab. Cassia, Manna. A vomit with Elleborum, if the belly bee bound, a gentle clyster at the first is good, for this doth draw backe the humors which were running vnto the skinne. After this a stronger may bee giuen, and at certaine distances of time be administred. The Clyster may be made with the rootes of Fennell, Horehound, Parsely, Wormewood, Agrimony, Maydenhaire, seeds of Annise,
Fennell, Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, Cassia fistula. If blood abound at the first, the Basilica veine shalbe ope∣ned; or else there would be danger of the dropsy. But espe∣cially the veine shalbe opened, if the Iaundise be caused by the obstruction of the passages, thorow which the gall is conueyed into the bladder. If there be store of excrements about the belly, they shalbe driuen away by some gentle purge, before the former preparing medicines be admini∣stred. For euil humors will sooner be caught into the great veines of the liuer: if opening medicines bee administred, these also will generate obstructions. When the excre∣ments are remoued from the belly, then those humours that cause obstructions, shalbe made obedient to nature, and then by these present remedies shalbe expelled. Clysters. Errhins. Sneezing medicines. If the hemroids did formerly runne, they must againe be opened.Auerters. Also the monethly tearms must be caused to flow. Conserue of Roses, Violets, the great conserue of our description. syr. of the iuyce of Lemmons, Pomegranates.Strength∣ners. A decoction of Guaiacum with Oxymel. iuyce of Dodder, roots of Radish. roots of Cyclamen, Rhab. Hore-hound, Fumitary. An epitheme for the liuer of red Roses, Spike, Spodium, French Wheate, Saffron, Rose-water, Buglosse, Endiue, Vineger. If this be applied to the heart, white and red Beanes, the wood Aloes, Cloues shalbe added; a bath of Violets, Endiue, Lettuce, Succhory. Diacurcuma, dialacca, Diacalamintha, Diatrium sandali, Diarrhod. Abba∣tis. Triacle, Mithridate, Trochiske of Agrimony, of Rhab. with the decoction of Ciches, Creame of Goats Milke, also the Milke of Goats that do feed vpon Sperage, Agrimony, Fennell, Parsley, worms dried in a fornace; the powder of them must be drunke with wine and Sugar. A decoction of Hore-hound, red Ciches, Sperage, Radish, and white wine; the ordure of dogs that haue fed for the most part vpon bones, as also Goose-dung. Shauings of iuory infused in wine,Correctors of accidents. or some other ope∣ning
liquor. Wormes also dried, and giuen in Wine, the roots of Fumitary boyld in water, and then drunke off. A Fomentation with the roote of Cyclamen, herewith sweat must bee caused. An odour of sharpe hot Wine: the patient as he doth sit in a bath, may receiue the fume hereof vp at his Nostrils▪ Errhins of the iuyce of Cyclamen, Nigel∣la, Beete, Anagallidis. Rosewater dropped in the patients eyes in the beginning of the disease, for this will hinder the humors running vnto the eyes. The eyes also may be wash∣ed with the water of Barley, iuyce of Sorrell, Pomegranats, and a little Vineger. Dry baths, also moyst baths with sweet water and Vineger for the eyes. A bath of Brimstone, or else a bath of the decoction of the flowers of Cammomile, Mel∣lilot, Calamint, Rosemary, Dill, Branne, Pellitory of the Wall. These doe take away the yellow colour of the eyes, and soften the hardnesse of the liuer. A more particular method seruing for the cure of ICTERITIA, or IAVN∣DISE. A Clyster.℞ leaues of Fennell, Parsley, ana ℥ i. Scolopendriae. M i. ss, leaues of Mallowes, Coleworts, ana M i. of Dodder, M ss, senae Alex. Polipodij quercini, ℥ i. ss, Epithymi, ℥ i. Colocynth. ℈ ss, M i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Diacath. ℥ i. ss, oyle of Rew, ℥ i. of Cammomile, ℥ ii. of Salt, ʒ i. A Iulep.℞ sir. Byzantini, Oxymellis compositi, ℥ ii. waters of En∣diue, Succhory, Alkekengi, ana ℥ iiii. Bolus.℞ Electuarij de psillio ʒ vi. Diacath. ʒ iii. Rhab. Agarici trochiscati, ana ℈ i. Giue this in the morning, or if the pa∣tient doth rather desire a liquid thing, these may be dissol∣in the decoction of Radish, Asarum, Aristol. rot. Agrimo∣ny, Dodder. A Potion.℞ roots of Asarum, Aristolochia rot. ana ℥ ss, Fennell, Par∣ley,
℥ i. seeds of Annise, Iuniper, red Ciches, ana ℥ iii. ss. Poli∣podij quercini, ℥ i. ss, Rhab. electi, ʒ ii. ss, Ginger, Spike, ana ℈ ii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning sir. de Epithymo, Byzantini, ℥ i. ss. ℞ Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, ʒ ii. Diacath. ʒ i. ss,A draught. Diaphenic. ʒ ii. ss, Rhab. electi. ℈ ss, of Spike, gr. v. sirupe of Succhory with Rhab. ℥ ss, water of Succhory, ℥ iii. ℞ Pillulae de Rhab. Hierae simplicis Gal. Aggregatiuae,Pills. ana ℈ i. Diagridij, gr. iii. sir. of Wormwood q. s. make hereof 7 pills. ℞ Rhab. electi, ʒ i. Aloes, ʒ ii. Agarici trochiscati, ℈ ii. ss,Pills. Radicum rubiae tinctorum, Cyclaminis, ana ℈ i. Diagridij, gr. xii. sir. of Agrimony q. s. Giue ʒ i. hereof after the first sleepe. ℞ water of Endiue, ℥ vi. macerate herein of Cinnamon,A draught ℈ ss, Rhab. electi, ʒ i. Giue some of the strayning with ℥ i. Oxymellis compositi, vnto the remainder of the strayning, adde of fresh Rhab. ʒ i. of Cinnamon, gr. xii. the wa∣ter of Endiue q. s. macerate againe all these together vp∣on hot embers for the space of twenty foure houres. The strayning hereof must also in the same manner bee drunke. ℞ roots of Asarum, Radish, ana ℥ i. ss,A Vomit. boyle these in wa∣ter q. s. vntill the third part be consumed, mixe ℥ ii. of oyle with a good quantity of this decoction. ℞ Troch. de Rhab. ʒ iii. Diarrhod. abbatis, Diacurcuma,An Electu∣ary. ana ʒ ii. Diatrion sandal. ʒ i. iuyce of Dodder, Horehound, ana ℥ ss, sir. of Endiue, iuyce of Sorrell, ana q. s. ℞ flowers of Elder M iii. Dodder, M i. ss, of burnt Iuory,A Potion. ʒ i. roots of Asarum, ʒ ii. Rhab. electi, ʒ i. ss, infuse these for the space of 24. houres in lb i. ss, of strong wine, adde to the strayning of fine Sugar q. s. the patient may drinke a draught hereof two houres after they haue taken the Elec∣tuary. ℞ Troch. de Rhab. ℥ ss, Diacurcumae, ʒ ss,A mixture. of Earth Wormes
dried ʒ ii. ss, roots of Cyclamen, ℈ ii. sir. Byzantini, of Agri∣mony, ana q. s. Lozenges.℞ Diarrhod. abbatis, Diacurcumae, ana ℈ ii. Trochisc. de Rhab. ʒ i. of fine Sugar, in the water of Dodder q. s. These following may bee applyed, if the disease bee caused by the spleene. A Potion.℞ roots of Fennell, Parsely, ana ℥ i, roots of Cyclamen, rinds of the roots of Tamariske, Capers, ana ʒ ii. Dodder, M i. ss, Scolopendriae, M i. Sarsaparillae, ℥ ss, roots of Ruscus, seeds of Annise, ana ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Oxymellis simp. ℥ iiii. Another.℞ roots of Cyclamen, ʒ v. of Radish, ℥ i. roots of A∣corus, Licorice, ana ʒ vi. boyle these a little in lb ii. of white wine. After they bee macerated, adde to the strayning Oxy∣mellis simp. ℥ iiii. Giue hereof ℥ iiii. in the morning, and so lay him downe to sweat, but first he must bee purged with the following purge. A draught.℞ Diacath. ʒ iii. of Cassia, Manna Calabrina, ana ℥ ss, with Creame of Milke: this must bee giuen first of all. Another.℞ roots of Althaea, Elecampane, ana ℥ iii. of clensed Bar∣ley, M v. of Succhory, Fumitary, ana M ii. ss, leaues of Sorrell, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Violets, Buglosse, ana M i. Volubilis, Centory the lesse, ana M i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. the humour that is running towards the skinne, shall be driuen another way herewith. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the IAVNDISE. THis disease for the most part is caused by stopping of the vessels passages, thorow which the Gall is conuey∣ed from the liuer and spleene, into the bowels, by reason of grosse humors, which do heate the liuer, and generate plen∣ty of Gall therein: Therefore the belly shall first be emptied by a Clyster, for by reason of the costiuenesse thereof, the
Gall cannot descend, which should stirre vp the bowels for the auoyding of the excrements. After this, the grosse humors shall bee made obedient vnto nature, with cutting, fining and opening medicines, and after they are concoct∣ed, they shall bee thrust out of the body: then the bowels shall be strengthned, and the passages opened. If it be caused by inflamation of the liuer, that must first be cured. If there be danger of the liuers swelling, adde some Ammoniacke vn∣to a playster of Mellilot: a decoction shall bee made of the roots of Lillies, Althaa, Figs, and Raysins: also an oyntment with the oyle of sweete Almonds and Dialthaea. If it be cau∣sed by some venomous matter, hee may cast it forth with a vomit: But if it doth descend into the bowels, then a Clyster shall be vsed. If this matter doe runne thorow the whole body, Triacle with the decoction of Orange pills, Lem∣mons, Endiue, Cardum benedictus, Angelica, Buglosse, Baulme. If it bee caused by the obstruction of the Galls bladder, then purging and opening of a veine shall bee vsed. Agaricke with Rhab. is herein of great force. It will bee good to wash the skinne with a bath, and to vse such medicines as will cause sweating: for hereby the matter that doth lurke in the bo∣dy, will bee fetched out. It will also bee good for the pa∣tient to wash his face and eyes, with the water which is vsed for the bath, or else with the water of distilled Mel∣lons. A method seruing for the knowledge of the disease of the WORMES. IT is euident that Wormes may breed in many parts of the body: for they breed in rotten vlcers, in teeth, in eares, and kidneys. Yet in this chapter onely mention is made of those Wormes alone which do breed in the bowels; which are cal∣led Lumbrici. Some of these are long and round, & breed oft∣ner
then the rest, and are like the worms that do breed in the earth; some are long and broad in the likenes of gourd seeds, and these are spred sometimes ouer all the bowels; for they haue beene seene of incredible length. There are some also that are very little, if they be compared with the for∣mer, which in Latine are called Ascarides, and are like mites breeding in rotten cheese. The part affected. The guts are heere affected, for in them all sorts of wormes are bredde whereof we speake, and the straight guts are troubled with Ascarides, or mites. Long round wormes breed in the vpper guts, from whence sometimes they fall into the belly, and they are sometime voyded at the mouth, sometimes at the nose. But broad wormes which are farre longer, and thinner then the rest, are spred ouer all the guts: for by reason of their length, they do as well touch the thinne guts, as the thicke. Signes. They that are troubled with mites, haue an extreme itch in the fundament, and narrow guts, and they haue a desire to go to stoole often. And sometimes the right gut slides out of the body, but after they haue voyded somewhat, they are not so much troubled, because they are voyded for the most part with the excrement. But long and round wormes do sticke intangled in the guts passages, and then grie∣uous accidents do ensue. For through want of meate, they do often ascend vp into the stomacke, and distresseth it by biting, and doe also stirre vp such biting panyes, that dissolution, choking, also trembling of the body, and some∣times faintnes of the heart doth follow; and then great panting of the heart, and a cold sweate ensues: oftentimes a desire to vomit, and sometime they vomit: a yexing and dry cough is also stirred vp, and the face looks red, and they are cast into a sudden heate, yet it doth not last long.
Hence is it that some start out of their sleeps and do cry∣out, peraduenture they do leape out of their beds. Some doe grynd their teeth, and tosse their bodies after sundry sort; yet they are more troublesome in the day time then in the night: when they bee waking, their nose is troubled with an itch; in the night their mouth is hot with spettle, their belly swels, & is as hard as if they were troubled with the dropsy; also the belly is very much wrung. Sometime a flux likewise ensueth, and a palenesse of the face. For the most part the body is wasted, when as there are such store of wormes, that the nourishment that the patient doth re∣ceiue, is scarce sufficient to feed them, and if they do want this nourishment, presently they get vp to the stomacke, and there afflict the patient with continuall gripings; they cause the patient to haue a good appetite, and sometime a doggish and rauenous greedines, yet for the most part they are leane; they do often thirst; and inordinate Fea∣uers, somewhat like quotidians, are caused, which bring horror with them. And as the appetite is sometime great, so sometime it is very small. All these accidents must not bee expected in all men; the broad worme, when it doth trouble the patient, as it hath many signes in common with those that are round, so also a leannesse of body con∣curs; much food is desired, which being digested, is soone voyded, whereby he is forced to take fresh meate; other∣wise there wilbe a gnawing of the guts. There is also a sure signe of this broad worme noted in the stoole: for little bodies are mingled withall, like vnto Gourd and Cow∣cumber-seeds, and it is the proper excrement of these sorts of wormes. The Causes. The cause of wormes in common is rottennes, or grosse, phlegmy, and slymy matter, such as is apt to corrupt; also a putrifying heate accompanies all these, which doth prepare this matter, and then it is wrought vp by the perfusion of naturall heate, which doth giue life to the wormes. By
salt, sharpe, or bitter humours, wormes are neuer genera∣ted, but rather are destroyed by them. In conclusion, Sum∣mer and sweet fruits which are soone rotted, do breed wormes. Prognostiques. Many men haue made a slight matter of being troubled with round worms, but in the end haue proued, that the danger of being molested with them, is not small: for they do eate vp many, and they do so fret the guts of others, that they bring them in danger of death: the greater worms are more dangerous then the lesser, many then few, red then white, liuing then dead; but such as are diuersly coloured are worse then all the rest; for they are a signe of a far greater putrifaction. Ascarides are least dangerous, be∣cause they be little and slender; and because they do breed in a place most remote from the principall parts of the body, namely, in the streight gut. Oftentimes grieuous diseases are caused by them, and sometime they procure sudden death; sometimes they do cast one into a swound; sometimes they do bring the falling sicknes, and a rauen∣ous appetite, sometime the collicke, or an inordinate Fea∣uer, which doth afflict the patient twice or thrice with cold and hot fits in the space of 24 houres; for the most part they annoy children, and such as are come to ripenes of yeers. Wormes voyded in the beginning of a Feauer, sig∣nifies no good. For by them may be perceiued, that there is great store of rotten and pernitions matter in the body, if they be voyded symptomatically in the state and heighth of a Feauer: but if they be voyded in the declination of a Feauer, there is some hope of health. A method seruing for the cure of the WORMES. THe ayre must be temperate; their meate such as doth breed good iuyce, and they may eat largely, or else the
wormes will gnaw their guts for want of sustenance. Also sweet meates must be giuen; for hereby the wormes are quieted. Cheese, Milke, and fish must be auoyded, and all such as do breed phlegmy humours; He may drinke wine mingled with water. It is better for him to sleepe in the night then day: the excrements of the belly must be kept loose, all perturbations of the mind must be auoyded. Sirupe of Wormewood, Endiue, of Succhory,Preparers. with Rhab. de Acetositate citri; the water of grasse, Purslane, Wormwood. Agaricus Troch. The infusion of Agaricke,Emptiers. in Oxymel. Hiera picra, Diacol. common Pills or pestilentiall Pills eyther eaten or layd to the nauell, are very good. Pillula ex Aloe, myrrha, Rhab. Sale gemmae. Diaturbith cum Rhab. is very good to kill and expell the wormes. Diacarthamus is also good for the same purpose. Rhab. Aloae, Turbith. A deco∣ction of the roots of Wormseed, Angelica, Grasse, Fine Wheate, Barkes and roots of Capers, Borage, Buglosse. Violets, seeds of Sanctonicus: adde vnto these Diaturb. with Rhab. A suppositor with Aloes, seeds of Sanctonicus, Coriander, Harts-horne, Myrrhe, Hony, and the gall of an Oxe: The matter whereof the wormes are generated is expelled by these medicines. The great conserue of our description. Mithridate,Destroyers of wormes. Tria∣cle of Andromachus, Hiera picra, Wormseed, seeds of San∣ctonicus, Male Pimpernell, roots of Grasse, Male Fennell, & Vineger. Centory the lesse with the seeds of Sanctonicus, Aristoloch. Rot. both Southernwood, al kinds of wormwood, Bitter-wort, Garlicke. Aloes▪ Seeds of Lupines, Purslane. Orange-leaues, of Peaches, wild Mints, water Germander, Turmentill, Dittany with the decoction of Sauine, Colo∣quintida, Agaricke, Harts-horne, the iuyce of blacke Hel∣lebore, Plantane, Wormwood. Water of Wormwood, Rue, Agrimony, Valerian, Mug-wort. syr. of Purslane with the seed of Orange, Oyle of Violets, with Euphorbius. Vnguen∣tum de arthanita. An oyntment for the belly and stomake
of the oyle of Rew, Wormewood, Mints, seeds of Sanctoni∣cus, Aloes, Vineger, the Gall of a Sow, Milke, Honey, and Su∣gar. An Emplayster for the nauell, of Aloes, the gall of a Sheepe, Oxe, and Sow, Wormewood, Wormeseed, Tormen∣till, triacle, oyle of Mints, Wormewood, iuyce of Peaches, Wormewood, tosted bread macerated in the best Vineger. These medicines may diuers waies bee applyed, eyther take them in at the mouth, or else they may bee giuen in a Cly∣ster, or else they may bee layd to the nauell: if they must bee taken in at the mouth, the patient must fast a pretty while before hee take them, and if for want of meate they pinch and gnaw the stomacke, pleasing medicines shall be giuen. Driuers out of Wormes.When they bee killed, the former emptiers shall againe be administred; Pills of Rufus, Triacle, Mithridate; oyle of sowre Grapes. A Clyster of the decoction of a Pullet, Bar∣ley, Sebesten, Sugar and fresh Butter. An oyntment of the oyle of Rew, Wormewood, the iuyces of the same, powder of Dittany, Tormentill, Hartshorne; a playster with leaues of Sothernwood, Rew, Cresses, meale of Lupines, leaues of Horehound, Mercury, Sage, Wormewood, Gall of an Oxe, Aloes. A Fomentation of the same. A suppositor for the Worms in the straight gut. ℞ oyle of Rew wherein a qanti∣ty of Aloes, and Cow gall is dissolued: this must bee put in∣to the body by a pipe, or else it may bee made with Hony, and a good quantity of Aloes. Also a suppositor may bee made of fat lard, and so thrust into the fundament, a thred must bee tied vnto it, that it may bee plucked backe againe. When the Wormes are killed, lest that sore paine should afflict the body, they must presently be expelled, lest rotten feauers should bee caused by their maligne humors, or else some other sore humors breake out.
A more particular method seruing for the cure of the WORMES. ℞ sir. of Succhory with Rhab. Byzantini,A Iulep. ana ℥ ii. waters of Fennell, Parsly, ana ℥ v. Giue this in the morning, and make hereof three draughts. ℞ roots of Grasse,A Potion. wheat ana ℥ i. roots and rinds of Ca∣pers, ana ʒ i. ss Tormentill, ℥ ss, flowers of Borage, Buglosse, Violets, ana M ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill halfe bee consumed; vnto lb i, ss, of the strayning, adde Diaturbith with Rhab. ℥ i. ss. ℞ seeds of Plantane, of Wormeseed, Lupines,A powder. Cento∣ry the lesse, ana ʒ i. of Aloes, Myrrhe, ana ℥ ss, of Hartshorne burnt, shauings of Iuory, ana ʒ i. ss. roots of Tormentill, Dit∣tany, ana ℈ iiii. shauings of Vnicornes horne, ℈ ii. ℞ of Hartshorne burnt, ʒ ss, Rhab. seeds of Endiue,Another. roots of Tormentill, Dittany, ana ℈ ss, seeds of Sancto∣nicus, gr. x. of the finest Sugar, ʒ ii. Giue at one time ʒ i. hereof. ℞ seeds of Sanctonicus, ʒ i. ss, roots of Fearne,A draught. Tormen∣till, Dittany, ana ℥ ss, Centory the lesse, M ss, steepe these in the best wine ouer hot embers, for the space of 16. houres, the patient may drinke of this strayning, ℥ iii. but first ℥ i. of Triacle must be added hereto. ℞ of the Pestilentiall pills of Rufus, ʒ i. of Triacle, ʒ ss,Another. de∣coction of the seeds of Sanctonicus, ℥ iii. ℞ of Triacle, ʒ i. male Pimpernell, water Germander,Another. ana ℈ ii. Giue this with the decoction of Sanctonicus. ℞ roots of grasse, ℥ iii. seeds of Sanctonicus, ℥ ss,A Potion. Centory the lesse, M i. ss, Licorice, ℥ i. Wormeseed, Rhab. ana ʒ iii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. Giue ℥ iii, hereof with ʒ i. of Hartshorne, burnt, and of Sugar q. s. ℞ of the roots of Dittany, Elecampane, ana ℥ i. Sauin,Another.
Licorice, ℥ i. heads of Garlicke, ʒ i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill halfe be consumed: adde hereto some new Cowes milke, of Barley flower, Saffron, and Sugar, ana q. s. A draught.℞ of male Pimpernell, seeds of Sanctonicus, Annise, ana ʒ i. (if the patient bee not troubled with a feauer) Pep∣per, Pulpae colocinth. ana ℈ i. Salis nitri, gr. vi. Mellis des∣pumati, ℥ i. water of Purslane, ℥ vi. Giue this at two draughts. Another.℞ seeds of Sanctonicus. ʒ ii. macerate these in Aqua viae, for the space of 24. houres adde vnto two ounces of the strayning of Triacle ʒ i. An Vn∣guent.℞ oyle of Tiles, ℥ i. ss, Aloes, ʒ iii. ss, Pulpae colocynth. ʒ i. ss of the gall of a Bull, ℥ i, of the flowers of Lupines, ʒ i. iuyce of blacke Hellebore, ʒ vi. with Waxe q. s. A Cata∣plasme.℞ rootes of Aristol. rot. Dittany, Elecampane, ana ℥ i. Cen∣tory the lesse, M iii. leaues of Wormewood, Arsesmart, Sou∣thernwood, ana M i, ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill they be soft, then adde of Aloes, ℥ i. Myrrhe, ʒ iiii. flower of the seeds of Purslane, Sanctonicus, Lupines, ana ʒ iii. of Oxes gall, oyle of Rew, Wormewood, ana q. s. this must be apply∣ed vnto the belly, and ʒ i. of Hartshorne, with the water of Hony must be taken first. Another.℞ roots of Ditanny, Tormentill, ana ℥ i. of Fearne, ℥ ss, Cen∣tory the lesse, Sothernwood, Horehound, ana M ii. flow∣ers of Lupine, Oxes gall, ℥ i. ss, oyl of Wormewood, q. s. An Em∣playster.℞ of Centory the lesse, seeds of Lupines, ana ℥ i. ss, Ni∣gella, Aloes, Wormewood, ana ʒ ii. Sothernewood, Harts∣horne burnt, ana ʒ i. male Pimpernell, ℥ ss, roots of Dittany, Wormeseed, Calamint, Origan, ℈ ii. ss, Myrrhe, Aloes, flow∣ers of Lupines, ana ʒ i. ss, iuyce of Wormewood, Rew, Oxes gall, ana ℥ ss, oyle of Tiles, ℥ i. ss, Waxe and Turpentine q. s. this must be layd to the belly. A Fomen∣tation.℞ roots of Dittany, Elecampane, ana ℥ i. of Sauine, ℥ i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be consumed: this must also be vsed about the belly.
℞ Rhab. turbith. Hierae picrae Gal. ana ℈ i. Ginger,Pills. Myrrhe ana ℈ ss, Saffron, Salis gemmae, ana gr. vi. iuyce of blacke Hel∣lebore q. s. make hereof 8. Pills. ℞ Diaturb. with Rhab. ʒ vi. Agarici trochihiscati,Bolus. ℈ i. Triacle, ℈ ss, of fine Sugar q. s. ℞ Diaturb. with Rhab. ʒ iii. Aloes, Myrrhe,A draught. Agarici tro∣chiscati, ana ℈ i. Salis gemmae, gr. v, sirupe of Succhory with Rhab. ℥ i. water of Purslane, ℥ iiii. ℞ of Goats and Cowes milke, ℥ xii. of course Sugar,A Clyster. ℥ i. Hony, ℥ ss, two yolkes of Eggs: this may bee giuen when as it may bee discerned that the Wormes are killed. Appendix seruing for the cure of the WORMES. FIrst of all the maligne and corrupt matter, whereby these Wormes are generated, shall bee made obedient vnto na∣ture, and then expelled with a purging medicine. Agaricus trochiscatus, Diaturb. with Rhab. and many other formerly recited, are good for this purpose. When it may be discerned by the signes, that Wormes are in the body, presently such medicines must be giuen as may kill them. But when medi∣cines for this purpose are receiued in at the mouth, then also a playster must bee layd vnto the belly; but before such me∣dicines bee giuen that may kill the Wormes, the patient must drink new Cowes milke for the space of 4. or 5. dayes, and the medicine prescribed for the killing of wormes, may be dissolued in Cow milke, or else they may bee administred with Hony and Sugar. If children bee vnwilling to receiue bitter things, they must be forced thereto; eyther they may bee put into a sirenge, and by that meanes conueyed into their mouthes, & body, or by a clyster pipe; afterward such shall bee administred as will expell them: Sowre, bitter, sharpe, and salt things, not onely hinder the breeding of
Wormes, but doth also kill and expell them, if they bee bred in the body. As for the small Wormes in the fundament, a Clyster of the decoction of Arsesmart, Wormewood, Hiera picra, oyle of bitter Almonds may bee giuen; or a suppositor of the same, and Aloes must bee sprinkled vpon it; and it may be rowled in birdlime, because the Wormes will sticke hereto; suppositors are best for the killing of the Wormes, called Ascarides. Here one thing must bee obserued, that although the wormes are voyded at the mouth, or lower parts, yet we must not presently seeke remedies for the expelling of the rest, because it doth often happen in sharpe diseases, whenas plenty of rottennes doth lie hid in the in∣ward parts of the body; but first we must make that hu∣mour obedient vnto nature: and rather endeauour to driue that out then the wormes; otherwise there wilbe danger of increasing the disease, and killing the patient. A method seruing for the knowledge of DYSENTERIA, or FLVX of the Belly. A Dysentery so properly called, is a flux of the belly with exulceration, and excoriation, whereto great paine with gripings is ioyned. Chiefly fat corpulent bodies are galled by sharpe humours, and sometimes the filmes of the inner tunicle of the bowels are voyded by stoole; this happens when the disease hath taken deepe roote in the guts sometime blood is voyded, and it is a signe of some filthy vlcer, if great store of blood be voyded without paine: if it doth stinke much, then the vlcer is putrified; euen as com∣menbdable matter is a signe of a cleane vlcer. Sometimes the lood is voyded without a flux, first, in regard of the weaknes of the liuer, and then the excrements doe re∣semble the water where in raw flesh hath beene washed. Secondly, in regard of the obstruction of the higher vessels, & then that which is voyded downward, is cleere: and some∣times they are suppressed for the space of 3 or 4 days and there, worse excrements are voyded then the first, and after,
thinne bloody matter, a grosse humour not much vnlike wine-lees is voyded; sometime without any vlcer of the bowels or obstruction of the vpper veines, or weaknes of the liuer, red and liquid blood is voyded in great plenty, and at certaine distances of times. The parts affected. The inward parts are affected; and those things that are voyded, do testifie as much; the excrements are thicke, and some fat or bloody drops are mixed therewith, & some∣times foamy, which is voyded with wind; this blood for the most part as it were, swims vpon the excrements, if the vlcer be fastened on the inward bowels. But if the paine rest about the nauell, or somewhat higher, and that a quantity of blood is mixed and drowned with the stoole, and if it doth stinke, and be cholericke, and haue diuers colours, and if great gripings and pains are stirred vp, and if it doth cause swounding and faintnes of the heart, the disease is in the smaller guts, and then fat geere is seldomer auoyded. whenas the gut called Ieiunum intestinum is af∣fected, the paine is aboue the nauell, and a great quey∣sines of stomacke, and propension to vomit ariseth, and oftentimes vomiting doth follow, also thirst, and loathing of meate is sometimes caused; the excrements are raw, and blackish blood is mixed therewith. In this case a dan∣gerous Feauer follows, insomuch that the strength is almost dissolued, and the patient is almost at deaths doore. This disease is a breach or solution of the continuity of the parts. Signes. In the beginning of this disease, for the most part biting, cholericke, and excrements of diuers colours are voy∣ded, wherewith at the last some quantity of blood is mixed: also there is a griping paine of the bowels, the excrements are liquid and voyded by little and little; and after this a small scantling of fat and flesh is voyded; and sometimes also parcels of the bowels inner tunicles do appeare in the excrements that are voyded, and before this excretion, the guts were very much wrung, whereby a great desire of
going to the stoole, and paine in the fundament doth con∣curre, and hereby the patient is not onely hindered and molested in his sleepe, but also he is altogether depriued of naturall rest: they do also thirst often, and are troubled with agues, especially if the vlcer be in the vpper bowels, and if the humour be sharpe; at which time also blood is mixed with the excrements, rather then when the vlcer is in the thicke bowels. The Causes. The flux is caused by sharpe humours, and such as are biting, and very much putrified, whether they be bredde in the bowels, or else come from some other parts of the body, as from the greater veines of the liuer, spleene, and other adioyning parts, but especially if these humours do sticke in the winding of the guts. It is also caused by brinish phlegmy yellow choler, also by burnt and blacke choler, which are caused by continuall crudities of sharpe and naughty meates, euill fruits, venemous and excoriating medicines, and by extreme cold or heate. Sometimes a dyssentery is caused by inflamation, but that wilbe knowne by the signes of an inflamation. Prognostiques. The fayling of the stomack, increase of thirst, continuall flux of the belly, are bad signes; also if the vrine bee not answerable to that which is drunke, and if black excrements be voyded, the body being leane, if parcels of fat and fesh and pieces of the guts be voyded, as also if the patient be weake, the flux is mortall, because the flesh cannot grow together, nor the vlcer be made hard. A loathing of meate, especially if the patient haue an ague, is dangerous in long fluxes. Those fluxes are worst, when the excrements do re∣semble the colour of a Leeke, and when they be blackish, and do stinke very much a dyssentery comming vpon such as are troubled with the tumour of the spleene, is good; for hereby melancholy humours which were in the spleene
are euacuated. A dissentery which is in the small guts, is hardly cured, but it wilbe cured with more ease, if the di∣sentery be in the greater guts. If it be caused by blacke cho∣ler, the dissentery is hardly cured, because a canker doth come withall. These frettings are with great paine: if there∣fore they do depend vpon a deepe and old vlcer, and if there be a great failing of strength, there is hope of life. Then the excrements do stinke very much, and are light, and of a blackish colour. If the dissentery be turned into a flux of the stomacke, there is great danger: a vehement collicke sometimes followes the flux of the belly, because the thinne is expelled, and the thicke is left. All fluxes of the belly that do cause a dropsy, are mortall, because the cure of the dropsy must be by the flux of the belly. A method seruing for the cure of DISSENTERIA, or FLVX of the Belly. THe ayre must be temperate: the patients diet must be easy of digestion, and such that will breed good blood, because the concoctiue and retentiue faculty are feeble. The flesh of Hens, Pullets, Capons, Partridges, Turtles, Blackbirds, Pheasants, rost Eggs are good. Furmenty made with Rice, Amylum, Panicum, grated Bread and Milke may be giuen the patient to eate, but first the seeds of Plantane and a little quantity of Cinnamon, must be ad∣ded thereto. The broaths of the aforesayd fleshes are also good: binding, salt, and sowre nourishment must be auoy∣ded, because of the vlcer that is in the bowels. He may drinke red astringent wine, whereto Saccharum rosatum must be added: exercise and motion must be auoyded; and because watchings are hurtfull for the flux of the belly, the patient may be permitted to sleepe at any time. All per∣turbations of the mind must be auoyded. Sir. of Violets, syr. Rosatus, Endiue, Succhory, Quinces,Preparers.
waters of Plantane, Buglosse, Wormwood. When some euacuation hath beene vsed in the beginning of the disease then the matter may be digested, and made obedient vnto nature, especially if there be no imminent danger, and if the excrements be not voyded in such plenty. Emptiers.Myrobal. Citrini, Kebuli; Tamarindi, Rhab. Agaricke when the excrements are phlegmy. Diacath. syr. of Roses, Violets. A Clyster: sharpe, cholericke, and corrupt hu∣mours which runne to the part affected, shalbe expelled by such medicines as do moderately loosen; & lest that we should bring flux vpō flux by so doing, moderately astringents shall also be mixed with them, though they were not digested before: for by this meanes a passage for the maligne humors is opened, that they that ouerflow may be euacuated, & the obstructiō may be taken away: but this euacuation must of∣ten be reiterated, because new matter will presently supply the place of that which was voyded. At the first therefore there shalbe no astringents vsed; for hereby great danger would ensue. For a Feauer, inflamation, vlcers of the bow∣els, & conuulsions are often stirred vp; for the corrupt mat∣ter doth arise vp to the vpper part, when their euacuation is hindered. But it shalbe better to fetch it forth with a Clyster, then with a potion, if the matter do sticke in the thicke bowels; and if the matter sticke in the thinne guts, a potion is better then a Clyster. Scammony, and all other sharpe medicines must be auoyded, as Electuarium rosatum Diaprunum solutinum. Auerters.At the first the shoulder veine shalbe opened, before there be any vlcer, if the strength will indure it, and if the pa∣tient do feele great paine, and if there be a great inflamation, or that some vsuall euacuation was auoyded, because this doth draw backe the course of the blood, and mitigates the sharpnes thereof: This shall also be effected, if the patient be troubled with a sudden suppression of the belly, because i is to be feared, that these defiled excrements which were vsually voyded, should ouerwhelme some noble bowell.
But when there is no vlcer, a veine shal not be opened, for it doth not cure the vlcer, and yet it doth cast downe the strength. A gentle vomit is good. The vrine must be brought downe, frictions of the arms and shoulders blades, painfull ligatures of the same parts, lotions of the feet and hands in astringent wine. A dry bath wch may procure sleepe; this may be made with bricks heat red hot, and wrapped vp in woollen cloths, but they must first be sprinkled with wine, and so layd vnto the patients feet. Trochisci de terra sigillata,Stayers of the flux. with the iuyce of shep∣heards-pouch, Trochisci de spodio Mesuae with the seeds of Sorrell▪ Electuarium diatrion sandal Diarrhod abbatis, syr. of Quinces, dry Roses, Violes, Myrtle, Poppy, acharum rosatum, conserue of Roses, Quinces, water of Roses, Plan∣tane, first Masticke must be boyled in this water, and then Saccharum rosatum must be added. Athanasia, Philonium Persicum with the iuyce of Plantane; Diacodium Actuarij cum aqua Caelesti. Spodium must be boyled herein. The iuyc of Goosberries, Barberries▪ Medlers, Quinces, Bul∣leys, Harts-horne burnt and washed: and if there be any suspition of virulent matter that doth lurke in the body, the liuer of a Wolfe, or kid, the Coagulum of a Hare. Water and Milke mixed together are good, some dissolue white paper in Milke; and then beat it fine with Beane flower, and thereto do adde fine Sugar, with a smal quantity of Cin∣namon, and then do make hereof a furmenty. Raysins the stones being taken out, and then beaten with Hony, Spo∣dium, and Sugar. Rhab. also is very good; Pistakes, Cubebs, Liuer-wort. A potion of the water wherein Sage, Smach, flowers of Pomegranates, Comphreys, the roots of Wall∣wort, Roses, Plantane, also Masticke shalbe boyled herein. A fomentation with the water wherein the roots of Plan∣tane, Roses, French Wheate, Endiue, Spodium. An oyntment of the Oyles of Roses, Quinces. Anoyntment of the Oyle of Quinces, Carabe, Masticke, powder of Roses, Bol Armony, Corall, Sanguis draconis. A cataplasme of tosted bread,
Mastike, oyle of Quinces, Roses strong wine. Emplastrum Diaphaenic. in a cold cause is good. When the greater part of the corrupt matter is euacuated, these astringent medicines shalbe vsed; but by no meanes at the first: for this corrupt matter will then cause a Feauer, Plurify, inflamatiō of the in∣ner bowels, conuulsions, & other grieuous accidents. For it is to be feard, that the matter being suppressed before its time, shoul get vp into the vpper parts. And therefore we wil vse such medicines that do bind in a meane, and so we may proceed vnto stronger. Always those things must be ming∣led with them,Clensers. that may strengthen the liuer and stomacke. A potion of Barley-water, made in the forme of ptisan, whereto great and store of Saccharum rosatum shalbe ad∣ded. A Clyster of the decoction of Roses, Plantane, Lupines, Bole armony, Sanguinis drachonis, Gumme Arabicke, Frankincense, Myrtle, Polygonium, Shepheards pouch, parched Barly, Tutiae, Litargirij, Troch. de Terra Lemnia, water wherein steele hath beene quenched. We will leaue our Oyles, because they do hinder the knitting together of the parts. Also a Clyster of the decoction of Barley, Sugar, yeolks of Egs, or else red wine, Creame of Goats Milke, Hydromel, Mel rosatum, or of the decoction of Branne, corne, red Cyches, the wood Guaiacum, Roses, Plantane, Lupines. If the vlcer be deepe, the Clyster in the latter place shalbe vsed, because it doth clense the sharpe matter that doth exulcerate; and when the excrements that are voyded be cleere, the Clyster in the first place shalbe giuen. Clysters in this disease are best.Correctors of acci∣dents. A Clyster of the decoction of Roses, Oyle of Roses, Mucilago seminis psyllij, is good, also sheeps Milke, or cowes Milke, wherein a hote stone hath been quenched, also Roses may be boyled, & yeolks of Egs must be added, that it may sticke the longer. Athanasia, Philonium Romanum, Plls of Hounds-toung; syr. of Poppy, Saccharum rosatum; decoction of the seeds of Poppy, in Rose water. A Clyster of sheeps Milke, Tragaeanth, Goats grease, Butter, Oyle of
Roses, Pills of Hounds tongue. The former of these do as∣swage the greatest pains; the latter doe procure sleepe, and make the matter more vnapt to flow out of the belly. A more particular method seruing for the cure of DYSSENTERIA, or FLVXE of the belly. ℞ of clensed Barley, M iiii. boyle them in water q. s.A Clyster. vn∣to lb i. adde to the strayning of course Sugar, ℥ i. ss, of the yolkes of Egges, no ii. this must bee often giuen, that the inward parts may bee clensed from their sharpe excre∣ments. ℞ of the decoction of Plantane, Roses,Another. parched Bar∣ley, lb i. Mellis rosacei, of course Sugar, ana ℥ i. oyle of Roses, ℥ i. ss, of the yolkes of Eggs no ii. Giue this a little before meate, this sowres and clenseh the in∣ward parts; also a Clyster may bee made with the vrine of children, and water of Honey, especially if there bee an vlcer. ℞ of the decoction of Barley lb i. Mucilago psyllij,Another. ex∣tracted with Rosewater, ℥ ii. Goats grease, ℥ i. ss, Mellis ro∣sacei, ℥ i. Phylonij persici ℈ i. ss, oyle of Roses, ℥ ii. this doth mitigate the paine. ℞ roots and leaues of wilde Mallows, Dill, ana M i. ss,Another. leaues of Mallows, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Ro∣ses, ana M i. seeds of Quinces, ℥ ss, seeds of Linus, Fen∣greeke, ana ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning oyle of Roses, ʒ viii. This doth miti∣gate the paine which is caused by the sharpenesse of the hu∣mours. ℞ leaues of Wormewood, Pellitory of the wall,Another. Cento∣ry the lesse, Bete, ana M ss, Red Roses, M i. seeds of Lupines, red Ciches, ana ʒ iii. of Branne, Barley, M i. ss, boyle these
in Creame to lb i adde to the strayning, Mellis rosacei, ℥ iii. Another.℞ of huld Barley, Plantane, Sheapherds-pouch, Poli∣gonij, ana M i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning of Bole Armony, Frankincense, Masticke, San∣guinis draconis, ana ʒ i. iuyce of Plantane, ℥ i. gumme Ara∣bicke, Tragacanth. ana ℈ iiii. the yeolke of one Egge. A small quantity hereof shall bee iniected, if wee doe intend to binde and consolidate the bowels, and when wee doe intend to clense them, a greater quantity shall bee iniec∣ted. A Potion.℞ Rhab. electi, ʒ i. ss, Corticum myroabl. citrinorum, ʒ iii. macerate these a little in red Wine, roots of Plantane, ℥ i. Licorice, ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto ℥ x. adde to the strayning Mellis despumati, ℥ . Giue this at twice. A draught.℞ Corticum mirobal. citrinorum, ʒ iii. Kebulorum, ʒ ii. beate these well together: adde of Raysins, ℥ i. Spike, ℈ ss, boyle these in the water of Plantane, q. s. vnto ℥ iii. strayne these forth very well: adde thereto Rhab. electi, ℈ ii. ss, a lit∣tle Sugar. Another.℞ Rhab. ℈ iiii. of Harts-horne burnt, and washed in Plan∣tane water, and Cinnamon water, ana ℈ i. water of Endiue, ℥ iii. Another.℞ Rhab. myrobal. citrinorum, ana ʒ i. ss, Kebulorum, ʒ i. Giue ʒ i. hereof with ℥ ss, of the sir. of Roses, water of Plan∣tane, Shepheards pouch, ana ℥ i. ss, A Potion.℞ of red Roses, M ii. of Violets, M i. seede of Plantane, Quinces, ana ʒ iii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning sirupe of Quinces, ℥ iii. and if wee doe intend to consolidate the inward parts, of Frankincense, ʒ ii. must bee added, of Bole Armony, ʒ i. Terra sigillatae, ʒ i. A Iulep.℞ sir. of Myrtle, Roses, Quinces, ana ℥ i. ss, of red Wine, ℥ x. A draught.℞ sir. of Quinces, dry Roses, ana ℥ ii. ss, of the former de∣coction ℥ iiii. Giue this at two seuerall times.
℞ sirupe of Roses, rob Berberorum, the iuyce of Quinces,A mixture. boyled, ana  i. Bole Armony, Yerrae igillatae, sanguinis dra∣conis, Hartshorne burnt, ana ʒ ss, conserue of old Roses, q. s. he may take hereof often. ℞ of Hartshorne burnt, Bole Armony, troch. de spodio,A powder. sanguinis draconis, ana ʒ i. seeds of Plantane, ʒ ss, Gumme Tra∣gacanth. ʒ i. red Corall, ℈ i. roots of Tormentill, ℈ ii. Myrrhe ℈ i. ss, Giue ʒ i. hereof with the water of Plantane. ℞ seeds of Plantane, ℥ ii. Cinnamon, ʒ ii. bruise these,Another. and giue them in broth. ℞ Conserue of old Roses. ℥ i. Hartshorne burnt and wash∣ed in Plantane water,A mixture. ʒ i. Sp. Diatrion sandal. Troch. de ca∣rabe, ana ℈ ss, iuyce of boyld Quinces, ʒ vi. sirupe of dry Roses, q. s. the decoction of Barley, with Mel rosatum may bee mixed with it, if it bee time to clense the body of these humors. ℞ water of Plantane, Succhory, Roses, Sorrell,Nectar. ana ʒ ii. Sacchari rosati, ʒ vi. Sp. Diarrhodonis abbatis, without Muske, Diatrion sandal. ana ʒ ss, Cloues, Mace, ana ℈ ss, rob de Berberis, ℥ i. ss, of fine Sugar ℥ ii. ℞ Diacydonites sine Sp. ℥ i. ss,An Elec∣tuary. Gumme tragacanth. ℈ ii. troch. de spodio, de terra Lemnia, ana ʒ i. ss, seeds of Sorrell, Plantane, Roses, ana ʒ i. flowers & rinds of Pomegranats, ana ℈ ii. of Hartshorne burnt, red Corrall, Amylum, ana ℈ ii. ss, sir. of Myrtle, Quinces, ana q. s. ℞ roots of wild Mallows, Longwort, ana ℥ ss,A Fomen∣tation. flowers of Roses, Cammomile, ana M i. seeds of Myrtle, Pomegranats, Sumach, Plantane, ana ʒ ii. flowers and rindes of Pomegra∣nates, ana ʒ i. ss, boyle these in red astringent Wine; this is for the belly. ℞ oyle of Quinces, Roses, Myrtle, Dill, ana ℥ i. trochisco,An Vn∣guent. rum de spodio, ʒ i. ss, Bole Armony, seeds of Myrtle, ana ʒ i. Masticke, ʒ ss. a little Wax. This shalbe vsed, when as the bo∣dy is purged, for else it would force the virulent matter in∣to the body. The like may be said of all other astringent me∣dicines.
An Em∣playster.℞ Emplaystri diaphaenici, ℥ i. red Roses, rinds of Pomegra∣nats, Sanguinis draconis, ana ʒ i. seeds of Plantane, Myrtles, ana ℈ iiii. bole Armony, Mastike, ana ʒ ii. oyle of Mastike, Myrtle, Roses, ana ℥ ss, of Waxe and Raysins q. s. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the FLVX of the Belly. AT the first the flux must not bee hindred, but the in∣ward parts must bee clensed by a Clyster, and it must often be vsed, and it may be guessed that the matter is grosse, clammy, or sharpe, whereby an vlcer may be caused: such medicines shall bee mixed with this Clyster, as will lessen the sharpenesse of the humours, and clense the body. Al∣so such medicines must bee added, that will mitigate the paine, if through too much vse of abstrging medi∣cines, the patient bee tormented, At the length cly∣sters shalbe giuen, that are astringent, and doe hindr the fluxe, whereto such things may bee added, as will consoli∣date, and strengthen the bowels: these Clysters must bee kept longer then the other: purging medicines also shalbe administred, that the corrupt matter may be voy∣ded, and then the flux must be hindered, which may be effected by turners aside formerly mentioned. If the vlcer be in the vpper bowels, potions are best, especially such as do asswage, the paine, heate, and inflamation: Then such as clense the vlcer caused by a sharpe matter; lastly astringent, whereto strengthners, and such as do beget new flesh. If sharpe humours be caused by a cold distem∣per of the liuer, this distemper will be amended with the oyle of Roses, Cerato sandalino, and other medicines of the like kind.
A method seruing for the knowledge of the COLLICKE. THe Collicke is a continuall passion of the bowell which is called Colon, and there follows it a difficulty o voy∣ding the excrements, and wind at the lower parts. A grie∣uous paine, and sore prickings doe come by fits, because this bowell is thicke and sinewy, whereupon if any hurtfull thing creepe into its tunicles, it is not presently driuen out. This disease hath taken its name from the part affected, viz. of the bowell Colon, wherein winds are very often gathe∣red, for this is the proper receptacle of them. This disease hath affinity with Iliaca passio, because they that are affect∣ed with eyther of these diseases, are wrung with vehements and sharpe paine; their bellies are bound, and they vomit often, but in the Iliaca passio, the paine is more vehement, because the thin gut wherein this disease doth lurke, is ten∣derer, & hath a quicker sense of the paine, then the gut Colon, and the vomit is also more troublesome, because it comes oftner. The stomacke is quite ouerthrowne, and sometimes a swounding, sometimes doating comes withall, and often∣times cold sweates. This paine also wanders vpward from the Nauels region, and is more settled. But the paine of the Collicke doth rather pinch the side close by the stomacke, where the gut Colon doth passe. The parts affected. The looser gut called Colon, is chiefly affected, but signes of the part affected will appeare by that which fol∣lowes. Signes▪ A vehement paine, as though the patient were bored thorow with an auger' is stirred vp in the inside of the bow∣ell
where Colon is seated, and for the most part it is vncon∣stant, for sometimes it doth pinch on the one side, then one the other, now it doth enter on the region of the liuer, anon the spleene is affected, sometime the stomacke, then the reines, for the most part it doth pinch the least share, because the Colon is there somewhat narrower; and hereby it is discerned from the paine of the kidneys, which comes oftner then the paine of the collicke, also the kidneys paine is alwaies in one place, eyther in the right or left side of the reines. The Collicke is eased by lenitiue Clysters, and Fo∣mentations, with much more speede then the paine of the reines can be asswaged. In the paine of the reynes, the vrine is watry, and a small quantity is voyded, and some∣time it is altogether suppressed, but at the length it is voy∣ded in great abundance, which is sometimes thicke. The paines of the collicke do afflict the belly, vnlesse it be caused by thinne phlegme, for then it is stedfast; also the paines of the Collicke doe chiefly molest the right side, & from thence is carried to the lest; also it leaues some impression neere vnto the reines and backe: and it is a more certaine token of the Collicke, if the paine bee felt in the places aboue the re∣gion of the kidneys: their bellies sometimes are so bound, that nothing is voyded, not so much as winde. In the paine of the reines little sandy bodies, sometime astone, or bloo∣dy geare may bee perceiued when the vrine is settled, and when the stone is voyded, they are freede immediately of their paine; but none of these are voyded with the vrine in the Collicke, onely a thicke & phlegmy choler is mixed with the vrine. Sometime vomit, oftner a propension to vomit is caused in the Collicke, and these be more troublesome and continuall, then in the paine of the kidneys. The appetite and concoction is weakened, and by reason of great paines the vrine is gally, and scalding hot, and doth falsely represent a cholericke nature: and this happens, because choler is con∣ueyed to the kidneys, by reason the passages of the bowels, thorow which the gall is vsually voyded, are stopped, that
neyther belching or wind can any way get out. The Causes. There be many causes of the collicke, because diuers matters do runne to the guts by reason of their widenes. But there be foure chiefe causes of this disease; eyther first it is caused by inflamation of the same part, and then the paine is more settled and bitter, heate, thirst, an inclination to vomit, loathing of meate, & sometimes vomiting of choler doth ensue; they are bound, and retaine their vrine long; also there is an inward heate, and ague ready to molest them: or secondly it is caused by a sharpe biting humor, and then the heate and thirst, also the Feauer is not so great as if it were caused by an inflamation; coolers do not a little ease the patient; the excrements that are voyded, are mixed with choler, and in the voyding of the vrine, a sharpe paine is felt: or else thirdly it is caused by slymy and grosse humors, and by thinne phlegme that is in the filme of the Colon, and then the paine is more stedfast, and hardly to be cured, vnlesse the matter be euacuated; and the inner gut is as it were bored thorow with an anger; they do vomit phlegmy humors, and a propension to vomit oftener with belchings doth concurre; the belly is so bound, that no∣thing can passe thorow it, and if the patient doth belch, very small ease doth ensue. Hot things do ease the pati∣ent: and because that Colon is the receptacle of winds, the collicke is often caused by them, whenas great plenty of them is gathered together in those places. These are some∣time shut vp in the Colons filmes by dregs too much hard∣ned; forthly, it is caused by slymy and grosse phlegme, sticking in the common passages: and sometimes from a tumor remayning in the inner bowels, whereby the guts are so strongly pressed, hat the wind can scarce get foth, and then extreme pains are caused: the patient doth feele great gripings and rumblings in the belly, but when the stopping is so great, that the excrements can haue no way forth, Iliaca passio is caused.
Prognostiques. The collicke doth often turne into a resolution of the sinewes, or into a ioynt gowt, or into Iliaca passio: Sometime into a dropsy. Of all collicks that is the worst which is caused by an inflamation; the collicke is lesse dangerous, if the excrements be voyded in due time, or a settled paine is not felt in one part of the Colon. A method seruing for the cure of the COLLICKE. THe ayre must be temperately hote and inclining to dri∣nes; yet the natiue heate of the outward and former part of the belly must be kept hote with warme cloaths. Their meate must be easy of digestion, and such as doth generate very few superfluities, it must be moist, and not windy or slymy. Waterfowles are naught, but ul∣lets, Capons, Hens, Birds of mountaines, also Veale, the flesh of Kids may be giuen, and they must rather be boyled then rosted. The fat broths of Pullets and Capons are good, because they are better conueyed thorow the bowels passages. Also with these broths Thyme, Maioram, Origan, Hyssop, Fennell, Sperage, Sauory and Parsley may be boy∣led; and sometime Malmsey may be put in these broths. At dinner the patient must eate sparingly, and at Supper more sparingly. Their drinke may be strong wine, ptisan: water and wine mixed with water, is prohibited. Exer∣cise is good before meate, and when they haue filled their bellies, they must addict themselues to rest; and if necessi∣ty require, they may sleepe longer then vsually they did, and also in the day time they may sleepe. The excrements of the body must be answerable to nature, and all such things also as are astringent. Perturbations of the mind must be auoyded, yet it wilbe good for them to bee somewhat vexed.
Mel rosatum colatum, syr. de duabus & quin{que} radicibus.Preparers. Water of Fennell, Baulme, Wormwood. A decoction of the roots of Sperage, Elecampane, Asarum, Galingale, Wormseed, Piony, leaues of Mints, Maioram, Origan, Hore∣hound, Thyme, Hyssop, flowers of Rosemary, Cammomill, seeds of Annise, Carroways, Dill, as also Figs; this decocti∣on must be made with sweet wine. The matter of this dis∣ease for the most part is stubborne; therefore this matter shalbe made subiect vnto nature, by cutting and concocting medicines: such syrupes as haue any Vineger in them, are vnwholsome. Clysters of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote,Emptiers. roots of Althaea, the seeds of Linus, Annise, Dill, Centory the lesse, Calamint, Origan, Mallowes, Figs, bastard Saffron, brui∣sed Agaricke, Colocynth, Cassia, Electuary of Bay-berries, Hiera picra, Logodij, Diacolocynth. Benedicta laxatiua, oyles of Cammomill, Rue, Nuts, fresh Butter. Those that are to be boyled, must be boyled in fat flesh-broth; this Clyster may be giuen often, euen vntill health be restored. Electu∣arum Elescopi, Diaphaenicum. Electuarium Indum, Hiera picra, Benedicta laxatiua, Diaturbith with Rhab. Pillulae alephangiae, Aggregatinoe, Faetidoe, these must be giuen before meate. Troch. Alhandal, Rhab, Myrobal. Cassia, and sene, because they do breed winds, may not be giuen. Tur∣pentine. A suppositor. A vomit before meate; if he did not vomit with ease in the beginning of the disease, it may be furthered with the decoction of Radish, Asarum, or with Oyle and Malmsey mixed together. A veine shalbe opened, if the disease be caused by an impostume: from gentler purging medicines we may proceed to stronger, if the disease be stubborne, and after we haue vsed cutting & clensing medicines. The opening of a veine is very good,Auerters. if the paine be vehement. Also Cupping-glasses shalbe fastned to the na∣uell, and part affected. Clysters, Suppositors, frictions of the Armes, and Shoulder-blades. The broth of Capons,
and Hens, with a little Saffron. Harts-horne burnt; a de∣coction of Cammomill flowers, roots of Althaea▪ in wine, or Cammomill water. A Clyster of fat broths, Oyle of Linus, Cammomill, or else a Clyster may be made of the decoction of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote; or else it may be made with the Oyles of Rue, Bayes, Hiera picra, strong wine. Or else only with Oyle, and strong wine. Or else with the Oyle of Rue, and the Electuary of Bay Ber∣ries; a bath of the decoction of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilot, leaues of Bayes. Rue, Oyle of sweet Almonds, with Hyppocras may bee drunke; a great bladder halfe filled with the Oyle of Cammomill, Lilies, Dill or common Oyle, also must be applied to the region of the belly; a small quantity of thread boyld in lee and ashes must be layd hot to the belly. A quilt of Milium and salt fried, flowers of Cammomell, seeds of Fengreeke, leaues of Mallows, Fennell, Althaea. An oyntment of the Oyle of Cammo∣mill, Lillies, Liuus, Parsly, Dill, Rue, Beauer-stone, Malm∣sey, or else a small quantity of Aqua vitae. An vnguent onely of the Oyles of Rue and Bayes, new Triacle, Athanasia Ni∣colai, Philonium Romanum, Andromachi, with the de∣coction of Cammomill, and Rue. Opium may be mingled with Beauer-stone, Pills of Hounds-toung, a Clyster of fat broths, wherewith a portion of the aforesayd benumming medicines shalbe mixed: a potion with Diaphaenic. Hiera Gal. Electua. lescopi, Philonio Romano: some of these do asswage paine, eyther because they take away the cause, or else because they do amend the distemper, or because they do dull the part affected. For benumming medicines are good in a hot matter; but hurtfull in a cold cause; for hereby the cold humours would be made colder, whereby windes would encrease, and the humors waxe grosser, and be harder to be expelled, and by this meanes the obstructi∣on be increased. Yet sometimes necessity doth force vs to vse these, when no other will preuaile. Clysters are better then potions for the asswaging of the paine; Sometimes ʒ i.
of benumming medicines are to be mixed with a purge, if the patient must receiue it at the mouth: for hereby the pa∣tient will be eased; also it is a safe and good method for the cure of this disease; for hereby the cause is taken away, and the paine is mitigated. The great conserue of our description is an excellent medicine in this case, Mithridate, Triacle, Diacuminum,Strength∣ners. Dia∣trium pipereon, Aromaticum rosatum, Diagalanga, conserue of Roses. The Electuary of Bayberries, Diamuscum. Wine wherein Wormewood hath beene steeped, and ʒ i. of Cum∣min must bee infused in it, after that, the strayning must be drunke. Or else the leaues of Cummin dried may bee infused in the wine. Beauerstone if it be drunk with Honyed water, is good. Also Harts-horne, stones of Medlers, Wormes, the intrals and dung of a Wolfe. Great Cupping-glasses shall be applyed to the part affected. An oyntment of the oyle of Rew, Dill, Cammomile, Parsly, Bayes, Beauer-stone, Lillies, seeds of Annise, Cummin, Fennell, Galbanum sagapenum, Bea∣uerstone. A drinke with the flowers of Cammomile, Melli∣lot, leaues of Rew, Calamint, Origan, Bayes, Rosemary. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the COLLICKE. ℞ roots of Lillies, ℥ i. ss. Angelica, ℥ i. flowers of Cam∣momile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, leaues of Calamint,A Clyster. Worme∣wood, Rew, Centory the lesse, Sothernwood, ana M i. seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana ℥ ss. Nigellae, Cummin, Annise, ana ʒ iii. boyle these in fat broth q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Benedictae laxatiuae, Electuarij elescopi, ana ʒ iiii. oyle of Rew, Cammomile, ana ℥ i. of fresh butter. ℥ ii. Electuary of Bayberries, ʒ iii. of Salt, ʒ i. one Yeolke of an Egge.
Another.℞ sir. de quin{que} radicibus, ℥ iii. Oxymellis compositi, ℥ i. ss, the decoction of Horehound, Calamint, Cammomile, ℥ vi. broth of Pullets, ℥ iiii. and if the disease be not too violent, administer this at three times. Bolus.℞ Electuarii lescopi, ℥ iii. ss, Benedictae laxatiuae ʒ ii. ss, Dia∣phae. ʒ ii. of fine Sugar q. s. A Potion.℞ roots of Fennell, Parsly, ana ℥ i. seeds of Annise, Rew, Cummin, Fennell, ana ʒ iiii. Polipodii quercini, white and light Agaricke, ana ʒ iii. seeds of Carrowaies, Daucus, Amis ana ʒ vi. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Benedictae laxatiuae, Electuarii elescopi, ana ʒ iii▪ drinke hereof morning and euening. Pills.℞ Hiera diacoloc. ℈ ii. Rhab. ℈ i. Diagridii gr. iii. sir. of Wormewood q. s. Bolus.℞ Pillul. sine quibus esse nolo, faetidarum, ana ℈ i. ss, of Beauer-stone gr. xii. Troch. althaendal. gr. iii. this doth take away the cause of the disease, and mitigate the paine. Pills℞ Hierae Gal. ʒ i. Opii gr. i Saffron, gr. iii. sir. de quin{que} ra∣dicibus q. s. make hereof pills, which may be giuen in the ex∣tremity of paine. A draught.℞ Philonii Romani, ʒ i. Diagalanga, ʒ i. ss, Electuarij eles∣copi, ʒ iiii. ss, drinke this with strong wine. Another.℞ the Electuary of Bay-berries, ʒ i. Diàcumini, ʒ ss, of wine, ʒ iiii. Giue this lukewarme. A Clyster.℞ oyle of Rew, ℥ viii. Cammomile, Lillies, ana ℥ i. Gummi serapini, Oppopanacis, Beauerstone, ana ℈ i, Electuary of Bay-berries, ℥ ss, Opij, gr. ii. of strong wine q. s. Another.℞ of common oyle, ℥ x. oyle of Lillies, ℥ iiii. of fresh But∣ter, ℥ iii. this is good, if the disease be caused by drynesse, and retaining of the dregs. A Vomit.℞ seeds of Dill, ℥ i. ss, roots of Radish, ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vntill halfe be consumed: adde to the ℥ v. of the strayning ℥ i. ss, of the oyle of white Lillies: this must be drunke lukewarme.
℞ Sp. Diacumini dianisi,A draught. ana ʒ iii. Electuary of Bayberries Diagalangae, ana ʒ i. ss. Giue ʒ i. hereof with Hyppocras, and when it must be vsed ʒ i, of ancient Triacle shall be mix∣ed with it. ℞ Electuary of Bay-berries, Philonij Romani,Another. ana ʒ ii. Diagalangae, ʒ ii. Electuarij elescopi, ʒ iii, ss. ʒ i. hereof must be giuen with strong wine. ℞ roots of Althaea, ℥ i. leaues of Mallows M ii. ss,A Fomen∣tation. flow∣ers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, seeds of Linus, Cummin, Fengreeke, Fennell, Parsly, ana ℥ ss, Nigellae, ʒ iii. ss; boyle these vntill the third part be consumed, this must be applyed to the belly. ℞ flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Pennyroyall, Origan,A Bath Mentastrum, ana M i. seedes of Fennell, Annise, Amis, Dill, ana ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part be con∣sumed. But the following quilt is better then the bath. ℞ flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. Penny-roy∣all, Branne, ana M ii. Nigellae Romanae, ʒ iii. seeds of Annise,A Quilt. Cummin, Fennell, ana ʒ ii. ss, of Salt, ʒ v. heate these in a ves∣sell, but without water, the flowers excepted: these must all be put in a bag, and be moystned with hot wine, and it must be layd to the belly. ℞ Ʋnguenti dialthaeoe, oyle of Cammomile,An Oynt∣ment. ana ʒ vi. oyle of sweete Almonds, Dill, Lillies, ana ʒ iiii. oyle of Spike, ʒ ss, fresh butter, Capons greace, Mans fat, ana ʒ v. if this disease be caused by drynesse, and retayning of the excrements. ℞ oyle of white Lillies, ℥ i. ss, Beauer-stone,Another. ℥ i. Olei pe∣troli, Rew, ana ℥ ss, roots of Galingale, ʒ i. Galbani, ʒ iii. of Waxe q. s. ℞ Emplaysters of Bayberries, ℥ ii, ss, oyle of Lillies, Rew,An Em∣playster. ana q. s. ℞ Emplayster of Bayberries, ℥ ii. Vnguenti Agrippae,Another. ℥ i. oyle of Lillies q. s.
An Appendix seruing for the cure of the COLLICKE. IF the paine be immoderate, first that shall be asswaged, and the cause also by degrees must bee taken away, the paine shall be eased by lenitiue medicines, and if these will not pre∣uaile, stupifying medicines must be then vsed: these may be vsed also at the first, for in delay there is danger; and yet they must not be vsed, except the case be desperate, for if the cause be first taken away, the paine will be mitigated. This disease for the most part is caused by windes and phlegmy matter, and then the paine will also be mitigated, if the cause bee taken away, (which is the matter that doth cause the Collicke) by a gentle Clyster, and this is better then that which is taken in at the mouth: but in the Iliaca passio, medicines giuen at the mouth are best. Yet because the Collicke and Iliaca passio haue one, and the same cause, one and the same way of curing shall bee vsed, onely here∣in they doe somewhat differ, because Iliaca passio is caused by an obstruction in the thinne bowels: the Collicke is caused by obstructions in the thicke and low∣er bowels. Wherefore at the first a purging medicine is good, and within one houre after, a Clyster will bee good. Amongst all medicines that are vsed, discussors of the wind, and asswagers of the paine shall be mixed, and then such me∣dicines shalbe prescribed that doe strengthen the bowels, and amend the distemper. For this purpose a clyster made of Hyppocras is best. If part of the matter be voyded by cly∣sters from the inward parts, and if the residue doe fall from some other parts into the belly, then the whole body shall be purged; whenas preparing medicines haue bin duly vsed. In strong obstructions ℥ v. of common oyle with the broth of Chickens, wherein the flowers of Cammomile haue bin boyled, may be taken; and then for the space of 4. houres
nothing else shalbe admitted. The patient must not drinke water. And also strong purging medicines must be auoy∣ded, especially in the beginning of the disease; lest the matter that is at a stand, should fall downe into the belly, and so the disease wilbe made worse then it was. Beauer-stone often drunke, is a very good remedy against this disease. A method seruing for the knowledge of the DROPSY. THe dropsy is such a passion, that it is not without plenty of watery humors, because the blood-breeding faculty is vitiated; it is a long disease, and for the most part cau∣sed by coldnes of the liuer. There be 3 kinds of dropsy, Anasarca, Ascites, Tympanites, which are distinguished both by their matter and place. Anasarca is a scattering of phlegmy humors ouer the whole body. In this disease, the whole body increaseth most vnnaturally, for it is all ouer swelled, and a humor mixed with phlegmy blood is spred ouer all the body, betweene the skinne and the flesh, and the body doth sucke it vp, euen as a sponge sucks vp water: and by reason of this, an euill colour appears all ouer. Ascites is that, when great store of winds, but greater of water, is gathered together in that place, which doth lie betweene the guts and Syphach. In this disease first the belly and Abdomen by little and little, then the thighes are swelled, and all the other parts of the body waxe leane. But when there is greater store of wind then water, where∣by the Abdomen is stretched beyond measure, then it is called Tympanites, and then rather a noyse of wind then water, is perceiued; if the belly be strooke, for there is the sound of a taber, from whence this disease hath taken its name. Also the naturall colour of the face is nor altered▪ Such a sound as this is not heard in Ascites, but when
the patient doth turne himselfe from the one side vnto the other, his belly waues as a bladder that is halfe filled. The part affected. The liuer for the most part is affected: for hereby the blood is generated, and from this the Dropsy is caused. The Drop∣sy is caused by the primary affect of the liuer, and then a small cough comes withall, because the hugenesse of the liuer cau∣seth obstruction about the lungs: also the excrements are not very liquid; sometime the disease is caused by consent of the mesentery, spleene, stomacke, miseraicall veines, and Ieiunium intestinum. Whereof a weakenesse of such veines doth follow, as did conuey food to the liuer, and then excre∣ments are heaped together in the lower parts, vntill they be corrupted, and so surcharge the body▪ and afflict the patient with a laxe. Signes. The common signes of a Dropsy are these. They are for the most part troubled with a feauer, and doe thirst very much, especially if they be troubled with Ascites: and be∣cause of Salt and putrified humors, they loathe meate, the colour of their face is whitish, hardnesse of breathing, and heauinesse of the body concurs, also swelling of the feete, be∣cause of the distances of the heart. In anasarca, the whole body is weakened, doth faynt and swell equally, yet for the most part the swelling is in the shinnes and feete, so that the prints of ones finger being thrust into the flesh, will remaine a long time. The belly is not heere puffed vp as in Ascites, yet being touched, it is felt to be thicker, and their flesh like vnto those that are dead, are stiffe, loose, and pale: a lingring feauer concurres, their vrines are thinne and white, especially after meate, they alwaies draw breath with great difficulty, but in the Ascites, the belly is more swelled and the other parts of the body doe wither away; they do also breathe with difficulty, because the Diaphragma is crushed by the tumor. And as the disease doth increase, so
the cods, thighs, and feet do by little and little swell: if the patient do stirre himselfe from one side vnto the other, the belly wauers; and this is caused by watry huwors which remaine in the Abdomen: and no maruayle, for the inward parts do as it were swim in water. Also in the beginning of the disease, they do voyd much by vrine, and by little and little they do voyd lesse, and doe waxe more red, and grosse. The patient also is very thirsty, and also an ague doth feaze on him in Tympanites the face swerues not so much from its naturall colour, and a noyse, like vnto the sound of a taber, is heard, if the belly be somewhat beaten vp∣on. Heere not such a grosse body, and so troublesome as in Ascites: from hence it is, that the guts rumble, and many signes of windines concurre. The Causes. A great cooling of the veines and liuer, is the cause of this most long and sore disease, whereof a great abundance of humors are generated. This happens to the liuer, eyther by it selfe, or else by the coldnes of the spleene, guts, mesentery, kidneys, mydriffe, which sometime because of their obstruction, sometimes because of their weaknes, draw not vnto them too much blood; also it is caused by to much bleeding at the nose, or by immoderate running or staying of moneths, or hemroids: for so the naturall heate is choaked by the losse of spirits with the blood. Sometime this disease is caused by the flux of the belly or stomacke, if they do last long: for the naturall spirits, and natiue heate are scattered. Also they who are sicke of a aundise, or the ioynt gowte, as of the feet or hips, often fall into a dropsy. Also they who are spent with long agues, whereby naturall heate & spirits are scattered: as also fayling of the liuer, too much drinking of cold water after heate or exercise of the body, is cause of it. In conclusion, whatsoeuer doth breake the force of the liuer, so that it cannot turne the iuyce into blood, doth also cause a Feauer but Ascites doth arise not only of too much cooling, or crudity of the parts, as Anasarca doth
but is often caused by too much breache of some bowels, or continuity of vessels, wherein humors are contained. And for that reason, all things that doe dry the liuer, as burning feauers, too much vse of strong wins, and hot nutriments, doe often cause a Dropsie: because the bowels, but oftener the liuer by too much drynesse, wither away; whereby the humors doe slide thorow some chinkes in the bowels cau∣sed by drynesse in the Abdomen, by sweating out, and drop∣ping. Oftentimes it is caused by a hard tumor of the liuer, spleene, or other parts, for so the bowels are cleft by too much drynesse, and want of moysture, whereby in time, the filmes, going round about them, doe breake, and so by little and little, watrish and wheyish excrements fall downe into the Abdomen. Prognostiques. If vlcers arise in the body by water that is betweene the flesh, because of the great plenty of humors is hardly to be cured. They who are suppurated, or haue a Dropsie, when they be cut, or burnt, if that water or matter doth runne out, they dye presently. Also if a cough doe seize on them that haue a Dropsie, or if the disease doth come againe after the patients are cut, they are in a desperate case. Of all these dropsies, Tympanites is the worst, next vn∣to that, Ascites, but Anasarca is easier then all the rest to be cured. For it is a signe that nature is not quite decayed, when that which is hurtfull, is spred ouer the whole body. All ancient Dropsies, and such as haue corrupted the habits of the body, are very dangerous, and not very easily cured. If the Dropsy be caused by a hard tumour of the liuer, or spleene, the disease is incurable. They that are in a consump∣tion, for the most part fall into a Dropsy, because this euill is communicated vnto the liuer: for matter, and venomous filth, hauing found a way into the liuer, get in and sticke fast therein, and so doe corrput the substance of the liuer.
A method seruing for the cure of the DROPSY. THe ayre must be cleere, and it must somewhat incline vnto heate and drynes; moyst and windy ayre do in∣crease the disease. They may eat the flesh of Hares, Con∣nies, Pheasants, Partridges, Chickens, Hens, Larkes, reare Eggs. Hens liuers are accounted good against this disease. At supper rost meate is better then sodde. Beefe is not good, because it is hard of concoction; also flesh broth may not be giuen vnto them, vnles they do take purges. Their cates may be seasoned with Cinamon and Cloues: and euen as fishes are forbidden, in like manner white meats, and Pulse is disallowed. They may drinke thinne wine, but not sweet, because this will not quench thirst. And they must also abstaine from drinking of water: and as it is good for this disease to indure hunger, so to thirst long is very dangerous. Moderate exercise before meate is good; ri∣ding, sayling, walking, frictions, & dry baths are good. They may sleepe in the night, but not much. The excrements must be answerable to nature: they must also abstaine from Venery: and euen as feare and sadnes do hurt very much, because they do hinder digestion, so anger and care are very good. Syr. of Agrimony, Wormwood, Endiue iuyce, Succhory: Acetosus simp. Oxymel. simp. water of Dodder, wormwood,Preparers. Hore-hound, roots of Radish, Sperage, Fennel, Parsly, Dane∣wort, Dodder, Alkekengi. A decoctiō of Wormwood, Hore-hound, Agrimony, Dodder, Sperage, Roots of grosse, Fennell, Parsly, Asarum, seeds of Annise, Fennell, red Ciches, Lico∣rice. This decoction must be made in white wine. syr. By∣zantinus, Endiue, Pomegranates, Oxysaccharū. The waters of Mayden haire, Endiue, Hops, Wormwood, Hore-hound, Fennell. Because a hardnes of the liuer doth concurre, there∣fore such medicines as do bring downe the vrine, and open the body, are very good.
Diaturbith with Rhab. Hiera diacoloc. Hiera logodij, Electuarium Indum. Pills of Euphorbium, Mezerum, Rhab. Agrimony, iuyce of flower-de-luce, of Agaricke, Sagapenum. A decoction of the roots of Elder, Dane-wort in wine. Sagapenum made into Pills; it is as good as Sea-cole∣wort. The iuyce of wild Cowcumbers dried, or Ela∣terium. The iuyce of Sea-colewort, or Soldanella. The iuyce of the roots of wild flower-de-luce, or else the decoction hereof is very good. Also small stickes of this roote must be macerated in white wine for the space of 12 houres, and then strayne it: that which is strayned out, must be drunke: this is very good against this disease, if it will admit of any cure. Rhab. doth strengthen the liuer, Agaricke and Sene do as much. The Electuary of Mesuae, made of Thymelaea, expels the water out of the body. But it is very troublesome, and hurtfull vnto the liuer: the distilled wa∣ter of the rinds of Elder, flowers of flower-de-luce. Some graines of Alkakngi, leaues of Fumitary, Dodder, Worm∣wood, seeds of Annise and Fennell must be infused in the Creame of goats Milke. A vomit herein is also very good. A veine shall not be opened, although the vrine be redde, because it doth increase the distemper; yet in this case it may be lawfull, if there be danger of the suppression of the moneths, or hemroids, because else the blood would runne vnto the liuer, and by reason of the same corrupt quality, or else because of the great abundance, would oppresse the natiue heat thereof. Clysters in this disease are very good, and it shalbe made of some of those medicines formerly recited; but in the dropsy called Asites, the iuyce of flow∣er-de-luce shalbe vsed, an vnguent of Swine-bread, if these will not preuayle; but then the patient must bee young and strong; this incision shall bee made foure fingers breadth aboue the nauell, but then there must be no tumor, or Schirrus of the spleene, or liuer, or vlcer of the lungs. The incision knife must be drawne to the right of left side: for it skills not much which side is launced; the outward
skinne shalbe drawne downward, for so the mouth of the wound wilbe better clozed, and the outward skinne re∣turne to its naturall place. But heere care ought to be had that too much water runne not out at one time; but a cer∣taine quantity maye twice or thrice in one day be drawne out by a pipe; therefore it is good to take time enough for the drawing out of the water. In stead of incision, a potentiall cautery must be made, and after that an actuall, and then a hole will with more ease be made: also vesica∣tories, and scarifications of the cods, and issues in the legs may be heere admitted: no great euacuations must be made, lest that the strength of the liuer be ouerthrowne, but we will empty it a little at one time, and often, and at certaine distances of time, the following strengthners of the stomacke and liuer may be giuen. Trochisci de Rhab. Diacurcuma, Dialacca, Diarrhod.Strength∣ners. Abbatìs, Diatrion sandàl. old Triacle, syr. of Wormwood, Agrimony, Mayden-hayre, Hore-hound, the iuyce of Agrimony, Dodder, Wormwood, the waters of Agrimo∣ny, Dodder, Hore-hound, Wormwood: the decoction of Gnaiacum, roots of Cyna, Sarsaparilla. Rhab. Dodder. Agrimony. A fomentation must be made for the belly of the decoction of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, leaues of Bayes, Origan, Rosemary, Sage, Calamint, Ma∣ioram, Dill, Penny-royll; with Branne and Allome. Part of these must be boyled in lee, the rest in white wine. And that it may not suddenly waxe cold, hot stones shalbe put vnder the vessell when it is taken from the fire. A quilt of branne, salt, sand, leaues & berries of Bayes, seeds of Annise: this must be layd to the belly. Bath both naturall, and ar∣tificiall, with the water of the decoction of flower-de-luce, Bryony, Hyssop Maioram, Penny-royall, Calamint, Rosemary. Fennell, Rue, Cammomill, Dill, Bay-berries, Iuniper, Bran, salt. This hath a resoluing force. Vesicatories must be made in diuers places of the belly with leauen, Cantharides, strong Vineger: let them lye on for the space
of ten houres, and when the blisters be raysed, they must be opened, and kept open for the space of 40. dayes, the leaues of Colewort must bee put vpon them, and anoynted with Butter; or oyle, also a little bit of Waxe must be put into the blyster to keepe it open. The thigh and outward skinne of the codde shall bee scarified, and little wounds shall bee made therein; also an issue shall be made in the legge two fingers breadth aboue the ankle. Ʋnguentum Agrippae, whereto oyle of Lillies, and Dill shall bee added. Emplay∣sters with Bayberries, the roots of Cyperus, Goats, or Cows dung. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the DROPSIE. A Clyster.℞ roots of Cyclamen, Danewort, Asarum, ana ℥ ss, leaues of Mercury, Sea Colewort, Agrimony, Wormewood, Penny royall, ana M i. seeds of Carrowaies, Parsly, Broome, Annise, ana ʒ iii. Polypodij quercini, senae Alex. ana ℥ ss, flowers of Broome, M i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning Diaturbith with Rhab. ʒ v. Benedictae lax∣atiuae, ʒ iii. oyle of Rew, Flower-de-luce, ana ℥ i. ss, of Salt, ʒ i. ℞ sir. de quinque radicibus, of Agrimony, ana ℥ i. Endiue, Acetosus comp. ana ℥ ss, water of Dodder, Succhory, Radish, Claret wine,A Iulep. ana ℥ iii. ℞ roots of Danewort, Rubiae tinctorum, Asari, ana ℥ i. Fennell,A Potion. Parsly, ana ℥ ss, Dodder, Agrimony, Endiue, Betony, Scolopendria, Wormewood, ana M i. seeds of bastard Saffron bruised, ʒ i. sena Alex. ℥ i. ss, Polipodij quercini, ʒ v. of white and light Agaricke, ʒ ii. ss, seeds of Fennell, Melons, Daucu, ana ʒ i. flowers of Broome, M ss, Ginger, Cinnamon, ana ʒ i. Licoriee, ʒ v. Raysins the stones being taken out ℥ ii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning sir. Byzantini, ℥ iii, Aceti squillit, ℥ ii. of the finest Sugar, ℥ i.
℞ Diacath. ʒ iii. Diaturbith with Rhab. ℥ ss,A draught. Agarici trochiscati, ℈ ss, water of Agrimony, ℥ iii. ℞ Pills of Rhab. ℈ ii. Agregatiuarum, ℈ i. ss, Elaterij,Pills gr. iii. iuyce of the roots of Flower-de-luce q. s. make here∣of 8. pills. ℞ Hierae diacoloc. ʒ i. Pillul. de Rhab. ℈ ss,Pills. Oxymellis com∣positi, q. s. ℞ Pillul. de euphorbio, ℈ ii. ss,A draught. de Rhab. ℈ i. sir. of Agrimo∣ny, ℥ i. water of Agrimony, ℥ iii. ℞ Dialaccae, Diacurcumae, ana ʒ iii. Nutmeg,An Electu∣ary. seeds of Par∣sley, ana ℈ ii. Licorice, ℈ i. sir. of Wormwood, Agrimony, ana q. s. ℞ Sp. Diarrhod. abbatis, Trochisks of Agrimony,A draught. ana ℈ ii. iuyce of the rootes of Flower-de-luce, ʒ vi. water of Ho∣ney, ℥ iii. ℞ Rhab. electi, ℈ ii. Masticke, Spike, Roses, Cancamum,Lozenges. ana ℈ i. leaues of dryed Bayes, and infused in Vineger, ʒ i. of white and light Agaricke, Turbith, ana ʒ ss, of baked Agri∣mony, gr. vi. dryed Wormes, ℈ i. beate all these into a small powder, then adde Elaterij, ℈ ss, iuyce of the roots of Flow∣er-de-luce, ʒ i. ss, of fine Sugar dissolued in Endiue, and Suc∣chory water, q. s. ℞ Diarrhod. abbatis without Muske, Dialaccoe,Lozenges. con∣serue of Roses, Troch. de Rhab. ana ʒ ss, of fine Sugar dissol∣ued in the water of Endiue, Succhory, and Agrimony, ana q. s. ℞ Troch. alkekengi, ℈ i. the flesh of a hedge-hog dried in the sunne, ℈ ii. ss, roots of Asarum ℈ ss, Oxymellis squillitici,A Potion to prouoke vrine. ℥ i, the decoction of the roots of Radishes, Danewort, Li∣corice, ℥ iii. vomit in the beginning of the disease is good, but it is bad, when the disease hath beene long vpon the pa∣tient. ℞ roots of Asarum aristolochiae rot. ana ʒ i. ss, Rew,A Lini∣ment. Lupines Parsley, Cummin, ana ʒ ii. red Ciches, ʒ i. iuyce of Swines-bread, Sea Colewort, ana ℥ ss, Bayes, Thymelaea, ana ℥ iii,
oyle of Scorpions, ℥ i. of Waxe q, s. this may bee vsed about the region of the reines, and nauell. An Oynt∣ment.℞ Vnguenti Agrippae, ℥ i. ss, Arthanitae, ℥ i. Martiati, oyle of Nard, Scorpions, ana ℥ ss, iuyce of Rew, ʒ iii. Aquae vitae ℥ ss. some drops of Vineger. A Cata∣plasme.℞ roots of Danewort, ℥ i, ss, Bryony, Flower-de-luce, ℥ i. Bay berries, ʒ vi. flowers of Cammomile, M ii. seeds of An∣nise, ℥ i. boyle these in water and wine q. s. vntill they be soft, then bake them, and adde the flower of Lupines, Cummin, ana ℥ i. ss, of Brimstone ℥ i. Goats or Cowes dung, ʒ vii. of Hony q. s. this is for the belly. Another.℞ Emplayster of Bay berries, ʒ i. ss. Ʋnguenti Agrip∣pae, rootes of Danewort, ana ℥ ss, Pigeons and Cowes dung, ana ℥ ii. naturall Brimstone, ʒ iii. ss, infants vrine and Honey q. s. this must also bee applyed to the same place. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the DROP∣SIE, called in Latine, AS∣CITES. FIrst, the humors shall bee well concocted, at the length such things shall be prescribed that doe take away the water out of the body; to these such things shalbe added, as doe comfort the liuer, and amend the distemper, and this may bee effected both by inward and outward medicines: the accidents also that doe follow this disease, must be amen∣ded, viz. thirst, swelling of the parts of the body, the stop∣ping of vrine, and many other accidents formerly recited. Cataplasmes and Vnguents, must be applyed to the belly with great care, for they must not touch the region of the liuer. For the swelled legges, a bath may bee made with lee made with the ashes of Cabbages, Fig-trees, Vines,
Alome, salt, and the roote of Daffodill. And then cataplasm may be made with Cows and Goats-dung, figs and wine. In the tympany those things shalbe prescribed that do dis∣cusse the wind. And for this purpose emplaisters that heate and dry, are very good. Anasarca wilbe cured by purging medicines, and such as doe prouoke vomiting▪ after that, baths, and dry stewes, and such as cause sweat are good, if the strength will permit, or if the disease be caused by the suppression of the monethly terms or hemroids, a veine shalbe opened, but in Tympanita, and Aascite, a veine shall not be opened, although the vrine be very red, for here∣by the cold distemper of the liuer would be increased. Yet in the latter of these two, rather then the monethly termes and hemroids shalbe suppressed, a veine shalbe opened, lest the matter should runne to the liuer, and so the liuer bee ouercharged. A method seruing for the knowledge of the STONE. The stone in the kidneys is a hard substance, bred like vn∣to a stone, or sand-stone in the substance of the reynes, From whence by the force of the vrine, it is often conuey∣ed thorow the straight pipes into the bladder, if it be not too great; which doth so stretch the passages of the vrine, that great paine doth follow; and if through weaknes of the vrine, it cannot be brought out, it growes bigger, and as it doth increase, so the paine doth likewise increase. The bignes of the stone is vncertaine, and as they haue diuers colours, and formes, so they are not alwayes of one bignes. For sometimes small stones are bred in the reines, some∣times great, which do varie much in forme, roughnes, and color. This disease doth differ from the collicke: for that doth straggle ouer the whole region of the belly, but in this disease, the paine is more settled: This disease doth take its name from the efficient cause.
The part affected. The settled paine is in the reines, and sometimes the right side, or the left side is affected, or both sides at one time, euen as the right or the left kidney is affected: for the grauel is bred in the mouth of the kidney, or flesh and substance of them; sometimes stones doe breed in the liuer, lungs, guts, ioynts, and other parts of the body, but for the most part they do breed in the bladder and kidneys. And hereof we now treate. Signes. A great loathing of meat, frequent belchings, and ex∣treme paine in the reines, are signes of this disease, and then the paine is great, when the stone doth passe thorow the passages of the vrine, or when it doth moue to and fro in the kidney, and so toucheth the filmes, but then the paine is greatest, when the body is exercised with violent motions, and when the patient bends forward too often: this paine is not exasperated by touching, as it is by the catarach or rhewme falling vpon it; but the stone doth so paine the patient, as if thornes were put into the passages of the vrine. Yet so long as the stone moues not, rather a loading then pricking paine is felt lying vpon the kidneys, which for the most part is settled, and stedfast, and which doth sometime reach vnto the neerest testicle, sometime to the hippe: the belly for the most part is bound, where∣by the paine in the kidney is increased, because the kidny is crushed by wind and abundance of excrements, a quei∣sines of stomacke and propension to vomit concurs: when the paine is increased, the patient hath a greater desire to vomit; at the length they doe vomit phlegme and choler, and sometimes greenish choler is voyded, whereby the paine is asswaged, for the reines are ioyned to the stomacke by Peritoneum. Also the paines doe increase by lying on the contrary side, and when the patient is full fedde: an
emptinesse doth diminish the paine, though it doth not take away the affect. The patients cannot well endure bending forward; there is no tumor discerned about the part affected; the seg and thigh of the affected side is be∣nummed, because of the crushing of the sinews, also the te∣sticle on the same side is as it were pulled backe: this happens, because the stones and legs haue some affinity with the reines, by the means of arteries, sinewes, and veines, which lye vpon the backe, and are spred thorow those parts of the body; the vrine in the fit time is thinne and little, and oftentimes bloody, chiefly after riding, and im∣moderate exercise, and also when the stone is conueyed from the kidneys; If the stone do stop the passages of the vrine, an extreme paine is caused, especially if the stone be rough, but when the stone runs backe to the kidneys, or when it is thrust downe from the vrine-pipes into the bladder, thicke, and great store of vrine is voyded, and therewith sometimes grauelly and vneeuen stones. This for the most part happens, because they that haue beene long troubled with this disease, do voyd a thicke and red∣dish blood, which sometimes is muddy; sometimes that which is settled in the bottome, is sandy, red and slymy. Vrine of this kind, is voyded without any danger for the space of many moneths and yeeres. And no maruayle: for great stones haue beene often found in dead mens kidney, without any paine in the backe; when the stone stickes in the bladder, a paine is felt in the priuie parts, and an itch∣ing in the passages of the yard▪ Retention of vrine is com∣mon to both diseases, and when the patients do endeauour to make water, extreme parts torment them, which for the most part is pricking. The Causes. The cause of the stone is a grauelly and sandy constituti∣on of the kidneys, immoderate heat of the kidneys concur∣ring; and for the most part grosse and slymy humors.
Prognostiques. They that are loose-bellied and do often vomit, are seldome troubled with this disease: the stone in the kid∣neys of old men is scarce cured; and besides it is incident to old men rather, then young, also the stone is rather in the bladder. Grosse and corpulent bodies are very seldome troubled with this paine. This is often an hereditary dis∣ease; smoothe and round stones, are with more ease voy∣ded then long and rough. They that were neuer troubled with this disease before, are extremely pained with the least stone that is in the passages of the vrine. For the most part, the stones of the kidneys are red, sometimes white, when the kidneys are bespred with matter. In such as haue life, the stone hath beene perceiued only by the mixture of the blood, no other discōmodity chancing, in whom some∣times a very sore paine is stirred, contrary to the opinion of many men, and this paine doth returne after long distances of time; the vlcer of the kidneys is caused by the stone of the kidneys, because it doth fret and waste the kidneys by rubbing, and then for the most part bloody vrine goes before mattry without a Feauer also the stone of the kid∣ney is sooner wasted then the stone of the bladder: first▪ in regard of the places distances: secondly, because of the hardnes which the stone maketh in those places: In con∣clusion both are dangerous, because by the suppression of vrine, an impostume is oftentimes caused by paine, or else some other disease comes vpō the patient. If the stone in the bladder bee great, it cannot bee taken away but by cut∣ting. A method seruing for the cure of the STONE. THe ayre must bee cleere and bright; they may eate Veale, Lambe, Larkes, and they must rather be sod then
rost. They must eate modeatley▪ for atiety doth not only exasperate the disease, but also breeds it at the first. White meates, and al slymy meats must be auoyded. They may drinke wine that is not too strong, ptisan, and flesh broths. Their exercise must be very moderate; and they may sleepe more then ordinary. The belly must be kept loose; and for the better preseruation of health, it wilbe good for the pa∣tients, to take once in euery moneth ʒ x of new extracted Cassia, with flesh broth wherein Semina alkekengi haue beene boyled. All perturbations of the mind must bee a∣uoyded. Syr. Byzantinus; de quin{que} radicibus; Acetosus simplex,Preparers. Oxymel simplex; water of Saxifrage, Betony, Penny-royall, Calamint. A Clyster of the decoction of the roots of Althaea,Emptiers. seeds of Annise, Fennell, Carrowais, flowers of Cammomill▪ Mellilote, Dill, Mallowes, Violets, figs, Benedicta laxatiua, Oyle of Cammomill, Dill, Scorpions, fresh Butter, oyle of sweet Almonds, & Cassia fistula must be mixed with them. Diacath. Electuarium elescopi, Benedicta laxatiua, Hiera picra. Cassia fistula may be giuen euery other day with the common decoction; Rhab. Agaricus. A vomit suppositors are good. The cubite veine of the pained side shall bee o∣pened, if the body be full, or if there be danger of an in∣flamation, by the humors that do assault the body. Clysters in the time of the fit are better then medicines taken in at the mouth; for these do sooner asswage the paine, because they do free the body of an vnprofitable burthen. Also by them, the vertue of softning and asswaging medicines will sooner come to the reines, whereby also the heauines, and paine of the loyns is not so great: and that the reines be not too much ouercharged, a small quantity shalbe iniected. The former Clyster,Mitigaters of paine. or else a Clyster with the Oyle of Cammomill, with a small quantity of Cassia fistula: they may eate the fat broths of flesh wherein Althaea, Mallows, and Butter were boyled: they may take Turpentine, mixed
with Nutmeg, and after it drinke a draught of white wine. A fomentation may be made with water, wherein the leaues of Althaea, Cammomill, seeds of Annise, Fen∣nell, Carrowaies, and branne haue beene boyled: a bath of the decoction of the seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, Mallowes, roots of Althaea. An oyntment for the region of the reines with the Oyle of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Violets, Cammomill, Hens-grease, fresh Butter, Vnguentum Agrippae, Dialthaea. Cupping-glasses fastned along on the vrine vessels, one after another comming downe to the priuities: for they do so stirre the stone, that the paine is presently suppressed, the stone being conueyed into the bladder. A ataplasme of the flow∣ers of Cammomill, Melllote, meale of Linseed, Fengreeke, Wheate and Lupines. Breakers and driuers  of the ne.Lythontripon, with Turpentine, washed, or with the de∣coction of the roots of grasse and Fennell. Elect. Iustinum, of the ashes of Scorpions, Dialacca. The decoction of the wood Guaiacum. The ashes of a Scorpion, the iaw of a Pike, Egshelles when the Chickens are hatched. The great conserue of our description is a good preseruatiue against the stone. Conserue of the roots of Parsley, Radish, water-Cresses, Turpentine burnt vpon a hote tile, the stones of Peaches, and Cherries. Hot Goats-blood, that it may not curdie in the belly, a little of the Coagulum, or seed of the Goate must be added. The powder of a hare with the skin dried in the fornace; the fruits of Alkekengi bruised, and strained, when they haue beene steeped in wine. Lapis Iudaicus. A Wren, a Wagtaile, Sampier, seeds of Saxifrage, Burnet, Ruscus, Fennell, Parsly, Radish, Milii solaris. Broome. A decoction of Radish, red Chi∣ches, Parsley, Ruscus, Sperage, Mallowes, Fennell, Nettle, Saxifrage, roots of Grasse. The rindes of sharpe Radishes, bruised, and macerated in white wine. The flowers of Broome, macerated in Cammomill, and so set in the sunne. oyle of scorpions, these may be vsed when Cherries, & oyle of
medicines that doe breake the stone are giuen. Cupping-glas∣ses must bee applyed as was formerly shewed. If the vrine be stopped, it may be fetched out with a siringe, they must set vpon a forme, and spread the legges abroad, that after the vrine is voyded, some vrinary medicine may bee in∣iected, as namely the oyle of Scorpions. Whensoeuer the vrine should bee brought downe, a double thread shall bee runne thorow the hollownesse of the sirenge, and at the one end of the thread a piece of Cotton shall be tied, the vrine must needs follow if the thread be neatly put into the yard▪ But before medicines that breake the stone, be administred the paine must bee asswaged, and the body purged of cor∣rupt humors; or else the humors lying thereabout be carried to the part affected. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the STONE. ℞ roots of Parsley, Aristoloch. rot. Althaea, ana ℥ ss,A Clyster. leaues of Beete, Mallows, Mercury, ana M i. Branne, ℥ i. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, seeds of broome, ʒ iii. fruits of Alkekengi, ʒ v. seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana ʒ iii. Figs, no 8. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning Elect. elescopi, ℥ i. Benedictae laxatiuae, ʒ ss, oyle of Rew, Cammomile, ana ℥ i. ss, oyle of Scorpions, ʒ vi. Ve∣nice Turpentine, ℥ ss, Salt, ʒ i. After this is giuen,A draught▪ the pa∣tient must take of the oyle of sweet Almonds, ℥ ii. Malm∣sey, ℥ iiii. ℞ oyle of Cammomile, of the seeds of Linus, ana ℥ v. sweet Almonds, ℥ ii. Rew, ℥ i. ss. this by prouoking to sleepe,A Clyster. takes away the paine.
A Bath.℞ leaues of Mallows, M ii. Pellitory of the wall, M iii. Mugwort, Rew, St. Iohns wort, ana M i. ss, roots of Fennell, Parsley, ana M iii. ss, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii.ss, seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana ℥ iiii. A Fomen∣tation.℞ roots of Althaea, ℥ i. leaues of Mallows, Althaea, ana M i. ss, Branne, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. Figs, no 8. seeds of Linus, Dill, Fengreeke, ana ʒ i.ss, boyle these vntill the third part be consumed: this must bee vsed about the reines and bladder. An Oynt∣ment.℞ oyle of white Lillies, Mans-fat, ana ℥ ss, oyle of Cam∣momile, ana ℥ i. oyle of the stones of Peaches, ʒ vi. Anoynt the backe herewith. ℞ of Pellitory, M iii. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. Figs,A Cata∣plasme. no x. leaues of Mallows, M ii. Seminum milij solis, Lupines, ana ʒ v. boyle these in water q. s. vntill they be soft, adde to the meale, of Linus, Fengreeke, Barley, Wheate, ana ℥ ss, oyle of Cammomile, Dill, fresh butter, fat of a Coney, q. s. Saffron, ℈ i. bake all these together. A Vomit.℞ of hot water, ℥ iiii. of new made oyle, ℥ i, sir. Acetosi simp. ℥ i. ss, this as the former doth ease the paine. A Potion.℞ seeds of Annise, Milij solis, ana ʒ iiii. roots of Fennell, Parsley, Althaea, ana ℥ i. seeds of Parsley, ℥ ss, Licorice, ʒ vi. wood Guaiacum. ℥ i. ss, leaues of Mallows, tops of Althaea, ana M i. ss, fruits of Alkekengi, no xiiii. Figs, Pruines, ana no vi. Raysins, the stones being taken out, ℥ ss, leaues of Vio∣lets, flowers of Buglosse, Borage, ana M i. of the foure colder seeds, ana ʒ i, Turbith albi et gummosi, white and light Agaricke, ana ʒ i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Electi elescopi, Benedictae laxatiuae, ana ℥ ss. A draught.℞ of Cassia, ℥ i. hee must take hereof betweene meales, with the decoction of Licorice, Damask Pruines, and Ray∣sins▪ This must bee drunke for the space of two dayes, be∣fore medicines that should breake the stone bee admini∣stred.
℞ Elect. elescopi, Benedictae laxatiuae, ʒ iii. ss,Bolus. Diatharbith with Rhab. ʒ i.ss, of fine Sugar q. s. ℞ Elect. elescopi, ʒ iii, ss. of Cassia, ℥ ss, seeds of Parsly,A draught. Nut∣meg, ana ℈ i. the water of Beane-flowers, ℥ iii. ℞ of Dropwort, ℥ ss. Rubiae tinctorum,A Potion. ʒ ii. roots of Al∣thaea, ℥ ss, red Ciches, M i. ss, seeds of Iuniper, ℥ ss, Annise, Fen∣nell, Carrots, ana ℥ i. seeds of Alkekengi, ʒ v. flowers of Keiri M i. seeds of Cheruell, ʒ ii. of Raysins, the stones being taken out ℥ ss, Licorice, ʒ iii. boyle these in an equall quantity of wa∣ter and Rennish wine, vnto lb i, ss, adde to the strayning a little quantity of Sugar. ℞ The blood of a Goate newly killed,A powder. ʒ i. Gumme traga∣canth, ʒ ss, Milij solis, the shels of Egges when the chickens are hatched, ana ℈ i. Nutmeg, ʒ i. drinke this powder with white wine. ℞ Mitij solis, ʒ ii. Seminis Petroselini Macedonici, ℈ ii, Annise, Fennell, Bay-berries, Louage, ana ℈ i. Long Pepper,Another. Saxifrage, Carrots, ana gr. xv. of Mace, ℈ ii. ss, ℞ Sp. Electuarij ducis, ℈ ii. Pulueris reginae, Lithontripi,Lozenges. ana ℈ i. Sp. Diatrij sandal. without Camphire, powder of the Electuary of Bayberries, ana ℈ ss, seeds of Saxifrage, Nutmeg, ana gr. v. Saffron, gr. iii. Cinnamon, ℥ ss, fine Sugar dissolued in the water of Carduus benedictus q. s. Giue hereof to the patient ʒ i. ss. ℞ of red Ciches, ℥ i. ss, seeds of Broome, Parsley, Carrots,A Powder. Milij solis, ana ʒ ii. of Mace, ʒ i. ℞ seeds of Broome, ʒ ii. roots of Saxifrage, ʒ iii. Specie∣rum lithontripi, ʒ ss, powder of Licorice, ʒ ss, Giue ʒ i,A Powder. of this powder with ʒ i. ss, of white wine, Parsley, iuyce of Fennell. ℞ seeds of Parsley, Cummin, Alkekengi, Grummell,Another. ana ʒ iii▪ red Ciches, Saxifrage, Chamaedrios, ana ʒ ii. Scor∣pions ashes, ʒ i. Giue of this powder ʒ i. with wa∣ter distilled out of such Hearbs as doe prouoke v∣rine.
A Lini∣ment.℞ Olei keirini, ℥ i. of Scorpions, Cammomile, Dill, ana ℥ ss, Goates grease, ℈ ii. a little quantity of Waxe. An Vn∣guent.℞ oyle of Linus, white Lillies, Mans fat, ana ℥ ss, oyle of Cammomile, Scorpions, ana ℥ i. Another.℞ Ʋnguenti Agrippa. ℥ i. oyle of Scorpions, ℥ ss, oyle of Peach-stones, ʒ iii. Also a playster may be made of those things that are vsed for the Fomentation; whereto oyle of Linus, Cammomile, May-butter and Hens grease must bee added. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the STONE. TWice in euery weeke the belly shall bee kept loose by a Clyster, and such medicines shalbe mixed with it, as do discusse the winds in the body, and asswage the paine. But Clysters that are too strong, are prohibited, for hereby the humors would be drawne inwards, and by that meanes, the passage of the vrine hindred. If necessity require, a veine shall be opened, but the best way to mitigate the paine, is by ap∣plying inward and outward medicines, such that by prouo∣king to sleepe do take away the sence of paine. After these, the humors, that are gathered together shalbe softned, and the passages from the reines vnto the bladder shalbe made wider, and this may be effected by baths of fat broth, and the vse of Cataplasmes, and then the grauell and stones will with more ease be voyded. But before these be administred, the safest course would bee to purge all the body, if it can be perceiued that the body is full: otherwise not. After all this another Clyster may be made with Hiera picra, Lithontri∣pū, electu, elescopi, Benedicta laxatiua, oyle of Rew: and at the length somewhat shall bee taken at the mouth to expell the stone. And euen as the stone of the kidneys and bladder haue great affinity, because they haue one & the same cause, & are a like generated; so they may be both cured after one manner;
but the stone will require stronger medicines, because it hath a harder substance; in this disease the ventricle shall be strengthned with the Oyles of Mace, Mints, Worm∣wood, Roses. If the patient be pained with great heate in the reine, they shalbe anoynted with the Oyle of Violets: and Roses, whereto some Vineger shalbe added. If the stone haue fallen once into the bladder, it cannot be expelled by medicines, because of its greatnes, and therefore it must be cut out. A method seruing for the knowledge of DIABAETES, or inuoluntary pissing. DIabaetes is a default of the kidneys, and a swift passage of that which is drunke thorow the body, the drinke being nothing altered; also an vnmeasurable thirst followes, or else Diabaetes is a long continued affection resting about the kidneyes, which doth cause great desire to drinke, and drinke being receiued into the body, it is but as it were strayned thorow the reines, and so voyded: for the beere is not much altered or changed. The part affected. Both the kidneys are affected, as appeares by the action that is hurt. For the reines do purge all the other veines frō their watery blood: but in this disease the reines snatch it away by force from the neighboring parts. The veines by these means being, dry they do draw moysture frō the liuer, and by a continuation of order, from the stomake; this is the cause that a man doth desire drinke, onely to satisfie the reins. For this cause Diabates may properly be sayd to be an affect of the reines: the disease of the reines, & of the mouth of the stomacke are somewhat alike, when as the stomacke continually gapes for more. The attractiue faculty of the kidneys drawes immoderately, & the retentiue faculty is so weake, that it cannot retaine the moisture that is attract∣ed,
vnles it were altered: and then because the quality is not changed, it doth passe thorow without any resist∣ance. Signes. A great heate is felt in the reines, and such an insatiable thirst doth follow, that no liquor can quench their thirst; the prouerbe is verified, Euer drinke, euer dry. If they do striue to hold their vrine, their stones, hips, and loynes swell, and so great heate is felt in their inward parts, as though their bowels were burnt, because the watery moisture of the blood wherewith the blood is vsually tem∣pered, is drawne from the reines; and at the length the solid parts humors are drawne from the reines, and then the heate increasing in the bowels, a consumption followes, because the body is melted away with heate. The Causes. Is the too hote distemper of the kidneys, wherewith the feeblenes of the retentiue faculty may be ioyned. It is sometimes caused by sharpe humors in the kidneyes; also it is caused dy brinish phlegme. Sometimes it is caused by a venemous matter; sometimes a pernicious quality mixed with the blood or humors fastned to the reines. Also it is caused by too much drinking of thinne wine. But none of these are heere treated of, vnlesse a great thirst con∣curre. Prognostiques. In time a great drynesse, and consumption of the body followes, because the reines do not only draw the humors of the veines, but also those that are in the whole body, because of the immoderate heate of those parts; In a young man this disease is curable otherwise not. If the patient haue a burding Feauer, it cannot be cured becaule radicall moisture is wasted by two strong caused.
A method seruing for the cure of the inuoluntary Pissing. THe ayre must incline to cold and moist; and their diet such as will breed good, but thicke iuyce, and such as will qualifie the sharpnes of the humors; they may eate free∣ly of them. Almond Milke, reare Egges, ptisan, fishes, that do breed in stony places, Apples, Peares, Rice, new Cheese, fresh Beefe, leane Porke, and Veale well boyld, are good. Amongst hearbes, Endiue, Lettuce, and Purslane are al∣lowed; such things as prouoke vrine, are not good: neyther  salt and sharpe meats or nutriments. They may drinke strong astringent wine, the iuyce of Pomegranates, and Goose-berries, with the decoction of Endiue, Lettuce, Myrtles. Rest is best, because it doth stay the motion of hu∣mors. The belly must be kept loose by art or nature, and per∣turbations of the mind auoyded. Syr. of Poppy, de acetositate citri, of water Lillies,Emptiers. Buglosse, of Violets, Roses, Myrtle, Sorrell, dry Roses. Waters of Purslane, Violets, water Lillies, Endiue, Sorrell, Plantane, Buglosse. A decoction of the roots and flowers of water Lillies, Plantane, whereto some Sugar must be added. The cubite veine shalbe opened at the first; for it doth not onely draw backe the humors, but it doth also allay the heate. If the disease be old, a veine shall not be opened, because hereby the body is more heated, and the weake strength too much weakned. Mnna, Cassia, Tamarindi. Syr. of manifold infusion of Roses. Diaprunum simplex. Dia∣cath. Rhab. A Clyster of the water, wherein the leaues of Althaea, Mallows, Violets, and damask Pruines haue beene boyled; vnto this decoction also Cassia newly extracted, and Oyle of Violets, shalbe added. A veine shalbe opened.Auerters. A vomit may be giuen with oyle and lukewarme water, frictions of the Armes, Head, and Shoulders.
An electuary made of Harts-horne burnt, red Roses, Blossomes of Pomegranates, seeds of Plantane, Pusane, Quinces, Sorrell, Endiue, Myrobal. Citrinis, Hypocistid. Bole Armony, Corall, Camphor, syr. of Myrtle, of Vi∣olets, Gumme Arabike, Saccharum rosatum. These also must be boyled in red wine astringent and if ʒ i of Myrobal. Ctrini bee added to the strayning, it is then a good medicine. Troch. de spdio, de succo Polygonij, de terra Lemnia, de camphora. Triacle, Athanasia magna, Diacydnites sine sp. Saccharum rosaum. Conserue of the flowers of wa∣ter Lillies, Roses, iuyce of Goos-berries, Sanguinariae, with astringent wine. Myrobal. Conditi, and Hedge-Hogs flesh dried in an ouen; ʒ i. hereof is good with astringent wi. A cataplasme for the priuy parts, oynes and sides, with Lettuce, Purslane, Pellitory, Vine-leaues, Barley-flower. An oyntment of the Oyle of Roses, Myrtle, Acetum ro∣saceum, Ʋnguentum rosatum. M. Ceratum refrigerans Gal. thinne plates of leade wherein many holes are bored, must be layd to the region of the reines. Emplaisters of the seeds of Quinces, Shepheards-pouch, Barley, flower of Pome∣granates, Purslane, red Roses, Bole Armony, Cumme Arabicke, Oyle of Myrtle, Roses. Strength∣ners.Troch. Alkkengi, with astringent wine or Honyed-wa∣ter. An epitheme for the liuer with the water of Roses, water Lillies, Endiue, Sorrell, Vineger, white & red Corrall, white French-wheat, seeds of Purslane, Sorrell, Spikenard, Cam∣pher. An oyntment for the reines, priuy parts, sides, & loyns, wh the oyle of roses, water Lillies, Poppy, Myrtle, Spikenard, red Roses, the cooling vnguent of Poplar. Rosatum Mesue. A quilt of the flowers of Violets, Roses, seeds of Endiue, Purslane, Sorrell, white and red French Wheate, Spikenard, Plantane, Succhory. A cataplasme of Purslane, Roses, Barley-flower, seeds of Poppy, flowers of Pomegranates, French Wheate, Oyle of Myrtle, Roses, Quinces, wormes of the earth. An emplaister of Barley-flower, Plantane, red
Roses, Oyle of Myrtle, Hypocystis, flowers and rindes of Pomegranates. A Sowes bladder must be fastned to the top of the yard,Correc∣tors of ac∣dents. so that the vrine may fall into that bladder. Triacle, sirupe of the iuyce of Sorrell, sirupe of Pomegranates. Agresta. The former of these will preuent the stinking of the bed, or breeches: the latter of these doe quench the thirst. A more particular method seruing for the cure of DIABAETES, or inuoluntary pissing. ℞ sir. of Water-lillies, Roses, ana ℥ i ss. Myrtle,A Iulep. iuyce of Sor∣rell, ana ℥ ss, of the decoction of Plantane, Myrtle, Violets, Sanguinariae, lb i. ℞ roots and leaues of Althaea, ana M i. ss,A Clyster. leaues of Violets Mercury, Beete, Mallows, ana M i. clensed Barley, M ii. Rhab. electi, ℥ ss, Miro. citrinorum, ʒ iii. the greater foure cold seeds ℥ . boyle these in water q▪ s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Diacath. ℥ i. ss, oyle o Violets, ℥ iii. ℞ Pulpae cassiae fistulae, ʒ v. amarind. ʒ iii. Rhab. electi,Bolus. ℈ i. ss, Sacchari rosci q. s. and if the patient like it better in broth, they may therein bee dissolued. ℞ Diacath ʒ iii. sir. of the manyfold infusion of Roses,A draught. ℥ i. ss, Cassiae, ℥ i. Myrobal. Citrinorum ℈ i. ss. Rhab. ℈ ss, water of Sorrell, Violets. ana ℥ i, ss. ℞ roots of Borage, Buglosse, ana ℥ i. ss, of Plantane,A Potion. ℥ i. leaues of Violets, Plantane, ana M i. seeds of Plantane, Pur∣slane, ana ʒ iii. flowers of Borage, Violets, Water-lillies, Buglosse, ana M i. Myrobal. lauorum, ʒ vi. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning sirupe of many∣fold infusion of Roses, ℥ ii. adde vnto ℥ iiii. of this strayning, when occasion shall serue, Rhab. electi, Mirobal. citrinorum, ana ℈ ii. and giue it in the morning. ℞ conserue of Buglosse, pulpe of Quinces,An Electu∣ary. ana ℥ i. Gumme
Tragacanth dissolued in Rosewater, ʒ iii. Sanguinis draco∣nis, Bole Armony, ana ℈ ii. ss, mixe these with sir. of Pop∣pie. Lozenges.℞ of Hartshorne burnt, of a hedgehog, dryed in an ouen, ana ʒ ss, seeds of Plantane, Purslane, Roses, ana ℈ ss, fine Sugar dissolued in Plantane water q. s. An Elec∣tuary.℞ Troch de spdeo, ʒ v. of the cup of an Acorne, ʒ i. ss, seeds of Roses, Purslane, ana ℈ i. pulpe of Quinces, without seeds ʒ ii. sir. of Myrtle, q. s. ℞ the flesh of a Hedghog dried in a furnace, ʒ iii, red Ro∣ses,Another. ʒ i. ss, Spodij, gr. iiii. Bole Armony, ʒ i. seeds of Corian∣der, Lettuce, Purslane, ana ʒ ii. ss, Camphor, ℈ i. ss, sirupe of Violets. q. s. Pills.℞ Bole Armony, ʒ i. red Roses, Spodium, flowers of Pomgranats, ana ʒ i. ss, seed of Lettuce, Plantane, Purslane, ana ʒ ii. Gumme Arabicke, ʒ ss, Camphor, ℈ ss, sir. of Myr∣tle q. s. A Powder.℞ Troch. alkekengi, ℥ ss, de Carabe, ʒ i. ss, Frankincense, Gumme Arabicke, ana ʒ i. Cinnamon▪ ℈ ii. A mixture.℞ Myrobal. citriuorum conditorum, ℥ ii. conserue of the flowers of water-Lillies, ℥ i. s, troch. de spodio, ʒ i. ss, red Ro∣ses, ʒ ss. Sacchari rosati, ℥ i. ss, sir. of Water-lillies q. s. A Fomen∣tation.℞ roots and leaues of Plantane, ana M ii. graines of Su∣mach, ʒ iii. red Roses, M i. seeds of Purslane, ʒ i. Roses, ℈ ii. red and white Sandals, ana ʒ i. boyle these in water q. s. for the reines. An Epi∣theme.℞ Rosewater. ℥ vi. water of Endiue, Succhory, ana ℥ viii, Vineger. ℥ i. of Sandals, ʒ ii. seeds of Plantane, ʒ i. the region of the liuer must be washed herewith. An Oynt∣ment.℞ of Sandals, ℈ i. Hartshorne burnt, ℈ ss, red Roses, seeds of Purslane, ana ℈ i. ss, oyle of Roses. Myrtle, ana ℥ i. oynt∣ment of Popler, ʒ vi. of Waxe, Aceti rosacei, q. s. Another.℞ the cooling oyntment of Roses, of Galen. the oynt∣ment of Popler, ana ℥ ss, Camphor, ʒ i. oyle of Roses, Quin∣ces, ana ʒ iii. of Waxe, and Vineger q. s. the reines and the whole backe-bone shall bee anoynted herewith.
℞ leaues of Plantane, Shepheards-pouch, Willowes,A Cata∣plasme. ana M i. ss, red Roses, M ss, Graines of Sumach, ʒ iiii. rinds and flowers of Pomegranats, ana ʒ iii. boyle these in water q. s. vntill they be soft, adde hereto of Barley-flower, ℥ i. ss, oyle of Violets, Myrtle, Sacchari rosati q. s. ℞ leaues of Violets, Endiue, Mallows, Plantane, Water-lillies, ana M iii. red Roses, M iii. ss, seeds of Quinces,A Bath. ℥ iii. Bar∣ley, lb i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. mixe herewith some new milke. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the inuoluntary pissing. FIrst the offending humors shall be made obedient vnto nature, and then expelled by a purging medicine: also the violence of the humors shalbe brought backe againe by Frictions of the head, armes, and shoulder; or by vomits. But first such shall bee giuen as may hinder the humors running to the reines, whether they be inwardly taken, or outward∣ly applyed, it is no great matter. Lastly, the reines shall bee strengthned and the hot distemper amended. If all this will not preuaile, but that the disease doth rather increase then decrease, stupifying medicines must be vsed, for which pur∣pose ʒ i. Philonij Romani is good. Or else. ℞ Philonij Perfici ancient Triacle, ana ℈ i. , giue them with the decoction of of Poligonium. Such medicines as prouoke vrine must espe∣cially be auoyded. A method seruing for the knowledge of the HEM∣ROIDS, or PILES. HEmroids are veines of the fundament, stretched be∣yond measure, or swolne most excessiuely, which doth happen because of melancholy blood. Sometime they do ap∣peare about the fundament, & then they are called outward
hemroids. Sometimes they swell inward, and then the swelling is not so great, and therefore the veines do not appeare outwardly. This is called the inner hemroids. Also the veines do often bleed, without eyther paine, or swelling. This flux of blood is prouided by nature, whereby melancholy blood is euacuated at appointed sea∣sons: and if then it be voyded in a meane, they do preuent imminent danger of diseases, & free them frō those which are already come. For it doth purge the whole body from the obnoxious humors, and soone euacuates the super∣fluities of good blood. Sometimes it comes by fits, and at vnertaine times, and yet this flux is naturall, because without impairing of the strength, it cateh out naughty and corrupt humors. Sometimes good blood is voyded at these veines, and in such abundance, that the strength is weakned, but not a iot relieued. Sometimes it is auoyded with such force, that in stead of grosse, blacke, & melancholy blood, great store of pure blood is voyded. Sometimes these veines are stretched and swelled, and yet no blood is voyded: and this is as much against nature, as the for∣mer, and then is a man afflicted with great paine, and then they are called obscure hemroids. An inflamation is incident to both kinds of hemroides: the obscure hemroids are sometimes hard like warts, and then they be called Ver∣rucales, and are worse then all the rest. Some are gentle and soft, called Morales, sometimes they are spred with a pur∣ple collour like Grapes, and then they are called Duales; It is better to close the obscure hemroids, rather then to open them, if they swell too much yet if extremity of paine require, they shalbe caused to flow. Partly these veines go into the straight gut through the branch of Ʋena porta, partly from the hollow veines, and are terminated with the fundament, and are called outward hemroids. If the melancholy blood be carried downe by the former veines, when the veines lie so deepe within, that they cannot be discerned, without a glasse or turning Aus vpward, then
they are called inward hemroids. Heere blood is voyded with the excrements, but is not mixed with them, but rather doth lie aboue the excrements, no paine concurring, but in the flux of the belly the excrements and the blood are mixed together: nature helpes the diseases of the reines and liuer by such excretion, thorow the former branches: the latter branches nature vseth, for to helpe the default of the spleene, the meseraicke veines, and other adioyning parts, the part affected is formerly mentioned to be the veines in the Fundament. Signes. When they runne too much at the first, they doe voyde melancholy, blacke and thicke blood, but after it, good and ruddy blood is shed, at the length the blood is of a citrine and pale colour, whereby the strength of the body failes, weakenesse of the legs, and a loding paine about the hips concurres. If the Hemroids be stayd against nature, then the backe, hips, kidneys, brest, and fundament are pained; if blood from the Hemroids bee stayed in the straight gut, it doth resemble a clodde of red blood; if the blood come from a weake liuer, it is like vnto the water wherein raw flesh newly killed hath beene washed; the mesentery veine sheads a small quantity hereof: If any veines of the vper parts be burst, or eaten thorow, or too much opened, the blood which is shed by continuall boyling, doth resemble pitch; for it lookes blacke and is as it were burnt. If blood be voy∣ded because of the fluxe of the belly, the signes hereof were formerly mentioned. By these signes may be discerned from whence the blood comes, because the blood runs out at the fundament, from many parts of the body. Therefore all the blood that is voyded at the fundament, is not presently caused by the Hemroids. The Causes. The blood is oftentimes this way euacuated, because
abundance of dreggish blood, which is generated in the bo∣dy by euill digestion, would else rot and putrify the body; wherefore nature hath prouided, that the liuer, spleene, and other parts adioyning, through the former branches should send all their corrupt blood by the fundament. Sometimes the Hemroids are caused by thinnesse and sharpnesse of the blood; sometimes it doth happen to women with childe, or to such whose monethly termes are stayd for sometimes nature driues out superfluous blood, by branches deriued fom the hollow veines, close by the bottome of the flanks thorow the fundament, euen as men are relieued by her. Sometimes it is caused by opening, breaking, or exul∣cerating of veines, and such superfluous blood is vnnatu∣rally stayed by contrary causes. Prognostiques. If the hemroids flow naturally, neyther inflamation of the lungs, or sides, or else eating vlcers or leprosy, me∣lancholy or quartane Feauer will molest any one. Hemroids comming vpon such as are madde, or are troubled with blacke choler, or the affects of the kidneys, are good. Yet if they do bleed too much, there is great danger; for it doth threaten a dropsy; because the strength is too much spent, wherefore if they flow too fast, let them be stopped, because otherwise the liuer and the whole body is thereby cooled, and the strength cast downe. Yet if one hemroid veine be not left open, there is danger of a dropsy, plurisy, inflamation of lungs, leprosy, quartane Ague, melancholy, Mania, or Consumption of the lungs; for these bad excrements flow backe to the liuer and heart walles; wherefore there is great danger by vntimely stopping of the hemroids, as there is by their too much running.
A method seruing for the cure of the HEM∣ROIDS too much flowing. THe ayre must be somewhat dry; and their meate must be such as do breed very few excrements, & that doth bind moderately. Fat flesh broth is good for this purpose, and the iuyce of Quinces must bee added thereto. In like manner furmenty is good. Their drinke may be wine some∣what binding. Syr. of the iuyce of Sorrell, of Roses, dry Roses, of Quin∣ces. Waters, of Plantane, Sorrell, water Lillies, Mel rosatum,Preparers. Syr. of wormwood, de myrobal. Citrinis. Waters of Worm∣wood, Buglosse, Mints. If the blood be cholericke, & thinne, the former may be giuen. If it be watery, the latter shall be prescribed. Syr. Rosarum solutiuus. Diasena. Rhab. Myrobal,Emptiers, flaui. Pillul. de bdellio; Myrobal. Kebuli, Emblici. Polypodium quercinum, seeds of bastard Saffron. Sharpe Suppositors may be giuen to loosen the belly: a stoole may be procured by a candle made of tallow, or with fat lard. The liuer veine of the right arme shalbe opened,Auerters▪ for is hinders the breeding of melancholy blood. Cupping-glasses may be fastned to the right and left side, and vpon the region of the liuer. The armes and hands must be well rubbed, also painfull ligatures of those parts, and fomenta∣tions and baths for the same. Troch. de spodio, with the seed of Sorrell,Closers of the mouth of the veines. de terra sigillata. Confectio de scorio ferri. The great conserue of our description is good to hinder the disease in the begin∣ning. Saccharum rosatum, Conserue of Roses. Pillulae de bdellio; Sanguis draconis. Bole Armony and the seed of
Sorrell are very good. Terra sigillaeta, sqamma et scoriae ferri, rindes of Pomegranates, Rhus oboncorum, Hypocistis. Waters of Pantan, Roses, ybright. Galbanum; Philo∣nium Romanum, Triphera Persica, Phenonis, Atanasia Nicolai. A bath of astringent medicines. Fomentations with astringent wine, wherein the roots of Plantane, red Roses, flowers of Pomegranates, Myrtle, Terra sigillata, Bole Armony, Rhus obsoniorum, Harts-horne burnt, Galla: out of these, iuyce may be strayned, and so put into the veines with a sirenge, if the hemroides be inward, Galla, with the Oyle of Myrtle, made into the forme of a pai∣ster is good. A suppositor of lead burnt, white lead, Colo∣phonia, Acatia; Ʋnguentumcomsitissae is very good, if it bee layd to the loynes, and Fundament. An emplaister of Aloes, Frankincense, new layd Egges, Haires of a Hare. Empliasters of the drosse of Iron, the grease of a Snake rosted and tempered with the rootes of Filipendula, eyther layd to the fundament, or put into the body with a suppositor; this doth stop the blood of the hemroids, and yet the hem∣roids must not suddenly be stayed, because there would be danger eyther of a dropsy or consumption. Phylonium Romanum. Athanasia N. An oyntment of the Oyle of Lillies,Correctors of accidents. Violets, wormes, Linus, Poplar, yeolke and white of an Egge with a little Opium. Oyntment of Poplar. The patient must sit in water where in steele hath beene quenched, and wherein the seedes of Linus, the leaues of Malleyne, Plantane, Mellowes, Violets, flow∣ers of Cammomill, Mellilot, heads of white Poppy, Myrtle, bloomes of Pomegranates, are boyled. The mucilage of Linus and Fengreeke are very good. An emplaister or cataplasme of Barley-flower, Fengreeke, Mucilago Althaae, Psyllij, Mellilote, Purslane, Oyle of Roses, whites of Egges, crummes of bread and Milke boyld, Diachylum with a little Saffron, and Opium. Long tents may be made and dipped in the former Oyntments, and so put them
into the fundament, if the Hemroids be inward. If with the fluxe, the patient bee in paine, that must bee asswaged, lest that the payne bee doubled by the sharpnesse and hardnesse of the excrements: to these must bee added such medicines as doe hinder an inflamation, which for the most part accom∣panies this disease. A more particular method seruing for the cure of of the HEMROIDS. ℞ sir. of Myrtle, Roses, Quinces, ana ℥ i. ss,A Iulep. decoction of Myrtle, Sumach, flowers of Pomegranats, ℥ viii. of red astrin∣gent wine, ℥ iiii. ℞ Pillul. de Bdellìo, ʒ i. Rhab. ℈ ss,Pills. sir. solutiui rosarum q. s. make hereof 8. pills, and giue of them after the first sleepe. ℞ Rhab. electi, ℈ ii. Mirobal. citrinorum, ℈ i. ss,A draught. sirupe of Mints, ℥ i. the water of Buglosse, ℥ iii. ℞ sir. of Quinces, ℥ i. ss, Bole Armony washed in Rose-water, ʒ ss, Masticke, ℈ i, ss, Sacchari rosaci, ℥ ss,Another. water of Plantane, ℥ iii. ℞ conserue of Roses, ℥ i. Troch. despodio, de sucino,An Electu∣ary. ana ʒ iii. red Corrall, Date-stones, ana ʒ ii. Bole Armony, blossome of Pomegranats, ana ʒ i. sirupe of Roses, Myrtle, ana q. s. ℞ of Date-stones, Myrobal. Indorum, ana ʒ ss,Lozenges. Cori∣ander, red Corrall, ana ℈ ss, red astringent wine, and fine Su∣gar, q. s. ℞ Troch. de terra sigillata, ʒ i. sir. of Quinces,A draught. ℥ i. water of Plantane, ℥ iii. ℞ roots and leaues of Plantane, ana M i, Rhoe obsoni∣rum, flowers and rinds of Pomegranats, fruits of Sumach,A Fomen∣tation. ana M i. ss, of Dare-stones, ʒ v. seeds of Linus, ℥ i. ss, seeds of
Myrtle, ʒ ii. ss, Bole Armony, Hartshorne burnt, ana ʒ i. ss. boyle all these in red astringent wine, q. s. wash the fundament herewith. A Lini∣ment.℞ of Frankincense, ℥ ss, Aloes, ʒ ii. mixe these with Egges, and dip a pensill made of the soft haires of a Hare in them, and so apply them to the part affected. Another.℞ oyle of Myrtle, ℥ i. Ʋnguenti comitissa, ℥ ii. Bole Armo∣ny, Sanguinis draconis, ana ʒ i. Hartshorne, white Lead, Li∣thargiri, Antimony, ℈ ss. An Vn∣guent.℞ oyntment of Poplar, ʒ iii. oyle of Violets, ℥ i. ss, Goose and Hens-grease, ana ℥ ss, oyle of sweet Almonds, ʒ vi. Saf∣fron, ℈ ss, the yeolkes of two Egges. Another.℞ Vuguenti comitissae q. s. anoynt the backebone here∣with. Another▪℞ oyntment of Poplar, ℥ i. oyle of Linu, ℥ ss, the yolke of an Egge, Opij, ℈ ss, Saffron, ℈ i. This must be vsed in extre∣mity of paine, or in stead hereof. A Cata∣plasme.℞ leaues of Violets, M iii. Psyllij, M i. ss, boyle these in Cowes milke, vntill they be soft, adde vnto them, of Barley flower, ℥ ss, of wheate flower, ℥ i, two yolks of Egges, oyle of Roses, Violets, ana q. s. A Fomen∣tation.℞ roots and leaues of Plantane, M iii. red Roses, M i. ss, flowers of Pomegranats, ℥ ss, boyle these in astringent wine. Vse this about the part affected. An Em∣playster.℞ the pulpe of Quinces rosted, ℥ iii. Bole Armony. flow∣ers of Pomegranats, ana ʒ ii. Oake Apples, & Frankincense▪ ana ʒ i. A Supposi∣tor.℞ of burnt lead, ʒ i. of white Lead washed, ʒ ss, Bole Ar∣mony, Scammony, ana ℈ ii. iuyce of Plantane, white of an Egge, and oyle of Violets, ana q. s. A Cata∣plasme.℞ roots of Altha, seeds of Myrtle, flowers and rindes of Pomegranats, ana ʒ vi. of the hearbe Longwort, M iii. boyle these in astringent wine, then adde hereto the powder of Dates-stones▪ Oak-apples, Frankincense, ana ʒ i. ss, oyle of Violets, Roses, ana q. s. An Em∣playster.℞ Bole Armony, Frankincense, Aloes, Masticke, ana ℥ ss,
Sanguinisdraconis, ʒ iii. ss, Ossium mirbal. Indrum, stones of Pine apples, ana ʒ i. mixe them with an Egge and Plantane water q. s. ℞ Troch. de terra sigillata▪ ʒ i. ss,A Cata∣plasme. of the white of an Egge beaten q. s. also an emplayster of Figges and Aloes may bee layd vpon that veine that runnes, that it may bee kept open. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the HEMROIDS Ouer∣much flowing. THat the liuer be not cooled by immoderate euacuation of blood, or that the strength of the body be not cast downe, the course of the blood flowing too fast shall bee hindred. If sharp and thin humors be mixed with the blood, first they shall be made obedient to nature, and then expel∣led by purging medicines. After this a veine shalbe opened, (if the patients strength will permit) partly that the super∣fluity of the blood may be diminished, partly that the force of the blood running another way, may be hindred. For this purpose Auerters are prescribed. When all this is done, such medicines shalbe prescribed, as will cloze vp the veines, & thicken the blood: and also the paine must bee mitigated: but if the Hemroids be not apparent, the belly shall be loos∣ned with fat flesh broth, or extracted Cassia, because the paine is caused by sharpe and hard dregges settled in those parts. And when they first breake forth, the first and chiefe care shall be, that the paine bee asswaged, and afterwards that they be dried vp, because this euacuation is vnnaturall: neyther may it be lawfull to prouoke the Hemroids, vnlesse extreme paine or swelling forceth vs: or vnlesse a man be in danger of death by their not flowing, then it shalbe lawfull to set bloodsuckers to the part affected, but first that part
must be washed with warme water, or else with a blood∣sucker. A fine cloth dipped in the white of an Egge, and layd to the part affected, will prouoke them, but the cloth must not be plucked from the place, vntill the moisture be quite dried vp. Or else ℞ Colocynth. ʒ ii. ss, Oyle of bitter Almonds ℥ i; a little quantity of Cowes-dung, make here∣of a cataplasme. Or else, ℞ the pulpe of an Apple rosted, Pigeons-dung ana ℥ i ss, iuyce of an Onyon q. s. make hereof an emplaister for the fundament, which must be first wash∣ed, before the emplaister be layd on. If the hemroids shall be dried vp, ℞ Viridis aris ℥ ss, Pine-Apples, Mastike, Bole Armony ana ʒ ii, water of Plantane or red astringent wie, ℥ xii, boyle these vntill they be boyled vnto the thicknes of Hony, and then apply it hot to the part affected. ℞ Ʋiridis aris vsti ℥ ii, Alome burnt ℥ iij, boyle these in astringent wine, vntill it be as thicke as Hony, and a piece of wooll must bee dipped in it, and layd to the part affected. If it may be discerned that there is an vlcer within, an vnguent shalbe made of blacke lead and Lithargirum. This must be iniected very cold. A method seruing for the knowledge of the ouerflowing of the monthly tearmes. THe superfluous flux of moneths is, when as it doth tend rather to the hurt then good of the women, be∣cause hereby they be purged more then they should; but in such women that are of a moister constitution, because of their good diet and much ease, the moneths may be suf∣fred to flow more then ordinarily they are wont where∣fore not so much the quantity, quality, or kind of substance must be obserued, but rather whether they flow in season, or out of season, or else for the good of the patients in such women that are with child, or that do giue suck, or are lately deliuered of their child, they must stand stil; yet
they breake forth in the first moneth, when women be with child, and not against reason, because the mouth of the wombe is not so fast bound, as it is afterwards, when as the smallest body cannot get in. And sometimes in women with childe, after that the mouth of the wombe is clozed vp eyther moneths, (as it doth sometimes fall out in maids,) or somewhat like vnto the moneths is voyded through the branches of the hollow veines, which are fastned to the necke and mouth of the wombe, in such fort, as the Hemroids veines are terminated in the end of the right guts. The Part affected. The wombe is chiefely affected, when the moneths o∣uerflow, sometimes the whole body simpathizeth, and is alike affected. This affect is an accident which appertaines vnto immoderate excretion, and it is not altogether a∣gainst nature, as it is in the bleeding of the nose, or other bleedings, for herein only too great a quantity of the moneth is vnnaturall. Signes. If the moneths flow immoderately, the appetite is taken away the digestion is hindered, and crudities are in all parts of the body. The whole body is weake, and a great feeble∣nesse of strength followes, and this is a certaine signe that the moneths flow too fast. The colour of the face is chan∣ged, feauerish heats arise in the body: sometime the whole body with the feete is swelled, and a Dropsy followes. The Causes. Superfluity of moneths run out, first by reason of the heate of blood, thinnesse, or abundance, more then is requisite: or else be cause of the continuall motion thereof, for when these
concurre, nature is defeated. Sometimes there is such store of blood, that it doth not only open the veines, but doth breake them open by force, which sometimes happens by too violent exercises. This doth chance to those that are vntimely, deliuered & also to those that are deliuered with paine, whether it be by the infants crosse comming out, or else by his bignesse: the hot season of the yeere, the vse of hot baths, and such like do cause the opening of the vessels. Sometimes this flux happens, because some veines are open by a fretting exulceration, which happens in the necke of the wombe, by the sharpnes of blood: and this is knowne by that which is voyded, because mattry and virulent matter is voyded with the blood, and sometimes it is stinking. Also a greater paine is felt about the wombe: Sometime store of blood is voyded by the rupture of the greater veines, whereof many are terminated in the mouth of the wombe. The lesser veines voyd but little, and that confusedly. Againe this flux is caused by too frequent copulation, as also by the weaknes of the retentiue faculty; and in conclusion, venemous, putrified and biting humors cause this flux. Prognostiques. Immoderate fluxes caused by the birth of a great babe, are lesse dangerous, because they will stay of their owne accord. If by vntimely birth, the danger is sudden, and therefore the greater: If it be caused by fretting or an vlcer, it is hardly cured; because of the euill complexion of the hu∣mors which are gathered about the wombe, and because many superfluities are mixed with the blood, medicines are prescribed in vaine. And as by the vtter stay of the moneths, there is danger of a dropsy; so also by the im∣moderate flowing of the tearms, the same disease is also to be feared; especially if the body be weakned, or the colour of the face changed, because a woman is heereby brought vnto great coldnes, faintnes of the heart, swounding; and sometimes death is like to ensue.
A method seruing for the cure of the ouerflowing of the moneths. THe ayre must be somewhat dry and cold. Theie meate binding and thickning, and such as will generate good blood, as the feet of beasts boyled, Partridges, Pheasants, Black-birds, Larks, Rabbets, Fawnes, Hares; rosted meate is better then boyled. They may drinke water where∣in the seeds, roots, and leaues of Plantane▪ are boyled: exer∣cise is altogether forbidden. Sleepe must be moderate; and all perturbations of the mind auoyded. Syr. of Endiue Quinces, Roses, Pomegranates. Of the iuyce of Sorrell, the iuyce of Barberries. Waters of Sorrell,Preparers. Roses, Plantane, Purslane, Endiue. If the body be full, the inward veine of the right arme shalbe opened, or if the strength hold out,Emptiers, and the months looke red, this blood must be taken out by degrees. Rew, extracted Cassia, Myrobal. Citrini, Kebul. Agaricke is also good, because watery phlegme is mixed with the blood. Syr. of the manifold infusion of Roses. Rhab. diaphaenicum. Elect. Indum, Hiera picra, Pillul. maiores de bdellio. A de∣coction of the flowers of Violets, Roses, Buglosse, water-Lillies, Damsens; Myrobal. Flauis. Rhab. iuiuba. to these also the syr. of manifold infusion of Roses shall bee ad∣ded. The Basilica veine shalbe opened.Auerters: Also painfull frictions and ligatures of the vpper parts shalbe vsed: one great Cup∣ping-glasse shalbe fastned to the right or left side vnder the paps, and this shalbe many dayes renewed. Also another shalbe fastned to the region of the spleene, and so be re∣moued from thence to the belly, and also to the shoulders, especially if a veine may not be opened, because of the ouerflowing of the moneths, or weaknes of the strength. A fomentation for the belly & lower parts, with the decoctiō
of Plantine, red Roses, rinds of Pomegranates, Hypocstis, Long-wort, Pine apples, Bole Armony, Acatia, sanguis draconis. A bath of the same decoction is good, wherein the patient must sit: in like manner vomit is good.  the blood be watery, causers of sweate are good. Thickners of the blood·Diaolibanum, Triphera phenonis. Philonium Romanum, & Persicum, Athanasia, Elect. Diatrim sandal. roch. de terra sigillata, Carabe, Spodio. Syr. of Myrtle, Roses, Pome∣granates, of the iuyce of Sorrell, Quinces. Conserue of dry Roses, of the iuyce of Goos-berries, they may drinke the water of Roses, morning and euening. The pulpe of Quinces, Harts-horne burnt, Shepheards-pouch, Balan∣stium, Calyces Glandium, Terra Lemnia, Polygonium, Hypocistis, Pine-apples, Roses, iuyce of Plantane, or else the water hereof with the Troch. of red earth, iuyce of Purslane, Millefolij Leaues of Oakes, sumach, Gumme Arabicke, Masticke, Olibanum, seeds of Coriander, burnt Alome. The waters of Plantane, Purslane, Lettuce, Sorrell, Roses, with the troch of Carabe de spodio, Terra sigillata▪ A bath of the decoction of the roots and leaues of Plantane, Comfrey, Horse-tayle, Knot-grasse, Pine-apples, graines of Sumach, the shell of an Acorne, rindes and flowers of Pomegranates, Roses, Rhoe obsoniorum. The patient must sit vp to the nauell, and take the fume of this decoction in at her wombe. A fumigation may be made with the fume of Mustard-seed. A Clyster with astringent wine, where∣in Sage, Roses, Plantane, Bole Armony Sanguis Draconis, are boyled. Or else the Clyster may be made with the iuyce of Roses, Plantane, Eybright, especially if there be any vlcer. A pessary must be made with Mummy, Tryphera, Mycleta, Bole Armony, iuyce of Plantane, Roses, Eybright. Or in stead of this Pessay; a soft linnen cloth dipt in the iuyce of Plantane, and put into the priuy parts. An epi∣theme may be made of red astringent wine, wherein the roots of Plantane with the leaues of Sumach are boyled. Apply this to the priuy parts. Ʋnguentum comiissae, Roses,
Myrtle: when the region of the reines must bee anoynted herewith, it shall be then cold, but if it bee vsed about the belly, it shall bee hot. An Oyntment of the oyle of Myrtle, Roses, Quinces, iuyce of Purslane, powder of Sandals, Ro∣ses, rinds o Pomegranates. Ceratum sandalinum. An Em∣playster of Roses, flowers and rinds of Pomegranats, roots of Plantane, Pine-apples, Sanguine draconis, Bole Armony, these shall be vsed at the first, for it is to be feared that na∣ture being accustomed to this immoderat fluxe of termes, then it will proue too common and familiar with her. And the Orifices of the veines wil scarce be clozed vp, and then it is incurable, if it doth continue so very long; and yet there be many that doe then vndertake the cure. Confectio Atha∣nasia, and many other medicines of this kind, though they stanch the blood, may not be drunke, vnlesse the strength will permit; or else they may bee vsed in a desperate case, when as other medicines cannot preuaile. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the Inordinate flowing of moneth∣ly termes. ℞ sirupe of Roses, Myrtle, Quinces, ana ℥ i, ss, water of Plantane, ℥ v. of the decoction of Myrtle, Sumach,A Iulep. ℥ vi. ℞ Diacath, ʒ iiii. Rhab. electi, ʒ i. sir. of Roses,A draught. ℥ i. water of Plantane, ℥ iii. ℞ Pillul. cochiarum, de Agarico, ana ℈ i. ss, Diagridij,Pills. gr. iii. with a sufficient quantity of Artemisia, make hereof 8 pills. ℞ roots of Plantane, ℥ i, ss, Rhab,A draught. ʒ i. Myrobal. citrino∣rum, ʒ iii. boyle thse in water q. s. vnto ℥ iiii. or v. adde to the strayning Rhab. electi, ℈ i. ss, sirupe of Quinces, ℥ i. ss.
Pills.℞ Pillul de Bdellio: ℈ ii, ss, sir. o Succhory with Rhab. q. s. hereof 8. pills must be made. A draught.℞ iuyce of Plantane, Mill efolij ana ℥ ii. Gumme Arab. ʒ i. make it sweete with fine Sugar q. s. A drinke.℞ Ʋini siptici, lb i. ss, boyle a small quantity of dry Cheese herein; this is good to stay the immoderate fluxe. A draught.℞ red Corrall beaten into powder, ℈ i. Plantane, ℥ iii. sir. of Quinces, ℥ i. A Potion.℞ roots of Plantane, ℥ iii. Bole Armony, ʒ i. boyle these in red astringent wine vnto lb i, sweeten it with fine Su∣gar, q. s. An Electu∣ary.℞ Troch. de terra sigillata, de Carabe, ana ʒ i. Masticke, Harts-horne, Frankincense, the rindes of Pomegranates, ana ℈ i. seeds of Roses, red Corrall, ana ℈ ss, the conserue of old Roses, pulpe of Quinces, ana ℥ , sirupe of Myr∣tles q. s. Another.℞ conserue of old Roses, ℥ i. Olibani, Frankincense, Myrrh, ana ℈ ii. Bole Armony, seeds of Roses, ana ℈ i. Masticke, ℈ i. ss, iuyce of Quinces, ℥ ss, make hereof an E∣lectuary with a sufficient quantity of the sir. of Quinces, and so giue it to the patient in the morning. A draught.℞ Troch. de terra sigillata, ʒ iii. Athanasiae, ʒ ii. Giue ʒ i. hereof with ℥ iii. of Plantane water, and with ℥ i. of the sir. of Quinces. Bolus.℞ Pills of Houndstongue, ℈ i. Philonij Perfici, ℈ ii. ss. Tria∣cle, Bole Armony, ana ℈ ss. Pills.℞ Pills of Houndstongue, ʒ i. Philonij Romani, ℥ ss, euery other day the patient may take ʒ ss. An Elec∣tuary.℞ red Corrall beaten to powder. Ambrae citrinae, ana ℥ i. Bole Armony, ʒ ss, seeds of Roses, Plantane, ana ℈ i. sir. of dry Roses, ℥ i. A draught.℞ tripherae, ʒ i. Pills of Hounds tongue, ℈ ss, sir. of Quin∣ces,
℥ ss, red astringen twine, ℥ iii. ℞ iuyce of Plantane, ℥ vi. Gumme Tragacanth. ℥ ss,An Iniecti∣on. if the patient will permit, this shall bee put into the wombe. ℞ Troch. de spodio, ʒ i. ss, iuyce of Plantane, Sage,Another. ana ℥ ii. vse this as the former is to be vsed. ℞ Mellis rosati, ℥ i. Alloes, Frankincense, Bole Armony,Another. terra sigillata, ana ʒ i. Corrall, Myrrhe, rindes of Pomegra∣nats, ana ℈ ii. ʒ ii. is sufficient at one time. Vse this as the former. ℞ iuyce of Plantane, ℥ iii. Bole Armony, rinds and flowers of Pomegranats, Frankincense, ana ʒ i. ss, Harts horne burnt,A Pessary. Pine-apples, ana ℈ i. ss. ℞ roots and rinds of Plantane, Comfrey, ana M i. leaues of Sage, M ii. rinds of Pomegranates, Roses, M i, ss, Sumach,A Fomen∣tation. Pineapples, ana ʒ iiii. ss, Hypocistis, Rhoe Obsoniorum, ana ʒ ii. ss, boyle these in red astringent wine q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed. Wash the belly and region of the reines herewith. ℞ trypherae, ℥ ss, Pine-apples, Frankincense,A Pessary. rindes of Pomegranates, ana ʒ i. Bole Armony, Gumme Arabicke, ana ℈ ii. ℞ Frankincense, Masticke, ana ʒ ii. Gumme Trgacanth,A Suffumi∣gat. ℈ iiii. dried Snailes skinne, Horses hoose, ana ℥ ss. or else an equall quantity of sheeps dung, and Frankincense▪ the pati∣ent must receiue the fume in at the priuy parts. Also a bath shall be made of those that were prescribed in the Fomenta∣tion: they must bee boyled in the water wherein Iron hath beene quenched. This is an approued medicine, especially if lb i, ss, of Bole Armony be mixed with it. In this bath the pa∣tient must sit vnto the thigh, and so shee may receiue the fume into her body. ℞ Vnguenti comitissae, ℥ i. ss, oyle of Myrtle, Quinces,An Vn∣guent. Ro∣ses, ana ʒ vi. Bole Armony, Sanguinis draconis, ana ʒ i. rinds
of Pomegranats, ʒ i. ss, Acetirosace, q. s. anoynt the reines and priuy parts herewith. An Em∣playster.℞ Maticorij, Balaustiorum, Hypocystis. Bole Armony, Eggeshes, Mummy, Olibanum, ana ʒ i. red Roses, Pine-ap∣ples, ana ʒ i. ss, Frankincense, ʒ iii. Beanes and Barley flower, ana ʒ ii. ss, oyle of Myrte, ℥ i. ss, of Waxe, and Rosin q. s. apply this to the region of the reines, and lower parts of the belly. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the ouerflowing of the monethly termes. WHen it shall bee perceiued that the body is weak∣ned by the ouerflowing of the tearmes, then they shall be suppressed. If plenty of blood be the cause of it, a veine shall be opened, and a slender diet shall be prescribed, and such meats as doe generate blood, shall be auoyded: but if this disease bee caused by watery blood, or else the heate, sharpenesse, or thinnesse of the blood, first the offending humors shall bee digested, and then expelled by a purge. At the length Cupping-glasses shall bee vsed, that the course of the blood may bee turned another way▪ and then the course of the blood may be stayed, the Orifices of the veines clo∣zed, and the blood thickned, whereof some shall bee taken inward, and others outward; and because in all fluxes the heart and liuer are weakened, therefore both those bowels shall be corroborated. Iniections, and pessaries of astringent things are herein of great force, because they come sooner to the part affected, then they that are taken in at the mouth. If this disease be caused by some eating vlcer in the wombe, it may be clensed with water of Hony, and then healed with Frankincense, Aloes, Terra sigillata, and other,
which were formerly mentioned. The same also may be vsed, if it be caused by a rupture. But they must be iniect∣ed with red astringent wine, and if the body abound with ill humors, the body may bee first purged. The iuyce of Plantane, Shepheards-pouch, whether they be iniected or taken in at the mouth, are very good, wherewith Gumme Tragacanth or Arabicke may be added. A method seruing for the knowledge of the suppression of the moneths. AS the ouerflowing is dangerous, so the retention on the contrary is as dangerous. The monethly tearmes are portions of blood destined by nature for generation, ouerflowing in the hollow veine, from whence it doth slide into the veines of the wombe, and by the superflu∣ity the mouth of the veines are opened, and then drop∣ping out from thence, they runne out at the necke of the wombe once euery moneth. But the staying of the moneths is altogether vnnaturall, if they bee of ripe age, vnlesse they haue conceiued. This blood increaseth in wo∣men rather then in men, because a woman is weaker, and of a colder constitution of body then man is, and therefore also cannot so well digest the nutriment, ney∣ther can they, by reason of their coldnes, concoct the nourishments in such sort as man can. Nature did order this for some speciall cause, which is, that they should giue plenty of food to their children when they are with child: & as the moneths do begin at a set time, so they haue a time limied for their end. But if they be with child, as was for∣merly sayd, then they doe not flow at all, lest that a pas∣sage being open the nourishment which should preserue the child, might be auoyded with the ill humors the like
also happens to those that giue sucke, because the blood is carried to the brests, and there turned into Milke: in some the moneths runne at twelue yeeres, in other at foure∣teene, or twenty; and they cease about the 50 or 60 yeeres of a womans age: heere is only mention made of vnnaturall suppression of monethly termes, which brings great dan∣ger with it. The part affected. The wombe is chiefly affected in regard of the fatnes thereof, whereby the veines are crushed together, and so the flux is hindered. Sometimes flesh growing in the wombe, or else scarres left after an vlcer, are in fault; sometimes it is caused by the default of the other parts, and sometime superfluities are not conueyed to the wombe, as vsually they were. Signes. The forepart of the head is pained, and spreads it selfe vnto the eye, necke, shoulders, and ioynes; her appetite is taken away, and she is sad, musing, and vnquiet, the colour of her face is altered, queisines of stomacke, and loathing of meate doth follow. She voyds phlegme, and is for the most part taken with a trembling, as though shee were presently to be deliuered. Her vrine is thicke, red and mud∣dy, and sometimes blackish, with a red mattery residence in the bottome. The Causes. Grosse and phlegmy matter mixed with blood is the chiefe cause of this disease; because it stops the veines leading to the wombe, whereby a thicknes of the wombe, and straightnes of the veines doth happen. Sometimes it is caused by the inflamation of the wombe, or fatnes thereof. Sometimes they come not at their accustomed season, because they are consumed by thinne diet, feare, too much thought, watchings, sadnes, violent exercises, too
much euacuation at the stoole, sweat, vomit, bleeding and long diseases. And in these causes it is not good to pro∣uoke the moneths: sometimes it is caused by too hot or cold distemper of the whole body, or of the liuer, lungs, spleene, stomacke or wombe. For by a hot distemper the excrement is dried vp and consumed: by a cold distemper it waxeth thicke and more tough, whereby the vessels of the wombe are stopped. Prognostiques. If the termes be too long suppressed, there is great danger of the dropsy, stopping of the matrix, gowte, paines in the ioynts, head, backe and loynes, difficulty of breathing, cough, melancholy passions, giddines of the head, reso∣lutions of sinewes, trembling of the heart, swelling of the bowels, swounding, collicke, payne in the reines; for hereby many corrupt humors are generated, and then conueyed to the liuer, spleene, lungs, heart and head: in briefe, vnto euery part of the body. But when the scarres of vlcers haue sea∣led vp the mouth of the vessels in the wombe, and for that cause the moneths are suppressed, the disease is incurable. It is good for such as are troubled with this disease, to bleed much at the nose: and if the moneth be too long at a stand, the vessels by which blood is vsually conueyed, are stopped, and so hardned, that they will scarce admit of any cure. A method seruing for the cure of the too much suppression of the moneths. THe ayre must incline to heate, and her meat must bee heating: she may drinke sweet wine; labor and exer∣cise is very good for her. Shee must not sleepe so long as vsually she did; likewise she must auoyd all passions of the mind. Syr. de quin{que} radicibus, of Maydens-haire. Artemisiae,Preparers.
Byzantinus, Agrimony. Oxymel compositum, water of Parsly, Dodder, Fennell, Baulme, Artemisiae, Sauine, Thyme, Wormwood, Penny-royall. A decoction with the roots of Fennell, Parsly, Asarum, rubia tinctorum, leaues of Nepite, Origan, Mug-wort, Sauine, Penny-royall, Saffron, Cina∣mon, seeds of Annise, Fennell, Carroots, flowers of Elders, Rosemary, Buglosse, red Ciches adde to this strayning Oxymel compositum. The thicke matter shalbe made thinne by attenuating medicines; the slimy matter shall be pre∣pared by cutters; because this matter is oftentimes caused by grosse and slymy matter, which must in time be pre∣pared: and for this very cause, a woman had need to be purged with these following medicines: Emptiers.The ankle bone must bee opened twice or thrice in euery yeere, especially if the body abound with blood. For by great store of blood the obstruction is nourished. But the part from whence blood must be drawne, must first be washed with the decoction of Mallows, Cammomill, Mellilote, Lillies for by this meanes the blood will descend to the lower parts. Pillul. de agarico, Mastichinae, Alephan∣ginae. Hiera simplex, Logoij, Diaolocynth. Diacath. Diaphaenic. Benedicta laxatiua, Electuarium elescopi, Indum maius. Pillul. Aggregatiuae, Fatidae, de Sagapeno, Alephanginae. Agaricus. Prouokers of the moneths.The Triacle of Andromachus, Mithridate, with the de∣coction of Cinnamon, Triphera magna, without any Opium, but with Cinamon water. The Trochisks of Myrrhe are very good. Hyppocra shalbe made with white wine and Cinamon: allay and mingle the decoction of Eringus herewith. Also the iuyce of Eringus, with white wine is good. Sauine, and Dittany infused in wine. Millium slis Sauine, with white wine. Cupping-glasses, with scarification shalbe applied to the share, hams, priuities or hips, and so the blood shalbe drawne to the wombe. The lower parts shalbe rubbed with a hot cloth, and the hips shall be tied very hard: quilts, fomentations, and sitting in
baths made with the decoction formerly specified: also a bath may be made with the flowers of Cammomill, Melli∣lote, Radice rubia tinctorum, Hyssop, Baulme, Nepit, Maioram, leaues of Bayes, and also Bay-berries, roots of Fennell, Parsley, Calamint, Origan, Penny-royall, Rose∣mary, Artemisia, Berries of Iuniper. A suffumigation of Artemisia, Aristolochia, Bay-berries, Iuniper, Cinamon, Cloues, Cassia lignea, Origan, Nepit, Frankincense, Sto∣rax, Galbanum. An oyntment for the lower part of the belly, of the mucilage of the seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, fresh Butter, Marrow of the bone of a Hart, Oyle of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Rue, Sauine. An oyntment of Arthani ta Oyle of Lillies, Tiles, Pepper. An emplaister of Southern∣wood, Sauine, roots of Cyclamen, Sagapenum, Myrrhe, Galbanum, Oppoponax, torax. A pessary ex oleo muscelino, Oyle of Tiles, Harts-marrow, roots of Broome, dip Muske Cotton in these. Another pessary may be made with the herb Mercury bruised, Triacle, Mithridate, Gentiana, Beauer-stone, Myrrhe, Berries of Iuniper, Tryphera magna, or else it may be made with Gumme Ammoniacke, Gal∣banum, oppoponax, Sagapenum, leedes of Melanthium, roots of Cyclamen, rubia tinctorum, Nigella, Sauine, Harts-marrow. An emplayste may be made of the same: and the pessary must be then vsed, when the plaister is layd on. Such medicines as do prouoke the termes, shall not be pre∣scribed vnto such as are newly recouered of a disease, nor vnto such as feele no paine by the suppression; neyther may they be brought downe in those that are fat or vnder 14 yeeres of age, or aboue 45, or in them that are with child, or that do giue sucke: also in them that haue an ill iuyced body, if it may be discerned that they haue small store of blood, or that they be weakned by dayly diseases: also if they haue lost great store of blood by bleeding at the nose or some other part: for then the blood shall rather be kept in: and if there be any humours that do corrupt the blood, they shalbe amended, if any of the former accidents hap∣pen,
the moneths shall not be caused to flow, by any of the former medicines: but if there be plenty of humors, and that they are suppressed because of thicknesse thereof, or a slimynesse, or stopping of the wombs vessell, or parts round about it, or else by the thicknesse of the womb, the moneths shall then be prouoked. Correctors of acci∣dents.Milke, the white of an Egge beaten; oyle of Violets, and Roses, Rosewater. These asswage the heat of the womb, if any be caused by Pessaries or such like medicines, a linnen cloth must bee dipped in them, and so layd to the necke of the wombe when occasion shall require. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the suppression of the moneths. A draught.℞ Diacath. ʒ vi. Mannae Calabri, ℥ i. sir. Artemisiae, ℥ i. ss, water of Artemisia, ℥ iiii. A Iulep.℞ sir. Artemisia, ℥ ii. sirupe de duabus radicibus, Byzan∣tinus, ana ℥ i. water of Fennell, Parsley, Matricaria, ana ʒ iiii. A Potion.℞ roots of Asarum, ℥ ss, Fennell, Parsley, ana ℥ i. ss, Sauine, M ss, Nepite, M i. ss, of Maydenhaire, p i. boyle these in wa∣ter. q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning sir. de quin{que} radi∣cibus, ℥ iii. This doth loosen the obstruction, and prepares the matter. A Potion.℞ roots of Fennell, Parsley, ana ℥ i. Aristol. rot. ℥ ii, seeds of Annise, red Ciches, ana ʒ ii. ss, Raysins the stones being taken out, ℥ i. ss, Sauine, ʒ i, ss, flowers of Borage, Buglosse, leaues of Nepite, Artemisia, ana M i. flowers of Elder, M ss, Licorice, ℥ ss, Polypodij quercini, ℥ i. white and light Aga∣ricke, ʒ iii. ss, Ginger, ℈ ii. boyle these in water, q. s. vnto lb i. ss. adde to the strayning Elect. elescopi, ℥ i. sir. Artemisiae. Byzantini, ana ℥ i. ss.
℞ Elect. elescopi, ʒ vi. Benedicta laxatinae,A draught. ʒ ii. sir. Arte∣misia, ℥ i. water of Nepite, ℥ iii. ℞ Pillul. de Sagapeno, Mastichinarum, Faetidarum,Pills▪ ana ℈ i. Cinnamon, ℈ ss, Beauer-stone, Sauine, ana gr. xii. sir. Arte∣misiae q. s. make hereof 7. or 8. pills. ℞ Trochisc. de Mirrhae, ℈ ii. Cinnamon, Beauerstone,A draught▪ ana ℈ i. sir. Artemisiae, of sweet white wine, ana ℥ ii. ℞ Boracis, Corticum Cassiae Fistulae, ana ℈ ii. ss,A Powder: roots of Cyclamen, Cinnamon, ana ℥ ss, Myrrhe, ℈ i. Giue ℈ ii. hereof with white wine. ℞ Triphera magna without Opium, Troch. de Myrrh,A mixture. ana ʒ ii. ancient Triacle, ʒ i. Beauerstone, ℈ i. ss. Mastri, roots of Dittany, Sauine, Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, ana ℈ i. conserue of Buglosse, ℥ ii. ss. ℞ Troch. de Myrrha, ʒ iiii. roots of Dittany, ʒ ii. ss,A Powder. Sauine, ʒ ss, Beauerstone, ℈ ii. Giue ʒ i. hereof with the wa∣ter of Artemisia. ℞ roots of Asarum, ℥ i. Cyclamen, ʒ iii. leaues of Nepite, M i. ss, Sauine ʒ ii. seeds of Parsley, Milij solis, ana ℥ ss,A Potion. Car∣rowaies, ʒ ii. Licorice, ʒ v. boyle these in a little white wine, adde to lb i. of this strayning sir. Artemisiae, de quin{que} radi∣cibus, ana ℥ i, ss. ℞ roots of Fennell, Parsley, Sperage, Ruscus,A Bath. Rubi tinctorum, ana ℥ i. the flowers of Cammomile. Mellilot, El∣der, ana M ii. ss, leaues of Rosemary, Artemisia, Sauine, Ne∣pite, Bayes, ana M ii. ss, Baulme, Origan, ana M i. seedes of Linus, Fengreeke, ana ℥ i. ss, seedes of Carrots, Ammi, ana ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee con∣sumed. The patient shall sit herein vp to the nauell, without prouocation of sweate, because it doth hinder the purgation of the moneths. A Quil shall be filled with Artemisia, and applyed to the priuy part. And after shee comes out of the bath, shee may take the following me∣dicine.
An Elec∣tuary.℞ of Beauerstone, ʒ i. Cinnamon, ℈ i. Mithridate, ℈ i. ss, decoction of Cinnamon with Hyppocras, ℥ iiii. or else giue it with the conserue of Rosemary-flowers. A Fomen∣tation.℞ roots of Danewort, lb i. Elder▪ ℥ v. roots of Rubiae tinctorum, Flower-de-luce, ana ʒ ii. leaues of Sage, Artemisiae ana M iii. boyle these in an equall quantity of wine and wa∣ter, vntill the third part be consumed: the hips shall be wa∣shed herewith morning and euening: the continuall vse hereof is very good. An Oynt∣ment.℞ oyle of white Lillies, ℥ i. ss, of sweet Almonds, ℥ ii. Cammomile, Hens-grease, ana ℥ ss, roots of Asarum aristol. ana ℈ i. ss, anoynt the lower region of the belly, and that part of the side where the reynes lye. An Iniec∣tion.℞ roots of Dittany, Cyclamen, ana ʒ iii. Fennell. Psley, Rubia tinctorum ana ℥ i. leaues of Sage, Nepit, Artemisia, ana M i. boyle these in water q. s. vntill the third part bee consumed. Giue ℥ iii. hereof with ℈ i. ss, of Beauerstone, and gr. i. of Muske. Another.℞ Triacle, ℥ ss, Saffron, ℈ ss, iuyce of Sauine, Danewort, with the water of Artemisia, ana ℥ iiii. A Pessary.℞ Harts-marrow. ℥ i. ss, roots of Rubia tinctorum, Ni∣gella, Bayberries, ana ℈ i. Myrrhe, Beauer-stone, ana ℈ ii. Cy∣clamen, Sauine, ana ℈ i, ss. oyle of Lillies, q. s. Another.℞ Colocynth. Cyclaminis; ana ʒ ss. Nigella, Gentin, ana ℈ ii, Triacle, ʒ ss. make hereof a Pessary with the iuyce of Sauine. A Suffumi∣gation.℞ troch. gallia muschata, roots of Rubi tinctorum, aristol. rot. ana ʒ i. Cinnamon, Cloues, ana ʒ ss, Artemisiae, Nepit, Baulme, ana ℈ ii. Frankincense, Storax, Galbanum, ana ℈ i. ss, This must be receiued into the wombe by a pipe.
An Appendix seruing for the cure of the too much suppression of the moneths. IF the moneths be stayd, and the health is thereby impai∣red, we will go about the cure, otherwise not. If it be ca∣sed by slimy and cold humors (as commonly it happens) such medicines that doe heate and dry, shall be prescribed, but first of all, the superfluous humors shall bee asswaged with lenitiue medicines, and then made obedient vnto na∣ture, and expelled by a purge. Then such as prouoke the termes, and open the mouth of the veines, shall bee prescri∣bed. After all this is done, the blood shall be brought down∣ward by opening of the Saphena veine, or by Cupping-glas∣ses, which shall bee fastned to the hammes with Scarificati∣on: the like may be also done with Baths, Lotions, and Pes∣saries, whereto such medicines shall be added as doe asswage the paine, & allay the heate, if the patient doe complayne thereof. And that the Pessarie doe not make an vlcer in the wombe, it must not remaine long in the body. After the Pessary is taken out, the place shall bee washed with white wine, wherein Baulme, and Pennyroyall haue beene boyled. The cure must bee begunne with gentle medicines, and then stronger by degrees shall be administred: if an ob∣struction be caused by too much fatnesse about the wombe, shee must eate sparingly, and vse violent exercise; if the termes bee suppressed because of sicknesse, or too much eua∣cuation, or too long fasting, or spare diet, they shall not bee prouoked, except the former diseases be first cured. The best medicines for the prouoking of the moneths, are ʒ i. of Beauerstone, drunke with strong wine, after she comes out of the Bath: Diacalaminthes Fernelij, troch, de myrrha, try∣phera magna without Opium.
A method seruing for the knowledge of the MOTHER. PRaefocatio vteri, or Mother, is a running backe of the wombe, or of maligne vapors bredde in the wombe, vn∣to the higher parts, whereby the bowels, midriffe, and sto∣macke, are sometimes so crushed, that they cannot be wide∣ned by breathing: for it seemes in this disease, that the wombe is lifted vp so high, that it driues the other mem∣bers aboue it, vnto the higher part; sometimes also the wombe is drawne toward one side. This disease hath some affinity with the falling sicknes, swounding, and apoplexy, because the speech is often taken away, and the party fals to the ground, or at the least cannot indure to stand long: yet herein they differ, for in this disease there is no foaming at the mouth, neyther are the eyes turned, or the sinewes stretched, which is neuer perceiued in the Mother. And as in this disease they haue the sence of hearing, so they do in like manner vnderstand, and feele the least paine that doth touch them, though but very dully: yet in the falling sicknes, they are destitute of all these. This disease also differs from the Sincope or swounding herein, because the pulse holds out, though it bee but little, thinne and faint; but in the Sincope the pulse beates not, and besides she that is in a swound, looks paler then they do that are troubled with the Mother, & a colder sweate ouer-sprreads their bodies. If sweet odours be put vnto her nose, they do much annoy the patient, but if they be layd to the wombe, they are present remedy. The part affected. The wombe is chiefly affected; for menstruous blood, or some other humor, oftentimes the seed it selfe is corrupted, and then drawes a corrupt quality to the place; sometimes
it is affected by the consent which the wombe hath with the principall parts of the body, as with the braine, by the films of the backe bone, and sinewes: with the liuer by the means of the middle veines, but with the heart by means of the arteries, neyther may it seeme strange that the whole body is ill affected, when as the principall parts are affected. Signes. For the most part queisines of stomacke and loathing of meate follows, and yet without vomiting; because an euill vapor is conueyed from the wombe vnto the bowels and stomacke, which causeth all this; from hence also comes thicke breathing, and if the vapor be carried to the mid∣riffe, or if the wombe be very much swelled, it doth crush the midriffe and guts, by which crushing the parts are straightned, and there is danger of suffocation; in conclusion her heart doth faile her, her lookes are heauy, although the pulse be nothing altered: if the paine get vp into her head, sometimes she is disquieted with anger, sometimes with feare, and sometimes a deepe sleepe doth concurre; the patient, is on a sudden dumbe, her face looks pale, & she pre∣sently fals to the ground with her eyes shut. And although they haue sense and motion, yet neyther of them can be easily discerned, for they lie on the ground speechlesse, and moue not at all. The extreme parts of the body are cold, which seemes to be caused by the head, from whence it falls downe into the shoulders, necke, armes, legs, and feete. Difficulty of motion comes withall, and a kind of resolution, yet it is soone shaken off when the disease de∣clines; and their eyes after much heauines are opened, their chekes growne red, and the body waxeth strong, the wombe by litle and little is loosned, and some moisture runnes out of the priuy parts, their guts rumble, their mind, sence and motion is as perfect as euer they were: when the fit is comming, a feeblenes of the legs takes
her, drowzines, lazines and palenes of the face, and by degrees greater accidents come vpon them. And then when these symptomes do appeare, then it can easiest bee discerned what the disease is. For the milder symptomes haue some affinity with the cardiacall passion, and melancho∣ly, and therefore it cannot bee rightly discerned what the disease is: both these kind of symptomes accompany this disease. The Causes. The cause of the Mother is menstruous blood corrupted, and an euill vapor breaking out from the wombe, or else some impostume in the wombe. For the most part it is caused by the seed that is sent to the wombe, and therein detayned and corrupted. Sometimes it is caused by cor∣rupt humors which remaine there; for when these do putri∣fie in the wombe, they do breed a noysome, and vene∣mous quality. And it happens that from whence life ariseth, from thence also the deadliest bane of venome springs, and then is it an easy matter for venemous matter to be car∣ried not only by veines and arteries, but also by secret brea∣thing holes into the vpper parts, and so disturbe their functions. Prognostiques. If the affect be long, and often comes vpon the patient by fits like to the falling sicknes, although there be no ap∣parent danger, yet euery fit brings no small danger with it. It is confessed that many haue recouered of this disease: yet most die eyther in the fit, or presently after the ft. Then the fit did last long, the sence and motion was taken away, the pulse did beate swift and disorderly, and at the length it cease: lastly, a cold sweat is spred ouer the whole body, the breath fayles: then a swounding
and death follows. The danger is not so great, if the spirits be not hurt; and there is lesse danger to be feared, if with their breath they haue motion and sence. Euen as the falling sick∣nesse comes by fits, so doth the Mother. A method seruing for the cure of the stopping of the MATRIX or MO∣THER. THe ayre must bee temperate, not cold or very windy, they must abstaine from such meats as doe increase the blood and seede, also they must eate sparingly. In like man∣ner such meats as doe generate windinesse, maligne and me∣lancholy humors, must bee voyded. They may not drinke wine, except it be allayed with water. And yet if there bee danger of swounding, they may drinke wine. Moderate ex∣ercises are good, their sleepe must bee shorter then ordina∣ry, the excrements must be avoyded by art or nature, sad∣nes must be auoyded. Syr. de quin{que} radicibus,Preparers. Oxymel squilliticum. decocti∣on of petasites, Briony, artemisia, Aristol. rot. Syrupus artemisiae. water of Nepite, Mug-wort, Dittany, Peta∣sites. Benedicta laxatiua, Electuarium elescopi,Emptiers. Agaricus troch. Hiera picra, Diacoloc. Pillul. de Agarico, Faetidae. Like∣wise a Clyster is good. Painfull ligatures of the lower parts,Auerters. chiefly of the legs and hips, euen vntill they be nummed. The sides must be crushed hard with the hand downward, for by this meanes the wombe cannnot get vp. Also she shalbe bound about with scarfs, frictions of the same part, and of the soales of the Feete, that the Spirits which are stirred vp, might expell the obnoxious humours. Cupping-glasses shalbe fastned to the share, and hips, but not to the
vpper parts of the belly, for then the wombe would eyther bee detained there, or else drawne thither. Bags and fomentations of Wormwood, Mug wort, Camomill, Penny-royall. Suffumigations of the feathers of Partridges, the soales of shoes, Goats-horne, Beauer-stone, Pitch, the wicke of a candle newly put out: for these stirre vp the expelling faculty, which doth shorten the fit by expelling the hurtfull matter. Odours shalbe put vnder the nose, being made of Assa fatida, Beauer-stone, Sagapenum, Galbanum. These driue the wombe downward, because the wombe cannot indure any stinking smell, when as a sweet smell refresheth it, & therefore Lignum-aloes, Cinet, Gallia moschata, Alipta moschata, Cloues, Oyle of white Lillies, wherein some Muske is put, do comfort the wombe: therefore the fume of these lastly mentioned, shalbe recei∣ued into the wombe by a tunnell. Sneezing medicines of Helle-bore, and Beauer-stone, doe suddenly breake off the fit: for the wombe returns to its proper seate, because the vpper parts are too much stirred vp and downe: the patient may hold her breath, or else sombody should blow vp into her nostrils; in the suppression of moneths, the inward veine of the arme shalbe opened, and then her ankle veine, or at the least bloodsuckers shalbe vsed, or scarification: frictions of the inward part of the wombe, as well in the time of the fit, as when it is quite ouer, with a midwifes finger anoynted with the Oyle of white Lillies, wherein some Ciuet, and Musk is dissolued; for hereby the obnoxious matter is expelled, and the matrice is drawne downe to the lower parts. Strength∣ners.Diacuminum, seeds of Carrots, Beauer-stone, with the decoction of Mug-wort in thinne wine, shalbe giuen at distance of time. Sometimes her nose shalbe stopped, and the breath kept in: for heereby the naturall heate being gathered together, doth comfort the part affect∣ed, & scatters the maligne humor. A pessary of Cummin,
Agaricke, Hiera picra, Triacle, Mithridate, Pepper, Ginger, Ammoniacke, Goose-greace, Storax, is very vsefull and ne∣cessary. A Suffumigation of Cinnamon, Cloues, Mace, Lig∣num aloes, Ladanum, Troch. aliptae, Gallia muchata: this must bee so conueyed to the wombe, as the former was. Oyles of Spike, and Flower-de-luce shall bee iniected into the priuy parts. An oyntment for the belly and loynes, of the oyle of Lillies, Nard, Gallia muschata, Cinnamon, oyle of Amber. A Pessary of Ladanum, Alipta moschata, Muske, Storax, Amber, Cinnamon, Cloues, Lignum aloes, oyle of Spike, Rosewater. An Emplayster of Ladanum, Gallia alipta{que} moschata, whereto a little muske shall bee ad∣ded. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the MOTHER. ℞ roots of Angelica, Bryony,A Clyster. ana ʒ vi. Aristol. rot. ʒ iii. leaues of Mercury, Mugwort, ana M i. ss, flowers of Cam∣momile, Mellilot, ana M i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Hierae logod. ℈ ii. Electuarij elescopi, ℥ i. oyle of white Lillies, Keirini, ana ℥ i. ss, of strong wine ℥ iii. ℞ sirupe of Mugwort, sir. de quin{que} radicibus, Oxy∣mellis simplicis, ana ʒ i. ss, the water of Mugwort, Nepite,A Iulep▪ ana ℥ v. ℞ roots of Angelica, ℥ ss, Bryony, ʒ v. Fennell, Parsley, ana ℥ i. the seedes of Annise, Piony, ana ℥ ss. Nepite, Mugwort,A Potion. ana M ss. Raysins the stones being taken out, ℥ i. Licoras, ʒ iii. Damaske Pruines, Sebesten ana no vi, Polypodij querini, senae Alex. ana ℥ i. white and light Agaricke, ℥ ss, flowers of Bo∣rage, Buglosse, ana M i. Ginger, ʒ i. ss, Cinnamon, ʒ ii. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. adde to the strayning Benedictae laxatiuae, Elect. elescopi, ana ℥ ss, Giue the patient ℥ iiii. here of in the morning.
A draught.℞ Electuarij elescopi, ʒ iii. Agarici troch. ʒ i. water of Dittany, Nepite, Petasites, sirupe of Mugwort, ana ℥ i. Pills.℞ Pillul. faetidarum, Hierae diacoloc. ana ℈ i. ss, sirupe of Mugwort, q s. Pills.℞ Pillul. de sagapeno, foetidarum, ana ℈ i, ss, of Beauer∣stone, ℈ ss, with the sir. of Mugwort, q. s. make hereof 8. pills. Pills.℞ Hieroe diacoloc. pillul. aggregatiuarum, ℈ i. Assae foetidae ℈ ss, of Beauerstone, gr. vi make hereof 8. Pills, and giue them to the patient once in euery weeke. A draught.℞ Triacle, Mithridate, ana ℈ i. ss, Assoe faetid, ℈ ss, the decoction of the seeds of Carroots, ℥ iiii, Also the de∣coction of Ptasite, Bryony, Licorice, roots of Angelica with Sugar may be drunke very often, because it is an espe∣ciall remedy against this disease. A Vomite.℞ oyle of white Lillies, ℥ ii. the decoction of clensed Barley, ℥ ii. Oxymellis squillitici, ℥ i. ss. Giue this luke∣warme in the morning. An Elec∣tuary.℞ Diamasi dulcis, Diambrae, Aromatici rosati, ana ʒ ii. Mithridat, ʒ i. Beauer-stone, ʒ ii. ss, roots of Dittany, ℈ i. con∣serue of Buglosse, ℥ i. sir. of Mugwort q. s. A Powder.℞ white Pepper, white Hellebore, ana ℈ ii. Beauer-stone, ℈ i. seeds of Rew, ℈ i. ss, put a small quantity hereof into the patients nose. ℞ Calami aromatici, wood Aloes, ana ʒ i. Salis gemmae et nitri,A Pessary. ana ʒ i. ss, dry Storax, ʒ ss, Muske, gr. ii. Rosewater and Vineger ana q. s. ℞ Troch. galli emuschata, ʒ i. alipa muschat, ʒ i. Calami aromatici,Trochisks. dry Storax, Cloues, Mace, wood Aloes, ana ℈ iiii. Muske, Ciue, ana gr. vi. Rosewater q. s. make hereof Tro∣chisks for a perfume. When necessity requires, one of these shall be cast into the fire, and the fume shall bee recei∣ued into the womb by some conuenient instrument for that purpose. A Lini∣ment.℞ oyle of Lillies, Spikenard, ana ℥ i. ss, Keirini, ℥ i.
Muske, gr. v. of Galliae muschatae, Storax, ana ʒ ss, mixe these, and vse them about the priuy parts and inward parts of the wombe. ℞ Emplastri ceronei, ℥ ii. Troch. galliae muschatae, ʒ i. ss,An Em∣playster. Cinnamon, leaues of Bayes, ʒ i. Ladani, ℈ i. ss, oyle of white Lillies q. s. apply this to the place about the priuy parts. Also twice in euery day, that place and the wombe it selfe shall bee anoynted with the oyle of white Lillies being first heate. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the MOTHER. IF there be any danger feared by the accidents, before the cause of the disease be opposed, they shall be taken away, the patient may bee relieued partly by vnsauory odours made with Assa faetida, Brimstone, Pitch, Beauerstone, snuffe of Candles, Feathers, and Asses hooues burnt, and partly by Pessaries, for eyther of these remoue the cause. The like also may bee effected by sweet perfumes receiued into the wombe: for although euill sauours are good against the disease, if they be receiued in at the nose, in like manner they are hurtfull, if they get into the wombe. For some of these cause the wombe so to swell, and lift it selfe vpward, that it flies to the midriffe for succour: and so by crushing the midriffe doth, hinder breathing. Also the chiefest part of the cure doth consist in hindering the maligne vapors that as∣cend not to the heart; for this purpose Frictions, and Liga∣tures of the lower parts are good. When the fitte is ouer, then the cause of the disease shall bee enquired after: for if it bee caused by the suppression of moneths, they shall flow in their due season: If it be caused by being detayned in the wombe, and therein corrupted, such things shall bee prescribed as will hinder the generation of the seede, or
she may enioy the company of man, or else the necke of the wombe shall be tickled with a womans finger, which must first be dipped in the oyle of Lillies. If it bee caused by o∣ther corrupt humors in the wombe, they shall first bee di∣gested, then made obedient vnto nature, and at the first ex∣pelled by a purge, and the body strengthned. And for the better preseruation of women from this disease, they must fast often, and exercise themselue in serious labors; they may likewise vse Cummin-seed, Saffron, Cinnamon, seeds of Carroots and such like with their meats. A method seruing for the knowledge of AR∣THRITIS, or Ioynt-GOWTE. THe Ioynt-gout is a feeblenesse of the ioynts, and paine comming vpon them at certaine distances of time; for the most part it is caused by a flux, which winds it selfe be∣tweene the ligaments, filmes, and tendones of the ioynts: for in this disease the ioynts doe first receiue the humor, which at the length doth insinuate into the filmes adioyning. If the Gowte happen in the wrist, the ioynts of the fingers, or else in the Ligaments and brawne, it is called Chiragra or finger-Gowte, if it doth sticke in the knee, then it is termed Genogra, or knee-Gout, but it is called the Gowte of the hips, if the patient be pained aboue the hips, from whence it doth spread it selfe to the thigh, calues of the legges, and vnto the end of the feete: yet this Gowt stickes not in the hippe, but it is fastned aboue the hippe, at the top of the buttocke. If the Gowte doth sticke in the feete, it is called Pdagra, the feete-Gowte, whether it be in the ankles, soales of the feete, or the great tos ioynt, wherefore euery paine of the ioynts shall not be called the ioynt-Gowte, but one∣ly that which is caused by the feeblenesse of the ioynts, by
reason of their loosnes, or widenesse of the passages, or de∣fluxe of the humors: sometimes seizeth on the shoulder ioynts, and turning ioynts of the backe bone, or chine. Sometimes not any knitting of the bones is free from this paine. Euery other paine of the ioynts hath one generall name, Athritis, or the ioynt gowte, and from hence may bee gathered, that the affects of the ioynts differ  in their whole kind, but only in diuersity of places af∣fected. The part affected. The ioynts, tendones, ligaments, and filmes of the parts of the body, which eyther knit o else enuiron the bones, are heere affected, and sometimes the membranes are filled and stretched. The Signes. The patient is extremely tormented for along space, when the disease doth first surprize the patient, yet the payne is but little, and arise the foure formerly specified; and then by the vse of the euill diet, almost all the ioynts of the body do suffer alike, sometimes not one part of the body is free from this disease. In the feetgowte, or hipgowte, for the most part no swelling doth appeare; but in the hand gowt, and kneegowte, a swelling, rednes, and heate by extreme paines are easily to be perceiued. Sometimes an inflamation is caused, and the appetite is ouerthrowne, and the patient is troubled with watchings, and a Fea∣uer. The Causes. The cause of euery ioynt-gowt is for the most part great store of phlegmy humours, or some other humours ouerflowing in the greater veines, the Liuer, and Head, so that the parts are therewith surcharged; and that these parts may likewise bee freed of this burthen, they do cast these excrements vpon the ioynts, ligaments, and
tendones, and filmes, whereby they are filled, stretched and weakned: Sometimes these humors grow thicke, and by the reason of the heate that is about those places, or by the force of medicines, they are as it were baked, and resume the nature of a sand-stone or grauell; and then a knotted gowte is caused, wherein the ioynts are wrested, and grow so crooked, that they cannot moue. There be foure causes of this superfluity of humors, the immoderat vse of strong wine, Venery, crudities, and feeblenes of the parts. To these may be added the relinquishing of ac∣customed exercises, and the suppression of vsuall euacuati∣on. This disease is an hereditary disease. Prognostikes. The paines of the feetgowte trouble the patient at the spring time, and Autumne. If this disease he not cured be∣fore the patient comes vnto his perfect growth, it will not be perfectly cured; yet in the younger sort there is some hope, if they do vse a moderate diet, and keepe their bellies loose, and do keepe themselues in action, but then the knotty gowte must not be growne, because it will not admit of any cure. In this disease if a dissentery, or laske doth happen to the patient, he is presently eased. In the hipgowte the paine is greater then it is in any other kind of the ioynt-gowte, and it will last so much the longer, by how much the numnes, cold in the hips, legs and loynes is; also if they be costiue, and well growne in yeeres▪ the disease will scarce shake hands with them. It is a good signe in this kind of ioynt-gowte, if the paine fall into the lower parts from the loynes and hips. These two kinds of gowts bring with them the dropsy, and Asth∣ma; and then these diseases are incurable. Also both these kindes of gowtes will returne againe, although the pa∣tient may iudge himselfe to bee altogether freed of them.
A method seruing for the cure of ATHRITES, or ioynt-GOWTE. THe ayre must be temperate, and rather incline to heat and drynesse. Such meats as do moderately nourish, are good, and of these they must eate but sparingly. They may drinke the water of Hony, or water wherein Cinna∣mon, or seeds of Annise haue beene boyled; they must a∣uoyd wine, especially strong wine. When the disease hath left them, they must vse exercises, otherwise not. Their sleepe must be moderate, for too long sleepe doth cherrish the disease. Their bellies must alwayes be kept loose. The vse of Venery is hurtfull; and in conclusion, let them auoyd all perturbations of the mind. Oxymel simplex,Preparers▪ Mel rosatum. Syr. Staechados. Syr. of the iuyce of Borage. Waters of Betony, Wormwood, Borage. If there be too much blood,Emptiers. and at the first time of the diseases seizing on the patient, the veine of the shoulder, on that side the paine is resident shalbe opened but if it be in the lower parts, then the hamme or ankle veine shall be opened: for this takes away the paine of the hips. Also that veine that goes to the ring finger or little finger, shall be opened. Yet if the hands and armes be pained, the hamme veine of the same side shall be opened. An ele∣ctuary of the iuyce of Roses, Benedicta laxatiua, Elect. Elescopi, Diaturbith with Rhab. Diacath. Pillula cocciae, Faetidae, Aureae, de Sagapeno, de hermodactylis maiores, Artheticae, de oppopanace, Arabic. Hiera picra, Agaricus, Troch. Rhab. myrobal. Kebuli, Turbth. Conserue of the manifold infusion of Roses, a decoction of the roots of Asarum, Stchas, Herba paralitica, Iuy, Sene, Polypody, Agaricke, Myrobal. Citrini, Kebuli, Centory thelesse, seeds of Annise, Fennel, to these Benedicta laxatiua & Elect. elescopi
shalbe added. Clysters are effectuall in the paine of the hips, & of the vpper parts, because they do draw backe the humors, and do refresh the part that is faint, by gentle oyles cōmunicated to the members. And seeing this disease is not only caused by on humor, therefore the cure ought to be an∣swerable to the humors. Auerters,A vomit with the decoction of Radish roots, Orage, seeds of Asarum, Broome flowers, Syr. Acetosi simplicis, Oxy∣melle simplici, squillitico, and luke-warme water. Cupping-glasses are good for the paine in the hips, if they be first ap∣plied to the vpper parts, from whence the humors did fall into the hips, after that the Cupping-glasses shalbe re∣moued to the part affected, Frictions, Ligatures, prouokers of vrine and sweat, potentiall cauteries of vnslaked lime, Mel anacardinum, Sope, Niter, Euphorbium. Or else of Cantharides the heads and wings being cut off, Staues-acre, leauen, Mel anacardinum; or else a plaister made with the roots and leaues of Ibris, and grease. All which are ef∣fectuall for the cure of this disease. Repelling medicines must be shunned, because they strike the humours in∣ward, and there deaine them, whereby the disease is caused. Asswagers of paine.Oyle of Elders, Almonds, Cammomill, Mulleyne flowers, and mans grease are very good in the hip-gowte. Or else the roots and flowers of Mulleyne macerated in red wine for the space of 24 houres and then distilled; after this a wet cloth shalbe dipped in the liquor, and shalbe applied hote to the part affected. Also the part may be anoynted with the aforesayd Oyle; likewise the Oyle of Spike is very much commended. An vnguent of the former Oyles, the fat of a Fox, Swine grease, Butter, Oyle of Turpentine. Cataplasmes may be made with the roots of Althaea, Barley flower, and swines grease, or else with the roots of Althae, meale of Linus, Fengreeke, Barley, flowers of Mellilote, Cammomill, Wormwood, Iuy, crummes of Bread, Oxes-dung, seeds of Poppy, a small quantity of
Opium, Oyles of Cammomill. Foxes, Roses, with goats Milke. Or else the seeds of Linus and Fengreeke may be boyled in water and Vineger, and a small quantity of the Mucilage shalbe extracted, which if it be mixed with Hony, shalbe applied to the part affected. A cerot of Frank∣incense, Galbanum, Saffron, Ammoniacke, Vineger, Ro∣sin, Wax, and Oyle of Roses. The medicines that asswage the paine must be stupefies, vnlesse the paine be very great. And after the vse of stupefactiue medicines, moderate heaters shalbe vsed, otherwise the member would be too much weakned by the distemper that is left behind. Triacle, Mithridate, Daiacorallum,Strength∣ners. the decoction of Broome, roots of Cyna, Guaiacum. An oyntment of the Oyles of Foxes, Spikenard, Cammomill, Lillies, Bays, Roses, Tiles; de euphorbio. An vnguent of the decoction of earth∣wormes, Sage, Nepite, Tormentary, Broome, Aristol. Fox. Vnguentum Agrippae, Martiatum, Aregon, Goose∣grease, Swines-grease, Oyles of Foxes, Cammomill. A Bath of the fruits of Iuniper, flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, roots of Dane-wort, leaues of Bayes, Sage, Rosemary, Ori∣gan, Wormwood, Betony, Roses, Dane-wort. The part affected shalbe washed with a sponge dipped in this liquor, and afterwards it shall be anoynted with mans-grease and Petroleum. A cerote may be made with the Oyles of Cammomill, Dill, Wormes, Beauer-stone, whereto some Brim-stone shalbe added. Cataplasmes also may be made of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, leaues and roots of Althaea, Fengreeke, Cummin, and Lin-seed, and the aforesayd Oyles. An Emplaster of the flowers of Cammo∣mill, Mellilote, Sage, Penny-royall, flower of Fengreeke, Gumme Ammoniacke, Oppoponax, Sagapenum, Oyles of Elder, Rue, Foxes, Cammomill, Bayes, Turpentine, Pitch & Wax. Emplastrum Iohannis de Ʋigo. Such medicines as do resolue too much, must be auoyded; lest the thinne humors being scattered, and the thicke left behind, it be turned into a hard substance.
A more particular method seruing for the cure of ATHRITES, or Ioynt-GOWTE. A Clyster.℞ Radicum Asar, Polypodij quercini, ana ℥ i. Agarici, ℥ ss, leaues of Sage, Bayes, Mallows, Rew, Centory the lesse, St. Iohns woort, ana M i. ss, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilote, ana M i. seeds of Annise, ℥ i. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Electu. elescopi, Diaturbith, with Rhab. ana ʒ vi. oyle of Rew, Cammomile, Elder, ana ℥ i. A vomit.℞ Oxymellis simp. et squillit. ana ℥ ii. lukewarme water, ℥ iii. common oyle, ℥ i. A Iulep.℞ Oxymellis simplicis, sir. taechados, Mellis rosati, ana ℥ i. waters of Fennell, Parsley, Betony, ana ℥ iiii. A Potion.℞ roots of Asarum, ʒ iii. Parsley, ℥ ii. Chammaepitis, Endiue, St. Iohns-wort, Sage, ana M i. seeds of Annise, ʒ vi. seeds of Melons, ʒ v. Hermodactylorum, ʒ i. ss, leaues of Sene, bastard Saffron bruised, Polypodij quercini, ana ʒ v. of white Ginger, ℈ ii. boyle these in water, q. s. vnto lb i. ss. adde to the stray∣ning of fine Sugar, ℥ ii. Pills.℞ Pillul. Faetidarum, de Sagapeno, Cochiarum, ana ℈ i. Rhab. electi, Mirobal. Indorum, ana ℈ ss, make hereof 7. or 8, pills. A vomit,℞ roots of Asarum, ℥ ss, seeds of Orage, Water-cresses ana ʒ iii. seeds of Asarum Rocket, ana ʒ ii. roots of Radish, ℥ i. boyle these in water, q. s. vntill halfe bee consumed, adde vnto ℥ v. of this decoction Oxymellis squillitici, ℥ i. oyle of Cammomile, ʒ vi. Giue it lukewarme. An Electu∣ary.℞ of preserued bastard Pellitory, ℥ iii. preserued Ginger, ℥ i. ss, Diatrion pipereon, ʒ iii. Bolus.℞ Elect. elescopi, Diaturbith with Rhab. ana ℥ iii. ss. Elec∣tuary of the iuyce of Roses, ʒ i. of fine Sugar q. s.
℞ roots of Ruscus, Sperage, ana ℥ i. Stoechados Arabicae,A Potion. Herbae paraliticoe, Iuie, ana M i. seeds of Annise, Parsley, ana ℥ ss, Licorice, ʒ iii. ss, senae Alex. Polypodij quercini, bastard Sffron bruised, ana ʒ v. boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Elect. elescopi▪ Benedictae laxatiuae, ana ʒ v. Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, ʒ i. ss. ℞ roots of Danewort, lb i. Sage, M iiii. Hysope,A Bath. Penny-royall, Wormewood, ana M ii. one or two roots of Rape, flowers of Cammomile, M ii. seeds of Linus, ℥ ii. fruit of Iu∣niper, lb ss, boyle these in water wherein a Fox hath beene boyled: adde hereto Brimstone, Alome, ana ℥ vi. after the patient comes out, he must sweat. ℞ of Mithridate, Triacle, ana ℈ ii. water of Cinnamon,A draught. q. s. the patient must drinke hereof before he comes out of the bath. ℞ the oyle of Tiles, Petrolei, ana ʒ ii. oyle of Cammo∣mile, Foxes, Turpentine, Elder,An Oynt∣ment. ana ʒ iii. Ʋnguenti Agrippae; fat of the Cat of the Mountaines, ana ℥ ss. fat of a Dog, ʒ i. ss. ℞ oyle of Wormes, ℥ i. Galbani, ʒ i. Beauer-stone,Another. ℈ ii. ss, Nutmeg, Sage, ana, ℈ ii. ss, Mans-fat, oyle of Turpen∣tine, ana ℥ ss. ℞ oyle of Elder,Another. lb ss. herein boyle of the roots of Dane∣wort bruised, ℥ iii. adde to the strayning of Mans-fat, ℥ ii. oyle of Foxes, Petrolei, ana ℥ ss, Galbani, Ammoniaci, ana ʒ vi. Hens-grease, ℥ . ss. Waxe and Vineger q. s. ℞ roots of Danewort, ℥ iii. three roots of Rape,A Cata∣plasme. seeds of Fengreeke, ℥ i. ss, boyle these in water q. s. vntill they be foft; then adde hereto, Cowdung, ℥ iii. Honey q. s. ℞ of Pitch ℥ iii. Brimstone, ℥ i. ss, oyle of Roses, q. s,An Em∣playster. spread this vpon a hot sheeps-skinne. ℞ roots of Althaea, ℥ ii. flowers of Cammomile,A Cata∣plasme. M ii. red Roses, leaues of Wormewood, Maioram, Cabage, ana M i. two roots of Rape of an equall bignesse, boyle these in Ver∣iuyce q. s. adde of wheate and Barley flower, seeds of Li∣nus,
Fengreeke, ana ℥ ss, oyle of Tiles, ʒ iii. oyles of Foxes, Cammomile, wherein Wormes haue beene boyled, ana q. s. the yolke of one Egge, Saffron, ℈ ss. This doth asswage the paine. An Appendix seruing for the cure of AR∣THRITIS, or Ioynt-GOWTE. FIrst, the ill humors shall be euacuated by a Clyster, and they that remaine behinde, shall be made obedient to na∣ture, and then driuen downe with a purge: but they must bee hindred from running to the part affected; for which purpose a vomit giuen two or three dayes together is good: but before they doe take these, they shall vse sundry kinds of nutriment, especially such as are liquid and fat. Then if the paine continue, it shall be asswaged, but stupe∣factiues shall not bee vsed, vnlesse great necessity doe re∣quire, when as too much heate and paine afflict the patient, and then an oyntment shall be made with the oyle of Roses and Cammomile, ana ℥ i. Opij, gr. ii. Waxe and Vineger q. s. after that the stupefactiue medicine is taken off, the grie∣ued part shall be washed with hot beere, and he shall drinke the sirupe of Roses and Quinces with Plantane water: for these doe hinder the humors running to the part affected. At the length the braine and part affected shall be strength∣ned, and the distemper that is left behinde amended. A method seruing for the knowledge of the FRENCH-POX▪ THe French-pox is a contagious disease, which for the most part comes by the immoderate vse of Venery. In
former times it was not knowne, but now it rageth & raig∣neth in most parts of the world. The beginnings of this dis∣ease are small, but in time it doth increase, and doth not only vitiate the humors & spirits but also the sinews, membranes, tendons, flesh, and bones. In briefe it doth peruert the temperature and substance of the whose body, whereby diuersity of excrements are generated. This disease hath ta∣ken its name from the efficient cause thereof. The part affected. The liuer is chiefly affected, as may appeare by the natu∣rall actions that are hurt; for the concoctiō of the stomacke is euill, the braine and other parts are corrupted, where∣by the colour of the body is changed, and the whole body is made vnable for any excercise. And besides, they haue not that propension to Venery as they formerly had. This disease doth assault rather the naturall spirits then the vi∣tall or animall: and these being corrupted, the liuer must needs be corrupted. In this disease, the haires do fall from the head, although the patient haue no scabs a∣bout the priuy parts, or vlcers, or running of the reines. Signes. In the beginning of the disease boches do grow in the groines: in the priuie members, and passages of the vrine, there be lttle pushes, which in time do send out clammy corrupt blood, and do cause heate of the vrine, and stran∣gury. Also the seed doth shead of its owne accord. Some∣times very small spots, sometimes yellow, another while red and wan, like vnto a lintle, doth appeare in the vpper part of the body, which will sticke as close to the pa∣tient as the disease doth. A paine in the sinews, heauines of the head, a oading paine in the shoulders and necke, doth accompany this disease. Sometimes the aforesayd spots go
away for a time, but returne againe, bringing with it such virulent matter, as doth eate into the flesh, whereby foule and poysonous matter runnes ouer the whole body. Likewise these kinds of stinking pushes do grow in the mouth, throate, nose, and iawes, and in time these parts are exulcerated, because they are tenderer then the rest: after∣wards the head, armes, and thighes are extremely pained and exulcerated; the haires of the head and beard do shead, and they take no rest in the night. These paines are rather felt in the limbs, then in the ioynts; in the aforesayd places likewise hard swellings arise, which cannot easily bee dissolued especially they do: appeare in the forehead, the head, the middle part of the shoulder, and fore-part of the leg, which at the length become great vlcers, which doe corrupt the bones, and trouble the patient in the night sea∣son, because the sinewes, membranes, ligatures and bones are diminished; the bones also sometimes are in like man∣ner eaten vp as the flesh is, and the membranes are plucked from the bones, and are pricked by the sharp∣nes of the humours. All these signes do not meet in euery one. The Causes. The cause of this disease is a maligne and filthy quality, which is communicated to other parties, only by a touch∣ing; but for the most part, it is communicated to the pa∣tient in the act of Venery, because the priuy parts haue a thinne and rare substance. Also this quality is communicated to the mouth and skinne by the clothes. And by how much the liuer is weaker, by so much is this disease more vehe∣ment; whereby it happens, that when as many do couple with an infected person, all are not for alike tainted, they that haue their naturall strength perfect, are not so sud∣denly corrupted with this contagion. For euen as it is in the Plague, euery man sucks in the infected ayre, yet all are not alike infected, because the vitall spirits are stronger in some then in others.
Prognostiques. At the first the disease will admit of cure, but afterward it is incurable. This disease is contagious, and may be got∣ten only by touching an infected person. They that are troubled with this disease, are at the length consumed with too frequent watchings, continuall crosses and Feauers. This disease is hereditary, and doth bring with it a consump∣tion, dropsy and Asthma, if the Liuer be very much af∣fected. A method seruing for the cure of the FRENCH POX. THe ayre must be moderately hote, for cold doth hin∣der the operation of the medicines. The patients must eate sparingly, and their bread must be twice baked, or else the crust of bread. They may eate the flesh of Hens, Pullets, Larks, Pheasants, and they are better rosted then sodde. But when they take a purge, sodde is best. Such meates as do breed cold and grosse humors, winds, or that do inflame the blood, are forbidden. They must excercise themselues vntill they sweate, for hereby the moist matter is expelled, their sleepe must be moderate; the belly must be purged once in euery weeke, especially if the offending humors be grosse; for thinner humors wilbe auoyded by sweate. They must shunne all perturbations of the mind, and also abstaine from Venery. Oxymel simplex, Syr. Acetosus, Syr. of Fumitary, Endiue,Preparers. Violets, Buglosse, Hops▪ Waters of Succhory, Violets, Borage, Endiue, Buglosse. Syr Staechados. Oxymel simplex & Squilliticum, a syr. compounded of Fumitary. The former shalbe vsed, if the abounding humors be cholericke, which doth happen vnto those that haue virulent vlcers. If the hu∣mors be phlegmy, the latter shalbe vsed.
Emptiers.Pillul. aggregatiuae, Artheticae, de hermodactylis, Cocciae, de Fumaria, de agarico, de colocynth. Faetidae, fine quibus esse nolo, Aureae, assaieret, de Rhab. de quin{que} generibus my∣robal. Hiera pacchij, Elect. elescopi, Lapis lazuli, Diasena. Confect. hamech, Electuarium de spyllio. Electuarium Indum maius. Diaprunum simplex▪ A decoction of Sena. A potion of the roots of Asarum, Flower-de-luce, Sperage, Fennell, Dittany, Tormentill, Aristolchia, Succhory, Bettony, Fumitary, Agrimony, Scabious, Scolopendria, Dodder, rinds of Dane-wort, Thyme, Epithymon, seeds of Annise, Fen∣nell, flowers of Borage, Buglosse, Violets, Sene, Agaricke, Polypodium, blacke Helle-bore, Rhab, Hermodactilis, My∣robal. Citrinis, Kebulis, Licorice, Raysins, Cinnamon, Cloues, Ginger, Syr. of Fumitary, de Epithym Oxymelle simplici. Hermodactyli, Colocynthis, Agaricke, Sene, Epi∣thymon. A Clyster of the decoction of Nettles, Buglosse, Althaea, Mallows, Fumitary, Hops, Cammomil, Mercury. If the body be full, and the disese is newly come vpon the patient, the liuer veine shalbe opened, especially if the pa∣tient be very much pained. Purging medicines must be often reiterated, because there is great plenty of vicious humors. Giue this potiō for the space of foure dayes in euery weeke, and that for the space of seuen weekes. The other dayes they may vse the electuary appointed in the potion. Expellers of the contagious humors.A potion to prouoke sweating, of the wood Guaiacum, is a soueraigne remedy against the French pox. A decoction of the roots of Cyna, Sarsaperilla, Apios, is good. Annoynt the vcer with the froth of the decoction of Sarsaparilla, Guaiacum, and Cyna. Triacle water, or Triacle distilled with Aqua vitae. An Electuary of Triacle, Mithridate, roots of Agelica, Tormentill, Pimpernell, Wormseed, rinds of the wood Guaiacum, seeds of Iuniper, Piony, Carduus Be∣nedictus, Scabious. St Iohns-wort, Dittany, Gentianae, Orange-pees, amariscus, iuyce of Scordium, Cnnamon, Myrrhe, Frankincense, Cionserue of Buglosse, Saccharum rosatum, syr. of Orange-peels. An vnguent to cause sweate,
may bee made of Myrrhe, Masticke, Frankincense, roots of Elecampane, Triacle, Mithridate, Bdellium, Galbanum, Gumme Ammoniacke, Ʋnguentum martiatum, oyle of Bays, Lillies, Cammomile, Almonds, Turpentine, Butter, Hens and Swines-grease. A Cerote of the former matter, where∣with the body shall bee clothed if occasions draw the pati∣ent forth of the dorers. An oyntment of the former ingredi∣ents, with Quicksiluer, oyle of Turpentine, Philosophers, Petroleum, and Aquae vitae. Ʋnguentum Iohanis de Vigo, is very good against this disease. A perfume of Ladanum, O∣libanum, Masticke, Frankincense, Aloes, Storax, Sandaracha, Cynabrio sublimato, roots of Dittany, Wormeseed, Mace, Cloues, Calamus aromaticus, Guaiacum, Bay-berries, Tria∣cle. This may be applyed vnto certaine parts of the body, namely, the legs and armes, if they be pained, or vlcers arise into those parts. Laetificans Galeni, Triacle, Mithridate,Strength∣ners. with the con∣serue of Buglosse, Diatrion sandali, Diamargaritum frigidū, Diarrhod. abbatis, Orange-pills preserued, Myrobal. conditi, Conserue of Buglosse, flowers of Sage, roots of Elecampane, Acorus, flowers of Rosemary. An Epitheme for the heart, Ex speciebus Diamargariti frigidi, Sandalis, Baulme. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the FRENCH-POX. ℞ of common roots, ana ℥ ss, seeds of Parsley, Alisander,A Potion. ʒ iii, Calamint, M ii. Licorice, ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Oxymellis compositi, ℥ iiii. Giue this before the patient doth enter into the Bath. ℞ sir. of Fumitary, ℥ iii. of Hops, Oxymellis simplicis,A Iulep. ana ℥ i. water of Fumitary, Hops, sowre Sorrell, ana ℥ iii.
A draught.℞ leaues of Sene, Polypodij quercini, ana ℥ ii. ss, Myrobal. Indorum, ʒ ii. Raysins, ℥ i. boyle these in ℥ xvi. of Buglosse water, vntill the third part be consumed. A Potion.℞ of sowre Sorrell, Elecampane, Danewort, ana ʒ vi. Wormewood, p i. Succhory, Buglosse, Borage, Fumitary, Scabious, Dodder, Mayden haire, Betony, Sage, Agrimony, ana M ss, Maioram, Rosemary, ana p i. Epithymi. ℥ ss, Stcha∣dos Arabici, bastard Saffron bruised, leaues of Sene, Lico∣rice, ana ʒ vi. Agaricke, ʒ i. ss, seeds of Melons, Annise, Fen∣nell, ana ʒ i. boyle these in posset drinke, vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning Oxymellis simp. ℥ iii. of fine Sugar q. s. the pas∣sages shall be opened by this potion, before they take any stronger medicines. Another.℞ roots of sowre Sorrell, ℥ iii, rootes of Elicampane, ℥ i. Betony, Dodder, Scabious, Agrimony, Borage, Buglosse, So∣lopendria, Cetrach, ana M ss, seeds of Annise, Fennell, ana ʒ iii. Polipodij quercini, leaues of Sene, bastard Saffron bruised, ana ℥ i. of blacke Hellebore, ʒ ii. ss, Thyme, Epithymi, ana ℥ ss, Raysins the stones being taken out, ℥ i. Licorice, ℥ ss, boyle these in water q. s. vnto lb i. ss, adde to the strayning fine Su∣gar q. s. A draught.℞ Electuarij elescopi, Cassiae, ana ℥ ss, Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, ʒ ss, water of Fumitary, ℥ iii. ℞ Diacath. Confect. hamech, ana ʒ iii. Sp. Diacarthami, ʒ ss Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, ʒ i. sir. of Fumitary, ℥ i. wa∣ter of Hops, ℥ iii. Pills.℞ Pillul. Indrum, de Rhab. aggregatinuarum, ana ℈ i. Diagridij, gr. iii. sirupe of Fumitary, q. s. make 8. pills hereof. Pills.℞ Agarici troch. Pillul. aggregatiuarum, de Her∣modactylis, ana ℈ i. Diagridij, gr. v. sirupe of Fumita∣ry, q. s. A draught.℞ of Triacle, Mithridate, ana ℈ i. ss. sir. of Orange-pills, ℥ i▪ the decoction of water-Germander, ℥ iii. A Bath.℞ flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Maioram, Pellitory of the wall, Fetherfew, Mugwort, Fennell, Calamint, leaues
of Bayes, uy, Agrimony, Horehound, Rosemary, ana p i. roots of sowre Sorrell, Danewort, Fennell, ana ℥ iiii. fruits of Juniper, lb i. Fengreeke, lb ss, seeds of Annise, Fennell, ana ℥ i. the seeds and roots must be bruised, and the hearbs chop∣ped small. ℞ scrapings of the wood Guiacum,A Potion. lb i. water lb xii. after the wood is macerated herein for the space of 24. houres, it must be boyled and then strayned, this must be their drinke at dinner and supper. ℞ of the former decoction, whereto ℥ iiii. of fresh scra∣pings shall bee added, boyle these in lb xii. of water,Another, vnto lb ix. This drinke they may vse for the space of 20.40, or 60 dayes: sometimes in this space they shall be purged, and the wood Guaiacum, Colocynthis, and Hermodactyli, shall be mixed with it. ℞ of swines grease, Vnguenti martiati, Hens-grease,An Vn∣guent. ana ℥ i. oyle of Lillies, Bayes, ana ʒ ii. Quicksiluer, ʒ vi. Oliba∣ni, Masticke, Sage, Staechas, Lithargy, ana ʒ i. ss, Aqua vitae, ʒ ii. oyle of Bayes, ℥ iii. the Quicksiluer shall be beaten in a morter with the grease, and the rest shall then be added to them. ℞ oyle of Cammomile, Spike, Lillies, ana ℥ ss,A Cerote. oyle of Saf∣fron, ʒ ii. Swines-grease not salted, ℥ ii. Euphorbii, ʒ i. Frank∣incense, ʒ iiii. oyle of Bayes, ℥ ss, wormes washed in wine, ℥ i. iuyce of the roots of Danewort, sowre Sorrell, Elecam∣pane, ana ℥ ss, Squinancy, Staechas, Fetherfew, ana p i. of the best wine, lb i. boyle these ouer a gentle fire, vntill the wine be consumed: adde to the strayning of the Lithargy of Gold ℥ ii. Turpentine, ℥ i. Waxe, q. s. make hereof a Cerote, adde at the length to this Cerote, of the decoction of Storax, ʒ iii. then take it from the fire, and stirre it with a sticke, vntill it be lukewarme, then adde hereto Quicksiluer ℥ ii. and stirre them vntill they bee all very well incorpora∣ted. ℞ oyle of Bayes, ℥ ii. Petrolei, ℥ ss, Quicksiluer, ʒ ii,An vn∣guent, Cina∣rij, ℥ ii. Swines-grease neyther salted nor melted, lb ss,
dissolue first the grease, and then Cinabrium, and the rest. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the FRENCH-POX. IF the patient were neuer troubled with this disease be∣fore, the cure is with more ease performed: First there∣fore a veine shall be opened and the grosse humors made thinne by preparers, and the pores of the body shall be clozed vp, and afterwards expelled by a purge. And then they shall goe into the bath, and there sweate continu∣ally, wiping off the sweat as it doth come out of the body; but before they enter into the bath, they must drinke a po∣tion which doth open the pores wherein the matter of this disease doth lye; the decoction of the roots of Fennell, Ele∣campane, Lintels, Raysins and Figs: adde vnto ℥ iiii. of this decoction▪ of Triacle or Mithridate, ℈ ii. they must sir in the bath for the space of three houres, sweating continually, and wiping it off as fast: at the prescribed time they must goe to bed, and there sweat, and if noe good can bee done on the pa∣tient this way, because the disease hath taken too deepe roote, a veine shall then be opened, and after they be pur∣ged, the decoction of the wood Guaiacum, or Sarsaparilla, or roots of Cyna, shall be giuen vnto them, this decoction must bee giuen vnto them hot. After the receiuing of this, they must lay them downe to sweate, and bee couered very warme with cloths. After they haue well sweat, they may walke in a chamber, but must not eate any thing for the space of fiue houres after. If by reason of pouerty they can∣not buy this decoction, or because of vrgent occasions that may call them abroad they cannot vse them, vnctions with Mercury shall be vsed; sometimes this disease goes away in a fume, being opposed by perfumes; yet they shall not be v∣sed,
vnlesse the other will not preuaile. If there be any that cannot stay at home, because of some vrgent occasion, an oyntment shall be layd vpon a linnen cloth, and so layd to the ioynts, which shall be renewed twice in euery weeke. For this purpose therefore, ℞ Emplastri de Mellilot, lb ss, Quicksiluer, ℥ ii. oyle of Bayes, Petrolei, Turpentine, ana q. s. make hereof a Cerote; If the tumors that be swelled are hard, roors of Altha, Figs, Fengreeke, boyled in wine, and a small quantity of Hens-grease added thereto, will make a good playster for to soften it, and asswage the swel∣ling. A method seruing for the knowledge of the PLAGVE. THe Plague is a disease which doth seize vpon many, and is caused by an vnusuall, and pernicious putrefacti∣on; sometimes the constitution of our bodies is so different from the naturall temperature, that it is changed altoge∣ther into a pernicious and poysonous quality. Sometimes the disease is caused outwardly by some cause, viz. by cor∣rupt and putrid exhalations, sometimes by dead carcasses vnburied, or by standing pooles, which stink aboue measure. Sometimes it is caused by the influence of the starres, and then it is the immediate hand of God, and then it is pro∣perly called the pestilence: when it is caused by outward causes, it is called a pestilent feauer, or plague. Those feauers which are caused by venome, are mortall, but not pestilent, because they are not infectious. The Part affected. The infectious ayre first gets into the heart, suck∣ed in thither by the breath, because the ayre is subtile and thinne, and apt to get into the pores. First this ayre doth infect the vitall spirits, and then the radicall moysture, and at the length the whole substance of the body.
Signes. When these corrupt humors do disturbe the patient, they do tosse themselues very vnquietly vp and downe, and will not abide long in one place: Their appetite is taken away, and the members are very dull and heauy: also the head akes, for the most part head and stomacke are both pained, and in breife their strength failes them, and the spirits are decaied, especially the vitall spirits. The extreme parts are cold, but the inward parts, namely the heart, sto∣macke, and lungs are very hote; they are for the most part very dry, and watchfull; yet they haue a great inclination to sleepe: they loathe all kindes of meate, and vomit vp cholericke, and diuers kinds of humors; their tongue is very foule, and their mouth bitter; their countenance is like theirs that are drunke, the vrine for the most part is thicke and smells not well; also a hicket doth disturbe the patient, the pulse doth beate swift and faint; madnes also and talking idlely with amazednes doth follow, and the forepart of the belly is stretched: but the most assured signe of the Plague is contagion, which because it cannot at the first be perceiued, the other signes must be obserued, espe∣cially it wilbe worth the obseruation whether there be any botches in the groine, behind the eares, or vnder the arme holes. In some, purple colour spots, or else little whelks arise, sometimes they be blacke, sometimes skie-co∣loured, especially when the disease is growne ripe; all these signes seldome or neuer meete in one and the same body. If the diseases cause bee supernaturall, these signes are so gentle, that a man can scarce perceiue himselfe to bee sicke: for their appetite remains perfit, they are not thirsty, no Feauer seizeth vpon them, and yet their strength doth faile them on a sudden. The pulse is swift, little and faint. They vomit much, and by too frequent vomiting death ensues. The Causes. The ayre tainted with a corrupt ayre, and conueyed to
the heart by drawing of breath, is the cause of this disease. For the infected ayre doth not only weaken the humours and spirits of the body, but also the solid substance of the heart, because wee are compelled to sucke it in, and to entertaine it in the inward clozet of the heart; where first the spirits, then the humors, and lastly, the solid sub∣stance of the heart, by the corruption of the venome is destroyed: and at the length the whole body. This corrupti∣on of the ayre is also caused by the stench of dead car∣casses, or by the excrements of men and beasts, or by stand∣ing stinking pools, or ill vapors, which arise out of the earth. Sometimes the disease it selfe is caused by some venomous quality bred in vs, by corrupt, cholericke, melancholly, and phlegmy humors; and then the disease is somewhat like a tertian, or quartane, sometimes a quotidian Feauer; and then beside the corrupt humor of the body, they haue a venomous and pestilentiall humor lurking in some parts of the body: & this is the cause that some one man amongst a thousand, that liues in a cleere ayre, is not sicke of the Plague. Prognostiques. The Plague of all other diseases is most dangerous: for although the signes be good, yet suddenly the patient dies. The danger is the greater, if no pushes, or carbuncles breake out in the body. And though they do breake out, yet if the patient be not thereby eased, nothing but death can be expected. It is also as dangerous, if the pushes hauing broke out, do runne in againe. This disease is consummated and brought to its full ripenes in 24 houres, but is not so soone cured; if a cold sweat arise on the body, and the face and eyes doe looke blacke, and the spirits are cast downe, & the patient vomits extraordinarily, and the excrements that are voyded be diuersly coloured, it is a signe of death. They which talke idlely with amazednes, a kind of conuulsion and phrensy, for the most part die.
A method seruing for the cure of the PLAGVE. THe aire must be rectified by sweet perfumes euery day. They must eate sparingly in the beginning of the disease, besides, that which they eate must be cooling. The broth of Hens and Pullets are good; the congealed Broth of Ca∣pons, Veale, with Raisins and Saceharum rosatum. They may drinke water, wherein iuyce of Lemmons, and Vinum granatorum is dissolued. They must not by any meanes drinke wine. In their broths, Borage, Buglosse, Carduus benedictus, flowers of Violets, Roses, seeds of Sorrell must be boyled. They must sleepe with moderation; for by sleeping long, the corrupt matter and venom runnes againe to the heart; the belly must be kept loose, and they must abstaine from Venery. Lastly, all perturbations of the mind must be auoyded. Emptiers.Syr. Rosarum solutiuus, syr. of Succhory, with Rhab. Diacath. Electuary of the iuyce of Roses, Diaprunum solu∣tiuum, Pillulae pestilentiales. Triphera Persica, Rhab. infused in the water of Endiue, and the creame of Milke. Agaricke, Diasena, Cenfectio hamech. A decoction of Thyme, Epithy∣mi, leaues of Sene, Polypody, flowers of Violets, Borage, Buglosse, Angelica, with the syr. of manifold infusion of Roses. A Clyster of the broth of Hens, Capons, Veale, with Mercury, Mallowes, Althoea, flowers of Violets, leaues of Lettuce, Cassia fistula, Melrosaceum, and Oyle of Violets. A veine shalbe opened in the beginning of the disease, or when there is any suspition of it. If the bloud do offend in quantity or quality: it may the better be per∣mitted, if the corrupt matter be not settled ro if the patient be tormented with such a paine & inflamition of the sides as if the breathing were hindered, or the brest much stop∣ped but if the venome haue corrupted the blood, & so it is
spred thorow the whole body, a vein shall not be o∣pened. But if it be lawfull to open a veine, as in some cases it may be permitted, a veine on that side where the paine is, shalbe opened. If the paine be about the head, face, or necke, then the Cephalica veine shalbe opened. If vnder the armepits a dull paine be felt, the Basilica veine: or if that appeare not, the median veine shalbe opened, if a hea∣uines and loading paine be felt in the share, and thighs, the ankle veine shalbe opened. At one time ℥ iiij. of blood shall be taken from the patient, if the humors are yet free from venome. Neyther is there any danger of the exagitation of the humors, because this only happens, whenas greater store of blood is taken out. If the disease beginne with a scowring, or with vomiting, a veine shall not be opened. The body shalbe emptied by a gentle Clyster, if the disease be not caused by plenty of blood: for it is then better to open a veine. And because the greater part of the humours are corrupted, as was formerly declared, therefore such pur∣ging medicines as are fit for the expelling of those humors, shalbe prescribed. But loosing Medicines that are strong, shall in no wise be administred, because it would too much disturbe them. A vomit is good in the beginning of the disease,Auerters. espe∣cially if the stomacke be too full, and corrupt humors are there in great abundance. Cupping-glasses and Horslea∣ches shalbe layd to the thighs, priuy parts, shoulders, and backe bone, and vnto those places where the pushes do breake forth; and then especially shall this be prescribed, if a veine may not be opened; by this means there is some hope of drawing the pushes vnto those places, where for the most part they do breake forth; also vnto the places that swell very much, great Cupping-glasses shall bee fastned, that the force of the venome may be turned from the heart, and that it runne not in againe, as some∣times it doth. After a veine is opened, the patient shalbe caused to sweate; and this may bee effected with the de∣decoction
of Petasites, Carduus benedictus, Scabious. Expellers of the Venome.Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diamargaritum frigidum, Diatria, sandali, Confectio alchermes. Triacle and Mithri∣date are good to preuent the danger. They that are affected, may drinke the water of Sorrell and Carduus benedictus▪ Conserue of Borage, Buglosse, Roses, Sorrell, Water-lillies, syr. of Violets, Lemmons, the iuyce of Goose-berries, Sorrell, Buglosse. Pestilentiall Pills. Electuarium de gemmis, Latificans Gal. Diascordium Tracastonij, Tryphera sara∣ceneca. Electuarium de on. A potion of Scabious water, Pimpernell, Borage, Dragunt, Mithridate, Triacle, Saffron. They that are infected, may drinke the iuyce of Carduus benedictus; in like manner the iuyce and seeds of Oranges, and the rinds preserued are very good. If they be newly infected, a medicine to cause sweate, may be giuen them, of Triacle, Mithridate, Beauer-stone, Bay-berries, water of Tormentill, Scabious, Dragunt, Pimpernell: this must be giuen after Phlebotomy. A potion of the decoction of Lentils, Saffron in Honyed water, with a small quantity of Oxymel is good. A potion of the water of Endiue, Fen∣nell, Sorrell, Parsley, wherein the seedes of Parsly, dry Figs, and Lentiles haue beene boyled: adde hereto the sirupe of the iuyce of a sowre Orange: this potion driues the pushes outward. The waters of Angelica, Tormentill, Sorrell, Pimpernell, Dittany, Serpentaria do effect the like. Wash Bole Armony with Vineger, the roots of Tormentil, Angelica, Dittany, Wormwood, Bitter-wort, Pimpernell, Betony. Mastike, Saffron, Aloes, Myrrhe, Scabious, Sor∣rell, Rue. Macerate these in wine and Vineger, and cast the Vineger vpon a hote stone. The party infected must be ready to receiue the fume hereof. Vnicornes-horne, Harts-horne. An vnguent of the Triacle of Andromachus, Oyle of Scorpions. St Iohns-wort for the pushes and swellings. A Cataplasme of Barley meale, Hony, Triacle, roots of Lillies, Tormentill, Dittany, Figs, Salt, Leauen, Pidgeons-dung, and Oyle of Lillies. An Emplaster of Triacle, mixed
very well with the iuyce of Rue. A caustike of vnslaked lime, Sope, Leauen, Figs, Ʋitriolo Romano, Turpentine, Wallnuts. An Epitheme of the water of Buglosse, Baulme, Sorrell, Roses, Aceto rosato, cold water, Lettuce, Gourd, Endiue, Plantane, powder of Roses, French Wheate, Diamargariti frigidi. An vnguent for the heart of the Oyle of St Iohns-wort, Cinnamon, seeds of Oranges, Harts-horne, Roses. A quilt of the flowers of Roses, Violets, Buglosse, Keiri, Oranges, Harts-horne, Cinamon. Many of these formerly recited, do cause sweating, and when he hath layd himselfe in the bed, hote Tiles also may bee layd to his feete, a bottle with hote water may likewise be layd vnto the armeholes of the infected, but the bottle must be wrapped in a linnen cloth, that it burne not: an oxe blad∣der with hot water will effect the same. This kind of swea∣ting shalbe vsed for the space of three dayes, but especiall care ought to be had, that they sweate not too much; for that is dangerous, and sweating too little, is no iot auayle∣able; whilest the patient is sweating, he must not sleepe, or eate any thing. There be many more remedies, that do expell the tumors that do scarce appeare, but especiall care must be had, that medicines heating too much, be not admi∣nistred, if the patient be already hote: for at that time Triacle is prohibited. Confectio. Liberantis, Laetificantis Gal. sp. Diamargariti calidi et frigidi, Dìarrhod. Abbatis, Diamuscum dulce.Strength∣ners. Syr. of Endiue, iuyce of Orange, Sorrell, Lemmons, Pome∣granates, water of Borage, Buglosse, Violets, wherein Bole Armony, red Corrall and Perle haue beene infused for the space of one night. This doth moderate the heate of the bowels. Conserue of Roses, Violets, Buglosse, Saceha∣rum rosatum, Manus Christi, perlita, iuyce of Lem∣mons, Acetositatis citri, Barberies. Cinnamon water di∣stilled.
An oyntment of red Corrall, red Roses, iuyce of Oranges and Lemmons, Triacle, Saffron, Camphor, oyle of Roses, Violets: this is for the region of the heart. An Epitheme ex. sp. de gemmis, the rindes of Oranges, Rozen, French-wheate, wood Aloes, Wormseed, the bone of a Harts heart, red and white Corrall, Saffron, Mace, Muske, Cloues, strong wine, water of Sorrell, Roses, Baulme, Acetum rosaceū▪ Car∣duus benedictus, Parsley; also a Quilt may bee made with the same that the Epitheme is. A more particular method seruing for the cure of the PLAGVE. A draught▪℞ sir. Rosarum solutiuus, ℥ i. of the decoction of Rhab. Myrobal. citrinorum, Cardui benedicti, Angelica, ana ℥ iiii. Another.℞ of the Triacle of Andromachus, ℈ ii. Mithridate, ℈ i. Bole Armony, ℈ ss. water of Scabious. ℥ iii. A mixture.℞ roots of Angelica, Tormentill, Dittany, ana ʒ i. Petafi∣tes, ʒ ss, Orange-pills, Cinnamon, Myrrhe, Saffron, ana ℈ ii. Aloes, ℥ ss, giue hereof ʒ i. with the decoction of Roses, Sor∣rell, Carduus benedictus. Another.℞ roots of Angelica, Dittany, ana ʒ i. ss. powder of Vni∣cornes horne, ana gr. viii. the Triacle of Andromachus, Mithridate, Bole Armony, ana ʒ i. ss, Sacchari rosati, ℥ i. Giue hereof ʒ ii. Another.℞ roots of Angelica, Diptamy, Pimpernell, Tormentill, Gallingale, Wormeseed, ana ℥ ii. Cinnamon, Cloues, Mace, ana ʒ i. ss, Myrrhe, Frankincense, ana ʒ i. Triacle of Androma∣chus, ʒ iii. ss, eeds of Carduus Benedictus, berries of Iuniper, ana ʒ i. Macerate these for the space of 24▪ houres in equall portions of wine and Angelica water, and then distill them. Giue ℥ iii, of this distillation with ʒ ss, of Triacle. A draught▪℞ Triacle of Andromachus, Ginger, ana ℈ ii. Sugar-can∣dy,
℥ ss, Dragunt water ℥ iii. Bole Armony, ℈ i. of the former distilled water, two or three spoonefuls. ℞ Bole Armony prepared, roots of Tormentill,A Powder. Diptamy ana ʒ ii, Wormeseed, ʒ i. ss, seeds of Citrines. Carduus bene∣dictus, ana ʒ i. scrapings of Iuory, Orange-pills, Galingale, Cloues, ana ℈ ii. Cinnamon, ℈ i. ss, Sacchari rosati q. s. Giue ʒ i, hereof with the water of Carduus benedictus. ℞ Triacle, ʒ i. ss, Mithridate, ℈ iiii. Sp. librantis, ℈ i. ss,A mixture. Beauerstone, gr. vi. Camphor, gr. ii. Bayberries, ℈ ss, Giue ʒ i. hereof with the water of Tormentill, Pimpernell, Scabious, after that a veine is opened, for this will cause sweating. ℞ roots of Angelica, ℈ i, ss; Triacle, ʒ i. water of Angelica,A draught. Dragunt Rew, ana ℥ i. ℞ conserue of Buglosse, Roses, preserued Orange-pils,An Opiate. ana ℥ ss, manus Christi, ℥ i. Diamargariti frigidi, ʒ i. ss, sir. of the iuyce of Oranges q. s. ℞ conserue of Roses, Violets, ana ℥ i. Orange-pills pre∣serued, ℥ ss, red Corrall, Bole Armony,A mixture▪ ana ℈ ii. sir. of Bu∣glosse, Violets, ana q. s. ℞ conserue of Roses, ʒ i. sir. Acetosi simp. ℥ i. ss,A draught. Rosewa∣ter, ℥ iii. ℞ sir. of the iuyce of Lemmons, of the iuyce of Sorrell,A Potion. Suchory, with Rhab. ana ℥ i. ss, water of Violets, Roses, Sor∣rell, ana ℥ iiii. ℞ roots of Angelica, Tormentill,A draught. ana ʒ ii. white Dipta∣my, ʒ iii. Triacle, ʒ vii. Giue ʒ i. hereof with the water of Violets, Roses, Sorrell, this may be giuen to the patient, ey∣ther when they are infected or before. ℞ roots of Bitterwort, Angelica, Tormentill, ana ʒ ii. Aristolohia rot. Myrhe, Beauerstone, Bayberries,A mixture. ana ʒ i. Saffron, ℈ i. ss, as much Triacle as all these weigh together, Giue ʒ i. hereof with Acetum rosatum, but be∣fore they be infected, twice or thrice in euery weeke is suf∣ficient. ℞ water of Buglosse, Roses, Violets, Sorrell,An Epi∣theme. ana ℥ iiii.
Sandalorum purpu. Sp. è gemmis ℈ iiij, rinds of Oranges, ℈▪ ij. Another.℞ Bole Armony, Terrae sigillatae ana ʒ i ss, iuyce of Lem∣mons, Pomegranates, ana ℥ i ss, of white wine ℥ iij, wa∣ter of Borage, water Lillies ana ℥ iiij, Roses ℥ viii. vse this about the heart. An Appendix seruing for the cure of the PLAGVE. THe best medicines ought to bee prescribed with all speed; because the disease doth infect the heart chief∣ly. Yet a veine should be opened f ime will permit; af∣terward that may be giue that as will expell the poison, for this purpose medicines that cause sweating may be giuen. And because men do so delay their comming vnto the phy∣sicians, vntill the patients be dangerously sicke, therefore the Physicians are compelled to beginne the cure with sweating. The patient may take the syrupe of Lemmons, Violets, Oranges. At the last, such medicines shalbe pre∣scribed, as do turne away the venome from the heart, and at length expell it. If the patient be weakned by the euacuation of blood, a gentle Clyster may be giuen, which may expell the corrupt humors that remaine, alwayes prouided, that inward and outward medicines be giuen to strengthen the heart: also one especiall care ought to be had that the ayre and place▪ where the patient abides, be whol∣some, & if they be not naturally wholsom, they must be recti∣fied by art. viz a Perfume of Iuniper wood, Rose∣mary, Sage, Cloues, Frankincense, Masticke, Myrrhe, Rue: the patients may carry a little Rue in his bosome, that the smell thereof may get into their nostrills. Rose∣water and vineger is good for the smelling, and they may wash their eyes, face, & hands in them. They must eate sch meates as nourish well. But as they are forbidden to
glut themselues, so they must not be altogether fasting. Twice or thrice in euery weeke, they may eate the Pilles of Ruffus. They may also chew Angelica, Zedoaria, and Elecampane roots, when they goe abroad, or when they do intend to visit the visited. For this purpose also ℞ Aloes ʒ i ss, Gumme, Ammoniacke ℈ i, Myrrhe ℈ ss Pollul. de agarico ℈ ii. Syr. of Orange Peels q. s. make hereof Pills, and they may take ʒ ss, hereof in the morning. Or else ℞ of Orange Peels preserued ℥ vi, Conserue of Rosemary flowers ℥ i, Mithridate ℥ i ss. Triacle ℥ ii, Aristol. Longa, Zedoariae, Diptamy ana ʒ i. roots of Angelica▪ ℈ ii, Aromatici rosati, ʒ ss, syr. of Orange peels q. s. This is an approued remedy. FINIS.
A Table of such Diseases as are contayned in this Booke. A Nasarca, the generall Dropsie. p. 319 Angina, the Squinancy. p. 160 Apoplexia, the Apoplexy. p. 77 Arthritis, or Morbus articularis the Ioynt-gout. p. 380 Ascites, the Dropsie, by plenty of wind and water. p. 319 Asthma, difficulty of brea∣thing. p. 178 Auditus grauitas, difficulty of hearing. p. 156 Aurigo, the yellow Iaundise. p. 280 C Calculus renum, the Stone of the Kidneys. p. 329 Capitis dolor, Paine in the Head. p. 1 Cardialgia, The paine at the stomacke. p. 239 Catalepsis, Congealation. p. 96 Catarrhacta, the Suffusion. p. 119 Catarrhus, the Rheume. p. 151 Cephalagia frigida, the cold Headache. p. 1 Chiragra, the Gowte in the fin∣gers. p. 380 Cholera, Choller. p. 223 Collica passio, the Collicke, p. 309 Cordis palpitatio, Panting of the heart. p. 207 Coxendicis dolor, Paine in the hips, p. 380
Cruditas stomachi, rawnesse of the stomacke. p. 239 D Debilitas hepatis, weakenesse of the Liuer. p 263 Diabetes, inuoluntary Pissing. p. 339 Distensio neruorum, stretching of the sinews. p. 67 Dysenteria, the Bloody flux. p. 298 Debilitas ventriculi, weaknesse of the stomacke. p. 246 E Epilepsia, the Falling sicknesse. p. 56 F Faucium inflammatio, infla∣mation of the iaws, p. 160 Fluxus mensium nimius, the o∣uerflowing of the moneths, p. 354 Fluxus mensium suppressus, the suppression of moneths. p. 363 G Gallicus morbus, the French-pox. p. 388 Genogra, the Knee-gowte. p. 380 H Hemorrhagia, bleeding at the nose. p. 142 Hemroides nimium fluentes, the Hemroids flowing to ast, p. 345 Hemecrania, the Megram, p▪ Hepatis obstructio, obstruction of the Liuer, p. 5 Hydrops. the Dropsie, p. 36 Hypocondria melancholia, Hy∣pocondriall Melancholy. p. 34 I Icteritia, the Iaundise. p, 280 Iliaca passio, the Iliacall Pas∣sion, p. 309 Imbecillitas venticuli, weake∣nesse of the stomacke, p. 246 Incubus, the Night-mare. p▪ 50 Lethargia, the Lethargy. p. 87 Lienis tumor, the Tumor of the spleene. p. 271 Lippitudo, Paine in the eyes. p. 127 M Mania, Madnesse. p. 10 Matricis praefocatio, stopping of the wombe▪ p. 372 Melancholia, Melancholy, p, 24 Morbus Regius, the Kings euill p. 281
O Opthalmia, Inflamation of the eyes. p. 126 P Paralysis, The Palsey. p. 12 Peripneumenia, impostume of the lungs. p. 152 Pestis, The Plague. p. 397 Phrenitis, the Phrensie. p. 108 Pleuritis, the Plurisie. p. 186 Podagra, the Feete-gowt, p. 381 S Sanguinis sputatio, spetting of blood. p. 198 Singultus, the Hicket. p. 231 Spasmus, the Conuulsion, p. 66 Syncope, Swounding. p. 214 T Tussis, the Cough. p. 169 Timpanites, the Timpany. 320 Tumor splenis, swelling of the spleene. p. 271 V Vermes, the Wormes. p. 289 Vertigo, Giddinesse. p. 43 FINIS.
Tat euery one may know how to compound these medicines, without the helpe of any other man, therefore the notes of all the weights which are vsed among the Apothecaries, are placed vn∣derneath. Grain hath this marke gr. Scruple hath this marke ℈. Drache hath this marke ʒ. Ounce hath this marke ℥. Pound hath this marke lb. Quart hath this marke qr. A smal handfull hath this marke p. A great handfull hath this marke M. Hale hath this marke ss. Of each hath this marke ana. Receiue hath this marke ℞. As much as i sufficient q. s.
