4985 99840675 5202
Ouids Banquet of SENCE. A Coronet for his Mistresse Phi∣losophie, and his amorous Zodiacke. VVith a translation of a Latine coppie, written by a Fryer, Anno Dom. 1400. Quis leget haec? Nemo Hercule Nemo, vel duo vel nemo: Persius. AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Richard Smith. Anno Dom▪ 1595.
TO THE TRVLIE Learned, and my worthy Friende, Ma. Mathew Royden. SVch is the wilfull pouertie of iudgements (sweet Ma:) wandring like pasportles men, in contempt of the diuine discipline of Poesie, that a man may well feare to frequent their walks: The prophane multitude I hate, & one∣lie cnsecrate my strange Poems to these serching spirits, whō learning hath made noble, and nobilitie sacred; endeuuring that materiall Oration, which y call Schema; varying in som rare fiction, from po∣pular custome, euen for the pre sakes of ornament and vtilitie; This of Euripides xceeding sweetly relishing with ee; Len∣tem coquens ne quicquam dentis addito. But that Poesie should be as peruiall as Oratorie, and plain∣nes her speciall ornarnt, were the plaine way to barbarisme: and to make the Asse runne proude of his eares; to take away strngth from Lyons, and giue Cammels hornes. That, Enargia, or cleerenes of representation, requird in ab∣solute Poems is not the perspicuous deliuery of a lowe inuention; but high, and harty inuention exprest in most significant, and vn∣affected phrase; it serues not a skilfull Painters turne, to draw the figure of a face onely to make knowne who it represents; but hee must lymn, giue luster, shaddow, and heightning; which though ignorants will esteeme spic'd, and too curious, yet such as haue the iudiciall perspectiue, will see it hath, motion, spirit and life. There is no confection made to last, but it is admitted more cost and skill then presenly to be vsed simples; and in my opinion, that which being with a little endeuour serched, ads a kinde of ma∣iestie to Poesie; is better ten that which euery Cobler may sing to his patch. Obscuritie in affection of words, & indigested concets, is pedan∣ticall and childish; but where it shroudeth it selfe in the hart of his subiect, vtterd with fitnes of figure, and expressiue Epethites; with
that drknes wil I still labour to be shaddowed; rich Minerals are digd out of the bowels of the earth, not found in the superficies and dust of it; charms made of vnlerned characters are not consecrate by the Muses which are diuine artists, but by Euippes daughters, that challengd them with meere naure, whose brests I doubt not had beene well worthy commendation, if their comparison had not turnd them into Pyes. Thus (not affecting glory for mine owne sleight labors, but de∣sirous other should be more worthely glorious, nor professing sacred Poesie in any degree,) I thought good to submit to your apt iudg∣ment: acquainted long since with the true habit of Posie, and now since your labouring wis endeuour heauen-high thoughts of Nature▪ you haue actual meanes to sound the philosophical conceits, that my new pen so seriously courteth. I know, that empty, and dark spirits, wil complaine of palpable night: but those that before-hand, haue a radiant, and light-bearing intellect, will sy they can passe through Corynnas Garden without the helpe of a Lanterne. Your owne most worthily and sincerely affected, George Chapman.
Richard Stapleton to the Author. PHoebus hath giuen thee both his bow, and Muse; With one thou slayst the Azans of thunder, And to thy loose dost such a sounde inuse, That gatherd storms therewith are blowne in sunder: The other decks her with her golden wings Spred beyond measure, in thy ample verse, Where she (as in her bowrs of Lawrell) sings Sweet philosophick strains tha Feends might pierse, The soule of brightnes in thy darknes shines Most new, and deare: vnstaind with forrain graces, And when aspiring sprights shall reach thy lines, They will not heare our trebble-termed bases. With boldnes then thy able Poems vse Phoebus hath giuen thee both his bow and Muse. Tho: VVilliams of the inner Temple. ISsue of  that will imbrace With fleshly arms the three-wingd wife of thunder: Let her sad ruine, such proud thoughts abase And view alooe, this verse in silent wonder, If neerer your vnhallowed eyes wil piese, Then (with the Satyre) kisse this sacred fire, To scorch your lips, that dearely taught thereby Your oney soules fit obiects may aspire, But you high spirits in thys cloud of gold like Ioue) this bright Saturan Muse, Your eyes can well the dazeling bames behold ythian lightner freshly doth ffuse To dant the basenes of that bastard traine Whose twise borne iudgments, formeles still remaine.
Another. VNgratefull Farmers of the Muses land That (wanting thrift and iudgment to imploy it) Let it manureles and vnenced stand, Till barbarous Cattell enter and destroy it: Now the true heyre is happily found out Who (raming it t'inritch posterities) Walles it with spright-fild darknes round about, Grafs, plants, and sowes; and makes it Paradise. To which without the Parcas golden bow, None can aspire but stick in errors hell; A Garland to engird a Monarchs brow, Then take some paines to ioy so rich a Iewell Most prize is graspt in labors hardest hand, And idle sonles can nothing rich command. I. D. of the middle Temple. ONely that eye which for true loue doth weepe, Onely that hart which tender loue doth pierse, May read and vnderstand this sacred vierse For other wits too misticall and deepe: Betweene these hallowed leaues Cupid dooth keepe The golden lesson of his second Artist, For loue, till now, hath still a Maister mist Since Ouids eyes were closd with iron sleepe; But now his waking soule in Chapman liues, Which showes so well the passions of his soule, And yet this Muse more cause of wonder giues, And doth more Prophet-like loues art enroule: For Ouids soule, now growne more old and wise, Poures foorth it selfe in deeper misteries.
Another. SInce Ouid (loues first gentle Maister) dyed he hath a most notorious trueant beene, And hath not once in thrice fiue ages seene That same sweete Muse that was his irst sweet guide; But since Apollo who was gratified Once with a kisse, hunting on Cynthus greene, By loues fayre Mother tender Beauties Queene, This fauor vnto her hath not enuied, That into whome she will, she may infuse For the instruction of her tender sonne, The gentle Ouids easie supple Muse, Which vnto thee (sweet Chapman) she hath doone: Shee makes (in thee) the spirit of Ouid moue, And calles thee second Maister of her loue Futurum inuisibile.
Ouids Banquet of SENCE. The Argument. OVID, newly enamoured of Iulia, (daughter to Octa∣uius Augustus Caesar, afer by him called Corynna,) secretly conaid himselfe into a Garden of the Emperors Court: in an Arbor whereof, Corynna was bathing; playing vpon her Lute, and singing: which Ouid ouer-hearing, was exceedingly pleasde with the sweetnes of her voyce,Auditus. & to him∣selfe vttered the comfort he conceiued in his sence of Hearing. Then the odors shee vsde in her bath,Olfactus. breathing a rich sauor, hee expresseth the ioy he felt in his sence of Selling. Thus growing more deeplie enamoured▪  great contentation with himselfe, he venters to see her in the pride of her nakedness: which dooing by stealth, he discouered the comfort hee conceiued in Seeing,Visus. and the glorie of her beautie. Not yet satisfied, hee vseth all his Art to make knowne his being there,Gustus. without her offence: or (being necessarily offended) to appease her: which done, he entreats a kisse a serue for satisfac∣tion of his Tast, which he obtaines. Then procedes he to entreaty for the fift sence and there is interruptd.Tactus. NARRATIO. THE Earth, from heauenly light conceiued heat, Which mixed all her moyst parts with her dry, When with right beames the Sun her bosome beat, And with fit foode her Plants did nutrifie; They (which to Earth, as to theyr Mother cling In forked rootes) now sprinckled plenteously With her warme breath; did hasten to the spring, Gather their proper forces, and extrude All powre but that, with which they stood indude.
Then didCyrrhus is a sur∣name of the Sun, frō a towne called Cyrrha, where he was honored. Cyrrhus fill his eyes with fire, Whose ardor curld the foreheads of the trees, And made his greene-loue burne in his desire, When youth, and ease, (Collectors of loues fees) Entic'd Corynna to a iluer spring, Enchasing a round Browe; which with it sees,By Prosopopaeia, he makes y• foun∣taine y• eye of the round Arbor, as a Diamnt seemes to be the eye of a Ring: and there∣fore sayes, the Ar∣bor sees with the Fountaine. (As with a Diamant dooth an ameld Ring▪) Into which eye, most pittifully stood Niobe, shedding teares, that were her blood. Stone Niobe, whose statue to this Fountaine, In great Augustus Caesars grace was brought From Sypilus, the steepe Mygdonian Mountaine: That sttue , still weepes for former thought, Into thys spring Corynnas bathing place; So cunningly to optick reason wrought, That a farre of, it shewd a womans face, Heauie, and weeping; but more neerely viewed, Nor weeping, heauy, nor a woman shewed. In Sommer onely wrought her exstasie; And that her story might be still obserued, Octauius caus'd in curious imagrie, Hr fourteene children should at large be carued, Theyr fourteene brests, with ourteene arrowes gored And et by her, that for her seede so starued To a stone Spulcher herselfe deplored, In Iuory were they cut, and on each brest, In golden Elements theyr names imprest. Hr sonnes, were Sypilus, Agenor, Phaedimus, , Argus, and Damasicthen, Te sauenth calde like his Grandsire, Tantalus. Her Dughters, were the fayre Astiochen, , Nra, and Pelopie, , pound Phhia, and Eugigen, All these apposde to violent Niobe ad lookes so deadly sad, so liuely donne, As if Death liud in theyr confusion.
Behind theyr Mother two Pyramides Of freckled Marble, through the Arbor viewed, On whose sharp brows, Sl, and Tytanides In purple and transparent glasse were hewed, Through which the Sun-beames on the statues staying, Made theyr pale bosoms seeme with blood imbrewed, Those two sterne Plannets rigors still bewraying To these dead forms, came liuing beauties essence Able to make them startle with her presence. In a loose robe of Tynsell foorth she came, Nothing but it betwixt her nakednes And enuious light. The downward burning flame, Of her rich hayre did threaten new accesse, Of ventrous Phaeton to scorch the fields: And thus to bathing came our Poets Goddesse, Her handmaides bearing all things pleasure yeelds To such a seruice; Odors most delighted, And purest linnen which her lookes had whited. Then cast she off her robe, and stood vpright, As lightning breakes out of a laboring cloude; Or as the Morning heauen casts off the Night▪ Or as that heauen cast off if selfe, and showde Heauens vpper light, to which the brightest day Is but a black and melancholy shroude: Or as when Venus striu'd for soueraine sway Of charmfull beautie, in yong Troyes desire, So stood Corynna vanishing her tire. A soft enflowred banck embrac'd the founte; Of Chloris ensignes, an abstracted field; Where grew Melanthy, great in Bees account, Amareus, that precious Balme dooth yeeld, Enameld Pansies, vs'd at Nuptials still, Dianas arrow, Cupids crimson shielde, Ope-morne, night-shade, and Venus nauill, Solemne Violets, hanging head as shamed, And verdant Calaminth, for odor famed.
Sacred Nepenthe, purgatiue of care, And soueraine Rumex that doth rancor kill, Sya, and Hyacinth, that Furies weare, Wite and red Iessamines, Merry, Melliphill: Fayre Crowne-imperiall, Emperor of Flowers, Immortall Amaranth, white Aphrodill, And cup-like Twillpants, stroude in Bacchus Bowres, These cling about this Natures naked Iem, To taste her sweetes, as Bees doe swarme on them. And now shee vsde the Founte, where Niobe, Toomb'd in her selfe, pourde her lost soule in teares, Vpon the bosome of this Romaine Phoebe; Who; bathd and Odord; her bright lyms she rears, And drying her on that disparent rounde; Her Lute she takes t'enamoure heauenly eares, And try if with her voyces vitall sounde, She could warme life through those colde statues spread, And cheere the Dame that wept when she was dead. And thus she sung, all naked as she sat, Laying the happy Lute vpon her thigh, Not thinking and neere to wonder at The blisse of her sweete brests diuinitie, The Song of CORYNNA. T'is better to contemne then loue, And to be fayre then wise; For soules are rulde by eyes: And Ioues Bird, ceaz'd by Cypris Doue, It is ur grace and sport to see, Our beauties sorcerie, That makes (like destinie) Men followe vs the more wee flee; That sts wise Glosses on the fool, And turns her checkes to bookes, Where wisdome sees in lookes Drision, laughing as his schoole, Who (louing) proues, prophanenes, holy; Natur, our fate, our wisdome, folly.
While this was singing, Ouid yong in loue With her perfections, neuer prouing yet How mercifull a Mistres she would proue, Bodly embrac'd the power he could not let And like a fiery exhalation Followed the sun, he wisht might neuer set; Trusting heerein his constellation Rul'd by loues beames, which Iulias eyes erected, Whose beauty was the star his life directed. And hauing drencht his anckles in those seas, He needes woulde swimme, and car'd not if he drounde: Loues feete are in his eyes; for if he please The depth of beauties gulfye floodd to sounde, He goes vpon his eyes, and vp to them▪ At the first steap he is; no shader grounde Coulde Ouid finde; but in loues holy streame Was past his eyes, and now did wett his eares, For his high Soueraignes siluer voice he heares. Whereat his wit, assumed fierye wings, Soring aboue the temper of his soule, And he the purifying rapture sings Of his eares sence, takes full the Thespian boule And it carrouseth to his Mistres health, Whose sprightfull verdure did dull flesh controle, And his conceipt he crowneth with the wealth Of all the Muses in his pleased sences, When with the eares delight he thus commences: Now Muses come, repayre your broken wings, (Pluckt, and pophan'd by rusticke Ignorance,) With feathers of these notes my Mistres sings; And let quik verse hir drooping head aduance From dungeons of contempt to smite the starr; In Iulias tunes, led forth by fuious trance A thousand Muses come to bid you warrs, Diue to your Spring▪ and hide you from the stroke, All Poets furies will her tunes inuoke.
Neuer was any sence so sette on fire With an immotall ardor, as myne eares; Her fingers to the strings doth speeche inspire And numbered laughter; that the deskant beares To hir sweete voice▪ whose species through my sence My spirits to theyr highest function reares; To which imprest with ceaseles conluence It vseth them, as propper to her powre Marries my soule, and makes it selfe her dowre; Me thinks her tunes flye guilt, like Attick Bees To my eares hies, with hony tryed to ayre; My braine is but the combe, the wax, the lees, My soule the Drone, that liues by their affayre. O so it sweets, refines, and rauishth, And with what sport they sting in theyr repayre? Rise then in swarms, and sting me thus to death Or turne me into swounde; possesse me whole, Soule to my life, and essence to my soule. Say gentle Ayre, ô does it not thee good Thus to be smit with her correcting voyce? Why daunce ye not, ye daughters of the wood? Wther for euer, if not now reioyce. Rise stones, and build a Cittie with her notes, And notes infuse with your most Cynthian noyse, To all th Trees, sweete flowers, and christall Flotes, That crowne, and make this cheerefull Garden quick, Vertue, that euery uch may make such Musick. O that as man is cald a little world The world might shrink into a little man, To heare the notes about this Garden hurld, That skill disperst in tunes so Orphean Might not be lost in smiting stocks and trees That haue no eares; but growne as it began Spred theyr renownes, as far as Phoebus sees Through earths dull vaines; that shee like heauen might moue, In ceaseles Musick, and be fill'd with loue.
In precious incense of her holy breath, My loue doth offer Hecatombs of notes To all the Gods; who now despise the death Of Oxen, Heifers, Wethers, Swine, and Goates. A Sonnet in her breathing sacrifiz'd, Delights them more then all beasts bellowing throates, As much with heauen, as with my hearing priz'd. And as guilt Atoms in the sunne appeare, So greete these sounds the grissells of myne eare. Whose pores doe open wide to theyr regreete, And my implanted ayre, that ayre embraceth Which they impresse; I feele theyr nimble feete Tread my eares Labyrinth; theyr sport amazeth They keepe such measure; play themselues and dance. And now my soule in Cupids Furnace blazeth, Wrought into furie with theyr daliance: And as the fire the parched stuble burns, So fades my flesh, and into spyrit turns. Sweete tunes, braue issue, that from Iulia come; Shooke from her braine, armd like the Queene of Ire; For firstIn this allusion to the birth of Pallas; he shewes the conceit of her Sonnet; both for matter and not, and by Metaphor hee exprasseth how shee deliue∣red her words, & tunes, which was by commision of the order, Philosophers set downe in apprehension of our knoweledge, and effection of our sences, for first they affirme, the species of euery obiect propagates it selfe by our spirites to our common sence, that deli∣uers it to the imaginatiue part▪ that to the Cogitatiue: the Cogitatiue to the Passiue Intelect▪ the Passiue Intelect, to that which is called Dianos, or Dicrsus; and that deliuers it p to the minde, which order hee obserue▪ in her vtterance. conceiued in her mentall wombe, And nourisht with her soules discursiue fire, They grew into the power of her thought; She gaue them dounye plumes from her attire, And them to strong imagination brought: That, to her voice; wherein most mouinglye Shee (blessing them with kysses) letts them flye.
Who flye reioysing; but (like noblest mindes) In giuing others life themselues do dye, Not able to endure earthes rude vnkindes Bred in my soueraigns parts too tenderly; O that asThe Philoso∣pher saith, Intel∣lectus in ipsa in∣tellegibilia tran∣sit, vpon whih is grounded thys inuention, tha in the same manner his life might passe into hys Mistres coneite, intending his in∣tellectuall life, or soule: which by this Analogie, should bee Intel∣lectus, & her cō∣ceit, Inteligibilis. Intellects themselues transite To eache intellegible quallitie, My life might passe into my loues conceit, Thus to be form'd in words, her tunes, and breath, And with her kysses, sing it selfe to death. This life were wholy sweete, this onely blisse, Thus would I liue to dye; Thus sence were feasted, My life that in my flesh a Chaos is Should to a Golden worlde be thus dygested; Thus should I rule her faces Monarchy, Whose lookes in seuerall Empires are inuested Crown'd now with smiles, and then with modesty, Thus in her tunes diuision I should raigne, For her conceipt does all, in euery vaine. My life then turn'd to that, t'each note, and word Should I consorte her looke; which sweeter sings, Where songs of solid harmony accord, Rulde with Loues ule; and prickt with all his stings; Thus should I be her notes, beforeThis hath refe∣rence to the or∣der of her vtte∣rnce, exprest be∣fore. they be; While in her blood they sitte with fierye wings Not vapord in her voyces stillerie, Nought are these notes her breast so sweetely frames, But motions, fled out of her spirits flames. For as when steele and flint together smit, With violent action spitt forth sparkes of fire, And make the tender tynder burne with it; So my loues soule doth lighten her desire Vppon her spyrits in her notesSo is thys lyke∣we eferd to the  aboue said,  the mre . pretence; And they conuaye them (for distinckt attire) To vse the Wardrobe of the common sence: From whence in vailes of her rich breath they flye, And feast the eare with this felicitye.
Me thinks they rayse me from the heauy ground And moue me swimming in the yeelding ayre: As Zephirs flowry blass doe tosse a sounde; Vpon their wings will I to Heauen repayre, And sing them so, Gods shall descend and heare Ladies must bee ador'd that are but fayre, But apt besides with art to tempt the eare In notes of Nature, is a Goddesse part, Though oft, mens natures notes, please more then Art. But heere are Art and Nature both confinde, Art casting Nature in so deepe a trance That both seeme deade, because they be diuinde, Buried is Heaen in earthly ignorance, Why break not men then strumpet Follies bounds, To learne at this pure virgine vtterance? No; none but Ouids eares can sound these sounds, Where sing the harts of Loue and Poesie, Which make my Mse so strong she works too hye. Now in his glowing eares her tunes did sleepe, And as a siluer Bell, with violent blowe Of Steele or Iron, when his soundes most deepe, Doe from his sides and ayres soft bosome flowe, A great while after murmures at the stroke, Letting the hearers eares his hardnes knowe, So chid the Ayre to be no longer broke: And left the accents panting in his eare Which in this Banquet his first seruice were. HEerewith,Olfactus. as Ouid something neerer drew, Her Odors, odord with her breath and brest, Into the sensor of his sauor flew, As if the Phenix hasting to her rest Had gatherd all th'Arabian Spicee T'enbalme her body in her Tombe, her nest, And there lay burning gainst Apollos eye, Whose fiery ayre straight piercing Ouids braine Enflamde his Muse with a more odorouse vaine.
And thus he sung, come soueraigne Odors, come Restore my spirits now in loue consuming, Wax hotter ayre, make them more sauorsome, My fainting life with fresh-breath'd soule perfuming, The flames of my disease are violent, And many perish on late helps presuming, With which hard fate must I yet stand content, As Odors put in fire most richly smell, So men must burne in loue that will excell. And as the ayre is rarefied with heate But thick and grosse with Summer-killing colde, So men in loue aspire perfections seate, When others, slaues to base desire are sold, And if that men neere Ganges liu'd by sent Of Flowres, and Trees, more I a thousand fold May liue by these pure fumes that doe present My Mistres quickning, and consuming breath Where her wish flyes with power of life and death. Me thinks, as in these liberall fumes I burne My Mistres lips be neere with kisse-entices, And that which way soeuer I can turne, She turns withall, and breaths on me her spices As if too pure for search of humaine eye She flewe in ayre disburthening Indian prizes, And made each earthly fume to sacrifice. With her choyse breath fell Cupid blowes his fire, And after, burns himselfe in her desire. Gentle, and noble are theyr tempers framde, That can be quickned with perumes and sounds, And they are cripple-minded, Gowt-wit lamde, That lye like fire-fit blocks, dead without wounds, Stird vp with nought, but hell-descending gaine, The soule of fooles that all theyr soules conounds, The art of Pessants and our Nobles staine, The bane of vertue and the blisse of sinne. Which none but fooles and Pessants glorie in.
Sweete sounds and Odors, are the heauens, on earth Where vertues liue, of vertuous men deceast, Which in such like, receiue theyr second birth By smell andBy this allsion drawne from the effects of sounds and Odors, hee imitates the eter∣nitie of Vertue: saying, the er∣tues of good mē liue in them, be∣cause they stir vp pure enclinati∣ons to the like, as if infusde in per∣umes & sounds: Besides, he infers, that such as are neyther delighted with sounds (in∣tēding by sound all vtterance of knowledge, as well as musicall affections,) nor with Odors, (wc properly drye the braine & delight the instruments of the soule, ma∣king them the more capable of her faculties) such saith hee, perrish without memo∣rie▪ hearing endlesly encreast; They were meere flesh were not with them delighted, And euery such is perisht like a beast As all they shall that are so foggye sprighted, Odors feede loue,  loue cleare heauen discouers, Louers weae sweets then; sweetest mindes, be louers. Odor in heate and drynes is conite Loue then a fire is much thereto affected; And as ill smells do kill his appetite With thankfull sauors it is still protected▪ Loue liues in spyrits, and our spyrits be Nourisht with Odors, therefore loue refected; And ayre lesse corpulent in quallitie Then Odors are, doth nourish vitall spyrits Therefore may they be prou'd of equall merits; O soueraigne Odors; not of force to giue Foode to a thing that liues nor let it dye, But to ad life to that did neuer liue; Nor to ad life, but immortallitie. Since they pertake her heate that like the fire Stolne from the wheeles of Phoebus waggonrie To lumps of earth, can manly lyfe inspire; Else be these fumes the liues of sweetest dames That (dead) attend on her for nouell frames; Reioyce blest Clime, thy ayre is so refinde That while shee liues no hungry pestilence Can feede her poysoned stomack with thy kynde; But as the Vnicorns pregredience To venomd Pooles, doth purdge them with his horne, And after him the desarts Residence May safely drinke, so in the holesome morne After her walke, who there attends her eye, Is sure that day to tast no maladye.
Thus was his course of Odors sweet and sleight, Because he long'd to giue his sight assaye, And as in feruor of the summers height, The sunne is so ambitious in his sway He will not let the Night an howre be plast, So in this Cupids Night (oft seene in day Now spred with tender clouds these Odors cast,) Her sight, his sunne so wrought in his desires, His sauor vanisht in his visuale fires. So vlture loue on his encreasing liuer, And fruitfull entrails egerly did feede, And with the goldnest Arrow in his Quiuer, Wounds him with longings, that like Torrents bleeds, To see the Myne of knowledge that enricht His minde with pouertie, and desperate neede A sight that with the thought of sight bewitcht, A sight taught Magick his deepe misterie, Quicker in danger thenAllusion to the trnsformatiō of Acteon with the sight of Diana. Dianas eye. Stay therefore Ouid, venter not, a sight May proue thy rudenes, more then shew thee louing, And make thy Mistres thinke thou think'st her light: Which thought with lightest Dames is nothing mouing. The slender hope of fauor thou hast yet Should make thee feare, such grosse conclusions prouing: Besides, the Thicket Floras hands hath set To hide thy theft, is thinne and hollow harted, Not meete to haue so high a charge imparted. And should it keepe thy secrets, thine owne eye Would fill thy thoughts so full of lightenings, That thou must passe through more extremitie. Or stand content to burne beneath theyr wings, Her honor gainst thy loue, in wager layde, Thou would'st be prickt with other sences stings, To tast, and feele, and yet not there be staide: These casts, he cast, and more, his wits more quick Then can be cast, by wits Arithmetick.
Forward,A simile, expres∣sing the manner of his minds cō∣tention in the de∣sire of her sight, and feare of her displeasure. and back, and forward went he thus, Like wanton Thamysis, that hastes to greete The brackish Court of old Oceaus; And as by Londons besome she doth fleet Casts herselfe proudly through the Bridges twists, Where (as she takes againe her Christall feete:) She curls her siluer hayre like Amorists, Smoothes her bright cheekes, adorns her browes with ships And Empresse-like along th Coast she trips. Till comming neere the Sea, she heares him rore, Tumbling her churlish billowes in her face, Then, more dismaid, then insolent before Charg'd to rough battaile, for his smooth embrace, She crowcheth close within her winding bancks, And creepes retreate into her peacefull Pallace; Yet straite high-flowing in her female prancks Againe shee will bee wanton, and againe, By no meanes stayde, nor able to containe. So Ouid with his strong affections striuing▪ Maskt in a friendly Thicket neere her Bowre, Rubbing his temples, fainting, and reuiuing, Fitting his garments, praying to the howre, Backwards, and forwards went, and durst not venter, To tempt the tempest of his Mistres lowre, Or let his eyes her beauties ocean enter, At last, with prayer he pierceth Iuns are, Great Goddesse of audacitie and feare, Great Goddesse of audacitie, and feare, Queene of Olympus, Saturns eldest seede, That doost the septer ouer Samos beare, And rulst all Nuptiale rites with power, and meede, Since thou in nature art the meane to mix Still sulphure humors, and canst thereore speede Such as in Cyprian sports theyr pleasures fix Venus herselfe, and Mars by thee embracing, Assist my hopes, me and my purpose gracing.
With this digression, wee will now returne To Ouids propect in his fancies storme: Hee thought hee sawe the Arbors bosome burne, Blaz'd with a fire wrought in a Ladyes forme: Where siluer past the least: and Natures vant Did such a precious miracle performe, Shee lay, and seemd a flood of Diamant Bounded in flesh: as still as Vespers hayre, When not an Aspen leafe is styrrd with ayre. Shee layThe amplifica∣tion of this simi∣le, is taken frō the blisfull state of soules in Elisi, as rgill faes: and expreeth a regenerate beauty in all life & per∣fection, not inti∣mating any rst of death. But in peace of that e∣ternall spring, he poyteth to that life of life thys beauty-clad na∣ked Lady. at length, like an immortall soule At endlesse rest in blest Elisium: And then did true felicitie enroule So fayre a Lady, figure of her kingdome. Now Ouids Muse as in her tropicke shinde, And hee (strooke dead) was meere heauen-borne become, So his quick verse in equall height was shrinde: Or els blame mee as his submitted debter, That neuer Mistresse had to make mee better. Now as shee lay, attirde in nakednes, His eye did carue him on that feast of feasts: SweetHe calls her body (as it were diui∣ded with her breasts,) y• fields of Paradise, and her armes & legs the famous Ri∣uers in it. fields of life which Deaths foote dare not presse, Flowrd with th'vnbroken waues of my Loues bests, Vnbroke by depth of those her beauties floods: See where with ben of Gold curld into Nests In her heads Groue, the Spring-bird Lamate broods: Her body doth present those fields of peace Where soules are feasted with the soule of ease. To proue which Parradise that nurseth these, See see the golden Riuers that renowne it: Rich Gehon, Tigris, Phisn, Ephras, Two from her bright Pelopian shoulders crowne it, And two out of her snoye Hills doe glide, That with a Deluge of delights doe drowne it: The highest two, theyr precious streames diuide To tenne pure floods, that doe the body dutie Bounding themselues in ngth, but not in beautie.
TheseHee intends the office her fingers in attyring her, touching thys of theyr cses, in theyr inflection following▪ theyr playing vpon an Instrument. winde theyr courses through the painted bowres, And raise sch sounds in theyr inflection, As ceaseles start from Earth fresh sorts of flowers, And bound that booke of life with euery section. In these the Muses dare not swim for drowning, Theyr sweetnes poisons with such blest infection, And leaues the onely lookers on them swouning, These forms so decks, and colour makes so shine, That Gods for them would cease to be diuine. Thus though my loue be no Elisium That cannot moue, from her prefixed place; Yet haue her feete no powre from thence to come, For where she is, is all Elisian grace: And as those happy men are sure of blisse That can performe so excellent a race As that Olympiad where her fauor is, So shee can meete them blessing them the rather And giue her sweetes, as well as let men gather. Ah how should I be so most happy then T'aspire that place, or make it come to mee? To gather, or be giuen, the flowre of women? Elisium must with vertue gotten bee, With labors of the soule and continence, And these can yeeld no ioy with such as she, Shee is a sweet Elisium for the sence And Nature dooth not sensuall gifts infuse But that with sence, shee still intends their vse. The sence is giuen vs to excite the minde, And that can neuer be by sence exited But first the sence must her contentment minde, We therefore must procure the sence delighted, That so the soule may vse her facultie; Mine Eye then to this feast hath her inuited▪ That she might serue the soueragne of mine Eye, Shee shall bid Time, and Time so feasted neuer Shall grow in strength of her renowne for euer.
Betwixt mine Eye and obiect, certayne lynes, Moue in the figre of a Pyramis, Whose chapter in mine eyes gray apple shines, The base within my sacred obict is: On this will I inscribe in golden verse The meruailes raigning in my soueraigns blisse, The arcs of sight, and how her arrowes perse: This in the Region of the ayre shall stand In Fames brasse Court, and all her Trmps commaund. Rich Beautie, that ech Louer labors for, Tempting as heapes of new-cond-glowing Gold, (Rackt of some miserable Treasrer) Draw his desires, and them in chaynes enfold Vrging him still to tell it, and conceale it, But Beauties treasure neer can be told None can peculier ioy, yet all must steale it, O Beautie, this same bloody sidge of thine Starues me that yeld, and fedes mee till I pine. And as a Taper burning in the darke (As if it threatnd euery wachfull eye That viewing bns it,) maes that eye his marke, And hurls guilt Darts at it continually, Or as it enuied, any eye but it Should see in darknes, o my Mistres beautie From foorth her secret stand my hart doth hit: And like the Drt of Caphlus dooth kill Her perfect Loe, though shee meane no ill. Thus, as the innocnce of one betraide Carries an Argus with it, though vnknowne, And Fat to wreake the recherie bewraide; Such vengece hath my Mres Beautie showne On me the  to her modestie, So vnassailde, I quite am ouehrowne, And in my tryumph bound in slauerie, O Beauty, still thy Empire swims in blood, And in thy peace, Warre stores himselfe with foode.
O Beautie, how attractiue is thy powre? For as the liues heate clings about the hart, So all Mens hungrie eyes do haunt thy Bowre, Raigning in Greece, Troy swum to thee in At; Remou'd to Troy, Greece followd thee in feares; Thou drewst each Syreles sworde, each childles Dar And pulld'st the towres of Troy about thine eares: Shall I then muse hat thus thou drawest me? No, but admire, I stand thus farre from thee. Heerewith shee rose like the Auumnale Starre Fresh burnisht in the loftie Ocean floode, That darts his glorious influence more farre Then any Lampe of bright Olypus broode; Shee lifts her lightning arms aboue her head, And stretcheth a Meridian from her blood, That slept awake in her Elisian bed: Then knit shee vp, lest loose, her glowing hayre Should scorch the Center and incense the ayre. Thus when her fayre hart-binding hands had tied Those liberall Tresses, her high frotier part, Shee shrunk in curls, and curiously plied Into the figure of a swelling hart: And then with Iewels of deuise, it graced: One was a Sunne grauen at his Euens depart, And vnder that a Mans huge shaddowAt the Sun go∣ing downe, sha∣dowes grow lon∣gest, whereupon this Embleme is deuised. placed, Wherein was writ, in able Charectry, Decrescente nobilit, crescnt ocuri. An other was an Eye in Saphire set, And close vpon it a fresh Lawrell spray. The skilfull Posie was, MedioSight is one of the three sences that hath his me∣diū extrinsecally, which now (sup∣posed wanting,) lets the sight by the close apposi∣tion of the Law∣rell: the applica∣tion wherof hath many constructi∣ons. cret, To showe not eyes, but meanes must truth display. The third was an ApolloThe Sun hath as much time to campasse a Diall as the world, & therfore y• world is placed in the Dyall, expressing the cōceite of the Emprese morally which hath a far higher intention. with his Teme About a Diall and a worlde in way, The Motto was, Tepsi t rbem, Grauen in the Diall; these exceeding rare And other like accomplemnts she ware.
Not Tygris, Nilus, nor swift Euphrates, Quoth Ouid now, can more subdue my flame, I must through hell aduenture to displease, To ast and touch, one kisse may worke the same: If more will come, more then much more I will; Each naturall agent doth his action frame, To render that he works on like him styll: The fire on water working doth induce Like qualitie vnto his owne in vse. But Heauen in her a sparckling temper blewe (As loue in mee) and so will soone be wrought, Good wits will bite at baits most strang and new, And words well plac'd, moue things were neuer thought; What Goddesse is it Ouids wits shall dare And he disgrace them with attempting nought? My words shall carry spirits to ensnare The subtelst harts affecting utes importune, "Best loues are lost for wit when men blame Fortune." WIth this,Narratio. as she was looking in her Glasse, She saw thereinOuid standing behind her▪ his face was seene in the Glasse. a mans face looking on her: Whereat she started from the frighted Grasse, As if some monstrous Serpent had been shown her: Rising as when (the sunne in Leos signe) Auriga with the heauenly Goate vpon her, Shows her horn'd forehead with her Kids diuine, Whose rise, kils Vines, Heauens face with storms disguisg▪ No man is safe at sea, the Haedy rising. So straight wrapt shee her body in a Clowde, And threatned tempests for her high disgrace, Shame from a Bowre of Roses did vnshrowde And spread her crimson wings vpon her face; When runng out, poore Ouid humbly kneeling Full in the Arbors mouth, did stay her race And saide; faire Nph, great Goddesse haue some feeling Of Ouids paines; but heare: and your dishonor Vainely surmisde, shall vanish with my horror.
Traytor to Ladies modesties (said shee) What sauage boldnes hardned thee to this? Or what base reckoning of my modestie? What should I thinke thy facts proude reason is? Loue (sacred Madam) loue exhaling mee (Wrapt in his Sulphure,) to this clowde of his Made my affections his artillerie, Shot me at you his proper Cytadell, And loosing all my forces, heere I fell. This Glosse is common, as thy rudenes strange Not to forbeare these priuate times, (quoth she) Whose fixed Rites, none shoulde presume to change Not where there is adiudg'd inchastiie; Our nakednes should be as much conceald As our accomplishments desire the eye: It is a secrete not to be reuealde, But as Virginitie, and Nuptialls clothed, And to our honour all to be betrothed. It is a want, where our aboundance lyes, Giuen a sole dowre t'enrich chast▪ Hymens Bed, A perfect Image of our purities, And glasse by which our actions should be dressed. That tells vs honor is as soone defild And should be kept as pure, and incompressed, But sight attainteth it: for Thought Sights childe Begetteth sinne; and Nature bides defame, When light and lawles eyes bewray our shame. Deere Mistresse (answerd Ouid,) to direct Our actions, by the straitest rule that is, We must in matters Morrall, quite reiect Vulgar Opinion, euer led amisse And let autentique Reason e our guide, The wife of Truth, and Wisdoms Gouernisse: The nature of all actions must be waide, And as they then appeare, breede loue or loathing, Vse makes things nothing huge, and huge things nothing.
As in your sight, how can sight simply beeing A Sence receiuing essence to his flame Sent from his obiect, giue it harme by seeing Whose actionActio cernendi in homine vel a∣mali, idente col∣locanda est.Ari∣to. in the Seer hath his frame? All excellence of shape is made for fight, Else, to be like a Beast were no defame; Hid Beauties lose theyr ends, and wrong theyr right: And can kinde loue, (where no harms kinde can be) Disgrace with seeing that is gien to see? Tis I (alas) and my hart-buing Eye Doe all the harme, and fele the harme wee doo: I am no , y harmles I Poyson with sight, and mine owne bosom too; So am I to my selfe a Soeresse Bewitcht with my conceies in her I woo: But you vnwronged▪ and all shonlesse No ill dares touch, affliction, sorcie, One kisse of yours can quickly remedie. I could not times obserue, as others might Of cold affects, and watry empers framde, Yet well assurde the wounder of your ight Was so farre of from seeing you defamde, That euer in the Phe of Memorie Your loue shall shine by it, in mee enflamde. Then let your powre be clad in lnitie, Doe not (as others would) of custome storme▪ But proue yor wit as pregnant as your forme. Nor is my loue so suddaine, since my hart Was long loues Vulcan, with his pants vnrest Ham'ring the shafts bred th delightsome smart: And as when Ioue at once from East and Wst Cast off two Eagles, to  the sight Of this world Center, bth his Byrds oynd brest In Cynthian Dlpo, since Earhs nauill hight: So casting off my ceseles thoughs to see My harts true Cer, all doe  in thee.
Cupid that acts in you, suffers in mee To make himselfe one tryumph-place of twaine, Into your tunes and odors turned hee, And through my sences flew into my braine In Cerebro est principium sen∣tiend, et inde nerui, qui instru∣menta sunt mo∣tus voluntarij o∣riuntur. Where rules the Prince of sence, whose Throne hee takes, And of my Motions engines frad a chaine To leade mee where hee list; and heere hee makes Nature (myNatura est vnius∣cuiusque Fatum,  Theophr. fate) enforce mee: and reignes The raines of all, to you, in whom hee shines. For yeelding loue then, do not haue impart, Nor let mine Eye, your carefull Harbengere That hath puruaide your Chamber in my hart, Be blamde for seeing who it lodged there; The freer seruice merits greter meede, Princes are seru'd with vnexpected chere, And must haue things in store before they neede: Thus should faire Dames be wise and confident, Not blushing to be noted excellent. Now, as when Heauen is mffled with the vapors His long since iust diorced wife the Erth, In enuie breath's, to maske his spuie Tapers From the vnrich aboundance of her binth▪ When straight the westerne issue of the Ayre Beates with his flowrie wings those Brats of dearth, And giues Olypus leaue to shew his fayre, So fled th'offended shaddowes of her heere, And showd her pleased count'nance full as cleere. Which for his fourth course made our Poet court her, &c.
THis motion of my soule,Gustus. my fantasie Created by three sences put in act, Let iustice nourish with the impathie, Putting my other sences into fact, If now thou grnt not,Alterationē pa∣ti est sentire. now changde that offence; To suffer change, doth perfect sence compact: Change then, and suffer for the vse of sence, Wee liue not for our selues, the Eare, and Eye, And euery sence, must serue societie. To furnish then▪ this Banquet where the tast Is neuer vsde, and yet the cheere diuine, The neerest meane deare Mistres that thou hast To blesse me with it, is a kysse of thine, Which grace shall borrow organs of my touch T'aduance it to that inwardHe intends the common sence which is centrum sensibus et specie∣bus, & cals it last because it dooth, sapare in effectione sensuum. taste of mine Which makes all sence, and shall delight as much Then with a kisse (deare life) adorne thy feast And let (as Benquets should) the last be best. I see vnbidden Gests are boldest still,Corynna. And well you showe how weake in soule you are That let rude sence, subdue your reasons skill And feede so spoilefully on sacred fare; In temper of such needles feasts as this We show more bounty still the more we spare, Chiefly where birth and state so different is: Ayre too much rarefied breakes forth in fire, And fauors too farre vrg'd do end in ire. The difference of our births (imperiall Dame) Is heerein noted with too triuiall eyes For your rare wits;Ouid. that should your choices frame To state of parts, that most doth royalize, Not to commend mine owne; but that in yours Beyond your birth, are perrils soueraignties Which (vrgd) your words had strook with sharper powers; Tis for mere looke-like Ladies, and for men To boast of birth that still be childeren.
Running to Father straight to helpe theyr needs, True dignities and rites of reuerence, Are sowne in mindes, an reapt in liuely deedes, And onely pollicie makes difference Twixt States, since vertue want du imperance Vertue makes honor, as the soule doth sence, And merit farre exceedes inheriance, The Graces fill loues cup, his feasts adorning, Who seekes your seruice now, the Graces scorning. Pure loue (said she) the purest grace pursues, And there is contact, not by application Of lips or bodies, but of bodies vertues, As in our eleentale Nation Stars by theyr powers, which are theyr heat and light Do heauenly works, and that which hath probation By vertuall contact hath the noblest plight, Both for the lasting and affinitie It hath with naturall diuiniie. Ouid replied; in thys thy vertuall presence (Most fayre Corynna) thou canst not effuse The true and solid parts of thy pure essence But doost thy superficiall beames produce Of thy rich substance; which because they flow Rather from forme then from the matters vse Resemblance onely of thy body showe Whereof they are thy wondrous species, And t'is thy substance must my longings ease. Speake then sweet ayre, that giu'st our speech euent And teach my Mistres tractabilitie, That art to motion most obedient, And though thy nature, swelling be and high And occupiest so infinite a space, Yet yeeldst to words, and art condust thereby Past nature prest into a little place Deare soueraigne then, make ayre thy rule in this, And me thy worthy seruant with a kisse.
Ouid (sayd shee) I am well pleasd to yeeld: Bounti by vertue cannot be abusde: Nor will I coylie lyft Mineruas shielde Against Mineru, honor i not brusde With such a tender pressure as a kisse, Nor yeelding soone to words, though seldome vsde, Nicenes in ciuill fauours, folly is: Long sues make neuer good a bad detection, Nor yeelding soone, makes bad, a good affection. To some I know, (and know it for a faule) Order and reuerence, are repulst in skaling, When pryde and rudenes, enter with assault, Consents to fall, are worse to get then falling▪ Willing resistance, takes away the will, And too much weakenes tis to come with calling: Force in these frayes, is better man then skyll, Yet I like skill, and Ouid if a kis May doe thee so much pleasure, heere it is. Her moouing towards him, made Ouids eye Beleeue the Firmament was comming downe To take him quick to immortalitie, And that th' Ambrosian kisse set on the Crowne: Shee spake in kissing, and her breath infusd Restoring syrrop to his tast, in swoune: And hee imaginde Hebes hands had brusde A banquet of the Gods into his sence, Which fild him with this furious influence. The motion of the Heauens that did beget The golden age, and by whose harmonie Heuen is preserud, in mee on worke is set, All instruments of deepest melodie Set sweet in my desires to my loues liking With this sweet kisse in mee theyr tunes apply, As if the best Musiians hands were striking▪ This kisse in me hath endlesse Musicke closed, Like Phoebus Lute, on Nisus Towrs imposed.
And as a Pible cast into a Spring, Wee see a sort of trembling cirkles rise, One forming other in theyr issuing Till ouer all the Fount they circulize, So this perpetuall-motion-making kisse, Is propagate through all my faculties, And makes my breast and endlesse Fount of blisse, Of which, if Gods could drink, theyr matchlesse fare Would make them much more blessed then they are. ButQua ratione fiat Eccho. as when sounds doe hollow bodies beate, Ayre gatherd there, comprest, and thickned, The selfe same way shee came doth make retreate, And so effects the sounde reecchoed Onely in part, because shee weaker is Is that redition, then when first shee fled: So I alas, faint eccho of this kisse, Onely reiterate a slender part Of that high ioy it worketh in my hart. And thus with feasting, loue is famisht more, Without my touch are all things turnd to gold, And till I touch, I canno ioy my store: To purchase others, I my selfe haue sold, Loue is a wanton famine, rich in foode, But with a richer appetite controld, An argument in figure and in Moode, Yet hate all arguments: disputing still For Sence, gainst Reason, with a sencelesse will. THen sacred Madam,Tactus. since my other sences Haue in your graces asted such content, Let wealth not to be spent, feare no expences, But giue thy bountie true eternizement: Making my sences ground-worke, which is, Feeling, Effect the other, endlesse excellent, Their substance with flint-softning softnes steeling: Then let mee feele, for know sweet beauties Queene, Dames may be felt, as well as heard or seene.
For if wee be allowd to serue the Eare With pleasing tunes, and to delight the Eye With gracious showes, the Taste with daintie cheere, The Smell with Odors, ist immodestie To serue the sences Empeor, sweet Feeling With those delights that fit his Emperie? Shall Subiects free themselues, and bind theyr King? Mindes taint no more with bodies touch or tyre, Then bodies nourish with the mindes desire. The minde then cleere, the body may be vsde, Which perfectly your touch can spritualize; As by the great elixer is trans-fusde Copper to Golde, then grant that deede of prise: Such as trans-forme into corrupt effects What they receaue from Natures purities, Should not wrong them that hold her due respects: To touch your quickning side then giue mee leaue, Th' abuse of things, must not the vse bereaue. Heere-with, euen glad his arguments to heare, Worthily willing to haue lawfull grounds To make the wondrous power of Heauen appeare, In nothing more then her perfections found, Close to her nauill shee her Mantle wrests, Slacking it vpwards, and the foulds vnwond, Showing Latonas Twinns, her plenteous brests The Sunne and Cynthia in theyr tryumph-robes Of Lady-skin; more rich then both theyr Globes VVhereto shee bad, blest Ouid put his hand: Hee, well acknowledging it much too base For Such an action, did a little stand, Enobling it with tytles full of grace, and coniures it with charge of reuerend verse, To vse with pietie that sacred place, And through his Feelings organ to disperse VVorth to his spirits, amply to supply The porenes of his fleshes facultie.
And thus hee sayd: King of the King of Sences, Engines of all the engines vnder heauen, To health, and life, defence of all defences, Bountie by which our nourishment is giuen, Beauties bewtifier, kinde acquaintance maker, Proportions odnes that makes all things euen, Wealth of the laborer, wrongs reuengement taker, Patterne of concord, Lord of exercise, And figure of that power the world did guise: Deere Hand, most dulie honored in this And therefore worthy to be wel employde: Yet know, that all that honor nothing is, Compard with that which w must be enioyd: So thinke in all the pleasures these haue showne (Likened to this) tho wert but meere anoyde, That all hands merits in thy selfe alone With this one touch, haue more then recompence, And therefore feele, with feare and reuerence. See Cupids Alps which now thou must goe ouer, Where snowe that thawes the Sunne doth euer lye: Where thou maist plaine and feelingly discouer The worlds fore-past, that flow'd with Milke and Honny: Where, (like an Empresse seeing nothing wanting That may her glorious child-bed bewtifie) Pleasure her selfe lyes big with issue panting: Euer deliuerd, yet with childe still growing, Full of all blessings, yet all blisse bestowing. This sayd, hee layde his hand vpon her side, Which made her start like sparckles from a fire, Or like Saturnia from th' Ambrosian pride Of her morns slumber, frighted with admire When Ioue layd young Alcydes to her brest, So statled shee, not with a coy retire, But with the tender temper shee was blest, Prouing her sharpe, vnduld with handling yet, Which keener edge on Ouids longings set.
And feeling still, he igh'd out this effect; Alas why lent not heauen the soule a tongue? Nor language, nor peculier dialect, To make her high conceits as highly sung, But that a fleshlie engine must vnfold A spirituall notion; birth from Princes sprung Pessants must nurse, free vertue waite on gold And a profest though flattering enemie, Must pleade my honor, and my libertie. O nature how doost thou defame in this Our humane honors? yoking men with beasts And noblest mindes with slaues? thus beauties blisse, Loue and all vertues that quick spirit feasts Surfet on flesh; and thou that banquests mindes Most bounteous Mistresse, of thy dull-tongu'd guests Reapst not due thanks; thus rude frailetie bindes What thou giu'st wings; thus ioyes I feele in thee Hang on my lips and will not vttered be. Sweete touch the engine that loues bow doth bend, The sence wherewith he feeles him deified, The obiect whereto all his actions tend, In all his blindenes his most pleasing guide, For thy sake will I write the Art of loue, Since thou doost blow his fire and feede his pride Since in thy sphere his health and life doth moue, For thee I hate who hate societie And such as selfe-loue makes his slauerie. In these dog-dayes how this contagion smoothers The purest bloods with vertues diet fined Nothing theyr owne, vnlesse they be some others Spite of themselues, are in themselues confined And liue so poore they are of all despised, Theyr gifts, held down with scorne should be diuined, And they like Mummers mask, vnknowne, vnprised: A thousand meruales mourne in some such brest Would make a kinde and worthy Patrone blest.
To mee (deere Soueraigne) thou art Patronesse, And I, with that thy graces haue infused, Will make all fat and foggy braines confesse, Riches my from a poore verse be deduced: And that Golds loue shall leaue them groueling heere, When thy perfections shall to heauen be Mused, Deckt in bright verse, where Angels shall appeare The praise of vertue, loue, and beauty singig, Honor to Noblesse, shame to Auarice bringing. HEere Ouid interupted with the view Of other Dames, who then the Garden painted, Shrowded himselfe, and did as death eschew All note by which his loues fame might be tainted: And as when mighty Macedon had wun The Monarchie of Earth, yet when hee fainted, Grieu'd that no greater action could be doone, And that there were no more worlds to subdue, So loues defects, loues Conqueror did rue. But as when expert Painters haue displaid, To quickest life a Monarchs royall hand Holding a Scepter, there is yet bewraide But halfe his fingers; when we vnderstand The rest not to be seene; and neuer blame The Painters Art, in nicest censures skand: So in the compasse of this curious frame, Ouid well knew there was much more intended, With whose omition none must be offended. Intentio, animi actio. Explicit conuiuium.
❧ A Coronet for his Mistresse Philosophie. MVses that sing loues sensuall Emperie, And Louers kindling your enraged fires At Cupids bonfires burning in the eye, Blowne with the emptie breath of vaine desires, You that prefer the painted Cabinet Before the welthy Iewels it doth store yee, That all your ioyes in dying figures set, And staine the liuing substance of your glory, Abiure those ioyes, abhor their memory. And let my loue the honord subiect be Of loue, and honors compleate historie; Your eyes were neuer yet, let in to see The maiestie and riches of the minde, But dwell in darknes; for your God is blinde. BVT dwell in darknes, for your God is blinde, Humor poures downe uch torrents on his eyes, Which (as from Mountaines) fall on his base kind, And eate your entrails ot with exstasies. Colour, (whose hands for faintnes are not felt) Can binde your waxen thoughts in Adamant, And with her painted fires your harts doth melt Which beate your soules in peecs with a pant, But my loue is the cordiall of oules Teaching by passion what perfection is, In whose fix beauties shine the sacred scroule, And long-lost records of your humane blisse Spirit of flesh, and soule to spirit giuing, Loue flowes not from my lyuer, but her liuing.
A Coronet. LOue flowes not from my liuer b her liuing, From whence all stings to perfect loue are darted All powre, and thought of pridefull lust depriuing, Her life so pure and she so spoles harted, In whome its beautie with so firme a brow That age, nor care, nor torment can contract it; Heauens glories shining there, doe stuffe alow, And vertues constant graces do compact it. Her minde (the beame of God) drawes in the fires Of her chast eyes, from all earths tempting fewell; Which vpward lifts the lookes of her desires And makes each precious thought in her a Iewell, And as huge fires comprest more prodly fame So her close beauties further blaze her fame. SO her close beauties further blaze her ae; When from the world, into herselfe reflected Shee lets her (shameles) glorie in her shame Content for heau'n to be of earth reiected, Shee thus deprest, knocks at Olypus gate, And in  Temple of her har Doth the diuorcele nuptials celebrate Twixt God and her; where loues prphaned dart Feedes the chast flames of Hym fimment, Wherein sh , for her part; The Robes, looke, Of female natures, Vertue is both Of her remou'd and soule-infusde regard.
OF her remou'd, and soule-infusde regard, With whose firme species (as with golden Lances) She points her liues field, (for all wars prepard) And beares one chanceles minde, in all mischances; Th'inuersed world that goes vpon her head And with her wanton heeles doth kyck the sky, My loue disdaynes, though she be honored And without enuy sees her emperie, Loaths all her oyes, and thoughts cupidinine, Arandging in the army of her face All vertues forces, to dismay loose yne That hold no quarter with renowne, or grace, War to all frailetie▪ peace of all things pure Her looke doth promise and her life assure. HEr looke doth promise and her life assure; A right line, forcing a rebaeles point, In her high deedes, through euery thing obscure To full perfection; not the weake disioint Of female humors; nor the Protean rages Of pied fac'd fashion, that doth shrink and swell, Working poore mn like waxen images And makes them apish strangers where they dwell Can alter her, titles of primacy Courtship of antick iesures; brineles iests Bloud without soul of false nobiliti Nor any folly that the world infests Can alter her who with her constant guises To liuing vertues turns the deadly vices.
TO liuing vertues turns the deadly vices, For couetous shee is, of all good parts, Incontinent for still she showes entices To consort with them sucking out theyr harts, Proud, for the scorns prostrate humilitie, And gluttonous in store of abstinence, Drunk with extractions stild in feruencie From contemplation, and true continence, Burning in wrath, against impatience▪ And sloth it selfe, for she will neuer rise From that all-seeing trance (the band of sence) Wherein in view of all soules skils she lyes. No constancie to that her minde doth moue Nor riches to the vertues of my loue. NOr riches, to the vertues of my loue, Nor Empire to her mighty gouernment: Which fayre analisde in her beauties groue, Showes Lawes for care, and Canons for content: And as a purple tincture gyuen to Glasse By cleere transmission of the Sunne doth taint Opposed subiects: so my Mistresse face Doth reuerence in her viewers browes depaint, And like the Pansye, with a little vaile Shee giues her inward worke the greater grace; Which my lines imitate, though much they faile Her gyfts so hie, and tymes conceits so base: Her vertues then aboue my verse must raise her, For words want Art, and Art want words to praise her.
FOR words want Art, & Art wants words to praise her, Yet shall my actiu and dustrious pen, Winde his sharpe forheade through those parts that aise her, And register er worth past rarest women▪ Her selfe shall be my Muse; that well will knowe Her proper inspirations: and aswage (With her deere loue) the wrongs my fortunes show, Which to my yoth, binde haresse griefe in age,) Her selfe shall be my comfort and my rches, And all my thoghts I will on her conert, Honor, and Error, which the world bewitches, Shall still crowne fooles, and read vpon desert, And neuer shall my friendlesse verse enuie Muses that Fames loose feahers beautifie. MVses that Fames loose feathers beautifie, And such as corne to tread the Theater, As ignora the de of memorie Haue most inspirde, and showe theyr glories there To noblest wits, and men of highest doome, That for the kingly Lawrell bent affayre, The Theaters of Athens and of Rm Haue beene the Crownes, and not the base empayre▪ Farre then be this foule clowdy-browd contempt From like-plude Birds: and let your sacred rymes From honors Court theyr serile feete exempt That liue by soothing moods, and seing tymes: And let my loue, adorne with modest eyes, Muses that sing loues sensuall Empery. Lucidius olim.
The amorous Zodiack. 1 I Neuer see the Sunne, but sddainly My soule is mou'd, with spite and ielousie Of his high blisse in his sweete corse discerned: And am displeasde to see so many signes As the bright Sye vnworthily diuines, Enioy an honor they haue neuer earned. 2 To thinke heauen decks with such a beautious show A Harpe, a Shyp, a Serpent, and  Crow, And such a crew of creatures of no prises, But to excite in vs th'vnshamefast flames, With which (long since) Ioue wrongd so many Dames, Reuiuing in his rule, theyr names and vices. 3 Deare Mistres, whom the Gods bred heere belowe T'expresse theyr wondrous powre and let vs know That before thee they nought did perfect make Why may not I (as in those signes the Sunne) Shine in thy beauties, and as roundly rne, To frame (like him) an endlesse Zodiack. 4 With thee Ile furnish both the yeere and Sky, Running in thee my course of destinie: And thou shalt be the rest of all my mouing, But of thy numberles and perfect graces (To giue my Moones theyr ful in twelue months spaces) I chuse but twelue in guerdon of my louing. 5 Keeping euen way through euery excellence, Ile make in all, an equall residence Of a newe Zodiack: a new Phoebus guising, When (without altering the course of nature) Ile make the seasons good, and euery creature Shall henceforth reckon day, from my first rising.
6 To open then the Spring-times golden gate, And flowre my race with ardor temperate, Ile eter by thy head, and haue for house In my first month, this heauen-Ram-curled tresse: Of which, Loue all his charme-chaines doth addresse: A Signe fit for a Spring so beauios. 7 Lodgd in that fleece of hayre, yellow, and curld, Ile take high pleasure to enlight the world, And fetter me in gold, thy crisps implies, Earth (at this Spring spungie and langorsome With enuie of our ioyes in loue become) Shall swarme with flowers, & ayre with painted flie▪ 8 Thy smooth embowd brow, where all grace I see, My second month, and second house shall be: Which brow, with her cleere beauties shall delight The Earth (yet sad) and ouerture confer To herbes, buds, flowers, and verdure gracing Ver, Rendring her more then Sommer exquisite. 9 All this fresh Aprill, this sweet month of Venus, I will admire this browe so bounteous: This brow, braue Court for loue, and vertue builded, This brow where Chastitie holds garrison, This brow that (blushlesse) none can looke vpon, This brow with euery grace and honor guilded. 10 Resigning that, to perfect this my yeere Ile come to see thine eyes: that now I feare: Thine eyes, that sparckling like two Twin-borne fires, (Whose lookes benigne, and shining sweets doe grace Mays youthfull moth with a more pleasing face) Iustly the Twinns signe▪ hold in my desires,
11 Scorcht with the beames these sister-flames eiect, The liuing sparcks thereof Earth shall effect The shock of our ioynd-fires the Sommer starting: The season by degrees shall change againe The dayes, theyr longest durance shall retaine, The starres their amplest light, and ardor daring. 12 But now I feare that thronde in such a shine, Playing with obiects, pleasant and diuine, I should be mou'd to dwell there thirtie dayes: O no, I could not in so little space, With ioy admire enough theyr pleneous grace, But euer liue in sun-shine of theyr rayes: 13 Yet this should be in vaine, my forced will My course designd (begun) shall follow still; So forth I must, when forth this month is wore, And of the neighbor Signes be borne anew, Which Signe perhaps may stay mee with the view More to conceiue, and so desire the more. 14 It is thy nose (sterne to thy Barke of loue) Or which Pyne-like doth crowne a flowrie Groue, Which Nature striud to fashion with her best, That shee might neuer turne to show more skill: And that the enuious foole, (vsd to speake ill) Might feele pretended fault chokt in his brest. 15 The violent season in a Signe so bright, Still more and more, become more proude of light, Should still incense mee in the following Signe: A signe, whose sight desires a gracious kisse, And the red confines of thy tongue it is, Where, hotter then before, mine eyes would shine.
16 So glow those Corrals, nought but fire respiring With smiles, or words, or sighs her thoughts attiring Or, be it she a kisse diuinely frameth; Or that her tongue, shookes forward, and retires, Doubling like feruent Syrius, summers fires In Los mouth, which all the world enflameth. 17 And now to bid the Boreall signes adew I come to giue thy virgin-cheekes the view To temper all my fire, and tame my heate, Which soone will feele it selfe extinct and dead, In those fayre courts with modestie dispred With holy, humble, and chast thoughts repleate. 18 The purple tinct, thy Marble cheekes retaine, The Marble tinct, thy purple cheekes doth staine The Lillies dulie equald with thine eyes, The tinct that dyes the Morne with deeper red, Shall hold my course a Month, if (as I dread) My fires to issue want not faculties. 19 To ballance now thy more obscured graces Gainst them the circle of thy head enchaes (Twise three Months vsd, to run through twise three houses To render in this heauen my labor lasting, I hast to see the rest, and with one hasting, The dripping tyme shall fill the Earth carowses. 20 Then by the necke, my Auumne Ile commence, Thy necke, that merrits place of excellence Such as this is, where with a certaine Sphere In ballancing the darknes with the light, It so might vvey, vvith skoles of equall weight Thy beuties seene with those doe not ppeare.
21 Now past my month t'admire for built most pure This Marble piller and her lyeature, I come t'inhabit thy most gracious teates, Teates that eede loue vpon the white riphees, Teates where he hangs his glory and his trophes When victor from the Gods war he retreats. 22 Hid in the vale twixt these two hils confined This vale the nest of loues, and ioyes diuined Shall I inioy mine ease; and fayre be passed Beneath these parching Alp; and this sweet cold Is first, thys month, heauen doth to vs vnfold But there shall I still greeue to bee displaced. 23 To sort from this most braue and pompous signe (Leauing a little my ecliptick lyne Lesse superstitious then the other Snne) The rest of my Autumnall race Ile end To see thy hand, (whence I the crowne attend,) Since in thy past parts I haue slightly runne. 24 Thy hand, a Lilly gendred of a Rose That wakes the morning, hid in nights repose: And from Apollos bed the vaile doth twine, That each where doth th'Idalian Minion guide; That bends his bow; that tyes, and leaues vntyed The siluer ribbands of his little Ensigne. 25 In fine, (still drawing to th'Antartick Pole) The Tropicke signe, Ile runne at for my Gole, Which I can scarce expresse with chastitie, I know in heauen t'is called Cpricorne And with the suddaine thought, my case takes horne, So (heauen-like,) Capricorne the name shall be.
26 This (wondrous fit) the wintry Solstice seaseth, Where darknes greater growes and day decreseth, Where rather I would be in night then day, But when I see my iournies doe encrease Ile straight dispatch me thence, and goe in peace To my next house, where I may safer stay. 27 This house alongst thy naked thighs is found, Naked of spot; made fleshy, firme and round, To entertayne loues friends with feeling sport▪ These, Cupids secret misteries enfold, And pillers are that Venus Phane vphold, Of her deare ioyes the glory, and support. 28 Sliding on thy smooth thighs to thys months end; To thy well fashiond Calues I will descend That soone the last house I may apprehend, Thy slender feete, fine slender feete that shame Thetis sheene feete, which Poets so much fame, And heere my latest season I will end. LENVOY. 29 DEare Mistres, if poore wishes heauen would heare, I would not chuse the empire of the water; The empire of the ayre, nor of the earth, But endlesly my course of life confining In this fayre Zodiack for euer shining, And with thy beauties make me endles mirth. 30 But gracious Loue, if ielous heauen deny My life this truely-blest variete, Yet will I thee through all the world disperse, If not in heauen, amongst those brauing fires Yet heere thy beauties (which the World admires) Bright as those flames shall glister in my verse.
The amorous contention of Phillis and Flora, translated out of a Latine coppie, written by a Fryer, Anno. 1400. 1 IN flowrie season of the yeere, And when the Firment was cleere, When Tllus Herbals pained were With issue of disparant cheere▪ 2 When th'Vsher to the Morne did rise, And driue the darknes from the skyes, Sleepe gaue their visuall liberties, To Phillis and to Floras eyes. 3 To walke these Ladies liked best, (For sleepe reiects the wounded brest,) Who ioyntly to a Meade addrest Theyr sportance with the place to feast. 4 Thus made they amorous excesse, Both Virgins, and both Princesses: Fayre Phillis wore a liberall tresse, But Flora, hers in curls did dresse. 5 Nor in their ornamentall grace, Nor in behauiour were they base, Their yeeres and mindes in equall place, Did youth and his effects embrace.
6 A little yet vnlike they proue, And somewhat hostilely they stroue, A Clarke did Floras humor moue, But Phillis likt a Souldiours loue. 7 For stature and fresh beauties flowrs, There grew no difference in theyr dowrs: All things were free to both theyr powrs Without, and in, theyr courtlie Bows. 8 One vowe thy made religiously▪ And were of one societie: And onely was theyr imparie The forme of eythers fantasie. 9 Now did a gentle timely gale, A little whisper through the Dale, Where was a place of festiuall, With verdant grasse adorned all: 10 And in that Meade-proude-making grasse, A Riuer like to liquid glasse Did with such soundfull murmre passe, That with the same it wanton was. 11 Hard by this Broke, a Pie had seae, With goodly furniture complete, To make the place in state more great, And lessen the inflaming heae.
12 Which was with leaues so beautified And spred his brest so thick and wide, That all the Sunnes estranged prid Sustaind repulse on euery side. 13 Queene Phillis by the Foord did it, But Flra farre remou'd from it, The place in all things sweet was fi, Where th'erbage did their ses admit. 14 Thus while they opposite were set And could not theyr effects forget, Loues arrowes and theyr bosoms me, And both theyr hart did passion-t. 15 Loue, close and inwad sods his fires, And in faint word, firme sighes expires, Pale tinctures change theyr cheekes attires, But modest shame entombes their res. 16 Phillis dyd Flora ighing take, And Flora dyd requitall make: So both together part the stke, Till forth the wound and sicknes brake. 17 In this chang'd speech they long time stayd, The processe all  loue they layd, Loue in theyr har theyr lookes bewraid: At last, in laghter, Phillis sayd:
18 Braue Souldier, Paris, my harts seisure In fight, or in his peacefull leysure: The Souldiers life, is lifes chiefe treasure, Most worth the Loue-Queenes houshold plesure. 19 While shee her war-friend did prefer, Flora lookt coy, and laught at her, And did this aduerse speech auer; Thou might'st haue said, I loue a Begger. 20 But what doth Alcibiades My Loue: past all in worths excesse: Whom Nature doth with all gyfts blesse? O onely Clarks liues, happines. 21 This hard speech, Phillis hardly takes, And thus shee Flora patience crakes: Thou lou'st a Man, pure loue forsakes, That God, his godlesse belly makes. 22 Rise wretch from this grose exstaie, A Clarke sole Epicure thinke I: No elegance can beautifie A shapelesse lumpe of gluttony. 23 His hart, sweet Cupids Tents reiects That onely mate and drinke affects: O Flora, all mens intelects Know Souldiers vowe shun those respects.
24 Meere helps for neede his minde suffiseth, Dull sleepe and surfets he despiseth: Loues Trumpe his temples exerciseth, Courage and loue, his life compriseth. 25 Who with like band our loues combineth? Euen natures law thereat repineth, My Loue, in conquests Palm wreaths shineth, Thine feast deforms, mine fight refineth. 26 Flora her modest face enrosed, VVhose second sile, more faire disclosed: At length, with moouing voyce shee losed VVhat Art in her stord brest reposed. 27 Phillis, thy fill of speech thou hast▪ Thy wit with pointed wings is grast▪ Yet vrgest not a truth so vast That Hemlocks, Lillies haue surpast. 28 Ease-louing Clarks thou holdst for deere, Seruants to sleepe and belly cheere: So Enuy, honor would enphere But giue me care, Ile giue thee answere. 29 So much inioyes this loue of mine, He nere enuies, or hirs, or thine, Household-stuffe, honny, oyle, corne, wine, Coyne, Iewels, plate, serue his designe.
42 Sharp is the wasting bane of war, The lot is hard, and straineth far, The life in stooping doubts doth iar To get such things as needfull are. 43 Knewst thou the guise, thou wouldst not say Shau'n hayre shamde Clarks, or black array, Wore higher honors to display, And that all sttes they ouer-sway. 44 All things should to my Clarke encline, Whose croune sustaines th'imperiall signe, Hee rles, and payes such friends as thine, And Laye, must stoope to men diuine. 45 Thou sayst, that sloth a Clarke disguiseth, Who (I confesse) base works despiseth▪ But when from cares his free minde riseth, Heauens course and Natures hee compriseth. 46 Mine Purple decks, thine Maile be digheth, Thine liues in warre, mine peace delighteth, Olde acts of Princes he reciteth, All of his friend, thinks, seekes, and writeth. 47 What Venus can, or Loues-wingd Lord, First knowes my Clarke, and brings me word, Musick in caes doth mine afford, Thine liues by rapine and the sword.
48 Heere speech and strife had both theyr ending, Phillis askt iudgment, all suspending, Much stirre they made, yet ceast contending, And sought a Iudge in homewards weding. 49 With countnances that equall beene, With equall maiestie beseene, With equall voyce, and equall spleene These Ladyes ward vpon the greene. 50 Phillis, a white robe beautifide, Flora, wore one of two hews dyde, Phillis vpon a Mule did ride, And Flora back a horse of pride. 51 The Mule was that which beeing create, Neptun did feede and subiugate: Which after fayre Adonis fae, He Venus sent to cheere her ste. 52 This, shee, the Queene of Iberine, (Phillis fayre Mother did resigne Since shee wa giuen to works diuine, Whence Phillis had the Mule in fine. 53 Who of the trappings asks and Bit The Mule, (though iluer) champing it, Know, all things were so richly fit, As Neptnes honor might admit.
56 Then Phillis, no decorum wanted, But rich and beautious, all eyes danted, Nor Floras vertue lesse enchanted, Who on a welthy Palfrey vanted. 57 Tamde with his raines, wun heauen for lightnes, Exceeding faire, and full of witenes: His breast Art deckt with diuers brightnes For lea black mixt, with Swan pure whitenes. 58 Young and in daintie shape digested, His lookes with pride, not rage inuested: His maine thin hayrd, his neck high-crested, Small eare, shor head, and burly brested. 59 His broad back stoopt to this Claks-loued, Which with his pressure nought was moued, Straite leggd, large thighd, and hollow houed, All Natures skill in him was proueed. 60 An Iuorie seate on him had place, A hoope of gold did it embrace Grauen: and the poitrell did A stone, that starre-like gaue it grace. 61 Inscription there allurde the eye With many a wondrous misterie Of auncient thing, made nouelie That neuer man did yet desry.
62 The God of Rhetoricks nuptiall Bowre Adornd with euery heauenly powre, The contract, and the mariage howre And all the most vnmeasurd dowre. 63 No place was there that figurde nought, That could through all the worke be sought, But more excesse of meruales wrought Then might inceede a humane thought. 64 The skill of Mulciber alone Engrau'd that admirable throne, Who looking stedfastly thereon, Scarce thought his hand such Art had shone. 65 The trappings wrought he not with ase, But all his paine employd to please, And left (to goe in hand with these) The Targe of great Aacides. 66 A styrrop for her feete to presse, And bridle-bosses he did aress, And added mines, in worths excesse Of his sweet Spouses golden 67 Thus on theyr famous Caualrie, These Prince-ome Damzels seemd to flye Theyr soft yong cheekballs to the eye, Are of the fresh vermion De.
68 So Lillies out of Scarlet pere, So Roses bloomde in Lady Vere, So shoote two wanton starrs yfere In the eternall-burning Sphere. 69 The Chyld-gods gracefull Paradise They ioyntly purpose to inuise, And louely emulations rise In note of one anothers guise. 70 Phillis to Flora laughter led▪ And Flora Phillis answered: Phillis, a Merlyn managed, A Sparhawke, Flora carried. 71 In little time, these Ladyes found A Groue with euery pleasure crownd, At whose sweet entrie did resound A Forde, that flowrd that holy ground. 72 From thence the sweet-breathd winds conuay Odors from euery Mirtle spray And other flowers▪ to whose aay A hundred Harps, and Timbrels play. 73 All pleasures, studie can inuent The Dames ares instantly present, Voyces in all sorts differet The foure parts, and the Dipent.
74 To tunes that from those voices flye With admirable harmonie, The Tymbrell, Harpe, and Psalterie Reioyce in rapting symphonie. 75 There did the Vials voice abounde, In Musicke Angelike profound, There did the Phi dispreden round, His voyce in many a variant sound. 76 All Birds with tunefull bosoms sing, The Black-bird makes the woods to ring, The Thrush, the laye, and shee in Spring, Rues the past rape of Thraces King. 77 Theyr sweet notes to the Musick plying▪ Then all the different flowrs descrying. The Odors in aboundance flying, Prou'd it the Bowre of Loue soft-lying. 78 The Virgins some-what entred heere, And sprinckled with a little feare, Theyr harts before that held Loue deere, In Cupids flames encreased were. 79 And while each winged Forrester Theyr proper rumors did prefer, Each Virgins minde made waite on her Applauses apt and singuler.
80 Deathles were hee could there repose; Each path his spicie Odor stroes Of Mirrh, and Synamon there groes, And of our blessed Ladyes Rose, 81 Each tree hath there his seuerall blisse, In fruits that neuer season misse: Men may conceiue how sweet Loue is, By that celestiall Court of his. 82 The dauncing companies they see Of young men, and of maydens free, Whose bodies were as bright in blee, As starrs illustrate bodies bee. 83 In which so meruailous a guise Of vnexpected nouelties, These Virgins bosoms through theyr eyes, Are danted with a quicke surprise. 84 Who stay theyr royall Steeds ou-right, And almost from theyr seats alight, Forgetting theyr endeuours quit With that proude rumors sweet affright. 85 But when sad Philmen, did straine Her rapefull-ruing breast againe▪ These Damz  hearing her coplaine, Are reinflamd in euery vaine.
86 About the center of the spring A sacred place is where they ing And vse theyr supreame worshipping, Of loues mere darting fiery King 87 There many a two-shapt companie Of Faunes, Nmphs, Sayes, meete and ply The Tibrell and the Psalterie Before Loues sacred maiestie. 88 There beare they Goblets, big with , And Coronets of Flowers combie, There Nimphs, and Faunes dey-diuine, Doth Bacchus teach to foote it fin. 89 Who keepe true measure with their Tht to the instruments doe , But old Siles playes not sweee In consort, but indents the streete. 90 The spring sleepe did his temple lod As on a long-ard Asse he rod, Laughters excesse to s him nod Dissolu'd the bosome of the God. 91 Fresh cups he euer calles vpon In sounds of perfection, With age and Bacchus oergon, They stop his voyces Organon.
92 Amongst this gamesome Crew is seene, The issue of the Cyprian Queene, Whose head and shoulders feathered beene, And as the starres his countnance sheene. 93 In his left hand his Bow hee bare, And by his side his Quiuer ware: In power hee sits past all compare, And with his flames the world doth dare. 94 A Scepter in his hand he held, With Chloris natiue flowrs, vntild, And Nectars deathlesse odors stild From his bright locks the Sun did guild. 95 The triple Graces there assist, Sustaining with their brests commist And knees that Tellus bosome kist The Challice of this Amoist. 96 These Vergins now approched neere, And worshipped, exempt from feare, Loues God, who was enirond there With youth, tha honord stiles did beare. 97 Theyr ioy is super excellent To see a Court so conflu, Whom Cupid seeing; theyr intent, He doth with greeting interuent.
98 He asks the cause for which they came: They confidently tell the same▪ And he giues prayse to either Dame That durst so great a war proclame. 99 To both he spake to make some pause Vntill theyr honorable cause Profoundly weighd in euery clause, Might be expland with all applause. 100 He was a God, which well they know, Rehersall needs it not bestow, They lite, and rest, and plainly show Where loue striues loue will maister growe 101 Loue, Lawes, and Iudges hath in fee, Nature, and Vse his Iudges be To whom his whole Courts censures flee Since past, and things to come they see. 102 These do the hart of iustice trie And show the Courts seueritie, In iudgment, and strong custom eye The Clarke is first for venerie. 103 Gainst which the Virgines, nothing stroe Since loues high voyce did it approue, So both to theyr abods remoue, But, as at first, rest firme in loue. Explicit Rhithmus Phillidis t Flor.
Certamen inter Phillidem & Floram. ANni parte florida coelo puriore Picta terra graminis vario colore Cum fugaret nubila nuncius aurorae Liquit sopor oculos Phyllidis & Flora Placuit virginibus ire spatiatum Nam soporem reiicit pectus sauciatum Aequis ergo passibus exeunt in praum Vt et locus facia ludum esse gratum Eunt ambae virgines & amb Regin Phyllis coma libera Flora compto crine Nec sunt form virginum sed form diuin Et respondent facies luci matutinae Nec stirpe, nec specie, nec ornatu viles Et annos & animos habent iuueniles Sed sunt parum impares et parum hostiles Nam huic placet Clericus & huic placet Miles Non est differentia corporis aut oris Sunt vnius voti, sunt vnius moris Omnia communia sunt itus et foris▪ Sola differentia modus est aris. Susurrabit modicum ventus tempestiuus Locus erat viridi gramine festiuus Et in ipso gramine defluebat riuus Viuus atque garrulo murmure lasciuus Ad augmentum decoris et caloris mins Fuit iuxta riuulum speciosa pius Venustata folio late pandens sins Nec intrare poterat calor peregrinus Consedere virgines, herba sedem dedit Phyllis iuxta riuulum, Flora longe sedit Et dum sedit vtraque et n sse redit Amor corda vinerat et vtramque ladit Amor est interius latens et occultus Et breui, certissimos elicit singultus Pallor genas inicit, alternantur vultus
Sed in verecundia fur  est Phyllis Et hanc Altera sic alter Ille sermo mutuus  habt ore Et est quadam series  de Amor est  et in ore Tandem Phillis incipt et arridi Florae Miles inquit incli  Paris, Ubimd militas et vbi moris O vita militiae vita singularis Sola digna gaudi Danai lris. Dum lla recoli militem amicum Flora (ridens) oculos, icet in obliqum Et in risu lquitur verbum Amo inquit poteras dicere mendicu Sed quid Alcibiades facit mea cura Res creata digni oni creatura Quem beauit omnibus gratiis natura O sola falicia Clericorum iura Floram Phyllis arguit de sermone duro Et sermone loquitur Floram commoturo Nam ecce virgunculam inquit credo puro Cuius pectus mobile seruit Epicuro Surge surge misera de furore fdo Solum esse Clericum Epicurum credo Nihil elegantiae Clerico concedo Cuius implet latera moles et pinguedo A castris Cupidinis cor habet remotum Qui somnum desiderat et cibum & potum O puella nobilis omnibus est notum Quantum distat militis ab hoc voto votum Solis necessariis Miles est contentus Somno, cibo, potui▪ non viit intentus Amor illum prohibet ne sit somnolentus Nam est vita Militis amor et iuentus
Quis amicos copulit nostros loro pari? Lex, Natura prohibent illos copulari Meum semper praemium dare tuo dari Meus nouit ludere, tuus epulari Haurit flora sanguinem vulta verecundo Et apparet pulchrior in risu scundo Et tandem eloquio reserat facundo Que corde conceperat artibus faecundo Satis inqui libere Phylli es loquuta Multum es eloquio vlox et acuta Sed non efficaciter verum prosequuta Vt per te praeualeat lilio cicuta Dixisti de Clerico qui indulgit sibi Seruum somni nominas & potus & ibi Sic sole ab inuido probitas describi Ecce parem pattere respondebo tibi Tot et tanta fator▪ &c. FINIS.
