5891 99857284 22982
Fruitfull Lessons, VPON THE PASSION, BV∣RIALL, RESVRRECTION, Ascension, and of the sending of the holy Ghost. GATHERED OVT OF THE FOVRE Euangelists: with a plaine exposition of the same. BY MILES COVERDALL. IOHN. 14.6. I am the waie, the truth, and the life no man commeth vnto  but by me. LONDON▪ Printe b Thomas . 593.
The Author to the Reader. SInce our humane imper∣fections are such, as one sinne driueth out another and the frailtie of our na∣tures is so great, as ha∣uing touched the brim of the Ocean thereof, we ne∣uer cease till we are ouer∣whelmed & drowned in the bottome of the same: since of our selues wee are but graftes of a corruptious tree, children of eternall darknesse, infidels who bowe the knee to Baal, hauing vncircumcised hearts and lying lippes, whose mindes are fixed on the world, and fastned on Mammon, I thought good (Christian Reader) considering the self loue in vs, which haue conuerted the Angels into deuilles, which (as Augustine witnesseth) hath builded the verie Babylon of contempt of God, to leuell out a waie for all men to tread, a glasse for all men to see, an Adamant wherewith all soules may be drawen to the beholding of their vices, the loathing of the same, and finally the amendement and hartie conuer∣sion
for their misdeeds. And for that it most euidently ap∣peareth, that the iustest man falleth oftentimes a daie, and they that discerne errors in themselues and seeing then that they are in the next step to amendement, it behoueth vs to consider the weaknesse which is in vs, how farre we are fallen and do fall from the protection of the iust, so that in the end we may in the spring▪ of repentance wash away originall and successive sinnes, which haue defiled our soules, and cleaning to the  corner stone, wheron our saith should be builded, withstand the peri of perdition, which our ghostly enemie hath raised against vs. And r that truth is neuer knowen but by his contra∣rie, and our nakednesse is not disclosed, vnlesse our eies be o∣pened, let vs examine our selues, and we shall find, that these are inseparable errours in vs, from which the iustest are not exempted, namely, blindnes, and corruptnes of iudgement,  spirit, mistrust in GOD, to be slacke and wearie in Gods seruice, defaming of Gods truth, not to haue God before the eies, surmising, vanitie  heart, curiositie and nicenesse, grudging in our heartes against the enemie, bitternesse, desire of vengeance, a mans good intent, greedines to be seen and praised, vainglorie, ambition, proper election, maintai∣ning of our owne and dislainfull, false, vnfaithfull wicked are, and  points and feats, wherwith the  the good men, that keepe themselues from . These and other innumerable vices shall e∣uery  good so euer he be) find in himselfe, if he search  vprightly and throughly to the bottome. then, that we finde our selues so vicious, altoge∣ther  poisoned, and wounded vnto death, we ought daie and night without ceasing, to complaine and lament before God, to watch and pray vnto God for remission of our sins,
yet should we not despaire of life. The true Phisition of our soules came downe from heauen, & through his passion hath he made vs a plaister for our wounds, onely let vs vse it and lay it to the sore. The faithfull Samaritane poureth oile and wine into our wounds, taketh vs vp to cure and to heale vs, onely let vs follow him, & fashion our selues after his image. He is the brasen serpent without sinne, whome with the eyes of faith we must behold hanging, and lift vp vpon the crosse for vs, hee taking our sinnes vppon himselfe, giueth vs his owne innocencie. If the burthen of sinne now oppresseth and grieueth vs, we ought to runne vnto him, he shall ease vs & giue vs rest, for his bloud washeth awaie our sinnes, him hath the father giuen vnto vs to be our righteousnesse and redemption. Besides this great treasure that God hath giuen vs in Christ, he is set foorth vnto vs, especially in his passion, for a patterne or example, whereby we may learne to die from sin, and finde a preseruatiue against vices to come. For selfeloue and high esteeming of a mans owne selfe is the wel-spring of all vice, Consider that Christ was not proude himselfe of his owne highnesse, but tooke vpon him the shape of a seruant, & come to serue vs, humbled him most lowly, loued not him∣selfe sought not his owne, desired not his honor, but the ho∣nor of his father: all despite and reproch fell vpon him. If we ponder this by saith, all greedy loue of our selues shall fall away. The obedience of Iesu in true beleefe considered, expel∣leth and healeth our disobedience, and the idolairie of our owne carnall heart. With his obedience couereth he the dis∣obedience of all men, so farre as we abide in the obedience of faith, that Christ be dearer vnto vs than the whole world, for the which cause we freely giue ouer our selues into his o∣bedience,
suffering all things for his sake. Pride and vaine∣glorie is healed through Christs humilitie and contempt, which he suffered for vs manifolde. Learne of me (saith he) for I am meeke and lowly of heart. Why are wee so greadie of temporal things, when Christ the Lord of heauen and earth became for vs so poore, hanging bare and naked vppon the crosse? The chast pure life of Iesus Christ expelleth in vs all vncleannesse of the flesh. Also his martirdome, anguish and trouble which in his flesh hee suffered for vs, quencheth the lust and concupiscence of the flesh. O how euill doth it become a beleeuer, to be irefull and greedie of vengeance, when his fore-runner, beeing in most humilitie like vnto a sheepe, praied for his enemies? Enuie and hatred is highly expelled, if we consider the excellent deepe loue of Iesu towards vs. Gluttonie and ex∣cesse of life shall fall awaie from vs, if we well remember that Christ for vs dranke vineger mixt with gall. As it is here shewed in certaine points, euen so against all vices and blemishes of the soule, there may remedie be sound in the passion of Christ, if it bee rightly vsed in the contemplation of faith. The old Adam ought we to lay aside, to mortifie the members vppon earth, and to put on Christ the Lord, as the new wedding garment. In the crosse ought to be our exercise, our ioy, comfort, and life. Herevnto also helpeth vs our heauenly father, who vnto vs his children (whom he most entirely loueth) suffreth ma∣nifold passions, afflictions, troubles, and anguishes, sicknesse, pouertie, and persecution to come: to keepe vs vppon the crosse, least we as negligent people gape for temporall earthie things. And if we will needs follow our owne lusts, he hedg∣eth our waie with thornes, nourturing and humbling vs through trouble, that we being tried and purified as the gold
in the fire, may crie and call vnto him, and that we may giue our earthly things, seeing we finde no quietnesse in them. He bringeth vs into the land of promise, howbeit through the wildernesse, through much trauell and labour. Blessed are they that in patience without murmuring, suffer the Lorde to worke, and doo faithfully follow him. All this, and more than I can saie, ought to be the con∣sideration and exercise, when we celebrate the supper of the Lord Iesu, that wee so sprinkle the bloud of Christ in our heartes, and drinke it into vs, that it may worke in vs, and bring forth fruit. Our eies and hearts we ought to lift vp in to heauen, and consider what the bread and wine pointeth vs vnto, namely, vnto the bodie of Christ, that was offered vp vpon the crosse for our sinnes, and to his bloud, that was shed for the washing awaie of our offences: and that we fashi∣on our selues vnto his image, and practise also such loue one towardes another. This is the proofe that Paul speaketh of, with the which a faithfull beleeuer ought to exercise himself before, and in the Lords supper examining well his faith and loue, which out of the loue of God towards vs, is kindled and increased. First ought a man to consider the excellent loue of our Lord Iesus Christ, who so loued vs, that he died for vs. And seeing that he biddeth vs to so high a feast of his grace we ought also to ponder the same, in such sorte, that wee bee thankfull vnto him, and prepare our selues thereafter. Saint Paul saith, that there is a feeding with milke, and a feeding with strong meate, which is to bee obserued accor∣ding to the nature and propertie of those that receiue the meate. And in the Church of God there be three sortes of men, as the same, by the high illuminated goodwise teacher Augustine, and by others is written. First, there be men, which hauing spent their former
time past, in pastime and wantonnesse of the world, and con∣sidering the carefull end thereof, (as they be inwardly mo∣ued by the grace of God) haue vndertaken to cease and re∣fraine from sinne, and from all occasions of sinne, & in most diligent wise, as neere as they can, with the assistance, grace and helpe of God, to be circumspect and warie thereof: albe∣it they are yet weake, and haue not so strong a spirite, as to laie aside and despise all worldly things out of hand. And these are the right true beginners of repentant and penitent persons: though they be not new beginners, yet are they vn∣to God the Lord so deare, that all things cannot sufficiently commend and praise it. This is witnessed vnto vs by the holy Gospell, of the vnthriftie sonne: who when with shamefull riot hee had wantonly consumed his inheritance, did in time of his ex∣treame hunger, conuert and turne againe to his louing Fa∣ther, and receiued not onely gracious forgiuenesse of his tres∣passe, but also speciall tokens of his fathers loue: as the gar∣ment, the kisse, the fat calfe, the sweete minstrelsie and me∣lodie. This is the first anker of true repentance. This is the first state concerning the blessed swineheard, who forsaking the hogges wiih the coddes, (draffe or swillinges) that hee sometimes greedily filled his belly withall, and returning to his louing father, is now in his first comming againe to his mercifull father, graciously taken vp, receiued and re∣warded. Who so now with this vnthriftie sonne forsaketh his sinnes, and comming agayne in true and heartie repen∣tance vnto God his most louing and gracious Father, saith meekely: O Father, I am not worthie to bee called thy sonne, for I haue sinned against heauen and before thee, O make nice one of thy hired seruants. To him shall the father
denie nothing. Who so nowe with an vnfained heart and mouth may speake this vnto God, and truely and vnfained∣ly seeketh Iesus, assuredly hee findeth him, and hath with him a cheerefull supper. Looke vnto whom God in his great mercie giueth such a tast of his geace, let him render thanks and praise vnto almightie GOD, let him nowe looke for it, that the Father who hath receiued him, will also nourture him in his owne schoole, and through manifolde aduersi∣ties furnish him, prepare him, and make him more perfect. Hee hath beene fedde with the milke, hee must learne also to knowe, what harde meate meaneth. Through aduersitie and trouble, some chaunces, hee must bee tempted and pro∣ued, whether hee haue ought in him of the blessed seede that groweth vpwardes vnto eternall life. Which thing shall well appeare and bee made manifest, if in time of temp∣tation and troubles, hee bee not choaked with the thornes, nor troden downe by the high waie side, nor withered a∣mong the stones, but founde fruitfull in a good and fertill ground. Other men there bee, which are called reformers, to whome belongeth somewhat more than there doth vnto the other. For like as it appertaineth to the first repentant or prnitent persons, that they continually and feruently, with the confession of their sinnes vnto God, with sorrowe and lamentation, with praier, watching, and chastising of the the bodie, doo breake out a waie from theyr olde sinnes, harnessing and arming themselues agaynst others for to come, and earnestly withstanding and forsaking their owne euill and naughtie customes, (if they minde to bring foorth fruite, and not to fall awaie againe:) Euen so the refor∣mers in the seconde order and manner, after the harde
rooting out of vice and wickednesse, must still exercise them selues in the will of God and in good works, seeking diligent∣ly experience thereof in holy Scripture, and of those teachers who by reason of long practise, and by the Scriptures, can de∣clare and teach the same waie. When these men in such a stedfast purpose to walke and practise themselues in the will of God with his grace and power, doe goe vnto the supper of the Lord, they inwardly with ioy and fruit of the godly feast are nourished and refreshed. For who so desireth to cleaue vnto vertue and to a godly life, shall no where find the same so euidently and plaine, as in Christs passion, whereof hee is mindfull at the supper with faith and thankesgiuing. The third sort of men are lled perfect: not that anie man here in time may be perfect, as to lacke nothing, or to haue no sinne in him, but therefore are they named perfect, because theyr exercise is such, that after long accustomate doing of vertuous deeds, after many spiritual fruits brought forth by them in patience, after many temptations, which they with the help of God haue ouercome. They haue so who∣ly humbled and cast downe themselues before God, being re∣conciled with him, that they are become one spirite with Christ their head, whom they cleaue vnto, whose crosse and holy passion they follow without fainting, so farre as theyr wit and power may suffer, being dead from the world & the flesh, following onely the Lord Iesu Christ, suffering with him, and liuing with him. These with their minds & harts step somwhat higher than the others, hauing their dwelling in heauen, in the sweet contemplation & beholding of Gods Almightinesse, wisedome, and goodnes, with feruent deuo∣tion. Which men also by inioying of the said feast, according to their beleefe and ferue loue, receiue the more excellent ruites, whereby they may expell the temptations that they
like not. For the deuill keepeth no holy daie, he sleepeth not, runneth about as a roaring lion: he ceaseth not, and there∣fore these men continually get them to their weapons, with the consideration of the passion of Christ. Abraham the good friend of God, must stil driue awaie the rauenous birds from the sacrifice, till the Sunne goe downe, and till a man cheerefully saie, In peace will I laie me downe and take my rest, &c. This probation must be well taken heed vnto, for many men not iustly considering themselues, neither right discer∣ning this meate from others, receiue the foode of life vnto death. Not that this holy bread was instituted and ordain∣ed of Christ, to hurt any man, but because the euil man doth wickedly receiue that which is wholsome, & abuseth it tho∣rough vnbeleefe. Therefore iustly doeth Paul exhort, that there be first had a diligent examination of a mans selfe, & that then he eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup. Thus let euerie man take good heed to his owne state and vocati∣on, that this banket may set him forward, not vnto his hurt but to eternall life. Who so taketh not heed vnto this difference, & to him selfe, as (alas) carnall people do, which are not spiritually in∣structed. The same faileth oft in many things, and vnder∣taketh to flie high, yea, higher than his knowledge & power may attaine. Hereof then it also proceedeth (as we see before our eyes) that so fewe folkes come to steadfast amendement, namely, euen hereof, that when men are not exercised in di∣scerning of Gods matters from others, a mad headie motion of sensualtie prouoketh them inordinatly to sitte highest at the table, wheras yet they are not worthie of the lowest place, and so will they forthwith possesse the seate roiall, afore they haue found the asses, or kept the sheepe, as of Dauid & Saul
in figure it is read. But thus ought it not to bee: for though the grace of the holy Ghost vse not long fetches about, yet commeth no man sodainly to the happiest step. I speake after the common course, as it beseemeth vs to talke and do in the Church of God, namely, after the ordinance which he hath appointed vs. Behold Saint Paul being so perfect in the law, that the world could not accuse him, being also chast, earnest, feruent and well exercised in all vertues, whom God that had sepa∣rated him from his mothers wombe, would cal to his seruice. Though he was taken vp into the third heauen, and saw se∣crets that no man can expresse, yet doth not he trust so much thereto, as (by reason of that great grace) to magnifie him∣selfe, and to take vpon him the office of preaching, before he being taught at Gamaliels feet, and baptised and instruc∣ted of Ananias, had perceiued in himselfe, and proued, that same which he afterwards out of the perfectnes of the spirit, might distribute abrode vnto al Christendome. This is per∣aduenture laughed to scorne of the vnexpert, proud, world∣lynesse: but who so hath eares circumcised with the feare of God, will thinke more vpon the matter. He that will sit now at the table of the high king let him diligently consider what hee receiueth in his soule through faith, namely, the body end bloud of Iesus Christ, which fee∣deth and nourisheth him to eternall life, and draweth him to God, altereth him, and maketh him steadfast, which the outward bread taken with the moueh, doth point and leade vnto: yea, let vs ponder, how great loue, and what an exam∣ple Christ ther setteth before him, that he also must prepare the like: that is, that he to his power must follow the loue, life and passion of Christ, to the intent, that hee being wounded with Christs loue, & fastned with him vpon the crosse, may
abide in him vnto the end. For in the passion of Christ, is the instrustion of the way which we ought and must follow vnto eternall life. There al∣so is information where and how the same waie and the e∣uerlasting truth is shewed & found. Thus the penitent sin∣deth the waie, the reformer the vndoubted vnwandring truth: the perfect, the verie life eternall, which is Christ Ie∣sus, and there is eternall peace. God graunt, that all they which reade this little booke, and consider this matter, may so burne in loue and feruent deuotion, that they con∣tinue and liue in Christ, and he in them for euer, Amen.
THE PASSION OF CHRIST, Out of the holy Euangelists. THE feast of sweete bread (which is also called Easter) drue nigh, namely, after two daies. Then sayd Iesus to his disci∣ples: Know ye, that after two daies shall be Easter, and the sonne of man shal be betraied and crucified. At the same time were the chiefe priests and councell gathered together in the pallace of the high Priest, whose name was Caiphas, and there they counselled, how they might craftily apprehend take, and kill him. Howbeit they feared the people. Therfore sayd they together, Not on the holie daie, least there bee an vproare among the people. But Satan was entered into Iudas (called Iscarioth) one of the twelue, who went out to the high Priests & rulers, intending to deliuer him vnto them: therefore how he would deliuer Iesus vnto them, he told them and sayd: What will you giue me and I will deliuer him vn∣to you. When they heard that, they were gladde, and agreed with him, promising him thirtie pence. Then promised hee them, & sought from thence forth oportunity, how he might
deliuer Iesus vnto them handsomely and without any vp∣rour. But afore the feast which is called Passah, Iesus know∣ing that his houre was come, and that hee should depart out of this world vnto the Father, while he loued his owne that were in the world, he loued them vnto the end. On the first day of sweet bread, when they offer passah, the Disciples came to Iesu and said: where wilt thou that we go and prepare Passah for thee? Then sent he two of his dis∣ciples: namely, Peter and Iohn, saying: Goe and prepare for vs, that we may eat Passah. They said: where? then said he: Goe into the citie to one, beholde when yee enter in, one shall meet you bearing a pitcher with water, follow him into the house that he entreth into, and say vnto the housholder: The maister saith vnto thee, my time is now heere, that I will eat Passah with thee: Where is now the place where the multi∣tude shall be kept? Where is the Parlour that I shall eat Pas∣sah in with my Disciples? then shall hee shewe you a great Parlour that is paued, there make ye ready. So the Disciples went and found as the Lord had tolde them, and they made readie the Passah. At euen came Ie∣sus with the twelue, and when it was time he sate him down at the table and the twelue with him. Now when he sat at the table with his disciples, and they did eate, hee saide: I haue greatly longed and heartely de∣sired to eat this Passah with you afore I suffer: For I say vn∣to you, that now from hence forth I will not eat of it till it bee fulfilled in the kingdome of God. Now as they did eat, Iesus tooke the bread, gaue thankes and brake it, gaue it to his Disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my bodie which shalbe betraied and deliuered for you, doe
this in remembraunce of mee. Likewise also when they had eaten, hee tooke the cuppe, rendered thankes, and gaue vn∣to them, saying: Take and diuide among you, and drinke ye all thereof. This is my bloud of the new Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, to the forgiuenesse of sinnes. I say vnto you, that from henceforth I shall not drinke of the fruite of the vine, vntill the day that I shall drinke it new with you in the kingdome of my Father. And they all dranke therof. Now followeth the doctrine and meditation. HEre should we children of beleefe, diligently ponder and consider, what Christ hath done for our sakes: namely, that hee, when hee had fulfilled his ministrati∣on committed to him of the father, and nowe would offer vp himselfe vpon the crosse for the sinnes of the world, and with his owne death deliuer mankind frō the captiuity of
Satan, and from eternall death declared, how he lo∣ued his owne vntill the end,Iohn. 13. Luk. 22. and with what desire he longed to eate the Easter lambe with his disciples, before hee suffered. Giuing them thereby to vnder∣stand,1. Cor. 5. Esay. 53. Iohn. 1 that he was the true pascal lambe, which being slaine for vs, shuld take awaie the sinnes of the world, that the figures of the olde Testament might bee re∣duced into the truth. That like as the Iews (to whom with a prescribed ordinaunce it was commaunded, yeerely to eate the Easter lambe) did the same for a memoriall of their deliuerance out of Aegypt:Exod. 12. So we beleeuers also, might in the new Testament, haue a remembrance and exercise of the gracious redemp∣tion, whereas we by his death are deliuered from the power of darknes, of the deuil, & of sinne, & brought to eternall life. And to the intent now that the remembrance of such excellent benefits, grace, and merites of the pas∣sion of Christ, might euer be fresh and new with his disciples and all beleeuers, our Lorde Iesus Christ, when he now would go vnto death, and paie the ran∣some for the sinnes of all the world, he then did eate the Easter lambe with his Disciples, to finish the sha∣dowe of the olde Testament: and that he might bee remembred thereby, he instituted the bread & wine, for a sacrament and memoriall of his hoie body and bloud. Seeing then, that wee are cleansed, deliuered, and redeemed with so deare & worthie a treasure; name∣ly, 67. with the pretious bloud of Iesus Christ, the vnde∣filed
lambe:1 Pet. 1. 1. Iohn 1. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 9. wee ought neuer to forget such an high benefite, but at all times with thankfulnes to remem∣ber, that Christ our Paschall lambe, was slayne and offered vp for vs vpon the crosse,1. Pet 2. that we from hence forth should walke in purenesse, singlenes and inno∣cencie of life: and that when wee in the Supper, by true faith do eate his bodie, and drinke his bloud, we might through him be so strengthened and fedde to eternall life, as to abide and liue in him for euer. For he is the bread of life that came downe from heauen,Iohn. 6. to nourish and strengthen our weake and hungrie soules, yea to make vs dead to liue againe. But then eate we his flesh, and then drinke we his bloud, when wee through true beleefe do ponder & consider, what hee hath doone and suffered for our sakes: then are we partakers of his supper & feast, whē we for his sake do liue, as he did for his Fathers sake. He gaue himselfe whole vnto vs: so ought we to giue our selues whole vnto him, and to our neighbour. To him through beleefe, to our neighbour through charitable loue. Through faith we abide in him:Iohn. 15. by working loue hee abideth in vs. The more wee loue, the more enioy we of this meate: the more wee be∣leeue, the more we loue. In this shall all men knowe that we are his Disciples, if we loue one another.Iohn. 13. 1. Ioh 2.3.4 God is loue, and hee that abideth in loue, abideth in God,Iohn. 15. & God in him. What greater loue can there be, than to giue his owne life for vs? The death of Christ ought neuer to come out of our heartes: that wee may doe and suffer all thinges for his sake that dyed for vs.
The second part. WHen supper was ended, after that the deuil had put in the heart of Iudas Iscarioth Simons son, to betray him: Iesus knowing that the father had giuen all things into his hands, & that he was come frō God, & went to God, he rose from Supper, and laid aside his vpper garments, & took a towel & girt himselfe. After that poured he water into a Bason, and began to wash his Disci∣ples feet, and to wipe them with the towell wherewith he was girt. Then came hee to Simon Peter, and Peter said vnto him: Lord, dost thou wash my feet? Iesus answered and said vnto him, what I doe thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know heereafter: Peter said vnto him, thou shalt neuer wash my feet. Iesus answered him: If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me, Simon Peter said vnto him: Lord, not my feet onely, but also my hands and my head. Iesus said vnto him, Hee that is washed needeth not saue to wash his feete, but is cleane euery whit: and ye are cleane, but not all, for hee knew who should betray him: therefore said he, ye are not al clean. So after he had washed their feete, and receiued his clothes, and was set downe, he said vnto them againe: wt you what I haue done to you? Ye call me maister and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. If I then your Lord and maister haue wash∣ed your feet, ye also ought to wash one anothers feet: for I haue giuen you an ensample, that yee should doe as I haue done to you. Verely verely I say vnto you: The seruaunt is not grea∣ter than his maister, neyther the messenger greater than he that sent him. If yee vnderstand these thinges, happie are ye, if ye do them.
Doctrine and fruite. HEere ought we diligently to consider the vn∣speakeable and feruent loue of our Lord Iesus Christ,Loue. who vntill the ende leaueth nothing vndone that may serue for our welfare.Humblenes. Likewise al∣so should we ponder and regard the meeke lowlines of him, in that hee the king of heauen doth humble himselfe, euen to wash his Disciples feete: which thing is accounted base and vile amongst men: yea euen vnto the man that betraied him, is not he asha∣med, neyther refuseth to shew such lowlines and worke of loue. By this we learne, to declare all workes of charita∣ble loue vnto our neighbor, and not to bee ashamed (how high soeuer we be) meekly to do our neighbor seruice, though he be poore, base, and small in repu∣tation, yea, albeit hee hath already hurt and betrayed vs. We ought to learne with Christ our head, to doe good: not onely to our brethren and friends, but al∣so to our aduersaries, enemies, euill willers, and such as loue vs not: euen vnto them should wee shewe friendship, seruing them, being gentle, milde, and lo∣uing vnto them. We must pray vnto the Lorde, that he wil graunt vs grace to fulfill and do, that we heare and read of him. Furthermore, considering that we daily perceiue in our selues spottes and blemishes of sinne, so that our feet (that is to say, our affections & desires) while wee walke in the myerie waie, are still continually defiled and stayned: we ought therefore incessantly
to watch and to call vnto God, that he with the wa∣ter of his grace, will vouchsafe to make cleane our feete, and wash away the mire of earthie and carnall spottes: that wee in the purenesse of faith may abide in Christ our head, and he in vs. Of the Sermon that Christ made vnto his Disciples after the Supper. The exhor∣tation and warning of Christ.THen saide Iesus vnto his Disciples: This night shall you all bee offended because of me. For it is written: I shall smite the shepheard, and the sheepe of the flock shal be scattered But when I am risen againe, I will go before you into Galilee. Peter answered,The pre∣sumption & rashnes of Peter. and said vnto him: And though they all bee of∣fended because of thee, yet will not I be so. Then said Iesus to him: Verely I say vnto thee, that this night before the cocke crowe twise, thou shalt denie me three times. Vpon this spake Peter further: Though I should die with thee, yet will I not denie thee: and so said all the Disciples likewise. But Iesus said: I speake not of you all: I know whom I haue chosen. He that eateth bread with me, shall lift vp his heele against me. This I tell you afore hand, ere it come to passe: that when it is done, ye may beleeue, that I am he. Verely verelie I say vn∣to
you, he that receiueth him whom I send, receiueth me:The dignitie and worthi∣nes of the disciples. The fore∣knowledge of Christ. & who so receiueth me, receiueth him that sent me. When Iesus had spoken this, he was troubled in spirit, & protested and saide: Verely verely I say vnto you, one of you shall betray me, yea euen he that eateth with me. The Disci∣ples looked one vppon another, and doubting of whome hee spake, they were very sorie and dismaied, and began to say one after another: Lord is it I? Then said Iesus: One of the twelue, euen he that dippeth his hand with me in the platter, he shall betray mee. The sonne of man goeth, as it is written of him: but woe vnto him by whom the sonne of man is be∣traied. Better it were for him, that he neuer had been borne.The pre∣sumptuous∣nes of Iudas. Then said Iudas that betraied him, Lord, is it I? Then spake Iesus: Thou hast said. One whom Iesus loued among the Disciples, lay vpon Ie∣sus lappe. To him beckened Peter, and said: Who is he that he speaketh of? Now when he leaned on Iesus brest, he sayde vnto him: Lord, who is it? Iesus aunswered: He it is, vnto whom I shall reach the soppe. And when hee had dipped in the bread, he gaue it vnto Iudas Simon Iscarioth:Treason commeth of the deuill. and after the soppe entred the deuill into him. And Iesus said vnto him: That thou doest, doo it quickly. None of those that sate at the table, perceiued why he spake this. Some thought, see∣ing Iudas had the purse, that Iesus had commaunded him to buy some thing necessarie at the feast, or to giue some thing vnto the poore. Now when hee had taken it, hee went out im∣mediately, and it was night. Now when hee was gone foorth, Iesus saide: Now is the sonne of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified by him, then shall God glorifie him in himselfe, and shall straight way glorifie him. Little children, I am yet a
small time with you. Ye shall seeke me, and as I said vnto the Iewes, whither I go, ye cannot come. And now I say vnto you: A new commaundement I giue you, to loue one ano∣ther as I haue loued you, that yee euen so loue one another. Herein shall all men know and perceiue, that yee are my Dis∣ciples, if ye haue loue among your selues. Then saide Simon Peter: Lord, whither goest thou? Iesus aunswered him, and said: Whither I go, thou canst not followe mee now, but thou shalt followe me hereafter. Then said Peter vnto him: Why may not I now follow thee? I will ieopard my life for thee Ie∣sus aunswered: Wilt thou ieopard thy life for mee? Verelie, verelie I say vnto thee: Afore the cock crow, thou shalt deny mee thrise. Doctrine and fruite. GOod vertuous children should harken most diligently vnto the wordes of their father, and fasten them in their hartes: but specially those wordes which hee speaketh and committeth vnto them, now when hee mindeth by death to departe from them, and to take his leaue of them. For the same wordes (beeing the last) pierce verie deepe in∣to the heart, and are neuer forgotten. Seeing then, that we are Gods children, and Christ heere nameth vs so to be, with his Disciples: wee ought verie dili∣gently to ponder and consider all his words and do∣ctrine, but specially such as hee vttered vnto them, when hee now would goe to his passion. For there shal we find an ardent, earnest, and feruent doctrine, full of most excellent, godlie, and inestimable loue,
proponed and thrust into their heartes, with wordes sweeter than honie. In this Oration bringeth hee foorth specially that same, which most of all concer∣neth his Disciples. First the eternal wisedome decla∣reth, that hee is ignorant of nothing, that vnto him there is nothing hid. Hee knoweth what shall hap∣pen vnto them through weakenesse of the flesh, and feare of men: albeit our feeblenes and imbecillitie doth alwaies breake foorth, presume, and brag more, than wee euer are able to performe, as wee haue ex∣ample in Peter. Such headie rashnesse the Lorde re∣buketh, admonishing vs of our owne weakenesse, and fall. Moreouer, wee ought to consider in Christ our head and fore-runner, how earnestly, and louingly, he mentioneth and warneth the traytour, setting his great offence before his eyes, and alwaies touching him, to remoue him from his wicked purpose. Yet maketh hee mention of him, and of the vice, in such sort, that hee neuer desireth his hurt, but onely his conuersion and amendment. His desire is, that hee were reformed, not that hee should be bewrayed, or that any harme should happen vnto him by him or others. Such lenitie and gentlenes ought wee also to shewe and declare vnto our enemies, and those that hurt vs: if it only concerne vs, we should not be desirous of vengeaunce. And though wee all ought sore to mourne in the Church, that is to saye, in the Christian congregation, if there be transgres∣sors and naughty people, applying our diligence the best we can, that such bee not therein: yet whereas
their vices be secret, and as yet not opened, we ought in loue and patience to beare and suffer them vntill the haruest, when the Lorde shall purge and cleanse his stoore. Besides this, wee ought not to cease with warning and aduertisement, with correction & do∣ctrine, that they may leaue off from their obstinate wickednes. And when the congregation of God through his grace is quite of such euill people, and discharged of such wicked blemishes, God must bee thanked, and diligence applyed, that no wicked thing breede therein againe. Loue.But aboue all things must we regard that princi∣pall and new commaundement which Christ giueth vs; namely, vpon the loue, that he after a new sorte hath declared and performed: by the which loue he reneweth those that are his, and plentifully indueth them through the holy Ghost, whome hee giueth in their hartes. Loue comprehendeth and fulfilleth all lawes: therefore Christ leaueth all other commaun∣dements, and admonisheth vs onely of loue. Loue hath he himselfe shewed vs afore-hand: of him must we learne to loue. Loue is the assured and vnfailing euidence of the children of God. Who so hath not it, though he had all other vertues, yet hath he nothing, neither is it profitable to him that hee hath. If he haue loue, then hath he all thinges that are necessary for his health & saluation. Therfore ought we to regard nothing so much as loue. There is no∣thing more acceptable, nothing more perfect, no∣thing better in heauen and earth, than loue: for it is
of God, and may rest no where else but in God. On∣lie loue maketh vs godly, and shapeth vs likest vnto God: namely, that loue which springeth and grow∣eth out of a pure heart, out of a good conscience, and of an vnfeined faith. Neuertheles wee must loue one another, not with wordes onely, and with tongues, but with the deede, and in the trueth, euen with our whole harts, as Christ loued vs. IESVS said vnto his Disciples: Let not your hartes bee troubled. If ye beleeue in God, beleeue in mee. In my Fa∣thers house are many mansions. If it were not so, I would haue told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come againe, and receiue you e∣uen vnto my selfe, that where I am, ye may be also: and whi∣ther I go ye know, and the way ye know. Then said Thomas: Lord, we wote not whither thou goest: and how is it possible for vs to know the way? Then said Iesus: I am the way, the truth, and the veritie. No man commeth vnto the Father, but by me. If ye had knowne me, yee had knowne my Father also. And now ye know him, and haue seene him. Philip said vnto him: Lord, shew vs the Father, and it sufficeth vs. Ie∣sus said vnto him: Haue I beene so long time with you, & yet hast thou not knowne me? Philip, he that hath seene me, hath seene the Father. And how saiest thou then: Shew vs the Father? Beleeuest thou not, that I am in the Father, & the Father in me? The words that I speake vnto you, I speak not of my selfe, but the Father that dwelleth in me, is he that doth the workes. Beleeue me, that I am in the Father, & the Father in me. At least beleeue me for the verie workes sake. Verely verely I say vnto you: he that beleeueth on mee, the
workes that I do, the same shall he do also, and greater works than these shall he do, because I go vnto my Father. And whatsoeuer ye aske in my name, that will I doo, that the Fa∣ther may be glorified by the Sonne. If ye shall aske any thing in my name, I will do it. Doctrine and fruite. WHen the Disciples of Christ heard of his death and departing, what trouble should fall vpon them, and what should happen vnto them through the weakenes of the flesh, they were verie heauie and dismayed, for they had great loue vnto the Lorde, and loath were they to departe from him, and yet might they not followe him at this time.Aduersitie. Therfore louingly doth the Lord comfort and strengthen them, saying; Be not afraide, let not your heart be troubled. This comfort is spoken vnto vs all: for while wee liue heere, wee must looke for much trouble and aduersitie, whereof springeth many times heauines, feare and vnpatiencie in our flesh. Therefore Christ, who corporally is absent frō vs,Patience. but present among vs with his grace, speaketh vn∣to vs inwardly by his spirit in our hearts, or outward∣ly by his word and exhortation, comfortably streng∣thening, and mightily comforting our feeblenes, gi∣uing vs gladnesse also in sorrow. To be without aduersitie (if it please God other∣wise) is not good for vs: to be rash and heady is hurt∣full. Therefore bringeth he vs in betweene feare & hope, that we should turne neither to the right hand
nor to the left. Much aduersitie suffereth he to come vnto vs, so that oft times fearefulnes and sorrow fal∣leth on vs: but this keepeth vs in his awe,Meeknes. cutteth our combe, bringeth downe our pride, and humbleth vs. Out of this wee learne, that if any humane infirmitie and feeblenes fall vppon vs, as it did vpon the Disci∣ples in the Lordes passion, wee shall not vtterly des∣paire, nor fall away through fearfulnes: but remem∣ber, that in this time it happeneth so of course, that wee must suffer and beare much trouble and aduersi∣tie, to the intent, that the glorie and power of GOD may bee opened in our weakenesse: and yet in all aduersitie must wee bee manly and stout, valiaunt∣ly fighting for his names sake. And though of weak∣nesse we bee fallen in the field, yet will he haue com∣passion vpon vs, and graciously forgiue our fall.The feare of God. For who would not bee afraide to fall, when the earnest and feruent Apostle Peter fell so sore, and all the o∣ther Disciples fledde from the Lorde? If this chaun∣ced to the beloued Disciples, no man need to thinke the contrary, but the like may happen vnto him. Hee that standeth, let him stande fast in the feare of God, and looke that he fall not. Christ vnto his owne that stande in this conflict and daungerous battaile,Faith. giueth the shield or target of faith, which they cast vp, and receiue all strokes & shotte therein. Beleeue ye in mee (saith he.) Who so beleeueth in Christ, beleeueth in God, for Christ is God. This faith giueth strength, and ouercommeth all aduersitie. As if Christ would say; Bee not afraide by reason of my bodily absence. Thogh ye see me no
more frō henceforth with bodily eyes, yet with my grace and comfort will not I forsake you, but be with you vntill the end of the world. I wil alway remaine with you: Onely looke that ye beleeue in mee, con∣tinuing and cleauing fast vnto mee with the beleefe of the hart, so will I defend, deliuer, and saue you for euer. Be not afraid for anie aduersitie: put your con∣fidence in mee. After your trouble, there is prepared for you an excellent great ioy, and an exceeding vn∣speakeable reward.Eternall re∣ward. For in my Fathers house are ma∣ny dwellings, which from euerlasting haue been pre∣pared for all the elect, that beleeue in me, and follow mee vnder the crosse. I will not deceiue you, I will shew you no vnfaithfull touch, I will not disappoint you, into no fools paradise nor false hope wil I bring you. If the mansions were not prepared for you in my Fathers house, I would tell it you: but doubt ye not in my promise, fall ye not off from faith & hope, stay your beleefe and affiance stedfastly vppon mee, hope vndoubtedly for the dwellings to come, which are ordained and prepared of my Father for you. Heere is nothing but miserie and trouble, here is no abiding, no dwelling, but a pilgrimage. Heere ye are among straungers: but in my Fathers house are ma∣ny dwellinges, not onely for mee, but also for you. And forasmuch as now through my death I will fur∣nish and perfectly open and make an entraunce into the same dwellings, which were prepared for you of my Father afore the creation of the world: bee not you therefore dismayed by reason of my death.Christes death our life. My death shall bee your life and saluation. Through my
death go I before you, & make you a way vnto hea∣uen. Looke what the Father of his gratious goodnes hath ordained for you from euerlasting, that will not hee giue you, but through mee. Therefore must I die, and with my death open you the entrance vn∣to life. And albeit that through my death and ascension I shall corporally depart from you, yet will I not faile you, neither forsake you.The fruite of the death of Christ. Like as by my death I open vnto you the entrance into the heauenly mansions: so will I send you my holie spirite, who shall furnish you, and make you meete for such dwellings. That I go from you, it is doone for your wealth: therefore be not sorie, that I open the dwellings vnto you: I wil come to you againe, and receiue you to my selfe, that ye may alwaies be with me in my Fathers king∣dome. For he that serueth me, shall also bee eternally with mee in my Fathers house: thither will I bring you through my power and grace: feare yee not, & beleeue in me. Thus ye know whither I go, namely, vnto the Father, to worke your welfare: yee knowe also through what way yee must followe mee, euen through faith and aduersitie. Abide yee stedfast in faith, and put your trust in me, so will I be your faith∣full mediatour and atturney in the presence of God my Father. And if we would say as Thomas did, that we know not the way, the Lord Iesus instructeth vs further,Christ is the onely way. & saith: that he is the way, the truth, and the life. This ought we poore sinners well to fasten in our hartes, that Christ is the onely way which bringeth vs vnto
God, and that no man may come vnto the father but by him. We should not therefore erect or choose vn∣to our selues anie other waie. Onely by Christ must we come vnto God: this hath hee spoken that is the truth it selfe, & cannot lie. In the way is he our guide, and by it he leadeth vs vnto himselfe, and so by him∣selfe vnto God. Thorough this waie we come to life, and though we must die in aduersitie for his sake, yet in him we finde eternall life, for hee is the life and re∣surrection, Who so beleeueth on him cannot die, but commeth out of death into life, and though hee die, yet shall he liue in him euerlastingly. Furthermore, we must take sure hold vpon Christs promise, which in life and death shal strengthen and comfort vs, in that he promiseth vs he will giue vs all that we desire in his name. Wherefore in all our ne∣cessitie and trouble, we ought to haue recourse onely vnto him, or vnto God his father, in his name. And then doe we praie in his name, when wee desire that which may serue to the honour of his father, that the father may be honored through the sonne, and in the sonne, when we desire such wholesome good things as the spirit of Christ moueth vs vnto. All this doth stirre vp in vs patience, peace, ioy in the holy Ghost, beleefe in Christ, who is our God & had, whom by his doctrine and wonderful miracles we haue learned to be verie good in deede. The ho∣ly Scripture also both of the old and new Testament doth sufficiently declare the same, as Esa. 7.9.42.49.62. Iere 23.33. Mich. 5. Zach. 13. Mala. 3. What doth hee els in his whole Gospell, but eui∣dently
and strongly proue, that Iesus is verie God? as in the 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Chapters, yea, in all. Christ calleth himselfe the sonne of God, & tea∣cheth euery where, that we ought to beleue on him: now if he were not verie true God, then had hee de∣ceiued vs, then had he taught vs wrong, & then were he himselfe a false teacher, for wee must beleeue in none saue onely in God. If Christ nowe were not God, how should wee beleeue in him? If he were a false teacher, then woulde not the father haue com∣manded vs to heare him: then had not he spoken frō heauen these wordes, This is my dearely beloued sonne, heare him: then had not hee also confirmed his cause with miracles, raised him vp from death, taken him vp into heauen, and set him on his right hand: For he hateth all lyers, and hath no pleasure in the wicked. Iohan. 8. Afore Abraham was, I am. Christ sayth, that the father hath giuen him all power in heauen and earth. Matth. 28. Which sentence alone, were sufficient and strong inough, to proue, that Christ is God, for God giueth his glorie and honor to none o∣ther, Esa. 42. he sayth also, that what the father hath, it is his, Ioh. 17. And Iohn. 20. sayth Thomas vnto Christ: My Lord and my God, by him were all things crea∣ted, Iohn. 1. Col. 1. Then must he needs be God, for no creature is the maker or creatour of all things. Paule sayth, He is the wisedome of God. 1. Corinth. 1. The wisedome of GOD is eternall, Prouerbes. 8. Eccle. 24. Romanes, 1.9. In the Epistle to the Hebrues, what doth Paule else euen from the beginning, vntill hee come farre within it, but bring in testimonies,
that Christ is verie God? Iohn saith: Euerie spirite which confesseth, that Iesus came in the flesh, is of God. Out of the which it followeth, that as concer∣ning his diuine nature, hee was from euerlasting a∣fore he came in the flesh. Item, Paule to the Hebrews saith: God tooke vpon him the seede of Abraham: then must hee needes be eternall God, before the hu∣manitie was. As also Iohn saith: The word was God, and the word became man. Item: No man hath seen God at any time. The sonne of God which is in the Fathers bosome, hee hath opened it vnto vs. Iohn. 3. Saith Christ: No man ascendeth into heauen, saue hee that came downe from heauen. Now canst thou not say, that hee came downe as touching his hu∣mane nature, for that tooke hee first vpon him in the Virgin Mary, Luke. 1. Then must it needes bee true, that he came downe concerning his Godhead: as he oft saith, I came forth from the father. And Paul Phil. 2. He tooke vppon him the shape of a seruant. Who? God. Also Iohn. 17. he saith: Glorifie thou me (ô Fa∣ther) with the glorie and honour, which I had with thee afore the world was created. And 1. Iohn. 5. Wee knowe that the Sonne of God is come, and hath gi∣uen vs vnderstanding to knowe him, who is the true God. And we are in him that is true, euen in his Son Iesus Christ: the same is the true God, and the eter∣nall lfe. Seeing then that God hath giuen vs his Sonne to bee our righteousnes, our sanctification, sauiour, re∣deemer, raunsome, life, light, and head, to beleeue & trust in him, and finally by him to be saued, hee must
needs then be the true liuing God, els might not, nei∣ther should our hart trust nor cleaue vnto him. This ought a beleeuing heart, fully and well to take holde of, and steadfastly to stand therevpon. IF ye loue me keepe my commaundements, and I will pray the father, and hee shall giue you another comforter, that hee may bide with you for euer: euen the spirite of truth, whom the world cannot receiue, because the world seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, and shalbe in you, I will not leaue you comfortlesse, but will come to you. Yet a little while and the world seeth me no more, but ye see me, for I liue, and yee shall liue. That daie shall ye know that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you: He that hath my commaundements and keepeth them, the same is he that loueth me: and he that loueth me, shall be loued of my father: and I will loue him, and will shewe mine owne selfe vnto him. Iudas said vnto him (not Iudas Isca∣rioth) Lorde what is the cause that thou wilt shewe thy selfe vnto vs and not vnto the worlde? Iesus answered and said vnto him, if a man loue me he will keepe my sayings, and my Father will loue him, and wee wil come vnto him, and wil dwell with him. He that loueth me not, keepeth not my say∣ings: and the wordes which yee heare, are not mine, but the Fathers which hath sent me. Doctrine and fruite. CHrist promiseth his Disciples (that is, such as beleeue on him) that he will giue them what∣soeuer they make peticion for, or desire: yea, if
they loue him. For faith without loue, is dead, & hath no strength. Where there is faith in man, there follo∣weth loue. Many of vs say: Wee beleeue in Christ, and we loue him, yet we keepe not his commaunde∣ments. Such men ought well to note the wordes that Christ heere speaketh:He that lo∣ueth wor∣keth. Who so loueth me, keepeth my commaundements. The Disciples thought, that they loued Christ right, because they were sorie for his departing: but Christ teacheth vs, that loue con∣sisteth in the keeping of his commaundements. If we will declare our loue towardes GOD, it must not be done onely with word and tongue, but with kee∣ping of his precepts.Psal. 34. The eies of the Lord behold the righteous, and his eares consider their prayers. God will not, that we (whome hee through his grace hath admitted for his own children, and purified through faith) should goe idle. Faith, which God giueth vs in our heart, standeth not idle: wee haue for this pur∣pose receyued it, euen to keep his commandements. Now is it his commaundement,Gods com∣mandement that wee denie and mortifie our selues, hate and despise the worlde, take vp our crosse vppon vs, and followe him, stoutly and manfully confessing and acknowledging him before the wicked worlde: louing one another, as hee hath loued vs: innocently and godly leading our liues, whereby we may daily receiue the more giftes at his hande. For if wee keepe not his grace that hee giueth vs: if wee do not continually and daily reforme our selues, and with all diligence fashion our liues after his life: it is but right that we loose againe what wee haue receiued.
And if anie man saith, it were vnpossible for man to keepe Gods commaundementes, (as it is true in∣deed) yet vnto vs that beleeue in Christ,All things possible to beleeuers. are all things possible: not in our selues, but in Christ our head. If we abide in him through faith, then hard and vnpos∣sible things are light and possible vnto vs: for in him that strengtheneth vs, we may do all thinges. And if wee loue God, then for his sake that is beloued, wee may doe and suffer all thinges:Loue ouer∣commeth all things. for there is nothing but loue ouercommeth it. Our Lorde Iesus Christ fulfilleth the commaundements and will of his hea∣uenly Father. So farre as wee now are his members incorporated with him, and abiding in him as our head through faith, our daily exercise, feruentnes, and diligence shall bee, in vndertaking to perfourme and keepe his commaundementes. And if wee, out of a true beleefe, doe applie such diligence, to keepe his preceptes, then m it be perceiued, that we loue God. And if that after such diligence in keeping Gods commandements, there be ought lacking (as we shal euer heere want some thing) wee must crie vnto our heauenly Father, and pray. O Father, forgiue vs our debts and trespasses. And then haue wee with him a faithfull mediatour, euen Iesus Christ the righteous, who maketh intercession for vs, and taketh our faults vpon himselfe: & what wee are not not able, that ful∣filleth he for vs. Thus is it his first, & highest cōmaun∣dement, which he earnestly requireth of vs,Faith, Loue, keeping of the cōman∣dements. that wee beleue in him. Where the same faith is right, it brings with it loue, which keepeth al the commandements.
Now when we begin to breake our mindes off from earthie worldly thinges, and to set them vpon godlie heauenly things, which Christ calleth vs vnto. Then take we in hande to bee obedient vnto God the Fa∣ther, after the example and patterne of Christ: for he loued vs first. If wee now also loue him, and practise our selues in his loue, then shall hee helpe vs to keepe his commaundements. And to the intent that we may be able to put our trust in him, to loue him, and to obserue his precepts, hee promiseth vs his holy spirite, to worke all such things in vs. Hee comforteth also his Disciples and all his elect in this world: as if he would say: Be not yee afraide neither sorrowfull, by reason of my departing. Albe∣it I now die, and goe corporally from you vnto the Father, yet will I alwaies haue a fatherly loue, faith∣fulnesse and care for you: neither will I leaue you friendles, as those that are vtterly destitute of al helpe and consolation. I will pray vnto the Father, so that hee shall sende you another to succour and comfort you. While I haue been with you my selfe, I haue in∣structed and taught you in all thinges that were ne∣cessary for your welfare. Vnto all such workes as are acceptable vnto my father, haue I exhorted you: vn∣to all good thinges haue I moued you: from all euill haue I defended you: in all trouble and aduersitie haue I comforted you. I haue beene your teacher, your exhorter, your atturney, your aduocate, & me∣diatour, so that ye haue lacked nothing, neither hath any man hurt you. Seeing now I haue hitherto ne∣uer
failed you, I wil also from henceforth not forsake you, but pray vnto my Father, who shall sende vnto you the holy Ghost. The same shall perfectly bring to your remembrance, and be your teacher in al that I haue shewed you: hee shall exhort and admonish you, aide, succour, and comfort you,The office of Gods spi∣rite. so that yee shall not be without consolation. He shall be your tutour and defender, neither shall he be with you onely for a time, as I haue beene, but euen in your heartes shall he dwell with you, and neuer depart from you. Of this helper, comforter, teacher, and tutor, shall yee also haue neede: for great trouble and persecu∣tion shall the world moue against you.Comfort & strength in aduersitie. To ouercom the same, is your flesh too feeble: therefore will I send you downe from heauen a power, whereby in all aduersitie ye may be able to stand fast, and to haue the victorie. O the vnspeakeable loue of our Lord Iesu Christ, who taketh such diligent care for vs, and endueth vs with so excellent a gift: namely, his owne holy spi∣rite. With what modestie and sobernesse, with how pure and honest behauiour ought wee to walke, see∣ing that God hath into our hartes giuen his holy spi∣rite, who vtterly abhorreth and loatheth all vice, and all filthines of sinne? Great diligence ought we ther∣fore to applie, in keeping cleane and vndefiled our bodies and soules, which God through his holy spi∣rite hath purified, and consecrated to bee his owne dwelling place and temple: least we expell the chast spirite of God. For in no froward soule abideth hee, neither dwelleth hee in that bodie which maketh it
selfe slaue and thrall vnto sin. The eares of our minde ought we to open, and to harken whereof this spirite admonisheth vs, and what doctrine hee in our Saui∣ours words doth teach vs, and his motion ought we to followe. Afraid ought we not to be: he that is in vs, is stronger than all our enemies. This spirite hath Christ by his prayer and me∣rites obtained of his Father: for hee prayed with weeping and teares, and was heard for his worthines sake. He is called also the spirite of trueth, because hee proceedeth of the truth, teacheth the trueth, and ma∣keth vs true: we are else of our owne nature altoge∣ther lyers, inconstant, vntrue, and dissembling hypo∣crites: and whatsoeuer the world speaketh, & doth, it is nothing but vanitie and lyes. Blessed therefore are they vnto whom God giueth the high gift of his trueth. The world, that is to say, fleshly men and children of the world, receiue not this spirite, for they despise the word of Christ, and laugh it to scorne. Therefore God sheweth not himselfe vnto them, for they loue him not: which thing they declare, in that they re∣fuse his word. But who so receiueth his word, shew∣eth thereby, that he loueth Christ and God: him wil God loue againe, and open himselfe euer more and more vnto him. This is a high reward which God gi∣ueth vnto his louers: that hee commeth vnto them, maketh his dwelling and abideth alwaie with them, working all good things in them and by them. Ther∣fore ought wee earnestly to heare his worde, to loue
him, and to keepe his commandements. And so euen the same his owne spirit which hee gaue vs at the be∣ginning, shall hee still graunt vnto vs more perfectly from time to time. Thus shall that spirite poure out loue in our harts, and indue them with more perfe∣tion. The loue of the world, which is not of God the Father, shall this spirit roote out and daily consume: but the loue of God it shall continually plant and in∣crease. The more loue there is, the more groweth the knowledge of God: yea the more Gods knowledge increaseth, the more feruent & perfect is loue. Grant vs (ô gratious Father) thy holy spirit, to take possessi∣on of our heart: that it may onely trust in thee, loue thee aboue all things, keepe thy commandements, & cleaue still vnto thee for euermore, Amen. THese things haue I spoken vnto you, beeing yet present with you. But that comfort which is the holie Ghost, (whom my father will send in my name) he shal teach you all thinges, and bring all thinges to your remembrance, whatsoeuer I haue taught you: Peace I leaue with you, my peace I giue vnto you. Let not your hart be troubled, neither feare. Ye haue heard that I said vnto you: I go, and come vn∣to you. If ye loued me, ye would verely reioice, because I said: I go vnto the father, for the father is greater than I. And now haue I shewed you before it come, that when it is come to passe, ye might beleeue. Hereafter will I not talke many words with you: for the ruler of this worlde commeth, and hath naught in me. But that the world may knowe, that I loue the father: as the father gaue me commaundement, euen so do I. Arise, let vs go hence.
Doctrine and fruite. THe Lord Iesus continueth his Oration in com∣forting his Disciples, and in telling them what the office of the holy Ghost should be. Where∣by we learne,We must all be aught of God, which is don by the spirite. that all reading and hearing, yea and al doctrine, bringeth vtterly no fruite, if the holy Ghost do not giue vs vnderstanding, and teach vs the word of God. For the Disciples were ignorant and forget∣full. Many thinges that Christ had tolde them, they vnderstood not: many thinges had they forgotten: in many thinges they doubted. Such like happen al∣so vnto vs: therefore ought wee at all times to pray vnto God, that he will send vs his holy spirite, to ad∣monish and prouoke vs, to comfort and strengthen vs, to instruct and teach vs all thinges that are neces∣sarie for vs to saluation. Hee is the right heauenly schoolemaister: when hee commeth into vs, hee ex∣pelleth all ignorance away. But forasmuch as there remaineth much trouble and aduersitie vnto all faithfull beleeuers, while they liue in this time,The peace of Christ through the spirit. Christ doth therefore promise them his peace, against the turmoyling, vnquietnes, and trouble of this world. In the world are many hurley burlyes and aduersities: In Christ we find true peace and quietnesse. And Christ vnto those that are his, giueth such a peace,Phil 4. as surmounteth all vnderstan∣ding: in the which peace they beeing coupled and knitte, are able valiauntly to ouercome all enemies and aduersitie. For in as much as they knowe, and
be vndoubtedly assured through faith, that their sins are forgiuen and taken awaie by Christ, that the fa∣ther of heauen is fauorable and gracious vnto them, that they be his owne children and inheritours, they doe little passe, what thing outwardly happeneth vn∣to them. All aduersitie and trouble that outwardlie is layde vpon them, is, through the inward ioy and peace which they haue in God, cleane swallowed vp and so forgotten. They settle and staie their harts vp∣pon saluation and eternall peace. The peace of the world seeketh quietnesse & rest of the bodie, throweth awaie the crosse,Worldly peace. & flieth from it: The peace of Christ reioyceth in the middest of aduersitie, and ouercommeth the crosse. For faithful beleeuers looke vnto Christ, who went before them vnto the father, and after his passion and death, tooke possession of so high honor and glorie,Our nature exalted in Christ. and hath car∣ryed theyr nature vp so high vnto the right hande of the father, where hee now ruleth as a mightie king of heauen and earth. Oh how great comfort, how sure a hope giueth it vnto vs, when wee see our owne na∣ture, our owne flesh and bones, incorporated vnto Christ, the onely begotten sonne,Comfort in aduersitie. and eternall word of God, in so high honor and glorie! how can it be o∣therwise, but wee must needes hope, that our weake flesh also shall be taken vp? Looke what is past in the head, the same shall assu∣redly be fulfilled in the members, for without the members cannot the head be. Which thing conside∣red, and (through true beleefe) printed in the heart, maketh a man patient and cheerefull in all aduersity,
giueth peace and ioy in all trouble. Let the Prince of this world,The deuill hath no∣thing in the faithfull. through his ministers and members, stirre vp all vexation against vs, yet hath he no vauntage of vs, if wee bee in Christ. Easily might he finde some∣what in our selues, but in Christ nothing, such inno∣cencie dooth Christ make vs partakers of. Tempt vs he may, and thrust at vs, but to ouercome vs, hee is not able, so farre as we abide in Christ. In vs is death a punishment of sinne:We must suffer, that we may bee obedient vn∣to the fa∣ther. in Christ it is obedience and loue. For seeing the father loueth the sonne, and of verie loue gaue him vnto death for vs, the son would of loue obey the father, and as hee also loued vs, so would he willingly and obediently suffer death for vs, that all the worlde might see his obedience, and that wee might learne of him to obey our heauenly Father, euen vnto the death, and faithfully folow his precept: and that likewise, whereas it toucheth his glorie, we should be afraide neither of aduersitie nor death, considering howe obediently hee dyed for our sakes. I Am a true Vine, and my Father is an husband-man. Euerie braunch that bringeth not fruite in mee, hee ta∣keth awaie: and euerie braunch that beareth fruite, hee purgeth, that it may bring foorth more fruit. Now are yee cleare, through the wordes which I haue spoken vnto you. Abide in mee, and I in you. As the branch cannot beare  of it selfe, except it abide in the vine, no more can yee, except  abide in mee. I am the vine, yee are the braun∣ches. He that abideth in mee, and I in him, the same brin∣geth, foorth  fruite: for without mee can yee doo no∣thing.
If a man bide not in mee, he is cast forth as a branch, and withered, and men gather them, and east them into the fire, and they burne. If yee abide in mee, and my words also in you, aske what yee will and it shall bee done vnto you. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye beare much fruit, and become my disciples. Doctrine and fruite. VNder this fayre similitude, doeth Christ teach his Church, that with∣out him wee can do nothing, but in him all things. Now forasmuch as hee through his grace, hath in∣corporated vs vnto himselfe, wee ought with great diligence to apply our selues, that we may abide in him, and beare fruit. For as long as wee are in him, wee liue, that is,To abide in Christ. we re∣ceiue liuely vertue and sappe of him, namely, his spi∣rite. For who so cleaueth vnto the Lorde, and is in∣corporated vnto him through faith, the same is be∣come one spirit with him, the first Epistle to the Co∣rinthians, and the sixt Chapter. For heereby knowe wee, that wee are in him, and hee in vs, in that hee hath giuen vs of his spirit, the first of Iohn and fourth Chapter. For why? the vineyard, the branches are of one nature and kinde. Thus the onely begotten sonne of GOD tooke our nature vppon him, is become man, and giueth vs of his spirite, and
maketh vs to be of a godly mind and spiritual nature. Out of the same pith and sap, doe all manner of god∣ly vertues and good workes breake forth. Gal. 5. Psal. 85. For through his grace, are we his operation and worke in Christ Iesu,Eph. 2 created vnto good workes, wherein we are bound to walke. And seeing we haue receiued Iesus Christ of God the father, we ought to walke in him, that in him we may be well rooted and stand fast.Col. 2. What it is to abide in Christ.But heereby knowe we that we are in him, if we walke as he hath walked. For who so saith, that he a∣bideth in him, then euen as hee walked, so must wee doe. 1. Iohn. 2. But if we woulde saie, that wee were in him, and had fellowshippe with him, and yet would walke in darknesse (seeing hee is the light, wherein is found no darknesse at all) then were wee lyars, and went not about with the truth. But if wee walke in light, as he is light, & we children of light, then haue we fellowship and companie with him, & the bloud of Christ purgeth vs from all sinne. 1. Iohn. 1. In Christ Iesu may no man be idle and without fruit.Punishment of vnthank∣fulnes. 2. Thes 3. who so now is vnthankful to the grace of God, & doth not practise himselfe in good works, to Gods glorie, the same is cut off, and as an vnfruit∣full drie branch, throwen into the fire & burnt. Faith grafteth vs into Christ, Loue declareth, that wee are planted in, & it knitteth the members with the head. Where the spirite of Christ followeth from the head into the members, from the stock into the branches; there are fruites of the spirite: for by the fruit is the tree knowen.
Christ through his worde and spirit hath pacified vs: that is,How the faithfull are cleane. he hath called and separated vs from the world, and from the filthines of the flesh vnto good workes. And into his owne seruice, and schoole of godly nurtor hath hee admitted vs, and written vp our names. He hath begonne to purge and clense vs from carnall lustes, and from all vncleannes of the world: accepting vs into the number of those that dye from the world, and that now from hence forth will liue vnto him, and bring forth fruite.1. Pet. 1. Faith brin∣geth fruite. But that is not enough: we must also obediently waite vpon the grace that hee hath placed vs in: applying our diligence, watching, and praying, that from so high a vocation, from so excellent grace and ho∣nour, wee fall not away againe. 1. Cor. 10. It is not enough to haue begonne, there must be a stedfast continuance. Hee that forsaketh the head againe, hath neither spirit nor vertue: for without him wee are able to doe nothing. Therefore through faith and loue ought wee to abide in him, hauing re∣spect vnto him in all thinges: so shall wee bring forth much fruite vnto him. Then abyde wee in him, when wee doe that hee commaundeth vs, and loue that which hee promiseth vs.The good workes are not open. Howbe∣it, these fruites that wee bring forth are not ours, but the fathers: to him ought wee to bring them foorth, vnto his honour must they extend, Matth. 5.28. For when Gods light doth appeare and shine in our conuersation, & many folkes thereby are drawn vnto God. The father of heauen is honoured, his
name is hallowed, and then are we his disciples. For wee haue learned of him, howe Christ was obedient vnto the father, and sought his glorie in all things, & so do we likewise. What wee ought to pae.Heereunto ought all our praiers to extend, that we may bring and winne much vnto Christ. There∣in is the father praised, whē we bring vnto him much fruit, but that might wee not, if God had giuen vs his sonne, that wee might bee his branches, and hee our vine. Where faith is, there is the holy Ghost, which teacheth to wishe and praie for that onely, which may serue to Gods honour, and that is the cause, why he that prayeth, obtayneth all his desire: for GOD may not giue ouer his glorie. Who so vn∣dertaketh to further that, him doeth hee assist and helpe. AS the Father hath loued mee. so haue I loued you. Con∣tinue ye in my loue. If ye keep my commandements, ye shall abide in my loue, as I haue kept my fathers com∣maundementes, and abide in his loue. These things haue I spoken vnto you, that my ioy might remaine in you, and that your ioy might be full. This is my commandement, that yee loue together, as I haue loued you. Greater loue than this, hath no man, that a man bestowe his life for his friendes. Yee are my friendes, if yee doo whatsoeuer I commaund you. Henceforth call I you not seruauntes, for the seruant kno∣weth not what his Lord doth. But you haue I called friends, for all things that I haue heard of my father, haue I opened vnto you. Yee haue not chosen mee, but I haue chosen you,
and ordained you, that ye goe and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain, that whatsoeuer ye ask of the father in my name, he may giue it you. This command I you, that ye loue together one another. Doctrine and fruit. OH how excellent great consolation is this to vs all, which beleeue in Iesus Christ,Entirely doth Christ loue those that are his. and are vndoubtedly assured in ourselues, that Christ loueth vs as his owne children and disciples, howso∣euer the world iudge vs to be forsaken of him? If this loue came right into our heart, oh how earnest and feruent should we be to loue him agayne, to further his honour, to keepe his commaundementes, and in charitable loue to serue our neighbors? Then should all good workes and keeping of Gods commaunde∣ments, flowe out of faith: namely, when we beleeue that God is fauourable and louing vnto vs, yea, that he is our father, and our sonne Iesus Christ our king,Iohn. 4. head, and brother. This faith worketh through loue: for wee coulde not loue God, if hee had not loued vs first. His grace, loue, and mercie preuenteth vs. Therefore doth Christ euer still set forth his loue before vs, as a light torch, to kindle vs in loue to∣wardes him and our neighbours. If wee beleeue this grace, committing vs cheerfully vnto his loue, which he hath declared, & cōtinually doth practise towards
vs, if we still abide therein: then shall this faith vp∣on the loue of God, worke great things in vs, and by vs, and shall moue vs, with good will gladly and cheerefullie to obserue his commaundements. And if wee keepe his commaundements,Loue is an euidence of faith. euerie man shall haue an assured token, that wee bee, and continue in the loue of God: that is, that we keepe our selues vnto his loue. What folo∣weth out of the loue of God.Seeing then that hee loueth vs exceeding much, and we finding the same in our hearts, through faith, doe comfort our selues thereupon, there must needs followe loue to our neighbours, ioye, peace, softnesse of minde, gentlenes, patience, &c. Gal. 5. Now that Christ doth not slenderly, but most no∣tably loue his Disciple,Tokens of Gods loue to vs. and all in them, hee proueth it himselfe diuerse waies. First, in that hee giueth his life for vs, and dyeth for vs vpon the Crosse: for greater loue hath no man, than to dye for his friend. Thus Christ with his death and blood, sea∣leth his loue towards vs. Secondly, in that hee counteth and esteemeth vs, not as seruants,Iohn. 1. but as deare friendes, bretheren, and heires with him. And the same declareth hee in this, that all things which hee hath heard of his fa∣ther, and suckt out of that fatherly heart, he openeth them vnto vs, and writeth the same through his ho∣ly spirit,1. Cor. 2. in our hearts. All his secret, his godly will, he giueth vs to vnderstād. For we which be in Christ, do know through an vndoubted faith, & feele it also in our hearts, that God is our father through Christ, & that in him he hath admitted & chosen vs, that he is
reconciled with vs through the bloud of his deare Sonne, that he loueth, preserueth, and defendeth vs.Rom. 5. Therefore doe wee also paciently and chearefully beare all aduersitie in this time for his sake, conside∣ring wee knowe, that so is the good pleasure of our dearest Father. Thirdly,Ephes. 1. Rom. 5. Christ declareth his excellent loue to∣wards vs, in that he did chuse vs afore the world was created, & loued vs when we were yet his enemies,We are cho∣sen to bring forth fruit. calling vs by his worde, and appointing vs to bring forth fruit vnto him. Fourthly, in that we obtaine at the fathers hand, all that we pray and desire in the name of Iesu. Are not these sure tokens of an exceeding loue of God towards vs?We ought to indure in loue. After that we once haue perceiued such loue, ô that we alwayes remained therein. Which commeth to passe, when wee applie ourselues vnto his commaundements, and when wee in obedience and patience are content to bee at his will, as hee for our sake was obedient vnto his Father,Phil. 2. euen vntill the death of the crosse. Now that wee might knowe what his commandements be, he concludeth them in a short summe, and saith: Loue yee one another together, as I haue loued you. As if he would say,The com∣mandement of God, is loue. see∣ing I haue declared my loue so worthily, so notably, and with so great faithfulnesse towardes you, that I haue nor refused to die for you: therefore is it my will (and so is it reason also) that yee likewise shewe such loue one towards another: for I haue giuen you example afore, that ye should do as I haue done,Iohn. 13. 1. Pet. 2. and follow my foot-steppes.
This shall not onely bee very seemely vnto you, but much profite also and greate honour shall it bring you. For like as my Father (as yee shall shortlie see) shall after my passion bring mee vnto glorie, so shall hee also doe vnto you, so farre as yee endure stedfast in aduersitie, and continue in loue one to∣wards another. Like as I with great trauaile and la∣bour haue shewed you the way and will of GOD my Father, and therefore goe nowe vnto death, to make you liuing: so ought yee also to bee minded one towardes another. Looke that yee serue one an∣other in loue, lead all men vnto God: and the grace of God which he giueth vnto the world through me, publish ye vnto all men, though yee must loose your life therefore. IF the world hate you, yee know that it hated mee before it hated you. If yee were of the worlde, the world would loue his owne. Howbeit, because yee are not of the worlde, but I haue chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said vnto you: the seruaunt is not greater than the Lord. If they haue persecuted mee, so will they persecute you. If they haue kept my sayings, they will also keepe yours. But all these things will they do vnto you for my names sake, because they knowe not him that sent mee. If I had not come and spoken vnto them, they should not haue had sinne: but now haue they nothing to cloake their sinne withall. Hee that hateth mee, hateth my Father also. If I had not doone workes amongst them, which none other man did, they had not had sinne: but nowe haue they seene, and haue hated both mee, and also my Father, e∣uen
that the saying might bee fulfilled, which is written in theyr owne lawe: They haue hated mee without anie cause. Doctrine and fruite. LIke as Christ in the aforesaid words hath giuen vnto his Disciples, and to vs that beleeue in him, an excellent consolation in his loue, which is infinite great towardes vs: so dooth he now com∣fort vs against such trouble and aduersitie to come, as outwardly happeneth vnto vs, and against the hate and persecution wherewith the children of the world recompence vs for our loue and well dooing. Loue ought wee to haue towards all men: such god∣ly loue shall moue vs earnestly to further Gods glo∣rie, to bring all men to the knowledge and loue of God, and to withdraw them from fleshly lustes and worldly vices. When wee now of a godly zeale, beginne thus to rebuke vice, and to reprehend the carnall lustes of the children of the world, then they that are drowned in the shamefull vices of the world and the flesh, may not suffer it, but hate, trouble, and vexe vs, molest, persecute vs, and put vs vnto death, contemning and despising the worde which wee offer them from GOD (whereby they might bee saued) and going about by all meanes to roote it out. But all this ought not to driue vs backe,Exhortation to patienes. or dis∣courage vs: For in this world must we seeke no high honour nor praise, but willingly humble and submit
our selues vnder the rebuke and crosse with Christ our head.1. Pet. 3. Iohn. 13. Christ also exhorteth vs to folow his foot∣steppes, and to doe after his example, and not to for∣sake the truth, and loue of our neighbour for theyr hatred, but constantly to proceed and do our best to guid all men vnto God. And if for such our vnfaith∣fulnes and loue, there happen reproach and trouble to vs,Acts. 5. we ought to reioice, that God dooth vs so great honour, as to graunt vs to suffer somewhat for his name sake. If we liued as do the children of the world wee should not bee hated of them, and happily wee needed to feare but little daunger. But Christ hath taken vs from the world, and chosen and called vs to good works, and to innocencie of life. Nothing hath he omitted, that might serue to our welfare: faithful∣ly therefore ought we to follow his vocation, & not do as the vnthankfull Iewes, that despise his doctrine and workes. He talketh yet daily with vs, prouoketh and calleth vs: therefore ought we to cease from sin, and not to fashion our selues after the world.Rom. 12. For if we would liue to please the world, to serue it, and to hunt after the fauour and praise of it, wee should not be faithfull Ministers of Iesus Christ. We ought not to look for worldly honor, but to haue respect to the eternall glorie, which wee shall haue with Christ our head, yea so farre as we suffer rebuke and dishonour with him. When he liued in this time, and practised the truth against the Pharisies, hee was reuiled, put to shame and death. The same happeneth also vnto vs; for we are not aboue the Lorde. An euill token were it, if the world loued vs. Paciently therefore and with
ioy ought we to beare such rebuke and shame, as hap∣peneth vnto vs for his name sake, by those that hate the truth. For our honor and reward is great in hea∣uen: but after our trouble shall the same be first ope∣ned, as it happened also vnto Christ our head first af∣ter the crosse. BVt when the comforter is come, whom I will send vnto you from the father (euen the spirit of truth, which pro∣ceedeth of the father) he shall testifie of me. And yee are witnesses also, because ye haue beene with me from the begin∣ning. These things haue I saide vnto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall thrust you out of their synagogues, & excommunicate you: yea the time shall come, that whosoeuer killeth you, will thinke that he doth seruice vnto God. And such thinges shall they doo vnto you, because they knowe not the father, neither me. But these things haue I told you, that when the houre is come, yee may remember that I tolde you. These thinges said I not vnto you at the beginning, because I was with you. But now I go my way to him that sent me, & none of you asketh mee; Whither goest thou? But because I haue said such things vnto you, your harts are full of sorrow. But I tell you the truth: It is expedient for you that I goe a∣waie. For if I go not away, that comforter will not come vn∣to you. But if I depart, I will send him vnto you. Doctrine and fruite. FOr as much as it is our bounden duetie to beare witnesse vnto Christ with our mouth and life, & yet our weake flesh feareth the hatred and resi∣stance
of the worlde,Math 26. Acts. 1. Christ therefore promiseth vs heere, that hee will sende vs strength from heauen: namely,Rom. . the holy Ghost, first in our harts to bear wit∣nesse vnto Christ, and then to open our mouthes, that we may testifie the Lord Christ, and his trueth manfully and without feare. Certaine it is, that all they which will liue here godly in Christ Iesu,2. Tim. 3. must suffer persecution. But seeing that to suffer such ad∣uersitie, our flesh is farre too slow, colde and feeble, God giueth vs the spirit of his son,Rom. 8. Rom. 5. Acts· 2. to mooue, streng∣then and preserue vs in all goodnes. This spirit pou∣reth out loue into our hartes, expelleth all feare and terror (as we see in Peter on Whitsonday) & maketh vs to ouercome all aduersitie. Iohn. 15.We are braunches in Christ the true vine, albeit as yet verie weake and tender, soone blowne awaie with the winde, or smitten downe other waies: but for as much as out of Christ wee receiue, yet the sap and vertue of spirite and life, wee are in life preserued that wee wither not away. Of this now must we bee mindfull in all aduersitie, so that without ceasing we pray vnto GOD for his holie spirite, who is our in∣structer, comforter, and teacher. Wee ought to haue respect vnto our fore-goer and finisher of our faith, remembring, that wee suffer not as theeues and euill dooers,1. Pet. 4. but for his sake, yea and that of the wicked. This shall make our aduersitie and crosse the more easie and light, when wee feele the comfort of the spirite, and beholde how shamefull a death Christ suffered for vs. Therfore should there no feare make vs to shrinke from the confession of Christ, and his
trueth. Wee are not they that speake, but it is the spi∣rite of the Father which speaketh in vs.Math. 10. Wee maye not feare those that kill the bodie,Luke 9. we may not bee a∣shamed of him: so shall hee also knowledge vs, and make vs honourable in his fathers sight. The honour of this world should not bee dearer vnto vs than the glorie of God. And though wee die for it,Iohn.  yet ought we not to shrinke or stirre from the confession of the trueth. This ingendreth manie times much heauines and feare in vs, that wee consider onely that which is pre∣sent, little regarding that which is to come, and euer∣lasting. And because wee thinke that when GOD thrusteth vs into aduersitie, he is farre from vs: where∣as hee then is most of all with vs by his grace, com∣fort, and strength, and tryeth vs through the crosse, standing behinde the wall,Cant. . and looking through the grate vppon our conflict and battaile, yea, helping vs to fight, and to ouercome. Therefore must we not al∣wayes bee children, wee must not hang still at the brest, seeking milke as children doo:1. Cor. 14. Heb. 5. but growe to a perfect age, learning to knowe Christ the Lord after the spirite, as hee now gouerneth, and is a mightie king: vnder whose banner wee must fight valiantly, and indure the crosse vnto the death, throwing be∣hind vs all thinges in this worlde,Psal. 120. Iohn. 1. and lifting vp our eyes and harts into heauen, whence our helpe com∣meth, and into the which Christ is gone, to prepare for vs an euerlasting dwelling.
ANd when the spirit is come, he will rebuke the worlde of sinne, and of righteousnes, and of iudgment. Of sin, because they beleeue not on me: of righteousnesse, be∣cause I go to my father, and ye shall see me no more: of iudg∣ment, because the prince of this world is iudged alreadie. I haue yet many thinges to say vnto you, but yee cannot heare them now. Howbeit when hee is come which is the spirite of truth, he will lead you into all truth. For he shall not speake of himselfe: but whatsoeuer he shall heare, that shall he speake, and he will shew you thinges to come. Hee shall glorifie mee, for he shal receiue of mine, and shal shew vnto you All things that the Father hath are mine. Therefore said I, that he shal take of mine, and shew vnto you. Doctrine and fruite. IN these wordes doth Christ shew vs the office of the holy Ghost, and what he worketh by his disci∣ples,1. Iohn 5. and by all faithfull beleeuers in the worlde. The whole world is sette vpon wickednesse and ini∣quitie, and when that is rebuked, it hateth and perse∣cuteth those that rebuke it. Whereout it follow∣eth oftentimes, that through imbecillitie and weake∣nesse of the flesh, we cease from rebuking of vice and sinne. Now when we find it to be thus, that the infirmi∣tie of our flesh, and the terrible threatening of the world will hinder vs, or vtterly drawe vs backe from the free rebuking of vice: wee ought to praye vnto God our Father, for to giue vs the spirit of his sonne,
that he may powre out loue into our hearts, and ex∣pell all feare, that with stoute stomacks and wordes,1. Ioh. 4. we may reprehend the vyces of the world, and va∣liantly resist them. This spirit shall teach vs the thing, that neither our flesh nor the world is instructed in. All we of nature doe erre,Isa. 53. and euery one wandreth his owne waie, that is, euery one foloweth his owne purpose and intent: and if we beleeue not in Christ, we perish in our sinnes.Ioh. 8. And this is the greatest sin of all, wherein the world is wrapt, afore it receiue the truth. Not to beleeue in Christ, is a sinne, out of the which, all vyce and wickednes dooth grow.Vnbeliefe is the originall of all vices. How great this sinne is, no man is able to knowe, onely the spirit of God openeth it: therefore the spirite tea∣cheth vs, how farre we goe astray. And if we come to Christ, from this erronius waie of vnbeliefe, all sinnes are forgiuen vs through Christ, and not im∣puted vs to our damnation. Neither is it enough to knowe, that wee haue er∣red, or doe yet erre, but wee must know also which is the right waie, wherein (when error is forsaken) wee must walke to attaine vnto godlines and blisse. This right waie,Ioh. 14. 1. Cor. 1. doth the spirit also shewe to be euen Christ, who is our waie, our righteousnes and good∣nes: which waie neuertheles the world will not goe. To beleeue in Christ, is the true way to attaine vnto righteousnes and saluation: who so now departeth not from the erroneous waie of vnbeliefe and vice, and will not walke in Christ, the way of all vertue and goodnes, (which all the world alas so abhor∣reth) the same is conuict, that the iudgement of eter∣nall
paine doth righteously fall vpon him, seeing the light is set before him,Ioh. 3. and he will rather abide & pe∣rish in darknesse. But is not this a iust iudgement, that the world should perish in sinne, and be punished for euer, considering that God hath graciously sent vn∣to them his owne sonne, promising euerlasting lyfe and saluation in him, who with his bloud hath wa∣shed awaie our sinnes, mightily ouercome death, sin, and the prince of this worlde, deliuered vs out of his power and heauie yoake, and taken possession of the kingdome and glorie with his father: And yet they will not know, receiue, nor honour Christ, as theyr chiefe king and Lord, but still serue the prince of this world in vice & sin, & not submit themselues vnder the easie yoake of Christ, & of his loue and vertues. O deare children, let vs departe out of the king∣dome of darknes,Col. 1. into the kingdome of Iesus Christ the sonne of God: let vs regarde his word with dili∣gence: let vs hearken what God speaketh in vs, and though there bee many things that as yet we knowe not,Psal. 84. many that we do not vnderstand and perceiue, we will earnestly praie vnto God for his spirite, who is the right schoolmaster and teacher. Hee shall lead vs into all truth,Ephe. 4. he shall renue vs in the spirite of our minde, and teach vs to vnderstand, what the good, acceptable,Rom. 12 and perfect will of God is. He shall plant and roote vs in loue, that we may comprehend with all Saints,Ephe. 3. what is the length, the breadth, the height, and deapth, that wee may also knowe the exceeding loue of the knowledge of Christ, that we might bee filled in all godly perfectnes. Thus the spirite teach∣eth
vs all truth, when he poureth loue into our harts. This schoolmaster teacheth all beleeuers here in time, euerie one as much as he can comprehend, and kindleth spirituall hearts with greater desire. He that nowe increaseth in loue, that is, who so loueth that whereof God giueth him knowledge, and desireth to know that which as yet he knoweth not, him doth the spirite leade into al truth. For the more that loue groweth, the more perfect is knowledge. And in this schoole of the loue which the spirit poureth into our hearts, the faithfull beleeuer learneth more, than all bookes and all men can teach him: but the more a man learneth & can, the more must he acknowledge and confes, that he can nothing towards that which we shall know,1. Cor. 13. when we shall cleerely and perfectly see God face to face. Vnto vs shall it bee inough and sufficient, that we in spirit and in the truth knowe Ie∣sus Christ, which was crucified,1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor.  Iohn 4 2. Cor. 4 & that he shine and be glorified in our mortall body, in our harts, mouth and in our whole life. AFter a while ye shall not see me, & again after a while ye shall see me, for I go to the father. Then said some of his disciples among themselues: What is this that he saith vnto vs, After a while ye shal not see me, & againe, af∣ter a while ye shal see me, & that I go to my father? They said therfore, what is this that he saith, after a while? We cannot tel what he saith Iesus perceiued that they would aske him, and said vnto them: This is it that ye enquire off betweene your selues, that I said, After a while ye shall not see me, & a∣gain after a while ye shal see me. Verily, verily I say vnto you▪
yee shall weepe and lament, but the world shall reioyce: yee shall sorrowe, but your sorrow shall be turned into ioye. A woman when she trauaileth hath sorrow, because her houre is come: But when she is deliuered of the childe, she remem∣breth no more the anguish, for ioye that a man is borne into the world. And yee now therefore are in sorowe: but I will see you againe, and your heart shall reioyce, and your ioye shall no man take from you. Doctrine and fruite. AN excellent comfort doth Christ giue here vn∣to his Disciples, who by reason of his depar∣parting, were in great sorrowe and heauines. But like as the Disciples of Christ, because of his pas∣sion, abode for a little season in great combrance, feare, and trouble, and yet receiued great ioye out of the Resurrection, when hee shewed himselfe vnto them: euen so in aduersity ought not we to be faint-hearted, but comfort our selues in this, that the Lord doth not long leaue those that are his. Though hee hide himselfe for a time, he shall shortly shewe vs his gratious countenance againe, & refresh vs with rich comfort. The aduersities of faithful beleeuers are not only short, but also they end with vnspeakeable ioy. After aduersitie and death, foloweth euerlasting ioye and eternall life. We are here with Christ our head, in trouble and on the crosse, where the world laugh∣eth at vs, and reioyseth. For all this ought not wee to be vnquiet in our selues. Very shortly will the mat∣ter change and turne vpside downe: so that their
laughter and ioy, shal be altered into weeping and e∣ternall sorrow. But our heauinesse shall God shortly end with great fruit and ioye, and the same ioy shall no man be able to take from vs, when we with Christ our head, shall euerlastingly bee gladde and reioyce, when all teares shall bee wiped away from our eyes, and wee discharged of all trauaile and labour of this time. IN that daie shall ye aske me no question. Verily, verilie I saie vnto you: Whatsoeuer yee shall aske the father in my name, he will giue it you. Hetherto haue ye asked nothing in my name: Aske, and ye shall receiue, that your ioy may be full. These things haue I spoken vnto you in Prouerbs, but the time will come, when I shall no more speak to you in pro∣uerbes, but I shall shew you plainly of my father. At that day shall ye aske in my name. And I saie vnto you, that I will praie vnto the father for you: for the father himselfe loueth you, because ye haue loued mee, and haue beleeued, that I am come out from God. I went out from the father, and came into the world, & I leaue the world againe and goe to the fa∣ther. His disciples said vnto him, Lo, now spekest thou plain∣ly, and thou speakest no prouerbe. Now are we sure, that thou knowest all things, and nedest not that anie man should aske thee anie question. Therefore beleeue wee, that thou camest from God. Iesus answered them, Now ye do beleeue, beholde the houre draweth nigh and is alreadie come, that ye shall be scattered, euerie man into his owne, and shal leaue me alone, & yet I am not alone, for the father is with me. These words haue I spoken vnto you, that in mee yee might haue peace. In the world shall yee haue tribulation, but bee of good cheere, I
haue ouercome the world. Doctrine and fruit. MAny times doth Christ promise vs, whatsoe∣uer wee praie, to obtaine the same of the fa∣ther of heauen, whereby he may stirre vp our hearts, faithfully to crie vnto God, the gracious and louing father, whose loue towardes vs is exceeding great, neither can he saie vs nay, that hath giuen and bestowed vppon vs his owne sonne: yea, not onely hath hee sent downe vnto vs his deare and onely be∣gotten sonne, to take the nature of man vppon him, and to die for vs, but hath also into our hearts giuen his holy spirite, with whome hee hath sealed vs, and certefied vs of his loue, pouring the knowledge and loue of Christ into our heartes. How can wee then doubt of his loue and faithfulnesse? How is it possi∣ble, that in all our trouble and heauinesse, we should not vnto him onely haue recourse, seeking helpe and comfort at his hand? The sonne for our sake, came forth from the father, humbled and made himselfe of no reputation, tooke all reproch, shame and trou∣ble vppon himselfe for our welfare. To the father was he obedient, vntil the death of the crosse, and af∣ter that he through his bloud had washed awaie our sinnes, and finished the worke of our saluation, he a∣rose againe from death, through the power & might of his father, ouercame death for vs, and with his as∣cension, opened heauen, and prepared an enterance vnto God, carrying vp our nature and flesh vnto the
honor and glorie, which he had from euerlasting, & giuing vs therein a hope and sure comfort, that wee also shal with him haue euerlasting ioy and glory for euer. Seeing then that he came out from the father, we ought to hearken vnto him, and not to despise his word: he is the eternall wisedome of God, he is the truth, no false teacher can he bee, forasmuch as hee commeth from God, and is his onely begotten son.Heb. 1 To contemne so deare an embassadour and messen∣ger of God, must needs haue great punishment, and though we are not able, in most perfection to vnder∣stand his doctrine, truth, and loue (for heere in this time is our knowledge vnperfect) yet shuld we con∣sider, that the father loueth vs,1. Cor. 13 and faithfully ought we to crie and praie vnto him for his spirite, that shal teach vs all truth, so much as is necessarie and profita∣ble for vs: which knowledge from daie to daie shall increase, till we shal see him face to face, and haue the perfect knowledge of him. Our nature is weake and feeble, the nature diuine is high and incomprehen∣sible: we are full of darknes, God is the cleere & farre passing light, but when our darke mist is taken away, then in cleere brightnesse shall the godly light open vnto vs. Some first fruits and beginnings of Gods know∣ledge haue we receiued alreadie. God hath cast and planted a litle seed of knowledge in our harts, which through his grace and moisture, shall daily grow, in∣crease, and prosper. Of such knowledge as we haue of God, we may not presume, neither of our weak faith,
nor yet ascribe too much vnto our own strength He that standeth, let him looke that he fall not. We think many times that we are verie strong in faith, but ad∣uersitie sheweth how feeble we bee, and how soone we shrinke. Therefore in all trouble and distresse of this world, we ought to comfort our selues, and trust onely in the grace and strength of Christ. In him shal we finde peace and quietnesse, in him shall we ouer∣come all our enemies: for his ouercomming is our victorie, his power is our strength. The world is not able to hurt and plague vs, more than of our gracious father is permitted vnto them for our wealth. While we liue here, we are in miserie, affliction, & distresse: but seeing the head hath ouercome, the members ought not to doubt of the victorie. Let vs with stedfast beleefe looke vnto Christ the fountaine of life, our foregoer, and finisher of our faith, & let vs stoutly step forth after him: let vs go the waie that he is gone, and hath troden, & made before. Afflictions shall serue vs vnto high honor, as they serued Christ the Lord vnto glorie. In Christ we finde the peace & rest of our consciences and soules: in him we knowe and find the goodnes & loue of God the father: out of him receiue we power, strength, comfort, & eter∣nall life: only let vs loke that we turne not the eies of our heart, & faith, away from him. Our welfare con∣sisteth in the stedfast beleefe and loue of Iesus Christ the sonne of God. Though we many times stumble, fall, and be proued by sundry temptations and afflic∣tions, yet is the same good and profitable for vs, that we may the better learn to know our own weaknes,
and againe, the strength and grace of God. If it were not profitable for vs, Christ had not suffered his Dis∣ciples to fall so greeuously. But in all distresse, he put∣teth his hand vnder vs, and in aduersitie he leaueth vs not alone, as hee also left not his owne Sonne alone. Though all men flie away from vs, yet haue we God with vs. THese wordes spake Iesus, and lift vp his eyes to hea∣uen, and said. Father, the houre is come:Iohn. 17. glorifie thy Sonne, that thy Sonne also may glorifie thee, as thou hast giuen him power ouer all flesh, that he should giue eter∣nall life to as manie as thou hast giuen him. This is life eter∣nall: that they know thee the onely very true God, & whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ. I haue glorified thee on the earth. I haue finished the worke which thou gauest me to doo. And now glorifie me thou Father with thine owne selfe, with the glorie which I had with thee ere the worlde was. I haue de∣clared thy name, vnto the men which thou gauest me out of the world. Thine they were, and thou gauest them mee, and they haue kept thy sayings. Now they knowe, that all thinges whatsoeuer thou hast giuen me, are of thee: for I haue giuen vnto them the words which thou gauest me, and they haue receiued them, and know surely, that I came out from thee, & do beleeue, that thou didst send me. Doctrine and fruite. CHrist the true, onely, & chiefe Priest, who now would offer vp himselfe to the father vpon the crosse for our sins, after that hee had loued his
owne vnto the end, comforting and strengthening them: turneth nowe himselfe in an earnest and fer∣uent praier vnto his heauenly father, for an ensam∣ple and doctrine to his Disciples and all faithfull be∣leeuers,How wee should pray. that they in all temptations and afflictions, should with an earnest and feruent praier, haue re∣course vnto the Father of heauen. That he taught a∣fore in wordes, the same declareth hee nowe in the deede. shewing not onely what, but also how, and after what sort wee ought to pray: not onely for our selues, but also for those that are giuen and commit∣ted vnto vs of God, and whom we haue comforted and exhorted. Our eyes and handes ought we to lift vp vnto heauen, from whence our helpe commeth, which doing is a token of a deuout, humble, & low∣ly mind. Yea, the eyes, not onely of the body, but al∣so of the hart and beleefe. The sancti∣fiyng of Gods name should we chiefly desireBut vnto this ende principally ought all our pray∣ers to be directed, that the heauenly father may bee glorified. The deuil the prince of this world, throgh his adherents, causeth the name and trueth of Christ his doctrine and knowledge, to be rooted out & des∣pised. Seeing then that wee are Gods children, wee should in nothing bee so earnest, as in sauing the ho∣nour of our father, & in furthering his glory. Which thing commeth to passe,What it is to honour the Father. when we notifie to men v∣pon earth, his grace, faithfulnes, loue & great mercy, which he by his only begotten & deare son hath de∣clared & shewed vnto mankind: when we lead men vnto God from earthly vices & false Gods seruice, & when we direct al things to his glorie. Thus is Christ
also honored and glorified by vs, when wee through the Gospell doe publish vnto all men, his power and goodnes, his honor and glorie: when we know, that he is our sauiour, our righteousnes, and sanctifiing: when we know, that the father hath giuen all things into his power: that to those whom the father hath granted to him, hee may giue euerlasting life. Which life euerlasting consisteth in this, that wee knowe the liuing God, & his sonne Iesus Christ, whom he sent into this world. For God the father cānot be known without Christ Iesus his sonne:Iohn. 14. neither is there any mo Gods but only one, on whom wee hope & trust. The way to God is Christ,Christ is the way to God whom God therfore sent downe, that by him the mercie and grace of the Fa∣ther might be opened and appeare vnto vs. Where∣fore if we wil haue eternal life, that is, the knowledge of God, we must beleeue in Christ, and knowe him: and by him as the way and mediator, we must know God the father. Who so refuseth Christ, cannot haue the Father What should it helpe thee to thinke, that thou knowest God the highest goodnes of all, if thou hadst not him by whom thou art deliuered from sin and eternall plague? Whereas GOD the originall of all goodnesse is knowne,The know∣ledge of God eternall life. and our minde through Christ his Sonne assured of his grace: namely, that hee is fauourable vnto vs, and that hee therefore hath seperated vs out of the world, to the intent that by his spirit he might make vs like vnto his sonne, righteous and blessed: there doth there spring in our hartes a comfortable trust vnto God, a loue, & such ioy, as nothing in this
world may be compared vnto. There also doth arise in vs a diligence to keepe his commandements, god∣ly and innocently to liue.The order of our health. Thus commeth our health originally out of the grace & mercie of our heauenly Father, who afore the worlde was created, did chuse vs in Christ Iesu his Sonne vnto eternall life, and in the booke of life wrote vp our names. After the same did the Father graunt vnto vs the Sonne, & gaue him power ouer all men. Nowe that wee are giuen vnto Christ, hee openeth vnto vs the name of his Father, through the outward worde, and through his spirite in the heart. When wee beleeue in him, (which to do cōmeth also of him) then increaseth the knowledge of God in vs. Out of that knowledge, groweth an as∣sured confidence in God the highest good: Of this assured trust commeth loue towards him. And when God graunteth vs all this, he saueth vs, and giueth vs eternall life. This is an high worthines and honour of Christ, in that the father giueth him all things into his hand, that he may giue euerlasting life vnto faithful belee∣uers. No man can haue life, but throgh Christ. Who so beleeueth not in Christ, remaineth in death, and the wrath of God-abideth vppon him. But then gi∣ueth hee vs eternall life, when we receiue his worde, and knowe, that he came out from God, and that the father sent him the Sauiour of the world. And when wee thus are become faithfull beleeuers,What it is to keepe Gods comman∣dements. then keepe we his commaundementes: for faith studieth, and is diligent to please God. This honour and dignitie of Christ, his power and kingdome are first opened vn∣to
the world, after his death and crosse in the resurre∣ction and ascension. Of the which honour and glo∣rie wee also in due time shall (after our measure) bee partakers, if we suffer with him. For the high Priest, who hath prayed for vs, is heard of the Father, and glorified with eternall honor and glorie. Wherefore we may not doubt, in the remnant that he praieth for still on our behalfe: hee shal be, and is for his worthi∣nes sake heard, and hath his request. Of this wee will consider more. I Pray for them and pray not for the worlde, but for them whome thou hast giuen me, for they are thine,Iohn. 17.9. and al mine are thine, and thine are mine: & I am glorified in them. And nowe am I no more in the world, but they are in the world, and I come to the holy father, keep them in thy name whome thou hast giuen me, that they may be one as we are. When I was with thē in the world, I kept them in thy name. Those that thou gauest mee, haue I kept, and none of them is lost but the lost childe, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. Now come I to thee, and these wordes speake I in the world, that they might haue my ioy full in them. I haue giuen them thy word, and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, euen as I am not of the worlde. I desire not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou keepe them from euill. They are not of the world, as I am not of the world. Sanctifie them with thy truth: thy saying is truth. As thou sentest mee into the world, so haue I sent them into the worlde, and for their sakes I sanctifie my selfe, that they also might be sanctified through the truth. I pray not for them alone, but for those also which shall beleeue on
mee through their preaching: that they all may bee one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee. and that they may bee also one in vs, that the worlde may beleeue, that thou hast sent me. And the glorie that thou gauest mee haue I giuen them, that they may be one, as we are one, I in them, & thou in me, that they may bee made perfect in one: and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loued them as thou hast loued me. Doctrine and fruite. THIS praier of our high Priest and mediatour Christ Iesus, is feruent, earnest, full of the fire of godly loue, ful of great secrets and spirituall in∣structions. Herein may we learne to know, what hie honor, dignitie, and power, Christ by his obedience and patience, hath obtained with his father: wherein consisteth our peace, ioy, & welfare. What care and loue Christ beareth towardes those that are his, and how he committeth them vnto his father. First, hee praieth for his Disciples, whome hee did choose to publish his truth: afterward praieth he for all such as should come to the faith by their preaching vntil the worldes end. And for asmuch as the Disciples had a great waightie matter in hand, full of danger and ad∣uersitie, for they must needs procure to themselues great hatred of the world, hee first praieth for them, that the Father will strengthen, comfort, and pre∣serue them thorow his power, & defend them from all euill. In this are we taught diligently, chiefly, and speci∣ally
to pray for those vnto whome is committed the preaching of the Gospell:How the Ministers of the word should be praied for. for a chargeable and great worke carry they vppon their shoulders, by meanes whereof (among all others) they haue speciall neede of the grace, helpe, & assistance of God. But our pray∣er ought we to frame, as Christ hath framed his. First we must in our praier to God, make speciall mention of his owne grace and mercie, whereby hee chusing them to such an office, hath giuen them vnto Christ his sonne. Forasmuch then as they are the Ministers of him and of his Sonne, and seeing the Sonne is so deare, worthie & beloued vnto the Father, our pray∣er must bee, that hee for his Sonnes sake will defende and preserue them, as in him, and by him they are worthie. Secondly, considering that for his sake and his word, which they declare, they are persecuted of the worlde, it is requisite that God preserue them in his owne worke. For great need haue they of his father∣ly protection, while they yet liue in the weake feeble flesh, and are mortall men. Thirdly, their office serueth to many mens health and welfare, their office is necessary and profita∣ble to the whole world, which walketh in blindnesse and darknes: for they are the light of the world,Math 5. that thorough doctrine and liuing, must shine to manie mens life: which without the assistance and helpe of God cannot come passe. Thus ought wee to praye for the ministers of the word, & to desire, that God throgh his holy name, & power, will defend, strength, comfort, and preserue
them in all aduersitie: but principally that hee will giue them grace to bee one, coupled together in the band of peace, loue and vniformitie: that they may be of one spirite, and of one mind: that in one spirite they may further and plant the honour of God:Ephe 4. Phil. 2. that like as Christ neither spake nor did anie thing but that which was acceptable and wel pleasing vnto the father, they also in their sayinges and dooinges may haue respect vnto Gods glorie: and that they being rooted and fortified in loue,Col. 2. bee not vanquished nor ouercome of the pleasures or threateninges of this world. Secondly, that in all their labour and trauaile, in al aduersitie and persecutions, hee will put into theyr hartes, his owne comfort and spirituall ioy. For the worlde hath manifolde mirthes, pastimes, and plea∣sures: much bragging and wilfulnesse vseth it in the riches and fleshly voluptuousnes thereof.Iohn. 15. But the true Ministers of Christ (seeing hee hath seuered them from the worlde) must and ought to refraine and absent themselues from all worldly ioy and vo∣luptuousnes: yea, it is they, that ought to diswade the worlde from such wantonnesse and vanitie: by meanes of whose faithfull admonition, there fal∣leth much hatred and trouble vpon them: Neither were it to the furtheraunce of Gods honour and our commoditie, to haue them vtterlye taken a∣way out of this worlde. Therefore dooth Christ desire (and so must wee with him) that from euill, namely from the Deuill the Prince of this worlde, who stirreth the world against them, they may of the
father in the world be defended and kept. Thirdly, that he will sanctifie and cleanse them a∣fore other men, that they may be holy and pure ves∣sels in the house and temple, that is, in the Church of God, for they are means & instruments, by whō God ministereth his grace and truth vnto men, therfore is it also conuenient, that they be pure and holy.1. Cor. 4. This commeth throgh the truth that God putteth in their mouth and heart by the holy Ghost, which inwardly purifieth them. But then are they holy when they teach truth, and liue godly. Into the worlde hath Christ sent thē, as the father sent him into the world. The father sent Christ into the world, that he should destroy the kingdome of the deuill and of the world, that he should declare vnto the world, the grace and mercie of God towardes mankinde, that he shoulde bring men from sinne, and from false idolatrish faith, to the true liuing God, and to a vertuous conuersati∣on, that he with the light of truth, should shine vpon those which sate in darknes: that he should bring the knowledge of God into the world, & exhort men to the amendement of life. Euen this hath Christ giuen in commission to his Apostles, and to all ministers of the worde to doo. This is their office, this is their mi∣nistration, vnto this haue they greate neede of the grace, power, and assistance of God, therefore ought we most earnestly to praie for them, for if they fail or fal, it hurteth the whole Church: yea, out of the same there groweth slaunder vnto the name of God in the sight of the vnbeleeuers, and an occasion of falling,Ezech. 36 to such as are weake of faith. Therefore Christ also
offered himselfe to the father for them, and sanctifi∣ed them, that they might bee pure and holy: not in outward apparance, but from the heart, and in the truth, that through their vniformity & loue, through the word of truth, which they preach, through the holynes of their doctrine and liuing, all men and the whole world might know and vnderstand, that God hath sent them, yea, that God sent his son Christ in∣to the world, vnto whome they with mouth and life beare record, and who also euery where shineth out of them with wordes and deeds. Not onely for them hath Christ praied, but also for vs, as many as hearken and beleeue the worde of truth preached by them. Wherein first wee may per∣ceiue and see, the loue, faithfulnes, and great care of Christ for vs, how earnestly the trustie shepheard of our soules, committeth his poore sheepe into his fa∣thers protection, how faithfully our mediatour and aduocate praieth for vs, whereby also he setteth forth a doctrine vnto vs, how and what we shal pray of the heauenly father. First, that he will make vs one by his holy spirite, in the truth, in the vnitie of faith, and in loue vnsepa∣rable,Phil 2. Ephe 2. that we all may be of one mind, one body, and one spirit in Christ Iesu our head, and to keepe the v∣nitie of the spirit in the bond of peace, that we all be∣ing illuminated by his spirit, may in word and deed, yea in our whole life, seeke and further the glorie of our heauenly father, that we all may bee one among our selues & with God,Iohn. 13. whereby all the worlde may spie, see, and perceiue, that we are Gods children and
Christs disciples Secondly, that of his fatherly goodnes, he will de∣fend, saue & preserue vs his own poore sheep, which be in the midst among wolues & manifold dangers:Math. 10. And seeing we being yet in the world, do not liue af∣ter the world, that it will please him to keepe vs from the euill, namely, frō the prince of of this world, that thogh the same our enemie doth tempt & plague vs, he neuer yet haue power to preuaile against vs. Thirdly, that inasmuch as we being in sin concei∣ued and borne, haue hetherto liued in sinne,Psal. 3. & seeing that albeit we are cleansed alreadie by his word and faith, yet the vncleannes of the flesh and of the world doth daily defile vs, it wil please him throgh his truth to purge and sanctifie our bodies, our soules,1. Cor. . 2. Cor. 6 and our whole life, that wee may become an holy temple of his grace, pure, cleane, & holy vessels, consecrated & sanctified to Gods own vse. He hath once purified & hallowed vs through the bloud of his son, and vnto the father hath Christ sanctified and offered vp him∣selfe an holy acceptable sacrifice for our sins: but the deuill, the world, and our flesh, is euer busie to lead vs away againe from God & from true holines. There∣fore must wee daily pray vnto him, that through his holy spirit, & through his holy truth, he wil continu∣ally purge, clense, & sanctifie vs, that we be not dissē∣bling hypocrites, but godly and vnfained euen from our harts, & that we be not stained in the filthines of this world, but to refraine from all vncleannes,Iames·  tho∣rogh the assistāce of his grace, that we may also offer vp our bodies an holy acceptable sacrifice to od the
Lord, as he offered vp himselfe vppon the crosse for our sakes. Iohn. 17FAther, I will, that they which thou hast giuen me, be with me where I am, that they may see my glory, which thou hast giuen me, for thou louedst me before the ma∣king of the world. O righteous father, the worlde also hath not knowen thee, but I haue knowen thee, & these haue kno∣wen that thou hast sent me. And I haue declared vnto them thy name, and will declare it, that the loue wherewith thou hast loued me, may be in them, and I in them. Doctrine and fruite. AFter that Christ had committed his vnto the fa∣ther, that he will care for them, defend & keepe them, while they liue in the world: he desireth now that it will please him, finally also to saue them, and to take them to himself into his kingdome. With the which praier, he giueth a great consolation to his disciples, and all faithfull beleeuers, that we might be the more cheerefull to serue him, considering the high reward that is prepared for vs: that for his sake we should ioyfully and stoutly beare all aduersitie, seeing he will make vs (yea hath made vs alredy) par∣takers of his glory and of his kingdome. Oh the great grace and incomprehensible loue of God towards vs, who through his mercie and great loue, whereas wee were children of wrath and dam∣nation, hath made vs his own children, elect and be∣loued: and when wee were dead in sinne, hath with
his son raised vs vp from death, reuiued vs, & made vs sit with him among those of heauen in Christ Iesu,Eph. 2 to declare vnto the ages to come, the riches of his grace in kindnes and loue to vs ward, through Iesus Christ. Forasmuch nowe as God hath caused the lyght of his glorie, euen Christ, to shine into our harts, and through the light of faith, hath kindled and purified our hearts, it is meete, that in this time we liue as chil∣dren of light, to the intent that men may see the brightnes of those good workes which proceede of faith, to the praise of our heauenly father.Math. 5 And thogh we be not as yet bodily with Christ, yet our heartes and mindes are alwaies aboue,Col 3. there as Christ sitteth at the right hand of God: our conuersation and be∣ing is in heauen, albeit wee are yet in corporall mise∣rie, with heart we desire to die, and to be with Christ.Phil. 1 2. Cor. 3 Wee are sure if this earthly house were fallen and broken downe, that we haue one euerlasting in hea∣uen. Wee are dead, but our life is reserued with Christ in GOD. It is not euident yet what wee be, but when Christ our lyfe shall shewe himselfe, then shall wee also appeare with him in glorie: euen when wee shall rise vp, and bee taken vp in the ayre, and bee with him for euer,1. Thes. . and see his honour and glorie, which the Angelles delight to see and be∣holde. Oh how great pleasure and ioy is it, to beholde the eternall light that neuer quencheth, in the which no darknesse hath place: from the which shall bee expelled and cast out, all they that woulde not re∣ceiue
and know the light which God hath sent into the world to illuminate them, but are blinded by the Prince of this world,2. Cor. 4 least the the light of the Gospel should shine vpon them? No wrong doth the righte∣ous father vnto them, when hee plagueth them, and taketh the light from them. A righteous and iust iudgement is it, seeing the gracious Father so mer∣cifully sent them the light of the truth, and they yet so maliciously and stubbornly haue despised and re∣fused it: yea, reason it is, that they perish in vntruth, in lies,Iohn. 3. & in euerlasting blindnes: for asmuch as they wold receiue darknes rather than the light, lies rather than the truth. And considering that they haue forsa∣ken the brightnes of the truth, and of the son of God: they must needes be cast into vtter darkenes, and ne∣uer enioy the light. O gracious Father, graunt vnto vs, which thorow thy sonne haue known thy name, that in such know∣ledge and light of the truth, wee may increase more and more: that the loue wherewith thou louest thy deare sonne, may bee and remaine in vs, and that thy onely begotten sonne Iesus Christ our head, may in vs his members continue still, worke, liue, and bring forth fruit acceptable vnto thee. AND when Iesus had spoken these words, he went out with his Disciples (as hee was woont) ouer the brooke Cedron, vnto mount Oliuet, into a village called Geth∣semani, wheras was a garden, into the which Iesus went with his disciples. Iudas nowe, who betrayed him, knewe also the place, for Iesus vsed oft to come thether with his disciples. Ie∣sus
sayd vnto his Disciples: Sit ye heere, till I go yonder and pray. And he tooke vnto him Peter and the two sonnes of Zebede, and began to be heauy and sony. And a feare and ter∣rour came vppon him. Thus said he vnto them, my soule is heauie vnto the death: tarrie ye heere and watch with me. And hee went from them as farre as a stones cast. Then fell he downe vppon his face to the ground and praied: that if it were possible, that houre might depart from him. And thus hee praied: O father, vnto thee are all thinges possible: take this cuppe from mee: howbeit not my will, but thy will bee done. Doctrine and fruite. AFter that Iesus hath established his Disciples in faith and loue, comforting and strengthening them against aduersitie and trouble to come in this world, promising also vnto them, the spirit, loue, defence, and protection of his father: hee goeth now to meet his traitour and enemies, and beginneth the worke of our redemption. Awake vp nowe, O thou faithfull and deuout soule, and go after thy redemer, followe his foot-steps, gather vp diligently the drops of his bloud, and sprinckle them with a true faith in thine heart: take vp the bundle of mirrhe, and lay it at thy breast, O thou noble bride and spouse of Christ: his passion that he suffereth for thee, write then in thy minde, learne to die from all sinne, from thy selfe, and from the world: that thou maiest bee crucified vnto the world, and the world vnto thee. Death is vgsome, and very terrible vnto the
flesh, but ioyfull and welcome is it vnto all such as are instructed in the secrete science of God, name∣ly, that death vnto faithfull beleeuers, is an ende of all trouble, an enteraunce into a better and eternall lyfe. Christ in that he goeth forth to meete death, de∣clareth that he wil suffer, not of compulsion, but wil∣lingly, whereby he comforteth vs. But whereas he is heauie, and trembleth before his disciples, and con∣fesseth howe hee feareth death: the same is done for our wealth, to declare vnto vs the weaknesse and fee∣blenesse that our flesh receiueth at the sight of aduer∣sitie,Heb. 2. for in all things (sinne except) it was his good pleasure to become lyke vnto vs his brethren, hee would take vpon him a true man, who felte our ad∣uersitie in his owne flesh, and so coulde haue com∣passion on vs. Besides this, hee sheweth also to whom our weaknesse ought to resort for comfort and helpe in aduersitie, namely, to our father in heauen, before whome wee must fall downe with deuout and fer∣uent praier, and vnto him disclose and open our an∣guish and trouble. To this praier, he seeketh and chooseth out a place meete and conuenient for the same: for prayer is a lifting vp of the minde in GOD, which among the multitude of men, and confusion of worldly matters cannot well bee done. Therefore Christ sheweth vs, what greate diligence wee ought to vse in prayer, when the enemie falleth in, that the minde maye cleaue vnto GOD constantly and without shrin∣king, and what iesture the bodie ought to shewe
in praier, Christ also declareth, in that hee falleth downe to the earth vppon his face, and praieth with the voyce and words. God hath no need of our prai∣er: but vnto vs is nothing more profitable and better, than oft and feruently to pray. And the greater the aduersitie is, the more ardent and earnest should the praier bee: as we see heere in Christ our head, whose passion is verie great in bodie and in minde, for the which cause also, as a verie true man, he sheweth the fame his passion, and heauines to his Disciples. The strongest of all, is weake: and the comforter of all harts, hath need of comfort himselfe: hee that expelleth all terror and feare, doth himselfe feare and tremble. But al this cōmeth to passe for our learning, that whē we be in temptations, we should not doubt in the helpe of God: and that none of vs (beeing in daunger and aduersitie, and feeling himselfe loth to suffer, or pensiue and slow to tame the motions and wickednes of the flesh) should therefore shrinke and bee faint harted: but with a constant faith to resorte vnto God, complaining to him of his trouble, with hartie praier: that he will bring the hard and painful beginning, to a blessed and ioyfull ende: that in all aduersitie we may consider, as well the excellent and great fruit which proceedeth thereof, as also the gra∣tious good will of our heauenly Father, to whom we ought wholly and perfectly to giue ouer, and offer vp our selues: that neither through the multitude of sinnes, neither through the greatnes of aduersitie, we despaire nor fall away: but with his helpe and assi∣stance, manfully to go through.
IEsus came againe to his Disciples, and founde them slee∣ping. Then saide hee vnto Peter: Simon, sleepest thou? Couldest thou not watch with mee one houre? Watch yee and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit is wil∣ling, but the flesh is weake. Doctrine and fruite. THE loue of Christ towardes vs, is feruent, ear∣nest and great: but our flesh is so weake, that we not onely consider it not, but are also so slow, that wee sleepe, and feele not for whose sakes Christ hath suffered so great things Oft times is there in vs a ready will to take great matters in hande, as Peter and the other Disciples did: but at the last wee misse, and haue many a sore fall. Therefore Christ (who know∣eth vs better than we our selues) willing to expell frō vs all pride and presumptuousnes, teacheth vs to bee lowly minded and humble, to bee euer watching, & with continual praier to cleaue only vnto him, with∣out whom we are able to do nothing, and in whome we may do all things and euen so doth he also in his feeblenes, which assaulted him as a very true man: to the intent, that wee alway remembring our owne weaknes, might vnderstand how to tame the rebelli∣ous flesh, & in no case to trust it: and that wee might bee carefull and vigilaunt, least the subtill enemie in temptations, come behind vs, fall vppon vs, and op∣presse vs. It is no time to sleepe, the battaile is yet a fighting, the enemie is yet aliue, and as yet beseegeth
hee our castle that Christ hath in keeping. All is full of snares and dangers, which no man is able to escape saue onely hee, which in feruent beleefe and prayer doth earnestly watch and stoutly fight, yea, and that continually vnto the end. Neither the present anguish and trouble, nor yet Christes exhortation can bring so much to passe in the Disciples, as to keepe them from sleepe: so little it helpeth, where the spirite giueth not life. Neuer∣thelesse Christes talke and admonition vnto his Dis∣ciples is not vtterly vnprofitable, for that they nowe vnderstand not, the same afterwardes (when the spi∣rite commeth) is made playne and euident vnto them, and then are they feruent and earnest in god∣ly prayer. Wherefore wee should neuer cease from comforting and exhorting the feeble and weake: for though it helpe not at this present, the houre shall come, that the spirite will make it to haue life, and to be fruitfull in them. HE went foorth the second time, and praied like as a∣fore: My father, if this cup may not passe except I drinke it, thy wil be done. Then came he againe, and found them sleeping, for their eies were heauie, & they knew not what answere to make him. So he left them againe, and went and praied the third time like as afore, and kneeled downe and said: Father, if thou wilt, take away this cuppe from me: Neuerthelesse, not my will, but thine be done. And there appeared vnto him an Angell from heauen comfor∣ting him: and when he was in the agonie (distresse and con∣flict) he praied the longer: and his sweat was like droppes of
bloud trickling downe to the ground. And when he rose vp from praier, and came to his Disciples, hee found them slee∣ping for heauines, and hee said vnto them: What? Sleepe ye? Sleepe on now, and take your rest. It is enough, vppe and pray that ye enter not into temptation. Behold the houre ap∣procheth, and the son of man is betraied and giuen into the hands of sinners. Vp, let vs goe: beholde, hee that betraieth me is at hand. Doctrine and fruite. IN the perfect example and mirrour of our life Christ Iesus, we find an earnest feruent loue, a do∣ctrine how wee ought to behaue our selues in ad∣uersitie. First, wee see that Christ of an exceeding great loue, taketh vpon himself al infirmities of man∣kinde, and becommeth like vnto his brethren in all thinges, sinne except: beeing a very true man, hee is therfore not ashamed before his disciples to acknow∣ledge his infirmitie, sorrow, heauines and feare, and to complaine thereof vnto his father. A feare by rea∣son of the death and passion, hee receiueth as a verie man: for not to feele trouble, is not the nature of mā: and passion is no passion, if it smart not, if it bee not felt, Christ therefore both in his mind and body fee∣leth the passion, hee feeleth the conflict of death, al∣beit in wrastling withall, he ouerthroweth it. Oh the exceeding feruent loue of our head and foregoer Ie∣sus Christ, who for our helth, commeth into so great an agonie and trouble, that aboue naturall moysture, through the fearefull conflict of the passion & death,
he sheddeth his bloud and sweateth it: but with har∣tie desire runneth he to his heauenly father: to him complaineth he of his weaknes and distresse: to him giueth he ouer himselfe in al obedience and conten∣tation of mind: of him also receiueth he comfort and strength. In the meane season, he forgetteth not his Disciples, but commeth to them, exhorteth them to watch and pray, & hath great compassion with their feeblenes and slouth. If we now be the disciples and schollers of Christ Iesu, and haue surrendered our selues vppe into the schoole of the heauenly Schoolmaister, we ought di∣ligently to looke, what Christ here in him selfe, doth teach and prescribe vnto vs: that wee learning the same of him, and following his foot-steppes (when temptations of sinne, and conflicts of aduersitie, tro∣ble, and death fall in vpon vs) may know how to or∣der and frame our selues therein. First, that wee know our selues to be poore, full of faultes; mortall men and sinners hauing nothing of our owne but feeblenes. So when the temptation of sinne and of the flesh assault vs, we must not be asha∣med to open such our faults and conflicts vnto God our heauenly Father, and to complaine vnto him of them. God hath not made vs to bee vtterly without temptation, but hath suffered the same to remaine in the flesh, that we therby might be exercised & prouo∣ked to seeke helpe at him, and to learne, in how mi∣serable a case we should be, if he withdrew his hande from vs When we now feele that the spirit is willing and the flesh weake,Rom. 7. Gal. 5. and that the law of the members
withstandeth the law of God in vs, that the flesh figh∣teth and striueth against the spirit: we must not be a∣shamed to confesse our feeblenes before our heuen∣ly Father (yea though of weakenes wee had lyen vn∣der in the battaile already) desiring his helpe, that we may rise againe, and valiauntly to fight it out. Thus must wee also doe, when the crosse and hatred of the world for Christes sake (or that is contrary to our na∣ture) falleth vpon vs. The cuppe which the father hath filled in, that we shoulde drinke it, the same ought wee willingly to drinke: and if there growe in our flesh a terrour and feare to tast it, we must not be ashamed to complaine thereof vnto our Father, forasmuch as we see heere, that Christ for our sakes beeing in such heauines and feare, did not yet (for all that) steppe aside from his Fathers will. The patience therefore of Christians standeth not in this, that they feele no passion, or bee not feareful, heauy, or sorie: but in this, that no crosse bee so great, as to bee able to driue them away from Christ. Yea, the more the crosse that God the Father hath laid vpon them doth make them to smart, & the more it presseth them (so that they yet beare it) the more pretious and more excellent is their patience: which patience we ought to declare, but not as they that suffer or feele no passion at all. For heere wee are instructed and certified of the kindnes of our louing Father, that hee is not angrie, neyther taketh it in euill part when we complaine to him of our present trouble, so that we giue ouer our will vnto his. All they therefore that be in afflictions,
aduersitie and temptations, must set this example of the Lorde directly before their eyes, and ponder it in their harts. Not only is the father not angry when wee complaine vnto him in our necessitie, but in all trouble hee sendeth vs his owne helpe and comfort, either by his Angell, or inwardly by his spirit, or out∣wardly by some other meane, he sendeth vs strength, giueth vs his hande, draweth vs, deliuereth vs, & suf∣fereth vs not to be tempted aboue our power, or else in the middest of our aduersitie, he giueth vs conso∣lation and strength to ouercome it. O how great comfort bringeth this vnto vs in our afflictions in life and death, if we ponder, weigh, and consider the exceeding loue of GOD our heauenly Father, who giueth his deare Sonne into so greate trouble, that wee might bee deliuered from eternall aduersitie and sorrow. If we also remember the loue of our Lorde Iesus towards vs, who for our sakes ta∣keth vppon himselfe so great a feare and passion, how cannot wee looke for all good thinges at his hande? What thing is so great, that wee his members would not suffer for his sake, if wee behold the head in such anguish and trouble? And for as much as hee suffe∣reth all this for the satisfaction of our sins, we ought to applie great diligence, that we fall not againe in∣to sinne, for the which Christ suffered this, and from the which Christ with so great a passion hath deliue∣red and cleansed vs. Wee learne heere also to loue our neighboures, to care for them, to pittie them if they bee impotent and slowe, to pray for their infir∣mitie, seeing wee are all weake and feeble: and vnto
such weaknesse must we so haue respect, that we bee not arrogant, nor hold much of our selues, when wee see that Peter and others are so full of sleepe & slug∣gishnes, that all the admonitions and exhortations of Christ, could at that time do little with them. But e∣uer in humblenes of minde, and in the feare of God, ought wee to stand: to ascribe all good thinges vnto him: to be carefull and watch, least the Deuill draw vs into his temptations. O mercifull Father, giue vs grace with feruent hartes to consider the vnspeakeable loue of thee and of thy Sonne, and neuer to forget the same: that our fayth and trust in thee may bee strengthened: that loue in vs towards thee and our neighbour may bee kindled: that aboue all thinges wee may loue thee, the welspring of all goodnesse: that wee may serue our neighbours in loue, care for them, and doe them good, according to the loue that thy deare Son hath bestowed vppon vs O giue vs patience and stedfast∣nes in aduersitie, strengthen our weaknesse, com∣fort vs in trouble and distresse, helpe vs to fight: Graunt vnto vs, that in true obedience and conten∣tation of mind, wee may giue ouer our owne willes vnto thee our Father in all thinges, according to the example of thy beloued sonne: that in aduersitie we grudge not, but offer vp our selues vnto thee with∣out contradiction. Giue vs strength constantly to subdue the rebellious and stubborne flesh, and to make it obedient vnto the spirit: to castaway al tem∣porall and carnall feare: to resort oft vnto prayer: to bee earnest and feruent therein: to mortifie all our
owne wils and lustes, and vtterly to giue them their leaue. O giue vs a willing and cheerefull minde, that vvee may gladly suffer, and beare all thinges for thy sake. SO when Iudas had gotten him a companie of souldiers of the high Priests and of the Pharesies ministers, hee came thether with lanthornes, linkes, and weapons, yea the same Iudas Iscarioth one of the twelue (as Iesus yet tal∣ked with his disciples) and with him a great heape of peo∣ple, with swoords & staues, sent from the high Priests, scribes and elders of the people. Now had the traitor giuen them a token, saying: Whom so euer I doo kisse, the same is he, take him and bring him warily. So Iudas went before them, and came neere vnto Iesus to kisse him. And when he came, he stept vnto him, and sayd: All haile master, and with that kissed him. Iesus sayd vnto him, Friend, whereto art thou come? Iudas, betrayest thou the sonne of man with a kisse? Iesus knowing all things that were to come vpon himselfe, went forth, and sayd vnto them: Whom seeke ye? They said, Iesus of Nazareth. Then sayd he vnto them, I am he. And Iudas that betraied him, stood with them. Now when Iesus sayd, I am hee, they went backeward and fell to the ground. Then Iesus asked them againe: whome seeke ye? They said: Iesus of Nazareth. Then answered Iesus and said: I haue tolde you that I am hee: If ye seeke me, then let these depart, that the saying which he spake might bee fulfilled: Of them whome thou gauest me, I haue lost none.
Doctrine and fruit. CHrist the worthy and strong Captaine, when he hath whollie giuen ouer himselfe, steppeth forth weaponed, going manfully and stedfast∣lie against the prince of this world and his ministers, yeelding and offering himselfe willingly to suffer for vs,Esa. 53 as Esay saith, quia voluit: for so was it his will. No man had beene able to take him, or put him to death, if hee had not so willed himselfe: for hee had pow∣er to leaue his owne life. Many times afore, did hee giue place to their fury,Iohn. 10 and got himselfe out of the way: but when the houre apointed of the father was come, he goeth himselfe willingly & meeteth death by the way. Heere ought we also to learne, willingly and stoutly to goe into aduersity, if it bee the will of our father, if Gods honour and our neighbours wel∣fare so require. For like as the father suffreth not his son to die till the houre of death come: euen so stan∣deth our life in his hand. The limits that hee hath set vnto vs, may we neither preuent, nor ouer passe: nei∣ther lieth it in the power of our enemies, to kill vs when they will themselues. Christ careth for those that are his: the enemies are able to doe vs no harme at all,Iob. 2 no neither in bodie nor goods, till the Father giue them leaue. Therfore he sayth, Let these go. The father, according to his greate mercie and gracious will, thrusteth vs into aduersitie with Christ his deare beloued sonne, in such wise, so much, and at what time he will himselfe. Against his will ought we not
to striue, but patiently and with obedience submit our selues wholy vnto it. Oh what an vnspeakable great loue is heere! The shepheard dieth, to saue the lyfe of the poore sheepe: the Lorde goeth vnto death, to the intent that the seruants should not die: the creator spareth not him∣selfe to saue his creature. If the sonne of God nowe doeth not abhorre to suffer death for vs, why would wee then bee ashamed, to suffer and die for hys sake. And though he be verie God, and sheweth his e∣nemies the brightnes of his godly strength, in that he so throweth them to the grounde, yet will not he in the same houre vse such his diuine power to deliuer himself: albeit he admonisheth them therby, to cease from their conceiued mallice, for his godly strength casteth them downe, his mercie & grace lifteth them vp again. Out of the which great myracle, they shuld haue learned, not to laie hande on him malitiously, they shoulde haue considered, that if it had beene his pleasure, hee might well haue escaped their handes, so that they had not beene able to holde him, but the vnbeleeuing rable are blinded, indurate, and hardned, that neither myracle nor kindnes can moue them. Oh the high maiestie of Christ! how shall vnbe∣leeuers be able to stand before him, when he shal ap∣peare in the iudgement, whereas before his weak∣nesse and humilitie (when hee was now to bee iudg∣ed himselfe) they were not able to stand? If his lo∣uing voice wherewith hee speaketh so gentlie vnto
them (and saith: I am hee) dooth so feare them and throw them down. What wil then the horrible voice of the Iudge doe, when hee shall say: depart yee cur∣sed into euerlasting fire? O how innocently and god∣ly ought we to liue before him, who is among vs, and in vs, heareth all our words, seeth all our workes, ser∣cheth and looketh thorow all our thoughts, howe se∣cret so euer they be? Christ at this time withdrew his high power, and in weaknes of the flesh, and in won∣derfull high patience, stept he forth to suffer. By his ensample must wee learne, not to take vs to our high estate, but with patience and humblenes of mind to meet the enemie. Like patience and gentlenes vseth he also towards his traitour, whome hee goeth to meet, not speaking rough wordes vnto him, brawleth not with him, ra∣teth him not, (as he was well worthy) but receiueth him with all softnes of mind, and gentlenes, whereas yet hee came to deliuer & betray him into the hands of the wicked, and vnto death. Neither dooth the Lorde denie him so much as the kisse, the token of friendship: but louingly also talketh he with him: al∣beit he also maketh mention of his vnfeined and dis∣sembling friendship, telling him of it: admonishing him (if he had not bene hardened) to cease from his conceaued treason. Wherefore, we also must learne of Christ (so far as concerneth our owne person and estimation) with all mildnesse, softnesse of mind, pa∣tience and greatest loue, to meete those that hate vs and betray vs:Math. 5: Rom. 12. if peraduenture with such loue and gentlenes of minde. wee may bring them away from
their malice and wickednes. Heere also with great feare & dread ought we to consider of the iudgement God in Iudas. that he be∣ing one of the twelue and elect Disciples, dooth be∣tray and sell the Lord Iesus his gratious louing Mai∣ster. Whereby wee are taught, how that amongst all men there is nothing throughly perfect and whole, seeing that in so holy and small number there is one man so greatly stuffed with wickednesse. Therefore he that standeth, let him looke that he fall not. Lette couetousnes blind no man: let the desire of tempo∣rall good possesse and rule no mans heart: for out of couetousnes the roote of all vice, groweth nothing but treason and despaire. No righteousnesse, no fi∣delity, no truth, no honesty, can be in that hart wher∣in greedie couetousnes hath taken root. Iudas for ve∣rie greedines of money, giueth ouer God & all loue: and hee that afore was a fellowe and companion of the holy congregation of Gods children, is become a mate, companion and Captaine of the wicked & vnbeleeuers: hee that was chosen to the preaching of the Gospell, is become an enemie, persecutor, and traitour against the truth. O from how high & great honour, to what shame, dishonestie, and vile state falleth Iudas, who hauing woluish conditions vn∣der sheepes cloathing, doth vnder the token of loue, practise treason against the trueth? From Iesus the true health. hee seperateth himselfe to the children of the Deuill: hee getteth him amongst the bloud-thirstie, yea euen he that hitherto in outward appea∣raunce had confessed the trueth. Thus goeth it when
temptation breaketh in, when the truth commeth in∣to perill and aduersitie: then the enemies of the truth declare themselues, and hypocrites get them to the aduersaries against Christ: then may wee learne to know them. Of these (the more pittie) there bee at this daie in the church of God many, which vnder the pretence and colour of truth, fight against the truth, and that taking the name of Christ in their mouth, betraye Christ, yea with the sword of their venemous tungs kill Christ, and in sheeps cloathing are very wolues, false teachers, and most noysome enemies, whome couetousnes and vaine glorie blindeth. And wheras they are not able to roote out Christ with the truth, they vndertake to do it with weapons and swords, & set the princes and powers of the worlde, to defende their falshood and tyranny. Yea, many there bee of those that rebuking Iudas acte, doo euen as hee did themselues: feyning the trueth, when in very deede they persecute the truth. O our great slothfulnes! whereof wee are admo∣nished in the Disciples that sleepe, when wicked Iu∣das in his vngratious worke so diligently watcheth, and earnestly runneth about. O that the loue & zeale of God might doe as much in vs, as the vngratious will in the wicked! O that wee which are chosen in∣to the seruice of Christ, were so diligent to minister vnto our Father and Lorde, as the children of this world are to wait vpon Sathan their maister! for no∣thing doo they omit, that may serue to the persecu∣tion of the truth.
O mercifull God, graunt vs poore feeble men pa∣tience in aduersitie, that sodaine wrath ouercome vs not, and that bitternesse and desire of vengeance, kindle vs not to vse vncharitable wordes, and to doe hurt, when enemies fall vpon vs, and bragge against vs, telling vs our faultes, whereof wee thinke our selues vnguiltie. Graunt vs euer louingly to receiue all aduersitie: and that wee may knowe those to bee our best friendes, which speake vnto vs, and rebuke vs hardest of all. Lette no wicked roote of enuie, malice, and euill will growe in vs: no tediousnes, nor slouth. Giue vs strength to bee willing and patient, and with feruent desire to suffer yet more greeuous thinges for thy sake. Pull vp the wicked root of co∣uetousnesse, and the false shine of feyned spiritualtie out of vs. Oh saue vs, that Sathan bring vs not into temptation Graunt vs loue towardes friendes and e∣nemies: that we may follow the nature of thee our Father, and the example of thy onely begotten Son Iesus Christ, Amen: THen came they and laide handes on Iesus, and tooke him. But when they that were with him sawe what would come of it, they said vnto him: Mayster, shal we smite with the sword? Iesus answered, & said: Suffer ye thus farre forth. Simon Peter had a sword, which he drew out, & smote the seruant of the high Priest, & cut off his right eare. And the seruantes name was called Malchus. Then sayde Iesus vnto Peter: Put thy (word into the sheath. Wilt thou not that I shall drinke the cuppe which my Father hath giuen mee? All they that drawe the sworde, shall perish
with the sword. Thinkest thou not, that I might pray my fa∣ther to send me now more than twelue legions of Angels? But how should the Scriptures be fulfilled? It must needes be thus. And when Iesus touched his eare, he healed it. Then began Iesus to speake vnto the multitude (that were come to him) and to the high Priests, and to the chiefe rulers of the temple, and to the elders, and said: Ye are come foorth as to a murtherer with swords and staues, to take me. whereas I yet being daily in the temple, sate and taught, and yee tooke mee not. But this is your houre, and the power of darknesse. All this commeth to passe, that the Scriptures should bee fulfilled. Then the Disciples forsooke him, and fledde all from him. There was a yong man that followed after, who had a white linnen cloth vpon the bare, and him they tooke. But he left the linnen cloth behind him, and ranne away naked. The multiude, and the captaine and Ministers of the Iewes, apprehended Iesus, took him, bound him, & lead him first to Annas the chiefe Priest: for he was Father in lawe vnto Caiphas, which Caiphas was high Priest, and was the same Caiphas which gaue counsaile vnto the Iewes, that better it were one man to die, than the whole people to perish. And all the Priestes, and Scribes, Pharisies, and Elders came to∣gether. Doctrine and fruite. PEter declaring his earnest loue which hee bare vnto the Lord, vndertaketh to defend him from malitious violence: but at the same houre it plea∣sed the Lord to declare and shew, not onely his own might and power, but also his vnspeakable goodnes
euen vnto his enemies: therefore is it not his will, that anie man on his behalfe should haue harme: for he was come to bring health, and no hurt: and ther∣fore the vncircumcised zeale of Peter, which was not directed after the will of God, he reiected and repro∣ued, commaunding Peter to put vp his sworde into his sheath: and the seruants eare that was smitten off he set on againe, and healed it: for hee was readie to be obedient vnto his Fathers will vnto the death, & to drinke the cup that the Father had filled for him. Yet doth he shew vnto his enemies, that he willingly suffereth, & that if it were not his wil, they shuld not be able to take him. But he affirmed the houre now to bee heere, that the Father had giuen him into the power of darkenesse, and that they shewed such vio∣lence vnto him, that the scripture might be fulfilled. The Disciples flie from Iesu their Lorde, & leaue him to tread the wine presse alone. In their weaknes, feare and flying, is signified the infirmitie of the vn∣perfect members of the Church, which yet when the spirite commeth, is strengthened. Let no man builde vpon his owne strength, but pray vnto God, that hee suffer him not to be lead into temptation. The gratious Lord Iesus is sold vnto sinners, that we which were solde vnder sinne, bond and thrall to the prince of this world, might be redeemed, and de∣liuered. He is content to be bound and taken, that we might be quite and free from the snares and catiui∣tie of sinne. O Iesu Christ, the mirrour of all gentle  mind, the example of highest obedience
graunt vs thy seruantes with true deuotion to consi∣der, how thou innocent and vndefiled lambe wert bound, taken, and hailed away vnto death for our sinnes:Esay. 53. how well content thou wast to suffer such thinges, not opening thy mouth in vnpatiencie, but willingly offering vp thy selfe vnto death. O gratious God, how vilely wast thou mishandled for our sakes: O Lord, let this neuer come out of our harts: expell through it, coldnes and slouth out of our minds: stir vp feruentnes and loue towardes thee: prouoke vs vnto earnest praier: make vs chearefull and diligent in thy will: bind our stubborne flesh with the cords of thy feare and nurture: yoke vs vnder thy holie worke and obedience. Yea, thy bands make quite & free from all sinnes: thy bandes keepe vs, and drawe vs in, that we run not at large in curiositie & worldly vanitie: they preserue vs in thy holy seruice vnder continual nurture and blessed perseuerance. O grant that it bee light and not greeuous vnto vs, to breake and yeelde our selues: that wee doo not loath nor abhorre, to bee enfourmed, taught, lead, and correc∣ted against our owne selfe will. Graunt that wee ne∣uer become disobedient, vnquiet, stubborne, busie, headie and contentious. that wee neuer bee found fighters, neyther such as vse brawling and scoul∣ding. Make thou vs quyet, milde, soft minded, tractable and meeke: euer readie, and not loth to keepe thy commaundementes. Bow downe our necke vnder the yoake of thy obedience: helpe vs, through straite exercises, to tame and ouercome our flesh and wicked dispositions, which wee are most
inclined vnto. O Lord Iesus Christ, graunt vnto vs whome thou hast deliuered, that fully and perfectly wee may yeelde our selues vnto thee, committing vs wholly vnto thy spirite: and to haue alwayes before our eyes and hearts, that wee are euen as sheepe ap∣pointed to the butcherie and shammels: that we de∣fende not our selues in ire and greedinesse of venge∣aunce: for thou hast numbred our haires, and giuen vs thine Angels to bee our keepers. Wherefore pre∣serue thou our mindes from displeasure and desire of reuengement: graunt vs a milde friendly stomacke towardes our enemie, that we may loue him, speake good vnto him, pray for him, recompence him good for euill, that wee may bee readie, to offer the other cheeke also. And when wee stand in anie daunger, O graunt vs, that we do nothing which doth euil be∣come thy children, and that is not agreeable vnto thine example. ANd Annas sent him so bounde vnto Caiphas the high Priest. The souldiers tooke Iesus, and lead him vnto the high Priest Caiphas, there as the Scribes, the Elders, and Pharisies were come together. But Peter follow∣ed after a farre off into the pallace of the high Priest, and so did another Disciple, the same Disciple was knowne to the high Priest, and went in with Iesu into the high Priests pal∣lace. But Peter stood without at the doore. Then the other Disciple (who was knowne to the high Priest) went out, and spake to the damosell that kept the doore, and brought Peter in. So Peter went in, and sate with the seruants to see the end. They had a fire, and coales kindled in the middest of the
pallace, and sate about it. Peter also sate amongst them, and warmed him by the fire. The other seruants also stood round about the fire, and warmed themselues, for it was colde: and Peter beeing with them, stoode and warmed himselfe. Nowe when the high Priestes maide that kept the doore, sawe Pe∣ter, and spyed him by the light of the fire, she saide: Wast not thou also with Iesus of Nazareth the Galilean? Art not thou likewise one of his Disciples? Another said: he also was with him. Then Peter denied before them all, and said: Wo∣man, I knowe him not, I am not hee, neither wote I where∣of thou speakest. And when hee was gone out into the porch, the cocke crew. Then there spyed him another Dam∣sell, which said vnto those that were there: This fellow also was with Iesus of Nazareth. Then denied hee againe with an oath, and saide: I neuer knewe the man. After a little while, as it were about an houre, others that stood there, spy∣ed him and saide: Verely thou art one of them, for thou art a Galilean: thine owne speech bewraieth thee. Then saide one of the Priests seruantes, a kinsman of his whose eare Pe∣ter had smitten off: Did not I see thee with him in the gar∣den? But Peter began to sweare and to curse himselfe, & to make great protestation, that hee neuer knew the man. Im∣mediately while he yet spake, the cocke crew againe. And the Lord turned him about, and he held Peter. Then Peter re∣membred the word that Iesus had said vnto him: Afore the cocke crow twise, thou shalt denie mee three times. And hee went forth, and wept bitterly. Doctrine and fruite. O The sodaine change! O the great inconstan∣cie of mans weaknesse! O the vnsearcheable iudgementes of God! Not long heretofore
would Peter haue gone with Christ his maister into prison & death. But now he is so afraid at the words of one Damosell, that hee denieth the Lord. Of the which fall, Christ told Peter and the other Disciples afore for a warning: but they beleeuing it not, be∣came presumptuous, and ascribed too much vnto themselues: therfore the Lord suffereth them to fall, that they may learne what they haue of themselues, and what they haue of God: yea, that we all may see what the Apostles were afore the receiuing of the holy Ghost, and what they became after the power that was giuen them from aboue. Afore they recei∣ued the holy Ghost, they were weake, feeble, incon∣staunt and wauering: but when God hath cloathed them with power from aboue, they became feruent, earnest and steadfast. Greeuously dooth Peter fall in deniyng of his maister: which thing yet turneth to the wealth of him & all men, to the intent that there∣by we might learne, how hurtfull and daungerous it is for a man to trust to himselfe, to his own strength, and not onely vnto God, without whome we are a∣ble to doe nothing that good is. Good godly peo∣ple do fall many times, and thorow feare and great∣nes of the battaile, they should vtterly giue ouer, if they were not fortified and preserued by the power of God. Therefore the mercie of God which continually careth for vs, hath brought to passe and appointed, that such examples should be noted in the scripture, to teach vs, & to declare vnto vs his power & good∣nesse in euerie thing. Thus the sinnes & falles of holy
and vertuous men are set before vs: partly to the in∣tent that if we stand, we should so continue vpright, looking well to our selues that we fall not: and partly that if we be fallen, we should learne to rise vp again, to amend our liues, and to bewaile our sinnes. And so haue the holye Euangelistes perfectlie and vni∣formelie described the fall and deniall of Peter, not that thereby they thought to deface Peter, or to pub∣lishe and make knowen his trespasse: but that the power of GOD in him might be knowen and prai∣sed. As for such sinnes as holy men commit through weaknesse and ignorance, God vseth them to his glo∣rie and our commoditie: that with the woundes of his Saintes, he might heale ours, and that the ship∣wracke of the godly, might bee vnto vs, a sure port & hauen. Peters fall serueth first to the knowledge and praise of the power and goodnesse of God, in that we see how mightily he setteth Peter vp again, & streng∣theneth him, howe graciously hee forgiueth him his sinnes, that we which are fallen, should not despaire, but hope for assistance and forgiuenesse of God, who giueth strength and power vnto those that are his. I∣tem, it serueth to our commoditie and profite, in that we see a good godly man fall and sinne, and afterward rise vp againe and amend, least we should saie: Alas, I am lost, I haue done this, and I haue done that: but forasmuch as wee see that Peter by repentance, wee∣ping and conuerting agayne, doeth obtaine grace, it is meete and conuenient, that wee acknowledge our offences vnto GOD, desire grace, weepe and com∣playne
of our sinnes before GOD. For both are heere set before vs, the fall and the repentaunce: and this ensample is good and profitable to those that are in the right waie of godlynesse, and also vnto sin∣ners. The godly, iust, and righteous, learne by this to bee circumspect, and not to presume. Sinners by occasion of this doo learne, immediatly to rise vp a∣gaine from theyr fall, and not in anie wise to de∣spayre. Yea, our owne fall learne we to knowe, by Peters fal, but alasse, our fall is much more grieuous & grea∣ter than Peters. Peter sinned through weaknesse, ma∣ny a time doe wee sinne wilfully and aduisedly: hee once, we daily: he was constrained thorow feare, we many a time thorowe light occasions, fall from the way of truth and righteousnes: hee riseth vp againe forth-with, we seldome and slowlie: he wept bitter∣ly, we scarce doe confesse and knowledge the sinne. Yea bitterlie wept he: which thing al the electought to doe, if they haue sinned. There should nothing greeue vs more, than to haue sinned against GOD, than to haue displeased God. This doe not wilfull sinners, which passe little or nothing vpon sinne, and when they come into the deepenes thereof, care not for it, neither confesse nor acknowledge their sinne, vntill afterwarde with dispaire, as it is to see in Iu∣das. But Peter bewailing the greeuous fall and wickednesse of his deniall, without further falling away into horrible desperation, is preserued thorow the goodnes of God: in the confidence of gods oft
prooued and accustomed mercie, is hee lift vp vnto blessed repentance, and so healed. Christs looke (the true Phisitian) is vnto him as much as a worde or speech. Wherein wee may learne to knowe the vn∣speakeable loue of GOD, who (euen in the middest of sinne) forgetteth not his own, forsaketh them not: but graciously looketh vppon them with the eyes of his mercie, admonisheth them, speaketh vnto them through the outward and inward worde, with the which gratious countenance he diswadeth them frō sinne, and calleth them againe to himselfe, prouo∣king them to sorrowe, and mourning lamentation & weeping. Hee spreadeth out his armes and lappe of his mercie, and graciously taketh vs vp againe, & re∣ceiueth vs with the lost sonne. Therfore let vs know∣ledge, repent, and bitterly bewaile our sinnes: let vs wash them away with teares, and endeuor our selues with great diligence, that negligently we fall not in∣to them againe: let vs runne to the bottomlesse well of the mercie of God, and pray. O merciful God, giue vs the wel of blessed teares, that from the bottome of our harts we may with Pe∣ter bewale our sinnes. O with how great and gree∣uous sinnes are we laden and entangled? O suffer vs not to lie vnder the heauie burden: lette vs not sinke downe in heauines and desperation. Set thou vs vp againe, and conuert vs throughly: send grace of thy holie repentaunce into our heart, wash away all our sinnes and negligence: graunt vs the light of newe graces and giftes: let not the soules perish, for whom thou diddest submit thy selfe into so many paines &
rebukes, and at the last diddest suffer the terrible bit∣ter death of the crosse, Amen. THE high Priest asked Iesus of his Disciples, and of his doctrine. Iesus answered him: I haue openly spo∣ken vnto the world: I haue alwaies taught in the Sy∣nagogue, and in the temple, there as all the Iewes resort toge∣ther, & in corners haue I taught nothing: Why askest thou me? Aske them that heard me, what I said vnto them. Be∣hold, they can tell what I said. When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers that stood by, smote Iesus vpon his cheek, & said. Answerest thou the high Priest so? Then Iesus answe∣red him & said: If I haue spoken euil, then bear record of the euil: but if I haue well spoken, why smitest thou me? Doctrine and fruite. HEere in the high Priest wee see an example of those malicious persons, that take in hand to o∣uerthrow and condemne the truth afore they heare it. Great is the arrogancie of man, who dare presume to make him selfe a Iudge of Gods trueth, whereas of more right, the truth and woorde of God should iudge our words and workes. The vnderstan∣ding of man & of the flesh, perceiueth not the thing that concerneth God, and therefore hee refuseth it, and iudgeth it vnright, and so giueth sentence, afore he know what the matter is. This (the more pitie) do al they that seeke their own profit and estimation, and not the honour of God. Nowe in such a false and temerarious sentence,
gaue him buffets vpon the chocke, and , and then asked him: Area who hath smitten thee? And the seruants stroke him vpon the face, and did him  ∣ther villany. Doctrine and fruit. O How vniust people come togither against the fountaine of righteousnes? What false wit∣nesse and sentence goeth against the truth? And yet all their shifting is, that their malice and ha∣tred may haue an appearance of iustice. They pre∣uent him with false witnes, they presse him with pe∣rlous and subtill questions, and go about to vnder∣mine and supplant the eternall wisedome. The ene∣mies are accusers, witnesses and Iudges. And where∣as they reuile and blaspheme Gods sonne to the vt∣termost, they will be seene to be the men, that are so∣rie and displeased, when God is dishonoured. But as much as they seeke in the innocent lambe, yet finde they nothing, no not so much as any suspicion of e∣uill: so pure and sincere is all his life, so true and con∣stant are his words. This example ought all faithfull beleeuers to set before their eies,1. Thes. 5. Ephes. 4. 1. Tim. 3. learning thereby, so to direct their life, that the enemies not onely find no vice in them, but also no suspicion of euill: that vnto the euill spea∣ker, there be giuen no occasion nor cause to slander, and that the name of Christ thorow them be not bla∣sphemed. But whereas the honour of God so requi∣reth,Math. 15. wee must openly speake and confesse the truth
before the vngodly, although they bee angry and of∣fended: according as in this place we hear of Christ, who telleth them of his glorious comming in Maie∣stie and power, although they take it for a blasphe∣mie. Heere ought wee also diligently and deuoutlie to consider, what Christ suffereth for vs, what igno∣minie and reproch hee taketh vpon himselfe for our sakes, how vilelie he is reputed, and how shamefullie in his bodie, and in all the parts thereof he is beaten: And yet in all this, how blessedly hee behaueth and sheweth him selfe: to the intent that it should not greeue vs, for his sake to beare vile buffets, and all vn∣gentlenes: for all this suffreth he for the truthes sake. Euen he whome the Angels oe worship, is blasphe∣med of vnthrifts: hee that giueth true answere, is na∣med a blasphemer: the righteous Iudge is condem∣ned of the vnrighteous, and pronounced to be wor∣thie of death. But the gracious Lord is quietly con∣tent to keepe silence and dooth suffer: and therefore the more humble hee is, and submitteth him selfe to bee mis-intreated, the more glorious is his victo∣rie. With many wicked euill words is he defaced and scorned, sore beaten and mishandled. That gracious face which the Angels delight to beholde, is blinde∣folded, spitted vpon, and buffeted: the head, the face, and necke beaten with many sore strokes. Christ is become a straunger vnto all his friends, forsaken of al his acquaintance and kinsfolkes, a mocking and iea∣sting stocke vnto all men. Euen as if it were a dizard foole, is hee laughed to scorne that is wisest of all: vp∣pon
whom the cruell dogs all the night long practise their vnsatiable malice and pleasure, with mocking, nipping, pulling, buffeting, spitting, and reuiling of him. In all this doth his swiftnes of mind and excellent patience abide still constant and vnmoueable: wher∣by we may iustly learne to bee ashamed of our pre∣sumptuous brags, in our pompe and pride which we vse in our soft and costly apparell: where as Christ for our sakes became most poore, and vilely reputed. Verie euill beseemeth it vs, yea a shame it is for vs, (which of Christ are called Christians, and will bee his disciples) to seeke bodily pleasure, and earthy ioy and sensualitie in all thinges, wheras the Lord Iesus our head dooth beare and suffer all that is contrarie therunto. O how vnlike are we to our head & forgo∣er? How farare wee frō right & true humilitie, when for the least wrong and vnaduised word, we bee dis∣pleased with our brethren: and whereas we should giue thanks for being rebuked to our profite, we are vnpacient and miscontent. O Lord Iesus Christ, graunt vs, so to consider thy holy passion, that it bring fruite in vs: make vs paci∣ent, when hurt and displeasure is done vnto vs: teach vs after thine owne liuing example, not to feare the rayling wordes and persecution of wicked people, neither to be discouraged for any wrongfull accusa∣tion that happeneth vppon vs. Teach vs to see our owne vilenesse, how iustly we are of the people reui∣led and despised for our sinnes. Haue mercie (ô lord) vpon our vnperfectnes: thou wast reuiled, that thou
mightst take from vs euerlasting shame: beaten thou was, that from the stripes which we with our sinnes haue deserued, thou mightest deliuer vs: spitted vp∣pon and mocked, to bring vs from euerlasting con∣fusion to euerlasting honour. Wherefore strengthen our minds (ô Lord) that in lowly shamefastnes wee may paciently suffer and beare the hard wordes and checkes that other folkes giue vs for our sinnes and offences: for many mo falser accusations and re∣bukes hast thou borne with highest patience, for vs vile sinners. O let the hard strokes and knockes of thy head, be vnto vs a swaging of all our bodily paines: lette that scornfull blindfolding of thine eyes, bee vnto vs a re∣straint and keeping in of our sight, from all wanton∣nes, vanitie, & lightnes of eies: let the vile spitting v∣pon thy holy face, expell out of vs all carnall lustes: and teach vs, not to regard the outward appearance, but to holde and keepe in honour the vertues of the soule. That carrying about and scornefull derision, which happened vnto thee vndeserued, driue frō vs all dissolute manners and wanton gestures. Let that refusing of thy worthines quench in vs all desires of temporall honor, let it moue vs vnto things that of the worlde are contemned, and in small estimation. Giue vs (ô Lorde) a strong victorie in all patience: that from our heart rootes wee may acknowledge and confesse our selues to be most worthie of al con∣tempt and slaunder, of all rebuke, shame, and punish∣ment, Amen.
EArlie in the morning at the break of the day, went the chiefe Priests and Elders of the people to counsail,  they might destroy Iesus. And they brought him to their Counsaile, and said: If thou bee Christ, tell vs? Then said Iesus vnto them: if I tell you, ye will not beleeue me: if I aske you a question, you will giue me no aunswere, neither let me go. But from this time forth shal the sonne of man sitte at the right hand of the power of God. Then said they all: Art thou then the sonne of God? Then said hee: Ye say it, I am. They said. What need we any more witnesse? We haue heard it our selues out of his own mouth. Then arose the whole mul∣titude, as many as were there, and bound Iesus, and led him from Caiphas to Pilate into the iudgement hall. And it was earely in the morning. They went not into the iudge∣ment hall, least they shuld be defiled, but that they might eat Passah. Then went Pilate forth vnto them, and they broght Iesus bound, and deliuered him vnto Pontius Pilate the de∣putie. Doctrine and fruite. SAthan sleepeth not, but watcheth and is diligent to driue his houshold together, to destroy Iesus Christ, to make him sure, and to bring him to his end. For they thought if they might haue Iesus once deade, then had they rooted out the doctrine of the trueth. But foolish and vaine is their deuise, for the truth is immortall: the more it is opprest, the more it breaketh forth againe: when men vndertake for to quench it, then doth the shine and brightnes therof
appeare more glorious. Shame therfore and rebuke, yea eternall punishment bring all they vppon them∣selues, that withstanding the trueth take it prisoner, bind it, and deliuer it to the Iudge.2. Tim. 2. Iohn. 8. They thinke they bind the truth, but the truth and worde of God can∣not be bound, for it maketh all thinges free, and such as are tangled and wrapt in the snares of sinne, those it deliuereth. Who so goeth about to bind the truth, dooth knitte and snare himselfe with vnlowsable bands, and casteth from him the band of loue, wher∣with God offereth to draw him vnto himselfe, and to binde him vnder his yoke. Wherefore let vs be o∣bedient vnto the truth, and not striue against it: for if we vndertake to condemne it, it shall so appeare a∣gaine in high Maiestie, that through the beautifull, faire, and cleare brightnesse thereof, wee shall all pe∣rish, and be blinded. WHen Iudas which had betraied him, sawe that Iesus was condemned, hee repented so, that hee tooke the money, the thirtie siluer pence, and brought them to the high Priestes, and to the Elders of the people, and saide: I haue sinned in betraying that innocent bloud. They said: What haue we to do withall? Looke thou to that. So he cast the money from him in the temple, went his way, and hanged himselfe in a snare. But the high Priestes tooke the money, & saide: It is not lawfull to put it into the treasurie, for it is the price of bloud. And they tooke counsell, & bought with the same money a potters field, to bury stran∣gers in. Wherfore the same field is called Acheldema, that is, the field of bloud vntill this day. Then was fulfilled that,
which was spoken by Ieremie the Prophet, saying: And they tooke thirtie siluer plates the price of him that was v∣lued, whom they bought of the children of Israel, and ga them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me. Doctrine and fruite. LIke as we haue had in Peter, an ensample of the grace and mercie of God: so haue we in Iudas, a fearefull and terrible ensample of Gods righ∣teousnesse. In Iudas, are described vnto vs all vnbe∣leeuing desperate persons, whom the gracious God of his bottomlesse mercie calleth to his goodnes and seruice: but they despise it, and followe satan, who blindeth them, and entiseth them through manifold wickednes, which they consider not, but when they are come into the deepnesse of vice, they force not of it. The deuill also, to whom they surrender them∣selues to serue, and that hath taken possession of their heart, blindeth them in such sorte, that they ponder not the vilenesse, grieuousnesse, and greatnes of their sinnes, till they haue fully finished the abhominati∣on: for if they did consider it, they should repent & amend. How many louing admonitions had Iudas heard of the Lord, to dissuade him from his purpose? yet all could not helpe. At the last openeth hee their eies that they repent, but a godly repentaunce they receiue not. They beholde the greatnesse and grie∣uousnesse of the sinne and offence, but the greatnes of Gods mercie in Christ they see not, by meanes whereof they despaire in theyr sinnes, and are dam∣ned.
In the Priests that loath the bloud monie, and yet abhorre not to shed the innocent bloud, is set foorth before our eyes an ensample of all hypocrites, which outwardly appeare to be good and vertuous, and yet regard not the godlynes of the spirit: A gnat choak∣eth them, and a camell they swallow vp. But vnto vs poore straungers and pilgrimes, there is prepared and bought through the bloud of Christ a field and Church-yard, that wee beeing washed cleane from our sinnes, might find eternal rest to our soules. Preserue vs (O God) from couetousnesse and de∣spaire, from false hypocrisie, treason, and bloushed∣ding: G lead vs not into temptation. And whereas we haue sinned, grant vs true & fruitfull repentance, that we neuer forget thy goodnes & mercie, but im∣mediatly cease from sinne, and serue thee continual∣ly vntill our end, Amen. IEsus stood before the deputie. Then said the deputy: what accusation bring ye against this man? They answered & said, If he were not an euill doer, we had not deliuered him vnto thee. Then said Pilate vnto them, Take yee him, and iudge him after your law. Then said the Iewes, It is not law∣full for vs to put anie man to death: that the saying of Iesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifieng what death hee should die. Then began they to accuse him, & sayd, We haue found this man peruerting the people, & forbidding to giue tribute vnto the Emperor, & naming himself to be Christ, a king. Pilate asked him, & said, Art thou king of the Iews? Then answered he and sayd, Thou hast spoken it. Then said
Pilate to the chiefe Priests and to the people: I  nor guiltines in the man. Then were they more earnest and said: he hath with his doctrine mooued the people to sedic thorow out whole Iewrie, beginning in Galilee, and from thence hither vnto this place. Nowe when Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked, if he were a Galilean. And when hee per∣ceiued that he was vnder Herods iurisdiction, hee sent him vnto Herode, who then was at Hierusalem. Doctrine and fruite. ALL they that hitherto from the beginning of the world, haue at any time preached the truth were of the aduersaries noted and accused to be sedicious & deceiuers of the people: which thing was brought vpon them, to rid them out of the way. Hereof find we examples enow in the olde and new Testament, Ieremy 26.32.38. 3. Reg. 18. Amos 7. In Christ and his Apostles we see it euident. Therefore haue wee no cause to giue ouer the truth, for wee are no better than our maister. And though wee bee complained vppon for the truthes sake, it ought not greatly to greeue vs, for as much as we see, that the like happened vnto Christ, in whose mouth there was neuer found guile. Hee is set forth vnto vs for an example of most perfect pati∣ence. We that be spirituail Disciples of Christ, must goe vnto him to schoole, and learne of him meeknes, obedience, patience, and lowlines of mind. Beholde our head standeth before an Hethenish vnrighteous Iudge, wrongfully and sore is hee accused, euen our
uiour our king & Lord, yea euen he that is iudge  whole world. Why should we then  for Gods sake to obey worldly  though they oppresse vs, & do vs wrong?  innocent, as for vs, we are in many things guil∣tie. Neuer should the patience of Iesus slip out of our hearts. Haue mercie vpon our impatiencie, O mercifull Father, and print in our heartes the image of thy son, grant vs grace to follow his footsteps: expell out of vs all feare of worldly accusations & false iudgments, giue vs such a gentle spirite, as (when we bee wrong∣fully accused, or vniustly punished) is not soone vn∣quieted: ô driue thou out of vs all fumishnesse, in∣dignation, and selfe will: let thy loue increase and growe in vs through the contemning of our selues, and whatsoeuer is in vs, that striueth or resisteth a∣gainst thy holie will, let the same bee cleane extinct and die. AND when Herode sawe Iesus, he was exceeding glad, for hee was desirous to see him of a long season, be∣cause he had heard many things of him, and he trust∣ed to haue seene some myracle done by him. Then he questi∣oned with him many wordes, but Iesus aunswered nothing. The high Priests and Scribes stood forth and accused him straightly. And Herode with his men of warre despised him: And when he had mocked him, he araied him in white clo∣thing, and sent him againe to Pilate. And the same daie Pilate and Herode were made friendes together, for before they were at variance.
Doctrine and fruite. THe euerlasting wisedome of God is mocked & iested at, as a desert foole, the truth is belied. Vs therefore that of nature are foolish and liers, it shuld not grieue to be reuiled for Gods sake. No an∣swere giueth Christ to the vngodly voluptuous king (who of a curious desire, woulde faine haue seene or heard some new thing of Christ) for at that houre to answere, it could not edifie. It was a time wherein it pleased him to suffer, not to doo miracles. Thus the innocent Lord Iesus, for vs guiltie is drawen and ha∣led from one vnrighteous iudge to another▪ All re∣proch, shame, dishonour, and derision, taketh he vp∣pon himselfe for our sakes, euerie where is hee grie∣uously accused, in euery place is there hurt done vn∣to him, and after many questions and examinations, they hang him vp vpon a crosse. Thus the high God is brought low, as if he were most vile, the almightie is defaced, as if he were most weake of all: the wisest of all, is laughed to scorne, as if hee were a natu∣rall foole: the most vnguiltie is handled as an euill doer. This spectacle ought wee verie diligently to be∣hold, for wee are laden with grieuous burdens of all wickednesse, and haue for our iniquitie deserued so much, that wee are worthie of all rebuke, shame, and confusion, yet are wee vnpatient, when wee bee despised. Neuerthelesse all such vile intreating doth Christ suffer for our sakes, to deliuer vs from eter∣nall
and confusion, which wee iustly haue de∣. O Lord take from vs all wantonnesse and pride.  vs, thy seruaunts, wilfully &  our bodies, whereas thou Lord, king of heauen, are scornefully despised in a fooles coate? O Lord set thou before our eies and heartes the con∣tempt and derision that was done vnto thee. Teach vs to followe thee thorough the contempt and ha∣tred of our selues, and to reioyce when wee are de∣spised. Let vs neuer set our hope vpon men, vpon praise, vpon honour, vpon power, vppon monie: but that from the bottome of our harts, we may be able to de∣spise all temporall things, and loue thereof, and firm∣ly and steadfastly to followe after thee, O Lord Iesu, our welfare, that as touching all the rebuke and con∣tempt which thou for vs, poore vnworthie sinners, hast suffered, wee may beare the same in the perpe∣tuall remembraunce of our heart, and neuer forget it, Amen. PIlate called together the high Priests and chiefe rulers with the common people, and sayde vnto them: Yee haue brought this man vnto mee, as one that peruert∣eth the people. And behold, I examined him before you, & finde no fault in this man, of those things whereof yee accuse him, no nor yet Herode. For I sent you to him, & lo, nothing worthie of death is done vnto him. So Pilat went againe in∣to the iudgement hall, and called Iesus, and sayde vnto him: Art thou the king of the Iewes?
Then answered Iesus Speakest thou that  others tolde it thee of me? Pilate answered▪  Iew? Thy people and thy high Priestes  vnto me: What hast thou done? Iesus answered  ∣dome is not of this world: if my kingdome were of this world assuredly my ministers would fight for mee, that I should not be giuen ouer vnto the Iewes. But now is not my kingdome from hence. Then sayd Pilate, Then art thou a king. Iesus aunswered: Thou sayest it, I am a king. For this cause was I borne, & for this cause came I into the world, that I should beare witnesse vnto the truth. Who so is of the truth, hea∣reth my voyce. Then sayde Pilate vnto him, What is truth? When hee sayde this, hee went foorth againe to the Iewes, and sayde vnto them: I finde no fault in him. But ye haue a custome, that I shoulde deliuer one vnto you loose at Easter. Will ye that I loose vnto you the king of the Iewes? Whome will ye that I shall let goe? Barrabas, or Iesus which is called Christ. For he knew, that the Priestes had of enuie and ha∣tred deliuered him vp. Then cried they all, and sayd: Not him, but Barrabas. As for Barrabas, he was a murtherer, who because of an vproare made in the Citie, and for man-slaughter, was layde in prison. Then spake Pilate farther with them, willing to let Iesus loose. But they cried, Crucifie him, crucifie him. Then said he vnto them the third time: What euill then hath he don? I finde no cause in him. Ther∣fore will I punish him, and let him go. Doctrine and fruit. FOrasmuch as the deuil knoweth, that Christ and his ministers applie all diligence with their doc∣trine,
that the kingdome of him (who is the Prince of this worlde)  hee destroied, and that the king∣dome of Iesus Christ the sonne of God, the chiefe king of all might prosper, hee bringeth to passe, that Christ and the Ministers of the word, are noted and supected of sedition, wheras they yet seeke nothing lesse than worldly power and dominion. Christ fly∣eth away, when they would make him king: now is he noted and accused, as one that seeketh to bee Em∣peror. Neuertheles Christ is a true king, whose king∣dome consisteth not in corporall things, but in spirit and in power. Christ despised all honor, riches, pow∣er, and pleasures of this world: his Ministers therfore must of all the world bee contemned. But Christ ru∣leth through his spirite and power in their hearts, & they also shall rule with him in the resurrection. Hee is the trueth, and giueth witnesse vnto the trueth: & who so is of the truth, heareth his voyce, and beareth record also vnto the trueth. Heere likewise we learne the vnstedfastnes of the worlde: they that afore ranne still after Christ, and would haue made him king, crying ioyfully Hosanna vnto the Lorde, crie now: Crucifie him, crucifie him. So little worthie is the praise and commendation of the world to be regarded. They that said afore: Prai∣sed be he that commeth in the name of the Lorde, the same crie nowe: Away with him, crucifie him: and so they chose a murtherer, in stead of the Sauiour. Their re∣quest is, that the murtherer may liue: as for the Saui∣our & well of life, him they desire to be put to death. If we pondered this well in our hearts, that our Saui∣our
Iesus was esteemed worse and more vile than a murtherer, there should be nothing that wee would not be glad to suffer for his sake. Now when the world is in hande with vs, and ca∣steth manie opprobrious wordes vppon vs, we must not be ouercome with vnpatiencie: the false accusa∣tion and threatening of wicked people, ought not to make vs shrinke: but if we loue Christ with our harts we must remember his patience, when he was false∣ly accused and reuyled for our sakes: and so with stopped cares ought wee to lette all sharpe wordes passe, yea to pray for them that speake euill of or to vs. When our good workes and meanings are taken in euill part, our enterprise resisted, our wordes reie∣cted and refused of euerie man, wee ought paciently to suffer it. For farre inferiouis are wee vnto Christ our Lord, ouer whom goeth so horrible and wicked a crie; Crucifie him, crucifie him. Hereof should all faithfull beleeuers bee admoni∣shed, yea assured, if they mind to liue godly in Christ Iesu, that they must suffer much persecution, & that if they wil walke and go forward in the way of God, they must beare many hurtfull and noysome things: for no man can please GOD, that for his sake is not exercised in much aduersitie. Therefore saith hee vnto his deare friendes: Blessed are yee when men reuyle you, and persecute you, & shall falsely speake all manner of euill against you for my sake. Reioice and bee gladde, for great is your reward in heauen. Math. 5.
Wherefore deare children, let vs follow our inno∣cent Lord Iesus: who being refused of wicked men vpon earth, but chosen of God the Father, is crow∣ned with eternall glorie, and godly honour in hea∣uen. No euill saying or curse ought to ouercome vs, considering that for the same there is so exceeding ioy prepared for vs of God. THen Pilate took Iesus therfore, & scourged him, & the souldiers wound a crowne of thorns, and put it on his head. And they did on him a purple garment, and came vnto him, and said: haile king of the Iewes: and they smote him on the face. Pilate went foorth againe, and said vnto them: Behold, I bring him forth to you, that you may know that I finde no fault in him. Then came Iesus foorth, wearing a crowne of thorne, and a robe of purple. And he sai∣eth vnto them, Beholde the man. When the high Priestes therefore and ministers saw him, they cried saying: crucifie him, crucifie him. Pilate saith vnto them: Take ye him, and crucifie him, for I finde no cause in him. The Iewes aunswered and said vnto him: Wee haue a lawe, and by our law hee ought to die, because hee made himselfe the sonne of GOD. When Pilate heard that saying, hee was the more afraid: and went againe into the iudgement hall, and sayth vnto Iesus. Whence art thou? But Iesus gaue him no aunswere. Then said Pilate vnto him: Speakest thou not vnto mee? Knowest thou not, that I haue power to cru∣cifie thee, and haue power to let thee loose? Iesus aunswe∣red: thou couldest haue no power at all against me, except it were giuen thee from aboue. Therefore he that deliuered me vnto thee, hath the more sin. And from thence forth souht
Pilate meanes to loose him, but the Iewes cryed, saying: If thou let him go, thou art not the Emperours friend: for who∣soeuer maketh himselfe king, is against the Emperour. Doctrine and fruite. HEre in Pilate we learne, how hurtful it is, when euery one in his office and vocation looketh not diligently about him, but slenderly letteth the thing slippe and passe, that he earnestly ought to bring to effect. Pilate was the deputie of a countrey, and knew that Christ had wrong, wherof he himself also many times beareth him witnesse with his owne mouth. Seeing then that he was a Iudge, it appertai∣neth to his office, to iudg right, & not to suffer the in∣nocent to die. For though Pilate doth, as if he would discharge Christ, yet he mindeth it not earnestly. Hee goeth about to let Christ loose, neuertheles so farre as hee displease not the Iewes, and the Emperour, so farre as hee loose not the fauour and friendshippe of men. While Pilate now fainteth, in the righteousnesse that hee knoweth and is sure of, and holdeth not on stoutly, as he should, to deliuer Christ, God suffereth him still to fall, till he come to this point, that he con∣demneth the innocent to death against his own con∣science. Thus goeth it with al those, that for the grace of GOD lent vnto them, are vnthankfull & vnfaith∣full in the little. It is the part of a righteous Iudge, to maintaine iustice, and to defend the innocent, thogh it should cost him, body, honour, and goods.
The pride also of Pilate, that presumed by reason of his authoritie, is brought downe with the wordes of the Lorde: there is no power but from aboue, & therefore should it bee godly vsed: the higher pow∣ers are Goddes Ministers. In the which wordes of Christ, the faithfull beleeuers that bee in aduersitie, are comforted: knowing that no man hath authori∣tie nor power ouer them, except it bee giuen him of God. Christ is bound to deliuer vs from the bandes of our sinnes, and to place vs in eternall freedome. Hee is scourged to take from vs the stripes that we should suffer by reason of our sins: yea to heale our wounds, is hee sore wounded himselfe. Altogether suffereth hee for our sakes: thorow his stripes are wee made whole. His backe (as Esay saith, Esay. 50.) offereth he to the smiters, and his cheeks to the nippers, to purge vs from all filthinesse of sinne. Hee became without beautie, as a leper despised, spitted vppon and mock∣ed, to deliuer vs from eternall shame & punishment. Wee had deserued all this, hee did nothing worthie thereof: wee are the cause of his martyrdome. Oh the great burthen of our sinnes, that the Sonne of the eternall GOD must suffer so sore stripes and cruell payne for vs, to reconcile vs with his Father! Oh the exceeding great loue which he declareth vn∣to vs, in that hee taketh all rebuke vppon himselfe for vs! Oh that wee considered this with true deuoti∣on, so that wee might say with Christ and Dauid: I am readie to bee scourged, and my plague is alwaies before mee.
O Iesu, kindle vs with the fire of thy exceeding loue, which thou in so much aduersitie hast well try∣ed towardes vs. Graunt vs the helpe of thy grace to the strengthening of our weakenesse, when the hea∣uie burdens of aduersities fall vppon vs: that tho∣row the terrible ouercharge of them, wee be not op∣prest and throwne downe. Giue vs grace, so to cha∣sten and subdue our body and flesh, that it maye bee subiect vnto the spirite, and obedient vnto thy will in all things. WHen Pilate heard that saying, he brought forth Iesus, and sate downe to giue sentence in the place that is called the Pauement, but in the Hebrue tong Gabatha. It was the preparing of the Easter about the sixt houre. And he saith vnto the Iewes: Behold your king. They cried: away with him, away with him, cru∣cifie him. Pilate saith vnto them: shall I crucifie your king? The high Priests aunswered: We haue no king but the Em∣perour. And the high Priestes with the Elders of the people, accused him in many things, but he gaue no answere. Pilate asked him further, and said: makest thou no answere? Seest thou not in how many and great thinges they accuse thee? But Iesus moreouer gaue no answer, so that the deputie mar∣uelled sore at it. At the feast he had a custome, to let one vn∣to them loose, whom they would desire. Now while the people presed on, Pilate began to aske them (as hee alwaies did) & said: Whom will yee that I let loose vnto you: Barabas, or Iesus who is called Christ? While Pilate sate in iudgement, his wife sent to him, & said: Haue thou nothing to doo with that iust man, for this
night in sleepe haue I suffered much for him. But the high Priests & the Elders perswaded the people, & inticed them, that they should aske Barrabas, & require Iesus vnto death. Then answered Pilate, and said vnto them: whom will ye of these two, that I shall let go loose vnto you? They said Barra∣bas. Then said Pilate vnto them: What shall I then do with Iesus, who is called Christ? Then said they al: let him be cru∣cified. The deputie said: What euill then hath he done? Ne∣uertheles they cried yet more: let him be crucified When Pilate saw that he profited nothing, but that the vprore was greater, he tooke water and washed his hands be∣fore the people, and said: I am vnguiltie from the bloud of this iust man: looke ye to it. Then answered all the people & said: His bloud be vpon vs and vpon our children. So Pilat, according to theyr desire, let Barrabas loose vnto them: And Iesus (whome hee scourged) gaue he ouer vnto them to be crucified. Doctrine and fruite. PIlate feareth men more than God, therfore doth he against God, and condemneth the innocent, althogh he thinketh to be vnguilty of his bloud. The Euangelist maketh mention of the feast of Easter or Passah, to the intent wee shoulde consider, that Christ the true right Paschall lambe, was put to death and slaine for vs. Here we learne what the iudgement of the world is: righteousnes is refused and condemned: wicked∣nesse, vngratiousnesse, and murther, is deliuered and quite. O how lamentably perisheth the righteous, &
no man there is that considereth it, or that goeth a∣bout to deliuer him? The true, is giuen ouer to the lyers; the innocent, to the guiltie; the godly, to the vngratious; the murtherer is chosen, before Iesus the annointed sonne of God: heere the wicked is pre∣ferred before the iust, death before life, night & dark∣nes before the light. This nowe, in all our troubles, when wee are op∣prest and falsely condemned, shal comfort & streng∣then vs, if we set before our eyes the blessed example of Iesus the innocent, who for vs was condemned as an euill dooer. For wee seruantes are not aboue our Lorde. If the Iudge of the quicke and deade bee wrongfully condemned, how much more conueni∣ent is it, that wee poore guiltie shoulde suffer, when wee are iudged, whether it bee doone iustly or vn∣iustly? Christ for our sake was falsly condemned, to take from vs the iust iudgement of eternall damnation, which was gone out vpon vs for our sinnes. Graunt vnto vs, O Lord Iesu, that neither thrate∣ning nor slaunder driue vs away from the contem∣ned crosse, but that with our whole powers we may gladly follow thee, O giue vs grace, to fasten our flesh with the temptations therof, vnto the crosse, that we bewailing our former sinnes, may withstand and o∣uercome the temptations that are behind. Helpe vs (Lorde) in the conflict of the spirite, lette thy crosse (ô Lord) bee vnto vs a medecine against all vice, and graunt, that we alway chearefully take vp our crosse, and follow thee, Amen.
THen the souldiers lead Iesus againe into the iudgment hall: And when they had mocked him, they stripped him out of the purple robe, and put his own garments vpon him, and lead him forth to be crucified. And he bare his owne crosse himselfe, and went on towardes the place of execution. And as they lead him, they caught one that was called Simon of Cyren, who came from the field, and was the father of Alexander and Rufus, him they compelled to carie the crosse of Iesus, and laid it vpon him, that he might beare it after Christ. And there followed him a great companie of people, and women, which bewailed and lamented him. But Iesus turned backe to them, and sayd: Ye daughters of Ierusalem, weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues and for your children. For behold, the daies will come, in the which they shall saie: Happie are the barren, and the wombes that neuer bare, and the paps which neuer gaue sucke. Then shall they begin to saie to the mountaines, Fall on vs: and to the hils, couer vs, for if they doo this in a greene tree, what shall be done in the drie? And vnto the place of execution, there were lead with him two other murtherers to be slaine. And they came vnto the place called Golgatha, that is, a place of dead mens skuls, (or the place of execution.) And they gaue him to drinke vinegre mixt with gall, but when he had pro∣ued it, he would not drinke it. And they crucified him, & with him two murtherers, the one on the right hand, the o∣ther on the left, and Iesus in the middest. That the Scrip∣ture might be fulfilled: Hee was counted among the euill dooers.
Doctrine and fruit. HEere ought we with deuout hearts to behold our Sauiour Iesus, how meekely he taketh the crosse vppon him for our sakes, and patientlie beareth it, to bring the lost sheep again vpō his shoul∣ders. Heere we see our king beare his kingdome vp∣on his shoulders,Esay. 9. as Esay the prophet saith. He is is not onely led foorth, but it is done with great teproch, e∣uen as if he were a ring-leader of murtherers and vn∣thrifts. O how was the king of glorie blaspemed and misintreated for our sakes? Hee taketh our sins vpon him, and dischargeth vs of our burthen. In the consideration of this his reproch, we shold not weepe ouer him, but ouer our selues. For if this be done to the innocent sonne of God, what are we then worthie of?1. Pet. 3. By this also must wee learne, pati∣ently to beare our crosse, in folowing our fore-goer: for he sheweth vs an example before, that we should follow his foosteps, euen to the death. And if we so consider our crosse, it shall be light and easie vnto vs. We haue sworne vnder the crosse, from the which we must not shrinke, if we will follow the Lord. The loue of Iesu Christ shal make all aduersitie sweet and acceptable vnto vs. Our ioy and comfort ought to bee chiefly in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, by whome the world must be crucified vnto vs,Gal. 5. and we vnto the world. He shall cause our slouthfull flesh to bee quicke and diligent, and shall kindle our colde heart. Hee goeth before vs in the narrowe waie, and
is a companion of our pilgrimage, a helper in all trouble, a comforter in all aduersitie, a worker with vs in the grieuous trauaile that wee suffer for his sake. O Lorde helpe vs to beare the heauie burthens: that wee maye bee diligent and apt vnto all good workes. Assist vs with thy power and grace, helpe vs according vnto thy accustomed mercie: teach vs to breake, and vtterlie to leaue our owne will. Make vs true Crosse-bearers and followers of thee: Take from vs all worldlie lust and wilfulnesse, what so euer hindereth vs in thy loue, that in obedience and patience wee may alwaie followe thee, and find rest with thee after aduersitie. Thou Lorde wast stripped out of thy apparell, and spoyled thereof: that wee with vertues might be cloathed. The same that was put vppon thee to rebuke and shame, is vn∣to vs become the highest honour. Thou wast lift vppe from the earth, that thou mightest drawe the heartes of thy faithfull beleeuers vnto thee from all earthlie thinges, and kindle them in the loue of hie heauenly things: that thou thorow thy death migh∣test reconcile & fully restore all that is in heauen and earth. O ye righteous and faithfull, that delite to serue God, behold with the eies of your hart, how our God, Lord, king, and redeemer hangeth on the crosse for vs. let vs consider our louer, who for our sakes hang∣eth naked and bare in great shame & reproch before the world. He spreadeth out his armes, to call and re∣ceiue vnto himselfe, vs poore sinners & lost children,
saying,Math. 11. Come to me all ye that labour and are laden, and I will refresh you. He sheweth his woundes, out of the which floweth the plentifull riuer and foun∣taine of his precious deare bloud, to the washing a∣waie of all our filthynesse.Zach. 13 Hee boweth downe his head, to speake friendly vnto vs. Boldly therfore with great comfort and confidence, ought al sinners to re∣sort vnto him, where they shall find help & consola∣tion, defence and protection: there should they laie downe the heauie burthens of theyr sinnes. Vnto vs must al the world be a crosse, and we vnto the world: onely let Christ the Lord be our life, and to die with him, our greatest aduantage. Farre bee from vs all re∣ioycing, saue onely in the crosse of Iesus Christ, farre be from vs al confidence in our owne workes & me∣rites, for all our health consisteth in the crosse of Ie∣sus Christ, wherein vndoubtedly we may well set all our hope. By him commeth forgiuenesse of sinnes, out of him floweth the riches of all deseruing: with him is the reward of all righteousnes. Through the contempt of our selues, and of all temporall things, let vs barely, nakedly, and simply followe the naked and crucified Lord. Teach vs (O God) to haue delight in contemning our selues, and all temporal things: and when other folkes are in trouble, to be sorrie and praie for them. Grant vs grace to wish good vnto those that hurt and punish vs: let vs not trust in men, for there bee fewe faithfull and constant friends. Heere also should we learne, not to be grieued, if we haue few louers and many enemies: for so hap∣pened
euen vnto Christ our head. He had many foes to whome yet he did none euil but much good, and receiued great vnthanke for his labour. Sweete and acceptable should it bee vnto vs, to suffer reproch of the world, and to be despised for his sake: yea, to a∣uoyd all voluptuousnes and ioy of the world, saying we are fastned vnto the crosse with Christ. To seeke much pastime & pleasure of the world, becommeth not him that must suffer aduersitie. All this learne we in the passion of Christ, and in the crosse. Blessed is hee that directeth his daily exercise and his whole life there after:Apoc. 2. Psal. 83. hee shall enioy the fruit of the tree of life for euer. O GOD heauenlie Father, looke vppon the face of thine annointed, who hanged for vs vppon the crosse: Be merciful vnto vs poore sinners, which bee laden with great and greeuous sinnes: forgiue vs for the most worthie merites sake of thine onelie begotten deare sonne, who for our sinnes was bea∣ten and wounded: Let him satisfie thee for all our sinnes. He is our suretie in thy sight, our faithful aduocat and mediatour: him thou gladly hearest O father of mercie, and graciouslie acceptest his intercession for all sinners. O gracious Lord Iesu, sonne of the eternall God, who of verie loue towards vs, tookest vpon thee our weake fleshe (vndefiled from all sinne) and diddest offer vp the same flesh vnto thy father vpon the Al∣tar of the crosse for the safegard of the worlde, haue mercy vppon vs thy seruauntes, for thy euerlasting
goodnes, and for the infinite merites sake of thy ho∣lie passion: For thy deseruing excelleth al mens sins, and much greater is the aboundance of thy mercie, then all our wickednesse. Therefore flie wee vnto thee vnder the protection of thy holy crosse, & with sighing hearts seeke we helpe, grace, and remedy for our woundes.Psal. 119. Receiue vs that are fledde vnto thee: Heale vs that be sick, make vs iust and righteous that be sinners. Drawe thou vs vppe an high O Lord Ie∣su from all worldlie thinges, binde vppe our fleshe with thy feare, wound vs with thy sweet loue, that nothing els take holde of our heart, saue onely Iesus Christ. Out of the woundes of Iesu, and out of the run∣ning out of his bloud, doe wee receiue hope: There finde wee medicine for our soules, aboundance of grace, and perfect forgiuenesse. Whatsoeuer we re∣ceiue of sinfull vices, whatsoeuer wee commit with bodily sensualitie, the same is altogether washed and refourmed in the fountaine of Christs bloud. O the vnoutspeakable loue, which the sonne of God bea∣reth towards his Church, that he washeth and clen∣seth it with his owne bloud,Ephes 5. with the bloud of the new Testament, that it may be holy, pure, and with∣out spot.3. Pet 1. Not with siluer and golde doth GOD re∣deeme his creature, but with the precious bloud of his owne sonne. O deare children, let vs not tread vnder foote the bloud of the holie Testament: let vs not be vnthankefull vnto our Sauiour. Heb. 10.Thy holie bloud O Iesu, make vs pure and cleane from all sinne, and sanctifie vs thoroweout,
that our spirite, soule, and bodie, may cheerefullie waite for thy comming, and liue with thee for euer.Thes. 5. IESVS said: O Father forgiue them, for they knowe not what they doe. Pilate wrote a superscription of the mat∣ter, and fastened it aboue at the head of the crosse. The superscription was written in the Greeke, Latine, and Hebrew with these woordes: Iesus of Nazareth king of the Iewes. This superscription did many of the Iewes read, for the place where Iesus was crucified, was neere vnto the Citie, and the superscription was written in Greeke, Latine, and Hebrew. Then said the high Priestes of the Iewes vnto Pilate: write not king of the Iewes, but that he called himselfe king of the Iewes. Pilate answered: What I haue written, I haue writ∣ten. The souldiers when they had crucified Iesus, they tooke his garmentes and made foure parts, to euery souldier one part, and also his coat. The coat was without seam, wrought vpon thorow out. Then said they together: let vs not deuide it, but cast lottes for it, who shall haue it: that the scripture might be fulfilled, saying: They haue parted my raiment a∣mong them, and for my coat they cast lots.Psal. 22. And the souldi∣ers did such things in deed. Then sate they downe and kept him. There stood also much people, and beheld. Doctrine and fruit. THE last wordes which Iesus spake vppon the crosse, ought all faithful beleeuers wel to write in their hearts, and therein diligently to keepe them. First, he spake a louing friendly word, a word ful of grace & sweet comfort to al sinners, sufficient
and enough to breake al hardnes of hart, and to pro∣uoke fruitfull repentance: Father forgiue them. O how great goodnes and louing kindnes is this? how rea∣dy is Iesus vnto mercy? how well willing is hee to forgiue his louers, that sheweth himselfe so mild and gracious vnto his enemies? No angrie word, no dis∣pleasure poureth hee out against those that crucified him: no vengeance nor plague desireth he to fal vp∣pon that vngracious people, but speaketh most sweet woordes, full of ardent loue: O Father forgiue them &c. In these words apeareth his exceeding great loue with vnoutspeakable softnes of mind, which thorow no mallice might bee ouerome. They (like madde and bloud thirstie men) cried: Away with him, cru∣cifie him, crucifie him. O the wonderfull great leni∣tie of our Lord Iesus Christ! They reuile and misin∣treat him to the vttermost: he praieth for them, that they beeing conuerted from their wickednes, may acknowledge him the very true son of God to haue appeared in the flesh. Esay. 53.Here is fulfilled that Esay said: hee hath borne the sinnes of many, and made intercession for the trans∣gressours, that they should not perish. Who now being in sinne, wil despaire in the mer∣cie of God, when the great offenders, that crucified and slewe the giuer of all remission, found so great grace and goodnes? A stedfast hope therefore ought we to conceiue and to bee sure of, howe great soeuer our sinne be: The hope of life standeth yet open, the bowels
of mercie are yet readie prepared. Onely vnto him let vs resort: full gratiously will hee receiue vs, so far as wee giue ouer our selues vnto him. Heere likewise by the example of our fore-goer, wee must learne to forgiue our neighbour, to pray also for our enemies, and for those that do vs harme. If we gladly forgiue that little, God will forgiue vs the great. If we so do, we finde grace, and are the children of the heauenly Father. As for the recompencing of all despite, & ta∣king of vengeance, wee must commit and refer that vnto our Father, who iudgeth righteously.1. Pet 2.3. O Iesu, thou heauenly schoolmaster, teach vs this, and graunt vs grace to doe it. Giue vs also an assured hope of thy mercie and grace, that wee fall into no despaire through the multitude of our sinnes: but with faithfull minds to consider, that for to heale sin, thou camest into this world, & hast shed thy bloud. O graunt vnto vs free refuge and sure defence, vn∣der the shadowe of thy winges, and vnder the inuin∣cible token of thy holie crosse. Receiue vs poore sin∣ners, which vtterly trust not in anie good deede or merit of our owne, but onely in thy mercie, Amen. Verie spitefull extremitie is shewed vnto our Sa∣uiour, in that he must beholde and see, how the vile vnthriftes part his clothes amongst them. By this, is there set forth vnto vs a doctrine, how wee ought to behaue our selues, if our temporall goodes bee with∣drawne and taken from vs. Wee must bee readier to suffer temporal harme, than to bee reuenged, or with vnquiet suite at the law to require our owne. He that created the whole worlde, hath not a corner where
to rest his head. Hee that beautifieth and decketh all things, hangeth bare and naked himselfe. Whereby we must learne to be pacient, if that which is ours be taken from vs: wee must learne to bee content with few thinges, and to take in good part things of small reputation, and not to grudge, but with quiet minds to be thankfull vnto God. O Lord, grant vnto vs, that we appeare not naked and bare before thee: cloth vs with the wedding gar∣ment of faith and loue, and when wee suffer wrong, giue vs grace to followe thine example in patience: that no sorrowe nor heauinesse for losse of temporall goods, lead vs away from thee, Amen. THey that passed by, reuiled and blasphemed him, wag∣ging their heades, and saieng: ha, thou that breakest downe the temple, and settest it vp againe in three dayes, helpe now thy selfe, if thou be the Sonne of God, come downe from the crosse. The high Priestes also mocked him, together with the Scribes and Elders, and saide amongst themselues: He helped others, can hee not helpe himselfe? If he be Christ the chosen of God, the king of Israell, lette him come downe now from the crosse, & we will beleeue him. He setteth his hope and trust in God, let him deliuer him, if hee will haue him, for hee hath said: I am the Sonne of GOD. The murtherers also that were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth, and reuiled him. The people stoode there, and wayted, and the chiefe of them mocked him, and saide: Hath hee helped others, and cannot helpe himselfe, and is Christ the chosen of GOD. The souldiers also mocked him, came and proffered him vineger, and said: If thou be king of
the Iewes, helpe thy selfe. One of the murtherers that hanged by him, reuiled him also, and said: If thou bee Christ helpe thy selfe and vs. But the other rebuked him, and said: Fea∣rest thou not God, seeing thou art in the same damnation. As for vs we are iustly punished, for we receiue according to our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amisse. And he said vnto Iesus: Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdome. And Iesus said vnto him: Verely I say vnto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in paradise. Doctrine and fruite. IEsus for our sake tooke vpon himselfe the most ex∣treme shame, rebuke & derision, to deliuer vs from eternall villainy, and that wee should learne gladly to suffer reproch and shame, and to despise the vain-glorie of this world. He is mocked & contemned of high and lowe, of spirituall, temporall, and of euerie man. For they being ful of gal, bitternes, and poison, poure it out with their false tongues and outwarde gestures, casting out wicked slaundrous wordes, and sharpening their venemous tongs against the inno∣cent sauiour. They rather shuld haue bewailed their owne great sinnes: but there is no compassion nor mercie in them, their harts are stopt, Sathan hath the leading of them. Yet cannot their malice ouercome good Iesus: Through their wickednesse and despite cannot his patience bee vanquished. No opprobri∣ous or vile word might cause him to omit the worke of our redemption: but hee continueth in loue, and performeth it with an honorable ende. Euen as hee
teacheth vs to endure vnto the end, so doth he prac∣tise it himselfe,Math. 24. and declareth it vnto vs in deede and example. We therfore that wil be followers of Iesu Christ, shuld set before vs this excellent example of our for∣goer, and learne to contemne the world, and stoutlie to abide in our holie vocation and purpose. It is the worke of Christ that we haue in hand, and before vs we haue an high perfect example giuer, of whom we ought to learne, euen Christ Iesus, who for our sakes was obedient to the Father, vntill the death of the crosse.Phil. 2. Wherefore seeing we are become children of God throgh grace, we must be obedient to our hea∣uenly father, looking to his good pleasure, bidding the world farewell, despising the mocks and scorns therof, looking vp euer diligently vnto the crucified Lorde Iesus, who waiteth for vs with outstretched armes, calleth vs louingly vnto him, and for a shorte trauaile promiseth vs eternall rewarde, and saith: If thou suffer with mee, thou shalt raigne with mee: If thou dye with mee,. Tim. 2. thou shalt also be crowned with mee. O Lord Iesu Christ, our fore-goer and protector graunt vs grace stedfastly to continue in our holie, vocation, and to abide in thy seruice: that through no tediousnes or slouth we shrinke or cease from the feruentnes of good workes and holie exercises: that we being alway readie furnished with watching and praier, may stedfastly stand, and with a constant mind despise all bodily prouocations, shewing patience in aduersitie, not fearing the slaunders and despitefull
swordes of the people, neyther desiring the prayse and honour of this worlde: that in the onely eternal wealth wee may sette all our trust, and neuer to goe backe from the crosse for wealth nor woe: but that vnder the same banner through true patience, meek∣nesse and obedience, wee may finish our life with a blessed ende, Amen. In the offendor that receiued of Christ the pro∣mis of grace, there is set before vs a comfortable ex∣ample of the mercie and loue of God: for, hee that afore had beene a murtherer, and now was become a penitent and repentaunt person, assoone as he ac∣knowledged the trespasse, and was vnfainedly sorrie for his offences committed, confessing Christ the fountaine of life, there was promised vnto him for∣giuenesse of his sinnes, and entrance into ioy. Wher∣by wee see, that no true penitent commeth too late, and that no conuersion is vnfruitfull, if it bee doone vnfainedly from out of the heart. Here should we learne to goe into our selues, to acknowledge and confesse our sinnes, to complaine vnto GOD with lamentation, and to desire grace at his hande: affir∣ming also, that wee are well worthie of all rebuke and shame, all punishment, payne, and aduersitie. Neuerthelesse, in the consideration of Gods eternal mercie, wee ought not to despayre, but to turne vs vnto the Bishop and chiefe shepheard of our soules, and to saye: Lorde, remember vs in thy kingdome, where thou sittest at the right hande of GOD thy Father: so shall wee vndoubtedly heare this cheare∣full voice; To day shalt thou bee with mee in para∣dise.
This word of consolation, this gratious promise shall strengthen & comfort our troubled hart in the carefull & terrible houre, so that we shal be able qui∣etly to die, forasmuch as Iesus so friendly speaketh to vs, and receiueth vs so graciously. Great and vnsearchable is the mercie of God, that pardoneth so great a sinner and offendour, and doth not cast him off: neither will hee reiect our feruent praier, which we in true confidence make vnto him. Hee desireth not the death of a sinner,Ezech. 18. but willeth that hee conuert and liue.Iohn. 3 So loued hee the worlde, that hee gaue his onely begotten Sonne, that who∣soeuer beleeueth on him, should not perish, but haue euerlasting life: neither came hee to call the righte∣ous,Math 9. but sinners. O Iesu, bee mindfull of thy promisse, thinke vpon vs thy seruantes: and when wee shall depart hence, speake vnto our soule these louing wordes: To day shalt thou bee with mee in ioy. O Lord Iesu Christ, remember vs thy seruauntes that trust in thee, when our tongue cannot speake, when the sight of our eies fayleth, and when our eares are stopped. Suffer not the olde Serpent, and wicked enemie the Deuill, to finde anie thing in vs, though hee subtilly tempt vs, and craftily lay wayte for vs. In thee shall we ouer∣come him, for in thee is our strength: thou takest al our sinnes vppon thy selfe, so that hee shall finde no∣thing in vs, but must departe from vs with shame. Lette them bee turned backe, and soone confoun∣ded: but lette our soule alway reioyce in thee, and bee ioyfull of thy saluation, which thou through thy
death hast purchased for vs. IT was neare hande about the sixt houre. And beside the crosse of Iesus stoode Marie his mother, and his mo∣thers sister Marie the wife of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalene. Now when Iesus sawe his mother, and the dis∣ciple standing whom he loued, he said vnto his mother: Wo∣man, behold thy sonne. Afterward said hee to the disciple: Behold thy mother. And from that houre foorth, the disci∣ple tooke her for his owne. Doctrine and fruite. IN the passion of Christ (as is mentioned afore) it ought to be considered, that he was most extreme∣ly reuyled, and suffered most great paine for our sakes. This now appertaineth to the increasing of his paine, that hee seeth his mother in all aduersitie, who might not helpe him, neyther hee her. Nowe doth the sworde that Simeon spake of, pierce thorow her heart. But Iesus seeing her in sorrowe and heauinesse, declareth his carefull loue vppon the honour and worthinesse of his dearely beloued mother, and giueth her a tutour, such an one as will looke vn∣to her. On both the parties maye wee perceyue great loue, which wee ought to learne of the Lord, and to exercise towardes those that bee committed vnto vs. Neither is it written of the Euangelist for naught, that shee stoode: for thereby we see, that though Marie was in verie greate heauinesse and
sorrowe, yet behaueth shee not heselfe vnseemelie nor vndiscreetly, as carnall men doe in aduersitie manie times. Shee standeth demurely and soberly, beeing fortified through the strength of the spirite that stayeth her.1. Thes. 4. Whereby wee may learne when our deare friendes die, not to bee sorie for them be∣yond measure and discretion. But chiefly we learne, when aduersitie commeth, one to haue respect to an∣other, to care for our owne, faithfully to cōmit them vnto others, that one may brotherly and truly looke to another: but specially we ought to be carefull for those which are deare vnto God. FRom the sixt houre there was darkenesse vppon all the earth, till about the ninth houre, and the Sunne was darkened. About the ninth houre, Iesus cryed with a lowd voyce, Ely, Ely, lama, sabacthani? that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? Some standing there, when they heard it, said: He calleth to Helias. Imme∣diately one of them ranne, and tooke a spunge, and filled it with vineger, and put it vppon a reede, and gaue him to drinke. Other said, lette vs see whether Helias will come and deliuer him. Doctrine and fruite. IN all aduersitie and despight, is all bodily and temporall comfort withdrawne from Christ, that euen when hee without all consolation dooth suf∣fer most greuous extremitie, wee might perceiue his loue. The Lord of all creatures that lacketh nothing,
commeth into so great affliction and necessitie for our sake, that hee complaineth himselfe to bee forsa∣ken of him, who worketh all things in him. This is the voyce of the passible mortall flesh, which for vs poore sinners crieth vpon the crosse. His patience is our comfort, his complaint is our helpe, his sicknesse is our health, his paine is our satisfaction. The Phisi∣tian came from heauen, that hee thorow great com∣passion, might giue ouer him selfe into exceeding many torments and rebukes. Therfore with the sick, he is sicke: with those that suffer, hee suffereth. with the sorrowfull, he is sorie: with them that suffer vio∣lence, hee complaineth: for his feeble and weake members, he praieth. And the voyce of the flesh and of naturall sence, is neither rebellious nor desperate. The fleshe feeleth great paine vndeserued, the inno∣cent holy body suffereth sore punishment, the God∣head neuerthelesse vseth the highest silence: And as for the diuine presence, the sensible paine is not mi∣nished by it. But a merueilous steadfastnes of patience is heere declared, to performe the redemption of mankinde. This paine and smart is so great, that euen the Ele∣ments which haue no sence, declare tokens of their compassion. The Sunne lost his shine, and hid his cheerefull light from the wicked rabble, hauing as it were a displeasure for the death of their maker. See∣ing now that the sun mourneth▪ and the earth qua∣keth: much more ought we reasonable men to haue compassion, and to consider the death of our ma∣ker.
Behold O faithfull seruant of God, how thy fore∣goer in all his punishment and sorrowfull trouble, indureth stil mild and patient, and that there is heard no bitternes out of his mouth. His praier and com∣plaint sendeth hee vppe vnto his heauenlie Father, neither nameth hee any other, saue onely God▪ To him alone hee complaineth and openeth his desola∣tion. Euen so ought wee to doe when aduersitie, re∣proch, or any such thing assaulteth vs, wee must not vndiscreetly sorrow or be angrie, but runne straight way vnto the Crosse, and at the Crosse tarrie and abide a little while with the Lorde. If thou be for∣saken, complaine of thy trouble vnto GOD the Father: Consider, that Iesus also for thy sake, was left in great trouble and anguishe: Learne thou likewise to bee soft minded, and patient, without murmuring or cursing: Keepe thee to the onelie comfort of God, giue ouer all the ioy of this world, so shalt thou not bee forsaken of him. All earthlie thinges set apart, turne thou thy minde vppe into the Countrey of Heauen. Take GOD for thy Fa∣ther, Iesus for thy brother: Thou art of a noble high kindred, namelie, a childe of the euer liuing God. O mercifull father, wee crie vnto thee in all trou∣ble, and call vppon thee through the crucified Iesus. Suffer vs not to sincke in great afflictions, giue vs not ouer vnto our owne strength: but the more the e∣nemie presseth vppon vs, the more bee thou our as∣sistance: For in all anguishe and trouble, thou art the right helper, and most faithfull friend. If tempta∣tion
then come vppon vs by thy fatherly will, graunt vs grace O Lord, patientlie to beare it, and to lay the burthen vpon thy mercie: that in all trouble, we be∣ing els destitute of all consolatiō, may put our whole trust onely in thee. Amen. AFter this, Iesus knowing that all thinges were nowe perfourmed, that the scripture might be fulfilled, hee saith: I thirst. So there stood a vessell by, full of vine∣ger. Therfore they filled a spunge with vinegar and wound it about with Isope, and put to his mouth. Assoone as Iesus then receiued of the Vinegar, hee answered and saide: It is finished. Doctrine and fruite. ADam satisfied his lust in the forbidden Apple: which noisome lust was ocasion of our death. But Iesus for the reformation of this concupi∣scence, suffreth also vpon his tongue, to restore vs a∣gaine from the fall, and to conquere vs in this life. His bitter drinke is vnto vs a blessed medicine. Such great vnthankefulnesse of the Iewes was prophe∣cied by King Dauid in the Psalmes.Psal. . To him that fedde them in the wildernesse with bread from hea∣uen, and gaue them water to drinke out of the hard stonie Rocke. Euen vnto him for a recompence, they giue Vineger and Gall.Esay . O the sower and vn∣naturall fruite that the LORDE receiueth of his owne Vineyard, which he had planted and garni∣shed so faire? To vs heere is prepared a soueraigne
medicine against glotonie and all voluptuousnes of the flesh, thorow the loue whereof God is forgotten and forsaken. Now when Christ who is the fulfiller of the law, and all the Prophets, had whollie and fully perfour∣med the will of his heauenlie father, hee saith for a conclusion and ende of his life: it is finished, as hee would say: Now is finished all that the old law hath written and spoken of me, all that the old Testament figured with oblations and sacrifices, with glory and beautie in the Gods seruice. Now are truly fulfilled the holy prophesies of the Prophetes, and the long wished desires of the holye olde Fathers. Nowe is wrought and perfourmed all that belonged & con∣cerned the redemption of mankinde. It is all (as it was promised of God) concluded with an honou∣rable blessed end. And looke what is behinde, shall vndoubtedly be fulfilled in due time. I haue accom∣plished the commandement of my Father, who sent me into this world: the worke that hee gaue mee to do,Iohn. 17. haue I finished. What could I do more for thee, O my people, that I haue not done? Vppon the sixt daye, hee finished the worke of the creation of the world: And nowe vppon the sixt day and age of the world, hee perfourmeth the blessed worke of mans redemption. Vppon the sixt day hee created man, and made him of the mould of the earth: Vpon the sixt day hee restored him againe, and deliuered him with his holy bloud. Thus all things are finished: the great worke of his mercie and most excellent loue, is accomplished: the way vnto heauen is opened: and
the deuils power is broken. In such hope ought wee valiauntlie to trauaile at this time in this vnconstant world, and not to let fall the worke of God that is begun: but by his assistance to bring it vnto a blessed ende, and stoutly to endure therein. It is well-nie come to the point, that all shal bee finished: the euening and ende of our life com∣meth on apace, wherein we may say with glad harts, as Christ our foregoer did: It is all finished. Wherefore deare brethren, let vs euer most dili∣gently and earnestly walke in the way of the truth, and of commendable vertues begun, exercising our selues in righteousnes. We must not think otherwise but to haue battaile against vice, against the flesh, the world, and Satan. Daily goe we on a pace towardes death, in hope to attain eternal life. O that we might say with Paule: I haue fought a good fight,2. Tim. 4. I haue ful∣filled my course, I haue kept the faith! We must suf∣fer and haue trauaile yet a litle season, the time of our deliuerance will shortly be heere. O Lord Iesu, direct thou all our works according to thy good pleasure, illuminate & purifie our minds and thoughts. Teach vs, how wee euer to the praise and honour of thy holy name, may meekly beginne, diligently doo, and blessedly end all our workes and enterprises. O giue vs grace, faithfully to labour in the Vineyard of the Lord: that the heat and trauaile driue vs not back, that we faint not: that in the schole of heauenly exercise, wee may steadfastly indure till wee giue vp the ghost: and that through thy mercie, after many commendable battails, and long striuing,
wee may say in the last houre of our life: It is all fini∣shed. Vouchsafe thou to bee the finall occasion of our whole life, and of all our woorkings: so shall it followe, that thou wilt bee also our eternall reward, ioy, and saluation. Amen. ANd Iesus criyng with a loud voyce, said: Father, into thy hands I commit my spirite. And when hee had thus said, hee bowed his head, and gaue vp the ghost. Doctrine and fruit. THE life of all liuing dieth after the fleshe, tho∣row the painefull torment of death doth Iesus depart: But by his death hee openeth vnto vs the way of life, and taketh from vs euarlasting death. This is a precious, dear, and victorious death, which hath slaine our death, and conquered vs life againe. Let this death euermore continue in our hearts, and let our death bee considered in the consideration of his death. This shall bring vs comfortable trust and hope, when our death striueth in vs, so that we shall neither be afraid, nor despaire, if wee steadfastly be∣leeue that Christ died for vs, and that hee through his death, hath opened vnto vs euerlasting life. Let vs with deuout heartes consider the death of him that hath redeemed vs, and restored vs againe. The gracious innocent Lorde Iesus dieth miserable and naked, so poore, so destitute as no man els: And yet vnto God is none so deare, although of men hee he most vilely intreated. This is euen the reward of
the worlde, to despise the children of God, and to re∣compence euil for good. If the like happen vnto vs, we must not thinke it straunge, for the seruant is not aboue the Lord. The Lorde hangeth on the crosse, hard pearced, not onely with nailes, but also with ardent loue towards vs: sore beaten and hurt in eue∣rie place, without succour, without helpe, without comfort, euen as a dead man, who is forgotten and out of minde. Ponder well, O thou good seruant of Christ, who and how great hee is, that crying with a loud voyce, giueth vp the ghost: Verilie euen the sonne of GOD, as Centurio likewise dooth testi∣fie. O deare brethren, let vs consider, how great our sinnes are, for the which the innocent sonne of God dieth. Iustly ought all the world to be dead vnto vs in Christ, and wee vnto the world. And what is our life but a blessed death? Hee that learneth not to die in his life, is afraide when the houre of death com∣meth. Euery day goe wee one daies iourney vnto death: therefore ought wee so to watch, so to speake, and so to worke, as if we would die euen now out of hand. Before death wee must learne to die, least hee sodainlie take holde vppon vs, and make vs afraide. Death vnto those that faithfully beleeue, is through the death of Christ, become the gate to life, for their comfort and strong hope is in the woordes of Iesus,Iohn. 11, when he saith: he that beleeueth on me, though hee were dead, yet shall hee liue Item: who so heareth my word, and beleeueth on him that sent me,Iohn. 3. hath e∣uerlasting life.
In this promise ought we to liue and die, casting away all impediments and such thinges as hinder vs from his loue, beeing with heart and minde sepera∣ted from the world, and vndefiled from the filthines thereof. Out of the passion of Christ, we must picke out vnto our selues comfortable helpe and medicine, so that obediently in al patience we offer vp our selues vnto our heauenly father, committing our soules in∣to his handes. In life and in death, let the death of Christ be our comfort, and let vs set it against al fear∣full temptations, and between the wrath of God and our sinnes. O Lord Iesu Christ, who in the feeble nature of man hast suffred death for vs vnworthie sinners, graunt vs grace, feruently in our hearts to beare the pain and loue of thy most bitter death, and through the subduing and ouer-comming of al vice and wic∣kednesse, to vse and exercise our selues daily, in fol∣lowing thy footsteppes and dying with thee: And when the end of our life draweth nie, that wee then may depart in thy mercie and grace, and receiue the ioy of paradise. Assist thou vs when we die, and de∣fend vs from the olde enemie, whom thou through thy death hast ouer-come. O Father, wee commit our spirite into thy hand, thou hast redeemed vs O God of truth. Let these be our last wordes, when we depart hence. Amen.
AND behold the vaile of the temple rent into two pee∣ces, from aboue till beneath: and there was an earth∣quake: the stones claue asunder: the graues opened: they that had slept rose vp, and went out of the graues, and came after his resurrection into the holie Cittie, and appea∣red vnto manie. The captaine, and they that were with him which kept Iesus, when they saw the earthquake, and that he gaue vp the ghost with such a crie (and other thinges that there happened) they were afraid verie sore, and saide: Ve∣rely, this was Gods Sonne. Centurio likewise praised God, & said: Verely this was a righteous man. And all the people that were there and saw it, smote vppon their brestes and re∣turned. Doctrine and fruite. THe Iewes alway required tokens of Christ, and of such there hapned manie nowe in the death of the Lord: for the very earth quaketh at their wickednes and blaspheming of God: the hard stony rockes with their cracking and cleauing asunder, ex∣presse a lamentation on their makers behalfe: the vaile in the temple renteth, for a declaration, that the olde couered thinges in the olde Testament are laid away, and the hidde significations of Christ expres∣sed and opened: for he is the holy true oblation, that taketh away the sinnes of the world: he is the vnde∣filed lambe of God: hee is the true high Priest,Heb. 10. that entreth within the vaile into the sanctuary, for the way of holy thinges is opened through his bloud:
hee is the high Priest that once entred in, and with one onely sacrifice doth perfectly cleanse and sancti∣fie. The graues opened for an euidence of his resur∣rection. Centurio knowledgeth that, which the harde harted Iewes would not confesse. O good faithfull beleeuers: let vs not bee harder than the stones: let our hearts rent asunder in repen∣tance and sorrow for our sinnes, that we may enioye the fruite of the Lords death. ANd a farre of stood all his acquaintance, among whom were many women, that came vp from Galilee, & fol∣lowed him, and ministred vnto him: among whome was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Iames the lesse, and Ioses, & the mother of Zebedes children, with ma∣nie other that were come to Hierusalem. The Iewes then, because it was the Sabaoth euen, that the bodies shoulde not remaine on the crosse vppon the Sabaoth day (for that was the great Saboth day) besought Pilate that their legges might be broken, and that they might be taken downe. Then came the souldiors, and brake the legges of the first, and of the other which was crucified with him. But when they came to Iesus, and saw that he was dead alreadie, they brake not his legges, but one of the souldiours with a speare thrust him into the side, and forthwith came there out bloud and water. And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true. And he knoweth that hee saith true, that yee also might beleeue. These thinges were done, that the Scrip∣ture might be fulfilled:Exod. 12. Zach. 11. Yee shall not breake a bone of him. And againe, another Scripture saith: They shall looke on him whom they pierced.
Doctrine and fruite. OVt of the side of him that sleeepeth vpon the crosse, runneth the fountain of wholsom wa∣ter, with the which our vncleannes is washed away, and the whole world sprinkled, purified, and cleansed therewith. The heart is opened and woun∣ded, loue floweth out, the bloud gusheth forth, to the washing away of all our sins. This is the true stonie rocke, which being smitten vpon, giueth water vnto our thirstie soules: like as Eue was taken & fashioned out of the rib & side of her husband that slept: so is the holie Church, the spouse of Christ,Ephes. . shapen out of the side of her husband. This gate is opened wide to all faithfull beleeuers: hee that hideth himselfe in this hole, is sure from all hurt and harme. Of this ho∣lie and godly fountaine, who so drinketh once, or taketh a draught of the holie loue, dooth forthwith forget all his aduersities and griefes, and shall bee whole from all wicked heate of temporall lustes and bodilie prouocations: feruently shall hee bee kind∣led in loue and desire of eternall thinges, and shall bee replenished with the vnspeakable goodnesse of the holie Ghost: and in him shall bee a fountaine and well of liuing water,Iohn. 7. flowing into eternall life. By this creepeth the poore sinner into the louing heart of Iesus Christ, which with exceeding great kindnes is pierced through: and there findeth hee rest and quietnes in the stony rocke. Here are opened
the conduites and well pipes of life, the way of our health, wherein we finde rest vnto our soules, & sha∣dow for heate and trauaile: this fountaine of grace is neuer dried vp. This is the well of the godly  that floweth out of the middest of paradise, to wate the whole earth, to moysture the drie hearts, to wash away sinne. Out of this plentifull well, ought wee with great desire to draw and drinke, that from henceforth wee liue not in our selues, but in him who for our sakes was wounded so deep. Our hart must we giue whol∣lie vnto him, that hath opened his heart so wide. His heart and ours must bee all one. Nothing requireth he of vs but the heart. Sonne (saith he) giue mee thy heart. Our hart must we giue to the Lord, not to the world: to eternall wisedome, not to lightnes. There do the true heardmans sheepe find pasture, there are the water brookes of life, there may they goe in and out. Nothing is there vppon earth that so kindleth, draweth, and pierceth the heart of man, as dooth Christes loue declared vppon the crosse. When wee thus surrender our heart vnto the Lorde, when wee thus wholly and fully giue ouer our heart into the Lordes hands, that hee may keepe and possesse it for euer, then haue we blessed peace. O Lord Iesu Christ, drawe thou our hearts vnto thee, ioyne them together in vnseparable loue, that they may feruently burne: that wee may abide in thee, & thou in vs, & that the euerlasting couenant betweene vs may stand sure for euer. O wound our hearts with the fiery darts of thy pearcing loue. Let
them pierce through all our slouthfull members and inward powers, that wee beeing happily wounded, may so become whole and sound. Let vs haue no lo∣uer but thy selfe alone, lette vs seeke no ioy nor com∣fort, but onely in thee. Thus haue we the passion and death of our Lord and redeemer Iesus Christ.Heb. 12. Now (as Paule saith) let vs go foorth of the tentes, vnto him that for our sake is despitefully crucified without the Citie of Hieru∣salem, and lette vs helpe him to beare his rebuke, gi∣uing him thankes and praise for his great loue. In his death standeth our life, for in his death is our death slaine: the sting of death and firme is taken awaye. Heere finde wee true life and eternall saluation: here sinne is forgiuen, and pardon graunted A poena & culpa: heere mercie is denyed vnto no man, for the vertue and merites of the Lordes holie passi∣on is bottomlesse. Through his shame commeth e∣ternall honour and glorie vnto vs. His passion is the wholesome playster for all woundes: his crosse the ouerthrow of all enemies, and victorie against all vice. From our whole heartes therefore ought wee to reioyce in the great and blessed fruites of thy holie passion. O Lorde Iesu, whilest wee are in this feeble life, graunt vs so to liue, that wee maye direct all our workes, desires, and intentes, according to thy god∣lie will and pleasure: that this our temporall course may bee founde and finished in thy grace: that after the ouercomming of all temptations and carefull
things, we may come to the reward of eternall salua∣tion. Teach thou vs dayly to die, and by the spirit to subdue the flesh: that when the flesh corrupteth, the spirit may be taken to eternall rest. Graunt vs grace, chearefully and continually to cleaue vnto thy holy crosse: O giue vs blessed teares of true repentance, while the doore of grace standeth open: graunt that we may stedfastly & blessedly finish the thing which commendably is begun. Let our daily exercise bee in the confideration of the passion of Christ, let him be our mirrour conti∣nually: let vs not shrinke from the crosse, but indure with Christ in life & death: with him on the crosse, with him in the graue and death, so shal we continue in rest, peace, and quietnesse: that when Christ our life shall appeare, we may rise vp with him in glorie. God the Father, Sonne, and ho∣lie Ghost, grant this vnto vs all. Amen.
THE BVRIALL OF IESVS CHRIST, OVT of the holie Euangelists. NOW when it was late,Math. 27. Marke 15. Luk. 23. Iohn. 19. for as much as it was the day of preparation afore the Sa∣baoth, there came a rich man of Arima∣thia, named Ioseph, such a principall & famous Senatour, as was iust and righ∣teous. The same had not consented to their counsaile and doings: for he also was one of those that waited for the kingdome of God, a disciple of Iesu, but secret∣ly for feare of the Iewes. Boldly went he in vnto Pilate, and begged the bodie of Iesu. But Pilate wondered, if he were now dead alreadie. And when hee had learned of the Captaine that it was, he graunted him the bodie of Iesu, and commen∣ded it to bee giuen him. Ioseph had bought a white linnen cloth, and tooke downe the bodie of Iesus,Iohn. 19. and wrapt it in the faire linnen cloth. There came also Nicodemus (who was come to the Lord afore by night) & brought mirrhe and A∣loes vppon an hundred pound, mixt together. So taking the body of Iesu, they wound it with clothes, and prepared it with
sweet ointments according as the maner of the Iewes was to burie. And by the place where Iesus was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new sepulchre. There Ioseph laid Iesus in his owne new sepulchre, which he had caused to be hewen out of a rocke, into the which no man had yet been laid. Forasmuch then as it was the Iewes day of preparing, the sepulchre being at hand, they laide Iesus into it, and Io∣seph weltred a great stone afore the entrance of the sepulchre and went his way. Now followeth the doctrine and contemplation. IN the former little Booke, we haue heard of the passion of Christ. Nowe if our great sinne put vs in feare, making our conscience vn∣quiet, and presse vs with the ter∣rour of euerlasting death & dam∣nation, wee ought to remember, that the lambe of GOD beeing slayne and hanged vp vppon the Crosse for our sinnes, hath himselfe satisfied for them all, and washed them cleane awaye. This
holy sacrifice was offred vnto God the father for our welfare, and euen the same it is that hath taken awaie the sinne and wickednes of all the world. Whatsoeuer is read and spoken concerning the passion of Iesus Christ, it is altogether done for our eternall wealth and comfort. Now is it described of the holy Euangelistes, with what honour and glorie his holy body was buried: and that not of mean per∣sons, but of noble and famous iust men, Ioseph and Nicodemus, who while Christ yet liued, fauored him and were secretly his Disciples. But nowe after his death, they steppe forth somwhat more stoutly and boldly, begging of Pilate the body of Iesu, to burie it. In the which act, is declared their worthy and va∣liant beliefe and loue vnto the Lord Iesu. For their bodies, their estimation and goods must they needes put in ieopardy, and procure vnto themselues the hatred and displeasure of all the world, if they hono∣rably burie him, who in his life time was taken to be an euill doer, a deceiuer, a sedicious murtherer, and so was condemned vnto death. But thus it pleaseth God, in weakenes:1. Cor. 1. Iohn 12. to declare his owne strength and glorie: Thus the dead wheat corne bringeth foorth fruit in the death of Christ, and thus appeareth the power of his death. For though he verily and trulie died as touching the body, yet after the spirit, and in mighty power, he liueth▪ yea hee himselfe is the life of all things. This is the power and fruite of his passion, when a mightie and strong spirit dooth exercise it selfe in faithfull beleeuing harts. They that afore were asha∣med
to go openly vnto the Lord, steppe now foorth manfully, all fearefulnes sette apart, ieoparding their bodies and goodes. For besides that they put them∣selues in perill of loosing their life and estimation, they bestow also great cost in linnen cloth, & in cost∣ly sweet ointment. For they bury not Iesus as an euil doer, but as an honourable man and friend of God, according to their custome. Loe, what a thing it is, to cleaue somewhat vnto Christ, how feeblie soeuer it bee doone: it bringeth alwaie great fruite in his time. No man therefore ought to bee reiected that cleaueth anie thing vnto Christ, and earnestly see∣keth him. Faith is strengthened in affliction and ad∣uersitie, the death of Christ giueth power vnto the fearefull. In death beginneth his honour and glorie to appeare, there are all thinges faire and beautifull. Centurio giueth testimonie, and maketh an honoura∣ble confession, and so doo they that were vnder him. Necessarie it was we should beleeue and confesse that Iesus verilie died vpon the crosse: therefore do the Euangelists describe it so perfectly, howe his bo∣die was taken downe from the Crosse by Ioseph, and was laid in the Sepulchre: To the intent that wee also might beleeue and confesse, that he hath broken the bands of death, and is from death mightily risen againe. For life might not bee holden captiue in death, neither might death with the rules thereof alwaies binde him, that of all thinges is the life, in whome wee liue, mooue, and haue our bee∣ing.
Heere we must learne to know the eternall infal∣lible foresight and prouidence of God, who for his annointed, appointeth afore hande an honourable Sepulchre, and mooueth the heartes of his elect to burie the bodie of Iesu, which els vndoubtedly had bene vilely cast out, & remained still vnburied. How be it his buriall and rest must needs bee honourable, as the Prophet saith, Esa. 11. For when hee by death had finished the course of his life, and the woorke of his father, this rest appertained to his honour, and the father heard him as hee praied afore: Father, (make thy sonne honourable) or glorifie thy sonne.Iohn 17. This began in the buriall, there was the faire white linnen cloth, the new sepulchre, the honorable men and excellent dead buriers, as witnesses of his death, there were the hundred pounds of pretious & cost∣ly oyntment. All these thinges were euidences of a glorious, new, and immortall life, which Christ had in his bodie as the firstling of his deed, and as we al∣so shall haue according to our measure. The sepul∣chre is newe: partly to preuent all wrong suspition, (for if anie man had lyen in that sepulchre afore, it might easily haue beene suspected or talked, that Christ was not risen againe from the dead, but some other) partlie to declare the newnesse of lyfe in Christ, and in those that are his, as it is sayde a∣fore. By this also wee see into what pouertie Christ submitted himselfe: hee that in his life time had neyther house nor place where to lay his heade, is nowe couered with straunge cloth, and layde in a
straunge Sepulchre. In the which thing (though Christs bodie was alwaie vncorrupt) we are taught fruitfullye to consider the corruption of our body. We are earth, and to the earth must wee yeelde and paie earth againe. Ashes wee be, and into ashes wee must returne. Why bragge wee then? Why are we proud and high minded, seeing that shortly we shall become foule doong and carrion? Why haue wee such desire to the wicked worlde, considering it ca∣steth vs out so vilely? We should alwaie remember, that within a small short time, we shall be laid down into a foule pit. There is the harborow of all fleshe: There lie the rich and poore together in one bedde: There is no difference betweene noble and base of bloud: There, neither goods helpe the rich, nor sub∣tile craft, the wittie. There the tender is worms meat, and he that a little while agoe went bragging vp and downe in costly apparell, is now an vglie smell to the nose: There the hardie Giant, is faine to play stoupe gallaunts parte. The praise and commendacion of such as are puft vp in foolishe pride, departeth as the dust before the wind. Thus passeth away all mankind and all flesh falleth to the place whence he came, be∣ing dissolued by reason of originall sinne. Wherfore let vs learne in this time so to liue, and so to subdue the flesh through the spirite, that when the flesh corrupteth,Rom. 6. our soule may bee taken into e∣ternall peace and rest. For all we that be baptized in∣to Christ Iesus, are baptized into his death, beeing buried with him rhrough baptisme into death: that as Christ was raised vp from the dead through the
glory of his father, so we likewise might walke in the newnesse of life. For if we be grassed in him through the similitude of his death, we shall assuredly also be partakers of his resurrection: knowing this, that our olde man is crucified with him, that the bodie of sin might be emptied, and that we should serue sinne no more, for he that is dead, is made righteous from sin, if we now be dead with Christ, we beleeue, that wee shall also liue with him. Looke vpon the whole sixte Chapter to the Romanes. We must die from the world, and from our owne flesh, that the world may be crucified, and dead vnto vs, as we vnto the world. The olde Adam, who in vs did liue and rule, must bee subdued and mortified, that Christ onely may liue and raigne in vs. We must burie our bodies with mirrhe and Aloes, that is, with lamentation and sorow for our sinnes, with weeping with fasting, and with abstinence, which workes of repentance are bitter vnto the bodie. But lyke as those bitter things, Aloes and mirrhe, doe keepe the bodie from corruption, so the crosse and aduersitie sent of God and borne for his sake, preserueth our flesh from sinne. If we thus die with Christ from the world, & bee buried in his death, we shall rise againe to a new life, here and in the world to come: & so as for death, we need not be afraid of it. For the sepulchre is new, and lieth in the garden: which noteth vnto vs, the return to the pleasant garden of paradise, which is opened vs through the death of Christ, for hee as a guide is entered in before vs, Iohn. 14. Heb. 9.10. that we also
after a new sort might escape from death, and rise a∣gaine to a new life. For in the death of Christ, is death killed, ouercome, and wholy nenued, and as much as altered into a sleepe. For we liue vnto God, and our bodyes (as the Scripture testifieth) shall also liue a∣gaine. And this is the cause that the Scripture affirm∣eth those which are dead in Christ, to be asleep. Esay 26. 1. Thess 4. Afore time had death mightily and openly raig∣ned, euen ouer those also that had not sinned like vn∣to Adam (yet had they put on Adams image, & were therefore subdued vnto the curse) but when the se∣cond Adam,1. Cor. 15 namely Christ, appeared, & purchased lyfe agayne for mankind, through the death of his flesh, destroying the dominion of death, and rising from death againe. Then was death renued & chan∣ged, and became like vnto a sleepe, for it destroyeth vs not for euer, but is a gate and enterance into a bet∣ter and eternall life, therfore haue we a much more perfect hope of the resurrection in Christ, than they of olde, which therefore buried the bodies so costly and honorably, because they hoped in the resurrec∣tion to come. As for vs, wee must bestowe such cost vpon Christ in his members, clothing & feeding the poore, and being ready also to loose all things for his sake. Graunt vnto vs, O God, that as concerning the world and the olde life, wee may die with thy sonne our head, and be truly buried in his death, that with him and in him we may rise againe to a new life▪ that we weak and feeble, may with Ioseph and Nichodemu
grow in vertue and stedfastnes, daily laying somwhat to the heape of godly exercises, being euer still renu∣ed in the spirit, that we in our hearts laying vp Christ who dyed for our sakes, may so in thankfull remem∣brance burie him, to the intent that our soule & bo∣die may still remaine pure and vnspotted, vntill the comming of our Lord, Amen. MArie Magdalene and Mary Ioses, sitting ouer a∣gainst the sepulchre, beheld where Iesus was laide. For certaine women there were, which comming with him from Galilee, and following him, beheld the sepul∣chre, and how his bodie was laide. Those returned back, and prepared sweet odors: but vpon the saboth they rested, be∣cause of the commandement. The next daie after the daie of preparation, the high Priests and Pharesies came vnto Pilate, and said: Sir, we remember that this deceuer said while he was yet aliue, that after three daies hee should rise againe. Cause therefore the graue to be kept vntill the third daie, least his disciples hap∣pily come and steale him awaie, and saie vnto the people, that he is risen from the dead, and so shall the last error bee worse than the first. Pilate said vnto them: Yee haue watchmen, go and keepe it as ye know. They went and kept, & prouided the sepulchre with watchmen, and sealed the stone. Doctrine and fruite. HEre we learne to haue an earnest, diligent, and feruent loue vnto Christ, hearing with what
zeale and feruentnes, that deuout women  vn∣to him, and serue him in life and death. Him whome they loued in life, will they not forsake in death, but cheerefully with constant mindes they ieopard their lyfe and goods. What auaileth vs then, that we can∣not shew friendship, loue and seruice vnto Christ, as well as these women? Seeing we haue not Christ al∣wayes bodily with vs, who nowe beeing in his king∣dome, needeth no corporall ministration & seruice, we ought to bestow the same vppon his poore ones, whom we haue alwaies with vs. Heerein ought wee to spare neither goods nor money, to serue & please Christ, who vnto death did ieopard and giue his bo∣dy and lyfe for vs. But like as in the women there was a deuout gesture & good mind toward Christ: so in the Iewish priests and pharesies there was found a great malice and ha∣tred against Christ. They were not satisfied in perse∣cuting him while he was aliue, but vndertooke also to hinder his resurrection. Yet God by his wisdome vseth their wickednesse to the glorie of Christ, that e∣uen the enemies themselues (albeit against their wil) must beare record of his buriall and resurrection in that they keepe the graue with watch men, and seale the stone. The truth is immortall, the more it is op∣prest, the more it breaketh forth. Therfore ought we to beware, that wee neuer goe about to hinder the truth: for if we should so doo, we should both labor in vaine, & procure vnto our selues euerlasting hurt.
THE RESVRREC∣TION OF IESVS CHRIST, out of the holie Euangelists. AND when the Sabbaoth was now past,Marke 16. euen the Sabaoth day at euen, Marie Magdalene, Marie Iames and Sa∣lome, bought sweete spices, that they might come and annoint Iesus.Luk. 24. Math. 28. Iohn. 20. The euening when the sabaoth is ended, and the first day dawneth after the Sabaoth (namely, the first day of the weeke) while it was yet darke, and the Sun brake forth and began to arise, the women came to the Sepulchre, to see it. But there happened first a great earthquake: for the Angell of the Lord came downe from heauen, and went and rolled backe the stone from the mouth of the sepul∣chre, and sate vpon it. His countenance was like the lighte∣ning, and his raiment white as snow. And for feare of him the keepers were astonied, and became as dead men. And behold, some of them that had watched the sepulchre, came into the Citie, and told the high Priests all the thinges that had happened. Then gathered they themselues with the El∣ders,
and tooke counsaile, and gaue large money vnto the sol∣diers, saying: Say ye, that his Disciples came by night, and stole him away while yee slept. And if this come to the rulers eares, wee will perswade him, and saue you harmelesse. So they tooke the money, and did as they were taught. And this saying is noised among the Iewes vnto this day. Now as the women were in the way going, they saide a∣mong themselues: Who will roule vs the stone away from the doore of the Sepulchre? (for it was a verie great one) & as they looked,Math. 28. they sawe that the stone was rolled awaie. Then went they into the Sepulchre, and found not the bodie of the Lord Iesu, but saw a young man sitting at the right side, clothed in a long white garment, and they were afraid. But the Aungell sayde vnto them: Feare not, I knowe whome yee seeke. Ye seeke Iesus of Nazareth, that was cru∣cified: Hee is not heere, he is risen as he saide. Beholde the place where they laide him. But goe yee and tell his Disciples and Peter, that he is risen againe from the dead. Behold hee goeth before you into Galilee, as he said vnto you. Lo I haue tolde you. Doctrine and fruit. THE resurrection of Iesus Christ from the dead is verie diligently and perfectly described of the foure Euangelistes, for right profitable and necessarie is it for the strengthening and stablishing of our beleefe in Christ. And whereas in the descrip∣tion of this historie they speake not all alike, the same happeneth to our wealth through the ordinaunce of the holie Ghost, that we should exercise our faith
therein, and applie our diligence, perfectly to learne and comprehend the same Resurrection of Christ: For where that is right conceyued and beleeued, there is faith perfect. The Euangelistes nowe in de∣scribing Christes Resurrection, doo most of all de∣clare, to what high honour Christ came after death, and that in one order and degree, according as our beleefe and weakenesse increaseth and groweth to∣wards perfection. At the first, is faith in vs feeble and vnperfect, but through the grace of him that hath giuen it, it daily groweth. Verie hard also is it for our naturall reason, to receiue and beleeue the resurrection of the dead: therefore doe the Euangelistes right diligently and with manie wordes set forth the same resurrection of Christ, that our beleefe therein might be assured and stedfast. For whosoeuer truely and constantly belee∣ueth the resurrection of Iesu Christ, is readie & pre∣pared to beleeue all that concerneth Christ. Neither is there anie thing that maketh a man more ioyfull then when he beleeueth, that at the comming of the Lorde, he shal rise againe, and receiue a glorified bo∣die after Christ, and with Christ. What can be tedi∣ous to suche a faithfull beleeuing man, when hee beholdeth so high a rewarde from God. Diligently therefore ought we to heare, what the holy Euange∣lists write of his resurrection, and to giue credence to the witnesses that saw it. First, wee heare agayne the great zeale, and the feruent loue and diligence of these deuout women, in that they desire to shew honour vnto the Lorde
being dead: but the Angell a messenger of his resur∣rection, commaundeth them to declare this ioy vnto the Disciples, and to get them vnto the Lord nowe being aliue. Heauenly is the messenger and proclai∣mer of the resurrection, for it passeth farre all natural reason and all flesh. Therefore are the women also a∣fraid of him, and at the faire brightnes of his counte∣nance and apparel. For our feeble flesh is not able to sustaine the glorious shine of the heauenly light and godly clearenes, but is afraid at it, and feareth. Ne∣uerthelesse God by his Angell doth right soon com∣fort the womens weakenes, taketh from them their feare, speaketh louingly vnto them, maketh them A∣postles, that is, messengers and proclaimers of the ioi∣full resurrection. So little doth God reiect our weak∣nes, that he maketh euen women to be the declarers of his resurrection: for he euer delighteth of the last to make the first. Forasmuch then as they were the beginners of death in sinne, they are heere first afore the Apostles, chosen to bee declarers of that immor∣tall life, which euen out of death is come forth vnto vs in Christ. As Christ with the earthquake died on the crosse, so riseth hee with the earthquake, which also was heard in the sending of the holie Ghost. This signi∣fied, that through his death and resurrection, and by the power of the holy Ghost (when the Apostles de∣clare the same in the world) the whole world should be moued and chaunged. And though the vngrati∣ous falshood of the high Priestes, vndertooke with their lies, to hide and suppresse the trueth of Christs
resurrection, yet God did directe it an other waie. Loo her with they minded to oppresse the truth  with the same haue they helped to set it forth: and thereby was it signified, how the Iewish people should bee blinded and refused. And forasmuch as they had no loue vnto the trueth, but reiected it, it it was moche that they should be blinded and darke∣ned in lyes, and that there shoulde errour and blind∣nsse enough fall vpon them. The Angel is not ashamed to call Iesus the crucifi∣ed, for the crosse is the token of Christes victorie:The crosse is the glorious & victorious token of the faithfull. through the crosse beganne his honour and glorie: through the crosse was death ouercome: the crosse is the glorious token of all Christians: In the crosse is the exaltation of Christ the heade, and of all his members. Wee ought not therefore to bee ashamed of the crosse of our Lorde which was crucified: for therein standeth our health, life, and resurrection, all our reioicing and glorie. Commission is giuen, that vnto Peter before other disciples, they should declare the Lords resurrectiō: that from the feare wherin he stood by reason of the denial, he might be deliuered, and so comforted. He sendeth them to Galilee (thither wil he go be∣fore them) that they might bee safe from the feare of the Iewes, which at that time raged horribly. Grant vs (O God) an earnest zeale and loue vnto the poore, in whom we may highly honor Iesus thy son. And wheras we throgh the weaknes of the flesh are inclined to bee faint hearted, and not able of our selues to behold the bright shine and clearnes of his
glorious Resurrection, strengthen and comfort thou vs by thy holie Angell, that wee may constantly be∣leeue the Resurrection of thy sonne: whereby  receiuing an holy hope of the life to come,  immortall Resurrection of our bodies, may be  also to comfort and strengthen others that be . O make thou this hard earth of our fleshe to  and mooue through the power of thy spirit, to ho∣lie fruitfull pennaunce, amendment and confessi∣on of our life. Preserue vs, that wee neuer resist the truth, nor take part with lies▪ Graunt vs loue vnto the truth, keepe vs from errour and blindnesse. Let our ioye bee in the crosse of Iesu Christ thy sonne, and our life in his resurrection: that wee with him, & in him may truly rise againe, hereto a godly righ∣teous and sober life, and in the world to come to the blessed life euerlasting, Amen. Marke 16.AND the women went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre, for they trembled and were amazed: Nei∣ther said they any thing to anie man, for they were af∣fraid. Mary Magdalen ranne, and came to Simon Peter and to the other Disciple who Iesus loued, and said vnto them:Iohn 20. They haue taken the Lord away out of the Sepulchre, & we wote not where they haue laid him. Then went Peter foorth, and the other Disciple, and came to the Sepulchre. They both ranne together, and the other Disciple out-ranne Peter, and came sooner to the sepulchre. And hee stouped downe, and saw the linnen cloathes lying, yet went he not in. Then came Simon Peter following him, and went into the Sepulchre, and saw the linnen clothes lying, and the nap∣kin that was about his head not lying with the linen cloths,
but  togeather in a place by it selfe. Ther went in  Disciple, which came first to the Sepulchre,Angus, he beleeued that the bo∣die was ta∣ken away.  and beleeued. For as yet they knewe not the  hee should rise againe from death. And the  Disciples went away againe vnto their owne home. But Marie stood without at the Sepulchre weeping. And as shee wept, shee bowed herselfe into the Sepulchre, and saw two Aungels in white, sitting the one at the head, the o∣ther at the feete, where they had laide the bodie of Iesus. And they said vnto her: Woman why weepest thou? She said vnto them: For they haue taken away my Lorde, and I wote not where they haue laid him. When shee had thus said, she turned her selfe backe, and saw Iesus standing, and knew not that it was Iesus. Then said Iesus vnto her: Wo∣man, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou? She supposing that he had beene a gardener, saide vnto him: Sir, if thou haue borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will fetch him. Iesus said vnto her: Marie. She turned her selfe, and said vnto him, Raboni: which is to say, Maister. Then said Iesus vnto her: Touch me not, for I am not yet as∣cended to my Father. But go to my brethren, and say vnto them: I ascend vp vnto my father and your father, vnto my God, & your God. Marie Magdalene came, & tolde the dis∣ciples (which had been with the Lord, & now were weeping and mourning) that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken such things vnto her. But though they heard that he was aliue, & that Mary had seen him, yet they beleeued not. Doctrine and fruite. THE Euangelists do most diligently set forth to vs the resurrectiō of Christ, as a thing necessary
profitable and ioyfull vnto all faithfull beleeuers. For in the resurrection we see how Christ ▪ and what hope we haue in him. But this resurrection do the Euangelists teach, according as mans  standing may comprehend it. For if Christ had so∣dainly at once opened himselfe to his Disciples, so that other exhortations & warninges were not gone before, then should they haue taken it but for a plain fantasie and vision,Math. 14. as they did when the Lorde ap∣peared vnto them vppon the water. Therefore the Euangelistes describe the matter verie distinctly and sundrie wayes, so that no man can bee able to sus∣pect anie deceyte. First, how the women and men came to the sepulchre, looked and went in, and how they viewed euerie thing throughly, not once, but oft and manie times: the clothes wherein the Lorde was wrapped, the heade kerchiefe, euerie thing fol∣den together in his seuerall place: and how they saw and perceyued, that the bodie was not there, that the Sepulchre was open, the stone rolled away, and how the Aungels and heauenly spirits testified, that hee was risen agayne. Yet for all this, they are weak and beleeue it not stedfastly, but bee as yet in a doubt. Thus GOD permitteth them to wauer, and to bee feeble of beleefe, and doth not through∣ly perswade them forthwith, and that altogether for our sakes. Hee might well sodainely haue certified and assu∣red Thomas and them at the first, but thus is it better both for them and vs. For the more a sicke man feeleth his owne disease and woundes, the more
acceptable is the medicine vnto him: The weaker that our beleefe is, the more cause haue wee to call vpon God for the increase of faith: the more weak∣nesse we find in our selues, the farther are we in debt and the more bound to praise God. When hee ma∣keth vs strong, and seeing it is his onely strength that staieth vs, we ought the lesse to reioyce in our owne. Christ in his life time had oft tolde them afore,Math. 20. of his resurrection, but their mind was so dul, that they vnderstood it not, neither perceiued they that great mysterie. The resurrection of the bodies they could not comprehend, but alway vnderstood it otherwise There was much written thereof, and that with eui∣dent woordes, in the Scripture (as in the sixteenth Psalme, and in the figure of Ionas) and yet could not they vnderstand it. Which thing neuertheles to be∣leeue, Christ had giuen them occasion sundrie wais: As in that hee raised vp Lazarus & other which were dead, and made them aliue againe.Iohn. 11. In all his preach∣ing and doctrine he declared, that this was vnto him in no wise vnpossible, by reason of the diuine pow∣er working in him. For all this, the disciples are yet so weake that they vnderstand it not all. Therfore doth the godly wisedome lead them still by little and little, to make them stronger, declaring vnto them certaine assured euidences: as that the bo∣die was not in the sepulchre, but that the clothes lay there wrapt together: for these were vndoubted to∣kens, that he was risen vp againe. For if any man had taken him out of the sepulchre (as Magdalen thoght) he could not haue had so much time and leisure, as
to loose vp the bands, and to vndoo the clothes from the bodie, but had taken and carried awaie the clo∣thes and bodie together. For the clothes dyd cleaue hard fast to the bodie, partly by reason of the ▪ and partly through the Aloes and Myrrhe than the bodie was dressed withall. But for all this, they are weake still, and in doubt, vntill such time as the Lord himselfe doth strengthen them. Therefore euen Ma∣rie also, as feruent as shee is, iudgeth not the bodie to be risen againe, but to bee stollen and priuily carryed awaie: thus God openeth himselfe vnto whom and when hee will, for though wee see sometimes many great and wonderfull workes, though wee reade and heare much of the Scriptures, yet remaineth our hart still ignorant, neither doth the doctrine take effect, till Christ open it, and till he himselfe be schoole-master within. Who so would rather haue another and higher sense or exposition than this, it may bee vnderstood that Christ appeareth vnto those which mourne and weepe, and stande in death with Christ in subduing of the flesh, in mortifying of the body, in abiding of the crosse. For while they bee in aduersitie vnder the crosse, and buried with Christ, the greatnesse of the trouble causeth them to thinke, that Christ is not risen againe, that is, they haue nothing but heauines, and sorrowe. Notwithstanding Christ appeareth vnto them, comforteth and refresheth them, and maketh them partakers of his resurrection and ioy. Heere may wee perceiue and see a great desire and loue vnto Christ,Luke. 7. in the disciples that runne, but
specially in Marie Magdalene: for seeing that much  forgiuen her, therefore was her loue exceeding  Peter also and Iohn, which were more fer∣uent  others in the loue of Christ, and drew nee∣  others did, when the Lorde was taken, al∣though the one fled, and the other denied him: ther∣fore vnto them, as to the principall, was this opened, before others. Marie loued Christ verie feruently, for many sinnes were forgiuen her,The number of seauen for many. many deuils & vices were driuen out of her, therefore vnto her dyd Christ first appeare. The crosse and trouble was not able to bring Christ out of her heart,Mark. 16 it could not quench her loue vnto Christ: the seede of faith was in her heart, it had taken roote, although it were not yet ripe. Verie earnestly and with great diligence seek∣eth shee him whome shee loueth, declaring her fer∣uentnesse by her weeping, and her zeale by tarrying still at the sepulchre, when the two Apostles were gone awaie alreadie. The Lorde therefore forsa∣keth her not, but instructeth her, and comforteth her by the Angell, appeareth vnto her vnknowen, at last talketh with her, and maketh himselfe know∣en vnto her. The Angels which are ministers for the wealth of the elect, disswade her from weeping and mour∣ning, and bring her tidinges of great ioy: for here∣in nowe is no iust cause to weepe, but rather to re∣ioyce, seeing that Christ hath ouercome death for vs, deliuering and setting vs free from the power thereof, and placing vs in eternall lyfe. Lyke
as the Aungels at the birth of Christ in this mortall life, did bring tidinges of ioy: so doe they heere also when Christ is risen againe into an immortall life. And hervnto also serueth the brightnes of the coun∣tenance, and whitenes of the clothes: for all such are tokens of ioy. But some man might maruaile, why Christ will not suffer Marie to touch him, saying: hee would afterward bee touched of the other women, of the Disciples, and of Thomas, yea he prouoketh Thomas and the Disciples thereto. It seemeth that Marie, with the ointment which she brought with her, thought to annoint the bodie of Christ (as she did afore in his life time) and to re∣uerence him, and to deale with him as with a mor∣tall man: which thing Christ forbad her to do. Here∣after shall wee heare how hee offreth vnto his Disci∣ples his hands, feete, and side, willing them to touch him. But with this inhibition, and that commande∣ment he hath respect to one onely thing: namelie, to deliuer Marie and the Disciples from vnbeliefe, from weake faith and doubting. Vnto Marie hee will say: Touch mee not of a carnall deuocion, as though thou wouldst anoint me. I need it no more. As for such corporall seruice, it is not necessary to do it vnto my body any more. The cause why I became man, was not that yee should alway hang vppon my corporall flesh, and honour me with bodely seruice. Thou shalt now shortly vnderstand, that I haue like power with the father. I am in thy heart, not yet as∣cended vp vnto the father. That is: Thou hast as yet
no right knowledge of my Godhead, therefore canst thou not now rightly touch me. Thus learne wee also, to knowe and honour Christ nowe no more after the flesh,2. Cor. 5 God is a spi¦rit, with th spirit will h be worship¦ped. and to shew no corporall outward seruice vnto his person. In spirite will he be worshipped, with the faith and loue of the inward minde. If anie thing bodily be done of vs, the same should be done vnto the poore, & to the neigh∣bour that hath need thereof. Thus may faith & loue well vse some outwarde thinges, not to doo seruice therewith vnto God, but vnto our selues, or to our neighbour As when we take and minister bread and wine about in the supper, distributing and eating it, the same is not done principally, to the intent to de∣clare a seruice vnto God: but somewhat to prouoke our outward senses and flesh by the exteriour signes, that wee may the better consider and ponder the grace of God declared vnto vs in the death of Iesus Christ, and that wee may lifte vp our mindes vnto Christ the heauenly foode and liuing bread, which inwardly feedeth vs with his flesh, and nourisheth vs with his bloud. Thereto also hath our sauiour Christ instituted the figuratiue tokens and sacraments of his grace, to helpe our infirmitie: for Sacraments are gracious e∣uidences of the faith that men haue or shoulde haue to God. In the which they comfortably exercise and practise themselues towards Gods promises, where∣in also they declare the obedience of theyr inwarde saith, and that they faithfully beleeue the words and promises of almightie God. For the token without
beleefe is nothing profitable, but rather hurtfull. All bodyly seruice that the flesh imagineth pleaseth not God. Hee sitteth at the right hande of GOD, there ought we to touch him with the lifting vp of a faith∣full heart, and with the worship which hee through his spirite worketh and directeth into vs: for there∣fore he dyed, rose againe, and ascended vp into hea∣uen, that hee might fulfill all things, and raigne true∣ly and spiritually in our heartes. Our heartes must wee lifte vp,Col 3. Phil 3. there as Christ sitteth at the right hande of God, and our conuersation ought to bee in hea∣uen. Whereas the Lorde willed his disciples to touch him, it was done to banish theyr doubtfulnesse, and to strengthen theyr weake faith. Which touching was not required of them as a worshippe, but that theyr flesh through the outward handling of his bo∣die, might bee quieted & stilled: and so is it a proofe and testimonie (that hee verily rose with the former bodie) rather than a worshipping or seruice. Christ dyd not therefore take vppon him his flesh, that we should alwaie hang and depend thereon, but that we by his humanitie, should ascend vp to his godhead: for when wee knowe the high and holy mysterie of his Passion and Resurrection (with the which hee hath serued our turne) wee ought to stirre vp our mindes to knowe the Godhead, wherein he is lyke vnto the father. Therefore vnto Marie Magdalene also doeth Christ speake of ascending vp to the Father, which thing he commandeth to shew the Apostles, as if he
would say, now shortly beginneth mine honor, that I, as concerning the humanitie receiued, shall be ta∣ken vp to the glorie, which I haue had from euerlast∣ing, that is, the flesh which I haue taken vpon me for your sakes, shall sitte at the right hande of my Fa∣ther. Oh how great a grace is this? Oh howe high is the glorie that heere is promised vnto vs in CHRIST? The onely begotten sonne of God, descended and became man for vs, that wee (so much as were possible for our nature) shoulde as∣cend vp vnto his Godhead. Hee descended downe lowe, that when wee are humbled, hee might re∣ceiue and exalte vs to his owne promotion. Hee that of nature is the Lorde, tooke vppon him the shape of a seruaunt, that of vs which naturally were bond seruauntes, hee might make vs Gods chil∣dren. Forasmuch then as hee became man, to make vs Gods, and children of godly grace. Hee tooke vpon him that which is ours, to giue vs and to parte with vs that which is his.Psal. 22. Therefore calleth hee vs bre∣thren, and maketh his owne father common vnto vs, so that hee is also our Father and our God: that same which hee hath of nature, doeth hee of grace giue vnto vs. For his spirite beareth recorde vnto our spirite, that wee are the children of GOD,Rom.  for wee haue not receiued the spirite of bondage to feare, but the spirit of adoption, in the which wee cry, Father, Father. Christ also calleth those that bee his,Iohn. 15. not ser∣uants,
but friends and brethren: he will be our God, and wee his people:Iere. 31. our father, we his children: and his couenant which he hath made with vs, shall bee euerlasting, for it is sealed and confirmed with the bloud of his onely begotten sonne. Now haue wee fellowshippe and companie with God the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost. But such grace and glorie, is inwardly seene with the eyes of faith, and felte in the spirite, beeing hidde heere in time vnder the shape of the crosse.The glory of the faithfull is hid vnder the crosse. For Christ doth not straight waie by and by declare him∣selfe openly vnto Marie Magdalene, as hee is in his glorie: but standeth there as a gardener, and speak∣eth vnto hir, by the which voice she knoweth him: he long deferreth the comfort, permitting her a good while to weepe and lament, that the ioy and conso∣lation afterward may bee the greater. But the cause why he so long delaieth his helpe and comfort from these that bee his owne, is, that their inward desires may bee the more feruent and earnest, and that hee may stirre vp and kindle their faith. Now when the fire is kindled inough, then commeth hee with his comfort, as it is euident heere in Marie Mag∣dalene, and in the woman of Cananee. Matthew 26. Moreouer, hee sendeth Marie Magdalene from him; to bring the Apostles tidings of this glorious exaltation, whereas shee doubtlesse had rather haue beene longer with him, and to haue had the comfor∣table fruition of the sight of him. Howbeit hee di∣recteth her forth, to declare that felicitie, and poyn∣teth
her to the work of charitable loue, to the seruice of her neighbour. For here in time wee cannot as yet come to the beholding & sight of God face to face, it shall first begin after this time. Now while we liue heere, wee must serue our neighbour in charitable loue, and do him good. O God, strengthen thou our weake faith in the resurrection of thy beloued son: that by it our con∣sciences being examined, may well answere: Illumi∣nate our mindes, and expell out of vs all darkenesse, thorow the light and brightnes of the glorious resur∣rection:Rom. 6. O strengthen our weaknes throgh the pow∣er of thy spirite. Raise vs from the death of sinne, in the same spirite and power wherein thou hast raised vp thy son from the dead. Comfort and strengthen vs in aduersitie, and make vs constaunt therein: that we may preasse through the same in steadfast hope, to the ioyfull and blessed resurrection. Kindle in vs the fire of thy godly loue, that with earnest and fer∣uent desire wee may seeke and finde thee through Christ. Withdraw our hearts from all earthly loue of creatures, and from filthines, vp to heauen-ward, where Christ sitteth at thy right hand, that wee may lead a godly and heauenly life vpon earth. Set vp the spirituall kingdome of Christ Iesu in our hearts, that in vs thy name may be sanctified and thy will perfor∣med: that wee may become thy vertuous children, and neuer displease thee our gracious father. that we continuing stil in thy mercifull couenant,1. Iohn. . doe neuer fall away from the companie and fellowship of thee and thy sonne. And where as thou hast giuen vs such
knowledge, grace, and vnderstanding, graunt that we may make the same knowne vnto many, beeing al∣way readie through charitable loue to serue our bre∣thren, Amen. It followeth now further in the historie, how the women that first were with Marie Magdalene at the sepulchre, and being afraid, fled away (no man say∣ing ought vnto them) returned now more stoutlie & boldly to the sepulchre, to see what would come of that wonderfull terrible matter. WHen the women came to the sepulchre & found not the bodie of Iesu, they were sore troubled in their minds. And behold, two men stoode by them in shining garments. And as the women were afraide & bowed down their faces to the earth, they said vnto them; Why seeke ye the liuing among the dead? He is not heere, he is risen. Remember how hee spake vnto you, when he was yes in Galilee, saying: that the sonne of man must bee deliuered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise againe. And they remembred the wordes of Iesu, & returned from the sepulchre, and told all these thinges vnto those eleuen, and to all the remnant. And as they went to tell his disciples,Math. 28. behold, Iesus met them, saying: All haile. And they came and helde him by the feete, and worshipped him. Then said Iesus vnto them: Bee not afraide. Go tell my bre∣thren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me. But when the women, namely; Mary Magdalene, & Ioanna, and Mary Iacob, and other that were with them, told these things vnto the Apostles, their words seemed vnto them fained things, neither beleeued they them.
Doctrine and fruite. LOne is not idle, but diligent & zealous: which thing may well bee perceiued in these women, that ran againe to the sepulchre, although they had found it empty afore. Gladly would they haue found the body, and done reuerence to their Lorde, whom they loued. This feruent zeale of the women confoundeth our coldnes & vnmercifulnes towards the poore. Oft times do they seeke him that is absent, and that with great diligence: wee receiue him not, when (in the poore) he commeth vnto vs. No trauel, labour, nor cost greeueth them: as for vs, we pitie our substance, when wee shoulde distribute to the poore which are Christs. O that we could rightly consider, how pretious a treasure we gather vnto our selues in heauen, when we giue of our goods into the hands of the poore, lending the same vnto Christ! Then should not wee garnish and build timber and stone, but the liuing temples of God, keeping them from wind and raine, and from decay: namely, that they suffer no extreme pouertie, nor be destitute of helpe. Such a treasure had Tabitha laid vp in store,Acts 9. for when she died, it was not stones and stockes that commen∣ded her benefits, but the bodies of the widows, they lamented her death, and declared how mercifull she had beene. Christ openeth and sheweth himselfe vnto those that earnestly seeke him, and those hee suffereth to touch him: to the intent that forasmuch as they must
declare his resurrection to the Apostles, their weake faith must be strengthned, to know and to be assured that hee was verily risen againe. For not onely the Angell, but Christ also himselfe commandeth them so to do. He comforteth them, and taketh from them the fearfulnes and sorrowe. Thus wee ought not to doubt, he shall in all aduersitie and trouble meete vs, he shall chearfully appeare vnto vs, and with his ioy∣full presence and resurrection shall hee comfort and preserue vs. But we lacke an earnest and strong faith: our harts are slow and cold: Diligent we be in seeking of tem∣porall things, but godly things wee either despise or neglect. Loue hath no rest, she ceaseth not to runne and seeke, till she finde him whome shee loueth, and when she findeth him, she holdeth him fast, that shee loose him not againe: glad is she also, to make others pertakers of the treasure that she hath found. O God, kindle our colde heartes with the fire of faith and loue, that we may earnestly seeke thee: and that when we haue found thee, we may feruently re∣ceiue and keepe thee, and with a right spirit worship thee. Expell all hardnes and vngentlenes out of our hearts: make vs louing and mercifull vnto the poore ones. Take from vs the terrour of all vndoubtfulnes, vnbeleefe, and feare of the world, and comfort vs in all aduersitie. Graunt vs the faith of thy resurrecti∣on, that we despising all transitory things, may set all our comfort and hope in the blessed resurrection to come, Amen. Heere also we learne, how exceeding weake and
ignorant our flesh is, to receiue and beleeue the truth  it of God giue not light and strength. For a∣  of the Apostles were illuminated and  the holy ghost, they esteemed the truth  Resurrection (opened vnto them by the women) to be a foolish and fained thing. Neuerthe∣lesse Christ forsaketh not those whom hee hath once imbraced, but still openeth himselfe vnto them more and more, to expell out of them all dubitation & vn∣beleefe. ANd behold, two of them went that same day to a town called Emaus,Luk. 24. which was from Hierusalem about a threescore furlongs, & they talked together of all these things that had happened. And it chaunced, that while they communed together and reasoned, Iesus himself drew neare and went with them: but their eies were holden, that they should not know him. And he saide vnto them: What man∣ner of communications are these, that ye haue one to another as ye walke, and are sad? And the one of them (whose name was Cleophas) answered and said vnto him: Art thou one∣ly a straunger in Hierusalem, & hast not knowne the things which haue chanced there in these dais? He said vnto them; What things? And they said vnto him: Of Iesus of Naza∣reth, which was a Prophet, mightie in deed and word before God & all the people, & how the high Priests & our rulers deliuered him to be condemned vnto death, & haue crucifi∣ed him. But we trusted, that it had been he which shuld haue redeemed Israel. And as touching all these thinges, to day is euen the third day that they were done. Yea and certain wo∣men also of our companie made vs astonied, which came
earlie to the sepulchrt, and found not his bodie, and came saying: that they had seen a vision of Angels,  that he was aliue. And certaine of them that  went to the sepulchre, and found it euen so as the  said, but him they saw not. Doctrine and fruite. THE longer the more, is set foorth vnto vs the vnoutspeakable loue and trustie faithfulnes of Iesus Christ our lord, who forsaketh not those that anie thing loue to talke of him. For look whom he admitteth into his schoole, those hee teacheth still continually (how weake soeuer they bee) vntill hee bring them to perfect vnderstanding, and expell all doubtfulnes out of their hearts. Forasmuch now as these his Disciples speake of him in the way, hee get∣teth him to them, albeit hee holdeth their eyes that they knowe him not: that by the meanes thereof, they themselues with their own words might know∣ledge & confesse their doubtfull wauering, & weak∣nes of faith: that they might open their disease vnto him, & hee to giue a conuenient medicine for theyr vnbeleefe: that through the long delay, frendly talk, and opening of the scripture, their harts and desires might more and more bee kindled and sette on fire: that their doubtfulnes might bee taken away, and theyr weake fayth strengthened. For though they helde Iesus for a great and principall Prophet, and and for an innocent good man, yet speake they vn∣certainely of the matter, and their heart wauereth:
yet were not they assured that hee had ouercome death, and by his owne death purchased life for all the world, that hee was risen againe into an immor¦  made vs vndoubtedly partakers of the  and ioyfull resurrection, and eternall life in himselfe. Now for as much as they gladly talke and wil∣lingly holde of him (how feebly and vnperfectly so∣euer it bee) yet the gratious and louing Lorde ap∣procheth neare vnto them, and instructeth them. It shall neuer bee vnfruitfull, it shall neuer passe with∣out profite, but assuredly doo good, where Christ is gladlie and with a good heart spoken of. Where two or three bee assembled in his name, there is hee in the middest among them, and infourmeth them. That he doth to the Disciples in the way by mouth, the same declareth hee alway vnto vs inwardly by his spirite in our harts, and outwardly with the scrip∣ture and word, and with the teachings of good god∣ly men. He that well and faithfully vseth the little ta∣lent, shall not be denied a greater, if he earnestly de∣sire it. Wheresoeuer he is earnestly & feruently thought vpon, and talked of, there is he present, & instructeth and teacheth the ignorant. For he is not ashamed to resort vnto those that lacke knowledge, and be in er∣rour, and to talke with them. This lowlie and gentle condition ought wee to learne of our head, that we shame not to repayre vnto such as are not yet right instructed, that wee may infourme them, and commune with them. We
should despise no man, that with a single hart seeketh God, though as yet wee perceiue much wauering and weake faith in him. For if the eternall  was not ashamed to humble himselfe, and  the ignoraunt, much more ought wee to doo ing we are neither sufficiently instructed in the scrip∣ture, nor yet diligent and carefull to doe that which we know. Luke. 24.THen said Iesus vnto them: O ye fooles and slow of hart to beleeue all that the Prophets haue spoken. Ought not Christ to haue suffred these things, and so to enter into his glorie? And hee began at Moses and all the Pro∣phets, and interpreted vnto them in all Scriptures which were written of him. And they drewe nigh to the towne that they went vnto: and he made as though he would haue gone further. And they constrained him, saying: Abide with vs, for it draweth toward night, and the day is far pas∣sed, and he went in to tarrie with them. And it came to passe as he sate at meate with them, he tooke bread and blessed it, and brake and gaue to them, and their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight. And they said betweene themselues. did not our heartes burne within vs, while he talked with vs by the way, and opened to vs the scriptures? And they rose vp the same houre, and returned againe to Hierusalem, and found the eleuen gathered toge∣ther, and them that were with them, saying: The Lorde is risen indeed, and hath appeared vnto Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knewe him in breaking of bread.
Doctrine and fruite. CHRIST sayth, Iohn. 5. Search the Scriptures,  they testifie of mee. Also, If yee beleeued Moses, ye should beleeue me, for he hath writ∣ten of me. Christ therefore willing to strengthen the weake, and to teach the vnlearned, expoundeth vnto them the Scriptures, beginning at Moses, and so tho∣rough out all the Prophets. For whatsoeuer is writ∣ten in the Scripture concerning the mercie, goodnes and wisedome of God, the washing awaie of sinne, and satisfieng for the same, it belongeth properly to Christ. For so worthily and euidently haue they de∣scribed the passion & glory of Christ, that one would thinke them not to write of a matter which were to come, but done alreadie, as it is plaine in the Psalmes and Prophets. Psa▪ 22. Esa. 53. 1. Pet. 1. &c. Thus out of the Scripture we learne, partlie the testimonies of the passion and resurrection of Christ, partly by what waie Christ came to so high honour; and glorie of his father, that wee first beleeuing that Chrit dyed for our sinnes, and rose againe for our righteousnesse, might by his resurrection be sure of a good conscience, and consolation of the lyfe to come. Secondly, that wee in patience and obedience might learne to be obedient to our heauenly father, to take vp our crosse, and to follow our Lord IESVS Christ, if wee will haue ioy with him, wee must also suffer and trauaile with him. Our head goeth to eter∣nall
ioy through aduersitie and trouble, and will we enter into it through the pleasure of the worlde and lust of the flesh? It passeth the boundes of all nitie, and comlynesse and honestie, for  to bee sluggish and slouthfull, when the  keth vppon him such trauell and paine,  narrowe gate that wee must enter in at, for tho∣rough many tribulations, vexations, and miseryes must wee come into the euerlasting kingdome of heauen: and all they that will liue godly in Christ Iesu, must suffer persecution in this world. He that will possesse an inheritance, must beare and suffer all the charges belonging to the same. The eternall in∣heritance is appointed vs of our heauenly father tho∣rough Christ: but with this addition, that we receiue the possession of it in such sort as the son hath done, namely with and through the crosse and trouble. Blessed are they whome God the father maketh par∣takers of the passion of his onely begotten sonne: for who so is a companion with him in suffering, shall haue his eternal fellowship in heauen, and inioy with him euerlasting blisse and rest. Hee that vnderstan∣deth not this, is a foole and slowe of heart to beleeue the Scriptures: let that man beseech God to open the Scripture vnto him, and to make him vnderstand it. Where that commeth to passe, ignoraunce vani∣sheth awaie, and the heart is feruent and receiueth vnderstanding, for the Lorde is the right and perfect schoole-master, that toucheth the hart, and pearceth it through with the arrowes of his words and ardent loue.
In breaking of the bread, they knowe the Lorde,  life time, when he nowe woulde goe  and death, tooke bread, rendered  it, and gaue it them, admonishing  bit as they dyd the same, they shoulde  remembrance of him. Whereby they now hinng on the same wordes, and beeing admoni∣shed of the act, remember that it is hee. Thus the breaking of the bread before our eyes in the supper, is an admonishing token, that Christs body was bro∣ken and dyed for vs on the crosse: and the drinke an admonishing token, that his bloud was shedde for the washing awaie of our sinnes. And so when wee breake the bread, and drinke the drinke, wee ought thereby to knowe the Lorde, thanking him for his death which is our life, being mindfull of him, and following his great loue, wherein hee dyed for our sinnes. AS they thus spake, (it was verie late the same daie; which was the first daie in the weeke: and where the disciples assembled together, the doores were shut for feare of the Iewes) Iesus came while they sate at the ta∣ble, and stoode in the middest among them, and sayde vnto them: Peace bee with you. But the disciples were afraid, thinking that they had seene a spirite. Then sayde Iesus vn∣to them, Why are yee troubled? And why doo thoughts arise in your head? And hee sayde yet agayne vnto them, Peace bee with you. And with that shewed he them his hands, feet, and side, and said: Behold my hands and feete, that it is euen I my selfe, handle me and see, for a spirit hath
not flesh and bones, as ye see me haue. The  when they had seene the Lord. And  ∣leeued not for ioy, and wondered, he sayd  ye anie thing to eate? So they offered him a  fish, and an honie combe. The same hee took  before them, casting in their teeth their vnbeleefe  nes of heart, because they beleeued not them which  that he was risen againe from the dead. Doctrine and fruite. IN that the Euangelists describe the true resurrecti∣on of Christ, they declare withal, vnto whom such a high mystery was opened and shewed For when we heare how the disciples were minded and beha∣ued themselues, we learne therby what becommeth vs, that we also may beleeue, that Christ is truly risen againe: yea, not only to acknowledge the same with the mouth, but also to proue and feele it in the tast of the spirite. So haue wee heard afore, what the desire & ardent loue which God stirred vp in Mary Mag∣dalene, dyd bring to passe, and what good came of the feruentnesse and diligence of Peter. This we see now here, for God hath a plesure to stir vp our desire when hee will open himselfe vnto vs. And therefore all the same daie from morning early vntill nyght, were the disciples still more and more endued with new ioy, that the desire to see Christ, might be kind∣led more and more in them. And as they were as∣sembled in loue & vniformitie (for those two things please God wel) Christ commeth and appeareth vn∣ro
them. He openeth himselfe vnto those, that long∣ing after him, are coupled in loue and vniformitie, & being assembled, doo hold themselues together, for where loue is, there is God: where discord is and diuision, there is the deuill. O deare brethren, let vs regard charitable loue, let vs care for our brethren, that the brotherhood be not broken, and that loue be not spotted, for els fare∣wel saith. No man needeth to boast himselfe of faith that hath not charitable loue, but stirreth vp and see∣keth diuision. Moreouer, we see here that the disciples of Christ stood in great danger of their bodies and life: for when the Iewes had no more power to rage agaynst Christ, they raged agaynst his disciples. Looke what men are partakers of the crosse and passion of Christ they verily shall vnderstand the high mysterie of his resurrection. For vndoubtedly, God with his owne consolation shall visite and comfort those, that suffer anie danger & harme for his names sake. Forasmuch then as the good disciples of Christ, must still bee in conflict and battel with the Iewes, the Lord speaketh vnto them with this comfortable worde, Peace bee with you: as if he shuld saie, be of good cheere, your matter shal stand in good case, in mee yee shal haue peace & be safe, & quiet, how hard so euer it go out∣wardly: Feare not, be not afraid, howsoeuer the Iews doo rage, ye shall doo right well. This salutation was common among the Iewes, therefore doeth Christ also vse it. Such a charge gaue hee lykewise vnto his Disciples, when hee sent them to preach, that ente∣ring
into an house, they should saie, Peace be to this house.Luk. 10. And though the disciples were somewhat ama∣zed and afraide at the first blush, yet was theyr glad∣nesse great, when they were throughly instructed, that it was the Lorde. Now was fulfilled that which Christ had said and promised vnto them afore. Io. 16 Yee shall mourne, and the world shall reioyce, but I will see you againe. Your sorrow shall be turned in∣to gladnesse, your heart shall reioyce, and your ioye shall no man take from you. For the ioye of a fayth∣full beleeuing heart is constant, and endureth. If the resurrection of Iesus Christ were truely and rightly beleeued, and the same ioye comprehended as it ought to bee, all sorrowe must needs vanish, all hurt and aduersitie must needes bee little regarded. For what can bee grieuous vnto a man, when by faith & hope hee is assured, that hee in a glorified immortall bodie shall arise agayne with Christ his head, and haue euerlasting ioy with him. And this is the cause that Christ appeareth so ofte vnto his disciples, instructing them so much and so perfectly of his resurrection, euen to make them steadfast in this faith, and to assure them of this ioy. Therefore sheweth hee them his bodie, and giueth it them to handle. The palpable bodie certifieth them, that it is a true bodie: the immortall bodie sheweth, that it is glorified, and of highest honor: the printes of the woundes declare, that it is euen the selfe same bodie that it was afore. Hee sheweth them the tokens of victorie, as a mighty ouercom∣mer
of death, and so doth hee the woundes that hee had gotten for them in the battell: and likewise the side that was opened, declaring his great loue. His woundes sheweth he to them, to heale the wounds of theyr vnbeleefe. As if hee would say: looke vp∣pon mee, and fight manfullie: Without a battaile shall no man bee crowned.2. Tim. 2. But vnto him that o∣uercommeth in the conflict,Apoc. 2. will I graunt to eate of the bread of Heauen, and will crowne him for euer. Where as hee eateth before them, it is done for the probation of the true humaine nature, and not for the great necessitie of the bodie: To them was it verie needfull, not vnto Christ. Euen so we, knowing howe to further our neighboures faith, must, and ought manie times to doe somewhat, and to leaue somewhat vndone, that for our selues wee need not. O GOD graunt vs true loue and vniformi∣tie: Take from vs all Scisme and diuision: gather vs togeather through thy holie spirite, remooue all discord and variaunce out of thy holie Churche. Giue vs patience in aduersitie: sende thy godlie comforte and ioye vnto all such as bee in distresse and trouble for thy names sake: Strengthen the weake, lift vppe the feeble, establish the doubt∣full, and in the battaile helpe those which bee thine owne: that they lie not vnder, but that in thee, they may ouercome all daunger and harme. Amen.
THomas one of the twelue (which was called Didi∣mus) was not with them when Iesus came. The other disciples therefore sayd vnto him: We haue seene the Lord. But he said vnto them: Except I see in his handes the print of the nailes, and put my finger into the print of the nailes, & thrust my hand into his side, I will not beleeue. And after eight daies again his disciples were within, and Tho∣mas with them. Then came Iesus when the doores were shut, and stoode in the midst, and saide, Peace bee vnto you. And after that sayd he to Thomas, Bring thy finger he∣ther, and see my hands, and reach hether thy hand, & thrust it into my side, and be not faithles, but beleeuing. Thomas answered, and said vnto him: My Lord, and my God. Iesus saith vnto him, Thomas, because thou hast seene mee, thou hast beleeued, Blessed are they that haue not seene, and haue beleeued. Doctrine and fruit. THat which was spoken afore, is heere euident and plaine, namely, that Christ openeth him∣selfe vnto those, which are desirous of him, and long after him associating themselues together one with another in true loue, and being partakers of the passion & crosse. Forasmuch then as Thomas is lesse feruent, and therefore absent from the rest, hee sawe not Christ with the other disciples, but when he ob∣tained a desire to see Christ, & was assotiate and ioy∣ned to the other, he became also partaker of the ioye that they had. And here we learne the nature and condition of true beleefe (which is an illumination of the grace
of God, yea a verie godly propertie) that he maketh others partakers of his holy and glorious ioyes, and that through loue, which seeketh not her owne pro∣fit, neither is disdainefull, to the intent that the glorie of God may be preferred among all men Therefore the Disciples of the Lord make Thomas their compa∣nion partaker of such gladnesse as they had receiued of Christs Resurrection opened vnto them: for hee was verie faithlesse, and too stiffe in his owne opini∣on. Which vnbeliefe God suffered to happen vnto him, and to continue somewhat the longer, that his slacknes and lacke of faith might serue to our com∣moditie: that through his vnbeliefe, wee might bee prouoked vnto faith, for as much as we heare, that he so perfectly proouing, seeing and feeling the thing, came so to an vndoubted faith: that wee also might beleeue, that the bodie of Christ which was hanged vpon the crosse for our sinnes, was of the Father ray∣sed againe vnto life. For if wee beleeue in our heart,Acts. 2. Rom. 10. and confesse with our mouth, that God hath raysed him vp from the dead, we shal be saued. Yea beleeue we must,Iohn 2. that Christ (according to his wordes afore) hath through his godly power, erected vp againe from death, the temple of his bodie. Therefore tho∣row the doubting of Thomas, wee learne the myste∣rie of the resurrection of our own bodies. For Christ hath sufficiently proued, and Thomas hath confessed that the bodie of Christ which was hanged vpon the crosse, is verely risen againe from death. Wherin, our faith is confirmed, to beleeue, that our bodies also shall truely and liuely rise againe to eternall life.
When Thomas is with the other disciples, Christ sheweth himselfe vnto him. For they that in the vni∣tie of faith and of vndiuided loue, doe not associate and accompanie themselues with other faithfull be∣leeuers in the Church, shall not be partakers of hea∣uenly ioyes. Truth it is, that to beleeue with the hart iustifieth: but the confession that is made with the mouth, belongeth vnto health, & serueth vnto loue and vnitie of the Church and congregation of God, without the which there can bee no hope of health. He that saith he beleeueth, and doth not ioyne him∣selfe vnto other Christians, his faith is vaine and of none effect. And therefore did Christ for his church institute the sacraments, that is to say, exterior signes of his grace, that his people might be associate toge∣ther in the vnitie of faith. The Church of God is it, that preserueth vs poore ones (as did the Arke of Noe afore time) in the floud, and bringeth vs tho∣rough this raging sea vnto the hauen of eternall sal∣uation. Not that the grace and health is there∣fore to bee ascribed to the elements and outwarde thinges: but that it may appeare how effectuous fayth is, and what it woorketh through charita∣ble loue in the Church. Christ maketh mention of the wordes which Thomas had spoken afore to the Disciples in his absence: Namely; Except I see in his handes the print, &c. Therefore sayth Christ: Thomas, bring thy finger hither, and see &c. Whereby it is euidently prooued, that Christ is God, and euen so doth Thomas vnderstand and confesse.
The woundes are shewed of Christ, specially to this intent, that his passion might be printed and sea∣led in mens mindes. For a verie deepe and high my∣sterie is it, that Christes side is opened, out of the which floweth bloud and water: whereby the spiri∣tuall and faithfull beleeuing mindes may well per∣ceiue Christes good louing will towardes mankind. Now when we looke vpon his handes, touching his side inwardly with our desire of inward fayth, and considering why and with what loue Christ suffe∣red for vs, it shall be no hard thing vnto vs to beleeue his resurrection. If Christ were deade but euen as an other pure man or Prophet, we could haue no hope of the resurrection. Who so beleeueth it, commeth soone to this knowledge, that immortall life is giuen vnto vs. Now where there is hope of an immortall life, there is the Lorde serued with great diligence. For if God hath not spared his sonne,Rom. 8. but giuen him for vs all, what good thing then may wee not looke for at his hand? If wee bee onely true beleeuers with Thomas, then shall God faithfully performe that hee hath promised vs. Christ desireth no more of vs weake feeble ones, than that we be not faithlesse, but stedfast beleeuers. Thomas is immediately obedient vnto the voice of Christ, and becommeth foorth with a newe man. The Pharisies could by no doctrine, by no myra∣cles, bee brought to giue credence vnto Christ, and to beleeue in him, although they sawe Laza∣rus raysed againe from death: malice and hatred
did so hinder them. But Thomas acknowledgeth him freely to be his Lord and God. He seeth and hand∣leth man, he confesseth God, whom he saw not. Hee acknowledged, that he whom he saw was his God & Lord. Through the same faith was his vnbeleefe and sinne forgiuen him. O mercifull God, graunt vs loue, that we seek not our owne commoditie nor honour, but the profit of our neighbours, and thy glorie in all thinges. Expell out of vs all disdaine, greedines, vngentlenes, headi∣nes, and flattering of our selues. Preserue vs from dis∣cord & diuision, binde vs together in vniforme loue, that wee may bee one bodie, and of one minde. Sta∣blish also our faith, that our minds may alwayes bee comforted in the resurrection of thy sonne, and im∣mortall life purchased by him, Amen. ANd many other signes trulie did Iesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this booke. These are written, that ye might beleeue, that Iesus is Christ the sonne of God, & that ye so beleeuing, might haue life through his name. Doctrine and fruite. LIke as Christ, while hee yet liued, did miracles before his death, to declare his godly power: e∣uen so after his rising again from death, he wor∣keth manie tokens in the presence of his Disciples, to proue his resurrection in the flesh. Some of the same are described of the Euangelists, not of anie cu∣riositie,
or for vaine glorie, but to confirme our sayth therewith. To write all, Iohn thought it not needful: for who could haue written all? Or who could haue fastened and borne them all in minde? Who so will not beleeue these few that are written, shall neuer be∣leeue a greater multitude. A faithfull beleeuer is well satisfied with these. For these that be written of him, are therefore written, that wee should beleeue, that Iesus is Christ the Sonne of GOD, and that we through his fayth might haue eternall life. Seeing then that all thinges which are written, doo extende and serue to this ende, that wee might beleeue in him, and bee saued by him, what lacke wee then? Or what can we desire more? So that hereby we learne, with great diligence to reade, to consider, and to ap∣plie into our owne lyfe, whatsoeuer the Euange∣listes haue written of Christ: as they haue written nothing but that which is altogether excellent, deare holie and godlie, and such thinges as doe liuely de∣scribe, sette foorth, and print Christ vnto vs: that our fayth, hope, loue, patience, meeknesse, and all good thinges might growe with blessed fruite: that wee in our life might become thankfull for such an excel∣lent grace, and in no wise to contemne or despise it. A scornefull thing is it, and the euidence of a greate vnbeleefe, whereas some thinke by these wordes to prooue, that for as much as all thinges are not written in the booke, it is lawfull for certayne men to adde the rest, and to deuise and ordayne what they will. For in these thinges that are writ∣ten,
doth Iohn comprehend the whole sum of fayth: which consisteth in this, that Iesus is the son of the li∣uing God, who for our saluation came downe from heauen, died, rose againe, & purchased for vs eternal life▪ Iesus the son of Mary, is the annointed king and high Priest, the sauior of the world promised of God, & spoken of afore by the Prophets. And euen hee it is, who being of the heauenly father annointed king euerlasting, was to come after Dauid, & to raigne for euer. This king is the redeemer and sauiour of man∣kind, & the very true sonne of God. If we beleeue in Christ, we beleeue in the true God▪ one onely God we honor, one onely God we worship. Seeing now that we honor & worship Christ, we worship God, for only God is to be worshipped. Forasmuch now as we worship the sonne no lesse than the father, it is certaine, that Christ is of one nature with the father: yea this ought we to beleeue, & that he came downe into this world to die for vs, to wash and wipe away our sins, & to kill sin in our mortal flesh, when he ma∣keth vs partakers of his passion, & mightily worketh in vs by his spirite, in mortifieng our carnall desires. We must also beleeue, that he by his godly power a∣rose againe from death, to a new, glorious & immor∣tall life. For if we thought that hee died, & beleeued not that he were risen againe to life, wee should haue no life in him. For vs he died, for our sakes hee rose a∣gaine, for our welfare reigneth he for euer. A newe godly & blessed life worketh hee in vs with his resur∣rection, and after this life haue we in him life euerla∣sting.
AFterward did Iesus shew himselfe againe at the sea of Tiberias. And on this wise shewed he himselfe. There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas (which is called Didus) and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, & the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples. Simon Peter saith vnto them: I will go a fishing▪ They say vnto him: We also will go with thee. They went their way, and entred into a shippe immediately, and that night caught they nothing. But when the morning was now come, Iesus stoode on the she: but the Disciples knewe not that it was Iesus. Iesus saith vnto them: Children, haue ye any meat? They answe∣red him no. And he saith vnto them; Cast out the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shal find. They cast out ther∣fore, and anone they were not able to draw it for the multi∣tude of fishes. Then said the Disciple (whom Iesus loued) to Peter: It is the Lord. When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his coate vnto him (for he was naked) and sprang into the sea. The other Disciples came by shippe, for they were not farre from lande, but as it were two hundred cubites, and they drew the nette with fishes. As soone then as they were come to land, they sawe hote coales, and fish layde thereon, and bread. Iesus saith vnto them: Bring of the fish that yee now haue caught. Simon Peter went vp, and drew the net to the land full of great fishes, an hundred and three and fiftie. And for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken. Iesus saith vnto them: Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst aske him: What art thou? For they knew that it was the Lord Iesus then came, & tooke breade, and gaue them, and fish likewise. This is now the third time that Iesus appeared to his Disciples after that he was risen againe from death.
Doctrine and fruite. WE read in the holy Euangelists, that at the first Christ called his disciples, namelie, Peter and the others from fishing, which they also left, and came to Christ, who told them that he would make them fishers of men. Now when hee wil send them out to that office, & depart from them he appeareth againe vnto them at their fishing. And (like as he did afore at their vocatiō) he doth before them a great miracle: in the which hee admonisheth them of their office, and chargeth them diligently to care for his sheepe committed vnto them. But first he proueth his resurrection, to stablish and confirme their weake faith therby, commaunding them after∣ward, to bring other folks also thereto. This historie in it selfe is euident enough, there∣fore ought wee first to consider it after the letter, for the letter also teacheth for it self. Christ like as he ap∣peared vnto those that were sorrowful & mourned: so doth he heere appeare vnto those that labour and trauaile. Christ gaue his disciples authoritie out of the Gospell,Math 10. 1. Cor 9. that they preach to take a competent honest liuing, as foode and necessaries of the bodie and yet did not hee restrayne them, that they should not or might not labour, when occasion serueth. Therefore Paule also vsed not that liberty at certaine times, but labored with his owne hands and wan his meate. So did the Disciples of Christ exercise them∣selues in their labour. For when they were come
into Galelee, from the feast of Easter which they had kept at Hierusalem, afore the holy ghost was giuen them, they would not goe idle, and thereby become a burthen vnto other men: (for he that goeth idle, li∣eth vpon other folkes, eating that theirs is, and ouer∣chargeth them) but vndertake to get their owne ly∣uing with their handy worke, which they had vsed a∣fore. Whereby wee must learne to apply our selues vnto labour, and not to bee idle: for idlenes is the mother of many and great vices. Euery man ought to haue an honest traiuaile, to bee exercised either with the body or with the minde. Who so labou∣reth not, must not eat. Man was created to labour,2. Thes. . Iob. 5. as the bird to flie. Therfore ought euery father to bring vp his children in honest exercise from their youth vp, that the deuill get no place in their hearts, which yet commeth to passe, if he finde them idle. The first commaundement giuen to our forefather Adam af∣ter the fall was this: In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread. Now when we in true faith and confidence vnto God, doe take in hand the worke that he hath com∣mitted vnto our charge, we ought not to doubt, God shal prosper it, and giue vs his rich and gracious bles∣sing in it, as it is written, Prouer. 3. In althy waies re∣member the Lord, and hee shall direct and order thy doings. Eccles. 5.9. Heere is also to bee considered, how Christ vtte∣reth his godly power before his disciples, in the great miracle that hee did in their sight, to confirme our faith in him. For out of the appearing of Christ grow¦eth
faith, Psal. 85. And his true resurrection will hee print in them, in that he appeareth vnto them, & eat∣eth with them. Heere wee see the ardent desire of Peter, which leapeth into the sea, as soone as he heareth that it is the Lord: he that afore had denied him, maketh now speedie hast againe vnto him. Though wee of mans feeblenesse and feare, doo fall into sinne, yet alwaies whē we heare God in his word, we ought forth with to turne againe vnto him: and so shall hee with the lost sonne, graciously receiue and embrace is a∣gayne.Luke. 15. In that Peter couereth himselfe being naked, we learne nurture and shamefastnesse, to walke & dwell with all honestie in the sight of men, specially in the presence of our superiours and gouernors. In the corporall workes and deedes of Christ, there is nothing in vaine, nothing without effect. Be∣sides the outward appearance of the worke, there is described somewhat more excellent, where unto a faithful beleeuer ought to direct the eies of his mind as when he maketh the blind to see, it is an outwarde act, and a declaration of his godly power, & an alte∣ration there is outwardly in the eyes of the blinde, in that his fight is restored vnto him againe: neuerthe∣lesse ouer and besides the outward worke, there is gi∣uen vs to vnderstand, that Christ is the true lyght of the whole world, which driueth awaie the blindnes of our hart, and illuminateth the eyes of our mind, according to the Scriptures, Isay. 42.49. Iohn. 1.9.12. &c.
Christ taking bread and wine, giueth the same to his disciples to eate and drinke. This (as no man can denie) was an outward act, and they commaunded outwardly to doo it, albeit in the remembraunce of him. Besides and aboue the outward eating & drin∣king, the faithfull beleeuer must lift vp his heart, and looke with the eyes of faith vnto that which is spiri∣tual, namely, how that Christ is the true liuing bread which feedeth our soules to eternall life, how his bo∣die was broken for vs vpon the crosse, how we tho∣rough his death are made liuing, and washed awaie from our sinnes by his bloud. In this is set forth vnto vs the highest loue of all, namely, that Christ gaue himselfe vnto the death for vs, whereby wee are ad∣monished of his grace, yea, not onely in this descri∣bed vnto vs, but also the holy Ghost doeth mightily land fruitfully worke the same in the heartes of the true beleeuers, which in faith at the supper receyue the true body and bloud of Christ: whereby theyr heartes are kindled in loue towardes God and their neighbor, so that they dwel in Christ, & he in them. &c. So heere likewise the outward fishing, represen∣teth a fishing spirituall. Like as in fishing it lyeth not in the fishers power or wit to take many or few, but  the power and blessing of God. And as the labor of the disciples is in vaine afore Christ commandeth them, but when they haue his commandement, and cast out the net vpon the same, they drawe vp a mul∣tion of fishes: euen so commeth it to passe at this present day that we bring forth no fruit so lōg as the
holie ghost worketh not with vs inwardly. But when Christ biddeth cast out the net: that is, when hee gi∣ueth his spirite, wee are able to draw vp many men, and to winne them vnto Christ. For all the night long had they taken nothing, till Christ came vnto them: Euen so can we doe nothing if Christ bee not with vs by his spirite.Acts. 2. On Whit-sonday when the spirite came vpon his Disciples, they brought foorth much fruit, and drue many men vnto Christ. Heereby declareth Christ vnto them in this ta∣king of fish, how it should go in their office, and how the time was now at hand, that they should shortlie drawe many men out of the sea of this worlde vnto him, and that they should prosper and haue good successe therein. The world is this wilde raging sea: the shore is the quietnes of eternall life that we haue in Christ, vnto whome we make hast with Peter and the other Disciples: neither doe wee bring men vn∣to our selues, but vnto Christ, and to the hauen of e∣uerlasting life. Faith is not idle, but is alwaies occu∣pied in the Lords businesse, causing vs to contemne all perrils, and to speede vs a pace vnto Christ with the cloathing of vertues, especially with fayth, the wedding garment: that wee appearing not naked, may make hast vnto the land of the liuyng, where Christ is, the conquerour of death: For the faythfull beleeuers are not far from the land, when their con∣uersation is in heauen. Without Christ wee must begynne nothing,Heb. 11. without fayth may no man please God. In the nyght of sinne, our labour is vayne and vnprofitable:Rom. 4. yea whatsoeuer is not of fayth is sinne.
Vpon the right hand must the net be cast out: That is, in the office of preaching, must respect bee had to the onely glorie of God, and edefiyng of the church and not to our owne profit or preferment.1. Cor. 14 Christ hungreth after our health, this is the meat which he desireth: that we doe the will of his hea∣uenly father: that wee put our trust in him,Iohn 4. and loue one another: that wee lead a iust and innocent life:Iohn. . that wee keepe our selues from the filthinesse of the world, & bring much people vnto God. Such meat is brought vnto Christ by the Apostles, when they through their teaching doe catche men, and bring them vnto God. Therefore doth he aske them whe∣ther they haue any thing to eat. They said: nay, for afore the receiuing of the spirite, they could doe no∣thing, but when he came, they brought many profi∣table things to passe. The haruest was so great, that they must needs haue many workmen. So when God helpeth the faithfull ministers of the worde, that they in the ministerie of preaching haue prosperous successe, so that they draw vp ma∣ny men through the nette of the Gospell, and finde much fruite: Then the Disciples whome Christ lo∣ueth, and which loue him againe, doe know that it is the Lorde, and that the same commeth not of their owne virtue, but of the power of God. And heereof then groweth there in them a great desire to come vnto Christ, and to be with him. The office therfore of Apostles & of all ministers of the word is this, that when they do what Christ commandeth them, they turne them to Christ againe, and ascribe the honour
vnto him▪ And if ought would let or hinder them to come vnto Christ, they ought to refuse all the same, and to hast vnto him with the losse of their life. Iohn knoweth Christ afore Peter, but Peter commeth to the Lord before him, whereby we may note the di∣uersitie of ministrations and giftes in the Church. Though Peter bee more feruent, yet is hee not asha∣med to learne of Iohn. The fishers come with the fish vnto Christ, the shepheards with the sheepe to one manner of salua∣tion, for they are not carefull onely for themselues how they may be saued: but also for those whome they haue caught, to bring the same with them vnto the shore of eternall rest. It is our saluation, when we become Christs meat, yea when Christ is our foode and sustenance. For they that in the sea of this world doe faithfully labour to drawe the fishe vnto the Ha∣uen, shall obtaine great fruit, and enioy an eternall banquet at Christs table in his kingdome. For Christ prepared them a dinner, wherein hee set foorth vnto the ministers of the worde, what they ought to doe, namely, to feed the people committed vnto them. A great honor is it, to bring much people vnto Christ. Great commendacion, and vnspeakable ioye shall those teachers haue, that faithfully trauel in the scrip∣tures and word of God. By the multitude and great number of the fishes that the Apostles drew in the net, is figured the mul∣titude of the Heathen, who through the preaching in the whole world, should be brought into the vni∣tie of the faith. And although many Scismes and er∣ronious
diuisions arise, yet of those that are ordained vnto life, there shall no man fall out of the net. God knoweth those that be his, and they shall alway hear∣ken vnto th voyce of their shepheard. Thus shall there euer bee one onely Church, which cannot by vs be throughly purged: Euermore wil Ipocrites do all their diligence to continue therein, though the makers of diuision shall not be without great trauail and labour. As for such vices as bee manifest, great, and offensiue, they that bee in authority, are bound to suppresse them, according vnto the ordinaunce of Christ. Mat. 5.13.18. First, they that be faithful beleeuers and ordained vnto life, doe cleaue vnto Christ their head, and then to the members, that is to say, all faithfull Christians. For they that are faithfull beleeuers, bee knit togea∣ther in perpetuall vnitie. And although some at this present day bee in contention, yet so farre as they are of the number of the elect, they will agree together againe one with another, afore they depart hence: that they may die in the vnitie of Gods congrega∣tion and Churche, without the which, there is no health. After the great labour that the ministers of the woorde haue in the raging sea, Christ rewardeth his with a very costly and glorious feast in his kingdom: there will he be the bread of life, that feedeth and sa∣tisfieth them for euer. O mercifull GOD, graunt vnto vs all that wee may faithfully cleaue vnto thee, and follow thy com∣maundement. Tame thou our bodie and members
in honest labour, that we loyter not in vices. O draw our hearts alwaie vpward: that all temporall things set apart, we may hast onely vnto thee. O gracious fa∣ther, giue vs such faithfull fishers, as beeing true and carefull in their office, may with the net of thy holie worde, drawe vs out of the raging sea: that wee with them, and they with vs, may enioye the euerlasting banquet. Amen. SO when they had dined, Iesus saith to Simon Peter: Simon Ioanna louest thou me more than these? Hee saide vnto him: Yea Lorde, thou knowest that I loue thee. Hee saith vnto him. feed my lambes. Hee saith vnto him againe the second time: Simon Ioanna, louest thou me? He sayth vnto him: Yea Lord, thou knowest that I loue thee. He saith vnto him: feed my sheepe. Hee said vnto him the third time: Simon Ioanna, louest thou me? Peter was sory, because hee said vnto him the third time, louest thou me? And hee said vnto him: Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I loue thee. Iesus saith vnto him: feed my sheepe. Doctrine and fruite. FOR as much as Peter had taken a speciall gree∣uous fall, Christ lifteth him vp with a speciall comforte: but so, that hee setteth forth vnto all Shepheards of his sheepe, what theyr office is Peter had many sinnes forgiuen him,Luk. 7. therefore was it meete that hee should loue the Lord the more. And seeing hee had thrise denied, hee maketh nowe a three-fold confession: so that now the song doth no
lesse seruice vnto loue, than it serued feare afore. Christ sheweth him that hee is receiued againe vnto grace, so that hee may safely put his trust in him, see∣ing he committeth vnto him his owne sheepe. As if Christ would say: As for thy deniall, I will no more remember it. And for an euidence hereof, I put thee in trust to keepe my sheepe: In no wise doe I refuse thee, but a shepheard of my sheepe will I make thee. Neither doth he cast him in the teeth with his deni∣all, but saith: If thou loue mee, then take vppon thee the care of the brethren. The loue that thou hast wil∣led to declare vnto mee in all thinges, and wherein I delight, the same declare thou now vnto my sheepe, whom I so dearely haue bought. Thy life that thou wouldest haue offered for mee, giue nowe for my sheepe. Now to the intent Peter should not say that hee were expelled from the Aposteship through his deniall, the Lorde therefore giueth him a new com∣mission to keepe his sheepe. As for Peter, hee was no more so rash and foolish hardie, but answereth more aduisedly than afore, and taketh the Lord to witnes: for hee remembreth how it had happened vnto him alreadie, therefore standeth hee not arrogantly in his owne conceite, neyther speaketh hee agaynst the Lorde, so wittie and circumspect is hee become tho∣rough the fall. Arrogant had hee beene and high minded, and therefore through the denyall he fell very sore. But his weeping through faith and sure confidence pu∣rifieth him againe, and in loue he becommeth more feruent, pondering, that much is forgiuen him: so
that where sinne was great, grace is more abundant and plentifull. Rom. 5. In Peter is the office of the other Apostles, and of all preachers of the worde described: for heere may wee see, who are meet to be called to guide the peo∣ple, and what care and diligence they ought to take for them. But here principally we must note this, that Christ minding to stablish his speciall excellent doctrine, did euer first worke a notable token and miracle. As when he fed the fiue thousand men with few loaues, he taught immediatly vpon the same,Iohn. 6. how wee must bee sustained with the bread of heauen. Euen so here when the Disciples had taken a great heape of fishes at Christes commaundement, and were afterward fedde of him, hee tolde them immediately vpon the same, what their office is, and that they should looke, euen so to nourish and feede those that are commit∣ted vnto them. This was spoken vnto Peter, and in him to all others. Christ who searcheth and knoweth all harts, doth not aske this question as one ignorant, or as one that first would proue & learne, but to teach faith, and to declare it vnto others. Such a question demaundeth he. Math. 16. Whō say the people that the son of man is? shewing therby what confession & faith he requi∣reth of those that are his. Euen so here: the schoole∣maister of the whole world, minding to put them in trust, wil declare vnto them with this question, how they ought to be, and the same wil hee print sure in∣to them with this threefold interrogation. Here also
will the Lord teach, how necessary it is, that he who is to be made a shepheard & teacher of christian peo∣ple, be first well knowne, proued and tried, & that in many things afore-hand he bee found faithfull. It is not requisite to take children vnto such an office, but such godly and apt men, as haue beene tried & temp∣ted: namely, such men as haue proued, suffered and felt somwhat by experience, wherby they haue lear∣ned humilitie and nurture. The first thing that Christ in his examination re∣quireth of those, which must guide the people, is a great, feruent, and notable loue to GOD. Without this loue shall soule shepheardes doo no good. This loue to GOD, shall bring with it loue towardes the sheepe committed vnto them. For as much then as at this day the loue of Christ is so greatly quenched, therefore are manie Curates and soule shepheardes so faint and colde to preach and teach Christ. They burne not in the loue of God against vice, they print not vertue and godlinesse feruently into the people, for there is no loue of Gods name in them. Seeing then that they haue no heauenly zeale vnto the glo∣rie of GOD, and to the amplyfiyng of his name, it is no maruaile that their preaching is so cold and vn∣fruitfull. Therfore saith our Sauiour Christ vnto Peter: A∣gapas me? Louest thou mee? For Agapao among the Greeks signifieth, feruently, earnestly, & right hartily to loue: yea to loue with a great good will. And this word he vseth in the two first questions. In the third question he saith: Phileis me? Louest thou me? Phileo
signifieth so to loue, that one be louing to another, & shew him friendship: therefore doth Peter take the Lorde himselfe to witnesse. As for the high excel∣lent loue, hee dare not bragge of it, but saith: Philose: which is as much to say, as, I haue hitherto doone all that becommeth a friend to do. If any derogation or hinderance bee done to thy honour and name, I am hartily sorie for it: as a friend is iustly greeued, if his friend be vilely intreated. Thus the Lorde with the three questions layeth hard vnto Peter: for a notable loue is it that hee re∣quireth of those, to whom he committeth his sheepe in his absence. Peter had a good conscience, & knew no falshood or deceite by himselfe, but bare a nota∣ble and feruent loue vnto Christ: yet by reason of his former fall, and this oft questioning, he was part∣ly out of quiet, fearing least peraduenture there laye yet hid in him some secret thing, that displeased the Lord, or were against him, or that happily he should not stand in such fauour with Christ. Therefore said he: Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest the harts of all men, and wotest, that I beare thee a good heart, and friendly mind: which wordes proceed of a meeke feruent hart. Christ knoweth better how we loue him, than we our selues. Thus a shepheard oght to haue an ardent loue vnto Christ, and yet not to stand high in his owne conceit, or to bragge of him∣selfe, although he loue, and bee garnished with ver∣tues more than other men. Wherein may it bee perceiued, that a soule shep∣heard loueth Christ, and is his friend? Verely in lo∣uing
his sheepe which Christ hath cōmitted to him. Therefore saith Christ alway vpon the same: Feede my sheep. But Christ vseth here two distinct words. First he saith: Vosce, that is, feed them, pasture them, fodder them. Secondly, he saith: Poimene, that is, bee thou vnto them a heardman, take thou care for them as it beseemeth a shepheard: be thou a shepheard vn∣to my sheepe, keepe them from the wolfe, & from al such hurt. First, he requireth of him a feruent loue, then committeth hee his sheepe vnto him, a treasur great & deare, redeemed & bought with the pretious bloud of Christ. As if he would say: If thou loue me declare the same in care and loue toward my sheep, whom I commit to thy charge. The sheepe are Christes, not the shepheards. As forsuch shepheards as keepe them so, that they make them hang vpon themselues, those loue themselues, not Christ. They that seeke their owne glorie, profit, and lucre among them, are not faithfull shepheards. Against such doth crie the threefold voice of Christ: Feed & keepe my sheepe: mine (saith he) not thine. Feed them, oppresse them not, flay them not: Feede them not thy selfe: Seeke my glorie, not thine own.Phil. 3. For some there bee, which (as Paule with weeping teares complaineth) that seeke themselues, not the glorie of Iesus Christ. Of these spake Paule also a∣fore. 2. Timoth. 3. Men shall be louers of themselues, couetous, &c. Where the wicked roote of selfe loue is in a Curate, there followe all the vices which hee in the same place maketh mention of. Who so nowe will bee a louer of Christ, and a faythfull shepheard
sciences, that they may be fruitfull and comfortable to the whole Christian congregation. If this might come to passe, then should there be no lacke of wise counsellors and actiue men, profitable to be in com∣mon authoritie: and also amongst christian people, there shuld be found men meet to be made ouer-see∣ers in the ministery of Gods word, with which men the people should be wel & worthily prouided for. Good vertuous teachers bring foorth a vertuous and godlie people. And doubtlesse, the meaning of those that gaue such goodes to monasteries & chur∣ches, was at the first, that they thoght therby to serue God, and to doe good vnto the poore. If such goods then as heeretofore haue beene euill bestowed, bee now profitably and blessedly turned to the honour of God, and commoditie of the whole Church, then is the last will and meaning of the founders fulfilled. They also that must pay such rentes, tithes, & goods, will be the readier so to doe, if they see, that the same is well and profitably bestowed. Then shall not they vntruly, but faithfully performe and pay all thinges, when they consider that they doe seruice vnto God himselfe. Graunt vs all (O God) to harken and be obedient vnto the voice of true shepheards: and giue vs hearts to haue in great honour, and worthily to esteeme of such faithfull shepheards as vppon earth are thy Mi∣nisters and stewards, by whome and in whome thou speakest to vs, and with vs: that wee shewing vnto them all reuerence and honour which they be wor∣thie of for thy sake, may giue them honest liuinges;
and consider, howe that Christ thy sonne our Lorde teacheth the same, Math. 10. and Paule thy seruaunt. 1. Cor. 9. Reason it is, seeing they sow spiritual things vnto vs, that they of vs reape thinges corporall. O Lord, remooue away the contempt of thy woorde and ministers, for the same neuer escaped without great punishment and harme. IESVS said vnto Peter: verely verilie I say vnto thee: When thou wast young, thou girdest thy selfe, and wen∣test whither thou wouldest: but when thou art olde, thou shalt stretch out thine hand, and another shal gird thee, and lead thee thither as thou wouldest not. This hee said, signi∣fyng with what death he should glorifie God. And when he had spoken this, he said: follow me. Doctrine and fruite. IT is not sufficient to haue begunne, except the soul shepheard continue in his office and faithfulnesse. For to take the cure and charge of the sheepe, brin∣geth great danger, losse, trauaile, and labour with it. Many a time must a faithfull shepheard ieoperd his life for his sheepe. Such perrill doth Christ promise vnto Peter, namely, that hee must die, and with what death. Afore-time when hee was young, he sought that which pertained to the flesh, he might not away with the crosse: but nowe after the receiuing of the holy ghost, he is stout, and dieth for Christs sake, and for his sheepe. Beholde, such an end had Peter, that of loue he dieth for him, with whome to die he rash∣lie
promised afore. But necessarie it was, that Christ should first die for Peters health, and that Peter af∣terward should suffer death for his names sake. The presumption and headines of man would haue set the cart before the horse, but the euerla∣sting truth hath appointed this order. Peter thought he would haue ieoperded his life for Christ, & haue redeemed the redeemer: but Christ came to giue his life for his sheepe, of whom Peter was one. Now af∣ter that Christ died for those that bee his, there is strength giuen in the hearts of such shepheards and sheepe as be faithful, to suffer death for Christs sake. Death is not now so to be feared of vs, that we wold therefore goe backe from the truth: for by death do not wee lose life, yea Christ hath made death to bee the way vnto life: And by his Resurrection he hath set forth vnto vs an example of another life, which is immortall. Peter was first afraide and feared death, and would haue dissuaded Christ that he should not die:Math. 16. but now that the precious treasure of Christes bloud is shed, hee followeth his redeemer, yea euen vnto the death of the crosse goeth hee after him, therefore is hee nowe no more a satan, but a Pe∣ter.Petrus of the rocke. But from whence commeth such strength into a feeble man? Euen from God who dwelleth in the hearts of the faithfull, for else is the nature and flesh of man impotent and weake, beeing afraid of death: which feare (naturall heate being abated) is the grea∣ter in them that are olde. And though we all wish to to be with Christ, and be desirous of eternall life, yet
would we faine haue it without any griefe of death, if it might be. Thus came the conflict of death euen vpon Christ, whereby hee declared himselfe verie man, but the wil of God had the mastry aboue mans in the wrastling: Peter also went not with his wil to death, but with his will he both suffered it, and ouer∣came it. Christ likewise, to comfort vs, was heauie: who neuertheles came vpon earth, that he wold die: neither was it necessitie that moued him to die,Iohn. 10 but his owne good will and loue: for hee had power to giue his soule, and take it agayne. Now though the feare of death be great in nature yet is it ouercome through the strength and great∣nesse of the loue,2. Cor. 5. which wee beare vnto him who is our life, euen Iesus Christ. And albeit he was the life it selfe, yet pleased it him to suffer death for vs. See∣ing then that hee alone dyed for vs, wee ought not to be ashamed, neither should it grieue vs to die also for him, specially considering that the publishing of so excellent grace is committed vnto vs. When the shepheard dyeth for the sheepe, it is no great matter if the sheepe die for the shepheards sake. Forasmuch now as the faithfull shepheard with his loue, direct∣eth and encourageth many of the sheepe, to die for his names sake: how much more meete is it, that the shepheards bee the first which ieoparde theyr liues, striuing for the truth, and euen vnto bloud to resiste sinne, when Christ hath put them in trust to feed his sheepe? This is now the occasion why our Sauiour Christ telleth Peter of his death afore hande, and strengtheneth and incourageth him therevnto: for
though the will bee constaunt in the saints, yet is the flesh feeble and weake.Rom. 7. Math. 26. No man dieth without paine and griefe: which thing is appointed vnto vs by the wisedome of God, to the intent no man should kill himselfe: For seeing the deuill doth now and then perswade som to murther themselues, how should it go, if the soule were not so loth to depart frō the bo∣dy? With these words therefore thought nor Christ to make Peter afraid, or to discourage him, but to fur∣nish him, and make him ripe. For Peter had a good desire to suffer somewhat for Christs sake: neuerthe∣lesse, beeing yet young, hee could not follow: but when he was olde, he followed him: therefore will Christ perfourme his desire. As if Christ would say: Peter, thou hast hitheto bin weake & fearful, but I wil strengthen thee: so that hence forth thou shalt deny mee no more, but manfully die for mee. Thou hast bene tender, in that thou wast afraid at one womans voyce: but now shalt thou stretch forth thy hand to the crosse to be bound. For by the stretching out of the handes, hee vnderstandeth and signifieth with what death hee should die, namely, vpon the crosse. Which death afore time was most shamefull: but af∣ter that Christ was hanged vpon the crosse, it is now an honorable and glorious death, with the which the faithfull doe glorifie God: and therefore saith the E∣uangelist, that the Lord would thereby signifie, with what death Peter should glorifie God. For in Gods quarrell, and for Christs sake to die, is the highest honour, whereof no man ought to be ashamed. This ought all soule shepheards to ponder
and consider, that they faithfully and constantly fol∣lowing Christ the Lord,2. Tim. 4. go not from that they haue taken in hand, but proceed and bring their course to an honourable ende, keeping fidelitie and trust with their Lord, and being fully appointed in themselues, to die for the sheepe of Christ. Therfore should they consider afore hand, what things they must suffer for the truth: least they destroy that, which they haue of long time builded and taught. O gracious father: strengthen thou vs in thy worke and in thy truth: that in the thing which thou hast begun in vs, we may steadfastly continue to the end. Expell out of vs the feare of death, & stablish vs tho∣row thy holy spirite, that wee manfully may despise & ieoperd this life, for the life eternall. Grant O God to the shepheards of thy sheepe, a feruent loue to the truth and thy glory: strengthen them with thy spirit that they valiantly standing by the flocke, may euen with their death confirme thy people in the truth. PEter turned about and saw the disciple whom Iesus lo∣ued, following (which also leaned on his breast at Sup∣per, & said: Lord, who is he that betraieth thee?) when Peter therefore saw him, he said to Iesus: Lord, what shal he heere doe? Iesus saith vnto him: If I will haue him to tarrie till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me. Then went this saying abroade among the brethren, that that Disciple should not die. Yet Iesus said not to him, he shall not die, but if I wil that he tarry til I come, what is that to thee? the same disciple is he, which testifieth of these things, & wrote these things, and we know that his testimony is true. There are al∣so
many other things that Iesus did, which if they should bee waitten euerie one, I suppose the world could not contain the bookes that should be written. Doctrine and fruite. THE former wordes which Christ spake vnto Peter (Follow me) were spoken vnto him in this meaning, that he should followe the foot-steps and passion of Christ, namely, with worde and deed to goe the waie that Christ had gone. But in asmuch as Peter is a figure of the Church, Christ spake those wordes, not onely vnto him, but vnto all faithful be∣leeuers. For the Church of Christ while shee dwel∣leth heere temporally in many troubles and afflic∣tions, she foloweth Christ her spouse and head, who also deliuereth her from all aduersitie. Shee loueth Christ, and in the behalfe of his truth she striueth vn∣till the death: for seeing Christ dyed for all, it is meet that they which are his, doo follow his foot-steppes. To followe Christ, is nothing else, than stoutly to suffer and ouercome despite and pouertie in this world for his sake. And God truly, euen in his wrath (which wee with our sinnes deserue) cannot forget his mercie. Ouer and besides the manifolde comfort and helpe which he otherwise declareth vnto vs, he hath giuen vs his own sonne, to be our mediator: by whom, if we put our trust in him, we should be saued & deliuered from eternall death, that we liuing from hence forth still in faith, hope, and charitable loue, as pilgrimes in this world: and beeing in all troubles &
aduersities preserued by the corporall and spirituall comfort of God, might walke innocently before his sight, in him who is become our way vnto God. It is no vile thing to suffer, & to be put to death for Christ and his truths sake: yea, a man cannot die a more ho∣norable death, than when for the truth innocently, he suffereth with a good conscience and with an vp∣right minde. No man in deede ought to put him∣selfe in daunger arrogantly, wilfully, or for vaine-glorie. Wheras Peter asketh a question concerning the disciple whom the Lord loued, what he should doo, it is a nicenesse and vnprofitable curiositie, that ser∣ueth nothing to edification, and therefore it pleaseth not the Lord. Whatsoeuer edifieth not, that ought not we to desire of Christ. Let euery man looke to himselfe, waiting vpon his owne businesse and office and not to be curious in another mans matter: what∣soeuer is not committed vnto his charge, and belon∣geth not vnto him, let him not meddle withal. Peter loued Christ, so did he them also: therefore asked he what should become of him, and whether he should remayne styll ot die, for hee was verie loth and vn∣willing to departe from him. And so he passed more vpon Iohn, than vppon the precept and commissi∣on of Iesus Christ. Such curious backe looking doth the Lord rebuke. Wee many and sundrie times doo regarde and esteeme more the thing that wee loue, than that which God commaundeth and biddeth vs. But such loue is verie hurtfull, and especially in those
that should be soul shepherds. Christs wil is, that they haue respect to his worke and commandement, and with a feruent loue to perfourme the same, not med∣ling with other busines not needfull. To enquire curiously of other mens matters, brin∣geth not alway profit, but much rather vnquietnes. Therefore Christ remoouing Peter from such curi∣ous questions, draweth his mind vnto a better thing, namely, to follow him. As for that which he desireth to know, Christ telleth him that it is no point of his charge, as if Christ would say: what hast thou to doo with other folkes busines? Thou hast heard what I haue commanded thee: look that thou faithfully do the same. What inquirest thou after other mens mat∣ters. Thus looking diligently and faithfully to our own charge, and expelling the affection of the flesh, wee should neither desire, curiously to aske any thing be∣yond the will of God, neither to looke vpon any o∣ther men, but vprightly to follow the Lord. Here also we learne, that in the commission and fi∣nal departure of the faithfull, there be manifold dif∣ferēces. Some rest in the Lord blessedly, without any speciall heauy affliction: but some it pleaseth God to bring through sore trauaile and exceeding trouble, laying the greater burthen vpon him: according as it was tolde Peter afore hand, that he should be cruci∣fied, but not Iohn. They now that are admitted to feede Christ his sheepe, prepare themselues, and bee alwaies readie, without any curiosity to follow the will of God.
Whereas Iohn in the conclusion of his booke re∣futeth the erroneous opinion of some, it is an eui∣dence of his meeknesse and sinceritie. It was not so spoken of the Lorde (saith hee) that the same Dis∣ciple should not die: whereby Iohn confessed, that he himselfe also was mortall. His writing wil he haue credited, for he hath written nothing saue onely the truth, wherof he may well testifie that which he hath seene. Yet saith he hath not written all, but only that whereby we may obtaine eternall life: as wee haue heard sufficiently afore. THE eleuen Disciples went away into Galilee,Math. 28. into a mountaine whereas Iesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted. And Iesus saide: These are the wordes which I spake vnto you, while I was yet with you, that all must needs be fulfilled, which were written of me in the lawe of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalmes. Then opened hee their wittes, that they might vnderstand the Scrip∣tures, and saide vnto them: Thus is it written, and thus it behooued Christ to suffer, and to rise againe from death the third day, and that repentance and remission of sinne, should be preached in his name among all nations, and must begin at Hierusalem. And ye are witnesses of these thinges. And behold, I will send the promise of my Father vppon you. But tarrie ye in the Cittie of Hierusalem, till ye be endewed with power from on high.
Doctrine and fruite. THE Lorde minding to make his Disciples as∣sured of his Resurrection, instructeth them first well in his passion, which hee declareth out of the Scripture, and printeth it in their hearts. He tea∣cheth them, that it was necessarie, that Christ should suffer and die, yea euen thus to die, namely, vppon a crosse, vpon a tree. On the tree was the transgression committed: vpon the tree behooued it the restituti∣on to bee made: vpon the tree was death fetched, v∣pon the tree was life giuen: vpon the tree must satis∣faction bee made for the lustes of the flesh, which on the tree were first conceiued. And would God, that we rightly knew the passion and crosse of our Lorde Iesu Christ, then shoulde the glorie of the resurrecti∣on be well knowne and loued of vs. O Iesu, graunt vs grace right to consider, what, wherefore, and with what loue and feruentnes thou hast suffered for vs, then shall our heart feele & pro∣fitably enioy the sweete fruite of thy resurrection: then shall our lyfe become new and of another sort, if we take vpon vs true pennance, beeing sorie for our sinnes, conuerting vs vnto thee, amending and chaunging our conuersation. Which with the grati∣ous forgiuenesse of our sinnes, is declared and pro∣mised vnto vs in the Gospell, according to thy com∣maundement. Esay 2. Psal. 109.O what a ioyfull message is this, that such greate grace should out of Sion bee shewed vnto vs, which
come of the heathen From this grace is no man shut out: it is common vnto euerie man,Iohn. 5. vnlesse the vn∣thankfull exclude himselfe: as doo they that loue darknesse more than the light, and they that disdain∣fully inclose thy grace, and hedge in thy Church, which thou by the preaching of repentance, and for∣giuenes of sinnes, hast commaunded to bee gathered vnto thy selfe in the whole world: not only at Hie∣rusalem, but also in Samaria and Galilee, euen vnto the ende of the world. O God, suffer vs not to be sub∣iect vnto vain-glorie, and headines: remoue all con∣tention and strife out of thy holie Church. Preserue vs from scismes, and all dissention: knitte vs together in vniforme loue, which is an vndoubted token of thy children. It behooued Iesus Christ to suffer, not for him∣selfe, but for our sakes, to become the sacrifice for our sinnes: that hee so satisfiyng the iustice of GOD, might make amends for our trespasse, and deliuer vs from death. It behooued him also to ryse agayne, that hee by his power might rayse vs vp from the death of sin to a new life, & by his own resurrection, to make vs assured of ours, and of immortall life. IEsus came to his Disciples, and said vnto them:Math Iohn To me is giuen all power in heauen & in earth. As my father hath sent mee, so send I you. And when hee had thus spoken, hee breathed vppon them, and sayde: Receiue ye the holy Ghost. Whose sinnes yee forgiue, they are forgiuen: and whose sinnes yee reteyne, they are reteyned. Goe therefore and teach all people,Marke 28. baptizing them in the name of the Fa∣ther,
and of the sonne, and of the holie Ghost, teaching them to obserue all thinges whatsoeuer I haue commaunded you. And beholde, I am with you euerie day vntill the ende of the worlde. Goe yee therefore into the whole worlde, and preach the Gospell vnto all creatures. Who so beleeueth and is baptized,Marke 16. shall be saued: but he that will not beleeue, shall be condemned. The tokens which shall follow those that beleeue are these: In my name they shall cast out deuils: They shall speake with new tongues: They shall take away serpentes: And if they drinke anie venemous thing, it shall not hurt them: They shall lay handes vppon the sicke, and they shall be whole. Doctrine and fruit. WHEN Iesus with manie euidences had certified his Disciples of his Resurrecti∣on, he sheweth them now to what excel∣lent glorie, and how high power his heauenly father hath brought him, wherby their hearts might be sta∣blished: and how that all thinges are iustly subdued vnto him, who through the crosse hath ouercome, gotten a glorious victorie, and suppressed the Prince of this world. And though some now declare them∣selues contrary to his kingdome, and are not obedi∣ent vnto his power, but persecute and kill him in his members (saying:Luke. 19. Wee will not haue him to raigne ouer vs) resisting and gathering themselues together against God and his annointed king,Psal. 2. how mightie soeuer they be: yet shall he bruise them with an iron rodde, and as an earthen vessell all to breake them:
yea they must become his foot-stoole,Psal. 109. and hee shall raigne for euer. As if he would say: In most perfect humilitie, in highest patience, and beeing in greatest contumelie, I haue hitherto serued you, and all mankinde: but now is the time come, that the Father will glorifie mee, and bring me to high honor, which I had afore the worlde was made,Iohn. 17. Phil. 2. that in my name all knees should bowe: for I am sette aboue all power, and dominion, hauing all thinges in my hande. From henceforth shall I bee worshipped and honoured of the Angels in heauen, and of all men vppon earth. And forasmuch as I haue receyued a whole power ouer all flesh, I sende you, not onelie vnto the Iewes as afore, but vnto all nations in the whole worlde,Math. 10. for in my selfe haue I sanctified the whole nature of man. Looke therefore that yee declare this ioyfull and gratious message vnto all men, and plant them in with baptisme vnto the Father, to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost. And those whom ye baptize, see that ye teach to obserue and keepe all that ye haue recey∣ued of mee. Ye must also bee stout, and not faint har∣ted. Many afflictions, much euill will, great persecu∣tion, shal happen vnto you: but consider how migh∣tie a Lord ye haue, vnto whom is giuen all power in heauen and earth: hee is able enough to defend and saue you from all enemies. And albeit that I goe nowe from you as touching corporall habitation, yet will I bee still remayning with you, with my po∣wer, grace, woorking, and protection, vntil the end of the worlde. Wherefore goe your way, sette your
whole delight in mee, keepe your selues vnto me a∣lone, so can ye not miscarrie. O how excellent and great consolation is this vn∣to all faithfull and beleeuing hearts? O how migh∣tie a strength is it in all aduersities and daungers of this worlde, to heare and consider, that all power in heauen and earth is giuen vnto Christ our Lorde and king, vnder whose protection and winges wee are safe and well preserued? And who cannot vn∣derstand that this promise reacheth not onely vnto the twelue Disciples, vnto whom it was then made, but vnto all faithfull beleeuers,Iohn. 17. which through their doctrine are come vnto Christ? For those twelue did not continue in this life vntill the ende of the worlde: and yet hee sayth: I will be with you vntill the end of the world. Wherefore wee may well per∣ceiue, that Christ vntill the end of the world, will be with all faithfull beleeuers: that is to say, with his ho∣lie church, to instruct, teach, strengthen, comfort, de∣fend and deliuer it, against all malitious violence of this world.Iohn. 10 In his hand they are safe and well kept, & no man is able to plucke them out of his hande. Al∣though the worlde rage, and the deuill the prince of the world, sette all his power (as great as it is) against the Church of Christ:Math. 16. yet are not the gates of hel a∣ble to doe anie thing against it: for it is founded and strongly builded vpon Christ the rocke: and he that is with it vnto the end of the world, is mightier than all enemies. Now forasmuch as the disciples of Christ should bring the heauenly doctrine throughout the whole
world, man being yet of himselfe vnable to compre∣hend the doings of God: he therefore first expoun∣ded and declared the Scriptures vnto them, as Luke mentioneth: and seeing they were simple vnlearned men, hee opened to them their vnderstanding. But to the intent they might not think: What should we poore simple bodies doe against so many learned & wise men? Who wil arme vs against those that are so mightie? Therfore he breatheth vpon them, & saith: Receyue the holie Ghost, whome hee there giueth them, and therewith strengtheneth them inwardly, but with much more power and might vpon Whit∣sonday: whereupon he commandeth them to wait at Hietusalem,Ioel 2. where he will send them the promise of the Father: cloathing the weake with heauenlie strength, as with a garment, and arming them as with a shield. What good thing then can hee lacke, or what euill thing can hurt him, which is his messenger (that hath all power in heauen and in earth) and with whome such a king is euer abiding? But when Christ would send out his disciples, he saith vnto them: As my father hath sent me, so send I you. Whereunto did the father send his sonne into the world? Euen that hee should open the glorie of the father vnto the world: that he should declare the will of the heauenly Father: that hee shoulde offer health vnto the worlde. This to doe, Christ also sent foorth his Disciples. He sent them not to seeke after vaine-glorie, after power and riches, after bodilie pleasure and worldly pompe, but to do as he himself
did.Luke. 15. Christ sought the lost sheepe, brought men vnto the knowledge and loue of the true liuing GOD, taught them to lead a vertuous and honest life. Hee was a Phisition,Math. 9. went to the sicke, helped them, and healed them:Iohn 6. Iohn. 3. he was not come to do his owne will, but the will of his Father: hee was not come to con∣demne the world, but to saue it. In all this, ought the ministers of the worde to fol∣lowe Christ, and to do as he did. Vnto this new hea∣uenly and godlie life and worke, Christ giueth them the holie Ghost. For like as hee himselfe was risen into a newe life: Euen so through his holie spirite, will hee graunt and giue a newe life vnto those that are his. Therefore breatheth hee vppon them, to declare, that it is hee, who at the beginning made man, and nowe by his death had quickened him, and renewed him: and that euen he is the fountaine and giuer of the spirite. Thus vnto his Disciples he gaue the firstlinges of the promised spirite, and with it a taste of more and greater perfection, as an earnest pennie. All this declareth, what belongeth to true Apo∣stles and Ministers of the worde, which are sent of Christ (for no man sendeth himselfe) what their of∣fice is: and that they which seeke the pleasures of the bodie, honor, praise, and riches, are not follow∣ers of Christ, and successors of the Apostles Where∣fore most diligently ought wee to pray vnto GOD, that he will giue vs faithfull Ministers of the worde, which looking truelie to the worke of Christ, maye leade vs vnto God.
But forasmuch as without the holy Ghost, no∣thing can be fruitfully done, we must neuerthelesse praie for his holy spirite, who may in vs stirre vp ho∣ly thoughts and deuout desires, directing and mo∣uing our will, and so giuing power and strength to accomplish the works of God, and steadfastly therin to continue: and that the same holy spirit may illu∣minate and kindle our minds, and prouoke them vn∣to all good and godly works. Considering then, that the keies which were promised vnto Peter, & in him to the whole Church. Matthew 16. are heere gi∣uen of Christ, wee will also intreate somewhat thereof. These keyes are nothing else than the Gospell,Of the keies. Christ now deduceth his oration from the common custome of men. Like as things corporal are shut and opened with the key: so be the consciences of men shut or bound with the Gospell. Thus are these the keies which Christ giueth vnto the Apostles, vnbur∣dening of consciences and souls. And that commeth to passe, when the holy Ghost illuminateth the mind that it vnderstandeth the misteries of Christ, & com∣mitteth it selfe therevnto. To bee discharged or vn∣bound, is, when the minde that hath despaired of health or saluation, is lifte vp to an assured and vn∣doubted hope. To binde, is, to leaue the obstinate & vnbeleeuing minde vnto it selfe. Iesus therefore sen∣deth foorth his disciples, to publish this health vnto the whole world, and to exclude & separate no man from this grace. But first he giueth them the holy Ghost (as Iohn
sayth) that is, he openeth their mindes that they may vnderstand the Scriptures, as Luke saith: for what is it else to open the vnderstanding, but to giue the ho∣ly Ghost? Meete is it also and conuenient, that they which by the Gospell should beare Christ through∣out the whole world, should receiue the holy ghost. For if they should preach Christ, it was necessarie they had Christs spirit, seeing that Christ & they had one manner of thing in hand: as, Christ was sent of God, so were they sent of Christ. Without fruit ve∣rily should the ministers of the word preach the go∣spel, if they were not endued, illuminated, and inspi∣red with the holy Ghost. Preach (saith he) the gospel, that is the key where∣with the gate of heauen is opened. Who so belee∣ueth the Gospell when hee heareth it preached, and vnderstandeth it, feeleth comfort in his conscience, that he is deliuered from sinne. Now doth the Gospell set before vs, not onely the grace of God by Christ, throgh the which grace our sinnes are forgiuen vs, but also it teacheth and re∣quireth a new life. Neyther doth anie man begin a new life, vnles he first be ashamed of the former old and wicked life.Luk. 24 Therefore saith Luke, that Christ o∣pened the mindes and vnderstanding of the disci∣ples, that they might perceiue the Scriptures, name∣ly, that he might thus and thus suffer, and rise again: and that in his name, that is, in his commandement and power, conuersion of life, and forgiuenesse of sinnes should bee preached and declared among all people.
Therefore when the poore sinner through the preaching of the holy Ghost, heareth his wicked and sinfull life (for the holy gospel rebuketh the world of sinne) he beginneth to knowe himselfe a sinner, and to be displeased, repentant and sorrie for his sinnes: he considereth also, that he is well worthie of eternal punishment and damnation. By meanes whereof, through the multitude and greatnesse of his sinnes, he vtterly dispaireth in his owne power and righte∣ousnesse, and eternall saluation. But therewithall, he heareth also, that Christ (by reason of his sins) came downe from heauen, and dyed for him vppon the crosse, washed away al his sinnes with his bloud, hath reconciled him with God, made him Gods child, & an eternall inheritour of his kingdome. And this he stedfastly beleeueth: I pray you doth not such a mans heart leape for ioy, when hee heareth, that thorough Christ he is discharged of all the sinnes that so sore pressed him? The keies therefore are the pure word of God, which teacheth men to know themselues, and to put their trust in God through Christ. With that word, with those keies do the ministers of the worde open. For they that so are taught & instructed by the word of God, that they put all their confidence in God, through Christ, those verily are loosed and dischar∣ged of their sins. But he that either wil not heare, or when he heareth, will not receiue and beleeue this grace declared to the world through Christ, & offred vnto him by the ministers of the word, him doo the ministers bind, that is, they leaue him stil in his error
according as Christ commandeth his disciples, Mat. 10. that from such as will not receiue and heare their word, they shal depart, & shake off the dust from their shooes vpon them. Thus dyd Paul binde, Act. 13.18. To bind then with the word, is nothing else, but (when the word of the grace of God is preached, & not receiued) to leaue such impenitent people, and to haue no fellowship, neyther ought to do with the despisers of the truth and grace. For in the daie of iudgement, it shall bee easier vnto Sodome and Go∣morrha, than vnto such. Now although the word that the Apostles preach, is not theyr own, but Gods, & no man may cleanse, vnbinde, and discharge from sinne, but onely God, yet Christ of his grace, and (according to the pro∣pertie of the Scripture) ascribeth such vnto the Apo∣stles. For the gracious father of his aboundant loue and kindnesse (and by reason of the couenant that he hath made with vs) doeth oft ascribe vnto vs many things, which can properly belong vnto none, saue onely to himselfe. Neither is this any maruell, seeing he hath giuen vs his onely begotten and most deare sonne, to be our owne: for how cannot he geue vs al things with him? Notwithstanding, we ought not by reason here∣of to be high minded and proud, and to ascribe vnto our selues, that which onely is Gods: but much ra∣ther to be thankfull for his grace, and diligent in our vocation, faythfully to employ and bestow the high treasure & gifts of God, and not to abuse them. This thing therefore extendeth not so farre, as that euerie
one man (properly to speake) doth of his owne pow∣er and authoritie forgiue sinne. But forasmuch as the Apostles and ministers of the word, doo publish and declare remission of sinne, they bring the keyes and forgiue sinnes ministerially, and as ministers. Neuer∣thelesse, if here withal the spirit of God do not worke in the hearer to beleeue the word when it is prached, then is not the sinne forgiuen: All the power there∣fore and working is Gods. Thus the Apostles may damne no man, but vn∣doubtedly they may by the word declare damnation to the vnbeleeuers. Where an assured promise of grace is declared, there sinnes are forgiuen.The holy Ghost that worketh in the Apostles forgiueth the sinnes. Nowe when the Apostles shew vnto sinners remission of sinne, they doo it out of the holy Ghost, and are not deceiued: for they preach, that our sinnes are pardo∣ned vs through Christ, who hath made satisfaction for them. If this faith vpon Christ, bee liuely in vs,Note this conditiō wel so that we abhorre sinne, and bee desirous of heauenly things, then are our sinnes forgiuen vs through the holy Ghost, for no man can say, that Iesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost. The key there extendeth to this end, that the mi∣nister declare remission of sinnes thorough Christe. Who so now beleeueth the Gospell preached, shall be saued: hee that beleeueth not shall bee condem∣ned. And seeing that faith is an inwarde thing in the soul inspired of God, the minister cannot know who in the sight of God beleeueth, or beleeueth not: for God onely knoweth the heart. Howbeit by the out∣ward confession, which is done with the mouth, & by
receiuing of the preaching, and by the fruits, the mi∣nister may iudge. For who so receiueth the word, o∣penly confessing Christ, and doeth not outwardlie defile himselfe with vile deedes, to such the minister openeth with the key, and dischargeth them: that is, he taketh them into the Church of Christ, numbe∣reth them among the people of God, and receiueth thē into the kingdom of heauen. As for those that wil not heare the worde preached, or that when they heare it, doo refuse it, not confessing Christ, or vtte∣ring theyr vnbeleefe with foule grosse and open vi∣ces, those the minister bindeth: that is, hee shutteth them out of the Church, and banisheth them out of the realme of heauen. To him that is in the Church, is forgiuenesse of sinnes promised: who so despiseth charitable loue, hath not faith: vpon such one remai∣neth sinne still, and the wrath of God. Now what the Apostles & Ministers of the word doo, that doo they not in theyr owne name, not in their own power: but as they which are sent of God and that declare his word, the holy gospell, out of the power of God, euen out of the holy Ghost, who be∣ing giuen vnto them, doth speak and work by them. What these binde, is bound before God, and in hea∣uen, for out of God is it that they iudge: and what they vnbinde, is vnbound before God, for God wyll ratifie and allowe what they doo, that beeing sent of him, keepe themselues in exercise, and meddle with∣in his word and commission. As for him that is not sent of God, and declareth not his worde and Go∣spell, but of his owne proper power will binde one
man, and vnbinde another, set this man in heauen, & that man in hell: is it any maruell if such one do ma∣ny times misse and be called a wolfe and not a shep∣heard, seeing his proceedings commeth not of God? Heere also we learne, with what desire and thank∣fulnesse, wee ought to receiue the ministers of God, that bring vs his holy word, and comfort of our con∣science: how wee ought to esteeme them that haue the holy Ghost, who speaketh vnto vs by them.Luke. 1 Heb. 13. For if we despise them, we despise God himselfe. S. Paul therefore exhorteth vs, to be obedient vnto them, & to haue them in worthie estimation that shew vs the word of God. Worthie they be of double honour, partly, for that through them God speaketh, whose ministers and ambassadors they bee:1. Tim. 5. for the highest king of all sendeth them out vnto vs with his com∣mission, partly, for that they be charged with so dan∣gerous and heauie an office and trauell. For,2. Cor. 5 though as concerning themselues they liue iustly, well, and blamelesse, yet if they regarde not the life of theyr sheepe, but neglect them, they must looke for greate and sore punishment. Not only for themselues must they giue account, but for al the soules that are com∣mitted vnto them, if one of them perish throgh their negligence. Wee should not therefore haue respect to the infirmitie or basenesse of the ministerie, but vnto him that sent him, and whose commission hee executeth. When a Prince or king sendeth out a meane seruant with a commission and charge, who will despise him without the wrath and indignation
of the prince? How can we then contemne the mi∣nisters of the high eternall king, without plague and punishment? This be spoken, not that vnworthie and vnmeet men should be placed in so high an office, or that we shoulde delight in their euill: but to the intent that malitious iudgement may be auoyded, & that there be no villanie done to the annoynted of the Lorde. More respect and regard shuld we haue to the word of God that they bring vnto vs, than to their liuing and aults: more to the giuer than to the minister. It is not thy that worke, but God worketh through his owne power, he cannot faile vs in his promise. The minister lendeth his hand and mouth, but the holie Ghost worketh in the harts of the beleeuers, neither can the wickednesse of the Priest diminish or hinder that operation. If we our selues haue pure, cleane and faithfull beleeuing mindes. It is not the vncleannes of the minister that can either defile or hurt vs. This is now the story of the Resurrection of Christ, wherein we see, how the goodnes of the Lord won∣defully striueth with the weake faith of those that are his. For when the Angels could not perswade them that he was risen againe, he himselfe appeareth vnto them aliue, and proueth by many euident testimo∣nies, that he is of a truth risen againe and reuiued, tal∣keth with them, eateth with them, offereth himselfe vnto them, that they may see him and handle him, sendeth the women and certaine disciples for wit∣nesses, and leaueth nothing vnattempted that may perswade them. For in the faith and beleefe of the re∣surrection
of Iesus Christ lieth all our welfare. We must therefore beseech Almightie God to establish in vs this faith, and by his spirite mightilie to worke, that we from sinne may truely rise againe, to a newe and godlie life, and afterward with our bodies to en∣ter into an immortall and euerlasting life. Hereunto helpe vs God the Father, the Sonne, and the holie Ghost. Amen. Heere endeth the Sermons vpon the Resurrection of Iesus Christ, according to the true copie of the Author: and now followeth the Sermons of the As∣cension.
THE ASCENSION OF IESVS CHRIST, out of the holie Euangelists. IESVS lead his Disciples out into Be∣thanie. And when he had brought them together, hee spake vnto them of the kingdome of God, & commanded them that they should not depart from Ierusa∣lem: but to waite for the promise of the father. For Iohn (saith he) baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost after these few dayes. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him▪ saying: Lorde, wilt thou at this time restore againe the kingdome to Israel? And he said vnto them: It is not for you to knowe the times and the seasons, which the Father hath put in his owne power: But yee shall receiue power after that the holie Ghost is come vpon you, and yee shall be witnesses vnto mee not onely in Ierusalem, but also in all Iurie, and in Samaria, and euen vnto the worlds ende. Now when Iesus had spoken these words vnto them, he lifted vp his handes, and blessed them, and was taken vp, and a clowd receiued him out of
their sight: so that hee departed from them, and was carri∣ed vp in heauen, and sitteth on the right hand of God. And whilest they looked stedfastly vp towards heauen, as he went behold two men stood by them in white apparrell: which al∣so said: Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing vp into hea∣uen? The same Iesus which is taken vp from you into hea∣uen, shal so come euen as you haue seene him go into heauen: So when they had worshipped him, they returned with great ioy into Hierusalem from Mount Oliuet: which is from Hie∣rusalem a Sabaoth daies iourney. And when they were come in, they went vp into a parlour where abode Peter and Iames, Iohn and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Barthol∣mew and Mathew, Iames the sonne of Alpheus and Simon Zelotes, and Iudas the brother of Iames. These all continued still with one accord in the temple, lauding & praising God, and making their praiers with the women, and Mary the mother of Iesu, and with his brethren. Doctrine and fruite. Iohn. 13.CHrist who loued his Disciples, declareth vnto them his loue, euen vnto the ende:Math 28. yea he neuer ceaseth to loue them For though hee leaue them as concerning
his bodilie presence: yet with his loue, grace, and power, he is euer still with them. Forasmuch now as after sufficient proofe of his resurrection, he will de∣part from them, and goe to his Father that had sent him: he taketh them forth with him vnto the place, from whence he mindeth to depart from them. And manifestly before their eyes, hee ascendeth into hea∣uen into the glorie of his father: that they might be witnesses, as well of his glorious ascension, as of all o∣ther things which they had heard & seene before. O how feruent words spake hee then vnto them? How deepely entred he into their hearts? How earnestly printed hee those his last wordes into them? The e∣ternall wisedome speaketh nothing vainely, nothing slenderly, nothing without profite. Although the Disciples (as men yet somewhat carnall) doe aske questions concerning the restitution of a bodily and temporall kingdome: yet maketh hee no aunswere vnto their demaund, but directeth them vnto that which is for their profie, and belongeth to their of∣fice, drawing their hearts from the earthly kingdom, (from the which they ought to bee mortified) vnto the kingdome of heauen, euen vnto the kingdome of God: in the which he himselfe is king, & into the which they now were receiued as citizens, that they shuld declare the same throughout the whole world and offer it vnto all men. This is the gospell of the kingdom of God, which for a testimonie vnto all nations, must bee preached in the whole world, to witnesse the grace of GOD vnto the elect. But to the damned and vnbeleeuers,
a testimonie of their damnation: in that they are conuinced of their owne infidelitie, and shall haue no excuse, if they contemne and despise the grace offered vnto them. By this ought wee also to learne, to see such thinges which are most profitable, and wholesome vnto vs: and which bring vs the nearest way to put our trust in God, and to loue our neigh∣bours, for that part of the play is ours. As for vnpro∣fitable and contentious questions, if we meddle not with them▪ then the lesse diuision, and the more loue and edifieng in the Church of God shall follow. Ma∣nie times are wee too much carefull, for such things as wee desire our selues: as what ende this thing or that will come vnto, when God will set vp our pro∣speritie, and what shall bee done hereafter, when and how God will punish those that are against vs. And this temptation, carnall zeale, and curiositie, chaun∣ceth oft euen in the hearts of the faythfull: as we see heere in the Disciples of Christ. Sometimes there bee froward and wicked mindes, which preten∣ding to bee Christians, seeke out of the Gospell no∣thing but honour, lucre, and profite. but such bee both false and fained. Notwithstanding (all these set apart) wee ought to commit and refer all things vnto our mercifull creator and gracious father, who can right well order and dispose them, how & when he will, as he thinketh best to further his glorie, and to edifie his elect children. Our care ought rather to bee, how we may lead a godly life, and beautifie the faith of Christ with good woorkes. Wee must looke, that wee bee neither vngodlie, nor hypo∣crites:
but to liue vertuously and innocently in his sight, and paciently at his hande to wayte for our deliuerance. The kingdome of Christ that is pub∣lished and offered through the Gospell, is not a cor∣porall but a spirituall kingdome: neither consisteth it in outward things, but in a pure and faithfull be∣leeuing heart, and yet reacheth it throughout the whole worlde, and amongst all nations. In the hearts of all faithfull beleeuers doth Christ raigne through his spirite, and there ouercommeth hee the deuill, sinne, and death. And to the intent they shoulde well vnderstande this kingdome, he commaundeth them to waite for the holy spirite, whom he had promised them: as if he would say; Now goe I to my Father, now enter I into my kingdome, that I may mightily raigne vpon the earth: this thing yee vnderstand not, but when the spirite is giuen you, yee shall perceyue it well. All thinges in heauen and in earth, are giuen into my power: In those that are mine shall I raigne, and make them righteous through fayth: yea inuincible shall I make them against all enemies: heereof shall yee beare witnesse when yee are baptized through the holie Ghost. This my kingdome shall ye publish in all nations, from one ende of the world to another. Thus shall I raigne from sea to sea, of the which my kingdome the Prophetes spake so much before. Of this king∣dome dooth Christ take possession through his as∣cending vp to the Father, at whose right hande, and in this kingdome hee sitteth: raigning much more
mightily in his Church, and working more effectu∣ously in those that be his, than hee did before when he liued yet corporally with him. Thus taking his leaue, hee giueth them louing wordes, comforteth them, and admonisheth them of their office, that they all may be diligent therin, that they continually direct and lift vp their heartes into that kingdome. and that they take in hand to bring all men to the same into the obedience of Christ. His blessing hee giueth them, saluting them, wish∣ing them good, and praying hartily vnto his Father for them. Thus was hee taken from them, and carryed into heauen. By the heuen we vnderstand the incompre∣hensible light in the which God dwelleth: & which no mortall man can attaine vnto. From thence came Christ vnto vs, and thither is hee gone againe, euen into the inuisible glorie and clearenes of God. For the eternall worde and power of GOD, dwelling in Gods incomprehensible light from euerlasting, became man: and had his conuersation vpon earth in all partes (sinne excepte) as a verie true man. But when hee had fullie finished and throughly en∣ded the worke that was giuen him in commission of his heauenly Father, and had obeyed him euen vn∣to the death, for as much as in all thinges hee had honoured and glorified his Father vppon earth: it was conuenient that the Father also shoulde glori∣fie his Sonne. And therefore raysed hee him from death, and tooke him vp into heauen: not after the Godhead (for so was hee alwaies in heauen) but
after the manhoode. For his true humane nature which hee tooke vppon him for our sakes, is carryed and taken vp out of this world into the inuisible ho∣nour and glorie, into the highest incomprehensible, and into the perfect fruition of the Godhead. In this honour and glorie Christ dwelleth and raigneth, and yet amongst those that are his, doth he finish and performe all things by his spirite, hauing gouernance in the harts of the faithfull, through be∣liefe, through loue, through patience, and innocen∣cie of life. To the intent now that this kingdome might be erected in the hearts of men, it was necessarie that he should giue his disciples commission to publish the same, and to prepare mens minds thervnto through the preaching of the Gospell. But first hee made the mindes of his disciples readie and apt to receiue the holy ghost, whom he afterwards poured into others by them, and therefore he commaunded them (vn∣till the spirite appeare and open the worke) to waite still at Hierusalem: from the which place the king∣dome of Christ was afterwardes planted in all the world. Of the promise of the spirite, reade Esay. 44. Iere. 31. Ezech. 36. Ioel. 2. Iohn. 19.16. Considering that the mysterie of Christs ascen∣tion is great and excellent, and that there is notable power contained therein to those that be faithful be∣leeuers: the Euangelists doe therefore describe ve∣rie perfectly, the time, the place, the persons, with all circumstances and assured testimonies thereof. Hee ascendeth vp before his disciples, that they might o∣penly
and euidently see it with theyr eyes: there did appeare Angels, as messengers and witnesses from heauen, euen two of them, that in the mouth of two all trueth might bee established. The white ap∣parrell signifieth the euident glorie, into the which Christ is taken vp, as a noble, royall, and mightie king and conquerour, entring into his heauenlie kingdome. Thus the high and glorious king, cloathed with our nature, is entred into our royall pallace, as one that mindeth faithfully to dispatch our matters. Hee is our owne mediatour and aduocate in the presence of the Father: notwithstanding our sinnes commit∣ted, wee haue a free entraunce vnto GOD by him. Our flesh hath hee in himselfe carryed vp, and exal∣ted our nature vnto the right hande of GOD the Father. Wherefore wee that are bones of his bones and flesh of his flesh, doe iustly conceyue a comfor∣table and assured hope, that our mortall bodyes also shall bee taken vp, and haue immortall and eternall ioye. The earnest pennie of his spirite hath hee giuen and left behinde him vnto vs, and contrariwise hee hath of vs taken an earnest pennie and pledge: name∣ly our sinfull and wicked flesh, which hee in him∣selfe hath carryed vp into the kingdome of heauen. Nowe where the parcell is, there shall also bee the whole summe. By this, wee that are flesh and bloud, haue a com∣fortable and assured trust, that in Christ wee shall haue the possession and inheritaunce of heauen. Our
sinnes in him are recompenced, heauen in him is opened, in him is the hope of immortall life sea∣led and made sure vnto vs: Christ the victorious & glorious conquerour is able to defend his church. So that from henceforth no man shall haue power, to condemne his elect and faithfull beleeuers. Rom. 8. Heb. 5.7.8.10. That his flesh is with-drawne from vs, and taken into heauen: it is our great profite, to the intent that all our deuotion and Gods seruice may bee directed vpwardes in the spirite: and that the mindes of faythfull beleeuers maye bee drawne from earthlie vnto heauenly thinges, euen vnto the place where Christ sitteth on the right hande of GOD the Fa∣ther. When the Disciples sawe that theyr Schoolemai∣ster was taken away from them into heauen: they perceiued and considered the thing that they knewe not before, although Christ had told it them. Iohn. 6. Namely, that by the Ascension they should receyue vnderstanding. Therefore they worshipped Iesus Christ, and according vnto his commaundement, they returned to Hierusalem: where they kepte themselues vntill the time that the spirite came: neyther were they idle, but continued in the ho∣lie fellowshippe and godlie exercises, with praier and deuotion, preparing and making themselues readie vnto the comming of the spirite. By occasion heereof (all nicenesse, curiositie, and contentious questions, all pride, vaine-glorie, and fonde affections and desires sette aparte) wee
ought with vpright mindes, and with the eyes of faith to be alway taken vp into heauen, and there to haue our dwelling, where Christ our head sitteth at the right hand of God, king and Lord of all thinges, our faithfull aduocate and mediatour. Then shall true godlynesse increase, then shall vertue blessedlie grow and bring forth fruit in vs, if wee with steadfast faith doe consider, that our Lord Iesus Christ dyed for our sakes, rose againe from death, and is exalted at the right hand of God, raigning mightily aboue all things in heauen, and finishing our saluation, if wee in spirite and in the truth worship and honour him, as the eternal God: confessing with a true faith, that all power is giuen vnto him of God the father, that he careth for vs, and that for our healths sake hee ru∣leth and shall raigne, vntill all things be brought vn∣der his feet. In the meane time he dayly in his church purifieth al his members by his spirit, cleansing them still more and more from all their sinnes. And when hee shall haue rooted out all sinne in his elect, ouer∣comming death the last enemie, so that God shall be all in all, then shall Christ also giue vp his kingdome vnto God the father, namely, the mediation for our sinnes, the purging of the same, defence against the deuill, and deliueraunce from death. For then shall there be no more sinne in the elect, so that he shal not need to be mediator for them, to purge from sinne, to defend against the deuil, or to deliuer from death. Oh mercifull father, graunt vs perfectly to know thy blessed and glorious kingdome of Christ thy sonne, drawe vp our hearts in such sort, that we with
all obedience maye yeelde our selues into this king∣dome, seeing and regarding onely those thinges that are aboue, and wholy applying our selues vnto this ende, that the same heauenly kingdome may be farre spread abroad, and knowne vnto all men. To the in∣tent, that as for all worldly things, wherin many foo∣lish people set all their saluation, but in vaine: men may vtterly refuse them, and hartily with bodie and soule, and with their whole life, may giue ouer them∣selues perfectly vnto the onely Lord Iesus Christ, the true God. For thy good pleasure it was (O God) that in him all perfectnes should dwell, and that by him al things towards thee, should be reconciled and pa∣cified through his bloud, whether they be in heauen or in earth. Graunt vs (O God) vnitie and brotherly loue in thy holie Church, kindle our harts to feruent and deuout prayer: make vs diligently to watch & circumspectly to waite for the comming of thy belo∣ued sonne, that we neither be drunken in excesse and bodilie lust, nor intangled with the snares of this world: but that we hauing alwayes the eyes of our heart open, and praying with vpright mindes, may chearefully meet our redeemer, & ioy with him for euer. To him be eternall praise and honor. Amen.
THE SENDING OF THE HOLY GHOST. WHen the fiftie daies were come to an end,Acts. . they were all with one accord together in one place, and sodainely there came a sound from heauen, as it had beene the comming of a mightie winde, and it fil∣led all the house where they sate. And there appeared vnto them clouen tongs, like as they had bin of fire, and it sate vpon each one of them: and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and beganne to speake with other tongues, euen as the same spirit gaue them vtterance. Doctrine and fruite. HEere the Euanglist Luke describeth how that after Christ entered into his glorie, the Gospell (euen the heauenly doc∣trine and grace) was opened vnto the
world downe from heauen, by a glorious and great miracle. For though the lawe (which is the will of God) and also the Gospell, that is his grace, hath from the beginning beene alwayes in the worlde: namelie, in the heartes of Gods elect children: yet was each one of them at seuerall times, gloriously vttered vnto the worlde by manifest and apparant myracle. And like as the holie Ghost was in the heartes of the faythfull beleeuers (for after the Re∣surrection hee gaue the spirite vnto the Disciples) euen so heere hee giueth them the spirite, with an o∣pen myracle, and with a more perfect woorking and power. For the spirite which Christ gaue them af∣ter his Resurrection when he breathed vpon them, was euen this day with more perfection: that is to say, his operation and strength declared it selfe more euidently, and more perfectly, and shewed his presence by the visible miracle. Thus is it heere described, how the promise of Christ and of the Prophets made as concerning the holie Ghost, were fulfilled: and how the same holie Ghost, who is the teacher of the trueth, the earnest pennie of saluation, the wedding ring of grace, and ioye of the minde was giuen. Nowe when it is saide that the holie Ghost is giuen vnto men, the same may bee vnderstood of the giftes and operations of the holie Ghost: for though GOD may bee comprehended of mans minde, yet can he not bee included or shut therein. Neuerthelesse, his giftes according to his will and pleasure, are pou∣red and measured into our heartes, vnto euerie
one so much as maye ferue  fite. Who so is desirous to knowe  Ghost is promised vnto faithfull bele  reade Ezech. 36.39. Ioel. 2. Math. 3. Now  God the Father hath promised by his Mini  same also doth Christ his sonne promise: where, wee may see that the sonne hath like power with the father, and that there is but one onely spirite of them both: as wee may reade Luk. 12. Iohn. 7.14.15.16.20. But before wee come to the sending of the spi∣rite, wee will first substantially and well peruse the storie, and looke what maye bee gathered there∣of: For heere is nothing written or sette downe in vaine. The Euangelist doth heere make mention of the fift day, vpon the which this great wonder was don. In the which there lyeth hidde a notable mysterie.Ezod. 25. Deut. 16 The Iewes from the day that they offered the Easter Lambe, told fiftie dayes, and vpon the fiftith day was the feast of weekes: In the which feast they kept ho∣lyday, offering vnto GOD a willing sacrifice of the first fruites when they cutte them downe: Wee beginne to number from the resurrection of Christ our Easter lambe, who also was offered vp. Vpon the fiftith day when the fruites began now to be ripe & readie to be reaped, the haruest also being great,Math. 9. and the labourers few, then sent God his spirit to prepare and furnish the Disciples,Iohn. 4. that they from amongst the heathen might gather fruite togeather vnto
ore time when the children  out of Egypt, the law was gi∣  people vpon the fift day: euen  nient that vpon the fift day the holie  be giuen to the Disciples: which ho∣  is both an interpreter and fulfiller of the we. The place where the holie Ghost was giuen, is Sion, for there Christ commaunded his Disciples to waite:. 2. Mich. 4. and from that place should the law of GOD (according to the saying of the Prophets) proceede foorth into the whole world. Therefore like as afore time the law was giuen vpon mount Sinay: euen so was the spirit giuen vpon mount Sion. Vppon Sinai did God at that time with some terrible thinges de∣clare his might and power, his plague also and ven∣geance, which should fall vppon those that despised his lawe: and therefore was there such fearefulnes through lightnings, thunderings, and other like ter∣rible thinges. Here there is heard a noyse, mightie & vehement,Note. but not horrible & feareful: in the which winde is signified, that the doctrine of the spirit shuld speedily & with power breake in through the world▪ and bring fruit: and that no man should be so migh∣tie as to hinder the strength therof, euen as the wind in his course can by no man be kept backe. Whereas fierie tongues do appeare, and are seen, it signifieth the manifolde speeches and instruction, which the spirit giueth to Christs Disciples, the zeal also & feruentnes that he worketh in their harts: ma∣king them altogether fire, and kindling them in such sort, that euen their words are feruent, and pierce af∣terwards
into the hearts of others. A  feare and coldnes remoueth he out of the  they are not afraid manfully to steppe foorth  all the people, although not long before  not abide, but fledde from the Lord. Now they confesse him to bee the Sauiour of all the world, whom they before had denyed. Whereas the tongues were diuided, it signifieth the diuersitie of the giftes of the spirite. Christ promised them in Marke. 16. that they should speake with other tungs, or with a new speech or language: which promise is now performed vnto them.Ephes. 4. Col. 4. The tongues of Christi∣an men ought to be garnished with gentlenesse, and with the holie Ghost, that no foule or wanton talke proceed out of their mouth. The tongues that pro∣nounce and confesse Christ the eternall truth, & his sincere spirit, must not lie, neither talke anie vnclean, hurtfull, nor venemous thing: for vnto all such is the spirite enemie. Therefore are they not fleshly but fie∣rie and spirituall tongues: out of the which the fire of the spirite hath consumed all moisture of worldly and carnal wantonnes, and God with his owne loue hath kindled them. How could the Apostles else haue been instructors of the whole world, if the spi∣rite had not taught them the diuersitie of tongues?Of signes. Oh the great wisedome and grace of God, who at all times for our wealth hath set forth and offered vnto vs poore men, his high, spirituall, & heauenly things, vnder corporall and visible tokens! For how might we carnall men els vnderstand godly matters, if they were not exhibited with visible and bodily thinges.
God alwaies this custome, that hee  nto vs his high gifts vnder those tokens,  most knowen of vs, and likest vnto those  which hee offereth vs: and so with humaine , hee couereth diuine and godly thinges. Not that God is closed or shut in with things of men, but that celestiall and heauenly things forsoorth vnto vs by such as bee earthly, might be of vs the better vn∣derstood. For els euery man of knowledge wotteth well, that the holy Ghost is not a dooue, neither a winde, a tongue, fire, nor water: For GOD is not a thing corporall, neither a thing that can bee felt or comprehended, with outward senses. Notwithstan∣ding things inuisible are the better knowen and per∣ceiued of vs, when they be set forth and represented by visible thinges: namely, by such as haue some si∣militude with the inuisible and spiritual things: And (so farre as naturall things may set foorth heauenlie matters) doe perfectly describe before our eies, the nature and propertie of them. Therefore doth the spirite appeare in the fourme of firie tongues, and with a sound, that thereby the two principall senses of man might bee mooued, namely, his hearing and seeing: for the sound toucheth the eares, and the fire mooueth the sight. Like as Christ also in the supper with bread and wine, to mooue the outward senses of man: thought to represent his body and bloud. For by bread is sig∣nified vnto vs, the true body of Christ which died for vs vppon the crosse, and by wine the bloud that was shed for our sinnes, which true flesh and bloud,
they that beleeue, doe at the supper eate and drinke through faith. By the which foode and sustenance, their soules are vpholden to the gratious and eternal life. Thus with exterior tokens it pleased the wisedom of God, to guide the outward senses of his Disciples into the obedience of faith, and vnder the same, to signifie and declare the strength & operation of the holie Ghost. For like as the winde bloweth through the whole earth, piercing, moouing and altering all priuie and secrete places: Euen so the spirit of God goeth through all things, searching all secret corners and inward mindes of men. Mightily also hee woor∣keth in mens hearts, kindling and chaunging them. He is the cleare, pure, and hote fire, that consumeth all filthines of sinne, inspiring mens harts, and draw∣ing them vpward to God. Without this spirit may a man worke no fruitfull thing, yea thinke no good thing: For man is nothing but flesh, neither considereth hee of himselfe ought that is spirituall or godly, but onely carnall thinges. Forasmuch now as the wisest & most gratious God, knoweth this so to bee, whereas hee hath made man his creature, to haue fruition of himselfe: he wil not suffer him to corrupt in the flesh, but giue him his owne holie spirite. God the father, through Christ his eternal word, did shape man out of the mould of the earth, & cre∣ated him after his owne similitude and lines. Now is God a spirite, therefore the image of God in man must needs be spirituall: which image in the inward
man is such a thing, as partly dooth expresse and de∣clare God that created him. But when man being deceiued through the deuil fell into sinne, and lost this image: then the propor∣tion of Gods pure spirite (in whome his image was printed) was defaced, and the image of God lost his beautie. So that the noble man who at the first was of God, so faire and goodly fashioned and beautifi∣ed in the similitude of God: became after sinne like vnto the deuill, filthie, and shamefull, yea altogether carnall, hauing nothing more of the spirite in him, as the scripture in the booke of creation testifieth.Genes. 6. For as much now as the miserable man was degenerate from the noble, spirituall, and godly nature, to an vncleane, carnall, and diuelish disposition, becom∣ming altogether flesh: hee was able no more ey∣ther to thinke or woorke any spirituall or godlie thing. All his thoughts and imaginations are carnall, in that he is fallen into eternall death, and hath lost the life of the spirite: for the affections and lustes of the flesh are death; but the desires of the spirite are life and peace.Rom. 8. The affections of the flesh are enmitie a∣gainst God, for the flesh is not subiect vnto the lawe of GOD, neyther can bee: they therefore which are in the flesh, cannot please GOD. Nowe when man who had taken so hurtfull a fall, was brought downe from life vnto death, from the grace of God into his wrath: life might not bee giuen him againe but by the spirite of God, whome man by sinne hath lost.
Therefore like as the Father at the beginning had created man: so fashioneth hee him againe by his Sonne▪ who ouercommeth and destroyeth death, and giueth vnto vs againe the way of immortalitie.Sap. 1. For into a froward soule entereth not the spirite of GOD: therefore is it conuenient and necessarie, that such soule and corrupt flesh bee purged and cleansed againe. By Christ the eternall worde were all thinges created, by him therefore after the fall must all things be restored againe: for this cause died Christ vppon the crosse, to banish the sinne of the worlde, and to make satisfaction for it. From death also hee riseth agayne, to giue vs a certaine and assu∣red hope, and an vndoubted pledge of an immortall and eternall life, and that hee hath ouercome death and sinne for vs. Immediately after the resurrection,Iohn. 20. he breatheth vpon his disciples, and giueth them the holy Ghost: to declare that he is the same, who at the beginning created our nature, and sealed it it with his spirite, and that it is euen hee who now in the beginning of a new life, must by his spirite renew and restore our decayed nature againe,Heb. 1. Col. 1. that thus Christ who is the liuing and expresse image of the inuisible GOD, may bee fashioned and fourmed of the newe in vs:Gal. 4. now cannot Christ the image of GOD bee right proportioned and renewed in vs but by the holie Ghost. Nowe like as Christ after the resurrection gaue his Disciples the spirite, to print into them a newe life, whereby they knewe and were assured, that hee was the fountaine and giuer of the spirite,
(and therefore hee saide,Iohn. 16. Math. 28. All that the Father hath is mine: Item, All power is giuen vnto mee in heauen and in earth) euen so immediately after the same, hee ascended vp into heauen, to declare vnto them, that he was the Lord of all thinges.Col 3. Out of the high and reall throne where he sitteth at the right hand of God his Father, Christ the eternall king sent downe his holie spirite vpon all flesh,Ephes 4. that we by him might obtaine the old innocencie and saluation againe: & that the Image of God stained and defiled by sinne, might be restored vnto vs, and that wee thus might become partakers of eternall life. What they be vnto whom God giueth his spirit, that see we well heere: namely, euen vnto those, that in vnitie of faith, and feruent loue, are gathered togither with one accord; for of all vnitie he is the fountaine and originall. In contentious and proud hearts dwelleth not the holy Ghost: therefore is it meet that we pray. Come (O holie spirite) replenish the harts of thy faithfull beleeuers, and kindle in them the fire of thy loue; thou that through manifolde tongues hast ga∣thered together all the nations of the heathen in vni∣tie of faith: O take all dissention and discord out of thy holie Church, and make vs to be of one mind in vnfained loue, without the which wee cannot please thee. THere were dwelling at Hierusalem Iewes, deuout men out of euerie nation of them that are in heauen: now when this was noysed about, the multitude came toge∣ther, and were astonied, because that euerie man heard them
speake with his owne language. They wondered all & mar∣uelled saying amongst themselues: Beholde, are not all these which speake of Galilee? and how heare wee euerie man his owne tongue, wherein we were borne? Partheans & Medes, and Elemytes, and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia, and of Iewrie, and of Capadocia, of Pontus and Asia, Phrigia & Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the parties of Lybia, which is besides Siren, and strangers of Rome, Iewes and Proselytes, Greekes and Arabians: wee haue heard them speake in our owne tongues the great works of God. Doctrine and fruite. THE eternall wisedome hath indued all good minds diligently to learne and search the thing wherein they thinke to finde that which they desire: and what can be more worthie to be desired, or more acceptable to the mind of man, than eternal life and saluation, which onely consisteth in God the highest good of all. Now was the sacred scripture gi∣uen of the holie Ghost, that man thereby might bee guided and lead vnto saluation, and to most excel∣lent felicity. For they that exercise themselues in ho∣lie scripture, studying and perusing it, ought thus to doe; euen to direct themselues and others vnto life. Therefore by the ordinance of God, there hath been euer men in all nations, which to instruct others, haue applyed themselues to the scripture: as among the Iewes wee finde Leui, of whome in the Prophet Malachie it is written,Mal. 2. that the lawe of the truth was in his mouth, and no wickednes in his lippes, that he
walked before God in peace and equitie, and con∣uerted many from vngodlines: for the lippes of the Priest are sure of knowledge, and the law is required at his mouth, for hee is a messenger of the Lorde of hosts. Thus as it may wel be coniectured, there were at Ierusalem congregations of learned men, that ex∣ercised themselues in the holy scripture. For though all wisedome come of God (as the fountaine & wel) & no man can be learned whom God himselfe tea∣cheth not: yet will not he giue his grace, spirite, and knowledge, to the idle, slouthfull, and vnthankfull, neither to the proud, but vnto those that with meek∣nes & feare of God practise themselues in the scrip∣ture, and that applying vnto feruent praier, doe not despise the meanes and gratious giftes granted them of God. And if any man will say, that all falshood and de∣struction, all erroneous doctrine and discorde were come into the church by such as be learned, let him consider, that the thing which in himselfe is good, ought not for the abuses sake to bee refused, remoue the abuse, and then the thing is good and profitable. Wine is a profitable and wholesome thing, created of GOD for the behoofe of man, and is neuer dis∣praised of any witty man to bee euill, because many doe abuse it, and is drunken: Euen so is holie scrip∣ture and other profitable sciences, to be esteemed as high giftes, although many men puft vp with pride, blinded in couetousnes, and intangled with other affections, haue misused the same scriptures. In the Papistry, the Vniuersities, Colleges, cathe∣drall
Churches, and Monasteries, haue highly exal∣ted the Pope and his false faith, and by false interpre∣tation of the scripture brought him so farre, that the doctrine of the faith and Christ is vtterly darkened. Now whereas lewd learned with false science, with wrong vnderstanding of scripture, haue broght such high thinges, great goodes, and plentifull riches to passe, drawing so much people vnto themselues: we ought not therefore to cease from reading and ex∣ercising of the scripture, but to take vppon vs to fur∣ther the true religion, and fayth of Christ, and to sette it foorth againe with no lesse diligence than they doo theirs. If wee will that the true fayth of Christ shall growe, continue, and increase, then wee must bring the same to passe by true vnderstanding of the scripture, by pure, sounde, and wholesome doctrine. With the trueth must lyes bee banished, with sound doctrine must false bee rooted out, with the light must darknesse bee expelled. But how can the true vnderstanding of the scripture, the vndoub∣ted, wholesome, and sound doctrine bee had: when men doo neyther exercise and imploy themselues, nor applye theyr endeuour, studie, and diligence therein? All the charges therefore and expences, which heretofore haue been bestowed vpon the vnprofita∣ble and noisome learned men, ought now to be con∣uerted to godly Colleges and studies, to the intent that litle seeds which God hath laid vp in yong wits, may fruitfully growe, be planted and brought forth. If thou seeke wisedome as the golde (saith Salomon)
thou shalt finde it. Gold is with great trauaile and la∣bour digged out of the inward and secrete veines of the earth, and of the high hilles, it raineth not downe vpon mens heads: euen so must knowledge & wise∣dome bee gotten with great trauaile and diligence, not with loytering and idlenesse. But when God gi∣ueth vs his giftes, wee must looke that we be not vn∣faithfull in them, but vse and bestow them to his glo∣rie, and edifiyng of his Church. Where godlinesse commeth to knowledge, or where they two are to∣gether in one man, God is highly to bee thanked for so excellent a gift and grace, and greatly is such a gift to bee had in estimation: but whereas pride, heaui∣nes, contention, greedines, and selfe loue, is in a lear∣ned man, there is not a more hurtfull poyson found vpon the earth. O God, thou that of thy grace and fatherly loue, hast giuen so good and excellent giftes with singular light of all sciences: graunt vnto such as be learned a heart and mind, that in all things they may haue re∣spect onely to thy glorie, & that in all their readings, writings, teachings, and doctrines, they may prefer the same.1. Cor. 8. For knowledge puffeth a man vp, but loue edifieth. O suffer not thy holy and excellent gifts to be stayned, defiled, and marred, with the filthy durt of mens affections. Graunt that our studies bee not heathenish, but godly and Christian. Preserue the tender and good youth from wicked and vngodly schoolmaisters, that the pure hartes which thou hast consecrated to be a temple for thee and thy holy spi∣rit, be not polluted with vice and filthines.
To testimoniall amazed and wondered,Acts. 2. saying one to an∣  What meaneth this? Other mocked, saying:  of new minds. But Peter stept forth , and lift vp his voice, and saide vnto them: , and all ye that dwell at Hierusalem, be this  you, and with your eares heare my wordes, for these are not drunken as yee suppose, seeing it is but the third  of the day: but this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel. And it shall be in the last daies (saith God) I will poure out of my spirite in those daies, and your sonnes and your daughters shall prophesie, and your yong men shall see visions, and your olde men shall dreame dreames. And on my seruantes, and on my hand-maides I will poure out of my spirite in those daies, and they shall prophesie, and I will shew wonders in heauen aboue, and tokens in the earth be∣neath, bloud and fire, and the vapor of smoke, the sunne shal bee turned into darknesse, and the moone into bloud, before before that great and notable day of the Lord come. And it shall come to passe, that whosoeuer calleth on the name of the Lord, shall be saued. Doctrine and fruite. WHen the truth is published in the church of Christ, & the power of God vttereth it selfe, there be alwaies some simple peo∣ple, that of good minde seeke to knowe that which they vnderstand not, and therefore they demaund questions▪ vnto those the Lorde dooth gladly open himselfe. But again there be others that despise, slan∣der,
mocke, and abhorre all holy things, as in the old and new Testament we haue many witnesses of the same. Ierem. 20.26.32. Iohn. 8.10.11. Acts. 17. For the naturall man vnderstandeth not the thinges that ap∣pertaine vnto God.1. Cor. 2. And thus doe they most of all which beeing puffed vp in the wisedome and sci∣ence of man, haue nor yet attained to the spirite and right kernell of the scripture: in the sight of which men,1. Cor. 1. Math. 11. the wisedome of God, and preaching of the crosse of Iesus Christ, is but a derision and foolish∣nes. But blessed are they that in the singlenes of their heart, with pure minds in meeknes, obedience, and in the true feare of God, submit themselues vnto his doctrine:Math. 11. Luk. 24. from them cannot God hide himself, but openeth their mindes, that they may vnderstand the scriptures. For they that of a good mind do here aske the question; What meaneth this? are afterwardes conuerted by Peters preaching. Peter the feruent Disciple of Christ, the faithful shepheard of Christs sheepe, as soone as he receiueth the spirit, is bolde to steppe foorth, and to confesse him, whom before he had denied. But first hee perswadeth that the Disciples were not drunken; for if such vice were in the Ministers of Christ, & they truly conuinced thereof, it should bring vnto the Gospell and name of Christ, great hinderaunce, staine his doctrine, & make it to be des∣pised and subiect. Most diligent therefore ought we to bee, in keeping vs from such vices, whereby our office, mniistration, and doctrine, might bee suspect and set at naught. Yet must we not deferre too long
in aunswering such euill reports; for more diligence must we apply in setting foorth the name and glorie of GOD, than in defending and maintaining our owne estimation. Thus the Apostle Peter in answering that obiec∣tion concerning drunkennes, dooth shortly passe o∣uer, and saith: Brethren, these are not drunken, as ye suppose, for why the time doth not permit, it is yet too earely in the morning. Immediately vppon the same, he proceedeth forth, to admonish them of the excellent graces and gifts, which the God of mercie had promised before, and now performed them. But this satisfaction concerning drunkennes, and this in∣struction of the ignorant, is made with all meeknes, and yet with sinceritie and stedfastnes, not lordly, or braggingly; although he was highly endewed with the holy Ghost. Thus we that be Ministers of Christ, and teachers of his congregations, ought not by reason of our of∣fice or high giftes, to take too much vppon vs, that with bragging or arrogancie wee would outface the weake: but worthily and valiantly with sinceritie & truth of the scripture, to instruct such as be ignorant and out of the way. Our mouth is an instrument of the holy Ghost, and of the truth, not of any lightnes, bragging, or presumption. This word prophecie is taken not onely to tell & shew before of godly and high thinges, but also to harken vnto the same, and to perceiue them▪ & this maketh for the vnderstanding of this place. For the holy Ghost declareth by Ioel, and promiseth also (as
he dooth by Ieremie) that the knowledge of GOD should bee common in all the world,Ioel. 2. Ierem 31. and that from the least vnto the most euerie one should be instruc∣ted in Gods knowledge, through the guiding of the spirit: which knowledge before time was common onely to the Iewes and Scribes, but by Christ is such abundant and plentifull knowledge of God, pow∣red out in all the world, through his holy spirit: who worketh in the Church vntill the ende, not onely in Scribes,Math. 11. from whome such high mysteries of Gods wisedome are oftentimes hidde, but vnto simple vn∣learned fishers, and to others that in the sight of the world are not esteemed. 1. Cor. 12. Esay. 11.Yea richly powreth he out of his holie spirite vp∣pon all flesh, vnto euerie one his measure, as it best pleaseth him, no man excludeth hee from his grace, his knowledge suffereth he to flow ouer all the earth as a water floud, vnto all those that are his seruantes and hand maides. This is the deare and excellent treasure, which in stead of it that was giuen before by the incarnation of Christ, is now offered, that the knowledge of God, which by the holy Ghost is the preaching of the Gospell, is come forth into all the world,Psal. 75. Iohn. .11. whereas before it was manifest only amongst the Iewes. For after the death of the Lorde finished vpon the crosse, was the Gospell published in all the world; by the which preaching, the children of God dispersed abroad are gathered together.Esay 40. The holie Ghost also who was before in the godly, did by his giftes and operations worke much more mightily & strongly after the death and ascension of Christ,Ierem. 31. than
before: by the which holy Ghost, the captiuitie of of the law and ceremonies is taken away, & heauen∣ly freedome giuen to the children of God. For as much as to know Christ & his kingdome, it miniseth true godlines and eternall life: Peter in his oration trauelleth especially to this end, that the Iewes being there present, which helde Christ for a wicked doer, and put him to death, might know him to be the true sauiour of the world, and to be risen a∣gaine from death: and therefore hee alleadgeth the prophecies which in Christ were fulfilled. As if I would say, Behold Ioel tolde before of the time that these your children should prophecie, now ye see it performed in them: whereby ye may well perceiue that the kingdome of Messias (which is a spirituall thing) is now begun already. In the which kingdom must bee not onely Iewes (which haue the outward temple & ceremonies) but all as call vpon the name of the Lord, wheresoeuer they be in the world. Vn∣to the Iew was promised a sauiour, neuertheles such one as shuld not onely saue them, but also the whole world, and whose kingdome should be euerlasting, that hee also should deliuer and bring them, yea all mankind, from the captiuitie of the prince of this world. Of these things there were amongst the Iew∣ish people many signes and figures, whereby in bo∣dily and corporall thinges God did partly set foorth these thinges spirituall: which they also which are spirituall and elect amongst the people of the Iewes, vnderstood right well (though darkely) in that they with the eyes of inward fayth had a further respect
than to gaze onely vppon the outwarde corporall things. Thus God the holie Ghost by visible thinges lead and taught them (euen as a yong scholler is first taught by letters and syllables vnder the schoolmai∣ster) vntill the time that the glorious kingdom came that in Christ the true Messias, all things were refor∣med, and became spirituall. Thus had the Iewes the corporall kingdome of Dauid and of other kinges, and thus for their sinnes they were brought vnto Babylon into captiuity. By the which captiuitie was figured the greeuous bon∣dage and thraldome of mankind, vnder the violent power of the deuill. But when they were in captiui∣tie at Babylon, God comforting them by his Pro∣phets, promised to bring them thence, and to restore them to their owne land: in the which deliuerance was figured the redemption of the world by Christ. This custome had all the Prophets, that when they told the people before hand, and promised of Gods behalf, deliuerance out of the captiuity before they came into it: they alwaies made mention also of the punishment of the sinnes that should go before. Pro∣speritie shall come (said they) but first there must bee an horrible plague for sinne, the iustice of God must first be satisfied. Thus doth Ioel heere also, in whom partly we learne, that God will not suffer our sinnes to passe without punishment, as wee see also in the greeuous captiuity of all mankinde, that God will haue the sinne so worthily satisfied, that euen his on∣ly begotten sonne, by whom no sinne was commit∣ted, must therefore die, and by his innocent death
sinnes. If God now spared not his onely , how may we then think that he will  sinfull life, to passe without punish∣  we paciently, and with good will beare the  nishment of our sins, sent vnto vs of God: and conuerting from our sinnes, doe turne vs to the gratious father that beateth vs, God vndoubtedly shall send vs grace, prosperitie, and welfare, and help vs out of all miserie. Once we must eyther liue a god∣ly and innocent life, and throghly amend our selues or els sinne must bee punished, and euery vncleane thing must in the fire & punishment of Gods wrath be consumed. Againe, though we were vertuous & godly, yet is God of this nature, that he maketh his chosen to bee like fashioned vnto the image of his sonne, and by much aduersitie and trouble hee lea∣deth them vnto ioy:Luk. 24. Euen as it behooued Christ to suffer, & so to enter into his glory. The punishment of sinne is harde, and the iudgement of the Lorde, as often as he commeth to recompence sinne, is sharp: which the Prophet partly by bodily thinges dooth describe, as other Prophets do also.Esay. 13. Ierem. 15. Amos. . The sunne shall be turned into bloud, &c: and euen so is it in the o∣pinion of those, that must beare the iudgement of God. For as much now as the Apostle Peter (accor∣ding as the matter required) did necessarily alledge testimony out of the Prophet, concerning the holy Ghost (who is giuen to the good children of God) he thought also to specifie that which was written in the Prophet, as touching the punishment of the wic∣ked, that despise the grace of God: giuing a warning
thereby vnto the Iewes, to cease from theyr vnbe∣leefe and shamefull life: declaring vnto them, that if they proceed foorth in wickednes, it should hap∣pen vnto them, as it did before vnto theyr forefa∣thers, vnto whome Ioel opened the punishment of God. Whereby wee must learne, paciently to beare it, and to take it in good part, when our sinnes are re∣buked, our vices spoken against, and we told that the punishment is at hande. For this custome had the A∣postles in their preaching and declaring of the Gos∣pell, that they not onely made mention of the grace of God offered vnto the world by Christ: but ther∣withall likewise, they threatned sore punishment to those that eyther despised such excellent grace, or hauing knowledge of the truth did cleaue vnto vice, which thing in the worde of Peter is yet more eui∣dent. The Gospell also preacheth amendment of lyfe, and not remission of sinnes onely through the bloud of Christ. But nowe at this present time there bee many dainty Christians, as certaine Princes and Se∣nates in the countreys, and citties, whose opinion is, that the grace of the Gospell is to bee preached, yea, and they permit Christ and his grace, gently & wor∣thily to be spoken of: but if the false Gods seruice, as the honoring of Images, and all that is crept in and erected vp in the Papistry agaynst Gods word be re∣prooued, or if the preacher speake agaynst theyr ty∣ranny, vniust actes, theyr malitious violence and wil∣fulnes, whereby they oppresse poore widowes and fatherlesse children, dooing right vnto no man, or if
the preacher touch them on the gald backs for their excessiue pompe and pride, for their rioting, whore∣dome, adulterie, gluttony, drunkennes, fighting, and extortion, if such vices (I say) wherein they still lead their liues, be touched to the quicke, then is all fauor gone, then burne these preachers (say they) drowne them, they be seditious fellowes, they will set vs to∣gether by the eares, and bring the common people in our necks. But such men should consider, that vn∣to this office of the preacher it belongeth to crye a∣gainst vice, least he bee called of God a blind watch∣man, a dumbe dogge,Esay. 56.57. Ezech. 5. and least all the soules which perish through his silence be required at his handes: their wilfulnes, pride, and vaine lyfe they should for∣sake, and reforme themselues, and so needed not the preacher to crye out agaynst them. Now conside∣ring that the Prophets vsed (as I said before) to make mention of the kingdome of Iesu Christ, and of the calling of the heathen to the grace and knowledge of God, especially in their orations when they speak of captiuity, and deliuerance from the same. Ioel in his prophecie doth also keepe that order. For seeing that the Iewes were euer still continually as stifnec∣ked, rebellious, and vnbeleeuing people, vnthankful to the grace of God: the holy Ghost foresawe theyr reiection, declaring it by the Prophets, and that ano∣ther people, namely the heathen, should bee recey∣ued in their stead. For in as much as they despised the grace of God, which first was offered vnto them, it was meet that the kingdome of God should bee ta∣ken from them, and giuen to another nation. Seeing
they thought scorne to come to the marriage, & to the royall feast whereunto they were bidden, it be∣hooued others to be called vnto the same. Therfore is Peter earnest vpon this sentence: Whosoeuer cal∣leth vpon the name of the Lord shall be saued. As if he would say; O ye Iewes, bragge not of circumcisi∣on, of Abraham, of the temple, or of other ceremo∣nies, thinke not that ye onely are the people of God, the time is now come, that God wil bestow his grace vpon those whom ye esteeme to bee vncleane. God is no accepter of persons, but among all people who so calleth vpon him shall be saued. Of this sentence dooth Peter now take occasion more manifestly to speak of the kingdom of Christ: for much more pithily, and with more euidence doth the Apostles describe the kingdome of Christ, than do the Prophets. Who so calleth vppon Gods name, must knowe God: Now can no man knowe God but by Christ: Therefore in this little worde (to call vpon the name of the Lorde) is comprehen∣ded the whole summe of the Christian faith. Like as oftentimes in the Prophets, bee these: to sweare by God, is contained his whole religion. But forasmuch as the Iewes knew not Christ, by whome commeth the true knowledge of God, therfore beginneth Pe∣ter, and declareth with strong argumentes, how the name of God is to be called vpon: namely, through true faith in Christ, who is the true Messias, the an∣nointed king and sonne of God, which was promi∣sed in the Prophets. This doth Peter prooue by the ground of the resurrection of Christ from death, by
his ascension into heauen, and by that he now sitteth at the right hand of God, Lord & king of al things. First let vs heare the text. YEe men of Israel heare these words▪ Iesus of Nazareth a man approued of God among you, with miracles, wonders, and signes, which God did by him in the midst of you (as ye your selues knowe) him haue yee taken by the hands of vnrighteous persons, after hee was deliuered by the determinate councell and foreknowledge of God, & haue crucified and slaine him, whom God hath raysed vp & loosed the sorrowes of death, because it was vnpossible that he should be holden of it. For Dauid speaketh of him, afore∣hand I sawe God alwayes before mee, for hee is on my right hand, that I should not be mooued. Therefore did my heart reioice, and my toong was glad: moreouer also my flesh shal ret in hope, because thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell, nei∣ther wilt thou suffer thine holie one to see corruption. Thou hast shewed me the waies of life, thou shalt make mee full of ioy with thy countenance. Doctrine and fruite. TO the intent now that no man should bee of∣fended at the death and crosse of Christ: Peter sheweth first, that in the councel of God it was concluded, foreseene, and determined, that the son of God, the true Messias, should and must die: and how that the same sacrifice was ordained from the beginning of the world, to bee slaine and offered vp vpon the crosse for our sins. And that no man should
make any stoppe by reason of his death, Peter there∣fore declareth, that he was no misse-doer, which had deserued his death by any transgression, but that hee was sent vnto vs by GOD the father, to dye for vs; whereby we might perceiue the loue of our Father in heauen. And if they now would thinke; well, if it were so concluded in the councell of God, then are not we guiltie of his death? hee aunswereth vnto the same, & sayth; Vnrighteous men broght him therto, & it is ye your selues that slew him & crucified him. As if he would say, yea euen so behoued it to be, that the righteousnes of God for the sinne of mankinde, might be satisfied. Christ must needs die, to recom∣pence and wash away with his bloud the sinne of all the world. And yet yee Iewes which haue betrayed Christ, and brought him to the crosse, are not vniust∣ly accused: yee cannot through the fore ordinance of God discharge your selues that ye be without sin, seeing ye haue slaine the sauiour of the worlde, hee being guiltles. By this now we learne, that when we do wrong and euill, wee may not excuse our selues, with the free ordinaunce of God, for it is not God, but the deuill and our owne wickednes that prouo∣keth vs to sinne. And heere we see, that when the grace of GOD through the Gospell is offered vnto the worlde, the sinne and vice also wherein the worlde is intangled, must be spoken of and touched, for no man can bee iustified, and come to the helth of his soule through Christ, which doth not first know & confesse his sin & wickednes. How can he be made whole, that will
will not know his owne disease and sicknes? There∣fore doth Peter sette before their eyes their great sin which they had committed against the innocent sonne of God, saying: The innocent and righteous whom God had giuen vnto you, haue ye slaine and crucified, which is a great wickednes & sinne. Now go to, on your behalfe it was euill done, and greuou∣sly offended, but on his behalfe it was so ordayned before. Therefore at his death, which in the sight of the world was so shamefull and vile, yee ought not to bee offended, that yee therefore would holde the lesse of him, or not receiue and know him for a saui∣our. For if you looke vpon his former conuersation, the same was innocent, pure, and holie: therefore cannot yee doubt but hee was sent of God. Besides this, ye haue perceyued and seene God to be euerie where in his workes: for the tokens and wonders which hee shewed and declared amongst you, giue euident knowledge that God was in him, & wroght in him presently, for no man had beene able to doe the tokens that he did, vnlesse God had beene with him. Which tokens also were spoken of before by the Prophets concerning Christ, and by those to∣kens must ye know and confesse, that he is euen the true Messias, of whom the Prophets spake. Where∣fore considering that by his former doctrine & god∣ly power, ye knowe that hee is the true Messias, yee ought not to bee offended that hee as an euill dooer was crucified vpon the crosse; for it was the speciall determination of God, that Messias should be cruci∣fied, according to the foresayings of the Prophets.
Consider yee also, that the Prophets likewise spake of his resurrection from death, by the which ye may well perceiue that he is the true Messias. Thus earnest is Peter, beating into them the re∣surrection from the dead, and that out of the Scrip∣ture. For Christs resurrection from death, is a strong argument to proue his godhead, as it is taught. Rom. 1. Iohn. 20. Yea he died (saith Peter) for our sinnes, but nowe he is aliue and risen againe from death: death hath no more power ouer him, for he liueth for euer, and his kingdome is euerlasting. Yea vnpossible it was, that the sonne of God should corrupt in the earth & sepulchre: namely, he that is the firstling risen from the dead, and that from his owne godly power. See∣ing that these wordes of Peter concerning the resur∣rection and life of Christ, were little credited among the Iewes: he alleadgeth the 15. psalm of Dauid, who amongst them was in great reputation. But now might the Iewes say or thinke, Dauid speaketh these words of himselfe, and not of Christ: that weapon therefore dooth Peter take from them, and proueth, that the same words may in no wise be referred vnto Dauid; but that Dauid as a Prophet hauing knowledge of things to come, spake them of Christ, in whom they be now fulfilled, and thus hee saith. YEe men and brethren, let me freely speake vnto you of the Patriarch Dauid▪ for he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre remaineth with vs vntill this day:
Therefore seeing he was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworne vnto him with an oath, that Christ (as concerning the flesh) should come of the fruites of his loynes, and shoulde sitte on his seate, he knowing this before spake of the resurre∣ction of Christ, that his soule should not bee left in hell, ney∣ther his flesh should see corruption. This Iesus hath God rai∣sed vp, whereof we all are witnesses. Doctrine and fruit. THe Prophet Dauid speaketh of one whose flesh should not corrupt; now could not hee haue spoken this of himselfe, for his flesh corrupted in the sepulchre, which wee yet haue, and his bones lie yet in the sepulchre, by the which it may well bee perceiued, that Dauid as a Prophet knowing of things to come, spake of another, which should bee borne out of his owne loynes and seede,Psal 88. 2. Reg 7. whom God with a solemne oath had promised to sitte vpon his seate, and raigne after him: not onely for a season, but also that his gouernance, kingdome, and domi∣nion should be perpetuall and endure for euer. And this king is Christ the true Messias, who as concer∣ning the flesh was borne of the seede of Dauid, and is his sonne. If this sonne now of Dauid had after death remai∣ned still in death, and not risen from death againe, how could hee then raigne for euer? It is euident therefore, that Dauid out of the holy Ghost (who had opened this vnto him) prophecied it of the re∣surrection of Christ his sonne, the eternall king. For
though hee as a verie man died indeede vppon the crosse, and was then buried: yet his soule or life re∣mained not in death: neither did his body resolue into corruption as other mens, but on the third day he rose again from death to life. This must we needs testifie: for after his resurrection he appear dost vn∣to vs. We saw him, we heard him, we handled him, we did eate and drinke with him. Heere wee learne, that the Saintes in the old Testament, vnderstood & knew by faith, the resurrection and eternal kingdom of Christ, seeing they prophecied of it so euidently. Here is also proued, that Christ died in very deed, & yet abode not still in death, forasmuch as hee ouer∣came it. Also, that the power and vertue of his holie passion and death, came not onely to the liuing vp∣on earth, but vnto all those that died before him, ac∣cording as Saint Peter in his Epistle, and the Article of our beleefe (He descended into hel) declareth. Wher∣of in the Catechisme vpon the Creed there is made mention sufficient. SIthens now that he by the right hand of God is exalted and hath receiued of the Father the promise of the ho∣lie Ghost: he hath shed foorth this gift, which yee now see and heare. For Dauid is not ascended into heauen, but he saith:Psal. 109. The Lorde saide to my Lorde: Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot stoole. Doctrine and fruite. WE beleeue, that Iesus Christ our king and Sauiour, is not onely risen againe from
death to life, but also is ascended vp into heauen, sit∣teth at the right hand of God, and raigneth for euer.Psal. 11 For though hee heere a season was despised and re∣fused (as the stone of the builders) yet hath the strong hand of God exalted him, and mightily wrought in him. Which thing may well bee perceiued by this, (as Saint Peter heere valiantly concludeth) that hee sendeth downe from on high such an excellent gift of the holy Ghost vpon those that are his. This is a sure euidence that he mightily raigneth at the right hand of God, and hath all things in his hand, seeing he hath power of the spirite of God, whom he pou∣reth into the hearts of his, and that sometime in visi∣ble manner. For the glorious triumpher ascending vp to heauen with great victorie,Eph. 4 did after the cu∣stome of great kings, and let fall his giftes downe vp∣pon vs, and parted them among vs, namely, the gifts of the holy Ghost, whom he as man, receiued of the Father, but after the godhead he had him alwaie, for of the father and of the sonne there is one onely spi∣rite. Neither may this bee applied vnto Dauid, for though hee as a iust friend of GOD, bee saued and come to heauen, yet did not hee immediatly after death ascend into heauen with bodie and soule, that he might be reported to sit at the right hand of God:Math. 22. for his wordes speake of another, whome he calleth his Lord, namely in the hundreth and ninth Psalme he saith: God the Father sayd vnto my Lorde, euen the Sonne, Sit thou on my right hand.
So therefore, let all the house of Ierusalem know for a sure∣tie, that God hath made this Iesus (whom ye haue crucified) Tord and Messias. Doctrine and fruit. WIth these wordes doth Peter conclude his Oration, exhorting them not to doubt Iesus Christ to be the same annointed sa∣uiour and king, who of God the father was first pro∣mised, & then giuen for the deliuerance of the peo∣ple of the Iewes, and of all nations. In this conclusion is comprehended the summe of the whole Christian faith, namely, that wee be∣leeue, that Iesus, who was borne of the virgine Ma∣rie, and crucified of the Iewes, is the true Christ, that is to saie, Messias, euen the king that was ordained & annointed of God, to raigne foreuer ouer all faithful beleeuers, Lorde of the whole world, and sauiour of all such as put their trust in him. This hath God the Father opened and set forth vnto vs by myracles, by the resurrection, by the ascension, & by the power of the holy Ghost, that wee might beleeue it, and not doubt thereof. Therefore saith Iohn, Who so belee∣ueth that Iesus is Christ, the same is borne of God. WHen they heard this, they were prickt in their hearts, and said vnto Peter, and to the other Apostles, Ye men and brethren, what shall we doe? Peter said vnto them: Repent of your sinnes, and be baptised euerie one of you in the name of Iesus Christ, for
the remission of sinners, and yee shall receiue the gifte of the holy Ghost. For the promise was made vnto you, & to your children, and to all that are a farre off, euen as many as the Lord our God shall call. And with many other words bare he witnesse, and exhorted them, saying: Saue your selues from this vntoward generation. Then they that gladly re∣ceiued his preaching, were baptised: And the same daie there were added vnto them about three thousand soules. Doctrine and fruite. THis is the fruit and end which followeth out of the preaching of the worde of God, that they whose heartes God toucheth, are so sorrie for theyr sinnes, that it euen pearceth them: for Gods word is euen a sharpe two edged sword, and entreth through to the depth. Blessed are all they which so reade and heare the word of God, that they begin to be ashamed of their sinnes and wickednesse, beeing repentant and sorrie therefore. A blessed and whol∣some sorrow is that, which riseth and groweth out of the truth, which is opened vnto the heart by the holy Ghost. Which spirite in the heart giueth hope vpon the mercie of God, and driueth awaie all de∣spaire. Then beginneth a man to aske, What shall I doo? Then enquireth he after the will of God: and such a man that so asketh is easie to be helped: soone is he healed, that knowing his disease would faine be made whole. Vnto such a man doth the faithfull Minister of
Christ giue counsell out of the Scripture▪ and shew∣eth him the fruit of Christ preached and knowen. He doth not bid him bestow monie on solemnities and Diriges, on Images, Monisteries, or coles, inying of pardons: He doth not will to runne vnto Rome, or to Lawret, but requireth of him the best and most profitable thing of all, namely, amendement & con∣uersion of life. Our mindes, our workes, and maners must be altered, if we will please God. Who so saith with his heart, that he beleeueth in Christ, holding Christ for his sauiour and king, must forsake his euil waie, eschuing euill, and doing good. Iere. 7.11. Isa. 1 Niniue stood still vpright, when they tooke vppon them true conuersion and amendement. As for Hie∣rusalem, though they offered many sacrifices, & fast∣ed much, it helped not, because there was no true re∣formation and forsaking of sinne, needs must they be destroied and miserablie perish. To botch or patch the matter it will not helpe, there is no remedie, wee must become godly and vertuous of life: it auaileth not to dissemble, God looketh into the heart, which he will haue pure and vnfained. Forasmuch then as we through baptisme in the faith of Christ, haue re∣ceiued Christ, and are marked out for him▪ hauing once forgiuenesse of sinnes, through the grace and gift of Christ, let vs be of a vertuous lfe, walking in∣nocently and in the feare of God: Let vs die there∣fore to the innocencie which is restored vnto vs a∣gaine through Christ: let vs daily remember to har∣ken & follow the admonishment of the spirit, which teacheth vs all good things. We are they vnto whom
God hath promised his grace of the spirite, yea, and vnto our children also, so farre as we abide in his co∣uenants. Let vs thankfully receiue such excellent grace (deare brethren) being ware, that we stain not the temple of Iesus Christ, and of his holy spirit with filthinesse of the worlde, that wee neuer make our selues partakers in the iniquitie of wicked and faith∣lesse men, but to leade here a pure and cleane con∣uersation with a good conscience before GOD our most louing father, and alwaie lift vp our minds vn∣to the place, where Christ our Lord and king raign∣neth at the right hand of God,Col. 1 from whence he shall come and take vs vnto himselfe. At all times there∣fore ought we to watch and wait for his comming, that we may ioyfully receiue him, and bee partakers with him in eternall blisse. Heere also we learne, how faithfull beleeuers vse themselues in the outward Sacraments. They that being moued by the inspiration of the holy Ghost in theyr hearts, doo heare the eternall word preach∣ed, giuing credite vnto it, & gladly receiuing it, these doo not afterward despise the outward Sacraments, which GOD hath instituted for the welfare of his Church: but vse the same with all obedience, good will and reuerence. To vse the Sacraments without faith profiteth not, but rather hurteth: to be loth to vse them, declareth a compulsion and vnbeleefe. For though the water in baptisme be an outward thing, and cannot cleanse the soule from sinne, yet the faithfull doo know right well, that Christ the e∣ternall wisedome in whom they beleeue, did not in∣stitute
it in vaine, and therefore will not they con∣temne or leaue vnexercised the ordinance of theyr head, to whome they as members are incorporated by faith. For they knowe, that Christ with these out∣warde tokens, thought to couple and knit together the members of his holy Church, in obedience and loue one towards another, whereby they knowing one another among themselues, might by such exte∣riour things, stirre and prouoke one another to loue and godlynesse. They know also, that the sacraments are euidences of the promise & grace of God, which they after a visible and palpable manner, do set forth declare, and represent vnto vs. These tokens of grace doth no man vse more deuoutly and with more re∣uerence, than he that in himselfe is certified and assu∣red of the gracious fauour of God, as we see in Corne∣lius, in Paul, and in Queene Candaces chamberlaine. What fruite followeth the preaching of the Go∣spell, it is heere euidently seene: for in one daie at Pe∣ters preaching, by the working of the holy Ghost, there came three thousand men to the Church of God. God suffereth not his word to passe voide and vnfruitfull. Verie earnest therefore & diligent ought we to be, and to spare no trauell, cost, and labor, that the pure and sincere Gospell, the word of truth, may euerie where be preached by good and faithful men, not doubting, God wil giue blessed successe thereto, that the seed sowen by the minister, shall bring forth fruit.
AND they continued in the Apostles doctrine, in the fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and in praiers. Doctrine and fruite. TO indure, crowneth and rewardeth all workes: who so indureth vnto the end shall bee saued: without continuance may no good thing bee brought to end and fruit. Therefore is it now decla∣red, how the word preached in the Church of God, bringeth fruit, and what the same fruites be, wherein faithfull beleeuers do exercise themselues. Saint Luke mencioneth foure thinges that pro∣ceed out of the faith in Christ: for faith is not voide nor idle, but worketh without ceasing in them that beleeue. Therefore here we finde a patterne & myr∣rour, how it ought to goe in the Church of Christ: for where these foure things bee, there is Christes Church. First, the Church of Christ, which is the fe∣lowship of all Saintes and faithfull beleeuers, indu∣reth, abideth, and continueth in the doctrine of the Apostles: for euerie thing is preserued with that out of the which it is borne: now is the Church of God borne first of the word of truth, therfore in the word of truth also must it indure and be kept, daily must it be planted, nourished, and watered with the worde and doctrine: the successe & the increase doth God giue. The doctrine of the Apostles is nothing else but the boly Gospell,Iohn. 1. Mark. 16. Rom. . which the sonne of God commit∣ted vnto them, & which they receued of him, which
also the Prophets before Christ spake of by the holy Ghost. What Gospel was preached by the Apostles it is easie to perceiue by the aforesayd Sermon of Pe∣ter and of others in the Acts, by the Euangelists and Epistles of the Apostles: namely, that God so loued the world, that he gaue his only begotten Sonne for it, that whosoeuer beleeueth on him, should not pe∣rish, but haue eternall life. Also, he dyed for vs, rose a∣gayne from death, ascended vp to heauen, and sitteth there at the right hand of God, being king and high Priest for euer, in whose name all knees must bow, & without whom there is none other name giuen vnto men, in whome wee must bee saued, than the onely name of Iesus,1. Ioh. 2. 1. Tim. . whose bloud washeth awaie our sins and he is the onely perpetuall mediation betweene God and vs. In this doctrine continueth the Church, beeing builded vpon the sure rocke Iesus Christ, and is not moued or driuen awaie by euerie winde of strange and inconstant doctrine.Mat. 7.16 Eph. 4. Shee hearkneth not to the voice of anie other, but of Iesus her shepheard. In the doctrine of the Apostles, there is no deceit, no guile, no poison. And in this doctrine is found none of those things, which certayne yeres after the Apostles were brought in by Romish Bishops, as Masses, Di∣riges, Cloisters, worshipping of Idols, setting vp of I∣mages, buying of pardons, forbidding of this or that meate. First now doth faith in Christ bring forth this fruit in the Church, namely, in faithfull beleeuers, that it draweth them to the doctrine of the truth, by
the which they became beleeuers: and in the same it maketh them to continue, that they ney∣ther hearken nor giue credite to anie false errro∣nious doctrine: for they do verie assuredly know, that such doctrines are not wholesome, but veni∣mous and hurtfull. But in the Gospell of our saui∣our Iesus Christ, and in the doctrine of the holie Apostles, they are sure to finde the truth, which nourisheth and preserueth them vnto eternall lyfe. The Church of God abhorreth all vntruth, for she knoweth it is of the deuill: but of the trueth is she desirous, for she knoweth that the same com∣meth of God, and bringeth vnto GOD againe. This Euangelicall truth and doctrine of the Apostles, in the which the Church of God, and all the members of Christ must continue, hath beene of long time, euen from the beginning, comprehended in certayne Articles, which wee call the Creede, whereof there is sufficient men∣tion made in the Catechisme. Among the true children and seruauntes of God also, there is no schisme, doubt, nor diuision, concerning the head and chiefe Articles, in the which they are well and firmely established, fully perswaded, and of one minde and consent. And whereas there be some men which ouer∣reach and goe beyond this marke, willing other men, and compelling Christians, as farre as in them lyeth, thereto, teaching those to bee here∣tikes
and damned, that cleaue to the onely doc∣trine of the Apostles. The same commeth and proceedeth of the presumptuous arrogancie of flesh, who esteemeth his owne inuention, more than that which God speaketh: As when they saie that Images must bee had in Churches, that pardons must bee bought with money, and such lyke things, which are not grounded in the doc∣trine of Christ nor of the Apostles, nor mencio∣ned in the Articles of the right and true auncient beleefe, but inuented by the fantasie & couetous∣nes of men. The second thing that must bee constantly and inuiolably kept in the Church of God, is the communion and fellowshippe, namely, that none looke vnto his owne singular profite, that no man seeke himselfe, but that euerie member loo∣king one to another what hee lacketh, supplye the same, helping him, and comforting him, and giuing him the best counsell he can. This friend∣ly loue and louing fellowshippe ought to bee a∣mong Christians. All temporall and outwarde goods ought to bee common among them. Not as some fondly thinke, that I must defraud another of that which is his, or take it agaynst his will, whether hee wyll or no, or that I shoulde goe idlely and loytering, eating and consuming that which other men la∣bour and trauaile for, or to thinke, that when I doo seruice and am profitable to no man, euery
man shall giue and serue mee. Christian loue which groweth out of the beleefe and doctrine of the Gospell, must distribute the goods and make them common: it must not bee anie mans gree∣die desire, presumption, nor wilfulnesse that shall doo it. All faithfull beleeuers are one bodie: nowe lyke as in the bodie, one member serueth to the profite and wealth of another, so ought one Chri∣stian to helpe and serue another in loue. The eye looketh not to himselfe onely, but vnto the whole bodie: the mouth eateth for the whole bodie, and for all the other members: the stomacke di∣gesteth for all the whole bodie, and for all the members. Thus ought it to bee lykewise among the spirituall members of the bodie of our saui∣our Iesus Christ. No man must bee wise and learned for himselfe onely: no man ought to be rich for himselfe, but euerie mannes giftes must serue to the profite one of another, and to the e∣dyfieng and sustaining of the whole bodie. Euery one is bound to serue the bodie, according to the gift and measure which the spirit of God hath di∣stributed vnto him. Among all liuing creatures, there is none created to a more louing and friendly societie and fellowshippe than man. Heerevnto serue all sciences and handie crafts, that men after a friend∣ly manner agreeing among themselues, may re∣lieue one anothers necessitie and want, and helpe
beare one anothers burthen. Heereunto serue all inwarde giftes of the minde, as reason and iudge∣ment, will, and remembraunce. Also the speech giuen of God vnto man, whereby one is know∣en, and discerned, and made priuie one to ano∣ther. And therefore is man borne into this world without anie defence or weapon, bare, naked and feeble: whereas all other creatures liuing in this worlde, bring with them euerie one his weapon and defence. The Beare hath his clawes and teeth, the horse his hoofe, the oxe his hornes, the hedg∣hegge his prickes, and the serpent his poyson. &c. Onely man is borne smooth and vnweapo∣ned, to signifie, that hee must not bee madde, fu∣rious and terrible, but milde, louing, and gentle, there must bee one minde, one meaning, and one will. Man also commeth into the worlde bare and naked, weake, feeble, and impotent, not able to doo anie manner of thing to helpe himselfe, but must stande vnto the curtesie of another; for if he be not helped, releeued, and succoured, he coulde not choose but perish, there were no re∣medie. Whereby almightie God will declare, that there is no man that eyther may or can liue without the helpe and comfort of another. Thus the poore wretched and distressed childe, lying vppon all foure, (whome if it were not for pit∣tie, no man woulde take vp, but let it lye still) is helped, nourished, and brought vp of the mo∣ther,
nourse, &c. Other folkes must cherish it, by other folkes helpe must it liue, for nothing doeth it bring with it into this worlde wit must begge and borrowe euerie thing, and therefore it weep∣eth and crieth. This teacheth vs to doo good, to bee obe∣dient, louing, and thankfull to our parents, and vnto those which bring vs vp and doo cherishe vs, that wee recompence them according to our power. By this also wee learne to helpe others, and to haue compassion of them when they are in need, remembring and considering out of what miserie and pouertie other folks haue helped and brought vs. Who is hee that is at this present so rich, so mightie and strong in this worlde (if hee wyll liue) but hee must vse the helpe and seruice of poore and feeble folkes, as the Husbandman, the Miller, the Baker, the Shepheard, the Wea∣uer, &c. yea, the higher and greater anie man is in office or authoritie, so much the more must he vse and haue the helpe of other people that are not so great as himselfe. Therefore doeth GOD sette vp some so high, that they must make pro∣uision and helpe all those which are ynder them, seeing that they must haue the vse of them all. For the poore and they that bee vnder, must supporte and beare vp the rich and mightie (as pillers doo the house) that they fall not: For without the helpe and seruice of such, are not
they able to liue in theyr dignitie and calling one daie. Therefore it is ordayned of Almightie God in his secrete wisedome, that certayne Countries lacke some things, whereof others haue suffici∣cient and too much, that one might bee sustayned by another, and that no man shal be inough to him selfe. GOD hath giuen vnto man remembraunce, to the intent that hee shoulde neuer forget the benefites, which hee from his youth vpwardes hath receiued of others, and dayly doth receiue, without the which hee cannot liue. And also a∣gayne remember and forget not, howe and in what manner hee ought to behaue himselfe in loue, in compassion, in succour, and in faithful∣nesse towardes those that haue anie wayes neede of his helpe. To this is hee moued, when he con∣sidereth and pondereth in his thoughts the weak∣nesse, feeblesse, and necessitie of mannes corrupt nature, which constraineth vs to lacke so manye things. Heereof groweth vnitie, loue, and fellowship among men, when we cast and call to our minds thus: eyther hee hath beene, or is nowe profi∣table vnto vs, or he doth good vnto ours, of whom wee haue profite, or heereafter hee may doo vs some good. This to bee so, there is not anie man that can denie. And whereas wee perceiue not this, and are not of one minde, friendly and fel∣lowes in loue and good wyll one towardes ano∣ther,
but giuen vnto such variaunce, dissention, strife, and discorde, it commeth through the dark∣nesse of our owne wicked and frowarde natures and dispositions. Forasmuch now as our eies are so blinded, that wee see not Gods ordinance and creation in man, our eares are so stopped, that wee will not heare the playne and perfect voyce of nature: our vn∣derstanding and remembrance so dull and blunt, that wee will not once regard or thinke anie such thing, whereby wee might the sooner forsake the diuision and stiffenesse of our heart, and in friend∣ly vnitie and brotherly loue, to doe good one vn∣to another. Christ therefore, the restorer of our decayed nature, and the onely true and eternall light, came into this worlde, to illuminate and lighten our blinde eyes, to crie with his voyce vn∣to vs that bee dumbe, and to sette that agayne be∣fore our eyes, which wee our selues haue made darke and dimme. Hee cryeth vnto vs in his Go∣spell, with a loude voyce, so that no man canne saie hee hath not heard it. Hee is the heauenly schoolemaster, the eternall wisedome, the foun∣tayne of all knowledge, the onely and true tea∣c▪ the whole building of his Church, the foun∣dation and roofe, the beginning and ende of all his commaundementes, hath hee sette and com∣prehended in onely loue, exhorting vs to loue, vnitie, and friendshippe, and saying, that men heereby shall knowe vs to bee his disciples, if we loue
hem vnto that, which faith inwardly considereth and looketh vpon. These tokens are instituted, to signifie and represent vnto vs high and greate things, to gather together and vnite the Church, that beeing dispearsed euerie where ouer the face of the whole earth, might gather together into one communion and fellowshippe in Christ, and bee made partakers of his promises, and inioye those comfortable blessings which hee hath pro∣mised from the beginning, namely, such as bee faithfull and true beleeuers, and that the exteriour and outwarde sense, might from all corporall thinges bee withdrawen to that which is spiritu∣all, for the eyes see the bread, which representeth the bodie of Christ: they see, as the bread is broken, so was the bodie of Christ broken vpon the crosse for our sinnes: and that as the wine is poured in and out, so was the precious bloud of Iesus Christ shedde to wash awaie all our sinnes. The eares doe heare Christes wordes spoken by the Minister in the person of Christ Iesus, by the which the promise is renewed, by which meanes those that are his, and of his Church, are by a cer∣taine feeling and comfort in their soules and con∣sciences refreshed. The tast vppon the tongue, the smell in the nose, and lykewise the handling, and so each other member in his seuerall office, e∣uerie one of them hath his delight and operation in confessing, acknowledging, and dooing his ser∣uice vnto saith.
But for what cause our sauiour Christ dyd spe∣cially vse bread and wine before anie other corpo∣rall things, to signifie his death and shedding of his bloud, it may well and easily bee perceiued by the nature of faith. With bread is the bodie fedde and sustayned, with wine are mennes heartes made mer∣rie. Forasmuch then as faith, the life of our soules, through the flesh of Christ spiritually eaten, is nou∣rished and sustained: and seeing our minde is moi∣stened and refreshed with true and perfect ioy tho∣rough the bloud of Christ shedde for vs, there was nothing more meere, nothing more expedient, no∣thing more necessarie for this Sacrament than bread and wine. Moreouer, through the bloud of Christ, are all other oblations and sacrifices cleane layde aside: and therefore Christ minding to finish the high sacrifice vppon the crosse, testified and declared before hand that his bodie beeing offered vp and his bloud shed, shoulde bee sufficient to wash awaie all mens sinnes, and that from thence forth there shoulde not neede anie other sinne offering, in the which there must bloud bee shedde. Therefore woulde hee with eui∣dent and plaine wordes testifie and saie, This is my bodie which is giuen for you: doo this in remem∣brance of mee: This is the cuppe of the new Testa∣ment in my bloud, which shall bee shedde for ma∣ny to the forgiuenesse of sinnes. To the inten thn that this excellent and worthie propitiation and sa∣crifice should not out of theyr eyes and heartes, he
added visible signes, not bare signes, but seales of his couenant (as was the Circumcision and Passah) and common tokens of loue and friendshippe amongst men, euen bread and wine, which haue no bloud, to declare that all bloud for sinne is onely in Iesus Christ, Christs minde was also, in one bodie to couple and knit together in one bodie the whole multitude of his Church. To signifie this, that there was no∣thing more apt and sit than wine and bread: for like as out of many cornes, is made one paste and one bread: and like as out of many grapes, one wine flo∣weth together, euen so by faith and loue become they all one bodie, that eate of one bread and drinke of one cup. And euen from the beginning of the world, it hath alwnyes beene the vse among men, that with breade and wine, they haue made and confirmed great friendshippe and league: And euen so Christ with the distributing of the bread among his disci∣ples, would establish an euerlasting friendship with them. The fourth thing now in the Church of Christ is prayer: namely, as Christ taught them to praie vnto the father of heauen, that the kingdome of his Sonne might still growe and increase, that his glory might arise, and spread it selfe throughout all the worlde, that his name might bee hallowed, and his will fulfilled, &c. This is the necessariest thing of all, and if we lacke
this, in vaine are all our good workes, in vaine are all the honest actions of a ciuill lyfe, in vaine are all godly exercises, nothing prospereth wee goe a∣bout, no oblation is sanctified, all is impuritie that wee eyther doo or thinke, the holy Apostle Paule willeth vs to praie continually: God graunteth not the presence of his spirite to anie thing but vnto praier. Without the presence of Gods spirite vnpro∣fitable is the worde preached, vnprofitable are the Sacraments ministred, vnprofitable shall all thinges bee vnto vs, so that praier is most requisite. Let vs therefore praie vnto almightie God, to increase in vs the spirite of Prayer, that with our soule and spi∣rite wee may praie continually for spirituall giftes, that they may dayly increase in vs to his glorie. Graunt this the great giuer of all good giftes, for his mercie sake. To whom bee all honour, glorie, pow∣er, dominion, and thankes, for euer and euer, Amen. A Praier. O Mercifull God, preserue our heartes from pride, from vaineglorie, and from shamefull couetousnesse, giue vs grace to abide in thy holy vocation, and to be thankfull for thy grace, that the fall of thine Apostle beeing alwayes before our eies, we may walke in thy feare before thee. For if we stand, we must take heed that we fall not, neither de∣spise those that as yet doo not stand. Make vs to con∣tinue thy grace for nothing haue wee sauing onely
tha which we haue receued of thee. And if of weak∣nesse we fall, put thy hand vnder vs (O Lorde) and suffer vs not to despaire in sinne, but cause vs with repentance and sorow for our offence, to resort vnto thee. Oh keepe vs, that we neither despaire, nor be∣traie thy dearely beloued sonne, whome thou tho∣rough thy Gospell doest send vnto vs, for without him is no safegard, but eternall death & damnation. From which keep vs (good Lord) for thy mercies sake, A∣men. FINIS.
