6054 99840896 5439
THE MANSION of Magnanimitie. WHEREIN IS SHEWED THE most high and honorable acts of sundrie English Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earles, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, from time to time performed in defence of their Princes and Countrie: set forth as an encouragement to all faithfull subiects, by their example resolutely to addresse themselues against all for∣reine enemies. Published by RICHARD CROMPTON an Apprentice of the common Law. 1599. Whereunto is also adioyned a collection of diuerse Lawes and Statutes meete to be knowne of all men: with a briefe Table, shewing what munition ought to be kept by all sorts of her Maiesties subiects, for the defence of her Highnesse Realmes and Dominions. LONDON, Printed for VVilliam Ponsonby. 1599.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT EARLE OF ESSEX AND EWE, EARLE MAR∣shall of England, Viscount Hereford, Lord Fer∣rers of Charley, Bourchier and Louaine, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Maister of her Maiesties Horse, and Ordenance, Chauncellor of the Vniuersity of Cambridge, and one of her Highnesse most honorable Priuy Counsell, RICHARD CRVMPTON desireth eternall felicitie. THere is no kingdome (Right honorable) so strongly seated, or with Castles so fortified, or that so aboundeth in wealth, which without valiant men trained vp in martiall disci∣pline, can be defended from the force of the e∣nemy: for the stronger or richer the countrey is, the more are the snares and sleights prepared by the enemy to compasse and conquer the same: for which cause, and for that also, occasions of warre are often offered vpon the sodaine, it is
necessary that some number of men should be trained vp continually in martiall actions, as in other countries is vsed, and so much the rather, where long peace hath bene had, which often taketh away the feare of warre, & causeth men to liue too securely and without regard of for∣reyne danger, whereby they are vnskilfull in warres affaires: and that such trained men may be alwaies ready and able to informe and leade others vnexperiēced in that seruice: for it is not the number of men that alwayes obtayneth the victory in battell, but such as are couragious, and well exercised in martiall skill, as Eras∣mus sayth well:Erasmus. Non refert quàm numerosum militem ducas in praelium, sed quàm fortem, & quàm exercitatum. Homer in these few verses following,Homer. setteth forth the whole military discipline, which resteth in the valour of the souldiers, and their obedi∣ence to their Captaines and Leaders. Graeci fidentes animis audacibus ibant, Ductorum quamuis premerent formidine vocem. VVhere he sayth, that they trusting in their cou∣ragious minds, went against their enemies, there he commendeth and extolleth their va∣lours in armes: and where he sayth, they feared
the commandement of their Captaines, there he highly praiseth their great discretion and modesty. VVhat bred such fame to the ATHE∣NIANS, who being but ten thousand, ouerthrew great numbers of the PERSIANS in one battell, in that time when they most florished in their conquests, and did rule ouer many nations, but valour and skill in the souldiers, and obserua∣tion of orders in battell? By order all things are preserued and maintayned, and without order all things come to ruine and confusion, as the Scripture sayth, Vbi nullus ordo ibi est confusio. And as these things are requisite in the souldiers, so is experience, valour, and skill also in the Cap∣taine: for if the blind leade the blind, both fall into the ditch, as the Gospell witnesseth: there∣fore such Captaines are alwayes highly to be honoured, imbraced, aduanced, and re∣warded, according to their places, callings, and deserts, as the defenders in the time of warre of the Prince and state of the kingdome and common-wealth, that they may be incou∣raged in that seruice: and such as lightly e∣steeme these men, or preferre them which liue idlely and daintily afore them, are ene∣mies
to the Common-wealth (as Osorius wri∣teth) and to be taken as the destroyers there∣of, in that they doe as much as in them lyeth, to lay open their Countrey to the force of the enemie. And because the matter of this Trea∣tise concerneth the defence of our Prince and Countrey against the enemie, which seruice appertaineth most properly to men of honour, who ought to hold nothing more deere to them then the safety of the same, of which they be the chiefe props, stayes, de∣fenders, and mayntainers vnder her Maiestie; I haue thought it conuenient to dedicate this little Treatise to a man of such state, and vnto your honour chiefly, to the ende you may therein see the notable actes of Chiualrie per∣formed in that seruice, that thereby you may be incouraged to followe their steppes, and increase the fame, honour, and renowme, which you haue attayned in your late valiant seruice at CALES in SPAINE, and else where. Humbly beseeching your honor to accept this my small labour, as a token of my desire to cō∣mend your Honourable name to posteritie. At your Honors commaund. RICHARD CROMPTON.
AN ORATION TO BE MADE BY THE GENERAL TO THE WHOLE ARMIE AFORE THE BATTEL. ALthough Warres are by all good meanes to be eschued, for the auoi∣ding of the great effusion of bloud that thereby often doth ensue, yet when intollerable wrongs and in∣iuries are offered, either by a for∣reine Prince, or his subiects, & no recompence is made for the same,The cause of the war must be published, that it may ap∣peare to arise vpon iust occa∣sions, which much doth en∣courage the souldier to fight. warre must be taken in hand: and Bodinus saith; Bella non nisi propulsandae in∣iuriae, ac pacis causa suscipienda sunt: that is, Warres are to be entred into, to withstand iniuries, and to procure peace. The causes which haue drawne vs at this present into the field against these our enemies, are knowne to many of you, namely, how these our enemies most vio∣lently and in warlike maner, with Ensignes displayed, in the time of peace, without anie proclamation of Warre first made, according to the lawes of Armes, haue en∣tred into our territories and countrey, burned some of our Churches, defaced the auncient monuments of our elders, put multitudes of her Maiesties people to the sword, yea women and children, wasted their dwellings with fire, despoiled them of their goods, and rauished most shamefully their wiues, daughters & kinswomen, euen afore their faces: to be short, there is no cruelty or tyrannie whatsoeuer which might be deuised, but they haue afflicted her Highnesse subiects therewith, with∣out all pitie or mercie. For which due recompence hath
bene diuerse times by her Malesties Embassadours re∣quired, and yet none is made. Therefore either we must with sword and fire be reuenged of these most ex∣treme dealings, or otherwise they will be encouraged to attempt the like: yea, they will account vs men of no courage, but cowards and base hearted; a name which to our nation hath bene alwayes most odious, in that it hath bin accounted valorous in armes in all countries, as one writeth: Anglia Bistonio gens semper inclita Marte. Euerie man is borne once to die, and how, when, or where, is most vncertaine: and to giue our liues for our countrie, hath alwayes among all nations (and among the heathen) bene reputed an honorable thing, where∣by euerlasting fame is attained, and left to posteritie as the noble Orator Tully saith: Hijs maiores nostri, qui ob rem publicam obierunt, pro breui vita diuturnam memoriam reddiderunt: that is, To them which haue lost their liues for the common wealth, for a short life they haue yeel∣ded euerlasting memorie. There is no difference be∣twixt the greatest person & the meanest man, whē they are both dead, if there be no vertues or deedes of fame done by them, whereby to commend their name to po∣steritie. Therefore euerie man that desireth to liue in name when he is dead, ought to endeuour himselfe to leaue some memorie of his vertues or worthie acts, that it may appeare that once he liued here, else being laid in his graue, he shall soone be forgotten. Riches and beautie (saith Salust) do vanish soone away, but vertues and deeds of fame are euerlasting: which sith our liues are short & momentanie, we must by this meanes make perpetuall. A glorious death is alwayes to be preferred afore a life stained with reproch and infamie.
If you will consider what miseries and calamities hap∣pen where the enemy preuaileth, look backe into the hard dealing of William Duke of Normandie, when he con∣quered this Lande: it ought greatly to encourage you in this seruice against the enemy. Did not he alter the whole state and gouernment of our Countrey? Did he not make new Lawes, altogither profitable for himselfe and his Nor∣mans, and hurtfull to our Nation? Did he not spoile sun∣dry of the English Nobles and others, of their lands and possessions contrary to promise, yea euen to those English Lords who ayded him in that Conquest? Did not hee lay greeuous taxes, tallages and impositions, vpon our Nati∣on? There was no cruelty, no misery, no seruitude or bon∣dage which could be deuised, but he afflicted them there∣with, as by our Chronicles euidently appeareth: and shall we looke for any other if our enemies shoulde preuaile? The wise Cato said,Cato. Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, Happy is he that can beware by others dāgers & mishap. Now therefore, if euer you will shew your loyaltie to your Prince, and loue to your Countrey: your naturall affecti∣on to your old father and aged mother, to your deer wiues and sweet children, which cannot defend themselues: if euer you will shew your selues careful to preserue your po∣sterities that shall succeed: if euer you desire to maintaine the Honour and Worship of the houses whereof you are descended: if euer you will shewe your selues to come of the seed and generation of your valiant auncestors & cou∣ragious forefathers: if euer you will leaue Honor or fame to your posterities of your valour in Armes, wherby your ofspring may be incouraged to follow your steps, nowe is the time or neuer. Plucke vppe therefore your hearts like
men, and set your rest vppon it, determining with your selues rather to die in field in defence of your Prince and countrey, then that these myseries shoulde happen vnto vs: if you turne your faces (which God defend) then shall our Prince bee indangered, the state of our Common∣wealth ouerthrowne, we shall be slaine as thicke as motes in the sunne; our fathers, mothers, wiues and children shall be destroyed; our wiues, our daughters and kinswo∣men rauished and defloured afore our faces, straungers shall possesse our lands and liuings; and wee that now liue in honor, worship and credit, and as it were at our owne hearts ease, shall then be made subiects, bondmen, slaues, and pesaunts to Forreners and strangers, and then shall al the myseries before remembred, or which can be deuised be laide vpon vs. There is no cause (my good friendes and fellowes in Armes) why wee should stande in feare or doubt of these proud Spaniardes, though they farre exceede vs in num∣ber, nor of their hauty lookes or great bragges: for they are of no greater force or strength now then they were in former times, when vnder the conduct of that worthy & couragious Prince of Wales, eldest son to K. Edw. the 3. a small Army of Englishmen, passed in despite of them through Nauarre into Spaine, & there euen in the midst and bowels of their own countrey, ouerthrewe at Nadres the vsurping K. Henry the bastard, with diuers of his No∣bility, and 60000. of the brauest fighting men in Spaine, & erected in his place Don Pedro their lawful Prince, cō∣pelling the Nobility and citties to receiue him. Besides, the valorous conquest atchieued by Iohn Duke of Lanc. brother to the said Prince in Galicia, against Don Iohn,
sonne of the said Henry the vsurping bastard. What fa∣mous victorie the noble K. Rich. the first obtained against the Souldan of Egypt and the K. of Cypres in their owne territories, and made the said K. of Cypres do homage for that kingdome to the crown of Engl. Besides other Nati∣ons which haue often receiued sundry great ouerthrowes at our hands, thogh they were mighty in Armes, such was the wil of God, who giueth victory where he pleaseth. And for that praise and rewards are due for iust deserts, if you will shew your selues valiant Captains and couragi∣ous souldiors in this seruice, of which I haue no doubt, and wherof I wil (God willing) make true report vnto her Ma. you may be assuted, that as she wil highly commend you, so you shalbe rewarded accordingly: for she holds such as you to be the chiefe defenders of her state and Common∣wealth against the enemy, and regardeth not such as liue daintily & at ease before men of your quality: For they (as Osorius affirmeth) which prefer such before men of your condition, are to be held subuerters of their countrey, in laying it open to the enemy, & in defrauding the same of her necessary defence & safeguard. And for my part I as∣sure you on my Honor, that whatsoeuer persons you shall take prisoners, & whatsoeuer thing shall fal into your hāds of the spoile (after the battel) you shal enioy the same with good wil, as the law of Armes requireth: to the end ye may the rather be incouraged in this action now in hand: for I hold it no reason that you should abide the brunt of bat∣tell, and not retaine and enioy the same which you shall obtaine with the venturing of your liues and losse of your bloud. And againe, the rather to encourage you in this seruice, see how gratiouslie and carefully her Ma. and the
whole state of the Parliament haue prouided for the kee∣ping and releefe of such of you which bee common soul∣diers, which shal happen to be maimed in her wars, which afore her daies was neuer done. And now to the end we may the rather preuaile against our enemies, I exhort and aduise you (noble Captains & valiant Gentlemen) attempt nothing in your fury without due consideration first had, for such enterprises are not holden to proceede of courage and valour, but rather of rashnesse, which often bringeth danger to the whole Ar∣my. And you couragious souldiors, submit your selues to the order and direction of your chieftaines and leaders, of whose great experience and skill in martiall affaires, you shall not need to doubt, by reason of their continuall trai∣ning vp therin: and so much the rather you must thus do, because you are not yet such men of vnderstanding in war∣like discipline:Herodotus. So did the noble Graecians as Herodotus writeth, whereby small companies gaue sundry notable ouerthrowes to great multitudes of the Persians in battel, euen when they were in their chiefest conquests, & moste triumphed of their glorious victories. Where no order is (the scripture saieth) there is confusion and vtter ruine. Keepe therefore your rankes, break not your arraies, stand fast in your places to which you are appointed; for out of doubt as obseruation of orders in battell is neuer with∣out hope of victory, so doth disorder open the way to the enimy to ouerthrow you. If you keepe order you shall be euen like a strong Bulwarke against the enimie, which they will with all their forces attempt to breake, being the only way to gaine them victorie: of which purpose if they faile, then they will bee vtterly discomfited and fall into
your hands. To conclude, forsomuch as the chance of war is vncertaine, and the sequele therof standeth doubtful, al∣though the causes afore remembred, ought greatly to en∣courage you in this seruice, and to hope of victory: yet let vs all make our selues readie for whatsoeuer it shall please God to lay vpon vs, and let vs make our humble prayers to Almighty God, confessing our sinnefull liues, and hearti∣lie repent vs thereof, who giueth grace in the very instance of time: as by the example of the theefe which was han∣ged with our Sauior Christ appeareth; who vsed these few words vnto him. Lorde, remember mee when thou com∣mest into thy kingdome. And Christ said vnto him, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradice. And let vs cal vp∣on him for his gracious assistance against our enemies, who no doubt wil ayde and defend vs against them accor∣ding to his promise: for heauen and earth shall passe, be∣fore one iòte of his Couenant or promise, which he hath made to such as serue and feare him shal faile, as the scrip∣ture doth plainely testifie. Now let vs all kneele down and lift vppe our hartes to the throne of Gods Maiesty & pray. ALmightie God, father of our Lord Iesus Christ, ma∣ker of all things, Iudge of all men, we acknowledge and bewaile our manifold sinnes and wickednesses, which we from time to time most greeuouslie haue com∣mitted against thy diuine Maiestie, prouoking most iustly thy wrath and indignation against vs, we doe earnestly re∣pent and are hartily sorie for these our misdooinges, haue mercie vpon vs most mercifull Father for thy blessed son our Lord Iesus Christs sake, forgiue al our offences past, & graunt that we may euer hereafter serue and please thee in
newnesse of life, to the honor and glory of thy holy name, through our onely mediator and aduocate Iesus Christ our Lord. And O thou most mighty God, that art the King of kings, and Lord of lords, and gouernour of all things, whose power no creature is able to resist, stretch out thy mighty arme and come, help vs, and be our de∣fence, for without thee, vaine is the help of man. We go not against this multitude trusting in our owne strength, but in thy name, and in thy most gratious ayde and assi∣stance, let them know that thou art the Lord of hoasts, and the onely giuer of victory, and deliuer them into our hands (if it be thy good pleasure) that we may glorify thy holy name through Iesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee & the holy Ghost that most sweet comforter, that art one in three, and three in one true and euerlasting god, be all honor, glory and praise for euer and euer, so be it. Now in the name of God almighty aduance our Stan∣dards, display your Ensignes, and set vpon them couragi∣ously, for the honor of your prince and country, for all England prayeth for our good successe in this buisines this day.
THE MANSION of Magnanimitie. ¶Of the strength of this Realme, in respect of the scituation, pleasantnesse of ayre, fruitfulnesse of soile, aboundance of al sorts of Graine, Cattell, and other necessaries for the vse of man: how it is replenished with thousands of couragious & valiant men, wherby to withstand all forren inuasion. Also how it is defended with many strong holdes in places need∣full, and furnished with a Royall Nauy, with mnnition suffi∣cient to incounter the enemy. Chap. 1. ALthough I doubt not, both in respect of your loyalties to her Maiestie, and fidelities to her Crown (things due by all Lawes from euery true Subiect to his Prince and Soue∣raigne gouernor) and also of the great loue and affection that euery man doth naturally beare to his natiue Cuntrey, but that you wil be alwaies rea∣dy with hart and hand to ioyne in the defence of these against the enemy; yet haue I thought it not vaine to set downe some speciall causes and reasons, which shall the rather moue vs hereunto. Amongst which (as in the first parte of this booke I will commend to your considerations) the strength of our Country in regard of the scituation therof,The first cause of in∣couragement in respect of the scituation of our Coun∣trey. & how our countrey is inuironed with the maine Sea, sauing that part onely ad∣ioyning to Scotlād, which is a sufficiēt defence to this realme, in that the Quéenes most excellent Maiestie & the noble King of that country are most surely linked, as well in respect of the néernesse of bloud, as also by reason of most honourable coue∣nants and agréementes of league, peace, and amity (which
by Gods grace shall long continue) concluded and passed be∣twixt them, so that we may well assure our selues that none can come to vs but by shipping: wherby what aduantage we haue that stand vpon the firme land, ready to receiue or defend the enimy, which must lie open to our forces from the sea, eue∣ry man of any reasonable sence or vnderstanding may easily conceiue. It is placed in that part of the world which is temperate, nei∣ther vexed with too much heat, nor oppressed with ouer much colde as many other Countries be. It is also of a most deli∣cate & holsome ayre, full of pleasant springs, fountaines, and ri∣uers. A Country of fruitfull soile,Commodi∣ties of our countrey. yeelding Corne of all sorts, abundance of Wooll, Allom, Copper, Mines of Leade, Tin, Yron, Stone, Wood, Seacole, Pittes to make Salt of, and of all manner of Cattell, Horsses, Fowles & Fishes: Beasts of Venery, of all kindes plentiful, and all other things necessary for mans sustenance, vse and pleasure. A Country apt for traffick by sea, from all places of the world: in respect where∣of, we are of our selues better able to liue then any other nati∣on vnder the Sunne.Camd fol. 3 Camden maketh mention of an old Ora∣tor speaking in praise of England, as followeth: O fortu∣nata & omnibus beatior terris Britannia,This Constan¦tine receiued the faith of Christ first in England An∣nales I. Stow  46. An. 306. quae Constantinū Caesarem prima vidisti; meritò te omnibus Coeli ac soli bonis natura donauit, in qua nec rigor est nimius hyemis, nec ardor aestatis, in qua segetū tā∣ta est foecūditas, vt munerib. vtrius{que} sufficiat, et Cereris et Liberi: in qua nemora sine immanibus bestijs, terra sine serpentib▪. noxijs, cōtrà pecorum mitium innumerabilis multitudo, lacte distenta, & onusta velleribus: certe, quod propter vitam diligitur longissimi dies, et nullae sine aliqua luce noctes, dum illa littorum extrema planities non at∣tollit vmbras, noctisque metam coeli & siderum trāsit aspectus, vt sol ipse qui nobis videtur occidere, ibi appareat praeterire. That is. O thou happy England and more blessed then all lands, that first of all hast seene Constantine the Emperor: whom nature hath indued with all the commodities of the firm ament and land, wherin is neither too much rigor of winter, nor heat o
summer: where is great fruitfulnes of Corne for bread and drinke; Woods also without hurtfull Beasts; the Land without noysome Serpents: where likewise are innumerable multitudes of Cattel giuing milke, and Sheep loaden with fleeses of wooll: and that which Life doth greatly desire, the daies are there very long, neither is there any night without some glimmering of light, by reason, that the Plaines of the Sea coasts doth not yeeld much shaddow, and the sight of the Starres and firmament doth passe away so quietly, that the Sunne which seemeth to vs to go downe, may there appeare as it were but to passe by. Also in that this Realme is replenished with infinit thou∣sands of valiant and couragious Men,The second cause of in∣couragement valiant men. able to giue battell to the greatest prince in Europe (for Castles are of smal ac∣count where valour in armes wanteth.) Cleomines the Em∣peror beholding a towne by arte and nature mightily defen∣ded, called such latebras muliebres,Castles. Cleomines. Bod. lib. 5. c. 5 alurking place for Women saying: Neque Ciuitatis robur positum est in mutis lapidibus,What should moue a man to fight. sed in prae∣stanti fortissimorum ciuium virtute, qui pro aris, pro liberis pro liber∣tate, pro ciuitate, pro fama, & pro vita dimicabunt. The strength of a Citty (saith he) resteth not in dumb wals, but in the force of valiant Men which fighte for their religion, Chil∣dren, libertie, Cities, fame and for their liues. And such as are desperate and resolute, are most méetest for the same as he writeth also. Nihil periculosius est, quam desperatis hominibus praeliū cōmittere. There is nothing more dangerous then to fight with despe∣rate men.Bod. lib. 5. c. 5 And remember as an example ye battell of Poytiers in France where Iohn the french King with a great number of his nobi∣litie were taken prisoners,Poytiers. & the rest were put to flight,Stow 15  with about ten thousand Englishmen, the french being almost fifty thousand. This was done by Edward prince of Wales eldest sonne to King Edward the thirde, and Erasmus saith also, ij de∣mum vtiles sūt Bello milites,Eras. Append. Apoth. 337. quibus decretum est in praelio, aut vin∣cere aut mortem oppetere,
They are meetest for War, which determinne to win the fielde or else to die.Castles. But yet Castels and Fortresses are not to be condemned, but must be vsed as a meane for the better defence of the enimy. ¶How much we are bound to the Almighty God, that hath giuen vs so gratious a Prince to raigne ouer vs, and what good things we daily receiue of her gracious goodnesse toward vs; and also how happy we are that are her High∣nesse subiects in respect of other Nations, which are charged with continuall Taxes, Tallages, and Impositions, and besides that liue in great bondage and seruitude, of which things we are freed. Chap. 2. NOw in respect of a most singular and further cause of incouragment herein,Third cause of incourage∣ment let vs consider how much we are bound to god, in that it hath pleased him to giue vs so gratious a Soue∣raigne Lady and Quéene to raigne ouer vs, one of our owne nation: which is obserued in the sacred scripture as a great blessing of god, as in the booke of Deuteronomy doth appeere, and of the right line and de∣scent of the noble kings and Princes of this Realme: for for∣ren princes are alwayes misliked of the people to raign ouer them;Osor. fol. 19. as Osorius saith, Quoties accidit vt in aliqua regione, vel haereditario iure, vel matrimonio, vel quauis alia ratione, princeps aliquis ex exteris gentib ad regnandū vocetur, id populis sibi per∣niciosum fore suspicatur. One vnder whom we haue enioyed such common peace and quietnesse these 39. yeares & more, as the like hath not béene heard of, neither is to be founde in any record or Chronicle sithence the Eonquest to this daie, for the like time of gouernment: One studious to aduance, set foorth and maintaine the honour and glory of Almightie God: one desirous to raigne with mercy, with loue, with pitty, and tender compassion, and not by tyranny, not by
effusion of bloud, neither alwaies by inflicting the extremitie of her lawes vpon such as iustly haue deserued the execution of the same: And is the rather induced to mercy and pittie, by experience of her owne troubles (most vniustly laid vpon her in her sisters daies) so as it is rightly said: Nihil est enim quod magis inuitat homines ad misericordiam tribuendam quam humanam miseriam experiri;Aeneid. lib. 1. vnde rectissime Regina Dido apud Vergiliū inquit, Non ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. There is nothing that more doth moue men to bee mercifull, then to haue experience of the misery of man; whereof Queene Dido (as Virgill maketh mention) said very well: I haue learned being not ignorant of euill, how to helpe them that are in mise∣rie. She is also bountifull to such as deserue well of her Ma∣iestie and of their countrey,Ouid de pon∣to lib. 2. in whom the saying of Ouid the Poet, which he spake of the clemencie and liberality of Cesar is verified: Est piger ad poenas princeps, adpraemia velox, Cuique dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox. The Prince is slow to punish, and ready to rewarde, and sorrow∣full when he is forced to punish any. And again he saith of him: Qui cum triste aliquid, statuit, fit tristis & ipse, Cuique fere poenam sumere, poena sua est. When the Prince doth ordain punishment to any he is sad also, & where any is punished he taketh it as it were don to himself. She is a most milde Prince, not fearefull to behold or to be spoken vnto,Ouid meta∣mor. li. 2. f 30. Nullae in fronte minae nec formidabile lumen, But with most benign and gracious countenances receiueth and answereth the petitions & supplications of her subiects: she is of that honorable and princely disposition in all things, that euen the greatest Princes do honor her. And in that hir Ma.4 cause of incoragemēt. hath fortified the borders of this realme in places dāge∣rous for inuasion, with such castels and strong holds, & with a mighty nauy of warlike ships,Fortification of the realme. and furnished her kingdome with such abundāce of armor & all other things necessary for the wars and defence of her cuntry & people, as the like hath not bin seen in any Princes dayes before her time.
If we will consider the miserable conditions of such Nati∣ons as liue vnder Princes where the pleasure of the Prince standeth for law,Miserable cō¦ditions of o∣ther people. and where the king saith: Sic volo, sic Iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas: So I will,Iuuenal. so I command, my will shall stand for reason: And compare the same with our happy state, we haue iust cause to thinke our selues much bound to God: for our Princes not only make good and wholsome lawes,Good lawes. but are wel pleased also to be ordered by them, & in the day of their Coronation take a solemne Oath vpon the holy booke of God to indeuor them∣selues,Othe. that the same lawes shall be obserued and executed to all indifferently.Osor. fo. 105. And therein is the difference (saith Osori∣us) betwixt a kind and a Tyrant. Non mediocre discrimen est inter regematque tyrannum, quòd Rex legibus s deuinctum profite∣tur, Tyrannus vero in interitu legum omnem dignitatem suam col∣locandam existimet. Among many other, what an Honorable law was made in the 9. yeere of king Henry the third,9. Hen. 3. A most hono¦rable Law. as followeth: No frée man shalbe takē or imprisoned, or be desseised of his freehold, liberties, or frée customes, or be outlawed, or exiled, or anie waies destroyed, nor we shall not passe vppon him nor deale with him but by lawfull iudgement of his peeres, or by the Lawes of the land: we shall sell to no man, wee shall deny nor deferre no man,42. li. Ass. either of iustice, right, or equitie. By which statute, a Commission granted out of the Chancerie, to take I. N. and seize his goodes and chattels, was iudged void, for that it was done without iudgement or sute of the partie, or other due processe. How happie be we in respect of the Russes, amongst whom there is a lawe,Russes. if any man die without issue male (though he haue many daughters) yet the Prince seizeth all his goods to his own vse, except perhaps of his goods he giueth some part amongest the daughters to bestowe them in marriage. And likewise, if a man that is vnfit in his owne person for the warres, hath such wealth that thereby many warriours might be maintained: or that if any of the Courtiers hauing
knowledge thereof, doe present his name to the Emperour, the vnhappie man by and by is sent for, and in that instant depriued of all his riches, which with great paines and tra∣uaile all his life time he hath gotten togither, except perchāce some small porcion thereof be left, to maintaine himselfe, his wife, children, and familie withall: and then the Emperour bestoweth these goodes amongst his Courtiers according to their deserts,Booke of Na∣uigation fol. 788. 417. as appeareth in the booke of Nauigation. But no such vse, lawe nor custome, is amongst vs. For if a man haue no sonnes, then his daughters or some other of his line, possesse his landes, and his Executor his goodes, as pleaseth the owner to limit. And when our Prince would haue ayde of her subiects, towards the maintenance of her warres, or for other necessarie respects, she taketh not her subiects lands or goodes from them, neither can so doe by her Highnesse lawes, except they be first thereby condemned, and so forfait them for some offence; but vseth to call a Parliament, and by the assent of all her Nobles and Commons, hath Subsidies and other aydes of her subiects, towards the defraying of som of these charges: and the subsidie or ayde thus granted, if it be of lande for the most part amounteth not to the thirtieth part of the yeerely rent of the same: and if it be of goods, rea∣cheth not oftentimes to the fiftieth part thereof. Againe, whereas in France,Tributes for meat & drink in other coun∣tries. Flanders, and other Countries, the peo∣ple pay certain tribute to their princes for some sort of meat and drinke, and for their dwellinges: We are not charged with any such impositions: Neither is such torment vsed heer in execution of offenders,Torments in execution. as breaking of their legs, armes, and backe, and so laide on a whéele of a cart pitched on a pole, and there to lie till hee be dead, which is common in other Realmes by the Ciuill lawes, but is executed here by hāging onely till he be dead, except it be in case of high treason. Ther∣fore I say we are in these respects most happy, in regarde of other Nations.
¶How much we are bound to God that doth assist her maiesty with such graue, wise and most honourable Counsellers: and also diuers and sundry perswasions in respect of the premisses and other things, why we should all resolutely fight in the defiance of the enimy. And of the miseries of warre where the enimy preuaileth. Chap. 3. AS a further cause of this incouragment.Fift cause of incoragemēt. how much are we bound to God in that it hath pleased him alwaies to assist her Ma. with such honorable counsellers, men of such grauity,Wise Coun∣sellers. truth, faithfulnesse, and wis∣dome, of such deep skil, consideration, poli∣cie, forecast, and experience, as to speak it plainly & simply, no Prince vnder the sun is furnished with the like: or at least with a better, by whose great wisdome, trauel, and indeuour this common peace and quietnesse hath bin so long preserued and mantained. If any thing hath bin intended to the perill of her maiesties person or danger of the state, that hath been by them quickly espied, deeply looked into, and with greate wisdome & pollicie in time preuented and auoided, to their great honors & immortall fame▪ so as in the choise of them her maiesty hath most graciously & wisely considered of the saying of Osorius.Osor. sol. 292. Necesse est vt Regis consiliarij sint maximo in∣genio praediti, bonis artibus exculti, longo rerum vsu per ti, in hi∣storijs diligentissimè versati,What men must be coun∣sellers to a K. neque praesntia tantum sagaciter odo∣rantes, sed longe in posterum quid vtile futurum Reipub. si, coniec∣tura prouidentes: neque solum ingenio & disciplina atque pruden∣tia valeant necesse est▪ sed sint opus est singulari fide & integritate, & quòd patriam amore atque pietate debita prosequantur. That is, It is conuenient that the Kings counsellers be men of great wisdome, very well learned, of long experience, well
exercised in histories, not onely grauely considering of thinges present, but also of things necessary for the good of the whole common wealth in time to come: and it is necessarie that they be not onely prudent, learned, and wise, but likewise of great integritie and faithfulnesse; and to be such as haue a loue & spe∣ciall care and affection to their Countrey. Salomon saith, Happy is that kingdome where they are many that can giue good counsell. And Iesus the sonne of Syrach affirmeth,Eccles. 10. where they that are in authority are men of vnderstanding, there the Citty doth prosper. And again Salomon sheweth,Prou. 11. where no counsel is, there the people doe perish, but where many are that can giue good counsell there is wealth.Words of in∣couragement Who will not thinke himselfe happy that may dwell in such a strong, pleasant, frée, and plentiful countrey as this is? in a Countrey replenished with such infinit thou∣sandes of valiant men, defended with such strong holdes, ap∣pointed with such warlike shippes, and furnished with such aboundance of al other thinges néedeful for the wars and de∣fence against the enimie: where the Gospell is truly prea∣ched, where so mercifull and gracious a Prince doth raign, where such Honourable and holsome Lawes are ordayned and executed, and where such graue and wise Counsellors doe gouerne? Whoe will not fight in the quarrell and de∣fence of these? Who will not giue his life for the safeguard of his olde father, aged mother and déere wife, in defence of his landes and possessions, his goodes and chattels, his liber∣tie and freedome, against all such Forreners and strangers as woulde spoile, waste, and destroy the same? Who will not defend his swéete tender Infantes and Children against such as seeke to slay them? The verie bruite Beastes and Fowles will defende not onely themselues by naturall in∣stinctions, but that which is bred of their own bodies. Wil not the Brache fight in defence of her whelpes? The Poet describing her nature saith: Haud secus atque canis Catulis qui dulcibus astat, Allatratque virum ignotum pugnamque caepessit.
The Brache standing to her whelpes, doth barke at the strāge man,Tully. and offereth him fight in defence of them. And Tully wri∣teth of the propertie of Beasts in defence of their yoong, thus. Bestiae pro suo partu ita pugnant vt vulnera accipiant, Nullos impetus, nullos casus reformident. The Beasts will fight till they bewounded, and feare no force nor violence in defence of their yoong. Wil not the sillie Hen set vp her fethers, and fiercely flie at the Kite or other thinge that commeth néere vnto her chickens? Will not the Tygers fight in defence of their whelps? Will not the Asse run tho∣rough the hot fire for safeguard of her fole? And will not eue∣rie fowle and beast doe the like in their kinde? Then howe much more ought man, being the reasonable creature of God, fight against such as would destroy their infantes and children? Did king Priamus when the Gréekes entred the ci∣tie of Troy,V. Eneid. li. 2. and Pyrrhus the Grecian captaine killed Polytes his sonne before his face, refraine his voice, his anger or his hand? Nay, did not he say to Pyrrhus, Thou wretch, for this spite done to me, the gods (if any iustice dwell in Heauen, or if they doe right regard) yeeld thée thy due reward, that afore my face my sonne hast slaine? and therewith he cast his dart at Pyrrhus, but in vaine, for it hung in the bosse of his buck∣ler, because his strength for age failed him, although hee did for natures sake thereby shew his willing mind to haue béen reuenged for so heauie and wofull a sight. Did Eneas the va∣liant Troian knight, at this time leaue his old father Anchises, his louing wife Creusa, or Ascanius his yoong son, among the enemies when Troy was on fire, and shifted only for himself? No, he rather did choose to aduenture the daunger of the ene∣my, who then euerie where swarmed in that Citie, and car∣ried his father on his shoulders, and led his son in his hand, and appointed his wife to goe through certaine bi-waies in the Cittie, to a place where he would méete her, and so they all saue his wife (who it is thoght fell into the enemies hāds) escaped: Wherby you may see that Naturae vis est maxima,
The force of nature is the greatest thing in operation that may be: and may well be called vis maxima, and the operati∣on of nature cannot be taken away, Naturam expellas furca, tamen vsque recurrit. Is there any that can indure to sée his Wife rauished, his daughter deflowred, or his kinswoman violently forced afore his face? or that can behould his Fa∣ther, Mother, Wife and Children, Kinsfolkes, his alies and deare friends, to be smitten down with the hands of the eni∣mie, and with deadly wounds lie gasping for breath, and make no resistance?Miseries of warre. Is there any that hath liued in place of honor or worship, or that is of any honest sort, degrée or cal∣ling, that can like to be a subiect, a bondman, a slaue, or pesant to any forren prince or state, specialy to a Spaniard who of all other nations is the most bloudy, insolent, vicious and tyra∣nous? Is there any that can endure that strangers shall inioy his lands and possessions, which he and his ancesters haue long had, or his goods or other things, which he with his great paines and trauell hath gathered together to man∣taine him selfe, his wife and children? These are some of the miseries which happen where the enimy doth preuaile: as for example, When Wil. D. of Normandy conquered this land,Holinsh. 303. 297. did not he alter the whole state & gouernment therof?Acts & Monu. 166. Did not he con∣trary to his oath refuse King Edwards lawes and made new lawes at his owne wil and pleasure, profitable for himselfe, but most greiuous and hurtful to the English nation?Fab. 6. part. c. 222. & 217. Did not he spoile sundry both of the nobilitie, and others of the welthier sort, of al their possessions & liuings, and gaue them to his Normans notwithstanding his faire promise made at his first comming, that he would deale louingly with them? Did not he lay grieuous taxes &How cruelly Wil. Conque¦ror de with the English∣men. impositions vpon our nati∣on? Did not he cause al the land in England to be measured & laid vpon euery hide of land (which as Holinshed saith con∣teined 100 akers) vj. s. which amounted to an inestimable sum,Holinsh. f. 11. Graft. abridg. An. 1085. when it came all together into his exchequer? And did not he shortly after cause all mens goods and chattels to be
valued, and raised thereof also a maruelous great masse of mony to the great greife and impouerishment of our people, who so sore lamented the miserable case wherein they were thrawled, that they hated the Normans in their hartes with deadly mallice: howbeit, the more they spake and séem∣ed to grudge against such sore touls, tallages and cruell op∣pressions as were daily deuised to their vtter vndoings, the more they were burdened after the manner of the bondage which the children of Israel sometime suffered in Egipt, for on the other side the Normans perceiuing the hatred which the Englishmen did beare towardes them, were sore offen∣ded in their mindes, and therefore sought by all manner of waies how to kéepe them vnder. In like sort, did not Wil. Rufus ouerthrow diuers and sundry townes,Holinsh. 313. parishes, vil∣lages and buildings, for the space of thrée miles together, to make thereof a Forrest, which to this day is called the new Forrest for wilde beasts and deare, whereby no small mem∣ber of the poore lost their houses, their lands and liuings, for the maintenance of sauage beasts,Nevv forrest Camden 188. of whose hard dealing in this case, Doctor White Bishop of Winchester hath these ver∣ses written as Camden affirmeth fo 198.B. of Win. Templa adimit diuis, fora ciuibus, arua colonis Rufus, & instituit Beanlensi in rure forestam, Rex ceruum insequitur, Regem vindicta, Tirellus Non bene praeuisum transfixit acumine ferri. Did not he cause a greiuous paine to be ordained, inso∣much that who so euer did kill any of the same deare he should haue his eies put out:Eies put out for hunting. wherevpon many refusing to sustaine such an intollerable yoke of thrauldome as was dayly laid vpon them by the Normans, choose rather to leaue both lands and goods, and after the manner of outlawes got them to the woods with their wiues, children, and seruants, meaning from thenceforth wholy to liue vppon the spoyle of the Countries adioyning, and to take what so euer came first to hand: wherevpon shortlie it came to passe, that no man
might in safetie trauel from his owne house or towne to his neighbours, and euery quiet and honest mans house became as it were a hould or fortresse, and was furnished for de∣fence with Bowes, Arrowes, Billes, Pollaxes, Swordes, Clubbes and Staues, the dores kept locked and strongly boulted, and namely in the night season, for feare to be sur∣prised as it had bin in time of war, and amongst publique eni¦mies. Prayers were made also to almighty God by the maister of the house to saue and defend them, as though they had bin in the middest of the seas in some stormy tempest, by meanes of these hard dealing towards the English nation. The people in the North parts of this Realme did rebell, whome the Normans suppressed,Hands cut off for rebelling. and caused some of their hands to be cut of in token of their rebellious dealings, and others by death to be punished, and tooke so great a displea∣sure with the inhabitants of those parts, that he wasted all the land betwixt Yorke and Durham, so that for the space of 90. miles, there was left in manner no habitation for the people: by reason whereof it laie waste and deserte by the space of nine or tenne yeares, so that no greater misery in the earth could happen then that, into the which our nation was now falne. Likewise, did not he take from the Towns and Citties, from the Bishops and Abbies all their ancient priuiledges and frée Customes, to the end they should not onely be cut short and made weaker, but also that they might redéeme the same of him for such somes of money as it pleased him to appointe, to obtaine their quietnesse, and made protestation that as he came to the gouernance of this Realme by plaine conquest, so he would and did seize into his hands the most parte of euerie mans possessions, causing them to redéeme the same at his handes againe, and yet retained a parte in the most parte of them, so that they that shoulde after∣wardes inioy them, shoulde acknowledge themselues to hold them of him, in yéelding a yearely rent to him and his successors for euer.
In like manner, when the Spaniards by violence posses∣the sed Crowne of Portingall,Booke of the estate of Fu∣gitiues. did not the king of Spaine vse the authoritie of a Conqueror and the tyrannicall cruelty of an vsurper, altring their Lawes, confounding their priui∣ledges, ouerturning the whole estate of their gouernment, strangling some of their Nobilitie, and other of them behea∣ding, imprisoning and banishing some other of them, with many other horrible and pittifull actions? These are also o∣ther miseries which followe where the enemy doth get the vpper hand, and shall we looke for any other dealing if they should ouercome vs? ¶That we shal preuaile against our enimies by faithful praiers to God, wherof diuers examples are here set down out of the Bible, also diuers other good perswasions to withstād the enimy, and how that euery man is bound so to do, whereby great fame is attained and left to posterities. Chap. 4. IF we wil consider how valiantly our forefathers haue alwaies resisted for∣ren forces prepared against our coun∣trey,6. cause of incorragemēt. and what great renowne and same they haue gotten for their va∣lour in Armes, which is spread a∣mongest all Christian Nations, of whom it is written: Anglia Bistonio semper gens inclita marte. England a Nation euer famous in battell.Bysto is a coū∣trey of valiāt people in warres in thrace. Camd. fol. 7. Of whome Iohn Wheathamsted, sometime the Abbot of S. Albons, in his Granario writeth: Sufficiat igitur Britannis pro nobilitatis suae orgine, quod sint fortes & potentes in praelijs, quodque vndique de∣bellent aduersarios, nullumque penitus patiantur iugum seruitutis. It is sufficient for the Britaines (of whom we are descended) for the beginning of their Nobility, that they are strong & migh∣tie
in battell, and that they doe euery where beate downe their enimies, and cannot suffer by any meanes the yoke of any bon∣dage. If we will remember that no Nation sithence the Con∣quest of this lande, which is about 529. yeares past, coulde yet ouercome vs (praised be God therfore) notwithstanding sundry attempts made to that end; if we will call to mind the notable ouerthrowes which king Richard the first gaue the Infidels with a few Englishmen,Foxe 245. Hol. 1191. and made the king of Cypres to doe him homage for his kingdome, and besides him diuers other valiant kings and people haue we brought into subiection, and made them stoope to the Crown of Eng∣land, as by our Chronicles is euident; we haue nowe then great cause to be mightily incouraged in this seruice of de∣fence: Shall we now distrust more of the ayde of our mer∣cifull Lord God then our forefathers did, whom he so graci∣ously assisted against their enemies? or think he wil forsake vs now more then our elders, whom he hath alwaies defen∣ded in their iust and lawfull accions? Surely if we indeuour our selues to serue and feare him, to walke in his waies, to call vpon him in our troubles and necessities, no doubt hee will ayde vs according to his promise: Call vpon me (saith he by his Prophet Dauid) in the time of trouble,We must call vpon God to ayde vs a∣gainst our e∣nimies. and I will heare thée and thou shalt praise me. And agaiue, Knock and it shalbe opened vnto you, aske and you shall haue. Whatso∣euer ye shall aske the Father in my name, he will surely giue it you. Did not the children of Israell ouercome their enimies in battell, so long as Moyses held vp his hands and praied vnto God for victorie, and when he ceased the enimie preuailed?Moyses. 2 Chron. 14. Did not the Almighty turne away his displeasure from the children of Israell at the praier of Moyses, when they wor∣shipped the golden Calfe, as it is written in the 106. psalme. So he said he would haue destroyed them,Psal. 106. had not Moyses his chosen stood before him in the gap to turne away his wrathful indignation least he should destroy them?
Did not Asha the godly king of Iuda when Sarache king of Ethiopia came against him with an hoast of aboue ten hun∣dred thousand chariots,2 Chron. 14 when they ioyned battell in the vale of Zephera, cry to God for aide against Sarachc: saying, Help vs O Lord our God for wee do put our trust in thee, and in thy name wee go against this huge multitude, thou art our Lorde God and no man shall preuaile against thee. And the Lorde smote the Ethiopians before Asha and Iuda, and they were o∣uerthrowue that there was none of them lefte, but were de∣stroyed before the lord and his hoast? Did not the good king Iehosophat when the grat number ofIehosophat. the Amorytes and Moabites ioyned battell with him, before the battell began,2 Chron. 20 stand vp, and said: Heere O Iuda and in∣habitants of Ierusalem, put your truste in the Lord your God, that you may be found faithfull, giue credit to the prophet and so shall you prosper, and their enimies were ouerthrowne without stroke amongst themselues, and with their owne forces consumed themselues. Besides the example of Sen∣acherib king of Assour, who with an hoaste of one hundred foure score and fiue thousand (as the prophet Esay witnes∣seth)Esay 37. could not preuail when he inuaded Hesechia king of Iu∣da; for Hesechia did put on sackcloth, and went vp to the tem∣ple and prayid, and sent Heliachym and other prophets to E∣say that he shuld pray to God for them, and God sent his An∣gels, who slew the Assirians hoast. Wherby it doth appear, that it is not the great multitude of men of war, horses, & chariots, but the lord God that giueth victory in battell, who is called the lord of hostes, who euer fighteth for his owne people, and neuer leaueth them distitute that put their trust in him. These are left to vs for examples, that we should not put trust in our owne forces and strength,Psal. 127. but repose our confi∣dence in him that hath made all, and therfore hath power of al things,Psal. 108. he must keep and defend the City or els the watch∣men that kéep it watch in vaine, as the prophet saith, and so he must aide and fight for vs, or else we cannot preuaile.
And againe he saith, O helpe vs against the enimy, for vaine is the helpe of man, through God wee shall doe great things, & it is he that shall tread downe our enimies: There is no king that can bee saued by the multitude of an hoast, neither is any mightie man deliuered by much strength. A horse is counted but a vaine thing to saue a man, neither shal he deliuer any man by his great strength. Behold the cie of the Lord is vpon them that feare him, and vppon them that put their trust in his mercy. And yet we may not leaue for∣ces and other ordinary waies deuised and ordained for de∣fence, but must vse them as the said godly Kings and princes did against their enimies,Psal. 118. alwaies hoping in the gratious aid and assistance of almighty God, and if he be on our side who is against vs, as the Proph. saith, The Lord is on my side I will not feare what man doth vnto me. Now therefore considering these miseries and calamities, which happen where the enimy doth preuaile, and the great preparation which they haue made to bring vs vnder their subiections and bondage, if euer we will shew our loyalties to our Prince, our cuntrey, or naturall affection to our pa∣rents, our loue to our wiues,Persvvations to encounter the enemy. children and litle infants which cannot defend themselues: our good will to our kinsfolkes friends and allies, if euer we will shew our selues carefull to preserue our posterity to succéed vs: if euer we will haue de∣sire to mantaine the honour, worship and fame of the houses wherof we are descended: if euer we will shew our selues to come of the séed and generation of our valiant ancestors and couragious forfathers: if euer we will leaue honour or fame to our posterities of our valour in arms wherby our ofspring may be also incouraged to follow our steps therein (for ver∣tues and acts of fame liue when men are dead) as the saying is viuit post funera virtus, nowe is the time for it or neuer. Therfore let vs pluck vp our harts like mē, make ready our horses, scowre our armor, sharpen our swordes, and make bright our weapons which wée are charged to haue by the
lawe of this Realme (whereof we may haue a view in this booke) and furnish our selues further with things méet for the warres according to our ability, and when we shall be commaunded by her maiestties authoritie, let vs be ready and sette our rest vppon it, determining rather to die in field in defence of our Prince and Countrey, then that the enimy should preuaile, whereby the miseries, calamities, and bon∣dages afore remembred should fall vpon vs. If we stand to it like men, then shall we preserue the word of God amongst vs, our gratious Quéene, and her most ho∣norable Counsel, the state of our common wealth, our owne liues, and our fathers, mothers, wiues, children, friends, kinsfolkes & allies: then shal we posesse our lands, our goods and liuings in peace: then shall wee preserue and continue our liberties and fréedomes, and saue our selues and our posteritie from thrawledome and bondage; and we shall passe the rest of our liues to our owne good contentment, and likewise according to Gods good pleasure. On the other side if we flie (which God defend) then shall the word of God be suppressed, our Prince indangered, her Counsell brought in perill, the state of our florishing Common wealth ouer∣throwne: We shall be slaine as thicke as motes in the sun, our fathers, mothers, wiues, children, kinsfolkes and allies, shall be destroyed with the hand of the enimy: our wiues, daughters and kinswomen, shall be rauished and defloured afore our faces, strangers shall possesse our landes, liuings, and goods: and we that nowe liue in honor, worship, credit, and estimation, and as it were at our owne harts ease, shall then be subiects, bondmen, slaues, vassels, and pesants, to forreners and strangers, and then shall all the miseries, ca∣lamities & bondage which may be deuised, be laid vpon vs. Therfore consider how greatly this matter standeth vs vp∣on, and with couragious harts and valiant mindes let vs stand to it, and discharge our duties to our Prince and Cun∣trey, as we are bound by the lawe of God and by the lawe of natnre; remembring with our selues, that no man is born
onely for himselfe,No man is born for him selfe, but for his countrey also. but for his countrey also. Euerie man ought to doe what he can for the preseruation and good of the Common wealth: so did Demonsthenes, as Osorius writeth, De∣mosthenes verò omnem laborem in sempiternae gloriae studio, & in Reipub. salute consumabat. And each man ought to be alwayes ready and diligent to withstand as well forreine force, as to appease ciuill dissention, that nothing be an impediment that the Common wealth may not flourish in all happinesse. No∣thing can be more discommendable and abhorred, then slouth and idlenesse, and nothing more commendable then courage & endeuour to serue the Common wealth, whereof the litle Bee in his kind giueth an example: for he in the summer time toi∣leth, not onely for him selfe, but also to his power to serue the Common wealth, and will not suffer the sluggish drone Bée to tast of his labour, as Vergil writeth: Qualis Apis estate noua per florida rura Exercet sub sole labor,Virgil. cum gentis adultos Educunt fetus, aut cum liquentia mella Stipant, aut dulci discendunt necterae cellas, Aut onera accipiunt, venientium, aut agmine facto, Ignauum fucos pecus à praesepibus arcent. The verie heathen men alwayes take it, that euerie man is bound to fight in defence of his Countrey,Horat. lib. 3. saying: Pugna pro patria, oportet mori pro patria: A man must die for his coun∣trey. Dulce & decorum est pro patria mori, It is a sweete and seemely thing for a man to die for his countrey.Cic. in Offic. lib. 1. And Tully saith, Chari sunt parentes, chari liberi, propinqui, & familiares, sed omnes omnium charitates patria vna complexa est, pro qua quis bonus dubitat mortem oppetere, si ei sit profuturus? Our parents, children, kinsfolkes and friends, are deare vnto vs, but the entire loue of our countrey onely doth comprehend the loue of them all in generall, for which, what man will not willingly die, if thereby he may profite the same? Amor patriae ratione valentior omnium.Oui. de Pont.
The loue (saith Ouid) of our countrey is of greater force then all reason, for it maketh the father to forget all naturall affection to preferre the safety of his countrey and common∣wealth, before the welfare and safety of his deare children.Tusculans questions. When as the Grecian fleete of one thousand saile was through a great tempest by force kept a long time in harbour within the hauen of Boetia, and Agamemnon their Captaine had knowledge by the Oracle that the nauie could not be re∣leased but by the death of his daughter Phigenia, was not he forward to fullfill the Oracle in offering her vp in sacrifice, and ready to follow the counsell of Pirrhus perswading him saying,Seneca. Praeferre patriam liberis regem decet, A king ought to pre∣ferre his countrey before his children.Osorius. Iohn king of Portingale hearing that ye Pellican by shedding her heart bloud, wold re∣couer her yong ones that had bene stong by the byting of ve∣nimous serpents, caused the picture of the bird to be caried in his ensigne, thereby to shew that he was ready to spend his bloud for the defence and safety of his subiects. When the A∣thenians were greatly oppressed by the Lacedemonians,Paterculus. lib. 1. & an∣swer was made by the Oracle of Apollo, that they should be conquerors whose Captaine was first slaine in battel, Codrus both king and Captaine of the Athenians disfiguring himselfe, entred disguised into the enemies campe, being clothed in a sheapheards weed, and of purpose there picking a quarell, was slaine, which purchased both victory to the Athenians, and renowne to himselfe for euer.Cicero sen∣ten. lib. 1. To such (saith Cicero) our fore∣fathers, which for the common wealth haue giuen their liues, for a short life haue yeelded euerlasting memory. His maiores nostri qui obrempublicam mortem Obierent, per breui vita diuturnam memoriam rediderunt. Assure your selfe there is no seruice more commendable, then that which is employed, nor death more honorable (tou∣ching any worldly thing) then that which is giuen for the de∣fence or safegard of the Common wealth. And because histo∣ries
are called by Tully the witnesse of time,Tully. Osorius. Histories are witnesses of time. the light of veri∣tie, the life of memorie, the teachers of life, the shewers of an∣tiquitie, let vs sée further what they record touching the va∣liant actes and aduentures attempted & performed by diuerse for the defence and good of their Countrie. The wonderfull magnanimitie and resolution of Mutius Sceuola, a yong Gen∣tleman of Rome, who deliuered the Citie from siege, and cau∣sed a firme peace betwixt Porsemia and the Romanes, for he passed ouer the riuer of Iiber with great courage and with an inuincible mind, and entred the whole host of Porsemia, till he came to the kings pauilion, where finding him with a great company about him, pressed in, and siue the Secretary in stead of the king: but when he perceiued that it was not Por∣semia, he was sory in his mind, and in token thereof burned his right hand in the fire, and told Porsemia, that though it were his chance to misse of his purpose, yet there were three hundred Gentlemen more in the city that had vowed to per∣fourme that action: wherevpon Porsemia seeing so great reso∣lution that the Romanes had to defend their countrey, foorth∣with raised his siege, and made peace with them. If the vali∣ant Horacius Cocles had not aduentured his life, and Horaci∣us Fabius his Seignory for the benefite of their countrey of Rome, the name of the Romanes had bene cleere extinct long before the Romane Monarchie. Notable is the history of the widow Iudeth, which ventured to saue her Citie with vnspeakable danger of her life: for she seeing no other waies to asswage the furie of Holofernes, but by the smooth wordes and dissimulation of a woman, presented her selfe before him in his chamber, and promised him faire vntill she had lulled him asleepe with drinke, and then making her praiers to Al∣mighty God to assist her against the proud Assyrian Holofernes, she tooke out his sword and stroke of his head, and passed through his host with her maid, hauing Holofernes head in a bagge, and so came to her castle in the night, and the next day fixed his head vpon a powle for the view of all his army: wherevpon they remoued, and so she deliuered her Citie by
the great mercy and fauor of God towards her. What shall I say of Curtius that noble Romaine, and Assurus the kings sonne of Phrigia, either of which seeing in their country a dan∣gerous breach of cliffe in the earth, which they were perswa∣ded would not be closed vp againe, vntill the best thing in the citie (which they tooke to be a man) were cast into it, willing∣ly threw themselues into the same, for the safety of the peo∣ple. But forraine examples are innumerable, and not so well knowne vnto vs as our owne. ¶This Chapter sheweth sundrie examples of diuerse Noblemen of this land, who haue aduentured their liues in defence of their countrey, and how that euerie man ought to indeuour him selfe to follow their steps, and most valiantly and resolute∣ly to fight in defence of his Prince and countrey, against all fo∣reine enemies. CHAP. 5. IT is not vnknowne vnto you,Aduentures of the Nobi∣litie. how valiantly the Kings, Princes and Nobles of this our Nation, haue in diuerse and sundrie warres ventured their owne persons, and with their owne handes incountred their enemies. As for example: Did not Henrie the first in a bat∣tell in France,Holinsh. 356. smite downe to the ground Crispio Earle of Eureux, by meanes wherof he was taken prisoner at the kings féet.Ibidē. 1181. 1170. Was not king Henrie the fifth in person in the battell at Agincourt in Fraunce, and there likewise fought in his owne person,Battell of A∣gincourt in Frāce fought by K. Henrie the 5. and caried away the stroke of the enemie vpon his hel∣met, and man of the French at that time a glorious victorie? And concerning the valiant seruice in field of a great number of the Nobilitie and others of this realme, how they haue also endaungered them selues in the defence of their Prince and countrey against the enemie, & performed most famous actes
of chiualrie therein, to their great honors & immortal fames, which obliuion the cankred enemie to fame, shall neuer be a∣ble to blemish: but they shall remaine as spectacles to poste∣rities for euer to behold, and to encourage them to ensue their martiall actes and enterprises. Among other, what valiant and faithfull seruice hath the noble house of the Lord Talbot done from time to time to their Princes and countrey,The valiant seruice of the noble house of the Lord Talbot. Hall 596. Mauns in Fraunce. when the Earle of Suffolke (hauing the charge of Mauns in France) and the magistrates (specially the cleargy of the same citie) conspired with the French, assuring them that if they would come to surprise the citie, they should find them ready to re∣ceiue them: and so they did, by meanes whereof, the said Earle with the rest of the said English men were forced to take the castle there, and keepe it, and in all hast sent to the Lord Talbot, who then lay at Alaunson, certifying him in what state they stood, hauing neither victuall nor munition, and their castle almost vndermined, so that yeelding now must follow, for resistance would not helpe, if they were not aided with speed. Did not the said Lord Talbot hearing this newes, with all hast assemble his Captaines and souldiers to the number of seauen hundred men of warre, and in the euening departed from Alaunson, and that night entred into the said castle of Mans at a posterne gate secretly? Whereupon about sixe of the clocke in the morning the English men issued out of the Castle crying aloud, S. George, Talbot. The French∣men within thinking nothing lesse then of this sudden ap∣prochment, rose out of their beds and fled, leauing all their horses, armour and riches behind them: at which time there was slaine and taken foure hundred gentlemen of the French. And thus was the Citie of Mans reduced againe vnto EnglishMauns takē by the Lord Talbot. Holins. 1262. Awians. Ibid. 1262. mens possessions by this most noble seruice and bold enter∣prises of this Lord Talbot. Did not the Lord Talbot likewise with a companie raise the siege of the French at Awrans, then being in the allegiance of the king of England? Did not he & the Lord Scales and others, hearing the Frenchmen to be come within foure leagues of Rone (which then was then al∣soRone.
vnder the subiection of the king of England) by night issue out of that citie, and in the morning by day, came to the place where the Frenchmen were, and then set vpon them, where many of them were slaine and taken prisoners. Also did not the Duke of Burgundie when he beseeged the towne of Cretoy with ten thousand men,Ibidem 1263 Cretoy hearing of the comming of the Lord Talbot raise his siege, the sayd Lord Talbot sending him word that he would giue him battell: if he would not, that the said Earle would wast and destroy his countrey in Picardy, and according to his promise so he did. Was not Iohn Lord Tal∣bot for his approued prowesse and tried valiancy performed in the warres of France,Ibidem 1276 Camden 462. Iohn first Earle of Shrewsburie. Normandy. Hall 31 h. 6. Aquitaine Burdeux ta∣ken. Diuers o∣ther cities and townes taken. created Earle of Shrewsburie, about the ninteenth yeare of Henrie the sixt, and after sent againe with 3000. men into Normandie for the better defence thereof, who neither forgot his duty, nor forslowed his businesse, but daily labored, and hourely studied how to molest and indanger his enemies? Did not the kings Counsell then send the said Earle with an army into Aquitaine at the earnest sute of the Ma∣gistrates and inhabitants of the citie of Burdeaux, who recei∣ued him and his power into that citie by a posterne gate, where they siue many of the Captaines, and others of the Frenchmen, and so was Burdeaux taken by the said Earle, which he fortified, and after rode into the countrey therea∣bout, and obtained diuers cities and townes without dint of sword. And among others, did not he take the strong towne of Castillon in Perigot?Castillon in Perigot. where the French king whē he vnderstood thereof, assembled twenty thousand men, and entred into Aquitaine,Aquitaine. Castillon be∣fieged by the french. (where Castillon is) and besieged the said towne of Castillon with a strong siege: where vpon the Earle of Shrew∣sbury assembled 800. horsmen and 5000. footmen, and went to the rescue of the said towne, in which battell very valiant∣ly he behaued himselfe,Earle of Shrewsbury slaine. Anno 1453. Camden 462. and there was slaine with a small shot: and this was the end of this noble Earle, after he had with much honor, more fame, and great renowne, serued his Prince in warrs foure and twenty years in France, and was honorably interred amongst them, on whose Tombe in ingra∣uen
as followeth.Inscription on the tomb of Iohn first Earle of Shrewsbury. Here lieth the right noble knight, Iohn Tal∣bott Earle of Shrewsbury, Washford, Waterford, and Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodrige, and Vrchengfield, Lord Strange of the blacke Meere, Lord Verdon of Alton, Lord Crumwell of Wingfield, Lord Louetoft of Worsop, Lord Furniuall of Shef∣field, Lord Faulconbrige, knight of the most noble order of S. George, S. Michaell, and the Golden fleece, Great Marshall to king Henry the sixt of his realme of France: who died in the bat∣tell of Burdeaux in the yeare of our Lord 1453.1453. If I should set downe euery particular seruice of such as haue discended of this noble house, done from time to time in the warres for their prince and countrey, it would aske very long time, therefore he that desireth to knowe more thereof, I referre him to the Chronicles of this realme, where they are set forth at large, to their great honor and glory. And touching the loy∣alty of this noble house to the Crowne, I find it not attainted for any disloyalty to the same sithens the conquest of this realme, for which they are most deepely bound to yeeld their most humble thankes to the goodnesse of Almighty God, that so from time to time hath blessed the same: and so much the more, for that a great number of other Peeres and Nobles of this land, haue bene attainted sithens that time for their dis∣loyalty. In honor of which house of the Lord Talbot, I haue made these few verses following.
TAlbot I am, that euer haue bene true, Vnto my Prince, her crowne and dignity: And hope in God, my fathers to ensue, So as my bloud shall neuer stained be. Prest I will be my countrey to defend, As doth belong, to men of my degree: And on her foes my life and land will spend, As each man ought for her securitie. The acts of warre, performed by my name, I shall increase, as God shall giue me might: To serue my Prince when she commands the same, As doth belong vnto a faithfull knight. My gracious Prince, hath honored me, With name of thorder of the garter knight, Of which great kings haue much desired to be, Wherein these words, with golden letters bright,
Hony soyt qui mal y pense are seene: As much to say, as ill to him befall, That ill doth wish, vnto so good a Queene▪ And so I pray, and during life I shall. And for some among many examples of the loyaltie of that noble house,Holinsh. 368. first I find, that William Lord Talbot, in king Stephen his time, tooke vppon him to defend Hereford in Wales, as diuerse other nobles of this Realme did other Castles and townes in England, to the vse of Maud the Em∣presse and her sonne against the sayd king Stephen, who vsur∣ped and detayned the Crowne against, her sayd son, contrary to his oath made to ye sayd Empresse, her said son being ye right heyre to Henry the first his Realme of England. Iohn Earle of Shrewsbury, was slaine at North, taking part with Henry ye sixt against the Duke of Yorke & others: then I find how Sir Gil∣bert Talbot was sent by the yong Earle of Shrewsbury, being within age and ward to Richard the third, with two thousand of his tenants and friends to ayde Henry Earle of Richmond against the sayd King Richard,Stow. 121. being not onely an horrible murtherer of his Nephewes, king Edward the fourth his chil∣drē, but also an vsurper of the Crowne, whom the sayd Earle ouerthrew at Bosworth field, and so obtayned the Scepter Royall of this Realme. I note also the great loyalty of the right noble George, fourth Earle of Shrewsbury, that where diuerse euill disposed persons in the rebellion in the North parts of this Realme, about the 28 yeare of the raigne of King Henry the eight, gaue forth very slanderous and disho∣norable speeches against the sayd Earle,Holinsh▪ 1567. as though he had fa∣uored more the part of the rebels, then of the king his Mai∣ster, for a full testimony and declaration of his truth to his Prince, he caused his Chapleyn to minister to him an oath, in the presence of a great number of people, assembled by him to represse the sayd rebels, by which oath he did protest, that as his Auncesters had bene euer true to the Crowne, so be wold
not staine his bloud in ioyning with a sort of rebels and tray∣tors against their Prince, but sayd, he would liue and die in defence of the Crowne, if it did stand but vpon a stake. How faithfully did the Lord George last Earle of Shrewsbury dis∣charge the great trust reposed in him by her Maiestie and her whole Councell, in the garding & safe keeping of the Quéene of Scots, by the space of seuenteene yeares at the least; a mat∣ter of such importance, as the like so long time was neuer committed to any State or Péere of this Realme sithens the conquest thereof, and how carefully he did preuent the sun∣dry deuises and subtill practises wrought by her selfe and o∣thers for her escape, it is sufficiently knowne. The trust was the greater, for that if she had escaped, no small danger might haue ensued to the person of our most gracious Queene, and to the whole Realme, as may appeare by her sundry conspi∣racies against the same. In like manner, when any matter of great importance for the seruice of the Realme, in those parts was committed to him (as often many were) how care∣fully and painefully,Camden. 463. and with what expedition he would dis∣patch the same, the world can testifie: what great confidence was reposed in him by the Queenes Maiestie when he was made Lieutenant of the counties of Darby and Stafford in those dangerous dayes, and how he performed the same trust to the preseruation of the common peace and quietnesse of those Shires, is well knowne to all men: what great trust was committed to himselfe also, when he had authority in times of rebellion and other outrageous actions in those parts to suppresse the same in forcible manner, and to exe∣cute the offenders by Marshall iustice, without further pro∣ceeding in law against thē, by the large Commission directed vnto him is manifest.Gilbert now the seuenth Earle of Shrewsbury. And lastly, was not the right honourable Gilbert now Earle of Shrewsbury in the xxxviij. yeare of her Maiesties most gracious Raigne, sent into Fraunce to receiue the oath of the French king, for the confirmation of the most honorable league betwixt her Maiestie and the said king? and did not he performe that Embassage to his great honour? And
did not the sayd king in proofe of his great good acceptation thereof,His Embas∣sage most honorably performed in Fraunce. giue him a ring with a diamond therein, as I haue heard, valued at xv. hundreth pounds, a thing meet to remaine as an heire loome to that house for euer, for a remembrance thereof. And now to returne to the valiant seruice of diuerse others to their Prince and countrey, let me tell you of Iohn late Duke of Northumberland,Iohn Duke of Northū∣berland. of whose fall by his disloyalty to his Prince (though there be great pitie) yet his courage, valiancy, and hardinesse in wars, and his great aduenture therein, I trust without offence, may here be remembred, as an incouragement to others to follow his steps therein, who being in king Edward the sixt his time sent as Generall to suppresse the rebellion of Ket in Norfolke,Holinsh. 1672. his number being but small, by reason his whole power was not yet come to him, and the rebels were many, was by some of his army ad∣uised to regard his owne safety, and to leaue the City of Nor∣wich, for that it was thought he was not able with his small company to defend the same against the sayd rebels, to whom with noble courage, shewing an inuincible hart, he sayd, that so long as any life was in him, he would not consent to such dishonor, but rather would suffer whatsoeuer either fire or sword should worke against him: and thereupon did draw out his sword, as other of the honourable and worshipfull then there present likewise did, and commaunded that each one should kisse the others sword, according to an auncient cu∣stome vsed amongst mē of war in time of great danger: wher∣upon they all made a vow, binding it with a solemne oath, that they would not depart from thence vntill they had either vanquished the rebels, or lost their liues in manfull fight, for defence of the kings honour.Ambrose Earle of Warwicke. Ibid. 1532. How valiantly did Ambrose Earle of VVarwicke in the fourth yeare of the Raigne of our Soueraigne Lady the Queenes Maiestie that now is, de∣fend the towne of Newhauen in Fraunce, notwithstanding they died in great numbers of the plague, so as they wanted men and other things necessarie for defence, & yet would not yéeld the towne by force, but manfully stood ready in the brea∣ches
to receiue the assault, whē the Frenchmen had with their Cannon made great breaches, verie easie for the enemie to enter: wherupon the Frenchmen perceiuing the resolutenesse of the Englishmen, sounded their Trumpet of parley, and so vpon honorable agréement then concluded vpon, the towne was yéelded vp to the Frenchmen. Besides, how valiantly did Sir Iames Wilford and other Captaines with their soul∣diers, defend the towne of Haddington in Scotland, against the French and Scots, being about eightéene thousand, in king Edward the sixt his dayes, and would not yéeld it, although they had scarsitie of men and munition, and were also great∣ly visited with the plague, so as manie died thereof dayly, but most valiantly and with inuincible courages defended the same,Holinsh. 1638. so as it was not surprised by the enemie? How valiantly & resolutely did the Lord Gray of Wilton, Lord Iohn Gray, the Lord Ed. Seymer, Edward Shelley, Preston, and others, to the number of seuen and twentie, all Gentle∣men, set vpon the foreward of the battell of the Scots at Mus∣clebrough in Scotland,Expedition. paten. folio. in king Edward the sixt his time, mea∣ning to haue broken their array? but the Scots had so strong∣ly fortified themselues, that they could not enter, and so in their retiring they were all slaine, sauing the Lord Gray of Wilton, and the Lord Iohn Gray, and Lord Ed. Seymer, who not without wounds and marks vpon their bodies of their being there, escaped. By these examples it appeareth, that those Noblemen and others respected not their liues, nor any painfull seruice, or extremities in the seruice of their Prince and countrey, for which they shall liue in fame for euer.Mē may not respect any trauell or pain to serue their Prince and country. He that hath desire to liue in name, when he is dead in bo∣die, must indeuour himselfe, according to his calling, & as God hath indowed him, to leaue some memorie, whereby it may appeare that once hee liued, as these verses following shew.
1 THough Death the fatal threed of ech man cuts in twaine, Yet vertues ay shall liue, and worthie acts remaine: 2 For others to ensue, their painefull steps therein, Whereby they may attaine, like lasting praise to winne. 3 But such as not regard, to leaue some deed of fame, When they are dead, shall lie, without regard or name. 4 And soone shall be forgot, as they had neuer bin, And shall not be thought of, no scarce amongst their kinne. 5 What difference shall be then, twixt great and meanest man, When of their worthie acts, no booke record ought can? 6 What booteth titles great, of honour for to haue, Or Croesus golden store, when men lie in the graue? 7 More worth a thousand fold, tis famous for to be, For vertues and noble acts, then all the rest to thee. 8 That moued mightie kings, and great States of this land, And manie others mo, great things to take in hand. 9 Some kingdomes to subdue by sword, both farre and neare: Their persons ventred haue, and dangers did not feare, 10 And manie worthy Peeres, their Prince to serue in field, And countrey to defend, great acts with speare and shield 11 Performed haue, which fame with blast of trumpe hath spread, Whereby they liue in name, though they in graue ly dead. 12 And some haue Churches built, in honor of our Lord, Where they did giue him thanks and praise with one accord. 13 Some Colledges for such, as learning list embrace, Their countrey and their Prince, to serue in euerie place. 14 Some Schooles to traine vp youth, in skill and vertues lore, While tender yeares do last, in age to haue in store.
15 Some Hospitals for poore, where they may be relieued, When crooked age of strength, to worke hath them bereaued. 16 And these they haue endow'd, with liuing and with land, To their immortall fame, for euermore to stand. 17 These for their Founders pray, and benefactors all, And for their off-spring eke, on God cease not to call. 18 For their prosperitie, and foes eke to withstand: That all things prosper may, which they do take in hand. 19 And when they are gone hence, that in the latter day, They may rise vp, with Christ, in ioyes to dwell alway. 20 None only for himselfe, but for his countrey too Is borne, and bound for her, the best he can, to do. 21 The Brutish kings that long, did beare the scepter here, Faire temples to their gods, and Castles strong that were, 22 And cities large, and townes, erected manie one, The enemie to defend, they walled them with stone. 23 And manie famous men, the founders of our skill, Their learned works haue left, to studie on that will. 24 Before that Christ was borne, whose glorie liues this day, And while the world doth last, shall neuer fade away. 25 The summe of all is this, who that will liue in name, Must leaue some deed behind, that worthie is of fame. And to this end Salust writeth:Salust. fol. 1. Qui sese student praestare cae∣teris animantibus, summa ope niti decent, ne vitam silentio transeant veluti pecora, quae natura prona ac ventri obedientia finxit, & quomam vita nostra qua fruimur, breuis est, memoriam nostri quā maximè longam efficere oportet, nam diuitiarum & formae gloria fluxa at{que} fragilis est, virtus autem clara aeterna{que} habetur. They which studie to excell other creatures, ought not to passe their liues in silence, as beasts do, whom nature hath made altogether
subiect to the belly, but because our liues be short, we ought to endeuour our selues to the vttermost of our power, that our me∣morie may continue perpetuall: for the glorie of riches and beau∣tie are vnstable and fraile: but vertue is a noble thing, and most worthy to be had in euerlasting remembrance. ¶How we ought to beware of sedition amongst our selues, and how that sundry attempts haue bene made by forreine ene∣mies, for the inuasion of his realme through the occasions ther∣of, as appeareth by diuerse and sundrie examples in this Chap∣ter following. CHAP. 6. NOw my deare friends and countreymen,We must be∣ware of sedi∣tion amōgst our selues. to the intent to make vs the more able in this seruice of defence, one thing there is, of which we must chiefly beware, namely of sedition, rebelliō, and diuision amongst our selues, for out of doubt there is no greater mischief or inconuenience that can happen to a kingdome, then ciuill dis∣cord, as one writeth well. Regnorum pessima pestis seditie. Sedition is the greatest plague that may happen to a kingdome. And the holy Gospell saith.Math. 12. Omne Regnum in se diuisum desolabitur. Euery kingdome in it selfe deuided shalbe desolate. As want of the feare of God,Hol. 1772. disobedience to rulers, blindnesse of guides, briberie in Magistrates, rebellion in subiects, ciuill disagree∣ment, flattering of Princes, vnmercifulnesse in rulers, and vnthankfulnesse in subiects, are causes of the ruine of a com∣mon wealth: so the feare of God, a wise Prince, learned ru∣lers, obedience to officers in subiectes, louers of the common wealth, vertue rewarded, & vice chastened, are the chief cau∣sers of a florishing common wealth. It is not without great
cause that we pray in our Letanie vnto God, to be deliuered from sedition: for sedition alwayes implieth daunger to the person of the Prince & State. it openeth the gate to forreine inuasion, as by sundry examples we may see, for when great dissention and warres were in England betwixt Herrauld and Tostus his brother,Dissentiō in England o∣pened the gate to for∣rein inuasiō. Stow. 1066. after the death of king Edward sonne of Etheldred, because Herrauld vsurped the crowne against his oath & the trust put in him by king Edward, who committed the gouernement of the realme to Herrauld during onely the nonage of Edgar his nephew, to whom he gaue the crowne, did not then William Duke of Normandy,Duke of Normandie. Hall. 251. seeing a conuenient time and occasion offered to conquer this kingdome, with a great army come into England, and landed at Hastings in Sus∣sex, where in battell Herrauld was slaine,Herrauld slaine. and so William pos∣sessed this land by conquest. Also, when the great warres were in England betwixt king Iohn & some of his Barons,Barōs wars. and sun∣dry bloudy battels were fought betwixt them, to the slaughter of many noble & other valiant men,Holinsh. 199. did not the Barons being sore distressed with the kings forces pray ayde of Philip theFoxe. 255. French king,Frenchmen entred this realme when the ciuill warres were here. requiring him to send Lewes his eldest sonne in∣to England with some conuenient number of men, and they would receiue him to be their king and do him homage: wher∣vpon the French king thinking rather by this deuice to con∣quer the realme, sent Lewes his sonne with a great army of men into England, whom the Barons receiued, & to him yeel∣ded homage according to their promise: whereupon diuerse great conflicts happened betwixt the king and the French,Ibidem. 600. and such of the Barons as ioyned with them, who greatly indo∣maged the said king, and got the possession of diuerse Castels, Townes, and other places, and so became strong within this realme. Likewise whē the ciuill warres were in England be∣twixt Edward the second & his Barons, concerning the Spen∣sers, did not the Scots waste & destroy the countrey of the Bi∣shoprike of Durham,Scots inua∣ded England when ciuill warres were here. and did not the French then enter the bor∣ders of Guyen, hoping to haue recouered all the lands which the king had in France? What imboldened the French king to
surprise the holdes and fortifications neare Bulleyne, in king Edward the sixt his dayes, but the rebellion in Norfolke, which greatly troubled the realme,Fox. 1309. and also to attempt the Isles of Gersey and Garnesey, thinking to haue surprised the same & al∣so our ships, but was repulsed to his great losses both of men and ships? If we marke the fruits which haue proceeded of ci∣uill warres,Cōquest by ciuill dissen∣tion. Greece. we shall sée that they haue bene alwayes guided after a most cruell and horrible kinde of hostilitie, and that their issue hath bene the losse and ouerthrow of many commō wealths. The Romaines came to the great Empire of Greece, more by dissention and ciuill warres (which they did sow a∣mongst their neighbours) then by force of armes.French Aca∣demie. Prou. 1. There are seuen things which God hateth, and the eight his soule abhor∣reth, and that eight is, he which nourisheth discord amongst brethren.French Aca∣demic. ca. 63. Iustin. li. 8. After the Romaines had kindled the fire of dissention in one nation, they maintained one side a certaine time, vn∣till in the end they had ouerthrowne both the one & the other, and so they deceiued sundry nations, as the Carthagenians, the Asians, & the Gawles: Qui apertè concordiam simulant, & occul∣ta dissidia serunt,Bodinus. li. 4 fol. 487. nihil est immortali Deo detest abilius, saith Bodi∣nus. And by sowing of the sayd dissention, in the end the Ro∣maine Empire fell from her greatnesse by the meanes of ci∣uill warres, which they had long time nourished amongest o∣thers. Incidit in foueam quam fecit. The Empire of Alexander being the greatest that euer was,Alexander. vanished as a fire of tow, through the diuision and dis∣cord that was among his successors.French Aca∣demie. ca. 63. Iudea. And Iosephus saith that the kings of Iudea became subiect and tributarie to the Ro∣maines through the ciuill warres, betwixt Hercanus and Ari∣stobulus, who were brethrē.The afflictiō of Spaine by ciuill dissen∣tion. There was no countrey more af∣flicted then Spaine by ciuill warres, when it was deuided into many kingdomes. The Mores did ouercome it on the one side, the French and the Englishmen deuoured it on the other side. And Hungarie which had valiantly resisted the Turke almost two hundreth yeares together,Hungarie. was at the length subdued by them, by the diuisions that happened amongst themselues.
What a great slaughter was there of the Nobilitie of Fraunce,Fountaine. at the battell of Fountaine, neare to Anserre, by the ciuill warres that were betwixt Lithargus, Lewes and Charles the Bald? What ciuill warres and bloudsheds did ensue of the diui∣sion betwixt the houses of Yorke and Lancaster here with vs in Englād,The houses of Yorke & Lancaster. which being begū in king Henrie the fourth his dayes, continued till Henrie the seuēth, who maried the eldest daugh∣ter and heire of Edward the fourth, by which the said two hou∣ses were vnited together, and so all ciuill wars then ceased. These sactions continued diuerse yeares, in which time there died in sundrie battels and skirmishes,Camden. 474. as Philippus Co∣mineus saith, aboue foure score of the bloud royall, with the floure of the Nobilitie of England, besides a great number of the Lords, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, and infinite thousands of the common people. And to passe ouer manie examples of like sort,Fraunce. in what pitifull state doth Fraunce now stand, which hath bene one of the most flourishing realmes of Europe, by ciuill warres and dissention, which hath afflicted that kingdome aboue thirtie yeares, wherof hath ensued, not only the slaughter of manie noble persons, but also infinite thousands of other subiects, and in the end the shamefull mur∣ther of their owne naturall liege Lord and King.Murther of their Prince These miseries may be examples to vs, to beware of such like sedition and diuision: and happie are they that can be∣ware by others dangers, as the wise Cato saith: Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Sedition is perillous,Cato. although it shew to haue neuer so good a countenance of honest cause: and it were better for the au∣thour of such sedition, to suffer anie losse or iniurie, then to be the cause of so great an euill.Bodynus. lib. 4. fol. 168. Ʋt morbi ac vulnera ipsae{que} ani∣mae egritudines ac perturbationes tum corporibus tum mentibus noxiae sunt: ita quoque bella ciuilia rebus publicis ac ciuitatibus pestifera sunt ac perniciosa. As diseases, wounds, and the griefes and troubles of the mind, both to the bodie and mind are
hurtfull, so likewise ciuill warres to the common wealth are pestiferous and daungerous. For ciuill warres bring forth and nourish want of reuerence towards God, contemneth authoritie, lawes and gouernment, without which, Nec domus vlla, nec ciuitas, nec gens, nec rerum natura, nec ipse mundus stare potest. No house, no nation, no citie, nor the nature of things, nor the world it selfe can stand.The fruits of sedition. Sedition causeth change of lawes, contempt of iustice, base estimation of sciences, it procureth horrible reuenge, forgetfulnesse of parētage, consanguinitie and friendship, it causeth extortions, violence, robberies, wa∣stings of countries, sacking of townes, burning of buildings, cōfiscations, vanishments, sauage murthers, alterations and ouerthrow of pollicies, with other infinite and intollerable miseries, pitifull to behold, sorowfull to expresse, and lamen∣table to thinke of. Non,Virgil. mihi silinguae centum sunt, ora{que} centum, Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprendere formas Possem. If I an hundred tongues, and mouthes had for to tell, And voyce as yron hard, expresse I could not well, The perils to a state, and kingdome that may fall, By ciuill warre, which makes to strangers bond & thrall. Seditiō armeth the father against the son, brother against brother, kinsman against kinsman, men of the same nation, prouince and citie, one against another. Hereupon the fields which before were fruitful are left vntilled, corne groweth where townes did stand: there the ground with bloud of men is made ranke, which before was barren, that a man may say, as Ouid writeth of Troy, Iam seges est vbi Troia fuit resecandá{que} falce, Luxuriat Phrigio sanguine pinguis humus. What doth not the fire and furie of sedition & ciuill wares bring with it, as one writeth well: Quid non discordia frangit,Epist. 1. Dissipat, eneruat, fera cum dominatur Erynnis?
What doth not discord breake, waste, and make weake, when Erynnis (which is fayned by the Poets to be the Lady of dissention and strife) doth rule?Erynni 1. And in the ende the bodies thus dismembred, and the parts thereof infected with the same poyson of discord,2. Reg. cap. 24. destroy themselues. Dauid the Prophet iud∣ged war worse thē either famine or pestilence, & he did rather chuse a plague amongst his subiects, then ciuill warres and tumults. Pythagoras saith, that three things are by all meanes to be remaued, a disease from the body, ignorance from the soule, and sedition from the city. Plato affirmeth, that no euill is worse in a city, then that which diuideth, and of one maketh it twō, and that nothing is better then concord, which tyeth and vniteth it together: Concordia res paruae crescut, discordia antem maximae dilabuntur. By concord small things do in∣crease, but by discord great things come to confusion. Let vs heare what ye noble Orator Tully sayth,Senten. lib. 1. fol. 190. of the miseries which ensue by ciuill wars: Omnia sunt misera in bellis ciuilibus, sed miserius nihil quàm ipsa victoria, quae etiamsi ad meliores venit, tamen eos ipsos ferociores impotentiorésque reddit, vt etiamsi na∣tura tales non sunt, necessitate tamen esse cogantur, multa enim victori eorum arbitrio per quos vicit, etiam inuito facienda sunt. All things are miserable in ciuill warres, but nothing is more miserable then the victory it selfe, which although it happen to the best sort, yet it maketh them cruell, in so much that though they be not so by nature, yet of necessity they are compelled so to be, for many things by the ouercommer at the pleasure of such, by whose ayd he doth ouercome, euen against his will are to be done.King Henrie the fift. When king Henry the fift not hauing aboue fif∣teene thousand men, gaue a great ouerthrow to the French king at Agincourt in Fraunce, where he had assembled to the number of forty thousand of the flower of all his countrey, & had taken many prisoners of the french,Hol. 1181. both Nobles and o∣thers, the french as they are men of great courage and va∣lour, so they assembled themselues againe in battell array, meaning to haue giuen a new battell to king Henry, which king Henry perceiuing, gaue speciall commaundement by
proclamation, that euery man should kill his prisoners: whereupon many were presently slaine, whereof of French king hauing intelligence, dispersed his army, and so depar∣ted: whereby you may see the miseries of warre, that though they had yéelded and thought themselues sure of their liues, paying their ransome, according to the lawes of armes, yet vppon such necessary occasion, to kill them was a thing by all reason allowed, for otherwise the king hauing lost di∣uerse valiant Captaines and souldiers in this battell, and being also but a small number in comparison of the French kings army, & in a strong countrey, where he could not supply his neede vpon the sudden, it might haue bene much daun∣gerous to haue againe ioyned with the enemy, and kept his prisoners aliue, as in our Chronicles largely appeareth. ¶Diuerse and sundry practises and deuices heretofore deuised and made (with many of our owne nation) both by the King of Spaine and the Pope, to inuade our countrey, and also what preparation hath bene made by her Maiestie to preuent the same. CHAP. 7. NOw for as much as the continual plots & pra∣ctises of the Pope,Practises of the Pope a∣gainst vs. the vowed enemy to this Realme, to the intent to sow discord and de∣uision within the same, to make an easie way for the enemy to inuade our coūtrey, haue bin strange, I haue thought good to make mention here of some part of her Maiesties proclamation published in the 33 yeare of her most gracious raigne:Proclamatiō 33. Eliz. by which it appea∣reth, that the Pope hath practised with certaine principall se∣ditious heads, being vnnaturall subiects of her Maiesties kingdome, but yet very base of birth, together with great la∣bour vpon his charge, a multitude of dissolute yong men, who
haue partly for lacke of liuing, partly for crimes committed, become fugitiues, rebels, and traytors, and for whom there are in Rome, Spaine, and other places certaine receptacles made to liue in, and there to be instructed in schoole points of sedition, and from thence to be secretly (by stealth) conueyed into her highnesse countries and dominions, and with ample authority from the Pope, to moue, stirre vp, and perswade as many of her highnesse subiects as they dare deale withall, to renounce their allegeance due to her Maiestie and her Crowne, & vpon hope by forreyn inuasion to be inriched & en∣dowed with the possessions & dignities of her other good sub∣iects. These sorts of traitors, rebels and fugitiues, do bind her highnesse subiects (with whom they practise) by oathes, yea by Sacraments,Renounce allegeance. to forsweare their naturall allegeance to her Maiestie, and yeeld obedience with all their powers to to a forreyn Prince, and to assist forreyn forces: and for the more forcible attraction of these vnnaturall people,This is trea∣son by. 13. El. cap. 1. Buls. being weake of vnderstanding, to this they bend these seedemen of treason to bring certaine Bals from the Pope, some of in∣dulgences, pretending to promise heauen to such as wil yeeld, and some of cursings, threatnings, & damnation and hell, to such as shall not yéeld to their perswasion. And it is certainely knowne,It is high treason to practise with any forrey∣ners to in∣uade this Realme. 13. El. cap. 1. that these heads of these dennes and receptacles (which are by the traytors called Seminaries and Colledges of Iesuits) haue heretofore assured the king of Spaine, who is lately deceased, yt though heretofore he had no good successe wt his great forces against this Realme, yet if now he would re∣new his war, there should be found ready secretly within her highnesse dominions many thousands (as they make their ac∣compt for their purpose) of able people that will be ready to assist such power as he shall set on land: and by their vaun∣ting they do tempt the sayd king hereunto, who otherwise wold not peraduenture hope of any safe landing here, conside∣ring what successe he had in the yeare of our Lord 1588, when he made so great preparation to conquer this land: that one named Parsons, and one Allen haue shewed to the sayd king
of Spaine certaine schroles or beadrolles of names of men, dwelling in sundry parts of her Maiesties countries (as they haue imagined them) but specially neare the sea coasts, with assurance that these their seedmen named Seminaries, Priestes, and Iesuits, are in sundry parts of this Realme secretly harbored, which shall be ready to continue their re∣conciled people in their lewd constancy, to serue their purpo∣ses, both in their forces, and with their trayterous enterpri∣ses, when the Spanish power shall be ready to land. Besides this, vpon their impudent assertion to the Pope and king of Spaine (though they knew a great part thereof to be false) they had lately afore this proclamation, aduertised into di∣uerse parts of this Realme, by their secret messengers (wher∣of some haue bene taken, and confessed the same) that the king vpon their informations and requests, promised to em∣ploy all his forces that he could make by sea, in ye yeare of our Lord God 1592, to attempt once againe the inuasion of this Realme: but because some of his wisest Counsellers doub∣ted yt he should not preuaile, he altred his purpose: besides ma∣ny other leud practises & treasonable cōspiracies by ye sayd fu∣gitiues. But her Maiesty doubteth not, but Almighty God the defender of all iust causes, will (as he alwayes hither to hath) make all their deuices voyd, and by the helpe of her faithfull subiects, to increase her & their forces, and by execution of her lawes & by other politicke ordinances, to impeach the afore∣sayd seditious practises and treasons, and doth exhort all the Ecclesiasticall State, by their example of good life, and by their diligent teaching, to retaine the people stedfastly in the profession of the Gospell, and in their duties to Almighty God and her Maiestie: and also she hopeth to haue such suf∣ficient forces in readinesse by sea, as by Gods goodnesse, and with the helpe of her good subiects shall be as great or greater then her highnesse hath had in any time heretofore, to with∣stand all her enemies, and that her subiects will consider of all things requisite to performe for horsemen, armor, & foote∣men, to be fully furnished as time shall require for seruice, to
defend their countrey. And further, her Maiestie doth most earnestly require and charge all manner of her subiects, with their hands, purses, & aduices, yea all persons of euery estate with their prayers to God, to moue him to assist this so naturall, honourable, and profitable a seruice, being only for defence of their naturall countrey, against straungers and such wilfull destroyers of their natiue countrey, and monstrous traytors. And more∣ouer to prouide speedy remedy against other fraudulent at∣tempts of these Seminaries, Iesuites, and traitors, without the which (it appeareth these forces should not be continual∣ly vsed) the same being wrought onely by falshood, by hy∣pocrisie, and by vndermining of her good subiects, vnder a false colour & face of holinesse to make breaches in men & womens consciences,It is fellony to receiue, aid, or main∣taine any le∣suit, &c. 27. F. l. cap. 1. & so to traine them to their treasons, that with such a secrecie, by the harbouring of the said traiterous mes∣sengers in obscure places, as without very diligent and con∣tinuall search to be made, and seuere order executed, the same will remaine and spread it selfe as a secret infection of trea∣sons in the bowels of this realme, most dangerous, yea, and most reprochfull to be suffered in any well ordered common∣wealth. Hereupon, according to her said proclamation, her Maiestie directed her Commissions forth, to enquire by all good meanes, what persons were by their behauiours, or o∣therwise, worthie to be suspected to be anie such persons as haue bene sent, or that are imployed in any such perswading of her Highnesse people, or of any residing within her realme to treason, or to moue anie to relinquish their alleageance to her Maiestie, or to acknowledge any kind of obedience to the Pope, or to the King of Spaine: and also of other persous, that haue therunto yéelded. And to the intent to discouer these venimous vipers, or to chase them out of this realme, for in∣fecting many more, her Maiesty did thereby straightly charge and command all maner of persons whatsoeuer without ex∣ception, that was kéeper of anie house, family or lodging, and gouernors of anie societies, to make diligēt search immediat∣ly
vpon the said Proclamation made, of all maner of persons that haue bene admitted or suffered to haue vsuall resort, diet, lodging or residence in their houses, or in anie place by their appointment, within one yeare ended at Michaelmas then last past, or that from thenceforth should be admitted or suffered to resort, eate, lodge, reside or attend, to be examined of what condition or countrey he is, and by what meanes he hath liued, and where he hath spent his time one yeare last be∣fore, and whether he vse to resort to Church to diuine seruice according to the law, and their answeres to be put in writing particularly, and to be kept as a register, to be shewed when they shalbe required, that vpon cause of suspition the partie may be tryed farther by the Commissioners, whether the same partie be a loyall subiect or not. And if any shalbe found vn∣willing to answere to such inquisition, or by his doubtfull an∣swere not like to be an obedient subiect, the same shalbe stayd by the houshold, or him that ought to haue the examination of him, and if any hauing gouernement or commaundement o∣uer any seruant, that shalbe found not to haue performed the points of the sayd inquisition, as is afore limitted, the same partie shalbe called before the sayd Commissioners, or before her Maiesties priuie Councell (if the qualitie of the person do so require) and shalbe vsed and ordered for such defaults, as the sayd Commissioners, or her Maiesties Councell shall haue iust cause to deale with such persons. And lastly by the same Proclamation, did admonish, and straightly charge and com∣maund all persons, that haue had any intelligence of any such that are sent or come from beyond the seas to such purposes, to direct them before her highnesse Commissioners, mentioned in the sayd Proclamation, to be assigned for the examinations of such persons, within twentie dayes next after publication of the sayd Proclamation, in the shyre Towne, Citie or Port, within the precinct of the same Commission, vpon paine, that the offenders therein shalbe punished as abbetters and main∣tainers of traitors, as by the same Proclamation amongst o∣ther things therein mentioned doth appeare.
And how let me turne my spéech to you, O ye vnnaturall and degenerated Englishmen,Booke of English fugi∣tiues. treacherous and vnfaithfull to her, to whom you owe all loyaltie, dutie and obedience: how can you thirst after the destruction of the countrey, where you were bred, borne, and nourished? why do you vnder colour of Religion enter into such hainous treasons, séeking thereby the ouerthrow of our most gracious Quéene and Soueraigne, and the subuersion of so glorious a State, by séeking to bring into this land strāgers to subdue ye same; a nation, who where they do ouercome,The tyranny of the Spa∣niards. shew themselues most cruell & tyrannous, and do séeke to fill the ayre with horrible blasphemies, & whose abhominable incontinencies do reach to the heauens, asking benegeance at the hands of God. Flaunders can well witnesse it: Portingall hath proued, Hispaniola can witnesse, & the other prouinces of India can testifie. And where amongst all nations it hath bene accounted a most honorable thing, for men to giue their liues for their coū∣trey, and to dye in the defence of their temples,It is honora∣ble for a man to giue his life for his countrey. Altars, & mo∣numents of their elders, you séeke to sée your countrey bathed with the bloud of your parents, wiues and children, kindred, and friends, to sée your Cities & temples consumed with fire, and the monuments of your auncesters defaced, our wiues, daughters, & virgins defloured and rauished afore your faces, and to bring this realme, which is famous amongst all Chri∣stian nations of the world, to the perpetuall slauerie, serui∣tude and bondage of a forrein Prince, in whose seruice in the field though you haue sundry times shewed your selues right valiant, yet they accompt you as traytors to your Prince and countrey, as they well may: they regard you not, they disdaine you: and how hardly you haue bene dealt withall there, your owne experience telleth you, which in the booke of the state of English fugitiues is set downe at large. I will remember some: When the Duke of Parma lay in siege at Andenard, did not Norris, Barney, Cornish, and Gibson (whom they had chosen to be their Captaines) with a troupe of sixe hundreth Englishmen, the tallest & best appointed souldiers
that a man might lightly see, offer their seruice to the sayd Duke, their comming being the onely cause that the sayd towne (a matter of great importance, and on the land side as it were the key of the prouince of Flaunders) was so soone de∣liuered vnto him as it was: for whereas the Duke of Aniow and the Prince of Orange lay vnder the walles of Gaunt with sufficient force and deliberate resolution to succour the sayd towne of Andenard (vpon this mutinie of the English) they marched away with their whole army, leauing the enemy battering the sayd towne, which seeing it selfe frustrated of the expected succors, presently rendered it selfe vnto ye Duke of Parma: thence they were drawne to Winoch Bargen, to serue against ye French & English, which lay there incamped, where they behaued themselues with such desperate resolu∣tion that day, that Monsieur de Balaunson brother to the Mar∣quis of Waranbone was taken prisoner, that besides the losse of many of their liues, they were in this action a wonder to the whole army. But could the pride of the Spaniard endure to heare these your prayses, nay did not they enuie and greatly disdaine it,They dis∣daine you. saying: That you had serued rather like gyddy headed drunkards then men wise and valiant. For a further proofe of valour, shortly after vppon the remoue of the Duke of Alansons army towards Gaunt, the rest of them were likewise brought thither, where also they gaue excee∣ding testimony of their valour and courage, namely the very day that Sir Iohn Norris made that famous retraite before Gaunt, who when the Frenchmen fled with a disordered a∣mazement, did with a present courage and excellent directiō, maintaine the place with such regiments of Englishmen, as were vnder his charge, and withstanding the Duke of Parma with all his puissance, who furiously charged him, neuerthe∣lesse withdrew his men, still holding their pikes in the bo∣somes of their enemies vnder the walles of Gaunt, not with∣out exceeding damage to the enemy, besides diuerse other great seruices done to ye sayd king in the field. But how were they recompenced for the same? were not a great number of
them suffered to perish in maner for hunger, & could neither get meat, nor their pay, to prouide for their néed: whereupon some of them were constrained by foraging in the country to relieue their hunger, and were not foure and twentie of them taken by the Spanish Prouost, and caried to Andenard, of the rendring whereof they had bene the chiefest meane, & there o∣penly hāged in the market place? And was not another troope of them being thirty in number in a village neare Papering in Flaunders, by a company of the Spaniards, after a friendly & souldierlike salutation of each side,Englishmen murthered most shame∣fully. as they were all making merrie together, on a sudden taken at aduantage, and vnar∣med, and most treacherously, cowardly, and inhumanely mur∣thered euerie one? whereof, though sundrie complaints were made to the Duke by their friends that were thus murthe∣red, and by their Captaines, yet Spaniards being the doers thereof, there could be no remedy nor iustice obtained. But to make them amends, because they wold be the cleanlier rid of the residue of this miserable troope, the Campe being then be∣fore Winoch Bargen, wherein lay a migty strong garrison of Frenchmen, they made them two Forts of purpose, in which they willingly placed the English in the vttermost part of the whole Campe, & nearest confining to the towne, to the end they might haue all their throats cut (as indéed they had in ve∣rie few nights after) at which time the enemie assaulting thē with great furie, and they defending themselues most man∣fully, aboue the space of one houre, in such sort as the Alarum passed through the whole Campe▪ yet they were not relieued with any succour at all, insomuch as the greatest part of thē being slaine, the enemie at last entred, and put the residue to the sword. To rehearse the sundry and seuerall calamities that these poore men, aswel Captaines as souldiers endured, during the time of their vnfortunate seruice, especially at Gansbecke, Aske and Gauer, would séeme for the vnspeakeable strangenesse therof, scarcely credible, for they neuer receiued in all the time of their seruice one moneths pay, their Lieu∣tenants and their Ensignes haue bene séene to go vp and
downe sickely and famished, begging their bread, couered on∣ly with poore blankets and tickes of featherbeds, that they had rifled in the villages abroad. And for a further proofe of the cruelty of the Spaniards against the English nation, when∣soeuer the fortune of warres hath deliuered any of vs into their hands, it is strange to thinke with what gréedie and vn∣satiable thirst, they haue desired to shed the English bloud. And for examples, at Resendale, where sundrie English regi∣ments being by the Marshal Byron abandoned and betrayed, were by them defeated and ouerthrowne as is scarcely credi∣ble, what barbarous crueltie they vsed vpon men rendred and demanding mercie vpon their knées. But admit all cruel∣tie tolerable during the surie of an execution (though amōgst Christians, and men of noble and valorous minds, there is yet a moderation to be vsed) what bloudy inhumanitie was euer heard the like to that which they vsed the next day: for wheras the Italians & Burgonians (moued with a souldier like cōpassion) had takē many English prisoners,A horrible murther of the English men by Spa∣niards after they were yeelded. & saued thē from the former slaughter, vpon the next morning march, as they brought thē forth, thinking to leade thē quietly to their quar∣ter, did not the Spaniards with a hellish furie, crying matta, matta, kill, kill, draw their rapiers, and murthred with many wounds these poore naked men, not suffering a man of thē to escape aliue? Likewise in that treacherous and Sinonicall practise of Graueling, wherin they thought to haue entrapped noble Sir Philip Sidney, how cruelly & tyrānously did they vse these poore men of ours, that were sent before to discouer it, whō after they had receiued into their gates with friendly sa∣lutations,Murther of men by the Spaniards af¦ter they had receiued thē kindly. & being entertained a good space in the towne, in the end, whē they did sée yt the successe of their enterprise answe∣red not their bloudy, treacherous & vnmāly expectatiō, did they not disarme & vnclothe thē in the market place, & finally, like cruell butchers, & not like honorable souldiers, murthered thē enery one? They wil not trust you (neither is there any reasō they should) for vpō their arriuall in the Spanish campe they were deuided into seuē cōpanies,They trust you not. the one of which was giuē to
the Earle of Westmerland, who vpon their humble request and sute, was made Coronell and Commander of them all, and yet they would not trust him, but appointed one Contra∣ras a Spaniard to be ioyned with him, as his assistant, or ra∣ther as a Maister or Commander both ouer him and the regi∣ment to ouersée. They scorne and hate you: for a great com∣panie of them standing together, séeing certaine Englishmen passe by, one of them sayd, that he wondred what the King made with anie such vermine in his countrey. Another of them sware a great oath, that looke how manie Englishmen there were in the kings seruice, there were so many spies & traitors. The third said, it was an almes déed to put them all in sackes, and throw them into the riuer. And the fourth said, it would be a better course to send them to the kings gal∣lies, where in regard of their big ioints and broad shoulders they could not but proue good to tug at an oare. A great mā in that countrey sware by a great oth, that he knew not any one of the English in regard of his ability, fit to do ye king seruice worth the straw that lay vnder his foot. Another great man of that country said, that he did not know what seruice the En∣glish had done, or were able to do, vnlesse it were to spend the kings money in tauernes and brothell houses. They sought to disgrace you: for whereas some of the En∣glish Captaines had made of their owne charges new & faire Ensignes, those Ensignes were by a Spanish Commissarie called Spinosa (who came with order to dissolue the regiment) taken violently from those that bare them, in presence of the Earle of Westmerland, who was Coronell of the regiment: & for a greater disgrace both to him & the rest, though both he, Captaine Tresham, & the other Captaines complained to the Duke for redresse, yet they could not obtaine any: the Spani∣ard after wards made his brags, that he turned the English Ensignes into Spanish field beds. They count you but traitors for conspiring the ouerthrow of your Prince and countrey, and so they may well do, and so they do all such as contrarie to the trust in thē reposed
did yéeld the Castels, Cities & fortresses, which they haue com∣mitted to them to keepe to the vse of her Maiestie: of which sort Pygot is one, who hauing cōmitted to his charge by that wor∣thy Knight now deceased str Iohn Norris, the kéeping of Alofte, and being Commāder of the rest of the companies there, most traiterously rendred the towne, himselfe and the whole regi∣ment (being well neare a thousand, as tall and well appoin∣ted men as were in any part of all Europe) to the seruice of the king of Spaine for 30000 French crownes: which seruice, how beneficiall and meritorious it was to the Spaniard, such as know the countrey can testifie sufficiently: for by yéelding of the sayd towne, they were the occasion that they got Der∣mounde, the Sasse, the fort of Leyskins, Hooke, S. Anthonies, & S. Margaret, the Doore, the best part of the land of wast, & in ma∣ner Gaunt it self, as the sequele verie apparātly sheweth: not∣withstanding all which seruice, were they not within two yeares space with hunger, the gallowes and other rigorous dealings quite consumed, and brought to nothing, as is afore∣said. They counted for the like Sir William Stanley and Row∣land Yorke, the one rendered vnto the king the towne of De∣uenter, the other betraying to him the fort of Sutteuen. As ye haue heard the end of the sayd reuolted regiment to the king of Spaine, so you shall heare the end of your Cap∣taines and guides, which is set down here to the end you may perceiue, that such and so great calamities as those, could ne∣uer haue hapned to them without the apparant hand of God, whose reuengefull iustice neuer ceased to pursue the infideli∣tie of those miserable men, vntill he had taken them from the face of earth: first Norris chief Captaine and ring-leader of the rest, after hee had considered of the foulnesse of his fact, and withall did see the scorne and contempt wherein hee liued vnder the Spaniard, it wrought such an impression in his hart, that hee fell into a kind of lunacy, being in prison in Flushing, and in the ende ended there his life with his owne hand: Gibson rising out of his bed suddenly (being in man∣ner naked) was by a Spanish horseman presently thrust
through the body and so died, whose wife sued to the Duke of Parma for iustice, but the English bloud was there of such vile price being shed by a Spaniard, that the matter was thought not worthy to be inquired of. Cornish was in one of the sayd little forts at such time as it was surprised by the Frenchmen, where both himselfe, his Lieutenant, his Ensigne and whole company were miserably slaine and mangled. Barners was shot through the right arme by a man vn∣knowne, with a small shot, in such sort that he hath vtterly lost the vse thereof, and after liued in great misery and po∣uerty: such (after these mens seruices) was their fortune, & such is the ende of all trecherous and euill affected English∣men to their Prince and countrey. Pygot died suddenly in the Marshalsey at London, being sent thither as prisoner from Ostend. Daulcon became a Py∣rate, and was hanged in the North countrey: Captaine Tay∣ler was slaine by the Earle of Westmerland in the Spanish Campe: Captaine Vincent was hanged, Chenie at Bargenop∣some, Captaine Welch was slaine vnder the walles of Roane, Yorke, and Williams were executed at Tyburne. Thus you haue heard what it is to liue vnder, and serue a forreyne Prince. They trust you not, for how can a strange Prince in reason perswade himselfe, that such as are traitours, and in their actions monsters against their countrey, will be faith∣full to him, but will alwayes carry a iealous opinion ouer you: that he will neuer credit you with any seruice of impor∣tance, but when he will appoint greater persons to ouerlooke you. He which séeketh to conquer another countrey will vse all wayes & deuises to attaine his purpose.Hiena. Eccles. cap. 13. Plin. histor. natur. lib. 8. cap. 30. Crocodiles. The beast Hiena (as is mentioned in Ecclesiastes) counterfeits the voyce of a man, and so entiseth him out of his house with faire per∣swasions, and then destroyeth him. The Crocodiles nature is, when he would deuoure a man, to weepe, as thongh he were louing an kind, when he would draw him on to kill him. Who will not (that hath his senses) rather endure any hard
fortune vnder his owne naturall Prince, who will not ra∣ther loose his life by the hand of the enemy, in defence of his natiue countrey, then hazard it in the seruice of any for∣reyne Prince against the same? You should rather say, as E∣neas the noble Troian, when the Greeks had won Troy, after∣wards trauelling through the raging seas to seeke the land of Italie, falling into a dangerous tempest, and séeing no hope of life, held vp his hands. and vsed these words: O ter quatérque beati,Virgill. Aeneid. Queis ante ora patrum Troiae sub maenibus altis Contigit oppetere, ô Danaûm fortissime gentis Titide, méne Iliacis occumbere campis Non potuisse, tuáque animam hanc effundere dextra? Saeuus vbi Aeacidae telo iacet Hector, vbi ingens Sarpedon, vbi tot Simois correpta sub vndis Scuta virûm, galeásque & fortia corpora voluit. Remember your selues yet at the last, and apply your mindes to the faithfull seruice of your Prince and countrey: he runneth farre (as the saying is) that neuer turneth againe: séeke by faithfull assurance of your loyalties hereafter to her Maiestie, for her gracious pardon yt yee may hencefoorth liue like dutifull subiects ready to defend your Prince & countrey against the enemy, following therein the steps of your faith∣full, valiant, and couragious forefathers, whose fame by this your disloyaltie you seeke to blemish and deface, rather then to liue vnder any forreyne Prince, that would surprise the City and bring it in thraldome. And now to returne to the proclamation last before men∣tioned. Were euer such practises as be mentioned in the same, wrought against any Christian Prince, by any man of the Church that challengeth to be Peters successour,Corinth. 14. as the Pope doth? Saint Paule saith that God is not the God of dissention but of peace: Lord God, what aunswere shall he make in the later day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be opened, that
ought to maintaine peace,The Pope stirreth the subiects to rebell a∣gainst their Prince. thus to sow discord among Chri∣stian Princes, and to moue their subiects to oppose against them surely his owne conscience shall testifie against him, which will be as strong as a thousand witnesses, as Persius ve∣ry well sayth. Poena autem vehemens ac multo seuerior illis,Satyr. 3. Quas & Ceditius grauis inuenit & Rodamanthus, Nocte diéque suum gestare in pectore testem. And againe, Conscientia mille testes, & onus Aetna grauius. Can he find by the word of God,No subiect can rebell for any cause. Rom. 13. that it is lawfull for the sub∣iect to rebell against his Prince for any cause whatsoeuer? Saint Paul sayth, Let euery soule submit himselfe to the higher powers: there is no power but of God, all powers that are, be ordayned of God▪ and whosoeuer resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and procureth to himselfe damnation. When Pilate sayd to Christ:Iohn. 18. Knowest thou not, yt I haue po∣wer to loose thee, & also to crucifie thee? he sayd; thou shouldest haue no power at all ouer me, were it not giuen thee from a∣boue: our Sauior Christ was called afore the high Priests to answere to his doctrine, did he oppose himselfe any way a∣gainst them? no, he knew they had their authority from God, and therefore he shewed all obedience to them in respect of their place, and patiently suffered death (though vniustly) ac∣cording to their wicked law and iudgements. When Malcus with other of the high Priests seruants, came by their commandement to take Christ,Iohn. 18. Peter drew out his sword, & cut off Malcus eare: & Christ said vnto him, Put vp thy sword into thy sheath,Math. 25. for all yt strike with the sword shall perish therewith: thinkest thou that I cannot speake to my Father, and he shall giue me more then twenty legions of Angels? but how should then the Scripture bee per∣formed? The famous clarke Erasmus in his Paraphrase vppon this place of Scripture,Paraphrase. speaketh these words vnto Peter, as it
were in the persō of Christ. Put vp thy sword into thy sheath: matters of the Gospell are not in such manner to be defen∣ded, if thou wilt succeed me as my vicar, thou must fight with no other sword then of Gods word, which cutteth away sinne, and saueth the man. And the auncient father Tertullian in his Apologia cap. 37 sayth, In our profession more meeter it is to be slaine then to slay. So did all the Martyrs of God, by whom the Church of Christ increased. Saint Augustine saith: Not resistendo sed perferendo: Not by resisting, but by suffering, If the Prince should set foorth a law touching the worshiping of God, or matter of conscience against the word of God, and lymit a paine to the breakers thereof,Acts. 4. though the subiect be not bound in conscience to obserue that law (for in such cases a man must rather obey God then man) yet he may not re∣bell nor oppose himselfe violently against his Prince, but he must rather referre his cause to God, and submit himselfe to ye punishmēts of the law,Peter. 2. as Saint Peter saith: Submit your selfe to euery ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king, as to the chiefe, or to them that be sent of him: then it followeth, he may not rebell, whatsoeuer the or∣dinance be. The Iewes had a law, that whosoeuer should say, he was the Sonne of God, should die: Christ that was the soonne of God in déede,Looke Iohn. 19. verse. 7. and so declared himselfe to the people to be, yet he did submit himselfe to the paine of the law, thoughit be vngodly.
¶The manner how to suppresse rebels, with a perswasion to all subiects to the due of obedience of their Prince: the great in∣conueniences that arise of ciuill warres. How hatefull the name of a traytour is to the posteritie; and what plagues haue fallen not onely vppon traytors, but also vppon such as haue bene murmurers against their Princes & Gouernors. CHAP. 8. WHen the Princes of Germany determined to take armes against ye emperor for ye defence of their religion,Bodinus 211 they asked Luther if it were lawfull so to do: who answered expresly, that it was not,Sleildan. 4. and would not perswade them thereunto, saying, that no cause could be iust, for the subiect to beare armes against his Prince & countrey. And because it is conuenient that rebellious and disorde∣red people should be dealt withall with conuenient speed,Bodinus. lib. 4. fol. 487. let vs heare what Bodinus writeth concerning the maner how. Si tamen seditio priùs coorta fuerit quàm prospiceretur, sapientissi∣mos ac summa virtute praestantes viros, qui populi motus orationis lenitate ac prudētia regere possunt, adhibere oportebit: nam qui vi adhibent, perinde faciunt vt ij qui torrentem praecipiti casu de rupi∣bus altissimis labentem sistere se posse confidunt.How rebels must be sup∣pressed. If seditious per∣sons and rebels be assembled together afore it be foreseene, the wisest men, and such as for their great vertue excell, & can moue the people with their gentle and wise perswasions, are most mee∣test to be vsed; for such (as at the first) vse force, do as they which thinke to stay a great water falling headlong from the high rocks. If wild beasts cannot be tamed with strokes, but by gentle and skilfull vsing of them, who can thinke with sharpe and rough words to tame such, as of all beasts are most fierce? The Senate of Rome did very often reprehend such as vsed force to appease the furie of the people, and rather cōmended Menenius Agrippa, which not with bitternesse, but rather with
gentlenesse and cunning vsed to reduce the people to their o∣bedience and dutie, which aboue all other bred to him immor∣tall praise, and glorie to the common wealth. And to that ef∣fect the Poet Virgill writeth thus: Ac veluti magno in populo cum sepè coorta est Seditio,Aeneid. lib. 1. saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus, Iam{que} faces & saxa volant, furor arma ministrat, Tum pietate grauem ac meritis si fortè virum quem Conspexêre, silent, arrectis{que} auribus astant, Ille regit dictis animos, & pectora mulcet. Whē sedition is raised amongst the common people, in their rage firebrands and stones flie (for furie doth minister weapons) then if they see by chaunce anie graue man, to be reuerenced for his ver∣tee and good deserts, they are silent, and hearken to him diligent∣ly, and he asswageth with his mildnesse and wise speeches their minds and rages.Pericles. So did Pericles the Athenian, Peter Lore∣dan the Venetian and others, whereby it appeareth, that ver∣tue and wisdome doth sometime mors preuaile in these cases, then either lawes, armes, or the commandement of rulers. And to restraine such rebellious people, and reduce them to due obedience, the feare and reuerence of Religion, hath bene in times past of great force:Lib. 4. fol. 480 for as Bodinus writeth, whē ciuill warres were raised amongst the Florentines, and great slaughter and bloudshed happened amongst them in the Citie, and no force of man could restraine the same, Fraun∣cis Soderinus the Bishop, hauing on his pontificall orna∣ments, and a companie of Priests attending on him, and the Crosse borne before him, entred into the middest of the Citi∣zens thus assembled: whereupon they forthwith for the feare they had of religion, did put off their armour: so did Iudas Bishop of the Hebrues,High Priest. (when Alexander the great came to the citie of Ierusalem with a great host) being apparelled in his holy vestiments, met him, which sight, and the brightnesse whereof being feared, Alexander did reuerence the Bishop, & did not spoile the countrie nor holy Citie, but with great
benefites did inlarge the same. By like meanes Vrbane the Pope is said to haue turned and remoued away the siege of Attila from the citie of Aquila,5. Ioseph. in anti. as Iosephus writeth: but when none of these will serue, then the extermitie of armes must be vsed. And because good perswasions and mild spéeches are thought so conuenient to be vsed to appease such vprores, I haue thought good to set downe this simple exhortation, which followeth. After that Almightie God had destroyed the world for the finne of man,Exhortation to rebels. sauing Noah and his family (who were preser∣ued in the Arke by Gods prouidence) and that nations and people did againe increase and multiply vpon the face of the earth, knowing in his euerlasting wisedome, how necessarie, good, and wholsome lawes should be for the go∣uernment and direction of his people, he gaue the lawes of the tenne commandements in the mount Sinay, wherein is con∣tained first, our dutie to almighty God, and next to our neigh∣bour: then he also ordained Kings, Princes, and Gouernors, to rule and order their subiects, and to punish the offenders thereof by these lawes, and gaue them power to make lawes, as Salomon saith:Prou. 8. By me kings raigne, through me Princes make good lawes. And lastly, he gaue straight commandemēt to the subiects touching their obedience to their Soueraigne Lords and rulers,Rom. 13. as Saint Paule saith, Let euerie soule sub∣mit himselfe to the higher Powers: there is no power but of God, all powers that be, are ordained of God: whosoeuer there∣fore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and they that resist, procure to themselues damnation: for rulers are not fearefull to them that do well, but to them that do euill. Wilt thou be without feare of the power? do well then, and so thou shalt be praised of him: for he is the minister of God ordained for thy wealth. But if thou do euill, then feare, for he beareth not the sword in vaine: for he is the minister of God to take vengeance of them that do euill. Wherfore we must obey, not onely for feare of vengeance, but for conscience sake also, for that cause we pay tri∣bute, for they are Gods ministers seruing for that purpose.
Now what euill counsel hath moued you thus to enter in∣to armes against your naturall Prince and Liege Ladie, whom Almightie God hath ordained to supply his place, and to raigne ouer you? Who hath be witched you, thus to abuse the great loue and fauour of so gracious a Quéene, which she hath borne alwayes, and doth dayly shew to her good subiects, to oppose against her, that is studious to set forth the Gospell, that is, and hath bene so carefull to maintaine such common peace amongst vs these fortie yeares and more,Though this be touched afore, yet it is not vn∣meet to be vsed here to these men as the like hath not bin séene nor heard of, neither is to be found in anie record or Chronicle of this realme sithence the conquest ther∣of (which is aboue 528 yeares) for the like time of gouern∣ment, that is desirous to raigne with mercie, with loue, with pitie and tender compassion, and not by tyrannie, nor by effu∣sion of bloud, neither alwayes by inflicting the extremitie of her lawes vpon such as most iustly haue deserued the execu∣tion of the same: that is mercifull to offenders, bountifull to well deseruers of her Maiestie and their conntrey: that to her great charge hath fortified this realme with strong Ca∣stles, and a Nauie of warlike shippes and all other things ne∣cessarie for the warres in great aboundance, for the defence of her kingdome and people: that hath not laid vpon vs any taxes or tallages, but the like thereof hath bene before her time, and greater also: that hath made good lawes, and ta∣ken a solemne oath in the day of her coronation to endeuour her selfe that the same shall be holden, kept, and executed vnto all her subiects indifferently, without respect of persons: and is also well pleased to be ordered by the same her selfe. If you consider the horrible murthers of great persons, the pitifull slaughter of man, woman and child, by fire and sword, the lamentable rauishments of maids, wiues and widowes, the ransacking and spoiling of Cities and townes, with ma∣ny other miseries and calamities, which haue hapned, & conti∣nued in other countreys, not farre hence these many yeares by occasion of ciuill warres and dissention, you shall find, that we haue cause to thinke our selues most bound of all nations,
to the goodnesse of God, in that he hath not suffered vs to be afflicted and visited with the like: all which haue bene preuē∣ted, by the great wisedome and prouidence of her Maiestie & her graue Councell. These besides other infinite great kind∣nesse and benefites, her highnesse hath daily most graciously bestowed vpon vs, that more nor greater no Prince can ex∣tend to her people, and shall we now be vnthankfull for the same? shall we yéeld vnkindnesse for kindnesse? shall we re∣compence her daily care & studie to do vs good, by seeking dan∣ger to her person, and perill to her state, which may ensue by your forcible and violēt opposing against her? There is nothing worse bestowed, then that is done to the vngratefull and forget∣full man, as Erasmus writeth. Nihil peius confertur quàm quod he∣mini ingrato atque non scienti. A man that receiueth a good turne (if there be any good na∣ture in him) will alwayes be thankful, and so much the more, when he is not able to deserue or requite the least part there∣of: king Dauid that receiued many good things at the hands of God, shewed not himselfe vnthankfull, but breaking out as it were on a suddaine, sayd vnto himselfe. Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? calicem salutaris accipiam & nomen Domini inuocabo.Psal. 116. 107. What shall I yeeld vnto God for all that he hath done vnto me? I will take the cup of thankesgiuing, & and call vpon the name of the Lord. It is all that Almighty God doth looke for at our hands, that we should be thankfull vnto him for all his mercies & louing kindnesse that he doth daily bestow vpō vs, as Almightie God saith by his Prophet: He that giueth me praise and thankes, the same is he that honoreth me. And all that her Maiestie looketh for at our hands, is to be true, faithfull and thankefull to her. Is there any thing that doth more open the gate to forrein in∣uasion, then ciuill warres and dissention? the Gospell saith, Euery kingdome in it self deuided, shalbe desolate. Did not Wil∣liam Duke of Normandie, when ciuil warres & diuision was in the realme, cōquere the same? and likewise in Henrie the third his dayes (when the great warres were betwixt him and his
Barons) did not Philip the French king, send hither Lewes his sonne with a great number of men of warre, and got sundry Cities, Castels, Townes, and holdes, thinking to haue made a conquest of this land, and so had done, if the sayd Barons (who conspired with the sayd Lewes) had not reuolted frō the French, and driuen them out of this countrey: besides diuers other like examples to be found in our English Chronicles. If there be any thing méete to be redressed, do you thinke by this meanes (though your number were far greater) to haue your wils, or to be reléeued? No, no, assure your selues, the no∣bilitie and thousands of thousands, of the good and dutiful sub∣iectes of this realme, will ioyne together (as they ought) to de∣stroy you, and you shalbe slaine as thicke as motes are in the sunne, before you shall obtaine your purpose: for it standeth not with the honour and name of a Prince to be forced by the subiect to do any thing against his will: and such of you as shal escape the sword, shalbe sure to be executed by course of law, that is, you shalbe drawne vpon hurdles to the places of execu∣tion, and there hanged vntill you be halfe dead, and then cut downe aliue, your priuities shalbe cut off, your bowels taken out of your bellyes and being aliue, they shalbe burned be∣fore your faces: then shall your heads be smitten off, and your bodies deuided into foure quarters (and as the vse is) shalbe set vpon stakes in the towers and highest places in good Ci∣ties and townes, where it shall please the Prince to appoint. Thus shall your carcases be meate for the fowles of the ayre, and a spectacle ioyfull to your enemies, and wofull to your parents, kinsfolks and friends to behold: besides you shall leaue to your posterities name of perpetual shame ignominy and reproch, that is the names of rebels and false traitors, yea rather monsters to your Prince and countrey: you shall also vndo your wife and children, in that you shal forfet to the Prince all your lands, leases, goods and chattels, besides your blud shalbe corrupted, so as none of your ofspring shalbe able to haue or claime by you any lands, as heyres to your fathers, mothers, or other auncesters. And this forfaiture and corrup∣tion
of bloud shalbe as well where you shalbe slaine in field, as condemned by course of law. Where haue you euer heard or read, that rebels (whether they haue bene of nobilitie or o∣thers) did euer preuaile, but haue bin alwayes ouerthrowne and brought to confusion, whatsoeuer their pretences haue bene? And amongst many examples I will put you in minde of a tew:Rebellion in Lincoln∣shyre. Hol. 1567. when as the Lincolnshyre men to the number of 40000. rebelled about the 28. yeare of Henry the eight for re∣ligion, was not Doctour Makerell and others of the ring lea∣ders, of that vnruly companie executed, in such maner, as is a∣boue remembred,Abridgemēt of Grafton. 140. West coun∣trey. Rebels in Norfolke, as Ket and o∣thers. Hol. 1734. Wiats rebel∣lion. and many of the rest of them slaine in the field, and so subdued? Was not Syr Humfrey Arundale, Win∣slade, Holins, Burie and diuerse others of the chief of the rebel∣lion in the West parts of this realme, raised in Edward the sixt his dayes, executed also as traitors? Did it not likewise happen so to Ket and many others of the rebels in Norfolke in the same kings dayes, which sought to haue layed Parkes and Commons inclosed open? Was not Wiat, Isley and diuers Knights, Esquiers and Gentlemen of Kent, who rebelled in the first yeare of Quéene Marie, & opposed themselues against the Prince in armes, to stay the alteration of religion and her mariage with the king of Spaine, executed for the same rebel∣lion? and were not aboue fifty of the common sort of these re∣bels hanged vp in London in diuerse places there?Holin. 1732. And were not sundrie other Esquires and Gentlemen condemned, and should haue bene executed for that commotion, had not Quéene Marie giuen them pardon? Were not the Earles of Northum∣berland and Westmerland, and about fiftie knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen attainted for the insurrection of the North parts of this realme,Insurrection in the North in the eleuenth yeare of the Quéenes Maiesties raigne? And was not the sayd Earle of Northum∣berland beheaded at Yorke? And did not manie others of the said Esquires and Gentlemen suffer for that offence in other places?Holin. 1840. And did not the said Earle of Westmerland, and di∣uerse other of the said attainted persons, fly ouer the seas to saue their liues, which other wise had tasted of that sauce?
And were not diuerse of the common sort executed by mar∣tiall law for the same rebellion? The matter is yet fresh in memorie, so that it néedeth no proofe of the end of rebels, and such as beare traiterous harts against their Prince. We haue diuerse examples also out of the holy Scriptures, and among other a notable example of Absolon, who conspired the death of his father king Dauid, who rebelling against him (riding vnder a trée) was by Gods prouidence hanged vp on a bough thereof by the long haire of his head.Ignatius. Epist. 2. Of whom Ignatius the anciēt father writeth, Absolon parricida existens Dei iudicio ar∣bori appensus, cor eius quod malè cogitabat, sagitta tansfixum est. And so you may sée the vengeance of God on the heart which conceiued the treason, and on the body that executed the same. Achitophel likewise, the mischieuous Counseller to Ab∣solon in that wicked rebellion, for lacke of an hangman, han∣ged himselfe; a worthie end of all false rebels, who rather then they shold lacke due execution, will by Gods iust iudge∣ment become hangmen vnto themselues Thus it hapned to ye Captaines of this rebellion,2. Reg. 187. besides fortie thousand of the com∣mon sort, which were slaine in the field for that rebellion. And as ye holy Scriptures do shew, so doth dayly experience proue, that the counsels, cōspiracies & attēpts of rebels neuer tooke effect, but came euer to a most horrible end. Now concerning such as haue bin murmurers against their rulers, you shall sée what hath hapned to thē: some haue bene strickē with foule leprosie, some burnt with fire sodainly frō heauen, sometime they were consumed with the pestilēce, sometime were stung to death with strange kinds of fiery serpents, & sometime the earth hath opened and swallowed thē vp quicke, the Captains and bands of such murmurers, with their wiues, children & fa∣milies. Then if such strange and horrible plagues haue hap∣ned to such subiects as did but only murmure and speake euil against their heads, what shall become of such subiects as con∣spire, arme themselues, assemble great numbers of men in armes, & encourage and leade thē against their Prince & coun∣trie, spoyling, robbing & slaying as manie of their good subiects
as do withstand them, and against whom they may preuaile. We are forbidden by the holy Scripture,Eccle. 10. so much as to think euill to the Prince, for the birds of the aire shall betray thee, & with their wings shal bewray they voyce. If we may not think euil, much lesse may we do anie thing that shal or may tend to her danger, as rebellions do alwayes imply peril to her per∣son & state.Sam 24. King Saule was a wicked Prince, & sought the life of Dauid the seruant of God diuerse wayes, & yet Dauid wold not hurt him, no, when he might haue slaine him in his caue, but said, The Lord keepe me, that I lay not my hands vpon the Lords annointed.2. Tim. 2. S. Paule saith, I exhort that aboue all things prayers & supplications, and intercessions, and giuing of thanks be made of all men, for kings, and all that are in authoritie, that we may liue a quiet life with all godlinesse, for that is good and ac∣ceptable in the sight of God our Sauiour. So did the people of God,Apol. cap. 30. which liued vnder Pagans and tyrants, as Tertullian witnesseth. If the Princes be good, they are a great blessing of God bestowed on the people: if they be vngodly & tyrants, then they are appointed for their punishment: yet must they pray for them whatsoeuer they be: for when S. Paule taught to pray for rulers, then Caligula, Clodius and Nero (who were no Christians, but Pagans and most cruel tyrants) were go∣uernors & rulers of the people. When Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, after he had slain their kings, nobles, wiues & chil∣dren, & the people of God & wasted their country, spoyled their cities, yea and Ierusalem it selfe, & the holy temple, and caried the residue with him captiue to Babylon,Baruc. 1. 11. yet Baruc the Pro∣phet of God, exhorted the people being in captiuity, saying: Pray you to God for the life of Nabuchodonosor king of Baby∣lon, and of Balthaser his son, that their dayes may be as the dayes of heauen vpon the earth, that God also may giue vs strength, & lightē our eyes, that we may liue vnder the defence of Nabucho∣donosor king of Babylon, & vnder the protectiō of Balthaser his sonne, that we may long do them seruice, and find fauor in their sight. If they then prayed for tyrants and vngodly kings, how much more ought we to pray to God for the life, preseruation,
and prosperons estate of so gracious a Quéene & soueraigne Gouernour as we haue? What shall I say of you? shal I call you subiects, that assemble your selues in this forcible maner, and breake the common peace of the realme, and in stéed of quietnesse, ioy and felicitie (which do follow of blessed peace and due obedience) do bring all trouble, sorrow, disquietnesse of mind and bodie, and all mischiefes and calamities, and turne all good order vpside downe, bring all good lawes in contempt, and tread them vnder foot, oppresse all vertue and honestie, and all vertuous and honest persons, and set all vice and wickednesse, and all vitious and euill men at liber∣tie, to worke their vngodly willes and vngracious purposes, which were before bridled with wholsome lawes: and do wea∣ken, ouerthrow, and consume the strength of the realme, as∣well by wasting and spending the treasure thereof, as by slaying the good subiects of the same, and make our countrie readie, as it were, to be a pray and spoyle to all outward ene∣mies, and to bring vs, our wiues, children and posterities to perpetuall captiuitie, slauerie, and bondage: that strangers may possesse our lands, goods, & liuings, to our vtter vndoing & destruction? Though God do often prosper iust & lawfull e∣nemies, which be no subiects, against forraine enemies: and though a small number (vpon wars begun vpon iust causes) hath many times prospered against huge nūbers of their ad∣uersaries, that haue offered them wrong and iniurie, yet ne∣uer did rebel prosper against their Prince,Note. how noble or great soeuer their Captaine or number of people haue bene: and whether their pretence of rebelling haue bene for reformatiō of religion, or for any other cause whatsoeuer, yet they haue bin alwayes ouerthrowne by the iust iudgemēt of God: and so Sir Thomas Wyat, vpō his arraignmēt for the sayd rebellion of Kent,Hol. 1. ma. affirmed openly, lamenting heartily his brutish and beastly fall (as he rightly tearmed it) into ye horrible offence of the law, requiring all the audience there present, to re∣member his spéeches, and to be taught by his infelicitie and most wretched case, as in the Chronicle doth appeare. If you
be grieued with any thing which is to be reformed, exhibit your supplication to her Maiesties Lieutenant here present, and make your humble submission, confessing your great of∣fences, and crauing together on your knees her most gra∣cious pardon, with faithfull promise, that (by Gods grace) you will not enter into the like horrible offence hereafter. a∣gainst her highnesse and her lawes, and so ye may the rather obtaine the same, which her sayd Lieutenant hath authority vnder her great seale of England to graunt to such of you, as shall do as is afore remembred: & herein you shall do as was vsed in king Edward the sixt his time,Holinsh. by some which then op∣posed themselues against the sayd king, as you do now a∣gainst her Maiestie, who vppon their like submission, had their pardon, and by order from the king also present redresse of their griefes. If ought be to be remedied, it belongeth not to the subiect to performe it: for if ye Prince should make a law neuer so hard against ye subiect, & impose a great punishment to the breakers thereof, yet the subiect may not presume to attempt to remedy the same, but must submit himselfe to the punishment of the law: as Saint Perer saith,Peter. submit your selues to euery ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king, as to the head, or to ye rulers, as to them sent of him for the punishment of euil doers; but for the cherishing of such as do well, for so is the will of God. If you will not take this course, but stand to the vtter∣most, assure your selues, that you shall be consumed with the sword, and such as escape that death, shall suffer the execu∣tion due by law to traitors, in such terrible manner as is a∣boue remembred. To conclude, if neither the feare of God, your dutie to your Prince, the preseruation of her person, the safety of your countrey, nor the safegard of your owne liues, if the forfei∣ture of your lands and goods, if the vtter vndoing of your wiues and children, the corruption of your bloud, the terror of your execution, the shame and ignominy of the world to be left to your posterity, the sorrow of your parents, the
griefe of your friends, and reioyring of your enemies, to see you come to this miserable and lamentable ende, will not moue you to desist from this your outragious dealing, and to submit your selues, as is aforesayd, yet at least remember your soules health, and the saying of Saint Paule, which I put you in mind of in the beginning, that such as rebell against their Prince, shall procure to themselues damnation, where∣of if you will haue no regard, then of all people you are the most miserable, and it had beene better you had neuer beene borne, then to be condemned to hell fire, where there is no redemption, and where you shall be tormented world with∣out ende, with Lucifer the first rebell against God, and father of all rebels, and with his angels, where is weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth, and perpetuall horror a∣mongst the damned spirits for euermore, from which Almigh∣ty God for his mercy deliuer vs. ¶A repetition of certaine Statutes, whereby it is high treason as well for any man to withdraw her Maiesties subiects from their loyaltie, as also to be so withdrawne. CHAP. 9. IT is not vnknowne vnto you, how that the Bishop of Rome by certaine Iesuits practised, as you haue heard, by the sayd proclamation to deale with her Maiesties subiects, to re∣nounce their obedience vnto her highnesse, which no man can do,No man can renounce his naturall allegeance. because it is due to her Maiestie by the law of God, and by the law of nature, of all which are borne vnder her obeissance, and that which na∣ture hath giuen no man can take away, as the saying is: Quod natura dedit, nemo est qui tollere possit.
And in proofe thereof,Dyer. 300. I find that Doctor Story an English∣man borne, fled into Brabant, and there tooke his oath of al∣legiance to be subiect to Philip king of Spaine, and after being brought into England, he was arraigned for practising beyond the sea with the king of Spaine his deputy there, in forcible and warlike manner to inuade this Realme of England,Doctor Sto∣ries arraign∣ment. and in this practising did shew how and where the best place was to make this inuasion. And if he would so doe, there should be diuerse ready to ayde him, he confessed that he was an En∣glishman borne at Salisbury, but sayd he was the sayd king of Spaine his subiect, and therefore refused to answere to that in∣ditement, saying also, that he was no subiect to the Quéenes Maiestie, & yt he had bin subiect to the king of Spaine this seuen yeares, and thereupon prayed that his plée might be entred, & because he would giue no other answer, he had iudgement as a traitor,Stories exe∣cution. 13. Elizabeth. yt is to be hanged drawne, and quartered, & so he was executed in the thirtéenth yere of her Maiesties raigne. Ther∣fore this deuise of the Pope and his practise to withdraw her Maiesties subiects from their loyalty, is but as it were a trap layd, to bring such to destruction as shall be so withdrawne, and it is treason by a Statute made in the three and twen∣tieth yeare of her Maiesties raigne, as well in the practiser to withdraw, as in the person which is withdrawne, as by that statute appeareth, the words whereof be these. Be it declared and enacted by the authority of this present Par∣liament,23. El. cap. 1. Treason to withdraw a∣ny from their natu∣rall obedi∣ence. that all persons whatsoeuer, which haue or shall haue, or pretēd to haue power, or shal by any waies or meanes put in pra∣ctise to absolue, perswade, or withdraw any of the Queenes Ma∣iesties subiects, or any within her highnesse Realmes & dominiōs, from their naturall obedience to her Maiestie, or to withdrawe them for that intent from the religion now by her Highnesse au∣thority established, within her highnesse dominiōs, to the Romish religion, or to moue them, or any of them, to promise any obe∣dience to any pretended authority of the Sea of Rome, or of any other Prince, State, or Potentate, to be had and vsed within her dominions, or shall do any ouert act, to that intent or purpose,
euery of them shal be to all intents adiudged traitours, and being thereof lawfully conuicted, shall haue iudgement, suffer, and for∣feit, as in case of high treason. And if any person shall after the end of that Session of Parliament, by any meanes be willingly absol∣ued or withdrawne as afore is sayd, or willingly be reconciled, or shall promise any obedience to any such pretended authority, Prince, State, or Potentate, as is afore sayd, that then euery such person, their procurers & counsellers therunto, being therof law∣fully conuicted, shall be taken, tried, and iudged, and shall suffer and forfeit as in cases of high treason. And be it likewise enacted and declared, that all and euery person and persons, that shall wil∣lingly be ayders or maintainers of such persons so offending, as is aboue expressed, or of any of them (knowing the same) or which shall conceale any offence aforesayd, and shall not within twenty dayes at the furdest, after such persons knowledge of such offēce, disclose the same to some Iustice of peace, or other higher offi∣cer, he shall be taken, tried, and iudged, and shall suffer and forfeit, as offenders in misprison of treason. And because by the sayd proclamation published in the sayd thrée and thirtith yeare, it appeareth that the Pope hath authorised Iesuits and Seminaries (named in the sayd pro∣clamation) by colour of Buls to absolue the persons mentio∣ned in the Statute last before remembred, I haue thought it also conuenient to set downe in this place, the Statut made in the thirtéenth yeare of the Quéenes Maiesties raigne, concerning the bringing in of Buls into this Realme, which is, as followeth. Be it enacted,13. El. cap. 1. Buls. that if any person or persons after the first day of Iuly next cōming, shall vse or put in vre in any place within this Realme, or within any the Queenes dominions, any Bull, wri∣ting, instrument, written or printed, of absolution or reconcilia∣tion, obtayned and gotten from the sayd Bishop of Rome, or a∣ny of his successors, or from any other person or persons authori∣sed, or claiming authority by or from the sayd Bishop of Rome, his predecessors or successors, or Sea of Rome, or if any person or persons after the sayd first day of Iuly, shall take vppon him or
them by colour of any such Bull, writing, instrument, or authority to absolue or reconcile any person or persons, or to graunt or pro∣mise to any persō or persons within this Realme, or any other the Queenes Maiesties dominions, any such absolution or reconcilia∣tion by any speech, preaching, teaching, writing, or any other o∣pen deede, or if any person or persons within this Realme, or any the Queenes Maiesties dominions after the sayd first day of Iuly, shall willingly receiue or take any such absolution or reconcilia∣tion, or else if any person or persons haue obtayned or gotten sithens the last day of Iuly, in the first yeare of the Queenes Ma∣iesties Raigne, or after the sayd first day of Iuly, shall obtaine or get from the sayd Bishop of Rome, or any his successors or Sea of Rome, any manner of Bul, writing, or instrument written, or printed, containing any thing, matter, or cause whatsoeuer, or shall publish or by any wayes or meanes put in vre, any such Bul, writing, or instrument, that thē all & euery such act & acts, offēce and offēces, shall be deemed & adiudged by the authority of this Act to be high treason, & the offender & offenders therein, their procurers, abbetters and counsellers, to the committing the sayd offence and offences, shall be deemed high treason to the Queene and the Realme, and being thereof lawfully indicted and attayn∣ted, shall forfeit as in cases of high treason, and their ayders, coun∣sellers, or abbetters, after the committing of the sayd offences and acts (to the intent to set foorth, vphold, or allow, the do∣ing or execution of the sayd vsurped power, iurisdiction, or authority, touching, or concerning the premises or any part ther∣of) shall incurre the paine of the Satute of Praemunire, made in the sixteenth yeare of king Richard the second.16. R. 2. cap. Prouided al∣wayes, nd be it further enacted by the authority aforesayd, that if any person or persons, to whom any such absolution, reconci∣liation, Bull, writing, or instrument, shall after the sayd first day of Iuly, be offered, moued, or perswaded to be vsed, put in vre,Conceale. or executed, shall conceale the same offer, motion, or perswade, and not disclose and signifie the same by writing, or otherwise within sixe weekes next following, to some of the Queenes Maiesties Priuie Councell established in the North
parts, or in the Marches of Wales for the time being, shall in∣curre the paine and forfeiture of misprision of treason,Treason. B. 19. 6. El. 6. which is to forfeit the profit of his lands, during his life, all his goods and chattels, and to haue perpetuall imprisonment. And the paine of the sayd Satute of the Praemunire, is to forfeit all his lands, that he hath in fee-simple,Forfeit. B. 101 24. H. 8. to the Crowne for euer, and all lands that he holdeth in tayle, or for life, during his life, and all his leases for yeares, and other his goods and chattels for euer, and shall haue perpetuall imprisonment,Protection. and be out of the Queenes pro∣tection. And it hath bene taken that any man might kill such a one before the making of the Statute of 5.F. n. b. 232. Coron. B. 193. El. cap. 1. but now he may not. Although it may be doubted, for that we are deuided for re∣ligion, if any inuasion should be attempted in this Realme,Inuasion. that some desirous of alteration thereof, would ioyne with them, yet it is to be hoped, that there are thousands and thou∣sands of true and faithfull subiects,German fo. 122. Forfit. B. 102 Triall. F. 54. 5. R. 2. 2. H. 5. cap. 7. which will spend their lands, liues, and goods (as they ought) before the enemy should preuaile. And one reason moueth me thus to thinke, for that the Quéenes Maiestie doth not punish them by death, nor losse of goods and lands, as was vsed in Queene Maries time for religion, but imposeth vppon some of them a cer∣taine summe of mony, to be payd monethly for not comming to Church: besides great numbers of others which perhaps would like well of the change of religion, as well as the rest, and yet are neither charged with like payment, nor o∣therwise any way dealt withall. And another chiefe reason moueth me thus to thinke, for that they which shall shew themselues traytors, false, and vntrue to their owne Prince and countrey,A forreyn Prince that con∣quereth, trusteth not him that is conquered. in adhering to strangers (besides that they shal ouerthrow themselues and their houses, and vtterly vndoe their wiues & children, for that they shall forfeit al they haue) may in all reason assure thēselues, ye no forreyn Prince will thinke yt such persons wil be true to him, for he yt will not re∣gard his countrey where he was bread and borne, his father,
mother, wife, children, kinsfolkes, nor allies, his lands, li∣uings, and possessions, his liberty and freedome, how can a stranger that commeth to conquer and bring all these into his subiection, seruitude, and bondage, be perswaded that he will loue, obey, or carry any loyalty or faithfulnesse towards him, as is aforesayd? How such haue bene dealt withall by them, with whom they haue ioyned against their Prince and coun∣trey, how faire soeuer they haue promised, appeareth in part afore, and more ensueth. Of the conspiracies and trecheries of certaine Nobles and o∣thers against their Prince and country, and what haue bin the rewards of such traitors, by them, who made vse of their trea∣sons: and how dangerous the controuersie in religion is to a common wealth. CHAP. 10. WHen William Duke of Normandie attempted to inuade this land,Holinsh. 298. Williā Duke of Normādy. there were certaine No∣blemen of England, which were aiding & assi∣sting to him in this action, to whom he made many faire and large promises, vntill he had wonne the Crowne, and then he forgot and nothing regarded them: and they which thought themselues sure to be made for euer by bringing in this stranger into this realme, did sée themselues vnderfoot, and to be dispised & moc∣ked on all sides.Ibid. 197. Againe, when the variance was in England betwixt king Iohn and some of his Barons, and that the king did put them often to the worst, they did write to the king of Fraunce Philip,Ibid. 600. Lewes the Frēch kings sonne came into Englād when ciuill waires were there. praying aide of him, and requiring him to send Lewes his sonne with men of warre into England, to assist thē against their king, promising that they would accept him for their king, and do him homage: whereupon the French king sent his sonne Lewes with a great company into England, to whom the Barons did homage, and the said Lewes tooke an
oath also to maintaine and performe the old lawes & customs of the realme, and to restore to euerie man his rightfull heri∣tage and lands: requiring the Barons to continue faithfull vnto him: and he vsed them so curteously, and gaue them so many faire words, and made them such large promises, that they beléeued him assuredly, but they remembred not that Lewes looked for a kingdome. And what will not manie do, if they may thereby be sure, or in hope to get a Crowne, as one writeth: Ad quid non adagis regnandi dira cupido? They remēbred not, that the Fowlers whistle soundeth swéet∣ly, when he deceiueth the bird most cunningly, according to the saying: Fistula dulce canit volucrem dum decipit auceps. Neither,Cato. lib. 1. that faire words make fooles faine: and that vnder the gréene grasse often lurketh the suttle serpent: nor that in the fairest floure a man may soonest find a canker:Poemata Ciceronis. 249. fol. 161. Nullae sunt occultiores insidiae, quàm quae latent in simulatione officij, aut in ali∣quo necessitudinis nomine. Tully de amicitia saith: Apertè enim a∣dulantem nemo non vidit nisi qui admodum est excors, callidus ille & occultus ne se insinuet studiosè cauendum est. They had also forgotten the counsell which Ʋicount de Melloir a French∣man gaue to certaine of them in his sicknesse at London,Holinsh. 603 Booke of Martyrs fol. 214. which was as followeth: I lament (saith he) for your de∣struction and desolation at hand, because you are ignorant of the perils hanging ouer your heads: for this vnderstand, that Lewes, and with him sixtéene Earles and Barons of Fraunce haue secretly sworne and vowed, that if fortune should fa∣uour him so much as to conquer this realme of England,The oth of Lewes the French kings sonne with other his Earles  Barons. and to be crowned king, to kill, banish, and consume all those of the English Nobilitie, which now do serue vnder him, & perse∣cute their owne king as traitors and rebels: and further∣more, to dispossesse all their linage of such inheritance as they now hold in England. And because (saith he) you shall not haue
doubt hereof, I which lie here at the point of death, do now af∣firme vnto you, and take it on the perill of my soule, that I am one of those sixtéene, that haue sworne to performe these things, and therefore I aduise you to prouide for your owne safeties and also of your realme, which you now destroy, and that you kéepe this thing secret, which I haue vttered vnto you. After this he shortly died, but the curteous offer of Lewes to the Barons (as is aboue remembred) so lulled thē on sléepe, as it were,Holinsh. 601. that they regarded not this good aduise: for after this, diuerse of those which before had taken part with king Iohn, as William Earle Warren, William Earle of Arundell, William Earle of Salisburie, William Marshall the younger, and diuerse other, supposing verily, that the said Lewes should now attaine the kingdome, reuolted to Lewes: but after that Lewes was setled,Note here what follo∣wed by tru∣sting of faire words. and had gotten the tower of London, & di∣uerse other holds, Castles & defencible places of this realme into his hands, and thought himselfe in maner sure of ye king∣dome: then the Frenchmen began to shew their inward dis∣position and hatred towards the Englishmen, and forgetting all former promises (such is the nature of strangers whē they are become Lords of their desire) they did manie excessiue out∣rages, in spoiling & robbing the people of that country without pitie or mercie, and bare little good will towards the Engish men, as it appeareth sundry wayes: and first of all, in that they had them in maner in no regard or estimation, but rather sought by all meanes to spoyle and kéepe them vnder,Booke of Martyrs. fol. 257. not suf∣fering them to beare any rule, nor putting them in trust with the custodie of such places as they had brought them in posses∣sion of. Secondly, they called them not to counsell so oft as at the first they vsed to do, neither did they procéede by their directions in their businesse, as before they were accustomed: and thirdly, in all their conuersation, neither Lewes nor his Frenchmen vsed them so familiarly as at the first comming they did, but shewed more loftie countenance towards them, whereby they greatly encreased the indignation of the En∣glish
Lords against them, who might euill abide to be so ouer∣ruled To conclude,Holinsh. 602. where great promises were made at their entring into the land, they were slow enough in performing the same: so as the expectation of the English Barons was made quite voyd, for they perceiued daily, that they were de∣spised and scoffed at for their disloyalty shewed towards their owne naturall Prince, hearing now and then nips & taunts openly by the Frenchmen, saying, that as they had shewed themselues false and vntrustie to their owne lawfull king,Note. so they would not continue anie long time true to a stranger. Hereupon the Barons better considering the words of the sayd Ʋicount of Melloit, and withall the great daunger that the realme was brought in by their dissention and op∣position against their soueraigne Lord, and the litle ac∣count the Frenchmen made of them,Booke of Martyrs. 247. gaue them iust occasion to take a better course, and so they reuolted to king Henrie their naturall Liege Lord (for King Iohn shortly after the comming of Lewes into England departed this life) and they ioyned with the King in battell against Lewes, where he had a great ouerthrow: whereupon he and all his com∣panie departed into Fraunce, and king Henrie possessed the Crowne after that in quiet. Caesar was wont to say of such as were false to their Prince and countrey,Caesar. that he loued Traitors to serue his turne, but abhorred them as monstrous to the com∣mon wealth. It is written of Alexander the Great,Alexander. who had conquered many countreys, that he did long time séeke many wayes to winne a certaine countrey pertaining to Darius king of Persia, and perceiuing that it was inuincible, he dealt with a noble man that had the charge thereof, vnder the king for a great summe of money to yéeld that countrey to his pos∣session, and so did Alexander giue good countenance in his Court to this noble man a good space, and in the end en∣tring into a déepe consideration of the matter, and meaning thereby to make an example to such as hée might commit
trust vnto, to beware of such treasonable practises, he sudden∣ly commaunded execution to be done of this noble man, who hearing thereof, and litle deseruing the same as he thought, desired to come to Alexanders presence (which was graunted) besought him to know the cause of this sudden execution: who sayd thou hast bene false to thine own Prince, how can I then trust thée, or hope thou wilt deale truely with me, or be my true subiect▪Tullie lib. 2. officiorum. Alexander. if I should credit thée with the like? and so he was executed. Philip king of Macedon did greatly blame his sonne Alexāder in an Epistle which he did write to him saying, what occasion or consideration hath brought thée into this hope, that thou shouldest thinke that they wilbe and continue true and faithfull vnto thée whom thou hast corrupted with money? I reade of one Christopher Paris,Holinsh. 98. Christopher Paris. Irish Chron. that had ye charge of a Ca∣stle in Ireland, to the vse of his Lord Thomas Fitzgerauld, and being dealt withall by the king of England his Lieutenant there, to yéeld to him to the vse of the king the sayd Castle, for a certaine summe of money agréed in the end so to do, and de∣liuered vp the hold accordingly, and receiued his money. After the Lieutenant considering the vniustnesse of this man to his Lord, which had put him in trust with the safe kéeping of his Castle, and to whom he was déepely beholden, meaning to make an exāple of such treacherie, caused this Captaine pre∣sently to be executed, declaring thereby though for the time he imbraced the benefite of his treasōs, yet after he could not dis∣gest the vnfaithfull dealing of this traitor to his Maister, that had trusted him with a place of such great credence and de∣fence. Christian van de Veque betrayed for a great pension the the Castle of S.Christiā van de Veque. Iohn, being one of the most importāt fortresses of Portugall, to king Philip, who in the end was rewarded with such as a traitor deserueth: for being a while entertained with hope, was at last banished to ye wars of Affrica for ten yeares. The like vsage in maner receiued all his fellowes, which be∣trayed the king of Portugall their lawfull king, by deliueries of such places as they had in gouernement, or by doing the king of Spaine any other seruice to the preiudice of Don An∣thonio
king of Portugall. Haue we not séene ye vnnaturall practises of Shelley, Charles Paget, and others, with the Spaniards to inuade our countrey, and to haue ouerthrowne this happy state and gouernement thereof? looke into a litle treatise published 1585, where it is set downe at large.Esay. 22. Sobna. The Prophet Esay speaketh of one Sobna whom the king Hesekiah had greatly aduaunced, who out∣wardly shewed that he would liue and dye with him, but he had a false hart to his Prince, and more fauoured the Assirians, the kings enemies, who sought to inuade his countrey, but he was caried captiue into a forreine countrey farre off accor∣ding to Gods ordinance, and there dyed in confusion. Such as are traitors to their owne countrey, may be well compared to the viper,Rhetorik. Wilso. fo. 64. Plinie. whose nature and propertie is, as Pliny writeth, that when by course of time he is to come foorth of the belly of his damme, he eateth a hole through the same, by meanes where∣of she dyeth, and so is he the cause and the destruction of her that did breed, nourish and preserue him. It is a commō saying: He is an euill bird that defileth his owne neast: and so is he a monster and no man, that conspireth or intendeth any perill or daunger to his natiue country. Who that desireth to know what hath bene the end of traitors and false conspirators a∣gainst their Prince and countrey in old time, may reade M. Renegers booke,Reneger. wherein they are disclosed at large. As ciuill warres,Ciuill wars. and dissentions are perillous to all states, so are all occasions to be preuented which may bréed the same, amongst which there is no one thing yt sooner ingēdreth such discord,Contention for religion breedeth of∣tentimes ci∣uil dissentiō. then contention for religion, which carieth away men with such vehement passions, that they will fight for the same, more willingly, then for their wiues or children, lands or goods, in respect of it, they regard nothing: through the diuer∣sitie thereof,French Aca∣demie. ca. 63 the father is against the son, and the son against the father, they which are nearest of kinne loose their naturall loue, they which are of ye same country and linage, persecute one another as mortal enemies, & sundry nations abhorre one another for ye same cause. To raise seditiō & tumults in
a Citie,Bodinus. li. 4. fo. 486. nothing is more daungerous (saith Bodinus) then to be diuided in opiniō, whether it be in matters of state, or of lawes and customes, or for religion, therefore the causes whereof such mischiefes may ensue, by all pollicies in the beginning are to be looked vnto. He is not counted a good Phisition onely that cureth the disease, but that preserueth health, and preuen∣teth sicknesse to come. A small sparke raiseth great flames of fire, as the saying is: Concitat ingentes flammas scintilla minuta. In the beginning a fire with litle water may be suppres∣sed,Nota. which if it increase to great flames, without much ado will not be quenched,Ouid. as the Poet Ouid verie well saith: Ignis ab exigua nascens extinguitur vnda, Sed postquam creuit, volitant{que} ad sydera flammae, Vix putei fontes, fluuij succurrere possunt. And the same Poet writeth also,De arte a∣mandi. Principijs obstat, serò medicina paratur, Cùm mala per longas conualuêre moras. Withstād the beginning, for the medicine is too late proui∣uided, when the disease by ouerlong tarying is increased. A∣fore religion is established,Not meet to argue a∣gainst reli∣gion setled by authority. Bodinus li. 4. fo. 481. Paradox. fo. 1 to argue of religiō, to try the truth is allowable, but when it is set downe by common authoritie, it is not after to be disputed vpon or brought in question, as Bodinus affirmeth: for there is nothing so firme or stable, which by force of argument can not be peruerted: and to that effect Tullie writeth: Nihil est tam incredibile, quod non dicendo fiat probabile, nihil tam horridum aut incultum, quod non splendes∣cat oratione, & tāquam excolatur. And Plutarke affirmeth: Quod extat Licurgi lex antiquissima,Plutarke. 5. quam Florentini (disputatores om∣nium acutissimi) in populari statu inferunt, nec scilicet de legibus se∣mel receptis ac probatis disserere liceret,Bodinus li. 4. fo. 48. intelligit leges disputatas in dubium reuocari, dubitationem verò iniusticiae opinionem afferre, ex quo legum ac magistratuum contemptum & reip. interitum se∣qui necesse est. Quod si Philosophi & Mathematici suarum discipli∣narum principia in dubitationem reuocari non patiuntur, quae demē∣tia
est de religione non modo priuatim, sed etiam publicè disputare velle? There is an ancient law (saith he) amongst the Ligurians, which the Florentines (most quicke in disputation) did com∣maund to be holden, that of lawes once receiued and allowed to dispute, it should not be lawfull; for to call in questiō lawes afore determined vpon, doth bring in doubt the thing afore agréed vnto, as though it were not right and iust, whereupon contempt of the lawes and gouernement, and the ouerthrow of the common wealth doth consequently ensue. If the Philo∣sophers & Mathematikes will not suffer the grounds of their learning to be brought in question, what madnesse is it then priuately or publikely to dispute of religion once set downe and allowed?Fo. 5. Doctour Smith in his booke de Repub. Angl. saith, Certaine it is that it is alwayes a doubtfull and hazardous matter to meddle with changing of lawes, and gouernement, or to disobey the orders of rule and gouernement, which a man doth finde already established. Bodinus sheweth,Bodinus li. 4. fo 482. that the people of the East and of Affrica, and the kings of Spaine most straightly did prohibite the same, when great contention was amongst the Muscouites for re∣ligion: the king deliuered to the Bishop, and certaine men cal∣led (Curiones) a booke, wherein was set downe what he would haue taught touching diuine matters, to be preached & taught to the people, and commaunded that none vpon paine of death should adde or withdraw from it. The Princes of Germanie by mutuall agréemēt, after long ciuill battels amongst them for religion, ordained that the religion of Rome and Saxonie should be suffered, and that none should dispute of religion vpon paine of death,Ibid. fol. 482. None to dis∣pute of reli∣gion setled vpon paine of death. Martin Mar-prelate. which the Gouernours of Germanie, & especially of Augusta did execute, whereby all Germany was quieted. If then to dispute of religiō once allowed by authori∣tie, or to encounter the same, it be so dangerous to moue sedi∣tion & ciuill discord, was it not high time (thinke you) to sup∣presse Martin Mar-prelate, who by seuerall writings did not let to affirme, yt we haue no Church, no Bishop, no Ministers nor Sacraments, and therefore that all which loue Iesus
Christ, with all spéed ought to separate themselues from our Congregation, affirming that our assemblies are prophane, wicked, and Antichristiā? Could there be a greater dishonour offered to her Maiestie, and to the state of the learned Clear∣gie, yea to the whole Parliament, whereby the religion now professed, is established? Was it not time to look vpon such as denied publike Bap∣tisme, if it be not done by a Preacher, and bring in question what is become of them which were not so baptized, as though they should not be saued? Was it not high time to looke about, when some of them durst vtter, that if reformation were not had with spéed, of such things as they disliked, that the subiects ought not to ta∣rie anie longer, but to do it themselues, and moreouer durst say, that he and his fellowes are forced in conscience to speake for this new order, and to vse it, and that there is manie a thousand which desire that which he doth: and that great trou∣bles will come, if it be not prouided for? Was it not time to looke to such, as by these means distra∣cted the minds of her Maiesties subiects, in drawing them in∣to factions, and encouraging the number of malecontents and mislikers of the state, which make no account of reli∣gion, but to make cheir cōmoditie, though it be with the spoile of their owne countrie, if oportunitie serued, in pulling a∣way the good and faithfull hearts of many subiects from her Maiestie, because she maintaineth the state of the Church go∣uernment which they mislike, and which is protested by them to be prophane and Antichristian? Was it not time to looke to those sorts of mē ye publish such libels, and such seditious books, tending to such dishonor of this state & gouernment▪ as the like neuer was offred in any age? Was it not time to looke to such as haue attempted these things with such impudent and desperate boldnesse, as if they thought there were neither Prince law, ruler, nor magistrate that durst controll or séeke to represse them? Was it not time to looke to such as haue vttered such bold
spéeches against our setled state & law, & the loose boldnesse of mind towards the superiors is ioyned with contempt, & con∣temptuous boldnesse is the verie roote and spring of discord, dissention, vprores, ciuill warres, and all desperate attempts, that may breede trouble or danger to the state; yea, and if they might be hardened with some continuance of time and hope of impunity, & some multitude of assistāts gathering to thē, what hereof might follow, I leaue to ye graue iudgement of those, to whom it appertaineth. All which matters aforesaid, with manie other of like sort, concerning Martin Marprelate, are grauely answered by the the reuerēd Father in God the Bi∣shop of Winchester.B. of Win∣chester. The mischiefes which might haue ensued by this seditious sect, was so greatly disliked by her Maiestie & her Counsell, that her Highnesse did publish her Proclamatiō with the aduise of her honorable Counsel, in the one and thir∣tith yeare of her raigne to the effect, as followeth: Her Maiestie considering how within few yeares certaine se∣ditious & euill disposed persons towards her Maiestie,Proclamatiō 31. Eliz. & the go∣uernmēt established for causes Ecclesiastical within her Highnesse dominions, had deuised, writtē, printed, or caused seditiously & secretly to be published & dispersed, sundrie schismaticall & sediti∣ous bookes, defamatorie libels, and other fantasticall writings a∣mongst her Maiesties subiects, containing in them verie erro∣nious doctrine, and other matters notoriously vntrue, slanderous to the state, and against the godly information of religion and go∣uernment Ecclesiasticall established by law, and so long quietly continued: and also against the persons of the Bishops, and o∣ther placed in authoritie Ecclesiasticall vnder her Highnesse, by her authoritie, in rayling sort beyond all good humanitie: all which bookes, libels, & writings tend by their scope, to perswade and bring in a monstrous and apparant daungerous innouation within her Maiesties domions and countries, of all maner Eccle∣siasticall gouernment now in vse, and to the abridgement, or ra∣ther to the ouerthrow of her Highnesse lawfull prerogatiue, allo∣wed by Gods lawes, and established by the lawes of this realme, and consequently to reuerse, dissolue, and set at libertie the pre∣sent
gouernment of the Church, and to make a dangerous change of the forme of doctrine, and vse of diuine seruice of God, and the ministration of the Sacraments now also in vse, with a rash and malicious purpose also to dissolue the state of the Prelacie, being one of the three ancient estates of this realme vnder her Highnesse: whereof her Maiestie mindeth to haue such reuerend regard, as to their places in the Church and common-wealth appertaineth: all which sayd seditious practises doe directly tend to the mani∣fest wilfull breach of a great number of good lawes and Satutes of this Realme, inconueniences nothing at all regarded by such in∣nouations. In consideration whereof, her Highnesse graciously minding to prouide for good and speedy remedy to withstand such no∣table, dangerous and vngodly attempts, and for that purpose to haue such enormous malefactors discouered▪ and condignly pu∣nished, doth signifie by the same proclamation her Highnesse dis∣liking, and indignation of such dangerous and wicked enterprises, and for that purpose doth thereby will and straightly charge and command, that all persons whatsoeuer, within any her Maiesties Realmes and dominions, who then had, or then after should haue any of the sayd seditious bookes, pamphlets, libels, or writings, or any of the like nature already published, or then after to be publi∣shed in his or their custody, contayning such matters as aboue are mentioned against the present order and gouernement of the Church of England, or the lawfull ministers thereof, or against the rites and ceremonies vsed in the Church, and allowed by the lawes of this Realme, that they and euery of them should presently after with conuenient speede bring in, and deliuer vp the same vnto the Ordinary of the Diocesse, or of the place, where they inhabite, to the intent they might be vtterly defaced by the sayd Ordinary, or otherwise vsed by them. And that from thence∣forth no person or persons whatsoeuer, should be so hardy as to write, contriue, print, or cause to be published or distributed, or to keepe any of the same, or any other bookes, libels, or writings of the like nature and qualitie, contrarie to the true meaning, and intent of her Maiesties sayd proclamation: and likewise, that none
after should giue any instruction, direction, fauour, or assistance, to the contriuing, writing, printing, publishing, or dispersing of the same, or such like bookes, libels, or writings whatsoeuer, as they tendered her Maiesties good fauour, and would auoyd her Highnesse displeasure, and as they would answere for the con∣trarie at their vttermost perils; and vpon such further paines and penalties, as by the law any way might be inflicted vppon the offenders in any of these behalfes, as persons maintaining such seditious actions, which her Maiestie affirmeth by that proclama∣tion she mindeth to haue seuerely executed. And if any person had knowledge of the anthors, writers, printers, or disper∣ers thereof, that they should within one moneth after the publication of the sayd proclamation, discouer the same to the Ordinary of the place, where he had such knowledge, or to any of her Maiesties priuie Councell, as by the same proclamation plainly appeareth. After that Martin Marprelate and his fellowes were restrained of setting foorth their seditious bookes, they and such like vsed to assemble themselues in conuenticles, where they had exercises (as they termed them) of religion con∣trary to the law, whereupon a Statute was very neces∣sarily made in the fiue and thirteth yeare of her Maiesties raigne to the effect following.35. El. cap. 1. If any aboue sixteene yeares of age, shall obstinately refuse to come to some vsuall place of Common prayer, to heare diuine Seruice, established by the Queenes Maiesties lawes by the space of one moneth without lawfull cause, or shall by printing, wri∣ting, or expresse words, aduisedly and purposely practise, or go a∣bout to moue or perswade any within her Maiesties dominions, to denie, withstand, and impugne her Highnesse authority in causes ecclesiasticall vnited to the Crowne, or to that end or pur∣pose shall aduisedly and maliciously moue or perswade any whatsoeuer, to forbeare or abstaine from comming to Church, to heare diuine Seruice, and receiue the communion according to her lawes, or to come to, or be present at any vnlawfull assem∣blies, conuenticles, or meetings vnder colour, or pretence of any
exercise of religion, contrary to the Statutes of this Realme, as afore is sayd, euery person thereof conuicted shall be impriso∣ned without bayle or maynprise, vntill they shall confirme them∣selues to come to Church, and heare diuine Seruice, according to her Highnesse lawes, and make such open submission and de∣claration of their conformity, as is there set downe. If the offen∣der aforesayd being thereof conuicted, shall not within three moneths conforme himselfe in comming to Church, and making submission and confession, being required by the Bishop of the Diocesse, or a Iustice of peace of the Shyre, where the person shall be, or be the Minister of the Parish, the offender there so warned or required by a Iustice of peace, where the of∣fender shall be, shall abiure the Realme by his oath afore the Iu∣stice of peace, at the quarter Sessions or Assises, as was vsed by the Common law in case of fellony. If he refuse to abiure, or shall not go, or returne without her Maiesties licence, it is fellony, and he shal loose his cleargie. If any offender aforesayd, afore they should abiure, come to Church on some Sunday or Holy day, and then, and there, heare diuine Seruice, and make open sub∣mission and declaration of his conformitie to the lawes, he should be discharged of all penalties and punishments appointed by this Satute. And also if any after such submission refuse or forbeare to come to Church, or come to such conuenticles as aforesayd, he shall loose the benefit of this Act, and be, and stand in such case as though no such submission had bene had, ne made. Likewise if any keepe in his house, or otherwise relieue any that shall obstinately refuse to come to Church, and shall for∣beare to come to Church by a moneth together, euery person so doing, after notice to him giuen by the Ordinary, Iustice of Assise, Iustice of peace, Curate of the parish, or Church-warden, shall forfeit ten pounds for euery moneth that he doth retaine or relieue any such person. The Satute extendeth not to mens wiues, children, fa∣ther, mother, wards, sisters, not hauing houses of Popish re∣cusants
or feeme couerts shall not be compelled to abiure. The persons that shall abiure, or refuse to abiure, vt suprà, shall forfeit their goods and chattels, and all his lands during his life. This act was made to continue to the end of the next ses∣sion of Parliament, and now is continued in the Parliament holden in the fortieth yeare of her Maiesties Raigne. THE FORME OF submission. I A. B. do humbly confesse and acknowledge,The submis∣sion. that I haue grie∣uously offended God, in contemning her Maiesties godly and lawfull gouernment and authority, by absenting my selfe from Church, and from hearing diuine Seruice, contrary to the godly Lawes and Statutes of this Realme, and in vsing, and frequen∣ting disordered, and vnlawfull conuenticles and assemblies, vn∣der pretence and colour of exercise of Religion, and I am hartily sory for the same, and do acknowledge and testifie in my consci∣ence, that no other person hath, or ought to haue any power or authority ouer her Maiestie, and I doe promise and protest without any dissimulation, or any colour, or meanes of any dis∣pensation, that from hencefoorth I will from time to time obey and performe her Maiesties Lawes and Statutes, in repayring to the Church, and hearing diuine Seruice, and will euer hereafter do mine vttermost indeuor to maintaine and defend the same.
¶Of diuerse and sundry victories obtayned in former time by the English nation, both by sea and land, against their for∣reyne enemies, to the great encouragement of the posterity, to maintaine the honor gotten by their progenitors. CHAP. 11. ANd now as in the last part of this encourage∣ment,The last cause of incourage∣ment. what notable victories hath our na∣tion obtayned against the French and Scots, aswell in their owne territories and coun∣tries, as when they haue inuaded this Realme, and how most gaciously Almightie God hath alwayes assisted vs in our rightfull causes against our enemies, when they haue greatly often exceeded vs in number, although they were and be right valiant Princes & mighty people in armes, to all which haue trauelled in our Chronicles that is euident, whereby the inuincible courages and valour of our nation in martiall acts hath appeared, which ought exceedingly to incourage vs in this seruice of de∣fence, for that we are descended of them, and not to doubt or dispayre any whit (if we be true amongst our selues) though the force of our enemies be great, and their number exceede vs farre, for God neuer fayleth them which put their trust in him and walke in his wayes, as by diuerse examples out of the Scriptures of God afore remembred appeareth most eui∣dently. Did not the English fleete, in the yeare of our Lord 1350, which was in the foure and twentieth yeare of Edward the third, meete with the Spaniards comming out of Flaun∣ders loden with Marchandize,Holinsh. 946. and slue a great number, and drowned also many of them, and tooke sixe and twentie of their ships vpon the coast of Sussex? Did not the great army of the king of Spaine at the siege of Barke, when it was bruted that the Earle of Lecester her Maiesties Lieutenant generall with the English forces came to relieue the towne and yet
they retired without so doing? & did not they come to remoue the siege which we made against Dusborow, and the great Sconce of Sutfen, where that most renowmed Knight S. Philip Sidney was slaine, neither could they haue euer won those things againe from vs, had not treason more preuailed then force and valiant courage. Haue not we seene a few yeares sithens, the mighty pre∣paration by sea of the king of Spaine and his Allies, appointed with such number of huge ships, souldiers, armour, weapon, shot, powder, and other things incident to the warres sent to conquer our countrey, as the like was neuer seene on ye seas, in so much that they called the same the inuincible nauy? they trusted in their forces, but yet God confounded their purpose and deuises, for did not we with a few ships and furniture of men and munition (litle in respect of theirs) send some of their mightiest vessels to the bottome of the Sea with great num∣bers of their men in them? Did not we with our shot and ar∣tillerie slay many of them? Did not we chase diuerse of them into Irish coastes, where about xvij. of their greatest ships pe∣rished, so that Lucans verse,Lucan. which in those dayes he did write to the glory of our nation, against the Romaines, may be ve∣rified in this seruice. Territa quaesitis ostendunt terga Britannis. And were not numbers of their souldiers which entred in∣to Ireland with the sword destroyed?Spaniards slaine in Ire∣land. Did not we also in the Low countries kéepe diuerse other of their ships in their ha∣uen, so as they could not come foorth into the seas to ioyne with the rest of the Spanish Nauy? This was done without hand-fight, and is to be taken as the only worke of God, and to him therefore we ought to yeeld our most humble thankes, and say with ye Prophet Dauid: A Domino factum est istud, & est mirabile: This is the Lord his doing, and is maruellous in our sight: and therfore. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam: Not vnto vs Lord, not vnto vs, but to thy name be all glory and thankes. And we may further say, as the Pro∣phet
Dauid sayth: If the Lord himselfe had not bene on our side (now may Israell say) if the Lord himselfe had not bin on our side, when men rose vp against vs, they had swallowed vs vp quicke: when they were so wrathfully displeased at vs, yea the waters had drowned vs, and the streame had gone ouer our soules. The deepe waters of the proud had gone ouer our soules: But praysed be the Lord, which hath not giuen vs o∣uer for a pray vnto their teeth, our soule is escaped, euen as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the snare is broken and we are deliuered. Our helpe standeth in the name of the Lord, which hath made both heauen and earth. Neither did they (though they were (as the report went) thirtie thousand strong) at that time land a man. And did not the noble Earle of Essex, Sir Iohn Norris, and Sir Frauncis Drake the next yeare following with a little Nauy,Landing in Spaine. contayning not aboue eleuen thousand men land in Spaine, burned their ships, and put their people to the sworde, and their townes to the fire, and so coasted thence along into Portugall,Portugall. and there landing, marched vp into the countrey, euen to the gates of Lisbone, with drums sounding, and with Ensignes displayed, from whence they re∣turned vnfought withall by any of his forces, either by sea or laud? Did not the Duke of Lancaster with a compaine of soul∣diers saile into Spaine,The Duke of Lancasters voyage into Spaine. Stow. 1390. 14 R. 2. Gallicia. Indies. to claime the realme of Castile, for that he had maried the eldest daughter of Peter king of Spaine, that was expelled by Henrie his bastard brother? he conquered the Countrie of Gallicia against Don Iohn sonne of the said Hen∣rie. And some doings we haue had at the Iudies, where our cou∣ragious English Captaines and souldiers conquered manie Cities and townes. How valiantly did they likewise be∣haue themselnes at S. Domingo, Carthagena, Cales, and in manie other places, where the Englishmen were few in number, and the enemies infinite, and in their owne coun∣trie, whose valiant actions there, haue deserued such fame, as lenght of time shall neuer take away, for that the like
hath neuer bene performed, or read of in any age before our dayes? In the yeare of our Lord God 1365,Hol. 971. and in the 39 yeare of Edward ye third, was not Peter king of Castile, chased out of his realme by his bastard brother Henrie? by reason wherof, ye said Peter was constrained to flie, and came to Burdeaux to sue for ayde at the hands of the Prince of Wales, the said king Edward his sonne, who thereof aduertised his father, by ad∣uise from whom,The Prince of Wales his voyage into Spaine. the said Prince determined to bring home the said king Peter, and to restore him againe to his kingdom by force of armes, maugre his enemies. The Prince indéed was verie desirous to take this enterprise vpon him, both of a certaine pitifull affection, mouing him to relieue this mise∣rable state of king Peter, and also of an ardent desire, which he had to purchase a glorious fame through martial déeds & noble acts of chiualrie. Therefore hauing this occasion to imploy his time in such exercises, and now commaunded thereto of his Father, he was excéeding glad in his mind, and with all the spéed that might be, made his prouision both of a sufficient armie of men of warre, and also of all other things necessarie for the furniture of such an enterprise, but first he tooke good as∣surance of king Peter for the paiment of the souldiers wages.1367. The Prince setteth for∣ward to Spaine. Thus when the Prince had taken order for his iourny in each condition, as was thought behoofefull, he with the king of Spaine in his companie, passed forth with an army of thirtie thousand men. Henrie king of Spaine hauing knowledge that the Prince of Wales was thus comming against him, to restore his brother king Peter to his former degrée, assembled of the French and of his owne people to the number of fourescore & seuen thou∣sand, or there about, of men of warre: wherof seuen thousand were horsemen. King Henrie sent to the Prince an Herald of armes with a letter,The king of Spaine sen∣deth to the Prince. requiring to know of him, for what cause he moued warre against him, sith he had neuer offered him a∣ny such occasion. The Prince dispatched the Herald with an answer to the Letter, containing in effect, that for great con∣siderations
he had taken vpon him to aide the rightfull king of Spaine, thased out of his realme by violent wrong: and that if it might be, he would gladly make an agréemēt betwixt them, but so algates, that king Henry of necessitie must then forsake all the title of the kingdome of Spaine, which by no rightful meanes he could enioy: and therfore if he refused thus to do, he was for his part resolued how to procéed. The He∣rald departed with this answer, and came therewith to king Henrie, and deliuered it vnto him, as then lodged with his puissant armie at Nouarret, which he liked not: whereupon both parties prepared themselues to battell, and ioyned. The battell was eagerly fought, & the victorie fell to the Prince. There were staine of men of armes fiue hundred and thrée score,The number slaine at this battell at Nouarret. and of Commons about seuē thousand and fiue hundred of the kings part, and of the English part there was slaine of men of account, but verie few, viz. foure knights, two Gas∣coynes, one Almaine, and the fourth an Englishman, and of other meane Souldiers not past foure hundred,Froissard. as Froissard saith, but other affirme that there was slaine of the Princes part about sixtéene hundred, which shold séeme to be more like a truth, if the battel were fought so sore & fiercely, as Froissard himselfe doth make report. This battell was fought vpon a Saturday,Caxton. the third of A∣prill, in the yeare of our Lord 1367. There was taken priso∣ners of the kings part to the number of two thousand, and a∣mongst them the Earle of Dene, Sir Berthram de Cleaquine, the Marshall Dandrehen or Dandenhien, and many other men of great account. After the battell King Peter went to Burgis, and was receiued into the Citie, and shortly the Prince came thither,Froissard. and there held his Easter with king Peter, and taried there aboue thrée wéeks: in the meane time they of Austergus, Toledo, Lisbon, Cordeua, Gallice, Ciuill, & of all other places of the kingdome of Spaine came in & did homage to King Pe∣ter, promising him to be true to him euer after: for they saw that resistance would not auaile, so long as the Prince should be in the Countrie.
I note by this discourse,Note the mightie courage of this noble Prince, that durst enterprise to displace a king of his royall seat in his owne kingdome, being there a méere stranger, and to encounter him in so great an action, hauing not aboue thir∣tie thousand in his Campe, the king being about fourescore & sixe thousand strong, whereof aboue seuen thousand were horsmen, and in his owne countrey, where he might be fur∣nished to supply his want. And here I may not omit to speake of the notable and va∣liant seruice performed by the said noble Earle of Essex, and ye right noble Charles Haward, now Earle of Nottingham, high Admirall of England, and diuerse other Lords, Knights, E∣squires, and Gentlemen at Cales in Spaine in the thirtie eight yere of her Maiesties raigne, where they found fiue Gallions of the king of Spaines, that is to say, the Philip, being Admi∣rall, the S. Matthew, the S. Andrew, the S. Thomas, the S. Iames, three Leuantices, two great ships of Noua Hispania, and diuerse gallies, and 20 marchant ships richly loden for the Indies, at which time the English had fight with the said Gallies about an houre, the next day the English men and the Spaniards incountred each the other valiantly, which conflict continued from seauen of the clocke in the morning till one in the after noone, which was so sharpe, that some of the Spanish ships did runne vp the riuer further into the country to saue themselues. The said ships called S. Mathew and S. Andrew, were taken, and brought into England, the Philip, & another being Uiceadmirall, ranne themselues on ground, and the English entred the Philip to haue had the spoile of her, which the Spaniards perceiuing did set on fire and went out, and the English men escaped the fire with danger: & some other of their ships were fired by vs: there the Generall landed about sire thousand men, and marched to∣wards Cales citie, being led by the said noble Earle of Essex, giuen in the head of that troupe, whome certaine of the Spa∣niards met some on foote and some on horsebacke, out of the citie about halfe a mile, but they did not tarie, but retired to
the towne. The said Eerle of Essex pursued them resolutely and with such inuincible courage vnto their walles▪ where they played vpon them with their ordinance and small shot a∣while, but in the end they entred by plaine force, with small losse of their men. The Earle of Essex was one of the first that entred with many voluntarie Gentlemen, and they which entred, were not aboue 1000 men which wanne the towne, but there was good ayde at hand. In the towne there were 500, horsemen, and a thousand footmen, besides a great num∣ber of other townesmen, and great store of munition, ordi∣nance and victualles. The towne was strongly walled, hauing a castle strongly edified in the midst thereof, and so fortified and victualled, that it was thought impossible to haue bene wonne without cannon shot, and the houses were all of stone very strongly and defencibly builded, so as if they had stood to it, it had not bene possible with a far greater number to haue bene so soone surprised. We tooke the spoyle of the Citie, being very rich in Iewels. Plate, Money, Cloth of gold, Silke, Sugars, Wine, Oyle, Rice, and other marchandise, which was esteemed with the losse of the said ships and goods in them, to be worth a huge sūme of money. The said noble Earles of Essex and Nottingham knowing the loosenesse of sol∣diers, very honorably caused the Ladies and gentlewomen (wherof there were diuerse in that Citie) with the rest of the women and children, with 500 men to be safely conueyed out of the Citie, and a straite proclamation made, that none should offer to any of them any violence vpon paine of death, and shortly after they fired the towne, and tooke the seas; and they brought also with them into England diuerse of the best sort of the Spaniards taken in the said Citie as prisoners to abide their ransome what the king will do being here∣with moued. I know not, but no doubt her Maiestie will pro∣uide to defend the worst, as good pollicie willeth. Salomon saith: Beatus qui semper timet, hoc est, qui cautus & prouidens est, & ad omnia mala quae possunt in illum incursare, depellenda paratissimus.
How most graciously Almighty God hath dealt for her Ma∣iestie, to defend her & her kingdomes from forraine forces & inuasion, you may sée, in yt in the beginning of winter about three yeares last past, when the king of Spaine had gathered together as great a number of Shippes as he could furnish from all partes of his dominions, or could recouer by imbar∣king all other shippes of seruice, which came for trade into Spaine or Portugall, intending to haue inuaded her Maiesties realme of England: and yet such was the prouidence of God, contrary to his expectation & intētion (by hastening of his en∣terprise in a time vnlooked for, to surprise some place in Eng∣land or Ireland, before her Maiesty could haue had her owne force in readinesse, she still prouiding to haue liued in peace, which she professeth both to her self & all Christēdome: it plea∣sed him (who frō heauen with iustice beholdeth all mens pur∣poses) sodainly & most strāgely to drowne & make vnseruicea∣ble diuerse of his best ships of warre, being vnder saile, com∣ming from Lisbone, and verie neare to the deffined hauen of Ferroll, with destruction of no smal numbers of souldiers and mariners: among which manie of those Irish rebels, which were entertained in Spaine to haue accompanied either that Nauy, or some part therof into Irelād, were also cast away: by which manifest act of Almightie God, ye Armie was so weake∣ned, as the same could not put to the seas, according to his for∣mer purpose. And here I protest, that I write not anie thing to disgrace anie Prince or nation, against whom our nation hath so often preuailed, but that you may by the said examples sée, that God giueth the victorie where it pleaseth him, although the said o∣ther Princes be right couragious and valiant in armes.
That notwithstanding the difference of religiō, or anie other cause whatsoeuer, we ought all to ioyne together for the defence of our Prince and countrey against the enemie: with a repeti∣tion of certaine lawes, tending chiefly to the preseruation of her Maiesties person and the safetie and defence of the realme. CHAP. 12. ANd though we be deuided for religion (which God of his mercie bring to vnitie) yet I trust that we will wholly,Though we be deuided for religion yet we must ioyne a∣gainst the enemie. faithfully, and as we are bound, and belongeth to good and loyall subiects, and naturall men to their countrey, ioyne together in this seruice of defence of our Prince and countrey against the enemie, following the good example of the Iewes, who although great dissention and ciuill discord was among themselues (as Iosephus wri∣teth in his booke de bello Iudaico) yet when the enemie did in∣uade their countrie,Lib. 6. cap. 10 they ioyned together, and valiantly de∣fended thēselues. So did the Romans, as Bodinus writeth, his words be these:Bodinus. 563 Cùm enim aliquando in visceribus vrbis Romanae patres cum plebe capitalibus odijs inter se contenderent, hostis in Capitolium inuasit, repentè ciues ad concordiam adducti, hostem re∣pulerunt, rursus parta pace, cùm ciuiles discordias relapsas intue∣rentur, venientes, Romanos agros vastare coeperunt, repent è ciui∣lis motus conquieuit, vt hostes propulsarent: That is, When the chiefe of the citie of Rome, with the common sort of the Citi∣zens there, were at deadly hate, the enemie entred the Capi∣toll: wherupon sodainly the Citizens being reduced to concord, they did driue away the enemie, and by that meanes peace being obtained, when they againe fell into ciuill discord, the enemy that perceiuing, they destroyed the fields at Rome, whereupon the commotion ceased, that they might repulse the enemie. To that effect he writeth of the troubles of Spaine,Ibidem. 563. thus: Nec verò mo∣tus ciuiles Hispanorum aliter sedare potuerunt, cum absente Ca∣rolo
quinto Imperatore, nouum creauissent regem Gallorum, exer∣citu in Cantabriam & Nauarram tunc irruente, quas regiones Galli occupauerant, sed Hispani repentè conciliatis animis hostiles impetus represserunt, & amissa recuperarunt: That is, The ciuill warres and troubles in Spaine could not otherwise be appeased, when Charles the fift Emperour being absent, they made a new King, at which time an armie of the Frenchmen entredinto Cā∣tabrie and Nauarre, and possessed the same: but the Spaniards so∣dainely according within themselues, did expell them, and recoue∣red againe those losses. By these examples, the naturall affection which these men had (and euerie man ought to haue) to the preseruation and safetie of their countrie, doth euidētly appeare. And whatsoe∣uer the cause be, that moueth ciuill warres, yet that ought not to worke such malice in them as the safetie and good of their countrie should thereby be endangered or neglected: wherby the saying of the Poet Ouid may appeare to be true: Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos Ducit, & immemores non sinit esse sui. And because there are many good lawes ordained,Diuerse lawes meet to be set downe and knowne in these dange∣rous dayes. as well in the time of our most gracious Soueraigne Ladie that now is, as also of her noble Progenitors, by the authority of their high Courts of Parliament, touching the securitie of her Highnesse person, and the safety and defence of the realme, which be necessarie at all times, but especially now in these dangerous dayes to be knowne, I haue thought good here to make mention of them, to the end men should not be ignorant thereof, although in truth the ignorance of the law doth not excuse,German. fol. 52. but of the déed, as the saying is, Ignorantia legis non ex∣cusat, sed ignorantia facti. And first touching her Maiesties per∣son,25. E. 3. cap. 2 Compasse or imagine the death of the Queene. it is ordained by a Statute made in the fiue and twen∣tieth yeare of Edward the third (which some hold to be but a confirmation of the common law) that if anie compasse or i∣magine the death of her Maiestie (whom Almightie God of
his great mercy vouchsafe to preserue, and to graunt her life, with most prosperous health, in high felicitie long to cōtinue, and to raigne ouer vs, to the ouerthrow of her enemies & con∣fusion of all traitors) this is high treason.Treason. B. 24. 1. Mariae. These words, om∣passe or imagine the death of the King or Quéene, are large words, for he that doth deuise how the Prince shall come to her death, by words or otherwise, & doth some act to explaine the same, as in assaying of harnesse, sending of letters or mes∣sage, or such like, this is treason. And he that doth intend to depriue the Prince, in that is intended the Princes death and therefore it is treason.Withhold Castle. 14. El. cap. Dyer. 145. Treason. B. 24. Leuie warre. 25. Edward. 3. cap. 2. Adhere to her enemies. Conspire to commit treason. 2. Li. ass. 49. Messenger. 21. Eliz. 3. 23. 45. E. 3. 25. Ayde. Brytton. 114. lib. 1. Stamf. 1. Misprision. Treason. B. 2. Armes. No access. in treason. Com. Plo. 262. Slaine in field. And the withholding of a Castle, For∣tresse or such like against the Prince, is a leauying of warre against her Maiestie, and is treason. If a stranger (borne in the time of peace betwixt his Prince and the Quéenes Maie∣stie) come into this realme, and take rebelliously anie of her Castles, and the same detaine against her, this is treason, and is in law as a leauying of warre against her. If any leauie warre against her Maiestie within this realme, or be adhe∣rent vnto her enemies in this realme, giuing them aide and comfort in this realme or else where, and thereof he probably attainted of ouert déed, this is also treason. If one moue ano∣ther to commit any treason, and the other assent that it shold be done, and it is committed indéed by the one of them: this is treason in thē both. It is treason by the cōmon law to kill him that is sent on her Maiesties message, or that goeth to ayd her in her warres. It is treason if any worke anie thing against her host, or be assenting, counselling, or consenting to ye same. If any do know another to haue committed treason, though he be not consenting to the same, yet if he do not reueale it to some that hath the law in gouernment, it is misprision of trea∣son. If anie ioyne the armes of England with his armes, this is treason, 38. Henrie the eight. I thinke this is meant, when it is without difference. Note that in cases of treason, there are no accessaries, but all be traitors & principals. If a man leauy warre against the Prince and be slaine in the field, this is treason, without any attaynder by the auncient law of the
Realme, for he was the cause that the course of law could not passe vpon him, & he shal loose his lands & goods in this case, & his bloud is corrupted,Dower F. 106. & ye, wife looseth her dower by ye cōmon law. If a treason be committed by the Queenes subiect out of the realme, against the realme, it shall be tried in England in ye Kings bench,8. E. 3. Dier. 132. Treason out of the Realme. Dyer. 298. Buls. Obedience. Adherent to the enemies. Triall. F. 54. 5. R. 2. Prophecies. Rebellion. or where ye Prince shall please, 33. H. 8. cap. 23. 35. H. 8. cap. 2. sée the case of Story afore Chap. 10. touching this. As touching the bringing into this realme of Buls, & practising to withdraw her Highnesse subiects from their na∣turall obedience (which is treason) see afore Chap. 10. If a man be adherent to ye kings enemies in Fraunce, his land shal be forfeit, & his adherence shall be tried where the land is, as it shal be of such as adherre to the kings enemies in Scotland. He that shall publish any prophecy vppon any mans armes, or things vsed in armes, to the intent to make any rebellion, insurrection, disturbance, or losse of life, shall forfeit ten pounds, and be imprisoned one yeare, and the second time (being conuicted of the first offence) shall forfeit all his goods, and be imprisoned during his life, if any by erecting or set∣ting vp of any figure by calculation,Figure. Witchcrafts. Natiuity. witchcraft, sorcery, or in∣chantment, or by casting of natiuity, or by publishing of any prophecy to such intent, shall seeke to know or vnderstand, and shall publish the same abroad, how long her Maiestie shal liue,Prophecies how long her Maiestie shall liue. 13. El. cap. 1. Compasse her Maie∣sties death. or who shall be King or Queene after her, it is felonie. It is ordayned also by a Statute made in the thirteenth yeare of her Maiesties Raigne, that if any shall without the Realme or within, compasse, intend, or imagine the death or destrustion, or any bodily harme, tending to the death, de∣struction, mayming, or wounding of the Queenes Maie∣sties person, or to depose or depriue her from the Crowne, or any her dominions,Leuy warre. Inuade this Realme. Dyer. 298. Vtter by words. Treason. or to leauy warres against her within this Realme or without, or to moue or stir any forreyners or straungers with force to inuade this Realme, or any o∣ther dominions being vnder her obeisance, and the same shall maliciously, aduisedly, and expresly, vtter or declare, by any printing, ciphering or saying, this is treason, aswell
in the principall offender, as in their counsellers, procurers, ayders, and comforters, knowing the same offence to bee done, and committed in any place within this Realme, or without. And because Castles, fortresses, and holds, are neces∣sary things for the defence of the realme; it is ordayned by a Statute made in the fourteenth yeare of the Queenes Ma∣iesties raigne,14. El. cap. that if any either within this realme or else where,Conspire to take any of her Maie∣sties Castles, &c. do conspire or deuise, to take or detayne, or to waste or destroy, any of her Castles, Bulwarkes, or fortresses, or any part of them, hauing any munition or ordenance therein, or appointed to be garded for defence of this realme, and the same conspiracies or deuises, shall aduisedly by any expresse words,Withhold a∣ny Castle of her Maie∣sties. Ships. act or writing, vtter, or declare for any the malicious or rebellious intents aforesayd, this is felony in euery such offender, counseller, comforter, and abbetter, knowing there∣of, and shall loose their cleargy & sanctuary. And by that Sa∣tute it is further ordayned, that if any person shall with force maliciously & rebelliously withhold from her Maiestie any of her Castles or holds, or any of her ships, ordenance, artillery, or other of her munitions or fortifications of war, and do not giue vp the same to her Highnesse, or to such person as her Maiestie shall appoint to receiue the same to her vse,Proclama∣tion. within sixe dayes next after such offender shall be in her name com∣manded so to do by open proclamation vnder the great seale of England,Burne. to be made within any place or market towne, within the County, wherein any such offence shall be com∣mitted, or shall wilfully,Ships. Hauen. Barre. maliciously, or rebelliously, burne or destroy, or cause to be burned or destroyed, any of her Maie∣sties ships, or shall barre, or cause to be barred, any hauen within any of her dominions,Imbesill. Armour. Victuals. this is treason in euery such of∣fender and in their counsellers, and abbetters: this act is made to endure during the Queenes Maiesties life, that now is And it is felony in any that hath the charge of armour vt∣ctuals, powder, shot, munition, or other abiliments of war, or victuals prouided for victualling of any souldiers, gun∣ners, or mariners, or pyoners of the Queenes Maiestie,
that shall (to hinder her Maiesties seruice) willingly imbe∣zell or conuey away the same, being to the value of xx. shil∣lings at one or diuerse times, if he be within one yeare next after impeachedsor the same. 31. Eliz. Chap. And for that her Maiestie must haue souldiers to serue her in warre,31. Eliz. Souldiers it is conuenient to set downe their duties. Also it is felony by a Statute made 18. Henry the sixt, in euery man that is mustered, and receiueth the kings wages,18. Henry the sixt. which de∣parteth from his Captaine without licence of his Captaine, except it be for notorious sicknesse, or impediment by the visi∣tation of God: and if any souldier, man at armes, or archer, mustered of record, and going with his Captaine beyond the sea, shall returne into England within the tearme, for which his Captaine hath retayned him, or leaue his Captaine there in the kings seruice, and aduenture of the warre, except hee hath reasonable cause shewed to his Captaine, and by him to the chiefe in the countrey hauing royall power, and thereup∣pon shall haue licence of his Captaine,Licence. vnder his seale, and the cause of his licence, and who that so is mustered of record, and commeth away without letters testimoniall of his Cap∣taine, as is sayd, within his tearme on this side the sea, that the kings ministers there, shall haue authority to arrest thē, and them there keepe, vntill it be inquired: and if it may be found before the Iustice of peace, and proued that they haue so mustered of record, & departed from their Captaine with∣out licence as aforesayd,Felony. Souldiers by sea. 13. Eliz. that then they shall be punished as felons, as by that Statute plainly appeareth: and the sayd Statute is made to extend to souldiers and gunners, which serue on the sea, as appeareth by thirteenth Eliz. If any person that shalbe cōmanded to come to the muster,Musters 4 & 5. P. and M: 3. doe willingly absent himselfe, hauing no excuse of sickenesse or other lawfull impediment, or at their apparance at such musters, doe not bring with them the best furniture of ar∣ray and Armour,Armour. as he or they shall then haue for his or their owne person in a readinesse,Imprison∣ment. shall for euery such default or offence haue imprisonment by the space of ten daies, without
bayle or mainprise, by the cōmandement of such as shall haue authoritie to take the same musters, vnlesse the offenders do agree with the said Commissioners, or two of them to pay to the vse of the Queenes Maiestie for euery such offence fortie shillings for a fine.40. shillings. And by the same acte it is further enacted, that if any being authorised to leauy,Mustermai∣stter muster, or make anie men to serue in warre, or otherwise for the defence of this Realme,Take monie. doe by any meanes take or cause to be taken any thing of any person that shalbe appointed, named, or muste∣red to serue in any such seruice,Release sol∣dier. to release or discharge him of such seruice, he shall for such offence forfeit fiue times so much as he shall so receiue, exacte or take. There was a notable & necessary exāple made of one L. a Captaine & one E. a Scri∣uener, which L. by writing indēted receiued of the Shiriffe of W. by order from her Maiesties Counsell, certaine soldiers to be by the said L. conducted to serue her Maiestie in the Ile of Wight, the said L. by confederacie with the said E. dis∣charged diuerse of the said souldiers for money, and deuised betwixt them another writing, by colour wherof the said L. caused certaine Constables to bring afore the said L. certaine other to supplie the roome of the other before discharged, which was done accordingly: for which bad practise prouided euidently, the said L. and E. were fined seuerally at 500 markes, and adiudged also to stand on the pillorie at West∣minster, and likewise at the Assises in the said County of W. By this practice the Queens Maiesty was disappointed of the souldiers which by her authoritie were prest, and so bound to serue, whose departure frōher seruice without lawful licence, had bin fellony by the law, where the other were not boūd to serue,4 & 5. P & Ma. ca. 3. neither had their departure without any licence bene felonie, because they were prest without her Highnesse au∣thoritie. If anie Captaine,Discharge souldier. Wages. Conduct mo∣ney. pety Captaine or other, hauing chaxge of men for seruice in warre, shall for gaine, take, dis∣charge, or licence any of his souldiers, or man appointed to serue in the warres vnder his rule or order, to depart from the said seruice, or shall not pay vnto his souldiers their full
and whole wages, conducte and coate money within ten daies next after he shall haue receiued the same,Ten times the value. he shall forfeit for euery such offence ten times the value of the thing so taken or receiued, and shall also pay to euery souldier from whome he shall so withhold any of the said wages, conduct or coate money,Treble sūme. Holinsh. 998. treble so withhoulden. Holinsh. 998. speaketh of a knight executed as a traitor for not paying souldiers their wages,51. E. 3. which he receiued of the king to pay them withall, Anno 51. Edward 3. And touching the true seruice of Captains and souldiers,Captaines. Souldiers. 2. & 3. Ed. 6. ca. 2. it is farther ordained by a statute made in the second and third yere of Edward the sixt, that if any souldier seruing the king in his warres, do giue or put away any horse, gelding, or mare, or any harnesse wherewith he shalbe set forth,Souldier put away horse or armour. that then euery such souldier so offending, vpon due proofe or testimonie, to be brought afore the Lieutenant, high Admirall, the kings deputie, Uiceadmirall or Captaine, and in their absence before any of their deputies, shalbe impriso∣ned by the same Lieutenant or any other before named, with∣out baile or mainprise, vntill he hath satisfied to the partie owner of the horse, gelding, mare, or harnesse, so by him sold, purloined, exchanged, or so wilfully lost, altered or other∣wise made away: and if such souldiers so offending, fortune to escape from the Lieutenant, and other the aforesaid per∣sons without punishment and restitution aforesaid, that then the same souldier vpon complaint made by the partie grie∣ued or his executors or administrators, vpon due proofe there∣of to be made by any Iustice, or Iustices of Peace in the parts where such souldiers so offending shalbe found, shall by such Iastice be cōmitted to ward without baile or mainprise, there to remaine vntill he haue satisfied the parties grieued, his ex∣ecutors or administrators, of or for such horses, geldings, mares, & harnesse, so by any such souldier wilfully lost, chan∣ged, altered, or otherwise wilfully purloyned, except the same shalbe lost in the kings seruice, against the will of the said souldier, or were taken by the said Lieutenant, or anie of the other afore named, from the said souldier for any rea∣sonable
respect, and appointed to some other to serue in his steede, and the same testified sufficiently from any the sayd persons to the sayd Iustice, then the sayd souldier not brin∣ging the sayd horse or harnesse to the owner, shall be dischar∣ged thereof against the owner. And by the sayd Statute it is also ordayned, that if any souldier seruing in the kings warres,Souldier depart. depart without licence of the Lieutenant, or any of the other aboue named, with buttey or otherwise being in the enemies countrey, or else where in the kings seruice, or out of any garrison where he or they shall be appointed to serue, it is felony,Felony. and shall loose the benefit of his cleargie and san∣ctuary. This Statute was repealed: but it is reuiued by 4 and 5 Philip and Mary.Cap. 3. And further it is ordayned by the Statute of 2 & 3 of Ed∣ward the sixt cap.2 & 3 E. 6. cap. 1. Commissio∣ners for set∣ting forth of souldiers. 2, that if any to whom the king shall direct his commandement by commission or letters, for the leuying or setting forth of any man to serue the king in his war, shall at any time for any gayne discharge any by him appointed to serue the king in his wars, and do assigne any other person in his steede for any gaine as is aforesayd,Forfeit twen∣ty pounds. the persons so ef∣fending shall forfeit to the king for euery man so discharged twentie pounds. And if any Captaine doe for any cause,Licence souldier to depart. Lieutenant. licence any soul∣dier in his retinue to depart from the field or fortresse where they shall be appointed to serue, without the speciall assent and licence of the Lieutenant in writing, shall forfeit for e∣uery such souldier so by him licēsed to depart,Forfeit twen∣ty pounds. twenty pounds. If any hauing the order of any number of souldiers seruing vpon the sea or land, doe at any time take of the king any wages for any more souldiers then serued in such manner & forme as the wages was payed for,Take wages for more then serue. Dayes. or for any more dayes then such souldiers serue, and do not note the dayes of euery souldiers entrie into wages, and day of his death and depar∣ture, and deliuer the same to such treasurers, as shall pay the sayd wages euery moneth, in writing, so as the truth of the number of souldiers may appeare to the kings treasurer and
maister of the kings musters,Forfeit fiue pounds. for the time being in yt behalfe, he shal forfeit to the king for euery such default fiue pounds, and be imprisoned by the space of one moneth, and loose his roome and office. No Captaine shall graunt to any of his souldiers appoin∣ted to serue vnder him,Captaine in any towne or fortresse kept with garrisons of souldiers, any licence or pasports to depart from his seruice,Souldier. Licence. Lieutenant. Imprison∣ment. Proclama∣tion. but onely the Lieutenant, or any other as is a∣foresayd, vppon paine of imprisonment, as well of the Cap∣taine as souldier so offending, at the discretion of the sayd Lieutenant. Euery Lieutenant vppon the paine of ten pounds, shall cause to be proclaimed the whole effect and con∣tents of this Act that is to say, euery Lieutenant of any army in euery field to proclaime this Act euery moneth, and that e∣uery of the kings deputies of any fortresse,Euery mo∣neth. & Captaine of a∣ny fortresse, to proclaime this Act within his charge, once e∣uery quarter in a yeare:Euery quar∣ter. One mo∣neths wages. and euery person giuing to the Lieutenant true information of any the offences aboue re∣membred, shall haue for his labor one moneths wages of him that shall be found faulty, to be payd by the hand of the trea∣surer, vpon the warrant of the Lieuteuant, or any of the o∣thers aforesayd. It is lawfull to the sayd Lieutenants, and other the sayd persons, to retaine in his or their owne hands, to their owne vse of the wages of his or their souldiers, the summes follow∣ing, that is to say, sixe shillings eight pence for the liuery coate of euery common souldier,Retain wa∣ges. Coate. and thirteene shillings foure pence for the coate of euery gentleman souldier for one whole yeare. No manner of Liuetenant or any other the sayd per∣sons, shall be charged or preiudiced by vertue of this Act for lacke of his number retained, as is aforesaid, for or cōcerning any souldier or souldiers,Souldiers die. as shal happen to die during his ser∣uice▪ or to be sicke by the visitation of God, or that shall depart against the will of the Lieutenant,Depart a∣gainst the will of the Captaine. or other before named vn∣lesse it shal be in default of anie of them This Act shall not be preiudiciall or hurtfull to any hauing vnder them retinue of
souldiers for the not payment of the kings wages to their houshold seruants,Houshold seruants. & other whom they shall dayly find & giue meat & drinke during the sayd seruice of warre, nor to charge any person for yeGift of te∣nants. taking or receiuing of any gift or reward of any of his or their tenants or friends, towards the reliefe, ayde or helpe of the same persons, being commaunded by the kings Maiestie for to serue in warres,Aid reserued by lease. or otherwise to finde men on horsbacke or on foote, aswell within this Realme as without,Couenant to find horse. &c. nor for the gift, reward, ayde or helpe, reserued or couenanted to be payd or giuen to any person appointed to serue in the wars, or to find horse or men to serue, by reason of any grant, couenant, reseruation, custome, or tenure, not to charge any Lieutenant or other aboue named,Wages re∣tained. Victuall, Armour. Prest mony. for detay∣ning or receiuing of any part of the sayd souldiers wages, to∣wards or for ye paymēt of victuals, harnesse, weapons, or for any prest mony prouided and deliuered to any such souldier. And by the said statute made 4 and 5 of Philip and Marie, ca.4 & 5 P. & M. cap. 3 3. It is ordained, that euerie article, clause, prouise, & mat∣ter contained in the sayd Act of 2 and 3 of Edward the sixt, shal stand, remaine, and be in their full force, strength and effect, and yet neuerthelesse, where in the said Act of 2 and 3 of Edward the sixt, it is prouided that no person or persons shall be charged for the taking or receiuing of any gift or reward of any of his or their tenannts or friends towards the reliefe, ayd or helpe of the said persons, being commanded to serue in warres, or otherwise to find men on horses or on foot within this realme or without, nor for the gift, reward, aid or helpe reserued or couenanted to be paid or giuen to anie person ap∣pointed to serue in warres, or to find horse or man to serue by reason of anie grant, couenant, reseruation, custome, or te∣nure, any thing in the said act to the contrarie notwithstan∣ding, as by that Act and Prouiso more plainly appeareth. Yet by the said Act of 4 and 5 of Philip and Marie, it is enacted that no person or persons shall or may by colour of the Prouiso mentioned in the sayd Act of 2 and 3 of Edward the sixt,Imployed in seruice. exact or demaund, or leauie any summe or summes of money, horse,
armour, or any other thing, other then shal be imployed forth∣with in the present seruice of those warres for which it is lea∣uied, the which summe or summes of money, horse, armour or other thing,Money ren∣dred backe. or asmuch thereof as shall not be left, spent or consumed in the said seruice, shall be rendred and restored to such person or persons, as paid or deliuered the same vpon the penalties and forfeitures contained in the said Act. And by a braunch in the statute of 4 and 5 of Philip and Marie, cap. 2. it is ordained,Sale of har∣nesse, horse, or weapon. that if any souldier shall make sale of his horse, harnesse, and weapons, or any of them, contrarie to the forme of the statute made in the second and third yeare of Edward the sixt, that then not only the said souldier shall incurre the penalties of the statute, but also that the said sale made by such souldiers,Sale void a∣gainst the setter forth. by anie person knowing him to be a souldier, shall be void against him that sold, or set forth the said horse, harnesse, and weapon, or any of them, to or for the furniture of such souldier to serue with the same. Also touching Sea-markes,Sea-marks. for that they are necessary for the safetie of her Maiesties Nauie, and others to be conueyed into the Ports and hauens, it is ordained by a statute made in the eight yeare of the Quéenes Maiesties raigne that now is,8. Eliz. that the Maisters, wardens, and assistants of the Trinitie house at Detford Scrond, shall at all times at their costs, make, erect, and set vp such Beacons, markes, and signes of the sea, in such places of the sea shores and lands neare the sea coasts or fore-lands of the sea onely for seamarks,Beacons. Markes. as to them shall séeme most méet, néedfull and conuenient, wherby the danger may be auoyded and escaped, and ships come into their ports without perill. And that all the said Beacons, marks & signes at the sea coasts shall be continued,Renued. renewed and maintained from time to time. And it is further ordained by that statute,Steeples, Trees. that no stéeples, trées, or other things now standing as Beacons or marks for the sea, whereof to the owner or occupier of the place where the same doth grow or stand, before the first day of March next comming,Notice notice shall be giuen by the Quéenes Maiestie
vnder her signet, shall be at anie time after taken downe, felled, or otherwise cut downe, vpon paine of an hundred pound:Forf. 100 li. and if the offender be not worth so much, then to be dée∣med outlawed ipso facto to all intents and purposes. And lastly,Outlawed. Statute of Armour. for that there is a notable law set downe touching how euerie man must furnish himselfe with harnesse and armour for the warres, I haue thought good to set downe this Table, whereby you may shortly see the effect of the statute concer∣ning the same, made in the fourth and fift yeares of Philip and Mary. And thus with my most humble prayers to the Lord of Hosts for the preseruation of the Quéenes Maiesties person, and this noble Realme, and to giue vs grace to be true and faithfull subiects to her Highnesse and her Crowne, and to dis∣couer all traiterous and false hearted Subiects to the same in time, I end this simple Treatise, the 20 day of Ianuarie 1599 & in the one & fortieth yere of the most peaceable raigne of our most gratious Qnéene, whom Almigh∣tie God for his great mercie graunt long to liue and raigne ouer vs. A∣men. Armour.
Euerie person tē∣porall shall keepe, &c. which hath estate of inheri∣tance, or freehold in lands, &c. Horses or geldings de∣milāes with armour for them, where∣of the one halfe shall be horses at the least, with furnitue. Light Horses with thr furni∣ture of harnesse & wea∣pon. ostets furnished. Almain riuets, plate coates, Brigā∣dines, or Cor slets furni∣shed. Pilies. Long bowes. Sheafes of arrowes. Steele caps or Sculs. Blacke Bils or halbards. Harquebuses. Morians or Salets. 1000 lib. 6 10 40 40 40 30 30 30 20 20 20 1000 marks 6 30 30 30 20 20 20 10 10 10 400 lib. 2. 4 20 20 20 15 15 15   6 6 200. lib. 1. 2 10 10 10 8 8 8   3 3 100. lib. 2 3 3 3 3 3 3   2 2 100 marks 1 2 2 2 2 2 2   1 1 40 lib   2 2 2 1 1 1   2 2 20 lib.   1   1 1 1 1   1 1 10 lib.   1 1   1 1 1   1 1 5 lib.     1   1 1 2 1 1   Goods. 1000 markes 1, or 18 cor∣slets furni∣shed. 1 2 2 2 4 4 4   3 3   400 lib. 1 or 9 Corslets   1 2 2 2 2   1     200 lib.   1 2 1 2 2 2   1 1   100 lib.   1 1 1 2 2 2         40 lib.     2   1 1 1 1       20 lib.     1   2 2 2 1       10 lib.         1 1 1 1     Penalties forfei∣ted for not hauing in three moneths to the Queene an informer. &c. 10 lib. the horse, 3 lib. the furniture 3 lib. the de∣milance. 10 lib. the gel∣ding, 3 lib. the furnit. 40. shillings. 20 shillings.   10 shillings. 10 shillings. 10 shillings. 10 shillings. 101 shillings. 10 shillings.
THE AVTHOVR TO his Booke. Farewell, to learned skill thy selfe submit, Of this to write, I thinke thou art not fit, For TVLLIES eloquence a thing more meet, How to perswade with words both mild & sweet: Yet maist thou serue, I hope, without disgrace, Till better come, & then thou must giue place.
