6530 99841015 5572
Troia-Noua Triumphans. London Triumphing, OR, The Solemne, Magnificent, and Me∣morable Receiuing of that worthy Gentle∣man, Sir IOHN SVVINERTON Knight, into the Citty of LONDON, after his Returne from taking the Oath of Maioralty at Westminster, on the Morrow next after Simon and Iudes day, being the 29. of October. 1612. All the Showes, Pageants, Chariots of Triumph, with other Deuices, (both on the Water and Land) here fully expressed. By Thomas Dekker. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, and are to be sold by Iohn Wright dwelling at Christ Church-gate. 1612.
To the Deseruer of all those Honors, which the Customary Rites of this Day, And the generall Loue of this City bestow vpon him; Sir IOHN SVVINERTON, Knight, Lord Maior of the renowmed City of London. HONOR (this day) takes you by the Hand, and giues you welcomes into your New-Office of Pretorship. A Dignity worthie the Cities bestowing, and most worthy your Receiuing. You haue it with the Harts of ma∣ny people, Voices and Held-vp hands: they know it is a Roabe fit for you, and therefore haue clothed you in it. May the Last-day of your wearing the same, yeeld to your Selfe as much Ioy, as to Others does this First-day of your putting it on. I swimme (for my owne part) not onely in the Maine Full sea of the General praise and Hopes of you. But powre out also (for my particular) such a streame as my Prayers can render, for a successe answerable to the On-set: for it is no Field, vnlesse it be Crowned with victory. I present (Sir) vnto you, these labours of my Pen, as the first and newest Congratulatory Offrings tendred into your hands, which albeit I should not (of my selfe) deserue to see accepted, I know notwithstanding you will giue to them a generous and gratefull entertainement, in regard of that Noble Fellowship and Society, (of which you Yesterday
were a Brother, and This Day a Father) who most freely haue bestowed these their Loues vpon you. The Colours of this Peece are mine owne; the Cost theirs: to which no∣thing was wanting, that could be had, and euery thing had that was required. To their Lasting memory I set downe This; And to your Noble Disposition, this I Dedicate. My wishes being (as euer they haue bene) to meete with a∣ny Obiect, whose reflexion may present to your Eyes, that Loue and Duty, In which I stand Bounden To your Lordship. Thomas Dekker.
Troia Noua Triumphans. London Triumphing. TRyumphes, are the most choice and dain∣tiest fruit that spring from Peace and A∣bundance; Loue begets them; and Much Cost brings them forth. Expectation feeds vpon them, but seldome to a surfeite, for when she is most full, her longing wants something to be satisfied. So in∣ticing a shape they carry, that Princes themselues take pleasure to behold them; they with delight; common people with admiration. They are now and then the Rich and Glorious Fires of Bounty, State and Magnificence, giuing light and beauty to the Courts of Kings: And now and then, it is but a debt payd to Time and Custome: And out of that dept come These. Ryot hauing no hand in laying out the Expences, and yet no hand in plucking backe what is held decent to be bestowed. A sumptuous Thriftinesse in these Ciuil Ceremonies managing All. For it were not laudable, in a City (so rarely gouerned and tempered) superfluously to exceed; As contrariwise it is much honor to her (when the Day of spending comes) not to be sparing in any thing. For the Chaires of Magi∣strates ought to be adorned, and to shine like the Cha∣riot which caries the Sunne; And Beames (if it were pos∣sible) must be thought to be shot from the One as from the Other: As well to dazle and amaze the common
Eye, as to make it learne that there is some Excellent, and Extraordinary Arme from heauen thrust downe to exalt a Superior man, that thereby the Gazer may be drawne to more obedience and admiration. In a happy houre therefore did your Lordship take vpon you this inseperable burden (of Honor and Cares) because your selfe being Generous of mind, haue met with men, and with a Company equall to your Selfe in Spirit. And vpon as fortunate a Tree haue they ingraf∣ted their Bounty; the fruites whereof shoot forth and ripen, are gathered, and taste sweetly, in the mouthes not onely of this Citty, but also of our best-to-be-belo∣ued friends, the Noblest strangers. Vpon whom, though none but our Soueraigne King can bestow Royall wel∣comes; yet shall it be a Memoriall of an Exemplary Loue and Duty (in those who are at the Cost of these Triumphs) to haue added some Heightning more to them then was intended at first, of purpose to do honor to their Prince and Countrey. And I make no doubt, but many worthy Companies in this City could gladly be content to be partners in the Disbursements, so they might be sharers in the Glory. For to haue bene leaden-winged now, what infamy could be greater? When all the streames of Nobility and Gentry, run with the Tide hither. When all Eares lye listning for no newes but of Feasts and Tri∣umphs: All Eyes still open to behold them: And all harts and hands to applaud them: When the heape of our Soueraignes Kingdomes are drawne in Little: and to be seene within the Walles of this City. Then to haue tied Bounty in too straight a girdle: Proh scelus infandum! No; she hath worne her garments loose, her lippes haue
bene free in Welcomes, her purse open, and her hands liberall. If you thinke I set a flattering glasse before you, do but so much as lanch into the Riuer, and there the Thames it selfe shall shew you all the Honors, which this day hath bestowed vpon her: And that done, step a∣gaine vpon the Land, and Fame will with her owne Trumpet proclaime what I speake; And her I hope you cannot deny to beleeue, hauing at least twenty thou∣sand eyes about her, to witnesse whether she be a True∣tong'd Fame or a Lying. By this time the Lord Maior hath taken his oath, is seated in his barge againe; a lowd thundring peale of Chambers giue him a Fare-well as he passes by. And see! how quickly we are in ken of land, as suddenly there∣fore let vs leap on shore, and there obserue what hono∣rable entertainement the Citty affoords to their new Praetor, and what ioyfull salutations to her noble Vi∣sitants. The first Triumph on the Land. THE Lord Maior, and Companyes being landed, the first Deuice which is presented to him on the shore, stands ready to receiue him at the end of Pauls-Chayne, (on the south side the Church) and this it is. A Sea-Chariot artificially made, proper for a God of the sea to sit in; shippes dancing round about it, with Dolphins and other great Fishes playing or lying at the foot of the same, is drawne by two Sea-horses. Neptune. In this Chariot sits Neptune, his head circled with a Coronet of siluer, Scollup-shels, stucke with branches of
Corrall, and hung thicke with ropes of pearle; be∣cause such things as these are the treasures of the Deepe, and are found in the shels of fishes. In his hand he holds a siluer Trident, or Three-forked-Mace, by which some Writers will haue signified the three Naturall qualiies proper to Waters; as those of fountaines to bee of a de∣litious taste, and Christalline colour: those of the Sea, to bee saltish and vnpleasant, and the colour sullen, and greenish: And lastly, those of standing Lakes, neither sweet nor bitter, nor cleere, nor cloudy, but altogether vnwholesome for the taste, and loathsome to the eye. His roabe and mantle with other ornaments are corre∣spondent to the quality of his person; Buskins of pearle and cockle-shels being worne vpon his legges. At the lower part of this Chariot sit Mer-maids, who for their excellency in beauty, aboue any other creatures belon∣ging to the sea, are preferred to bee still in the eye of Neptune. At Neptunes foot sits Luna (the Moone) who beeing gouernesse of the sea, & all petty Flouds, as from whose influence they receiue their ebbings and flowings, chal∣lenges to herselfe this honour, to haue rule and com∣mand of those Horses that draw the Chariot, and there∣fore she holds their reynes in her hands. She is atired in light roabes fitting her state and con∣dition, with a siluer Crescent on her head, expressing both her power and property. The whole Chariot figuring in it selfe that vast com∣passe which the sea makes about the body of the earth: whose Globicall Rotundity is Hieroglifically represented by the wheele of the Chariot.
Before this Chariot ride foure Trytons, who are feyned by Poets to bee Trumpeters to Neptune, and for that cause make way before him, holding strange Trumpets in their hands, which they sound as they passe along, their habits being Antike, and Sea-like, and sitting vp∣on foure seuerall fishes, viz. two Dolphins, and two Mer-maids, which are not (after the old procreation) begotten of painted cloath, and browne paper, but are liuing beasts, so queintly disguised like the natural fishes, of purpose to auoyd the trouble and pestering of Por∣ters, who with much noyse and little comlinesse are eue∣ry yeare most vnnecessarily imployed. The time being ripe, when the scope of this Deuice is to be deliuered, Neptunes breath goeth forth in these following Speeches. Neptunes Speeches. WHence breaks this warlike thunder of lowd drummes, (Clarions and Trumpets) whose shrill eccho comes Vp to our Watery Court, and calles from thence Vs, and our Trytons? As if violence Weere to our Siluer-footed Sister done (Of Flouds the Queene) bright Thamesis, who does runne Twice euery day to our bosome, and there hides Ebbe Her wealth, whose Streame in liquid Christall glides Guarded with troopes of Swannes? what does beget These Thronges? this Confluence? why do voyces beate The Ayre with acclamations of applause, Good wishes, Loue, and Praises? what is't drawes All Faces this way? This way Rumor flyes,
Clapping her infinite wings, whose noyse the Skyes From earth receiue, with Musicall rebounding, And strike the Seas with repercussiue sounding. Oh! now I see the cause: vanish vaine feares, *Isis no danger feeles: for her head weares Crowns of Rich Triumphes, which This day puts on, And in Thy Honor all these Rites are done. Whose Name when Neptune heard, t'was a strange Spell, Thus farre-vp into th' Land to make him swell Beyond his Bownds, and with his Sea-troops wait Thy wish't arriuall, to congratulate. Goe therefore on, goe boldly: thou must saile In rough Seas (now) of Rule: and euery Gale Will not perhaps befriend thee: But (how blacke So ere the Skyes looke) dread not Thou a Wracke, For when Integrity and Innocence sit Steering the Helme, no Rocke the Ship can split. Nor care the Whales (neuer so great) their Iawes Should stretch to swallow thee: Euery good mans cau Is in all stormes his Pilot: He thats sound To himselfe (in Conscience) nere can run-a-ground. Which that thou mayst do, neuer looke on't still: For (Spite of Fowle gusts) calmer Windes shall fill Thy Sayles at last. And see! they home haue brought A Ship which Bacchus (God of Wines) hath fraught With richest Iuiee of Grapes, which thy Friends shall Drinke off in Healths to this Great Festiuall. If any at Thy happinesse repine, They gnaw but their Owne hearts, and touch not Thine. Let Bats and Skreech-Owles murmure at bright Day, Whiles Prayers of Good-men Guid. Thee on the way. Sownd old Oceanus Trumpeters, and lead on.
The Trytons then sownding, according to his com∣mand, Neptune in his Chariot passeth along before the Lord Maior. The foure Windes (habilimented to their quality, and hauing both Faces and Limbes proportio∣nable to their blustring and boisterous condition) driue forward that Ship of which Neptune spake. And this concludes this first Triumph on the Land. These two Shewes passe on vntill they come into Pauls-Church-yard, where standes another Chariot; the former Chariot of Neptune, with the Ship, beeing con∣ueyd into Cheap-side, this other then takes the place: And this is the Deuice. The second Land-Triumph. IT is the Throne of Vertue, gloriously adorned & beau∣tified with all things that are fit to expresse the Seat of so noble and diuine a Person. Vpon the height, and most eminent place (as wor∣thiest to be exalted) sits Arete (Vertue) herselfe; her tem∣ples shining with a Diadem of starres, to shew that her Descent is onely from heauen: her roabes are rich, her mantle white (figuring Innocency) and powdred with starres of gold, as an Embleme that she puts vpon Men, the garments of eternity. Beneath Her, in distinct places, sit the Seauen liberall Sciences, viz. Grammer, Rhetoricke, Logicke, Musicke, A∣rithmetike, Geometry, Astronomy. Hauing those roomes alotted them, as being Mothers to all Trades, Professions, Mysteries and Societies, and the readiest guide to Vertue. Their habits are Light Roabes,
and Loose (for Knowledge should be free.) On their heads they weare garlands of Roses, mixt with other flowers, whose sweet Smels are arguments of their cleere and vn∣spotted thoughts, not corrupted with uice. Euery one carrying in her hand, a Symbole, or Badge of that Learning which she professeth. At the backe of this Chariot sit foure Cupids, to signi∣fie that vertue is most honored when she is followed by Loue. This Throne, or Chariot, is drawne by foure Horses: vpon the two formost ride Time and Mercury: the first, the Begetter and Bringer forth of all things in the world, the second, the God of Wisedome and Eloquence. On the other two Horses ride Desire and Industry; it beeing inti∣mated hereby, that Tyme giues wings to Wisedome, and sharpens it, Wisedome sets Desire a burning, to attaine to Vertue, and that Burning Desire begets Industry (earnest∣nestly to pursue her.) And all these (together) make men in Loue with Arts, Trades, Sciences, and Knowledge, which are the onely staires and ascensions to the Throne of Ver∣tue, and the onely glory and vpholdings of Cities. Time hath his wings, Glasse, and Sythe, which cuts downe All. Mercury hath his Caduceus, or Charming Rod, his fethe∣red Hat, his Wings, and other properties fitting his con∣dition, Desire caries a burning heart in her hand. Industry is in the shape of an old Country-man, bearing on his shoulder a Spade, as the Embleme of Labour. Before this Chariot, or Throne (as Guardians and Pro∣tectors to Vertue, to Arts, and to the rest; and as Assistants to Him who is Chiefe within the Citty for that yeare) are mounted vpon horsebacke twelue Persons (two by two)
representing the twelue superior Companyes, euery one carrying vpon his left arme a faire Shield with the armes in it of one of the twelue Companies, and in his right hand a launce with a light streamer or pendant on the top of it, and euery horse led and attended by a Footman. The Lord Maior beeing approached to this Throne, Vertue thus salutes him. The Speech of ARETE (Vertue.) HAile (worthy Pretor) stay, and do Me grace, (Who still haue cald thee Patron) In this place To take from me heap'd welcomes, who combine These peoples hearts in one, to make them thine. Bright Vertues name thou know'st and heau'nly birth, And therefore (spying thee) downe she leapd to earth Whence vicious men had driuen her: On her throne The Liberall Arts waite: from whose brests do runne The milke of Knowledge: on which, Sciences feed, Trades and Professions: And by Them, the seed Of Ciuill, Popular gouernment, is sowne; Which springing vp, loe! to what heigth tis growne In Thee andThe Al men. These is seene. And (to maintaine This Greatnesse) Twelue strong Pillars it sustaine; Vpon whose Capitals,The tw Compa Twelue Societies stand, (Graue and well-ordred) bearing chiefe Command Within this City, and (with Loue) thus reare Thy fame, in free election, for this yeare. All arm'd, to knit their Nerues (in One) with Thine, To guard this new Troy: And, (that She may shine In Thee, as Thou in Her) no Misers kay
Has bard the Gold vp; Light flies from the Day Not of more free gift, thau from them their Cost: For whats now spar'd, that only they count Lost. As then their Ioynd-hands lift Thee to thy Seate. (Changing thereby thy Name for one Moreio. Great And as this City, with her Loud, Full Voice, (Drowning all spite that murmures at the Choice, If at least such there be) does Thee preferre, So art thou bound to loue, both Them and Her. For Know, thou art not like a Pinnacle, plac'd Onely to stand aloft, and to be grac'd With wondring eyes, or to haue caps and knees Heape worship on thee: for that Man does leeze Himselfe and his Renowne, whose growth being Hye In the weale-publicke (like the Cypres tree) Is neither good to Build-with, nor beare Fruit; Thou must be now, Stirring, and Resolute. To be what thou art Sworne, (a waking Eye) A farre off (like a Beacon) to descry What stormes are comming, and (being come) must thn Shelter with spred armes, the poor'st Citizen. Set Plenty at thy Table, at thy Gate Bounty, and Hospitality: hee's most Ingrate Into whose lap the Publicke-weale hauing powr'd Her Golden shewers, from Her his wealth should hoord. Be like those Antient Spirits, that (long agon) Could thinke no Good deed sooner, than twas Don; Others to pleasure. Hold it Thou more Glory, Than to be pleas'd Thy Selfe. And be not sory If Any striue (in best things) to exceed thee, But glad, to helpe thy Wrongers, if they need thee.
Nor feare the Stings of Enuy, nor the Threates Of her inuenomd Arrowes, which at the Seates Of those Who Best Rule, euermore are shot, But the Aire blowes off their fethers, and they hit not. Come therefore on; nor dread her, nor her Sprites, The poyson she spits vp, on her owne Head lights. On, on, away. This Chariot or Throne of Vertue is then set forward, and followes that of Neptune, this taking place iust before the Lord Maior: And this concludes the se∣cond Triumphant shew. The third Deuice. THe third Deuice is a Forlorne Castle, built close to the little Conduit in Cheap-side, by which as the Throne of Vertue comes neerer and neerer, there appeare a∣boue (on the battlements) Enuy, as chiefe Comman∣dresse of that infernall Place, and euery part of it guar∣ded with persons representing all those that are fellowes and followers of Enuy: As Ignorance, Sloth, Oppression, Disdaine, &c. Enuy her selfe being attired like a Fury, her haire full of Snakes, her countenance pallid, mea∣gre and leane, her body naked, in her hand a knot of Snakes, crawling and writhen about her arme. The rest of her litter are in as vgly shapes as the Dam, e∣uery one of thē being arm'd with black bowes, & arrows ready to bee shot at Vertue. At the gates of this Fort of Furies, stand Ryot and Calumny, in the shapes of Gyants, with clubs, who offer to keep back the Chariot of Vertue,
and to stop her passage. All the rest likewise on the bat∣tlements offering to discharge their blacke Artillery at her: but she onely holding vp her bright shield, dazzles them, and confounds them, they all on a sudden shrin∣king in their heads, vntill the Chariot be past, and then all of them appearing againe: their arrowes, which they shoote vp into the aire, breake there out in fire-workes, as hauing no power to do wrong to so sacred a Deity as Vertue. This caue of Monsters stands fixed to the Conduit, in which Enuie onely breathes out her poyson to this pur∣pose. The speech of Enuy. ENVY. ADders shoote, hysse speckled Snakes; Sloth craule vp, see Oppression wakes; (Baine to learning) Ignorance Shake thy Asses eares, Disdaine, aduance Thy head Luciferan: Ryot split Thy ribbes with curses: Calumny spit Thy rancke-rotten gall vp: See, See, See, That Witch, whose bottomelesse Sorcery Makes fooles runne mad for her; that Hag For whom your Dam pines, hangs out her flag Our Den to ransacke: Vertue, that whore; See, see, how braue shee's, I am poore. VERTVE. On, on, the beames of Vertue, are so bright, They dazle Enuy, on: the Hag's put to flight. ENVY. Snakes, from your virulent spawne ingender Dragons, that may peece-meale rend her, Adders shoote your stings like quils
Of Porcupines, (Stiffe) hot Aetnean hils Vomit sulphure to confound her, Fiendes and Furies (that dwell vnder) Lift hell gates from their hindges: come You clouen-foote-broode of Barrathrum, Stop, stay her, fright her, with your shreekes, And put fresh bloud in Enuies cheekes. VERTVE. On, on, the beames of Vertue, are so bright, They dazle Enuy: on the Hag's put to flight. OMNES. Shoote, Shoote, &c. All that are with Enuy. Either during this speech, or else when it is done, cer∣taine Rockets flye vp into the aire; The Throne of Ver∣tue passing on still, neuer staying, but speaking still those her two last lines, albeit, shee bee out of the hearing of Enuy: and the other of Enuies Faction, crying still, shoote, shoote, but seeing they preuaile not, all retire in, and are not seene till the Throne comes backe againe. And this concludes this Triumphant assault of Enuy: her conquest is to come. The fourth Deuice. THIS Throne of Vertue passeth along vntill it come to the Crosse in Cheape, where the presenta∣tion of another Triumph attends to welcome the Lord Maior, in his passage, the Chariot of Vertue is drawne then along, this other that followes taking her place, the Deuice bearing this argument. Vertue hauing by helpe of her followers, conducted
the Lord Maior safely, euē, as it were, through the iawes of Enuy and all her Monsters: The next and highest ho∣nour shee can bring him to, is to make him ariue at the house of Fame, And that is this Pageant. In the vpper seat sits Fame crowned in rich attire, a Trumpet in her hand, &c. In other seuerall places sit Kings, Princes, and No∣ble persons, who haue benefice of the Marchant-tailors: A perticular roome being reserued for one that repre∣sents the person of Henry the now Prince of Wales. The onely speaker heere is Fame her selfe, whose wordes sound out these glad welcomes. The speech of Fame. VVElcome to Fames high Temple: here fix fast Thy footing; for the wayes which thou hast past Will be forgot and worne out, and no Tract Of steps obseru'd, but what thou now shalt Act. The booke is shut of thy precedent deedes, And Fame vnclaspes another, where shee reades (Aloud) the Chronickle of a dangerous yeare, For Each Eye will looke through thee, and Each Eare Way-lay thy Words and Workes. Th'hast yet but gon About a Pyramid's foote; the Top's not won, That's glasse; who slides there, fals, and once falne downe Neuer more rises: No Art cures Renowne The wound being sent to 'th Heart. Tis kept from thence By a strong Armor, Vertues influence; She guides thee, Follow her. In this Court of Fame None else but Vertue can enrole thy Name. Erect thou then a Serious Eye, And looke
What Worthies fill vp Fames Voluminous booke, That now (thine owne name read there) none may blot Thy leafe with soule inke, nor thy Margent quoate With any Act of Thine, which may disgrace This Citties choice, thy selfe, or this thy Place: Or, that which may dishonour the high Merits Of thy Renown'd Society: Roiall Spirits Of Princes holding it a grace to weare That Crimson Badge, which these about them beare, Yea, Kings themselues 'mongst you haue Fellowes bene, Stil'd by the Name of a Free-citizen: For instance, see, seuen English Kings there plac'd, Cloth'd in your Liuery, The first Seate being grac'd By second Richard: next himHen Bullingbrooke: Then, that Fift (thundring) Henry: who all France shook: By him, his sonne (sixth Henry) By his side Fourth Edward: who the Roses did diuide: Richard the third, next him, and then that King, Who made both Roses in one Branch to spring: A Spring of which Branch, (Highest now but One) Is Henry Prince of Wales, followed by none: Who of this Brotherhood, last and best steps forth, Honouring your Hall: To Heighthen more your worth. I can a Register show of seuenteene more, (Princes and Dukes All:) entombed long before, Yet kept aliue by Fame; Earles thirty one, And Barons sixty six that path hue gone: Of Visecounts onely one, your Order tooke: Turne ouer one leafe more in our vast booke And you may reade the Names of Prelates there, Of which one Arch-bishop your cloth did weare.
And Byshops twenty foure: of Abbots seue, As many Priors, to make the number euen: Of forty Church men, I, one sub prior adde, You from all these, These from you honour had: Women of high bloud likewise laid aside Their greater State so to be dignified: Of which a Queene the first was, then a paire of Dukes wiues: And to leaue the Roll more faire Fiue Countesses and two Ladies are the last, Whose Birth & Beauties haue your Order gracd. But I too long spin out this Thrid of Gold; Here breakes it off. Fame hath them All en-rold On a Large File (with Others,) And their Story The world shall reade, to Adde vnto thy Glory, Which I am loath to darken: thousand eyes Yet aking till they enioy thee, win then that prise Which Vertue holds vp for thee, And (that done) Fame shall the end crowne, as she hath begun. Set forward. Those Princes and Dukes (besides the Kings nominated before) are these. In the time of Richard the second. Iohn Duke of Lancaster. Edmond Duke of Yorke. The Duke of Gloster. The Duke of Surrey. In the time of Henry the the fifth. Humfry Duke of Gloster. Richard Duke of Yorke. In the time of Edward the 4. Gorge D. of Clarence. In the time of Richard the third. Duke of Suffolke Iohn D. of Norfolke George D. of Bedford.
Edward D. of Buckingham, In the time of Henry the 7. with others, whose Rol is too long, here to be opened. The Queene spoken of, was Anne wife to Richard the 2. Dukes wiues these, viz. The Dutchesse of Gloster. In the time of Richard the 2. Elionor Dutchesse of Gloster. In the time of H. the 5. Now for Prelates, I reckon onely these, The Prior of Saint Bartholmewes, And his Sub-prior. The Prior of Elsing-spittle, Thomas Arundell Arch-bishop of Canterbury Henry Bewfort Bishop of Winton. The Abbot of Barmondsey. The Abbot of Towrchill. Philip Morgan Bishop of Worster. The Abbot of Tower-hill. The Prior of Saint Mary Ouery. The Prior of Saint Trinity in Cree-church. The Abbot and Prior of Westminster. Kemp Bishop of London. W. Wainfleete B. of Winchester. George Neuill Bishop of VVinchester, and Chauncelor of England. Iohn May Abbot of Chertsay, Laurence Bishop of Durham. Iohn Russell Bishop of Rochester. If I should lengthen this number, it were but to trou∣ble you with a large Index of names onely, which I am loath to do, knowing your expectation is to bee other∣wise feasted.
The Speech of Fame therefore being ended, as 'tis set downe before, this Temple of Hers takes place next be∣fore the Lord Maior, those of Neptune and Vertue mar∣ching in precedent order. And as this Temple is carryed along, a Song is heard, the Musicke being queintly con∣ueyed in a priuate roome, and not a person discouered. THE SONG. HOnor, eldest Child of Fame, Thou farre older then thy Name, Waken with my Song, and see One of thine, here waiting thee. Sleepe not now But thy brow Chac't with Oliues, Oke and Baies And an age of happy dayes Vpward bring Whilst we sing In a Chorus altogether, Welcome, welcome, welcome hither. Longing round about him stay Eyes, to make another day, Able with their vertuous Light Vtterly to banish Night. All agree This is hee Full of bounty, honour, store And a world of goodnesse more Yet to spring Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether, Welcome, welcome, welcome hither. Enuy angry with the dead, Far from this place hide thy head: And Opinion, that nere knew What was either good or true Fly, I say For this day Shall faire Iustice, Truth, and Right, And such happy sonnes of Light To vs bring Whilst we sing In a Chorus altogether, Welcome, welcome, welcome hither. Goe on nobly, may thy Name, Be as old, and good as Fame. Euer be remembred here Whilst a blessing, or a teare Is in store With the pore So shall SVVINERTON nere dye, But his vertues vpward flye And still spring Whilst we sing In a Chorus ceasing neuer, He is liuing, liuing euer. And this concludes this fourth Triumph, till his Lordships returne from the Guild-hall.
In returning backe from the Guild-hall, to performe the Ceremoniall customes in Pauls Church, these shewes march in the same order as before: and comming with the Throne of Vertue, Enuy and her crue are as busie a∣gaine, Enuy vttering some three or foure lines toward the end of her speech onely: As thus: ENVY. FIends and Furies that dwell vnder, Lift Hell-gates from their hindges: Come You clouen-footed-brood of Barathrum, Stop, stony her, fright her with your shreekes, And put fresh bloud in Enuyes cheekes. VERTVE. On, on, the beames of Vertue are so bright, They dazzle Enuy: On, the Hag's put to flight. This done, or as it is in doing, those twelue that ride armed discharge their Pistols, at which Enuy, and the rest, vanish, and are seene no more. When the Lord Maior is (with all the rest of their Tri∣umphes) brought home, Iustice (for a fare-well) is moun∣ted on some couenient scaffold close to his entrance at his Gate, who thus salutes him. The speech of IVSTICE. MY This-dayes-sworne-protector, welcome home, If Iustice speake not now, be she euer dumbe: The world giues out shee's blinde; but men shall see, Her Sight is cleere, by influence drawne from Thee. For One-yeare therefore, at these Gates shee'l sit, To guid thee In and Out: thou shalt commit
(If Shee stand by thee) not One touch of wrong: And though I know thy wisdome built vp strong, Yet men (like great ships) being in storms, most neere To danger, when vp all their sailes they beare. And since all Magistrates tread still on yce, From mine owne Schoole I reade thee this aduice: Do good for no mans sake (now) but thine owne, Take leaue of Friends & foes, both must be knowne But by one Face: the Rich and Poore must lye In one euen Scale: All Suiters, in thine Eye Welcome alike; Euen Hee that seemes most base, Looke not vpon his Clothes, but on his Case. Let not Oppression wash his hands ith' Teares Of Widowes, or of Orphans: Widowes prayers Can pluck downe Thunder, & poore Orphans cries Are Lawrels held in fire; the violence flyes Vp to Heauen-gates, and there the wrong does tell, Whilst Innocence leaues behind it a sweet smell. Thy Conscience must be like that Scarlet Dye; One fowle spot staines it All: and the quicke Eye Of this prying world, will make that spot thy scorne. Tha Collar (which about thy Necke is worne) Of Golden Esses, bids thee so to knit Men hearts in Loue, and make a Chayne of it. That Sword is seldome drawne, by which is meant, It should strike seldome: neuer th'innocent. Tis held before thee by anothers Hand, But the point vpwards (heauen must that cōmand) Snatch it not then in Wrath; it must be giuen, But to cut none, till warranted by Heauen. The Head, the politike Body must aduance
For which thou hast this Cap of Maintenance, And since the most iust Magistrate often erres, Thou guarded art about with Officers, Who knowing the athes of Others that are gone, Should teach thee what to do, what leaue vndone. Nights Candles lighted are, and burne amaine, Cut therefore here off, Thy Officious Traine Which Loue and Custome lend thee: All Delight Crowne both this Day and Citty: A good Night To Thee, and these Graue Senators, to whom My last Fare-wels, in these glad wishes come, That thou & they (whose strength the City beares) May be as old in Goodnesse as in Yeares. THe Title-page of this Booke makes promise of all the Shewes by water, as of these On the Land; but Apollo hauing no hand in them, I suffer them to dye by that which fed them; that is to say, Powder & Smoake. Their thunder (according to the old Gally-foyst-fashion) was too lowd for any of the Nine Muses to be bidden to it. I had deuiz'd Oe, altogether Musicall, but Times Glasse could spare no Sand, nor lend conuenient Howres for the performance of it. Night cuts off the glory of this Day, and so consequently of these Triumphes, whose brightnesse beeing ecclipsed, my labours can yeeld no longer shadow. They are ended, but my Loue and Duty to your Lordship shall neuer. —Non displcuisse mretur, Festinat (Praetor) Qui placuisse Tibi▪ FINIS.
