A3585A R214866 99826922 31333
APPRENTICES no SLAVES. An ANSWER TO A Namelesse PAMPHLET Lately published as an ACT, declaring what HABIT APPRENTICES Are to wear. With an Additional Order forbidding their wearing of Points, Ribbons, and other Trimmings whatsoever. THE Scribler of this Pamphlet, for he is not the Author, except in some nonsensical places of his own intercalation and Addition seems to be the Tell-Stripe Clerk of Bridewell, or the Keepers man of Little-Ease, who having by the cor∣ruption
ruption and Bribery of a Pot of Ale, got some idle Clerk to turn over some musty Rolls, got these Moth-eaten Orders of Apparel to be transcribed, and then with a bold Title at Randome, not assigning any Time when they were Enacted by the City, supposeth (as his intention is to impose upon the Reader) the Pren∣tices (as it is in Law) will take uncertain time for the Present, and buy it out of Curiosity or Indignation; and then his turn is served. The whole drift of this Libell looks very like the Story of the Gibeonites, who with mouldy bread and clouted Shooes, came to make Indentures with the Is∣raelites, and by them were made Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water. The manner of this Libellous design is a little diffe∣rent from the Gibeonites, he pretends not to come a far of from antique, obsolete, and old Customes, but obtrudes these mad Whimseys, as of the present times and newly fitted and furbish'd up for the next mode and fashion, and that from no lesse Authority then Be it Enacted, &c. But before we come to that let us consider the Pre∣face, which should by custome shew the Reasonable∣nesse and ground of such an Act. Tis this, For Re∣formation of many abuses growing by reason of Excesse, and strange fashion of Apparell used by many Appren∣tices within the City of London and the Liberties there∣of; [Good Mr. Gravity] and for satisfying such others [mark the Wisdome of the Law-giver] who being well disposed are contented with such Apparel as is fitting, and their Masters wel;l able to afford them. Be it Enacted, &c. Sure this came out of the Oracle of the black Pot especially the Hinder Part or Rump end of it; it's a
pretty doubsul and ambiguous sentence betwixt sense and English, to satisfie such as are contented already with their Clothes. Mighty man of Reason! Could he find no better dresse of words for the Cities meaning, or was it on purpose to cloth their Intentions with the same Impertinencies and absurdities as these Orders would the Apprentices. Indeed he graceth the City in the same manner as the odd and antick kind of Ha∣bit, enjoyned in the ensuing orders, would, if re∣ceived into monstrous use again, out of which for Forty years last past it hath been exploded and dismis∣sed. But this Cato talks of Reformation, a dangerous word, and mainly driven on lately by Shoomakers and Taylors, and we all know what it proved. It is a max∣ime of State, that even evils of Custome, and which are deep rooted in the minds of men, are rather to be endured then to substitute new ones in their places, which might bring danger to the Common-wealth by the alteration of them. (Add hereto the long pre∣scription to the contrary) and that the Reformation of the Apparel of Prentices as the case stands, may not be of as evil consequence as may appear by several rea∣sons) we refer it to the Reader to judge. For London is no Algier, where the captive slaves have their seve∣ral Badges by which they are to be known, though it may be presumed the rigidnesse of some Masters cared not even in this City if there were Brands put upon Ser∣vants as they do upon Horses, to showe their absolute∣ness and Propriety. Nor are the Apprentices like the Helots to the Lacedemonians at the unlimited unboun∣ded will of their Masters, having no power of their
own, not so much as of the faculties of their under∣standing. Nor have their Parents by committing them to the care of their Masters, wholly quitted and resign∣ed their right and Interest in their Children, by their Indentures. No there's no such matter, they are En∣glish men born, and cannot lose that natural Freedom, and 'tis as absur'd, that a municipal Franchisement, the freedome of one City should swallow up and annul that of the whole Nation and Kingdome, as 'tis for a smaller thing to contain a greater, for a Gudgeon to de∣vour a Pike. Besides this Common Liberty there are many and those thousands which can and justly do pre∣tend to greater Priviledges by their Birth and Descent which as well by Custome as the Courtesie of England are due to them; so that as to these persons who as is said are so numerous, it is impossible these Orders should take effect. And the exception of them out of this yoake, will and must be stretched to those who make up the lack of Gentile Fxtraction by Wealth and Estate, of which there is neer one third of the Prentices. This likewise maugre all opposition will fall into the Imitation of those who being of as honest Parentage, will ambitiously think in some degree to follow the Fashion; so that it will be a work of more difficulty to reduce them then a bare be it enacted. On the contrary side see what Honour this handsom∣nesse and fashionable of Apparel worn now by the Ap∣prentices hath done to this City and the whole King∣dome. [It is the happinesse (as it was the acknowledge∣ment of one of the best and greatest of them) of the Kings of England that they rule not over Slaves but Subjects.] It was generally confessed and spoken by
Strangers, that the Auxiliary Regiments of London, the last general Training day, were the finest, bravest, Sight they ever see, being equally mixt with terrour and delight; so that London which was reported to them for a Hell, seemed plainly to be a Heaven for Servants; and that it was no little addition to its for∣mer glories. Indeed the Buffe Doublet better becomes such brave Spirits then Leather Breeches, and 'tis known to whom the City was beholding for her Safety, during all the dangers of the late Anarchy, and it would be a very ill requital to give them a Fools Cap, who never feared to expose their heads without Helmets for their Security. This City is now another place then what it was for∣merly, not only to the Gentility and Wealth of those that are bred in it, (many persons being sent hither as Sir— Bollen Lord Mayor of London Ancestor to Queen Eliz. ad Aedificandum domum Antiquam to build up and repair their antient Families) but also in regard of its Potency and Commerce; we deal now in our own Shops with most People of the World, from whom we have learned Civility with their fashions, and there∣fore 'tis fit Apprentices should not be in that despicable Habit as to cause men to disdain converse with them, which is the only means of promoting Trade. Whereas formerly the Easterlins managed all the forraign busi∣nesse, very few English Merchants being then resident here, but were content to truck as it were under those Forraigners. So that it is requisite that to this opulen∣cy there should be a suitable bravery, and 'tis the most innocent (as it's a natural) pride that floweth and ari∣seth from Plenty.
'Twould be a mad antick Sight to see now out Dames and Mistresses in their wide Fardingales, with which they could scarce enter in at a Church dore, and the Apprentices in their close order, in a Jack a Lents pair of Breeches, ready to run in at a Mouse hole, instead of civilly becoming their Shops. And sure the world especially London, hath been frantick long enough and needs none of Tom Bedlams Guegawes for their diver∣tisement, unlesse they will professe themselves Qua∣kers, as well as they stifly say they will be P— For the rest of this Pedlery, it will raise so much dust if we brush it, having lain so long by, that though it was thought fit at first to beat it, that it might foul no Fingers, it shall now rot with this Epitaph on these Monuments and Records of the Tyranny used former∣ly to Apprentices, that the Kent Street Warchouse com∣pared with it is a Compleat Wardrobe. In sum, It is supposed that Pamphlet was intended to beget some broyl in the City, by those who are restlesse in their endevours against our present, and we hope, perpetual peace, which hath therefore obliged this Answer thereto. FINIS.
