b1088 12256262 57532
Lib. 1. cap. 9 Sect. 13.39 Page. 475. F. H. van. Hove. sculp: section of Zwelfer's globe, furnace and bellows method for obtaining vapours of antimony
Pharmacopoeia Bateana: OR, Bate's Dispensatory. Translated from the Second Edition of the Latin Copy, Published by Mr. James Shipton. CONTAINING His Choice and Select Recipe's, their Names, Compositions, Preparations, Vertues, Uses and Doses, as they are Applicable to the whole Practice of Physick and Chyrurgery: THE ARCANA GODDARDIANA, AND Their Recipe's intersperst in their proper Places, which are almost all wanting in the Latin Copy. COMPLEATED With above Five Hundred Chymical Processes; and their Explications at large, various Observations thereon, and a Rationale upon each Process. To which are Added in this English Edition, GODDARD's Drops, RUSSEL's Pouder, AND THE EMPLASTRUM FEBRIFUGUM: Those so much Fam'd in the World; As also several other Preparations from the Collectanea Chymica, and other Good Authors. By WILLIAM SALMON, Professor of PHYSICK. LONDON: Printed for S. Smith and B. Walford, at the Prince's Arms, in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1694.
TO THE Most Serene and Mighty MONARCH, WILLIAM III. King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. Great SIR, I Bring to Your Majesty a small Work, a Series of Prescriptions in the Medi∣cal Art, yet possibly the Greatest in its Kind, for Excellency and Ʋsefulness, that ever any Age produced: A Collected Sum∣mary of the Choicest Secrets in Physick yet known; and what all the Professors thereof acknowledge as a Spontaneous Product from the Ʋniversal Stock of Experience. I have Accomodated it for the Ad∣vantage of all Your Majesty's Subjects, and made its Ʋse as Ʋniversal and Easie, as the Medicaments themselves are Gene∣ral
and Good: Had not the Necessity of such a Work, prevailed with me, I had never put my Hand to this Plough, nor troubled Your Majesty on such an Occasion. Be pleased therefore, Sir, to cast Your Favourable Eye, on the State of the Pro∣fession of Physick, and in particular on this Book, which thro' your Benignity can∣not go without its hoped for Effects; for that thro' Your Royal Favour, it will not only live now in Estimation and Respect, but stand as a Signal to future Times of Your Majesty's extraordinary Goodness, frustrating the Designs of evil Men. You have, Sir, rescued us not only from the Jaws of Lions and Paws of Bears, the brutest of Beasts, but from the Insu∣perable Chains of Popery and Slavery, and from the Dreaded Tyranny of Eter∣nal Slaves, the Barbarous French: And restored our dearest Liberties, ravisht from us by Ʋsurpation and Violence, thro' the Malice and Deceit of Treache∣rous and Ambitious Men; who not only ruin'd the Publick by their Follies, but
precipitated themselves from the highest Acme of Glory, to the fathomless Abyss of Dishonour and Contempt. Thus, Sir, becoming the Glory of the Diadem, and the Majesty of Crowned Heads, You will out-do Royalty it self; and by Your Magnanimity, build such Monuments of Honour, which the Result of utmost Ages shall never deface, nor eternal Times ever wear out or alter. Were my Abilities to write your Cha∣racter but equal to the Greatness of Your Spirit; and could I but scetch out a faint Idea of Your Glorious Actions, I'd write in Everlasting Lines Your Immortal Life, and depict upon the Curtains of Eternity, not the Shadows of Royalty but the perpetual Substance thereof, powerfully Arm'd with unlimited Good∣ness: A Prerogative that no Prince upon Earth, but Your Majesty, can justly Claim. May Heaven therefore continue the Suc∣cess of your Arms; and Victory attend You wheresoever You go: May you subdue Tyrants by Your Sword, and vanquish the
Terrible of the Earth, trampling under Your Feet the Destroyers of the World: and being filled with the Spoils of Your Enemies, May You lift up the Standarts of Justice and Truth, and by Your Ʋnresist∣able Power introduce Peace to your People And that a Prosperous Conduct may at∣tend You with Honour and Glory, thro' a long and happy Reign, is the perpetual Prayer of Your Majesty's most Loyal And humble Subject, WILLIAM SALMON.
THE PREFACE. I THE Original Author of this Book was the Eminent and Learned Dr. Bate, a Man who in his Station had been Physician to Two Kings of England, and a Protector; and of such Approved Skill in his Profession, that to make any Descants thereon, would be to draw a Vail over his Lustre, and blemish that Excellency, which in this following Work, gives a convincing Proof, that he was one of the greatest Masters of his Art in the Universe. II. His Arcana and Prescripts were Collected, as they appear in the Latin Copy, by that ingenious and indefatigable Gentlemen, Mr. James Shipton, who had the Happiness of preparing and making the greater part (if not all) of them up: And by whose Care and Industry the World became blest with such a valuable Production; which exceeds in its Benefit and Usefulness to Mankind, (we speak it without Flattery) all the Dispensatories this day extant, in what Language soever. III. Thus came out the first Edition, with general Ap∣plause, which meriting so well in the World, Mr. Shipton was pleased to make us happy with a Second, wherein he added above One hundred more of Dr. Bate's Recipes, and the Arcana Goddardiana, from the Authors Autograph, who being a Learned Man, and they no mean things, advanced very much the Value of the Book: So that in a very few Years, there were sold of the Latin Copies to the number of (at least) Six thousand. IV. The Work obtaining thus exceedingly upon the Publick, as having the general Liking and Approbation of all the Learned World, more especially of the Gentlemen
of the Profession: And among the number of the rest, fall∣ing into my Hands, upon view thereof, finding it so vastly to exceed in Usefulness and Learning whatever had been yet extant of that kind before; and that it was entertained among Professors of Our Art (of what Quality or Educati∣on soever) with no common Friendship or Reception: It made me consider it a little farther; and to draw an Ar∣gument from its general Usefulness and Entertainment; That if whilst it wandred thro' the World in an unknown Tongue (as to the Vulgar) and was a Stranger, it became so desirable and acceptable; how much more, if we indul∣g'd it, by making it a Free Denizon, or Native of our own. V. Upon these Considerations, I immediately fell upon the Translation, which I hope you will find done with all Faithfulness and Sincerity: And whereas the Arcana Godd. were for the most part Nominal, without exhibiting their Preparations: We have in this English Edition, added them at large, and intersperst them for the Benefit of all the Lo∣vers of this kind of Learning. VI. And whilst we were doing this, that we might yet lay a farther Obligation upon the Generous Lovers of Art; we have added to this Impression, the much esteemed God∣dard s Drops, and Russel's Pouder (neither of them in any printed Work before) the former of which was one of the accounted inestimable Jewels of K. Charles II. The other that Fam'd Ʋniversal, which for these twenty five Years last past has obtain'd a general Reputation, from the East to the West-Indies, and in a manner thro' the whole World. You have also the Emplastrum Febrifugum, which, tho' as to its Composition, it is a very simple thing, and whilst not published, hugg'd as a great Secret, yet truly valuable as to its Vertues, for that it has scarcely been ever known to be applied without the desired Success; nor did I ever use it in vain. And to these we have added near half an hundred more, of considerable Recipes, out of the Collectanea Chy∣mica, and other valuable Authors. VII. We have not here given you a bare Translation only, but besides that, a large Comment upon each particu∣lar (as the Nature of the Subject would admit, or did re∣quire) more especially upon all the Chymical Processes, which
are many, and the most excellent, selected out of a large Farraginous heap; and made choice of from mighty Strength of Reason, and a long Series of Experiences, which has exceedingly added to their Credit and Reputa∣tion. VIII. These We have almost every where searcht out, from their Original Fountains, and where need required, given a clear Explication of the Process it self, and added as a Supplement (to make the Work the more absolute and com∣pleat) a Rationale upon the same. And farther, We have examin'd the Prescripts and O∣pinions of the most Learned Authors who have wrote there∣of: Shewing, either their Processes at large, if new; Or, the particular Circumstances wherein they chiefly differ, if material; and so representing as it were in a Glass, a Summary of all that has been hitherto written of this kind. IX. As to the Authors made use of in this Book; tho' we cannot have the Vanity to obtrude a vast Catalogue or Heap, as is usual with several Writers of Books (possibly many whom they never lookt into, to consult, but for O∣stentation they enumerate) yet we think it necessary to give an Account of the Chief of those We were Beholden to, that we may put Our Artist into a Capacity to make a more exact and satisfactory Judgment of the following Dis∣courses. X. The Chief of those We consulted in this Underta∣king were either of the more Ancient; as, Paracelsus, Crollius, Hartman, Libavius, Beguinus, Sala, Faber, Mynsicht, Grulingius, Ʋntzer, Quercetan, Mylius, Senner∣tus, &c. Or of the Modern and more Late; as, Riverius, Schroder, Hofman, Horstius, Rolfincius, Marggrave, Maets, Le Mort, Ludovicus, Ettmuller, Junken, Tachenius, Glauber, Le Febure, Thibaut, Charras, and Lemery, with some others of lesser Note, whose Performances in this kind (for so much as they wrote of) have been admirable above all the rest of their Fellows. XI. This being thus compleated, you may in a little time expect the Second Part of the same, which is now in in the Press, viz. Our Officina Chymica, or Chymical Shop; being a compleat Body of Chymistry in all in its Parts: Where∣in
you will find Explicated, 1. The Principles of Natural Bodies, in their received and genuine Sense. 2. The For∣naces and Instruments of the Art particularly described with their Figures in Copper Plates. 3. The Operations of Chymi∣stry per se, abstracted from the Preparation of any set Medi∣cine. 4. The Preparation of Metals and Minerals deduced from all the Operations of Chymistry. 5. Lastly, The Prepa∣ration of certain Vegetable and Animal Substances, according to all the more late Discoveries or Designations. XII. But from hence one Objection arises to be obviated, viz. That I have treated of many things in this Dispensatory, that I had handled formerly at large in my Pharmacopoeia Londinensis and Doron, and therefore might very well have been omitted here. To which I answer, 1. That this is ano∣ther Man's Book, and my self but the Translator thereof; so that I could by no means with Justice and Honour have gelt the Text, or obliterated any part thereof, without a manifest Wrong and Injury to the Author. 2. That I have done no otherwise with respect to the aforenamed Books, than Schroder did with his Quercetanus Redivivus when he wrote his own Dispensatory. 3. That notwithstanding this seeming Repetition, or reiterating of the very same thing sometimes, you may possibly in this meet with that which is new concerning it, not contained in the other Books, which may recompence the Labour and Pains of a second Review. XIII. If any of the Gentlemen of the Profession, think, that in this Work or any other, we have done them Wrong or Prejudice, in discovering to the Vulgar, many of the Arcana of Our Art: We hope (as a Recompence for the same) to make them amends again, in divulging several other Secrets, which the most of them were wholly igno∣rant of before. However as a general Answer to this Ob∣jection, We think, that all particular Interests should sacrifice to the general, and that the Publick good ought ever to be pre∣ferred before the Private how dear and valuable soever. XIV. It is my Opinion, that the Art of Physick is not any particular Man's or Societies proper Right, more than anothers; but that every Man has an equal share in the same. But 'tis like Gold and Silver, he that wins it, or takes pains for it, shall have it. And as in one, every Man
has a Right by his Wit and Industry, to get Gold, if he can, and having got it, to make use of it; so in the other, eve∣ry Man has a Right to study Physick if he pleases; and having once made himself Master of the Knowledge of it, has as great a Right to use it as we. Nor can I see ought, which may entitle any one particular Person to an Origi∣nal Interest in it, more than it can another, whatever some self-ended Men may pretend to the contrary. XV. It is generous to do good to Mankind; and the more voluntary is is, the more acceptable. For my part, I owe so great a Friendship to all the World, that I wish every Man understood the Art as well as I do. And I should be content upon the Condition, that it would please the most Good and Infinite Being, to bless the Sons of Men with a perpetual State of Health, to seek out some other way of living. And as Health is the most valuable of all Earthly Happinesses; so I am of Opinion, all other Interests should vail to it. He can be no good Man, who desires to build up his Fortunes from the Miseries and Calamities of others; or to raise an Estate upon the Necessities of the Mean, and the Ruins of such as want Bread. XVI. For this Reason sake, I have for these Thirty Years together exercised my Art (as well as to live by it) as a ne∣cessary piece of Charity. I know no poor Creature that ever came to me, in my whole time, that once went from me, without my desired help Gratis. I have not only given them my Judgment or Opinion concerning their Diseases and Distempers; but if curable and Poor) have supplied them with all the Medical Necessaries for the whole Cure, till they became perfectly well, without demanding or requi∣ring one Penny for it afterwards. And I have accounted the Restauration of such poor and wretched Creatures a greater Blessing to me, than if I had gotten the Wealth of both the Indies. I can't so well express my self concerning this Matter, as I can conceive it; but I am sure I should have been more pleased, and had a greater Satisfaction, in seeing such a helpless Creature, restored to its desired Health, than if I had found a very valuable Treasure. XVII. There are several Hundreds in this Great City, can bear me witness to this Truth. And for all the past
Good I have done in those Cases; as I can never repent it; so I resolve to continue it; for I certainly know, that I have had the signal Blessing of God attended my Endeavours for it: For which, (with all humility) I here publickly acknow∣ledge his Goodness; and blessing his most merciful Hand, with bended Knees give Thanks for the same. Nor shall I ever desist the doing of what I have for thus many Years done in this kind, but am resolved thro' the Assistance of the most good God, to exercise the same Charity, and as largely extend it, to all the Poor and Miserable, who shall please to make use of it, whilst I have my Sense and Rea∣son, and draw Breath upon Earth. XVIII. I have begun to render the Arts of Physick and Chyrurgery with their Appendices, the Materia Medica, Ana∣tomy and Chymistry into English; and in doing of which, by this present Work, and Thirteen or Fourteen other Books, I have made a considerable Progress already; and intend not to desist, till I have fully made them in all their parts, com∣pleat and intire. 'Tis every English Man's Birth-right, and an unspeakable Wrong to endeavour the keeping it from him. XIX. Nor do I know why any should be offended with me for thus doing, since it is but what Hippocrates and Galen, Celsus and Paracelsus, with hundreds more, all did, writing the System of Physick in their own Languages. Yea, and it is what the French (out of an Ambition of Glory) do at this day. I am sure we are their great Admirers in most things, and Ape them in whatsoever is vitious and ridiculous: And why we should not imitate them in a thing of such an essential Good I know not; unless you would oblige us to follow them only in their Vices, and eschew them in their Vertues. XX. I know that I have many Enemies in the World, and that the publishing this Work will create me many more, and those powerful ones, and malicious too: But I have o∣verlookt all this, and have directed my Eye to the Recom∣pence of Reward. If herein I have serv'd my Country and Generation, I have what I aimed at, and I am sure I shall have along with it the Defence of him, whose Mercies are over all his Works, and the Blessings of the Poor and Needy. W. SALMON. From my House at the Blew Ball by the Ditch-side, near Holbourn-bridge, London 7. Decemb. 1693.
BOOKS Printed for S. Smith and B. Walford. MEDICINAL EXPERIMENTS: Or a Collecti∣on of choice and safe Remedies for the most part simple nd easily prepared; useful in Families, and very serviceable to Country People. By the Honourable R Boyl, Eq Fellow of he Royaf Society. To which is annexed a Catalogue of his Theo∣ogical and Philosophical Books and Tracts. Lond. 1693. Price 1 s. — A Second Volume; containing about Three hundred ew Receipts, published from the Author's Original Manuscripts, nd by him recommended to the Care of his Executors, and per∣sed by some of his Learned Friends; together with a large Pre∣ace written by the Author's own Hand. Lond. 1693. Price 1 s. 6 d. — Medicina Hydrostatica: Or, Hydrostaticks applied to he Materia Medica; shewing how by the Weight that divers Bodies used in Physick have in Water; one may discover whe∣her they be genuine or adulterate; and also a Previous way of stimating Ores. Price 2 s. — Of the Reconcileableness of Specfick Medicines to the Corpuscular Philosophy: To which is annexed, the Advantages f the Use of simple Medicines, in Octavo. Price 2 s. — Short Memoirs for the Natural, Experimental History of Mineral Waters; wherein are discovered several ways of ex∣mining all sorts of Mineral Waters, very useful for Water-rinkers. Price 1 s. With most of the other Tracts written by Mr. Boyle, and printed in Quarto and Octavo, Latin and English. Osteologia Nova: Or some new Observations of the Bones. . Of the Membrane, Nature's constituent Parts, and internal Structure of the Bones. 2. Of Acretion and Nutrition, as also of the Affections of the Bones in the Rickets, and of Venerial Nodes. 3. Of the Medulla, or Marrow. 4. Of the Mucilagi∣ous Glands, with the Etiology or Explication of the Causes of  Rheumatism and the Gout, and the manner how they are pro∣duced: To which is added a Fifth Discourse of the Cartilages. By Clop. Havers, M. D. in Octavo. Myotomia Reformata: Or, A new Description of all the Muscles of Humane Bodies; Containing many new Discoveries and cu∣ious Observations: Illustrated with several Copper Cuts after he Life. By W. Cooper, Chyrurgeon, in Octavo, 1694. A Collection of curious Travels and Voyages, in two Tomes. The first containing Dr. Leonart Rauwolff's Itinerary into the Eastern Countries. The second taking in many parts of Greece, Asia Minor, Egypt, Arabia Felix, and Petraea, Ethiopia, &c. From the Observations of Mr. Belon, Mr. Vernon, Dr. Spon, Dr. Smith, Dr. Huntingdon, Mr. Greaves, Alpinus, Veslingius, Thevenot's Col∣lections, and others; To which are added three Catalogues of such Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs as grow in the Levant. By John Ray, Fellow of the Royal Society. Lond. 1693. Octavo.
THE General CONTENTS. LIB. I. Of Compound Internals. Chap. I. OF Waters. Pag. 1 Chap. II. Of Spirits. 37 Chap. III. Of Oils distilled. 132 Chap. IV. Of Balsams distil∣led. 153 Chap. V. Of Essences or Pow∣ers. 174 Chap. VI. Of Elixirs. 184 Chap. VII. Of Tinctures. 199 Chap. VIII. Of Extracts. 329 Chap. IX. Of Magisteries. 353 Chap. X. Of Salts. 606 Chap. XI. Of Liquors. 710 Chap. XII. Of Wines. 723 Chap. XIII. Of Vinegars. 729. Chap. XIV. Of Infusions. 734 Chap. XV. Of Decoctions. 745 Chap. XVI. Of Syrups. 759 Chap. XVII. Of Quiddonies. 789 Chap. XVIII. Of Lohochs. 796 Chap. XIX. Of Preserves. 799 Chap. XX. Of Sugars. 832 Chap. XXI. Of Pouders. 807 Chap. XXII. Of Electuaries. 831 Chap. XXIII. Of Pills. 840 Chap. XXIV. Of Troches, and Tablets. 856 LIB. II. Of Compound Externals. Chap. I. OF Lotions. 869 Chap. II. Of Oils. 874 Chap. III. Of Balsam. 880 Chap. IV. Of Ointments. 887 Chap. V. Of Cere-cloths. 898 Chap. VI. Of Emplasters. 901 Chap. VII. Of Cataplasms. 912 Chap. VIII. Of Clysters. 915 Chap. IX. Of Medicaments Anomalous. 921 APPENDIX. Chap. X. Tabula Posologica. 93 Chap. XI. Orthotonia Verbo∣rum. 945
The Usual Chymical CHARACTERS. ♄. Saturn, or Lead. ♃. Jupiter, or Tin. ♂. Mars, or Iron. ☉. Sol, or Gold. ♀. Venus, or Copper. ☿. Mercury, or Quick-silver. ☽. Luna, or Silver. ♌. Bezoar minerale. {arsenic}. Arsenick. {day}. {night}. Day. Night. {sal armoniac}. Sal Armoniack. ⊡. Ʋrine. {fire}. Fire. {arsenic}. Arsenick. ⊕. Virdegrise. {cinnabar}. Cinnabar. {vitriol}. Chalcantum. {vitriol}. Vitriol. {salt}. Salt common. {nitre}. Nitre or Salt-Pe∣tre. ♁. Antimony. ⦾. Oil, of any kind. ☠. Caput Mortuum. {alum}. Alum. ♉. Sal Gem. ♋. Cancer, or Crab. {subli}. Sublimate. {precipi}. Precipitate. {water}. Water. {tartar}, Tartar. {sulphur}. Sulphur. {retort}. Retort. {vinegar}. Vinegar. {vinegar distilled}. Spirit of Vinegar. {quicklime}. Quicklime. {orpiment}. Auripigment.
The Usual Medicinal CHARACTERS lb. A Pound, or ℥xij. ℥. An Ounce, or ʒviij. ʒ. A Dram, or ℈iij. ℈. A Scruple, or gr. xx. gr. A Grain. gt. A Drop. gut. Idem. M. A Handful. P. A Pugil. p. j. ij. One, two parts. ss. ss. Half any quantity. No. In number. A. Of each a like quan∣tity. Ana. Idem. alembic;. Alembick. AB. Bole Armon. fine Bole. aaa. Amalgama. {aqua fortis}. Aqua Fortis. A F. Idem. A R. Aqua Regia. {aqua regis}. Idem. A V. Aqua Vitae B M. Balneo Mariae. B V. Balneo Vaporis D. Distil, or Distilling. {ashes}. Ashes. MB. Balneo Mariae. q. s. quantum satis. q. v. quantum vis. ℞. Recipe, Take. S. Spirit. S. V. Spirit of Wine. S A. Secundum Artem. S S S. Stratum super Stratum: Or, Lay upon Lay. V. Vinum, Wine.
PHARMACOPOEIA BATEANA: LIB. I. CHAP. I. Of WATERS. I. Aqua Aluminosa, Alumed Water. Bate.] ℞ ALƲM and White Vi∣triol ana: Mix them together, and boyl them in an earthen Vessel, with a gentle Fire, till they become like a Stone: pouder it; and to e∣very spoonful thereof, add boyl∣ing Water a quart: dissolve and filter. It is profitable a∣gainst Wounds, Ʋlcers, Fistu∣la's, &c. washing them there∣with. Salmon.] If to every pint of this Liquor you add ℥ij. of Spirit of Wine or Brandy, it will be almost of double ver∣tue to that of the prescript; for Spirits of Wine has a won∣derful power, being mingled with fit Medicaments to cleanse, purifie, heal, and glew together Wounds and Ulcers, especially those of the nervous parts, which it does safely, as we have taught in our Synopsis Medicine, lib. 3. cap. 26. Sect. 9.4. & 7. I know by almost a thousand Experiences, that this Alum∣ed Water is a most admira∣ble thing against a Herpes mi∣liaris, and all manner of Tet∣tars and Ring-worms, or Ser∣pigines, and such like break∣ings out in any part of the Body, thô of never so many years standing. The way of using it is thus: Put some of it into an earthen Bason over a Chafing-dish of Coals, and with a Cloath let the diseased
bathe well the place affected, as hot as they can endure it, for a quarter of an hour or more at a time; and do it two or three times a day, or oftner, as need requires: It will in a short time cure the Tettar, let it be never so in∣veterate and rebellious. I cured two Gentlewomen of inveterate Tettars herewith, the one of which had been troubled with the Distemper above twenty years. It is also a most admirable Inje∣ction in a Virulent Gonorrhaea, or the Whites in Women, u∣niversals being premised, in∣jecting therewith warm three or four times a day. It is al∣so a good Collyrium, curing weeping Eyes, and strength∣ning them, taking away Clouds, Films, Pearls, &c. II. Aqua Animalis, The A∣nimal Water of Horse∣dung. Bate.] Take Horse-turds newly made, No xij.: White-wine a Gallon: Sweet Fennel∣seeds, Parsly-seeds, ana ℥ij.: Grocers Treacle, or lbj.: Polypody of the Oak, Butchers Broom, Liver-wort, ana Mij.: Ginger ℥iij.: mix and distill according to Art, with a gen∣tle Fire. It prevails against Pleurisies, Pains, Rheumatisms, &c. Dose add ℥iv.: sweating upon it. Salmon.] It is not only good against Pleurisies, which is the chief design of the Medi∣cine, but also against the Gra∣vel and Stone, whether in the Reins or Bladder, as also Pains and Stoppages in the Urinary parts, it dissolving the mucous Matter to a Mi∣racle. It may be given to old or young from ℥ij. ad ℥vj, and may be repeated four times in twenty four hours: but it will be much more ef∣fectual if you add to every Dose, as it is taken twenty or twenty five drops of Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniack, in the Case of a Pleurisie: or fifteen Grains of Sal Prunellae in Ne∣phritick Diseases. ℥vi. of it immediately given upon a Surfeit is an admirable thing, and might save the Life of many a poor Creature, which otherwise for want of it would be lost. III. Aqua Antiphthisica, A Water against Phthisicks. Bate.] ℞ The Blood of a Calf new killed, freed from its Fibres, by beating together lbiij: Venice Turpentine, ten Ounces; Liquorice not dried lbj: Rai∣sons stoned ℥xij: Fat Figgs No 100: Garden Snails No
70: fresh Orice-Roots ℥vi: Spanish Tobacco cut ℥ij: Crums of White-bread lbj: mix and distill according to Art. Dose ℥ij, with its proper quantity of Oyl swimming thereupon, being all mixt together with a Pecto∣ral Syrup, and taken for fif∣teen days. Salmon.] If this Medicine should receive a gentle Fer∣mentation before Distillation, it would be so much the bet∣ter, for by that means the Sulphur of the Fruit and Tur∣pen. being more intimately mixt with the Aqueous parts of the Blood and Snails, a more volatile Liquor would come over the helm. This in some Constitutions will gently Vomit, and in others cause a most admirable Ex∣pectoration, cleansing and healing Ulcers in the Lungs to a wonder, and thereby cure Consumptions, take a∣way Coughs and Colds, short∣ness of Breath, and Obstru∣ctions of the Lungs, and cause a free breathing. IV. Aqua Antiscorbutica, The Water against the Scur∣vy. Bate.] Take Leaves of Fu∣metary, Water-cresses, Scurvy∣grass both sorts, Brook-lime, ana Mxij: Harts tongue, Ci∣chory, Pine-tops, Germander, Hore-hound, Agrimony, Centory the less, ana M.x. mix: Roman Wormwood, Liverwort, ana, Miv.: Bryonie Roots ℥viij.: Roots of Female Ferne, Dook Bitter-sweet, inward Bark of the Ash, ana ℥vi: Ash-keys ℥iss.: Seeds of Angelica ℥ss.: all being fresh and bruised, add Rhenish-wine lbvi, in which a red-hot Iron has been twenty times quenched: Express all strongly out with a Press, and distil the Liquor in B. M. (ad∣ding Troches of Capers pouder∣ed ℥vi.: Lime of Mars ℥iss.:) to the thickness of Honey, the Magma evaporate to the con∣sistency of an Extract, which keep for the Antiscorbutick Extract. Salmon. It is an excellent Antiscorbutick, and a Water that may be profitably given in all cold and weak Sto∣machs, and such as cannot digest their Food: It opens Obstructions of the Viscera, sweetens and strengthens the Blood in its Crasis, and is profitably given not only to young Girls against the Green-sickness, and in Scorbutick Rheumatisms, but also to a∣ged People, to comfort and strengthen them; which it effectually does if given ad ℥ij. Morning and Evening, (a little dulcified with White
Sugar) for fifteen or twenty days together. Dose of the Extract à ʒj and ʒij. V. Aqua Antiscorbutica altera, The other Antiscorbutick Water. Micklethw. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of A∣ron, Garden-Scurvy-grass, Wa∣ter-cresses, common Wormwood, ana Mvi.: fresh Orange peels, ℥iv.: Nutmegs ℥ij.: infuse for a Night in a Gallon of Bruns∣wick Beer or Mum, and distil according to Art. Salmon.] The four Ounces of Orange-peels must only be the yellow Rind pared off from the white, which in this case is of no great worth. It is a good Antiscorbutick, gi∣ven with other things to the same intention. Dose by it self (sweetned) is from ℥j. to ℥ij. in the Morning fasting. VI. Aqua Bechica, A Water against a Cough. Bate.] Take Leaves of Ground-Ivy, Colts-foot, Oak of Jerusalem, ana lbiij.: Hyssop, Rosemary, Pennyroyal, Hore∣hound, ana lbiss.: Roots of Ele∣campane and Liquorice ana lbiss Orrice Florentine ℥xij.: Figgs cut lbiij.: of the best Saffron, A∣nniseed sweet Fennelseed, ana, ℥ss. Spirit of Wine lbx.: Fountain Water lb48.: digest a while, and distil by a Vesica lbxxiv. or xxx. for to make the Sy∣rupus Tolutanus Magistralis. Salmon.] The Title shews the chief design, as being good against Coughs, Colds, Stoppages of the Breast and Lungs, Wheesings, and such like: Dose à ℥ij. ad ℥iv. sweet∣ned with white Sugar-Candy at night going to Bed, it may also be taken in the day time in like manner, when the Cough proves troublesome; and may serve for a Vehicle to take Balsams of Sulphur in, or any other Pectoral or Anti∣asthmatick Medicine. How∣ever the Prescript tells you, it is to make the Magistral Sy∣rup of Bals. de Tolu. VII. Aqua Benedicta, The Bles∣sed Water. Bate.] Take unslackt Lime lbi.: to which affuse boiling Water lbviij: after the Ebu∣lition is over, and it is suffici∣ently setled, filter it and keep it for use. Dose ℥iij. or iv. thrice a day; or to be used as common Drink for a Month; being drunk it does much good in many cases, as in Redness of the Face, Pustules, &c. in the Kings-Evil, Asthma, Phthisick or Consumption of the Lungs, Empyema, malign Dysenteries, watery and scrophulous Tumors,
flux of the Whites, running Gout, Morphew, Freckles, Her∣pes, Tettars, Gangreens, Oe∣dema, Swellings of the Knees and Shins, common Ʋlcers, with a Flux of Humours, &c. and in the cure of the Diabetes it is a most excellent Reme∣dy. Salmon.] If a few Cloves, Jamaica Pepper, or some other Spice be infused in it, to give it a relish, it will be so much the better. It is certainly an excellent thing to sweeten the Blood and Humours, and to absorb the acid Juices lodging in them, by which means it prevails against Heart-burnings, Soreness of the Stomach, Griping of the Intestines, and such like. VIII. Aqua Benedicta Compo∣sita, The Blessed Water Compound. Bate] ℞ Fresh Liquorice ℥j.: Bark of Sassafras ℥ss.: Raisons of the Sun stoned ℥vj.: Nutmegs ʒvj.: Aqua Benedi∣cta aforegoing lbvj.: infuse without heat for two days, then strain and keep it for use. It is better than the former, and more efficacious in several Ca∣ses. Salmon.] It is not only good against the aforenamed Di∣seases, but is also an excel∣lent Pectoral opening Ob∣structions of the Breast and Lungs, sweetning the acid Humours, and cleansing the Body of them: and may be of good use, to be taken some few days before the Exhibi∣bition of a Purge or Vomit, for that it not only opens, but also loosens the toughest Hu∣mour. Dose ℥iij.: two or three times a day. IX. Aqua Camphorata, Cam∣phorated Water. Bate.] ℞ Roman Vitriol, Fine Bole, ana ℥iv.: Camphir ℥i,: mix and make a Pouder; of which put ℥j. to boyling Wa∣ter lbiv.: remove it from the Fire, and let the Faerces settle. With this Water, being warm∣ed, wash any Ʋlcer: It stops all Defluxions, cleanses, dries, strengthens, fastens the Teeth, hinders putrefaction, cures Ig∣nem sacrum, Scaby Hands and prevails wonderfully against Ophthalmies, Epiphora, and o∣ther Diseases of the Eyes. Salmon.] To reduce the Camphir into subtil Poder, you must first drop upon it a small quantity of rectified Spirit of Wine, so with a Knife, or in a little Mortar you may immediately rub it till it is impalpable, without which you will be troubled
to bring it to a fine Pouder. This Water is a good Colly∣rium, and prevails against all Diseases of the Eyes, taking away Mists▪ Clouds, Films, Pearls, Blood-shot, or any o∣ther Distemper which obfus∣cates the sight: it also cures Ulcers in the Eyes, by wash∣ing them therewith two or three times a day; and is a most admirable thing against Herpes, Tettars, Ring-worms, or other breakings out in any part of the Body. X. Aqua Cariophyllorum, Wa∣ter of Clove-gillyflowers. Bate.] ℞ Clove-gilliflow∣ers new gathered lbij.: Dates lbi.: Anniseeds, Liquorice, ana ℥j.: Lees of Wine lbxxiv.: digest and distil in an Alem∣bick lbiv.: to which add Sugar∣candy ℥iv.: and hang it in a Nodule, Cloves No iv.; Musk and Ambergriese, ana gr. v. Salmon.] It is an excellent Cordial-water, good against Faintings, Swoonings, Sick∣ness at Heart, Oppression of the Spirits, Wind, Gripings, and such like; and is very profitable to be given against the Plague, and all manner of pestilential Fevers proceed∣ing from putrefaction. It chears the Heart, revives the Spirit, comforts Nature, drives away Melancholy, making merry and pleasant: but by reason of the Musk, you must be cautious not to give it to Women troubled with Va∣pours or Hysterick Fits. It strengthens the Brain and Memory, fortifies the Animal Spirits, and is good against cold Distempers of the Head. Dose ℥j. in Wine or other convenient Vehicle upon any Paroxysm or Fit. XI. * Aqua Cephalica, A Wa∣ter for the Head. Bate.] ℞ Male Peony-roots ℥iv.: Roots of Angelica, Vale∣rian, ana ℥iss.: of Avens ℥i.: Leaves of Sage, of Rosemary, Betony, Marjoram, Bawm; Flowers of Lavender, Betony, Peony, Marigolds, Sage, Rose∣mary Lilly Convally, of the Tile Tree, ana M.j.: Staechas ℥iss.: Red Roses, Cow-slips, A. M.ij.: Lignum Rhodium, yellow San∣ders A. ℥vj. Nutmegs ℥iss. Ga∣langal, ℥ss.: Cardamoms, Cu∣bebs, A ℥iij.: infuse in the best White-wine lbxiv.: for ten days, then add of the best Ci∣namon lbj.: digest for two days, and distil according to Art. It is profitable against the intemperature of the Head, Head-ach, &c. Dose two spoonfuls: Let it be drawn up the Nostrils, ba∣thed
well upon the Temples, and places about the Ears, dropt into the Ears, and held in the Mouth: and Lint dipt in it may be applied to the Nape of the Neck: It gives comfort to many, thô to others it is used in vain. Salmon.] You must not draw it off to dryness, least the Matter tasts of Burning, unless you distil in Balneo, then you may be more secure: but if you have not the con∣veniency of a Bath, but must make use of a Copper Vesica with its Worm, you must when you distil add a Gal∣lon of Water; then may you draw off, nearly your whole quantity; or so much accor∣ding to the strength which you design it. You may give it from ℥ij. to ℥iv. in any cold Distemper of the head: but in hot Distempers it will make the pain worse. XII. * Aqua Cerasorum Compo∣sita, Water of Black Cher∣ries compound. Bate.] ℞ Black Cherries with their Stones well bruised lbx.: Red Cows Milk new milked, two Gallons: Leaves of Violets, Bramble, Self-heal, Wood-bine, A. Miv.: distil according to Art. Dose half a pint twice a day. It is a most powerful Remedy in the cure of a Tympanites. Salmon.] This ought to be distilled in Balneo, if you would make the Medicine well; and then you may draw off the matter to dry∣ness. The Water is Stoma∣tick and Astringent; and is of good use for those who have old Sores, running Ul∣cers, Fistula's, &c. which are hard to cure. XIII. * Aqua Chalybeata, Steel∣ed Water. Bate.] ℞ Mars cleansed ℥iv.: White-wine lbiv.: di∣gest in the Sun, shaking the Glass every day, so long till the Wine grows black, and the Mars becomes altered in its colour; then add Juyce of fresh Strawberries gently pres∣sed forth lbiv.: Sperma Ceti, Rhubarb, Mummy, A. ℥ss.: di∣stil to dryness. Dose three or four Ounces twice a day in Fistula's or Ulcers of the Urinary parts, Apostems, Hemorrhoids, pissing of Mat∣ter, Bruises, coagulated Blood, &c. Salmon.] It is a good Me∣dicine before Distillation, in my opinion, much better than after, being only filtrated: It cures the Green-sickness in Virgins to a miracle, and
makes them have a good co∣lour in their Faces, even in three or four times taking, presently taking away all their faintness, weakness, and indisposition to stir up and down. Dose ab ℥j. ad ij, in a Glass of Ale or Wine: It also is good against Consum∣ptions and dries Ulcers and Fistula's, wonderfully dispo∣sing them to a present heal∣ing. Being diilled, it has some of the same Virtues, but scarcely of half the strength▪ and therefore is to be given in double the Dose: But this advantage you have by distil∣lation, that tho' it may not be of half the Vertue, yet it is five times more pleasant than that undistilled. But in my Opinion the former is pre∣ferrable; and truly my Ex∣perience has confirm'd it. XIV. * Aqua Chamaemeli Com∣posita, Camomil Water Compound. Bate.] ℞ Camomil Flow∣ers M. 30.: Cut, bruise, and infuse in Water stilled from Camomil itself, lbx.: Spanish Wine lbxvj.: digest for twenty four hours then express; and infuse a second time fresh Flowers M.xx.: Express again the third time, and infuse fresh Flowers M. xij.: then add the yellow of Orange-peels fresh ℥ij.: Pontick or Roman Worm∣wood, Centory, Penny royal, O∣riganum, A. Miiss.: Seeds of Dill ℥ij.: of Anise, Fennel, Caraways, Cumin, Carduus ben. Ladies Thistle, A. ℥iss.: Bay and Juniper Berries, A. ℥ss.: Nutmegs ℥iij.: digest a suffi∣cient time, then distil accord∣ing to Art. It is prevalent against Wind, Colick, Stone, obstructions of the Courses. Salmon.] It warms the Sto∣mach, expels Wind, opens Obstructions of the Urine, brings away Sand, Gravel, Slime, or other Matter stop∣ping the passages; and is a specifick against Pleurisies, Stitches, and Pains of the side coming from Cold or Wind, or both. Dose ab ℥j.: ad ℥iij. in the Morning fasting. It is also found by experi∣ence to be good against inter∣mitting Feavers or Agues. XV. * Aqua Cinamomi Car∣diaca, Cordial Cinamon Water. Bate.] ℞ Juyce of Borrage freed from its residence lbxxiv. Clove-gilliflowers, or Pinks. M.ix: Saffron ℈ij.: of the best Cinamon lbiss: Flowers of Bor∣rage Miv.: distil in B M. ac∣cording to Art. It is profita∣ble against Faintings, Swoon∣ings,
dejection of Mind, &c. Salmon.] It is an excellent thing against Consumptions, of what kind soever; and may be given in a Hectick, if the Sick drinks plentifully new Cows Milk, and some∣times a sweet palatable Lime∣water, which extinguishes the preter-natural heat. Dose ℥i. to ij, alone or in a proper Ve∣hicle. XVI. Aqua Cinamomi Hor∣deata, Cinamon Water with Barly. Bate.] ℞ Barly-water cla∣rified lbviij.: Best Cinamon ℥xij.: digest and distil ac∣cording to Art. Taken by Spoonfuls with Oxymel of Squils, it is of admirable use in Asthma's. Salmon.] It is Cordial, good against Faintings and Swoon∣ings, and has the Vertues of the former, but is thought to be not altogether so hot. It strengthens the Stomach, and very much revives the Spirits. Dose from three spoonfuls to six, either alone, or in any sit Vehiculum. XVII. Aqua Cordium Compo∣sita, Water of Hearts Com∣pound. Bate.] ℞ Calves Hearts new killed, and cut into pieces, No vi.: Crums of Bread steep∣ed in Cows Milk, lbi.: Damask Rose-water, Orange Flower Water, A. lbi.: Citrons sliced. No iij.: Cinamon ℥iv.: Mace ℥i.: Gelly of Harts-horn made with White-wine lbiv.: Lambs and Calves Blood freed from the Fibres A lbij.: Spanish Wine lbiij.: mix and distil according to Art. It is of ad∣mirable use against Weak∣nesses, and a dejection of the Strength. Salmon.] It is given with good success in Consumpti∣ons, Pinings, and Decays of Nature, and may be taken Morning, Noon and Night, from two Ounces to four, ei∣ther alone, or in some fit mixture. XVIII. Aqua Cosmetica, The Beautifying Water. Bate.] ℞ Calves Feet bro∣ken, No vi.: Mill Dust ℥iv.: Pouder of Myrrh ℥ivss: Wine, Milk, A lbiij.: mix and distil according to Art. With this the Face is to be washed; some smooth pieces of Alum being
first shaked up and down in it. Salmon.] Some parts of the Alum being dissolved in the Menstruum causes it to dry and whiten; it also heals Ulcers, dries up Tettars, or other breakings out in the skin, taking away Scruf, Morphew, Sun-burnings, and other like deformities: but it ought to be used twice a day; and after the skin has first been bathed for a pretty while with almost scalding hot Water, whereby the Pores will be opened, and so made the more fit to receive into it the vertues and efficacy of the Medicine. XIX. * Aqua Crinalis, A Water for the Hair. Bate.] ℞ Live Flies, [or rather Bees] ℥iv.: Honey lbi.: Milk lbij.: mix and distil Sec. Artem. Besides, that it won∣derfully helps in an Alopecia, or falling of the Hair; it is very good against Deafness, being dropt into the Ears. Salmon.] If you infuse Pou∣der of Pomegranate-peels in it after distillation, it will be more powerful to hinder a falling of the Hair: Also if you infuse therein Black Pepper ℥j. to a lbj. of Water: it will be of more than treblestrength in causing hair to grow upon bald places: and if you infuse Ant Eggs in it, being first bruised, it will be more pre∣valent against deafness, and thickness of hearing: all which things you may use ac∣cording to your discretion. XX. * Aqua Cucumerum Com∣posita, Water of Cucumers compound. Bate.] ℞ Juyce of Garden Cowcumbers lbiv: White-wine lbvj.: Bean Cods lbiss.: Leaves and Roots of Rest-harrow, lbj.: Juniper Berries ℥vi.: Nut∣megs, No 21.: Parsly-seed ℥iv. Seeds of White Saxafrage ℥iss.: Flowers of Broom M. viij.: of Elder, of white dead Nettles, A. M. vi.: distilled according to Art to driness. Dose ℥ij. every Morning to expel the Stone and Gravel, or Sand, Pills made of Cypress Tur∣pentine being premised. Salmon.] You may give before hand, either the Pilulae Diureticae Clossaei, described in our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 23. § 3. or these follow∣ing: ℞ Cypress Turpentine ℥ij. Aniseeds, Caraways, in fine Pouder, ana, enough to make it up into Pills: of which the Sick may take from ʒj. ad ij. every Night going to Bed; for some time, drinking after
it, the Water in the Prescript. These things thus jointly used, prevail also against the Scurvy and Dropsie, and all other ill habits of body. XXI. Aqua Cynosbati Compo∣sita, Water of Hipps com∣pound. Bate.] ℞ Hipps, or Fruit of the Wild Bryar, bruised Seeds and all ℥vi.: Seeds of Radishes ℥ss.: of Parsley ℥j.: of Saxifrage ℥ij.: Roots of White Saxifrage ℥i. Liquo∣rice ℥iij.: of Altheaa ℥vj.: Whey lbx.: mix, and distil according to Art. Dose ℥iv. twice a day, wtih Syrup of Marshmallows and Purslane, the Conserve of the Pulp of the Hips being premised. Salmon.] It ought to be di∣stilled in B.M. to dryness: otherwise, if in a Copper Ve∣sica with its Alembick, you must add Water lbiv. or vj.: and then draw but half off to avoid burning. It is a good thing against Sand, Gra∣vel, or mucous Matter ob∣structing the passages of the Reins and Bladder. XXII. Aqua Digitalis, Wa∣ter of Fox-Glove. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Fox-Glove ℥xij.: Liquorce ℥iv.: Ani∣seeds ℥ij.: Strong Beer lbxij.: ferment it nineteen days, and distil according to Art. It is an admirable Anti-asthma∣tick, and is powerful to cause Expectoration: Dose some spoonfuls often. Salmon.] It takes away Wheesings and Shortness of Breath, and is prevalent a∣gainst most Distempers of the Lungs, which obstructs or hinder breathing. Dose ℥j. ad ij, in which ten or twelve drops of Spirit of Sal Armo∣niack may be mixt: thus ta∣ken it is good against Quin∣sies, Pleurisies, and the like. XXIII. Aqua Embryonum, A Water to preserve the Child in the Womb. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Eringo∣roots lbj.: Dates lbss.: Sweet Almonds ℥iv. all being bruised and brought into a pulp, add Nutmegs ℥iij.: Mace ℥ss.: Barly Cinamon-water lbiss.: Spanish Wine, Baum-water, A lbij.: mix and distil accor∣ding to Art. Dose ℥ij. thrice a day with Sugar Pearled; an Electuary made of Con∣serve of Red Roses, Clove∣gilliflowers, preserved Nut∣megs, Powder of Ivory and Pearl, &c. being premised. Salmon.] This Medicine daily taken, nourishes the Child in the Womb, and pre∣vents Miscarriage where it is
feared, as also in such as are accustomed to it. It is cor∣dial also, and restores in Consumptions. If you distil in B. M. you may draw off to dryness; otherwise you must add Water to prevent burning. XXIV. * Aqua Epidemica, The Plague-Water. Bate.] ℞ Celandine, Rose∣mary, Rue, Sage, Mugwort, Worm-wood, Pimpernel, Dra∣gons, Scabiouse, Agrimony, Bawm, Scordium, lesser Centory, Carduus Ben. Betony, Ros. Solis, A. Mij.: Roots of Angelica, Tormentil, Gentian, Zedoary, Liquorice, A, ℥j.: macerate in White-wine lbviij, for two days, then distil according to Art. Salmon.] You may distil in B M. to dryness; otherwise if in a Copper Vesica, you must add Water to prevent the Empyreuma. This Wa∣ter is profitable against the Plague or Pestilence, and all manner of malign and pesti∣lential Feavers, &c. It may either be given alone from ℥ij. ad ℥iv.; or used as a Ve∣hicle to convey other Medi∣cines for the same intention in letting the sick be in bed, and sweating well upon it. In my opinion, if three or four good large Lemons were thin sliced and put (after Distillation) into the Water, it would be so much the bet∣ter, for that the particles of that acid Juice certainly de∣stroys all the Vermiculi, or Miasmata, which are the Progenerators of the Plague, or Pestilence; and also more powerfully overcome it when the Infection is begun. For this reason it is, Vinegar is put into almost all our Plague-Waters, by Sylvius, Barbet, and others of the more learned Physicians. XXV. * Aqua Febrifuga, The Febrifuge-Water. Bate.] ℞ Tops of Centory the less, M. viij.: Wormwood, Featherfew, Cink-foil, Mari∣golds, Tormentil, Green Tobacco, Sorrel, Carduus Ben. Dragons, Camomil, Germander, A. Mvi.: Dandelon Mxij. bruise them all, and add to them Whitewine lbiv. and distil according to Art. To the distilled Water affuse new Herbs, digest and distil to dry∣ness. In the distilled Water infuse Roots of white Dittany, of Tormentil, A. ℥iss.: Seeds of Citrons, of Carduus Ben. of Carduus Mariae, of Sorrel, A. ℥ij. Leaves of Scordium, Goats Rue, A. M. iv.: then distil according to Art.
Salmon.] This Water is profitable against all manner of Feavers, whether conti∣nent, continual, or intermit∣ting, commonly called Agues. You may either distil in a Copper Vesica, adding a convenient quantity of Water to keep it from burning, or distil in a Glass Body in B.M. then may you distil to dry∣ness. This Water is also good for a cold and weak Stomach. fainting Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, and such like. Dose two, four, or six spoonfuls according to the Age, Sex, and as necessity requires. XXVI. Aqua Formicarum, Water of Pismites. ℞ Bate.] ℞ Of the lar∣ger Pismires (gathered in May or June) lbj.: Honey lbij: Spring-water lbj.: mix and distil according to Art. Dose one spoonful. It provokes Vomiting, and cures Tertian Agues. Salmon.] Let it be distil∣led in a Glass Body in Balneo; otherwise, if in a Copper Ve∣sica tinn'd within, you must not draw off much above a quart, least the Water tasts of burning, and so the Medi∣cine be spoiled: If it be fer∣mented before Distillation, it will make an Aqua Magna∣nimitatis, which will be good against Melancholy, Sadness, and dejectedness of Mind. XXVII. Aqua Fortis Duplex, Double Aqua Fortis, or Dissolvent of Silver. Bate.] It is made of Nitre and Vitriol, Ana: distilled by a Retort according to Art. It dissolves Silver and Copper. Salmon.] Filings of Venus, or Luna in Leaves may be dissolved by this Water: which being dissolved the Water may be separated by B. M. and the Calx of Luna, &c. will remain at bottom: If you dissolve this Calx again in double the quantity of fresh A F. abstracting, and putting on fresh continually, you will at length find the Metal reduced to an Oyl at bottom; for the fresh AF. does every time divide the Metaline Particles into infi∣nitely finer and finer Atoms, till at length they become as it were a perfect Oyl, accord∣ing to the Opinion of Para∣celsus. XXVIII. Aqua Fortis Alu∣minata, Aqua Fortis made with Alum. Bate.] ℞ Alum, Nitra, A. lbj.: Vitriol lbss.: mix and
distil according to Art. Salmon.] It is to be distil∣led by a Retort as the for∣mer, and serves for the same uses: but this is much better for some work than the for∣mer, for that it blacks not so much as that does; as in the dissolving of Pearls or Co∣ralls; or the dissolving of Sil∣ver in order to the making its Crystals for the Pilulae Luna∣res, which see in its proper place. XXIX. Aqua Herpetica, A Water against Tettars, Ring-worms, Itches, Scabs, Herpes, &c. Bate.] ℞ Roch Alum ℥j.: White Vitriol ℥ij.: best White-wine Vinegar lbj.: fresh Roots of Elecampane ℥ij.: Leaves of Green Tobacco, M. j.: boyl to the consumption of a third part, strain, and add burnt Vitriol ℥ss.: mix, and keep it for use. Cloths being wet in a sufficient quantity of this Water, are to be laid upon the Herpes, and permitted to dry on, four times, viz. till (the Scabs yet sticking on) a new skin be generated un∣derneath. Salmon.] It not only cures Herpes, but also Scabs, Itch, Tettars, Ring-worms, and other breakings out of the skin; and I heard a certain Lady say, (who constantly used it) that it will take a∣way Lentils, Freckles, Pim∣ples, Sun-burning, Tannings, and such like Deformities: you may either use it with a Cloth as aforesaid, or only by bathing the parts affected several times a day, but then you must be sure, to let it be always very hot when you use it, so will it do five times more good than if you should use it cold; because hot, it the better opens the pores, and penetrates the skin. XXX. * Aqua Hirundinum, Water of Swallows. Bate.] Live Swallows Num∣ber 40: Castoreum ℥j.: White-wine lbiij.: distil. It prevails admirably in cure of the Epi∣lepsy. Salmon.] If you distil in BM. to dryness, and coho∣bate four or five several times, your Water will be so much the stronger and better; for at length by many Cohoba∣tions the Volatile Salt will in some measure ascend and mix with the Water, which at the first distillation it will not. It is an excellent thing indeed in the cure of the E∣pilepsy: Dose ab ℥j. ad ℥iij, every Morning for forty days
together; and if in every Dose iv. or vi. Grains of Sal Volatile Cranii Humani be added, the Medicine will be so much the better. You may give it either alone, or in Black-cherry-water. XXXI. * Aqua Hormini Com∣posita, Water of Clary com∣pound. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of fresh Clary bruised, M. xij.: Spirit of Wine lbij.: distil to dryness: to the distilled Water, put fresh Clary M. x. Flowers of Arch-angel, or Dead-nettles, M. vi.: and distil a second time: repeat the affusion and distillation with fresh Herbs and Flowers, adding also Nut∣megs ℥j.: the Liquor distilling is to be received in a Glass up∣on double refined Sugar ℥vj.: Ambergriese gr. iij. tyed up in a Rag, and hung within the Vial. It is of great use (a∣mong young and tender Wo∣men) for preventing Aborti∣on; it also stops the Whites. Salmon.] You must distil it every time in a Glass Body in B. M. it being digested or macerated twenty four hours before distillation; and then you must draw off the Spirit with a gentle Fire. It is good for the intention: but if you put into every quart of the Water Catechu in fine Powder ℥ij.: and so make a Tincture, it will be ten times stronger to all the purposes aforementioned, and will also stop the most violent flux of the Terms. Dose one or two spoonfuls at night. XXXII. * Aqua Hungarica, The Queen of Hungary's Water. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Rosemary Flowers lbij.: Alchool of Wine, i. e. the highest and best recti∣fied Spirit lbiij.: digest and distil S. A. It prevails against the Running Gout and Sci∣atica. Dose to one spoon∣ful twice a week. The Face and parts affected, may be daily washed therewith; it may also be drawn up the Nostrils, as in the use of the Aqua Cephalica. Salmon.] It is of singular good use against Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, the Falling-sickness, Vertigo, Le∣thargy, Megrim, Head-ache, and indeed most Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, proceeding from a cold cause; it may be outwardly bathed upon the part twice a day, (it is a neat and cleanly Medi∣cine) as also drawn up the Nostrils against the Vertigo, Head-ache, Megrim, &c. In∣wardly
it may be taken a∣gainst all the same Diseases, as also against dimness of sight, cloudiness of Eyes, and even blindness itself, where it proceeds from an in∣ward cause, nor do I believe there is any better specifick in the World, against weakness of the Sight, hurts of the O∣ptick Nerves, and Palsies, than this very Water is; but it ought to be taken every day about a spoonful at a time in a Glass of pure Ale or Wine, or some other con∣venient Vehicle, as Black∣cherry Water, Aqua Lactis, &c. for a quarter of a year together, or more; yea, half a year if need requires. In external pains of the Gout, Sciatica, &c. as also in vehe∣ment Colicks (for which it is an admirable thing) it will be much more powerful, if you add to it (to every quart of the Water) ℥ij. of the best Camphir; and then to bathe the place affected therewith, as also to take a spoonful of it at a time, in a Glass of Sack, in the most excrucia∣ting Colick. This Water is a thing I have used many years in my Practice, and have found it of singular use to a great number of Disea∣ses, more than I have here time to enumerate. I always keep great quantities of it by me, and have sent it through the Nation, to the most con∣siderable Persons of the King∣dom, Ladies of Quality, Phy∣sicians, Chirurgions, &c. Those who desire it, may be suppli∣ed with what quantities they please, as good as can be made by Art, at very reaso∣nable Rates. It is good also to preserve against the Mea∣sles, Small-pox, Plague, or Pestilence, and other infecti∣ous Diseases. XXXIII. Aqua Lactis Alexi∣teria, Milk-water resisting Poyson. Bate.] Mead sweet, Car∣duus Ben. Goats Rue, A. M. vj.: Mint, common Worm∣wood, A. M. v. Rue Miij.: Angelica M. ij. being bruised, add new Milk three Gallons: mix and distil in a common Still. Salmon.] It is better if it be distilled in a Copper Vesica tinn'd within, with a very gentle Fire; but much better if it be distill'd in a Glass Body in BM. for then you may distil to dryness, and never hazard an Empyreuma, or tast of burning. The intention of this Medicine is to be used as a general Vehicle to take ma∣ny other Medicines in, it be∣ing
much better and pleasan∣ter than Beer, Ale, Wine, Water, Broaths, or Posset-drinks. However it is good against Poyson, the biting of Venemous Creatures; and is many times used to quench thirst in Violent, Continual, and Burning, or Malignant Feavers, where other Liquors being given would be preju∣dicial. Dose ℥ij. ad vj. XXXIV. * Aqua Lactis Car∣diaca, A Cordial Milk-water. Bate.] ℞ Sweet-scented Apples, (as Pippins and Pear∣mains) with their peels and kernels lbxij.: Bawm, Scordi∣um, A. M. x.: Zodoary, Tor∣mentil, A. ℥viij.: new Milk lbx.: mix and distil, S. A. Salmon.] It ought to be di∣stilled as we have before di∣rected; and then you have a pleasant Cordial Water to be used as a Vehicle to give any Cordial Medicines in, a∣gainst fainting Fits, Palpitati∣on of the Heart, Swooning, and other Distempers of the Praecordia. Thus, ℞ Of this Water à ℥ij. ad iv. plus minus, Cinamon Water ʒiij.: Tin∣cture of Coral ʒj.: Confectio Alkermes ℈ij.: Syrup of Clove∣gilliflowers, q. s. mix for a Cordial Draught. XXXV. * Aqua Lactis Nephri∣tica, Nephritick Milk-wa∣ter. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Al∣thaea, Pellitory of the Wall, Cleavers, A Miv.: Roots of Althaea ℥xij.: Liquorice ℥iij.: of White Saxifrage ℥iv.: new Milk lbxij.: mix and distil S. A. Or thus: ℞ Whites of Eggs, with the shells, (the yelks being taken away) No xxiv.: beat them well together, then add Milk warm from the Cow lbviij.: mix and distil accord∣ing to Art, with a gentle fire. Dose half a pint every Morn∣ing for fifteen or twenty days; and afterwards once or twice a Month, or for two or three days together about the New and Full Moons. Salmon] This is chiefly to be used as a Vehicle to con∣vey other Nephritick Medi∣cines in, after this manner: ℞ Of this Water à ℥iv. adviij. Oleum Tartari per deliquium, ʒiij.: Pouder of Winter Cher∣ries ℈j.: mix for a Dose. This Water ought to be distilled in a Glass Body in B.M. and then you may distil to driness, otherwise it is impossible to avoid an Empyreuma.
XXXVI. * Aqua Lactis Pe∣ctorali. A Pectoral Milk-water. Bate.] ℞ Garden Snails bruised lbj.: Hogs Blood lbii.: Maiden-hair, Ground-Ivy, A. M. iij.: Harts-tongue M. ij.: Liquorice, Aniseeds, A. ℥iij.: Jujubs, Raisons, A. ℥iv.: Milk warm from the Cow lbxij.: mix and distil, S. A. It is a good Pulmonick, profitable against the Phthisick, Con∣sumption, Pining, &c. Salmon.] In my opinion, if Sal Armoniack ℥vi.: be ad∣ded and dissolved in the Milk and Hogs Blood, and then distilled, it will be much more powerful to the purpose intended: It is good against Coughs, Colds, Obstructions of the Lungs, Shortness of Breath, and other Diseases of those parts. You may give it from an Ounce to ℥iij.: e∣specially mix with some Pe∣ctoral Syrup; and is used as a Vehiculum to convey any Pectoral Medicine down the Throat in. XXXVII. * Aqua Lactis Scor∣butica, Milk-water against the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Sea Scurvy-grass, greater Houseek, A. M. xij.: Watercresses, Brook-lime, Grass, A M. vi.: Chervil, M. iv.: Milk warm from the Cow lbxij.: mix and distil S. A. Salmon] Distil in a Glass Body in B. M. The Title shews the use: Dose ℥iv. or more at a time, every Morning fasting: but its chief design is to be a Vehicle to convey other Antiscorbutick Medicines in. XXXVIII. Aqua Lamii Com∣posita, Water of Dead Net∣tles Compound. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of the White Arch-angel M.x.: Com∣frey M. viij.: Clary, M. iv.: Dates No 24.: Nutmegs ℥iij.: Cassia Ligna ℥i.: Wine and Milk, Ana lbvj.: mix and di∣stil to driness. It is used in the overflowing or flux of the Whites in Women; Dose ℥iv. at a time. Salmon.] If you distil to driness you must do it in a double Vessel to avoid burn∣ing: and if to every quart of Water you add ℥ij. of the best Catechu in fine Pouder, it will be much more power∣ful to the end designed: the Water will extract a good Tincture from the Earth, and make it an excellent Medi∣cine against the overflowing
of the Terms also, or any in∣ward Flux of Blood, spitting of Blood, pissing of Blood, &c. whereby it will be prevalent against Consumptions, Phthi∣sicks, Violent Coughs, Ca∣tarrhs, or any Flux of Hu∣mours: The Tincture may be given ab ℥j. ad ℥iij. at Night going o Bed in a Draught of Ale. XXXIX. * Aqua Mellumi∣nata, Honeyed Water A∣lumed. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Oak, Rib-wort, Bramble, Straw∣berries, Cinquefoil, Bugloss, Yarrow, Woodbine, Sage, Rose∣mary, red Roses, A. M. ij.: Chips of Guajacum ℥iv.: Rho∣dium ℥ij.: Roots of Bistort ℥i. Sulpher Vive ℥iss.: Vitriol. ℥i. Alum ℥iv. Honey lbss. Water lbviij. boyl to the consumption of one half, strain, and the faeces being setled, you may keep it for a year, It is used with Oyl of Sulphur, for to cure Ulcers of the Mouth and Gums: with Flowers of Nitre it is the best Remedy against Pustules. Salmon.] Besides what the Author has prescribed it for, it is a most excellent thing against all manner of Tettars, Ring-worms, Herpes, or o∣ther like breakings out, pro∣ceeding from a virulent, salt, and sharp humour. But this you must observe in the use of it, that the Patient must bathe with it for a quarter of an hour or more at a time, as hot as they can endure it, else it will not so effectually answer the intention. XL. Aqua Mercurialis, Wa∣ter of Mercury sublimate. Bate.] ℞ Roots of White Lillies ʒij. Spring-water, q. s. boyl and strain, to lbi. of which add, bitter Almonds blanched ʒij.: make an Emulsion. In this dissolve (by grinding in a Glass Mortar) Mercury sub∣limate ʒij, and make a most white Water, S. A. It takes away redness and pustles in the Face▪ for which it is a most certain Cure: touch the pla∣ces often with the Water drop by drop at a time, and drying it always with a rag. Salmon.] This Water seems to whiten at first, and with∣out doubt it is of good use, if wisely used, to take away the defedations of the skin: but it ought to be used with cau∣tion and discretion, and not for a constancy, least the infi∣nitely small particles of the Mercury should by degrees, in length of time, insinuate
themselves into the flesh, and in process of time corrupt the Bone. For an ordinary use, and with much less danger, the Water of the Gryphs Mercurii is much better to be used, which is thus made: ℞ Sublimate ℥j. in fine pou∣der: Water boyling hot lbiv. put the Water upon the Mer∣cury in a white ware Bason; and dissolve; or dissolve by boyling in an earthen Pipkin: then precipitate with Oleum Tartari per deliquium: the Mercury being fallen, decant the Water for use. It is ad∣mirable to wash any old Sore or running Ulcer withal, and to bring it to a speedy heal∣ing; and to cleanse and beau∣tifie the skin, and take away the deformities thereof. XLI. Aqua Odorifera, Sweet or Perfumed Water. Bate.] ℞ Oranges and Le∣mons, A. No vi. Roots of Flo∣rentine Orrice, white Sanders, Cinnamon, A. ℥ij. Mace, Cloves, A. ʒvi. Flowers of Lavender M iv. of Roman Camomil and Rosemary, A. M. ij. Leaves of Marjoram, M. ij. Basil M. iij. Styrax Calamit. ʒiij. Benja∣min ʒv. Damask Roses M. xv. round Cyperus ℥ss. Fountain Water lbxxx. distil all in an Alembick according to Art, drawing off only the first lbxv. to every pint of which add (tied up in a Nodule) the best Musk gr. ij. Salmon.] The Musk ought to be mixt with a third part of a Volatile Sulphur, such as is in that of Civit, to open its body, adding a few drops of Juyce of Limons, to make it exert its odour more pow∣erfully, thus: ℞ Musk gr.ix. Civit. gr. iij. grind them to∣gether on a Stone or in a small Glass Mortar, to which add Juyce of Limons gut iij. or iv. This being put in a Nodule, will sweeten or perfume twice the quantity of Water that the Musk will do alone: and will make almost an incredi∣ble Odour. The Water it self is used as a Perfume, or it may be used in place of Rose-water; and is a most excellent Vehicle to make a∣ny Cordial Juleb up withal; for it admirably comforts and recreates the Animal Spirits. XLII. * Aqua Omnium Flo∣rum, All Flower-water. Bate.] It is made of Cows∣dung gathered in May, adding to it a third of White-wine. and then distilled. Or thus: ℞ Fresh Cows-dung, Snails with their shells bruised, A. mix and distil in a common
Still. This Water is said to be good against the Gout, running Gout, Rheumatism, Stone, Stoppage of Urine, &c. being very effectual: Dose ℥iv. at a time. Salmon.] This is a Water of general tendency, being a Spirit extracted from the Sulphur of Plants in general: It is not only good against the afore-named Diseases, but a most excellent thing against the Scurvy in particular, as also against the Palsie, and o∣ther Distempers of the Nerves, Blood, and Humours. There was a certain Woman who from the most obscure For∣tune set up for a Doctress, and undertook the Cure of all Diseases with this only Reme∣dy, or rather the same worse made; and from the state of a Beggar became Mistress of more than Twenty thousand pounds: This she gave in all Distempers, and against all Diseases; and so happy and successful she was, that she cured almost all such who were given over by others, for uncurable, and it was rare that any thing came un∣der her hands that miscarried; this was her Catholicon, this her excellent Secret, by which she did such Wonders in the Art of Physick: ℞ Fresh Cow-dung gathered in the mor∣ning lbxij. Spring or River∣water lbxxx.: mix and di∣gest twenty four hours; let it settle, and then decant the clear brown Tincture. It is without doubt a good thing, and so much the better, be∣cause of its general tendency, and being constantly used with such an approved suc∣cess: by reason it is extracted from Cows-dung, it has a pretty kind of sweet scent, as if it was perfumed with Musk, or some other odorife∣rous thing: her usual pro∣portions and way of giving it was thus: She ordered the Patient to take about 5 or 6 Ouncesin the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed; and if the Disease was rebellious or stubborn, as much half an hour, or an hour before Dinner; and if there was any external affect, to bathe the part two or three times a day therewith very hot, for a quarter of an hour at a time: By this only and alone thing and method, she did even almost incredi∣ble things. 'Tis true, the Medicine is but a mean thing, but not to be despised.
XLIII. Aqua Ophthalmica, Eye-Water. Bate.] It is made of the Water from Gum Guajacum distilled by Retort in Ashes mixt with Brick dust, with a moderate Fire; the Oyl being separated, and the Water being rectified, and mixed with white Rose-water, S A. It is a most excellent Remedy in Diseases of the Eyes. Salmon.] This is the acid Water of the Gum, which be∣ing rectified is to be mixed with its equal weight or quantity of the Rose-water, or double or tripple quanti∣ty, according as the Patient is less able to endure the pain and smarting; with which the Eyes are to be washed two, three, or four times a day, and at Night going to Bed, after washing, a little Virgin-honey is to be put into them. XLIV. * Aqua Ophthalmica Sapphirina, The Sapphi∣rine Eye-Water. Bate.] It is made of Water of Calx Vive lbi. Sal Armoni∣niack ʒiij. put and kept in a Copper Bason, till it acquires a Sapphirine colour; and then to be futred for use. It is in∣vented for various Diseases of the Eyes, three or four drops at a time being put in∣to them: all sorts of Ul∣cers, Defluxions of Humors, Rheums, Pustules, Suffusions or Cataracts, &c. are cured herewith. Salmon.] All the difficulty in this Recipe, is to find out the just proportion of the Lime to the Water, to make the Water of a just strength, which because some may be ignorant of, we shall here set down. ℞ Quick-lime lbiij. put it into a large Vessel, upon which affuse three Gallons of hot Water gradatim. stirring the Lime till it is dissolved in the Water: stir it often with a wooden Spotula, that the Vo∣latile Salt may dissolve and mix with the Water: let it settle for some hours, then de∣cant the clear, which filter, and keep for the use aforesaid, close stopt. This is a most incomparable Water for most Diseases of the Eyes, it cures Ophthalmies, or Blood-shot, Clouds, Films, Pearls, or what other matter soever, which obstructs or hinders the sight: It cures sores, ulce∣rated, rheumy or running Eyes, and has in a short time made those see, which have for some years been in a man∣ner quite blind: I cannot e∣nough
praise it, but it ought to be esteemed as a Jewel. See the preparation in other proportions in our Druggist's Shop, lib. 4. chap. 14. sect. 15. XLV. * Aqua Pectoralis, The Pectoral Water. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Elecam∣pane, of round Birth-wort, A. ℥iij. of our Orrice, or Flower∣de-luce ℥iss. of Florentine Or∣rice, Parsley, Fennel, Liquo∣rice, A. ℥i. Green Tobacco, M. iv. Scabiouse, Veronica, Colts∣foot, Hyssop, Horehound, Mai∣den-hair, Carduus ben. A. M. j. Jujubes, Sebestens, A. No xxx. Figgs, Dates, A. No xvi. Seeds of Tobacco ʒiij. of Ni∣gella ʒi. of Nettles, of Cresses, Mustard-seed, Linseed, A. ʒij. Bay-berries ʒvj. Pouder of Gua∣jacum ℥viij. Venice Turpen∣tine (dissolved in the yolks of Eggs) ℥iiss. White-wine lbxvi. digest three days, and distil S. A. In the time of the distil∣ling, let Hog-lice bruised No 60. be tied up in a rag, and hung by a thread in the Recei∣ver. It is a very powerful thing against Asthma's, Dysp∣naea's, Coughs, and tartarous Diseases of the Lungs and Reins, &c. Dose ℥ij, twice or thrice a day, out of the Fit. Salmon.] All the Ingredi∣ents are to be gotten green that can be, and then the whole Matter or Composi∣tum is to be digested a day or two before distillation, in order to a previous fermen∣tation; which done, you may distil either in BM, or a Cop∣per Vesica tin'd within, draw∣ing off only lbviij. so will you have a fine and spiritous Li∣quor, good for all the Inten∣tions proposed: but if you draw off to driness, you will have a double Liquor; 1. An Etherial Oyl. 2. A weak Water; which may be sepa∣rated and kept apart: but the first way will be the best, in which the Liquor will be united into one: for other∣wise, you must draw off the Water again, or rectifie it, separating the fine Spirit from the inconsiderable Wa∣ter: then you must joyn the Spirit with the Oyl, and u∣nite them by a third distilla∣tion; all which is a great deal of trouble. It is an ex∣cellent thing against Stone and Gravel, whether in Reins or Bladder, given as directed for a Month together. If it be well made and spiritous, you will find from ℥ss. to ℥i. to be Dose large enough.
XLVI. * Aqua Persicariae composita, Arsmart Water compound. Bate.] ℞ Fresh spotted Ar∣smart lbiij. Pellitory of the Wall, Purslain, Bean-cods, A. lbi. bruise them, and add Milk new or hot from the Cow lbviij. mix and distil S. A. It is a great Arcanum against the Stone in the Reins and Blad∣der. Dose ℥iv. twice a day with Honey, for twenty six days together. Salmon.] You may keep and use this Water as a gene∣ral Vehicle, to convey all Ne∣phriticks and Lithontripticks in, it being an excellent thing indeed against the Stone and Gravel, or any obstruction of mucous slime, or any other Matter afflicting the Reins and Bladder,: alone it may be given ad ℥vi. XLVII. * Aqua Picarum com∣posita, Water of Magpies compound. Bate.] ℞ Young Magpies No vi. White Dung of a Pea∣cock lbss. Misceltoe of the Oak, Male Peony-roots, A. ℥iv. Fresh Cowslip Flowers lbj. White and Spanish Wine, A. lbv. infuse and distil, S. A. Dose ℥iv. Morning and Evening, in the last days before the Full and New Moons. It is an emi∣nent Remedy against the E∣pilepsie. Salmon.] If you distil to driness it must be in a double Vessel in BM, and cohobate three or four times: other∣wise, if in a Copper Vesica, you must add White-wine, Water, A. lbiij. more, and then draw off the first five or six pints. It is good against the Falling-sickness, and al∣most all Diseases of the Brain and Nerves, Palsies, &c. and may be used as a general Ve∣hicle to convey other Antepi∣leptick, Neurotick, and Ce∣phalick Medicines in. XLVIII. * Aqua Pneumonica, A Water expelling Wind. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of the best Tobacco, outward rind or peel of Oranges, A. ℥vi. Win∣ters Cinamon, ʒvi. Aniseeds ℥iss. Spanish Wine lbiss. Spi∣rit of Wine lbi. digest and di∣stil in a Glass Still. In the Colick, excruciating pains of the Stomach, want of Ap∣petite, &c. it is an approved Cure. Dose i. spoonful be∣fore eating. Salmon.] It ought to be di∣stilled in B. M. with great care: 'tis an excellent Car∣minative, and Anti-colick,
giving ease in those most in∣tolerable pains, almost upon the spot. ℞ Of this Water a spoonful, Blood red Tincture of Opium, made with juyce of Sevil Oranges, gut. xx. ad xxx. mix for a Dose. Give this in extremity it will not fail of the desired end. XLIX. Aqua Prolifica, The Water making fruitful. Bate.] ℞ Seeds of Angelica hull'd, lbiss. Sweet Fennel-seed, Liquorice, A. ℥iv. Raisons sto∣ned lbj. Leaves of Mugwort, Baum, A. M. iv. Carduus ben. Penny-royal, A. M. ij. Seed of Amomum ℥iv. Wine of Milk, A. lbvi. mix and distil accord∣ing to Art. Dose ℥iv. (prae∣missis, praemittendis) with Tin∣cture of Juniper ʒi, and Sy∣rup of the Juyce of Sage two spoonfuls, morning and night (℈ij. of the Pouder of the Seeds of Hartwort, or Bastard Lovage, mixt with Sugar of Roses, being given before). Salmon.] You must distil in B.M. and draw off to dri∣ness. It is given to cure Bar∣renness in Women, and make fruitful. It sweetens the Blood, and destroys the Scorbutick Acidities, which hinder the breeding of good Seed, and being given at a convenient time, (after the exhibition of the ℈ij. of the Hartwort-seeds) it is said to provoke the Terms and effecteally cleanse the Womb of its Impurities, which hinder Generation. Sometimes it is also profita∣bly given against Hysterick Fits: and may be used as a Vehicle for other things of like nature. L. Aqua Regia, The Dissol∣vent of Gold. Bate.] It is made of Nitre and Sal Ammoniacum, ana, in a Glass Retort sufficiently large, placed in Sand, distilling for two days S. A. with degrees of Fire. It dissolves Gold. Salmon. This is Basil Va∣lentine's Aqua Regia: but that you might the better and more conveniently draw off the Spirit, you ought to add Pouder or Calx of Flints, viz. to the Nitre and Sal Ar∣moniack A. lbij. Pouder of Flints lbiij. and to distil by a red hot tubulated Retort; but the ordinary way is by an Iron pot, on which is pla∣ced an earthen Cover like an Alembick with a Beak, set in a naked Fire with a large Receiver. This Water dis∣solves Gold, and after many Cohobations will reduce it to an Oyl, and carry it with it, over the Helm into the Re∣ceiver. Through the mani∣fold Cohobations, the Sol be∣comes
volatilized, and is made to yield a blood red Tincture in rectified Spirit of Wine, if you proceed Philosophically; which is the highest of Cordi∣als, and may be given some drops at a time, in a Glass of Sack, or other Wine against Faintings, Fits, Swoonings, Palpitation of the Heart, Trembling, Plague, Pesti∣lential Fevers, Measles, Small-pox, &c. LI. Aqua Salivalis, The Sa∣livating, or Spitting Wa∣ter. Bate.] ℞ Mercury subli∣mate, Venice Treacle, Zedoary, Cinamon, A. ʒij. Saffron ʒss. Fountain-water lbiss. mix, and infuse some days. Salmon.] The intention of this Water is to salivate with, in order to the cure of the Lues Venerea, or other Re∣liques of that filthy Disease: you may give one, two, or three spoonfuls at a time, (ac∣cording as the strength and condition of your Patient may be) and so to diminish or in∣crease the Dose (as you find it inclines your Patient to Vo∣mit or not Vomit) a spoonful at a time, continuing the same with an increase of the Dose, till you find the Gums to begin to swell, and the Mouth to be sore: when you see the Flux to arise, you may desist the Exhibition, till you see with what force and vigour it comes on; if freely and briskly, give no more; but if dull and slow, you must yet continue it a Dose or two, or more, till you see it is likely to effect what you desire; which when done, and the Salivation becomes laudable, you must let it continue so long as your rea∣son, and necessity of your Pa∣tient may require, following the methodical Rules of a Sa∣livation. The exact Dose, in order to a Salivation can∣not be prescribed, that you must find out by your Pra∣ctice and continual Experi∣ence; for that the Constituti∣ons of Bodies do so vastly dif∣fer; the continual giving of one or two spoonfuls at a time, will make some Per∣sons flux; while others shall take three, four, or five, and it shall do almost nothing at all, scarcely make their Gums sore or swell; therefore in this thing you ought to be guided according to the Nature, Strength, and Constitution of the Sick. You may exhibit it in a Decoction of Sarsaparil∣la, or thin Water-gruel, or o∣ther convenient Vehicle, which is free from any thing of
sharpness, nor is apt to grow sharp in the Stomach after it is taken: for Liquors which are acid, or apt to turn acid in the Stomach, may pro∣voke the Mercury to a strange kind of Violence; which by the softness, and sweetness of the Vehicle, would have o∣therwise been kind and mild enough. Some give this Medi∣cine Dietetically, and every day for a Month or two together, and with good success: but that must be after you have observed what Dose may be given without inclining the Gums to swell, which a pru∣dent Man will soon be in∣formed of. The following Water is a good Vehicle for the Exhibition of it in. LII. Aqua Sarsae Composita, Compound Water of Sar∣saparilla. Bate.] ℞ Sarsaparilla, choice China, A. ℥xij. Lig∣num Guajacum, lbij. Bark of the same, Sassafras, A. lbiv. White Sanders, Coriander-seed, A. ℥iss. Liquorice ℥vj. White-wine lbxxiv. Barley-water lbxvj. digest for some time, then draw off per Vesicam lbxxiv. what remains strain out, and evapo∣rate in Balneo Mar. to the Consistence of an Extract, S. A. Salmon.] This Water is an Antidote against the French Disease, and all its Conco∣mitants and Symptoms, and may be given dieterically e∣very day, in order to the cure of that Disease, from ℥iv. ad ℥vi. It is good also against Surfeits, the Scurvy, Dropsie and Gout, for that it streng∣thens the Tone of the Sto∣mach, and the whole Ner∣vous System, sweetens the Blood, taking away all its sharpness and acidities. It is also a good Vehicle to convey the former Medicine in, whe∣ther you intend it as a Flux, or to use it only as a Diet. The Extract may be given à ʒj. ad ʒij. or more, in some of the same Water, for the same purposes and intentions, chiefly at Night going to Bed, and so to sweat upon it. LIII. * Aqua Senelorum Com∣posita, Water of Haws Compound. Bate.] ℞ Ripe Haws, freed from their stalks, two Gallons: bruise them well, and add to them, Roots of Althaea, Li∣quorice, A. ℥viij. of Rest-har∣row ℥iij. Leaves of Parietary, Winter Cherries, A. ℥xij. Mint, M. ij. Seeds of common Dau∣cus ℥iv. of Coriander ℥ij. Milk
warm from the Cow lbxij. mix and distil, S. A. Dose ℥iv. sweetned with Syr. de Althaea, &c. It is an excellent thing against the Stone. Salmon.] It ought to be di∣stilled in M.B. to driness, and if it was several times cohoba∣ted, it would be yet better. ℞ Of this Water from ℥iv. ad vj. Spirit of sweet Fennel-seeds ʒvj. Pouder of Winter Cherries ℈j. mix for a Dose against the Stone, Gravel, Heats, Pain, and all Obstru∣ctions of Urine. Or thus: ℞ Of this Water ad ℥vj. Tin∣cture of Salt of Tartar ʒij. ad iij. Salt of Broom ℈j. Pouder of Winter Cherries gr. xvj. mix for a Dose for the same pur∣pose. ℞ Of this Water ℥iv. Powers of Juniper Berries ʒij. Pouder of Sows ℈j. mix for a Dose. LIV. Aqua Siphylica, The Pocky Water, or Water against the French-Pox. Bate.] ℞ Chips of Gua∣jacum lbiss. digest them in new well wrought Beer or Ale lbij. digest in Ashes for three days, and distil to driness. Dose ℥i. in a fit Vehicle against the French Pox. Salmon.] You must distil it in a Glass Retort in Sand or Ashes to driness, so will you have an acid Spirit of Gua∣jacum joyned with the Spi∣rit of the Beer or Ale, which will be profitable against the Lues, and its retaining Sym∣ptoms given to ℥i. or more, in ℥iv. of the Aqua Sarsaecom∣posita, aforegoing. LV. Aqua Stimmios Sulphu∣rata, The Sulphurated Wa∣ter: or Gass of Antimony and Nitre. Bate.] It is made of An∣timony, Nitre, and Sulphur, ana. distilled into a Liquor, filtra∣ted, and rectified according to Art. Dose so much as may give the Liquor a conveni∣ent acidity. It opens Obstru∣ctions, and is a noble Diure∣tick and Diaphoretick. Salmon.] It ought to be di∣stilled in a tubulated Re∣tort, into a very large Glass Receiver, having Water in it, so will the Volatile Spi∣rits of the Ingredients impre∣gnate the Water with such a Gass or Volatility, that it will be as uneasie to be smelt to, as Spirit, or Volatile Sal Ammoniack, and with a ve∣ry pleasing acidity. If you distil in a tubulated Retort, into Water, &c. you must put in the Ingredients being in Pouder by spoonfuls into the Retort, being red hot, and
then immediately to stop the Pipe, so will the matter be presently calcined, and the Receiver filled with cloudy Vapours, which mixing with the Water, the Receiver will presently be clear again, then put in more of your Pouder, repeating this work so long as it lasts. Before you begin your Distillation, be sure that the neck of the Retort be well luted into the Receiver lest the fumes should come forth and do you a mischief. You ought not to filter it, be∣cause of its volatility, for that will much impair the Medi∣cine. In this preparation the Niter opens the Body of the Antimony, and the Sulphur fixes its Emetick quality. Without the help of the Ni∣tre the Spirit would difficult∣ly come forth, for closing the Tube of the Retort, the Sul∣phur would be stifled; but the Nitre being fixed by it, ceases not to burn till all is consumed. It is an Ens pri∣mum of the three matters con∣joyned, is a famous Antiscor∣butick, and Antiarthritick: it is also a Preservative a∣gainst the Plague or Pesti∣lence, Measles, Small-pox, or any other malign Feaver, extinguishing the praeterna∣tural heat upon the spot, purifying the Blood, and all the other Juyces: It opens all Obstructions whatsoever in the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Gall, Mesentery, Womb, Hy∣pochonders, Bowels, and o∣ther organick parts, provokes the Terms, and cures the Greensickness and Cholick: but all these things it does more powerfully, if it be im∣pregnated with the Crystals or Salt of Mars, or a Tin∣cture be made therewith, of the Filings of Iron; you have then a Medicine great indeed, with which you may be cer∣tain to do wonders. LVI. Aqua Styptica, The Sty∣ptick Water. Bate.] ℞ Collothar, burnt Allum, White Sugar-Candy, A. ʒj. boys Ʋrine, Red Rose-water A. ℥i. Plantane Water ℥iv. digest, filter, and keep it for use. Salmon.] It is a most ex∣cellent Styptick, and stops bleeding in any part, being applied with stuphs, or the like, for some time. This fol∣lowing possibly may not be inferiour to any: ℞ Hunga∣rian Vitriol, Roch Alum, A. lbss. Phlegm of Vitriol, lbiv. boyl to the dissolution: being cold, filtrate it, and separate it from the Crystals; and to e∣very pound of the Water, add
Oyl of Vitriol ℥j. mix and keep it for use. It has the same Virtues with the former, but much more powerful. LVII. Stypticum Regis, The Royal Styptick of King Charles II. Bate.] ℞ To Vitriol dissol∣ved, filtrated, precipitated with Spirit of Vinegar, edulcated and dried, affuse Oyl of Vitriol, and distil by a Retort to dri∣ness. The Caput Mortuum digest with Spirit of Wine, fil∣ter warm, and abstract: dis∣solve the Salt remaining in the bottom, with four times its weight of Water, by digestion, and the Styptick is done. Its use is both internal and exter∣nal; Dose gut. 10.20, &c. in all sorts of Haemorrhagies, or Bleedings. Salmon.] The first part of the Prescript, is only an arti∣ficial Method, teaching you how to make Spirit of Vitriol, which is possibly better than the ordinary method: the whole in short is this: You must first extract a Salt out of the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol, with Spirit of Wine: this Salt you must dissolve in four times its weight of fair Water, and your Styptick is made. This is the great Styptick which made such a noise in the World, and for the know∣ledge of which K. Charles II. gave a vast Sum of Mo∣ney. It is not only a great Styptick, as to the stopping of violent Hemorrhagies, but a most excellent Vulnerary, possibly one of the best yet known in the World. In spittings of Blood, Bloody Fluxes, (Universals being pre∣mised) violent Fluxes of the Terms, pissing Blood, it is a noble Arcanum, and upon an exigency worth a whole A∣pothecaries Shop. LVIII. * Aqua Tussilaginis Composita, Water of Colts∣foot compound. Bate.] ℞ Herb Gerrard, Hyssop, A. ℥viij. Flowers of Colts-foot ℥xxiv. Liquorice ℥iv. Aniseeds ℥iij. Raisons lbj. strong Beer lbxij. mix and di∣stil S. A. It prevails against a Pleurisie, Empyema, or Inflammation of the Lungs, &c. Salmon.] You may distil in a Copper Vesica, with a gentle Fire, and draw of eight pounds, or in a Glass Body in BM. and distil to driness: but the first will be the stron∣ger, as having less of Flegm in it. It is indeed an excellent thing against most Distem∣pers of the Breast and Lungs,
where there is any stoppage, shortness of breath, difficulty of breathing, pain, stitch, swel∣ling of the Pleura, or the like. Dose ab ℥ss. ad ℥i. in any fit Vehicle: Or you may give it thus: ℞ Of this Water ℥j. Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or of Harts-horn gut. xxx. Black-Cherry-Water ℥iij. White Su∣gar-candy in fine Pouder ʒij. mix for a Dose. LIX. * Aqua Venustatis, The Beautifying Water. Bate.] ℞ Mint Water lbj. fine common Salt ℥iss. boyl and scum it. It is to wash the Face with after the Small-Pox; it also takes away Scurf and Itch. Salmon.] It is an excellent sort of Salt Brine, which may be useful in the case prescri∣bed; but it is of known ef∣ficacy being used almost scal∣ding hot, against Kibes in the Feet and Toes, not broken, which the Vulgar call Bloo∣dy-falls. LX. Aqua Vermifuga, A Wa∣ter killing Worms. Bate.] ℞ Crude Mercury well cleansed ℥i. Water of Grass and Purslane, A. ℥iv. digest two hours, often and strongly stirring of it; afterwards de∣canting the Water, straining it, and leaving the Mercury in the Vessel. It is given three spoonfuls at a time, thrice a day. Salmon.] The better way is to put Mercury ℥viij. with any proper Water lbiij. or more; into a large Glass, and being close stopt, to shake it for three or four hours toge∣ther; then to digest it in a gentle heat for a week, more or less, or otherwise to boyl it for two or three hours, by which means the Water will be better impregnated. It is a known remedy for killing Worms of all sorts; and may be given with all the safety i∣maginable. LXI. Aqua Vulneraria; The Wound-water: Sir Ken. Digby. Bate.] ℞ Of the best Vi∣triol ℥ss. pure Nitre ʒij. put upon it Fountain-water six Gallons, digest and let it stand still for forty eight hours: then with a Syphon, (without troub∣ling the subsiding matter) draw off the Water. Dose half a pint or a pint, twice or thrice a day. It immediately and effectually cures Wounds or Ulcers. Salmon.] The Nitre is chief∣ly put in, to cause an exqui∣site
subsidence of the dissol∣ved matter, that the Water might be perfectly clear. It is doubtless an excellent thing for the curing of any Wound or Ulcer, whether inward or outward, in what part of the Body soever. And since Vi∣triol (in the Sympathetick Pou∣der) has such a mighty pow∣er and force, that it is able to cure Wounds at a distance; yea, at a very great distance; it is much more reasonable, being taken into the Body, and received into the mass of Blood, and thereby into all the parts of the whole Body, that it should perform the same thing more powerfully, and with more singular ad∣vantages. This Water drunk for some Months together, is said perfectly to cure the Le∣prosie, Scurf, Morphew, and such like defedations of the skin. LXII. Aqua Absinthii Com∣posita, Wormwood Water Compound. †] ℞ The outward fresh rinds of Lemons lbiss. Orange-peels lbj. Tops of dried Worm∣wood, Winters Cinamon, A. lbss. Flowers of Camomil ℥iv. Lesser Cardamoms not husked, Cloves, Cubebs, Camels Hay, A. ℥i. Cinamon, Nutmegs, Ca∣raways, A. ℥ij. Spirit of Wine lbxij. Spring-water (or Worm∣wood Water draw off a second time from the faeces) gal. ivss. digest for three days, then distil in B. M. to driness. Salmon.] It is an excel∣lent Stomach-water, and a good Cordial, prevalent a∣gainst Faintings and Swoon∣ing Fits, Cholick, Wind in the Bowels, and such like. It is also a specifick against the Scurvy, very much sweetning the Blood; and an admira∣ble Surfeit-water, being given to ℥j. or more, either alone, or in any proper Vehicle. LXIII. Aqua Alexiteria, The Water resisting Poy∣son. †] ℞ Juniper-berries lbiij, Zedoary, Myrrh, Seeds of Angelica, A. ℥ix. Dittany of Creet. Virginia Snake-root, A. ℥vj. Saffron ℥iss. Spirit of Wine gall. iiss. Aqua Proa∣lexiteria gall. ivss. infuse warm for three days, then distil in B.M. to driness. A second A∣lexiterick Water is made by affusing simple Water upon the faeces, and distilling it; and afterwards mixing it with an equal part of the Aqua Alexi∣teria. Salmon.] It is profitable a∣gainst the Plague, Measles,
Small-pox, and all manner of malign and pestilential Fe∣vers, the Bitings of Serpents, ad Dogs, and other vene∣ous Creatures; and may e given either alone to ℥j, or ℥ij, or mixt with any conve∣ient Vehicle. It prevails al∣so against Faintings, Swoon∣ngs, or any other Distem∣per or Sickness of the Sto∣mach and Heart. If six good Lemons sliced be added to the Composition, the Water will be of almost double worth; for the reasons we formerly expressed, at Sect. 24. aforegoing. LXIV. Aqua Chamaemeli com∣posita, Camomil Water com∣pound. † ℞ Tops of Wormwood ℥viij. Flowers of Camomil, Nutmegs, A. lbj. Spirit of Wine a Gallon: simple distilled Ca∣momil Water, (or fair Water) Gal. 6. infuse for three days, then distil in B. M. to dryness. Salmon.] Being distilled ac∣cording to this Prescript, the Water will be very low and small, and the Oyl of both the Camomil Flowers and Nutmegs will swim a top, which ought to be separated for other uses; and the Wa∣ter kept for a Cephalick, Sto∣matick, Cardiack, and Ne∣phritick Vehicle: But if you would distil so, as to have the oylie parts to be joyned with the spirituous; you must put only Spirit of Wine in a four-fold quantity, which you may in B. M. draw off to driness, cohobating three or four times. Or you may distil in a Copper Vesica, adding Water Gall. i. and drawing off to driness with a very gentle heat, which you may cohobate as before, three, four, or five several times, drawing off in the last distillation only the compleat quantity of the Spirit of Wine: In every distillation or cohobation, you will have more or less of the Oyl to a∣rise, which you must after e∣very cohobation separate and keep by itself: lastly having separated the pure high re∣ctified fine Spirit from its phlegmy parts, you are to joyn the Volatil Oyl, (ga∣thered upon each distillation and cohobation) with the said Spirits, mix, and distil them together, so will they be united, and become one subtil, volatile, spirituous and congenerous Medicine, having a thousand times more virtue and power than that produ∣ced by the Prescript. It is a great Cephalick and Cordial. Dose ʒij.
LXV. Aqua Cochleariae com∣posita, Scurvy-grass Water compound. † ℞ Garden Scury-grass lbxxx. Horse-Radish-roots cut into thin slices lbvj. fair Wa∣ter Gall. iij. infuse warm for twenty four hours: then draw off three Gallons of Wa∣ter. Salmon.] This ought to have a different distillation from that of Aromaticks, for as Scurvy-grass, &c. abounds with more volatile Spirits, and more volatile Salts, so it admits of less fermentati∣on; and therefore ought to have a proper Menstruum, (stronger than common Wa∣ter) which may attract, dis∣solve, and joyn with the es∣sential parts of the Ingredi∣ents and carry them along with it in distillation, without chan∣ging their natures and vir∣tues; for this purpose you may use strong March Beer, clear and well made Rhenish Wine, Cyder, Perry, Mead, as also Spirit of Wine, &c. as proper Menstruums. ℞ Of the Ingredients as much as you please, which shred small, put them into a Copper Vesica tin'd within, and affuse thereon of some of the former Liquors so much as may over-top the In∣gredients four of five Inches, then distil twenty four hours, and distil through a Serpentine or Worm, with a very gentle Fire, that the spirituous and volatile parts may ascend, con∣tinuing the distillation till the falling drops are almost insipid: to this Water put the same quantities of the Ingredients again in like manner, and its equal weight of Wine, digest and distil again as aforesaid: the distillation being over, put in again fresh Herbs, pouring in upon them the last distilled Liquor, which digest and di∣stil as aforesaid, repeating this distillation so long, till the Spi∣rit is strong enough: this done, rectifie the Spirit in B. M. keeping that which is repleat with Sulphur and Volatile Salt, and ascends first, apart by its self: and the remaining spiri∣tuous Water by itself, continu∣ing the distillation till the drops are almost insipid. All these Liquors are essentially good against the Scurvy, Dropsie, and Gout, as also against the Cholick, Rheumatisms, Sur∣feits, and other like general Distempers, which will hard∣ly admit of any singular name or denomination: Dose of the Water in the Prescript ℥i. or more, in a Glass of Ale, or other proper Vehide. But of the sulphurous Spirit
abounding with Volatile Salt a gut .xx. ad 40. in Ale or Wine as aforesaid: and of he spirituous Water follow∣ing it ʒj. ad ij. continuing their use for some weeks. LXVI. Aqua Cordialis, The Cordial Water. † ℞ The outward rind of Lemons fresh, ℥iv. of Oranges ℥iij. Cinamon ℥ij. Nutmegs, Mace, Calamus Aromaticus, Coriander, A. ℥i. Cubebs ʒvj. Cloves, Seeds of Carduus ben. Cardamoms unhuskt, A. ℥ss. Saffron ʒij. Spirit of Wine lbvj. Fountain-water lbxij. infuse and distil according to Art. Salmon.] You ought to di∣stil in B. M. to driness, and to cohobate two or three times, drawing off the last time only lbxij. of the Water: Or you may distil in a Cop∣per Vesica, drawing about lbx. which you must dulcifie (if you would make it plea∣sant to the tast) with a small quantity of Syrup of Damask Rose-water, made with dou∣ble refined Sugar in the heat of a Bath. Dose from ℥j. to ij. either alone, or in any proper Vehicle, against Faint∣ings, Swoonings, Palpitations, sickness of the Heart of and Sto∣mach, Plague, Pestilence, and all manner of malign Fevers, in which last cases it ought to be given in some cooling Vehicle, with three or four drops of Spirit of Sulphur in it. LXVII. Aqua Lenitiva, The Lenitive, or Loosening Wa∣ter. † ℞ Figs, Althaea Roots, A. lbij. Liquorice, Florentine Orrice, A. lbj. Flowers of El∣der dried ℥iij. infuse in Spring or Fountain Water, Gal. v. and add Styrax Calamita ℥iij. Nutmegs ℥ij. Aniseeds, Sweet Fennel-seeds, A. ℥ss. infused in Spirit of Wine lbvj. Oyl of bit∣ter Almonds ℥vj. mix, digest and distil in an Alembick ac∣cording to Art. Salmon.] It opens Obstru∣ctions of the Bowels, and o∣ther Viscera, strengthens the Tone of the Stomach and o∣ther parts, and may be given ab ℥iij. ad vj. being designed, as I suppose, only for a Vehi∣cle to convey any Lenitive Purge in, down into the Bo∣dy. Of itself it purges not, nor can it any ways loosen the Belly: Nor do I see for what reason the Oyl of Al∣monds is added, for it is scarcely possible to be brought over the Helm in an Alem∣bick; which yet, if it could be done, will be but the
same thing it was before, and not in the least mix with the Water, but only swim upon it. LXVIII. Aqua Pectoralis, The Pectoral Water. †] ℞ Figs lbvj. Roots of Ele∣campane, Liquorice, A lbiij. Florentine Orrice lbiss. Anni∣seeds, sweet Fennel-seeds, A ℥i. Spirit of Wine gal. iiss. Aquae Propectoralis, (or Fountain-wa∣ter mixt in equal parts, with the said Aq. Propectoralis) gal. iv. ss. infuse warm for three days, then distil to driness. Salmon.] Let it be distil∣led in B. M. to avoid an Em∣pyreuma: Dose ℥j. at a time, more or less, in any Cough, Cold, Soreness of the Breast and Stomach, shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breath∣ing, or any obstruction of the Lungs: your best way of ex∣hibiting of it, will be thus: ℞ Of this Water ℥i. Syrup of Poppies ℥ss. Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniack, gut. xvj. mix for a Dose. Which may be repeat∣ed twice or thrice a day. LXIX. Aqua Propectoralis, The Water for making the Pectoral Water with. †] ℞ Oak of Jerusalem, Colts-foot, Ground Ivy, A. lbvj. Hore-hound, Penny-royal, Hys∣sop, Rosemary, A. lbiij. Foun∣tain Water twelve gallons, in∣fuse warm for iij. days, and then distil in an Alembick, S. A. Salmon.] Being a little fer∣mented in that three days with Sugar or Melossos, ad∣ded in a fit quantity, viz. lbj. to a Gallon of Water, you will have a small Spirit, or rather Water, fit for that purpose it is designed for; and may serve for Vehicle for other Medicines: it is best distilled in B. M. to dri∣ness. LXX. Aqua Proalexiteria, The Water for making the A∣lexiterick Waters with. †] ℞ Green Walnuts lbxxxv. or in number 400. fresh Roots of the Butterburr lbxij. of Masterwort lbiv. of Valerian, Elecampane, Flowers fresh ga∣thered of Marigolds, Leaves of Scordium, Bawm, Centory the less, A. lbvj. Wormwood, Rue, A. lbss. fair Water, gal. xviij. infuse warm for three days, then distal in an Alembick with its Worm, till you have drawn forth all the vertue, but having a care to avoid burning: you may draw off from gall. xij. to xv. Salmon.] It will be best in
this as in the former, to add to every gallon of Water lbss. of course Sugar or Melossos, to cause a fermentation, and then in B. M. with a Worm to distil to dryness; other∣wise in an Alembick, you must not draw off above gal. xiv. of the Water. Be∣sides the purpose for which it is designed, which is the making of the Aqua Alexite∣ria aforegoing, it may indif∣ferently serve for a Vehicle to convey any Cordial Medicine, or Antifebritick in. CHAP. II. Of SPIRITS. I. Spiritus Alkermes, Spirit of Alkermes. Bate.] ℞ SPirits of Cinamon, of Citrons, of black Cherries, of Rosemary Flowers, A. ℥iv. Juyce of Kermes ℥ij. mix them very well, filtrate through brown paper, and add of the best white Sugar-Candy ℥ij. Leaves of Gold No 10. mix them S. A. For the Rich some add the Spirit of Ambergriese ℥ij. It discusses sharp Va∣pours, recreates the Spirits Natural, Vital, and Animal; gives relief and comfort to Women in Labour. Salmon.] This is properly a mixture or compound made of several choice things, where y it becomes a great Cepha∣ick, Neurotick, and Cardi∣ack; and may be given in all cases where there is any Deliquium Animi, as Faint∣ings and Swoonings, Sickness at Heart and Stomach; and indeed in almost every kind of weakness; as also in Pal∣sies, Tremblings, Numbness, feebleness of the Joynts, weak∣ness of the Sight, and in most of the Illnesses and Distem∣pers of Old Age, for that it comforts, warms, and che∣rishes their chilled and un∣active Juyces, &c. Dose ℥ss. either alone, or in any pro∣per Cordial Water. I know but one fault in this Com∣position, which is its dear∣ness, it being only fit for the more wealthy sort of People, who are able to pay a good price for a Cordial Draught.
II. Spiritus Aluminis, Spirit of Alum. Bate.] It is distilled from burnt Alum by a Retort, in all respects, as you distil Oyl of Vi∣triol. Dose gut. 4, 5, 6, &c. Salmon.] 1. It is Roch Al∣lum which you are to use, of which you may take lbvj. put it into a very large Glass or Earthen Body, fit to it a Head with its Recipient, and distil in Sand till no more moisture will arise; this is the Flegm of the Alum. 2. This done, break the Body, take out the white Mass and pouder it, which put into an earthen Retort half empty, place it in a Re∣verberatory Furnace, luting to it a large Receiver; make a gentle Fire for the first three hours, to warm the Re∣tort as it were, then increase it every hour to the utmost violence, so will the Spirits come forth, and fill the Re∣ceiver with white Clouds: continue the Fire at this height for three days and nights together, then let the Vessels cool: so will you have an Acid Spirit, which by re∣ctifying in a Glass Alembick in Sand, you may make pure and clear. 3. At the bottom of the Retort is a white and very light Calx, very much rarified, which is called burnt or calcined Alum. 4. The Phlegm of Alum is used a∣gainst Diseases of the Eyes, for Quinsies, to cleanse Wounds and Ulcers, and to heal them: more especially if in six Oun∣ces thereof, you dissolve ʒi. of the crude Roch Alum. 5. The Acid Spirit. It is scarcely so pleasant as that of Vitriol and Sulphur, but it is ordi∣narily used in Juleps for Con∣tinual and Continent Fevers, as also in Tertian Agues, and has indeed neerly all the Vertues of the Oyls, or Spirits of Vitriol or Sulphur: Dose is from four to eight drops. It is likewise used in the cure of the Aphthae or Thrush, i. e. little Cankers in the Mouths, for the most part of Children. This Spirit thus distilled with a strong Fire for three days together, does not give place neither in strength nor quantity to that of Vitriol, notwithstanding that most Authors affirm the contrary, saying, that it yields but little Acid. 6. The white light Calx, after the last di∣stillation, which we call burnt Alum, is used to eat fleshy excrescences, or proud flesh, &c. but that which remained before, after the first distilla∣tion, or when the Flegm of
the Alum was only drawn off, is much more Escarcotick than the latter, which has lost its acid Spirits. 7. In the first distillation you must fill the Retort not above half full, because it is apt to swell much, and requires a great deal of room; and the Flegm is all come off, when there di∣stils no more, for the acid Spirits being very weighty, require a much greater heat than that of Sand to raise them. 8. Lastly, There is no such thing as an Acrimoni∣ous Salt of Alum, to be distin∣guished from its Acid Salt; for that there is nothing Acri∣monious, or purely Corrosive in this Mineral, which will not turn into an Acid Spirit, being strongly forced by the Fire, which he that shall take the pains actually to distil it, shall find the Mechanical de∣monstration of. III. Spiritus Aluminis dulcis, Sweet Spirit of Alum. Bate.] It is made by often∣times rectifying the aforego∣going Spirit of Alum, with re∣ctified Spirit of Wine so long, till the Spirit comes over sweet. It is Diuretick, expels the Stone, opens Obstructions, and abates the heat in Fevers. Dose gut. 4.5. &c. at a time. Salmon.] You must mix equal parts of Spirit of Alum, and Spirit of Wine together, and so draw them off, till they grow sweet: this mix∣ture also will grow sweet, meerly by digestion in a gen∣tle heat, in length of time, whereby it appears, that this Spirit, (like as unripe and sour Fruit, grows ripe and sweet by length of time, and heat of the Sun, through the power of its internal heat conjoyned); in like man∣ner ripens and looses its Acidity, by vertue of the in∣ternal heat of the Spirit of Wine, conjoyned with it, and stirred up by the exter∣nal heat of a Bath, or Sand. It opens also Obstructions in the Reins and Bladder, and dissolves whatever is lodged there, causing Obstructions. It opens also Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, prevails a∣gainst the Scurvy, or a Scor∣butick habit of Body; cures Continent and Continual Fe∣vers; cures Inflammations; and heals sore Throats and Mouths. Dose à gut. v. ad xx. plus-minus. IV. * Spiritus Ambrae, Spirit of Ambergrise. Bate.] ℞ Ambergrise ʒss. Muck gr. xv: Sugar-candy ʒj.
mix and make a Pouder; up∣on which affuse of the best re∣ctified Spirit of Wine ℥iv. di∣gest (in a Vessel hermetically sealed) in Horse-dung, for twen∣ty or thirty Days; then filter for use. Dose gut vj. in any Swooning or Fainting of the Spirits. Salmon.] For want of the conveniency of Horse-dung, you may use either a Bath, or a genle heat in Sand, of equal strength with the Horse∣dung. The Musk and Am∣bergrise will be almost. all dissolved in the Spirit of Wine, and make a Tincture of a high red colour: for Amber∣grise being a kind of Bi∣tumen, and Musk being of an oylie nature, they will ea∣sily dissolve in the Spirit of Wine, and communicate to it their Tincture. If a few grains of Civet be added to the Composition, the Tin∣cture will be yet richer; for that the Bodies of the Musk and Amber will be thereby more admirably opened, it being a more excellent and volatile Sulphur. ℞ Am∣bergrise ʒss. Musk gr. 15. Ci∣vit gr. ix. burnt Bones in fine Pouder ʒj. grind altogether in a Glass Mortar, then add Juice of Lemons, gut. 10. Spirit or Oyl of Damask Roses ʒj. mix well, and put it into a Glass Matrass, upon which affuse of the Alcohol of Spirit of Wine ℥iv. seal up hermetically, and digest till the Tincture is deep. Where note, That the Civet and Spirit of Roses are added, the better to open the Bodies of the other Perfumes; and the Pouder of Burnt Bones serve only to separate the Particles of the Ingredients the better one from another, and that they may be the ea∣sier poudered; whereby, when the Spirit of Wine is put upon them, it will the more admirably penetrate their Substance, and extract their Tincture. Dose à gut. vj. ad xij. in any convenient Cordial Vehicle. V. * Spiritus Benzoini, Spirit of Benjamin. Bate.] ℞ Of the white parts of the best Benjamin ℥ij. best rectified Spirit of Wine ℥xvj. let them remain toge∣ther in a cold place, often sha∣king or stirring the Vessel, till the Rosin is dissolved, then fil∣ter, and keep it for use. If you precipitate with Aqua Lactis, and then dry it, you will have Magistery of Benjamin. Dose of the Spirit à ʒj. ad ʒiij. of the Magistery à gr. 10. ad 20. It has the Virtues of the Benjamin.
Salmon.] Benjamin, or Assa Dulcis, is a Resin of a Tree whose Name is yet unknown to us, which is very common in Samaria, and other Coun∣tries adjacent thereto. That which has white Spots in it is called Amygdaloides. 2. This Medicine which the Author calls a Spirit, is rather a Tin∣cture, for that it is a dissolu∣tion of the Sulphurous parts of the Gum in the Spirit of Wine. 3. Inwardly taken it strengthens the Stomach, and is good against Asthma's and other Obstructions of the Lungs; it also mightily sweetens the Blood, and is prevalent against Scorbutick, Arthritick, and Pocky Sym∣ptoms; and an excellent thing against the Colick. The Magistery has the same Vir∣tues, but is not full out so powerful. 4. Outwardly it is used to take spots out of the Face, and remove the defile∣ments of the skin; a dram of it being put into four oun∣ces of Water, whitens it like Milk, which serves for a Wash, and is called by some Virgins Milk. 5. This white colour in the Water, results from the weakning of the Tincture with the Water, whereby the Spirit quits what it held, to the Water, the par∣ticles of which make the Wa∣ter white. 6. If this Water be suffered to stand still, those particles will settle to the bot∣tom, which are the Magistry, and the Water will become again clear. 7. That if a sixth part of Styrax Calamita be added, the Odour will yet transcend. VI. * Spiritus Camphorae, Spirit of Camphir. Bate.] It is made by dis∣solving Camphir ℥j. in the best rectified Spirit of Wine ℥viij. S. A. Dose ℥ss. before the Fit of a Tertian Ague. It is an ad∣mirable Diaphoretick in ma∣lign Fevers; it is also a Noble Anodyn, gives ease in the pains of the Teeth, &c. Salmon.] It is profitable a∣gainst all Arthritick pains whatsoever, and a singular thing against the Colick, let the pain be never so extream, giving ease in less than an hours time. Give it in a Glass of Canary; having another Glass ready to drink imme∣diately after it; for the pre∣sent heat of the Medicine (which yet is without danger) is such, that the Patient will think he has swallowed down so much Fire; nor will in∣credulous People be satisfied till the heat is over. This precious Medicine is above an ordinary Commendation.
VII. Spiritus Cardiacus ma∣gnus; seu Flos Cordialium, nec-non Cardiacum Mag∣num, The Great Cardiack Spirit, or Flower of Cor∣dials, &c. Bate.] ℞ Dried Flowers of Rosemary, Marigolds, Clove∣gilliflowers, Carnations, Bor∣rage, Bugloss, Red and Damask Roses, Rosa Solis, Violets, El∣der, Betony, Oranges, Jesa∣mine, A. ℥j. Saffron ℈iv. dry∣ed Leaves of Carduus ben. Scor∣dium, Angelica, Bawm, Mint, sweet Marjoram, Valerian, A. ʒvj. Roots of Tormentil, Ze∣doary, round Birthwort, Avens, A. ℥ss. Gentian ʒij. Seeds of Basil, Citron-peels, yellow San∣ders, Juniper-berries, Kermes, Cardamoms, A. ℥ss. Cubebs ℥iij. Sassafras bark, Wood of Aloes, A. ℥j. brusing these things which are to be bruised, add Spirit of Wine tbxxx. and after a convenient digestion, draw off by B. M. tbxx. of Water, which keep for use un∣der the Title of Flos Cordiali∣um: The remainder strain out by pressing, and by another distillation reduce the Magma at bottom to the consistency of Honey: to every Ounce of which mix perfectly, white Sugar∣candy in fine Pouder ℥ij. Juyce of Kermes ℥j. Tincture of Co∣ral ʒvj. Pearls prepared ℥ss. Terra Sigillata ʒij. Bezoar A∣nimale, Bezoar Oriental, A. ʒj. Ambergriese ℈ij. Musk ℈ss. Leaves of Gold, No xx. mix S. A. and make Cardiacum Magnum, or The Great Cor∣dial. Salmon.] This rightly made, is a great Cordial, both the Spirit and the Extract, and may be given in all mali∣gnant Fevers, Plague, Pesti∣lence, Small-pox, Measses, Faintings, Swoonings, Palpi∣tation of the Heart, Melan∣choly, and the like: the Spi∣rit being dulcified, may be given in any Cordial Water à ʒij. ad ℥ss. or more: the Extract à ʒss. ad ʒij. or more, drinking a small Cordial Draught after it, and this ei∣ther at Night going to Bed, or in the Morning fasting, or when any Paroxysm is feared, or approaches. It is a long tedious Recipe, which requires a great deal of trou∣ble in making of it; and will hardly countervail the labour and charge, consider∣ing that multitudes of full as good Medicines of less per∣plext Preparations, and far less Price, are always to be had, and almost every∣where at hand.
VIII. * Spiritus Cerasorum ni∣grorum, Spirit of Black Cherries. Bate.] It is made of Black Cherries with their stones bruised and broken, and fer∣mented, then distilled in an A∣lembick, and rectified in B.M. It is Cephalick, Diuretick, Hysterick, and Antepileptick; it expels Wind, and is good against Convulsions. Dose ʒij. ad ℥j, &c. Salmon.] You may ferment them with Leven, or Yest; but Melossos or Sugar is bet∣ter, for that they add to, and exalt the Spirit. It may be given to elder Persons ab ℥j. ad ij. either alone, being dul∣cified, or compounded thus: ℞ Of this Spirit ℥i. Volatile Spirit of Hungarian Vitriol, gut. 20. Peony Water simple ℥ij. mix for a Dose, against the Falling-sickness, then which there is not many things more powerful in the World. IX. * Spiritus Cochleariae, Spi∣rit of Scurvy-grass. Bate.] It is made of Gar∣den Scurvy-grass in the Flow∣er, fermented, or not fermen∣ted, then distilling in an A∣lembick with its Worm: that which first comes forth save for Spirit, by itself. It is also pre∣pared after this manner: ℞ Of the best Spirit of Wine tbxxiv. fresh Garden Scurvy∣grass while in flowering, so much as may fill the Spirit: digest twelve hours, and then distil the one half. With this Spirit, and the Resin of Scam∣mony, or Jallap (extracting the Tincture, and filtrating) you may prepare Spiritum Cochle∣ariae Purgantem, The Purging Spirit of Scurvy-grass. It is Splenetick and Diaphoretick, makes fixt and crude Hu∣mours volatile, and resists putrefaction. It is profita∣ble in Hypochondriack and Tartarous Diseases, chiefly against the Scurvy. Dose 20, or 30 drops or more, in any proper Liquor. Salmon.] I have already in a manner shewed you how to make Spirit of Scur∣vy-grass, in Chap. I. Sect. 65. aforegoing, which you may compare with the Prescript here laid down, taking which you like best. 2. But some make it thus: ℞ Fresh and large Garden Scurvy-grass when in the Flower, q. v. bruise well in a Mortar, then put it into a wooden Vessel, affuse thereon so much Water as may cover it: add to it two or three handfuls of Salt, and a little Yest, and
let it ferment a day or two, then distil in a Copper Alembick tin'd within, saving the first running by itself for the true Spirit, which you may distil again from fresh Scurvy-grass, saving the first running as be∣fore: so will you have a very strong, and true essential Spi∣rit of Scurvy-grass. 3. But Rolfincius dislikes this way by fermentation, and makes it thus: ℞ Fresh Scurvy-grass, q. v. bruise it in gross, gently and speedily, add to it generous White-wine, (not fermenting of it beforehand, by which means much of the volatile Spi∣rit will be lost) and draw off the Spirit in an Alembick, ac∣cording to Art; separating the Oyl, if any be found superna∣ting. He exhibits the Spirit with any proper Vehicle: the Oyl he mixes with Sugar, and makes thereof an Elaeo∣saccharum Cochleariae. But in London several other sorts are made, which are called Plain and Golden, which they make after this man∣ner: 4. The Plain Spirit: ℞ Proof Spirit, q. s. put into it as much Scurvy-grass as it can contain, digest two or three hours, then distil in an Alembick with its Worm, sa∣ving the first half. This is little differing from the latter Prescript. 5. The Golden or Purging Spirit: ℞ Of the for∣mer Spirit tbij. Pouder of Jal∣lap, or Scammony ℥iij. digest in Sand, or a gentle B. M. till you see the Tincture grow very red, which decant and keep for use. Where Note, That we here use the Drugs themselves instead of their Extracts, or Resins, which is much chea∣per and full as well, if not better, considering the Spirit is fully strong enough to ex∣tract the Tincture. 6. The best way of making this Spirit is thus: ℞ Scurvy-grass in its prime, bruise it, and put it into an earthen Jarr, pressing it in, upon which affuse Wine made of the Juyce of Scurvy∣grass, so much as may supernate four or five inches; stop it up close with a Cork and lute it firmly for three or four days: then put all into an Alembick with its Head and Worm, drawing off the Spirit or Wa∣ter according to Art; which rectifie in a Glass Cucurbit, so will the pure, subtil, and vola∣tile Spirit ascend first, which keep by itself, in a Glass close stopt. The remaining Wa∣ter you may draw off to dri∣ness to make fresh Spirits with. 7. Dose of any of these, whether Simple or Purging, is from gut. 20. ad 60. or more, in a Glass of Ale or Wine in the Morning
fasting. 8. It cures the Scurvy and all Scorbutick Diseases, (as well the Simple as the Purging) destroys Acidities, and prevails against the Gout, Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, Rheumatisms, &c. but ought to be cautiously given to such as are of a hot and dry Constitution, or of a Cholerick Habit. In gross Bodies, and where Humors much abound, you must give the Purging Spirit; in other cases the Plain or Simple Spi∣rit. 9. Thus after the same manner, you may make the Spirit of Mustard and Mu∣stard-seed, of Charlock, Ra∣dishes, Horse-radish, Radish-seed, Rochet, Brook-lime, Wa∣ter-cresses, Garden-cresses, Scia∣tica-cresses, Bank-cresses, Oni∣ons, Scallions, Garlick, Leeks, &c. X. Spiritus Corallorum, Spirit of Coral. Bate.] It is made of the best purified Salt of Coral, by di∣stilling it in Sand, and recti∣fying it. It is an Antiscor∣butick, and Lithontriptick. Dose à gut. 5. ad 20. Salmon.] How this Salt is made, we shall hereafter shew in its place. The di∣stillation is best to be done in a close Reverberatory, and the Flegm being come off, to take the Spirits by themselves in a large Receiver, the white Spirits first come over, then the rest, blood-red like Oyl, the which may be sepa∣rated by a Retort. 2. This white Spirit, or Menstruum, (which is partly extracted from the Spirit of Vinegar, and partly from the Coral) will extract from fresh Coral put into it, a most red Tin∣cture; and if you make it volatile, by freeing it again from this Spirit by distillation, and digesting it with Spirit of Wine, or proper Cordial Spirit, and by cohobating it, you will have an excellent Tincture of Coral, of a sweet taste, and fragrant scent. 3. That this Salt before the distillation of the Spirit, is to be impregnated with Spirit of Vinegar, which is gently to be distilled off, that the insi∣pid Flegm may only come forth, and fresh Vinegar to be added, distilling in like manner again; and this course to be followed so long, till the Vinegar comes forth as sharp as it was when it first went in. 4. If you di∣stil the simple Salt not impre∣gnated with Spirit of Vinegar, as before directed, in a Re∣tort in Sand, you will get a Liquor onely Styptick,
without any considerable a∣cidity, which shews that the Acids are almost wholly de∣stroyed, and do not come forth from the Alcali as they went in. You may give it in a fit Vehicle against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Stone and Gout. XI. * Spiritus Cornu Cervi Suc∣cinatus, Spirit of Harts∣horn, with Amber Bate.] It is distilled from Harts-born, with half the weight of Amber. Dose à gut. v. ad xv. &c. It is a good Sudorifick, Diuretick, Hysterick, and Antepileptick, &c. Salmon.] It is indeed of good use in Fainting and Swooning Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, &c. and much more powerful against Fits of the Mother; than either the Spirit of Harts-horn, or Oyl of Amber alone. It as well recreates the Spirits, as contends with the Disease: you may give it from ten drops to thirty, in any con∣venient Vehicle, first, in the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed, as also in the time of the Paroxysm, or before, if it be feared. XII. * Spiritus Diatrion, vel Mixtura Simplex, The Spi∣rit of Three Things, Or, The Simple Mixture. Bate.] ℞ Spiritus Theria∣calis camphorated ℥x. Spiritus Vitrioli ℥ij. Spirit of Tartar rectified ℥vj. digest in a Phial Hermetically sealed for three weeks, that they may be per∣fectly united according to Art. It prevents Sweat, resists Pu∣trefaction, and is of excellent use in Malign Fevers. Dose ʒj. Plus-minus. Salmon.] 1. The first Au∣thor of this Medicament was Paracelsus, in his Book Of Na∣tural Things, lib. 8. where he calls it, Arcanum Caduci, or, The Secret against the Falling-sickness; the foundation of which Cure is taken from Vitriol. 2. The Spirit of Vi∣triol here intended, is not the common Oyl or Spirit of Vi∣triol, every-where almost sold; but the true Volatile Spirit, which ascends next after the Flegm in the distillation of Vitriol, and before our vul∣gar or common Oyl or Spirit: and according to Maets is thus made: ℞ Vitriol calcin'd to whiteness, q. v. put it into an earthen Retort, and distil S. A. First comes the Flegm, then the Volatile Spirit; lastly,
the Oyl, or Vulgar Spirit. If you distil altogether, you must separate the Flegm, Spirit and Oyl one from another, by put∣ting the whole into a high Glass Cucurbit, and with a very gentle Fire, the volatile sulphu∣rous Spirit will ascend and come forth, which you must keep in a Glass very close stopt, for this use: afterwards the Flegm will ascend, leaving the fixt Oyl or Spirit at bot∣tom, which also being put into a Glass Retort, may be rectified so as to be clear like Water. 3. But if you would avoid this trouble of Rectifi∣cation, in getting this Volatile Spirit of Vitriol, put your Vitriol dryed to whiteness in∣to a large earthen Retort, or a Glass one luted, and ac∣cording to Art: 1. Draw forth the Flegm which might remain yet in the Vitriol, with a very small fire, till no more will distil: Pour forth this Flegm, and refit the Receiver again to the neck of the Retort, luting the Juncture exactly. 2. Encrease the Fire by de∣grees, to raise the Volatile Spirit, which will ascend and come forth into the Receiver in Clouds; continue the distilla∣tion, till the Receiver grows cold, then is all the volatile Spirit come over; take off the Receiver, and pour out the Spi∣rit, which keep for the use here intended, by Paracelsus. 3. Luting the Receiver to the Retort again, augment the Fire to the highest violence, and in three days draw off the fixed Spirit or Oyl, as is usual in distilling Oyl of Vitriol, &c. 4. This mixture has the pow∣er of inciding, and attenua∣ting; and by the subtilty of its substance, penetrates through the whole body, without a∣ny trouble. It is one of the most powerful things in cu∣ring the Falling-sickness, as Paracelsus declares; gives im∣mediate help in the Pleurisie, and wonderfully opens all Obstructions of the Viscera. It prevails against Hypochon∣driack Distempers, and Me∣lancholy; overcomes burn∣ing and malignant Fevers, and expels them from the Center per , to the superficies of the Body, from whence it is called by its Au∣thor, Diaphoreticum in Pera∣cutis. 5. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Of Aqua Lactis Alexiteria ℥j. A∣quae Cinnamomi ʒij. of this Spirit ℈j. ad ʒj. mix for a Dose. You may also give it in Carduus Water, Bawm Water, or any other fit Vehi∣cle in like manner.
XIII. Spiritus Dracunculi, Spi∣rit of Herb-Dragon. Bate.] ℞ Spirit of Wine Gal. j. Leaves of Herb-Dra∣gon new gathered, as much as the Spirit will hold; bruise and digest for three days, and distil S. A. To the distilled Water add a sufficient quantity of the best Sugar, to dulcifie it. Dose ℥iv. at a time. It provokes Sweat, and wonderfully pre∣vails against even unknown Diseases. Salmon.] It is good against the Scurvy, Dropsie, and Gout, prevails against Rheu∣matisms, and a Scorbutick Habit of Body, by sweetning the Blood; strengthens and comforts a cold Stomach, and resists malign and infectious Diseases. If you distil it by the Prescript, you must do it in a Glass Body in B. M. and then draw off to driness, o∣therwise ℥iv. will be too large a Dose to be given at a time. But in my opinion it will be better to distil it, as we have before taught you to distil Spirit of Scurvy-grass; by that means you will have a very strong and virtuous Spi∣rit, of which ℥j. will be e∣nough to be given at a time in a fit or proper Vehicle. XIV. * Spiritus Embryonum, A Spirit to preserve a Child in the Womb. Bate.] ℞ Capons No iij. freed from their fat, beat and cut them: Dates lbj. Raisons lbiss. Bawm, M. iv. Angelica, sweet Marjoram, Chervil, A. Miij. Seeds of Bazil ℥ss. of Fennel, of Angelica, Lemon-peels, A. ℥iij. Citron-peels, Roots of Peony, Borrage, A. ℥iv. of Angelica ℥iss. Saffron ʒv. Conserve of the Flowers of Bor∣rage, Clove-gilliflowers, Mar∣joram, A. ℥iv. Spanish Wine, (I suppose Sherry ought to be un∣derstood) lbxxxij. mix and distil to driness. With this Water and Spirit of Clary lbj. Waters of Black Cherries, and Bawm, A. lbiij. Borrage-water lbiv. and blanched Almonds lbiss. make an Emulsion, to which add Conserve of Peony Flowers, ℥vj. of Borrage and Clove-gilliflowers, A. ℥iv. of the Flowers of Violets, of Cow∣slips, Carnations, Red Roses, of Rosemary, and Marigolds, A. M. iv. Wood of Aloes ʒiij. yel∣low Sanders ʒiiss. Cinnamon ℥viij. Aromaticum Rosatum ℥j. mix and distil again, S. A. It is happily given to Women, who are apt to suffer Aborti∣on; also to Women with Child, when they have been
frighted, or put under any sudden terrour, or languish from any external cause: It cures Faintings and Swoon∣ing Fits, and Inflamations in the Bowels. It comforts the feeble Foetus in the Womb, strengthens the Uterine Liga∣ments; cures the Epilepsy, and contributes to the making of Blood, &c. Dose two or three spoonfuls, or more, pro re nata. Salmon.] It is a long, tedi∣dious, and troublesome thing to make, and something chargable, performed by a double distillation, which (a previous fermentation being supposed) might have been better done by a single, in a moderate Balneo. The Ti∣tle shews the intention, be∣sides which it is a good Cor∣dial, and restorative for such as are in Consumptions, being assiduously taken for some time. XV. Spiritus Hormini Com∣positus, Spirit of Clary Com∣pound. Bate.] It is made as the Aqua Hormini Composita, in Chap. 1. Sect. 31. afore∣going. Salmon.] If you design it only as a Water, you are to distil to driness; but if you design a subtil and volatile Spirit, you must rectifie it by another distillation, drawing off only about two thirds of the Water or Spirit: what remains, will serve to make fresh Water, or Spirit withal: you may give it for the same intentions you use the Water for, to one spoonful, in any proper Vehicle. XVI. * Spiritus Hyssopi Ve∣rus, The true Spirit of Hys∣sop. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Hyssop when in Flower, q. v. bruise it well, and put it into an Oa∣ken Vessel, adding Fountain-water warm, q. s. and a little Ale-yeast; let it alone for a while to ferment, viz. for ten or twelve days: then add more Water, and distil by an Alem∣bick; afterwards rectifie it often in B. M. according to Art. After the same man∣ner you may prepare the Spi∣rits of other Herbs and Plants. It is an admirable Pecto∣ral. Salmon.] You must not distil to driness in a Copper Vesica, for then the Matter distilled will certainly taste of burning; but only draw off about two thirds of the humidity, which afterwards you may rectifie in Balneo
Mariae, as is directed. It is designed against Coughs, Colds, Obstructions of the Breast and Lungs, Wheesings, Hoarsness Shortness of Breath, and Difficulty of Breathing; you may prescribe it thus: ℞ Of this Spirit ℥j. Aquae Lactis Pectoralis ℥ij. Liquid Laudanum gut. 20. ad 30. mix for a Dose, to be given at Night going to Bed: or half of it in a Fit of Coughing in the day time, and to be repeated. Or thus: ℞ Of this Spirit ℥j. Aq. Lactis Pe∣ctoralis ℥ij. Spir. Salis Armo∣niaci gut. 20. Syrup of Red Poppies enough to sweeten it, mix for a Dose. XVII. * Spiritus Juniperi ve∣rus, The true Spirit of Ju∣niper. Bate.] It is distilled from the Berries, fermented as be∣fore. It is a singular Carmi∣native, Diuretick, and Sto∣matick; expels Wind, as al∣so Sand and Gravel in the Reins, provokes the Terms, and is egregiously powerful in curing or removing Bar∣renness. Salmon.] 1. Juniper-Berries, as they are produced from a Plant able to endure the greatest injuries of the hard∣est Winter, and which takes a longer space of time than ordinary, in bringing its Ber∣ries to maturation, viz. about two years, before they are fit to be gathered, or can be ta∣ken in the height of their ma∣turity and perfection; so it seems, that in this elaborated Fruit there is perfected a most admirable and salutife∣rous Balsam and Spirit: The longer Nature is in perfecting or compleating any thing, the more elaborate and excellent will its Productions be at last. § 2. Let therefore the Berries used in the Preparati∣on, be such as have attained a perfect ripeness, gathered in the second year of their Pro∣duction, in the Month of Se∣ptember, at what time they have a certain kind of plea∣santness, and balsamick Ho∣ney, which contains its vola∣tile Salt, subtil and penetra∣ting Oyl, and thin Aetherial Spirit, the Berries being black, plump, and smooth. § 3. ℞ Full ripe Juniper-Berries lbvj. bruise them well, Seeds and all, add to them warm Water lbxviij. Sugar lbiiss. mix, dis∣solve, and let it ferment eight or ten days, till it has got a Vinous scent; then distil in an Alembick with its Worm, draw∣ing off lbxiv. the Water re∣ctifie, separating the Spirit in in B. M. by drawing off lbvij.
which keep by itself for Spirit: then distil to dryness, keep∣ing this that comes last for Juniper-Water: with which by addition of fresh Berries you may make more Spirit. § 4. Or thus, according to Le Febure: ℞ Juniper-Berries lbvj. beat them in a wooden Mortar, put them into a Vesi∣catory; affuse thereon Rain or River Water, so much, till it comes within six inches of the brim; cover, and lute it, and distil S. A. so will you have a spirituous Water with a subtil Oyl swimming a top, which you must separate; rectifying the Water to the subtilty of a Spirit: But this is not the best. § 5. Now if you have a design to raise an ardent or burning Spirit from the Ber∣ries, and not an Oyl, you must cause them to undergo a fermentation as aforesaid, adding Leaven, Yeast, Ho∣ney, Sugar, or Manna, to excite it, to make a separa∣tion of the subtil and volatile from the grosser parts, by which the greatest part of the Oyl will be dissolved in the said Spirit; this is an excel∣lent way, and the Spirit thus made, good. § 6. But that is esteemed yet more excellent, which is distilled with Spirit of Wine, instead of Water, as being extracted with more ease, and rather of greater virtues and subtilty, after this-manner: ℞ Full ripe Juniper-Berries, well bruised lbvj. put them into a Glass Cucurbit, filling it about half full: affuse thereon Spirit of Wine well rectified, till but one third of the Cucurbit re∣mains empty; cover it with its blind head, perfectly luting the Junctures: digest in a little Sand heat for three days, (which will be enough for penetration of the Berries, and dissolution of their volatile parts): this done, take off the blind Head, and put thereon an Alembick fitted, with its Receiver, and distil in B. M. or in a Sand heat with a gentle Fire, so will you have a subtil, volatile, and inflamable Spi∣rit, repleat with the best and most volatile parts of the Ju∣niper-Berries. § 7. You may also obtain this Spirit in its perfection, by bruising a good quantity of those Berries, and then to fill about two thirds of one, or more Earthen Jarrs well leaded within, af∣fusing warm Water upon them, and then (without the addition of any ferment) stop∣ping them close up, and so let them stand about eight or ten days, in a gentle Sand heat, to distil in a Copper Vesica tinn'd within, and co∣vered,
over with its Alem∣bick and Serpentine, or Worm, and Receiver well luted, continuing the distilla∣tion, till what distils is al∣most insipid. So have you a Juniper-Water repleat, with the volatile Salt, subtil Oyl, and aetherial Spirit of the Berries: what Oyl swims a top, separate according to Art. The Water rectifie in a Glass Vesica in B.M. draw∣ing off one half for Spirit; and the other half for Juni∣per-Water, which may be kept to make new Spirit of as before, from fresh Berries. § 8. The Feces at the bottom of the Copper Vesica, strain out hard by pressing, put it into a glazed earthen Vessel, and evaporate to the Consi∣stence, of Honey, (this is cal∣led, Honey of Juniper) or of an Extract, which will be something Aromatical, to which if you add the fixt Salt of the Feces, made by Cal∣cination, and Elixiviation, you will have an excellent Confection, and obtain all that is excellent in the Sub∣ject you wrought upon. § 9. All these several Medi∣cines produced from this mixt, have for the most part one and the same Virtues, save that one is more power∣ful than another: The Wa∣ter is weaker than the Spirit, and the Spirit weaker than the Oyl: the Extract, thô it has some of the same Vertues, yet it has another intention in its operation, which is a little purging. § 10. The Vir∣tues therefore of these things are to provoke Urine and Sweat, to open Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Bladder, and Womb, and to comfort and fortifie the Brain and Nerves. The Extract is excellent against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Wheesings, Shortness of Breath, Ulcers in the Lungs or Bowels, and Weakness of the Stomach, it evacuates cold, windy, slimy, and griping Matter or Hu∣mours out of the Bowels. Dose à ʒij. ad ℥ss. It is good against Plague and Poyson, and is used in all cases where Treacle or Mithridate are used. The Water may be given ab ℥j. ad ℥ij. or more, as need requires. § 11. The Aetherial Oyl, is a most ad∣mirable thing to provoke U∣rine, to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and to cure a Scirrhus of those parts, being assiduously used for some time; and it is an ex∣cellent Topical Remedy in all Palsies, Cramps, Convul∣sions, and all cold affections of the Nerves. Dose from
gut. iij. ad xij. xv. or xx. dropt upon white Sugar, and so given in White-wine, or Aqua Alexiteria. §12. But the Powers are an Agent far sur∣passing all what we have said, for they penetrate in a moment the whole Body, and inti∣mately mix with the Blood, which is evident, for that the sick taking never so little shall have the next Urine which comes from him smell purely sweet, and like a Vio∣let: §13. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. in Wine, or Aqua Lactis Nephri∣tica. ℞ Aquae Lactis Ne∣phriticae ℥iij. Spirit of Juniper ʒiss. Salt of Hog-lice, gr. iij. mix for a Dose in Nephritick Diseases. XVIII. Spiritus Mannae, Spi∣rit of Manna. Bate.] If you distil Manna by a Cucurbit, with a gentle or slow Fire, you will have an in∣sipid Sudorifick Spirit. It is an admirable Sudorifick in Fevers, whether pestilential or common; producing e∣ven a sticking kind of Sweat. Dose to one spoonful. Salmon.] § 1. That what comes off, will be insipid like Flegm is certain; but as to its Medicinal Virtues, I can say nothing by Experience; you are obliged to take them upon the Credit of our Learn∣ed Author. § 2. It is said to expel the Excrements of the last digestion; and that it has a peculiar Virtue to dis∣solve Sulphur, and to extract its yellow Tincture, which is not one of the least Reme∣dies for easing the Breast, and the Praecordia, when oppres∣sed; this Tincture being as a restoring Balsam, to reme∣dy the Distempers and Af∣fects of the Lungs, and to strengthen and preserve their Action, and may be given from gut. iij. ad xij. in prepa∣red or depurated Juyce of Ele∣campane, or Hyssop. §3. There is another insipid Spirit of Manna, thus prepared: ℞ Choice Manna lbij. pure Nitre lbj. put them both into a Hog's Bladder, tye it exactly up: hang the same by a string, in boiling Water, till the two Substances be well dissolved: this Liquor or Dissolution di∣stil in a Glass Cucurbit covered with its Head, and fitted with a Receiver: so will you have an insipid laxative Water, provoking Sweat copiously; Dose à ʒij. ad ʒvj. or ℥j. in Aqua Lactis Pectoralis, or Cardiaca, or other proper Ve∣hicle: it is good to bring forth those superfluous Sero∣sities, which many times breed Rhumatisms, and Defluxi∣ons.
§ 4. Spiritus Mannae A∣cidus. ℞ Manna q. v. put it into a Cornute or Retort in a Sand heat, and with a soft Fire at the beginning, draw forth the insipid Water afore∣mentioned: then change the Receiver, and augment the Fire by degrees, distilling to dryness, (which if you please you may cohobate several times) so have you the Acid Spirit, which rectifie to take away the Empyreuma. This is a Spi∣rituous Water, containing all the best of the Manna, and is more effectual than the first insipid Water, to provoke Sweat, and also makes a bet∣ter Tincture of Sulphur. This Acid Spirit is said to be a wonderful Specifick against all sorts of intermitting Fevers or Agues, giving it at the be∣ginning of the Fit from ʒj. ad iv. § 5. But here is to be noted, that whether you di∣stil in a Cucurbit or Retort, you ought not to fill them with the Matter above a quarter, or one third part full; because the Manna is apt to swell in Distillation. § 6. Spiritus Mannae Compo∣situs. ℞ Pure Manna ℥viij. pure Sal Armoniack ℥iv. mix and put it into a Glass or Ear∣then Body, so as it may fill on∣ly a third or fourth part, place it in a Sand Furnace, and fit to it a Head and Receiver, lu∣ting the Junctures with a wet Bladder: make a small Fire for an hour only to heat the Vessel; then encrease it to the second degree, so will the Li∣quor distil drop by drop, and towards the end there will arise white Vapours into the Head: increase the Fire still more, till all is come forth that will: Let the Vessels cool, and you will find in the Receiver ℥viij. of an ill scented Spirit, and a little Oyl; decant all into a∣nother Glass Body, with its Head and Receiver well luted, and distil again in a Sand heat, till you have about ℥vj. which will be a very pure clear, acid Spirit, without any Em∣pyreuma, and agreeable to the Tast. § 7. This Spirit is stron∣ger than the former, and is a good Operative against the Gravel and Dropsie; it is good to stop Diarrhaea's and Dysenteries, and may be dropt into Tincture of Roses instead of other acid Spirits. Dose gut. 8. or 10. or to an agreeable acidity in any pro∣per Vehicle. The faetid Oyl remaining may be of use to cleanse old, running Sores. § 8. Spiritus Mannae ardens. ℞ Choice Manna lbj. warm Water a Gallon: add Ale or Beer-yeast ℥ j. or ij. and mix them well together; stop the
Vessel carelesly, and leave it for twenty four hours, so will it ferment very strongly: then decant the Liquor into a Glass Cucurbit, with its Head and Recipient well luted in the Joynts, and distil in B. M. with a gentle heat; so will you have an inflamable Spirit fol∣lowed by the Flegm, or watery parts, which separate by recti∣fication: the Spirit keep by it self: the Flegm affuse upon the Feces, cover and stop it slightly up, set it in a Cellar for two Months, and make a new di∣stillation in the first Cucurbit, with its Head and Recipient, so will you have more inflama∣ble Spirit, or a Water, from which by distillation it must be separated. This Spirit added to the former reserved Spirit, will make the just weight of the whole Manna, by which it appears, that its whole Substance is a Spirit, and is here converted into a pure, aetherial, volatile, and infla∣mable Sulphur. § 9. The Vir∣tues are the same with those of Spirit of Wine; but as it is produced from an aetherial, airy, or heavenly Substance, so it is a more admirable and noble production than Spirit of Wine, they differing one from another, as much as their Principles differ; the one being the product of the Earth, the other of the Hea∣ven or Air, &c. Hence it appears also, it is a much better Menstruum to extract Tinctures with, and the Vir∣tues of Things, especially if impregnated with the Acid of the Air also, which is a pure Nitrious Spirit. A Word is enough to the Wise. XIX. Spiritus Millepedum, Spirit of Sows, or Hog∣lice. Bate.] It is distilled in all respects as Spirit of Harts-horn, saving the Salt. It provokes Urine powerfully, opens all Obstructions, is profitable a∣gainst Diseases of the Eyes, and the Rickets: and is a Specifick in Deafness, and difficulty of hearing, being dropt into the Ears. Salmon.] § 1. Take an Ear∣then Retort, or a Glass one lu∣ted, fill it almost full of Mille∣pedes, lute to it a Receiver, and distil in Sand, or rather in an open Fire, observing the degree of heat: with the first degree of heat will come the Flegm; with the second, the Oyl; and with the third, the volatile Salt; continue the di∣stillation till no more will come forth: the Oyl, volatile Salt, and Spirit mix together, by shaking well the Recipient; put
all into a Glass Cucurbit, and with a very gentle heat, sub∣lime the volatile Salt, then aug∣ment the Fire, and the Spirit and Oyl will ascend, take each by themselves. § 2. The Spi∣rit is volatile and subtil, like that of Sal Armoniack, but the volatile Salt is the most penetrative and powerful, and the highest Diaphoretick and Sudorifick, and may be given à gr. iij. ad xij. or xvj. in any proper Vehicle, against the Stone, Gravel, all man∣ner of Stoppages of Urine, the Yellow Jaundice, Apo∣plexy, Palsie, Pleurisie, Run∣ning Gout, Small-pox, Mea∣sles, Plague, and all sorts of Pestilential Fevers: the Spi∣rit may be given to ʒj. § 3. But because the Salt is so Volatile, that it is difficult to be kept, it is best to be con∣served in the Spirit thus: ℞ Of the Spirit ℥j. of the volatile Salt ℥ss. mix and di∣gest; and in length of time, part of the Salt will crystal∣lize. This Spirit has all the former Virtues, and may be given à gut. x. ad ʒss. or ʒj. in any proper Vehicle. & 4. The Oyl is of an ingrateful Odour, and scarcely (for that reason) fit to be given in∣wardly, unless in the case of Hysterick Fits: you may make the Potestates thereof thus: ℞ Of this Oyl ʒj. of the volatile Salt ℈j. Spirit of Wine highly rectified ℥iv. mix, digest a Month, shaking it once a day, then draw them off to∣gether in a Glass Body. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. in any fit Vehi∣cle, in the cases aforemention∣ed. § 5. The Potestates may also be made thus: ℞ Sows, or Hog-lice, q. v. pure Spirit of Nitre, enough to dissolve them; being dissolved, add thereto the equal quantity of the Alcohol of Spirit of Wine; which digest for a Month, and keep for use. § 6. These are the Potestates Millepedum Ni∣tratae, powerful against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, Stone, Plague, and all sorts of Ma∣lign Diseases, and may be given in any fit Vehiculum à gut. xij, ad xx. or more, as the Physician shall see occasi∣on. XX. * Spiritus Nitri, Spirit of Nitre. Bate.] ℞ Sand p. ij. Nitre, p. j. mix and distil by a Retort, till the Fumes cease to appear. You can scarcely find a more admirable Diuretick; it pow∣erfully provokes Sweat, from whence it is of signal use in the Colick, Pleurisie, and all Fevers, chiefly such as are Malign. Dose à ℈j. ad ℈ij.
Salmon.] § 1. Here is but p. ij. of Sand to p. j. of Ni∣tre, which I judge too little, the Colledge in their Dispen∣satory allows 5. to 1. as you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 10. Sect. 47. But three to one is by experience found to be the best proportion. § 2. ℞ Pure Nitre tbij. common Bole, or Potters Earth tbvj. mix and put them into a large Earthen, or Glass Retort luted, set it in a close Reverberatory Furnace, fitting to it a large Receiver: give a gentle Fire for four or five hours, till all the Flegm is come forth, which will be drop by drop; when it will drop no more, cast away the Flegm in the Receiver, and refit it, luting the Juncture, increase the Fire gradatim to the second degree, so will the Spirit come forth, filling the Receiver with white Clouds, continue the Fire in that equa∣lity for two hours, and then in∣crease it to the greatest Vio∣lence, and the Vapours will be red, which continue till all is come over, which will be in a∣bout fourteen or fifteen hours. The Vessels being cold, take the Spirit and put it in a strong Glass Bottle, with a Glass Stopple, or else stop it with Wax. § 3. This Spirit is the best Aqua Fortis that can be made; and therefore besides the Vertues ascribed to it by our Author, it has the power of dissolving of Metals. § 4. The Earth or Sand here put in, is of use on∣ly to separate the parts of the Salt, to the end that the Fire may the more easily operate upon the Body thereof: and we cast away the Flegm, be∣cause if it was retained, it could be of no use, but only to weaken the Spirit, § 5. The white Vapours are the first and weakest Spirit: the red ones are the latter, and strongest, coming forth from the most fixt part of the Salt; where Note, That no kind of Salt yields red Va∣pours but Nitre only. § 6. The greatest part of the Ni∣tre comes over in Flegm and Spirit; for out of 32 Ounces of Nitre, 30 Ounces of Flegm and Spirit is commonly drawn. § 7. You must not fill the Retort above two thirds full, and the Recipient must be very large, for that the Spirits being strong, and the Vapours plentiful, and withal coming hastily forth, they would break all to pie∣ces, if they had not room e∣nough to expatiate in. §8. This Spirit, from its coming forth in red Vapours, is by some Authors called, The Salaman∣ders Blood; and being thus at
first freed from its Flegm, will act with so much the more force. § 9. This Spi∣rit will dissolve, or rather corrode all Metals, except Gold, into which it cannot enter alone, by reason of the smallness of the Pores of that Metal; but if you add to it a fourth part of its weight of Sal Armoniack, or of Sea Salt, or of Sal Gem, it will give a new form to its parti∣cles, shaping them into more subtil points, capable of en∣tering into the pores of the Gold, and to penetrate and disslve its substance. § 10. It is highly good against Ma∣lign Feavers of all sorts, and to suppress Vapours that a∣rise from crude and tartarous humours, ceases the ebiliti∣on of the humours, by reason of its volatile and sulphurous Salt joyned with its acid; and is an excellent Remedy against the Colick. It opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and of all the Bow∣els, dissolves coagulated Blood, and therefore is singularly profitable against the Pleuri∣sie, whether true or bastard, expelling the Disease either by sweat, or insensible tran∣spiration. It cures Rheuma∣tisms, and all sorts of wande∣ring pains, and the Dropsie Tympanites. Besides all which it changes the Emetick and Cathartick Virtues of several things into Diaphoretick, par∣ticularly Antimony. XXI. Spiritus Nitri Bezoar∣ticus, Bezoartick Spirit of Nitre. Bate.] ℞ It is distilled from Spirit of Nitre rectified, and Butter of Antimony, ana; by a Retort, S. A. The Caput Mortuum serves to make Bezoar Mineral of. Salmon.] It ought to be di∣stilled in a Retort in Sand; whereof, if the Fire be spee∣dily urged, the Spirit will be red, and as Authors affirm, be able not only to dissolve Gold, but also to volatilize it. § 2. It ought to be made of rectified Spirit of Nitre; which is thus done: ℞ Of the former Spirit of Nitre, at Sect. 20. q. v. put it into a Glass Body, and in an open Fire make it to evaporate, till the Vapours or Fumes begin to ascend yellow; then re∣move it from the Fire, and keep it for use; this is recti∣fied Spirit of Nitre. § 3. This Spirit of Nitre thus rectified, ought to be put upon the Butter of Antimony, so long till the Effervescence ceases: then the mixture to be distil∣led to dryness; this Liquor thus distilled is the Bezoar∣tick
Spirit, which indeed is nothing else but Aqua Regia, made by a conjunction of the Spirit of common Salt, which Spirit of Nitre, for which reason it dissolves Gold, and does other things which the vulgar A. R. does. XXII. * Spiritus Nitri dulcis, Dulcified Spirit of Nitre. Bate.] ℞ Spirit of Nitre, p. j. Alcohole of Spirit of Wine, p. ij. Digest till they are joyn∣ed, and distil in Sand, coho∣bating twice, S. A. Dose ad ʒj. in any convenient Liquor; it moves sweat, takes away Obstructions of the Colick, Reins, Breast, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This propor∣tion of 1 to 2. is that which is observed by Le Mort, Maets and Marg-grave; but Rolfin∣cius, Charras, and Lemery, make the mixture in equal parts of each. § 2. In the mixing them you must be very cautious, and do it leisure∣ly and by degrees: you must not put the Spirit of Wine to the Spirit of Nitre, for then you will set it all in a flame; but you must put in the Spirit of Nitre Gradatim into the Spirit of Wine, so will you prevent the flaming, but the mixture will grow so hot, that you will scarcely be able to hold your hand on the outside the Vessel. § 3. Being mixed together, digest for seven days, then put the mixture into a Glass Retort, and di∣stil in Sand, first with a gen∣tle heat, and afterwards with a stronger, to driness: the Receiver let be very large, and the neck of the Retort fit for it, and so enter a good way in, and the Juncture to be well luted, for otherwise you will lose much of your Spirit. § 4. It is necessary that the Spirit should be coho∣bated twice at least, some Authors advise thrice; for the oftner it is cohobated, the sweeter it is. Le Mort also says, that the distillation may be performed upon the spot of the commixtion; and that if the digestion exceeds se∣ven days before the distilla∣tion, the Union will be so firm that there will be no need of a distillation. § 5. The two Spirits mix and u∣nite with an inseparable U∣nion, sweet, or at least not of so great an acritude as be∣fore, and of a very grateful odour. § 6. It ought to be an open Vessel that the mix∣ture is made in, for should it be in a Glass Bottle, and stopt before the ebulition be over, it would hazard the breaking of the same. § 7. Lemery
advises to make the mixture in a Bolt-head set in straw in the Chimny, without heat, letting it be open till the Ebu∣lition is over, taking heed al∣so to avoid the fumes, and then to put it into a Glass, and keep it without distilla∣tion for use. § 8. This O∣peration differs not much from that of mixing Oyl of Turpentine, and Oyl of Vi∣triol together: for these Li∣quors also heat and boyl to∣gether much alike. § 9. In this mixture the Spirit of Ni∣tre joyns itself to the Sulphur of the Wine, and both being admirably volatile, they strive to mount upwards, whereby the mixture is put into that mighty motion and efferve∣scency; and from whence re∣sults a complicate Spirit, be∣ing most fragrant, and ha∣ving the greatest volatility. § 10. Charras advises it to be distilled in a Sand heat in a Glass Cucurbit, covered with its head carefully luted, and to be repeated three times; from whence, says he, arises a composed Spirit, more a∣greeable in smell, more grate∣ful to the taste, more gentle in all in operations, more fit for our bodies, and more ad∣mirably diaphoretick than the simple Spirit of Nitre can possibly be. § 11. Rolfincius in Chimia, Lib. 3. Sect. 1. Art. 4. Cap. 11. advises after four days digestion to distil it in an Alembick; so, says he, will the Spirits in this Ope∣ration be united, and con∣tract a Violet kind of odour, or smell, and a subdulce and grateful taste. § 12. It is a most admirable Diuretick and Diaphoretick, quenches thirsts, resists putrefaction of the blood and humours, and and powerfully attenuates and incides: It is a singular Febrifuge, cures all malign Feavers, even the Small-pox, and Plague itself. It abates Inflamations, even of the Lungs, and penetrates the whole Body, for it is indeed the highest volatile acid that is yet known in Rerum Natu∣ra. It is a most signal Anti∣colick, curing the Disease a∣bove all other Medicines, and many times when all other Remedies fail. It is a Speci∣fick against the Pleurisie, in which Disease Rolfincius gives it with Syrup of Corn Pop∣pies in a proper Volatile. It takes away all preternatural heat in any part of the Body to a Miracle: It is good a∣gainst the Stone, Gravel, and all Obstructions of Urine whatsoever, and indeed has not only all the Virtues of simple Spirit of Nitre, at Sect.
20. § 10. aforegoing, but al∣so much exceeds that in eve∣ry respect. § 13. It is a cir∣culated Menstruum, and by some is taken for the Circula∣tum majus Paracelsi; by it the Vertues of many things are momentarily to be ex∣tracted, much better than by several others, and some Chy∣mists use it in the preparati∣on of Tincture of Coral. Dose is from gut. 10. ad 40. plus∣minus, in any proper Vehi∣cle. Infinite Diseases almost, saith Marggrave, are cured by this Medicine. XXIII. * Spiritus Rhoeados cra∣pularius, the Surfeit Spi∣rit of the Red, Wild, or Corn Poppy. Bate.] ℞ Corn Poppy Flow∣ers new gathered lbj. Caraway∣seeds ℥ij. Nutmegs ℥j. Amber∣grise gr. iv. Spirit of Wine lbiv. digest S. A. strain out, and keep it for use. Dose ℥iv. at the hours of sleep, or in the Morning after a Surfeit∣ing. It is a Specifick also in the Pleurisie. Salmon.] 1. § 1. The bo∣dy of the Ambergrise ought to be opened as we have for∣merly directed at Sect. 4. a∣foregoing, whereby it will perform four times as much as it would otherwise. § 2. That the Spirit of Wine here intended, is only common Spirit of Wine or Brandy for otherwise it could not be, given in so large a Dose as our Author here prescribes it in. § 3. That it is not only an excellent thing against Sur∣feiting and Drunkenness, as also the Pleurisie, but also against all manner of Pains, and Stitches in the Sides, Breast, and Stomach, the Co∣lick, and Griping of the Guts, Pains in the Back, Reins, and Bladder, but indeed a∣gainst all manner of Pains in any part of the Body: it gently provokes Sweat, dis∣solves coagulated Blood, and gives relief against the stron∣gest Agonies. § 4. The Dose is from ℥j. to iv. according to the Age, and Condition of the Sick; it may be given either alone, sweetned with white Sugar; or in Ale, Wine, or Aqua Lactis Alexiteria, &c. chiefly at Night going to Bed. XXIV. Spiritus Salis Armo∣niaci, Spirit of Sal Armo∣niack. Bate.] ℞ Sal Armoniack p. j. Calx Vive, p. ij. Water p. iij. mix and distil in Sand, S. A. It is Diuretick, Dia∣phoretick, and Inciding; it
resists putrefaction, and is most powerful against Fea∣vers; Dose à gut. vj. ad xij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. Various are the Ways and Proportions which Authors have prescri∣bed in the making of this Spirit, which because we would not leave the Artist in the dark, and are willing to ease him of the labour of searching of many Books, we shall here take the pains to deliver the Summary of all together. § 2. Le Mort makes it thus: ℞ Sal Ammoniacum lbj. Salt of Tartar lbj. ss. (or in place thereof Pot-ashes) common Water lbj. mix them. Or thus, from the same Author: ℞ Sal Ammon lbj, Oyl of Tartar, per deli∣quium lbij. mix and distil in a Glass, or glazed Retort in Sand, with a very gentle Fire, till the volatile Salt be∣gins to swell, so will the vo∣latile Salt ascend, which in the following Flegm will be dissolved. Or thus: ℞ Sal Am. lbj, in fine Pouder: Sal Tartari, or other Alcalious Salt lbij. Water lbiij. mix and distil with a gentle Fire by a glased Retort, till about ℥xij. is come forth, then cease. § 3. Where Note, That if Calx Vice be used instead of the Salt of Tartar, the Spirit will come forth much more volatile and fu∣gitive: also if it be distilled from Minerals, as Iron, La∣pis Hematitis, Calaminaris, &c. it comes forth most pe∣netrative. § 4. This is also to be noted, That if the Sal Amm. be mixed with Calx Vive, the Spirit goes forth in a most volatile Liquor, but never in a volatile Salt, whereas if it be mixt with other Calxes or Salts, the volatile Salt come first in a dry form, then the liquid Spirit together with the Flegm, in which the volatile Salt is dissolved. § 5. Sal Ammon. does seem to be nothing else, but a mixture of Sea Salt, and the volatile Salt of Urine, which here is reduced into a saline volatile Spirit, by the help of a fixt Salt, or other earthy Bodies being mixt. § 6. Rolfincius advises to take Sal Am. lbj. Ashes lbiv. so to mix and to distill by an Alembick in Sand, and then to rectifie the Spi∣rit. § 7. The Rectification of the Spirit is thus done: ℞ Of the said Spirit lbss. Salt of Tartar, or of Pot-ashes ℥ij. mix them in a glass Retort, and distil again. § 8. Marg∣grave makes it thus: ℞ Sal Am. Salt of Tartar, or ay other Alcalious Salt, ana:
each being in Pouder mix them, and put them into a glased Retort, with Water q. s. and a very large Re∣ceiver well luted, and distil in Sand; and in three or four hours with a Fire of the third degree, you will have first, the coagulated Spirit, or volatile Salt in a dry form, sticking to the sides of the Receiver like Snow: con∣tinue the distillation, that the Spirit may come over, till the said dry volatile Salt is brought or dissolved into the said Spirit. Then immedi∣ately take the Recipient a∣way, keeping the said Spirit in a Glass close stopt for use; what comes after over is only pure Flegm, of little or no use. § 9. From this Caput Mort. with Water you may extract a pure white Salt, which Sylvius calls, Sal Fe∣brifugum: which being right∣ly prepared and sublimed from an earthen Retort, in an open Fire, will go forth for the most part, in most white Flowers, very penetra∣ting, but not urinous, and of a pleasant refrigerating taste; which some will have to be a volatile Salt of Tartar. § 10. Maets makes it thus: ℞ Sal Am. Salt of Tartar, Pot-ashes, ana; mix, (being in Pouder) put them into a Glass Cucur∣bit, affuse thereon Water, q. s. and distil with a gentle Fire: so will you have a potent Spi∣rit of Sal Am. together with its volatile Salt in a dry form, sticking to the sides of the Vessel. § 11. Le Febure makes it thus: ℞ Sal Am. in Pou∣der, Salt of Tartar, ana, mix, put them into a glass Retort with a wide neck, fitting to it a large Receiver; give a gradual Fire, and in short time you will have a volatile Spirit coming over the helm in Liquor, the Salt subliming into a clear substance as white as Camphir; which operati∣on will be done in about four or five hours. The volatile Salt you may dissolve in its own Spirit, and so keep both together as Spirit of Sal Am. § 12. Now Sal Am. consists of a double Nature, as we have above observed, viz. of a kind of common Salt as it were fixt; and of a volatile Salt of Urine; the mixture and union of which Salts is so strict, that it is very diffi∣cult, almost impossible, to bring them over the helm into Liquor, he one without the other, the urinous and vo∣latile carrying along with it the common and fixt Salt; without the addition of some other Body as Salt of Tartar, Pot-ashes, Calx Vive, &c.
which have the faculty to keep back the acid Salt, to let the urinous and volatile ascend. § 13. But if you would extract the acid Spi∣rit of the Sal Am. as well as its volatile; the said Le Fe∣bure does it thus: ℞ Sal Am. Quick-lime A. mix and make them into a pap with Ʋrine: then distil in a glowing red hot Iron Retort, having a Tube with a wide Mouth, and an Iron stopple; put in the matter Cochleatim at the Tube, and immediately stop it, so will the Vapours pre∣sently go into the Receiver luted to the same, which Me∣thod continue till all the In∣gredients are done: now take all this Liquor in the Recipient, put it into a glass Cucurbit a Cubit high, and narrow in the neck, cover it with an Alembick-head, and its Recipient, both well lu∣ted, and in B. M. give a gradual Fire, that all the vo∣latile Spirit, and urinous Salt may ascend; when no more will arise, put the remaining Liquor into a Retort, and rectifie it in Sand, so will you have an acid Spirit, much pleasanter than the Spirit of common Salt, and of the same Virtues; save, that being compared therewith, it as much exceeds that of common Salt, as a full-grown and perfect Man exceeds a Youth or Child. § 14. Le∣mery makes the urinous Spi∣rit thus: ℞ Sal Am. lbj. Calx Vive lbij. Pouder them apart, and when you have mixed them in a Mortar, put upon them ℥iv. of Water, which put presently into a Retort, whose half must remain em∣pty: fit to it a large Recei∣ver, lute the Junctures, and distil in Sand, beginning the distillation without Fire, for about a quarter of an hour, then make a gentle Fire, and increase it gradatim to the second degree, and continue it till nothing more comes forth; take off your Recipi∣ent, pour out the Spirit im∣mediately into a Vial, turn∣ing away your Head as much as may be, to avoid the sub∣til Vapours that continually rise: stop the Glass with a Glass stopple well ground, or with Wax. § 15. In this last Prescript here is to be ob∣served, That before distilla∣tion the Alcali of the Sea Salt had in a manner bound up the volatile Salt in the Sal Am. to loosen which, the un∣slakt Lime is added whose Alcali destroys the Acid of the Sea Salt; whence it is, that as soon as they are mix∣ed together, the volatile uri∣rinous
Spirit begins to arise and distil; which Vapours come forth so plentifully, that you could never be able to put the mixture into the Retort, should you not turn away your Head, while your Hands are at work. § 16. That the Water is added to moisten it, (which Le Febure certainly forgot in his Pre∣script) and to liquifie the volatile Salts; for if there were nothing to moisten them, they would suddenly sublime to the neck of the Retort, and stopping it alto∣gether, would break it to pieces: but the quantity of the Water seems to be too little by half: ℥viij. of Wa∣ter is the least that ought to be used. § 17. By reason of the swelling of the Lime after wetting, and the great deal of room the Spirits take to rarifie themselves in, the Re∣tort must not be above half full, and the Receiver must be very large, that they may circulate with ease. § 18. This Spirit is nothing but a solution of the volatile Salt in Water: if you would sub∣lime and separate this Salt there from, put the Spirit into a Matrass with its head, and a Receiver, lute the Joynts with a wet Bladder, and in Sand, with a gentle Fire, you may make the vo∣latile Salt ascend white as Snow; for it will sublime and stick to the top, and up∣permost parts; which sepa∣rate and keep in a Glass close stopt with a Glass stopple. This Salt being dry, more easily flies away, than when you kept it dissolved in the Water, for which cause sake it is best to keep it in a li∣quid form. § 19. This Spi∣rit made with Quick-lime is stronger than that made with Salt of Tartar, &c. because the fiery particles of the Quick-lime, quicken the motion of the volatile Salts, much more than the Salt of Tartar can do. § 20. It is also to be noted, That the Spirit of Sal Am. thus drawn with Quick-lime, being mixt with Spirit of Wine, will not coagulate; whereas that which is drawn with Salt of Tartar, &c. will. § 21. When you take away the Receiver from the Alem∣bick, have in readiness a wet cloth to stop its mouth, that its volatile Vapours may not strike your Nostrils & Brain, and so hinder respiration, and cause swooning. § 22. This volatile Spirit is also an ex∣cellent Menstruum to make precipitations with, it de∣stroys acids, as do all other volatile Alcalies, and precipi∣tates
Gold after it is dissolved. § 23. Charras makes it thus: ℞ Good Sal Am. lbj. Salt of Tartar lbj. or in its place Oak Ashes lbiv. beat them in a Mortar, and put them in a Cucurbit, in Sand: Sprinkle the mixture with Water ℥viij. then immediately, put on the Head with its Receiver, luting the Junctures well, kindle a gentle Fire, and continue it five or six hours, or till all the volatile Spirit is come over, and the Flowers are sublimed partly into the Head, and partly to the upper part of the Cucurbit, which take and keep for use. § 24. Near as soon as the Water is put in, the Salt of Tartar joyns with the Acid of the Sea Salt, so that the Sea Salt disingages itself from the Volatile Salt, thereby giving it the liberty of immediate arising, partly in the form of a dry Salt, and partly in the form of Spirit, so that you are forced as spee∣dily as may be, to cover the Cucurbit with its Head, &c. § 25. From all these Conside∣rations it evidently appears, that should Sal Am. be distil∣led alone in its own condi∣tion, when exposed to the violence of the Fire, the vola∣tile part of the Sal Am. would do violence to the acid, and sublime it, or carry it up with it, so that you would have only a mixt Flower of Sal Am. or rather Sal Am. purified, not the pure volatile alcalious Salt alone, but mixed with all its acid, &c, § 26. It is also to be observed, that thô the mixture of Quick-lime, or a fit Salt, stops the Acid or Marine Salt from ri∣sing, letting the urinous, vo∣latile part go alone, either in dry Salt or Spirit, yet the acti∣on would be very slow and feeble, did you not mix Wa∣ter with them, the more firmly to dissolve the marine Salt, and the fixed Salt, and to mix them together, ma∣king their conjunction the more facile. So that it ap∣pears, the Spirit and volatile Salt are possible to be separa∣ted without Water; but then it is more slowly, and in this case, besides strong luting of the Junctures, you must leave at least three quarters of the Cucurbit empty, &c. § 27. Besides all these ways of distilling this Spirit, you may see several others in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 30, 31, & 32. the last of which is the Colledge's own Prescription; but those of our Author, and Lemery's seem to carry away the Bell from all the rest. § 28. This vo∣latile Spirit may be given a
gut. vj. or x. ad 20. and some Authors allow it given to 30, yea to 60, in any proper Ve∣hicle, as Bawm, or Carduus Water, Aqua Lactis Alexite∣ria, &c. it is better given in some good or proper Cordial or Sudorifick Water than in Broath, because Broath being taken hot, the heat would dis∣sipate a good part of the vo∣latile Spirits, before the mix∣ture could possibly be drunk. § 29. It is given with good success in the Cure of Mali∣gnant Feavers, and all Di∣seases where Sweating is re∣quired. It is of a most pe∣netrating nature, revives A∣poplecticks and Lethargicks, resolves and attenuates the humours, takes away the stagnation of the Blood, and causes it to circulate; resists putrefaction, takes away all manner of Feavers, arising from Obstruction, and pow∣erfully removes the Obstru∣ction itself: it cures Quoti∣dians and Tertians, Plague or Pestilence, and other Di∣seases proceeding from mali∣gnity. It is said also to cure the Epilepsie, Palsie, Hyste∣rick Fits, Hypochondriack Melancholy, inveterate Head∣achs, Heart-burnings, Gouts, &c. It is attenuating, inci∣ding, resolving, penetrating, dissipating, and opening, pre∣valent against the Scurvy, and other Chronick Diseases a∣rising from a morbifick acid, making all the humours fluid, and putting them into moti∣on, whereby, what is preter∣natural, is the more fit for excretion. It is given also in Venereal Diseases, and e∣specially where Mercury has been given unseasonably, un∣skilfully, or in too great a quantity, for that this Spirit drives and forces the said Mercury, lodged in the se∣veral parts of the Body thro' the pores of the skin. It is good against Vapours ari∣sing from the lower parts, and ascending up into the Stomach and Head, as well by smelling to it, as by ta∣king it inwardly, whereby it removes Vertigo's, and o∣ther ill Accidents of the Head and Brain, which interrupt the proper course of the Spi∣rits, and the Functions of all the parts; for which reason it is proper in swooning Fits, weakness and palpitation of the Heart, and to dissipate Vapours rising from the Womb; it kills Worms, and above all things opens the passages of the Urine, pro∣vided it be mixt with some fixt Salt or Acid in a proper Vehicle. § 30. The volatile Salt has the same Vertues
with the Spirit, but must be given in smaller Dose, viz. à gr. v. ad xij, plus-minus. They sometimes cause sleep, because they dull the sharpness of acid Salts, which entering into the little Conduits of the Brain, do cause perpetual watchings. This is also to be added, viz. that as this volatile Salt and Spirit do a∣bove most other things cor∣rect and hinder putrefaction, so also they more powerfully overcome the poyson and ve∣nom of the Plague, and as well preserve from that dread∣ful Disease, as cure it, preser∣ving the Stomach also from putrefaction and corruption, which is caused by the vice and defect of the digestive faculty. In all the mention∣ed Diseases, 'tis certain that they will produce wonderful and surprizing effects. § 31. The acid Spirit distilled as be∣fore directed, is said to open all Obstructions of the lower Belly, to break and expel the Stone, and to ease the pain of the Bowels, strength∣ning them as well as the Li∣ver, Spleen, and Stomach: This Spirit will be so much the better or more powerful, if (when you mix the Sal Am. in order to drawing off its volatile urinous Spirit,) you take the equal quantities of the Pouder of Lapis He∣matitis, or Filings of Steel, and then proceed in all re∣spects, as if you had used Lime, or Salt of Tartar, to the eliciting the volatile Spi∣rit and Salt: and then from the Caput mort. to draw the Acid Spirit as before direct∣ed, which will be of a Gol∣den colour, and may be recti∣fied over a gentle Fire, to separate its flegmy parts. Dose à gut. vj. ad xij. or more in any proper Liquor. XXV. Spiritus Salis Armoni∣aci Tartarisatus, Spirits of Sal Armoniack tartarized. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Tartar, Sal Arm. ana, mix and add a tripple quantity of Water, and distil, S. A. It has the Ver∣tues of the former. Salmon.] It is the same with the former volatile urinous Spirit, and to be distilled as we have directed in the An∣notations of the former Se∣ction, and is to be given a∣gainst the same Diseases, in the same manner and dose. Note, That if to the Caput Mort. you add new Salt of Tartar, and distil again, you will have volatile Salt afresh. XXVI. Spiritus Salis Armoni∣aci Succinatus, Spirit of Sal Ammoniack with Amber. Bate.] It is made by recti∣fying the volatile Spirit of Sal
Ammoniack [whether made with Quick-lime, Salt of Tartar, or Pot-ashes] upon the fine Pouder of Amber, S. A. Salmon.] §. 1. But if you would have only a Salt suc∣cinated, you must mix the Volatile Sal Amm. with the Volatile Salt of Amber, in e∣qual parts, and so sublime according to Art. § 2. This Salt and Spirit has all the Virtues of the former simple Volatile Salt and Spirit, but with this advantage, that it is yet more powerful against the Diseases for which it is designed, but especially in all Epileptick and Hysterick Ca∣ses, and where Vapours are apt to afflict the Patient. § 3. It is also to be given in the same manner and dose. XXVII. Spiritus Salis Armo∣niaci Chalybeatus, Spirit of Sal Armoniack steeled. Bate.] ℞ It is made from the Caput Mortuum of the steeled Flowers of Sal Armo∣niack (the Sal Armoniack be∣ing first mixed with Filings of Mars) being distilled in a Retort, S. A. Dose à gut. 5. ad 15. It takes away all Obstructions, provokes Urine and the Terms; and is said to be Sudorifick. Salmon.] This is nothing but the Acid Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniack; which, in our An∣notations upon the simple Spi∣rit, at Sect. 24. above, we have taught more fully the preparation of: It pierces, is thin, diuretick, and diapho∣retick, and has been found good against: the Colick, and against the Greensickness in Virgins: give à gut. vj. ad xij. plus-minus, in Water di∣stilled from Onions, Parsly, Arsmart, Smallage, or Saxi∣frage. XXVIII. Spiritus Salis Coa∣gulatus, Spirit of Salt coa∣gulated. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Worm∣wood depurated ℥j. rectified Spirit of Salt ℥iss. mix and coagulate S. A. It is a Diu∣retick Medicament, and a Specifick Hydropick, potent∣ly expelling by Urine, all watery Humours and Wind, and all the tartarous and vis∣cous matter, from whence the Stone is generated. In the Iliack Passion, Colick, Fe∣vers, Jaundice, Bloody Flux, Apoplexy, Gout, &c. it is a present help. Dose gr. vj. ad xv. See Mynsicht. Salmon.] § 1. Mynsicht in his Thesaurus, Sect. 1. pag. 31. advises, That so much of the
Spirit may be coagulated and united with the Salt, till it prevails both in taste and strength: being brought to in just consistence, it may be kept in a Glass for use: and in this form, you may more easily carry it up and down in travelling, than you can Spirit of Salt alone by itself. § 2. It is a most excellent Medicine, having a Balsa∣mick property, renovating the whole Man. It purifies the Blood, comforts the Head, Heart, and Stomach; opens Obstructions of Liver and Spleen; it incides, discusses, mundifies, and resists putre∣faction. § 3. Besides also, it is a more efficacious Diure∣tick, and so specifick an Hy∣dropick, that it admirably expels by the urinary parts, all preternatural Humidities and Wind, and the whole tartarous and viscous matter, from whence the Stone, and Gravel, and the lapidiscent Concretions in the Gout are produced. § 4. Our Author commends it also against the Palsie, the Leprosie, Worms, whether in old or young, Ru∣ptures the English Sweating-sickness Plague, and all man∣ner of Poyson, as a speedy help in time of need. § 5. It may be given in the Dose a∣bove mentioned, in any ap∣propriate or specifick Vehi∣cle: In the Dropsie (Univer∣sals being premised) in Aqua Absinthii, mixt with an equal quantity of Spirit of Eider∣flowers, continuing it daily, till the Dropsie and Tympa∣ny (which will in a little time) vanishes. XXIX. Spiritus Salis Mar∣tialis, Steeled Spirit of Salt Gem. Bate.] ℞ Sal Gem. p. j. Mars, p. ij. mix and distil by a Retort, S. A. Dose à gut. 5. ad 15. It is diuretick, and wonderfully aperitive or o∣pening. Salmon.] § 1. It is made as Spirit of common Salt, and indeed is nothing but Spirit of Salt impregnated with the virtue, power, and efficacy of the Steel or Iron, and the most volatile parts thereof, which are dissolved by the Acid of the Salt, and made to ascend with it. § 2. It may be dulcified after this man∣ner: ℞ Of this steeled Spirit lbj. Alcohol of the Spirit of Wine lbiss. mix and digest a week, shaking the glass once a day: being thus sweetned by digestion with Spirit of Wine, it is more balsamick, and na∣tural to the Body of Man. § 3. It strengthens and forti∣fies
the Stomach, potently re∣sists the Scurvy and Green-sickness in Virgins; opens all manner of Obstructions in Liver, Spleen, Womb, Reins, or Bladder, expels watery Humours and Wind, and is of singular use against the Colick. It increases the Ap∣petite, and causes a good di∣gestion. ℞ Of this Spirit à gut. 6. ad 20. White-wine, or Canary ℥iv. ad vj. Tincture of Wormwood gut. xxx. mix for a Dose; to be given either at Night going to Bed, or early in the Morning fasting: where Note, That if it be dulcified with Spirit of Wine, you may give it from 15 drops, to 50, or 60, as you see need requires. XXX. Spiritus Sambuci, Spi∣rit of Elder-berries. Bate.] It is distilled from the fermented Berries, as you distil Spirit of Hyssop, &c. It is Alexipharmick, Cardiack; Sudorifick, and Uerine. Dose a spoonful or two, &c. Salmon.] § 1. You must take the Berries and bruise them well, then put them into a wooden Vessel; to every gallon of which, you must add of course Sugar, or Melussos lbj. to ha∣sten the fermentation, which ought to be continued so long, till the Liquor has acquired a vinous scent; then put it into a Copper Vesica tinn'd within, with its Worm and Recipient, and draw off the Spirit with a gentle Fire: draw off the quarter part, which save by itself as the best and strongest Spirit; and is to go by the name of Spirit of Elder: then changing the Receiver draw off about as much more, which keep by itself, under the title of Elder-water. § 2. This Water you may reserve for making of new Spirit, putting it into fresh bruised Berries, (but after the fermen∣tation, least you lose the vo∣latile parts thereof before you distil it) and draw off the Spirit as before; and then the Elder-water, which you may save for a supplement to the next Spirit. § 3. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Of this Spirit ℥j. Juniper, or Parsley-water ℥ij. Syrup of Lemons ℥ss. mix for a Dose, against Obstru∣ctions of the Reins and Blad∣der. ℞ Of this Spirit ℥j. Tincture of Castor ʒj. White-wine or Sherry ℥iv, mix for a Dose, against Distempers of the Womb. ℞ Of this Spi∣rit ℥j. Spirit of Sal Armoniack gut. 20. Spirit of Scurvy-grass gut. 10. Camomil-water ℥iv. mix for a Dose, against the Pleurisie.
XXXI. Spiritus Sanguinis, Spirit of Man's Blood. Bate.] Distil it from the Blood of a sound young Man, putrefied, in Sand, and then rectifie it, S. A. It is chiefly commended against the Epi∣lepsie, or Falling-sickness, ra∣dically taking it away; as also against the Palsie, Apo∣plexy, Ulcers of the Lungs, &c. Dose à gut. 10. ad 20. and more, for a whole Month. Salmon.] § 1. Because it is really necessary to understand the way of distilling Humane Blood, we shall here parti∣cularly explicate and exem∣plifie the process. ℞ Of the Blood of a sound young Man q. v. put it into a large Glass Body, upon which put some two or three handfuls of Hemp, to prevent its rising or swel∣ling into the Head or Alem∣bick▪ lute the Junctures well, giving a gentle and gradual Fire in Ashes or Sand, distil to driness, but beware of burn∣ing; so have you Water and Spirit, which you must rectifie in B. M. § 2. With the Wa∣ter you may extract the Salt out of the Caput Mortuum; af∣ter due Calcination; the Spi∣rit you may preserve as it is, as an excellent Remedy a∣gainst the Falling-sickness, and Convulsion Fits in Chil∣dren, and may be given à ʒss. to ʒj. thus: ℞ Of this Spirit ʒj. Water of Earth∣worms, Lilly Convally, Laven∣der, or Peony ℥ij. or iij. Syrup of Peony ʒij. mix for a Dose. § 3. Now here is to be noted, that this Spirit would yet be stronger and better, if you cohobate it upon the faeces several times in a Retort, viz. Eight or nine times, or till it has got a Ruby colour, and that the Oyl comes at last with its volatile Salt, sticking to the neck of the Glass, or sides of your Recipient; then to mix it with the Spirit, and joyn them together by distil∣lation in B. M. § 4. This is that Spirit so much cried up for the cure of the Palsie, be∣ing inwardly taken à gut. vj. ad xij. or xx. in Broath, De∣coction, or generous Wine: what remains at the bottom of this Glass Body, after the Cohobations, being calcin'd, you may extract the Salt out of, as before directed. § 5. The Oyl you may rectifie upon Colcothar in Sand, in a Retort, till you find it thin, subtil, and penetrative, with which mix the fixed Salt, and digest till they are per∣fectly united: thus have you an excellent Balsam to ease
the Gout in Hands or Feet, and to remove the tumour and redness thereof; it sof∣tens, dissipates, yea, and dis∣solves the chalky Concretions, which are bred in the Joynts in that Disease; as also pocky Nodes, Tophs, Gums, and Swellings, the Body being beforehand prepared by ta∣king some few Doses of our Aurum Vitae. § 6. In defect of Man's Blood, you may make use of Sheeps, Goats, Swines, or Neats-blood, and distil it in the same manner as Humane Blood; for in per∣fect Animals, the natural di∣gestions are performed in the same manner, and their Blood is endowed with nearly the same Virtues, save that Hu∣mane Blood may be thought to be more homogenial to our Natures. § 7. Rolfincius Ar∣tis Chimicae, Lib. 5. Sect. 1. Art. 4. Cap. 2. makes it af∣ter this manner: ℞ The Blood newly gathered, dry it gently in an Oven, so that be∣ing freed from the Flegm, there may be lbxij. put it into a Retort, and distil with an open Fire, so have you first a Spirit, after a volatile Salt, then a thick Oyl: The Fire being out, and the Vessels cooled, gather the yellow Salt moistned with the Oyl; and after the white and cry∣stalline, (which is indeed but little) that adheres to the lightest part of the Recipient. The Spirit impregnated with much Salt separate from the Oyl, and the more sincere or pure Spirit, mixed with the former volatile Salt, re∣ctifie by an Alembick, keep∣ing the pure white Salt by it self for use. The residue of the Liquor which remains, distil through the Alembick, and keep by itself. Lastly, Because you cannot distil to driness without danger of breaking the Glass Body: affuse thereon Spirit of Wine rectified, so will it ascend white, pellucid, and of a grateful flavour. This Salt and Spirit have one and the same Virtues, and are ad∣mirable Diaphoreticks to be used in all burning, ma∣lign, and pestilential Fea∣vers. Dose à gr. iij. ad viij. in Broth, or a Draught of Wine. § 8. Maets makes it thus: ℞ Blood of a sound Man, and dry it, adding as much rectified Spirit of Salt as the Serum weighed; evaporate to driness again: of this Blood thus dried, take p. j. white Rhenish Tartar, p. v. mix ex∣actly and distil: separate the stinking Oyl from the Spirit, the Oyl rectifie upon Glawber's Sal Mirabilis Calcinatum, or
upon common Salt calcined, or decripetated; rectifie it so long, till it becomes clear and limpid, leaving a black Earth at bottom of the Retort: to this Oyl add Alcohol of Spirit of Wine, p. iv. and distil them together till they are perfectly united. So have you a most subtil and fiery Spirit of Hu∣mane Blood, of which you may give à gut. 20. ad 40. but of the former Spirit to a much larger Dose. § 9. He also makes it thus: ℞ Man's Blood dried, p. j. Calx of Flints, p. ij. or decripitated Salt: mix and distil by a Re∣tort, so have you Spirit and Oyl, which separate by filtring; the volatile Salt adhering to the Receiver and Neck of the Retort, gather and rectifie or depurate it, as you do volatile Salt of Harts-horn: the Oyl rectifie as before, the volatile Salt dissolve in the Spirit, and keep it for use. § 10. It is made also after this manner: ℞ Man's Blood, q. v. put it into a sublimatory Vial, and digest it in Horse-dung for for∣ty days; then draw off the Spi∣rit with a very gentle Fire. This volatile Spirit is a great Arcanum in the cure of the Falling-sickness. § 11. Marg∣grave makes it thus: ℞ Man's Blood ℥xxx. distil it in a low Cucurbit in Sand, for six or eight hours, augmenting the Fire strongly in the end, till nothing more will come forth: first there ascends ℥xv. of a limpid Liquor: then follows ℥ix. of a turbid Liquor: con∣joyn both, and affuse them the next day upon the Caput Mort. and distil again as be∣fore to driness; do this once or twice more, till the Liquor a∣scends turbid, with some lit∣tle drops of Oyl swimming in it: Separate the Oyl by a Funnel, and rectifie the Li∣quor, so as to abstract on∣ly five or six Ounces, of which the Dose is gut. x. ad xx. against the Epilepsie, and most other Diseases of the Brain, Nerves, and Womb, Hysterick Fits, &c. XXXII. Spiritus Saturni, Spirit of Saturn. Bate.] It is distilled by a Retor from purified and recti∣fied Saccharum Saturni, S. A. It is sudorifick, good against the Plague or Pestilence, Hy∣pochondriack Melancholy, Burning Fevers, French-Pox, and the like. Dose gut. ij. or iij. Salmon.] This Spirit of Sa∣turn, drawn from its Salt, is an inslamable Liquor, and is thus made: ℞ Salt of Sa∣turn, so much as may fill your
Glass or Earthen Retort two thirds full; put it into a Fur∣nace over a very gentle Fire, both to heat the Retort, and drive out the Flegm, (which comes first:) continue this de∣gree of Fire, till the drops be∣gin to have some taste; then fit to it a large Receiver, lute well the Junctures, and increase the Fire gradatim, so will the Spirit come forth, filling the Receiver with Clouds: all be∣ing come off, let the Vessels cool, then unlute, and take the Spi∣rit and put it into a Glass Cu∣curbit, to rectifie it, in a very gentle Sand heat, drawing off about the one half thereof: this is the inflamable Spirit of Saturn, burning like Spirit of Wine, and of a sowre taste, Quemque inter non entia re∣ponit Rolfincius; but I think him to be mistaken. § 2. The other half of the Liquor which remains in the Alem∣bick, they call (tho' impro∣perly) Oyl of Saturn, and is used to cleanse and clear the Eyes of Horses. § 3. The blackish matter remaining in the Retort, being put into a Crucible upon a good Fire, will reassume the form of Lead, being deprived of the Acids which gave it the form of Salt. § 4. The Salt of Sa∣turn may also be revived into Lead, by mixing it with an Alcaly, and melting it as a∣foresaid in a good Fire, for that the Alcali absorbs the Acid, and as much enervates it, as if it were drawn off; but then it will flame, before it revives, because of the Spirit of Wine contained in the Vinegar, which convert∣ed the Lead into Ceruse. § 5. The Spirit of Saturn there∣fore is inflamable, because it contains some Spirit of Wine, which remains still involved in the Vinegar, and was car∣ried with the Acids into the Pores of the Lead, when the Saccharum Saturni was made. This Salt being distilled, the force of the Fire breaks the Acid, and sets the Spirit of Wine at liberty; so that the Spirit of Saturn has very lit∣tle of an acid taste in it. § 6. It is also to be observed, that if you take lbj. or ℥xvj. of the Saccharum, you will have by distillation in the Retort, about 3¼ ounces of Liquor, or Spirit, and yet there will be left in the Retort (which is the wonder) about eighteen ounces of a blackish matter, so that here an augmentation is evident: Now the quantity of Lead in the Saccharum: And if you re∣duce the eighteen ounces of black Matter into Lead, in a Crucible, you will have of
Lead ℥10¾; and ℥ij. of a yel∣low Earth, like Litharge of Gold, which seems to be an impurity of the Lead. § 7. Hence it is apparent, that the Saccharum, as by distillation it loses its acid particles, it receives others, which are igneous, in; more in num∣ber, and greater in quantity or weight, as appears by the operation: but when again it is reduced in a Crucible into Lead, the particles of the Lead coming together into a Body, expel the fiery par∣ticles, so that the Lead revi∣ving as before, recovers but its first weight. § 8. The Retort ought scarcely to be ⅔ full, and the Receiver ought to be very large, because these volatile Spirits flying out with violence, if they should not have room enough to play in, might possibly break the Vessels. § 9. Le Febure makes it after this manner: ℞ Pure Crystalline Saccharum Saturni lbj. dis∣solve it seven times one after another in the best Spirit of Vinegar, evaporating every time: then in the hottest Sea∣son of the Year dissolve it in a cold Cellar, per deliquium, this Liquor put into a Retort placed in a Reverberatory Fur∣nace upon an earthen Pot, the bottom turned upside down, ha∣ving about an inch thickness of Sand or Ashes between the said bottom and Retort: fit to the neck a very large Receiver, lu∣ting the Juncture with all pos∣sible care; which being dry, make a gentle Fire at first, and very slowly increase it, till the Receiver is totally filled with white Vapours, but by degrees augment it to the height, and when you see hea∣vy and red drops fall down, and that the Receipient grows clear of itself, (which will be in a∣bout twenty or twenty four hours) cease, or put out the Fire. § 10. This Liquor di∣stilled over into the Receiver, is four-fold, viz. 1. A subtil and volatile Spirit. 2. A yel∣low Oyl. 3. A Phlegm. 4. A red Oyl, which you must separate one from ano∣ther by rectification, thus: § 11. Put them into a clean glass Retort in B.M. or Sand, with its Recipient, changing the Receiver according to the change of the Liquors coming over. The Volatile and Ae∣therial Spirits come first thrô the neck of the Retort, with∣out framing any Veins there∣in: next follows the yellow Oyl, which makes oblique and winding Veins; as soon as which sign does appear, the Receiver must be chan∣ged: After the yellow Oyl
comes the Flegm in streight and direct Veins, which must also be taken away by itself: And lastly, In the bottom of the Retort you will find the red Oyl remaining. § 12. This Volatile Spirit of Saturn resists putrefaction of the Blood and Humours, and cures Hypochondriack Me∣lancholy (given for twenty or thirty days together); it is a wonderful Sudorifick, and therefore is excellent against the Plague, pestilential and burning Fevers, Palsie, Epi∣lepsie, Apoplexy, French-Pox, Frenzy, Madness, and other like Diseases afflicting Body or Mind, or both. Dose à gut. 8. ad 16. or 20. in any appro∣priated Vehicle. § 13. The yellow Oyl being digested upon Calx of Gold, or Crocus Solis in a gentle heat of a Bal. Va∣poroso, in a Circulatory Ves∣sel hermetically sealed, will become as red as Blood; and then be a great Arcanum a∣gainst all Griefs of the Heart and Brain, being given à gut. j. ad iv. in Spirit of Lilly Convally, Canary, or other proper Liquor. § 14. The red. Oyl being circulated with e∣qual parts of Oyl of Camphir, and tartariz'd Spirit of Wine for fifteen or twenty days, or longer, and then the S. V. ab∣stracted with a very gentle heat in B. M. you will have remaining a miraculous Balsa∣mick Essence, which will cure green Wounds in a day or two, at once dressing, being only slightly besmeared with a Feather dipt therein; and is besides profitable for the cure of the most inveterate Ulcers, dissolves and resolves all Swellings, hinders Acci∣dents in Wounds, wonder∣fully cures Fistula's, and growing Cancers, as also takes away Scurf, Morphew, and Leprosie, and restores a∣gain pined and withered Members; for it is a kind of Mummial Balsam impregna∣ted with the Sulphur of Sa∣turn. XXXIII. Spiritus Spongia∣rum, Spirit of Sponges. Bate.] It is distilled from Sponges by a Retort, and recti∣fied, S. A. It is a singular Lithontriptick. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ As much Sponge as you please, cut it ve∣ry small, put it into a glass Retort, which place in a close Reverberatory, with its Recei∣ver; lute the Juncture well, and give Fire Gradatim, like as in the distillation of Tartar: and continue to increase it by little and little, till the white and oily clouds begin to come,
and that you see the volatile Salt does sublime and stick to the sides of the Receiver: con∣tinue the Fire in the same de∣gree till all is come forth, and the Receiver grows clear of it self. § 2. Then cease the Fire, and all being cold, take away the Vessels, pour out the Spirit and volatile Salt together, and separate the Oyl by a Funnel, or some Cot∣ton, which keep in a Glass by itself. § 3. Put the Spirit and Volatile Salt into a low Glass Body, and rectifie them in Sand, keeping them toge∣ther: The Sponge also cal∣cin'd at the bottom of the Retort after distillation, you may save for to stop violent fluxes of Blood. § 4. This Spirit, volatile Salt, and Oyl of Sponges, are not only of excellent use against the Stone and Gravel, or any o∣ther Obstruction in the Reins and Bladder, or other passa∣ges of Urine, but are also profitable against strumous or scrophulons Swellings, and the Disease called, Broncoceles, which is a Bunch or Swel∣ling in the Throat: for they not only admirably open, but also by their acuity of parts, attenuate and resolve much. § 5. Against the Stone and Diseases of the Reins and Bladder, you may use them thus: ℞ Of the Spirit, in which the volatile Salt is dis∣solved ʒj. Aquae Fabarum, or in place thereof Petroselini, ℥iij. Syrupus Nephriticus, or in place thereof Dialthaea ʒij. Pouder of Winter Cherries ʒss. mix for three Doses. § 6. But for a Broncoceles, or Kings-Evil thus: First, Purge the Patient with my Family-Pills, or Pilulae Panchymagogae, or Pilulae Mirabiles, or some o∣ther Purge proper in this case, as this: ℞ Fine Scammony gr. xvj. Resin of Jallap, gr. viij. Colocynthis in Pouder ℈ij. mix, and with extract of Co∣locynthis, make Pills for iij. Doses. Or you may purge with a simple Extract of Co∣locynthis alone, made only with common Water, which is an admirable thing, and works well in gr. vj. or viij. This Purging is to be conti∣nued all along the Cure, eve∣ry fourth or fifth day, till the Swelling is wholly gone. § 7. Then you must anoint outwardly with this: ℞ Oyl of Sponges ʒj. Oyl of bit∣ter Almonds ℥j. mix them to anoint with Morning and Evening, applying over all an Emplaster of Oxycroce∣um, or Diachylon, or some such like. § 8. Lastly, Give the Patient every Morning fasting, and every Night go∣ing
to Bed, the Spirit mixt with the volatile Salt, after this manner: ℞ Of the Spi∣rit à gut. xij. ad xx. or xxiv. Arsmart Water ℥iij. Syrupi Volatilis ʒvj. mix for a Dose: Or, giving the said mixture at Night going to Bed, give these following Lozenges, one every Morning fasting: ℞ Of the strongest fine Sugar ℥iv. Calx of the Sponge aforemen∣tioned ʒij. Crocus martis a∣stringens ʒiij. Long Pepper ʒj. mix, and make Lozenges, weighing each ʒiiss. which dry and keep for use. By follow∣ing this course constantly, you will evidently and daily see these Scrophulous, Strumatick, and Bronchocele Tumours to decrease, and vanish to no∣thing. § 9. In what Classis to place Sponge, Authors have scarcely determined; some thinking it to be neither Ve∣getable, Mineral, nor Animal; others thinking it to partici∣pate of them all: others place it between Animals and Vegetables, affirming it to partake of both of them; for that, say they, it has an active quality to dilate itself, and shrink up together when it is in the Sea, whereby it en∣joys a tenebrous life, coming near to that of an Animal, and to that of a Plant, whence they will have it a Zoophyton, or Plant Animal. XXXIV. Spiritus Tabaccae, Spirit of Tobacco. Bate.] It is distilled as that of Amber, from the dried Leaves. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiij. for Vomiting. Salmon.] § 1. In handling this Preparation, I hope we shall evidently demonstrate, That Chimical Physicians are not contented simply with the superficies, or outside of things, but aim at a farther scrutiny, viz. to open them, and to penetrate into their insides, and very centers, thereby to find out the whole of what they do contain, separating the pure and virtuous parts, the Spirit, Oyl, and volatile Salt, viz. the Potestates, or Powers, from their impure, faeculent, and earthy parts, that so they may the more aptly be appropriated and applied to the cure of the Diseases of Humane kind. § 2. ℞ Of the best Spanish Tobacco cut small lbj. or ℥xvj. put upon it an equal weight of Flegm of Vitriol, put on the Cucurbit or Vesica its Head, digest in Sand for a day or two; fit to it a Receiver, and distil about ten ounces of Li∣quor by a gentle Fire, which keep in a Vial by itself. This is a powerful Vomit, and may
be given à ʒij. ad vj. in some fit Vehicle; outwardly it is good also to bathe Tettars, Ring-worms, Itch, and such like with. § 3. Put the Ma∣gma in the Cucurbit into an Earthen, or Glass Retort luted, place it in a Furnace with a large Receiver, well luting the Juncture, begin with a small Fire to raise the Flegm, which augment gradatim, and the Spirits will come forth confu∣sedly with a black Oyl; con∣tinue the Fire till all is come over, then cool the Vessels, and unlute them: what you have in the Recipient, put into a Funnel lined with brown Paper, so will the watery and spirituous parts pass through, leaving the black foetid Oyl in the Paper or Filter. § 4. This Spirit is not usual to be taken inward∣ly; outwardly you may use it thus: ℞ Pure yellow Palm Oyl ℥ij. of this Spirit ʒj. mix them. It cures Itch, Tettars, Ring-worms, by anointing therewith. § 5. The Oyl is too violent to be given in∣wardly, and therefore some use it outwardly thus: ℞ Lapis infernalis q. v. Oyl of Tobacco, so much as will make an Oyntment, which keep in a dry place. Anoint the pit of the Stomach with gr. v. or vj. and the Patient will pre∣sently vomit; but if you would move the Body down∣wards, anoint about the Na∣vel therewith, and the sick will presently fall a purging; where note, 1. That the sick ought to take some warm Broath, or Posset-drink in the working. 2. That the Oynt∣ment is not to lie so long as to cauterize the part to which it is applied. § 6. But the greatest external use of this Oyl, is, to consolidate new Wounds, and to cure Cacoe∣thick Ulcers, and to remove all the Accidents of Contusions: because it potently resolves the extravasated Blood, and hinders the heat and infla∣mation, which are always previous to a putrefaction. It is good also against the Tooth-ache, and to dissipate the chalky knots proceeding from the Gout, and to dis∣solve pocky Gums, Nodes, and Tophs, thus: ℞ Palm Oyl ℥ij. Oyl of Tobacco ʒij. mix for an Oyntment, for the a∣foresaid purpose. § 7. This Oyl is best unrectified, for now it contains both Oyl and volatile Salt, which in conjunction produce those rare effects; whereas being rectified it loses much of the said volatile Salt, and be∣comes less effectual. Dr. French makes Lozenges of
this unrectified Oyl thus: ℞ Of the strongest refined Sugar ss. Oyls of Resemary, and Rhodium ana gut. xxxij. Oyl f Nutmegs by Expression ʒj. Oyl of Tobacco, gut. xxx. or ss, mix and make Lozenges, ach weighing a dram; which s a Dose, about half a grain of the Oyl being in each Lo∣enge. One of these being aken (says he) every Morn∣ng, or every other Morning, eeps the Body soluble, and s good for such as are apt to e costive. § 8. I must con∣ess, I like not much the ta∣ing of this unrectified Oyl nwardly; for by reason of he peircing sulphur, and vo∣atile Salt which it contains, it as soon as ever it gets into he stomach) falls a pricking he fibres with violence, and n weak persons may endan∣ger Convulsions: yea, this Oyl is so great a Vomit, that olding but ones nose a little over the Vial containing it, it mmediately puts the sto∣mach upon a convulsive mo∣ion. § 9. A few drops be∣ng instilled into the Veins of  Dog's Leg, presently put he Dog into Convulsions and Vomiting, and in a short time fter kill'd him; from which t appears, that if it be ever given inwardly, it would doubtless be best to rectifie it by distillation, thereby to take away in a great mea∣sure its Empyreuma. § 10. Then (say Authors) it may be given with happy success a∣gainst Suffocations, Fits of the Mother, Risings, Vapours, In∣flations, and Irritations of the Spleen, which cause shortness of breath, by reason of the compression of the Diaphra∣gma, or Midriff. It is good also against intermitting Fea∣vers, given a little before the Fit comes; and is a good Antepileptick Remedy, exhi∣bited upon the Full of the Moon, two or three days be∣fore and after in Spir. Theri∣acalis camphorated, volatile Spirit of Harts-horn, or Mix∣tura Simplex. § 11. In gi∣ving this Oyl, (if not made up into Lozenges) you must drop it upon pure white Su∣gar, à gut. ij. ad iv. and then mix it with any appropriate Vehicle; for example, against an Epilepsy: ℞ Mixtura Simplex ʒj. of this Oyl gut ij. ad iv. dropt into white Sugar: Bawm Water ℥iij. Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers ʒvj. mix for a Dose. Against intermitting Feavers you may give it thus: ℞ Spir, Theriacli ʒj. of this Oyl, gut. iij. or iv. Centaury Water ℥iv. Syrup of Citron-peels ℥j. mix for a Dose. § 12. But as this Oyl is not often
given inwardly, except upon great necessities, when no o∣ther Remedies are to be found; so being reserved for external uses, it is best with∣out rectifying, and so is much more powerful to the intenti∣ons proposed, as then com∣prehending within it, its vo∣latile Salt, which being recti∣fied, it will be in the greatest part deprived of. § 13. From the Faeces in the Retort by Calcination and Elixiviation, &c. you may have a fixed Salt, or Alkali; but in ma∣king of it, it will be good to get a larger quantity of Ash∣es, that you may have it the more plentifully. § 14. This Salt is said to possess all the Virtues of the Plant, besides which, it mundifies and heals, and is very gentle being ap∣plied to foul and running Ul∣cers, and upon their callous sides, which hinder Cicatri∣zing: taken inwardly in Broath, it gently moves the Belly, kills Worms, and ex∣pels all other Corruptions in the Stomach and Entrails: It is Sudorifick, Diuretick, and Deopilative, removing all Obstructions in parts ad∣jacent to the Ventricle, chief∣ly those of the Mesentery and Pincreas, and takes away all the Impurities of the Womb. The Dose is à gr. iv. ad xx in any appropriated Liquor. § 15. Le Febure makes this Spirit and Oyl thus: ℞ To∣bacco cut small lbiv. put it in∣to a Glass Retort in a Rever∣beratory Furnace, upon the Co∣ver of an Earthen Pot turned upside down, and kept up upon two Iron Bars, putting two or three handfuls of Sand or A∣shes thereon, to hinder the tou∣ching of the Earthen Pot and Retort, and prevent its break∣ing: cover the Furnace, and lute on the Recipient, which being dry, kindle the Fire, in∣creasing it gradually by little and little, till the Recipient begins to be filled with Clouds and Vapours; then keep the Fire in an equality till the Glass it freed from fumes, which done, give the last and extream degree of Fire, that the Tobac∣co may calcine, and no volatile, saline, or oleaginous substance may remain behind: when the Recipient grows clear, and no more comes over, let the Fie go out, take the Recei∣ver, and shaking all together, pour it out into a Funnel li∣ned with brown Paper, so will the Spirit filtrate through the Paper, leaving the Oyl behind, as afore directed. § 16. This Spirit you ought to rectifie in a Glass Cucur∣bit from its Flegm; and be∣ing so rectified, it is full of
volatile Salt, whereby it is powerful to deterge, attenu∣ate, and dissolve whatever is against Nature, of what qua∣lity soever, and in what part soever contained. It is pro∣fitable against Asthma's, and other Oppressions of the Breast and Lungs, proceed∣ing from a tartarous matter, which it truly and specifical∣ly dissolves. It works by Spitting, Urine, and Sweat, and also provokes Vomiting according to the matter it meets with: outwardly it pu∣rifies, cleanses, and heals cal∣lous and cancerous Ulcers; and above all, admirably cures Fistula's; it is also ex∣cellent above many other things for fresh Wounds and Contusions, if mixt with U∣rine, and then part washt therewith, and afterwards applied warm upon the woun∣ded part. It also cures the Crystaline Bladder arising on the end of the Yard, in the French Disease, which is one of the most pernicious Sym∣ptoms that can happen, it ap∣peases the pain, resolves pow∣erfully the venemous matter which causes it, and prevents the mortal consequences at∣tending it. § 17. It may be given inwardly in any Speci∣fick Decoction or Water, or in Broth, Hydromel, or Wine, as you see convenient; and the design is from gut. iij. ad xx. according to the age and strength of the Patient. § 18. The Oyl aforementioned you may rectifie in this manner: ℞ The Caput Mort. before the Salt is extracted, pouder it, and therewith mix the Oyl, till you have made it into a mass or lump; put it into a Retort, and in a Sand Furnace, draw off the Oyl; so will it be very pure and subtil; which keep for the inward uses afore∣mentioned. Tobacco is a won∣derful Plant, and admirable uses may be made of it in the curing of many Diseases, if a wise Man has it in hand. § 19. Clissus Peti, The Powers of Tobacco, are made (accord∣ing to Le Febure) out of the three Principles of the Plant, viz. the Mercury, or Spirit; Sulphur or Oyl, and Salt, mixt together in a fit proportion, and digested till an inseparable union is made; which will be more absolute and perfect, if they be drawn over the helm to∣gether, and several times coho∣bated. This is a much more efficacious remedy than any of the three Principles sepa∣rated; and therefore the Dose must be less in proportion.
XXXV. Spiritus Theriacalis camphoratus, The Treacle Spirit camphorated. Bate.] ℞ Venice Treacle ℥v. best Myrrh ʒx. English Saf∣fron ℥ss. Camphir ʒij. best re∣ctified Spirit of Wine ℥x. di∣gest and distil in B. M. coho∣bating thrice, S. A. It is of egregious use in all malign Diseases; it provokes Sweat, and resist Poyson. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒj. &c. Salmon.] § 1. Rolfincius Ar∣tis Chimiae, Lib. 3. Sect. 1. Art. 2. Cap. 23. has this pre∣script in a differing propor∣tion, viz. ℞ Venice Treacle ℥v. choice Myrrh, ʒxx. Saf∣fron ℥ss Camphir ʒij. Spirit of Wine ℥xx. by which you may perceive that in this the Myrrh and S. V. are com∣pleatly doubled, and he makes the distillation in a Sand heat, but this in B. M. is much the best, for so the Spirit will have no Empyreuma or smatch of burning. § 2. It has the power of inciding, attenua∣ting, and resisting malignity; by the tenuity and subtily of its substance it immediately penetrates the universal Bo∣dy without any trouble.  est, malignitatem per sudorem dispellens. It has a place amongst the greatest of Cordials, is good against fainting and swooning Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, the Colick, Wind in the Bowels, and all sorts of burning and malign Feavers, but chiefly against the Contagion of the Plague or Pestilence. § 3. The Dose of it in way of Cure may be ad ʒij. but in way of Prevention ad ℈ij. in generous Wine, or some o∣ther appropriate Liquor; but some Authors allow it to be given to an Ounce in a pro∣per Vehicle. § 4. Charras in his Royal Pharmacopoeia makes a Treacle Spirit after this man∣ner: ℞ Of the best Venice Treacle ℥v. Roots of Angelica, of Master-wort, of Spignel A∣thamantick, and Valerian the greater, A. ℥iij. ʒvj. Seeds of Bishops-weed, and Seseli, A. ʒx. Spirit of Wine rectified lbij. the Roots and Seeds bruised, digest eight days in S. V. then distil in B. M. S. A. This, if you please, you may make camphorated with three drams of Camphire. § 5. It has the Virtues of the former, and powerfully resists and sorts of Poysons, and may be given a ʒj. ad ʒiv. in Canary, or any other Cordial Liquor: Some drops of it being dropt upon the palms of the hands, may be gently rubbed toge∣ther, and then immediately
drawn up the Nostrils a∣gainst the pain of the Head, Megrim, or other Distem∣pers of the Brain, as also ap∣plied to the Temples and Su∣tures of the Skull, and Pit of the Stomach. XXXVI. Spiritus Veneris, Spirit of Venus, or Cop∣per. Bate.] It is distilled by a Retort from the Vitriol of Ve∣nus, S. A. It is the greatest Arcanum for the Cure of the Epilepsy, it corroborates the Ventricle, corrects Crudities, warms a cold Womb, cures the Suffocation thereof, or Fits of the Mother, moves or provokes the Courses, and strengthens the Reins to per∣form their duty. Dose à gut. v. ad. x. Salmon.] § 1. In Our Do∣ron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Sect. 19. we have given you a full and large description of the Spirit of Venus, shewing you its compleat Preparation, as well as its Virtues, Uses, and Dose. But there are se∣veral other ways of preparing thereof, which we now come to declare. § 2. Spiritus & Crocus Veneris Marg-gravii. ℞ Verdigrise in fine Pouder lbss. put it into a Glass Retort, and distil in Sand with Fire of the third degree, for five or six hours, or till no more will come forth; so will you have ℥iv. of Liquor. Take this di∣stilled Liquor, and distil it by a Glass Retort to driness, so have you Spirit of Venus recti∣fied and pure, which Zwelfer calls the Liquor Alcahest. The Caput Mort. left in the first di∣stillation, edulcorate, or wash oftentimes with warm Water, and dry it; so have you Cro∣cus Veneris. § 3. This Spirit or Alkahest or Zwelfer is an admirable dissolvent of Mars, Venus, Corals, and other Stones; being taken into the Body, it attenuates gross humors, and opens all manner of Obstru∣ctions, taking away the vi∣scosity of the passages, it strengthens the Stomach and created dries and astringes, stops Haemorrhagies, and is used in drying and astringing Oyntments and Emplasters. §. 4. Maets makes it after this manner: ℞ Verdigrise, or rather Crystals of Venus, q. v. to which add a half part of A∣lum calcined, (i. e. of the Ca∣put Mort. after its Spirit is drawn off) mix and distil in an earthen Retort, or a Glass one well luted in an open Fire, till all the Fumes cease, which Spirit rectifie from its flegm, as before directed. § 5. This
Spirit is an egregious Men∣struum for extracting the Tinctures from the Glass of Antimony, as also from its Minera, and the Crocus's and Calces of other Metals, ex∣ceeding indeed all other Spi∣rits of Vinegars. § 6. Lemery makes it thus: ℞ Crystals of Venus q. v. put them into a Glass Retort, filling it ⅔ full, place it in Sand, fit to it a large Receiver, lute well the Juncture, and give a small Fire at first, to drive out the insipid Flegm, after which will follow a volatil Spirit. Aug∣ment the Fire gradatim, and the Recipient will fill with white Clouds; towards the latter end, kindle Coals round about the Retort, encreasing the Fire to the last degree, to force over all the Spirits. When the Clouds disappear, and the Recipient grows cool, put out the Fire, unlute and decant the distilled Spirit into a Glass Body, drawing off the Spirit again to driness: this is Spirit of Venus rectified. § 7. It is a Specifick against the Epilep∣sy, Palsie, Apolexy, and o∣ther Diseases of the Head and Brain: it may be given à gut. v. ad x. or xij. in any convenient Vehicle. The black mass at bottom may be revi∣ved into Copper, if put into a Cucurbite in a fire of fusion, with a little Saltpeter, or Tartar. § 8. In making this Spirit from the Crystals of Ve∣nus, you will have ℥viij. from xvj. of the Vitriol, ℥viij. of Caput Mort. remaining be∣hind. § 9. And thô Zwelfer says, that this Spirit will dis∣solve Coral and Pearl with∣out loosing any thing of its force or strength, so that when you would use the same numerical Spirit again, it shall do again the same operation upon new matter, yet Experience has not con∣firmed this assertion; for thô it may come off from the dis∣solved matter with a great deal of sharpness, yet has it lost a great part of its acidity wherein the force of the Men∣struum lay: and by many reiterated Operations upon new matter Operations upon new matter, it will come off at length very weak, and al∣most insipid. § 10. Charras makes it thus: ℞ Crystals of Venus made of Verdigrise, af∣fuse on them (in fine Pouder) S. V. rectified, so much as may overtop it four inches, which in a Sand heat abstract, and cohobate twice or thrice more, to qualifie the Acrimony of the Vitriol: then being dry, and in Pouder put it into a Retort, and distil as before directed in a close Furnace of Reverbera∣tion, with a large Recipient: reiterate the distillation as al∣so cohobation of the Spirit di∣stilled upon the sediment, and make a third distillation: so will you have a Spirit impre∣gnated with the most essential parts of the Crocus Veneris. § 11. This Spirit is a Speci∣fick against the Epilepsy-Ap∣polexy, Convulsions, Le∣thargy, Coma, Carus, and other Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Womb. It is highly esteemed against the Jaundice, illness and weak∣ness of the Stomach, want of Appetite, and to break the Stone in the Reigns and Blad∣der. It is prevalent also a∣gainst all sorts of Agues, the Plague or Pestilence, and all other malign Feavers; and may be successfully used in∣stead of the Prophylactick Wate of Sylvius, even against all the Diseases for which that is commended. § 12. Paracelsus accounts this very Medicine as the quarter part of the whole Materia medica, and by some it is esteemed as a real Alcahest, able to dissolve totally all Pearls, Corals, and such other like hard Substances, with more ease than any other dissolvent, and then quitting them by distillation, is able to dissolve more: but without doubt (as I before observed) it must
grow weaker and weaker; for the saline parts of the matter dissolved will be sure to retain, and unite itself with some part of the acid; and the terrene parts will also detain and unite with other particles of the said Men∣struum, which cannot well be separated by distillation, nor by any other way but by lotion; so that in all proba∣bility▪ this Spirit must by u∣sing decay, and grow every time weaker and weaker. § 13. And this is also to be noted, That Iron, Copper, Pearls, Corals, &c. ought not to pass for pure Alcalies, because that acid Spirits work upon them: for thô these, and such other like substances, are not destitute of the proper Alcali, it follows not, that this part is the whole, nor that it can transform the other parts into itself, since that when acid Spirits dissolve those kind of Substances, they do it not by uniting themselves to them, as they do with true Alcalies, but by destroying them, by dividing them into little particles; quitting them, and letting them precipitate downwards, when they meet with any fixed or volatile Salt, with which they can unite; con∣sidering that▪ only salt Sub∣stances
dissolvable in Water, and capable to unite and in∣corporate themselves with the Oils, can be accounted real Alcalies. And thô boyling Water may make some dis∣solutions of Copper reduced into Crystals, or Crocus after it has been calcin'd with Sulphur; yet it only dissolves that part which the acid of the Sulphur has corroded, and as it were half dissolved in Calcination. § 14. As it is given inwardly in any pro∣per Liquor à gut. vj. ad xij. so likewise it is used out∣wardly in Oyntments to make the Hair grow, and to cure the Itch, Scurf, and Scald Heads. XXXVII. Spiritus Vini Scu∣cinatus, Spirit of Wine with Amber. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Amber ℥iv. Alcohol of Spirit of Wine ℥xij. mix and distil in B. M. S. A. It is Cephalick, or good against Diseases of the Head, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The method how you are to perform this, we have exactly shewed in Our Pharmacopoeia Londinen∣sis, lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 39. to which I refer you. It is much pleasanter than Oyl of Am∣ber, and in my opinion more subtil and piercing, and there∣fore of greater efficacy. § 2. You may also do it after this manner: ℞ Of the best re∣ctified Spirit of Wine (three or four times drawn off from the best volatile Sal Armoniack, or rather digested six Months thereon) lbij. Oyl of Amber of the first dwing ℥ij. mix, digest two or three days, and then draw them off together in a Glass Body; so will you have the Potestates Succini, of admirable subtilty. § 3. This Medicine is good for all that the Oyl is good for, and may be given inwardly a∣gainst Vapours, Hysterick Fits, and all Distempers of the Head, Nerves, and Womb. Outwardly to bathe with, it cures Palsies, Numbness, Cramps, Convulsions, Pains, Aches, Sciatica's and Gouts, proceeding from a cold cause, in what part of the Body so∣ever. Dose à gut. 30. ad 60. XXXVIII. Spiritus Vini Tar∣tarisatus, Spirit of Wine tartarised. Bate.] Take Salt of Tartar ℥iv. Alcohol of Spirit of Wine lbij. mix and distil in B. M. It is Scorbutick, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The intenti∣on of this Prescription is per∣fectly
to deflegmate the Spi∣rit of Wine, not that the Spi∣rit of Wine receives any great matter from the Salt of Tar∣tar, forasmuch as they are two distinct Substances not easily miscible. § 2. The Spirit of Wine will also be deflegmated, if you put the Salt of Tartar into it, and di∣gest it therein for some time, as eight or ten days, without any thing of distillation: for the Flegm will dissolve the Salt, and mix with it, lying at the bottom like a heavy Oyl, the Spirit perfectly de∣phlegmated swimming on the top, which you may decant off, or separate with a Funnel. § 3. You may also deflegmate it with the purest and best Pot-ashes, (which are almost all Salt) af∣ter the same manner, for the Salt of the Pot-ashes imbibing the phlegmatick part of the Spirit, the pure subtil, vola∣tile Spirit will swim a top as before, which may in like manner be decanted off for use; or is it in the least inferiour to the former, § 4. I made once an Experiment, by long digesting rectified Spirit of Wine upon Salt of Tartar, after this manner: ℞ Pure Salt of Tartar ℥j. Bone∣ashes in fine Pouder ℥iij. rectifi∣ed, S. V. lbij. mix them, and digest together for a Year or more, sha∣king it once a day. I then decan∣ted off my Spirit, which smelt and tasted extream strong of the Salt of Tartar, which made me believe, it had ta∣ken some of the substance of the Salt, and united it with its own Body. The Salt I restored carefully by Elixivi∣ation, and Coagulation, &c. and found it to want ℈ij. of what it weighed before: this is matter of fact: and from hence I conclude, many great Medicines may be made by long digestion. § 5. This Spirit is seldom used simply of itself against any Disease, yet it mightily sweet∣ens the Blood, chears the Spi∣rits, warms the chilled Blood and Humors, dissolves Coa∣gulations of the Juyces, is good against the Scurvy, and provokes Urine. § 6. But the chief intention of it is to be a Menstruum to extract the volatile, saline, and oily particles of other Bodies, chiefly from dried Vegeta∣bles; not moist or green, for then their flegmy parts by mixing with the Menstruum, would so weaken it, that it would do no great feats, or what would be worth re∣garding. § 7. You may al∣so make a Syrup of it to have always ready, to dulci∣cifie
any Cordial Medicine with, after this manner: Sy∣rupus Violatilis Tartarisatus. ℞ Spirit of Wine Tartarized lbij. double refined Sugar, so much as it will dissolve over a gentle heat: being mixt and dissolved, keep it close stopt for use. You will find it much better in practise than the cold flegmatick Syrups of the Shops: and if you please you may Aromatize it with Cina∣mon, and other Spices as you see fit, by digesting them grosly bruised, or whole, in the Tartarized Spirit, before it is made into a Syrup. XXXIX. Spiritus Viperarum, Spirit of Vipers. Bate.] It is distilled from dried Vipers in the same man∣ner as you distil Spirit of Harts-horn, reserving the vo∣latile Salt. It penetrates in the highest degree, resists putrefaction, and opens Ob∣structions through the whole Body; it overcomes Feavers, chiefly Quartan Agues. Dose gut. iv. ad. x. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Vipers Flesh dried and shred small, q. v. put it into an earthen Retort, or a glass one coated, place it in a close Reverberato∣ry with a large Receiver, lute the Juncture well, and distil first with a very gentle Fire to warm the Retort, driving out the Flegm drop by drop; when no more drops fall, in∣crease the Fire by little and little, so will the Spirit come forth, filling the Receiver with white Clouds, and afterwards a black Oyl, and the volatile Salt sticking to the sides of the Receiver. Continue the Fire till no more comes, then cool and unlute, shaking about the Receiver a little, to loosen the volatile Salt from the sides: Put all into a Bolt-head, with its Alembick, and a small Receiver, luting the Joynts with a wet Bladder, then di∣stil in Sand with a gentle Fire, so will the volatile Salt sublime to the top of the Bolt-head, which separate and keep in a Glass well stopt, for use. § 2. What remains in the Bolt-head filter through brown Paper, so will the Flegm and Spirit pass through, leaving the Oyl be∣hind. This Spirit and Flegm put into an Alembick, and draw off about half the Liquor (which is the subtil Spirit) in a Vaporous Bath, which keep close stopt for use, casting a∣way the Flegm. § 3. Rol∣fincius advises to take the dryed Flesh, with the dried Hearts, Livers, Heads, and Tails, and to distil as afore∣said,
with degrees of Fire; so will you have Spirit, Oyl, and volatile Salt, the Salt sticking to the neck and sides of the Receiver. The Spirit you must separate from the Oyl, by filtration, as before, through double brown Paper. Then you may mix the Salt with the Spirit, and in a Glass Body & Alembick rectifie the Salt, making it to ascend with a very gentle Fire to the head of the Alembick white and pure. This head is then immediately to be taken off, and another put on, and the distillation to be continued till the Spirit is drawn off, as before directed. See my Phar∣macopoeia Londinensis, lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 24. § 12. and Do∣ron Medicum, lib. 1. cap. 25. §. 138. § 4. The farther preparation of the volatile Salt, with its several Virtues and Uses, we shall pretermit here, and refer you to its proper place in the Chapter of Salts following. The black Oyl here, is so fetid and stink∣ing, that it is not to be used either outwardly or inward∣ly, except only in the case of Hysterick Fits, to be smelt to. § 5. But if you prepare it with Spirit of Nitre after this manner following, it will be a most excellent Medicine, and not much inferiour to the Salt. ℞ Of the black fetid Oyl of Vipers ℥iv. Spirit of Nitre ℥viij. mix and digest two days: then add thereto of the best rectified Spirit of Wine ℥xij. filter through brown Pa∣per, and keep it for use. § 6. Thus have you a most excel∣lent Medicine, and one of the most abominable scents upon Earth, made one of the greatest Fragrancies in the whole World: it may be gi∣ven from gut. xij. ad xxx. in Wine, or any other proper Liquor against fainting of the Spirits, Weakness, Consum∣ptions, Epilepsies, Apople∣xies, and in a word, against all Diseases the volatile Spirit or volatile Salt are prevalent against. § 7. Now in the distillation of Vipers this is to be noted, that the Recei∣ver must be large, that the Spirits may circulate with the greater ease, and the Fire gentle and gradual, least the too hasty rushing forth of the Spirit should break the Ves∣sels. § 8. And whereas in the first distillation the Flegm comes first, before the Spirit, Oyl, and Salt; yet in the se∣cond distillation or rectifica∣tion the Volatile Salt rises first, and the Flegm remains last: in performing of which operations, the neck of the Vesica or Bolt-head must be
very high, that the volatile Salt may ascend pure; for if any Flegm should rise with it, it would liquifie it, and turn it into Spirit. § 9. In rectification of the Spirit of Vipers, to clear it from its Flegm; if you should let the Liquor continue distilling never so little longer than it should do, the Flegm will rise after the Spirit, and make the Spirit look whitish; but being kept together for about a Month, or somewhat lon∣ger, they will mix perfectly together, and become clear: the reason of this whiteness is from a small quantity of Oyl ascending with the Spirit, which coming to be mixt with never so small a quanti∣ty of Flegm, always gives a white colour. § 10. This Spirit is one of the best Me∣dicines in the whole Art of Physick; it is prevalent a∣gainst Plague or Pestilence, and all sorts of malignant Fevers and Agues the French-Pox, Consumptions of all sorts, Poyson, Bitings of Vi∣pers, Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venemous Crea∣ture: It is a stupendious Re∣medy against the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsie, Numbness, Tremblings, Lethargy, and Hysterick Fits. It is good against all Stoppages of the Head and Brain, and cures Asthma's, Pleurisies, Obstru∣ctions of the Lungs, as also all old and new Coughs, and other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs. It strengthens the Stomach, helps Digestion, opens all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Bowels, dissolves the Congelation, or Stagnation of the Blood, and is one of the greatest Sudori∣ficks in the World. Dose à gut. xx. ad xl. in Carduus, or Angelica-water, or Spirit of Saffron, or Cinamon-water § 11. Lemery makes a Sudo∣rifick-water of Vipers thus: ℞ Live Vipers cut them into pieces, and put them alive into a large Earthen, or Glass Body, with its Head and Receiver, lute well the Joynts, and distil in B. M. to dryness. This Water (containing some part of the volatile Salt) is Sudo∣rifick, and may be given à ʒj. ad ℥ss. in any sit Liquor. The dried pieces of Vipers may be distilled as before, from whence you will have Spirit, Oyl, and volatile Salt in like manner. § 12. Le Febure's Spirituous Essence of Vipers: ℞ Dried Harts and Livers of Vipers ℥iij. Alcohol of S. V. so much as to over-top them six inches; put them in∣to a double Glass, lute it and digest in B. V. with a very gen∣tle
heat for four days: then in B. M. distil with a slow Fire to driness; cohobating three times: to every ℥x. of this Spi∣rit put ℥i. of the volatile Salt of Vipers; Ambergrise essenti∣ficated ʒj. Oyl of Cinnamon, Oyl of Lemon-peel, A. ʒss. mix all, and circulate in a Pellican for eight days, and keep it close stopt for use. § 13. This essentificated Spirit of Vipers has all the Virtues of the vola∣tile Salt, and this advantage over and above, that it may better be preserved, being one of the best and noblest Anti∣dotes in the World, worthy the Closets of the greatest of Princes. Dose à ℈j. ad ℈ij. in a little Wine. § 14. Spi∣ritus Viperarum acovisticus▪ ℞ Vipers Flesh dried, cut it into bits, and bruise it well, q. v. affuse thereon so much rectified S. V. as may over-top it six inches. Digest in a very gentle heat, till all, or most of the substance is turned into an oily or spirituous Liquor, which keep close stopt for use. It wonderfully helps in deaf∣ness, curing those that have been deaf a long time: this was the Secret of a Noble∣man of Germany, and his chiefest Medicine, by which (it is reported) he cured such as are born deaf: It is used by dropping it warm into the Ears. XL. Ros Vitrioli, Dew of Vi∣triol. Bate.] It is drawn forth from crude white Vitriol, by the heat of a boyling B. M. S. A. It is good against a violent pain of the head, and adu∣stion of blood, and strengthens the Viscera. Dose ʒij, &c. continuing it for some time. Salmon.] § 1. Sala was the first that took notice of this Medicine, and after him o∣ther Authors. We placed it among the Spirits, altho' it is a Phlegm. 1. Because it con∣tains a part of the volatile Spirit of Vitriol, which is in it. 2. Because it is previous in making of the said volatile Spirit, which follows next after. § 2. Le Febure makes it thus: ℞ Pure Vitriol. q. s. put it into a broad mouthed Cu∣curbit eight inches high, with its Limbeck-head and Receiver, and in a boyling B. M. distil till no more will come over. It is given in Broth or other fit Liquor against the Megrim, and other pains of the Head, &c. § 3. According to Marg-grave, thus: ℞ Pure green Vitriol, put it into a Glass Cu∣curbit, and distil in B. M. so long as any thing will come forth, which will be done in twenty four hours time. This,
says Marg-grave, is the Spiri∣tus Vitrioli verus Paracelsi, which refrigerates, opens, re∣sists putrefaction, extinguish∣es Fevers, and cures the Fal∣ling-sickness. Dose ʒij. XLI. Spiritus Vitrioli, Spirit of Vitriol. Bate.] Distil Vitriol cal∣cin'd from Sand, and separate the Spirit from the Flegm▪ S. A. In strengthning the Ventricle, repressing Fevers, quenching Thirst, allaying Inflamations, &c. it is a Secret. Dose so much as may make the Liquor pleasantly acid, and not set the Teeth on edge. Salmon.] § 1. In our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 78. you have the Colledge's way of distilling this Spirit and Oyl, with our Annotations thereon, which in that respect are enough: but by reason several Men have several ways or methods of doing the same, from whence new Observations may arise, and that they are also equally necessary to be known to the ingenious Physician, we shall take the pains here to relate them. § 2. From Marg-gra∣vius. ℞ Vitriol calcined and poudred lbx. put it into a strong earthen Retort, or a glass one well covered with lute; di∣stil in an open Fire for twenty four hours, so will you have Flegm and Spirit come over together: which by rectifica∣tion you must separate: then change your Receiver, and di∣stil with a Reverberating Fire for twenty four hours more, so will you have a most potent and strong Oyl, which is the Oleum Vitrioli verum Paracel∣si; which being mixt with Water will make an Efferve∣scence. § 3. Now here is to be noted, that in the begin∣ning of this distillation, the Fire ought to be small for the first six or eight hours, this brings off the Flegm: then it ought to be increased by de∣grees to the second and third degree of Reverberation for eight hours more, and then urged for the next eight hours to the fourth degree, so have you Spirit and Flegm in one mass together, which (as I said before) by rectification are to be separated: lastly, for the other twenty four hours, the Fire is continued in that same fourth degree for eliciting the Oyl of Para∣celsus. § 4. From this vehement strong Oyl, by means of Wa∣ter, and other Liquors, a white Substance may be precipita∣ted, which by fusion or melt∣ing will turn into Copper.
§ 5. According to Maets thus: ℞ English or Hungarian Vi∣triol calcined to whiteness, put it in grose pouder or bits into an earthen Retort, distil in an open Fire first with a gentle heat, so have you Flegm with a vola∣tile Spirit: then increase the Fire till the Retort grows red hot, so have you the volatile a∣cid Spirit. At length urge the Fire to the fourth and last degree, so have you the red Oyl of Vitriol of Paracelsus, won∣derfully corrosive; continue the Fire in this degree for twenty four hours, till all the Oyl is come forth. All being cool∣ed, take what is distilled, put it into a Cucurbit with a long neck, and with a most gentle Fire abstract the volatile Spi∣rit of Vitriol: what remains at bottom put into a Retort, and with a moderate Fire draw forth the Flegm; then the acid Spirit of Vitriol, lea∣ving the ponderous corrosive Oyl at bottom. § 6. Le Mort's Oleum Vitrioli martis. ℞ Vitriol of Iron lbv. calcined and poudred put it into a Retort so as it may not be above half full, (which thing you ought to observe in the former) add a large Receiver, luting the Joynt well, and then distil: Flegm comes first, then the Spirit and Oyl, the sign of which is, that the Recipient will be full of white Vapours: continue the Fire in the highest degree; so in the space of eight hours you will have a pound of Oyl or more, according to the goodness of the Vitriol. § 7. Now to rectifie this, put all into a glass Retort, and distil first with a gentle Fire, so will a little Flegm come forth, with a sulphurous volatile Spirit: next comes forth the acid Spi∣rit, leaving the most sharp Oyl, like limpid Water in the bottom. § 8. In this ope∣ration you must note, that if your Vitriol be not well cal∣cined, you will have so much the more Flegm, and it will need so much the more recti∣fication: besides, in the first distillation it will endanger the breaking of the Vessels. § 9. That the Vitriol of Mars yields more Oyl, and less of the volatile Spirit, whereas the Vitriol of Venus yields a much less plenty of Oyl, and a far greater quantity of a most grateful Spirit, like Spi∣rit of Sulphur per Campanum. § 10. That the whole quan∣tity of Oyl of Vitriol may ac∣cording to Le Mort be con∣verted into Spirit after this manner: ℞ Oyl of Vitriol ℥j. Common Water ℥iv. mix, and put them into a glass Re∣tort, distil in Sand, and the Flegm will come forth; then a
volatile Spirit, leaving a hea∣vy Oyl in the bottom, a third, or at least a quarter part di∣minished: Repeat the distil∣lation, by mixing more Water with the Oyl, and so often re∣peat this work till the whole Oyl is converted into Spirit. § 11. Le Febure having drawn off his Ros Vitrioli from the crude Vitriol, so long till no more will come, as we have already taught, places the Cucurbit in a Sand heat, with an Alembick Head and Re∣ceiver, and increases the Fire till the Head of the Alembick is filled with white Vapours, and continues it till no more drops of Liquor will fall from it: this acid Liquor he also saves, being a Flegm of Vitriol mixed with some of the volatile Spirit, which, says he, is not to be despised, for thô it has but little acidity in it, yet it particpates of the volatile, aperitive, and ano∣dyn Virtue of the Vitriol, which makes it successfully used for cleansing the Reins, and healing all inward Cor∣rosions, quenches Thrist in Feavers, and provokes Urine abundantly. If you add a little Saccharum Saturni to it, it will take away Inflamati∣ons, Pains, and sharpness of the Eyes, heal malignant Ul∣cers in them, they being washt with it warm. And a little Sal Tartari being mixt with it, it takes away itching of the skin, and heals, scabs. § 12. Then he proceeds to making the acid Spirit and Corrosive Oyl thus: ℞ The matter last left in the Cucur∣bit, beat it into a gross Pouder, put it into an earthen or glass Retort well luted, place it in a close Reverberatory, with a ca∣pacious Receiver, well luting the Juncture, give a gradual Fire, as in distilling Spirit of Salt, but higher and longer, with the flame of dry Wood for the space of three days and nights without ceasing, viz. till the Receiver (filled with white Clouds and Vapours in the distilling) grows clear: the distilled Liquorice put into a glass Retort, and distil in Sand with a gradual Fire, till the drops begin to fall, which taste from time to time, to change the Recipient as soon as you perceive them to have an acidity: having drawn off two parts of the Liquor, remove the Fire, so have you three several Liquors. 1. An almost insipid Liquor, con∣taining the volatile Spirit with a sulphurous smell. 2. A plea∣sant acid Liquor, called the acid Spirit of Vitriol. 3. The remaining Oyl in the Retort, which you may purifie by fil∣trating
it through Glass beat∣en into fine Pouder, (for it would corrode all other sub∣stances) commonly called Oyl of Vitriol. § 13. Le Febure's sweet Spirit of Vitriol. ℞ Vi∣triol calcin'd between yellow and red lbiij. put it into a Cu∣curbit in Pouder, add Spirit of Vinegar so much as to reduce it to a paste: stir without cea∣sing putting in still new Spirit of Vinegar, till it is three in∣ches high: put the Cucurbit into B. Vaporoso, cover it with a blind head, and digest in a gentle heat for three whole days: the fourth day decant the Vinegar, and add more fresh Spirit in the room of it; digest again three days and de∣cant; thus proceed seven times, every time adding fresh Spirit of Vinegar: at length filtrate all the Spirit or Tincture, put it into a Cucurbit in Ashes, and draw off the superfluous Menstruum by distillation with a slow and gradual Fire, till the Magma is as thick as Ho∣ney: this make into a mass with calcin'd Pebbles, which put into a Retort, and with a gradual Fire, in twenty four or thirty hours space, draw off an Oyl and Spirit, which rectifie in a Glass Retort in Sand, and keep it for use. § 14. This Spirit or Oyl, is of a plea∣sant sweetish taste, having in it the Virtues of the Vitriol, mixt with those of the Spirit of Vinegar. It may be given in all Diseases proceeding from a Tartarous matter, as the Stone, Gravel, Scurvy, Gout, Rheumatism, Catarrhs, French Pox, and generally in all Di∣seases proceeding from gross and sharp Serosities, as Le∣prosie, Scabs, Herpes, Itch, Tettars, Ring-worms, &c. for this wonderful Spirit rectifies the whole Mass of Blood, by Urine, Sweat, and insensible transpiration. Dose à ℈j. ad ℈ij. in Broth, Decoctions, or Wine, or some appropriated Syrup. § 15. Charras after he has drawn his Ros Vitrioli, and acid Water following it in a Sand heat, Takes the Vi∣triol in the Cucurbit, beats it into Pouder, and fills an ear∣then Retort three quarters full with a large Receiver, and in a close Reverberatory with a gradual Fire increas'd to the utmost violence, draws forth the Spirit. § 16. This Spirit he rectifies, by putting it into a glass Cucurbit covered with its Head and Receiver, di∣stilling in Sand first with a gentle heat, by which the vo∣latile, subtil, penetrating, sul∣phurous Spirit is drawn off, and kept in a Glass close stopt by it self: then continu∣ing the Fire the Flegm arises:
after that, an acid Spirit, lea∣ving at the bottom of the Cucurbit the heavy Spirit, commonly called Oyl of Vi∣triol. § 17. According to Rolfincius: ℞ Roman Vitriol lbxxv. calcine to whiteness, and the absumption of its humidity, the Vessels being cold, take the mass, which will be about lbxiv. and put it into an earthen Re∣tort in a Reverberatory Fur∣nace, with a large Receiver, observing degrees of Fire for the space of three or four days, till all the Spirit and Oyl is come over, which rectifie in a Cucurbit, separating the Spi∣rit, Flegm, and Oyl, as before directed. § 18. Zwelfer says, That the Retort is to be fil∣led not above half full, and that the Receiver ought to be long, and have a large neck, because of the violence and impetuosity with which the Spirits come forth; that the Fire is to be very gentle while the Flegm is a coming forth, which ought to distil drop by drop, for the space of ten or twelve hours: then the Fire by degrees being in∣creased, white Clouds will break or come forth, which will fill the Retort, and Re∣ceiver also; and that this di∣stillation is to be continued with the highest violence of the Fire for the space of two days, till the whole radical humidity, viz. Spirit and Oyl (improperly so called) are come forth, and all the said white Clouds cease to appear. § 19. Lemery makes it thus: ℞ Vitriol calcined to whiteness lbviij. put it into an earthen Retort, so as to fill it about three quarters full: place it in a close Reverberatory, with a very large Receiver: give a very small Fire to make the Flegm come forth which re∣mained yet in the Vitriol. When no more will come off, take off the Recipient, decant the Flegm, (which is used for Inflamations of the Eyes) and refit the Recipient again to the Retort, luting the Juncture; increase the Fire gradatim, and when you see white Clouds to fill the Receiver, continue it in the same condition till the Re∣ceiver grows cold, then streng∣then the Fire with Wood to an extream violence, till the flame rises through the Funnel of the Reverberatory: the Receiver will then fill again with white Clouds; now continue the Fire in this degree, for the space of three days and nights, letting it then go out. § 20. The Vessels being cold, decant the Spirit into a glass Body, set it in Sand, and immedi∣ately fit to it a Head with its Receiver, and distil with a
very gentle Fire four or five Ounces; this is the Sulphu∣rous Spirit of Vitriol, which keep by itself in a Glass close stopt. Change the Receiver, and augmenting the Fire di∣stil about half the Liquor which remains; this is the a∣cid Spirit of Vitriol. That which yet remains in the glass Body is the most acid part of the Vitriol, and is called Oyl, thô improperly, and may be used like the a∣cid Spirit in continual Fea∣vers, and other Distempers which proceed from a vio∣lent heat. In the bottom of the Retort remains the Caput Mortuum, which is called Colcothar, out of which is eli∣cited the Sal Vitrioli, The Sty∣ptick Water of Rabel, and Ens Veneris. § 21. As to the choice of the Vitriol, Lemery advises to take green English Vitriol, such as (saith he) be∣ing rubbed upon Iron, does not at all change colour, which shews that it does not partake of Copper, as the German does, that looks a lit∣tle blewish, and is more acri∣monious. § 22. There comes also a great deal of Flegm into the Receiver, which is known to be all come off, when there drops no more. When the volatile sulphurous Spirits come, you must then be very careful of the Fire, for they come with a great deal of violence, and will break the Retort, if driven too furiously. They being come forth, you must then augment the Fire to the high∣est and last degree of all, for the acid Spirit will not part with its Earth, unless forced by an extraordinary heat. § 23. From lbviij. of Vitriol calcin'd (sixteen Ounces to the pound) you will have of Flegm ℥xvij. of the volatile sulphurous Spirit, and acid Spirit together ℥xxiiss. of which twenty two Ounces and half, there will be of the volatile sulphurous Spirit about four or five Ounces: and in the Retort you will have lbv.℥v. of Colcothar. § 24. That if you use German Vi∣triol instead of English, you may have a little more Spirit than the proportion named, by reason of the Copper par∣ticles contained in the Vitriol, it would smell something like A F. and the matter remain∣ing in the Retort would be of a brown or darker colour. § 25. That no other Body is added to Vitriol in distillati∣on, as in the distillation of Nitre, because its own Body contains Earth enough. § 26. That the Furnace ought to be very thick, that the heat of
the Fire being little or none of it lost through the pores, may the better act upon the Retort. § 27. That some in distilling Vitriol continue the Fire for four or five days together: and that if it should be continued for three or four days longer, there would come forth a congeal∣ed Oyl of Vitriol, and Cau∣stick, which is nothing but the more fixt part of the Spi∣rit of Vitriol, or common Oyl. § 28. That all acid Spirits are only salts made fluid by force of Fire, they thereby being disengaged for their terrestious parts; and that they may again be revi∣ved by affusing them upon some proper Alcali. Thus Spirit of Vitriol put upon Iron, and remaining there some time, does reincorporate in∣to Vitriol. And Spirit of Ni∣tre, put upon Salt of Tartar, makes again Saltpeter. § 29. That the Caustick nature of the Oyl of Vitriol, and its fiery Corrosion, pro∣ceeds from a repletion of the mineral Salt with fiery parti∣cles, without which it could never burn nor heat any for∣reign matter put into it. § 30. If into a Tincture of Violets, or of the Sun-flower, you drop Sp. Vitrioli, it will presently make it red; put into it Ol. Tartari, or of Pot∣ashes, and it will recover its former colour again. Con∣trariwise, put to the said Tincture Oyl of Tartar, or Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and the blew Tincture will pre∣sently turn green; put then into it a little Sp. Vitrioli, and it will be an obscure red. A Tincture of red Roses in warm fair Water, will be very weak and mean; if thereinto you drop a little Spirit of Vitriol, it will im∣mediately be of a high red: drop into it afterwards Ol. Tartari, it will become of a dirty black. § 31. So also, a decoction of Brazil, Log∣wood, or Brazilletto, being very red, if you drop into it Spirit of Vitriol, it turns it yellow; and then if you add Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoni∣ack, it will become black: if also you drop Oyl of Tartar into Claret, it becomes gree∣nish, but adding a little Spi∣rit of Vitriol it returns to its former colour again, &c. Now all these changes of co∣lour made by these differing Salts, do really arise only from the different position of the particles of Bodies dissol∣ved in the Liquor, and their disposition to modifie and re∣present the light several and different ways. § 32. Some
Authors put Vitriol into a Glass Cucurbit in an Ash heat, covered with its Head and Re∣ceiver, and well luting the Junctures, with a moderate heat they draw off the Flegm and acid Spirit, or Ros Vi∣trioli, as much as they can force to ascend; then they co∣hobate the distilled Liquor up∣on the Paeces, distilling and co∣hobating seven or eight times and redoubling the heat in the last distillation, they at length draw forth a Flegm mixt with much acid Spirit, which is of a very grateful odour, being cir∣culated in a Sand heat with a Fire of digestion, in a Glass well closed. § 33. The Vir∣tues of the volatile sulphurous Spirit of Vitriol. It is good against Palsies, Asthma's, and Diseases of the Lungs, it also dissipates pains of the Head, eases the Megrim, and cures the Epilepsy, and Apoplexy, and indeed most Diseases of the Head, Nerves, Breast, and Lungs, it opens, cuts, at∣tenuates, absterges, resolves viscous humors, resists putre∣faction, and heals Ulcers of the Lungs, and Spitting Blood. But, saith Rolfincius, Non pos∣sidet omnes enumeratas virtu∣tes primario & ex se, sed mul∣tas secundariò ex accidente. In Diseases of the Head from a hot cause it is taken in a cold Vehicle, as Aqua Rosa∣rum, &c. but in Diseases from a cold cause, in a hot Vehicle, as the Spirituous Water of Rosemary, Sage, Lavender, &c. It prevails against a Vertigo, and is gi∣ven against an Apoplexy in Apoplectick Waters, as that of the Tile-tree, Lillies of the Valley, &c. against a Phren∣sie, in Syrup of Poppies, or Tincture of the same: against the Falling-sickness, in Lime-flower, or Peony-water, &c. against Convulsions, in Sage Water. In Diseases of the Breast, in Water, Tincture, or Decoction of Veronica, or Elecampane. Against Disea∣ses of the Stomach in Mint or Cinamon-Water. Against the Dropsie in some Diuretick Water, as of Parsy, Arsmart, Onions, &c. Against the Co∣lick in Water or Tincture of Zedoary, or Juniper-Berries, against the Stone in the Reins or Bladder in the last afore∣mentioned-Waters, or in Strawberry, or Saxifrage-Water. Against putrid and burning Feavers, and to quench Thirst in Sorrel Wa∣ter, or Julepo Rosaceo. A∣gainst malign Feavers in Wa∣ter of Goats Rue, Angelica, &c. § 34. The Virtues of the acid Spirit of Vitriol. It is Diuretick, Diaphoretick, A∣peritive,
and Inciding, resists Putrefaction, and allays In∣flamations, wherefore it is of great force against all burn∣ing Feavers, occasioned by putrid and malignant Hu∣mours, as also against Ob∣structions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery; it restores Appetite when lost, streng∣thens the Faculties of the Sto∣mach, correcting its defects It eases the Tooth-ache, if mixt with White-wine, and held in the mouth: and if mixt with Water or Juyce of Celandine, it cures the Scurf, Scab, and Scald of the Head, by washing it therewith, de∣stroying it in its root, and killing that sharp, acid, cor∣rosive and malign humour which causes it: in a word, it is a perfect Cure for the Scurvy, and a most admira∣ble thing given dietetically a∣gainst a Gonorrhoea, and the Reliques of the French Di∣sease: I speak by the Experi∣ence I have had of it in ma∣ny Patients, in those Diseases. § 35. The Virtues of the Cor∣rosive Oyl of Vitriol: Le Mort, and most other Authors, say, it is not given inwardly, by reason of its corrosive and catheretic quality, &c. but now with us it is daily given as the acid Spirit, being mixt with fit and appropriate Ve∣hicles, and has all the same medical Virtues. Authors say, it is improperly called Oyl, for that it is neither in∣flamable nor unctuous; but if differing Substances, many have principles of differing forms, I know not why it may not more properly be called Oyl, than Spirit; and forasmuch as all mixt Bodies are composed of Earth, Wa∣ter, Salt, Oyl, and Spirit, there is no reason, that Me∣tals and Minerals should be exempted from being repleat with a respective Oyl also. Lemery says, it may be used like the acid Spirit in conti∣nual Feavers, and other Di∣stempers that are accompa∣nied with a virulent heat. It is also used in Chymical O∣perations, as for the dissolu∣tion of Metals, fixing of Spi∣rit, and many other Alchy∣mical Secrets; and accord∣ing to Helmont, is the chief Ingredient in the Lapis But∣leri. It is a most admira∣ble Catheretick in sordid and rebellious Ulcers, for that in a moment it puts a stop to the putrefaction, and puts a period to the eating, &c. § 36. The Dose. The volatile sul∣phurous Spirit may be given à gut. viij. ad x. or xx. ac∣cording to Age and Strength. As for the acid Spirit, and
the Oyl, there is no better way to limit the Dose, than by putting in so much, or so many drops into the Vehicle, till the sharpness be pleasing to the Palate. All these Spi∣rits of Vitriol are good to kill Worms, have a peculiar faculty to stop internal fluxes of Blood, to cool Inflamati∣ons of the Eyes, or any other part, and to resist and destroy the malignity of Plague or Pestilence, and all other ma∣lign Feavers, as also the pu∣trefaction proceeding from the Bitings of Vipers, Rattle-Snakes, Mad Dogs, or any o∣ther venemous Creature, in∣wardly given as before di∣rected, and outwardly ap∣plied to the Wound. § 37. A sweet green Oyl of Vitriol. ℞ Coperas Stones, q. v. beat them small, and lay them in a cool Cellar, and in twenty or thirty days they will attract the Air, and look black, and after fourteen days more be∣come whitish and sweetish, then dissolve them in distilled Rain-water, filter and evaporate the Water, so will they shoot into green Crystals: these beat small and dissolve in a Cellar per deliquium, by laying them on a marble stone. This is a kind of oily Liquor, which some Authors affirm to be Para∣celsus's famous Medicine for the Falling-sickness, a few drops being taken in any appropriate Liquor. Beware in making, that the Liquor comes at no strong Fire; for then, saith Paracelsus, it loses its greenness, and as much as it loses of that, so much it loses of its virtue: from this Liquor a Spirit may be drawn by an ingenious Ar∣tist, which will smell like Musk or Ambergrise. XLII. * Spiritus Vitrioli Coa∣gulatus, Spirit of Vitriol coagulated. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Sorrel ℥j. Spirit of Vitriol ℥iss. mix and coagulate S. A. It is a Secret in strengthning the Ventricle or Stomach extinguishing Fe∣vers, quenching Thirst, al∣laying Inflamations, &c. Dose, so much in any convenient Liquor, as that the Teeth may not be set on edge. See Mynsicht. Salmon.] § 1. It is done as we have directed in the Spi∣rit of Salt coagulated, at Sect. 28. § 1. aforegoing: save, that instead of the Salt of Wormwood there used, here is used Salt of Sorrel; which (saith Mynsicht, Sect. 1. pag. 32.) is even a Divine Medicament and of the great∣est efficacy in Medical Pra∣ctice,
as Experience does te∣stifie. § 2. It corroborates a debilitated Ventricle, pro∣motes Digestion, destroys the Essence of Feavers, cools In∣flamations, and allays an ex∣orbitant Thirst. It is used in all Diseases of the Head, Suffocation of the Womb, Stone, Jaundice, Plague, and all Epidemical Diseases, for it strongly resists their im∣pression, and preserves from putrefaction. § 3. The Dose is, so much as many change the Vehicle to a pleasing aci∣dity, (Universals being pro∣mised) but not so much as to set the Teeth on edge. It may be given in warm Broth, or any other appropriate Ve∣hicle. § 4. The Author here∣of, Mynsicht, saith, That it ought not to be given to such as are troubled with Choler, or black Choler, but that such ought really to desist its use. And that it may be as well made with Sal Absinthii, as with Sal Acetosae, and that prepared with the former, it will be full as effectual as with the latter. XLIII. Spiritus Vitrioli Dia∣phoreticus, Spirit of Vitriol Diaphoretick. Bate.] Salt of Tartar, Harts∣horn calcin'd, A. ℥ij. Spirit of Vitriol ℥iv, mix and distil by a Retort to driness: to the di∣stilled Liquor add an equal quantity of rectified Spirit of Wine, and keep it for use. It purifies the Blood, takes a∣way Scabs and Itch, opens Obstructions, provokes Sweat in the Plague, resists and ex∣pels Poyson, is good against the Dropsie, Jaundice, Con∣tractions, &c. It is powerful also in cleansing the Lungs. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. Schroder makes it after the same manner. It is an excellent thing against all burning and malignant Feavers, and where there is any Obstruction hindering free breathing. § 2. It quen∣ches Thirst admirably, and the use of it may be continu∣ed safely, for it is a good and innocent Medicine: it may be given as ℈ij. plus-minus, in any appropriate Liquor. See my Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 90. § 3. ℞ Of this Diaphoretick Spirit ℈ij. Spirit of Saffron ʒiss. Aq. Lactis A∣lexiteriae ℥ij, Syr, Corn Poppies ʒiij. mix for a Sweating Dose. Or thus: ℞ Of this Spirit ʒij. Mixtura Simplex, Spirit of Angelica A. ʒi. Aqua Ele∣mentaria ℥ij. Syrup of Clove∣gilliflowers ℥ss. mix then for a Dose.
XLIV. Spiritus Vitrioli Essen∣tificatus, seu Clissus Vitrioli, Essentificated Spirit, or Pow∣ers of Vitriol. Bate.] ℞ Green Vitriol of Mars, purified by a threefold solution and crystallization, and calcined to yellowness, q. v. dis∣solve it in Spirit of Vinegar, filtrate and crystallize, repeat∣ing this work three times: cal∣cine again to yellowness, and distil by a Retort to driness, with cohobation. Then distil with an open or naked Fire, till all the Spirits are come forth; from the Caput Mort. exposed to the Air, extract the Salt, which depurate by many Solutions, Filtrations, and Cry∣stallizations. ℞ Of this Salt p.j. of the aforesaid Spirit, p.iv. mix, and extract the Tincture, by digesting it a Month, then filter and keep it for use. It expels noxious humours by insensible transpiration, pro∣vokes Lust, strengthens the Womb, putting a stop to its inordinate motions, and in both Sexes it stirs up the power of the Seed for Gene∣ration. Dose gut. ij. ad iv. Salmon.] § 1. The deriva∣tion of the word Clyssus is obscure, fortè , abluo, lavo, to wash: rectus dicetur , ablutio, lotio, ita, ut dignetur actio abluendi Antimonium, vel , flu∣ctus, unda, as denoting Vio∣lence, Thundering, and Effer∣vescence, which is heard in the distillation of the vulgar Clyssus. § 2. The vulgar Clys∣sus is threefold, The Lesser, The Mean, and The Greater. The lesser is thus made: ℞ Hungarian Antimony, and Sulphur A. lbj. as Schroder has it. The Mean is thus: ℞ Antimony, Tartar, and Nitre, A. lbij. as Kesler has it under the Title, Liquor Compositus Pneumonicus. The Greater is thus: ℞ Antimony, Tartar, Nitre, Calx of River Pebbles, A. lbj. and some add Sal Ar∣moniack. The method of the process you may see at large in our Pharmacopoeia Lond. lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. 99. in which place are many good Observations concerning the same, with their Virtues, Use, and Dose. § 3. This here is a simple preparation of Vi∣triol, so lled in respect that it contains all the powers of this concret, and ought not to go without its deserved applause. It rectifies the whole mass of Blood, resolves thick and tartarous slime, purifies all the Juyces of the Body, wheresoever placed; it atte∣nuates, incides, and purges
noxious Humors by the E∣munctories, as also by Stool, Urine, and Sweat, § 4. You may exhibit it in Broath, or any Specifick Water, Cepha∣lick, Pectoral, Splenetick, Li∣thontriptick, Arthritick, &c. and may be given à gut. iij. ad viij. or x. XLV. Spiritus Vitrioli Mar∣tis, Spirit of the Vitriol of Mars or Iron. Bate.] It is distilled from the Vitriol of Mars or Iron cal∣cined, by a Retort in Sand. It opens Obstructions, cures the Green-sickness in Virgins, and the Rickets in Children, &c. Dose à gut. v. ad xv. Salmon.] § 1. It differs nothing in the making from the com∣mon Spirit of Vitriol, at Sect. 41. of this Chap. aforegoing. Also at § 6. ad 10. of the same Section, we have ex∣emplified the process from that of Le Mort, with its re∣ctification, and ot Phaeno∣mena attending it, o that no more need be said thereof in this place. § 2. It is Cau∣stick, and fit for the dissol∣ving of Metals, for the redu∣cing them into Vitriol, and to extract the Sulphurs of Minerals, reducing them to a Specifick property, as is e∣vident in the Sulphur of An∣timony drawn forth by the means thereof, of which God willing, we shall hereafter speak. § 3. This Spirit cools, represses the Effervescence of Choler, and admirably pro∣vokes Urine. Dose à gut. ij. ad vj. in any proper Vehi∣cle. XLVI. Spiritus Vitrioli Phi∣losophicus, Philosophick Spi∣rit of Vitriol. Bate.] It is made from the Water in which the Butter of Antimony is cast to be sweet∣ned, by exhaling it to a third part, and rectifying it S. A. It is Cephalick, Antifebritick, and an opener of Obstructi∣ons. Dose gut. v. ad xv. Salmon.] It quenches Thirst, provokes Appetite, strengthens the Digestion, and is an ex∣cellent Antiscorbutick, and Cephalick: I have known the Megrim, and vehement Head-achs cured by the con∣stant use thereof, when al∣most all other things had fail∣ed. It is also profitably gi∣ven against Vapours and Hy∣sterick Fits, and other Disea∣ses of the Womb. For its other Virtues, see my Phar∣macopoeia Londinensis, lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 91.
XLVII. Spiritus Vitrioli Tar∣tarisatus, Spirit of Vitriol tartariz'd. Bate.] ℞ Vitriol calcin'd to whiteness. p. ij. Tartar cal∣cin'd to blackness, p. j. mix them being in Pouder, and moisten them with Spirit of Wine, then distil by a Retort in Sand, and rectifie. S. A. It has an egregious power for provoking Sweat in all inter∣nal Obstructions, and Con∣gelations of the Blood: it is good against Scabs, and o∣ther Breakings out, purifying and smoothing the skin. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiv. in Broth or Wine for three or four Morn∣ings together, as you shall see fit. Salmon.] Besides the Vir∣tues ascribed by our Author, it is an approved thing against the Rickets in Children, ha∣ving strengthned and restored those who could not go nor stand for some years together. It is also prevalent against the Plague or Pestilence, and all manner of malign Feavers, given in some Antifebritick Water, Universals also being premised. See more of it in my Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 93. ℞ Of this Spi∣rit ʒij. Centory-water, or A∣qua Lactis Alexiteria ℥iij. Syr. of Clovegilliflowers ʒiv. Tin∣cture of Antimony or Coral ʒss. mix for▪ a Dose, against a malign Feaver. XLVIII. † Spiritus Anisi, Spi∣rit of Aniseeds. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Aniseeds lbv. bruise them well, add to them warm Rain-water lbxviij. Su∣gar or Melussos lbij. mix and ferment for some days, till it has gotten a vinous scent, then distil in an Alembick with its Worm, drawing off lbxij. of Liquor; this rectifie in a Glass Matrass in B. M. drawing off first lbiv. for Spirit of Ani∣seeds, and then the remainder to driness for Ani-seed Water, or to make new Spirit with. § 2. After the same manner you may make the Spirit with Beer, Ale, Cyder, Perry, Hy∣dromel, or Malmsy Wine; but these as they are stronger and have a Spirit in them∣selves, so they yield a Spirit in greater quantity, according to the proportion with which they abound. § 3. A nearer way to the Wood is this: ℞ Spi∣rit of Wine lbviij. Ani-seeds bruised lbiss. mix and distil in B. M. to driness: but if you distil not in B. M. but in a Copper Vesica, add Water lbiv. or vj. and distil according to Art lbviij. of Spirit. § 4. This
Spirit is Stomatick, Cardiack, and an excellent thing against Wind, Indigestion, Griping of the Guts, Colick, and o∣ther Distempers of the Bow∣els proceeding from cold. It also gives relief in Asthma's, Coughs, Phthisicks, and Short∣ness of Breath. Dose à ℥ij. ad iv. either alone being dul∣cified, or in some proper mix∣ture. ℞ Spirit of Aniseeds ʒiij. Baum-water, Hyssop-wa∣ter. A. ℥j. Syrup of Corn Pop∣pies ʒiij. mix for a Dose. § 5. Or you may distil green Aniseeds thus: ℞ Green A∣niseeds lbxij. or xvj. bruise them, and put them into a great Copper Vessel tinn'd with∣in: Rain-water, or distilled Aniseed-water, enough to over∣top them four or six inches: fit it with its Head, Worm, and Receiver, and digest with a very gentle Fire, so much only as throughly to penetrate the Seed, for four days, or lon∣ger; then begin the distilla∣tion with a moderate Fire, continuing till about two thirds of the Water is drawn off, then cease. So have you a Water filled with the volatile Salt, which is the Spirit, and an Oyl swimming a top, which separate for use. § 6. What remains in the Still press out strongly, to which add as much more Ani-seeds as before; after the same manner you may proceed again, if you think fit. § 7. This Spiritu∣ous Water will be white, be∣cause of the small particles of Oyl which yet remain in it, which you may separate by setting the said Water in a double Glass Bottle in the Sun, close stopt, for some days; by this means the Oyl which is mixt with the Wa∣ter, and gives it a whitish colour, will ascend to the top of the Water, and gather together at the neck of the Bottle, from whence you may separate it. § 8. But if you would have the Water clear without separating of the Oyl, you must add to every pint of Water, half a pint of pure rectified Spirit of Wine, so will it be pure, clear, and spirituous, § 9. Or if you design to have all in a Spirit, to every pint of the Spirit and Oyl together add a pint of pure rectified Spirit of Wine, shake them together, and unite them by a new distillation in a Glass Cucurbit in B.M. S.A. § 10. This Spirit is stomatick, cre∣ates an Appetite and helps Digestion, and is Specifick gainst Wind, Colicks, dissol∣ving viscous Flegm which sticks to Lungs, Stomach and Guts, causing prickings and
tortions: It is said also to increase Milk in Nurses, com∣fort the Lungs, facilitate the Birth, ease After-pains, and the sharp Gripings of little Infants, which they many times have in the Month, proceeding from acid and windy Humours. It also eases Pains and Noises in the Ears, being dropt into them. Dose à ʒss. ad ℥ss. according to age and strength. XLIX. † Spiritus Asae Foetidae, Spirit of stinking Assa. Salmon.] ℞ Assa Fetida lbj. put it into a large Retort big enough to hold eight times the quantity, fit to it a large Re∣ceiver, and begin to distil in a Sand heat with a gentle Fire, till the danger of swelling of the Gum is over, then gradatim increase the Fire to force over the Oyl, continuing the distil∣lation till the Receiver is abso∣lutely clear: so will you have a flegm, and acid spirit, containing the volatile Salt of the Gum, and a thick stinking Oyl, all which you must separate and rectifie S. A. § 2. ℞ Bone Ashes ground fine lbj. put up∣on them the former Substances in a Glass Cucurbit, covered with its Head well luted, and in a Sand heat with a very mo∣derate Fire, draw off the Spi∣rit and volatile Salt, (which ascend first,) with a very gen∣tle Fire: then changing the Receiver, force over the Flegm and Spiritous Oyl; which you may separate by a filter: the Oyl you may rectifie again up∣on new Bones. § 3. The Spi∣rit and Oyl are both good against Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Palsies, Vapours, and Hysterick Fits: the sick may both smell to them, and also take them inwardly. The Spirit may be given à gut. x. ad xx. or xxx. the Oyl à gut. ij. ad iv. in any appropriate Vehicle. § 4. The Spirit may also be drawn thus: ℞ Assa Fetida in small pouder lbj. put it into a large Retort, upon which affuse Spi∣rit of Wine lbiv. mix and di∣gest for three of four days, sha∣king the Glass three or four times a day; then having fit∣ted to it a large Receiver, di∣stil in a Sand heat, with a very gentle Fire at first, in∣creasing it by degrees, till the spirituous and oily parts of the Assa are drawn forth. The Spirit will ascend first impre∣gnated with the subtil and vo∣latile Oyl; which being come over, change the Receiver, and draw off the remaining part of the thick Oyl. The Spirit keep by itself for use: The Oyl you may rectifie as before, either
from Bone-ashes, or its equal weight of Vitriol calcin'd to whiteness, in a little Glass Re∣tort in a Sand heat, with a very gentle Fire, so will the Oyl be less thick, and more pure then it was, the Vitriol or Bones retaining the thicker and earthy parts. § 5. The Spirit is given ad ʒss. the Oyl à gut. ij. ad vj. incor∣coprated with fine Loaf Sugar, and then dissolved in some appropriate Liquor, a∣gainst the Diseases aforemen∣tioned; for which both the Spirits and Oyl are counted admirable Specificks. L. † Spiritus Aurantiarum Corticum, Spirit of Orange-peels. Salmon.] ℞ The outward Rinds of Oranges fresh, and cut into bits lbiv. Spirit of Wine lbviij. mix and digest a Week; then in B. M: with a gentle heat draw off the Spi∣rit to driness, which you may cohobate twice or thrice, so will you have a pure and subtil Spirit of Orange-peels very odo∣riferous, and of great Virtues. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Orange-peels, ut supra lbiv. Wine lbxx. mix and digest a week, then distil in a Copper Vesica with its Worm: draw off lbvj. which is Spirit of Orange-peels: then changing the Re∣ceiver, draw off lbvj. or vij. more, which keep for Orange-water, or reserve to make more Spirit with as afore directed. § 3. Or thus: ℞ Orange-peels, ut supra lbiv. Water lbxx. Melussos or Sugar lbv. mix, ferment gently till it has a vinous scent; then in a Cop∣per Vesica, with its Head and Worm, draw off the Spirit: the first lbvj. is Spirit of O∣range-peels: change the Recei∣ver, and draw off lbviij. of Water, which you may keep to make other Spirit with. § 4. It is an excellent Cephalick, Stomatick, Cardiack, and Ne∣phritick, good against the E∣pilepsy, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Vertigo, Megrim, and other vehement Head-achs: It strengthens the Stomach, cau∣ses a good Digestion, expels Wind, comforts all the Spi∣rits natural, vital, and ani∣mal, and admirably pro∣vokes Urine, removing all stoppages in the urinary parts. It comforts the Womb, and is said to help Conception. Dose ℥ss. in the Morning fa∣sting, or when the Stomach is sick, or Bowels griped. It is also the Plague, and all infectious Diseases.
LI. † Spiritus Cinamomi, Spirit of Cinamon. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Bruised Cinamon lbj. White-wine a Gallon: digest twenty four hours in a warm B. M. then di∣stil in an Alembick S. A. drawing off the first lbiij. for Spirit, and a quart more for Cinamon-water. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Bruised Cinamon lbj. recti∣fied Spirit of Wine lbviij. di∣gest three or four days, and in a gentle B.M. distil off the Spi∣rit to driness. § 3. It is a most admirable Cordial Wa∣ter, comforts all the principal Parts, as Head, Heart, Sto∣mach, Nerves, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and Womb; it opens Obstructions, attenuates thick Humors, and is an excellent Preservative in Pestilential Times, against the Infection of the Plague, and other ma∣lign Diseases: it prevails a∣gainst Faintings, Palpitations of the Hea, sickness at Sto∣mach, and other Diseases of like kind. Dose ʒij. ad ʒiv. in any fit Vehicle. § 4. Or you may give it alone being thus dulcified: ℞ Damask Rose-water lbij. treble refined Sugar. lbiij. mix, melt, and make a Syrup, which add to lbij. of the Spirit. Dose ij. or iij. spoonfuls. § 5. ℞ An∣gelica or Borrage-water ℥iv. Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers ℥iss. Spirit of Cinamon ℥ij. Tin∣cture of Ambergrise and Musk, gut. 10. mix for a Cordi∣al, Dose ij. or iij. spoonfuls at a time. ℞ Spirit of Ci∣namon ʒij Spirit of Peony ʒiss. Volatile Spirit of Vitriol, gut. 20. Peony-water ℥ij. Syrup of Citron-peels ʒvj. mix for a Dose against the Epilepsy. LII. † Spiritus Foeniculi dul∣cis, Spirit of sweet Fennel-seeds. Salmon.] § 1. It is made as we have taught you to make Spirit of Aniseeds at Sect. 48. § 1, 2, 3, 5, 6. afore∣going. § 2. It breeds Milk in Nurses, is good against the Colick, Gripings at Sto∣mach, and Oppression of Wind in the Bowels; it is also a singular good Pectoral and Stomatick, opening Ob∣structions of the Lungs, cau∣sing free Breathing, and to take away Coughs, Colds, Wheezings, Hoarseness, &c. Dose á ʒj ad iv. ℞ Spirit of Sweet Fennel-seeds ʒiiss. Hyssop-water ℥ij. Tincture of Liquorice ʒj. Syrup of Red Poppies ℥ss. mix for a Dose, for the purposes aforesaid.
LIII. Spiritus Guajaci, Spi∣rit of Guajacum, or Pock∣wood. Salmon.] § 1. There are several ways to distil the Spi∣rit of Guajacum, of which the two following are chief: ℞ Raspings of Guajacum, q. v. so much as may fill your Vessel two thirds full, pour upon it Rain-water, so much as may nearly fill the Vessel, and with Sugar make it to ferment eight or ten days: Or, ℞ Raspings of Guajacum, q. v. put upon them White-wine, or other Ʋrine q. s. digest forty eight hours: Or, ℞ Raspings, q. v. Spirit of Wine, Water A. q. s. mix and digest: put all into a Copper Vesica tinn'd with∣in, with its Alembick-Head tinn'd within, its Worm, and Receiver: distil first with a gentle Fire, and continue the distillation, till about one half or two thirds of the Li∣quor is drawn off; so will you have subtil Spirit, with some few drops of Oyl. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Guajacum ra∣sped, or cut into small bits or chips lbvj. put them into an earthen Retort, in a close Furnace of Reverberation, with a large Recipient; make a very small Fire at first, only by degrees to heat the Furnace and Retort, for about an hour; then increase it by degrees, till you see the watery part of the Wood to come over into the Reci∣pient; continue and increase the Fire a little more, till you see white Vapours come out of the Retort like Clouds, which are a Sign that the a∣cid Salt and oily parts of the Guajacum begin to come forth: at which time open the Cover to the Duomo, and increase the Fire more and more, till your large Re∣ceiver looks clear, at what time your distillation will be compleated; thus have you an acid Spirit repleat with a volatile Salt of Guajacum, and a blackish stinking Oyl. § 3. Lemery advises to fill a a large Retort three quar∣ters full of the shavings or chips of Guajacum, and in a large Reverberatory with a great capacious Receiver, di∣stil, first with a very gentle Fire, only to warm the Re∣tort, and to distil the Water or Flegm, continue it in this condition till there comes no more drops, which is a sign that all the Flegm is come off: fit again the Receiver to the neck of the Retort, luting the Juncture well, then increase the Fire gradatim,
so will the Spirit and Oyl come forth in white Clouds, continue the Fire till no more will come, let the Vessels cool, and unlute them. § 4. Then put that which is in the Retort into a Funnel lined with brown Paper, so will the Spirit pass through, lea∣ving the thick, black, and very fetid Oyl behind in the Paper, which being set into another Bottle, and the low∣er part of the Paper being pierced with a Bodkin, the Oyl will also drop through, which you may keep for use: Or you may rectifie it by mixing it with as much Sand, Bone-ashes, or Tobacco-pipe-Clay in Pouder, as will make it into a Paste, and then put∣ting it into a Retort, place it in a Furnace in a nacked Fire; you may draw off the Oyl by a moderate Distilla∣tion, which will be much more pure than it was before. § 5. If you make the Spirit by § 2. it ought to be recti∣fied in a Glass Cucurbit, over a Sand heat, with its Head and Receiver; and having separated the almost insipid Water, which will first a∣scend, receiver and keep a part the spiritous and volatile acid and salt part, which will suc∣ceed, and be attended with an oy Volatile, which con∣tains also itts part of the vola∣tile Salt, and may also be se∣parated and kept apart as well as the acid, and be ad∣ministred inwardly, being mixed with fine poudered Sugar, and given in any fit Liquor. § 6. After the very same manner and method you may distil a Spirit and Oyl from the Cortex, which may also in the same manner be rectified, having all the same Properties and Virtues of the Wood. § 7. This is also to be observed, That during the Distillation of the Spirit (after the Flegm is come off) you must not make the Fire too strong, for they coming forth with a great deal of violence, would then be apt to break either the Retort or Receiver. § 8. Guajacum also, thô a dry Body, yet yields a great quantity of Liquor: for from 64 Ounces of the Wood, you will have 39 Ounces of Spi∣rit and Flegm, and five Ounces and half of Oyl, and nineteen Ounces of Coals, from which you may ex∣tract four or six Drams of an alcalious or fixt Salt, which Salt is aperitive and sudorifick, and may serve to fortifie any Vehicle against the French Disease, being given from 10. gr. to 30.
§ 9. The Spirit of Guajacum is nothing but a dissolution of the essential Salt of the Wood in a portion of its Flegm. It is Sudorifick and Nephritick; it is much ap∣plauded in Diseases of the Bladder, to purifie the Mass of Blood, so that some af∣firm, that by continuing the use of it for several Weeks à ʒj. ad iij. plus-minus, in its own Water, from four to eight Ounces, it is able to expel and carry off, through the pores of the skin, the Ve∣nereal Venom, especially if not too inveterate, without making use of Mercury. It is good for the Cure of Ve∣nereal Ulcers which happen in the Mouth, or other parts, being mixt with Aqua Mellis. It is diaphoretick from its be∣ing repleat with volatile Salt, and is given against all sorts of Rheumatisms, Scurvey, Gout, &c. from half a Dram to two or three Drams, in a Glass full of the Decoction of the same Wood, especially when it is required to expel the sharp Serosities by Sweat, or sensible Transpiration. § 10. The Oyl stinks above measure, and therefore is sel∣dom used inwardly by rea∣son of its ill scent; but out∣wardly it is successfully used for the cure of all sorts of Ulcers, chiefly Venereal, to cleanse Wounds, and con∣sume proud Flesh, as also for the opening and exfoliation of Bones, and to resist Putre∣faction. It is plainly of a fiery nature, and has both a Cathartick & Caustick force: but mixed and prepared with S. V. rectified, it may be taken inwardly with o∣ther Sudorificks, and Alexi∣pharmicks against the Plague and malign Feavers, as also against the French-Pox, Pal∣sie, Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Hy∣sterick Fits, Vapours, Pains of the Teeth, and the like; and Authors affirm, that some have been cured of the Pox, by the constant use of this Oyl for some Weeks, from four to ten or twelve, drops, in a small Decoction of the Wood. Inwardly given, al∣so, it drives forth the After∣birth: outwardly it is indeed a good thing for rottenness of the Bones, and to cleanse old Ulcers, as I said before; al∣so to ripen Aposthumes and Venereal Bubo's, and resolve cold Tumours. § 11. Le Mort rectifies the Spirit by itsself in a Retort, and says, it contains a double Spirit, viz. a volatile and an acid Spirit: both which you may separate after this manner: ℞ Spirit of Guajacum lbj. put
it into a Cucurbit, and in B.M. abstract ℥iv. which is the volatile Spirit: what re∣mains in the Cucurbit put into a Glass Retort, and di∣stil in Sand; so will there come forth, first an insipid Flegm, which cast away, then follows the acid Spirit. The volatile Spirit you may again rectifie in B. M. by mixing it with Ashes of Gua∣jacum calcined to whiteness, so will it come forth most subtil and efficacious: Dose of the volatile Spirit is à gut. vj. ad xxx. of the acid Spi∣rit à ʒss. ad ʒij. or iij. § 12. After the same manner may you draw the Spirits and Oyls of the Woods of the Oak, Ash, Cyprus, Cedar, Box, Juniper, Hazle, Wal∣nut, Chestnut, &c. LIV. † Spiritus Lavendulae florum, Spirit of Lavender-flowers. Salmon.] § 1. You may make this Spirit two ways: 1. By Fermentation: ℞ Green Lavender-flowers, q. s. bruise them, add to them to every lbof the Flowerslbiij. of warm Water; and to every lbiij. of Water, a pound of Sugar, or Melussos, cause them to fer∣ment in awooden Vessel, till it has a kind of Win-like scent; then distil, and draw off a third part for Spirit of La∣vender: and a second third part for Lavender-flower Wa∣ter, which keep for use. § 2. Without Fermentation it is made thus: ℞ Lavender-flowers lbvj. Spirit of Wine lbxviij. mix and digest twen∣ty four hours, then distil in a Glass Body in B. M. drawing off the Spirit to driness: So will you have a subtil Spirit endowed with all Properties of the Lavender-flowers. § 3. The Spirit and the Water have one and the same Vir∣tue, but differ onely in strength, the Spirit having thrice the efficacy of the Wa∣ter; and therefore may be gi∣ven in treble Dose. § 4. This Spirits is hot and dry, Cepha∣lick, Neucrotick, and of thin parts: good against Diseases of the Head and Nerves, and is used chiefly in Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Palsies, Cramps, Catarrhs, Megrims, Vertigo's, Lethargies, and Trembling. It provokes Urine and the Terms, expels both Birth and After-birth, eases the Wind; and outwardly applied takes away Pains in the Head, Joynts, and Nerves proceed∣ing from a cold cause. § 5. Dose of the Spirit ʒij. of the Water ʒvj. in any fit Liquor. ℞ Of this Spirit ℥ij. Spirit of
Saffron ʒj. Poppy and Ange∣lica-water A. ℥ij. White Su∣gar-candy ʒiij. mix and dis∣solve for a Dose against Faint∣ing and Swooning. §6. You may make this Spirit also af∣ter this manner: ℞ Laven∣der-flowers lbvj. Manna, Sugar, or Honey lbj. White-wine, in which a little Leven is dissol∣ved, enough to make them in∣to a soft mass (the Manna and Flowers being first beaten toge∣ther well in a Mortar) put all into an earthen Pitcher or Jarr, filling it well, and pres∣sing it down; carefully stop the mouth with Cork and a little Wax melted, then set it by to ferment, till it has got∣ten a Wine-like scent, or is become somewhat sour; then take all out, and put it into a Glass Cucurbit with its Head and Receiver; and distil in B. M. so you will have an Ardent Spirit, repleat with the Odour of the Flowers, this, if you so please, you may cohobate upon fresh Flowers, by which means it will become stronger and more efficacious. § 7. Now because Flowers are very apt to a dissipation of their parts, by reason of the tenuity of their substance, Authors strive to recompence this by the ad∣dition of some other parts of the Plant, adding, for Ex∣ample-sake, to Roses their Hip: To Orange, Lemon, and Ci∣tron-flowers, the Fruit well stampt: To Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Mint, Bawm, Lavender, Thyme, Stechas, Jesamine, &c. their Seeds, well bruised: To the Flowers of Lilly, Flower-de-luces, Peony, Angelica, &c. their Roots and Seeds bruised: To Flowers of Petty Mu∣get, Elder, Dwarf-Elder, &c. their Berries, §8. Others moisten the Flowers with All-Flower-water, and then distil in B.M. (after a pre∣vious Fermentation) coho∣bating upon fresh Flowers as often as they please. Some use Spirit of May-dew, inso∣lating first, then distilling and cohobating upon fresh Flowers; affirming, That Spirit of May-dew, and Cows∣dung, are very necessary in the first distillation of Flow∣ers, but not in the latter di∣stillations, by which means you will have Water perfect∣ly odoriferous, of which one Ounce will be more fragrant than ten Ounces distilled the ordinary way. LV. † Spiritus Limomum, Spi∣rit of Lemon-peels. Salmon.] § 1. It is made exactly as the Spirit of Orange-peels, at Sect. 50. aforegoing,
to which we referr you. In making this Spirit, you must be sure to take only the out∣ward yellow rind, which you may pare off with a knife. § 2. You must take this rind while it is yet recent and smooth, retaining its fragrant smell, not when it is faded, grown rugged, and half dry: for being fresh, these rinds have a subtil and volatile Spi∣rit, which insinuates itself in∣to the Brain, strengthning and recreating both it and the Nerves; whereas being withered and shrunk, the taste is unpleasant and bitterish, and void of that vivacity and pleasantness it had before: This being distilled with re∣ctified Spirit of Wine in B.M. gives you a most admirable Spirit beyond all comparison for fragrancy and delicacy: the same may be done in a Copper Vesica from White-wine, drawing off the one half. § 3. This Spirit is a most excellent Cephalick and Neurotick, curing most cold Diseases of the Head and Brain, as Apoplexies, Epilep∣sies, Megrims, Vertigo's, Le∣thargies, Palsies, Tremblings, &c. being taken à ʒss. ad ʒij. even to ℥ss. in a Glass of Wine, or mixt with some other Cor∣dial Water. § 4. Outward∣ly it may be used against Pains and Aches from a cold Cause, cold Gouts, and Head∣achs, Bruises, and such like. It comforts weak and feeble Joynts and Limbs, adding strength and agility to them, and this by being used both outwardly and inwardly. It is a Specifick in Diseases of the Womb, and is reported by some Midwives to cure Barrenness. § 5. You may make in Elixir of it after this manner: ℞ Of this Spirit ℥viij. of the outward rind ℥ij. Ambergrise ℈j. Oriental Musk gr. vj. (both the Perfumes ground with white Sugar-can∣dy ʒij.) mix and digest for ten days, then filter and keep it for use. After the same man∣ner you may make an Elixir both of Orange and Citron-peels. § 6. This Elixir is a choice Cordial which has few equals; it is good against Faintings and Swoonings, Sickness at Heart, Deliqui∣um of the Spirits, and chiefly in sudden Accidents after vio∣lent exercise. It is good both for Men and Women, except such as are apt to be troubled with Vapours and Hysterick Fits: In those Cases it may be made without the Musk and Ambergrise, and then this, as also that made with Orange-peels, you will find to be a Specifick to facilitate
and hasten the Birth of Wo∣men in Labour, &c. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒj. or more in a Glass of Wine, or some Cordial-Water. LVI. † Spiritus Menthae, Spirit of Mint. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ A good quantity of Mint newly ga∣thered, bruise it, and put to it (in a wooden Vessel) a good quantity of warm Water, or rather of Mint-water; in eve∣ry three quarts of which dis∣solve a pound of Sugar, or ra∣ther as much Manna: let them lie to ferment till they have acquired a vinous scent; then distil in B.M. drawing off the third part for Spirit of Mint: the second third part for Mint-water: what remains in the Still may be cast away. This Spirit and Water by cohoba∣ting again upon fresh Mint, may yet be made stronger. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Fresh Mint lbvj. rectified Spirit of Wine lbiv. mix, digest twenty four hours, then draw off lbiv. of Spirit in B.M. or if you please you may distil to driness, which then may be coholobated upon fresh Mint, and repeated a∣gain if you see fit. It is an ex∣cellent Spirit. § 3. To make the Mint-water aforementi∣oned. ℞ Fresh Mint, q. v. beat it well in a Mortar, put it into a long earthen Pot, and make it sufficiently moist with Juyce of other Mint; cover it, and leave it so about two days in digestion, then put the mat∣ter into a large Copper Vesica, with its Head and Refrigera∣tory, as also its Receiver, lu∣ting well the Junctures with a wet Bladder: make a Fire of the second degree, and distil off about the one half of the Juyce which you added, then cease distilling; so will you have a good Mint-water, re∣pleat with the odour and fla∣vour of the Herb. Put it in a Bottle, and expose it open to the Sun five or six days, then stop it up and keep it for use. §4. Now here is to be noted, that in the distillation of this Water, we add a good quan∣tity of the Juyce of Mint, be∣cause there would be no good distilling of the Herb itself, without it was first moistned with something, and in my Opinion, the Juyce of the same Plant much exceeds fair Water, which other Authors use. And besides, this Juyce which is added serves to im∣bibe the volatile parts of the Herb, in the fermentation, and when the Matter is heat∣ed, the more spiritous part, as being the lighter, rises first and smells less of the Empy∣reuma,
than if the Herb was distilled without being moist∣ned with the said Juyce. § 5. In these and the like distilla∣tions you must given Fire from the second to the third de∣gree, because if it should be too little, none of the essenti∣al or volatile Salt of the Plant would rise; but if it be too strong, the Water will taste of an Empyreuma, do what you can: therefore, if you would proceed rightly, distil so as to make one drop only to follow another. § 6. These Waters so soon as they are distilled have no great smell; but having lain some time in the Sun, the spiritous parts will exert their activity in the aqueous, and the Water will become fragrant which was not so before. § 7. What remains in the Still after the Water is drawn off, strain out by pressing, and evapo∣rate with a gentle heat, till it comes to the consistency of an Extract, which does con∣tain almost all the essential Salt of the Plant, and there∣fore is of greater Virtue than the Water before distilled, for in this Salt the principal Virtue of the Plant does con∣sist. This Extract is stoma∣tick and Cardiack, opens Ob∣structions of the Lungs, Reins, and Womb, working by per∣spiration, and may be given à ʒss. ad ʒij. dissolved in its proper Water. § 8. The Vir∣tues of the Spirit of Mint. This Spirit is chiefly stoma∣tick, cephalick and uterine, of thin parts, and subastrin∣gent. It is used mostly a∣gainst Vomiting, and debili∣ty of the Stomach, Crudities, hicket, nauseating Wind, faint∣ings, Obstructions of the Li∣ver, Pains of the Guts, and the Belly-ache in Children, Megrim, Vertigo, Lethargy, Coagulation of Milk, Colick, &c. it opens, attenuates, dis∣cusses, cures Diseases of the Womb, provokes the Terms, strengthens the Liver, and re∣sists Poyson, and particularly the Narcotick quality of O∣pium; outwardly by bathing on the Region of the Abdo∣men it eases the Colick, and takes away the hardness of Womens Breasts, from curd∣ling of the Milk, by bathing the part, and taking it also inwardly: Dose à ʒij. ad vj. LVII. † Spiritus Nucis Mos∣chatae, Spirit of Nutmegs. Salmon.] § 1. Thô Spirits of Nutmegs is a thing seldom made, nor prescribed in any Author, yet for the Publick good sake (since it is a thing
of most excellent use) we shall take the pains to de∣scribe it here. ℞ Of the best Nutmegs ℥viij. grate them on a Grater, or beat them very small in an Iron Mortar, put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and affuse thereon tartarised Spirit of Wine or Alcohol of S.V. lbv. mix and digest forty eight hours, then distil in B. M. to driness. § 2. This is an ex∣cellent Spirit of Nutmegs▪ but if you cohobate it upon the faeces three or four times, it will be much stronger, and more subtil, and contain more of the oily particles dissolved in itsself. The Feces you may reserve for other Extra∣ctions, to be made use of when you extract a Chymi∣cal Oil, the which, in its place, we shall shew. § 3. It is Cephalick, Stomatick, Car∣diack, Neurotick, and Ute∣rine; it warms and cherishes a cold and afflicted Brain, and Habit of Body; com∣forts the Nerves, strenghens the Stomach, and causes a sweet Breath. It discusses Wind, eases the Colick, and Gripings of the Guts, sharp∣ens the Eye-sight, comforts the Liver and Spleen, pro∣vokes Urine, is good against the Whites, and a cold Di∣stemper of the Womb, it chears the Heart, revives the Spirits, is good against the Palsie, Cramp, Tremblings, and other weaknesses of the Nerves, and prevails against the Apoplexy, Vertigo, Me∣grim, Head-ache, from a cold Cause, Lethargy, and other the Distempers of the Head. § 4. Modus Utendi. ℞ Aqua Lactis Alexiteria ℥iiss. Spirit of Nutmegs ʒij. ad ℥ss. Spirit of Saffron ʒss. Syrup of Citrons or Lemons ʒvj. mix for a Cordial draught. Or thus: ℞ Aqua Lactin Scorbutica ℥iiiss. Spirit of Nutmegs ʒij. Volatile Spirit of Vitriol ʒss. mix for a Dose to be given in the Morning fast∣ing, against Diseases of the Head. LVIII. † Spiritus Opii, Spirit of Opium. Salmon.] § 1. This is a Prescript which no Author, that we know of, or have seen, has in the least treated of; and because the Medi∣cament is excellent, and there are, or may be various ways of preparing it, some of which exceed others, we shall do our endeavour to exhibit here the best Methods of its Preparation; which because we write them out of the Fire, and not from any Au∣thor,
we hope will be the more acceptable to all the Sons of Art. § 2. ℞ Choice Thebian Opium lbj. cut it into bits, and with your hand dis-dissolve it in a quart, or more, of pure rectified Spirit of Wine, over a gentle heat: what is dis∣solved decant, and add more rectified Spirit, dissolving and decanting so long, till all the Opium is dissolved, and till you have mixed with it five or six quarts of the said Spirit, and nothing but a little straw, dross, leaves, and feces to be left be∣hind, which cast away: Put all these dissolutions of Opi∣um into a Glass Cucurbit, with its Head, Worm, and Receiver, and in B.M. draw off the Spi∣rit by a gentle heat to driness, which that it might compre∣hend the full of the Opium, cohobate it again upon the Magma or Feces; digest it in a very gentle heat for three or four days till the Magma is dissolved, and in like manner distil again, thus cohobating, digesting, and distilling, three or four several times, you shall have a most excellent Spirit repleat with the Powers and Virtue of the Opium, a thou∣sand times transcending for pleasantness all the Tinctures that can be made of it in the World. § 3. Or thus: ℞ Thebian Opium lbj. dissolve it in Vinegar lbiij. digest a Week, and decant the Tin∣cture: to the Magma add Vinegar lbiij. more, digest and decant as before, not troubling the sediment. To the Magma put Tartarised S. V. lbiij. mix and digest three days, then gently de∣cant the Tincture: upon the Magma put tartarised S.V. lbiij. more, mix, and di∣gest again three days more, then decant the Tincture as before, casting away the dregs: put these Tinctures of the Vinegar and Spirit of Wine together, mix, and di∣gest in a very gentle heat for three Months, that they may unite and meliorate together: then put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and draw off the first volatile Spirit in B. M. so much as will easily come over: cohobate the Spirit up∣on the Magma, and distil a∣gain, cohobating and distil∣ling thus four or five times to driness, so will you have a volatile Spirit repleat with all the Virtues and Powers of the Opium, as aforesaid. § 4. Or thus: ℞ Thebian O∣pium lbj. dissolve it in this following Menstruum lbx. (℞ Tartarised S. V. p. 16. Spirit of Nitre, or Oyl Vitriol, p. j. mix, digest, and unite them by drawing them over the
Helm) Put them into a Glass Cucurbit, digest two or three days then in B. M. distil to driness, cohobating and distil∣ling three or four several times. This is a noble Spirit of O∣pium, and not inferiour to any of the former. § 5. Or thus: ℞ Thebian Opium lbj. of the Spiritus Intimus (in our Seplasium, lib. 2. cap. 6. sect. 19.) lbvj. cut into bits the Opium and dissolve it, digest three or four days, then distil it in a Glass Cu∣curbit in B. M. to driness, cohobating thrice: so will the Spirit ascend with the volatile Salt of most admira∣ble use, and for some purpo∣ses much transcending any of the former. § 6. Or thus: ℞ Thebian Opium in bits lbj. Powers of Turpentine lbx. mix, dissolve, digest three or four days, and draw off the Spirit in a Glass Cucurbit in B. M. cohobating thrice. This is a noble Spirit, and of great Virtues. § 7. Or thus: ℞ Thebian Opium cut in bits lbj. Rain-water lbiv. mix: put them into a Glass Matrass, and dissolve over a gentle heat in twenty four hours, stirring it often, increasing the Fire at the end, that it may just boil; being a little cooled and setled, decant the clearest of it, which filter through brown Paper while warm: to the remainder put Rain-water lbiv. more, with which proceed as with the former, decanting and filtering. To the remaining Sediment in the Matrass, put of rectified S. V. lbiv. mix, digest close stopt for forty eight hours, then decant the Tincture, which al∣so filter as before: to the feces in the Matrass add again tar∣tarized S. V. lbiv. mix, di∣gest, and extract the Tincture as before, which filter also, cast∣ing away the faeces in the Ma∣trass, as now of no use. Put all these Tinctures both aqueous and spiritous together into a Glass Cucurbit, with its Head Serpentine and Receiver, and in a Sand heat draw off a pure Spirit of Opium lbx. which keep for use. What re∣mains in the Matrass evapo∣rate to the consistency of an Extract, of which you may make a most excellent Lau∣danum. § 8. There is also a way of extracting the Spi∣rit with pure Wine Vinegar after this manner: ℞ Of the best Thebian Opium in bits, dissolve it in strong Vinegar, casting away the filth, then di∣stil it in an Alembick with a strong Fire to driness, cohoba∣ting thrice, and distilling in like manner. § 9. But Opi∣um as it contains, 1. A Flegm. 2. A Spirit and volatile Salt.
3. A black stinking Oyl; so by distilling it per se, may they be separated thus: ℞ Opium, put it into a Glass Re∣tort with a large Receiver, and distil in Sand, first with a gentle Fire, afterwards in∣creasing it gradually to the third degree, cause the Flegm, Spirit, or volatile Salt, and lastly be thick black stinking Oyl to come over the Helm: all which separate and recti∣fie according to Art. In the bottom of the Retort you will have a Caput Mort. con∣taining a small quantity of fixed Salt, of the nature of o∣ther fixt alcalious Salts, and a useless Earth, which is to be cast away. § 10. Where note, That this Spirit thus distilled by a Retort, is a vo∣latile urinous Spirit, which is followed by a copious Sul∣phur, or oleaginous inflama∣ble substance: this urinous Spirit is indeed diaphoretick, and by its exceeding subtilty in penetrating, causes Sweat. However this is not the Spirit intended by our Author, but rather some one of the for∣mer of a sulphurous, or sul∣phurous saline nature distilled as aforesaid in a Cucurbit. § 11. One Preparation more remains, which because some may value before all the rest, we shall be willing to insert. ℞ Opium in bits lbj. dissolve by gentle boiling in a gallon of Water, then strain and cast the filth or feces away: to this add another gallon of fair Rain-water: add Sugar, or Melus∣sos lbiv. and a good Leven; dissolve, and being warm, cause the Liquor gently to ferment for some days, till it becomes of a vinous scent; then put all into a Copper Vesica, with its Head, Serpentine and Recei∣ver, distil and draw off lbviij. or ix. of Spirit, which keep for use. What remains in the Vesica pour out, and in an earthen Pan evaporate to the consistency of an Extract, of which you may make Laudanum. § 12. The Ma∣gma left at the end of the di∣stillation, at § 2. may be ab∣stracted to the thickness of an Extract for the making of Laudanum: for the same purpose the dry Magma at § 3. may serve, but it has not altogether the same strength and virtue, because many of the volatile saline particles are carried off by the Spirit. The Magma also at § 4. may serve as an Ingredient for Lauda∣num, so also those at § 5, 6, & 7, 8, & 11. as at the end of the said 7, & 11 Para∣graphs we have hinted. § 13. From hence it appears, that the Spirit drawn only with
sulphurous Spirits, or that Spirit drawn only with acid or saline Spirits, cannot be altogether so forcible as Tin∣ctures drawn with the same; for the first contain only an Opiate Sulphur, with little or none of the volatile Salt: and the other contains chiefly a volatile opiatick Salt, with little or nothing of an opiate Sulphur. But that Spirit which is drawn with a sul∣phurous acid Spirit, or sul∣phurous saline Spirit, con∣tains both an opiatick Sul∣phur, and an acid volatile or urinous volatile Salt, al∣most in the same proportion that the Tincture does, whe∣ther it be made with a sul∣phurous, acid, or saline Men∣struum. § 14. These Spirits are all of them much plea∣santer than either the Tin∣ctures or Extract of Opium, or any preparation of Opi∣um which contains the Body of the Concrete; for they never make the stomach sick; as those other oftentimes do; nor yet disturb the Head o∣therwise than it is possible Spirit of Wine may do, which is a considerable advantage in their Operation. And al∣tho' they are not altogether so strong and forcible as is Tincture or Extract of Opi∣um, yet they operate with much more speed and safety than possibly the others can; for they fly like lightning through the whole Body, and give ease and relief not only to the Spirits, but to the whole Body almost in a mo∣ment. § 15. These Spirits are not capable of these ill effects which usually happen from other Preparations of Opi∣um; they suppress not the excretion of Excrements, nor stop the passages of Urine, they benumb not, nor ener∣vate the Limbs, nor change the natural complexion of the skin to paleness; they neither cause cold sweats nor yet shortness of Breath, or difficulty of breathing, with a perturbation of the Senses, drowsiness and stupefaction of the Animal and Vital Fa∣culties; but they have all the good effects which are at∣tributed to the most excellent Laudanums, thô not with the self-same strength and force. § 16. They appease all per∣turbations, intestine and vio∣lent Commotions of the Body; Disquietings, Rage, Fury, and Madness of the Archeus, (the principal Director of the Spi∣rit of Life,) restoring again Peace and Concord, and maintaining it between the Faculties and Motions of the Body; so that after they have
softly and silently (as it were) appeased the pain, and allay∣ed the Grief, they procure a quiet and pleasant rest and sleep, restore Nature to its pristine state, and repair the decayed strength, whereby unthought-of Health comes on, with a violent carreere, and takes possession of its an∣cient Habitation: Extinguish∣ing in all Ages and Sexes, and in what Condition soever the sharpness and anguish of Di∣seases. Dose à ʒss. ad j. ij. iij. yea, to ʒiv. according to Age, Strength, Condition, and Necessity of the Sick. § 17. These Spirits are of such an amicable and kind nature, that scarce any Cordial should be given without them: they may also themselves be made more Cordial, if after the last cohobation, they be drawn off with these following ad∣ditaments: To the quantity of Spirit mentioned in the for∣mer Preparations, add Saffron, Cochineel in Pouder, ana ℥iv. Vipers Flesh, Nutmegs, A. ℥iij. Cloves, Mace, A ℥j. Zedoary, Snake-root, A. ʒss. mix, digest twenty four hours, then draw off the Spirit in B. M. and keep it as a most precious Cor∣dial for use: in the Glass hang a Nodule of Musk gr. 10. Am∣bergrise gr. vj. ground with white Sugar-candy ʒij. to add a fragrancy to it for refresh∣ing the Animal Spirits. LIX. † Spiritus papaveris er∣ratici Simplex, Spirit of the Wild Poppy, or Corn Rose. Salmon.] § 1. I presume that what our Author here intends is a simple Spirit from the Flowers of the Plant; which if so, and you desire a pure and neat Me∣dicine, you may make it af∣ter this manner: ℞ Wild Pop∣py-flowers lbviij. rectified Spi∣rit of Wine lbxvj. mix, di∣gest a Week, then distil in a Glass Alembick in B. M. to driness: Affuse this distilled Liquor, upon as many more of the same Flowers, digest again three days, and distil as before: this distilled Liquor affuse a∣gain a third time, and if you so please a fourth time in like manner upon fresh Flowers, distilling each time to driness; lastly, in a gentle B. M. draw off three parts of the Liquor, which keep as Spirit of Poppies simple. §2 ℞ Or thus: ℞ Fresh Poppy-flowers lbxx. Witne lbxvj. mix, and with Sugar lbiij. and a large Leven dissolved in the Wine cause a fermentation, till the whole becomes some∣what acid: then distil in B. M. to dryness: affuse the
Liquor upon lbx. of fresh Flow∣ers digest three days, and distil in like manner again to dri∣ness: lastly, in a gentle B. M. draw off the one half of the Liquor, which keep for Spirit of Poppies: Continue the di∣stillation to driness, in the same B. M. and keep the Li∣quor for Aqua Papaveris, or reserve it for making more Spirit with. §3. If you design a Spirit from the whole Plant, you may likewise proceed in the same manner as with the Flowers, by either of the former ways, or otherwise, after this manner: ℞ Poppies the whole Plant q. v. bruise it well in a Mortar, add warm Rain-water four times the quantity in weight, in every Gallon of Water dissolve lbj. of Sugar: mix well, and cause them to ferment to a fit acidi∣ty; then distil with a Copper Vesica tinn'd within, in a pro∣per heat, drawing of the first quarter part of the humidity for Spirit of Poppies; and half the remaining part for Poppy-water, which keep for use, or reserve for making new Spirit of Poppies. § 4. It is an excellent thing against the Colick, and to alleviate Pains in any part of the Body: it gives ease in the Stone, and is profitable against After-pains of Women in Travel, and with a great deal of plea∣sure induces sleep: but these things it does more power∣fully, if you make a Tincture of the Flowers with the same: It has in a word the Virtues of the former Spirit, but not altogether so powerful. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒiij. Plus-minus. LX. † Spiritus Papaveris al∣bi, Spirit of White Pop∣pies. Salmon,] § 1. It is made either of the Flowers, or of the whole Plant, as the Spi∣rit of the Corn Poppy is made, in all respects, by § 1, 2, 3. of the former Section. §2. The Virtues are also the same with that, and the Spi∣rit of Opium aforemention∣ed, save that this is somewhat stronger than the Spirit of the Wild, thô scarcely so strong as the Spirit of Opium. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒij. or more. LXI. † Spiritus Papaveris ni∣gris, Spirit of Black Pop∣pies. Salmon.] § 1. This is also made as the two former, whe∣ther you make it of the Flow∣ers, or of the whole Plant, and therefore in that respect, no more need be said of it in this place. § 2. And the Vir∣tues,
Uses, and Doses are the same with the Spirit of Opi∣um aforegoing, it being much stronger than either of the two former Spirits: It is an excellent Medicine indeed, and in my Opinion an excel∣lent thing to go into the com∣position of most Cordials. § 3. Modus Ʋtendi: ℞ Aq. Lactis Alexiteria ℥iv. Spirit of Saffron ℥ss. Spirit of Black Poppies ʒvj. Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers ℥j. mix and make a Cordial. Dose three or four spoonfuls at a time. LXII. † Spiritus Raphani Compositus, Spirit of Ra∣dishes compound. ℞ Sal Armoniack, Tartar calcin'd with Nitre, A. dissolve them in Wormwood-water com∣pound, distilled without the Spirit, and in Scurvy-grass Water compound, A. q. s. (see them cap. 1. sect. 62. & 63. of this Book) mix the Soluti∣ons, and distil them in Glass or Tin Vessels in B. M. Salmon.] § 1. How this can be called Spirit of Ra∣dishes, without any Radishes at all in it, I cannot tell, un∣less the name is given to it from the small quantity of Horse-Radish Roots in the Scurvygrass Water mention∣ed, being but a fifth part of the Scurvygrass in the said Composition, and not above a twelfth part of this present Recipe. § 2. The best way of making it is thus: ℞ The said Wormwood and Scurvygrass Waters compound A. lbxvj. Horse-Radish Roots bruised lbviij. mix and distil in B.M. to driness, which cohobate twice or thrice, then take Sal Ar∣moniack and Tartar calcin'd with Nitre A. lbiv. of the for∣mer distilled Water or Spirit of Horse-Radishes, lbviij. mix and dissolve, and then distil the Spirit as we have taught you to distil the Spirit of Sal Armoniack at Sect. 24. § 2.8.10. of this Chapter. § 3. It has all the Virtues of the simple Spirit of Sal Armoni∣ack, and therefore is of sin∣gular use against Pleurisies, Quinsies, and all manner of Obstructions whatsoever; besides which, it is of appro∣ved Vertue against the Gra∣vel and Stone, whether in the Reins or Bladder, or any o∣ther matter which may ob∣struct the Urine in those parts: It also facilitates the Delivery, if given to a Wo∣man in Labour. Dose à gut. 20. ad 60. Plus-minus, in a Glass of Wine.
LXIII. † Spiritus Rutae, Spi∣rit of Rue. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Fresh Rue bruise it well, put it into a wooden Vessel, and add to it warm Spring-water q.s. Sugar or Melussos a pound to every gallon of the whole matter; let it ferment for ten days; then put in more Water, and distil in a Copper Vesica, draw∣ing off a third part for Spirit of Rue, and a third part more for Rue-Water, which keep a∣part for use: the Spirit you may rectifie S.A. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Fresh Rue bruised lbviij. of the best rectified Spirit of Wine lbxvj. mix, digest forty eight hours, then distil in B. M. to driness. This Spirit put up∣on as much more of fresh Rue bruised, digest, and distil as be∣fore, which repeat in like man∣ner the third time, so will you have a Spirit very strong, and fully repleat with all the essen∣tial properties of the Herb. § 3. It is hot, dry, piercing, and attenuating, discusses and expels Wind, is Cephalick, Neurotick, Hysterick, and A∣lexipharmick, used chiefly a∣gainst the Plague, and all o∣ther malignant Diseases. It is highly Sudorifick, expels Poyson, cures the Pleurisie, weakness of the Stomach, Co∣lick, Gripings of the Guts, Biting of Mad Dogs, Ser∣pents, and all other venemous Beasts. It is profitable against Agues, (being bathed on the Back-bone) as also the Me∣grim, Head-ache, Vertigo, sickness at Stomach, palpita∣tion of the Heart, Surfeits, and the like. It is apt to provoke the Terms, and there∣fore not so very good for Women with Child. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiij. in any Cordial Draught, or in a Glass of Wine. LXIV. † Spiritus de Sassafras, Spirit of Sassafras. Salmon.] § 1. Whether our Author intends the simple Spirit drawn per se, in a Re∣tort; or the sulphurous Spi∣rit drawn with Spirit of Wine in an Alembick, the matter is not great: for we are resolved, because we will not miss the right, to handle both. § 2. The sulphurous Spirit of Sassaphras is distilled with Spirit of Wine, thus: ℞ Raspings of Sassafras, or ra∣ther the Pouder of it ground in a Mill (as the j grind Pou∣der of Liquorice, &c.) lbxij. re∣ctified Spirit of Wine lbxxiv. mix, digest two days, then add fair Water lbxxiv. put all in∣to a Copper Vesica with its
Head, both Tinn'd within, with its Serpentine and Receiver, and distil first with a gentle fire, and increase it to the se∣cond Degree, continuing the Distillation till the lbxxiiij. of Spirit a come off, which will be v very strong of the Sassafras: But if you distil in a Glass B. M. you need add no Wa∣ter, but may distil to dryness and Cohobate Two or Three times, by which means it will be yet stronger of the Ingre∣dient. § 3. The Acid Spirit distilled in a Retort per se. This is done exactly, as that of Guajacum at Sect. 53. § 24. aforegoing, to which I refer you. But in these Aromatick Woods that Spirit is best, and most homogene to our Bo∣dies, which is distilled with Spirit of Wine, as before di∣rected. § 4. This Spirit is accounted as an Antidote a∣gainst the French Pox, and an universal Remedy against Catarrhs; It is Cephalick, Neurotick, Cardiack, and A∣lexipharmick, attenuates, o∣pens, discusses, causes Sweat, and cures Barrenness in both Sexes. It is carminative, ex∣pels Wind, and strengthens the Stomach admirably. § 5. That distilled with Spi∣rit of Wine, is the pleasant∣est, and for all that I know, the most effectual in the pre∣cited Cases; for it sweetens the Blood admirably, and may be given à ʒj ad ʒiij: That distilled by Retort, has the same Virtues, repleat with the Volatile Salt of the Concrete, and is more espe∣cially good against Vapors, and hypochondriack Fits, and may be given à ʒj ad ʒij. in any Fit Vehicle. § 6. The Oyl which will be distilled the latter way, is very fetid, and not to be ta∣ken inwardly, unless first re∣ctified from Colcothar, or Bone-Ashes. Then it may profitably be given against the French Pox, Vapors, Fits of the Mother, &c. à gut. i. ad iij or iiij. Outwardly it cures Pocky Pustles and Sores, and all sorts of Putrid and Venemous Ulcers; It also cures Gangreens, and ex∣foliates rotten Bones. LXV. † Spiritus Succini, Spi∣rit of Amber. Salmon.] § 1. Spirit of Amber is also twofold: 1. The Acid Spirit. 2. A Sulphu∣rous Spirit made with Spirit of Wine. § 2. ℞ Amber grosly beaten, put it into an Earthen Retort, so as to fill it Two Thirds full; fit to it a large Receiver, luting the Juncture close: Make a gentle fire first
only to warm the Retort, then augment it gradatim, till the Spirit and Oyl come forth, con∣tinuing the fire till no more distils: When cold, and unlu∣ted, put about a Pint of fair warm Water into the Receiver, and stirring it soundly about, dissolve the Volatile Salt, which many times sticks to the sides of the Receiver. Put all this Liquor into a Glass Alembick, fit to it a Receiver, and luting well the Junctures, make first a very gentle fire, which aug∣ment by degrees, so will the Flegm and Spirit ascend, carry∣ing with them a little White Oyl; Continue the fire till no more arises, so will the thick Oyl be left at bottom. § 3. Se∣parate the Flegm and Spirit from the White Oyl; and the Black Oyl (if you so please) you may rectifie from Colcothar or Bone-Ashes, as is often afore-directed. The Flegm and Spirit yet remains together, which you must thus separate: Put them into an Earthen or Glass Dish, and evaporate it about two thirds over a gentle fire, that which remains is the Acid Spirit of Amber, which keep in a Vial close stopt for use. § 4. Where note, That there is little rea∣son for this trouble of evapo∣rating the Flegm; for you cannot so securely do it, but that some of the Volatile Sa∣line Particles will go along with it, which will be a loss to you: And what need is there of thus separating its own natural Flegm from it? for that when it is done, the Spirit cannot be given alone, but must be mixt with some other Flegmatick Vehicle to con∣vey it in: And if so, why should not its own Flegm be as good as any thing For∣reign, for that a less quanti∣ty of another Vehicle would then serve the turn? § 5. The Black Oyl remaining in the bottom of the Cucurbit, by reason of its fetidness is scarce∣ly fit to be given inwardly without rectification; but it may be kept for outward use to anoint the Noses and Wrists, of Women troubled with Va∣pors and Fits of the Mother. § 6. But if you would rectifie it, mix it with so much Sand as is necessary to make it into a Body, which put into a Retort, place it in a Furnace, and force over the Oyl, so will it come over-red, but exceeding clear, which is to be kept by it self, and may serve instead of the White. § 7. This, as al∣so the White Oyl, may be given inwardly in all Hyste∣rick Distempers, Palsies, A∣poplexies, Epilepsies, Verti∣go's, Lethargies, and other
Distempers of the Brain, Nerves and Womb. Dose à gut. ij ad x. § 8. The Spi∣rit is an excellent Aperitive, and is successfully given a∣gainst all the aforesaid Di∣stempers, but chiefly against the Epilepsie, Jaundice, Stop∣page of Urine, Ulcers in the Neck of the Bladder, Scur∣vey, Cachexia, Dropsies, Rheumatisms, and other the like Diseases; for that this Spirit is only the Volatile Salt of Amber, dissolved in some of its Flegm, and may be gi∣ven à gut. xij. ad xxx. in some convenient Liquor. The Oyl may be dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg, by grinding them together, whereby it will easily mix with any Wa∣ter, Wine or Broath. § 9. If you would separate the Salt from the Flegm, you may do thus: Evaporate about a third part of the Spirit over a very gentle fire, then put the re∣mainder into a cool place, lea∣ving it there ten or twelve days without stirring it, so will it crystallize, which you are to take and keep in a Vial close stopt. § 10. But here is to be noted, that it is much better to keep the Salt with its Flegm, for in Evaporation (tho' with never so gentle a Fire) some part of it will fly away; besides, it is easier kept with its flegm, than a∣part from it, because it will be apt to dissolve. § 11. This Salt is acid, and like unto the essential Salt of Plants, and being less volatile than that of Animals cannot rise so high in rectification, and being heavier than the flegm, lets the flegm rise first, for which reason we chuse the method of crystallizing it, rather than that of subliming it. But there is an excellent and subtil volatile Salt of Amber to be made by subli∣mation from the Amber it self, of which we shall say nothing here, but reserve you to its determined place: These Salts of Amber have the Virtues of the Spirit a∣forementioned. § 12. The sulphurous Spirit of Amber, made with Spirit of Wine, is done as we have taught in our Pharmacopoeia Londinen∣sis, lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 39. where Amber in Pouder, p. i. is mixt with rectified S. V. p. ij. them put into a Retort so as to fill it not above half full, to which is fitted a large Re∣ceiver, without luting (for that if luted, the S. V. would break all the Vessels) and then di∣stilling with a gentle fire, in∣creasing it gradatim, and at last giving a fire of suppression; you will have the sulphurous,
spirituous and volatile Spirit of Amber, equal in quantity to the Spirit of Wine, and a black fetid Oyl, equal to half the weight of the Amber, which you must separate. § 13. This sulphurous volatile Spirit has all the Virtues of the former Spirit and Oyl, and infinitely more pleasant to be taken in∣wardly, being a Specifick a∣gainst Hysterick Fits, Epi∣lepsies and all cold and moist Distempers of the Head, Brain, Nerves, Womb, and Joynts: and may be given à ℈i. ad ʒi. in any proper and specifick Vehicle. § 14. Out∣wardly, it is a most admira∣ble thing against the Palsie, Lameness, Numbness, Trem∣bling of the Limbs, or Weak∣ness of any singular Part, the Cold Gout, and all manner of Aches and Pains proceed∣ing from a cold Cause, and Bruises or Hurts of the Nerves, it is of very thin and subtil parts, and by rea∣son of its penetrative faculty is resolutive and discussive: It cures Contractions and Sinews shrunk up, from its balsamick property, and restores such as have lost the use of their Limbs: drawn up the No∣strils often at one time, and the Head well bathed there∣with also, gives immediate ease in the Head-ache, tho' never so extream, and that even upon the spot. CHAP. III. Of OYLS Distilled. I. Oleum Aloëticum, Oyl of Aloes. Bate.] ℞ ALoes Epatica lbj. Myrrh ℥ij. Fran∣kincense ℥ss. mix and distil in Sand with degrees of fire. Be∣ing anointed upon the Na∣vel, it purges and kills Worms. Salmon.] § 1. You must put these Ingredients into a Glass Retort, large, deep, and fit to contain three or four times as much of the Ingredients; fit to it a large Receiver; begin the distillation with a gentle fire for some time, then increase the fire by little and little, till you see the Oyl to come over, and
continue the fire till you see the Receiver clear; so will you have an acid Spirit mixt with much flegm, and a thick, bitter, stink∣ing Oyl. Filter all through brown Paper, so will the Flegm and Spirit pass through leaving the fetid Oyl behind in the filter. § 2. The Spirit you may rectifie by putting it into a glass Cucurbit, with its Head and Receiver; and with a very gentle fire in Sand, or B. M. distilling the one half, you will have the acid Spirit very pure ascend first, leaving the flegm or unprofitable part behind. § 3. The Spirit be∣ing given inwardly à gut. x. ad xx. or xxx. in any fit Ve∣hicle, has the same virtue and operation, that the Oil has being anointed outward∣ly: they both of them are good against Vapours and Hysterick Fits, the Spirit be∣ing inwardly taken as afore∣said, and the Oyl being out∣wardly anointed upon the Nostrils, Universals being prescribed. II. Olium Antimonii Saccha∣ratum, Oyl of Antimony Sugared. Bate.] It is made from the Pouder of crude Antimony and Sugar, ana, distilled through a Retort by the help of à strong fire, S. A. It is profitable a∣gainst both internal and ex∣ternal Diseases: Dose à gut. iij. ad vj. in Quartan Agues before the Fit. Salmon.] § 1. In our Phar∣macopoeia Londinensis, lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, & 92. we have taught six several ways of making this Medicine from Basil, Senner∣tus, Fausius, Beguinus, Querce∣tanus, and Sala, so that much more need not be said there∣of in this place: Yet it seems that this Prescript of our Au∣thor is different from them all, and therefore we shall endea∣vour here to explicate what he intends by his sugared Oyl. § 2. ℞ Choice Antimony, white Sugar-candy, .a; grind each severally and being exactly mix∣ed put them into a Retort, put∣ting over them a handful of clean Hemp or Tow, to hinder the Ingredients from rising and passing over into the Recipient, when it feels the heat, and makes an ebulition (which cannot well be otherwise hindred but by this Tow): place the Retort in a close Reverberatory fitting there∣to a large Recipient; make at first a slow fire, and increase it by degrees, till you see no more drops nor vapours come over the Helm: let the Vessels cool, and take the Recipient, and put the distilled matter therein in∣to a glass Matrass, add to it
Tartarised S. V. three inches above it, and digest them toge∣ther in a vaporous Balneo for three or four days: then filter all in the Cold through a Cot∣ton into a small Cucurbit, which place in B. M. and draw off the S. V. leaving the Sugared Oyl at bottom, which keep for use. § 3. Lemery makes it thus: ℞ Antimony, Sugar∣candy, A. pouder and mix them, and put them into a large Glass Retort, so as to leave two thirds empty, fitting to it a large Receiver: distil in Sand with a gentle fire, to draw off the Flegm, which cast away: when red drops begin to come forth, fit to it another Receiver, lute the Juncture, increasing the fire gently, which manage prudently (lest the mat∣ter rarifie, and its substance runs into the Receiver, which will force you to begin again) continue the fire till nothing more comes forth, and when the Vessels are cold, take and keep what you find in the Re∣ceiver for use. § 4. In this Composition the Sugar, as it contains in itself and essential acid Salt, and an Oyl; so being mixed with a portion of the Sulphur of Antimony, it makes an oily Liquor: now the sweet tast of the Sugar proceeds from a natural mix∣ture of this acid with the Oyl; for if you separate these two substances one from another, neither of the two will be sweet at all: The Oyl alone is insipid upon the Tongue, making little or no impressi∣on on the Nerve that serves for tasting, but being perfect∣ly mixt with the acid, the points of the acid serve for a Vehicle to the Oyl, to make it penetrate, and superficial∣ly smite upon the Nerve, whereby the Sense of Tasting is produced. And the acid being alone becomes incisive, and prick the Nervi Gustan∣tes by their points; but be∣ing blunted by the ramous parts of the Oyl, they no lon∣ger peirce the said Nerves, but only smite them with a great deal of pleasantness and sweetness. § 5. This Oyl is a most excellent and almost miraculous Medicine for the Cure of great Wounds and Contusions, it cleanses Ulcers also, and heals them, if ap∣plied with a Feather or Cot∣ton; and takes away Tet∣tars, Ring-worms, and other Itchings which infest the skin. If you find it too sharp, you may qualifie it with a little Aqua Mellis, or some such like thing. § 6. Besides, Le Febure affirms it to be a sur∣prizing Remedy against inter∣mitting Feavers, but chiefly
against Quartanes, for the cure of which he also proposes the following Pills therewith. § 7. ℞ Of this Sugared Oyl of Antimony ℥i. fine Aloes washed with Juice of Carduus Ben. and reduced into an Extract ℥ss. Ambergrise ʒij. Tincture of Saf∣fron, evaporated to the thick∣ness of a Syrup ʒi. mix and make all into a Mass of Pills. Dose à gr. iv. and xvj. in Con∣serve of Roses: they purge gently downwards, and some∣times provoke Sweat, or work by insensible transpiration. III. Oleum Balsamicum, The Balsamick Oyl. Bate.] ℞ Alkanet Roots ℥ij. Oyl Olive lbij, boyl till it is of a rubicund colour: strain and add Cyprus Turpentine washed in Violet-water lbss. Oyls of Hypericon, and of Bay-berries A. ℥j. Oyl of Peter, and Chy∣mical Oyl of Juniper Berries, A. ℥ss. distilled Oyls of Rhodi∣um and Spike, A. ʒij. distilled Oyls of Angelica Seeds, and A∣ni-seeds, A. ʒi. mix them S.A. It prevails against all cold af∣fects, and dissipates Wind. In the Palsie, Deafness, Pain of the Ears, &c. it does much; and is a present Remedy a∣gainst the Cramp, Colick, Dropsie, being both internal∣ly taken, and outwardly ap∣plied. Dose à ℈i. ad ʒj. in some appropriate Vehicle. Salmon.] It is an approved thing for healing Ulcers of the Lungs, and curing inward Bruises, for which purposes there is scarcely a better Re∣medy. Outwardly also, it is as good a Vulnerary as one shall meet withal; for if im∣mediately applied, (the Blood being washt off first with common Spirit of Wine) it commonly performs the Cure at one intention, and by one application; and therefore ought to be valued as a Jewel. Being applied in the Gout, Sciatica, or any old ache or pain, it removes the pain, and cures the sick in a short time. IV. Oleum Camphorae, Oyl of Camphire. Bate.] ℞ Camphire ℥ij. Tobac∣copipe-clay ℥iv. mix and make a Mass, and distil by a Glass Re∣tort in Sand, S. A. Or it may be made by dissolving Camphire ℥ij. in Spirit of Nitre ℥iv. in a warm place. It is Di∣aphoretick and Hysterick: Dose ad gut. x. &c. Salmon.] § 1. In our Phar∣macop. Lond. lib. 1. cap. 8. sect. 20. § 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, & 6. we have shewn you six seve∣ral ways of preparing the
Oyl of Camphire from Schro∣der, Hartman, Horstius, and Kesler: And in our Doron Medicum, lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 7. § 2, 3, 4. we have shewn three other several ways of doing it from other Authors: The ways here prescribed by our Author are differing from all them, which by reason he is very conciso and short there∣in, require a little Explica∣tion  Tho' it is our Opinion, (Doron. Med. lib. 1. cap. 25 sect. 102) that Camphire is of so pue and exalted a sub∣stance, that it can be made better by no kind of distilla∣tion, nor by any other Arti∣fice whatsoever. However for the sakes of such as cannot rest in that Judgment, we will now come to the expli∣cation of our Author. § 2. ℞ Camphire. ℥ij. Potters Earth ℥iv. mix them into Balls, or otherwise, dry in the Sun, and put the mixture into a glas Retort, and distil in Sand into a large Receiver which has Rain-water therein: first there comes forth a white matter, than a clear Water, and at last with a stronger fire a sweet-scented Oyl, which be∣ing rectified with Spirit of Wine, will be as yellow as Gold: Where note, that the white matter which sublimes in the Alembick, melts and falls into the Receiver. § 3. This Oyl is an excellent Re∣medy, resins putrefaction and poyson, and is good against the Plague and all malignant Diseases, both continual and intermitting Feavers: The Dose is from gut. i. ad vj. in some appropriate Liquor. The Spirit of Wine is also campho∣rated, and good for the same purposes, and may be given à ʒss. ad ʒi. or ʒij. Both Oyl and Spirit are good to stop a Gangreen, give ease in the Tooth-ache, and allay the pains of the Gout and Scia∣tica. § 4. Oyl of Camphire by Spirit of Nitre: ℞ Cam∣phire ℥iv. rectified Spirit of Nitre ℥viij. dissolve in a Ma∣trass, stop the Vessel close, and set it over a Pot full of a Water a little heated, stir it now and then with a little stick to help forward the dissolution which will be done in two or three hours: so will the Camphire be turned into a clear Oyl, swim∣ming above the Spirit, which separate and keep in a Vial well stopt for use. § 5. This Oyl is of excellent use to cure rebellious and stubborn Ul∣cers; to remove the Caries of Bones, and to touch Nerves that are uncovered in Wounds. § 6. Some may think this to be a dangerous Medicine, be∣cause of the violent impression
which the corrosive Spirit does give to the Camphire in its dissolution; but by rea∣son this preparation is never given inwardly, those scruples are caussess; Medicines much more acrimonious than this are commonly used, and yet esteemed without peril: and considering the uses it is put to, the Spirit of Nitre seems to be of absolute necessity, for the Oyl does so much the more and better, cleanse and scale rotten Bones, and foul Ulcers, and cause them to heal. § 7. This Oyl is only a dissolution of Camphire in Spirit of Nitre; for if you mix Water with it, and so destroy the force of the Spi∣rit, it will return into Cam∣phir as before: And of all the Rosins, this is the only one that will dissolve with Spirit of Nitre: from Camphire ℥iij. you will have of Oyl ℥iv. the Spirit of Nitre losing an Ounce in the dissolution. § 8. This dissolution is made with∣out ebulition, or sensible heat, for Acids mixing with Sul∣phur never make any ebuli∣tion, because Sulphurs always submit without any resist∣ance; and Camphire consist∣ing of thin disunited parts, the Acids softly enter among them, and make an easie se∣paration: § 9. Le Febure has a compound Oyl of Cam∣phire, which is made after this manner: ℞ Camphire in gross Pounder ℥vj. Spirit of Ni∣tre lbxij. put them into a Ma∣trass, which stop with another, the neck of the one going into the other; lute the Juncture with a Bladder and Whites of Eggs, and digest in B. V. till the Camphire is dissolved and become an Oyl, swimming a∣bove the Spirit: separate the Oyl, and add thereto rectified Oyl of Amber, Oyl of Juniper Berries, A. ℥iv. digest till they are united, then distil in a glass Retort in Ashes, cohobating three times; after which, re∣ctifie upon Colcothar of Vitriol, till the Oyl comes forth clear, depurated, and fluid, the Cam∣phire being made incorphoreal, and perfectly turned into an Oyl. § 10. This Oyl is Su∣dorifick, and of mighty force to expel the malignity of the Plague, or Pestilence, Spotted Feaver, Measles, and Small∣pox, and Poyson itself. It is also a Preservative Remedy in time of Plague, being both inwardly taken, and outward∣ly applied. Inwardly, let it be taken, reduced into a dis∣soluble Balsam, with double or treble refined Sugar in Pouder: Dose three or four drops in a Glass of Wine: Outwardly, let the Nostrils,
Temples and Wrists at the beating of the Arteries, be anointed therewith, and by this means (being inwardly taken, and outwardly appli∣ed) this Noble Remedy will sufficiently strengthen the Spi∣rit, and all the Natural and Vital Faculties so, as that there shall be no fear of their being invaded by the Infecti∣on, or Venom, and Poyson of the Plague. § 11. The use also of this Oyl cannot be sufficiently commended a∣gainst Fits of the Mother, Vapours, and other Hysterick and Splenetick Passions, for it penetrates as in a moment, and appeases all those Hyste∣rick Irritations. This Oyl is also a Noble Specifick in the Epilepsie, whether in Old or Young, but chiefly against that kind which proceeds from disaffections of the Me∣sentry and Womb. Dose à gut. ij. ad iv. viij. or x. ac∣cording to the Age, Sex, and force of the Disease. § 12. Terebinthinated Oyl of Cam∣phir. ℞ Camphir ℥iv. Oyl of Turpentine ℥viij. mix, dissolve, and distil it, cohobating twice. It is a subtil Medicine, Alexi∣pharmick, and Anodyn; gives ease in a cold Gout, and Aches and Pains from a cold Cause, and is profitable against the Palsie, being anointed upon the part affected. § 13. Rol∣fincius his Oyl of Camphir: ℞ Camphir ℥ij. Oyl of Sweet Almonds ℥iij. dissolve the Cam∣phir by digestion in a gentle heat, & cum homogeneo Men∣struo Sulphureo per minima miscetur, and so keep it for use. You may give it a glorious red colour with Alkanet-roots. § 14. The celebrated Virtues of this Oyl are beyond all reproof; it provokes Sweat, purifies the Mass of Blood, strengthens the principal Ve∣scera, resists the Infection of the Plague or Pestilence, and is profitable against all malign Feavers, if inwardly taken. Dose à gut. iij. ad vj. or viij. § 15. Utendi modus. ℞ Ge∣nerous Wine ℥iv. Spirit of Saffron ʒss. of this Oyl gut. iv. ad vj. mix for a Draught. Outwardly, it is anointed up∣on Gangreenated Parts, by which means it refocilates or recovers the dying heat, and resists the impending putre∣faction. Angelus sala Hydre∣laeologia, cap. 13. Prefert Cam∣phorae in Substantia Ʋsum, o∣leis quantum vis diligenter prae∣paratis.
V. * Oleum Chartoe, Oyl of Paper. Bate.] ℞ Paper, and light it, and put it upon Plates of Jupiter, or Tin, that it may be burnt, so will the Oyl adhere to the Tin-plates, which gather and keep for use. It wonder∣fully prevails against an Alo∣pecia, or Fox-like Falling of the Hair, Herpes, Impetigo, &c It is Anodyn, and eases the Pain of the Teeth. Salmon.] § 1. Lemery makes an Oyl and Spirit of it after ano∣ther order, by distillation in a Retort, after this manner: Make white Paper up into lit∣tle Pellets, and fill with them a greater Earthen Retort, or a glass one convered with lute, which place in a Reverberatory Furnace, with a large capacious Recipient well luted to it; make under it a fire, at first very gentle for about two hours, only to heat the Retort, then increase it with two or three Coals, and continue it so for two or three hours more, and then increase it to the third degree, and the Receiver will be filled with white Clouds; when no more will come, put out the fire; this Operation will be ended in about seven or eight hours: The Vessels being cold unlute them, and that which you have in the Receiver filter through brown Paper, so will the Spirit pass through the fil∣ter, and a thick, black, ill-scen∣ted Oyl, will be left at the bot∣tom of the filter, which keep in a Vial close stopt for use. § 2. The Spirit you may rectifie by distilling it in Sand. It is an excellent Apperitive and Diuretick, and after an ad∣mirable manner takes away all Obstructions of Urine, be∣ing given à gut. x. ad xx. or xxx. in any proper Liquor. This Spirit is very acid in comparison of the Spirits of other Vegetables, because it comes from a essential Salt, which has been put into a very considerable motion. § 3. For considering the ma∣ny mutations of the Hemp and Flax, before it is brought into Cloth, or made Canvass of; and afterwards what it passes through when Cloth, by Washings, Boylings, Buc∣kings, Whitings, &c. And lastly, what it meets withal by being converted into Pa∣per, and the Fermentations which it there receives, it is possible that its fixt Salt may be so far volatilized, as to become of the nature of an essential Salt. § 4. Now in the distillation all this Salt becomes dissolved into a Li∣quor by the Flegm, and con∣verted
into that which is cal∣led Spirit; the which may be demonstrated with almost Mathematical certitude; for scarcely any fixed Salt at all can be drawn from the feces left in the Retort, but they are cast away as useless: it takes fire exceeding easily by reason of a sootiness adhering to it, which gives it the black colour. § 5. The Oyl is a good Remedy for Deafness, because that Difese is often caused by a thick pituitous humor, which dries and hard∣ens in the Ear, so as to stop the Auditory Nrve; now this Oyl dissolves and thins this humor, or matter, and disposes it the better for its coming forth, by which means the noise and ringing in the Ears cease, being caused by Wind which this matter pent in. It may be dropt into the Ears, and folopt in with a little Cotton, dipt in the same. It cures the Tooth∣ache, much like the Oyl of Guajacum; and being anoint∣ed with, it helps Tettars, Ring-worms Herpes, and o∣ther like breakings out: and being smelt to, and the No∣strils touched or anointed therewith, it represses Vapors, and Hysterick Fits. § 6. You ought to use Paper white and clean, and not written upon, for the Ink thereupon may alter the Virtue of the Oyl and Spirits, and change the natures of the Preparations. § 7. The Receiver also ought to be large, that the white Vapours may have room to circulate in, for they come forth with that force, that o∣therwise the Vessel would break, had they not room e∣nough to play in: be cautious also in your fire, for if it be too great at first, for the first two or three hours, the Retort will infallibly be broken: from lbvj. or ninety six Oun∣ces of Paper, you will have ℥ix. of Oyl, and fifty four Ounces of Spirit, there re∣maining about thirty Ounces of Coals in the Retort. VI. Oleum Heracleinum, Oyl of Hazel-wood. Bate.] It is made of Hazel-wood cut down in September or March, cut into little bits; put them into a Retort and di∣stil in Sand with a gradual fire: separate the Oyl from the Water S. A. It heats, in∣cides, is anodyn, and an ex∣cellent thing against the Epi∣lepsie, and Pain of the Teeth. Gut. ij. iij. or iv. taken with Crums of Bread, kills Worms upon the spot, and brings them forth by Stool.
Salmon.] § 1. Rolfincius, lib. 3. sect. 2. art. 1 cap. 11. makes it after this manner: ℞ Hazel-wood rasped, or in pieces, q. v. fill an earthen Re∣tort therewith, fit to it a Re∣ceiver, and distil with degrees of an open fire, so will you have Spirit and Oyl: separ ate the Oyl from the acid Spirit by fil∣tration, and rectifie the Spirit. This Oleum Heraclinum Ru∣landi, (saith he) Quercetanus judges to be Oyl of Box; but Libavius; Hartman, Ke∣sle, and Beguinus, say it is the Oyl of the Hazel-wood; the Spirit and Oyl being recti∣fied, both cure the Epilepsie, and Apoplexy, being inter∣nally taken: Outwardly, with Cotton or Lint, some drops  the Oyl applied, it cures e Tooth-ache; and anoint∣ upon the Navel, kills orms, cases the Pains of e Colick, and drives forth both Birth and After-birth, as also the dead Child. They are confirmed in the Opinion, that the Oleum Heraclinum is Oyl of Hazel-wood, because the Hazel-nuts are called Nu∣ces Heracleoticae. See Beguinus Tyro. Chym. lib. 2. cap. 6. §2. Some Authors order the Wood to be ground into Pou∣der, and then put into the Retort and distilled in Sand: and order the Oyl to be re∣ctified with much Water to make it more pleasant; and the acid Spirit to be rectified in B. M. But Hartman in his Practical Chymistry, saith, it is more rightly distilled per Descensum, or per Vesicam. § 3. Schroderus in Pharmac. lib. 4. clas. 1. sect. 108. saith, That the Oyl is made by a Retort with a naked Fire, or by descent: and that both Spirit and Oyl are hot and inciding, anodyn, and ante∣pileptick, and chiefly cure the Tooth-ache. Some, says he, will have Rulandus's Oyl of the Wood Heracleum to be the Oyl of Hazel-wood: for that the Hazel was first tran∣slated from Heraclea Ponti in∣to Greece where it was cal∣led Heracleotica seu Pontica, and the Nuts, Heracleoticae: Tho' others again will not allow it, but affirm it to be the Oyl of the Box Wood, as Quercetanus, Tetrade affect. capitis, pag. 214, 215, 216. where he shews, that the Oyl of Box-wood, abounds with a very Narcotick Sulphur, and commends it against the E∣pilepsie and Tooth-ache, Worms in the rotten Teeth, and hollow Teeth, a Tooth∣pick being put into it, and the then put to the bottom of the hollow Tooth. § 4. But if we may be guided by the
name of the thing, adding also the Authority of the greater number of the most Learned, we are obliged to conclude, that the Oleum He∣raclinum Rulandi, and which our Author here intends, is truly the Oyl of Hazel-wood, and not of Box, to which the appellation has no relation. VII. * Oleum Linteorum, Oyl of Linnen-cloth. Bate.] It is made from Lin∣nen-cloth [or old Linnen Rags] kindled and extinguished upon Plates of Tin, S. A. It is a powerful thing for the curing of Ophthalmies, a drop there∣of being mixed with one of spittle. Salmon.] It is distilled af∣ter the way and manner as Oyl of Paper, at Sect. 5. a∣foregoing, to which I refer you; and the Virtues and Uses are also the same. And an Oyl likewise may be di∣stilled from the Hemp or Flax after it is peeled from the Bun, before it is spun or hac∣kled, having the same uses and effects to every intenti∣on and purpose. VIII. Oleum Ludi, Oyl of the Gravelly Substance sticking to the bottoms of Cham∣ber-pots. Bate.] ℞ The Tartarous matter adhering to the bottoms and sides of Chamber-pots, which calcine and dissolve per deliquium, S. A. [that is, by passing it through a Bag in a cool Cellar, or other moist place.] It is prevalent in resolving Tartar in any part of the Bo∣dy; yea, even to the dissol∣ving of the greater Stones whether in the Reins or Blad∣der, and to expel them. It also conduces wonderfully to open all Obstructions arising from those causes. Salmon.] § 1. You may calcine the matter sever ways, either with Sal Nit in about six hours time:  with Sulphur and Nitre:  with a treble quantity of Beech-tree Charcoal. § 2. Sen∣nertus calcines with a Circu∣lary Fire; then with Rever∣beration; then with Beech Charcoal in a Potters Oven, Instit. lib. 5. par. 3. sect. 3. cap. 5. He also calcines with Nitre, and extracts a com∣mon Salt with Spirit of Wine, then abstracting the Spirit of Wine, sets it in a cool moist Air to melt per deliquium.
Dose à gr. vj. ad xij. in Par∣fly, Arsmart, or Onion-wa∣ter. § 3. Others calcine ei∣ther with Beach Charcoal, or with Nitre, and elicit the Salt with some proper Diu∣retical Water, or Spring-wa∣ter, or with Flegm of Nitre or Allum, then filtrate, eva∣porate, and melt per deliqui∣um. Dose à gr. iv. ad x. plus-minus. § 4. And because this matter is full of an im∣pure Sulphur, it may be dou∣bly calcin'd, filtrated, and evaporated as aforesaid, so will the Oyl, per deliquium, be yet purr. § 5. Lastly, be∣ing put into a Glass Retort and distilled as you do Harts∣horn, you will have a volatile Salt sticking to the Neck of the Retort, and Sides of the Receiver, a Urinous Spirit, and a little quantity of stink∣ing Oyl; all which may be rectified as other Oyls, Vo∣latile Salts and Spirits, &c. These have the same Virtues with the Oyl per deliquium, but much more powerful; and all of them specifick a∣gainst the Epilepsie, Apo∣plexy, and Fits of the Mo∣ther. § 6. Let the Salt be dissol∣ved in the Spirit, and so kept, of which you may give à gut. x. ad xxx. or more, in any proper Liquor: the Oyl may be given à gut. ij. ad iv. or viij. first mix with a little of the Yolk of an Egg, and then with the Vehicle. IX. Oleum Lumbricorum, Oyl of Earth-worms. Bate.] It is distilled in a Sand hea from Earth-Worms washed in Spanish Wine, S. A. It wonderfully prevails in the Cure of the Pal∣sie. Salmon.] § 1. The Worms ought to be carefully dried with a very gentle heat be∣forehand, that they may be divested of the greatest part of their flegm, so will the O∣peration be the sooner per∣formed. § 2. Then being cut into pieces, put them into an Earthen Retort, or a Glass one coated, which place in a Rever∣beratory Furnace, fit to it a great capacious Receiver, lu∣ting the Juncture close; begin the distillation with a small Fire to warm the Retort, and drive out the remaining part of the flegm gutatim; when no more drops fall, increase the fire a little, and the Spirits will come forth, filling the Re∣ceiver with white Clouds, and at last a black Oyl and vola∣tile Salt, sticking to the sides of the Receiver: continue the fire till all is come forth that will; then cooling the Vessel,
and unluting, shake the Re∣ceiver, to loosen and mix the volatile Salt with the aqueous and spiritous Matter, put all into a Bolt-head, with its Re∣ceiver, luting the Junctures well with a wet Bladder, then with a gentle Fire in a Sand heat, the volatile Salt will sub∣lime to the top of the Bolt-head, which separate and keep by it self. § 3. What remains fil∣ter through brown Paper, so will the Flegm and Spirit pass, leaving the Oyl behind; keep each by themselves for their particular uses. The Spirit, you may, if you so please, rectifie from its Flegm, casting the Flegm away. § 4. The Oyl is fetid, and stinks so abominably, that it is scarce possible to be used a∣lone, especially unrectified. To rectifie it, you must mix it with Pouder of Bone-ashes, or Colcothar, and draw it off from them, so will it be pure, and divested much of its stink∣ing scent, but scarce tolerable to be used by Ʋnction. § 5. The Spirit, volatile Salt, and Oyl, have all one and the same Virtues, save the volatile Salt is the more powerful, the Spi∣rit next in virtue, then the Oyl: the two first are to be given inwardly, the Oyl on∣ly to be used outwardly by Unction, as we shall present∣ly teach you. § 6. The Spi∣rit is given à gut. xx. ad xxx. or xl. The volatile Salt à gr. iv. ad xij. or xiv. in any Specifick Vehicle against the Palsie, Apoplexy, (for which they are Specificks) Epilepsie, Vertigo, Lethargy, Consum∣ptions, and all other cold and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as also against the Pleurisie, and all Disaffections of the Lungs, and Womb, as Va∣pours, Hysterick Fits, and such like. § 7. Outwardly, the Paralytick Parts are to be anointed with the rectified Oyl, as also the Sutures of the Head, Temples, Nostrils, &c. But because it is so o∣dious by reason of its ill scent and nastiness; we shall here teach you to convert it into the Potestates of the same, which are a Medicine so near and cleanly, that it will scarce∣ly foul the finest and cleanest Linnen. § 8. These Potesta∣tes are thus made: ℞ Of the best rectified Spirit of Wine lb ij. Volatile Salt of Earth-worms ʒj. mix and digest two Months, till the Spirit is im∣pregnated with the Salt: de∣cant it from the remaining Salt (for all of it, it will not suck up) and add thereto of the for∣mer rectified Oyl ℥j. mix by shaving them well together, di∣gest
two Months, and then draw them off together in an Alem∣bick, so will they be intimately united and remain together for ever; and thus have you the Powers of Earth-worms, ha∣ving all the Virtues of the Spirit and Salt aforemention∣ed; and may be given in∣wardly à ʒss. ad ʒi. in any fit Liquor, and bathed withal outwardly for the Cure of the Palsie, as our Author has directed, being ten times more effectual than his distil∣led Oyl prescribed, which stinks (as I said before) so e∣gregiously, that it is scarcely possible to be used. X. Oleum Martis, Oyl of Mars, or Iron. Bate.] It is made of the Rust of Mars, contracted by sprink∣ling it with Aqua Stygia, then washing it with Water, fil∣tring and exhaling it to an Oleagniosity, S. A. It is one of the greatest Deobstructors in the World. Dose gr. iv. or v. &c. Salmon.] § 1. This is not Oleum Martis, for that is Oyl made of the Vitriol of Mars, of which we have nothing to say here, for that there is no difference in the preparation thereof, from that of the pre∣paration of the Common Oyl of Vitriol, all the same Rules, Directions and Cautions be∣ing to be observed in the one, that is observed in the other. § 2. This here is rather a Tin∣cture of Mars extracted with common Water, the Body of the Mars being beforehand opened with Aqua Fortis, or Spirit of Nitre, by virtue of which the Tincture of the Mars is extracted by the Water; which being filtred and abstracted to the thick∣ness of Oyl, receives its deno∣mination from the likeness which it has thereto. § 3. Le Mort makes it after this man∣ner: ℞ Filings of Mars ℥ xiv. Spirit of Common Salt ℥j. fair Water ℥viij. mix, and digest for three or four days, stirring it twice a day: then add Cry∣stals of Tartar in fine Poder ℥viij. mix them well again; and add fair Water again a sufficient quantity, boyl them together for an hour in an Iron Pot or Kettle, continually ad∣ding fresh Water, as the Mat∣ter evaporates; then filter, or let it settle, pouring off the clear Liquor, which evaporate to the consistency of a thin Sy∣rup: add an half part of recti∣fied Spirit of Wine, and keep it for use. § 4. Lemery makes it thus: ℞ Rust of Iron ℥xij. White Tartar lbij. Pouder and mix them together, then boyl
them in an Iron Pot with lbxij. or xv. of Rain-water for 12 hours with a soft fire: stir the matter with an Iron-slice often, of al∣most continually, taking care to put in more boyling Water into the Iron Pot, according as it consumes: then leave it for a while to settle, and you will have a black Liquor, which fil∣trate and evaporate in an Ear∣then Pan over a Sand heat to the consistence of a thin Syrup, or till a little pellicle rises upon it. § 5. Now here is to be noted in this Preparation, that Water alone would not be strong enough to pene∣trate the Iron, so as to make a Tincture, tho' it should be boyl'd for a year together; and therefore our Author in his way, makes the Rust with Aqua Stygia. § 6. Le Mort uses Spirit of Salt, and a small proportion of Tartar; but Lemery, because he uses no Aqua Fortis, nor Sp. Salis, takes so much the larger a propor∣tion of Tartar; with these things the Water being im∣pregnated it dissolves the Mars very easily, and gives it strength enough to extract almost its very Soul. § 7. But you must not think that this Oyl-like Body is a perfect solution of Mars; for if there was an intire solution of it, there would appear no more Tincture than there does in the Solution of it, with Spi∣rit of Vitriol and Water; but because the soluble parts of the Tartar, which is the A∣gent in this Operation is only an impure acid Salt, it can but grosly rarifie or open the Mars, and after mixing with it, keep it suspended in the Water. § 8. After the Tin∣cture is drawn, there remains a whitish matter, which may be cast away as nothing worth, being a mixture of the grosser and unclean parts of the Tartar and Mars. and the Tincture has a sweetness in it, from whence, as also from its Consistence or Body, some are pleased to call it a Syrup: Others an Oyl, tho' in truth, it is neither. § 9. It is brought by evaporation to the consistency of an Oyl or Syrup, that it might keep the better; but Le Mort thought good to add to it Spirit of Wine for its greater security and preservation. XI. Oleum Polypodii, Oyl of Polipody. Bate.] It is made from the dryed Roots, distilled by a Re∣tort in Sand, S. A. It serves for catching of Fishes. Salmon.] § 1. It is found on Beech and Hazel-Trees,
and stony Places, but that from the Oak is best. § 2. The Root in form of a Deco∣ction, purges Melancholy, and tough Flegm, and opens Ob∣structions of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, and Mesentery, but because it is but a slow Purge it is seldom given alone, but with other stronger Purges. § 3. Being distilled its Ca∣thartick Virtue is totally de∣stroyed; you having instead thereof a sharp, opening Spi∣rit, and a fetid Oyl: The Spirit is profitably given a∣gainst Venereal Defedations, and Dietetically; you may give it à ʒi. ad ʒij. or more in Drink, or Decoction of Guajacum. § 4. The Oyl is so fetid, that it is not possibly to be taken inwardly with∣out rectification, and then at best it is a loathsome Medi∣cine; which tho' it may be good against the Venereal Di∣stemper, Leprosie, and other Impurities of the Blood, is seldom or never taken; for that many other Medicines, a thousand times more grate∣ful, and possibly more effica∣cious, are ever ready at hand to be had: what its other Properties are, our Author has told you, which is the Catching of Fish, which it does by drawing them toge∣ther after it, by reason of its strong scent. § 5. As for the way and manner of making it, there is no difficulty in it; being cut into bits, you may fill an Earthen Retort full thereof, and having luted thereto a Re∣ceiver, you may perform the distillation in Sand, first with a gentle fire, then with a stron∣ger, augmenting it even to the last degree, in all respects as we have before taught you in the distillation of Guajacum. XII. Oleum Sacchari Simplex; Oyl of Sugar simple. Bate.] It is made with Su∣gar-candy, and Spirit of Wine, ana, being mixed and dissol∣ved in the heat of B. M. then by burning the Spirit away to the Consistence of a Syrup, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. This is no Oyl, but a Syrup, and re∣ceives its denomination only from its Form, Body, or Con∣sistency. § 2. It was design∣ed against Coughs, Colds, Wheezings, Asthma's, Short∣ness of Breath, Difficulty of Breathing, and other Distem∣pers of the Brest and Lungs. § 3. The way of using it is thus: ℞ Of this Syrup ℥ij. Ele∣campane in fine Pouder, ʒj. Ginger in fine Pouder ℈j. Cate∣chu in fine  ℈ss. mix for a Dose  Mor∣ning
and Evening; the Sick may also lick of it in the day time, as often as the Cough returns. XIII. * Oleum Sacchari Com∣positum, Oyl of Sugar com∣pound. Bate.] ℞ Dates cut into pieces ℥ij. Figs ℥iij. Hyssop, M. j. Liquorice, Aniseeds, Cotton-seeds, A. ʒvj. Roots of Florentine Orrice ℥j. Spirit of Wine lbij. boyl by burning to the consumption of the half, then strain through Hippo∣crates's Sleeve, dissolving in it Sugar-candy a sufficient quan∣tity. It prevails against Asth∣ma's, Coughs, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This is no Oyl of Sugar, any more than the former, and is only so called with respect to the Form or Consistence, being more properly a Syrup. § 2. The Virtues are the same with the former, but is more Pectoral, and therefore to be made use of in the more de∣sperate cases, thus: ℞ Of this compounded Syrup ℥j. Elecampane in fine Pouder, Aniseeds, ana ℈j. Pepper in fine Pouder, gr. x. mix for a Dose to be taken Morning and Evening, and to be lickt of in th  as need re∣qui  makes an Oyl of Sugar after this man∣ner: ℞ Sugar lbj. Sand, or washed Ashes lbiij. mix them, and put them into a Glass Re∣tort, and distil with a very gentle fire in Sand, at last in∣creasing the fire almost to a red hot heat, so have you Oyl and Spi∣rit, which you may separate. § 4. The Spirit opens Obstructions of the Breast, Lungs, and uri∣nary parts: The Oyl is Pecto∣ral, and may be mixt with other Pectorals, and so given. Dose of the Spirit, so much as to give any Wine, Ale, or Cordial Draught a pleasant acidity: the Oyl may be gi∣ven à gut. vj. ad xij. or more, mixed with proper Pectorals as afore directed. XIV. * Oleum Saponis, Oyl of Soap. Bate.] It is made of Veneti∣an Soap thin sliced or scraped, and Spirit of Wine, of each a like quantity, being distilled by a Retort, first with a gentle fire, then increasing it grada∣tim. Let the Oyl swimming upon the Green Water be sepa∣rated. It is good against Con∣vulsions and Pains of the Head, being anointed upon the Temples, Nape of the Neck and Nostrils. It helps also against the Gout, Con∣tusions, and Worms, being
anointed upon the place affe∣cted, and then a Colwort-leaf applied over them. Salmon.] § 1. Rolfincius, Art. Chimiae, lib. 3. sect. 2. art. 1. cap. 15. makes it af∣ter this manner: ℞ Venice Soap thin sliced or rasped lbj. Calx Vive finely pulverized lbij. mix them well, then sprin∣kle them with White-wine: put all into a strong glass Re∣tort: begin the distillation with a very gentle fire, increasing it to the third degree, so will you have Flegm and a rubicund Oyl, which keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 2. It resolves and dissipates cold Tumors; helps the Spleen and Vapors, being anointed upon the Re∣gion of the Spleen; and a∣nointed upon the Joynts it eases the Gout, and dissolves the Tartarous Nodes thence arising. § 3. It stinks much, and therefore it is necessary that it should be once or twice rectified from Colcothar, or Bone-ashes, for by that means it will be finer and subtiller, and lose much of its Empyreu∣ma. § 4. A warming and strengthning Emplaster, and good against Fits of the Mo∣ther, you may make after this manner: ℞ Galbanum, Am∣moniacum, A. ℥ij. Wax, Oyl of Soap, A. ℥j. mix and make an Emplaster. XV. Oleum Tabaci, Oyl of Tobacco. Bate.] It is made of the dry∣ed Leaves by a Retort, or from the Seeds bruised, by expression. It is of use against Pains of the Gout, Rheumatism, Tooth∣ache, Worms, &c. Salmon.] § 1. By the leave of our Author, there is a vast difference between a distilled Oyl drawn by a Retort from the dryed Leaves, and the ex∣pressed Oyl from the Seeds: An Ounce of the latter is not equal in Virtue and Power to ten drops of the former. § 2. How this Oyl is parti∣cularly to be made we shall not here repeat, forasmuch as we have largely performed that task in Chap. 2. Sect. 34. § 3. & 15. where also we have amply shewn its recti∣fication, and several uses, with the way of its exhibiti∣on or pplication. § 3. In making of this Oyl you have also a Spirit fill'd with vo∣latile Salt, which you are to rectifie, as (in the place cited) you are directed, which has admirable Vertues, and in my Opinion, much tran∣scending the Oyl. § 4. To make the Oyl of the Seeds by expression: Let them be ground in a Mustard-Quern as
fine as for Mustard, then put them into a Bag of new strong Canvass; tie the mouth of it fast, and put it between two Tin-plates, or Plates of Wood lined with Tin, which place in an Almond-press, squeezing it at first very gently, but after∣wards with a very great force, leaving the Bag in the Press, till the Oyl has time to drop forth. § 5. Now here is to be noted, that if the Seeds be heat in an Earthen Pan, or Frying-pan, till they be pret∣ty warm, before they are put into the Bag, (which ought to be wetted and wrung hard out of hot Water) you will have the more of Oyl. 2. That if you press strongly at first, some particles of the Seeds will be apt to come through the Bag, whereby your Oyl will be thick and filthy, which otherwise would be pure and clear. XVI. * Oleum Vitrioli ulce, Sweet Oyl of Vitriol. Bate.] ℞ Rectified Oyl of Vitriol j. part: Alcohol of Wine lbiv. digest thirty or forty days, and then distil by a Retort, co∣hobating three or four times till they are united, S. A. It is profitable against the Stone, Tartarous Diseases, Catarrhs, &c. Dose ℈ij. in some proper Liquor. Salmon.] § 1. By j. part in this place is intended lbj. and it is the same proportion which is limited in our Phar∣macopoeia Londinensis, lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 94. where the Process is amply explicated, together with its several Vir∣tues and Uses. § 2. But Mon∣sieur Charras alters the pro∣portion, and makes it by mixing the two inequal pro∣portions, and then distilling the mixture in a Glass Alem∣bick in an Ash heat with a moderate fire. By this in∣ward Union (says he) of the acid of the Vitriol, with the volatile Sulphur of the recti∣fied Spirit, there arises a com∣position much more sweet in savour, and gentle in all its effects, than was the Oyl of Vitriol before its conjunction. § 3. And tho' we must con∣fess, that this Spirit is com∣posed of two; nevertheless, we have a better Opinion thereof, because they unite without the destruction of each other, and that by this new disposal of their parts through this Union, that which both of them had of Violent, is qualified, and their joynt operation much more proper and fitted to our Nature. § 4. So that the use of this Spirit is of much more advantage, than that of
the unmixed Spirit, especial∣ly to those Persons to whom Acids are injurious, and that it is much more proper for several Diseases, especially the Scurvy; for the Spirit of Wine imparts to the Oyl of Vitriol a Diaphoretick Virtue, yet does not deprive it of its quality or property it has to open Obstructions, and streng∣then the parts. § 5. Maets takes Oyl of Vitriol lbj. Tarta∣rised S. V. lbiij. digest them together for a Night, and in the Morning distil them by a Retort, and De Nova, digests for a Night again, reiterating this Work three or four times, till the Acrimony of the Oyl of Vitriol is apparently abated. Thus, saith he, you have a most temperate Menstruum for extracting the Tinctures of multitude of Vegetables. § 6. This Spirit allays the febrile heat and ardours of the Blood, powerfully cuts tough Flegm, and opens the most obdurate Obstructions; it breaks and dissolves the Stone and Gravel, whether in the Reins or Bladder, expel∣ling the same by Urine. § 7. From the Caput Mort. an a∣cid Spirit, but much less vio∣lent than that which is drawn from Vitriol after the ordi∣nary manner, may be ex∣tracted by laying it in a place where it may receive the Beams of the Sun, Influences of the Moon and Heavenly Bodies, with the Moisture of the Air, but yet so that no Rain may fall upon it, and leaving it there for about a Year. § 8. By this means the Terra Damnata (being depri∣ved of its own natural Salt, but not of its Ferment) will be impregnated with the a∣cid Salt of the Air, and be∣come in a sort a new kind of Vitriol, from whence by the ordinary method, in about twelve hours time, you may draw an acid Spirit very pleasing (called by some Spi∣ritus Vitrioli Regeneratus) which being compared with the former strong Oyl of Vi∣triol, may well be accounted among the number of the sweet Spirits of Vitriol, for which reason sake, we have discoursed it here. Dose ℈ij. ad ʒj. § 9. A sweet Spirit of Vitriol compound. ℞ Vitriol calcin'd to redness in Pouder lbiv. Flints calcin'd, and in Pouder lbv. Salt of Tartar cal∣cin'd to whiteness lbj. mix and put altogether into a Retort, which place upon a naked fire in a close Reverberatory, with a very large Receiver, and di∣stil as for the common Spirit and Oyl, till all is come forth. This done, cohobate the Liquor
upon the Caput Mort, reitera∣ting the distillation, and re∣peating this cohobation and di∣stillation three times. § 10. Thus have you a Spirit powerful to open Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and Bowels, profita∣ble especially in Dropsies and Jaundice, being used as you use the former. § 11. Spiri∣tus Vitrioli Dulcis Paracelsi: ℞ Common Oyl of Vitriol, co∣hobate it upon the Caput Mort, and distil, reiterating the Cohobation, and distilling nine times; with this last Spi∣rit mix the Caput Mort. a∣gain, and affuse thereon so much tartarised S. V. as may make the whole into a Paste, which put into a Retort, di∣stilling with a gradual fire as before, so have you Paracel∣sus's corrected sweet Spirit of Vitriol. This he commends against the Epilepsie, given à vj. ad xij. drops, or more in any Antepileptick Water. § 12. Hartman's dulcified An∣tepileptick Spirit of Vitriol. ℞ Hungarian Vitriol, Chil∣dren's Ʋrine: mix and digest for some days in B. M. then draw off in the same Balneo the Water or Flegm to driness, (which Water is good against the Gout, and a peculiar Re∣medy for most Diseases of the Eyes) pouder the feces, put them into a Retort, with a ve∣ry large Receiver, and with a naked and gradual fire, forces over the Spirit of an austere savour, and sulpherous smell, which rectifie twice. § 13. This (says he) is an infallible Re∣medy and absolute Cure for the Epilepsie in Children. Dose ℈j. with a little Water and Spirit of Peony-Roots and Flowers, giving it in the Fit, and continuing the use of it so long as need requires.
CHAP. IV. Of BALSAMS Distilled. I. * Balsamum Apoplecticum, Apoplectick Balsam. Bate.] ℞ DIstilled Oyls of Ci∣namon, Cloves, Lavender, Limons, Marjoram, Mint, Rue, Rosemary, Sage, Rhodium, Wormwood, A. gut. vj. Bitumen Judaicum in fine Pouder ʒij. Oyl of Nutmegs by Expression ℥j. Balsamum Pe∣ruanum. q. s. mix and make a Balsam. It comforts the Head, discusses cold Humors, for which reason it prevails a∣gainst Apoplexies, Swoonings, and Palsies, being put into the Nostrils, or otherwise ap∣plied. Internally it is given à gr. iij. ad vj. &c. with some Cephalick Electuary. Salmon.] § 1. This Apo∣plectick Balsam as it is now used, is only smelt to; but that can do but little good; if you would have it power∣ful to the intention, which is to cure all the parts affected, bathe it well in before a Fire. § 2. If the Head be afflicted you must anoint the Temples, Sutures of the Head, and Nostrils: if for a Palsie, anoint the Back-bone from the Nape of the Neck to the Rump, as also the Paralytick Parts; and be sure to do it twice a day, for a Month or six Weeks together, and be not weary; too soon giving over the use of a Medicine (thô it might be the best in the World) as it frustrates the intention for which it is used, so it disparages the Me∣dicine, and causes the Physi∣cian to be slighted and despi∣sed, who otherwise may be a Man of Learning and Abi∣lity enough. § 3. If it be made for Great and Noble Persons who are able to pay for it, you may add choice Musk, Ambergriese, A. ʒss. O∣riental Civet ℈j. which being ground together with a few drops of pure Juyce of Le∣mons, may be mixt with the Composition.
II. * Balsamum Magistrale, The Magistral Balsam. Bate.] ℞ Distilled Oyls of Spike, and of Bays, Oyl of Pe∣ter, A. ℥j. Caranna, red San∣ders in Pouder, Oyl of Hyperi∣con ℥iss. liquid Storax ℥iv. Wax ℥ivss. Venice Turpentine ℥viij. Choice Oyl Olive lbiss. boil all for an hour, then add distilled Oyl of Juniper-berries ℥j. Oyl of Cloves ʒj. Oyl of Cinamon ʒss. mix them S. A. It most effectually heals green Wounds whether internal or external, and is profitable a∣gainst all sorts of Burnings, Contusions or Bruises, Pains in the Bones and Nerves. It is good against the Head∣ache, being anointed on the Nostrils and Temples: being applied to the Sides with warm Cloths, it discusses Wind, and eases Pain. It gives ease in the Colick, and Pains of the Feet, being a∣nointed warm thereon, they being first cut or pared to the quick. It stops the Bleed∣ing of the Nose, kills Worms, being internally given, and outwardly applied. Salmon.] § 1. The Pro∣portions are not exquisite; For what signifies ℥iss. of Oyl of Hypericon to above forty Ounces of the Composition? it may either be left out, or ought to be added in a lar∣ger proportion, as ℥iv. at least. § 2. I dislike the Pre∣paration; for if you put in the distilled Oyls of Spike and Bays, and the Oyl of Peter, before the Boiling, they (by reason of their subtility and volatility) will all boyl away, and so the Medicine will be never the better. My Opinion is, that they ought to be put in at last after the boyling, with the Oyls of Juniper, Cinamon, and Cloves. § 3. At the end of the work, every thing being perfectly dissolved that will dissolve, the whole ought to be strain∣ed; for otherwise you will find some kind of filth or feces, which will diminish the pleasant look of the Bal∣sam. III. Balsamum Martiale, Bal∣sam of Mars. Bate.] ℞ Mars purified ℥iv. affuse thereon Oyl of Tur∣pentine ℥v. after put in Gut∣tatim Spirit of Nitre ℥iij. di∣gest in a gentle heat for some days; then decant the pure Bal∣sam, S. A. It is the greatest of Vulneraries. Salmon.] § 1. This is ta∣ken from Zwelfer, Mantiss. Spagyric. par. 1. cap. 4. pag. 808
but somewhat differs in the Composition. In the Author it is thus: ℞ Pure and clean Filings of Mars ℥ij. Oyl of Turpentine, or Oyl of Juniper, or Aniseeds, or Fenuel, which of them you please ℥iij. mix them, and instil thereto by drops, and at times of the acid chalibeat Spirit of Sal Armo∣niack; or for want thereof, a pure Spirit of Nitre: mace∣rate them a little while, so will you have in the Oyl a rubicund Tincture, which separate from its feces by filtring, and keep for use. § 2. The acid cha∣libeat Spirit of Sal Armoni∣ack, is made from Sal Armo∣niack sublimed from an equal quantity of pure Filings of Mars, in a Glass Alimbeck, or Glazed Earthen Cucurbit, upon a naked Fire, first gentle, and then increasing it with degrees of heat, till the bottom of the Cucurbit is red hot (saving the volatile Spirit as it comes forth). ℞ This Martial Sublimate, mix it with the Caput Mort. very well, expose it to the moist Air, that it may be impregna∣ted, and begins to ascend in Flowers of a yellowish colour: put this impregnated Mass into a large Glass Retort, with a long Neck well coated; place it in a Reverberatory, on a naked Fire, with a large Re∣ceiver, well closed in the Joynt, then distil first with a gentle Fire, to force the Flegm; then with a stronger gradatim, that the Spirit in the form of Clouds may follow, by little and little, which continue till the cloudy Spirits disappear, so will you have the acid saline Spirit of Sal Ammoniack of a Golden colour, (much like to Spirit of Salt) by one only distillation pure and deflegmated. § 3. This is the Spirit which Zwel∣fer uses in making of this Balsamum Martiale, for want of which, he says, you may use Spirit of Nitre, and that our Author to avoid such a great labour, chose rather to do: however, I thought good to give the Prescript, that e∣very man may take his choice. § 4. This Balsam, says Zwel∣fer is a present Remedy a∣gainst the Stone, and Ulcers of the Reins, the Colick, the Nephritick Passion, and all other internal Ulcers, of what kind soever, healing them af∣ter a most effectual manner: Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. § 5. It has also the same effects upon exter∣nal Ulcers, doing more than can possible be imagined in a very short time; and there∣fore may very well be ac∣counted among the best of Vulneraries Zwelfer also makes it with Ol. Vitrioli.
IV. Balsamum Paralyticum, The Palsie Balsam. Bate.] ℞ Venice Turpentine lbiv. Olibanum, Aloes, Castor, Myrrh, Xyloaloes, Flowers of Hypericon, A. ℥j. Gum Elemi, Labdanum, A. ℥iij. Styrax li∣quida ℥ij. Balsam of Peru ℥iv. Calamus Aromaticus, Galangal, Cloves, A. ʒvj. Cinamon ℥iss. Flowers of Rosemary and Sage, A. ʒx. all being rightly prepa∣red, mix them with the Tur∣pentine, adding S. V. lbiv. di∣gest warm for six days, then distil through a large Retort in Ashes, first with a gentle fire for forty eight hours, so that the Retort by degrees may grow warm: then for some time with a stronger; and at length with the highest degree of heat; so will you have, 1. A Water which is called, Mater Bal∣sami. 2. A yellow Oyl of a thin substance, which is called, Balsamum Paralyticum. 3. A thick Oyl, which is called, O∣leum Balsami. It wonder∣fully comforts the Nerves, cures the Palsie and Contra∣ctures, outwardly anointing with it, and inwardly ta∣king of it. Salmon.] § 1. This is taken from Phirovant's Secrets, lib. 3. cap. 2. but differs some∣thing from that Composition; which is this: ℞ Venice Tur∣pentine ℥iv. Olibanum, Myrrh, Gum Hedera, Galbanum A. ℥j. Oyl of Bays, Gum Arabick, A. ʒx. Lignum Aloes, Galingal, Cloves, Consolida Minor, Ci∣namon, Nutmegs, Zedoary, Gin∣ger, white Dittany, A. ʒiij. Musk Ambergrise, A. ℈j. beat all these things together, and put them into a Retort of Glass, well coated, and put thereto recti∣fied Aqua Vitae lbij. digest eight days, then distil in Sand, so will you have a white Water mixed with Oyl: let the Fire be but gentle, till a blackish Oyl begins to come; then change your Receiver, and increase the Fire till all be come forth, so will you have Water and a black Oyl, which separate. The first Water is white, and is called Aqua Balsami, and the Oyl separated from it is cal∣led, Oleum Balsami. The se∣cond Water which is fetid, is called, Mater Balsami; and the Oyl separated from it cal∣led, Balsamum Artificiale. § 2. The first Water is good for the Eyes, and to clear the Skin, being washed therewith; taken inwardly, it is good against Gravel, and to pro∣voke Urine, and is preva∣lent against all manner of Wounds, in what place of the Body soever, if washed therewith, and Cloths wet
therein be laid thereon: It is also good against Whee∣sings, Catarrhs, Coughs, Gouts, and such like. § 3. The o∣ther Water called, Mater Bal∣sami, cures Scabs in a short time, if washed therewith, as also the Leprosie, white Scall, and all sorts of Ulcers which are not corroding, and heals them to a Miracle, without any trouble; as also many other Diseases of the Nerves and Joynts. § 4. The Oleum Balsami cures many Diseases, chiefly Wounds in the Head, tho the Cranium and Mem∣branes should be hurt: It is good against the Palsie and Gout, from a cold Cause, be∣ing anointed with. And ta∣ken inwardly, it is most ex∣cellent against the Pleurisie, ℈j. of it being taken at a time in Balm-water, or some such like thing. § 5. The Balsa∣num Artificiale, is good a∣gainst any Stich in the Side, being taken inwardly à ℈j. ad ʒss, in any proper Vehicle; as also against Vapours and Fits of the Mother: It is good against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, and Coldness of the Head and Stomach, as also for Wounds in the Head, the Head and Stomach being a∣nointed therewith. It is good against a Quartane, the Back, Stomach, Bowels, and Pulses being anointed therewith; as also against Palsies, and other Diseases of the Nerves and Joynts. § 6. But considering of what differing Substances this Preparation is composed, and how many Aromatick things are in it, we cannot commend the Modus Prepa∣randi, for that those things which are of themselves, and in their own nature fragrant and odoriferous, are by this means made extreamly fetid and ingrateful: nor do we think it prudent or necessary to put odoriferous Ingredi∣ents into Medicines which are distilled by a Retort, for by that means their fragran∣cy is lost, and the pure odour of the Ingredients destroyed. § 7. If therefore you would prepare this Balsam according to Art, you must proceed after this manner: ℞ Venice Turpentine lbiv. Oblibanum, Myrrh, Gum Hedera, Galba∣num, Aloes, A. lbj. Castoreum, Xyloaloes, Galangal, Zedoary, Ginger, Acorus, A. lbss. Flow∣ers of Rosemary, Sage, Laven∣der, Liquid Styrax, Labda∣num, Gum Elemi, Balsam of Peru, A. ℥iv. Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinamon, A. ℥iij. rectified Spi∣rit of Wine lbvj. pouder what are to be poudered, and bruise what are to be bruised, then mix altogether, and put them
into a Glass Cucurbit: di∣gest a Week then distil in B. M. to driness: so have you a sweet or odoriferous Spirit and Oyl, which take, se∣parate, and keep by themselves. § 8. This done, ℞ All the dry matter left in the bottom of the Cucurbit, beat it into gross Pouder, put it into a Re∣tort, and distil upon a naked Fire in a close Reverberatory, so will you have an acid Water, and a fetid Oyl, which take rectifie, separate, and keep by themselves also. By this means you have all the virtue, pow∣er, and efficacy out of the Ingredients, preserving their natural properties and quali∣ties entire. § 9. By the first di∣stillation you have the odori∣ferous Spirit and Oyl, profi∣table against most Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Joynts: and by the latter di∣stillation, the acid Spirit, and fetid Balsam; the last of which, may be of good use in many external Diseases, as is before declared: the acid Spirit is Sudorifick, purifies the Blood, and is of excellent use against the Lues Venerea. § 10. The odoriferous Spirit is excellent against the Plague or Pestilence, and infallibly cures it, if the Brain and Heart be not smot, about ʒij. of it being given in a Glass of fragrant Wine, and the Stomach anointed with the fragrant Oyl, and then the Patient made to sweat there∣upon. It comforts the Sto∣mach, consumes cold Hu∣mours, causes an Appetite and good Digestion, and is an excellent thing against Pal∣fies, Convulsions, Weakness of the Optick Nerves, and o∣ther Diseases of the Head and Brain. § 11. The odori∣ferous Oyl preserves all things from putrefaction, is good a∣gainst the Plague or Pesti∣lence, cures the Gout and Sciatica, and is profitable a∣gainst Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Numbness, Loss of the use of Limbs, and is good against Rheums, Coughs, Ca∣tarrhs, Colds, Stitches, Pleu∣risies, and expels the Stone and Gravel, whether in Reins or Bladder. Dose à gut. viij. ad xx. dropt into white Su∣gar, and drunk in Parsly-wa∣ter. § 12▪ It has all the Virtues of the Natural Balsam, and cures all manner of Wounds wheresoever, if drest there∣with, and if timely applied, at one application: held in the Month, also, it gives ease in the Tooth-ache; so also, if a hollow Tooth be stopt with a little Cotton, or Lint dip therein. § 13. The fe∣tid Oyl is of use for curing
outwardly Ulcers and Fistu∣la's, and other like stubborn and rebellious running old Sores; it also allays Vapours, and helps Fits of the Mother by smelling to it, or anoint∣ing it on the Nostrils, and sometimes taking it inwardly à gut. j. ad iv. V. Balsamum Saturnium, Balsam of Saturn. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Saturn ℥iv. Spirit of Turpentine ℥xij. mix and digest according to Art. It is of very great use in Chyrurgery: heals inve∣terate Ulcers and Tumours, cures Wounds, and preserves them from Accidents, more especially if a little Camphir be added thereto: it prevails also against Fistula's, Cancers, Morphew, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Prescript is exactly from Le Mort, who when they are mixt, advises you to let them stand in di∣gestion for six days, till the Oyl or Spirit is tinged of a most rubicund colour, and the Sal or Saccharum is whol∣ly dissolved, still adding a little more, as long as it will dissolve any: And if ʒj. of Camphir be dissolved in eve∣ry Ounce of the Balsam, it will be yet more efficacious. § 2. Or thus, according to Lemery: ℞ Salt of Saturn ℥viij. rectified Oyl of Turpen∣tine, so much as to cover it four inches deep; being put into a Matrass, place it in a gentle Sand heat, digesting for a day, or till you have a red Tincture; which decant, and put on more Oyl of Turpentine digesting as before; then decant the Tin∣cture again, which is a little coloured; and there will remain a little feces at bottom, which you may revive into Lead in a Crucible. Put these dissoluti∣ons into a Glass Retort, place it in Sand, and fit to it a Re∣ceiver, and with a very gentle Fire distil off about two thirds of the Oyl of Turpentine, cease the Fire, and cool the Retort, pouring that out which is in it, into a Glass Vial, which keep for Balsam of Saturn. § 3. It is excellent for curing Fi∣stula's, cleansing and cica∣vizing of Ulcers: It heals Cankers, being but touched with it, thô never so bad, for it mightily resists putre∣faction, heals Wounds, and cures an Atrophy in any par∣ticular part. § 4. It is also of wonderful use in a hot Gout, if a little Lint, or Cloth be moistned in it, and applied to the part. It is said also to cure Suffusions or Cata∣racts in the Eyes, and to take away redness and blood-shot
in them. § 5. It has all the Vir∣tues of the Saccharum Saturni, but much more powerful, and by reason of the Correction of the Ol. Terebinth. may be the more safely taken inward∣ly. Dose à gut. j. ad vj. § 6. Now here is to be no∣ted, That this Oyl of Tur∣pentine dissolves Lead, and easily unites with it, because of its sulphurous nature, and therefore if you should persist in putting on new Spirit or Oyl of Turpentine on the remaining matter, all the Sac∣charum would at last dissolve. § 7. A Compound Balsam of Saturn. ℞ Filing of Mars cleansed q. v. put upon them rectified Spirit of Salt, so much as to over-top them four inches: let them stand together till the effervescence ceases, and the Spi∣rit of Salt grows sweet; which sign appearing, filtrate the Spi∣rit, and evaporate to one half: then add an equal quantity of Saccharum Saturni, put them into a Retort, and with a gen∣tle fire draw off the superfluous Liquor to driness; so in the bottom of the Retort will re∣main a mass of a rubicund o∣lour, sweet like to Sugar, and most powerfully astringent. § 8. This being given inward∣ly, it most happily cures Dy∣senteries Hemorrhagies, and the overflowing of the Terms, as also the Hepatick Flux, and the Caeliack Passion. §9. Outwardly, mixed with a∣ny convenient Vehicle, and injected by a Syringe into Wounds, it cures their He∣morrhage or Bleeding, ob∣tunds the sharpness of Hu∣mours, mitigate the Pain, and stops their flux to the wound∣ed part. Inwardly, it is gi∣ven in Vulnerary Potions à gr. iv. ad x. VI. * Balsamum Succini, Bal∣sam of Amber. Bate.] ℞ White Amber in subtil Pouder ℥ij. pure Oyl of Turpentine ℥iv. insolate them so long till the Amber is per∣fectly dissolved. It strengthens the Brain and Senses, com∣forts all the Nerves, and is profitable against all their Disaffections, as Convulsions, Epilepsies, Hysterick Fits, &c. It is also a great Diure∣tick. Salmon.] § 1. Rolfincius, Ar∣tis Chymiae, lib. 4. sect. 5. cap. 2. makes it thus: ℞ Bees∣wax white or red, in fine Pou∣der, q. v. affuse thereon a suf∣ficient quantity of Oyl of Am∣ber, that may dissolve the Pou∣der: mix and digest with a gentle heat to a just Consisten∣cy. This, says he, most pow∣erfully comforts the Brain,
and may be given inwardly in Broth to ℈ss, without nau∣seousness: Outwardly it is to be anointed on the Coro∣nal and Sagittal Sutures, up∣on the Forehead and Tem∣ples. § 2. That which I use is thus made: ℞ Pure Oyl of Nutmegs or Mace by Expressi∣on, ℥ij. Choice Oyl of Amber ℥j. Salt of Amber ℥ss. mix them well together, so have you an excellent Balsam of Amber. § 3. The Virtues thereof we will give you from Gru∣lingius, Florilegii, par. 11. cap. 2. It excells other Balsams, being used against the Epi∣lepsie, Apoplexy, and Verti∣go; it comforts the Memory after an admirable manner; it cures all Diseases of the Head and Brain; it stops the overflowing of the Terms, Fluxes of Blood, and Suffo∣cation of the Womb; it faci∣litates the Birth, being anoint∣ed upon the Navel, for which reason also it gives ease in the Colick [and in After-pains of Women lying in]; it is good against the Strangury, and strengthens the Concoction of the Stomach; and is a fa∣mous Medicament against the Plague, and all Epidemick Diseases. Dose of it inward∣ly à ℈j. ad ℈ij. VII. Balsamum Sulphuris Anti∣monii, Balsam of the Sul∣phur of Antimony. Bate.] ℞ Combustible Sul∣phur of Antimony, Salt of Tar∣tar, A. ℥j, Spirit or Oyl of Tur∣pentine ℥iv. digest them toge∣ther, S. A. It is profitable against sordid Ulcers, Fistu∣la's, &c. Dose inwardly ad gut. x. Salmon.] § 1. This combu∣stible Sulphur of Antimony is thus made: ℞ Aqua Re∣gia (made of Spirit of Nitre ℥iv. in which ℥j. of the Pouder of Sal Gem is dissolved, and distilled by a Retort in Sand to driness) ℥iv. most fine Pou∣der of crude Antimony ℥j. mix them together in a long Cucur∣bit, putting in the Pouder into the Spirit by degrees, always waiting till the former effer∣vescence ceases: all the Pouder being put in, digest twenty four hours: then pour off the Solution into a white Ware Pot or Bason almost filled with pure Water, so will the whole become like Milk after a little while decant the milky Water into another clean Pot or Bason, and in the bottom you will have a thick and heavy Pouder, which is the inflamable Sulphur of Antimony, which is so often to be washed with pure fair
Water, till it ceases to come a∣way milkie, then dry it, and keep it for use. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Fine Pou∣der of crude Antimony, q. v. to which put by degrees Aqua Regia, in a Glass Retort, so long till the effervescence cea∣ses, then draw off the Aqua Regia, by a gentle distillation in a soft fire, but exciting it vehemently towards the end, so in the neck of the Retort, you will find the inflamable Sul∣phur of Antimony sublimed of a subcitrine colour, which take and keep for use. § 3. Otto Tachenius in his Hippocrates Chymicus, cap. 23. saith, Simple Aqua Fortis of Nitre and Alum, or Vitriol, corrodes not, nor dissolves crude Antimony; but adding to this Water so much fine cleanly pou∣dred fused Salt, as it can dis∣solve; if it be then superfused on the Pouder of crude Anti∣mony, it will with a gentle heat presently act on the Antimony, and corrode the Regulus of it, on which presently pouring cold Water, you will see the Sulphur separated and swimming upon the top of the Water like Pitch: where note, That at one O∣peration you must not dissolve above ʒij. or thereabouts, for in a greater quantity, the Sulphur will also be corroded by the Water, and turn to feces: dulcifie this Sulphur with cold Water, and it will look like the common Sul∣phur, only a little greener. § 4. In making the Bal∣sam you ought to stir the mix∣ture continually till the Sulphur is dissolved in the Oyl, for other∣wise it will coagulate and set∣tle to the bottom into a mass, and never dissolve so as to bring the Oyl into a Balsam: the fire must be gentle and not extream, and you must be cautious, that it kindle not, least you set the House on Fire: the Sulphur being once dissolved, it ought to digest for a Week or more in a gentle heat, to perfect the Ʋnition. § 5. This Sulphur is an excellent thing against all Wounds and Ulcers what∣soever, and stops Bleeding ad∣mirably. It is also good a∣gainst Coughs, Colds, Asth∣ma's, and all Oppressions and Obstructions of the Lungs, Difficulty of Breathing Short∣ness of Breath, &c. Dose à gut. vj. ad xij. VIII. * Balsamum Sulphuris Anisatum, Balsam of Sul∣phur Anisated. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur ℥ij. Oyl of Aniseeds ℥viij. mix and digest till the Sul∣phur is dissolved, and the Bal∣sam
becomes of a rubicund co∣lour. It is of admirable use against Catarrhs, or Defluxi∣ons upon the Brest and Lungs, Coughs, Asthma's, Phthisicks, Pleurisies, Colick, the Plague or Pestilence, Epilepsie, and all sorts of Apostemes, and Putrefactions of the Body. Dose ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. It is only a solution of the oily parts of the Sulphur in the Oyl of A∣niseeds: put the Ingredients into a Glass Matrass in Sand, and give a digesting fire for two hours; afterwards in∣crease it a little for four hours more, stirring it very often; the Vessel being cold, sepa∣rate the clear Balsam from the Sulphur that will not dis∣solve. § 2. In this our Prescript the Proportion is as j. to iv. but Grulingius, and Monsieur Charras in his Royal Pharma∣copoeia, makes it as j. to vj. ℞ Flowers of Sulphur ℥j. Oyl of Aniseeds by Expression ℥vj. put them into a Matrass, which stop exactly, and set it in dige∣stion over a moderate fire till the Flowers of Sulphur are al∣most all dissolved in the Oyl; take off the Matrass, and when the Ingredients are cool, sepa∣rate the Balsam by inclination from the feces, which keep in a Bottle close stopt. § 3. Now here is to be no∣ted, that the volatility of the Oyl of Aniseeds requires that the Matrass should be well stopt; but you must be care∣ful in the time of digestion to shake the Matrass often, to hasten the dissolution of the Flowers. § 4. It is also to be obser∣ved, that the Oyl by Expres∣sion may make a dissolution of the Sulphur; yet the Oyl by distillation would do bet∣ter, (and that is it which is intended by our Author) but being more volatile, it is ab∣solutely necessary, that the Vessel should be well stopt. § 5. Le Mort makes it af∣ter this manner: ℞ Sulphur, or its Flowers ℥ij. Salt of Tar∣tar ℥j. mix and melt them to∣gether exactly, till they become of a darkish purple colour; this done, pouder them, and to two Ounces of the Mass add Oyl of Aniseeds ℥iij. boyl them in B. M. for eight hours often stirring the Materials: then the Vessel being cold, decant the tinged supernating Oyl, and keep it for use. § 6. This you see is made by the help or addition of Salt of Tartar; which thô it may be made without it, yet by this means the Body of the Sulphur is not only pre∣pared, and somewhat open∣ed
beforehand, but also the acid particles thereof, are cor∣rected, so as they may not hurt the Lungs. § 7. But in our Phylaxa Medicinae, cap. 55. sect. 1. we have taught you to make it from Lac Sulphuris, for that the Body of the Sulphur is yet better opened by the Al∣cali, and Experience has con∣firmed the Effects thereof to be more excellent, than that otherwise prepared. § 8. Our Author thinks this Balsam to be little inferiour to Natural Balsam, for that it moderately heats and dries and preserves from Corrupti∣on. It is highly recommend∣ed against Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Coughs Colds, Asthma's, Pleurisies and Ulcers of the Lungs. It is very good against the Co∣lick, Oppressions of Wind, Gripings of the Guts, Weak∣ness and Indigestion of the Stomach, want of Appetite, Heart-burnings, &c. It is al∣so good against the Plague or Pestilence, and all Epide∣mick Diseases, continual and intermitting Feavers. § 9. Grulingius, par. 17: cap. 5. pag. 385. Florilegii, calls it the most perfect of Balsams, and says it has all the Virtues of the Natural Balsam, and the greatest Con∣servative Power in preserving from putrefaction; and be∣sides all the former Diseases for which it is good, he com∣mends it as an excellent thing against the Lues Venerea, and all Apostemes proceeding from putrefaction. Dose a gut. iv. ad xij. or xvj. § 10. If you would take it in a Potion, it will be best to dissolve it first in a little of the Yolk of an Egg, and then to mix it with the Broath, Wine, or Waters which you design as a Vehiculum. For the Colick anoint it on the Navel and Belly. IX. Balsamum Sulphuris Ben∣zoïnatum, Benjamin Bal∣sam of Sulphur. Bate.] It is made of the Flowers of Sulphur, and Oyl of Benjamin, in like manner as the Anisated Balsam. It is a wonderful Pulmonick and Antiasthmatick, and strange∣ly prevails in drying up Catarrhs. Salmon.] § 1. What this Oyl is, and how it it is di∣stilled, we shall here shew. Having made the Flowers of Benjamin, as we shall here∣after (in this Book) declare; you are to take what remains after the Flowers are sublimed and put into a little Glass Re∣tort,
and then to distil with a fit Sand heat a thick and fra∣grant Oyl, continuing the di∣stillation till no more will come forth, and nothing but a spon∣gy Earth remains behind in the Retort. § 2. Grulingius in Florile∣gium teaches you to mix the Benjamin with Sand, and to fill the Retort half full, then to distil with degrees of Fire; so have you a Water and Oyl thick like Butter: But this is fetid, and not fit for our purpose, and therefore he prescribes a rectification; this, tho it renders it more grate∣ful, yet is unfit for this work. § 3. Charras makes it thus: ℞ Benjamin lbj. in Pouder put it into a Glass Retort having a longer neck then ordinary; add rectified S. V. lbiij. mix them well, and lute to it a Vessel of Rencounter, setting the Retort upright for twenty four hours, upon a very gentle Sand heat, stirring the Substances from time to time to hasten the dissolution of the Benjamin: this done, place the Retort in a Sand heat, take off the Vessel of Rencounter, and fit to it an half Ball, luted with a wet Bladder, and with a moderate Fire distil off the Spirit of Wine, after which the Flowers will rise: as soon as you see them appear, set to a new Re∣ceiver, in the place of the for∣mer, luting the Juncture slight∣ly, that you may take out from time to time, the Flowers that shall fall into it, and such as stop the neck of the Retort, keeping them by themselves for their particular use. The Flow∣ers being past Lute to another Receiver, so will you have at first a thick Liquor or Oyl. 2. An acid Water. 3. A yel∣low, clear, and odoriferous Oyl, (which is the thing designed in our Prescript.) 4. And by con∣tinuance a fat and thick Oyl; which is only of use to cleanse and heal old Ulcers. § 4. We will yet (because of the excellency thereof) shew another way of distil∣ling our intended Oyl, which is thus: ℞ Benjamin in Pou∣der, so much as may fill the third part, or less, of the Re∣tort, (which if of Glass must be coated) affuse thereon Spirit of Salt, q. s. but so as the Retort may not be too full, least the matter should flow over: place it in Sand, and give Fire by degrees, so will you have, 1. A Flegm. 2. A clear transparent Oyl together with the Spirit of Salt, which must be kept by itself. 3. A yellow Oyl, which is to be kept by itself, and is that intended in the Prescript. 4. A thick fat Oyl; which,
thô it is not to be cast away. yet is very unlike to the for∣mer, and serves only for out∣ward uses, to be mixt with Oyntments and Emplasters. § 5. The Water or Flegm is very subtil and penetra∣ting, good against Contracti∣ons of the Nerves, Pains, Aches, Palsies, &c. The clear Oyl is more powerful, and does Wonders in cold Disea∣ses of the Nerves. The yel∣low Oyl which is the intend∣ed matter of the Prescript, is yet more powerful than ei∣ther of the former, and a Spe∣cifick in the Palsie, &c. § 6. Having gotten this yellow odoriferous Oyl of Benjamin, you are to put in∣to it a fourth part of the Flowers of Sulphur, in a Glass Matrass, which being stopt up close, you are to pursue the Operation in all respects in the former Anisated Balsam of Sulphur. § 7. This Balsam is singu∣larly good for Asthmatick Persons, and such as Wheeze, are Short-winded, and cannot easily fetch their Breath; and is especially good for such as have a vehement Ca∣tarrh, which falls violently upon the Brest and Lungs: It is good against a Phthisic, or Ulcer of the Lungs, and by its Balsamick property, quickly heals and cures it: It is also good against the Colick, and Griping of the Guts, more especially if it proceeds from a Dysentery or Bloody-flux. Dose à gut. vj. ad xij. or xvj. § 8. Outwardly it is vul∣nerary, and speedily cures any green Wound, or old Ulcer, being applied either alone, or with some other proper Balsam or Emplaster. It cures the Gout, as also old Aches and Pains proceeding from a cold Cause, the places afflicted being often anointed therewith, and Cloths dipt in the same laid thereon, at least twice a day. X. Balsamum Sulphuris Knoe∣phelii, Knephely his Bal∣sam of Sulphur. Bate.] It is made from the Hepar Sulphuris poudered, p. 4. fresh Lin-seed Oyl, p. iij. and then boiled to a thickness, and cautiously distilled by a Retort; then mixing the Oyl (first se∣parated from the Water) with half the quantity of the Colco∣thar of Vitriol, upon a gentle Fire; which being cooled are to be put into a Glass Retort in Sand, to be distilled, or rather rectified: this rectified Oyl is to be mixed with half the quan∣tity of Oyl of Aniseed, and to
be digested, S. A. into a red Balsam. It is a most excel∣lent Balsam for the Lungs, drying up Catarrhs, helping Asthma's, Coughs, Phthisicks, the Colick, &c. It helps Ex∣pectoration, stops Defluxions to the Joynts, discusses Ven∣tosities, and prevents them. Dose à gut. iv. ad xij. Salmon.] § 1. This is taken out of the Messis Medico-Spa∣gyrica, or the Edition of Schro∣der in Folio, pag. 733. from whence we shall a little ex∣plicate the process: moreo∣ver, in the original Prescript the Sulphur and the Linseed Oyl are in equal quanti∣ties. § 2. ℞ The best yellow Sul∣phur finely poudred, fresh made Linseed-Oyl, A. lbiij. mix them together, and boyl them in a very large Copper Vessel, but upon a very gentle fire, conti∣nually stirring them with a wooden Spatula, till they begin to grow thick: then remove the Kettle or Skellet from the fire, and put it into a great Vessel filled with cold Water, so will the matter ascend, and be condensed like Liver, but all spongy; which being cooled, and taken out upon a wooden Table, let it be cut into little bits, which put into a strong Retort, well luted and coated; then put it into a Rever∣beratory, affixing a proper Re∣ceiver, and distil with degrees of fire: for the first five hours, there comes forth Flegm; af∣ter that, a milkie Liquor, which will also continue for six or se∣ven hours: cautiously proceed farther to fifteen hours, pru∣dently managing the Fire (if you would save your Receiver, and not take pains in vain, which you are friendly advised of) till little white Clouds be∣gin to come forth, then increa∣sing the Fire (by adding more Coals) a most red Oyl will di∣stil forth; in which degree of heat continually keep it, till the whole radical humidity is distilled over, and till no more Clouds appear, then exciting the fire to the highest violence, so as the Retort may be red hot, the thick Oyl, like to Butter, will come forth, but yet in small quantity. § 3. In this last distillation, you shall see the whole Fur∣nace (chiefly in the Night) of a Cerulean colour, for that all the Sulphur being kindled does burn, and the whole House will be filled with a Sulphurous Odour; and al∣most all Metalick Vessels, chiefly such as are made of Silver and Copper, or Iron, spotted and blemished, or changed into divers colours, as if they had been stained
with Verdigrise, so subtil is this Spirit, to pierce all the Vessels, the Walls of the Fur∣nace, and the several Coat∣ings. This Butter, like Oyl being come forth, the Fire is to be removed or diminish∣ed, that every thing may cool. § 4. The distillation being done, the milkie Liquor is to be separated from the Oyl, which is wont to coagulate itself into a thick and stiff Mass, which yet notwith∣standing, upon the Fire is a∣gain easily melted, and it is to be rectified after this man∣ner: § 5. ℞ Of this coagulated Oyl p. ij. Colcothar of Vitriol, p. j. mix them upon the Fire in a large Pan, stirring them with a wooden Spatula: being mixed and cooled, break it in∣to small bits, put them into a Glass Retort, and distil in Sand, and again in the space of twen∣ty four hours the Flegm will come forth with Oyl; then augmenting the Fire, there comes forth together with the Spirits a thick Oyl, not much unlike Glew, which being all come forth, is again to be sepa∣rated from the Flegm. § 6. ℞ Of this Oyl separated from the Flegm; for Example sake, ℥iv. Oyl of Aniseeds ℥ij. mix them in a Phial hermeti∣cally sealed, and digest for for∣ty days in a gentle and Philo∣sophick digestion, and so long till they are perfectly united, so have you the true Antihectick Tincture, red like a Ruby. § 7. It is one of the great∣est Arcanums that is, for the Cure of the Phthisick, and all Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, so that in the World a greater or better is scarcely to be found (for which the Name of the most great and good God be eternally blessed and praised). In the Plague it is as it were a Divine Re∣medy, as well for the preser∣vation from, as the Cure of that Disease. And as it is a Balsam for both Lungs and Liver, so also it is an ex∣cellent Antepileptick and An∣tilunatick. Dose à gut. iij. ad x. in any fit Vehicle. § 8. Now here is to be no∣ted, That the Work will the better succeed, if some Salt of Tartar be added by mix∣ing it with the crude Sul∣phur in the first work, before you mix it with the Linseed Oyl. Agricola in his Tract of Sulphur, pag. 397. and Joh. Poppius in Hodegetico, make mention of this Oily Medi∣cament. So also Paracelsus, Libro de Naturalibus rebus, cap. 8. § 7. And Rolfincius Artis Chymiae, lib. 4. sect. 1.
art. 1. cap. 2. describes it from Paracelsus. § 9. It does wonders in the Colick, Stone, Palsie, Con∣tractions of the Limbs, in ex∣pelling Worms, and in heal∣ing, old, fetid, and rebelli∣ous Ulcers. The white Li∣quor separated in the first distillation (which has no in∣ternal use) is a singular thing against the Psora, Scab, Le∣prosie, and an Alopecia Le∣prosa, or Leprous Falling of the Hair. It is good for Pu∣stuls, and other Breakings out in the Face and Skin, Scurf, Morphew, Gutta Rosacea, being mixt with other Li∣quors; and some say it is profitable for such as labour under an Hydrophobia. XI. * Balsamum Sulphuris Suc∣cinatum, Balsam of Sulphur with Amber. Bate.] It is made of the Flowers of Sulphur with Oyl of Amber, in all respects as you make the Anisated Balsam. It prevails against the Colick, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Vulgar Chymist has another way of making this Balsam, besides the common way of the Te∣rebinthinated, or Anisated Balsam, and it is thus: ℞ Of the thick Terebinthinated Bal∣sam of Sulphur (the Prepara∣tion of which see in Sect. 12. next following) ℥j. Pure Oyl of Amber ℥ij. mix them well together, by shaking them in a Vial, then put them into B. M. and gently boyl them, so will the Oyl dissolve the Balsams, enter into it, and mix with it, and this is Balsamum Sul∣phuris Succinatum. § 2. Other Authors advise not to boyl the Terebinthi∣nated Balsam, and the Oyl of Amber together, but only to digest them together in a boyl∣ing B. M. till the Balsam is dissolved in the Oyl: but by this way it will be thinner, and want of the true Consistency of the Balsam of Sulphur. § 3. It is a good Vulne∣rary; both inwardly taken, and outwardly applied heals Ulcers of the Lungs; it heats, attenuates, incides, dries, re∣solves thick Flegm both in Stomach and Lungs, is of good use against the Jaundice, Coughs, Colds, and Shortness of Breath, allays Vapors, and helps Hysterick Fits; and in a word, it is good against most Diseases of the Brest, Lungs, and Womb. It also kills Worms, and strengthens the Bowels. Dose à gut. iv. ad xx. mixt with some pro∣per Syrup.
XII. * Balsamum Sulphuris Terebinthinatum, Balsam of Sulphur Terebinthinated. Bate.] It is made with Oyl of Turpentine, as that with Oyl of Aniseeds aforegoing. See the Virtues of the Anisated Balsam. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Sulphur in fine Pouder, or rather Flowers of Sulphur ℥iv. pure Oyl of Tur∣pentine ℥xvj. put them into a Glass Matrass, which place in Sand with a digesting fire for two hours; then increase it a little for four hours, so will the Oyl dissolve part of the Sulphur, and extract out of it a red co∣lour: let the Vessel cool, then separate the clear Balsam from the Sulphur that will not dis∣solve. § 2. Now here is to be no∣ted, that in making this Bal∣sam, the Matrass ought not to be above half full: and whereas, we here prescribe it to be made in a Sand heat, some make it in a boyling Balneo, and fit another Ma∣trass to it, thereby making a double Vessel. § 3. In this heat (whether in B. M. or Sand) the Spirit will begin to simper, and presently after the Sulphur will melt, and ting the Oyl of a deep red colour: the fire is to be so govern'd as to hin∣der the Oyl from boyling, and in about two hours time the Operation will be done; yet it will be better to keep it in the same heat for three or four hours longer. § 4. This done, decant the dissolution while it is hot, into an Earthen white Ware Ves∣sel, so will the undissolved Sulphur as it grows cold, set∣tle to the bottom in a yellow Lump, the pure Balsam re∣maining above, which then you are to pour off by incli∣nation, and keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 5. There is no need of a great Fire for this operati∣on, because the Sulphur being a fat Body, does easily incor∣porate with Oyls, and com∣monly gives them a red co∣lour, that which remains un∣dissolved in the Matrass, Le∣mery says, is the acid or sa∣line part of the Sulphur, and is found crystallized. § 6. In this Operation the Oyl draws with the colour the odour also of the Sulphur, so much, as almost to lose all its own scent. § 7. Le Mort first mixes the Flowers, p. ij. with Salt of Tartar, p. j. by exactly melting them together, till they are of a blackish purple colour, then poudering the
Mass, adds to it double the weight of the Flowers of the Oyl of Turpentine, and then boyls them in a Glass Ma∣trass in Sand for three hours, after which being cold, he separates the clear Balsam for use. § 8. And this addition of Salt of Tartar may seem ne∣cessary, for that thereby the Body of the Sulphur is in a great measure opened, where∣by it the easier dissolves and yields its Tincture to the Oyl: and tho' without the Salt of Tartar the substance of the Sulphur will dissolve in the Oyl; yet by the help there∣of, the Balsam is made much more efficacious. So that this Balsam thus made, is nothing but a conjunction of the Sul∣phur, or its oily parts, with distilled Oyls, which by the addition of a fixed Salt is ac∣celerated, for that it breaks the Chains of the acid, which holds the particles of the Sul∣phurous Body together. § 9. It is a most excel∣lent Anodyn and Healer of Wounds and Burns of the Nerves, and Nervous parts: It cures also Ulcers of the Brest and Lungs, and is ad∣mirable against Coughs of all sorts, Colds, Hoarseness, Loss of Voice, Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Breathing, and other Diseases of the Brest and Lungs. It cures also the Pain of the Ears, being dropt into them. It heats, dries, atte∣nuates, incides, resolves, and provokes both Sweat and U∣rine. Dose à gut. iv. ad xx. § 10. Modus Utendi. ℞ Of this Balsam q. v. mix with it so much double or treble refined Sugar, as will make it into a kind of a rough moist Pouder: to which add so much pure fresh Butter, as may make it into the Body of a Balsam fit to be cut like Butter, of a perfect bright golden colour. § 11. By this means the Balsam is rendred pleasant both to the Eye and Palate, so that the most delicate Sto∣mach will hardly refuse it, it having lost all the scent both of the Sulphur and the Oyl, and acquired by the mixing of the Sugar, the true scent of Lime-Juyce, or Juyce of Li∣mons: but that it may have this smell certainly, it is re∣quisite that in the first making of the Balsam, you never give it so great a heat as to make it boyl. Of this Balsam thus compounded, the Patient may take the quantity of a pretty large Chestnut, three or four several times a day, and par∣ticulary, first in the Morning fasting, and last at Night go∣ing
to Bed. It is an admira∣ble thing, and does wonders. Thus compounded, it is gi∣ven to Children for the Worms. § 12. The Balsam of Sul∣phur may also be reduced to the Consistence of an Un∣guent, by evaporation, and then it is of use to cleanse and heal Wounds, especially of the Nerves and Nervous parts, and to cure old Ul∣cers, Running Sores, and Fi∣stula's. See our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 12. sect. 12. XIII. Balsamum Tartari, Bal∣sam of Tartar. Bate.] ℞ Oyl of Tartar per deliquium ℥ix. Cremor Tartari poudred ℥viij. digest and eva∣porate to driness; affuse there∣on Spirit of Wine or Vinegar, with which extract a Tincture, filter and abstract to the Con∣sistence of Honey, S. A. It is a most powerful Medica∣ment against the Gout and Stone, and loosens the Belly. Dose ad ʒss. Outwardly parts pained are anointed there∣with: It is good also against all chronick and stubborn Diseases. Salmon.] § 1. This is the Balsamum Samech Paracelsi, whose usual preparation is this: ℞ Of the best Salt of Tartar lbj. and with a suffici∣ent quantity of Water make of it a strong Lixivium: take also Cremor Tartari lbj. and dissolve is in Rain-water by boyling: mix these Solutions together guttatim, so long till you see all the Effervescence cease, then immediately filter it, and evaporate to the form of a Salt. To this affuse the best Tartarised S. V. so much as may cover or over-top it three or four inches; let it stand in digestion, so long till the S. V. has contracted the highest red∣ness; then decant the S. V. and affufe-new S. V. as before; this Work continue till you have extracted all the Tincture out of the Salt: mix these Tin∣ctures together, and in a Glass Alembick in B. M. draw off the one half of the Spirit, so will the Balsam remain at the bottom. § 2. Now here is to be no∣ted, that the first part of the preparation, where the two Liquors being mixt together, till the Effervescence ceases, then filtrated and evapora∣ted to the form of a Salt, is that which is properly called the Balsamum Samech, and is given à ℈ss. ad ʒss. in some Diuretick Liquor. § 3. It is a Medicine that powerfully educes the Tartar of the Blood by Urine, and
effectually expels Sand, Gra∣vel, and Stone from the Reins and Bladder, for which rea∣son it is esteemed as a potent Medicine against the Gout. It is exhibited as a Specifick against the Dropsie, Podagra, Scrophula, and Obstructions of the Terms, Green-sickness in Virgins, &c. § 4. The Tincture (which is the latter part of the Pre∣paration) has all the same Virtues with the Salt, but is much more powerful to the said intentions, and may be given à ℈j. ad ʒj. XIV. Balsamum Veneris, Bal∣sam of Venus. Bate.] It is made of Plates of Copper, digested with Oyl of Turpentine, till a green Bal∣sam is formed, S. A. It chiefly cleanses Wounds, Ulcers, Fi∣stula's, &c. being mixed with other convenient Medica∣ments. Salmon.] § 1. Schroderus in Pharm. lib. 3. cap. 12. sect. 4. § 3. advises to take Filings of Copper, and to add to them Spirit of Turpentine, then to digest till it is green, so have you a thing useful in Chirur∣gery. § 2. But the best way of making this Balsam is thus: ℞ Verdigrise, and dissolve it in Spirit of Vinegar, filter, and abstract to driness, or let it crystallize, so have you a pure Verdigrise: of this take ʒj. Spi∣rit or Oyl of Turpentine ℥vj. mix and digest, till the Oyl has drawn the Tincture of the Verdigrise into its Body. § 3. It is of excellent use in all inveterate running Sores, old Ulcers, Fistula's, the Synovia, or Running of Water from Wounds and Ulcers in the Joynts, and all other stubborn and rebellious Maladies of like nature, do∣ing that which scarcely any other Medicine will do be∣sides; but it is not usually ap∣plied alone. § 4. The best way is to mix it with some other proper Oyntment or Balsam, and so apply it. It is a Me∣dicament not to be despised, tho' it is composed of things of small price, and easily made.
CHAP. V. Of ESSENCES, Or POWERS. I. Essentia Absinthii, Powers of Wormwood. Bate.] ℞ THE Spiritus Ar∣dens, or burning and inflamable Spirit di∣stilled from the green fer∣mented Herb ℥xij, distilled Oyl of the same ʒij. of the thick Extract of the same, Salt of Wormwood, A. ℥ss. digest them S. A. till they are united, then filter and keep them for use. After the same manner you may prepare Essences of other Vegetable Productions. Salmon.] § 1. The Ardent or Inflamable Spirit of Worm∣wood is thus made: ℞ A good quantity of Wormwood newly gathered, bruise it, and put to it (in a wooden Vessel) a good quantity of Wormwood-Water, or rather Juyce of Wormwood, in every lbvj. of which dissolve lbj. of Sugar, or rather as much Manna, or Ho∣ney, let them lie to ferment, till they have acquired a Vi∣nous scent, then distil in B. M. drawing off the third part for Spirit of Wormwood, and the second third part for Worm∣wood-Water: what remains in the Still may be cast a∣way. § 2. This Spirit of Worm∣wood you must Tartarise, or rectifie upon Salt of Tar∣tar, till it is so pure as it will fire Gunpowder, and is per∣fectly dephlegmated, other∣wise it will be wholly unfit for this Work. § 3. The Extract must not be made of what remains in the Still after the usual man∣ner; for seeing it is the Re∣mains of a fermented matter, after the volatile and subtil Sulphur and Spirit is drawn out of it; it is reasonable to believe the best parts of it are lost; and therefore it behoves you to make an Extract of fresh Wormwood, or its Juyce, which yet never past any fermentation, for by this means, the Aqueous parts will only ascend, leaving the essential, spiritous, and sa∣line parts behind in the Ex∣tract. § 4. It is thus done: ℞ Juyce of Wormwood, q. v. eva∣porate in Sand, or B. M. to
driness: this beat into fine Pouder, and keep for the use intended. § 5. The Salt must be made of green Wormwood well calci∣ned to pure white Ashes, (for being dryed, it will yield but very little Salt, as that which is once rotten will yield you none). These Ashes you must make a Lixivium of with Wormwood-Water, or Spring-Water, then filtrate and eva∣porate to driness, gently calci∣ning of it till it is of a blew colour. § 6. This being done, you are presently in an Iron Mor∣tar almost red hot, to beat it to a subtil Pouder, mixing it with four or six times the quantity of fine Pouder of Bone-ashes; and then imme∣diately to put all into the Spirit, with the Oyl of Worm∣wood, so will the Oyl joyn with the Spirit, and together extract the Tincture out of the Salt, which by long dige∣stion will be of an intense red colour. § 7. The Spirit Oyl and Salt having been mixt and digested together a Month, (for in much less time the Tincture of the Salt will not be drawn out) you are to put in the Pouder of the Extract, which being digested about ten days, shaking it well once every day, you may then decant the clear Tincture of the Extract, which you are to filter, and keep in a Bot∣tle close stopt for use. This is the ESSENCE, or ra∣ther POWERS of Worm∣wood. § 8. And this is the common way of making the Pote∣states, or Powers of Vegeta∣bles, which is with the Spi∣rit, Oyl, and fixt Salt of the Plant; but there is a better way of doing it, with Spirit, Oyl, and Volatile Salt of Plants, (which Volatile Salt all Plants have) which how that Volatile Salt is to be made, we shall in its proper place teach. § 9. The Virtues: These Potestates, or Powers are pos∣sibly the greatest Stomatick Medicament that is in rerum Natura, for they cleanse, strengthen, and fortifie the Stomach to a wonder, ma∣king it able to digest Food, thô almost never so weak; I speak what I know by Ex∣perience upon my own Body, besides the use of the Medi∣cine a thousand times in other Patients. It is cleansing, yet a little Styptick, Stomatick, Splenetick, Hepatick, Open∣ing, Attenuating, Discutient, Sudorifick, Antifebritick, Hyp∣notick, and Strengthning.
§ 10. It prevents and helps Surfeits and Feavers, chiefly Tertians, opens Obstructions of the Liver, Womb, and Reins; it is Alexipharmick, resists Poyson, and cures the Plague, and all Malign and Pestilential Feavers, as also the Cachexia, Dropsie, and Jaundice. § 11. It is Sudorifick, ex∣pelling watry Humors thro' the pores of the skin, expels Wind, and gives ease in the Colick and Griping of the Guts▪ It is a Preservative from ill Airs and Scents, and against Pestilential Infection, for that it wonderfully resists Putrefaction: It cures stink∣ing Breaths, evacuates Cho∣ler, and kills Worms in Children. Dose à gut. xx. ad lx. § 12. Utendi modus. ℞ Potestatum Absinthii ʒss. Spi∣rit of Saffron ℈j. Tincture of Musk and Ambergrise gut. iv. Damask Rose-water ℥iij. Syrup of Poppies ʒiij. mix for a Cor∣dial Dose, for a Man or Wo∣man, or for two Doses for a Child. This mixture is good against any Deliquium of the Spirits, as fainting and swoon∣ing Fits sickness at Stomach, Vomiting, Palpitation of the Heart, and other Diseases of like kind. See our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 1. where the Virtues of these Powers are more fully expli∣cated. Price Eighteen-pence an Ounce. II. Essentia Cardui Benedicti, Powers of Carduus Bene∣dictus. Bate.] This Essence is made in all respects like that of Wormwood aforegoing. Salmon.] § 1. The Powers of Carduus Ben. are not to be accounted among the num∣ber of mean Remedies, for that they have an admirable force against all putrefactive and contagious Diseases, and therefore are said to be a sure Antidote against the Small∣pox, Measles, Spotted Fea∣ver, Callentures, Plague and all malign and pestilential Di∣seases. § 2. They are Cardiack, and Alexipharmick, preva∣lent against Fainting, Swoon∣ing, Heart-qualms, and all manner of Poyson whatsoe∣ver, chiefly the Bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venemous Beast. § 3. They attenuate, open Obstructions, discuss Wind, are good against the Colick and Gripings of the Bowels, kills Worms, and expel Sand or Gravel from the Reins, and esteemed as an Antidote
against the Scurvy, and French-Pox, being an excellent sweet∣ner of the Blood, and a resto∣rer of it to its purity. § 4. They are Cephalick, Neurotick, and Antihysterick, cure Head-achs, Lethargies, Vertigo's, Loss of Memory, Deafness, and Dimness of the Sight; they are said to cure Quartans, allay Vapours, and resist Hysterick Fits. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒj. or ℈iv. III. Essentia Hyssopi, Powers of Hyssop. Bate.] After the same man∣ner also are made Powers of Hyssop. Salmon.] § 1. They are certainly one of the greatest Pectoral Medicaments in the World, upon all Obstructi∣ons of the Brest and Lungs whatsoever, prevail against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's; Wheezings, Loss of Voice, Shortness of Breath, and Dif∣ficulty of Breathing. § 2. They are also good a∣gainst inward Bruises of the Brest and Stomach, Spitting of Blood, Apostems, Tumors, and Ulcers of the Lungs, as also a Peripneumonica, or In∣flamation of those parts: they are of thin and subtil parts, and as they open Obstructi∣ons, so likewise they cleanse and digest, and ripens Tu∣mours in the Mouth, Throat, and Brest. § 3. They are good against Pleurisies, preventing them before they come, by opening the obstruction, and hindring the stagnation of the Blood, thereby removing the cause; and also curing them after they are present, by de-ob∣structing the Parts, and re∣solving the coagulated Hu∣mour. § 4. They are also Trau∣matick, and Vulnerary, ad∣vancing the Cure of Wounds and Ulcers, by cleansing, strengthning the Parts, and and healing them to a Mira∣cle, being inwardly taken, and outwardly applied, ac∣cording to the Prudence of the Physitian. You may mix them with any Vulnerary, Lotion ℥ij. to a pint, and so wash therewith, by which means the healing will be ad∣vanced more than five to one. Dose inwardly à ʒss. ad ʒj. or ℈iv. IV. Essentia Martis, Essence of Mars. Bate.] ℞ Filings of Mars ℥iv, put them into a long, or capacious Glass, and affuse thereon Spirit of Nitre ℥iij. re∣ctified Oyl of Vitriol ℥ij. stir∣ring
it thrice, or oftner, with a Spatula: then dilute or loosen the Mass (before it be too much compacted or hardned) with the Flegm of Vitriol ℥x, and make a rubicund Tincture, or an Es∣sence of a very deep yellow, which decant, filter, and keep for use. It powerfully opens Obstru∣ctions of what kind soever, it provokes the Courses, cures the Cachexia, Green-sickness, Dropsie, &c. Dose à gut. v. ad xv. Salmon.] § 1. This Recipe is taken from Grulingius his Florilegium, par. 19. cap. 2. sect. 3. where he advises to take ℥iv. or vj. of the pure Fi∣lings of Mars, and to put in the Spirit of Nitre, and Oyl of Vitriol by drops, and leisurely, lest there should be too great an Effervescence, and the Matter should be as it were inflamed, then to stir the Matter with an Iron Spatula, lest it should grow hard and break the Vessel: and the Spirit being all dropt in, to dilute the Mass (before it is too compact) with Flegm of Vi∣triol ℥x. or as much of the Flegm of the acid Spirit of Sal Armo∣niack by which a rubicund or highly yellow Essence will be made. § 2. Now here is to be no∣ted, That this Essence may be made only with Spirit of Ni∣tre, and Flegm of Vitriol, the Oyl of Vitriol being omit∣ted. § 3. It is a powerful Ope∣ner of all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery and Womb, insomuch, that those who look like Death itself, and are scarcely able to go the length of an ordinary Room, or move or stir about, it gives relief to in three or four times taking, insomuch, that it seems to be a Miracle of a Medicine; nor will any Man scarcely be able to believe what a mighty alteration it will so suddenly make, in the most deplorable Objects of that kind, that shall not behold the same with his Eyes, as we have done, so that to say all that has been truly done with it, would be to an incredulous or ignorant Man, only a kind of a far∣fetcht, or strained Romance. § 4. It provokes the Terms in Women, and cures all the other Diseases mentioned by our Author; and most effe∣ctually softens and resolves the hardest external Tumors, especially such as proceed from a scrophulous Humour, or Habit of Body. § 5. Grulingius in the place cited, gives us a History of a very hard Tumor of the na∣ture of a Wen, which was in his Wrist near his Hand, which by the only application
of this Essence, with double Linnen Cloths dipt, or moist∣ned in the same, was taken away, and perfectly cured. § 6. But if you would ren∣der this Essence more effica∣cious in Diseases of the Li∣ver, and Disaffections of the Womb, he advises you to compound it after this man∣ner: ℞ Zwelfer's true soluble Magistery of Red Coral (pre∣pared with the Spirit of Ve∣nus, see pag. 54. of his Ap∣pendix) ʒvj. dissolve it in the best Cinamon-water ℥iss. then add of this Essence of Mars ℥ij. mix them, so have you a de∣obstructive hepatick Essence, which contains both the Vir∣tues of the said Tincture of Mars, and Magistery of Co∣ral, both thing and name. § 7. In this first Essence of Mars, this is to be observed, That if the humidity be ab∣stracted by distillation, none of the Vitriol will be left be∣hind, but it will also ascend and come over the Helm; whereas in other Solutions of Mars, made with Spirit or Oyl of Vitriol alone, it will not; by which it is evident, that this Preparation is much more subtil and volatile, and consequently more penetra∣ting, than any of these Pre∣parations can possibly be. § 8. Marggrave makes the Essence of Mars after this man∣ner: ℞ Pure Filings of Mars ʒij. Spirit of Vinegar ℥iij. put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and digest in Sand for a Day and Night, increasing the Fire to the second and third degree, and in twenty four hours time you will extract a most red Tincture, which decant and filter: add to this double or treble refined Sugar, such a quantity as may bring it to the consistency of a Syrup, and Aro∣matize it with two or thre drops of Oyl of Cinamon, or Cloves. § 9. This Essence attem∣perates the Acrimony of a∣cid Humors, and melts them though never so tough and obdurate, opens Obstructi∣ons, stimulates the Womb to action, cures Cachexies, Jaundice, Scurvy, &c. Dose half a spoonful in Wine or Ale. V. Essentia Pulegii, Powers of Pennyroyal. Bate.] They are made after the self-same manner in all re∣spects, as Powers of Worm∣wood, at sect. 1. aforegoing. Salmon.] § 1. They are an excellent Cephalick, Pectoral, Uterine, and Nephritick: Cures Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Joynts,
as Apoplexies, Vertigo's, Le∣thargies, Corns, Megrim, Head-ache, Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Pleurisies, Obstru∣ctions of the Lungs, Vapours, Obstructions of the Terms, Hysterick Fits, Convulsions, Palsies, Tremblings, Numb∣ness, Loss of the use of Limbs, and other Disaffections of the Nerves; as also Pains and Aches, Gouts, and Sciatica's proceeding from a cold cause, by taking them inwardly, and bathing them outwardly up∣on the parts affected. § 2. They warm a cold Stomach, give ease in Pains of the Colick, and Gripings of the Guts, proceeding from what cause soever: and be∣ing drawn gently up the No∣strils, give ease to the Me∣grim or Head-ache, thô ne∣ver so vehement. § 3. It is a famous thing for easing After-pains of Wo∣men in Child-bed, being in∣wardly taken, and the Belly well bathed with the same two or three times a day. See Dor. Med. lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 15. ESSENCES added by the Translator, out of Collectanea Chymica. VI. ‡ Essentia Regia, The Royal Powers. § 1. ℞ Musk ℈ss. Civet gr. v. Balsam of Peru, gut. xij. Oyl of Cloves, gut. iv. Oyl of Rho∣dium, gut. ij. Salt of Tartar ʒss. mix them all well together, and digest till they are well united; then add Tartarised S.V. ℥ij. keep them together in a warm Plate for three days, stirring or shaking them twice a day; after, separate the clear from the faeces by inclination, so have you a most odoriferous Essence. § 2. It is a great Cardiack, chiefly if gut. ij. of Oyl of Ci∣namon be added in the mix∣ture to the Composition; takes away Fainting, and Swooning Fits: It also ren∣ders other Medicines more grateful and pleasant. § 3. With this Essence you may prepare an odoriferous Water, (which may be cal∣led, Aqua Moschata & Am∣brata) after this manner: ℞ Aqua Rosarum Damase. ℥j. of this Essence gut. ij. mix them, and it will be most fra∣grant.
§ 4. Also with it you may make Aqua Vitae Ambrata, thus: ℞ Aqua Vitae lbj. of this Essence gut. xx. mix them. The like you may do with other Liquors. § 5. Vinum Moschatum may also be made, by putting into every pint of White-wine, gut. ij. of this Essence. Or thus: ℞ Of Cyder Royal lbj. of this Essence gut. iij. mix them. These Compositions emulate Ambergrise. § 6. Confects and Conserves may also be made most odo∣riferous, if to every Ounce of the Confect, &c. gut. iij. or iv. of this Essence be ad∣ded. § 7. A Water may also be made to perfume Cloaths, Vestments, Linnen, Gloves, &c. after this manner: ℞ Damask Rose-water, Lavender-water, ana lbj Essentiae Re∣giae ʒj. mix them. Or thus: ℞ Damask Rose-water, Orange-peel-water, A. lbj. of this Royal Essence ʒj. mix them as be∣fore. And they who love To∣bacco, may perfume their To∣bacco with the same. VII. ‡ Essentia Metallica ad Vermes, Metallick Powers against Worms. § 1. ℞ Saccharum Saturni, Vitriol of Mars, ana ℥j. Mer∣curius Dulcis ʒij. mix them well together, and affuse there∣on the best rectified S. V. so much as may overtop it some inches: digest them together for two days, till the Spirit is ting∣ed of a high red, then decant it and keep for use. § 2. It powerfully opens all Obstructions, kills Worms in Children, or Elder Per∣sons, and is a very good thing against the Yellow Jaundice. § 3. If it be given in a larger Dose than ordinary, it provokes both Vomiting and Stool; forces down the Terms, discusses internal Apostems, and resists putrefaction. Dose à gut. iij. ad xx. VIII ‡ Essentia Asthmatica, An Essence against the Asth∣ma. § 1. ℞ Of the best Honey, Liquorice-root, A. ℥iv. Flowers of Benjamin, Opium prepared, A. ʒj. Camphir ℈ij. Oyl of A∣niseeds ʒss. Salt of Tartar ℥j. Tartarised S. V. so much as may overtop it some inches: digest altogether for viij. or x. days, then decant the clear, fil∣ter, and keep it for use, adding to every Ounce thereof ʒj. of the Tincture of Saffron. § 2. It is an excellent Pe∣ctoral, opening all Obstru∣ctions
of the Brest and Lungs, and gives great ease in the most stubborn and inveterate Cough. § 3. It thickens thin Hu∣mors, obtunds such as are sharp, and absorbs acidities; it cures most Diseases of the Lungs, is good against Pleu∣risies, eases pains of those parts, helps shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing; and takes away the Swellings of the Amygdalae, and Soreness of the Throat. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒj. IX. ‡ Essentia Antihysterica, Powers against Fits of the Mother. § 1. ℞ The best Castor, Assa Fetida, A. ℥ss. Oyl of Amber ʒj. Oyl of Rue ℈j. Oyl of Savin ʒss. Camphir ℈j. Tar∣tarised S. V. ℥x. mix and di∣gest them together, then distil: cohobate the Spirit upon the Feces, adding Spirit of Harts∣horn mixt with its Volatile Salt ℥ij. distil again, the one half (in B. M.) keeping the distilled Spirit for use; then draw off the remaining Spirit to driness, keeping it also for the same purposes, but as a wea∣ker Medicine. § 2. It is a great Antihy∣sterick, and Antiparalytick, as also an Antepileptick, curing those Diseases, as also Lethargies, Vertigo's, and most other Distempers of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb to a wonder. § 3. It provokes Sweat e∣gregiously in the Plague, and all Pestilential Diseases, is e∣minently good against the Measles, Small-pox, and all malign Feavers, prevails in Apoplexies, expels the Foe∣tus, and gives ease in the Gout. Dose à gut. vj. ad ʒss. X. ‡ Essentia Alexipharmi∣ca, & Bezoartica, The A∣lexipharmick, and Bezo∣artick Powers. § 1. ℞ Roots of Valerian, Butter-bur, Angelica, Master∣wort, A. ℥j. Leaves of Scor∣dium, Mint, Rue, A. M. j. Seeds of Lovage, Cumin, A∣nise, A. ʒij. Cubebs, lesser Cardamoms, A. ʒss. Cloves, Nutmegs, A. ℥j. Common Spi∣rit of Wine lbv. Salt of Tar∣tar ℥ij. mix and digest all to∣gether for two days at least; then draw off about two thirds of the Liquor for Spirit: In this Spirit infuse a fresh, Sas∣safras rasped, outward Orange-peels, Citron-peels, A. ℥iij. di∣gest twenty four hours, then distil off one half of the Li∣quor: to this Spirit put Con∣trayerva
℥ij. Saffron ℥j. Roots of Angelica, Masterwort, Va∣lerian, Butter-bur, A. ʒvj. all dry, and in gross Pouder: Choice Myrrh, Resin of Gua∣jacum, A. ℥ss. Salt of Tartar calcined to blewness, or the Scoria of Antimony calcined for an hour in a very strong Fire ℥ij. mix and digest in B. M. the longer the better; then decant the clear Essence, and keep it for use. § 2. Now here is to be noted, That if you intend to give it in intermitting Fea∣vers, it will be convenient to add to the last Extraction ℥ij. of the Jesuites Bark. § 3. In this Preparation the Roots and Seeds are to be first reduced into a gross Pouder; and the Salt of Tar∣tar, immediately while hot, is to be ground to a fine Pouder, in a hot Iron Mor∣tar, with a hot Pestil, and so forthwith to be put into the Spirit; for otherwise, should it take any Air, so as in the Mortar to grow moist, it would not yield any of its Tincture. § 4. This is an incompara∣ble Essence against many Di∣seases; it is good against all manner of Malign and Pesti∣lential Feavers, which it radi∣cally takes away. It is a pre∣sent Remedy against Poyson, the Biting of Mad Dogs, Ser∣pents, or any other venemous Creatures: It also presently cures the Measles and Small-pox, and is said to be an in∣fallible Cure for the Pesti∣lence itself: You may safely give it to all Ages and Sexes. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈ij. § 5. Utendi modus. ℞ Borrage, or Angelica-water, Damask Rose-water, A. ℥iij. Spirit of Saffron, Tincture of Cochinele, ana ʒij. of this Es∣sence ʒiij. Syrup of Limons ℥ij. Of the Royal Essence gut. vj. mix for a Cordial for four Doses. Or you may give a spoonful or two of it now and then upon any Fainting or Sickness at Heart; if to sweat upon, when the sick is in their Bed well covered. ℞ Damask Rose-water, Poppy-water, A. ℥j. of this Essence ℈ij. Tincture of Cochinele ℈j. Royal Essence. gut. ij. mix for a Sweating Dose against the Measles Small-pox or Plague. 'Tis an excellent thing in such-like; but you may in∣crease the Dose according as you see the strength of the Sick, or exigency of the Di∣stemper requires.
CHAP. VI. Of ELIXIRS. 1. Elixir Camphoratum, The Camphorated Elixir. Bate.] IT is made by dissol∣ving Camphir ℥ss. in Tartarised S. V. tinged with Saffron ℥vj. S. A. It is a most admirable thing against the Plague, as well to preserve as to cure.: it prevails also against the Hysterick Passion. Dose ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. This is no∣thing but the rectified Spirit of Wine, with Saffron, im∣pregnated with the Body of Camphir: and is called by other Authors, Spirit of Wine camphorated. Rolfinc. lib. 4. sect. 2. cap. 5. but he makes it without Saffron, or any li∣mitation of the quantity of the Spirit of Wine; not dif∣fering much from Quercetan's Tartarized Essence of Camphir with Aqua Vitae, § 2. ℞ Rectified S. V. ℥vj. Choice Saffron ʒiij. mix, and in five or six days extract a pure Tincture, which decant and filtrate: put it into a Glass Matrass, to which put the Camphir ℥ss, or better; fit to this Matrass another little one, and so make a double Ves∣sel; lute them well together with slices of Paper and Paste: place your Vessel in a Sand Fur∣nace, letting the Camphir stand till it be entirely dissolved in the S. V. the Spirit or Dissolu∣tion will be pure and transpa∣rent as before, and the Cam∣phir will give it a pleasant smell. § 3. Camphir is a Gum Ro∣sin, and therefore may easily be dissolved in Spirit of Wine, whose property it is to dis∣solve Resinous Substances by the homogenity of its sub∣stance, and the tenuity of its parts. § 4. It is a Cephalick, Car∣diack, Antiarthritick, and an Alexipharmick, having a ve∣ry great Diaphoretick force, and therefore very excellent against all manner of Malign or Pestilential Feavers, as the Measles, Small-pox, Calen∣ture, Spotted Feaver, yea, and the Plague itself. Dose à ℈ss. ad ʒss. or ℈ij. in any Cor∣dial Water, or medicated Wine.
§ 5. It chears the Heart, strengthens Nature, fortifies the Faculties, expels Wind, and to a Miracle cures the Colick, and Griping of the Guts, Rheumatisms, Gouts, &c. and revives all the Spi∣rits, Natural, Vital, and A∣nimal. § 6. It is an excellent ano∣dyn to appease the Tooth∣ache, by putting a little Cot∣ton dipt therein to the pained Tooth, and it is good to help the Pains in the Ears, by dip∣ping in it a little Conies or Rabbets Wool, and putting it into the Ear: Outwardly bathed upon places having the Gout, it cures them. § 7. It is also good in the Apoplexy, Lethargy, Verti∣go, Megrim, Palsie, and o∣ther old Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as also against Vapors, and other Hysterical Maladies. Ba∣thed upon an Inflamation in any part, it preserves it from a Mortification, and retrieves a Gangreen in the begin∣ning. II. Elixir Proprietatis Dulce, Sweet Elixir Proprietatis. Bate.] It is made of Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, A. ℥j. ex∣tracted with S. V. ℥viij. dige∣sted and filtrated, S. A. It is used profitably against all Ma∣lign Diseases, Hypochondria∣cal and Uterine; it takes a∣way the crudity of the Sto∣mach, and restores a lost Ap∣petite. Outwardly it serves for cleansing of sordid Ul∣cers. Salmon.] § 1. This is cal∣led Sweet, (not that it is sweet in tast, but) in opposition to that which is made with Spi∣rit of Sulphur; otherwise it is bitter like the Aloes it is made of. § 2. The preparation here∣of without an acid, we have taught in our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 6. sect. 1. where also you have at large its Vir∣tues and Use. The prepara∣tion of that with an Acid, in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. cap. 6. sect. 1. from the Colledges Pre∣scription, with Animadver∣sions thereon. Besides which, there are several other Pre∣scriptions, which we shall give you here. § 3. ℞ Tartarised S.V. af∣fuse it upon Flowers of Sal Ar∣moniack, so as to overtop it four or five inches: digest them to∣gether till the Alcohol of the Wine is sufficiently impregna∣ted with the Volatile Sal Ar∣moniack: take of this Spirit ℥viij. Saffron ℥j. mix and ex∣tract a Tincture in ten days: this done, decant the clear Tin∣cture,
and add to it Myrrh and Aloes in fine Pouder, A. ℥j. mix, digest a Month, sha∣king it every day, then decant the clear Tincture for use. By this means your Elixir Pro∣prietatis will be of much greater power, more pleasant in taste, and more grateful in smell. § 4. Maets makes it thus: ℞ Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A▪ q. v. the Gums being in Pou∣der, and the Saffron chopt small, affuse thereon Ol. Tar∣tari per deliquium, so much as to moisten it, and make it a thick kind of pap: digest them in a warm Balneo for twenty four hours: to this fer∣mented Mass, affuse Tartari∣sed S. V. so much as to cover it four inches over: digest (often stirring it) till the Alcohol of the Wine is impregnated with the more subtil and pure Sul∣phur, and Volatile Salt of the mixture, and becomes intensly of the colour of Blood, then de∣cant it from the feces, and keep it for use. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiv. It purges well. § 5. This, if you would have more Noble, you may fortifie thus: ℞ Of the pre∣cedent Elixir ℥i. Volatile oily Salt ʒij. mix and digest them together for twenty four hours with a gentle digestion, so will they be firmly united, and make a most admirable Bal∣samick Elixir. Dose à ℈j. ad ℈ij. § 6. But prepared with the Tincture of Sena, it is more Cathartick, and better in O∣peration: ℞ Make a strong Tincture of Sena, with Tarta∣rised S. V. or if you please, with common Spirit: of which take ℥viij. Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. ℥i. mix, and make an Elixir as before directed. This is superiour to all those which are ordinarily sold, and it is an excellent Medi∣cine, which I cannot suffici∣ently commend. § 7. I also prepare it thus: ℞ Powers of Amber, Aniseeds, Carraways, or Juniper Ber∣ries ℥viij. Saffron, Myrrh, A∣loes, A. ℥i. mix and make an Elixir. And if you add Sena ℥i. it fully answers the Inten∣tions of all the former Prepa∣rations, and becomes a No∣ble Stomatick and Cardiack, wonderfully restoring and conserving the Balsam of the Blood. § 8. It provokes the Terms, opens all inward Obstructi∣ons, and is a wonderful thing against Hypochondriack Me∣lancholy: It cures the Green-sickness in Virgins, and the Scurvy, from a sharp and au∣stere ferment in Elder Peo∣ple; it is also given success∣fully
against all sorts of Ma∣lign and Pestilential Feavers: it also resists Putrefaction and Poyson, helps the weakness of the Stomach, Crudities and Indigestion, and cures the Jaundice and Dropsie. § 9. It gently purges down∣wards, and is a Specifick a∣gainst Tertians, which it is said radically to take away: It is indeed a kind of Uni∣versal Remedy, warming, drying, strengthning, evacua∣ting, altering, and comfort∣ing, and may be given in all Diseases, in all Ages, and to all Sexes. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiij. or more. § 10. Hitherto we have been shewing you how it is made dulcid, or without an Acid, we shall now shew you how it is made with an acid from Lemery. ℞ Myrrh, Aloes, A. ℥ij. Saffron ℥j. S. V. so much as may overtop it a fin∣ger's height above it, put all into a Bolt-head, which stop well, digest two days, then add Spirit of Sulphur, till the Li∣quor is four fingers above the matter, shake all well together, and fit another Bolt-head to the former, making thereof a Cir∣culating Vessel, digest in Horse-dung, or a gentle B. M. for four days, then decant the Tin∣cture, strain, and keep it for use. It fortifies the Heart, purifies the Blood, and works by Sweat. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. § 11. From the remaining feces you may draw more Tincture, but it will not be so strong, nor so good as the former, because it has alrea∣dy parted with its more vo∣latil and pure parts; yet this second Tincture may serve to make new withal. Lemery also allows but ℥j. of Saffron, because it not only takes up much room by its lightness, but is withal sufficient to fill the Pores or Body of the Men∣struum, so that if more should be added, it would receive no more. § 12. He first infused the Ingredients in S. V. thereby to draw there more Sulphu∣rous parts; then he adds the acid Spirit, which being sweetned by the ramous parts of the S. V. it will have no more power or force, but on∣ly to load itself with the Tin∣cture. And by this mixture of the S. V. with the Spirit of Sulphur, the Elixir acquires a very pleasant smell. § 12. Le Febure makes his Elixir, which he calls Elixir Proprietatum, with the vola∣til Spirit of Harts-horn, char∣ged and saturated with its volatile Salt, thus: ℞ Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. ℥iij. put the
Saffron, with the others, in Pouder, into a Bolt-head with a long Neck, and large, or at least two inches diameter: to which put rectified Spirit of Harts-horn, saturated with its volatile Salt, as much as it is able to dissolve, and ℥xx. of Tartarised S. V. stop the Ves∣sel with a Circulatory, luting the Juncture with a wet Blad∣der, Whites of Eggs and Flour, and digest in a very gentle B. M. for three days: then di∣stil off ℥xv. slowly: and if the volatile Salt does sublime, dis∣solve it again in the Spirit di∣stilled, cohobating, digesting a∣gain three days, and then di∣stilling ℥xx. which cohobate, again digesting for three days more, which done, leave it till it is cold, then decant the clear, filter, and keep it for use. § 13. It alters and rectifies the Mass of Blood, cures the Scurvy, Jaundice, and Green-sickness, opens all Obstructi∣ons, cures Palsies and Atro∣phies, and is a most admira∣ble thing against Hypochon∣driack Melancholly, and Hy∣sterick Fits. Dose à gut. x. ad xl. or ʒj. in the Morning fasting. § 14. Paracelsus was the Author of this Medicine; but the Prescript of Crollius; which makes it with Spirit of Sul∣phur, has been best approved of, tho' without much rea∣son, since that Spirit is enough to burn the pure substance of the Ingredients: Others as much disapprove of alcholi∣zate Liquors, made with Ve∣getable Salts, for that they think their Acrimony does e∣nervate the most pure and es∣sential parts; both which Objections may in part be true, and as easily removed on both hands, if a wise Man has it in managing. § 15. Charras makes it thus: ℞ Saffron, Myrrh, A∣loes, A. in fine Pouder, mix, and slightly sprinkle them with a small quantity of Spirit of Sulphur, mixt with equal parts of rectified S. V. to which put Baum-water, so much as may over-top the Ingredients three fingers: mix well, and cover the Cucurbit with a Vessel of Rencounter, well luting the Juncture, digest in B. M. for fifteen days, stirring them from time to time; then decant the Tincture; putting in a third part more of Spirit of Wine, than you put before of Bawm-water: lute the Vessels together again, and digest for two Months, stirring the Ingredi∣ents from time to time: then decant the Tincture, which fil∣ter; and affuse new S. V. re∣iterating the maceration, if you so please, (tho I suppose it
will scarce be worth the trou∣ble). Put the two first Tin∣ctures together into a Cucurbit, which cover with its Head, lute the Juncture, and in Sand, or B. M. with a very gentle Fire draw off about two thirds of the Liquor; taking what re∣mains in the Cucurbit, as the Elixir, which keep for use. § 16. Marggrave makes it thus: ℞ Best English Saffron, choice Myrrh, Aloes Socotrina, Spir. Sulphuris per Campanum A. ℥i. Tartarised S. V. ℥viij. mix, digest a Month, decant the Tincture, and keep it for use. Or thus: ℞ English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. ℥i. Tartariz'd S. V. ℥xx. mix and digest eight days, then add Spirit of Sulphur ℥j. digest a∣gain twenty days, and decant the pure black Tincture for use. § 17. Le Mort thus: ℞ English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. ℥ij. moisten them first with S. V. then affuse so much Spi∣rit of Sulphur, as may over∣top them two inches, and digest twenty four hours: decant the Tincture, and to the faeces put Tartarised S. V. so much as to over-top it three inches, digest again for two days, till the Spi∣rit is well tinged; mix these Tinctures together, filter them, digest a week, and keep it for use. § 18. These are the varie∣ty of ways Authors have taught, which seem not to be so natural and excellent as the three following Methods, which we are willing to com∣municate to the World, for the benefit of Mankind: The first two are performed with Alcalious Menstruums, the latter with an Acid. § 19. The first way: ℞ English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, Sena, A. ℥i. Spiritus Intimus ℥x. mix, digest a Month, shaking them once a day, then let them settle, decant the clear, and keep it for use, § 20. The second way: ℞ English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, Sena, A. ℥i. Powers of Aniseeds, Carraways, Juniper-berries, La∣vender, or Rosemary ℥x. mix, digest a Month, then decant the clear, keeping it for use. § 20. The third way with an Acid: ℞ English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, Sena, A. ℥i. Spirit of Wine rectified (accuated and digested with a quarter part of the best Spirit of Nitre or Sul∣phur, before-hand) ℥x. mix, digest a Month, then decant the clear, and keep it in a Glass close stopt for use. These three last ways, are not only new Methods of making this Elixir, but also the best ways, and much exceeding all the
former, as they who shall please to make tryal will cer∣tainly find. Price 2 s. 6 d.an Ounce. III. Elixir Proprietatis Pesti∣lentiale, Elixir of Property against the Plague. Bate.] ℞ Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes A. ℥ss. Spirit of Harts∣horn ℥ij. mix and unite them with the Alcohol of the Spirit of Wine ℥iv. digest, decant, filter, and keep it for use. Salmon.] § 1. This is from Le Febure, and is the same preparation with what we have before declared at § 12. of the former Section: and in § 13. of the same, you have its Virtues at large, so that no more need be said of it in this place. § 2. But if you would make it an absolute Anti∣pestilential Medicament, you ought to make it thus: ℞ English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, Camphir, A. ℥i. Powers of Juniper ℥xij. accuated with Spirit of Nitre ℥i. mix, di∣gest, decant, filter and keep it for use. § 3. This has more than treble the Virtues and Force in curing the Plague, and all sorts of Malign and Pestilen∣tial Diseases of what kind soever, for it strikes at the root of the Disease, and ener∣vates the Poyson to a Mira∣cle: it not only cures, but also preserves from all kinds of contagious Diseases what∣soever, in the time of their greatest rage and violence, so that he that takes this Me∣dicine, needs fear no danger. § 4. It expels Wind, and is a safe and sure Remedy a∣gainst the Colick and Griping of the Guts, how vehement soever; it kills Worms, and opens all Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder, provokes Urine, and expels Sand, Gra∣vel, and all other things which obstruct those parts: I have given it to Children against the Measles and Small-pox, and with such success, that of some scores which I have given it to, I remember not one single Patient that has died, or done amiss. Dose à ℈ss. ad ʒss. ʒi. plus minus, according to the Age and Condition of the sick. § 5. It is good also a∣gainst Hypochondriack Me∣lancholy, Madness, Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves; and is of singular use against Lethargies, Ver∣tigo's, Palsies, Cramps, Con∣vulsions, and Hysterick Fits, being taken inwardly in a fit Dose Morning and Even∣ing, and the parts afflicted
being outwardly bathed with the same. § 6. It cures the Scurvy, want of Appetite, Indigestion, Rheumatisms, and wander∣ing Pains, tho' of many years standing; and is accounted a Specifick against the Yel∣low Jaundice. I have had a long experience of this latter Preparation, insomuch, that I think I cannot say enough of it, I am sure not too much and therefore once more re∣commend it to the Thoughts Consideration, and Use of all the industrious Practisers of our Art. IV. Elixir Proprietatis Tar∣tarisatum, Elixir of Pro∣perty Tartarisated. Bate.] It is made of Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, A. ℥i. with Tincture of the Salt of Tartar ℥xij. digesting and filtering. S. A. Salmon.] § 1. How Tin∣cture of Salt of Tartar is to be made, shall be shewed in its proper place; and with that the Tinctures of the o∣ther things are to be extract∣ed; so that this Elixir is on∣ly a Tincture extracted with a Tincture, or a Tincture extracted with the Sulphur of the Salt of Tartar, joyned with the Sulphurous S. V. § 2. Le Mort makes it thus: ℞ Aloes, Myrrh, Saf∣fron, A. ℥j. Salt of Tartar ℥ss. rectified S. V. ℥xx. then digest fix days in B. M. &c. so that he would make the Sulphur of the Wine to extract two Tin∣ctures at one time, viz. the Tincture of the Ingredients, and the Tincture of the Salt, which answers not the inten∣tion; for this Elixir is to be valued by reason of the Men∣struum extracting; and it is notoriously known, that the Tincture of Salt of Tartar much excels the best rectified S. V. § 3. If it be objected, that by this way of Le Mort's, you will have a Tincture of a Salt of Tartar, extracted with the Tincture of the other Ingredients, and so that up∣on the matter, it will be the same thing; we answer, No. For the rectified S. V. will first act upon the Vegetable Ingredients, by which it will be enervated, or weakned, and clogged, that it will have no ability to extract the Tincture of the Salt, which is the design of the Pre∣script. § 4. It has all the Virtues of the Vulgar or Common Elixir Proprietatis, at Sect. 2. aforegoing; besides which, it more powerfully opens Ob∣structions,
and more abso∣lutely sweetens the Blood, and other Juices; absorbing the Acidity, and dissolving Coagulums in any part of the Body. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. V. Elixir Salutis, The Elixir of Health. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Sena ℥iv. Raspings of Guajacum, Elecampane dried, Aniseeds, Carraways, Coriander, Liquo∣rice A. ℥ij. Raisons stoned ℥viij. Aqua Vitae lbvj. digest cold for four days, then strain through Hippocrates's Sleeve. Some add Salt of Tartar, Rhubarb, Scammony, &c. Dose one or two spoonfuls at Bed-time, and three or four more in the Morning. Salmon.] § 1. There are many Prescipts of this Medi∣cine, the Basis of which are Aqua Vitae and Sena, 3 Quarts of the one, to 6 Ounces of the other in proportion, which is the true Recipe: but to make it stronger, better, and more effectual, it ought to be Sena ℥ix. to Aq. Vitae lbvj. what is less than this is too little: the other things are added as a Com∣plement to take off the Griping quality of the Sena, and there∣fore whatsoever things will do that, and not hurt the tast of the Medicine, may be used instead of, or as well as them. § 2. Among those things which do that, Liquorice-Roots, and Carminatives are the chief; and of Carmina∣tives, Aniseeds, and Juniper-berries bear away the Bell: To which may be added a Pectoral, such as is Elecampane. § 3. The Raisons are chie∣fly added to sweeten it, thô they have also a slimy, and laxative, or loosning quality withal; so also has Honey, which will purge some Per∣sons of itself: But since the whole Cathartick Virtue de∣pends upon the Sena, a Syrup of refined Sugar may serve as well to dulcifie the Mixture, for that all Melaginous and Saccharine Bodies are very apt, and that naturally to loosen the Body. § 4. Aqua Vitae, Aniseed-water, or Spirit of Wine, are made use of, not for that they extract the Virtue of the Se∣na better than some other Menstruum, but because, 1. The Medicine will better keep, than when it is prepa∣red with a simple Aqueous Body. 2. They better cor∣rect the Griping quality of the Sena, than Water can. 3. They much better extract the Virtues of the Corre∣ctives, whose Sulphurs could scarcely be drawn forth with a simple watry Men∣struum.
§ 5. Some Prescripts have Pouder of Jallap ℥j. which does somewhat quicken it as to its Operation: and that (if any other Cathartick is added to the Sena) is the best Purger which we know of, which has so little ill tast: now if Jallap be added, you must be certain to use a Spirituous Menstruum, for an Aqueous one, will draw nothing out of it. § 6. If you prepare it with the Jallap you may order the Proportions after this man∣ner: ℞ Alexandrian Sena ℥iv. Pouder of Resinous Jallap ℥i. Aniseeds, Juniper-berries, Li∣quorice, Elecampane, (all brui∣sed) ana ℥ij. Aqua Vitae a Gallon: mix, digest, strain, and dulcifie it with a Syrup made with double refined Sugar. § 7. If you prepare it with∣out Jallap, you may order the Proportions thus: ℞ Choice Sena ℥xvj. Elecampane dried, Liquorice, Aniseeds, Juniper-Berries, A. ℥vj. Aqua Vitae, three Gallons: mix, digest a week, strain, and then dulci∣fie it in Syrup of Liquorice made with doublerefined Sugar. § 8. It is a good Purga∣tive, and by reason it is made with a Spirituous Menstruum, it is the more apt to insinuate itself into the Blood and Hu∣mors, and so to cleanse and depurate them: It cures the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, and Jaundice; is good against the Sciatica, Kings-Evil, Scabs, and all manner of Breakings∣out in the Body; it opens Obstructions in the Stomach, Gall, Liver, Spleen, Reins, and other Viscera; it is Pe∣ctoral, and prevails after an eminent manner against Di∣seases of the Lungs, as Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Obstructi∣ons of the Lungs, Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Brea∣thing, and other Distempers of those parts of like nature. It is also an excellent Reme∣dy against the Griping of the Guts, Belly-ache, &c. car∣rying off the cold, acid, and viscous Humours, sticking to the Tunicles of the Guts, causing those Diseases. § 9. It is truly an excel∣lent thing against Rheuma∣tisms, or wandering Pains running up and down in any part of the Body; draws forth and expels watry Humours, and prevails mightily against Disaffections of the Stomach and Bowels: you may take it alone of itself, without mix∣ing it with any other thing, for it is pleasant enough: Some take it as the Author has directed; others take it altogether in the Morning, three or four spoonfuls or
more at a time. It is a Me∣dicine I much use, and is a good general Purger, and may be had ready prepared at my House at Eighteen-pence a small Bottle: but I deviate something in the Preparation from the former Prescripti∣on. VI. Elixir Vitae, Elixir of Life. Bate,] ℞ Nutmegs, Mace, best Cinamon A. ℥i. Cloves ℥ss. the yellow of Orange and Ci∣tron-peels A. ʒiij. best Saffron ℥ij. Tartarised S. V. lbiij. mix, digest, and filtrate, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. This is pro∣perly but a Tincture, ex∣tracted from the Ingredients with Tartarisated S. V. but if you would have the Spirit Elixitrated, it ought to be first drawn off from the Mat∣ter with a very gentle Fire, cohobated upon the feces se∣veral times, till the Spirit be∣comes maturated with the Spirituous Sulphur of the par∣ticulars. § 2. This done, you are to take the like fresh Ingredients, and then to digest them in this Elixirated Spirit for 20 days, in a temperate place, by which means you will ex∣tract also the Corporeal Sul∣phur, which by digestion will be united with the Spiritu∣ous, and so make an excel∣lent Medicine. § 3. It is a great Cordial, revives all the Spirits Natu∣ral, Vital, and Animal, forti∣fies the Faculties, strengthens the Head, Brain, Nerves, Heart, and all the other prin∣cipal parts, and comforts the whole Body. § 4. It is good against all manner of Infectious Disea∣ses, as Measles, Small-pox, Spotted Feaver, Purples, and the Plague itself: It prevails against Faintings, Swoonings, Sickness at Stomach, and all other Diseases of the Heart and Praecordia. You may give it à ʒj. ad ʒij. or more, in any proper Vehicle. VII. Elixir Vitrioli, Elixir of Vitriol. Bate.] ℞ Cinamon, Gin∣ger, Cloves, A. ʒiij. Calamus Aromat. ℥j. Galangal ℥iss. Leaves of Sage, Spear-Mint, A. ℥ss. Cubebs, Nutmegs, A. ʒij. Wood of Aloes, Citron-peels, A. ʒj. make all into a fine Pouder; and add thereto White Sugar-candy ℥iij. Spi∣rit of Wine lbiss. Oyl of Vi∣triol lbj. extract a Tincture by digesting it twenty days S. A. then filter, and keep it for use. It wonderfully comforts the
Stomach and Bowels, and rovokes Appetite: it pre∣erves from the Epilepsie and Apoplexy, purges the Brain, nd dries the Head, and whole Body, whose Natural Habit is overturned with a eneral Flegmatick Catarrh, reeing it wonderfully from ain. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. In making f this Medicine, we are to onsider, 1. The Menstruum. . The Ingredients. 3. The reparation. § 2. As to the Menstruum,  consists of two parts, Spirit f Wine, and Oyl of Vitriol: he Spirit of Wine ought to e that which is highest recti∣ied or tartariz'd, whereby it ay be freed from its chief legmatick parts: the Oyl of itriol ought also to be pure nd free from its Flegm: These two pure Substances re to be mixed together, and igested till they are united; nd the Menstruum will be o much the better if it be istilled, and brought over he Helm; for by that means he conjunctions will be the more firm. § 3. The Menstruum be∣ng thus prepared, the Ingre∣dients are next to be consi∣dered; and therein you will do well if you except the Su∣garcandy; for that, by its too sudden dissolution will be apt to blunt the edge of the Menstruum, whereby it will not well extract the whole Virtue of the other Ingredi∣ents. § 4. This done, put in the several Particulars into the Liquor, and digest for twen∣ty days, shaking the Glass once or twice a day; then decant the clear and filter: this is but a Tincture, but if you would elixirate it, you must draw it off in a Glass Alembick in B. M. to driness, and cohobate it three or four times, so will you have a subtil and volatile Elixir, of such pure and thin parts as will be able to penetrate through the whole Body in a moment. § 5. After the last Coho∣bation, you may put in your Sugarcandy in fine Pouder, which being dissolved, let the Liquor stand till it is fine, and keep it for use. § 6. It is an excellent Sto∣matick, Cephalick, and Neu∣rotick, good against and cold and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain, Palsies, In∣disposotions of the Stomach, the Scurvy, in a cold Habit of Body, Rheumatisms, Sick∣ness at Heart, Faintings, Swoonings, and the like. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj.
VIII. Elixir Vitae Maetsia∣num, Mates his Elixir of Life. Salmon.] ℞ Fresh Damask Roses preserved with Salt lbj. Tartariz'd S. V. lbiiss. digest them together for two days; and then distil with a very gentle Fire, hanging in the Beak of the Alembick, Amber∣grise ʒss. Oriental Musk ℈ss. mixt together: to the distil∣led Liquor add of the best Li∣gnum Aloes finely rasped, or in Pouder ℥ij. Yellow of Orange-peels, A. ℥ss. Yellow of Limon-peels ℥iss. Oyl of Cinamon ʒiss. digest them together for two or three days; so will you have a Cordial Elixir of almost infi∣nite Virtues. § 2. It is a great Cepha∣lick, Neurotick, Cardiack, and Alexipharmick, and an egregious Remedy against all Diseases proceeding from cold and moisture in any part of the Body. It is good against the Lethargy, Carus, Apo∣pxy, Epilepsie, Palsie, and old and most Distempers of he Womb, and is good for Barrenness in Women. It is singular good against Paint∣▪ Swoonings, Palptan and Sickness at Heart, Weak∣ness of the Stomach, Indige∣stion, and want of Appetite. § 3. Where note, That if you would have it more grate∣ful to the Palate, you ought to dulcifie it either with the best double refined Sugar, or with a Syrup made of the Yellow of Limon-peels. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj. or ʒiss. in a Glass of Wine. IX. Elixir Anodynum Le Mo∣tianum, Le Mort's Elixir Anodyne. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ S. V. re∣ctified after the following man∣ner: ℞ Vitriol calcined to whitness with a very gentle Fire lbj. Nutmegs, Saffron A. ʒij. Camphir ʒiv. Tartarised S. V. lbv. digest all together for three or four days, then di∣stil off the one half: the Feces evaporate with a very gentle Fire to driness, and cohobate the former distilled Spirit up∣on them. and distil in B. M. to driness. To this put Thebian Opium made with Water ℥i. hoc Sffron ℥s. Nutmegs, Lignum Aoe▪ . Cam∣phr ʒi▪ ye  s ℥i. mix and digest  ether, for
two or three days, the longer the better. § 2. This is a troublesome way of making the Menstru∣um for Extraction; a sim∣ple rectificated S. V. from Pot-ashes by cohobation, may do nearly as well, and so save much labour: and a rectification upon any Alca∣lious Salt without distillation will do the same. § 3. It is highly Anodyn, and gives ease in all sorts of Pains whatsoever: it gently induces Sleep and Rest, and renders the Spirits chearful, and is a most excellent thing in Feavers, and other like Acute Diseases. It ceases the too great Effervescence of the Blood, if made with the Vi∣triol as afore directed. § 4. But if made with the Alcali Salt, it opens more, and therefore, provokes the Terms, and moves Sweat, more especially if mixed with other Sudorificks. Dose à gut. vj. ad ʒss. X. Elixir Menstruale Le Mor∣tianum, Le Mort's Ure∣rine Elixir. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Rosemary, Rue, Savin, A. Mij. Laven∣der, Marjoram, Pennyroyal, Motherwort, A. M. j. Roots of round Cypress, Levisticum, A. ℥ss. Sassafras, Orange-peels, A. ℥ss. Seeds of Daucus, Lovage' Anise, A. ʒvj. Cinamon ʒij. Spirit of Wine lbiv. cut what are to be cut, and bruise what are to be bruised, then mix all together, and macerate them for twenty four hours, then di∣stil to one half: the Spirit drawn off, mix with fresh S. V. and rectifie again upon the same Herbs; and repeat once more the same operation. Then add Filings of Steel lbj. Cremor Tart. lbiss. Spring-water lbviij. boil them together, till the Liquor becomes of a red co∣lour, filter, and evaporate to the consistency of a Syrup, which keep for use. Lastly, ℞ A third part of the former Spi∣rit, Saffron ℥ss. mix and ex∣tract a Tincture. ℞ Another third part of the said Spirit, sweet-smelling round Cypress-roots ℥iss. mix, and extract a Tincture. ℞ The last third part of the same Spirit, of the former Syrup of Mars, double the quantity of the Spirit: mix them, and extract a Tin∣cture: mix all these three Tinctures together, and keep them for use. § 2. It is an excellent thing to open all Obstructions of the Womb, as also of the Liver and Spleen; and a most admirable Medicine to cure the Green-sickness in Virgins:
It is also of singular use to facilitate the Birth, and to expel the Birth and After∣birth; it strengthens all the Viscera or inward parts, and causes a good colour in the Face. § 3. It is given à ʒss. ad ʒij. in all Diseases of the Womb, as Vapors, Fits of the Mo∣ther, Obstructions of the Courses, and the like, in which, 'tis possible it may do more, than many other more famed Medicines for those purposes. § 4. It sweetens the Blood, and by a constancy in taking it, alters the ferment of all the Juices, so that more may be done by this Medicine in ten days time, than by many others in an hundred; be∣sides which, it is an excellent Cordial, as the Saffron, and other Cordial Ingredients of which it is compounded de∣monstrate. § 5. It is given with suc∣cess in all fainting and swoon∣ing Fits, and in Palpitations, and other Distempers of the Heart and Praecordia, as also in Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Asthma's, Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Brea∣thing, Wheezing, &c. XI. Elixir Juniperinum Rol∣fincii, Elixir of Juniper. Salmon.] ℞ Rob of Juniper-berries, or the Melaginous Ex∣tract ℥iij. Malago-wine lbiss. mix them well in a Marble or Glass Mortar, then let them stand in digestion: the Tin∣cture separate by straining through a Hypocras Bag, and keep it for use. § 2. If some few drops of the Oyl, and ℥iv. of the in∣flamable Spirit of Juniper-berries be added, it will yet be better. § 3. It opens, attenuates the Blood, and breaks or dissolves any tartarous or sa∣bulous coagulation in the Reins or Ureters, and expels it to admiration. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj. in any appropriate Vehicle.
CHAP. VII. Of TINCTƲRES. I. * Tinctura Absinthii, Tin∣cture of Wormwood. Bate.] ℞ DRied tops of com∣mon Wormwood freed from the stalks ℥v. be∣ing bruised, add to them Tar∣tarisated S. V. ℥xx. digest in B. M. for some days, then strain out by a strong expres∣sion: in the Liquor infuse more tops of dried Wormwood, and express as before, repeat∣ing this Work the third time; then filter through brown Pa∣per, and keep it for use. Dose gut. vj. plus-minus, in a Glass of Wine, Beer, or Ale. Salmon.] § 1. Thô it is not impossible to make the Medi∣caments in these proportions, yet I can assure you, upon many Tryals, that the quan∣tity of the S. V. is by much too little; it ought to be ℥xxx. at least: and if at last to this Tincture thirty drops of the Oyl of Wormwood be ad∣ded, it will yet be so much the better. § 2. It is a great Stoma∣tick, strengthning and fort∣fying of those parts to a won∣der. It causes a good Appe∣tite to Food, and by cherish∣ing and exciting the languid Heat of the Part, causes a good digestion; by which means good Blood is genera∣ted, and a good Habit of Body created. It both pre∣serves from, and cures the Scurvy in a cold Habit of Body, and is an excellent thing for such as are inclina∣ble to the Jaundice and Dropsie. § 3. Being constantly ta∣ken for some time, after due purging, it opens Obstructi∣ons of the Liver, Spleen, and Womb, and provokes the Terms in Women. Dose à gut. x. ad xx. in Wine or Ale, or some appropriate Ve∣hicle. II. * Tinctura Amygdaloides, The Almond-like Tin∣cture. Bate.] ℞ The white parts of Benjamin. Styrax, Cala∣mita, Tartarised S. V. lbj. digest till they are dissol∣ved, then filter and abstract
the Spirit to the one half. It is an excellent Pectoral and Neurotick, good against Ca∣tarrhs, Asthma's, Diseases of the Nerves, and provokes Sweat, &c. Dose à ʒij. ad ʒvj. Salmon.] § 1. In my Opi∣nion, it will be best to pre∣serve the Tincture with the whole quantity of Spirit, for it is little enough; lest by that abstraction the disabled Gums should in part precipitate, or fall down to the bottom; and you will find the Tin∣cture strong enough, so that at the utmost Dose, you need not give above ʒiv. or half an Ounce thereof. § 2. It must always be gi∣ven in some proper Vehicle, for by reason of its great strength it is impossible to be taken alone: being mixed with Wine, or any other Aqueous Vehicle, it makes it immediately look white like Milk, or an Emulsion of Al∣monds, from which it may take its Name, as well as from the Almond-like pieces of the Benjamin, of which it is in part made. § 3. Le Mort makes it of Flowers of Benjamin, thus: ℞ Flowers of Benjamin ℥j. re∣ctified S. V. twice distilled from Carminatives ℥iv. mix and digest with a gentle heat, in a Vial with a long Neck, or Bolt-head, till the Spirit is tinged of a deep yellow co∣lour. § 4. This, says he, contains much greater Virtues than the simple Flowers of Benja∣min. It discusses Wind, cures an inveterate Asthma and Cough, and helps the short∣ness of Breath, and difficulty of Breathing, as also gives present ease in the Colick. Dose à gut. vj. ad xx. or xxiv. § 5. Or thus, from the same Le Mort: ℞ Tartari∣sed S. V. ℥iij. or iv. Benja∣min in fine Pouder ℥i. Oyl of Rhodium gut vj. digest till the Spirit is tinged of a rubicund colour. Take of this some drops, and mix it with an Ounce of Damask Rose-water, and it will become like Milk; it helps Spots and Pimples in the Face, Redness of the Eyes, and is good against all sorts of Inflamations. Inwardly you may give it mixt with Syrup of Hyssop, Liquorice, or Coltsfoot, and exhibit it to such as are Asthmatick. § 6. He prepares it also thus: ℞ Tartarised S. V. ℥ij. Flowers of Benjamin ʒiss. Sty∣rax Calamita, ʒss. Oyl of Rho∣dium, gut. vij. Musk gr. iij. Civet gr. ij. mix and digest, till the Tincture is of a rubi∣cund
colour; then decant the clear from the feces. § 7. Of this he makes a Lac Virginale thus: ℞ Of this Tincture ʒi. Water of white Lillies, or white Roses, or of Damask Roses ℥ij. mix them: It cures Inflamations of the Eyes, and an Erysi∣pelas, &c. It is a most pre∣cious thing even for the most noble and delicate sort of Peo∣ple. § 8. It is also thus made: ℞ Flowers of Benjamin ℥j. Styrax Calamita ℥ss. Oyl of Rhodium, or of Jessamy, gut. viij. Civet gr. viij. mix the Civet and Styrax together, then add the Oyl of Rhodium, and after that the Flowers of Ben∣jamin, to which affuse the S. V. and digest two or three days, then decanting the clear from the feces. § 9. This last Preparation is an excellent Perfume, for Gloves, Cloaths, Linnen, &c. in this manner: ℞ Damask Rose-water, or other perfumed Water ℥i. of this Tincture forty drops, in which let them be dipt or besmeared, and then gently dried in the shade: It is also accounted an excellent Cosmetick, washing the skin therewith; and allays Infla∣mations, more especially if a little Camphir be added to the Tincture. § 10. This of our Au∣thor's Prescription (as well as all the Preparations fol∣lowing it) is an admirable Pectoral, and Antiasthmatick, helping such as are troubled with difficulty of Breathing, or shortness of Breath. It is Cordial, moves Sweat, and by reason of its fragrant O∣dour wonderfully comforts the Animal Spirits, suppres∣ses noxious Vapors, and re∣sists the malignity of Conta∣gious Feavers. Dose à gut. x. ad xxx. in any proper Vehi∣cle. § 11. Locum Ambrae-grysieae obtinere potest, si loco Spiritus Vini & Olei Ligni Rhodii, substituatur Spiritus Rosarum Damascenarum fragrantissi∣mus & Oleum Cinnamomi ea∣dem proportione. III. * Tinctura Antimonii E∣metica, Vomiting Tincture of Antimony. Bate.] It is extracted out of the Glass of Antimony with Spirit of Vinegar, then filtring and exhaling to driness. The Matter dissolved in Water, filtrated, and again abstracted to driness, digest with [Tarta∣riz'd] S. V. till it is of a ru∣bicund colour, which filter. A Tincture may also be extracted from the Scoria of the Regulus
of Antimony, with Tartarised S. V. digested and filtred. Or you may extract a Tincture from the Vitrum Antimonii, with rectified Spirit of Venus, which being decanted, may be abstracted in an Alembick, but not to driness; then extract the Tincture therefrom with rectified S. V. which filter, and exhale to a convenient thick∣ness. Dose to gr. x. Salmon.] § 1. These Pre∣parations are in general Terms; but because the Medicine is admirable be∣yond many others of much greater Names and Account, and because by these general Prescriptions (for want of Proportions) the young Tyro may easily err in the Pro∣cess, we shall take the pains to explicate every thing more particularly. § 2. Maets makes it thus: ℞ Alcohol of Vitrum Antimo∣nii q. v. affuse thereon re∣ctified Spirit of Venus drawn with Mineral Sulphur, so much as may over-top it three in∣ches: set it in a continual di∣gestion, stirring it with a wood∣en stick two or three times a day, so long till the Menstruum has extracted a most yellow Tincture from the Antimony: decant the Tincture, and if you think good, affuse more fresh Menstruum, extracting as before: mix the Tinctures, and by a Glass Alembick ab∣stract the humidity, till the Magma is of the thickness of Oyl: to this Magma affuse Al∣cohol of S. V. so much as may over-top it the depth of three inches; set it in a warm di∣gestion, till the Spirit is im∣pregnated with the Tincture of Antimony; which decant, and in a Glass Alembeck in B. M. abstract the S. V. to one half, so will the Tincture of Anti∣mony remain behind. § 3. This Tincture, if you would have it high coloured, and more efficacious, you must impregnate it with the Crocus of Sol thus: ℞ Of this Tincture of Antimony p. iij. Croci Solis p. j. mix them in a Porcelane Vessel, and over a gentle Fire evaporate to driness. This is a dry Tincture, and is given à gr. ij. ad vj. a∣gainst all Diseases which are to be cured by Sweat, as Measles, Small-pox, Spotted Feaver, Plague or Pestilence, and all kinds of Pestilential and Malign Diseases, but chiefly in the French-Pox, Leprosie, profound Scab, in∣veterate Herpes, Apoplexies, Contractures, &c. § 4. This Crocus of Sol is thus made: ℞ Pure Sol pur∣ged by Antimony p. j. purified Mercury p. vj. make S. A. an
Amalgama, which commix with double its whole quanti∣ty of Sulphur: mix them well, and calcine them upon a Tile, continually stirring it, till all the Sulphur and Mercury are gone; so have you the Crocus Solis, which wash, and dry for use. § 5. Le Mort makes it thus: ℞ Alcohol of Vitrum Antim. q. v. sweet Spirit of Salt. to which a few drops of Spirit of Nitre are added: mix and di∣gest for some days, till a very yellow Tincture is extracted: this decant, and draw off the Spirit in B. M. till a fourth part only remains, to which affuse Alcohol of S. V. ℥xij. and digest as before, so have you a Tincture of great Virtues. § 6. Or thus: ℞ Rectified Spirit of Salt ℥iij. rectified Spi∣rit of Nitre ℥ij. Alcohol of S. V. ℥xij. digest, and then distil, cohobating twice, till the Spirits are well united, with which extract a Tincture as before. This Tincture, says he, is like a Panacea in all Diseases which are to be cu∣red by Sweat, which it per∣forms with much less labour and time, than the Tincture which is made by the help of distilled Vinegar, and may be given à gut. j. ad x. or xx. in Wine. § 7. He also has this: ℞ ℞ Antimony, Nitre, A. p. j. Salt of Tartar p. ij. mix them well, and put them by spoonfuls into a large red hot Crucible, letting them melt together for at least half an hour: then be∣ing cooled, let the matter be poudred, and with Tartariz'd S. V. q. s. or so much as may over-top the Pouder three or four inches, extract a Blood-red Tincture, by digesting for some days in a Phial close stopt: this Tincture decant, and af∣fuse new Spirit upon the feces, digesting as before, and thus continuing till the matter will yield no more Tincture: all these Extractions mix, and obstract the Spirit in B. M. till one half only remains. § 8. Marggrave makes it thus: ℞ Alcohol of Vitrum Antimonii ℥i. put it into a Glass Matrass, to which put re∣ctified Spirit of Venus ℥iv. stop it close, and digest fourteen days in a gentle heat, till the Tincture is of a Blood-red co∣lour: this decant gently from the feces, and so often till it is perfectly fine and pure: then put it into a Glass Retort, and with a gentle Fire (or if it may be in B. M.) draw off the Spirit of Venus to driness: sic recuperabitur Spiritus Vene∣ris:) in the bottom you have a rubicund Pouder, to which af∣fuse Tartarised S. V. so much
as may over-top it the depth of four inches: digest for some days, till you have a red Tin∣cture, which decant, and by a Glass Retort abstract the Spirit to one half; so will there re∣main a rubicund Liquor, fat like Oyl, which Chymists call the Gemuine Tincture of Anti∣mony. § 9. Charras extracts the Tincture thus: ℞ Alcohol of Vitrum Antimonii ℥ij. put it into a Matrass; and affuse thereon rectified Oyl of Amber, or of Juniper Berries, or of Turpentine ℥xx. cover it with its blind Head, lute the Jun∣cture, and digest in a strong Sand heat, till the Liquor seems ready to boil, which con∣tinue till it is very deeply co∣loured. This Tincture works by Stool, or by Sweat, and is given à gut. ij. ad v. or vj. in any proper Liquor. § 10. Le Febure has two ways of making this Tincture, First, With the Spirit of Ve∣nus, as we have taught from Marggrave at § 8. above. Se∣condly, With this following Menstruum: The Menstru∣um: ℞ Choice Vitriol, pure common Salt, Quick-lime A lbj, Sal Armoniack ℥iv. make each feverally into Pouder, then mix them, and put them into a Cu∣curbit, adding good Spirit of Vinegar lbiij. cover it with its blind Head, which lute on, and digest with a slow heat twenty four hours, which done, put all into a Report, and with de∣grees of Fire, draw the Spirit in about twenty four or thirty hours: weigh the Spirit di∣stilled, and add its equal weight of common Salt to it, and re∣ctifie it in a gradual heat, so as what distils may come over fair and clear, and nothing of troubledness in it. § 11. Then take Alcohol of Vitrum Antimonii lbj. put it into a large Matrass, upon which affuse the former pre∣pared Menstruum: mix them together, and put them into di∣gestion in Ashes, in an equal heat, till the Vitrum is dissol∣ved: decant the clear by in∣clination, and filter the re∣mainder; put all into a Cu∣curbit, which cover with its Head: lute and place it in B. M. and distil to driness with a gentle heat: at bottom of the Cucurbit will be a thick blackish matter, which in a cold Cellar upon a square Glass will dissolve into an oily or red Liquor, which Liquor put into a small glass Cucurbit, and in Ashes abstact the moisture to driness; this done, immedi∣ately (before it takes air) af∣fuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. put all into a Pellican, or dou∣ble Digester, lue the Joynts,
and digest in a very gentle Bal. Vap. till the Spirit is tinged of a fair high red colour, which de∣cant, and add more Spirit, thus continuing till the Spirit will be no more tinged: those Tinctures mix, filtrate, and abstract from them two thirds of their Spi∣rit, in a gentle B. M. so will the wonderful, and almost in∣valuable Tincture be left at the bottom for use. § 12. Now here is to be noted, That this red Liquor made in the Cellar upon a square Glass, is one of the best Balsams in the World, for curing of Wounds, and all kind of malignant Ulcers, be they never so inveterate or dangerous, but chiefly those which proceed from the Pox, Kings-Evil, Cancers, &c. It is also good aganst Pocky Nodes, for which reason it is necessary always to be kept in the form ready prepared. § 13. The Virtues of these Tinctures of Antimony. Le Fe∣bure saith, They are endowed with infinite Virtues; for they are Soveraign Remedies against all inveterate Obstru∣ctions of the Liver and Spleen, and all other parts of the in∣feriour Ventricle; they open Obstructions of the Lungs, provoke the Terms, cure the Green-sickness, Yellow and Black Jaundice, Dropsy, Phthi∣sick, Asthma, Difficulty of Breathing, Pleurisie, Cache∣xia, and Hypochondriacal Melancholly. § 14. They are excellent against all manner of Ulcers, both internal and external, thô in the Lungs, Stomach, Reins, and Ureters, or Blad∣der, are good against the Le∣prosie, Plague, Great and Small-pox, and all sorts of Pestilential and Malignant Feavers, as Measles, Spotted Feaver, &c. They are good against all kinds of Itch, Scabs, and Breakings-out, and ge∣nerally all ill Humors and Habits of Body which de∣stroy Health. § 15. They purge and drive away whatever is hateful to the Body, by Sweat, Urine, and insensible Transpiration, and sometimes by Vomit: The Dose in general may be from gut. iij. ad x. or xij. in Spanish Wine, or Canary, or Mead, Hydromel, or other Analagous Liquor. Let it be taken in Bed, the sick ex∣pecting its Sudorifick opera∣tion, reiteràting it every day, or every second or third day, as need requires: but for pre∣vention of any Sickness, once a week will be enough, or seldomer.
IV. Tinctura Antimonii Pur∣gans, Purging Tincture of Antimony. Bate.] ℞ Glass of Antimo∣ny finely poudred ℥i. Spirit of Vitriol not rectified ℥viij. di∣gest in B. M. till the Tincture becomes of a black red colour. It is accounted as a Panchy∣magogon for the cure of all Diseases: it strengthens the Stomach, opens Obstructi∣ons, cures the Green-sickness, Cachexia, &c. Dose à gut. vj. ad x. Salmon.] § 1. This Tin∣cture is drawn from the Sul∣phur of the Antimony, which in its own nature is an Eme∣tick, and so would be now, were it drawn with many o∣ther Vehicles, or not correct∣ed with the Spirit of Vitriol, which Spirit does two things at once, viz. both draws the Tincture, and corrects it. § 2. The same may also be done with Spirit of Sul∣phur in like manner, and it will have the same operation downwards which this has, whereas that which is drawn with Spirit of Vinegar, is for the most part wholly Eme∣tick. § 3. It may also be made with Spirit of Venus drawn from Vitriol of Venus, or from Verdigrise, in all respects as you make common Oyl of Vitriol, and with this Men∣struum it is that Maets makes it, who saith, It is good a∣gainst all Diseases which are to be cured by Sweat, and is of principal use against the Leprosie, and French Disease, as also against inveterate Fe∣vers, Apoplexies, &c. § 4. Le Mort makes it with sweet Spirit of Salt, ad∣ding only a few drops of Spi∣rit of Nitre: But that the Ni∣tre does little, I am very well satisfied, for putting the Spi∣rit of Nitre alone upon the Pou∣der of the Vitrum, it makes no alteration at all, whereas if to the Spirit of Nitre you add as much Spirit of Vitriol, it will so dissolve the Vitrum, as the whole will become a Pulp, and drink up all the humidity, and this it will continually do, till the Vitrum has drunk up seven or eight times its weight of the Spirit of Vitriol; this Mass being washed with fair warm Water, several times, till it is freed from the Salts, leaves a Milk or rather Cream white Pouder behind it, which will work both upwards and down∣wards in a small Dose, (thô mostly downwards) and in a very small Dose, viz. à half gr. ad gr. iiss. but generally
gr. j. will be Dose large e∣nough for any ordinary Per∣son; or gr. iss. at most, very few Constitutions being able to bear gr. ij. and a half, or gr. iij. § 5. This Tincture is ac∣counted as a Panacaea against all Diseases, which require much labour and time in cu∣ring: I know it to be a Specifick against the Kings-Evil, and in that Disease I have done wonders with it: it is a Specifick also against all sorts of Feavers, and pow∣erfully opens all Obstructi∣ons in both Reins and Blad∣der; and cures the Green∣sickness in Virgins. It re∣sists Putrefaction, and the Plague, and all manner of Infection and Poyson. It purifies and corroborates the Blood, and frees it from all Impurities, rendering it, as some Authors say, incorru∣ptible. Dicitur curare Ele∣phantiasin, Lepram, omnes∣que alios insanabiles morbos. Collect. Chym. pag. 48. V. Tinctura Armoniaci, Tin∣cture of Sal Armoni∣ack. Bate.] ℞ Sal Armoniack lbij. [Filings] of Mars lbj. mix them well together by beating and grinding, and di∣stil them by a Retort with a gradual heat: save the Spirit of Sal Armoniack by itself: The Mars remaining at the bottom of the Retort, pouder and sweeten it by manifold wash∣ings with fair Water: after add Spirit of Wine lbij. and digest warm for eight days: decant the Spirit, and affuse new Spirits, digesting as be∣fore eight days: then abstract the Spirit of Wine lbiij. in B. M. so that lbj. only may re∣main, which is the Tincture. It prevails wonderfully in o∣pening all Obstructions of both Liver and Spleen; also against Hypochondriack Me∣lancholly, Quartane Agues, the Cachexie, Dropsie, Green∣sickness, Scurvy, Stoppage of the Terms, and their too much overflowing. Dose à gut. vj. ad xij. in any conve∣nient Liquor. Salmon.] § 1. This is ra∣ther a Tincture of Mars, than a Tincture of Sal Armoniack, the chief work of the Salt be∣ing to open the Body of the Mars, that it may the bet∣ter yield its Tincture. § 2. But Le Febure makes it of Vitriol of Mars after this manner: ℞ White Vitriol of Mars (prepared as we shall hereafter teach) ℥ij. in fine Pouder, and as much Sal Tar∣tari foliated (but some say Sal
Saturni, others Sal Armoniack) in Pouder: mix them in a Marble Mortar, so will the Salt on a sudden, after a won∣derful manner, draw forth the Soul of the Mars, or its Sulphur, out of the Center of its Vitriol; for altho' this Vitriol is white, and this Salt also, yet in an in∣stant will a deep red predomi∣nate, higher in colour than that of Saffron: this Mass stir so long till it is reduced to a pap, then expose it to the moist Air, that the whole may be resolved into a Liquor, which is already an Aperitive and Deopulative Remedy, and may be given against all manner of Obstructions, and against the coagulation of Tartar in Man's Body, from gut. vj. ad xvj. in any Broth or proper Vehicle. § 3. But this is not the per∣fection Le Febure aims at: To this end, saith he, weigh this red matter or substance, after mixing in the Marble Mortar, and note the weight: weigh it also after the dissolu∣tion in the open Air; to draw off by distillation in B. M. the weight of the moisture it has at∣tracted, and to pour upon it as much Spirit of Venus, as that moisture weights: then digest in Bal. V. in a digesting or double Vessel for twenty four hours, af∣ter which draw off the Spirit with a Still-head, till the re∣mainder is of the consistency of a Syrup, upon which put Tar∣tarised S. V. to over-top it four inches; close up the Vessel with a blind Head, digesting three days; after which filtrate the Tincture cold, and then draw off half of the Spirit in B. M. with a slow heat, so have you a no∣ble Tincture, as well pleasant in Tast, as excellent in Vir∣tue. § 4. This excellent Tin∣cture of Le Febure's does re∣solve all sorts of Tartar in Mans Body, (the cause of all Obstructions) opens Opila∣tions of the Liver and Spleen, and may be safely and profi∣tably given against all Di∣seases proceeding from Stop∣pages in any part; but the most wonderful thing of all is, that it bears no weight upon the Stomach, as most Medicines prepared from Mars do; but on the contra∣ry, it strengthens the Ventri∣cle, purifying it from tarta∣rous, coagulated, and clam∣my Humors and Viscosities, which are for the most part the cause of the Scurvy, loss of Appetite, Disaffections of the Spleen, Putrefaction of the Blood, Gout, Stone, Jaun∣dice, Dropsie, Rheumatism, and many other pernicious Diseases. Dose à gut. vj. ad
xxx. in some proper Li∣quor. § 5. But the Tincture of our Author is exactly taken from Mynsicht's Thesaurus sect. 2. pag. 49. of the Leyden Im∣pression; who commends it as a singular Experiment a∣gainst all Obstructions, Hy∣pochondriack Disaffections, &c. being given in Wine, or some proper Syrup or De∣coction, by means of which Vehicle it will the more ea∣sily penetrate to the more re∣mote parts and corners of the Body: but in the use hereof this is to be observed, that the Body ought often to be pur∣ged from the peccant Hu∣mors, and a good Diet to be observed. § 6. Rolfincius in his Art. Chym. lib. 4. sect. 1. art. 3. cap. 11. has it exactly ac∣cording to Mynsicht, and our Author's, but in cap. 13. al∣most after Le Febure's Me∣thod, thus: ℞ Vitriol of Mars in Pouder, but not calcined, Terrae foliatae Tartari, A. ℥i. mix and place them in a cold and moist Cellar for three days; the colour being changed, and the mixture rendred fluid by the intromission of the Air, let it be strained, and add thereto Spirit of Wine. Dose. gr. xx. ad xxx in Wine, or Broth, against Obstructions of the Viscera, and other the afore∣named Diseases. VI. Tinctura Asae fetida, Tin∣cture of stinking Assa. Bate.] ℞ Asa fetida ℥ij. Alcohol of S. V. lbj. mix, and ex∣tract a Tincture. It is Uterine, Traumatick Splenetick. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. &c. in any pro∣per Liquor. Salmon.] § 1. It is hot and dry in quality, and therefore of excellent use to dry up the Humidities of the Brain, and is used chiefly in the Suffoca∣tion of the Womb, Peripneu∣mony, and Wounds, whether inward or outward; as also against the Epilepsie, Verti∣go, Apoplexy, and other Di∣seases of the Head. § 2. It is good against à swoln Spleen, Suffocation of the Womb, Vapors, &c. be∣ing bathed upon those parts. Ulcers also being washed with it, it disposes them to a more speedy healing. § 3. But for the Epilepsie, and other Diseases of the Head and Womb, it would be better if it be thus prepa∣red: ℞ Assa fetida, Wood∣soot of a Pitch-like consistency, A. ℥ij. Tartariz'd S. V. lbij. mix, digest, make a Tincture, filter, then add Vol. Salt of Mans Skull ℥i. and keep it for use.
§ 4. This is much more effectual than that in the Prescript, and upon the oc∣casion of an Epilepsie (for which it is a Specifick) may be given from a spoonful to two spoonfuls in a Draught, of any Antepileptick Water. Let it be given in the Morn∣ing fasting, and last at Night going to Bed, for four or five days before the Full and Change of the Moon, and as many days after. This Me∣dicine alone, has cured seve∣ral of that Disease. VII. * Tinctura Asthmatica, A Tincture against the Asthma. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Elecam∣pane, Florentine Orrice, Seeds of Anise, Caraways, Liquorice, A. ℥ij. Leaves of Carduus Ben. M. ij. Raisons of the Sun sto∣ned lbj. Sena cleansed ℥vj. A∣niseed-water lbvj. mix, and digest four days: then strain. Dose two spoonfuls at Bed-time, and three or four spoonfuls the Morning fol∣lowing. Salmon.] § 1. In my Opi∣nion, it is best in making of Medicines, if bitter, to put bitter things together; but if sweet and pleasant, to put sweet and pleasant things to∣gether, and not promiscu∣ously to mix sweet and bitter together, especially in such Medicines (as this is) which are to be often a taking. § 2. Thô Carduus is really a good thing, yet by reason of its bitterness it spoils this Composition, which would be better made without it; and this ought to be a gene∣ral Observation in all Com∣positions whatsoever. § 3. As to the Proportions, they are not so exactly ad∣justed as might be desired; for if composed according to this Recipe, it will be in the general use but a slow wor∣ker: you cannot put in less than ℥ix. Ounces of Sena in∣to the Composition; and if you add Pouder of Resinous Jallap ℥iss. it will be better by all the cost. § 4. If I might advise it, it should be made thus: ℞ Roots of Elecampane, Floren∣tine Orrice, Seeds of sweet Fennel, Caraways, Liquorice bruised, A. ℥ij. Pot-ashes, ℥i. Rai∣sons stoned lbj. Sena ℥ix. Pou∣der of Jallap ℥iss. Aniseed-water lbvj. mix, digest ten or twelve days, shaking the Ves∣sel every day, then strain out the Tincture, which let set∣tle, and decant the clear for use.
§ 5. This is not only good against the Asthma, and all Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, but also effectually cleanses all the Bowels, car∣ying off all the Crudities, nd Tartarous Matter, with which they abound. It is an excellent thing against the Kings-Evil, the Scurvy, Gout, Stone, Gravel, and all Ob∣structions, whether in Reins or Bladder, Rheumatisms, Sciatica, Gripings of the Guts, dry Belly-ache, Drop∣ie, and Yellow Jaundice: and in a word, performs whatever may be expected rom an excellent Purger. § 6, It has cured such as have been Bed-rid many Years, and restored to seve∣ral the use of their Limbs, taking away, even by the Roots, supposed incurable Diseases, and that after all hope of Recovery has been past; for by reason of the Spirituous Menstruum, with which the Purgatives are mixt, their Virtue is more immediately, and more ef∣fectually conveyed into the Blood, intimately mixt with it, and thereby disper∣sed into the Habit of the whole Body, by which means those things are done and ef∣fected, by such a seeming in∣considerable Medicine, which possibly a thousand times more Great, and more Noble, would never per∣form. VIII. * Tinctura Aurea, The Golden Tincture. Bate.] ℞ Pulp of Colocynthis freed from the Seeds, cut and beaten to a gross Pouder ℥iss. Aniseeds ʒj. Saffron ʒss. Cloves n vj. Spirit of Wine ℥xx. digest a Month, and filter. Dose à ʒij. ad ℥iss. Salmon.] § 1. There are various Considerations to be taken Notice of in the ma∣king this Tincture, according to the Methods of several Men. Maets makes it thus: ℞ Pulp of Colocynthis ℥iss. choice Rhubarb ʒv. Cinamon ℈iv. Malago Wine ℥xxviij. Spirit of Vinegar ℥xlv. mix and digest together in a warm place for three days, then ex∣press strongly out and filter: add Gum Tragacanth, Arabick, Bdellum, A. ʒiiiss. digest three days more, decant and filter, and keep it for use. Dose à ʒij. ad ʒss. The Gums here are supposed to be put in to correct the Violence of the Colocynth.
§ 2. But as Colocynthis con∣tains as well a watry Salt, as a purging Refine, so some Authors make the Extraction or Tincture with differing Menstruums, that they may have a Tincture comprehend∣ing the whole Virtue of the mixt, thô 'tis true that Ru∣landus, and some others, on∣ly drew it with Spirit of Wine. § 3. If therefore you would have it to contain a due pro∣portion of both substances, you may make it thus: ℞ Pulp of Colocynthis cut small lbj put it into an indifferent large Cucurbit on a Sand heat, on which affuse White-wine lbvj. cover the Cucurbit with its Head, which lute well, with a Recipient to its Beak, and make a very gentle Fire under it, for ten or twelve hours. Then strain out the Liquor by pressing, setting it apart: to the feces, return'd into the Gourd, put good S. V. lbvj. or pints, and all the Wine made use of in the former Tincture, which was distilled in the Re∣cipient: cover the Cucurbit with a Vessel of Rencounter, luting it well, and digest in B. M. for twelve hours more, but with a little more heat, afterwards strain forth the Tincture by pressing strongly, which mix with the former Tincture, and filter through brown Paper, so have you the true Tincture of Coloquinti∣da. § 4. This Tincture you may, if you so please, reduce to a Rob, or more, thin Ex∣tract, by putting it again in∣to the Cucurbit, and with a gentle Fire in B. M. abstract∣ing the S. V. (which will serve for the like use again) you may afterward in an open Vessel evaporate the superfluous humi∣dity, till it comes to the consi∣stence of a Rob, which you may use as occasion serves, by mixing it with other Extracts or Purging Pills: or you may continue the evaporation till it comes to a sufficient consistency of itself, to form into Pills in like manner. § 5. This Extract is excel∣lent to cure Dropsies, and expel Serosities from the most remote parts of the Body, in such Patients where no other Medicines will prevail. It is also a most excellent thing in Diseases of the Joynts, and in Rheumatisms; and won∣derfully prevails against the Gout, whether taken alone, or mixt with other Purgers, especially with that of Rhu∣barb, which qualifies its vio∣lence, and strengthens the
parts at one and the same ime. It is given alone in Pills à gr. iij. ad x. at most, r proportionably mixt with ther Extracts, as necessity, r the Physitian shall see re∣quisite. § 6. Le Febure makes this Spiritus Aureus Rulandi, of Troches of Colocynthis, which e forms thus: ℞ Pulp of Colocynthis cut small with Sciz∣zars, and made into Pouder by eating, anointing the Mortar ith a little Oyl of Nutmegs, r Oyl of Mastich by distillati∣on: this Pouder reduce into Paste, by beating with Spirit of Vinegar, of which Paste make Tches, which dry in the Shae between Papers: be∣ing dry, beat them a second time into Pouder, which with the same Spirit of Vinegar form into Troches as before, and dry them; these are much better than those pre∣pared the old way, with Mucilage of Gum Traga∣canth. § 7. Now to make this Golden Tincture do thus: ℞ Pouder of the aforesaid Tro∣ches ℥j. put it into a Circula∣tory, or double Vessel, called a Vessel of Rencounter: affuse thereon Tartariz'd S. V. lbj. lute the Juncture, and digest in the Reverberation of the Sun-beams (or such other like heat) for fifteen days: after which open the Vessel, and add more of these Troches ℥ss. close and digest again in like man∣ner: open the Vessel again, and add the third and last time ʒij. more of the said Troches in Pouder, digesting as before fifteen days more, then strain out the Liquor by pressing, and filter through brown Paper; so have you the Spiritus Vitae au∣reus Rulandi, in perfection, to be used in all cases afore∣mentioned, à ʒj. ad ʒvj. or to ℥j. as need shall require. But if you reduce it to an Ex∣tract (by abstracting the S. V.) the Dose is à gr. vj. ad xxiv. IX. Tinctura Bezoartica, The Bezoartick Tincture. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Elecam∣pane, Angelica, Zedoary, Vir∣ginian Snake-root, A. ℥iss. best Saffron ℥j. Myrrh, Cinamon, Yellow of Citron-peels dried, A. ʒvj. Leaves of Scordium, Rue, A. Mss. Venice Treacle ℥iij. Thebian Opium ʒij. re∣ctified Spirit of Tartar ℥xv. Spirit of Vitriol ℥iij. rectified Spirits of Elder, and Juniper-Berries A. ℥xviij. mix, di∣gest according to Art, and fil∣ter: then add Salt of Amber
℥j. Camphir ʒij. digest again and keep it for use. Dose ʒiij. ad ℥j. It is given against the Plague, and all Malign Diseases; it wonderfully re∣creates and revives the Spi∣rits, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Opium is put in as an Ingredient to provoke Sweat, which is ve∣ry proper and necessary for the intention; but the quan∣tity for this Composition is much too little, ℥ss. is as small a proportion as you can take, and if it was ʒvj. it would be yet better; for the Opium being augmented, the Dose, if needful, may be diminish∣ed at pleasure. § 2. It is an excellent Me∣dicine, not only against the Plague, and Pestilential Di∣stempers, but also against the Measles, Small-pox, Purple Feaver, and the like: for it drives the Infection from the Heart, and expels the Ma∣lign matter through the pores of the skin, sometimes by in∣sensible transpiration, but for the most part by a gentle and pleasant sweat. § 3. When it is taken, the Patient ought to be in his Bed; and the Dose à ʒij. ad vj. or to ℥j. in strong People, is to be given in a Glass of Sack, or some proper Bezo∣ardick Water, and so the Pa∣tient to rest upon it. § 4. Or you may admini∣ster it after this manner: ℞ Of our Aqua Bezoardica, or Aqua Mirabilis ℥iss. simple Angelica-water ℥iij. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers ʒvj. of this Bezoardick Tincture à ʒiv. ad ʒvj. or ℥j. mix for a Dose, covering the sick very well to sweat upon it. § 5. In the interim of Sweating, if the sick requires any thing to drink, or the next Morning, you may give this: ℞ Water in which Ashes of Hartshorn have been boiled, choice Canary, A. ℥ij. Spirit of Sulphur gut. ij. iij. or iv. to make it grateful, which will very much compose and strengthen the Stomach, and and resist the highest degree of Infection. X. * Tinctura Cardamomi, Tincture of Cardamoms. Bate] ℞ The lesser Carda∣moms hulled and bruised ℥iv. Alcohol of Spirit of Wine ℥xvj. digest, express, and filter S. A. It powerfully discusses Wind, and comforts the Brain. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiij. in any fit Vehi∣cle. Salmon.] § 1. Althô the rectified Spirit of Wine may
extract a good Tincture out of the Grains, yet there are other Menstruums which will do it better; among which, as chief, we commend, 1. The Tincture of the Salt of Tar∣tar, which more powerfully opens the Body of the mixt. The Powers of Cardamoms, which as it is a Menstruum more homogene than the sim∣ple S. V. so will it more ex∣alt and elixivate the prepa∣red Medicament. § 2. It is a powerful thing against the Colick, Pains in the Stomach and Sides, whe∣ther proceeding from Wind or Cold, Stiches, Gripings of the Guts, and the most extream Torture of the Bow∣els. It mightily strengthens the Stomach, causes a good Appetite, and extreamly helps the Digestion, so that it cau∣ses those to hunger after their Food, that have either a nau∣seousness and loathing or have not eaten with any delight for many weeks together. § 3. If you give it for the Colick, you may administer it thus: ℞ Of this Tincture à ʒij. ad ℥vj. of our Gutte Vitae or Cordial Drops, gut. xxv. or in place thereof the former Be∣zoartick Tincture ʒj. Angelick water, Poppy-water, A. ℥ij. Sy∣rup of Citron-peels ℥ss. mix for a Dose, to be given to the Pa∣tient upon the Spot, letting him immediately repair to his Bed. XI. * Tinctura Carui, Tincture of Caraways. Bate.] It is made of Ca∣raway-seeds, and Alcohol of Spirit of Wine, in all respects as the former: And does the same thing. Salmon.] § 1. This (as the former) is also better to be prepared with Tincture of Salt of Tartar; or other∣wise with the Potestates Ca∣rui, by which the Tincture will be as it were Elixira∣ted. § 2. It has all the Virtues of the former, and is found also of good use against the Stone and Gravel in the Reins and Bladder; and indeed a∣gainst most Diseases of the Urinary parts: It is also good against Fainting and Swoon∣ing Fits, and being taken in due Doses, and at fit Times, (after Universals have been premised) it provokes the Terms, and effectually opens Obstructions of the Womb. § 3. It is also a singular Cephalick, Neurotick, Sto∣matick, Pectoral, and Alexi∣pharmick; it prevails against the Lethargy, Carus, Apo∣plexy, Vertigo, Megrim, Ob∣structions
of the Lungs and Nerves, Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, &c. § 4. The way of using it is manifold, 1. Inwardly, by ta∣king it in the Morning fasting, an hour before Dinner, and at Night going to Bed à ʒij. ad ℥ss. or ʒvj. in a little Beer, Ale, or Wine. 2. By smel∣ling to it often in a day, and drawing it up the Nostrils for most Diseases of the Head. 3. By bathing the Parts afflicted with Pains, Aches, Gouts, Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, Contusions, Weaknesses, Tumors, &c. therewith, Morning and Eve∣ning. XII. Tinctura Cathartica Ridg∣lei, The Purging Tincture of Dr. Ridgley. Bate.] ℞ Of the best Sena ℥i. Cloves ʒiss. Saffron ʒj. Spanish Wine chalybeated lbiss infuse for some days, then ex∣press and filter. Dose two three, or four spoonfuls eve∣ry day, for a long time, a∣gainst stubborn Feavers, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This is a good Medicine, and in some Constitutions may work well enough; but for the gene∣rality, being made up in this Proportion, you will find it but a slow Purger. § 2. If you would have it more effectual to purge, you must make it thus: ℞ Sherry-Wine lbiss. Sena ʒxvij. Cloves, Saffron, A. ʒj. Salt of Tartar ʒss. mix, digest twelve days, then strain out, filter, and keep it for use. This quantity will be enough for six or seven Doses. § 3. It is a general Purger, and besides its usefulness in stubborn and rebellious Fea∣vers and Agues, it is a Re∣medy, approved by manifold Experiments against Gouts of all sorts, tho' of never so long standing, Sciatica's, Rheu∣matisms, Scurvy, (even when it is become scandalous) Drop∣sies of all kinds, Jaundice, and all other Diseases proceeding either from Obstructions, or from a cold, moist, watery, slimy, mucilaginous, or tar∣tarous matter. § 4. It enters readily into the Mass of Blood, purifies it, and expels the morbifick cause of Diseases, almost to a Miracle, I speak what I know of it, by daily Practice: and therefore commend it to the honest Country-man, as a Medicament worth his ta∣king notice of.
XIII. * Tinctura Cerussae, Tin∣cture of Ceruse. Bate.] ℞ Venetian Ceruse finely poudred ℥iv. Camphir ℥ss. Oyl of Tartar, per deli∣quium ℥iij. Spirit of Vinegar ℥xvj. macerate or digest them in a cold place, then filter. It is good against Defedations of the Skin, Inflamations, Burnings, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Thô this is mostly applied to outward uses against Inflamations, Pains, Aches, Gouts, &c. yet it is also of good use for inward Diseases, being given in a fit Dose, and a proper Vehicle. § 2. It gives ease in a ve∣hement Colick, and is profi∣table against a violent Hae∣morrhage of the Womb, or overflowing of the Courses, as also in Burning Feavers, the Plague, or Pestilence, and all manner of Malign and Pestilential Diseases, being given à gut. xx. ad xxx. or more, in a Glass of Wine, or some proper Cordial Wa∣ter. § 3. It prevails against a hot Gout, if a little Tow, or Linnen Cloth be dipt in it, and applied to the place. In a Gonorrhea, where, by the acidity of the Venereal fer∣ment, the urinary Ductus is corroded, it is of excellent use, being mixed with Rose∣water or Milk, and so in∣jected with a Spring, it gives immediate ease. § 4. If a Fistula happens to be in the Canthus of the Eye, being first cleansed by mundificatives, you may put into it some few drops of this Tincture, so will it be in a short time fill'd with Flesh, and cicatrized. § 5. In other Diseases of the Eyes, you may mix it either with Aqua Lactis, Rose∣water, Fennel-water, or some such like, and wash the Eyes daily therewith several times a day, so will they in a short time be healed and cured. XIV. * Tinctura Chamaemeli, Tincture of Camomil. Bate.] It is extracted from the dried Flowers with recti∣fied S. V. as is Tincture of Wormwood. The Virtues are the same with Tincture of Caraways. Salmon.] § 1. This is a good Tincture thus drawn but yet it will be much bet∣ter, and more powerful and efficacious, if it be made with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or otherwise with the Powers of Camomil.
§ 2. It is an excellent thing against all Feavers whatever, whether non-putrid, putrid, or Malign and Pestilential; whether they be continent, continual, or intermitting: It is an excellent Cephalick, Neurotick, Stomatick, Sple∣netick, Hepatick, Utrine, Ne∣phritick, Arthritick, and A∣lexipharmick. It is Anodine, Diaphoretick, and Diure∣tick; an Opener of Obstru∣ctions, Discusser of Wind, Repeller of the Colick, Pro∣voker of Urine, Easer of Pain, and Restorer of the Nerves, in Cramps, Convul∣sions, Palsies, Gouts, Sciatica's, Rheumatisms, and such like. § 3. It is given inwardly Morning, Noon, and Night, in some proper Cordial, or Antifebritick, Anodyn, or Diuretick Vehicle, according as the nature of the Disease requires. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiv. according to Age, and ne∣cessity urging. § 4. Outwardly the Belly in the Colick, the Stomach and Sides in a Palpitation of the Heart, or a Pleurisie, the Joynts in a Gout, the Nerves and Parts affected in Con∣vulsions, Cramps, and Pal∣sies are duly to be bathed therewith Morning and Night for sixteen or twenty days, but cold; if this course be taken, and duly followed, I am very confident, that the Patient will very rarely fail of his expectation, or miss the Cure of his Disease. XV. * Tinctura Cochleariae composite, Tincture of Scur∣vy-grass compound. Bate.] ℞ Clean Filings of Mars ℥iv. red Sage, Agrimo∣ny, A. M. iij. choice Sea-Scurvy∣grass-leaves lbij. Garden Scur∣vy-grass, M. iij. Wormwood, Rosemary, A. M. ij. Horse-Radish Roots ℥iv. Cut all small, and add to them White-wine, and Sherry-wine, A. lbiv. digest or infuse for three days, then strain out. Dose ad ℥iv. twice a day, for twenty, thirty, or forty days: It has cured ma∣ny sick of a deplorable Drop∣sie, accompanied with a Scur∣vy, (or a Dropsie in a Scor∣butick Habit of Body) even when they have been past all hope, and after that many other Medicines had been u∣sed in vain. Salmon.] § 1. Thô this is a good Tincture, yet that is much stronger, and truly better, which is made with the best Spirit of Scurvy∣grass, made according to our Order; but then it is to be observed, that it is to be given in a much lesser Dose.
§ 2. It not only cures de∣plorable Dropsies, and inve∣terate Scurvies, but also the Gout, Jaundice, Rheumatism, Tremblings, Palsies, and ma∣ny other Distempers of the Nerves, vitiated by a cold, mucilaginous, and tartarous Matter. § 3. If it be made with Spirit of Scurvy-grass, you may give it inwardly à ʒij. ad ʒiv. in some proper Vehi∣cle, and in some extraordi∣nary occasions to ʒvj. § 4. It is also to be noted, That was I to make it for my own use, I would have added Mustard-seed ℥iv. brui∣sed and tyed up in a rag; for by that Ingredient it becomes more Diuretick, and has a greater influence upon Di∣seases of the Reins and Blad∣der: for from the infusion of Mustard-seed alone in White-wine, I have known supposed incurable Dropsies to be cu∣red, and perfectly taken a∣way. XVI. Tinctura Corallii, Tin∣cture of Coral. Bate.] Dissolve red Coral in Spirit of Bread, filter and evaporate, from which extract a Tincture with Spirit of Wine, then filter and exhale to a due consistency, S. A. It is Ca∣diack, Diuretick, and a Kil∣ler of Worms, &c. Dose gut. xxx. xl. &c. in some appro∣priate Liquor. Salmon.] § 1. Where note, That the Coral must be first reduced into an impalpable Pouder before it is put into the Spirit: And that this Spi∣rit is an Acid drawn by Re∣tort from Wheaten-bread, Leavened, or Rye-Bread, or rather from Bread made of a mixture of Wheat and Rye, Leavened as aforesaid, which Spirit so distilled is an incom∣perable Acid. § 2. The ordinary Prepa∣rations of Coral reduces it into a Pouder almost impal∣pable, grinding it upon Por∣phyry; but it may be better done, with the Engine of Mon∣sieur Joel Langelot, Physician to the Duke of Holsatia, which is an exquisite kind of Steel-Mill: this opens the Body well, and divides it almost into imperceptible Atoms, and recommends this En∣gine to all other Preparations which require any mixt Bo∣dy to be reduced into minute parts. § 3. Being thus reduced into an impalpable Pouder, it is so much the better for an Acid Spirit to work upon, and from that to extract its Tincture.
§ 4. But there is another way of making this Tincture with Juyce of Limons, as we have taught in our Seplasium, lib. 4. cap. 21. sect. 9. It is made also with the acid Spi∣rit of Honey, or Sugar, as it is in our Doron Medicum lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 20. Glauber does it with Salt of Tartar, and Grulingius with Spirit of Nitre; as you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 22, &c. 23. Besides eight several other ways, which are taught in the said Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 13. sect. 79, ad 90. § 5. Marggrave makes it also with Spirit of Nitre, in the following Proportions: ℞ Pouder of red Coral ℥j. best rectified Sp. Nitri ℥iv. put them into a Glass Phial, with a long Neck, and digest for fourteen days, so will the Men∣struum be ting'd of a Golden colour, which decant several times from the feces, till it is most pure; then distil in a Glass Retort with a gentle Fire to driness, so will a red Pouder be left at bottom: to which affuse the Alcohol of S.V. and digest for one day, then decant the rubicund Tincture; and this is one of the best Tinctures of Coral. § 6. It is an admirable Cardiack, depurates the whole Mass of Blood, and preserves it from corruption: it is a Medicament of great use a∣mong Chymical Physicians, but chiefly for the conserva∣tion of the Health of Hu∣man Bodies: it is also good against all sorts of Feavers, especially such as are burning, putrid, or malign, as also the Plague itself. § 7. There is also a prepa∣ration of this Tincture with the acid Spirit of Guajacum; and Rolfincius, lib. 4. sect. 1. art. 5. cap. 3. Art. Chym. pre∣pares it with Juice of Ci∣trons, in the same manner as we prepare it with Juice of Limons, the work of which being so plain and easie, we shall say no more of it in this place. Le Febure has the making of this Tincture with other Menstruums, the con∣sideration of which we shall pretermit, till we come to discourse thereof in our Offi∣cina Chymica, which Book is also now in the Press.
XVII. * Tinctura Ferri, Tin∣cture of Iron. Bate.] ℞ Clean Filings or Pleces of old Iron overcome with Rust ℥iv. Roman Worm∣wood M.j. Raspings of Ivory, white Sanders, A. ʒiss. Red Wine ij. digest forty eight hours, then strain, filter, and keep it for use. It is much more effectual than Vinum Chalybeatum, to open all kinds of Obstructions, &c. Dose from two spoonfuls to five, every Morning for a long time. Salmon.] § 1. The Filings or Pieces of Iron ought to be fully rusted before-hand, which may be done by spreading them in a broad Trey, or Earthen Pan, and exposing them for some con∣siderable time all Night in the open Air, so as the Dew may effectually fall thereup∣on: or otherwise, they may be daily sprinkled with Rain-water, and permitted each time to dry, stirring them constantly every day, till such times as their tho∣rough Rusting is compleat∣ed. § 2. This done (whereby the Body of the Iron will be in a good measure opened) put this rusted Matter into a Bolt-head with a long Neck, and affuse thereon, to every ℥i.. a pint of choice Red (or rather in my Opinion White-) Wine, which digest for some days, till the Wine has ex∣tracted the Tincture there∣from. § 3. Our Author here ad∣vises to digest only for two days, but I, who have many times made it, can tell you, that the longer you digest it, the better it is; and if it be digested two Months, yea, four or six Months, it will be yet so much the better, and more efficacious to the pur∣poses intended. § 4. It not only opens all manner of Obstructions, but most effectually cures the Green-sickness in Virgins; and it performs this Cure so admirably, that it is even to a wonder, for the Person who even but now lookt pale, wan, and thin, obstructed in the Brest and Lungs, so that they could hardly breath, without Stomach, loathing all manner of Food, scarce a∣ble to move or stir, without much uneasiness or trouble, nor hardly able to go up Stairs, without blowing, as if they strove for Life, weak∣ned in an extream manner, and seemingly as it were in a very deep Consumption; such
a Person as this, has been re∣trieved, as it were, out of the Jaws of Death, and by taking of but two Doses so sensibly benefited, that all who conversed with them could not but take notice of it: the shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing went away, the Sick was pleasant and easie, began to eat with a good Stomach, and to re∣ceive their Food with a great deal of pleasure; and in a word, the whole Habit of the Body did seem to be chan∣ging. § 5. This is indeed the na∣ture and property of this Me∣dicament; if then it does thus much at two or three times taking, what may it be thought to effect, if its use be conti∣nued for some reasonable time? The truth of the mat∣ter is this; no certain space of time can be limited for the taking thereof, but it must be according to the nature of the Body afflicted, obduracy of the Obstructions, and length of time wherein the Disease has prevailed; some need not take it above three Weeks or a Month at most; whereas other some again, must be obliged to take it for two or three Months; yea, sometimes for four or five Months, or longer. § 6. The sick ought to take it for some considerable time after they seem to be well; for this Disease being of a stubborn and rebellious nature, and not easily rooted out, may leave its Seeds or Roots behind it; and thô the Body of the Tree, be as it were cut down, and the Pa∣tient seems to be perfectly well, yet (the use of the Me∣dicine being given over too soon) the Disease revives a∣gain out of the remanent Seeds or Roots, contrary to all expectation, and the Pa∣tient becomes presently as bad again, or worse than e∣ver. § 7. In such cases as these it is requisite, that the Sick should begin as at first, and then to continue the taking of it so long, till it is evident a perfect Cure is compleat∣ed. § 8. Dose three, four, five or six spoonfuls in a Glass of White-wine, Ale, or Mild Beer, and to be taken either at Night going to Bed: or if in the Morning, so as the Sick may lie or keep their Bed two or three hours after taking it, and this so long till they have gotten strength e∣nough to stir more, and go abroad, then it may be bet∣ter to be at work, and indu∣strious
in some stirring Exer∣cise, or to take a Walk of two or three Miles upon a stretch, and so back again, by which means the stagna∣ting Juices and Humors will be put into motion, and the Operation of the Medicine facilitated, to the very great benefit of the Patient. XVIII. Tinctura Guajaci, Tin∣cture of Guajacum, or Pock∣wood. Bate.] ℞ Cortex of Guaja∣cum in fine Pouder lbj. Amber∣grise gr. xv. Aniseeds, Liquo∣rices, A. ℥i. S.V. lbiv. digest and strain out for use. It pro∣vokes Sweat, conduces ad∣mirably to the cure of the French-Pox, cures the Tooth∣ache, is Pulmonick, and pro∣fitable against Catarrhs, &c. Dose ʒvj. ad ℥iss. &c. Salmon.] § 1. The better way to make this, will be to leave out the Ambergrise, till the digestion is over, and the Spirit strained off from the Ingredients, which if you would be yet more curious, ought to be filtred; after which the Ambergrise being in fine Pouder is to be put in, and so long digested, till its whole Tincture is extracted, and after all the Tincture to be kept upon it, till it is all used. § 2. This Tincture is used by way of Diet in the French-Pox, and may be taken in place of a Diet-drink, for that it performs more than any Diet-drink can do; it ought to be taken two or three times a day, viz. in the Morn∣ing fasting, an hour before Dinner, and last at Night go∣ing to Bed, but at least twice a day: nor do I think it would be amiss for the sick to take some of it in all the Drink he drinks, for thereby the Habit of the Body will be more easily replenished with its excellent properties and effects. § 3. It is not only benefi∣cial against the Diseases na∣med, but also (by reason of its drying Virtue) to dry up, and consume watery Humors, and take away the Water in Dropsies, and therefore pre∣vails against Cachexia's, Ca∣chochymia's, and all other ill Habits of Body, as Rheuma∣tisms, wandering Pains about the Body, Gripings of the Guts, praeternatural Fluxes, Weaknesses and Lassitudes in what part soever; as also a∣gainst the Gout, Sciatica, Weakness of the Joynts and Limbs, and the Scurvy, in a cold and moist Habit of Bo∣dy.
XIX. Tinctura Galbaneti, Tin∣cture Galbanated. Bate.] It is extracted from the Galbanetum of Sennertus, with double quantity of the Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, by circulation, and afterwards by separating the Oyl from the Tincture S. A. It is Hysterick, Paralytick, Scorbutick, Em∣menagogick, or provoking the Terms, &c. Dose gut. 10, 20, 30, &c. Salmon.] § 1. How the Gal∣banetum is made, you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 1. cap. 8. sect. 30. which is only Galbanum p. j. mixt with Oyl of Turpentine p. ij. di∣gested ten days, and then di∣stilled in a Retort in Sand. Le Mort advises to take Gal∣banum cut into pieces, q. v. and to affuse thereon so much Oyl of Turpentine, as may over-top it the depth of two inches, then to digest twenty four hours, and to distil; so will you obtain an Oyl of Turpentine impregnated with a most potent volatile Salt and Sulphur of the Galba∣num; and this is that which is called Galbanetum. § 2. This Galbanated Tin∣cture (separated from the Oyl of Turpentine) is a most admirable Opener of Obstru∣ctions, even in the Nerves, and Womb, for which reason it is said to cure Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, Va∣pors, Fits of the Mother, Faintings, Swoonings, and Palpitation of the Heart; to rectifie the Blood, and other Juices contaminated with a Scorbutick taint, whereby it becomes of excellent use a∣gainst Rheumatisms, running and wandering Pains in the Limbs and Joynts, Obstru∣ctions of the Courses, &c. § 3. It may be taken Morn∣ing and Night à gut. xx. ad lx. in a Glass of Wine, or some other proper Vehicle good against the Disease in∣tended; and if the Patient sometimes sweats upon it, its effects will be so much the sweeter and better. XX. Tincturae Haematitae, Tincture of the Stone Hae∣matite. Bate.] It is drawn forth by the help of Spirit of Wine from Lapis Hematitis sublimed with Sal Armoniack. Its use is to stop all sorts of Hemorrha∣gies, or Fluxes of Blood. Dose ʒj. ʒij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. Maets makes the Sublimation of the Lapis thus: ℞ Impalpable Ponder of Lapis Hematitis lbj. Sal
Armoniack in Pouder lbss. mix them well together: put them into a Glass Cucurbit, which cover with a Glass Alembick, luting the Junctures, then sublime according to Art; so by a more gentle Fire the Spirit of Sal Arm. will first ascend, after which will fol∣low the Flowers tinged of an excellent Golden colour, and impregnated with a subtil and fine Martial Sulphur. § 2. From these Flowers it is, that the Tincture is ex∣tracted, which must be done with the Alcohol of S. V. you may put upon the Flowers so much as may over-top them about four inches; and they are to stand in digestion, till the Alcohol of the Wine has extract a yellowness. § 3. From the Feces there is also an Aqueous Tincture to be extracted thus: To the Feces put Rain-water, and di∣gest them together till the Wa∣ter is tinged of a reddish yel∣low colour, which filter and keep for use. This Aqueous Tincture in all Resolutions and Fluxes, both of the Bow∣els and Womb, all sorts of Hemorrhages, Diarrhea's, Go∣norrhea's, &c. and may be given à gut. vj. ad xij. in a∣ny proper Vehicle. § 4. The Feces, after the Aqueous Tincture being cal∣cined with a Reverberatory∣fire, and reduced into a fine Pouder, become Crocus Mar∣tis, whose use in all Hypo∣chondriack Affections, and Obstructions of the Cour∣ses, forcing them down, thô many Months stopt; it opens Obstructions of the Li∣ver, Spleen, Mesentery, and other Bowels, more especial∣ly if it is given with Gum Ammoniacum, Sagapenum, Myrrh, or other aperients, and exhibited in the form of a Pill. § 5. The Spirituous Tin∣cture is a most egregious Styptick, and Astringent; so that if a Sponge be moistned in the same, and be applied even to the greatest Arceries or Veins, being wounded or cut, it will in a short time astringe them, and stop the flux of Blood: So also given inwardly, in some fit Liquor it cures Spitting of Blood, a Bloody Flux, and Hepa∣tick Flux, as also the over∣flowing of the Terms, for which purposes there is scarce∣ly such another Medicine in Nature. § 6. This Tincture is said to be made more beneficial against a Dysentery, and o∣ther Fluxes of the Bowels and Womb, and Bleeding at Nose, if it be thus prepared:
℞ Of this Spirituous Tincture ℥j. Tincture of Opium made with Tincture of Salt of Tartar ʒij. Tincture of Saffron and Cinamon, A. ʒvj. mix them. Besides the former Virtues, this mixture eases all manner of Pain, takes away the too great Acrimony of Humors in Feavers, and is an excel∣lent thing against all Camp-Diseases, as Fluxes, Bloody Fluxes, Vomitings, Calen∣tures, &c. Dose à gut. iv. ad xij. or xx. § 7. This is also farther to be noted, that the Feces, af∣ter the extracting of the first Spirituous Tincture, if they be put into a moist Cellar for fourteen or twenty days, they will melt into a Liquor, which contains the Acid Spirit of Sal Armoniack, in which the Lapis Hematitis does subsist dissolved: from this Liquor evaporated to driness, may be made an Universal Men∣struum, for the dissolving of all sorts of Minerals, after this manner. § 8. ℞ Of this Salt ℥xij. Tartarised S. V. ʒvj. mix and digest for some days, then with a gentle Fire abstract the S.V. The remaining Salt mix with Tobaccopipe-clay, or Bole Armo∣niack, and distil in a Glass Retort almost to a red-hot heat, so will an Acid Spirit come forth descending in streaks almost like S. V. which keep in a Glass close stopt for your use. § 9. This Spirit, or Ʋni∣versal Menstruum, is a Me∣dium between a fixt Acid and a Volatile; and by its benign acidity is much better ac∣commodated to internal uses than other Acids, chiefly in Dropsies, Burning Feavers, Calentures, the Plague, and all other malign and infecti∣ous Diseases. § 10. It is also of extraor∣dinary use for Chymical O∣perations, in extracting the Anima Metallorum &c. Mine∣ralium, (which Soul with the Chymists is the most subtil Essence) and is chiefly their Sulphurs, as of Gold. Anti∣mony, Talck, &c. Dose in∣wardly à gut. iij. ad xij. XXI. * Tinctura Hierae, The Holy Tincture, commonly called Tinctura Sacra. Bate.] ℞ Species of Hiera picra simple ℥j. Cochinele ℈j. Sherry Wine lbiiss. mix and digest for some days, stirring it often in a day, then filter and keep it for use. It is given in Pains of the Stomach, Ca∣hexia's, Belchings, kills Worms, &c. It is exhibited before the Es of Tertian
and Quartan Agues, it com∣monly curing at the third time of taking. Dose ab ℥ij. adiv. Salmon.] § 1. This has been a Medicine of admirable use for many Years last past, and truly it has been used not without singular success, for the intentions it was design∣ed: being prevalent against all manner of Obstructions of the Viscera whatsoever. § 2. It opens the Opilations of the Liver and Spleen, is good against Hypochondriack Me∣lancholy, Cachexia's, Rheu∣matisms, Dropsies, Gouts, Sciatica, Palsies, and Con∣vulsions, and indeed most Distempers of the Nerves, Womb, and Joynts. § 3. It provokes the Terms in Women, strengthens the Stomach, causes a good Ap∣petite and Digestion, and makes a good Colour and Complexion in the Face. Given to Children affected with the Rickets it cures them, taking away Obstru∣ctions of the Lungs, and su∣perfluous Flegm, and causes a free breathing. Of ordi∣nary and plain Medicines, there are but few better than this Tincture the World. § 4. The constant use of it for some Weeks, cures stinking Breaths, thô of long standing; which I have ob∣served to be well perform∣ed Two or Three several times. XXII. Tinctura Juniperi, Tincture of Juniper-Ber∣ries. Bate.] It is made of the Rob of the Berries ℥i. and a Spirit of Juniper-Berries di∣stilled from their fermented substance; the Tincture digest and filter, S. A. Dose three spoonfuls thrice a day, against the Dropsie, Colick, Stone, &c. for which Diseases it is a sin∣gular Remedy. Salmon.] § 1. Rolfincius Art. Chym. lib. 3. sect. 2. cap. 9. makes it of the simple Berries thus: ℞ The Berries alone q. v. bruise them well: add Spirit of Wine q. s. mix and extract the Tincture with a gentle heat. It is a wonderful thing, saith he, in the depuration of the Blood, and preserves from Pestilential Contagion. § 2. The principal use of this Tincture is to open, dis∣cuss, resolve, attenuate, and dissipate, to provoke Urine and Sweat, bring down the Terms in Women, remove Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, strengthens the Brain, Nerves, Brest, Sto∣mach, and Lungs, and in∣deed
all the Viscera, it cures Coughs, Hoarsness, Asthma's expels Wind in the Bowels, and cures the Colick, but a∣bove all dissolving and eva∣cuating any sandy, viscous, slimy, or tartarous substance in the Reins, Ureters, and Bladder. It is also a great Preservative against the ma∣lignity of the Plague, and all infectious and pestilential Airs. § 3. It is also a singular thing against both Palsies, Convulsions, and Rheuma∣tisms, being daily taken in∣wardly in a fit Dose, and outwardly bathing the parts affected therewith Morning and Evening. § 4. But this is to be ob∣served, that if you will make this Tincture to Perfection, you ought to make it of the rectified Spirit of Juniper-Berries, distilled from their fermented substance, and al∣so from the ripe Berries im∣mediately bruised, rather than from the Rob; for that in making of the Rob, many of the subtil volatil, and essen∣tial parts of the Berries will be lost. § 5. This Tincture thus made, penetrates in a mo∣ment the whole Body, and may be given against all Di∣seases the Berries are good for: and that this is certain, as also that it intimately mixes with the whole Mass of Blood, does plainly ap∣pear, for that the Patient ha∣ving but two or three Doses of it, the first Urine he makes will be sure to smell thereof, or rather something resembling Florentine Orrice, or Violets. Give it in White∣wine, or its own Water. § 6 This Preparation of our Author you may see in Etmuller, Tom. 2. pag. 55. which seems to be taken from Hoffmans Animadversions up∣on Schroder, Messis Medico-Spagyrica, pag. 430. b. Save that he adds a half part of Mallaga-Wine, and then calls it, Elixir of Jumper. § 7. Le Febure makes it o∣therwise, and calls it also an Elixir, which is yet nothing but a Tincture, and does it after this manner: ℞ Best Juniper-Berries well bruised lbj. Juice of Pellitory of the Wall, or Golden Rod lbij. mix and digest in B. M. three days, then strain out by expression, and abstract in B. M. with a slow fire the humidity, till the Extract or Rob is of a middle consistency; which done, add Spirit of Juniper lbj. mix well, lute up the Vessel, digest and circulate in Bal. Vap. for eight days: after which, all being
decant the Tincture, fil∣ter and keep it for use. § 8. This Tincture has the Virtues of the former, but its Authors says, it is a Sove∣reign Remedy to preserve from, or cure the Plague, and other malignant and pesti∣lential Diseases; but is pecu∣liarly dedicated to the Kid∣neys and Bladder, not only to evacuate what is viscous and sandy in them, but also to remove the Seminary there∣of, and hinder, (by the con∣stant use of it) the farther Generations of Sand, Gravel, or Stories. § 9. It is also a Stomatick and Hysterick, Specifick, which by its Heat, Balsamick Property, Alexiterick Princi∣ples, and Cordial Virtue, does dissipate Flatus or Wind, or whatever may cause any ill Disposition in the Viscera, or Womb. XXIII. Tinctura Lunae, Tin∣cture of Luna, or Silver. Bate.] ℞ Luna precipita∣ted ℥i. Common Salt ℥ij. Sal Armoniack ʒij. mix and re∣verberate eight days: wash the Calcinate from the Salts, and extract Cerulean Tincture by the help of sweet Spirit of Vi∣triol, then decant and abstract. Its chief use is in Diseases of the Head, and more especially against the Epilepsie: and it dries up the Water in Dropsies. Dose gr. 4, 5, 6, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Either you abstract the humidity wholly, or not; if wholly, it is to be accounted nothing but a Tin∣cture, and such are many of the Tinctures of Metals. But the Liquid Tincture we have taught you two ways of ma∣king in Our Doron Medic. lib. 1. cap. 25. sect. 143. And lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 28. Clossae∣us has another way: So also Beguinus, Kelser, and Basil Valentine; all which you may see in Our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 8, 9, 10, 11, 15. § 2. The making the Lu∣na into Calx, Lime, or Pre∣cipitate is thus: ℞ Refined Leaf Silver ℥i. choice Sp. Ni∣tri ℥iij. put them into a Glass Matrass, and digest in a mo∣derately hot Sand Furnace, till the Silver is dissolved: then impregnate Water lbj. with Sea Salt, as much as it wit suck up, filter it, and affuse it on the dissolved Luna; so will the fixt Salt unite with the vo∣latile saline Sulphur of the Spi∣rit of Nitre, and make the Spirit quit its hold of the Sil∣ver which it had dissolved, and make it precipitate to the bot∣tom; which it will also the
better do, if you pour on a good quantity more of fair Water, whereby the Spirit being weak∣ned in all its parts, all the Particles of the Silver will more easily and perfectly fall down. § 3. Now here is one thing to be specially noted, that the Tincture of Luna is colourless; for the more it contains of a Cerulean, or Azure colour, the more it has of Copper in it; and if it is perfectly free from Copper, it will be perfectly free from that blew colour, as Le Mort has well observed: Si Argen∣tum (saith he) in Aqua Forti dissolvatur, quô liquor magis caerulescit, eo impurius est Ar∣gentum: Luna enim per se co∣loris est expers. § 4. Having drawn what quantity of Tincture you please out of the Calx of your Silver, you may if you so please, reduce it into a Mass of Silver again, thus; ℞ Tartar, Pouder of Flints, A. ℥i. Nitre ℥iv. Charcole in Pouder ʒij. put them all into a red-hot Crucible, and let them fulminate a little; then pour them melted into a hot Mor∣tar: when they are cold; then take the said Calx of Silver, and mix therewith, its equal weight of the afore∣said mixture, and put them into a Crucible upon a melt∣ing Fire, so will the Calx re∣sume its former Body of Silver. § 5. The fixed Salts of Tartar and Nitre, are here absolutely necessary, to hin∣der the volatility of the Salts of Tartar and Urine, where∣with the Calx of Luna was digested, and to fix the parts of those Salts, which carry a∣way some part in evaporati∣on; and the Pouder of Flints and Coals serve to cause the fulmination, and make the volatil Spirit of Nitre exhale. § 6. Etmuller, Tom. 2. pag. 256. extracts the Tincture from the Calx of Luna dis∣solved in AF. and calcin'd, with a Menstruum, or Li∣quor extracted by the help of a strong Fire, from Sal Am. and Calx Vive, ana, or from Sal Armoniack p. j. and Calx Vive p. ij. from this Tincture, the Menstruum being extract∣ed, with Tartarised S. V. the Lunar Tincture is at lengh exalted to its highest perfection. § 7. Neudorfferus extracts it from the Calx of Luna with this Menstruum: ℞ Oyl of Tartar per deliq. Sal Arm. an q. s. mix and distil gent∣ly in Ashes; so will you have a subtil Spirit with a volatile Salt, which mixed with Tar∣tarised S. V. and well united, will extract a Tincture out of
the said Lunar Calx: from this Tincture, the Menstruum is abstracted till it is as thick it Honey; after which fair Water is added; and by a fourth distillation the Salts of the Menstruum are drawn forth: and from what remains with Tartariz'd S. V. the Tin∣cture is extracted, whose Dose is à gut. x. ad xx. Morning, Noon before Dinner, and at Night against the Epilepsie, and other Diseases of the Head. It is an elegant Pre∣paration, but not the true Tincture. § 8. Le Febure first makes an Amalgama of the Luna with Quicksilver, then sepa∣rates the Mercury with a little Salt, and a gradual Circula∣tory Fire, grinds then the Calx on a Marble with Rain-water, and with it washes it from the Salt, then dissolves it in three times of its weight of Spirit of Nitre, after abstracts the Men∣strum by distillation in Ashes to driness, and perfectly sweet∣ens the Calx with distilled Rain-water, and dries it: which done, he affuses thereon Spir. Veneris, so much as to ever-top it four inches, covers it with a blind Head, les the Juncture, and digests in a con∣tinual and gentle heat for fif∣teen days; decants the Tin∣cture which will be (saith he) blew, and thus goes on digest∣ing and extracting, till the Men∣struum takes no more colour: these Tinctures are mixed toge∣ther, filtrated, and the Men∣struum drawn off in B. M. to the Consistence of a thick Syrup: upon this he affuses rectified S. V. accuated with a six∣teenth part of its weight of Vo∣latile Salt of Ʋrine, and put∣ting to a blind Head, luting the Juncture, he digests in Bal. Vap. for twenty one days, and so extracts a Tincture; which (saith he) contains the Cente∣ral Sulphur of Luna; from whence abstracting in B. M. the two thirds of the Spirit, you have remaining the true Antepileptick Tincture or Es∣sence, which is the grand Specifick against all Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Womb. Dose à gut. ij. ad x. § 9. The same Le Febure makes another Tincture of Luna, after this manner: First he makes a Menstruum of pure Sal Arm. p. j. of Mi∣nium or Red Lead, p. ij. mix and put them into a Retort in Sand, with a Receiver luted to it, the Retort having a wide Neck, that if any sublimation should happen, the Spirit might yet have a free passage, and not stop in the Neck, to ha∣zard the breaking the Retort: give a gradual fire, and con∣tinue
it till the Vapors and Drops be over, the Vessel being cooled, take this Spirit, and re∣ctifie it in Ashes for use. ℞ Calx of Luna (made with Sp. Nitri, precipitated with salt Water, edulcorated and dried) p. j. of the aforesaid re∣citified Spirit p. vj. digest in Bal Vap. till it has drawn the Tincture, which decant; put∣ting fresh rectified Spirit in the place, continue the dige∣stion, till you have a sufficient quantity of Tincture: then put them all together, filtrate and abstract the Menstruum to dri∣ness: upon the bottoms affuse distilled Rain-water to cover it three inches high, which ab∣stract by distillation; affuse new digefied Rain-water, and abstract in like manner, till the Lunar Pouder has lost its ill Ʋrineus smell, made by the Sal Arm. put this dried Feces or Pouder into a Circulatory Vessel, and affuse thereon the Alcohol of S. V. to over-top it three inches: stop exactly, and digest in Bal. Vap. till the Spi∣rit has drawn the Tincture, then abstract the half of the Spirit, and keep the remainder for use. § 10. This last Tincture, (says the Author) is the true Essence of Silver, and very excellent against all Affecti∣ons of the Brain, particularly against Madness, or Mania∣cal Passion, Apoplexy, Epi∣pilepsie, and Passie, given à gut. j. ad viij. in some fit Li∣quor, as Spirits of Black Cher∣ries, or of Elder-berries. § 11. Another Tincture of Le Febure's, more Philosophi∣cal than the former: ℞ Pure fine Silver in very thin plates, q. v. which put in a Crucible, stratum super stratum, with very dry Vitriolated Salt of Tartar (prepared with pure Salt of Tartar, and rectified Oyl of Vitriol): begin and end the lays with the Salt, cover and lute the Crucible, and let it dry, and then calcine in a Circulatory Fire for four hours: take then the Luna which will be calcin'd and brittle, and of a Glass colour: beat it to Pou∣der, which put into a Cucurbit, affuse thereon Spirit of Vine∣gar to over-top it three inches: digest in a moderate Ash heat, for eight or ten days, to ex∣tract the Tincture, which de∣cant, and affuse new Spirit, decanting and affusing in like manner till you have enough: put all the Tinctures together, and filtrate them. The Sedi∣ment in the bottom of the Ves∣sel of a yellowish colour, is the remainder of the Silver, and its Earth divested of its Sul∣phur. Put the filtrated Li∣quor into a Cucurbit, and in
B. M. with a gradual heat, draw off the Menstruum, till the Magma is of the Consistency of a thick Syrup, upon which S. V. Tartarised, to over top it four inches: cover the Cucurbit with its blind Head, and circulate in B. V. in Saw∣dust for forty days: decant the pure Tincture impregnated with the Centeral Sulphur of Luna; and in a Cucurbit in B. M. draw off two thirds of the Spi∣rit, the remainder is the Tin∣cture of Luna. § 12. The Virtues of this are the same with the former, but by him esteemed more excellent; for it is an excel∣lent Remedy to evacuate in∣sensibly Water in a Dropsie. Dose à gut. j. ad viij. in Broth, or White-wine, or in any pro∣per Vehicle. § 13. Lastly, That thô we have declared the Tincture of pure Luna (if free from all mixture of Venus) to be co∣lourless, yet it many times contracts an adventitious co∣lour to it, from the quality of the Menstruum used in the Extraction: for the Luna, as fine Luna only, has a fixt Body, and a fixt Mercury, with a white Sulphur, void of all Tincture, whether Blew or Green, yet it is apt to admit of different appearances, from the differing Particles of those Saline Menstruums, whether of Sal Arm. Niter, Aqua For∣tis, or Vitriol, &c. being after a new manner joyn'd with it, in most Minute Parti∣cles. XXIV. Tinctura Martis, Tin∣cture of Mars or Iron. Bate.] It is extracted from Flowers of Sal Arm sublimed from Mars, by the help of the Alcohol of Wine, S. A. It has the same Virtues with the Tincture of Sal Armoni∣ack. Salmon.] § 1. How this Sal Arm. is to be sublimed from the Mars, you may see in Our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 28. where you are to note, That you may as well make use of Filings of Iron corroded with the Salt, as of the Martiated Salt, sub∣limed from Gads of Iron; for that the Salt suffidently enough opens the Body of the Mars, so as it may easily yield its Tincture to other Menstruums. § 2. Mynsicht has another Preparation, which differs something from this of our Author, yet in the main is very like it. See it in Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 34. which is only the Body of Steel or Iron opened with the
Sal Arm. and extracted with S. V. § 3. A Tincture of Mars from Maets, which is called Potable Mars: ℞ Niter, Tartar, A. q. v. both in Pou∣der, mix, and kindle it with a red hot Iron, stirring till it is calcin'd: of this take lbj. fresh Ʋrine lbiv. digest in Horse-dung three Months; then in a Glass Cucurbit with its Alembick, and a very gentle heat, draw off the Spirit, which will be watery and fiery, and serves principally to draw the Tinctures from calcin'd Metals. This Spirit is able to draw from the Crocus of Sol a yellow Tincture, which being freed from the same Menstruum by distillation, till it comes to the form of an Oyl, will then yield its Tin∣cture, by digestion to the Al∣cohol of S. V. with which it will unite, whereby you have an Aurum Potabile of great Virtue; but this by the way. § 4. After the same man∣ner from Crocus Martis (made by the Vapours of Vinegar, or otherwise) you may ex∣tract a Tincture with this Menstruum, which being ab∣stracted by distillation, you may then with the Alcohol of S. V. draw forth a very fine Tincture of Mars, called by some Mars Potabilis. Dose à gut. vj. ad xxx. in any pro∣per Liquor. § 5. Some make an A∣stringent Tincture thus: ℞ Scoria of Mars in Pouder q. v. to which affuse Spirit of Vine∣gar to over-top it four inches: digest fourteen or twenty days, or till the Spirit has contracted a blood-red colour, then decant, it from the Feces, filter, and keep it for use. This is A∣stringent, and cures Spitting of Blood, or other Fluxes of Blood, whether in the Bow∣els or Womb, after an admi∣rable manner. Dose ʒj. ad ʒij. § 6. An opening Tincture from Le Mort. ℞ Vitriol of Mars calcin'd to redness, q. v. affuse thereon Sp. Aceti, so as to over-top it two inches: which digest till it is of a blood-red colour, decant, fil∣ter, evaporate to the Consistence of Honey, and with tartariz'd S. V. extract all the Tincture, which S. V. abstract in B. M. till only one third, which is the Tincture of Mars remains. § 7. This Tincture of Mars is a Specifick against the Worms in Children, the Ca∣chexia and Chlorosis in Mai∣dens, and the Dropsie, and Suppression of the Terms in Women. It opens Obstru∣ctions in Liver, Spleen, and
Mesentery, and cures Disea∣ses thence arising. Dose à gut. iv. ad ℈ij. § 8. Rolfincius Art. Chym. lib. 4. sect. 8. art. 3. cap. 6. gives us from Hartman a Tin∣cture of Mars, made with Ma∣laga Wine, thus: ℞ Filings of Mars (rusted with moisture) lbss. Malaga Wine lbj. mix and digest in a Sand heat, for some days, so will the opening Virtue of Mars by degrees be transplanted into the Wine. It opens all Tartarous Obstru∣ctions, and sweetly cures both the Dropsie, and Yel∣low Jaundice; and is profi∣table against Tertian and Quartan Agues. Dose à ʒij. ad ℥ss. in the Morning Fast∣ing, at Noon before Dinner, and last at Night going to Bed. § 9. In the next Chapter he makes the said Tincture in the same manner (which he calls his Black Essence) with Wine-Vinegar: this, he says, has a singular Virtue of open∣ing, dissolving, inciding, and removing all Obstructions from thick and melancholly Humors, purifying also the Blood and Juyces, Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. § 10. In the next Chapter he prepares it after the same nanner, by a gentle digestion in the depurated Juyce of Sor∣rel, or Wood-sorrel, p. vj. depu∣rated Juyce of Tumerinds p j. or somemhat better, being mixt together, whose Virtues and Use is like the former. § 11. In the next Chapter he prepares it with recent Juice of Apples (but Cyder to my knowledge will do as well) in which digesting the Filings for some days, and stirring the mixture often with a wooden stick, or Iron pin, he at length decants the Tincture, filtrates, and keeps it for use: but he extracts continually with fresh Juyce, till he has Tincture e∣nough, or the Sulphur is wholly extracted, conjoyns the extra∣ctions, and abstracts the humi∣dity to the half, or better: and then to make it the more penetrating, he takes of this Tincture ℥vj. Anisated Spirit of Wine ℥ij. Spirit of Scurvy-grass ℥i. mixes them together, digests and keeps it for use. § 12. This Tincture (saith he) is of great Virtues; it re∣solves thick and feculent Hu∣mors, which are mixt with the Mass of Blood, expels those which are acred and se∣rous, and cures the Scur∣vy. Dose à ʒi. ad ʒij. in Wine. § 13. And in his twelfth Chapter following, he makes it of the Scoria of Antimonial Regulus of Mars, thus:
℞ Scoria of Antimonial Regu∣lus in fine Pouder, Sal Arm. A partes equales; by sublima∣mation raise the Salt into Flowers: extract from the Ca∣put Mort. in fine Pouder with Rain-water, a Lixivium: this Lixivium exbale, but very gently, not calcining it to dri∣ness: upon this Coagulum af∣fuse S. V. so will it extract a yellow Tincture, which opens, incides, and cures Hypochon∣driack Melancholy. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. § 14. From what has been said, it appears that the Bo∣dy of Mars is apt to be pene∣trated and dissolved, not on∣ly by corroding Spirits, and by volatile and fixed Salts, but also by Dew, by Wine, and other Juices of Vegeta∣bles, provided, that being in small filings, the Menstruums may be allowed a due time to work upon, penetrate and dissolve the parts. § 15. And thô neither Wa∣ter nor Wine can totally dis∣solve Mars, nor operate up∣on it with that force and ce∣lerity as corroding Salts and Spirits; yet nevertheless they are able to dissolve a conside∣rable quantity of its parts, of which the taste of the Tin∣cture by them extracted, is an evident demonstration. § 16. Water with which Filings of Mars are penetra∣ted, converts them into Rust, which you may afterwards dissolve in a larger quantity of Water, and change into a yellow Tincture, of great use to open Obstructions. § 17. But Filings being di∣gested (tho' cold) for some weeks in White-wine or Cy∣der, in a double Glass well stopped, will extract a much better Tincture than could e∣ver be possible to be drawn by Water; for the Acid and Volatile Salt of the Wine, will make a larger dissolution of the parts of the Mars, and so thereby extract a stronger, deeper, and more effectual Tincture; which may be gi∣ven from one spoonful to two or three spoonfuls in the Morning fasting (to be conti∣nued for many days) against all sorts of Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and Womb. § 18. Or you may make a Syrup of it with fine Sugar, which may be given ab ℥i. ad ℥iij. at a time, either alone by itself, or mixt in a Glass of White or Rhenish, or Ma∣laga Wine, or Cyder. But to make the Tincture of Mars by these Menstruums, it will be long, and that is the chief reason that we use other
stronger dissolvents, as is a∣bove declared. § 19. The Prescript of our Author is exactly from Marg∣grave, whose words are these: ℞ Batiturae Martis, Sal Am∣moniacum in fine Pouder, A. ℥iv. mix, and from a earthen Cucurbit on a naked Fire, a Glass head being applied, sub∣lime for a while what will a∣scend, so will the Mars be vo∣latalized, and ascend with the Sal Armoniack of a rddish yellow▪ colour, which are com∣monly called, Flores Salis Am∣moniaci Martiales: and from these it is, that with S.V. he extracts his Tincture. § 20. Hofma in his Notes upon Schroderus, gives us this caution, That if we would extract a Tincture of Mars with S. V. from Crocus Mar∣tis, that it will not well suc∣ceed, unless the Crocus made by reverberation be first dis∣solved in some Saline Men∣struum, as Spirit of Salt, Spi∣rit of Nitre, Spirit of Verdi∣grise, or Venus, &c. and then reduced to a Crocus again. § 21. Basil Valentine's Tin∣cture of Mars, which you may see in my Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 20. made of Fi∣lings, red Spirit of Vitriol, and Spirit of Vinegar, &c. is commended also by Hof∣man, (Messis medico Spagyrica, pag. 248.) as a present Reme∣dy against the Megrim, Epi∣lepsie, Stone, internal Ulcers, to cleanse them, and to puri∣fie the Blood. But, saith he, Basil's Tincture may be better made thus: ℞ Vitriol of Mars calcin'd to redness, or Caput Mort. thereof, q. v. and with repeated affusions of Spi∣rit of Vinegar, extracts all its saline particles; these Extra∣ctions filtrate, and in an Alem∣bick extract in B. M. to the thickness of Honey: with this mix Sand, put all into a Glass Retort well coated, and with a naked Fire (augmenting it by degrees) distil a most rubicund Liquor. But by this Learned Man's favour, I take this to be rather a distilled Spirit of Vinegar, than an extracted and digested Tincture of Mars. § 22. It is evident then, in the Preparation of this Tincture, that acid Salts, and such as are purely Salt, dis∣solve Mars with equal force; and that Mars thus dissolved before-hand, and prepared, is more fit to be given into Man's Body, than that which is Crude; forasmuch as the Crude Mars can do nothing in the Stomach, till it, by its acid Juices has dissolved and opened it, so that the Sto∣mach and its Juices must
first prepare and cure the Medicine, before the Medi∣cine can prepare the Hu∣mours, and cure the Di∣sease. § 23. So that by being first dissolved by an acid saline Salt, it is prepared afore∣hand to remedy more effe∣ctually the Disorders of the Microcosm, produced by Ob∣structions, and the Scorbu∣tick taint of the Blood and Juices; and this Tincture is so much the more able to o∣pen all the Obstructions of the Viscera, and their Vessels, by reason of the Auxillary help it receives from its Dis∣solvents, which not only open the Body of the Mars, but without diminishing any of its good qualities; strengthens all the parts through which the said Tincture passes, and thereby helps also to dissolve the obstructing matter, and to carry it off by the ordina∣ry ways. § 24. The Tincture also which is extracted from the Crocus which Alcohol of S. V. is a more particular Specifick in the Dropsie, to comfort and strengthen the Tone of the Bowels, weakned by the long continuance of the wa∣try humor; for it restores the Lymphatick Vessels, (now as it were relaxed) by which they let loose the Serosities o∣ver the whole Habit of the Body. § 25. Lastly, By putting Filings of Steel into an Iron Pot, Kettle, or Pan, and moi∣stening them with Vinegar, drying it over the Fire, and stirring it often with an Iron Spatula, with several repeti∣tions of this operation, the Bo∣dy of the Mars will be so well opened, that by being digested some days in Canary, (stirring it once or twice a day) a very good Tincture will be extracted, which may be given from one spoonful to two or three, every Morning fasting, a∣gainst the Greensickness in Virgins, and all the Obstru∣ctions of Womankind. XXV, Tinctura Martis Au∣rea, The Golden coloured Tincture of Mars. Bate.] ℞ Crocus of Mars ℥i. Spirit of Salt ℥iv. infuse two days, often stirring of it: then add rectified S. V. ℥iv. digest warm for three or four days more, then filter, and the Tin∣cture will be of a Golden co∣lour. Dose ad gut. 20. Salmon.] § 1. The only dif∣ference between this and the former Tincture of Mars, is chiefly, that this is made of the Crocus of Iron, these of the
Filings, or Filings rusted with Water, and the difference of the Saline Menstruum, this being Spirit of Salt. § 2. Zwelfer Mantissae Spa∣gyricae, par. 1. cap. 3. makes it of the Crocus, with Spirit of Venus, thus: ℞ Crocus Martis Cachecticus q. s. to which affuse Spirit of Venus so much as may over-top it three or four inches: digest in a gen∣tle heat, till the Spirit is im∣bued of a rubicund colour, which decant, and affuse more fresh Spirit, and that so often as need shall require, till the Spirit will be tinged: put all these tinged Spirits together, and in B. M. abstract to an oleaginity. To the remaining thick Matter put Tartarized S. V. and extract a Golden co∣loured Tincture, which abstract in part again, leaving the yel∣low Tincture at bottom. § 3. This Golden Tincture of Mars made by either way, is a most excellent thing a∣gainst the Cachexia, Green-sickness in Virgins, and all Obstructions of the Viscera, being taken à gut. xij. ad xxx. or more in any proper Liquor: but this is peculiar to the Tincture of the Crocus, more than to the other Tin∣ctures, that they strengthen (in Dropsies, and other like Diseases) the Bowels more than the other, as Hofman has observed: See § 24. of the former Section. § 4. Kesler makes this Tin∣cture of the Crocus with Sal Armoniack; but Quercetanus with A. F. the Preparations of which you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 19, 22. § 5. But in making this, and all other Preparations of this kind, you are to take heed, that your acids be not too extream; for so Etmul∣ler, Tom. 2. pag. meâ 606. has advised, by reason that being so prepared and taken into the Body, they little or no∣thing operate. Pari ratione (saith he) Tincturae martiales nimis acidi praeparetae intra corpus assumptae parum aut ni∣hil operantur, si verò cum al∣kalibus aut blandis acidulis praeparentur, suam merentur laudem. § 6. Equal to this Tin∣cture of the Crocus, Zwelfer, accounts his Tincture of the Vitriol of Mars, which is pre∣pared from the said Vitriol with Terra foliata Tartari, which is indeed a Medicine of great use, and preferred before most others. § 7. There is a preparation of the Crocus with Sp. Vitrioli; but this, saith Hofman, is no∣thing but the Vitriol of Mars
dissolved, and extracted with Spirit of Wine, which opens Obstructions, and after an admirable manner relieves the Hypochondriacal: but that which is made from the Vitriol of Mars, and Crystals of Venus, ana, dissolved and in∣spissated to the thickness of Ho∣ney, and then extracted with S. V. is accounted by Ett∣muller, Pyrotechnia Rationalis, lib. 2. sect. 1. cap. 2. pag. meâ 606. as a most excellent thing against Affections of the Reins, Bladder, and Urinary Parts. Dose à gut. x. ad xxx. or more, in a fit Vehi∣cle. XXVI. Tinctura Martis Tar∣tarisata, Tartarised Tin∣cture of Mars. Bate.] ℞ White Tartar in Pouder lbij. Rust of Mars lbj. mix and boyl in an Iron Vessel or Pot, with fair Water lbxvj. for twelve hours, stirring it continually with an Iron Spa∣tula, and adding as need re∣quires more Water boiling hot, at last, letting it settle, filter the Liquor, and exhale to a convenient thickness, S. A. Dose ʒj. ad ʒiij. Solmon.] § 1. This is ex∣actly Lemery's Process, which you may see expressed more at large in our Doron Medi∣cum. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 19. with some Observations up∣on the making thereof, its Virtues, Uses, and Dose. § 2. Nor does this differ from that of Charras, par. 3. lib. 3. cap. 53. of his Pharma∣copoeia, save in the matter of the Body of the Mars: for whereas Lemery prescribes Rust of Mars to be taken, Charras takes the pure Filings, making it after this man∣ner: § 3. ℞ Filings of Mars lbss. white Tartar in fine Pouder lbij. put them into a large Iron Pot, or Kettle, filled almost quite full of Water: boyl, stir∣ring the Matter from time to time, to facilitate the dissolu∣tion of the Mars, adding still more Water, as you see need, from its boiling away: continue this boiling for ten or twelve hours, till you perceive the Fi∣lings are almost dissolved in the Liquor▪ which will be of a brown colour when filtred, the sediment being of a whitish grey: whilst warm filter it, and it will be very clear, but of a brown red, and a sour taste, like that of Cremor Tar∣tari. The filtred Liquor put into the Iron Kettle, being first washed clean, and evapo∣rate the superfluous humidity over a gentle Fire, till it be∣comes of the thickness of a
Syrup, which when cool▪ keep it in a Glass close stopt for use. § 4. This is indeed a good Preparation of the Tartarized Tincture of Steel; but if you follow Lemery's Method, to use Rust of Iron, instead of the bright Filings, and so to proceed in all respects as is before declared, you will sooner and more easily ac∣complish the Preparation; for by so much as the Filings are rusted, by so much the Bo∣dy of the Mars is opened before-hand, in order to the work. § 5. This Operation and Solution will be so much the more accelerated, if a little Spirit of Nitre be added; or if the Filings and Tartar be∣ing mixed together be gent∣ly sprinkled with Water, or moistned, and so exposed for some Days to the Air; for by this means a greater plen∣ty of the Tincture will be had, and also more easily. § 6. Le Mort makes it af∣ter this manner: ℞ Filings of Mars ℥iij. Crystals of Tartar in Pouder ℥viij. mix, moisten with Water, and expose them to the open Air for some days, that they may be throughly ru∣sted: then boyl in an Iron Kettle for four hours, with a sufficient quantity of Water, continually stirring the matter with a Spatula, adding Wa∣ter as the former boyls away, till it is sufficiently coloured: then evaporate to driness, ta∣king heed towards the end, that the Matter be not burnt: of this Pouder take ℥iij. Rhenish∣wine ℥x. mix and digest in a gentle Bal. M. for two days: and being setled, de∣cant the clear Tincture for use. § 7. It is a most egregious Deoppilative, and conduces in the highest degree for the killing of Worms; and it momentarily opens all Ob∣structions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery, curing Drop∣sies, Jaundice, and the Green-sickness in Virgins to a won∣der. Dose à gut. x. ad xxx. or xl. or more, even à ʒij. ad ʒiv. or vj. according to the Age and Quality of the Pa∣tient, in some convenient Vehicle, as the Bitter Draught, Canary, Ale, &c. § 8. Where Note, That in the Preparation of this Tincture, a Phlegmatick Menstruum, or a Spirit mixt with Flegm, is required to extract its Tincture, so that the Salts which promote the attenuation and dissolution of the Mars, may be dissolved also; for which reason Le Mort has here chosen Wine,
as the most proper Medium and Expedient. XXVII. * Tinctura Melam∣podii, Tincture of Black Hellebor. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Black Hellebor ℥iss. Calamus Aroma∣ticus ℥ij. Galangal ℥ss. Saffron ʒiss. lesser Cardamoms ʒiij. Canary, or Spanish Wine lbiv. mix and digest in a Vessel close stopt for twenty hours in a warm place, afterwards in a cold place for four, five, or six days; then press out and filter. Dose two spoonfuls at the time of going to Rest or Sleep, and three spoonfuls in the Morning for some days. It is of signal use for Distempers of the Head, Head-aches, Melancholly, Asthma's, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This Prepa∣ration is well enough correct∣ed, and may be of great use for such as are Maniacal, or troubled with Madness, e∣specially that kind of Mad∣ness, which proceeds from a profound or deep Melanchol∣ly; for which, and all Ob∣structions and Oppressions of the Spleen, Discontents, vain Fears, and foolish Fantasies and Imaginations, it is a Specifick, and a very excel∣lent thing. § 2. They who cannot go to the Charge of Canary, or Sherry, may make it with our Spiritus Intimus; and truly in my Opinion, tho' the Menstruum's much chea∣per, yet the Medicine there∣with prepared will be much better, and more valuable; and also more corrected for that the saline par∣ticles thereof, do in a great measure bridle the violence of the Black Hellebor, and being thus made, you may give it à ʒij. ad ʒiv. or ʒvj. in any fit Vehicle. § 3. It is an excellent Re∣medy against most Diseases of the Head and Brain, as Head∣achs, Megrims, Vertigo's, A∣poplexies, Lethargies, Carus, Palsies, and such-like; for it attracts and carries forth the cold, moist, and Morbifick Matter of the Disease, and leaves the parts disburthened of their load. § 4. In like manner, it gives ease and help in most Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, opening their Obstru∣ctions, and calling forth the offending Matter which cau∣ses Coughs, Hoarsness, Whee∣zings, shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, stink∣ing of the Breath, loathing of Food, sickness of Stomach, and the like: and if the Sto∣mach
be foul it cleanses it, for he most part by a gentle kind of Vomiting; by means of which, it carries off the slimy Mucilage, and tarta∣rous Matter which breeds both the Stone and Gout, and many times is the cause of Gripings in the Guts, Vomi∣tings, Convulsions, and other Indispositions of the Viscera; for which purpose account this Medicine a Jewel. XXVIII. * Tinctura Melissae, Tincture of Bawm. Bate.] ℞ Red or Claret∣wine lbxvj. or two Gall. Bawm fresh gathered, M. viij. distil in B. M. to driness: to the distilled Water add fresh Bawm, a little dried, M. viij. distil by an Alembick lbiv. in∣to a Stone Receiver fill'd full with fresh and choice Bawm∣leaves not bruised: afterwards strain out, and sweeten with double refined Sugar, hanging a Nodule in the same contain∣ing Ambergrise, gr. v. Musk gr. i. It is a wonderful Cor∣dial. Salmon.] § 1. There is first made a small Spirit of Bawm, by distilling of Wine from Bawm, which will be yet better if it be cohobated up∣on the Feces, or other fresh Bawm. § 2. Or you may distil a Spirit from it, as we have taught you to distil Spirit of Hyssop, cap. 2. sect. 16. of this Book afore-going; this ought to be tartarised, or perfectly deflegmated, and then put upon well dried and choice Bawm, which by a due di∣gestion will extract its Tin∣cture. § 3. But you will have yet a much better Tincture, if you use in the place of all these, Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, which as it more ex∣cellently opens the Body of the Vegetable, and penetrates it, so in like manner it ex∣tracts a more compleat and pure Tincture. § 4. But for the meaner sort of People, who cannot go to the charge, you may extract a Tincture with our Spiritus Intimus, which will not be much inferiour to the for∣mer; but here is to be no∣ted, that if the Sp. Intimus be used as a Menstruum, there will be no need at all to dry the Bawm: and yet notwithstanding, you shall have a Medicament of most admirable use. § 5. It admirably chears the Heart, revives the Spi∣rits, comforts Nature, and re∣stores weak and decayed Bo∣dies, who want their natural
heat, and are verging towards a Consumption. It is also a Specifick against Sadness, Melancholy, and Pensiveness of Spirit; for it really recre∣ates the Vital and Animal Spirits. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. iij. or iv. XXIX. * Tinctura Mellis, Tincture of Honey. Bate.] ℞ The best Honey lbij. fine, white, and dry Sand, lbiij. Spirit of Wine lbij. di∣gest warm, filter, and in B.M. evaporate to the Consistence of a Syrup. It is given against the Phthisick, and for Nou∣rishment to the Body. Dose two or three spoonfuls. Salmon.] § 1. Le Mort in his Chymia Medico-Physica, pag. 178. makes it after this manner: ℞ Virgin Honey ℥vj. Spirit of Wine twice re∣ctified from Carminatives ℥x. Salt of Tartar ʒj. mix and di∣gest together in B. M. for two or three days, stirring the mat∣ter twice or thrice a day, that the Tincture may be of a sub∣rubid colour, then separate the tinged Liquor from the Fe∣ces. § 2. The reason why this Spirit is twice rectified from Carminatives is, that it might be imbued or filled with their Volatile Salts and Spirits, and pure Etherial Oyls, by reason of which it will the better pe∣netrate, and by the help of the Salt of Tartar attenuate and incide the Matter, and so promote the extraction of the Tincture. § 3. And whereas the high∣est rectified Spirit is used, it is as well (with the help of the Salt of Tartar) to give it a grateful Odour and Sapor, and so exalt it to the heighth of goodness; for otherwise, if it be not well deflegma∣ted, it will make no extra∣ction of the Tincture, but only a dissolution of the Bo∣dy of the Honey. § 4. The same Le Mort makes it also thus: ℞ Pure Virgin Honey, fine dry Sand, A. q. v. the highest rectified Spirit of Honey, q. s. mix, di∣gest in a Cucurbit having a broad bottom, till the Spirit is tinged of a Golden colour: de∣cant the Tincture, and put fresh Spirit upon the Feces, so long till it will be no more tinged: the Tinctures mix to∣gether, and abstract the Spirit (till a third only remains) in B. M. so will you have the Tincture at bottom. § 5. The Prescript in our Text is from Beguinus Tyro∣cinii Chymici. lib. 2. cap. 10. pag. 159. meâ. But the best of the three Preparations is
the First of Le Mort's: and the Second would yet be bet∣ter than that, were it but twice rectified in like manner from Carminatives. § 6. There is a Fourth Pre∣scription not yet in Print, which is this: ℞ Virgin Ho∣ney, put it into a Glass Body, and in B.M, draw off an Aqua Mellis, almost to driness: the Magma at bottom mix with equal quantities of fine, white, dry Sand, and with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, made of ardent Spirit of Honey, or with tarta∣rised Spirit of Honey twice re∣ctified from Carminatives, q.s. make a Tincture in a gentle digestion: this much tran∣scends any of the former Pre∣parations. § 7. All these several Tin∣ctures, thô one may be bet∣ter than another, as to their goodness or excellency, yet they have but one and the same Virtue, being account∣ed by Authors as the highest Remedy against an Asthma, Phthisic, and an inveterate Cough, as also Catarrhs, dif∣ficulty of Breathing, and o∣ther Diseases of the Brest and Lungs. § 8. Beguinus prescribes it rather to the truly Hectical, or such as are in deep Con∣sumptions, to be given daily, Morning and Evening, either alone, or in some Pectoral Decoction. § 9. The first of Le Mort's, besides all the former Virtues, wonderfully discusses and ex∣pels Wind, cuts and expecto∣rates tough Flegm, and may be given à ʒj. ad ʒij. or more: his Second Tincture he gives from half a spoonful to a spoonful: The Fourth Pre∣paration à ʒss. ad ʒiss. or ʒij. in any fit Vehicle. XXX. Tinctura a Myrrhae, Tin∣cture of Myrrh. Bate.] ℞ The best Myrrh, fine Aloes, A. ℥i. Alcohol of Spirit of Wine lbj. mix, digest, and filter. It is an admira∣ble Vulnerary, cleanses, a∣stringes, strengthens, consoli∣dates, and hinders putrefa∣ction, and prevents Gan∣greens. Salmon.] § 1. You ought to chuse that Myrrh which is friable, light, and every∣where of one colour, which being broken has white lines (as it were) running between, bitter in taste, well scented, and fat: that which is a∣cred, heavy, of an ill smell, and of a Pitch colour, is naught.
§ 2. The Alcohol of Spirit of Wine, if it be rectified from Carminatives, it will yet be better, and make a more Absolute Tincture, of singular uses to the purpose intended. § 3. The chief intention of this Medicament is to pre∣vent Gangreens, and hinder putrefaction, or mortification in Incarnations, and to restore the Natural heat almost ex∣tinct, by bathing with it hot, and fomenting the part there∣with, and laying over the Affect Cloths dipt in the same. § 4. But besides all the things afore-named, it is a most admirable thing against the Plague, and all Pestilen∣tial and Malign Diseases, be∣ing given inwardly, as well in a preventive as curative sence; and so may be given à ʒj. ad ʒij. in a Glass of Wine, first, and in the Morn∣ing fasting, before Dinner, and last at Night going to Bed; and in Pestilential times it will be good con∣tinually to smell to it, and besmear the Nostrils there∣with, to resist the malignity of the Pestilential Air. § 5. You may reduce the Tincture into an Extract, by abstracting the Spirit to a due consistency, of such a Body as it may be made up into Pills. Dole à ʒss. ad ʒj. XXXI. Tinctura Oculorum Cancrorum, Tincture of Crabs Eyes. Bate.] ℞ Crabs Eyes in fine Pouder ℥iv. the best Wine Vi∣negar ℥xvj. mix, extract the Tincture and filter. Dose two spoonfuls thrice a day, for the Curing of Ulcers. K. D. E. A. Salmon.] § 1. This is from Sir Kenelm Digby, and is ra∣ther a dissolution of Crabs Eyes than a Tincture; if you would extract the true Tincture, it must be done in all respects as that of Coral, or Pearl. § 2. The chief use of this Medicine is in the curing of old Ulcers and Fistula's, which have been of long standing, and supposed to be past cure, in which it is said to do wonders; but in my Opinion, it would be much better to precipitate the dis∣solved Matter, and free it from the acidity of the Vine∣gar, by many Lotions, and then it may be given à ʒj. ad ʒij. But as to this, let Ex∣perience guide you, for that
the dissolution of the Oculi do better in some, the precipitate in others. § 3. Whether you give the dissolution, or the precipitate, this is always to be under∣stood, that they ought to be given in a proper Traumatick or Vulnerary Liquor, which may also contribute to the same intention. § 4. The way by which this Medicine works is, by a Diuretick property, carrying off the Morbifick Matter, which feeds the Disease, by Urine, which it does very sensibly, in such who conti∣nue the use of it for some time. § 5. Hofman is of the O∣pinion, That if this Liquor be made, it ought to be done with the Spirit of Venus, or Juice of Citrons; the one is a better Dissolver than Vin∣gar, and the other makes a better dissolution, and with∣out doubt is to be preferred before that made with Vine∣gar: but the Artist may use what likes him best. XXXII. Tinctura Odontalgi∣ca, A Tincture for the Tooth-ache. Bate.] ℞ Guajacum ℥ij. Pyrethium ℥j. Pomgranate∣peels, Galls, Seeds of Henbane and Stavesagree, A. ℥ss. Cloves, Ginger, Long Pepper, Oliba∣num, A. ʒij. Opium, Camphir, A. ʒj. Indian Tobacco, Sage, Horse-Mint, A. ℈ij. S.V. lbiij. mix, digest, and filter or strain. A little of this is to be held warm in the Mouth, and kept in for a while, then spit out, and reiterated. Vide Myn∣sicht. Salmon.] § 1. This is some∣thing altered from that of Mynsicht: the true Recipe you have in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 35. In this there is Ginger, Pepper, Pomgranate-peels, Galls, Sage, Mint, Tobacco, and Camphir, more than in that of Myn∣sicht: and in Mynsicht there are, Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, Flea-wort, Origanum, Saffron, Alum, and Nitre, more than in this of our Author's. § 2. So that the main things in which they agree, are the Raspings of Guajacum, the Pyrethrum, Seeds of Staves∣acre, and Hen-bane, Cloves, and Opium, in which six
things the chief force of the Composition lies. § 3. But if to these six things you add out of Our Author, the Pomgranate-peels, Galls, Pepper, Ginger, Tobac∣co, and Camphir: and out of Mynsicht, the Saffron, Alum, and Nitre, the Composition will be better than either of them, which you may pro∣portion thus: § 4. ℞ Raspings of Guaja∣cum ℥ij. Pyrethrum, Alum, Nitre, Henbane-seeds, Staves∣acre, Galls, Pomgranate-peels, A. ʒvj. Opium, Camphir, Saf∣fron, A. ʒiij. Cloves, Pepper, Ginger, Tobacco, A. ʒiss. Spirit of Wine, and Wine Vinegar A.lbiss. mix, digest, and make a Tincture. § 5. You are to hold it for a while in your Mouth, up∣on the place where the Pain is, and after you have spit it out, you must reiterate it, which so long continue till the Pain ceases; which it most effectually accomplishes, tho' never so acute or sharp, and withal, prevents after an admirable manner the farther afflux of Humors. XXXIII. * Tinctura Para∣lytica, The Palsie Tin∣cture. Bate.] ℞ Ponder of Can∣tharides ℥ij. Bishops-weed ʒvj. Spirit of Wine rectified lbiss. mix and extract a Tincture, which strain. It is to be rub∣bed upon the Paralytick Members. Salmon.] § 1. The intention of this Medicine is only for friction, which is so often to be repeated, till the part grows red, and in some thin skin'd People, is blistred, till Blisters arise you may use it twice a day, or oftner; for by this means the Animal Spirits are attracted into the part, and the natural heat is revived. §2. Whilst this is in use ontwardly, some thing pro∣per to the same purpose ought to be given inwardly, as the Tinctura in Paralysi Milii, which see in our Pharm. Lend. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 36. and other things of like na∣ture. § 3. But the more excel∣lent of this kind are the Pote∣states Rosmarini, Lavendulae, or Limonum, made and re∣pleat with the Volatile Salt of the same Vegetables, of
which fifty or sixty drops may be given at a time in a Glass of Wine in the Morn∣ing fasting; as much an hour before Dinner; and the lit∣tle quantity at four in the Afternoon, giving at Night going to Bed ten or twelve grains of the volatil Salt of Vipers, or Mans Skull, in some proper Vehicle. XXXIV. Tinctura Perlarum, Tincture of Pearls. Bate.] It is made in all re∣spects as the Tincture of Co∣ral. Salmon.] § 1. And there∣fore for the same reason sake, we shall chiefly reserve you to the said Process, in Sect. 16. of this Chapter. Libavius's Tincture made with Spirit of Salt, &c. you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. cap. 13. sect 99. And an Arcanum in Sect. 100. following it, made with Spirit of Vinegar. § 2. But the Arcanum Per∣larum, prepared with Spirit of Guajacum, is commended as a much better preparation, which you may see in the place cited, Sect. 97. which afterwards according to Ett∣muller's Opinion, Tom. 2. pag. 219. meâ, is to be ex∣tracted with perfectly defle∣gmated S. V. or rather with some appropriate Spirit, re∣ctified upon Salt of Tartar, and then (saith he) it is a Medicament not to be con∣temned. § 3. Grulingius in his Flori∣legium, pag. 262. advises to dissolve them in Spirit of Vi∣negar, digesting them in a Glass close stopt in Sand for some days, then decanting the Spirit, and assusing new, and reiterating this work, till the Pearls are all dissolved, and the Shells only as it were remain, then joyning the dis∣solutions, and in B. M. ab∣stracting the Spirit to the consistency of an Extract; which dissolve in some proper distilled Water, and filter: this whilst liquid is his Essence or Tincture, but the humidity being abstracted, you have the Magistery. § 4. Yet when all is done, that made with Sprit of Gua∣jacum, and after extracted with some Specifick Tarta∣rised Spirit is much to be preferred, for all the purpo∣ses it is intended for, being indeed, a Specifick against the French-Pox, virulent Go∣norrhea, malignant Whites, and all Defedations of that kind. § 5. It is a Noble Cordial, excellent against Phrensies, Convulsions, Contractions,
and Resolutions of the Nerves; it comforts the Brain and Memory, chears the Heart, preserves from Apoplexies and Vertigo's, dries and con∣sumes up evil Humors, and destroys the Tartarous Mat∣ter which breeds the Gout, Stone, and pernicious Fea∣vers. § 6. It is a certain Pre∣servative against the Palsie, an Arcanum against the Epi∣lepsie, helps the Palpitation of the Heart, and is good a∣gainst Fainting and Swoon∣ing Fits; strengthens the Child in the Womb, is a Pre∣servative against the Plague, and all sorts of Malign Fea∣vers, increases, and renovates or restores the Radical Moi∣sture, and the Debilities of Old Age, keeping the Body sound and in good health. Dose à gut. xx. ad xxx. or more , in Cinamon-water, Wine, or other Specifick Li∣quor. XXXV. * Tinctura Piperis, Tincture of Pepper. Bate.] It is made of Black Pepper, and the Alcohol of Wine, in the same manner as Tincture of Cardamoms: and has the Virtues of Pep∣per. Salmon.] § 1. Something like this you may meet with in our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 14. only there is added a small proportion of Cardamons, viz. ℞ Tarta∣riz'd S. V. lbij. Black Pepper in fine Pouder ℥vj. Cardamoms in Pouder ℥i. mix and di∣gest to a kind of redness, &c. § 2. Now here is to be noted, That the best rectified S. V. extracts only an Amber coloured Tincture, unless it continues some Months in a very gentle warmth upon the Feces; if so, the Tincture at length becomes of a red∣dish colour, like the colour of Blood mixt with Water; and this I have only done with Black Pepper; from White, or Long Pepper, thô I have digested never so long, no such Tincture will arise, which makes me think that that Red colour proceeds from the Husk of the Black Pepper alone. § 3. It is an excellent Sto∣matick, causes an Appetite and a good Digestion, ex∣pels Wind admirably, and gives ease in the Colick, al∣most to a Miracle; it pro∣vokes Urine and the Terms, hastens the Labor, and faci∣litates both Birth and After∣birth.
§ 4. It is an excellent thing against Coughs, Colds, Ca∣tarrhs, Sore and Swell'd Throats, Tumors of the A∣mygdalae, &c. and is an ap∣proved thing against Pinings and Consumptions, whether in Old or Young. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiv. in a Glass of Ale: it may seem tedious, and very hot indie Mouth and Throat at first: but as the Medica∣ment is without danger, so the assiduous use thereof takes away much of the sense of its heat. XXXVI. Tinctura Proprie∣tatis, Tincture of Proper∣ty. Bate.] ℞ Best Aloes, choice Myrrh, ana, ʒvj. Best English Saffron ʒiv. being reduced in∣to Pouder, add Oleum Tartari per deliquium ℥ij. digest in a close Vessel twenty four hours; then add of the Alcohol of S. V. ℥xvj. digest and filter, S. A. It has the same Virtues and Operations with Elixir Pro∣prietatis dulce. Salmon.] § 1. This is no∣thing but Elixir Proprietatis dulce, made with an alcalized Salt, by which the Bodies of the Ingredients are not only better opened, and the bit∣terness somewhat abated, but the Griping property of the Aloes is in a good measure corrected. § 2. It is good against the Plague, and all sorts of Ma∣lign and Pestilential Feavers, strengthens and fortifies a weak Stomach, causes a good Digestion, and an excellent Appetite. § 3. It is a good Hysterick, provokes the Terms in Wo∣men, opens Obstructions of the Womb, and is prevalent against the Green-sickness in Virgins, more especially if in giving of it, you mix it with an equal part of the Tincture of Mars, &c. § 4. It is also a kind of Specifick against all Oppres∣sions of the Spirits, Hypo∣chondriack Melancholly, Ob∣structions of the Mesentery, and Hypogastrick Diseases, being daily taken in the Morning fasting à ʒij. ad ʒvj. or more, in a Glass of Ale. XXXVII. * Tinctura Ra∣barbari, Tincture of Rhu∣barb. Bate.] ℞ The best Rhu∣barb, Liquorice A. ℥ij. Raisons stoned no 60. Aniseeds ℥j. Su∣gar-candy ℥vj. S. V. lbij. di∣gest S.A. and strain out. Dose two, three, or four spoonfuls in a Morning, against Co∣lick,
and Gripings of the Guts, &c. which it wonderfully cures. Salmon.] § 1. It ought to be digested eight or ten days in a very gentle heat, shaking it two or three times a day, then letting it settle, decant the clear, and keep it in a Bottle close stopt for use. § 2. It purges gently, and collects and expels the acrid and tartarous humor, which adhering to the Tunicles of the Viscera, causes violent Pains and Gripings; for which purpose it is indeed a Speci∣fick, and one of the greatest things in Nature against all the Weaknesses and Distem∣pers of the Bowels, especial∣ly if accompanied with pain∣ful Dejections. § 3. It is also of singular use to purge such as are troubled with any simple Go∣norrhea, Weeping, or Glee; as also the Whites in Women, Universals being premised; for thô it gently purges, yet it strengthens admirably, and stops all sorts of Fluxes, as Diarrhea's, Dysenteria's, and Lienteria's, to a wonder. XXXVIII. *Tinctura Rosa∣rum, Tincture of Roses. Bate.] ℞ Red Roses exungu∣lated ℥ss. Fountain-water boil∣ing hot lbiiss. Oil of Vitriol gut. xxx. digest three hours, strain out, and to the clear add white Sugar-candy in Pouder ʒiij. It refrigerates in Fevers, and comforts the Liver, helps Concoction, stops Fluxes, as also the overflowing of the Terms. Dose ℥ij. ad ℥iv. Salmon.] § 1. It is a plea∣sing Julep to allay the heat in Fevers, and quench Thirst: and is of good use to be given in the Measles or Small-pox, if any Flux be present or feared. It is also of appro∣ved success in the Plague, and all Malign or Pestilen∣tial Fevers, destroying the Root of the Morbifick Cause. § 2. It may also be given as a Cordial after this man∣ner: ℞ Of this Tincture or Julep ℥iij. Aqua Mirabilis ℥j. Tincture of Coral compound, gut. xij. mix for a Draught against Faintings, Swoonings, Sickness at Stomach, Palpi∣tation of the Heart.
XXXIX. * Tinctura Sassa∣fras, Tincture of Sassa∣fras. Bate.] ℞ Sassafras Bark ℥iv. dried Sage ℥ij. Nutmegs ℥j. Cinamon ℥ss. Ambergrice ℈ss. extract the Tincture with S. V. lbij. S. A. Dose two spoon∣fuls: it gives ease in the Running Gout. Salmon.] § 1. The Tincture ought to be extracted with Tartarised S. V. at least, for thereby the Sulphur of the Medicaments are the more firmly embraced; and it will yet be more excellent, if it be done with Tincture of Salt of Tartar. § 2. It is an excellent Cor∣dial Medicament, fortifies Nature, strengthens the Fa∣culties, chears the Heart, revives the Spirits, sweetens the Juices, and restores such as are in Consumptions. § 3. It is an excellent thing against Rheumatisms, for which it seems to be de∣signed, as also against the Gout in Hands or Feet; and for such as have got any Ve∣nereal Distemper, an Old or New Clap, Kings-Evil, Scur∣vy, and other like Diseases in which there seems to be an universal taint of the Blood. § 4. It is also used Dieteti∣cally for such as have the French-Pox, or have lately been fluxt, forasmuch as it brings the Blood to its pri∣stine state and rectitude. Dose two spoonfuls at a time, twice a day at least, in Ale, or other convenient Vehi∣cle. § 5. Or you may give it thus: ℞ Decoction of Raisons stoned in Water, or in Barley∣water ℥viij. of this Tincture ℥iss. ad ℥ij. mix for a Draught to be taken twice or thrice a day. XL. Tinctura Saturni, Tin∣cture of Saturn or Lead. Bate.] ℞ Thin Leaves of Lead, extract a Tincture with Spirit of Saturn essentificated; filter and abstract S. A. It chiefly conduces to the cure of Madness, Melancholy, Quartans, Phthisicks, &c. Dose à gut. j. ad v. &c. Salmon.] § 1. This is the same Medicine which is cal∣led Manna of Lead by Schro∣der: and it is extracted with that Spirit of Saturn which is impregnated with its Essence; which is not so well done, as some think, with the ardent Spirit of Saturn, which is lit∣tle more than the pure Sul∣phur of Vinegar or Wine,
and can but meanly operate upon the Crude Lead, as with the yellow, red, or purple Li∣quor or Spirit, which some (thô improperly) call Oyl of Lead. § 2. But Tincture of Saturn is made almost as many other ways besides this, as there are Authors, as Clossaeus's Tincture made with Red Lead; Kesler his Tincture made with Crystals of Lead; and the Sulphur Saturni made with this Tincture or Man∣na, from Kesler: all which see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 6. sect. 11, 12, 13, 14. § 3. Tinctura Saturni Clos∣saei, from Cream of Lead: ℞ Spirit of Vinegar ℥x. Sp. Salis ℥ij. Lead Ore in fine Pouder ℥j. mix, digest eight days in Ashes, or longer, till the Spirit is sweet: filter the solution, and exhale; in the exhaling, with a glass spoon take off the Snow-like Cream as it arises, till you have e∣nough, (the rest Crystalize for other uses) put this Cream in∣to a fixing Vessel, luted, in A∣shes; first with a gentle Fire for forty days, taking heed that it melt not, (as in the common Salt of Lead it is inevitable) try then upon a red-hot Plate if it flow with fume; if so, continue the digestion longer, till it fumes not, and begins to be yellow, then increase the Fire till it be a Red Pouder, from which with Tartarised S. V. make a Tincture. The Virtues are the same with the former. § 4. Another Tincture: ℞ Crystals of Lead, q.v. Rain-water eight times distilled, q.s. mix and dissolve as much as may be: decant and distil the Liquor to driness: then add Spirit of Honey, circulated forty days, and distil, often cohoba∣ting: abstract the Spirit of Honey, and to the remaining add the Common Salt from the Caput Mort. of Lead: circu∣late eighty days with Alcohol of S. V. then abstract the Spirit, so have you a Magistery, or red Tincture of Lead. This is an excellent Medicine against Madness, Melancholly, Quar∣tans, Consumptions, and re∣moves Obstructions of the Spleen, and Oppression of the Hypochonders. § 5. Basil's Tincture from the Galss of Lead: Lead by force of Fire, and Bellows, on a Test is brought to a yellow Gum or Glass of an Orange co∣lour, transparent and meltable, not fuming in the Fire, but a most noble Body, which says Rhodian draws the Colours, Scents, and Tasts of all Metals to it, with a conservation of
their Vegetative Faculties. Mix the Cals of any Metal with this Gum, and bring the mixture into a Smaltus or E∣namel, which pouder finely: from which with Spirit of Vi∣negar extract a Tincture: if the Calx mixt therewith was of Lead, the Tincture will be of a green yellow: if of Tin or Silver, a yellow Tin∣cture: if of Copper a dark green: if of Iron, a Blood colour: if of Gold, a Hya∣cinth colour: the Solvent be∣ing abstracted, the remainder is distilled in a Retort, so have you a white fume coming forth cold, which at length turns to Oyl of a Vegetative Nature. § 6. Le Mort's Tinctura Sa∣turni: ℞ Litharge of Gold ℥viij. Spir. Aceti ℥xx. mix and digest together twenty four hours: decant the sweet Vine∣gar, and evaporate to an olea∣ginity: to this put Rain-water ℥viij. that it may be white like Milk; the Milky Liquor decant gently, and again eva∣porate, this so often repeat with Water, till the Odour of the Vinegar is plainly gone, and the Liquor comes forth sweet: eva∣porate to the consistence of Ho∣ney ad rectified S. V. and by di∣gestion extract a Tincture, which will be most sweet. It cools, astringes, extinguishes Lust, it allays all Inflamations whether internal or external: it cures also malignant and eating Ʋlcers, suddenly clean∣sing, and healing them. § 7. There is yet another Tincture of Saturn made with our Spiritus Ʋniversalis, the making of which you may see in our Seplasium, lib: 1. cap. 21. sect. 6. which is a thing of good use. § 8. The Essentificated Spirit of Saturn: ℞ The pure yellow Oyl of Saturn, and di∣gest it upon Crocus of Sol, or Calx of Gold well opened in a gentle heat of a Bal. Vap. in a Circulatory Vessel Hermetical∣ly sealed for a hundred days, so will it become as red as Blood, and with this fortified Spirit you may extract a Tincture out of Crude Lead, as our Author teaches. It is a great Arca∣num against all Diseases of Head, Brain, and Heart, as Vertigo's, Apoplexies, Fren∣sie, Madness, Headach, Me∣grim, Faintings, Swoonings, Palpitation, &c. Dose à gut. ij. ad vj. in choice Canary, or some Antepileptick Wa∣ter.
XLI. * Tinctura Scorbutica, Tincture against the Scur∣vy. Bate.] ℞ Scurvy-grass, Wa∣ter-cresses A. M j. Horse-Ra∣dish-roots ʒij. Rhubarb ʒiv. Polypody of the Oak ℥iss. Sena. ℥i Spirit of Wine lbij. mix, in∣fuse two days, then strain. Dose ℥i. or ij. every Morning with Scurvygrass-Water: it is marvellous how great a Relief it gives to Hydropick and Scorbutick People. Salmon.] § 1. Thô the Scur∣vygrass and Watercresses be used green, yet the Spirit ought to be rectified or tar∣tarised, for by that means it will be the stronger (being mixt with the Flegmatick part of the Herbs) to extract the Tinctures of the other things; for otherwise, were it common Spirit, the Flegm of the Herbs would so much weaken it, that it would scarcely have force enough to reach the internal saline and sulphurous Principles of the Ingredients. § 2. You must also allow it a longer time to digest in, viz. seven or eight, or ten days, the longer the better; unless you digest warm, (which I presume our Author intends not) then indeed a much shorter time might suf∣fice; the Potential heat of the Menstruum being assisted with the actual heat of the Fire, Vis unita fortior. § 3. It is really a very good Cathartick to purge all such Bodies as abound with ill Humors, or are gross and and pursie, and cannot move up and down without puffing and blowing; as also for such as are Scrophulous, or trou∣bled with the King's-Evil, or affected with stubborn and rebellious, or ill natured Sores, old running Ulcers, or Fistu∣la's, which are hard and dif∣ficult to heal. § 4. It is also a singular thing for such as are troubled with old Coughs, Colds, Asth∣ma's, Shortness of Breath, Obstructions of the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Womb, or U∣reters; and for all such as are troubled with the Scurvy, Dropsie, or Gout, carrying forth the Wind, Water, and Tartarous Matter, both by Stool and Urine. § 5. And given by a pru∣dent Hand, and in a due Dose, it perfectly cures the Rickets in Children, and kills Worms, whether in the Sto∣mach or Bowels.
XLII. * Tinctura Serpylli, Tincture of Wild Time, or Mother of Time. Bate.] It is made of the Herb, whilst in Flower, being dried, and digested in Tarta∣rised S. V. in the same man∣ner as we have taught to make Tincture of Wormwood. It is Diuretick, Hysterick, Sto∣matick, &c. Dose à gut. v. ad xv. Salmon.] § 1. That is, you ought to take to every Ounce of the Herb, and its Tops freed from the Stalks, six Ounces of Tartarised Spirit; less quantity of the Spirit will not do well. § 2. And thô Tartarised S. V. will draw a very good Tincture, yet it is certain from real experience, that the Tincture of the Salt of Tartar will do it vastly be∣yond the other, and make the Medicine much more powerful to all the purposes it is intended for, and not much inferiour to that, will the Tincture be, if drawn with the Potestates Thymi, fill'd with the volatile Salt. § 3. Besides what our Au∣thor ascribes to it as its Vir∣tues, this we know experi∣mentally, that it is an excel∣lent Cephalick, Neurotick, Arthritick, Carminative, and Antiscorbutick; for it com∣forts the Head and Brain to a wonder, is good against Megrims, Head-achs, Verti∣go's, Lethargies, Apoplexies, Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, weakness of the Back, Nerves, and Joynts: Gouts, whether in Hands or Feet, and the most vehement Colicks: It is also of special use to all such as are troubled with the Scurvy, in a cold and moist Habit of Body, for weakness of the Stomach and Indige∣stion, Dose à gut. xv. ad xxx. or xl. in a fit Vehi∣cle. XLIII. * Tinctura Stomachi∣ca, Stomach-Tincture. Bate.] ℞ Species Hiera sim∣ple ℥i. Cochinel ʒj. Spirit of Wine lbij. digest and filter, S. A. Dose one, two, or three spoonfuls, before eating, against Crudity and Pain of the Stomach. If ℥iij. of it be exhibited half an hour before the Fit of a Tertian, it most effectually cures it; and sometimes also it cures a Quartan. Salmon.] § 1. This differs from the Tinctura Sacra, or Hierae aforegoing chiefly in the Menstruum, which is, that this is extracted with
Spirit of Wine, that with Sherry-wine; and are there∣fore both good for the same Diseases: save, that whereas this is extracted with the hot∣ter Menstruum, it ought to be given to the colder Con∣stitution. § 2. It is a good Stomatick, warming a cold Ventricle, and expelling Cold and Fle∣gmatick Humors out of the Stomach and Guts, and car∣rying off the Crude Humors, which cause Pains, Gripings, and the Colick. § 3. And therefore for the same reason, it is an absolute and specifick Antiscorbutick and Antiarthritick, in all cold and moist Habits of Body, for that it effectually carries off the scorbutick taint, and tartarous mucilage, with which such People are afflict∣ed, warming the Stomach and Bowels, rectifying the Blood and Humors, and strengthning all the vitiated and weakned parts. XLIV. * Tinctura Succini, Tincture of Amber. Bate.] ℞ White Amber in fine Pouder ℥iv. Alcohol of Wine lbj. mix and digest to the solution of the Amber: decant, filter, and abstract the third part in B. M. It is a Cephalick, Hysterick, Anti∣colick, Nervous Medica∣ment, &c. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. Several Men have taught the making of this Tincture, and not much differing, among whom you have that of John Dan. Hor∣stius, in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 46. But a more ample Process you have from Charras, in our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 20. which agrees both with the Process of Le Febure, and Lemery. § 2. These differ little from this of our Author, save in the abstraction of the Spirit or Menstruum, which they advise to be done to a half part; but our Author more prudently, only to a third part, lest if too much of the Spirit should be drawn off, the dissolved sulphurous par∣ticles of the Amber should subside. § 3. In this Operation you must be sure that the Amber be finely poudred, for then the Menstruum will the bet∣ter open its Body, and ex∣tract its Tincture, which is nothing but the sulphurous or oily parts of the Amber, joyned to, or impregnating the S.V. or Sulphur of Wine.
§ 4. A Liquor stronger, and not sulphurous, might perchance dissolve the Amber in substance, and thereby make it the more impure, whereas a sulphurous Men∣struum only dissolves and ex∣tracts the more pure and sulphurous, or resinous parts thereof, rendering the Tin∣cture more subtil: for this is a Rule, To use always a Men∣struum of the same nature, with the nature of the sub∣stance you would extract: So that if you would have a sul∣phurous Tincture, you ought to use a sulphurous Menstru∣um; if a Saline, a Saline, &c. § 5. And after the Method of Horstius aforementioned, Grulingius in his Florilegium, par. 12. cap. 2. teaches the making of this Tincture, but as was said before, 'twill be to the advantage of the Me∣dicine, to abstract but only a Third part of the Spi∣rit. § 6. Marggravius teaches to extract it with the fixed Liquor of Nitre, or Glaw∣ber's Alcahest, which they call, The Ʋniversal Menstru∣um; this dissolves the Parti∣cles of the Matter, which afterwards by the affusion of the Alcohol of Wine, and a gentle digestion, a new and essential Tincture is pro∣duced. § 7. Maets and Ettmuller makes it thus: ℞ Amber in fine Pouder q. v. Flowers of Sal Armoniack, a half part: beat and mix them well toge∣ther, upon which affuse the Alcohol of S. V. so much as to overtop it four inches; which let stand in digestion, till a yellow Tincture is extracted, which decant and keep for use. § 8. This Tincture, saith he, has the greatest success in the Colick, proceeding from an acrid, austere, and pituitose Humors; and above all things in the Obstructi∣ons of Womens Courses; as also in Deafness, occa∣sioned from a Catarrh or Flux of Humors to the Ears, being dropt into them, and and then stopt with a little Lint or Cotton dipt in the same. Dose à gut. xv. ad xl. § 9. Another way: ℞ Amber in fine Pouder q. v. Oleum Tartari per deliquium, q. s. let them stand in dige∣stion twenty four hours; and then add Alcohol of S. V. so much as to overtop them four inches; which digest together, till the Spirit extracts a rubi∣cund Tincture.
§ 10. Or thus, according to Le Mort: ℞ S. V. (thrice rectified from Sal Armoniack) ℥iv. yellow Amber in subtil Pouder ℥i. mix and digest in B. M. for three days, till the Tincture is extracted, and be∣comes clear, which keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 11. The Sal Armoniack is here added, that the Spirit may thereby be accuated, and made the more penetra∣ting, to promote the dissolu∣tion of the Sulphur, and un∣less the Spirit be rectified to the highest, you can do no∣thing; for if there be any Flegm in it, it leaves the Am∣ber untouched. It is given to the most delicate, against Hysterick Fits, and the Co∣lick, and provokes Urine and Sweat. Dose à gut. viij. ad ʒss. § 12. Otherwise from the same Le Mort: ℞ S. V. tar∣tarised q. v. and put thereto so much of the best rectified Spirit of Salt, till the Effer∣vescence ceases, let it remain a while, till the Salt shall subside, and the Spirit becomes clear: ℞ Fine Pouder of yellow Am∣ber ℥i. of the former Menstru∣um so much as to over-top it three or four inches; and di∣gest four days, till the yellow Tincture is extracted, which separate, affusing upon the Fe∣ces new Menstruum, so long till the Amber will give no more Tincture. § 13. This, they say, is a most egregious Diuretick; allays the Hysterick Passion, breaks the Stones, kills Worms and cures the Plague: and may be given à gut. x. ad ʒj. in any Specifick Vehi∣cle. § 14. But Paracelsus takes Amber in fine Pouder, and af∣fuses upon it his Circulatum, which he digests in Ashes for some days, then abstracts and cohobates, till the oily Tincture appears at bottom, Archidox. lib. 6. p. 1. § 15. This, saith Hoffman, (Messis Medica Spagyric. pag. 344.) is a Noble Medica∣ment for the Head, Stomach, Bowels, and whole Nervous System, and a most efficaci∣ous thing against the Stone. § 16. And this Medica∣ment, saith Schroder, as it is only the purer fulphurous, or resinous part of the Amber, separated from the grosser and more terrene by soluti∣on, so it has not only the same, but stronger Virtues than the Amber itself hath. § 17. Nor is this Tincture to be despised, thô it seems to be only a part of the Am∣ber dissolved: as Ettmuller rationally enough suggests,
Tom. 2. pag. 548. from the affusion of an Aqueous Body thereon, for that a kind of Cream in a short time super∣nates upon it, (he rather ap∣proving that made by the Al∣cahest of Glawber) for the im∣palpable Pouder of Amber, ground upon a Porphiry, is of excellent use, being given in Diseases of the Brain, Sto∣mach, Bowels, Womb, and Joynts, and in losses of Blood, where there is a necessity of closing the parts, as also in malignant Feavers, Pleurisies, and the like. XLV. Tinctura Sulphuris, Tin∣cture of Sulphur. Bate.] ℞ Liver of Sulphur ℥ij. S.V. lbj. digest and filter. You may also extract it by the means of S. V. from the Balsam of Sulphur Terebin∣thinated, boyled or abstracted to driness in B. M. It is a very great Pectoral. Dose ad gr. xij. Salmon. § 1. The first way is exactly that which is taught by Le Mort in his Chym. Me∣dico-Physica, pag. 201. The Spirit, saith he, will be co∣loured of a subrubid Tin∣cture, which by digestion will become deeper and deeper. And it is the same with that of Zwelfer, in Phar. Aug. Reformat. pag. 859. save that at last be advises to free the Tincture from that great plenty of Spirits, which is done by abstraction in B. M. § 2. This Tincture, saith Zwelfer, is a most excellent thing against contagious Di∣seases, and the very Plague itself, from which it is a Pre∣servative; it opens Obstru∣ctions of the Viscera; and cures most Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Coughs, Colds, Wheezings, shortness of Breath, difficulty of Brea∣thing, Ulcers of the Lungs, Consumptions, &c. § 3. But Paracelsus, from a mixture of Salt of Tartar and Flores Sulphuris, with Lin∣seed-Oyl, extracts a Balsamick Tincture by boyling, it being cautiously to be done, lest it runs over in the operation, and so hazards the firing of the House. This is in colour red like Blood. § 4. This oily Tincture takes the place of a Balsam, and is profitable in all Disea∣ses of the Brest and Lungs: and thô Linseed-Oyl seems to be an abject thing, and of small price, yet notwithstand∣ing this Tincture is of great value, for it is a Specifick in Pleurisies, and a present cure for a Dysentery, or Bloody∣flux;
it also strengthens the Joynts, and is good against the Gout, being anointed. In Clysters it cures Ulcers of the Guts. § 5. Rolfincius in Art. Chym. lib. 4. sect. 1. art. 4. cap. 2. makes the Tincture of Sul∣phur after this manner: ℞ Liver of Sulphur q. v. Caput Mort. of Vitriol q. s. mix them to a more solid consistence; distil by Retort first a milky Liquor, then a blood-red Oyl. But this, with that learned Man's leave, is rather a Spirit than a Tincture, and with∣out doubt he only called it a Tincture from its red co∣lour, not its way of ma∣king. § 6. This, saith he, cures a Phthisis, or Consumption of the Lungs, and purifies the whole entire Body, even as Antimony purifies Gold: it cures also Epilepsies, and o∣ther Diseases of the Brain. § 7. The second way of our Author is Le Mort's Tin∣ctura Diasulphuris, where he advises the Balsam only to be made thick: Yet doubtless if it be abstracted to driness, the S. V. will extract a more excellent Tincture. § 8. This, says he, is a most admirable Nephritick; it provokes the Terms, gently loosens the Belly, cures all Di∣seases of the Brest and Lungs, Phthisicks, Consumptions, and the like: if it be farther pre∣pared with Honey, it be∣comes an excellent Antiasth∣matick. Dose à gut. x. ad xxx. See our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 12. sect. 16. And Sect. 17. of the same, where you have two other ways of preparing it, both from Clos∣saeus. § 9. Beguinus makes it af∣ter the same manner as Le Mort. But his Commentator will have it to be made thus: ℞ Flowers of Sulphur q. v. melt them in a Crucible; but that they may not grow hard, put in guttatim Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, as much in weight as the Flowers, stir them together and mix, till they be∣come of a dark red, or Liver colour: beat this to fine Pou∣der in a very hot Mortar, and immediately affuse thereon tar∣tarised S. V. so will you have in a short time a most rubi∣cund Tincture. § 10. It is indeed an excel∣lent thing against the Phthy∣sick, and heal Ulcers of the Lungs, and to preserve from the Plague, and all contagi∣ous Diseases: it prevails a∣gainst Coughs Colds, Rheums, Hoarsness, Wheezing, and shortness of Breath. Dose à gut. viij. ad xx.
§ 11. The making of the Liver of Sulphur we shall shew in its place, in the mean sea∣son we must tell you, that as it is only composed of Flow∣ers of Sulphur, and Salt of Tartar, yet notwithstanding they very much differ in the Proportions of the mixture. Some will have Sulphur p. ij. and Sale of Tartar p. j. Others, as Ettmuller, Tom. 2. pag. 502. Flowers of Sulphur, Salt of Tartar, ana: And Zwelfer, Mantissae Spagyricae, pag. 859. has it Fl. Sulphuris, p. j. Salt of Tartar p. j. or rather, if you please, saith he, p. ij. melt them gently together in a La∣dle, or Earthen Pan, continu∣ally stirring them till they are mixt, and taking great care withal, that the Sulphur may not be inflamed. § 12. This latter propor∣tion, in my Opinion, is to be chosen, for that the Salt of Tarter so divides the Par∣ticles of the Sulphur, and o∣pens its Body; and therefore the more of the Salt, the better it will perform its work. § 13. Hofman's Tincture of Sulphur (Messis Medico-Spa∣gyric. pag. 341.) ℞ Choice Sulphur Salt of Tartar, Nitre, ana, make them to flow in a Crucible, (but without infla∣ming them) then putting them out into a hot Mortar, beat them into a fine Pouder, and with tartarised S. V. extract a rubicund Tincture. § 14. The Volatile Tincture of Sulphur from the same Hofman: ℞ Sulphur in fine Pouder: Sal Armoniack, A. ʒv. Calx Vive ℥vj. mix and put them into a Retort, and distil in Sand, with degrees of Fire; at length increase the heat, and there will come forth the red volatil Tincture of Sulphur, of wonderful use against the Plague, and in all Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, not sufficiently to be praised. Dose à gut. vj. ad xx. where note, that it colours the Fin∣gers black. § 15. Le Febure's Tincture of Sulphur: ℞ Choice Sul∣phur ℥iv. pure Nitre in fine Pouder lbj. mix, put them by spoonfuls into a Crucible, red fire hot on all sides, renewing it after every detonation is past, till all is put in, and then increasing the Fire till it be reduced into a red mass or lump, which pouder in a hot Mortar, put it into a Matrass affusing thereon Tartarised S. V. and extract a Tincture as before directed, abstracting afterwards half the Menstru∣um.
§ 16. It is a Specifick a∣gainst the Plague, Agues, Scur∣vy, Obstructions of the Li∣ver, and all Diseases of the Brest and Lungs. Dose à gut. iv. ad xij. § 17. In our Text, our Author's second way is ex∣tracting it from the Balsam of Sulphur, which we shall here a little explicate, and shew the best way how the Balsam may be abstracted to driness: Put the Balsam into a Cucurbit p. j. distilled Rain-water p. ij. and in B.M. distil, so will the Aetherial Spirit, or Oyl of Turpentine ascend with the Water, and leave the true Balsam of Sulphur in the bot∣tom, from which, with Alco∣hol of S. V. you may extract the Tincture as our Author di∣rects: and then at least to abstract one half, or two thirds of the Spirit, leaving a thick Tincture at bottom. § 18. This Tincture ex∣ceeds all the Balsams of Sul∣phur, because it is more open, and more exalted through the help of the Tartariz'd Spirit, and as it is more vo∣latil, so also more able to penetrate into the inward re∣cesses of the afflicted parts; and therefore is used with a quite different success from that of the said Balsams. Dose à gut. iv. ad xij. in some Pectoral, or Alexiterical Sy∣rup. § 19. From this last Tin∣cture of Sulphur you may make Crystals, and of them a more excellent Tincture thus: ℞ The last mentioned Tincture, abstract the one half of its humidity, and then set it into a cool Cellar, and it will Crystallize. These Cry∣stals contain in themselves all the Essential and Central Vir∣tues of the Sulphur. ℞ These Crystals from their Liquor, dissolve them in new S. V. and abstract one third part by di∣stillation: set them to crystal∣lize again, and dissolve again in new S. V. repeating this Crystallizing, and dissolving till seven times is compleated, so have you a true dry Tincture of Sulphur, freed from all its evil smell and taste, and useful in all respects as any of the for∣mer. Dose à g. iij. ad xij. in some fit Vehicle, Liquor, Lozenge, Conserve, or Ele∣ctuary. XLVI. Tinctura Veneris, Tin∣cture of Venus. Bate.] It is extracted by the help of Spirit of Wine from the Flowers of Verdigrise, p. j. Sal Armoniack p. ij. being mixt in a Crucible upon the Fire, S. A. It is a most
powerful Remedy against the Falling-sickness, Hyste∣rick Passion, &c. being gi∣ven in any convenient Li∣quor. Salmon.] § 1. The Flow∣ers of Verdigrise are made by subliming it with Sal Armo∣niack, and edulcorated, or thus: ℞ Quick-Lime lbij. Sal. Armoniack lbj. mix, coa∣gulate, mix with Bole Ar∣mon, p. iij. and distil an Aqua Fortis with degrees of Fire, which rectifie: of this Spirit take p. iv. Verdigrise, p. j. mix and dissolve over a gentle heat, put in more, till only light black Feces remain, abstract the Water, and what remains force in an open Fire in a Still, so will the Verdigrise be ele∣vated in Flowers, which are those to be made use of in this preparation. § 2. Hence it appears, that the Menstruum must be made of volatile urinous Salts, which impregnate themselves with the Flowers of the Ver∣digrise, and prepare them for sublimation: this is indeed pretious. § 3. And these Flowers may be used externally in Oyntments, Plaisters, Cere∣cloths, &c. These Flowers are very carefully to be edul∣corated with fair warm Wa∣ter, that no corrosiveness of the Menstruum may remain in them, or as little as may be: Thus after all, the Flow∣ers are only Verdigrise puri∣fied, and the Body opened, and made more subtil, that it may yield its Sulphur the better to the S. V. § 4. Flowers by Precipita∣tion from Hofman: ℞ Vi∣triol of Verdigrise q. v. Flegm of Vitriol, so much as to over∣top it four inches, to which add an eighth part of Spirit of Vi∣triol: digest warm for three days and nights, then filter and precipitate with Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, and sweeten the Flowers by many ablutions in warm Water. § 5. These Flowers will serve for this Tincture as well as the former: besides which, they are an Arcanum against Worms; they move Vomi∣ting; but being joyned with common Salt and Nitre, they are commended against Quo∣tidian and Tertian Agues. Dose of them à gr. iij. ad x. in some fit Vehicle. § 6. As for this present Tincture, you may see the whole process more at large in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 3. sect. 14. and is given inwardly à gut. iv. ad x. in any proper Vehicle.
§ 7. Utendi modus: ℞ Spirit of Lavender, or of Li∣mons ʒj. Black-cherry, or Lilly Convally-water ℥iij. Syrup of Peony-flowers ℥i. of this Tin∣cture of Venus gr. viij. or x. mix for a Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed: the Stomach being first cleansed with a Dose of Tartar Eme∣tick of Mynsicht. It prevails against the Epilepsie, and most other Diseases of the Head. § 8. Maets makes it thus: ℞ Verdigrise, or Copper cal∣cin'd with Nitre to redness, in subtil Pouder ℥j. of the best Nitre ʒxij. put them into a strong Crucible, and with de∣grees of a naked Fire calcine till it turns into Scoria's of a subvirid or greenish blew co∣lour, upon which affuse the fol∣lowing Menstruum, which will extract a most rubicund Tin∣cture, which separate, add more of the same Menstruum, digest and separate, which repeat so often till all the Tincture is drawn forth: mix these extra∣ctions together, and abstract till they come to the form or thickness of Oyl: upon this put S.V. tartarised, which keep in a warm digestion, till the sulphu∣rous parts of the Verdigrise is u∣nited with the Sulphur of the Spirit, which is a Specifick against the Epilepsie, and most other Diseases of the Head and Brain, and is gi∣ven à gut. vj. ad x. § 9. The Menstruum afore∣mentioned is thus made: ℞ Nitrated Salt of Tartar lbj. new made Ʋrine lbiv. digest in Horse-dung for three months, then with a gentle fire abstract the volatile Spirit, which is highly both watry and fiery, and is able to extract the Tinctures from the Calces of all Metals. From the Crocus or Calx of Sol, it extracts a yellow Tin∣cture, which by distillation is freed from the Menstruum, and brought to the form or body of an Oyl; from which with tartarised S.V. in a gen∣tle digestion, you may ex∣tract the Tincture of Sol, the Sulphur of the Spirit uniting itself with the Sulphur of the Gold, as we have before declared, in the extraction of the Tincture of Verdi∣grise. § 10. Marggrave's Tin∣cture of Venus. ℞ Filings of Venus, or pure Verdigrise ℥ss. Spirit of Ʋrine made by fermentation ℥viij. or x. di∣gest some days, so have you an excellent Tincture for outward uses, thô some give it inward∣ly against divers fermentati∣ons of the Ventricle; out∣wardly it kills an ulcerated
Cancer, a Gangreen, and a Sphacelous, or Mortifica∣tion. § 11. The same thing may be done with the Calx of Venus calcined to redness; this some give inwardly to destroy an acid ferment in the Stomach, but 'tis not very safe: It is powerful against most Af∣fects of the Eyes, as Rheums, Inflamations, Blood-shot, Pearls, Films, &c. in curing old and inveterate Ulcers, and in easing the pains of the Gout. It is also of use to Anatomists, to demonstrate the Capillary Vessels. XLVII. * Tinctura Virginia∣na, Tincture of Virginian Snake-root. Bate.] ℞ Virginian Snake-root in fine Pouder ℥ij. Tincture of Salt of Tartar ℥xvj. ex∣tract a Tincture by digestion, S. A. It is an Alexiterick, Cardiack, Sudorifick, Anti∣scorbutick, &c. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. The common way of making this Tincture is with rectified S. V. but this of our Author is vastly to be preferred before that, for that the sharp particles of the Sulphur of the Salt of Tartar, more effectually o∣pen the Body of the Ingredi∣ent than simple S. V. can pos∣sibly do. § 2. It resists Poyson, cures the Bites of the Rattle-Snake (the most poysonous of all li∣ving Creatures) Vipers, and other Serpents, the Biting of Mad Dogs, the Malignity of the Plague, and of all other contagious or infectious Di∣seases. § 3. And by reason of its subtilty and volatility, it powerfully provokes Sweat, expelling all noxious Vapors from the Heart: It chears the Spirits, comforts Nature, and prevails against Faint∣ing and Swooning Fits, Pal∣pitation of the Heart, and other Diseases of the Precor∣dia. § 4. As it is also a high Alcaly, so it encounters and resists all Distempers proceed∣ing v from Acids, and the pu∣trefaction of Humours, the chief of which are the Scur∣vy, Gout, Surfeits, and such other as proceeds from a Tartarous Mucilage: It is also commended against in∣termitting Feavers. § 5. Modus Utendi. ℞ Of this Tincture ʒiss. ad ʒij. Aquae Bezoartiae nost. ℥ss. Mint-water ℥iv. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers ℥i. mix for
a Dose, the Patient being in Bed, and covered warm, to sweat upon it. XLVIII. Mars Potabilis, Po∣table Mars. Bate.] Dissolve tartarised Chalybs, in fair Water filter coagulate, S. A. It is most powerful against the Cache∣xia, Dropsie, Scurvy, Green∣sickness, Quartan Agne, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This is a dry Tincture of Mars; but in my Opinion will be better to be kept in a liquid form, which it may be, by adding to it a quarter part of good Spirit of Wine, and so it will be al∣ways the more ready for use. § 2. It opens all Obstru∣ctions of the Viscera, thô of never so long standing, and cures many seeming incura∣ble Diseases: yet it ought not to be given to Bodies which are apt to be Costive, nor to have such as are trou∣bled with a Scirrhus, which is bred or produced from the highest Stypticity in Nature; forasmuch, as thô this Medi∣cine is extreamly opening, yet it is of a vehement Styptick quality, which is easily discern∣ed by tasting it upon the Tongue. § 3. It cures Fluxes of the Belly of all sorts, as Dysen∣teries, Lienteries, and Diar∣rhea's, by Virtue of its Sty∣pticity, strengthning and com∣forting all those parts, ma∣king them able to resist, or withstand Diseases. § 4. It has much the Na∣ture, Properties, and Virtues of the Tinctura Martis Tarta∣risata, at Sect. 26. aforego∣ing, and therefore to that I refer you. If given in a so∣lid or dry form, it may be given à ʒss. ad ʒiss. or more: if in a liquid form, accord∣ing to our Advice, from one spoonful to three or four, in any convenient Vehicle. XLIX. † Tinctura Absinthii, Tincture of Wormwood. Salmon.] § 1. Dried Tops of Common Wormwood freed from the Stalks ℥v. Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or Powers of Wormwood ℥xxx. mix, di∣gest for some days, and then decant the Tincture, being of a reddish colour. § 2. It is highly Stomatick, and causes a good Appetite to Food, curing the Scurvy in a cold and moist habit of Body, as also the Cachexia, and is a very good thing in a Leucophlegmatia, after due Purging. § 3. It comforts and streng∣thens all the inward parts;
and restores such as are in a Consumption, from Obstru∣ctions created thro' cold. § 4. You may give it à gut. xv. ad xxv. or xxx. or more, in a Glass of Ale or Wine; it will make it taste like Wormwood-Ale, or Wine, and be very grateful and pleasing to the Stomach: The constant use of it for some time, warms the whole Mass of Blood, preserves Health, and makes such as look sick∣ly, pale and wan, to be strong and lusty, and to have a rud∣dy and florid Countenance. L. † Tinctura Amara Compo∣sita, The Bitter Tincture compound. ℞ Centaury the less ℥v. Gen∣tian ℥iv. Flowers of Camomil ℥iij. Wormwood ℥ij. mix, and with S. V. extract a Tin∣cture. Salmon.] § 1. It ought to be extracted with Tartarised S. V. at least; but if you do it with Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, it will be so much the better, for that sul∣phurous Tincture is better able to unlock, or open the Bodies of the Ingredients. § 2. The next thing to be considered is the quantity of the Spirit or Tincture, which ought to be used to this pro∣portion of the Simples; you may well take lbivss. with less you cannot well make the extraction; and with more, the Tincture will be too weak unless it be designed to be gi∣ven in a larger Dose. § 3. It has all the Virtues of the former, wonderfully corroborating and comfort∣ing all the internal parts: but it much more powerful∣ly opens Obstructions of the Viscera, and after an admira∣ble manner gives ease in the most profound or exquisite Colick. § 4. It provokes Urine, and is said to be a Specifick in curing Quotidian and Ter∣tian Agues, being given in a large Dose two hours or bet∣ter before the Fit, and al∣ways in the Morning fasting, an hour before Dinner, and an hour after Supper at Night going to Bed. § 5. It may be given à ʒj. ad ʒiij. in Ale or Wine. Or thus: ℞ Of this Tincture ʒij. Aqua Mirabilis ʒiij. Poppy∣water, Syrup of Citrons ℥i. mix for a Dose. Or thus: ℞ Of the Tincture ʒij. choice Canary, or Sherry ℥iij. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers ℥i. mix for a Dose.
LI. † Tinctura Ambraegriseae, Tincture of Ambergrise. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Choice Am∣bergrise ʒj. Musk, Civet, A. gr. xx. Spirit of Damask Ro∣ses ʒiij. Ashes of Bones in fine Pouder ʒiv. mix and grind all well together in a Glass Mor∣tar, till it comes to a pulp: then add Salt of Tartar ʒss. grind again till they are well mixed; which done, put all into a Glass Matrass, and af∣fuse thereon Tincture of Salt of Tartar ℥viij. stop it close up, and digest for forty days, sha∣king it once a day, then decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use. § 2. Here is to be noted, that the Civit, and burning Spirit of Roses are added, the better to open the Bodies of the other Perfumes: and the Bone-ashes are added to se∣parate the Particles of the o∣ther Ingredients, that the Menstruum may the better extract the Essence, or Sul∣phur of the Perfumes. § 3. It is a great Cordial, revives all the Spirits, Natu∣ral, Vital, and Animal, chears the Heart, recreates Nature, and restores in deep Consum∣ptions. It comforts the Brain beyond most other things in the World, and is a most ad∣mirable Neurotick, strength∣ning and confirming the Nerves, and therefore a most excellent thing against Con∣vulsions and Palsies. § 4. It is good against any Deliquium of the Mind, Fainting, and Swooning Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, most cold Diseases of the Head, as Head-aches, Vertigo's, Me∣grims, Apoplexies, Lethar∣gies, and the like, which may proceed from Cold, Weakness, or Obstructions of the parts affected; but it ought not to be given to Wo∣men subject to Hysterick Fits, or Vapors, because it is apt to excite them in such Persons. § 5. Dose à gut. vi. ad xij. or xv. in any convenient Cor∣dial, thus: ℞ Of our Aqua Bezoartica, or Aqua Mirabi∣lis ℥i. Syrup of Red Poppies, Syrup of Citrons, A. ʒiij. Bor∣rage-water ℥ij. of this Tincture gut. x. or xij. mix for a Dose, to be given in a Fainting Fit, or Sickness at Heart. Or thus: ℞ Aq. Bezoartica ℥j. Tincture of Cochinele ʒss. Sy∣rup of Citrons ʒvj. simple An∣gelica-water ℥ij. of this Tin∣cture gut x. mix for a Dose.
LII. † Tinctura Ammoniaci, Tincture of Gum Ammo∣niacum. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Gum Am∣moniacum q. v. dissolve it in Water or Wine-Vinegar, by a gentle boyling, and strain it through a thin cloth, and then inspissate to a fit thickness. ℞ Of this inspissated Gum ℥ij. Tartarised S. V. lbiij. mix, and digest till the Body of the Spirit is full of the Rosin, then decant the Tincture, and keep it for use. § 2. It is dissolutive, dige∣stive, and opening, dissolves tartarous Mucilage in the Reins and Joynts, as also in the Brest, Lungs, and Mesen∣tery; opens Obstructions both of Liver, Spleen, and Womb, and is particularly prevalent against the Stone and Gout, a Scirrhus, Scro∣fula, and other hard Tumors of like kind, being both in∣wardly used, and outwardly applied. § 3. You may give it à ʒj. ad ʒij. or more, thus: ℞ Of this Tincture ʒij. Tincture of Juice of Liquorice ʒiss. Succo∣ry, or Fumitory-water ℥iv. mix for a Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed: Out∣wardly, bathe it upon the Joynts in a Gout, the Regi∣on of the Spleen and Hypo∣chonders in Hypochondriack Melancholy: the Belly in a vehement Colick, &c. § 4. You may also make it thus: ℞ Of the prepared or inspissated Gum ℥ij. Spiritus Intimus lbiij. mix, digest, dis∣solve, and extract a Tincture, which decant and keep for use. § 5. This has all the Vir∣tues of the former, but is much more powerful to open and dissolve, clears the Brest and Lungs better, and more specifically dissolves Tartar in the Reins or Bladder, and may be given à ʒi. ad ʒij. mixt as aforesaid with ʒi. of Tincture of Liquorice, and a Glass of White, or Rhenish-wine. LIII. † Tinctura Seminum An∣gelicae, i. Celestis, Tincture of Angelica-Seeds, or the Heavenly Tincture. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Angelica-Seeds bruised ℥iss. Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbj. mix, di∣gest a week, then decant the clear and keep it for use. § 2. It is Cordial, opens Obstructions, and prevails a∣gainst Faintings, Swoonings, Sickness at Heart, Palpitati∣on, and such-like: it streng∣thens
and fortifies the Sto∣mach, sweetens the Blood and is good against all tarta∣rous Mucilage in the Lungs and Precordia, and is an ex∣cellent thing in good earnest against the Scurvy, continual Fevers, as also putrid and contagious, not excepting the Plague itself. § 3. You may use it thus: ℞ Of this Tincture à gut. xx. ad xxx. Tincture of Virginian Snake-root gut. xv. Aquae Be∣zoarticaenost, or in place there∣of Aq. Mirabilis ℥ss. Aquae La∣ctis ℥iv. Syrup of red Poppies ʒiij. mix for a Dose, to be given the sick being in a na∣ked Bed, gently to sweat up∣on: but if the Small-pox is feared, or the Plague is pre∣sent, you may add to the Dose, gr. xij. of Bezoar Mi∣nerale. LIV. Tinctura Antiemetica, vel Menthae, Tincture a∣gainst Vomiting, or Tin∣cture of Mint. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Mint ga∣thered in its prime, and care∣fully dried ℥i. Tartarised S.V. or Spirit of Mint rectified; or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbj. mix, digest and extract a Tin∣cture in seven days: decant the clear, and put into it as much more dried Mint, digesting and extracting as before, after forty days decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use. § 2. Here is to be noted, that that which is made with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, much transcends that made with the Spirit of Mint, or simple tartarised S. V. but that if you are obliged to use the said tartarised S. V. the Menstruum will be much more effectual to the work, if it be a little accuated with Oyl or Spirit of Vitriol, Sul∣phur or Nitre; for by that means the Spirit will become the more penetrative, and more effectually pervading the Matter, will extract a more substantial Tincture. § 3. It is a great Stoma∣tick, and strengthens and fortifies all the Faculties of the Stomach, thô never so much debilitated, it stops Vomiting upon the spot, takes away loathing of Meat, and causes a good Appetite. § 4. Some make it thus: ℞ Tartarised S. V. ℥xij. de∣purated Juyce of Limons ℥vj. mix them, then add the dried Mint ℥iss. digest ten days, de∣cant the clear, and add more dried Mint ℥iss. digest forty days, and decant the clear for use.
§ 5. As to the length of the time of digestion, 'tis pos∣sible that the Tincture may be extracted in much lesser time, and may be nearly as effectual in all cases in which it is used, as if it had stood the full length of 40 days: But this is certain, it will not be so pleasant to the Eye; for, being kept digested upon the Feces 6 or 7 weeks or more, yea, 10 or 12 if need be, it acquires a much greater Purity and Clarity, and with∣al, a kind of reddish colour, which without that long di∣gestion upon the Feces it will never attain; whereby it ap∣pears, that somewhat more of the internal Sulphur of the Ingredients is attracted by such a long digestion, than if it had stood a shorter time. § 6. This is notoriously evident in the Tincture of Wormwood, which possibly is the most florid Green in the World, and yet by a long di∣gestion upon the dryed Herb, it wholly loses that green co∣lour, and acquires (to look through the Glass) an intense or deep red: And the same red Tincture will black Pepper also have, if it be long dige∣sted, &c. LV. † Tinctura Antepileptica, i. Lavendulae florum, Ante∣pileptick Tincture, or Tin∣cture of Lavender Flo∣wers. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ the best rectified Spirit of Lavender, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar ℥xiiij. dryed Flowers of Laven∣der ℥i. mix, digest 10 days, then decant the clear from the feces; add more dryed Laven∣der-flowers ℥i digest again 10 days; decant again, and last∣ly add again more Flowers ℥i. digest 40 days, and keep the Tincture for use. § 2. Or you may extract the Tincture with Spiritus Intimus, adding of liquid or roping Pitchlike Soot ʒiij. so will it yet be more effectual to the purposes intended, and may be given; as also the former à ʒi. ad ʒii. or ʒiiij. in any convenient Vehicle. § 3. Now here is one thing worthy of note, in the extra∣ction of all these kinds of Vegetable Tinctures: That if the Pouder of the Herb be ground in a hot Mortar with Salt of Tartar, and then im∣mediately put into the Men∣struum, the Salt will so ad∣mirably open the Body of the Ingredients, that they will yield their sulphurous Tin∣cture,
in a quarter of the time that it would be extracted without the Salt; yea, as it were upon the spot; so po∣werful are saline Bodies to open other Vegetable Sub∣stances. § 4. Thus: ℞ dryed La∣vender-flowers, Salt of Tartar, or for want thereof Salt of Pot-ashes, A. ℥i. grind all together in a hot Mortar to a Pouder, then put it into the Men∣struum ℥xiv. mix and digest, and repeat the Operation, so you will have in a short time a deep red volatile Tincture of Lavender. § 5. And if the dryed Herbs be in like manner ground with volatile Sal Ar∣moniac, and then put to ex∣tract in their proper menstru∣um, you will have a Tincture yet much more effectual a∣gainst the Falling-sickness, and most other Distempers of the Brain. § 6. All these various Tin∣ctures of Lavender-flowers are accounted Specificks against the Falling-sickness; Besides which, they are excellent Cephalicks, and cure most Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, proceeding from a cold and moist Cause, or from Obstructions, such as are Vertigoes, Megrims, Headachs, Carus, Lethargies, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Pal∣sies, Tremblings of the Limbs, Numbness, and other like Distempers of those parts. § 7. It is given thus: ℞ of any of these Tinctures à ʒi. ad ʒiij. Milk-wat. or Peony-wat. ℥iiij. Salt of Vipers, or Man's Skull, gr. iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels ʒvj. mix for a dose to be given in the morning fasting. Or thus: ℞ of this Tincture à ʒi. ad ʒij. or iij. Powers of Rosemary ʒi. Water of Lilly-convally or of Tile-flowers ℥iiij. Syrup of Peony-flowers ʒvj. mix for a Draught, to be given in the morning as aforesaid, and to be repeated for a Month together, as the Stomach, Age, Sex, and Necessity of the Di∣stemper requires. LVI. † Tinctura Anticolica, i. Baccarum Juniperi; the Anticolick Tincture, or Tincture of Juniper-Ber∣ries. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Juniper-berries well bruised, grains and all, Bone-ashes, ana, ℥iiij. best rectified Spirit of Juniper-berries, made by fermentation, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar made therewith, lbj. ℥iiij. mix, digest 20 days. and then decant the clear for use. § 2. Or you may make the Tincture thus: ℞ of the
bruised Berries ℥iij. Powers of Juniper repleat with the vo∣latile Salt, lbj. mix, digest 20 days, and then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 3. Or you may make it thus: ℞ of the bruised Ber∣ries ℥iij. Spiritus Intimus lbj. mix, digest 2 days, or more, then decant the pure Liquor, which is a saline Tincture, and more powerful in opening all manner of Obstructions in the Urinary parts. § 4. All these Tinctures are of excellent use against the Stone, Sand, Gravel, and all other Obstructions of tartarous matter in the Reins' Ureters, and Bladder; for, it powerfully provokes Urine, and gives almost immediate Ease in these Distempers, even in an exquisite Stran∣gury from what cause soever; but, in all these cases, the last Preparation is best, as afore∣said. § 5. These Tinctures di∣spel Vapors in the Stomach, expel Wind, and are an ex∣cellent thing against the Cho∣lick, or Griping of the Guts, more especially if it proceeds from Cold, Moisture, or eat∣ing of crude and unripe Fruits, Surfeitings, or the like. § 6. It preserves the Body in Health, as also from the Infection of the Plague, Spot∣ted Feaver, Measles, Small Pox, or any other infectious and contagious Disease: It is good against Poyson, and the bitings of Serpents, or any other venomous Creature, and is of very great efficacy in pu∣rifying of the Blood. § 7. As to the Dose, Rol∣fincius says, it is given à ℈ss. ad ℈j. in some convenient Li∣quor: But I know from Ex∣perience, that you may give the first Preparation à ʒj. ad ʒij; the second Preparation à ʒss. ad ʒj; and the third Pre∣paration à ʒj. ad ʒiij. in any fit Vehicle, and it may be ta∣ken morning fasting for Pre∣vention, and last at night going to Bed, and at any other time, when a Fit of the Cholick or Stone is pre∣sent. LVII. † Tinctura Antihy∣dropica, i. Jalapii; Tin∣cture against the Dropsie, or Tincture of Jalap. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Aqua Vitae, or rectified Spirit of Wine, lbj. Jallap in fine Pou∣der ℥ij. put them into a Ma∣trass, which stop with another whose Neck enters into it, lute well the Junctures with a wet Bladder, digest 3 or 4 days in a gentle Sand-heat, till the Spi∣rit
has extracted a red Tin∣cture; decant, filter, and keep it for use. § 2. It opens all Ob∣structions in the Bodies of Man, Woman, or Child, and is generally used as a Speci∣fick for Dropsies and Kings-Evil, and to purge away Se∣rosities, for which purposes it is an extraordinary Medi∣cine, and may be given in any convenient Vehicle à ʒj. ad ʒiij. and in very strong Bodies, to ʒiiij. § 3. This Tincture con∣sists of the Rosinous parts of the Jalap, or its gross Sulphur, and therefore upon mixing it with the Vehicle you give it in, (if liquid or aqueous as Wine, Posset-drink, &c.) it commonly turns them of a milky colour. § 4. This Tincture is cal∣led in Grulingius (Florileg. pag. 126.) Phalaja Rhumelii, which, says he, is an Infusion of Jalap in Spirit of Wine; which being afterwards affu∣sed on Citron-peels, or Da∣mask Roses, (or otherwise, if some part of their Spirits be added to it) it becomes a most pleasant Purge. § 5. The same Author has a Compound Tincture of Jalap, which he calls Elixir Citri purgans, thus made: ℞ Jalap in pouder ℥iss. Car∣thamus Seeds ℥j. Cambogia, Rosinous Scammony, A. ʒss. Eli∣xir Citri, q. s. (or about ℥xvi. mix and extract a Tincture, to which add a little strong Cinnamon-water, and Syrup of the juice of Citrons. Dose à ʒij. ad ʒiij. § 6. The said Elixir of Citrons is thus made: Cut off the yellow of the Peels or Rind very thin, and take the remai∣ning Pulp, put it into a Ma∣trass, which close well, and di∣gest it in a Sand Fornace for 8 or 10 days, then take forth and express the juice, which distil by a Cucurbit; so will you have a Spirit emulating Spirit of Wine; put this Spi∣rit upon the yellow Parings aforementioned, so will you have a yellow Elixir, most plea∣sant both to the Taste and Sight. This is the natural way, and what Grulingius teaches, but the shorter way is to do it with Spirit of Wine. § 7. All the purgative Vertue of the Jalap is extra∣cted into this Tincture; and from the feces an alcalious Salt may be made, but in a very small quantity. § 8. What Reason may be given for this Tincture's so powerfully purging wate∣ry Humors, does not plainly appear, unless it is, that it
contains more acrimonious Particles than other Purga∣tives do; and so consequent∣ly may be more powerful to open the Lymphatick Vessels, and to incide and attenuate the Viscosities in humane Bo∣dies, till they become like Water. LVIII. † Tinctura Antime∣lancholica, i. Ellebori utri∣usque: Tincture against Melancholly, or of both Hellebors. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ bark of black Hellebor, and strings, white Hellebor A. ʒiiij. Aniseed-water ℥viij. white-wine lbiij. mix, digest in a close Vessel, and extract a Tincture in two or three days, which decant, filter, and keep for use. § 2. This is the best Tincture of the Hellebors, and in my Opinion much ex∣ceeds that made with Spirit of Wine (tho' it may be done with that too) because it consists of but little Resini∣ous and many Aqueous parts, so that it was thought fit to be done with a more flegma∣tick Menstruum, for that be∣ing but a little acuated with S. V. it is sufficient enough to penetrate and extract all its vital and purging parts, and withal, to preserve it a consi∣derable time without corru∣ption; whereas that which is wholly done with S. V. has but a small, or almost no Ca∣thartick Power with it, for∣asmuch as the Cathartick A∣queous Particles of the Roots will not intimately joyn with the Sulphur of the S. V. § 3. And in considerati∣on that the Aqueous Men∣struum ought to be acuated with a sulphurous Spirit, that of Anniseed-water was made choice of, that it might in some measure correct the malignity of the Hellebors, and obtund the Acrimony or Sharpness of their Particles. § 4. But Maets is of opi∣nion, that all such things as abound with an Acrid and Caustick Salt, ought to be prepared with Spirit of Ni∣tre, Collect. Chymic. pag. 189. Now because Vegetable Sub∣stances dissolve not in it, like Animal Substances, it may be good in this case to acuate the Spirit of Wine with the Spirit of Nitre, and with that mixture to extract a Tin∣cture after this manner. § 5. ℞ Spirit of Wine lbij. Spirit of Nitre lbj. mix, digest, and if you please distil them together, cohobating twice: To this Spirit put of both the Hellebors, Ana ℥iiij. mix well, digest 8 or 10 days, and then
decant the clear Tincture. § 6. The Title shews you its Virtues, or what it is chie∣fly good against, which is Me∣lancholy, and that whether Hypochondriack or Cere∣brose, the which I have had particular experience of, and have not only given it success∣fully to such as have been Spleenetick, and vehemently troubled with Vapors from the Hypochonders, but also to such as have been troubled with a mad Melancholy, and even to such as have been afflicted with an exquisite Mania, or Madness it self. § 7. The first Tincture may be given à ʒj. ad ʒij. iij. or iiij, as the Sick is in Age and Strength, but you ought to begin with the smaller Dose first, and encrease it gradually, as you see the strength of the Patient is able to bear it: Of the other Tincture, prepared with S.V. acuated with Spirit of Niter, you may give à ʒss ad ʒj. or more, encreasing the Dose gradually, as before dire∣cted. § 8. But for the meaner sort of People, the Physician may prepare it with Spiritus Intimus, which though it will be much cheaper, yet I do not think is any whit inferior to either of the former Prepara∣tions: ℞ black and white Hellebor in fine Pouder, A. ℥iiij. Spiritus Intimus lbiij. mix, digest 24 or 48 hours, let it settle, and decant the clear for use: Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiij, as the Patint is in Age and Strength. § 9. But here is to be noted, that if the Patient is directly and downright mad, you may venture to give a much larger Dose, than if otherwise; for it is found by Experience, that upon such, Medicines operate not so na∣turally as upon others, and upon some of them the very strongest will hardly operate at all. LIX. † Tinctura Antiscor∣butica, i. Winterani; Tin∣cture against the Scurvy; or Tincture of Capt. Win∣ter's Cinnamon. Salmon] § 1. ℞ Spirit of Winter's Cinnamon, or Tar∣tariz'd S. V. or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbiiij. Winter's Cinnamon in Powder ℥viij. mix, digest 10 or 20 days, shaking the Glass once a day, then letting it stand till it is clear, decant it off, and keep it for use. § 2. Or thus for the meaner sort of People, who cannot so well go to the price
of the former. ℞ Spiritus Intim. lbiiij, of the bark ℥viij, or x. in Pouder; mix, digest 2 days, then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 3. It is a good Medi∣cine for the Stomach, and a Cure for all Stomach Disea∣ses, such as the Scurvy, Ca∣chexia, &c. are; the Scurvy being of old called Stomacha∣cia, or the Stomach-Disease, by way of Eminency from its prime or chief Cause. It strengthens a weak Stomach, expels Wind, and is of sin∣gular use for all such as have taken any Surfeit, either by over-eating or drinking them∣selves, or by over-heating themselves, through any vio∣lent Exercise. § 4. It prevails against the Plague, and all sorts of Pestilential Feavers, Poyson, and the Bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other ve∣nomous Beast; and is of known Excellency against all Diseases of the Head and Womb, proceeding from Cold and Moisture; for it strengthens the Nerves, stops Defluxions, and other like Diseases proceeding from Lethargies, Vertigoes, Apo∣plexies, Palsies, Convulsions, Rheumatisms, and other Distempers afflicting those Parts. § 5. It helps Concocti∣on, takes away a stinking Breath, cures fainting and swooning Fits, and Palpita∣tion of the Heart, and is as good an Alexipharmick as most is. Dose of those made with the Spirit of the Bark, or Tartarised S. V. à ʒj. ad ʒij. of that made with Tincture of Salt of Tartar à ʒss. ad ʒj. of that made with Spiritus Intimus, à ʒj. ad ʒiij. in any proper Vehicle. LX. † Tinctura Asae foetidae, Tincture of stinking Assa. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ fine Assa fetida, make it into small bits, ℥ij. Bone-ashes ℥iiij. or more, mix them, and put them into a Glass Bottle, to which affuse Aqua vitae, or common Spirit of Wine, lbij. mix, di∣gest warm, shaking the Bottle well twice a day, for 10 or 12 days, then let it settle, and de∣cant the clear for use. § 2. In this Preparation two things are to be noted; first, that the Bone-ashes are added not for any particular Vertue which is in them, but only to make a separation of the Particles of the Gum, so that the Spirit of Wine might the better penetrate it to ex∣tract its Tincture.
§ 3. Secondly, That Aqua vitae or Common Spirit of Wine is used, not rectified Spirits, because the Gum con∣sists of more Aqueous than Resinous parts, and so being apt to be dissolved in a wa∣try body, it was thought that common Spirit would have power and strength enough, so to open it Body, as to make it yield all its Tin∣cture. § 4. You may also make it without Spirit of Wine, with Spiritus Intimus, after this manner: ℞ fine Assafe∣tida in small bits ℥ij. Bone∣ashes ℥iiij. Spiritus Intimus lbij. mix, digest warm for two days, then being settled, decant the clear, and keep it for use. § 5. This latter Prepa∣ration seems to be more than a Tincture, for that some of the finest and most subtile Substance of the Gum is dis∣solved in the Menstruum: However, it is not only chea∣per than the former for the Poor, but also in many cases much more effectual than that made with Spirit of Wine. § 6. It is intended against Vapors, rising of the Lights, Fits of the Mother, Obstru∣ctions of the Spleen, Peripneu∣mony, and other Distempers of the Viscera; and it is found by certain Experience, to be an excellent Traumatick and Vulnerary, as also to be a Specifick against the Epilepsy and other Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves. § 7. But there is a com∣pound Tincture, much more valuable than the former, and so specifick for the curing of the Epilepsy, that I have known several cured by ta∣king of it some few times. It is thus made: ℞ fine Assafoetida in small bits, ropey or pitchlike Wood-soot, Ana ℥ij. filings of Man's Scull, Castore∣um, A. ℥j. volatile Salt of Man's Scull ʒij. Bone-ashes ℥viij. Spirit of Wine lbiiij. mix, digest 20 days, shaking the Glass once every day, then being settled, decant the clear for use. § 8. Than this, perhaps, there is not a better Medicine, nor more specifick against the Falling-sickness; it is gi∣ven both in and out of the Paroxysm, as also in the ap∣proaching thereof; Dose one or two spoonfuls at a time in Wine or any convenient Ve∣hicle; it ought to be given 10 or 15 days together, first in the morning fasting, and last at night going to Bed, as also constantly upon the ap∣proach of the Fit. It has done Cures beyond credit.
§ 9. Now here is to be noted, that in making this compound Tincture, you may use instead of Spirit of Wine Spiritus Intimus, in the same quantity and proportion, for that in my opinion it can bet∣ter open and penetrate the Bodies of some of the Ingre∣dients, than Spirit of Wine can, and for that reason draw a more excellent and power∣ful Tincture; which I have often used against Vapors and Suffocation of the Womb to admiration. Dose ad ʒiij. LXI. † Tinctura Balsami Capivii, Tincture of the natural Balsam of Co∣payba. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tin∣cture of Salt of Tartar, or for want of it the best tartarised S.V. ℥viij. Balsam. Capivii ℥ij. mix, digest, dissolve, and ex∣tract a red Tincture for use. § 2. This is the simple Tincture, but there is a Com∣pound made according to Le Mort, after this manner: ℞ Balsam Copaybae ℥ij. Gum Guajaci ℥ss. Oil of Sassafras ʒj. Alcohol of S. V. ℥x. mix, and digest together, with the addi∣tion of a little Salt of Tartar, for 24 hours, so will you have an excellent Tincture. § 3. In this latter Prepa∣ration the Oil of Sassafras is added not so much for its Vertues sake, as to strengthen and fortifie the Menstruum, that thereby it may the more powerfully open the body of the Gums, and readily ex∣tract their Tincture, which without this addition would not so easily be done. § 4. This Tincture, whe∣ther Simple or Compound, is a notable Antivenereal, and a Specifick in the curing of the Gonorrhea, for which it is highly profitable, as also in the cure of the French Pox itself. § 5. It provokes Sweat powerfully, and prevails a∣gainst all Diseases which are to be cured by sweating: You may give either of them à gut xij. ad ʒj. or ʒiss. in any convenient Liquor antivene∣rial; as for example, in a Decoction of Guajacum a∣gainst the French Pox. LXII. † Tinctura Balsami Tolutani, Tincture of the Balsam de Tolu. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ choice Balsam de Tolu ℥iiij. Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or tartarised S. V. lbij. mix, digest, dissolve and extract a Tincture in a cool place.
§ 2. Or thus: ℞ Balsam of Tolu ℥iiij. Oil of Sassafras ℥ss. tartarised S. V. lbij. mix, and with the addition of Salt of Tartar in fine Pouder ℥ss. extract a fine red Tincture in two days, which decant and keep for use. § 3. It provokes Sweat powerfully, purifies the Blood, and is an excellent thing a∣gainst the Gonorrhea, or any Reliques of the French Pox; it is good also against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, and Rheumatism, or running and wandring Pains which afflict the Head, Nerves, Limbs, and Joynts. Held in the Mouth, it also cures the Tooth-ach, and heals any Canker or Ulcer in the Mouth, tho' never so rebelli∣ous. Dose à gut xx. ad 40. or 60. in any proper Vehi∣cle. § 4. This Tincture is on∣ly the Resinous parts of the Balsam dissolved in the Spi∣rit of Wine, which being mixt with any other Aque∣ous body, makes the mixture to become troubled or thick, and of a milky or yellowish colour. It is a delicate fra∣grant Tincture, and of mani∣fold Vertues. § 5. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Aq. Lactis alexiteriae ℥iiij. Sy∣rup of red Poppies ℥ss, of this Tincture ʒj. or more, mix for a draught, to sweat, or against a Gonorrhea. ℞ Decoction of Guajacum ℥vj. Syrup of red Poppies ℥j. of this Tincture ʒiss. mix for a draught, against the Lues. LXIII. † Tinctura Benzoini, Tincture of Benjamin. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ the Benjamin Amygdaloides ℥iiiss. pouder it grosly, and put it in∣to a Matrass half empty, and affuse there on tartarised S. V. lbj. stop the Vessel close, and set it in warm Horse-dung, or other proper heat, and leave it in di∣gestion for 14 days, after which decant the clear Tincture and filtrate it, which keep in a Vial close stopt for use. § 2. Or thus, according to Lemery: ℞ Benjamin ℥iij. Storax ℥ss. both in gross Pou∣der: Balsam of Peru ʒss. Spi∣rit of Wine lbj. mix, digest a fortnight, and extract a Tin∣cture. § 3. This Tincture is only a Dissolution of the Resin of the Benjamin, &c. in Spirit of Wine, which when it is mixt with a great deal of Water, makes the mixture white like Milk, because the Water weakens the S. V. and makes it quit what it held up dissol∣ved.
§ 4. If you let this Milk settle, the Resin will precipi∣tate to the bottom of the Vessel, and the Water become clear. § 5. The Storax, and the Balsam of Peru in the latter Prescript, are both ad∣ded chiefly to encrease the fragrancy of the smell, and to add to the Luxury of the Odour. § 6. Authors prescribe this Tincture, to take a∣way Spots in the Face, thus: ℞ Damask-Rose-water ℥iiij. of this Tincture ʒj. mix them, and make Virgins milk; it serves to wash with for the purpose aforesaid. Or thus: ℞ Orange-flower-water ℥iiij. of this Tincture ʒj. Essence of Musk and Ambergrise, gut iiij. mix for a Wash for the Face. § 7. If this Tincture be made with a S. V. drawn off from Benjamin (before the making of the Flowers) as it contains many of the sulphu∣rous and volatile Particles of the Benjamin; so will it also be more powerful and effe∣ctual to all the purposes it is intended for; and this Tin∣cture will contain all the good parts of the Benjamin dissolved in it self; the Hete∣togene Feces remaining at bottom, and which the S. V. could not dissolve, being of little worth. § 8. You may also be sure that the S. V. which rises first in the distillation of the Benjamin (in making the Flowers) certainly carrys off some Particles of the volatile Salt of the Resin, with which the sulphurous part has a sin∣gular Congruity, as you may perceive by its fragrant Odour, and the good effects it produces being taken in∣wardly. § 9. This latter Tincture made with its proper Spirit, is a more excellent Cosmetick than the former, for it clean∣ses, scowres, and penetrates better than they. § 10. Tincture of the Flowers of Benjamin, most excellent. ℞ Flowers of Ben∣jamin, or the Buttery substance thereof, ℥j. Spirit of Benja∣min (made in distilling before the Flowers arise) lbj. mix▪ di∣gest, and extract a famous Tincture, more pure and sub∣til, and which will operate in a less quantity than the simple Tincture of Benjamin made with Spirit of Wine. § 11. And as there is no doubt to be made, but that the Flowers of Benjamin are the most essential part of it; so the Tincture made thereof must be more pure and sub∣til,
and so more powerful to subtilize bad Humors, and to expel them through the Pores of the Skin, being taken inwardly à ʒj. ad ʒij. in some proper Water or Decoction, especially when you would provoke Sweating. § 12. These Tinctures al∣so cut, loosen, and expel by the ordinary ways tartarous vis∣cous and thick Humors lodg∣ing in the Brest and Lungs, given in the proportional Dose aforesaid, in some pro∣per pectoral Tincture, Infu∣sion, or Decoction, &c. § 13. Le Mort says, That the Tincture of Benjamin has many great Vertues, and is to be preferred before the simple Flowers thereof: It discusses Wind, helps Diffi∣culty of Breathing, cures an inveterate Cough, and the Pains of the Collick, Asth∣ma, &c. being given in Sy∣rup of Colsfoot, or of Hyssop, or some pectoral Water. Outwardly, it helps Defedati∣ons of the Skin, redness of the Eyes, and all external Infla∣mations of what kind soe∣ver. LXIV. † Tinctura Callefa∣ciens, i. Caryophylorum, Tin∣cture heating, or Tincture of Cloves. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Choice Cloves ℥j. in gross Pouder, Al∣cohol of Spirit of Cloves ℥xij. mix, digest in a Matrass, close stopt for 10 or 20 days (the longer the better) so will you have a pure red Tincture, which decant and keep for use. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Cloves in Pouder ℥j. Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbj. mix, digest, and 01 make a Tincture as aforesaid. § 3. The Alcoholiz'd Spi∣rit of Cloves is thus made: ℞ Cloves bruised ℥viij. Spirit of Wine lbiiij. mix, digest 20 days, add Damask-rose-water lbvj. digest 3 or 4 days more, then put all into a Copper Ve∣sica tinn'd within, fitting to it its Head, Worm, and Recei∣ver, and with a very gentle fire draw off the first pint and half of Spirit, which is the highest, and fit for making our Tincture of Cloves: Continue the Fire, and draw off lbij. more of the Spirit, which keep as common Spirit of Cloves, and after that draw off the Clove-water, which keep for use, as a Vehicle for any Cordial, or to take this present Tincture of Cloves in.
§ 4. Or you may make the said Alcholiz'd Spirit thus: ℞ Cloves bruised ℥viij. Spirit of Wine tartarised lbij. mix, digest 2 or 3 days, and with a Glass Vesica, in B. M. having its Head, Worm, and Receiver, draw off the Spirit to dryness, and cohobate, for the purpose aforesaid of ma∣king the Tincture. § 5. It is a noble Cor∣dial Tincture, Cephalick, Neurotick, Hysterick, and Arthritick, and is given with good success in all cold and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, Stomach, Heart, Womb, and Joynts: It cures Headachs, Cramps, Aches, Pains, Numbness, and Palsies in what part soever: It discusses Wind, eases the Colick, comforts a cold Sto∣mach, and warms the Bow∣els, being chilled by a long and excoriating Flux: It promotes the circulation of the Blood, and helps such as are troubled with the Scur∣vy. § 6. It is given à gut xij. ad 20, 30, or 40, as the occa∣sion may be, in any proper Infusion, Decoction, or Wa∣ter, or in a Glass of Ale, Beer, or Wine, &c. mixt with equal quantities of Wine, and held in the Mouth, it eases the Pain proceeding from rotten Teeth. LXV. † Tinctura calida major, i. Cardamomi, The greater hot Tincture, or Tincture of Cardamoms. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Car∣damoms greater and lesser bea∣ten into Pouder, A. ℥j. Salt of Tartar ʒvj. grind them toge∣ther into a small Pouder, in a hot Iron Mortar, put all into a Glass Matrass, and affuse thereon rectified Spirit of Car∣damoms, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbij. mix, digest close stopt for 20 days, then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Car∣damoms greater and lesser in Pouder, A. ℥j. Tartarised S. V. acuated with Spirit of Nitre or Sulphur lbij. mix, digest 10 days, and then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 3. Or thus: ℞ Car∣damoms great and less in Pou∣der A. ℥j. Spiritus Intimus ℥xvj. mix, digest 2 days in a gentle heat, shaking the Glass twice a day, then being set∣tled, decant the clear Tincture for use. § 4. This Tincture is Ce∣phalick, Neurotick, Cardi∣ack, Uterine, and Arthritick: It discusses Wind, gives Ease in the Colick, and all sorts of Gripings and Tortions of the Guts; it is an excellent
Stomatick, comforting and warming a cold and moist Stomach; it eases Pains of the Womb, provokes the Terms, facilitates the Birth, and brings away both dead Child and After-birth. § 5. Outwardly used, by bathing, it gives Ease in Pains of the Head, Nerves, and Joynts, proceeding from a cold Cause, and is found to be of singular use against the Gout, and other Rheumatick Pains, Palsies, Numbness, and Weakness of any Part or Parts. § 6. If it be given to suppress Wind or Vapors, or against the Colick that made with S. V. acuated with Spi∣rit of Nitre, is most specifick, if you will believe the Judg∣ment of the famous Sylvius de le Boe; and truly, daily Ex∣perience it self says the same thing. It strengthens the Stomach also, and causes a good Digestion. § 7. Dose of the first is à ʒj. ad ʒij. of the second à ʒss. ad ʒj. several times a day; of the last ʒj. ad ʒiij. but they ought to be given in some proper or appropriate Vehi∣cle, respecting the Disease and Party afflicted. LXVI. † Tinctura Calida minor, i. Cubebarum; The lesser hot Tincture, or Tincture of Cubebs. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Cubebs in fine Pouder ℥ij. rectified Spirit of Cubebs, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbiss. put all in∣to a Bolt-head, which stop close, and digest only in a Blood∣warm heat for 12 or 14 days, shaking the Bottle once a day; then being settled, decant the clear, filter, and keep it for use. § 2. Where note, that if the Tincture is made with Spirit of Cubebs, you ought to grind the Pouder of the Cubebs in a very hot Iron Mortar with Salt of Tartar calcin'd to blewness ℥j. till they are well mixed, and them to put the mixture into the Glass Matrass, and so to affuse thereon the rectified Spirit of Cubebs, freed from all its Phlegm: By this means you will have a very deep Tincture from the Ingre∣dients, and that in half the time you would otherwise get it. § 3. It is a most excellent Tincture to strengthen the Head, Stomach, and Bowels; it attenuates Diseases, and expels Wind admirably, com∣forting
and warming a cold and moist Constitution. This Tincture corroborates the Womb, and takes away the accidental Causes of Barren∣ness, warming, comforting. and strengthening the Instru∣ments of Generation. § 4. You may give it thus: ℞ Black-cherry-water ℥iiij. Essence of Motherwort ℥ss. Tincture of Cubes ʒj. ad ʒij. Syrup of Peony-flowers ʒvj. 01 mix for a Draught, to be gi∣ven Morning and Evening for a Month together. Or thus: ℞ Choice Tent or Ali∣cant ℥iiij. or vj. of this Tin∣cture à ʒj. ad ʒij. mix for a Draught, to be given as afore∣said. LXVII. † Tinctura Caran∣nae, Tincture of Gum Ca∣ranna. Salmon.] § 1. Gum Ca∣ranna ℥ij. in Pouder, tartari-sed S. V. ℥xx. put all into a Bolt-head, which close well up, and digest for 10 days in a warm place, then decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use in a Glass close stopt. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Gum Caranna in fine Pouder ℥ij. Bone-ashes in Pouder ℥vj. mix them, and put them into a Bot∣tle-head, on which affuse Spi∣ritus Intimus lbij. stop up the Vessel well, and digest in a gentle heat 8 or 10 days, so will you have a high-colour'd saline Tincture of the Gum of great Vertue. § 3. It is Cephalick, Neu∣rotick, Uterin and Arthritick; is good against Rheumatisms, or running and wandering Pains, stops Defluxions of Humors to any part, and al∣lays Pains in the Brain, Nerves, Womb, and Joynts; it strengthens the Stomach, and stops fluxes of Humors upon the Eyes, fluxes of the Bowels, and other Weaknes∣ses of the Viscera. § 4. Outwardly, by ba∣thing therewith it strengthens the Nerves and Joynts, eases Pains and Aches from a cold cause, prevails against the Gout, digests, dissolves, sof∣tens and discusses Tumors, cures Convulsions, and pre∣vents Gangreens. § 5. But if you intend it against any Distemper of the Womb, and parts adjacent, my Advice is, that you use the latter Preparation, made with Spiritus Intimus, for that more powerfully opens Ob∣structions, and better corrects the acidity and other Vices of the Blood and Humors. § 6. The Dose of the first is à ʒss. ad ʒj. of the second a ʒj. ad ʒij. or more: Your
best way of taking it, will be to mix it with an ounce of some proper Syrup, and then with 3 or 4 ounces of some fit Water, and so to drink it up, at night going to Bed, and early in the morning fast∣ing, and to continue the use of it for some days. § 7. Take for example sake of this Tincture, prepared with S. V. ʒj. Syrup of Peony ℥j. mix them well together, then add 4 ounces of Black-cherry-water, mix for a Dose for the Brain and Nerves. ℞ Milk-water ℥iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels ℥j. of the latter Tincture ʒij. mix for a Dose against Distempers of the Womb. LXVIII. † Tinctura Cardia∣ca, i. Croci, The Cordial Tincture, or Tincture of Saffron. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Choice English Saffron ℥j. Spirit of Saffron, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbj. mix, put them into a Bolt-head, and digest in a very gentle heat, close stopt for 7 or 8 days, then decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use. § 2. It is a great Cordial and of singular use against Fainting, and swooning Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, Sickness at Stomach, and other like Distempers; it al∣so is good against the Mea∣sles, Small-Pox, and all sorts of malign Feavers; opens Obstructions of the Womb, provokes the Terms, and is prevalent to facilitate the Birth, and expel the After-birth. § 3. Modus Utendi. ℞ Borrage or Angelica-water ℥iij. Syrup of Citron-peels ℥ss. Tin∣cture of Saffron ʒj. mix for a Cordial, to give in fainting and swooning Fits. ℞ Per∣sicary-water ℥iiij. Syrup of Motherwort or Pennyroyal ℥j. of this Tincture ℥ij. mix for a Dose, to facilitate the Birth or bring away the After-birth. ℞ Treacle-water ℥ij. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers ʒvj. of this Tincture ʒiss. mix for a Dose, to give in a malignant Fea∣ver, or expel the Measles or Small-Pox. § 4. But in this latter Case, viz. against all sorts of malign or pestilential Fea∣vers, the compound Tincture is much better; which is thus made: ℞ Choice English Saffron, choice Cochenele in fine Pouder, A. ℥j. Cloves, Nut∣megs, A. ℥ij. Spirit of Saffron, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar ℥40. mix, digest in a Bolt-head close stopt, for 7 or 8 days, then decant the clear Tin∣cture,
and keep it for use. § 5. Besides its Use a∣gainst malign and pestilential Diseases, it is much a greater Cordial than the former, strengthens the Head, Brain, Nerves, Stomach, Heart, and all the Spirits, natural, vital, and animal. Dose is the same with that, viz. à ʒss. ad ʒj. or ʒij. according as the Exigency of the Patient requires. LXIX. † Tinctura Cardiaca restringens, i. Cinnamomi; The strengthening Cordial Tincture; or Tincture of Cinnamon. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Spirit of Cinnamon rectified, or Tin∣cture of Salt of Tartar lbij. Cinnamon bruised ℥iiij. put all into a large Bolt-head, which close well, digest only in a warm place for 7 days, shaking the Glass once a day, then decant the clear, and keep it for use. § 2. Now here is to be noted, that you must be careful to chuse good Cin∣namon, which is such as has a sharp and biting Taste, and therefore in the choice of it you are obliged to bite and taste every Stick of it, if you will not be cheated; for lbj. of that which is sharp and bi∣ting upon the Tongue, is worth an hundred weight of that which is tastless, for that without all doubt has alrea∣dy past the Hands of the Artist, and the pure Oyl and volatile Spirit have already been extracted from it by Distillation in much Water: This being dryed, is after∣wards mixt with some more that is really good, that so they may both be put off to∣gether. § 3. Although it is my Opinion, that this Tincture is better to be kept, as it is here now made, yet some make this following additi∣on: They take Damask-Rose∣water lbij. dissolve therein white Sugarcandy, or double refined Sugar ℥viij. of which they make a Syrup, the which they add to the aforemade Tincture, hanging therein a Nodule of Musk and Amber∣grise, ana gr. iij. and so keep it in a cool and quiet place till it is fine. § 4. It is a great streng∣thening Cordial, of extraor∣dinary use in Comsumptions, weakness of the Stomach, want of Digestion, and other Distempers of the Viscera, proceeding from Weakness. It is prevalent against Fain∣ting-fits, Swooning, Sickness at Heart, and other Diseases
of the Precordia, as Straitness of the Brest, Swelling of the Stomach, Palpitation, &c. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. of the pure simple Tincture, in any pro∣per Vehicle. § 5. Utendi Modus. ℞ Black-cherry-water ℥iiij. Sy∣rup of Clovegilliflowers, or of Citron-peels, or of the juice of Citrons ʒvj. of this simple and pure Tincture ʒiss. Tincture of Cochenele ʒss. mix for a Cor∣dial-draught, against fainting Fits, Swoonings, Palpitation, Sickness at Heart, &c. § 6. That if you shall be pleased to dulcifie it, it will be good to do it in two seve∣ral Vessels, one half in one Glass, and the other half in another, that the one part of it may be without the Musk and Ambergrise, as the more fit Medicine to be given to such Women as are troubled with Vapors, or are subject to Hysterick Fits. § 7. This Tincture will be yet much more powerful if to the whole quantity you add ʒj. of the pure Oyl, made by distillation in much Wa∣ter; and then it will be an admirable thing to stop Vo∣miting, being given in Mint-water with Syrup of Quin∣ces. LXX † Tinctura Castorei; Tincture of Castor. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Fresh Castor ℥j. Salt of Tartar ʒij. rectified S. V. ℥iij. cut the Ca∣storeum into thin slices, and bruise it, to which put the Salt of Tartar and S. V. digest all together for three days, till the Spirit is become of a Rubicund colour; decant the tinged Spi∣rit from the Feces, and letting it settle for three or four hours, decant it again from the subsi∣ding Feces, being most pure, and keep it for use. Thus Le Mort. § 2. Where note, that in making those kinds of Tin∣ctures, which are in some measure ingrateful to the Smell, as is the Tincture of Castor, or those which are ingrateful to the Taste, as is the Elixir Proprietatis, &c. The longer you keep them in a gentle digestion, the more grateful they become, because a gentle heat better unites the Particles, and brings them to a state of ma∣turity. So the Elixir Pro∣prietatis now mentioned, will have not only a much grea∣ter Energie, but also a much more grateful Odour and Taste, being digested for a month or two, than if it had
stood only a day or two. § 3. It is Uterine and Antihysterick, of notable use against Vapors, and all sorts of Fits whatsoever: It cures the Palsie and Apoplexy, Epi∣lepsy, Vertigo, Lethargy, and most other Diseases of the Head and Brain; but it will be much more efficacious, if to every ounce you add ʒj. of Spirit of Sal Armoniack: It is of singular use for such as are troubled with the Gout, if to every ounce thereof ℈j. of Camphir, and ʒiij. of Spirit of Sal Armoniack be added, and a Cloth dipt therein be ap∣plied to the place affected. Dose à gut. x. ad xxx. in a fit Vehicle. § 4. Now, in my Opi∣nion, the quantity of Spirit of Wine in the aforegoing Re∣cipe is too little for the quan∣tity of Castor, and so I sup∣pose the Author himself thought, when he advised the following Proportions, which are more fit. ℞ Castor in Pouder ℥j. Salt of Tartar in Pouder ʒvj. rectified S. V. ℥v. mix and digest 3 or 4 days in B. M. so have you the grea∣test Hysterick, Antepileptick, Neurotick, and Cephalick that is. § 5. There is another Preparation hereof in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 2. where the Tincture is made with Spirit of Castor, which is indeed much better than simple Spirit of Wine: And this may be done either with the Compound Spirit in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 5. or with the simple Spirit of Castor, which you may make thus. § 6. Spiritus Castorei sim∣plex: ℞ Castor thin sliced and bruised ℥iiij. rectified S. V. lbiiij. mix, digest 20 or 28 days, then distil in a Glass body in B. M. and cohobate three or four times, distilling to dry∣ness, and keep the Spirit for use, But there is another Spirit of Castor, which is the acid Spirit made with the Oil by Retort, which is not at all intended here. § 7. An ordinary cheap Tincture of Castor for poor People, yet of great vertue and use: ℞ choice Castoreum in fine pouder ℥ij. Spiritus In∣timus ℥viij. mix, digest 6 or 7 days, shaking the Vessel once or twice a day, then letting it stand till it grows fine, decant the clear Tincture for use. It has all the Vertues of the for∣mer, and in my opinion more powerful against Hysterick Passions: Dose à ʒj. ad ʒiij. in any proper Hysterick Wa∣ter: It is also good against Poyson, the bitings of Ser∣pents,
mad Dogs, or any other venomous Creature, Defluxions upon the Joynts, Colick, Deafness, &c. § 8. Tincture of Castor from Charras. Having taken off the unctuous part, which lies in the Bladder by it self, at the top of the Bags, you must take the fleshy Substance, which cut or bruise, putting it in a proportional Matrass, affuse thereon well rectified S. V. so much as to overtop it four inches; stop well the Ma∣trass, and place it on a Bakers Oven, or in a Sand Fornace of equal heat, digesting for 15 days, 3 weeks, or longer, sha∣king the Ingredients from time to time, so will the Spirit be impregnated of a high colour, containing the most essential parts of the Castor, which strain and squeeze out, keeping the Tincture in a Glass close stopt for use. § 9. This Tincture, by the addition of Salt of Tartar, would have been much dee∣per; for tho' the Salt adds not much to the Spirit, yet it does two things at once, viz. it helps to open the body of the Castor, whereby it the more easily yields its Tincture: And it dephlegmates more perfectly the S. V. whereby it is the more able to extract the essential parts of the Mixt. § 10. Thus have you a Tincture truly noble, and of great prevalency against all cold Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Stomach, but more particularly for those of the Womb. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒij. and sometimes says Charras to ℥ss. mixing it with some proper Cepha∣lick, Neurotick, Stomatick, or Hysterick Water. LXXI. † Tinctura Cephali∣ca, i. Salviae; Tincture for the Head, or Tincture of Sage. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ choice Red Sage purely dryed ℥iiij. Salt of Tartar ℥ij. grind them to pouder in a very hot Iron Mortar, put them into a Ma∣trass, and add Tartarised S. V. or Spirit of Sage, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbij. mix, di∣gest, close stopt 15, 20 or 30 days, then decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use. § 2. For poor People you may make it thus: ℞ dryed Sage ℥iiij. Spiritus Intimus lbiss- mix, digest, close stopt in a gentle heat for 2 or 3 days, then decant the clear, and keep it for use. § 3. The Vertues of both are much alike, but the lat∣ter more powerfully opens Obstructions, and provokes
the Terms in Women. They are appropriated to the Head, and therefore called the Ce∣phalick or head Tincture, being indeed of excellent use for most cold and moist Di∣seases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as Lethargies, Slee∣piness, Dulness, Heaviness, Vertigo, Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Melancholy, and the Gout: It comforts a cold and moist Womb, and is said to remove the Cause of Barrenness in Women. § 4. It is prevalent against Diseases of the Stomach, Brest and Lungs, drys up Ca∣tarrhs, and hinders Defluxi∣ons of Rheum upon any part, is good against Coughs, Colds, Stoppages in the Head, and, in a word, after an admirable manner streng∣thens all the inward parts, and the whole frame of the Body; it resists Poyson, and is of good use against all pu∣trid, malign, and pestilential Feavers. Dose of the first, à ʒss. ad ʒj. of the second à ʒj. ad ʒij. in some proper Vehi∣cle. § 5. Outwardly bathed upon any part, it eases Pains from a cold and moist Cause, as also Gouts and Sciatica's, discusses Tumors, takes away Inflammations, and prevents Gangreens, restores Contusi∣ons, and strengthens the Head, Stomach, Nerves, and Joints. Bathed upon the lower parts of the Belly after Travail, it prevents or gives ease in Af∣ter-pains. LXXII. † Tinctura Cepha∣lica Cordialis, i. Nucis Mo∣schatae; The Cephalick Cordial Tincture, or Tin∣cture of Nutmegs. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Nut∣megs grated into pouder ℥iiij. Salt of Tartar ℥ij. in a hot Iron Mortar, grind them well, then add rectified Spirit of Nut∣megs lbj. or so much as in a large Glass Matrass, or long Bolt-head, may overtop the Ingredients about two or three inches: Mix, stop close up, and digest in a very good heat 14 or 15 days, the longer the bet∣ter, shaking the Glass at least once or twice a day; then let∣ting it grow fine, decant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. The Title shews you its general Vertues, for which it is a most excellent thing: It is indeed a Remedy a∣gainst all cold and moist Di∣seases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb, such a one, as has scarcely any Ve∣getable Preparation of this kind which does exceed it;
I think, scarcely equal it: It fortifies the Heart and Brain, and is a singular good thing against Headachs, Megrims, Vertigo's, Epilepsies, Palsies, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Con∣vulsions, Cramps, Numbness, loss of Memory, Smelling, Tasting, and weakness or dul∣ness of the Sight. § 3. And as it is truly a Cordial, so after an admira∣ble manner it gives relief in fainting and swooning Fits, Pain at the Stomach, Sick∣ness at Heart, Palpitation, and other like Diseases of those parts: It strengthens and comforts the Womb, and makes it fruitful, or fit for Generation, and is a singular thing against the Scurvy in a cold habit of Body. § 4. Outwardly bathed upon any part, it comforts and strengthens it, eases Pains and Aches from a cold Cause, as also scorbutick and an∣thritick Pains, helps Contusi∣ons, discusses Swellings, and prevents Gangreens. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒiss. LXXIII. † Tinctura contra Iliacum, i. Chamaemeli flo∣rum; Tincture against the Iliack Passion, or of Camo∣mil Flowers. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Camo∣mil Flowers dryed ℥ij. Salt of Tartar ℥i. grind them together in a hot Iron Mortar, then put them into a large Glass Ma∣trass, or Bolthead with a long neck, upon which immediately affuse rectified Spirit of Camo∣mil, or Tincture of Salt of Tar∣tar lbiss. mix. stop close the neck or mouth of the Glass and digest in a very gentle heat, for 10, 20, or 30 days, then being fine, decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use. § 2. Or rather thus: ℞ of the aforesaid Tincture, being very fine, lbj. pure Cam∣phir ʒij. mix and dissolve, and keep it for use: It is double in Power and Efficacy to the former. § 3. This yet is commen∣ded above them all: ℞ of our Spiritus Anticolicus (in Phylaxa Medicinae, lib. 1. cap. 12. sect. 1.) lbij. Camo∣mil-flowers dryed ℥iiij. Cam∣phir in bits ʒiiij. mix, dissolve, digest, and extract; after 12 or 14 days decant the clear Tincture, and keep it in a Glass close stopt for use.
§ 4. They have all one and the same Vertues, save that one is more powerful than another; the second is more powerful than the first, and the third much more powerful than the second. § 5. They are all Speci∣ficks in the Colick, and ease the Pain thereof upon the spot; they strengthen the Stomach, help Digestion, for∣tifie the Head, Brain, and Nerves, discuss Wind, and are most admirable against the Plague, or any malign or pestilential Feaver, more especially the last of them. § 6. The two first taken by the Mouth, and also drawn up by the Nostrils, or put in∣to the Ears, ease Pains in the Head and Teeth, and are good against all Bruises in any part, Palsies, Apoplexies, Cramps, Convulsions, Gouts, old Aches and Pains, Palpi∣tations of the Heart, Fain∣tings, Swoonings, &c. being inwardly given, and outward∣ly bathed upon the parts affli∣cted. § 7. For inward Uses, take the last of them, as being most powerful; but for out∣ward Uses the first, or rather the second, because the third of them is not so fit to be ap∣plied outwardly, by reason of the Spiritus Anticolicus; yet in any extremity of the Gout you may make bold with it. § 8. The Dose of the first is about one spoonful and half, of the second a spoonful, of the third from 16 to 30, 40, or 50 drops, or more, in a Glass of Ale, Wine, or other proper Vehicle. § 9. There is one thing more also to be noted in the use of this third Preparation against the Colick, viz. That if the Colick has been inve∣terate and rebellious, or of any long standing, this Me∣dicine must be constantly used some days or weeks, and in all the Liquor the Sick drinks, by which means, and that on∣ly, the malignity of the Di∣sease will be overcome. LXXIV. † Tinctura Cor∣dialis, The Cordial Tin∣cture. † ℞ Aqua Cordialis, q. v. Juice of Kermes Berries, a sufficient quantity to satiate the Water, or fully impreg∣nate it. Salmon.] § 1. What this Cordial Water is, you may see chap. 1. sect. 66. aforego∣ing in this Book; but for want thereof, you may, in its place, use the Spirit of Saffron or our Aqua Bezoartica, de∣scribed
in Phylaxa Medicinae, lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 1. or any other proper Cordial Water whatsoever. §. 2. But, to compleat this Cordial Tincture, you ought to make it after this manner: ℞ the said Cordial Water, or Spirit of Angelica, or Saffron lbij. Juice of Kermes-berries ℥viij. Cochenele in fine pouder ℥ss. English Saffron ʒj. mix, digest in a Glass Matrass or Bolthead in a very▪ gentle heat, for 14 days, then being well settled, or fine, decant the clear Tincture for use. § 3. It is not only an ex∣traordinary Cordial to revive the Spirits, natural, vital, and animal, chear the Heart, re∣sist Melancholy, and help all sorts of fainting and swoon∣ing Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, &c. but it is a famous thing in all continual, putrid, malign, and pestilential Fea∣vers, yea, against the Plague it self; it powerfully brings out the Measles and Small-Pox, and secures the Patient from danger. § 4. Modus Utendi. ℞ Aquae Lactis Alexiteriae ℥iiij. Syrup of the Juice of Citrons ℥j. of this Tincture à ʒss. ad ʒiss. or ʒij. mix for a Cordial Dose, against Fainting, Swoo∣ning, Sickness at Heart, Plague, &c. ℞ Aquae Cera∣sorum nigrorum ℥iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels ʒvi. of this Tin∣cture ʒiss. Bezoar-Mineral gr. x. mix for a Dose, to bring forth the Small-Pox or Mea∣sles. LXXV. † Tinctura Cordia∣lis antepidemica, i. Contra-yervae; A Cordial Plague-Tincture, or Tincture of Contra-yerva. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Spirit of Contra-yerva, or rectified Spirit of Saffron, or of Angeli∣ca lbij. Contra-yerva in gross pouder, or well bruised ℥iij. Salt of Tartar ℥iss. grind all the Ingredients in a hot Iron Mortar, in a Glass Matrass, or long Bolthead, mix them with the Spirit, which stop close up, and digest 14 days in a very gentle heat, then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Contra-yerva ℥iij. Virginia Snake-root ℥iss. or ℥ij. Camphir ℥ss. Tin∣cture of Salt of Tartar lbiij. mix, digest 14 days, then de∣cant the clear Tincture, which keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 3. Or thus: ℞ Contra-yerva ℥iij. Snake-root ℥ij. Camphir ℥ss. Spiritus Antico∣licus lbiij. mix, digest a week in a Bolthead close stopt, then decant the clear, and keep it for use.
§ 4: Of these the second Tincture is more powerful than the first, and the third more powerful than the se∣cond; and are all famous Antidotes against the Plague, and all sorts of malign, pu∣trid, and pestilential Disea∣ses: It takes off the Contagi∣on of the Disease, and destroys the Putrefaction; so that I believe there is scarcely a greater Antidote or Preserva∣tive in the World against the Malignity and Poyson of the Plague than this Medica∣ment, chiefly the third Prepa∣ration. § 5. The first may be gi∣ven à ℈ij. ad ʒiss. the second à ʒss. ad ℈ij. and the third from gut. xij. ad 30, 40, 50. or more, in Carduus Water, or Aqua Theriacalis, or a Glass of Sack, or some other pro∣per Vehicle, as Water, Infu∣sion, Decoction, &c. § 6. These Tinctures are also famous things against the Colick, and all Oppressions of Wind whatsoever; and as they powerfully open Obstru∣ctions of the Viscera, so they as admirably destroy Putre∣faction, and the Seeds of all malign Diseases, particularly they resist the King's-Evil, Gout, and Scurvy in all their appearances. § 7. Lastly, for the Poor and ordinary People, you may make it with our Spiri∣tus Intimus, that they may not want an Antidote or Re∣medy to save them in the day of Necessity, when possi∣bly they may have little or no Money to pay for it. LXXVI. † Tinctura Corro∣borans, i. Limonum Corti∣cum; The Strengthening Tincture, or Tincture of Limon-peels. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ the yel∣low of Limon-peels fresh cut off, ℥viij. Spirit of Limon-peels lbij. or as much of the Tincture of Salt of Tartar; put all into a Matrass or Bolthead, and di∣gest in a gentle heat for 14 or 20 days, then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. Or you may make it in like manner with Spiritus Anticolicus, which will extract the Tincture with all its Per∣fections in two days: Or for want of that with Spirit of Limon-peels acuated with Spirit or Oyl of Sulphur. § 3. These Tinctures strengthen all the vital Pow∣ers, and recreate all the Spi∣rits natural, vital and animal; they strengthen and fortifie the Stomach, cause a good Appetite and a strong Dige∣stion.
§ 4. They are Cephalick, Neurotick, Stomatick, Car∣diack, and Uterine, good against all manner of Disea∣ses of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as Headachs, Me∣grims, Apoplexies, Epilep∣sies, Lethargies, Vertigo's, Palsies, Lameness, Numbness, Weakness of the Nerves and Joynts, Lassitude of the Womb, and Barrenness, pro∣ceeding from Cold and Moi∣sture of the same. § 5. They are famous Cordials being given in any proper Vehicle, and defend the Heart and Vitals against all manner of Infection of the Measles, Small-Pox, Purples, Spotted-Feaver, or any other malign Feaver; yea, and against the Plague it self: They also cure the bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Creature. § 6. The Dose of the first is from ʒj. ad ʒij. of the se∣cond à gut. 10 ad 20 or more, as the necessity of the Patient may require. ℞ Aqua Lactis alexiteria ℥iij. Syrup of Citron or Limon-peels ℥j. of this Tin∣cture à ʒj. ad ʒij. for a Dose in a malign Feaver. ℞ Aquā Theriacalis ℥i. Cerasorum Ni∣grorum ℥iij. of this Tincture ʒiss. Bezoar mineral gr. xii. mix for a Dose, against the Plague. LXXVII. † Tinctura Exo∣nerans, i. Scammonii; The Purging Tincture, or Tin∣cture of Scammony. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Resi∣nous Scammony as much as you please; bruise it into a Pou∣der, and affuse thereon common Spirit of Wine, so much as may overtop it four inches; digest 3 or 4 days in a gentle heat, and then decant the clear Tin∣cture. To the Feces put more Spirit, and extract till they will yield no more Tincture. These latter Tinctures, if they be not strong enough, are to be put upon fresh Scammony. § 2. Here note, that if you please you may make the Tincture with Aqua Vitae or Aniseed-water, whereby it will in some measure be cor∣rected, and besides, it will be pleasanter to the Patient. § 3. Tentzelius's purging Spirit. ℞ Scammony 4 parts, Juice of Quinces 2 parts; set them in a gentle heat, and stir them daily till they are hard, then beat the Scammony to pouder, and with Spirit of Wine extract a Tincture as aforesaid. It purges without any molestation or trouble. § 4. The Dose must be according to the quantity of Scammony; for example
sake, an ounce of Scammo∣ny will make about 32 pur∣ging Doses; and therefore if you have the compleat Tin∣cture of ℥i. of Scammony in a quart or ℥xxxij. of Aqua Vitae, Aniseed-water, or S. V. you may give ℥i. of that Tin∣cture for a Dose, and so pro∣portion it ab ℥ss ad ʒx. accor∣ding to Age and Strength. § 5. But Experience, which is the chief Mistriss of Arts, tells us, that this Tin∣cture will purge nothing near so well as the Scammo∣ny it self; and I have many times given an ounce, yea, two ounces and more at a time, without any effect at all; and in many Patients the Body has rather been bound than purged, which I conceived came from the Spirit, overcoming the Ca∣thartick Property of the Scam∣mony (all sulphurous Spirits being of a binding quality.) § 6. For this Cause sake I bethought my self of an Expedient to promote the purging faculty of the Scam∣mony, and overcome the binding (I had almost said styptick) Property of the Spi∣rit of Wine, and that was by the addition of Sena, which the Spirit cannot mas; and it is thus: ℞ Spirit of Wine, or Aqua Vitae, or Aniseed-water ℥xxxij. Scammony in pouder Alexandrian Sena A. ℥ij. mix, digest 2 or 3 days in a gentle heat, then strain forth the Tincture by pressing, which be∣ing fine, decant the clear, and keep it for use. § 7. It is an excellent Purge, and carries off all Humors in the Body, whe∣ther Flegm, Choler, Melan∣choly or Watery Humors, is good against the Dropsy, Scurvy and Gout, Rheuma∣tisms, King's-Evil, and other stubborn Diseases, not easie to be overcome. Dose ab ʒss. ad ʒj. or ʒx. according to the strength of the Disease, and Patient's Condition and Ha∣bit of Body. LXXVIII. † Tinctura Fe∣brifuga, i. Schaenanthi; Tincture against Feavers, or Tincture of Camels Hay. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Camels Hay in pouder ℥iiij. Salt of Tartar ℥ij. grind them toge∣ther well in a hot Mortar, then put them into a Glass Matrass, to which put tartarized Spirit of Wine lbiiss. digest close stopt in a very gentle heat for 20 or 30 days, then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. Or thus: ℞ Camels Hay ℥ij. Tincture of Salt of
Tartar ℥xv. mix, digest in a large Vessel 14 days, then de∣cant the clear for use. § 3. Or thus, for the meaner sort of People: ℞ Camels Hay in gross pouder ℥iiij. Spiritus Intimus ℥xxxij. mix, digest close stopt for two days, in a gentle Sand-heat, and then decant the clear Li∣quor. § 4. The Title shews the Use, which is chiefly against all sorts of continent and con∣tinual Feavers, whether non∣putrid, putrid, or malign, ex∣pelling the Morbifick Matter through the pores of the Skin, and by Urine; but besides all this, it is an excellent Sto∣matick, strengthens the Ven∣tricle, causes a good Appe∣tite and a quick Digestion; it expels Wind, provokes Urine and the Courses, di∣gests crude and tough Hu∣mors, and helps spitting of Blood, there being some astriction in it, and eases the after-Pains of Women in Childbed. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒiss. & ʒij. of the last. LXXIX. † Tinctura Galba∣ni, Tincture of Galba∣num. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Galba∣num ℥i. to which put in a Glass Vessel so much Liquor of fixt Nitre, or of Glauber's Alca∣hest so much as throughly to moisten it, or in some measure to dissolve it: Digest for some hours in Sand, then affuse thereon tartarized S. V. so much as may overtop it three or four inches, digest again for some few hours, then enclining the Glass, decant the Tincture, (taking care that none of the Alcahest come off with it) and reserve it for use. To the re∣maining Gum put new S. V. and continue it in digestion again for some time, till the Alcohol will be no more tinged, but remain of a white co∣lour. § 2. Now here is to be noted, that the S. V. ought to be purely rectified, and freed from all its Phlegm, for sim∣ply rectified S. V. is apt to mix and confound itself with the Alcahest, whereby your Tincture will be impure and savor thereof, the which it ought not to do in the least. § 3. When all the Tin∣cture shall be extracted out of the Gum, nothing will re∣main but Feces and Alcahest, which being joyned with the Alcohol of Wine, will always fall down to the bottom, nor ever wll mix therewith. § 4. This Tincture is an approved thing against Va∣pors,
Hysterick Fits, and Hy∣pochondriack Melancholy; it prevails against all cold Diseases of the Womb, opens its Obstructions, and brings away both Birth and After∣birth; it provokes the Cour∣ses, and prevails against Con∣vulsions, Falling-sickness, Swelling, Obstructions, and pain of the Spleen, Scirrhus of the Spleen, inward Ru∣ptures of Veins, shortness of Breath, Cough, Pains in the Sides, and Torment in the Bowels; it kills Worms, re∣sists Poyson, and is an Anti∣dote against the bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Beast, and by some is affirmed to be a Specifick against the Colick. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj. § 5. But for the meaner sort of People, you may ex∣tract it with Spiritus Intimus, which will be done in 12 or 24 hours; and this, tho' it will not be so fine and plea∣sant a Medicine to look up∣on yet may be full as vertuous and efficacious as the former, and in some cases more pre∣valent: Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. § 6. And from this saline Tincture you may (if you so please) extract also a sul∣phurous Tincture, as before, if you affuse thereon the Al∣cohol of S. V. q. s. and digest close stopt some hours, from which you may separate the Tincture by inclination and decantation, as in the for∣mer. § 7. Outwardly, being bathed with it, is good to ease Pain, and dissolve hard Tu∣mors, and being bathed upon the Stomach, expels the Fits of the Mother, Vapors, and suchlike. It also cleanses and heals Wounds and Ulcers. LXXX. † Tinctura Cam∣bogiae, Tincture of Cam∣boge. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Cam∣bogia ℥j. (infine pouder) tar∣tarised S. V. ℥xvj. mix, digest, and extract a Tincture, which being fine, decant from the Feces, and keep for use. Or thus: ℞ Camboge in pouder ℥i. Spiritus Intimus lbij. mix and dissolve, and with the Al∣cohol of S. V. extract a Tin∣cture, which separate by incli∣nation and decanting. § 2. Its chief use is to purge serous and watry Hu∣mors, which it does without any great violence, and there∣fore is profitable against the Dropsy, chiefly the Anasarca and Ascites. § 3. It also prevails against the Jaundice, Gout, and most Obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen; sometimes it pro∣vokes Vomit; sometimes it only works downward, and sometimes it works both ways, and sometimes by ac∣cident it works only by Sweat. § 4. But the certainest way to give it for working, is to mix it with an Infusion of Sena, thus: ℞ Sena ℥iss. Whitewine or Spring-water ℥v. Salt of Tartar ℈j. mix, and make an Infusion over a gen∣tle fire; strain out, and add to it of the Tincture of Cambo∣gia ʒij. or iij. mix and give it for a Dose. It purges watry and scorbutick Humors, and prevails both against Dropsy and Jaundice. Dose of the Tincture alone in any proper Vehicle is à ʒij. ad ʒiiij. LXXXI. † Trinctura Gua∣jaci, Tincture of the Wood Guajacum. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ sha∣vings of Guajacum beaten small and past thro' a Sieve ℥ij. affuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. ℥vj. digest in a Bolt-head with a long neck for 8 or 10 days, (the longer the better) then de∣cant the Bloodcolour'd Tincture, strain it through a Cloth, and keep it for use. § 2. Or thus: ℞ pouder of Lignum Guajacum ℥viij. Spiritus Intimus lbij. mix, di∣gest close stopt in a gentle heat for 2 or 3 days, then decant the clear, filter through brown Pa∣per, & keep the Tincture for use. § 3. The first is a sul∣phurous Tincture made with S. V. the latter is a saline Tincture, and they both have their various uses and inten∣tions, tho' both are alike good in some cases, and for some purposes. § 4. The first Tincture is sudorifick and alexiphar∣mick, heats, drys, stops Ca∣tarrhs, helps Diseases of the Stomach, prevails against Rheumatisms, wandring Pains and the Reliques of the Ve∣nereal Disease, it being an Antidote against the maligni∣ty and venom of the Pox. Dose à ʒj. ad ij. in decoction of Guajacum. § 5. The latter or saline Tincture has many of the ver∣tues of the former, as being a Help for Rheumatisms, Ve∣nereal Reliques, and the like, but it operates more by Urine than by Sweat, cleansing and purifying the Reins, Ureters, and Spermatick Vessels, and therefore the more fit to be used against Gonorrhea's, whether simple or virulent, Whites, &c. to be taken die∣tetically, à ʒj. ad ʒiij. in some proper Vehicle.
LXXXII. † Tinctura Hy∣pnotica, i. Opii; Tincture procuring Sleep, or Tin∣cture of Opium. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Pure Thebian Opium ℥i. S. V. acua∣ted with Spirit of Sulphur lbj. mix, dissolve, digest in a Bolt∣head well stopt for 8 or 10 days, then decant the clear for use. This is the simple Tin∣cture. § 2. A Tincture of Opi∣um with a more compound Menstruum: ℞ Spirit of Ca∣stor, Spirit of Saffron, Spirit of Cloves, Spirit of Virginia Snake-root, ana ℥iiij. which acuate with Spirit of Sulphur, in which dissolve Thebian Opi∣um ʒx. adding Cochenele in fine pouder ʒiij. mix, digest close stopt for 10 or 14 days in a very gentle heat, then decant the clear Tincture, which keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 3. Now in both these Processes here is to be noted, that a Menstruum acuated with Spirit of Sulphur, Spirit of Salt, or some other Acid, is rather chosen than one that is not, because it is the na∣ture of Opium to make the Stomach sick in many per∣sons, and in some vehement∣ly sick with violent Rea∣chings and Vomitings, and in others who take it with less trouble, yet it is apt to di∣sturb the Stomach, and make it out of order, for which rea∣son it was thought necessary to be corrected, and among Correctives, none are found so powerful and prevalent for this purpose as a proper Acid, among the several Varieties of which you may chuse what agrees most with your Inten∣tion; but for the general this is certain, that the Men∣struum being acuated with any Acid, it corrects its eme∣tick Property, and makes the Tincture become more benign and friendly not only to the Stomach in particular, but to the Ʋniversal Body in gene∣ral. § 4. It is chiefly to be given at night going to Bed, (you may give either of the Tinctures, but the latter and compounded is more cordial than the former.) Dose à gut. xij. ad 20, 30, or 40, encrea∣sing the Dose according to the Age and Strength of the Sick, and vehemency of the Disease afflicting. § 5. Given thus at night in a Glass of Canary, or other fit Vehicle, it admirably in∣duces Sleep, and gives ease in all manner of tormenting and excruciating Pains, and stops the flux or motions of
all sorts of Humors in any part of the Body, partly by thickening the matter, and partly by constringing or shutting up the Mouths of the Vessels, as also by per∣spiring the more fusible and liquid Juice through the Pores of the Skin, for it indu∣ces a sweating posture after a very excellent and easie man∣ner. § 6. It gives ease in the most exquisite Colick, helps a Pleurisie, cures all sorts of Fluxes of the Bowels, as Diarrhoea, Dysenteria, Lien∣teria, and the Hepatick Flux, stops the Menses and the Whites, and is very prevalent against Catarrhs, Coughs, Colds, and other Distempers of those parts, proceeding from flowing, thin, sharp or salt Humors. § 7. It is a singular thing against a Gonorrhoea, eases the Pains of the Gout, Scia∣tica, and Rheumatism, let them proceed from what cause soever. It is also ap∣proved against intermitting Feavers or Agues of all sorts, and in a short time puts a stop to the current of the Disease. There is scarcely any Case wherein exquisite Pain is pre∣sent, in which this most ad∣mirable Remedy is not a Re∣lief: Esteem it as a Jewel. § 8. Marggrave his Tin∣cture of Opium is thus made. ℞ Thebian Opium ℥i. put it into a Bolt-head, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar, q. s. or so much as may overtop it some inches; mix, dissolve and digest for one day (or more) then press all hard out through a Cloth; this straining take and digest again till the Feces subside, and the liquor becomes clear, which decant, and keep it close stopt for use. § 9. It is anodyn, narco∣tick, and somniserous, indu∣cing Sleep after an admirable manner; it takes away all sorts of Pains, and is a migh∣ty Anodyn even outwardly applied, the part pained be∣ing bathed therewith, and a double Cloth dipt therein be∣ing applied or laid over. Dose à gut. ij. ad iiij. vel vj. LXXXIII. † Tinctura Ma∣stiches, Tincture of Ma∣stick. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Ma∣stick in fine pouder ℥i. tarta∣riz'd S. V. ℥v. put them into a Bolt-head with a long neck, which stop close up; di∣gest in a very gentle heat for 14, or 16, or 20 days, shaking the Glass once day, then being clear, decant, filter, and keep it for use. This is nothing
but Vernish, and not so fit this way made for inward uses. § 2. The true medicinal Tincture is thus made: ℞ Mastick in pouder ℥i. put it into a Glass Vessel, and af∣fuse thereon so much Liquor of fix'd Nitre, or the Alcahest of Glauber, so much as may throughly moisten it; digest 24 hours in a Sand-heat; then affuse thereon the highest alco∣holiz'd S. V. (for the ordinary will scarcely do) so much as may overtop it three or four in∣ches, and digest again for ano∣ther day, shaking the Glass now and then; being clear, incline the Glass, and decant the Tin∣cture, taking heed that you pour out none of the Alcahest; and to the remaining matter put new Alcohol, and digest again, continuing this Work so long, till it will yield no more Tincture. § 3. It is an excellent Ce∣phalick and Stomatick, streng∣thening the Stomach in all its faculties; it stops Vomi∣ting, and helps the retentive faculty, causing a good Dige∣stion; it stops fluxes of the Bowels of all sorts, helps a∣gainst spitting of Blood, and is good for Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, and Fluxes of Rheum; it takes away Acri∣mony, and represses all sorts of sharp Humors. § 4. It is prevalent against most Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as Me∣grims, Vertigo's, Lethargies, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Pal∣sies, Convulsions, and other Diseases of those parts. It cures Pains and Sickness at Stomach, and represses Va∣pors arising from the Mother. Dose à gut. 20 ad 60 more or less in a Glass of Wine, as Canary, Sherry, &c. § 5. Lastly, for the mea∣ner sort my advice is, that it should be made with the Spi∣ritus Intimus, allowing ℥ij. to lbj. of the Spirit, mixing, digesting and filtring accor∣ding to Art. Dose of this à ʒss. ad ʒij. LXXXIV. † Tinctura Mo∣schi, Tincture of Musk. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Alcohol of S. V. acuated with Spirit of Sulphur lbj. Spiritus Rosarum Damascenarum ℥i. mix, and digest a week, then add choice Oriental Musk ʒiij. digest a∣gain for 20 days, shaking the Glass once a day, then keep it upon the Feces for use. § 2. It is a great Cor∣dial, and revives all the Spi∣rits, natural, vital, and ani∣mal, but must not be given to hysterick Women, nor such as are troubled with Vapors.
It is good to comfort and corroborate the Brain, streng∣then the Memory, take away sleepiness and dulness of the Senses, and is profitable against a Vertigo, Lethargy, Apoplexy, Fainting, Swoon∣ning, and the like, and is chiefly used as a Perfume for to make grateful other Me∣dicaments. § 3. If to the Composi∣tion you add Cochenele in fine pouder ℥ss. the Medicament will be so much the better, and by far the more Cor∣dial. § 4. A perfumed or musked Water; ℞ Damask-Rose-water ℥iiij. of this Tin∣cture gut. xij. mix them, and keep it close stopt for use. LXXXV. † Tinctura Myr∣rhae, Tincture of Myrrh. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ choice Myrrh in pouder ℥ij. put it in∣to a Bolt-head, upon which put Spirit of Wine, so much as to overtop it 4 inches; stir them well together, and digest in a gentle Sand-heat 3 or 4 days, till the S. V. is loaded with the Tincture of the Myrrh, then de∣cant the clear, and keep it in a Glass close stopt for use. § 2. This is Lemery's Method, and is only a Solu∣tion of the Oily parts of the Myrrh in Spirit of Wine, and though it is commonly made with Wine alone, yet this is much better which is made with Spirit of Wine, because the Menstruum is not only more able to dissolve, but al∣so to receive and retain the Oily or Balsamick parts of the Myrrh; whereas the Flegm of Wine does cause the substance of the Myrrh to dissolve, and will be impreg∣nated as well with the more earthy as with the oily parts of the mixt. § 3. Some use to evapo∣rate this Tincture to the con∣sistency of an Extract, but in so doing they lose the more subtile and volatile parts of the Myrrh, which evanish with the Spirit; so that in my opinion the Tincture itself is much more efficacious and valuable. § 4. It is of great use to hasten Womens Labor, to bring away both Birth and Afterbirth; it provokes the Terms, and opens Obstru∣ctions of the Womb, is a sin∣gular good thing against Va∣pors, and all sorts of hyste∣rick Fits, hysterick Colicks, and the like; it prevails a∣gainst the Vertigo, Megrim, Headach, Apoplexy, Lethar∣gy, Palsie, and all Diseases which proceed from Corru∣ption
of the Humors: It is and Antidote against the Plague and all malign and pestilen∣tial Diseases, hinders Putre∣faction, and is sudorifick and aperitive. Dose à gut x. ad xx. and I have sometimes gi∣ven it à ʒss. ad ʒj. with suc∣cess. § 5. Outwardly bathed on the Stomach, it allays Vapors, and helps Fits of the Mother, and eases pain in any part, especially the Pain and Weakness of the Back; mixed with Tincture of Aloes, it discusses cold Tu∣mors, and softens and dis∣solves Tumors; It prevents Gangreens, scales rotten Bones, and hinders the sprea∣ding of a Sphacelus. § 6. If this Tincture be made Compound after this manner, it will be yet more efficacious and valuable for Cephalick and Uterine Di∣seases: ℞ Myrrh, Castoreum, both in pouder, A. ℥i. pouder of Oxhorus, Saffron, A. ℥ss. Spi∣rit of Wine, so much as may overtop the Ingredients about 4 inches; mix, digest, close stopt for 14 or 20 days, shaking the Glass once a day, then de∣cent the clear Tincture, and keep it for use. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒj. in some fit Vehicle. § 7. Or you may make the Tincture according to Marggrave's method, after this manner: ℞ Myrrh in fine pouder, put it into a Glass, and affuse thereon the Liquor of fixed Nitre, or Glauber's Alcahest, so much as that the pouder may be well moistened; digest them together for 24 hours, then affuse thereon the Alcohol of S. V. so much as may overtop it three or four inches; digest again for an hour or two (but should it be for a day or two it would be bet∣ter) and then carefully decant the Tincture. Ʋpon the Feces affuse more S. V. and digest for 24 hours as before, decanting and repeating this work till the Myrrh will yield no more Tin∣cture. The Alcahest you may recuperate, as we shall in its proper place declare. Dose of the Tincture à ℈j. ad ℈ij. or ʒj. upon an extraordinary occasion. § 8. But for the meaner sort of People, you may in∣stead of S. V. make it with Spiritus Intimus, which will in 24 hours, extract all the chief Vertues of the Myrrh, and make an excellent Medicine. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij.
LXXXVI. † Tinctura Nu∣tritiva, i. Chinae; a nou∣rishing or restoring Tin∣cture, or Tincture of Chi∣na. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Choice Canary lbiiij. rectified S. V. lbij. China in gross Pouder, or well bruised lbj. mix, digest in a Glass Matrass with a blind Head, well luted in a gentle Sand-heat for 14 days, shaking the Vessel once a day; then be∣ing fine, decant the clear Tin∣cture for use. § 2. Where note, that if you make it of equal parts, of China and Sarsaparilla, the Medicine will be never the worse, for Sarsa sweetens the Blood more powerfully than China, and nourishes and re∣stores as much. § 3. That the Menstruum here made use of is two parts Canary to one of Spirit of Wine; the reason of which is, that because China (and Sarsa also) consist more of Aqueous Particles, than Sul∣phurous, Resinous or Oily, an Aqueous Menstruum, or one more abounding with Aque∣ous Particles than S. V. does, was thought not only strong enough, but also more homo∣geneous to the nature of the Body to be extracted: Be∣sides which, tho' S. V. chears and exhilerates the Spirits, yet it nourishes but little; and it was our business to chuse such a Menstruum, which being strong enough to extract the nutri∣tive vertue and power of the China, might also be nu∣tritive itself, which Canary is in the highest measure, if it be joyned with other things nourishing and restorative, with a due proportion of Spirits to enliven the matter, and promote the Operations of Nature. § 4. The intention of this Medicament was to nourish and restore such as were ex∣treamly ematiated and wast∣ed with a Pocky Consumpti∣on, which it does do admi∣rably: But beside this, it re∣stores in all other Consumpti∣ons, adding Strength, and nourishing the whole Body almost to a Miracle. It moi∣stens the dryed parts, encrea∣ses their Substance, streng∣thens the Nerves, revives the Spirits, and adds Life and Activity to the whole human Frame. § 5. In taking of it you may a little dulcifie it with double-refined Sugar, or white Sugarcandy, and you may give it in the morning fasting, a little before Din∣ner,
and last at night going to Bed, after this manner. § 6. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ of this Tincture ℥iiij. white Su∣gar ʒij. Volatile Salt of Hogs∣flesh, gr. x. or xij. mix toge∣ther for a Dose: Half an hour or an hour after taking of it, let the Patient take half a Pint or more of strong Chic∣ken-broth, Mutton-broth, or fresh Beef-broth, made so strong as to be almost a Jelly. LXXXVII. † Tinctura Oli∣bani; Tincture of Oliba∣num. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Oliba∣num in fine Pouder, q. v. put it into a Glass Matrass, and af∣fuse thereon Liquor of fixed Nitre, or Glauber's Alcahest, so much as may well moisten it; digest 24 hours, then affuse thereon the Alcohol of S. V. so much as may overtop it four inches; digest again for 24 hours, and then cautiously de∣cant the clear Tincture. Ʋpon the Feces affuse more Alcohol of S. V. and digest again as before, decanting and repeating this Work till the Olibanum will yield no more Tincture. § 2. But for the meaner sort of People, you may ex∣tract it with Spiritus Intimus, which may be used for all the same Intentions; the former is à ʒj. ad ʒij. or iij. § 3. These Tinctures are hot and dry, subastringent, and strengthening, used chie∣fly against Diseases of the Head, Nerves, Brest, Lungs, and Bowels; it stops Fluxes of the Womb and Bowels, stays Vomiting, helps spitting Blood, strengthens the Head and Nerves, discusses Catarrhs and dries them up, cures Green-wounds and old Ul∣cers, and helps the Piles being bathed therewith: Dropt into the Eyes mixed with a third part of Rosewater, it stops their Rheums, streng∣thens them, and takes away Clouds and Bloodshot. Dose inwardly is à ʒss. ad ʒj. in some proper Liquor. § 4. Modus Utendi. ℞ Blackcherry-water ℥iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels ʒvj. of this Tin∣cture ʒj. mix for a Dose, a∣gainst Pains of the Head, Ver∣tigo, &c. ℞ Aqueous Tin∣cture of the juice of Liquorice, Aqua Lactis, A. ℥ij. Syrup of Limons ʒvj. of this Tincture ʒj. mix for a Dose, against Coughs, and Obstructions of the Lungs. ℞ Poppy-water ℥iij. Syrup of red Poppies ℥ss. of this Tincture ʒiss. mix for a Dose, against Catarrhs and violent fluxes of Rheum from the Head upon the
Eyes, Teeth, Brest, Lungs, &c. LXXXVIII. † Tinctura O∣pii Composita; seu, Lau∣danum Liquidum, Tincture of Opium Compound. ℞ Nutmegs, Saffron, A▪ p. ij. Castoreum p. j. Spirit of Wine, q. s. mix and distil. A smaller weak Spirit may suffice, and therefore you may mix two or three parts of Wa∣ter to one of the distilled Spirit, and being thus mixt, you must dissolve your Opium in it, so much as may sufficiently satu∣rate it. Salmon.] § 2. Let your Opium be crude and not tor∣refied, for that dissipates its best and most volatile parts; and the Water you mix with the Spirit ought to be May∣dew or Rain-water at least, because impregnated with a volatile, nitrous, astral qua∣lity. § 3. The reason why Wa∣ter is mixt with the Spirit for Extraction, is because Opium consisting of many Aqueous Particles, is the more easily dissolved in such a Menstru∣um as is homogeneous with it, which being joyned in a due proportion with a Spirituous Menstruum, is made able to extract all the good and es∣sential parts of the Opium. § 4. It is a good Cordial if given with cordial things, and is chiefly used to pacifie the irritated Spirits, provoke Sleep, stop Catarrhs, and violent Coughs, stay the im∣moderate fluxes of the Belly, and to sweeten the Acrimony of Humors. § 5. It is used after gene∣ral Remedies against Deflu∣xions upon the Brest and Lungs, Vapors, and Hyste∣rick Fits, to appease the Tor∣ments of the Gout, and ease other internal Pains, inward∣ly taken, and outwardly ap∣plied. Dose à gut. 10. ad 20. § 6. Modus Utendi. ℞ Blackcherry-water ℥iiij. Syrup of Poppies ℥ss. of this Tincture à gut. 10 ad 20. Powers of Amber à gut. 20 ad 40. mix for a Dose, against Vapors and Fits of the Mother. ℞ Aquae Lactis ℥iiij. Syrup of Poppies ℥ss. of this Tincture à gut. 10 ad 30. mix for a Dose, against the Gout, and to procure Rest. LXXXIX. † Tinctura Pe∣ctoralis, i. Glycyrrhizae; a Pectoral Tincture, or Tin∣cture of Liquorice. Salmon.] § 1. Take the best Spanish Juice of Liquorice
cut into thin slices, or bruised in a Mortar ℥xviij. Rain-water or May-dew, so much as may overtop it five or six in∣ches, or three pints; mix, and set it in a gentle digestion for 24 hours, or 2 days, viz. till the whole body of the Juice is throughly softened and dissol∣ved; Spirit of Wine six pints: Mix, digest 12 or 14 days, till the Tincture is wholly drawn up into the body of the Men∣struum, then decant the clear, filter, and keep it for use. § 2. Now here is to be noted, that Water alone would extract the most of the Li∣quorice, but being a thing of constant use, and which ought to be kept always rea∣dy prepared, the S. V. is ad∣ded▪ that it might the better keep, which now it will do a year or two, or longer; moreover the Spirit of Wine is a kind of Balsam, and adds to the vertue of the Medi∣cine. § 3. Or thus: ℞ Choice English Liquorice bruised well ℥xviij. common Spirit of Wine four pints; mix, digest 21 or 28 days, then decant the clear for use: Where note, that if you use dryed Liquorice, you may take the Pouder ℥xvij. and mix it with Salt of Potashes ℥ix. grinding them together in a hot Iron Mortar, and then with four pints of the best rectified S. V. extract the Tin∣cture according to Art. § 4. Or thus: ℞ Spanish Juice well bruised ℥iiij. Spiri∣tus Intimus lbiiij. mix, digest in a gentle Sand-heat for 24 hours, then decant the clear Tincture, which filter, and keep it for use. § 5. Or thus: ℞ English green Liquorice well bruised ℥viij. Spiritus Intimus lbiiij. mix, digest 48 hours, then de∣cant the clear Tincture, which filter and keep for use. Where note, that if in the time of the digestion you add an eighth part of Aniseeds, the Medicine will yet be the more pectoral. § 6. It is an excellent Pe∣ctoral, stops Coughs and vio∣lent Catarrhs, expectorates tough Flegm from the Lungs and Kidneys, abates sharp∣ness, lenifies roughness, takes away hoarseness, helps corro∣sion of the Bladder and sharp∣ness of the Urine, and molli∣fies the Bellies of Infants. § 7. Modus Utendi. ℞ Aquae Lactis ℥iiij. Syrup of Poppies ℥ss. of this Tincture ℥i. to ℥ij. mix for a Dose, against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, sharp∣ness of Urine, Obstructions of the Brest and Lungs, &c.
XC. † Tinctura Quartana∣ria, i. Peruviana; Tincture for Quartans, or Tincture of the Jesuite's Bark. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Cortex Peruvianus, or Jesuit's Bark in fine pouder newly made lbj. Sal. Tart. lbss. Spirit of Wine lbiiij. put all into a Bolt-head, mix or shake them well together; close it up, and digest in a very gentle heat for 14 days, sha∣king the Glass once a day, then being fine, decant the clear and keep it for use. § 2. Or rather thus: ℞ Jesuite's Bark newly made into fine pouder lbj. Claret wine lbix. Spirit of Wine lbiij. mix in a Bolt-head, close it well up, and digest cold for a month, then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 3. Where note, That it is to be beaten into pouder but just when you use it, for if it lies long, if but 24 hours, it loses much of its vertue; for there are certain volatile Particles in it which easily and almost immediate∣ly fly away, and that is the reason that it sometimes fails of its Operation, having been beaten long beforehand. § 4. That of these two Tinctures the latter is the better, because it is made with a Menstruum more ho∣mogene with it than is all S. V. as containing in it a greater number of Styptick Particles: I know some make it wholly with the one or the other, but neither are best alone. § 5. For Spirit of Wine is not styptick enough to con∣firm and corroborate, or ex∣tract all the specifick Vertue of the Cortex; and Claret Wine, tho' it is homogene with it in Property, and sty∣ptick enough, yet it has not sharpness enough sufficiently to penetrate and open the Body thereof: Now acua∣ting the Wine with the Spi∣rit you have a Menstruum strong enough to extract all the Vertue of the Bark, and to confirm it in its Vertue and Operation, as being of the same styptick Property with it: Besides which, it will keep much better, and not easily decay; whereas was it made with the Claret a∣lone, it would quickly grow soure, and so lose its whole Power and Force. § 6. The first Tincture may be given in simple Cla∣ret Wine, or a Decoction of the lesser Century, à ʒj. ad ʒiij. ad iiij. the latter from 4 to 6 ounces alone of it self.
§ 7. But before you use this Remedy some Cautions are necessary to be premised: I. That you never use it to such Women who have an Obstruction of the Menses, or are troubled with the Green-sickness, nor to other persons who are frequently afflicted with a Constipation of the Bowels, or have a continent or continual Fea∣ver, whether putrid, malign, or pestilential; for in the case of all those kinds of Feavers, it is commonly mortal, and does the work as surely in a manner as if the Hangman did it. § 8. About the time of the writing of this, I knew four men seiz'd with a conti∣nual Feaver, two were high∣ly malignant, and the other two more apparently the Spotted-Feaver; two Do∣ctors, of great names, but no Physicians, were sent for, who presently prescribed the Pulvis Patrum, and in three days time the Victim yielded to the fatal blow. Afterwards to the second they gave the same in like manner, who died the fourth day. To the third they gave it also, who had the Spotted-Feaver, and he died in 2 days. They yet continued to give the same Medicine to a fourth, and in order after they had seen the ill effects in the former three, and this likewise became a Sacrifice with the rest. § 9. Another Youth fell sick (after the other four) with the Spotted-Feaver, to whom the same persons pre∣scribed the same course, (so senceless, or rather wilful and ignorant, were those Coblets and Botchers in Physick, those Legal, as they say, and Pri∣viledg'd Quacks:) but the Relations of the Youth ha∣ving the Massacres of the other four just before their Eyes, would not yield to it, but forbad their fatal Pro∣ceedings; and having some knowledge of me, immediate∣ly came to me, and carried me to the Sick; I view'd the Patient, and they told me what had been prescrib'd; I confess I forbad it, as they va∣lued their Sons and Relations Life, and counselled to other things; my Advice was fol∣lowed, and the young man recovered, did well, and is now abroad and healthy again, tho' in the Opinion of all that saw him, the Hope of Life was past. I cured a second Patient in the same House, of the same Disease, tho' delirious, by the very same method, who is now alive and well; and also a
third, in the same place, who after fell sick, and with the same Medicines, with the same good success. § 10. I give this Rela∣tion of these Experiences to convince, if possible, those Homicides of their Barbarity and Male practise, and to give the unthinking World a Caution to be no more im∣posed upon for the future, by such base, ignorant, mercenary and merciless, yet vainglorious Pretenders to Physick. But to proceed. § 11. II. Let the Patient be first very well cleansed, both upwards and down∣wards, by some general Re∣medies, such as are the Tartar Emetick of Mynsicht, Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or Vi∣num Benedictum, Antimoniale, or some suchlike; and for the greater Security sake, purge them also, either with our Family-pills or Family-pouder, or an Infusion of Sena, Electu∣arium Lenitivum, or other Medicines proper to the Con∣stitution. § 12. This being done, you may now come safely to the use of the Cortex, or of this Tincture; for the Malignity and Morbifick Cause being thus generally carried off, you need not fear the shutting it up, and lock∣ing it into the Body to do more mischief, the which if not carried off, it must infal∣libly do. § 13. What must become of the Venom in a malign and pestilential Feaver, when by this Medicament it is lockt up within the Body? When by it the Diaphoresis is hindered, the Pores of the Body constringed, and the other Passages by it stopt up, so that there is no way made for the Poyson to pass off or transpire; doubtless it re∣currs to the Center and smites the Heart and Vitals in a mo∣ment, and immediately makes the miserable Patient a Sacri∣fice to Ignorance and Pride: The truth of which Position I think was too well verified or made out in the four above enumerated Examples. § 14. It now remains, that we shew for what Inten∣tions this Remedy is used, and the Order, Method, and Rea∣son of taking it. The Disea∣ses it is most proper against, and for which it is a Speci∣fick, are all sorts of intermit∣ting Feavers, vulgarly called Agues, (in the cases of conti∣nent or continual Feavers it is as bad as Poyson) and in all Fluxes of Blood, as spitting of Blood, bleeding at the Nose, overflowing of the
Menses, a Dysentery, and the Hepatick Flux, and indeed in all other Fluxes of the Bowels, or Fluxes of sharp Humors upon the Lungs cal∣led Catarrhs, or upon the Limbs and Joynts, called a Rheumatism. In these and the like cases it is the most famed Remedy in the World, nor is there any Remedy yet found out, that is equal to it in Vertue and Goodness, for those Intentions, and if right∣ly used, and given by a skil∣ful, prudent, and honest Hand, it is as safe as it is sure and excellent. § 15. Universally being thus premised, you may come to the use of the Cortex, or this Tincture. In Children and tender persons the Dose is to be less, but often reite∣rated and longer continued: In Tertians and Quartans you ought to use it at the end of the Fit, and then again to be repeated when the force of it is over, which may be every 6 or 8 hours; but because of its heat from the Men∣struum, if any should fear it might enflame the Body, by the so often repeating of its Doses, to prevent any Dan∣ger of that kind, you may give it thus: ℞ of this Tin∣cture à ℥iij. ad vj. Blackcher∣ry-water (or some suchlike) ℥vj. or viij. mix for a Dose, and give or repeat it at divers in∣tervals, till the time of the next Fit; when that is over, repeat the Remedy again in the same manner, till the time that another Fit should be, if it be not prevented by what is given. § 16. The bigger the Dose, the longer must be the Intervals between each Dose; and if the Fits cease, so that the Sick thinks himself well, yet he must be sure to con∣tinue the Dose morning and night, or twice or thrice a day for at least 12 or 14 days after that, lest the Di∣sease should return again. If this course be taken, and the Sick forbears purging after it, (for that also makes the Ague recurr) you need not fear but to have an absolute and per∣fect Cure. § 17. Many after the first taking of it have had no more Fits, so powerful and abso∣lute a Remedy it is; but if it should so chance, that the Paroxysm or Fit should re∣turn again, you must again repeat the whole former course (the purging excepted) and you may be sure that it will not fail to produce the desired effects, viz. so per∣fectly to cure the Ague, that it shall no more return upon
that Basis, or from the Old Cause or Foundation. § 18. A Quotidian is com∣monly mastered at the first Fit, after taking the first Dose; a single and double Tertian at the second Fit, or at most at the third, often∣times at the first; and a sin∣gle and double Quartan at the third or fourth Fit at most, be it never so stubborn. § 19. Lastly, you must be sure not to give it at the beginning of a Fit, nor yet during the time of it, because then, instead of abating the Force and Violence of the Di∣sease, it would be apt, by reason of the turgency of the Febritick Spring, to excite a more fierce Conflict, and make the Fit the more vio∣lent and obnoxious. See our Seplasium, lib. 8. cap. 2. sect. 14. where you may re∣ceive abundant satisfaction. XCI. † Tinctura Rhabarba∣ri Absinthiata; Worm∣wood Tincture of Rhu∣barb. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Rhu∣barb very thin sliced, or grosly bruised ℥iiij. Aquae Absinthii compositae▪ (which see Cap. 50. Sect. 62. of this Book afore∣going) lbij. mix in a Bolt∣head, digest in a gentle heat, close stopt for 14 days, shaking the Bottle once a day, then be∣ing settled and fine, decant the clear, and keep it for use. § 2. You may also, for want of this, make the Tin∣cture with choice Cinnamon∣water, or with any other Cordial-water, which may answer the Intention of the Medicine. § 3. This Tincture has both a purging and an astrin∣gent Property, for it purges gently Choler, Flegm, and clammy tartarous Humors which cause the Colick and Griping of the Guts, from the Stomach and Bowels; be∣sides which, it has a Cordial and strengthening Vertue; it is especially good for the Heart, Liver, and Spleen, is good against Fainting and Swooning, Sickness at Heart, Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, cures the Jaundice, and all sorts of Fluxes, as Diarrhoeas, Dysenteries, Lien∣teries, and the Hepatick Flux, from its astringent Property. § 4. Indeed I must needs say, I know it to be a Speci∣fick in the most vehement Fluxes of the Bowels, and will do that (in those cases) which a thousand other Me∣dicines will not do; and I have cured Colicks and vehe∣ment Gripings of the Bowels
with it, of several Months standing, and when I have been failed by many other Medicaments. § 5. Utendi Modus. When given for purging, use it thus: ℞ of this Tincture ℥i. choice Whitewine, in which a few leaves of Sena have been infused ℥iiij. Syrup of Damask-Roses ℥ss. mix for a Dose. The Body being sufficiently cleansed, when you would stop a Flux and strengthen the parts, give it thus: ℞ Cinnamon-water, Blackcherry∣water, A. ℥ij. of this Tincture, Tincture of Catechu A. ℥ss. Sy∣rup of red Poppies ʒvi. mix for a Dose, and let the Sick drink it all the day long in all the Drink he takes, about fifty or sixty drops at a time, in a little time it will so alter and corroborate the Bowels, and the whole Ha∣bit of the Body, that the Pa∣tient will think himself to be almost a new man. XCII. † Tinctura Rubra, i. Papaveris erratici; The Red Tincture, or Tincture of Corn-Poppies. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Corn-poppyflowers new and fresh ga∣thered lbx. rectified Spirit of Wine drawn off from Opi∣um lbxx. digest in a Matrass covered with a blind Head, and well luted to, for 14 days, then strain out by pressing; digest again till the Recrements subside, then decant the clear, filter, and keep it in a Vessel close stopt for use. § 2. Now here is to be noted, that if you would have the Tincture stronger of the Flowers, you may affuse the same upon a like quantity of fresh Flowers, digesting, pres∣sing out, digesting again and filtring as before. § 3. If also you add some Spices, as Jamaica-pepper in pouder ℥iij. Nutmegs in pou∣der ℥j. Mace ℥i. Cloves ℥ss. mix and digest with the Flowers aforesaid; they will give the Tincture a more pleasing Flavour, correct the crude taste of the Flowers, and make it much more stomatick and cordial. § 4. It is a Specifick a∣gainst Surfeits, Vomiting, Sickness at Stomach, Coughs, Catarrhs, Rheums; it streng∣thens the Stomach, causes Digestion, prevents and cures Pleurisies, gently induces Sleep, cures the Colick and Gripings of the Guts even to a Miracle, resists Poyson, and eases the Pains of the Spleen and Hypochonders. § 5. Held in the Mouth, it eases the Tcothach; and
taken inwardly, it helps the oppression of the Stomach, the Chin-Cough, or Whoop∣ing-Cough▪ stops Fluxes of all sorts, strengthens the Bo∣wels, and helps the overflow∣ing of the Terms in Wo∣men. § 6. It cools the Blood, helps sharp and gnawing Rheums, cures the Phthisick, spitting of Blood, Pains and Stitches in the Sides, prevails against Megrims, Headachs, Frenzies, and Madness. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒij. or iiij. according to Strength, Age, urgency of the Disease, and customary Use thereof, at Night going to Bed, either with an equal quantity of Syrup or Clove∣gilliflower, or mixt with ℥iiij of Blackcherry-water. XCIII. † Tinctura Rutae; Tincture of Rue. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Rue carefully dryed ℥iiij. Salt of Tartar ℥ij. Grind them toge∣ther in a hot Iron Mortar, put them into a Glass Matrass, to which affuse of the best re∣ctified Spirit of Rue lbiij. mix and cover the Vessel immedi∣ately with a blind Head, luting well the juncture; digest all in a very gentle heat for 14 days, shaking the Glass once a day, then being-fine, decant off the clear Tincture, and keep it for use. § 2. This Tincture is Cephalick, Neurotick, Sto∣matick, Cardiack, and Ute∣rine; it incides, attenuates, digests, discusses; is alexi∣pharmick, and resists Poyson, used chiefly in the Plague and other malign Diseases, to cure them, and preserve from them, to expel Poyson, ex∣tinguish Lust, cure the Pleu∣risie, the Colick, bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs or other venomous Creatures. § 3. Outwardly used, it is beneficial against Ague-Fits, bathing the Back-bone there∣with; it helps also the Head∣ach, Megrim, Vertigo, Le∣thargy, and malignant or pestilential Feavers by way of Epithem, being given withal inwardly according to Art. § 4. The Dose is à ʒj. ad ʒij. in some proper Vehicle, after this manner; ℞ Ange∣lica or Blackcherry-water ℥iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels ʒvj. of this Tincture à ʒj. ad ʒij. mix for a Dose, against Diseases of the Head and Womb, Poy∣son, bitings of mad Dogs, &c. ℞ Carduus-water, or Aquae Lactis alexiteriae ℥iij. Syrup of Limons ℥i. of this Tincture ʒj. to ʒij. mix for a Dose, against the Plague and all pestilential
and malign Diseases. § 5. This Tincture may also be profitably made with the same quantity of the Tin∣cture of Salt of Tartar, to be given à ʒss. to ʒj. So also with Spiritus Intimus, to be given à ʒj. to ʒiij. it is chea∣per, and so fitter for the mea∣ner sort of People, not much inferiour to either of the former Preparations, and in some cases superiour to them. XCIV. † Tinctura Salviae absinthiata; Wormwood-Tincture of Sage. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Red Sage carefully dryed ℥iiij. Aquae absinthii compositae (whose Preparation see Chap. 1. Sect. 62. of this Book afore∣going) lbij. mix in a Bolt∣head; digest in a gentle heat close stopt for 14 days, shaking the Glass once a day; then be∣ing very fine, decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use. § 2. Or for want of this Water, you may make it with Spirit of Sage and addi∣tion of Salt of Tartar; or otherwise with Tincture of Salt of Tartar; as we have in many other places at large directed. § 3. It is Cephalick, Neu∣rotick, Stomatick, Cordiack, Uterine and Arthritick; provokes Urine and the Terms in Women, yet cor∣rect them when too many; is good against Headachs, Megrims, Vertigoes, Lethar∣gies, Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Catarrhs, Weak∣ness of the Stomach, Indige∣stion, want of Appetite, Fain∣ting and Swooning Fits, Va∣pors, Fits of the Mother, Gout and running Pains in the Limbs, inwardly given and outwardly bathing the parts affected therewith. § 4. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. in some proper Vehicle. ℞ An∣gelica-water, or Carduus or Blackcherry-water ℥iij. or iiij. Syrup of Black-cherries ℥i. of this Tincture à ℥j. ad ℥ij. Mix for a Dose to be given in a Morning fasting. XCV. † Tinctura Senae ab∣sinthiata; Wormwood-Tincture of Sena. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Choice Alexandrian Sena lbj. Aquae absinthii compositae (in Cap. 1. Sect. 62. of this Book) lbix. put all into a Glass Matrass, which cover with a blind Head, and lute well; digest three or four days (or a fortnight, which is better) in a very gentle heat, then decant the pure red Tin∣cture, and keep it for use.
§ 2. It is an excellent Purge, and carries off all Hu∣mors which are predominant but chiefly Wind, Water and Melancholy by a Specifick Property: It opens Obstru∣ctions of the Spleen, and helps such as are spleenetick and melancholy; it prevails against Catarrhs and Rheu∣matisms, the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout, and Kings-Evil; and cures many repu∣ted incurable Diseases. I have also found it an excel∣lent thing to cure the Rickets in Children, being mixt with a fit Vehicle. § 3. I chuse a fortnights digestion rather than two or three days; for though that shorter time seems to extract as deep Tincture as a lon∣ger; yet by Experience I can tell you, That that which has stood fourteen days upon the Ingredients, purges almost as much more as the other, which stands only the shor∣ter time; and without doubt, by that long digestion, the more inward Vegetable Salt and Sulphur of the Sena are more effectually loosened and extracted. § 4. Dose ab ℥i. ad ℥ij. ac∣cording to Age and Strength. ℞ Carduus-water ℥iiij. of this Tincture ab ℥i. ad ℥ij. Syrup of Prunes made with Sena ℥i. mix for a Dose; which is most effectual in the Cases before enumerated. ℞ Scur∣vygrass-water ℥ij. of this Tin∣cture from ℥ss. ad ℥i. or more; Syrup of Prunes, or Maiden∣hair, or Liverwort ℥i. mix for a Dose against the Rickets and Kings-Evil in Children. § 5. But if you desire that it should purge yet more briskly, and carry off the morbifick cause more abso∣lutely in the Scurvy, Drop∣sy, Jaundice, Gout and Kings-Evil; you may add to the Composition of Resinous Jalap in fine pouder ℥iij. and then it will answer Expectation ac∣cording to your Desire. XCVI. † Tinctura Stoma∣chica Cordialis, i. Aurantia∣rum Corticum; The Cor∣dial Stomach Tincture. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ the yellow of Orange-peels fresh and thinly cut lbj. Spirit of Orange-peels, or instead thereof Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbvj. mix in a Glass Matrass, which cover with a blind Head; di∣gest in a very gentle heat for 12 or 14 days, then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. This is the best, most noble and substantial Tin∣cture; but for ordinary use among the meaner sort, you
extract it with rectified S. V. yea, it may be of good use and service, tho' done only with common Spirit of Wine. § 3. It is a famous Ce∣phalick, Neurotick, Stoma∣tick, Cardiack, Uterine, and Nephritick; it is also an opener of Obstructions, a provoker of Sweat, a resister of Poyson, an Antidote a∣gainst Malignity, especially of the Plague and Spotted-Feaver, hindering Putrefacti∣on, and a singular Diure∣tick. § 4. It cures the Vertigo, Apoplexy, Megrim, Head∣ach, (from a cold cause) Le∣thargy, Palsie, Convulsions, and admirable to correct the coldness, windiness, and weak∣ness of the Stomach, want of Appetite, and Indigestion: It is an extraordinary Cor∣dial, cheers the Heart, re∣vives the Spirits, represses Melancholy, is good against Vapors and Fits of the Mo∣ther, and after a peculiar manner rectifies the cold and moist Distemper of the Womb, as also the weakness thereof, which are common∣ly together the causes of Bar∣renness. § 5. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj. or ʒiss. thus: ℞ Angelica or Borrage water ℥iv. Syrup of Citrons ℥vj. of this Tincture ʒiss. Tincture of Cochenele ʒss. mix for a Cordial Dose, against Faintings, Swoonings, Fits, Sickness at Heart, &c. ℞ Blackcherry-water ℥iv. Syrup of Citron-peels ʒvj. of this Tin∣cture à ʒj. ad ʒiss. Tincture of Man's-Skull ʒss. mix for a Dose against Distempers of the Head, Brain and Nerves, bitings of Serpents, and mad Dogs. XCVII. † Tinctura Styracis, Tincture of Styrax. Salmon.] § 1. Styrax Ca∣lamita, the best and most Resi∣nous ℥ij. put it into a Glass Cucurbit, upon which affuse the best tartarised S. V. so much as may overtop it 4 or 5 inches; digest in a warm Bal∣neo for one day, till the Spirit is tinged of a red colour, which decant, adding more Spirit and digesting, if you see any of th Resinous parts yet remain: Pu these Tinctures together, and keep them for use. § 2. But because this Gum needs a prior Extra∣ction, before you can well extract the Tincture there∣of, we will shew you Zwel∣fer's Method of doing it: ℞ the best and most Resinous Styrax Calamita, beat or hreak it grosly in a Mortar, put it into an earthen Pan, to which
affuse Wine, or Rose-water q. s. dissolve it over the Fire by boi∣ling, then putting all into a Bag, by the help of a Press strein it forth hot, after which carefully separate the Rosin from the watery matter, and keep it for the former use. § 3. Schroder advises to chuse the fat and clammy Storax, which is red, and with white Fragments, for that (saith he) is best; or the yellow with a sweet scent, that yields like Honey when it is softened; the branny, black, or mouldy, without scent, is naught. § 4. This Tincture is ce∣phalick, pectoral and dige∣stive, good against Colds, Coughs, Catarrhs, or Distil∣lations of Rheum, Hoarsness, Astma's, and the like: It mol∣lifies the hardness of the Womb, provokes the Terms, and resists Poyson. § 5. Dropt into the Ears, it helps the singing and noise in them, and gives ease in Pains and Aches from any cold cause, being bathed up∣on the parts afflicted: It strengthens the Nerves, and is singularly good against Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, Bruises, overstraining of the Joynts, &c. § 6. Taken constantly for some time, it is said to cure Barrenness. I will not affirm this without any exception, but I knew one Woman which had been without Children fifteen years, who after she had taken this Tin∣cture constantly for three or four months, conceived, and had a lusty Child: And another who had been eight years without a Child, after she had taken it for two months, conceiv'd and brought forth a lusty Boy. Dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. XCVIII. † Tinctura Sudo∣rifica, i. Serpentariae Vir∣ginianae; The Sudorifick Tincture, or Tincture of Virginia Snakeroot. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Radix Serpentaria, or Virginian Snake∣root well bruised ℥iss. or ℥ij. Salt of Tartar ℥i. be at all in∣to a small pouder in a hot Iron Mortar, put it into a Glass Matrass, and affuse thereon the best tartariz'd S. V. lbiss. cover it with a blind Head, luting the Juncture, and digest for a Month in a very gentle heat, shaking the Glass once a day; then being fine, decant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. You may also ex∣tract it with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, which will be better than the former; or
with tartarised S. V. acuated with Spirit of Nitre or Sul∣phur both in the same pro∣portion, which latter will be better against all malign and pestilential Diseases. § 3. It is one of the grea∣test Antidotes and Alexiphar∣micks in the World, perfor∣ming that which no other Alexipharmick will do. It infallibly cures the biting of the Rattle-Snake, (the most venomous of all Serpents) and immediately secures the Pa∣tient from Death; its sana∣tive Vertue being as volatile and swift as the volatility and acuteness of the Poyson is fierce and dangerous; yea, and exceeding it in those re∣spects, it defends the Heart and Vitals from all manner of danger in that case, as also from the bitings of other Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Creature. § 4. All these Tinctures are nearly of equal strength, but the last of them is the more powerful Antidote a∣gainst the Plague or Pesti∣lence, Spotted-Feaver, and suchlike malign Diseases: They defend the Heart a∣gainst the most vigorous As∣saults of the Pestilential Poy∣son, and like an Angel of Peace, speak Safety to the Sick, if timely given, or be∣fore the fatal Signals of Death appear. § 5. Dose of any of them à ʒss. ad ʒj. or ʒiss. thus: ℞ Carduus-water ℥iv. Syrup of Limons ℥i. of any of these Tinctures à ʒss. ad ʒiss. Bezoar minerale ℈ss. mix for a Dose, for one assaulted with the Plague or Spotted Feaver. ℞ Snakeroot-water ℥iv. Syrup of Juice of Citrons ʒvj. of this Tincture ʒj. Cochenele gr. xvj. mix for a Dose, against the bitings of Serpents, Rattle-snakes, mad Dogs, Plague, Poyson, &c. It provokes Sweat powerfully. XCIX. † Tinctura Sudorifi∣ca minor, i. Valerianae; The lesser Sweating Tin∣cture, or Tincture of Va∣lerian. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Vale∣rian Roots in pouder ℥vj. pure Salt of Tartar ℥j. grind them together in a hot Iron Mortar, then put them into a Matrass, and affuse thereon, of the best tartarised S. V. lbiss. mix, di∣gest us in the former, and de∣cant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. You may also make it in the same Proportions with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or tartarised S. V. acuated with Spirit of Nitre
or Sulphur, or with the Spi∣ritus Intimus for meaner Peo∣ple, as we have before seve∣ral times directed. § 3. It is an excellent Su∣dorifick, and sends out the malignity of the Measles, Small-Pox, Plague, Spotted-Feaver, or of any other ma∣lign and pestilential Distem∣per, through the Pores of the Skin, saving and defending the Heart and Vitals from the Poyson and Dan∣ger. § 4. It is aperitive and diuretick, opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Ureters, used much in As∣thma's, Pleurisies, weakness of Sight, Catarrhs, Jaundice, Ruptures, &c. § 5. Outwardly, mix'd with an equal quantity of Rosewater, and put into the Eyes, it strengthens the Sight, and cleanses the Spots there∣of: Bathed on the Head and Temples, it cures the Head∣ach, eases Pains and Aches in other parts being applied, and is good to cleanse and heal old Ulcers and running Sores. § 6. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒiss. ℞ Carduus or Valerian-water ℥iiij. Syrup of Limons ℥i. of this Tincture ʒj. Bezoar-mine∣ral gr. 10. mix for a Dose, against the Plague, Spotted Feaver, Measles, Small-Pox, bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, &c. C. † Tinctura Taccamahac∣cae; Tincture of Tacca∣mahac. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tacca∣mahac in small bits ℥ij. tarta∣rised S. V. lbj. put all into a Matrass, which cover with a blind Head; digest in a very gentle heat for some few days, then decant the clear Tincture for use. § 2. The same may be done likewise with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or Powers of Turpentine, or Spirit of Wine acuated with Spirit of Nitre, or Sulphur, or Spiritus Intimus. § 3. Made either way, it is an excellent Cephalick, Neurotick, Uterine, and Ar∣thritick. It digests, dissolves, strengthens, softens and dis∣cusses Wind; it eases Pains in the Head, Nerves, Joynts, and other parts, proceeding of cold, being bathed there∣on. § 4. Inwardly taken, it represses Vapors, and helps the suffocation of the Womb, strengthens the Stomach and other Viscera, and stops all Defluxions from the Head to the Eyes, Nose, Mouth,
Teeth, Lungs, &c. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj. CI. † Tinctura Terebinthinae è Chio; Tincture of Chio Turpentine. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ choice Chio Turpentine ℥i. tartariz'd S. V. or Tincture of Salt of Tartar ℥viij. mix, digest in a Glass Matrass with its blind Head, for 2 or 3 days, in a very gentle heat; so have you Tincture of Turpentine filled with its thin, aetherial, and volatile Oyl. § 2. It opens Obstructi∣ons of Liver, Spleen, Reins, and Bladder, and is good against violent Coughs and Distillations of Rheum. It is cephalick, neurotick, ar∣thritick, uterine, and nephri∣tick. It provokes Urine ad∣mirably, dissolves tartarous Mucilage in the Stomach, Reins, and other parts, and expels with the Urine, Sand; Gravel, Stones, &c. giving ease in the most intolerable Pains of that kind. § 3. It is given also in a virulent Gonorrhoea, Ulcers of the Urethra, and the the French Pox; for it is an incomparable Vulnerary, hot, dissolving, mollifying, and cleansing. § 4. It is a good thing also to provoke the Terms, com∣fort and warm a cold and weak Womb, and to induce Conception, being daily ta∣ken à ʒss. ad ʒj. thus: ℞ choice Tent, or Mallago Sack ℥iij. or iv. of this Tincture ℈ij. mix for a Dose, to be ta∣ken at night going to Bed. § 5. Outwardly, it eases all manner of Pains and Aches proceeding from a cold cause; is a famous thing in the Gout and Sciatica; dissolves Tumors, and is pre∣valent against Numbness, Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, and other Diseases of like kind, being only bathed Mor∣ning and Evening upon the parts afflicted: Given in∣wardly in a Clyster à ʒj. ad ʒij. it gives ease in the Colick, Stone, and Griping of the Guts. § 6. But Schroder makes it thus: Put the Turpentine into an earthen Dish, and with a gentle Fire under it, make the Oyl to evaporate till there remains only a very red Colo∣phony, of which draw a Tin∣cture with Spirit of Wine, and at the bottom there will remain a Balsam to anoint the Reins against the Stone. § 7. This Tincture has the Vertues of the former, but not altogether so power∣ful,
and may be given in the same Dose. In most ca∣ses the other is best, but in a Gonorrhoea, whether simple or virulent, or in an Ulcer of the Reins, Ureters, or Bladder this much exceeds that. CII. † Tinctura Thymi Ci∣trini; Tincture of Ci∣tron, or Limon-Time. Salmon. § 1. ℞ Citron or Limon-Time carefully dryed and reduced into a fine pouder ℥ij. pure Salt of Tartar ℥i. mix them in a hot Iron Mor∣tar, and grind them well toge∣ther; then put them into a Glass Matrass, affusing thereon of tartarised S. V. ℥xvj. cover it with its blind Head, and di∣gest 14 or 20 days in a very gentle heat; so will you have a pure red Tincture, having wonderful Vertues, which keep for use. § 2. Or, to the pouder of the Time ℥ij. you may put Tin∣cture of Salt of Tartar ℥xvj. mixing and digesting as before directed, and decanting the Tincture for use. § 3. It is cephalick, neu∣rotick, pectoral, stomatick, cardiack, uterine, and arthri∣tick: It incides, attenuates, discusses, is alexipharmick, and an excellent Antipara∣litick. It eases Pains of the Head, Nerves, Joynts, Sto∣mach, Bowels, Gripings of the Guts, Colick, Womb, and Joynts; helps the Gout, and Sciatica, bathed on the part, as also Contusions, Bruises, and cold Tumors. § 4. It prevails against the Vertigo, Apoplexy, Lethar∣gy, Palsy, Cramp, Convulsi∣on, Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Obstructions of the Lungs, Catarrhs, Fainting, Swoon∣ing and Palpitation of the Heart: It warms, comforts and strengthens any cold, de∣bilitated and weak part, for∣tifies the Stomach, creates an Appetite, helps Digestion, provokes the Terms, opens all Obstructions, and helps most Infirmities of the Womb. § 5. It is good against Poyson, bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or other veno∣mous Creatures, and expels the malignity and venom of the Spotted-Feaver, Plague, &c. through the Pores of the Skin. Dose ad ʒj. CIII. Laudanum liquidum Cydoniatum; Liquid Lau∣danum with Juice of Quin∣ces. Bate.] ℞ Opium corre∣cted ℥iv. Saffron ℥ij. Juice of
Quinces lbiiss. Ale-yest 4 spoon∣fuls; mix, and let them fer∣ment together in digestion till the Saffron and Opium have subsided, then express and filter. To the Liquor add Cinnamon ℥ij. Cloves, Xylo-aloes, yellow Sanders A. ʒj. digest 14 days, then filter, and evaporate to one half. Willis. It wonder∣fully eases Pains, induces Sleep, stops all Fluxes, takes away Anguish, comforts Na∣ture, composes the unquiet Spirits in the Frenzy, alle∣viates the Gout, Epilepsy, &c. and being applyed, it admi∣rably takes away the pains of the Gout. Salmon.] § 1. If the Opi∣um be choice Thebean, it is much better without any such correction; as we have sufficiently proved in our Seplasium, lib. 9. cap. 41. sect. . for being corrected by drying it upon hot Iron plates, as is the usual way, a great part of the volatile Sul∣phur (and Salt too) is lost, in which lies the best and most valuable part of the Opium: And of this Opinion we are not alone, but also Thibaut, Lemery, and Charras do all of them maintain the same. § 2. Liquid Laudanum is often made with S. V. but this is done with an Acid, for another intention: If the de∣sign be to ease the Headach, correct Insomniums, or vehe∣mently to stupefie, then that made with S. V. is best: But if it is to stop a Diarrhoea, Dysentery, or Lienteria, or to asswage the pains of the Co∣lick, pain of the Stomach, Spleen or Hypochonders, then this made with the Juice of Quinces is to be preferred. § 3. Besides this advan∣tage, there is in a Laudanum made with an Acid, that it never makes the Stomach sick, or causes vomiting; whereas that made with S.V. often does so, insomuch that 'tis impossible for some con∣stitutions to bear it. § 4. If your Opium be very clean, and without filth, it will convert almost all of it into Tincture, and leave but little Feces, not above an eighth part of the whole Mass will be left in the Caput Mor∣tuum. § 5. It is a most certain Somniferick and Sudorifick; it allays all pains which pro∣ceed from the motion and activity of Humors, stops spitting of Blood, and all other Fluxes of Blood, the Menses, and all other Fluxes of the Bowels, gives imme∣diate ease in the Colick and Stone, stops Defluxions of Rheum on the Eyes, Nose,
Teeth, Jaws, and other parts; and provokes Sweat, by ope∣ning the Pores after a singu∣lar manner. § 6. Dose à gut. 10 ad 20 or 30. ℞ Blackcherry water ℥iv. Tincture of Castor ʒss. of this Laudanum gut. 20 or 25, Syrup of Limons ʒvj. mix for a Dose, to stop Fluxes of the Bowels, &c. CIV. Laudanum Liquidum Tartarisatum; Liquid Lau∣danum tartariz'd. Bate.] ℞ Opium ℥ij. Saffron ℥i. Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Xylo-aloes, A. ʒj. Tincture of Salt of Tar∣tar lbij. mix, digest some days, filter and exhale to one half. The Vertues and Dose are the same with the for∣mer. Salmon.] § 1. This is better to induce Sleep than the former, quiets the Ar∣cheus after a wonderful man∣ner, by sweetening the Juices and Humors, and taking away their acidity and ari∣mony; it makes those sleep who are troubled with con∣tinual Watchings. § 2. It asswages great Headachs, thickens and sof∣tens all harsh and sharp Hu∣mors flowing to the Brest and Lungs, stops Fluxes, as Diar∣rheas, Dysenteries, and Lien∣teries; helps a bilious Colick, stops the most vehement Cough and Catarrh, or any Flux of Humors upon the Lungs or other parts. § 3. But in giving of this and all other Laudanums you ought to be cautious, and not to give them while the Body is full, and has not been evacuated sufficiently by pro∣per Emeticks, Catharticks, or Clysters, by some of them or all of them, as the Prudence of the Physician shall deter∣mine; nor while there is a copiousfluxion upon the Brest, caused by thick Humors; nor when there is pain and stoppage of Breath; or when the Patient is very weak, the Pulses low and slow, and the natural heat but little, or al∣most extinct. Dose à gut. xii. ad 24 or 30.
CHAP. VIII. Of EXTRACTS. I. Laudanum sine Opio; Landanum without Opi∣um. Bate.] ℞ THE best Myrrhe, Mummy, red and yellow Sanders, A. ℥iss. Mace, Cardamoms, Pepper, Ga∣langal, A. ℥ivss. S. V. lbiij. mix and extract a Tincture according to Art; filter and add thereto the narcotick Sul∣phur of Vitriol lbiij. mix and digest for a month. If you please you may evaporate to a mellaginous substance, to which you may add Saffron ℈iss. Salt of Pearl ℥iss. compleating the mixture S. A. It is a most powerful Anodyn, stops all sorts of Fluxes, Catarrhs, Rheums, Coughs, &c. and has the same Vertues with the two former. Salmon.] § 1. This Me∣dicine is much better in Tin∣cture than in the Extract; for being extracted with Spi∣rit of Wine, the Sulphur of the Wine in evaporation will certainly carry off some of the best, most volatile and subtile Particles of the Ingre∣dients, and leave the Medi∣cine much weaker and dispi∣rited; and therefore I should chuse to add the Saffron, viz. ʒij. in the first Digestion, and after decanting and filtering, to add the Salt of Pearl, most of which will dissolve in the Tincture, because it is made with common S. V. not re∣ctified. § 2. This Preparation is taken from Tilingius's Pro∣dromus, clas. 2. tit. 8. p. 463. but differs something both in the number of Ingredients and their Proportions. Ti∣lingius has it thus: ℞ Red Myrrh, Egyptian Mummy, A. ʒj. extract a Tincture with Succory water. ℞ Pouders of red and yellow Sanders, A. ℥i. Mace, Pepper black and long, Galingal, A. ʒiij. Xylo-aloes, Cardamoms greater and lesser, A. ℥ij. mix, and with S. V. extract a Tincture as is usual;
both these Tinctures filter apart, and conjoyn, and add narcotick Sulphur of Vitriol ℥ij. circulate all in a Vessel close stopt for five days, then abstract the S. V. by distilla∣tion in a gentle B. M. to the thickness of Honey, to which add Extract of Saffron ℥ss. Salt or Magistery of Pearl and Coral, A. ℥i. mix, and make a Mass. Dose à gr. vi. ad x. § 3. But how this narco∣tick Sulphur is to be made is next to be enquired into, which Tilingius makes two ways: I. ℞ Filings of Mars, p. j. Hungarian Vitriol, or Vi∣triol of Venus, p. ij. mix them well, put them into a Glass Cu∣curbit, upon which affuse Spi∣rit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop it half an inch; boyl and coagulate in a Sand-heat to dryness, and urge the Fire yet more till it grows red: To this pouder affuse more Spirit of Vinegar, so as to overtop it four inches; digest some hours in a warm place, and the Tin∣cture will arise, which decant, filter, and upon the Feces affuse more Spirit, digesting, decan∣ting and filtering as before, continuing this Work till all the Tincture is extracted; put these Extractions together, and drop in Gutatim, Oleum Tar∣tari q. s. and the Sulphur will immediately precipitate; the supernating Spirit of Vinegar decant and cast away, and swee∣ten by many ablutions in warm Water; so have you the Ano∣dyn and fixt Sulphur of Vi∣triol before mention'd. § 4. II. Or thus: ℞ Vi∣triol in fine pouder, and by a gentle heat evaporated to white∣ness lbss. S. V. tartarised ℥xxx. mix and digest for a month in Horse-dung; decant from the Feces, and distil in B. M. till the residence is of a yellow colour, and of the substance of some distilled Vegetable Oyl, as Oyl of Rosemary, Li∣mons, &c. this keep for use. § 5. If following the Pre∣script of our Author, you keep it in Tincture, you may give it à ʒss. ad ʒj. but if you re∣duce it to an Extract accor∣ding to the Prescript, you may give it à gr. viij. ad xvj. or to ℈j. Authors say, it is a fa∣mous, great, and most power∣ful Anodyn, eases all Pains, induces Sleep, and may be given in all cases in which Laudanum Opiatum is exhi∣bited. II. * Extractum Absinthii; Extract of Wormwood. Bate.] It is made of a Tin∣cture drawn forth from the Tops of Wormwood dryed, which being filtrated, is evaporated to
the consistency of an Extract; to every ounce of which there is to be added ʒss. of the fixed or elementary Salt: You may also prepare this Extract from the deparated Juice by evaporation in B. M. S. A. Salmon.] § 1. In making the Tincture you ought to grind the dryed Wormwood p. ij. with Salt of Wormwood or Tartar, p. j. in a hot Iron Mor∣tar, and then putting them in∣to the Matrass, affuse your tar∣tarised S. V. for by this means the Tincture will be the soo∣ner and more easily elici∣ted. § 2. As to the choice of the Extracts, which is most valuable, whether that made by Tincture, or that by the Juice: I must confess, the first is the siner Medicine in some respects, but I cannot be beaten out of this Opinion, That the Spirit of Wine car∣ries away with it some of the finest, subtilest, and most va∣luable parts of the Wormwood, and therefore in that respect should rather chuse the lat∣ter. § 3. That in making the Extract with S. V. it is better to save the Spirit than lose it by evaporation, which you may do by drawing it off in a gentle B. M. and it may well enough go for Spirit of Wormwood; or (being dul∣cified with Syrup made of double-refined Sugar and simple Wormwood-water) it may go very well for a strong Wormwood-water. § 4. Either of them are admirable stomatick Medi∣caments, strengthen and for∣tifie the Ventricle and all its Faculties, cause a good Ap∣petite and an excellent Dige∣stion, heat, dry, comfort, and take away the debility and wateriness thereof: It is good against nauseousness and vo∣miting; kills Worms, and opens Obstructions of the Mesentery, and is an excel∣lent thing against the Scurvy in a cold habit of Body. § 5. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj. ei∣ther in a Bolus, with Con∣serve of Wormwood, or in a Pill made up with Pouder of Wormwood, or dissolved in some of the aforesaid Worm∣wood-water and so taken. It is a good thing against inter∣mitting Feavers or Agues. III. Extractum Alhandal; Extract of Coloquintida. Bate.] ℞ Pulp of Colo∣cynthis, choice, freed from the Seeds, and in fine pouder ℥iv. Liquorice, Aniseeds à ℥ss. Lime-water filtred lbiv. digest 20 days, express out, and evapo∣rate
to a due consistency, S. A. Dose à gr. v. ad xv. and be∣yond. Salmon.] § 1. It is a fa∣mous Purge, and not inferior to any other in the World; for it universally purges all Humors, and carries off the Recrements from all parts of the Body, and attracts even from the most extream even from the most extream parts, as Head, Fingers, Toes, Joynts, Skin, &c. It prevails against the Dropsy, Cachexy, Jaun∣dice, and Green-sickness in Virgins, and is a famous Re∣medy against the Gout, Scia∣tica, Rheumatism, Kings-evil and the Scurvy in a cold and moist habit of Body; it pro∣vokes the Terms, and brings away both Birth and After∣birth, expels the Mola or dead Child; and is excellent against all Diseases of the Brain, Nerves, Joynts, and Lungs, and is therefore of singular use in Vertigo's, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Epi∣lepsies, Megrim, and invete∣rate Headachs. § 2. It is the only Speci∣fick Purge in all Venereal cases, and may be given for that purpose à gr. vi. ad ℈j. made up into Pills, or into a Bolus with the Pulp of Prunes or of a rosted Apple, after which the Sick may drink a draught of warm Ale, or Metheglin, or choice Canary. I must confess, I can say by experience, it does more in Pocky Distempers than any other vegetable Purge what∣soever, its Effects in that Di∣sease being admirable, yea, sometimes stupendious, so that a man may trust to what it will do. § 3. Le Febur's Extract of Colocynthis: ℞ the whi∣test and lightest Colocynthis in gross pouder (but he takes of the Pulp, p. ij. of the Seed p. j. which I approve not of) im∣bibe it by little and little with Spirit of Vinegar impregnated with half an ounce of Senner∣tus's Salt of Tartar to every pound of the Spirit, and put on so much of this Spirit, that it may overtop the moistened Mass 4 inches; digest in a gentle Ash or Sand-heat for 8 days, shaking the Glass three or four times, or oftener, eve∣ry day; let the Matrass be so large, as not to be above half full, because the Pulp will swell extraordinarily, and hazard the breaking of the Glass; this done, strain out by pressing the Tincture, and filter through a Linnen Cloth: To the Cake affuse more fresh Menstruum, shaking and digesting as before 8 days renewing the Menstru∣um even the third time; by which means you will extract
the whole vertue and power of the Colocynthis: Joyn these Tinctures together, and gently evaporate to the consistency of a Extract. § 4. It may be given alone in most ordinary Di∣seases à gr. iij. ad ℈ss. even to ℈j. after which let the Sick drink a draught of Malmsy, Canary, or Malago Sack, or strong Mead, or other gene∣rous Wine: Or you may mix it with some Mercurial Pre∣paration, such as is Aurum Vitae, the Prince's Pouder, or the like, to be given against the French Pox, or any Re∣liques of the same; as also against Dropsies, Kings-evil, Rheumatisms, and all arthri∣tical and paralytical Distem∣pers; after which let the Pa∣tient drink warm Broth in which a little Mace has been boyled. § 5. But he proceeds to perfect his Extract after this manner. ℞ of the former Extract ℥iij. soluble Magistry of Coral ℥i. tartarised S. V. so much as to overtop it 4 in∣ches; digest 30 or 40 days in a very gentle B. M. then add to it Oyl of Nutmegs by expres∣sum ʒiij. mix'd with double∣reed Sugar in pouder ℥vj. all being well mixt together, ab∣stract the S. V. by distillation, and then evaporate to the con∣sistency of an Extract. It has all the former Vertues, but is more corrected, and may be given à ℈j. ad ℈ij. § 6. Charras his Extract of Colocynthis. ℞ Pulp of white and pure Colocynthis cut very small lbj. put it into a very large Cucurbit on a Sand∣heat, and affuse thereon good new Whitewine 6 pints, cover it with its Head and a Recei∣ver, luting well the Junctures, and digest with a gentle fire for 12 hours, after which strain out the Infusion by pressing: Put the Sediment into the Cu∣curbit, and affuse upon it a pint or two of good S. V. cover the Vessel with a blind Head, luting the Juncture, and digest again 12 hours more, but with a little more heat, then strain and press forth the Tincture with a good strength; mix it with the former, and filter both thro' brown Paper; put it again into the Cucurbit, and ab∣stract in B. M. or a gentle Sand-heat the S. V. which will serve again for the like work; then put all the remains into a glaz'd earthen Pipkin, and in a gentle Sand-heat evapo∣rate all the remaining humidi∣ty, till it comes to the consi∣stency of a Rob or Extract, which keep in a wide-mouth'd Bottle close stopt, to mix with
other purging Extracts. § 7. This Extract is pro∣per to expel the Serosities of the remote parts of the Bo∣dy, and therefore is very good for Dropsies, where gentle Medicines will not prevail: It is also an excellent thing in Diseases of the Joynts and Rheumatisms, especially a∣gainst the Gout, Sciatica, and Kings-evil, and all sorts of strumous Swellings, mix∣ing it with other Extracts, as that of Rhubarb, to qualifie its activity, and fortifie the Bowels at the same time. Dose alone in Pills à gr. iij. ad. x. and accordingly to be proportion'd, with respect to the strength of those it is mixt withal. § 8. Or thus, according to Le Mort. ℞ Pulp of Co∣locynthis q. v. affuse thereon boyling Water, which digest thereon in a Sand-heat 24 hours; express the Liquor, and put on more boyling Wa∣ter, which digest and express, as before; and continue this operation so long, till the Wa∣ter be no more coloured: Put all these tinged Liquors toge∣ther, and evaporate to the con∣sistency of Honey, to which put a half part of rectified S. V. and keep it in a wide-mouth'd Glass close stopt for use. It is more gentle than other Pre∣parations, and works in less dose. § 9. I now come to pro∣pose an Extract of my own. ℞ choice white Pulp of Colo∣quintida cut small with a pair of Sizers lbj. Rain or Spring-water lbxij. mix and boyl all in a large Earthen or Iron-pot for 6 or 8 hours, then express strongly: To the Feces put Water lbxij. more; boyl again 10 or 12 hours with a good Fire, and whilst hot express again strongly: To the Feces put more Water lbvj. or viij. and boyl again for 14 or 16 hours, and strain out again strongly: Mix all these De∣coctions together, and boyl them till half the liquor is evapora∣ted; this being cold, will be a perfect Liver or Gelly, which you may cut: Continue a gen∣tle evaporation, till it comes to the consistency of an Extract to be made up into Pills: But if you determine it for any long keeping, you must evaporate most of the humidity, and then moisten it with Chymical Oyl of Limons, or Caraways, and so keep it in a Jar-glass or Gallypot, tyed close over with a wet Bladder for use. It has all the before enumerated Vertues, and may be given à gr. iij. ad x. more or less, according to Age, Strength, and the Disease.
§ 10. In this last Prepa∣ration here is to be noted, that at length you will not have a quarter part of Feces to be cast away, but the greatest part of the Pulp dis∣solves, and becomes a Gum∣my Extract, a Medicine tru∣ly great, and beyond any other Purger in the vegetable Kingdom. § 11. Also instead of the chymical Oyl of Limons or Ca∣raways, if they cannot be had, you may add a quarter part of pure and true Oyl of Nut∣megs, or Mace by expression, which will not only correct its Violence, but also pre∣serve it from decay. IV. * Exeractum Antiscor∣butim: Extract against the Scurvy. Bate.] It is made of the Magma of the Aqua Antiscor∣butica in chap. 1. sect. 4. of this Book. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good thing against the Cachexia, Dropsy, Leucophlegmatia, Jaundice, Scurvy, and other like Diseases which infest the Blood and Flumors: It strengthens the Stomach, and makes a good digestion. § 2. Dose ʒss. ad ʒj. You may take it thus: ℞ Con∣serve of Damask-roses ʒij. of the Extract ℈ij. mix for a Dose, to be taken at night going to Bed. Or thus: ℞ Blackcherry-water ℥iv. Aq. Antiscorbuticae ℥i. of this Ex∣tract ʒss. dissolve and mix for a Dose in the morning fast∣ing. V. * Extractum Chalybis; Extract of Steel. Bate.] ℞ Juice of Sorrel depurated lbiv. Tamerinds ℥i. boyl a little and clarifie: In this macerate warm, Filings of Mars ℥ij. for 4 days, often stir∣ring it; then strain out, and in B. M. inspissate to a due consistency. This is also cal∣led the Magistery of Mars. It is otherwise prepared in like manner with Juice of Apples, instead of the Juice of Sorrel and Tamarinds. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. You may prepare it also with many other things, as with strong Beer, White-wine, Rhenish-wine, Juice of Oranges or Limons or Quinces, &c. § 2. And whereas our Author advises only to 4 days digestion, it is true, it may serve; but I who have made the Medicine many times over, can tell that it will be much better if it stands a much longer time; and if
you have the patience to at∣tend the digestion, I can as∣sure you, the longer it stands, the better you will find your Preparation. § 3. It will gradually change colour, and by long standing grow thick and black, like Ink, but this it will not come to in a few days, the body of Mars is not so easily opened: The last time I made it, it stood 7 or 8 months upon the Filings, which produced me a most incomparable Medicine. § 4. But such a length of time you cannot permit it upon Juice of Sorrel, or any other unfermented juice, be∣cause it will be apt to cor∣rupt: In this case, at the end of 3, 4, or 5 days, you must put in lbiss. or more of dou∣ble-refined Sugar, and then digest on in order. § 5. It is a famous Me∣dicine against the Cachexy, Dropsy, Obstructions of Li∣ver, Spleen, Mesentery, and Womb, and in particular, a powerful thing against the Greensickness in Virgins; it commonly gives some relief at second or third dose, and by a constant taking of it, in a little time a perfect Cure. § 6. It is best to be gi∣ven at night going to Bed, in a Glass of new Beer or Rhenish-wine and Sugar, be∣cause then the Patient keeps warm upon it; but if it be taken in the morning, the Sick ought to rise, and stir after it, to get themselves in∣to a good heat, without which it has not so good an effect: And since the weakness of many will not permit this early rising and exercise, they must take it at night, as be∣fore directed. VI. * Extractum Diatessa∣ron; An Extract of the Species of Diatessaron. Bate.] ℞ Species of Dia∣tessaron ℥iij. Roots of Angeli∣ca ℥i. Zedoary ℥ss. Seeds of Carduus ʒij. Waters of Scor∣dium Compound, of Carduus, of Bawm, of Angelica, A. lbj. mix, and extract a Tincture S. A. and exhale to a due con∣sistency. It is good against cold Diseases, both of the Head and Brain, as the Palsie, and of the Ventricle or Sto∣mach, as Inflations or Wind, and from that pain, want of Digestion, &c. and of the Liver also, as the Dropsy, Cachexy, Obstructions. It is powerful also against the bitings of mad Dogs, and pre∣vails against Poyson.
Salmon.] § 1. What the Species Diatessaron are you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. cap. 22. sect. 18. which are Roots of Gentian, round Birthwort, Myrrh, and Bay∣berries, Ana. § 2. That the Menstruum will be too weak to make a good Extraction: Your best way will be, to abate the full half of the quantities of the cold Waters, and add as much to it of good Spirit of Wine. § 3. Or else, after the Extraction is made with the cold Waters, decanting the Tincture, to affuse on the Magma lbij. or better of good Spirit of Wine, to digest 4 or 6 days in a gentle heat, and then decanting this Tincture also, to mix it with the for∣mer Tincture, and then in B. M. to abstract the S. V. which having obtained, you may in a small clean earthen Sacepan, or some suchlike, evaporate the remaining hu∣midity to a just consistency. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒiss. VII. * Extractum Drasti∣cum; The active or wor∣king Extract. Bate.] ℞ Choice Scam∣mony finely pounder'd ℥iij. Juice of Oranges expressed with the Peels lbij. mix, and digest warm for 6 days; strain out by expressing, and exhale to the consistency of a Mass for Pills. Dose à ℈ss. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1.  activum significat, quod vires suas in profundum transmittit, & penitùs transfundit. The Title shews the mighty pow∣er and force of the Medicine, which is able to send and extend its efficacy, both to the most extream parts, and the most recluse Caverns of Nature in Man's Body. § 2. Yet it works gently and pleasantly, without gri∣ping or making sick, or scarcely any disturbance to Nature, carrying off the most inveterate and rebellious Di∣seases. It purges all Humors, and is a Specifick against the Gout, Rheumatisms, and most other Pains and Aches of the Joynts, especially if coming of Cold. § 3. It is indeed an ex∣cellent thing, as it is now prepared, yet it will work but slowly in some Bodies: In this case it will be good to add to each Dose gr. iij. or iv. of Extract of Colocynthis. It will not only make the Me∣dicine work more lively and briskly, but also vastly aug∣ment its Vertue, to all the purposes it is intended for.
VIII. * Extractum Ecphra∣cticum; The opening Ex∣tract. Bate.] ℞ Wood of Aloes, Galingal, Cloves, A. ℥ss. Cinna∣mon, Gentian, Cortex Winte∣ranus, A. ℥i. Horse-radish-roots ℥ij. Calamint, Pennyroyal, Wormwood, A. M. j. Mars prepared with Sulphur ℥viij. White-wine, and a decoction of white Tartar, A. lbiiss. Digest, strain out, and exhale, to a due consistency S. A. adding fine Aloes in fine pouder ℥i. Myrrh ʒij. Micklethw. It is a most effectual Remedy against the Green-sickness in Virgins, and the Scurvy. It has a great Ver∣tue in opening Obstructions, chiefly of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, and Mesentery, and curing those Diseases procee∣ding therefrom. Salmon.] § 1.  medicamenta, apud Galenum, quae meatus obstru∣ctos expediunt. An Ecphra∣ctick Medicament is such a one as opens Obstructions of the Passages, and a powerful one of that kind is this here of our Authors. § 2. You had better make it thus: First extract a strong Tincture from the Species with S. V. grinding their pouders first with Salt of Tartar in a hot Iron Mortar, then make a strong Extract of the Mars by itself, with the White-wine and decoction of white Tartar: Put these Tinctures together, and in B. M. abstract the S. V. after which evaporate the remaining humidity to a due consistency, and so add the Aloes and Myrrh as before directed. § 3. The Mars is thus to be prepared: ℞ Common Sul∣phur ℥iij. Filings of Mars ℥i. mix and put them over a Fire, and kindle the Sulphur, often∣times stirring of it, till the deflagration is over; to what remains add more fresh Sul∣phur ℥ij. deflagrate again, then being cold, grind it into a sub∣tile pouder for the intended use. § 4. It is good against the Cachexia, Dropsy, yellow Jaundice, black Jaundice, Ob∣structions of the Courses, Va∣pors, and Fits of the Mother; it sweetens the Blood and Juices, and is excellent in ma∣ny other cases. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒiss. in a proper Vehicle. IX. * Extractum Febrifu∣gum; The Ague Ex∣tract. Bate.] ℞ Jesuites Bark in fine pouder ℥iv. Centory the less, Gentian, A. ℥ij. Vir∣ginian Snakeroot ℥i. Spirit of
Wine lbiv. vel q. s. extract a Tincture, and evaporate, S. A. The Title shews the Vertues. Dose à ℈ss. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. The best way will be, to draw off the S. V. in B. M. to preserve it, with which you may make an Extraction another time. § 2. 'Tis a famous Ague-frighter, seldom or never fai∣ling the Cure at some few Doses taking; though, to speak not only my own Thoughts, but my Experi∣ence also, the Tincture ex∣tracted with a good, strong, and rough Claret-wine, or red Port, is much more po∣werful to the intention it is given for, and more certain∣ly effects the Cure; for 'tis certain, that the S. V. in the abstraction or evaporation carries away many of the volatile Particles of the mixt with it, and such as, circu∣lating with the Blood, con∣vey the power, vertue, and force of Medicament into it. § 3. It ought not to be given to such as are apt to be costive, or have hard and dry Bodies, or afflicted with any fly prick Humor, or Scir∣rhous, or Cancerous Tumors; or to Women whose Cour∣ses are stopt, or are apt to be troubled with Vapors or Hy∣sterick Fits. § 4. And before it is gi∣ven, the Body ought to be well cleansed, if possible both upwards and downwards, lest it lock up into it the morbifick matter, or the malignity of the Distemper, which reverting inwards, immediately smights the Vi∣tals, and puts a period to Life. § 5. Above all things, you ought to avoid giving it in any continent or continual Feaver, for in those Distem∣pers it is no better than Poy∣son, and certainly fatal if ac∣companied with any Putre∣faction or Malignity; for, the Pores of the Body being by it constringed, and the other Avenues stopt up, the Poyson of the Disease una∣voidably strikes the Heart, and makes the vital Flame a Sacrifice. § 6. You are to vary the Dose according to the kind of the Ague, the age of the Patient, and strength or con∣tumacy of the Distemper; on which considerations you may give it from ℈ss. ad ʒj. yea, in some Constitutions ad ʒiss.
X. Extractum Fellis; Ex∣tract of Galls. Bate.] ℞ Bullocks Galls dryed in the Sun ℥ij. S. V. lbiss. mix and extract a Tincture, which evaporate S. A. It provokes the Terms. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒss. daily. It ope∣rates by Stool. Salmon.] § 1. This is deduced from Hartman's Tincture of Bulls Gall, de∣signed by him for beautify∣ing the Face and Skin, and for taking away heat, pim∣ples, freckles, sunburnings, tawniness, and other Defor∣mities thereof. § 2. You are either to augment or diminish the Dose, according to the Age of the Person and Exigency of the Distemper; to an el∣der person, and where the Obstruction has been long, you may give from ʒss. ad ʒj. To young Girls, and where the Obstruction is recent, from ʒj. ad ʒss. But if it be a Chloro∣sis, or Greensickness confir∣med, you must not dispute, but give it in the largest dose, and that every night going to Bed. § 3. It is also an appro∣ved Medicine for killing Worms, and expelling them out of the Body. I knew it given to a young Girl of about 14 years of age, who looked pale, and always com∣plained of a pain at her Sto∣mach; the Physicians decla∣red it to be the Greensickness, which I believe was the least of the effects; however, gi∣ving this Extract to ℈ij. and repeating the dose several nights going to Bed, with an intention to provoke the Terms, it had this effect up∣on her, that it brought away long Worms, about 8 or 10, (I remember not exactly which) and the Patient im∣mediately thereupon grew perfectly well; and after∣wards being repeated, it plentifully brought down her Courses. § 4. I have also known it given to several others with the same success against the Worms; and I knew one person from whom at times it brought away about four∣teen long Worms. § 5. Dissolved in a De∣coction of Centory the less and Carduus, and exhibited Cly∣ster-wise, it kills the Worms called Ascarides, and brings them away in great quanti∣ties, even the very bags wherein their Eggs or Seed is lodged, and in which they engender: But if you give it Clyster-wise, you may en∣crease
the dose à ʒj. ad ʒij. or more. XI. * Extractum Ictericum; The Extract against the yellow Jaundice. Bate.] ℞ Fresh made Sheeps-dung ℥iv. Celandine∣roots ʒx. Turmerick ℥iss. Earth-worms prepared ʒvj. Centory the less, M. ij. Mars prepared ℥ij. Juice of Limons ℥vj. Cichory-water lbiv. infuse all for 48 hours, and then ex∣press out, which evaporate to a consistency for Pills, adding Earthworms prepared ʒiss. red Coral, Amber, Ivory, A. ʒij. mix them. Dose ʒss. thrice a day, drinking after it ℥iv. of the Icterick Decoction. Salmon.] § 1. I am of opinion, that Goose-dung is better than Sheeps-dung, but you may take what is rea∣diest at hand: And the Ce∣landine-roots must be of the greater▪ Celandine, not the Roots of Pilewort. § 2. The Earthworms are prepared by putting them alive into a Pail of Water all night in which they will cleanse and purifie themselves, the next day take them out and dry them gently in the Sun, or in a Baker's Oven after the Bread is taken out; being through ry, out them into bits, and beat them into a fine pouder, which keep for this use. § 3. The Mars is thus prepared: ℞ Filings of Mars q. v. put it into a Glass Vessel, and affuse thereon AF. q. s. or so much till it will no longer effervesce, and put it into dige∣stion for 24 hours, then over a gentle heat evaporate the AF. to dryness, so will you have in the bottom a red Calx, which reverberate in a Crucible red hot, then cool, levigate, and keep it for use. § 4. The Title shews the intention, besides which it is very powerful to open all sorts of Obstructions of the Viscera, and cure the Green∣sickness in Virgins; you may give it à ℈j. ad ℈ij. or ʒj. XII. Extractum Maltae com∣positum; Extract of Malt Compound. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Colts∣foot, fresh-spotted Lungwort, A. ℥vj. Liquorice ℥viij. Raisin stoned lbij. strongest Ale not hopt, of a due age, Gall. vj. boyl to the Consumption of Gall. iv. then express strongly, and evaporate to the consisten∣cy of Honey. Dose ʒij. twice or thrice a day, against the Phthisick, or Consumption of the Lungs, &c.
Salmon.] § 1. If you add to each ounce of the Extract Catechu in fine pouder, Bezoar-mineral, A. ʒj. volatile Salt of Vipers, or volatile Salt of Hogs-flesh, Cochinele, A. ʒss. It will be much more effectual to the purpose intended, for volatile Animal Salts are the very radical matter of Flesh, and the very things without which it cannot well be gene∣rated: The Bezoar-mineral absorbs the acidity of the Ul∣cer, and the Catechu heals and constringes, whilst the Cochinele agreeing with the Volatile Salt, conspire to the perfect restoration. § 2. This Extractum Malti is really a good thing for this purpose; but besides that, it is famous for streng∣thening weak Backs, and ea∣sing the pain thereof, though never so vehement. I knew a Woman who could scarce∣ly go or stand upright, but had been for many months in extream misery and pain, who by the taking this Ex∣tract, with the addition here made, but for 14 days, was perfectly cured beyond ex∣pectation. § 3. This very Medicine with the addition of the vola∣tile Animal Salt, does not on∣ly cure a Phthisis, but also a Tabes or Pining, and some∣times that incurable Disease called Marasmos; at least, it prevails against a Hectick, and restores all the Decays of Na∣ture. § 4. You may give it à ʒj. ad ʒiij. morning fasting, an hour before Dinner, and last at night, drinking after it half or three quarters of a pint or more of strong Broth. XIII. * Extractum Melam∣podii; Extract of black Hellebor. Bate.] ℞ The Roots of the true black Hellebor, with the string in gross pouder ℥vj. Ani∣seeds ℥i. Spirit of Wine lbiij. infuse all in a gentle heat for 6 days, then express and eva∣porate. Dose à ℈ss ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. The bet∣ter way will be to make a double Extract, first with Water and Salt of Tartar, and then drying the Roots to make a second Extraction with S. V. then joyning these Tinctures together, to ab∣stract the S. V. in B. M. and after to evaporate the humi∣dity to a just consistency. § 2. By this means you will have all the good parts of the Hellebor, which the S. V. would not be able to extract of itself; for the
more aqueous Particles are first drawn forth by the Wa∣ter and Salt of Tartar; then the resinous parts are extra∣cted with the S. V. so that joyning these two together, and abstracting, you must necessarily have all that is excellent out of the Helle∣bor. § 3. You may give it in strong Bodies to ʒss. It po∣werfully opens Obstructions of the Spleen, corrects and evacuates Melancholy, and is a Specifick against Madness, and of great use to be con∣stantly given (for some time) to such as are apt to have their Paroxisms return at some certain times. § 4. Where there is a real Madness, there you may venture to give it in a much larger dose, because Expe∣rience does daily evince, that in such persons even very strong Medicaments work very hardly, and sometimes not at all: Yet that you may be sure not to over-dose them, the best way will be to en∣crease them gradually, till you see the utmost which may be safely given them. XIV. Extractum Paregor∣gicum; The Extract ea∣sing Pain. Bate.] ℞ Philonum Ro∣manum ℥iss. Mithridate ʒv. London Treacle, Diascordium, A. ʒiij. Carduus-water lbj. S. V. ℥iij. digest, strain out, and evaporate S. A. It is pro∣fitable against contagious Di∣seases, Catarrhs, Pains, Watch∣ings, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Com∣position of the Philonum Ro∣manum, its Vertues and Uses, you may see in our Pharma∣copoeia Londinensis, lib. 4. cap. 22. sect. 22. which is the Philonum majus Nicolai. The Mithridate, London Trea∣cle, and Diascordium, you may also see in the same Di∣spensatory, so that upon the matter this is only a Composi∣tion made of many other Compounds. § 2. The Extraction will be best to be done first with the Carduus-water, and after∣wards with a sufficient quan∣tity of the S. V. then these two Tinctures or Extracti∣ons to be mixed together and digested for some little time, which being done, the S. V. may be abstracted in B. M. and the aqueous humidity
evaporated to the due con∣sistency of an Extract. § 3. It has all the Ver∣tues of Laudanum, famous against all manner of Pains, whether external or internal in any part of the Body; it stops Fluxes of Rheum upon any part, Fluxes of the Bo∣wels, as Diarrhoea, Bloody-flux, Lienteria, and Flux of the Liver, as also the over∣flowing of the Terms, Whites, &c. It prevails won∣derfully against the Strangu∣ry and Colick, and is famous against Coughs, Colds, Ca∣tarrhs, &c. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒj. XV. * Extractum Pecto∣rale; The Pectoral Ex∣tract. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Sca∣biose, Hyssop, Ground-Ivy, A. M. xij. white Horebound, ***Knapweed, A. M. x. Coltsfoot, Elecampane, A. M. xviij. bruise, and express the Juice, depurate it, and evaporate to the consistence of Honey, S. A. Dose one spoonful thrice a day, drinking after it the Pectoral Decoction. Salmon.] § 1. If you eva∣porate it to a higher consi∣stency than that of Honey, and then add a third part of Honey or double-refined Su∣gar, it will be never the worse, and I am sure will keep much the better. § 2. The pectoral Deco∣ction, with its Vertues and Use, you may see in our Pharm. Londinensis, lib. 4. cap. 14. sect. 4. which is also designed against the same Diseases, of which the Patient may take half a pint at a time. § 3. It opens Obstructi∣ons of the Brest and Lungs, is good against Coughs, Cold, Asthma's, Wheesings, short∣ness of Breath, viscous Flegm lodged in the Ventricle, as also in the Bowels, Reins, or Bladder: It takes away Hoarseness, and recovers the Voice of such as have lost it. XVI. * Extracticum Peti∣cum; Extract of To∣bacco. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of out∣landish Tobacco ℥ij. Liquo∣rice ℥i. fresh leaves of Asara∣bacca ʒx. Aniseeds ʒiij. Co∣riander ʒij. Roots of Galin∣gal, Angelica, A. ℈viij. Hy∣dromel ℥xx. mix, and digest warm for 24 ounces, then ex∣press out the juice or humidity, and exhale to a due consisten∣cy. Dose ad ℈ij. It power∣fully
purges thick Humors, both by Vomiting and Stool, and is happily given against Asthma's and tartarous Ob∣structions of the Lungs, as al∣so against Feavers, chiefly Tertians and Quartans; it is profitable against the Jaun∣dice, Dropsy and Gout. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good Medicine for the purposes in∣tended, but in some strong Bodies you must be forced to give it to ʒj. else it will scarcely work, but only make the Patient very sick. § 2. In the working of it you must be sure to pro∣vide two or three quarts of Posset-drink or Broth afore∣hand, before it is given, and after every Vomit, imme∣diately to cause the Sick to drink three quarters of a pint thereof, for by that means the Vomit will work with much more ease and pleasure, and the Patient will be only vehemently sick at the mo∣ment of vomiting. § 3. That in some Con∣stitutions it will work but moderately, as 5 or 6 times, whereas in others it will work even extravagantly, and give sometimes twenty or more Vomits: In this latter case you may quell the Violence of it, by giving very hot Broth well season'd with Salt, and repeating thereof for a while, so will the vomiting cease, and the Medicine exercise its force downwards. § 4. Some exhibit it thus: ℞ Carduus-water ℥iv. Oxy∣mel of Squils simple ʒvj. of this Extract ℈ij. mix for a dose, to be given in a morning fasting. It is excellent against tertian and quartan Agues, to be given 3 or 4 hours be∣fore the Fit. XVII. * Extractum Sarfae; Extract of Sarsaparilla. Bate.] It is made out of the Magma of the Aqua Sarsae composita, (in Chap. 1. Sect. 52.) aforegoing. Salmon.] § 1. It is an excellent thing to sweeten the Blood and Humors, streng∣then the Stomach, resist the progress of the Scurvy, and restore in Consumptions, and is in particular an Antidote against the French Disease. § 2. It may be given from ʒj. to ʒij. or more, in some proper Stomatick, Re∣storative, Antiscorbutick, or Antivenereal-water, accor∣ding to the quality of the Distemper and disposition of the Body taking it; and it is to be given every night go∣ing to Bed, for some conside∣rable time.
§ 3. For as it is only an Alterative, so it alters the Body but by degrees, and not all at once; and such kind of Medicines are not to be gi∣ven only for a little while, for a spurt and away, but assidu∣ously for several weeks toge∣ther, that thereby they may accomplish a change of the Habit, and so effect what they are designed for. XVIII. † Extractum Ca∣tarrahale; An Extract a∣gainst Catarrhs. It is made of the Tinctures constituting the Extractum Panchymagogum at Sect. 21. following, mixed together in the same proportion; to which you may add Tincture of Opi∣um, in such proportion, as that ʒss. of the Extract may contain gr. j. of Opium. Salmon.] § 1. Or thus: ℞ Of all the Tinctures of the Panchymagoge Extract, in the same proportion ℥xxx. strongest Tincture of Opium ℥i. mix and evaporate to an Extract. Or thus: Take of the said Tin∣ctures evaporated to an Ex∣tract ℥iij. ʒvj. Extract of Opi∣um ʒj. mix them well toge∣ther. § 2. It is not only good to stop Catarrhs, or Defluxi∣ons of Rheum upon the Tho∣rax and Lungs, but prevails against a Rheumatism over the whole Body, eases pains in any part, and particular∣ly is a Specifick in the Gout. § 3. For it not only gives ease by vertue of the Opium, but also effectually carries off the morbifick cause, and that without any pain, griping of the Bowels, or molestation of the Sto∣mach, and that so pleasantly, as if the Sick had taken no Physick at all. § 4. Dose à ʒss. ad ℈ij. and in very strong Bodies to ʒj. it ought to be given over∣night, and it will work the next morning very well and kindly, for the Opium being added, hinders its immediate operation. XIX. † Extractum Hypno∣ticum, seu Laudanum; The sleeping Extract. ℞ Opium ℥x. Nutmegs, Saffron, A. ℥ij. Castoreum ℥i. make an Extract with S. V. S. A. Salmon.] § 1. The In∣gredients being of differing natures and qualities, ought to have different ways of extraction; the Opium ought to be extracted with a two∣fold Menstruum, viz. first
with Water, then with S. V. and these Tinctures to be added together, and then the S. V. to be abstracted in B. M. and the aqueous hu∣midity to be evaporated, as we have taught in our Sepla∣sium, lib. 9. cap. of Opium, the reason of which double Extraction you will there see. § 2. The Tincture of the Nutmegs ought to be extra∣cted with the Tincture of Salt of Tartar; so also the Tinctures of the Saffron and of the Castoreum, but each apart: Or, the Saffron being gently dryed, and ground with Salt of Tartar in a hot Mor∣tar, may be extracted with rectified S. V. and the Casto∣reum with Spirit of Castor; as in the proper places we have taught. § 3. These several Tin∣ctures are to be mixed toge∣ther, and the S. V. abstracted in B. M. to the consistency of an Extract, which then you are to mix exactly with the Extract of the Opium, and so keep it for use. § 4. It causes Sleep and Rest, alleviates all manner of Pains, in what part of the Body soever; stops Fluxes, whether of Humors or of the Bowels; stops a Cough, and is good against most Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, ha∣ving indeed all the vertues of Laudanum. Dose à gr. j. ad gr. ij. or iij. at night going to bed. XX. † Extractum Leniti∣vum; The Lenitive Ex∣tract. ℞ Aloes, Jalap, A. ℥vj. Rhubarb Sena, A. ℥xij. extract the Tinctures with rectified S. V. with which mix Centory the less, Gentian, Wormwood, Myrrh, Camomile-flowers, Gum Ammoniacum, Nutmegs, Saf∣fron, A. ℥ij. Castoreum ℥i. Assa foetida ℥ss. abstract to a due consistency of the Ex∣tract. Salmon.] § 1. These dif∣fering Substances ought to have different ways of extra∣cting, or are to be extracted apart, and with differing Menstruums. The Aloes ought not to be extracted with S. V. but only with Water, or some proper juice, as of Violets, Damask-Ro∣ses, &c. because the resinous Substance of the Aloes, is of no use in this Medicament, but rather hurtful, causing by its tenacious quality, (whereby it adheres more than it ought to do, to the Tunicles of the Stomach, and Bowels, &c.) Gripings, and
other ill accidents in its ope∣ration. § 2. To save the labour in extracting of the Jalap, you may take the Rosin thereof, which is ready done to your Hands, otherwise the Tin∣cture is to be extracted with tartariz'd S. V. § 3. The Rhubarb and Sena, by reason they consist mostly of aqueous Particles, may be extracted with a mixt Menstruum: Being re∣duced to Pouder, let them be ground in a hot Mortar with Salt of Tartar ℥iij. and then infused in Whitewine, or Mead, or Metheglin 6 quarts, encreasing the heat till it simpers, or comes al∣most to boyling, for the space of 10 or 12 hours, being close covered, after which the In∣fusion is to be strongly strai∣ned out by expression. § 4. The Cemory, Gen∣rian, Wormwood and Saffron being throughly dryed, and in pouder, are to be ground in a hot Iron Mortar, with their half quantity of Salt of Tartar, and then their Tin∣cture is to be extracted with tartarised S. V. § 5. The Nutmegs and Castoreum are to be extra∣cted with Tincture of Salt of Tartar; the Assa foetida and Myrrh with Spirit of Wine, and the Ammoniacum with some proper Water, or Vine∣gar, or Juice of Limons: This done, all those done with Aqueous Menstruums are to be mixed together, and the humidity evaporated to a due consistency. § 6. In like manner those done with the Spirituous Men∣struums, as Tincture of Salt of Tartar, and S. V. they are to be mixed together, and the S. V. abstracted in B. M. which done, these two kinds of Extracts are to be mixed exactly together, so will you have a generous Lenitive Extract, freed from all the ill qualities of the Ingredi∣ents, as making sick at Sto∣mach, Vomitings, Gripings, &c. § 7. It purges gently and pleasantly, opens Obstructi∣ons of the Viscera, and is a famous Antifebritick, being good against both Tertians and Quartans. It streng∣thens and fortifies the Sto∣mach, creates a good Appe∣tite, takes away fainting and sick Fits, caused by the quan∣tity and sharpness of Humors lurking in those parts. § 8. It is also a singular thing in hypochondriack Me∣lancholy, and gives ease in Distempers of the Spleen tho' of many years standing:
It expels Wind, brings down the hardness of Childrens Bellies, and is a Specifick against the Colick, carrying off the viscous and tartarous Humors which cause it. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒj. in the morning fasting, with observation as in other Purges. XXI. † Extractum Pan∣chymagogon; The univer∣sal purging Extract; or Extract purging all Hu∣mors. ℞ Aloes, Jalap, A. ℥vj. Rhubarb Sena, A. ℥xij. Scam∣mory ℥i. black Hellebor, Tur∣beth, A. ℥iij. extract a Tin∣cture with rectified S. V. to which add Gentian, Centory the less Camomile-flowers, Gum Ammoniacum, Nutmegs, Saf∣fron, A. ℥iij. Castoreum ℥iss. Assa foetida ʒvj. extract to a due consistency, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. What In∣gredients in this are the same with the former, are to be extracted in like manner, so that we need not repeat the same things over again. § 2. The Scammony and Turbith are to be extracted with S. V. tartarised, because their purging Properties con∣sist most in resinous Particles. Or you may extract them as also the Tincture of Hel∣lebor, as we have before taught in Chap. 7. Sect. 27. and Sect. 58, & 77. of this Book. § 3. This done, put the aqueous Extractions toge∣ther, and evaporate to the consistency of an Extract; and put the Spiritous Extra∣ctions, and abstract in B. M. the S. V. leaving the Magma of a due consistency, which mix well with the former aqueous Extract, and keep it for use. § 4. It purges all tartarous and viscous Humors admi∣rably from all parts of the Body, even from the most remote, by which means it carries off the progenerative cause of the Scurvy, Dropsy, Stone and Gout, and all other Diseases having affinity with them. § 5. It is a singular good Purge in Melancholy, and to carry off the Recrements of the Spleen, and to evacuate and cleanse the Stomach and Bowels in Agues, before the administration of the Cortex or Pulvis patrum; for which purpose it ought to be given 2 or 3 times, after which you need not fear to administer the Cortex with both success and safety. § 6. It opens Obstructi∣ons of the Womb, provokes the Terms, and is good against
hysterick Fits, and cleanses the uterine parts of all Impu∣rities. It prevails against old Headachs, the Megrim, Lethargy, Vertigo, Apoplexy, Palsie, and most other cold and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain and Nerves. § 7. Being made into long Pellets, and put up the Nostrils as an Errhine (whilst soft) it purges the Head ad∣mirably, and cures invete∣rate Headachs, Lethargies, Apoplexies, by drawing away the morbifick cause through the Nostrils. Dose inward∣ly à ℈j. ad ℈ij. in the morning fasting, with Cautions as in other Purges. XXII. Phosphorus; An Ex∣tract out of Urine. Bate.] It is made of the Magma after the distillation of the Spirit of Wine, with a little Sal Armoniack, by di∣stilling with degrees of Fire in a Glass Retort into a Receiver half full of Water. It is diu∣retick and diaphoretick: Dose ℈ss. Salmon.] § 1. How the solid Phosphorus is made, with several Observations upon it, you may see at large in our Seplasium, lib. 5. cap. 1. sect. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, & 17. so that we need not say much more of it in this place. § 2. The Aereal or Liquid Noctiluca or Phosphorus, which according to Mr. Boyl's Pro∣cess is thus: Take a consi∣derable quantity of humane Ʋrine, (because it yields but a small quantity or proportion of Luciferous matter) let it be di∣gested or putrefied a competent time before it be used, then di∣stil it with a moderate heat till the spirituous parts are drawn off, and abstract the superfluous moisture, till the re∣maining substance be brought to a consistence somewhat thick like a Syrup, or a thin Extract, this well incorporate with thrice its weight of fine white Sand, to which joyn a large Receiver: The two Vessels be∣ing carefully luted together, place the Vessel upon a naked fire, which make and encrease gradually for 5 or 6 hours, that all that is either phlegmatick or otherwise volatile, may come first over: This done, encrease the fire for 5 or 6 hours more, which let be as strong and in∣tense as a strong Fornace may be capable of giving; so will there come over good store of white Fumes, (almost like those which appear in the distilla∣tion of Oyl of Vitriol) which when they are past, and the Receiver grows clear, after a while there will succeed another
sort, which in the Receiver will seem to give a blewish light, almost like that of little bur∣ning Matches dipt into Sul∣phur: And last of all, the fire being very vehement, there will come over another Substance, supposed to be more ponderous than the former, for that it falls through the Water to the bottom of the Receiver, which when taken out (and partly even whilst is stays there) ap∣pears by several effects, and other Phoenomena, to be of a Luciferous nature. § 3. From the foregoing Process (saith he) occasion may be taken to enquire, whether the matter wherein the shining faculty chiefly re∣sides does not consist, not (as one would expect) in or of the volatile and spirituous parts of our Animal Liquor, but of its (not absolutely, but) more fixt Salt and, ponde∣rous fetid Oyl, associated or mixt in a peculiar manner or proportion. § 4. From whence occa∣sion may be taken to propose Conjectures of the cause of the lucidness of the Lucife∣rous matter, and also, both to add somewhat about the despised Sapa of Urine, in re∣ference to some uncommon Menstruums, and to make enquiry into other things, relating to the nature of Light and Flame, especially as found in the Noctiluca. § 5. And since we have been discoursing of this No∣ctiluca or Phosphorus, it will not be much from the matter to give you here with it the Phosphorus Balduini, or Bolo∣nian Stone, (as is supposed) at least something like to it, from the same Author, which is this. ℞ Fine white Chalk, dissolve it in good Spirit of Ni∣tre, or clean Aqua-fortis, fil∣trate it through Cap-paper, and the clear Solution evapo∣rate, till there remains a dry Substance; with this white Calx overlay the inside of some Vessel made of good Earth, which will endure the Fire, and that of a round figure, which is more convenient than that of ordinary Crucibles, and to the matter contained in this Vessel give a due degree of fire for about half an hour, or an hour, (according to the large∣ness of it and other circumstan∣ces) which 'tis not easie to hit, and requires a conveniently-shap'd Vessel, whereby the flame or heat may be reverberated, till you perceive the matter to have acquired a disposition to retain the light; after which the said earthen Vessel, which usually ought to be somewhat shallow, and not to exceed
many inches in diameter, is to have a Cover of fine Glass or Crystal, carefully cemented on to it, to preserve it from its great Enemy the Air. § 6. Now Chymists in former times working upon Urine, sought only after the volatile, saline, and sulphurous parts of the Concrete, which they thought to be the only spiritual and noble substance therefore, casting away the rest as filthy and useless; whereas you may now see from the former process, that in that so despicable substance the Wisdom and Bounty of the great Author of Nature is apparent almost to a Mi∣racle, for that in so contem∣ptible a matter, so glorious and excellent a thing as a self-existing Fire and self-shining Substance should be lodged; which, tho' it be but admired now, may pos∣sibly be highly prized here∣after, when it shall be brought to greater perfection, and more of its Uses shall be dis∣covered in relation both to Physick and Chymistry. § 7. And since it is evi∣dent, that it is not constituted of the volatile Salt and Sul∣phur of the Concrete, it re∣mains then, that it must be formed out of its other parts, which are a fixt or elemen∣tary Salt, and a terren fetid Oyl, mixt in such an har∣monious proportion, as may excite the precited Phoenome∣na. These things being con∣sidered, you may from the Principles constituting it, make a judgment of its me∣dical Vertues and various Effects, with relation to hu∣man kind.
CHAP. IX. Of MAGISTERIES and ARCANƲMS. 1. Magistium Antimonii Diaphetici; The Magi∣stery of Antimony Diapho∣retick. Bate▪ IT  made of Antimo∣ny diaphoretick, oy∣led in Water and filtrated, by ag m dissolved, preci∣ping and washing, S. A. Dose  ad ℈j. It has the same Vertues with Ceruse of Aimony. Salmon.] § 1. It is an ex∣cellent Sudorifick and Dia∣phoretick, resolves the coagu∣lation of the Blood, opens Obstructions, sweetens the Juices of the Body, prevails against Feavers, Pleurisies, and the like Diseases. Dose à ℈j. ad ℈iss. § 2. Now whereas that Antimony diaphoretick, ei∣ther by Age or some other accident, does many times acquire an Emetick quality, th▪ by means of this Ope∣ration, is freed therefrom, and the Patient more secure in the taking of it. § 3. You may give it in all cases wherein Pearl is gi∣ven, and it is ordinarily exhi∣bited in the so much celebra∣ted Pearl-Cordials, and for the same intentions is of good use. § 4. Le Febur makes this Magistery or Precipitate out of the first Water wherein the fixt Nitre is dissolved, which comes off from the first wash∣ing of the Diaphoretick Anti∣mony, because, says he, the na∣ture of this Salt is altered by the Sulphur of the Antimony, and is become of the condition of an Alcali and lixivial Salt, whose quality and essence is subtil, penetrating and igneous, rather than corrosive, which is the reason it has dissolved the purest part of the Antimonial Regulus, impregnated with its fixt and solar Sulphur, very well concocted and digested, by the action of the Fire and Nitre.
§ 5. And though this Water appears clear, yet it has con∣tracted a weight and substance out of the Antimony, which must be precipitated: This our Author does with Alum dissol∣ved in Water, but Le Febur with Spirit of Vinegar, so (says he) will it turn imme∣diately as white as Milk, be∣cause the Diaphoretick was hid∣den in the dissolution of it, and does manifest itself with no un∣pleasant smell, but contrari∣wise has the very smell of Cream or sowrish Whey, whilst it is edulcorating, which is done with fair Water, then dryed and kept for use. § 6. And this Precipitate is of a very good smell, by reason of the fixedness of its internal Sulphur; whereas that prepared out of the com∣mon Sulphur Auratum with Spirit of Vinegar, has a very ill and unpleasing smell, be∣cause it is nothing else but the external, impure, and vo∣latile Sulphur, which the Salt had drawn to it self, being not sufficient to draw it and expel it away, much less to fix it, the parts of the Nitre and Antimony in making Crocus Metallorum being but equal; whereas in making Antimony Diaphoretick there is Nitre, p. ij. to Antimony p. j. and after the Detonation is over, Nitre, p. j. more, is added, to perfect the matu∣ration and fixation of all the crude and indigested remai∣ning matter. § 7. This is thought ne∣cessary to be said, to inform the Sons of Art, That what∣soever fixes a Substance ought ever to be at least in tripple proportion to the matter to be fixed, and contrariwise, what∣ever is to be volatilized must be less in the same tripple pro∣portion to the matter volatili∣zing, if not sometimes quadru∣ple; as ℥iv. of Spirit to vola∣tilize ℥i. of Salt, and ℥iv. of Salt to fix ℥i. of Spirit; which Note is worthy of your ob∣servation. § 8. The common Dose is but to gr. xx. but we have with good success given it many times to xxx, and more; in this matter you must be guided by your Reason. § 9. The Vertue of this Remedy is very estimable, and of high value in Phy∣sick: And tho' it is here said to be fixed, it is to be un∣derstood only comparatively to other Antimonial Reme∣dies, which provoke violent vomitings and purgings, this Diaphoretick only working
by an irradiation of Vertue, and an efficacy not easily conceivable. § 10. For it naturally and gently strengthens the inter∣nal Archaeus, which is the principal director of all the Functions of Life, either in Health or Sickness, and there fore its use must be continued without interruption, for a least 30 or 40 days, because that during that time, it wil make the alteration and change in the Blood, and other Juyces desired. § 11. It is of singular us to resist any Corruption o Putrefaction which may lurk in any part of the Body, mun∣difying and rectifying the whole mass of Blood, where∣by it becomes capable of opening the most inveterate Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Pancrea's, Womb, and other Viscera. § 12. Besides, it removes the obstruction of the Men∣ses, cures the Greensickness, Dropsy, and Hypochondria∣cal Melancholy, cleanses and heals inward and outward Ulcers, and is a singular good Remedy against malign and pestilential Feavers, Measles, Small-Pox, Spotted-Feaver, and the Plague itself. II. * Magisterium Benzoïni; Magistery of Benjamin. Bate.] It is made of the white parts of the Benjamin, being dissolved in Alcohol of Wine, precipitated with Milk∣water, and drying it, accor∣ding to Art. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. It is a noble Pectoral. Salmon.] § 1. This is nothing but a Tincture of Benjamin precipitated with Water; for the Tincture made with the Alcohol of Wine, being mixed with a great deal of Water, makes a kind of Milk, (which by some is called Virgins Milk, and serves for a Wash for the Face and Skin) because the Water weakens the S. V. and makes it quit what it held up dissolved, if you let this Milk be still a while, the Rosin or Magistery precipitates to the bottom of the Vessel, and the Water becomes clear. § 2. Le Febur makes it thus: ℞ Benjamin ℥ij. in fine pouder, put it into a Ma∣trass, upon which affuse Alcohol of S. V. prepared upon Salt of Venus ℥vj. shake them toge∣ther nimbly, and digest a while in a warm B. M. so will the Benjamin dissolve in a very short time, (by which it is evi∣dent, that this Concrete con∣tains
a very pure and subtile sulphurous volatile Salt; for if it was composed of a gross and unctuous Sulphur, the Alcohol of S. V. would make but a sim∣ple Extraction of it, not a per∣fect Dissolution:) This Disso∣lution, which will be red and transparent, must be filtrated into a Vial or Glass; the one half you may keep for Tincture, the other for Magistery, or precipitate, which is done by affusion of a good quantity of common fair Water, then in B. M. abstract the S. V, in a small Cucurbit, so will the Ma∣gistery be left at bottom, with the Water upon it, which you may decant by inclination, and if you please, wash it with Da∣mask-rose-water, then dry and keep it for use. § 3. The Tincture, to speak the Truth, is only a dissolution of the Benjamin, yet however, its Vertues is encreased by reason of the ex∣cellency and nobleness of the Menstruum, for which reason it may be used inwardly for Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as well as outwardly for a Wash; as in its proper place we have declared. § 4. However, this we add concerning this Tincture, That outwardly applyed, it is said to be a wonderful Cos∣metick, cleansing the Skin beyond any other thing, ta∣king away all Spots and Pim∣ples, as also other Tumors, Pustles, Buds, or redness in the Skin, and dissipating all harsh, virulent, and malig∣nant Serosities, with which it is many times infested. You must apply it towards Bed∣time upon all the places which you find wanting it, and the next day wash the same places with Barley∣water, in which Veal has been boyled, which you shall turn to a Milk-colour with some few drops of this Tin∣cture, and then wipe the Skin (whether of Hands or Face) with a very dry, soft Linnen Cloth. And as the Tincture, used simply or alone, will cure the Defects of the Skin aforementioned, so washing with the white Water made by this Tincture will prevent for the future the coming again of other Pimples, Redness, Pustles, &c. § 5. Inwardly, it may be given à gut. iiij. ad xx. mixt with the Yolk of an Egg, or in a spoonful of Syrup of Hyssop, against Asthma's, Shortness of Breath, Phthi∣sicks, old Coughs, &c. in the morning fasting, and an hour before Supper.
§ 6. The Magistery is a Specifick for Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, and by rea∣son of its subtile, volatile, and balsamick parts, is appro∣priated, by the help of the Archeus, to the digestions of the diseased parts, and is gi∣ven instead of the Tincture, to such as have an aversion to Spirit of Wine, for all the purposes aforesaid. § 7. It may be exhibi∣ted in the Yolk of a new∣laid Egg, or some pectoral Conserve or Syrup à gr. x. ad xx. or xxv. Or you may give it in Tablers, or Lozen∣ges, or mixt with some pro∣per Electuary, and so made up into a Bolus. § 8. To make excellent Washballs: Your Soap being prepared, and brought to a due consistency with new Milk, feed it for soone days with Tincture of Benjamin, adding also to each pound of Soap of the Ma∣gistery ℥ss. or more, and a few grains of Musk and Amber∣grise, then frame it into little Balls each weighing ℥ij. or iij.  yo like best your self, which carefully lay to dry, and then keep them for use. § 9. These Washballs, for their sweetness and excellen∣cy, in cleansing and preser∣ving the Skin both of Face and Hands, much exceed the Bolonian Washballs, which have had such a great repute in the World. III. Magisterium Bismuthi; Magistery of Marcasite or Tin-Glass; or, Spanish White. Bate.] ℞ Marcasite in fine pouder, p. j. Spirit of Ni∣tre, p. iij. mix and dissolve, precipitate with Salt water, edulcorate and dry, S. A. It is good against the Vices of the Skin, as Freckles, Len∣tils, Impetigo or Ringworms, Scabbiness of the Hands, and the like, for which intentions it is a most absolute Cosme∣tick or Beautifier. Salmon.] § 1. Rolfincius Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 2. cap. 34. makes it thus: ℞ Of the Marcasite of Lead, which they call Bismuth, and by us Tin-Glass, q. v. Aquae∣fortis made with Alum and Nitre, A. q. s. mix and dis∣solve in a gentle heat; what is dissolved pour off, and precipi∣tate with Oleum Tartari per diliquium, so in a moment you will have the Alcohol of Bis∣muth, most pure white, like the new-faln Snow: Dulcifie it by many ablutions in fair water, which will free it from all its saltness and acrimony, and then dry it.
§ 2. This (says he) is a most wonderful Cosmetick, freeing the Face and Hands from Freckles, Spots, and other Defedations. In using it to cleanie the Face, let it be applyed with Bean-flower-water; to take away the Freckles and Spots of the Hands with Ʋnguentum Po∣matum, or Hogs Lard well washed, for by this means it removes Lentils, Freckles, Ringworms, Tetters, and all sorts of Scabs whatsoever. § 3. But the way most agreeable with the Process of our Author you may see ex∣plicated at large, with a Ra∣tionale thereon, in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 10. sect. 6. wherein you have many Ob∣servations in the making thereof worthy of noting. § 4. Lemery's Magistery of Bismuth. ℞ Bismuth in pouder ℥i. put it into a Glass Matrass with Spirit of Nitre ℥iij. put the Dissolution into a clean white Ware Vessel, and affuse thereon five or six pints of Fountain-water, in which you have dissolved beforehand an ounce of Sea-salt, so will you have a white Pouder, precipi∣tate to the bottom; decant the Water by inclination, and wash the Magistery several times, drying it in the shade. § 5. This is that which is called Spanish White, and is a most excellent Cosmetick, for that it serves to cleanse the Skin and whiten the Com∣plexion; and it is used mixt either with Pomatum or Lil∣ly-water. § 6. Now, in the making of this, you must be sure to use a very large Bolthead to dissolve the Bismuth in, be∣cause of the great Ebulition; for as soon as the Spirit of Ni∣tre is put upon it, it takes up much room to move in, sen∣ding forth many Vapors, of which beware, for they are very pernicious to the Head, Brain, Brest and Lungs. § 7. Now this great Ebu∣lition proceeds from the A∣cid's penetration of the large Pores of the Bismuth, which violently divide all that op∣pose their motion: In this operation the Bolthead grows so hot, that a man can't en∣dure his Hand upon it, which comes from the points of the Acid chafing against the so∣lid body of the Bismuth, which makes a heat much after the manner, as when two solid Bodies are rubbed hard one against another: And the great store of Igne∣ous Particles contained in the Spirit, help much also to en∣crease this Heat.
§ 8. If the Dissolution becomes troubled thro' some Impurities in the Bismuth, you must put into it twice as much Water and filter it, for if you should filter it without Water, it would coagulate in the filter like Salt, and not pass through. This Coagu∣lation proceeds from the acid Spirits of the Nitre, included in the Particles of the Bis∣muth, which having not room or moisture enough to swim in or disperse, do gather to∣gether when the Dissolution is cold, into Crystals. § 9. The Impurity which commonly swims upon the Dissolution of the Marcasite is a fat or bituminous mat∣ter, which the Spirit of Nitre is not table to dissolve; and indeed Marcasite is nothing but an Excrement of a Me∣tal, or a fat Earth impregna∣ted with metalick parts. § 10. That is, it is a sul∣phurous Substance found in the Tin Mines, (thought by some to be an imperfect Tin, which partakes of good store of Arsenick) but its Pores are disposed in another manner than those of Tin; which is evident from the operation of the Menstruum, for that it perfectly dissolves Bismuth, but has nothing near such an operation upon Tin. § 11. This Magistery may also be made by affusion of a great quantity of Fountain-water into the Dissolution, without any Salt, but it is made the quicker when you do it with Salt, and the Pre∣cipitation is the better, be∣cause the Salt Particles do encounter and break the Acids, which Water alone was not sufficiently able to enervate or weaken. Thus you see the Acid of the Salt overcomes the Acid of the Spirit of Nitre. § 12. Now how fair Wa∣ter alone should be able to precipitate Lead, Antimony, and Marcasite, being dissol∣ved by the Acid, and yet cannot precipitate Gold, Sil∣ver, or Mercury, without the help of some Salt or other Body, is worthy to be enqui∣red into: Without doubt the largeness of the Pores of the former give the Water a greater liberty to pervade them, and force away the Acids, which cannot stick so close as they do in Gold, Sil∣ver, and Mercury, where the Pores are very much finer and smaller, by which rea∣son the Acid sticks not only the closer, but the Water for the same reason is denied that easie entrance, and so can make no separation, without
the help of a more piercing and active body. § 13. In making of this Magistery there is a conside∣rable augmentation of the Bismuth, but this proceeds from part of the Spirit of Ni∣tre remaining in it, and which cannot be separated by the precipitation nor lotion, tho' never so often repeated. § 14. And what we have here taught you from Bis∣muth, or the Marcasite of Load, or Silver, as some call it, the same you may do from Zinck, or the Marcasite of Gold, which much resembles Bismuth; and the operation is performed in like manner in all respects: But in the whole operation avoid the use of AF. (made with Vi∣triol) for that, by reason of the Vitriol, will blacken or foul the Precipitate, do what you can. § 15. Modus Ʋtendi. You may mix ʒj. of this Magi∣stery with Orange-flower-water or Damask-rose-water ℥iv. Or with choice Pomatum, or well-washed Hogs-Lard ℥i. It sof∣tens the Skin very much, and is also good against the Itch, because it feeds upon those Acids or Salts which cause and nourish this Disease. § 16. Le Febur makes it thus: ℞ A. F. made of equal parts of Nitre and common Salt, lbss. Bismuth in pouder ℥iv. mix and dissolve, and if there be any foulness in it, filter it, then precipitate with tar∣tarized S. V. abstract the Li∣quor swimming above the Ma∣gistery, and wash it with di∣stilled Rain-water, till it is sufficiently dulcified. Thus Schroder and Beguinus. § 17. It is, says he, a very good Remedy for all the Vices and Eruptions of the Skin, and above all against the Itch: It takes away Spots and Freckles in it, and smooths the roughness of the Face and Hands: But if you would make there with a pure and white Cosmetick, and use it either with or without Pomatum, he advises to precipitate with Oyl of Vi∣triol, (tho' I think Oyl of Sul∣phur would be better) so (says he) you shall have an almost incomparable White, which you must dulcifie, dry; and keep for use. § 18. Charras makes it in all respects, as does Le Febur, in a large Glass Cu∣curbit, but with this diffe∣rence. That whereas Le Febur allows for the Bismuth, but p. ij. Charras allows the full tripple quantity, and then when the dissolution is perfected, precipi∣tates with the best tartarized
Spirit of Wine, and pouring thereon a good quantity of fair Water, lets it settle, decants the Water by inclination, and perfectly edulcorates it by many ablutions, then dries it in the shade between two Papers, and keeps it for use. § 19. This (says he) is a very white Magistery, fit for all Deformities of the Skin, and to beautifie the Com∣plexions of Ladies, mixing it with proper Waters and Po∣matums. And here note, that the Water of the first Lion is very good to cure Tetters Ringworms, and the Itch. § 20. This Bismuth is a Mineral Body, half metalick, composed of Mercury, or the first maner of Tin ill dige∣sted, a oul terrestial Sulphur no ripened, and an impure Arsenical Salt, as aforesaid, which Arsenical Salt making one part of the Composition, is the reason that no Prepa∣rations made thereof are ever taken inwardly. IV. * Magisterium Gittae; Magistery of Cambogia. Bate.] ℞ Cambogia pure and in pouder ℥iij. Tincture of Red roses lbiss. Juice of Limons lbss. Spirit of Vitriol ʒj. mix. digest, and evaporate, to the consistency of an Extract. Or thus: Make a fine pouder of choice Cambogia ℥ij. add to it Oleum Tartari per deliquium ℥j. S. V. ℥iiij. digest and eva∣porate S. A. It purges  sursum & deorsum, upwards and downwards, chiefly serous and watery Humors. It is profitably used in the Dropsy, Scab, Itch, &c. Dose gr. x. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. Mynsicht extracts it with S. V. Rolfin∣cius with S. V. acuated with Spirit of Vitriol; Schroder with Oyl of Tartar per deli∣quium; all which see in our Seplasium, lib. 9. cap. 17. sect. 4, 5, & 8. § 2. Mindererus dissolves in Spiritus Vitrioli, then ab∣stracts the Spirit, and drys it gently, so as it grows not black, but may retain its co∣lour: This, if you please, you may edulcorate with much washing. Dose à gut. xv. ad xx. Sanè (dixit Grulingius) extractum hoc maximè lau∣dandum, id quod sine mole∣stia, sine torminibus humores, , evacuat, inpri∣mis serosos & biliosos, nec diu in corpore haeret; vomitu quo∣que in ventriculo congesto ex∣pellit.
§ 3. The following Com∣position is accounted with Physicians, among the Ca∣tholick Secrets. ℞ Of the Magistery of Cambogia gr. viij. Mecohacan in pouder ℈j. Ma∣stick gr. vij. Oyls of Anise and Fennel, A. gut. ij. mix and make a pouder for one Dose. Or thus: ℞ Of this Magi∣stery gr. viij. of Tartar Vitrio∣late ℈j. Magistery of Pearls gr. v. Oyls of Citrons and Cin∣namon, A. gut. j. mix, and for a Dose, to be given in Broth, Malaga-wine, Wormwood-wine, Cinnamon-water, or the like. § 4. But being thus com∣pounded, it is more profitable against the Dropsy. ℞ Of this Magistery à gr. vj. ad xij. Extract of wild Cucumbers gr. x. mix, and with Syrup of Cinnamon make Pills for a dose. Or thus: ℞ Of this Magistery gr. vij. Troches Al∣handal à gr. iv. ad vij. Oleum Anisi, gut. ij. with Sugar dis∣solved in Cinnamon-water, make a Confection in Lozenges and Rouls. V. * Magisterium Jovis, Magistery of Jupiter or Tin. Bate.] It is made of the Flowers of Jupiter, dissolved in Water and filtred, precipita∣ting with Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, or a dissolution of Alum, edulcorating by many ablutions in warm Water, and drying it again. Dose gr. 4, 5, 6, &c. See the Vertues of the Salt of Jupiter. Salmon.] § 1. This Pre∣script is from Lemery, but by all that is said, it does not appear of what kind the Flo∣wers are, of which this Ma∣gistery is to be made; they are twofold, viz. a sublima∣tion of Tin, either with Sal Armoniack or with Nitre: What the latter is, we shall shew in its place; what the former is (which without doubt is the Subject of this Prescript) we shall here shew. § 2. Flowers of Tin, with Sal Armoniack, from Lemery. ℞ Tin, p. j. Sal Armoniack in pouder p. ij. mix them well together, put them into a strong earthen Cucurbit, so large, as that not above a third part may be full, fit to it a blind Head, luting the Juncture, and place the Vessel on the Grate in a small Fornace and a naked Fire, and only so open, as that the Fire may pass through the Registers, for which reason you must stop up the top of the For∣nace with Bricks and Lime, leaving some holes in the sides, which are called Registers, and let the Cucurbit enter a third
part of its height into the For∣nace; then make a Fire small at first, and encrease it by de∣grees, till the bottom of the Cucurbit is red hot, which Fire continue till nothing more will sublime, which you will know by the Heads growing cold, and then the sublimation will be at an end; the Flowers will stick to the Head, and to the top of the Body, which take and keep for the making of the aforesaid Magistery. § 3. These Flowers are nothing but some Particles of the Tin, raised up by the vo∣latility of the Sal Armoniack, and at the bottom of the Body you will find some of the Tin revived. § 4. But that this may be the more effectually done, your Tin ought first to be reduced into a Calx by the means of Fire, for the better mixing it with the Sal Ar∣moniack, which is thus done: Put Tin into a large unglaz'd earthen Pan, place it in a cir∣cular Fire, so will the Tin melt, then stir it with a Spatula, till it comes into a pouder, con∣tinue a great Fire to it 36 hours, stirring it from time to time, so will you have the Calx of Tin fit for sublimation. § 5. In this Operation an unglaz'd Earthen Vessel is used, lest the Lead with which it is glaz'd should mix with the Tin, and hurt its Purity; and the Vessel is broad, that it might by stir∣ring be the sooner reduced to Pouder, in which it will be easier done in 36 hours, than in 4 or 5 days in a Cruci∣ble. § 6. It is impossible to make Tin ascend in Flowers without any mixture; and therefore, tho' the mixture of Salts may be found fault with, yet since it is not to be sublimed without them, it must be born withal, but the fault is the less, by reason of the facility of separating the said Salts again from the Me∣tal by Lotion, of which our Author's Prescript here gives the Example. § 7. Some take equal quantities of Tin and Sal Armoniack; but Charras takes Calx of Tin, ℥iij. Sal Armo∣niack ℥xij. and being mixt in fine pouder, he sublimes in a good Aludel upon a proper For∣nace, covered with 3 or 4 of its pots, one upon another, and the Junctures well luted, and the uppermost covered with a little Head, then kindles a Coal-Fire under the Aludel, encrea∣sing it by degrees, till the Alu∣del is red hot in all its lower parts, at which time he throws in at the hole about ℥ss. of the
pouder, and then closes it im∣mediately, by which means the Tin and Sal Armoniack rise together in Vapors, which con∣dense in Flowers, on the insides of the Pots; then throws in another like quantity at the hole, and repeats this Opera∣tion till all the pouder is spent, keeping a good Fire under the Aludel, to facilitate the subli∣mation of the Tin which by this means will be all sublimed. § 8. Now, should you take equal parts of Tin and Sal Arm. the Tin would re∣main almost all at the bot∣tom of the Aludel: Nor is it to be wonder'd at, since it is impossible to make Metals ascend in Flowers, without the assistance of 3 or 4 times their weight of volatile Salts mixed with them, or at least without several constant Co∣hobations, directed to be made use of. § 9. This Magistery is a delicate White, being mixt with Pomatum, and serves for a Paint: The Precipitate thus wash'd, is in order to deprive the Flowers of Jupiter of the volatile Salt which they de∣rive from the Sal Armoniack in sublimation: It is desica∣tive, and is used in Pomatums, for that purpose of drying up running Sores and Ulcers, and it is found to be of good use to repress Vapors, and resist Fits of the Mother. VI. Magisterium Saturni; Magistery of Saturn or Lead. Bate.] ℞ Red Lead, boyl it in Spirit of Vinegar, filter, precipitate with Oyl of Vitriol, and edulcorate S. A. It is of use against Phthisicks, or Ul∣cers of the Lungs, Hecticks, burning Feavers, and other inward Inflammations; also in Quartans, Affections of the Spleen, the Colick, and French Pox, it is a Secret. Dose gr. 4, 5, 6, &c. Outwardly it prevails against Cankers of the Mouth, malign Ulcers, Cancers, the Wolf, Fistula, Burnings, red Pustles of the Face, redness of the Eyes, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Lemery makes it thus: ℞ Salt of Sa∣turn ℥iij. well purified, dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of Water and Spirit of Vinegar; filter, and affuse on it drop by drop Oyl of Tartar per deliqui∣um, so will it become a kind of Milk, and then a kind of Coa∣gulum, which will precipitate into the bottom of the Vessel in a white pouder; boyl it a lit∣tle, and then filter again, so will the Liquor pass through, leaving the Precipitate behind
very white, which wash feveral times with warm Water, to abolish all the acid Particles of the Vinegar, which being dryed, will be a very white Magi∣stery. § 2. It is used for a Fu∣cus, like Bismuth, and it is likewise mixed in Pomatums for Tetters, Ringworms, Pu∣stles, and other breakings out of the Face and Skin. § 3. Here is to be noted, that if you should use only Water, you would make but a kind of Virgins Milk, and the Saturn would not dissolve but precipitate, leaving some particles of its Body yet in the Water; wherefore it is better to take equal quanti∣ties of Water and Spirit of Vinegar, for thereby the Salt will be dissolved, into which dropping the alcalious Oyl of Tartar, the edges or points of the Acid are destroyed, which held up the Salt, and the matter precipitates by its own weight. § 4. In this Operation there is no effervescency, for the Acids of the Vinegar be∣ing broken and weakened, it has not strength nor activi∣ty enough left to enter the Pores of the Salt of Tartar, so as to make such an opera∣tion; and it is the same in all other substances dissolved by Vinegar; but if the Dissolu∣tion be performed with stron∣ger Acids, as Oyls of Vitriol or Sulphur, Spirit of Ni∣tre, &c. an Ebulition is made. § 5. This Pouder being washt and dryed, is nothing but a Ceruse made exceeding pure and fine. It is used by some for Paint; but this Cosmetick, as well as others made of metallick Substan∣ces, such as Tin, Bismuth, &c. do often black the Skin, after having whiten'd it, because the heat of the Flesh gathe∣ring together these metallick Particles (which owe all their whiteness to their alcoholiza∣tion) does often make them revive. § 6. But Le Febur makes a twofold Magistery of Sa∣turn; 1. The false made from Red Lead, with Spirit of Vi∣negar, as our Author here di∣rects, but precipitated with Oyl of Tartar. 2. The true Magistery, which he makes thus: ℞ Ceruse ℥ij. in fine pouder, Spirit of Venus ℥vj. put it in by little and little, and stir them together, that the Spirit may penetrate to the bot∣tom; place the Matrass in B. M. and digest warm for 12 hours, then filter and let the filtrated Liquor rest one night in a cold place, so will you find
it coagulated into white Cry∣stals; separate the superfluous liquor, and abstract the Spirit by distillation in Balneo to dry∣ness, so will you have at bottom the Magistery of Saturn, dis∣soluble in all kinds of liquors, and like unto the first which was in Crystals, in respect of its Vertue; which dry in a gentle heat between two Pa∣pers. § 7. This Magistery may be given in all Diseases for which the Salt of Saturn is given, and you will find from it much better and quicker effects than from that made with Vinegar, but the Dose is less, and may be gi∣ven à gr. ij. ad vj. yea, to xij. says Febur. § 8. You are also to note, that the Spirit of Venus used in this Operation, and drawn off again by distillation, is yet good for the same Work again, or any other for which it is proper, having lost but very little of its Power and Vertue. § 9. It is also to be noted, that you may indifferently make use of Litharg, Minium, White-Lead, Ceruse, or other Calces of Lead, for this Pre∣paration; for it is sufficient to have a Lead that is open, and in a condition easily to be dissolved by Spirit of Vi∣negar: But because this Medicine calcin'd to white∣ness comes nearest to the co∣lour of its Salt and Magiste∣ry, it is better to make use of Ceruse, or some other white Lead, but be sure to chuse a true Ceruse of Lead, such as we call Venetian Ceruse, and not that which is counterfei∣ted, as being mixed with Chalk, Whiting, or other like Substances, having neither the brittleness, weight, nor whiteness of the true Ceruse, or that of Venice. § 10. This Magistery of Saturn may also be made by weakening the Spirit of Vine∣gar, impregnated with the Ceruse or Salt of Lead, with Water only; but then it be∣hoves you to use a great quantity of Water, without which you cannot therewith alone be able to make it quit its hold, and let fall the whole dissolved matter, or most part thereof, to the bot∣tom. § 11. Some also dissolve thin plates of Lead in A. F. made with Nitre and Alum, and upon this Dissolution affuse Salt-water filtred, whereby they precipitate a Magistery extra∣ordinary white, which is dulci∣fied by many Lotions with fair Water, then dryed in the shade between 2 Papers, and kept for the uses aforesaid.
VII. Magisterium Sulphuris, i. Lac Sulphuris; Magi∣stery or Milk of Sulphur. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur p. j. Quick-lime, or Salt of Tartar p. iij. boyl them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the Solution of the Sulphur; filter it while hot, and preci∣pitate with Spirit of Vinegar or Spirit of Nitre, then edulco∣rate and dry S. A. It is a Balsam for the Lungs, healing and drying, being profitable against Catarrhs, Asthma's, Coughs, Phthisicks, Colicks, &c. Dose ℈ss. ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. This is explicated at large in our Pharm. Lord. lib. 3. cap. 12. sect 8. from Quercetans Pre∣scription: Clossaeus has ano∣ther done with Quick-lime, and precipitated with Piss, which you may see in the same place. § 2. Lemery and Charras makes it also almost exactly according to this Prescript of our Author; but to dissolve the Flowers, he boils 5 or 6 hours with Water, lbii. to every ounce of Sal ☿, or Salt of fixt Nitre, and so drys it in the shade. § 3. Now here is to be observed, that as simple Wa∣ter is not able to dissolve the Sulphur, but an alcalious Salt is made use of, to divide it into imperceptible Particles; so on the contrary the Acid afterwards pierces the Alcali, and by separating its parts, makes it let go its hold of the Sulphur, whereby it falls down in a white Pouder, which being edulcorated, may be said to be only Flo∣wers of Sulphur Alcoholiz'd. § 4. And the change of the colour into a white, comes from its being more rarified, and obtaining a smoother Surface than it had before, to reflect the light in a direct line to our Eyes. § 5. And this operation (says he) may give us an Idea of Chylification and San∣guification; for as the Sulphur becomes white in the Magi∣stery, so the Aliments being fermented, and their substance attenuated in our Stomachs, are in part reduced into Chyle of a white colour; and as the Sulphur when entirely dissolved, turns of a red co∣lour, so the parts of the Chyle being exalted and dissolved by repeated Circulations, be∣come red, and turn into Blood, which Blood in Apo∣stems turning into Pus, be∣comes white again, by reason of the praeternatural Acid assisting anew in that opera∣tion.
§ 6. Also when you make this Preparation, let no Ves∣sels of Silver be near where it is perform'd, for the Va∣pors proceeding from the Sulphur and Alcali, with the Acid, will make it black. § 7. As to the Dose, our Author limits it in the largest to 20 grains; whereas Le∣mery limits it to 15, because (says he) 15 grains of this Pouder will do as much as double the quantity of Flowers of Sulphur, in Diseases of the Brest, and yet it does not heat so much: But notwith∣standing this, I have given it to ℈j. yea, to gr. xxv. with very good success. § 8. Marggrave makes it thus: ℞ Flowers of Sulphur ℥ss. melt them in a clean earthen Pan, and then add Oyl of Tartar per deliquium ℥iss. stir them continually with an Iron Spatula to dryness, and till it acquires a spadiceous or brown colour; reduce it to pouder, and with Alcohol of S. V. extract a Blood-red Tin∣cture in some few hours; from this, in some few days space, a grey pouder will spontaneously precipitate, which Beguinus calls the grey Magistery of Sul∣phur; But this Tincture (says he) with Vinegar is precipita∣ted into a most white Mass, which when dryed, is called Lac Sulphuris. § 9. Le Mort makes it with Flores Sulphuris p. j. Quick-lime p. ij. which he boyls in Water to redness, then filter the Water, and precipi∣tates with Spirit of Vinegar, which he edulcorates with ma∣ny washings. The same he also does with Cineres Cla∣vellatorum or Pot-ashes. § 10. Rolfincius, lib. 5. sect. 2. cap. 35. Art. Chym. saith, That in the preparation thereof there are four distinct Operations; 1. , by Solution, which is done in some fit saline Menstruum, as an alcalious Salt, with which the fat or oily parts of the Sulphur will mix easily; this is twofold, viz. either vulgar as a Lixivium of Quick-lime alone, or with Tartar; or singular, as Salt of Tartar: But the first of these he su∣spects, for (says he) the Atoms of the terra damnata of the Calx will inseparably unite themselves with the Lixivium and pass through the filter: The other, which is a solu∣tion of the Salt of Tartar, is much the more noble. 2. , by precipitation, which he performed by Spi∣rit of Wine-Vinegar. 3. Edul∣catione, sweetening by wash∣ing
with much Water. 4. Ex∣siccation, by drying, as is be∣fore taught. § 11. To this Opinion of Rolsincius, Le Febur seems to assent, for (says he) we re∣commend the Purity of Ma∣terials, which makes us make choice of Salt of Tartar in the dissolution of Sulphur, notwithstanding several Au∣thors content themselves with Ashes of Wine-lees or Sandi∣ver; but as these Salts have not the penetrating and fiery Vigor which is required for the dissolution of Sulphur and maturation of that Mineral, so neither can they make the Medicament so good nor so fai▪ o endow it with the requisite vertues. § 12. These things being considered, he takes Flowers of Sulphur wice sublimed, and dissolves the Salt of Tartar in in 15 parts of distilled Rain-water; but before the affusion of the Water, he grinds the Flowers of Salt of Tartar toge∣ther dry▪ in a warm Marble Mortar, then affuses the Wa∣ter, and boyls 5 or 6 hours to the dissolution of Sulphur; this done while hot, he only decants the clear Solution, (but filtrates not, because it cannot be soon enough performed, for that as soon as the Menstruum begins to col, the Sulphur returns in∣to a body again) and then pre∣cipitates with Spirit of Vine∣gar, performing all the rest of the Operation as before dire∣cted. § 13. This is also to be noted, that your first Water is not to be thrown away but reserved and evaporated, for so you will find again your Salt of Tartar, which rever∣berate in a Crucible to red∣ness, dissolve and filter again, and then coagulate, so will it be as good and as pure as before, and serve for the same operation, or any other that Salt of Tartar is fit for. Lastly, he washes the Magistery in equal parts of Cinnamon and Rose-water, and so drys it slowly for use. § 14. This Remedy is called the Balsam of the Lungs, which consumes and drys up all malignant, serous, and watery Superfluities, for which reasons it is exhibited in melting and suffocating Catarrhs, Asthma's, Phthi∣sicks, and to such as are afflicted with old and inve∣terate Coughs, Colicks, Ven∣tosities, or Wind, malignant Humors and Serosities in the Joynts; it hinders and dissi∣pates Vapors, facilitates Ex∣pectoration, and wonderful∣ly strengthens the Brest and Lungs.
§ 15. Dose so much as will turn Bawm or Cinna∣mon-water milk-white, and may be given every day morning and evening. § 16. But says Charras, by reason of the various al∣terations happening to the Sulphur in its dissolution and precipitation, the ill qualities which it receives from the Substances with which it is mixt, (and of which the ill scent remaining after the washing is a sign) it will be better to lay it aside, and make use of the Spirit of Sul∣phur in its place. § 17. And Le Febur says, Tho' this Remedy is highly celebrated by Authors, it is better rather to trust to the Tincture extracted from it, than to this body, yet too course and material, to hope from it all the good and com∣mendable effects which are attributed unto it. § 18. However we can∣not rely wholly upon what these Gentlemen say, for the Medicine is not so despicable as they would make it, tho' it be none of the highest Pre∣parations; and notwithstan∣ding Le Febur says, it is yet too course and material, we say it is much more subtile than a thousand other Medi∣caments much esteemed above it, and will do that by tou∣ching only outwardly with it, which other more estee∣med sublime Medicines will not do neither by inward nor outward application. § 19. By simply rubbing it on an Itchy person, it will absolutely cure him; which shews the great sublimity of its Substances, and what it may do and effect if it be pru∣dently given inwardly. This very thing shews, there is something more in the tex∣ture of its parts than Artists are ordinarily aware of, and that it has a subtilty in its nature able to penetrate the whole human frame, and an alexipharmick Property able to overcome and ruinate the most inveterate, malignant, and rebellious Humors what∣soever, destroying them in their Crasis, and undoing them in their very Essence and Being. VIII. Magisterium Tartari; Magistery of Tartar. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Tartar q. v. impregnate it with the best Vinegar so long, till the Tartar will receive no more acidity, then affuse thereon S. V. and abstract again, co∣hobating several times, at length place the Tartar so as it
may melt, and you will have a red Oyl, which purges per in∣feriora, or downwards. It is of profitable use in all deplo∣rable Diseases. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. Le Mort makes it otherwise, and calls it soluble Tartar, thus: ℞ Crystals of Tartar in pou∣der ℥iij. Oyl of Tartar per de∣liquium ℥iv. dissolve them to∣gether, filter the Solution, and affuse theron Spirit of Vine∣gar ℥x. shake them together, and  them stand for a time, then evaporate to the consum∣ption of a third part, and set the remaining matter in a oool Cellar to crystallize, the Cry∣stals take, dry gently, and keep them for use. § 2. If you would have them yet more grateful, dissolve them again in Spirit of Vine∣gar, frate and evaporate as before, so will they be both more pure and more pleasant to the Palate and Stomach. They break the Sone, and expel it, and have all the vertues of Cremor Tartari, but four times stronger. Dose à gr. viij. ad ℈j. or ʒss. or to a pleasing acidity in Broth or Wine. E vinis Gallicis vina Rhnna extempore conficiun∣tr ado circiter drachmam n pinae uni. § 3. Another process of the same Le Mort. ℞ Cry¦stals of Tartar ℥vj. Oyl of Tar∣tar per deliq. ℥i. dissolve in a warm place, and at length an earthy pouder will fall to the bottom, which hindered the solubility of the Tartar. This Solution filtrate, and add to it Spirit of Vinegar, to take away the ingrateful taste of the Al∣cali; evaporate a third part of the humidity, and set it to cry∣stallize, which dry and keep for use: These, if not acid enough, dissolve again in more Spirit of Vinegar. § 4. It is admirably pe∣netrating, and dissoluble in any Liquor, it breaks the Stone, eases the Gout, takes away Pain, and strengthens weak parts, powerfully pro∣vokes Urine, and wonderful∣ly quickens the Operation of other Purges. It prevails al∣so against Hypochondriack Melancholy, the Jaundice, and all Obstructions of the Bowels. § 5. We will now deliver you the Process of Sennertus's Magistery or purgative Salt of Tartar, which is the very thing with which Le Febur makes his Armoniack Tin∣cture of Mars, the Prescript of which you have in Chap. 7. Sect. 2. aforegoing. The said Magistery of Sennertus is thus done.
§ 6. ℞ Pure Salt of Tartar lbij. put it into a Glass Cucur∣bit, affuse thereon strong Spirit of Vinegar lbiv. stir them toge∣ther till the Salt is well dissol∣ved, place the Cucurbit in a Sand or Ash heat, and abstract the humidity, which will come off tastless as fair Water; put on more Spirit of Vinegar, and continue to distil softly; and so often repeat this work, till what you distil off comes forth with the same strength as when it went on, which will happen after you have reitterated the operation about 20 times: The Salt remaining after all this work will be very black, but have lost all its lixiviate taste, and become of a pleasant aci∣dity. The last time you draw off the Vinegar, you must dry this Salt with a pretty strong Fire, that no moisture may re∣main with it: Dissolve the same in the Alcohol of S. V. and filtrate, to separate from it the blackness it has contracted; then put it into B. M. and abstract the Spirit to dryness; dissolve again, filtrate and ab∣stract again, until the fourth time; the fifth time cohoba∣ting the Spirit, abstract in Ashes, and continue these coho∣bations, giving still more and more a stronger fire towards the latter end, until the Salt be∣comes white: After all, put the Salt in a clean Glass Vessel, and in a cool moist Cellar, so will it easily dissolve into a red liquor, which filter, and either keep it in a liquor, or evaporating the humidity to dryness, keep the dried Salt in a Vial close stopt, to preserve it from dissolving. § 7. In this Operation the change which happens in the taste of this Salt, proves this Truth, that acid and alcali∣ous Salts convert one another into a neutral substance, which is no more either the one or the other, and yet possesses a less hurtful and more excel∣lent vertue than the Bodies of which they have been com∣pounded. § 8. This evidently ap∣pears in the Example of Tar∣tar Vitriolate, for Oyl of Vi∣triol is a very strong and fiery Corrosive, like an all-consuming Fire; and strong Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, or Soap-boilers strongest Lees, is a very fine Alcali, of a biting, urinous, and unpleasing taste; nevertheless the Result of both being mixt, makes a very pleasing Magistery, contain∣ing no more the simple qua∣lities of either of the Bodies of which it is compounded, ex∣cept that of a penetrative, sub∣tile, and dissolutive property. § 9. And this appears in our present Magistery, in that
the Vinegar loses all its acidi∣ty, and turns into an insipid Water; and this volatile-acid Salt of the Vinegar (for such it is) checks, and turns the edge and ill taste of the Alca∣li, or Salt of Tartar, and makes it to become an extra∣ordinary Remedy. § 10. We cannot chuse therefore but recommend this magisterial Salt in the highest manner considering the won∣derful effects it is able to pro∣duce, for it is beyond most other Remedies in opening the Obstructions of all the Viscera, or in any other part of the Body, (for which rea∣son it is an excellent thing against the Palsie) and to eva∣cuate gently any morbifick matter lodged in the said Vi∣scera, and parts adjacent to the same. § 11. It purges gently, and without violence, through all the Emunctories and prevails against all chronick and de∣sperate Diseases, which have been of so rebellious a nature, as to yield to no other Reme∣dies. § 12. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. if dry, or from ℈j. or 20 drops, to ℈ij. or 40 drops, if liquid: You may give it in Veal or Chicken Broth, or Veal boi∣led with Parsly-roots, or White-wine in which Da∣mask-Roses have been infused and aromatiz'd with a little Cinnamon: Give it fasting in the morning, and if need require, reiterate it at night going to Bed. IX. Magisterium Turpethi; The Magistery of Turbith Mineral. Bate.] ℞ Corrosive Subli∣mate q. s. boil it in Rain-water till it is dissolved, filter, and with Oyl of Tartar per deliqui∣um precipitate, then edulcorate with distilled water S. A. It is a famous thing against the French Pox, Worms, Tetters, Scald Heads King's-Evil, &c. Dose ℈ss. ad gr. xv. with Comfectio Hamech ʒij. or iij. Salmon.] § 1. Mynsicht is the Author of this Prescript, and calls it Turpethum Mine∣rale Verum, but he advises the solution of the Mercury to be se∣veral times filtred, and the precipitation with the Oyl of Tartar to be made Guttatim, and then to be edulcorated with common Water, till it be freed from its sharpness and saltness, and after that, that it should be cohobated with the best Aqua Mellis, rectified six or seven times, so often, till the pouder is become exceeding sub∣tile; and lastly, affusing there∣on the best Alcohol of S. V. that
it may be well moistened, to de∣flagrate it, continually stirring it round with an Iron Spatula, till all the S. V. is consumed. The Dose of which he limits to be à gr. iv. ad vj. or vij. in some proper Vehicle. § 2. But the latter part of this Preparation of Mynsicht would be better done, in my opinion, by abstraction of the S. V. in B. M. two or three several times, from the Magistery, rather than by de∣flagration, because the actual heat of the fire in that Opera∣tion is apt to vivifie some of the Particles of the Mercury; for being very small and sub∣tile, a small Fire has a great power over them. § 3. Tilingius in Prod. Chy∣mic. Chap. 3. Tit. 24. Pag. 899. gives us another Prescript made with simple red Precipitate, which is this. ℞ Simple red Precipitate ℥iss upon which affuse Oyl of Tar∣tar per deliquium, as much; digest for one or two days, then edulcorate with simple fair wa∣ter, and calcine it a little with a very gentle fire: Lastly, af∣fuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. de∣flagrate and keep the Magistery for use. Dose à gr. iv. ad vij. § 4. Here is to be noted, that for want of Salt of Tar∣tar, you may do the work with Salt of Pot-ashes, or a Lixivium thereof; and some do it with a Lixivium of Quicklime. § 5. The first Water which is decanted off after precipitation, you may re∣serve as a Jewel, for it cures even to a Miracle all old Ulcers, running Sores, and inveterate Fistula's, only by washing them therewith, and laying a Cloth wet therein up∣on them; and this it per∣forms, though of never so many years standing, with∣out any other Medicine for any pain or discomposure. § 6. A man who had a foul filthy Ulcer upon his Leg, and been troubled with it for near 30 years, and could get no Remedy, but was de∣clared by all his Chyrurgions to be past cure, was herewith cured perfectly in less than a months time. And a Ser∣ving-maid, who had been troubled with a like stubborn Ulcer for about 12 years, I cured) only by washing here∣with, and laying a Cloth wet therein over the Sore) in less than 6 weeks time. So that for such-like purposes this Water is almost above va∣lue. § 7. As to the Precipitate it self, it works strongly, and must be given with caution;
but therewith a wise man may cure the French Disease withall its Symptoms. § 8. If it be given in any great quantities, or often, it will certainly Flux, but that may be prevented, if the next day a Cathartick Dose be gi∣ven, or it self be first mixt with a Cathartick Dose, and then exhibited with Caution, that the Sick should beware of taking cold. § 9. Mixt with Oynt∣ments or Balsams, or Hogs-Lard, and outwardly applied, it cures Tetters, Ringworms, Itch, Scurf, Morphew, or any other Breakings out, or deformities of the Skin; and this it has done after all other things have failed and proved fruitless. X. Alumen Dulce; Sugar of Alum. Bate.] ℞ Alum, and dis∣solve it in Water, and coagu∣late; repeat this work thrice, that the Alum may be sweet, this is called Sugar of Alum. It is commended in Diseases of the Brest, chiefly those contracted from Mineral Fumes: And it eases the Tooth-ach, being applied to the Gums. Salmon.] § 1. We will shew the Method from Le Febur, more explicitly. ℞ Roch-Alum lbiij. put it into a good glass Retort, and in a gra∣dual Sand heat abstract the Flegm; cohobate this Flegm upon the desiccated Alum, and digest them together in a gentle vaporous balneo for 24 hours, then in Sand again abstract the Flegm, which cohobation, digestion, and abstraction re∣peat seven times; this done, after the seventh time, or se∣paration of the Flegm, put that which remains in the bottom of the Vessel, into a Cellar, or other cool place, to dissolve per deli∣quium into Liquor; this Li∣quor filter, and digest it in a double or circulatory Vessel, in a gentle heat in Ashes, for 12 or 14 days, then put it into a Cucurbit, and in Ashes abstract again the moisture to dryness, so will the Sugar of the Alum remain behind. § 2. It is a peculiar Re∣medy against Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, especially for such as are affected with any metallick, mercuriel, mi∣neral, or arsenical Vapours or Fumes. It is cooling, and allays the extremity of Thirst in Fevers. § 3. It is of singular use for such as feel heats and pre∣judicial pains about the Ster∣non, or Region of the Brest, arising from malignant, sharp,
and biting Serosities, procee∣ding from a venereous taint, especially in such as have had the stain long upon them. § 4. Applied to the Gums, it eases the Tooth-ach, and cures Cankers and Sores in the Mouth and Throat: It works inwardly by Urine▪ Spitting, Sweats, and an in∣sensible transpiration. Dose à gr. vj. ad xvj. or xx. in Broth, or some pectoral or diuretick Water, Infusion, or Decoction. This Process of Le Febur is exactly the same with that of Schroder. § 5. There is also an Alu∣men Dulce Liquidum, which according to Charras is thus made. ℞ Roch-Alum q. v. dissolve it in Rain-water, fil∣ter it, put it into a low Glass Cucurbit, and in Ashes distil to dryness: The Caput. Mort. dissolve again in the distilled Water, filter and distil anew in like manner to dryness; this Work of dissolving, filtering, and distilling, continue till the Alum is truly freed from all its terrestreities, and its pure sub∣stance wholly ascends in distil∣lation. § 6. This is a liquid sweet Alum, or the Magisterial Spi∣rit of Alum, and is accoun∣ted one of the best Stypticks that is known in the World, and without doubt, being mixed in Gargarisms for the Mouth, (℥j. of this Spirit to ℥x. ounces of the Gargarism) it may be of singular use to heal all manner of Sores and Ulcers in those parts, kill Cankers, and stop Defluxions of Humors when the maxil∣lary Glands are too much extended, and the Pores or Mouths of the salivatick Ves∣sels too open: It cools, clean∣ses, and binds, and is of use for Diseases of other parts, as well as of the Mouth, where there is need of cooling, clean∣sing, and strengthening; as also to stop a defluxion of Humors upon the same, Fluxes of the Bowels, Gonor∣rhoeas, heat of Urine, &c. § 7. It may also be put into vulnerary Drinks, and traumaticks, (p. j. to p. 20. of the Drink) and so drank in the morning fasting, and last at night going to Bed, or otherwise, as the urgency of the Disease shall seem to re∣quire. § 8. Thus having this Spirit in a readiness, you may mix it as you see occasion, with any proper distilled Water, Decoction, or Juice, specifick to your purpose, which will be incomparably much better than all the di∣stilled Aluminous Waters, found ordinarily in Books.
XI. Alumen Febrifugum; A Febrifuge Alum, or Alu∣minous Fever-frighter. Bate.] Dissolve Alum ℥iij. in Water of Carduus Bene∣dictus (well tinged with Dra∣gons Blood, and filtred) lbiss. then evaporate to dryness S. A. Dose ℈j. before the febrile Pa∣roxism, it induces Swea∣ting, &c. Vide Mynsicht. Salmon.] § 1. Mynsicht has it thus. ℞ Crude Alum ℥j. Magistery of Dragons blood ℥ss. dissolve in Water of Car∣duus Benedictus, and coagulate or evaporate the humidity, S. A. § 2. This, says he, is a won∣derful Medicament against Fevers, and a Remedy even for the quartan Ague it self; besides which, it is a Secret for the Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes of the Bowels: Let it be given in some ap∣propriate Vehicle, some hours before the Fit of the Ague: The Author advises, in Aqua Nicotianae, or distilled Water of Indian Tobacco, provo∣king Sweat withal, if possi∣ble. § 3. Charras his Aluminous Febrifuge is this: ℞ Burnt Alum q. v. put it into a Glass Cucurbit, which place in asand beat, and affuse thereon as much good Vinegar as is need∣ful to dissolve it; filter the dissolution, and evaporate in the same bath till a film cover the top of it, then set it to cry∣stallize in a cool place, which separate, dry, and keep for use. § 4. It is given for the cure of Tertian Agues, a lit∣tle before the Fit, à gr. xij. ad xx. in some proper purg∣ing Liquor. The Author had it doubtless by report, for he professes to know nothing of it by Experience: Yet this is certain, that it is cooling, and extreamly styptick, and as such, it may be esteemed a good thing against Agues of all sorts, forasmuch as Expe∣rience has confirmed to us, that styptick Medicaments are the chief profligators of those Diseases. § 5. Le Febur makes it after this manner: ℞ Pure Roch-Alum lbiij. calcine it in an unglaz'd earthen pot, in a moderate heat, till all the flegm is vanished away, then encrease the fire by degrees, till the Pot and Alum grow red hot, which done, have in a readiness in a great earthen Pan, Spirit of Vinegar lbij. into which put this calcin'd Alum thus red hot, so will it draw immediately, and take to it self the Essence and Magistery of Alum, (and the remainder of the Body will pre∣cipitate
it self in the bottom of the Vessel, into a white Pou∣der, which being separated, may by ablutions be sweetened and dryed, for other particular In∣tentions) This Vinegar im∣pregnated with the vertues of the Alum, filter and add to it Tincture of Elderberries, made with its own fermented Spirit ℥ss. put all into a Cucurbit, and in B. M. abstract all the super∣fluous humidity, to the consisten∣cy of a Syrup, then setting the Vessel in a cool place for 4 or 5 days, it will crystalize, which separate, dry, and keep for use. § 6. These Crystals are sudorifick, diuretick, and sto∣matick, and therefore a good Remedy against the Scurvy; but their chief intention is for the cure of Tertain Agues, be∣ing given à gr. x. ad xx. in decoction or Juice of Net∣tle-roots, or Chervil well de∣purated and mixed with a little Whitewine, a little be∣fore the Fit: In other cases it may be taken in like manner in the morning fasting. XII. Arcanum Aluminis; The Arcanum of Alum. Bate.] It is made of Alu∣men Dulce ℥ij. fused or melted Salt ℥vj. being mixed together and reverberated, and washed with Water S. A. The Ver∣tues are the same with those of the Alumen Dulce, or Sugar of Alum. Salmon.] § 1. This is only Sugar of Alum, yet more purified and corrected, by the fused or melted Salt, which Salt is afterwards separated from it by washing, the Ar∣canum Aluminis precipita∣ting. § 2. It is esteemed better than the Alumen Dulce, and thought not inferiour to the Essence of Chalybs or Iron, Loadstone, &c. and is given à gr. x. ad xx. in any proper astringent Liquor. § 3. It is said to perform all the Operations of a good Styptick, and is not only good against Fevers and Agues, but also stops all immoderate Fluxes of the Bowels, and Fluxes of Seed, Gonorrhoea's in Men, and Whites in Wo∣men, or heat of Urine from a venereal cause, the Pocky taint being first taken off by some proper and specifick Remedy, according as the Prudence of the Physician shall direct. § 4. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Aq. Lactis alexiter. ℥iv. Syrup of Citron-peels ʒvj. of this Ar∣canum gr. xx. liquid Lauda∣num gut. x. mix for a Dose, against the Gonorrhoea, Whites, weakness of the
Back. &c. Universals being first premised. ℞ Centory or Carduus-water ℥iv. Syrup of Limons ℥j. of this Arcanum gr. xx. of our volatile Lauda∣num gr. ij. mix for a Dose, against a Tertian Ague, to be given three hours, or better, before the Fit, putting also the Sick into a condition of Sweating, that when the time of the cold Fit should come, the Patient may be in the midst of a good Sweat, by which means the violence of the Paroxism will be anti∣cipated. XIII. * Arcanum Corallinum; The Coralline Secret. Bate.] It is made of crude Mercury lbj. Spirit of Nitre lbij. distilled therefrom with cohobations, so will the Arca∣num remain in the bottom which is to be edulcorated ei∣ther by calcination, or washing it with Water S. A. Dose à gr. iv. ad vj. or more. It purges chiefly downwards, is a great Secret in the Lues Venerea, Dropsy, Gout, Ulcers, Scabs, Cancers. Salmon.] § 1. We have shewn you another way of making it in our Pharm. Lon. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 23. which is with red Precipitate and Spirit of Salt, which is from Thibaut. And in Sect. 27. following you have another Coralline Arcanum from Schroder, in these or the like words. ℞ Fine Quick-silver, rectified Spirit of Nitre, A. ℥iij. digest till dissolution, draw off the Spirit in Sand, with a long∣neck'd Glass; to the Mercury left and pouder'd add as much fresh Spirit, viz. ℥iij. more, draw it off again, and repeat this with ℥iij. of fresh Spirit of Nitre the third time, so will you have a fine corallated Mer∣cury, which calcine with a gen∣tle fire, and it will be sweet without any corrosion. § 2. Now the difference between this Prescript, and that of our Author is only this; that whereas Schroder, or rather Hartman, prescribes but an equal quantity of Spi∣rit with the Mercury, and the operation to be three times repeated with the same quan∣tity of fresh Spirit. Our Au∣thor prescribes a trebble quantity of Spirit at once, and the same to be 3 times cohobated, which to me seems to make the Preparation the better by all the Cohobations, though Lemery seems to be of another opinion. He makes it thus. § 3. ℞ Mercury revived from Cinnaber ℥viij. Spirit of Nitre ℥viij. or ix. mix, and
dissolve, put the dissolution in∣to a Vial or Matrass with a short Neck, set in Sand, and evaporate all the moisture with a gentle heat, until there re∣mains a white Mass, then quic∣ken the Fire by little and lit∣tle, to the third degree, and keep it in this condition till all the matter is turned red, then take it off from the Fire, let it cool, and break the Vial, so will you have ℥ix. of Precipitate. Some put this red Precipitate into an earthen Pot, and pour upon it S. V. well rectified, then fire it, letting it burn till it is consumed, and then adding more, and burning it off as be∣fore: They repeat this Opera∣tion of deflagration six times, and call it Arcanum Coralli∣num. § 4. Now here is to be noted, that Lemery is of opi∣nion, that the distilling Spirit of Nitre three times off from the white Mass, or cohoba∣ting of it, to the encrease of its redness, is of no use, and as I apprehend him, adds no∣thing to the Vertue of the Medicine. § 5. But that it reduces the Mass into smaller Parti∣cles, is apparent; for if ℥iij. of Spirit of Nitre will reduce the Mercury into Particles so fine, ℥ix. of Spirit, from the same reason, must reduce it into Particles three times as fine. And this was the Opi∣nion of Paracelsus; and that the Particles at length might be made so fine, as to become Oily, else in vain was the Engine of Joel Langelot made, for the grinding of Gold, thereby to reduce it into Oil, if the smalness of the Particles added not something to that Reduction. § 6. And if the reducing of the Mercury into small Par∣ticles accidentally add to the Vertue of the Mercury, by enlarging the surface thereof; if then by adding three times the quantity of Spirit, the Particles be made three times as small, it follows by parity of Reason, that its Vertues must be three times as great. § 7. The white Mass which remains after the first evapo∣ration of the humidity, is a mixture of Mercury with a great many acid Spirits, for it weighs three ounces more than the crude Mercury did; and it is extreme corrosive and fiery, if applied to the Flesh. § 8. But according as it is calcin'd, to make it red, the Points of the Spirit of Nitre which caused the corrosion, do strike off, and fly into the Air; whence it comes to pass, that the more it is cal∣cin'd,
the more we encrease in nedness, and the more di∣minish its weight, and the less, it corrodes even in outward application. And therefore some Chyrurgions observing this, when they would make an Eschar quickly, chuse the Precipitate that is less red, or less red than usual, the more red being less escharotick. § 9. Therefore being con∣tinued for some hours under the red Mass, will cause it to sublime, and yet still retain its red colour, but this subli∣mate is hot so corrosive as the other; from whence it ap∣pears, that the Points or Acids of the Spirit of Salt are neces∣sary to make a sublimate very corroding. § 10. And the reason why it will sublime, is, because the Mercury being freed from many of the acid Spirits, which did fix it, has power to sublime with those that re∣main; but because those re∣maining Spirits do a little clog it in its career or volati∣lity, it commonly makes its station in the middle of the Vial. § 11. Le Mort makes it in all respects as Schroder or Hartman does, but after the dissolution and abstraction of the Spirit of Nitre, he affuses Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop in 4 inches, di∣gests two days, after evapo∣rates to dryness, then affuses tartarized S. V. to overtop it 3 inches, digests and abstracts in Sand to dryness, cohoba∣ting the same Spirit upon the Mercury, so long till it ac∣quires an acidity. Lastly, affuses fresh Spirit of Wine upon the matter, and abstract again, so have you an Arca∣num Corallinum, which you may keep under the name of Aurum Horizontalis. § 12. It brings forth all noxious humors in the French Pox, Leprofie, Kings-Evil, &c. being given à gr. j. ad vj. It is a specifick Purge in all ul∣cerous Affects, or any vene∣real Relique; and if pru∣dently given with proper Catharticks, it cures the Dropsie, and all Diseases proceeding from cold glassy Flegm and watery Humors. § 13. Marggrave makes it of crude Mercury, and but double the Spirit of Nitre, with one single dissolution and abstraction of the Spirit and calcination to redness, abstracting several times from it the Alcohol of S. V. to re∣move from it its Acrimony. § 14. Charras makes it thus: ℞ Quick-silver ℥iv. (revived from Cinnaber) Spi∣rit of Nitre ℥iv. put all into a
Matrass, being first placed in a gentle Sand-heat; the ☿ being dissolved, encline the neck of the Matrass a little, and by en∣creasing the fire, evaporate the Spirit; this repeat three times with equal quantities of Spirit of Nitre, and at last encrease the fire, till the matter looks perfectly red, pouder it, affuse thereon the best rectified S. V. a little to overtop it, then de∣flagrate, and repeat the defla∣gration six times; pouder it, and keep it for use. § 15. He not only gives it against all venereal Di∣stempers, but also against Dropsies, Rheumatisms, and intermitting Agues, it purging universally bad Humors, chiefly Flegm, which it dis∣solves and carries off by the most commodious ways. § 16. It is given in some Conserve or Confection, from gr. iij. (saith he) ad. gr. viij. or x. It is used outwardly for the cure of old Ulcers, Fistula's, &c. chiefly such as are venereal; and in Poma∣tums, to take away all sorts of Scabs, Leprosies, Scurf, Morphew, and other defeda∣tions of the Skin. § 17. Le Febur takes to Mercury purified ℥ iv. Spirit of Nitre ℥ ivss. dissolves in a gen∣tle Ash-heat, in a short-neckt Matrass, and abstracts the Spi∣rit to dryness, and repeats this same work twice more with fresh Spirit of Nitre ℥ ivss. each time (by which means the Par∣ticles are made much finer than by any of the former. Operati∣ons) then poudering it finely in a Glass Mortar, calcines it in a Crucible by degrees in an open fire, till it is red hot, be∣comes of a fine red coralline co∣lour, and insipid in taste. Lastly, being in fine pouder; deflagrates rectified S. V. from it seven times, as is before taught. § 18. This, says he, is a purgative Precipitate, capa∣ble of working many noble effects, and without any cor∣rosion. Dose (says he) is from gr. ij. ad x. in purga∣tive Extracts, or a Dose of the Pilulae Angelicae of Gru∣lingius, commonly called the Frankfort Pill; which you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 86. with its Vertues at large. § 19. It is a real and true Arcanum against the French Pox, with all its regiment of evil Symptoms, for it equal∣ly and universally purges away all that is hurtful and superfluous, and therefore is good against hydroptick hu∣mors, Gouts, Sciatica's Rheu∣matisms, Kings-Evil, inter∣mitting Fevers or Agues,
scirrhus Tumors, whether in∣ward in the Bowels, or out∣ward in other parts of the Body; it resolves Fluxions, and Cararrhs, and is good against the malignity of the Plague. § 20. Outwardly no Re∣medy surpasses it in the cure of corrosive, or eating and malignant Ulcers; it is good against Itch, Scabs, Leprosie, and all irruptions of the skin if mixed in Pomatums ℈j. of it to ℥ j. of the Oyntment, and so the Pulses in the Wrists, Feet, Fingers, and other parts be anointed there∣with. § 21. One thing I have to remind you of here, which is that being taken in∣wardly, but 6, 8, or 10 doses, it is a Specifick in removing nocturnal pains, which it so ab∣solutely cures, that they never return any more from that ocon. You may give it à gr. iij. ad v. or vj. mixt with ℈j. of Cinnaber of Anti∣mony, or native Cinnaber in fine pouder, which being mixt with the Pap of an Apple, is to be swallowed at night going to bed, and repeated in like manner the next night, then intermitting 2, 3 or 4 nights, (as the strength of the Patient requires) to be in like man∣ner repeated again for two other nights, and this course to be followed till 8 or 10 Doses are taken, at the end of which course you may pro∣bably (thro' God's Blessing) find your Patient perfectly well. § 22. Lastly, this Arcanum being put into a Vial hermeti∣cally sealed, and set for 8 whole days in a Sand-heat, a Tincture of Gold may be extracted from it, red like blood, leaving in the bottom a white substance or body of Gold; in another Phiol hermetically sealed coagulate it with a gentle fire in an Athe∣nar, into a red stone, which up∣on a Porphory, in a cold moist place, dissolve into Oyl, which afterwards purged from its fe∣ces, coagulate, and repeat the same coagulation a third time: This Precipitate, Elixir of Life and Mercurial Laudanum care∣fully keep in a Glass close stop∣ped. § 23. Dose gr. j. with Ex∣tract of Treacle, and Pouder of Liquorice, enough to make it up into Pills. In every Disease, after taking it, the Sick may drink a draught of Wine, repeating the Dose if necessity urge. Note, that the white substance of Gold remaining in the bottom of the Phiol, which is wont to be called fixed Silver, recovers its pristine colour, if precipi∣tated
with Antimony. See Paracelsus's Chyrurg. Mag. XIV. Arcanum Corallinum Paracelsi; Paracelsus his Coralline Secret. Bate.] ℞ Crude Mercury, Vitriol calcin'd, Nitre, A. lbij. mix and sublime, the sublimate mix with Nitre and Salt a lit∣tle calcin'd, A. lbj. Wine-Vine∣gar q. s. so as to make a Paste, which again sublime, separa∣ting the red from the yellow; wash each apart, or by it self, deflagrating thereon S. V. S. A. Dose à gr. iv. ad vij. It exceeds in vertue and power Mercurius Dulcis, and is a Secret in the French Pox, Dropsie, Scabs, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Schroder has an Arcanum not much unlike to this, which he calls the Pa∣nacaea Mercurii, or fixt Mer∣cury, and it is thus made: ℞ Crude Mercury lbiij. yellow Sulphur lbij. Sal Armoniack lbiss. mix them well till no Mercury appears, then sublime, mix the sublimate again with its own feces, and sublime still afresh, then encrease the fire, and that at the bottom is the great Secret. It is (says he) sudorifick, drys up all bad Humors, and expels them by Sweat. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. or ʒss. § 2. This Operation more fixes the Mercury than the former, for in the former Operation it all sublimes, whereas in this the Spirit of the Sulphur, by several subli∣mations, brings it to a singu∣lar degree of fixity, insomuch that it may be taken in all respects as safely as Mercu∣rius Dulcis. § 3. Hartman has also an Arcanum, which answers all the same intentions, but it is prepared after another man∣ner, which because it may be of service to the Sons of Art, we will here impart. ℞ Crude Mercury purified, digest it in red Oil of Vitriol, till it become as Water, abstract the Oyl by a Retort in Sand, and you will have a Precipitate at bottom; take this Precipitate and add to it an equal weight of Silver calcin'd, and as much of Sal. Armoniack; mix and sub∣lime, so the Sal Armoniack will ascend, leaving the Mercury and Silver at bottom, like pure Gold, which sweeten by many ablutions in fair Water, or by a gentle calcination, and it will become red. Dose à gr. iij. ad viij. or x. against the Pox, Dropsie, Scab, Leprosie, Gout, Stone, &c. § 4. This Arcanum or Matter being put into a Cru∣cible, in a melting Fire, turns
both the Ingredients, viz. the Mercury and Silver, into Glass; Harim. Disp. Chym. Med. 7. Th. 127. Vitrum hoc (dixit ille) infinitarum virtu∣tum est, quas singulas hoc loco recensere ne{que} instituti, ne{que} aequitatis est: Sed demonstra∣to conficiendi modo, solerti Chy∣miatria indagatori committi∣mus. It may be given à gr. iij. ad iv. and it will yield its Vertue to Wine by infusion, as other Glasses of the like kind will. § 5. But what the Arca∣mon Corallinum of Paracelsus was, does not plainly appear by what we have from him, for in his Fragmenta libri se∣cundi (pag. meâ 70.) speaking of the perfect cure of the Gout by his Coralline Arca∣num, he saith, Podagricut pri∣mò plenè, perfecté que per Ar∣camon Corallinum purgandus est. Per hoc fluxus podagrici us{que} adeò expurgantur, ut locus illi morbo ampliùs non detur: in isto siquidens Corallino, quod ex essentia Auri preparatum est, facultas adeò insignis latet, ut impossibile sit, Medicum ci∣tra illam purgationem Poda∣gram inquirere, &c. By the Essence of Gold he may pos∣sibly mean Mercury, for that the Hermetick Philosophers al∣ways accounted it the very Root and Foundation, or Es∣sence of that Metal. And De Vita Longa, lib. 2. cap. 1. he saith, Tria quae ad perfe∣ctam podagrae curam requirun∣tur; purgatio, apertio, deinde Cura in hanc sententionem: Principio purgetur omnis po∣dagricus plena ac perfecta pur∣gatione, & id ipsum Arcano Corallino, quo interveniente, eliciuntur fluxus podagriae, adeò ut ne locus porro relinqua∣tur podagrae: In hoc Corallino quod ex essentia Auri est, tanta vis, ac virtus inest, ut eam, nisi hac purgatione à medico deprehendi impossibile sit: fiat ista purgandi ratio sexies, aut septies, pro vetustate sive duri∣tia, sive natura podagrae. All this we were willing to say in the Author's own words, that at least its use might the better be understood. § 6. However, this of our Author's, going under the Name of Paracelsus, is taken from Crollius, and by Hart∣man attributed to Paracelsus, tho' he confesses it is no where to be found in his Works. Libavius also denies it to be his, because the genuine Pre∣paration is no where in any of his Writings; therefore Hartman questions whether Libavius ever saw Paracelsus's Key (which he sent in Wri∣ting to a certain Friend, and has lain hid among some few,
as especially with Heuserus, who set forth Paracelsus his Works, and afterwards by Rhenanus it was in part divul∣ged) or had yet read Geber de Fornacibus, or the Ninth Chapter of the same; or whe∣ther he understood how Mer∣cury with Saltpeter is subli∣med, red, and splendid. § 7. In this Preparation the crude Mercury ought to be purified, which is done with a Lixivium of Calx Vive, and Potashes, 6 or 7 times repea∣ted, and afterwards wash'd with Salt and Vinegar so long, till it has a coelestial colour, so will it be fit for sublimation. § 8. Or thus: ℞ Crude Mercury, put it into a long Glass, no part cut off, put on it the best S. V. so much as to co∣ver it 2 inches; keep it well stopt with your Thumb, and shake the Glass between your hands very well, so will the Mercurial blackness be sepa∣rated in the Spirit of Wine, and to the sides of the Vessel; the S. V. thus fouled, decant and affuse fresh S. V. shaking as be∣fore, which Operation continue and repeat, till the whole black∣ness be removed (which in some kinds of Mercury which are very foul, will be almost a fourth part of their weight) and the Mercury appears of a most pure, bright, and coelestial colour. The S. V. you may abstract in B. M. from the filth, and keep it for use, reserving the Feces for killing Lice, Nits, Worms, Itch, &c. as you shall see fit. § 9. The Saltpeter or Ni∣tre must be also diligently purified, and separated from all vulgar Salt, otherwise the Sublimate or Arcanum will be above measure corrosive. Now a Trial whether the Salt be duly separated, is thus made: If the Nitre be put upon a red-hot Iron Plate, and it all burn up and fly away, lea∣ving no sign of that remaining, it is fine and pure, and fit for this work, otherwise not: How to purifie it, see in its pro∣per place. § 10. The incorporation will be best done with a wooden Pestel, and so long till the Mercury seems wholly mortifi∣ed, or does disappear, then put the whole Mass into a conve∣niently large earthen Cucurbit, being very clean, and begin the distillation in Sand, or a naked Fire, but moderate it first for one night, that the Flegm may come forth, then by gradual en∣creasing the Fire for 24 hours or more, sublime the matter; so will the crude Mercury ascend to the head of the Alem∣bick with a very dark colour, in the middle of the Alembick
it will be of a yellow colour, and a little above the matter of a rubicund colour; then break the Glass, and gather all the sublimate Pouder, as well the red s the yellow, and take of Nitre, and of Alum calcin'd (not too lightly, lest the Mercu∣ry revive with it, not too strong∣ly, lest the Spirits vanish) of each as much as your Mercury purified was at first; mix them with the Mercury by beating, moistening them with the flegm of the former distil∣led Vinegar, then sublime in a new Alembick as before, and in contining the fire for the space of 12 hours (the last two there∣of the bottom of the Cucurbit being very hot) the Operation ill be done, and the pouder asend, below of a most red co∣lour, a little above that yellow, and in the top black. § 11. The Vessels and Mat∣ter being coled, break the Glass, and carefully take all out; that which is red, and sticks to the sides of the Glass, a little above the Caput Mor∣tum, is e, and fit for use, because the Mercury has acqui∣red a Coralline colour; this keep apart, and dulcorate with Cordial Waters, as of Rose∣mary flowers, Damask-Roses, and the like, and lastly, burn often from it the best S. V. § 12. The yellow flowers gather also apart, and in a Crucible, with a moderate fire, calcine, that it may be red, and afterwards, in the same man∣ner, edulcorate it: Or rather mix at first the red and yellow flowers together, and put them into a Phial or Bolt-head, and set them in a sand-heat for cer∣tain days, till they are red. § 13. The black Feces in the top, with the Caput Mort. you may either cast away, or otherwise keep it, and from thence revive Mercury. § 14. It cures not only the French Pox, with all its Attendants, and the Dropsie, but also the Gout, Scabs, and Leprosie; this needs not seem strange to them who know that Mercury is the Balsam of Nature, in which is an in∣carnative and regenerative Vertue, wonderfully renova∣tive and restorative, and cleansing from all Impuri∣ties. § 15. Hartman has ano∣ther Arcanum Coralinum of his own, much of this kind, which (says he) is more easie to make, and more excellent than the former of Paracelsus, and it is thus: ℞ Salt (ex∣tracted out of the Caput Mort. of AF. made of Vitriol and Nitre) ℥vj. and Mercury well purged ℥ij. Nitre purified ʒij.
mix and grind them well toge∣ther, imbibing them with Vi∣negar until in those Salts the Mercury be quite consumed, then in a Cucurbit, with its Alembick, sublime after the usual manner: Some will be white, some yellowish Saffron like, and some of it will be most red, without any corrosion. Gather the Saffron coloured and red, rejecting the rest; when mixt, put them into a Bolt-head, and in a very hot sand-heat, or otherwise, sublime it per se, that all may be very red, afterward wash or edulco∣rate it, and upon it burn S. V. tartarized. § 16. It cures Scabs, Ul∣cers, Cancers, Fistula's, Pox, Gonorrhoea, Dropsie, Gout, Leprosie, &c. and the Dose is as in the former, being a true metallick Laudanum, or Treacle of Metals. XV. Arcanum Cosmeticum; The beautifying Secret. Bate.] ℞ Venice Talck made into subtile pouder, accor∣ding to Art, p. j. Oyl of Cam∣phir, p. ij. digest in B. M. to the greatest whiteness, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. There are several ways of reducing Talck into Pouder; as we have shewed in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 13. sect. 102. & 103. but Schroder, from whom the Recipe is taken, says it must be crude Talck in Pouder, and if so, you must take the Pouder made by rubbing it with Pumex∣stones, or filed with a Gold∣smith's Smoothing-file, or otherwise by heating it in a hot Mortar. § 2. The Oyl of Cam∣phir also here intended, is that which we have describ'd cap. 3. sect; 4. § 2. of this Book aforegoing, so that no more need be said of it here. § 3. This Oyl being pou∣red upon the fine Pouder of the Talck aforementioned▪ or a Pouder made by calcina∣tion, it will grow white, as Schroder says, by two days maceration in B. M. which, says he, is a brave fucus for Ladies Faces. See our Se∣plasium, lib. 4. cap. 60. sect; 9, 10, & 11. XVI. Arcanum Duplex, seu Sal Duplex; The Dupli∣cate Secret, or Salt. Bate.] It is drawn forth out of the Caput Mortuum of double AF. dissolved in warm Water, filtred and evaporated S. A. It is of egregious use in melancholy affects, all sorts of Fevers, Stone, Scurvy, &c. Dose à ℈j. ad ℈ij.
Salmon.] § 1. What the single Aquafortis is, you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 10. sect. 48. the Double here intended is described in cap. 1. sect. 27. of this Book aforegoing. § 2. It is drawn forth with warm Water, because by reason of the heat, it melts the Salt, and so both more easily and sooner makes the Extraction. § 3. Mynsicht seems to be the Author hereof, and calls it Arcanum Duplicatum, but he calcines the elicited Sal, (being first ground into Pou∣der on a Marble) in a Glass Cucurbit, well luted, by a good gradual encrease of the Fire for 12 hours, so that at length the bottom of the Cu∣curbit becomes red hot, which Work of poudering and cal∣cining he repeats to the third time. § 4. And from Mynsicht Rolfincius assumed it, who makes the Calcination in a Glass Retort, affirming Geor∣gius Bussius to be the first In∣ventor. He saith it opens and incides and cures Ob∣structions of the Hypochon∣ders, having also a diuretick force. § 5. Mynsicht saith it is a Secret against Melancholy, Madness, alienation of the Mind, Fevers, Plague, and Epidemick Diseases; and it works variously, by Sweat, Stool, and sometimes induces Sleep. § 6. Marggrave calls it Nitrum Vitriolatum, or Sal Ducis Holsatiae, and prepares it only by a simple solution and digestion for 24 hours, then fil∣tration, evaporation, ad cuti∣culam, or to dryness, by which you have a very white Salt en∣clining to greenness: This Salt he well dries upon Paper in hot Sand, till it becomes hard and white, and so keeps it for use without any farther calcination, as the other Authors advise. § 7 He ascribes also the same Vertues to it, and withal says, it is very acute and pe∣netrating, conducing to the cure of acute Diseases, the Scurvy, and Hypocondriack Distempers: It is to be given in Broth, in the morning fa∣sting. § 8. Schroder depurates the Salt by many Solutions and Coagulations, till it is white, then pouders it, and puts it in∣to a luted Cucurbit or Still, calcines and melts, and for the better melting, adds some Sal Nitre, to make it melt the ea∣sier, which work he repeats four times, but after the second or third time depurates the mat∣ter again from the feces,
by solution and coagulation. § 9. Others, to make it melt, instead of Sal Nitre, take Sal Prunellae p. j. to the Salt of the Caput Mort. p. ij. § 10. Joel Langelot says, he has proved it by a thousand Experiences, in Fevers, Agues, Melancholy, Stone, Scurvy, &c. And Schroder says, he has often observ'd it to cause Sleep chiefly in melancholy Persons; also that it cost his Prince five hundred Dolars or Crowns, and that they spent some pounds of it every day. § 11. Some add to the Salt p. vij. Calx of Gold right∣ly prepared p. j. then mixing and grinding them together upon a Crucible, keep the mix∣ture as a great Treasure. § 12. Le Febure puts the Caput Mort, to digest in boi∣ling distilled Rain-water, and stirs it often the better to ex∣tract the Salt; then filters and slowly evaporates in Ashes, in an earthen Pan or glass vessel, and when the Cuticula appears, puts it to crystallize, and after that, evaporates to dryness, that he may have all the Salt, which he often dissolves, filtrates, eva∣porates, and crystalizes, till it is very clear and pure. § 13. Then he takes of this Salt p. v. of Crystal Mineral p. j. mixes them in fine pou∣der, puts them into a luted Cu∣curbit, and calcines them in an open gradual Fire, in this Cu∣curbit, till all be melted into a Mass. This Work he repeats a second time, then dissolves a∣gain, filtrates and evaporates in B. M. to dryness; of this Salt he takes p. vij. Calx of Sol p. j. mixes and gives them together, and in a new-luted Cucurbit calcines it in a well-graduated fire, till it melts, which then he takes and keeps as a great Remedy. § 14, He ascribes to it all the Vertues before enumera∣ted, and says, that its manner of operating cannot sufficient∣ly enough be praised, for that it sweetly provokes Sleep, and settles the Archaeus of the Ventricle in its ordinary state and calmness when it is out of order. § 15. Briefly, says he, there is a certain hidden Mystery in it, whereof it is very diffi∣cult to render any reason, un∣less it be, that this Salt has re∣ceived the Eradiations of the Anodyn Sulphur of Vitriol, by the mighty power and force of the Fire, or sufficient∣ly opening the Gold, makes it yield and communicate its salutiferary Influences and Vertues, &c.
XVII. Arcanum Joviale; The Jovial Arcanum, or Secret of Tin. Bate.] Make an Amalga∣ma of equal parts of purified Mercury, and English Tin, which reduce into a pouder, di∣gest it into rectified Spirit of Nitre, and distil off the Spirit by retort to dryness; the mass in the bottom grind and edul∣corate it, by a manifold accen∣sion of S. V. S. A. Dose à gr. iij. ad viij. It is a great su∣dorisick. Salmon.] § 1. You must first melt the Tin, and then add the Mercury, stirring them together in a hot Mortar with an Iron Pestel, till the Sub∣stances are well mixed and reduced into Pouder, then putting the metalline Pouder into a Glass Stillatory, you are to digest them together for some time before distilla∣tion; the more in quantity the Spirit of Nitre is, the better will be the Arcanum, because there is a more ample union made not only between the metalline Sulphurs, among themselves, but also between the metalline and saline Sul∣phurs, so that they may be said to enter into one ano∣thers Properties. § 2. In this Preparation, tho' the Spirit of Nitre opens both the bodies, and also in some measure unites them, yet that is but a part of the work, for the body of the Mercury is also in a great measure fixed by the sub∣stance of the Jupiter, so that it is not so apt to fly upwards and cause Salivations as other∣wise, nor has it half the dan∣gerous and pernicious conse∣quences, which attends most other Preparations of Mer∣cury. § 3. It is a great Secret in the cure of the Pox, and all sorts of Pocky Symptoms, as also Leprosies, Ringworms, rebellious Herpes, Rheuma∣tisms, Scurvy, &c. in any part of the Body. If it be given in a small dose, it po∣werfully provokes Sweat, but if in a larger dose, as à gr. viij. ad gr. xij. ad xvj. or xx. in very strong People it does Wonders in a short time. § 4. I am not aware that I ever observed it to flux any one, but it powerfully pro∣vokes Sweat, if given in a moderate dose, as ℈ss. or gr. xij. for sometimes it cures al∣most incurable Diseases, and that by an insensible way. I deny not but it may cause spitting in some, but 'tis very rare, and what I never found
by the use of the Medicine. § 5. It is a Specifick a∣gainst the Worms in Chil∣dren, the King's-Evil, though of many years standing, Can∣cers in Womens Breasts, or elsewhere, and a confirmed Leprosie. XVIII. Arcanum Scriptorium, A Secret for Writing, or The Sympathetical Ink. Bate.] It is made of the Salt of Saturn ʒj. dissolved in an ounce of Water, for the Writing Liquor, and of Arse∣nick or Orpiment in pouder, mixed with Quick-lime, A ℥ss. digested in Water ℥iv. for the oblineatory Liquor. Salmon.] § 1. The Process from Le Mort, who calls it Atramentum Sympatheticum. It is composed, says he, of two liquors the first of which is thus made: ℞ Litharge of Gold ℥j. Spirit of Vinegar ℥iij. mix and boil a little, till the Spirit of Vinegar grows sweet, or has extracted the salt of the Lead, then let it be fil∣tred, and kept for use. § 2. The second Liquor is thus made: ℞ Auripig∣ment in fine pouder ℥j. Calx Vive about ℥ij. mix and boyl 'em well together in a sufficient quantity of Water, till the Li∣quor acquire a subvirid colour, then filter, and keep it for use. § 3. Whatsoever is writ∣ten with the first Liquor will not appear, unless the second be put to it, or over it, near it, for then the inapparent Wri∣ting done with the first Li∣quor appears black, yea, al∣tho' some others Bodies be interposed between them; as suppose it be a moderately thick Book, so that the writ∣ten Paper may be on the up∣per part of the Book lying along, and another Paper moistened with the latter Li∣quor, be put on the under side of the Book, and so prest hard together for some little time. § 4. Lemery has it some∣what more explicitely, with the additions of a third Li∣quor; first get an impregna∣tion of Saturn with Spirit of Vinegar, or dissolve so much Saturn as a quantity of Wa∣ter is able to receive. § 5. Secondly, Burn Cork and quench it in Aqua-vitae, then dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of Water, in which a little Gum-Arabick has been melted, in order to make an Ink as black as common Ink: The Cork that wont dissolve and mix, separate, and if the Ink be not black enough, add more burnt Cork, as be∣fore.
§ 6. Thirdly, Take Quick-lime ℥j. Orpiment in fine pou∣der ℥ss. mix them together, put the mixture into a Matrass, and pour upon it water ℥v. or vj. so that it may be three in∣ches above the pouder; stop the Matrass with Cork, Wax, and a Bladder, and set it in digestion in a gentle sand-heat for 10 or 12 hours, shaking the Matrass often; then let it set∣tle, that the liquor may become clear, like common Water. § 7. The first Experiment. Write with the first Liquor or Impregnation of Saturn on Paper, with a new Pen, and take notice of the place where you wrote, and let it dry, then nothing at all will appear. Write upon the in∣visible Writing with the Ink made of burnt Cork, and let it dry, which will appear as if it had been done with com∣mon Ink. Dip a little Cot∣ten in the third or last Li∣quor, being first filtred, or very clear, and rub the place you wrote upon with this Cotton, so will that which before appeared, being writ∣ten with the Cork-Ink, im∣mediately disappear; and that which was written with the Impregnation of Saturn, and not to be seen, will im∣mediately appear, and be vi∣sible. § 8. The second Experi∣ment. Take a Book four in∣ches in thickness, or thicker if you please, write on the first leaf with the Impregnation of Saturn, or else lay a Paper which you have written in the same place, then turn the other side of the Book, and having observed as near as may be, the opposite place to your Writing, rub the last leaf of the Book, or another Paper, with the third Liquor made of Quick-lime and Or∣piment, which lay in the place of that last leaf, and leave the Cotton on the place, clap a folded Paper presently upon it, and shutting the Book quickly, strike upon it with your Hand 4 or 5 good strokes, then turn the Book, and put it into a Press for half a quarter of an hour, take it out and open it, and you will find the place appear black, where you had wrote with the first Liquor or Im∣pregnation of Saturn: And the same thing would be done, was the thickness of 2 or 3 Ream of Paper between, pro∣vided they were in like man∣ner prest, to hinder the eva∣porating of the Spirits.
XIX. Aurum Fulminans; Lightning or Thundering Gold. Bate.] It is made of Sol dissolved in A. R. and precipi∣tated with Oyl of Tartar per deliq. then edulcorating and drying, S. A. They usually give 3 or 4 grains thereof to provoke Sweating. Salmon.] § 1. Maets makes it in this proportion; ℞ Filings of fine Gold, p. j. Aquae Regiae p. iij. or iv. dis∣solve the Sol in a gentle sand-hea to which dissolution affuse Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, drop by drop, till the efferve∣scence of the Salts shall cease. This is made a regeneration of Nitre, for the most subtile parts of the Nitre intimately mix themselves with the Par∣ticles of the Gold, in such sorts, that if they be affected with too great a heat, they break forth into a flame with a thundering noise. § 2. Lemery makes it thus. ℞ Gold in thin Plates or Leaves, q. v. put it into a Vial or Matrass, and affuse thereon gradatim, 3 or 4 times as much A. R. digest on warm Sand till the Gold is dissolved, or the A. R. has swallowed up as much of the Sol as it can hold, which you may know by the ceasing of the Ebulition. Decant the solution into a Glass Vessel, and affuse thereon five or six times as much common wa∣ter, then drop into this mixture Gutatim, volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack or Oleum Tartari per deliq. so will the Gold pre∣cipitate. After a good while settling, that all the Gold may fall down, decant off the Water by Inclination, wash the Preci∣pitate with warm Water, till it grows insipid, and so dry it in a Paper at a gentle fire, be∣cause it is apt to take fire, and fly away with a noise and vio∣lence like Thunder and Light∣ning. § 3. Now here is to be no∣ted that Plates or Leaves of Gold are used in this Opera∣tion, that its dissolution may the more easily be perfor∣med: And you must put on the A. R. gradatim, to avoid the mighty effervescency, which would possibly drive it out of the Matrass; which effervescency proceeds from the violent division of the me∣talline Particles, for when it finds no more Particles to work upon, having divided the body of the Gold into as many Atoms as 'tis possible, the Ebulition ceases, and the Sol remains in the A. R. im∣perceptible to us, so that the Water seems not to be chan∣ged
from what it was before, it is, so perfectly clear and transparent, except that it has received a golden colour, and is become yellow. § 4. This dissolution of Gold is only a suspension of the Particles of the Metal in the Water, made by the Points of the A. R. for it is not enough, that the A. R. does divide the Gold into subtile Particles, but it is farther re∣quisite that the said points or edges should hold up the A∣toms, otherwise they would alwaies fall to the bottom in a Pouder, though never so subtile. § 5. These acid edges are bodies exceeding light, in comparison of the Particles of Gold, and they have their su∣perficies more extended, con∣sequently take up more room in the flegm, and this is that that holds them up, and makes them swim; for as a piece of Wood will swim in Wa∣ter, and a piece of Metal sink, yet if the Metal be fixt on the Wood, or suspended by it, they both will swim toge∣ther. § 6. The Oyl of Tartar, or Spirit of Sal Armoniack used in this Precipitation, contain each of them an alcalious Salt, which being mixed with A∣cids, causes an immediate fermentation, in which the Parts of the A. R. which held up the Particles of the Gold, do grow weak, and so weak, as to be able to hold them no longer; by which means, through their own weight, they precipitate. § 7. Now the reason why the volatile Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniack weakens the A. R. which is compounded of Sal Armoniack, is this; The strength of the A. R. not pro∣ceeding so much from the vo∣latile part of the Sal Armo∣niack, as from the Sea-salt, which in great plenty is mix∣ed with it, and from which indeed the mighty force of the A. R. proceeds, it follows that as the only Sea-salt which is a fixed Acid, can strengthen it, so whatsoever is opposite to it, such as is a volatile Alcali, (and such is the volatile Spi∣rit of Sal Arm.) must in like manner weaken and destroy it, by absorbing in some mea∣sure its acidity: And indeed, both Sea-salts and Sal Gem may either of them be indif∣ferently substituted in the place of Sal Armoniack for making Aqua Regis, as I may elsewhere observe and de∣monstrate. § 8. From what has been said it appears, that this Ope∣ration is only Particles of
Gold, impregnated with acid Spirits, which causes it, when set over the Fire, to give such a loud or thundering crack. § 9. And it is also obser∣vable from the precise weigh∣ing the Gold, that from ʒiij. of fine Gold, you will have ʒiv. of Aurum Fulminans, when well dryed. § 10. Now the reason why the dissolvent quits the Body it dissolved and held up, is the adding some Body which by its motion and fi∣gure is able to engage the Acids, so much as to break them, whereby the Particles of Gold being at liberty, through their own weight they subside; and this is done through any alcalious Salt: And such are Oyl of Tartar. and volatile Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniack, which being very active Salts in their kind, and finding Bodies at rest, pre∣sently move them, and by a quick and rapid motion shake them so violently, as to break the Points by which the metalline Particles were su∣spended; which fragments of Points being thus disenga∣ged from the Gold, act now upon the alcalious Salt, pier∣cing and dividing their Par∣ticles asunder, which are much more soluble in their nature than the Gold; and from hence proceeds this new Ebulition, &c. § 11. By this means the remaining A. R. is rendered uncapable of dissolving any more Gold, because it has no more power left of making a penetration: And the precipi∣tated Gold is impregnated with some parts of the Dissol∣vent, for that the sharpest part of these points remain within the Particles of the Precipi∣tate, in which they are so closely lock'd up, that though it be several times washed in warm Water, they cannot possibly be disengaged from their hold. § 12. And this is plainly apparent, when put upon the fire, from the great detona∣tion or noise which is made, which can proceed from no∣thing else but the enclosed Spirits, which violently break the most compact body of Gold, to get speedily out, when they are forc'd to it by the vertue of Fire. § 13. This Aurum Fulmi∣nans has a force vastly stron∣ger than Gunpouder, viz. as 1. to 200. for ʒj. of this Ful∣minant Gold put into a Silver Spoon or Ladle, and held over the Fire, will give a lou∣der bounce than ʒ 200 or ℥xxv. of the finest and best Gunpouder.
§ 14. But from this Vio∣lence no Fear need to arise; as to the taking of it inward∣ly, tho' much heated by the Stomach, for the humidities thereof mixing with it, hin∣der it from making such a thundering noise, as when set over the Fire in a Spoon; for so much the more moi∣sture comes to it, so much the less noise it does make. § 15. This Medicine cau∣ses Sweat, and drives out malign and pestilential Hu∣mors by transpiration, and may be given in the Small Pox à gr. ij. ad vj. in Con∣serve of Roses, or Electuary, or some proper Syrup: It stops Vomiting, and mode∣rates the activity of Mercury; and some Authors think it to be the best Medicine in the World to expel Mercury out of the Body by Sweat, when it has been given by unskil∣ful Hands: And as Gold re∣presses the violence of Mer∣cury, because it does amalga∣mate with it, so Aurum Ful∣minans does it much better; for being volatile, it is more easily carried through all the Body, and fails not to find out the Mercury, where-ever it lies. § 16. And as taken in∣wardly it causes Sweat, be∣cause the heat of the Body volatilizes it, and forces it through the Pores; so also, if the Pores are very open, it will only cause an insensible transpiration, for from the closeness of the Pores, it re∣mains a longer time before it can pass through, whereby the vaporous humidity which accompanies it condenses up∣on the Skin, and is that which we call Sweat. § 17. That the Gold and Spirit of Nitre, jointly toge∣ther, causes this Operation, is almost manifestly apparent, for 'tis very probable that these Spirits do carry with them some parts of the Gold, with which they are so inti∣mately mixed; and being thus armed (as it were) with the Particles of the Gold, it is made the more powerful, to conquer and overcome what shall oppose in its Passage, than if it were singly given of it self. § 18. Charras says it must not be washed above once or twice, if you intend to pre∣serve the Purgative faculty, which the Salts impart to it: It is, says he, very diaphore∣tick, and may be given à gr. iij. ad vj. in some Conserve or Confection. § 19. The violent and wonderful effects of this Au∣rum Fulminans ought to o∣blige
the Artist to great cir∣cumspection in the drying of it, as also in the keeping and giving of it. 'Tis true also, that its fulminating or thun∣dering force may easily be obtunded, by moistening it with Spirit of Vitriol, Salt, or Sulphur, before it be wholly dryed, because those Acids joyning themselves to the Par∣ticles of the other Acids, which were intimately mix∣ed with the Precipitate of Gold, break the Union, and hinder the violence which they would exert in taking fire. § 20. By this means you may afterwards dry this Pre∣cipitate over the fire without any danger, yea, and make it red hot in a Crucible, o melt it without fear of any fulmination; but then it would be a question whether it would be so efficacious to the purposes intended, as it was before; and therefore, in my opinion, it is better to have it according to its ge∣nuine proportion, though it costs more care and circum∣spection in the performance thereof. XX. Aurum Vitae; Living or Vital Gold. Bate.] It is made of fine Gold ʒij. and purified Mercu∣ry ℥ij. each dissolved by them∣selves in their proper Menstru∣ums, then mix'd together and distilled in a Retort to dryness: This remaining Calx is to be calcin'd, and edulcorated by ablution in Water and Accen∣sion of S. V. S. A. It is said to excel, and is preferred be∣fore all other kinds of Ca∣tharticks; it kills Worms, cures the French Pox, and overcomes the Spotted Fever, Plague, Quartan Agues, &c. Dose à gr. iij. ad vj. vel viij. in Sugar of Roses, or in the yolk of an Egg. or in Broth, or in Pills, more especially if mix'd with Scammony, and moistened with burnt Aqua Vitae. Salmon.] § 1. We have gi∣ven you several Preparations of this Medicament, from divers Authors, as from Bo∣vius, Hartman, and Sennertus, all which you may see in our Pharmacop. Londinensis, lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 37, 38, 39. but this of our. Author differs from them all, as we shall anon shew. § 2. Others makes it thus: ℞ Fine Gold in Filings or
Leaves ℥ij. Aqua Regis ℥viij. mix and dissolve, keeping the dissolution in a hot place: Take also crude Quick-silver well cleansed ℥xij. common A. F. lbij. ℥xxiv. mix and dissolve; mix the Solutions together, and in a little time all will appear very black; by an Alembick in Sand distil it with a gentle heat, encreasing the fire gra∣dually, till what is in the bot∣tom begins to be red, and the Spirits are seen to evaporate, afterwards encrease the heat, that the Cucurbit in the bot∣tom may be very hot; this done, take it out, and if any thing shall be sublimed, take it also and mix with the other, put all into a Crucible, and cal∣cine it till the Spirits be well separated, stirring it with an Iron Rod, then edulcorate it by washing it in warm Water, and draw off from it rectified S. V. with many cohobati∣ons. § 3. This of our Author is thus to be done: The Gold ʒij.  to be dissolved in the A. R. ℥iv. described in the afore-cited Chapter, sect. 27. These two Solutions you are to mix together, and perfect the Precipitate by distillation, cal∣cination, ablution, and accensi∣on of S. V.  the Prescript di∣rects. § 4. The difference of all these five Prescripts has rela∣tion either as to the manner of making, or to the Proportions: As to the manner of making, Bovius, Hartman, Bate, and the Prescript aforegoing, agree, in dissolving the Gold and Mercury apart: Sennertus alone makes first an Amalga∣ma, and then dissolves it in A. F. As to the Proportions, they all differ; Bovius has p. j. of Sol to p. iv. of Mer∣cury; Tilingius and the Pre∣script we have here inserted, has 1 of Gold to 6 of Mer∣cury; Bate, our Author, has 1 of Gold to 8 of Mercury; Sennertus has 1 of Gold to 10 of Mercury; lastly, Crollius and Hartman have one of Gold to 12 of Mercury. § 5. Without doubt, as it has the suffrage of the grea∣ter number, to dissolve each Metal apart by it self, so it seems to be the more natural way, notwithstanding the smallness of the Particles, which some think the Mer∣cury by amalgamation reduces the Gold to, the A. F. only acting upon the Mercury in this Preparation, and not up∣on the Gold at all; whereas in the other Preparations the Gold receives a singular vola∣tility and openness from the A. R. as upon occasion I am
able to demonstrate, and has such a union with some parts of the Armoniack Salt, as can scarcely ever be separated from it again, without loss of some parts of the Gold. § 6. As to the proportions, if it be made after Sennertus's way, the longer proportions are the better; but in the other methods, that in a mean between 4 and 12, is in my judgment to be chosen, which is the proportion assigned by our Author; for if you amal∣gamate, the more the Mer∣cury is in quantity, the more minute Particles it reduces the Body of the Gold into; but if you dissolve apart in Strong-waters, you do two things at once, in some mea∣sure volatilize the Gold, and make more fixt the Mercury, by a unition of dissolved Par∣ticles in their Menstruums, and a gentle fixation toge∣ther in a calcinatory heat. § 7. The Vertues of this Medicine are many and great, (take which Prepara∣tion you please) it easily, safely, and speedily roots out any old, malign, rebellious, or deplorable Disease; it cures the French Pox, with all its symptoms, to a won∣der, kills Worms in old or young, cures the King's-Evil, Dropsie, Gout, Sciatica, Le∣prosie, Scurvy, Tetters, Ring-worms, rebellious Herpes, Plague, Poyson, and all sorts of Fevers, whether continual or intermitting: It also cures the Green-sickness in Virgins, the Cholick, from what cause soever, Cancers in any part of the Body, dissolves Scir∣rhus Tumors, and removes all manner of Obstructions, in what part of the Body so∣ever; and it is said in these Distempers to begin, conti∣nue, and perfect the Cure alone. Truly, I can say upon my own large experi∣ence, it performs wonderfully in all long, old, rebellious, and undetermin'd Diseases, performing Cures many times beyond all expectation. XXI. Aethiops Minerale; The Mineral Black. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur p. ij. crude Mercury p. j. mix them exactly, and kindle or fire them, so as they may be made into a most black pouder, S. A. It is of use in the French Pox, Dropsie, &c. and fluxes not. Salmon.] § 1. Some make the mixture with Flowers of Sulphur, and crude Mercury, ana. But a late Writer will have it to be Flowers of Sul∣phur ʒvj. crude Quick-silver ℥j
to be only mixed together in a Mortar, by grinding till the Quick-silver disappears, and is reduc'd into a subtile brown pouder, which grows very black. This thus made, and in this proportion, he gives à gr. xxv. ad xxx. Morning and Eve∣ning (gently purging the Bo∣dy the fourth day) to kill Worms, for which 'tis doubt∣less a good Medicine. § 2. But that it may be alwaies given safely, without danger of fluxing or saliva∣ting, I dare not affirm; for my self, who have used it above this twenty years with extraordinary success, (pre∣pared only by grinding toge∣ther) altho' I often used it without any sear of Salivati∣on, yet sometimes, contrary to my expectation, it would raise a gentle Flux or Spit∣ting. § 3. My usual proportion was this: ℞ Crude Quick-silver, Flowers of Sulphur, ana. mix them together y grinding in an Iron or Marble Mortar, till the Mercury disappears, and becomes with the Sulphur an impalpable Pouder▪ as black as Jet, which by much rubbing in this Mortar it will easily be made. § 4. The first Light I had for making this Medicine, I received from the Learned Barbet, by reading of his Chyrurgery; and some little hint I gave of suh a like Me∣dicine (made of Sulphur and Mercury by grinding) about ten years since in my Doron. Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 21. sect. 16. printed anno 1683. § 5. And this Medicine made of the two Ingredients in equal proportion, I have all a long used, and do still, not esteeming it much infe∣riour to many other Prepara∣tions of Mercury, much more famed than it; but where I meet with fluxile and tender Bodies, and where the Hu∣mors are apt to be put into motion, I alwaies take the Proportions of our Author, but compleat it without de∣flagration, thus: ℞ Flowers of Sulphur ℥ij. crude Quick-silver ℥j. mix by grinding in an Iron or Marble Mortar, till the Mercury disappears, and with the Sulphur becomes an impalpable pouder of a deep black colour. § 6. The Medicine made according to this last Pre∣script, I take to be very safe, and have given it often with all the desired effects imagi∣nable; nor do I remember that it ever produced a Sali∣vation, or any thing like it, in any person I ever gave it to, whether old or young.
§ 7. If you shall yet scru∣ple to use this mean Prepara∣tion, but rather make choice of that of our Author, made by deflagration, you have your liberty, and may do it, but for my part, I shall al∣waies use that made by sim∣ple grinding, &c. § 8. That with double quantity of Sulphur I give à ℈j. ad ℈ij. but that with equal quantities à ℈j. ad ʒss. and according as the Patient is strong, and able to bear Medicines: The Doses of each may yet be encreased to ℈ss. more, but this is to be li∣mitted and directed accor∣ding to the Prudence of the Physician. § 9. Besides the killing of Worms in Children, and el∣der persons also, it is an ex∣cellent Remedy against the French Disease, and all its Attendants, cures Pocky Scabs, Ulcers, Impetigo, Serpigo, and other defedations of the Skin, proceeding from a Pocky Venom: It is also good against Nodes, Gums, Tophs, Nocturnal Pains, and the like; for being taken in∣wardly, (constantly for some time) in some proper Con∣serve or Bolus, it gives relief almost like Opium, and makes that Herd of Symptoms va∣nish, as if it was done by Enchantment. It is excel∣lent against the Scurvy, pre∣vails against the Gout, and all tartarous Diseases through the whole Body, and per∣fectly cures a Rheumatism. § 10. Where note, that such as cannot take it in a Bolus, may make it up into a Pill or Pills, with the Pap of an Apple, or a little Cy∣press, or Chio Turpentine, which may be taken as be∣fore directed. XXII. Antifebrile Concha∣rum; The Antifebritick of Muscle-shells. Bate.] ℞ Muscle-shells, affuse thereon Vinegar, and macerate them 24 hours, then wash away the external Mucus and dry them, after which re∣duce them into pouder, often sprinkling in, in the time of poudering, a spoonful of Car∣duus-water, by which means the more subtile pouder will be re∣tained, then dry and keep it for use. Dose ʒj. it is a noble Febrifuge, and provokes Sweat powerfully. Salmon.] § 1. It is an Antisebritick, like those pre∣pared from Pearls, Oiter∣shells, Crabs Claws, Crabs-Eyes, and such-like, and may be given in the same manner, and to all the same purposes
which those Preparations are given for. § 2. It is a notable fixt Alcali, and ablorbs Acids ad∣mirably, destroying the Root of all such Diseases, which proceed from acid Humors; and therefore since it is belie∣ved that Fevers proceed from Acidities, it is very probable, that assaulting them in their Root, it may so undermine them, as by degrees, and at length, totally to overcome and extirpate them. § 3. This Operation, 'tis probable, may be most per∣spicuous in the beginning of Fevers, and while they have been of no long standing, so as that the whole mass of Blood and Humors are not yet infected; but then you must have recourse to stron∣ger Remedies, viz. to vola∣tile Alcalies, and such as by the stability of their Parts, and volatility of their Efflu∣viums, are able to pervade the whole Human Frame, and undo them not only in their Root, but in their very Es∣sence and Existence; of which kind are volatile Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniack, Horns, &c. XXIII. * Antihecticum Po∣terij; The Antihectick of Poterius. Bate.] It is made of Re∣gulus of Antimony, of Mars and English Tin, ana. mel∣ting and detonating them with a treble quantity of Sal Nitre, and edulcorating with Water, S. A. Dose gr. vj. ad xx. in the Pox, Dropsie, Scurvy, Consumption. Salmon.] §. 1. This of equal Proportions of the Re∣gulus of Antimony and Tin, agrees with Maets's first way, where he makes the Detonation and Calcination with but a half part of puri∣fied Nitre. § 2. His second way is thus: ℞ Regulus of Antimo∣ny ℥xij. English Tin ℥vj. melt them together, and being cold, reduce them into a fine pou∣der, to the which add an equal weight of pure Sal Nitre, viz. ℥xviij. beat and mingle them well together, and make the de∣tonation in a red-hot Crucible, as you do in making Antimony diaphoretick; when all is well calcin'd, take it out of the Cru∣cible, break it and reduce it to a subtile pouder, affuse thereon warm Rain-water, stirring it up and down with a Pestel, so will the Rain-water grow
white, which leisurely and gen∣tly decant: To the remaining bottom put more fresh Rain-water, proceeding as before, and thus continue so long, till nothing but a thick Gummous Matter or Sordes remain: These white or milky Liquors put all together, which put in a still quiet place, free from dirt or Ashes, so will a very white pouder precipitate to the bot∣tom, the Water swimming above, which has imbibed in it self all the nitrous Salt: This Pouder oftentimes wash even so long, till the Acrimony of the Nitre is wholly taken away, then dry, and keep it for use. § 3. This Pouder, says he, Is exhibited in hectick Fe∣vers, and in Dropsies with Rob of Elder-berries; chie∣fly it is used in malign and inveterate Ulcers, and in the Scurvy, which neither by Decoctions (of Guajacum) nor by any other more benigh Gallenical Medicaments, are possible to be cured; in all those cases it is a most power∣ful Medicament. § 4. In some it operates by Vomit, if the Stomach be very foul and obtructed, for for then possibly it may give a Vomit or two, in others it works by Sweat, in some by Urine, and in some by stool: It is given in the beginning of a Hectick, and in Obstru∣ctions of the Womb; in each Body it operates according to the habit and disposition. § 5. Methodus Exhibendi. First begin with four or five grains, and encrease the dose gradually, till it begins to nauseate the Stomach, then diminish that larger dose a little, and proceed in the use of it in that proportion for several days. § 6. Modus Ʋtendi. In the French Pox, and in inve∣terate Ulcers, let it be exhi∣bited in Decoction of Guaja∣cum, Sarsaparilla, Sassafras, &c. where it operates by Urine, you will presently see inveterate and malign Ul∣cers, in such Persons, to remit of their violence and malig∣nity, and to submit to Oint∣ments, Balsams, Emplasters, &c. Outwardly, It is suc∣cessfully sprinkled upon Ul∣cers, or mixed with Empa∣strum Diasulphuris Ruandi. XXIV. * Antimonium Dia∣phoreticum; Diaphoretick or Sweating Antimony. Bate.] It is made of Anti∣mony p. j. Sal Nitre p. iij. de∣tonating and edulcorating with Water, S. A. Dose ℈j. twice a day for many days, aug∣menting the quantity daily
gradaim, till it comes to ʒj. or a Dose, Its use is to pu∣rifie the Blood in Cachexies, Dropsies, the Scurvy, French Pox, &c. Salmon] § 1. Having poudered and mixt the Ingre∣dients well together, and ha∣ving a Crucible heat red hot in the Coals in a readiness, cast into i a spoonful of the mix∣ture, which will presently make a thundering noise; which be∣ing done, cast in another spoon∣ful, and this continue till the whole quantity of your Pouder is done; then make a great fire about it fr about 2 hours, after which cast the white matter into an earthen Pan▪ almost full of fair Water, where leave it for 12, 14, or 16 hours, that the Nitre may dissolve in the Water, which separate by inclination, and wash the white Pouder which remains in the bottom five or six times with fresh warm Water, and then dry it. § 2. This is a Preparati∣on of Antimony, whose Sul∣phurs are fixt by the Nitre, and are thereby hindered from working otherwise than by Sweating. § 3. The first separated Li∣quor may be evaporated, and a fixt Nitre will be found at bottom of the Vessel, which is much of the nature and will work much like the Sal Po∣lychrestum. This fixt Nitre unites it self in the operation with the Antimony, making the volatile Parts thereof to y away, and thereby hinders the Antimony from being emetick. § 4. This Medicament is sudorifick, resis Malignity and Poyson, and therefore is said.  be good against the Measles, Small Pox, Spotted Fever, Plague, and all other malign Contagions, and pesti∣lential Distempers▪ Dose à gr. 10 ad 30. and by a gra∣dual encrease to ʒj. in some specifick or appropriate Li∣quor. § 5. It is ordered to be 5 or 6 times washed, but should the Lotions be never so ma∣nifold, they could never wash away all the Salt which had joyned it self to the Antimo∣ny▪ for each Particle of Anti∣mony is so closely united to as many Particles of fixt Ni∣tre, that they can never be separated therefrom, without recourse to some reductive Salt, which is the reason that this Preparation is said to be not at all vomitive, but on∣ly sudorifick, tho' in my opi∣nion this latter Effect is not very sensibly apparent; but all Authors, affirm it, and so we submit? And possibly
some of its Sulphur may be separated by the heat of the Body, which not being strong enough to be emetick, may have a force by Transpira∣tion, either sensible or insen∣sible, as the Pores of the Body may be more or less open. § 6. Some will have this Antim. Diaphoreticum to be a fixt Alcali, like Pearl, Coral▪ calcin'd Hartshorn, Chalk, Crabs-eyes, &c. and so like them, to absorb sharp and acid Humors, which are the Causes of many Diseases: But in this doubtless they are mistaken, for put any Acid upon it, it will never dissolve at all, nor absorb the Acid, though after a long Infusion, but let it remain as strong as ever; which is a demonstra∣tion strong enough, that it is no Alcali. § 7. It may be quaeried, why a treble quantity of Nitre being mixt, will not make so great a detonation, as if it was mixt in equal quantities with the Antimony? But this is ea∣fily answered; for that there is too little Sulphur in the Antimony, for such a great proportion of Nitre, and that some parts of the Sulphur of the Antimony remain unactive in the fixt Nitre, which ad∣mits not of flagration, the volarile parts of the Nitre not burning, but according to the proportion of Sulphur with which it is mixt. § 8. There is another Pre∣paration of this Medicament in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. 57. with double Nitre, and a treble Calcina∣tion, and that either with crude Antimony, or with its Regulus; which see in the place cited. § 9. Maets takes first equal parts of crude Antimony and Nitre, and therewith makes a Crocus Metallorum; this Cro∣cus, in fine pouder, he again mixes with an equal quanti∣ty of pure Nitre, and calcines as before, by which repeated calcination, says he, the Sul∣phur and volatile Salts of the Antimony are made to fly, whereby the remaining Calx of the Antimony becomes totally deprived of its Emotick and Cathartick Properties. After the same manner Beguinus makes it also, as he has taught in his Tyrocinium Chymicum, lib. 2. cap. 12. § 10. Marggrave takes equal quantities of Antimony and Nitre, and makes the pro∣portion by a treble detonation, adding equal parts of fresh Nitre each time. § 11. Le Mort makes it thus. ℞ Crude Antimony p j. pure Nitre p. iij. mix in fine
pouder, and make the detonati∣on as before directed, keep it in the fire for half an hour, but so as it may not flow or melt, then cast it into a Pot almost full of warm Rain-water, so will the Salts upon the Spot be dissol∣ved, which with the superna∣ting Water are to be poured off, and new or fresh Water is to affused, stirring all together, till the Water grows white like Milk, from a good quantity of the pouder swimming in it, which decant, and affuse more Water again, stirring and de∣canting it as before, and re∣peating this Operation so long, as the affused Water will grow white. Put all the decanted Liquors together, which let rest for a while, that the Pouder may settle, which carefully dry, and keep for use. § 12. Where note, that Le Mort uses a broad Ear∣then Pot or Pan, rather than a Crucible, which Blasius the Commentator upon Beguinus would have to be large, for the more easie separation of the matter. § 13. Secondly, if the Ni∣tre be not pure, the Antimo∣nium Diaphoreticum will be of a yellowish colour. § 14. It ought not to be too long detained in the Fire, because the longer it is cal∣cin'd, it is not made the bet∣ter, but the worse, for then the Nitre will degenerate in∣to an alcalious nature, and the Antimony be apt to a fusion, from the fusion and coalition of which, some reguline Par∣ticles will be formed, which will cause a revivification of the emetick Property of the Antimony, which in this Pre∣paration we ought by all means to avoid. § 15. The more pure the Mineral of the Antimony is, the purer and whiter will be the Antimonium Diaphoreti∣cum; from whence it is, that that which is made of the Regulus is judged to be better than that which is made of the crude Antimony. § 16. Le Feburc takes to pure crude Antimony p. j. most pure Nitre p. ij. mixes them in subtile Pouder, and detonates in a red-hot Crucible, as before directed; by which Operation (says he) the Nitre does forci∣bly carry away and expel the impure Sulphur of the Anti∣mony, and its Mercury is di∣gested, ripened, and forced by the property of the fixt Salt of Nitre, and the action of the Fire: Being thus once calci∣cined, he adds another like quantity of pure Nitre, to what is in the Vessel, that it may flow with the Matter, and per∣fect the coction and fixation of
it, by the penetration and acti∣on of the Spirits of Nitre, which by their subtilty and quickness insinuate themseves into the least Atoms of the Antimony, by which it concocts, purifies, and fixes it in a white friable substance; and in this heat he keeps it one or two hours, which past, letting the Crucible cool, and freeng it from all the filth hanging to it, he puts it into a Pot full of boiling Wa∣ter, which dissolves the whole mass from which he separates the Antimony Diaphoreticum, as is taught at § 11. aforego∣ing, then dries it, and keeps it for use. § 17. The decanted clear Water containing the fixed Salt of Nitre, which is im∣prgnated with the internal Sulphur of Antimony, and is of a penetrating and igneous nature (but not corrosive) is a truly-fixt and Solar Sulphur, well concocted and digested by the action of the Fire and Nitre. This Wa∣ter, I say, containing a Salt impregnated with such a Sul∣phur, tho' it appears clear, has a weight and solid sub∣stance in it, which with Spi∣rit of Vinegar may be preci∣pitated, (the Water turning white as Mlk, and of a plea∣sing acid sl) § 18. This Precipitate, which is called Ceruse of An∣timony also, is a Diaphoretick proceeding from the fixed in∣ternal Sulphur now mentio∣ned, (Dose à gr. iij. ad xx.) whereas the Sulphur Auratum precipitated with the like Spirit of Vinegar, has a very unpleasing smell, because it is nothing else but the exter∣nal, impure, and volatile Sul∣phur, which the Salt had drawn to its self, not being able to force it away, or fix it, the parts in the Nitre and Antimony to make the Crocus Metallorum being equal; whereas in this Preparation there is three parts of Nitre to one of Antimony, which does perfect the maturation and fixation of the remaining crude and indigested Sul∣phur. § 19. And it is this Au∣thor's opinion, that whatever must fix a volatile substance ought to be in triple pro∣portion to what is to be fix∣ed; and contrariwise, what is to be volatilized, must in the same proportion be less than that which is to volati∣lize it, and sometimes the proportion is to be quadru∣plicated, as ℥iij. or iiij. of Spirit to volatilize ℥j. of Salt, and ℥iij. or iiij. of Salt to fix ℥j. of Spirit, &c.
§ 20. This Diaphoretick Antimony, faith Le Febure, is said to be fixed only compa∣ratively to other Antimonial Remedies, which are violent∣ly Cathartick or Emetick, this being sudorifick by an irradiation of vertue and effi∣cacy, strengthening the inter∣nal Archaeus, which is the principal director of all the functions of Life, both in Health and Sickness, for which cause its use must be continued, without irruption, for the space of 40 days, since in that time it is able to alter and change the habit of the whole humane frame, for the better. § 21. It resists Corruption, rectifies the whole mass of Blood, and is capable to open the most inveterate Obstru∣ctions of the Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Pancreas, Mesentery, and all the other Viscera, provokes the Terms, cures the Greensickness, Dropsie, Hypochondriacal Melancho∣ly, Pox with all its sym∣ptoms, cleanses and heals in∣ward and outward Ulcers, and is singular against all sorts of malign and pestilen∣tial Fevers of what kind so∣ever, as Measles, Small Pox, Spotted Fever, and the very Plague it self, as afore∣said. § 22. Rolfincius Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 7. cap. 2. agrees in the manner of the Prepa∣ration with Le Mort and others, as also in the triple proportion of the Nitre to the Antimony, but saith, that the decanted clear Water being evaporated, the one half is an egregious Anodyn; and the evaporation being continued to a just degree, it will in a cool Cellar shoot into Crystals which he calls Nitrum Anodynum, but Schroder, Lapis Prunellae Antimonialis. This, says Rol∣fincius, is impregnated with many Atoms of the first Ens of Metals, cools the Blood, and as a Gargle, helps the Inflamation of the Fauces and the Quinsey, prevails against the Pleurisie, expels Urine, gently loosens the Belly, and discusses serous Humors by Sweat, and is given in sub∣stance ad gr. vj. § 23. Charras takes equalquan∣tities in fine pouder, which gra∣dually be puts into a red-hot Cru∣cible (in the midst of the Fire∣place of a Wind fornace) fitted with a Cover, into which putting it by spoonfuls; after each spoon∣ful he covers the Crucible at the same time, leaving the Pou∣der to fulminate, and thus con∣tinues the calcination till all the mass is gone, adding after∣wards, by degrees, the two other
parts of the Nitre, stirring it each time with a long Iron Spatula, and keeping a good fire for two or three hours, or till the Antimony and Nitre have lost their fluidity, and are reduced in the Crucible to a white and solid mass, after which he perfects the Prepara∣tion according to the Method of Le Mort, at § 11. aforegoing; yet stops not there, but puts it into a Crucible, and holds it over the fire for two or three hours, after which he burns off from it good S.V. and then keeps it close stopt for use. § 24. From what has been said, it appears, that most Authors agree to three parts of Nitre to one of Antimony, only some would have all the Nitre mixt at once with the Antimony, others but two parts at first, others but one part, adding the other one or two parts successively to the Mass. Now 'tis true, the event of all these various Pro∣portions differs not much, provided the triple quantity of Nitre be used; yet Charras thinks it much better to mix but a third part at first, which will make a fulmination vio∣lent enough to raise the gross Sulphur of the Antimony, tho' not able to dissipate the vola∣tile parts, and then to add afterwards by degrees the other two parts of the Nitre, which tho' they cause no more fulmination, yet will consume the rest of the vola∣tile and impure parts of the Antimony, for that the spiri∣tuous and fixt parts of the Nitre have now the liberty to use all their time and force upon the Antimony, to change its emetick and cathartick qualities into diaphoretick, and to fix the essential Pro∣perties of this Mineral. § 25. Lemery gives us another Preparation, by which he saves the volatile parts of the Antimony, which sublime from it, and it is thus: Take an unglaz'd earthen Pot (able to resist the Fire) with a hole in the middle of its height, and a stopple to it, set it in a fit and proper Fornace, and fit to it three earthen Pots more, all three open at bottom, and a glass Head to the uppermost Pot, with a Vial or Receiver, luting all the Junctures well, let the Fire transpire through some proper holes in the For∣nace, but be only so strong as to warm the bottom of the lowermost Pot, then give Fire by degrees, heating the said Pot gradatim, till it is red-hot. § 26. Then take your mix∣ture made of three parts of Ni∣tre, and one of Antimony, and
cast it into the red-hot Pot, through the hole, by spoonfuls, stopping it again immediately till the detonation is over, after which cast in another spoonful, and thus continue till your whole quantity is spent, then encrease the Fire to the utmost for half an hours time, after which let it go out: When the Vessels are cold, you will find a little Spirit of Nitre in the Receiver, white Flowers in the three upper Pots, and a white Mass in the lowermost, which you must wash, as afore directed at § 1. or § 11. to make your Antimonium Diaphoreticum, which dry and keep for use; which is full as good as any of the former. § 27. In all these Opera∣tions it appears, that tho' An∣timmy is naturally black, it becomes altogether white, when it is well rarified; for whatever is seen in this Ope∣ration is a pure-white (if the Nitre he pure) as well the volatile as the fixt; which shews, that Colours have on∣ly an accidental, not an essen∣tial Being. § 28. In this last Prepara∣tion the Sulphurous or vola∣tile parts of the Antimony, which stick to the sides of the Pots in Flowers, tho' unwasht, will not be so emetick as other Flowers of Antimony, because the Acid of the Nitre, which arises with them, hin∣ders their activity. § 29. In the Receiver an Acid Spirit will be found which is only Spirit of Nitre, and is of good use in the Co∣lick, being given à gut. iv. ad. viij. in Broth, or some other fit Vehicle. § 30. In this Operation you have of Antimony Dia∣phoretick ℥v. after it is well wash'd and dried; of fixed Nitre ℥x. after it is crystali∣zed; Spirit of Nitre ℥ss. and Flowers of Antimony wash'd and dried ʒij. out of a mix∣ture of five ounces of Anti∣mony, and 15 ounces of Ni∣tre; but this crystalliz'd Ni∣tre will not be above half fixt, for being thrown upon Coals, it will flame. By this it appears there is lost in this Operation ℥iv. and better of the whole, which may come from what it loses by the hole of the Pot through which it is cast in the detonation; for stop it as well as you can, much fume will come forth that way; which the Artist ought to beware of, lest it hurt him. § 31. Tho' the volatile parts of the Antimony arise with the volatile parts of the Nitre, in the detonation, yet the Antimony Diaphoretick
will weigh as much as the Crude Antimony, because that in place of the volatile parts of the Antimony, as many fixt parts of the Nitre do insepa∣rably joyn themselves with the remainder, whereby it becomes fixt, and is hindered from being emetick. § 32. An Antimony Dia∣phoretick made with a Sulphur of Antimony, which will burn like common Sulphur. ℞ Crude Antimony in fine pouder ℥viij. Aqua Regis ℥xxiv. mix them in a Glass Body (within a Chimney) so will there be a strong ebulition with red fumes (which are to be avoided) and the Antimony will dissolve; being dissolved, affuse thereon a great deal of Water, so the Aqua Regis being weakened, the whole will become milky or white, and a Precipitate in a white Pouder will fall to the bot∣tom; upon the top of the Water a grey scum will swim, which gather and dry in the shade: This is inflamable Sulphur of An∣timony, and burns like common Sulphur, having the same ver∣tues and effects, and therefrom a Spirit of Sulphur may be drawn: Decant the water from the Precipitate, and wash the Precipitate divers times, till it is sweet, then dry it, and you have Antimony Diaphore∣tick, of the same vertues and use with the former, and by some preferred before all the other Preparations. XXV. Antimonium Diapho∣reticum fixum; Fixed Sweating Antimony. Bate.] ℞ Antimony and Nitre, A. make the detonation, wash and dry; with this Pou∣der mix again an equal quan∣tity of Nitre, calcine again, wash and dry; lastly, mix again with that Pouder an equal quantity of Nitre, make the detonation or calcination, put this into boiling Water, filter and precipitate with Spi∣rit of Vinegar, then sweeten by washing it, and dry it. It has the same vertues with the for∣mer, and to be used in the same dose. Salmon.] § 1. This differs little or nothing from Le Fe∣bure's Precipitate at § 17. of the former Section, it being properly a Diaphoretick made of the internal Sulphur of the Antimony. § 2. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Of this Precipitate ℈j. ad ʒss. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers or Citron-peels ℥ss. Aquae Ceraso∣rum nigr. ℥iss, mix for a dose, to sweat upon, in the Measles, Small-Pox, Spotted Fever, Calenture Plague, or any ma∣lign or pestilential Distemper.
XXVI. Antimonium Medi∣camentosum; Medicinal Antimony. Bate.] ℞ Antimony in pouder p. v. Common Salt p. iv. Nitre, Tartar, p. j. mix, melt into a Regulus, and edul∣corate. It differs little from the former in vertue. Salmon.] § 1. Hartman in his Chymical Disputations has something like this, and it is thus made: ℞ Antimony, Common Salt, Sal Nitre, Ana. pouder them asunder, and put them into a Vessel well luted, with a hole left at the top, and set them in a Wind-fornace, blow with Bellows till all melt, and till it ceases to smoke, then for a quarter of an hour en∣crease the fire, after which take it off▪ and you shall have Anti∣mony like Cinnaber-glass at the bottom separated from the Salts like a Regulus from the Scales, and easie to be broken with a Hammer. § 2. This of Hartman purges most downward, and is good against Epilepsies, Pleurisies, Obstructions and Foulness of the Stomach, Me∣lancholy, Fevers, Plague, con∣gealation of the Blood, and Gout. § 3. But let Hartman say what he will, my Experience has told me, that it will some∣times vomit, especially if the Stomach be obstructed and foul. § 4. The Dose is from gr. iij. ad x. but it will be prudent to encrease the dose gradually, till you see what the strength of the Patient will bear: It may be given in Clysters à ℈j. ad ʒj. boil it in proper Water or Wine, strain, and add emollient Herbs, to be given against a Collick. § 5. This of our Author's is said to be sudorifick, and to agree in nature and vertue with Antimonium Diaphoreti∣cum; but this I can assure you also upon Experience, that it has the vertue of the Regulus with it; and though in some strong Constitutions it may provoke sweating, yet in weaker it gives both Vo∣mits and Stools, and therefore the Dose is with Art and Caution to be proportion'd: Begin with gr. v. or vj. and so encrease it gradually, as you see the Body of the Sick is able to bear it. § 6. Lastly, this of our Author's is of that nature, that having freed the Stomach and Body from the peccant matter, it will not then ope∣rate at all, whatever the Ope∣ration of it was before, which
single Property is enough to commend it to the considera∣tion and use of all the lovers of Art. XXVII. Antimonium Resu∣scitatum; Antimony revi∣ved. Bate.] Sublime Antimony, and Sal Armoniack, of each equal parts, with a triple coho∣bation; digest the Sublimate with Spirit of Vinegar, exhale, and sweeten by washing S. A. It is said to be diaphoretick, and gently to provoke Vo∣mit. Salmon.] § 1. The Lear∣ned and Ingenious Dr. Gideon Harvey is said to be the Au∣thor of this Medicine; and that you may be sure to have the true Recipe, we will give you it from himself, as he has published it in his Discovery of the Venereal Evil, lib. 2. Art. 10. pag. 141. word for word. § 2. ℞ A sufficient pro∣portion of Hungarian glistering Antimony, add thereto an ana∣tick quantity of Sal Armoniack, grind them well together in a Mortar, put the mixture into a sublimatory, and sublime it into yellow and red Flowers, these conves into a Bolthead, affuse upon them Acetum di∣stillatum ad eminentiam Pal∣mae Unius, after 7 or 8 days digestion, abstract the Liqur by distillation or evaporation, grind the whitish residue, and edulcorate it with warm Wa∣ter, whereby it's ultimately re∣duced to its pristine colour. § 3. This having left be∣hind it its ferocity, malignity and venom, results a most gentle Vomitory, Dejectory, and Diaphoretick, accommo∣dated to all Ages, Sexes, and Climes, radically curing all Opilations, Jaundices, Fevers, Dropsies, initial Phthises, Con∣vulsions in Children; But more particularly (says he) we have removed with it se∣veral Agues in Children, Obstructions of Courses in Women, and incipient Con∣sumptions in Men. In short, Crocus Metallorum, or Vitrum Antimonii, are Poysons in comparison to this Prepara∣tion. § 4. Than this (says he) in a frontier Pox, no Cure is more admirable: Or, in short, this, if parallelling it with other Cures, is the sole Me∣thod that cures tutò, citò & jucunde. § 5. His way of prescri∣bing it is thus: ℞ Anti∣monium Resuscitatum, from gr. iv. ad viij. or x. Mercu∣rius Dulcis à gr. 15 ad 25. fresh Conserve of Roses a suffi∣cient
quantity, mix, and make a Bolus; Capiat cum Regi∣mine. Let this be reiterated thrice, for three days succes∣sively, or intermitting every other day, if the Patient's Strength counterindicates. § 6. This he calls The Hermaphrodite Cure of the Venereal Lues, from the Com∣mixture of Heterogeneous Minerals, and Grand from the Regimen or Custodia, the Patient being obliged to confine himself within doors. Its duration is seldom protra∣cted beyond twelve or four∣teen days. § 7. His Dyet is required to be thin and dry; his usual Drink Fountain-water boiled with a small quantity of Sas∣safras and Liquorice: After this course is over, the rest of the Cure is to be pursued with this Prescript: ℞ An∣timonium Diaphoreticum à gr. vj. ad x. Oyl of Juniper à gut. ij. ad iv. Syrup of Bawm q. s. mix, and make Pills, No. 3 or 5, which let be gilded, or rou∣led in Liquorice-pouder, for one dose, to be taken in the morning, and the Patient well covered for sweating. § 8. These are to be con∣tinued four days together, the Patient composing himself to sweat after them; but if he be too much enervated by the Precedents, the first Sweat may be remitted to him: If his Strength can bear another at night, he may propose to himself a securer and shorter cure. § 9. The fifth or eighth day, if you compute from the commencement of the Cure, the Patient must breakfast with his purgative Bole, and be re-acquainted with his Antivenereal Pills, for the four next ensuing days, after∣wards let him take his farwel of his Bole, by repeating it once more. § 10. Marggrave has an Antimonium Regeneratum, which he makes after this manner: ℞ The Caput Mor∣tuum left in the distillation of the Butter of Antimony, put it into a Glass Retort coated, and distil in an open Fire, so as the Retort may be throughly red fire-hot, and in an hour, or hour and half, the whole Caput Mortuum will be sublimed into the neck of the Retort, leaving in the bottom of the Retort a little crude Antimony, which Chymists call Antimonium Regeneratum. What ascends or sublimes is Cinnaber of Antimony, which being redu∣ced into pouder, may be se∣veral times rectified and sub∣limed by it self, &c.
XXVIII. Aurum Mosaicum; Mosaick Gold. Bate.] It is made of Jupi∣ter, Mercury, Sal Armoniack and Sulphur, mixed and subli∣med S. A. It is a noble Su∣dorifick. Dose ad gr. x. vel xij. Salmon.] § 1. Our Au∣thor here gives you the mat∣ter of the Composition, but not the proportions thereof; several men have given them directly, but those proporti∣ons are the best which bring the Preparation nearest to the colour of Gold. § 2. In our Doron Medi∣cum, lib. 2. cap. 21. sect. 40. you have these Proportions: ℞ Crude Tin ℥ij. crude Mer∣cury q. s. or ℥j. mix and make an Amalgama; Flowers of Sal Armoniack, Flowers of Sul∣phur, A. ℥j. mix and sublime. § 3. But this Proportion is said to be better, and more natural: ℞ Block Tin, crude Mercury, A. ℥j. make an Amal∣gama, then mix therewith Flowers of Sal Armoniack flower of Sulphur, A. ℥j. mix and sublime with a very strong fire. § 4. Or thus, from Maets. ℞ Tin ℥j. crude Mercury ℥ij. mix, and make an Amal∣gama, to which add Sulphur and Sal Armoniack, Ana. ℥j. mix, and sublime, as be∣fore. § 5. Or thus, from the same Maets: ℞ The Mar∣casite of Gold, crude Mercury, A. ℥j. mix, and amalgamate, to which (being in fine pouder) add Sulphur and Sal Armoni∣ack, A ℥j. then mix and sub∣lime in a coated Glass Cucur∣bit. § 6. Or thus, from the same: ℞ The best English Tin ℥j. Mercury purified from its blackness ℥ss. Sulphur in fine pouder, Sal Armoniack. A. ℥ss. make an Amalg. of the two first, which reduce into fine pouder, which mix with the other in pouder, and sublime. § 7. In making this Pre∣paration you must first make the Amalgama, which is done by putting the crude Mercury to the melted Tin, and stirring them together, till they are mixed, and the Mercury coa∣gulated, then being well pou∣dered, they are to be mixed with the other Ingredients in fine pouder. § 8. Here you see some prepare it with Flowers of Sulphur, and Flowers of Sal Armoniack, others with the crude Sulphur and unsubli∣med Salt, but without doubt the purer the Substances are, the better will the Prepara∣tion
be, and the finer the colour. § 9. Some also take a double quantity of Tin to the Mercury; others take them in equal quantities, and say, that such a Proportion gives the most orient and true colour; but my Experience tells me, that the colour ari∣ses in the main from the goodness and purity of the Ingredients, for I have pro∣duced good from both the proportions, and ill-coloured too; so that by choice of the Maner, and many Tryals, you may find out the exact Truth only; and therefore it will be good to make Tryals but in small quanti∣ties first. sect; 10. It is a good Sudori∣fick, and may be given ad ℈j. in some proper Conserve, Electuary, or Bolus, against Fits of the Mother, Wind, Vapours, and Hypochondri∣ack Disaffections, as also against Diseases from a foul cause, and of a malign na∣ture. XXIX. Bezoar Animale; Animal. Bezoar. Bate.] ℞ Harts-horn cal∣in'd to the highest whiteness, and pouder'd ℥iv. levigate it pon a Marble, till it becomes an impalpable pouder, affusing thereon Guttatim, Spirit of Vitriol q. s. or so much as will make it into a Paste, of which make little Balls, which let be forthwith dryed. It is an Ale∣xipharmick, Sudorifick, and Destroyer of Worms; stops the flux of the Whites, quen∣ches Thirst, &c. it is a Medi∣cine for Infants, Second to none. Salmon.] § 1. It ought to be done with pure rectified Oyl of Vitriol, or rather Sul∣phur, and stirred with an Ivory Spatula, unless you mix them in a Glass Mortar with a Glass Pestel. § 2. The burning of Harts-horn is thus: ℞ The Caput Mortuum of the Horn, left after the distillation of the Spirit and Oyl, put it into an open Fire, and leave it there for one or two hours, or till it be∣comes most pure and white, which is the sign of its perfect calcination. § 3. This is the thing in∣tended by our Author, but Charras thinks when it is thus calcin'd, it has but all its chief and essential vertues, at least, its volatile Properties; yet in my opinion it has that left which answer the inten∣tion of the Medicine. § 4. Le Febure is also for the Philosophick Calcination,
because, says he, by the for∣mer way it is deprived of its Spirit and volatile Salt, whereas by this way its Ver∣tue is preserved; and it is thus done: § 5. ℞ Choice Harts-horn saw it in pieces of the length of a Pan about the ends, then put∣ting two sticks cross-ways, to∣wards the top of such a Glass Body as usually serves for distil∣lation of Spirits and Waters, there suspend with a Pack∣thread the cut pieces of the Horn aforementioned, when you are to distil any Cordial-waters, or rather Spirits, which send forth most penetrative and sub∣til Vapours; cover the Glass Body with an Alembick, and give the same degree of Fire, as for the distillation of Aqua Vitae, so shall these Vapours pe∣netrate into the very Center of the Harts-horn, and make it so brittle, as that it may be re∣duced into as fine a Pouder as if calcin'd with open fire. § 6. But this Work of Di∣stillation must be prosecuted 4 or 5 days without intermis∣sion or opening the Vessel, for which reason the Glass Vessel must have a hole to∣wards the upper part, placed side-wise, whereby to recruit it with warm Water, propor∣tionably as it diminishes by distillation. § 7. But in this Work you must take care that the Li∣quor touches not the suspen∣ded Horns, nor yet come near them by at least half a foot. § 8. If it be objected, that the Vapors may carry along with them the most subtile Spirits and volatile Salt, it is answered, That some part of the Spirits may possibly be lost, but the volatile Salt is held in too strong a Prison, to be with so easie a force and heat set at liberty, not be∣ing yet disunited with its oily and earthy Particles. § 9. And therefore if this Preparation be used to make this Animal Bezoar with, it will be yet more powerful to the Purposes intended, both to provoke Sweat, and to strengthen, as also to give to Children against the Worms, and hinder all those Corru∣ptions which breed for the most part in their tender Stomachs. § 10. It is good also against all manner of malign and pestilential Diseases, the Spot∣ted Fever, Calenture, yea, and the Plague it self; Dose à gr. iv. ad ℈j. in some pro∣per Vehicle, Conserve, Pre∣serve, Electuary, Bolus,  Cordial and Antipestilential Water.
§ 11. There is another Bezoarticum Animale, made of the Flesh of Serpents, or ra∣ther Vipers, the Preparation of which see in our Pharmac. Lond. lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 23. § 6. which has all the Ver∣tues before mentioned, besides which, it is an Antidote against Poysonings of Mad Dogs, Serpents, or other ve∣nomous Beasts, French Pox, and Leprosie, and a Cure for Consumptions. Dose ad ʒj. XXX. * Bezoarticum Jo∣viale; The Bezoartick of Tin. Bate.] ℞ Regulus of An∣timony ℥iij. which melt in a Crucible to which add English block Tin ℥ij. in like manner elted, so as thereof to make a ew Regulus; this Regulus eat into fine Pouder, or levi∣gate, and mix therewith Mer∣ury sublimate ℥vj. distil by a Retort, so will you have a Butter, which fix with Spirit f Nitre by a threefold distilla∣tion, afterwards calcine, and being red-hot, extinguish it in . V. and dry it, so will you ave a grey pouder. It is a upendious Diaphoretick, and revails against all Diseases f the Womb, and many ther Diseases of Women∣ind: It prevails also against Fevers, Plague, Scurvy, &c. Dose à gr. iij. ad vj. Salmon.] § 1. This is ex∣actly the same with that in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 13. excepting in the quantity of the Mercury, which there (to the same pro∣portions) is but ℥v. § 2. You may, according to Maets, either first melt the Tin in a Crucible, and then presently put in the Regulus of Antimony in fine Pouder, and make them flow together: Or the Regulus being in Pouder, may be put into a red-hot Crucible first, and then the Tin in a lump may be added, which in a mo∣ment will flow with the Re∣gulus, which being poured out into a fusory Cone, or other clean Crucible, you will have the Regulus of Jupiter, in a hard and white Mass, but brittle. § 3. Rolfincius, in Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 10. makes it thus: ℞ English Tin, Mercury Sublimate, A. lbss. mix, and distil by Retort a Butter or Gummy Liquor, upon which put Spirit of Nitre, q. s. which the Ebulition ceasing, draw off by an Alembick with a trebble distillation; the pou∣der remaining calcine in a Cru∣cible, till it becomes a white Pouder.
§ 4. In this Recipe the Regulus of Antimony is forgot∣ten, which whether it was the Author's or Printer's fault I cannot tell, but possibly it might be the Printer's; how∣ever, without the Regulus of Antimony the Medicine can∣not be made. § 5. It is diaphoretick, used chiefly in Diseases of the Womb, and to expel no∣xious and serous Humors there, as also to comfort the part. It is given ad gr. vj. and in some cases to viij. or x. in some proper Water, or Syrup of Mugwort. § 6. Tilingius makes it with simple Regulus of Anti∣mony ℥vj. English Tin ℥iv. which he amalgamates, and re∣duces it into a subtil Pouder, and adds thereto of the best Sublimate Mercury ℥x. and then by Retort distils a Butter, which with Spirit of Nitre he fixes by a threefold distillation, then calcines, extinguishes in S. V. and dries. § 7. This (he says) is a potent Sudorifick, and a kind of Universal De-obstructor of the Liver, the Dose being but from gr. j. ad ij. but I am confident he has under-dosed it. I have many times given it to gr. vj. vij. or viij. accor∣ding to the disposition of my Patient. § 8. Beguinus makes it exactly after the same man∣ner as our Author here pre∣scribes, but differs in the pro∣portion of the corrosive Sub∣limate, which is double to the joynt-quantity of the Re∣gulus and Tin; so that if the Regulus be ℥iij. the Tin ℥ij. the Sublimate is ℥x. &c. And with him agrees Grulingius. § 9. Zwelser, Mantiss. Spagyr. par. 1. cap. 5. makes it thus: ℞ Tin finely filed ℥iv. Corrosive Sublimate ℥ij. mix them exactly, put them i to a Glass Retort, and distil i Sand by degrees of Fire, so will you have a Buttery Substance, like Butter of Antimony, which dissolve in the best Spiritu Nitri, q. s. dropping it in Gut∣tatim, till the noise and ebuli∣tion ceases; this done, abstract in an Alembick to dryness, lea∣ving a white Mass, which grind on a Porphory, and put it again into the Glass Cucur∣bit, affusing thereon fresh Spi∣rit of Nitre, and distil again to dryness, encreasing the Fire at length to the highest degree, that the bottom of the Vessel may be red-hot; lastly, take the Mass at bottom, grind it a aforesaid, edulcorate by washing with Water, and calcine it i a Crucible for an hour or t with a red-hot heat, and keepi for use.
§ 10. It is a Specifick in Hysterick Fits, or Suffoca∣tion of the Womb, and cures burning Feavers by Swea∣ting. Dose gr. vj. ad x. & xij. in some proper Li∣quor. § 11. We shall give you Charras's way of making it, and so conclude this Section. ℞ Regulus of Antimony ℥iij. Pure Tin ℥ij. melt them in a Crucible, and cast them in an Iron Cone greased within, beat this into fine Pouder, and mix it with double its weight of corrosive Sublimate; put all into a Glass Retort coated, and draw off as well the Butter as the Mercury, and precipitate with fair Water, which Preci∣pitate wash and edulcorate, after which you may, if you please, keep some part of the Pouder for use, to purge gen∣tly upwards and downwards in Hysterick Diseases, giving it from gr. ij. ad v. in some proper Conserve or Confe∣ction. § 12. But to compleat the Bezoartick of Jupiter, weigh the remaining pouder, put it into a small Glass Cucurbit, and affuse thereon best Spirit of Nitre, three times its weight, and in a Sand-heat, over a moderate fire, evaporate the Spirit of Nitre to dryness, which pouder edulcorate by many washings, dry it, and keep it in a Glass well stopt for use. § 13. This Jovial Bezoar∣tick is one of the best Prepa∣rations that can be made of Tin, for it is not only a Spe∣cifick against all Diseases of the Womb, but a famous Su∣dorifick in all malignant, pe∣stilential, and venereal Di∣stempers, where the maligni∣ty is to be cast out by Sweat. Dose à gr. vj. ad ℈j. XXXI. Bezoarticum Lunare' The Lunar Bezoar, or Sil∣ver Bezoartick. Bate.] It is made of Luna dissolved in Spirit of Nitre and Butter of Antimony proceeding as above with the Jovial Be∣zoar. It is a Specifick in the Epilepsie, Convulsions, Me∣grim, Apoplexia, &c. it is anodyn and sudorifick, and prevails admirably in the cure of an Erysipelas. Dose à gr. vj. ad xij. Salmon.] § 1. Zwelfer, Mantis. Spagyr. par. 1. cap. 2. makes it thus. ℞ Fine Sil∣ver, or in Leaves, ℥j. Spirit of Nitre q. s. mix and dissolve. Again, ℞ Butter of Antimo∣ny rectified from its Cinnaber, ℥ij. or iij. Spirit of Nitre q. s. mix and dissolve, putting on the Sp. Nitri on the Butter gutatim, so long till all the
effervescence and noise ceases, which is the sign of a perfect dissolution; these two solutions joyn together, and abstract by distilling in a Glass Cucurbit, in a sand-heat, to a dryness, so will you have a greenish white mass: To this Residence put again fresh Spirit of Nitre, and abstract, repeating this three or four times, at the last time augment the fire to the highest degree, that all the corrosive Spirits may be forced away, then beating the mass into a subtile pouder, wash and edulcorate with fair warm Water, till it is perfectly freed from the Acri∣mony of the Spirits of Nitre, after which put it into a Cru∣cible in a naked fire, calcine it for two hours, and keep it for use. Where note, that every time after the abstraction of the Sp. Nitri, you are to grind it on a Porphyry, before the affusion of new or fresh Spi∣rit. § 2. This (says he) prevails against all Lunar Diseases, viz. Diseases of the Head and Brain, and the Epilepsie, Apo∣plexy, Palsie, Melancholy and Madness: It is also a most powerful Alexipharmick, or Resister of Poyson. Dose ℈j ad ʒss. § 3. In our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 18. we have given you several other ways of making this Lunar Bezoartick, which are taken from Schroder, and therefore shall not be here again repeated. But here is to be noted, that in the third of those ways, Hofman, in∣stead of that Sky-colour'd Tincture there mentioned, takes the Magistery of Silver, which with the Butter of An∣timony he dissolves apart, not in AF. as Schroder prescribes, but in Spirit of Nitre, then joyns the solutions, and perfects the Medicine according to the Prescript. Now here is to be noted, that this Magistery may be made from the Tin∣ctura Lunae, by the affusion of Oleum Tartari per deliquium, &c. § 4. Grulingius Florileg. par. 8. cap. 3. makes it thus. ℞ Luna, dissolve it in Spirit of Nitre, so as the weight there∣of may be well augmented, and reduce it by digestion into a viscid Water, to one part of which put ten parts of the Gummy Liquor (i. e. Butter of Antimony) well rectified and liquified, and upon this mixture the Spirit of Nitre; which ab∣stract from it two or three times, giving towards the end agreat fire; after which cal∣cine it in a Crucible for an hour and a half, then pouder it finely, and burn from it S.V.
§ 5. Rolfincius, Art. Chym lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 8. prepares it as Zwelfer aforesaid, in all respects, excepting the triple affusion and abstraction of the Sp. Nitri, but after all, dislikes it; first, because of the ingrateful Vitriolick taste, from which it cannot be freed, causing nauseating and vomiting: Secondly, because of its colour, appearing black∣ish in superficie, (though in∣wardly in it self white) which is not to be mended. Therefore he prefers it to be made of the Magistery of Luna (of which opinion Hofman is, as aforementioned) perfectly freed from its corrosive Salts. § 6. This Magistery he thus makes: ℞ Leaf-silver ℥j. AF. ℥iij. mix and dissolve, precipitate with Oleum Tar∣tari per deliquium, affused gutatim, in a large quantity, that all the corrosive Salts may be absorbed and the Water may come forth sweet; the pouder edulcorate with many affusions and lotions of warm Water. § 7. Tilingius. Prod. Chym. Class. 3. Tit. 2. has it word for word from Zwelfer, but without so much as naming his Author. From all these Descriptions the proportions of the Ingredients, and the method of preparing it, is manifest; but that without doubt is best, which makes the Dissolution the most per∣fect, and frees the Bezoartick the most absolutely from the Salts § 8. As to its Vertues, Zwelfer has been large and plain, and 'tis doubtless a fa∣mous Cephalick. I cured a Gentlewoman of a vehement Headach with it, after a vast number of Medicines had been before tryed in vain and when the hope of Life was past. And another I cured of an Epilepsie with it, by taking about sixty Doses thereof, in a continued course. XXXII. Bezoarticum Mar∣tiale; The Martial Be∣zoartick. Bate.] It is made of the Crocus of Mars with the Butter of Antimony dissolved and then fixing of it, as in the former. Or, it is made by dissolving Mars ℥j. in A. R. q. s. affusing by little and little, Butter of Antimony ℥viij. and then pro∣ceeding with Spirit of Nitre. It powerfully stops the hepa∣tick Flux, and all other Flu∣xes, strengthens the Bowels, &c. Dose ad ℈ss. Salmon.] § 1. This we have taught you the way of preparing more fully, in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 7.
sect. 24. from Schroder. This saith Hofman, Tho' it is not to be despised, yet the best Bezoartick is made from the Regulus of Mars, reduced into Butter, with corrosive Subli∣mate, and then fixed with Spirit of Nitre. § 2. It is profitable in Fe∣vers, accompanied with a Diarrhoea, or Flux of the Bowels; also is an Epide∣mick Dysenteria; for by reason of the Mars, it has the power of astringing or binding, and by vertue of the Nitre it is cooling and ano∣dyn. § 3. Grulingius Florileg. par. 8. cap. 3. Takes Regulus of Mars infine pouder ℥j. Mer∣cury Metorisatede, i. e. Corro∣sive Sublimate ℥ij. mixes and distils by Retort, and so obtains a Gummy Liquor, or Butter, which he fixes with Spirit of Nitre, as in the making of Be∣zoar Mineral. This agrees exactly with Beguinus. It is principally good in all Fluxes of the Liver. § 4. Rolfincius, Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 9. makes it of the Antimonial Regulus of Mars, and corrosive Sublimate, of each equal parts, from which by Retort he draws a Butter, not urging the fire very much, lost the Mercury should follow; then he dissolves, precipitates, and fixes with Spirit of Nitre, and distils the same by an A∣lembick, with a threefold co∣hobation; the matter at bot∣tom reduces by calcination in a clean Crucible, into a subrubid or Liver-colour'd soft Calx. § 5. This made of rhe Re∣gulus is a more noble Bezoar∣dick than the other kind, in all hypochondriack Disaffe∣ctions Diseases of the Bowels, and Faults of the first Con∣coction; it incides, attenu∣ates, opens, and discusses vi∣tious Humors, per , or by Sweating: Dose à gr. iij. ad vj. or x. in any speci∣fick Vehicle, or antihypochon∣driack Wine or Decoction. XXXIII, * Bezoarticum Mi∣nerale; The Mineral Be∣zoar. Bate. It is made of the Butter of Antimony lbj. and Spirit of Nitre lbiij. vel q. s ('tis Spirit of Salt in the La∣tin Copy, I suppose that is a Mistake) mixt and distilled by a treble cohobation, as in the Jovial Bezoar. Or it may be prepared from the Caput Mor∣tuum of the Bezoardick Spirit of Nitre. It is a great Alexi∣terick, or Resister of Poyson. and a most saluberrious Re∣medy, which Effects it de∣monstrates by powerfully
provoking Sweat in all pesti∣lential, and venene or malign Disaffections. Dose à gr. vj. ad xij. and more. Salmon.] § 1. The Col∣leges way and method of preparing this Medicine, with several Notes and Animad∣versions thereon, you may see in our Pharm. Lond. lib, 3. cap. 7. sect. 11. to which we refer you: What other Au∣thors say upon the matter, we now come to examine. § 2. Rolfincius, lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 6. Art. Chym. makes it of the Butter of An∣timony, with Spirit of Nitre, a sufficient quantity, (but not limiting the proportion) which he distills Guttatim, till the Ebulition ceases, then distils by an Alembick with a treble cohobation, then calcines it for 6 hours in a Crucible, till it be∣comes a Chalk like pouder, and sometimes of a subincarnate co∣lour. § 3. What the Bezoardick Spirit of Nitre is, you shall have from Marggrave, viz. That it is that Spirit with which the Bezoar Mineral was prepared, or which was thrice abstracted from it: Hic dici∣tur Bezoardicus, non quòd vim Bezoardicam contineat, sed quia à Bezoardico minerali aliquoties abstractus est. § 4. Le Mort makes it thus: ℞ Butter of Antimo∣ny q. v. put upon it Spirit of Nitre q. s. till the noise or ef∣fervescence ceases; this mix∣ture evaporate, or abstract by Retort to dryness, then put into a Crucible, and calcine it, first with a gentle fire, till the pouder appears of a Citrine co∣lour, after augment the fire, till the Crucible and that within it is red-hot, then let it cool, and keep the white pouder for use. § 5. The effervescency is caused from the occurse of the greater and lesser Acid, viz. from the concentrated Spirit of Salt, and common Spirit of Nitre, concurring with the Antimonial Parti∣cles, which the Spirits of Vi∣triol and Salt were neither strong enough, nor in quanti∣ty enough to make an entire Solution of, but only gnawed them into smaller bits, with a light adhesion; but those Spirits of Vitriol and Salt be∣ing once concentrated with the Spirit of Nitre, they act with much more force, divi∣ding every Particle, and ren∣dering them almost imperce∣ptible, and uncapable of re∣ceiving a more perfect disso∣lution.
§ 6. Now, by reason of the great effervescency the Sp. Nitri ought to be put in Guttatim, for fear the matter should rise or swell above the Vessel; and this effervescen∣cy proceeds in part from the resistance which the points of the Sp. Nitri meet with, en∣tering into the narrow Pores of the Antimonial Particles, in order to their dissolution, for as soon as that is performed, the ebulition and noise cea∣ses. § 7. How the Butter of Antimony (which was a vehe∣ment Caustick, from the acid Spirits with which it was fill'd) should by means of another acid Corrosive, (such as is Spirit of Nitre) suffer such an exceeding change, and become one of the swee∣test and mildest Medicines that is; or how Spirit of Ni∣tre should be able to sweeten such a corrosive matter, is difficult to conceive. § 8. This Doubt receives a twofold Solution; first, that as Acids and Alcalies are Op∣posites, and destroy one ano∣ther, so also in the Acid king∣dom there are opposite Acids, which have like effects, by mixing one with another, the points of the one entering in∣to the sheaths of the other. Secondly, That as the first Acids did but adhere super∣ficially to the Antimony in its Butter, and adapted to the motion of the Antimonial Particles, which served them as a Vehicle, to display their points, so being dissolved by the Spirit of Nitre, they joint∣ly fix the Antimony, and de∣stroy its motive quality, and sheath themselves in the sul∣phurous parts thereof, where∣by they lose all their corrosi∣on. § 9. The abstracted Li∣quor called Bezoardick Spirit of Nitre, (ut suprà) is nothing else but an Aqua Regia from the conjunction of the Spirit of Common Salt with the Nitrous Spirit; for which reason it dissolves Gold, and will do all other things which Aq. Regis can. In abstracting this Li∣quor, much of the Sulphurs which were in the Butter of Antimony are lost. § 10. I know Authors re∣quire a reiteration of the Spi∣rit of Nitre, but this says Le Mort (Chymic. Medico physica, pag. 238.) is needless, for that the fluid Salts require no more thereof to make them let go their Pouder, and then by consequence this Work has no more need of Correction.
§ 11. This same Le Mort in the place cited, has another Bezoardicum Minerale, made without Sublimate, after this manner: ℞ Regulus of Anti∣mony in pouder ℥j. Spirit of Salt prepared with Oyl of Vi∣triol ℥iij. mix them as before; digest them in a Sand for two days, till the Regulus is dissol∣ved; decant the clear Liquor, (which will be as limpid as it was before the affusion) and evaporate the one half of it a∣way by a gentle fire, then affuse Guttatim Spirit of Nitre, and proceed as before, &c. § 12. Or thus, from the same Le Mort. ℞ Regulus of Antimony freed from its Scoria ℥j. Aq. Regia ℥iij. mix them together, and digest them for two days, till all the Regu∣lus is brought to a very white pouder, upon this put a great quantity of fair Water, so will the white pouder precipitate, which edulcorate by many washings. Both this and the last are egregious Sudorificks, and Bezoardicks, curing all Diseases that are to be cured by Sweat, and in particular they resist Plague and Poyson. Dose à gr. iv. ad xij. § 13. Lemery makes it thus: ℞ Butter of Antimo∣ny ℥ij. put it into a Bolthead and melt it, put to it guttatim Spirit of Nitre, so much till the Butter is perfectly dissolved, which will be about the weight of the Butter) in the dissolution fumes will arise, which to avoid place the Vessel in a Chimney; decant the Solution into ano∣ther Glass Body or Earthen Dish, and evaporate in a gentle sand-heat to dryness; the white mass being cooled, affuse there∣on fresh Spirit of Nitre ℥ij. and evaporate in Sand as be∣fore to dryness; again affuse fresh Spirit of Nitre ℥ij. and evaporate again, and encrea∣sing the fire a little, calcine the matter for half an hours time, then take it from the fire, so will you have a white pouder, (which is Bezoar Minerale) this keep in a Vial close stopt. Dose à gr. vj. ad ℈j. § 14. This Preparation is only an Antimony fix'd by Spirit of Nitre, and render'd sudorifick; or so many Transformations of the Regu∣lus, made by acid Spirits, or by Fire; so that by fusion, or by means of some reductive Salt, they may be recovered into a Regulus again, by de∣stroying those Salts which kept them under this form. § 15. Zwelfer, Mantiss. Spagyr. par. 2. cap. 8. p. 837. makes it in all respects as Le∣mery, but orders the dryed mass to be ground each time upon a Porphyry, into a sub∣tile
pouder, before the affu∣sion of fresh Spirit of Nitre, and then calcines it (after the third affusion of Spirit) for an hour or two, and so keeps it without any other Prepara∣tion. § 16. Charras makes it of Mercurius Vitae, after this manner: ℞ Mercurius Vitae ℥j. Spirit of Nitre ℥iij. put them into a small Glass Cucur∣bit, on a sand-heat, which stir with a wooden Spatula steeped well in the Spirit; evaporate all the humidity to dryness, then wash and perfectly dulcifie it, keeping the white pouder in a Glass Bottle well stopt. § 17. This Bezoar, says he, is given to good purpose in all Diseases where the Be∣zoar-stone is used: It streng∣thens very much all the no∣ble parts, and defends them against Malignity and Poison. It purifies the mass of Blood, and drives from thence, as well as out of the whole ha∣bit of the Body, all those sharp Serosities which offend Nature, and are to be expel∣led through the Pores of the Body, driving them forth ei∣ther by Sweat or insensible Transpiration. § 18. For which reason it is very highly commended against all Diseases proceed∣ing from corruption or de∣pravation of the Blood and Juices, chiefly the Scurvy, Cachexia Small Pox, Measles, Plague, Spotted Fever, and all sorts of malign and pesti∣lential Distempers. § 19. By reason of the weight thereof it is seldom given in Liquors, because it is apt to descend, unless in some thick Syrup, but for the most part in a Bolus or other proper Electuary or Con∣serve, à gr. viij. ad xx. or xxx.. It is also sometimes mixed with Catharticks and Aperitives, to fortifie the noble parts during their ope∣ration. § 20. Le Mort prepares it also at once, by affusing a triple quantity of Spirit of Nitre at first, then evapora∣ting and calcining as before taught; affirming (as afore∣said) that there is no need of a triple affusion or repetition of the Spirit of Nitre, as most Authors require, because, says he, all the Bodies are satura∣ted with the Acid, so as they can no more be changed or altered. § 21. He also prepares it from Flowers of Antimony, dissolving them with Aqua Regis, as before with the Re∣gulus, at § 11 & 12 aforego∣ing, and calcining, &c.
§ 22. Marggrave makes it exactly after Zwelfer's me∣thod, with a double or treble cohobation, and gives it à gr. v. ad xv. vel xx after this manner, ℞ Bezoar Mine∣ral, Saffron, A. gr. viij. Salts of Wormwood and Carduus, A. gr. xij. Crabs-Eyes and Coral prepared, A. gr. v. Laudanum Opiatum gr. iss. Confectio de Hyacintho, or Diascordium, q. s. mix, and make a Bolus. § 23. Le Febure puts the Antimonial Butter into a large Matrass, affusing guttatim its equal weight of good Spirit of Nitre; the Liquor being defe∣cated and clear, he decants it into a Cucurbit in a sand-heat, and evaporates to dryness, repeating twice again the same quantity of Spirit of Nitre, evaporating it the third time, till the mass becomes fair, white, dry, brittle and insipid, which is the Bezoar Mineral. § 24. In this (says he) should there remain yet any pleasant sharpness, can be no prejudice, wherefore it will be needless to urge the Fire higher, but contrariwise to take off the Vessel, and let the matter cool, and taking the Pouder at bottom, to keep it in a Glass close stopt for use. § 25. The Epithite Mine∣rale is added, to difference it from the Stone Bezoar and the Animal, for that the ver∣tues of those is not only at∣tributed to it, but it every way exceeds them in vertue and goodness, possessing ma∣ny other essential Properties. that they have not, by rea∣son of the Solar Sulphur that is in it, the efficacy whereof is not to be exhausted. § 26. For this rare Medi∣cine does potently expel by Sweat and Urine, but chiefly by insensible Transpiration, all the hurtful and poysonous Humors lurking in the Bo∣dies both of healthy and un∣healthy persons, especially in all those malign and pesti∣lential Diseases where Swea∣ting is absolutely necessary. § 27. And this I can affirm from a Thirty years conti∣nued Experience, That who∣soever makes use of it in all the afore-named cases, shall never find himself deceiv'd, nor disappointed of the help (sooner or later) which he expected: I, who have for so many years tryed, can tell more especially where ma∣lignant Serosities have aboun∣ded, as in the Scurvy, Ca∣chexies, Scabs, Itch, French Pox, &c. § 28. Who constantly uses it, ought also to have a Dyet of Veal and Chicken-Broth,
with Scorzonea and Sarsaparil∣la in it, and to keep their Bo∣dies soluble, by adding every third day to the Broths ℈j. or ʒss. of Salt of Tartar of Sen∣nertus, or otherwise with proper Clysters. § 29. And as this Remedy is in kind universal, so it may be specificated and appro∣priated to some particular parts, by adding any of the Metals, as Sol, Luna, Venus Jupiter, the eighth part of any of which may be added to the Regulus of Antimony, with three times as much corrosive Sublimate, and then distilled into a Butter, to be fixt with Spirit of Nitre, as before dire∣cted, in making the simple Be∣zoar Minerale. § 30. Moebius makes it of Mercurius Vitae, as Charras does, afore-declared. Hof∣man exactly follows Zwelfer, with a gentle calcination at last for an hour. Beguinus is exactly the same with Le∣mery, save that in the second and third affusions of Spirit of Nitre, he uses but half the first quantity of the Spirit. § 31. From all that has been said, it appears with Le Mort, that a single affusion of Spirit of Nitre is sufficient, because what is after added is nugatory and void, as ha∣ving no operation: Of which Opinion also is Blasius, the Commentator upon Beguinus; and also with Le Febure, that a simple drying of the Calx, without calcination or wash∣ing, suffices to bring the Me∣dicine to the perfection desi∣red, and indeed leaves it more efficacious than it would be otherwise with it. § 32. Hic notandum quod Bezoarticum hoc minerale lon∣ge antecellat Bezoar Animalis, sicut id expresse fatetur Dn. Crato in Epistola medicinali dum inquit; Lapis Bezoar Animalis in febribus pestilen∣tialibus nobis nihil profuit, quod sane de hoc minimè pronuncian∣dum. XXXIV. Bezoarticum Mer∣curiale; Mercurial Be∣zoar. Bate.] It is made by draw∣ing forth the Tincture from the Glass of Mercurius Vitae with Butter of Antimony, and fixing it with Spirit of Nitre, S. A. It is of admirable use in the French Pox. Salmon.] § 1. That is, says Schroder, it is to be made as that of Lead, of the Glass of Mercurius Vitae, and Butter of Antimony: This Hofman will not have to participate of Mercury really, but to be of an Antimonial nature; but
let Hofman say what he will; of this, we are sure that it participates of a Mercurial Property, for it is the nature of that Mineral to display its Beams where-ever its Body has once been, and to leave its Character behind it. § 2. This Preparation is taken from Crollius's Basilica Chymica: A red Tincture (says he) is drawn from Glass of Mercurius Vitae, with recti∣fied Butter of Antimony, which by Spirit of Nitre is fixed, and becomes an excellent Be∣zoardick, not inferiour in ver∣tue to any other Bezoar. § 3. If you joyn Mercu∣rius Vitae with Butter of An∣timony, and afterwards fix it with Spirit of Nitre, what, I pray you, will be the effects thereof? Is not the excee∣ding purging Property of the same Butter corrected, so that it may be given in a greater Dose? Diligently consider. § 4. By this means it is manifest, Bezoardicks, or Dia∣phoreticks may be made with all Metals, in which the vir∣tuous parts of those Metals, conjoyn'd with Butter of An∣timony, by the noble menstru∣um of fixed Nitre, are con∣verted to excellent Medi∣cines. § 5. Likewise many other things may, with these in the former manner be described and prepared, which perhaps were not thought of by the former Age. § 6. This Medicament is a famous Sudorifick in the Lues Venerea, and ought to be given at night going to Bed, in some proper sudori∣fick Vehicle, the Patient being immediately after it well co∣vered in order to sweat upon it. § 7. The Dose is à gr. vj. ad ℈j. after this manner: ℞ Black-cherry-water ℥iiss. Mixtura Simplex ʒij. Syrup of Citron-peels ℥ss. Bezoarticum Mercuriale à g. vj. ad ℈j. mix for a Dose. XXXV. Bezoarticum Satur∣ni; Saturnine Bezoar. Bate.] It is made by ex∣tracting the Tincture from Glass of Saturn (which is made of Minium or Red Lead mel∣ted with Flints) with Butter of Antimony not rectified, and fixing with spirit of Nitre, S.A. It is an Hysterick, and con∣duces to curing disaffections of the Spleen. Dose ad gr. vj. Salmon.] § 1. The Re∣cipe is from Crollius, from whom Schroder has borrowed it, but Hofman not liking it, prepares it after this man∣ner.
§ 2. ℞ The Mineral of Saturn, Corrosive sublimate, Ana. mix, and distil by Re∣tort a saturnine Butter, and a Cinnaber of Saturn, from which with fixt spirit of Nitre, make a saturnine Bezoardick, accor∣ding to the methods before de∣livered. § 3. This (says he) is of mighty power against the Plague, Pleurisie, Scurvy, Scabbiness, and Hypochon∣driack Melancholy; and I know by experience it is of great use in curing all Disea∣ses which are to be cured by Sweat, or proceed from Cor∣ruption or Putrefaction. § 4. This Butter of Saturn being put upon Saccharum Sa∣turni, and digested, you may therefrom easily distil by Retort, a subrubid sweet liquor, excel∣lent for the cure of all sorts of sordid, foetid, and cacoë∣thick Ulcers, being outward∣ly applied: And from the same a Mercurius Vitae may be made, excellent against Saturnine Diseases. XXXVI. * Bezoarticum So∣lare; Solar or Golden Be∣zoar. Bate.] It is made of Leaf Gold dissolved in Bezoartick spirit of Nitre, then affusing this solution by little and little upon Butter of Antimony, and proceeding as above. It is an egregious Sudorifick, of use against the French Pox, Plague, Gout, Dropsie, Fevers, Obstructions of the Spleen, &c. Dose à gr. iij. ad viij. Salmon.] § 1. We will more particularly explain it from Crollius. Dissolve Gold in A. R. (made of Nitre and Sal Armoniack) from the so∣lution by Retort often distil the same Water, and then pour on fresh, until by Retort the Gold comes forth most red, which afterwards precipitate to the bottom with vulgar Mercury (well purified from its foeculen∣cy, for otherwise the noxious feces of the Mercury will re∣main with the Gold) then the Precipitate being delivered from the Mercury by calcina∣tion, comes forth of a purple colour. This Pouder dissolve again in A. R. and to the so∣lution joyn Butter of Antimony in a tenfold proportion with the same A. R. by Retort draw off the Menstruum, often repeating the Distillations, then by calci∣nation reduce it to a reddish pouder, which if the calcina∣tion be strong, will be of a pur∣ple colour. § 2. In our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 15, 16. we have shewn you several other ways of preparing it from
entzelius, Crollius, Schroder, nd Hartman, as also a Com∣ound Solar Bezoar of our own efignation, the Vertues, Uses and Doses of which ou may see at large in the lace cited. §3. But Schroder has ano∣her way of preparing the olar Bezoar, after this man∣er: ℞ Butter of Antimony ss. Cinnabar of Antimony ʒj. ssolve in a long-neek'd Glass  a gentle sand-heat, till they ently boil, so the solution will  red, to this add some pints  hot Water, and the white ouder will precipitate; de∣ant the yellow Liquor from it  degrees, then sweeten it by ashing, and dry it gently: Then take Leaf-Gold ʒij. A.R ij. (made of A. F. and a quar∣er part of common Salt) then bstract the A. R and cohobate ur times; then dissolve it ain, and add to it of the rmer pouder ℥iij. digest 28 ays, and abstract by degrees; hobate the third time, and crease the fire, that the A.R. ay fly away, then affuse S. V. nd abstract it several times;  have you a Bezoardick Mi∣ral of Gold. § 4. This Preparation of r Author seems to be that  Crollius, which is the se∣nd way taught in our Lond. ispens. but Hofman is plea∣sed to censure it, by reason of the corporeity of the Gold, and for that it is not rende∣red subtile, whereby it is less useful, and not so much augmented in Vertue: How the Gold is render'd volatile, he shews, by digesting it in the Bezoardick Spirit of Ni∣tre, and a threefold distilla∣tion or cohobation. It is render'd volatile, at least ve∣ry subtile, by Crollius's Me∣thod here delivered at § 1. above of this present Secti∣on. § 5. But he shews another way of rendering the Gold subtile, and reducing it from a corporeal to a more spiri∣tual substance, which is by a Philosophical Trituration in a Philosophick Mortar, where∣by it is reduced into a most subtile Pouder. § 6. I suppose this is to be performed by the Engine of Mons. Langelot, which is a Philosophical Mill, made of well-tempered Steel, into which he puts Leaf Gold cut into bits with Sissars, which is ground from morning till night for a month together keeping the Mill covered with a Paper to prevent Dust or other matter from falling into it. § 7. When the Gold is thus reduced to Atoms, he puts it into a Glass Retort
somewhat flat, and having pla∣ced it in a sand-heat, and fit∣ted a small Recipient to the Beak, with a gentle fire at first, and a gradual augmenta∣tion of it, till it is at length very violent, he distils and for∣ces from the Gold some red drops, which digested alone, or mixed with tartarized S. V. becomes an Aurum Po∣tabile. § 8. And by grinding the Gold which remains in the Re∣tort, as at first, in the same Mill, and by repeating the same Operations as long as any of it shall remain in the Re∣tort, he affirms, all the Gold may be reduced into Liquor. § 9. The Preparation, says he, tho' at first it seems plain, yet it requires great Pains; and if you consider it well, you will find it very rational, because he has seve∣ral times experimented, that this way of grinding, assisted by the heat and natural dis∣position of the Steel, draws to it the admirable Salt of the Air, which insinuating by degrees into the Pores of the Gold, hastens its dissolution; and therefore this Mill is in∣comparably much better than all the learned Hofman's Mortars, let them be made of what substance soever they will. But to proceed, § 10. Another way the said Hofman teaches of sub∣tilizing Gold, is by subliming the Pouder thereof with Sal Armoniack. § 11. Having made the Gold (by any of these ways) spiritual or subtile, he dissolves it in spirit of Nitre (not in A. R) and abstracts the solu∣tion to dryness, by an often re∣petition of the distillation of the Spirit of Nitre, and then calcines it sub tegula, &c. § 12. The Solar Bezoar of Rolfincius, which (Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 12.) he calls Bezoardicus praecipt∣tatus Solaris, or Verum Laza∣ri Riverij Febrifugum Quarta∣narum. ℞ Leaf Gold ℥ss. dissolve it in A. R. Vitrum Antimonii ℥ss. dissolve it in A. F. Quick-silver ℥iij. dissolve it also in A. F. joyn the solu∣tions, and distil by an Alem∣bick, reiterating the distilla∣tion 12 times: To the Pouder in the bottom affuse rectified S. V. which abstract 6 times, then calcine it with a red-hot heat in a Hascian Crucible. § 13. This Process, tho' Riverius calls it his, yet (says he) it is not a new, but an old Invention. It cures all forts of Agues, but chiefly Quartans; but Riverius gave it not usually by it self, but mixed with a proportional
part of Scammony, thus: ℞ Febrifugi gr. vj. Scammo∣ny gr. xij. Plus minus, pro re natâ. § 14. Beguinus, Tyro. Chym. lib. 2. cap. 12. and from him Grulingius, Florileg. par. 8. cap. 3. gives you the Prepa∣ration after this manner: Put it into a Matrass with a long Neck, well rectified But∣ter of Antimony ℥ij. melt it by a gentle fire, and affuse there∣on guttatim the like quantity of spirit of sulphurous salt. ℞ Fine Gold ʒj. dissolved in A. R. which for the better ope∣ning and attenuating of its body, let be thrice dissolved in fresh or new A. R. upon this affuse the former Liquor, (which ought to be clear, and of a subrubicund colour) put all in∣to a small Cucurbit, and distil in sand to dryness; then again affuse thereon ℥ij. more of spi∣rit of sulphurous salt, i. e. spi∣rit of Nitre, and distil as be∣fore, encreasing the fire to the height towards the end: Last∣ly, put the Matter into Cru∣cible, which calcine with a red-hot heat for the space of an hour. § 15. Zwelfer, Mantis. Spagyr. par. 1. cap. 1. pre∣pares it thus: ℞ Fine Leaf Gold ℥ss. dissolve it in a suffi∣cient quantity of A. R so that all the Gold may be dissolved; take also Butter of Antimony rectified from its Cinnabar ℥j. which dissolve by affusion of rectified spirit of Nitre gutta∣tim q. s. or so much as that the Butter may be all dissolved, the noise and effervescency ceasing, and the dissolution become of a subrubicund colour: Mix these two solutions together, and by an Alembick distil of dryness: On the remainder affuse fresh spirit of Nitre ℥iij. and distil as before, encreasing the Fire at last to the highest, for the total expulsion of the corrosive spirits; which Work repeat also a third time in the same manner with fresh Sp. Nitri: The remaining Mass edulco∣rate with fair Water, dry it, and calcine it in a Crucible for the space of two hours, gen∣tly at first, but encreasing it to a red heat, which levigate upon a Porphyry, and keep it in a Glass close stopt for use. § 16 From what has been said it appears, first, that the Gold ought to be spiritualiz'd or subtiliz'd; and the better that Operation is performed, the better will the Prepara∣tion be; also that the pro∣portion of the Gold to the But∣ter of Antimony ought to be such, as so much, as the But∣ter of Antimony may over∣come and dissolve it.
§ 17. Crollius takes to Gold ʒj. Butter of Antimony ʒx. Schroder to Gold ʒj. Butter of Antimony ʒxij. Beguinus to Gold ʒj. Butter ʒxvj. But Zwelfer to Gold ʒj. Butter of Antimony ʒiv. Which last Proportion, if the Gold be volatilised first, as it ought to be, is found by ma∣nifold Tryals to be the best, and the Medicine so prepa∣red to exceed in Vertues. § 18. It is a famous Su∣dorifick and Cordial, won∣derfully prevalent against the Plague, and all sorts of ma∣lign and pestilential Diseases, epidemic and contagious Fe∣vers; it powerfully drives forth the Sweat, and frees the Heart from poysonous Va∣pours; and Beguinus saith, It is a singular Remedy against the French Pox, Gout, Drop∣sies, and other Diseases which require sweating. § 19. Dose is, says Begui∣nus, à gr. vj. ad x. and the older it is, the greater Dose may be given. But Zwelfer says, the Dose may be à ℈j. ad ʒss. or ℈ij. if need re∣quires. § 20. Lastly, Schroder has a Compound Bezoardick, which take as follows. ℞ Solar Bezoar ℥j. Solution of Cora ℥iss. Salts of Rue and Guajacum, A. ʒss. mix, by grinding them an hour in a Glass Mortar, then add spirit of Sulphur ʒss. Extract of Saffron ʒiss. Oyls of Cloves, Amber, Cinnamon, A. ℈j. mix and digest warm in a close Glass for three days, and keep it for use. § 21. It provokes Sweat strongly, and is good in Apo∣plexies, Palsies, Gouts, Trem∣bling of the Joynts: Dose à gr. iv. ad viij. or x. The Extract of Saffron is made with S. V. abstracted to the consistence of Honey. The Solution of Coral is thus made. ℞ Sal Armoniack, sublimed (fast, from so much Common Slt decripitated; secondly, without Common Salt, by it self) Pouder of red Co∣ral, A. ℥iij. mix and sublime again, so in the bottom of the sublimatory will be the Calx of Coral, put it on a Glass plate to dissolve; that which re∣mains after solution purifie with Sal Arm. and sublime, dissolving as before on a Glass plate, till all the Coral is dis∣solved, which keep for the pur∣pose aforesaid. XXXVII. Bezarticum Ve∣neris; The Bezoar of Ve∣nus. Bate.] It is made by draw∣ing forth the Tincture from
the scales of Copper with But∣ter of Antimony rectified, and fixing it with spirit of Nitre S. A. It is given by some against the Leprosie, and Di∣seases of the Head and Brain. Dose ad gr. vj. Externally, it is good against old Ulcers, Fistula's, Tettars, Ringworms, &c. mix with some appro∣priate Ointment. Salmon.] § 1. Our Au∣thor here uses Copper, but Schroder does it with Scales of Brass; which Preparation has a Power (besides the Vertues before ascribed by our Author) to cure the French Disease, virulent Go∣norrhoeas, Exulcerations of the Reins and Genital Parts, with other like Diseases, for which it is an egregious Me∣dicament, as Hofman affirms. § 2. Crollius also does it from Scales of Brass, by di∣gestion with corrected Butter of Antimony. which he fixes by a manifold distillation of Spirit of Nitre from it, which, says he, has besides its other Vertues, a most certain Ale∣xiterick force in every kind of Gonorrhoea. § 3. You may give it à gr. iv. ad viij. x. or xij. accor∣ding to the Strength and Cir∣cumstances of the Patient, (Universals being first pre∣mised) which may be mixt or made up into a Bolus with some proper Alexiterick, Su∣dorifick, or Antivenereal Ele∣ctuary, and given at Night going to Bed, causing the Sick to sweat well upon it. XXXVIII. Calx Lunae; Calx of Silver. Bate.] It is made by dissol∣ving Lunae in A. F. and pre∣cipitating it with salt Water. Or, by amalgamating it with an equal quantity of Mercury, with the addition of a fourth part of Salt. Or, by cemen∣ting it with Tartar Vitriola∣tum, or Sal Gem, or Sul∣phur, &c. Or, by reverbera∣ting it for 8 days with Salt, Sulphur, Sal Armoniack, &c. S. A. It is profitable against Hysterick Fits, Epilepsies, Apoplexies, &c. Dose ad gr. x. Salmon.] § 1. Here is to be noted, that your Silver ought to be fine Silver, and totally freed from any mix∣ture of Copper with it, for otherwise being used physi∣cally, it will cause vomi∣ting. § 2. The first way by A. F. from Thibaut: ℞ A lit∣tle Matras. with a strait long Neck, put into it A. F. ℥ij. Leaf-silver ℥j. set it upon a round, covered with snd in a
little Wheel-fire Fornace, gi∣ving a small Fire to help the dissolution of the Silver, and to consume the Dissolvant, s as after a gentle boiling, your Matter may dry and change in to a black skum, not unlike a Pumice-stone then encrease your Fire to melt this skum half petrified, and continue your Fire till the boiling cease, and that there arise no more Va∣pours, then take it off the Fire and let it cool so will the mat∣ter be reduced to a white pou∣der, which is the Calx of Luna. § 3. Now here is to be noted; that if to this Calx of Silver you give a violent fire, and ad to it half a spoon∣ful of Brax, it will return again to is first mtallick na∣ture, and be Silver again in form▪ hardness, and consisten∣cy, because the violence of the Fire and Borax will car∣ry away the least Particle of the A. F. which kept the Sil∣ver in the form of a Calx. § 4. Marggrave does it thus: ℞ Leaf silver ℥ss. af∣fuse upon it A. F. ℥iij. mix, and put them for a night in digestion▪ till the Silver is whol∣ly dissolved, (unless by chance any Gold be mixt with it▪ which will not dissolve, but fall to the bottom:) the Solution evaporate te dryness, or if you would save the A. F. distil by a Glass Retort to dryness, and in the bottom you will have the Calx of Luna. § 5. Where note, that if the Luna be pure from any mixture of Venus, the Solu∣tion will be white; but if any Allay of Copper be in it, it will be green. § 6. This Calx serves for preparing the Tincture of Luna with, besides the other Vertues ascribed to it by our Author. § 7. Schroder says, That being dissolved in A. F. or Sp. Nitri, the Calx may be made by precipitation with Salt-brine, Salt-water, or a piece of Brass or Copper cast in, the Water being put in to a three, four, or sixfold quan∣tity. § 8. Le Febur takes fine or cupulated Silver ℥j. A. F. ℥iij. or as much good Spirit of Nitre, dissolves in a gentle heat in Sand or Ashes, then precipitates with salt Water, edulcorates with fresh Water, and dries it for use, which is Calx of Silver. § 9. Lemery and Charras also use a treble proportion of A. F. to the Luna, in dis∣solution, which is generally received by most other Ar∣tists, Thibaut (who uses but a double quantity) and Marg∣grave
(who uses a sixfold quantity) only excepted. § 10. The second way is by Amalgamation with Quick-silver. ℞ Fine Leaf-silver, Quick-silver depurated, ana, mix and make an Amalgama, adding a fourth part of Com∣mon Salt, or Salt of Vitriol, then exhale the Mercury at the Fire, or bring it over the Helm and wash the remainder: Where note, that if a double quantity of Mercury be used, the Calx will yet be the better, or more subtile. § 11. The third way by Cementation. Besides Tartar Vitriolate and Sal Gem, which our Author prescribes, it may be cemented with Precipitate and Sublimate Mercury, Com∣mon Salt, Crude Tartar, Vi∣triol, &c. thus: ℞ Plates of Silver, or Leaf-silver p. j. Mer∣cury sublimate p. ij. mix and exhale at the Fire, so will you have the Silver remaining like Rosin, Sennert. Institut. § 12. But Hofman says it is better done thus: ℞ Leaf-silver, Corrosive Sublimate, Sal Armoniack, ana. Mix them well together, and put them in∣to a small Bolt-head with a long neck, close it well with the heat of a Candle, and in a short time the Mercury will flow in the bottom of the Ves∣sel; and the Glass being bro∣ken, you will find the Mass in a rare Spongy Calx. § 13. The reason of which is, from the vehement heat excited by the Contest be∣tween the saline parts of the Sublimate and the Sal Armon. whereby the Silver is calcin'd and reduced into minute parts. § 14. It is also cemented with twice as much Sal Gem, or four times as much Common Salt, in 7 or 8 hours. § 15. Or thus: ℞ Filings of Silver ℥j. Flowers of Sul∣phur ℥ij. Common salt ℥ss. mix and sublime seven times, as you make Flowers of Sulphur, still adding to the Sublimate the remaining matter; cast away the Sublimate the last time, and wash the remaining Calx. § 16. But says Hofman, the calcination will be better done in this last if the Salt be omitted, and therefrom you may extract and egregious Tincture of Luna with Spirit of Lilly Convally, and uri∣nous Spirit of Sal Armoniack, adding also a little Spirit of Vitriol. § 17. And thereof a Water of Luna may be thus made. ℞ This Calx (calcin'd with Sulphur) and affuse thereon some cephalick Water, Simple, or Compound, as of Rosemary,
for a defect of the Memory, or Water of Mans-brain; Wa¦ters of Flwers of Hypericon or Pniperne▪ for Maness; the Epileptick of Langus for the Falling sickness, or of Lilly Convally, or the Flowers of the Tile-Tree, &c. § 18 But in this Opera∣tion you must be cautious not to take too much Sulphur, to wit, not above two parts, lest it be over-burnt, as a less quantity would not do it enough; if you take Leaf-silver ℥j. an ounce and half of Flowers of Sulphur may suffice. § 19. Schroder also saith, it may be cemented with Spi∣rit of Salt of Tartar, (which is a very difficult thing to distil) But, saith Hofman, it is more conveniently done with the volatile Salt thereof. § 20. The fourth and last way is by Reverberation: Now, because Silver does more easily obey the Fire and Calcination than Gold, so it needs not a very tedious Work: Nor indeed ought it (as Hofman saith) be too much calcin'd, for thereby▪ instead of having a good and valuable Medicine, you will only have a vulgar and com∣mon one, apt to cause nau∣seating and vomiting, from its Vitriolick Sapor. § 21. And therefore, says Schroder, if you please, you ay elaborate it more after calcination, and then with Sulphur or Common salt, or Sal Gem, or Sulphur and Sal Gem, or Common salt and Sal Armoniack; cement it as often as you please, and so edulcorate it by washing off the salt. § 22. As for example. ℞ Calx of Silver made by Aqua fortis ℥j. Common salt ℥ij. Sal Armoniack ʒij. mix them together, and reverberate for eight days. XXXIX. Calx Jovis, Calx of Tin. Bate.] It is made of Tin melted, and continually stirred with an Iron Rake, or some such-like thing, till it is per∣fectly reduced into Ashes: Or, it may be prepared from Jupi∣ter dissolved in A. F. precipi∣tated and edulcorated S. A. It is a Specifick against Hy∣sterick Fits. Dose to ten grains. Salmon.] § 1. The Calx of Tin is made several ways, as by, 1. Incineration, according to our Author's method. 2. Re∣verberation, which is done by putting the former Calx into a Reverberatory, and conti∣nually stirring of it. 3. Vapor, which is hanging Plates of
Tin over Vapors of Vinegar, or other corrosive Liquors. 4. Cementation, by laying it S. S. S. with Sulphur, Quick∣lime, or other proper Ce∣ments. 5. Immersion, which is done by dipping Plates of Tin into corrosive Liquors, as in Sp. of Lead, but usually in Spirit of Vinegar: And from this Calx by Immersion is made, first, a Salt of Tin, se∣condly, a Magistery of Tin. § 2. Besides what our Au∣thor has signified as to its Vertues for the suffocation of the Womb, which it is said admirably to cure, this is certain, that outwardly it is good for all manner of old Sores, putrid Ulcers, weep∣ing Fistulaes, Cancers, and other rebellious Diseases of like kind. § 3. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Calx of Tin gr. x. Oyl of Man's-scul gut. ij. Salt of Am∣ber gr. vj. Mithridate ℈j. mix and make a Bolus for one dose. Or thus: ℞ Calx of Tin gr. viij. Oyl of Ox-horns gut. ij. Salt of Harts-horn gr. vj. Venice-Treacle ʒss. mix for a Dose, to be repeated every night for a Month, and in the morning also if the Disease is vehement. § 4. ℞ Calx of Tin ℥j. Oyl of Hypericon q. s. mix and make an Ointment for old Ulcers. ℞ Calx of Tin ℥j. Balsamum Lucatelli, Honey A. q. s. mix for a Balsam, to cure Blindness, which it has done to a Miracle. XL. * Cerussa Antimonij; Ceruse of Antimony. Bate.] It is made out of the Regulus of Antimony instead of crude Antimony by burning, &c. S. A. It has the Vertues of Antimonium Diaphoreti∣cum. Salmon.] § 1. The Regu∣lus is to be calcin'd with a tre∣ble quantity of Crystals of Ni∣tre, for half an hour or more, then sweten, and take away the dross at bottom, dry it, and the pouder is called Ceruse; then calcine it with Nitre, or reverberate it without, melting till it be yellow, so will it be diaphoretick. § 2. This, says Knuffelius, is the white Sulphur of the Phi∣losophers: And, saith Hofman, to one part of the Regulus you must have 3 or 4 parts of the depurated Crystals of Nitre, otherwise you will have no Ceruse. § 3. Le Febur makes it is another way, viz. of the first decanted Water of the Antimonium Diaphoreticum, as is taught at large in Sect. XIV. § 16, 17, 18. of
this Chapter aforegoing, and equals it to the Antimonium Diaphoreticum. § 4. Being made according to the Prescript, Hofman saith, it cures inveterate and de∣plorable Ulcers, proceeding from too great Serosities, and is prevalent against contuma∣cious Scabs, Measles, and Small Pox, the happy Energy of which in those cases, he had oftentimes proved. § 5. If it be given for the purifying of the Blood, it ought to be taken continually for 30 days, or more; if for Wounds and Ulcers, it ought to be administred with vul∣nerary Drinks and Decocti∣ons, tho' in truth it much ex∣ceeds them all. § 6. Outwardly it dries much, and is used in Cosme∣tick Waters, as of Bean-flow∣ers, of Solomon's Seal, and such-like, for taking away Deformities of the Face and Skin, which it renders very pure and clean; and it is mix'd with Cosmetick Oint∣ments to heal Fistures, Chaps, and the like. § 7. It is (Universals be∣ing first premised) thus used to stop a Gonorrhoea. ℞ Ce∣ruse of Antimony ℈j. Roch Alum in fine pouder ℈ss. Catechu in fine pouder gr. 15. mix, and give it in Jelly of Ising-glass made in Milk for a Dose, which repeat as long as need requires. § 8. The Dose is à gr. x. ad xxx, but some give it ad ℈ij. yea, to ʒj. augmenting the Dose gradually. Schroder saith it works diversly; for in some the two or three irst days it causes a loathing and spitting, at other times it works insensibly; in some it gently loosens and in others it sweats, and not but at the conclusion perceived. It may be given at night going to Bed, or in the morning fast∣ing, but Schroder prescribes it four or 5 hours before Din∣ner. § 9. Charras makes it of the first decanted Liquor of the Antimonium Diaphoreti∣cum, according to Le Febur's method, precipitating it with Vinegar, very white, which he washes and dries: Which, says he, fortifies Nature, and disposes it to expel ill Hu∣mors by all sorts of ways, but chiefly by Sweat, and insen∣sible Transpiration: It is proper to mortifie corrosive Salts, especially Acids, and to prevent fermentation of the Humors, the Corruption whereof it also hinders clean∣ses the whole mass of Blood, and gives wonderful Relef in scorbutick Maladies, if
its use be continued for some time. § 10. And though it may seem astringent, as well in regard of its substance, being altogether terrestrial, as in respect to its operation, being disabled from purging either upwards or downwards, yet being mixed with Cathar∣ticks or Openers, it then seems to assume their Qualities and Operations, by assisting their activity, and therefore is of∣ten mixed with Aperients to open the Obstructions of the Bowels and Womb. § 11. Le Mort makes it thus: ℞ Regulus of Antimony ℥j. A. R. ℥iij. digest them to∣gether till the effervescency ceases, then digest again for one day, so the Regulus corroded will remain in the bottom, the A. R. supernating, which will be tinged of a yellow colour, decant the A. R. and edulco∣rate the subsiding pouder by many affusions of fair Water, which dry upon Chalk, and keep for use. § 12. It is diaphoretick and sudorifick, and emulates (says he) the Vertues of Be∣zoar Minerale, the Dose be∣ing from gr. iv. ad x. or xii. § 13. Cerussa Antimonii solaris Schroderi, a Solar Ce∣ruse of Antimony: ℞ Regulus of Antimony ℥j. fine Gold ʒj. Sal Nitre ℥iij. mix, calcine them without melting in a Crucible, so the Regulus will be a yellow Pouder, but the Sol will lose of its weight; edulco∣rate the pouder, and if you please calcine again. It has the Vertues of the former, but is more cordial. § 14. The Cerussa Solaris is also made by a calcination by the Sun-beams, thus: ℞ Pouder of Antimony, or Regulus, or Flowers thereof, and concentrate the Beams of the Sun thereon by a Burning∣glass, so in a short time will the Fumes ascend from the Antimony, and it will turn white. § 15. Where note, 1. That the Flowers are easier to cal∣cine than either the Crude Antimony or the Regulus. 2. That the weight of the Antimony is rather encreased after calcination than dimi∣nished. § 16. This Preparation Schroder calls Magical; Bar∣tholettus, in Meth. Med. Hea∣venly and Physical; and Pop∣pius, in Basilic. Antimonii, pag. 21. commends the same; and Le Febur saith, That the Sun-beams does pu∣rifie and fix Antimony much better, and with much more efficacy than Nitre can pos∣sibly
do; which, says he, is a kind of Calcination Philoso∣phical, and worthy indeed of a Son of Art, who desires to search into the Wonders of Art and Nature. § 17. Behold and contem∣plate the rare Effects of Ma∣gical and Coelestial Fire, drawn from the Rays of the Sun by the help of a Bur∣ning or Refracting-Glass, which but few apprehend, and fewer yet believe what may be done and performed thereby. § 18. And whereas com∣mon Fire and Salts do alter and destroy the substance of Antimony, this noble and miraculous Fire preserves and encreases it; which Wonder will cease, as soon as you do but consider, that this noble Mineral has a kind of natu∣ral Magnet in its self, which makes it capable to attract from the Heaven it self a noble and familiar Substance which is Light and Fire, by which both its Substance and Vertues are depurated, exal∣ted, and augmented. § 19. ℞ Antimony in fine pouder gr. xij. calcine it either by simple common Fire, or by Salts, and it yields a smoaky Vapor, unpleasant and heavy, (which being preserved in a sublimatory, would be flowers of Antimony) and you will have a Calx of not above six or seven grains, which will have a purging and emetick quality. § 20. ℞ Again, Antimony in fine pouder, gr, xij. and cal∣cine it by the Sun-beams with a Burning-Glass, which may concentrate the Light and Beams of the Sun, so as to work upon the matter, then will the Mineral yield Vapors also, as when calcin'd in a com∣mon Fire; and one would think that it should decrease in like manner in the same pro∣portion, but it is otherwise, for the calcination being often re∣iterated, and the Antimony turned into a white Calx, you will find it to weigh gr. 15 instead of 12, which is eight or nine grains more than by the former Operation. § 21. And a thing more to be admired and less con∣ceivable, is, that these fifteen grains of Solar Ceruse are neither Emetick nor Cathar∣tick, but contrariwise Diapho∣retick, or Sudorifick, and Cor∣dial; Dose à gr. iij, ad xij. in all the Diseases before enumerated; and we know that Experience has made it appear, that this Remedy is incomparably better, and much more excellent than the other Ceruse prepared by
common Fire, or the Vulgar Diaphoretick. How this Ope∣ration is to be performed, we shall hereafter shew in our Officina Chymica, now in the Press. XLI. Cerussa Martis; The Ceruse of Mars or Iron. Bate.] It is made of the Regulus of Mars, in all respects as in the Ceruse of Antimony. It is also prepared with a nine∣fold quantity of Nitre. It is Diaphoretick, like the Ceruse of Antimony. Salmon.] § 1. It has all the Vertues of the Antimonial Ceruse added to the nature of Mars; so that it is not only sudorifick from its Antimo∣nial Property, but it is also opening and strengthening from its Martial; for which reason it is of good use to be given to such as have been troubled with a Chlorosis, (Universals having been first premised) for it confirms the healthful tone of the parts, and prevents the Sick for fal∣ling into the like Distemper again. § 2. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Ceruse of Mars gr. xij. ad xx. Cochinele in fine pouder gr. vj. Saffron in fine pouder gr. iij. Mithridate ℈j. or. ʒss. mix for a sweating dose, to be given at Bed-time. § 3. ℞ Ceruse of Mars gr. xij. Salt of Harts-horn gr. vj. Laudanum Volatile nost. gr. ij. mix, for a dose against the Bitings of mad Dogs, Serpents, and other venomous Creatures. § 4. ℞ Ceruse of Mars, gr. x. ad xx. Rosin of Chio Turpentine ℈j. Roch-Alum in fine pouder gr. vj. mix for a Dose, against the Whites in Women, and Gonorrhoea in Men, or a continual Gleet, to be given after due purging and taking away the malign cause with proper Antivene∣reals. § 5. Or thus: ℞ Ceruse of Mars, Rosin of Chio Tur∣pentine, A. ℈j. Catechu in fine pouder gr. xv. Roch-Alum in pouder, gr. iv. Volatile Lau∣danum gr. j. ad iij. Marma∣lade of Quinces q. s. mix, and make a Bolus, to be taken every night going to Bed, in the cases last mentioned, after due purging, as afore directed.
XLII. Chalcanthum Rube∣factum; Rubified Vi∣triol. Bate.] It is made by calci∣ning the Vitriol to redness. It wonderfully astringes and dries, being good against Dysenteries, Haemorrhagies, &c. In pulling out of Teeth (if a great flux of Blood should happen) it is success∣fully applied with Vinegar and Lint. Salmon.] § 1. You may take in place thereof the Caput Mortuum of the Oyl of Vitriol, which does the same thing; where note, that if it be for inward uses, the Vitriol ought to be purified and cleansed by dissolution, filtration, evaporation, and crystallization, and then pre∣pared according to Art. § 2. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Diascordium ʒss. Rubified Vi∣triol gr. xij. Catechu gr. viij. mix and make a Bolus, to be given Morning and Evening, drinking after the same a Glass of red Wine. § 3. Or thus: Mithridate ʒss. Rubified Vitriol, Bezoar Minerale, A. gr. xij. mix and make a Bolus, to be given as afore directed. § 4. ℞ Rubified Vitriol, Red Coral levigated, Ana. mix them for a Dentifrice, to cleanse the Teeth; besides which, it also strengthens, nourishes, and restores the Gums. Note. Before the inward use of this Medicine, let Universals be premised. XLIII. * Chalybs Sine Acido; Chalybs prepared without an Acid. Bate.] It is prepared by moistening Mars ten times with Salt of Wormwood dissol∣ved in Cichorf-water, and drying it again in a dry and warm Air; after which it is reduced into a subtile pouder. It powerfully opens Obstru∣ctions. Dose ℈j. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. In order for the more easie perfor∣mance of this, you ought to take Filings of Iron, not Gades, &c. and Iron is bet∣ter than Steel, because not only its Body is more porous and open, but it also con∣tains in it a larger proportion of Sulphur and Mercury. § 2. Whereas our Author prescribes the Reduction to be done with Salt of Worm∣wood, it may as well be done with Sal of Tartar, or the
Salt of any other Vegetable, or instead of any of them, with Salt of Pot-ashes, which may be dissolved in any other distilled Vegetable-Water, or in Rain-water or May-dew, &c. § 3. This Preparation is indeed only a Rust of Iron, contracted from the moisture. Lemery makes it thus: ℞ Fi∣lings of Iron, put them into a broad flat earthen Pan ungla∣zed, and expose it to the Rain till it turns into a Paste, then set it to dry in the shade, and it will rust; pouder it, and expose it to Rain, as before, and so let it rust; pouder again and reiterate this Operation for 12 times, then reduce it into subtile pouder, and keep it for use. § 4. Or thus: ℞ Thin Plates of Iron, wash them well, and expose them to the Dew for a good while, till they rust, which scrape off; put them again to receive the Dew, and gather the Rust as before; which Work continue till you have gotten so much as you de∣sire. § 5. This Preparation (saith Lemery) is really better than all the Preparations of Iron, which are called Crocus, and is an excellent thing for opening of all Obstructions whatsoever, but more espe∣cially of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and Mesentery. § 6. It is used very suc∣cessfully against the Green-sickness, to remove the stop∣page of the Terms, cure Dropsies, Jaundice, and other Diseases which proceed from Oppilations. § 7. The Dose à gr. iv. or vj. ad ℈ij. in a Bolus, Lozen∣ges, or Pills: In a Bolus you may give it thus: ℞ Leni∣tive Electuary ʒj. of this Cro∣cus à ℈ss. ad ℈j. mix and make a Bolus, to be given at night going to Bed, and to be con∣tinued for a month together, or as long as need shall re∣quire. § 8. This Preparation of the opening Crocus of Mars is out of the common Road, and much longer a doing than the rest, but it is the best of all that ever were in∣vented; the Dew is impreg∣nated with a Dissolvent that very much opens the Pores of the Iron, and incorporating with it, renders it more active and soluble than it was before. § 9. This Medicine also opens Obstructions, by ver∣tue of its Salt, which being assisted with the solid parts of the Metal, penetrates farther than other Salts can; but you ought alwaies to purge
and moisten the Body you give it to with Broths, before you presume to give it, be∣cause should it find the Pas∣sages of the small Vessels fil∣led and obstructed with gross Humors, it would  op and cause Inannations whence the Colick would be excited. § 10. How Iron performs its Operation many have doubted, yet it seems clear, that it opens Obstructions as an Alcali, by absorbing the Acid, which causes the Coa∣gulum: But if any one should object, That Iron does only act according to the Preparations which the dif∣ferent Juices it meets with in the Stomach do make, for that these acid Juices not fai∣ling to encounter with, and to dissolve it, there may result from this dissolution a liber∣ty to the parts of the Body where this Action might be and some other parts adjacent thereto, and consequently their Restauration. § 11. To which we say, that though Mars may act in the Body, sometimes as an Alcali, by absorbing and sweetening the acid Humor which it meets with, as it does absorb and sweeten the acid Liquors which are pou∣red upon it: Yet we con∣clude not from hence, that its aperitive faculty does al∣waies consist in this effect, for that the Water in which Iron has been put to boil is aperitive, and yet there is no Alcali in it, to sweeten the Acids of the Body when it is drunk. § 12. That though Steel is alwaies used in Chymical Preparations for Physick and commonly preferred before it, yet it is nevertheless certain that Iron is much more fit for that intent than Steel, because it is more soluble; for if the Action of Iron proceeds from nothing but its Salt (as 'tis certain) the Salt of Iron must be much more easily separa∣ted than that of Steel because the Pores of the latter are more close than the Pores of the former, and therefore this must have quicker effects. § 13. But the reason which has induced People to be∣lieve that Steel is better for Physical uses than Iron, was its being thought to be depri∣ved of many Impurities by calcination; but that which they call the Impurity is the more open part of the Iron, and therefore the more to be chosen, and the more effe∣ctual. § 14. And therefore as Iron by calcination being tur∣ned
into Seeel, is freed from its Scories, and also deprived of its more volatile Salt, so it is made worse for our Uses by that Change; for the Im∣purities, which is called the Scories, is the better part of the Iron, that has been rarifi∣ed by its Salt; and tho' some call the Rust of Iron its Dross, the whole Metal may re∣ceive the same appellation, every Particle thereof being capable of the same change, if but laid in the open Air. XLIV. * Chalybs Tartarisa∣tus; Steel tartarised. Bate. ℞ Mars cleansed from filth, white Tartar in pouder, A. ℥vj. Fumitory water q. s. mix, and make a Mass like Paste or an Electuary; boil it in an earthen Vessel in Clibano, with a gentle heat, to dryness; make it into a subtil pouder, to which add Fumitory water q. s. and boil again to dryness; which repeat again the third time, reducing it at last into a subtil pouder, S. A. Of this is made Potable Mars. Salmon.] § 1. This is the Arcanum of which Dr. Willis his Tincture of Steel was made, which made so great a noise, and obtained so great a Re∣putation in the World. § 2. The Pouder may be given against all manner of Obstructions of the Bowels, but chiefly those of the Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Womb, Pan∣creas, and Mesentery; it is indeed a good thing against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, but chiefly against the Green sickness in Virgins, which it scarcely ever fails to Cure, as also the Rickets in Chil∣dren, though in the latter case (in my opinion) it is better gi∣ven in a Tincture than in Substance, in which latter form it may be given à ℥ss. ad ℈ij. more or less, in a fit Vehicle. § 3. From this Pouder a Tincture may be made, 1. by boiling it in fair Water till the Liquor looks black, which may be filtrated and evapora∣ted in an earthen Pan, to the thickness of a Syrup. This is a famous thing against the Green-sickness, and may be given from one spoonful to two, in a Glass of Ale, every night going to Bed. § 4. Or, 2. by infusion in White or Rhenish-wine, thus. ℞ White or Rhenish-wine lbviij. of the former Crocus lbj. mix, and digest in a very gentle heat, for a month, so will you have a famous Tincture of Mars, good for all the Purposes aforesaid, and may
be given at night going to Bed, ab ℥ss. ad ℥j. in a Glass Bv Ale or Wine. § 5. Or, 3. by Infusion in tartarised S. V. or as some will have it, in Tincture of Salt of Tartar, thus: ℞ S. V. &c. lbiv. of the former Crocus lbj. mix, digest for a month in a gentle heat, and decant, and affuse fresh spirit so long as it will yield any Tincture; put all these Tinctures together, and abstract one half or three parts of the spirit, according to the quantity which you used in extracting the Tincture. § 6. The latter is more spirituous and penetrating, and has all the Vertues of any of the former, and may be given à ℥j. ad ℥ij. more or less, in any convenient Vehi∣cle, and that as well in the morning as at night. XLV. Cinnabaris Antimonii, Cinnabar of Antimony. Bate.] It is made by subli∣mation of the Caput Mortuum left, after the distillation of the Butter of Antimony, then re∣ctifying it, S. A. It provokes Sweat plentifully, and pre∣vails against the Gout, French Pox, Falling-sickness, Palsie, &c. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. Having pre∣pared all the Matter for distil∣lation of the Butter of Antimo∣ny, (the making of which we shall shew in its place) and the Gummy or Glacial Liquor being come off, you must give by little and little a Fire of suppression, till the red Liquor also comes forth, then remove the Recipient, and substitute another, and with a fire of sup∣pression, for an hour or two, (as Beguinus directs) or four hours, (as Roifincius, Chym. lib. 5. sect. 5. cap. 5. will have it) or eight hours, (as Blasius the Commentator on Beguinus advises) encreasing towards the end, for some time, till the Retort grws red-hot; continue the distillation so will you have the Cinnabar sticking to the neck of the Retort, and in the Receiver a little running Mercury. § 2. From a pound and half of each of the Ingredi∣ents, viz. from lbiij. of the first matter, you will have says Rolfincius, a glaciale But∣ter: an elegant shining Anti∣mony in the bottom of the Retort lbi¾: in the latter Re∣ceiver running Mercury a lit∣tle: and Cinnabar in the neck of the Retort but ʒiij. But in the latter I know he was mistaken, for if you work rightly, you will have of Cin∣nabar ℥xiiiss.
§ 3. Thibaut, in his Art of Chymistry, says, If you would have the Cinnaber of Antimo∣ny, you must towards the end of the first distillation in your luted Retort, give a violent fire of suppression, and (says he) without any Re∣ceiver to your Retort, which is to be continued till your Retort be sunk and almost melted: This fire will drive the Mercury to the end and middle of the neck of the Retort, and when the Ope∣ration is done, it will, either be revived into Quicksilver, or turned into a grey or blackish Pouder; and at the mouth of the Retort you will find an Antimonial substance, which at the end of the ope∣ration will appear in the form of a Crust, as thick as the Back of a Knife, and which outwardly is of a grey co∣lour, but being pared, is with∣in red, and called Cinnabar of Antimony; and in the bot∣tom of the Retort a congea∣led Lump, which is the rest of your Antimony revived. § 4. If, says he, you weigh your Mercury, (both the revi∣ved and that which is in pou∣der) you will find that they weigh little more than the corrosive Sublimate first used. And if you weigh the Cinna∣bar and the Antimony at bot∣tom of the Retort, you will see that they will weigh little less than the Antimony first taken. § 5. That when you in∣tend to make Cinnabar of Antimony, you must alwaies take the best crude Antimony, and not its Regulus; for thô from the latter you will have a better and more gentle Mercurius Vitae, yet from it you will have no Cinnabar of Antimony at all, because the Regulus has lost a great part of its Sulphur. § 6. Le Mort, Chymic. Medico-physicae, pag. 169. saith, That if after the distil∣lation of the Butter of Anti∣mony, you make the fire more intense, you shall have a Cinnabar; But if you would have it In greater abundance, you are to make the sublimation in an earthen Retort, with a naked fire; and being made red-hot, the Work is to be continued for two hours, (Collect. Chym. cap. 53) so will all the Mer∣cury mixt with the Sulphur of the Antimony ascend in the form of Cinnabar. § 7. Marggrave makes it thus. ℞ The Caput Mort▪ left in making the Butter of Antimony, make it into pou∣der, and put it into a Glass
Retort coated, which place upon a naked fire, so as the Retort may be made throughly red-hot, and sublime for the space of an hour or two. § 8. The Work being fini∣shed, break the Retort, you will find in the first part of the neck a black matter, which by washing in fair Water will become Quicksil∣ver; in the other part of the neck you will have a kind of grey Sublimate, which being freed from its Scoria, and re∣duced into ponder, will be red, which is the Cinnabar of Antimony; and in the bottom of the Retort you will have a little crude Antimony, which Chymists call Antimoninm Regeneratum. § 9. The Cinnabar being reduced into ponder, is to be several times rectified, by subli∣ming it per se, in a Glass Re∣tort in sand, by which means it will become very pure and red. Chymists advise a seven-fold rectification or sublimati∣on; but Marggrave is of opi∣nion, that three are enough. § 10. From this Cinnabar it is that the Philosophers make an augmentation of Gold , and some dissolve it in Spirit of common Salt, and then distil it to dryness, obtai∣ning a most white pouder, which they call Chaos Mercu∣rit. § 11. Zwelfer performs the Operation the same way, in the space of one or two hours, but advises that the neck of the Retort should be large. § 12. Schroder says, That if you desire Cinnabar rather than Butter of Aniimony, you must at first give a strong Fire: This Cinnabar, says he, may be purified with one or two sublimations. § 13. Lemery makes it af∣ter this manner: ℞ Crude Antimony, corrosive Sublimate, Ana. in fine pouder, mix them well together, and therewith fill a Retort half full, set it in sand, in a small Fornace, and fit thereto a Receiver, luting the Juncture; distil first with a small fire, so will a clear Li∣quor distil, then augment the fire a little, and the Butter of Antimony will come forth white and thick (which will stop the neck of the Retort and break it, if you take not care to set live Coals near it, that it may melt and run into the Receiver) continue the distillation till red Vapors begin to appear, then take away the Receiver, and put another in its place, without luting the Juncture; encrease the Fire by little and little, till the Retort becomes red-hot; continue it so three or four hours, then letting the
Retort cool, break it, and you will find the Cinnabar subli∣med and fixed to the neck, which separate and keep for use. § 14. From ten ounces of crude Antimony, and ten oun∣ces of corrosive Sublimate, you will have of Butter of Anti∣mony ℥v. of Cinnabar of Anti∣mony ℥viiss. of Quicksilver ℥i. and of Antimony regenerate (which remains in the Retort) ℥v. so that it seems there is ℥iss. of the Matter lost in the Operation, which possibly might happen while the Cin∣nabar was rising. § 15. The Mass at bot∣tom of the Retort, Lemery says, may be flung away, as being the more terrestrious part of the Antimony; the Quicksilver is found as well in the neck of the Retort, as in the last Receiver; and at the end of the neck of the Retort, there is sometimes a Mossy Substance found, which represents many little figures, and is the more rarified Cin∣nabar. § 16. Now the reason why Running Quicksilver is found in this Operation, is, from the paucity of the Sul∣phur in the Antimony, there being not enough in that quantity for the Mercury to adhere to, for that to make Cinnabar, Mercury, and Sul∣phur must be sublimed toge∣ther. § 17. Take this Cinnabar in fine pouder p. j. Salt of Tar∣tar p. ij. mix, and put them into a Retort, and distil with a great fire into a Receiver fil∣led with Water, so will the Mercury come forth, and the Sulphur will remain in the Re∣tort with the Salt of Tartar, which you may thus sepa∣rate. § 18. Boil what remains in the Retort in a sufficient quan∣tity of Water, filter the Deco∣ction, and affuse thereon spirit of Vinegar so will a grey pouder precipitate, which edulcorate with Water, and dry; thus have you done the Sulphur of Antimony, which is much estee∣med for Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, being given à gr. v. ad viij. in some pectoral Vehicle. § 19. Le Febure differs little in the form of the Pre∣paration, but much in the proportion of the Ingredients, for to lbj. of crude Antimony he takes lbiij. of Corrosive Sublimate, which he puts in∣to a Retort so large, as that ¾ of it may be empty, and lutes the Juncture only with Paper and Paste made of Flower, performing the Ope∣rations as afore directed.
§ 20. This Cinnabar, says he, may be used for a Fume to such who are in a course of Cure for the Pox, but is mostly used as an Internal in the Venereal Disease and all its Retinue, because this An∣timonial Sulphur, (which cleaves to the Mercury, and coagulates it) is of a much-more exalted Vertue than common Sulphur, and therefore this Medicament does more effectually absorb Acids, pu∣rifies the mass of Blood, and hinders the corruption and putrefaction of all the Hu∣mors and Juices of the Body, removing the malignity, and destroying the Venereal Ve∣nom. § 21. Authors prescribe it à gr. vj. ad xv. or xx. but my Experience has told me, it may safely be given for a Month together ā. ℈j ad ℈ij. yea, ad ʒj. in a proper Bolus, or made up with Chio Turpen∣tine, or Balsam of Peru, or other t Vehicle. § 22. Marggrave, Le Mort, and indeed most Authors who have wrote of it, com∣mend it as a famous thing for the cure of the Epilepsie▪ and other Diseases proceed∣ing from an Acid ferment, it being of an alcalious and sul∣phurous nature: But in re∣spect to the Epilepsie, it must proceed from an Acid cause, else it will not have that fa∣med effect. § 23. How this Cinnabar of Antimony may be made in a greater plenty we will here shew from Rolfincius, Chym. lib. 5. sect. 5. cap. 6. thus: ℞ Crude Antimony, Corrosive Sublimate, Ana. mix in fine pouder, and distil off the But∣ter, as before directed; which ceasing to distil, take the Ca∣put Mort. or Matter remaining in the Retort and mix it again with an equal quantity of Mercury Sublimate, which put into a new Retort, having a much longer and wider neck (that the Cinnabar may have a spacious place to be lodged in) begin first with a gentle fire, then with a more intense, and lastly, with a fire of suppressin, so will the Cinnabar sublime in a much greater plenty, &c. § 24. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Cinnabar of Antimony, Magi∣steries of Coral and Pearl, ana. gr. xv. mix for a Dose, against the Falling-sickness. Hart∣man. § 25. Or thus: ℞ Cinna∣bar of Antimony, Misselto of the Oak, Elks-hoof, A. ℥ss. Man's-skull filed, or calcin'd without Fire, ℥i. mix them. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. or ℈ij. Myn∣sicht.
§ 26. Or thus: ℞ Cin∣nabar of Antimony, crude Man's skull, Magisteries of Coral and Pearls, ana. mix, and make a pouder. Dose à gr. 10, ad 20, ad 30. in any con∣venient Liquor. Sennertus. § 27. ℞ Cinnabar of An∣timony, Magistery of Elks-hoof, A. ʒij. Eleosaccharum Citri, Angelicae, A. ʒj. mix, for 12 or 18 Doses. Rolfincius. § 28. Or thus: ℞ Cin∣nabar ℥ss. Magisteries of Pearl and Coral, A. ℈ij. Saffron ℈j. Aurum Fulminans gr. x. mix them. Dose à ℈ss. ad ℈j. or ʒss. in Lilly-convally-water, &c. Quercetan. XLVI. Coleothar Vitrioli; Caput Mortuum of Vi∣triol. Bate.] It is nothing else but Vitriol calcin'd to redness; or the Caput Mortuum left in the bottom of the Retort after the distillation of the Oil of Vitriol. Vide Chalcanthum Rubefactum. Salmon.] § 1. You may see the thing more at large in Sect. XLII. aforegoing of this Chapter, with the Vertues and Uses thereof. § 2. Besides what we have there signified, this take notice of, That a Salt may be extracted out of it, which is indeed a famous Styptick, and stops Bleeding above any other thing in the World; of which we fully and plainly speak in its proper place. XLVII. Corpus sine Anima; A Body without a Soul. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Floren∣tine-Orrice ʒiss. Musk gr. iij. Sugar ℥vj. mix, and make a pouder. It is of use to dis∣solve Tartar in the Lungs, help Coughs, Asthma's, &c. and takes away the stinking of the Mouth or Breath. Salmon.] § 1. The name of this Recipe is not stranger to me than the reason for which it was given: But that it will do something, is cer∣tain: If you add to it ℥ss. of Tartar Vitriolate▪ it will more compleatly cut tartarous Hu∣mors in the Lungs, or else∣where, and remove Obstru∣ctions which cause Asthma's, Shortness of Breath, &c. § 2. The Acid of the Tar∣tar will also in some measure open the Body of the Musk, and makes its redolency so much the greater, by which means it will be much more effectual in curing stinking Breaths. § 3. It may be taken ei∣ther alone, or dissolved in Ale, Wine, Water, or oher
proper pectoral Vehicle: Dose (the Tartar Vitriolate being added to it) à ʒj. ad ʒij. or iij, first in the morning fasting, and last at night go∣ing to Bed. XLVIII. Corvus Epilepticus; The Antepileptick Crow or Raven. Bate.] ℞ The greater Crow, deplumate and evisce∣rate it, casting away its Feet and Bill, put into its Belly the Heart, Liver, Lungs, Bladder of the Gall, with Galangal and Aniseeds, A. ℥iv. bake it in a new earthen Vessel well shut or closed in an Oven with House∣hold-Bread; after it is cooled, separate the flesh from the sides, and repeat this Operation of baking the second or third time, but taking great care that it may not be burnt, then reduce it into a fine pouder S. A. Dose ʒj. every day to suh as are afflicted with the Falling-sickness. It is a fa∣mous Remedy. Salmon.] § 1. It may be doubtful, what Bird is here intended by our Author, whether it be the Rook▪ common Crow▪ or Raven, the Flesh of all these being repor∣ted by Authors to be good against the Falling-sickness: But if we may make our Conjecture from the Epithite [Majorem] which is added, we positively conclude, that the Corvus Leguminalis, or Rook, cannot be it, because it is the least of all the Crow∣kind; the Doubr then lies between the common Crow and the Raven. § 2. Since the Crow and the Raven are each indiffe∣rently called in Latin Corvus, (which is the Term our Au∣thor has used) the former being much the lesser, the lat∣ter much the greater; and since the Crow has a peculiar Name, proper to its singular kind, and cannot be applied to the Raven, viz. Cornix, which he has avoided, and used only the common Name Corvus, (the common Appel∣lation of both kinds, but pro∣per also to the Raven) and since to the common Appel∣lative Corvum he added Ma∣jorem, we may reasonably conclude, That he intended nothing more nor less than our common Raven. § 3. That this Recipe is an excellent good thing a∣gainst the Falling-sickness, we doubt not, nor are we willing to question the Au∣thority which has confirmed it, since we know 2 or 3 Ex∣periments which have sealed to the truth thereof.
§ 4. But that there may be a more excellent Compo∣sition than this, we doubt not, and are confident that it may be improved to a grea∣ter advantage: The Compo∣sition in our Seplasium, lib. 6. cap. 21. sect. 11. seems to excel it, which is this: ℞ Of Ravens flesh in pouder (as the former Prescript advises) ʒiij. Viper-pouder ʒj. Native Cin∣nabar ℈j. mix, and make a subtile pouder for two Doses, to be given at night going to Bed. § 5. If such be the Vertues of the gross Flesh, what would it be if it was Spagyrically prepared? Since it is the Volatile Salt, Oily parts, and Spirit which performs these things if they were freed and set at liberty from their more gross and terrene parts, which are the Chains which hold the active power of the Con∣crete in Bondage, what might not this so excellent a Medi∣cine perform? Since there∣fore it is the volatile part which performs these things, we will here shew you how to separate them. § 6. ℞ A whole Raven gently dried, chop all into bits (Head, Bill, Feathers, Claws, Bones, and Intrails) and put them into an earthen Retort, or a glass well coated, which fix in a Reverberatory Fornace, with a large Receiver, luting well the Juncture; distil first with a very gentle fire to warm the Retort, and bring forth the Flegm drop by drop; when all that is come over augment the fire a little, and the acid Spi∣rits will come, filling the Reci∣pient with white Clouds; en∣crease the fire now to the third degree, so will you have a blackish fetid Oyl, with a vo∣latile Salt sticking partly to the neck of the Retort, and partly to the sides of the Receiver; encrease the fire to the highest degree, and continue it till no more will come forth. § 7. Shake all together in the Receiver, to loosen the vo∣latile Salt, and put all (Flegm, Spirit, Oyl, and Salt) into a Matrass or Bolt-head with its Alembick and a small Recei∣ver, luting the Joints with a Bladder met in the Glair of Eggs; distil in sand in a gen∣tle heat, so will the volatile salt ascend pure and white to the top of the Vessel, which se∣parate, and keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 8. The matter remaining in the Matrass filter through brown Paper, so will the flegm and spirit pass, leaving the fe∣tid Oyl at bottom: The spirit you may rectifie by a glass Alem∣bick in B. M. drawing off the
one half thereof; which is the volatile acid Spirit repleat with volatile Salt, casting the other half away. § 9. The fetid Oyl you may mix with Colcothar or Bone-ashes, and put it into a Glass Retort coated, and by a distillation in Sand you may rectifie it, and make it very pure, freeing it from its thick blackness. § 10. This Salt is one of the best Medicines against Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Palsies, Lethargies, and other Disea∣ses of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as also against Di∣seases of the Womb, as Va∣pors, Hysterick Fits, Fain∣ting, Swooning, &c. Dose à gr. viij. ad xvj. vel xx. in any proper Vehicle. § 11. The Spirit may be∣gin à gut. 10, ad 30, in Water of Lilly-Convally, or the like. And the Oyl is to be smelt to and may also be given in∣wardly against Fits of the Mother, and most Diseases of the Brain and Head, à gut ij. ad iv. being first dropt into Sugar, and then dissolved in the Vehicle you intend to give it in. § 12. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Conserve of Rosemary-flowers ʒij. Eleosaccharum Citri ℈ss. ad ℈j. volatile Salt of Ravens gr. xvj. mix for a Dose, to be gi∣ven last at night going to Bed, and first in the morning ri∣sing. XLIX. Crocus Jovis; Saf∣fron of Tin, or Jovial Cro∣cus. Bate.] Make an Amalga∣ma of Jupiter or Tin ℥ss. and of Mercury ℥iss. from which (evaporating the Mercury) you will have left the Crocus of Jupiter. It is a great Sudo∣rifick. Dose à gr. iv. ad x. It prevails wonderfully a∣gainst the French Pox, Gout, Plague, Suffocation of the Womb, &c. Outwardly it is used against inveterate Ul∣cers, Cancers, Fistula's, &c. Salmon.] § 1. You must first melt your Tin by it self, then add your Mercury, stir∣ring them about continually, till such time as they are throughly mixed together: This done, you may abstract your Mercury by a Retort in Sand, for otherwise by an open evaporation it would be all lost. § 2. It is a Specifick against Diseases of the Womb, par∣ticularly such as proceed from Obstruction, Wind, Vapors, and the like. § 3. You may use it thus. ℞ Conserve of Peony-flowers ʒij. Crocus of Jupiter gr. viij.
Filings of Horse-hoofs gr. vj. mix for a Dose, to be given at night going to Bed. Or thus: ℞ Mithridate ʒj. Cro∣cus of Jupiter gr. x. or xij. Salt of Harts-horn gr. vj. mix for a Dose, to be given as aforesaid. L. Crocus Veneris; Saf∣fron of Venus or Cop∣per. Bate.] It is made by re∣verberation of the Vitriol of Venus, S. A. It is Diuretick▪ Anticolick, Uterine, and a Febrifuge. Dose gr. x. Salmon.] § 1. Lemery makes a Crocus of Copper after this manner: ℞ Copper calcind S. S. S. with Sulphur, q. v. heat it red-hot in a Cru∣cible, and cast it red-hot into a Pot of Linseed Oyl, contai∣ning so much as may overtop it four inches, (covering the Pot immediately, for otherwise it would take fire) in which let it lye till it is nearly cold: Take the Copper again, and heat it red-hot, extinguishing it as aforesaid; which Work repeat nine several times, so will you have a Copper well purified: Calcine it once again, to con∣sume the Oyl, and make it into pouder, so have you the Crocus of Venus. § 2. The chief use of this Preparation of Lemery is ex∣ternal, being detersive, and of good effects to eat away the proud Flesh of Wounds and Ulcers, and remove the Cal∣losity of Fistula's. § 3. Le Febur makes it of Copper calcin'd S. S. S. with Sulphur, till at becomes spongy, and brittle as Glass, and red when ground to pouder, which pouder he reverberates for 24 hours, and repeats the Reverbe∣ration three times, by which means he has a very red and open Crocus, and a fit Ingre∣dient for Salves and Plai∣sters. § 4. But the Crocus of the Vitriol of Venus he thus makes. ℞ Vitriol of Venus lbj. put it into a Cucurbit, place it in a close Reverberatory, and fit to it a large Recipient, which be∣ing exactly luted, give a gra∣dual fire, and keep it 48 hours with Coals; then after this use very dry Wood, to give it the last degree of flaming fire, for the space of 12 hours, so will you be sure to have extracted the Flegm, Volatile Spirit, Acid and Corrosive Spirit or Oyl of the Vitriol of Venus, and in the bottom of the Retort an astrin∣gent Crocus high and subtile, called also Caput Mortuum of the Vitriol of Venus.
§ 5. Some order the cal∣cination of this Vitriol to be done in a Crucible, to reduce it to a Crocus; but why should one lose the Cost and Pains, and the best Substance and most full of Vertue, which must necessarily be, if the Work be done in a Cru∣cible? for all that is found in the Recipient after distilla∣tion, will exhale in the open Air; and the Crocus made by distillation will not be in∣ferior, but rather superior, better and purer than that made in a Crucible. § 6. And if all the Liquor be rectified in Ashes or Sand, and drawn off to dryness, without any distinction or se∣paration of Substances, it will be a specifical Spirit, good against cephalick and uterine Diseases, being mixt in Ju∣laps or Apozems to a plea∣sant acidity, or used in the or∣dinary Drink of the Patient. § 7. But as to the Crocus, it is an infallible Remedy to stop bleeding in any part, outward or inward, and to dry and cicatrize Wounds and Ulcers. § 8. It is also a Specifick internally applied in Opiates, and externally by Injection, for the cure of Gonorrhoea's and heat of Urine, and an excellent Remedy against immoderate looseness of the Belly, Dysenteries, Lienteries, and spitting or pissing of Blood, if it be exhibited à gr. vj. ad xv. vel xx. in Conserve of Roses, the Patient being purged beforehand with a Tincture of Rheubarb, or of Rheubarb and Sena made with Endive and Succory-water. § 9. Marggrave makes it in all respects as Le Febur, putting the Vitriol into a glass Retort, but distils in Sand with a fire of the third degree for 5 or 6 hours, or till no more will come forth: This Caput Mortuum he edulcorates by se∣veral times washing it in fair warm Water, then dries it and keeps it for use. Collect. Chym. cap. 497. § 10. And if you abstract or evaporate this Water to dryness, you will have at bot∣tom a Salt of Venus, or of the Vitriol of Venus, which is the true Gilla Theophrasti, which as some think, is not to be gi∣ven but to strong Bodies. § 11. Zwelfer Mantiss. Spagyr. par. 1. cap. 4. saith, That the Caput Mortuum left after the distillation of the Spirit of Venus, having an exsiccating and astringing Vertue, profitable for the drying of Ulcers, which
abound with a flux of Hu∣mors. § 12. Charras has a Sul∣phur of Venus for external uses, thus made: ℞ Filings or thin Plates of Copper, and cal∣cine per se, in a Fornace of Re∣verberation to redness. Or thus: ℞ Thin plates of Cop∣per, which lay in an earthen Vessel or Crucible S. S. S. with decripitated Salt in fine pouder, which reverberate to redness, then quench them in Water, and cleanse them well with Iron Brushes; repeat the calcina∣tion S. S. S. with decripitated Salt three times, so will you have a very red Crocus Veneris, which wash well and reduce into fine pouder for external uses. § 13. Or thus: Dissolve Copper in A. F. or Spirit of Nitre, abstract the Spirit by distillation, so will the Crocus be at bottom in a red pouder, which wash, dry, and keep for use. Or else precipitate the Dissolution, by putting in a thin plate of Iron, and pouring hot Water upon it, the Dissolvent lets fall a red pouder, which, says Charras, is to be kept as a true Crocus Veneris. But it is chiefly for external uses, as that of Le Febur at § 3. afore, being not so fit to take in∣wardly. § 14. Hartman in his Notes upon Beguinus, set the Prescript of Calcining with Salt, to Charras; but he says, it ought to be by degrees, and gently calcin'd, and then at last the Calx being freed from the saline Particles by boiling Water, the Crocus Ve∣neris will remain at bottom of a most red colour, like Blood. § 15. Schroder Cements Plates of Venus S. S. S. with common Salt and Tartar, which says Hofman, for its mighty power of consolida∣ting, is commended to dry up and heal old Sores and Ulcers; but it succeeds not, being calcin'd with Tartar alone: the Tartar must be joyn'd in equal proportion with either Salt or Sulphur, and then laid S. S. S. in order for the Cementation, &c. LI. Diacreta; Pouder of Chalk Compound. Bate.] ℞ White Chalk four times wash'd in Violet-water ℥j. Liquorice, Quince∣seeds, Crabs-eyes, A. ℥ss. Nut∣megs, stone of a Carps-head, A. ʒij. Pearl, Red Coral, A. ʒss. Saffron, Mace a little torrified, A. ℈ss. mix, and make a subtile pouder. It prevails wonder∣fully
in Pains of the Stomach. quenches Thirst, and removes the Cause of the Evil. Dose ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. The Chalk ought to be levigated, so also the Crabs-eyes, the Stone of a Carps-head, the Pearl and Co∣ral, and that by the help of Violet or Damask-Rose-water. § 2. The Liquorice ought to be in a very subtile and fine Pouder, so also the Saffron, Mace, and Nutmegs; but how the Quince-seeds will be reduced as they should be, I know not. § 3. If you have not pure Chalk, you may in place thereof take Terra Sigillata, of the white kind, which will do full as well, if not bet∣ter. § 4. This Remedy prepa∣red with the Terra Sigillata, I have given many times in Pains of the Stomach, (so ve∣hement, as to be beyond al∣most all manner of expression) but never without Success, for those Pains being commonly caused from the biting of the Acid Humor, this Pouder be∣ing an Alcali, absorbs the Acid, and so delivers the Sick. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒij. LII. Diatartarum; Pouder of Tartar Compound. Bate.] ℞ Rosin of Scam∣mony, Tartar Vitriolate, A. ℥j. Turbeth, Hermodacts, A. ℥ss. Oyls of Cinnamon and Cloves, A. gr. xij. mix, and make a pouder. Dose à ℈j. ad ℈iv. Salmon.] § 1. How the Rosin of Scammony is made, you may see in our Pharmac. Londinensis, lib. 1. cap. 8. sect. 68. as also in our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 9. sect. 2. where you may have its Ver∣tues, Uses, and Dose. § 2. The Tartar Vitriolate is thus made: ℞ Pure white Salt of Tartar melted per deli∣quium q. v. put it into a large and high glass Cucurbit, where there may be room enough for the Ebulition, and affuse there∣on the Spirit or Oyl of Vitriol, which do gradatim stirring the mixture from time to time, the better to unite them well; con∣tinue to pour in the Spirit or Oyl, so long as there is any Ebu∣lition, and when that ceases give over, for that is a sure sign that the fixt Salt and acid Spirit have sufficiently penetrated and satiated one another, and are mixed in their due proportion; then place the Cucurbit in a gentle
sand-heat, and evaporate the superfluous humidity to a Pel∣licle, and set it to crystalize, or otherwise evaporate to dryness, and the Tartar Vitriolate will remain at bottom purely white. § 3. Or thus: ℞ Pure, white, dry Salt of Tartar in pouder, put it into the bottom of the glass Cucurbit, and gently pour upon it as much good Spirit or Oyl of Vitriol as it can suck up, forbearing to pour any more when you see the Ebulition ceases, so will you have Tartar vitriolated, very white and dry, and without any superfluous moisture, and fit for your occasion. § 4. The Turbith ought to be resinous, and the Hermo∣dacts pure and white, which are to be reduced into Pou∣der by beating in an Iron Mortar, adding a few drops of Oyl of sweet Almonds, to keep them from sticking to the bottom of the Mortar, &c. § 5. It is a general Purge, and carries off all Humors by Stool chiefly, being an ex∣cellent thing against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, Jaun∣dice, King's-Evil, Pox, and Obstructions of the Womb: It is to be taken in the morn∣ing fasting, drinking after it warm Broth or Posset-drink, and avoiding the taking cold as much as may; with Ob∣servations as in other Pur∣ges. LIII. * Diatrachia; Pouder of Wind-pipes Compound. Bate.] ℞ The Wind-pipes of Sheep cleansed and dryed in an Oven ℥iv. Wind-pipes of Capons in like manner prepa∣red ℥iij. Ivory rasped A. ℥ij. Sea-horse Tooth rasped ℥iss. mix and make a subtile pouder, ad∣ding Sugar of Roses ℥viij. mix them well. Dose ʒj. thrice a day, with Syrup of Comfrey; it prevails wonderfully against incontinency of Urine. Salmon.] § 1. In my opi∣nion, after the cleansing and gently drying of the Wind∣pipes, those and all the rest of the Ingredients will be best reduced into Pouder, by a Philosophical Calcination, by the Vapors of distilled Wa∣ters in distillation, exactly in the same manner as you per∣form the Philosophical Calci∣nation of Harts-horn, which you may see in its place. § 2. Considering the In∣tention of the Medicine, I think it convenient to add white Henbane-seeds ℥xij. be∣cause this simple thing alone has a strange and admirable
Vertue for performing Cures o that kind: And I have cu∣d three or four several per∣ons of a pissing of Bed, who had had it from their Infan∣cy for fourteen or fifteen years, and some of them for sixteen or seventeen years to∣gether, without being able to obtain any Remedy be∣fore it was administred. sect; 3. And with the same simple thing I have cured se∣veral of a Diabetes, when sup∣posed incurable, and given over, after using very much other means: For these Rea∣sons it is that I think it ne∣cessary that this Ingredient should be added. § 4. And with the white Henbane-seeds ℥xij. I would have added Catechu, Jesuite's Bark, A. ℥iv. by which means the Remedy will be∣come more absolute, and so transcendently answer the in∣tention, as that the Disease being once cured by the use thereof, it will never be in danger of returning any more. Dose à ʒss. ad ʒiss. thrice a day, as directed. LIV. * Elleborus albus prepa∣ratus; White Hellebor prepared. Bate.] It is done by affu∣sing the Water impregnated with Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, after the dissolution of Coral upon the Root reduced into pouder, digesting for 24 hours and drying it, and repeating the woik thrice. Dose à ℈ss. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. It is the nature of Acids to destroy the emetick power of any mixture whatsoever; and if they will do it in Antimo∣nial Preparattons, as the Correction of Mercurius Vitae, much more may it be suppo∣sed to be done in meer Vege∣table roductions. § 2. And therefore as Ve∣getables are more porous, and apt for dissolution, than Metals or Minerals, so a weaker Acid may be employ∣ed in the performance of that Work; for if the strongest Acids (or Oils of Vitriol or Sulphur, &c.) were made use of, they would totally ener∣vate and destroy all the Fa∣culties and Operation of the Vegetable Mixt they should be applied to.
§ 3. This Preparation is safe enough, and in many will work only downwards; but in some weak Stomachs, and where the Tone of the Viscera is debilitated or de∣stroyed, it will (notwithstand∣ing all this preparation) work upwards. § 4. In this case the Dose ought to be a little larger, for this proportion will only make sick, and scarcely in∣duce Vomiting, whereby the Patient will truly be made more sick and out of order (for want of its due Opera∣tion) than if a larger Dose was given. § 5. It is designed against Melancholy, and all the Ef∣forts of a Manical Dispositi∣on of the Mind: it removes Vapors, and helps Obstructi∣ons of the Spleen and Hypo∣chonders, restoring Reason and the Imagination to their right Stations and Habitudes. § 6. If you give it only as Cathartick, use it thus. ℞ Jallap, Scammony, Ana, gr. vj. Of the prepared Hellebor à gr. x. ad xx. mix for a Dose. § 7. Or thus▪ Make an In∣fusion of ℥ss. of Sena in half a Pint of White-wine, strain out, then add the Hellebor à ℈ss. ad ʒss. for one Dose to be taken in the morning fasting against Melancholy. § 8. If you design it for a Vomit, you may give it either Per se, in any proper Vehicle, a gr. 15. ad ℈ij. Or thus compounded. ℞ White Hellebor prepared à ℈ss. ad ʒss. Tartar Emetick a gr. i. ad ij. mix for a Dose to be given in the morning fasting with all the precautions of a Vomit. LV. * Ens Veneris, The Ens or being of Venus. Bate.] ℞ The Vitriol of Mars, well reverberated and washt, p. j. Sal-Armoniack, p. ij. mix and sublime accord∣ing to Art, with three Coho∣bations. It is an Anodyn, and pacifier: of admirable use in the Rickets, and to kill Worms in Children. It prevails against the Pleurisie, and Hysterick Fits. It also opens Obstructions, &c. Dose, à gr. iiij. ad xij. Salmon.] § 1. This is ra∣ther Ens Martis, or Ens Vi∣trioli Martis than Ens Veneris for as much as it is only Sal-Armoniack sublimed from the Reverberated Vitriol of Mars, or the Caput Mortuum of the Vitriol after the Distillation of the Oil.
§ 2. It may also be made by subliming the Sal-Armoni∣ack from the Reverberated Crocus Martis, and it will be no ways inferior to the for∣mer. § 3. And from these Flow∣ers edulcorated, you may ex∣tract a Tincture with S. V. and then drawing off the S. V. you will have an Essence of Vi∣triol at Bottom: This as Kesler says will precipitate Mercury. § 4. It may also be done thus. ℞ Sal-Armoniack pou∣dred, filings of Iron, Ana: mix them well and sublime from Sand; so the faeces will be left at bottom, and the Sal-Armoniack will ascend pure, impregnated with some of the Iron: mix these Flowers with the Caput Mort▪ again well, and sublime as before, and the Flowers will contain more of the Essence of the Steel, and this work repeat four times at least. § 5. By this means as the opening force of the Steel will be much sharpned by the Sal-Armoniack, so the Sal-Arm. will more plentifully draw to it self the Martial Essence, by which means the Medicament will be more successful in Quartans, Hypo∣chondriack Diseases, the Scur∣vy, and Hysterick Dispositi∣ons, and perfectly remove the Crudities of the Stomach, being drank in Wormwood-Wine, or other appropriate Liquor. Dose à gr. v. ad x. § 6. But here is to be no∣ted, that if the Sal-Arm. be sublimed from filings of Steel or Iron, the sublimed Matter will be but little, or in small quantity; but if you sublime with a Gad of Iron, the Salt will ascend of a yellowish red colour. § 7. Or thus. ℞ Caput Mort. of Vitriol from which the Salt is drawn, mix it with an equal quantity of Sal-Armon. And sublime it with a gradual Fire, till it ascends or smoaks no more, Basil. § 8. ℞ The Caput Mor∣tuum of dried Vitriol, Sal-Armoniack in fine Pouder, A. mix them well in an Iron Mortar: put all into an Ear∣then Cucurbit, and sublime in an open fire, so long as any thing will ascend, which will be done in a few hours; the yellowish red Flowers gather carefully, and keep them with∣out. edulcoration for use. § 9. These Flowers (says Marggrave) contain the Ano∣dyn Sulphur of Venus; which if edulcorated with fair Wa∣ter, and reposed for some days will fall to the bottom in a very red Pouder, which
Pouder Helmont knew how to bring to the sweetness of Sugar, and appropriated it to the prolongation of Life. § 10. Or thus from the same Marggrave. ℞ The red edulcorated Earth of Vitriol, Sal-Armoniack. A. lbss. make each apart into fine Pouder, which mix well, and sublime a before: the Flowers separate from the head with fair water; evaporate the water to dryness, with a very gentle fire, and in the bottom will remain the flowers of a very red colour, composed of the Sal-Armo∣niack and the Sulphur of Vi∣triol. § 11. This Sulphur (if you so please) you may separate from the Sal-Armoniack, if you digest the flowers with Al∣cohal of Wine, which is after∣wards to be decanted, and eva∣porated, so will the pure Sul∣phur of Vitriol remain at bot∣tom. § 12. It serves for many elaborate Arcanums of Chy∣mists, and is called Ens pri∣um Veneris (but then I pre∣sume it ought to be made of the Caput Mort. of the Vi∣triol of Venus) but is a chief Ingredient of the Lapis But∣leri apud Helmontium, cujus descriptio in Helmontij libro Butlr dicto, extat. § 13 This Ens Veneris, or ra∣ther Vitriolum Martis, power∣fully opens Obstructions, and cures not only the Rickets (for which it is an approved Remedy) Pleurisie, &c. but it is found to be a singular thing to cure Consumptions in old or young, and to root out the Kings-Evil, tho' com∣plicated with other Diseases; and indeed to eradicate ma∣ny other Chronick Diseases, not to be prevailed upon with other Remedies. LVI. Febrifugum Riverij, Riverius his Fever-fright∣er. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of An∣timony thrice thrice sublimed with Sal-Armoniack, and edulcora∣ted, Glass of Antimony pre∣cipitated (in ℥iiij. of A. F. made of Nitre and Alum) Ana ℥ss. Mercury precipitate in A. F. (made from Nitre, Vi∣triol, and Alum) ℥vj. Sol (dis∣solved in Aqua Regis) ℥j. mix, and distil by a Retort grada∣tim to dryness, with twelve Cohobations: to the Pouder five times washed and dryed, add the Alcohol of the S. V. lbij. distil by a new Retort, cohobating six times: decant off at last the S. V. and put the Mass at bottom into a Cru∣cible,
well luted in a fire of Rotation for three hours, then affuse there on the afore di∣stilled S. V. which burn off, S. A. Dose gr. vj. ad xx. with an equal quantity of Scammony sulphurated, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 6. Cap. 12. gives us the Recipe and it seems as if he was the first Man which brought it to light: however his Process something differs from this of our Author, which you may take as follows. § 2. ℞ Leaf-gold ℥ss. dis∣solve it in A. R. Glass of An∣timony ℥ss. dissolved in A. F. Quick-silver ℥iij. dissolved in A. F. mix these Sollutions to∣gether, and distil by an Alem∣bick, with twelve Cohobati∣ons: at last to the Pouder left in the bottom put S. V. which abstract from it six times, then calcine it upon a Tile, or in a Crucible, in a Circulary fire; so have you one of the best Remedies for an Ague yet known, chiefly for Ter∣tians and Quartans. § 3. And he gives it thus. ℞ Of this Powder six grains; Scammony 12 grains, mix for a Dose to be given in the Morning the day before the Fit; or in the morning the same day, if the fit falls out towards night. § 4. But the Recipe of our Author is doubtless the best, and that which agrees most with the Mind of the Riveri∣us, if not the true thing it self: however it is the same with that in the Arcana Ri∣verij, published since his death, and adjoined to his Works in Folio, as you may see, pag. 601. § 5. But this is in the Ar∣cana, which is not here in our Text, viz. That the Glass of Antimony be pellucid and hyacinthine: that the Mer∣cury be such as is revi∣ved from Cinnabar: and that the Pouder be washed with some Cordial water: Lastly, That the Dose of it is à gr. vj. ad x. (in the Folio Impression) ad gr. xx. (in the Impression of Twelves) mixt with Rosin of Scammony, or Scammony sulphurated, à gr. xiij. ad gr. 25. according to strength. § 6. Or thus. ℞ Of this Pouder gr. vj. Scammony gr. ix. Gambogia, gr. v. Rosin of Ja∣lap gr. iij. mix for a Dose to be given in the morning fast∣ing, or six hours before the Fit.
LVII. Flores Antimonii; Flowers of Antimony. Bate.] Sublime Antimony with a strong Fire, either perse, or mixed with Sand, or calcined Tartar; the very white Flowers gather and keep them for use. They some∣times provoke Vomiting. Dose gr. 2. ad 4. they are also sudorisick. Salmon.] § 1. We have explained the whole Process at large in our Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, Lib. 3. cap. 8. Sect. 75. with several Obser∣vations thereon, so that no more need be said of that Method in this place. § 2. But since there are other methods and ways of doing it, and that that Book may not be at some times in the Reader's Hand, we shall here deliver other Processes from variety of Authors. § 3. ℞ Pouder of Crude Antimony, put it into an ear∣then Still, set it deep in Sand, fit an Alembick with a Neck and Receiver to it, or add three or four Necks one within ano∣ther, make a gradual Fire, not too strong, nor too weak; If you order the Fire aright you will have white, yellow, and red Flowers; and Flegm in the Receiver. Thus Schroder from Sennertus. § 4. Now here is to be noted, That Beguinus uses Stibium or Glass of Antimony in fine Pouder instead of Crude Antimony, but in my Opinion the latter may do well enough; and he sublimes by degrees of fire, ten or twelve hours, whereby he raises the white Flowers; and twenty four hours to raise the yellow Flowers: and thirty six hours by which he raises the red Flowers, the fire being all the time con∣tinued and augmented. § 5. This Sublimation says the Commentator on Be∣guinus may be commodiously done in a short time, from an Earthen Cucurbit with a gentle fire from Crude Anti∣mony in Pouder, observing Schroder's Directions, which are, § 6. That the Cucurbit may may have a pipe in its side, by which you may cast in the Pouder of the Antimony, by degrees with a Spoon or other fit Instrument, and so fired by degrees. § 7. That the Cucurbit be set oblique in the Furnace, that the Tube may ascend perpendicular.
§ 8. That you may sublime in a wind Fornace, and mix with Antimony ℥ij. Sand ℥iij. Others mix Pouder of Char∣cole with the antimony, and draw forth the Sulphur, a blew Matter remaining at bottom, in which is the Mercury of Antimony. § 9. That a little hole be in the top of the Alembick, and this you must observe, or you will do all in vain. § 10. The Receiver should have a Hole or Canale into ano∣ther Receiver, through which the Acid flegm may fall, for if there be not a hole for the Wind to go forth, your labour will be in vain. § 11. If you govern the fire rightly says Hofman, you will have three kinds of Flowers, viz: white, yellow, and red, according to the diversity of the Instruments. § 12. These red Flowers of Antimony are not to be used in Physick, unless they be first Corrected, as Glukradius right∣ly affirms; and the white Flo∣wers, if they be circulated with S. V. loose their eme∣tick Property, and work on∣ly by Stool, Beguinus. § 13. Le Mort makes them thus. Take a tubulated Re∣tort with a long and wide Neck which being red-hot, cast into it by degrees in small Spoonfuls Antimony in Pouder; and with a Pair of Bellows blow so that the humid Mat∣ter may be forced into the Receiver: when the fumes cease put in more Antimony, and this continue so long, till you have a quantity suffi∣cient. § 14. Where note, That without the Bellows, the Flowers would rise, but more slowly; and that being done in this manner, almost all the Antimony will ascend in flowers, except a little only remaining at bottom. That the Fire be the more strong. otherwise the Operation will be hindred, and the Flowers will scarcely ascend. That you beware of the fumes, for they are commonly mor∣tal. § 15. The Action of these Flowers vary according to their colour and fixity the whitest and lightest work by Vomit and Stool, violently enough, and are given, à gr. j. ad iv. The yellow Flow∣ers says Le Mort do the same more gently, and therefore he gives them, à gr. ij. ad vi. § 16. But in this I fear he was mistaken, for if you will believe Thibaut, he affirms, That the white contain no∣thing of the Venomous Sul∣phur
of the Antimony, but a good quantity of the Volatile Salt, and therefore are of its colour; provoking Sweat, and sometimes Vomiting, à gr. iij. ad vij. The yellow contain a little of the said Sulphur, and are therefore somewhat tinged, containing a part of the Body of the Regulus, and a little of the Volatile Salt; these provoke vomiting with violence. The red Flowers abound much with the said malignant Sul∣phur, and are therefore high∣ly died; these cause Vomi∣ting with Convulsions, and many times the Death of the Patient, and therefore are no ways to be given inwardly till corrected. § 17. These red Flowers says Le Mort, sticking to the Neck are easily fixed into a Sudorifick Pouder with Spi∣rit of Nitre, and then they may be given in some pro∣per Bolus, à gr. iv. ad x. § 18. But if any of the kinds of Flowers be used un∣corrected, it is much better to use their Infusion in Wine, than their Substance because of their Violence. One of the late Duke of Buckin∣gham's Servants was killed with a single Dose of them, gi∣ven by an Outlandish Physician: he was a young lusty Man, and as strong and likely to live as any Man in London, but the fatal Dose being given he ne∣ver ceased Vomiting till he died, and the Vomiting was accompanied with dreadful Convulsions. The Duke sent for me, but too late, I came so as to see the miserable Object alive, but 'twas so wretched a sight as my Eyes never beheld before, and in a few hours af∣ter he expired. As I remem∣ber he was the Porter at the Gate at Wallingford House. § 19. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 6. Cap. 2. Makes them thus. ℞ Choice Hunga∣rian Antimony lbj. pouder it and put it into a Cucurbit with its Aludel, or two or three Earthen-pots superimposed, the uppermost of which let it have a small hole in its top, for so the Flowers will the more free∣ly ascend, but without it with some difficulty; increase the Fire to the second degree, and gather the Flowers. § 20. These saith he purge vehemently by Vomit, and therefore are not to be given alone without correction: they are rarely given, be∣cause much safer Vomits, are commonly near at hand. § 21. Lemery makes them thus, ℞ A good unglazed Earthen-pot, with a ho in its side (about the dd f
its height) and a stopple to it, set it in a Furnace of an equal proportion, and fit to it three Pots more of the same Earth, all open at the bottom, and fill a Glass-head to the uppermost Pot, without any Receiver (for there is no Liquor to fall into it, so that a blind head might do.) Lute the Junctures well, and let the Fire transpire only through some little holes, and be but strong enough to warm the bottom of the lowermost Pot, then give fire gradatim to heat this Pot, by little and little till it is red hot; which done cast into it a small Spoon∣ful of Antimony through the hole, and stir the Matter at the bottom of the Pot with a crooked Iron Spatula, which presently draw out, and stop the hole, so will the Flowers rise and stick in the upper Pots: Continue a great Fire, that the Pot may still remain red hot, and when you see no∣thing more sublime, cast in so much more Antimony doing as before: this casting in repeat through the hole, so long till you have Flowers enough: let the fire go out, and when cold unlute the Vessels, and you'll find the Flowers all about the three upper Pots and the Head, ga∣ther them together with a Fea∣ther, and keep them in a Vial for use. § 22. These Flowers says he are powerfully Emetick, and given in Quartan-Agues and other intermitting Fe∣vers, and in the Falling-sick∣ness: Dose à gr. ij. ad vj. in Lozenges or Broth. § 23. In this Preparation we ought to have room e∣nough; otherwise the Flow∣ers of Antimony being forced by the Fire, would be apt to break the Vessel for want of room to move in; and this is the Reason why so ma∣ny Pots are thus placed one upon another. § 24. Le Febure makes them wholly after the same Method, with three or four Pots, but without a Glass-head, the uppermost having a hole of an Inch diameter, which he as need requires stops with a piece of Clay, and at the end of your Ope∣ration you will find the Anti∣mony sublimed in gray, white, yellow, and sometimes red Flowers, according to the management of the Fire. § 25. These Flowers (says he) are not much in use, by reason of their violent Ope∣ration, for they are properly the Sulphur of the Antimony; but they are fit to prepare o∣ther Remedies after due cor∣rection. They may never∣theless be administred à gr. ij.
ad iv. in Conserve of Roses; or make an Infusion of them in White-wine. § 26. But to make these Flowers more gentle you must sublime thus. ℞ Pou∣der of Regulus of Antimony (which is already deprived of most part of its impure Sul∣phur) pouder of pure Sal-Ar∣moniack A lbss. mix and put them into a Glass-body in Sand cover it with its Head, and a fit Receiver, lute the Junctures, and give five till all is ascended; so will you have Flowers of a yellow Colour, which edulco∣rate by washing and keep for use. § 27. These are much gentler than the former, and are gi∣ven to lunatick or mad Peo∣ple, such as are melancholy, or are afflicted with Quar∣tan-Agues. Dose à gr. ij. ad vj. in Conserve of Roses, or in an Infusion in Wine or Ale. § 28. In this Operation, the Sal-Armoniack carries a∣long with it, the purest Sul∣phur and Mercury of the An∣timony. § 29. You may also put the simple Flowers ℥iij. with pure Nitre ℥iv. into a cruci∣ble in the open Fire, and edul∣corate them afterwards, then digest them with S.V. for five∣teen days, and deflagrating the Spirit, you will have a diapho∣retical Pouder of excellent use for purifying the Blood, being given à gr. vj. ad vij. § 30. The Correction of Flow∣ers of Antimony. ℞ Pure white and subtil Flowers ℥j. Salt of Tartar of Sennertus ℥jss. mix and put them into a good Cru∣cible, and with a strong Fire melt them in a Wind-fornace, so will they turn to ared lump: reduce it to a Pouder in a hot Mortar, adding to it a dissol∣luble magistery of Pearl and Coral, A. ℥ijss. put all into a Matress and affuse thereon S. V. aromatiz'd with Spices) so much as to overtop it four Inches: cover the Matress with a blind Head, and digest in a Sand heat for three days, after which abstract the S. V. in B. M. so will you have a well cor∣rected and pleasant Antimony, which keep in a Vial well stopt for use, for otherwise in the Air it would melt. § 31. Dose à gr. iv. ad xvj. in some proper Vehicle, against all inveterate Diseases chiefly against the strongest and most stubborn Impressi∣ons of Melancholy, inter∣mitting Fevers or Agues, and all kinds of Obstructions: it works variously, according to the Matter it meets with in the Stomach; for it some∣times
provokes Vomiting, but not always; it also purges by Stool and Urine, but its chief Operation is by insen∣sible transpiration, for by irradiation, and emanation of its Vertue, it strengthens all the Natural digestions, and causes the internal Archaeus to drive away or expel from the Center to the Circumfe∣rence all the obstructing Par∣ticles, and whatsoever is de∣structive or hurtful to the Health, Life, and Welfare of the humane Frame. § 32. Lemery has also red Flowers of Antimony, which are chiefly the more Sulphu∣rous parts of the Antimony rarified by fire. ℞ Antimo∣ny in Pouder lbj. common Glass in pouder lbiv. mix and put them into a coated Glass Re∣tort, so as it may be but half full, set in a Reverberatory Furnace, fit to it a large Re∣ceiver, luting the Juncture, give fire at first but to warm the Retort, and augment it gradatim, so will red Flowers come forth into the Receiver, continue the fire till all is come forth, then gather the Flowers and keep them for use. § 33. These are more e∣metick than any of the for∣mer, and are to be used with much caution; but the safest way is first to correct them as is before taught. The red colour proceeds from the great quantity of Sulphur with which they are so add∣ed. § 34. In taking these Flow∣ers of Antimony, or any other Antimonial Emetick, you ought often to drink Broth or Posset-drink, both to fa∣cilitate the Vomiting, and dull the activity of the Me∣dicine: but because it some∣times happens that Antimo∣nial Pouders sticking on the Membranes or Tunicles of the Stomach, or some of its folds, does cause a continual Vomiting, notwithstanding the continual use of Broths, you must then add the Cream of Tartar, and dissolve it in the Broth scalding hot, and which is so hot to be taken a quarter of a Pint at a time, every quarter of an Hour; so the Acid of the Tartar joyn∣ing with the Sulphur of the Antimony, fixes them, and so stops the Vomiting, making the remaining part of the Opera∣tion by Stool. § 35. Lemery has also a∣nother Preparation of Flow∣ers of Antimony, which you may see at large at Sect. XXIV. § 25. and 26. of this Chap∣ter afore-going being subli∣med with Nitre; these Flowers will not be so eme∣tick
as others tho' unwasht, because the Acid of the Nitre which arises with them, hin∣ders their activity. § 36. And as you make Flowers from the Regulus with Sal-Armoniack, at § 26. a∣bove, so also may you make Flowers from the Glass of Antimony, and from Crocus Metallorum and Regulus Mar∣tis having the same Vertues with those Flowers from the Regulus aforesaid. These Flowers, says Rolfincius purge , sursum & deorsum, upwards and down∣wards. § 37. Charras makes his Flowers after Lemery's Me∣thod, whether simple or mixt, with Nitre, or Sal-Armoniack; save that in su∣bliming with Sal-Armoniack, he takes double the quantity or weight of Salt to the quan∣tity or weight of Antimony, whether it be Crude Antimo∣ny, Vitrum, Crocus, or Regu∣lus. § 38. And he affirms, that the diversity which happens to Flowers of Antimony in several or the same Prepara∣tions or Sublimations, as to their colours being white, yellow, or red, in respect to their vomitive or purgative Qualities may be used all alike, provided they be well washt or dulcified: And (says he) sometimes a Grain of these Flowers is mixed a∣mong other Purgatives, or with Mercurius dulcis upon certain occasions; for ser∣ving as a Spur to those Re∣medies with which it is mixt, it assists their activity, work∣ing only downwards. § 39. Zwelfer's Method (which is that which Le Mort seems to imitate) is thus. Get a Retort made al∣most like a Ball or Globe, ha∣ving two Pipes more on each side of the middle, place it in a proper Furnace (see the Fi∣gure) and kindle under it a fire sufficient to melt the An∣timony, which put in by one of the Pipes, fitting a Re∣ceiver to the other Pipe, ha∣ving a little hole in its hinder part, and when the Vapours begin to appear in the Recipi∣ent, blow gently with a small pair of Bellows into the oppo∣site Pipe to the Recipient, so will the Vapours forced there into, condense there, in Flow∣ers, Mantis. Spagyr. Cap. 6, and 8, pag. 817, 833. § 40. Margrave prepares the Flowers thus. ℞ Crude Antimony in pouder ℥iij. put it into a Glass Cucurbit with its head, on which affuse Spi∣rit of Nitre Bezoardick, or Aqua Regia for the dissolving
of Antimony ℥ix. or xij. or so much till the Effervescence ceases: shake the Glass till they are well mingled, cover it with its head till (which a great Effervescence and Ebu∣lition) the Antimony in the bottom of the Glass is reduced into a very white Substance: then by affusion of a great quantity of Water precipitate the whole Mass, so will the Water become milky, and a yellow pouder (which is an in∣flamable Sulphur of Antimo∣ny) precipitate to the bottom: decant immediately this white water from the said Pouder, and let it rest till the white∣ness settles to the bottom; de∣caut off the clear water; and so the white Matter left at bottom affuse more fair Wa∣ter, and edulcorate it by many washings: then filter through brown Paper, and the white Coagulum left behind dry by a gentle fire, and make into fine Pouder, which keep for use. § 41. These are called the white fixed Flowers of Anti∣mony; and they purge by Stool only, and that gently, and not by Vomit, from which Operation they are called fixed. Dose gr. iij. or iv. § 42. Lastly, Maët's pre∣pares them thus. ℞ Flowers of Antimony fixed by a con∣tinued flame into the highest redness; Sal-Armeniack Ana. mix and sublime them toge∣ther; so will a part of the Flowers ascend: to that re∣mains in the bottom add Sal-Armoniack Ana. and sublime as before, continue this Work till the greatest part of the Flowers are sublimed with the Salt. gather the Flowers to∣gether, and edulcorate them by much washing with fair water. § 43. They have the Ver∣tues of all the other, but are accounted safer, and may be given à gr. j. ad iv. They also serve for the Prepara∣tion of the Essence of Anti∣mony. LVIII. Flores Antimonii Dia∣phoretici; Sweating Flow∣ers of Antimony. Bate.] They are made of Antimony sprinkled with Oil of Sulphur, and calcined in a close Crucible, S. A. They have the same Vertues with the former. Salmon.] § 1. You have the Process more at large in Sala his Anatomy of Antimo∣ny, S. 3. but there is no dif∣ficulty in it, and therefore needs no great Explication;
save that you may perform the Operation with a Coal fire. § 2. Some affuse thereon Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, which is again abstracted, then e∣dulcorated and calcin'd with a red-hot Heat. § 3. These Flowers are less Emetick than the former, and sweat more, and may be given à gr. j. ad vj. in Conserve of Roses, Mithri∣date, or other proper Ve∣hicle. LIX. Flores Benzoini, Flow∣ers of Benjamin. Bate] They are made of the Pouder of the best Benja∣min, being put into a Glass Vessel, and covered with a dou∣ble Paper Pyramid, subliming with a gentle fire S. A. the Flowers adhering to the Paper (by often changing the Pyra∣mid) are to be swept off for use. See the London Dispen∣satory. They are admirable Pulmonicks, Bechikiks and Antiastmaticks, stop Ca∣tarrhs, and provoke Sweat. Dose à gr. v. ad xij. Salmon.] § 1. A small hole ought to be in the top of the Pyramid, for there by the Flowers will the more easily ascend. § 2. Every half hour, if the fire be strong enough the Flowers are to be removed with a Feather, for which reason you ought to have two of the Pyramids at least, that the second may be put on while the other is a clear∣ing. § 3. These Flowers which are only the lighter and pu∣rer resinous parts of the Ben∣jamin, or an Exaltation of the Volatile Salt of the Benja∣min, white and almost like Snow, are to be gathered and kept in a Glass close stopt. § 4. The sign of the ab∣solute Sublimation is when the Paper or Alembick shall appear to be moistned with the Oily parts of the Benja∣min, for then all the Flow∣ers are ascended, that are possible to ascend pure. § 5. From lbj. of pure Benjamin you will not have above ℥ ij. of pure Flowers, which are very profitable in Asthma's, and in all Distem∣pers of the Breast and Lungs; they also provoke Sweat, and may be given a ℈ss. ad ℈j. § 6. From these Flowers a Tincture may thus be pre∣pared. ℞ S. V. Twice di∣stilled from Carminatices ℥j. Flowers of Benjamin ʒij. mix,
digest with a very gentle fire in a bolt head, till the Tincture is of a yellow colour. It is much more powerful than the simple Flowers, discus∣ses Wind, cures inveterate Coughs, difficulty of Breath∣ing, and the Cholick. Dose à gut. vj. ad xx. § 7. An Essence of Ben∣jamin. ℞ Flowers of Ben∣jamin ʒij. best Styrax Cala∣mita ʒj. Oil of Rhodium, or Jessamy, or rather of Damask Roses gut. iv. Civet, gr. ij. Musk gr. ij. mix the Civet and Storax with the Oil, which put into a Phial, putting thereon, the Flowers of Ben∣jamin; S. V. rectified ℥ij. vel q. s. digest two days, then de∣cant the clear and keep it for use. § 8. Where note, That if a little Salt of Tartar be mixed with it before dige∣stion, the Tincture will be the more easily extract∣ed. § 9. It is a most egregi∣ous perfume, by which Cloaths, Gloves, Linen, &c. may be made odoriferous in this manner. ℞ Damask Rose-water, or other Odorife∣rous-water, as Orange Flower-water ℥j. of this Tincture gut. 40. mix them: and there∣with moisten the things you would perfume, drying them in the Shadow. § 10. Le Febure makes the Flowers after the same man∣ner, and says, that they pos∣sess a Volatile sulphurous Salt, very subtil and pene∣trating; for as soon as there is heat enough to drive it out from its Body, it invades the Nose, Eyes, and Breast, by reason of its subtil and vola∣tile Salt, in which lies all the Power and Activity of the Benjamin. § 11. Thibaut makes them thus. ℞ Benjamin in pou∣der, q. v. put into a Crucible, proportioned to the quantity of your Matter, so as it may be but half full, put your Crucible into an Iron ring which has two Arms, one on each side, which place upon a second row of Bricks of a Circulatory Fur∣nace, so that your Crucible may be suspended in the mid∣dle of the Furnace, and the fire may immediately strike upon it fit to the top of your Furnace an Earthen Pyramid, much like a Sugar Loaf, as broad in the bottom as the Furnace, with a small hole in its top to give the Fire air, lute it to the Furnace, and make a moderate fire, so will the Flowers arise in dry fumes and stick to the sides of the Pyramid in form of white Snow, or Meal-dust: at half an hours end take off the Cap∣sula
or Pyramid, and with a Feather gather all the Flowers, which presently stop close up in a Glass bottle, and in the Crucible there will be remain∣ing nothing but black, oily Faeces. § 12. Now the Reason why he applies the Capsula to the brim of the Furnace, and not the brim of the Crucible is, lest the heat stri∣king the out-side thereof should make the Flowers melt and resolve into their first Nature; but to this I an∣swer, That if the Heat stri∣king on the out-side thereof should endanger the melting of the Flowers; much more, would it do it, when it has the liberty of striking within, where the Flowers are. § 13. These Flowers must be white, because it is their volatile Salt, which predomi∣nates over them, and which consequently invests them with that colour, which is natural to all simple Flowers. but particularly to volatile Salts. § 14. Lemery makes it thus. ℞ An Earthen pot or Crucible high and narrow, with a little Border round it, put into it ℥iv. of pure Ben∣jamin grosly poudered, cover the Pot with a Pyramid of Pa∣per, and tie it round about un∣der the Border; set the Pot into hot Ashes, and when the Benjamin is heated, the Flow∣ers will ascend, take off▪ the Pyramid every two hours, and fix another in its place, put∣ting the Flowers up quickly in∣to a Glass, which stop close: continue this Sublimation, till the Flowers begin to appear Oily, and then cease: put what remains into a little Glass Retort, fitted with a Receiver and distil off a thick fragrant Oil, in a Sand heat, till nothing more comes forth, there remaining in the Re∣tort nothing but a spungy Earth. § 15. Benjamin being a Substance full of Volatile parts easily sublimes over the smallest Fire, the Flowers a∣rising in little white needles; but if the Fire be never so little too much, the Oil will ascend with them in some small quantity, which will make them yellow and im∣pure; you must therefore do the Operation in hot A∣shes or Sand, to have the Flowers fair. They have a pleasing Acidity, and are al∣lowed by Lemery to be given but à gr. ij. ad v. other Authors allow them to be given to 20 grains.
§ 16. Flos (Dixit Rolfin∣cius) aequivocum est vocabu∣lum, & variis rebus accomo∣datur:  flos salis in Nitrariis & salinis inve∣nitur officinis, aeris in aerariis, farinae in Molendinis, lactis, qui & Cremor, in pecuariis, — in Chymicis ergasteriis flores nominantur tenuiores & subtiliores partes Corporis, à Crascioreper sublimationem se∣paratae. § 17. Rolfincius, Beguinus, Schroder, Le Mort, Charras, and almost the whole herd of Authors, follow one and the same way of making these Flowers, which is that of Lemery's at § 14. afore∣going: but there is another way by Distillation, where∣in they are made in greater plenty, which according to Charras his Method is this. § 18. ℞ Choice Benjamin lbj. in pouder, put it into a large Glass Retort, and affuse there∣on good S. V. lbiij. stir and in∣corporate them well together; lute to it a Vessel of Rencoun∣ter; and keep the Retort twen∣ty four hours with the neck up∣right upon a gentle Sand heat, shaking the Substances often, to hasten the dissolution of the Rosin in the Spirit; which done, place the Retort in a Sand heat fitting to its beak a middle siz'd Receiver, and with a gentle fire first distil off the S. V. after which the Flowers will ascend; but as soon as they appear, change the Receiver, which let be dry, and lute it slightly, that you may be able to draw out from time to time the Flowers, (which you must immediately stop close up in a Glass) putting another Receiver in its place, which now you may lute up very ex∣actly, and continue the fire, so will a thick Liquor distil from the Retort, which is the first Oil of Benjamin: if you con∣tinue still the fire you will have an Acid Liquor, and after that a yellow, clear and odoriferous Oil, and then lastly an Oil thick and greazy. § 19. Le Febure makes the Flowers by distillation after the same manner, but he ad∣vises, 1. To rectified S. V. lbiv. 2. To digest five whole days. 3. To distil in a great large Retort having a long and broad Neck. 4. To put into the Ingredients pure clean Sand lbj. Scales of Iron falling from the Anvil lbss. 5. The Retort to be so large as not be above ⅓ part full, 6. To lute the Juncture with a wet Blad∣der, that it may the easier be removed in changing the Re∣ceiver. 7. That the fire be
soft at first and increast but little, slowly and by degrees. 8. That the S. V. and a new Receiver being put to for the Flowers, the Juncture is not to be luted, because it must be often taken off to gather the Flowers out of the mouth of the Retort lest they should wholly stop it, and so break it. 9. That the first Flowers are the whitest and purest. 10. That when the buttery Substance be∣gins to come, you may then lute the Juncture again with a wet Bladder, and increase the fire a little, that all the Acid and Mercurial Liquor may follow the Butter: which done. 11. That then the Receiver is to be charged again, to receive the true Oil of Benjamin, which will be of a fragrant O∣dor, and yellow colour, some∣what resembling a Hyacinth. 12. That when the drops be∣gin to appear red, you must immediately substitute a new Receiver, which is to take the thick and dark Balsam, which in this Work is the last action of the Fire. § 20. Thus according to Le Febure there is, 1. a S. V. impregnated with a portion of the volatile, sulphurous and spiritual Salt of the Ben∣jamin. 2. The Volatile Salt or Flowers in the neck of the Retort. 3. A Butter-like Oil, which is the grossest part of the Salt and Sulphur. 4. A small quantity of Mercurial acid Spirit. 5. The Odorife∣rous yellow or Hyacinth Oil, which will be but lit∣tle. 6. A thick blackish Bal∣sam. § 21. This S. V. alone and without mixture, or adding any more of the Gum to it may serve for an Excellent Cosmetick, because it is al∣ready filled and impregnated with the Volatile Salt of the Benjamin, in which the de∣tersive, mundifying and re∣solutive Vertue of the Benja∣min does confist; and is more powerful than the vul∣gar Tincture, because that is mixt with the unctuous Body of the Benjamin which stops the Pores and dries the Skin. And with this Spirit, a famous Tincture may be drawn from the Flowers of Benjamin (if pure and white, and divested of their thick Oily parts) after the man∣ner as is before declared at § 6. § 22. The Flowers or Vola∣tile Salt of Benjamin are Pul∣monick, Antiastmatick, Su∣dorifick, and a great Speci∣fick against the French Pox, if given à gr. vj. ad xx. in a Glass of Infusion of Sassa∣fras
in Wine, or a Decocti∣on of Sarsa, China, and Gua∣jacum bark; for it is a Search∣er which immediately pene∣trates the whole Body. § 23. The Buttery Oil is Vulnerary, and contains a portion of the Flowers, which you may thus seperate. ℞ Of the whitest Butter of Benja∣min ℥j. dissolve it in boiling water, and immediately filter the Liquor through Paper, so will the Flowers be instantly coagulated under the hand: then draw back again the white Water by inclination, and let it settle, and you shall have in the bottom, a Magistery, of equal Vertue, with that made by precipitation of the Tincture: let the Flowers dry, and the Magistery slowly and leisurely between double Pa∣per, and keep it for use. § 24. The Mercurial Spi∣rit, is an Antidote against Malignity and Venom, and proper against the Poyson of the Pox. Dose gut. 20. ad 30. § 25. The Odoriferous Oil, besides its excellency for ma∣king Perfumes, is an admi∣rable Vulnerary, and has all the Vertues of the Salt, and may be given à gut. iij. ad x. in any proper Vehicle. A Perfume may be thus made with it. ℞ Of the Odorife∣rous Oil ℥ss. pure Salt of Tar∣tar ℥j. Butter of Benjamin ℥j. mix and grind them well together in a Mortar, to which add this: ℞ Musk gr. x. Am∣bergrease gr. vj. Civet gr. iij. Salt of Tartar ℈ss. mix or grind them together, and mix it with the former: Of this: Tincture may be made with rectified S. V. for perfuming Cloaths, Gloves, &c. § 26. The thick blackiss Balsam, is also an excellent good Vulnerary, and has a real Excellency for curing Punctures of the Nerves, old Sores, running Ulcers and the like: and if it be applied to Gouts, Sciaticaes, Aches or Pains proceeding from a cold Cause it cures them to admiration. It is also prevalent against Pal∣sies, Contractions of the Nerves, Cramps, Weak∣nesses, and other Distempers of the Nerves; so that in these cases there are not many Remedies more effectual: put into a hollow Tooth it eases the Pain thereof, and dropt into the Ears (mixt with Oil of Ben) it helps Deafness, noise and pain in the Ears, &c.
LX. Flores Bismuthi, Flow∣ers of Bismuth, Marcasite, or Tin-Glass Bate.] ℞ Marcasite cal∣cin'd, Sal-Armoniack. Ana; mix and sublime S. A. It is  celebrated Cosmetick to whiten the Skin, being mix∣ed with a double quantity of Pomatum: it is good a∣gainst Cutaneous defections, as Tettars, Ring-worms, Pu∣stules, &c. Salmon.] § 1. In a word (says Le Mort) the Flowers of Bismuth, Znick, &c. are made exactly in the same manner as Flowers of Antimo∣ny; but you have another way of preparing the Flow∣ers in our London Dispensa∣tory, Lib. 3. Cap. 10. Sect. 11. according to Schroder's Me∣thod. § 2. Bismuth is a sulphu∣rous Marcasite found in the Tin Mines, being nothing but the Excrement of a Metal Or an Earth impregnated with Metalick parts, Or an imperfect Tin, mixt with a good quantity of Arsenick: There are several kinds of it, but the principal one Bis∣muth and Zinck, of each of which, like preparations are made. § 3. Lemery makes them thus. Calcine Bismuth as you do Lead, then mixing it with equal parts of Sal-Armoniack proceed to its Sublimation, as you do in that of Tin following: So will you have Flowers which you may dissolve in Water, and precipitate with Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, or Oil of Tartar per deliquium. § 4. Le Febure makes them after this manner. ℞ Bis∣muth (as it comes from the Mine, and before it has ever felt the fire) in fine Pouder lb.j. New White-wine lb.ij. mix and digest in a double Vessel the space of three days: after which, decant the Wine and affuse lbij. more in the place: and this Work repeat the third and fourth time: The fourth part of the Wine digested af∣fuse on the Marcasite in a Cu∣curbit, which place in Sand, and cover it with an Alem∣bick, draw off the Menstruum with a moderate heat to dry∣ness: cohabate it with another fourth part, and distil off to dryness; and so proceed with the third fourth part, and the last fourth part; distilling to dryness. When all the Moi∣sture is come over, increase the fire, and there will su∣blime into the head silvered Flowers, which you may keep without any farther preparati∣on
in a Glass close stopt; or be∣ing put into a Cellar upon a Glass Plate, they will dissolve into an Oily Liquor. § 5. The distilled Liquor being put into a large Cucur∣bit you may draw off the S. V. from it, to be used in other universal Operations: The remaining part put into a stone kind of Earthen Pan, and evaporate in Sand, till it comes to a Pint: after which set it to Crystallize for three days: if it Crystallizes not, evaporate it again, till it will; then cast in some little Straws or Sticks, and in a cold place the Crystals will shoot and stick to them, which are the Salt of the Marcasite: these Crystals dry slowly, and keep in a Glass also, close stopt for use. § 6. The Flowers are pre∣fertable to the Magistery for outward uses on the Face and Skin: the Liquor made per deliquium, takes away all Spots and Freckles from it, whether used alone, or mixt in a Pomatum. And the Li∣quor and Salt are an admira∣ble Remedy against Fistu∣la's old running Sores, and all kinds of Cancerous and malignant Ulcers. § 7. The Artist who shall be so prudent as to apply them to their proper uses, shall find them to be such ex∣ternal Remedies, as are not inferior to any other Topical Medicament whatsoever. § 8. You may mix them with Injections or Vulnerary waters, with which you may inject, wash, and foment Ul∣cers, especially such as parti∣cipate of a Cancerous and Corroding Nature; for this Mineral being endowed with a Volatile Sulphur, and a Balsamick Salt cannot be sufficiently valued for soft∣ning Tumors, and allaying Pains, and mortifying the Malignity, and mundifying and bringing to a perfect Cure the most desperate, ear∣ing and malign Ulcers. § 9. Charras makes the Flowers exactly after the same manner as Le Febure, save, that he prescribes, but the weight of the Bismuth in Wine, to be affused thereon each time; but then he ad∣vises the Repetition of the digestion five or six times one after another: these Flowers (says he) are very proper to take away ble∣mishes (Defedations I suppose he means) out of the Face and Skin, and to cure Fistu∣la's, and malign and Can∣cerous Ulcers.
LXI. Flores Joviales, Flow∣ers of Tin. Bate. ℞ Jupiter p. j. Nitre p. ij. sublime according to Art, washing the Flowers in warm water. They are of great use in Hysterick Fits, or suffocation of the Womb, being both inward∣ly used and outwardly ap∣plied. Dose à gr. jj. ad vj. being several times repeated. Salmon.] § 1. Lemery pre∣pares them thus. ℞ Tin ℥ij. Sal-Armoniack in pouder ℥iv. mix and put them into a strong Earthen Cucurbit, able to endure the fire, so large as it may not be above ⅓ full; fit to it a blind head, luting the Juncture well, place it on a Seat in a Furnace, with a na∣ked fire, but covered so as that the fire may only pass through the Registers, the top of the Furnace being stopt up with Brick and Lute, &c. The Cu∣curbit must also be set ⅓ part of its height deep in the Fur∣nace, to which give a fire, gentle at first, which increase by degrees, till the bottom is become red-hot, which heat continue till nothing more will sublime, which you will know by the growing cold of the head. § 2. The Flowers sticking to the top of the head are no∣thing but Particles of Tin sublimed by the help of Sal-Armoniack; and at the bot∣tom of the Cucurbit you will find the rest of the Tin revi∣ved. These Flowers being dissolved in Water q. s. and filtered, you may there from precipitate a very white pou∣per by dropping into it drop by drop either Spirit of Sal-Armoniack▪ or Oleum Tartari per deliquium; which being edulcorated by many times washing in warm Water, and dried, is chiefly used as Paint, being a very curious White, and so mixed with Pomatums § 3. In this operation it is only the Acid Salt which is in the Sal-Arm. which divides the Jovial Particles, and makes them ascend; and therefore it is that any Alcalious Spirit or Oil makes them precipitate in water. § 4. But Lemery has ano∣ther kind of Flowers made with Nitre, from which this of our Author seems to be taken, which more explicite∣ly is thus. ℞ Tin lbj. Sal-Nitre lbij. mix them; then take an unglaz'd Earthen Pot, with a hole in the midst of its height, and a stople to it, place it in a Furnace of a just fitness, wherein the Pot may enter only as high as the hole, and with Bricks and Lute or Mortar, take care that the fire may not transpire; On this Pot fit three Aludels, with a head to the top-most, luting well the Junctures; then make
a fire, soft at first, and gra∣dually increase it till the part of the lower Pot lying within the Furnace is red hot; then through the hole cast in your former Mixture, by Spoonfuls, and presently stop up the hole, so will there be a Detonation, which when over; cast in ano∣ther Spoonful, and thus con∣tinue till all your Mixture is spent; which done, you'll find in the Recipient a little Spirit of Nitre, and in the sides of the Aludels very white Flow∣ers of Tin, which being ga∣thered, you are to edulcorate with warm Water, and dry in the shade between two Pa∣pers to be kept in a Vial close stopt for use. § 5. These Flowers (says he) serve for Paints, and make a delicate White when mixt with Pomatums, or in some proper Liquor. And at bot∣tom of the Pot, there is a Calx of Tin mixt with the fixt part of the Nitre; which by boiling in Water may be edulcorated, and then dry∣ed, and is of good use in Deficcative Ointments. § 6. The Flowers are washt in order to edulcorate them, and free them from the Volatile Salt of the Ni∣tre; and they are dryed in the Shade, for that the Sun, or Fire would dull their Lu∣stre and Whiteness, which is caused from the fineness of the Particles, whereby ha∣ving another kind of Super∣ficies, they make a new Re∣flexion of Light. § 7. Charras makes the Flowers by subliming with four times the Weight of Sal-Armoniack, but with Vessels like those of Lemery's at § 4. above, increasing the fire by degrees, till the Aludel be red-hot in all the lower part; then he throws in at the hole ℥ss. of the Pouder, stopping it imme∣diately, by which means the Tin and Sal-Armoniack will rise together in Vapours which will condense in Flowers with∣in side the Pots: this done, cast in another like quantity, stop∣ping the hole in like manner, and thus continue, till all your whole mixture is spent. § 8. Now there is to be noted in this Operation with Sal-Armoniack, that the Tin must first be made into a Pouder by Calcination, o∣therwise you will have few or no Flowers worth looking after. § 9. That if you use only equal parts of Tin and Sal-Armoniack, the Tin would remain almost all of it at the bottom of the Aludel, which is not to be wondred at since it is impossible to make Me∣tals
ascend in Flowers with∣out the assistance of three or four times their weight of volatile Salts mixed with them, or several consequent Cohobations of more Salts. § 10. That through the whole time of the Operati∣on, a good fire ought to be kept, by which means the Sublimation will be the more easily absolved. § 11. That among the many Preparations of Tin, the Sublimation thereof into Flowers is esteemed to be one of the best, for though they cannot be made without any mixture (which some may fault, though without cause) yet by reason of the easie se∣paration of those Salts by Lotion, the Medicament is found to be really praise∣worthy. § 12. The Flowers being gather'd from Pots, put in∣to a great Earthen Pot full of fair warm Water, let it stand quiet for twenty four Hours, then decant the clear Water, and the Flowers, or rather Calx of Tin, will be found at bottom in the form of a Magistery, which be∣ing sufficiently edulcorated by many Lotions, are to be dryed in the Shade as before directed. § 13. But because of the length of time and trouble which is found in the Calci∣nation of Tin by the ways which Authors have set down, they have sought for a more easie and advantage∣ous Method, which is the subliming it with Nitre in the way aforesaid at § 4. which Charras does with a trebble proportion of Nitre, whereas Lemery makes use but of a double. § 14. Now whereas it is evident that Tin contains a Sulphur, for that being mixt with Nitre, and put into a red-hot Pot it will flame, which Nitre of it self will never do alone, without mix∣ture of some sulphurous Mat∣ter: so you must take care, if you would rightly make your Detonations, to pro∣portion the Nitre to the Sul∣phur. § 15. For if there be too little of the Nitre, it will have too few Volatile parts, to unite with the Sulphur, and so not be able to raise it all up; And if there be too much of the Nitre, whereby its Volatile parts exceed those of the Sulphur, it will cause but a Sublimation in part, because the great quantity of the fixed part of this Salt, which remains at the bot∣tom
without firing, will fix some part of the Sulphur, and cause but a very small Deto∣nation. § 16. From whence 'tis concluded, that a double pro∣portion of Nitre will raise more Flowers from Tin than a treble because the Deto∣nation of the double propor∣tion is greater than that of the trebble, since experience hews that a more perfect detonati∣on raises more Flowers than that which is less perfect. § 17. For the fixt Nitre remaining at the bottom sixes some part of the Sulphur of the Tin, and hinders it from subliming as it should do. § 18. And note, That three Aludels and one head are used, because of the great quantities of Vapours and force of the Detonati∣on, which ought to have room enough, for otherwise the Vessls would break, notwithstanding the casting in the Matter by little and little. § 19. Charras advises that if you use the Flowers in∣wardly, you should (after e∣dulcoration with Water, and drying) pour upon them rectified S. V. to over-top them two Inches, and then set it on fire, reiterating the Ope∣ration three or four times: But what great need there is of this Work I see not, and therefore leave every Artist to his own Prudence and In∣genuity. § 20. You may also make these Flowers according to Zwelfer's Method (Mantis. Spagyr. Cap. 6. Pag. 817.) and use his Vessels, as you may see in the Preparation of the Flowers of Antimony afore∣going. LXII. Flores Sulphuris albi, white Flowers of Sul∣phur. Bate. ℞ Lapis Prunellae calcined for two hours in a Crucible covered (which do with live Coals laid above and below and round about it) ℥iij. Sulphur ℥vj. mix and sublime in a Sand heat, S. A. They are equal in Vertues to Lc Sulphuris. Dose ℈j. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. Lemery makes these white Flowers with Sal-Polychrestum instead of Lapis Prunellae after this manner. ℞ Sulphur in pouder lbij. Sal-Polychrestum lbj. mix them to∣gether; put this mixture by half Pounds into a Glass body, which place in a small open fire, and cover it with a Pot, or another Cucurbit of unglazed Earth, so as the neck of the lower may enter into the neck of the higher: change the
upper Cucurbit every half hour, and fit another in its place, adding likewise new In∣gredients: gather your Flowers in the upper Cucurbit, and continue this work, till all your mixture is added, and there remains at bottom only a little infignificant spungy Earth. § 2. The Salt remaining at bottom of the Cucurbit may be calcin'd, and if after∣wards you purifie it by Solu∣tion. exhaling and filtering, it will be as good as before. § 3. The whiteness of these Flowers proceeds from the attenuation of the sulphu∣rous Particles by the adjoyn∣ed Salt. § 4. And exactly as Lemery makes them, you have them in Monsieur Charras both for Method and proportion of Ingredients; but he uses in his Preparation Sal-Nitre. § 5. But the true Author of the Prescript was Angelus Sala, as you may see in his Opera Medico-Chymica, pag. 745. A. who makes it of fixed Nitre, or Sal-Prunellae in the same proportion, whom our Author is pleased to follow. § 6. They are a most fa∣mous Pectoral, drying up all Catarrhs and Rheums after a most admirable manner: and yet withall open Ob∣structions of the Brest and Lungs; are good against Coughs, Colds, Hoarsness, Asthma's, shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, and other Vices of those parts. § 7. Motus Ʋtendi. ℞ Of these white Flowers ℈ij. Be∣zoar mineral gr. xvj. Mithri∣date ʒiss. mix for a Dose to be given at Night going to Bed. ℞ Of these Flowers ʒj. Syrup of Comfrey ℥j. mix for a Dose against a Catarrh. ℞ Of these Flowers ʒj. Syrup of Poppies ℥ss. mix for a Dose against a Cough. ℞ Of these Flowers ℈ij. Catechu ʒss. Venice-treacle ʒj. mix for a Dose against Fluxes of the Bowels. LXIII. Flores Viridis aeris, Flowers of Verdigrise. Bate.] Dissolve Verdigrise in Spirit of Vinegar, then fil∣ter and Crystallize S. A. It is the greatest cleanser of Ul∣cers. Salmon.] § 1. It serves to make the Ʋnguentum Fuscum Wurtzii, the Composition, Preparation, Vertues and Uses, of which you may see in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 3. Cap. 6. Sect. 13. which is a famous thing of the kind.
§ 2. Le Mort takes the Verdigrise, and pouders it fine∣ly and adds so much Sp. of Vinegar as may overtop it some Inches, after which he boils it gently, till the Verdi∣grise is dissolved, then filters the Liquor, and puts into it little Oak Twigs or Sticks, and sets it to Crystallize. § 3. This he had from Swelfer in Append. ad Ani∣madversiones, pag. 43 where (though they are really Cry∣stals of Verdigrise) he calls them Flores Aeris; and out of the same he prepares his so wonderful and much mag∣nified Spirit of Venus. § 4. Lemery has it thus. ℞ Verdigrise q. v. put it into a large Matrass: Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to over-top it four Inches: digest in a Sand heat three days, stirring it now and then, till the Spirit becomes blew; then decant it, and affuse new Spirit of Vine∣gar, which digest as before three days, and decant again; thus affuse, digest and decant fresh Spirit till about ¾ of the Verdigrise is dissolved, and no∣thing but an Earthy matter remains: mix these Impreg∣nations, filter, and in a Glass body evaporate ⅔ of the moi∣sture, then set it four or five days in a cool Cellar to Crystal∣lize: from which decant the Liquor and gather them: e∣vaporate again ⅓ of this Li∣quor, and Crystallize again as before, thus continuing till you have got all your Crystals, which dry and keep for the Cleansing of Wounds, ma∣king the Spirit of Venus, and the Ʋnguentum fuscum Wurt∣zii. § 5. But Schroder makes Flowers after another manner by Sublimation thus. ℞ Calx Vive lbij. Sal-Armoniack lbj. mix and make a Lixivium: coagulate it into a Salt, and mix with it three times as much Bole, and draw a Spirit from it like A. F. which recti∣fie: take of this Spirit p. iv. Verdigrise p. j. set them in the Embers in a luted Vessel, so will the Matter dissolve: de∣cant and pour on more, till on∣ly light black Faeces remain; abstract the Menstruum, and force the remainder in a na∣ked Fire in a Still, so will the Verdigrise be elevated in Flowers, which will dissolve in the Air into a green Li∣quor. § 6. It is good against malign and ill-conditioned Ulcers; and if you free it from the Spirit of Sal-Armo∣niack it will, as Clossaeus says, cure Wounds and Ulcers safely without biting, being mixt with Balsams, Ungu∣ents, &c.
§ 7. Le Febure follows the same Method with Lemery, and calls it the Volatile Vi∣triol of Venus: but (says he) if you desire to be yet more accurate and successful in you Operation, proceed in the Dissolution of these Cry∣stals in new Spirit of Vinegar, till you can discover by try∣ing a Distillation in B. M. or in Ashes, whether the as∣cending Vinegar be insipid; which if it be so, go on in the Dissolution, Filteration, Evaporation and Crystalli∣zation, till the Vinegar comes forth with the same Strength and Acidity, with which it was put in; then have you attained the true point of the desired Perfection, which this noble Flos is to be brought to, dry it gently between two Papers, which digest in Alcohol of S. V. three Inches above it in a double digest∣ing Vessel for twenty four hours, abstract the S. V. and repeat this Operation thrice in B. M. opening it no more till you make the Spirit of Venus thereof; so will it be endowed with those Vertues and Perfections, which do shine, and are required in the Spirit to be drawn from it. LXIV. Flores Zinci, Flow∣ers of Zinck, or Spelter, called also Tin-glass. Bate.] They are made as are the Flowers of Bismuth. And they have the same Ver∣tues. Salmon.] § 1. Zinck is only a differing Marcasite from Bismuth, and therefore its Flowers are made exact∣ly after the same manner, which you may see at large in Sect. LX. § 3. of this Chapter aforegoing. § 2. They are used as a Paint and Cosmetick (being of an exquisite whiteness) and for that reason are put into Pomatums, Washes, &c. § 3. They are proper a∣gainst Cancerous Ulcers, Strumatick and Sirrhous, as also against Lentils, Freckles, Pustles, and other Defedati∣ons of the Skin; and in a word, have all the Vertues of the Flores Bismuthi, so that in like cases, each may be indifferently used.
LXV. Gilla Theophrasti, the Vomiting Vitriol. Bate.] It is nothing else, but white Vitriol depura∣ted. Salmon.] § 1. Paracelsus de Rebus naturalibus, Lib. 1. Cap. 8. (where he treats of the Vertues of Crude Vitriol and Colcothar, calls it Grillus non Gilla. This word Gilla, Schroder interprets to be the Vomiting Salt of Vitriol. Gilla apud Paracelsum est Vi∣triolum sua sponte resolutum in Aquam, Lexic. Chym. But the Word is barbarous, and without any known E∣tymological Derivation from the Learned Languages. § 2. Beguinus make it of white Vitriol dissolved in com∣mon Water, then filters and coagutes, which he repeats a second time, and a third time dissolves in Rose-wa∣ter. § 3. Or, He evaporates to a Cuticula, then set it in a cold place to Crystallize: dis∣solving, filtering and crystal∣lizing to the third time, which last time is also done in Rose-water, then drying the Crystals with a gentle fire. § 4. He gives it with hap∣py Success in Feavers, Ca∣tarrhs, Crudity of the Ven∣tricle, fulness of the Stomach, Worms, Plague, &c. à ℈j. ad ʒss. in a Draught of Wine or Ale, or Conserve of Roses. But his Commentator says this Dose is too large, and that it may scarcely be exhi∣bited to ℈ss. let it go so; but I have oftentimes given it to ʒj. in Broth with good suc∣cess, never in my whole pra∣ctise having any evil Symp∣toms following it; yet I say for the Caution of the said Commentor let it be used with Prudence and Discre∣tion; possibly one may find that by it, which another may not; nor are all Consti∣tutions alike. § 5. Beguinus also extracts it from the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol, after the Sublima∣tion of the Flowers of Sulphur: This he gives ad ℈j. in Fen∣nel-water; and it moves Vo∣mits, Stools, and Sweat: and sometimes also conciliates Sleep. § 6. It may be universally exhitibited in all Vomits, but is carefully to be avoided in an Asthma, and other Diseases of the Brest and Lungs. § 7. Schroder dissolves white Vitriol in Water, filters, eva∣porates and crystallizes, which he repeats the third time with
Rose-water; this, says he, is a gentle Vomit, good against all the aforenamed Diseases, as also the Falling-sickness, and may given à ℈j. ad ʒj. in Wine, Broth, or other Li∣quors: But Centory-water more effectually promotes its emetick Property, as Crollius thinks. § 8. This Preparation, says Hofman, deserves praise, for that it exerts its Emetick property without any suspi∣cion of a Colliquative Ma∣lignity. This following Pre∣paration also he commends. ℞ White Vitriol. q. v. dissolve by boiling in fair Water. Take also prepared Nitre, and dis∣solve in Water: this latter dissolution sprinkle in Gutta∣tim upon the former, so will all the Impurity fall to the bottom; then filter the Clear, evaporate the one half, till it grows (as it were) milky, and in less than the space of an hour, it will Crystallize. § 9. There are four seve∣ral sorts of Gilla's, 1. That which is made of Sky-colour'd Vitriol, dissolved and preci∣pitated with Oil of Tartar, which is the strongest and sharpest Gilla, and scarcely safe unless given by a pru∣dent Hand. 2. That which is made of the Vitriol of I∣ron, according to Crollius, which has a stiptick Sweet∣ness; this is less Violent. 3. That which is made of white Vitriol, which is this of our Author, and is yet more safe. 4. That which is made out of the. Caput Mor∣tuum of Vitriol after the ab∣straction of its Spirit and Oil, which is called Salt of Vitriol; this is the most in∣nocent Gilla, and fit only for Children. § 10. But to these you may add a fifth which is ex∣tracted out of the Caput Mor∣tuum of the Vitriol of Venus, which some will have to be the only true Gilla Theo∣phrasti. § 11. Lemery makes it thus. ℞ White Vitriol q. v. dissolve it in flegm of Vitriol, filter and evaporate ⅔ set it in a cool place for three days to Crystallize which separate: evaporate again ⅓, and Cry∣stallize again as before, thus continuing till you have gotten all the Crystals, which dry in the Sun and keep for use. § 12. By this Operation the Vitriol is freed from its Earthy parts; and white is chosen, because it is milder in its operation. Dose, à gr. xij. ad ʒj. in Broth, or some other proper Liquor.
§ 13. Here note, That sometimes after taking of this Vomit, the Stools will be black like Ink; but this is when the Vitriolick Particles descending into the Guts meets with some saline Mat∣ter which joyns with it, much resembling its Union with Galls. § 14. Le Febure does it the same way, save that he does it with Rain-water, or May-dew, and then digests a Philosophical Month, separa∣ting and digesting till no more Impurity will precipitate, then filtrates, evaporates and crystallizes. § 15. The first Crystalli∣zation (says he) does only take away the superficial and outward foulness: but the second separates the very Central Impurities, and is to be kept for extraordinary Preparations, which are Tinctures and Arcana's: this is Vitriol purified from its Metallick Earth. § 16. That prepared from the Blew (says he) is violent, and therefore to be abstain∣ed from, and this of the white rather to be used, which may be given à gr. x. ad ℈iv. in some warm Broth, Ale, or Decoction, &c. § 17. Charras also saith, if you would perfect the Pre∣paration, and separate it from its Terrestial parts, we are obliged to have recourse to long Digestions, by means whereof its Terrestrieties and Metallick parts will preci∣pitate to the bottom of the Liquor (as Le Febure has said before him) whereby the Crystals will be much fairer, and more transparent. LXVI. Jupiter Diaphoreticus, Diaphoretick or Sweating Tin. Bate.] It is made of the Caput Mortuum of the Flow∣ers of Jupiter, boiled in Wa∣ter, precipitated, and edulco∣rated, S. A. Dose, à gr. iij. ad x. It powerfully moves Sweat, and is profitable in Hysterick Fits, Gout, Plague, or Pestilence, French-Pox, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Beguinus Tyroc. Chym. Lib. 2. Cap. 14. makes it thus. ℞ Filings of English Block-Tin, or Calci∣ned-Tin ℥ij. Mercury subli∣mate ℥iv. mix them together, and distil by Retort in a Sand heat, having adjoyned a Re∣ceiver half full of Water; to take what shall begin to di∣stil; give a moderate Fire of suppression, till all the Liquor is come over, which will preci∣pitate
in the Water: that which sublimes to the neck of the Retort is to be taken away, and digested with that which was distilled, for one night: the water (impregnated with the Spirit of Vitriol) separate, and dry the Calx. Dose, à gr. iv. ad vj. § 2. Charras takes Filings or Calx of Tin, and double quantity of Corrosive subli∣mate, mixes them and distils in a Glass Retort in a small Furnace of close Reverberati∣on and having slightly fitted a Receiver, he distils first with a gentle fire, which he continues till the Butter-like Liquor ceases to distill: then changes the Receiver, and increasing the Fire Gradatim, forces it at length till all the Mercury in the Sublimate is revived and dropped into the Recipient: then pouring fair Water upon the white and thick water in the first Receiver, he precipi∣tates the Substance of the Tin, and leaves it to settle till it is exactly dulcified, which he dries in the Shade and keeps for use. § 3. This is given for the same Distempers which the other Preparations of Tin are given for. Dose, à gr. iij. ad vj. § 4. This Diaphoretick is only a more perfect Calx of Tin made by the Corrosion of the Corrosive Sublimate, and may be reduced into Tin again. § 5. Schroder makes it with Filings or Calx of Tin p. j. mixed with Precipitate p. iv. and distils by Retort in Sand or a naked Fire into a Receiver half full of Water, in which a Pouder precipitates, which he washes, drys and keeps for use. § 6. Where note, That if after the Butter of Tin is made, you make a Fire of Suppression by degrees, you will have. Silver Flowers to sublime in the neck of the Retort. Dose, of the Dia∣phoretick and of the Flowers, gr. iv. ad vj. § 7. Le Febure does it af∣ter the same manner with Charras, but uses a tripple quantity of Corrosive Subli∣mate distilling in a Retort with a large neck in Sand; from whence he has, 1. A Spirit continually smoaking. 2. A Butter or Corrosive Oil. 3. A revived or running Mercury; this done, increasing the Fire downwards, and giving a Fire of Suppression, the Substance of Jupiter, ascends in the neck of the Retort in form of a grey Gum very hard: which being immediately re∣duced to pouder, and put on a
Sheet of white Lattin edged about, will melt into a yellow Oil, which may run into a glass Receiver, and being precipitated is an excellent Diaphoretick. LXVII. Magnes Praeparatus, Loadstone prepared. Bate.] It is made of the Pouder of the Magnet heat Red-fire-hot in a Crucible: and affusing thereon an equal quantity of the Oil of Mars, it is with a gentle fire evapora∣ted to dryness, S. A. mixt with Wax, and so made into an Emplaister, being applied, it admirably eases pains of the Gout. Salmon.] § 1. The Load∣stone is found in divers parts of England, Scotland, Ger∣many, Norway, Sweethland, Italy, and the Iron-Mines; and that is to be chosen which is most of an Iron co∣lour, and draws Iron strong∣ly to it. § 2. In this Preparation Schroder advises the Cemen∣tation to be made with Lime at a gentle Fire, and then after to quench it in the Oil of Mars, or Solution of Iron, in order to the strengthning of it. § 3. The Emplaister is described by Boetius, and is commended highly to ease the pains of the Gout, as Hofman affirms. § 4. This I know by ex∣perience, that it stops Fluxes of Blood, but evacuates gross and melancholy Humours if rightly given in a proper Vehicle. ℞ Elect. Leni∣tivum ℥j. Magnet prepared ℈j. mix for a Dose to evacuate melancholy Humours. Or thus: ℞ Syrup of Sena ℥j. Magnet Praep. ℈j. mix for a Dose. LXVIII. Mars Diaphoreti∣cus, Sweating Mars. Bate.] Sublime Sal-Ar∣moniack with an equal quan∣tity of Mars, S. A. dissolve the Sublimate in a small quan∣tity of Fountain-water, which filter, and precipitate by affu∣sing thereon Oil of Tartar per Deliq. or Spirit of Sal-Armo∣niack then dry the Precipitate S. A. It moves Sweat, and is Diuretick, of great use in Hypochond, Melancholy, Quartans, &c. Dose, ℈ss. ad ℈j.
Salmon.] § 1. Schroder ad∣vises to take the Filings of Mars and sublime them with the Sal-Armoniack, so will a part of the Mars or Iron be elevated therewith: if this (says he) be washt from the Sal-Armoniack it will be like Gun-pouder or Thun∣dering-gold. § 2. But if you sublime from Filings, the Filings will be coroded by the Salt, and but little of them ascend; it will be better therefore to sublime with Gads of Iron, so will all the Flowers as∣cend of a yellowish red co∣lour: but this Medicament is better prepared from Cro∣cus Martis than from either of them. § 3. Lemery makes this Dia∣phoretick after this manner. ℞ Rust of Iron in fine Pou∣der, Sal-Armoniack Ana. mix them well and put them into an Earthen Cucurbit, which set in a little Furnace, stop∣ing up the bottom with Bricks and Mortar; that the Fire may only pass through certain Registers: fit to the Cucurbit a Vessel of Rencounter or Blind-head, making at first only a small fire; augment it gradatim till the Cucurbit is red-hot, which degree of heat continue till no more Vapors a∣rise. The Vessels being cold gather the Flowers, put them into water sufficient only to dissolve them, which filter through brown Paper; and drop thereon Guttatim Oleum Tartari per Deliq. or Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, so will a pouder precipitate to the bot∣tom of the Vessel, decant the Liquor, and dry the Precipi∣tate. § 4. It is indeed an excel∣lent Medicament against all manner of Diseases proceed∣ing from Corruption of Hu∣mours and Defilements of the Blood; it is Sudorifick and Diuretick, carrying off Di∣seases sometimes as well by Urine as Sweat, according as Nature is most disposed to the Action. It is famous against Hypochondriack Me∣lancholy, Obstructions of the Spleen and Mesentery, and Quartan Agues. Dose, à gr. x. ad xxiv. in Pills, Bolus, or some proper Syrup, as Syrup of Mars. § 5. Its Sudorifick pro∣perty seems to come from the Particles of the Sal-Ar∣moniak, yet joyned to the precipitated Mars (by rea∣son of the Acid of the Salt, which makes a strict Conjun∣ction with them) for when these saline Particles are actuated by the internal heat of the Body, and thereby
brought into a Ferment, they become of a Volatile Nature, and rather fly insensibly into all the Pores of the Body, than take their course (as fixt Salts do) by way of Urine; whence Sweating or insen∣sible Transpiration follows. § 6. But if they meet not with a fit Matter sufficient to excite this Fermentation, and cause their Volatibility, they then open the Lymphatick Vessels, and take their ordi∣nary course by the Reins and Ureters, evacuating the Di∣sease that way, by which mostly a greater benefit is found than by Sweat, because the way by Urine is more natural and easie, and debi∣litates less. LXIX. Mars Fulminans, Thundering Mars. Bate.] ℞ Nitre ʒivss. Salt of Tartar ʒjss. Sulphur ʒij. mix and make a Pouder, S. A. It is diuretick, and provokes the Terms. Salmon.] § 1. What rea∣son there is for the Name of this Medicament (there be∣ing nothing of Mars in it) I know not: Its usual Ap∣pellations are Lapis Fulmi∣nans, and Sal Fulminans, by which Names you may meet with it in Authors. § 2. Lemery makes it of Nitre ʒiij. Salt of Tartar, ʒij. Sulphur ʒj. mix together. This Pouder being heated in an Iron-Ladle or Fire-shovel to the weight of ʒj. gives as thun∣dering noise as a Canon it self. Now the fixt Salt of Tartar causes the thunder∣ing noise in this Pouder, which Gold causes in the Aurum Fulminans, viz. it so chains and locks up the Spi∣rits of the Nitre and Sulphur, that they cannot break forth out of their Prison, not be separated without an extra∣ordinary violence. § 3. But if you would have it Martial, and to an∣swer the Name given to it, you ought to add to it a proportional part of the Mars Fulminans at Sect. LXVII. § 1. just aforegoing. after this manner. ℞ Fu∣minating Mars ʒiv. Nitre ʒiij. Salt of Tartar ʒij. Sulphur ʒj. mix and make a Pouder, which keep in a Glass close stopt from the Air. § 4. Marggrave calls it Nitre Fulminans, and makes it in these proportions. ℞ Ni∣tre p. 18. Salt of Tartar, p. 7. Sulphur p. 6. make each in∣to a fine Pouder and mix them.
§ 5. Le Mort, who calls it Pulvis Tonitruans, makes it in these proportions. ℞ Nitre ʒ 18. Sal-Tartari ʒ 12. Sulphur ʒ 6. mix them S. A. It is by many Tryals that you must find out the true Proportion of the Ingre∣dients; for those quantities which give in firing, the greatest blow or noise, are those which are truly adapt∣ed to the Composition. § 6. It is a singular Diu∣retick, opens Obstructions of the Viscera, but chiefly of the Reins and Womb, and has a singular Property in taking away the heat and sharpness of Urine. Dose, à ℈j. ad ʒj. in any proper Ve∣hicle. § 7. It is indeed a curious Experiment, for that it de∣monstrates the thundering Property to reside in the Nitre, which consists of an Acid and Alcali, shut up by the Sulphur. LXX. Mercurij Purgatio, The Cleansing or Purifica∣tion of Mercury. Bate.] It is done divers ways; either by straining it through Leather; Or washing it with Vinegar and Salt mixt together; Or with Aqua Cal∣cis Vivae, by often stirring it; Or by strongly shaking of it with S. V. in a Glass close stopt; Or by distilling it in Sand by Retort with a strong fire, and that either by it self; Or with the addition of Salt of Tartar, Quick-lime, &c. Or by Amal∣gamating it with Sol, or Luna, and then separating it from the same again by Retort. Salmon.] § 1. Some only wash it with the best Vine∣gar and Salt, and when it is dry, then they strain it thrô Leather; but by this way it may carry Lead or Bismuth, or some other Mineral where∣with possibly it may be mixt, and therefore this mode of purifying is not suffici∣cient. § 2. Others put the Mer∣cury into a Glass or Iron Re∣tort, and distil it into a Re∣ceiver half full of Water, by which means if it has been increased by Lead, Tin, Zinck, or Bismuth, those Metals will remain in the bottom of the Retort, whilst the Mercury runs simple into the Recei∣ver; but by this way if the Mercury has been mixt with any Metal or Mineral which has a Volatile Arsenical Poy∣son, it imbibes it, and car∣ries it along with it.
§ 3. Some put it into a strong Lye made with Quick∣lime or Pot-ashes, or both, which they put into a double Glass bottle well stopt, and then shake them together, to separate the Impurities, then decanting the Liquor, they dry the and Quick-silver, and strain it through Shammoy Leather; but if it be mixt with any Foreign matter, it will pass the Leather with it as aforesaid. § 4. But a much better way is to mix it with Salt of Tartar Quick-lime e∣qually mixt and poudered; then to put it into an Iron Retort, and distil into a Re∣ceiver fill'd half full of Wa∣ter, so will the Impurities re∣main behind, and the fixed Alcali will fix the Volatile Poyson of the mixt, by which means the Quick-silver will be very pure. § 5. And not inferior to this is the Amalgama of Gold and Silver, from which it may again be purely sepa∣rated by diilling from a Glass Retort in Sand with a gradual Fire, leaving all its Foeces, Filth, Impurities and Heterogenities behind it. § 6 But the best way of purifying Mercury, and the fittest for all Chymical Ope∣rations, is to revive Cinnabar into fluid Mercury, by which means you will be sure to have pure Mercury as it comes from the first hand; because all the Cinnabar is made near the Mines of Mercury. § 7. Moreover, the mix∣ing of Quick-silver with Sulphur by Sublimation is the way by which Cinnabar is made, and it does in some sort graduate and perfect the Mercury; and then the revi∣ving of Mercury into fluid Quick-silver from the Cinna∣bar by Filings of Iron, deli∣ver it from all impurity: how therefore Quick-silver revived from Cinnabar (be∣ing most sought for) is to be done we now come to shew. § 8. But in the first place we shall shew you the ma∣king of the Artificial Cinna∣bar of Quick-silver and com∣mon Sulphur, and then from thence the reviving of it a∣gain. ℞ Sulphur in pouder lb ss. melt it in a large Ear∣then Pan (glazed within sa Charras) and put Quick-sil∣ver lbjss. into a piece of Sham∣moy Leather which tie up hard, through which squeeze it upon the melted Sulphur: stir the Matter in fusion with a wood∣en Sputula, and continue
ressing forth and stirring, ill all the Mercury is squeez'd hrough the Leather, and so nited with the Sulphur, that he Quick-silver appearing no ore, they both seem reduced to a black Mass: being cold, educe it into a Pouder, and ublime it in an Aludel or Earthen Subliming pot, with  close Fire, (luting well the unctures:) let the Fire be ft at first, and gradually in∣rease it, which continue for some hours; so will the Mer∣ury being incorporated with hat portion of Sulphur which  fit for it, sublime into a very hard Mass of a very red olour, leaving some Feces at ottom, especially if any Me∣al or other Matter had been mixt with it before. § 9. The reviving the Quick-silver from the Cinna∣bar, which is its ultimate purification. ℞ Of this Ar∣ificial Cinnabar in fine pou∣der lbj. Filings of Iron lbj. mix them well together, and put them into a Retort of Earth or Glass well luted, and set it in a Furnace, and put Coals round about it till it be covered  put lighted Coals a∣bove, so that the Fire may kindle by degrees; then having filled the whole largeness of the Furnace with Coals, co∣ver the Retort and fit a small Receiver to its neck half full of water; leave the Coals to kindle of themselves, and the Fire to act at his own plea∣sure. When the Retort begins to be red, the Mercury will come into the Receiver drop by drop; for the Acids of the Sulphur sticking to the Mars, (with the Pores whereof the Figure of its parts does bet∣ter agree, than with those of the Mercury) and quiting the other, the Fire forces it out of the Retort, and makes it (falling into the water) to re∣sume its former body: by which means all extrinsecal Substances mixed with the Cinnabar, will be stopt in the Retort with the Filings of I∣ron (which Filings will be much rarified. black and in∣creased in weight, because of the addition of the Sulphur, &c.) and the Quick-silver will be at bottom, very pure and fit for any kind of operation. § 10. But Lemery does it otherwise with Quick-lime, after this manner. ℞ Pou∣der of Artificial Cinnabar lbj. Quick-lime in pouder lbiij. mix, and put them into an Earthen or Glass Retort, so large as ⅓ may be empty: put it into a Furnace of Reverbe∣ration, with a Recipient al∣most fill'd with Water: give fire gradatim, increasing it
at length to the height, so will the Mercury run gutta∣tim into the Recipient: con∣tinue the fire till no more will come over, which will be fi∣nished in about seven hours time: the Quick-silver at bot∣tom (which will be very pure) dry with Linnen and keep for use. § 11. This Mercury thus revived is very pure; for if any Metal was mixed with it in the Mine; or if after∣wards the Cinnabar should be adulterated, the said Me∣tals, or Heterogene Substan∣ces would either remain at bottom, and not rise with the Mercury, or be separated from it in the Receiver; and if your Cinnabar was good▪ you would have out of each Pound of the Artifical ℥ 12½ of flowing Quick-silver. § 12. A third part of the Retort is left empty, because the rarified Quick-silver ex∣pands it self with such a ve∣hemency, that it would o∣therwise be in danger of breaking the Retort. § 13. Now as Cinnabar is nothing but a mixture of A∣cid Spirits and Mercury toge∣ther with some terren Par∣ticles of the Sulphur: so if you mix it with an Alcalious body, and force it upwards by fire, the Acid leaves the Mercury, and finding the Quick-lime very porous, cleaves thereto; so that the Quick-silver being disingaged from what held it in Chains be∣fore, and being forced by the fire, comes forth of the Re∣tort in form of Spirit, which by the coolness of the water in the Receiver condenses and becomes again Quick-silver. § 14. Having mixt your Cinnabar and Quick-lime to∣gether, you ought to let it rest one or two days before you begin your Distillation, that the Lime may slake as it where a whil for other∣wise the Retort would burst. § 15. But if you use such Quick-lime, as has been already slakt in the Air, you may then begin to distil im∣mediately upon the mixtion: but the former which is un∣slakt is said to be better in the Revivification, because the Alcali will the more strongly absorb the Sulphu∣rous Acid. § 16. Upon the Distilla∣tion, a great Sulphurous fume is seen to come out of the Retort, for which rea∣son the Juncture is not to be luted, but the said Sulphu∣rous fume is to be permitted to fly away, for fear, that being kept in, it should joyn
with some part of the Mer∣cury and so unite, whereby you might be put to the trouble of a second Revivi∣fication. LXXI. Mercurius Sublima∣tus ruber & Flavus, Mer∣cury Sublimate red and yellow. Bate.] ℞ Mercury, Salt, Vitriol, calcined, A. ℥iv. mix them exactly and sublime: to the Sublimate add Nitre and Alum a little calcin'd, A. ℥iij. mix and make them into a Paste with Vinegar, and sublime a∣gain: separate the Red from the Yellow, wash each by it self with water, dry, and de∣flagrate from each S. V. S. A. It purges chiefly down∣wards, and is a great Se∣cret against the Dropsie, French Pox, Gout, Scabs, Ulcers, Cancers, &c. Dose, gr. 5, 6, 7. &c. Salmon.] § 1. That is, take Corrosive Sublimate, and mix it with Nitre and Alum, and sublime again▪ and you shall have red and yellow Sublimate: But how the Corrosive Sublimate is to be made we shall here shew you out of Otte Tachenius his Hippocrat. Chymic. Cap. 24. and 25. § 2. ℞ Red Precipitate made either perse, or other∣wise of what Condition soe∣ver, mix it with common Salt: urge this Compositum with a moderate fire, and it will he elevated into a Sublimate Cor∣rosive. § 2. ℞ Of this Corrosive Sublimate lb 20. Quick-silver lb 280. common Salt, Salt-peter, A. lb 200. of the Caput Mortuum reserved lb 50. Vi∣triol rubified lb 400. reduce all these several to ponder (the Quick-silver excepted) under a Mill Stone, grinding them: then mix the Mercury and Sublimate together, with a part of the common Salt and Salt-peter; and although the Salts be dry, yet by this mix∣ture they become moist, so the Mercury in being mixt with the said Pouders dies; after add the other part of the Salts, proceeding to mix them with t an Iron Instrument, till the Mercury appears no where quick. This mixture is very moist, to which if you have a mind to add the rubified Vi∣triol (which is very dry) it con∣sumes the Humidity in a mo∣ment, and they become alto∣gether as hard as a Stone; wherefore instead of the afore∣said Vitriol, you must add the Caput Mortuum either reser∣ved from the first Sublimation,
from A. F. 'tis all one, so the, mixture becomes moderately dry, which then you must pass through a Sieve: then you may conveniently mix the sif∣ted Pouder with the rubified Vitriol, so will the mixture be made. With this fill six∣teen great Glass Vessels, a fourth part of each of them to be empty; place them on Stillatories, and sublime in an Ash heat (not with a naked fire) in four little Fornaces, each of which is to hold four Vessels: set Limbecks to the Vessels at least loosely, with their Receivers; and with a slow Fire in twenty four hours, the Salts will dissolve the Mer∣cury (in which operation it smells like A. F. and may hazard the strangling of such as suck, it in; after twenty fours the Smell ceases) and then the Mercury begins to sublime: (the A F. which is fortified by the other Ingredients, and serves for Precipitation of Mercury save:) and continue the heat▪ till the Mercury is wholly separated from the Caput Mor∣tuum and sublimed to the top, in form of a Cake, which com∣monly happens about the fifth day, if ou have operated right∣ly, When all is cooled, the Glass Vessels (by reasn of the great weight of the Sublimate) wll break of their own accord: the pieces gather up by them∣selves, for they have some Sub∣limate upon them, which scrape off, and therewith you may at another time mortifie running Mercury, in order to make more Corrosive Subli∣mate, according to this present Process. § 4. Now here is to be noted, That the Cakes must be curiously taken off with both Hands (avoiding the Ashes) and laid aside, which they call Loaves; of which every one will weigh lb 25. or thereabouts, according to the capacity of the Vessel, which held more or less of the Mixture. So that of lb 280. of Quick-silver, and lb 20. of Sublimate, you will have lb 380. of fresh Subli∣mate: and this is the true way of making Corrosive Sublimate, which every Ar∣tist knows not. § 5. Now the Sublimate thus increased in weight lb 80. is not from the Acidity of the rubified Vitriol, as many Chymists think; but only from the Common Salt, which is thus proved: Sub∣lime the same Mercury with the same proportion of Nitre and rubified Vitriol, without common Salt; and the Mer∣cury will ascend Red, acqui∣ring nothing of weight,
or taking from the Corro∣sive. § 6. So also if the same Mercury be precipitated with A. F. made of Sure and Vi∣triol, it will be of a shining Red, but require no farther weight. The reason is, that the Sulphur of the Nitre be∣ing joyned with the Sulphur of the Vitriol, do act joint∣ly upon the external Sulphur of the Mercury, whereby it can encrease nothing at all, nor assume a Corrosive Ver∣tue. § 7. From what has been said it appears, that rubified Vitriol is not added to in∣crease the weight of the Mer∣cury, as most Chymists think; for then it should not be cal∣cined to the highest red, but to whiteness only, so that its Spirit is net needful to be added to the weight of the Mercury; but the said ru∣bified Vitriol is added that the Sulphurous Nitre, might apprehend the Sulphur of the immature Metal lying hid in the rubified Vitriol, and so by their joint forces dissolve the Mercury. § 8. But the quantity is Quadruple to that of the Salts, because they are of easie fusion in the Fire, from which by the rubified Vitriol, they are preserved. § 9 Authors to perfect the Sublimate, say that it must be twice or thrice repeated with new Pouders of Salt and Vitriol: But why, and to what purpose is this re∣peated Sublimation with new Pouders? Mercury being once saturated with the Acid Spirits, what needs any reiteration of the Labour? for it absorbs and imbibes as much as it can bear, and as much as it wants from its first Sublimation; and though it be resublimed afterwards an hundred times either by it self, or with new Pouders, it will still remain the same sublimated Mercury:so that that Repetition seems only to be Labour in vain. § 10. And because the same sublimed Mercury puts not off, nor deposes the Acid Spirits it has once absorbed, so as to need a resuming the same again from new Ingre∣dients, therefore it needs no Resublimation, nor if it should be resublimed an hundred times with fresh Salt and Vitriol would it become e∣ver the purer or more effica∣ous. § 11. Having thus shewn you the true way of Making the Corrosive Sublimate, the remaining part of the Pro∣cess, for making the Subli∣mate
red and yellow, is so plain that it needs no Expli∣cation: It is thus. ℞ Corro∣sive Sublimate ℥v. Nitre, Alum a little calcind, A ℥iij. mix and make a Paste with Vine∣gar, and sublime, S. A. so will you have red and yellow Flow∣ers which separate, &c. ac∣cording to the Prescript. § 12. Schroder teaches two ways of making this Subli∣mate which you may see at large in Our Pharmacopoeia, Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. S. 52, § 53. The latter of which he calls Metallick Laudanum; and may be given either of them à gr. iv. ad viij. They purge all vitious Humours chiefly, downwards, and ad∣mirably ease pains. LXXII. Mercurius praecipi∣tatus albus, white Precipi∣tate. Bate.] Dissolve Mercury: or Quick-silver in A. F. pre∣cipitate with Salt-water, wash or sweeten and dry. Albus Sub∣dulcis; sweet white Precipi∣tate. Dissolve Quick-silver in Spirit of Nitre, precipitate with S. V. dry, and often burn off from it S. V. S A. The Dose is the same with Mer∣curius Dulcis: It is used in the French-Pox, Dropsie, Gout, Yellow Jaundice, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Precipita∣tion is an Operation which belongs to all Magisteries; but that Medicament which is signified by the simple name of Precipitate is chiefly Mercury or Quick-silver dissol∣ved in A. F. and separated again according to the fol∣lowing Method. § 2 ℞ Quick-silver revi∣ved from Cinnabar ℥viij. A. F. ℥xiij. mix and dissolve, then precipitate with Oil of Tartar per Deliq. or with Salt-brine, i. e. water in which common Salt is dissolved; de∣cant the clear Liquor, and e∣dulcerate the Precipitate with many affusions of fair water, till it is freed from all its Acri∣mony. Dose, à gr. vj. ad x. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 6. Cap. 1. It is given in Pills or Bolus: outwardly it is used against Freckles, Spots, and Defedations of the Face, and is called therefore Mercurius Cosmeticus. § 3. This is the same way with that declared in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. Sect. 21. but the Proportions differ, for the Colledge pre∣scribes to Quick-silver, P. ij. A. F. p. j. which is indeed too little of the A.F. by p. ij. for if the Quick-silver be ℥ij. the A. F. ought to be ℥iij. for that with a less quantity a compleat and perfect Dis∣solution
will not so well be made. § 4. Zwelfer limits no Proportions but requires a sufficient quantity of the A.F. to be taken. Lemery uses Spirit of Nitre instead of A. F. and to Quick-silver ℥viij. takes of Spirit of Nitre ℥x. and precipitates with Salt-wa∣ter filterated, made of water lbiv. common Salt ℥x. adding unto it Volatile Spirit of Sal-Armoniack ℥ss. and then washes the Precipitate seven times with Fountain-water, drying it in the shade. § 5. If you would have the Precipitate very white, the Q. S. ought to be dissol∣ved in a Vessel whose mouth is very large, that so the red Vapours of the Sp. N. may vanish the more easily: and if the Dissolution is made without Fire, it will yet be the whiter. § 6. Nor need you religi∣ously retain the exact quan∣tity of Spirit of Nitre here limited, you may either use a little more or less, according to the strength of the Spirit, or its being deflegmated; if perfectly deflegmated, an equal quantity may do. § 7. In the Precipitation, you must not make the Wa∣ter too Salt, because the quan∣tity of Salt would keep the Precipitate from falling. But it may seem strange that an Acid Salt (such as Sea-Salt) should be able to precipitate that which the Acidity of Spirit of Nitre had dissolved. § 8. To which is answer∣ed, that the Acids do all perform the same things, in pricking and piercing; yet they all differ in the Figure and Sharpness of their Points, as their Fermentati∣on is more or less, so their Points are more subtil, sharp and light; or more thick and dull, which not only the Taste but the Sight also e∣vinces: if you Crystallize various Acids, you will have as many kinds of Crystals, each different in figure, as there were different Dissolutions. § 9. And as the Crystals of Vinegar will be sharper than those of Spirit of Nitre; so those of Spirit of Nitre will be sharper than those of Spirit of Vitriol; and those made by Spirit of Vitriol sharper than those made by Spirit of Alum; and those made by Spirit of Alum sharp∣er than those made by Spirit of Salt; each kind of Cry∣stal retaining the figure of its Constituent parts. § 10. This being known, it will not be difficult to ex∣plicate the Phaenomenon; for
that Salt or its Spirit contain∣ing Points more gross than those of Spirit of Nitre, and falling on this dissolution, they move, shake, and easily break the Points of the Nitre, impregnated with the Quick-silver, making them let go their hold, and so the Mercury falls down by its own weight. § 11. But to facilitate this Precipitation he adds a little Volatile Spirit of Sal-Armo∣niack. which contains a great Alcali, which by reason of its subtilty and agility pe∣netrates every recess of the Liquor, where possibly the Sea-Salt (by reason of the obtuseness of its points) can∣not go. § 12. This is evident by this demonstration. First pre∣cipitate with Salt-water, the Liquor being clear decant it: into this decanted Liquor drop Volatile Spirit of Sal-Armo∣niack, and you will find a con∣siderable quantity of Precipi∣tate more to fall, which plain∣ly shews, that the Salt-water had not precipitated all: And if instead of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniack you use Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, you will have more Precipitate, but of an Orange tawny colour. § 13. The Precipitation may be made as well with the Spirit of Salt, as with the Salt in Substance: but this Precipitation is not so easily made in Mercury, as in Zinck or Bismuth, because the Pores of the former are smal∣ler than those of the latter, and therefore retain more strongly the Acids with which they are joyned: Al∣so Mercury (being of a Vola∣tile Nature) does more easi∣ly swim in the dissolvent than Zinck, &c. the latter being bodies more sixt. § 14. The Dose of white Precipitate is less than that f Mercurius dulcis, because it contains a greater quantity of Acid Spirits; but if you ublime it alone in a Ma∣trass in a gradual Sand heat (as Charras speaks) you will have a Sublimate as sweet as the other; for that the Fire having acted upon it, deroys most of its Acid points, so that it may then be given in full as large a Dose as the common Mercurius dulcis, in Vencral and other inveterate Diseases! it is given in a Bolus a gr. 10. ad 20. or 30. or mixt with some Conserve, or other purgative Reme∣dy. § 15. Charras makes his white Precipitate with Q. S. ℥viij. A. F. (made of Nitre and Alum without Vitriol) ℥xij. which he mixes and dis∣solves: and then precipitates with water ℥24. or ℥32. in
which Bay-Salt ℥viij. has been dissolved and fitred; putting upon the dissolved Mercury first fair water lbij. and then the Salt-water; by which means the Mercury coagulates into a very white Substance, precipitating to the bottom: the Precipitate being settled, decant the clear Liquor; and edulcorate the Precipitate by many washings with filtered wa∣ter, which dry and keep for use. § 16. From this clear de∣canted Liquor you may with Volatile Spirit of Sal-Armo∣niack produce more Preci∣pitate as aforesaid, which remains insensibly in the Par∣ticles of the Liquor; or you may have an Orange tawny, by doing it with a fixt Alcali, as Oil of Tartar per Deliquium. § 17. The reason of this Precipitation has in part been explicated at § 8.9.10. and 11. aforegoing; but to such as that may prove no satis∣faction to, we say that pos∣sibly the recipitation may be caused by other means; as, either from the Sympathy of Acids one with another by which means another dif∣fering Acid joyning with the former, the former to lay fast hold of the latter, lets go its hold of the Mercury, and so lets it fall down to the bottom. § 18. Or else from the Antipathy of their Natures (for there are Acids which will be destroyed one by a∣nother, as well as by Alcali's) the latter Acid opposing the former, and weaking of it so much, as that it cannot be able to suspend the Particles of the Matter dissolved, whereby mixing together they make a kind of new body. § 19. But 'tis certain that the quantity of water, not only weakens the A. F. or Spirit of Nitre, but also gives the Salts the liberty of Mo∣tion and Action, making them able to penetrate other Bodies: for though the Cry∣stals of each Salt are all of a different bigness and shape, yet they are either thicker or slenderer, blunter or sharp∣er according to the quantity of Water in which they are dissolved and crystalliz'd; for being dissolved in a lar∣ger quantity of Water the Crystals are much slenderer, finer, and sharper, than if dissolved in a small quantity; for the quantity of Water making a more numerous division of their Particles, it diminishes their quantity, and sharpens their Points, where∣by it renders them more sit to enter one in ano∣ther,
and to unite mutually together. § 20. This Precipitate (not being sublimed as at § 14. above) ought to be given on∣ly to Persons of a strong Con∣stitution, à gr. iij. ad viij. or x. because that notwith∣standing all the Lotions; some Particles of the Salts will lie still hidden in its Pores, which cause it to purge upwards and down∣wards. § 21. But it is more fre∣quently used externally for the Cure of Scurff, Tettars, Ringworms, Herpes, Pustuls, Redness, and other Defeda∣tions of the Skin, being mixt with Pomatums or Oint∣ments to beautifie the Face: it certainly whitens the Face and Skin; but it ought to be used with caution, be∣cause Mercury is an Enemy to the Native heat. Nerves, Bones, &c. and therefore may at long run prove of ill consequence. § 22. Now because of the ill Qualities which the A. F. or Spirit of Nitre gives to the Mercury, you may pre∣pare a white Precipitate thus. ℞ Sal-Armoniack in fine pouder ℥viij. put it into a Glass Cucurbit, and affuse thereon River-water ℥32. dis∣solve in a Sand heat, filter and dissolve therein, Corrosive Sublimate in fine pouder ℥viij. without heat: this done, drop in Guttatim Ol. Tartari per Deliquium ℥iv. this uniting it self with the Acid part of the Salts which ascended in Sublimation will force the Mercury out of its place, and cause it to precipitate into a white Pouder: but at the same time you must affuse on the Precipitation a good quan∣tity of fair Water filtred, both to weaken the dissolvents and moisten the Salts: then the Precipitate being settled, de∣cant from it the clear Liquor, wash and edulcorate it, and dry it between two Papers in the Shade, and keep it for use. § 23. This Precipitate purges also like the former, both upwards and down∣wards: but whereas the for∣mer is to be given ad gr. viij. or x. at most; this may be given ad gr. xij. or xiv. be∣cause that the ill qualities of the Acid Salts of the Subli∣mate being enervated by the action of the Sal-Armoniack and Tartar, they cannot ex∣ert their force like those in A. F. or Spirit of Nitre in the former.
§ 24. Now here it is ob∣servable, that Oleum Salis Tar∣tari makes an Orange tawny Precipitate by A. F. but be∣ing cohobated upon the Dis∣solution of Sublimate in Li∣quor of Sal-Armoniack it makes a perfectly white Pre∣cipitate: This Precipitate ought to be given chiefly in Catharticks, as in Confectio Hamech, &c. for the Cure of Veneral Diseases, Kings-Evil, Scurff, Leprosie, and all other Deformities of the Skin, Gouts, Dropsies, and the like Distempers; but outwardly in Pomatums as before directed. § 25. Lastly, If you take of the Solution of Quick-silver q. v. and put it into a Glass Matrass, affusing thereon 24. times its weight of fair wa∣ter, all the Liquor will be∣come Milky; let it settle till it becomes clear, then filter it and keep it for use: This Water may be given ab ℥ss. ad ℥j. in a Glass of Decoction of Sarsa, Liquorice, or Broth: it Vomits gently, and pro∣vokes a Salivation: and gi∣ven in the Itch ad ℥ss. it is said to cure it, Universals be∣ing premised as due Purging, Vomiting, &c. LXXIII. Mercurius Precipi∣tatus correctus; Mercury precipitate corrected. Bate.] ℞ Mercury purged by Salt and Vinegar ℥ij. double A. F. ℥viij. abstract the A. F. in Sand, with Cohobation: the Precipitate being in pou∣der, affuse thereon Oil of Vi∣triol ℥ij. digest and abstract the Oil: upon the Mercury affuse S. V. digest three days and decant; affusing other S. V. which work, with fresh S. V. repeat the third time, then dry it. Dose à gr. iij. ad x. It purges by Stool; and is a most famous Remedy in the Cure of the French-Pox. Salmon.] § 1. Schroder shews many ways of cor∣recting Precipitate, as, First, By boiling it in Spirit of Vi∣negar till it is dissolved; then precipitating with S. V. or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, washing, drying and keep∣ing it for use. § 2. Or thus, ℞ Preci∣pitate white, red, yellow, e∣dulcorate often with Rose-wa∣ter; then digest in a good quantity of Camphorated S. V. for twelve or fourteen days, and abstract the S. V.
§ 3. Or thus: ℞ Pre∣cipitate, wash it well in distil∣led Water, then let it be gent∣ly reverberated and fixed with water of Eggs, often cohobated. To which add as a fourth way, the Method prescribed by our Author. § 4. By these ways the Emetick property of the Pre∣cipitate is much abated if not taken away; but of them all, that of our Authors is thought to be the best: that corrected with Camphorated S. V. is chiefly given in Fea∣vers, and is good against the Spotted Feaver, Purples, Plague or Pestilence, and all sorts of malign and contagi∣ous Diseases; in which cases it is given only, à gr. iij. ad vj. § 5. Precipitate (after the other ways of Correction, chiefly that of our Author) may be given in a Inve∣terate Lues, as also in Quar∣tan Agues, Kings-Evil, Dropsies, Gouts, and other the most obdurate Diseases of the Humane Body, pro∣ceeding from Obstructions: you may mix it either in Mithridate, or Extractum Catholicum, Confectio Ha∣mech, &c. à gr. iv. ad x. § 6. Outwardly also it is applied to soften indurated Tumours as a Scirrhus, Scro∣fula, &c. but chiefly in cu∣ring Veneral Tophs, Gums, and Nodes, Herps miliaris, profound Scabs, Tettars, Ring-worms, &c. for Scabs, Herps, &c. Mix it thus: ℞ Hogs-Lard, or Veal-Suet, washed with Rose-water ℥ij. White Precipitate ℥jss. Sac∣charum Saturni ℥j. mix and make an Ointment: in Tophs and indurated Glandules, rub the part affected very well first with a hot Cloth, and then apply the Oint∣ment. § 7. And then upon the Veneral Toph you may ap∣ply this Emplaister. ℞ Pre∣cipitate not washed ℥ij. Hogs-Lard washed in Rose-wa∣ter ℥iv. Bees-wax ℥j. Tur∣pentine ℥ss. Olibanum in Pouder and Mastick, A. ʒij. mix and make an Emplaister, to be applied as aforesaid.
LXXIV. Mercurius praecipi∣tatus fixus; Precipitate fix'd. Bate.] ℞ Purified Quick-silver ℥iij. Sal Armoniack ℥iss. Flowers of Sulphur ℥ij. mix and sublime; beat and mix the sublimate with the feces, and sublime again; then aug∣ment the fire, that it may be red hot; what remains fixed in the bottom is called a Pana∣cea, or Alcohol. It moves all sorts of noxious Humors, and expels them by Sweat. Dose ℈ss. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. The Pre∣script you have exactly in Schroder, Pharm. lib. 3. c. 15. The Ingredients are so well to be mix'd, till none of the Quicksilver appears for other∣wise the sublimation will be made but in part, and that is the reason of a second sub∣limation, because 'tis impos∣sible but some grains may e∣scape grinding at first. § 2. The first Sublimate is therefore to be ground again with the Feces, and then to be sublimed after the same manner as before; and at last the Fire is to be encrea∣sed, to make what will to ascend, so will that which ascends not be fixed, and as Schroder says, is a great Se∣cret. § 3. In this Operation a part of the Mercury is only fixed, which part is fixed by the Acid of the Sulphur in conjunction with the Acid part of the Sal Armoniack, by help of a second sublimation, as Hofman thinks. § 4. It expels preternatu∣ral Humidities, and malign Serosities in the Venereal Di∣sease, disposing running Ul∣cers to a healing; but says Hofman, it expels them not without salivation, as Expe∣rience testifies. However, it is more gentle than Turpethum Minerale, or any other sali∣vating Precipitate. LXXV. Mercurius Precipi∣tatus Flavus; i. e. Turpe∣thum Minerale; Yellow Precipitate. Bare.] The Dose is à gr. 5. ad 10. It has the same Ver∣tues with Arcanum Coralli∣num. Salmon.] § 1. How it is particularly to be done, you may see at large in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 43. as also another Pre∣script according to the Col∣leges method, which you may see in the place cited.
§ 2. But Lemery has a more exact way, which is this: ℞ Quick-silver revived from Cinnabar ℥iv. put it in∣to a glass Retort, and affuse thereon rectified Oyl of Vitriol ℥xvj. mix and dissolve, and distil off the humidity in sand, making the fire so strong to∣wards the end, that it may drive out some of the last spi∣rits; at bottom you will find a white mass; break the Retort, and take it, pouder it in a glass Mortar, (it will weigh about ℥vss.) and affuse thereon warm Water, so will it presently change into a yel∣low Precipitate or Pouder, which edulcorate by many re∣peated Ablutions, then dry it in the shade, and you will have ℥iij ¼. then put it into a Glass, and keep it close stopt for use. § 3. Le Mort uses the same Ingredients and Proportions, but he evaporates the Humi∣dity over a strong Fire, after dissolution, because that which is distilled off is ex∣ceeding weak, the Mercury retaining the greatest part of the acid Spirits, which are the matter that purge so ve∣hemently, though many of them be taken away by the Lotion. § 4. He would have the Vessel to have a red-hot heat, but it ought to be short, lest most of the Salts vanishing, the Mercury should become a grey pouder. § 5. And though Authors say, that the greater quantity which the Mercury drinks up of the Oyl, the greater will be its fixation; yet that is quantity sufficient enough, which will dissolve and retain the Mercury; what is more does but encrease the labour and augment the price of the Medicament. § 6. The Water which is decanted off in the edulcora∣tion is not to be rejected, be∣cause it contains dissolved in it some of the Mercury, thro' the mediation of the Spirit adhering: This by some fix'd Salt (as of Tartar) is precipitated of an intense yel∣low, or an Orange-tawny colour, nearly of the same nature with the Turpethum Minerale, but more mild or gentle. § 7. Beguinus uses Oyl of Sulphur per Campanum, in∣stead of Oyl of Vitriol, but his proportions and way of do∣ing it are wholly the same with the former. And this Turpethum Minerale, he saith, is the best Precipitation which is prepared from simple Mer∣cury; and in this, I think, he is in the right.
§ 8. That Oyl of Sulphur is better for this Preparation than Oyl of Vitriol, you have the Suffrage of Crolliuc, who not only prescribes Oyl of Sul∣phur, but prefers it before all other corrosive Oyls, and affirms, that it far more powerfully precipitates and coagulates it than Oyl of Vi∣triol, so that it will endure a much stronger Fire. His method of making it is thus: § 9. ℞ Quicksilver puri∣fied ℥iv. rectified Oyl of Sulphur per Campanum, q. s. mix and dissolve, digesting two days in Sand, afterwards by Retort; distil with a gentle heat; the liquor which comes off cohobate and repeat it the third time; the fourth time add a little more fresh Oyl of Sulphur, in a new and well-luted Retort; distil again, and about the end encrease the Fire, that the Retort may grow very hot, and so distil, that the Mercury may be precipitated or left at bot∣tom in a white mass: Break the Vessel with an Iron Ring, take out the matter, grind it on a Marble very well, and with distilled Rain-water warm, wash away the Acrimony in a Glass with a wide mouth; work it well for four hours to∣gether, let it settle and decant: This washing so often repeat, till no sharpness be perceived, and the Precipitate becomes a pure yellow pouder; this pouder put into a Bolt-head, which tye over with a paper, and place it in a pretty strong Sand-heat, to digest for eight days, in which time, if any of the Mercury is not sufficiently dissolved and precipitated, it will spontane∣ously sublime it self in the neck of the Glass, which afterwards with a red hot Iron Ring cut off; the mass at bottom take out, and burn off thrice from it Spirit of Wine, then careful∣ly put it up for use. § 10. Now, a sign that the Preparation is well per∣formed is, that if it be strong∣ly stirred with Gold, the Gold will not be made white at all thereby, (as it is when it is touched with crude Mer∣cury) the Precipitate is there∣fore better, and may more securely be taken inwardly into the Body. § 11. Nor is it needful that it be altogether fixt, for so it loses its purging Vertue, nor will it operate then in Man's Body at all. § 12. And though Oyls of Vitriol or Sulphur be the strongest and most caustick Acids of those Minerals, yet they are much weaker than Spirit of Nitre, and so require a greater quantity of them,
and a longer time to dissolve the Mercury in, for the disso∣lution will hardly be di∣spatch'd in ten hours. § 13. This Precipitate, as well as all others, may be revived into Quicksilver again, by mixing with Lime, and distilling them, as in the Revivification of Cinnabar, for the Alcali of the Lime de∣stroys the Acids which dis∣guise the Quicksilver. § 14. Mercury, says Crol∣lius, is the Balsam of Nature, in which is an incarnative vertue, whereby it wonder∣fully restores and purifies the microcosmick body infected with the French Pox; for when the whole mass of Blood is corrupted and tain∣ted with the Seminaries of many Diseases, then these Metallicks, rarified like Fire, acquire such a penetrating force, that they pass through the whole habit of the Body. § 15. Schroder, Zwelfer, Marggrave, and Maets follow Crollius, in making it with Oyl of Sulphur; but Charras makes it with either Oyl of Sulphur or Vitriol, and distils as aforesaid, in which, he says, the first Water that comes away will be almost insipid; but towards the end the acid Spirits will also come over in part, the Mercury re∣taining a good part of the Spirits which dissolved it. § 16. But whereas those who make it with Oyl of Vi∣triol use only a double quan∣tity of it, if you use Oyl of Sulphur instead thereof, you ought, says Le Mort, to have a greater proportion: And Maets uses it in a triple, viz. to Mercury ℥j. Oyl of Sul∣phur ℥ij. § 17. Haec massa si in cru∣cibulo, igne aperto, fundatur, habebis substantiam fixam, quam Poterius elaborat in substantiam auream, ex qua formari possunt annuli, & ul∣terius in Mercurium fixum elaborari. Collect. Chym. cap. 258. pag. 289. § 18. The Vertues ascri∣bed to this famous Medicine are many, we will deliver you them from Crollius him∣self, though possibly the Au∣thor of this work has had as large Experience thereof as any man living upon Earth. It is a Remedy (says he) against Diseases from putre∣faction of Humors, and in desperate Distempers there is scarcely any thing that gives more speedy relief. § 19. It expels all viscous Humors, helps Defluxions of the Brain, purifies the Blood in the Veins, and the Marrow in the Bones; it is a Specifick
in the Dropsy and Gout, gi∣ven in a Cathartick Pill, and in the Pleurisie with a Speci∣fick Vehicle, (given to Infants afflicted with Coughs and Shortness of Breath, or ful∣ness of the Praecordia, it is wonderfully profitable, the first day being exhibited half a grain, the second and third days a grain, in some pecto∣ral Syrup.) § 20. It is good against venereal Poysons and Scabs, all sorts of Feavers, continual and intermitting, the French Pox, though inveterate, for it heals and eradicates all ve∣nereal Ulcers, Gums, Tophs, Nodes, Warts, &c. by reite∣rating the Dose; cures the Jaundice, and all sorts of running Sores. § 21. Paracelsus, in curing the Lues Venerea, exhibited it in Electuary of Juice of Roses: And Phoedro very happily removed Venereal Tumors, giving it with Spi∣rit of Tartar: Heuserus (who published Paracelsus's Works) affirms, that in his most fre∣quent exhibiting thereof, he never found any detriment to ensue, unless sometimes in cholerick Vomitings, where it excited sometimes pain or heat in the Throat and Mouth, which presently by using a Gargarism or Terra Sigillata was removed. § 22. The Dose is à gr. ij. ad v. or vj. but now in our days bold Artists will venture to give it to gr. viij. or xij. such great Doses ought not to be adventur'd on, except to very strong persons. It is gi∣ven mixt with Pil. Ruffi, Pil. Rudii, Confectio Hamech, or purging Extracts, and it ope∣rates better being given in Juice of Liquorice, than in Mithridate or Venice Treacle; Conserve or Sugar of Roses are good Vehicles, or it may be swallowed made up into Pills with white Bread, drin∣king a little Wine or Cordial Water after it. LXXVI. Mercurius Praecipi∣tatus griseus; Grey Preci∣pitate. Bate.] ℞ Turpethum Mi∣nerale, wash it in Rose-water, and dry it, then imbibe it in rectified S. V. and add Cam∣phir dissolved in a like quanti∣ty of the said rectified S. V. from whence with a gentle fire abstract the Spirit S. A. Dose à gr. iij. ad viij. &c. It purges downwards, or by Stool. Salmon.] § 1. That is, to ℥i. of Turbeth Minerale wash∣ed
in Rose-water, ried and imbibed with rectified S. V. you must add Camphir ℥j. dissolved in a sufficient quan∣tity of rectified S. V. and then with a very gentle Fire abstract the Spirit. See the Officina Chymica. § 2. It has all the vertues of Turbeth Mineral, but works chiefly downwards, for which reason it makes not the Patient so sick, nor so much out of order, and there∣fore may be given in the lar∣ger ds, as à gr. iv. ad x. according to Age and Strength. § 3. It cures the French Pox, and all the Symptoms attending it, as virulent Go∣norrhoea's, Gleets, Gums, Tophs, Nodes; and particu∣larly it is a Specifick against Nocturnal Pains, being given in a little Mithridate, or Con∣serve of Roses, at night going to bed, and sleeping upon it, repeating the dose for two or three nights together, and then ceasing two or three nights, or purging with some gentle Cathartick, to carry off the Recrements of the matter, and prevent Saliva∣tion, after which it is to be taken in like manner for two or three nights more, and the same method to be continued till about 10 or 12 doses are taken. § 4. It is an excellent thing also against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, Jaundice, Scabs, Itch, Leposy, Tetters, Ring-worms, Feavers, and all Di∣seases whatsoever, proceeding from corruption and putrefa∣ction of the Humors, but it must be used with the Cau∣tion aforementioned, to avoid Salivation: In Agues give it six hours before the coming of the Fit. LXXVII. Mercurius Praeci∣pitatus Incarnatus; Flesh∣colour'd Precipitate. Bate.] ℞ Mercury or Quicksilver ℥i. which dissolve in A. F. ℥ij. add to it boiling Water ℥iij. and precipitate with new made Ʋrine, wash and dry S. A. It only works by Stool, and has the same vertues with the Arcanum Co∣rallinum. Dose gr. vj. ad xij. Salmon.] § 1. The Urine ought to be the Urine of a sound man, which, as Hart∣man says, must be so much as may be sufficient to moisten the Mercury, by which means the Mercury will be preci∣pitated Incarnate. This only works downwards, says he,
and may be given à gr. vj. ad xij. § 2. But Charras advises, to put in the Urine so long till the Ebulition ceases: The colour, says he, proceeds from the union of the Spirit of Nitre with the Salt of Urine, and the impression which that conjunction makes upon the Mercury. § 3. And the unition of the Urine with the Spirit of Nitre renders the effects of this Precipitate more gentle than that of Turbeth Mineral, whose effects depend chiefly upon the last Spirits of Vitriol or Sulphur, which have dis∣solved it, and are as it were concentrated with it, for which reason this Precipitate purges only downwards. § 4. It is an excellent thing against the French Pox, and all its numerous Sym∣ptoms or Attendants, but is found to be a Specifick against the Stone, whether in the Reins or Bladder (for which I have prov'd it an ex∣cellent thing) as also in the Gout, Dropsy, Jaundice, and Rheumatism. § 5. It is a valuable Re∣medy, and as it may be given safer than many other Preci∣pitates, so also with more eminent and certain effects. § 6. Now, by reason Urine contains an alcalious Salt dissolved, when drop'd or put into the dissolution of Mercury in A. F. or Spirit of Nitre, it breaks or destroys the edges or points of the Acid, which held up the Mercury imperceptible, and served like as Finns to make it swim in the dissolvant, so that the Quicksilver having nothing to bear it up, it pre∣cipitates by its own weight. § 7. And in this all Alca∣lies agree, in enervating or destroying the power of the Acid; yet nevertheless they always do it with some diffe∣rence in their action, which evidently appears in the dif∣ferent-colour'd Precipitates, which can only be attributed to proceed from their several ways and manners of wor∣king upon Acids, whereby they dispose and modifie the Particles of the precipitated body, so as to be capable of breaking various ways the beams of Light, and so by re∣flection to make as many ap∣pearances of colour. § 8. For corrosive Subli∣mate being dissolved in boi∣ling fair Water, if you drop into it Oil of Tartar per de∣liquium, you have a reddish or Orange-tawny Precipitate; if Urine, another colour'd
Pouder; if Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniack, the Precipitate will be white; but if Lime-water, the Precipitate will be yel∣low. § 9. Now, in all these the Mercury and its Dissolvent is one and the same, and all the Precipitants are Alcalies, yet you see different colours arise, which can only be from the difference of the Alcali, and its different way of wor∣king upon the Acid. § 10. These Precipitates now are no longer Poysons, though they are produced from corrosive Sublimate; for the Acid which made the Mercury poysonous, being now enervated and destroy∣ed, and the Mercury being thereby delivered, it resumes its former innocent nature, and becomes sweet▪ and friendly to Nature. § 11. If upon the Liquor of the Orange-tawny Preci∣pitate you should affuse Oyl of Vitriol or Sulphur, the Acid, by contending and pe∣netrating the Oleum Tartari, would cause an Ebulition, whereby the Alcali would be destroyed, and the Precipi∣tate again dissolved, and the liquor becoming clear, would be a Poyson, as before. § 12. But by affusion again of fresh Oyl of Tartar, then Spirit of Sal Armoniack upon it, you would have again new reddish and white Precipitates. § 13. Lastly, If upon this Liquor and Precipitates you should affuse again more Oyls of Vitriol or Sulphur, (but in a larger quantity than be∣fore, because the Acid has not only the Mercury to dissolve anew but also a greater quantity of the Alcali to con∣tend withal) you will find the whole to be clear again, and resume its former poyso∣nous nature. LXXVIII. Mercurius Praeci∣pitatus Laxativus; Laxa∣tive Precipitate. Bate.] It is made of Mer∣cury or Quicksilver, by putting to it Oyl of Vitriol or Sulphur, and digesting in a Sand-heat, till the Mercury is crystallized; these Crystals are put into a Crucible, and made red-hot, for an hour, by the help of a proper fire, then being cast in∣to hot water, a yellow pouder precipitates: Decant the wa∣ter, and take the pouder, which wash and dry, burning off from it. S. V. S. A. It pur∣ges , sursum & deorsum, upwards and down∣ward. Dose gr. iij. ad x. It is of wonderful force in
rooting out and destroying the French Pox, Gout, Yel∣low Jaundice, Dropsie, Scabs, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Hartman was the Author of it, and out of his Pract. Chym. pag. mea, 8. b. we will give you it word for word, translation only excepted. § 2. ℞ Quicksilver q. s. upon which affuse Oyl of Sul∣phur per Campanum, so much as to overtop the Mercury an inch; set them so long in a hot Ash-heat, till by the heat the Mercury is coagulated, which will be in the space of thrre hours; cover the Vessel with Paper, through which the volatile spirits may pass, then cool the Vessel, and take out the matter, and if any of the Quicksilver happen to remain in the bottom, separate it: The matter pulverize, and put it into a Crucible, letting it stand in an open fire for an hour, till the whole is red-hot, which done, remove the Cruci∣ble, and put the matter into warm water, and it will be∣come a very bright pouder: Decant that water, and affuse more, washing it and drying it; then digest it with S. V. fiften days; afterwards decant the S. V. and dry the Mercury upon hot Iron Plates. § 3. It purges both by Vomit and Stool, and evacu∣ates all malign and evil Hu∣mors in the French Pox, Rheumatism, Scurvy, Gout, Dropsy and Jaundice, and removes most Diseases pro∣ceeding from Obstructions of the Vilcera. Dose à gr. v, ad x, or xij. if in strong Bodies. § 4. Modus Utendi. ℞ Mithridate ʒss. or ʒj. of this Precipitate à gr. iv. ad x. Oyl of Citrons or Limons gut. iij. mix for a Dose, to be given at night going to Bed, and repeated for two or three nights, then intermit∣ting it for three or four days, it may be given in like man∣ner again. § 4. But if the Sick should be in danger of fluxing, (as some easie Bodies will be) you must either take a purg∣ing Dose or two after eve∣ry second or third Dose, or else give it in a Cathartick after this manner: ℞ Con∣fectio Hamech ʒss. ad ʒj. of this Precipitate gr. viij. Oyl of Limons gut. iij. mix for a Dose. Or thus: ℞ Pil. Co∣chiae ʒss. of this precipitate gr. vj. ad x. Oyl of Oranges gut. iij. mix for a dose.
LXXIX. Mercurius Praeci∣pitatus per se; Mercury precipitated by it self. Bate.] ℞ Mercury put it into a Glass with a broad bot∣tom, high and very close-neckt, place it exactly in Sand, and give fire by degrees, till the Mercury is converted into a rubicund pouder, which take and wash with S. V. It is a work of many days, it won∣derfully provokes Sweat, and at 6 or 7 times taking per∣fectly eradicates the French Pox. It takes away all Fea∣vers, kills Worms, and in many causes violent Vomi∣ting. Dose à gr. iij. ad vj. but the Precipitate will be more effectual if it be made with an eighth part of Sol; as hereafter is declared. Salmon.] § 1. This is a sin∣gular Preparation, and the best of all the Precipitates, and therefore we shall be a little more exact in observing what Authors have said con∣cerning it. Crollius makes it thus: Take a Glass flat and broad, (near a cubit in breadth) high, and very close-neck'd, ha∣ving an Orifice no bigger than a Needle may go into, turn'd in with a wide mouth, that the Mercury may be poured into it: Into this Glass put purified Quicksilver, so much as may every where cover the bottom, place it so exactly in Sand, that no part of the Mercury, by the unequal placing of the Glass, be either higher or lower; this done, decoct it at first with a gentle heat, then with a more strong fire, till it becomes a most red pouder like Cinnabar, which edulcorate with Cordial Waters, or S.V. § 2. This, says he, power∣fully provokes Sweat, and being 6 or 7 times exhibited in a Lues Venerea, it wholly roots out and exterminates the Disease; more especially if other things necessary in this Cure be also duly per∣formed, it cures all sorts of Feavers, both continual and intermitting. § 3. Schroder makes it exactly after the same man∣ner, but says it is a work of thirty days. Besides the for∣mer Vertues, he says, it kills Worms, but vomits violent∣ly, and commends it more if it be made with an eighth part of Gold. § 4. Rolfincius Chym. lib. 5 sect. 6. cap. 3. Prepares it in a like Vessel, and almost after the same manner; in the space of eight days he coagulates it, then breaks the Vessel, grinds the matter into a most subtil pouder in a glass Mortar, then
puts it again into a glass Vessel, and digests in a sand-heat for four or five days more, or till all things within grow black; he breaks the Vessel again, and pulverizes the matter anem, putting it into a new Phial, and makes a calcination with an intense degree of Fire, till the Mercury rises up or shoots forth into a kind of Grove (as it were) of little Trees, or a company of young Shoots and slender Sprigs growing together as out of the Ground, of an Orange-tawny or red colour, which by little and little fall down again. This, says he, loosens the Belly, provokes Sweat, and oftentimes causes vomiting. § 5. Le Febure makes it thus: ℞ A double Vessel, cal∣led by Chymists Infernus, or A Hell, flat and broad in the bottom; put into it purified Quicksilver, i. e. revived from Cinnabar ℥iij. or iv. stop the upper part of it with a single Paper, and place it in Sand equally in its poise, so as the Quicksilver may be evenly spread upon the whole bottom of the Vessel, lying no thicker on one part than on another, that the Fire may equally work on the whole: Make at first a soft Fire, and encrease it by degrees, till all the Q. S. be changed, calcined, or precipi∣tated into a red Pouder, like Mineral-Cinnabar, very bright, shining and sparkling to the Eye, then digest it the space of 21 days in Alcohol of S. V. afterwards, deflagrate from it also rectified S. V. seven times, so will the decoction and fixa∣tion of it be perfected. § 6. This, says he, is an universal Remedy against all Agues, and a true Specifick against the French Pox, which it radically cures, if given seven times to the Patient, to provoke Sweating, for it is an infallible Sudorifick. It kills also Worms in the Sto∣mach, Guts, and Intestinum Rectum. § 7. The Dose is à gr. ij. ad viij, in some Conserve, Confection, or Cordial Ex∣tract; the Sick must keep his Bed when he uses it, and must be sure to be well co∣vered, patiently expecting the Diaphoresis, which will not fail to bring along with it the desired effects. § 8. Nor must the Artist himself grow weary in the preparation of this Medica∣ment, though the Operation be long and tedious, for he must take care to govern and manage the Fire with Judg∣ment and Discretion, other∣wise he will be often forced to begin his work anew, for
a small fault in the Fire will cause the Vessel to break. § 9. This Operation is very tedious, by reason of the length of time in which it is a doing, for it can scarce∣ly be perfected under fourty days; yea, sometimes it may be 90, 100, or 120 days, be∣fore it may be accomplished, according as you take care to prepare your Mercury well or ill, and according to your care and assiduity in keeping and managing your Fire. § 10. Now 'tis only Sul∣phur can rubifie Mercury, as evidently appears by its re∣duction into Cinnabar, from which reason and the former operation of calcining it per se, it is evident, that common Quicksilver has a Sulphur ex∣ternal and separable from the Essence of Mercury. To this Experience we may add the Testimonies of Geber, and many other of the Ancients, and learned in this Art, who continually testifie the same. § 11. When it is resusci∣tated or regenerated out of Silver, or any other perfect Metal, so as to be exquisite∣ly cleansed from any foreign or poysonous matter, and then according to Art preci∣pitated to a redness, it be∣comes a Medicine not to be despised, which provokes neither Stool nor Vomit un∣less it be given in an unrea∣sonable Dose. § 12. The external Sul∣phur in Mercury (says Tache∣nius) is the cause of Vomit and Salivation, and not the corrosive Spirits with which it is precipitated or sublima∣ted, which the very anointing with crude Quicksilver proves; wherein the acid Sulphur of the Mercury, piercing the Skin, after the manner of other Acids, joyning with the inward occult Acid of the Body, absorbs the Alcaly of the Ventricles, and by ma∣king the internal Acid of the Body more acid, and a most strong Poyson, it extinguishes the alcalious faculty, and then resolves, as Causticks do, all the Aliments and Juices of the Body into a putrid Recre∣ment. § 13. So this occult veno∣mous acidity of the Sulphur of Mercury does primarily hurt the Gums and Teeth, for all Sulphur (witness the Oleum Sulphuris per Campa∣num) has an occult Acid: And as Mercury has an ex∣ternal Sulphur, (containing in it an occult venomous Acid) so by vertue of that Sulphur it is precipitaed per se (as be∣fore declared) by the assi∣stance of a gentle and con∣stant fire.
§ 14. For this reason it is that Tachenus would have Mercury regenerated out of Silver, or other perfect Me∣tals, that it may be freed from its external and poyso∣nous Sulphur; then, says he, wanting that Sulphur, as it can never be precipiated per se, though decocted a whole year in the abovena∣med flat-bottom'd Vessel, with a proper Fire, yet will it move Sweat, and sweetly perform its Operations, Rea∣son and Experience confir∣ming as much. § 15. And being thus di∣vided in its essential parts, (viz. freed from its poyso∣nous Sulphur) it may be re∣conjoyn'd with new and per∣fect Sulphur, and then it will become the subject of all Won∣der. And if it be sublimed with Sulphur to rubifie it, (as in the Preparation of Cinnabar) yet will it gain little or nothing in weight: which is an Observation worth the considering. § 16. It remains only that we shew you Charras's way of performing the Operation of the vulgar Precipitate per se, and so conclude this Section. Get an Infernus, which is a Vessel of double Glass, the neck whereof must be long and very much like a Funnel, and the bottom there∣of large and very broad; put into it Mercury revived from Cinnabar ℥iv. set it in a Lamp-Fornace, in a sand-heat, &c. then having filled a Lamp with Oyl, and lighted three Cotton Wicks of a fit bigness, and put them under the Sand Vessel; so order it that they may burn without ceasing, and that the Oyl may not fail for fifteen days, at the end whereof make every Wick a third part bigger, and keep them lighted for fifteen other days: After thirty days make every Wick bigger by one half, burning as before for another month, or till the Q. S. becomes a red and shining pouder. § 17. Where note, that it is enough all the time to co∣ver the top of the Vessel with a single Paper, and to take care that the Oyl be not wan∣ting in the Lamps, but that all the Wicks may burn equally, and continually cast∣ing their Flame at an equal distance, to the bottom of the Sand-vessel: This work is tedious, but that trouble not great, if you have a Ves∣sel and Fornace proper, and that the Vessel be set in an equal poise. § 18. The Pouder wash with Cordial Waters, or di∣gest for some days in Alcohol
of Wine, then abstract the Spirit, and keep the Pouder for use. § 19. It is diaphoretick, and apt to provoke great Sweats, but often causes vo∣miting withal; but it is one of the best Preparations of Mercury, for the rooting out Venereal Distempers; and curing Agues; and it is a Specifick for killing Worms of all sorts, being given à gr. ij. ad viij. in some proper Conserve or Sweating Ele∣ctuary or Bolus. LXXX. Mercurius Praecipi∣tatus ruber; Red Precipi∣tate. Bate.] Dissolve Quicksilver ℥i. in A. F. ℥ij. abstract the A. F. from the Mercury by di∣stillation with three cohobati∣ons, till the Mercury becomes a red pouder. It has the ver∣tues of the former. Salmon.] § 1. This is cal∣led Vigo's Precipitate, because he was the Author of it; and he made it by dissolving Quicksilver in A F. and then evaporating to dryness, the Fire being encreased, till the bottom of the Vessel is made red-hot, whereby is made a most red sparkling Pouder, which is the vulgar red Pre∣cipitate. § 2. And of this is made that Medicament which is called The Prince's Pouder, a thing much famed of late years in London, thus: ℞ Of the former red Precipitate ℥i. grind it upon a Porphyry to a subtil Pouder; add to it ʒij. of Oleum Tartari per deliq. which digest together 24 hours, stirring it now and then; up∣on this put tartarised S. V. to overtop it an inch, and defla∣grate it, which repeat twenty times, and it is done. § 3. This is the true Re∣cipe, as it came from the Prince's own Hand, and was communicated to me by Sir Francis Blundel Baronet, of Kings-County in Ireland, who purchas'd it of the said Prince with a considerable sum of Money. It is given in the Yolk of an Egg or Conserve of Roses, Mithri∣date, &c. The Prince gave it ʒss. ad ʒj. which in my opi∣nion is too great a dose, it may be given à gr. iij. ad x, xij, xv, or xx. according to the age, strength, and malig∣nity of the Disease. § 4. It is famous in curing the French Pox, and all the Symptoms attending it, as also the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, Sciatica, and most Chronick Diseases which af∣flict the extream parts; and
I have known it to be a Specifick against the Stone, Sand, Gravel, and all manner of Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder, doing that in those cases which none of the vulgar Nephriticks and Diu∣reticks could possibly per∣form. § 5. From the process of the Prince's Pouder it appears, that it is nothing but Common red Precipitate corrected with Oyl of Tartar and Spirit of Wine, by which the greatest part of the Acid remaining in the vulgar Precipitate is absorbed or destroyed, and so thereby the Medicament made more mild and gen∣tle. § 6. And of this Opinion was Tachenius in his Clavis, where he says, If upon red Precipitate you pour Alcali of Tartar, and leave it for an hour in a warm place, the whole pouder will become ob∣scurely yellow, or of an Orange-tawny colour, because the Alcali has in part absorbed the Cau∣stick Acid left by the Aqua-fortis. § 7. But the Vertues of the simple Red Precipitate without correction is strongly and without almost any pain, to absume and eat up the thicker Sordes of Ulcers, cal∣lous proud Flesh, Apostemes in the Fundament, and other like Excrescencies; yea, it cures all sordid, putrid, mat∣tery, callous Shingles, some∣times alone, and sometimes in Emplasters or Unguents, as necessity requires. § 8. Rolfincius Chym. lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 2. makes it after the vulgar manner, and says, that it is very rarely given inwardly; but if so exhibi∣ted, that it works powerfully , both by Vomit and Stool, which after many Lotions in Rose-water he gives à ℈ss. ad ℈j. which is a Dose in my opinion too large by two thirds of it, unless corrected as abovesaid after the manner of the Princes Pouder. See my Pharm. Lond. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 22. § 9. Charras makes this vulgar Red Precipitate thus: ℞ Good Quicksilver, or refined, A. F. or Spirit of Nitre A. put them into a glass Retort in a gentle sand-heat to dissolve, then bury the Retort in Sand all over, fitting to it a Recei∣ver; encrease the fire gradual∣ly, and continue it till the A. F. or Sp. Nitri is almost all drawn off; letting all cool, co∣hobate the A. F. or S. Nitri upon the Mercury in the Re∣tort, and draw it off again as before: Cohobate this three times and abstract forcing the
fire at last more than ordinary to augment the colour of the Precipitate, which will be of a much fairer red than that which is calcined at the end in a Crucible, where you lose of the weight of the Mercury, and are endangered by the poysonous Vapors of the A. F. or Sp. Ni∣tri, &c. The shining red mass at bottom, if you intend to give it inwardly (says he) must be pouder'd, and re∣ctified S. V. is to be deflegma∣ted from it, and so kept in a glass Bottle close stopt for use. § 10. He gives it inward∣ly to men of strong Consti∣tutions ad gr. vij, or viij. at most at a time; but its prin∣cipal use is for outward ap∣plications, as well in Poma∣tums and other Remedies to cure the defedations of the Skin, as to be mixed with other Oyntments and Bal∣sams to consume proud Flesh and other superfluities of ma∣lign and venereal Ulcers; and it is the usual Remedy which Chyrurgions apply to Cankers and Warts upon the secret parts. § 11. But here is to be noted, that if you intend to give it inwardly, you must not use A. F. in the prepara∣tion thereof, but Spirit of Nitre, or an A. F. made only of Nitre and Alum. § 12. Maets and Marg∣grave both make it after the same manner, but without any cohobation of the abstra∣cted Spirit, and at last cal∣cine it a little, (for if the Fire should be continued too long, all the corrosive Spirits would be forced from the Mercury, whereby some part of it would be revived, and the other not revived, of a dirty, dull, red colour, with∣out any sparkling brightness or shining:) then edulcorate it by washing it in Rain-water, and burning off from it S. V. five or six times. § 13. This Precipitate (says he) if it be corrected, (I suppose he means with Oyl of Tartar, as abovesaid) it is given for a Sudorifick in the French Pox, Dropsy, Quartan-Ague, profound Scab and Leprosy, being mixed with Venice-Treacle, Mi∣thridate, Conserve of Roses, Confectio de Hyacintho, &c. but if for purging in Extra∣ctum Catholicum, Extract of the Juice of Roses, Confectio Hamech. Dose à gr. ij. ad v. § 14. Marggrave saith, it has a Cathoeretick force, and is used to take away Carnosities or fleshly Excre∣scencies, which it does easily,
and without pain; for which reason it conduces to the heal∣ing of Fistula's, Pustuls, and other external Diseases, if sprinkled upon any Emplaster and applied, or injected with a Syring in Plantane-water: but then the Water ought to be made somewhat thick with Honey of Roses or some pro∣per Syrup, that the Powder may not immediately sink, or separate it self from the Ve∣hicle. § 15. And being correct∣ed he says, it is used by ma∣ny as a Panacea for curing the French-Pox, given à gr. iv. ad vj. ad Summum. § 16. According to Lemery it is thus. ℞ Quicksilver re∣vived from Cinnabar ℥iv. Spi∣rit of Nitre ℥ivss. dissolve in a Glass Matrass with a short Neck and in a Sand heat evapo∣rate all the Humidity till a white Mass remains: then augment the Fire to the third degree in which keep it, till it is turn∣ed Red, then letting all cool, break the Glass and take your Precipitate, which will weigh ℥ivss. § 17. Some mix it (says he) with burnt Alum, Aegyp∣tiacum and the common sup∣purative, for the external Uses above-mentioned: and some give it inwardly, ad gr. iv. to raise a Flux, but this says he, is dangerous unless rectified S. V. be burnt two or three times off from it. § 18. Now it is to be ob∣served, that some think by two or three Cohobations of the Sp. Nitre to increase its Redness or its Virtues, but Experience shews the con∣trary, and that those Coho∣bations are of no use. § 19. The white Mass re∣maining after evaporation of the Sp. Nitre, is a mixture of the Mercury with much of the Acid Spirit; so that of ℥iv. of Quicksilver, you will have ℥vss. of that white Matter, which is very Corrosive: but according as it is calcin'd to make it red, the points and edges of the Spirit strike off and vanish in the Air; for which reason the more you calcine it to increase its red∣ness, the less it weighs, and the less corrosive it is. § 20. If you put this red Precipitate into an Earthen Pan deflagrate from it well rectified S. V. and repeat this deflagration six times, you have Lemery's Arcanum Cora∣linum: in this Operation the S. V. by burning makes some part of the Acid Spirits to fly away, in place of which the Alcali of the S. V. joyns it self to the Mercury, and thereby renders it more
sweet and fit to be taken in∣wardly. § 21. If you continue your red Precipitate for some hours over the Fire, it will sublime of a red colour; but this red Sublimate, is no∣thing near so corrosive as the common white corrosive Sub∣limate. It cannot sublime before it is calcined red, be∣cause there is too much of the Acid Spirit which fixes it; but being freed from it in a great measure by Calci∣nation, it has power to arise or sublime with that which remains; And by reason the Acid has an aptness to fix, it checks the Volatility of the Mercury, and makes it stop in the middle of the Glass. § 22. If upon common Red Precipitate you affuse vola∣tile Spirit of Sal-Armoniack it becomes of a grey colour: so also if into the Solution of Quicksilver in Sp. Nitre, you drop in the said Spirit of Sal-Armoniack you will have a grey Precipitate; and if upon either of them you affuse a good quantity of fair Water, you will have a mil∣ky Liquor, tho' none of the whitest. § 23. If on common red Precipitate you affuse Spirit of Salt; it becomes present∣ly a delicate White; for the same thing must happen here, as when Spirit of Salt is cast into a Solution of Q. S. in Spirit of Nitre; for tho red Precipitate be a dry body, it is nothing but a Conjunction of Mercury with the Nitrous Spirit. § 24. But the immediate change of the colour seems strange, that so red a Sub∣stance should in a moment of time as it were become so ex∣ceeding white: this without doubt must be attributed to the new situation of the Mercu∣rial Particles, whereby their Superficies reflect the Light in right Lines, or a different Position from the former to our Eyes, thereby to give room for this white Colour. § 25. Again, should ano∣ther Acid Liquor, or any Al∣cali be affused thereon, it would be again changed, and some other colour would a∣rise, or else it would revive into Quicksilver; from which Experiments a kind of de∣monstration is made, that Co∣lour is no real and substan∣tial thing, but wholly de∣pends on the Modification of the Particles of the Mixt. § 26. Lastly, if on common red Precipitate you affuse Oil of Vitriol, it will be dis∣solved for the Spirit of Vi∣triol j'oyning with the Spirit
of Nitre in the Precipitate, an A. F. is made, which dis∣solves perfectly the Mercuri∣al Particles without any E∣bullition or Effervescence: the reason is, because the Mer∣cury has already been rarified by the Acid Spirit of Nitre, so that the Spirit of Vitriol enters the Pores of the Mer∣cury, and by Conjunction of the Nitrious Spirit dissolves it without trouble. This So∣lution is clear, like other dis∣solutions of Mercury, with∣out any redness; and there∣of may be made the same Preparations as may be made of Quicksilver dissolved in Aqua fortis or Spirit of Ni∣tre. LXXXI. Mercurius praeci∣pitatus Solaris per se: Gol∣den Precipitate, or Preci∣pitate with Gold. Bate.] It is made of an Amalgama made of Quick-silver ℥iv. and Gold purified with Antimony ℥ss. in a Glass Infernus, posited as before di∣rected (at Sect. 78.) which is often to be taken out and beat∣en in a Mortar S. A. Salmon.] § 1. Rolfincius calls this Preparation Radix aurea, and Precipitatus ruber compositus; and makes it ex∣actly in the same proporti∣ons, digesting the Amalga∣ma in a Phial, for the space of two Months in a gentle and continual Sand heat: Sensim massa adsurgit in spe∣ciem fruticeti aurei, & quasi crescere Videtur: Sensim rur∣sùm ad fundum Vergit; then being of a resplendent rubi∣cund colour, he takes the Precipitate out, pouders it, and keeps it for use. § 2. It is accounted by Zehnerus as a Panacea of great Vertues, purging alone , both by Vo∣mit and Stool, according as the Dose is increased: but in a small Dose it is diapho∣retick: to little Infants it is given, ad gr. j. to Children from five to seven Years of age à gr. jss. ad ij. and so in∣creasing the Dose in propor∣tion to the Age and Strength. See Our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. Sect. 19. § 3. Zwelfer Mantis. Spa∣gyr. cap. 7. makes it thus. ℞ Purified Mercury, or Mer∣cury seven times sublimed from the stellified Regulus Martis, and filings of Luna ℥ij. fine Gold purged by Antimony ʒiv, or v. make an Amalgama, as the manner is by putting into a Crucible over proper fire the Mercury; into which when heated let the Gold be cast red
hot: this Amalgama often∣times wash with Vinegar and Salt, till no more blackness ap∣pears in grinding and wash∣ing it: to this Amalgama thus washed, well cleansed and dry∣ed, add of the former rubi∣cund Precipitate made per se, ℥ij. grind them together for a long time in a Glass Mortar, that they may be well united, then put all into an Infernus as afore directed, or into a Philosophical Egg, which Seal hermetically, and digest or de∣coct by degrees of fire till the whole is reduced to dryness, and the highest Redness: Et hic de∣mum Praecipitatus praestantis∣simus erit, sine ullo corrosivo factus; solius naturae opus, & Medicina ad multorum mor∣borum extirpationem effica∣cissima: sapientibus pauca haec sufficerint: sub iis enim haud facile obvia aut Vulgaria la∣tent Naturae Arcana. § 4. The thing thus made is indeed a good Medicine, as Zwelfer professes; but this tedious Work of his is La∣bour in vain; for first, there is a Precipitation of the Quicksilver per se, which what∣ever Authors may affirm, is a Work of 3 or 400 Days to do it well: Secondly, there is a second Precipitation or Calcination, by mixing this prec. per se, with an Amalga∣ma of Mercury and Sol; which will then require as long time as if all the Mercury were a∣malgamated with the Sol all at once; so that it is appa∣rent that the first tedious La∣bour is lost; since Mercury amalgamated with Gold, will be calcin'd into a Redness in the tenth part of the time, that it can be done in, per se. § 5. Charras make it thus. ℞ Purified Mercury ℥j, fine Gold ʒj, make an Amalgama, &c. but you may, says he, add to the Mercury a quar∣ter part of its weight of cu∣pellated Silver, and make an Amalgama of it: Or else a∣malgate together Gold ℥ss. Silver ℥j. and Quicksilver ℥iv. and so fix them together by a gentle Coction as aforesaid. § 6. Le Febure gets a Ma∣trass flat or plain at bottom (not making use of an Infernus as in the precip. per se) which he stops in the mouth only with a wooden Pin, which may be easily taken away to put down the Mercury, which shall be su∣blimed into the neck of the Vessel: into this Vessel he puts an Amalgama of pure Mer∣cury p. viij, with fine Gold thrice purged from Antimony, p. j. Or of Mercury p. iv, with fine Silver p. j. made into Leaves, or a subtile Calx,
for the easier Amalgamation; Or, an Amalgama of pure Mercury p. viij. with Gold, p. j. Silver p. ij. melted with pure Regulus of Antimony p. vj. these he digests or decocts till they become a fine red Preci∣pitate. § 7. The solar Precipitate is given à gr. j. ad vj. in some Conserve, Confection, or Cordial Extract, the Pa∣tient keeping Bed when it is taken; it is an excellent Re∣medy against the French Pox and all its Symptoms, and has all the Vertues of the Precipitate per se exalted by means of the Gold, having this effect more, as to be a Specifick for strengthning and corroborating the Heart, and to drive away all Weak∣nesses and Griefs from it. § 8. The Lunar Precipitate is also specificated and desti∣nated to the Head, and to the cure of Diseases thereof, be∣sides the general intention: Dose thereof à gr. j. ad xij. § 9. But neither the Solar, nor Lunar are to be compared in Strength and Virtue to that which is made of a mixture of Sol, Luna, and Antimony; for that this is a kind of Pa∣nacea, or universal Remedy, called by some Authors Au∣rum Medicum. § 10. It is of good use for prevention of Diseases, espe∣cially where the Viscera are loaded with impure Serosi∣ties and Tartarous Humors, proceeding from Weakness, ill Digestion, and Superflui∣ties of Nourishment: you may give gr. vj. in the morn∣ing fasting, and the Patient being covered in Bed may sweat upon it; after which they may eat a Bisket dipt in Wine; then the Sweat be∣ing ended, the Sick may rise but ought to keep the Cham∣ber for that whole day. § 11. Thus have you va∣rious Precipitates, or rather Calces of Mercury with the more perfect Metals, wholly performed without addition of any Salts or Acid Spirits: and as their Preparations are long and tedious; so are their Operations high, and much more effectual than those other kinds of Precipi∣tates are, which are not fit∣ted for such transcendent de∣signations.
LXXXII. Mercurius Praeci∣pitatus Viridis, green Pre∣cipitate. Bate.] ℞ Mercury ℥iv. Venus ℥ss. dissolve them sepa∣rately in A.F. and mix them: afterwards abstract the A. F. digest the Precipitate with Spirit of Vinegar, then filter and dry S. A. It is a Specifick in a virulent Gonorrhoea, which it perfectly takes away and cures: but it ought day∣ly to be used, till all the Flux is stopt. Dose, gr. ij, iij, ad viij. Salmon.] § 1. See our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. Sect. 40. where you have the Prescript in the same pro∣portion; but you are advised to digest in the Spirit of Vine∣gar in B. M. for 24 hours, and then to boil, that the pu∣rest part of the Q. S. may be dissolved in the Vine∣gar. § 2. Hartman upon Crollius has it thus. ℞ Purged Quick-silver ℥iss. dissolve in A. F. ℥iij. dissolve also, Copper ℥ss. in A.F. mix these Solutions together; and draw off the A. F. in Sand: towards the end aug∣ment the fire more vehement∣ly, that the greatest part of the Spirits may be removed: what is left in the bottom, dry, grind and digest with Spirit of Vinegar for twenty four hours or six days, then boil it: the Vinegar thus impregnated, gently draw off in B. M. and the Precipitate will remain in the bottom green. § 3. It is a Specifick in a virulent Gonorrhoea, tho' de∣clining to the grand Pox it self, and may be given, à gr. ij. ad viij. although the Go∣norrhoea be seen to cease, yet by exhibiting this Medica∣ment it returns again▪ for which reason, it must be re∣iterated, till all the Flux ceases, and is perfectly re∣moved; for this Medicine both moves the Gonorrhoea, and also takes it away: Hart∣man gives it in Conserve of Roses. § 4. Our Author (who fol∣lows Schroder) has Mercury ℥iv. to Venus ℥ss. which is 8 to 1. whereas Hartman has of Mercury ℥iss. to Venus ℥ss, which is but as 3 to 1. doubt∣less the former Proportion is the safer and better, for too great a quantity of the Venus will provoke intolerable Vo∣mitings, so that the Medicine will scarcely be safe. § 5. Beguinus follows Hart∣man in the Quantities, in which he deserves reproof; and digests six days, where∣as
his Commentator says two are sufficient, if the Digesti∣on is good: this Precipitate is not usually edulcorated, for which reason it ought to be given with the more cau∣tion: it will do what it is designed for; but at best, it is but a churlish Medicine, and therefore ought to be given only to strong Bodies. Some call this Precipitate Lacerta Viridis, the green Lizard. LXXXIII. Mercurius Vitae Correctus, Mercurius Vite corrected. Bate.] Digest Mercurius Vitae in a Phial, in a Sand heat, till it begins to grow red: afterwards abstract often from it S.V. S. A. It purges excellently well by Stool, and carries forth all Impurities of the Body whatsoever. Dose, gr. iv. ad vj. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Regulus of Antimony purified ℥iv. Cor∣rosive Sublimate in pouder lbj. mix and put them into a Glass Retort, which place in a Sand heat, gentle at first; lute to a Receiver, and a gummy Li∣quor or Butter will come forth, which easily congeals and sticks to the Neck of the Retort, which stopping it, hold a burn∣ing Coal near it, to melt it, that it may fall into the Re∣ceiver: when no more comes forth, take away the Receiver, and substitute another half full of Water, then increase the Fire, and there will drop out of Quicksilver about ℥xiij. which was in the Corrosive Sub∣limate: thus have you Butter of Antimony. § 2. To make Mercurius Vitae. Take your Butter of Antimony depurated by Recti∣fication (as is usual) put it in∣to an Earthen Pan with a Quart of warm Water, so will a Precipitate presently fall as white as Snow, the Water ha∣ving weakned the Corrosive Spirits, which keept the regu∣line part of the Antimony in dissolution, and constrained them to quit the Body: being precipitated, stir the Water again, and let it settle, then pour off the Liquor by incli∣nation which reserve: The Pouder wash, edulcorate and dry; this is Mercurius Vitae, which some Authors call Pou∣der of Algoroth, and is given à gr. j. ad iv. it working vio∣lently, both upwards and downwards. § 3. The Reserved Water contains in it all the Saline Spirits, which adhered to the Antimony, and is of a plea∣sing Acidity, called by some Philosophical Spirit of Vi∣triol
it is used in Julaps for Fevers, rendring the same Tart, and agreeable to the Stomach. § 4. From ℥iv. of Butter of Antimony you have ʒ 14. of Mercurius Vitae, after it is well washed and dryed; so that ℥iv. of this Butter continues ʒ18. of the Acid, in which its Corrosion does consist. § 5. It is a famous Medi∣cine, and purges downwards, or by Stool, being corrected according to the Prescript of our Author: it purges off all bad Humors of the Body, chiefly those in the Viscera and Bowels; it is an excel∣lent thing against the Plague and all sorts of Pestilential Diseases, all Diseases of the Head and Brain, as Head-Achs, Megrims, Lethargy, Vertigo, &c. the French pox, malignant Ulcers, Fevers, Gouts, Sciatica's, Rheuma∣tisms, Dropsies, Jaundice, and kills Worms. Dose, à gr. iij. ad vj. in the morn∣ing fasting. LXXXIV. Mercurius Vitae purgans, Mercurius Vite, Or Laxative Mineral. Bate.] If you often grind Mercurius Vitae with common Salt, and afterwards wash it away again with Water, it will have only a purging Property, and work downwards or by Stool. Dose, à gr. vj. ad xij. Salmon.] § 1. Notwith∣standing all this, it will work upwards in some Constituti∣ons, and where there is a foulness of the Stomach; in such habits of Body, a good quantity of Posset drink ought to be given with it, to make its Operation the more easie. § 2. Schroder corrects it after this manner. ℞ Sal-Nitre melted at the Fire, and Mercurius Vitae, cast them in by degrees and stir them; af∣ter they are cold, you will find the corrected Matter at the bottom like a Regulus, which sweeten by washing or deflagra∣tion of S. V. § 3. Or thus. ℞ Mercu∣rius Vitae ℥ss. Sal-Nitre melted at the Fire ℥ij. cast them in by degrees, then wash off the Salt: to this Pouder dryed add twice as much common Salt: grind them together twelve hours, then wash it again; this is Mineral Laxative, and is given à gr. vj. ad xij. § 4. In this Operation, you ought to cast in but ʒj. at a time, and cover the Crucible presently, and so keep it till it leaves smoak∣ing,
then cast in the rest by degrees, &c. § 5. Ʋntzer in his Anato∣my of Mercury, has an excel∣lent Mercurius Vitae made of Gold, which purges down∣wards; it is made with Sal-Nitre, cast upon the Calx of Sol, till it draws a Tincture, and then precipitated with Sal-Armoniack, or Oil of Tar∣tar. § 6. Or thus. ℞ Oil of Mercurius Vitae, and Spirit of Nitre which prudently mix together; digest them for some time, and afterwards distil, so as to make a Homagene Menstruum: Cohobate, digest, and distil so long till you find the Mercurius Vitae gathered together about the bottom: the Menstruum thus prepared, put into it Calx, or Leaves of Gold, so much as the Menstruum may over-top it three Inches; digest till it is dissolved, or be∣comes a kind of Tincture or Magistral Solution, and till the Gold appears like Clouds in the bottom of the Glass: ab∣stract the Menstruum by distil∣lation, till the remainder is like Oil: into which affuse a good quantity of Water, and the Mercurial Calx of Gold, or Solar Mercurius Vitae will fall down: Or otherwise pre∣cipitate with a Solution of Sal-Armoniack, or Oil of Tartar per deliq. and edulcorate by washing. Untzer. Anat. Merc. Lib. 2. Cap. 14. Sect. 3. § 7. It has the Virtues of the former, but is more cor∣dial, and works mostly by Stool, carrying off all noxi∣ous and peccant Humors without any disturbance: It is also given by Infusion, six or seven grains being digest∣ed in Wine or other Liquor ℥iss. and so given in the Morning fasting: But Experi∣ence tells us you may make the Infusion à gr. x. ad xx. with∣out any danger. § 8. It cures Dropsies, Gouts, Rheumatisms, Scurveys, Ca∣chexea's, and other ill Dis∣positions and Habits of Bo∣dy, especially such as pro∣ceed from repletion or ful∣ness of Humors, &c. § 9. But as to the common Mercurius Vitae, that it might be made more gentle, and purge only by Stool, Maëts has this Correction which is none of the worst. ℞ Mer∣curius Vitae ℥j. Sal-Mirabile of Glawber ℥ij. or iij. put the Sal-Mirabile into a Crucible, and when it flows, mix with it the Mercurius Vitae, stirring them well with a wooden Stick, which done, pour all out, and with Rain-water abstract all the Salt; so will you have a corrected Mercurius Vitae, di∣vested
of the greatest part of its emetick force. § 10. This is given in sub∣stance à gr. iij. ad vj. or viij. which extract of Juice of Roses, Extractum Catholicum, or some such like Purge, in an inveterate Lues Venerea, and in the most contumaci∣ous Obstructions, in which cases it is given with good success. § 11. Le Mort corrects it thus. ℞ Common Salt decri∣pitated ℥j. pure Nitre ℥iss. melt them together in a Cru∣cible; then by degrees cast in Mercurius Vitae ℥iss. make them flow together for a quar∣ter of an hour, then edulcorate by washing. Dose, à gr. ij. ad x. in the Cases aforemen∣tioned, made up into the form of a Pill with extract of Juice of Roses. § 12. It purges gently without pain or trouble, cuts and attenuates tough Flegm, powerfully opens the most obdurate Obstructions, and is a famous thing against Sur∣feits given in the beginning. If it purges not downwards, it many times becomes dia∣phoretick, and causes Sweat∣ing. § 13. An Infusion of Mer∣curius Vitae uncorrected. ℞ Mercurius Vitae ʒij. White∣wine ℥xx. let them stand in a warm digestion for twelve hours, often shaking the Glass; then decant the clear Wine from the Feces, for the greater se∣curity sake. Dose, à ℥ss. ad ℥iss. in the Morning fasting. LXXXV, Panacea Aurea; The Golden Panacea, or All-heal. Bate.] ℞ Crocus Metallo∣rum and Calomelanas, A. mix and make a Pouder. It is excellent against the French Disease; moves Salivation, and purges , both by Vomit and Stool. Salmon.] § 1. Crocus Me∣tallorum is thus made. ℞ Choice Antimony lbj. purified Nitre lbj. pouder each apart, and mix them together, then make an Earthen Pot red hot, a∣mongst burning Coals, and put into it ℥ij. or iij. of the mix∣ture, covering the Pot imme∣diately with a Tile, so will it make a thundering noise, send∣ing forth much Smoak, which carefully avoid: the Fulmina∣tion being over, put in more in like manner, and thus con∣tinue till your whole quantity is spent, then increase the Fire till the Matter melts, which done, take the Crucible from the Fire and leave it to cool, then break it, and you will
have in the bottom a Mass of a Liver colour whilst whole, and of a Saffron colour when poudered, (for which cause it is called Hepar Antimonii, or Crocus Metallorum) and a white Feces, which take away, and keep if you please to re∣duce any Calx of Metals into a Body. § 2. This Hepar or Crocus being reduced into pouder, you may by several Lotions separate some Nitrous saline Particles from it, but many use it without washing or e∣dulcorating for ordinary uses▪ but for this Composition of our Authors it ought to be freed from the Salts, for the Mercury sake. § 3. The first Water of the washing will be very clear, yet it contains some of the fi∣nest Particles of the Sulphur of Antimony, which by put∣ting some Acid to it will pre∣cipitate of a very subtil red∣dish Pouder, which being se∣parated, edulcorated and dryed is called the Golden Sulphur of Antimony, or Sulphur Aura∣tum, and has the same Vertues nearly with the Flores Anti∣monii. § 4. Calomelanas is a sweet Sublimate of Mercury, or Mercurius dulcis, five or six times sublimed, till it loses (as it were) its Cathartick or Purging Vertue. § 5. This Calomelanas by being ground fine and inti∣mately mixed with the Cro∣cus Metallorum, corrects it, and takes away much of its Emetick force, whereby it makes the Crocus a kind of Panacea, and disperses and carries it upon its Volatile Wings through the whole U∣niversal Body, which other∣wise might possibly pass on∣ly through the Stomach and Guts. § 6. The reason also why we chuse the edulcorated Crocus is, because that tho' the Saline Particles may cor∣rect the Emetick property of the Crocus in some measure, yet being joyned to the Salts in the Sublimate, they would augment the Acid in the Mer∣cury, and so endanger its being made Corrosive; whereas the Salts alone contained in the Calomelanos, are enough with∣out the other to correct the Crocus, and render it more facile and pleasant in its O∣peration, at least to make it more gentle, and not to be so violently Emetick. § 7. It has all the Vertues of the Mercurius Vitae pur∣gans aforegoing, but more powerful to the Intentions, as being joyned with Mer∣cury; and therefore more effectual in purging off
the Feculencies of the Vene∣real Disease, Kings-Evil, Dropsie, Gout, &c. LXXXVI. Panacea Cathar∣tica, The Purging Pana∣cea, or All-heal. Bate.] ℞ Mercurius Vitae (made of corrosive Sublimate p. ij. Antimony. p. j.) ℥iv. Quicksilver (proceeding in the Distillation of the Butter of Antimony) ℥iij. mix and sub∣lime as in Mercurius dulcis. Dose, gr. v. ad viij. It is more efficacious in the Cure of the French Pox than Mer∣curius dulcis, &c. Salmon. § 1. How the Mercurius Vitae is made we have shewn in Sect. 82. § 2. of this Chapter aforegoing; other ways of doing the same we shall shew in our Officina Chymica, suddenly to be pub∣lished. § 2. Now this purified Quicksilver is obtained in the Distillation of the Butter of Antimony, we have also decla∣red in Sect. 1. &. 3. §. 45. afore∣going of this present Chap∣ter, so that no more need be spoken of it here. § 3. These two, viz. the Mercurius Vitae and the Quick-silver are to be ground together in an Iron Mortar, till the Mercury appears not at all, but is with the other Ingredi∣ent reduced into a subtil black Pouder, or at least grey; put this into a Phial, so as to fill it half; place this Glass in a Sand Fornace, and give fire Gradatim, for some hours, at least 7 or 8, then every thing being cold, break the Vessel, and gather the Sublimate, which keep for use. § 4. The Mercurius Vitae in this sublimes but in part, so that the Medicament con∣sists partly of the Mercurius Vitae, and partly of the Mer∣cury it self; and this Subli∣mate is caused from the re∣maining Acids in the Merc. Vitae, for were there not A∣cids enough to engage the Particles of the Quicksilver, it would fly away all in Fumes, whereas here they supply the place of Salt and Vitriol, whereby you have a sweet Sublimate having the Vertues of Mercurius dulcis joyned with the Vertues of the Merc. Vitae, and becomes by so much the better Medicine. § 5. That it cannot vo∣mit, tho' it contains some Particles of the Merc. Vitae is manifest, for that they re∣ceive a perfect correction from the Alcali of the Quick-silver, the Acid of its Mer∣curial Sulphur, not being e∣nough to fortifie the Eme∣tick
property, in opposition to the Cathartick. LXXXVII. Panacea Hart∣manni, Hartman's Pana∣cea, or All-heal. Bate.] ℞ Combustible Sul∣phur of Antimony ℥j. rectified Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur ℥iij. Regulus of Antimony ℥j. digest warm for ten days, then distil by a Glass Retort in Sand, co∣hobating there at least; aug∣ment the Fire towards the end, and the Matter reverbe∣rate for the space of five hours: afterwards take it forth, wash it in Rose-water and dry it: take of this Pouder ℥j. Salt of Coral ʒij. and mix them exactly S. A. It is instead of an universal Remedy: and is in it self an undoubted Dia∣phoretick, having a power of purifying or cleansing the Blood: and therefore in any curable Disease it performs the Work by sweating, chiefly in the French Pox▪ and De∣fedations of the Skin. Dose, à gr. x. ad xx. Salmon.] § 1. How this Combustible of Red Sulphur of Antimony is to be made, we will teach you from the same Hart. ℞ Cinnabar of Antimony in fine Pouder q. v. boil it in a very strong Lixi∣vium of Harts-ease, or Calx-Vive in an Iron Skillet for 3 or 4 hours: the Lixivium will be red by reason of the Sulphur, but the Argent Vive will run in the bottom in Flux: the Lixivium tin∣ged, by inclination separate, and whilst hot filterate thro' brown Paper, and put it again where it was for certain hours, and the Sulphur of the Anti∣mony will precipitate in form of a red Pouder, which sepa∣rated from the Lixivium must afterwards be edulcorated with fair water, and dryed with a gentle heat. § 2. ℞ Then of this Sulphur of Antimony, Regulus of An∣timony, A. gr. v. Oil of Sul∣phur ℥j. or instead thereof Oil of Vitriol ℥iij. digest for cer∣tain days in a Glass Retort in a Sand-heat, then distil in Sand, cohobating three or four times, increasing the Fire ve∣hemently for the last twelve hours, and the whole will re∣main fixt, which take out wash with Rose-water; and then add to every Ounce of the same Salt of Coral ʒij. which mix and keep for use. § 3. How extreamly these Proportions differ from our Text, I cannot but observe; there being but ana. gr. 5. of the Sulphur of Antimony and Regulus to ℥iij. of the Oil of Vitriol; which bare no proportion together, for which
reason I am apt to believe it to be a Mistake in the Print∣er, tho' it is according to the most correct Latin Copy in Folio: that which confirms me the more in this belief is the Prescript of Beguinus Ty∣rocin. Chym. Lib. 2. Cap. 20. which exactly agrees with our Author and from whence I believe it was fetcht, which is infinitely more reasonable, and agreeable to the nature of the Prescription. § 4. It wonderfully pro∣vokes Sweat says Hartman, chiefly in malignant and epi∣demical Distempers, being given in proper Sudorifick Waters: It is also sometimes given in Mithridate, and in Conserves; and in the De∣coction of Harts-horn, or o∣ther things of like nature. LXXXVIII. Regulus Jovia∣lis, Regulus of Tin. Bate.] It is made of the Regulus of Antimony melted ℥iv. by adding thereto filings of Jupiter the same quantity, S. A. It opens all Obstructi∣ons, and is a noble Remedy against the Suffocation of the Womb. Salmon.] § 1. The Prepa∣ration is easie and obvious, but Marggrave makes it in differing proportions, thus. ℞ English Tin ℥iij. Regulus of Antimony ℥ij. melt the Tin in a Crucible Red-fire-hot, then presently put into it the Pouder of the Regulus of Antimony, and they will presently be uni∣ted flowing: then gently pour forth the fluid Matter into another Crucible, so will it turn into Regulus, which in Colour will not be much diffe∣ring from Silver. § 2. Or thus from the same Marggrave. ℞ Regu∣lus of Antimony in fine Pou∣der ℥ij. put it into a Crucible Red-fire-hot, so will the Mat∣ter presently be in▪ a flux like Water, then add English Tin, whole or in lumps (not filings) ℥j. and it will melt in a mo∣ment with the Regulus, and becomes one fluid Mass: pour it forth flowing into a fusory Cone or clear Crucible, so will you have a Mass very hard and white, which being polish∣ed will look like Silver, but being beaten or hammered is found to be brittle, this take and keep for use. § 3. It is of use for pre∣paring a Butter, in order for making the Jovial Bezoar. And amongst Mechanicks it serves for making several Ves∣sels and Utensils, as Platters, Dishes, Porrengers, Sawcers, Plates, Sword-hilts, &c. and
in Physick it is given against all Obstructions of the Vis∣cera, chiefly of the Womb. § 4. One Secret commu∣nicated to me by an ancient Midwife I think fit to dis∣close, viz. that it makes bar∣ren Women fruitful; and that she had given it to some Scores upon the account, and with the desired success: her way of giving it was thus. § 5. ℞ Regulus of Tin in Pouder à ℈j. ad ʒj. Flesh of Vipers in pouder ʒss Mithri∣date q. s. make it into a Bo∣lus, which repeat every night for a Month. I upon know∣ledge hereof, gave it to three Women successively, and it succeeded according to their desire: It may do so in o∣thers for all that I know; this I am certain of, it is a great opener of Obstructi∣ons of the Womb, and a strengthener of it, which are the chief Causes either of Barrenness or Miscarriage. LXXXIX. Regulus Lunaris, Regulus, or Metal of Sil∣ver. Bate.] It is made by add∣ing of Regulus of Antimony melted ℥viij. Luna ℥j. S. A. It is good against the Epi∣lepsie, and to strengthen the Brain. Salmon.] § 1. Schroder makes it with Regulus of Antimony p. iv. or v. to Silver p. j. let them be melted and poured out, as is usual into a Regulus to be separated from the Sco∣ria or Dross: melt the Dross again with Crude Antimony, and when they run add filings of Iron, and melt it again till the Regulus settle, and do thus the third time, or till no more Regulus appears. § 2. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 9. Cap. 4. makes it by putting in the Luna in small bits, but without assign∣ing any proportions, and calls it Electrum Lunare, from which Electrum (saith he) or Regulus of Antimony pre∣pared with Luna, some think the Febrifugium antiquarta∣narium Riverii is made, which he in his Appendix to the third Century of his Obser∣vations aenigmatically de∣scribes. § 3. Therefore says Rolfin∣cius: ℞ Of this Electrum, and of corrosive Sublimate, A. lbss. and distil from thence by Retort a Butter: precipitate it with Fountain-water; the Li∣quor will grow milky or white, and by standing quiet and still, a Pouder will subside, or settle, which edulcorate by washing, and keep for use.
§ 4. But in this Preparati∣on there is nothing answers to his Hercules, and his 12 Labours; and therefore seems not to be Genuine; the true Preparation we have taught in a former Process of this Book, and so shall say no more of it here: As to this, it purges , both by Vomit and Stool, af∣ter the manner of Mercurius Vitae, but more gently, and may be given à gr. ij. ad iv. and in strong Bodies to gr. vj. with Observations as in other Vomits. § 5. It is a Specifick Eme∣tick against the Quartan A∣gue, as also the Epilesie, and most Diseases of the Head and Brain proceeding from cold, moisture and repletion of Humors. § 6. But the simple Lunar Regulus of our Author is to be given daily every Morn∣ing fasting, à gr. iv. ad viij. and increasing the Dose eve∣ry Morning half a Grain till it comes to ℈j. or rather till it begins to vomit strongly; af∣ter the use of it for some time, the Emetick property will, cease, the Medicament will seem to become alterative, and the Patient will grow well. § 7. It prevails against the Scurvy, and most Diseases proceeding from a discrasie of the Blood and Humors; chiefly against Diseases of the Head and Brain, and against Quartan Agues, and other Agues whether regular or irregular, viz. whether sim∣ple, double, or tripple, &c. XC. Cauterium Lunare▪ The Silver Caustick. Bate.] Dissolve Luna p j. in A. F. p. iij. and evaporate to dryness, afterwards augment the Fire to a melting heat, and till the Fumes cease; then pre∣sently power forth the Matter into a little Brass or Earthen Vessel of a convenient bigness. It is a perpetual Caustick, if it be kept from the Air. It takes away Warts by touch∣ing them therewith. Salmon.] § 1. See our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. Sect. 20. But Thibaut makes it after this manner. Take A. F. ℥j. refined Silver Fi∣lings ℥ij. put them together in∣to a little Matrass, with a streight long neck, so big as that ⅔ of it may be empty: let it be Coated half way, and set it in a Round covered with Sand in a circular Fire, giving a small heat till the Silver is dissolved; and the dissolvant is evaporated to dryness, and the
Matter remains black not un∣like a Pnice store: then in∣crease the Fire to a melting eat, and continue it till the ling ceases, and no more Vapors arise, which shws that the Matter is in fusion; then without delay pour out the Mat∣ter into little Brass or Iron Moulds (for if it cools in the Marass it will be reduced into a white Pouder, which is the Calx of Luna, and may by the addition of Bo∣rax return to its first Meta∣lick nature) and keep the same for use. § 2. Lemery takes Spirit of Nitre ℥iij. to Silver ℥j. and dissolves in a Vial in a Sand heat, evaporating about ⅔ of the moisture, then puts the rest as it is hot into a good large Crucible over a gentle Fire, and lets it alone till the boiling Matter sinks quietly to the bottom of the Crucible, then increasing the Fire, till it becomes like Oil, pours it out in∣to pred Brass or Iron Moulds a little iled and heated, in which it presently coagulates and bardns, after which he takes the Matter and keeps it in a Glass close stopt for use. § 3. Or thus according to Charras. ℞ Refined granu∣lated Silver ℥iv. put it into a Glass Cucurbit, in a gentle Sand beat, and affuse thereon A. F. ℥xij. digest till the Silver is dissolved, and if you please, co∣ver the Cucurbit with its Head and abstract about half the A. F. or otherwise evaporate it, and let the Sediment cool and Grystallize; which then put by piece meals into a good Crucible upon a Culot in the midst of the fire-place in a small Fordace, regulating the Fire that the Matter may not boil over; and continue it till the dissolved Silver becomes as it were dry in the Crucible, and the red Vapors of the A. F. cease to arise; at which time increase your fire to melt the Silver, which after some few boilings will descend to the bottom of the Crucible, of a Consistency like that of thick Oil: then take out the Cruci∣ble, and gently pour out the melted Silver into proper Moulds (before hand heat and greased) in which the Silver will coagulate into brittle Stones of a blackish colour, which being half cold, take them out of the Moulds, and put them up into Glasses, &c. to preserve them for the Air. § 4. This Caustick caute∣rizes the Flesh or Bones upon which it is applied, provi∣ded you moisten the end of the Stone, or the part, upon which you would have it o∣perate.
It is a gentle and pleasant Eschatotick, and consumes by touching all Warts, proud Flesh, Cancers, Ulcers, and Red Spots, wet∣ting them first with Water, and then applying the Stone. § 5. It eases the Pain of the Teeth, using it as has been said upon that part of the Skin and Cartilage, that makes the hollow of the Ear. § 6. The Crumbs of this Stone poudered, and incor∣porated with a Suppurative consumes likewise proud and ill Flesh, and takes away Rottenness in Ulcers. § 7. It serves likewise to dye the Hair black, if you put gr. ij. or iij. of it into a Spoonful of Water distilled from the green Shells of Wall-nuts, and then with a Brush-pencil to wash the Hair over with it two or three times, holding mean-season a Comb between it and the Flesh or Skin, for otherwise it will not fail to black the Skin, where-ever it touches, because of the Vitriol which is in the A. F. § 8. If the Hair some∣times grows green, it is be∣cause there has been dissol∣ved in the A. F. Silver al∣lay'd with Copper instead of pure Cuppelated Silver. § 9. This Stone may be made of Copper instead of Silver, but then it will not keep so well, because the Copper being very porous does more easily suffer the Air to enter it and dissolve it. § 10. If you use fine Cu∣pellated Silver, you will from ℥j. of it have ʒxiij. of the Lapis Infernialis; but if you use Silver with allay ℥j. of it will not yield you above ʒxj. The reason of the increase of weight is from the sharp A∣cids of the Spirit of Nitre adhearing to the Silver; but the difference of the increase comes from Cupellated Silver having finer Pores than the other, whereby it the better retains the Acid, and so makes the Stones thereby the stronger. § 11. This Strength or the Effects of the Stone proceeds from the lost Spirits which remain in the Pores of the Silver, and are petrified with it, which work more speedi∣ly or more slowly, and with less violence, according as they were dissolved with a greater or less quantity of Moisture. § 12. Lemery says this Stone is more Caustick than the Crystals of Silver, though compounded of the same In∣gredients,
the reason of which he says is, that in the Eva∣poration of the Spirit of Nitre, the sharpest part remains at last, which gives the strength to the Infernal Stone; where∣as in the Crystals (says he) there's a much weaker Spirit, as being impregnated with watery parts. § 13. But Charras says that the Crystals of Silver of which the Stones are made are more Caustick than the stones themselves: the reason he gives for it, is for that the simple dissolution of Silver in A. F. burns with more speed and violence than the Stones or Cstals themselves, as Ex∣perience teaches, for if the least drop falls upon ones Hand, it will burn it imme∣diately, and very deep, if you do not presently wash it to weaken and carry off the Caustick Spirits of the A. F. which says he is not to be wondred at, for that the A.F. has nothing in it hardly but what is Caustick, and the Sales are not able to act as they should but when they are dissolved. § 14. Nor does this Lapis Infernal burn at all, unless it be wet; and for that reason the dissolution of the Silver in A. F. or S. N. which are Caustick in all their parts, and able to act alone beyond the force of common Water, which is used to excite the Action of this Caustick, and make it operate. § 15. If you take Crystals of Luna, and melt them in a Crucible boiling the Li∣quor till it comes to the con∣sistence of Oil, and then cast it into the Moulds, you will have also a Lapis Infer∣nalis, like to this described by our Author. § 16. This Silver Caustick is nothing but Cupellated Sil∣ver, dissolved and calcined Philosophically by A. F. &c. and then coagulated by the Evaporation of the greatest part of the Humidity, and at last petrefied by the fusi∣on of the said coagulated Matter, which has retained so much of the A. F. as to make the Luna into the con∣sistence of a Stone. § 17. The Matrass here used ought to be small, be∣cause we prepare not much of it at a time, and the fire gentle that the Matter may not run over: its neck long and straight (if the whole Operation be done in a Ma∣trass) for the easier pouring it into Moulds; it ought also to be of strong Glass, and coat∣ed on the bottom half way, that a naked fire, drying up
the Matter may not break the Glass. § 18. And tho' Silver may be dissolved in an equal quan∣tity of A. F. yet double or treble quantities are used, as well for making a greater quantity of the Stone, as that it may be softer and less black: for the lesser and less black: for the lesser the quan∣tity of the A. F. the harder the Stone and the more black, the Silver not being so per∣fectly calcin'd, nor contain∣ing so much of the A. F. § 19. In boiling of this Solution, it ought to be with a gentle Fire, because it is apt to run over into the Fire; or else it ejects some drops or sprinklings upon the hands of the Artist or his Cloaths, which upon the Skin smarts vehemently. § 20. You must also often cast your Eye into the Cruci∣cible, chiefly towards the conclusion, for so soon as the Matter ceases boiling and ap∣pears like Oil, you must im∣mediately cast it into the Mould; for if it be longer in the Fire, the strongest Spirits would evaporate, and the Stone be less Corrosive. § 21. That this Caustick may be made either of Sp. Nitri or A. F. but by the first it will be whitish, and less Caustick; and instead of blackning the Skin and Teeth which it may touch, it will only make them look yellow; for that it is the Vi∣triol with blacks in the A. F. but not other Corrosive or A∣cid can corrode Silver, nor by consequence serve in this composition. § 22. To make little Moulds of Lattin, you must hold it a little time over the Fire, so will it be flexible, and not apt to break, then cut off a piece, and toul it about a Stick as thick as a Quill, and three Inches long, and so tie it close with small Wyar, turning up the bottom so as it may not go through, then paste it with our Lute, and let it dry; and when you use it, take out the Stick, and pour in the Matter, which will condense into petrefied Cyllinders. § 23. To make this Cau∣stick good and strong whe∣ther white, grey, or black, you ought to use only Cupel∣lated Silver, for by a mixti∣on of Copper it will be both green and soft, and will easi∣ly melt of it self. § 24. From hence we con∣clude, that it can never be made of Lead or Tin, which are yet softer: nor yet of I∣ron, because it cannot be dis∣solved and brought into a po∣table
Liquor, by reason of its great dryness and earthy∣ness: As for Gold, tho' it may be made of that by dis∣solution in A. R. or Spirit of Salt, acuated with decripita∣ted Salt, you would only have your labour for your pains, because refined Gold would be too dear. And as for the Marchassites or Half-Metals, they are not fit for this Operation, because their dissolution evaporated and reduced to a Calx, cannot keep the Consistency of a Stone, but must remain a Pouder. XCI. Regulus Martis, Metal or settling of Iron, i. e. Martial Mettal of Anti∣mony. Bate.] It is made of Mars ℥ij. mixed with Nitre, Tartar, and Antimony A. ℥ivss. and detonated S. A. It cures the French Pox, without any Flux at the Mouth, or Spit∣ting. Salmon. § 1. You may see another way of making this Regulus Martis in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. Sect. 66. with large Notes and Observations thereon: this Regulus is nothing but Antimony perfectly opened by Nitre, and divested of its poysonous qualities, by a long fusion, tho' not long e∣nough to evaporate all its pur∣gative Sulphur; and its eme∣tick Vertue is fixt by the addition of Mars. § 2. It purges by Stool very well without provoking to vomit, if it be infused in White-wine, or made into Cups, or Pills, which they call everlasting Pills: you may infuse ℥j. of the Pouder in a Quart of Wine, Sack, Ale, &c. of which you may give ab ℥j. ad iv. in the morn∣ing fasting. § 3. If you make it into Pills (which is not so good) one large Pill may serve you for ever, taking it out of the Close-stool, and then making it clean for another time; the Pill may be made in weight from ʒj. ad ʒij. and in some Bodies will work very well. § 4. And if you pouder 18 or 20. ounces of it, and tye it up loosly in a course Linnen-Rag, and then let it infuse in lbiij. of some Sudorifick decoction of the Woods, Roots, Barks, &c. it is said to cure the Pox without fluxing with Mercurial Remedies: but in∣deed this Medicament con∣tains a Philosophick Mercury of greater Excellency than the Vulgar.
§ 5. If you dissolve Regu∣lus of Mars in Spirit of Sal-Gem, and macerate the Solu∣tion, and distil it, and then inspissate, you will have a good purge, and a Vomit which works gently: the Dose may be two or three Grains. § 6. Le Febure from Begui∣nus makes this Martial Re∣gulus thus. ℞ Ends of Horse-Nails, or filings of Iron or Steel lbss, very pure and clean, put them into a large deep strong Crucible, place it in a Wind Fornace, upon a Culot, which is a round bottom or Tile so called, cover it with a piece of Brick bury it in Charcole mixt with kindled Coals, that they may kindle by degrees: the Iron being clearly red-hot, drawing near to a white Glow∣ing, add to it of choice Anti∣mony in Pouder lbj. and cover it again with the Brick and Chals to make the Fusion and Ʋnion of the two Matters; which done, throw into the Crucible of good Nitre in gross Pouder, a little warmed ℥iv. that taking flame with the Sul∣phur of the Antimony, it may make the Fusion the quicker and clearer: this done, imme∣diately as soon as the Ebulition is over take forth the Crucible and pour the melted Matter into a Cone or Regulus Vessel bemeared with Wax; upon the brims of which strike with a Hammer or Pestel, to cause the Regulus the better to sepa∣rate it self: but for want of such a Vessel, take your Cru∣cible out of the Fire, and stri∣king softly upon the brims of it, let it cool, and the Regulus will settle in the same. § 7. Take the Regulus out of the Vessel, or Crucible, and therein you shall find a seeming uniform Lump; but knock upon it about the mid∣dle, and the Regulus which is in the bottom, will forsake the Dross which is (in this Operation) uppermost, and is nothing else but the Mar∣tial Sulphur, and Terrestial Impurieties of the Antimony, with some little remainings of the Nitre, which also frame by themselves a kind of close compacted Lump, which every day dissolves it self in the Air into a dry Pouder, resembling dirty fi∣lings of Iron. § 8. The Regulus not being pure enough in the first melt∣ing, beat it therefore into pou∣der, and add to it ℥iij. of An∣timony in pouder to hasten its fusion, and put it in a new Crucible, and cause it again to flow in a Wind Fornace, and being in fusion, cast into it of very dry Nitre ℥ij. or iij. be∣ing
warmed and in gross Pou∣der, upon which there will be yet again a small Detonation or Ebulition, which being over, cast is again into the Iron Cone, knocking upon it as before: and from this Regulus separate the blackish Impurities as before, and you will find your Regulus twice as pure and white as the former: proceed thus the third time, and you will find the Scoria more grey or whitish, which is a sign that it begins to draw nearer to a state of Purity. § 9. Proceed now to a fourth fusion but always with new Nitre dry and warm, giving a very strong fire this last time, that the Nitre may be in a very good fusion; then cast it quickly, and with swift∣ness stir the Casting Vessel, be∣ing first well warmed, and turn it round, and you shall have a bright Sellate or starry Regulus of Antimony, to the very Center, white as Silver, and repleat with a Solar Sul∣phur▪ for the Nitre which was on the top of it, is all yellow, an infallible sign, (with the Star on the top of it) that it has attained to its purity and perfection. § 10. Charras makes it ex∣actly according to Le Febure's Method now declared, and adde, that the Antimony used in this Preparation, affords in proportion to its quantity, much more Regulus, than in that which is simply Antimo∣nial; because the Mars not only hinders the dissipation, which would otherwise hap∣pen of several Particles of the Antimony, but also aug∣ments its quantity by joyning with it in its own pure parts in the Fusion; nor can the Nitre make so great dissipa∣tion as in the simple Regulus, because it is here used later, and also mixed by degrees in a small quantity. § 11. But this is also true, that should you long continue to mix it, it might at length consume all the Mars, and change all the Qualities of the Antimony, rendering it Diaphoretick. § 12. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 11. Cap. 1. saith that the oftner the Calcination is reiterated with Nitre, the more the Regulus decreases, and at length is all turned into Scoria, and that the ite∣ration of the Calcination to the end the Star may appear, is done all in vain: this he says he knows by experience; but we will bring Experience against Experience, and say that for the three or four Ite∣rations, the Regulus becomes apparently more bright and
pure; but after the fourth time, it may diminish not on∣ly in the quantity, but in the Vertues also, and so we a∣gree with him. § 13. Marggrave makes the Regulus after Beguinus his Method, but only with one single Calcination, and with a quarter part of the Nitre which he puts in, in the first Calcination: but this Regulus he beats into pouder, and melts it again in a clean Cru∣cible, which he performs with a very small Fire, so says he, it comes forth more pure and bright, adding to∣wards the end a small pro∣portion of Nitre. § 14. Le Mort makes it with pieces of Steel p. iv. which being made red hot, he adds to it. Antimony in small bits p. ix. melt them together, and fuses them with a Pouder pre∣pared of Nitre and Tartar, ℥j. letting them flow in the Fire for an hour, then pours them forth, shaking or striking the Cone, and separates the Re∣gulus from the Scoria: this Regulus he again melts, and cast in by degrees, about a sixth part of pure Nitre, for a far∣ther separation of the Scoria; then casting it into the Cone, he lets it stand till it is perfect∣ly cold, so obtains a stellified Regulus: this Regulus says he, may be done without addition of Salts, but then it will not be so pure. § 15. Lemery makes it ex∣actly after Le Febure's Me∣thod with four Calcinations adding fresh Antimony ¼ part the second time, but no An∣timony the two last times, but each time the same proporti∣on of Nitre; observing the last time to melt it well, be∣fore you cast the Nitre into it, that the Star may ap∣pear. § 16. From Antimony ℥xvj. and Iron ℥viij. after the first purification you will have ℥x. of Regulus, and ℥xiij. of Scoria: after the second pu∣rification ℥ixss. of Regulus: after the third purification ℥viij. ʒij. do remain; and after the fourth time you will have only ℥vij. ʒvj. of this Martial Regulus. § 17. Now the Iron in its first fusion with the Antimony, turns almost all of it into Scoria, or Dross, because it joyns with the more impure Sulphur, so that the Reguline or Metalline part being more weighty falls down to the bottom. § 18. The Nitre is used only in order to open the Body of the Antimony, and cause a more perfect fusion, the better to make a separati∣on
of the grosser parts, and to carry off some of its offen∣sive Sulphur by its Volatile parts; so that the Scoria con∣sists of Iron, Sulphur and fixt Nitre. § 19. This Fusion is thrice repeated because some Par∣ticles of the Mars (which easily joyns with Antimony by reason of a gross Sulphur it contains) may leave the Regulus and joyn with it. § 20. The Star appearing in the Martial Regulus (tho' not in the simple Regulus) is from the Antimony it self, which is apt to shoot into Needles, as they who shall be pleased to make its Vitriol may easily prove; but before it is purified from many of its sulphurous and impure parts, these Star-like Needles cannot appar, unless confu∣sedly: but being purified with Mars (which attracts to its self most of its soft and impure Sulphurous parts, which hinder the Stars ap∣pearance, and the Crystalli∣zation of the Antimony) the Particles of the Crystaline substance of the Antimony remain and stick close toge∣ther, which being joyned with the most pure parts of the Mars from that Star, by a natural shooting or disposi∣tion of the same: and this Star appears in the purified Regulus Martialis because it was naturally in the Antimony before, and not from any thing which was in the Mars, the Iron only helping to puri∣fie it, expatiate its Crystaline Particles, and harden it; for which reason the Martial Regulus is found to be harder than the common or simple Re∣gulus, tho' never so often pu∣rified. § 21. The Dose of this Martial Regulus, if it be gi∣ven in its own substance in pouder is from gr. x. ad ℈j. in some Conserve, or other proper Vehicle. § 22. To make the Gol∣den Diaphoretick Sulphur of Antimony. ℞ Scoria of Re∣gulus Martis, q. v. boil a quarter of an hour in fair Wa∣ter, in a Brass or Iron Vessel, so have you a dark yellow Lixi∣vium: filter the Liquor into a Glass or Stone Vessel (not a glazed Earthen one, lest the Salts should corrode the Lead) and affuse thereon two or three Spoonfuls of Spirit of Vinegar, Nitre, Vitriol or Sulphur (the stronger it is, the higher the Colour of the Precipitate) so will the Liquor coagulate the Curd being settled, decant the clear Liquor (which keep to wash Bedsteds with to preserve them from Buggs) and on the
Curd affuse common Water, so will a Saffron coloured Pre∣cipitate or Pouder fall down: decant this first water, and affuse more in great quantity, to sweeten it, and take away its ill Smell, and Emetick quality; lastly, dry it between two Papers leisurely in the Shade for use. § 23. The Acid poured on the Lixivium causes 1. A co∣agulum, 2. Gives the dull yellow colour. 3. Causes it to stink abominably: for the Antimonial Sulphur is dissol∣ved by an Alcali in the Li∣quor, and therefore it will not let it go till the Alcali is weakned by an Acid. And as to the colour, Sulphur is naturally yellow but the A∣cid enlivens and heightens the Colour, so that being washt from the Alcalious Salts, the Pouder becomes of a fine light yellow. And Sulphur being heat, always stinks, therefore being heat∣ed by the Action of the Acid and re-action of its Dissol∣vant, it causes that extream∣ly abominable smell. § 24. That a great quan∣tity of Water being poured upon the Coagulum, it pre∣sently precipitates into a yel∣low Pouder, of a much live∣lier colour; for the Water dissolves all the Salts of what kind soever, and thereby frees the Antimonial Sulphur from all its tyes and bonds; so that the Sulphur having thrown off its Salts, it then appears of its own natural colour. § 25. This Golden Dia∣phoretick Sulphur, is nothing but a fixed Sulphur of Anti∣mony, drawn from the Scoria of Antimony, opened and melted by Nitre: for the Volatile Sulphur of Antimo∣ny, is so much the more poy∣sonous; as it is Volatile; and that which is least Volatile is violently Emetick and Ca∣thartick; but this being once fixed it is only Diapho∣retick and opening. § 26. For a Demonstrati∣on that this Diaphoretick Sul∣phur is but a fixt Sulphur of Antimony, do but let the Scoria lie two or three days upon the ground, and there will rise of it self, without any Artifice, a kind of yel∣low Moss, which is nothing but the true Sulphur of An∣timony purified. § 27. It is a powerful Dia∣phoretick and Diuretick, ser∣ving principally to provoke Womens Monthly Terms, being given à gr. 20. ad 30. either alone or with Saffron, Savin, or Sena, gr. x. infu∣sing them twelve hours in
White-wine, and so continu∣ing i for two or three days together. Where Note, that if this Pouder be not well washt and edulcorated, it may both provoke Vomiting and Stools too: and there∣fore of that you must be care∣ful. XCII. Regulus Solari, Solar Metal of Antimony. Bate.] It is made of the Regulus of Antimony being melted ℥iv. mixt with fine Gold ℥st. S. A. It is an Hy∣sterick, and Deoppilative, or opener of Obstructions. Salmon.] § 1. Schroder makes it after this manner. ℞ Antimony ℥iv. Gold ℥j. melt them together, and pour them out (as is usual) into a Regulus, to be separated from the Scoria or Dross: melt the Scoria again with Crude An∣timony, and when they run, and silings of Mars, and melt it again till the Regulus set∣tles; do this the third time, or till no more Regulus is pro∣duced. § 2. Also a Regulus or Gol∣den Ceruse of Antimony is thus made. ℞ Regulus of Anti∣mony ℥j. fine Gold ʒj. Sal-Ni∣tre ℥iij. Calcine them without melting (in a Crucible) so the Regulus will be a yellow Pou∣der; the Gold losing something of its weight: edulcorate the Pouder, and if you please cal∣cine again. This poudered Golden Regulus excellently provokes Sweat. § 3. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 11. Cap. 5. makes it more compound, and calls it Electrum Majus: Thus, ℞ Martial Regulus of Anti∣mony ℥iij. melt it in a Cruci∣ble, and then add of fine Sol ʒss. of Luna ʒj. of Venus ʒij. of Jupiter ʒiij. and of Sa∣turn ʒiv. add them sensim & sensim, and that their Flux may be promoted cast in of Nitre ℥ij. then pour it forth into a Cone▪ and being cold keep it for use. § 4. The use of this Ele∣ctrum Majus is to prepare therefrom with Corrosive Sublimate a Butter, and from thence a Mercurius Vitae, and a Bezcar Minerale. This E∣lectrum calcined with an e∣qual proportion of Nitre, and edulcorated with fair Water, is given ad gr. iv. or v. either by it self, or with other things, in Broth, or some other pro∣per Liquor or Antidote. § 5. Le Mort makes it thus. ℞ The best and purest Regulus of Antimony ℥ss. Gold purified with Antimony ʒiij. mix and melt them together,
according to the usual Me∣thod. § 6. The Dose is ad ℈j. be∣ing first reduced into fine Pouder, and then taken in some proper Vehicle, as Con∣serve, Electuary, Syrup or the like, in the Morning fast∣ing, having a good quantity of Posset-drink or Broth, ready before hand, to drink with it, in its working. XCIII. Regulus Veneris, Me∣tal or Settlings of Venus i. e. Venerial Metal of Antimony. Bate.] It is made of Venus, Tartar and Nitre, A. ℥iv. An∣timony ℥viij. mixing and de∣tonating S. A. It opens Ob∣structions in the Rickets. Salmon.] § 1. There is little or no difference between this and the former Reguli, as to the Methodus faciendi, you may either make it as our Author here directs with Crude Antimony: or other∣wise with the Regulus Anti∣monii, adding a proportion∣al quantity of Nitre, to fa∣cilitate the Fusion of the Ve∣nus, &c. § 2. It is an excellent o∣pener of Obstructions, not only of the Liver and Spleen, but also of the Womb, and of all the other Viscera; and it has been found by Experi∣ence to be good against the Green-sickness in Virgins, more especially if it be pre∣pared with the Martial Regu∣lus, which has a Specifick property for that purpose. § 3. It very much sweet∣ens the Blood, and therefore dissolves the Coagulum caused by the Acid, whence pro∣ceeds the Rickets in Children, the Green-sickness in young Maids, and the Kings-Evil in elder Persons, with other Diseases of like kind, pro∣ceeding from internal Ob∣structions, &c. § 4. It is a Specifick against Barrenness in both Sexes, for it not only opens Obstructi∣ons of the Womb, cleansing and purifying it from all its feculencies, but it also streng∣thens the Instruments of Ge∣neration in both Sexes, con∣firming the Tone of the Sper∣matick Vessels, and enabling them to do their Duty, both to the Generation of Seed, and Ejection of the same be∣ing generated, &c. Dose, à gr. viij. ad xij. or xx. ac∣cording to Age and Strength.
XCIV. Secundinae Preparatae, The Secundines or After∣birth prepared. Bate.] ℞ The Secundine of a Woman, or of a Sow, at its first bringing forth; wash it is White-wine; dry it as speedily as may be, and reduce it into a fine Pouder, S. A. Dose is ad ʒj. against the Fal∣ling-sickness and Suffocation of the Womb: it also facili∣tates the Birth in time of Travel, &c. Salmon.] § 1. After it is washt in the White-wine, it will be best to cut it into small pieces, for by that means it will the more easi∣ly dry, and be made fit to reduce into Pouder. § 2. But that it might the more speedily be reduced, it will be best after the wash∣ing it with Wine, and dry∣ing it with Cloths, to wash it in the best rectified S. V. and then let it dry of its own accord, and being dryed to dip it in again, and let it dry again, and this work to reiterate four or five times; for by this means the Fire, or Sulphur of the S. V. will more effectually dry it in one Day, than by the other it will be dryed in a Week; and so it will be much more easily reduced to a Pou∣der. § 3. The Author has shown you its Vertues, for which it is excellent, but the Dose is too small upon some occasi∣ons. It may be given à ℈ij. ad ʒij. in some proper Vehi∣cle: But Note, the After∣burden of a Woman much exceeds, and is more Speci∣fick than that of a Beast. XCV. Sedativum Archaei, A Quieter of the Archaeus, or chief Vital and Animal Powers. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sal-Armoniack martiated from which draw a Tincture with S. N. which abstract to a just Consistency S. A. It has the Vertues of the Flowers of Sal-Armoniack martiated. Salmon.] § 1. How these martiated Flowers of Sal-Armoniack are to be made, see Chap. 10. Sect. 4. follow∣ing. § 2. It is only a Tincture drawn from the martiated Flowers of Sal-Arm. and therefore you may choose whether you will abstract any of the Spirit or no: if you abstract all the Spirit, the remainder will be a solid
Tincture: but if half the Spirit, it will be a Syrup like Tincture. § 3. But since it is impossi∣ble to abstract any of the Spirit, but that some of the Volatile parts of the Medi∣cine will come over with it; and since the remainder is not to be given alone, but in some proper Vehiculum; it is in my opinion better to keep the Tincture in its whole Body, without any abstraction, for as much it is but doubling the Dose, and the work is done; whereby, much labour and loss is saved. § 4. It powerfully opens Obstructions of the Viscera, but chiefly of the Slpeen and Womb, thereby removing Melancholy, and irregular Fancies thence proceeding; and is profitable against Va∣pors, and Fits of the Mother, but more especially is a Spe∣cifick against the Green-sick∣ness in Virgins, and the Ric∣kets in Children. Dose, à gr. x. ad ℈j. or ʒss. XCVI. Silices Preparati, Flints prepared. Bate.] ℞ Flints white and pellucid gathered out of Rivers; heat them red-fire-hot in a Crucible, and quench them in Fountain-water (in which Sal-Armoniack has been dissolved) so long till they may be made into a Pouder, make a subtil Pouder by grinding on a Mar∣ble, which make into Troches with Rose-water, drying them well S. A. They are Diure∣tick, and used against the Dropsie, Stone, stoppage of Urine, &c. Dose, gr. 10. ad 20. &c. Salmon.] § 1. Hartman up∣on Crollius says that Flints and other preparations of such hard Stones may be taken inwardly with more safety and satisfaction, than if un∣prepared, by breaking into pieces and grinding into Pouder, to be taken either alone, or mixt with other Medicaments. § 2. And therefore Crollius prepares a Salt of Flints, af∣ter this manner. ℞ Pouder of Flints, Sulphur, A. q. v. Calcine three or four times in an open Fire, the Crucible be∣ing covered; and after with a Fire over the whole Crucible: then wash away the Sulphur and Feces, and being in fine Pouder, mix it with an equal quantity of purified Nitre, and calcine in a covered Crucible, in an open Fire, till they flow: then abstract the Salt with hot Water, and on the edulcora∣ted Pouder, affuse Oil of Tur∣pentine
drawn off from Horse-radish-roots: stir them dili∣gently for the first hour or two, lst the Matter congeal, so will they be resolved: afterwards abstract the Menstrum by an Alembick, and a Salt will re∣un in the bottom, which dulcifie well, always filtring and evaporating the distilled Water. This Salt put upon a Marble in a cold moist Cellar will resolve into Liquor. § 3. This Liquor much exceeds the former prepared Pouder of our Author, and may be given in some drops, viz. à gut. 10. ad 15. in Broth, or Aqua Calcis, &c. to all the purposes aforemen∣tioned. § 4. But if upon this said Liquor you put good Alcohol of Wine; it will extract or imbibe from the Liquor, its Tincture or Sulphur, and se∣parate it from the Salt under∣ath, and remain superna∣ting with the Alcohol; from which Tincture you may if you so please abstract the Spirit to a due Consistency. § 5. The Feces remaining in the bottom, after exacti∣on of the Menstruum afore∣mentioned poured on, may be calcined again with new Sulphur, and used for a far∣ther Extraction of Salt in the former manner. § 6. But Hartman has an ordinary preparation of Flints which he calls Diuretick, which for the sakes of those who have not Conveniences to make the former Prepara∣tion, and by reason it is short and easie to be done, we shall here insert. § 7. ℞ White River Flints, calcine them in the Fire, and quench them in rich Wine which so often repeat, till they be wholly reduced into Pou∣der. § 8. The Pouder you may use in Case and Place, and in the same Dose with that prescribed by our Author: The Wine filter; one draught of which (for that it contains▪ some part of the Salt of the Flint) being drank will presently expel Urine: for Tartar within the Bo∣dy stops the Urine, which is resolved and expelled by Salts given inwardly. See Our Pharmacop. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 12. Sect. 45. § 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
XCVII. Sulphur Antimonii, Sulphur of Antimony. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Tartar or Salt of Wormwood ℥iv. melt it in a Crucible, and put in Cochleatim, Crude Anti∣mony in Pouder ℥j. let it flow for the space of a quarter of an hour, and then your it out into a Brass Vessel: the Mass of a Saffron colour, edulcorate by many and often repeated ablu∣tions. S. A. It provokes Vo∣miting. Dose, à gr. 5. ad. 10. given with Cremor Tartari, it purges by Stool. Salmon.] § 1. This is Sul∣phur of Antimony mixed with all the gross Body of the Antimony, and is nothing near so good as the Sulphur Auratum; but it may do in want of the other, and sup∣ply its place. § 2. The Pills of Antimo∣ny going under the Name of Lockyer's Pills, are supposed to be this Vulgar Sulphur of Antimony, ground small, and made up with Honey or some such like Body, to which he ascribes almost innumerable Vertues. § 3. But the better Arrists mak the Sulphur of Antimo∣ny, by extracting it from the rest of its gross body: Schro∣der has it thus. ℞ Antimony, Tartar Ana. mix and melt them at the Fire, then cast them into a Pot full of hot wa∣ter; let them stand a night, then decant the Liquor, and precipitate the Sulphur by boiling or dropping in Spi∣rit of Vinegar, or some other Acid. § 4. The Sulphur of Ami∣mony is commonly drawn forth with Spirit of Vinegar, or by a strong Lixivium, such as this. ℞ Salt of Tartar, Quick-lime, common Salt cal∣cined, Ana. make a Lixivi∣um which filter. Or thus. ℞ Ashes of Bean-stalks, Quick∣lime, Pot-ashes, Ana. make a Lixivium. Or thus. ℞ Quick-lime lbj. Water lbxij. or xv. mix and digest, then decant the clear. § 5. Sulphur from the Ore, of Crude Antimony. ℞ Ʋn∣melted Antimony in fine Pou∣der lbiij. affuse on it a strong Lixivium of Lime-water; digest six days; decant, filter and by gentle boiling reduce it to a red Pouder. It both purges and vomits, being gi∣ven à gr. ij. ad v. § 6. Charras makes it from Cinnabar thus. ℞ Cinnabar of Antimony in fine Pouder, put it into a glazed Earthen Rot upon which affuse a strong Lixivium made of Salt of
Tartar, Quick lime, and Pot-Ashes: fill the Pot almost full of this Lye; boil all for three or four hours, putting in from time to time, new Lye into the Po, as it wastes: then whilst the Liquor is bot filter it, and save the revived Mercury, which will lie at the bottom; and if you please affuse on the Liquor Spirit of Vinegar to ha∣ste e Precipitation of the Sulpur; or else letting the Liquor cool, the Sulphur of the Cinnabar which is the Sulphur of the Antimony will precipi∣tate to the bottom of its own accord▪  being precipitated wash it with Water several times, till it is perfectly edul∣corated, then dry it, and keep it in a Glass Bottle close stopt up for use. § 7. This Sulphur is not to be taken for that, which is said to be one of the prin∣ciples of Antimony, which being united with its most pure parts, is as it were inse∣parable from it. It is given à gr. ij. ad iv. or v. but it works violently both up∣wards and downwards, ex∣pelling all bad humors, not much unlike to the Sulphur Auratum drawn from the Feces of the Crocus. Metallo∣rum, or the Dross of the Re∣gulus of Antimony. XCVIII. Sulphur Antimonii Combustibile, The Com∣bustible Sulphur of Anti∣mony. Bate.] ℞ Antimony dissol∣ved in a proper Menstruum; and cast it into Water: gather the Sulphur, and wash it with warm water: or if you so please, sublime it per se S. A. Dose and Vertues are the same with the former. Salmon.] § 1. What this proper Menstruum is, our Au∣thor has not here told us; but to make it susceptible to every mean understanding, we will give you it from Zwelfer, Mantiss. Spagyr. Cap. 8. in the following Words. § 2. Distil an A. F. from Nitre and Alum, Ana. mix∣ing Bole with them: or other∣wise a sufficient quantity of calcin'd Alum, according to Art: to this A. F. ad d a fourth part of common Salt, and dis∣solve it in the same, in a gentle heat; so have you the Men∣struum prepared. § 3. ℞ New Antimony in fine Pouder q. v. put it into a Glass Alembick, and affuse thereon Guttatim & pederen∣tim, the afore-prepared Aqua Regia, or Menstruum, tting
it dissolve at much as it can: The Solution presently decant and filterate (for certain Rea∣sons) to which immediately put a large quantity of simple warm Water, so will the Sul∣phur be separated which care∣fully gather, and edulcorate it by many repeated Ablutions with fair water, and then keep it for use. § 4. Or thus, from the same Author. ℞ Hungarian Antimony in Pouder, or in place thereof, the Regulus in Pouder lbj. to which affuse Pe∣detentim, Oleum Tartari, per deliquium, lbj. or more: mix and put them over a gen∣tle Fire, and abstract to dry∣ness, so that the Mass may be of a Red colour: reduce it to a subtil Pouder, and boil it in an Iron Frying-pan, or Iron Kettle, with a sufficient quan∣tity of a strong Lixivium, re∣peating it several times, till the Lixivium appears very red: The tinged Lixivium precipitate with Spirit of Vine∣gar, so will a red Pouder fall to the bottom, which edulco∣rate by many Ablutions with fair warm Water, and keep the Sulphur for use. § 5. The aforegoing Sul∣phurs of Antimony are very Emetick, and therefore not very safe for vulgar use; but Zwelfer, that he might make them more profitable for practical use, fixes their E∣metick properties after this manner. ℞ Sulphur of An∣timony q. v. affuse thereon de∣phlegmated Oil or Spirit of Vitriol so much as may over∣top it an Inch, digest some days, and abstract; repeating this operation several times, so will you have a fixed Sul∣phur of Antimony, of great Vertues, and which will on∣ly work downwards, being given à gr. iv. ad x. increa∣sing the Dose gradually, as the Body of the Sick can bear it. § 6. From this fixt Sulphur of Antimony, with the Philo∣sophical Spirit of Vitriol or Spirit of Venus you may ex∣tract, a Tincture thus. ℞ Fixt Sulphur of Antimony q. v. Philosophick Spirit of Vitriol, so much as to over-top it three Inches: digest some days in a gentle B. M. then decant the tinged Spirit, which abstract to the thickness of Honey: to this Mellaginous extract affuse rectified S. V. so will you have a Rubicund Tincture: from which if you abstract the S. V. again to a due Consi∣stence, you will have the Es∣sentia Antimonii, of almost infinite worth in purifying the Blood, altering the dis∣crasie of the Juices and Hu∣mors,
and resisting all sorts of Fevers and Febritick Di∣stempers whatsoever: Dose, à gr. iv. ad vj. or x. in some Cordial Vehicle. § 7. And from the afore made Sulphur Antimonii not fixed, he makes a Balsamum Antimonii, after this man∣ner. ℞ Sulphur of Antimo∣ny aforesaid ℥j. Salt of Tartar a much: mix them well toge∣ther in a Crucible over agentle Fire, put the Mixture into a Glass Cucurbit, and affuse therein Spirit, i. e. Aethe∣ri Oil of Turpentine, so much  may overtop it about three Inches; digest in a gentle Sand or As eat, till the Spirit of Turpentine is tinged of a Ru∣bicund colour, which then de∣cant, and keep for use. § 8. This Balsam prevails wonderfully in Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, hears Ulcers of the Lungs, and the Hurts of the other Vis∣cera and internal parts; and is excellent against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Wheezings, Spitting Blood, &c. Dose, à gut. vj. ad x or xij. § 9. Marggrave makes this Balsam of the Sulphur of Antimony thus. ℞ Pure Sul∣phur of Antimony ℥ss, common Oil of Turpentine ℥ij. mix and digest in a Glass Cucurbit, in the third degree of Fire for three hours, so that the Sulphur may be dissolved with a great noise; and leave the Glass in the Sand to grow cold gradually of its self: decant the Solution into a clean Pot, and affuse thereon fair water q. s. boil for a quarter of an hour, with a Fire of Charcole without flame (because the Matter is apt to take fire, and not to be quenched with any water) all being coled decant the super-flowing Water and Oil; and in the bottom you will find a Balsam of Sulphur, thick and black like Pitch, which you may dissolve into a thinner Balsam by adding to it 4 or 5. times its weight of some proper Aromatick Oil, as Oil of An∣niseed, Fennelseed, or the like. § 10. Or from this thick black Balsam, you may ex∣tract a Tincture with recti∣fied S. V. which you may keep and preserve for the same uses. § 11. This Balsam of Marg∣graves is thought not to be inferior to any natural Bal∣sam, it comforts and restores the Native heat, and after an insensible manner depu∣rates the whole Mass of Blood, whereby it is found to be a Remedy against the greatest Diseases, for that it is made of Antimony which
is of a Solar nature, sive Ma∣teria Solis. Dose, gr. iij, or iv. § 12. Marggrave makes inflamable Sulphur of Antimo∣ny, according to the Process delivered Sect. LVII. § 40. of this Chapter aforegoing the former part of the Pro∣cess; so that no more need be said of it here; this Sul∣phur is said to have a Dia∣phoretick and Sudorifick force, freeing the Blood from Impurities, and preserving it from putrefaction, and the ancient Chymists had it in great Estimation, for the cure of many supposed incurable Diseases, which it seems to root out insensibly: and therefore it was reputed a Panacaea, of which see Basil Valentine, Hartman, and o∣thers. And some Alchymists take the Tincture of this Sul∣phur (for it has the colour of Gold) for the Tincture of the Philosophers. § 13. Le Mort's fixed Sul∣phur of Antimony, by some called Panacea, or All-beal. ℞ The true inflamable Sulphur of Antimony; purified Regu∣lus of Antimony. Ana. ℥j. both being in fine Pouder, put them into a Retort, and affuse there∣on the best rectified Oil of Sulphur per Camp. or Oil of Vitriol, perfectly freed from the Flegm, ℥iij. digest them together for seven days: the eighth day augment the Fire, fixing to a large Receiver, and abstract the Oil of Vitriol to dryness: the abstracted Oil, co∣hobate, and reiterate the Coho∣bation six times: At last add ℥iss. of fresh or new Oil of Vitriol, and again abstract, making towards the end a very strong fire, that the bottom of the Vessel may be nearly red-hot: the Retort being cold, break it, and take out the Pouder; and to calcine it in a Crucible with a red-hot heat for three hrs, so will it be perfectly fixed; from which if you please you may distil off aromatiz'd S. V. four times. § 14. This Panacea puri∣fies the Blood, and helps all curable Diseases by Sweat, chiefly the Leprosie, Mor∣phews, Herpes, Scurvy, French Pox, &c. Dose, gr. j. ad. 8.
XCIX. Sulphur Auratum, The Golden Sulphur of Anti∣mony. Bate.] It is made of the Scoria of the Regulus of An∣timony, being separated from it, boiled in water and filtred, precipitating the Sulphur with Vinegar, and washing it. Dose, gr. ʒ. ad xv. In some it vo∣mits before it sweats; with others it sweats, and then provokes stools: it wonder∣fully conduces to the cure of Tertian and Quartan Agues, being given an hour before the Fit: it often prevents the Infection and Contagion of the Plague, Small-Pox, &c. being given, and two or three times repeated, or otherwise it happily makes them to come forth: it is profitable also against the French Pox. Salmon.] § 1. It is called Sulphur, but Sennertus lib. de consensu & dissensu. Cap. 19. will scarcely allow it: Sul∣phur illud auratum non esse Sulphur, sed calcem subtilem Antimonij, quae etiam in An∣timonij facilè reducitur, docet. But it is without doubt a Sulphurous part of the Anti∣mony dissolved by Alcalious Salts, and precipitated by an Acid: Thus. § 2. ℞ The Scoria or Dross of the Regulus of Antimony in fine Pouder, boil it in common Water in an Iron. Kettle or Earthen Pot half an hour, to make thereof a Lixivium, this decant and filter thro' brown Paper into a Stone or Glass Vessel (not an Earthen one gla∣zed, lest the Salts should cor∣rode the Lead) then affuse thereon Vinegar, or its Spirit, or Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, or Nitre, or some other Acid, so will the Liquor presently co∣agulate, which let stand for a while, and the Coagulum or Curde will settle of a reddish yellowish colour; then decant the clear Liquor; or otherwise, filter the whole, and separate the Precipitate, which dry and keep for use: but if you filter it not, you may put the Coagulum into common Water, and the Sulphur Auratum will precipitate in a Saffron-colour∣ed Pouder; being settled decant this first Water, and put on more in great quantity, that you may at once sweeten the Pouder, take away its ill smell, and diminish its Emetick force: then decant the clear Water, and filter the rest thro' a brown Paper, in which let it dry leisurely in the Shade, and keep it in a Glass close stopt for use.
§ 3. Lemery says that from fifteen Ounces of Scoria, you will have ℥12. ʒij. of the Sulphur Auratum; which is Emetick, and may be given à gr. ij. ad vj. in Broth or other like Vehicle; or other∣wise in form of Pills. § 4. To ℥xvj. of Scoria you may put Water lbxvj. this Liquor will coagulate like a Gelly when it is cold, by reason of the Salts and Sulphurs joyning together; the Scoria, being nothing but a mixture of the fixt parts of the Nitre and Tartar, joyn∣ed with the more impure part of the Sulphur of Antimony. § 5. The Coagulum is caused by reason of weaken∣ing the force of the Alcali∣ous Salts (which held the Sulphur of the Antimony) through the help of an Acid, by which means the Alcalies letting go their hold, the Sulphur precipitates; and of a yellowish colour, because it is the natural colour of Sulphur, which here is height∣ned and enlivened by the help of the Acid. § 6. So soon as the Vine∣gar or any other Acid is poured on, it causes a most abominable stinking Scent, from the ascending of some part of the Volatile Sulphur▪ of which so much as the Acid seizes on, it fixes; and this is natural to all Sulphurs being heat with Acids; and the hot Waters or Springs of the Mineral Baths are not free there from, for that mostly, they stink very much with Sulphur: the Precipi∣tate which the Acid makes is in large quantity, and much like a Coagulum or Curd. § 7. Now this Sulphur Au∣ratum is emetick, and not altogether pure, but is mix∣ed with much Salt and Ter∣restreities, which it yet re∣tains in its precipitation; and some suppose, that it is this Salt, which gives it this co∣lour by rarifying its parts. § 8. As to its Vertues and Operations it is much like to that of Crocus Metallorum, and therefore ought to be given in the same Dose; tho' some Chymists think it may be given in a larger, as to gr. x. or xij. or more: and it is called Golden Sulphur, by reason of its colour, it much resembling that of Gold. § 9. But doubtless the Gol∣den Sulphur of Antimony of the Ancients was another thing, viz. a fixt Sulphur, like that of Gold, which was subtil tinging Sudorifick and internal: whereas this Sul∣phur
is gross, without Me∣tallick Tincture, Emetick and External. C. Sulphur Vitrioli, The Sul∣phur of Vitriol. Bate.] It is made by dis∣solving Vitriol in warm Wa∣ter, and affusing therein Gut∣tatim Oleum Tartari per deli∣quium, that the Sulphur of the Vitriol may be precipitated, which edu ate and dry. It is good against Diseases of the Lungs: it cleanses pu∣trid Ulcers, and induces a Cicatrize; and is of very excellent use against the Fal∣ling Sickness, Vertigo, and Chronick Diseases. Dose, ad gr. 15. Salmon.] § 1. Le Febure makes it thus. ℞ Pure Vi∣triol q. v. dissolve it in Water of May-Dew: digest the So∣lution seven days in B. Vapo∣roso: the eighth day filter it, and draw off half the Men∣struum by distillation in a boil∣ing B. M. take forth the Vessel, and whilst it is yet warm, af∣fuse thereon Oil of Tartar per deliquium, so will the Sul∣phur contained in the Liquor precipitate: let the Liquor grow clear by degrees, and then decant it by inclination; af∣terwards by several Affusions of distilled Rain-water, edul∣corate the remaining Sulphur, which dry, and keep for use. § 2. This says he is a good Remedy against disaffections of the Brest; and it may be given à gr. ij. ad x. in some proper pectoral Syrup, Lohoch, Lozenge, or Con∣serve, appropriated to the Disease: it is also successfully used to mundifie and cica∣trize sordid and evil Ul∣cers. § 3. Hartman in his Notes on Crollius, has the Prepara∣tion of this Sulphur, some∣thing differing from the for∣mer Prescripts; but it is only in the Calcination of it, in the Sun or otherwise, before he dissolves it, which to me seems to be labour in vain, because it is dissolved in a watery Menstruum again▪ whereby that is recuperated which was before unadvised∣ly taken away; besides in that Calcination some of the most Subtil and Volatile parts are lost, which cannot be restored by any after O∣peration. § 4. This is the same Pre∣paration which Schroder calls Sulpher Vitriolidulce, sweet Sul∣phur of Vitriol, which he says, is not only good for the Lungs but to cleanse sordid Ulcers and heal them.
§ 5. Sala opera. pag. 720. makes it thus. ℞ The best Vitriol dissolve it in Water, and let its Earthy parts settle, decant the clear Liquor from the Residence, and affuse there∣on a strong Lixivium of Pot-Ashes, so will the Sulphur fall down to the bottom: this do so long till the Liquor is depri∣ved of all its Sulphur: this Sulphur dry carefully and sub∣lime it per se, casting a∣way the Feces; and adding to it a half part of Salt of Tar∣tar distil by Retort a most Ru∣bicund Oil; to which after∣wards affuse a little Vinegar, and a redish Pouder will pre∣cipitate which wash from all its Acrimony: upon this Pou∣der or Sulphur affuse S. V. which circulate for eight days, and the desired Sulphur of the Vitriol, will be separated to the Superficies of the Spirit, and swim on top like an Aro∣matick Oil, which separate with a Tritorium, or separa∣ting Funnel. § 6. It consumes all the depraved Humidities of the Body, cleanses the Womb, makes fruitful the Seed, drys away the Water between the Skin and Flesh in a Dropsy, resolves the Coagulum of the Blood, and lastly has the power of opening Apostems. Dose, à gr. j. ad iv. or vj. in Bawm or Parsley-water &c. By the continued use of this Medicine the Leprosy (says he) is most happily cured, yea even the poyson∣ous Elephantiasis it self. CI. Sulphur Vitrioli Mar∣tiale, Martial Sulphur of Vitriol. Bate.] Wash the martia∣ted Flowers of Sal-Armoniack from all their saltness, and calcine, S. A. It has the same Vertues with the former; besides which it opens Ob∣structions: the Dose also is the same with the aforego∣ing. Salmon.] § 1. You may find the Recipe in Zwelfer Mantis. spagyr. Cap. 3. pag. 803. where he advises to take the yellow martial Flow∣ers of Sal-Armoniack, q. v. and to affuse thereon a suffici∣ent quantity of fair Water, therewith to wash them from all their saltness, which they have received from the Sal-Armoniack, and this washing to be so often repeated till they are sweet, and a Rubicund Pouder remain, the true Off∣spring of Mars, and the very Essence of that Mineral; the which carefully dry; and (if you shall so please) by little
and little or degrees, ver gly calcine, and so keep it for use. § 2. It is an Anodyn, and profitable to ease the most acute pains; and by some is very aptly mixt with Opiate Laudanums: it gives ease in the Cholick, and the Gripings of the Guts, and alleviates all other pains: strengthning the Liver, and opening the Ob∣structions of the Spleen. Dose, à gr. j. ad ℈j. § 3. You may give them thus. ℞ Of our Antidote ℈ss. of this martial Sulphur, à gr.  ad xvj. Camphir in pou∣der gr. vj. Oil of Juniper-berries gut. iij. mix for a Dose against the Cholick, and the Griping of the Guts, or Pains oe Gout. § 4. Or thus ℞ Of this Martial Sulphur ℈j. of our Vlle Laudanum, gr. ij. Extract of Saffron ʒss. mix for a Dose, against any vehe∣ pain i what part of the dy soever § 5. Or thus ℞ Sy∣  Poppies ℥ss. Treacle-wa∣ter ʒiij. of this Martial Sul∣phur gr. 5. Oil of Cinna∣ gut. ij. shake them toge∣ther, and give them for a Dose in pains of the Spleen, &c. CII. Sulphur Vitrioli Narco∣ticum, The Narcotick or Anodyn Sulphur of Vi∣triol. Bate.] ℞ Vitriol p. ij. Mars p. j. digest in Spirit of Vinegar, and distil in Sand to dryness: from the red Mass extract a Tincture, with Spi∣rit of Vinegar, filter and pre∣cipitate with Oil of Tartar: the Sulphur fallen down to the bottom edulcorate, and dry. From this Anodyns are made, bearing the Name of Lauda∣num. It stops Catarrhs, takes away Pains, &c. Dose, gr. ij. ad vj, &c. at time of sleeping. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Purifi∣ed Vitriol lbij. filings of Iron lbj. mix them together, and put them into a Glass body, affuse on them Spirit of Vine∣gar, so much as to over-top them two or three Inches: fix a head on the body and place it in a Sand heat, fitting a Re∣ceiver thereto; give but a gentle fire at first, to make all the Moisture rise, which in∣crease gradatim, till the Sand is red-hot: when all is cold, take out the Matter at bottom, pouder it, and digest it in a Matrass with fresh Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to over∣top
it three or four Inches, in B. M. for three or four days: then will you find the Men∣struum coloured, which decant, putting on again fresh Spirit of Vinegar, digesting a new, and decanting as before, reitera∣ting these same Operations, till your Spirit will be tinged no more: mix all these de∣canted Tinctures together, fil∣ter them; and then affuse thereon Oil of Tartar per de∣liquium, so much as may pre∣cipitate all the Sulphur of the Vitriol to the bottom, which afterwards edulcorate with warm Water by several Ablu∣tions, dry it, and keep it for use. Thus Beguinus. § 2. This lays he is a fa∣mous Anodynon, and to be preferred before many others, and Paracelsus commends it in the highest degree, as a Medicament of great worth: without doubt, it is an ex∣cellent thing, and a good Remedy for Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, Coughs, Colds, Asthma's Obstructi∣ons of the Lungs, Spitting of Blood, &c. Dose, à gr. v. ad xij. in any pectoral Syrup. Conserve, Lohoch, or Con∣fection. § 3. That it will ease pains in some measure is true; but that it is a Narcotick or A∣nodyn like to Opium, or as some will have it, to exceed Opium, or an Opiate Lauda∣num is so false, that scarcely any thing can be falser; and this Assertion my own large Experience has told me to be true; yet it is an excellent Medicine, and not to be despised for those Diseases it is designed against, and peradventure may exceed many others for Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, &c. § 4. Hartman upon Crol∣lius (who seems to be one of the first Publishers of this Medicine, and from whom most of the others had it) makes it exactly after the aforegoing manner, but with Hungarick Vitriol which is blew, or a Vitriol of Copper: this Sulphur he says is Com∣bustible Sulphur, which says he you may see by putting it to the Fire; for it will presently take flame, and be thereby wholly consumed like other Sulphur; but this is understood of the Pouder, the Spirit of Vinegar be∣ing abstracted to dryness, and then edulcorated, before the Oil of Tartar is put in∣to it. § 5. For the Vinegar im∣pregnated with this  Sulphur of Vitriol, being mixed with a sufficient quan∣tity of the Oil of Tartar
guttatim, lets go its hold of the Sulphur, whereby it pre∣cipitates, and is rendred fix∣ed and Anodyn. § 6. But Zwelfer has ano∣ther peculiar way of making it, by dissolving the best Hun∣garian Vitriol, or Vitriol of Mars in Water and filter∣ing &c. the whole Process at large you may see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 9. Sect. 1. with some Notes upon it, so that we shall say no more of it here. § 7. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 9. Cap. 8. exactly follows Hartman, making first the inflamable Sulphur with Spirit of Vinegar; and from that the Anodyn Sulphur by affusion of Oil of Tartar, as is above taught; which same Method Schroder, Sala, Charras, and others pur∣sue. § 8. Le Febure makes it thus. ℞ Liege Vitriol lbvj, purified in a sufficient quan∣tity of Rain-water: this done, add to the Dissolution, fi∣lings of Iron or Steel lbiss. put them into a glazed Earthen Pan, stir them together, and put the Pan in the Sun, lea∣ving it till it grows thicker by degrees, which stir often, and evaporate to dryness: then beat it to pouder, and add to it lbiss. more of filings, sprink∣ling it with distilled Rain-wa∣ter, till all be reduced to a smooth uniform Pap, which stir often, and dry again by evaporation in the Sun; and thus proceed to the seventh time, until the Matter becomes a very high red Tincture: then being evaporated to dryness, put it into a large Matrass, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vine∣gar so much as to overtop it four Inches: digest in a Sand heat, stirring or shaking it of∣ten, and continuing the dige∣stion, till the Spirit is tinged of a fresh red colour: decant this Tincture, and affuse fresh Spirit of Vinegar, digesting, stirring, decanting, and af∣fusing fresh Spirit, till it will extract no more Tincture; mix all these Tinctures and filte∣rate them, and divide the Li∣quor into two equal parts. The one half put into a Glass Cu∣curbit, and in an Ash or Sand heat, abstract all the Men∣struum by distillation in a gradual heat to dryness: what is left at bottom edulcorate with distilled Rain-water, till the Water comes off tasteless: then dry it between two Papers in a gentle heat, so have you the combustible or inflamable Sulphur of Vitriol, mixt with that of Mars, which will easily take flame, and be con∣sumed like common Brim∣stone,
yielding a Purple flame. § 9. This Sulphur of Vi∣triol may be used instead of Flos Sulpuris, being much more efficacious and vertuous in all Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Catarrhs, Short∣ness of Breath, Wheasings, Spitting of Blood, Ulcers and Obstructions of the Lungs, &c. being given à gr. iv. ad x. or xij. in Lozen∣ges with flowers of Benja∣min; or in some proper Sy∣rup, Conserve, Lohoch, Bo∣lus, or Electuary, &c. § 10. Of the other half he makes the Fixed and Nar∣cotick Sulphur of Vitriol thus. Being filterated as aforesaid, he puts it into a Cucurbit in B. M. and draws off one half or two thirds of the Men∣struum, then precipitates the remainder with Oleum Tar∣tari per deliquium affusing it guttatim, or drop by drop, till the precipitation ceases, or no more will fall: lets the Mat∣ter settle in the bottom of the Cucurbit for some time, then decanting the clear Liquor from it, he edulcorates the precipitated Matter by many ablutions; then drys it accord∣ing to Art: this redish Pouder he puts into a Matrass or Philosophical Egg, and in an equal heat digests or ripens it for the space of forty days, till it becomes of a fair, high red colour, which is the fixt Ano∣dyn Sulphur of Vitriol. § 11. This Sulphur is said to be a true Preserver and Restorer of Health, and con∣firmer of the Vital Functi∣ons, being given once in five or six days as a preservative, and every other day as a Cu∣rative; for it sends its Solar beams through the whole Body, expelling from it all Impurities whatever, either by Urine or Sweat, or an in∣sensible Transpiration, and easing all manner of pains whatsoever: Dose, à gr. ij. ad viij. or x. in Confectio de Hyacintho, or some other proper Vehicle fasting, drink∣ing after it a small Glass of generous Wine, or some Cor∣dial Water. § 12. Out of this fixed Sul∣phur of Vitriol you may make a Tincture. ℞ Of this fixed Sulphur of Vitriol ℥iv. ripned as before directed, put it into a Pellican, upon which affuse Tartariz'd Spirit of Vitriol, best rectified S. V. Ana. ℥vj. united together first by distilla∣tion in B. M. lute exactly the Junctures; digest and circu∣late in a vaporous B. till you see the Liquor become Blood∣red: then remove the Fire, and
decant the pure clear Tincture into a small Cucurbit, and there from abstract a half or third part of the Menstruum, keeping the remaining Tin∣cture as a most precious Jewel. § 13. It is a famous easer of Pains, strengthner and restorer of the Tone of the parts weakned, driving away naturally and insensibly, all hurtful and corrupted Hu∣mors, which may provoke or irritate the Archaeus: it opens Obstructions of the Lungs, Womb, Spleen, and other Viscera, provokes Ap∣petite, strengthens the Sto∣mach, and excites Venery, strengthening the Matrix, and all the Instruments and Vessels of Generation, recti∣fying, strengthning and in∣creasing the Seed, and ma∣king it prolifick and fruitful in both Sexes: it provokes Urine given in Arsmart or Onion-water, expelling the Dropsie by Urine, and with all it is prevalent against Va∣pors from the Spleen, Fits of the Mother, and most other Distempers of the Womb. Dose, à gut. j. ad vj. in Broth, Wine, or some proper Cor∣dial water. § 14. Schroder and some others have also a Purging Sulphur of Vitriol, which is made after this manner. ℞ Vitriol of Liege well depu∣rated lbij. mix it well with pure clear filings of Iron or Steel ℥vj. put all into a great Matrass, and affuse upon it Acid-water of Vitriol, so much as to overtop it four Inches: digest in B. M. for four days, stirring or shaking the Vessel five or six times a day: this done, filter the Liquor, and abstract one half of it by di∣stillation in Ashes; then af∣fuse on the remainder, Oleum Tartari per deliquium, gut∣tatim, ℥ij. to every pound of the Matter, so will the Sul∣phur precipitate; which (de∣canting from it the clear Li∣quor) take, dry, and keep for use. § 15. It is said to be a mild and gentle purge, good for such as have any stoppage or oppression of the Brest and Lungs, as a Cough, Asthma, Wheasing, Phthisick, or incline towards a Con∣sumption or hectick Feaver. Dose, à gr. ij. ad vj. in con∣serve of the Roots of Ele∣campane, or other good Pe∣ctoral. § 16. This Sulphur says Le Febure, if it be put into a Matrass, sealed up herme∣tically, and digested in a slow heat for the space of forty days, in Vertue
will be doubled, or be of double strength, and the Dose may be less by the half. CIII. Sulphur Auri, seu Au∣rum potabile; The Sulphur of Gold, or Potable Gold. Bate.] Purge Sol twice with Antimony, then calcine first with Mercury and Sul∣phur: Secondly, with Sea-salt melted: Thirdly, with Salt of Tartar, then extract with the Sulphur of Saturn, S. A. It is accounted an Universal Remedy against all Diseases whatsoever. It is Sudorifick and Alexipharmick after an admirable manner. Dose, gr. vij. or viij. in generous Wine. Salmon.] § 1. This is the Reputed Aurum Potabile of our Country-man Dr. Antho∣ny, Published by Schroder, as you may see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. Sect. 11. Joh. Daniel Horstius in his Pharmacopoeia, has published another Recipe under the Name of Dr. Anthony, which you may also see in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 11. Sect. 4. but neither of these re the true. § 2. The right and genuine Preparation you may see in our aforesaid Doron. Lib. 2. Cap. 11. Sect. 3. out of Pa∣pers under Dr. Anthony's own Hand, as in the place cited we have declared, where you have the Process at large, and in his own words Ver∣batim. § 3. But to give you all the satisfaction we can in this matter, we shall do our en∣deavour in this place, 1. To explicate the Text of our Author. 2. To recount to you the several Aurum Poto∣tabiles which are extant by several Men. 3. And to add some others to the number, which are not to be found collected in any of our for∣mer Books. § 4. First, You are to take pure Sol; it is made pure by animmersive Calcination thus: Dissolve the Gold in Aqua Re∣gia, so will the Impurities set∣tle; decant the Solution and precipitate it; then melt the Gold and it will be pure. § 5. Secondly, Purge it with Antimony thus: Make a Re∣gulus of Gold as you do in An∣timony, put it into a Crucible, place it in a Fornace in a cir∣cular Fire, and use Bellows till the Antimony be blowed off, and nothing remain but pure Gold; which work twice repeat.
§ 6. Or thus from Charras. Put Gold q. v. or p. j. into a sound strong Crucible, placed upon a Culot in the midst of the Hearth place, in a Wind Fornace, and having kindled a good Coal-fire, make it red-hot: then cast in Gradatim Antimony in Pouder p. iv. which melting presently causes the Gold to melt: keep the mixture in fusion, till you see no more sparkles fly out, by which you may be certain, that the Antimony has consumed all the Heterogen or Foreign Sub∣stances mixed with the Gold; at which time having heated an Iron Cornute, and greaz'd it within, cast the melted Mat∣ter into it, and knocking the Cornute the Gold will descend to the bottom: letting it cool, separate all the Scoria, and pour it again into the Iron Cornute heated and greased, so will you have a Gold very pure, and of an excellent colour: This Work accord∣ing to the Text of our Au∣thor i to be twice repeat∣ed. § 7. Lemery does it much after the same manner, and in the same proportions, but taking the Crucible out of the Fire knocks it that the Regu∣lus may settle, and when cold, breaks it, and separates the Scortia on the top from the Gold: this Regulus of Sol he weighs, and melts again in a Crucible over a strong fire, and when it is melted casts in∣to it by little and little three times its weight of Salt Nitre, then continues a good strong Fire, that the Matter may remain in fusion, till the fumes are all gone, and it ap∣pears clear, then casts it into a Cornute, or else leaves it in the Crucible to cool, (knocking the Crucible while it is cool∣ing for the separation of the Regulus or Gold (from the Scoria) which then will be perfectly pur. § 8. This purification of Gold by means of Antimony is better than any other, for∣asmuch, as nothing but Gold is able to make resistance against the Mouth of this de∣vouring Dragon; which de∣vours with that violence that it sometimes swallows up and consumes some part of the Sol. it self; but never leaves it in any other Me∣tal. § 9. It is also to be put up∣on a Culot or Tile, for fear, lest the Air coming in by the Ash-hole, should cool the bottom of the Crucible or Melting-pot: then the Anti∣mony being put into the red-hot Gold, it presently melts, and by reason of the Sulphur
of the Antimony the force of the Fire is increased; so that the porous and unfixed Mat∣ter mixed with the Gold, u∣niting with the Antimony, one part of it evaporates a∣way in Smoke, and the o∣ther remains in the Scoria. § 10. The Nitre is put into the second melting of the Regulus, to absorb or receive all the Antimony that may yet remain, whereby you have a well purified Regulus, even Gold of 24 Carats fine (a Carat being the 24th part of an Ounce.) § 11. Thirdly, the calci∣ning the Gold with Mercury and Sulpher. This is by A∣malgamation. ℞ Plates of Gold p. j. Quicksilver p. vj. mix or amalgamate at the Fire, till they begin to smoke, and cast them into Water, that the Mixture may be all alike: then grind it with twice as much Sulphur, and calcine is with a gentle Fire, till the Mercury and Sulphur exhale without melting; and the Calx of Gold be like the colour of a Marrigold. Thus Schroder. § 12. But Hartman says it is better, that after Amalga∣tion, you abstract the Mer∣cury by Retort, till they will no longer mingle, before you calcine with Sulphur. § 13. Beguinus separates after amalgamation, the su∣perfluous Mercury through Leather, mixes the remaining Mass with twice as much com∣mon Salt decripitated, and re∣verberated (in a luted Cruci∣ble, having only a hole at top) without melting the Gold, be∣ing thus calcin'd and dulcified, he amalgamates it with more Mercury, strains again the superfluous through Leather, and the remaining Matter calcines with twice as much Sulphur Vive, adding S. V. and burning it with the Sul∣phur, whereby the Gold is much attenuated, and made spun∣gy. § 14. Lemery takes very thin Plates of the former Re∣gulus of Gold, which he heats in a Crucible red-hot in a large Fire; then puts upon it eight times it weights of Quick-silver revived from Cinnabar, stirs the Matter with a small Iron Rod, and when it begins to fume, casts the Mixture in∣to an Earthen Pan of Water, in which it coagulates; then washe it several times to take away the blackness: the Mer∣cury not united he separates by straining through Linnen Cloth, the Matter remains being Gold with about thrice its weight of Mercury: put this Amalgama into a Crucible
over a gentle Fire, so will the Mercury evapora into Air, and  the Cal of Gold as , in a  and alpable Pouder. § 15. This malgama says Chrr, being flung into a Dish of Water  if it be∣wa and rubb'd in the Wa∣ter to free it from all the Dros and Unclness, the Agama will be gentle,  and of an unous ap∣pearance: Then having freed it from the superfluous Quick silver  straining be evapo∣rates the remaining▪ Mercury▪ in a Crucible, over a gentle Fire as aforesaid: then amal∣gamates the Gold again with new Quicksilver, reiterating the same Operation three times. § 16. After this be mixes and bur gently over the Gold, si times o after another its double eight in Flowers of Sulphur, as well to open it the better as to carry off all the Particles of the Mercury that . § 17. By this means you have a Calx of Gold, the Par∣ticles of which will be per∣fectly divided, which are to be wash, and reserved for the farther uses here re∣ferred to in our Text. § 18. From this Calx of Gold, you may have Flowers of Gold thus. ℞ Of this Calx, of Gold washed, p. j. Flower of Sal-Armoniack in sub i Pouder. p. iij. mix and put them into▪ an Adequate blind Alembick, and sublime them together in a Sand-heat with a moderate Fire; so will the Gold ascend in Flow∣ers with the Sal-Armoniack; edulcorate the Flowers by many Ablutions, and keep them for our present use, or any other, occasion which Art may re∣quire. § 19. Fourthly, The Cal∣cination of the former Calx of Gold with Sea-salt. This Operation we shall give you from Angelus Sala, Opera Me∣duo Chymica. pag. 686. ℞ Sea-salt but (he says Sal Gem) and make it flow in a Fire of Charcole▪ often stirring it▪ this distil afterwards with Rain-water to dryness; and grind this Salt upon a Marble with the former Calx of Gold, moistning it now and then with the distilled Rain-water, so long till the Calx appear very pure▪ put all into a Glass Matrass, pouring in Water and washing it, till no Salt∣ness remain, or till the Water comes off fresh: then in a re∣verberatory Fornace, rever∣berate or calcine this Solar. Calx▪ for a whole day, that it may be made very subtil.
§ 20. But Schroder advises the said Calx of Gold to be laid S. S. S. with the said melted Salt, and to be calein'd in a reverberating Fire, but so gentle as not to melt the Gold. § 21. Fifthly, To calcine the Gold with Salt of Tar∣tar. ℞ The last mentioned Calx of Gold p. j. pure Salt of Tartar p. iij lay them S.S.S. in a calcining Vessel or Cru∣cible, and in a gentle Rever∣beratory calcine again for seven days, but with this cau∣tion that the heat be not so great as to melt your Gold, (for then all your labour is lost) the Gold being then very light, and soft like the finest Flower, take it forth, and free it from the Salt of Tartar by many Ablutions in distilled Rain-water, then carefully dry it, and keep it for making Au∣rum Potabile with. Where Note, That Basil reverbe∣rates with Flowers of Tartar; but doubtless the Salt is bet∣e § 22. Sixthly. To make the Sulphur of Lead. ℞ Cry∣staline Saccharum Saturni lbj. dissolve it seven times in the best Spirit of Vinegar, and evaporate as many times: then in a cold Cellar let it melt per deliquium, this Liquor put into a Retort in a Reverbera∣tory Fornace upon the cover of an Earthen Pot turned up side down, an Inch thickness of Sand, being between it and the bottom of the Retort: fit to the Neck a large Receiver, luting the Juncture well, and with a gradual Fire, carefully distil, and continus the distil∣lation till you see red heavy drops fall down, and the Reci∣pient grows clear of it self, which will be in about 24 hours, then put out the Fire, and in the Recipient you will have four several Liquors, viz. a volatile, subtil and infla∣mable Spirit: a yellow Oil, which is the Sulphur of Lead intended by our Author: a Flegm, and a red Oil. § 23. Put all into a clean Retort, and make a Rectifica∣tion in B. M. or Ashes, chang∣ing the Recipient to receive the said Liquors; so have you first the Volatile and Aetherial Spirit, coming over without any Veins therein, in the neck of the Retort: which being come over, change the Receiver, and you have secondly, the yel∣low Oil or Sulphur with oblique and winding Veins: when this sign disappears change the Re∣ceiver again, and you have, thirdly the Flegm, in straight and direct Veins; and fourth∣ly, the red Oil remaining at bottom.
§ 24. Sevebly, To com∣ the design'd Aur Po∣ ℞ Of the former pre∣red Cu of Gold p. j. of this Spr of Lead p. iij. mix them, and  the Mix∣ture into a Glass Pal or Egg, which seal up hermetically, and gest in a gentle Sand  40 days, so will you have  Aurum Potabile as red as Blood, which is the Particles of the Sulphur of Gold dissolved and extracted into the Men∣struum. § 25. This is a great and famous Arcanum, and a se∣cret Remedy against all Di∣es of the Heart and strain, being given à gut. j. ad viij. in the Spirit of Lilly Coally, or in a Glass of generous Canary. It pro∣vokes Sweat gently, and as Nature requires, resists Poy∣son, restores in Consumpti∣ons, ces the Plague, and all sorts of malign, burning, contagious and epidemick Feavers; and in a special manner prevails against Epi∣lepsies, Apoplexies, Vertigo's Lrgies, Palies, Megrims, Leprosies, Scabs, Itch, Ulcers, Fula's, and other invete∣rate and almost incurable Di∣stempers: it is good against sainting and swooning Fits. chearing the Heart, and re∣viving the Spirits to a Mira∣cle. § 26. Thus have we given you this elaborate Process of our Text at large, explica∣ting plainly and clearly, e∣very particular thereof; But such as dislike it, for the re∣diousness thereof, may have recourse to other Prescripts of Aurum Potabile, such as are taught in our Pharm. Lond. and Doron Medicum, which are the following, viz. 1. Aurum Potabile made with Volatile Salt of Ʋrine. 2. With S. V. accuated with Flowers of common Salt, or Sal-Gem. 3. With rectified Oil of An∣timony. 4. With Oil of com∣mon Salt, or Sulphur and S. V. 5. With Spirit of Salt of Tar∣tar of Clossaeus. 6. That of Quercetan. 7. That of Billi∣chius: 8. That of Grulingius. 9. That of Mynsicht. 10. The Tinctura Auri of Clossaeus. 11. The Tincture of Basil Valentine. 12. Tinctura Ru∣bini Anri. 13. Quintescentia Auri Fabri. 14. Oleum Solis, or Oil of Gold; all which you may see in our said Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. Sect. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 23, 25, and 26. § 27. To the former four∣teen you may add the four following, 15. The true Au∣rum Potabile of Dr. Anthony. 16. Dr. Anthony's Prescript according in Horstius. 17. Es∣sentia
Auri. 18. Liquor Au∣reus, sea Oleum salis; the Preparations of which see in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 5. Sect. 36. and Cap. 11. Sect. 2, 3, and 4. § 28. Besides all these here mentioned, there are several other Aurum Potabiles, and Tinctures of Gold to be found in Authors; which we can∣not here have leisure to de∣scribe, but shall rather refer you for the same, to our Of∣ficina Chymica, now in the Press. § 29. But to gratifie the Ingenious, we will here give you an▪ Aurum Potabile, not inferior to any Preparation I have yet seen▪ which was communicated to me, by a worthy and ingenious Gentle∣man, profoundly skilled in Chymical Learning, and an indefatigable Searcher into the most mysterious Secrets of Nature. § 30. It is made with the following Sal-Mirabile. ℞ The best and perfectly deflegmated Oil of Vitriol, common Salt, A. lbj. mix them together Paulatim; put the Salt into a Cucurbit guttatim put on the Oil: this done, distil in a Retort to dryness, so in the bot∣tom you will have a fixed Salt: this Salt dissolve in fair Water, and set it to Crystal∣lize, so will you have Sal-Mira∣bile: this being dryed in the Sun-beams, or a very gentle heat (so as it may not melt, for then the work of Crystallization must be performed again) will come to a fine white Pouder. § 31. To make with this Salt the Aurum Potabile. Take of this Pouder ℥vij. fine Sol in Leaves or Filings, ℥j. mix them, and in a Coat∣ed Glass Retort put them over a gentle Fire, at first, which increase gradatim, even to a red-hot heat; so will the Salt dissolve the Sol, and open its Body: this opened Sol dissolve in rectified S. V. so will you have a Tincture as red as Blood, which is Aurum Potabile. Dose, à gut. 10. ad 30. in some Cordial Water, or a Glass of generous Canary. § 32. Of this opened Sol, to make Vitriol of Gold. Dissolve this opened Body of Sol in fair Water, and it will be a glorious Green; this be∣ing put into a cool Cellar will shoot into long green Cry∣stals. § 33. Where Note, That the first ℥vij. Ounces of the Sal-Mirabile will not dissolve all the Ounce of Gold, and therefore to what remains of the undissolved Sol, put ℥vij. more of the aforesaid Salt in Pouder, which melt and dis∣solve
together as aforesaid; af∣ter which dissolve again in fair Water and Crystallize or Vi∣triolize as before. § 34. And to the remaining Sol, yet undissolved, ad ℥vij. more of the same Salt in pou∣der, and proceed in all re∣spects as in the former Opera∣tion, dissolving and vitrioli∣zing; so will you have of ℥j. of fine Gold 24. Ounces of its Vitriol, which will dissolve in Wine or Spirit of Wine, and become an Aurum. Potabile of almost infinite Vertues. § 35. Being thus exalted with S. V. rectified, it is a Remedy fit to give relief in all great, dangerous and acute Diseases, which may seize upon the Heart or Brain or any of the Vital parts or Juices; for it preserves the Naral heat and Radical moisture, restores it when decayed or diminished, chear∣ing the Heart and recreating the Vial and Animal Spirits, adding vigor, and acuity, stirring up the Latent or al∣most obliterated ferment of Life, and preserving the Tone of all the Parts. § 38. It never causes or inclines to vomit, but on the contrary▪ intely streng∣thens the Stomach, and powerly provokes sweat∣ing, cures the most desperate or malignant Diseases, puri∣fying the Blood, and amend∣ing the Humors disposed to corruption, causing the Im∣purities to transpire, thro even the very solid parts of the Body. It is a Secret also a∣gainst the Plague or Pestilence, Spotted Feaver, or any other contagious Disease. CIV. Terra Vitrioli dulcis, sweet Earth of Vitriol. Bate.] It is made of the O put Mortuum of the Oil of Vitriol, calcined to Redness, and edulcorated by many wash∣ings, till the red Earth be freed from all its saltness. It is of great force against Dy∣senteries, Haemorrhagies, &c. Dose, ℈ss. ad ʒss. &c. Salmon.] § 1. Here is to be noted, that the Water or Washings of the Caput Mort. contain the Salt of Vitriol, which you may obtain pure by filtration and evaporation or crystallization, and is a good vomiting Gilla, given, à ℈ss. ad ℈ij. in Wine or Fen∣nel-water, and vomits easi∣ly, and sometimes purges and sweats, as Hartman and Schroder say. § 2. But some Authors, as Schroder seem to make this Terra Vitrioli; by a bare dis∣solution of crude Vitriol in Water, letting the Oaker or Earth to settle, which other
Authors cause to be washed several times and then dry∣ed. § 3. Le Febure calls it the Metallick Earth, or Oaker of Vitriol, and makes it thus. ℞ Vitriol q. v. dissolve it in distilled Rain-water q. s. this dissolution put into a great Matrass, and put it in a gentle heat for four or six days; so will all the Earth or Oaker of the Vitriol fall to the bottom: se∣parate the Water by inclina∣tion (of which you may make a purified Vitriol) and wash the Earth and dry it for use. § 4. Angelus Sala says, it has a constringing and dry∣ing power with it, for which reason it is used in drying and cicatrizing Emplasters and Ointments, and other like Applications used for the diversion of Humors. § 5. Minsicht. pag. 97. makes it of green Vitriol cal∣cin'd to redness (which is Col∣cotha) then poudred, and e∣dulcorated by many Ablutions in distilled Rain-water, till the Earth be freed from all its Acrimony and saltness, which he then drys, and keeps for use. § 6. Marggrave also makes it of the Caput Mortuum, left in the distillation of the Spirit and Oil of Vitriol, by boiling it in pure Water, and then let∣ting it remain to settle: then he decants the clear Water (which he filters and reserves for making Salt of Vitriol of, which being given add ℥j. works both upwards and down∣wards:) and the remaining Earth, he washes again seve∣ral times, till the Water comes off insipid, then drys it and keeps it for use. § 7. It is, says he, a most egregious astringent and dry∣er, and admirably stops Hae∣morrhages or Bleedings in any part, whether inward or outward: for outward uses it may be mixed with Turpentine (of any kind) and the white of an Egg, and so applied. Chymists also use it in sublimation to make the Sulphur of Venus, for that it contains in it self Copper, if the Vitriol was made from that Metal. § 8 Others dissolve this Earth in Spirit of common Salt, and so have a golden co∣lour'd Tincture; of great Vertues; but the Humidity being abstracted to dryness, there is left a white Salt or Pouder, which being melted turns into Copper: By which it is manifest that the Earth of Vitriol, whe∣ther from the Crude, or
from the Colcothar, is of a Metallick Nature. CV. Hepar Sulphuris, Liver of Sulphur. Bate.] It is made of the Flowers of Sulphur being melted. ℥iv. adding to it the most pure Salt of Tartar ℥iss. and mixing them well with a Spatula; being removed from the Fire and cooled, the Mass is kept for use. It serves for making the Tincture and Sy∣rup of Sulphur. Salmon.] § 1. How the Tincture of Sulphur is made with it, you may see Cap. VII. Sect. 59. aforegoing: how the Syrup is to be made from it, see Cap. XVI. S. 38. following. § 2. Le Febure makes this Hepar Sulphuris thus. ℞ Of the best Sulphur in fine Pou∣der ℥iv. Salt of Tartar very dry, as much: mix them to∣gether, and put it into a gla∣zed Earthen Dish, over a gentle Fire; and stir it con∣tinually with a wooden Slice, till all be reduced to a Mass, which is called the Liver of Sulphur. § 3. And from this Hepar, or Liver, he makes a Vulne∣tary Balsam of Sulphur, thus. ℞ The former Hepar in fine Pouder, put it into a Matrass; and add to it Aloes succotrina ℥j. fine Myrrh ℥ss. English Saf∣fron ʒij, all in fine Pouder: put upon it yellow Oil of Tur∣pentine p. j. red Oil of Tur∣pentine (which some call its Balsam) p. ij. so much of this mixed Menstrum, as to over∣top the Ingredients four Inches: digest in an Ash-heat, increa∣sing the Fire by degrees, till the Matter begins to simper (but have a care it takes not Fire or runs over, lest it sets the House on fire) and the In∣gredients are dissolved and their Tinctures extracted: then remove it from the Fire strain the Balsam through a Cotton or Flannel-bag, and keep it for use. § 4. This Balsam he war∣rants as a Remedy that shall never fail those who know how skillfully to use it. in the Cure of Wounds, Ul∣cers, and Contusions: for it is one of the most excellent Balsams (says he) which Art  forward out app∣lications, whereof the skilful Physician and Chyrurgion who value their Reputations, and their Art must make use: and of this Balsam you ought to make the Emplastrum Dia∣sulphuris if you would have it obtain the Vertues and Effects which are attributed thereto.
§ 5. And from this Hepar Zwelfer Mantiss. Spagyr. Cap. 10. Pag. 857. makes a Pecto∣ral Balsam with Chymical Oils of Juniper, Aniseeds, or Citrons, &c. after the former manner: This he dedicates to Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, spit∣ting of purulent Matter, and the Phthisick: outwardly also it cleanses external Ulcers, conserves them from Putre∣faction, and immediately conglutinates and heals them. And this is that very Balsam (says he) Circumfora∣nei & Agyrtae, Mountebanks and Quacksalvers have ascri∣bed no less than six hundred several Vertues and Effects to. CVI. Lac Aluminis, Milk of Alum. Bate.] It is made of the Water of Whites of Eggs ℥iv. Alum in fine Pouder ℥j. Spi∣rit of Wine lbij. mixt altoge∣ther in a Glass Vessel, and strongly shaked together, till it becomes like Milk. It is a Secret against the Gonor∣rhoea, Flux of the Whites, over-flowing of the Cour∣ses, &c. Dose, two or three Spoonfuls thrice a day: Be∣ing taken ad ℥ij. an hour before the Fit of a Tertian, it often cures it. Salmon] § 1. It is a pret∣ty neat Medicine, and easily made, and has admirable ef∣fects in the Cases mentioned by our Author, seldom or never failing; but the Body ought before hand to be cleansed of its Feculencies, by the exhibition of Uni∣versals, lest in striving to mend one hole you make two. § 2. Le Febure has a kind of Liquid Magistery of Alum, which answers this Milk of our Author very well, but is much more troublesome to make, and is done thus. ℞ Purified and Crystalliz'd Alum put it into a Glass Cu∣curbit, and moisten it with distilled Rain-water (putting it in a cold place) till it be all resolved into Liquor, which filterate and distil in Ashes to dryness: dissolve again the re∣maining Alum with distilled Rain-water, into a Liquor, and distil again to dryness; and continue this Operation, till the whole Body of the A∣lum is converted into a Li∣quor, and comes over the helm. § 3. This says he, is one of the noblest and surest Stypticks and Astringents
which is to be found in the whole Art of Physick; not inferior to Preparations of Mars or Vitriol, or Bole, or any other thing, whether for inward or outward applica∣tion. § 4. The Dose is à gut. iv. ad xij. (yea ad xx.) in im∣moderate Fluxes, Gonor∣rhoea's, or heat of Urine, the venerous Taint being remo∣ved by the Exhibition of U∣niversals, as I before hint∣ed. § 5. But that it may be made into a Milk, in con∣formity to the Prescript of our Author, you may add an equal quantity of rectified S. V. or more as you see occasion by which addition, it will be double in Vertue and Ef∣ficacy of operating. § 6. It may also be mixt with Epulotical-waters, by which means it, will speedily and successfully heal Ulcers and running Sores, and ad∣vance their Cicatrization and Re-union of the Solution of Continuity. CVII. Lac Benzoini, Milk of Benjamin. Bate.] ℞ Spirit of Ben∣jamin ℥j. Hyssop or Scabious-water ℥xij. mix them S. A. It is Antiasthmatick and Pe∣ctoral. Salmon.] § 1. Thibaut makes it thus. ℞ Benja∣min and Storax, A. ℥ij. be∣ing an fine Pouder put them in∣to a Matrass; affuse thereon so much S. V. as to over∣top them four or five Inches: digest in a cool place two or three days so will you have a Ruby-like Tincture, which keep in a Glass Vial for use. § 2. To one Spoonful of this Tincture, put a Pint of fair Water, (or rather Damask Rose-water) and you will have a Snow-white Milk, the Tin∣cture mixing with the Water without precipitation. § 3. Here is to be noted, That the Gums (having but little Earthy substance) al∣most totally and easily dis∣solve in the S. V. without heat: and that the Spirit (when the Tincture is mix∣ed with Water) by being weakned, lets go its hold of the Gums, by which reason,
they mix with and whiten the Water. § 4. The use of this Vir∣ginal Milk is to clear and whiten the Skin, and is ex∣cellent against all manner of Pimples, Pustuls, Redness, Inflamations, Erysipelas's, and other Deformities of the Skin, by washing there∣with, as directed. § 5. Lemery makes the Tincture with Pouders of Benjamin and Storax as the former; but he differs in the proportion, adding but a sixth part of Storax (which he says is added to the Tin∣cture to increase the delica∣cy of its smell:) ℞ Benja∣min ℥vj. Storax ℥j. being in Pouder put them into a Ma∣trass, upon which affuse S. V. lbj. stop the Vessel close, and digest in Horse-dung for 14 days, then decant the Tincture, filter it, and keep it for use: You may add to it gut. x. or xij. of Balsam of Peru, to give it a better Sent. § 6. Being put into Water as aforesaid, it becomes white like Milk, which takes away Spots in the Face, and whitens the Skin admirably: you may put a Spoonful of it into thirty two Spoon∣fuls of Water and so use it. § 7. Le Febure makes it thus. ℞ Of the best Benja∣min in fine Pouder ℥ij. af∣fuse thereon Alcohol of Wine rectified upon Salt of Tartar, (because if the least Flegm be mixt with it, it hurts the preparation) ℥vj. digest in B. M. to the dissolution of the Rosin; which contains a very pure and sulphurous Volatile Salt. § 8. To make a right use of this Tincture, apply it at Bed-time upon all places where you find need, as up∣on all Pimples, Pustules, break∣ing out, Inflamations, &c. and the next day wash it off with Barley-water, made into Milk with some drops of this Tincture. § 9. But to prevent such defects of the Skin (where they are absent) you need only convert this Spirit or Tincture into a Milk by adding twenty or thirty times the quantity of Da∣mask Rose-water to it, and then to wash therewith Morning and Evening, as with other washes. § 10. Le Mort makes it thus. ℞ Essence of Benja∣min ʒj. Water of white Lil∣lies, or any Odorifrous Wa∣ter, as of Damask Roses, or Orange Flowers ℥ij mix them,
and keep it for use. It cures, says he, Scurff, Morphew, Freckles, Lentils, and other external Diseases of the Skin; more especially if to every Ounce of the Essence (which is made of the Flowers of Benjamin) ʒj. of Camphire be added. § 11. It is good against Inflamations of the Eyes, take away an Erysipelas, and other breakings out of the Skin, a Linnen Cloth dipt in the same, being for some time applied. CVIII. Lac Mercurij, Milk of Mercury. Bate.] It is made of Cor∣rosive Mercury sublimate ʒvj. bruised small and stirred in a Tin Bason, or Dish with Fu∣mitory-water ℥xij. till it be∣comes like Milk. S. A. See the Vertues in the Aqua Mer∣curialis. Salmon.] § 1. Dr. Willis seems to be the Author of this Medicine, whose preparati∣on you may see more at large in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 3. Cap. 1. Sect. 3. to which you are referred. § 2. It is a famous thing against all ctaneous Defeda∣tions, and exceeds most o∣ther Mercurial washes in use; it perfectly cures the most rebellious Herps, Tettars or Ring-worms, tho' of never so long standing, and parti∣cularly is said to kill Worms in the Face. § 3. But in my Opinion these kinds of Mercurial Washes, are not to be used too familiarly, or for a long continuance, lest the Par∣ticles of the Mercury, insi∣nuating themselves into the Pores, should prejudice the Nervous Juyce and Bones, and so create Pains, Aches, Rottenness, or a Virulency never to be taken away. CIX. Lac Scammonij, Milk of Scammony. Bate.] ℞ Scammony in fine Pouder ʒvj. put it into a cold Mortar; and affuse there∣on by little and little Aqua Cinnamomi hordeata ℥viij. stirring them together well as you put in the Liquor: the Li∣quor will grow milky, which separate (from the Pitch like substance of the Scammony) and keep it for use. It is also called Liquor Acuens. Dose, one Spoonful: it purges sweetly and pleasant∣ly.
Salmon.] § 1. You must chuse the most resinous Scam∣mony; which is clear and pure from any Foreign mix∣ture which is to be reduced into a subtil Pouder, by grind∣ing in a Mortar. § 2. Any other proper Water may do, as well as that named in the Prescript, as Aqua Lactis alexiteria, with the addition of a little Spirit of Angelica, Cinnamon, Saffron, or the like; because that as Scammony contains many resinous Particles, there might be a proportional quantity of Spirit to open the Body thereof; and it is indeed so much the better done if the Menstruum be a little Spirituous withall; tho' 'tis true, Scammony will yield a great quantity of its Juice in simple Water alone. § 3. It is an excellent brisk, nimble Purge, espe∣cially for such as cannot swal∣low Pills: it works safely, easily, and in a short time after it is taken; but the Pa∣tient ought to take Broth or Posset-drink after it, as with other Purges, and beware of taking cold. § 4. It may be given from one Spoonful to two, ac∣cording to Age and Strength, and difficulty of the Body to be wrought upon: It expels Watery and Tartarous Hu∣mors, from the Blood, and whole habit of the Body, and therefore is of singular use against the Scurvy, Drop∣sie, Jaundice, Gout, Kings-Evil, and all Obstructions whatsoever in any part of the Body. CX. Lapis Medicamentosus, The Medicinal Stone. Bate.] ℞ White Vitriol ℥iv. Sal-Armoniack ℥ss, Alum, Ceruse, Bole Armoniack, A. ℥j. mix and make a Pouder, which boil with Vinegar, q. s. to the Consistency of a hard Stone, S. A. The Vertues of this Stone are manifold: it drys up Ulcers and Defluxions; heals Wounds and inveterate Sores; cures an Erysipelas, the Scab, or Leprofie, Tet∣tar, &c. The manner of u∣sing it is thus. Dissolve of this Stone ℥j. in Rain-water lbj. then filter: with which wash the part affected, and apply over it a Cloth wet in the same. Salmon.] § 1. Lemery makes it thus. ℞ Colcothar, or Ca∣put Mort. of Vitriol ℥ij. Li∣tharge, Alum, fine Bole, A. ℥iv. all being in fine Pouder, mix them, and put them into a glazed Pot, upon which affuse
good Vinegar, so much as to over-top the Ingredients two Inches: cover the Vessel and leave it in digestion two days, then add it to Nitre ℥viij. Sal-Armoniack ℥ij. and over a gentle heat evaporate all the Humidity, and calcine the Mass that remains about half an hour, in a strong Fire, and keep it for use. § 2. Where Note, The Vinegar is added for the in∣corporating the Materials to∣gether, and create a fer∣ment, after which the Nitre and Sal-Armoniack easily mix with the other things: and the Calcination at the end is done, to carry off some parts of the Acid, and increase the Astringency, to fix the Stone, and make it the better to keep. § 3. It is certainly one of the best Remedies in the World to cure a Gonorrhoea by Injection, Universals be∣ing before hand premised ℞ ʒj. of it, and dissolve it in Smith's-water, Rose-water, or Plantane-water ℥viij. mix, and then make an Injection into he Yard, with a pro∣per. Yard Syring, three or four times a day; the Pa∣tient being sure to make wa∣ter just before the use of it, if he has occasion, and not after it, in some considerable time. § 4. It is also a singular thing to clear the Eyes at any time, especially in the Small-Pox, gr. viij. of it being dis∣solved in Rose-water ℥iv. and the Eyes washed therewith: and being applied outwardly in a Wound, it stops bleed∣ing, and nearly answers all the Effects of the Styptick-water. § 5. The Original of these Artifical Stones seems to be ta∣ken from Crollius, whose Com∣position differs from both the former, and is as follows ℞ Green Vitriol lbj. White Vitriol lbss. Alum lbiss. Sal-A∣natron, common Salt, A. ℥iij. Salts of Tartar, Wormwood, Mugwort, Succory, Arsmart, Plantane, A. ℥ss. put them into a glazed Pot, on which affuse a little Vinegar of Roses, over a gentle Fire, often stir∣ring them; when the Mix∣ture begins to grows thick, add Venetian Ceruse lbss. fine Bole ℥iv. mix all well by stirring, till by the force of fire they are brought to the hardness of a Stone, which by breaking the Vessel take out. § 6. To this he assigns wonderful Vertues, as cu∣ring all Ulcers in the exter∣nal Parts of the Body, stop∣ping Defluxions of Rheum, drying up of Ulcers, heal∣ing of Wounds, stopping
Fluxes in the Eyes, and ta∣king away their pain and redness, helping Ophthalmies, as also Erysipelas, Scabs, Tet∣tars, Cancers in the Breasts of Women, Cancers in the Mouth, Ulcers of the Gums, Noli me Tangere, Ulcers of the Throat, Fistula's, and the Scurvy, eases old Aches or Pains, Sores and Fistula's of the Fundament, &c. ap∣plied as directed. CXI. Lapis Salutis, The Stone of Health, or Heal∣ing-stone. Bate.] ℞ Sal-Arm. ℥j. Alum. fine Bole, A. ℥ij. green Vitriol ℥vj. Nitre ℥iij. Ceruse ℥ij. mix and make a Pouder; Vinegar q. s. mix all together, and boil them with a gentle Fire, till they become a hard Stone; it has the same Vertues with the former. Salmon.] § 1. This is o∣riginally taken from Hartman upon Crollius, who prepares it in the following propor∣tions. ℞ Vitriol lbij. Nitre lbss Alum, Ceruse, fine Bole, A. ℥iv. Sal-Armoniack ℥ij. all being in fine Pouder, mix them: first grind the Ceruse and Bole on a Marble, and pour on the Vinegar so much as to over-top them two Inches, in a convenient large Pot: boil them gently; and con∣tinue the boiling till all be∣comes of the hardness of  Stone. § 2. Or thus according to Greiff from the same Hart∣man. ℞ Ceruse ℥vj: Alum ℥iv. fine Bole ℥iij. Hungarian Vitriol ℥ij. White Vitriol, Tar∣tar, Borax, Sal-Arm. Ma∣stick, Frankincense, A. ℥j. all being in fine Pouder, mix them, and put them into a large glazed Earthen Vessel, adding strong Vinegar q. s. boil all over a gentle Fire to the Consistency of a Stone. § 3. The Vertues and Uses of this Stone (take you which Composition you please) are the same with the former: it is called Lapis Salutis, or the Healing-stone, because it is profitably used in Chyrurgery, as a Medi∣cine for external Application. § 4. You may take ℥j. of it, and dissolve it in Rain or Rose-water; then de∣canting it from the Feces, and filtering of it, the clear Water is to be applied with Cloths, or as need re∣quires to the places affected.
CXII. Liquamen Silicum, Oil or Liquor of Flints. Bate.] ℞ Calcin'd Flints p. iij. Salt of Tartar calcin'd with Nitre ℥iv. mix them exactly; and put them by degrees into a red hot Crucible, urging the Fire S. A. afterwards ex∣pose the Mass to the Air, that it y melt per deliquium, S. A. It cuts Tartarous Mu∣cilage, resolves the Stone, and powerfully opens Ob∣structions. Dose, gut. 20. ad 30. in some fit Liquor. Salmon.] § 1. Schroder says it may be given to a ℈j. but he has a Cream or Oil of Flints described in the second part of Glauber's For∣naces Pag. Mea. 44. If you keep it long in a Cellar it lets fall a Settling to the bottom, and sends an Oil to the top; which must be so long eva∣cuating from the Jelly, as any Liquor will ascend: and then be sweerned: this Oil or Cream, Clossaus says may easily be dissolved in any Liquor. § 2. In the place cited Glauber takes four times as much Salt of Tartar, as of calcin'd Flints, which ex∣treamly differs from this of our Author, the exact Pre∣script you have in our Poly∣graphices, Lib. 3. Cap. 29. Sect. 57. conformable to Glauber's Mind. § 3. In the making of it, he shews how to get a power∣ful Spirit out of the Salt of Tartar, of wonderful Ver∣tues and Effects, of which it is not our business here to speak, that being designed for the Officina Chymica, next to come forth after this work. § 4. But the remainder after that Spirit is extracted, is the thing of which our Experiment is to be made; What looks (says he) trans∣parent like Glass is nothing else but the most fixed part of the Salt of Tartar and Flints, which joyning them∣selves in the Heat, turn thus to a soluble Glass, in which lies a great Heat and Fire. § 5. As long as it is kept from the Air it cannot be perceived in it; but if you pour Water upon it, then its secret heat will discover it self. § 6. If you reduce it to a fine Pouder, in a hot Mor∣tar, and lay it in a moist Air, it will dissolve into a thick and fat Oil, leaving some Feces behind.
§ 7. This fat Liquor or Oil of Flints, Sand, or Cry∣stal, may not only be used inwardly, and outwardly of it self, but also serves to pre∣pare Metals and Minerals in∣to good. Medicines, or to change them into better by the Chymical Art. § 8. Many great Secrets are hid in this contemptible Flint, which the unlearned will hardly believe. The great Paracelsus maintains that a despicable Flint. cast at a Cow, is many times more worth than the Cow it self; not only because that Gold may be melted out of it, but because the other in∣ferior Metals may be so pu∣rified thereby, as to become like the best Gold and Silver in all tryals. § 9. This Liquor of Flints is of that Vertue in respect of Metals, that it makes them exceeding fair, (not by the common way of Cook-maids scowring them,) but by being dissolved there∣in by the Chymical Art, and then either after the wet or dry way, to be digested in it for a due time, which Para∣celsus terms the going into the Mother's Womb, and being rn again: and if this be rightly done, then the Mother will bring forth a pure Child. § 10. All Metals are ge∣nerated in Sand or Stone, and therefore they may be well called the Mother of Metals, and the purer the Mother is, the purer and sounder will the Child be: and among all Stones, none are sound purer than the Peble, Flints, Cry∣stal or Sand, which are all of one Nature, and therefore the Flint, Peble or Sand is found to be the fittest Bath to wash the Metal with all. § 11. But this Bath, is not the Philosophers secret Menstruum, for that is more friendly to Gold, by reason of its affinity with it; but this more, easily dissolves other Metals than Gold; therefore neither can it be Bernhard's Fountain, but must only be taken to be a particular cleanser of Metals. § 12. As to the kind of Flints or Pebles which you ought to take for this work they should not be white, but a fair yellow, green, or blew, which possibly may contain Gold either fixed or vola∣tile. § 13. Then having from them made the said Soluble, Glass, and reduced it to fine. Pouder, you may there from make a Tincture thus. Put▪ this Pouder into a Belt-head.
and affuse thereon rectified S. V. (it needs to be perfectly deflegmated, or pure and fine) digest in a gentle heat till it becomes red, often shaking the Glass, that the Spirit may the better work upon it; then de∣cant it and affuse fresh Spi∣rit, which work repeat so long till the S. V. will be no more tinged. Put all these Tinctures together, and in B. M. ab∣stract the S. V. so will the Tincture of Flints remain in the bottom like a red Juice▪ which take and keep for use. § 14. This Tincture if it be made out of Gold-Flints, Pebles or Sand, is none of the least Medicines; for it powerfully resists all soluble Tartarous Coagulations, in the Hands, Knees. Feet, Reins, or Bladder: and tho' for want of such as hold or contain Gold, it be extract∣ed out of the common white Peble or Flint, yet will it act its part however, tho' not full out so well as the for∣mer. § 15. This Tincture will yet be more powerful, if first Gold has been dissolved in the Liquamen of Pebles, before the Extraction: Nor let any think, that this Tincture comes from the Salt of Tar∣tar, because that will also tinge S. V. for there is a great difference between this Tincture, and that of the Salt of Tartar. § 16. For the Tinct. Salis Tartari is no true Tincture, but only the purest part of the Salt dissolved in the Spi∣rit, as you may prove by ab∣straction, wherein you will have, First, a clear Spirit of Wine: Secondly, an unsavory Flegm: Lastly, a white com∣mon Salt of Tartar remain∣ing behind. § 17. Whereas this Tin∣cture of Flints or Pebles is clear of another nature; for if you abstract the S. V. from it, which comes over colour∣less, yet there remains a deep tinctured Salt, whose colour is lasting in the strongest Fire, and therefore may be ac∣counted for a genuine or true Tincture. § 18. The Liquamen Sili∣cum does precipitate all Me∣tals which are dissolved by Corrosives, but not as Salt of Tartar does; for the Preci∣cipitate will be much hea∣vier hereby, than if it had been done with Ol. Tartari, because the Particles of the Flint do mix themselves therewith. § 19. Ex. gr. ℞ Fine Sol q. v. dissolve in A. R. q. s. then precipitate with the Li∣quor
Silicum, till all the Gold falls down in a yellow Pouder, and the Solution becomes white and clear: decant the Liquor and edulcorate the Precipitate by many ablutions with fair Water and dry it (as Aurum Fulminans, but you need not fear its fulminating in the drying, as it uses to do, when precipitated with Salt of Tar∣tar, or Spirit of Urine) so will you have a yellow Calx, as heavy again as the Gold, before Solution, the cause of which is the Particles of the Flint or Peble precipitating therewith. § 20. This edulcorated yel∣low Calx put into a Crucible on a fire of live Coals, till it begins to be red-hot, but not long, so will it become a most fair Purple, very pleasant to behold: if it stands longer, the Purple colour will vanish, and it will be of a brown Brick colour, for which reason you must not let it remain too long. § 21. This purple Gold pou∣der may be given à ℈j. ad ʒss. in any fit Vehicle, in all Di∣seases where sweating is need∣ful, for it provokes Sweat, comforts the Heart, and is said to expel Stone and Gra∣vel from both Reins and Bladder: and to cure even the Plague it self. § 22. From this purple Calx of Gold, you may ex∣tract a Tincture with this our Liquamen Silicum, thus. ℞ Purple, Calx of Sol, p. j. Liquaminis Silicum, p. iij. mix them in a good large Crucible (lest in run over) and evaporate over a gentle heat to dryness, and increase the fire till the Crucible is red-hot (keeping it covered, that no Coals, Dust, or Ashes may fall into it) then still increase the fire in a Wind Fornace, till the Mat∣ter melts and flows like Wa∣ter, keeping it so long melted till it be like a transparent fair Ruby, which will be in an hours time, or thereabouts. Then being cold reduce it into Pouder, and with S. V. ex∣tract a Blood-like Tincture, which will be much more pow∣erful than the former Tin∣cture. § 23. The remaining Calx, you may melt with Lead and re∣duce into white Gold, which being melted with Antimony will recover its yellow colour again. § 24. And as this Liquor of Flints is the Medium of opening the Body of Gold. in order to the extracting of its Tincture, so also will it do in all the other Metals and Minerals, for which rea∣son it is needless to describe them by themselves, all the
Processes of them, being de∣monstrated in this One of Gold. §25. By the help of this Liquor of Flints, you may also make the Golden, Silver, and Steel Trees of the Phi∣losophers as is taught in our Polygraphice, Lib. 3. Cap. 29. Sect. 54, 55, 56. as also other profitable things in Alchymie, fair Pigments for Paintings, out of Metals which will a∣bide in all Elements; and to frame all sorts of transpa∣rent hard Stones out of Cry∣stal, which in Beauty may be as fair or fairer than the Natural, Enamels, and such like. §26. Lemery instead of a five-fold proportion of Salt of Tartar, uses a six-fold of Tartar to one of calcin'd Flints: ℞ Calcin'd Flints in fine pouder ℥iv. Salt of Tar∣ter ℥xxiv. mix and put them into a large Crucible in a wind Fornace, making a fire by lit∣tle and little, and then gently increafing it to the last degree, in which keep it for five hours, the Matter being in Fusion, till it grows Diaphanous like Glass, which you may know by putting a Spatula into it: cast it forth into an Iron Mortar, and it will presently congeal into a hard Mass, which Pouder while hot: take one half it, and set it in a Cellar in a Glass Pan' and it will dissolve into a clear Liquor, which filter, and keep for use. § 27. This Liquor is said to be diuretick given à gut. vj. ad xxvj. in some fit Vehicle: and being mixed in equal parts, with some Acid cor∣rosive Spirit, they will pre∣sently become a Stone: and from this Phaenomenon the Generation of Stones in Ani∣mal Bodies may be explica∣ted, seeing Acids and Alca∣lies do often meet within us; and for this reason some Au∣thors give a Caution against the use of this Remedy in∣wardly, as also the Tincture therefrom; tho' they con∣ceed, that they may some∣times dissolve some Sulphu∣rous Obstructions, and so thereby provoke Urine. § 28. This Liquamen Sili∣cum has obtained mightily among some Men, insomuch that they give it no less than the name of Alcahest: but it is indeed use to extract the Sulphurs of many Metals and Minerals. § 29. Upon the mixing of it with an Acid, an Ebuliti∣on is made, and a stronger Coagulation, than upon the mixing the Oil of Tartar with an Acid; the reason of which is because this Alcali
contains more Earth than the Salt of Tartar does, whence the cause of the Lapidiscent property-appears plainly e∣nough. § 30. Upon the other half of the Pouder, put into a hot dry Matrass, affuse the best rectified S. V. so much as to overtop it four Inches, stop the Matrass with ano∣ther, whose Neck may be received into that which con∣tains the Matter, lute the Juncture with a wet Bladder, and digest in a gentle Sand heat for two or three days, so as the S. V. may simper, so will you have a very red Tincture, which decant, put∣ting in fresh S. V. to the re∣mainder, repeating, &c. these Tinctures mix, and in B. Vap. abstract two thirds of the Spirit, and keep the re∣maining Tincture for use. § 31. This Tincture is e∣steemed an excellent Medi∣cine to cure the Scurvy, open Obstructions, and root out Hypochondriack Diseases, be∣ing given à gut. 10. ad. 30. in some fit Vehicle. § 32. Lastly, From the melting of the Calx per De∣liquium, it appears. that the Calx of the Flint is so inti∣marely incorporated with, and into the Salt of Tartar by Calcination, that it may truly enough be said to be convert∣ed into a Salt. CXIII. Liquamen Sulphuris, Liquor of Sulphur. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sulphur, white Sugar-Candy, A. ℥j. mix and make a Pouder: then take four Eggs boiled hard, stit them in the middle, and take forth the Yolks, in place of which put this Mixture, which join close together by tying them; then hang them over Coals, and the Liquor will sweat forth, which keep for use. It is a famous Pectoral, prevailing against Asthma's, Coughs, Phthisicks, Pleurisies, &c. Dose, gut. 20, 30. &c. Salmon.] § 1. This sup∣plies the Use of the Balsam and Tincture of Sulphur, and is to be esteemed by reason of its Efficacy and Vertue: for as Sulphur is of it self in∣corruptible, and preserves dead Bodies, from Pu∣trefaction; so also it hinders the Corruption and Decay of living Bodies, and re∣stores the Defects of the Ra∣dical Balsam of Life, when once it is altered. §2. Wherefore we com∣mend to all, the Preparati∣ons of Sulphur, because it supplies with Medicaments,
less subject to fail in their O∣perations, than many other things. §3. For this is certain, that whatever the most excellent Remedies have of Vertue, Power and Efficacy, they re∣ceive it from the Beams and Vigor of the internal Sulphur which they have in them∣selves, whether they be ex∣tracted from Vegetables, Mi∣nerals, or Animals. §4. And for this reason it is, we recommend the Con∣servation of Volatile and Sul∣phurous Salts and Substances, for that the are the last co∣vering or cloathing of the Light and Spirit of the Mixt, from whence proceed all the chief Actions of natural Bo∣dies. § 5. The Sugar-Candy be∣ing an essential Salt, it has a power in it self, by help of the Moisture in the Whites of Eggs, to dissolve, extract or draw forth the Efficacy of the Sulphur; and tho' it is not the greatest Medicine that can be made of Sulphur, yet it is a very good one, and safe to be used; and much more pleasant than the vul∣gar Balsam of Sulphur made with Chymical Oils, for which reason it is to be com∣mended, and esteemed. 6. This Liquamen par∣ticipates of a Vitriolick Na∣ture, for it is chiefly the Sa∣line parts of it which dissolve, and are eliquiated by the dissolution of the Sugar; and this is evident, because there seems to be no difference be∣tween the Salt of the Caput Mortuum of Sulphur, being extracted out of it after Cal∣cination with Rain-water, and the Salt of Vitriol. § 7. Therefore says Le Febure, The Salt of Vitriol may always be lawfully substitu∣ted, and without any scruple, in the place of that of Sul∣phur, because they spring from the same Original, and have the same Vertue, which is to cleanse and strengthen the Brest, Stomach and Lungs, open their Obstructi∣ons, and eradicate from them all Seminaries of Worms and Corruption. CXIV. Liquor Cephalalgicus, Liquor against the Head-Ach. Bate.] ℞ Camphire ʒij. dissolve it in rectified S. V. ʒij. which with a sufficient quan∣tity of Oil or Spirit of Da∣mask Roses (Rhodostagmatis) being put into a Dish, is mix∣ed over a gentle fire, sprink∣ling in also Nutmegs in pou∣der
℈j. Zedoary ʒss. Applied to the Forehead, it gives ease in the Head-Ach. Salmon.] § 1. What the Author means by his Rhodo∣stagma is uncertain, it being a word of a various, dubi∣ous, and uncertain Significa∣tion, and besides a Word not usually to be met with in Medical Authors, being a a Greek compound, signify∣ing a Liquor drawn from Roses; but whether it be Rose-water, Spirit or Oil of Roses who can tell? § 2. But considering the Intention, and with what it was to be mixt, viz. the Al∣cohol of Wine and Camphire; and by reason the Spirit was rectified and an Alcohol, it was not reasonable to sup∣pose, that Rose-water (which is only the Flegm of Roses) could be intended, for then an ordinary Spirit of Wine might have sufficed; nor in respect to the Camphire, be∣cause Aqueous Bodies are apt to cause that Gum or Rosin, to coagulate again. § 3. You may pour it gently upon the pained part, and then rub it with your Hand, it will sink in as fast almost as you lay it on; be∣sides which the Patient is to snuff some of it up the No∣strils: if it be well used, it will take away the pain in three or four Minutes time: you may use it cold, without heating, nor need it be used near any fire. § 4. If the Pain should return again presently, you must then immediately take the same course again, I can assure you upon my own Ex∣perience, that at two or three times using, sometimes at once, it takes away (in a few Minutes) the pain so perfect∣ly, as that it no more returns at that time, or from that present Cause. § 5. Inwardly taken to the quantity of half a Spoonful or more in a Glass of Sack, it not only prevails against Megrims, Head-Aches, Ver∣tigoes, Lethargies, Palsies, Convulsions, Apoplexies, and other cold and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain; but also is a most powerful and instant Remedy against the Colick, Gripings of the Bow∣els, Hysterick Passions and the like. § 6. Outwardly bathed on places pained with the Gout, and Pains and Aches from a cold Cause, it gives great comfort, and in a short time relief.
CXV. Liquor Limacum, Li∣quor of Snails. Bate.] It is made of Red Snails cut in pieces and Salt, A. put into Hippocrates his Sleeve, and hung up in a Cel∣lar, that the Liquor may fall from them, which is kept for use. Being bathed upon the place or applied, it eases the Pains of the Gout. It cures Warts. It also prevails a∣gainst an Atrophia of the Limbs, they being bathed with it warm, and well co∣vered with toozed Wooll. A certain Woman by giving some Drops hereof in a Draught of Beer, was wont to cure the Chin-Cough, or Suffocative cough in Chil∣dren. Salmon.] § 1. It is a sin∣gular Arthritick, Universals being before premised; o∣therwise Topicks unskilfully applied tho' they may give ease, as to the part, yet are apt to drive the Disease into the Stomach, which some∣times proves the Death of the Patient. § 2. It abates Inflamations (being cautiously used for fear of a Gangreen) and takes away Pains and Aches from a hot Cause. § 3. Whatever it may do for a Cough I have no Expe∣rience of; but this I know, that three or four Spoonfuls of it being given at a time in the Morning fasting, it will kill Worms and expel them out of the Body. CXVI. Oleum Talchi per De∣liquium, Oil of Talck by melting or dissolving. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Talck Tartar calcin'd with Nitre, Ana. mix them S. S. S. and cement them in a Crucible close stopt or covered for six hours, so as the Crucible may be red-hot: Take the Matter forth and edulcorate. Ex∣tract with Spirit of Vinegar, filterate and coagulate: then edulcorate and put the Matter in a Cellar to melt. It is said to be a famous Cosme∣tick, and that it will take away Spots, Lentils, and Freckles from the Face and Skin. Salmon.] § 1. Clossaeus cal∣cines the Talck with double its weight of Salt of Tar∣tar: and without doubt it will be best to set it to melt per Deliquium; separating that which melts not, and cal∣cining as before, melting, se∣parating and calcining again,
till the whole Body of the Talck will run per deliquium as at first: then putting all the Liquors together, abstract the Humidity to dryness, wash and edulcorate; then extract with Spirit of Vinegar, and proceed as in the Prescript. § 2. There are many o∣ther ways of calcining the Talck, (upon which work be∣ing well done, the stress of the Operation almost lies) which you may see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 13. Sect. 102. to which I shall now refer you. § 3. But Hartman has an Oil of Talck made by Di∣stillation, which is thought to be more valuable for all the Purposes aforementioned, and other Vices of the Skin; thus ℞ Venetian Talck cleave it into slices, or rub it into fine pouder; then put it into a Phial, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar made of Ca∣nary; stop it close and digest in Horse dung or an equivolent heat for a Month, adding e∣very day new distilled Vinegar to the former, till the Vinegar be Mucilaginious: then put it into a Coated Glass Retort, fixing a large Receiver, and luting the Juncture; distil with a naked Fire, first there comes forth the Vinegar, then a white Oil, which separate, and keep for use. § 4. Before you use this latter by distillation, or that prescribed by our Author, you ought to cleanse the Skin very well by washing it first with warm Water, and sweet scented Wash-balls▪ rubing the Face dry with a Cloth, and then washing it again with warm Water in which Wheat Bran has been boiled, so will the Skin be prepared. § 5. This being done, then first wash with the Vine∣gar, after which anoint with Hartman's Oil by distillation; if the Face be first washed from all Impurity, this one anointing may hold for a Month without fading. This Cosmetick if rightly prepa∣red, is worth above Five Pounds an Ounce. CXVII. Oleum Viridis Aeris, Oil of Verdigrise. Bate.] ℞ Verdigrise ℥ij. Nitre ℥iij. mix and put them into a little Earthen Dish or Pan, and fire it with a live Coal, till the Deflagration ceases: then dissolve it per deliquium in a Cellar. It is Caustick, cures Venereal Pu∣stules, and takes a way Warts.
Salmon.] § 1. Clossaeus was the Author of the Recipe, and he advises to take double the quantity of Nitre, that there is of the Verdigrise; so that according to his Rule, there ought to be ℥iv. of Nitre to the ℥ij. of Verdigrise. § 2. It ought to be gently laid on and with caution, lest it eat too deep, or do mis∣chief: but thus you may ap∣ply it safe enough: ℞ Basili∣con minus, of this Oil of Ver∣digrise, Ana. mix them; and anoint therewith. § 3. Or thus. ℞ Pure Golden coloured Palm Oil, Ointment of Cowslips, A. ℥j. of this Oil of Verdigrise ℥ij. mix them and anoint there∣with. § 4. But Pocky Warts you may anoint therewith simple of it self without Mixtures, for being with any other Matter, it will so weaken the Oil, that it will scarcely perform what you desire, to wit, the removing of the Warts. CXVIII. Plumbum album, & Cerussa, White Lead, and Ceruse. Bate.] Make Plates of Lead and hang them over Vinegar, so that the Vapors from the Vingar may environ or go round it: so will the Lead by little and little con∣vert into Ceruse. Salmon.] § 1. Lead says Lemery is converted into Ce∣ruse or white Lead, by the help of Vinegar, whose Va∣pors it imbibes, by which means it is converted into a white Rust, which being ga∣thered is made into little Cakes: this is called white Lead; but if into one great Lump, it is called Ceruse; so that you may see there is no difference in the things, but in the Terms, and Form of making up. § 2. Charras reduces the Lead (after purification) into thin Plates, and then hangs them up over the Vapors of Vinegar put into a proper Vessel over a moderate Fire: so will a white Substance grow upon the Lead, which he separates and gathers to∣gether, and this is that says he, which they call Ceruse. § 3. It is of a drying Pro∣perty, and is used by Nurses to dry up galling and scald∣ings of Urine, in Infants, being reduced into Pouder, and strewed thereon with a Puff: It is also mixed with Unguents, and Plaisters where drying is required: it unites with Oils and fat
Substances in boiling, and gives them a solid Consisten∣cy, and there from, several Emplasters receive their Body and hardness. § 4. Saccharum Saturni, or Salt of Saturn is made out of several Preparations of Sa∣turn, as burnt Lead, Litharge Minium, or Red Lead; but it is most plentifully and easi∣ly made out of White Lead or Ceruse, because being more open, it is easier to dissolve than the other Preparations of Lead, by reason of the Vinegar, with which it is already impregnated, so that almost the whole Body of the Ceruse will convert into Salt; whereas in the other Prepa∣rations it is done with much more difficulty. § 5. Here is also to be no∣red, that this White Lead or Ceruse may be prepared by the Vapors of any other A∣cid, as A. F. Spirit of Nire, &c. as well as by those of Vine∣gar, forasmuch, as all Acids whatsoever corrode and rust it. CXIX. Pilulae Vomitoriae, Vo∣miting Pills. Bate.] ℞ Gilla Theo∣phrasti in fine Pouder ℥j. fresh Butter new made ʒj. or q. s. beat them well together into a Mass for Pills. Dose, iv. or v. Scruples. Salmon.] § 1. I dislike the Name more than I do the Medicine, for it is rather a kind of Pap, than Pill, and might with more reason have been called Pulticula Vomitoria, or Bolus Emeticus which it much more resem∣bles than a Pill, for which reason I transferr'd it out of the Classis of Pills to this place. § 2. It cleanses the Sto∣mach admirably, evacuating by Vomit tough Phlegmatick Humors, which have long offended it; and it is of sin∣gular use being given in a Surfeit, especially being exhi∣ted upon the beginning of the Disease. § 3. You may give it à ʒj. ad ʒij. but you must regu∣late the Dose according to the Age, Strength, and Con∣dition of the Sick, making also a provision of Posset∣drink before hand to take with it. § 4. What this Gilla Theo∣phrasti is, and how to make it. See Sect. LXV. of this Chapter aforegoing.
CXX. Sapo Tartareus, Tar∣tarean Soap, or Soap of Salt of Tartar. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Tartar (made of Tartar and Nitre in equal parts, S. A.) ℥iv. Oil of Turpentine ℥viij. Let them stand together (in a large Ves∣sel) in a cold and moist place for some Months; that is to say, so long till the Salt has indeed drank or suckt up a triple quantity of the Oil (daily and often in the interim stirring it well with a estel, and adding more Oil as oft as there is need) till the whole comes into one Mass like to Soap, and attains a homogene thickness unseparable. It is designed for the Preparation of Pilulae Pacificae, and Mat∣thew's Pills. Salmon.] § 1. Those are the chief Intentions for which it it prepared: but it may be given inwardly to ℈j. or ʒss. dissolved in any proper Li∣quor against the Stone, Gra∣vel, Heat and Sharpness of Urine, or for any Obstructi∣on of the Reins, Ureters and Bladder from a Tartarous Matter. § 2. It is also a famous thing being applied outward∣ly against the Gout, or any other Ach or Pain, for it gives ease to a Miracle more especially if to ℥j. of Soap, ʒij, of Camphire be added. § 3. Lastly, Although the Prescript only orders it to be made with Oil of Turpen∣tine, yet it may as well be made with Oil of Juniper∣berries, and many other Chy∣mical Oils, and so become more homogene, pleasant, and effectual to the Pur∣poses you intend it: but this ought to be done ac∣cording to the Intention and Design of the Physician.
AN APPENDIX Added by the TRANSLATOR. CXXI. GƲttae Goddardianae, seu Arcanum God∣dardianum, Goddard's Drops. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Humane Bones, put them into a Re∣tort, and join thereto a large Receiver, which lute well; and distil first with a gentle Fire, then with a stronger increasing the fire Gradatim; so will you have in the Recipient a Flegm, Spirit, Oil, and Volatile Salt: shake the Receiver to loosen the Volatile Salt from the sides, then close your Receiver, and set it in the Earth to digest for three Months; after that digest it in a gentle Heat for fourteen days, then separate the Oil which keep for use. § 2. The Author of this Recipe, was not that Goddard, many of whose Recipes and Prescripts, are scatter'd up and down in several places of this Book, but the Fa∣mous W— Goddard, a great Philosopher and Physi∣cian, who deserved well of the World in his day and time, and who has even in this Remedy left himself an Immortal Name. § 3. And this is the true Medicine which was purcha∣sed of the Doctor by K. Charles the Second, so much famed thro' the whole Kingdom, and for which he gave him (as it is reported) fifteen hun∣dred Pounds Sterling. § 4. They that please may make it according to the Pre∣script; but in my Opinion (for 'tis possible a Dwarf standing upon a Giant's Shoulders may see farther than the Giant) it would be a better way, first to rectifie the Oil from the Flegm, then to grind the Volatile
Salt with the Oil, and so by a long digestion to join them together, S. A. § 5. You may make it of all the Bones of the Humane Body together, or if it be for a particular Intention, as for the Gout in any Limb, then of the Bones of those parts; but if for Diseases of the Head, then of Skulls only, and you ought to chuse those Bones which have lain a long time a drying, for that they will have lost most of their Flegm, and for the same reason will yield their Volatile Salt and Oil the more plentifully. § 6. These drops are of an ill and fetid Smell, but be∣ing made of Skulls are an excellent thing against the Falling Sickness, as also a∣gainst the Apoplexy, Lethar∣gy, Vertigo, Megrim, Head-Achs, Carus, Palsies, Con∣vulsions, and most other Di∣seases of the Head, Brain and Nerves; they cure the Vapors in Women, and Fits of the Mother, and remove the Obstructions and Pains of the Spleen. Dose, à gut. vj. ad xij. or xvj. and in ex∣tremity to gut. xx. in any proper Vehicle. § 7. But if you would take away their evil Scent and Elixirate them, add to every Ounce of them Spirit of Nitre rectified so much as may dissolve the Oil, which done mix it with four times the weight of the whole of Alcohol of S. V. and digest them together for a Month, so you will have a Medicine be∣yond all comparison, ten times exceeding the other in Worth and Efficacy. § 8. for it will not only be pleasant in Smell even to a Fragrancy, and retain all the afore enumerated Vertues, but as it will be much more sharp, volatile and subtile, so will it also ten times more powerfully open Obstructi∣ons, and become even a Re∣storer of Nature, and add Vigor and Strength to the whole Humane Frame. § 9. But in this last way, you must give it in a larger Dose, as à gut. xx. ad 60. in a Glass of Canary, in the Morning fasting, a little be∣fore Dinner, and last at night going to Bed. § 10. But before we leave this Subject, let me give you this following Note, That the Bones being reduced into pou∣der by beating in a Mortar, and then prepared with Spirit of Nitre rectified; and that Dissolution mixed with double
the quantity of the best Tar∣tariz'd Spirit of Wine makes a Medicine much pleasanter both in Smell and Taste, and preferrable before all the other Preparations both for Vertues and Efficacy, as I by a long Series of Experiments can truly tell. Dose, à gut. 20. ad 60. in a Glass of Wine, as in the former. CHAP. X. Of SALTS. I. Crystallum Minerale, Cry∣stal Mineral. Bate.] ℞ SAl-Prunellae, dis∣solve it in Wa∣ter, filter and crystallize, S. A. If you add an equal quantity of white Sugar, before the Cry∣stallizing, it will be Crystal∣lum Minerale Saccharatum. It resists Putrefaction, quench∣es Thirst, and abates the Heat in Fevers, cuts Tartarous hu∣mours, resolves coagulated Blood, eases Pains, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Lemery makes it out of Nitre thus. ℞ Pu∣rified Nitre ℥xxxij. put it in∣to a Crucible: when it is mel∣ted, cast thereon Flowers of Sulphur ℥j. a Spoonful at a time; so will it presently flame, and the more Volatile parts of the Nitre will fly away: when the flame is over, the Matter will be in a clear Fusion, then pour it forth into a clean Brass Bason, a little warmed, which shake about to spread the Mat∣ter while it is cooling: this is Sal-Prunellae. § 2. If you desire to have it very pure, dissolve it again in a sufficient quantity of Wa∣ter, then filterate the dissolution, and set it to Crystallize, so have you Crystal Mineral; by which it appears that Cry∣stal Mineral, is only Sal-Pru∣nellae purified. § 3. Other Authors put ℥j. of Sulphur poudred fine to 12 or 16 Ounces of Nitre: and that also is the Propor∣tion used by Beguinus and Charras. § 4. Le Febure makes it of Lapis or Sal-Prunellae, which he dissolves in distilled Water of wild Endive, Borage, or
Bugloss, and filters it thro' a Funnel of brown Paper filled with Province or Damask Roses, moistned before with a little Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur or Salt: and then sets it to Crystallize again; so says he, you have a Mineral Crystal pleasant in Taste, Colour, and Vertue, and endowed with ad∣mirable Properties. § 5. It is a true Anodyn and an excellent quencher of Thirst, and allays the Preternatural heat of all pu∣trid and malignant Feavers, burning Feavers called Febres Prunllae: it not only cools, but works by Urine, and is profitable in Quinsies, Pleu∣risies, Gonorrhoe's, and other Diseases that proceed from Heat and Obstruction, as heat and scalding of the U∣rine, stoppage in the Reins and Bladder, by Sand, Gra∣vel, Stones, Slime, or any Tartarous Matter. § 6. Dose is ℈ss. ad ʒj. in Ale or Wine, or some De∣coction well sweetned with Sugar, and it may be repeat∣ed once or twice a day, at night going to Bed, and in the Morning fasting. § 7. It is a general Remedy, and may be specificated, by the addition of several Salts, being united and incorpora∣ted with it, as Salts of Sa∣turn, Mars, Pearls, Coral, &c. so may you have a Cordial, Hepatick, Spleenetick, or Sto∣matick Crystal Mineral, ac∣cording to the Faculty and Vertue of the Salt which you have joyned and coagulated with it. § 8. The Germans having coloured it red with Roses, melt it and cast it in Molds, having the shape of a Sloe, that the external Form may have some relation to the Name. § 9. This Preparation of Nitre with Sulphur, Lemery mightily dislikes, because he thinks it is thereby deprived of the more opening Spirits, carried away by the Sulphur, and so instead of being made more opening and forceable, it loses its better part: and says he, this is one of the abuses which insensibly has gained upon Men, diminishing very much the Benefits that might be received from Chymical Physick, for want of a seri∣ous Examination of the con∣stituent Parts of Natural things. § 10. And therefore he ad∣vises rather to the use of sim∣ple purified Salt-peter; or Nitre, or which has been purified from its fixt Salt three or four several times, for that by much Experience,
he knows it will better an∣swer the Intentions it is used for than that prepared with Sulphur. § 11. It is sometimes adulte∣rated with Roch Alum, mixing it during the Fusion, which (if the Nitre be impure,) purifies it, by causing a thick Scum to separate to the sides of the Crucible, whereby the Crystal becomes much the whiter: this is discovered by its glit∣tering more than the other, the Alum giving it the Co∣lour; but it is nothing so vertuous and effectual, except in stopping a Gonorrhoea. § 12. Crystal Mineral (says Charras) is opening, diure∣tick, and proper to cut Vis∣cous and Tartarous humors: and it is mixed among Pur∣gatives as a Vehicle, and in divers Menstruums to assist in the Extractions of the Tinctures of mixt Bodies, and to heighten the Color. II. Flores Salis, Flowers of Salt. Bate.] They are made by aug∣menting the Fire, after distilla∣tion of the Oil of Salt and subli∣ming: the Flowers sticking in the neck of the Retort, are to be gathered. They are Alexi∣tericks, or resisters of Poyson. Dose, ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. Schroder says, that as in distilling of Amber, Flowers arise called Volatile Salt, which sticks to the sides and neck of the Re∣tort; so in distilling of the Spirit or Oil of Salt, the Flowers ascend by the vio∣lence of the Fire. § 2. You may also make Flowers of Salt, if in recti∣fying of the Spirit and Oil of Salt, you sublime the re∣mainder with a stronger Fire. § 3. If also you distil with Alum, the Caput Mortuum ex∣posed a while to the Air, and distilled again, will af∣ford more Oil and Flowers; and this may be done of∣ten. § 4. Some sublime with Sal-Armoniack; but then you can never get the pure and simple Flowers, but a com∣pound only, of differing Ver∣tues. § 5. The simple pure Flowers of Salt, are not only resisters of Poyson, but they are of great use in cutting tough gross Flegm; and to keep the Humors from pu∣trefaction.
III. Flores Salis Armoniaci, Flowers of Sal-Armoni∣ack. Bate.] They are made from Salt melted, and Sal-Armoni∣ack, Ana. and subliming; according to Art. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Sal-Ar∣moniack in fine Pouder, com∣mon Salt, A. lbj. put them in∣to a Goard, covered with its Head, and place the same in a Sand Fornace; give a gentle fire at first, increasing it by little and little, till you see the Sal-Armoniack ascend in the head like Meal; then continue the fire in the same degree for five or six hours: after which let the Vessels cool, and gather what is ascended into the head, and mix it with new Salt, and sublime as before; repeat this thrice, and you will have Flowers well purify∣ed. § 2. Some are content with the simple Sublimation with common Salt, (as our Au∣thor here) but because the opening force of the Iron is much accuated by the Sal-Armoniack, it is better to use the Preparation with Iron, which follows in the next Section. § 3. Modus utendi. ℞ Waters of Parsley, Arsmart, Ana ℥iij. Onion water ℥jss. of these Flowers gr. 10. ad 20. mix for a Dose, to be given in Ob∣structions of the Reins and Bladder, and to provoke Ʋ∣rine. Or thus. ℞ Onion-water, Juice of Parsley, A. ℥iv. Syrrup of Winter Cherries ʒiij. of this Salt gr. 15. mix for a Dose, for the same pur∣pose. § 4. ℞ Treacle-water ℥j. Mixtura Simplex ʒiij. Car∣duus-water ℥iv. of these Flow∣ers gr. 20. mix for a Dose, to provoke Sweat, against the Plague, or any malign and pestilential Distemper. ℞ Aquae Bezoaticae ℥j. Car∣duus and Angelica-waters A. ℥ij. Syrup of Citron-peels ℥ss. Bezoar mineral, of these Flowers, A. gr. 15. mix them, to be gi∣ven in the same Cases. § 5. Lemery makes them exactly after the same man∣ner, but whereas our Author takes melted Salt; he only orders it to be decripitated: these Flowers says he, have the same Vertues with Sal-Armoniack, but are given in a little less Dose, as à gr. iv. ad xv. § 6. The common Salt decri∣pitated is added, to the end that the Sal-Armoniack may be made more Volatile, by checking some part of its
fixt Salt; and for that reason they become more active than the unsublimed Sal-Armoniack, tho' they are both compound∣ed of the same Salts, the Flowers having less of the fixt Salt in them, than that which is not sublimed. IV. Flores Salis Armoniaci Martiati, Flowers of Sal-Armoniack martiated. Bate.] They are made from Mars and Sal-Armoniack Ana. sublimed; exposing the Ca∣put Mortuum to the Air, and mixing it with the half quan∣tity of Sal-Armoniack; dry∣ing and subliming, S. A. They perfectly take away the Crudities of the Ven∣tricle, given with Worm∣wood-wine, or Decoction of Sassafras, by provoking Sweat. It is very prevalent also in the Cure of Quartans. Salmon.] § 1. Schroder makes them thus. ℞ Sal-Arm. in pouder, filings of Steel, Ana. mix them well and sublime from Sand, so the Feces will be left at bottom, and the Sal-Armoniack ascend pure, im∣pregnated with some of the Steel or Iron. § 2. But if you sublime them with filings of Iron or Steel, the Iron will be cor∣roded by the Salt, and it will sublime but little: but if you sublime them with a Gad of Iron; then all the Salt will ascend in Flowers of a yellowish red colour. § 3. Then he takes of this Sal-Armoniack, and common Salt melted, Ana. mixes and sublimes them seven times, al∣ways casting away the Caput Mortuum, and adding as much common Salt melted. § 4. By this means the Steel or Iron is wonderfully accuated, and the Flowers of the Sal-Arm. admirably fortified by virtue of the Steel, so that they will be of ten times the efficacy of the former simple Flowers. § 5. And therefore these Flowers (tho' more plentiful) are accounted much better than those of Sal-Arm. puri∣fied only by Crystallization, and are more successful a∣gainst Quartans, fully re∣moving the Crudities and Weaknesses of the Stomach: they open Obstructions pow∣erfully, and are therefore prevalent against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Jaundice, and Green∣sickness in Virgins; perfect∣ly removing Cathectick Di∣stempers.
§ 6. The Dose is, à gr. 5. ad 10. or 1. and I have sometimes successfully given them to ℈j. in Wormwood-wine or some proper and specifick Decoction: you may exhibit them twice a day. V. Flores Vitrioli; Flowers of Vitriol. Bate.] Sublime common Salt melted, and Vitriol, Ana. S. A. They serve to cleanse putrid Ulcers, to incar∣nate them, and to induce the cicatrize, or heal them. Salmon.] § 1. Most Au∣thors which teach the Subli∣mation of Vitriol, do it ei∣ther from the Earth of the Vitriol, or from the Sulphur of it, and that too, not with common Salt, but with Sal-Armoniack: this indeed makes it ascend better and easier; but when all is done, that with common Salt (in my Opinion) is best for the Inten∣tions our Author prescribes it for. § 2. From the Earth of Vitriol Schroder makes it thus. ℞ Oaker Earth of Vi∣triol from whence the Salt is drawn, Sal-Arm. Ana. mix and sublime with a gradual fire, till it smoaks no more: The Sublimate wash or edulco∣rate with war Water, di∣gesting in B. M. twenty four hours, so will a fine Pouder sub∣side, which yet sweeten by many washings. Sala says it cleanses and cures Wounds. § 3. From the Sulphur of Vitriol, Le Febure makes it thus. ℞ Sulphur of Vitriol, Sal-Arm. Ana. mix and sub∣lime in Sand in a Cucurbit somewhat low, covered with a Still head; give first a gentle fire, and increase it by degrees, till the Fumes or Vapors cease; then edulcorate as before. § 4. From crude Vitriol according to our Author, you must do it thus. ℞ Crude Vitriol in pouder, Sea-salt de∣cripitated, Ana. mix them well together, and put the mix∣ture into an Earthen Cucurbit, and place it in a Sand heat, fit∣ting to it a head; give a gentle fire at first, and increase it by little and little so long as any Fumes will arise; then in∣crease the fire to the highest de∣gree of heat, which continue for ten or twelve hours, after which let the Vessels cool; and gather the Flowers, which mix with new Salt and sublime as before; gather the Flowers, and keep it for use. § 5. It is a good Medicine to cleanse any old, rotten Sore, or Ulcer, and to take
away the ill Properties of putrid Ulcers which hinders the healing; and is of good use in a Herpes miliaris; for it so alters the ferment of the part in a short time, as to in∣duce a speedy Cure. VI. Nitrum Antimoniatum, antimoniated Nitre. Bate.] ℞ Nitre melted in a Crucible, p. iij. Put in pau∣latim, or by little and little the Glass of Antimony made perse, p. j. these being mixt or united, pour the Mixture forth; pouder it, and with Water wash away the Salt or Nitre, filter, and crystallize S. A. Dose, gr. 5, 6▪ 7, &c. in malign Feavers, Dropsie, French-Pox, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Pou∣der is white, and the true Antimonium Diaphoreticum; but the Water is Rolfincius his Aqua Anodyna egregia, which says he being con∣creeted into Crystals is cal∣led Nitrum Anodynum; and Sal Anodynum; and by Schro∣der, Lapis Prunellae Antimo∣nialis. § 2. This Anodyn Salt impregnated with many A∣toms of the Ens primum of Metals, cools the Blood; and taken inwardly and used as a Gargarism in a Quinsey and internal Inflamations of the Face, is of singular ef∣fect: it prevails against Pleu∣risies, expels Urine, and thrusts forth serous Humors by sweat; it also gently loosens the Belly, and there∣fore it is used to be mixed with the Broth or Posser∣drink, towards the end of the working of a Purge. § 3. The Dose in sub∣stance is to gr. vj. it is given inwardly in vehement Pains; and outwardly used in Epi∣thems upon the like occa∣sions. § 4. This Salt, Lemery calls a fixt Nitre, and says he, it works much like Sal-Polychrestum: but in making it, you must put the Mixture into the Crucible, Spoonful after Spoonful, that the Cal∣cination may be done the better; which when it is ended, and reduced to Pou∣der, the Matter is washed to separate the Salt. § 5. In making of this Me∣dicine the Nitre ought to be pure, for thereby, it will the better penetrate the Body of the Antimony, and extract some of its essential Qualities, which that it may the more effectually do, it is kept up∣on the fire for about half an hour after the Flagration and
Projection, even till all the Smoak be vaished. § 6. Le Febure says in the Preparation of Antimony Dia∣phoretick▪ that it is not with∣out Reason that he ordered the first Water wherein the fired Nitre was dissolved, to be set apart; because the na∣ture of this Salt is altered by the Sulphur of the Antimony, and is become of the Condi∣tion and Nature of the Al∣calious and Lixivial Salt, whose Quality and Essence is subtil penetrating and ig∣neous rather than corrosive. § 7. Charras says you may dissolve these Crystals drawn from the first Lotion of Anti∣mony Diaphoretick in some proper Liquor, and give it à gr. 5▪ ad  5. or 20. for the sme Diseases as you give Diaphoretick Antimony. § 8. The exact Recipe of our Author, was taken from Zwelfer, Mntisse Spagyrice, Cap. 11. Pagina meâ, 1863. But there he gives you the equal liberty of making it either of the Vitrum Antimo∣nij or of the Flores in the same proportion; and this he says gently purges both upwards and downwards. § 9. The same Zwelfer, has another Nitrum Antimo∣niatum  which be prepares after this manner. ℞ White Flowers of Antimony well pre∣pared ℥j. Cremor Tartari ℥ij. mix them, and boil them in an Earthen Pot, or an Iron Kettle or Frying-Pan, with a suffici∣cent quantity of fair Water, which decant; affusing fresh Water, and boiling, repeating this work so often, till the whole Vertue and Efficacy be extracted out of the Flowers, which filter thro' brown Paper, and in the filtred Liquor dis∣solve pure Nitre ʒiv. then gent∣ly abstract the superfluous Hu∣midity, to a Salt, or otherwise pedetentim let it be Crystal∣lized. § 10. This is without doubt more powerful than the sormer, and has more of an active or purging Quali∣ty in it, for it cleanses the Stomach and Bowels both upwards and downwards, but not with any harshness or vehemency. It is given à ℈j. ad ʒss. yea ad ʒj. dis∣solved in some grateful Ve∣hicle. Le Mort. gives it a∣gainst Quotidian and Ter∣tian Agues, the Yellow Jaun∣dice, and Effervescency of the Blood.
VII. Nitrum Cachecticum, The Cachectick Nitre, or Salt against Cachexies. Bate.] ℞ Vitriol of Mars p. iij. Arcanum duplicatum, p. v. Nitre, p. vij. mix them, and calcine in a Sand-heat to redness, S. A. It restores mightily a depraved Appe∣tite, prevails against Ca∣chexies, Fevers, Scurvy, Stone, Catarrhs, French-Pox, Con∣vulsions or Contractions, Pal∣sies, &c. it induces Sleep, provokes Sweat, and in some, it gently moves the Belly Dose, à gr. vj. ad xx. Salmon.] § 1. What the Sal-Duplicatum is, (which also is called Arcanum Duplex) we shall refer you to what we have before discoursed on that subject in Cap. 9. Sect. 16. aforegoing of this Book. § 2. But that we might give you it according to the Mind of Zwelfer the Author thereof, we shall here give you Prescript of the Arca∣num Duplicatum from him. ℞ Salt of the Caput Mort. of Vitriol exposed for some Weeks in the open Air, ℥ij. Salt extracted out of the Ca∣put Mort. of Nitre, ℥iij. mix them, and put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and in Sand, increasing the heat gradually, till the bottom of the Cucurbit is red-hot, calcine for a day or two, then taking it forth, grind it upon a Porphyre, and keep it for use. § 3. And with this prepa∣ration it is, that he makes his Nitrum Cachecticum Cha∣lybeatum, in the same man∣ner as our Author, and ex∣actly in the same proporti∣ons: but at last he so much increases the Fire, as to melt the Ingredients into a Mass: then being cold, he breaks the Glass, and has a Rubi∣cund Stone, which he keeps use. § 4. 'Tis without doubt an excellent thing for the Di∣seases mentioned by our Au∣thor; and admirable against Melancholy, Pains and Ob∣structions of the Spleen, the Stone, and all Tartarous Di∣seases in any part of the Bo∣dy, Fevers, Agues, &c. and gives many other Benefits by an insensible Transpiration or Sweat, which it does with∣out trouble: in some it vo∣mits gently; in others it purges, but these Operations are but seldom. § 5. The Dose is à gr. x. ad ʒss. in some proper Li∣quor, as in an infusion of Steel in White-wine for two
or three Months. ℞ Of the said Infusion ℥ss. of this Salt ℈j. Borrage-water ℥iij. Syrup of Citron-peels ʒiij. mix for a Dose, to be given at night going to Bed. VIII. Nitrum Catharticum, Cathartick or purging Ni∣tre. Bate.] Heat or melt Ni∣tre in a Crucible, and put in by turns or times live Coals, that it may be inflamed and burn: continue this till the Flagration is over: that which remains dissolve in Spirit of Vinegar, filter and coagulate; and repeat this work three times with fresh Spirit of Vine∣gar: then dissolve in S. V. and evaporate to dryness. It is called also Foliated Earth of Nitre: It removes the Ob∣structions of the Mesentery and Spleen, and gently purges. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. It is taken exactly from Schroder, who says it is used with Extract of Rubarb and Sena, to en∣crease their Vertues, and ex∣hibits it in Syrup of the open∣ing Roots. § 2. Marggrave saith it is made as the foliated Salt of Tartar, only with this diffe∣rence, that for Salt of Tar∣tar, here is taken Nitre fixed with live Coals by flagration. Or the Liquor of the Alcahest Glawber evaporated to dry∣ness; on which is affused Spi∣rit of Vinegar, and then ab∣stracted by distillation, which is so often to be repeated, till the Spirit comes off acid; and lastly after the same manners the Alcohol of S. V. is affused and drawn off from it. § 3. But Zwelfer to make it more absolutely, Cathartick or purging, compounds it af∣ter this manner. ℞ Choice Sena, Roots of Asurum, A. ℥vj. Mechbocan ℥iv. black Helle∣bar ℥vj. Cremor Tartari ℥ij. cut and boil, by several times re∣peating the Water, till the whole Vertue is extracted; strain and clarifie with Whites of Eggs; and then dissolve therein purified Nitre lbij. and abstract the Humidity to a Pellicle, and set it to Crystal∣lize. § 4. Being given ad ʒss. or more, it loosens the Belly, penetrates the Body, opens Obstructions of the Viscera, cools and Refrigerates, ta∣king away preternatural heat.
IX. Nitrum Corallatum, Co∣rallated Nitre. Bate.] ℞ Nitre p. iij. Salt of Coral, p. j. dissolve them apart in Rose-water, and fil∣ter: then mix them together and coagulate S. A. It is pro∣fitable against Fevers, and re∣stores lost Strength. Dose, ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. How the Sal-Coralliorum is to be made we shall shew in Sect. XXVII. fol∣lowing of this Chapter: that being understood, there is no difficulty in making this Me∣dicament; for Nitre is such a saline substance, as being dissoluble in any kind of Li∣quor, whether Waters, De∣coctions, Juyces, Wines or Cyders is apt to receive in∣to it self any other liquifi∣able Body, and to essenti∣ficate its self with them. § 2. This corallated Salt is indeed an excellent thing against Fevers of what kind soever, chiefly against all sorts of burning Fevers: it is also restorative especially in hectick Fevers; and if I may give Credit to an old Practi∣ser, who had much used it, that it is excellent even in a Marasmos it self; and that he had sometimes cured a Marasmos with it. § 3. However that this is truth I will not affirm, since most Physicians account Ma∣rasmos an incurable Di∣sease: but that it is prevalent against Hecticks, I know by my own Experience, and a singular thing in their resto∣ration; and truly of good use in any Pining whatsoever, principally where there is any preternatural heat a∣bounding. § 4. It may be given à ℈ss. ad. ʒss. in any specifick Ve∣hicle, as the Gellies of Harts∣horn, and Flesh of living Creatures accuated with the Juyce of Sevile Oranges, or other things grateful to the Stomach, but always avoid∣ing things ingrateful to the same. X. Nitrum Fixatum, Fixed Nitre. Bate.] Dissolve Sal-Pru∣nellae in Fountain-water, fil∣ter and coagulate S. A. See Crystal Mineral. Salmon.] § 1. This is no∣thing but Crystal Mineral, or Sal-Prunellae purified by dis∣solving it, and Crystallizing it again; and therefore has the same Vertues with Cry∣stal Mineral at Sect. I. of this Chapter: But this is not
the true fixed Nitre, however our Author is pleased to dig∣nifie it with that Title; yet that you may not be left in the dark, we will now give you the Sence of others up∣on it. § 2. 'Tis true that Senner∣tus, Hartman, Quercetan, Be∣guinus, Schroder, and some few more call Crystal Mine∣ral, fixed Nitre; because much of the Volatility there∣of is consumed by the Fla∣gration thereof with an eighth part of Sulphur: but Glauber and his Followers have another thing. Schro∣der pretends to fix it with Quicklime thus. ℞ Nitre in pouder lbiij. Quicklime lbiv. cement them five or six hours, then extract the Sal-Nitre by pouring on hot Water, filtera∣ting and inspissating. § 3. He also Essays the Fixation with S. V. thus ℞ Nitre, add Spirit of Wine, distil it by degrees; then in∣crease the fire to make it run; do this five times, always af∣fusing on it fresh Spirit. But neither of these are the thing which we intend. § 4. Glauber's Method (which is the true) is thus. ℞ Pure Nitre lbvj. melt it in an Iron Pot in the open Fire; cast in continually by small Parcels Charcole-dust, or beat∣en into small bits which will presently take fire, and by the action of its Fire and Sul∣phur, consume the Humidity which the Salt of the Earth had coagulated and united to it self in its Crystallizing: continue this putting in of Sea-Coal-dust, until you find it will kindle no more, and that the remainder of the Nitre begins to thicken and turn to a blewish green co∣lour; then cease, and take the Salt out of the Pot, put it in∣to a warm Mortar, and if you will preserve any of it in form, put it as it is hot and dry into a Bottle, keeping it close stopt, with a stopple dipt in melted Wax. § 5. This is true fixed Ni∣tre, much altered from its first nature, for it is no more Volatile, and apt to be turn∣ed into Crystals, but contra∣rywise turns (being exposed to the Air) into a Liquor which is subtil and penetra∣ting, having an Urinous and Lixivial taste, like unto Salt of Tartar, but more biting and penetrating. § 6. Glauber was the In∣venter of this Liquor, who has given us the description thereof under the Name of Alcahest, which he says will draw the Tinctures of all natural Bodies, whether
Mineral, Vegetable, or Ani∣mal. § 7. Now to speak the real truth, this Liquor has something which is very con∣siderable in it, being capable of extracting the Sulphurs of Metals, provided they had been well opened before: those of Minerals do easily yield unto it, from whence it may be concluded that it takes into it in an instant, the Sulphurs and Volatile Salts of Animals and Vegetables. § 8. Thus you see by this Vegetable Sulphur of Coals the Nature of the Nitre is changed from that of an A∣cid, into that of an Alcali, whose Taste is Urinous and Lixivial: this Salt is capa∣ble of fertilizing the worst Earth, if the Seeds to be put in it be prepared with a Li∣quor made of this Salt; for it so nourishes and invigorates the Gessom or Gem of the Seed, that it makes it multi∣ply to an admirable num∣ber: for the Sperm of the Seed finds in this saline Li∣quor, that which is Analo∣gus to its principle, and does greedily attract it in, and im∣brace it, for which reason being thus doubly fortified as it were, it brings forth more vigorous and nume∣rous Stalks, abounding with a greater plenty of Fruit or Seed, than otherwise could be expected. § 9. Lemery advises to take Nitre ℥xvj. and to put it into a strong large Crucible, and to throw into it a Spoonful of Coals grosly poudred, from whence a flame and detonati∣on will arise, which being o∣ver to cast in more, and to continue this Operation till the Deflagration ceases, or the Matter will flame no longer, but remains fixt in the bot∣tom of the Crucible; this he pouders, dissolves in Water, fil∣ters, and evaporates to dry∣ness in an Earthen Pan, in a Sand-heat, so is there a very white fixt Salt, which he keeps in a Vial close stopt for use. § 10. In this Operation the Crucible ought not to be a∣bove half full of Nitre, be∣cause the Detonation is so violent, that the Matter would be driven out of the Crucible; and it ought to be very strong, otherwise it will break in the Operation: and this detonation with Coals is much more violent than that which is made with Sulphur, because the Sulphur of the Coals is more rarified than common Brimstone.
§ 11. The Taste of this Salt is like that of Salt of Tartar, and differs not much from it in Vertue: it opens Obstructions of the Reins, Ureters, and Bladder, pro∣vokes Urine, and sometimes Stools, being given à gr. xvj. ad ʒss. It may be used to as∣sist in drawing forth the Tin∣cture of Sena; and a red Tincture may also be drawn from it with Alcohol of Wine, as from Salt of Tar∣ter. § 12. If you use common Nitre, to ℥xvj. thereof you will use but ℥iijss. of Coals, and you will have ℥xij. of purified fixt Salt: but if you use purified Nitre, you will use ℥vij. of Coals, and will have but ℥iij. of purified Salt: the reason of this difference proceeds from the Nitres fine∣ness, as containing more Vo∣latile parts, which requires more Coals to make them vanish, and having less of the fixed part, so that there must needs remain less of the fix∣ed Salt. § 13. Now this Liquor or Alcahest of Glauber being prepared with Common Nitre, and kept a Year or more, looses most of its Activity as an Alcali, so that it will not cause any ebullition with A∣cids, as formerly; the rea∣son is for that the remaining Acid in the Nitre, closing up the Pores of the Salt, does because it is greater than the Alcali; destroy the Alcali, which kept the Pores o∣pen. § 14. But if refined Nitre be used, where much Coals are used in fixing it, the Al∣cali will there so predomi∣nate, and be so powerful, that the Acid not being able to regain its strength, and get the dominion, the said Alcahest will keep its Pow∣er and Vertue for ever. § 15. From what has been said, it appears that this Salt is an Alcali, being a Mix∣ture of the Salt of the Coals, (which is a vegetable Alcali,) and fixt Nitre: these two Salts are so firmly united in the Calcination, that they make a porous Salt, not much unlike to the fixt Al∣calious Salt of Plants. § 16. It is also observable, that Nitre alone in a Cruci∣ble, will never flame, tho the Fire be never so strong: but when any Matter, ha∣ving Sulphur in it (as Char∣coal) comes to be mixt with it; then the Volatile parts of the Nitre, joyn with the Sul∣phur, and cause that great flame.
§ 17. So that it seems, Ni∣tre is not inflamable of it self, or apt to catch fire, be∣cause that as soon as ever the Coals are burnt out, the flame goes out and appears no more, till more Coals be put in; for which reason, Coals are to be put in, so long as there are Volatile parts in the Nitre, to inflame the Sulphur: when the Vo∣latile parts of the Nitre are wholly spent, the Datonati∣on will wholly cease, and the Coals burn only as when they are alone. § 18. Yet it appears not that there is any Alcalious Salt in Nitre, whatever some will have; for that, by no Ar∣tifice any such Salt can be ex∣tracted out of it, without something be added to it, but only an Acid, which seems to be its Root and Es∣sence. § 19. Charras makes it after the same manner with Coals, then dissolves in Wa∣ter, filters, and coagulates, and keeps it in a Glass close stopt for use. This fixt Nitre before dissolution will be a little grey coloured, now to make it white, you must calcine it in a great Fire, stir∣ring it in the Crucible all the while with a Spatula, con∣tinuing it red-hot for above an hour, so will it be very white; then dissolve in Wa∣ter, filter and evaporate, so will the Salt be exceeding white. § 20. This Salt having lost in this Calcination al∣most all its Acid, cannot be crystalliz'd, as you do Cry∣stal Mineral (which retains most of its Acid and Volatile parts) but you may restore it to that Condition, by affu∣sing Spirit of Nitre upon its filtred dissolution, till the E∣bullition ceases, and then e∣vaporating, it will shoot as is usual, with Crystals like those which the Nitre had, before it was calcin'd. § 21. Some make of this Salt, a Foliated Earth of Nitre, thus. ℞ Of fixed Nitre lbj. Spirit of Vinegar lbij. mix, dissolve and digest for twenty four hours; abstract the Spirit to dryness: add fresh Spirit of Vinegar, and digest and distil again, repeating this Opera∣tion, till the Vinegar comes off with the same sharpness it went on: then dry it perfectly, and affuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. dissolve and digest for four days, filter, and in a Glass Cucurbit, covered with it head, abstract to dryness in a moderate Sand-heat, so will you have at bottom a scaly Earth, like Talck, melting
in the Heat like Wax; and dissoluble in all kinds of Li∣quors, containing the fixed Nitre, impregnated with the Acid of the Vinegar. § 22. This Salt in the bot∣tom of the Cucurbit, Le Fe∣bure calcines (in the same Cucurbit) in a Sand-heat, giving it a good fire, to cleanse it from all its re∣maining Impurities, till it be white, resembling Chalk, of a good and pleasant Taste; but others calcine it not. § 23. It is accounted one of the best Remedies, a∣mong all Chymical Prepara∣tions, opening all Obstructi∣ons of the Viscera, purging gently without prejudice, and not hurting the digestive Fa∣culty of the Stomach, expel∣ling the Faeculencies of the Humors and Body by Stool, Urine, and Sweat. § 24. It corrects the Ma∣lignity and Corrosion of all other Purgatives, and is said to encrease their Strength in a double proportion; and is indeed one of the most So∣vereign Medicaments that can be used in any Chronical and Rebellious Distemper. Dose, à ℈j. ad ℈ij. in Tin∣cture or Infusion of Rhubarb and Sena. XI. Nitrum Hermaphroditi∣cum, The Hermaphrodi∣tick, or Duplicated Nitre. Bate.] ℞ Pure Nitre, and pure Salt of Tartar, Ana. dis∣solve them in Red Rose-water, filter, and crystallize, S. A. It is a most powerful thing to cut and deterge gross and tartarous Humors, and to open the Passages obstructed, expel the Stone in the Reins, provoke Urine, &c. above all, it is most excellent in putrid and malign Fevers. Dose, à gr. 20. ad 30. Salmon.] § 1. Minsicht is the Author of this Recipe, who in his Thesaurus, Sect. 1. Pag. meâ 18. calls it Tartarus Nitratus, but limits not the kind of Rose-water. § 2. Besides the Vertues ascribed to it by our Author, he says, it is good against a Hungarick Fever, which is a kind of Sweating sickness; it also resists Putrefaction, and is prevalent against the In∣flamation of the Throat, quam Prunellam vocant, gi∣ving therein immediate Re∣lief, and expels Tartarous Impurities from the Blad∣der.
§ 3. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 1. Art. 2. Cap. 9. prepares it not with simple Nitre, but with Sal-Prunellae, dissolving in warm Rose-water, filtering, and boiling till a Crust or Cuticle appears, then setting it in a cold place to crystallize. The Dose of which he makes to be à ℈j ad ʒss. or ʒj. in some fit Ve∣hicle. XII. Nitrum Joviatum, i. e. Jupiter Nitratus. Nitre with Tin, or Jupiter ni∣trated. Bate.] It is made of the Ca∣put Mortuum after distillati∣on in making the Flowers of Jupiter, by boiling it in fair Water, filtering, and exhaling to dryness, S. A. The Ver∣tues and Dose are the same with the Jupiter Diaphoreti∣cus, at Sect. LXVI. a forego∣ing of the last Chapter. Salmon.] § 1. This is on∣ly Nitre impregnated with some of the Sulphur of Ju∣piter, at least with some of the Particles of Tin, which were too heavy, and would not rise in the Sublimation, but remain in the Caput Mor∣tuum; where thro' the Pow∣er of the Salt, the Jupiter is in some measure opened, and in minute Particles joyned with the Particles of the Salt. § 2. This union of the Salt with some of the Tin is so firm, that a dissolution in Water will not separate the one perfectly from the other, but they continue joyned as one body. § 3. It is a good Sudori∣fick, and of good use against Wind, Vapors, Fits of the Mother, and other Distem∣pers of the Womb, as also against the Venereal Disease, Gout, malign Fevers, &c. Dose, à gr. iv. ad xij. or more. XIII. Nitrum Nitratum, Sal-Nitre impregnated with Spirit of Nitre. Bate.] ℞ Rectified Spirit Nitre p. iv. purified Nitre p. vj. mix, and distil to dry∣ness, with a threefold Cohoba∣tion, increasing the Fire after∣wards, S. A. Dose, ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. More ex∣plicitely thus. ℞ Purified Nitre, Flowers of Sulphur, Ana. put them into a good large Retort; affuse thereon distilled Ʋrine, or Spirit of Ʋrine, thrice the weight of the Nitre, place it in a Sand Fornace, so that the Sand be not higher
than the Matter, but that ⅔ of the Retort be free from it: fit to it a great Receiver, not lu∣ting of it, because the Spirit comes forth with such violence, that if there be no vent the Vessels would break: distil first with a very gentle fire, which increase gradatim, but not too hastily, for as soon as the Nitre and Sulphur begin to melt, they will flame, and drive forth their Spirits with an Impetuesity in Red Fumes in∣to the Receiver, which being all come forth, let the Vessels cool, break the Retort, and in the bottom you will have a fixt Salt of a bitterish Taste; which put into a little Ear∣then Gourd, and affuse thereon the Spirit contained in the Receiver, to unite to its pro∣per Body; cover the Gourd with a fit Vessel, and digest in hot Sand for three or four hours, so will the Salt be dis∣solved in its proper Spirit: filter the Solution, and eva∣porate gently to dryness, so will you have a Salt as white as Snow, and of a pleasing Acid taste, which keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 2. I inserted this Me∣thod for the sake of Country Gentlemen, who cannot at every turn in the Country, have choice Spirit of Nitre, because by this way, it is very easily made, and in good quantity, and better than is usually sold; this Spi∣rit may either be put upon its own Caput Mortuum, ac∣cording to the Recipe; or up∣on fresh Nitre not distilled, according to the Text of our Author: but such as live in London (where Spirit of Nitre is easie to be had) need not put themselves to this trou∣ble, but directly follow the Batean Text without more ado. § 3. It is an excellent Re∣medy against continual and intermitting Fevers, for which reason, it is called by some Sal-Antifebrile: it admirably opens all Obstructions of the Viscera, and powerfully resists Putrefaction. 'Tis to be gi∣ven in the beginning of the Fit in some proper Liquor, à ℈ss. ad ʒss. § 4. Thibaut makes it thus. ℞ Fine Nitre ℥viij. Sulphur or its Flowers ℥iv. fire this Mixtion by degrees in an Ear∣then Cup set in a stone Pan, in which is a Quart of Spirit of Ʋrine, covering the Pot with a Bell: then take the Feces of the calcin'd Sulphur, which pouder and mix with Spirit of Ʋrine impregnated with the Spirits of Nitre and Sulphur: digest twelve hours in this stone Pot to dissolve, filter the
dissolution, and evaporate in a short neckt Matrass in a cir∣culary Fire, till it has a white scum, diminish the Fire and evaporate, till it ceases boil∣ing, (having a Care that the too much boiling does not break your Vessel) put this Matter while warm, into a whit Ware Dish, and it will con∣geal like Crystal Mineral. To mould it in shape, you must melt it, and then pour it into a Vial, or melt it in the Vial, and then break your Vial by cold Water, taking away all the Glass by the point of a Knife. § 5. 'Tis says he, a power∣ful Diuretick and Cooler, it resists Corruption, drives forth Gravel out of the Reins and Bladder, cures Fevers and softens Metals. § 6. Schroder makes it thus. ℞ Nitre q. v. digest it in Spirit of Nitre to dissolve: abstract a Flegm: add more Spirit, digest, and distil, till it comes forth as sharp as it went in, so will it be sufficient∣ly impregnated, put the Li∣quor remaining in the Retort into a Cellar to crystallize, which dissolve in Water, fil∣ter, and crystallize, again. It expels Tartarous Matter by Sweat, Stool, and U∣rine. § 7. Le Mort makes it thus. ℞ Pure Nitre ℥ij. Spirit of Nitre ℥iij. mix and di∣gest them together for some hours; then putting them on the Fire, evaporate all the Hu∣midity; so will a most white Salt remain in the bottom, which keep for use. § 8. Muykens the Com∣mentator or Reviser, in his Notes upon the same, says you may take instead of the Spirit of Nitre, either Oil of Sulphur or Oil Vitriol: but then it willbe Nitrum Sul∣phuratum or Vitriolatum. § 9. This Nitrum Nitra∣tum, answers the Ends of Sal Prunellae, but is a much stronger and better Medi∣cine: and is used only inter∣nally in all sorts of burning Fevers, as also against the Plague, Scurvy, and all man∣ner of infectious and conta∣gious Diseases. § 10. Now here is to be noted, that all sorts of Ma∣rine Salts may in the same manner be impregnated with their own proper Spirits, whereby they become not on∣ly more palatable, but also more virtuous and excellent: so common Salt prepared af∣ter the same manner, makes not only a better Pickle, but also becomes a Preservative against the Scurvy, Putre∣faction, Plague, and all sorts
of malign and contagious Diseases: and as it serves to pickle Flesh, Fish, and Vege∣tables, so ℥j. of this will do more than lbj. of the common Salt, making the things pre∣served in it more grateful to the Stomach: but if you use it for a Pickle, then there will be no need of evaporating away the Humidity. § 11. ℞ The best Wine Vinegar lbj. Spirit of Salt § j. Salt ʒij. mix and dissolve: into which put small unripe Cucumbers: they will be pick∣led in two days, and keep a long time, never corrupting. XIV. Nitrum Perlatum, Ni∣tre pearled. Bate.] It is made after the same manner as the Nitre co∣rallated, with Salt of Pearls and Nitre. It is a most e∣gregious Cordial, and takes away or mitigates the febrile Heat. Dose, ad ℥j. Salmon.] § 1. This is ta∣ken from Zwelfer, who has it thus. ℞ Sal-Prunellae, or pure Nitre ℥iij. soluble Magi∣stery of Orient Pearls ℥j. dis∣solve each by it self in Damask Rose-water; joyn the two So∣lutions together, then put them into a Glass Alembick, and ab∣stract to the Consistence of a Salt. § 2. Schroder makes it thus. ℞ Fine Nitre ℥iij. dissolve it in Spirit of Vinegar: Salt of Pearls (so dissolved ℥ij.) mix the Dissolutions, and coagulate by Evaporation, and set it in a cool place to evaporate. § 3. The soluble Magi∣stery is thus made. ℞ Pearls q. v. dissolve them in Spirit of Vinegar, or Spirit of Nitre, (adding, if with the last some Water) precipitate with Oil of Sulphur, sweeten, and digest well with S. V. so have you a Magistery will melt in your Mouth like▪ Butter. Or thus. Dissolve Pearls in a Spirit not without some Flegm (made of common Salt, Alum, Ana. lbj. made into Balls with Potters Clay lbiij.) affusing the Spirit by degrees: decant the Soluti∣on add Rose-water if you please, filter and precipitate with Oil of Sulphur, or Spirit of Vi∣triol, sweetned with Cordial-water. § 4. Schroder's Salt of Pearl is thus made. ℞ Whole Pearls, q. v. put them into Spirit of Vinegar, or Spirit of Salt, or of Vitriol, or of Guajacum, or in Juice of Bar∣berries, or of Limmons or Ci∣trons; dissolve, filter, and in∣spissate: If you use Spirit of Vitriol or Salt, they ought to be circulated before hand with S. V. to make them lose
something of their Acrimo∣ny: but if in Juices, as of Citrons, &c. digest them in the Juice four Inches above, till they are dissolved, then add Spirit of May Dew, and de∣cant the Solution: add new Juice of Citrons depurated, digest, and add more distilled May Dew, or Bawm-water, and decant, this so often re∣peat till the Pearls are all dis∣solved, a few Feces only re∣maining, and then inspissate with a gentle Fire to dry∣ness. § 5. This Pearled Nitre is good in all hot Diseases, and in burning Fevers, where there is much weak∣ness and debility of Nature; for it is an excellent cooling Cordial, resisting Putrefacti∣on, Poyson, Plague, and the most contagious Diseases; it chears the Heart, revives the Spirits, and refreshes in the greatest Agonies. Dose, à ℈ss. ad ʒss. in a fit Ve∣hicle. XV. Nitrum Saturnisatum, Nitre Saturnised, or with Lead. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Saturn, Nitre, Ana. dissolve in Spirit of Vinegar, and crystallize, S. A. It is profitable against Asth∣ma's, or for Asthmatick People. Dose, gr. v, vj, or vij. Salmon.] § 1. It will be best to dissolve each a part in the Spirit of Vinegar; and then to join the Solutions; after which, you may ab∣stract to a Cuticle, and set it to Crystallize; or evapo∣rate to dryness. § 2. It is an excellent A∣nodyn and Cooler, refrigera∣ting the over-heated Spirits and Humours: But it is ac∣counted a Specifick against most Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Asthma's, Shortness of Breath, Difficul∣ty of Breathing, Wheasings, Stoppages of the Lungs, Pleurisies, Quinsies, and o∣ther like Diseases of those parts. § 3. Outwardly applied, being dissolved in a proper Liquor, it is an excellent thing against the Gout, and all sorts of Pains in the Joynts, alleviating the Pain, and drawing forth the Hu∣mor through the Pores by o∣pening them. § 4. The Liquor fit for this purpose is thus made. ℞ Spi∣rit of Wine, Spirit of May Dew, Ana. lbj. Oil of Sulphur ℥j. mix and digest them to∣gether for ten days; then dis∣solve therein, to every ℥j. of the Liquor, ʒj. of this Salt:
with which bath the part af∣flicted; and lay over it Cloths dipt in the same. XVI. Nitrum Sulphuratum, Sulphurated Nitre. Bate.] ℞ Spirit of Sul∣phur ℥iv. fine Nitre ℥iv. mix and distil to dryness, cohoba∣ting thrice, and at length in∣creasing the Fire, till the Ves∣sel is red-hot. It has the Ver∣tues of Sal-Primellae. Salmon.] § 1. Our Text teaches you to cohobate, or to use again the Spirit distil∣led off; but some Authors think it would be good to use fresh Spirit each time, else I fear you will scarcely have the the Spirit come as Acid off, as it went on, which it ought to do, and then you have a good Medicine indeed; but by this latter way, your Salt will be much the dear∣er. § 2. At last the Vessel is made red-hot because all the superfluous Spirit (as Le Mort calls it) it may be taken a∣way, by which means your Salt will be the dryer, whiter, and purer. § 3. It is highly aperitive, stomatick and nephritick, re∣fists Putrefaction in the high∣est degree, and therefore is said to be a singular thing to preserve from the Infection of the Plague, or any other infectious Disease; it quenches thirst, cools the heat of Fe∣vers how violent soever, and provokes Urine. It is good against the Putrefaction of the Teeth, cleanses them, and takes away the stinking of the Mouth. Dose, à gr. iij. ad ℈j. in Canary, or other proper Vehicle. XVII. Nitrum Vitriolatum, Nitre vitriolated. Bate.] It is prepared from Nitre, p ij. Oil of Vitriol, p.j. being distilled to dryness, and cohobated, as in Nitre sulphu∣rated. See the Arcanum Du∣plex. Salmon.] § 1. The Arca∣num Duplex see Chap. IX. Sect. XVI. aforegoing, from which this apparently differs, tho' it has much the same Vertues with that: but that is prepared from the Caput Mortuum of double Aqua Fortis, made of Nitre and Alum, say some, but of Nitre and Vitriol say others, as Schroder: where∣as this is prepared from pure simple Nitre it self, by ad∣dition of Oil of Vitriol. § 2. You may see the Pre∣paration of it at large in Horstius his Pharm. Lib. 17. Pag. 457. but it is a Recipe
of Mynsicht's, in Thesaur. Sect. 1. Pag. 29. where you will find the Proportions dif∣fering from these in our Text, viz. ℞ Prepared Nitre. p. j. rectified Oil or Spirit of Vitriol p. ij. (which is four times as much as is prescribed by our Author) mix and di∣stil by Retort with degrees of fire, first gentle, then with a stronger fire, till the Retort grows red-hot, and no more Spirit will ascend; so will a Snow white Pouder remain at bottom. To this he advises to put as much more fresh Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, enough for its perfect dissolution, then to filter, and evaporate away the Humidity to one half, after which he sets it in a cold place to shoot into Crystals, which he drys and keeps for use. § 3. This is Nitre vitrio∣lated, which Chymists call Spiritus Vitrioli Coagulatus, whose Vertues we will give you from the same Myn∣sieht. § 4. It has says he, the same Vertues and Operations with Spirit of Vitriol, saving, that this more cools, and is more diuretick than that, and has a greater power in tinging or coloring any thing: but its chief Vertues consist in iciding, dissipating, mundi∣ng drying, resisting Pu∣trefaction, and quenching Thirst. § 5. For these Reasons it is said to be most powerful against all malign Fevers, pestilential, putrid, hungarick, epidemick, which are caused from a sulphureous, astral, and venen Influence upon the Bodies of Humane kind. § 6. It has a Bezoartick property which often times moves both Urine and Swear, thereby expelling all inward hot, noxious Vapors; it purges and restores a trou∣bled Stomach, helps the Con∣coction, and excites the Ap∣petite; and takes away the Cause of a putrid and stink∣ing Breath, kills Worms bred of Crudities and putrid Hu∣mors. § 7. It is also good in He∣patick Distempers, which some think to be the Causes of Rubies and Pustules in the Face; and for such as are apt to be troubled with a Diarrhaea, it is a most ex∣cellent Remedy. § 8. It prevails against the Quinsie, pestilential Diseases Pleurisie, Tumor of the Spleen, a putrid or virulent Gonor∣rhoea, the Flux of the Whites in Women, the Scurvy, and o∣ther like Diseases, for which it is said to be an excellent Remedy.
§ 9. Dose, à gr. iv. ad 10. in some proper Conserve, E∣lectuary, Syrup, Julep or Liquor: in cold Diseases let it be given in Wine; but in burning Fevers in pure Wa∣ter, or Barley-water: a∣gainst a Diarrhaea, and to comfort the Liver, as also against a Gonorrhaea, and Flux of the Womb, mix it with Conserve of red Roses, of which the sick may take Morning and Night to the quantity of a Chesnut. § 10. But all such as are obnoxious to Contractions and Convulsions of the Nerves, have an exceeding dry Head, and a wasted and dried Body; such also who have a very thin and debile Stomach, and a straitness of the Orifice of the Ventricle, Women and Virgins afflict∣ed with a suppression of their Courses, are all to abstain from the use of this Medica∣ment. XVIII. Sal Absinthij Crystal∣linum, Crystallized Salt of Wormwood. Bate.] It is made by dis∣solving Salt of Wormwood in Water, by filtering, crystal∣lizing and drying it. S. A. Salmon.] § 1. Our Au∣thor here intends the fixed or elementary Salt made by in∣cineration, elixiviation, fil∣teration and evaporation; which by reiterated Dissolu∣tions, &c. will become pure and crystalline, as it is said. § 2. But that the Crystals might be the more firm and durable, Oil of Sulphur ought to be added to the Lixivium, then they will shoot sooner, fairer, and better: this may do in some Cases, but where the pure Alcaly is desired, all Acid substances must be a∣voided. § 3. But the Crystalline Volatile and Essential Salt is thus made. ℞ Wormwood while it is fresh and full of Juice before seeding, q. v. bruise it in a Wooden, Stone or Iron Mortar, add to it a great quantity of fair Water, and boil to the Consumption of the half part; strain, pres∣sing it out strongly, and after boil it to the thickness of new Honey: then put it into a Glass or glazed Vessel, and set it in a cold place for nine or ten days or more, and it will shoot into a Crystalline Salt, (which decanting the Li∣quor) gather, dry, and keep for use. § 4. But in making thi Essential Salt, if you pou the Juice a little inspissate upon fresh Herbs, and the
digest, decoct, and strain as before, you will have a larger quantity of Salt than other∣wise. § 5. This Salt if not pure enough according to your Mind, dissolve again in Wormwood-water, filter and evaporate; and then crystal∣lize, so will it be very pure and clear, which dry and keep for use. § 6. The fixt or elemen∣tary Salt, incides, opens, ab∣sterges, and attenuates, and is stomachick: It brings forth (says Le Mort) the Stone by Urine, and provokes Sweat as all other alcalious Salts do: it prevails against Fe∣vers (especially intermitting) of what kind soever, and is given à gr. vj. ad ℈j. in some sudorifick Vehicle. § 7. But the fixt Salt be∣ing crystallized with Oil of Sulphur, it seems to be more powerful against Tartarous Diseases, and a greater Sto∣matick, resists Corruption and Putrefaction, and the Infecti∣on of the Plague. Dose, the same with the former. § 8. In making the Essen∣tial Salt, after you have got∣ten all the Crystals you can, the remaining Liquor you may evaporate to the con∣sistency of an Extract, and keep it under the Title of the inspissate Juice of Worm∣wood. § 9. This essential Salt cleanses admirably, and is an egregious Stomatick and Su∣dorifick: it kills and expels Worms, opens and removes Obstructions, and allays or quiets the Effervescency of Choler. Dose, à gr. vj. ad ℈j. or more. § 10. The extract or inspis∣sate Juice is stomatick, and removes Obstructions of the Spleen and Mesentery, and kills Worms in the Stomach, being inwardly taken, and outwardly applied about the Navel and Stomach. Dose, ℈ss. ad ʒj. XIX. Sal Aceti Essentiale, Essential Salt of Vinegar. Bate.] Boil the Caput Mortuum of the Spirit of Vinegar in Water, filter and crystallize, S. A. it is sudori∣fick, and resists Putrefaction. Dose, à gr. v. ad 10. in any proper Vehicle. Salmon.] § 1. Abstract Vinegar to the consistence of Honey, then set it to crystal∣lize: these Crystals you may purifie by dissolving them in the Flegm of the Vinegar, evaporating, and crystallizing again.
§ 2. Marggrave does it in a Glass Retort, and then ab∣stracts but to the consistency of a Syrup or new Honey; lest it should contract an Empyreuma: but distilling the Spirit of Vinegar in a low Cucurbit in B. M. he distils to dryness: a quarter part of what is distil∣led is Flegm of Vinegar, which ought to be taken by it self; the other there parts is Spirit of Vinegar. § 3. The Feces at bottom, whether like Syrup or dry, con∣tain the Salt and Oil of Vine∣gar, or its fixt and gross Sul∣phur, which may each by them∣selves be separated, if the Feces be dissolved in pure Water; then presently the Water being throughly mixt with the Sul∣phur or Oily parts is decanted red into another Vessel, and the Sal Aceti will remain in the bottom like Sand; which is the essential Salt of the Vine∣gar, and is nothing but Crude Tartar, which by the fair Water is purified and edulco∣rated. § 4. Some affusing the Flegm of the Vinegar upon the Feces, digest twenty four hours then filter, strain, and evaporate in a Glass Vessel to the consistency of a Syrup, and call it Elixir Aceti: it is stomatick, attenuates, and excites the Appetite. § 5. The Spirit of Vine∣gar, cools, drys, and astrin∣ges; attemperates and thick∣ens thin fermenting Humors; and on the contrary again o∣pens and incides crass and vis∣cous Humors, attenuates, provokes Sweat and Urine, and preserves from Putrefa∣ction. Dose, à ʒij. ad iv. It prevails against the Plague and all contagious Diseases, Pleurisies and internal Infla∣mations. § 6. It is a noble and e∣gregious Menstruum in Chy∣mistry for dissolving Stones, Shells, Coral, Pearl, and Me∣tals, as Venus, Saturn, Jupi∣ter, Mars, and for making Mineral and Metalick Tin∣ctures and Extractions. XX. Sal Aceti fixum, The fixed Salt of Vinegar. Bate.] Calcine the Caput Mortuum left after the di∣stillation of the Spirit of Vine∣gar, dissolve it in Water, fil∣ter and cuagulate, S. A. It does the same thing as the former. Salmon.] § 1. Marggrave takes Vinegar lbiv. evapor ates it in a gentle B. M. lbij. or lbj. the rest be puts into a Glass Retort, and distils in Sand till the Liquor seems oily or thick; so have you first a weaker Spi∣rit
of Vinegar, which if you please you may take by it self: then continues the distillation longer till only lbss. or there∣abouts remains in the Retort, so will you have a stronger Spirit. § 2. That which remains in the Retort is to be dryed, and calcined, then dissolved in fair Water, filtred, evapora∣ted, and coagulated to dryness, so have you an Alcalious fixt Salt of Tartar, and having the same Vertues. § 3. But whereas our Au∣thor says it does the same thing as the former; we are not altogether of the same O∣pinion, because the one is an Essential, and Acid Salt, the other is a fixt, elemental and alcalious Salt; so that, so much as an Acid and an Al∣calie differ one from another; so much do these two Salts differ in their Natures, Qua∣lities, Properties and Opera∣tions. § 4. 'Tis true, that both are openers and dissolvers in their kind, but it is, when they meet with proper Bodies or Subjects to work upon: so the Essential and Acid Salt will dissolve testaceous and fixt alcalious Bodies, as Pearl, Crabs Eyes Crabs Claws, &c. and the like substances in Man's Body: and the fixt al∣calious Salt, will dissolve o∣ther acid Bodies, if in quan∣tity it is able to over power them. § 5. The former are good for such as are Ahstmatick, and have Tertian and Quar∣tan Agues: the latter for such as have the Stone in Reins or Bladder, or the Gout, or other Diseases pro∣ceeding from an acid and vis∣cous Tartar, &c. XXI. Sal Alcali, Sweet or Alcalious Salt. Bate.] ℞ Quicklime lbj. Ashes of Wood lbss. Tartar, Nitre, A. ℥j. boil in Water, filter, and coagulate to dry∣ness. Salmon.] § 1. This is ex∣actly from Schroder, but there are several other ways of making of this Salt, which seem to be better: Theophra∣stus takes Quicklime, and Bean Ashes, and makes a Lixivi∣um and coagulates. § 2. The Venetians take Quicklime lbj. Oak or Beech Ashes lbij. Sandiver, Vitriol calcin'd, Tartar, A. ℥ij. of which they make a Lixivium, and then a Salt. § 3. Marggrave makes it only of Pot-Ashes, by elixiva∣tion, filtration, evaporation, and reverberation, till the Salt
flows in the Crucible like Wa∣ter: then being cooled he dissolves it again in fair Water, and filters through Paper, then evaporates in a Glass body till the Cuticula e∣merges, and then sets it for a Night in a cold place, so a most white Salt will concreet, which is vulgarly called Sal Alcali, or Sal Alcalisatum, that is a Salt fixed or reverbe∣rated. § 4. All Alcalies power∣fully attenuate, open, re∣solve, melt Humors, and ef∣fervesce with Acids, not only to attemperate them, but al∣so totally to destroy them; from whence they conduce to the cure of almost infinite Diseases, viz. of all such, as proceed from and are gene∣rated of an Acid ferment, as flegmatick Diseases, Scurvy, Epilepsia, &c. Dose, ℈ss. ad ℈j. § 5. But all these things are properly spoken only of Marggrave's Sal Alcali, not of Schroders, which is the Text of our Author: the use of which Schroder saith, is only Chymical, and serves to se∣parate Gold from Copper, if it be cast on when it runs: as also, to make Silver run easie and melt. XXII. Sal-Aluminis, Salt of Alum. Bate.] Boil burnt Alum in Water, filter and coagulate, S. A. It is Sudorifick and a Febrifuge. Dose, gr. v. ad x. Salmon.] § 1. Or rather you may take the Caput Mor∣tuum of the Spirit of Alum, at Chap. II. Sect. II. § 3. and 6. aforegoing of this Book, and so proceed to dissolution, filtration, and coagulation, as directed in our Text. § 2. But there is another kind of Salt of Alum, which is crystalline, and according to Charras is thus made. ℞ Burnt Alum, or the Caput Mort. now mentioned, put it into a Glass Cucurbit in a Sand-heat, and affuse thereon as much good Vinegar, as is requisite to dissolve it, filter the dissolution, and evaporate in the same heat, till a Cu∣ticle covers it, then let it cool and set to crystallize, which Crystals dry and keep for use. § 3. These are given up∣on occasion, in some proper purging Liquor, à gr. xij. ad xx. or xxiv. twice a Week for the Cure of Tertian Agues, a little before the Fit. Schro∣der says they move Sweat,
and cure the Scurvy being given once or twice a week to sweat with, and cure Ter∣tians being given often before the Fit. XXIII. Sal-Armoniacum fixa∣tum, Fixed Sal-Armoni∣ack. Bate.] Mix Sal-Armoniack with half the quantity of Quicklime, and giving a most strong fire, with the help of Bel∣lows melt it, which afterwards wash with water, S. A. Its chief use is for making a Li∣quor of it: it is Sudorifick, resists Putrefaction, and opens Obstructions. Dose, gr. v. ad x. &c. Salmon.] § 1. Charras makes it thus. ℞ Sal-Arm. Quicklime, Ana. mix them, put them into a Crucible upon the Iron square in the midst of a Wind Fornace, where it may be at length for∣ced into fusion: then it is ta∣ken and dissolved in Water, af∣ter which it is filtered and co∣agulated: so have you fixt Sal-Armon. this being put on a Glass Plate in a cool moist Cellar dissolve by little and little into a Liquor, fit to dis∣solve Gold or Silver. § 2. It is the nature of two Volatiles to fix one another; and thus the Volatile Salt of the Quicklime hastily joyn∣ing with the Volatile Salt of the Sal Armon. and in the Calcination and Fusion, invading one anothers Pro∣perties fix one another, tho' in the doing this, before the intimate Mixtion can be made, some part of the Volatile Salts must be lost. § 3. But Lemery has an o∣ther kind of fixt Sal Armon. which he makes after this manner. ℞ Sal-Armoniack, Salt of Tartar, Ana. ℥viij. both being in pouder, mix them and immediately put them into a Glass body, and sprinkle it with ℥iij. of Rain-water fix on it a Head and Receiver, luting well the Junctures with a wet Blad∣der: distil in Sand, first with a gentle fire, to warm the Ves∣sel gradatim, and to distil the Spirit drop by drop: when no more will come over; take a∣way the Receiver, stop up the neck, and increase the Fire to the third degree, for the space of about two hours, so the white Volatile Sal Armoniack will sublime, which will stick about the bottom of the head like Meal: and at the bot∣tom of the Cucurbit a good quantity of white fixt Salt. § 4. The Spirit has the same Vertues and Operati∣ons of the common Spirit of Sal Armoniack; and thereof you will have ℥vijss. of the Volatile Salt, you will have
about ℥jss. and of the fixt Salt nere ℥ixss. § 5. This fixt Salt dissolve in a sufficient quantity of Water, filter, and evaporate to dryness, so will it be very white and pure. § 6. This Salt is esteemed by Physicians as Sylvius, a Sal Febrifugum. an excellent Remedy for intermitting Fe∣vers, and all sorts of preter∣natural Hearts whatsoever; being given à ℈ss. ad ʒss. in Centory-water, or some o∣ther proper Vehicle. § 7. This Febrifugous Salt is nothing but a mixture of Salt of Tartar, with the A∣cid part of the Sal-Armon. which makes it to work much by Urine, but seldom Sweat, because that being fixed it penetrates more easi∣ly than rarifies, for which reason it opens Obstructi∣ons, which are the rooted or original Causes of all Fevers. § 8. In performing this O∣peration, you might use in∣stead of the Salt of Tartar, the fixt Salt of Nitre, Salt of Pot-Ashes, or any other Al∣cali that you please: the Vo∣latile Salt does proceed from some part of the Sal Armon. which the Salt of Tartar had not sufficiently opened and seiz'd upon: this when the Fire begins to heat the Mat∣ter rises up into the head, in a delicate Crystalline form, but the moist Vapors coming upon it, dissolves it into Spirit, but the moisture being spent, what Salt afterwards arises keeps in a dry form. § 9. This Spirit then is a dissolution of the Volatile Salt in Water; in which if there be not Flegm or Wa∣ter enough, the Volatile Salt will lie at bottom undissolv'd; this may all be turned into Spirit, by only adding more Water; thus the Pores of the Water are filled with the Volatile Salt: but if there be more Water than the Volatile parts require, the Spirit is then weak, and must be given in a larger Dose. § 10. If equal quantities of this Spirit and Spirit of Wine be mixt together, there will be a Coagulum, as thick as Butter, which may be cut with a Knife; this proceeds from the Sulphurous part of the S. V. which uniting with the Saline parts of the Sal-Armon. they filling the Ra∣mous parts of the said Sul¦phur of the Wine, immedi∣ately fix it, and stop their Motion, from whence pro∣ceeds their Coagulation: to which 'tis possible that the Acid in the S. V. joyning with the Volatile Alcali in the Spi∣rit of Sal Armon. may much contribute.
XXIV. Sal Armoniacum Vo∣latile, i. e. Febrifugum Sa∣lis, Volatile Sal-Armoni∣ack, or Febrifuge of Salt. Bate.] It is made of Sal Armoniack and Salt of Tar∣tar, Ana. by subliming, S. A. It may be also sublimed (by the order of the Physician,) with a third part of Castor, or Am∣ber. It takes away the Cru∣dities of the Ventricle. Dose▪ à gr. iij. ad x. It is a S∣dorifick, and a Specifick in the Gout. Salmon.] § 1. This Pre∣paration is nothing but the same with Lemery's in the last Section; by which it appears that both a fixt and a vola∣tile Sal-Armoniack may be made by one and the same Operation; that is the Vola∣tile, which after the Mixti∣on of this Quicklime or Salt of Tartar ascends and sticks to the head: and that is the fixt Salt which after the Di∣stillation and Sublimation is ended, remains at bottom of the Cucurbit, having had a reverberatory or melting Heat. § 2. How to make it with Quicklime, we have shewed from the same Lemery, in Chap. II. Sect. XXIV. § 14. and 18. of this Book afore∣going, so that it is needless here to repeat it again: but this is observable, that out of ℥viij. of Sal-Armon. and ℥24. of Quicklime with the addi∣tion of ℥iv. of Water, you will have of Spirit ℥v. ʒvj. and the Caput Mort. in the bottom will be thirty Ounces; so that abating the ℥xxiv. of Quicklime, you will have just ℥vj. of fixt Salt. § 3. This fixt Salt is to be gotten out of the Caput Mor∣tuum by elixiviation in Wa∣ter, filteration, and evapora∣tion to dryness, &c. accord∣ing to the usual Method. § 4. In Sect. III. of this Chapter, we have shewn you how to make the Flowers of Sal Armoniack, by which com∣paring the Discourse, with that in this and the former Section you may apparently see the difference between Flowers and Volatile Salt: the Flowers being the whole bo∣dy of the Sal-Armoniack, to wit, its Acid and Alcalious parts, sublimed together, and so are in truth no more but a purified Sal-Armoniack: whereas the Volatile Sal-Ar∣moniack is only the Volatile parts sublimed alone, (in Salt or Spirit) the Acid and fixt part remaining behind at bottom of the Sublimatory.
§ 5. This Volatile Salt, is a famous thing for open∣ing all Obstructions of the Viscera, and to remedy Di∣seases of the Head, Brain, and Nervous parts, being excellent against Vertigo's. A∣poplexies, Epilepsies, Megrims inveterate Head-Achs, Le∣thargies, fainting and swoon∣ing Fits, Palsies, Convulsi∣ons, and other like Diseases of the nervous System and Womb. § 6. It is a famous Speci∣fick against all Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, opens their Stoppages, and helps Coughs, Colds, Wheasings, Asthma's Shortness of Breath, Phthisicks, and restores in Consumptions: besides which, it resists Corruption and Pu∣trefaction of the Humors, and all malign, infectious or con∣tagious Diseases, as putrid Fevers, Measles, Small-Pox, spotted Feaver, Plague, and all sorts of Pestilential Di∣stempers, expelling the Poy∣son and Virulency of the Distemper either by Sweat or Urine, or both. Dose, à gr. iv. ad xvj. or ℈j. in some proper Sudorifick or pectoral Vehicle. XXV. Sal-Armoniacum Vo∣latile Oleosum; Volatile Oily Sal-Armoniack. Bate.] ℞ Cloves ℥ij. Spirit of Wine ℥viij. Spirit of Sal Armon ℥iv. digest them together to be united according to Art. Dose, à gr. x. ad xv. &c. In Diseases of the Head, Sto∣mach, Spleen, Womb, &c. as also in the Cholick and Palpitation of the Heart, it is a most powerful Reme∣dy. Salmon.] § 1. This Pro∣cess is plain and easie so that it needs no Explication, but there are several kinds of them, the chief of which, and such as are of more vul∣gar use, we shall here insert. § 2. Sal Volatile Oleosum in Forma sicca, seu Essentia Vegetabilium. ℞ Pure Salt of Tartar ℥iv. of the Oil of any Vegetable ℥j. Volatile Salt of Ʋrine, or of Horse-hoofs, Cows-horns, Harts-horn, or Hair, or of Flesh, ℥ij. the Vo∣latile Salt being made into fine Pouder, mix it well with the Oil; then add the Salt of Tartar, which speedily put into a Sublimatory, and sublime with a gentle Fire so will the Volatile Salt ascend impregna∣ted with the Essence of the Vegetable.
§ 3. In this Operation, you must be careful that the Salt of Tartar may not imbibe any moisture from the Air, be∣cause it will be apt to hurt the Operation: for which reason, it will be better to put the Salt of Tartar (redu∣ced into fine Pouder in a very hot Iron Mortar with a hot Pestle) first into the Sublima∣tory, to which affuse the Oil, and then add the Volatile Salt, letting them digest to∣gether three or four days without fire, and then subli∣ming as aforesaid. § 4. The Vertues of this kind of Oily Salt, are in part taken from the Subjects of which it is made: suppose of Oil of Savin, Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, and Salt of Tar∣tar; it is then opening, diu∣retick, and a provoker of the Menses, &c. Dose, à gr. vj. ad xvj. Plus-minusve pro ra∣tione Patientis. § 5. Sal Volatile Aromati∣cum & Oleosum. ℞ Cinna∣mon ʒiv. Nutmegs ʒij Cloves ʒj. Aniseeds, Cardamoms. Saffron, A. ʒj. being all in gross Pou∣der, add pure Salt of Tartar, ʒiij. Sal Armon. ʒjss. common S. V. ℥viij. digest for one night, and distil in the morning with a gentle fire; so the most subtil part of the S. V. will asced, impregnated with the aroma∣tick Essences united with the Volatile Sal Armoniack, as also a Volatile Sal Armoniack in a dry form, adhearing to the sides of the Alembick and Receiver. § 6. Or thus. ℞ The Aro∣matick Tincture, or Aroma∣tick Spirit of Wine, prepared as aforesaid ℥j. most pure Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniack à ʒj. ad ʒij. mix and digest twenty four hours, then distil with a gentle fire: so will the most subtil part of the S. V. joyn, and ascend with the Spirit of Sal Armoniack. § 7. Or thus. ℞ Flowers of Sal Armoniack, and affuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. so much as to overtop them your Inches: digest eight days till the S. V. is impregnated: de∣cant the clear, and with this Menstruum extract Oily aro∣matick Tinctures without di∣stillation, which will be noble Medicines, and of almost in∣finite Ʋses. § 8. The Vertues of these Volatile Salts, Oily Aroma∣tick Tinctures are to be drawn from the Ingredients of which they are made; ac∣cording to which they may be Cephalick, Neurotick, Stomatick, Pectoral, Ne∣phritick or Hysterick; and by reason of the Vola∣tile Salts will potently cut
tough Flegm, dispel Tarta∣rous Humors, open Obstru∣ctions, provoke the Terms in Women, resist the hysterick Passions, remove Lethargies, Vertigo's and Apoplexies, ease the Palpitation of the Heart, and allay a Suffoca∣tive, ferment of the Sto∣mach, &c. being given à gut. vj. ad 30. Plus minus. § 9. Sal Volatile Oleosum & Aromaticum extempora∣neum. ℞ Alcohol of S. V. ℥iv. Sal-Tartari ℥ss. Oil of Mint gut. xx. Oils of Orange-Peels, gut. 16. of Cloves, of Rosemary, of Nutmegs distil∣led, Ana. gut. viij. of Juni∣per gut. x. mix the Oils with the Salt, then affuse the S. V. shaking them well together, lastly add Spirit of Sal Armo∣niack ℥ij. and it will grow Milky: digest them together for some hours, often shaking the Glass, and at length it will grow clear; which de∣cant from the Feces, and keep for use. § 10. It is a famous Ce∣phalick, Neurotick, Stoma∣tick, Cardiack and Uterine, good against Vertigo's, Le∣thargies Apoplexies vehement Head-Achs, sickness at Sto∣mach, Palpitation of the Heart, Faintings, Swoonings and hysterick Fits. Dose, à gut. 15. ad 30. § 11. Sal Volatile Oleosum Uterinum Extemporaneum. ℞ Chymical Oils of Rue gut. xx. of Savin, gut. 26. of Lavender, Rosemary, Time, Juniper, Mace distilled, A. gus. 8. mix the Oils with the Salt of Tartar as aforesaid, and then with S.V. rectified and Spi∣rit of Sal Armon. in the same Proportions as before, so will you have a Specifick against all Obstructions and Affects of the Womb: it will pro∣voke the Terms immediately, and as it were to a Miracle, besides it is excellent against Palsies, Lameness, Pains and Aches. § 12. Sal Volatile Oleosum Cephalicum extemporaneum. ℞ Chym. Oils of Mint, of Marjoram, of Time, of O∣ranges, of Rosemary, of La∣vender, A. gut. viij. of Cloves gut. xvj. mix them with Salt of Tartar ʒv. then with Alco∣hol of S. V. ℥v. and with Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniack ℥ij. as before. § 13. Sal Volatile Oleosum Febrile & stomachicum ex∣temporaneum. ℞ Chym. Oils of Cloves, Mint, A. gut. xvj. of Wormwood, Juniper, Ca∣raways, Fennel, Oranges, A gut. viij. Camphire ʒss. mix them with Salt of Tartar in fine Pouder ʒvj. and then with Alcohol of S. V. ℥vj. Spirit of
Sal Armoniack ℥ij. as be∣fore. § 14. Sal Volatile Aroma∣ticum, made by digestion only. ℞ Biting Cinnamon ℥iv. Cloves, Cardamoms the less, Cubebs, Coriander-seeds, Florentine Orice, A. ij. the yellow of Citron-peels, of China Oranges, A. ℥j. all being cut and well bruised, add to them pure Salt of Tartar calcined Blew ℥ss. and immediately af∣fuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. so much as to overtop the Ingredi∣ents four or five Inches: di∣gest in a cool place a week, and the Tincture will be ex∣tracted: decant the clear, and add to it a third part of Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniack, and keep it for use. § 15. Sal Volatile Aroma∣ticum, made by distillation. ℞ The same quantities of all the aforesaid Simples, and affuse thereon S. V. ℥xx. Salt of Tartar, Sal Armoniack, A. ℥vj. best Damask Rose-water ℥iv. Lavender-water ℥ij. mix and digest three days, then di∣stil in B. M. with a moderate fire, till about ℥xij. are come forth, which keep for use. § 16. Sal Volatile Oleo∣sum quod Odorem Urino∣sum non habet. ℞ Roots of Angelica, Masterwort, But∣terbur, Valerian, A. ℥ss. Roots of round Cyperus, of Galangal the less, Cardamoms, Cubebs, Amomum, A. ʒiij. Cloves, Cin∣namon, Nutmegs, A. ʒv. La∣vender, Marjoram, Mint, Rosemary, A. M. ss. Benjamin, Styrax Calamita, Labdanum, A. ʒij. Lignum Rhodium, yel∣low Sanders, A. ℥ss. Seeds of Anise and Fennel, A. ʒvj. all being grosly poudered and mix∣ed, affuse thereon common S. V. lbvj. Plus minus: Spirit of Nitre ℥vj. digest for three days (but the longer the better) then distil off about two thirds: to the abstracted Spirit, add Sassafras shavings ℥j. Corian∣der-seeds ℥ij. yellow of Citron and Orange Peels, A. ℥iij. La∣vender, M. ij. Spirit of Nitre ℥j. mix and digest for a day, and distil off again the one half, to this distilled Spirit add Spirit of Sal Armon. a half part, digest again for a day, and then add Oils of Ginna∣mon, of Cloves, of Oranges, of Mint, A. gut. viij. of Juniper, gut. vj. mix, digest, and in B. M. distil to dryness, keep∣ing what is drawn off for use. § 17. It opens Obstructi∣ons of the Viscera, strengthens the Stomach, and facilitates the Circulation of the Blood and other Juices, helps the Cachexia in Women, pro∣vokes the Sweat, and cor∣rects all noxious Humors
of what kind soever; but as to its more specifick Ver∣tues, they are to be deduced from the Chymical Oils which go to its Composition. Dose, à gut. viij. ad xxx. or more. § 18. Sal Volatile Oleosum Le Mortianum. ℞ Marjo∣ram, Mint, Sage, Time, A. M. j. Seeds of Lovage, Carda∣moms, Daucus, Amomum, Anise, Caraways. A. ʒij. Cu∣bebs, Roots of Galangal the less, sweet Costus, round Cype∣rus, Florentine Orrice, A. ℥ss. Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, A. ʒjss. Salt of Tartar ℥ss. be∣ing grosly bruised, mix them together, and affuse thereon ℥100. of S. V. digest three Weeks in a warm place, then distil off two thirds. To the distilled Spirit add, yellow of Citrons ℥iv. of Oranges ℥ij. Sassafras ℥ij. digested first in S. V. ℥x. for the same time: these two, viz. the former Spi∣rit; and this latter Tincture, being joined, draw off the Spirit again in B. M. to dry∣ness. To the whole quantity of this Spirit, add a half part of Spirit of Sal Armon. Chymi∣cal Oil of Cloves, gut. x. of Mint, gut. xx. of Orange-peels, gut. xxx. of Rosemary, Mace distilled, A. gut. viij. of Juniper, gut. xij. Salt of Tar∣tar calcined Blew, and made into fine Pouder in a hot Mor∣tar ℥iij. put all together into a Glass sufficiently large, digest for four days (but 8 or 10 would be better) then separate the clear from the Feces, keep∣ing it for use, under the Title of Sal Volatile Oleosum subti∣lissimum. § 19. It is a most egregi∣ous Antifebrile and Stoma∣tick, opening all Obstructi∣ons of the Viscera, recreating the Spirits through the whole Body, and promoting the Circulation of the Blood: it is as a Panacea in all sorts of Diseases, and cures Fevers by sweating. Dose, à gut. iv. ad xx. § 20. Sal Volatile Oleo∣sum aliud. ℞ What specifick Herbs, Roots, Barks, Seeds, Flowers, or Woods you please; Spirit of Wine so much as they may swim in it: digest them together the longer the better, but adding to every Pound of Spirit of Wine, Spi∣rit of Nitre ℥ss. distil after∣wards the one half: and to the distilled Spirit add what Chymical Oils you please, so much as the Spirit can possibly imbibe: then add Spirit of Sal Arm. a half part, and di∣gest them together, or distil them drawing off two third parts, which keep for use.
§ 21. Sal Volatile Oleo∣sum nobilissimum, of an ex∣cellent smell and taste. ℞ Bi∣ting Cinnamon ℥iv. yellow of Citrons-peels ℥vj. Benjamin, Styrax Calamita, Rhodium, A. ʒvj. Cloves, Mace, Car∣damoms, Cubebs, Cyperus-roots, Florentine Orrice, A. ℥ss. Musk, gr. iv. S. V. lbviij, digest to∣ether for eight days, then di∣stil off one half: to which add Spirit of Nitre ℥ij. and put it upon the former Magma, adding Sassafras, Coriander-seed, A. ℥j. digest again for two days; then with a very gentle fire distil off two thirds of the Humidity or Spirit, to which add. Oils of Cinnamon, of Cloves, of Oranges, Ana. so much as the Spirit will swa∣low up, or dissolve Spirit of Sal: Armoniack, a third part of the whole Spirit, mix them, sha∣king them well together, digest for one or two days, and keep it for use. § 22. This wonderfully re∣creates the Vital and Animal Spirits, exhiberates the natural Powers, strengthens the whole Body; fortifies the Stomach, and removes its Debility, and promotes the Circulation of the Blood, which directly tends to the Prolongation of Life. Dose, à gut. iv. ad xx. or more, in a Glass of Wine. Here note, that the older this Medicament is, the more grateful and pleasant it will be, both in its taste and smell. § 23. Sal Volatile Oleo∣sum extemporaneum. ℞ Aquae Vitae Matthioli, q. v. or in place thereof, if it be not in a readiness common Spirit of Wine, half the quantity of the other: Sal Alcali q. v. Oils of Cloves, Mint, Ana. q. v. Oils of Rosemary, Oranges, and Mace distilled, A. half the quantity of the Cloves: of these Oils put in so much as the Spirit will dissolve: or rather first mix them with the Sal Alcali, and then with the S.V. to which put of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, the third part of the quantity of the S. V. or a sixth part of the quantity of the Aq. Vitae: digest them to∣gether for the space of twenty four hours, so will all the Flegm be separated from the Spirit. § 24. In a word, all Vo∣latile Oily Salts, made after these Methods, resist Putre∣faction, cure Fevers, and the Suffocation of the Womb, and have the same Vertues, which the Oils composing them have. § 25. Sal Volatile Oleo∣sum Antivenereum. ℞ S.V. lbx. Sassafras Chips or Sha∣vings lbij. digest in a warm place for forty days, and in
B. M. draw off only the pure Spirit without any Flegm: with this Spirit extract a Tin∣cture from Gum Guajaci, and the extract of Guajacum make by the help of com∣mon Water: This done, ℞ Sal Alcali, Oil of Lignum Guajacum rectified, Oil of Sas∣safras, A. gut. 40. raspings of China-root ℥iij. Antimony so prepared for the extraction of its Tincture ℥vj. Meroury pre∣cipitated with Salt of Tartar ℥ss. of the former prepared Spirit or Tincture ℥40. of the best Spirit of Sal Armoniack ℥40. digest them together for four days, then decant the clear from the thick, and keep it for use. Dose, à gut. x. ad xxx. § 26. Sal Volatile Oleo∣sum vulgare. ℞ Volatile Sal Armoniack ℥j. Nutmegs, Cinna∣mon, A. ʒjss. best Saffron ʒij. Chymical Oils of Lavender, Cloves, Nutmegs, Amber, Mar∣joram, A. gut. xx. Calx Vive, or rather Salt of Pot-ashes ℥ij. Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Ana. ℥viij. mix and digest for three days sha∣king it often: then being quiet for some time, decant the clear and keep it for use. XXVI. Sal Chalybis, Salt of Steel. Bate.] ℞ Crocus Martis made with A. R. extract the Salt with Water, filter and crystallize, S. A. It has the Power of inciding and open∣ing Obstructions, both of the Bowels and Womb. Dose, à gr. j. ad v. and more. Salmon.] § 1. Beguinus, Lib. 2. Cap. 15. makes his Crocus after this manner. ℞ Filings of Mars ℥j. which dissolve in A.F. ℥viij. (but other Authors say ℥iv.) or in as much good Spirit of Nitre in a Glass Gourd; put the Spirit in pau∣latim, or by little and little, by reason of the great Ebuli∣tion which arises: when this is done, put an Alembick or Head upon the Gourd, and draw off all the Humidity, which will be as insipid as Water, by reason that the Steel retains all the Acid Spirits: at the bottom of the Glass you will have ℥jss. of a Rubicund Crocus, which put into a Cru∣cible, upon a moderate fire, so as to make it red for three hours. § 2. This is the Aperitive Crocus Martis, which accord∣ing to Zwelfer may be pre∣pared also with Oils or Spirits of Vitriol, or Sulphur, or Salt,
with Spirit of Nitre, or Vine∣gar, or any other proper A∣cid: but, says he, this opening Crocus is made with a very gentle Calcination: The Cro∣cus being made, you may easi∣ly make the Salt by the or∣dinary Method of Extracti∣on with fair Water, filtering, and crystallizing. § 3. Our Author in his Text, exactly follows Schro∣der, but he orders it to be often dissolved and coagula∣ted, that the Salt may be sweetish: Where note, that in the first dissolution of the Steel in A. R. if you can∣not filter it, because it cor∣rodes the Paper, you must mix the greater quantity of Water with it, that it may not be so sharp, and it will filter the better. § 4. Gregorius Horstius in his Epistle to his Observati∣ons says, that this Salt will cut and open the worst Ob∣structions of the Bowels and Womb, and may be given, à gr. iv. ad viij. it cures the Cachexia and Green-sickness in Virgins. § 5. Authors seem to make a difference between the Vitriol of Mars, and the Salt of Mars, tho' they are both but Salts of Mars, and both do one and the same thing: but there is this difference in the Preparation, that the Vi∣triolum Martis is made with the Oil or Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, with the addition of some Water; whereas the Sal Martis is made only with Spirit of Vinegar. § 6. Riverius his Vitriolum or Sal Martis is thus made. ℞ Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur lbss. S. V. lbj. mix them in a new clean Iron Frying-pan, co∣ver it with a sheet of white Paper, and digest fifteen days so will there be a white Salt like gathering, which set in the Sun and dry it throughly, stirring it sometimes with an Iron Spatula; in the Winter dry it in a gentle Sand-heat, and keep it in a Glass close stopt for use. § 7. This he commends as an admirable thing against the most contumacious Ob∣structions of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, or the other Vis∣cera: and it is said to be a perfect Cure for Hypochon∣driack Melancholy, above all other Medicaments. Dose, à ℈ss. ad ℈j. in Wine or other Liquor. § 8. Crollius makes a Salt of Iron by cementing Calx of Iron with Sulphur, and then extracting it with hot Water, filtering, and crystallizing ac∣cording to the usual Method.
§ 9. Schroder has a purging Salt of Iron, which he makes after this manner. ℞ Filings of Iron, Sal Armoniack, A. grind them gently on a Marble, put them into an Earthen Still, and sublime, first with a gentle fire, then with a stron∣ger, increasing the fire by de∣grees: let it cool, and break the Vessel, and keep the upper part that is white, to make a new Sublimation with fresh filings: keep also the middle yellow part, which is the Dia∣phoretick Flowers of Iron: then take out the Caput Mor∣tuum, in the bottom, and ex∣tract with Water a common Salt, which purifie by Soluti∣on, Filtration, and Coagula∣tion, keeping it in a Glass close stopt for use. § 10. Being mixed in any proper Laxative or Syrup of Violets, à ℈ss. ad ℈j. it purges gently, and admirably opens all sorts of Obstructions of the Viscera: but this it does in my opinion much better, if the middle yellow Flow∣ers be mixed with it. § 11. Le Febure's Vitrio∣lum Martis. ℞ Filings put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and Gradatim affuse Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, with most of its Flegm, stir both together with an Iron Spatula, and put on so much of the Spirit, as that the Matter may be well satiated therewith; then af∣fuse thereon Rain-water al∣most boiling hot, so much as may overtop the Filings the height of four Inches: digest in a gentle Sand-heat for 24 hours, then filter the warm Liquor, and evaporate to one half, and set it to crystallize, which the next Morning you will find of a bright green round about the Vessel: take these Crystals or Vitriol, put them between two Papers, and dry them in a slow and gentle heat: upon the remaining Fi∣lings put more Spirit of Vi∣triol and warm Water, which in like manner digest, decant, filterate, and crystallize, till the whole body of the Iron is converted into Vitriol or Salt, a little Earthy sedement only remaining. § 12. Of ℥xij. of Filings you will have ℥48. of Vitriol, by which you may perceive, that it is nothing but Mars dissolved and resuming its Vitriolick Idea or Character, as being a Body which was once Vitriol: and this Vi∣triol much surpasses in Ex∣cellency the common Vitriol out of which the Spirit used in this Work has been distil∣led; for the recorporified Spirits have a greater Sphear of Activity, and do much
more powerfully work than the Substances purely and meerly natural; this Vitriol has more efficacy, and acts with much more quickness than the apperitive Crocus, in all the Diseases it is applicable to, but the Dose is much less, beginning with gr. 3. and so increasing gradually till you come to gr. 10. or 20. ei∣ther in some Bolus, Wine or Broth. § 13. But here is one Note worthy of Observation, the Remedies extracted from Mars must be long continued and ta∣ken, increasing their Dose a Grain, or more every day, till it begins to cause a nauseousness in the Stomach, and then to diminish it to what the Sto∣mach can well receive, and so continuing it; for that it ap∣pears, Nature then is bringing forth its desired effects, with∣out any force or violence. § 14. You ought also to observe that such as use Steel Remedies should be purged every fourth or fifth day, in case it does not so provoke Nature as is desired; and every other day, the Bowels ought to be opened by a so∣lutive Clyster, or a Clyster made of new Urine. § 15. Wherefore every fourth or fifth day take this gentle Purge. ℞ Veal or Chick∣en Broth ℥viij. vitriolated Tartar ℈j. choice Sena ʒij. in∣fuse twelve hours, strain, and give it for a Dose. This carries off, and expels out of the Body, those Recre∣ments which this great Re∣medy has made fit for Eva∣cuation. § 16. Le Febure's Salt of Mars, which Schroder and others call the sweet Salt of Mars. ℞ Filings lbss. put them into a Stone Dish or Pan, sprinkle them with good Spirit of Vinegar, till they become a Paste, which gently dry: grind it on a Marble, and moisten in like manner again with the same Spirit; then dry again, grind and moisten again, which work so often repeat till you discern by the Taste the Mass to be of a sweetish savour or rellish: then put this Pouder into a Cucurbit, and affuse thereon Flegm of Vinegar, so much as may overtop it six Inches; cause the Liquor to boil, so will it extract the Salt, always observing to put in new Flegm of Vinegar, as you see the other evaporates away: the Menst being sufficiently impreg∣nated decant it, and being cold filterate it, and in B. M. abstract two or three parts, and in a cool place, set it to shoot into Crystals: separate the superna∣ting Liquor, evaporate again
and crystallize, which work so often repeat till it will yield no more: then dry them, and put them into a circulary Ves∣sel, affusing thereon Alcohol of S. V. so much as may overtop them three Inches: lute it close up, and digest in B. V. with a very gentle heat for seven days: then unlute the Vessel and abstract the S. V. and at bottom you will have a very pure and pleasant Salt of Mars. § 17. It is famous in open∣ing and removing of Ob∣structions, chiefly in weak and tender Bodies; and is good generally, against all Melancholick Affections, and Diseases of the Reins and Bladder; but is particularly a Specifick for the Cure of Dropsies, opens Obstructions of the Womb, and cure Fits of the Mother. Dose, à gr. iv, ad 20. in Broth, Decocti∣on, or Wine. § 18. Beguinus makes his Vitriol of Mars, with Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur, putting to ℥j. of the unrectified Oil, ℥ij. of Water, which he puts upon ℥j. of Filings, and then per∣forms the Operation in all re∣spects as at Sect. XI. afore∣going. § 19. Others make the Vitriol thus. ℞ Filings lbj. put them into a large Ma∣trass; and affuse thereon of the best corrosive Oil of Vi∣triol lbiij. mixt with Rain-water lb9. putting on the Li∣quor by degrees: digest in a Sand-heat for two or three days, in which time most of the Fi∣lings will be dissolved (which would not be without the addi∣tion of the Water, which hin∣ders the Oil of Vitriol from being suckt up, and congealed by the Filings of the Steel;) and the dissolution will be green, then filter, and crystallize as before directed. § 20. With this Vitriol Ar∣tificial Mineral Waters may be made, either strong or weak, according to the In∣tention of the Physician: but for the most part ʒj. of this Vitriol serves for two Quarts of Water. § 21. Some in making the Salt of Mars at Sect XVI. a∣bove, repeat the Operation of moistening the Filings with Spirit of Vinegar, drying and grinding, at least a dozen times, the better to open the Body of the Steel, and then if the Filings were at first but lbss. (putting them into a Gourd in B. M.) they affuse thereon lbxij. of distilled Vinegar, and con∣tinue it in the heat till a third part of the Menstruum is consumed; then being cold, they decant the Solution, and
affuse new Menstruum to the Steel, &c. repeating this Ope∣ration thrice: mix the Solu∣tions, filter, evaporate, and crystallize, &c. § 22. This Salt has a great use in Physick, for the Acids with which it is prepared, carry it into the most remote and difficult places of the Body: and the Acids them∣selves (which being alone might do mischief) being as it were fettered and correct∣ed by the Alcali of the Steel or Iron, act not with their wonted or natural Vio∣lence. § 23. Thibaut makes his Salt or Vitriol of Mars thus. ℞ Of the opening Crocus in fine Pouder lbvj. put it into an Iron Kettle, and affuse thereon fair Water lbxij boil, con∣tinually stirring it for two hours with an Iron Spatula, till the Water be half boiled away, then filter whilst warm, afterwards evaporate and cry∣stallize, as before directed. § 24. These Crystals are of a transparent green colour, because that Mars is made out of a Vitriolick Earth, as afore-hinted, which does con∣tain nothing but pure Vi∣triol, which by the violence of the Fire is changed into a Metalick body, this being opened again by dissol∣vants resumes its ancient co∣lour. § 25. They ought to be kept in a Glass close stopt, because the Air will soon change their colour, and co∣ver them with a kind of white Meal, which will change their transparency and greenness. § 26. These Crystals of Mars are nothing but Par∣ticles of the Body of Mars, intimately joyned with an Acid Salt, and extracted out of the opening Calx of Mars, by the sweetest of all dissol∣vants, which is common Water, by boiling, and then evaporated and crystal∣liz'd. § 27. Charras makes two kinds of the Salt of Mars, the first is exactly agreeable with that of Le Febure at Sect. XVI. above, so that no more need be said of it here: his other is the same with that of Riverius at Sect. VI. afore∣going, with whom Lemery exactly agrees; but they differ from him, in the Pro∣portions of the S. V. and Oil of Vitriol: for whereas Riverius doubles the Pro∣portions of S. V. to the Oil; they both, make them equal.
§ 28. This Salt says Char∣ras is much beyond that made with Spirit of Vinegar, and is a singular Example of the Change of the Liquid Forms of the Spirits of Wine and Vitriol into a solid, by the common Union with the Particles of Iron: and is gi∣ven à ℈ss. ad ʒss. as one of the best Remedies which can be drawn from Mars, and which may be truly called the Soul of that mixt. § 29. In making this Salt a Frying-pan (which ought to be new) is most proper be∣cause of its flatness: and if you use ℥iv. of S. V. and ℥iv. of Oil of Vitriol, you will have ℥x. of the Salt of Mars: which proportion Ex∣perience has convinced us of, is more agreeable with Rea∣son, than that of Riverius. § 30. This Salt also is more agreeable with the Sto∣mach, than that made with Vinegar, and is indeed more subtil and efficacious, for that nothing but the more soluble parts of the Iron, incorpo∣rates with the Menstruum, to make a Salt of: It is also pre∣ferrable before the Vitriol of Mars made with the Oils of Vitriol or Sulphur: and if it be put into a cold moist place, upon a Plate of Glass, it will melt per Deliquium, which is Liquor vel Liqua∣men Martis, by some (but improperly) called Oil of Mars. § 31. Charras makes his Vi∣triolum Martis exactly ac∣cording to Le Febure, so al∣so does Lemery, but with li∣mited proportions of the In∣gredients thus: § 32. ℞ Clean filings of Iron lbj. put them into a large Matrass, and affuse theron fair warm Water lbiv. and of good Oil or Spirit of Vitriol lbij. stir them mell together, and set the Matrass in a gentle Sand-heat, and digest twenty four hours, in which time the purest part of the Mars will be dissolved, decant the clear Liquor, casting away the Earthy parts which remain at bottom; filterate and evaporate in a Glass Cucurbit, to a Pellicle, over a Sand-heat, then set it in a cool place to crystallize, so will you have green Cry∣stals: decant the Liquor, eva∣porate again to a Pellicle, and crystallize as before, which work repeat till you have got all the Crystals, then dry them, and keep them in a Bottle close stopt for use. § 33. Where note, That if Water should not be add∣ed, there would want moi∣sture to separate the pure parts of the Mars from the
Impure, so that the Oil of Vitriol would not be able to dissolve the Mars, but only to incorporate with it: now in the dissolution of the Li∣quor it heats and boils consi∣derably, because the Acidity of the Vitriol does violently pe∣netrate the body of the Mars, making a separation of its parts. § 34. This Vitriol being calcin'd in a Crucible in an open fire, till it is reduced to a very fine red Pouder, makes a very beautiful Crocus Mar∣tis which is properly that part of the Steel which the Spirit of Vitriol has dissol∣ved: this Lemery will have to be used like an Aperitive Crocus. § 35. This Vitriol of Mars, may also be distilled by a Retort in the same manner as ordinary Vitriol; and the Spirit drawn from it, is said to have the same Vertues with ordinary Spirit of Vi∣triol (but some question, whe∣ther full out so strong) and may be made use of for the dissolution of Iron; after which you have the Caput Mortuum at bottom, which is the true Crocus Martis. XXVII. Sal Coralliorum, Salt of Coral. Bate.] It is drawn forth from the Ashes after the common manner: Or thus. Dissolve Coral in Spirit of Vinegar fil∣ter and exhale S. A. Dose, à ʒss. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. The Calx or Ashes is made by a gentle re∣verberating Fire, with a heat of the second degree (accord∣ing to Quercetan) lest by the force of a violent fire the Tin∣cture or Colour should exhale: but if you would have the Salt of Coral, you must cal∣cine it with a strong reverbe∣ratory Fire to Ashes (which is done in about three days time) then after the usual way you must make a Lixi∣vium, and from thence a Salt. § 2. Or thus, ℞ Coral, calcine it two days in a Potter's Fornace till white; then dis∣solve it in Spirit of Vinegar, by digestion in a gentle Sand-heat for eight days, so will you have a red Solution, abstract the Menstruum with a gentle fire to dryness; dissolve this Salt often in May Dew, fil∣tring and coagulating, which keep for use.
§ 3. Reduce Coral into an impalpable Pouter by grind∣ing upon a Porphyry Stone, put it into a Glass Ma∣trass, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop it four Inches, so will there be a great Efferves∣cency, which being over, digest in a gentle Sand-heat for two or three days, often shaking the Matrass, leave the Coral to settle at bottom and decant the clear Liquor; pouring on so much more Spirit of Vine∣gar on the remainder, digest∣ing as before, and decanting; this work continue till all the Coral is in a manner dissol∣ved: then the Dissolutions be∣ing mixed together, put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and in a Sand-heat evaporate all the Moisture, so will a Salt of Co∣ral remain at bottom, which keep in a Vial close stopt for use. § 4. This is the way by which Crollius, Beguinus, Schroder, Rolfincius, Lemery, and most others make this Salt, but it may be made with other Menstruums, as Schroder witnesses, with Spi∣rits of Vitriol, or Sulphur, or Salt, or by the Spirit of Gua∣jacum, which then it is said to purge the Blood excellent∣ly in the French-Pox, as also with the Juices of Limons, Citrons, and Barberries. But Thibaut makes it with Spirit of Sulphur, as before we have taught with Spirit of Vinegar. § 5. It is Cordial, revives and chears the Spirits, strength∣ens Nature, restores in Con∣sumptions, and takes away the Preternatural heat of Fe∣vers and Hecticks; it is gi∣ven also to quench thirst with success, and to open Ob∣structions, which it does by virtue of the conjoyned Acid Salt: it purifies the Mass of Blood, and expels Melan∣choly. XXVIII. Sal Margaritarum, Salt of Pearls. Bate.] It is to be prepared as Salt of Coral. Salmon.] § 1. It is made exactly as the Salt of Coral; but Pearls heed no pouder∣ing, for they dissolve whole, by meer digestion in distilled Vinegar: it is made also with Juice of Limons, and with all the other things with which Salt of Coral may be made. § 2. It is also made with Juice of Citrons thus. ℞ Pearls bruise them, and affuse thereon Juice of Citrons purified by digestion, so much as may over∣top them four Inches: digest till they are dissolved: then
add distilled May Dew, or Bawm water, and decant the Solution: add fresh Juice of Citrons depurated, digest, and add more distilled May Dew, or Bawm-water, and decant; this work repeat till the Pearl are nearly all dissolved, a few Feces only remaining; joyn the Solutions, and inspissate with a gentle fire, to dry∣ness. § 3. But Crollius seems most to approve of its Pre∣paration with Spirit of Vine∣gar, which Hartman assents to, as being a proper Men∣struum, and herein says he, (Crollius) is not besides the Mark; yet the use of other Juices for this purpose is not to be contemned. § 4. When the Evaporati∣on is made, in Salt of both Pearl and Coral, &c. the flegmy or watery parts only go forth, the Acids stay be∣hind, being joyned to the Particles of the Coral or Pearl, and so make a kind of Salt. § 5. This Salt, should it be put into a Retort and di∣stilled in Sand, would only yield a kind of styptick Li∣quor, without any conside∣rable Acidity, which plainly enough demonstrates, that the Acids are in a great mea∣sure destroyed, and come not forth of the Alcali with that Strength, Life, and Form or Figure, with which they went in. § 6. We will give you the Vertues of this Salt of Pearls from Crollius. It is (says he) a most noble Cordial, not much inferior to Aurum Po∣tabile, in Temperature and Operation; as in helping Contractures, Resolution of the Nerves, Convulsions, Phrensies: it keeps the Body sound; and if hurt restores it to its pristin state of Health, amends Womens Milk, and corrects and in∣creases the Seed of either Sex. § 7. It comforts the Brain, Memory and Heart; is a Prophylactick against the Vertigo and Apoplexy; dry∣ing up and consuming all the depraved Humors in the Bo∣dy from whence all kinds of Gout and Fevers are wont to proceed; it is good against a Consumption, and the wi∣thredness of Age, renewing, increasing and confirming the radical Humidity, by which it preserves from extream de∣bility in Age. § 8. It is admirable against the Stone, and preserves from the Gout, if daily taken for some time: it preserves from the Palsie, taken in Wine;
and is a Confortative in the Dropsie, Universals being premised: it alleviates the Venereal Evil; and is a sin∣gular Medicament against the Epilepsie, being taken Morn∣ing and Evening for six Weeks together. § 9. It strengthens the Child in the Womb; is good against Trembling and Pal∣pitation of the Heart, and Swoonings; being given in Cinnamon-water: it fortifies the Vital principal, and the Internal nature through the whole Body. Dose, à ʒss. ad ʒj. If it will do the half of all this, it is a wonderful Medicine. § 10. But Paracelsus attri∣butes great Vertues to the Salt of Pearl, and some other of its Preparations: and (says he) tho' the Process be simple yet believe my Experience, for Pearls have a wonderful Operation, not from Art but Nature: The Vertue lodged in the gross Substance, can∣not work but like a dead Body; but Resolution being made the Body is revived, and they become an excellent Cordial, resisting Poyson, Pu∣trefaction and the Pestilence, chear the Spirits and streng∣then the Balsam of Life, so that the greatest Agonies are removed thereby. XXIX. Sal Oculorum Can∣cri; Salt of Crabs Eyes. Bate.] It is made and pre∣pared as Salts of Corals and Pearls. Salmon.] § 1. As to the Process of making the Salt nothing more need be said than what has been said in those of Coral and Pearl. § 2. As to its Vertues it is (besides being Cord.) an excel∣lent traumatick and vulnerary and being given in traumatick Potions, disposes Ulcers and Fistula's to a speedy healing, carrying off part of the Mor∣bifick Cause by Urine. § 3. ℞ Of the Traumatick decoction ℥vj. of our Aqua Be∣zoartica ℥ss. of this Salt of Crabs Eyes ʒss. mix for a draught to be given three times a day. XXX. Sal Corte Cervi Suc∣cinatum, Ambred Salt of Harts-horn. Bate.] It is made by subliming Harts-horn with half the quantity of Amber S. A. Dose, gr. ʒss. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. This is an odd Medicament, and to be found in very few Authors (ex∣cept in Hippocrates and Ga∣len, as they found out in
them the Circulation of the Blood, in spight of what our immortal Harvey could do) but Hofman seems to hint at it in his Comment upon Schroder, Messiis medico Spa∣gyrica, paginâ meâ, 599. where speaking of the Li∣quor or Spirit of Hartshorn, Cum sale Volatili rectificatissi∣mus, he says, Ex hoc praepa∣ratur etiam C. C. Succinatum, Cinamomisatum, Citratum, &c. § 2. And Etmuller, Opera medica, Tom. 2. Pag. 286. has been so unlucky too as to give us some notice of it, in these Words, Huic etiam Liquor Cornu Cervi succinatus in om∣nibus supradictis affectibus (nempe Apoplexiâ, Epilepsia, Lethargo, & Vertigine, & in specie Catarrhis) est Mira∣bilis. § 3. It is made, says he, of these three things, viz. of the Spirit of Harts-horn, of the Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, and of the Volatile Salt of Amber, mixt together, digest∣ed and distilled. § 4. It is a most famous thing against the Falling-sick∣ness in Infants and Children, as also in Catarrhs, and all Rheumatick Diseases, De∣fluxions from the Head upon the Ʋvula and Tonsils, par∣ticularly in a Coryza, which is a Defluxion of sharp, salt, and thickened Humors into the Mouth, Lungs and No∣strils, from the Entricles of the Brain, as some think by the Nerves of Smelling. § 5. Now this Volatile Salt may be made either in a li∣quid or in a solid and dry form: in a liquid form, you may follow the Prescript of Et∣muller aforegoing: but if in a solid form, then you may make it, after the Text of our Au∣thor: or according to this following Prescript: ℞ Pure Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, Volatile Salt of Amber, Ana. mix them together, put them into a Glass Matrass or Vesica, affixing thereon a blind Head and Sublime, S. A. § 6. To conclude this Section, we will here give you Tillingius his Antepilepti∣cum Cervinum, which you may find in his Prodomos Chym. pag. 508. ℞ The simple Pouder made of young Harts-horns (i. e. ex Typhis) ℥vj. Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, Volatile Salt of Amber, A. ℥ss. white Sugar-candy in fine Pouder ℥ij. Chymical Oils of Coriander, Marjoram, and Lavender, A. ʒj. mix and make a Pouder for the Fal∣ling-sickness, which keep in a Glass close stopt with Cork waxed over. Dose, à ℈j. ad ʒij.
XXXI. Sal Decripitatum, De∣cripitated or calcin'd Salt. Bate.] It is made by calci∣ning it in a covered Cruci∣ble, till the Salt has done crackling. Salmon.] § 1. Some ad∣vise to put the Salt into an Earthen-Pot covering it, and then to put fire round about it (called Ignis rotae) that it may be red fire hot, so will the Salt crackle, and be re∣duced to pouder: then to continue the fire till the noise ceases. § 2. Lemery heats an un∣glaz'd Pot or Crucible red hot, and puts into it a Spoonful or two of Sea-salt, and then covers the Vessel, till the crackling is over, and the Salt falls into Pouder; which done he puts in more Salt, and continues the same Operation as long as need requires: the noise being over, and the P taken out of the Fire and cool▪ e takes the Salt and keeps it in a Glass bottle close stopt for use that the Air may not enter in to moisten it a new. § 3. The reason of the crackling in the Fire is an inward Humidity, which being rarified by the heat of fire, and finding the Pores of the Salt very close shut up, it breaks through them with a kind of Impetuosity and Violence, and so causes that crackling noise. § 4. The use of this Salt is either Medicinal or, Mechani∣cal: its Medicinal use is, that being put very hot into bags, and laid behind the neck, it will open the Pores, and fa∣cilitate a Perspiration of the too much abounding Hu∣midity, of the Brain: and if a little Salt of Tartar be mixed with it, it will be made the more active. § 5. Its Mechanical use is for Refiners, who Regalize their Aqua fortis therewith, to make it able to dissolve Gold, thus, ℞ Of this Salt decripitated lbj. put it into a Retort and affuse thereon good A. F. or Spirit of Ni∣tre lbij. then draw off the Spirit in a Sand-heat, and keep it for use: But some only dissolve the Salt in the A. F. &c. without di∣stillation, which they e∣steem the stronger Prepara∣tion. § 6. Here is to be noted, that when you have occasion to make use of decripita∣ted Salt, it will be best to use that which is newly done,
lest it should be again moist∣ned with any new attracti∣ons of Air. XXXII. Sal Diureticum, A Diuretick Salt▪ Or Sale pro∣voking Urine. Bate.] Dissolve the Caput Mortuum of Volatile Sal Armoniack in fair warm Wa∣ter; filter and coagulate, S.A. It is profitable in inter∣mitting Fevers. Dose, ʒss. ad ʒss. and prevails very much against the Jaundice, Scurvy, Dropsie, and all kinds of Obstructions. Salmon.] § 1. The Caput Mortuum here mentioned and intended, is that which is left from that Volatile Sal Armoniack which is made of equal parts of Sal Armoniack and Salt of Tartar. § 2. Its chief use is in Ob∣structions of the Reins, Ure∣ters and Bladder, and to ex∣pel Sand, Gravel, or any Tartarous matter filling those parts: it is good also to open Obstructions of the other Viscera, and is profitable, a∣gainst Cachexies, Dropsies, Yellow Jaundice, Scurvy, Gout, and Rheumatick Di∣stempers. § 3. Outwardly used, being dissolved in Water, and any part pained with the Gout, being washed with it, and Cloths wet in the same being applied, it gives immediate Relief: but the Wash ought to be used as hot as con∣veniently it can be endured, and to be continued for a quarter of an hour at least, and that twice a day. § 4. But in this case, before the external use of it, it will be necessary to purge and cleanse the Body very well by Universals, that as much as may be, the morbifick Cause of the Disease may be mostly carried off, lest by repercussi∣on the Humour should ascend upwards, and cause Stomach and Heart-sickness. XXXIII. Sal Febrifugum, The febrifuge Salt, or Salt against Fevers. Bate.] It is drawn forth out of Oister-shells, being first made very clean, and then calcin'd to whiteness; by dis∣solving in Water, filtering, and coagulating, S. A. Dose, ad ʒj. before the coming of the Fit.
Salmon.] § 1. Some take the lower Shell only; and of that, the limy white part; whilst others take the Orien∣tial part only, which look like or resemble, Oriental Pearl: Others make choice of the upper Shell and reject the Nether, and of them chuse such, as (being made very clean) are most Oriental, and in a manner transparent. § 2. But if I may deliver my Opinion, the Matter of both Shells (being first purely cleansed) may do, and the whole Substance of them both, but if a Choice is to be made, this is certain, that the upper Shell and that part which is most Oriental, and most resembles Oriental Pearl, is that which ought chiefly to be taken for this work. § 3. The Calcination ought to be very gentle, and not with a violent fire, because of a Volatile Salt which they contain, which tho' it is vo∣latile, is not so volatile as to be made to flye with a small heat, yet will in no wise su∣stain an intense strong heat, or a fire of long reverbera∣tion. § 4. The gentler the Cal∣cinatory heat is, the greater quantity of Salt you will have; the greater the Heat, the lesser the quantity of Salt, for by that means the volatile being made totally to evanish, you will only have the fixt Salt remaining, whereas otherwise, a consi∣derable quantity of the Vo∣latile will be joyned with the fixt, whereby a Salt of a middle nature being com∣posed, the quantity will be proportionably augmented. § 5. This Salt is indeed a singular Antifebririck, being composed of a double Alcali, to wit a volatile and a fixt, both which absorb the Acid Humors, of which Fevers are mostly generated. § 6. And therefore this Salt has immediately an intimate mixtion with the Blood and other Juices; whereby, be∣ing carried all over the whole Humane; Frame, it certain∣ly and presently performs that in a small Dose, which a Cart-load of some other Medicines would do nothing at all in. You may give it in the Juice of the lesser Centory. See our Doron. Medic. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 16. XXXIV. Sal Jovis, Salt of Jupiter or Tin. Bate.] It is made by dis∣solving the Magistery of Ju∣piter by digestion in Spirit of
Vinegar, filterating, and coagu∣lating. It is a present Reme∣dy against the Suffocation of the Womb, or Fits of the Mother, which it helps after a miraculous manner, being both inwardly taken, and outwardly applied. Dose, gr. 2, 3, 4, &c. repeating it. Salmon.] § 1. The Ma∣gistery of Tin some make thus. ℞ Filings of pure Tin ℥iij. Spirit of Nitre ℥jx. put them into a Matrass upon a Sand-heat; decant the Solu∣tion into a great glazed Ear∣then Pan, full of pure Water which by its quantity may weaken the Spirit of Nitre, and make it forsake the Tin which it had dissolved, so will it precipitate to the bottom of a very white Pouder, which e∣dulcorate by many Ablutions, and dry it between Papers in the Shade: 'Tis a very fair white, and is used for Poma∣tums for the Face. § 2. Lemery makes the Ma∣gistery thus. ℞ Flowers of Tin, dissolve them in a suffi∣cient quantity of Water, fil∣ter, and precipitate, by drop∣ping thereon drop by drop, Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniack, or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, so will you have a very white Ma∣gistery, which being edulcora∣ted by many Ablutions in fair warm Water, becomes a most admirable and delicate White which serves for a Fucus, be∣ing mixed with Pomatums, and of this our Author's Salt of Tin is made. § 3. Some make the Salt of Tin thus. ℞ Flowers of Tin dryed, put them into a Matrass, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar, so much as may over∣top them ʒ Inches: digest in a Sand-heat for three days, then decant the Solution by inclina∣tion: affuse to the remainder new Spirit of Vinegar, q. s. digesting and decanting as be∣fore, which work repeat with fresh Spirit of Vinegar so of∣ten till all the Flowers are dis∣solved: mix all the Solutions, filter; and with a gentle heat evaporate to dryness so will you have remaining at bottom the Salt of Jupiter or Tin, which you must free from the Acidity of the Vinegar by the help of S. V. thus. § 4. Put the Salt into a little Glass Gourd, pouring thereon good S. V. so much as to over∣top it two Inches: fit an A∣lembick to the Gourd, and a little Receiver, and with a very gentle fire abstract the Spirit, which work repeat five or six times always with new or fresh Spirit, so will the Spirit carry off with it, a great part of the Acid Salt of the Vinegar, and you will have
a Salt of Jupiter free from all Acrimony, and endued with very great Venues, which may be given à gr. iij. ad vj. as Crollius and others, but some Authors say it may be given ad gr. 20. § 5. Crollius makes it thus. ℞ Ashes of Tin, prepared in an open fire, without sophisti∣cation from it, not with Wa∣ter (as by vulgar Descriptions is vainly taught) but with Spi∣rit of Vinegar, extract a Salt, which afterwards by filtering, and with a most gentle heat in B. M. separate from the Salt, seven times edulcorate it with Rain water, which af∣terwards resolve per Deliqui∣um into a Liquor. § 6. This says he, is a Secret, and most effica∣cious against the Suffocation of the Womb, the Navel be∣ing bathed therewith hot; as soon as the Matrix per∣ceives the heat, it is presently settled in its own place, nor does it afterwards any more easily remove: and it may be given inwardly in Mug∣wort-water in the Morning fasting for several days toge∣ther, or in some other Hyste∣rick-water. § 7. This Liquor of the Salt of Tin is (says Crollius) otherwise profitable for the French Disease, all fetid Ul∣cers, Fistula's, Cancer, Wolf Noli me Tangere, and other grievous Diseases: it cures them given from one drop to two or three, at most, the Dose being repeated: in those of ripe Age it vehemently and largely, moves the Belly. § 8. Beguinus dissolves Eng∣lish Tin in A. F. (made of Nitre and Alum) from which he has a Calx as white as Snow, this he sublimes into Flowers as we have taught in the former Chapter, and from those Flowers with Spirit of Wine Vinegar, by a total dissolution of the Matter he makes a Salt according to the Method in § 3 aforegoing, this Salt he dissolves in good Spirit of Wine, digests and decants, and affuses fresh Spirit, till the whole Salt is resolved, then in B. M. he abstracts two thirds of the Spirit, and sets it in a cool place to Crystal∣lize, which being separated from the Liquor, he puts them upon a Marble, and in a cold moist place resolves them per Deliquium: And this is Crollius his Liquamen Jovis, which he says will cure ma∣lign Cancers, inwardly used, and outwardly applied, in the quantity of three drops, as at § 7. aforegoing.
§ 9. Etmuller makes a Crystalline Salt after this manner. ℞ Mineral of Tin in fine Pouder lbj. affuse thereon the best Spirit or Oil of Vitriol seven times rectified lbj. digest for some time in B. M. then affuse thereon common Water lbij. being well mixed toge∣ther, whilst hot filter, and set it to Crystallize: the Cry∣stals edulcorate with Water, and reduce into Pouder. § 10. This, says he, is gi∣ven à gr. j. ad ij. against the Dropsie, Scurvy, and despe∣rate Fistula's, as also Uterine Affections: outwardly it is applied, being mixed with Honey of Roses: It purges or carries off the Water in Hydropick Persons gently by Stool. This he had from Fr. Hofman out of whom we have supplied the Proportion of the Oil or Spirit of Vi∣triol, which is wanting in Et???mullor. § 11. Le Febure says its Salt and Magistery are made the same way as those of Sa∣turn, but in order to the well making of the Salt, the Calx of Jupiter must be reverberated, taking it as it is already pre∣pared for Potters to use: this reverberation must be continu∣ed for at at least two days, that its body may be sufficiently opened, as is fitting, otherwise very little Salt will be obtain∣ed. § 12. The true Magistery and Salt says he, are specifi∣cal Remedies, and singular against the Suffocation of the Womb, or Fits of the Mo∣ther, which are wonderfully allayed by it, whether in∣wardly administred or out∣wardly applied: they are also admirable Topicks a∣gainst putrid, stinking, hol∣low and fistulous Ulcers, as also against Wolfs, ma∣lign Cancers, and cancerous Ulcers. § 13. But after the use of these Remedies to Women∣kind, you must beware of purging them, lest you irre∣rate the Womb, and be for∣ced to begin your work a∣gain; for after it is once quieted and laid asleep by the irradiating Vertue of Mineral Sulphurs (in which a potential and mighty Ano∣dyn power is lodged) it is not prudent to disturb it a∣gain by Emetick or Cathar∣tick Medicaments, but ra∣ther Diaphoretick and Diu∣retick Cleansers are to be chosen. § 14. Charras also in like manner makes it of the Lime, or reverberated Calx of the Metal, and so does Zwelfer; but that certainly
is best which is made of the Flores Joviales, as is taught at Sect. 3. above, and tho' Authors say, that Salt of Tin differs nothing in making from Salt of Lead, yet there are several difficulties in the making of the one, which are not in the making of the other. § 15. For 'tis impossible to dissolve the Calx of Tin, tho' very well reverberated in Spirit of Vinegar, which nevertheless dissolves the Calx of Lead easily enough; 'tis true, the most Corrosive A∣ci, such as A. F. Spirit of e▪ Vitriol, &c. dissolve it; but in respect, that a great quantity of them is ne∣cessary for a very small pro∣portion of Tin; the Reme∣dies drawn from it by means of those Corrosives must needs be very injurious: but if you reduce Tin into Flow∣wers by Sublimation, then it will be so opened that the Spirit of Vinegar will easily penetrate and dissolve it. § 16. Lemery makes it thus. ℞ Calx of Tin lbij. put it into a Matrass, on which af∣fuse Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop it four Inches: digest three days, and decant the Solution, affusing fresh Spirit digesting and decanting, and continuing this work till all or most part of the Calx is dissolved: filter the Soluti∣on, and abstract in a Sand-heat three quarters of the Humidity, and set the remain∣der in a cool Cellar to crystal∣lize, decant the Liquor from the Crystals, evaporate and crystallize again; which Ope∣ration continue till you have got all your Salt of Tin, which dry in the Sun, and keep close stopt in a Vial: or otherwise, you may at once evaporate to dryness, and the Salt will re∣main at bottom, as good as the former. § 17. Where note, That if the Calx of Tin be not well calcin'd, and disposest of some quantity of its Sul∣phur, the Acidity of the Vinegar will never be able to dissolve it, because it would be presently dull'd, and all its Points broken, by the ∣sisting Sulphur, and so  out of a capacity of acting besides, that an Acid may be able to dissolve a Body it is requisite that the Pores  that Body be fitly disposed, and not obstructed or filled with any heterogeneous Mat∣ter, or clammy Sulphur, th the Motion and Action  the Acid being preserv for some time it may mak its way perfectly through
See Doron Modicum. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 17. XXXV. Sal Lithargyrites, Salt of Litharge. Bate.] It is drawn out of the Litharge with Spirit of Vinegar, after the same man∣ner as in making a Saccha∣rum Saturni; then the Solu∣tion is decanted, filtred, and coagulated, S. A. If the Solu∣tion is precipitated with Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, it is called the Magistery; It is given inwardly in Diarrhaea's Dysenteries, and other Di∣seases proceeding from hurt of the Tone of the Parts and Weakness. The Bowels be∣ing hurt or ulcerated it heals and consolidates them; and cools the fermenting or boil∣ing Blood. Dose, ʒss. with some Sudorifick Treacle or Anodyn. Salmon.] § 1. In our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 1. we have given an ample Description of the whole Process, with a Ra∣tionale upon the same, so that referring the Reader to that, no more need be said of it here. § 2. But this is observable, that if you design to Crystal∣lize the Salt, it will be best done in a Tin Vessel or Ba∣son, because Tin has in it a mighty coagulating Spirit, which causes all the Matter which you fit to shoot into Crystals in this Liquor, soon∣er to assume a Crystalline form, than it would do in another Vessel, as those who shall be pleased to try the Ex∣periments may find. § 3. Many Authors will have this Salt to be cold, be∣cause say they, Lead is ter∣restious, and of a cold Na∣ture; also Vinegar an Ingre∣dient in its Preparation is cold, and yet they attribute to it effects, which are only produceable by heat, and say a Spirit may be drawn from it, which is of an active, subtil, and penetra∣tive Vertue, Sudorifick, and which drives away by Sweat the Malignity of Venene, Pestilential and Veneral Di∣seases, which Qualities and Effects are opposites in Na∣ture. § 4. But Lead truly is a Me∣tal which has much Sulphur or Fire in it, and is called Aurum Leprosum, and tho' very unripe and earthy, yet is repleat with the two no∣blests Metals, indivisibly mixt in its original Chaos, or first undigested Matter, which communicates to it much Vertue.
§ 5. Moreover its internal Fire is excited and stirred up, by the activity of the ex∣ternal Fire, which concocts and digests all its immaturi∣ties or unripenss, driving a∣way its Imparities, exalting its more pure internal Sul∣phurs, and bringing to per∣fection the Seeds of that pu∣rity which lay hidden and dormant in it: all which things being considered makes me think, that this Salt is rather of a hot na∣ture, and has some Specifick Vertues in it, not to be found in marry other Medi∣cines. § 6. Some Authors say it is a good Remedy against all sorts of Agues, whether con∣tinual or intermitting, and a Specifick in Diseases of the Spleen, as also Vapors ari∣sing from it; it is also given against Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, being dissolved in Scabious-water, and mixt with an equal quantity of purified Nitre, and then cry∣stallized: those Crystals are good against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's or Shortness of Breath, and Stoppages of the Brest and Lungs: and thereof you may give à gr. iv. ad xxx. in proper Liquor. § 7. This sweet Balsamick Salt for Saturn, is no less ex∣cellent for external Diseases, for it obtunds or kills all cor∣rosive, harsh and biting Salts or Humors which cause pain in Wounds, Ulcers and Fi∣stula's, whereby the Grief and Inflamation of the part is excited, and from which flow all other Accidents. § 8. It resolves and molli∣fies all hard and scirrhous Tumors, and some say it cures Cancers and cancerous Ulcers, destroying the malign Acrimony which feeds them: it takes away the lividity, and ill colour of Bruises and Contusions, and hin∣ders extravasated Blood from producing ill Accidents. § 9. It is an unequall'd Remedy against Itching, In∣flamations, and other Di∣seases of the Eyes, being u∣sed as a Collyrium in Eye∣waters, Salves, Liniments, Ointments and Balsams, and so applied to the affect ac∣cording as the prudent Phy∣sician shall direct. XXXVI. Sal Martis Ca∣tharticus, Purging Salt of Mars. Bate.] Dissolve the Caput Mortuum of the Flowers of Sal Armoniack martiated in Warm-water; filter, and co∣agulate. Dose, ad gr. xij.
it purges gently, and is diu∣retick. Salmon.] § 1. We will give you the whole Process from Schroder.℞ Sal Armoniack, Filings of Iron, Ana. grind them gently on a Marble, then put them into an Earthen Still, and sublime them, first with a gentle fire, then with a strong∣er, increasing the fire by de∣grees: after which, let it cool, break the Vessel, and keep the upper part which is white for a new Sublimation, with new filings of Iron: the middle yel∣low Flowers are diaphoretick Flowers of Mars: then take out the Caput Mortuum in the bottom, and with Water ex¦tract the Salt, which purifie by Solution and Coagulation, which keep in the Glass close stopt for use. § 2. This Salt purges gen∣tly being given from half a Scruple, ad ℈j. in any pro∣per Vehicle: Of thus, ℞ Of this Saltʒj. Gum Guajici in fine Pouder ʒss. ad ʒj. Syrup of Roses solutive ℥j. mix for a Dose: It purges Rheuma∣tisms admirably, and possi∣bly beyond most other things in the World. § 3. It is good against Ter∣tians and Quartans, as also against the most inveterate Rheumatisms (being used as last directed) and in particu∣lar against the Gout in any part of the Body: It opens Obstructions of the Reins and Womb, cleanses those parts from their Feculencies, and is very effectual to re∣move a sterile Disposition in Women-kind, and cure the Green-sickness in Virgins. Kill Worms in Children, and restore them, if over-run with the Rickets. § 4. It is a Remedy also against the Cachexy, and o∣pens Obstructions in the Li∣ver, Spleen, Stomach, Pan∣creas, and Mesentery; but the use of it must be con∣tinued for some time, as is usual in other Remedies ex∣tracted from Mars; and the Dose must likewise be in∣creased by little and little, as you find the Stomach can bear it; and it may be used where-ever there is occasion for any aperitive Preparati∣ons of Mars. Sal Perlarum, Salt of Pearls. See the Preparation in Sect. XVIII. of Sal Margaritarum aforegoing.
XXXVII. Sal Philosophorum, The Philosopher Salt, or Salt of the Wise. Bate.] ℞ Common Salt decripitated, Sal Gem. A. ℥jss. Galangal, Mace, Cubebs, A. ℥ss. mix and make a pouder S. A. It facilitates the Concoction of the Stomach, and con∣sumes Crudities. Dose, à gr. iv. ad xij. in the Morn∣ing fasting. Salmon.] § 1. The way of decripitating of common Salt we have explicated at large in Sect. 31. aforegoing: the rest of the Process or Composition is so plain that it needs no farther Elucidati∣on. § 2. Being given in a Glass of fair Water in a Morning fasting, à ℈ss. ad ʒss. or ℈ij. or more, according to the Age of the Person, it kills Worms in them, and expels them: if it be given in a very large Dose, it will be apt to cause Vomiting, but then it cleanses the Stomach admirably: otherwise given in a mean or moderate Dose it only corroborates it, and causes Appetite. § 3 By using it for some time it is found to open Obstructi∣ons, strengthen the Viscera, and provoke the Terms in Women: but this it more effectually does, if it be gi∣ven with martial Aperitives, and other proper Emmena∣gogicks. XXXVIII. Sal Polychrestum, Salt of many Vertues. Bate.] It is made of Nitre and Sulphur exactly mixt in an equal proportion, by detona∣tion, solution in Water, fil∣tration, and coagulation, S. A. It purges serous Humors by Stool, and sometimes by U∣rine: Dose, ʒj. ad ʒiij. dis∣solved in a quart of fair Wa∣ter, that it may be made like a Mineral Spring-wa∣ter. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Fine or purified Nitre, Sulphur Ana. lbj. reduce them together into Pouder; then take a good strong Earthen Pot with a flat bottom, and which is able to resist the fire; set it in a Wind Fornace with Coals round about it, which kindle gradatim to presperve the Pot; when the Pot is red-hot, put in about ℥ij. of the Mixture, and stir it: the Matter will flame, and the Volatile parts of the Nitre will exhale with part of the Sulphur: when the Flame ceases, put in ℥ij. more, stirring the same continually. This work repeat till all your
Mixture is spent, then calcine it, stirring it six hours more, during which, the Matter must be always red-hot without melt∣ing, which would retain the Empyreuma of the Sulphur, and the Salt would be greyish; but with these cautions, your Salt will be of a Rose colour, without Smell, and of a bitte∣rish Taste. § 2. Thus done, it may be used without any more preparation; but if you de∣sire it yet purer, dissolve it in a good quantity of warm Wa∣ter, filter it, and evaporate gently, till it has a Pellicula upon it, then set it in a Cellar to shoot into Crystals, at the bottom and sides of the Vessel, whose Figure will be cubical, much like that of common Salt. § 3. It is used chiefly a∣gainst Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and Mesentery, dissolves the vis∣cous Matter which afflicts them, and purges gently downwards, being given à ʒij. ad ʒvj. you may dissolve it over might in Spring-water and give it the next morn∣ing. § 4. But if the Sick are affected in their Nerves, or have an exceeding weakness of the Stomach, they ought wholly to abstain from all sorts of the Preparations of Nitre, as Sal Prunellae, or Crystal Mineral, and this Sal Polychrestum, which are not to be put into other Compo∣sitions but only to sharpen them, temper their heat, and make them more penetra∣ting, in which cases, their Doses must be much less: for Example sake, to Sen ℥ij. or iij. you may put of Cry∣stal Mineral ʒss. or ℈ij. and of this Sal Polychrestum ʒj. or ℈iv. § 5. It is called Polychre∣stum, from the Greek Word  ad multa utilis, as being profitable against ma∣ny Diseases; because it not only cures many Distempers, but also operates to the same Intentions many ways, for that it purges by Stool and Urine too, and in some mea∣sure opens the Pores, causing after those Operations a gen∣tle Sweat. § 6. Being dissolved in any Menstruum, it makes it the more powerful to extract the Verrues of any Cathartick, and to draw forth its Purga∣tive force, as in the Example of Sena aforegoing. But whereas some give it to ʒvj. as aforesaid, to purge strong∣ly, I must confess I never do it to so large a Dose, by rea∣son of the trouble it gives
the Stomach in palling thro' it; yet that ill Property is much abated if not taken a∣way by mixing a good quan∣tity of double refined Sugar with it, or giving it in a Ve∣hicle well sweetened with Sugar. § 7. It ought not to be u∣sed by any means till it is made very white by Solution, Filtration and Crystallizati∣on; for if any gross portion of Sulphur remains in it, it is apt to cause, nauseousness of the Stomach, Vertigo's, and stupefaction of the Nerves. § 8. From ℥xvj. of fine Nitre, and as much good Sul∣phur, you will have at last but ℥iijsi. of pure Sal Poly∣chrestum: whereas, if you use the common Nitre, in∣stead of the purified, you will have ℥v, of Salt as white as the other; which difference of weight proceeds from the common or unpurified Nitres having more fixt Salt, than the fine or purified Salt-Pe∣ter. § 9. Charras makes it ex∣actly after the former man∣ner, but in a large Crucible set upon a Trevet in a Wind Fornace, then at last continues the fire for two or three hours, and letting it cool, he dis∣solves in Water, filters, eva∣porates and crystallizes as afore∣said. § 10. The Dissipation of the Acid and Spirituous parts of the Nitre, during its cal∣cination with the Sulphur, is the reason that the Crystals lose the Form, which those of Nitre had before: not could you have it in Cry∣stals, had not the fixt Salt retained some part of the A∣cid of the Sulphur, during its Calcination with it. § 11. Now because this Salt contains only the fixt part of the Nitre, joyn'd with some part of the Acid of the Sulphur, it acts not, but like Salt of Tartar, or some other fixt Salt. § 12. And tho' it is some∣times given à ʒij. ad ʒv. or vj. in a Quart or three Pints of Water, or in some Prisan, to be drank at several draughts, as you drink Mine∣ral waters, for the cutting and loosening of gross Humors, afterwards to be expelled by the ordinary ways, yet in my Opinion, it is much bet∣ter to be used▪ with proper Catharticks as is before hint∣ed. § 13. If to lbj. of Sal Poly∣chrestum, you add Sal Armo∣niack ℥iv. incorporating them, and crystallizing them toge∣ther, you will have a Com∣positum
much more deserving the Name of Polychrestum than that of which we have all along been speaking: for as the simple Sal Polychrest. Works with much Acrimony, and not with any delectation to the Bowels; so the latter being by the reciprocal Mix∣tion dulcified, operates in e∣very respect with much more gentleness; and more easily penetrates the parts of the Body, which require its help and assistance, especially the Arteries, Veins and Urinary Vessels, leaving no Impressi∣ons of sharpness in any place behind it. § 14. Lemery makes the simple Sal Polychrestum in all respects as does Charras at § 9. aforegoing but calcines it afterwards for four or five hours; then pouring it forth into a Copper Vessel, he af∣terwards pouders it, dissolves, filterates, and crystallizes as afore directed. § 15. If the Salt be not yet so white as it should be, it is because it re∣tains some Particles of the Sulphur in it: therefore it ought to be calcin'd in a Cru∣cible in a strong fire, stirring it continually with a Spatula three or four hours until it becomes purely white, then repeating the dissolution in Water, filtration and evapo∣ration, as aforesaid till it be∣comes exceeding pure. § 16. Marggrave makes it also after the same manner as at § 1. and 9. and says it is a most admirable deobstru∣ctive, prevailing against in∣termitting Fevers or Agues if given in the ordinary drink of the Sick; but he prescribes but ʒj. at a time in Drink, or pure Water. XXXIX. Sal seu Saccharum Saturni; Salt or Sugar of Saturn. Salmon.] § 1. Lemery makes it thus, ℞ Ceruse lbiij. or iv. pouder it finely and put it in∣to a large Earthen or Glass Vessel: affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop it four Inches: digest in a gentle Sand heat for three days, shaking the Matter often: let it settle, and decant the clear Tincture; upon the remainder affuse new Spirit of Vinegar, di∣gesting and proceeding as before, thus continuing the affusion of new Spirit, till you have dis∣solved about the one half of the Ceruse. Mix all these Tinctures together in an Ear∣then or Glass Vessel: evaporate with a gentle Sand-heat about two thirds of the Moisture, or till a Pellicle comes over it,
and then set it in a cool Cellar to crystallize: decant the Li∣quor from the Crystals or Salt, evaporate again to a Pellicle, and set it to crystallize again, thus continuing till you have obtained all your Salt, which dry in the Sun or otherwise, and keep it in a Glass for use. § 2. The Colledge makes it with Minium or Red-Lead, as you may see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 6. Sect. 3. others as Zwelfer and Marg∣grave make it with the grey∣ish Calx of Lead after the same manner. Beguinus makes it of Minium; so also Crolli∣us, and Rolfincius, which two latter make it also of Ceruse: but Zwelfer in his Mantissa Hermetica paginâ meâ 458. saith, that it is not made only of the Calx of Lead, but also from Plates and granulated Lead, as well as from Ceruse▪ Litharge, and Minium: not∣withstanding (saith he) it is made more pure▪ from one than from another, and by the help of Spirit of Vinegar, or some other acid Liquor drawn forth, according to the Method before directed. But Thibaut and Maets make it of Litharge only: Le Fe∣bure makes it of a Mixture of equal parts of Minium and Litharge: Schroder out of the Calx of Lead, or Red-Lead: Le Mort and Charras (as Lemery) out of the Ce∣ruse. § 3. Thus you may see, Quot homines tot capita, and every Man thinks his own way best; but he that has tryed all of them can best tell: for my part I should ra∣ther chuse Ceruse or White-Lead, than my of the other, for the Preparation thereof; for it appears to me to be more open, and easier to dis∣solve than the rest, by rea∣son of the Vinegar with which it is already-impreg∣nated: and this seems to me to be reasonable, because I can with more ease make a greater quantity of Sal or Saccharum out of that, than I can out of any of the o∣ther; yea with a very little labour more than ordinary, the whole body of the Lead will turn to a Saccharum, whereas the other Prepara∣tions of Lead, yield it slow∣ly, and with much difficulty, nor can be totally dissolved without a vast labour. § 4. If you would have the Sal or Saccharum very white, you must dissolve it again in equal quantities of Spirit of Vinegar, and com∣mon Water, then filter and crystallize again, as before;
which purification you may repeat three or four times, as you see need requires it. § 5. This Salt is called Saccharum or Sugar, by rea∣son of its sweetness, which proceeds from the sulphurous Particles of the Lead, joyn∣ed with the Salt of the Vine∣gar, whence results that de∣lightful taste, which so ad∣mirably affects the Nerves of the Tongue in tasting it. § 6. This is not to be sup∣posed to be a true Salt of Lead, but only a dissolution of its Substance by▪ Acids, which so closely unite with it, as to give it the form of a Salt: for if by distillation, you abstract the Humidity of the dissolution, you will find nothing but an insipid Flegm to come off, deprived of all its Acidity, which shews that the acid Salt is actually joyned with the Particles of the Lead. § 7. The Ebullition in the making of it from Ceruse a∣rises from the violent Pene∣tration of the Acids, which with violence separate the Plumbouse Particles; but if they be affused on any other Preparation of Lead, the E∣bullition is very much strong∣er; because when the Acid meets with a Body not so o∣pen as Ceruse is, it must use a greater power to enter in∣to it, and so consequently raise a greater Effervescen∣cy. § 8. But in all these Ebul∣litions or Effervescencies (as well as in many others) the least degree of heat is not perceived, but rather (as some think) the Cold is much in∣created. § 9. Vinegar impregnated with this Salt, being ground with Oil of Roses, or some other Oil, in a Mortar, makes an Ointment called Nutri∣tum, or Butter of Saturn, which is good for Burnings, Scaldings, Tettars, Ring-worms, and other Defedati∣ons of the Skin. § 10. This Salt of Saturn powerfully absorbs Acids, and therefore it is said to be good for Diarrhaea's, Dysen∣teries, and Lienteriaes, as also Fluxes of the Haemor∣rhoides and Menses, which are all caused by sharp and corrosive Salts falling into the Vessels, or upon those parts. § 11. And indeed it is good for any Disease proceeding from sharp Humors, because it blunts or dulls their Points, and asswages them, taking away their keenness.
§ 12. Taken inwardly it is said to be very good for the Quinsey and Pleurisie, and the aforenamed Diseases at § 10. above, because they mostly proceed from a Saline, or acid Serosity, which fall∣ing too abundantly upon any of those parts, raises a fer∣mentation which dilutes the Fibres of the Muscles, causing Inflamation of the Throat, &c. as is seen in a Quinsey, &c. or a corrosion of the Tunicles and Membranes of the Ves∣sels Dose, à gr. ij. ad iv. or vj. in Wine or Water; and in Plantain-water for Gargles. § 13. Mixt with Water, it makes that Preparation cal∣led Lac Virginis, or Virgins Milk, and is used in that manner, or mixt with Poma∣tums against Inflamations, Burnings, Scaldings, Tettars. Ring-worms, Herpes, and other Diseases of the Skin. § 14. If Sal Saturni be mixt with Sal Tartari and put into a Crucible over a melting Fire, the Acid of the Spirit of Vinegar will quit the Lead, and unite with the Salt of Tartar, whereby the Salt is reduced to what it was before, to wit, Ceruse or Calx. § 15. Some who are afraid of the Coldness of this Salt, and the Acrimony of the Spi∣rit of Vinegar, impregnate it with the Heat and Sulphur of S. V. well rectified, so much as to overtop it four Inches, digesting it three or four days, then abstracting the S. V. drying die Salt and keeping it for use. § 16. Taken inwardly, it not only takes away Inflama∣tions and Heats of Fevers, but abates Lusts and Venereal Desires; it dissolves also hard and scirrhous Tumors, ab∣sorbs the Acidities of Cance∣rous Humors, and dissipates Contusions, stops Fluxes of all sorts, and is prevalent against the Gonorrhoea in Men, and the Whites in Wo∣men. § 17. It may be also used in an Injection for a Gonor∣rhoea, &c. as also for Ulcers of the Bladder, Womb, and their Passages; and is ex∣celent in Gargarisms for most Diseases of the Mouth, and Throat, &c. which are caused by fixt or volatile Salts; these are mortified, by the Acid of the Vinegar, ssisted by the cold Quality of the Lead. § 18. And this is so much the more reasonable to believe, because we find by Experi∣ence that Sal Prunellae, Spirits of Salt, Sulphur and Vitriol,
and all sorts of Acids, even simple Vinegar it self, are very good for these kind of Diseases, which are irritated by the use of all other Salts of what kind soever, whe∣ther fixt or volatile. § 19. Made into a Colly∣rium with some proper Wa∣ter or common Spirit of Wine, it stops Fluxes of Hu∣mors into the Eyes, cools In∣flamations in them, and dis∣solves Pearls, and consumes the Pin and Web, or Films, at the beginning; a Scruple or two, being dissolved in five Ounces of common S. V. or Brandy, or in as much Ce∣landine-water, augmenting the quantity of the Salt-as you see occasion. § 20. Crollius says, that Saccharum Saturni makes all sublimate, and corrosive Mercuries sweet, and unhurt∣ful; therefore in corrosive Ulcers, which arise from ve∣nene and malign Salts it is an excellent Medicament. And as in Vegetables common Sugar tempers and corrects their Acrimony and Bitter∣ness; so this Sugar of Saturn mitigates and amends Mine∣rals, and Mercurial Arsenicks, both in the greater and lesser World. § 21. It is says he, good against Putrefaction, sore Mouths, malign, corroding and cancerous Ulcers, Tet∣tars, Ring-worms, red Pim∣ples in the Face, inflamed Tumors, and such other like Saturnian Evils: It cleanses old Ulcers, Apostems, and running Sores, and is a singu∣lar Arcanum against an Ery∣sipelas, and such like, by dis∣solving it in Plantane or Nightshade Water, and wash∣ing therewith, Linnen Cloths dipt in the same being also laid thereon. § 22. Mixt with Oil of Camomil and applied, it dis∣cusses Tumors: mixt with Oil of Turpentine it cures all Ulcers, Wounds, and contracted Members, being constantly for some time a∣nointed therewith. § 23. It prevails against Cancers and Fistula's, all sorts of Ulcers in Womens Breasts, and all Aches and Pains in the Members, being outwardly applied; and takes away all Inflamations to a Miracle. It may be mixed with Emplaisters, Ointments, Balsams and Oils, or be dis∣solved per se in appropriated Waters and applied. § 24. It gives ease in the Cholick, some Grains of it being given in White-wine, and in all internal Inflamati∣ons and Heats, it is of extra∣ordinary
use. It prevails a∣gainst Quartan Agues, as al∣so against disaffections of the Spleen, and Pains of the Hy∣pochonders: Spirit of Wine may be affused thereon, which will extract its Vertue; this essentificated Spirit may be given instead of the Salt or Saccharum against all the Di∣seases aforementioned. XL. Sal Spongiae Volatile, Vo∣latile Salt of Sponges. Bate.] It is made by distil∣lation in a Retort, and recti∣fying the Salt S. A. From the Caput Mortuum, with warm Water, a dissolution is made of the fixt Salt, and it is drawn forth. It is good to break the Stone in the Reins and Bladder. It is power∣ful also to discuss Struma's or Swellings of the King's Evil. Dose, gr. 5. ad 12. Salmon.] § 1. How this Volatile Salt of Sponges is particularly to be made, we have shewed at large, where we have taught the Distilla∣tion of the Spirit, in Cap. 2. Sect. XXXIII. § 1. aforego∣ing. § 2. In the Distillation thereof, part of the Volatile Salt will arise and stick to the top and neck of the Re∣tort, and part of it will mix and be dissolved in the Spirit; you may rectifie each apart if you so please, or dissolve all the Salt, in the Spirit and rectifie them together from the Oleaginous Particles▪ as we have in many places taught in our Seplasium, lately emitted into the World. § 3. This Volatile Salt and Spirit of Sponges is said to be one of the greatest Specificks in Nature▪ for the Cure of the King's Evil being daily given Morning and Night, à ℈ss. ad gr. xvj. in any pro∣per Vehicle, Universals being also premised. § 4. That the Volatile Salt is truly thus effectual, may be deduced from the vulgar use of the simple Pouder of Sponges, (being just so much calcined or scorched, as to be reduced to such a Form or Consistence) which Experi∣ence has confirmed to be an absolute cure for all kinds of Struma's or Scrophula's what∣soever, being given to a Dram or more, Morning and Even∣ing, with due purging: but this, by reason of the great quantity, many, especially Children cannot be brought to take, for which reason, we rather commend the use of the Votatile Salt aforesaid, as being less nauseous by rea∣son of its quantity, and more
effectual by reason of its quality. § 5. From the Caput Mor∣tuum as it is left in the bot∣tom of the Retort, you will get but little fixt Salt, with∣out a new and open Calcina∣tion, and therefore it is ne∣cessary to calcine it again in a Crucible till it is white, after which you may draw forth the said fixt Salt after the vulgar Method. § 6. This fixt Salt is of the Nature of other fixt Al∣calies, as Salt of Tartar, Salt of Oister-Shells, and such like, and may be given in the same Cases, à gr. xij. ad xxiv. or ʒss. in Arsmart, Parsley, or Onion-water against, Obstru∣ctions in the Reins and Ure∣ters, Stone and Gravel in those parts, and to absorb Acid Humours, which are the Causes of many pernicious Diseases. XLI. Sal Sulphnris, Salt of Sulphur or Brimstone. Bate.] Dissolve the Caput Mortuum of the Spirit of Sulphur in Water, filter and coagulate, S. A. It is a pow∣erful Remedy against Worms, and the breeding of Worms. Dose, à gr. 5. ad 10. Salmon.] § 1. Hartman makes it of the Caput Mor∣tuum of Oil of Sulphur made per Campanum; but Schroder of the Caput Mor∣tuum of the Oil of Sulphur made by Retort, thus: § 2. ℞ A Retort that has a Pipe in the hinder part, place it in a Fornace, and fit a Receiver with Water in it, without luting; when it is hot, cast in peices of Sulphur now and then, shutting the Pipe after every time; the Spirit or Oil separate from the Wa∣ter in B. M. and rectifie it; This Spirit (says Schroder) is only Spirit of Vitriol, and has the same Vertues; but if you give no vent in making it, you will labour in vain, and have only a milky Li∣quor for a Spirit, without any acidity; from the Feces re∣maining (after the common manner) make a Salt. § 3. Le Febure says, there remains in the bottom of the Dishes which have been used in the burning of Sulphur for making its Oil or Spirit, a kind of Feces, or blackish Caput Mortuum, light, spongy, and as it were in Leaves or Beds, which must be calcined and reverberated in a Crucible, till it become of a whitish Grey; afterwards with distilled Rain-water or Ros or Dew of Vi∣triol, a Lye or Lixivium is to be made, which filterate, and evaporate slowly in Ashes, either to a Pellicle or to dry∣ness,
so will you have the Salt, which will be but little. § 4. Wherefore (says he) that of Vitriol may lawfully be substituted in the place thereof, viz. in place of that of Sulphur, without any scruple or question, be∣cause they spring from the same Original, and have the same Vertues, which is to cleanse and strengthen the Stomach, and root from it all Seminaries of Worms, and the Crude corrupt Matter from which they breed, ex∣pelling the same. § 5. Lemery makes it ano∣ther way, and says that Salt of Sulphur is a Sal Polychre∣stum, impregnated with Spi∣rit of Sulphur: Thus. ℞ Sal Polychrestum ℥iv. put it into an Earthen Pan, or Glass Ves∣sel, and affuse thereon Oil of Sulphur ℥ij. set the Vessel in Sand, and evaporate in a gentle Sand-heat to dryness, so will there be remaining ℥iv. ʒvj. of a pleasant acid Salt, very agreeable to the Taste, which keep in a Bottle close stopt for use. § 6. This Salt (which is improperly called Salt of Sul∣phur, it being nothing but Sal Polychrestum impregnated with an Acid Spirit) is of ex∣cellent use in Tertians, and continual Fevers, and on all occasions where there is need of quieting the turbulency and effervescency of the Hu∣mors (for that Acids general∣ly fix the Volatile Salts and Sulphurs, which most com∣monly are the principal Cause of such Diseases:) it opens all Obstructions, and works by Urine, and sometimes by Stool. § 7. The Dose of it is from ℈ss. ad ʒss. or ℈ij. in Broth, or other specifick Ve∣hicle; or it may be dissolved à ʒj. ad ʒij. in a Quart of pure fair Water, to be given as a Drink to quench thirst, and abate the Preternatural heat in Fevers. § 8. Many large descrip∣tions have been made of Salt of Sulphur▪ which being tru∣ly examined do all come to the same thing as this, and is called by many Authors Sal Febrifugum. But the true Salt of Sulphur, is only a little of the Vitriolick Substance, which remains in the Earth of the Sulphur (as is declared above by Le Febure) after that the Spirit and Flowers have been separated from it; and ought to be separated from the said Earth by Eli∣viation, as other fixed Salts are § 9. The Union of Acid Spirits with Acid Salts is very different from that of Acid Spirits with alcaous Salts,
for the Acid Spirits not be∣ing able to open the Bodies of the Acid Salts, they lose nothing of their strength and acidity, but remain the same; whereas, being mixed with Alcalies, they make such a penetration, that they im∣mediately lose their whole strength, and become insipid. § 10. For this Reason, when Oil of Sulphur is affused on Sal Polychrestum, or Nitre, there is no Ebullition or Ef∣fervescency, they being both Acid Salts: And therefore also Salt of Sulphur (thus made) is very acid, whereas Tartar Vitriolate is but a little acid, although proportional∣ly, there is double the quan∣tity of the Aid Spirit or Oil, for making the latter, or Tar∣tar Vitriolate, which is usually taken for making the former. § 11. Charras has several Pre∣parations of Salt of Sulphur: His first is exactly the same with the aforementioned of Lnery: His second is thus made. ℞ Nitre in pouder lbj put it into a large Retort, and affuse therein rectified Oil of Sulphur, enough to entirely dissolve the Nitre, and having fitted and luted to the Retort a very large Receiver, distil in a Sand-heat; first with a gentle Fire, which augment by degrees to the highest, the better to force what is to be got out of the Nitre; so will you have a good Spirit of Ni∣tre, very proper for all sorts of uses, while the Spirit of Sulphur strictly unites with the fixed Salt of the Nitre, and makes therewith but one Body, which will be found in a lump in the Retort when broken, of a very white co∣lour, and of a pleasing acidity in Taste, having the same Vertues with that of Lemery afore described. § 12. In this Operation, you obtain the Spirit of Ni∣tre, which would else va∣nish, when the Salt is cal∣cin'd with Sulphur in a Pot or Crucible: and the Conside∣ration of the Spirit of Nitre leaving the Mixture, makes me believe that the Salt which remains in the Retort, is of very safe and innocent use, and therefore not to be feared in its Effects, since there remains nothing of the Nitre but its fixed part. which is not only of its self an excellent Remedy, but by reason of its union with the Spirit or Oil of Sulphur, be∣comes infinitely more grate∣ful to the Stomach, and much more efficacious in opening Obstructions▪ and allaying the Preternatural heat of vio∣lent burning, malign, or pe∣stilential Fevers.
§ 13. Charras his third and last Preparation of the Salt of Sulphur. ℞ Volatile Salt of Ʋrine very pure and white lbj. put it into a large and high Cucurbit, and affuse there∣on so much well rectified Oil of Sulphur, till the Ebullition ceases; then in a gentle Sand∣heat evaporate the Humidity till a film or scum comes over it, and set it to crystallize, sepa∣rating the Crystals; or else continue the Evaporation to dryness. § 14. This Volatile Salt of Urine, tho' fixed for a time by the Oil of Sulphur, loses not its first Nature, but may shew its effects, if the Acid of the Sulphur, (which has fixt it) shall meet in the Stomach with some other Salt or Substance, with which it can unite; for then the Volatile Salt of Urine is re∣stored to its pristine Nature and Quality: and therefore this compounded Salt, may be thought nothing inferior to the former, but much more proper to purifie the Mass of Blood, and to ex∣pel by Sweat or insensible Transpiration, sharp and ma∣lign Humors, which are the Roots and Causes of almost an infinite number of Di∣seases. Dose, à ℈ss. ad ʒss. and sometimes ad ʒj. in some proper Vehicle. § 15. The same thing may be done in like manner with Volatile Sal Armoniack, and the Salt resulting, will have all the same Vertues and Ef∣fects, with the former made or compounded with the Salt of Ʋrine, as has been even now declared. XLII. Sal Tartari; Salt of Tartar. Bate.] It is made of cal∣cin'd Tartar, after the same manner as all other Salts which are extracted from Ashes. It may also be prepa∣red by Elixiviation from the Caput Mortuum remaining after the distillation of the Spirit of Tartar, being yet longer calcin'd, even to white∣ness. Or it is made from crude Tartar and Nitre, Ana. made into a Pouder and calcin'd in a Crucible, S. A. It is one of the best Remedies against Ulcers, Serpigines, Scall'd-Heads, Scabs, &c. being in∣ternally given, as well as ex∣ternally applied. Salmon.] § 1. The last way of making this Salt with e∣qual parts of Nitre, we have sufficiently explicated in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 11. Sect. 99: so that no more need be spoke of it here: but this we have to say in relation
to this Preparation, that it is not so genuine and good as is that which is made of Tar∣tar alone; for refine and pu∣rifie the Nitre as well as it is possible, there will be a fixt part remaining, which will unite it self with the Salt of Tartar, and by its acidity much diminish the Vertues of the true Salt. § 2. The other two ways whether from the Caput Mor∣tuum, or from simple cal∣cin'd Tartar, are but one and the same, for they are both of them but the Ashes of the Tartar, save the one of them is calcin'd in an open and naked fire, the other in a close Glass or Stone body: thus. § 3. ℞ The black Caput Mortuum remaining after the distillation of the Oil and Spi∣rit of Tartar, Calcine it in a Reverberatory Fornace, in a flat open Pot till it becomes white; let it cool, and pour upon it hot Water in an Earth∣en Vessel, so much as may over∣top it six Inches and stir it from time to time for some hours, so will the Salt dissolve in the Water, which decant, adding more hot Water to the remain∣der, which repeat so often till all the Salt is extracted: mix and filter all your Solutions, and evaporate the Humidity till the Salt becomes dry, and white as Snow in the bottom of the Vessel, which keep in a Glass well stopt (else the Salt will dissolve into Liquor) for use. § 4. This Salt is very diu∣retick, as all other fixt Salts and Alcalies of Vegetables are; and therefore is given with success against Obstru∣ctions of the Viscera, Diseases of the Reins, Bladder, Drop∣sies, and all sorts of Diseases proceeding from Obstructi∣ons and watery Humors, be∣ing given à gr. x. ad xxx. in any proper or specifick Vehicle. § 5. If this Sale is laid up∣on a Marble or Plate of Glass in a Cellar, or put into a Flannel Bag, and placed in some moist place, it will re∣solve per Deliquium into an Oil or Liquor, which may be used instead of the Salt, being no other than the Salt dissolved, but its Dose must be increased à ʒss. ad ʒj. or ʒij. as the Prudence of the Phy∣sician shall direct. § 6. How the Spirit and Oil of Tartar are made, from whence this Caput Mor∣tuum is to be had, we shall at large explicate (thro' God's Assistance) in our Officina Chymica: however out of forty eight Ounces of Crude
Tartar you will have four Ounces of Flegm, eight Ounces of Spirit, three ounces of Oil, and thirty two ounces of Caput Mortuum, out of which you will by the for∣mer Method have twelve Ounces of Salt, and no more; and this Salt is of great use in the drawing forth the Tinctures of Vegetables. § 7. But should you desire only the Salt, without the o∣ther Substances, you need on∣ly bruise it, wrap it up in Paper, which wet well in Water, and calcine it till it turns into a white Mass after which you may draw forth the Salt by Elixiviati∣on, as is before directed. § 8. Out of every four Ounces of Crude red Tar∣tar, once Ounce of pure Salt may be got, and from the same quantity of white Tar∣tar, somewhat more: but it is no ways better than the former. § 9. The Ancients will have Salt of Tartar to be fixt, being prepared accord∣ing to the common way, with a violent Fire: but doubtless this Salt of it self is not so, but naturally very volatile, and would continue so, did not the Volatile Acid Salt (which makes one part of its Composition) fix it, by making a strict Union with it, during its Calcination. § 10. But notwithstanding this alteration, it is not so unalterable in its Property, but that you may restore to the greatest part of this Salt, its first volatility, if you free it from its Chains, by separa∣ting, or augmenting the Acid, so that it may mater it; or if you prevent its Union with it. § 11. Yet their Conjuncti∣on is not without a singular advantage, because that by fixing the volatile Salt, it hinders its dissipation, and is made serviceable for several other uses, which being only Volatile it would not be ap∣plicable to. § 12. In making this Salt of calcin'd Tartar, Lemery only affuses hot Water, let∣ting it stand for some hours, stirring it now and then; whereas Charras boils it in the Water, as thinking it a more effectual way of dis∣solving the Salt in the Water: without doubt both ways may do, but the latter is the more speedy, and not inferi∣or to the other, since the boiling, is certain to extract all the Salt, nor can dissolve any Particles of the Tartar, except the Saline.
§ 13. Some calcine the Sale of Tartar with Sulphur, to hinder it from dissolving so easily by the Air, or to preserve it in its beauty and dryness; Thus. They mix three Ounces of the Salt with one Ounce of Sulphur in Pou∣der, causing it to burn and consume over a good Charcole fire, then elixiviate, filter, and evaporate the Humidity to a Pellicle, in a Glass Cucur∣bit over a Sand-heat, and set it to crystallize, separating the Crystals, &c. § 14. But this says Lemery is no good Practice, because the Acid of the Sulphur de∣stroys some part of the Alcali; and this happens because the Pores of the Salt by being thus calcin'd, are not so open as they were, whereby the Air cannot so easily penetrate them. § 15. The aptness of Al∣calious Salts to dissolve in the Air, is natural to them, not can it be taken from them, but by destroying their Nature; for having had in their Calci∣nation as much of the Acid as was requisite for their fixa∣tion, but not to fill up all the Cavities or Pores which the force and violence of the Fire had left there, they have their Pores open, and subject to any penetration, especially that of the Air, when expo∣sed to it: But when they meet with an Acid more powerful, such as that arising from the Sulphur, mixt and calcin'd with them in their last Calci∣nation they fill themselves so much, that having no more vacuities, the Acid of the Air cannot break the strict Union which is be∣tween them, and so preserves the Salt from such a facile dissolution. § 16. The same thing is to be understood of the ad∣dition of Nitre in the Calci∣nation of Tartar, because the Volatile, parts of the Nitre being sublim'd, or made to fly away, the fixt do remain, which by their Acidity do di∣minish the Vertue of the Salt of Tartar, as we have al∣ready hinted at § 1. afore∣going. § 17. But there is a Cry∣stalline Salt of Tartar, pre∣pared with equal parts of Salt of Tartar and Nitre together well purified, dissolved in Rose∣water heated, filtred, coagu∣lated and crystalliz'd after the ordinary manner, which some call Sal Tartari Nitratum, very proper to open the Li∣ver, Spleen, Reins, Ureters, and Womb, as also to as∣swage Inflamations of the Mouth and Throat given à
℈ss. ad ʒss. in some proper Vehicle. § 18. And tho' Salt of Tar∣tar be of a good whiteness after the first Purification; yet if you do calcine eighteen Ounces of it, then dissolve and filtrate as afore directed, you will have yet abundance of Earthy substance, which being dryed would weigh a compleat Ounce. § 19. But I think it not the best way for to expose this, or any other Vegetable alcalious Salt to such vehe∣ment and frequent Calcina∣tions; for it cannot be done without a notable Diminuti∣on of some of their best parts, and among the rest, of the spirituous Sulphur: as is ob∣servable in the dissipation of the Scent and Savour of the Plant, which happens al∣ways to Salts thus calcin'd, which otherwise were they not so exposed to the violence of the Fire, would preserve a good part of them. § 20. Hence it appears that there is great reason, to preserve the essential Salts of Vegetables, which may be drawn from Plants with a moderate and gentle Fire, be∣fore those that undergo such violent Calcinations. § 21. Alcalious Salts are aperitive, dissolving viscous, mucilaginous and tartarous Humors, which cause Obstru∣ctions in almost all parts of the Body: And Salt of Tartar as the chief of them, does it with advantage: It corrects Sena, and keeps it from gri∣ping, rarifying and altering its viscous Substance, and causing it to work quicker: it dissolves and expels viscous Flegm lodging in the Stomach and Bowels, which because of its Acidity causes Gri∣pings, Cholicks, and the like. § 22. This Salt in the chief Exemplar of all Vegetable fixt Salts, none being more u∣sed in either the one or the other Pharmacy, not only u∣sed in opening and purging Medicines to mortifie the A∣cids, which excite Fermenta∣tions in our Bodies; but also in extractions, dissolutions and precipitations of several Substances, especially of Mi∣nerals. § 23. Outwardly also, it is of singular use in lotions against the Gout, and to take away Scars and Ble∣mishes in the Face, and as a Specifick in all Diseases of the Skin proceeding from A∣cids. § 24. The Oil of Tartar per Deliquium is made of the Salt as at § 5. aforegoing: but if you would make it
quickly, you may dissolve it in Rain-water q. s. filtred, which may be used in all the Cases of the Oil. § 25. If Salt of Tartar be dissolved in distilled Waters from fresh green Plants, (im∣mediately after they are di∣stilled) they will turn green; and the greener the Plant was from which the Water was distilled, the greener will it make the Water. § 26. The Reason is, be∣cause the Alcali of the Salt does stir up and make appear the latent or hidden little parts of the Plant, which rose with the Water in distillati∣on: But if you would have this appearance, you must be sure that the Water is but newly distilled, and done not in B. M. or a gentle heat, but with a strong and violent Fire. § 27. Tincture of the Salt of Tartar. ℞ Fine Salt of Tartar lbij. put it into a Cru∣cible, and in a great Fire of Fusion, melt it, covering it with a Tyle, and put Coals round it; blow about it so as to make a greater heat than for the melting of Gold, which degree of heat continue about six hours, or until the Salt is of a red Marble colour, which you may know by putting the end of a Spatula into the Crucible, and looking upon it: then taking the Crucible out, turn it upside down into a very hot Iron Mor∣tar, in which it will presently coagulate; pouder it imme∣diately, and put it into a Ma∣trass warmed before-hand, up∣on which affuse Tartarised S.V. so much as may overtop it four or five Inches: stop the Ma∣trass with another, making a double Vessel: lute the Jun∣ctures close with a wet Blad∣der, digesting in a very gentle Sand-heat, so as the S. V. may boil (as it were) for eight or ten hours, and become impreg∣nated with a red Tincture: let the Vessels cool, and decant the Tincture and keep it for use, in a Glass close stopt. To the remaining Salt affuse fresh S. V. and operate as before so long as it will yield any Tin∣cture. Thus Lemery. § 28. This Tincture is a famous Aperitive, and one of the greatest Sweetner of the Humors or Juices that is in nature; it purifies the Blood, acuates the Spirits, and resists Putrefaction and Malignity in the highest measure; prevailing against the Scurvy, Surfeits, Measles, Small-Pox, and all sorts of malign and pestilential Fe∣vers, being given à gut. 10. ad 30.40. or 60. in any fit Vehicle.
§ 29. In the making of this Tincture some things are ob∣servable; As first, That the Crucible be placed upon a Culot or Tyle, lest the Wind which comes thro' the Ash∣hole, or else where should cool the bottom, and hin∣der the Fusion. § 30. That altho' some Authors say, it is sufficient to calcine the Salt of Tartar two hours in a violent Fire, or till it becomes blewish, yet that will yield little or no Tin∣cture, or but a very faint one; whereas it should be red like Wine; and that it will be, if it be kept before∣hand a good while melted in the Crucible. § 31. That as the Tincture grows old, it loses its red co∣lour, and becomes of a pale Amber or Sack colour, by reason that the more subtil part of the S. V. is lost, thro' often opening of it, and o∣ther accidents, so that the Spirit remaining has not strength enough to keep the Salt of Tartan its exalted state. § 32. That for this reason, you must be very careful to use S. V. perfectly deflegma∣ted; for if any Flegm be left in it, it will never turn red. § 33. That the Salt of Tartar being thus melted and poudred, if you add to ever Pound of it, lbij. of Bone-Ashes in pouder, that there∣by the Particles of the Salt may be separated one from another, you will have a much deeper Tincture, and a much greater quantity, for fresh S. V. may be continually affused upon the Salt, at least ten or a dozen times or more, whereas twice is as much as it will bear the o∣ther way. § 34. Some think that this Tincture proceeds from a Sul∣phur contained in the Salt, but that is a mistake, for it is only an exaltation of some Particles of the Salt in the S. V. and this is evident, not only by the diminution of the weight of the Salt, (which I have several times proved) but likewise by distillation, for no Tincture will rise, but only a colour less S.V. leaving the small quantity of Salt (which the Spirit had suckt up into it self) at bottom, of its usual whitness: from what has been said, it ap∣pears that the whole body or quantity of Salt of Tartar, will by degrees be converted to Tincture.
§ 35. Lastly, That Salt of Tartar having been a while melted in a Crucible, if live Charcoals be cast into it, it will flame as easily as Nitre or Salt-peter; which proceeds from the attenuated Par∣ticles of the Salt, being made fit to be exalted with the Sul∣phur of the Coals: and from this Observation some light is given to the making of Ar∣tificial Salt-peter. XLIII. Sal Tartari Volatile, Volatile Salt of Tartar. Bate.] ℞ Pure Salt of Tartar ℥iv. Alcohol of Wine ℥viij. distil in Sand, thrice cohobating, so will the Salt stick to the sides of the Alem∣bick. It is a famous Diure∣tick and Aperitive, purifies the Blood, and resists Ma∣lignity. Dose, à gr. 10. ad 20. and more. Salmon.] § 1. In our Do∣ron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 20. we have given you five other several ways of preparing this Volatile Salt of Tartar; the fourth of which is Lemery's Method, so that referring you thither, we need say no more of it here, only make some short Observations concerning the same. § 2. It is my Opinion (from an Experiment which I accidentally made) that Salt of Tartar is naturally Volatile, and so that no great Study or Labor need be used to change its Nature; and Volatile it will be, if you hinder the Acid of the Tartar from fixing it, or otherwise separate them when united and fixed together. § 3. The Ancients and many of the Moderns in searching after this volatile Salt, generally met with ill success, or wholly mist their end, because they understood not the aptness which vola∣tile and fixt Salts have to joyn with Acids; nor the indissolubility of their union when joyned together, and therefore they determined that (because they understood not the way) there was no such thing in nature. § 4. And tho' the Acid and Volatile Salts, naturally found in Tartar, are not to be se∣parated but with much diffi∣culty, and are always inclin'd to unite themselves as strict∣ly together as is possible, e∣specially in Calcination which (dissipates the Watery parts, which sensibly kept them di∣vided, and) manifestly closes up the Earthy parts, serving as a means to their Union, leaving a sufficiency of the
Acid to maintain that Union (notwithstanding the large diminution of the Acid in that Operation;) yet this seeming invincible Difficulty, this Gordian-knot, this almost indissoluble Unity, Nature it self has lead us by the hand to surmount and overcome. § 5. For since it is the A∣cid which fixes the Volatile part, and keeps it in its Chains, if you would brake its Bands, and deliver the Prisoner, you must surmount that Acid, by the addition of some new Acid, which may unite it self with that fixt Salt. § 6. For the Salt of Tar∣tar having lost in Calcination much of the Acid parts which stopt it, and there be∣ing only so much left to pre∣serve the quality of the fixt: the most fixed part of this Salt, being hungry, and as it were, half starv'd for want of Acid enough, it comes to pass, that swiftly uniting it self to this new Acid, whose Particles are ready to fill all the Vacancies which the vio∣lence and action of the Fire had made empty, by this U∣nion it relinquishes the Vola∣tile parts, and they resume their natural Liberty and Volatility, which is evident by its Smell, and all the o∣ther signs, essential to Vola∣tile Salts. § 7. And this is clear in the Volatile Salts of Ani∣mals, which have been fixed by Acids, where we have re∣course to fixed Salts, which are only able to force the A∣cid Salts to abandon the Vo∣latile, to unite themselves to them▪ whereby, the Vo∣latile being disengaged it ap∣pears with all the Qualities and Dispositions proper to it. § 8. Lemery makes this vo∣latile Salt of Tartar of Lees of Wine, because, says he, they are incomparably more fermented than the Tartar, which is found in the sides of Vessels, and therefore it is no wonder if its Salt is more vo∣latile. § 9. But this Salt of Lees, seems to be all Acid, not∣withstanding that some af∣firm that they abound in an Alcalious volatile Salt and a sulphurous Spirit, contain∣ing but a very little Acid. § 10. To which we an∣swer, That if so, it must fol∣low, that the more the Lees ferment, the more they must lose of their Acidity▪ because the Alcaly would absorb or destroy it; the contrary of which we every day see, for they by so much, glow the
more sowre; as the Vine∣gar-makers can experimen∣tally tell you, who use Lees to make them ferment with that Wine, which they would speedily turn to Vinegar: and this Tartar does all dissolve in the Wine, and turns into Vinegar, for very little or no Lees, or other Tartar is to be found in those Vessels in which the Vinegar is made, tho' there was some naturally before, or other Tartar had been added to it. § 11. Out of what has been said, it plainly appears, that the Volatile Salt in the Lees, is a Volatile Acid, and is the same, that makes the Acid Spirit of Vinegar, (be∣ing more volatile than many other Acids) to volatilize with its Flegm in the distil∣lation. § 12. But the Salt of Tartar drawn by Retort (after Lemery's Method) does rise more easily, than the Spirit of Vinegar, which comes to pass from its being volatiliz'd by the violent heat of the Fire. § 13. Against what has been said, some may object, that Lees are sometimes add∣ed to Wines grown ropy, to make them good again, with∣out sowering them in the least, or making them grow hard: which is true, because the first Fermentation was imperfect, as appears by the ropiness of the Liquor; for had it been sufficiently fer∣mented, it would never have grown ropy: this ropyness or gummyness, contains ma∣nifestly a great quantity of Oil (which by Retort may be drawn from it:) The Salt of the Lees then, conjoyning with those Oily Particles of the Liquor, does rarifie and ex∣alt them into that Substance of which Spirit of Wine is made; and so long as the Sa∣line Particles of the Lees, shall find Oily Particles to act up∣on, the Wine will not grow sowre, but refine, and grow better: but being added, af∣ter a perfect Fermentation, wherein those Oily Particles are all dissolved, it changes the Liquor into a sowerness, and makes it become Vine∣gar, as at § 10. aforegoing is proved. § 14. This Salt is subli∣med in a Bolt-head, that the Flegm which is too heavy to rise easily so high may not mix with it: but it is diffi∣cult to keep this Salt dry, be∣cause it easily grows moist and dissolves into a Liquor; for which reason it is much better to draw it in a Spirit, for thereby less of the Vola∣tile
parts would be lost being detained by the Flegm. § 15. The reason of its aptness to dissolve and melt per Deliquium, proceeds from the more Essential parts being volatiliz'd, there remaining much of the fixt Acid Salt in the Earth or Feces. § 16. From whence it ap∣pears, that tho' in the Lees it was a Volatile Acid Salt, (as we said at § 11. above:) Yet after distillation in a Retort, it becomes an Alcali by the means of the Fire, as other Volatile Salts do; there be∣ing no probability that it could be of this nature ei∣ther in the Plant or in the Lees § 17. But if you had ra∣ther have the Salt in a dry Form, than in a spirit or li∣quid Form, mix the Spirit or Liquor with a sufficient quan∣tity of Bone-Ashes finely pou∣dred, and make thereof a Paste, which make into little Balls or Pellets, put them into a Bolt-head, and fit to it a blind Head, so will the Salt sublime very pure, white, and dry, which keep in Glasses close stopt for use. § 18. Out of the Feces left in the Retort (being after calcin'd in an open Fire) you may extract a fixt Alcalious Salt, as out of common cal∣cin'd Tartar, but it will be in a vastly less quantity, from whence it appears, that the greatest part of the Salt of the Lees is truly volatiliz'd, which is the thing proposed to be done. § 19. This Volatile Salt is of excellent use, to absorb Acids in the Body, of what kind, or how malign soever, and to cause Sweat, purify∣ing the Blood and other Juices by perspiration: for by their volatility they penetrate mo∣mentarily all parts, enliven the Animal Spirits, and open Obstructions to a wonder if prudently given: having much the same effects, as volatile Salt of Beans, and other like substances, and is indeed a singular Specifick against most Diseases of the Head and Brain, proceeding from Cold Moisture, and Obstructions. Dose, à gr. vj. ad xvj. in some proper Vehicle. § 20. From what has been said it appears, that a very volatile and alcalious Spirit may be drawn from the Lees of Wine; which possi∣bly may be that very Spirit which Paracelsus and Van Hel∣mont do speak so much of, and has caused many Authors to affirm that Tartar does contain a most volatile and admirable Spirit.
§ 21. Marggrave makes a volatile Salt of Tartar after this manner. ℞ White Crude Tartar, Crude Antimony, Ni∣tre, A. lbj. Calx Vive lbjss. beat them all apart, sift, and mix them, put it Cochleatim into an Earthen tubulated Re∣tort in an open Fire, affixing a very large Receiver, and in the Receiver you shall have a Golden coloured Liquor, which being rectified in a Cucur∣bit, goes forth or ascends in a volatile Salt. § 22. But his Commenta∣tor Muykens makes it after this manner. ℞ Rhenish Tartar lbv. pouder it grosly, moisten it with common Wa∣ter, and keep it in a moist place, till it begins to putrefie, and the Tartar grow black; put it then into a Vessel which stop close, and digest in Horse∣dung, for its further Exalta∣tion, adding a little quantity of Spirit of Wine, to make a Precipitation, which continue so long till it does yield a spi∣rituous Saline Odor: Put this Earth like Tartar into a Coat∣ed Glass Retort, and distil first with a gentle fire, so long as any Flegm will arise; then increase the Fire to a stronger beat, and at length augment it to the highest degree, so will you have a Spirit and Oil, which separate per Tritorium, and mix with the Volatile Salt sticking to the sides of the Receiver, and with the fixt Salt to be extracted from the Feces, and distil again, after the same manner as you di∣stil Volatile Salts, so will you have a most penetrating Vola∣tile Salt of Tartar, which keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 23. This Volatile Salt is that which is said to bear a∣way the Palm from all other Volatile Salts, having all their Vertues, but much more powerful in its Operations and Effects: and it is one of chiefest of Chymical Arcanum's supplying (in the Opinion of Helmont and some others) the place of the Alcahest, being able to resolve radically sim∣ple Bodies for extraction of their Essences, and to pene∣trate into the most remote parts of the Body. Dose, à gr. vj. ad xij. or more. XLIV. Sal Viperarum Volatilis, Volatile Salt of Vipers. Bate.] It is made of dryed Vipers by Retort, as you make the Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, from the Caput Motuum, a fixed Salt is drawn or extract∣ed, after the common manner. It is a Medicament of a most penetrative force, resisting
Putrefaction, opening Ob¦structions, taking away Fe∣vers, and prevailing against Melanholy, Gout, Stone in the Reins and Bladder. Dose, gr. vj. ad x. Salmon.] § 1. The way how this is performed we have taught in our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 61. Sect. 6. from Charrs; where, and in the three following Sections of the same Chapter, you have several Notes and Remarks worthy Observation: and in Cap. 2. Sect. 39. § 1, 2, & 3 of this Book aforegoing, from Lemery, to which for the par∣ticular Exemplification of the Process we refer you. § 2. Here is to be noted That in the first distillation the Flegm comes before the other Principles; but in the rectification the Volatile Salt and Spirit rifes first, because it is at liberty, and leaves the Flegm behind. § 3. The Vessel for Subli∣mation must be very high, that the Volatile Salt may a∣rise without any Flegm; for f the Vessel be low or short, the Flegm will rise with the Volatile Salt liquifie it, and turn it into Spirit. § 4. A Bolt-head, or a long Body with its Head, may serve for this Operation, because the Flegm being too heavy cannot ascend so high and therefore the Volatile Salt in its flight, leaves it, and sublimes alone, which is af∣ter to be rectified and made more pure. § 5. To do this, you must mix it with the distilled Spi∣rit, and repeat the Sublima∣tion as before. But because this Salt always carries along with it, some few Particles of the fetid Oil, it quickly loses its whitness, and turns yellowish. § 6. To remedy this, when you have put it into the Bottle, affuse thereon S. V. tartarized, so much as to overtop it an Inch, stop it up close shake them well together, and digest for a week or ten days, so will the Salt grow white, and be preserved from dissolving, and the S. V. will suck up all the fetid Oil which gives the Em∣pyreuma to the Salt, and be∣come reddish or Amber-colour∣ed. § 7. But in this Operati∣on, care must be taken, that the S. V. be perfectly defleg∣mated; for if the least Flegm should remain in it, a part of the Salt would dissolve therein to fill it: after it is thus washt in S. V. you may sublime it again, and then it will be very dry, white and fair.
§ 8. There is another way of rectifying the Volatile Salt, which is by mixing it with four or five times as much Bone-Ashes, or Horns burnt white, putting the Mixture into a Glass or Earthen body, and then fitting to it a blind Head, luting well the Juncture, and then with a gentle fire sub∣liming in Sand, the Volatile Salt will arise very white, and stick to the head almost like hoar Frost. § 9. This Salt is hereby purified from most, if not all its fetid Oil, which remains at bottom in the Bone-Ashes, and hereby becomes whiter than it was, and pleasanter to the Palate: which yet by another rectification from Bones, will be still more pure and desirable, the Empy∣reuma in a manner totally vanishing. § 10. This Volatile Salt, if it be dissolved in a little distilled Rain-water, will crystallize like Sugar-Candy, and then will be easier to keep than before. § 11. This Salt, and in∣deed all others drawn from Animals, are of almost infi∣nite Vertues, and may be esteemed even as the Pillars of true Pharmacy, for they penetrate to the places far∣thest removed from the first digestion, even to the most remote parts of the Body, and dissolve all viscous and tartarous Matters, open all Obstructions, cure all Fe∣vers, principally Quartans, preserve from the Plague, and strongly resist all Putre∣faction. § 12. It prevails not only against all continual and in∣termitting Fevers, but are good against the Palsie, Fal∣ling-sickness, Leprofie, King's-Evil, Rickets, French-Pox, Elephantiasis, bitings of Ser∣pents, Vipers, Rattle-snakes, and of any other venomous Beast, cures Fits of the Mo∣ther, expels Poyson, and preserves from all malign, in∣fectious, and pestilential Di∣seases; and possibly may be one of the greatest Remedies in the World for the Cure of Hecticks, Phthisis, and Consumptions, &c. Dose, à gr. vj. ad xvj. XLV. Sal Ʋrine Volatile, Volatile Salt of Urine. Bate.] It is made of fer∣mented Ʋrine distilled by Re∣tort S. A. From the Caput Mortuum a fixed Salt is drawn, according to the com∣mon Method. It is a famous Anodyn, and takes away Pains, being mixt with some
proper Liquor, and the place afflicted bathed therewith. Inwardly given it opens tar∣tarous Obstructions of the Viscera and Mensentery; for which reason it is said to be of admirable use against the Scurvy, Cachexia, yellow and black Jaundice, &c. It breaks the Stone in the Reins and Bladder, and eases Pains thencearising. Dose, gr. 15. ad 30▪ Salmon.] § 1. How this is to be made we have taught in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Sect. 12. and 14. as also in our Doron Medicum Lib. 1. Cap. 25. Sect. 128. and 129. and Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Sect. 22. which latter it ex∣actly according to Lemery's Method. There are other Methods of making it, which you may see at large in our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 63. Sect. 8. ad 15. and in Sect. 18. a compound Volatile Spirit and Salt of Urine and Tar∣tar from Maëts, which is a thing of good use. § 2. Others, as Le Mort and Charras make it thus: ℞ Fresh Ʋrine, evaporate it in B. M. to the thickness of Honey, put it into a Glass Ma∣trass or Vesica fitted with its Head and Receiver luting the Joynts, and distil with a gra∣dual Sand-heat, that the Mat∣ter may not rise and run over, first you have the Volatile Spi∣rit; after that, the Volatile Salt arises, which sticks to the Head; then a little stink∣ing Oil, which tricles over in∣to the Recipient, with the Vo∣latile Salt which it dissolves: the Vessels being cooled, the Oil and Volatile Salt are to be taken and separated from the fetid Oil, by putting into the Receiver so much warm Water, as is needful to dissolve the Volatile Salt which was congealed: filter the Solu∣tion thro' Paper, so will the Oil be left behind: the filtred Liquor put into a large Bolt-head, with a long Neck, and fit to it a large Head round and flat, with a Receiver, lu∣ting the Joynts, and distil in a very gentle Sand-heat, so will the Volatile Salt be sepa∣rated (even by the least heat) and sublime into the head of the Still like Snow, white and pure, leaving whatever is in∣sipid or stinking behind it in the bottom, as not being able to rise because of the height of the Vessel and weakness of the Heat: this Volatile Salt gather and keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 3. This subtil Salt is of great Vertue and Power, whe∣ther inwardly used or out∣wardly applied, in the Cure of Diseases: it opens all Ob∣structions,
and is of singular use in all Melancholick Di∣eases to break and dissolve Stones and Gravel, whether in Reins or Bladder and to expel them by Urine. Dose, à gr. vj. ad xx. in some fit Vehicle. § 4. Outwardly applied it prevails admirably against the Gout, or any external Pain being dissolved in Aqua Vitae (in which a little Flegm is left, for a pure rectified Spirit will not dissolve it) and it is said to be confirmed by experience, as an excellent dis∣solver of Nodes, Tophs Gums. § 5. This Volatile Salt of Urine (says Charras) power∣fully mortifies Acids, which usually raise the Fermentati∣ons in our Bodies, and are the Causes of several Di∣seases: it is very much e∣steemed in all Diseases of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesen∣tery, to purifie the Mass of Blood, and cure the Scurvy Cachexia, Jaundice and Hy∣pochondriack Melancholy: it is prescribed with good Suc∣cess in Lethargies Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and Convulsions; as also in Suffocations of the Womb and difficulty of ma∣king Water. Dose, à gr. 10. ad 20. or 30. in White-wine or some other proper Liquor. § 6. A Compound Volatile Saline Spirit of Ʋrine and Tartar is thus made, accord∣ing to Maëts. ℞ Recent Ʋ∣rine lbiv. Salt of Tartar made with Nitre lbj. mix and di∣gest in a Glass close stopt in Horse dung for three Months; so will the Volatile Salt of the Ʋrine joyn it self by Putre∣faction with the igneous Spirit of the Tartar; after which with a gentle fire draw forth the Volatile saline Spirit, which will be indeed of an A∣queous Consistence, but extream∣ly fiery and saline. § 7. This serves principal∣ly for drawing forth or ex∣tracting the Tinctures from the Calces of Metals and Minerals, and opening the several Bodies, to which it is applied: From the Crocus of Sol it extracts a yellow Tin∣cture, which by distillation is freed from the Menstruum, leaving the Tincture behind in the form and thickness of Oil: this being mixed with Alcohol of S V. q. s. and di∣gested for some time unites it self with the Spirit, and be∣comes an Aurum Potabile of great Vertue, which is gives à gut. vj. ad xvj. § 8. After the same man∣ner you may extract a Tin∣cture from the Crocus of Mars, of admirable Vertues, which may be given à gut. vj, ad xxvj. And from the
Crocus Veneris, a Tincture of Venus, which is a Specifick against the Epilepsie: Thus. ℞ Crocus of Venus (made with Nitre) calcin'd till it is of a blood-red Colour, made into a subtil Pouder ℥j. of choice Ni∣tre ℥xij. mix and calcine in a strong Crucible with de∣grees of heat in a naked Fire, till the Venus with the Nitre is turned into subvirid or blewish green Scorias: on this affuse the aforesaid Men∣struum, and extract a Rubi∣cund Tincture, which separate, adding fresh Menstruum, and digesting as before, which so often repeat till the whole Tincture of the Venus is ex∣tracted: mix these several Tinctures, and by distillati∣on abstract to the thickness of Oil; on which affuse the Alcohol of S. V. digesting in a warm Sand heat, so will the Tincture of the Venus unite it self with the S. V. (as be∣fore in that of Gold) and be∣come potable Venus. Dose, à gut. vj. ad x. XLVI. Tartarum Antimo∣niatum, Tartar antimo∣niated, or Tartar prepared with Antimony, Bate.] ℞ Cream of Tar∣tar, p. vj. Flowers of Anti∣mony, p. j. mix and boil in Water, filter and exhale to dryness. It is Ecphractick, or Opening and Cleansing, Diuretick, Diaphoretick, and a Febrifuge. It loosens the Belly, and moves Vomiting, Dose, ℈j. ʒss, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This is ta∣ken from Zwelfer, Mantiss. Spagyric. Cap. 12. paginâ meâ 870. who orders the Repetition of the boiling with fresh Water, till all the Cremor is dissolved, and will pass by filtration thro' brown Paper, which then with a very gentle heat is to be eva∣porated to dryness. § 2. How the Flowers of Antimony are to be made we have shewed at large in Cap. 9. Sect. 57. of this Book a∣foregoing: of these Flowers there are several sorts, as the white, yellow, and red, of which the white Flowers are only to be chosen for this purpose. § 3. It purges gently up∣wards and downwards, and prevails against continual Fevers, and intermitting Ter∣tians, and other chronick and radicated Diseases: Dose, à ℈ss. ad ℈j. Plus minus, in any proper Vehicle.
XLVII. Tartarum Chalybia∣tum, Chalyblated Tar∣tar. Bate.] ℞ Tartar washed lbj. Mars ℥ij. Water lbviij. boil them a moment or two, then strain immediately thro' Hip∣pocrates his Sleeve, stirring the Liquor till it is cold, so a pouder will settle at bottom of a greenish Colour, which dry. Or thus. ℞ Cremor Tartari ℥iv. Vitriol of Mars ʒij. boil in a small quantity of Water, filter, and evaporate to dryness. It is very profitable against Chronick Diseases, viz. Ob∣structions of the Spleen, Quartans, Yellow Jaundice, Cachexia, Hypochondriack Melancholy, &c. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. Zwelfer in the place above-cited pre∣pares it after this manner. ℞ Vitriol of Mars prepared with Spirit of Vitriol or Sul∣phur ℥ss. expressed and depu∣rated Juice of Endive, or Juice of Wood Sorel, q. s. mix and dissolve: in this dissoluti∣on mix and incorporate Cre∣mor Tartari ℥iij. by a gen∣tle boiling, which (if you please you may filter whilst hot, and then) evaporate to dryness. § 2. This, says he, is pow∣erful in removing Obstru∣ctions of the Hypochonders, and to provoke the Terms: it opens the Bowels and makes the Belly soluble: and is indeed one of the best of Remedies against the Green∣sickness in Virgins, and the Rickets and King's-Evil in Children. It kills Worms, saith Le Mort, and expels Pituitous, and other like vis∣cous Humors. § 3. The same Le Mort makes it according to the latter Method of our Text; but he advises, that the E∣bullition should not be long, but only a walm or two, (stirring it with a wooden Spatula) for if it be too long boiled, it becomes of an ingrateful Taste, and will be apt to move Vomit∣ing. § 4. But the first was which proposed in our Text, is exact∣ly conformable to Le Febure, which makes a Pouder of a greenish Colour, and shining when dry: This, says he, is incomparably more Aperi∣tive than purified Tartar, because it has in it the Vitriol of Mars, which the Sharp∣ness of the Tartar has drawn forth, as the greenish Colour does evince.
§ 5. Lemry makes it al∣most after Le Febure's and oar Author's first way, save that he uses Rust of Iron in∣stead of crude Filings of Iron, and ℥iij. instead of ℥ij. which he boils for half an hour, or there abouts, till the Tartar it all dissolved, then he strains the Liquor through a Cloth, but very hot; for if it were a little cool, the Tartar would coagulate in the Cloth, and none of it would pass. § 6. When you exhibit this Chalybeat Tartar, you must make it just boil in the Li∣quor you give it in, for o∣therwise it will not dissolve; and you ought to give it as hot as they can take it, for fear it should coagulate at the bottom of the Cup. § 7. By reason of this in∣conveniency, he has a soluble Chalybeat Tartar, thus made. ℞ Crystals of Tartar in pou∣der ℥viij. Salt of Tartar ℥iv. put them into a glazed Earthen Pot, and affuse thereon Water iij. boil gently for half an hour, cool, filter, and evapo∣rate to dryness, so will you have were℥xij. of white Salt, to which put forty eight Ounces of Lemery's Tincture of Mars (see it Cap. 7. Sect. XXVI. of this Book) mix and digest for a little time in a Sand-heat, then with a gentle fire evapo∣rate the Liquor, till a black Pouder remains, (which will be about twenty four Ounces) which keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 8. This has all the Ver∣tues of the Tincture of Tar∣tar, which see in its proper place, and is especially good in Nephritick Cholicks, and difficulty of Urine, being gi∣ven à ℈ss. ad ss. or ℈ij. in Broth, or some specifick Ve∣hicle, or else made into Lo∣zenges. § 9. And it is much more convenient for use than the other Preparations, because it not only dissolves and mixes in any cold Liquor, but is also more vertuous and effectual, for that the Tin∣cture of Mars is though to contain only the more Essen∣tial and Saline parts of the Tartar. § 10. Charras has the two ways of our Author, besides which, he has a third which is after this manner. ℞ Cre∣mor Tartari in fine Pouder ℥iv. Vitriol of Mars ʒij. re∣duce them into a Paste, with some Cordial-water ℥ij. then drying all, pouder it finely, and add to it some few drops of Oil of Cinnamon or Cloves, and keep it in a Glass close stopt for use. It is endued with all the former Vertues,
bu is not to be used, till af∣ter Ʋniversals. or general Re∣medies, of a Cathartick Ver∣tue have been first admini∣stred. XLVIII. Tartarum Emei∣cum, Emetick, or Vomit∣ing Tartar. Bate.] ℞ Liver of Anti∣mony, Cremor Tartari, Ana. p. aeq. mix Mint-water, filter, and evaporate to dryness. It operates much more gently and safely than Crocus Me∣tallorum. Dose, gr. iij. ad xij. Salmon.] § 1. How this Emetick Tartar is to be made according to Mynsicht, Le Febure and some others we have shewn in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 7. & 18. with some Notes and Observations up∣on the same. § 2. That of Mynsicht is made wit a peculiar Crocus Metallorum, viz. made with equal parts of Antimony, Nitre, and Salt of Wormwood, putting the Mixture into a good Cru∣cible, till it is half full, and covering it with another Cru∣cible of the same bigness, ha∣ving a little hole in the bottom, and the Juncture well luted and dryed; it is then placed upon a Culot or Tyle in the midst of a Fire-place of a pro∣per Fornance: then having kindled a fire about it, it is left till the Substances, deto∣nate and melt: after which the Crucible is taken from the Fire, and being cold, that con∣taining the Matter is broken, and you'll find at the bottom the Hepar Antimonij, the Co∣lour and Pouder of which is more red, than the other sorts of Preparations, and covered with Salts. § 3. This Hepar, is called by some Magnesia Opalina, because it is of the Shape and Colour of Marchasite, and very much like to that of the Opal: and most believe it to be the true Crocus Metalior. Rulandi. § 4. It is certain that this is one of the truest and most excellent Preparations of An∣timony that can be prepared, as well to make the Emotick Wine, as to give in Pouder, à gr. vj. ad 10. 20. 30. or 40. Grains (as some Authors allow) in some Conserve, Bolus, Egg, or roasted Apple, or otherwise; and like∣wise to make thereof this our present Emetick Tartar, as in the place cited we have at large taught. § 5. How Lemery makes it, see in our Seplafium, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 15. and 16. where you have the Vertues,
Use, and Dose at large. He makes it with Spirit of U∣rine, or Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack: if with the first, there happens a small Ebul∣lution, which proceeds from the Cremor Tartari, meeting with the Volatile and Alca∣lious Salt of Urine, the A∣cid of the Tartar peircing the Salt of Urine, and divi∣ding its parts, thereby giving vent to the Igneous Particles contained in it, which now being freed, break forth in great haste. § 6. But if it be prepared with the latter, there will then be no sensible Ebullition▪ be∣cause the Salt of that Spirit is not so open an Alcali, as is the Salt of the Spirit of U∣rine, but retains some Impres∣sions of the Acid Salt of the Arack; so that the points of the Acid of the Tartar (not freed from its Earth) are too unactive, gross or blunt to insinuate themselves into the Pores of this Salt, to se∣parate its parts, &c. From whence, it may rationally be deduced, that this Medi∣cament is much better to be made with the former, than with the latter. § 7. In this Operation also, you may either evaporate to dryness, or exhaling about two thirds of the Liquor, you may set it to crystallize, after the usual manner, but those Crystals will be in no kind, better than the former: yet however, if you like Crystals better, it will be best to do it in an Earthen flat-bottom'd Vessel, that the Crystals may shoot the bet∣ter. § 8. Marggrave makes it thus. ℞ Glass of Antimony, or Crocus Metallorum in fine Pouder ℥j. Crude Nitre in Pouder ʒij. mix, and in a Cru∣cible make the detonation: the Matter remaining Pouder finely again, and add thereto pure Salt of Tartar ℥j. fair Water ℥ix. mix them, and in an Iron Vessel, boil to a to∣tal Consumption of the Water: the Mass remaining Pouder, and extract the Salt with boil∣ing Water, which filter: the Pouder remaining in the Paper is Vitrum Antimonij, which dry and save: the filtred Li∣quor put into a Glass body, and evaporate to dryness, which keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 9. It purges both up∣wards and downwards, but chiefly bilious or cholerick Homors, and is to be given à gr. ij. ad iv. vel vj. but in the first Impression of the Collectanea Chymica, the Dose is à gr. 10. ad 20. which is
truly too large in my Opini∣on: there can be no danger in giving a Dose too little, whereas very ill consequents may be upon giving a Dose, though never so little too large. XLIX. Tartarum Laxati∣vum, Laxative or Loosen∣ing Tartar. Bate.] ℞ Cremor Tartari ℥viij. Salt of Tartar ℥iv. Foun∣tain-water lbiij. boil them in a gentle fire for half an hour, which being cold, filter and e∣vaporate to dryness, that you may have a white Salt. Dose, à ℈ss. ad ℈j. Salmon.] § 1. You may see the Method or Way of doing it more at large in our doing it more at large in our Seplasium, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 8. where note, That this Preparation is nothing but such a Mixtion of the Cream of Tartar, with the Salt of Tartar, in such Proportions, that it may dissolve in cold Liquors, which the Cream would not do alone: and the Cream being an Acid, insi∣nuates it self into the Pores of the Alcalious Salt, and sweetens it. § 2. If Salt of Tartar be put into the Dissolution of the Cremor Tartari in boil∣ing Water, there will be an Effervescency; but if they be mixed cold, there will be none; the reason is, because the Acid Salts of the Cremor being involved in other Prin∣ciples, have but little power to enter and open the Al∣cali, unless actuated and for∣tified by the help of Fire. § 3. In the Cremor of Es∣sential Salt of Tartar, the Acid Salt is proportionably mixed and united with the Volatile Salt: But says Char∣ras, this Union may be bro∣ken, by dissolving this Essen∣tial Salt in Water, and mix∣ing it with the Alcalious Salt of Tartar, for by that means the Acid being overcome by the other Salts, and not be∣ing able to close with so great a quantity, which it could neither stop not contain, re∣sumes its dissolutive Nature, so that they become together, all of them dissoluble in Wa∣ter. § 4. This Preparation is of principal use to cut and digest thick and viscous Hu∣muors, and to prepare them for Excretion; and is suc∣cessfully used in all manner of Obstructions of the Li∣ver, Spleen, and other Vis∣cera; the use of which may be continued for several days as need requires, and may
be given à ℈ss. ad ʒst. in any fit Vehicle. L. Tartarum Vitriolatum Antimoniale, Antimonial Vitriolated Tartar. Bate.] It is made by add∣ing paulatim to antimoniated Tartar (at Sect. 46. a foregoing) Oil of Vitriol, q. s. and dry∣ing it, then dissolving in Wa∣ter, filtring, and exhaling to dryness. It is a Febrifuge, and prevails against the Yel∣low Jaundice, and Cachexia, and is digestive, given à gr. 15. ad 30. &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is taken from Zwelfer Mantiss. Spagy∣ric. Cap. 12. pag. meâ 874. which because it seems to be more clear in the Author, we will give you Word for Word, Translation only ex∣cepted. § 2. Take white Flowers of Antimony ℥ij. Cremor Tartari ℥iv. boil them in Water, q. s. repeating it several times, till the whole Vertue is drawn forth: first strain, and then filter hot through brown Pa∣per; with which mix or dis∣solve Salt of Tartar lbj. This, by a gentle heat evaporate way to dryness, or to its former Consistency of a Salt. Again to this Liquor thus impreg∣ted with the Essence of An∣timony, put in leisurely, and by drops Spirit or Oil of Vi∣triol or Sulphur, q. s. till the Salt is sufficiently saturated: Let this saline Matter be dry∣ed, and then dissolved again in simple Water, filtred, and by a gentle Evaporation of the Aquosity in a Glass Body or Vessel, be reduced to the Con∣sistency of a Salt, which keep for use. § 3. It is indeed an excel∣lent thing in chronick or long continuing Diseases as Hypo∣chondriack Melancholy, te∣dious Tertian and Quartan Agues, and other Diseases a∣rising from such like Causes, as tartarous and rebellious Humors in the Viscera, Ob∣structions of all kinds, &c. § 4. It ought to be given in the Morning fasting, with a good supply of Posset-drink, by which means it will work easier, pleasanter, and more nimbly: but else for want of that to repleat the Stomach, it may cause the Patient to strain too much, and so do mischief; which o∣therwise observing these Di∣rections is safe enough, and an excellent Medicine of ex∣traordinary use.
LI. Tartarum Vitriolum E∣metico-purgans, A Vomit∣ing purging Vitriolated Tartar. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Tartar melted ℥viij. Glass of Anti∣mony ℥j. mix them well in a Crucible, which then pour forth, dissolve in Water, filter, and dry with a Sand-heat, in∣stilling by degrees Oil of Vi∣triol, q. s. and drying it a∣gain. It has the same Ver∣tues with the former, and purges , upwards and downwards. Dose, gr. iij. ad viij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is taken from Zwelfer in the place above-cited, from whom we shall also deliver you the Pro∣cess in like manner as we did in the former. § 2. ℞ Salt of Tartar lbj. melt it in a Crucible over the Fire, into which forthwith put by little and little Glass of An∣timony (prepared without any addition ℥ij.) and being melted and well mixed together, by stirring them up and down with an Iron Rod, immediate∣ly pour them fourth: when cold, beat it in a Mortar to fine Pouder. dissolve it in fair Water, filter, and by a gentle heat evaporate the Humidity to dryness, and its former Consistency of a Salt: into which instil leisurely, and by degrees Oil or Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, q. s. so much and so long till no more Ebullition or Effervescency appears: Let this vitriolated saline Mass be dryed, which then again dissolve in fair common Wa∣ter, filter, and gently evapo∣rate so much of the Humidity that it may crystallize, or otherwise, at once evaporate it away to dryness, which keep for use. § 3. It works both up∣wards and downwards gent∣ly, but chiefly by Stool, for as much as the Antimony is doubly corrected, first by the Salt of Tartar, and then by the Oil of Vitriol; and it is given in all the Cases, and for all the same Purposes for which the former is exhibi∣ted; § 4. And by the Authority of our Text is not to be gi∣ven in much above the quar∣ter part of the former Dose, viz, à gr. iij. ad viij. Yet Zwelfer says it may be gi∣ven à gr. x. ad xx. which I suppose is to be understood in strong Constitutions, and contumacious Diseases.
LII. Vitriolum Camphora∣tum, Camphorated Vi∣triol. Bate.] ℞ Vitriol calcin'd ℥vj. Camphire (dissolved in S. V.) ℥j. mix, and by a gentle fire abstract the Spirit, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. As to the Calcination of the Vitriol, it is my Opinion, it ought to be Philosophically done, which is performed two ways; First, By a solar Cal∣cination with the Sun-beams, as Antimony is calcin'd, the full way of doing of which you will have in our Offici∣na Chymica, now in the Press, and in a short time to be published: Secondly, By the following Method of Le Fe∣bure. § 2. ℞ Vitriol purified by digestion, dry it between two Papers in a very slow heat, till it turns of it self to a dry Pouder, which put into one or more Matrasses, with a flat bottom, the thickness of a Shilling or Half Crown, obser∣ving well this Note, else you will come short of your design: Seal up the Vessels hermetically, and put them in Ashes as deep as the Matter is high, and half an Inch more; then give it a fire, which ought not to exceed the heat of the Sun in Summer, and continue the same without interruption for forty days, and the Vitriol will turn by degrees from a white into a yellowish Colour, and from a yellow to a red, which will come to the height of Blood reduced to Pouder; then re∣move the fire, break the Vessel, and keep this Philosophick Vi∣triol as an excellent thing both for inward and outward Ʋses. § 3. This is the Vitriol which is to be Camphorated according to the Prescription of our Text, which then be∣comes a most admirable Re∣medy against all Fluxes of Blood whatsoever, whether in∣ward or outward. § 4. It also possesses in it self the true Soul and Tin∣cture of the mixt, which may be extracted with the Alcohol of S. V. if you have Patience enough to attend the Operation; and thereof you have a famous Remedy for Wounds and Punctures of the Nerves, and indeed to cure an hundred other Diseases, if a wise Physician has it in handling. § 5. Take of this Campho∣rated Vitriol, q. v. Alcohol of Wine, or rather Tincture of Salt of Tartar, so much as
may over-top it two Inches, di∣gest in a very gentle heat, till the Menstruum is well tinged, which decant and affuse more fresh Spirit, digesting and do∣canting as before, and continu∣ing this Work till the Men∣struum will not extract any more either Sapor or Colour: mix and filter all these Tin∣ctures, and by an Alembick in B. M. abstract, about the one half, or two thirds of the Spi∣rit, leaving the thicker Tin∣cture behind. § 6. This is said to be a present Remedy against the Stone, Epilepsie, Megrim, to cleanse and heal internal Ul∣cers, stop bleeding in any part, and to purifie the Blood. Dose, à gut. 10. ad 20. in any proper Vehicle. § 7. But there are some which profess to bring it to a higher degree of Perfecti∣on, by mixing it with burnt Alum, or Alum extreamly calcin'd, and then distilling the Liquor by Retort, which will be both red and sweet, and having the afore-enu∣merated Vertues, but to be given in a smaller Dose. LIII. Vitriolum Lunae, Vi∣triol of Silver. Bate.] It is made of Silver dissolved in Spirit of Nitre, coagulating and crystallizing, S. A. It is called also Crystal∣lum Lunare, and Magisteri∣um Lunae. Dose, gr. ij. ad vj. It is profitable against the Dropsie, and Diseases of the Head, as the Falling-sick∣ness, Megrim, &c. It purges gently, and sometimes it moves Vomit. Of this Vi∣triol, mixt with Crumbs of White-bread, the Pilulae Lu∣nares are wont to be made. Salmon.] § 1. We have explicated the Process at large after Lemery's Method in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 3. and according to Charras in Lib. 1. Cap. 25. Sect. 148. of the same work, so that no more from them need be said here. § 2. Beguinus makes it af∣ter this manner. ℞ Leaf Sil∣ver ℥j. put it into a Cucurbit, and affuse thereon Spirit of Nitre, q. s. or so much as may overtop it one Inch: cover it with a blind head, and digest in B. Vaporoso for twenty four hours; then with a gentle heat abstract the more Volatile Spirit of Nitre, till no more
will come over: then the Ves∣sel being cooled affuse more fresh Spirit of Nitre, digest∣ing and distilling as before, which Work continue till the Luna is augmented in weight three or four Drams, by the addition of the more fixed parts of the Spirit of Nitre: then drive forth all the Flegm by a boiling B. Vaporosum: after which the Vessel being exactly closed digest it in B. Vap. for thirty days, in which space of time the Luna will be changed into a white vis∣cous Water, which placed in a cold place will congeal into a greenish blew Vitriol. § 3. Now here is to be noted, That when the Silver is all of it dissolved, the Li∣quor will become clear and transparent, but yet a little blewish, which proceeds from the small quantity of Copper which is mixed with it; for if the Silver had been per∣fectly freed from the Cop∣per, it would not have the least Eye of blew in it, but be perfectly free from blew∣ness or greeness like Spirit of Nitre: but because there is scarcely any Silver to be found so perfectly pure and free from Copper, there∣fore it is, the Solution is as seldom colourless, but for the most part tinged more or less with an Eye of Blew. § 4. Others make it thus. ℞ Fine Leaf Silver ℥j, A. F. ℥iij. put them together into a Matrass in a Sand beat, where leave them till the Silver is dissolved: pour the warm Solu∣tion into a little Gourd, warm'd a little before▪ lest the heat of the Solution break it: leave it to cool some hours, and the Liquor will turn almost all into Crystals: the remaining Liquor evaporate half away in a Sand-heat, and put it again in a cool place to crystal∣lize: the yet remaining Liquor put into an Earthen Pan, into which put some Water and a piece of Copper, so will all the Silver contained in the Liquor fall down in Pouder, which you may wash and dry, and melt with a little Nitre and Tartar, in a Crucible, to re∣store it to its first Body again. The Crystals dry by a gentle fire, and keep them in a Glass close stopt for use. § 5. These Crystals, Salt, or Vitriol of Luna are of a very bitter Taste, and apt to black the Skin, with an enduring Black, not to be re∣moved, till the Skin wears off: they purge very easily, and are given à gr. iij. ad vj. some say gr. viij. in some specifick Vehicle, for such as
can away with their bitter∣ness: but for such as cannot bare that, it may be made up into Pills with Crumbs of White-bread, (which are called Pilulae Lunares, see our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. Sect. 18.) and so given at Night going to Bed. § 6. It is a Specifick for all Diseasrs of Head and Brain, as inveterate Head-Achs, Me∣grims, Apoplexies, Lethar∣gies, Vertigo's, Epilepsies, Palsies, &c. And is a famous thing against Dropsies, and to purge the Brain from su∣perfluous Humors. § 7. But by reason of the Acrimony left by the Spirit of Nitre, or A. F. in these Crystals, I think it not so safe to give gr. 8. or gr. 10. as some Authors allow, for their Effects will be too violent, and their Qualities too cau∣stick to be given in so great a Dose: You may give à gr. j. ad iij, or iv. or in very strong Bodies to gr. vj. as our Au∣thor has limited, which seems to be the utmost Dose: for in some Constitutions, a Dose of gr. iv. will work above an hundred times, yet without making the Body much the weaker for it. § 8. Maēts from Angelus Sala, having made the Cry∣stals according to the vul∣gar Method at § 4. above, dissolves them de Nova in May Dew, or distilled Rain-water (digesting for twenty four Hours, that the Feces, if any be, may subside) then fil∣ters, and evaporates to a Cu∣ticle, and then sets it to con∣creet into Crystals again, which he drys and keeps for use. § 9. These Crystals are much more freed from the Acid of the Spirit of Nitre or A. F. than the other; and if to the Solution, you add an equal part to the Crystals of fine Nitre, it will yet much more infringe the corrosive Quality of the remaining A∣cid Spirits, and become a Specifick Antihydropick, be∣yond any other Medicament yet known. § 10. Where note, That you ought to have the finest Silver, and perfectly free from any Mixture of Venus with it, if possible; for other∣wise it will excite violent Vomitings. § 11. And because the Vi∣triol of Lunae works strong∣ly in the Eduction of watery Humours in the Dropsie, you ought to corroborate the Vis∣cera, in the intervals of Ex∣hibition with Essence, Spirit or Water of Juniper-berries,
or strong Cinnamon-water, Angelica-water, the greater Composition, or Aqua Mira∣bilis, adding some few drops of Spirit of Salt to them. LIV. Vitriolum Martis, Vi∣triol of Mars or Iron. Bate.] ℞ Alcohol of Wine ℥iv. Oil of Vitriol ℥ij. keep them together in an Iron Vessel for twelve or fifteen hours, or to dryness. Dose, à gr. ij. ad vj. to open Obstructi∣ons. Salmon.] § 1. This is ex∣actly Riverius his Sal Martis, of which we have already spoken something at Sect. XXV. § 6. & 27, 28, 29, & 30. aforegoing of this Chap∣ter. § 2. But out of what has been there said, it appears that it will be best to prepare this Vitriol with equal parts of the Alcohol of Wine and Oil of Vitriol, forasmuch, as out of those equal Proportions a larger quantity of Salt does emerge. § 3. This Vitriol of Mars is an admirable Remedy for all Diseases which proceed from Stoppages, is good a∣gainst a Cachexia and Leuco∣phlegmatica, and the Obstru∣ctions of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, Mesentery, and Womb. § 4. But the Use of it (Universals being always first premised) ought to be continued for some time, as in the use of other Medica∣ments extracted from Mars; and the Dose likewise, must be inereased in thecontinuance, and that by little and little, till the Stomach seems to be displeased with it, and therefore may be given à gr. iij. ad xij. in some Con∣serve, Bolus, or Broth, or o∣ther specifick Liquor. § 5. A new Frying-pan is more proper to make it in than any other Vessel, because of its flatness, whereby the Li∣quor may the more spread it self about, and incorporate it self with the Particles of the Iron. § 6. This Vitriol or Sal, is of greater Vertue than any of the aperitive Crocus's, not only because it is acuated with the Oil of Vitriol, but because its piercing Particles, being the more soluble parts of the Iron, are separated from the more gross and ter∣rene, which will always car∣ry a Stypticity in their nature, and be a Remora to the more Aperitive principles; for which reason it is always gi∣ven in less Dose than the A∣peritive Crocus, and with much greater and more cer∣tain
Effects: but if the Dose be too large, it sometimes causes a Nauseousness, as all sorts of Vitriol do. § 7. The Spirit of Wine in the making of it serves to modarate the too great vio∣lence of the Oil of Vitriol, and to make it more subtil and penetrative, and stimu∣lates it, only to extract the more soluble Particles of the Iron, to unite with the Oil, and make a Salt. § 8. Fill the Frying-pan an Inch or better deep with the Menstruum, and leave it there about two days with∣out stirring it, so will you find all the Liquor incorpo∣rated with the Particles of the Mars, and turned into a Salt, which you must dry, then separate from the Pan, and keep in a Vial close stopt for use. § 9. From ℥xij. of the Menstruum (being made of equal Proportions) you will have ℥xv. of the Salt of Mars: which Salt being put upon a Plate of Glass or glazed Tyle, in a cold place will dissolve per Deliquium into a Liquor, which some did improperly call Oil of Mars. The Two following Preparati∣ons are added by the Translator. LV. Sal Antimonij, Zwelferi, Salt of Antimony from Zwelfer. Salmon.] § 1. It is made of that Mass which remains in the Retort after the distilla∣tion of the Butter of Antimo∣ny, and that by help of Spirit of Vinegar, a little acuated with Spirit of Nitre; and this by so much the more easily and speedily, if the said Mass be made into fine Pouder, and first, twice or thrice calcin'd with Sulphur, after the man∣ner of the Calcination of Cha∣lybs with Sulphur for the Pre∣paration of its Vitriol, by mixing an Ounce and half of Sulphur at a time, with lbj. of the Antimonial Mass: Then extracting with Spirit of Vine∣gar. the Salt will be drawn forth, and by abstracting with the Spirit there from, the sa∣line Matter will remain at bottom of a yellowish Colour, which you are to dissolve a∣again in simple fair Water, filter, and evaporate to a Cu∣ticle, and lastly in a cool moist place set it to crystallize, which diligently gather, dry, and
keep in a Glass close stopt for use. § 2. They purge gently, and are given to Infants a∣gainst Worms, which they effectually kill and bring forth; they also prevail a∣gainst the Dropsie, continual, malign, and pestilential Fe∣vers; and are famous for purifying the whole Mass of Blood, restoring the Sick mi∣raculously to their pristine Health. § 3. Zwelfer (Mantiss. Spa∣gyr. Cap. 8. pag. 838.) has another Salt of Antimony purging, made from the Vi∣trum (after the Extraction of a purging Tincture from it) after this manner. The pur∣ging Tincture. ℞ Glass of Antimony (made without any addition) q. v. put it into a small Cucurbit, and affuse thereon so much dephlegmated Oil of Vitriol, as may overtop it about two Inches: digest in a gentle Ash-heat for some days, till the Oil is imbued of a black Colour, which gently separate and keep for use. § 4. This Tincture purges pleasantly being given à gut. v. ad x. it purifies the Blood, and brings forth superfluous and tartarous Humors, kills Worms, and conduces to the Cure of Gouts and Rheuma∣tisms. § 5. From the Glass re∣maining after the extraction of the aforesaid Tincture a Sal Antimonij is thus made. ℞ The said remaining Glass, and add to it a fourth part of Sulphur beaten small, and cal∣cine it with a gentle Fire in an Earthen Pan, continu∣ally stirring it with an Iron Spatula or Rod, till the Sul∣phur is wholly burnt up: beat the remaing Mass into pouder, and again with a fourth part of Sulphur calcine it as before, which Calcination three or four times repeat: then from this Glass thus calcin'd; with Spirit of Vinegar, q.s. and by many af∣fusions of fresh Spirit, extract the Salt: abstract the Spirit of Vinegar to dryness, and the Salt will remain at bottom, which dissolve in simple Wa∣ter, filter and crystallize as aforesaid. § 6. It has all the Vertues of the former Salt, purges gently, and may be given both to Infants, and Women with Child with all security imaginable. Dose, à gr. v. ad x. in any proper Ve∣hicle. § 7. Le Febure makes the Salt much after the same manner, Of the Glass after the Extraction of the Tin∣cture, but he mingles the Vi∣trum with its equal weight
of Sulphur in Pouder, and then calcines gently (as in calcining Antimony to make the Glass thereof) stirring well the Mat∣ters till all the Sulphur is con∣sumed: this fire he makes not too intense, lest the Matter should melt, and so return to Antimony again: thus once calcin'd, he grinds it on a Por∣phyry to an Alcohol, puts it into a Matrass, and affuses thereon Spirit of Vinegar so much as to overtop it four Inches, digests in Sand for eight days, decants the Men∣struum, and affuses new, this continuing till all the Salt is extracted, these Extractions he mixes, filters, and abstracts the Spirit to a Pellicle, and crystallizes as afore-directed, or otherwise evaporates to dry∣ness: afterwards dissolves the Salt in Flegm of Vinegar, fil∣ters, evaporates, and thus con∣tinues till it is pure and white; lastly digests it in Alcohol of S. V. for fifteen days, and ab∣stracting the Spirit, keeps the Salt in a Glass close stopt for use. § 8. The same Le Febure has another way of making this Salt, which is thus. ℞ The black Matter after extraction of the Tincture from the Vi∣trum afore-mentioned, dry it in an Earthen Dish, and with∣out any other previous Calcina∣tion put it into a Matrass, upon which affuse subtil Spirit of Vinegar; digest together for many days in a gentle heat, to make an Extraction of the Salt; filter, evaporate to dry∣ness, dissolve again and depu∣rate, as in the former Prepa∣ration; then digest with Al∣cohole of S. V. for fifteen days, after which abstract the Spirit to dryness, so have you a noble Salt, not much inferi∣or to Salt of Gold. § 9. The Vertues of both these Salts are one and the same, they purifie and cleanse the Blood, and purge the Body from all the Filth, Pu∣trefaction and superfluous Humors, cure the Leprosie and French-Pox, and after a wonderful manner make the Gout to vanish: they di∣gest and evacuate as it were insensibly, and cause inward Abscesses or Apostems, to break or discuss. § 10. They have all the Vertues mentioned at § 2. above, besides which, they are said to cure all inward and outward Ulcers, and to expel and drive away all sorts of Fevers and Agues, chiefly Quartans, and such as proceed from Malignity and Putrefaction. Dose, à gr. j. ad iv. in Canary, Malemsie, Mead or Metheglin, or other proper Liquor.
LVI. Sal Vitrioli Compositum, Compound Salt of Vitriol. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Common Vi∣treol, or instead of that, Vi∣triol of Mars, dissolve in di∣stilled Rain-water, digest in a Matrass for some time, after filter this Liquor precipitate with Oil of Tartar per Deli∣quium, or Oil of Pot-ashes, decant the clear Liquor from the Feces which dry; these are the sweet Sulphur of Vitriol. The Liquor evaporate to a Pellicle, and crystallize, or o∣therwise abstract to dryness, keeping the Salt remaining at bottom, in a Glass close stopt for use. § 2. Thus you see the clear Liquor decanted after Precipitation contains in it the most pure Acid and Salt part of the Vitriol, united with the fixt Salt part of the Tartar or Pot-ashes, of which this most excellent Salt is made. § 3. And by this Operati∣on the Terrestial parts con∣cealed in the Salt of Tartar, precipitate with the Earthy parts of the Vitriol; so that by Conjunction of the Acid part of the Vitriol, with the fixt Salt of Tartar, you have a Crystalline Salt, composed of two Salts, the Effects of which are very much dif∣ferent from the Effects of the common simple Salts of Vitriol. § 4. For they are emetick, whereas this works general∣ly by Stool, and rarely pro∣vokes Vomiting; it is com∣mended as an admirable thing against intermitting Fevers or Agues, especially when there is a necessity to purge Melancholy. § 5. For the Lixiviate Salts correcting the emetick Quali∣ty of the Vitriol, which lay in its too pungent Acidity, ren∣ders this Salt in a condition only to operate by Stool or Urine: and it may with much safety be given from ʒss. ad ʒj. in any proper or specifick Vehicle.
CHAP. XI. Of LIQƲORS. I. Caudela Amygdalina, The Almond Caudle. Bate.] ℞ OF the best Ale a Quart: Spring∣water a Pint; biting Cinna∣mon ℥j. boil to the Consumpti∣on of a third part: strain, and add thereto Jordan Al∣monds cleansed (but not blanch∣ed) and bruised No 60. boil a little, and strain through a Sieve: add, of the best Loaf Sugar ℥ij. and make a Caudle. It is good for Women in Child-bed, who are troubled with a Diarrhaea or Loose∣ness. Salmon.] § 1. If you add to it Canary or White-wine ℥iv. or ℥vj. it will be so much the better, and comfort the Stomach and Bowels more. § 2. If the Woman has been much weakned, and the Flux of long continuance, you had better add to it ℥iij. of strong Cinnamon-water, leaving out the Wine; for Spirit of Wine, and all sorts of vinous Spirits, not only comfort the Bowels, but in a special manner cure a Diar∣rhaea, or any Flux of the Bowels. § 3. It may be taken ℥vj. or more at a time, three or four times a day, or as of∣ten as the sick desires it. II. Caudela Nenupharina, The Water-Lilly Caudle. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Water-Lillies ℥j. Ising-glass, raspings of Harts-horn, Ivory, White-Sanders, A. ʒij. Bistort-root ʒss. Dates No 4. Rice two Spoonfuls: Ale half a Pint; boil to the Consumption of a third part, strain, and add the Yolk and White of one Egg, and white Sugar, q. s. It is for two Doses: It pre∣vents Abortion, eases the Pain of the Back, and is of good use in a Gonorrhoea, and the Whites in Women. It is of extraordinary use, and to be given twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. If you add to it Catechu ʒjss. Nutmegs ℈j. Roch-Alum ℈ss. it will be so much the more powerful to all the Intentions for which
it is design'd; and not in the least more unpleasant. § 2. In case of a Gonor∣rhoea or the Whites, you ought to add Saccharum Sa∣turni gr. viij. strong Cinna∣mon-water ℥iij. and then it will do wonders. § 3. It is to be given twice a day, viz. the one half in the Morning fasting, the other half at Night going to Bed: and if there be great Weakness in the Genital parts, you may give the Pa∣tient gr. ij. of our Volatile Laudanum, to be taken im∣mediately before it at Night going to Bed. III. Emulsio de Avellanis, E∣mulsion of Hasle-Nuts, or Filberts. Bare.] ℞ Filberts or Hasle-Nuts, No 40. Hemp-seed, Seeds of Melons and Musk-melons, A. ℥j. Seeds of Pur∣slane ʒvj. sweet Almonds blanched No viij. bruise them all and add simple Milk-wa∣ter lbijss. red Rose-water ℥iv. Sugar-candy ℥ij. mix and strain out by Expression. Dose, Half a Pint twice a day, with the Pouder of a Deers Pizzle ʒj. against Sharpness of Urine, Gonorrhoea, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Instead of red Rose-water, in my Opi∣nion it is better to put as much Parsly or Arsmart-wa∣ter, because those Waters are confirmed by Experience to be Specificks in giving ease to Heat, Sharpness and Stoppage of Urine. § 2. But if the Pain be excited from the Sharpness of the Matter in a Gonorrhoea, it will be absolutely necessa∣ry to add to each Dose ℈j. of Sal Prunellae, and so to give it, till all the Pain and Sharp∣ness is gone. § 3. After that, to stop the Gonorrhoea (universals being premised) you may add to each Dose Antimonium Dia∣phoreticum ℈j. Roch-Alum ℈ss. Saccharum Saturni, gr. iij. and exhibiting it Morning and Evening according to use, it will not fail to answer expectation. IV. Emulsio Cathartica, A Purging Emulsion. Bate.] ℞ Carthamus seeds ℥j. best Manna ℥iij. Sweet Al∣monds blanched ℥ij. Barley-water, or Epsom-water lbij. mix and make an Emulsion, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only Cathartick, but some∣times also emetick, purging and evacuating gross, viscous and tartarous Humors, chiefly
from the Brest and Lungs, and therefore is said to be good against Asthma's Whea∣zings, Hoarseness, and Stuf∣fings of the Lungs. § 2. But by reason the Carthamus-Seeds are apt to cause Vomiting, you would do well to correct them by the addition of Mace ʒss. Cloves ℈j. Ginger, gr. xv. for by these the Windiness will be much abated. § 3. This quantity here in the Prescript may serve for three Doses in young People, and such as are weak and tender: in stronger, and such as are 12, 14, or 16. Years of Age it may be given at two Doses, that is in two days: but in very strong and rustick Bodies, it may be all drunk in one day, and then it will work very well. V. Emulsio Expulsiva, An expulsive Emulsion. Bate.] ℞ Seeds of Citrons hull'd ℥ss. bruise them and add distilled Waters of Citrons, Medesweet, Scordium Com∣pound, A. ℥iij. white Sugar ℥j. make an Emulsion, S. A. Give three Spoonfuls at a time every hour, against the Malignity of the Small-Pox, &c. to expel it. Salmon.] § 1. It seems to be too cold, to be so ordina∣rily given in the Small-Pox, Measles, &c. you would do well to add to it Tincture of equal parts of Saffron and Cochinele in rectified. S. V. ℥ss. by which means it will not be only more Cordial, but more Sudorifick, expelling the Disease thro' the Pores of the Skin, &c. § 2. At night going to Bed you may give it thus: ℞ Of this Emulsion four Spoonfuls: Of our Guttae Vitae, gut. 30. mix for a Dose, for the Patient to rest upon. § 3. The next Morning give it thus. Of this Emul∣sion four Spoonfuls: of Sylvius his Anticolick Spirit, gut. 30. mix for a Dose in the inter∣mediate parts of the day you may give it as directed with the Tincture of Saffron, &c. VI. Emulsio Creatacea, Emul∣sion of white Chalk. Bate.] ℞ Whtie Chalk in fine pouder ℥iij. Barley-water lbiij. boil to lbij. being cold add of the four greater cold Seeds, A. ʒij. sweet Almonds, No viij. Caraways ℈ss. make an Emulsion: then add
Chalk finely poudred ʒiij. Sac∣charum perlatum ℥j. or Dia∣codium ℥jss. according as need may require. Salmon.] § 1. It is cool∣ing, and abates the heat of Fevers: and by reason of its alcalious Nature will ab∣sorb Acidities in the Sto∣mach and Intestines, thereby taking away Heart-burn∣ings, Gripings, and other like Distempers of those parts. § 2. If at last to the whole quantity of the Emul∣sion you add ℥ij. of strong Cinnamon-water to take a∣way its Crudity it will be better and more grateful to the Stomach, nor in the least hurt its Alcalious Property, because it is an. Alcali it self. § 3. It may be given of∣ten in the day-time three, four or five Spoonfuls at a time; but if given at night for rest, it ought to be ei∣ther prepared with the Dia∣codium, or Diacodium ʒij. or iij. ought then to be add∣ed to it. VII. Emulsio Dactylorum, E∣mulsion of Dates. Bate.] ℞ of Dates stoned, No 15. Ale lbijss. boil them together: then beat the Dates with sweet Almonds No 24. mix all with the Ale and Express. adding Sugar-Candy and Nutmegs, of each a suffi∣cient quantity. Dose, ℥vj. thrice a day for forty or fifty days, to prevent Abortion ease the Pains of the Back, help a Gonorrhoea, cure a Consumption, Cough, Wast∣ing, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is very good in the Diseases named: but if made with equal parts of Raisons of the Sun, and drank as a constant drink for some Months, it cures an inveterate Gout be∣yond all imagination. § 2. It also prevails against Hoarsness, Wheasing, Short∣ness of Breath, and all other Stoppages of the Lungs which proceeds from viscous and tartarous Humors. § 3. If it be given against a Gonorrhoea or the Whites in Women, universals ought to be premised: and then the Emulsion it self prepared with the addition of ʒvj. of white Poppy-seed.
VIII. Emulsio Peoniata, E∣mulsion of Peony-seeds. Bate.] ℞ Peony-seeds huld ℥j. bruse them, and add di∣stilled Waters of Rue, black Cherries, of Peony compound, A. ℥vj. make an Emulsion, adding Saccharum perlatum ℥iss You may give three Spoon∣fuls of it in the Morning fasting, and as much at bed∣time; some Specifick Electu∣ary being given before-hand, against the Falling-sickness, Vertigo, Megrim, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This Medi∣cament is intended against Distempers of the Head, as is the Epilepsie, and other Diseases a-kin to it, proceed∣ing from Cold, Moisture, and too great a plenty of thick Humors. § 2. But it ought to be preceeded with some other Specifick, whether Pouder, Electuary, Spirit, or Oil; of which you may see variety in my Pharmacopoeia Londi∣nenfis, Doron Medicum, Sy∣nopsis Medicinae, Jatrica, Parateremata, Seplasium, and this present Pharmacopoeia Bateana so that no more need be said thereof. § 3. But as preparatory to all this, a proper Emetick ought to be two or three time before-hand given, that part of the Morbifick cause, which may lodge in the Sto∣mach, and other adjacent Bowels, may be evacuated, after which the Specifick E∣lectuary, &c. may be ex∣hibited with this Emulsi∣on. § 4. Though our Author prescribes it to be given but twice a day, Experience has confirmed to me, that it ought to be taken thrice a day at least, viz. Morning, Noon, and Night. § 5. If it be given to Men, you ought to per∣fume it with Musk and Am∣bergrise, because they are Specificks in the Epilepsie, adding to the whole quanti∣ty when made, gr. xij. of ei∣ther or both those Ingredients in subtil Pouder: but then you must be sure always to shake the Glass well before you pour forth the Dose. IX. Jusculum Galli, Cock-Broth. Bate.] ℞ An old Cock well wearied with running, till, he falls down; then kill him pull off his Feathers, embowel him, and stuff the Body with proper Ingredients: then boil him in Fountain-water, q. s.
for five or six hours, till the Flesh is ready to fall from the Bones, and strain out for use. It is nutritive, and restores in Consumptions, Hecticks, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Ingre∣dients with which the Body ought to be stufft are left to discretion of the Physician, which are to be ordered ac∣cording to the Constitution and Disposition of the Pa∣tient. § 2. But the most usual Composition is this follow∣ing. ℞ Savory, Hyssop, Par∣sly, Bawm, Borrage, Bugloss, A. M. j. Time, Sweet-marjo∣ram, A. M. ss. Onions ℥iv. Limon-peels ℥ss. mix and chop all small, with which stuff the Body of the Cock, after which boil him as is directed. § 3. Being boiled and strained out make it savory with Salt, and squeeze in Juice of Limon, so much as may make it grateful to the Pa∣late; for by the means of the Limon, the Broth will bet∣ter agree with the Stomach, and the Patient will be indu∣ced much the longer to con∣tinue the use of it, whereas otherwise without it, the Stomach would soon loath it. § 4. It is an excellent thing not only to restore in Con∣sumptions, but to strengthen such as are weak and faint, and such as are decayed with Age, or are emaciated and weakned through hard La∣bour, Watchings, or Grief of Spirit. § 5. It wonderfully streng∣thens a weak Back, easing the Pain thereof, and helps such as have constant Run∣nings and Weaknesses upon them, corroborating the weakned Parts: and there∣fore is commended in con∣tinued Gonorrhoea's, Gleets, Whites in Women, continual running Fistula's, &c. § 6. The Patient may drink it freely and liberally, two or three Quarts a day, with Buiscuit, or without it: but the quantity is to be pro∣portioned according as his Sto∣mach will bear it; however observe this as a general Rule, That all things given as Diets, Restoratives, or Al∣teratives, to alter or change an ill Habit of Body ought to be given in very large quanti∣ties or proportions, oftentimes taken in a day, and to be continued for a long time, o∣therwise they profit little or nothing.
X. Lac Ammoniaci, Milk of Gum Ammoniacum. Bate.] ℞ Pure Gum Ammo∣niacum ʒiij. dissolve it in cold Hyssop-water ℥vj. in a cold Mortar, S. A. It is given often a Spoonful at a time in difficulty of Breathing. Salmon.] § 1. It is ac∣counted a Specifick in Di∣seases of the Lungs, thickens thin and sharp Rheums, and takes off the roughness of Aspera Arteria, for which reason, it is good against Coughs, Hoarseness, Whea∣sings, &c. § 2. It opens Obstru∣ctions of the Liver, Spleen, and all the Bowels, and therefore is given with success against Cachexies, Dropsie, Jaundice, Gout, and Scurvy, but particularly a∣gainst Diseases of the Womb, which proceed from Obstru∣ction of the Courses, and o∣ther parts adjacent. § 3. It ought to be given (after general Remedies, and) in the Morning fasting, in White or Rhenish Wine, or some other proper Li∣quor. XI. Mixtura Anticolica, A Mixture against the Cho∣lick. Bate.] ℞ The best Manna ℥ij. Cremor Tartari, Sperma Ceti, A. ʒij. mix them. It is gi∣ven as an approved Remedy against the Cholick, in a draught of Chicken Broth. Salmon.] § 1. It purges away salt and sharp Humors which cause Gripings, mollifies the Aspera Arteria, open Ob∣structions of the Lungs, and other Bowels, purges Choler and watery Humors, and keeps the Belly soluble, be∣ing an excellent thing for such as are apt to be costive. § 2. The constant use of it for some time helps to cure Scall'd Heads in Children, and take away other rebelli∣ous Breakings out: Besides it is one of the famed Reme∣dies of the World against the Stone in Reins or Bladder, or any Obstruction of U∣rine. § 3. Some Authors affirm Manna to be flatulent, and therefore in my Opinion if you add Cardamoms ℈j. Cloves, Ginger, A. ℈ss. all in fine Pouder to the two Doses, you will do well; or in∣stead of them Oil of Cinna∣mon
or Cloves, or Juniper-berries gut. iv. which is bet∣ter. XII, Potio Alba, The white Potion. Bate.] ℞ Turpentine ℥ss. distilled Oil of Nutmegs, gut. j, White-wine ℥iv. Yolk of one Egg: Syrup of Marsh-mal∣lows ℥j. mix and make a draught, S. A. It purges well , upwards and downwards and is given a∣gainst a Gonorrhoea. Salmon.] § 1. It ought to be Venice or Strasburg Tur∣pentine; for the common is too course and foul, and the Cypress and Chio, of too thick a Body, so that it does not easily dissolve. § 2. The quantity of White-wine is too little by one half at least; you can∣not well make up the Medi∣cine with less than 8 or 10 Ounces of the Liquor: or instead of White-wine you may use any other Specifick Vehicle. § 3. It is a Specifick against the Gonorrhoea in Men, and the Whites in Women, or any wasting or pain in the Back, or other weakness which accompanies such like Distempers. § 4. It prevails also against the Cholick, Pain and Sharp∣ness or Heat of Urine, and is really a good thing against the Stone, Gravel, Sand, or any tartarous Matter obstru∣cting those parts: in which cases you may make it with Parsly, Arsmart, or Onion-water, or with Rhe∣nish-wine. XIII. Potio Febrifuga, A Po∣tion against Fevers. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Worm∣wood ℈ij. Spirit of Sulphur ℈j. Cichory-water ℥iv. mix them. It is given before the Pa∣roxism or Fit, sweating upon it. Salmon.] § 1. Before these saline Antifebriticks are gi∣ven, Universals ought to be premised to carry off the the chief of the Morbifick Matter lying in the Stomach, Bowels and first Passages, and these ought to be either E∣meticks or Catharticks, or both. § 2. My reason for this is, because these immediately en∣ter into the Blood, and forth∣with cause an alteration in the Sanguinous Juice and other Humors: Now being apt to dissolve all Matters or Sub∣stances they meet with whe∣ther Morbifick or other, and to mix with them, they car∣ry
that diseasie Matter into the Blood with them, and so make the latter end of that Person worse than the begin∣ning. § 3. For thereby the whole Mass of Blood, and other Juices of the Body are con∣taminated at once, and that mischief is done, which by a long course of Medicines cannot be easily retrieved a∣gain, which by due Evacua∣tions at first, would be infal∣libly prevented: and this is the general failure of those who use these Medicines without Skill, Judgment, and due Precaution. XIV. Potio Hydropica, A Potion against the Drop∣sie. Bate.] ℞ Generous White∣wine ℥iv. Syrup of Buckthorn ℥ij. Sal Prunellae ʒj. mix and make a Potion. May∣hern. Salmon.] § 1. If Sena ʒj. be before-hand infused in the White-wine, it will work much better in all Hydropi∣cal Cases, for Sena acuates and stirs up the Vertues of he Buckthorn admirably be∣yond any other thing. § 2. The quantity of the White-wine is two little; you oht to take ℥vj. of it to make the Composition, add∣ing ʒij. of bruised Liquorice, because this Ingredient al∣ways makes Catharticks work without pain. § 3. It opens Obstructions of the Bowels, and carries off those Humors which cause Gripings, illness at Stomoch, Faintings, &c. and it is of singular use against the King's-Evil, Tettars, Ring-worms, and all sorts of breakings out proceeding from salt and sharp Hu∣mors. XV. Potia Pleuritica, A Po∣tion against the Pleuri∣sie. Bate.] ℞ Juice expressed from Horse-dung, by mixing with it White-wine, A. ℥ij. Syrup of Corn-poppies ℥j. Pouder of Olibanum ʒss. distilled Oil of Nutmegs, gut. iij. mix and make a Potion; to be taken three or four times a day af∣ter Blood-letting. Salmon.] § 1. There ought to be ℥vj. of the White-wine, for thereby the Juice of the Horse-dung will be the bet∣ter extracted, and it will serve instead of a Vehicle to take the Medicine in; for o∣therwise you mu give it in some other fit Liquor.
§ 2. Or you may make a compound Menstruum thus. ℞ White-wine, Onion-water, Water of Winter-Cherries or Poppies, A. ℥ij. mix them, to extract the Juice out of two Ounces of Horse-dung: which ought also to be Stone-Horse-dung, and newly made. § 3. It is not only an ex∣cellent thing against the Pleu∣risie: but also approved a∣gainst the Cholick and Gri∣pings of the Guts, Stitches in the Sides, and Stone or Gravel in Reins or Bladder, and all sorts of Stoppages of Urine whatsoever. XVI. Ptisana Cathartica, A Cathartick or Purging Ptisan. Bate.] ℞ Choice Sena freed from Stalks, Husks, Cods; Li∣quorice, Coriander-seeds, A. ℈j. boiling Fountain-water ℥vj. or viij. make an Infusion by di∣gesting threehours: then strain out the clear. It is an ad∣mirable Medicament because of its delicate Operation: it seldom fails to move the Belly five or six times. Salmon.] § 1. There ought to be of the three first Ingre∣dients ʒss. and if the Medi∣cine is to be given to a strong Body less than a ʒj. of Sena will not do; and sometimes in Bodies very hard to work upon, I have made an Infu∣sion of ʒij. of Sena for one single Dose. § 2. It is a general Pur∣ger, and is said to purge all sorts of Humors (chiefly that which is uppermost) and that in all sorts of Per∣sons. § 3. Let it be given in the Morning fasting, and if the Dose works not in three hours, let it be repeated a∣gain, for in such cases it is without danger. § 4. Note, The Digestion ought to be made in a gentle heat, so as to keep the Li∣quor scalding hot, and to be continued for three or four hours at least. XVII. Serum Aluminatum. Whey made with Alum, or Alumed Whey. Bate.] Alum ʒiij. Milk lbiv. boil a little that a Whey may be made; add Sugar ℥iv. clarifie with the Whites of Eggs, S. A. If you would have it emetick, boil the ʒiij. of Alum in ℥viij. of Milk, making the Serum as before. It is to be exhibited before the Febrile Paroxism.
Salmon.] § 1. The Alum ought to be Roch-Alum: the Milk new made, and which has not stood long, if hot from the Cow so much the better: The Whey ought to be clarified before the go∣ing in of the Sugar, if you use trebble refined Loaf Su∣gar; but if a coarser sort of Sugar, then after. § 2. If made with the greater quantity of Milk it vomits not, for it is all to be taken at times, but before the coming of the Fit, and its effects are much like that of the Cortex, being very styptick. § 3. But in my Opinion, the lesser quantity ought to be given twice or thrice, some hours before as many Fits of the Ague, because it powerfully provokes Vo∣miting, and admirably car∣ries off the offending Mat∣ter; after which you may with more safety and cer∣tainty give the Medicine in the larger Dose, and with as good Effects as you can desire. XVIII. Serum Hepaticum, A Whey for the Li∣ver. Bate.] ℞ Fumitory, Suc∣cory, Endive, A. M. iij. Li∣verwort, M. ij. Agrimony, Sorrel, Harts-tongue, Borrage, Bugloss, A. M. j. Caraway-seeds ʒj. being bruised, put upon them, Whey (made the common way from Milk) lbiij. strain out by Expression, and sweeten with white Sugar ℥iij. clarifying it, S. A. Dose, a Pint at a time twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. Here is six∣teen Handfuls of the Herbs to lbiij. of the Whey, which is too little if used only to wash out the Juice: it ought indeed to be nearly the double quantity; which when the Juice of the Herbs is expres∣sed out with it, is to be clari∣fied with the Whites of Eggs by boiling. § 2. Being clarified you ought to sweeten it with double or trebble refined Loaf Sugar ℥jx. (for ℥iij. to the half quantity will not make it sweet e∣nough.)
§ 3. It opens Obstructi∣ons of the Liver, cools and strengthens it, and allays vio∣lent heats, and the preterna∣tural Fermentations of the Blood and Humors; and therefore is good to be given to Children and young Peo∣ple in the Spring time; and helps such as have the Ric∣kets. § 4. It is also a singular An∣tiscorbutick, and good for such as are troubled with Botches, Boils, Itchings, and other Breakings out, in a hot Constitution of Body. Dose, a Pint three or four times a day. XIX. Serum Scorbuticum. A Whey against the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Suc¦cory and Sorrel, A. M. xij. Fir-tops, Scurvy-grass, Water-cresses, A. M. iv. Coriander-seeds ℥j. being bruised, add to them the Juice of Oranges ℥iv. Common Whey of Milk lbiv. white Sugar ℥ij. clarifie S. A. Dose, a Pint twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. Here is thirty eight Handfuls of the Herbs to two Quarts of Whey, which is nothing near e∣nough to wash out the Juice; less than five Quarts of Whey will not do, to do it as it should be done. § 2. The Juice of Oranges (which are to be Sevil) also is too little for that proporti∣on of Herbs ℥xvj. is the least quantity that you can put in, which I would avise to have added after the Juice is ex∣tracted or washed out with the Whey. § 3. The Juice of the Herbs being extracted out with the Whey, and the Juice of the Oranges added, clarifie the whole with the Whites of three or four Eggs; and afterwards while warm dulcifie it with trebble refi∣ned Loaf Sugar ℥jx. or x. and keep it for use. § 4. You may take a Pint of it at a time in the Morn∣ing fasting: a Pint an hour or something better before Dinner: a Pint about four or five in the Afternoon: and a Pint at Night going to Bed: if the Patient refuses it in so large a quantity, let it be given only Morning, Noon, and Night, about three quar∣ters of a Pint at a time, or according to the Age. Con∣dition and Circumstances of the Patient.
XX. Serum de Sedo, Whey of Housleek. Bate.] ℞ Juice of com∣mon Housleek lbj. Milk lbij. boil them together, and make a Whey, S. A. Dose, a Pint or a Quart in a day. Its chief use is in Cholerick Fevers, to quench Thirst, re∣press the Heat, &c. Salmon.] § 1. If to the Whey when made you add Juice of Sevil Oranges ℥ij. and double refined Sugar ℥iss. it will be pleasanter, and more fit for the occasion. § 2. Besides the Uses men∣tioned by our Author, it may be given in all sorts of burn∣ing and malignant Fevers; but before the use of it in the beginning of the Disease, I should advise an Emetick to be once or twice given. § 3. It is said to kill Worms, and being used for some time (without the Juice of Oranges) to stop hot Fluxes, cool the Reins, and stay the Whites in Women. XXI. Serum Sinapinum, Mu∣stard-seed Whey. Bate.] ℞ Milk lbij. heat it, and add Mustard new made, three Spoonfuls, so as to make a clear Whey, which strain out for one Dose, or time. It is a singular thing against a Cough, Asthma, &c. Let it be drank at Bed-time warm, and so likewise in the Morning fasting for three or four days. Salmon.] § 1. The Medi∣cine is of thin parts, and a good opener of Obstructions, and therefore may very well be good against Asthma's, Wheasings, Hoarseness, and Shortness of Breath. § 2. It purges by Urine, and opens Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder; and be∣ing continued for twenty days or more, is said to pre∣vail against a Dropsie. § 3. Outwardly used, it allays Inflamations, and by bathing with it hot, gives ease in the most vehement Pains of the Gout, more especially, if you dissolve in it ʒij. of Salt of Tartar, applying Cloths wet in the same, over the part afflicted.
CHAP. XII. Of WINES. I. Succi Scorbutici, Wine of the Antiscorbutick Juices. Bate.] ℞ OF the Juices of both sorts of Scurvy-grass, Brook-lime, Wa∣ter-cresses, A. ℥xvj. Juice of Oranges ℥xx. white Sugar ℥xij. mix them, and pass them of∣ten through Hippocrates his Sleeve, till the whole becomes of a Rubicund clearness, like to Red or Claret-wine. It may be kept long, if reposed in Glass Bottles, and will be of a very grateful Taste. Dose, a Spoonful at a time in e∣very draught of Ale: or ℥iv. of it at a time, twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. It will not become clear and rubicund till it has past a Fermentati∣on, and then it needs only to settle, and to be drawn off the Feces into Bottles, and it will be a kind of Wine of the Juices of those Plants. § 2. It is possible it might ferment without the Sugar, but the Fermentation will be better and sooner absol∣ved, if the Sugar be put in∣to the Juices at first: after fermentation, upon the bot∣tling of the Wine, you ought to put a small Knives point full of double refined Sugar, and a Clove slit in twon, into each Bottle. § 3. It is prevalent not only against the Scurvy, but all such as are a-kin to it, which proceed from an acid, viscous and tartarous Matter, obstructing the Bowels, or any of their Passages, as Ca∣tarrhs, Rheumatisms, Gouts, Scorbutic Cholicks, &c. II. Vinum Arthriticum, A Wine against the Gout. Bate.] ℞ Sarsaparilla, Gua∣jacum, A. ℥j. Viscus Querci∣nus ʒvj. dryed Leaves of Ger∣mander, Ground-Pine, Sage, A. ℥iij. Cowslip-flowers, Flow∣ers of Rosemary, of Lilly con∣vally, A. ℥ss. Hypericon ʒvj. White-wine lbx. infuse all three days, then strain out. Dose, ℥ij. twice a day for thirty or forty days together, after the use of the Wine in the next Section.
Salmon.] § 1. If you add to the Composition Burdock-roots bruised ℥ij. Goutwort, Roots of Master-wort bruised, A. ℥j. Herb frankincense ℥ss. it will certainly be so much the better. § 2. If to the White-wine lbx. you add Spirit of Wine lbj. the Menstruum will not only be the more able to draw forth the Vertue of the Ingredients; but the Wine it self will afterwards keep longer and better. § 3. It prevails not only against the Gout, but also a∣gainst Rheumatisms, and o∣ther Pains and Weaknesses of the Limbs and Joints: It is also good against Catarrhs, and all cold and moist Di∣seases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, Universals be∣ing premised for some time, or the use of the following Wine. III. Vinum Arthriticum pur∣gans, A Purging Gout-wine. Bate.] ℞ China, Sarsa∣parilla. A. ℥ij. Polypody ℥iij. Rhubarb, Sena, A. ℥j. Hog∣lice ʒvj. Cloves ʒj. White-wine lbvj. Infuse S. A. and strain. Dose, ℥iv. daily for eight days, Spring and Fall. Salmon] § 1. This is a good thing as it is, but to make it more effectual to all intententions you ought to add these following things: Jalap, Turbeth, Hermodacts, Scammony, A. ʒvj. all being in gross Pouder. § 2. You ought also to augment the quantity of the Menstruum, thus: White-wine lbjx. Spirit of Wine lbj. for by the addition of the Spirit, the Menstruum will be both acuated the better to extract the Vertues of the Ingredients; and when made, it will keep the longer. § 3. Thus prepared it will be a specifick Cathartick a∣gainst the Gout, and Rheu∣matism or Running-Gout; and withal, it will purge all Humors from all parts of the Body, and prevail against most Chronick diseases, as the Green-sickness in Vir∣gins, universal Obstructions Dropsies, Jaundice, French-Pox, &c. § 4. You may if you please give it thus. ℞ Of th Wine ℥iij. or ℥iiiss. Syrup  Roses purging ℥j. mix for Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting, for several days together.
IV. Vinum Chalybeatum, Steel∣ed Wine. Bate.] ℞ Crude Mars ℥viij. Roots of Eryngo, Elecampane, A. ℥jss. yellow Sanders ℥j. ras∣pings of Ivory, red Coral in Pouder, A. ʒvj. Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Ginger, A. ʒiij. Ceterach or Spleenwort, Flow∣ers of Rosemary, of Broom Epithymum, A. pug. ij. White-wine lbvj. digest all in B. M. for eight days, often shaking it: being settled, filter and keep it for use. Dose, three Spoonfuls to six, &c. every Morning for twenty, thirty, &c. days, against the Green-sickness, Droposie, Jaundice, Obtructions of the Terms, Quartan Agues, &c. Salmon.] § 1. That is, take Horse Shooe-nails, Hob-nails, or the like old Iron; but you need not be confined to the quantity, for you may put in a Pound or two, or more of them as you please your self. § 2. I disapprove of the Ivory and red Coral; for being fixt Allies they will destroy the Acid of the Wine which is the principal Instru∣ment for drawing forth the internal Property of the Mars; do but once destroy that, and the Medicament will not be a quarter so good. § 3. It is better to be made cold than in any digestion; for a hot digestion will turn the Wine wholly into Vine∣gar, and as it is without be∣ing made Vinegar, it has A∣cid enough to do the work withal: if you do it in a cold digestion, it ought to stand eight Weeks at least; and if eight Months it will be so much the more effectual shaking the Bottle once a day: after the first Month add to the Composition Spirit of Wine lbj. by which after the Body of the Mars has been opened by the former digestion, it will be now acuated more powerfully to extract the Tincture. V. Vinum Ephracticum, A Wine opening Obstructi∣ons. Bate.] ℞ Live Earth∣worms, having a red Circle on their Necks, No 24. bruise them in a Marble Mortar with Currants cleansed ℥iv. adding Rhenish-wine lbiij Cry∣stal Minerall (dissolved in the Wine) ℥ss. strain, and make it very limpid and pure, by often passing it through Hip∣pocrates his Sleeve. Dose ℥iij. thrice a day, with Aqua Cin∣namomi
hordeata ℥j. It is a noble Diuretick. Salmon.] § 1. It is a nasty unpleasing Medicine, and doubtful whether it has the Vertues ascribed to it, far∣ther than what is given to it by the Wine and Crystal Mineral. § 2. In my Opinion, it is better to make the Wine ex∣actly without the Worms, adding to it Horse-raddish∣root scraped or bruised ℥jss. and then drying the Worms gently. to reduce them into pouder, of which ʒj. may be taken at a time in the Morning fasting, drinking two or three Ounces, or more of the Wine either alone, or mixt with a Glass of Ale. § 3. Made after this Me∣thod, it is really deobstru∣ctive, and purges by Urine very well, prevailing against Stone, Gravel, and other tartarous Matters obstruct∣ing the Passages of the U∣rine, as also against Stop∣pages of the Stomach, Li∣ver, Spleen, Womb, &c. VI. Vinum Hippocraticum; Artificial Wine, or Hippo∣cras. Bate.] ℞ Cloves, Ginger, A. ℥j. Cinnamon, Nutmegs, A. ℥ij. bruise them, and add Spanish Wine or Canary lbxij. white Sugar lbiijss. mix with new Milk lbijss. let them stand twenty four hours, then strain: to which add one Limon thin sliced, and two tender sprigs of Rosemary; often passing it thro' Hippocrates his Sleeve, till it becomes clear. Dose, ℥iij. vel iv. in Languors or Faintings. Salmon.] § 1. You may see several other Prescripts of Hippocras in our Doron Medi∣cum, Lib. 1. Cap. 24. Sect. 40. and 41. and Lib. 2. Cap. 15. Sect. 4. and 5. which you may at your own leisure view, and compare with this. § 2. If you add white Pepper ʒss. it will make the Composition more grateful to the Stomach. And for such as love Perfumes, you may add also Musk-seed ℥ss. which digest with the other things.
§ 3. It is a singular Cor∣dial, good against fainting and swooning Fits, and for such as have a cold and weak Stomach, or are trou∣bled with Belchings, Gripings, Wind, and the like. VII. Vinum Hydropicum, A Wine against the Drop∣sie. Bate.] ℞ Our blett Flow∣er-de-luce Roots ℥j. Elecam∣pane, Squills prepared, A. ℥ss. Horehound, M. j. Bark of the Roots of Elder and dwarf El∣der, A. ℥j. Sena ℥jss. Agrick ʒij. Ginger ʒj. White-wine lbiv. infuse all and strain ac∣cording to Art. Or thus. ℞ Ashes of Broom and Juni∣per, A. ℥j. Rhenish-wine lbiij. mix and make a Lixivium, to which add, of our blew Flower-de-luce Roots ℥jss. in∣ner Bark of the Roots of Elder and dwarf Elder, A. ℥j. Bark of Amaradulcis ℥ss. Rhubarb ʒij. Mechoacan ℥ss. Sena ℥j. Caraways-seeds ʒvj. Bark of Sassafras, and Winters Cin∣namon, A. ℈iv. infuse warm for a night, strain and add white Sugar ℥iv. Damask Rose-Leaves, M. ij. let them stand a little while, and strain a∣gain. Dose, ℥iij. &c. every Morning for some days. Salmon.] § 1. I should like the Composition much bet∣ter thus. ℞ Blew Flower-de-luce Roots, Sena, A. ℥ij. in∣ner Bark of the Roots of El∣der and dwarf Elder A. ℥jss. Turbeth, Mechoacan, A. ℥j. Jallap ℥ss. Juniper-berries ℥iij. White or Rhenish Wine lbvij. Spirit of Wine lbiss. mix, digest four or five days, strain, and sweeten with Sy∣rup of Damask Roses lbj. mix well, and keep it for use. § 2. I add the Spirit of Wine in this Composition, that the Menstruum may have the greater power to draw forth the resinous parts of the Turbeth, Mechoacan and Jallap, which the simple Wine of it self would scarce∣ly be able to do. § 3. It is singular against the Dropsie, and all sorts of watery Humors wheresoever scattered through the whole Body, which it evacuates, very gently, and yet per∣forms its work almost to a Miracle: it is good also a∣gainst the Scurvy, King's-Evil, and other inveterate and rebellious Diseases.
VIII. Vinum Scelotyrbicum, Wine against the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Sorrel, Brook∣lime, and Water-cresses, Gar∣den Scurvy-grass, A. M. iij. Roots of Elecampane, of our blew Flower-de-luce, Horse-Raddish, A. ℥iss. Seeds of Scurvy-grass ℥j. White-wine lbiv. digest all for two days, then strain out. The Title shews the Vertues. Salmon.] § 1. You may add to the Recipe Garden Cresses, Rocket, A. M. j. Roots of Masterwort, Win∣ter Cinnamon, A. ʒiss. where∣by the Medicine will be made the more Stomatick. § 2. And to the Menstruum it will be necessary to add Spirit of Wine ℥vj. or ℥viij. to acuate it, and make it more powerful for Extracti∣on. § 3. It is singular good against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Jaundice, and Gout: it warms the Stomach, and alters a cold Habit of Body, destroy∣ing the Root of that Matter which breeds viscous and tarous Humors. It pro∣vokes Urine and the Terms, and expels Sand, Gravel, and Stones out of the Reins, Ureters, and Bladder. Dose, ℥iij. or iv. twice a day, either alone, or in a Glass of Ale. IX. Vinum Viperinum, Vi∣per Wine. Bate.] ℞ Live Female Vipers, gathered in the Spring time, No vj. best Spanish wine, or Canary lbvj. digest them (the Vessel being stopt) with∣out heat for six Months, then strain out for use. Some make it by digesting the Vi∣pers excoriated (and casting away the Bowels, Heads and Tails) in the Wine afore na∣mod for some days. It is a most celebrated thing against the Lepra Grecorum, or Le∣prosie, the Elephantiasus, Bar∣reness Plague &c. and prolongs Life. Dose, ℥iij. or ℥iv. twice a day for some considerable time. Salmon.] § 1. The way of making it is explicated more at large in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 1. Cap. 24. Sect. 39. with its Vertues and Uses, to which you are refer∣red. § 2. In weak and con∣sumptive Habits of Body; you may exhibit it thus. ℞ Of this Wine ℥iiiss. Con∣fectio Alkermes ʒj. Tincture of Cinnamon ʒss. or in place thereof Oil of Cinnamon, gut. j. or ij. mix for a Dose, to
be given first in the Morn∣ing fasting, and last at Night going to bed. § 3. Or thus, in an ex∣tream Consumption, or an Impotency. ℞ Of this Wine ℥iij. Salt of Ox-flesh, gr. vj. Milk-water ℥iv. mix for a Dose, to be given Morning and Evening. CHAP. XIII. Of VINEGARS. I. Acetum Mellis; Vinegar of Honey. Bate.] ℞ Honey lbj. of the best Vinegar lbiij. distil in Sand, and re∣ctifie. Besides it other Uses, it is said to dissolve Stones without any preceding Cal∣cination. Salmon.] § 1. But there is a simple Vinegar made of Honey without distillation, which according to Le Fe∣bure, is thus. ℞ Honey lbj. depurated Rain-water lbviij. boil to the Consumption of one half, scumming it well: when it is cooled, put into it a Nodule containing the follow∣ing things, Seeds of Sumach grosly beaten lbj. leave the Cask in a warm Room, if it be Winter, or expose it to the heat of the Sun, if it be Sum∣mer, till the Liquor has done fermenting or working, so will it by degrees, slowly turn into good Vinegar; which may be distilled as the former for the same Ʋses. § 2. It is an excellent Menstruum for the dissolving of Pebble-stones, and all o∣ther things, tho' not calcin'd before; and this is that Vine∣gar which Quercetan calls in his Writings, Philosophical Vinegar; and in the same Writings he often intends Honey, under the appellati∣on of Dew or Heavenly Man∣na. § 3. This simple Vinegar Le Mort makes after this man∣ner. ℞ Honey lbj. common Water lbx. boil them to a Con∣sumption of a fourth part; being cooled, add sowre Leven of Bread, q. s. viz. about the bigness of half a small Egg; let them ferment toge∣ther
in the Sun, (or for want of it in some other warm place, or a very gentle Sand-heat:) the Fermentation being ab∣solved, add the follow things. ℞ Fresh or dry Rape, or the Pressings of Grapes lbiiss. sowre Leven of Bread ℥iss. or ℥ij. Roots of Pyrethrum, and Gin∣ger, or long Pepper ʒij. mix all these things together in one Mass, and put them in the middle of the Rape: then to facilitate the Work, let two like Vessels be furnished with this Mixture: to these in one Vessel affuse the Liquor, macerating together for twenty four hours; then pour the Li∣quor into the other Vessel ha∣ving the Species in it; and digest as before for twenty four hours; then pour off the Li∣quor again into the first Vessel, the Materials therein being grown hot, and repeat this work so long, till you find it acid enough. § 4. Where Note, 1. That to accelerate this Operation, you may moisten the Ingre∣dients, with a little Wine-Vinegar, and digest them to∣gether, till they grow hot of themselves, and then affuse thereon the Liquor: and this Commixtion being placed in a warm place, or the Sun, not absolutely close covered, nor yet absolutely open, and so kept for a while becomes Vinegar of its own ac∣cord. § 5. If this Work be done in a Vessel which has had be∣fore-hand S. V. in it; or if a little S. V. be added to it, your Vinegar will be the stronger, and the Work will the sooner be done. 6. That every fourteen days you ought to renew your Bag of Species; and ever twenty four hours to shift the Liquor of one Vessel into another, that it may grow hot or warm, so that having the one Vessel full, the other will always alternately be empty. 4. From the Vinegar of Ho∣ney thus made, you may make the distilled Vinegar of Honey of our Author. II. Acetum Pestilentiale, Vine∣gar against the Plague. Bate] ℞ Roots of Ange∣lica, Zedoary, A. ℥j. Juniper-berries ℥ij. Rue, M. iij. best Wine Vinegar lbiij. mix, digest, and strain. It is used for a Fume; and to wah and gargle the Mouths and Throats of such as are assault∣ed with the Plague.
Salmon.] § 1. If Camphire ʒij. fine Pouder of Bay-ber∣ries, and Winters Cinnamon, A. ʒss. Spirit of Wine ℥viij. be added; the Medicine will be much more spiritous and effectual to the Purposes in∣tended. § 2. For preservation, let it be smelt to, or drawn up the Nostrils every Morning; thrice a day let the Mouth be washt therewith; and e∣very Morning fasting let one or two Spoonfuls of it be ta∣ken in a Glass of Sack; or in two Spoonfuls of our Sy∣rupus Nephriticus which is al∣so a Specifick against the Plague. § 3. For Cure, it is to be given in all that the Sick drinks, making the drink pleasantly sharp; and if it be Broth, give it therewith, to a grateful Acidity. III. Oxysaccharum Emeti∣cum. A sugared Vomiting Vinegar. Bate.] ℞ Glass of Antimo∣ny in fine Pouder ℥j. of the best Vinegar lbj. digest in B.M. (often stirring it) for twenty four hours: strain out filter, and add the best white Sugar ℥viij. boil to a Syrup. Dose, ad ℥j. or more. Salmon.] § 1. You may put in a Quart of Vinegar, (which ought to be of White-wine) at a time, often stir∣ring or shaking of the Bottle in which it is put: and it is best to let the Vinegar stand upon the Pouder all the time, till you have spent the quantity, pouring it off, on∣ly as you have occasion to use it. § 2. Of this Vinegar you may give ad ʒvj. or more, sweet∣ning it with some proper Sy∣rup, or dissolving ʒij. or iij. of double refined Sugar in it, and so giving it in the Morning fasting. § 3. It is a famed thing a∣gainst all sorts of Agues, whe∣ther Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan, and seldom fails to cure them, if given by a skilful Hand: it ought not to be given in the Fit, but on the day the Fit is not, or otherwise so many hours be∣fore the coming of the Fit, as that the working of it may be fully over; and to be re∣peated two, three, or four times as need shall be: after which you ought to exhibit the Cortex in Pouder, à ʒj. ad ʒij. every day for twelve or fourteen days together, not purging after it.
§ 4. It is good also against weakness and illness of the Stomach pain of the Stomach, Soorbutick Cholick, indige∣stion and want of Appetite, evacuating both upwards and downwards all those tenaci∣ous, viscous and tartarous Humors in the Ventricle and Bowels, which are the Cause of almost infinite Di∣seases. § 5. When this quantity of Vinegar is spent, you may affuse the like quantity again, repeating the same almost ad infinitum, so vast∣ly diffussive is the wonderful and admirable Power and Vertues of this Mineral. Added by the Translator. IV. Acetum Terebinthinatum, vel Radicatum Crollij, Ra∣dicate Vinegar of Crol∣lius. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Of Tur∣pentine lbij. or iij. Spirit of Wine Vinegar lbij. mix and distil according to Art in Sand, at first with a gentle heat, un∣til the Vinegar with the Spi∣rit of Turpentine become forth; afterwards increase the Fire, and a yellow Oil will come forth and a sharp red Water; when the red Oil begins to come forth, then cease the Work: Separate the Spirit of Turpentine and Oil from the Vinegar, by a separatory, and rectifie the Vinegar, alone by it self. § 2. This distilled Spirit of Turpentine being often re∣ctified may be kept, and af∣terwards joined with most strong Vinegar, or Spirit of Vinegar, and used for the like Operations of dissolving as the former; but the for∣mer is accounted the stron∣ger and better. § 3. Hartman makes it thus. ℞ Turpentine, White-wine Vinegar, A. lbiij. put them into a Retort, and di∣stil in Ashes or Sand, till the red Oil arises, then change the Receiver, separate the Oil of Turpentine from the Vine∣gar, and rectifie the Vinegar alone with Ginger: but a little before this, he advises to distil in Ashes making a Cohoba∣tion; by which in three times, the Vinegar will be made sweet, and not at all tart; yet of great force in dissolving all sorts of preci∣ous Stones. § 4. Spirit of Vinegar may also be made radicate, and more strong if it be distilled a new upon Sal Armoniack according to Marggrave.
§ 5. The Uses of the Te∣rebinthinated or radicate Vi∣negar (which should always be ready prepared in good quantities) is for the dissolu∣tion of all sorts of Stones, chiefly precious Stones, of which Crollius and Hartman make much mention. And it is used by Paracelsus against Diseases of the Stone, by gi∣ving it in a proper or speci∣fick Vehicle. V. Acetum Radicatum Hart∣manni Harman's Radi∣cate Vinegar. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Of the best Honey p. j. River-water p. viij. boil till half be con∣sumed; set it to ferment as Mead or Metheglin: then put this into a fit Vessel, and by a hole on the top, hang a Linnen Bag of Rocket-seed of a convenient quantity, and leave it in a hot place, or set it in the Sun, that it may be hot, so will it be converted into sharp Vinegar. § 2. From this either alone, or mixt with an equal quan∣tity of Turpentine distil a very sharp or radicate Spirit, according to the former Me∣thod. § 3. This in like manner, as the other will dissolve Flints, and other Stones also, without any preceeding Cal∣cination; and is also profi∣table for many other uses. § 4. Where note, That if it has power to dissolve such hard Substances without Cal∣cination; it has much more power to do the same, if they have passed such a pre∣paratory Operation of the Fire.
CHAP. XIV. Of INFƲSIONS. I. Rosa Solis, The Infusion of Ros Solis. Bate.] ℞ FResh Rosa Solis, or Sun-dew, M. iv. Nutmegs, Aniseeds, Co∣riander, Red Roses dryed, A. ℥ss. Galangal, Ginger, Cloves, A. ʒij. Liquorice ℥j. Cardamoms, Zedoary, Grains of Paradice, Calamus, Aromaticus, A. ʒss. yellow Sanders ʒj. red Sanders, Cinnamon, A. ʒvj. best Aqua Vitae lbvj. infuse for some days, then strain thro' Hippo∣crates his Sleeve, and add of the best white Sugar ℥xij. It is good against a Phthisis or Consumption of the Lungs, a Tabes or Pining, &c. It comforts the Heart, Liver, and Ventricle; eases the Pain of the Head, and is a preservative from the Plague, &c. Dose, ʒij, iij, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Nut∣megs ought to be grated; the other Spices, Seeds, Roots and Woods, to be reduced into a gross Pouder, and then all put into the Aqua Vitae. § 2. The digestion ought to be in a very gentle Sand-heat, for at least fourteen or twenty days; a much shorter time will not be sufficient to draw forth the Vertue of the Ingredients. § 3. If the Aq. Vitae be accuated with Oil of Sul∣phur ʒiij. or iv. It will make it the more powerful to do the work of Extraction, and it will be done in a great deal less time. § 4. It is a singular Cor∣dial, good against fainting and swooning Fits, palpita∣tion of the Heart, Vapors, Wind, illness of the Spleen, Pain and Griping of the Guts, sickness at Heart and Stomach, and other Diseases of like kind. § 5. There is another Com∣position of this Medicament in other Proportions which you may see in our Phar∣macopoeia Londinensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Sect 36. and two others in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 1. Cap. 24. Sect. 16. & 17. in which places you have their various Vertues and Uses.
II. Infusio Aperiens, The o∣pening Infusion. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Elder, Tops of Broom, A. pug. iij. The lesser Centory, pug. ij. Tops of common Wormwood, Ca∣momil Flowers, A. pug. j. Wa∣ters of Pennyroyal, of Hyssop, of Mint, of Raddishes com∣pound, A. ℥iv. infuse all warm for two hours; strain out, and add Tincture of Saf∣fron ℥ss. Syrup of the Juice of Oranges ℥iss. mix them. Dose, six Spoonfuls twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. This is no mighty Arcanum, and so much the worse, because the Men∣struum is so weak: If you accuate it with Sal Prunellae or Salt of Tartar ʒij. or iij. it will not only be more powerful for Extraction but the Infusion, will be much a greater aperitive in its Ope∣ration. § 2. It opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Hypo¦chonders, Womb and Reins; is a good Stomatick, and prevails against the Scurvy Dropsie, Jaundice, Gout and Rheumatism. § 3. You may take it for eight or ten days or more three times a day, viz. in the Morning fasting, an hour before Dinner; and last at Night going to Bed. Dose, six Spoonfuls to twelve or more. III. Infusio Arthritica, The Gout Infusion. Bate.] ℞ Rosemary-flowers lbj. Votatile Sal Armoniack ℥j. Alcohol of S. V. lbvj. digest in a Matrass, Bolt head or Glass Bottle well stopt, in Horse-dung, for forty days: then set it in the Sun for twenty days, and express out. It is applied in the declination of the Gout: It wonderfully extracts or draws forth the Cold, thick and flatulent Humors in the Joints, and strengthens them. Salmon.] § 1. If you add Camphire ℥iij. you will make the Medicament much the better for the Intention, and it will become a Specifick in that Disease, being bathed upon the part two or three times a day. § 2. But besides the out∣ward use of it, it ought to be used inwardly twice or thrice a day, giving about half a Spoonful of it at a time in a Glass of Ale or Canary. § 3. I have known it cure also the Cholick and Griping of the Guts to a Miracle, and that almost in a moment, even while I have stood by my
Patient and seen it admini∣stred, and that after many Weeks tryal of many other things, and when all others had failed; nor do I know scarcely any other thing in the World better against a Rheumatism. § 4. In the making of it, it will be best to have a double Vessel well luted in the Juncture, for otherwise you will very difficultly keep it in any heat without break∣ing: And without a double Vessel, you must be obliged to make the digestion in a cold place. IV. Infusio Benedicta, The blessed Infusion. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Poly∣pody of the Oak, Turbeth, the best Sena, A. ℥vj. Caraways ℥j. White-wine lbxij. the Vessel being stopt close, macerate them upon warm Ashes for twenty four hours, strain, and to the Colature add of the best Manna, Syrup of Roses with Agarick, Sugar, A. lb.j. then clarifie with whites of Eggs, S. A. It brings forth Choler, Flegm and Melancholy, from the Head, Stomach, and o∣ther parts, after an admira∣ble manner, and that with∣out any trouble. Dose, ℥iv. ad vj. Salmon.] § 1. You ought to add S. V. lbj. to the Men∣struum, else it will scarcely be strong enough to extract the Resinous parts of the Turbeth, in which the chief purging Property lies. § 2. It is a general Pur∣ger, and purges well, if gi∣ven in a Dose large enough: It carries off Scorbutick Hu∣mors, and is an excellent thing against Dropsies, Gouts, Rheumatisms, King's Evil, inveterate Head-Achs, Ob∣structions of the Womb, hurts of the Nerves, Palsies, Convulsions, &c. § 3. It may be given in the Morning fasting to ℥vj. or more, according to the Age, Strength, and Habit of the Body. V. Infusio Cachectica, An In∣fusion against the Cachexia, or evil Habit of Body. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Roots of Elecampane cut thin ℥vj. Cur∣rants cut or chopt small ℥viij. white Sugar ℥vj. White wine lbiij. digest them cold for forty eight hours, and then strain. Dose, ℥iv. twice a day in a Cachexia, Green-sickness, Dyspnaea, or difficulty of Breathing.
Salmon.] § 1. It will do well if you add to the Com∣position, Raisons of the Sun stoned ℥viij. which will make it much more pectoral. § 2. It prevails against all sorts of Coughs, Colds, Wheazings, Hoarseness, Short∣ness of Breath, loss of Voice, Ulcers of the Lungs, Spit∣ting Blood, and other Di∣stempers of those parts. § 3. You may with all the safety imaginable give from ℥vj. ad ℥viij. at a time, twice a day, and in an ex∣tream Cough you may take two or three Ounces of it, as often as the Cough troubles you. VI. Infusio Icterica, An In∣fusion against the Yellow Jaundice. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Goose∣dung ℥vj. Celandine M. ij. White-wine, simple Celandine-water, A. lbj. infuse warm for vj. hours; then add white Sugar ℥ij. dissolve and strain often thro' Hippocrates his Sleeve. Dose, ℥iiij. twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. I should ad∣vise to add Hempseed bruised, Turmerick sliced, A. ʒvj. Salt of Tartar or Pot-ashes ʒiij. Saffron ʒj. by which the In∣fusion will be made the more effectual. § 2. Thus composed, it is a Specifick against the Yel∣low Jaundice, and by reason of the fixt Salt will carry off much of the Morbifick cause by Urine: if afterwards the Patient be made to sweat ten or twenty Nights, by ex∣hibiting my Volatile Lauda∣num, the Disease vanishes to a wonder; for often sweat∣ing is truly essential to the Cure. § 3. You may (if prepa∣red with the addition here prescribed) give it safely e∣nough, ad ℥vj. and that twice a day: it opens Obstructions, and provokes Urine power∣fully. VII. Infusio Ireata, Infusion of Flower-de-luce Roots. Bate.] ℞ Of our blew Flower-de-luce Roots, fresh ga∣thered, and thin sliced, Rai∣sons stoned and cut small, white Sugar, A. ʒvj. White∣wine, new Ale, A. lbiij. di∣gest three days, then strain out. It is given a draught at a time Morning and Evening against the Scurvy, Dropsie &c.
Salmon.] § 1. It is a sin∣gular thing against the Ca∣chexia, as well as Scurvy and Dropsie; and carries-off thick, viscous, and tartarous Humors which breed the Stone and Gout to a won∣der: and being used for sometime it prevails against a Rheumatism. § 2. You had best to di∣gest in a cool place (not in any actual heat) for fear of making it sowre, which it is apt to be: and for that reason, you must continue the Digestion for at least four or five days: but in this you must be regulated in part by the Season of the Year; for if done in the Winter, it requires a longer time of digestion than if done in the Summer. § 3. The Dose generally given, is a Pint at a time, but you ought to regulate it, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient: to Children, and such as are weak you may give half a Pint Plus-minus. VIII. Infusio Sancta, An In∣fusion of Guajacum. Bate.] ℞ Guajacum ℥ix. Salt of Tartar ℥iv. Liquorice ℥iv. Fountain-water lb xx. mix and digest warm for six days; then strain out. It is a noble Alexipharmick; it pu∣rifies the Blood, takes away Obstructions and Putrefacti∣on, and admirably preserves Health: it prevails much al∣so against the Scurvy, Drop∣sie, Fevers, French-Pox, Gout, and other Diseases proceed∣ing from Tarrarous Hu∣mors. Dose, ℥vj. four times a day. Salmon.] § 1. It drys up watery Humors in the Drop∣sie; but was chiefly designed as a Diet against the French-Pox, and all the Symptomata belonging to the same. § 2. But it ought not to be used in thin, hot, dry, and tabid Constitutions, for in such (my own Experience has confirmed it to me) it does much more hurt than good. § 3. It is an Alcali, and absorbs the Acid Humor af∣ter a singular manner, and therefore is of singular use in all such Diseases proceeding from Acidities. § 4. If any object that the Spirit of Guajacum is Acid, and therefore this cannot be true; to that we answer; that there are differing Acids in Nature, and such as are opposite to one another, and will destroy one another, as they who are acquainted
with Chymical Precipitations can tell; besides the stronger Acid overcomes and destroys the weaker: but in this In∣fusion there is no such thing, for if any Acidity be in it, it is yet latent, and not stirr'd up, or put into act; And that the contrary is ma∣nifest from this, for if the Chips after the Infusion be distilled in a Retort, you would have still the full quantity of Acid Spirit from them, and in the same Pro∣portion, as if no previous Infusion had been made. An Appendix to this Chapter, Concerning DRINKS. IX. Cerevisia Butleri, Dr. But∣ler's Ale. Bate.] Betony, Sage, Agri∣mony, Garden Scurvy-grass, Roman Worm-wood, A. M. iij. Roots of Elecampane, of Horse-raddish, A. ℥iv. mix and put them into a Bag, with a Stone in its bottom, which hang in four Gallons of new Ale. It is a Cephalick, Stomatick, Hepatick, Splenetick, Pulmo∣nick, Diuretick, &c. It re∣ctifies the Blood, makes sixt and crude Humors Volatile; attenuates and expels the tartarous Matter, in the Brest and Lungs, as also in the Reins: prevails against the Cachexia, Dropsie, Scurvy, Hypochondriack Melancho∣ly, &c. It may be used as common Drink, but at least drank three times a day. Salmon.] § 1. It is used by some as a Panpharmacom, but what Diseases it will ab∣solutely cure I think is scarce∣ly determined: this is cer∣tain, it is a great opener and purifier of the Blood, by putting the Juices of the Body into a Fermentation. § 2. It is also certain, that much good cannot be ex∣pected from it, except it be assiduously used, and that for some considerable time, for by such a constant use of it, it makes great changes and alterations in the Body. § 3. When you begin the use of it, it will be necessary once a Week to take some proper Purge, that there may be an Excretion of the Mor∣bifick Matter, which by the Vertue of this Drink is seg∣gregated.
X. Cerevisia Catapsoras, Drink against Scabs, Itch, and Breakings out in the the Skin. Bate.] ℞ Sena ℥vj. Me∣choacan ℥iij. Liquorice ℥iss. Ca aways ℥j. Roots of sharp pointed Dock lbiss. Polypodie, Madder, A. lbss. Scabious, A∣grimony, A. M. iij. Crude An∣timony in gross Pouder lbj. mix and make a Bag, for five or six Gallons of Ale. It purges the Blood, and is ad∣mirably good against the Itch, Scabs, and other Defe∣dations of the Skin, which it cures. It is given a Pint at a time, (Plus-minus) twice a day for some days. Salmon.] § 1. It opens the Body powerfully, and purges singularly well; but the use of it must be continued for about thirty days, else it will scarcely have the desired Ef∣fect. § 2. You must vary the Dose according to the Age and Strength of the Patient: for in some Constitutions a Pint hereof will give at least twenty Stools or more, whilst in others it will not give above three or four. §3. In this Case it will be good to begin with a lesser Dose at first, and as you find that works to either increase or diminish it; and so continually altering the quantity, till you find what will exactly fit that Consti∣tution. § 4. If the Body is very foul, it will be necessary to give a Vomit as preparatory to the use of this; after which you will find this to do its work much more kindly you affectually: In this case you may use the Apozem at Sect. 1. Chap. 15. follow∣ing. XI. Cerevisia Embryonum A drink to strengthen the Child in the Womb, and prevent Abortion. Bate.] ℞ Raspings of Lig∣num Cotoneum lbj. white San∣ders Ivory, A. ℥iv. Oak Most ℥ij. Roots of Tormentil ℥iss. Bistort ℥j. Nutmegs, Corian∣der-seed, A. ʒvj. Raisons lbiss. mix and put them into a Bag. which hang in six Gallons of new Ale. Let it be drank as ordinary drink; it prevents Abortion, strengthens the weak Foetus, and confirms the Ligaments of the Womb. Salmon.] § 1. In using of this, where there is great danger of Abortion, it will be good to put into each draught of Drink, as often
as you drink it, half a Spoon∣ful or better of the Tincture of Carechis, for this alone Me∣dicament does in this Case more than any other yet known in the World. § 2. And thus used, it strengthens a weak Back, prevails against Pains, Gri∣pings of the Bowels, stops the Terms in Women, or any other Flux of Blood, by re∣straining its unnatural Fer∣mentation. § 3. It stops Fluxes of the Bowels of all sorts Diar∣rhaea's, Dysenteria's, and Lienteria's, and is good a∣gainst the Hepatick Flux, also pissing of Blood, and strengthens such as are weak and inclinable to a Consump∣tion. XII. Cerevisia Hydropica. A Drink against the Drop∣sie. Bate.] ℞ Hore-hound, Harts-tongue, Liverwort, Worm-wood, Sorrel, A. a full Handful: cut them, and put them into Barley-Paste, baking them in an Oven; then break the Paste with the Herbs into bits; add Salt of Wormwood ʒij. put all into a Bag, which hang in four Gallons of new Ale. Let it be drank as common drink: for so it has cured many of the Dropsie. Salmon.] § 1. I wonder what ʒij. of Salt of Worm∣wood can do with four Gal∣lons of Ale: an Ounce is as little as can be put in. § 2. If to the Compositi∣on you add Broom Tops M. iss. Inner Bark of Roots of Elder ℥iv. blew Flower-de-luce Roots sliced ℥ij. Mustard-seed ℥j. the Preparation will be so much the more effectual. § 3. If thus prepared, it may be drank three or four times a day, half a Pint or more at a time; and being continued for one whole Month, you will see a fa∣mous alteration in order to the Cure of the Disease, whether Cachexia, Dropsie, Jaundice, Gout, or King's-E∣vil. XIII. Cerevisia Jovialis, Drink with Filings of Jupiter, or Tin. Bate.] ℞ Filings of Tin lbj. white Sanders, raspings of Ivory, A. ℥iij. Raisons lbj. Roman Wormwood, Harts-tongue, Pauls Bettony, Agrimony, A. M. ij. yellow of Orange-peels ℥ij. mix and make a Bag for four Gal∣lons of new Ale, for ordinary drink. It has a peculiar Pro∣perty in curing Diseases of
the Womb; it is also Hepa∣tick, and Splenetick. Salmon.] § 1. The Filings of Tin had best be put up in∣to a Bag by themselves, which Bag may be put up into the other Bag with the rest of the Ingredients, by which means the Tin will be saved and serve again, as often as you shall have occasion to use it. § 2. It is said to be a Spe∣cifick in opening Obstructi∣ons of Liver, Spleen, and Womb, but in my Opinion it would be much more pow∣erful if you added to the Composition, old Horse-Nails lbij. which may be di∣gested in a small quantity of Ale before-hand for a Month, and then that Ale, Nails and all to be put into the for∣mer. § 3. Thus prepared it will be an excellent thing against the Green-sickness in Virgins, the Rickets in Chil∣dren, the King's Evil in el∣der Persons, the Gout in Men, and the Stoppage of the Terms in Women; The Pa∣tient drinking a good draught of it Morning, Noon, and Night. XIV. Cerevisia Oxydorica, A Drink to quicken the Eye-sight. Bate.] ℞ Rue, Sage, Ver∣vain, Eye-bright, A. M. j. live Hog-lice or Sows, No 400. sweet Fennel-seed ℥j. Raisons stoned lbss. put them all into a Bag for four Gallons of new Ale. It is to be taken as ordinary Drink for dimness of Sight. Tern. Salmon.] § 1. The Ingre∣dients of this Composition are good, but the Principal which ought to have been in, are wanting: if you would have it truly effectual to the Purpose intended you ought to add these things: Rosemary-flowers fresh gathered M. j. fresh Lavender-flowers M. ss. Spicknard ʒiij. yellow of Limon and Orange-peels, A. ℥j. § 2. At time of drinking it, put into every draught twenty drops of Spirit of Sal Armoniack. § 3. And let the use of it be continued for three or four whole Months, or long∣er, (for a lesser time will do but little good) and outward∣ly let the Eye-lids be bathed with the Queen of Hungary's Water; or wash the Eyes themselves three or four
times a day with our Aqua Regulata, or Eye-water, mixt with an equal quantity of Spirit of Wine. XV. Cerevisia Scorbutica, A Drink against the Scur∣vy. Bate.] ℞ Sea Scurvy grass a little dryed lbj. Brook-lime, Water-cresses, A. M. iij. Red Sage, M, ij. Cloves ʒiij. Nut∣megs ʒvj. bruise them, and put them into a Bag for five Gallons of new Ale, with bits of old Iron ℥vj. in the bottom of it, which use as common Drink. Salmon.] § 1. I understand not why the Scurvy-grass should be at all dryed; for being full of subtil and vola∣tile Particles, I am confident, that some of its choicest parts by that means must be dissi∣pated. § 2. I am also of Opinion, that the Juice of four or five choice Sevil Oranges ought to be put in, not only because of their acute Property, and that they are Specificks a∣gainst the Scurvy, but, be∣cause thereby the Fermenta∣tion, will the better and more compleatly be absol∣ved. § 3. You may either take it as common drink, or drink it at formal and set times, as a Pint in the Morning fast∣ing: A Pint an hour before Dinner: and a Pint last at Night going to Bed; Uni∣versals being used in the In∣tervals of taking it, as once a Week. XVI. Cerevisia Scrophularia, A Drink against the King's Evil. Bate.] ℞ Sarsaparilla ℥vj. Lignum Sanctum ℥viij. Bark of the Wallnut-Tree, Roots of Scrophularia, Sassafras, A. ℥ij. Herb Robert, M. iij. Raisons stoned; living Millepedes, A. lbj, mix and make a Bay for four Gallons of new Ale. Its chief use is against the King's Evil, the Ficus and Hemor∣rhoides in Ano, cancerous and other like malign and eating Ulcers, malign Scabs, &c. by taking this drink as common Drink, and purging once a Week with some ap∣propriated Medicament. Salmon.] § 1. Whether by Scrophularia is meant Pile∣wort or Figwort is uncertain, for that in some Authors, they are both called by that name, from their being approved Specificks against the Scrophu∣la, but I am apt to believe,
that what our Author here in∣tends is Figwort, because that though Pilewort is sometimes so called, yet it has not u∣sually that Appellation, but rather is known by the name of Cheledonium minus. § 2. In the Composition I would add Bark of Guaja∣cum ℥ij. bruised, (for nothing seems to be more effectual in the Vegetable Kingdom against that Disease) Antimo∣ny in Pouder, tied up in a Rag lbj. (and so put into the Bag with the other Ingredi∣ents, by which means the same quantity will serve of∣tentimes again:) of our Her∣cules in Pouder ℥vj. tied up in a Rag in like manner. § 3. The Specifick or ap∣propriated Purge which we would advise to in this case is our Pilulae Panchymagogae, than which I know nothing better in the World. XVII. Cerevisia Vernalis, A Drink for the Spring time. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Sena ℥v. Roots of Polypody of the Oak ℥vj. Monks Rhubarb, Roots of the sharp pointed Dock, A. ℥x. Currants lbj. Liquorice, sweet Fennel-seeds A. ℥iss. raspings of Sassafras ℥ij. Red Sage, Agrimony, Water-cresses, Sea Scurcy-grass, A. M. ij. mix and make a Bag for five Gallons of new Ale. It has the same Vertues with the Cerevisia Catapsoras, at Sect. 10. above. Salmon.] § 1. For the Vertues of it, we also refer you to the afore-mentioned place: but in the Composi∣tion to put in here (as well as there) Crude Antimony in Pouder lbj. by the addition of which the Medicament will be made much more effectual. § 2. In the use of this Me∣dicament it will be necessary also, to prepare the Body by Universals, as, 1. By Vomit∣ing once or twice with Tar∣tarum Emeticum, or some such like. 2. By Purging, either with our Family Pills, or Pilulae Panchymagogae, which ought to be taken once a Week, so long as this Drink is used. § 3. That it be used Spring and Fall, by reason of the Inveteracy of those Diseases, and the rebelliousness of those Humors, against which it is prepared, and for which it is designed to be admini∣stred: because at those Sea∣sons of the Year, the Semi∣naries of those Distempers seem always to bud again a∣fresh.
CHAP. XV. Of DECOCTIONS. I. Apozema potenter Expecto∣rans; An Apozem or De∣coction compound power∣fully expectorating. Bate.] ℞ OF the pectoral Decoction. lbj. Syrup of Scabiout compound, Oxymel of Squils, A. ℥ij. Wa∣ter of Wallnuts compound ℥jss. Infusion of Crocus Metallorum ℥j. mix them. Three or four Spoonfuls of it are given e∣very Morning, so as it may cause Vomiting three times. Salmon.] § 1. The De∣coctum Pectorale here intend∣ed is that in our Pharmaco∣poeia Lendinensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Sect. 4. The Syrup of Scabious compound, and the Oxymel; of Squills, those in the Book cited, Lib. 4. Cap. 16. Sect. 50. & 84. The Wallnut-water, that in Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Sect. 29. of the same, from Platerus, which alone of it self is a good Vo∣mit. § 2. The Infusion of Cro∣cus Metallorum, is the Vinum Benedictum in our said Dis∣pensatory, Lib. 4. Cap. 12. Sect. 7. where you may see its Composition, Vertues and Uses at large. § 3. This Apozem being thus compounded, serves to differing intentions, and is very powerful in evacuating tought, viscous and tartarous Humors out of the Brest and Lungs, and other the adja∣cent Bowels: It cures Agues, chiefly Tertians and Quar∣tans, cleanses and strength∣ens the Stomach, takes away the pain thereof, and cures the Cholick to admiration. II. Decoctum album, The white Decoction. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Hayts-horn calcin'd ℥ij. Fountain-wa∣ter lbiij. mix and boil to the half: then strain it imme∣diately thro' a thin Linnen Cloth, with gentle pressing: to this milky Liquor add Syrup of the Juice of Oranges ℥iij. or q. s. mix them: It is of ex∣traordinary use for quench∣ing Thirst in Fevers, &c.
Salmon.] § 1. It is excel∣lent to abate the heat in all forts of Fevers, burning and malignant; but in my O∣pinion, it will be more ef∣fectual if it be sweetned with Syrup of Limons. § 2. It rectifies a weak and disorderly Stomach, and takes away nauseousness and vomiting. § 3. And it may be used as a general Vehicle in all sorts of Fevers, and to give most Antifebriticks in: It is a Specifick in the Plague, Spotted Fever, Measles, Small-Pox, &c. III. Decoctum Amarum, The bitter Potion or Drink. Bate.] ℞ Tops of Centory the less, Agrimony, Camomil-flowers, A. M. ss. Seeds of Car∣duus, Citrons, A. ʒjss. Mary∣gold-flowers, p. ij. Roots of Gentian ʒij. Sena ʒvj. Rhu∣barb ʒj. White-wine, Foun∣tain-water, A. lbj. mix and boil to the half, and strain out for three or four Doses. Salmon.] § 1. It is to be taken in the Morning fasting to cleanse and rectifie the Stomach and Bowels, re∣store their Tone, and to cause a good Appetite and Dige∣stion. § 2. It prevails against Worms in Children, the Green-sickness in Virgins, and Obstruction of the Courses in Women: and indeed o∣pens all other Obstructions of the Viscera, after an ad∣mirable manner, if taken for eight or ten Mornings to∣gether. § 3. It is good against the Dropsie, Gout, Scurvy, Cho∣lick, Stoppages of the Lungs by tartarous Matter, the Yel∣low and Black Jaundice, King's-Evil, Rickets in Chil∣dren, and other stubborn and rebellious Diseases, tho' of long standing, &c. IV. Decoctum Amarum alte∣rans, The bitter Potion only alterative. Bate.] It is the same with the former, the Purgatives only being omitted. Salmon.] § 1. It has the former Vertues, and opens as much, but cannot carry off the Recrements of the Blood and Humors. § 2. It is only to be used to weak People, who can∣not endure purging, and where purging is not requi∣red; but then it ought to be used much longer.
§ 3. You may give it ab ʒiv. ad viij. either alone by it self, or in a Glass of White or Rhenish Wine in the Morning fasting, and if need requires, as much at Night going to Bed. V. Decoctum Ambrosianum, The Syrup or Decoction of Ambrose. Bate.] ℞ Grains of Panick bruised ℥viij. Fountain-water lbvj. boil. to the Consumption of a third part adding at the end White-wine ℥xij. after it is a little cooled strain it of∣ten through Hippocrates his Sleeve, till it becomes limpid and pure. It is also called Syrupus Ambrosianus. It is given in time of sweating, half a Pint at a time. It is noble Diaphoretick, used in the Dropsie, Gout, Rheu∣matism, or running Gout, malign Fevers, &c. Salmon.] § 1. One Au∣thor will have it to be Grom∣well-seed; whilst others will have it to be Panick; but most are of the Opinion it should be the Indian Mil∣let, to which I assent. § 2. Weckerus in his Anti∣dotary, Lib. 2. Sect. 2. p. 492. orders it to be boiled till it cracks or is broken: of this Decoction he takes ℥ij. add∣ing to it good White-wine ℥ij. and so gives it to the Patient hot, covering them well down. § 3. It is said to provoke Sweat after a wonderful manner, and to be good a∣gainst Fevers, chiefly Ter∣tians, being given in the de∣clination of the Fit, Pharm. Lond. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. Sect. 94. Pag. 149. VI. Decoctum Analepticum▪ The restorative Decocti∣on. Bate.] ℞ River Crabs bruised, No vij. White-wine▪ Fountain-water, A. ℥xij. boil to the half, strain out, and sweeten with Sugar-Candy, q. s. It is given to three Spoonfuls against hectick Fevers often in the day. Salmon.] § 1. That it is a good Restorative I know: but if you would have it absolutely effectual against Hecticks, you ought to add to the Composition Crystal Minerale ʒij. § 2. Then you may ad∣minster it thus. ℞ Of this De∣coction ℥iss. Milk-water ℥iij. Spanish-wine ℥j. Volatile Salt of Ox-flesh, gr. vj. mix for a Dose to be given three times a day.
§ 3. Or thus. ℞ Milk-water ℥iij. of this Decoction ℥iss. Spirit of Cinnamon ʒij. Volatile Salt of Hogs-blood, gr. vj. mix them for a Dose, to be given as before. This re∣stores in all sorts of Con∣sumptions. VII. Decoctum Antimoniale, An Antimonial Decocti∣on. Bate.] ℞ Lentish Wood, Misseltoe of the Oak, A. ʒvj. Betony, M. j. Sassafras rasped ℥j. Crude Antimony grosly bruised, and tyed up in a Rag, ℥ij. Spring-water, q. s. boil till it comes to lbij: then strain. Dose. ℥vj. in the Morning warm, for purifying the Blood, &c. It is good against Catarrhs, Scabs, and all sorts of Defilements; and frees the Body from all sorts of noxious Humors. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good Purifier of the Blood, and may serve in place of the vulgar Diets used against the French Disease. § 2. It is prevalent against all sorts of Fevers, whether continual or intermitting; but would be more power∣ful if in every Dose you dis∣solved at time of taking, gr. 1. or 20. of Crystal Mi∣eral. § 3. The quantity of An∣timony is too little; it ought to be ℥iv. at least; and if Guajacum ℥ss. and its Bark ʒij. were added, the Recipe would be never the worse. VIII. Decoctum Antiphthisi∣cum, Decoction against an Ulcer of the Lungs. Bate.] ℞ River Crabs No xij. Elecampane-root, Roots of Flo∣rentine Orrice, Comfrey, A. ℥j. Liquorice ℥ss. Ladies Mantle, Ground-Ivy, Yarrow, Ribwort, Veronica, spotted Lungwort, the greater Housleek, A. M. ij. Conserve of Red Roses ℥vj. Fountain-water, q. s. boil to lbvj. strain, clarifie with the Whites of Eggs, and add Spi∣rit of Sulphur, q.s. Salmon.] § 1. It is not on∣ly good against a Consump∣tion of the Lungs, but all other Consumptions whatso∣ever; and all inward Ob∣structions of the Bowels or other parts, which are the conjoyned cause of a Con∣sumption. § 2. You may use it thus. ℞ Milk-water ℥iv. of this Decoction ℥iij. Volatile Salt of Hogs-flesh, gr. vj. mix for a Dose, to be given two or three times a day.
§ 3. The Spirit (by which is intended the Oil) of Sul∣phur is to be put in only to a grateful Acidity. IX. Decoctum Astacorum, De∣coction of Crevises, or Craw-fish. Bate.] ℞ River Craw-fish, No 20. Roots of round Birth-wort ℥ss. Comfrey-roots ℥j. Sa∣nicle, Ladies Mantle, Bugle, Agrimony, Ground-Ivy, Beto∣ny, A. M. j. Fountain-water lbvj. White-wine lbij. mix and boil all to the Consumpti∣on of a third part: add Syrup of Limons, and Spirit of Sul∣phur, q. s. mix them. It is invented for Wounds of the Thorax or Brest, &c. Dose, ℥vj. twice a day, four hours before eating: Dress also the Wound twice a day with Cloths dipt therein; It is a wonderful thing in all deplo∣rable Cases. Salmon.] § 1. You must put in the Syrup of Limons, and Oil of Sulphur to a grate∣ful Acidity: but more of the former than of the latter, because it sweetens withal. § 2. It is an excellent Wound-drink, and is of good use against all rebellious Ul∣cers and Fistula's, which have been of long standing. § 3. It opens Obstructions of the Lungs, and heals Ul∣cers there, and therefore is of good use in the curing Consumptions, of what kind soever, give it as the for∣mer. X. Decoctum Digitalis, De∣coction of Fox-glove. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Fox-glove new gathered ℥iv. or M. ij. Zant Curants cleansed by washing ℥ij. bruise them, and add Ale lbij. boil all to one half, and express out strongly: It is used for a Vomit in the Epilepsie. Salmon.] § 1. It may be a good thing in the Epilepsie for all that I know, but I have had no experience of it: I must confess I have a better Opinion of Antimo∣nials in that case, because they do the work more brief∣ly, and more effectually. § 2. For this Reason sake, I should advise it to be used with the addition of gr. ij. or iij. of Mynsicht's Emetick Tartar in each Dose. § 3. The Dose of the De∣coction simple as it is here prescribed, is ℥viij. more or less, according to Age and Strength, to which you may add gr. j. ij. or iij. of an Antimonial as before direct∣ed, as necessity requires.
XI. Decoctum Diureticum, Augenij, A Diuretick De∣coction. Bate.] Roots of Smallage, Parsley. A. M. j. of Madder ℥ss. Lavender, Maidenhair, Dodder, Agrimony, red Cicers or Chick-peese, A. M. ss. Roots of Asarabacca ℥j. Calamus A∣romaticus ℥ss. Seeds of Anise, Smallage, Parsley, Daucus, Ca∣raways, Faenugreek, A. ʒj. Seeds of Melons, Cucumbers, A. ʒiij. Fountain-water lbvj. boil all to the Consumption of lbij. strain, and sweeten with Su∣gar, q. s. It is given in diffi∣culty of making water, ℥vj. for a Dose. Salmon.] § 1. It provokes Urine powerfully; but it will be much more effectual, if at time of taking it, you add to the Dose, gr. xij. ad xx. of pure Salt of Tar∣tar. § 2. If Winter Cherries ℥j. Juniper-berries ℥ss. be added to the Composition, it will yet be much more effectu∣al. § 3. And at last to make the Medicine compleat, be∣ing boiled and strained, you ought to every lbss. ad S.V. ℥j. XII. Decoctum Dysentericum, A Decoction against the Bloody-flux. Bate.] ℞ The under Crust of three Loaves of wheaten Bread: boil them in Fountain-water lbvj. ad lbj. in which infuse for two hours Cloves bruised ʒij. strain, and add Claret-wine lbj. white Su∣gar, q. s. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only good against Bloody-fluxes, but all other Fluxes of the Bowels, but more especially if to each Dose of it you add ℥j. of strong Cin∣namon-water. § 2. Utendi modus. ℞ Of this Decoction ℥vj. strong Cin∣namon-water ℥j. Tincture of Catechu ℥ss. mix for a Dse to be given twice a day. § 3. If the Flux be vio∣lent, and of long continu∣ance, you must add to the former things of our Gutte Vitae ℈j. XIII. Decoctum Ictericum, A Decoction against the Yel∣low Jaundice. Bate.] ℞ Goose-dung, I∣vory rasped, A. ℥j. Swallows-dung with the whole Nest, Harts-tongue, Flowers of Hy∣pericon. A. M. ij. Saffron ʒs.
White-wine, Fountain-water, A. lbij. boil to the one half, strain, and add white Sugar, q. s. and clarifie with Whites of Eggs; Dose, ℥v. those things being done before, which ought to be done. Salmon.] § 1. It is an ap∣proved thing by manifold Experience against the Yel∣low Jaundice; but would be more effectual if Hempseed bruised ℥j. were added to the Composition. § 2. Modus Utendi. ℞ Of this Decoction ℥iv. or v. Tin∣cture of Turmerick ℥ss. Vola∣latile Sal Armoniack Salt of Tartar, A. gr. vij. mix for a Dose to give in the Morn∣ing fasting. § 3. At Night going to Bed give the Patient gr. iij. or iv. of my Volatile Lauda∣num, to sweat with all for thirty or forty Nights toge∣ther. XIV. Decoctum Limacum, Decoction of Snails. Bate.] ℞ Garden-Snails freed from their Shells and cleansed, No xij. New Red Cows Milk lbij. boil to the one half: strain, and add Rose∣water ℥j. Sugar-candy ℥ss. mix for a draught, to be taken e∣very Morning for the whole Month of May. Salmon.] § 1. It is de∣signed for the Cure of Con∣sumptions of the Lungs, Pin∣nings, Hecticks, and the like. § 2. Give it thus. ℞ Of this Gelly of Snails, q. v. strong Cinnamon-water (but this, in a Hectick must be omitted) ℥j. Volatile Salt of Ox-flesh, gr. viij. mix for a Dose. § 3. If there be a violent Flux of the Bowels withal, give, gr. iij. or iv. of my Volatile Laudanum every Night going to Bed. XV. Decoctum ad morsum Canis rabidi, A Decoction a∣gainst the Biting of a Mad Dog. Bate.] ℞ Rue ℥vj. Gar∣lick, London Treacle, A. ℥iv. filing of Jupiter ℥iv. clear Ale lbiv. boil to the Con∣sumption of the half, and di∣gest a while. Let the sick take of the strained Decocti∣on six Spoonfuls twice a day for nine days together; and apply the Magma to the place affected. Salmon.] § 1. Modus U∣tendi. ℞ Of this decoction five or six Spoonfuls or more: Pou∣der of the Liver of a mad Dog ℈j. ad ʒss. mix, and give it in the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed.
§ 2. Or thus. ℞ Of this Decoction, q. v. Volatile Salt of the whole mad Dog, gr. vij. mix, and give it as the for∣mer; this has never been known to fail. § 3. This Volatile Salt is made from the whole Ani∣mal, being killed, then cut into thin bits, all the Flesh and Skin, and throughly dry∣ed, and at last distilled by Retort as we have taught in our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 60. Sect. 24. and Cap. 61. Sect. 6. of the same. XVI. Decoctum Pacificum, A Decoction easing Pain. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Tartar made with Nitre ℥viij. fresh Flowers of Corn-Poppy, Juni∣per-berries, Roots of black Hellebor, A. ℥viij. Aqua Be∣nedicta simple lbviij. boil with a gentle fire, (the Vessel being close covered or well clo∣sed) for twenty four hours: which being cooled strain out, thro' Hippocrates his Sleeve. Let three Spoonfuls of it be given at Bed-time, and five Spoonfuls every Morning, in a little White-wine, sweetned with Sugar. Salmon.] § 1. This is Mat∣thews his Receipt which he published in his Ʋnlearned Alchymist many Years ago: but you have a more ex∣act Process thereof in our Pharm. Lond. 1. Lib. 4. Cap. 11. Sect. 23. which is more effectual to the purposes in∣tended. § 2. It eases all manner of Pains after an admirable manner, and prevails against Rheumatisms, and Pains of the Stone and Gout. § 3. It is singular also a∣gainst Fevers, and Surfeits; as also the Gripings of the Guts and Cholick, and may safely be given to Infants in small Dose. See the Aqua Benedicta, Cap. 1. Sect. 7. of this Book. XVII. Decoctio Polychresta, A Decoction of many Ver∣tues. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Poly∣pody of the Oak ℥iij. of Ci∣chory ℥ij. Roots of Monks Rhu∣barb ℥vj. Sena ℥ij. sweet Fen∣nel-seeds, Liquorice, A. ℥j. Raisons stoned ℥iv. Fountain-water, q. s. infuse and boil four hours; then strain. To lbiiss. of the strained Liquor add depurated Juice of Sea Scurvy-grass ℥viij. red Sugar, Manna, A. ℥iij. mix, and clarifie with Whites of Eggs. Dose, ℥iv. ad viij. early every Morn∣ing, for purifying the Blood.
Salmon] § 1. It is a good general Purger, yet with all purges but gently; and is of excellent use for such as can∣not swallow Pills, Bolus's, Pouders, &c. § 2. It is singular against the Scurvy, and all its Symp∣toms, as also against all Di∣seases which proceed from salt, sharp, acid, or tarta∣rous Humors, as the Dropsie, Jaundice, Rheumatism, Stone, Gout, &c. § 3. Modus Utendi. ℞ Of this Decoction ℥vj. black Cherry or Milk-water ℥iv. Salt of Scurvy-grass ℈j. mix for a Dose. XVIII. Decoctum Preservato∣rium, A preservative De∣coction. Bate.] ℞ Malaga-wine lbiij. Rue, M. j. black Pepper bruised, Ginger, A. ʒij. Nutmegs ʒj. boil to the Consumption of the third part: strain and add Venice-Treacle ʒij. Mithri∣date ʒj. strong Angelica-wa-℥iv. mix them. Dose, one Spoonful as a Preservative from the Plague; and three Spoonfuls at a time for the cure thereof. Salmon.] § 1. Modus U∣tendi. R. Of this Decoction ℥ss. or more: Spiritus Aperiens, gut. 20. Carduus-water ℥ij. mix, for a Preservative Dose. § 2. R. Of this Decoction ℥ij. Aquae Bezoarticae nost. ℥ijss. Spirtius Aperiens, gut. 20. mix for a curative Dose. § 3. Or thus. ℞ Of this Decoction ℥iss. Aquae Mirabi∣lis ℥ij. Salis Tartari Vitriola∣ti, gr. viij. ad xij. mix, for the purpose last mention∣ed. XIX. Decoctum ad Rachti∣dem, A Decoction for the Rickets in Children. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Polypo∣die of the Oak, of Smallage, of Fennel, A. ℥j. Liquorice, Aniseed, A. ℥ss. Harts-tongue, Maiden-hair, Dodder, Beto∣ny, Celandine, Tamarisk, A. M. j. blew Currants ℥iij. Bar∣ley-water lbiv. boil to one half and strain. Two, three, or four Spoonfuls thereof are given at a time, twice or thrice a day; in the mean time purging once a Week with Syrup. de Cichorio cum Rhab. Salmon.] § 1. Utendi Mo∣dus. ℞ Of this Decoction, q. s. Tincture of Antimony, gut. 12. Volatile Salt of Ʋ∣rine, gr. ij. or iij. mix, for a Dose in the Morning fast∣ing.
§ 2. Or thus. ℞ Of this Decoction, q. s. Rob of Raisons ℥ss. Spirit of Man's Blood or of Sal Armon. gut. 10. mix, for a Dose. XX. Decoctum Rubiae Tin∣ctorum, Decoction of Mad∣der. Bate.] ℞ Roots of Madder ℥ij. Aniseeds, Liquorice, A. ℥ss. Fountain-water lbiv. boil to one half and strain. Dose, ℥4 twice a day, for twenty days: It is a most powerful Cure for redness of the Face, Pustules, &c. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Of this Decoction ℥iv. Tincture of An∣timony, gut. 20. mix, for a Dose to be given Morning and Evening. § 2. ℞ Of this Decoction ℥iv. Tincture of Mars, Tin∣cture of Coral, A. gut. 20. Volatile Salt of Ʋrine, gr. iij. mix, for a Dose. § 3. Or thus. ℞ Of this Tincture ℥iv. Tincture of Ox∣galls, gut. 40. Pouder of Vi∣pers, gr. 20. mix, for a Dose to be given twice a day. XXI. Decoctum Rubicundum, The Red Decoction. Bate.] ℞ Harts-horn cal∣cin'd ℥j. Cochinele whole ʒss. Fountain-water, q. s. boil to lbiss. strain, add Cinnamon Barley-water ℥iss. best white Sugar, q. s. It is a draught often given in the Measles, Small-Pox, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Though I would not have the Cochinele reduced to a subtil Pouder, yet I know by Experience, it is necessary that it should be bruised. § 2. It may be ordinarily given both day and night to quench Thirst: but once at night particularly thus: ℞ Of this Decoction ℥vj. Gutae Vinae nost. gut. 20. mix, for a Dose. § 3. The next Morning give it thus: R. Of this Decoction ℥iv. or vj. Spi∣ritus Anticolicus nost. gut. 20. mix, for a Dose: in the intermediate times give it alone. XXII. * Decoctum Reguli, A Decoction of the Metal of Antimony. Bate.] It is made by boil∣ling the Regulus of Antimony, or a Cup made of the same, weighing lbss. Plus minus, in White-wine lbiss. to the Con∣sumption of a third part. It is used for a Vomit.
Salmon.] § 1. If it was boiled in Water it would do nothing, but it is the Acid of the Wine, which ex∣tracts the Emetick property of the Regulus. § 2. It cleanses the Sto∣mach admirably of Acid, viscous and tartarous Hu∣mors, and is a Specifick in the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Le∣thargy, Vertigo, Megrim, Palsie, and other Diseases of the Head and Brain. § 3. The whole quantity may be given to a strong Man, otherwise you must proportion the Dose to the Age and Strength of the Pa∣tient. XXIII. * Decoctum Rhabar∣bari, Decoction of Rhu∣barb. Bate.] ℞ Rhubarb ʒij. Cur∣rants bruised ℥iv. Roots of Sor∣rel ℥iij. sweet Fennel-seeds ʒj. Fountain-water lbiij. boil all to lbij. strain, and add white Sugar ℥j. clarifie, S. A. Dose, ℥4. thrice a day, in a Rheu∣matism, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It opens Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and other Bowels, carries off the Recrements of the first and second Concoctions, and strengthens the Tone of the Stomach, and other parts. § 2. It may be given, ad ℥vj. at a time, and that four times a day, either aone or mixt with Milk-water, of o∣ther fit Vehicle. XXIV. * Decoctum Scorbuti∣cum, A Decoction against the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Cones of the Fir-tree, No iv. cut each of them into four parts: to which add Leaves of green Wheat ℥ij. White-wine lbiij. boil to lbij. strain, and being cold▪ put to it Spirit of Scurvy-grass ℥ss. Syrup of Oranges, and Syrup. de Pomis alterans, A. ℥iss. mix them. Dose, ℥4. twice or thrice a day. Salmon.] § 1. It is an odd kind of Medicine, than which I am sure there are are many better: As for the Liquor of the green Wheat, I see not what a mighty power it has as a Remedy in this case. § 2. However to make it more effectual, after the De∣coction is made and strain∣ed it will be better, if you augment the Spirit of Scurvy-grass ad ℥iss. and leaving out the Syrupus de Pomis alterus, increase the Syrup of Oranges add ℥iv. or something more.
XXV. * Decoctum ad Sitim, A Decoction to quench Thirst. Bate.] ℞ Sorrel, M. ij. Fountain-water, q. s. boil to lbj. strain, and add the Juice of twelve Limons: Rhenish-Wine lb ij. white Sugar ℥iv. vel q. s. so as it may be made very grateful. It may be drank at pleasure. Salmon.] § 1. It abates the heat of burning Fevers, and quenches Thirst admirably; but in my Opinion, might be drank more freely, if it was less sowre. § 2. It cuts tough Flegm, and opens Obstructions of the Lungs, causing a free breathing. § 3. It may be used where no Fevers is present, for it excites the Appetite, and causes a good Digestion: but if the Stomach seems to be too cold it will be good to add a little of our Aqua Be∣zoartica to it, or some such like. XVI. Decoctum ad Strumas, A Decoction against the King's Evil. Bate.] ℞ Herb Robert, Brook-lime, A. M. iij. dead Nettles, M. vj. Liquorice, Aniseeds, A. ℥j. Raisons ℥iv. Sena ℥iij. Catharmus ℥ij. A∣garick ʒvj. Fountain-water lbviij. infuse and boil to lbiv. Dose, ℥4. four times a day: and besides in the Interim (the purging Simples being omitted) it may be drank as ordinary drink: outwardly to the place affected apply Ʋnguentum Digitalis. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only good against the King's-Evil, but also against Ca∣tarrhs, Rheumatisms, Gouts, and the Sciatica, and other like Pains in any part of the Body. § 2. It purges well, and carries off the Morbifick cause of rebellious Diseases almost to a Miracle. § 3. If you add Juniper-berries ℥iss. well bruised to the Composition, they will strangely augment the Ver∣tue of the Medicament.
XXVII. Decoctum Trauma∣ticum, A Wound Drink, or Drink for wounded People. Bate.] ℞ Tops of Hyperi∣con, Pauls Betony, both sorts, Periwinkle, Agrimony, A▪ M. ij. Roots of China, Com∣frey, white Sanders, Nephri∣tick-wood, A. ℥j. Dates cut, No 30. Liquorice ℥ ss. infuse all for twelve hours in Lime-water, q. s. Strain to lbiv. thereof add Syrup of Mouse-Eare, Sy∣rup of the Juice of Fluellin, A. ℥ij. mix and keep it in a cold place. Dose, ℥iv. Horis Medicis. Salmon.] § 1. You may drink it ℥vj. at a time in the Morning fasting: as much an hour before Dinner: the like at five in the After∣noon: and ℥vj. last going to Bed. § 2. But if you would have it to have a certain O∣peration, you ought to add to every Dose, of Aqua Mi∣rabilis (or some such like spirituous Cordial-water) ℥j. and then it will do won∣ders, and be almost of ten∣fold Vertue to what it was before. § 3. There are but few, who truly understand the great Vertues of S. V. in the healing of Wounds and Ulcers, whether inward or outward; but such as do, know what I say to be true. XXVIII. *Decoctum ad Tussim, A Decoction against a Cough. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Hounds-tongue, M. iv. Hyssop, Mai∣den-hair, Colts-foot, A. M. j. Aniseed, Liquorice, A. ʒvj. Barley-water lbvj. boil to lbiv. strain, and sweeten with Su∣gar-Candy, q. s. Dose, ℥iv. three or four times a day. Salmon.] § 1. Modus U∣tendi. ℞ Of this Decoction ℥iv. Tincture of Catechu ℥ss. Spirit of Opium ʒiij. mix, for a Dose to be taken as need shall require. § 2. At Night going to Bed give it thus. ℞ Of this Decoction ℥iv. Tincture of Ca∣techu ℥iss. Guttae Vitae nost. gut. 30. mix them for a Dose. § 3. Outwardly bathing very hot with it, it eases pains of the Gout.
XXIX. * Decoctum Ʋlmi, A Decoction of Elm-bark. Bate.] ℞ The inner Bark of the Elm-tree new gathered ℥iv. Fountain-water lbiij. boil to one half; to the Rubicund strained Liquor (which will be like Claret-wine) add Syrup of Rasp-berries, and Syrup of Mulberries, A. ℥iss. mix them for a most excellent Gar∣garism. It is good against the Roughness and Soreness of the Tongue, the Thrush, all affects of the Mouth from Heat, and Ulcers of what kind soever: being drank as common Drink, mixt with a little White-wine, it has cured the Leprosie, and Elephantiasis. It causes a very stinking kind of Sweat. Salmon.] § 1. 'Tis with∣out doubt an excellent thing for all Distempers of the Mouth and Throat, but may sometimes be advanced in Vertue for those Purposes by adding a little Claret-Wine to it. § 2. If inwardly taken against a Leprosie, &c. you ought to give with it Morn∣ing and Night ʒss. or ℈ij. of Pouder of Vipers, by which means it will become a Specifick in that case. § 3. Mixt also with a proportional quantity of Spi∣rit of Opium, and Salt of Vipers, it becomes a famous Sudorifick.
CHAP. XVI. Of SYRƲPS. I. * Diatessaron Potabile, The Julep of four Things. Bate.] ℞ SPirit of French Wine, or French Brandy ℥iv. Juice of Li∣mons ℥ij. Syrup of Violets ℥v. fair Water ℥ xij. mix and make a Julep, of a grateful Taste: To be drank before the Febrile Parox∣ysm. Salmon.] § 1. This is in truth but a kind of small Punch, but good enough to be given in Fevers, and it will quench Thirst to admi∣ration. § 2. But it will the better perform that Work, if it has a larger proportion of Spirits added to it, and then it may be drank the more freely and largely, and with the less danger. § 3. If you would make a pleasant and grateful sort of Punch, you must com∣pose it with the following quantities. ℞ Fair Water a Quart: choiee and pure Lime Juice, almost half a Pint: double refined Sugar, three quarters of a Pound: mix and perfectly dissolve the Sugar: then add of French Brandy a full Pint; and if you so please one Nutmeg grated. § 4. It makes merry and chearful, strengthens the Sto∣mach, revives the Spirits, fortifies the Heart, stops Vo∣miting to a wonder, and quenches Thirst beyond all imagination: nor is any Wine so grateful to the Pallet as this, if made according to this way, and with these pro∣portions. II. Julapium Antiscorbuticum, A Julep against the Scur∣vy. Bate.] ℞ Chalybiated Wine lbss. Tinctura Sacra ℥iij. Spi∣rit of Scurvy-grass ʒv. Spirit of Lavender Compound ℥ss. Tartar Vitriolate ℈j. Syrup of Scurvy-grass ℥iss. mix them. Let it be given ten Spoon∣fuls at a time every Morn∣ing.
Salmon.] § 1. How the Chalybiated Wine is made, see. Chap. 4. Sect. 12. afore∣going. § 2. It is indeed a singular Remedy against the Scurvy, opens all manner of Obstru∣ctions of the Viscera, alters the Habit of the Body, ab∣sorbs Acids, and sweetens the Juices. § 3. To young Children and Infants you must give less; and if they be of a hot Constitution, you may omit the Syrup of Scurvy-grass, and sweeten it with Syrup of Plantane, or our Syrupus Ne∣phriticus. III. Julapium Asthmaticum, A Julep against the Asth∣ma. Bate.] ℞ Live Sows or Hog-lice, No 400. bruise them, and add Hyssop-water ℥vj. Ma∣gistral-water of Snails ℥iss. Sugar-Candy ʒiij. mix, dis∣solve, and express strongly. It is given two Spoonfuls at a time, in ℥iij. of pectoral De∣coction warm, every fourth hour. Salmon.] § 1. If you would have it truly effectual to the purpose, you ought to add to every Dose as it is given Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniack, gut. 20. § 2. It opens Obstructions of the Lungs powerfully, and dissolves that tartarous or viscous Humor which causes Asthma's, Hoarseness, Wheasings, and other Di∣stempers of those parts. § 3. If there be a Cough withall you must then ne∣cessarily give an Opiate, such as is our Volatile Lau∣danum, every Night duly going to Bed. IV. * Julapium Cretaceum, The White or Chalky Julep. Bate.] ℞ The purest and whitest Chalk in fine Pouder ℥j. double refined Sugar ℥iss. distilled Oil of Nutmegs, gut. iij. Water lbij. mix them well, S. A. Dose, ℥iij. at a time often, , in the most vehement Cardial∣gia, or sickness at Heart. Salmon.] § 1. It cures all Pains and Sicknesses at Heart caused through Acidities, Heart-burnings, &c. which it immediately eases; and this is as an Alcali, by absorbing the Acid. § 2. But as it is a fixt Al∣cali, so it only performs the Work in the first Digestions; for Acidities and Diseases caused there from, in the Blood and Humors are only
to be cured by Volatile Al∣calies. V. * Julapium Fragorum. Julep of Straw-berries. Bate.] ℞ Ripe Straw∣berries lbiss. Water lbj. White-wine lbss. white Sugar, Syrup of Limons, A. ℥iss. digest cold for three hours, then strain. It cools the Heat of Fevers, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good Cooler, and quenches Thirst well: but if it be given in a violent burning Fever, it will be good to drop into it some few drops of Spirit of Sul∣phur, by which means it will cool more effectually. § 2. Thus used with Spirit of Sulphur, or Salt of Tar∣tar vitriolate, it is good a∣gainst the Plague, and all o∣ther malign and contagious Diseases. VI. * Julapium Hystericum Camphoratum, A Campho∣rated Julep against Fits of the Mother. Bate.] Fire Camphire ʒij. and often extinguish it in Fountain-wa er lbj. to the to∣tal Consumption of the Cam∣phire, then strain. Dose, four or five Spoonfuls often in the Paroxysm. Salmon.] § 1. It is good to be given out of the Fit to prevent the coming of the Fit, as well as in the time of the Fit, but both ways it will be good to dissolve therein in Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, gr. iv. ad viij. § 2. Or for want of the Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, dissolve therein Sal Prunellae, gr. x. or xij. for this Salt has a specifick Vertue in repres∣sing these kinds of Fits. XVII. * Julapium Hystericum Farinaceum, The Meally Julep against Fits of the Mother. Bate.] ℞ Fine Wheat Flower ʒij. white Sugar ℥ss. fair Water ℥viij. stir or shake them well in a Glass Vial, to make a white Julep. It may be given to four Spoonfuls, often in the Fit. Salmon.] § 1. It cools, and is more pleasant than fair Water; but will be more effectual with a few grains of Sal Prunellae added to it. § 2. If also you make it of Purslane or Lettice-wa∣ters instead of the simple Fountain-water, it will yet be more for the occasion; The Waters also distilled
from Citruls and Cucum∣bers, are very good in this Case. VIII. * Julapium Hystericum Faetidum, The Faetide Ju∣lep against Fits of the Mother. Bate.] ℞ The best Asa fetida ʒiss. black Cherry-wa∣ter ℥vj. mix and dissolve without Heat, in a cold Mortar, that the Liquor may be Milky, S. A. give a Spoon∣ful of it in the beginning of the Paroxysm, and repeat it after the end thereof. Salmon.] § 1. Take of this Liquor half a Spoonful or more; Powers of Harts horn, gut. 10. add. 20. mix for a Dose, to be given at the beginning of the Fit, and also at the end thereof. § 2. But for such as can∣not away with the Powers of Harts-horn, instead of so many Drops of them, add half the number of Grains of the Volatile Salt of Harts-horn. IX. * Julapium Hystericum Mi∣thridaticum, The Mithri∣date Julep against Fits of the Mother. Bate.] ℞ Bryony-water compound ℥vj. Mithridate ʒij. Tincture of Castor ℥ij. Syrups of black Cherries; and of El∣der-berries, A. ℥iss. mix S. A. Dose, one or two Spoonfuls in the time of the Fit, or Fainting. Salmon.] § 1. You may often repeat it: and before the coming of the Fit the Sick may take it to four Spoonfuls or more to prevent its access. § 2. In this case whatever the Specifick is which may be given, it will be good to purge before-hand with some proper Hysterick Purge, for by that means these kinds of Juleps will be of much more effect. § 3. For this is certain, that the more the Morbifick cause is carried off, the bet∣ter is the success of Specifick of every kind. X. * Julapium Hystericum Mos∣chatum, The Musked Ju∣lep against Fits of the Mother. Bate.] R. Orange Flower-water ℥vj. Musk ℈ss. Sanguis Draconis ℈j. mix for two Doses in the Paroxysm. Salmon.] § 1. This Recipe is taken from Riverius his Praxis, who mightily com∣mends it even from Experi∣ence it self against Hysterick
Fits, and cites the Authority of Solenander for it, Prax. Med. Lib. 15. Cap. 6. pagi∣nâ meâ. 383. § 2. I have tryed it seve∣ral times, sometimes with extraordinary success; but sometimes without; so that it seems to me, to succeed according as it agrees or dis∣agrees to the natural Habit of the Body. XI. * Julapium Idaeum, Julep of Rasp-berries. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Rasp ber∣ries lbj. white Sugar ℥ij. fair Water lbiss. keep them toge∣ther in a cold place for three hours, and strain out. The Sick may drink of it at plea∣sure to quench Thirst and ex∣tinguish any febrile Heat. Salmon.] § 1. It is bet∣ter to be made with the di∣stilled Water of Wood-sor∣rel, Purslane, or Cucum∣bers. § 2. Its cooling Property may be strengthned by add∣ing to it, a few Grains of Sal Prunellae, whose Effects will be to carry off the Di∣sease by Urine. XII. * Julapium Perlatum, The Pearled Julep. Bate.] ℞ Waters of Ci∣trons, Borrage, Bawm, black Cherries, A. ℥iij. Spirit of black Cherries, or Spirit of Citrons ℥j. double refined Su∣gar ʒvj. Pearls prepared ʒjss. stir them well, S. A. give five or six Spoonfuls at a time in any Fainting. Salmon.] § 1. The Spirit of black Cherries is made of the Juice of black Cherries fer∣mented, almost to acidity, and then the Spirit drawn off in an Alembick, in a very gentle B. M. § 2. It is a good Cordial, and absorbs Acids by virtue of its fixt volatile Alcali which it contains; and there∣by revives the fainting and drooping Spirits. XIII. * Julapium Purpureum, The Purple Julep. Bate.] ℞ Syrup of Vio∣lets ℥iij. Spirit of Vitriol, gut. 30. Barley-water, or fair Water lbij. mix, S. A. It is very good to quench Thirst in burning Fevers. Salmon.] § 1. You ought to take that which is usually called Oil of Vitriol, other∣wise so many drops of the
flegmatick Spirit will not be enough: you may also do the same with Spirit or Oil of Sulphur. § 2. It is one of the best things to abate the violent Heat of burning Fevers, that is; and it carries off much of the Morbifick Mat∣ter by Urine. XIV. * Julapium ad Rachiti∣dem, A Julep against the Rickets. Bate.] ℞ Water of Harts-tongue distilled with two Coho∣bations ℥iv. Confectio Alkermes ʒj. Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers ℥ij. Spirit of Sulphur, gut. vj. Leaves of Gold, No ij. mix and make a pleasing Julep. Dose, two Spoonfuls twice a day. The Ladies say it is of wonderful force. Salmon.] § 1. It is a plea∣sing thing, but what power it has to do what is desired I know not: however it may be used as a Vehicle, to con∣vey such things as are Specifick against the Disease named. § 2. But if you would make it truly effectual to the purpose intended, you ought to add to every Dose thereof gr. j. or ij. of Volatile Salt of Vipers. XV. * Julapium Tartarisatum, A Tartarised Julep. Bate.] ℞ White Tartar in fine Pouder ℥j. Salt of Tar∣tar ℥ss. White-wine lbiijss mix them. Dose. ℥iv. twice a day for eight days, for the cure of the Jaundice. Salmon.] § 1. 'Tis from the fixt Salt, that it is said to cure the Jaundice, and per∣forms the same thing here, which (according to Sylvius de le Boe) the fixt Alcali does in Castle-Soap. § 2. But then, if it was made with an Emulsion of Hemp-seed in White-wine, it might possibly be more powerful to the Intention. § 3. The Crude Tartar is added to take away the loath∣some or urinous Taste of the fixed Salt. XVI. * Julapium Vitae, The Vital Julep, or Julep of Life. Bate.] ℞ Yolks of new laid Eggs, No ij. white Sugar ℥ss. Oil of Cinnamon, gut. iij. White-wine or Canary ℥vj. mix them very well, S. A. It gives great Relief in fainting and swooning Fits, and where there is an extraordi∣nary debility or weakness; as
also to such as are at the point of Death. Salmon.] § 1. It is indeed a good Cordial Julep, and of excellent use to strengthen Women who are apt to mis∣carry; and to cause Con∣ception in such, who are thought to be barren. § 2. It also cures Consumptions in old or young, being used as ordinary Food in the Day∣time, and Morning and E∣vening being taken with the addition of gr. iv. of the Vo∣latile Salt of Vipers, or of Ox-flesh. XVII. Syrupus Allelujae, Sy∣rup of Wood-Sorrel. Bate.] ℞ Juice of Wood-Sorrel lbijss. Red Rose-water lbss. trebble refined Sugar lbjss. mix and digest in B. M. so long till the Feces cease to subside. Salmon.] § 1. It is a cool∣ing Cordial, and may be given in the height of any burning or malignant or pe∣stilential Fever; as also to quench Thirst, and help the Roughness of the Throat and Wind-pipe. § 2. It is given either as a Vehicle to convey other Me∣dicaments in; or as a draught to quench Thirst, and allay the vehement Heat. § 3. For this latter give it thus. ℞ Milk-water or black Cherry-water ℥vj. or vij. of this Syrup ℥jss. or ij. mix for a draught. XVIII. Syrupus Antiscorbuti∣cus, Syrup against the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Fresh and ten∣der Pine-tops, Sea Scurvy-grass, Brook-lime, Water-cresses, A. p. aeq. bruise them, and ex∣press their Juice, of which take lbiij. Juice of Oranges ℥vj. mix and clarifie well with Whites of Eggs: then add double or trebble refined Sugar lbij. and boil to the consisten∣cy of a Syrup, S. A. being cooled add thereto Spirit of Scurvy-grass ℥ij. Salmon.] § 1. The Title shews the Vertues for which it is an excellent thing; it o∣pens Obstructions of the Vis∣cera to a Miracle, and puri∣fies the Blood. § 2. The Patient may take of it four Spoonfuls in a little Ale or Mead, in the Morning fasting; as much an Hour before Dinner; and the like quantity last at Night going to Bed. § 3. If Juice of Plantane an equal quantity be added to it, twill be so much the better, for Plantane (I have
found by experience) is a Specifick against the Scur∣vy. XIX. * Syrupus Balsamicus, The Balsamick Syrup. Bate.] ℞ Balsam of Tolu ℥ij. Coltsfoot-flower-water ℥xij. boil in a circulatory Glass well luted in a Sand-heat for three hours: strain, and being cold add thereto trebble refined Su∣gar ℥xx. and make a Syrup without heat. After the same manner you may make the Sy∣rup of Benjamine, and Syrup of Styrax. Salmon.] § 1. You had better make it of the Tin∣cture after this manner. ℞ Of the Tincture in Cap. 7. Sect. 62. aforegoing ℥viij. Syrup of double refined Sugar made with Spirit of Wine ℥xij. mix them. § 2. It has the Vertues of the Tincture, being a famous thing against Rheumatisms and wandering Pains. § 3. It may be thus given. ℞ Of this Syrup ʒij. or iij. Aquae lactis Alexiteriae ℥iij. or iv. Syrup of Red Poppies ℥ss. mix for a Dose, to sweat upon. XX. * Syrupus Benedictus, The Blessed Syrup. Bate.] ℞ Of the Infusio Benedicta, in (Chap. 14. Sect. 4. aforegoing) ℥xij. white Sugar ℥iv. mix, and exhale in B. M. to the consistency of a Syrup, S. A. Dose, a Spoon∣ful or two, &c. for In∣fants. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good Purge to be given in the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, Kings-Evil, or Rheumatism, twice a Week. § 2 R. Of this Syrup; Syrup of Damask Roses, A. one Spoonful, to be given a Child: But to a Man thus: ℞ Of this Syrup ℥jss. Syrup of Buck∣thorn, of Damask Roses, A. ℥ss. mix for a Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting. XXI. * Syrupus Cardiacus Au∣ratus, The Golden Cordial Syrup. Bate.] ℞ Celandine-water compound lbj. the best white Sugar lbij. dissolve in a gentle heat, and add Syrup of the Juice of Kermes, Syrup of Coral compound, A. ℥ij. Leaves of Gold, No 20. mix S. A.
Salmon.] § 1. It is a great Cordial, good against all malign and pestilential Di∣seases, Measles, Small-Pox, &c. § 2. It prevails mightily against fainting and swoon∣ing Fits, palpitation of the Heart, Consumptions, Sick∣ness at Stomach, &c. § 3. Give it thus. ℞ Aq. Lactis alexiter. or black Cher∣ry-water ℥iv. of this Syrup ℥j. Oil of Cinnamon, gut. ij. Tincture of Saffron ʒj. mix for a Dose. XXII. * Syrupus Chalybeatus, The Chalybeat or Steeled Syrup. Bate.] ℞ Sal of Mars ʒij. dissolve it in Gentian-water compound ℥j. to which add Syrupus de Pomis alterans ℥ix. mix, S. A. Dose, ℥ss. ad ℥iss. &c. Salmon.] § 1. You had bet∣ter make it of Lemery's tar∣tarizated Tincture of Mars, which you may see at large Cap. 7. Sect. 26. aforego∣ing. § 2. ℞ Of this Tartarized Tincture ℥x. of the Syrups of Juice of Scurvy-grass and Centory, A. ℥viij. mix them in a gentle B. M. § 3. It cures the Rickets in Children, and the Green-sickness in Virgins, and pre∣vails against Obstructions of the Viscera, Gouts, Dropsies, Rheumatisms: Dose, of this latter Preparation two, three, or four Spoonfuls at Night going to Bed. XXIII. * Syrupus Chalybeatus alius, Another Chalybeat∣ed or Steeled Syrup. Bate.] ℞ Vinum Chaly∣beatum (in Chap. 12. Sect. 4. aforegoing) well filtred lbij. the best white Sugar lbj. mix and exhale with a gentle Fire to the consistency of a Sy∣rup. Dose, the same with the former. Salmon.] § 1. It has the Vertues of the former, and in my Opinion is something pleasanter to be taken, by reason of the Wine. § 2. It may be given ab ℥ij. ad ℥iij. according to the age of the Sick and strength of the Disease, at Night go∣ing to Bed: but if in the Morning, let it be fasting, and good exercise after it.
XXIV. * Syrupus Chalybeatus Corallatus, The Corallate Syrup of Steel. Bate.] ℞ Raspings of Red Sanders ℥iv. Raspings of white Sanders, Cinnamon, Red Co∣ral, A. ℥j. the best Red or Claret-wine lbiss. the Vessel being stopt, digest in a Sand heat for twenty four hours; then strain out the clear, to which add white Sugar trebble refi∣ned lbj. and make a Syrup, S. A. to which add the Salt of Mars calcined to Redness (dis∣solved in Quince-water) ℥ss. mix them. It wonderfully astringes and strengthens, and is of mighty use against all sorts of Fluxes, chiefly the Hepatick. Dose, ℥ss. ad ℥j. Salmon.] § 1. It is with∣out doubt a good thing to strengthen the Stomach and other Viscera, being given after due purging in the Dropsie, and other like Di∣seases, which require often and strong Purging. § 2. You may give it Morning and Evening from ℥ss. ad ℥ij. in some proper Vehicle, adding Tinct. of Catechu ʒj. XXV. * Syrupus de Croco, Sy∣rup of Saffron. Bate.] ℞ The best English Saffron ʒij. Tears dropping from the Heads of the Turkey or Egyptian Poppies, dryed upon an Iron Plate, and pou∣dred ℥ss. Spirit of Vitriol, gut. 30. Water distilled from the whole Citron ℥viij. digest in B. M. so as the Tincture may be extracted, which care∣fully filter: Then, ℞ Trebble refined Sugar ℥xviij. Water of the whole Citron ℥vj. boil (and despumate) to the thick∣ness of a Syrup, to which add the afore-made Tincture, ma∣king the Syrup of a due con∣sistency without boiling. Dose, ʒj. ad ʒiij. and more. Salmon.] § 1. These Tears of Poppies, exprest with so much Circumlocution, are nothing but the vulgar Tur∣key Opium, which is to be dryed on an Iron Plate, so as be reduced to Pouder. § 2. It is an Anodyn Cor∣dial good to ease Pains, cause Sleep, provoke Sweat, stop Fluxes, being given in any proper Vehicle.
XXVI. Syrupus ad Fissuras, A Syrup against Clefts or Chaps of the Skin. Bate.] ℞ Gum Arabick ʒij. Sugar-candy ℥ss. Red Rose-wa∣ter ℥ij. mix and boil into a li∣quid Syrup. It is the best of Remedies against Clefts or Chaps in Womens Breasts. Salmon.] § 1. Inwardly given it is profitable against Fluxes of all kinds, because it much abates the Acrimony of the Humor. § 2. It is also good against Ca∣tarrs, Coughs, Colds, Hoars∣ness, Shortness of Breath, Ul∣cers of the Lungs; see it in our Seplasium, Lib. 9. Cap. 6. Sect. 6. § 3. Give it with a Li∣quorice-stick, and in Ulcers of the Lungs, mixt with a little Tincture of Cinna∣mon. XXVII. Syrupus Haemoptoi∣cus, Syrup against Spitting of Blood. Bate.] ℞ Juices of Ground Ioy, of Plantane, of Agrimo∣ny, of Housleek, of Purslane, all depurated, to lbss. Sugar of Roses double quantity, mix and make a Syrup, S. A. Dose, ℥ij. mixt with Milk-water ℥vj. every Morning, and the same quantity at Bed-time in ℥iv. of Red or Corn Poppy-water. Salmon.] § 1. You may give it according to the Di∣rection, adding to each Dose Tincture of Catechu ʒij. which is a Specifick in this case. § 2. If the Flux be inve∣terate and vehement, and not easie to be stopt, it ought to be repeated in Milk-water at Noon; and at Bed time gr. j. or ij. of our Volatile Laudanum ought to be added to it. XXVIII. * Syrupus Jovialis, Syrup made with Tin. Bate.] ℞ Filings of Tin ℥vj. of Mars ℥ij. Fountain-water lbvj. infuse all for forty hours; then add Tamarisk M. ij. Bark of Caper-roots ℥jss. Raisons ℥iv. Aniseeds ℥j. boil to the Consumption of lbiv. strain, and add white Sugar lbj. clarifie, and boil to the Consistency of a Syrup. Dose, ℥j. every Morning with Ma∣gistral-water of Earth-worms ℥ij. It prevails mightily a∣gainst Hypochondriack Me∣lancholy, Cachexia, Green-sickness, Yellow Jaundice, &c. Salmon.] § 1. I know not what good the Filings of Tin or Mars can do in this Pre∣paratio nor what Vertue
so simple a Menstruum as Fountain-water is, can ex∣tract from them without the help of an Acid, such as is that of Vinegar, or Crude Tartar. § 2. In my Opinion, it would be much better to make the Syrup by it self without the Filings▪ adding a little Vinegar or Juice of Limons thereto; and then af∣terwards to add thereto Salt of Tin ʒiij. Salt of Mars ʒjss. by which means it will be made much more power∣ful and effectual to the Pur∣poses intended. § 3. You may then give it à ʒiv. ad ʒvj. in the Wa∣ter aforenamed, or other proper Vehicle. XXIX. * Syrupus Limacum, Syrup of Snails. Bate.] ℞ Garden Snails, gathered before the Rising of the Sun, freed from their Shells and cut in pieces lbj. Sugar-Candy in fine Pouder lbss. mix them, and put them into Hippocrates his Sleeve in a Cellar, that the Liquor may drop through in a Syrup. It may also be made of the Snails perforated with the Shells and Sugar-Candy. Dose, j, Spoon∣ful every hour, in Ulcers of the Lungs, Consumptions, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The best way of Administration of it is thus. ℞ Milk-water ℥ij. choice Canary ℥j. of this Sy∣rup j, Spoonful: Volatile Salt of Hogs-flesh gr. j, mix for a Dose, to be given to Chil∣dren. § 2. But for Men thus, ℞ Milk-water ℥iij. choice Ca∣nary ℥jss. of this Syrup ℥iss. Volatile Salt of Ox-flesh gr. iij. mix for a Dose, to be given in like manner. XXX. * Syrupus Lumbricorum, Syrup of Earth-worms. Bate.] ℞ New gathered Earth-worms, and well clean∣sed lbj. put them into a Glass with a narrow mouth well stopt; wrap up the whole Glass, in Paste made of Wheat-flow∣er and Water, which bake in an Oven with House-wives Bread: then strain out the Liquor, to which add trebble refined Sugar, q. s. and make a Syrup. Dose, ℥j. at a time in some Chalybeat Vehicle. Salmon.] § 1. Its design is against Epileptick, and A∣poplectick Fits, and other Distempers of the Head, Brain, and Womb, and is said to be a Specifick against Rheumatisms.
§ 2. The way of using it is thus. ℞ Chalybeat Wine, Milk-water, black Cherry-wa∣ter A. ℥ij. of this Syrup ℥j. Salt of Mans or Beasts Skulls, or of Ox-flesh, gr. ij. ad iv. mix for a Dose, to be given at Bed-time. XXXI. * Syrupus de Myrrha, Syrup of Myrrh. Bate.] ℞ Of the best Myrrh ʒv. Saffron ℈iv. Hyssop, Colts-foot, A. M. iij. Maiden-hair M. j. Cotton-seed ℥j. Rai∣sons stoned ℥iij. White-wine lbjss. boil to one half: strain and add white Sugar ℥viij. and bring it to the consistency of a Syrup, S. A. It is Pecto∣ral, Asthmatick, Aperitive and Emmenagogick, or pro∣voking the Terms, &c. Dose, ab ℥j. ad ℥ij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. You may make it of the Tincture drawn from the Myrrh with common Spirit of Wine, if you so please; which in some Cases (as in Ulcers of the Lungs, Ruptures of the Ves∣sels, &c.) will be more ef∣fectual. § 2. You may use it thus. ℞ Milk-water, black Cherry-water, A. ℥ijss. Water distil∣led from Hogs-flesh ℥ij. of this Syrup ℥jss. Tincture of Ca∣techu ʒij. ad ʒiv. mix for a Dose. XXXII. Syrupus Peponicus, Syrup of Pepons, Pompi∣ons, or Melons. Bate.] ℞ The Flesh of ripe fresh Pompions or Melons lbijss. cut it very small, to which add trebble refined Su∣gar in fine Pouder lbj. lay them S. S. S. in a glazed Pot: put upon the top of the Mixture a Weight of one or two Pounds (for some hours) and make a Syrup in a cold place, S. A. Dose, three Spoonfuls twice a day, with Pulvis Haly ʒj. against Phthisicks, Consump∣tions, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Whether the common Melon or the Musk-melon is intended is scarcely determinable, for the Latin Name will indifferent∣ly serve for both; but they being much of a Nature, you may take which you like best; however the common great Pumkin or Melon is most styptick, and therefore the most fit for this occasi∣on. § 2. You may exhibit it thus. ℞ Milk-water, Poppy-water, A. ℥ij. of this Syrup ℥jss. Tincture of Catechu ʒiij. Volatile Salt of Hogs-flesh gr.
ij. mix for a Dose. Or you may put in the Pulvis Haly (as in the Prescript) upon oc∣sion. XXXIII. * Syrupus de Peto, Syrup of Tobacco. Bate.] ℞ Juice of English Tobacco lbiv. Oxymel simple ℥iv. Hydromel lbj. mix and digest four days, that it may be well defecated: decant the clear, and digest again till the Matter is freed from all its Impurities: then add white Sugar lbij. and boil into a Syrup, S. A. Dose, half a Spoonful to two Spoonfuls for several days: it prevails admirably against the Epilep∣sie, Cough, Asthma, Suffocative Catarrh, Phthisick, Pain of the Stomach, restoration of decayed Sight, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is an E∣metick, and therefore is to be taken with caution; but the longer it is digested the better it will be, and the more divested of its vomit∣ing Property. § 2. It is Quercetan's Pre∣scription, which you may see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 16. Sect. 91. It o∣pens all sorts of Obstructions, expectorates Flegm, is good against Catarrhs, King's-Evil, Agues, and Rheumatisms, and carries off the Recre∣ments of Diseases by Stool, being often taken. XXXIV. * Syrupus de Rapis, Syrup of Turneps. Bate.] ℞ Turneps pared and cut into thin slices lbiij. trebble refined Sugar in fine Pouder lbj. lay them S. S. S. in an Earthen Vessel; let them stand together in the Vessel, (with a Weight put upon them) for twelve hours then strain out. It alle∣viates the Acrimony of Cho∣ler, and helps the roughness of the Aspera Arteria, and Bronchia of the Lungs. Salmon.] § 1. It is design∣ed for a Pectoral, and 'tis a good one; and is said to be of extraordinary use in cu∣ring Consumptions of all sorts. § 2. Some make it thus. ℞ Turneps full grown, and new gathered q. v. bake them in an Oven with House-wives Bread, then press forth the Juice, to every Pound of which (depurated with Whites of Eggs) add lbj. of trebble refined Sugar, which melt and mix in B. M.
XXXV. Syrupus Sambucinus Compositus, Syrup of Elder Compound. Bate.] ℞ Ripe Elder-ber∣ries freed from their Stalks lbij. Currants cleansed and cut lbj. dryed Flowers of Bor∣rage, Bugloss, Violets, Red Roses, A. ℥ss. Red or Claret Wine lbij. boil all in a little Still: strain out, and to the clear Liquor add the equal quantity of trebble refined Su∣gar, and boil into a Syrup S. A. Micklethw. It is A∣lexipharmick, Cardiack, and Uterine; provokes Sweat∣ing, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Being con∣stantly taken for sometime, it prevails against the Scur∣vy, Dropsie, and Gout, and helps all dissaffections of the Heart and Womb. § 2. You may use it thus. ℞ Aq. Bryoniae compositae ℥ss. Water of Juniper-berries ℥iij. of this Syrup ℥ij. mix for a Dose. Or thus. ℞ Aq. Lactis alexiteriae ℥iij. of this Syrup ℥ij. Syrup of Juice of Citrons ℥j. Tincture of Saffron ʒj. mix for a Cordial against Faint∣ing, Swooning, and Palpita∣tion. XXXVI. * Syrupus de Scam∣monio, Syrup of Scam∣mony. Bate.] ℞ Diagredium ʒvj. Raisons stoned, white Sugar, A. ℥viij. S. V. lbij. boil with a gentle fire, simpering it a∣way to the Consumption of one half, then strain out for a purging Syrup. Dose, ℥ss. ad ℥jss. Salmon.] § 1. It purges all Humors, chiefly such as are cold, slimy, and watery, and may be given safely even to Children who abound with superfluity of Evil Hu∣mours. § 2. ℞ New Ale which has not done working ℥iv. of this Syrup ℥j. Plus-minus: mix for a Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting. It is sin∣gular against the Gout, Dropsie, Scurvy, Jaundice, King's-Evil, and other like rebellious Diseases; but it ought to be several times taken in a Course.
XXXVII. Syrupus Syde∣reus, Syrup of Mars or Iron. Bate.] ℞ Tincture of Mars or Iron (which see in its place) carefully filtred lbij. trebble refined Sugar lbj. mix and exhale in B M. to the consistency of a Syrup, S. A. It is much more effectual than the Chalybeat Syrup in Obstructions, &c. Dose, ʒij. ad ʒ vj, &c. Salmon.] § 1. See the Tin∣cture of Iron, Cap. 7. Sect. 17. aforegoing: this our Author affirms is much better than the Chalybeat Syrup at Sect. 22. above: which is made of the Salt of Mars. § 2. It opens all manner of Obstructions, sweetens the Mass of Blood, cures the Green-sickness in Virgins; and most Diseases of the Womb in Women-kind, pro∣voking the Terms, &c. XXXVIII Syrupus de Sul∣phure, Syrup of Sulphur. Bate.] ℞ The Hepar Sul∣phuris ℥ij. Spanish Wine lbj. mix and digest three days, then decant the tinged Wine and filter it. ℞ Coltsfoot-water lbj. trebble refined Sugar lbiij. boil to a thick Consistency de∣spumating it, to which add the former Tincture, and make a Syrup of a due substance, S. A. It is a singular thing against Asthma's, Coughs, Phthisicks, Plague, &c. Dose, ℥ss. ad ℥j. Salmon.] § 1. How the Hepar Sulphuris is made see in Cap. 9. Sect. 105. afore∣going of this Book: where you have the various ways of making it, with its seve∣ral Vertues and Uses. § 2. It heals and drys up Ulcers in the Lungs and Parts adjacent, prevails a∣gainst Catarrhs, and Rheums tho' never so violent, and is of good use to stop a violent Salivation. XXXIX. Syrupus Tolutanus Magistralis, A Magistral Syrup of Balsam of To∣lu. Bate.] ℞ Balsam of Tolu, Balm of Mecha, or Gillead, or for want thereof Balsamum Capivi, Styrax Calamita, choice Benjamine, Olibanum, Mastich, Myrrh, Ammonia∣cum in Grains, Taccamahaca, Gum Elemi, Chio Turpentine, Roots of Florentine Orrice, A. ℥ss. Aquae Bechicae lbjss. boil in a circulatory Vessel well closed in a Sand-heat, for some hours; strain out, and add
trebble refined Sugar q. ss. ma∣king a very white Syrup, S. A. It is Pectoral, Antiasthmatick, Antiphthisick, &c. Dose, ℥ss. ad ℥j, &c. Salmon.] § 1. How the Aqua Bechica is to be made see in Cap. 1. Sect. 6. where you have its Vertues and Uses; it being chiefly design'd for the Composition of this Syrup. § 2. The Ingredients of this Composition are chiefly Gums, but of such differing Natures, that they will not easily unite, (or not pleasant∣ly) in the Operation: some of them the Bechick-water will almost dissolve as the Myrrh; out of others it will only extract a Tincture, as the Balsams, &c. some it will make into a kind of white Liquor as the Ammo∣niacum: and some it will hardly touch at all, as the Benjamine, Olibanum, &c. so that upon the whole, it seems not to be composed (whoever was the Author of it) with much Art. § 3. Modus Utendi. ℞ Milk-water, or Ptisan ℥iv. of this Syrup ℥j. Tincture of Catechu ℥ss. mix for a Dose at Night going to Bed: but if in a violent Cough it be often ta∣ken in the day time, let the Tincture of Catechu be only ʒij. XL. Syrupus Vermifugus, A Syrup to kill Worms. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Bears-foot new gathered ℥ij: Worm-seed ℥jss. fresh Bryony-roots ℥ss. Roman Worm-wood M . ij. fair Water q.  mix and boil to lbj. strain, and add trebble refined Sugar lbj. and then boil again, S. A. Dose, one Spoonful twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. It will really kill Worms, but it is so vio∣lent and dangerous, that it ought only to be given to strong Constitutions. I am an Eye-witness of the Tra∣gedies that have been perpe∣trated with it, several to my knowledge having lost their Lives by taking it; of such a malign Nature is this Helle∣boraster or Bears-foot; tho' I must confess, that those mis∣carriages, that have happen∣ed in the use thereof, I am fully perswaded were caused from the over-dosing the Pa∣tient therewith. § 2. It is much better to give it in too small a Dose than in too large, and aug∣ment it gradually as you see the Patient can bear it; but to be sure that it may do no hurt, the better way will be to let it quite alone.
XLI † Julapium aperiens mi∣nus Compositum, The o∣pening Julep, the less Com∣position. ℞ Waters of Cinna∣mon, Wormwood the great∣er Composition, Scurvy-grass compound, Syrup of Ammonia∣cum, A. lbjss. Water of bitter Almonds lbx. mix, and add Sal Martis ʒvj. dissolved in triple its weight of Elder Flower-water, and cleared from the Residence. Salmon.] § 1. It is cor∣dial and opening; and be∣ing constantly taken for some time removes obdurate Ob∣structions; but then it would be good to take some proper Purge, once a Week to carry off the Recrements of the Disease. § 2. It provokes the Terms, opens Stoppages of the Womb, and is good against the Green-sickness in Vir∣gins, Weakness of Stomach, Loss of Appetite, &c. Dose, ℥iij. ad ℥vj. Morning and Night. XLII. † Julapium Aperiens magis Compositum, The o∣pening Julep the greater Composition. To the above-named things in the former Com∣position, add, common Worm∣wood, Camomile-flowers, A ʒx. Nutmegs, Saffron, A. ʒvj. Ca∣storeum ℥ss. Salmon.] § 1. By the ad∣dition of these Ingredients the Julep is made the more Cordial, Stomatick, and Hy∣sterick; and in some kind they will assist the Aperitive faculty. § 2. It is more powerful than the former, prevails a∣gainst the same Diseases, and may be given in the same Dose and Manner: Besides, this is singularly good against most Diseases of the Head and Brain. § 3. The Preparation of the Salt of Mars: See in Cap. 10. Sect. 54. of this Book aforegoing, and in se∣veral other places of the same.
XLIII. † Syrupus Antepidemi∣cus, A Syrup against Epi∣demical Diseases. ℞ Fresh Roots of Butter∣bur lbj. fresh Scordium ℥vj. Rue ℥ij. infuse them for three days in Juice of green Wall∣nuts lbiv. in a gentle heat: strain from the Residence, and to the clear add trebble refined Sugar, the double weight, and make a Syrup. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against the Measles, Small-Pox, spotted and malign Fe∣vers, Plague, and all o∣ther Epidemical distempers, strengthning the Stomach, and driving the Infection from the Heart and Vi∣tals. § 2. In the Measles and Small-Pox give it thus. ℞ Aq. Lactis Alexiteriae ℥iij. or iv. Aq. Mirabilis, Theria∣calis, A. ℥ss. of this Syrup ℥ij. mix, and give it Morning and Night. § 3. In the Plague give it thus. ℞ Choice Canary ℥vj. of this Syrup ℥ij. Oil of Sul∣phur, gut. q. s. to give it a grateful Acidity: mix, and give it every Morning fast∣ing as a Dose for Preven∣tion. § 4. But for Cure, thus: ℞ Carduus-water ℥iv. of our Aqua Bezoartica ℥j. of this Syrup ℥ijss. Oil of Sulphur, gut. viij. mix for a Dose to sweat upon. XLIV. † Syrupus Antihydro∣picus, i. e. Jalapii, Syrup against the Dropsie, or Syrup of Jallap. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Jallap in fine Pouder ℥iv. S. V. re∣ctified lbijss. mix and digest in a very gentle heat, and ex∣tract a Tincture: in this Tin∣cture dissolve trebble refined Sugar lbij. and keep it for use. § 2 It purges Wind, Wa∣ter and Flegm from the Vis∣cera, and extream Parts; and is therefore of good use in curing Dropsies, Gouts, King's-Evil, and other like rebellious Diseases. § 3. You may give it thus. ℞ Barley-water, Pti∣san, Ana. ℥ij. Syrup of Da∣mask Roses ʒvj. of this Sy∣rup ℥j. mix for a Dose, to be given in the Morning fast∣ing. XLV. † Syrupus Aurantiorum, Syrup of Oranges. ℞ Orange-flower-water one part: trebble refined Sugar two parts: mix and make a Syrup.
Salmon.] § 1. It is a Ce∣phalick and Cordial, and mostly used either to dulcifie, and as it were aromatize o∣ther Medicaments, as Spirits, and Waters Chymically pre∣pared, such as are Rosa Solis, and such like. § 2. Or it is used as a Ve∣hicle to convey Cephalick, Cardiack, and Uterine Me∣dicaments in; as also to mix with sweet Perfumes, as Tin∣ctures of Musk and Amber∣grise. See our Seplasium, Lib. 8. Cap. 8. Sect. 1. XLVI † Syrupus Benzoini, Sy∣rup of Benjamine. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tincture of Benjamine (as we have taught the making of it in Cap. 7. Sect. 63. of this Book aforegoing) lbij. trebble refined Sugar in fine Pouder, q. s. put them into a Circu∣latory Vessel, and in a gentle Sand-heat dissolve, digesting till they are perfectly uni∣ted. § 2. It is an excellent Su∣dorifick, (as consisting of the most essential part of the Benjamine) and of very pure and subtil parts, whereby it subtilizes bad Humors, and expels them thro' the Pores of the Skin. § 3. It is also pectoral, and cuts and loosens Tarta∣rous flegm, and thick viscous Humors in the Brest and Lungs, being given in Prisan, or some pectoral Decoction, made of Figs, Raisons, Li∣quorice, &c. for so it cures inveterate Coughs. Asthma's, Hoarseness, Difficulty of Breathing, Cholicks, &c. Dose, ℥ss. XLVII. † Syruput Capivij, vel de Tolu, Syrup of the Balsam Copayba, or Bal∣sam of Tolu. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tincture of Balsam Capivij. or Tin∣cture of the Balsam de Tolu (the Preparations of which we have taught, Cap. 7. Sect. 61, 62. of this Book aforego∣ing) lbj. Syrupus Volatilis lbiss. (the making of which, see in our Phylaxa Medicinae, Lib. 1. Cap. 61. Sect. 6.) mix and digest them together. § 2. The Syrupus Capivij is an excellent Antivenerial, and a Specifick in curing of a Gonorrhoea, whether simple or virulent, Universals being premised; it provokes Sweat, and cures most Diseases which are to be cured by sweating. Dose, ʒvj. in a proper Vehicle.
§ 3. The Syrupus de Tolu, has also the same Vertues, being indeed a Specifick a∣gainst the French Pox, as also against the Gonorrhoea, or any Reliques of the foul Disease: It prevails also a∣gainst Rheumatisms, Scurvy, Dropsie and Gout, running and wandering Pains in any part of the Body, and heals any Canker or Ulcer in the Mouth tho' never so rebelli∣ous. Dose, ℥ss. add ℥j. in any Antivenerial Vehicle. XLVIII. † Syrupus Contempe∣rans, i. e. Mastiches, Sy∣rup contemperating, or Syrup of Mastich. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tincture of Mastich, (which see Cap. 7. Sect. 83. aforegoing) Sy∣rupus Volatilis Ana. mix and digest them together for a Sy∣rup. § 2. it is Cephalick, Neu∣rotick, and Stomatick, good against Vertigo's, Lethargies, Megrims, Apoplexies, Epi∣lepsies, Palsies, Convulsions; strengthens and fortifies the Stomach, stops Vomiting, and restores the Tone of the Viscera. § 3. It stops Fluxes of the Bowels of all sorts, stops bleeding and spitting of Blood, Catarrhs, is good a∣gainst Coughs, Colds, Hoarse∣ness, Asthma's, &c. and re∣presses the Acrimony of sharp Humors. § 4. Dose, à ʒj. ad ʒiv. in any proper Vehicle. ℞ Aq. Lactis Alexiteria, or black Cherry-water ℥iv. ad vj. of this Syrup ʒj. ad ʒiv. mix for a Dose to be given at Night going to Bed, and in the Morning fasting. XLIX. † Syrupus Exonerans, i. e. Scammonij, The pur∣ging Syrup, or Syrup of Scammony. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Lac Scam∣monij, (which Preparation see Cap. 9. Sect. 109. afore∣going) lbij. and with an e∣qual quantity of trebble refi∣ned Sugar, make it into a Sy∣rup by melting in a Bath. § 2. Or thus. ℞ Lac Scammonij lbij. Syrupus Sac∣chari lbiij. (which see in our Phylaxa Medicinae, Lib. 1. Cap. 61. Sect. 5.) mix, and digest them together into a Syrup. § 3. Here is to be noted, That tho' this Syrup might be made with the Tincture extracted with S. V. yet it would not be near so good nor so strong, because that the Cathartick Vertue not lying wholly in the Resinous
parts of the mixt, but partly in the Resinous parts, partly in the Watery parts the Spi∣rit would only touch what lies in Resin, letting what lies in the Watery parts alone; whereas the Lac Scammonij, being made with a mixt Menstruum extracts equally the Cathartick Particles of both parts, which being as∣sumed in this Composition, renders the Preparation much more preferrable. § 4. It is a most delicate Purge, carrying off all sorts of Humors very sweetly and pleasantly, and may serve very well for such as cannot swallow Pills: it works safe∣ly and easily, and in a short time after it is taken, but Broth ought to be taken af∣ter it, as after other Purges. § 5. It is prevalent against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Jaun∣dice, Gout, King's-Evil, and Rheumatism, opens all sorts of Obstructions, and exo∣nerates the Body of all sorts of Watery and Tartarous humors. Dose, of either from two Spoonfuls to four or five in the Morning fast∣ing. L. † Syrupus Faetidus, i.e. Asae Faetidae, The ill-scented Syrup, or Syrup of Asa fetida. Salmon.] § 1. Tincture of Asa fetida (see it Cap. 7. Sect. 60. aforegoing) lbij. trebble refined Sugar lbiij. in fine Pouder: melt them into a Syrup in the heat of a Bath. § 2. It is a Specifick a∣gainst the Falling-sickness, Fits of the Mother, and o∣ther Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb. § 3. It is good also against Vapors, rising of the Lights, (as 'tis called) Obstructions of the Spleen, and other Diseases of the Bowels. Dose, ℥ss. add ℥j. in any proper Vehicle. LI. † Syrupus Guajaci composi∣tus, Syrup of Guajacum compound. ℞ Guajacum ℥iv. Nut∣megs ℥ss. Sassafras ʒij. white Sugar lbiv. dissolved in Aqua Guajaci lbij. boil gently, and despumate. Salmon.] § 1. This can be no strong Syrup of the Gua∣jacum, unless by the Aqua Guajaci is meant the Acid Spirit of Guajacum; for that
possibly may draw a Tin∣cture out of the Wood, and the other Ingredients. § 2. But out of the Rasp∣ings of the Guajacum and Sas∣safras, and gross Pouder of the Nutmegs, you may with Tar∣tarized S. V. draw a famous Tincture, which with its equal weight of trebble refined Su∣gar in fine Pouder, you may by the gentle heat of a Bal∣neo in a Circulatory Vessel melt into a Syrup of singular use. § 3. It sweetens and pu∣rifies the Blood, is Sudorifick, and a good thing against the French Pox, virulent Gonor∣rhoea, and other Symptoms attending that Disease. § 4. It may be daily taken by the Sick in all their drink, or if they think that too much, only Morning, Noon, and Night. Dose, ℥ss. ad ℥j. or more. § 5. This Syrup may also be made of the Tincture of the Cortex, at Cap. 7. Sect. 18. adding the other Ingredi∣ents in this Prescript, melt∣ing it into a Syrup with its equal weight of trebble re∣fined Sugar. LII. † Syrupus Hystericus, i.e. Galbani, The hysterick Sy∣rup, or Syrup of Galba∣num. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tincture of Galbanum (at Cap. 7. Sect. 79. aforegoing) trebble refined Sugar, A. lbij. mix, and melt (in the heat of a Bath into a Syrup.) § 2. It opens Obstructions, and is a Specifick against Diseases of the Womb, as Vapors, hysterick Fits, Hy∣pochondriack Melancholy, Obstructions, Pains, and Scirrha's of the Spleen, &c. having all the Vertues of the Tincture afore-mention∣ed. § 3. Dose, à ʒj. ad ʒij. or more, in some proper Hy∣sterick Vehicle, (due purging having been premised) to be given first in the Morning fasting, and last at Night go∣ing to Bed. LIII. † Syrupus Hypnoticus Pe∣ctoralis, A sleeping Pecto∣ral Syrup. ℞ White Sugar lbiv. O∣range-flower-water ℥xvj. Da∣mask Rose-water ℥viij. mix and melt them into a Syrup: to which add Nutmegs, Saf∣fron,
A. ʒij. liquid Lauda∣num, q. s. or so much that one Ounce of the Syrup may con∣tain, gr. j. of of pure Opi∣um; mix them, and boil a little, to cause the Scum to arise. Or thus. With Wa∣ter of Elder-flowers and Da∣mask Roses, A. lbj. and the addition of ʒj. of Castor, com∣pleat the Syrup. Salmon.] § 1. It eases all manner of Pains, provokes a gentle Sweat, and causes pleasant Sleep: it gives ease in all inveterate and violent Coughs and Colds, stops Ca∣tarrhs, and Rheums, Bloody-fluxes, and Fluxes of all sorts, whether of the Belly or Womb; and is of singu∣lar use against Defluxions upon the Joints, Gouts, and all sorts of Rheumatick Pains in any part of the Body. § 2. It is to be given at Night going to Bd in some pectoral Decoction, ab ℥ss. ad ℥ij. according to the Age, and Constitution of the Sick, and Nature or Violence of the Sickness. LIV. † Syrupus Hypnoticus Bal∣samicus, A Balsamick sleep∣ing Syrup. ℞ It is made of the pecto∣ral Balsamick Syrup (at Sect. 58. following) by the additi∣on of liquid Laudanum, so much that one Ounce of the Syrup may contain gr. j. of Opium. Salmon.] § 1. It has all the Vertues of the former, but is more Pectoral and Balsamick, and therefore a greater Healer, being of ex∣traordinary use in a Phthisis or Ulcer of the Lungs, and cures a virulent Gonor∣rhoea, easing the Pain, ta∣king away the Sharpness of Urine, and healing the Ulcer. § 2. It is to be taken chiefly at Night going to Bed, à ℥ss. ad ℥ij. or iij. as the Physician shall direct, and in some proper Bal∣samick Vehicle. If the Di∣sease be vehement or inve∣terate, it may sometimes be taken twice a day.
LV. † Syrupus Jovis, i. e. Ammoniaci, Syrup of Tin, or Syrup of Gum Ammo∣niacum. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Lac Am∣moniaci, double refined Sugar, A. mix, and melt them into a Syrup in the heat of a Bath. § 2. How the Lac Ammo∣niaci is made you may see in Cap. 11. Sect. 10. of this Book aforegoing, being a Specifick in Diseases of the Lungs. § 3. This Syrup opens Obstructions of the Lungs and Womb, and is good a∣gainst thin salt and sharp Rheums, Coughs, Whea∣sings, Hoarseness, Disaffecti∣ons of the Spleen and Bow∣els, Cachexia's, Scurvey, Dropsie, Jaundice, Gout, &c. § 4. Dose, two or three Spoonfuls at a time in the Morning fasting in a Glass of White or Rhenish Wine, or some deobstructive Li∣quor. LVI. † Syrupus Martis, Sy∣rup of Mars. ℞ Sal Martis ℥j. dissolve it in Water of bitter Al∣monds ℥iij. add to it Syrup of Elder-flowers lbvj. mix them; then add again Gum Ammo∣niacum ʒvj. tops of Worm∣wood, Camomil-flowers, Cin∣namon, Nutmegs, Saffron, A. ʒiij. Castor ʒjss. boil gently taking off the Scum. Salmon.] § 1. It is intend∣ed against Womens Diseases, chiefly Obstructions of the Womb, and Diseases proceed∣ing there from, as the Green∣sickness in Virgins, Ca∣chexia's, Dropsies, Gouts, Scurvy, Jaundice, and other obdurate and rebellious Di∣stempers. § 2. It sweetens the Mass of Blood, abates the Acri∣mony of Humors, and is a singular thing against the King's-Evil in old or young, Pains of the Spleen, Hy∣pochondriack Melancholy, and other Diseases of like kind. § 3. Dose, two or three Spoonfuls or more in a Glass of steeled Wine at Night going to Bed, Universals being first premised.
LVII. † Syrupus Odoratus mi∣nor, i. e. Benzoini & Sty∣racis, The lesser sweet∣scented Syrup, or Syrup of Benjamine and Storax. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tinctures of Benjamine and Storax, A. lbj. double refined Sugar in fine Pouder lbij. or rather Sy∣rupus Volatilis lbiv. mix and make a Syrup in B. M. or the heat of a Bath. § 2. How the Tinctures of Benjamine and Storax are to be made you may see Cap. 7. Sect. 63. and 97. of this Book aforegoing: the ma∣king of the Syrupus Volatilis you may see in our Phylaxa Medicinae, Lib. 1. Cap. 61. Sect. 5. to which we refer you. § 3. It is an excellent well scented Syrup, and a great Cephalick and Pectoral, good for most Diseases of the Head, Brain, Brest and Lungs: it dissolves Tartarous and Viscous Humors lodging in those parts, discusses Wind, helps Difficulty of Breathing, and is therefore good against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, Rheumatisms, Wheasings, Hoarseness, and Shortness of Breath. § 4. It prevails against Pains of the Cholick, Wind, Vapors, and Obstructions of the Womb; helps the Me∣mory, quickens the Senses, and is singular good against Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, and Weakness of the Bowels. Dose, à ʒij. ad iv. or v. LVIII. † Syrupus Pectoralis Balsamicus, The Balsamick Pectoral. Syrup. ℞ Myrrh, Benjamine, Storax, Taccamahacca, Ma∣stich, Ammoniacum, Chio Tur∣pentine, Olibanum, Gum Ele∣mi, Balsam of Tolu, Balsam Capivij, A. ℥ij. Saffron ℥ss. Liquorice ʒvj. Aq. Pectoralis lbiv. white Sugar lbviij. To those things which are to be dissolved in Water, let the rest be added, and well mixed, boiling gently that the Syrup may be despumated. Salmon.] § 1. It is a Com∣position of Heterogeneous bo∣dies, which can never hand∣somely mix together, nor make a pleasant Compositi∣on; because some of them are Aqueous bodies, and only to be dissolved in a watery Menstruum; others Sulphu∣rous bodies, and to be dis∣solved only in a sulphurous or spirituous Menstruum; these Dissolutions will never mix perfectly or well toge∣ther, but curdle, and make
an unpleasant Mixture: and yet if you will make a Sy∣rup of all these things, there is no better way but by those differing Solutions, with which you must mix the Sugar, melting them together into a Syrup in. B. M. or the heat of a Bath. § 2. It is pectoral good a∣gainst Ulcers of the Lungs, inward Bruises, spitting Blood, a Gonorrhoea in Men, and the Whites in Women, as also Pains and Weaknesses of the Back, Reins and Womb, &c. § 3. Dose, two or three Spoonfuls or more Morning and Night, in some specifick Pectoral or Comfortative and Anodyn Vehicle. LIX. † Syrupus Pectoralis sim∣plex, The simple Pectoral Syrup. It is made of the Aqua Pectoralis, Elder-flower-water, Damask Rose-water, and Su∣gar, S. A▪ Salmon.] § 1. How this pectoral Water is to be made see Cap. 1. Sect. 68. aforego∣ing of this Book, for that is the Water intended in this Composition, and not that at Sect. 45. of the same Chapter. § 2. The Title shews the Vertues, its principal inten∣tion and design, being a∣gainst Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Coughs, Colds, Hoarseness, Wheating, short∣ness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, soreness of the Brest and Stomach, &c. § 3. Modus Ʋtendi. ℞ Milk-water ℥iv. of this Syrup ℥j. ad ℥ij. Spirit of Opium ʒij. or iij. mix for a Dose, to be given Morning and Night, or as often as need requires. LX. † Syrupus Rosarum Da∣mascenarum, Syrup of Da∣mask Roses. It is made of the distilled Water p. j. trebble refined Sugar g. ij. melting them in∣to a Syrup in B. M. Salmon.] § 1. It is a pretty cooling Syrup, and used chiefly as a Vehicle to con∣vey other Medicaments in, as also to make cooling Cor∣dial Juleps of; and to dulci∣fie any delicate fine Spirit, or strong Water, which you would have carry a fine Fla∣vour with it. § 2. A cooling Antifebri∣tick Potion. ℞ Milk-water ℥iv. of this Syrup ℥ij. Sal Primellae in fine Pouder ʒss. mix for a Dose, to take off the violent heat of a Fever.
§ 3. A Cordial Potion. ℞ Aq. lact. alexiteriae, or black Cherry-water ℥iv. of this Syrup ℥ij. of our Aqua Bezoartica ℥j. Spirit of Cin∣namon, of Angelica, A. ʒiij. mix for a Cordial draught against fainting and swoon∣ing Fits, sickness at Heart, &c. LXI. † Syrupus Rosarum ru∣brarum, Syrup of Red Roses. It is made of the distilled Water p. j. trebble refined Sugar p. ij. melting them into a Syrup in B. M. Salmon.] § 1. It is in∣tended for refrigerating, cor∣dial and strengthning Juleps, and to be used as a Vehicle to convey other Medicines in. § 2. Dropt into the Eyes four or five times a day, it is of good use to clear the sight, and take off Clouds, Mists, Blood-shot, &c. § 3. It is many times also mixt with Gargarisms, Washes and Injections, in∣stead of Honey of Roses to palliate, cleanse and heal old Sores, running Ulcers, Fistula's, &c. LXII. † Syrupus Rosarum O∣doratus, Sweet or Per∣fumed Syrup of Roses. It is made of the former of the two last, by adding Musk and Ambergrise. Salmon.] § 1. The best way will be to perfume it by adding to every Pound of the Syrup forty Drops more or less, of the Tin∣ctures of the Perfumes, and not the Perfumes themselves in substance. § 2. It has the Vertues of the simple Syrup, but much more Cephalick, Neurotick, and Cordial, tho' not fit for Women which are apt to be troubled with hysterick Di∣seases. See Cap. 7. Sect. 84. aforegoing. LXIII. † Syrupus Sambuci florum, Syrup of Elder-flowers. It is made of the distilled Water p. j. with trebble re∣fined Sugar p ij. melting them into a Syrup in B. M. Salmon.] § 1. It is intend∣ed for making of hepatick Juleps, and for a Vehicle to convey ecphractick or open∣ing Medicines in.
§ 2. ℞ Black Cherry, and Orange-flower-water, A. ℥ij. of this Syrup ℥j. Lac Ammo∣niaci ℥ss. Tincture of Asa fe∣tida ʒj. mix them for a Dose, against hysterick Fits. LXIV. † Syrupus Sapientum, i. e. Myrrhae, The Wise-Man's Syrup, or Syrup of Myrrh. Salmon.] § 1. It is made of the Tincture of Myrrh ei∣ther simple or compound, the Preparations of which you may see Cap. 7. Sect. 30. and 85. adding to the Tin∣cture p. j. Syrupus Volatilis p. ij. mixing and digesting till they are united. § 2. It is good against all malign and pestilential Di∣seases whether used as a pre∣ventive or curative Remedy, strengthning and fortifying the Stomach and restoring natural heat. § 3. It is a famous Cepha∣lick, Neurotick and Hyste∣rick, opens Obstructions, provokes the Terms; and fa∣cilitates the delivery of Wo∣men in Labour, brings away both Birth and After-birth. § 4. It is good against Cholicks, Vapors, hysterick Fits, Head-achs, Megrim, Vertigo, Lethargy, Apoplexy, Palsie, and other cold and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb. § 5. It is also used in Mixtures, Washes, or In∣jections to hinder Inflamati∣ons, Gangreens, or Mortifi∣cations, restore the almost extinguished heat, and to digest, cleanse, and heal old Ulcers, running Sores, Fi∣stula's, and to strengthen parts weakned by the fluxion of Humors. § 6. Dose, inwardly, à ʒiij. ad vj. or ℥j. in any pro∣per Vehicle, at Night going to Bed, and in the Morning fasting, or in the time of a Paroxysm, &c. LXV. † Syrupus Terebinthinae compositus, Syrup of Tur∣pentine compound. ℞ Turpentine ℥xiij. Ma∣stich ℥j. Nutmegs ℥ss. Syrup of Roses lbvj. mix, and boil gently that it may be despu∣mated. Salmon.] § 1. Or you may make it thus. ℞ Tincture of Turpentine ℥xiij. Tincture of Mastich ℥j. Tincture of Nutmegs ℥ij. Syrupus Volatilis lbij. mix by shaking and digest till they are united. § 2. Either of these Sy∣rups cleanse the Reins, Ure∣ters, and Bladder of any tar∣tarous, viscous, or other he∣terogene
Matter which ob∣structs or offends them, pro∣vokes Urine, helps the Di∣sury and Ischuria, and expels Sand, Gravel, Stones, &c. out of those parts. § 3. In a Clyster it gives ease in the Cholick, is good in Diarrhoea's, Dysenteria's, and Lienteria's, healing the Excoriation of the Bowels, and comforting them. § 4. Taken inwardly by the Mouth, it expels Wind, sweetens the Blood, and all the Juices of the Body de∣stroying the unnatural Acidi∣ty which affects them, being one of the best things in the World against the Scurvy. § 5. The Syrup made the first way may be given ab ℥j. ad ℥iij. in any proper Ve∣hicle, as Parsley, Arsmart, or Onion Water. The latter Syrup as being hotter is to be given only à ʒij. ad ʒvj. in a Glass of White or Rhe∣nish Wine, or other fit Ve∣hicle. LXVI. † Syrupus ad Tussim, i. e. Olibani, Syrup against Coughs, or Syrup of Oli∣banum. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tincture of Olibanum lbj. (the making of which see Cap. 7. Sect. 78. or you may make a simple Extraction with S. V.) Syrupus Volatilis lbjss. mix shake digest and unite them. § 2. It is used for easing of Coughs, stopping of Ca∣tarrhs, and to strengthen the Head, Brain, Nerves, Brest and Lungs much weakned with too great a flux of Hu∣mors: It cures also Fluxes of the Bowels. § 3. It may be given any time of the Day, but chiefly Morning and Night, or when the Cough is very trouble∣some à ʒij. ad ʒiij. in a Glass of Ale or Milk-water. § 4. At Night going to Bed, using it for a Cough, take it thus. ℞ Poppy-wa∣ter, Milk-water, A. ℥ij. of this Syrup ℥ss. Liquid Lauda∣num gut. xvj. Tincture of Ca∣techu. ʒij. mix for a Dose; it will not fail of the desired Effects. LXVII. † Syrupus Ʋterinus, i.e. Carannae, The Womb Sy∣rup, or Syrup of Gum Ca∣ranna. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Tincture of Caranna lbj. (the making of which see Cap. 7. Sect. 67.) double refined Sugar in fine Pouder lbj. or Syrupus Volati∣lis. lbj. mix, shake digest, and make a Syrup.
§ 2. It is dedicated to the Womb, being good for most Diseases afflicting it; as Va∣pors, Fits of the Mother, Whites, Reds, and Weak∣ness thereof, which is com∣monly the cause of mani∣fold Miscarriages in Wo∣men-kind. § 3. It is Cephalick, Neu∣rotick, Hysterick, and Arthri∣tick, good against cold and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain, Rheumatisms, Defluxions, wandering Pains, Gouts, Fluxes of Humors upon the Eyes, Nose, Palate, &c. § 4. Dose, à ʒij. ad iv. in any proper Hysterick or Ce∣phalick Water, or Decocti∣on, &c. CHAP. XVII. Of QƲIDDONIES. I. * Clissus Portulacae, Quid∣donie of Purslane. Bate.] ℞ JƲice of Pur∣slane depura∣ted lbviij. white Sugar lbj. clarifie, and boil to the con∣sistency of Honey. Salmon.] § 1. It is moist∣ning and refrigerating, and excellent to cool a hot Sto∣mach; it cools the hot Fit in Agues; it attemperates the Blood, and cools the Li∣ver, Spleen, Reins, and Womb, of which in some measure the Leaf has the Signature. § 2. It stops Cholerick Fluxes, Catarrhs, the Flux of the Terms in Women, and the Gonorrhoea in Men, eases Pains proceeding from a hot Cause, induces Sleep, and helps the Phrenzie. § 3. It allays the heat of Lust, so much, that the too great use thereof, is said to extinguish the natural Seed; and also abates the heat of Urine. Dose, ℥j. ad ℥ij. in some proper Vehicle at Bed-time.
II. Clissus Argentinae, Quid∣dony of wild Tansie. Bate.] After the same manner is made the Quiddony of wild Tansie, or Silver-weed. Salmon.] § 1. It is astrin∣gent, stops Catarrhs, and all Fluxes of the Bowels or Womb, and strengthens the Tone of all the inward parts. § 2. Mixed with a little Vinegar, Honey, and Alum, and some Rose-water, so as to be used as a Gargle, it cleanses and heals Ulcers in the Mouth, heals sore Gums, eases the Tooth-ach, fastens loose Teeth, and reduces the Uvula or Pallate of the Mouth, as it is vulgarly cal∣led to its natural state. § 3. It heals old running Sores in the Legs or else∣where, Ruptures, inward Wounds and Ulcers in the secrets Parts, closes the Lips of green Wounds, abates Heat and Inflamations, and stops a Flux of Blood in any part. Dose, ℥j. ad ℥ij. III. Clissus Betonicae, Quid∣dony of Betony. Bate.] After the same manner is made the Quid∣dony of Betony. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good Cephalick and Neurotick, and is said to be a singular thing in curing the Head-Ach, Megim, Vertigo, E∣pilepsie, Palsie, Lethargy, Convulsions, and other Di∣seases thereof, from Cold and Moisture. § 2. It is prevalent against the Gout, Dropsie, and Scur∣vy; and being taken two or three times a day, it prevails against Coughs, Colds, Ca∣tarrhs, Asthma's, Hoarseness, Wheasings, Phthisis, and o∣ther Diseases of the Brest and Lungs. § 3. It is a singular Reme∣dy against Quartan Agues, and drys up superfluous Hu∣mors falling into the Eyes: it opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, cures Stitches in the Sides and Gripings in the Bowels, pro∣vokes the Terms, and causes speedy delivery; and is ad∣mirable against Spitting or Pissing of Blood. Dose, ʒvj. ad ℥jss.
IV. Clissus Farfarae, Quid∣dony of Colts-foot. Bate.] After the same manner also is made the Quid∣dony of Colts foot. Salmon.] § 1. It is cool∣ing and drying, stops Ca∣tarrhs, and all Fluxes of Rheum to any part; and is one of the most admirable Pectorals yet known, pre∣vailing against Coughs, Colds, Wheasing, Hoarseness, Short∣ness of Breath, and heals a Phthisis, or Ulcer in the Lungs. § 2. Taken ab ℥jss. ad ℥iij. at a time, it prevails against the hot Fits of Agues; quenches Thirst, and stops Fluxes: Cloths being wet therein and applied, it is said to give ease in the Piles, and cure them. V. Clissus Hederae terrestris, Quiddony of Ale-hoof or Ground-Ivy. Bate.] In the same man∣ner likewise is made the Quiddony of Ale-hoof or Ground-Ivy. Salmon.] § 1. It is a fam'd Bechick, accounted a Spe∣cifick against the Cough, Di∣stempers of the Brest and Lungs, and dryness of the Aspera Arteria. § 2. Put into the Eyes four or five times a day it is good against the Pin and Web, Films, watering and redness of the Eyes and dimness of Sight. § 3. It is a good Trauma∣tick and Vulnerary, helps Ulcers of the Lungs, opens Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and Gall, is good against the Yellow Jaundice, and provokes Urine. § 4. Made into a Garga∣rism with Honey and Juice of Limons, it is good for Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat; and also to wash foul Ulcers of the privy parts. Dose, ad ℥iij. VI. Clissus Prunellae, Quid∣dony of Self-heal. Bate.] And after the like Method the Quiddony of Self-heal. Salmon.] § 1. It is an ex∣cellent Traumatick, or Vul∣nerary, whether for inward or outward Wounds; and in outward Cases it is found by Experience to heal the sore Nipples of Nurses. § 2. If taken inwardly from ℥j. ad ℥iij. it heals Ves∣sels broken within, and is prevalent against Bruises,
whether by falls or other∣wise. § 3. Being made into a Lotion thus; ℞ Decoction of Bugle lbj. White-wine lbss. of this Quiddony ℥vj. Salt of Vitriol, Roch Alum in Pou∣der, A. ℥j. mix them: It is good to wash outward Ul∣cers with, and to inject into Fistula's, in order to their speedy healing. Dose, in∣wardly from ℥j. ad ℥iij. VII. Clissus Agrimoniae, Quid∣dony of Agrimony. Bate.] It is made in all respects as the Quiddony of Purslane. Salmon.] § 1. It is a sin∣gular Hepatick, and after a singular manner opens Ob∣structions of the Liver and Spleen, strengthning the same, and therefore is good against all sorts of Fluxes of the Bowels, Weakness and Ex∣coriations of those parts. § 2. It restores in Consup∣tions, is good against the Distempers of the Reins, pre∣vails against inward Bruises, and helps such as spit, or piss Blood. § 3. It has been expe∣rienced good against the Rickets in Children, causing them to out grow their weak Habit of Body, being daily given them, Morning, Noon, and Night, for some Weeks. Dose, ℥j. ad ℥iij. in some sit Vehiculum. VIII. * Gelatina Corun Cervi, Gelly of Harts-horn. Bate.] ℞ Raspings of Harts-horn ℥vj. fair Water lbvj. infuse warm, and boil with a gentle fire (in a close Vessel) for three or four hours, that the Raspings may become Gelly: strain, and add Juice of Limons ℥j. trebble refined Sugar ℥ij. It is restorative in Consumptions, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is a sin∣gular use in all other Weak∣nesses of the Body whatever, and in every case where the Body is emaciated by a long and vehement Sickness, tho' no proper Consumption. § 2. It is of approved use in Ulcers of the Lungs, Phthisis, and corrosion of the Bowels, whether by sharp Humors, or the Acrimony of violent Medicines. § 3. It is an Alcali (not∣withstanding the addition of the Juice of Limons) and absorbs the Acid humour in what part of the Body soever, and by long Experience has been found of extraordinary use against the Scurvy. Dose, ℥j. ad ℥iv. Plus minus.
IX. * Gelatina Corroborans, The strengthning. Bate.] ℞ Four Sheeps-feet; two Calves-feet; Raspings of Ivory, Roots of Satyrion, A. ℥ij. Sea-horse-Pizle ℥j. Ras∣pings of Harts-horn ʒx. La∣dies Mantle, Daisies, A. M. ij. fair Water lbx. mix and boil to lbiij. strain, and add white Sugar-candy ℥iij. being cold separate the Fat and the Feces, S. A. keeping the Gelly for use. Give a draught of it in the Morning fasting with Pouder of a Harts-Pizle ℈j some adstringent Pills being premised. Salmon] § 1. It is said to cure Consumptions and a Phthisis, or Ulcer of the Lungs; as also to be preva∣lent in a Hectick, and as some say in a Marasmos. § 2. It is good against Weaknesses and Wastings in the Back, the Whites in Wo∣men and a Gonorrhoea in Men, Universals being pre∣mised. § 3. It strengthens much, such as labour under universal Weaknesses and a Scorbutick discracy, by absorbing the morbifick Acid which causes those disorders. X. * Gelatina Ichthyocollae, Gelly of Ising-glass. Bate.] ℞ The whitest and best Ising-glass, cut it into bits, and bruise it ℥ij. fair Water lbij. boil to lbj. S. A. strain, and add new Milk lbj. white Sugar-candy ℥j. Dose, a Pint at a time twice a day, for stopping the Whites in Women and a Gonorrhoea in Men, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is of sin∣gular use to restore in Con∣sumptions, and all sorts of Weaknesses whatsoever, by reason of the volatile Ani∣mal Salt which it contains, and which is indeed in all Gellies. § 2. If it be used for a Go∣norrhoea, or the Whites, &c. Universals ought to be pre∣mised, that the Body may be cleansed as much as may be, and the Morbifick mat∣ter in part carried off, to the end the Humor may be in some measure diverted; for which purpose our Pillulae Panchymagogae, or Mirabiles are excellent. § 3. Then you may give this Gelly thus. ℞ Of this Gelly ℥iv. or vj. Antimony diaphoretick ℈j. Roch Alum in fine Pouder, gr. x. white Vi∣triol in fine Pouder, gr. iv.
white Rosin in fine Pouder ʒss. mix for a Dose to be given twice or thrice a day. If assiduously used it will not sail of doing the work, especially if a proper Injecti∣on be used. XI. * Miva Borraginis, Pulp of Borrage. Bate.] Boil Borrage-Roots to a softness: beat them in a Mortar, and pass them thro a Sieve: of this Pulp take lbj. trebble refined Sugar lbj. mix or boil to the consistency of a Marmalade or Pulp, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It is cor∣dial, and singular good to expel Sadness and Me∣lancholy, and is of good use in Pestilential times, and against malign and pestilen∣tial Diseases. § 2. It is said to restore in Consumptions; but is chiefly used as a Vehiculum for the Conveyance of o∣ther Medicines into the Bo∣dy. Dose, ℥ij. XII. * Miva Consolidae, Pulp of Comfrey. Bate.] It is made of the Pulp of the Root and Sugar, Ana, as the former; adding to every lbj. thereof, Nutmegs ʒvj. It is of use against Spitting of Blood, Ruptures, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is cool∣ing, drying, and binding, very good for Weaknesses of the Back, Running of the Reins in Men, and Whites in Women. § 2. It stops all Fluxes of Blood, whether by the Mouth, as Spitting of Blood; by the Fundament, as bloody Fluxes, and the hepatick Flux; by the Yard, as pis∣sing blood; and by the Womb, as the Flux of the Terms. § 3. It heals all inward Wounds, also Ulcers of the Lungs, and is effectual for the consolidating and curing of Ruptures. § 4. Outwardly, being ap∣plied it closes together the lips of Wounds, stays the bleeding of the Hemorrhoides or Piles, cools Inflamations; and gives ease in Pains of the Gout. Dose, ℥j. ad ℥iij. Morning and Evening. XIII. * Miva Dialthaeae, Pulp of Marshmallow-roots. Bate.] It is made of the Pulp of the Root and Sugar, ut suprà adding to every Pound thereof, Nutmegs ℥j.
Salmon.] § 1. It is good to heal the Excoriations of the Bowels, Reins, Bladder and Yard, opening the streight Passages, and ma∣king them slippery, thereby giving ease in Pains of the Stone, and removing the Stoppages of Urine, and Heat thereof. § 2. It is good also against Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Coughs, Colds, Hoarseness, Wheasing, Asth∣ma, Pleurisie, &c. And for that called the Chin-Cough in Children. § 3. In a Clyster it helps Gripings in the Belly, and Pains in the Reins and Blad∣der; and applied in a Cata∣plasm, it helps swellings in Womens Breasts, as also in the Throat, mollifies hard Tumors, and allays Inflama∣tions, helping Burnings or Scaldings, and the Bitings of Men or Dogs. Dose, in∣wardly, ℥j. ad ℥iij. XIV. * Miva Satyrij, Pulp of Satyrion. Bate.] It is made in all respects as the last, with ad∣dition of the like quantity of Nutmeg. It stirs up Vene∣ry, &c. Salmon.] § 1. In making of this Medicament you are to chuse the full Roots, not the lank ones, which are said to have an opposite Vertue; this is understood, if you take the Orchis, or Dogs∣stones: but according to the Opinion of Parkinson, our Tulip, is the true Satyrion of the Ancients, and for all that I know, he may be in the right. § 2. This nourishes such as are in Hecticks, restores in Consumptions, stops Fluxes, increases Seed, stimulates Nature, and provokes to the Act of Generation. Dose, ℥j. ad ℥iij. XV. * Mucilago Nephritica, A Mucilage or Gelly for the Reins. Bate.] ℞ Gum Traga∣canth ℥jss. Gum Arabick ʒiij. Cherry-tree Gum ℥ss. Red Rose∣water ℥xx. Plantane and Pur∣slain waters, A. lbjss. digest cold for forty eight hours, strain, and add white Sugar∣candy ℥iv. which mix and dis∣solve. Dose, ℥iv. twice a day, in a draught of Milk-water, a Scruple of Balsam of Peru made up into Pills with Liquorice Pouder, being given before-hand. Salmon.] § 1. It is a slip∣pery thing, and cleanses and smooths the Passages from
the Reins by its slipperyness: but in my Opinion, Parsley, or Arsmart, or Pellitory-wa∣ters, had been much more proper than Rose, Plantane, or Purslain waters, for this occasion, because they carry with them a singular Diure∣tick force, but with much gentleness, and seem to be Specificks appropriated to the Reins. § 2. You may give it in a draught of Milk-water in which fix, eight, or ten Grains of Salt of Tartar is dissolved: It will indeed be so much the more effe∣ctual. CHAP. XVIII. Of LOHOCHS. I. * Linctus Benedictus, The Blessed Lambative, or that made with Vinum Benedictum. Bate.] ℞. VEnice Soap, Vi∣num Benedi∣ctum, A. ʒij. Lohoch Sanum ℥ij. Syrups of Jujubes, of Colts-foot, of Maiden-hair, A. ℥j. mix them S. A. It is called the Powerful Linctus. One Spoonful may be given every fourth hour; it power∣fully causes Expectoration. Salmon.] § 1. It causes a Nauseousness, but is scarcely strong enough to give a Vo∣mit, unless in very weak Sto∣machs; and this Nauseous∣ness, causes a great watering in the Mouth, by which much slimy Matter is spit forth. § 2. It is good against Ca∣tarrhs and Rheums, opens Obstructions of the Lungs, and makes an expectoration of that Matter which causes Coughs, Wheasings, Hoarse∣ness, Asthma's, and the like. § 3. And being taken to two, three, or four Spoon∣fuls, it evacuates some of the Morbifick cause of a Pleuri∣sie, giving relief immediately upon the Operation.
II. * Linctus Expectorans, The Expectorating Lambative, or Throat Medicine. Bate.] ℞ Castile Soap ʒijss. Oil of sweet Almonds, Syrup of Violets, A. ℥ijss. white Sugar, q. s. mix them S. A. Or thus. ℞ Lohoch Domesticus ℥iij. Castile Soap ʒj. mix them. These do the same with the former. Salmon.] § 1. This only causes a watering of the Mouth, but no vomiting, tho' taken in a good quantity; it by its substance moistens and loosens the Matter, and so causes it to be spit up. § 2. They that cannot take it alone, may mix it with four or five times the quantity of Carduus-water, and so take it, in all the Cases the other is prescribed for. III. Linctus Haemoptoïcus, A Lambative against Spitting of Blood. Bate.] ℞ Lapis Hematites, Gum Arabick, white Amber, A. ℈ij. white Starch ℥ss. Li∣quorice ℈j. Whites of Eggs, q. s. mix and make a Lin∣ctus. Let it be lickt from the end of a Liquorice∣stick. Salmon.] § 1. If to the Composition you add Cate∣chu, in fine Pouder ʒij. Her∣bane-seeds ʒss. Opium ℈ss. all in fine Pouder, they will add much to the Vertue of the Medicine, and do more in one day, than the other things will do in three. § 2. Thus compounded, it is not only good against Spitting of Blood which it stops to a wounder, but it eases a Cough, helps Whea∣sing, Hoarseness, and a Salt sharp Catarrh, and stops all Fluxes of the Bowels of what kind soever. IV. * Linctus Synanchicus, A Lambative for the Quinsey. Bate.] ℞ Pulp of the Conserve of red Roses ℥ij. Rob of Elder-berries ℥j. Honey of Roses ℥jss. Dogs-turd in fine Pouder ʒvj. mix them S. A. A Spoonful at a time is of∣ten given in a Quinsie. Salmon.] § 1. It ought to be given or repeated every hour, or hour and half at farthest, till the Distemper seems to be alleviated, or decline. § 2. And if the Inflamati∣on may be dissipated with∣out Apostemation, it will be good to add to every
Ounce of it Sal Prunellae gr. xij. Flowers of Sulphur gr. x. by which it will become much more effectual to the purpose intended. V. * Lohoch Album, The white Lohoch. Bate.] It is made of Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, and Sugar penides, Ana. so exactly mixt as they may make one homogene Mass of a very white Colour. It is not possible to be done with∣out the Art of the Apothe∣cary. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against Hoarseness; Whea∣sings, Stoppages of the Lungs, and vehement Coughs, and other Distempers of the Thorax. § 2. The Patient may take a Spoonful of it every hour and half, till relief is found; then it may be given only Morning and Night two, three, or four Spoonfuls at a time: It loosens the Flegm, and tough viscous Humors, and causes Expectoration. VI. * Lohoch Domesticum, The Family Lohoch. Bate.] ℞ Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn ℥iv. Sy∣rups of Jujubes, and of Mai∣den-hair, A. ℥ij. white Su∣gar ʒij. mix them exactly in a Marble Mortar, S. A. It may be made much better, and the Ingredients more in∣separable (if the Apothecary is not wanting in his Art) without the addition of the Sugar. It helps Expectora∣tion. Salmon.] § 1. This has all the Vertues of the for∣mer, but is more pectoral and healing, and is indeed good against a Phthisis, or Ulcer of the Lungs, and pre∣vails against violent Coughs and Asthma's. § 2. Take it as the for∣mer, a Spoonful every hour, till relief comes, and then only Morning, Noon, and Night two or three Spoon∣fuls Plus-minus, till a Cure succeeds: It is also of use to make the Linctus Expecto∣rans, as Sect. 2. aforegoing.
CHAP. XIX. Of PRESERVES. I. * Alkakengi Conditum, Preserved Winter Cher∣ries. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Winter Cherries ℥vj. bruise them, and affuse thereon Milk-water lbjss. express the Juice, and clarifie it with Whites of Eggs: add fresh Winter Cherries but whole; and with Nutmeg ʒiij. Trochisci Gordonij ʒij. Eryngo Roots candied ℥ij. boil gently to tenderness: then take the Berries out, and boil the Li∣quor with Sugar, q. s. into a Syrup, in which preserve the before boiled Berries. It is Nephritick, Diuretick, and Lithontriptick. Salmon.] § 1. It dissolves tar∣tarous Matter as well in the Lungs, as in any other parts, opens Obstructions of the Viscera, provokes Urine, and is used against Stone and Gravel, whether in the Reins or Bladder. § 2. This Condite is also of good use to prevent the Gout, because it dissolves and expels the Humors which cause it. The Syrup may be thus used; ℞ Choice Mead ℥vj. or viij. of this Sy∣rup ℥j. ad ℥ij. mix them for a Draught to be drank thrice a day. II. * Allium Conditum, Pre∣served Garlick. Bate.] ℞ Cloves of Gar∣lick cleansed lbj. Water, q s. boil a little; which Water cast away: then boil in Hyssop-wa∣ter, q. s. to a through softness: make the Liquor into a Syrup with double refined Sugar lbj. by boiling: about the end add the Garlick, with Ambergrise, gr. xxiv. Musk. gr. iv. tied up in a Rag: Spirit of Clary ℥ij. It is of use in the Wind Cholick, Cough Asth∣ma, Stone, Gout, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is good also against all sorts of Epi∣demical or Infectious disea∣ses, as Plague or Pestilence, spotted or malign Fevers, and is used as a Prophyla∣ctick, as well as a Cura∣tive.
2. It is a famous thing a∣gainst Wheasings, Hoarsness, and loss of Voice, for it makes slippery the tenacious or tough Matter obstructing the Lungs and Aspera Arteria, and causes Expectoration. Dose, ℥j. three or four times a day, chiefly in the Morn∣ing fasting, an hour before Dinner, and last at Night go∣ing to Bed. III. * Conserva Aurantiorum, Conserve of Oranges. Bate.] ℞ The yellow of Orange-Peels new cut off, and out small lbss. beat them well with white Sugar lbj. in a Marble Mortar, so as to be∣come a Conserve, S. A. It is used in the Cholick, Griping of the Guts, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is a most ad∣mirable Stomatick, strength∣ning the Tone of the Sto∣mach above most other ordi∣nary things, it expels Wind, causes a good Appetite, and a firm Digestion. § 2. You may take it ab ℥ss. ad ℥ij. in the Morning fasting, before Dinner, and last at Night going to Bed. drinking after it a Glass of Wormwood-wine, or ℥ss. of Our Aqua Bezoartica. IV. * Conserva Hepatica Co∣rallitana, The Coral like Hepatick Conserve. Bate.] ℞ Ripe Hips of the wild Roses or Bryar, perfectly freed from their Seeds and Skins, q. v. keep them in a close Vessel for six days, then add Red or Claret-wine, q. s. boil to soft∣ness, and pass the Pulp thro' a Sieve; to which add its e∣qual weight of trebble refined Sugar; and to every Pound of the Matter red Rose-water ℥jss. boil them in B. M. to the Consistence of a Pulp. It is good against bloody Urine, Stone, &c. It has a Diure∣tick force, powerfully cools the Liver, and is good against the Scurvy. Salmon.] § 1. You may give an Ounce of it at a time more or less, Morning and Evening, but it will be more powerful in stopping Fluxes of Blood, whether by the Mouth, Yard, or Womb, if to every Dose of the Con∣serve you add ℈j. of Catechu in fine Pouder. § 2. Otherwise as a Diu∣retick, you may give it thus. ℞ Of this Conserve ℥j. Pou∣der of Winter Cherries ℈ss. ad ℈j. Sal Prunellae gr. 10. mix them. It provokes Urine powerfully cools the Liver
and Reins, and cleanses the Ureters and Bladder from all sorts of herogeneous Sub∣stances which offend them. V. Conserva Nicotianae, Con∣serve of Tobacco. Bate.] ℞ Green Leaves of To∣bacco lbij. Styrax Calamita ℥ij. Cinnamon ℥j. Sugar ℥vj. the best Manna lbjss. beat them altoge∣ther into a Mass, and insolate for forty eight days. It pre∣vails wonderfully against the Asthma, a suffocative Ca∣tarrh. Dose, ℥ss. every fourth hour. Salmon.] § 1. It is indeed good against all Obstructi∣ons of the Brest and Lungs, but not a Medicament to be given to every Constitution; for tho' in some strong Bo∣dies, it will do admirably well, yet in others again, it is apt to cause Convulsions. § 2. Applied outwardly to the place afflicted with the Gout, it gives relief; and by continuing it, and renewing it once a day, in short time a Cure; more especially if the Patient can be brought to take it inwardly. VI. * Juniperi Baccae Cande∣factae, Juniper-berry Com∣fits. Bate.] They are made by sprinkling choice Juniper-ber∣ries lbj. with Mallaga Sack; then strewing over them trebble refined Sugar in fine Pouder ℥iv. through a Sieve, and dry∣ing them with a gentle heat, S. A. They are Sudorifick, Hysterick, Nephritick, &c. Salmon.] § 1. They re∣move Stoppages in the Reins, Ureters and Bladder, pro∣voke Urine, and are good against Sand, Gravel and Stone, taking away pain and sharpness in making U∣rine. § 2. How Sudorifick they are, I cannot tell, unless eaten in a large quantity; but this I know, they expel Wind ad∣mirably, and are a power∣ful Anticolick; and an Anti∣dote against malign, infecti∣ous and epidemick Diseases; as also the Scurvy in a cold and moist habit of Body. VII. * Passulae Laxativae, La∣xative or purging Raisons. Bate.] * ℞ The best Alexan∣drian Sena ℥j. Ginger, Cin∣namon, A. ℈j. S. V. lbss. digest warm for six hours: strain,
and add thereto white Sugar ℥j. Raisons greater or lesser cleansed ℥iv. boil with a gentle fire till the Fruit is soft, and let them be conserved together. Or thus. With a gentle fire, (the Bunches being taken out of the Syrup) let them be dry∣ed, strewing over them refined Sugar, q. s. Salmon.] § 1. They gently purge the Bowels, expel Wind, and carry off sharp Humors, which cause the Cholick, and Griping of the Guts, Fluxes, bloody Fluxes, &c. § 2. You may take from ℥ss. ad ℥j. or more at a time, ac∣cording as you find your Body easie or hard to work up∣on. VIII. Pruna Laxativa, La∣xativ or purging Prunes. Bate.] They are prepared after the same manner as the former. Salmon.] § 1. These have the Vertues of the former, and may be taken in the same manner and Dose, a∣gainst the same Diseases. § 2. They are of use also for such whose Bodies are hot and dry, and apt to be co∣stive. CHAP. XX. Of SƲGARS. I. * Cardiacum Coeleste, The heavenly Cordial or Car∣diack. Bate.] ℞ White Sugar ℥xvj. (trebble refined) Bor∣rage-water ℥iv. boil almost to a consistency, then (boiling) add fresh Borrage-flowers, freed from their black spots ℥vj. and continue boiling till the Flow∣ers are crisp or dryed, remove it from the fire, and mix therewith Leaves of Gold, No xvj. Ambergrise, gr. 24. It is a most elegant Cardiack, recreating the Vital and Ani∣mal Spirits, and is profitable against all affections arising from Atrabilis: In Hypo∣chondriack Melancholy it has no second.
Salmon.] § 1. It is not only a Cardiack, but is good against Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Colds, Coughs, Asthma's, tickling Rheums, Wheasings, Hoarseness, &c. § 2. There is no Dose to be limited in the use thereof, but it may (in the before enumerated Diseases) be held constantly in the Mouth, and suffered to dissolve at leisure. II. * Elaeosaccharum Cardia∣cum, The sugared Oily Cardiack. Bate.] ℞ Chymical Oil of Nutmegs ʒiij. Oil of Cinna∣mon ʒj. trebble refined Sugar ℥xviij. mix and make a Pou∣der, S. A. It is proper for the sweetning of Juleps, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good Cephalick, Neurotick, Car∣diack, and Stomatick, of good use against all cold and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain, as Lethargies, Carus, Vertigo, Head-ach, Megrim, Apoplexy, Palsie, Convulsion, &c. § 2. It strengthens the Vi∣tal and Animal Spirits, com∣forts the Heart, and is good against Palpitation, Faint∣ing, Swooning, Sickness at Stomach, and a good Preser∣vative against all malign, e∣pidemical, infectious and pe∣stilential Diseases. Dose, ʒij. ad iv. III. * Elaeosaccharum Carmi∣nativum, The Sugared Oily Carminative, or Wind breaker. Bate.] It is made of the Chymical Oil of Camomile, gut. xxiv. trebble refined Su∣gar ℥xij. mixing them. Salmon.] § 1. It is a fa∣mous Anticolick, and gives ease in those Pains to a won∣der; it is also an excellent thing against the Stone and Gravel, whether in Reins or Bladder, helps the Strangury and stoppage of Urine, and takes away the Heat and Scalding thereof: Some give it against Agues. § 2. You may give it from ℥ss. ad ℥jss. or ℥ij. in any Specifick or proper Ju∣lep: and in Diseases of the Reins it may be given dis∣solved in Parsly, Arsmart, or Onion-water. IV. * Elaeosaccharum Foeni∣culi, The sugared Oil of Fennel. Bate.] It is made of the Chymical Oil of sweet Fennel-seed, gut. 40. trebble refined
Sugar ℥xij. mixing them to∣gether. Salmon.] § 1. There is scarcely a better thing in the World against the Cholick, and Gripings of the Guts, e∣specially in new-born Chil∣dren, for, and in which case I commend it as a Jewel, to sweeten their Milk and Pap with all. § 2. It is also a Pectoral, and opens all sorts of Ob∣structions in the Brest and Lungs, being specifically good against Colds, Coughs, Asth∣ma's, Wheasing, Hoarseness, &c. Dose, to a Man ab ℥ss. ad ℥j. either alone, or to sweeten any Specifick Julep or Liquor. V. * Elaeosaccharum Nucistae, The sugared Oil of Nut∣megs. Bate.] It is made of the Chymical Oil of Nutmegs ʒj. trebble refined Sugar ℥xij. mixing them. It is often given ʒj. at a time against Wind oppressing the Sto∣mach. Salmon.] § 1. It is a sin∣gular Cephalick, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cardiack and Hy∣sterick, and good not only against Vapors and Wind afflicting those parts, but al∣so against all cold and moist Diseases of the same. § 2. It is a Specifick a∣gainst the Head-ach, Pain of the Stomach, the Cholick, and disaffections of the Womb, for which purposes it is not to be slighted. Dose, ʒj. ad ʒij. in any Cordial Julep, &c. VI. * Elaeosaccharum Sassa∣fras, The sugared Oil of Sassafras. Bate.] It is made of the Chymical Oil of Sassafras ʒij. trebble refined Sugar ℥vj. mix∣ing them. Salmon.] § 1. It is said to be good against the French Disease; but its a Specifick against Distempers of the Head, Nerves, Stomach and Womb, and dissolves the tartarous Mucilage in the Bowels which breeds the Stone and Gout. § 2. It warms and com∣forts a cold Stomach, causes a good Appetite and Dige∣stion, expels Wind, and gives ease in the Cholick. Dose, ʒj. ad ʒij. in any specifick Julep.
VII. * Saccharum Ambara∣tum, Sugar with Ambar∣grise. Bate.] ℞ Trebble refined Sugar in fine Pouder lbj. vel q. v. put it into a Tin Vessel, and add thereto little pieces or bits of Ambargrise, to the quantity of ℈j. or q. v. put∣ting them into the middle of the Sugar, the Vessel being close stopt, let them stand to∣gether perpetually in a warm place in or near the Chimney-Corner; so the Ambergrise will communicate with its fragrancy, its whole Vertue to the Sugar, without any detri∣ment to the Amber, or any loss thereof. Salmon.] § 1. It recreates the Vital and Animal Spirits, and is good against Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Heart; and therefore is of excellent use to dulcifie or sweeten any Cordial Ju∣lep. § 2. Being often eaten, or held in the Mouth, to dis∣solve, it causes a sweet Breath, and is good against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Wheasings, Hoarseness, and other Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, &c. VIII. * Saccharum Caryophyl∣latum, Sugar cloved. Bate.] ℞ Garden Clove∣gilliflowers poudered ʒvj. Cloves in fine Pouder ℈j. trebble re∣fined Sugar (dissolved in Da∣mask Rose-water) ℥xij. mix, boil, and pour them forth up∣on a Marble, S. A. It is a wonderful Cardiack, Ce∣phalick and Stomatick, pre∣vails against the Vertigo, Crudities of the Ventricle, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against all cold and moist Diseases of those parts, chief∣ly the Palsie, as also the Le∣thargy, and other sleepy Di∣seases: it recreates the Ani∣mal Spirits, and dissipates Vapors. § 2. It discusses Wind, and prevails against the Cholick, Sickness at Stomach, Indi∣gestion, &c. Dose, ℥j. ad ℥ij. in any Specifick or pro∣per Julep. IX. * Saccharum Eboratum, Sugar with Ivory. Bate.] ℞ Ivory ℥jss. Crabs Eyes, Pearl prepared, A. ʒj. Oil of Cinnamon, gut. vj. treb∣ble refined Sugar (dissolved in red Rose-water) ℥xvj. mix and boil, S. A.
Salmon.] § 1. It is a fixt Alcali, and therefore good to absorb Acidities in the Stomach and Bowels: It helps Heart-burnings, and is of singular use against the vehement pain of the Sto∣mach. § 2. But it is mostly used as a Cordial against Con∣sumptions, and as such it may be given three or four times a day, or oftener ℥ss. ad ℥j. either alone, or in any proper Vehicle. X. Saccharum Persicorum, Sugar of Peach-flowers. Bate.] It is made of the Pouder of Peach-flowers ℥ij. Sugar boiled in Rose-water lbj. S. A. It is used to kill Worms in Children, and to loosen the Belly. Salmon.] § 1. It is but a gentle Laxative; and therefore if you would have it to purge the Bowels as it ought to do, you ought to add to every Dose thereof Scammony in fine Pouder, gr. v. ad viij. and so it will be more effectual in killing Worms. § 2. It is used with singu∣lar advantage against the Griping of the Guts, which is so common in the West-Indies, and in this case I think it will be best to take it with the Scammony. Dose, of the Sugar ℥j. ad ij. adding the Scammony, gr. v, ad viij. as afore-mentioned. XI. * Saccharum Sambuci∣num, Sugar of Elder-flowers. Bate.] It is made of the Flowers ℥ij. trebble refined Su∣gar (dissolved in Elder-flower∣water) lbj. S. A. It is good against Wind in the Sto∣mach, Cholick, Stone, &c. and loosens the Belly. Salmon.] § 1. It is in∣deed Anticolick, but given against the Stone, it ought to be dissolved or mixt with Parsly, Arsmart, or Onion-water, and gr. xx. of the Pouder of Winter Cherries to be added to it. § 2. If it be given as a Laxative you ought to add to every Dose thereof Scam∣mony in fine Pouder, gr. iv. ad viij. ℞ Of this Sugar ℥j. ad ℥ij. Scammony gr. iv. ad viij. mix for a Dose. XII. * Saccharum Tormen∣tillae, Sugar of Tormen∣til. Bate.] ℞ Tormentil-Roots in Pouder ℥jss. Cinnamon ℥ss. Sugar (dissolved in Cinnamon-water)
lbj. boil and pour forth, S. A. It is of singular use to prevent Abortion or Miscar∣riage, and comfort the Foetus in the Womb. Salmon.] § 1. If you add to it Catechu in fine Pouder ℥j. the Medicament will be ten times more effectual to the Intentions, for this Ingre∣dient is a Specifick against Abortion, and to strengthen the Womb. § 2. You may give it from ℥ss. ad ℥j. either alone by it self, or mixt with any other Specifick Vehicle; and it ought to be given twice a day, viz. Morning and Night. CHAP. XXI. Of POƲDERS. I. * Pulvis Aethiopicus, The black Pouder. Bate.] ℞ LIve Toads, No 30. or 40. burn them in a new Pot to black Cinders or Ashes, and make a fine Pouder. Dose, ʒss. or more in the Small-Pox, &c. and is a certain help for such as are ready to die: some also commend it as a won∣derful thing for the Cure of the Dropsie. Salmon.] § 1. You may give it à ʒss. ad ʒj. against malignant Diseases, in some proper Sudorifick, and A∣lexipharmick Vehicle, at Night going to Bed. § 2. It prevails also against Cancers, being given for some time inwardly, and outward∣ly applied to the Ulcer: it absorbs the Corrosive Acid, and destroys the Malignity. II. * Pulvis albus, The white Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Bezoar Ani∣male, white Amber, red Co∣ral, Pearls, A. ℥j. Crabs Eyes, Crabs Claws, A. ℥ij. mix and make a subtil Pouder. It ex∣ceeds in Vertue the Pouder of Crabs Claws compound. Salmon.] § 1. It is usually given in the Measles, Small-Pox, and all sorts of malign
and pestilential Diseases, à ʒss. ad ʒj. § 2. It is Sudorifick and Alexipharmick, stops Fluxes and kills Worms; for which purposes it is accounted an excellent thing. § 3. The Bezoar Animale here intended is not that which is prepared of the Flesh of Vipers, but that made of Harts-horn calcin'd, the which you may see Cap. 9. Sect. 29. aforegoing. III. * Pulvis Anticardialgicus, A Pouder against a Pain at Stomach, and swooning Fits. Bate.] ℞ The purest and whitest Chalk ℥vj. Crabs Eyes, Crabs Claws, A. ℥jss. trebble refined Sugar ℥ss. Chymical Oil of Nutmegs, gut. vj. mix and make a Pouder: adding thereto fine Bole ʒvj. Dose ʒj. in a large draught of cold Wa∣ter. Salmon.] § 1. It is a Spe∣cifick against Pains at Sto∣mach, tho' never so extream, yea tho' they cause swooning, it always giving present re∣lief, and in a short time per∣fect Cure. § 2. Let the Patient that begins to take it for that purpose, take it Morning fasting, and at Night going to Bed, for fourteen or six∣teen days at least, taking a gentle Purge once in six days to carry it off. § 3. It performs the Cure by absorbing the Acid, which is the cause of the Disease: but as it is only a fixt Alcali, can only alter the Juices in the first Passages. IV. Pulvis Anticolicus, A Pou∣der against the Cholick. Bate.] ℞ The whitest Chalk in fine Pouder lbj. moi∣sten it with Juices of Rue and Camomile, till it becomes like a Pulp; dry it with a gentle heat, and pouder it fine again, repeat this Work with fresh Juices to the fourth time, re∣ducing it at last into a very subtil Pouder. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒj. every fourth hour. Salmon.] § 1. It is not on∣ly an Anticolick, by absorb∣ing the Acid, and opening the Obstructions, which are the causes of the Pain from the Wind, being put up in too narrow a place; but it is also an Antifebritick, and resists all malign Fevers of what kind soever. § 2. It may be given ei∣ther made up into a Bolus with Confectio Alkermes, or mixt with some proper Sy∣rup, and so exhibited.
V. Pulvis Antipyreticus, i. e. Tertianarius, A Pouder a∣gainst Feavers, chiefly Ter∣tians. Bate.] ℞ Lapis Manati ℥ij. Sanguis Draconis ʒj. mix and make a subtil Pouder. It seldom sails of curing Agues in the Spring-time. Dose, ʒj. an hour before the Fit, drink∣ing after it this Julep at three times. ℞ Red Rose-water ℥iij. Juice of Oranges ʒvj. white Sugar ℥ss. mix and dis∣solve. Salmon.] § 1. The Lapis Manati, is a white hard Bone (hard like a Stone) ta∣ken out of the Head of the Manatea or Sea Cow, some∣times like a Tooth, and re∣sembling the whitest Ivory, but much harder. See our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 28. where you have its Vertues and several Preparations. § 2. It is a fixt Alcali, and something Styptick, and there∣fore a proper Specifick a∣gainst Agues and Fevers; for which it is of singular use, as also against all inve∣terate Pains of the Stomach and Bowels, Cholicks, &c. VI. Pulvis Arthriticus Tur∣neri, Turner's Gout Pou∣der. Bate.] ℞ Turbeth, Her∣modactils, Sena, Scammony, dwarf Elder-seeds, Ana. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ℈j, ad ʒj. &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is an ex∣cellent Purge, and purges tartarous and watery Hu∣mors from the Head, Joynts, and most remote parts. § 2. It is not only good against the Gout, but also the Dropsie, carrying off the Water to a miracle, but it will be more effectual if to the Composition you add Cambogia, a sixth part of the whole Composition. § 2. You may mix it with the Pap of an Apple, or Sy∣rup of Roses solutive, and give it in the Morning fast∣ing, with Observations as in other Purges. VII. * Pulvis Asthmaticus, A Pouder against the Asth∣ma, or Difficulty of Breath∣ing. Bate.] ℞ Carthamus-seeds, Aron-Roots, Carduus Bened. Sena, A. ʒij. Aniseed ʒss. long Pepper ʒj. Diagrydium ℈ss. mix, and make a Pouder.
Dose, ʒj. twice a day, continuing it for six days. Salmon.] § 1. If Salt of Tartar ʒss. be added, it will be much more powerful to the Intention and Cause the easier Dissolution of the tar∣tarous Flegm. § 2. Let it be given in the Morning fasting in Syrup of Roses Solutive: and after the Operation is over, let the Sick take in all their Drink, 15 or 20 drops of Spirit of Sal Armoniack. VIII. * Pulvis Basilicus, The Royal Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Diagrydium, Ceruse of Antimony, Cremor Tartari, Mercurius dulcis, Ana. mix and make a Pou∣der. It has the same Ver∣tues with Pulvis Cornachini. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against the Scurvy, Dropsie, and Gout, and carries off tar∣tarous Humors, in what part of the Body soever, and is said to do Wonders in many Diseases supposed almost in∣curable. § 2. It kills Worms in Children, cleanses a vitious Stomach, and evacuates the Recrements of the Bowels, conserving their Tone. § 3. And being used ac∣cording to Art, for some∣time, it stops Fluxes of what kind soever, restoring Health and Strength. It may be taken every other Morning for some time. IX. Pulvis ad Calculum, A Pouder against the Stone. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Car∣duus Stellatus ℥j. Roots and Seeds of Parsley, A. ʒiij. let them be dryed apart, and pou∣dred, then mixed together. Dose, ℈ij. in White-wine, or Broth. Mayhern. Salmon.] § 1. It expels Wind, and is good against the Cholick; but would be much more powerful to the Intention, if to the Composi∣tion there were added ʒiv. of Winter-Cherries in fine Pouder. § 2. The best way of gi∣ving it will be to mix it with Syrup of the Juice of Parsley, and so take it ʒss. ad ʒj. Morning and Night. X. * Pulvis Cantianus, The Countess of Kent's Pou∣der. Bate.] ℞ The black tips of Crabs Claws, taken in June, which reduce into a fine Flow∣er, Contrayerva, A. ℥ij. Pearl, Coral red and white, Crabs
Eyes (all levigated upon a Marble with Juice of Limons, and dryed) A. ℥j. white Am∣ber, Crystal, (ground into a subtil Pouder with Rose-water and dryed) A. ℥j. Harts-horn calcin'd to the highest white∣ness, (and levigated with Juice of Citrons, duely acuated with Spirit of Vitriol, and dryed) ℥j. Occidental Bezoar, Terra Lem∣nia, A. ℥ss. fixed Ceruse of Antimony ℥ij. Ambergrise ʒjss. Musk ℈ss. mix all well toge∣ther, and with Gelly of Vipers, Skins and Harts-horn, made with Carduus-water, and light∣ly tinged with Saffron, q. s. make Balls of various Magni∣tudes, drying them carefully. If to the aforegoing Composi∣tion you add Mexico Cochinele in fine Pouder ℥ss. it is called Pulvis Cantianus Ruber. But if you add the Pulvis Aethio∣picus (at Sect. 1. aforegoing) it is called Pulvis Cantianus Niger. It is of egregious use against all contagious Di∣seases, Plague, Small-Pox, &c. Dose, ℈ss. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. Here is a great deal of labour and pains to little purpose; for tho' the Pouder when it is done is an excellent thing, yet a much more excellent Medicament might be made with a quarter of the trouble. § 2. It is usually given a∣gainst all malign and in∣fectious Diseases, as Measles, Small-Pox, Burning, purple and spotted Fevers, Pesti∣lence, &c. and may be ex∣hibited every four or six hours in those cases, à ʒss. ad ʒj. without any danger. § 3. This following may supply the place of it. ℞ Crabs Eyes, Pearl, white Amber in fine Pouder, A. ℥j. whitest Chalk, Cinnabar of Antimo∣ny, common Cinnabar, Bezoar Minerale, Cochinele, Viper Pouder, Oriental Bezoar, A. ℥ij. Contrayerva, Zedoary, Cloves, A. ʒvj. Saffron ʒiij. Ambergrise ʒij. Musk ʒj. all the Ingredients being in fine Pouder, with Gelly of Harts-horn, q. s. make it into a Mass for Balls; whose Ver∣tues and Dose is as the for∣mer. XI. * Pulvis Cardiacus Co∣rallatus, The corallated Cordial Pouder. Bate.] Red Coral pre∣pared, trebbled refined Sugar, A. ℥iij, Oil of Cinnamon, gut. vj. mix them. Salmon.] § 1. It is a sin∣gular Cordial, and good a∣gainst the Cardialgia, or Sickness at Heart, and Pain at Stomach, absorbing the sharp Humors which cause them.
§ 2. It is good against faint∣ing and swooning Fits, Weakness, and Debility of the Ventricle. Dose, ʒss. ad ʒj. in any Cordial and Sto∣matick Vehicle. XII. * Pulvis Cardiacus E∣boratus, The Ivory Cor∣dial Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Magistery of Ivory, Cinnamon, A. ℥ij. treb∣ble refined Sugar ℥iij. mix and make a Pouder. Salmon.] § 1. The Ver∣tues are the same with the former, save that this is more astringent, by reason of the body of the Cinnamon, and therefore the better to restore the Tone of the Stomach and Bowels. § 2. You may give it mixt with a little Confectio Alkermes, or Syrup of the Juice, à ʒss. ad ʒj. or more bis in die. XIII. * Pulvis Cardiacus Perlatus, The Pearled Cordial. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of China-roots ℥iij. Pearls prepared ℥ij. white Starch, or the finest wheaten Flower ℥viij. trebble refined Sugar ℥vj. bake them in an Oven in an Earthen Ves∣sel; then make them into a Pouder again de novo. Be∣ing put into all sorts of Food, Broth, Caudles, &c. it won∣derfully restores in Consum∣ptions. Salmon.] § 1. It seems to be a fixt Alcali, and there∣fore absorbs the Acid, which sharpens, alters, or destroys the Nutriment received. § 2. It may be given, à ʒij. ad ʒiv. in Barly, or Oat∣meal, Cream, in Gellies, or in Sack Posset, or other pro∣per nutritive Vehicles, and that Morning and Night. § 3. If to the Compositi∣on, Pouder of Vipers Flesh, ℥ij. be added, the Medi∣cament will be much the better. XIV. Pulvis Cardiacus Ru∣beus, The red Cordial Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Pure white Chalk ℥viij. Crabs Eyes ℥ij. fine Bole ℥j. Nutmegs ℥ss. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒij. at a time in a Cardial∣gia. Salmon.] § 1. It cures the most inveterate and cruel Pain at Stomach af∣ter an admirable manner, and that when all other things prove ineffectual.
§ 2. Give it as often as the Pain returns, at least thrice a day, in any proper Vehicle, as Barley Cream, and the like; and continue it for ten or twelve days. XV. * Pulvis ad Casum, A Pouder against inward bruises by falls. Bate.] ℞ Terra Sigillata, Sanguis, Draconis, Mumiae, A. ℥j. Sperma Ceti ℥ss. Rhu∣barb ʒiij. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒj. at a time after bleeding. Salmon.] § 1. If you would have it made effectual to all intentions and purposes a∣gainst inward Bleedings, you ought to add to the Com∣position these things: Cate∣chu ℥j. Henbane-seeds ℥ss. Roch-Alum ʒiij. white Vitriol ʒij. § 2. And after this addi∣tion, you may give it in the aforesaid Dose, Morning and Night, in some proper Ve∣hicle: if the Flux of Blood be vehement, it must be the the sooner repeated. XVI. * Pulvis Cibarius, A Pouder for the Table. Bate.] Tops of Eye-bright ℥iij. Fennel-seeds, Cinnamon, Mace, A. ʒj. make a Pouder, to which add refined Salt ℥viij. mix them. It is to be used with all your Food: It ad∣mirably sharpens and pre∣serves the Sight, and pre∣vails against Suffusions of the Eyes, darkness, hurts of the Memory, &c. Salmon.] § 1. What the Specifick Vertue of Eye∣bright is, I cannot yet tell; I have used much of it but without any observable ad∣vantage: My Opinion is, that the same Proportion of Time, or Rosemary would be much more effectual to the intention. § 2. Instead of our com∣mon refined Salt, Sal Gem in subtil Pouder is rather to be chosen; because there is a subtil and volatile Spirit con∣tained in it, not yet dimi∣nished by boiling, XVII. * Pulvis Cinnabaris Compositus, Pouder of Cinnabar compound. Bate.] ℞ Native Cinna∣bar ℥ij. white Amber ℥j. Roots of Male Peony, red Co∣ral, A. ʒx. mix and make a a Pouder, S. A. Dose, ʒss. every Morning. Against the Epilepsie, it is given ℈j. ad ʒss. &c.
Salmon.] § 1. This Pou∣der is said to be a Specifick for curing the Falling Sick∣ness; but differs something from that of Crato, which you may see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 91. § 2. But out of both, with a little addition, you may prepare one more pow∣erful than either thus. ℞ Na∣tive Cinnabar ℥ij. white Am∣ber, Peacocks Dung, Roots of Male Peony, A. ℥j. Pearls, and Coral prepared, volatile Salt of Man's Skull, A. ℥ss. Misleto of the Oak, Saffron, A. ʒiij. Crystals of Luna ʒiijss. Leaves of Gold No 90. mix and make a Pouder, which give every Morning in the former Dose keep it in a Glass close stopt. XVIII. * Pulvis Cornachini, The Warwick Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Diagrydium Sul∣phuratum ʒx. Antimony Dia∣phoretick ʒvj. Cremor Tartari ℥ijss. mix and make a Pou∣der. It is good almost a∣gainst all Diseases (where purging is required) being commended in their Cure. Dose, ʒss. ℈ij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. We have many Notes and Observati∣ons upon this Medicine in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 38. where it is called by the Name of the Earl of Warwick's Pouder, but it seems that Cornachinus was the Author thereof, who wrote a whole Book of the Vertues and Uses of it, which Original printed Book is scarcely to be got; but Hart∣man for the Excellency thereof, took the pains to coppy it over, and has in∣serted it word for word, in his Opera Medica, printed at Frankford, Anno 1684. Pa∣ginâ meâ, 144. § 2. But Zwelfer in his Pharmacopoeia, pag. meâ. 574. has two several Preparations thereof, both which you have in our London Dispensa∣tory, the place cited; but by reason we have been there short in explicating his lat∣ter Process, you shall have it here. § 3. ℞ Antimonial Tartar vitriolated ℥j. Rosin of Scammo∣ny, reduced to pouder with sweet Almonds ℥ ss. Cremor Tar∣tari ʒvj. mix and make a Pouder. § 4. How the Antimonial Tartar vitriolated is to be made we shall shew you from the same Zwelfer. ℞ White Flowers of Antimony ℥ij. Cre∣mor Tartari ℥iv. boil them in a sufficient quantity of fair Water, repeating it several
times, till all the Vertue is drawn forth; strain all the Li∣quors, and filter them hot, thro' brown Paper; in which dissolve Salt of Tartar lbj. af∣ter which gently exhale the Humidity, till the Matter comes to the dryness of a Salt: To this Salt thus impregnated with the Essence of Antimony, put in leisurely, and by drops, i. e. Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur q. s. for the Saturation of the Salt; dry it throughly again, and dissolve in Water, filter, and gently evaporate in a gla∣zed Vessel to dryness, to be kept for the former use. § 5. The Pulvis Cornachini, made with this Preparation, is a most excellent thing a∣gainst the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, Sciatica, Jaundice, Hypochondriack Melancho∣ly, King's-Evil, old Ulcers, Fistula's, and all sorts of Chronick Diseases, more e∣specially in tedious and long continuing Tertian and Quar∣tan Agues. Dose is ℈ss. ad ʒss. for the carrying forth of heavy and vitious Humors, which it sometimes does as well by Vomit as Stool. § 6. It opens all sorts of Obstructions, provokes the Terms, helps the hardness of the Spleen, and is good a∣gainst the Stone and Gravel in the Reins and Bladder. XIX. * Pulvis Coronatus, The much to be esteemed Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Epithymum ℥ss. Agarick, Lapis Lazuli pre∣pared, A. ʒij. Scammony ʒj. Cloves, No 20. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ad ℈iv. It is much commended for the Cure of melancholy Madness. Salmon.] § 1. It purges Melancholy after a singular manner, but works somewhat roughly by reason of the Lapis Lazuli, yet may be given safely enough. § 2. It effects not what it is design'd for presently, but must be given for some considerable time; and in the intervals of the taking of it, if the Patient cannot rest, some proper Opiate must be exhibited. XX. * Pulvis Crinalis, The Hair Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Roots of long Cypress, Calamus Aromaticus, Red Roses, A. ℥jss. Benjamine ℥j. Xyloaloes ʒvj. red Coral, Amber, A. ℥ss. Bean-meal ℥iv. Flower of Orrice-roots ℥viij. mix and make a subtil Pou∣der; to which add Musk, C∣vet, A. gr. v. Its chief use
is for to cause Hair to grow, and to strengthen and con∣firm its Roots, (being strew∣ed upon the Head.) It also recreates and comforts the Brain and Memory. Salmon.] § 1. It drys the Hair, and makes it clean, but the effects it has upon the Brain and Memory, is rather from its scent, than its substance. § 2. You will add to the Vertues of it, if Flower of Winter's Cinnamon, Bay∣berries, A. ʒij. be added to it. XXI. * Pulvis Cucuphalis, The Pouder for a Cap, or Quilt for the Head. Bate.] ℞ Black Pepper, Marjoram, Amber, A. ʒiij. Nutmegs, Mace, A. ʒj. mix and make a Pouder for a Quilt for the Head: It is of singu∣lar use against old Pains of the Head, proceeding from a cold Cause, drys up Ca∣tarrhs, &c. Salmon.] § 1. You ought to add, fine Pouder of Win∣ter's Cinnamon ʒiv. Pouder of Cloves ʒij. by which means it will become more effectual. §. 2. And in applying it let the Head be shaved, and then well rubbed Morning and Night with the Powers of Amber, and let the Pow∣ers of Amber be sprinkled also upon the Quilt. XXII. Pulvis Epidemicus aureus, The Golden An∣tidote or Epidemick Pou∣der. Bate.] ℞ White Sugar-candy ℥iv. Balsam of Sul∣phur ʒjss. Saffron gr. vj. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒj. in a draught of Wine Posset-drink, in the Morn∣ing fasting, and at Bed-time. Salmon.] § 1. This Me∣dicine will look of a glorious golden colour, if the Balsam be well made, otherwise but of a very dirty hue: which that it may be neatly done, it is necessary that the Bal∣sam be brought to its thick∣ness with a very gentle heat, &c. § 2. This being mixt with a little pure, sweet, new made Butter, made in April, May, or June, will make a famous Pectoral Balsam, of a pure golden colour, and not un∣pleasant, which will do won∣ders in Diseases of the Brest, Lungs, and Bowels.
XXIII. * Pulvis Epilepticus, A Pouder against the Fal∣ling-sickness. Bate.] ℞ Roots of white Dittany, Miselto of the Oak, Contrayerva, Virginia Snake∣root, Roots of Male Peony (gathered in a proper time) Seeds of Male Peony, Magi∣stery of Harts-horn, and of Elks-hoofs, A. ʒij. Roots of wild Valerian ℥j. red Coral, Man's Skull, A. ʒiij. Lapis Hyacinth, ʒj. Occidental Be∣zoar ʒjss. Oriental Bezoar ℈j. mix and make a fine Pouder, S. A. add Musk, gr. v. Leaves of Gold, No 30. and mix them. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only good against the Fal∣ling-sickness, but most cold and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain and Nerves, and is an exceeding good Stomatick. § 2. It also prevails a∣gainst all sorts of malign and pestilential Fevers, cast∣ing forth the Poyson by sweat; and cures the Bitings of mad Dogs, Serpents, and other venomous Creatures. § 3. Dose, ʒss. ad ʒj. vel ʒjss. in any proper Vehicle Morning and Night for many days, more especially three or four days before and after the Change and Full of the Moon. XXIV. * Pulvis Febrifugus certus; A sure Pouder a∣gainst Agues. Bate.] ℞ Virginea Snake∣root ʒij. Contrayerva, Genti∣an. Zedoary, Seeds of Ci∣trons, Carduus Ben. Occiden∣tal Bezoar, A. ʒj. Specifick Ve∣getable, i. e. Cortex Peruvia∣nus ℥iv. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒ j. every fourth hour between the Fits, in a Glass of Wine, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Before the giving of this Pouder it is necessary that the Body be prepared by Universals, that the morbifick Matter lying in the first passages may be evacuated; for which purpose the Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht is to be exhibited once or twice (if the strength of the Sick will bear it) to gr. iv. v. or vj. and after that a proper Infusion of Sena, to cleanse the Bowels. § 2. This done you may exhibite the Pouder accord∣ing to the Direction in the Recipe, and you Will find it as certain in its Effects as any Medicine can be in the World; I never to my know∣ledge gave it in an Ague where it mist the Cure, or
did not perform it accord∣ing to expectation. § 3. But this you must note, that as it is of abso∣lute necessity to evacuate and cleanse before-hand; so it is as pernicious to purge after, for purging undoes what the Styptick had be∣fore done, and gives room for the return of the Fits a∣gain. § 4. Moreover you must be sure to continue the use of if for sometime after the Fits have left the Patient, lest by a too early leaving it off, you seem to do the work but by halves, and the Fits re∣new with a greater force. § 5. Lastly, You must avoid it as Poyson in all con∣tinent or continual Fevers, whether non-putrid, putrid, malign, or pestilential, for if it be given in those cases, it locks up the Putrefaction, Malignity and Poyson within the Body, and so having no place to vanish at, imme∣diately recurres to the Cen∣ter, assaults the vital Spirits, and seizes upon the Heart, overcoming the whole Oe∣conomy of the Humane Frame, to the certain De∣struction of the Patient; the which Tragedy as it has been often managed by some of our Collegiate Quacks, my own Eyes have been too many times Witnesses of. XXV. * Pulvis Griseus, The grey Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Crabs Eyes, Sage, A. ℥ij. white Chalk ℥j. Nut∣megs ʒj. mix and make a Pouder. It is an admirable thing agianst a Diarrhoea or Loosness, Palpitation of the Heart, Acidity of the Blood, Stone, &c. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. It is power∣ful against a Cardialgia, or Pain at Stomach, tho' never so vehement, which it reme∣dies by absorbing the Acid which causes it. § 2. You may give it ʒj. at a time, Morning and E∣vening, or at the time when the pain is, or in a Heart-burning in a little Barley Cream, &c. XXVI. * Pulvis Hemoptoicus, A Pouder against Spitting of Blood. Bate.] ℞ Fine Bole ℥jss. white Starch ʒiij. Sugar of Roses ℥ss. Oil of Aniseeds, gut. ij. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒ jss. thrice a day or oftner; in a spitting of Blood, there is nothing equal to it.
Salmon.] § 1. That it may be made more effectu∣al, you ought to add to it Catechu, Jesuites Bark both in fine Pouder, A. ℥j. and if white Henbane-seeds ʒiv. be also added, it will yet be more powerful to the In∣tention, but then the Dose need not to exceed ʒj. § 2. But if you would have it more prevalent to all intentions and purposes of that kind, viz. not only to stop all Fluxes of Blood, but also all Fluxes of the Bowels, it will be necessary to add to the Composition Opium in fine Pouder ℈ij. so will it be effectual above any other Medicine yet known, of what kind so ever, and may then be given twice a day ad ʒj. in any Specifick Vehicle. XXVII. Pulvis Hermodacty∣lorum compositus, Pouder of Hermodacts compound. Bate.] ℞ Man's Bones cal∣cin'd. Hermodacts, Turbeth, Scammony, Sena, white Su∣gar, A. p. ae. mix and make a Pouder. It effectually at∣tracts and expels soft tough Flegm, and other viscous Hu∣mors from the very Joints. It cures the Gout in the Feet and Hands, and Pains in any other Joint, proceed∣ing from the same Humors. Dose, ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. It purges well, but with some small gripings, which the Sena given in the gross substance occasions, and therefore to prevent that, it would be good to add to the Composi∣tion a seventh part of the Pouder of Liquorice. § 2. It is good against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Jaundice, and King's-Evil, and may be given every third or fourth day, according to the condition and strength of the Patient. XXVIII. * Pulvis Hystericus, A Pouder against Fits of the Mother. Bate.] ℞ The inward Skin of a Capon's Gizard ℥iv. the yellow of Orange-peels ʒj. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒj. in the Fit, and every fourth hour: it is one of the best of Remedies. Salmon.] § 1. You may give it à ℈ij. ad ℈iv. upon the approach of the Fit, in some Antihysterick-water or Conserve. § 2. But used as a pre∣ventive, and to cure the Di∣sease, it ought to be given Morning and Night for a whole Month together. It
is good against Vapors, ex∣pels Wind, eases the Cho∣lick, &c. XXIV. * Pulvis Ictericus, A Pouder against the Yellow Jaundice. Bate.] ℞ Goose-dung ga∣thered in the Spring-time, dryed in the Sun, and finely poudered ℥ij. the best Saffron ʒj. white Sugar-candy ℥ ij. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒij. twice a day in Rhenish Wine for six days together. Or thus. ℞ Roots of Turmerick, white Tartar, Mars prepared, A. ℥ss. Earth∣worms, choice Rhubarb, A. ʒij. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒj. in a little Glass of White-wine. Salmon.] § 1. I have seen excellent Effects of the first Composition, and have heard the latter commended, but never tryed it my self. § 2. An Acquaintance of mine, a Learned Physician, usually makes both the Com∣positions into one, and as∣sures me that he never yet found it once to fail. XXX. * Pulvis Lateralis, A Pouder for a Pain in the Side. Bate.] ℞ Acorns hulled ℥ vj. Nutmegs ℥j. white Su∣gar ℥ij. mix and make a Pou∣der, which is also called Pulvis Iliacus & Colicus. Dose, ʒj. at a time, twice or thrice a day, against the Iliack Pas∣sion, Cholick, Pain, Stitches in the Side, Wind, Pains of the Gout, &c. Salmon] § 1. It is ac∣counted a Specifick against Stitches in the Side; but if you add to it Camphire ʒij. Thebian Opium in fine Pou∣der ʒj. the Composition will be much the better. § 2. You may with this addition give it to a Dram every Night going to Bed; and if the Distemper be ve∣hement every Morning and Night, &c. XXXI. * Pulvis Liliaceus, The Lilly Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Dryed Roots of white Lillies ℥ijss. Ceruse of Antimony ʒiij. Nutmegs, Ve∣nice Turpentine (boiled to hardness) A. ʒij. Sugar of Roses ℥j. mix and make a Pouder, S. A. Dose, ad ʒiss. twice a day with Syrup of Water-Lillies, against Sharp∣ness of Urine in the French-Pox, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only good to stop the Heat and Sharpness of Urine, but
(being used after Universals) to stop a Gonorrhoea in Men and the Whites in Women, as also Fluxes of the Bowels. § 2. If the Disease be ve∣hement, it may be given three or four times a day, adding to each Dose white Vitriol, gr. iv. Roch Alum, gr. vj. XXXII. Pulvis Martialis compositus, Pouder of Mars compound. Bate.] ℞ Mars prepared ʒvj. Cassia Lignea, Nutmegs, A. ℥ss. Cloves, Mace, A. ʒij. white Sugar ℥i. mix and make a Pouder. It is a power∣ful Remedy against the Ca∣chexia, in Maids, Women, or Men, whether they be young or old. Dose, ʒj. ad ʒij. Salmon.] § 1. You may prepare Mars by laying the Filings thin spread upon Pewter or Earthen Plates in Dew for many days and nights till they are wholly turned to Rust, which may then be poudered for this Work. § 2. Or thus: Dissolve Salt of Wormwood, Scurvy-grass or Tartar in Centory-water, with which moisten Filings of Iron, and dry them, repeating this work ten times or oftner, and then make them into a fine Pou∣der. § 3. Or thus. ℞ Pure Fi∣lings of Mars, white Tartar in fine Pouder, Ana. Car∣duus-water, q. s. mix and make a Mass like an E∣lectuary; put it into an Earth∣en-pan, and bake it in an Oven with a gentle heart; pouder it fine, and with more Carduus-water make a Paste again, which dry in an Oven as before, repeating this work four or five times, till the whole body of the Mars is prepared. XXXIII. Pulvis Odoratus, The sweet Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Meal of Orrice-roots ℥xiv. Lignum Rhodium ℥ij. sweet Marjoram ʒiij. Cloves ℥j. Limon-Peels ʒv. Cypress-roots ℥j. Calamus Aromaticus ʒvj. Damask Roses ℥iv. Red Roses ℥ij. Benjamine, Styrax calamita, A. ℥j. Labdanum ℥ss. mix and make a gross Pouder. It is used to be scattered among Cloths to preserve them from Moaths. If all these Ingredients be put into very strong Beer, and di∣stilled in a common Rose-wa∣ter still (hanging in the Re∣ceiver Musk, gr. vj. tied up in a fine Bag) you will have
a most Odoriferous water, of singular use. Salmon.] § 1. The Pou∣der being put into a Quilt, and applied to the Head, is said to comfort the Brain and Animal Spirits. § 2. The Water being drawn up the Nostrils re∣creates all the Animal Fun∣ctions, revives the Spirits, chears the Heart and strength∣ens Nature; but much more if taken inwardly ad ℥ss. up∣on any Fainting and Swoon∣ing. § 3. But you must be cau∣tious, that you never give it to such as are troubled with Vapors, or Rising of the Mo∣ther, or are apt to have hy∣sterick Fits, because it is thought to induce them. XXXIV. * Pulvis Ophthal∣micus, The Eye Pou∣der. Bate.] ℞ Tops of Eye∣bright ℥iij. common Fennel-seeds ℥ij. Seeds of Rue ℥ss. Mace ʒij. trebble refined Su∣gar ℥vj. mix and make a Pouder, S. A. Dose, one Spoonful thrice a day: See the Vertues of the Pulvis Ci∣barius. Salmon.] § 1. The Com∣position is good, but it would be much better, if thereto you added Rosemary-flow∣ers gathered in their prime ℥iij. § 2. It may be taken in Rosemary-water, drinking immediately after it Hungary Water ʒij. in a Glass of White-wine. XXXV. * Pulvis Oxytocius, The Birth Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Saffron, Cassia Lignea, Myrrh, white Amber, A. ʒij. Chrysocolla ℥j. mix and make a fine Pouder. Dose, ℈iv. in Mug∣wort or Savin-water; it is a most powerful Medicament to accelerate the Birth, pro∣voke the Terms, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Medi∣cament is proper for the in∣tention, but it is a much bet∣ter to be given in White or Rhenish Wine; but if not in Wine, rather use Onion-wa∣ter, or Water of the biting Arsmart. § 2. If the first Dose does not the feat, you ought to repeat it at a due distance of time, and that to the third Dose, if necessity requires it. XXXVI. * Pulvis Pannoni∣cus rubeus, The Red Hun∣garian Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Fine Bole prepa∣red with Rose-water and Vine∣gar
℥iij. Terra Lemnia ℥ij. Emeralds, Ruby, Sapphir, Ja∣cynth, Bone of a Stag's Heart, red Coral, A. ℥ss. white Co∣ral ʒvj. Spodium, Pearls, A. ʒv. Cinnamon, red Sanders, Seeds of Sorrel, A. ʒij. Cloves, Saffron, A. ʒj. Citron-Peels white Sanders, A. ʒiss. Ivory ʒiij. mix and make a subtil Pou∣der; to which add Leaves of Gold, No 50. mix them. It is of great Power in curing malign, contagious, and pe∣stilential Fevers. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. In some Compositions there is Ʋni∣corns-horn added, but that which supplies the place thereof in all Apothecaries and Drug∣gists Shops, is the Horn of a great Fish, found in Groyn∣land, which the Islanders call Narwall; whose Horn is white, hard, heavy, twisted, hollow within for some space, and from one to two Ells long, which serves him as a defence against other Fish, and to kill great Whales. § 2. The Horns of this great Fish, were formerly very rare, and the Fish it self very little known: but the late constant fishing in those Seas have made them more frequent and common in Eng∣land, Holland, Denmark, Ger∣many, and other places. § 3. This Pouder is used in malignant Fevers, and a∣gainst all Epidemick Distem∣pers, and all sorts of Poy∣sons. It prevails wonderfully a∣gainst the Small-pox, for it ex∣pels the malignity, and streng∣thens the noble Parts. § 4. It is generally given in some Cordial-water, sweet∣ned with Syrup of Cleve-gilli∣flowers, Limons, or Granates, and taken fasting in the Morning, and last at Night going to Bed. § 5. You may make it into Tablets if you mix of this Pouder ℥jss. with trebble refined Sugar ℥xij. (dissolved in Damask Rose-water) and then boil'd up to the con∣sistency of a solid Electuary. XXXVII. * Pulvis Pectora∣lis, The Pectoral Pouder. Bate.] The white parts of Benjamine ℥jss. Sulphur vive ℥iij. Aniseeds ℥j. Sugar of Roses ℥ij. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, adʒjss. twice a day in soft boil'd Egg. Salmon.] § 1. It is an ex∣cellent thing indeed against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Wheasing, Hoarseness, and other Distempers of the Brest and Lungs, proceeding from Tartarous humors, &c. § 2. If the Cough be ve∣hement it may be given thrice a day, and that in
Syrup of Hyssop or Liquo∣rice. XXXVIII. * Pulvis Pepti∣cus, The digestive Pou∣per. Bate.] ℞ The yellow of Orange-peels candied, and chopt small ℥iv. Coriander Com∣fitz ℥iv. Seeds of Anise, Cara∣ways, and Fennel, A. ℥ij. A∣romaticum Rosatum ℥ss. Salt of Wormwood ʒj. Mint in Pouder ℈ij. Sugar-candy the weight of them all: mix and make a gross Pouder. Dose, ʒj. after every Meal. Salmon.] § 1. What the Aromaticum Rosatum is, and how it is made, see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 2. where you have its Vertues and Uses. § 2. It strengthens the Stomach, warms it, and causes a good Digestion, expelling Wind, and preventing Crudities; and with all causes a sweet Breath. XXXIX. Pulvis Pleres-Ar∣chonticon, The great Resto∣rative Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Cinnamon, Cloves, Xyloaloes, Galangal, Nutmegs, Ginger, red Roses, Indian Spicknard, Schaenanth (the some omit) Spodium, Cyprus, Violets, A. ʒj. Mace and Li∣quorice, Mastich, Styrax ca∣lamita, Basil, Marjoram, Cost∣mary, Pepper long and white, Cardamoms, Myrttle-berries, Citron-peels, A. gr. 36. Pearl, Behen white and red, red Coral tosted Silk, A. gr. 18. Camphire, gr, iv. mix and make a subtil Pouder; with this Pouder ℥ss. and trebble refined Sugar ℥viij. dissolved in Mint-water) Sto∣matick Tablets may be made, by boiling them to a due con∣sistency. Salmon.] § 1. It Is said to resist Melancholy, chear the Heart, and restore in Con∣sumption: it is Cephalick, Neurotick, Stomatick and Cardiack. § 2. It expels Wind, cor∣rects sharp Humors in the Bowels, gives ease in the Cholick, and prevails against Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Palsies, Convulsions, and all other cold and moist Diseases of the Nerves. § 3. It is good against the Vertigo and Lethargy, re∣stores a decayed Memory, quickens all the Senses, and and chears the Spirits natural Vital and Animal, &c. Dose, ad ʒj. or more, Morning and Night.
XL. * Pulvis Pleuriticus, A Pouder against the Pleu∣risie. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur ℥ij. Boars Tooth, Jaw of a Pike, A. ℥j. Com Poppy∣flowers ℥ss. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ʒj. it is said to be a stupendious An∣tipleuritick given with Sugar of Roses. Salmon.] § 1. These In∣gredients are all fixt Alcalies, which absorb the Acid which causes a Coagulum in the Blood, and so far as it takes away that Acidity, it takes away the Cause of that Di∣sease. § 2. It may be given Morn∣ing and Night in Syrup of Corn Poppies, or other pro∣per Vehicle which the Sick best likes. XLI. * Pulvis Purpureus, The purple Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Harts-horn cal∣cin'd, white Amber, red Co∣ral, Pearl prepared, A. ℥j. Crabs Eyes, Crabs Claws, A. ℥ij. Saffron ℈ss. Cochinele ℈ij. mix and make a Pouder; add thereto Gelly of Harts-horn rasped Ivory, made with Aniseed-water, q. s. and make therewith little Balls, S. A. Dose, ℈j. ad ℈ij. against the Measles, Small-Pox, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is good also against the Purples, Spotted Fever and the Plague. or any contagious or pesti∣lential Disease, Poyson, the biting of mad Dogs, or any other venomous Creature, &c. § 2. Give it every Morn∣ing fasting, and every Night going to Bed in a little Sy∣rup of Citrons-peels, or o∣ther proper Vehicle. XLII. * Pulvis ad Rachiti∣dem, A Pouder against the Rickets in Children. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of the Roots of Osmund royal ℥iv. Sugar ℥ij. mix them. Sprinkle a little thereof upon all their thin or liquid Food, so as they may take ʒij. or iij. of it in a day. Salmon.] § 1. Or you may give it (as you give Spice or grated Ginger in drink) in a Decoction of Li∣verwort, Figs, Raisons of the Sun and Currants, which by reason of the pleasantness of the Vehicle, the Child will scarcely refuse. § 2. It will be best to give it ʒj. in the Morning fasting: ʒj. an hour before Dinner∣time; and ʒj. at time of sleep, and to continue it for
sive or six Weeks toge∣ther. XLIII. Pulvis sine Pari, A Pouder without Equal. Bate.] ℞ Auripigment, Verdigrise, A. ʒij. Burnt A∣lom ℥j. Colcothar ℥ss. mix and make a Pouder. Sprinkle this a little upon any place ulce∣rated, and apply over it Ʋn∣guentum de Minio, spread up∣on Cloth, letting it lie till the Eschar will fall off its own accord, or may be easily se∣parated. And let the Sick take in the mean time a De∣coction made with Guaja∣cum, Liquorice and Raisons, as their common drink. Salmon.] § 1. It is very sharp and painful, and there∣fore must be used with great caution; 'tis not for a No∣vice to meddle with it, lest ill accidents follow which he knows not how to help. § 2. You ought to consi∣der the place, and to beware that it touches not any naked Nerve, lest it induces Con∣vulsions, and other mischiefs not thought of, nor easily removed. XLIV. * Pulvis Solearis, A Pouder for the Feet. Bate.] ℞ Cumin ℥iij. Cloves ℥j. Salt decripitated ℥iv. mix, and make a Pouder. It may be quilted in Socks, and applied to the Soles of the Feet of such as are troubled with the Gout. Salmon.] You may add whatsoever has a strong and attractive Vertue; such as Rochet-seed, Mustard-seed, Stavesacre, and the like. § 2. If it draws much Hu∣midity, you must change twice a day, but while the Application keeps dry it may be worn: Pouder of Bur∣dock Leaves is good in this case. XLV. * Pulvis Sternutato∣rius, A Sneezing Pouder. Bate.] ℞ Marjoram, Rose∣mary, Betony, Flowers of Lilly Convally, A. ʒiij. Nutmegs ʒij. Volatile Sal Armoniack ℈j. mix and make a Pouder. It is good against Pains of the Head, Lethargies, Gouts, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Unless you keep the Pouder in a Glass close stopt, the Volatile Sal Armoniack will quickly lose it self, which it will yet do, by often opening it. § 2. It is designed to purge the Head and Brain of gross flegmatick Humors which offend it; but it will
be much more effectual if thereto be added sweet-scented Tobacco ℥ss. in fine Pouder. XLVL. * Pulvis Stomachicus, A Stomach Pouder. Bate.] ℞ The inward Skins of Capons Gizards ℥iv. Nut∣megs, Mace, Seeds of Cori∣ander Anise. Fennel, A. ʒiij. Mint ʒj. Liquorice ʒij. Sugar of Roses ℥ij. mix and make a Pouder. It is good against the Pains pf the Stomach, &c. Dose, à ʒj. ad ʒij. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only good against Pains of the Stomach, Gripings of the Bowels, Cholick, Wind, and the like; but a Specifick a∣gainst hysterick Vapors, Fits of the Mother, and other Distempers of the Womb. § 2. In this latter case it may be given every fourth hour, in any proper hysterick Water. XLVII. * Pulvis ad Strumas, A Pouder against the King's Evil. Bate.] ℞ Sponge Stone ʒiij. Sal Gem ʒij. Tartar vitriolate ʒj. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ℈ij. twice a day, for twelve days together. Salmon.] § 1. If you take the Sponge it self, and dry it so as it may be beat∣en into Pouder, which is a kind of roasting, scorching, or half calcining it, it may do as well, as the Sponge Stone it self. § 2. It is said to be a Spe∣cifick in the Cure of the King's Evil in what part of the Body and how inveterate soever, exceeding all other Medicines for that purpose in the World. § 3. But it must be taken for a longer time than our Author prescribes, at least for six or seven Weeks toge∣ther: and if there be any Ul∣cers, let it be strewed upon them, &c. XLVIII. Pulvis Sympatheti∣cus, The Sympathetick Pouder of Sir Kenelm Digby. Bare.] It is made by calcining Roman Vitriol with the Sun-beams, through the help of a Burning-glass, and then poudering it. See the Vertues of the Ʋnguentum Sympatheticum. Salmon]. § 1. It is best to be done by a concave Re∣flecting-glass; one of a Foot Diameter will do admirably well; but the larger it is, so much the better, and the
sooner it performs the Ope∣ration. § 2. Dissolve a little of it in fair warm Water (ʒij. to half a Pint) and dip a bloody Cloth (taken from any Wound) in it, keeping them in a very gentle and tempe∣rate heat, and washing the Wound with warm Urine, keeping it clean and warm; and it will quickly be healed without any other Remedy. § 3. After the same man∣ner it cures Ulcers, if a Cloth or Rag (bedaubed with the Pus or Sanies of the Ulcer) be dipt and kept in as before, &c. XLIX. * Pulvis Vermifugue, A Pouder killing Worms. Bate.] ℞ Harts-horn, Rhu∣barb, Coraline, Wormseed, Ana. p. ae. mix and make a Pouder. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒss. continually for three days, about the New and Full Moon. Salmon.] § 1. Whether the Harts-horn ought to be calcin'd or not is dubious: if it be not calcin'd, it will be somewhat troublesome to be reduced to Pouder; the best way will be to calcine it Philosophically, as we have taught in our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 13. Sect. 9. to which you are referred. § 2. Tho' some may think it best to give the Pouder a∣bout the New and Full Moon, yet Experience has told me, that where there is Worms, it will do at any time. Dose, à ℈j. ad ℈ij. vl ʒj. in elder People. L. * Pulvis Ʋvularis, Pou∣der for the Uvula, com∣monly called the Pa∣late. Bate.] ℞ Balaustians, Roots of Bistort and Tormen∣til, A. ℥ss. Alum ʒij. mix and make a Pouder. Let it be put upon the Uvula and Palate with your Finger, or with Lint, often in a day. Salmon.] § 1. It is de∣signed against a Soreness, Swelling or Tumor, Lassi∣tude or Weakness of the Ʋvula, which Country Peo∣ple call the falling down of the Palate, for which it is an excellent thing. § 2. It also heals Ulcers in the Throat, Mouth and Gums, Cankers, and other like Di∣stempers of those parts.
LI. * Ranarum Hepata, Li∣vers of Frogs. Bate.] ℞ They are prepa∣red by drying them upon Cole∣wort Leaves in a closed Vessel, and then poudring them, S. A. Dose, ʒss. against the Epilep∣sie, Quartan Ague, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This Pou∣der is a Specifick against the Falling-sickness, and other Diseases of the Head and Brain, and as some say, has a Vertue against Quartan Agues, but of that I know nothing by Experience. § 2. If they be dryed and prepared with the Galls ad∣joyning, the Medicine will be stronger and better; and may then be given Morning and Evening, à ℈j. ad ℈ij. in any fit Vehicle. LII. * Testes Equi preparati, Testicles of a Horse pre∣pared. Bate.] They are taken from a living Horse, cut in peices and washed with White Wine, speedily dryed, and re∣duced into Pouder. Dose, ʒj. at a time twice a day, a∣gainst the Epilepsie, Stone, pain in the Yard, pissing of purulent Matter, Cholick, Fits of the Mother, Barren∣ness in Women, dead Child, difficult Labour, Suppressi∣on of the Loches, &c. Dose, ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. Let it be given in any Fit as the ne∣cessity requires, in some pro∣per and specifick Vehicle; but otherwise, (the necessity not being present) only Morning and Evening in a Glass of White-wine, or some Antepileptick-water. § 2. It is singular good a∣gainst Convulsion, Vapors, Wind, and other Distem∣pers of the Bowels given in Juniper-water. LIII. * Testes Apri preparati, Testicles of a Boar pre∣pared. Bate.] ℞ After the same manner are prepared the Te∣sticles of a Boar, or wild Boar. Salmon.] § 1. They have all the Vertues of the former, and in my Opinion are some∣what the more powerful Me∣dicine. § 2. Against Fits of the Mother give them thus. ℞ Of this Pouder, pouder of Castoreum, A. ℈j. Filings of Ox-horns, and of Elks hoofs, A. gr. 10, mix for a Dose.
LIV. * Tragea Granorum Actes, Pouder of Elder-berries. Bate.] ℞ Juice of ripe Elder-berries, q. v. Rie-meal or Flower, q. s. so as to make it into a Paste: of which form small Loaves, which bake in an Oven as hard as Bisquit: these pouder, and with fresh Juice of Berries make it into Paste again, and as before bake it, and repeat this work the third time; after which reduce all into a subtil Pouder, to every Ounce of which add Nutmeg in Pouder ʒj. Dose, ʒj. in the Yolk of an Egg, against the Bloody-flux, immoderate Flux of the Courses, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Quercetan is the Author of it (as it is in his Pharmacopoeia, pag. meâ. 426.) from whom Schroder has borrowed it, who says it is a Specifick Ar∣canum against the Bloody-flux. § 2. If it be thus com∣pounded it is better. ℞ Of this Pouder ʒiv. Catechu in pou∣der ʒij. Opium in fine pou∣der, gr. v. mix them for five Doses, to be given at Night going to Bed: It prevails a∣gainst Catarrhs, and all sorts of Fluxes whatsoevèr. Added by the Translator. LV. Pulvis & Sulphur Anti∣monii, Pouder and Sul∣phur of Antimony, com∣monly called Russel's Pou∣der. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Choice Antimony reduced into gross Pouder, put it into a Crucible, and melt it making it red-hot; then pour it from aloft into a large Vessel full of Water, so will the Pouder of the Anti∣mony settle to the bottom, of a dirty reddish colour; and the separated Sulphur (of a kind of yellowish or Orange tawney co∣lour) swim on top, which ga∣ther a part and keep for use. § 2. The first, or that which sinks to the bottom is called the greater Species: The latter, or Sulphur which swims on top is called the lesser Species: The former works more gently, and may be given à ℈j. ad ʒj. it cau∣sing Vomiting in some, and in some not, but is common∣ly given, till it ceases work∣ing. The latter is given à gr. vj. ad xij. and so in∣creased Grain by Grain to twenty, according as the Age and Strength will permit.
§ 3. In some it works vio∣lently (yet safely) in others very gently, and it is given (as the former) so long till it will not work at all. § 4. It is esteemed by some as a Catholicon, or Univer∣sal Remedy against all Di∣seases, and is said to operate or work according as Na∣ture designs and the Disease requires. § 5. In some it vomits on∣ly, others it purges only; and some it both vomits and purges; in others it does nei∣ther, but provokes an admi∣rable Diaphoresis; according as it meets with the Morbi∣fick Matter, sending it forth that way, which Nature is disposed to. § 6. It is given against Sickness at Stomach, Wind, Gripings of the the Bowels, Cholick, Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, Jaundice, King's-Evil, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Vertigo, Megrim, Head-ach, Con∣vulsions, Palsies, and all o∣ther Diseases coming from a cold and moist Cause, or proceeding from tartarous Humors in what part of the Body soever. § 7. The two Pouders seem to be both of one na∣ture, but the former is the gentler, and therefore given to the weaker Constitutions; the latter, to such as are of a more strong and robust Na∣ture: At first they are given in the Morning only, but when the Body becomes a little habituated to their use, they may then be given Morning and Evening with∣out any danger. CHAP. XXII. Of ELECTƲARIES. I. Catharticum Caesareum, The Royal Cathartick. Bate.] ℞ PƲlp of green  Ginger ℥ ij. Rosin of Scammony ℥j. con∣fectio Alkermes ℥ss. Pouder of red Roses, Cremor Tartari, A. ʒij. Oil of Cinnamon, gut. xx. Spiritus Vitrioli, gut. xvj. Syrup of green Ginger, q. s. mix and make an Electuary. It is a profitable and pleasant Purge, in all cold Dis-affe∣ctions,
evacuating without any trouble or disturbance: it recreates the Mind, pro∣vokes the Appetite, and is helpful against a stinking Breath, whether from Mouth or Nose. It rectifies the Blood, dissipates Wind, and wonderfully prevails against an excruciating Colick. Dose, ʒj. ad ʒij. Salmon.] § 1. You may give it in the Morning fast∣ing, with Observations as in other Purges; it operates very pleasantly and sweetly; but if the Body be very hard to work upon, let it be given at Night going to Bed. § 2. It carries off the tar∣tarous Matter which breeds the Gout; and therefore is good for gouty Persons to take five or six times every Spring and Fall. II. * Electuarium Album, The white Electuary. Bate.] ℞ Ceruse of Anti∣mony ℥iv. trebble refined Su∣gar ℥xij. mix and make a Pouder; to which add Syrup of Eryngo-roots ℥iv. vel q. s. so as to make a very white Electuary. Dose, ʒij. or iij. twice a day, increasing the quantity daily to ʒvj. at a time. It purifies the Blood, and is given against the Cachexia, Dropsie, Jaun∣dice, Scurvy, and French-Pox, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is strength∣ning, restorative in Con∣sumptions, and good for a weak Back. § 2. Taking it for some considerable time, it absorbs all the Acidities in the Blood and Humors, and dissolves the Coagulum, thereby de∣stroying that which is the Cause of Boils, Botches Scabs, Itch, Tettars, Ring-worms, &c. III, * Electuarium Asthma∣ticum, An Electuary a∣gainst Difficulty of Breath∣ing. Bate] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur ℥iij. Cinnamon ʒj. Gin∣ger ℈iv. Saffron ʒij. Musk gr. vj. clarified Honey ℥vj. vel q. s. mix and make an Electuary. Dose, ʒiij. twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. If you add to the Composition pouder of Elecampane ℥j. the Medica∣ment will be much more ef∣fectual, augmenting also pro∣portionably the quantity of the Honey. § 2. You may give it a∣lone▪ and drink after it this.
℞ Syrup of Elecampane-roots ℥ij. Milk-water ℥iij. mix for a Draught. IV. * Electuarium Caryophylla∣tum, Electuary of Clove-Gilliflowers. Bate.] ℞ Conserve of Clove Gilliflowers ℥iv. Conserve of red Roses ℥vj. Syrup of Citron-peels ℥ij. beat all well together, and pass it thro' a Sieve, and add thereto Aromaticum Rosatum ʒiij. Cloves cut ʒiij. Amber∣grise ℈ss. mix and make an Electuary. It is of excellent use against loathing of Meat, Pain of the Stomach, &c. Dose, ʒj. ad ʒij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. In my Opini∣on, the Medicament would be much the better if the Cloves were added in a gross kind of Pouder. § 2. You may give it in the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed; and if occasion require, presently after Dinner. V. * Electuarium Castitatis, An Electuary to cause Chastity. Bate.] ℞ Seeds of Ag∣nus Castus, Henbane, A. ʒj. Camphire ʒij. Liquorice ℈iv. mix and make a Pouder: add thereto Conserve of Water-lilly-Flowers ℥iij. Syrup of Water-lillies, q. s. mix and make an Electuary. Dose, ʒij. or iij. twice a day, drinking after it Chalybeated Whey; a∣nointing also in the mean while the Reins and Testicles with Oil of Henbane-seed by expression. Salmon.] § 1. There is nothing upon Earth induces Chastity like Opium, and Preparations from Saturn, and therefore if you would make it effectual to all In∣tentions, you ought to add to the Composition, Saccha∣rum Saturni ℈iv. Opium in Pouder ℈ij. § 2. And then you may give it à ʒjss. ad ʒiij. but it ought only to be given at Night going to Bed. VI. * Electuarium Chalybea∣tum, Electuary of Mars prepared. Bate.] ℞ Mars prepared ℥j. Mars purified ℥ss. Pulp of Currants ℥xij. Oil of Cinna∣mon or Cloves, gut. 40. mix them, S. A. It is profitably given against the Green-sick∣ness, Dropsie, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Dose is from ℥ss. ad ℥j. but it ought to be given at Night going to Bed, that the Sick
may lie warm, and if pos∣sible sweat upon it. § 2. Otherwise, if it be given in the Morning fasting the Sick ought to labour stoutly upon it, so as to be brought into a breathing Sweat; or to take a walk of three or four Miles to heat them; for thereby the Ope∣ration will be made much more excellent, and the Pa∣tient receive the greater good by it. VII. * Electuarium Diar∣rhodi, Electuary of the Species Diarrhodon ab∣batis. Bate.] ℞ The Species Diar∣rhodon abbatis ℈iv. Conserve or Quiddony of Berberries ℥iij. white Sugar ℥iij. dissolved in Strawberry-water; mix and make an Electuary. Dose, ʒiij. twice a day, drink af∣ter it a draught of Horsleek Whey. Salmon.] § 1. It is a cooling Electuary, and good for such as are in a hectick Fever, especially if taken according to the Direction. § 2. It also prevails a∣gainst burning Fevers, and hot Distempers of the Sto∣mach and Liver: it abates violent Heats, strengthens the Ventricle, is pectoral and carminative. VIII. Electuarium Ducis Sa∣baudiae, Electuary of the Duke of Savoy. Bate.] ℞ Sarsaparilla ℥iij. Seeds of dwarf Elder ℥vj. Seeds of Hypericon, Leaves of Germander, Ground Pine, A. ℥iij. Angelica-root ʒiij. round Birthworth-root ʒvj. Cinna∣mon ʒijss. Cloves ℈iv. Saf∣fron ℈ij. mix and make a subtil Pouder, and with tripple quantity of clarified Honey make an Electuary. Dose, ʒiij. every day for a whole Year. It is accounted the best Remedy for curing the Gout. Salmon.] § 1. Let it be taken ʒj. in the Morning fasting: ʒj. an hour before Dinner; and ʒj. at Night going to Bed. § 2. You may either take it alone, and drink a Glass of Mead after it; or you may take it in a Glass of Germander and Ground Pine∣wine, &c. IX. * Electuarium Epilepti∣cum, An Electuary against the Falling-sickness. Bate.] ℞ White Dung of a Peacock, dryed, Male Peony Roots, A. ℥ij. Roots of Vale∣rian ℥j. Peony-seed hull'd ℥iij.
Caraways ℥ss. mix and make a Pouder; to which add Honey of Rosemary-flowers, q. s. mix them. Dose, ʒij. &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is de∣signed as a Remedy against the Falling-sickness; but it would be more powerful to the Intention if these things be added to it, volatile Salt of Man's Skull, native Cinna∣abar, A. ℥ij. Miselto of the Oak ℥j▪ § 2. It may then be given, à ʒi. ad ʒij. Morning and Evening for sixty days toge∣ther, drinking after it a Glass of Rosemary-wine. X. * Electuarium Juniperi∣num, Electuary of Juniper-berries. Bate.] ℞ Full ripe jucy Juniper-berries bruised lbj. in∣fuse them in fair Water lbij. for three hours, strain out by pressing, and add of trebble refined Sugar lbj. boil to the consistency of a thick Syrup: then add Electuary of Sassa∣ras ℥iv. Calamus Aromaticu in Pouder ʒjss. Mace ʒj. Saf∣fron ℈ij. mix them, S. A. It is Diuretick, Stomatick, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It provokes Urine powerfully, and re∣moves Obstructions of the Reins, Ureters and Bladder, bringing away tartarous Hu∣mors, Sand, Gravel and Stones if small. § 2. If thereto you add Pouder of Winter-cherries ℥iij. Pouder of Millepedes ℥j. it will be much more pow∣erful to the Intention. Dose, ʒij. Morning and Night in Juniper-wine. XI. * Electuarium Lithon∣tripticon, An Electuary a∣gainst the Stone. Bate.] ℞ Venice Tur∣pentine ℥j. Yolks of Eggs, No ij. mix them very well, and add thereto, Burdock-seeds, Gromwell-seed, both in Pouder, A. ℥j. Winter-cherries ʒiij La∣pis Judaicus ʒvj. Syrupus de Al∣thaea, q. s. mix them. Dose, ʒij. twice a day (such things being premised as ought to be given before-hand) drink∣ing after it Water of Haws compound ℥iv. mixt with Syr. de Althaea ℥j. Salmon.] § 1. The quan∣tity of the Winter-cherries is much too little, ʒj. is the smallest quantity ought to be put into the Composition; to which you may also add Pou∣der of Sows or Hog-lice, ʒvj. § 2. It is really a good thing against all manner of Obstructions in the Reins, Ureters, or Bladder, whe∣ther proceeding from thick and tartarous Humors, Sand, Gravel, or Stones, and has
scarcely a second to it known. Dose, ʒjss. ad ʒiij. twice or thrice a day, as you see need requires. XII. Electuarium Macis, E∣lectuary of Mace. Bate.] ℞ Mace infused twenty four hours in Vinegar of Roses and dryed ℥j. Seeds of Citrons, of Carduus, Lig∣num Vitae, A. ʒjss. make of all a very fine Pouder; to which add the Species Liberant. ʒj. condited Citron-peels ℥j. The∣riaca Andnomachi ʒiij. Con∣serves of Borrage and Wood∣sorrel, A. ℥ij. Syrup of Wood∣sorrel, q. s. mix and make an Electuary. Its use is in the Plague and malign Di∣seases. Salmon.] § 1. What the Species Confectionis Liberan∣tis is, you may see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 27. The Theriaca An∣dromachi or Venice Treacle see also, Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 25. of the afore-cited Book. § 2. It is given in the Measles and Small-Pox with very good success. Dose, ʒss. ad ʒij. according to Age and Necessity; and given in the Morning fasting ad ʒj. It is a good Preservative in pestilential times. XIII. Electuarium Orvieta∣num, The Antidote against Poyson. Bate.] ℞ Roots of white Dittany, of Bistort, of Tor∣mentil, of Masterwort, of Gentian, of Carline Thistle, of both sorts of Birthwort, of Cinkfoil, of Zedoary, of Valerian the greater, of Con¦trayerva, of Elecampane, Vir∣ginea Snake-root, Leaves of Carduus Ben. of Devils bi▪ of Meadow-sweet, of Rue, S∣vin, Pennyroyal, Scordium▪ Hypericon, Citron-peels, O∣range-peels, Cinnamon, Ba-berries, Juniper-berries, Toad-flesh, Ana ℥ij. Vipers-flesh ℥i best Saffron ℥ss. make all in a Pouder, to which add Ex¦tract of Juniper-berries mad with White-wine, and evap¦rated to the thickness of H¦ney, q. s. so as to make  Confection: To which add th Elaeosaccharum of Rue, of A¦ber, of Cloves, of Juniper A. ℈ij. mix them, S.  then add to every Pound of th Confect Venice Treacle, M¦thridate, A. ℥ij. mix agai This was communicated ¦me by Sir Robert Talbor.  is a most powerful Remed against the Plague, and  malign Fevers. Dose, ʒ ad ʒij.
Salmon.] § 1. There are several Compositions of this Antidote: In our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 63. we have given you one according to the Italian form, rom Schroder. § 2. In our Doron, Medic. Lib. 2. Cap. 22. Sect. 5. we ave given you another from Charras, according as it is made at Paris, and this is accounted the true Recipe. § 3. Our Author here gives you one different from both them (but in my Opini∣on) much superior to them for Vertues and Goodness, and not more difficult to make; this Estimation I put upon it because of the addi∣tion of the Elaeosaccharum's, which vastly add to the va∣lue and worth of the Me∣dicament. § 4. It is good against all sorts of Poysons, Small-Pox, Measles, purple and spotted Fever, Plague, and other epidemick and malign Di∣seases; it is Cephalick, Neu∣rotick, Stomatick, Cardiack, Uterine and Nephritick, pre∣vailing against cold and moist Diseases of those parts, Cholick, Wind in the Sto∣mach, &c. § 5. It operates much as Mthridate does, and may be given à ʒss. ad. ʒij. ei∣ther as a Bolus, or dissolved in some proper Vehicle. XIV. Electuarium Oxydori∣cum, An Electuary to sharpen the Eye-sight. Bate.] ℞ Juices of Rue and Celandine, A. ℥iv. of the best Honey lb.j. boil and despu∣mate to a due consistency, then add Pouders of the tops of Eye∣bright (the black Sprigs) ℥ij. sweet Fennel-seeds ʒvj. Cinna∣mon, Culebs, Cloves, Mace, black Pepper, A. ʒj. mix and make an Electuary, S. A. It is an admirable Remedy to sharp∣er the Eye-sight. Dose, ʒiij. twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. It is of as good use being externally used and put into the Eye Morning and Evening in some small quantity; but then it will be best to leave the black Pepper out, because of its exceeding hear. § 2. Before the putting of it into the Eyes, it will be good towash them with Aqua Regulata, or some other pro∣per Eye-water; and this will be necessary to be done, if you only follow the internal use thereof.
XV. * Electuarium Paraly∣tecum, An Electuary a∣gainst the Palsie. Bate.] ℞ Mustard-seed dryed and poudred ℥v. Cress∣seeds ℥ij. Syrup of the Juice of Sage lb.j. vel q. s mix and make an Electuary. Dose, ℥ss. every day for some Months. It is esteemed as one of the best Remedies. Salmon.] § 1. If you add to the Composition, Volatile Salt of Ox-flesh ℥ss. or ra∣ther to each Dose, as it is taken gr. vj. or vij. it will be much more powerful to the Intention. § 2. While this is a taking for sometime, it will be ne∣cessary to use Topicks; for which purpose we commend the Oil of Amber to be anoint∣ed withal upon the Paraly∣tick parts, and that twice a day; bathing it in for half an hour at a time, before a good Fire, and continuing the use thereof for fourteen or twenty days at least, or as you shall see need require: If these Directions be fol∣lowed, you will hardly fail of the Cure of a Palsie, especi∣ally if it be recent. XVI. * Electuarium Pecto∣rale, A Pectoral Electu∣ary. Bate.] ℞ Pulp of Raisons stoned, Pulp of the Conserve of Red Roses, Syrup of Maiden∣hair, A. ℥iv. Sugar-candy in fine Pouder ℥iij. Species Dia∣tragacanthi frigidi ℥ss. Spi∣rit of Sulphur, gut, 25. mix and make an Electuary. Salmon.] § 1. You may in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 21. see the way of making the Species Diatragacanthi frigidi. I must confess I mightily dis∣like this way of Decom∣pounding of Medicines: It I was to make a Compound for my Life, it should only be of simple Ingredients. § 2. It is good against Coughs, Colds, Stoppages of the Lungs, Wheasings, Hoarseness, Asthma's, &c. be∣ing taken from ʒij. ad. ℥ss. at a time, and leisurely swal∣lowed down the Throat, as often in the day as need re∣quires. XVII. * Electuarium Pipe∣rinum, Electuary of Pep∣per. Bate.] ℞ Long Peper cut very small ℥jss. Rue in ine
Pouder ℥ss. Sal Gem ʒv. The∣riaca Januenisis ℥xij. mix them. It is a very excel∣lent thing (after many other things have been used in vain) against the Cholick, Pain of the Stomach, &c. Salmon.] § 1. If the Pain of the Stomach proceeds from Wind, as the Cholick (for the most part does) it may do much good, as also if it proceeds from cold and moisture: but if it proceeds from an Acid humour, you must have recourse to other Remedies, as fixt and vola∣tile Alcali's, &c. § 2. You may give it à ʒj. ad ʒij. or more twice a day, viz. Morning and Night, either alone by it self, or in some proper Ve∣hicle. § 3. If Camphire in fine Pouder ʒij. be added, it will add to the Verture of the Medicine, and be more ex∣cellent against Pains of the Cholick. XVIII. Electuarium Vermi∣fugum, An Electuary for the Worms. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Bears-foot in Pouder ℥ij. clarified Honey ℥vj. mix and make an Electuary, S. A. It is a most certain Remedy for killing and bringing forth Worms. Dose, ℈iv. ad ʒij. Salmon.] § 1. This is a Medicine I wholly dislike; for the Infusion I have known to be fatal in several; but probably this may be less. dangerous, because that in drying the Leaves to a Pou∣der many of its sharp, vo∣latile and hurtful Particles will be lost by exhalation. § 2. If you do adventure upon it do it cautiously, giving a small Dose, as à ℈ij. ad ʒj. at first, and so increase it gradatim: I am very con∣fident, that if it does not kill the Patient, it will cer∣tainly kill the Worms; but it for the most part proves E∣metick. XIX. † Electuarium Ante∣pidemicum, An Electuary against the Plague. ℞ Roots of Contrayerva ℥iij. of Valerian, of Master∣wort, Zedoary, A. ℥jss. Seeds of Angelica hull'd, Dittany of Creet, Myrrh, A: ℥j. Virginea Snakeroot ℥ss. Saffron ʒiij. Opium ʒij. (for so much as ℥j. of the Electuary may contain gr. ij. of Opium:) Pulp of Juniper-berries (extracted with Malaga Wine) ℥xij. Malaga Wine, q. s. to dis∣solve the Myrrh and Opium
Syrupus Antepidemicus, q. s. mix and make an Electu∣ary. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only good against the Plague, but all other malign and e∣pidemical Diseases, which it overcomes by putting the Patient into a very gentle Sweat. § 2. Your best way of gi∣ving it will be to dissolve à ʒj. ad ʒij. (according to age, and malignity of the Di∣sease) in some proper Plague-water, and so give it to the Patient (being in Bed) cove∣ring him down warm, and causing him to sweat some hours upon it. § 3. If it be given by way of prevention, take ʒj. of it upon a Knives point in the Morning fasting, and drink after it a Glass of Sack. CHAP. XXIII. Of PILLS. 1. * Ciceri Tartara, Pills of Tartar. Bate.] ℞ THE best Chio Turpentine ℥ij. Crystals of Tartar ℥j. Species Diaireos simp. Nitre prepared, A. ʒij. mix and make a Mass of Pills. They are given twice a day ʒss. at a time for some Months, as a pre∣ventive against the Gour. See Mynsicht. Salmon.] § 1. How the Species Diaireos Simplices are made, see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 10. with their Vertues and Uses. § 2. They are not only good against the Gout, but all Diseases proceeding from Tartar or Tartarous Hu∣mors, as Obstructions in the Reins, Ureters, or Bladder, from Slime, Sand, Gravel, or Stones, &c. Dose, ʒj. twice a day in some proper Vehicle. II. * Pilulae Aethiopicae, The Black Pills. Bate.] ℞ Aethiops Mine∣rale ℥ij. Ceruse of Antimony ℥j. Gum Guajaci ℥ss. Extract of Sarsa compound, q. s. so as
to make a Mass for Pills. Dose, ad ℈ij. twice a day, con∣tinually for forty or fifty days together, against the Dropsie, Scurvy, French-Pox, &c. Salmon.] sect 1. How the Aethiops Minerale is made, see Cap. 9. Sect. 21. of this Book aforegoing: the Com∣pound extract of Sarsa is made as is taught Cap. 8. Sect. 17. and Cap. 1. Sect. 52. of this first Book. § 2. It purges very gently, and is good against all Sym∣ptoms proceeding from Ve∣neral Infection, as also the Reliques of the Venereal Disease. III. * Pilulae de Ammoniaco Magistrales, Magistral Pills of Ammoniacum. Bate.] ℞ Gum Ammo∣niacum prepared with Vinegar ℥ij. fine Alos ℥jss. Myrrh, Ma∣stich, Benjamine, A. ℥ss. Saf∣fron, Salt of Wormwood, A. ʒij. Syrup of Wormwood, q. s. mix and make a Mass: They purge all tartarous and faecu∣lent Humors, and prevail much against all sorts of De∣fluxions, Cachexia's, Ob∣structions of the Spleen, and remove the Hardness and Scirrhus thereof, cure inve∣terate Quartan Agues, &c. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒss. &c. Salmon.] § 1. You will do well to separate the Resi∣nous part of the Aloes (which is of no worth in this case) by extracting it with Wa∣ter or Juice of Roses or Violets, &c. whereby the griping Property will be re∣moved, &c. § 2. I should like it much better, if instead of the Myrrh, Mastich and Benja∣min you added in their places Resinous Scammony ℥ss. Gum Guajaci ℥j. and so make them up. § 3. By means of this al∣teration, the Pills will not only be more powerful to the Purposes intended, but also be a singular Specifick a∣gainst the Gout. IV. * Pilulae Angelicae, The Angelick Pills. Bate.] ℞ Sena cleansed ℥vj. Rhubarb, Myrrh, Agarick, A. ʒiij. Benjamine ʒjss. Saffron ʒij. Flowers of Violets, Bor∣rage, A. M. j. of the depura∣ted Juice of Cichory lb.jss. cla∣rified Juices of Fumitory, of Borrage, A. lb.ijss. digest in B. M. for forty eight hours, and express out: add thereto fine Aloes ℥12. exhale to the consistency of a Mass for Pills; adding Balsam of Peru ℈ij. Chymical Oil of▪ Nutmegs, gut.
20. Salt of Wormwood ʒij. mix them. It evacuates very gently, and is of great use for corroboration or strength∣ning all the more Noble Ves∣sels, and for correction of vi∣tious Humors. Dose, ʒss. and more. Salmon.] § 1. There are several sorts of the Angelick Pills, as those of Angelus Sala, and those of Gralingius, the Compositions of which you see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 23. Sect. 47.86. But this of our Author dif∣fers from them both. § 2. Being made accord∣ing to this Prescript, it is a perfect Extract, which given whilst recent, works briskly and well, yet with a great deal of gentleness and sweetness; but if in be old, it works more slowly and dull; but then it is a singu∣lar good Stomatick, and Strengthner of the Bowels. V. * Pilulae Anticolicae, Pills against the Cholick. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Rue, Sal Gem, Ana. Honey, q. s. so as to make a Mass for Pills. Dose, ʒss. at Bed-time, and in the Morning fasting for four days in ever) Month. It is an approved Medicine for the Cure of the Cholick. Salmon.] § 1. If the Di∣sease be vehement let it be given four times a day, viz. besides the former times at ten or eleven in the Morn∣ing, and at four in the After∣noon. § 2. And after it let the Sick take this Draught: ℞ Aquae lactis alexiteriae ℥iv. Spirit of Opium ʒij. ad iv, Tincturae Stomatich. gut. 20. mix them. VI. Pilulae Antimoniales, An∣timonial Pills. Bate.] ℞ Glass of An∣timony (prepared with Spirit of Vitriol and whitned) in subtil Pouder ℥ss. Sugar-candy ℥iij. Wheat-flower ℥iv. Saffron ℈j. boil in fair Water to a thickness like Paste (bewaring that you burn them not) of which make Pills. These Pills are accounted as a true Cure for Fevers or Agues. Dose, ℈ss. ad ʒj. in the beginning of the cold Fit. Salmon.] § 1. If the Vi∣trum Antimonij be rightly prepared , it will work in some Constitutions in half a Grain, in others in a Grain; in some in gr. jss. and in the strongest in gr. ij. in some also it will work both up∣wards and downwards; but chiefly downwards, by rea∣son
of its correction with the Spirit of Vitriol. § 2. From this Calculati∣on you may safely enough give these Pills from ℈ss. ad ℈j. and in strong Constituti∣ons to ʒss. but I fear, if you give them ad ℈j. you will out-run the Constable, un∣less you meet with a very hard and robustick Habit of Body. VII. * Pilulae Antipodagricae, Pills against the Gout. Bate.] ℞ Chosen Castor in fine Ponder ℥ss. white Amber, Germander, Ground Pine, A. ʒvj. Salt of Amber, Ceruse of Antimony, Balsam of Tolu, Opopanax, A. ℥j. Roots of Butterbur, ʒiij. Chio Turpen∣tine ℥ij. Terebinthinated Bal∣sam of Sulphur, q. s. mix and make a Mass for Pills. Dose, ʒss. twice a day, for two or three Months together, drink∣ing in the mean while as common Drink, A Decoction of the Roots of Butterbur, Sarsa, China, with Raisons of the Sun, &c. Salmon.] § 1. What Spe∣cifick Vertue the Castor has against the Gout, I cannot well tell; but if in the place thereof, as much Volatile Salt of the Flesh of any Animal be added, I am sure you will not be deceived of the desired Effects. § 2. It will then be not only a Specifick against the Gout, but also against Slime, Sand, Gravel or Stone, whe∣ther in Reins or Bladder; and a famous restorer in Con∣sumptions. VIII. * Pilulae Balsamicae, The Balsamick Pills. Bate.] ℞ Extractum Eu∣stachij ʒv. Troches Alhandae ʒj. Saffron ℈j. Crude Mer∣cury strained thro' Leather ℥j. Venice Turpentine, q. s. mix and make a Mass, S. A. They are excellent against the French-Pox, Leprosie, Gout, &c. Salmon.] § 1. These are made in spight of the Pills of Chalmetous Enchirid. Chirur∣gic. Lib. 5. Cap. 7. Pag. 338. which are accounted an infal∣lible Remedy for the French-Pox, and all its Symp∣toms. § 2. They are thus made. ℞ Rhubarb in fine Pouder ℥x. Scammony ʒ iij. Quick silver strained thro' Cloth) ℥ij. ʒvj. which kill with Syrup or Juice of Limon, adding to the said Syrup or Juice Wheat-slower ʒij, Musk ʒj. mix and make a Mass of Pills, so big as five of them may weigh a Dram.
§ 3. Of these Pills he gives one at a time, in the Morn∣ing, and lets them fast six hours after it, which he con∣tinues for thirty days toge∣ther, without the use of any other Medicament, whether Cathartick, or Topick, &c. § 4. But whether the Au∣thor intended ℥x. or ʒx. of the Rhubarb, is something doubtful; and possibly there might be a Mistake of the Printer: If not, a Pill of ten Grains (which will not con∣tain above one Grain of the Mercury) is an inconsiderable Dose for such a Cure, and certainly can do but little in order to it. § 5. But it may be the Au∣thor might mean ʒj. for a Dose, for so he may be un∣derstood, as well as one Pill, his Words are, Sumat quoti∣die unam; now whether this Ʋnam signifies Drachmam u∣nam, or Pilulam unam, must e left to the Prudence of the Physician to judge of. § 6. For my part, (if the Printer has made no fault) I am of Opinion, it ought to be understood Drachmam u∣nam, and not Pilulam: but if there be a mistake, and it ought to be of the Rhubarb but ʒx. as Bonetus in his Mercurius compatil. pag. 451. seems to inculcate, and cor∣rect the Copy, then it is most probable that Pilulam unam is intended. § 7. Having thus discant∣ed upon the Pills of Chalme∣teus, which seems to be the Pattern, we now come to speak to these of our Author, which we think do very much transcend the other, the Mer∣cury being joyn'd with brisk∣er and nimbler Purgers. § 8. They are not only prevalent against the Diseases named in our Text, but one of the greatest Specificks in the World against Pains, Aches, and Lameness in any part of the Body, as also a Rheumatism, tho' never so vehement and extream. § 9. I have cured several of Rheumatisms with them, after many Years affliction, and when all other Medi∣cines had proved ineffectual; upon the use of these Pills for some certain time, they had ease, and after a while long∣er were perfectly cured to admiration, as if the Di∣sease had been removed by Inchantment. § 10. Make the Mass into small Pills, so as eight or ten may make a Scruple, which is a Dose, to be given every Night going to Bed, for twenty or thirty days toge∣ther, as the Age of the Pa∣tient,
Strength of the Body, and Nature of the Distem∣per, may in Prudence re∣quire. § 11. But if you give them not every day, but with Intervals, as of two or three days between, then you may safely enough encrease the Dose, à ℈j. ad ℈ij. or ʒj. IX. * Pilulae Costitatis, Pills inducing Chastity. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Wa∣ter-lilly-roots ℥ss. Salt of Sa∣turn ʒij. bone of the Cuttle-fish ʒvj. Camphire ʒjx. Syrup of Water-lillies, q. s. mix and make a Mass. Dose, ʒss. twice a day for some days. It prevails admirably against a Gonorrhoea, Priapism, &c. Universals being premised in their Cure. Salmon.] § 1. If it be intended purely for Chastity's sake, I know of no use of the Bone of the Cuttle-fish nor Camphire, the latter (if any thing may be learnt by Ex∣perience) being rather provo∣cative; than otherwise. § 2. And therefore instead of those two Ingredients I should rather add Extract of Opium so much as each Dose may contain, gr. j. thereof. But in case of a Gonorrhoea, the Whites, Weakness of the Back, &c. you may make them as prescribed in the Text, with the addition of the Opium, &c. X. * Pilulae Catarrhales, Pills against Catarrhs. Bate.] ℞ Extract of Li∣quorice ℥j. Rhodaloes ℥ss. Pi∣lulae de Cynoglosso ʒij. mix them. Dose, ℈j. ad ℈ij. in Catarrhs, Coughs, &c. at Bed-time, for four or five days. Salmon.] § 1. They are excellent good in stopping any violent Defluxion of Rheum, whether down the Throat upon the Lungs, or any other part whatsoever; and this they do by an uni∣versal thickning of the Hu∣mor, thro' the whole Body at once. § 2. Let the Pills be swal∣lowed first, and then give after them this Draught. ℞ Black Cherry-water, Poppy-water, A. ℥jss. Lettice-water, Aqua Mirabilis, A. ʒvj. Sy∣rup of Limons ℥j. mix them: Give it and let the Sick compose themselves to Sleep.
XI. * Pilulae Crapulariae, Pills for a Surfeit. Bate.] ℞ Diagrydium, Species Hiera, A. ʒvj. fine Aloes ℥jss. Oil of Cloves ʒss. S. V. q. s. mix and make a Mass, S: A. Dose, ℈j. go∣ing to Bed after Surfeiting or Drunkenness. Salmon.] § 1. If you make them up with S. V. they will scarcely work at all, nor (if they be old) give so much as one Stool: your better way therefore is to make them up with some proper Syrup or Water. § 2. They evacuate the Stomach, cleanse the Bowels, and carry off the Recrements of Humors heaped up toge∣ther, and make the Body lightsome and pleasant. XII. * Pilulae Cretaceae, Chalk Pills. Bate.] ℞ Pure white Chalk white Sanders, Nutmegs, Ana. p. ae. with Chio Turpentine, q. s. make a Mass of Pills. They are good against the Flux of the Whites, &c. Dose, ad ʒj. twice a day, drinking af∣ter them Posset-drink, boiled with Comfrey or Consound Leaves in it. Salmon.] § 1. They are good against a Gonorrhoea, Whites, Gleets, Weepings, &c. being taken according to direction: but they will perform much more if Ca∣techu ʒj. Extract of Opium, gr. iv. be added. § 2. They also cure a Cardialgia or Pain of the Stomach to admiration, if regularly taken for some convenient time. XIII. Pilulae de Creta Pal∣marij, Palmarius his Pills of Chalk. Bate.] ℞ Fine Aloes ℥j. pure white Chalk, white Am∣ber, Myrrh, Gentian, white Dittany-roots, A. ʒj. Mithri∣date ℈iv. Turpentine washed ʒij. Syrup of Marsh-mallows, q. s. mix and make a Mass for Pills. Some add Calo∣melanos ℥ss. or ʒvj. with the addition of the Calomelanos they are given ad ℈ij. or ʒj. at Bed-time, every night for fifteen days. There is no∣thing equal to them for the Cure of a Gonorrhoea; they are also equally powerful a∣gainst the Whites in Wo∣men. Salmon.] § 1. They are strengthning Pills, corrobo∣rate weak Backs, and stop Catarrhs being skilfully gi∣ven,
viz. Universals being before-hand premised. § 2. With the Calomelanos, they are excellent against tartarous Humors and Ob∣structions, more especially stoppages of the Reins, Ure∣ters, and Bladder. § 3. If in the first Case for strengthning, and stop∣ping a Gonorrhoea, &c. to every Dose gr. j. of Opium be added, it will be so much the more powerful. XIV. * Pilulae Hydropicae, Pills for the Dropsie. Bate.] ℞ Rosin of Jal∣lap, Scammony, Rhubarb, Cam∣bogia, Calomelanos, A. ℥ss. Ammoniacum (prepared with the Juice of our blew Flower-de-luce) ʒiij. Tartar vitrio∣late ʒij. Mastich ʒj. Saffron ℈j. Spirit of Turpentine, gut. 40. with Syrup of Buckthorn, q. s. make a Mass. Dose, ℈ij. or more in strong People. Salmon.] § 1. They work briskly and strongly, and may be given in the Morn∣ing fasting, twice a Week, with Observations as in o∣ther Purges. § 2. But because that such melting Purges much weak∣en the Bowels, it is necessary in the Intervals to exhibite Strengthners, sometimes a Dose of Laudanum at ight going to Bed, at other times a Dose of Tinctura Martis, which things admirably for∣tifie the Viscera. § 3. Otherwise the Wa∣ter will be in danger of in∣creasing faster on one hand thro' weakness of the Bowels, then it will be possible to be carried off with these Pills on the other; so that the Vital indication seems to be ab∣solutlely necessary. XV. * Pilulae Hystericae, Pill for the Womb, or Pills a∣gainst Fits of the Mo∣ther. Bate.] ℞ Seeds of Agnus Castus ℥j. Rue, Asa fetida, Camphire, A. ʒij. Castor ℥ss. Oil of Amber, gut. 40. Sy∣rup of Mugwort, q. s. mix and make a Mass. Dose, ℈ss. ad gr. 15. every second or third hour, in the time of the Hysterick Fit, as also over and above, every Night at Bed-time out of the Fit. Salmon.] § 1. The Dose is well enough at time of the Fit; but for the Evening Dose, you may augment it to ʒss. or ℈ij. § 2. If to the Composition volatile Salt of Harts-horn ʒjss. be added it will be much more effectual; but
it ought to be added just at time of Exhibition. XVI. Pilulae Lithrontripticae, Pills against the Stone, or Stone-breaking Pills. Bate.] ℞ Seeds of Broom, of Burdock, Lapis Judaicus, A. ℥j. Chio Turpentine ℥iij. mix and make a Mass for Pills. Dose, ℈ij. ad ʒj. for twenty or thirty days, &c. Salmon.] § 1. If you can∣not get the Lapis Judaicus, our English Spar-stone, (which is plentiful enough in those Countries where there are Leaden mines) may supply the place, and is a Specifick in this case, proved by many Experiments, and in my O∣pinion much exceeds the La∣pis Judaicus. § 2. Were I to make this Medicament, I should cer∣tainly add Winter-cherries in fine Pouder ℥j. which possibly may be worth all the rest of the Medicine; and upon strong Obstructions, Pou∣der of Sows or Hogs-lice ℥ss. but this we submit to the Judgment of the Physician. XVII. * Pilulae Marocostinae, Pills of Herb Mastich and Costus. Bate.] ℞ Gm Ammo∣niacum (dissolved in four Ounces of Vinegar of Squils) ʒvj. fine Aloes (dissolved in Damask Rose-water lbij. Juice of Limons lbj.) lbj. Agarick (mixt with Cinnamon-wa∣ter ʒij. Juices of Smallage, Fennel and Wormwood, A. ℥iij. by beating together) ʒvj. the best Rhubarb (beaten with Cinnamon-water ʒvj. Juices of Succory, Burnet and Fu∣mitory, A. ℥viij.) ℥iij. best Saffron ℥ss. Costus ʒvj. true Herb mastich ℥ss. Wood of Aloes ʒij. all prepared with Juice of Citrons ℥iv. Damask Rose-water, q. s. mix every thing well; then add of the Waters of Peony, Cowslips, Borrage, Bettony, Carduus, Agrimony, Gout Ivy, Centory the less, Rosemary, black Cher∣ries, A. lbj. vel q. s. digest in B. M. for three days, strain out, and exhale in B. M. to a due consistency. These Pills cut, and by degrees expel Tartarous Mucilage collect∣ed in the Stomach Mesen∣tery, Liver and Spleen: They strengthen the Head, and all the Viscera, and pre∣vail against most Diseases of those parts, arising from such like Causes. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒj. Salmon.] § 1. The In∣vention is from Mindererus, whose true Composition you
have in our Pharm. Lond. lib. 4. ap. 23. Sect. 76. But this thus corrected by our Author s much the better Medicine, nd more to be valued. § 2. If the Body be hard to work upon, let the Dose be given at Night going to bed: Otherwise in easie Con∣stitutions, give it in the Morn∣ing fasting; and if it works not vehemently, but very gently, it may be given for two or three days together. XVIII. * Pilulae Masticatoriae, Spitting Pills. Bate.] ℞ Seeds of Mu∣stard, Staves-acre, Pellitory of Spain, A. ℥ss. Mastich ʒvj. mix and make a Pouder: add Honey, Wax, ana q. s. mix again and make a Mass. See Masticatoria. Salmon.] § 1. These are Pills to be chewed in the Mouth, to provoke spitting, whereby the Head and Brain, and all the parts adjacent are purged and cleansed of their Recrements. § 2. They draw Rheum out of the Teeth and Gums, and thereby ease the Tooth∣ach, help difficulty of Hear∣ing, and are good against Vertigoes, Head-aches, Le∣thargies, Palsies, and other cold and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain. § 3. The Masticatoria, di∣rected to in our Text, (whose Vertues these Pills contain) you may see Lib. 2. Cap. 9. Sect. 12. following of this Work. XIX. * Pilulae Matthaei, alias Starkii, Matthews his Pills, but more truly Starkies Pills. Bate.] ℞ The best The∣bian Opium cleansed from all its filth ℥ij. subtil Pouders of Liquorice, of white Hellebore, of black Hellebore, A. ℥ij. Soap of Salt of Tartar and Oil of Turpentine (which see in its place) ℥vj. mix them well, ad∣ding Oil of Turpentine q. s. so as to make a mass of Pills; which as often let be moistned with Oil of Turpentine, as the said mass shall grow dry. Where note, that some reject the black Hellebor. They are admirably Diuretick, Dia∣phoretick, Sudorifick, Lithon∣triptick, Nephretick, Hydro∣pick, Bechicik, Anodyne, and Paregorgick; and are given with happy Success in all sorts of Agues, chiefly Ter∣tians and Quartans. They are profitably given in all sorts of Catarrhs, pains of the Stomach, of the Head, and of the Teeth; as also against Coughs, Surfeits, Gouts,
Diarrhoea's, Dysenteria's, in∣ternal Ulcers and Apostems, &c. Dose ℈ss. ad ℈j. drinking after it a draught of some proper Liquor. Salmon.] § 1. Some (in making this Pill) leave out the white Hellebor, and put in only the black; and some (very profitably in my Judg∣ment) leave them both out, as Starky himself (who was the Original Author of the Medicine) had resolved long before he dyed. § 2. It is best to be given at Night going to bed, in any case wherein the Vulgar Laudana could be profitable: And it seems to be a Specifick against the Pleurisie, Colick, and Stone, whether in the Reins or Bladder. XX. * Pilulae Melanagogae, Pills Purging Melancholy. Bate.] ℞ Strings of the true black Hellebor ℥ij. pulp of Colothynthis ℥iij. boyl them in the stegm of Vitriol lbv. to the consumption of half, press out the remaining Liquor, and with a gentle fire evaporate to the thickness of Honey: then add Rosin of Scammony ℥j. so as to make a mass for Pills. Dose ℈ss. ad ℈j. &c. Salmon.] § 1. In some Constitutions they will work upwards, but in most down∣wards: If the Body be hard to work upon, and it be warm Weather, it will be best to give them at Night; but to easie dispositions, in the Morn∣ing fasting. § 2. They Purge Melan∣choly admirably well, and therefore are good for such as are Mad or Distracted, or are apt to fall into a Melan∣choly Madness. XXI. * Pilulae Pacificae, Pills making easie. Bate.] ℞ Choice Opium dryed upon Plates of Iron, and poudred ℥ij. the white part of Benjamin ʒij. Saffron, Nut∣megs, A. ʒiij. Chymical Oils of Dill and Nutmegs, A. ℈j. Sapo of Salt of Tartar and Oil of Turpentine q. s. mix and make a Mass S. A. They are equal in Vertues to Matthews his Pills. Salmon.] § 1. They are altogether of the Nature of Matthews his Pills, and ope∣rate as they, and are given in all cases where Sweating, and easing of Pain are re∣quired. § 2. They are given in Pleurisies, stitches of the Side, Colick, Stone, Gout, and o∣ther like Diseases, in which they quiet the Archeus, and
give Nature respite, so that she may gather up her Forces to contend with the afflicting Malady. § 3. They are prevalent also against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, Fluxes of the Bow∣els and Womb, Bleedings, of what kind soever. XXII. Pilulae Pavii, Pavy his Pills. Bate.] ℞ Species Hiera Simplex ℥ss. Galbanum (pre∣pared with Tincture of Castor) ʒij. Mars prepared ʒiij. Dia∣curcuma, (but some have Dia∣cinnamomum) ℈iv. Syrup of Stechas q. s. mix and make a Mass of Pills, of such a big∣ness as ʒj, may make 21. Dose No. 10. or 20. Morning and Evening for 40 days against Hypochondriack Melancholy. Salmon.] § 1. The Dia∣curcuma is the same Medica∣ment with Diacrocuma, if you will believe the Augustane Di∣spensatory; the Composition of which you may find in our London Dispensatory, Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 27. and the Dia∣cinnamomum in Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 84. of the same Book. § 2. They Purge all Hu∣mours, but chiefly Melan∣choly, and are good to Purge with in those Diseases which are said to proceed from that cause; but for the length of the time of using them, let your Discretion guide you. § 3. If the body be not easie to work upon, let them be taken at Night going to bed, taking after them a Glass of Vinum Chalybeatum: Otherwise let them be taken in the Morning, and the Wine only at Night. XXIII. * Pilulae de Pice, Pills of Pitch, or Tar. Bate.] ℞ Liquorice Pou∣der ℥j. Florentine Orrice-root ʒiij. Tar, Balsam of Peru, A. ℥ss. vel q. s. so as to make it up into a Mass of Pills. They are most efficacious against the Phthisick, Cough, and for the Excretion of purulent Humours, in the Brest and Lungs, which are difficult to be cast forth by Coughing or raising. Dose ʒss. twice a day, drinking after them a draught of the Pectoral De∣coction. Salmon.] § 1. I should better like them if instead of the Tar, as much Balsam of Tolu, or Chili, or Capivii were added; and Flowers of Sulphur ʒiij. it might then prove so effectual a Medicine, as scarcely to be exceeded. § 2. They may be taken from ʒss. ad ʒj. without any
danger; but the Dose ought to be regulated according to the Age of the Patient, and Vehemency or Remisness of the Distemper afflicting. XXIV. * Pilulae Restringen∣tes, Astringent or binding Pills. Bate.] ℞ Fine Bole, red Coral, Mastich, A. ʒiiss. bone of the Cuttle-fish ʒjiss. Gum Guajaci ℥ss. Crocus martis re∣stringens ʒiijss. Cypress Turpen∣tine ℥jss. Syrup of Water-Lil∣lies q. s. make a mass of Pills. Dose ʒss. or ℈ij. twice a day for the stopping of a Go∣norrhoea. Salmon.] § 1. I would have added to the Composition, Catechu, Cortex peruanus, A. ʒij. white Henbane-seeds ʒj. Opium in fine pouder ℈ij. § 2. Then you may give it ad ʒss. or ℈ij. once a day, viz. at Night going to bed: but leaving out the Opium, it may be given in the Dose prescribed twice a day, with∣out any ill conveniency. § 3. It Cures not only a Gonorrhoea in Men, and the Whites in Women, but helps pains and weaknesses in the back, and stops all Fluxes of what kind soever, and pre∣va ils against a Diabetes, and involuntary passing away of the Urine. XXV. * Pilulae de sagapeno, Pills of Sagapenum. Bate.] ℞ Clear Sagape∣num ℥ss. Troches Alhandal, Agarick, A. ʒijss. Diagredium ʒij. Sal Gem. ʒss. Chymical Oil of Fennel-seeds ℈j. Syrupus de Eupatorio q. s. mix and make a mass of Pills. They are profitable against the I∣liack Passion, Colick, &c. given ad ʒss. They are ad∣mirable also against Quartan Agues. Dose ℈ss. in the be∣ginning of the Fit, continu∣ing it for some days. Salmon.] § 1. There is scarcely a better Remedy a∣gainst that Disease which in the West-Indies they call the Dry Cholick: They Purge Tartarous Humours, not on∣ly from the Bowels, but the Joynts, and therefore are good against the Gout and Rheu∣matism. § 2. After twice or thrice purging with them as they are here prescribed, it will be best then to add to each Dose gr. jss. or ij. of Extract of Opium, and so give the Dose over Night; so will the Patient rest with a World of quietness and pleasure, or sweetness, and the next day in the Afternoon have three or four Stools, without any
kind of Griping, which will carry off the Morbifick mat∣ter of the Disease almost to a wonder; and by that you have taken them six or seven times, will give me hearty Thanks for these my Di∣rections. XXVI. * Pilulae Sinapinae, Pills of Mustard-seed. Bate.] ℞ Mustard-seed in Pouder ℥iij. Liquorice ℥ij. Sy∣rup of Maiden-hair q. s. make a mass of Pilulae Hypoglossidae, often to be held in the Mouth. They prevail mightily against the Cough, Asthma, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Pilulae Hy∣poglossidae, are Pills which take away the Asperity of the La∣ryax, and they attract and draw forth the Humours of∣fending those parts after a singular manner. § 2. You may hold them in the Mouth without chew∣ing till they dissolve, and mix with the Spittle, and then you may spit them forth, and re∣new the Matter, till they have expectorated enough. § 3. But some hold them in the Mouth till they dissolve, and so swallow them down leisurely; both ways they give relief. XXVII. Pilulae Styracinae, Pills of Storax. Bate.] ℞ Storax Cala∣mita ℥ij. Flowers of Sulphur ℥j. white of Benjamin ʒij. mix and make a Mass for Pills. They are very profi∣table for such as are troubled with Asthma's, Dyspnoea's, Suffocative Catarrhs, &c. Dose ℈j. ad ʒj. once or twice a day. Prujean. Salmon.] § 1. You may give them Morning and Even∣ing, drinking after them a Glass of Metheglin. Or this: ℞ Aquae lactis Alexiteriae ℥iv. Syrup of Hyssop ℥j. Oil of sweet Fennel-seeds, gut. ij. mix them for a draught. § 2. Outwardly anoint the Stomach Morning and Even∣ing with this: ℞ Oil of Nut∣megs by Expression ℥j. Chymi∣cal Oyl of Rosemary ʒss. mix them. XXVIII. Pilulae Tartareae Bontii, Bontius his Pills of Tartar. Bate.] ℞ The best Aloes ʒiij. Gum Ammoniacum ℥jss. (depurated with Vinegar of Squills) Tartar Vitriolate ʒss. mix them. They are of such Estimation among the Dutch, that they think it a sin to
make them common. Dose ℈j. to ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. They are good against Tartarous Dis∣eases, and Purge Salt, Gross, and Tartarous Humours from the very profound parts, are good against▪ Hypochondri∣ack Melancholy and Madness, Quartan Agues, Scabs, Itch, &c. They open Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, &c. and cut Viscous Slime, chiefly that which is gathered in the Stomach, purging it out. § 2. You may give from ℈j. ad ʒj. in the Morning fast∣ing, and ℈ss. before Supper, or to ʒss. after a light Sup∣per. § 3. It is also to be noted, that some add to the Compo∣sition Extract of Rhubarb ℥ss. and then they more respect the Liver, and Purge Choler from the Bowels. XXIX. Pilulae Vaticanae, The Vatican Pills. Bate.] ℞ Calamus Aro∣maticus, Aniseeds, Ginger, Ma∣stich, Cinnamon, lesser Carda∣moms, Zedeary, Mace, Nut∣megs, Cloves, Saffron, Cubebs, Xylo Aloes, Cassia Lignea, Tur∣beth, Manna, Sena, all the Myrobalans, A. ℈j. Carduus ben. Scordium, A. ʒss. best Rhubarb ℥j. fine Aloes ℥ij. ℈iv. Syrup of Roses sclutive, Syrup of Vio∣lets, A. q. s. mix and make a mass of Pills S. A. They are Cephalick and Stomatick, and empty all the stuffed Bowels, purging and strength∣ning them, expelling what∣soever noxious Humours of∣fend them, the right way, and helping the Oeconomy of all the Nourishing parts. Salmon.] § 1. Here's a great Cry, and a little Wool, as the Devil said, when he shore his Hogs: A Farragi∣nous heap of Correctors for a little Rhubarb and Aloes, which being compounded, alone correct themselves. But 'tis a Quack Medicine, made to amuse Ignorants. § 2. You may more briefly make it thus. ℞ Extract of fine Aloes (made with fair Water) ℥iij. Rhubarb in Pou∣der ℥jss. Scammony, Turbeth, Extract of Sena, Pulp of all the Myrobalans, A. ʒiv. Ma∣stich ʒij. Syrup of Roses solu∣tive q. s. mix and make a mass of Pills, adding thereto Oil of Clovesʒiij. Dose à ℈j. ad ʒss. XXX. Pilulae Vermifugae, Pills killing Worms. Bate.] ℞ Pil. Ruffi ʒss. Chymical Oil of Savin, or Tan∣sie
gut. 24. mix them. Dose ad ℈ss. or gr. xij. made up into 10 Pills. Let them be taken continually for three Nights about the New or Full Moon, in Syrup of Li∣mons. Salmon.] § 1. If you add to the Composition the Levi∣gated Pouder of Calomelanos ʒss. it will be yet much more ef∣fectual to the intention: And then you may give it in the same Dose. § 2. Or if you like the Aethiops Minerale better, you may add of that ad ʒj. and then you may increase the Dose ad gr. xvj. or more, as you see occasion. XXXI. * Scammonium Cy∣doniatum, Scammony pre∣pared with Juice of Quin∣ces. Bate.] ℞ Scammony in fine Pouder ℥ij. depurated Juice of Quinces lbj. digest 24 hours: add Aqua Vitae q. s. digest a∣gain, and evaporate to the con∣sistence of an Extract, S. A. Dose ℈j. ad gr. 25, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This is but a kind of Diagrydium, the heat of the Scammony being corrected by vertue of the Acidity of the Juice of Quin∣ces. § 2. It Purges excellently all sorts of Humours, and is of singular use against the Colick, Gout, Stone, Rheu∣matism, Dropsie, Jaundice, and Kings-Evil, if given for some considerable time ac∣cording to Art. XXXII. * Scammonium Li∣moniatum, Scammony pre∣pared with the Juice of Limons. Bate.] ℞ Scammony in Pouder ℥j. Juice of Limons lbj. digest, strain, and distil to the consistency of an Extract, S. A. The Dose is the same with the former. Salmon.] § 1. This is one of Quercetan's ways of ma∣king Diagrydium: His other way is with Flegm of Vitriol impregnated with its Spirit; because in these kinds of A∣cids lies (according to his Opinion) the true Prepara∣tion of such things as are too hot. § 2. The Vertues, Use, and Dose, are the same with the former, but the Medicine works more mildly and gent∣ly, because that Acids destroy in some measure, at least di∣minish the Cathartick powers of Purgers.
XXXIII. * Scammonium Ro∣satum, Scammony prepa∣red with the Juice of Ro∣ses. Bate.] ℞ Scammony in fine Pouder ℥iij. depurated Juice of Damask Roses lbiij. Spirit or Oil of Sulphur ʒiij. which mix with the Juice, and then the Juice with the Pouder: digest and evaporate to the consistency of Pills, and add Chymical Oil of sweet Mar∣joram ℈j. The Dose is the same with the former. Salmon.] § 1. This is as good a Medicine as either of the former; and it would do the same thing if the ʒiij. of the Oil of Sulphur were mixt (according to Hart∣man's Method) with lbiij. of fair Water, adding a few drops of some Chymical Oil to give it a flaver. § 2. It Purges gently à gr. 15. ad 25. and is commend∣ed as a singular thing against the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, Jaundice, and Rheumatism. CHAP. XXIV. Of TROCHES and TABLETS. I. * Bolus Alexiteria, seu Car∣diaca, A Cordial Bole, or Troches resisting Poyson. Bate.] ℞ ANgelica, Baum, Scordium, Bur∣net, Scabious, A. M. ij. Dra∣gons, M. j. Flowers of Mari∣golds, Clove-gillyflowers, A. M. iij. Wood of Aloes ℥ss. Berries of Kermes ℥jss. Cochinele ʒij. White-wine lbij. vel q. s. di∣gest warm for 24 hours; then express out, and with fine Bole in fine Pouder ℥viij. make a kind of Pulp, or Pudding like substance, which dry in the Sun. This work repeat five times with the said Infusion, and at last form them into Troches S. A. Dose ℈j. ad ʒj. in Malign Diseases. Salmon.] § 1. I should ra∣ther chuse to make it with the Juices of the eight first Ingredients than with their Infusion in White-wine; for thereby the Medicine would be both stronger and bet∣ter.
§ 2. It may be given Morn∣ing and Evening as a preven∣tive against the Infection of the Plague, or the Contagion of other Malign Diseases; but curatively, when the Sick is in Bed, and well covered down in order to Sweating, drinking after it a small draught of some proper Su∣dorifick Antidote, &c. II. * Tabulae Absinthiacae, Ta∣blets of Wormwood. Bate.] ℞ Treble refined Sugar lbj. Wormwood-water q. s. boyl them S. A. dropping in Chymical Oil of Wormwood gut. 60. and then pour it forth upon a Marble Plate or Tile. They are Stomatick, Hepa∣tick, Splenetick, &c. Salmon.] § 1. They strength∣en a weak Stomach almost to a Miracle, warm and com∣fort it, cause Appetite and a good Digestion, and corro∣borate all the other Viscera. § 2. You may eat them as Sweet-meats, or hold them in your Mouth till they melt down; but I should rather chuse to dissolve ʒij. iij. or iv. in a Glass of Ale or Wine, and so take them in a Morn∣ing fasting, or as need re∣quires, III. * Tabulae Amygdaloides, Tablets of the Almond∣like parts of Benjamin. Bate.] ℞ The white parts of the best Benjamin ℥j. Flow∣ers of Sulphur ℥ij. Root of Flo∣rentine Orrice ℥jss. Sanguis Draconis ʒj. white Sugar ℥xij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, extracted in Rose-water, q. s. mix and make Tablets or Tro∣ches, S. A. They are very powerful against the Asthma, Cough, Phthisick. &c. Salmon.] § 1. Dose ad ʒj. You may beat them into Pouder, and mix the same with any proper Syrup or Pectoral Water, and so take it Morning and Night, or in case of a Cough, as often as the Cough afflicts. § 2. They heal inward Ulcers of the Bowels, stop Fluxes of the Belly, and dry up Catarrhs. IV. * Tabulae de Angelica, Ta∣blets of Angelica. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Angelica-Roots, boyl'd to a softness, and passed thro a Sieve ℥jss. treble refined Sugar ℥xij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make pure white Tablets. They are Bezoardick, Car∣diack, Traumatick, Emmena∣gogick, &c.
Salmon.] § 1. They are good against the Contagion of Infectious Times, and may be taken Morning, Noon, and Night, by way of preven∣tion. § 2. Dose ℥j. ad ℥ij. and indeed they may be taken rather as a Sweet-meat, than as a Medicine. V. * Tabulae Antimoniales, An∣timonial Tablets. Bate.] ℞ Ceruse of An∣timony (made from the Regu∣lus) ℥vj. treble refined Sugar ℥xij. with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, make small Ta∣blets weighing each a Scruple, S. A. The Vertues are the same with the Electuarium Album. Salmon.] § 1. They are good to purifie and cleanse the Blood, and sweeten all the Juices of the Body by ab∣sorbing their Acidities; and therefore are good against the Cachexia, Dropsie, Jaun∣dice, Scurvy, and such Dis∣eases which proceed from a discrasie of the Blood, &c. § 2. You may take them Morning and Night à ʒss. ad ʒj. eating them either alone, or reducing them into Pou∣der, by mixing them with some proper Syrup, or other Vehicle. VI. * Tabulae Antisynanchicae, Tablets against the Quin∣sey. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur ℥j. Goose-dung in fine Pouder ℥iij. Sanguis Draconis ʒij. Oil of Aniseeds gut. vj. treble refined Sugar ℥viij. with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth q s. mix and make Tablets. They are good against the Ulcers of the Mouth, Thrushes, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Dissolve and mix them with a little Ho∣ney, and apply the Mixture to the part affected; inward∣ly, by smearing it upon the place, and outwardly, in a Quinsey, by applying it in manner of a Cataplasm. § 2. Or you may dissolve, and mix with some proper Water, and often to Gargle with in a Quinsey, or other Tumors, Swellings, Ulcers, and Sores of the Throat and Tonsils. VII. * Tabulae de Aurantiis, Orange Tablets. Bate.] ℞ The yellow of Orange, Limon, and Citron-peels candied, A. ℥j. Confects of Aniseeds and Ginger, A. ʒiij. Galingal ℈ss. Cloves No. xij. preserved Nutmegs No. ij. Aro∣maticum Rosatum ℈iv. sweet
Almonds blanched, Eringo-wood candied, A. ℥j. Pine-nuts, Pistaches, A. No. x. Musk, Civet, Ana. gr. iv. Amber∣grise ℈j. treble refined Sugar lbjss. Mucilage of Gum Tra∣gacanth made in Rose-water, q. s. mix and make a Paste, which form into Tablet S. A. They are Antiscorbutick, Car∣diack, Carminative, &c. Salmon.] § 1. What the Aromaticum Rosatum is, see in our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 2. the rest of the things almost, are Sweet-meats. § 2. You may take it as often in a day as you please to gratifie your Palate and Stomach: It chears the Spi∣rits, and makes a Sweet Breath. VIII. * Tabulae Burgesianae, Burgess his Tablets. Bate.] ℞ Green Liquo∣rice lbj. Decoction of Raisins, Scabious, and Violets, lbvj. In∣fuse for three days, and boyl to the half: press out, and eva∣porate to the thickness of Ho∣ney; to which add white Su∣gar candy in Pouder ℥xij. Gum Tragacanth in Pouder ℥ij. Oil of Aniseeds gut. xx. Amber∣grise gr. iij. beat them well together, and make a Mass, of which form Tablets or Rouls, S. A. They are Bechicik, Cardiack, &c. Salmon.] § 1. They are Pectoral and Opening, good against Obstructions of the Lungs, Coughs, Asthma's, Wind, Gripings of the Bowels, Cholick, &c. § 2. They may be held in the Mouth, and suffered to dissolve at leisure; but being often or long used, will of fend the Stomach. IX. * Tabulae Cardialgicae, Tablets against Pain of the Stomach. Bate.] ℞ White Chalk ℥ij. Crabs-Eyes ℥j. Nutmegs ʒj. white Sugar ℥xij. Mucilage of Quince-seeds q. s. mix and make Tablets. The Title shews their Vertues. Salmon.] § 1. You may eat ℥j. or ij. or more at a time, as you eat Sugar-plumbs, and they will (by reason they are made of a fixt Alcali) absorb the Acid Humor which is the cause of those intolera∣ble gnawing Pains at Sto∣mach. § 2. This is made for such as cannot take the Medicine without Sugar; but to speak Truth, the Alcalies alone are much more effectual.
X. * Tabulae Carminativae, Tablets breaking Wind. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of com∣mon Daucus-seeds ℥j. treble re∣fined Sugar (dissolved in De∣coction of common Daucus seeds) ℥xij. boyl, and pour forth, S. A. Otherwise thus: ℞ Carda∣moms grosly poudred ℥j. yellow of Orange-peels cut small ℥ijss. treble refined Sugar ℥xvj, (dis∣solved in Rose-water two parts, Time-water one part) boyl, and pour four, S. A. It is a most Excellent Remedy against Wind. Salmon.] § 1. They Re∣medy the Cholick, expel Wind, and are good against stoppage of Urine, and the Stone. § 2. You may hold them in your Mouth till dissolved, or otherwise eat them like Sweet-meats. XI. Tabulae Catharticae, Pur∣ging Tablets. Bate.] ℞ Diagrydium ʒjss. Cream of Tartar ʒvj. Oil of Cloves gut. vj. treble refined Sugar ℥iv. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth made with Rose-water q. s. make Tablets, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. You may give from ʒv. ad ʒx. accord∣ing to Age and Strength, a∣gainst the Scurvy, Dropsie, Jaundice, Gout, Rheumatism, and other-like stubborn and inveterate Diseases. § 2. Let it be given in the Morning fasting, with Ob∣servations as in other Purges. It works safely, gently, and without griping. XII. * Tabulae Dialthaeae, Ta∣blets of Marsh-mallows. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of the Roots of Marsh-mallows ℥ij. Liquorice ℥j. Flowers of Sul∣phur ʒvj. Gum Tragacanth ʒij. treble refined Sugar ℥xij. A∣qua Pectoralis q. s. mix and make Tablets S. A. Salmon.] § 1. What the Aqua Pectoralis is, you may see Chap. 1. Sect. 45. afore∣going of this Book. § 2. It is intended to open Obstructions of the Lungs, and the Passages of the Urine. It is good against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, Wheesing, Hoarseness, and other Di∣stempers of the Brest and Lungs. § 3. Dissolved in Parsley or Onion-water, or Water of the biting Arsmart, and drunk, it helps against the Stone, Sand, Gravel, or any stop∣page of the Urine, and eases the pains of making Water. Dose ℥j. pro vice.
XIII. * Tabulae Diambrae, Ta∣blets of Ambergrise. Bate.] ℞ Species Diam∣brae ℥ss. treble refined Sugar ℥viij. Cinnamon-water q. s. boyl them according to Art. They are Cardiack, Cepha∣lick, Stomatick, &c. Salmon.] § 1. What the Spe∣cies Diambrae are, see Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 14. with their Vertues and Uses. § 2. The intention of this Prescript of our Author is to comfort and strengthen the Head, Brain, Nerves, Heart, Stomach, and all the Princi∣pal Bowels. § 3. They are good against Megrims, Head-ach, Verti∣goes, Lethargies, Apoplexies, Convulsions, Palsies, Sickness at Heart, Fainting, and Swooning Fits. Dose ℥j. Morning and Evening, or at any time of Fainting. XIV. * Tabulae Diatragacan∣thi, Tablets of Gum Tra∣gacanth. Bate.] ℞ Species Dia∣tragacanthi frigidi (newly made) ℥ss. Musk, Ambergrise, A. gr. j. Civet gr. ij. treble refined Sugar ℥xij. Damask-Ros-water q. s. beat them to∣gether into a Mass, and make pure white Tablets. Salmon.] § 1. What the Species Diatragacanthi are, see out Pharm. Lond. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 21. with their Vertues and Uses. § 2. These Tablets are much more pleasant than the Species, and therefore fitter for the more delicate Sto∣macks. § 3. They are Pectoral, and good against Coughs, Colds, Asthmas, Consump∣tions, Catarrhs, Preternatu∣ral Heats, and Ulcers of the Lungs. They cause a clear Voice, and a sweet Breath. Let them be held in the Mouth, and suffered to di∣still down at leisure. XV. * Tabulae Divinae, Ta∣blets of a most Excellent Vertue. Bate.] ℞ Lac or Milk of Sulphur vive ℥ij. white Sugar ℥vj. Mucilage of Quince-seeds q. s. mix and make Tablets each containing a Dram. They are an Arcanum in the Cure of the Haemorrhoides; and prevail against Scabs, Asth∣mas, &c. Dose No. iij. or iv. twice or thrice a day. Salmon.] § 1. They are a Specific against Coughs, Ca∣tarrhs, Colds, Hoarseness, Wheesings, shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, and
other Distempers of the Brest and Lungs. § 2. They heal also Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat, and dry up salt sharp Hu∣mours, in what part of the Body soever. XVI. * Tabulae Embryonum, Tablets to strengthen the Foetus in the Womb. Bate.] ℞ Pouders of Bi∣stort-Roots, Ivory, Red Coral, Coriander-seed prepared, A. ℥ss. white Amber, Crystal, Berries of Kermes, A. &ij. white Su∣gar ℥xvj. Quince-water, q. s. boyl them S. A. adding Oil of Cinnamon gut. vj. then pour it forth. They are of great Vertue in preventing A∣bortion, and strengthning the Child in the womb, &c. Salmon.] § 1. You may give of them à ℥iij. ad ʒvj. twice a day, viz. Morning and Night, for eight or ten days together: they strengthen the Womb, and corroborate the Foetus contained. § 2. If the Woman has often miscarried, and is apt to fall into that Weakness upon small occasions, you will do well to add to the Com∣position, Catechu ʒvj. white Henbane-seeds ʒij. and then the Medicament will be with∣out comparison. XVII. Tabulae Emeticae, Vo∣miting Tablets. Bate.] ℞ Stibium, or Glass of Antimony in subtil Pouder ℥ss. treble refined Sugar ℥iv. Oil of Aniseeds gut. 5. Mu∣cilage of Gum Tragacanth q. s. mix and make Tablets. Dose gr. 16. ad 40. Salmon.] § 1. I like not this Medicine, nor may it be safely given to weak Consti∣tutions: to very robust Bo∣dies you may venture to give it à gr. 15. ad 30. but you had best to be sure of their Strength before-hand. § 2. But to make a Me∣dicine of the same Vertue and Operation, and to work with a great deal more safety, you may do thus. ℞ Tartar Emetick of Mynsicht ℥ss. treble refined Sugar ℥iv. Rose-water q. s. boyl to a consistency, ad∣ding Oil of Cloves gut. vj. then pour them forth. § 3. Of these you may give from gr. 16. ad 40. or 48. in strong Constitutions, which will give 3, 4, 6, or 8 Vo∣mits, and sometimes more, but with safety enough, if the Sick be perswaded to drink largely of Broth or Posset-drink. § 4. When you would have it give over working, give
Broth well seasoned with Salt, or mixt with a little Cremor Tartari, and as hot as 'tis possible to be got down the Throat, and the Vomiting will immediately cease, and take its course downwards. XVIII. Tabulae Farfareae, Tablets of Coltsfoot. Bate.] ℞ Leaves of Colts∣foot gathered in a serene Air (cleansed from their Mucosity with a moist Cloath, and sprink∣led with Spanish Wine, and dryed) in fine Pouder ℥ss. Pou∣der of Liquorice ℥ss. white Su∣gar-candy in fine Pouder ℥xij. Gum Tragacanth (dissolved in Pectoral Decoction) q. s. mix and make Tablets or Treches, S. A. They are an Efficaci∣ous Pectoral Medicament, prevalent against the Cough, &c. Salmon.] § 1. What the Decoctum Pectorale is, see in our Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Sect. 4. which is the thing intended here un∣der that Name. § 2. They are good against most Diseases of the Brest and Lungs, chiefly Coughs, Wheesings, Hoarseness, dif∣ficulty of Breathing, shortness of Breath, and Obstructions in those parts, &c. XIX. * Tabulae Foeniculinae, Tablets of Oil of Fennel-seed. Bate.] ℞ Treble refined Sugar lbj. Fennel-water q. s. boil, S. A. dropping in Chy∣mical Oil of Fennel-seeds gut. 50. S. A. They are preva∣lent against the Cholick, Wind, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is a plea∣sant sort of Medicine for such as can away with the taste of the Fennel-seeds, which in some sort strengthens the Stomach, as well as discusses Wind; it is good for Chil∣dren, and to ease them of the Gripes that are new∣born, to which some Chil∣dren are very obnoxious. § 2. Elder People may also take them with singular Ad∣vantage against the Cholick, Pain and Sickness at Stomach, from ʒvj. ad ℥jss. at time of the Fit; otherwise by way of prevention, only Morn∣ing and Night. XX. * Tabulae Griseae, Ta∣blets of Ambergrise. Bate.] ℞ Ambergrise ʒi. Musk gr. vj. Alom gr. ij. white Sugar-candy in Pouder ℥xij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth (extracted in Mint-water) q. s.
mix and make Tablets. They comfort the Brain and Heart, and wonderfully revive the Spirits, Natural, Vital, and Animal. Dose ʒj. or ij. three or four times a day. Salmon.] § 1. Being held often in the Mouth, and suf∣fered to distil down at lei∣sure, they cause a sweet Breath, and chear the Heart. § 2. They are also preva∣lent against Palpitation of the Heart, Sickness at Sto∣mach and Fainting or Swoon∣ing Fits. XXI. * Tabulae Haemoptoicae, Tablets against spitting Blood. Bate.] ℞ Terra Lemnia ʒiij. fine Bole ʒij. Lapis Hae matitis, Magistery of Ivory, A. ℈iv. Bistort-Roots, Henbane-seeds, fresh Limon-peel cut very small, A. ʒj. white Poppy-seeds ℥ss. Sugar of Roses ℥viij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth q. s. mix and make Tablets. The Title shews their Ver∣tues: Let them be taken often in a day. Salmon.] § 1. You must take white Henbane-seeds, and if you increase them to ʒij. it will be so much the better. § 2. To make it more ef∣fectual, you ought to add Catechu ʒiij. increasing in proportion the quantity of the Sugar of Roses, which ought also to be of Red Roses. § 3. They may be taken often in the day-time; but it will be necessary at Night going to Bed to take gr. ij. or iij. plus minus, of our Vo∣latile Laudanum. XXII. * Tabulae Helenii, Ta∣blets of Elecampane. Bate.] ℞ Pulp of fresh-gathered Elecampane-Roots, made by boyling, ℥jss. treble refined Sugar lbj. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, extracted in Hyssop-water, q. s. mix and make Tablets. They are ve∣ry profitable against Coughs, Asthma's, &c. Salmon.] § 1. You may take them often in the Day or Night, more especially when a Fit of Coughing is present; they give ease upon the Spot, and in short time Cure. § 2. But that their Effects might be more certain, it is my Opinion, that these Ta∣blets should be taken in the day-time, and gr. ij. iij. or iv. of my Volatile Laudanum at Night going to bed, drinking after them a Draught of Milk-water.
XXIII. * Tabulae Infantum, Tablets for Infants or Children. Bate.] ℞ Resin of Jallap ʒj. Mercurius dulcis in fine Pouder ʒvj. trebble refined Su∣gar ℥iij. mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make Tablets, each weighing half a Dram. They are com∣mended for killing Worms, two, three or four of them being taken in a Morning. Salmon.] § 1. If the Child be very young you ought not to give above one or two of them at a time; two containing of the Rosin of Jallap, gr. ij. and of the Mercurius dulcis, gr. xij. which is a Dose large enough for any Child of 3, 4, 5, or 6, Years old. § 2. You ought so often to repeat it till the Worms come away, or the Child grows well, which after 5, 6, or 7, Doses you will see. XXIV. * Tabulae Lenthales. Bate.] ℞ Green Liquorice ℥viij. Aniseeds ℥iv. Caraways ℥j. Waters of Coltsfoot, Hyssop, Horehound, A. lbj. infuse them in B. M. for three days, then express out strongly, and ex∣hale to the thickness of Honey; adding Cherry-tree Gum, Gum Arabick, A. ʒij. Gum Traga∣canth ℥ss. infused for two days in Damask Rose-water lbss. then add trebble refined Sugar lbij. Musk Ambergrise, A. gr. vj. Pouder of Liquo∣rice ℥ss. beat all well together into a Mass, of which form Tablets, or Rouls, S. A. They are a pleasant kind of Pecto∣ral. Salmon.] § 1. Here is more cost than worship in this Medicine; but besides being Pectoral being often and long used, they cause a sweet Breath. § 2. If Choice Catechu in fine Pouder ℥ij. be added, the Medicine will be five times the better to all the Intenti∣ons it is proposed for. XXV. * Tabulae de Pipere, Tablets of Pepper. Bate.] ℞ Cinnamon ℥ss. Ginger ʒij. black Pepper ℈ij. Calamus Aromaticus, Mace, Nutmegs, A. ℈ij. gr. v. Cu∣bebs, lesser Cardamoms, A. gr. 15. Cloves, Galangal, yellow of Orange-peels new cut, A. ʒss. yellow of Citron-peels fresh cut ʒj. cut altogether grosly, and add blanthed sweet Al∣monds ℥v. Citron-peel candied ℥j. white Sugar (dissolved in
Mint-water) lbj. boil and pour forth, S. A. They are Ce∣phalick, Stomatick, Carmi∣native, &c. Salmon.] § 1. These com∣fort a cold and moist Head, Brain and Stomach, strength∣en the Nerves, and are good against Vertigo's, Lethargies, Apoplexies, Palsies, Indige∣stion, and want of Appe∣tite. § 2. They expel Wind admirably, give ease in the Cholick, and comfort the Bowels after any violent Flux. You may give them from ℥ss. ad ℥j. at a time, especially at Night going to bed, or in the Morning fast∣ing. XXVI. * Tabulae Prunellae, Tablets of Sal Prunellae. Bate.] ℞ Sal Prunellae ℥ss. trebble refined Sugar ℥vj. mu∣cilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make Tablets. They are held often in the Mouth to quench Thirst in Fea∣vers. Salmon.] § 1. Or you may give them at set times, as Morning and Evening; ʒiij. at a time, and if you please you may dissolve them in ℥iij. or iv. of black Cherry-water or Milk-water simple or alexiterick. § 2. They are good also against scalding of Urine, or heat and pain in making Water, they provoke Urine and remove the Stoppages of the Water: but in these cases, they ought to be given in Parsley, Hydropiper, or Oni∣on-water, &c. XXVII. * Tabulae Rosaceae, Rose Tablets. Bate.] ℞ Red Roses ex∣angulated ʒvj. Gum Arabick, Gum Tragacanth, A. ℥ss. trebble refined Sugar ℥xvj. Rose-water, q. s. mix and make a Paste, of which make Tablets, or Rouls, S. A. you may add thereto some few drops of Oil of Nutmegs. They are profitable against Ca∣tarrhs, inveterate Coughs, &c. Salmon.] § 1. The Roses must be reduced to a fine Pouder; and the Gums dis∣solved in the Rose-water, and then the Paste made Secun∣dum Artem. § 2. If I was to use them my self, I would have Cate∣chu in fine Pouder ʒvj. added to the Composition; it much advances the worth of the Medicine, and makes it al∣most infallible.
§ 3. If the Catarrh be fierce and inveterate you must also add Flowers of Sul∣phur ʒiv. augmenting in proportion to these additions, the quantity of Sugar. XXVIII. * Tabulae Saponaceae, Soapy Tablets. Bate.] ℞ The best Venice Soap ℥jss. Liquorice ℥ij. Root of Florentine Orrice ʒvj. Flow∣ers of Sulphur ℥ss. Angelica-root ʒij. Oil of Aniseeds ℈ss. trebble refined Sugar ℥viij. mucilage of Gum Tragacanth made in Hyssop-water, q. s. mix and make Tablets or Troches, S. A. They are admirably prevalent against an Empyema, Phthisis, or Ulcer of the Lungs, &c. and most powerfully promote Expectoration. Salmon.] § 1. This is no pleasant Medicine; your best way will be to dissolve them in some proper pectoral Li∣quor, as Hyssop or Mint-water, or Tent, Alicant, &c. and so drink the Solution. § 2. Dose, à ʒiij. ad ʒvj. to be given in the Morning fasting; also in the Fore∣noon; at four in the After∣noon; and at Bed-time. XXIX. * Tabulae de Styrace, Tablets of Styrax. Bate.] ℞ Styrax Calamita strained, Pulp of Raisons, A ℥j. Pouder of Liquorice ʒvj. Wood of Aloes, Cinnamon, A. ʒij. Nutmegs ʒij. ℈ij. fine Bole ʒx. Nutmegs preserved dry ℥jss. trebble refined Su∣gar ℥xx. mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make Tablets. They are Pectoral and Cordial, and wonderfully conduce to the Cure of Catarrhs, Consump∣tions, &c. Salmon.] § 1. They are to be held in the Mouth till they dissolve, and suffered to distil down the Throat by degrees, and that all the day long as you see occasi∣on. § 2. If Catechu in fine Pouder ℥j. Flowers of Sulphur ℥ss. be added to the Com∣position, it will be much the better. XXX, * Tabulae Tartareae, Tablets of Tartar. Bate.] ℞ Crystals of Tar∣tar in fine Pouder ℥j. trebble refined Sugar ℥viij. mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make Tablets. They are to hold frequently in the
Mouth against Vehement Thirst. Salmon.] § 1. They not only quench Thirst, but also cool the Heat of the Sto∣mach, strengthen it, and take away the Sickness there∣of. § 2. If Juice of Limons ℥ij. be added to the Mucilage, and so made up and dryed, it will advance to the Inten∣tion of the Medicine, and please the languishing Pa∣tient. XXXI. * Tabulae Vermifugae, Tablets for killing Worms. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Crude Harts-horn, Ivory, A. ℥ jss. white Sugar ℥viij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make Tablets each weigh∣ing ʒss. Dose, No iij. twice a day. Salmon.] § 1. I am of O∣pinion, that if the Harts-horn and Ivory pass a Phi∣losophical Calcination, they will not only, more easily re∣duce to Pouder; but as their Bodies will be more open so they will better operate to the end desired. § 2. That if to the Com∣position, you add Pouder of Maw Worms ʒvj. it will be much more effectual to the Intention; augmenting also in proportion the Sugar, &c. XXXII. * Trochisci Pecto∣rales. Pectoral Troches or Tablets. Bate.] ℞ Extract of Li∣quorice ℥ss. white Starch ℥jss. Musk Civet. A. gr. iij. Oil of Aniseeds, gut. xij. trebble refined Sugar ℥xij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth. q. s. mix and make Troches. The Title shews the Vertues. Salmon.] § 1. They take away the Asperity of the Trochea Arteria, give relief in vehement Coughs, open Obstructions of the Brest and Lungs, and prevail a∣gainst Hoarseness, Wheasings, Asthma's, &c. § 2. You may hold them all day long in the Mouth, and suffer them to distil down at leisures. Explicit Liber PRIMUS.
PHARMACOPOEIA BATEANA. LIBER II. Of Compound Externals. CHAP. I. Of Lotions or Washes. I. Acetum Lithargyrites; A Lotion of Litharge. Bate.] ℞ LItharge of Gold  in fine Pouder ℥iv. best White-wine Vinegar ℥viij. mix, digest three days stirring it often, and filtering it. It is designed for the Cure of Redness of the Face, Pustules, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Besides this, it is very drying, repercussive and anodyn, and a very good thing to ease the Pain, and take away the Paroxysms of the Gout. § 2. It cools, and there∣fore takes away the violent Heat of Anthonies Fire: and put into the Eyes, it is of singular use to take away their Heat, Redness, and In∣flamation; and withal, to to dry up any Rhume, or violent hot Humor falling in∣to them. § 3. But in these last cases it will be much more effectu∣al, if to every Pint thereof
three Ounces of good Spirit of Wine be added; for then, it will not only resist the Di∣sease, but also strengthen the parts afflicted. II. * Aluminatum, A Pre∣paration or Lotion with Alum. Bate.] ℞ Juice of Li∣mons lbj. Alum ℥ss. boil and despumate, S. A. It prevails mightily against Redness of the Face, Pustules, &c. drink∣ing in the mean Season Ce∣revisiam Catapsoras, the Pre∣paration of which see Cap. 15. Sect. 3. Lib. 1. Salmon.] § 1. You are to bath it upon the Skin three or four times a day, or oft∣ner, and it ought to be done as hot as you can convenient∣ly do it. § 2. It cools and clears the Skin excellently; but if Sac∣charum Saturni ℥ss. were add∣ed it would yet be much better. III. * Dentilavium Scorbu∣ticum, A Wash against the Scurvy in the Teeth. Bate.] ℞ Bistort-roots, Seeds of Scurvy-grass, A. ʒij. Alum ʒj. Mastich ʒiij. boil in fair Water, q. s. to lbj. strain, and add Honey of Roses ℥ij. mix and make a Lotion. Salmon.] § 1. You are to wash the Teeth, and gargle the Mouth and Throat there∣with, if any Ulcers be there four or five times a day, or oftner. § 2. If the Ulcers run much, and a Catarrh seems to be present, add to the Composition, Saccharum Sa∣turni ʒss. IV. * Fotus Arthriticus, A Fomentation for the Gout. Bate.] ℞ Sage, Rosemary, Camomile, Mugwort, Hyperi∣con, common Wormwood, A. M. vj. Bay Salt, M. iij. Wa∣ter three Gallons; boil to two Gallons, then strain out for a Fomentation. Salmon.] § 1. You are to bath with it as hot as it can be endured, and the Gouty part ought (if it can conve∣niently be) to lie in it for some time. § 2. You may repeat it three or four times a day or oftner, as need requires: it infallibly gives ease; but sometimes is apt to send the Gout into the Stomach, and then the Remedy is worse than the Disease, for it may chance to kill the Patient.
§ 3. Preparatives and U∣niversals therefore ought to be given before-hand, that the Morbifick matter may be either evacuated in part, or the Stomach defended by proper Antidotes, which may have power to resist the as∣saulting Disease. V. * Fotus Scorbuticus, A Fomentation for the Scur∣vy. Bate.] ℞ Mugwort, Hy∣pericon, Scurvy-grass, of both kinds, Ground Pine, A.M. iij. Wormwood Common and Ro∣man, A. M. iv. Rosemary, M. ij. Wild or Horse Radish-Roots ℥iv. Water, q. s. mix and boil, S. A. for a Fomen∣tation. Salmon.] § 1. Bathing with it hot, it gives ease in Scorbutick pains, and takes away the discolouring of the Scorbutick spots. § 2. It may be used twice or thrice a day, or oftner as you see need require; a∣nointing the pained Parts with this Mixture. ℞ Oil of Nutmegs by expession ℥ss. Oil of Rosemary, gut. 10. Camphire, gr. vj. mix them. VI. * Gargarisma Album, The white Gargarism. Bate.] ℞ Plantane-water ℥iij. red Rose-water ℥j. Whites of Eggs (reduced Glaire) Noiij. Sugar-candy ℥j. mix and make a Gargarism. Otherwise thus. ℞ Roots of Althea ʒiij. Quince-Seeds ʒjss. Barley-water lbijss. boil to lbjss. towards the end add Liquorice scraped or rasp∣ed ʒij. Strain and add Glair of Eggs, No ij. Sugar-candy, ℥ ij. mix and make a Gar∣garism. With which the Mouth is often to be wash'd and gargled, and by degrees a little of it swallowed for the Thrush, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Either of them are cooling and clean∣sing, and leave the Mouth moist in the heat of a Fea∣ver. § 2. But if it be used for the curing of a Thrush, or sore Mouth, a Decoction of Balaustians would do better than the Barley-water, add∣ing also a little Spirit of Wine. VII. * Gargarisma Apoplecti∣cum, A Gargarism against Apoplexies. Bate.] ℞ Mustard-seed in Pouder, Spirit of Castor, A.
℥ij. Vinegar of Roses ℥j. make Mustard thereof, S. A. to which add, a strong Decocti∣on of Rosemary and Betony, A. lbj. Honey of Roses ℥ij. mix them. Salmon.] § 1. It attracts Flegm and watery Humors strongly out of the Head and Brain, and gives relief in all those Diseases which proceed from a Fulness or Obstruction of those parts. § 2. you may use it seve∣ral times a day at first; and very liberally at Night going to Bed, because then the Head will be kept warm: afterwards it may be used only Morning and Night for some days. VIII. * Gargarisma Scorbuti∣cian, A Gargarism against the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Rosemary M. j. Cloves, No 40. Salt of Scurvy-grass ℥ij. Omphacine lbiij. boil to lbij. It is good for putrid Gums in the Scurvy. Salmon] § 1. If the Gums be putrefied, or Cankers be pre∣sent in them, it must be often used in a day at least five or six times, till it is apparent that the Putrefaction is ma∣red. § 2. After that you may gargle with White-wine, wherein a little Salt of Scur∣vy-grass is also dissolved. IX. * Gargarisma Synanchi∣cum, A Gargarism for a Quinse. Bate.] ℞ Jews Ears ℥j. white Dog's Turd ʒvj. Bramble Leaves, M. j. red Roses, M. ss. Doves-foot, M. ij. Figs, No viij. Water, q.s. boil to lbij. strain, and add Elder Vinegar ℥j. Honey of Roses ℥iij. It is good against Ulcers of the Mouth, Thrushes, &c. Salmon.] § 1. If it be used to gargle with, in Quin∣sies, it is better made with Water, than any thing else; but if it be for Thrushes, Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat, &c. then Red or Clarret Wine is better than Water. § 2. In the first Case it ought to be often used; to abate the Inflamation, or dis∣cuss the Tumor if possible; and as often in the latter Case, where cleansing the Ulcer is required. X. * Pedilavium Emmena∣gogum, A Wash to pro∣voke the Terms. Bate.] ℞ Mugwort, Penny-royal, Calaminth, Camomile, A. M. iv. Water, q. s. boil
to lbviij. With which wash the Feet. Salmon.] § 1. If you would have it effectually to perform the Work, there ought to be so much, as the Woman may sit in up to the Waste, for then it will have a particu∣lar Operation upon the Womb. § 2. Then after coming out of the Bath, the Matrix it self at least the outward Sheath ought to be anointed with this Mixture. ℞ Oil of Nutmegs by Expression ℥ss. Oil of Savin. gut. x. Musk gr. iv. mix them. XI. * Pedilavium Hypnoti∣cum, A Wash inducing Sleep. Bate.] ℞ White Poppy heads, No xx. white Poppy-seed ℥j. Leaves of Lettice, M. iv. Flowers of Water-Lillies, M. vj. Violets, M. jss. Water, q. s. boil them. They provoke Sleep. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good Medicament as it is here prescribed; but if you add to it, in the boiling Opium ℥ss. it will be so much the better; and then to bath with it hot. § 2. The Opium being added to it, as soon as the bath is over, and the Sick in Bed, let the Forehead and Temples be bathed with the same. XII. * Pedilavium Podagri∣cum, A Wash for the Gout. Bate.] ℞ Rosemary, Hy∣pericon, Penny-royal, Bay-leaves. Mugwort, A. M. iij. Bay-salt ℥xij. Sal Armoniack ℥ij. Wheat Bran ℥vj. Water two Gallons, boil, and add Ca∣stile Soap ℥ij. Spirit of Wine lbij. Salmon.] § 1. It gives ease in the Gout by washing, but it endagers the sending the Humor up into the Sto∣mach, unless before-hand eva∣cuated, or the Stomach is fortified by some proper An∣tidote which may resist it. § 2. If Opium ℥j. be dis∣solved in the Wash it will yet be more effectual to the In∣tention. § 3. Immediately after the Wash is over apply over the place pained this Emplaister. ℞ Oil-Olive ℥j. Camphire ℥ss. grind them together, and add Frankincense ℥v. melt, mix, and spread it on Cloth or Leather.
XIII. * Pedilavium Scorbu∣ticum, A Wash against the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Rosemary, Penny-royal, Bay-leaves, Hypericon, Water-cresses, A. M. iij. com∣mon Salt lbj. Water, q. s. boil them, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It eases Scor∣butick pains of the Feet, and takes away Spots of the Scurvy, and other Scorbutick Symptoms attending the Feet, or those parts which are washt with it. § 2. You may wash with it three or four times a day, but twice a day at least; if Salt of Pot-ashes ℥iij. be put into it, it will cleanse more powerful, and better answer the Intention. CHAP. II. Of OILS. I. Galbanetum Hartmanni, Hartman's Oil of Galba∣num. Bate.] ℞ Galbanum, p. j. Spirit or Oil of Turpentine, p. ij. digest and distil by Re∣tort, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. You must not fill the Retort above a third part full, then put to the Re∣ceiver and Lute the Juncture, and distil in Sand, or a naked fire, but with degrees of heat, first very gentle so as to warm the Retort, and by degrees in∣creasing it to the highest, so will you have an Acid Spirit, a Volatile white Oil, then a yellow Oil, and at last a thick red Oil or Balsam; which you may keep by themselves as they come over by changing the Re∣ceiver. § 2. The Acid Spirit and Volatile white Oil, will come over nearly together, and therefore may be taken in one Receiver, and afterwards separated. § 3. The other two may be taken severally as you please, or drawn together, if you intend them only for an outward use. § 4. The Acid Spirit may be separated from most of its Flegm by distillation in a Bolt-head; it is Sudorifick and Diuretick, opens Ob∣structions
of the Lungs, Reins, and Womb, provokes Urine, and expels malign Humors thro' the Pores of the Skin. Dose, gut. 30.40. or more. § 5. The Volatile Oil is ac∣counted a Specifick against Sand, Gravel, and Stone, whether in Reins or Bladder, and prevails against the Cholick. Dose, gut. 10. ad 20. § 6. The yellow Oil and Balsam are good against Fits of the Mother, Vapors, Wind. Dose, gut. iij. ad vj. out∣wardly, they are vulnary, cure Ulcers and Fistula's, and ease all sorts of Pains, chiefly those of the Gout. II. Galbanetum Sennerti, Sen∣nertus his Oil of Galba∣num. Bate.] ℞ It is made as the former, adding Chymical Oil of Lavender ℥j. and di∣stilling, S. A. It is a won∣derful Remedy against the Palsie, being anointed upon the part affected. Salmon.] § 1. The Acid Spirit has the Vertues of the former, and may be given in the same Dose. § 2. The Volatile white Oil, has the Vertues of the former also, and given in the same Dose; it is a famous thing against the Palsie and Convulsions both inwardly taken, and outwardly a∣nointed upon the parts: It gives ease in a cold Gout, and in all Pains proceeding from Cold. § 3. But if you design the whole Distillation only for an external use, it will be best to draw them all off to∣gether, and afterward to se∣parate from them the Acid Spirit; so will the Volatile Oil, yellow Oil, and red Balsam mix together, which is the Galbanetum of Senner∣tus. § 4. It cures Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, Lame∣ness, Aches and Pains in any part; as also green Wounds, old Ulcers, Gouts, &c. III. * Oleum Bufonum, Oil of Toads. Bate.] ℞ Live Toads, No iv. boil them in Oil-Olive lbij. for one hour, or till they break; then strain and keep it for use. It is good against Pustles of the Lips, and Can∣cers of the Breasts; it is al∣so prevalent against the Dropsie, and provokes U∣rine, being anointed on the Reins.
Salmon.] § 1. It is said to be an excellent thing a∣gainst all manner of Break∣ings out of the Skin, of what kind soever; and cures a red Face, more especially if mixt with a small quan∣tity of Flowers of Sulphur. § 2. I am informed that an old Man who had been troubled with the Gout for forty Years, by anointing the places affected with this Oil for some time, was perfectly cured thereof, so as he never had any more Fits of it. IV. * Oleum Cosmeticum, A beautifying Oil. Bate] ℞ Oil of bitter Almonds ℥iv. Oil of Tartar per deliquium ℥ij. Oil of Rhodium, gut. iv. mix them. S. A. It cleanses the Skin, and smooths it. Salmon.] § 1. It brings off the Skin, but by de∣grees; it makes not the Face raw, but makes it fall off in manner of a Scurf. § 2. If there be Worms in the Face, it kills them all, brings them forth of the Skin, leaving their holes behind, which afterwards fill up a∣gain. § 3. It ought to be used three or four times a day, or oftner, and to be continued for five or six Weeks more or less, as you see occasion. It will smart a little, but without any other detriment, and at length leave the Skin very smooth, clear, and white. V. * Oleum Cremoris, Oil of Cream. Bate.] ℞ The inner green Bark of Elder fresh gathered, M. iij. the best Cream lbij. boil them well, till the Cream turns to an Oil, press out, and add more fresh Bark of El∣der, M. iv. boil again till the Bark grows crisp, and then express the Oil. It is one of the best of Remedies against the Piles, Burnings, an Ery∣sipelas, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against Inflamations of all kinds, as also Burnings and Scaldings of all sorts, by a∣nointing therewith and dip∣ping a Linnen Cloth in the same (if need requires) and laying it over the Affect. § 2. In using it for the Piles or an Erysipelas; it ought to be often anointed, at least five or six times a day; and in the latter you may lay it on with a Fea∣ther.
VI. * Oleum Milvinum, Oil of Kites. Bate.] ℞ Young Kites or Gleads from the Nest, or older with Mag-pyes, No iv. let them be exenterated and de∣plumed; and boil them in black Cherry-water, q. s. add∣ing Peony-roots ℥iij. Castor ℥j. Rue, M. iij. Flowers of Rosemary and Lavender, A. M. ij. Flowers of Hypericon ℥j. Roots of Valerian ℥ij. add Oil-Olive lbij. and boil till they come to a Mash, or are boiled to pieces; press forth, and the Oil which swims on top take off, and keep for use. At the time of an Epileptick Fit, anoint the Soles of the Feet, Nostrils, and Nape of the Neck, with this Mix∣ture. ℞ Of the aforesaid Oil ℥j. Chymical Oils of Rue and Savin, Ana. ℈j. mix them. Salmon.] § 1. It is chiefly to be done (if used preven∣tively) three days before and after the Full and New Moons; otherwise I should chuse to use it Morning and Evening the whole Month throughout. § 2. During the Unction it will be good also to give inwardly. gr. iv. ad x. or xij. (according to Age) of the Volatile Salt of Kites, in some proper Vehicle every Morning fasting. VII. * Oleum Paralyticum, An Oil against the Pal∣sie. Bate.] ℞ Mustard-seed lbiij. Castor ℥ss. Cloves ℥ij. Nutmegs ℥iij. S. V. ℥vi. beat all well and digest them together in B. M. for twenty four hours, then strongly press forth the Oil with a Press. Often a∣noint the Back bone, Nape of the Neck, and parts af∣fected therewith. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good thing if used according to this Composition and Prepa∣ration, but it will be much more powerful if you add to it a third part of Oil of Amber. § 2. You ought to use it to all the parts affected, and that Morning and Evening for many days together, gi∣ving inwardly Volatile Salt of Vipers. VIII. * Oleum Pomosum, Oil of Thorn Apple Leaves. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Leaves of Strammonium bearing Thorn Apples lbj. bruise them and add Oil-Olive lbijss. boil to
the Consumption of the Juice; express, and add fresh Leaves lbss. Insolate for fourteen days, then boil to the Consumption of the Juice, and press out. It quickly heals, even to a Miracle all Inflamations, and all sorts of Burnings, whe∣ther by Fire, or boiling Water, melted Lead, or Gun-pouder, or by Light∣ning. Salmon.] § 1. If the Skin be not broken, you need on∣ly to anoint it upon the place affected, but often. § 2. If the Skin be bro∣ken, it will be best to apply it Plaister-wise, and so bind it up till the Fire is drawn out; and till that is done, no healing can be expected. IX. Oleum Ranarum, Oil of Frogs. Bate.] ℞ Live Frogs, No xij. Oil-Olive lbjss. boil them for an hour, and express the Oil. It cures Redness of the Face and Impetigo, helps E∣rysipela's and Gangreens, and is a Specifick against Can∣cers. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good thing for the Intention, but in my Opinion Oil of Toads is much before it, to all the Purposes mentioned. § 2. It is admirable also against the Gout, being a∣nointed Morning and Even∣ing, and applied to the part mixt with Barley Meal, as a Pultice. X. * Oleum Scorbuticum, The Oil against the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Horse Rad∣dish-roots ℥vj. Scurvy-grass, M. iv. Lavender-flowers, M. ij. Neats-feet Oil lbj. bl with a gentle Fire to the Con∣sumption of the Juices; pr out and add Spirit of Salt ʒiij. Spirit of Scurvy-grass ʒj. Oil of Cinnamon and Cloves, A. ʒss. Oil of Origanum ℈iv. mix them. With this Oil the parts affected are anointed once a day, for half an hour very warm. Salmon.] § 1. But where Scorbutick pains affect in  cold habit of Body, you must (besides anointing with it) apply it as a Pultice to the parts affected by mixing it with Pouder of Elecam∣pane and Bay-berries, Ana. § 2. In a cold Gout it is also a Specifick, first anoint∣ing with it, and then apply∣ing it in a Cataplasm as be∣fore directed.
XI. Oleum  Tri∣chophues, An Oil for re∣storing Hair fallen. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Southern∣wood bruised lbss. old Oil lbjss. red Wine lbss. boil till the Herbs are crisp; then strain out: repeat this Work the third time with new Southern∣wood: strain out, and add Bear's-grease ℥ij. mix them well. It is mightily com∣mended for the Cure of an Alopecia, or for like falling of the Hair. Salmon.] § 1.  fignificat, quod capillos resti∣tuit: And Dioscorides uses it in that Sense, where he saith, , &c. Lib. 2. Cap. 97. § 2. You must before you anoint rub the bald places with a warm coarse Cloth, till they look very red, or you may do it with an Oni∣on in like manner, then a∣noint with this Oil, rubbing it well in for half an hour at a time, and this repeat three or four times a day, for six Weeks together at least. XII. * Oleum Tritici, Oil of Wheat. Bate.] ℞ It is made by strongly expressing bruised Wheat, between hot Iron Plates, so as the Oil may come forth. It is admirably good against Chops in the Hands, Ulcers of the Feet, or Kibes, Chops of the Lips, Herpes, Scabbines of the Skin, &c. Salmon.] § 1. You may anoint therewith three or four times a day, but chiefly at Night going to Bed, and apply over where it is ne∣cessary this Emplaister. ℞ Emplastrum Diapalma ℥j. of this Oil ℥j. Wax ℥ss. mix them. § 2. It is anodyne, abates Inflamations, and is good a∣gainst Scurf, Dandrif, and other Foulnesses of the Head in Children, being anointed on the part. XIII. Oleum Viperarum, Oil of Vipers. Bate.] ℞ Large, fat, live Vipers, No 3. Spanish Wine ℥ij. Oil of Hypericon ℥viij. put them into a Vessel with a narrow Mouth, boil in B. M. to the Consumption of the Hu∣midity, and then press forth the Oil. It cleanses the Skin, heals the Impetigo, &c. takes away Gouty Tophs, cures the Leprosie.
Salmon.] § 1. It is in∣deed a good thing to cleanse the Skin, but it must be long used, except it be fortified with some of the Volatile Salt of Toads. § 2. And that it might the more effectually answer the Intention, while this Oil is used outwardly, the Volatile Salt of Vipers ought to be taken daily inwardly, where∣by the malign Acid, which is the cause of those Distempers will be effectually mortify∣ed. CHAP. III. Of BALSAMS. I. Balsamum Anodynum, A Balsam easing Pain. Bate.] ℞ CAstile Soap ℥j. Opi∣um ℥ss. Camphire ʒvj. Saffron ʒj. Alcohol of S. V. ℥xviij. digest in Sand, ten days and nights, then strain. Dip Linnen Rags in it, which apply to the pained parts, renewing the Appli∣cation every fourth hour, till all the Pain ceases. It won∣derfully allays the Pains of the Gout. Internally it is also given, gut. 30.40.50. in Wine. Salmon.] § 1. It is indeed a famous Balsam for easing of Pains, whether inward or outward: outwardly apply∣ed, it ought to be renewed oftner than our Text pre∣scribes. § 2. Inwardly given it not only prevails against the Gout, Rheumatism, &c. but is of singular use against the Cholick, Gripings of the Guts, and the Stone, whe∣ther in the Reins or Blad∣der. § 3. It provokes Sleep, and causes rest, and therefore ought to be given at Night going to Bed. § 4. Given, ad ʒij. iij. or iv. in a Clyster it heals the Bloody-flux, and stops all o∣ther Fluxes of the Bowels. II. * Balsamum Faeminarum, The Balsam for Women∣kind. Bate.] ℞ Of the small Flowers of the musked Crane's Bill ℥iv. Oil of sweet Al∣monds
new drawn lbjss. inso∣late forty days; then express out: add fresh Flowers of Water-lillies and of white Lil∣lies, A. ℥iv. insolate again twenty days; and express the Oil; to which add Oil of Jassemy ℥iv. Civet ʒj. mix S. A. and make a Balsam. Anoint therewith the Perinaeum, Groins, Loins, Flanks of Women, , in pariendi difficultate, who have hard Labour, or are not easily delivered. Salmon.] § 1. The Oil is much better made by boil∣ing till the Flowers are crisp; and they may all be put in at once, as well as at seve∣ral times, by which means it will also be sooner done. § 2. But it will be no per∣fect Balsam without the ad∣dition of some proper Resin; of which kind are Turpentines of all sorts; to the former Oil, after expression you may add, Strasburg Turpentine, Balsam Capivi, Balsam of Tolu, Chio Turpentine, A. ℥jss. Liquid Styrax ℥iv. which mix well. § 3. Being thus compound∣ed, it will be much more powerful for the intended purpose, besides which it will be a very good Vulne∣rary; and if any of the parts be hurt or torn in the bringing forth of the Child, it will speedily and safely heal them. III. * Balsamum Lucatelli, Lucatellus his Balsam. Bate.] ℞ The best Oil-Olive lbiij. Spanish Wine lbj. Venice Turpentine washt in Rose-water ℥viij. Wax lbj. boil S. A. adding red Sanders in fine Pouder ℥ij. Balsam of Peru ℥j. mix them. Out∣wardly applied, it is good against Burnings, Inflama∣tions, Ulcers, Wounds, &c. Inwardly it is given, ad ʒj. or ʒij. in Wine for inward Bruises, Ulcers of the Reins, Stone in the Reins and Blad∣der, Difficulty of making Water. Salmon.] § 1. In making of this Balsam some few things are observable, first, That the Turpentine is bet∣ter unwasht than washt, be∣cause some of its most Vola∣tile, Spirituous and Essential parts are lost in that Agita∣tion. § 2. Secondly, That Stras∣burg Turpentine much ex∣ceeds the Venice in this Occa∣sion, as being much more Fra∣grant and Balsamick; and Cyprus and Chio are yet still better than that.
§ 3. That where such balsamick Resins are used it is not good to boil much the Balsam, after the mixing of them, because much of their Spirituous and Volatile parts flye away in that Acti∣on, and therefore it is best to boil the Oil and Spanish Wine together first, to the Consumption of the Humi∣dity; and then to add the Resins, mixing them only by a gentle melting together, not boiling. § 4. That the Balsam of Peru is too little in quantity ℥ivss. is as small a proportion as can be put into this quan∣tity, to add any thing of Ver∣tue to the Medicament; and if instead of ℥ivss. you allow ℥ix. the Balsam will be very much the better. § 5. In our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 5. Cap. 2. Sect. 50. you may see it, according to the Colledges Prescript, which is in much differing Propor∣tions. § 6. The Red Sanders ought to be added after it is off the Fire, and the boiling heat abated, otherwise it will not be of any good colour, and then to be stirred continual∣ly, till it is almost cold. § 7. When I make it for my own use, my Proporti∣ons are these. ℞ Oil-Olive lbjss. Spanish Wine lbj. boil to the Consumption of the Wine; then add the best Bees wax lbj. when it is melted, put in Strasburgh, Cyprus, or Chio Turpentine lbjss. Balsam of Peru ℥viij. Red Sanders in fine Pouder ℥ij. melt, mix▪ and stir it till it is cold. 'Tis a Balsam without compared. IV. Balsamum Momordicae, Balsam of the Balm-Apple. Bate.] ℞ It is made of the Fruit thereof, being insolated for a long time in Oil. It is one of the best of things, against Wounds and Ulcers; a most admirable thing a∣gainst the Haemorrhoides or Piles, Ulcers of the Womb, Ruptures, &c. Salmon.] § 1. I humbly conceive that by Momordica our Author intends nothing more nor less than the Balm-Apple, and in that Sence we have taken him. § 2. But most Herbalists take Momordica to be the Balsamitamas, which is clear∣ly another Plant, and bears no such Fruit as the Balsa∣mina, Viticella, or Balm-Apple-Plant does. § 3. This Oil is tempe∣rate in respect of the first qualities, vulnerary, and
cures Pains, chiefly of the Haemorrhoides; it is also good for wounded Nerves, Burnings, Ruptures, &c. V. Balsamum Nucistae, Bal∣sam of Nutmegs. Bate] ℞ Nutmegs bruised, or beaten lbj. Spanish Wine lbss. pure new made Butter without any Salt in it lbij. put them all into a Vessel which stop close, and insolate for five days; then boil gently to the Consumption of the Wine, and strain out the Balsam. Its use is as well internal as ex∣ternal. It expels the dead Child, and brings forth the Secundine or After-birth, &c. It is exhibited in Wine ad ℥ss. it eases also the Pains of the Head and Spleen, &c. out∣wardly it is anointed upon the part to ease all Pains proceeding from Cold, or cold Causes. Salmon.] § 1. This is no∣thing more or less but an Ar∣tificial Oil of Nutmegs by expression made by addition of the fresh Butter. § 2. The insolation and boiling being over; whilst very hot, you must press out the Oil, but it must be with an Almond Press as they make Oil of Almonds, or Oil of Nutmegs by expressi∣on; otherwise a great deal of the Strength and Oil of the Nutmegs will be left be∣hind. § 3. It comforts the Head and weakned Viscera, and is an excellent thing against Ulcers of the internal parts; it discusses Wind, and gives ease in the Cholick to a won∣der. VI. Balsamum Sclopetarium, A Balsam for Gun-shot Wounds. Bate] rx; Oils of Line∣seed and Turpentine, A. lbj. Verdigrise ℥ss. boil them a little, S. A. It is used against Gun-shot Wounds, and old Ulcers, for which purposes it has no equal. Salmon.] § 1. It is an ex∣cellent thing against Burn∣ings and Scaldings of all kinds, whether with naked Fire, boiling Water or Oil, boiling Pitch or Wax, melt-Lead, or other Metals, Nitre, Gun-pouder, &c. § 2. Lay it on with Lint (the part being anointed with it) and then a proper sticking Plaister over it; it will take out the Fire in a very short time, and soon after heal the Ulcer.
§ 3. It is esteemed also a most excellent thing for the healing all sorts of putri∣fied Sores, old Ulcers, run∣ning Fistula's, &c. doing those things which sacarcely any other outward Medicine will do. VII. Balsamum Spinale, A Balsam for the Back. Bate.] ℞ Man's Grease ℥iv. Goose Grease, Badgers Grease, A. ℥iij. Oil of Bays ℥ij. Sage, Marjoram, Elder, dwarf Elder, Calamint, Ori∣ganum, Lavender, A. M. j. boil all to the Consumption of the Juices, and press out; add Balsam of Amber ℥j. Butter of Mace ℥ss. Petroloeum, Oil of Spike, A. ʒij. mix them, S. A. Anoint on the Spina Dorsi, or Back-bone, for the Rickets. Use it in the Morn∣ing; and at Night a little before going into Bed, lay over it greasie Wool, as it is new shorn off the Sheeps Back, and binding it fast to with a double Linnen Cloth sewed on. Salmon.] § 1. It is design∣ed as an external help against the Rickets, and it is of good use for such Children, as cannot be easily made to take things inwardly. § 2. But besides anointing the Back-bone, it will be necessary to anoint the Sto∣mach therewith Morning and Evening, as also all the Joynts affected. VIII. Balsamum Spleneticum, A Balsam for the Spleen. Bate.] ℞ Rue, Ground-Ivy, Camonile, Time, A. M.j. beat them together, and add Ox-Gall, Neats-feet Oil, A. lbj. Aqua Vitae ℥j. boil for an hour, and strain out. It is of singular Vertue against Pains of the Spleen, and all other Pains and Aches pro∣ceeding from a cold Cause. Salmon.] § 1. It is a good thing as it is, but if you add to the Composition, Cam∣phire ℥ij. it will be much more effectual. § 2. While this is using outwardly, let the Patient take in the mean time Tin∣ctura Martis every Night in∣wardly, in some proper Sple∣netick Vehicle. IX. * Balsamum Sulphuris Bateanum, Dr. Bate's Bal∣sam of Sulphur. Bate] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur ℥j. Florence Oil-Olive ℥v. boil all with a gentle Fire, (continually stirring of it) till it comes to the consistence of a
Balsam. It is most efficacious against all Ulcers, whether internal or external. Dose, ad gut. 20. or more. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against Scabs, Itch, Pimples, Redness, Scurf, and all sorts of breakings out of the Skin, taking them away, and ma∣king it white, soft, and smooth. § 2. Applied in the Gout, it is of good use, and gives ease in that Disease, when many other Remedies fail. x.* Balsamum Sulphuris Mi∣nerale, Mineral Balsam of Sulphur. Bate.] ℞ Linseed Oil ℥x. Sulphur in fine Pouder ij. boil gently, continually stirring it, till it comes to the Consistency of Honey. Let it be applied to the place pained and weakned with the Gout, spreading it on Leather or Cloth, and renewing it eve∣ry third or fourth day. Salmon.] § 1. This has all the Vertues of the former, and therefore may profitably be used to the same Intenti∣on. § 2. In the Gout, &c. a∣noint with it very well, which done make another part of it into a Cataplasm, with Pou∣der of Elecampane-roots and Bay-berries, and apply it af∣ter anointing, over the grie∣ved parts. XI. Balsamum Sulphuris Ru∣landi, Rulandus his Bal∣sam of Sulphur. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur ℥j. Oil of Nuts or Rape∣seed ℥vj. generous Wine ℥ij. digest eight days, stirring them sometimes; then boil to the Comsumption of the Wine. It it is a singular Easer of Pain; A maturative and digestive in Wounds of the Ner∣vous parts: Dropt into the Ears, it takes away their Pain. Salmon.] § 1. It is good also against all vices of the Skin whatsoever, freeing it from all its Defedations, for which purposes it is not lightly to be valued, being only anointed thereon, Morn∣ing and Evening for some time. § 2. It gives ease in the Gout, and in all Pains pro∣ceeding from Cold and Moi∣sture; and strengthens weak Nerves; and is a famous thing against Wounds in what part of the Body soever.
XII. Balsamum Verum, A True Balsam. Bate.] ℞ It is made of Snails with Shells, for a long time and much beaten with an equal quantity of Sugar-Canday, so as to become a Bal∣sam. It is good to anoint with in the Small-Pox. Salmon.] § 1. After the Small-Pox are filled, and come to their full bigness, you may safely anoint with this Medicine, it drys them and prevents their pitting. § 2. You ought to lay it on almost as often as it drys, till they become very crusty; but being applied before they are come fully out, it may endanger their striking in again, which you must with all care avoid. XIII. † Balsamum Magis com∣positum, Balsam the great∣er Composition. Bate.] ℞ Balsam de Tolu, Capivi, Myrrh, Saffrons, Nut∣megs, A. ʒij. Mastich, Gua∣jacum, Ammoniacum, Tacca∣mahacca, Caranna, A. ʒj. Chio turpentine ℥ss. yellow Wax℥j. Oil of Hypericon ℥vj. Red Rose-water ℥ ix. melt fist the Wax with the Oil; then add the Tinctures and exhale the S. V. after add the Rose-water; which after the cooling, let it be melted again in a gentle heat, and poured forth into another fit Vessel, to keep for use. Salmon.] § 1. It is one of the best Vulneraries (of an Artificial Balsam) in the World, and in the Cure of Wounds does wonders. § 2. It also cleanseth run∣ning Sores, old Ulcers, and Fistula's, and brings them to a speedy Cure. § 3. Applied also to the Gout, and to weak and pain Limbs, as also to a weak Back: It gives speedy ease and relief: Inwardly given ʒj. ad ʒij. at Night going to Bed, it is good against Stone, Sand, or Gravel in Reins or Bladder. XIV. † Balsamum minus Cem∣positum, Balsam the lesser Composition. ℞ Chio Turpentine ℥ij. Oil of Hypericon ℥iv, yellow Wax ʒvj. Red Rose-water ʒvj. mix and make the Balsam in the same manner as the for∣mer. Salmon.] § 1. It is a sin∣gular Vulnerary, and cures Wounds almost to a Miracle,
yet in my Judgment, it is not so good a Balsam as the for∣mer. § 2. It softens Scrophulous Nodes, Tophs, and Gums and in the Gout, or any Pains of the Nerves, is little inferior to the former. CHAP. IV. Of OINTMENTS. I. Butyrum Amygdalinum, Al∣mond Butter. Bate.] ℞ LArge sweet Al∣monds (i. e. Jordan Almonds) lbj. macerate them in cold Water and blanch them bruise them well in a Marble Mortar, sprinkling them often (whilst beating) with a little fair Water. Then add fair Water, q. s. till it grows thick like Cream; strain it hard out by pressing, and put it up∣on a gentle Fire often stirring it, till it begins to boil: then add (that it may coagulate or thicken) Juice of Limons ℥j. suspend it in a good thick Cloth, that there may be a se∣paration of all the servse or thin parts, the Butter remain∣ing behind in the Cloth, which mix with Sugar and Rose-water, till it is of a pleasant Taste. It is a delicate Anodyn; it lenifies or softens, and ma∣turates, and is good against the Gripings of the Guts in Children, for which it is very much commended. Salmon.] § 1. The Sugar with which the Condiment is made ought to be trebble refined; and the Rose-water ought to be that of Damask Roses. § 2. For external Uses, it is a good Maturative, and therefore ought to be mixt with Ripners; and mixt with Turpentine, and the Yolk of an Egg, it makes one of the best Digestives in nature. § 3. Inwardly against the Griping of the Guts you may give it from ʒij. ad ʒvj. or more, mixing with it, gut. i. ij. or iij. as you see convenient of the Oil of sweet Fennel-seeds.
II. Butyrum Cerae, Butter of Wax. Bate.] ℞ It is made of yellow Wax, dissolved in S. V. and filtrated, so that it may remain in the Paper like But∣ter. Being edulcorated, it may be drank ad ʒj. as the most excellent of Remedies against the Dysentery or Bloody-flux. Salmon.] § 1. Outwardly it is good to stop Fluxes of Humors into Wounds and Ulcers, and to cause them speedily to heal. § 2. Inwardly it may not only be given against a Bloody-flux, but against all other Fluxes of the Bowels whatsoever, with good suc∣cess: It stops the Flux and strengthens the Parts weak∣ned. Dose, à ℈ij. ad ʒij. twice a day. III. * Linimentum Mellumi∣natum, The Honied Li∣niment. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Co∣lumbines, Sage, Mint, Nut∣megs, A. ℥ss. burnt Alum ℥j. Honey ℥iv. mix them. It is good against Ulcers of the Gums, Inflamations, Loose∣ness of the Flesh about the Teeth, &c. Salmon.] § 1. If there be Ulcers in the Mouth, dissolve a little of it in Red or Clarret Wine, and gargle therewith: then lay it in substance with Lint up∣on the Ulcer it self, till it is cleansed. § 2. It is good for Ulcers in other parts, and induces them to a speedy healing. IV. * Linimentum Simplex, The simple Linniment. Bate.] ℞ Juice of Night∣shade, Oil of Roses, A. ℥xx. boil to the Consumption of the Juice, strain, and add Li∣tharge, Ceruse, A. lbj. mix them, S. A. It is good a∣gainst Cancers in Womens Breasts, Heats, and Inflama∣tions, Erysipela's, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Anoint there∣with Morning and Evening, and spread it upon soft, gentle Leather, and cover the whole Affect therewith. § 2. If Saccharum Saturni ℥vj. be added to it, it will be more effectual to answer all the Intentions for which it is designed. V. Mel Saponis, Ointment of Honey and Soap. Bate.] ℞ Common Soap, Honey, A. ℥iv. Salt of Tartar ℥ss. Fumitory-water ʒij. mix
them, S. A. It is a Cosme∣tick, and serves chiefly for whitening the Hands and Face by washing therewith. It prevails also against Burn∣ings, Inflamations, Gout, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is one of the best of external Reme∣dies against the Gout, or any kind of Pain or Tumor of the Joints, being spread upon Leather and applied. § 2. If you please you may add to the Composition Cam∣phire ℥ss. it will be more ef∣fectual to all the Intenti∣ons. VI. * Savanetta Cosmetica, A beautifying Soap or Ointment. Bate.] ℞ Venice Soap ℥ij. dissolve it in Juice of Limons ℥ij. add Oil of bitter Almonds, Oil of Tartar per deliquium, A. ℥j. mix, and insolate so long, till it comes to the thickness of an Ointment, stirring it well every day. Lastly, add Oil of Rhodium, gut. vj. vel q.s. and make an Ointment. Salmon.] § 1. It clears the Skin and makes it white, soft and smooth, freeing it from Pimples, Breakings out, Scurf, Morphew, Sun burn∣ing, and other Defedati∣ons. § 2. It is reported, that if it be spread thick upon a Cloth, and laid upon the Face, or other parts of the Skin troubled with Lentils, Freckles, and the like, it will take them away; but it ought to lie on two days, and to be renewed two or three times, or till the scurf Skin seems to come off, which it will do in a little time with the discolouring or spots upon it, which I have some∣times seen. VII. * Ʋnguentum Albumi∣num, Ointment of the Whites of Eggs. Bate.] ℞ It is made by mixing exactly Oil of Roses ℥ij. with Whites of Eggs ℥iv. S. A. It is one of the best of Remedies against Burn∣ings, Inflamations, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Anoint the Inflamation, Erysipela's, or part burnt or scalded with it, then lay over the Affect more of the same laid upon Lint, and gently bind it on, renewing it twice a day. § 2. It loosens Contracti∣ons, and gives ease in the Gout, being prudently ap∣plied.
VIII. * Ʋnguentum Antipy∣reticum, An Ointment a∣gainst Burnings. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Goose∣dung, Oil-Olive, A.℥iv. Ʋn∣guentum de Althaea, Oil of Roses, A. ℥j. Snow-water ℥viij. boil with a gentle Fire, S. A. strain and add Camphire ʒj. mix them. It is very ex∣cellent against Burnings, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Anoint the Burning or Scalding there∣with, and then apply it upon a Linnen Cloth, dressing it twice a day till the Fire is out. § 2. If it be raw, and the Fire be once out by Appli∣cation of this Ointment, you must heal it after the manner of other Ulcers. IX. * Ʋnguentum de Auran∣tiis, Ointment of O∣ranges. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Oranges, but green, and not ripe; No vj. beat them into a Pulp with their Peels; Bay-leaves, M. iv. Sage, Sorel, Marigold, A. M. ij. Juice of Water-cresses lbij. fresh Butter lbij. boil all to the Consumption of the Juices, then press strongly out; to which add fresh Bay-Leaves, and Sage bruised as before; Cinnamon ℥j. Nut∣megs ℥ss; boil again, till the Herbs are crisp, and then press out again. It is an excellent thing against Scabs, Itch, &c. Salmon.] § 1. What good it will do in the Itch, I know nothing of (the Ʋnguentum de Enula cum Mercurio, or Neapolitanum, are a thousand times better:) but as to Scurf, Dandrif, Pustles, Pimples Scabs, and other like Break∣ings out, it is a singular good thing. § 2. You may anoint there∣with two or three times a day, till the Affect ceases. X. * Ʋnguentum de Betonica Aquatica, Ointment of Water Betony. Bate.] ℞ Water Betony, Sorrel, A. M. vj. bruise them, and add fresh new made But∣ter lbij. boil till the Herbs are crisp, and press out strongly; repeat the boiling with fresh Herbs three times, strain or press out again, and add Sul∣phur Vive in fine Pouder ℥ijss. Chymical Oil of Orange-peels ʒj. mix and make an Oint∣ment, S. A. It cures Scabs, Itch, &c.
Salmon.] § 1. Anoint the Scabby or Itchy places with it twice a day, laying over them a Cloth dipt in the same, if it can with conve∣niency be done. § 2. It is good against Pu∣stules, and other breakings out of the Face, Scurf and Dandrif in the Head, scald Heads, &c. being daily a∣nointed therewith. XI. * Ʋnguentum Cephalal∣gicum, An Ointment for the Head. Bate.] ℞ Ointment of Alabaster, Ointment of Roses, A.℥ij. Opium ʒj. Saffron ʒss. Oil of Nutmegs ʒj. mix and make an Ointment. It is to be anointed on the Temples and Forehead. Salmon.] § 1. What and how the Ointments of Ala∣baster and Roses are made, see our Pharm. Lond. Lib. 5. Cap. 4. Sect. 26. and 36. where you have their Ver∣tues and Uses. § 2. It eases Pain in any part, but chiefly in the Head, for which it is ac∣counted a Specifick: being a∣nointed on the Forehead, Temples, Nostrils, Pulses, and Soles of the Feet, it gives ease and rest. XII. * Ʋnguentum Crinifi∣cum, An Ointment cau∣sing Hair to grow. Bate.] ℞ Labdanum ʒvj. Bears grease ℥ij. Crude Honey ℥ss. Southernwood in Pouder ʒiij. Ashes of Reed-roots ʒjss. Oil of Nutmegs ʒj. Balsam of Peru ʒiij. mix them. Salmon.] § 1. It is said to breed Hair, and restore bald places, &c. you must first rub the place a good while with an Onion, till the Skin looks very red, and then you must anoint it with this Ointment, laying over it, a Linnen Cloth dipt in the same. § 2. And that it may be the more effectually done, it ought to be in like manner repeated three or four times a day for five or six Weeks together at least. XIII. Ʋnguentum Depilato∣rium, An Ointment taking away Hair. Bate.] ℞ Quick-lime ℥iv. Auripigment ℥jss. Root of Flo∣rentine Orrice ℥j. Nitre, Sul∣phur, A. ℥ss. strongest Soap-Lees lbij. mix, and boil to a just Consistency: add Oil of Cloves, gut, xx. mix and
make an Ointment, or rather Pultice. Salmon.] § 1. You must use it with great caution, because of its corrupting quality, and if it lies too long, it may do mischief making Marks and Scars upon the place. § 2. Spread it thin upon a thick peice of Linnen Cloth, and so apply it, or anoint the place therewith, letting it lie for half an hour, more or less according to the Nature, Quality, and Thickness of the Skin, &c. § 3. The Hair being taken off, anoint the place with Oil or Ointment of Roses. Myn∣sicht is the Author there∣of. XIV. * Ʋnguentum Digita∣lis, Ointment of Fox Gloves. Bate.] ℞ May Butter lbiij. fresh Fox Glove beaten, as much as you can well put into it; insolate for thirty days; then boil S. A. and press out strongly. Anoint the places affected with the King's-E∣vil therewith; for this pur∣pose it has no equal. Salmon.] § 1. You are to anoint therewith Morning and Evening, continually for so long time till you find the Affect to cease: It dissolves Kernels in the Neck, or else∣where, and takes away all sorts of Scrophulous Tumors what∣soever. § 2. But the Patient ought to purge once a Week with our Pilulae Panchymagogae, and take a Decoction all along of Fox Glove inwardly. XV. * Ʋnguentum Faciale, An Ointment for the Face. Bate.] ℞ Camphire, Sul∣phur Vive, A. ʒij. Pomatum ℥ij. strong Diasinapi strained out ℥j. Oil of Rhodium, gut. iv. mix and make an Oint∣ment. It cures a Red Face, Universals being premised. Salmon.] § 1. What Pre∣paration of Mustard-seed the Diasinapi is, is hard to be understood, however instead thereof you may take com∣mon Mustard, which we use for Sawce, straining it thro' a Cloth from the gross body of the Seed. § 2. If you anoint Morn∣ing and Evening therewith, for about fourteen days time, it will do wonders, removing not only Redness, but Pu∣stules, Worms, and most o∣ther Deformities of the Skin.
XVI. * Ʋnguentum Fami∣liare, The Familiar, or Family Ointment. Bate.] ℞ May Butter ℥vij. Wax, Rosin, A. ℥iv. Crude Honey ʒx. Wheat-flower ʒvj, mix them, S. A. It warms, moistens, loosens, discusses, cleanses, smooths, ripens and digests; and is of familiar use for the speedy curing Fel∣lons and Whitloes in Fingers, and Kibes and Chilblains in the Feet and Toes. It also wonderfully helps Scorbutick Ulcers in the Feet. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only good for Fellons, Whit∣loes, Chilblains and Kibes; but it is of singular use to a∣bate Inflamations, and bring Pushes to Ripeness and Ma∣turity. § 2. Spread it upon Lea∣ther, and apply it warm to the part affected, renewing twice a day till you find a∣mendment. XVII. * Ʋnguentum ad Fis∣suras, An Ointment against Chaps. Bate.] ℞ Myrrh, Ginger, Litharge of Silver, A. j. Ho∣ney ℥iv. Wax ℥ij. Oil of Roses ℥vj. mix them, S. A. For the Rich, you may add, Oil of Rhodium, gut. xij. Leaves of Gold, No 10. Otherwise thus. ℞ Fine Bole, Myrrh, Ceruse, A. ʒij. Ducks Grease, q.s. mix and make an Ointment. It cures quickly. Salmon.] § 1. Any of these may do the deed; but this (more common and easie) will do the work better. ℞ Beef Suet ℥iij. Wax ℥j. Stras∣burgh Turpentine ℥ss. Oil of Bitter Almonds, q.s. to bring it into the body of an Oint∣ment being melted together. § 2. Anoint here with, Morning and Evening at Bed-time, and in a few days the Chaps will be well. XVIII. * Ʋnguentum ad Fo∣veas, An Ointment against the Marks of the Small-Pox. Bate.] ℞ Oil of sweet Al∣monds ℥ij Sperma Ceti ʒiij. Oil of Rhodium, gut. iv. mix and make an Ointment, S. A. It is a most excel∣lent thing to take away the Pittings or Marks of the Small-Pox. It alleviates the Pain, and takes away the Acrimony, &c. Salmon.] § 1. I would not have you think that this Oint∣ment will take away the Marks of the Small-Pox, when once you have them,
but rather that it is to pre∣vent them. § 2. When therefore the Small-Pox are fully come out, to prevent their Pitting, you must anoint Morning and Evening with this Medica∣ment; keeping the Face warm, and thereby they will quickly dry up, and come off without any damage. XIX. Ʋnguentum Fuscum, The brown Ointment. Bate.] ℞ Colcothar and Flegm of Vitriol, A. ℥j. Ce∣landine Vinegar ℥jss. Flowers of Verdigrise ʒv. clarified Ho∣ney ℥iij. mix and make an Ointment, S. A. It is one of the best Cleansers in Wounds and Ulcers. Salmon.] § 1. This is made in imitation of the Ʋnguentum fuscum Wurtzij, which you may see in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 3. Cap. 4. Sect. 13. and it has the same Vertues. § 2. And the Directions there for making that, will fully instruct you how you ought to make this; and un∣less it be well done, the Me∣dicine will not be of that worth and validity, which you may expect. § 3. It is not only a great Cleanser, but possibly the best of Remedies against all sorts of running Sores, Ulcers or Fistula's, in what part of the Body soever. XX. * Ʋnguentum Haemor∣rhoidale, An Ointment a∣gainst the Piles. Bate.] ℞ Fresh new made May Butter lbiij. Flowers of Elder and Broom fresh ga∣thered, as many as the Butter will contain being bruised: Insolate for a Month; then stir them well about, and bury them in the Earth, that they may putrifie for a Month; af∣terwards boil, S. A. and press the Ointment out. Otherwise thus. ℞ Ashes or Pouder of burnt Cork ʒj. Camphire ℈ij. Opium gr. vj. Ʋnguentum Populneum ℥jss. mix them. Anoint upon the place affect∣ed. Salmon.] § 1. First, fo∣ment the part very well with hot Claret Wine, which done, immediately anoint the Piles with either of these Oint∣ments; which you must rei∣terate, (viz. the anointing) at least five or six times a day.
§ 2. But the Fomentation may be made use of Morn∣ing and Night so long as the Ointment is used; and the Patient may sometimes sit o∣ver a Chafing-dish of Char∣cole, wherein small peices of Amber are put for a Fume. XXI. * Ʋnguentum Herpeti∣cum, An Ointment against the Herpes. Bate.] ℞ Quick-lime, Auripigment, A. ʒj. Tartar, Bay Salt, common Soap, A. ʒij. Oil of Elder, q. s. mix and make an Ointment, S. A. Anoint the place where the Herpes is, very well, and let it lie on twenty four hours: It will produce a Crust, which being removed, you must anoint with Ʋnguentum Album. Salmon.] § 1. It is a sharp Medicine, and must be cau∣tiously used; because of the Poyson of the Auripigment. § 2. I must confess I am not for such doubtful (if not dangerous) Medicines, but it may be much better used to any other part of the Body than to the Face. XXII. * Ʋnguentum ad Lum∣bricos, An Ointment a∣gainst Worms. Bate.] ℞ Common Worm∣wood, Mint, Tansie, Rue, Leeks, Leaves of the Walnut-Tree, A. M iij. Savin, M. iv. Bears-foot, M. vj. bruise them well with Worm-seed ℥ij. fresh Bryony-roots ℥iv. Colocynthis, Aloes, A. ℥ij. Bulls Gall lbj. new Butter not salted lbv. White-wine lbij. boil with a gentle Fire to the Consumption of the Wine and Juices, then press forth. Salmon.] § 1. If Sow-bread ℥j. has been added, it would have been yet better, and more powerful. § 2. You may anoint the lower parts of the Stomach, and Belly therewith at Night going to Bed, and in some few days you will see the Ef∣fects; but you must be care∣ful that the Child takes not cold. XXIII. Ʋnguentum Ophthal∣micum, Eye-Salve, or an Ointment for the Eyes. Bate.] ℞ May Butter ℥iv. white Wax ℥j. melt and wash often with Rose-water; then (the Water being poured forth) add Lapis Tutia prepared ℥ss.
Camphire ℈ij. mix and make an Ointment. Salmon.] § 1. Before you use this Ointment wash the Eyes with our Aqua Regulata, or some other proper Eye∣water, which done, put some of this Ointment into the Eye, and for an hour or there-abouts gently bind it on. § 2. You ought to use it for at least three or four Months or more, if any Pearl or Film be upon the Eye∣sight, and it ought more e∣specially Evening and Morn∣ing be put into the Eyes, let∣ting the Patient lie still in the Morning an hour after it. XXIV. * Ʋnguentum Pare∣gorgicum, A mollifying or discussive Ointment. Bate.] ℞ Wax ℥vj. Tur∣pentine ℥iv. Honey ℥iij. Wheat∣flower ℥jss. Oil of Roses, Ʋn∣guentum Haemorrhoidale, A. ℥iv. melt them and make an Oint∣ment, S. A. It is good for Kibes and Chilblains in the Feet. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against Inflamations in any part, chiefly the Piles in Ano, and is used with success a∣gainst Kibes and Chilblains. § 2. The Piles ought to be anointed with it five or six times a day, as also Morn∣ing and Evening: And Kibes ought to be dressed there∣with twice a day. § 3. It discusses Tumors from cold, which will not brake, and mollifies and ri∣pens such, as Nature has dis∣posed to braking. XXV. * Ʋnguentum Pipe∣rinum, Ointment of Pep∣per. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Ele∣campane, Flowers of Sulphur, A. ℥ij. black Pepper ℥jss. Oint∣ment of Roses ℥xvj. Oil of Rhodium ℈ij. mix and make an Ointment. It is a com∣pleat thing for the Cure of Scabs, Itch, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against Pustules or Pimples in the Face and Skin, Worms, with which many Peoples Foreheads, Noses, and Chins much abound, and other De∣formities of those parts, as Scabs, Breakings out, &c. § 2. Anoint with it Morn∣ing and Evening for some days, laying over (if need so requires) some of the same spread upon thick Cloth or Leather.
XXVI. * Ʋnguentum So∣leare, An Ointment for the Feet. Bate.] ℞ Garlick beaten to a Mass ℥iv. Hogs-Lard ℥viij. boil to the Consumption of the Juice, and press out; add Saf∣fron in Pouder ʒj. Spirit of Salt ℈ij. mix and make an Ointment. Anoint the Soles of Childrens Feet herewith against the Cough, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Applied also to the Soles of the Feet in Fevers, it is very profitable to abate the heat of the Fe∣ver, and cause rest. § 2. And made into a Cataplasm with Mithridate and Pouder of Myrrh it is a singular thing against the Gout and all Rhumatick pains. XXVII. Ʋnguentum Sym∣patheticum, The Sympa∣thetick Ointment. Bate.] ℞ Oil of Roses, fine Bole, A. ℥j. Linseed-Oil ʒij. Man's Grease, Moss of a Man's Skull, kill'd by a vio∣lent Death, in Pouder, A. ℥ij. Mummy, Man's Blood, A. ℥ss. mix and make an Ointment, S. A. By this Ointment all Wounds are healed; anoint∣ing the Instrument by which the Wound was made, once a day, every day, if the Wound be great, otherwise, if the Wound be small, once every second or third day may suffice. The Weapon is to be kept wrapt up in a clean Linnen Cloth, and in a place not too hot, lest the Patient suffers there∣by. Salmon.] § 1. This is ex∣actly from Barbet; but you may see another Composi∣tion thereof in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 3. Cap. 4. Sect. 7. of which you may take that which likes you best. § 2. These Ointments are said to perform the Cure, provided the Nerves or Ar∣teries, or some principal Member be not hurt. See the place cited, for the more compleat Use there∣of. XXVIII. * Ʋnguentum Vi∣rilitatis, An Ointment a∣gainst Impotency. Bate.] ℞ Clarified Ho∣ney, Oil of Nutmegs by ex∣pression, A. ℥ss. Pyrethrum, black Pepper, Cubebs, A. ℈ ss. Civet ℈j, Musk ℈ss. Balsam of Peru ʒj. mix and make an Ointment, S. A.
Salmon.] § 1. This Me∣dicine wound be better, if it was accuated with Vola∣tile Salt of Vipers, or of Man's Flesh ʒj. Balsam of Tolu ʒij. and an augmentati∣on of the Civet and Musk each to ℈ij. Chymical Oil of Pismires ʒj. mixing them well. § 2. The Patient may a∣noint with it Morning and Night, the whole Penis or Perinaeum, and also before the Act, because it stimulates mightily. XXIX. † Ʋnguentum Hae∣morrhoidale, An Oint∣ment against the Piles. ℞ Oil of Roses ℥jss. Em∣plaistrum de Minio ℥j. white Wax ℥ss. being melted add Aethiops Minerale ʒij. Opium ℥ss. Saffron, Nutmegs, Camo∣mile-flowers, A. ʒj. Syrup of Roses ℥j. by a gentle heat ex∣hale the Humidity, and mix them well, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It is not only good against the Piles, which it cures by anoint∣ing; but also a singular and approved thing against the Gout, or any vehement Pain in what part of the Body soever. § 2. First, anoint the part afflicted therewith; then spreading it upon Lea∣ther, apply it, binding it on. § 3. It has been found also by Experience to be an excel∣lent thing to dissolve Tumors, and Kernels in the King's Evil, being applied and re∣newed every other day. CHAP. V. Of CERE-CLOTHS. I. * Ceratum Album, The White Cerate, or Cere∣cloth. Bate.] ℞ WHite wax ℥iv. Oil of bitter Almonds ℥v. the whitest and purest Sperma Ceri ℥j. Ce∣ruse washed in Rose-water ℥jss. Camphire ℥ss. mix them, S. A. It softens, resolves, and is Anodyn: it cicatrizes in the Small-Pox, and fills them. It is indeed an elegant Cos∣metick.
Salmon.] § 1. If a little Turpentine or Frankincense be mixed with it, it will stick the better, and the Ce∣rate will be never the worse. § 2. It may be laid upon Ladies Foreheads and Faces at Night going to Bed, and taken off the next day, to make the Skin fair and smooth. Added by the Translator. II. ‡ Ceratum Cephalicum, A head Cerate, or Cere∣cloth. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Gum Ta∣camahac, Mastich, Olibanum, A, ʒj. Gum Elemi ʒij. Wax, Frankincense ℥j. Camphire ℈ij. Opium in Pouder ℈j. Oleum Terrae, Oil of Nutmegs by ex∣pression, Ana. q. s. mix and make a Cerate. § 2. First, gently melt the Rosins and Wax; then add the Gum Elemi, after the Pouders, and the other Gums; Lastly, the Camphire dissol∣ved in the Oleum Terrae, with the Oil of Nutmegs; ma∣lax them together, and make a Cerate, to which if you please you may add a little Oil of Origanum and Oil of Cloves. § 3. I comforts and strengthens a old and moist Head and Brai admirably, eases the Megrin and Head-Ach, and is of singular use against Colds, Coughs and Catarrhs, &c. III. ‡ Ceratum Stomachicum, A Cerate for the Stomach. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Frankin∣cense ℥jss. Gum Elemi, Wax, Ana. ℥ss. Oleum Petrae ʒiij. Oil of Cumin-seed distilled, Oil of Nutmegs by expression, Camphire, Ana. ʒj. Oil of Ben, q. s. melt the Frankin∣cense, Gum Elemi and Wax together with a gentle Fire; then being removed from it put in the Oils, in which let the Camphire be dissolved, adding at last the Oil of Ben, so much as to give it, its due Consistence. § 2. You may spread it upon Leather or Cloth, and so apply it to the Stomach, renewing it every other day, or as you see occasion. § 3. It comforts and strengthens a cold and weak Stomach, causes a good Ap∣petite and Digestion, re∣moves the Pains thereof, as also Pains and Stitches of the Sides, discusses Wind. § 3. Lastly, being worn for some time, it is a Specifick for the
curing of all sorts of Agues whatsoever, Colick Pains, Bastard Pleuries, &c. IV. ‡ Ceratim Vulnerarium, A Cerate for Wounds. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Wax, Frankincense, A. lbij. Gum Elemi, Chio Turpentine, A. lbj. Balsam de Tolu, de Chili, A. lbss. melt the Wax and Frankincense at a gentle Fire, then add the Gum Elemi and Turpentine, which being also dissolved. put in lastly the Balsams de Tolu and de Chili, and continue stirring them till it is nearly cold. § 2. You may spread it upon Cloth or Leather, and apply it to either Wounds or Ulcers, renewing it once or twice a day, as the Nature of the Affect does require. § 3. It also eases Pains in any part being applied pro∣ceeding from a cold Cause, strengthens weak Limbs and Joints, discusses Swellings, and gives singular ease in the Gout and Sciatica. § 4. It oftentimes cures green Wounds at one or two dressings, and old Ulcers in a very short time; applied over the whole Belly, it gives present relief in the Cholick, and in short time after, perfect cure. V. ‡ Ceratum ad Clavos pe∣dum, A Cerate against Corns of the Feet. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vi∣negar of Squills and inspiated ℥ij. Vitriol of Venus ℥ss. (but some use Cyprian or Roman Vitriol, which they call the blew Stone, of which they take ʒjss.) white precipitate well e∣dulcorated ʒiij. Strasburgh Turpentine a little, or q. s. mix and make a Cere-cloth. § 2. You may spread it upon Cloth or Leather and apply it, renewing it when it ceases to stick, or as you see occasion. § 3. It is designed for the Cure of Corns in the Feet and Toes, for which it is doubtless an excellent thing: It prevails also against old Ulcers, which are hard to be cured, and dissolves or suppurates Veneral Buboes; and is said to be good a∣gainst Gums, Tophs, Nodes, &c. being applied.
CHAP. VI. EMPLAISTERS. I. * Diachylon Odoratum, Perfumed Diachylon. Bate.] ℞ EMplastrum Dia∣chylon simplex lbiij. Pouder of Florentine Or∣rice-roots ℥iij. Oil of Rhodium ʒss. Musk gr. iij. mix and make an Emplaster, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It is ano∣dyn, and resolves and dis∣cusses Tumors, and also of an Emollient Nature, soft∣ning and ripening such as will come to Suppuration. § 2. The Orrice-root and Oil of Rhodium are added, only to make it smell a little the better. § 3. It also digests, gently cleanses, and conglutinates new Wounds; and is good for a Pain or Swelling in Womens Breasts. II. * Diapalma Odorata, Per∣fumed Diapalma. Bate.] ℞ Emplastrum Diapalma (made with Un∣guentum & Oleum Rosatum, in the place of Hogs-Lard and Oil-Olive) lbiij. melt it, and add Chymical Oil of Rhodium ʒij. mix them, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It is of a cooling, drying, astringent Nature; eases Pain, and strengthens weak Parts, and stops Defluxions of Humors. § 2. It is also often spread upon Leather and applied to Womens Breasts to dry up the Milk. § 3▪ Applied for a con∣stancy to an old running Sore or Ulcer in the Legs, it is possibly one of the best things in the World, and has sometimes performed a Cure of that kind, when most other things have been used and have failed. III. * Emplastrum Adhaesi∣vum, A sticking Empla∣ster. Bate.] ℞ Diachylon sim∣plex, Diapalma, A. lbj. Bur∣gondy Pitch, Sarcocolla, A. ℥iv. vel q. s. mix them, S. A. It serves for keeping Issues open, and freeing them from Inflamation.
Salmon.] § 1. Besides which, I know it by Experience to be one of the best Empla∣sters in the World against the Gout, in what part of the Body soever. § 2. It sticks well, eases Pain proceeding from a cold Cause, cleanses and heals Wounds and Ulcers, &c. IV. * Emplastrum Burgun∣dicum. Of Burgundy Pitch Emplaster. Bate.] ℞ Burgundy Pitch lbj. Pouder of Cloves ℥x. Chy∣mical Oil of Pepper ʒiij. mix them, S. A. It is of singu∣lar use against the Head-Ach, Ophthalmy, Catarrhs, Vapors, &c. being applied to the Shoulders, and Nape of the Neck. Salmon.] § 1. It sticks well, and draws strongly, and therefore is a good thing for the Divertion of Humors falling upon any part. § 2. It is a Specifick a∣gainst the Gout, being pru∣dently applied, Universals being used before-hand. § 2. It is good against Wounds of the Nerves, but ought not to be applied to any depending part. V. Emplastrum Camphora∣tum, The Camphorated Emplaster. Bate.] ℞ Camphire ℥jss. Balsam de Tolu ℥j. Galbanum strained ℥vj. mix them. It is of use in the Suffocation of the Womb, Vertigo, &c. being applied to the Navel; and has the Vertues of the Emplastrum Diagalbani. Salmon] § 1. Besides the Vertues ascribed to it by our Author; it is a singular dis∣cussive, and cures a Gout proceeding from a cold Cause. § 2. It is a good Vulnera∣ry, and of singular use in Wounds of the Nerves, Pains, Aches, and Weaknesses; ap∣plied over the Regions of the Stomach and Belly, it pre∣vails against the Cholick. VI. Emplastrum Catarrhalt, An Emplaster against Catarrhs. Bate.] ℞ Taccamabacca, Caranna, A. ℥jss. Emplastrum de Betonica ℥iij. Amber in Pouder ℥j. Cloves ℥ss. Sassafras Bark, Winter Cinnamon, A. ʒij. Balsam de Peru, q. s. mix and make a Mass. It is to be applied to the Head be∣ing first shaved.
Salmon.] § 1. Applied al∣so to the Stomach, it com∣forts it, and discusses Wind; and over the Region of the Belly, it eases the Pains of the Cholick. § 2. Applied to the Joints t strengthens them; and to he Soles of the Feet, it abates the Heat of Fever and causes Rest. VII. * Emplastrum Diagal∣bani, Emplaster of Galba∣banum. Bate.] ℞ Galbanum pre∣pared with Vinegar ℥xij. Wax ℥viij. Turpentine ℥ v. mix them. S. A. It digests, softens, and resolves Tophs, Nodes, Scrophula's, and o∣ther hard Tumors, and eases their Pain. It takes away Warts on the Hands and Corns on the Feet; and strengthens the Nerves and Womb. Salmon.] § 1. I have known it successfully apply∣ed to Womens Breasts, which have been very hard and painful, and much swoln; wherein it presently gave ease, and totally discust the Tumor. § 2. Applied upon the up∣per Region of the Belly, a∣bout the Navel, it is said to prevent Abortion, and to cause the Woman to go out her whole time. VIII. Emplastrum Diasul∣phuris Rulandi, Rulandus his Diasulpher Empla∣ster. Bate.] ℞ Balsam of Sul∣phur ℥iij. Wax ℥ss. Colophony ʒiij. being melted, add the best Myrrh in sine Pouder ℥iijss. and boil S. A. It in∣fallibly cures all sorts of Ul∣cers and Wounds whatso∣ever. Salmon.] § 1. It is as good a Vulnerary as a Man shall usually meet with, it cleanses, conglutinates, drys, and heals to admiration. § 2. Spread upon Leather, and applied to the Joints in Arthritick pains, it gives ease and removes them: And ap∣plied to a weak Back, it comforts and strengthens the part. IX. Emplastrum Epispasticum, A Blistering Emplaster. Bate.] ℞ Burgundy Pitch ℥xviij. Oil-Olive ℥ss. being melted add Cantharides in Pouder ℥iv. Seeds of Bishops-weed in Pouder ʒij. mix and make a Mass, that may stick firmly.
Salmon.] § 1. You must spread it upon Leather, and let it lie twelve or fourteen hours more or less, according to the nature of the part, and thickness of the Skin. § 2. Being taken off, ap∣ply over the place either Me∣lilot Emplaister, or Colewort Leaves, the smooth side next the Skin, dressing it at first twice a day. § 3. Many times an ill Symptom falls out in apply∣ing of this Emplaster, which is a strange Pain, Heat and Sharpness in making of U∣rine, and sometimes their Ef∣fects are such, as to cause pissing Blood; for all which, I would not have the Patient to be out of Heart, since it is nothing but what is u∣sual. § 4. The Remedy of this is, to drink liberally Barley-water (made of that call'd French Barley) casting away the first Water and using the second: to this I usually add an equal, and sometimes a double quantity of Milk, which I a little sweeten with treb∣ble refined Sugar: This li∣berally drank, quickly takes off the Pain. X. * Emplastrum Febrifu∣gum, An Emplaster a∣gainst Fevers or Agues. Bate.] ℞ Mastich in Pouder ʒvj. Aloes ʒij. fine Bole ʒiij. Euphorbium, Saphis∣acre, Bay-berries, Fenugreek, Venice-glass, A. ʒij. Pitch like Soot of Wood, Bay-Salt, A. ʒjss. Turpentine ℥iij. vel q. s. mix and make a Mass of Em∣plaster, S. A. It oftentimes cures Tertians, and some∣times Quartans, being ap∣plied to the Wrists three or four hours before the accessi∣on of the Fit. Salmon.] § 1. You may apply it so many hours before the coming of the Fit; but you must also keep it on af∣ter it, as long as it will stick, and then renew it again. § 2. But if you will be∣lieve the Tradition, as soon as you take it off, you are to cast it into a River or Brook, which has a Stream, that it may be carried away therewith, and from thence forth, they say, the Ague shall never return any more. XI. Emplastrum Haemorrhoi∣dale, An Emplaster against the Piles. Bate.] ℞ Litharge of Sil∣ver
lbj. Hogs Grease ℥j. vel q. s. beat them well together, so as to make a Mass of a fit hardness or stiffness for an Em∣plaster; which may also be made into Suppositories, S. A. as need shall require. Salmon.] § 1. Being ap∣plied to the Joints in the Gout, it it eases the Pain; and is good to dry up an old Sore, or running Ul∣cer. § 2. Applied to the Back, it strengthens it, and eases the Pain thereof, tho' of long standing: In a Suppo∣sitory it eases the Pain of the Haemorrhoides. XII. * Emplastrum Laterale, An Emplaster for the Side. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Sul∣phur ℥v. Roots of Florentine Orrice ℥ij. Cloves ℥ss. Cumin ℥jss. being all in Pouder, add Ship Pitch, Burgundy Pitch, A. ℥iv. Turpentine ℥iij. Chy∣mical Oils of Caraways and Rhodium, A. ℈iv. mix them, S. A. It does much good it Pleuritick pains, Phlebo∣nomy being premised. Salmon.] § 1. It is also good against Pustles, Botches, Boils, and other breakings out in the Skin, it draws them, and brings them out. § 2. Applied to any place where there is Pain, it eases it after a singular manner, discussing the Morbifick mat∣ter which causes it. XIII. * Emplastrum Mammil∣lare, An Emplaster for Womens Breasts. Bate.] ℞ Sperma Ceti ℥j. white Wax ℥ij. Galbanum pre∣pared with Vinegar ℥ss. Oil of Elder, q. s. It has no e∣qual in all Scrophulous Tu∣mors, Oedema's, and Hard∣nesses of the Breasts, curdled Milk, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is good against a Scirrhous, or any hard Tumor in Womens Breasts, occasioned thro' a Blow, Cold taken, or Milk curdled therein. § 2. Applied to a white Swelling in the Knee, called an Oedema, it discusses or dissolves it, eases the Pain thereof, if any, and strength∣ens it: And indeed it is good against any hard Tumor in what part of the Body so∣ever. XIV. * Emplastrum Nuchale, An Emplaster for the Nape of the Neck. Bate.] ℞ Gum Elemi, Turpentine, A. ℥ss. Olibanum,
Mastich, Gum Tragacanth, A. ʒiij. fine Bole ℥jss. Seeds of Fleawort, Myrtles, Balansti∣ans, A. ʒj. Euphorbium ℈j. Burgundy Pitch ℥viij. Caran∣na ʒx. Oil of Cloves, Balsam of Peru, A. gut. vj. mix and make a Mass, S. A. Apply∣ed behind the Ears it takes away the Tooth-ach: Ap∣plied to the Nape of the Neck, it helps Ophthalmies, Desluxions into the Eyes, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It was in∣vented for the stopping of Catarrhs, or Defluxions of Rheum upon any part. § 2. Spread it upon Lea∣ther, and apply it as long as it will stick, then renewing it: It is also good against Pains and Aches from a cold Cause, in what part of the Body soever. § 3. Applied to the places afflicted with Arthritick pains or the Sciatica; it gives pre∣sent relief, Universals being before-hand exhibited. XV. Emplastrum Opiatum, An Opiate Emplaster. Bate.] ℞ Diachylon magum ℥iv. Quick-silver ℥ij. Opium ℥j. mix them. S. A. It won∣derfully conduces to the ea∣sing of Arthritick and Vene∣real pains. Salmon.] § 1. Besides which, it is a most excellent thing against all Rheumatick pains proceeding from Wind, and Cold, and Sharpness of fermenting Humors. § 2. Applied to the Reins, it gives ease in their Pains, tho' proceeding from the Stone; and strengthens a weak Back. XVI. * Emplastrum Paraly∣ticum. An Emplaster a∣gainst the Palsie. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Earth∣worms ℥iv. Calamus Aroma∣ticus ℥jss. Galangal ʒvj. Ho∣ney, q. s. mix and make an Emplaster. It has no se∣cond in the Palsie, being ap∣plied to the parts affected. Salmon.] § 1. Before the Application of this Empla∣ster, you ought to anoint the Paralytick parts, and all along the Back-bone, twice a day with the Oil of Amber before a good Fire, rub∣bing it well in for above half an hour, for at least three or four days, or longer, accord∣ing to the continuance of the Disease. § 2. This done, you may apply the Emplaster over all the parts affected, renewing every other day. § 3. And while this is a doing, let the Patient take
every Morning and Evening the following Draught. ℞ Black Cherry-water ℥vj. Pow∣ers of Rosemary, Lavender, Limons, Ana. gut. 20. Syrup of Citron-peels ℥jss. mix them. XVII. Emplastrum Podagri∣cum, An Emplaster against the Gout. Bate.] ℞ Opium, Venice Soap, A. ℥ss. Emplastrum Dia∣chalciteos ℥ ij. mix them, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It is a Spe∣cifick for the Gout (Univer∣sals being premised) but it will give ease in any other pain whatsoever. § 2. Before the Appli∣cation of it, let the places pained be well bathed with the following Mixture. ℞ Tincture of Opium made with S. V. ℥iss. Camphire in small bits ʒiij. mix and dissolve. XVIII. Emplastrum Saturni∣num, An Emplaster of Saturn, or White Lead. Bate.] ℞ White Lead ℥iv. white Chalk ℥ss. Myrrh ʒij. an Amalgama (of Quick-silver, p. ij. with Lead, p. j.)ʒ vj. old Lard, q. s. to make it into an Emplaster of a stiff con∣sistency in a cold Mortar. It cures callous and malign Ul∣cers, yea, the most rebellious with one only Application, washing them first (if they be foul) with the Water of the Solution of Lapis Salutis; immediately applying to the Ulcer this Emplaster, spread thick upon Leather; and (if need be) holding it on with a Plaister of Diachalciteos put over it, and binding it sufficiently fast with a Wool∣len Rouler; this Application is not to be removed before fifteen days is past. Salmon.] § 1. Besides the Vertues here assigned to it, it is a singular thing against all Venereal pains whatso∣ever, whether in the Joints or Shin-bones. § 2. It is also good against Venereal Nodes, Gums and Tophs, and all sorts of Scro∣phulous or Strumatick Tu∣mors or Swellings whatso∣ever, and is especially com∣mended against an Oedema in the Knee. § 3. You may spread it on Leather, and renew it every second day, or third, at farthest, bathing with the Mixture in the former Section every time, before you apply the Emplaster.
XIX. * Emplastrum Scorbu∣ticum, An Emplaster a∣gainst the Scurvy. Bate.] ℞ Flowers of Hy∣pericon: Leaves of Mouse-Ear, Pauls Betony, Sea Scurvy grass, A. M. ij. Wormwood, M. j. Oil of Roses ℥vj. boil till the Herbs are crisp, and press out, to which add Deers Suet, Wax, Honey of Roses, A. ℥ijss. Wheat Flower ℥ j. mix them, S. A. It is good against Scorbutick Ulcers, and Breakings out. Salmon.] § 1. It eases also Scorbutick pains in what part of the Body soever, be∣ing applied. § 2. You may spread it upon thick Cloth or Leather, and renew it every other day; made up into a Sup∣pository it gives ease in the Piles. XX. * Emplastrum Smecti∣cum, The Cleansing Em∣plaster. Bate.] ℞ Red Lead lbjss. Oil lbij. white Soap ℥iv, Wax ℥ ij. boil them, S. A. It cleanses and resolves, eases the Pains of the Back and Joints, dissipates Contusions, alleviates the Pains of the Gout, and prevents Abor∣tion, being timely applied to the Back and Navel, and kept continually on. Salmon.] § 1. It is a Spe∣cifick against the Gout, and all sorts of Arthritick pains, so that no Plaister is more famed for that purpose that I know of. § 2. Spread it on Cloth or Leather, and apply it, and renew it again, when it will stick no longer. XXI. * Emplastrum Solare, An Emplaster for the Feet. Bate.] ℞ Sheeps Suet ℥iv. Ship Pitch, Rosin, A. ℥viij. Frankincense ℥xij. Saffron in Pouder ℥ss. Cloves, Mace, A. ʒvj. Cumin-seed ℥jss. Labda∣num ʒvj. mix them, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It is ap∣plied to the Soles of the Feet against Coughs and Colds in Children, and such elder Persons, who cannot be easi∣ly prevailed upon to take Physick. § 2. Applied in violent Burning and malign. Fevers, it is said to draw away the Heat, and give rest.
XXII. Emplastrum Spasma∣ticum, An Emplaster a∣gainst Cramps and Con∣vulsions. Bate.] ℞ Ship Pitch ℥iv. Castor, Oil of Costus, A. ℥j. mix and make a Mass: The Title shews the Vertues. Salmon.] § 1. Before you apply this Emplaster the part or parts affected ought to be Morning and Night, a∣nointed with the Oil of Amber, well chaffed in, and that for three or four days together; which done, this Emplaister may be applied. § 2. Spread it on Cloth or Leather, and renew it when it begins to leave sticking. § 3. It is an excellent thing against all Pains and Aches, Gouts, and Rheuma∣tick Distempers proceeding from a cold Cause. XXIII. * Emplastrum ad Strumas, An Emplaster a∣gainst the King's-Evil. Bate.] ℞ Emplastrum è Cicuta cum Ammoniaco ℥iv. Gum Elemi ℥ss. Mercury pre∣cipitate ʒx. mix them. It heals Scrophula's and Stru∣ma's, vulgarly the King's Evil. Salmon.] § 1. It is ap∣plied to hard and painful Swellings in Womens Breasts, (whether occasioned thro' Blows, or curdled Milk, or a Cold, which the Vulgar call an Ague in the Breast) with admirable Success: It eases the Pain, softens, and discusses or dissolves the Tu∣mor. § 2. Spread it on Cloth or Leather, and apply it, re∣newing it every third or fourth day, and continue the Application till the Tumor or Swelling is wholly va∣nished. XXIV. * Emplastrum Synan∣chicum, An Emplaster a∣gainst the Quinsey. Bate.] ℞ White Dogs Turd in Pouder ℥vj. Crude Honey ℥viij. Wheat-flower ℥ijss. Wax ℥iv. Oil of Roses ℥vj. vel q. s. mix and make an Emplaister. S. A. It is applied to the Jugular, and parts of the Neck below the Ears, where the Pain is. Salmon.] § 1. It ought to be made large, and to be ap∣plied over the whole Throat, from Ear to Ear, and re∣newed once a day. § 2. Mean Season, while this is applying outwardly the Sick ought to take Spirit of Sal Armoniack outwardly,
gut. 20. ad 30. in four or five Ounces of Milk-water, or black Cherry-wa∣ter. XXV. Emplastrum Tibiale, An Emplaster for the Shin-bones. Bate.] ℞ Mercury ℥ij. dissolve it in A. F. ℥ij. add to it Hogs Grease ℥iv. boil them in an Earthen Vessel, continually stirring it with an Iron Rod or Spatula, till it comes to the consistency of a soft Emplaister, by the ex∣haling of the Humidity; then add yellow Wax ℥j. Pouder of Mastich and Olibanum, A. ʒiij. mix and make a Mass, S. A. It is profitable in the French-Pox, for Nodes, Gums, Tophs, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is of use for such as have got Noctur∣nal Pains, and are troubled with Nodes, Gums, &c. on their Shin-bones, to be ap∣plied and renewed every fourth day. § 2. But while this is a doing, it will be good for the Patient to take inwardly some few Doses of the Prince's Pouder, the Preparation of which, we have taught in the aforegoing part of this Book. XXVI. * Emplastrum Ver∣mifugum, An Emplaster to kill Worms. Bate.] ℞ Aloes in Pou∣der ℥j. Colocynthis, Myrrh, A. ʒiij. Savin, Rue, Worm∣wood, Tansie, Wallnut-Tree Leaves, Bryony-root, A. ʒij. Wax, Rosin, A. ℥4. Oil of Rue ℥ij. mix and make a Mass, S. A. Being applied to the Navel, it kills Worms, and brings them forth. Salmon.] § 1. Spread it upon a round piece of Cloth or Leather, about seven or eight Inches in Diameter, and apply it, laying the Center of it over the Na∣vel. § 2. But before you ap∣ply it, bath the Belly well with this Mixture. ℞ Strong Decoction of Colocynthis ℥iv. with which mix Ox-Gall ℥jss. and therein dis∣solve Aloes in Pouder ʒij. adding at last Spirit of Wine ℥j. XXVII. † Emplastrum de Minio Compositum, An Emplaster of Red-Lead Compound. ℞ Red Lead half a Pound: Oil-Olive lbj. mix and boil to
blackness, continually stirring it, adding Colophony lbss. It is also made with Linseed-Oil. Salmon.] § 1. This is the vulgar Gout Plaster, and an Emplaster for all sorts of Aches and Pains in what part of the Body soever; and a good one it is; and tho' simple, not to be despised. § 2. In making of it, be∣ware you boil it not too much, lest it be hard and brittle, and so, not be apt to stick, which it ought to do; and let it be rather of the Body of a Cerate than of an Emplaster. § 3. Spread it on Cloth, and apply it to the parts afflicted, letting it lie on as long as it will stick, and then renew it, which repeat as long as there is occasion or need. XXVIII. † Emplastrum de Minio Compositum aliud: Another Emplaster of Red Lead compound. ℞ Minium or Red Lead ℥iij. Oil-Olive ℥vj. mix, boil, and add Vermilion ℥j. mix them well. Salmon.] § 1. The Ver∣tues of this are the same with the former, and to be made, used and applied in the same manner; but the Ver∣million may be added to∣wards the end of the boil∣ing. § 2. It is more powerful than the former to all Inten∣tions, and more dissolutive, by reason of the Vermili∣on. One Emplaster added by the Translator. XXIX. Emplastrum Febri∣fugum alterum, Another Febrifuge Emplaister. Salmon.] ℞ Frankincense ℥xiv. Oil-Olive ℥ij. vel q. s. Vermilion ʒiij. melt and make Emplaster than may stick. § 2. Spread it upon an Oval piece of Leather about eight Inches long and five Inches broad, and apply it to the Pit of the Stomach, let∣ting it lie on as long as it will stick; then renew it once more if you see occasion. § 2. It cures all sorts of Agues, whether Quotidian, Tertian or Quartan without any other help, and that mostly at one Application; In one hundred Examples together, it has not failed of one.
CHAP. VII. Of CATAPLASMS. 1. * Cataplasma Apoplecticum, A Pultice against the Apo∣plexy. Bate ℞. BRyony Roots fresh, ℥iii. Mustard seed, Black Soap, A ℥ j. Cantharides ʒvi. beat them well together: add the best Vinegar q. s. and make a Cataplasm to be laid upon the Head shaved. Salmon § 1. It is a strong attractive, and draws a Bli∣ster singularly well; it may lye on about twelve or four∣teen hours more or less; and then being taken off, a Melli∣lot Emplaster, or Colewort leaf may be applyed. § 2. In these kind of ap∣plications, the Patient is for the most part troubled with a great heat, pain and sharpness in making of Urine, and some∣times with Pissing blood: this is usual. § 3. The Remedy is to drink freely and largely Bar∣ly Milk, made by mixing Milk with Barley water, and sweetning it a little with treb∣ble refined Sugar. II. Cataplasma Cephalicum, a Pultice for the Head. Bate ℞ Pouders of Cloves, Nutmegs, A. ʒ ii. Guinny Pep∣per ℥ ss. Diasinapi, or Mustard ʒ vi. sower Leaven ℥ iii. Spi∣rit of Lavender Compound ℥iss, vel, q. s. mix and make a Pul∣tice for the Head being shaved. Salmon. § 1. It is a strong attractive, but not to blistring; it warms, comfort, and strengthens a cold Head and Brain, and is good to be ap∣plyed in Apoplexies, Verti∣goes, Lethargies, Megrims, Headachs, &c. from a cold cause. § 2. Being spread upon Leather, let it be applyed over the whole Head, being first shaved: 'tis a good thing for a Catarrh from a cold and moist cause.
III. * Cataplasma Synanchicum, A Pultice for a Quinsey. Bate.] ℞ White Dogs-turd ℥j. Pulp of the Conserve of Red Roses ℥ij. Syrup of Meconium, q. s. mix and make a Pultice. It is to be applied under the Chin from Ear to Ear, after Blood-letting. Salmon.] § 1. Lay it very thick upon Cloth or Leather, and lay it over the whole Throat, under the Chin, let∣ting it lie for six or seven hours, and then renew it. § 2. Before application thereof, let the Throat be anointed with Oil of Jews-Ears; which is made by boiling the Jews-Ears (first steeped in Water for twelve hours) in Oil-Olive till they are crisp, and pressing out the Oil, and repeating the boiling in like manner with fresh Jews-Ears, to the time. IV. Cataplasma ad Parony∣chiam, A Pultice against Whitlo's and Felons. Bate.] ℞ Yolk of one new laid Egg, add to it common Rosin in fine Pouder, q. s. Bal∣sam of Peru, gut. vj. vel viij. mix them well together, till they become a Pultice. Apply it to the place affected: It is a famous Medicine. Salmon.] § 1. I know this by my own Experience, to be an excellent thing against Whitlo's or Felons, giving ease in the extremity of Pain to admiration: and in a very short time bringing them to suppuration, if Nature tends that way. § 2. I have done the same thing, by mixing Rosin in fine Pouder, with Hogs Lard, as also with Beef or Sheeps Suet; tho' this made with the Yolk of an Egg, I think to be the best of them all. * Cataplasma Pestilen∣tiale, A Pultice against the Plague. Bate.] ℞ Pidgeons Dung in Pouder ℥iv. Saffron ℥ss. Mi∣thridate, London Treacle, Mu∣stard-seed, A. ℥j. Turpentine q. s. mix and make a Pultice. It is intended for the break∣ing of Bubo's, After the Bu∣bo is broken, apply this: ℞ Emplastrum de Mucilaginibus, Diachylum cum Gummis, & Sticticum, A. ℥iss. Galbanum ℥ss. mix them. Salmon.] § 1. If I might give my Vote, I should be for adding Black Soap ℥iij. Pulp of Onions, raw or roasted ℥iiss. Quick-lime ℥j. mixing them.
§ 2. Being applied it ri∣pens and breaks Bubo's in a very short time to admiration, whether Pestilential or not; and it is a good thing to ri∣pen and break other Tumors also. VI. * Cataplasma Podagticum, A Pultice against the Gout. Bate.] ℞ Black Soap ℥iv. Yolks of Eggs No ij Saffron ʒj. Oil of Spike ℥j. mix and make a Pultice, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. This is a good Medicine as it is, against the Gout, and all sorts of Ar∣thritick Pains; but it would be almost ten times more ef∣fectual, if to the Composition you add. Camphir ℥iss. ground with the Oil of Spike in a Mor∣tar, and then mixt with Chio Turpentine ℥iv. adding this mixture to the rest of the things. § 2. Spread it thick upon Cloth or Leather, and apply it warm renewing it every Twenty four, or Forty eight hours, as you see reason or need. VII. * Cataplasma Solare, A Pultice for the Feet. Bate.] ℞ Fresh Rue ℥ij. fresh gathered Bryony-roots ℥iv. sr Leaven, Bay-salt, Black Soap, A. ℥iss. Mustard ℥iij. beat them well together, and add Vinegar, q. s. It is to be applied to the Soles of the Feet in Fevers. Salmon.] § 1. There ought to be added Turpentine ℥ij. ground with the Yolk of an Egg: Camphir, Sal prunellae, A. ℥j. § 2. Being applied to the Feet in Fevers, it abates the violent heat, draws down Vapours from the Head, which disturb the Brain, and causes rest. VIII. * Epicarpia Febrifuga, The febrifuge Wrist-Pul∣tice. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of White Hellebor ℥ss. Nitre ʒij. Pulp of Figgs, q. s. so as to make a Mass like a Pultice. Apply it to the Wrists two hours before the Fit of a Tertian. Salmon. § 1. Spread it up∣on Leather, and apply it to both Wrists, letting it lie on all the time of the cold and hot Fit, (if the Ague comes) and when the Fit is over, re∣new it again. § 2. It is reported, that at two applications, or three at the most, it has cured Terti∣ans when many other things have failed.
CHAP. VIII. Of CLYSTERS. I. * Enema Alexiterium, A Clyster resisting Poyson. Bate.] ℞ SCordium M. j. Citron-seeds ʒiij. Flowers of Elder, of Camomil, red Roses, of Centory the less, A. P. j. Water q. s. boil and strain. To ℥x. add Juice of Kermes ℥j. double refined Sugar ℥ss. mix and dissolve. It is for the drawing forth Malignity and Poyson out of the Bowels, &c. Salmon.] § 1. It is of good use after Sweating in the Plague; as also after the Mea∣sles and Small-pox, when they are fully come out, and begin to die again. § 2. It is used also after the taking of Poyson, when Emeticks will do no good, as also after strong and violent Catharticks, which by their force melt the Juices and ex∣coriate, &c. II. * Enema Colicum, A Cly∣ster against the Colick. Bate.] ℞ Decoctum com∣mune (prepared with Juniper-berries and Fenugreek seed A. ʒiij) ℥x. Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Oil of Dil, A. ℥ij. Case Soap, Electuarium Le∣nium, A. ounce;j. Chimical Oil of Juniper-berries ʒss. mix them, S. A. It is admirable against the Cick, Iliack Passion, Stone, &c. Salmon.] § 1. O an ex∣ternal, used Clyster-wise, there is scarcely a better Me∣dicine in the World, and it may be twice repeated in Twenty four hours, if the Fit goes not off; yea, twice in twelve hours. § 2. Outwardly anoint the Stomach, and whole Region of the Abdomen with this: ℞ Oyl of Ben. ʒj. Chymical Oyls of Rue and Savin, A: ʒss. mix them. III. Enema Balsamicum, A Balsamick Clyster. Bate.] ℞ A strong Deco∣ction of Horse-tail ℥vj. Oil of Hypericon ʒvj. Lucatella's Bal∣sam ℥j. Balsam de Peru ʒiij. mix them. It is a most ex∣cellent thing against the
Bloody-flux, and to heal the Excoriations of the Bowels, &c. Salmon.] § 1. This is often given after violent Cathar∣ticks, which excoriate the Guts, and many times bring Blood away. § 2. I think the Decoction of Horse-tail will be best to be made with Chicken-broth; and adding to each Clyster S. V. ℥ij. It may be exhi∣bited so often, till the Pati∣ent becomes well. IV. * Enema Dysentericum, A Clyster against the Bloody-flux. Bate.] ℞ A Sheep's-head kill'd with the Wool, and bro∣ken to pieces, (the Tongue and Brains being taken out) boil it in Water q. s. ad lbvj, and strain out for Clysters. You may add Flowers of Camo∣mil, Mallows, and Marsh∣mallows, &c. Or it may be made of Butter not salted ℥x. Sanguis Draconis ʒij. red Wine ℥ij. Or otherwise, of New Milk ℥xij. Opium ℈j. Saffron ʒss. being boiled, add White Sugar ℥iss, and the Yolks of two Eggs. They have the same Vertues with the former. Salmon.] § 1. The Medi∣cament according to the Pre∣script is good; but if to each Clyster you add S. V. ℥ij. ad iv. or vj. according as the violence of the Distemper, and the occasion may require, it will be ten times better. § 2. And where the Di∣stemper has been of long con∣tinuance, and the Patient ex∣ceeding weak, so that Life is dispaired of, the one half of the Clyster ought to be Spirit of Wine, or Brandy. V. Enema Hystericum, A Cly∣ster against Fits of the Mo∣ther. Bate.] ℞ Decoctum com∣mune ℥x. Camphir ʒj. Oil of Rue ℥ss. Honey of Herb Mer∣cury ℥iij. mix and make a Cly∣ster. Salmon.] § 1. You ought to put into it Musk gr. x. ground with a few drops of Juice of Limons, whereby its Virtue against Hysterick Fits will be doubled. § 2. Anoint the Vulva and Womb with this mixture. ℞ Musk gr. vj. grind it with Adeps Rosarum ℈ss. which mix with Balsam of Peru ℈j. Oil of Ben ʒiij. VI. Enema Oleosum, An Oily Clyster. Bate.] ℞ Linseed Oil ℥iij. Oils of Camomil and Dill, A.
℥ij. Oils of Scorpions and of Rue, A. ℥i. Oil of Turpentine ʒ;i. mix them. It is an egre∣gious Medicament against the Colick, Stone, &c. Salmon, § 1. It is a singu∣lar thing indeed for the na∣med Intentions, and will not fail of answering expectation, so far as a Clyster can do: but if instead of the Linseed Oil ℥iij. you substitute Rape-seed Oil ℥iij. it would be much more specifick. § 2. Also adding to it Spi∣rit of Wine ℥ij. or iij. you will add to the Virtue of the Me∣dicament, and make it more discussive. VII. Enema Terebinthinatum, A Turpentine Clyster. Bate.] ℞ Decoctum Com∣mune ℥xij. Venice Turpentine ℥ss. Yolk of one Egg: Syrup of Violets ℥iss. Diaphenicon ℥i. mix and make a Clyster. It is admirably good against the pain of the Stone. Salmon.] § 1. It is an ex∣cellent thing against the Co∣lick and Wind in the Bowels: but the chief design or intenti∣on of it is against the Stone and Gravel, whether in the Reins or Bladder, for the easing of the pains thereof, it is truly a Specifick. § 2. You may repeat it (if you see need) twice a day, till you see the desired ef∣fects. VIII. Enema Vinosum, A Cly∣ster of Wine. Bate.] ℞ Spanish Wine ℥xij. Oil of Aniseeds ʒss. red Sugar ℥iij. mix and make a Clyster. It is good against the Tor∣mina, or Griping of the Guts. Salmon] § 1. To make it more absolute, you ought to add to it Camphir ʒss. which you may dissolve in the Oil of Aniseeds, and so mix it with the rest of the Ingredi∣ents. § 2. This as well nourishes a weak and consumptive Patient, as gives ease to one that is in pain: if the sick is in a Consumption, add the Yolk of one or two Eggs to it. IX. Enema Ʋrinosum, A Cly∣ster of Urine. Bate.] ℞ Seeds of Rue, of Daucus, of Cumin, A. ʒij. Sena ℥j. Ʋrine lbiss. boil to one half: strain, and add Species Hiera Simplex ʒij. Red Sugar ℥iij. mix and make a Clyster. It is a good Hydragogue, and prevails against the Drop∣sie.
Salmon.] § 1. It evacuates more Water and Wind than can be well imagined, and does more good than many Catharticks which are given by the mouth. § 2. You ought to repeat it once every day, till the hy∣dropick Humor is wholly e∣vacuated, at first, for a while, twice a day. One Clyster added by the Tran∣slator. X. Enema Spirituosum, A Spi∣rituous Clyster. Salmon.] § 1. ℞ Spirit of Wine ℥viij. Oils of Turpen∣tine and Aniseeds, Ana. gut. 10. Broth of a Sheep's-head ℥viij. mix and exhibit warm. § 2. It is a Specifick against the Bloody-flux; and there∣with I have cured several which have been at the point of Death. § 3. Among the number of the rest, I cured one poor Man, who had lain twelve Weeks languishing under that Distemper; I being sent for, found the Man, as I thought, dead, at least a dying and sensless, his Eyes closed, his Teeth set, and scarcely any signs of Life in him: the mi∣serable condition of the Man, and importunity of the By∣standers, moved me to try what I could do for him: I presently caused this Clyster to be exhibited, he seem'd to sleep and lie quietly after it, resting twelve hours with it in his Body, and awaked easie and pleased: it was re∣peated again, and afterwards once a day for a Week, (di∣minishing somewhat of the quantity of the S. V.) and in short time he persectly reco∣vered, to the wonder of all about him. An APPENDIX containing Interjections and Suppositories. XI. * Injectio Alba, An Inje∣ction of the White Tro∣ches. Bate.] Trochisci albi Rha∣si ʒiij. Camphir ℈j. Dissolve them in Frog-spawn Water ℥xij. S. A. It allays Inflamations and eases Pain, and is effectu∣al against Ulcers of the Yard, Gonorrhea's, &c. Salmon.] § 1. You ought to have a short Syringe, much like an Ear-Syringe, but much less, and the Body of it all of a piece with the Spout.
§ 2. Before using of it, let the Patient make Water, if he has occasion, and then exhibit the Injection, inject∣ing three Syringes full at a dressing; and after, holding the end of the Syringe in, for about a Minute, before you suffer the Water to come forth. § 3. This ought to be done at first five or six times a day, afterwards as the Ulcer begins to heal, three or four times a day, and at last but twice a day, till it is well: and it ought to be continued for some time after it is seemingly perfectly well, lest it should return again. § 4. If it be Winter-time, and cold Weather, the Inje∣ction ought to be made Blood∣warm. XII. Injectio Auricularis, The Ear-Injection. Bate.] ℞ Rosemary-flowers M. ij. boil them in Boys Ʋ∣rine lbiss. to lbj. strain out, and add Honey of Roses ℥iv. mix them. It is good against Deafness and pain in the Ears. Salmon.] § 1. It is good a∣gainst Thickness of Hearing, Pain and Noise in the Ears: It alleviates the Pain in Apo∣stems, and brings them to maturation. § 2. After the Ear has been well syringed with this Inje∣ction, you ought to drop into it the following Oil. ℞ Oil of Ben. ℥ss. Oil of Amber ʒij. mix them. § 3. And the Ear is to be stopped with Cotton dipt in a strong Tincture of Musk and Ambergrise, made with S. V. XIII. * Injectio Benedicta, An Injection made of the In∣fusion of Crocus Metallo∣rum. Bate.] ℞ Aqua Benedicta ℥viij. Mercurius dulcis in sub∣til Pouder ʒiij. mix them well S. A. It has all the Virtues of the Injection made of the White Troches, at Sect. 11. above. Salmon.] § 1. It is an ex∣cellent thing against running Sores, old Ulcers, inveterate Fistula's, and other like Dis∣affections, being used two or three times a day. § 2. And it prevails against a Gonorrhea, being injected four, five, or six times a day, as directed at Sect. 11. afore∣going. § 3. Exhibited Clyster∣wise in a Colick. (℥ij. iij. or
iv. to twelve Ounces of Chic∣ken or Mutton-broth) it gives relief to a Miracle, and per∣forms that which no other Clyster in the World can do besides. XIV. * Suppositoria Alumi∣nosa, Suppositories made with Alum. Bate.] ℞ Alum in fine Pouder q. v. Whites of Eggs beaten together q. s. or so much as may make the Pouder of the Alum into a Paste, of which form Suppositories, of several magnitudes and lengths, which dry for use. One of these be∣ing anointed with Oil, and put up pro re nata, provokes to Stool in several cases. They are of singular use in the Colick. Salmon.] § 1. The ordi∣nary way which Country People have, is to take a good long piece of Alum, of about a Finger's length, and with a Knife to cut or scrape it into the shape of a Suppo∣sitory, and so put it up; and this will do full as well. § 2. But of the shavings or scrapings, (that they may not be lost) you may, if you so please, form Suppositories according to this Prescript. XV. * Suppesitorium Hemor∣rhoidale, A Suppository for the Piles. Bate.] It is made of Chalk and Ʋnguentum Populneum, so as to make a stiff or hard Mass, S. A. It cools and stops the bleeding of the He∣morrhoids. Salmon.] § 1. It is of good use, where there is a vehe∣ment heat, and withal, an untoward Costiveness of Bo∣dy, in which case it ought to be so long used, till all the hardened Excrements are come away. § 2. It is of a brittle sub∣stance, and therefore must be used with much tenderness, lest it break in pieces.
CHAP. IX. Of Medicaments ANOMALOƲS. I. * Acetarium Scorbuticum, An Antiscorbutick Sauce. Bate.] ℞ SEa Scurvygrass-(chosen Leaves) ℥iij. Trebble refined Sugar ℥vj. Salt of Scurvy-grass ℥j. being well bruised together, add Juice of Oranges ℥ vj. and mix them. In this you may dip all your Antiscorbutick Food. Salmon.] § 1. The Com∣position it good enough as to the Nature of it, but it does not fully answer its Name; for the Ounce of Salt of Scurvy-grass, wholly takes away the pleasure of it as to a Sauce. § 2. In my Opinion, it would be much better to make a Potion of it, by straining all the Syrup out from the Herb, by pressing, and so taking ℥j. of it at a time Morning and Evening in a Glass of Antiscorbutick, or Scurvy-grass Ale. § 3. But leaving out the Salt of Scurvy-grass it may go then well enough for a Sauce, and that a highly An∣tiscorbutick one too; if the Salt must be taken, let it be taken in some other more proper Mixture, I am sure it will never make a good Sal∣let. II. Amuleta Pestilentialia, A Pestilential Amulet or Pre∣servative. Bate.] ℞ Auripigment ℥jss. Angelica-roots ʒvj. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make a Paste, of which make Amulets, No xij. of a Globe-like form, which roul up in Silk, and hang against the Region of the Heart. Salmon.] § 1. Paracelsus, Crollius, Hartman, and others, are of Opinion, that there is a mighty Power, Force, and Vertue, in such like Amulets, made to defend against the Infection of the Plague; I will not say much to the Matter, but leave every one to use their own freedom. § 2. However this I will say, that if my own Life lay at stake, I should rather trust to some known and approved
inward Specifick Antidote, than to all the fam'd Amulets in the World. § 3. Tho' if the Philoso∣phick Reason of the thing be consider'd and inquired into, there may be much more in it, than many are aware of. III. * Caryophylli Odorati, Per∣fumed Cloves. Bate.] ℞ Styrax Calamita, Labdanum, A. ℥ij. Benjamine ℥j. Cloves ℥ss. , Charcole ℥iij. make a subtil Pouder; add Gum-water, q. s. so as make a Mass, of which make little Rouls in the form of Cloves. They are used for the fuming of the Bed-Cham∣bers of sick People. Salmon.] § 1. Having a fire of live Charcole, you may put some few of them upon it, which being set in the middle of the Room, will perfume it, in Infectious and Pestilential times, and among ill smelling Diseases. § 2. The Fumes also re∣ceived up the Throat by the Mouth thro' a Funnel (whose wider part is wide enough to spread over the whole Cha∣sing-dish) are good to stop vehement Coughs, and vio∣lent Catarrhs. IV. * Cashew, seu Catechu, Rouls of Catechu. Bate.] ℞ Catechu in fine Pouder ℥iv. white Sugar-candy ℥ss. Roch Alum, gr. j. Am∣ber-grise, gr. iv. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth made with Rose-water, q. s. mix and make a Paste, which make in∣to little Rouls, almost in the form of Mouse-turds. They are good to dry up Catarrhs, and conduce admirably to the strengthning of the Head, being held often in the Mouth. Salmon.] § 1. Being day∣ly chewed in the Mouth, or otherwise held in the Mouth till they dissolve, they com∣fort all the Spirits Natural, Vital, and Animal, and cause a sweet Breath. § 2. Being eaten every Night going to bed ʒss. ad ʒj. they stop Coughs and Catarrhs, heal Ulcers in the Lungs, and stop all sorts of Fluxes of the Bowels, whe∣ther of Blood or Humors, as also Fluxes of the Womb, whether White or Red; for which last, it is a Specifick.
V. * Cremor Hordei, Bar∣ley Cream. Bate.] ℞ Pearled Barley cleansed ℥iv. boil (casting a∣way the first water) in Foun∣tain-Water, q. s. till it is soft; beat well the Barley with sweet Almonds blanched, No 20. then add Barley-water, lbijss. mix well, and express strongly, S. A. add there∣to trebble refined Sugar ℥ ij. Damask Rose-water, ℥jss. stir them well and make a Cream. It is diuretick and nutritive, quenches Thirst in Fevers. Salmon.] § 1. It is of sin∣gular use to be given upon any Heat, Sharpness, or Scalding of the Water, or Pissing of Blood, occasioned from the Malignity of Epi∣spastick Emplasters, or Bli∣stering occasioned from Can∣tharides, being often taken ℥ij. iij. or iv. at a time. § 2. It is also a very good thing in hectick Fevers, a∣bating the Heat, and resto∣ring the Consumptive body. § 3. And in other Fevers, it is given to abate their Heat and quench Thirst, being mixt with Milk-water, or black Cherry-water in a trebble Proportion. VI. * Dentifricium Domi∣narum, A Dentrifice for Ladies. Bate.] ℞ Crystal prepared ʒjss. Pouder of Bricks of Pu∣mice-stone, A. ℥ss. Os Sepiae, Coral red and white, A. ʒij. Pearl, Cloves, A. ʒj. Musk, gr. iv. mix and make a fine Pouder: To which add Honey of Roses, q. s. so as to make a soft Paste. Otherwise thus. ℞ Pouder of Brick ℥j. Spirit of Sulphur, q. s. so as to make a Paste; to which being dry∣ed add, Pouder of Tartar ʒvj. burnt or toasted Bread ℥ss. mix them. Rub the Teeth therewith, and after wash the Mouth with Wine. Salmon.] § 1. In the latter Composition, Pouder of Cre∣mor Tartari, will be best to be chosen, because it is finer, cleaner and more pure than Argol, or unrefined Tar∣tar. § 2. If the Teeth be very foul, the Medicament must be used often in a day, at least five or six times; and afterwards, every time after eating.
VII. * Dentifricium Infan∣tum, A Dentrifice for Children. Bate.] ℞ New made fresh Butter ℥j. clarified Honey ʒvj. red Coral prepared ℥ss. make a Mixture, S. A. With this let the Gums of Children be rubbed twice or thrice a day, for the more easie Breeding of their Teeth. Salmon.] § 1. But if you would have it do any good, you must rub the edges of their Gums with it four, five or six times a day. § 2. And when all is done, to rub them every hour in the day, with a good Coral is a thousand times better; for the hardness of the Co∣ral falling hard (and that al∣most continually) upon the edge of the Teeth to be cut out of the Gum, does in some measure deaden (as it were) or benumb the Gum it self, and so makes it the more insensible of the Pain, and also facilitates the cutting of the same. § 3. And this is the rea∣son, that such Children whom their Nurses are almost al∣ways rubbing their Gums hard, with a smooth Coral, ever breed their Teeth with∣out any pain. VIII. * Dentifricium Scorbuti∣cum, A Dentrifice against the Scurvy in the Teeth. Bate.] ℞ Salt of Scurvy-grass, Mace, A. ʒj. Sage ℈iv. burnt Alum ʒij. Salt decripi∣tated ℈ij. mix and make a subtil Pouder, to which add Honey of Roses, q. s. make a Mixture. You are to rub your Teeth therewith, before the use of Dentilavium Scor∣buticum in Cap. 1. Sect. 3. of this Book. Salmon.] § 1. If your Teeth have a Crust upon them, and want scaling, the Chyrurgeon ought to do it with his Instrument, before you use this Medicament. § 2. This done (if need require) then three times a day, viz. Morning, and af∣ter Dinner and Supper, rub your Teeth with this Den∣trifice, washing them after∣wards as directed. IX. * Frontale Cephalalgi∣cum, A Cephalick Appli∣cation to the Forehead. Bate.] ℞ It is made of Rose-cake, q. s. fryed in Vine∣gar or S. V. and sprinkled with Pouder of Nutmegs ʒj. Zedoary ʒss. Camphire ℈ij.
Apply it to the Forehead and Temples. Salmon.] § 1. It is a singular good thing to ease the Pain of the Head, and cause rest. § 2. In vehement Pains, Vertigo's, Megrims, &c. you must often renew it, by moistning it with Vinegar, as fast as you find it dries. X. * Lapis Contrayerva, The Stone against Poyson. Bate.] ℞ Magisteries of Harts-horn, of white and red Coral, of Pearl, of white Am∣ber, of Crabs Eyes, A. ʒij. Roots of Contrayerva ℥ss. the black points of Crabs Claws ℥ij, all rightly prepared; mix them together, and with Gelly of Vi∣pers, q. s. make it up into little Balls, which cover with Leaf Gold, and carefully dry, S. A. some add to the Com∣position Ambergrise ʒjss. It is a famous Cordial, Anti∣dote against Poyson, and Su∣dorifick, prevails wonderfully against the Plague, Small-Pox, Measles, and all sorts of ma∣lign Fevers. Dose, ℈ ss. ad ʒss. Salmon.] § 1. Whether you ought to take the Ma∣gisteries of the Corals, Pearl, Amber and Crabs Eyes, or their levigated Pouders only, is not easie to be discerned by the Prescript, but either of them will do. § 2. There is another Com∣position of this Stone in o∣ther Proportions, which you may see in our Doron Medi∣cum, Lib. 2. Cap. 24. Sect. 3. which we transferr'd from Monsieur Charras, but in my Judgment, this of our Au∣thor is much the more excel∣lent, and may be used against all malign and pestilential Di∣seases from gr. 10. ad ʒj. in any proper Vehicle. See our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 25. Sect. 3. XI. Lapis de Goa, The Goa∣stone. Bate.] ℞ Of the Hya∣cinth, Topaz, Saphire, Ruby, Pearls, A. ℥j. Emeralds ℥ss. Oriental Bezoar, white and red Coral, A. ℥ij. Musk, Am∣bergrise, A. ℥ss. Leaves of Gold, No 40. make all into fine Pouder, which bring into a Paste with Rose-water, and form into oblong Balls not much unlike to little Eggs, drying them well in the Shaddow: then with a Limpets Shell, or some other thing of like na∣ture, let them be curiously pollished, that they may have a Gloss upon them, S. A. It has the same Vertues with
the former: Besides which it is a Specifick against Cramps and Contractions of the Nerves. Dose. à ℈j. ad ʒss. or more. Salmon.] § 1. 'Tis true you may make it up with simple Rose-water, but then it will be apt to brake with the least fall; your better way will be to add a little Mu∣cilage of Gum Tragacanth, or Gelly of Harts-horn, or some such like, which being dryed will make the Stone, not only firmer, but the bet∣ter also to be polished. § 2. Some are of Opinion, that you ought to take the Magisteries of those frag∣ments of precious Stones, &c. but I am confident, that if they be well levigated upon a Porphyry, with a little Rose-water, it will be full as well; what is required is, that their Pouders be impal∣pable, and soft like Flower. § 3. It is an Antidote a∣gainst Plague and Poyson, and cures the Bitings of Ser∣pents, mad Dogs, or any o∣ther venomous Creature; it revives the Spirits, chears the Heart, fortifies Nature, re∣sists Melancholy, restores in Consumptions, prevails a∣gainst all Diseases of the Head and Brain, proceeding from Cold and Moisture, causing a lively Presence▪ nimble Wit, a pleasant Coun∣tenance, and a sweet Breath. Dose, ℈j. ad ʒj. See its Ver∣tues and Use at large in our Seplasium, Lib. 4. Cap. 65. Sect. 4. ad 8. XII. * Linteum Crocatum, Saffron Cloth, or Stay. Bate.] It is made by boil∣ing Linnen Cloth with Saf∣fron ʒss. in Rue water, q. s. and drying it. It is constant∣ly bound under the Chin, du∣ring the come forth of the Small-Pox. Salmon.] § 1. It is an O∣pinion among the good Wo∣men, that a Saffron Stay be∣ing applied to the Chin or Throat of the Child in the coming out of the Small-Pox will keep them out of the Throat; but what real effi∣cacy it has upon that ac∣count, I cannot tell. § 2. This I am sure of, that a Gargle made of Saf∣fron and Cochinele, A. ʒss. Claret Wine lbj. double refi∣ned Sugar ℥ss. will do feats in that kind, and is much more effectual, that all the ex∣ternal Applications in the World.
XIII. * Masticatoria, Spitting Balls. Bate.] ℞ Mastich ʒiij. Pyrethrum, Stavesacre, A. ʒij. Angelica-root ʒss. Cubebs. Nut∣megs, A. ʒj. Euphorbium ℈ss. Wax q. s. mix and make a Mass, of which make Masti∣catories, S. A. That is to say, Spitting Balls, or a large sort of Pills, to be often chewed. They cause Spit∣ting, purge the Brain, and help against Thickness of Hearing, Palsies, and Disea∣ses of the Head proceeding from Cold. They cure also the Tooth-ach. Salmon.] § 1. You are to put one of the Balls into your Mouth, and constantly to chew it for some time, a quarter of an hour, or half an hour, more or less, con∣strantly spitting out, as it at∣tracts the Rheum or Spit∣tle. § 2. It is good to be used in case of Defluxions upon any part, especially upon the Eyes, Teeth, Jaws, or Throat: it removes a Catarrh; and by often and long using, eva∣cuates the Morbifick cause of a Rheumatism. § 3 It is said to be a singu∣lar thing to give ease in the Tooth-ach, tho' the pain be never so extream. XIV. * Mixtura Tubularis, A Mixture for the Pipe. Bate.] ℞ The outward Hulls of Pistaches ℥ij. Colts-foots, Betony, Rosemary, all dried, A. ℥iij. let them be cut, and add Raspings of Lignum Sanctum ℥iij. white Amber, Olibanum, grosly bruised, A. ℥iss. Mastich ℥j. distilled Oil of Nutmegs ʒj. make a mix∣ture; to be taken as you take Tobacco. Or thus: ℞ Betony, Colts-foot, A. ℥ij. Rosemary Flowers, outward Pi∣stach shells or hulls, A. ℥j. Cardamoms the less ℥iss. cut them, S. A. and add Oyl of Aniseeds, gut. xvj. Oil of Ci∣namon gut. viij. mix them. Some add of the best Tobacco cut ℥j. It is chiefly useful in drying up Catarrhs, stopping of Fluxes of Rheums, Coughs, &c. Salmon.] § 1. What Vir∣tue there can be in the out∣ward Hulls of Pistaches for this use, I can scarcely tell; in my Judgment, if as much dried Sage, or Winter Cina∣mon prepared, were added in the place thereof, or rather Pimento, the Composition would be much better for the Uses it is intended. § 2. It is good to dry up Fluxes of Rheums, stop Ca∣tarrhs,
case the Tooth-ach, help Coughs, expectorate Flegm, and take away the cause of a Rheumatism, be∣ing taken in a Tobacco-pipe, in the same manner as you take Tobacco. XV. Nodulus Facialis, A No∣dulus for the Face. Bate.] ℞ Barley parched, q. v. make it into fine Flower, which tie up in a Lawn Rag into a Nodule. With which strew the Face, about the E∣leventh Day after the coming out of the Small-pox: it ve∣ry much defends the Face against Scars and Pittings. Salmon.] § 1. The same thing may be done with the Indian Maize, where English Barley is not to be had, and it yields in parching, both a greater quantity of Flower, and better for the purpose, than the other. § 2. And for want of ei∣ther of these, you may take unhulled Rice, (in those pla∣ces where it grows) which will answer the same end: but if the Rice be hulled, it will not parch well, so as to be reduced to a soft flowery substance, but in the parching it will grow dry and hard; the same understand of Bar∣ley. XVI. * Nodulus Hystericus, A Nodule against Fits of the Mother. Bate.] ℞ Castor in fine Pou∣der ʒss. Assa Fetida ℈j. Oyl of Amber ℈ss. mix, and tie it up in a bit of Silk in form of a Nodule. Let it be often held to the Nostrils in time of the Fit. Salmon.] § 1. If you add to it gut. iv. of Oil of Harts∣horn, it will be much the better for this purpose. § 2. It is good to smell to (for such as are troubled with Vapours, or Hysterick Fits, or such as are apt to these Distempers, but not usual with them) at other times, by way of prevention, in which cases I have known it used with success. XVII. * Panis Diasarsae, Bread of Sarsaparilla. Bate.] ℞ Sarsaparilla ℥iij. China ℥j. Caraways whole ʒj. fine Wheat-flower ℥xvj. Yolks of Eggs, No ij. a little Yest or Barm; with Milk q. s. mix and make a Paste, of which make Loaves to be baked in an Oven. It may be eaten as ordinary Bread, in the French-Pox, &c.
Salmon.] § 1. It sweetens the Blood and Juices, and is of good use in other Diseases where acid and moist Hu∣mors abound, as the Scurvy, Dropsie, Gout, Rheumatism, Catarrh, &c. § 2. If it be baked hard like Bisquit, it will keep lon∣ger, eat better, and be more profitable to the sick. XVIII. * Panis de Vipera, Viper Bread. Bate.] ℞ Pouder of Vipers Flesh ℥j. Sarsaparilla ℥iij. fi∣nest Wheat-flower lbj. Yolk of one Egg: Yest a little: Milk q. s. mix and make a Paste, of which make four little Loaves, or Cakes, which bake in an O∣ven, S. A. Let it be used as common Bread, in the Ca∣chexy, Scurvy, Leprosie, French-Pox, &c. Salmon.] § 1. Let this as the former be made into the form of Bisquits, and baked dry and hard like them. § 2. Besides these particu∣lar Uses mentioned, it is a most singular thing to restore in Consumptions. XIX. Pasta Halieuica, A Paste or Bait for Fishes. Bate.] ℞ Henbane-seeds ℥ss. strong old Cheese, Cocculus Indi. A. ℥iss. Wheat-meal two spoon¦fuls, Aqua Vitae four spoonfuls Honey q. s. mix and make a Paste, S. A. Break it into very small bits, and cast it into divers places of the Wa∣ter, and it will draw the Fish. Salmon.] § 1. You may break it into small bits, about the bigness of White Pease: but it ought to be cast in, in a proper Season for Fishing, which such as are acquainted with the Art know best. § 2. And tho' the Fish seem to be dead, yet they may be eaten safe enough, and will eat as well as if taken by other means. XX. Pasta Hippiatri, A Paste or Horse-Medicine for Farriers. Bate.] ℞ Pouders of Fenu∣greek, Aniseed, Cuminseed, Car∣thamus Elecampane, Colts-foot, Flowers of Sulphur, A. ℥ij. Juice of Liquorice (dissolved in White-wine lbss.) ℥j. Oil-Olive, Honey, A. ℥viij. Genua Treacle ℥xij. Oil of Aniseeds ℥j. mix all together, and with Wheat-meal lbiss. vel q. s. make a Paste, S. A. of which make Balls about the bigness of a Man's Fist. Dissolve one of them in cold Water q. s. letting the Horse drink it all
up at a time; this do Morn∣ing and Evening, for fifteen days; in which time it will certainly cure such Horses as are troubled with Asthma's, Coughs, and several other in∣ternal Diseases: it makes such fat as are wasted and poor, and makes healthy such as are infirm and diseased. Salmon.] § 1. This Medi∣cine will do much better in a strong Decoction of Ground Malt, Anglicè-Wort, and gi∣ven as hot as 'tis convenient for the Beast to take it in. § 2. And to speak without any thing of a Complement, it is a good thing for what it is intended, and beyond ma∣ny other Horse-Medicines, much valued and esteemed in the World. XXI. * Pasta Hypoglottida, A Paste to take away the Asperity of the Larynx. Bate.] ℞ White Sugar∣candy in fine Pounder ℥iv. Oil of Sweet-Almonds new drawn ℥j. vel q. s. beat them well into a Paste. S. A. Hold a little thereof often in the mouth. Salmon.] § 1. It is of sin∣gular use against Coughs, Colds, Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Breathing Whee∣sings, Hoarseness, and other Distempers of the Latinx, Brest and Lungs. § 2. Let it be held five, six, or seven times a day, or more, in the Mouth, and suf∣fered to distil down at lei∣sure; more especially let it be used at such times as the Cough is present and trou∣blesome; but at other times at discretion. XXII. Pasta Regalis pro E∣mulsionibus, The Royal Paste for Emulsions. Bate.] ℞ White Poppy-seed ℥j. Sweet Almonds blanched ℥iv. Eryngo-root condited ℥ij. The four greater cold Seeds, Ana ℥ss. Sugar-candy ℥ij. mix and beat them into a Paste, S. A. At time of using it: ℞ Of this Paste ℥j. Aqua hordeata lbj. mix and make an Emul∣sion, S. A. Salmon.] § 1. It is singu∣lar good against pain, heat, and sharpness of Urine, or scalding thereof, making of bloody Urine, or pissing Blood, and the like. § 2. The Patient may drink a Draught of the E∣mulsion about Eight in the Morning: another Draught about Eleven a Clock: a Third at Four in the After∣noon: and the last at Night going to Bed.
§ 3. But you ought to be cautious, that the Coldness thereof may not hurt the Stomach; if any such thing be perceived, add to the Emulsion ℥j. of Aqua Mira∣bilis. XXIII. * Pisa Lutea, Yel∣low Pease. Bate.] ℞ Yellow Oker ℥ss. Florentine Orrice-root ʒ ij. Wax ℥j. Turpentine, q. s. so as it may be made up into the form of Pease of various Mag∣nitudes. They are used to keep open Issues. Salmon.] § 1. That is the principal Intention, and where they are apt to dry up, or will not easily be kept open, they are much better than white Pease. § 2. They draw gently, and abate Inflamations which are sometimes usual to those kinds of Sores. XXIV. * Pisa rubra, Red Pease. Bate.] ℞ Vermilion ℥ss. Hermodacts ʒij. Wax ʒvj. Turpentine, q. s. make it up into the form of Pease. Salmon.] § 1. These are stronger than the former, and attract Humors more pow∣erfully, by reason of the ad∣dition of the Hermodacts. § 2. But they do it gently, and without any evil Sym∣ptoms, by reason of the Ar∣tificial Cinnabar, or Vermil∣lion, which powerfully cor∣rects all Accidents. XXV. * Pisa Viridia, Green Pease. Bate.] ℞ Verdigrise, white Hellebore, A. ʒ ij. Cantha∣rides ʒj. Root of Florentine Orrice ʒjss. Wax ʒvj. Tur∣pentine, q. s. Or, you may make them of Verdigrise, Cantharides, A. ʒij. Aripig∣mentum ℈ss. Wax ʒij. Tur∣pentine, q. s. mix them. They are used for Issues. Salmon.] § 1. These are yet stronger than the latter, and design'd to make their own way, where the Patient will not permit the use of the Knife. § 2. Afterwards way be∣ing made, the Pisa Rubra may be applied till the Issue is compleat and runs well; which done, the Pisa Lutea may lastly be used for a con∣stancy.
XXVI. Pomum Ambrae, Pome-Ambers, or Sweet-Balls. Bate.] ℞ Styrax Cala∣mita ʒvj. Benjamine ℥j. Lab∣danum ʒ ij. white Sanders, Cloves, A. ʒ jss. Marjoram, Damask Rose-Leaves, A. ℈iv. Musk, Ambergrise, A. ℈ss. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth (made with Damask Rose-wa∣ter) q. s. or so much as may make up the Ingredients into a Paste for Balls, S. A. Being held to the Nose, they stir the Blood by their grateful Odor, and chear the Heart above measure in Apo∣plexies, Epilepsies, Pestilen∣tial Airs, &c. Salmon.] § 1. If they be made into the usual Magni∣tude for Pills, they may be taken every Night going to Bed, ad ʒj. against the same Distempers, and that way used they will be more pow∣erful to the Intentions, than by bare smelling to them. § 2. Besides which, be∣ing firmly made up into little Beads, and bore thro' the middle, they may (when dry) be put in order upon a String, and worn as a Neck∣lace about the Neck. XXVII. Pilae Odoratae, Sweet Balls. Bate.] ℞ Venice Soap ℥vj. Styrax Calamita, Benjamine, A. ℥ss. Marjoram ℈iv. Cloves, No 12. Musk, gr. ij. Damask Rose-water, q. s. mix and make Balls, S.A. They cleanse well, and have a grateful Scent, comforting the Nerves, Skin of the Hands, &c. They serve to wash withal. Salmon.] § 1. It is good to wash in the Morning with them, for cleansing, and whitening the Skin, the con∣stant use of which will make it very pure and soft. § 2. It is good to wash the Head also with them in a warm Larder, which is troubled with Scurf, Dan∣drif, or other Defedations u∣sual to those parts. XXVIII. Suffimentum Hy∣stericum, An Hysterick Fume. Bate.] ℞ Asa fetida ℥j. Rue, M. j. best Wine-Vinegar lbj. boil them in a Pot with a narrow Mouth, S. A. The hot Fumes are to be received often in a day up the Mouth (being open) and Nostrils.
Salmon.] § 1. If at the same time the Patient takes fifty or sixty Drops of the Liquor inwardly in any pro∣per Hysterick water, it will be much more effectual. § 2. But using it as a Fume, there ought to be added to it Oil of Harts-horn ℥ss. where∣by the Power of it for this purpose will be ten times increased. XXIX. * Torquis Infantum, A Necklace for Chil∣dren. Bate.] It is made of the male Peony-root and Henbane-root fresh gathered, cut into round pieces and bored thro' the middle, and strung in order up∣on a Thread or String. Which being wrapped in fine Lin∣nen or Lawn, are to be worn about the Neck in the time of breeding of Teeth. They are said to facilitate the breeding of Teeth, and pre∣vent Convulsions. Salmon.] § 1. It is used as an Amulet, in which I believe there is no more Vertue for driving away Pains in breeding of Teeth, than there is in the Words being worn about the Neck as a Pentacle. § 2. But for such as have Faith in the thing (and I know not but their Faith may do the Work) they may put it about their Childrens Necks, and let them wear it as long as they are breed∣ing their Teeth. § 3. If in this time, the Child should be cross and froward, and peevish, with the anguish of its Teeth cut∣ting, the Parent or Putter on thereof must wholly blame themselves (and not the Me∣dicine) for that they were People of little Faith. XXX. * Turundae Acousticae, Ear Tents to help the Hearing. Bate.] ℞ Galbanum, Ship Pitch, A. ʒij. white Hellebore in fine Pouder ℈ 5. Civet, gr. vj. mix them; divide the Mass into eight or ten parts, making each into the form of a Clove; which wrap or tie up in a very thin piece of fine Linnen or Lawn, fixing a Thread to the greater end thereof, for the more easie pulling it forth again out of the Ear. It is one of the best of Remedies against Deafness.
Salmon.] § 1. It may be a good thing for all that I know, but I have had no Experience of it, and there∣fore only recommend it to your Prudence in making Tryal. § 2. I must confess, I ad∣mire not the white Helle∣bore in it (because it is of a putrefactive Quality) and within ℈j. it is nearly half as much as the rest of the In∣gredients; but possibly the Emplastick Bodies of the Gum and Rosin, may so chain or fetter it up, as that it may do no great mischief.
An APPENDIX to the former Book. CHAP. X. TABƲLA POSOLOGICA. THis is fitted for the more easie computing the Doses or Quantities of certain Ingredients, going into se∣veral of the Compositions in the last Edition of the London Dispensatory: In some of them the Doses of the purging Ingredients are computed exactly; in others, as near as the Proportion to the given Quantities would hear. I. Aromaticum Caryophyl∣latum. In ℈iv. is contained of Ambergrise, gr. iv. Musk, gr. j. II. Aromaticum Rosatum▪ ʒj. gr. xij. contain Ambergrise, gr. j. Musk, gr. ss. III. Benedict. Laxat. Spe∣cies. ℈ij. gr. 7. contain Diagrydium, Esula, Hermodacts, A. gr. xv. Turpethum, ℈ss. IV. Caryocostinum. ℥ss. contains Diagrydium, Hermodacts, A. gr. xv. V. Catholicum. ʒvij. contain Sena, ℈j. Polypodium. Rhubarb, A. ℈ss. VI. Confectio Hamech. ℥j. contains Diagrydium, gr. vijss. Sena, Agarick, A. ℈j. Epithymum, ℈ss. Colocynth, in Decoct. gr. xv. VII. Confectio Alkermes. ʒij. ℈ij. contain Ambergrise, Pearl, A. gr. j. ʒxj. contain VIII. Confectiones de Hya∣cintho Spec. Ambergrise,
Musk, A. gr. j. IX. Decoctum Epithymi. ℥iv. contain Epithymum, Sena, A. ℈iv. Black Hellebor, gr. xv. Turbeth, Myrob. Chebul. & Indar, A. ℈ij. Agarick, gr. v. Poypodie, ʒj. X. Decoctum Senae Ge∣reonis. ℥iij. contain Sena, ʒxij. Polypodie, ʒss. XI. Diacarthamum. ℥j. contains Diagrydium, gr. ix. Turbeth, gr. xviij. Carthami, Hermodacts, A. gr. xij. XII. Diacodium. ʒix. contain Poppy-heads, ʒiijss. in Decoct. XIII. Diachylon Ireatum. ℥jss. contain Pul. Florentin Orrice, ʒj. XIV. Diacinnamomi Species. ʒjss. contain Musk, gr. j. XV. Diaprunum Soluti∣vum. ʒvjss. contain Scammony ℈j. XVI. Diaphoenicon ℥ss. gr. xiv. contain Diagrydium, gr. xij. Turbeth, gr. xxxij. XVII. Diarrhodon Ab∣batis. ʒiij. ℈j. contain Greater cold Seeds, ℈ss. Musk, gr. ss. XVIII. Diasatyrion. ʒx. contain Musk, gr. j. Ambergrise, gr. ss. XIX. Diascordium. ʒv. gr. xij. contain Opium, gr. j. XX. Diaturbeth cum Rhabarb. ℈ij. gr. 17. contain Hermodacts, Turbeth, A. gr. xij. Diagrydium, gr. vj. Rhabarb, gr. xv. XXI. Electuarium ama∣rum maj. ℥j. contains Aloes ℈ij. Turbeth, Rhubarb, A. gr. xv.
XXII. Electuarium Ama∣rum min. ʒvss. contain Epithymum, gr. v. Aloes, ʒj. XXIII. Electuarium è Citro solutiv. ʒiij. contain Diagrydium, gr. vj. Turbeth, gr. vijss. Sena, gr. ix. XXIV. Electuarium Le∣nitivum. ℥j. contains Pouder of Sena, ʒj. Polypodie, Sena in Decoct. A. ℈j. XXV Electuarium Sassafras. ℥j. contains Ambergrise, gr. j. Musk, gr. 1/12;. XXVI. Electuarium è Succo Rosar. ℥iijss. contain Diagrydium, gr. xij. XXVII. Emplastrum Barbarum mag. ℥iss. contain Opium, gr. j. XXVIII. Emplastrum Cephalicum fort. ℥j. contains Black Pepper, Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain, A. gr. vj. XXIX. Emplastrum Dia∣chalciteos. ʒviiss. contain Burnt Vitriol, ℈j. XXX. Emplastrum Epi∣spasticum. ʒiij. contain Cantharides ℈ij. XXXI. Emplastrum Hy∣stericum. ℥ij. ʒiss. contain Gall. Moschat. Alipt. Moschat. A. gr. j. Musk, gr. ss. XXXII. Emplastrum Oxycroceum. ʒiij. contain Saffron, ℈j. XXXIII. Emplastrum de Ranis. ℥j. contains Quicksilver, ʒss. XXXIV. Hierae Diacolo∣cynth. Species. ʒj. contains Colocynthis, Agarick, A. gr. vj. XXXV. Hierae Logadij, the Electuary. ʒvij. contain Colocynthis, Opoponax, Sagapenum,
Polypodium, A. ℈j. Diagrydium, Agarick, A. ℈ss. Hellebore white, Hellebore black, A. gr. j. Spurge-seed, Euphorbium, A. gr. vj. Aloes opt. gr. v. XXXVI. Mithridatium. ʒiv. ℈ij. contain Opium, gr. j. XXXVII. Moschelaeum. ℥j. contains Musk, gr. j. XXXVIII. Philonum ma∣gistralis. ℈ss. contains Opium, gr. iv. vel v. XXXIX. Philonum Ro∣manum. ʒiss. contain Opium, gr. ijss. Henbane-seeds, gr. v. X L. Philonum Persi∣cum. ℈iv. contain Opium, gr. ijss. Henbane-seeds, gr. v. XLI. Pilulae de Agarico. ʒj. contains Colocynthis, gr. iv. Turbeth, gr. x. Agarick, gr. v. Hiera picra, gr. viij. XLII. Pilulae Aggregati∣vae. ʒj. contains Diagrydium, gr. v. Colocynthis, Agarick, A. gr. ij. Turbeth, Aloes, A. gr. vj. XLIII. Pilulae Aureat. ʒj. contains Diagrydium, Aloes, A. ℈ss. Colocynthis, gr. ij. XLIV. Pilulae Cochiae maj. ʒj. contains Diagrydium, gr. ivss. Turbeth, gr. ix. Colocynthis, gr. vjss. XLV. Pilulae Cochiae min. ʒj. contains Scammony, Colocynthis, Aloes, A. gr. xiij. XLVI. Pilulae de Cyno∣glosso. ℈ss. contains Henbane-seeds. Opium, A. gr. j. XLVII. Pilulae Diambrae. ℈j. contains Ambergrise, gr. j.
XLVIII. Pilulae de Eu∣patorio maj. ʒj. contains Rhubarb, gr. vij. Aloes, gr. x. XLIX. Pilulae faetidae. ʒj. contains Colocynthis, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Epithymum, Aloes, A. gr. iv. Turbeth, gr. iijss. Scammony, gr. ijss. Esula, Hermodacts, A. gr. jss. L. Pilulae de Gutta Ga∣mandra. ʒj. contains Cambogia, gr. ix. Scammony, gr. vj. Aloes, gr. xv. LI. Pilulae de Hermo∣dactylis. ʒj. contains Colocynthis, Turbeth, Hermodacts, Sagapenum, Aloes, A. gr. iij. Opopanax, gr. jss. Euphorbium, gr. ss. LII. Pilulae Hierae cum A∣garico. ʒj. contains Aloes, ℈j. Agarick, gr. vij. LIII. Pilulae Imperiales. ʒj. contains Agarick, Sena, A gr. v. Aloes, ℈ss. Rhubab, gr. viij. LIV. Pilulae de Lapide Lazuli. ℈ij. gr. v. contain Epithymum, Agarick, A. gr. iv. Lapis Lazuli, gr. ijss. Black Hellebor, Scammony, A. gr. j¼. LV. Pilulae Mechoacanae. ʒj. contains Mechoacan, gr. viij. Turbeth, gr. vj. Esula, gr. iij. Leaves of Spurge. Seeds of dwarf Elder, Agarick, A. gr. iv. LVI. Pilulae de Opopanace. ʒj. gr. x. contain Colocynthis, Hermodacts, Sagapenum, Opopanax, A. gr. v. Turbeth, gr. iv. Scammony, gr. ij. Aloes, gr. xij. LVII. Pilulae sine Quibus. ʒj. contains Scammony, gr. vj. Agarick,
Rhubarb, Sena, A. gr. iv. Aloes, gr. xiv. LVIII. Pilulae de Sty∣race. gr. vj. contain Opium, gr. j. LIX. Pulvis Diasenae. ʒj. gr. vj. contain Diagrydium, gr. vj. Sena, gr. xxiv. LX. Pulvis Haly. ℥j. contains Greater cold Seeds, gr. vj. LXI. Pulvis Senae Com∣positus maj. ℥j. contains Sena, ʒss. LXII. Pulvis Senae Com∣positus min. ℈ijss. contain Sena, gr. 32. LXIII. Pulvis Warwi∣censis. gr. xxj. contain Scammony, gr. xij. LXIV. Saccharum Perla∣tum. ℥j. contains Pearls prepared, ℈j. LXV. Sief de Plumbo. ʒjss. contain Opium, gr. j. LXVI. Sief de Thure. ʒiv. contain Opium, gr. vj. LXVII. Species Cordiales temperatae. ℈ijss. contain Ambergrise, Musk, A. gr. j. Pearl, gr. xij. LXVIII. Species Diamar∣garit. frigidi. ℈ijss. contain Greater Cold Seeds, gr. viij. White Poppy Seeds, gr. ij. LXIX. Species Diambrae. ʒj. gr. vij. contain Ambergrise, gr. iij. Musk, gr. j. LXX. Species Diamoschu dulcis. ℈ijss. contain Musk, gr. j. LXXI. Species Diamaschu amari. ʒj, gr. x. contain Musk, gr. j. LXXII. Species Diatra∣canthi frigidi. ʒj. gr. x. contain Greater Cold Seeds, gr. viij. White Poppy Seed, gr. iij.
LXXIII. Species Diatrion Santalon. ʒj. gr. iv. contain Greater Cold Seeds, gr. 12. LXXIV. Species Liberan∣tis. ʒvss. contain Ambargrise, Musk, A. gr. ss. LXXV. Syrupus Cichor. cum Rhab. ʒvj. contain Rhubarb infused, ℈j. LXXVI. Syrupus de Epi∣thymo. ℥j. contains Epithymum, ℈j. Infus. Myrobalans, ℈ij. Infus. Polypody, Infus. Agarick, A. gr. vj. Infus. LXXVII. Syrupus de Meconio. ʒix. contain Poppy-heads boiled, ʒiijss. LXXVIII. Syrupus Papa∣veris Composit. ʒix. contain Poppy-heads boiled, ʒiij. LXXIX. Syrupus de Po∣mis Magistralis. ℥j. contains Sena, ʒj, Coct. Epithymum, ℈j. Coct. Rhubarb Coct. Agarick, A. gr. v. Coct. LXXX. Syrupus de Po∣mis Purgans. ʒvj. contain Sena infused, gr. ℈j. LXXXI. Syrupus de Rha∣barbaro. ʒvj. ℈ij. contain Sena infused, and Rhubarb, A. gr. 25. LXXXII. Syrupus Rosa∣ceus cum Agarico. ʒvj. contain Agarick infused, ℈j. LXXXIII. Syrupus Rosa∣ceus cum Helleb. ℥j. contain Myrobalans, ℈v. Sena, Polypody, Epithymum, A. ʒss. Rhubarb, ℈ss. Black Hellebor, gr. iijss. LXXXIV. Syrupus Rosa∣ceus cum Sena. ʒvj. contain Sena, ʒj.
LXXXV. Theriaca An∣dromachi. ℈iv. contain Opium, gr. j. LXXXVI. Theriaca Lon∣dinensis. ℥j. contains Opium, gr. j. LXXXVII. Trochisci A∣liptae moschatae. ʒijss. contain Ambargrise, gr. iij. Musk, gr. ss. LXXXVIII. Trochisci de Carabe. ℈j. contains Opium, gr. j. LXXXIX. Trochisci de Gallia Moschata. ℈ss. contains Ambargrise, gr. iij. Musk, gr. ss. XC. Thochisci de Ligno Aloes. ℈v. contain Ambargrise, gr. iij. Musk, gr. ss. XCI. Trochisci de Terra Lemnia. ℈ij. contain Opium, gr. j. XCII. Trochisci e Violis Solutivi. ℈ijss. contain Scammony, gr. iv. Turbeth, gr. 24. XCIII. Tryphera mi∣nor. ℈vj. contains Scoria of Iron. Myrobalans, A ℈ij. Musk, gr. j. XCIV. Tryphera Solu∣tiva. ℥ss. contains Diagredium, ℈ss. Turbeth, gr. xij. XCV. Unguentum album Camphorat. ʒvj. contain Camphire, gr. vij. XCVI. Unguentum Enu∣latum cum Mer. ℥j. contains Quicksilver, ℈ij. XCVII. Unguentum Nea∣politanum. ℥j. contain Quicksilver, ʒj. XCVIII. Unguentum Tu∣tiae. ʒiij. contain Lapis Calaminaris, ℈ss. Lapis Tutia, ℈j.
XCIX. The Doses of simple Catharticks in substance. Agatick, ℈j. ʒj. ʒij. Aloes, ℈j. ʒj. ʒii. Bryony-roots, ℈j. ʒss. ʒ j. Carthamus, ʒ j. ʒ iv. ʒ vj. Cassia Fistula, ℥ss. ℥j. ℥ij. Cataputia minor. Bacc. No x. Cataputia minor. Fol. 4.5. Colocynthis, gr. vj. x. xx. Ebuli Sem. ℈j. ℈ij. ℈iij. Ebuli Succus, ʒiv. v. vj. Ebuli Cortex, ʒj. j ss. ij. Elaterium, gr. j. ij. iij. Epithymum, ʒj. ij. iv. Esulae Cortex, gr. vj. xij. xv. Euphorbium, gr. iij. vj. xij. Frangulae Cortex in∣tern. ʒj. jss. ij. Gratiolae Fol. ℈ j. ij. iij. Gutta Gamba, ℈ss. ℈j. ʒ ss. Hellebor nig. gr. xv. ℈jss. ij. Hermodacts, ℈ ij. iv. vj. Jalapium, ℈j. iij. iv. Ireos Succus, ℥ss. ℥ij. iij. Lapis Armenus, ʒss. ʒj. ʒjss. Lapis Lazuli, ʒ ss. ʒj. ʒ jss. Manna, ℥j. ij. iij. Mechoacana, ℈ij. ivss▪ vj. Mezerei fol. Cort. gr. vj. xij. xv. Myrobalani, ʒij. vj. viij. Opopanax, ʒss. ℈ij iij. Polypodium, ʒij. vj. viij. Rhubarb, ʒj. jss. ij. Ricini Nuclei. No iv. viij. xij. Rosar. Damasc. Succus, ℥ss. jss. ij. Sagapenum, ℈jss. ij. iij. Scammonium, gr. vj. xij. xx. Sena, ℈ij iijss. vj. Soldanella, ℈jss. ij. iij. Spin Cervin. Baccae, No 30.40.50. Spin Cervin. Succus, ʒij. iv. vj. Tamarindi, ℥j. ij. iij. Turpethum, ℈ij. iij. iv.
C. To the former, these following Particulars may be added. Aquae Minerales, lbiij. ad viij. Brassicae jus. ad lbj. Cremor Tartari ʒij. iij. iv. Genistae Flores. Suc∣cus, ʒiv. vj. viij. Gum Guajaci, ℈iij. iv. vj. Lac Ebutyratum, lbij. iij. Lac Recens Mulctum, ad lbj. Mercurialis, Coctum in Brodio, M. j. Oleum Seminum Lini, ℥iij. iv. vj. Persici Flores. Succus, ʒiv. vj. viij. Pruna Damasc. Mace∣rata, No 12.16.20. Pruni Sylvestr. Flores. Succus, ʒiv. ad viij. Sambuci turiones pulv. ʒj. ij. Serum Lactis, lbij. iij. iv. Terebinth. Venet. ʒiij. iv. vj. Violarum Succus, ℥j. jss. ij.
CHAP. XI. Orthotonia Verborum Medicinalium. THis last Chapter shewing the true Pronountiation of certain Medical Words, is added for the sakes of such Apothecaries and others, who, by reason of Igno∣rance, or from meer use, are wont to pronounce them false, without regard to their true Quantities, which are here noted, to avoid that Error. A. Abbātis Diarrhōdon. Abiētis lignum. Achillēa herb. Aconītum. Adōnis flos. Aelurōpus. herb. Aethiōpis, herb. Alabastrinum, ung. Alectorolōphus. Alcēa. herb. Alcōhol Vini. Aloephangīnae Pil. Alȳpum. herb. Amarācus. herb. Ambārum. Amōmi Sem. Amygdalīnum ol. Anacardīna nux. Anagȳris. herb. Anātis axungia. Androsāce. herb. Anemōne. herb. Anethīnum oleum. Anīme gum. Anodȳnum Ung. Anthēra Rosarum. Anthōrae Radix. Antirrhinum. herb. Apozēma. — . Apozȳnum. herb. Arbūtus. Ardēa. Avis. Arēgon. ung. . Arisārum. herb. Aristolochīa. Armēna Bolus. Armeniāca mala. Asbestīnum linum. Aspalāthum lignum. Asphodēlus. herb. Athanasīa. herb. Attāgen, avis.
B. Bacchāris. herb. Balanīum ol. Balsamīne. herb. Barbarēa. herb. Bardāna. Benzōīnum. Bombācis sem. Bombycīna lana. Buniās— ādis. Rad. Byssīnum linum. C. Camphōra. . Cancāmum gum. Cannabīnum oleum. Canthāri, insecta. Caphūra. . Capparīnum oleum. Capreōlus, animal. Carbassīnum linum. Cardamīne. herb. Caryīna. herb. Caryīnum oleum. Caryocostinum. Castor—ōris. Cathēter.  instrum. Caucālis. herb. Centaurīum herb. Calcītis. . Chamaemelīnum ol. Chamaemōrus. Chamaepītys. Chebūlae myrob. Cheirīnum oleum. Cholagōga potio. Chrysolīthus. Chrysoprāsus, lapis. Chrysomelīnum ol. Cinārae radix. Cinnabāris. Citrīna cera. Clemātis daphnöīdes. Clystēres.— . Cocina vestis. Colchīcum. herb. Colcōthar. Colutēa. . herb. Corallīna. Corallīnum Arcanum. Coronōpus, Rad. Costinum oleum. Cotylēdon. herb. Crataeogōnon.— . Crocīnum oleum. Crystallīnum sacchar. Cumīnum. Cymīnum. Curcūma. . Cuscūta. Cassūtha. Cyāni. flores. Cyclāmen—īnis. Rad. Cynnorrhōdi cons. Cynosbāti cons. Cypēri Rad. Cyprīnus lapis. Cytīni flores.
D. Daphīnum oleum. Diacrocūma. Dianūcum. Diaphoenīcum. Diaphorēsis. . Diarrhōdon Abbātis. Diospȳros. herb. Diphrȳges. Dropax—ācis. Dryoptēris. . E. Ebēnum lignum. Empyēma. . Enēma. . Epilīnum herb. Epūlis. . Eranthēmum. . Erīca. herb. Errhinum. Erythrodānum. Exostōsis . F. Fagīnus. Febrifūga potio. Figulīnum Vas. Formīca. G. Gagātes. Glaucīnus color. Glottīdes, aves. Gratiōla. herb. H. Halīmus. herb. Hedychrōi Troch. Hedysārum herb. Heliochrȳson. herb. Helleborīne. herb. Herba Parīdis. Hierobotāne. herb. Hippolithus lapis. Hippopotāmi dens. Hippūris. . Hormīnum. Hydragōgus. . Hypecōum. herb. Hyperīcum. I. Jacēa. herb. Janthīnus color. Jasmīnum oleum. Illecēbra. herb. Intūbus. Intūbum. Irīnum oleum. Isātis herb. Jujūbe.
Jujubīnus Syr. Juniperīnum ol. L. Laudānum. Labdānum. Ladānum. Lagōpus. herb. Lampsāna. herb. Lapis Armēnus. Lapis Lazūli. Lathȳris. herb. Laurīnum Ung. Ltiscīnum lign. Leucöīum. Leucöīnum. ol. Leucogrāphis. herb. Libanō is. . Lithanthrāces. Lumbrīci. M. Macropīper. Malabāthrum. Martāgon. herb. Mastiche. Mastichīnae Pil. Melīa terra. Melicrātum. Melinum oleum. Melōnum sem. Melopēpo. . Melopepōnis sem. Miclēta. . Mumīa. Myosōtis. . Myrrhīnum ol. Myrtīnum ol. N. Narcissīnum ol. Nardīnum oleum. Nenūphar. Nenupharīnum ol. Nepēta. herb. Nervīnum Ung. O. Ocȳmum, Ocīmum. Oesȳpus. Omphacīnum ol. Onobrȳchis. herb. Opālus, lapis. Ophioscorōdon. herb. Ophthalmīa. morb. Ornithogālon. herb. Opopānax—acis. Origānum. Osȳris. herb. Oxālis—īdis. Oxycrātum. Oxyrrhodīnum. P. Pampīni folia. Papaverīnum ol. Parūlis. morb. . Pepōnis Sem. . Perdīcis. Fel.
Periclymēnum. herb. Periplōca. herb. . Petroselīnum. Peucedānum. Phellodrys. . Philanthrōpus. . Phyllītis. herb. Platānus, arbor. Piperīnum ol. Polygāla. herb. Polygonātum. Polygōnum. herb. Polytrīchum. Pomphōlyx—ȳgos. Potamogīton. . Prasīnus color. Priāpus. Propōlis— . Psilōthrum. Ptisāna. Pylōrus. . Pyrēthrum. . R. Raphānus. Resīna. Ricinus. com. Rubrīca. ochra. S. Sambucīnus Syr. Sampsūchum. Sampsuchīnum ol. Sandarācha. andȳcis emp. Sanguisūgae. Santalīnum cerat. Sapphirīna Aqua. Sardōnyx. . Saxifrága. Scariōla. Schoenoprāson. Securidāca. herb. Scordīum. Serapīnum gum. Sesamīnum ol. Sesāmum. Sinapīnum oleum. Sisāri Radix. Smilax-ācis. Sophīa chirurgorum. Storax—ācis. Strobīlus. Strobilīna resina. Styrācis Pil. Styracīnum ol. Sycomōrus arbor. T. Taraxācum. Tetānus. morb. Thalassina vestis. Tragopōgon. . Tribūlus aquat. Trichomānes. Tripōlis. . Tryphēra. — .
V. Vagīna. Venētus sapo. Vernix—īcis. Veronīca. Vesīca. Vīcia. Umbilīcus. Vomica morb. Urāchus. Urēter—ēris. Urēthra. — . Usnēa. Z. Zeopȳrum. Zibēthum. Zizȳpha. Jujūbae. Zythogāla. Posset-drink. Two General RULES. I. ADjectives in [inus] de∣rived from Sensitive Animals, from the Names of Families, also from pro∣per Names, and Names of Countries are long in the Penultima, or the last Syl∣lable save one. As, Caro agnīna. Pinguedo anatīna. Stercus equīnum. Syrupus Byzantīnus. Sena Alexandrīna. Manna Calabrīna, &c. II. Adjectives in [inus] derived from things non-animate, viz. from Herbs or Plants, Stones, and vari∣ous other Matters (of which kind are many formed of Greek Words:) Also Adje∣ctives derived from Adverbs of Time, or from Substantives denoting the four Principal Seasons of the Year, are always short in the Penul∣tima, or last Syllable save one. As, Acanthīnus. Amaracinus.
Cedrīnus. Cypressīnus. Fagīnus. Glaucīnus. Adamantīnus. Amathystīnus. Hyacinthīnus. Diutīnus. Crastīnus. Pristīnus. Perindīnus. Hornotīnus. Serotīnus. Carīnus. Therīnus. Oporīnus. Chimerīnus, &c. Excepted out of this Rule, as having their Pe∣nultima long: Matutīnus. Vespertīnus. THE END.
INDEX RERƲM. The Characters or Marks explained. ACetarium Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 921. Acetum Lithargyrites. 869. Acetum Mellis. 729. Acetum Pestilentiale. 730. Acetum RadicatumMedicines added by the Translator. 733. Acetum TerebinthinatumMedicines added by the Translator. 732. Aethiops Minirale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 400. Alkekengi ConditumDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 799. Allium ConditumDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 799. Alumen Dulee 375. Alumen Febrifugum 377. AluminatumDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 870. Amuleta Infantum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's.. 933. Amuleta Pestilentiali. 921. Ani Hepatis. Vid. Vitriolum Martis. Antifebrile Concharum. 404. Antihecticum Poterii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 403. Antimon. DiaphoreticumDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 404. Antimon. Diaphoretic. fixum. 412. Antimon. Medicamentosum. 413. Antimon Resuscitatum. 414. Apozema potenter Expectorans. 745. Aqua Absinthii Composita.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 32. Aqua Alexiteria.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 32. Aqua Aluminosa.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 1. Aqua Animalis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 2. Aqua Anisi,Doctor Goddard's Arcana. v. Spir. Anisi. Aqua Antiphthisica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 2. Aqua Antiscorbutica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 3. Aqua Antiscorbutica alia. 4. Aqua Arthritica. Vid. Aqua omni∣um florum. Aqua Asgae faetidae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. Vid. Spir. Asae faet. Aqua Asthmatica, vid. aqua Pecto∣ralis. Aqua Aurant. corticum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. Vid. Spir. Aurant. Cort. Aqua Bechica. 4. Aqua Benedicta. 4. Aqua Benedicta composita,Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 5. Aqua Camphorata.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 5. Aqua Caryophyllorum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 6. Aqua Cephalica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 6. Aqua Cerasorum composita.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 7. Aqua Chalybeata.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 7.
Aqua Chamaemeli comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 8. Aqua Chamaemeli comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 33. Aqua Cinnamomi,Doctor Goddard's Arcana. vid. Spir. Cin∣nam. Aqua Cinnamomi Cardiaca.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 8. Aqua Cinnamomi Hordeata.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 9. Aqua Cochleariae Comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 34. Aqua Cordialis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 35. Aqua Cordium composita. 9. Aqua Cosme tic 9. Aqua Crinalis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 10. Aqua Cucumerum comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 10. Aqua Cynosbati comp. 11. Aqua Digitalis. 11. Aqua Embryonum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 11. Aqua Epidemica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 12. Aqua febrifuga.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 12. Aqua foeniculi dulcis, vide Spir. foenic. Aqua Formicarum. 13. Aqua Fortis Duplex. 13. Aqaa Fortis Aluminata. 13. Aqua Guajaci, vid. Spir. Guajaci. Aqua Herpetica. 14. Aqua Hirundinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 14. Aqua Hormini comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 15. Aqua Hungarica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 15. Aqua Junip. Bacc. vid. Spir. Ju∣nip. Aqua Lactis Alexiteria.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 16. Aqua Lactis Cardiaca.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 17. Aqua Lactis Nephritica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 17. Aqua Lactis Pectoralis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 18. Aqua Lactis Scorbutica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 18. Aqua Lamii comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 18. Aqua Lenitiva.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 35. Aqua Lavendulae, vid. Spir. La∣vendulae. Aqua Limon. cort. vid. Spir. Li∣mon. Aqua Melluminata.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 19. Aqua Menthae. vid. Spir. Menthae. Aqua Mercurialis. 19. Aqua Nucis Mosch. vid. Spir. Nucis Mosch. Aqua Odorifera. 20. Aqua omnium florum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 20. Aqua Ophthalmica. 22. Aqua Ophthalmica Sapphirina.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 22. Aqua Opii vid. Spir. Opii. Aqua Papaveris. errat. vid. Spir. Papav. Aqua Papaveris alba. vid. Spir. Pab. alb. Aqua Papaveris nig. vid. Spir. Pap. nig. Aqua Pectoralis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 23. Aqua Pectoralis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 36. Aqua Persicariae comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 24. Aqua Picarum comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 24. Aqua Pneumonica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 24. Aqua Prolifica. 25. Aqua Propectoralis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 36. Aqua Proalexiteria.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 36. Aqua Regia. 25. Aqua Rutae, vid. Spir. Rutae. Aqua Salivalis. 26 Aqua Sarsae comp. 27. Aqua Sassafrass. vid. Spir. Sassa∣fras. Aqua Senelorum comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 27. Aqua Siphylica. 28. Aqua Stimmios sulphurata. 28. Aqua Styptica. 29. Aqua Succini. vid. Spir. Succini. Aqua Tussilaginis comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 30. Aqua Venustatis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 31. Aqua Vermifuga. 31. Aqua. Vulneraria. 31. Arcanum Aluminis. 378. Arcanum Corallinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 379. Arcanum Corallin. Paracelsi. 384. Arcanum Cosmeticum. 388. Arcanum Duplex. 388. Arcanum Goddardianum.Medicines added by the Translator. 604. Arcanum Joviale. 391. Arcanum Scriptorium. 392. Aurum Fulminans. 394. Aurum Mosaïcum. 416. Aurum Potabile. 574. Aurum Vitae. 398. B Balsamum Anodynum. 880. Balsamum Apoplecticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 153. Balsamum Embryonum, vid. Spir. Embryon.
Balsamuml Foeminarum. 880. Balsamum Lucatelli.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 881. Balsamum Magistrale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 154. Balsamum magis-compos.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 886. Balsamum minus-comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 886. Balsamum Martiale. 154. Balsamum Momordicae. 882. Balsamum Nucistae. 883 Balsamum Paralyticum. 156. Bals. Podagr. v. Bals. Anodyn. Balsamum Saturninum. 159. Balsamum Sopetarum. 883. Balsamum Spinale. 884. Balsamum Succini.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 160. Balsamum Spleneticum. 884 Balsamum Sulphuris Antim. 161. Balsamum Sulph. Anisatum. 162. Balsamum Sulph. Bateanum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 884. Balsamum Sulphuris Benzoïna∣tum. 164. Balsamum Sulph. Knoephelii. 166 Balsamum Sulph. minerale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 885. Balsamum Sulphuris Rulandi. 885. Balsamum Sulphuris succinat.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 169. Balsamum sulphuris Terebintha∣turn.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 170. Balsamum Tartari. 127. Balsamum Veneris. 173. Balsamum Verum. 886. Balsamum Virilitatis, vide Ung. Virilitatis. Bezoar Animale. 417. Bezoarticum Joviale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 419. Bezoarticum Lunare. 421. Bezoarticum Martiale. 423. Bezoarticum Minerale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 424. Bezoarticum Mercuriale. 430. Bezoarticum Saturni. 431. Bezoarticum Solare.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 432. Bezoarticum Veneris. 436. Bolus Alexiteria, seu Cardiac.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 856. Butyrum Amygdalinum. 887. Butyrum Cerae. 888. Butyrum Succini, vide Bals. suc∣cini. C Calx Auri, v. Aurum Fulminans. Calx Jovis. 440. Calx Lunae. 437. Calx Saturni. i. e. Plumbum Ustum. Cardiacum Coeleste.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 802. Cardiacum Magnum. i. e. flos Cor∣dialium, vide Spiritus Cardia∣cus Magnus. Caryophilli odorati.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 922. Cashew, seu Catechu.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 922. Cataplasma Apoplecticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 912. Cataplasma Cephalicum. 912. Cataplasma Synanchicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 913. Cataplasma ad Paronychiam. 913. Cataplasma Pestilentiale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 914. Cataplasma Podagticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 914. Cataplasma Solare.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 914 Catharticum Caesareum. 831. Caudela Amygdalina.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 710. Caudela Nenupharina.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 710. Cauterium Lunare. 544. Ceratum album.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 898. Ceratum Cephalicum.Medicines added by the Translator. 899. Ceratum ad Clavos pedum.Medicines added by the Translator. 900. Ceratum Stomachicum.Medicines added by the Translator. 899. Ceratum Vulnerarium.Medicines added by the Translator. 900. Cerevisia Butleri. 739. Cerevisia Catapsoras.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 740. Cerevisia Embryonum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 740. Cerevisia Hydropica,Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 741 Cerevisia Jovialis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 741. Cerevisia Oxydorcica 742. Cerevisia Scorbutica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 743. Cerevisia Scrophularia.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 743. Cerevisia Vernalis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 744. Cerussa Antimonii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 441. Cerussa Martis. 445. Chalcanthum Rubefactum. 446. Chalybs sine Acido.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 446. Chalybs Tartarisatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 449. Cicera Tartari.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 840. Cinnabaris Antimonii. 450. Clissus Agrimoniae.Medicines added by the Translator. 792. Clissus Argentinae.Medicines added by the Translator. 790. Clissus Betonicae.Medicines added by the Translator. 790. Clissus Farfare.Medicines added by the Translator. 791. Clissus Hederae Terrestris.Medicines added by the Translator. 791 Clissus Peti.Medicines added by the Translator. 83. Clissus Portulacae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 789. Clissus Prunellae.Medicines added by the Translator. 791. Clissus Vitrioli. 105. Colcothar Vitrioli. 105. 455. Conserva Aurantiarum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 800.
Conserva Hepatica Corallitana.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. ibid. Conserva Nicotianae. 801. Corpus sine Anima. 455. Corvus Epilepticus. 456. Cromor Hordei.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 923. Crocus Jovis. 458. Crocus Veneris. 459. Crystallum Lunae, vide Vitriolum Lunae. Crystallum Minerale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 606. D Decoctum Album.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 745. Decoctum Amarum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 746. Decoctum Amarum alterans.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. ib. Decoctum Ambrosianum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 747. Decocticum Analepticum. ibid. Decoctum Antimoniale. 748. Decoctum Antiphthisicum. 748. Decoctum Astacorum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 749. Decoctum Digitalis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 749. Decoctum Diureticum Augenii. 750 Decoctum Dysentericum. 750. Decoctum Ictericum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 750. Decoctum Limacum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 751. Decoctum ad Morsum Canis Ra∣bidi.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 751. Decoctum Pacificum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 752. Decoctum Polychrestum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 752. Decoctum Praeservatorium. 753. Decoctum ad Rachitidem. 753. Decoctum Rubiae Tinctorum.754. Decoctum Rubicundum. 754. Decoctum Reguli.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 754. Decoctum Rhabarbari.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 755. Decoctum Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 755. Decoctum ad Sitim.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 756. Decoctum ad Strumas. 756. Decoctum Traumaticum. 757. Decoctum ad Tussin.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 757. Decoctum Ulni.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 758. Dentifricium Dominarum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 923. Dentifricium Infantum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 924. Dentifricium Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 924. Dentilavium Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 870. Diachylon OdoratumDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 901. Diacreta. 461. Diapalma Odorata.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 901. Diatartarum. 462. Diatessaron Potabile. 759. Diatrachea.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 463. E Elaeosaccharum Cardiacum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 803. Elaeosaccharum Carminativ.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 803. Elaeosaccharum Foeniculi.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 803. Elaeosaccharum Nucistae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 804. Elaeosaccharum Sassafras.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 804. Electuarium Album.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 832. Electuarium Antepidemicum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 839 Electuarium Asthmaticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 832. Electuarium CaryophyllatumDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 833. Electuarium Castitatis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 833. Electuarium Chalybeatum. 833. Electuarium Diarrhodi.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 834. Electuarium Dcis Sabaudiae. 834. Electuarium Epilepticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 834. Electuarium Juniperinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 835. Electuarium Lithontripticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 835. Electuarium Macis. 836. Electuarium Orvietanum. 836. Electuarium Oxydorcicum. 837. Electuarium Paralyticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 838. Electuarium Pectorale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 838. Electuarium Piperinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 838. Electuarium Vermifugum. 839. Elixir Anodynum Le Mort.Medicines added by the Translator. 196. Elixir Camphoratum. 184. Elixir Juniperinum Rolfincii.Medicines added by the Translator. 198. Elixir Menstruale Le Mort.Medicines added by the Translator. 197. Elixir Proprietatis DulceDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 185. Elixir Proprietatis Pestilentiale. 190. Elixir Proprietatis Tartarisat. 191. Elixir Salutis. 192. Elixir Vitae. 194. Elixir Vitae Maetsianum.Medicines added by the Translator. 196. Elixir Vitrioli. 194. Elleborus albus praepar.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 464. Emplastrum Adhaesivum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 901. Emplastrum Burgundicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 902. Emplastrum Camphoratum. 902. Emplastrum Catarrhale. 902. Emplastrum DiagalbaniDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 903. Emplastrum Diasulphuris Rulandi.
Emplastrum Epispasticum. 903. Emplastrum Febrifugum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 904. Emplastrum Febrifugum alterans.Medicines added by the Translator. 911. Emplastrum Haemorrhoidale. 904. Emplastrum Laterale. 905. Emplastrum Mammilare. 905. Emplastrum de Minio Comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 910 Emplastrum de Minio Comp. aliud.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 911. Emplastrum NuchaleDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 905. Emplastrum Opiatum. 906. Emplastrum Paralyticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 906. Emplastrum Podagticum. 907. Emplastrum Saturninum. 907. Emplastrum Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 908. Emplastrum Smecticum. 908. Emplastrum Soleare.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 908. Emplastrum Spasmicum. 909. Emplastrum ad Strumas.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 909. Emplastrum Synanchicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 909. Emplastrum Tibiale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 910. Emplastrum Vermifugum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 910. Emulsio de Avellanis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 711. Emulsio Cathartica. 711. Emulsio Expulsiva.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 712. Emulsio Cretacea.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 712. Emulsio Dactylorum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 713. Emulsio PaeoniataDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 714. Enema Alexiterium.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 915. Enema Cholicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 915. Enema Balsamicum 915. Enema Dysentericum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 916. Enema Hystericum. 916. Enema Oleosum. 916. Enema Spirituosum.Medicines added by the Translator. 918. Enema Terebinthinatum. 917. Enema Vinosum. 917. Enema Urinosum. 917. Ens Veneris.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 465. Epicarpia febrifuga.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 914. Essentia Absinthii. 174 Essentia Alexipharmaca.Medicines added by the Translator. 182. Essentia Antihysterica.Medicines added by the Translator. 182. Essentia Asthmatica.Medicines added by the Translator. 181. Essentia Cardui ben.Medicines added by the Translator. 176. Essentia Hyssopi.Medicines added by the Translator. 177. Essentia Martis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 177. Essentia Metallorum ad Vermes.Medicines added by the Translator. 181. Essentia Pulegii.Medicines added by the Translator. 180. Essentia Regia.Medicines added by the Translator. 180. Extractum Absinthii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 330. Extractum Alhandal. 331. Extractum Antiscorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 335. Extractum Catarrhale.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 346. Extractum Chalybis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 335. Extractum Diatessaron.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 336. Extractum Drasticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 337. Extractum Ecphracticum. 338. Extractum Febrifugum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 339. Extractum Fellis. 340. Extractum Hypnoticum, seu Lau∣danum,Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 346. Extractum IctericumDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 341. Extractum Lenitivum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 347. Extradtum Maltae comp. 341. Extractum Melampodii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 342. Extractum Panchymogogon.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 349. Extractum Paregorgicum. 343. Extractum Pectorale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 344. Extractum Peticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 345. Extractum Sarsae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 345. V. Aq. sarsae comp. F Febrifugum Salis, i. e. Sal Ar∣moniacum Volatile. Febrifugum Crollianum, vid. An∣tifebr. Conch. Febrifugum Riverii. 467. Flores Antimonii. 469. Flores Antimonii Diaphoret. 476. Flores Benzoïni. 477. Flores Bismuthi. 483. Flores Joviales. 485. Flores Salis. 608. Flores Salis Armoniaci. 609. Flores Salis Armoniaci Martiati. 610. Flores Sulphuris albi. 488. Flores Viridis. Aeris. 489. Flores Vitrioli. 611. Flores Zinci. 491. Flos Cordialium, nec non Cardia∣cum Magnum. 42. Focus Arthriticus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 870.
Fotus Scorbuticus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 871. Frontale Cephalalgicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 924. G Galbanetum Hartmanni. 874. Calbanetum Sennerti. 875. Gargarisma Album. 871. Gargarisma Apoplecticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 871 Gargarisma Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 872. Gargarisma Synanchicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 872. Gelatina Cornu Cervi.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 792. Gelatina Corroborans.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 79. Gelatina Ichthyocollae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 793. Gilla Theophrasti. 492. Guttae Goddardianae.Medicines added by the Translator. 604. H Helleborus albus praep. V. Ellebo∣rus. Hepar Sulphuris. 583. Hercules Bovii. Vide Aurum Vi∣tae. I Ignis Philosophicus. Vide Phos∣phorus. Infusio Aperiens.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 735. Infusio Arthritica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 735. Infusio Benedicta.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 736. Infusio Cachectica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 736. Infusio Icterica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 737. Infusio Ireata. 737. Infusio sancta 738. Injectio Alba.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 918. Injectio Auricularis. 919. Injectio Benedicta.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 919. Jovis Amalgama, i. e. Crocus Jo∣vis. Julapium Antiscorbuticum. 759. Jalapium Aperiens minus comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 776. Julapium Aperiens magis comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 776. Julapium Asthmaticum. 760. Julapium Cretaceum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 760. Julapium Fragorum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 761. Julapium Hystericum Camphorar.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 761. Julapium Hystericum Farinaceum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 761. Julapium Hystericum Foetidum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 762 Julapium Hystericum Mithridati∣cum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 762. Julapium Hystericum Moschatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 762. Julapium Idaeum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 763. Julapium Perlatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 763. Julapium Purpureum. 763. Julapium ad Rachitidem.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 764. Julapium ad Sitim. Vide Decoct. ad Sitim. Julapium Tartarisatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 764. Julapium Vitae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 764. Juniperi Baccae candefactae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 801. Jupiter Diaphoreticus. 494. Jupiter Nitratus. 622. Jusculum Galli.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 714. L Lac Aluminis. 584. Lac Amoniaci.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 716. Lac Asae foetidae, vid. Julap. Hyst. foetid. Lac Benzoïni.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 585. Lac Mercurii. 587. Lac Saturni, vide Magist. Satur∣ni. Lac Scammonii. 587. Lac Sulphuris. 367. Lapis contra yerva.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 925. Lapis de Goa. 925. Lapis Medicamentosus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 588. Lapis Salutis. 590. Laudanum Liquid. Cidoniat. 326. Laudanum Liq. Tartarisat. 328. Laudanum sine Opio. 329. Laudanum Goddard.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. vide Ex∣tract. Hyp. Laudanum Liquidum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. vide Tinct.Opii.
Laudanum Starkii, vid. Pil. Mat∣thaei. Linctus Benedictus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 796. Linctus Expectorans.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 797. Linctus Haemoptoëcus. 797. Linctus Synanchicus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 797. Linimentum Melluminatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 888. Linimentum simplex.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 888. Linteum Crocatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 926. Liquamen Silicum. 591. Liquamen Sulphuris 596. Liquor Acuens, vid. Lac. Scam∣monii. Liquor CephalalgicusDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 597. Liquor Limacum. 599. Lohoch Album.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 798. Lohoch Domesticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 798. Luna Potabilis. v. Tinct. Lunae. M Magisterium Antimonii Diapho∣reticum. 353. Magist. Benzoïni.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 355. Magist. Bismuthi. 357. Magist. Gittae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 361. Magist. Jovis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 362. Magist. Lithargyrites, vid. Sal Litharg. Magist. Lunae, vid. Vitriolum Lunae. Magist. Martis, vid. Extract. Cha∣lybis. Magist. Saturni. 364. Magist. Sulphuris. 367. Magist. Tartari. 370. Magist. Turpethi. 373. Magnes Praeparat. 496. Mars Diaphoreticus. 496. Mars Fulminans. 498. Mars Potabilis. 268. Masticatoria.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 927. Mater Balsami, vid. Balsam Pa∣rylit. Mel. Saponis. 888. Mercurii Purgatio. 499. Mercurius praecipitat. albus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 506. Mercurius praecip. correctus. 511. Mercurius praecipitat. sixus. 513. Mercurius praecipitat. flavus. 513. Mercurius praecipirat. griseus. 517. Mcrcuiius praecip. Incarnatus. 518. Mercurius praecip. Laxativus. 520. Mercurius praecipitat. per se. 522. Mercurius praecipitat. ruber. 526. Mercurius praecip. solaris per se. 531. Mercurius praecipitat. Viridis. 534. Mercurius Sublimat. ruber & fla∣vus. 503. Mercurius Vitae correctus. 535. Mercurius Vitae Purgans. 535. Miva Borraginis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 794. Miva Consolidae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 794. Miva Dialthaeae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 794. Miva Satyrii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 795. Mixtura Aaticolica. 716. Mixtura simplex.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 46. Mixtura Tubularis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 927. Mucilago Nephritia.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 795. N Nitrum Antimoniatum. 612. Nitrum Cachecticum. 614. Nitrum Catharticum. 615. Nitrum Corallatum. 616. Nitrum Fixatum. 616. Nitrum Hermaphroditicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 621. Nitrum Joviatum. 622. Nitrum Nitratum. 622. Nitrum Perlatum. 625. Nitrum Saturnisatum. 626. Nitrum Sulphuratum. 627. Nitrum Vitriolatum. 627. Nodulus facialis. 928. Nodulus Hystericus. 928. O Oleum Aloëticum. 132. Oleum Antimonii Saccharatum. 133. Oleum Baisami, vid. Balfam Pa∣ralytic. Oleum Balsamicum. 135. Oleum Bufonum. 875.
Oleum Camphorae. 135. Oleum Chartae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 139. Oleum Cosmeticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 876. Oleum Cremoris.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 876. Oleum Heracleinum. 140. Oleum Lintcorum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 142. Oleum Ludi. 142. Oleum Lumbricorum. 143. Oleum Martis. 145. Oleum Milvinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 877. Oleum Paralyticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 877. Oleum Polypodii. 146. Oleum Pomosum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 877. Oleum Ranarum. 878. Oleum Sacchari simplex. 147. Oleum Sacchari comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 148. Oleum Saponis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 148. Oleum Saturni, vid. Bals. Sa∣turnium. Oleum Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 878. Oleum Silicum, vid. Liquamen silicum. Oleum Tabaci. 149. Oleum Talchiper deliq. 599. Oleum Tartari purgans, vid. Mag. Tartari. Oleum  Tricophues. 879 Oleum Tritici.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 879. Oleum Viperarum. 879. Oleum Viridis aeris. 600. Oleum Vitrioli dulce.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 150. Orviteanum. 836. Oxysaccharum Emeticum. 731. P Panacea Aurea. 538. Panacea Cathartica. 540. Panacea Hartmanni. 541. Panacea Holsatica. V. Arcan. Du∣plex. Panacea Schroderi, vide Merc. praecip. fixus. Panis Drafarsae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 928. Panis de Vipera.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 929. Passulae Laxativae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 801. Pasta Halieutica. 929. Pasta Hippiatri. 929. Pasta Hypoglottida.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 930. Pasta Regalis pro Emulsion. 930. Pedilavium Emmenagogum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 872. Pedilavium Hypnoticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 873. Pedilavium Podagticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 873. Pedilavium Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 874. Phosphorus. 350. Pilae Odoratae. 932. Pilulae Aethiopicae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 840. Pilulae de Ammoniaca Magistral.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 841. Pilulae Angelicae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 841. Pilulae Anticolicae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 842. Pilulae Antimoniales. 842. Pilulae Antipodagricae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 843. Pilulae Balsamicae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 843. Pilulae Castitatis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 845. Pilulae Catarrhales.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 845. Pilulae Crapulariae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 846. Pilulae Cretaceae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 846. Pilulae de Creta Palmarii. 846. Pilulae Hydropicae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 847. Pilulae Hystericae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 847. Pilulae Lithontripticae. 848. Pilulae Lunares, vid. Vitriolum Lu∣nae Pilulae Marocostinse.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 848. Pilulae Masticatoriae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 849. Pilulae Matthaei, alias Starkii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 849. Pilulae Melanagogae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 850. Pilulae Pacificae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 850. Pilulae Pavii. 851. Pilulae de Pice. 851. Pilulae Restringentes.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 852. Pilulae de Sagapeno.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 852. Pilulae Sinapinae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 853. Pilulae Styracinae. 853. Pilulae Tartareae Bontii. 853. Pilulae Vaticanae. 854. Pilulae Vermifugal. 854. Pilulae Vomitoriae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 602. Pisa Luta.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 931. Pisa Rubra.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 931. Pisa Uvridia.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 931. Pleres Archonticon, vid. Pulvis Pleres Archon. Plumbum Album & Cerussa. 601. Pomum Ambrae. 932. Potio Alba.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 717. Potio Febrifuga.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 717. Potio Hydropica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 718.
Potio Pleuritica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 718. Pruna Laxativa. 802. Ptisana Cathartica. 719 Pulvis Aethiopicus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 807. Pulvis albus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 807. Pulvis AnticardialgicusDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 808. Pulvis Anticolicus. 808. Pulvis Antimonii Russellianus.Medicines added by the Translator. 830 Pulvis Antipyreticus. 809. Pulvis Arthriticus Turneri. 809. Pulvis Asthmaticus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 809. Pulvis Basilicus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 810. Pulvis ad Calculum. 810. Pulvis Cantianus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 810. Pulvis Cardiacus Corallatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 811 . Pulvis Cardiacus Eboratus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 812. Pulvis Cardiacus Perlatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 812. Pulvis Cardiacus Rubeus. 812. Pulvis ad Casum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 813. Pulvis Cibarius.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 813. Pulvis Cinnabaris comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 813. Pulvis Cornachini.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 814. Pulvis Coronatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 815. Pulvis Crinalis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 815. Pulvis Cucuphalis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 816. Pulvis Epidemicus aureus. 816. Pulvis Epilepticus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 817. Pulvis Febrifugus certus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 817. Pulvis Griseus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 818. Pulvis Haemoptoicus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 818. Pulvis Hermodactyl. comp. 819. Pulvis Hystericus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 819. Pulvis lctericus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 820. Pulvis Lateralis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 820. Pulvis Liliaceus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 820. Pulvis Martialis comp. 821. Pulvis Odoratus. 821. Pulvis Ophthalmicus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 822. Pulvis Oxytocius.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 822. Pulvis Pannonicus rubeus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 822. Pulvis Pectoralis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 823. Pulvis Pepticus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 824. Pulvis Pleres-Archonticon. 824. Pulvis Pleuriticos.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 825. Pulvis Purpureus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 825. Pulvis ad Rachitidem.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 825. Pulvis fine Pari. 826. Pulvis. Solearis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 826. Pulvis SternutatoriusDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 826. Pulvis Stomachicus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 827. Pulvis ad Strumas.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 827. Palvis Sympatheticus. 827. Pulvis Tertianarius, vide Pulvis Antipyr. Pulvis Vermifugus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 828. Pulvis Uvularis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 828. R Ranarum Hepata.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 829. Regulis Jovialis. 542. Regulus Lunaris. 543. Regulus Martis. 549. Regulus Solaris. 555. Regulus Veneris. 556. Ros Vitrioli. 93. Rosa Solis. 734. S Saccharum Aluminis. V. Alumen. Dulc. Saccharum Ambaratum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 805. Saccharum Caryophyllatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 805. Saccharum Eboratum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 805. Saccharum Persicorum. 806. Saccharum Sambucinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 806. Saccharum Saturni.Medicines added by the Translator. 668. Saccharum Tormentillae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 806. Sacculus Embryonum. V. Cere∣vissia, &c. Sal Absinthij Crystallinum. 629. Sal Aceti Essentiale. 630. Sal Aceti fixum. 631. Sal Alkali. 632. Sal Aluminis. 633. Sal Antimonij Zwelferi.Medicines added by the Translator. 706. Sal Armoniacum fixatum. 634. Sal Armoniacum Volatile. 636. Sal Armoniacum Volatile Oleo∣sum. 637. Sal Chalybis. 643. Sal Cibarius. V. Pulvis Cibarius. Sal Coralliorum. 650. Sal Cornu Cervi Succinatum. 653. Sal Decripitatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 655. Sal Diurericum. 656. Sal Duplex. V. Arcanum D∣plex.
Sal Febrifugum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 656. Sal Jovialis. 657. Sal Lithargytes. 662. Sal Martis, i.e. Sal Chalybis. Sal Martis Catharticus. 663. Sal Margaritarum. 651. Sal Perlarum. 651. Sal Oculorum Cancrorum. 653. Sal Philosophorum. 665. Sal Polychrestum. 665. Sal Saturni. 668. i. e. Saccharum Saturni. Sal Spongiae Volatile. 673. Sal Sulphuris. 674. Sal Tartari. 677. Sal Tartari Volatile. 684. Sal Viperarum Volatilis. 688. Sal Veneris, i. e. Flores Viridis Aeris. Sal Vitrioli compositum.Medicines added by the Translator. 709. Sal Volatile Oleosum formâ siccâ.Medicines added by the Translator. 637. Sal Volatile Aromaticum & Oleo∣sum.Medicines added by the Translator. 638. Sal Volatile Oleosum & Aroma∣ticum Extemporaneum.Medicines added by the Translator. 639. Sal Volatile Oleosum Cephalicum Extemporaneum.Medicines added by the Translator. 639. Sal Volatile Oleosum febrile & Sto∣machicum Extemporaneum.Medicines added by the Translator. 639. Sal Volatile Aromaticum per dige∣stionem.Medicines added by the Translator. 640. Sal Volatile Aromatic. per distil∣lation.Medicines added by the Translator. 640. Sal Volatile Oleosum quod Odo∣rem Urinosum non habet.Medicines added by the Translator. 640 Sal Volatile Oleosum Le Mort.Medicines added by the Translator. 641. Sal Volatile Oleosum Aliud.Medicines added by the Translator. 641. Sal Volatile Oleosum nobilissimum.Medicines added by the Translator. 642. Sal Volatile Oleosum Extempora∣neum.Medicines added by the Translator. 642. Sal Volatile Oleosum Antivenere∣um.Medicines added by the Translator. 642. Sal Volatile Oleosum Vulgare.Medicines added by the Translator. 643. Sal Urinae Volatilis. 690. Sapo Tartareus. 603. Saranetta Cosmetica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 889. Scammonium Aurantiatum, vid Extract. Drastic. Scammonium Cydoniatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 855. Scammonium Limoniatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 855. Scammonium Rosatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 856. Secundïnae preparatae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 557. Sedativum Archaei. 557. Serum Aluminatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 719. Serum Hepaticum. 720. Serum Scorbuticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 721. Serum de Sedo.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. A 722. Serum Sinapinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 722. Silices Praeparati. 558. Spiritus Alkermes.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 37. Spiritus Aluminis. 38. Spiritus Aluminis Dulcis. 39 Spiritus Ambrae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 39. Spiritus Anisi.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 107. Spiritus Asae foetidae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 109. Spiritus Aurantiarum Corticum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 110. Spiritus Benzoïni.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 40. Spiritus Camphorae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 41. Spiritus Cardiacus magnus. 42. Spiritus Cerasorum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 43. Spiritus Cinnamomi.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 111. Spiritus Cochleariae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 43. Spiritus Coralliorum. 45. Spiritus Cornu Cervi succinatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 46. Spiritus Diatrin.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 46. Spiritus Dracunculi. 48. Spiritus Embryonum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 48. Spiritus Foeniculi dulci.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 111. Spiritus Guajaci.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 112. Spiritus Hormini comp. 49. Spiritus Hyssopi Verus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 49. Spiritus Juniperi Verus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 50. Spiritus Juniperi Bacc.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 114. Spiritus Lavenduli florum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 115. Spiritus Limonium corticum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 116 Spiritus Mannae. 53. Spiritus Menthae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 118. Spiritus Millepedum. 55. Spiritus Nitri.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 56. Spiritus Nitri Bezoarticus. 58. Spiritus Nitri dulcis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 59. Spiritus Nucis Mocshat.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 119. Spiritus Oii.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 120. Spiritus Papaveris erratici.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 125.
Spiritus Papaveris albi.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 126. Spiritus Papaveris Nigri.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 126. Spiritus Reginae Hungariae, vide Aqua Hungarica. Spiritus Raphani compositus.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 127. Spiritus Rhoeadus crapularius.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 61. Spiritus Rutae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 128. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 128. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Bate. 61. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Tartari∣satus. 68. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Succina∣tus. 68. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Chaly∣beatus. 69. Spiritus Salis Coagulatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 69. Spiritus Salis Martialis. 70. Spiritus Sambuci. 71. Spiritus Sanguinis. 72. Spiritus Sassafras.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 128. Spiritus Saturni. 74. Spiritus Spongiarum. 77. Spiritus Succini.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 129. Spiritus Tabaccae. 79. Spiritus Theriacalis camphoratus. 84. Spiritus Veneris.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 85. Spiritus Vini Succinatus. 88. Spiritus Vini Tartarisatus. 88. Spiritus Viperarum. 90. Spiritus Vitae aureus, vide Tinct. aurea. Spiritus Vitrioli. 94. Spiritus Vitrioli Coagulatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 103. Spiritus Vitrioli Diaphoreticus. 104 Spiritus Vitrioli Essentificatus. 105. Spiritus Vitrioli Martis. 106. Spiritus Vitrioli Philosophicus. 106. Spiritus Vitrioli Tartarisatus. 107. Stypticum Regis. 30. Succi Scorbutici.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 723. Suffimentum Hystericum. 932. Sulphur Antimonii. 560. Sulphur Antimonii Combustibile. 561. Sulphur Antimonii Russelianum.Medicines added by the Translator. 830. Sulphur Auri. 574. Sulphur Auratum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 565. Sulphur Vitrioli 567. Sulphur Vitriole Martiale. 568. Sulphur Vitrioli Narcoticum. 569. Suppositoria Aluminosa.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 920. Suppositorium Haemorrhoidale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 920. Syrupus Allelujae. 765. Syrupus Ambrosianus, vide De∣coct. Ambrosianus. Syrupus Antepidemicus.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 777. Syrupus Ammoniaci.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 783. Syrupus Antihydropicus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 777. Syrupus Antiscorbuticus. 765. Syrupus Asaesoetidae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 780. Syrupus Aurantiarum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 777. Syrupus Balsamicus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 766. Syrupus Balsamicus min.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. vide Syr. Capivii. Syrupus Benzoïni.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 778. Syrupus Benedictus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 766. Syrupus Capivii.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 778. Syrupus Carannae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 788. Syrupus Cardiacus auratus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 766. Syrupus Calybeatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 767. Syrupus Chalybeatus Albius.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 767. Syrupus Chalybeatus Corallatus.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 768. Syrupus Contemperans.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 779. Syrupus de Croco.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 768. Syrupus Exonerans.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 779. Syrupus ad Fissuras. 769. Syrupus Foetidus.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 780. Syrupus Galbani.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 781. Syrupus Guajaci comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 780. Syrupus Hypnoticus Balsamicus.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 782. Syrupus Hemoptoicus. 769. Syupus Hypnoticus pectoralis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 781. Syrupus Hystericus.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 781. Syrupus Julapii.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 777. Syrupus Jovis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 783. Syrupus Jovialis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 769. Syrupus Limacum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 770. Syrupus Lumbricorum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 770. Syrupus Martis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 783. Syrupus Mastiches.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 779. Syrupus de Myrrha.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 771. Syrupus Myrrhae,Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 787. Syrupus Olibani.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 788.
Syrupus Odoratus min.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 784. Syrupus Pectoralis simp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 785. Syrupus Pectoralis Balsamicus.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 784. Syrupus Peponicus. 771. Syrupus de Peto.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 772. Syrupus de Rapps.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 772. Syrupus Rosarum Damascenarum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 785. Syrupus. Rosarum rubrarum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 786. Syrupus Rosarum Odoratus.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 786 Syrupus Sambuci florum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 786. Syrupus Sambucinus comp. 773. Syrupus Sapientum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 787. Syrupus de Scammonio.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 773. Syrupus Scammonii.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 779. Syrupus Sidereus. 774. Syrupus Styracis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 784. Syrupus de Sulphure. 774. Syrupus Terebinthinatae comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 787. Syrupus Tolutanus Magistralis. 774. Syrupus ad Tussim.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 788. Syrupus Vermifugus. 775. Syrupus Uterinus.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 788. T Tabulae Absinthiacae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 857. Tabulae Amygdaloëdes.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 857. Tabulae de Angelica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 857. Tabulae Antimoniales.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 858. Tabulae Antisynanchicae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 858. Tabulae de Aurantiis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 858. Tabulae Burgessianae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 859. Tabulae Cordialgicae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 859. Tabulae Carmintivae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 860. Tabulae Catharticae. 860. Tabulae Diambrae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 860. Tabulae Diambrae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 861. Tabulae Diatragacanthi.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 861. Tabulae Divinae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 861. Tabulae Embryonum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 862. Tabulae Emeticae. 862. Tabulae Farfareae. 863. Tabulae Foeniculinae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 863. Tabulae Griseae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 863. Tabulae Hemoptoïcae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 864. Tabulae Helenii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 864. Tabulae Infantum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 865. Tabulae Lenthales.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 865. Tabulae de Pipere.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 865. Tabulae Prunellae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 866. Tabulae Rosaceae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 866. Tabulae Saponaceae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 867. Tabulae Stomachieae, vide Pleres Archonticon. Tabulae de Styrace.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 867. Tabulae Tartarcae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 867. Tabulae Vermifugae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 868. Tartarum Aceti, vide Sal Aceti Essential. Tartarum Antimoniatum. 693. Tartarum Chalybeatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 694. Tartarum Emeticum. 696. Tartarum Laxativum. 698. Tartarum Vitriolatum Antimoni∣ale. 699. Tartarum Vitriolatum Emetico∣purg. 740. Terra Vitrioli Dulcis. 581. Testes Apri praeparati. 829. Testes Equi preparati.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 829. Tinctura Absinthii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 199. Tinctura Absinthii simp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 268. Tinctura Amara comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 269. Tinctura Ambrae griseae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 270 Tinctura Ambrae. Vid. Spiritus Ambrae. Tinctura Ammoniaci.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 271. Tinctura Amygdaloides.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 199. Tinctura Angelicae seminum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 271. Tinctura Antemetica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 272. Tinctura Antepeleptica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 273. Tinctura Anticolica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 274. Tinctura Anti-hydropica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 275. Tinctura Antimelancholica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 277. Tinctura Antimonii Emetica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 201. Tinctura Antimonii Purgans. 260. Tinctura Antiscorbutica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 278. Tinctura Armoniaci. 207. Tinctura Asae faetidae. 209. Tinctura Asae faetidae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 279. Tinctura Asthmatica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 210.
Tinctura Aurantiarum Corticum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 320. Tinctura Aurea.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 211. Tinctura Balsami Capivii.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 281. Tinctura Balsami Tolutani.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 281. Tinctura Benzoïni.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 282. Tinctura Bezoartica, 213. Tinctura Calefaciens.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 284. Tinctura calida major.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 285. Tinctura calida minor.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 286. Tinctura Cambogiae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 301. Tinctura Carannae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 287. Tinctura Cardamomi.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 285. Tinctura Cardamomi.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 214. Tinctura Cardiaca.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 288. Tinctura Cardiaca Restringens.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 289. Tinctura Caryophyllorum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 284. Tinctura Carui.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 215. Tinctura Castorei.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 290. Tinctura Cathartica Ridglei. 216. Tinctura Cephalica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 292. Tinctura Cephal. Cordialis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 294. 293. Tinctura Cerussae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 217. Tinctura Chamaemeli.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 217. Tinctura Chamaemeli florum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 294 Tinctura Chinae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 308. Tinctura Cinnamomi.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 289. Tinctura Cochleariae comp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 218. Tinctura Coelestis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 271. Tinctura contra Iliacum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 294. Tinctura Contra yerva.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 296. Tinctura Corallij. 219. Tinctura Cordialis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 295. Tinctura Cordialis Epidemica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 296. Tinctura Coroborans.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 297. Tinctura Croci.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 288. Tinctura Cubebarum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 286. Tinctura Ellebori Utriusque.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 277. Tinctura Exonerans.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 298. Tinctura Febrifuga.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 299. Tinctura Ferri.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 221. Tinctura Galbani.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 300. Tinctura Gambogiae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 301. Tinctura Glycyrrhizae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 310. Tinctura Gratissima.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. vid. Tinct. Thymi Citrini. Tinctura Guajaci.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 302. Tinctura Guajaci Corticis. 223. Tinctura Galbaneti. 224. Tinctura Haematitae. 224. Tinctura Hierae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 226. Tinctura Hypnotica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 303. Tinctura Julapii.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 275. Tinctura Juniperi Bacc.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 274. Tinctura Juniperi.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 227. Tinctura Lavendulae florum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 273. Tinctura Limonum Corticum.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 297. Tinctura Lunae. 229. Tinctura Martis. 233. Tinctura Martis aurea. 238. Tinctura Martis Tartarisata. 240. Tinctura Mastiches.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 304. Tinctura Melampodii.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 242. Tinctura Melissae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 243. Tinctura Mellis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 244. Tinctura Menthae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 272. Tinctura Moschi.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 305. Tinctura Myrrhae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 306. Tinctura Myrrhae comp. 245. Tinctura Nucis Moschatae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 293. Tinctura Nutritiva.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 308. Tinctura Oculorum Cancrorum. 246. Tinctura Odontalgica. 247. Tinctura Olibani.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 309. Tinctura Opii simp.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 303. Tinctura Opii comp.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 310. Tinctura Papaveris erratici.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 317. Tinctura Paralytica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 248. Tinctura Pectoralis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 310. Tinctura Perlarum. 249. Tinctura Peruviana,Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 312. Tinctura Piperis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 250. Tinctura Potentialis, vide Tinct. Paralytica. Tinctura Proprietatis. 251. Tinctura Quartanaria.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 312. Tinctura Regalis, i. e. Spir Am∣brae. Tinctura Rhabarbari.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 251. Tinctura Rhabarbari Absinthit.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 316. Tinctura Rhaeados, vide Spir. Rhaeados Crap. Tinctura Rosarum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 252. Tinctura Rubra.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 317. Tinctura Rutae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 318.
Tinctura Sacra, vid. Tinct. Hierae. Tinctura Salviae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 292. Tinctura Salviae Absinthit.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 319. Tinctura Salutis, vide Elixir Sa∣lutis. Tinctura Sassafras.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 253. Tinctura Saturni. 253. Tinctura Scammonii.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 298. Tinctura Schaenanthi.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 299. Tinctura Scorbutica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 256. Tinctura Senae Absinthit.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 319. Tinctura Serpentar. Virgin.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 322. Tinctura Serpylli.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 257. Tinctura Stomachica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 257. Tinctura Stomachica Cordialis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 320. Tinctura Styracis.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 321. Tinctura Succini.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 258. Tinctura Sudorisica.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 322. Tinctura Sudorisica min.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 323. Tinctura Sulphuris 261. Tinctura Taccamahacchae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 324. Tinctura Terebinthinae. è Chio.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 325. Tinctura Thymi Citrini.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 326 Tinctura Valerianae.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 323. Tinctura Veneris. 264. Tinctura Virginiana.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 267. Tinctura Winterani.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 278. Torquis Infantum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 933. Tragaea Granorum Actes.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 830. Trochisci Pectorales.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 868. Turundae Acousticae.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 933. Turpethum Minerale. 513. V Vinum Arthriticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 723. Vinum Arthriticum purgans.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 724 Vinum Chalybeatum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 725. Vinum Ecphracticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 725. Vinum Hippocraticum. 726. Vinum Hydropicum. 727. Vinum Scelotyrbicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 728. Vinum Vperinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 728. Vitriolum Camphoratum. 701. Vitriolum Lunae. 702. Vitriolum Martis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 705. Vitriolum Veneris. 489. Unguentum Albuminum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 889. Unguentum Antipyreticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 890. Unguentum de Aurantiis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 890. Unguentum de Betonica Equatica.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 890. Unguentum Cephalalgicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 891. Unguentum rinificum. 891. Unguentum Depilatorium. 891. Unguentum DigitalisDoctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 892. Unguentum Faciale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 892. Unguentum Familiare.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 893. Unguentum ad Fissuras.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 893. Unguentum ad Foveas.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 893. Unguentum Fuscum. 894. Unguentum Haemorrhoidale.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 894 Unguentum Haemorrhoidale.Doctor Goddard's Arcana. 898. Unguentum Herpeticum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 895. Unguentum ad Lumbricos.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 895. Unguentum Ophthalmicum. 895. Unguentum Paregorgicum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 896. Unguentum Piperinum.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 896. Unguentum Soleare.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 897. Unguentum Sympatheticum. 897. Unguentum Virilitatis.Doctor Bate's more Ʋsual and Experimented Receip's. 897. Vomitorium Aluminis, vide Se∣rum Aluminatum. Uvae Passae & Corinthiacae pur∣gantes, vid. Passulae Laxativae.
Libri Medici, Anatomici, Chirurgici, & Plantarum Historiae, qui prostant Venales apud Sam Smith & Benj. Walford, Londini. 1694. In Folio. JOannis Raii S. R. S. Historia plantarum generalis, species ha∣ctenus editas, alias{que} insuper multas noviter inventas, & de∣scriptas complectens, accesserunt Lexicon, & nomenclator Botanicus cum Indicibus Necessariis 2 vol. 1684. Wilughbeii Ornithologia, sive historia Avium cum Iconibus e∣legantissimis ex recensione Joannis Raii S. R. S. —Ejusdem historiae Piscium libri IV. cum figuris elegan∣tissimis totum Opus recognovit Jo. Raius S. R. S. Joannis Raii S. R. S. Synopsis Methodica Animalium Qua∣drupedum & Serpentini Generis: vulgarlum notas Characte∣risticas, Rariorum descriptiones integras exhibens: Cum Historiis & Observationibus Anatomicis perquam curiosis. Praemittuntur nonnulla de Animalium in Genere, Sensu, Ge∣neratione, Divisione, &c. Lond. 1693. Octavo. —Ejusdem Synopsis Methodica Stirpum Britannicarum. 1691. Octavo. Richardi Morton, M. D. Regii. Collegii Medicor. Lond. So∣cii, & Censoris ΠΥΡΕΤΟΛΟΓΙΑ seu exercitationes de morbis universalibus acutis. Lond. 1692. Oct. —Ejusdem Phthisiologia seu excercitationes de Phthisi tri∣bus libris comprehensae, totumque opus variis historiis illu∣stratum. Lond. 1689. Oct. Gulielmi Cole, M. D. Novae Hypotheseos ad explicanda fe∣brium intermittentium Symptomata & typos excogitatae Hy∣potyposis. Una cum Aetiologiâ remediorum, speciatim ve∣rò de Curatione per Corticem peruvianum. Accessit Disser∣tatiuncula de intestinorum Motu peristaltico. Lond. 1663. Oct. Gualteri Harris, M. D. Collegii Medicor Lond. Socii atque Cen∣soris tractatus de morbis acutis Infantum. Lond. 1689. Oct. Theodori de Mayerne Equit. Aurati Mag. Brit. Reg. Archi∣atror, comitis, Praxeos in morbis Internis praecipuè gravi∣oribus & Chronicis Syntagma, ex adversariis, conciliis ac
Epistolis ejus summâ Cura ac diligentia concinnatum. Lond. 1690. Oct. Pharmacopaeia Bateana, Quâ Nongenta circiter Pharmaca è praxi Geo. Batei Regi Carolo Secundo Medici primarii ex∣cerpto ordine alphabetico concise exhibentur. Editio al∣tera priori multò locupletior: cum viribus ac Dosibus an∣nexis. Item Arcana Goddardiana ex Autographo Autoris Desumpta. Curâ Ja. shipton. Lond. 1691. Duod. Pharmacologia seu Manuductio ad Materiam Medicam in qua Medicamenta Officinalia, Simplicia, in Methodum Natu∣ralem digesta succincte, & accurate describuntur, cum no∣tis generum Characteristicis specierum synonymis, diffe∣rentiis, & Viribus, Opus Omnibus Medicis, Philosophis, Pharmacopaeis, Chirurgis & Pharmacopolis utilissimum à Sam. Dale 1693. Processus integri in Morbis fere omnibus Curandis à Do. Tho∣ma Sydenham M. D. Conscripti, quibus accessit graphica Sym∣ptomatum Delineatio, in 12o. price one Shilling. 1693. Phtisiologia Lancastriensis, cui Accessit Tentamen Philosophi∣cum de Mineralibus Aquis, in eodem Comitatu Observatis. Authore Carolo Leigh M. D. Oct. 1604. Hippocratis & Galeni Opera Gr. Lat. conjunctim edita per Char∣tarium 13 tom. Paris. —Opera Gr. Lat. cum Annotat. Foesii. Genevae. 1615. Bidloo Anatomia humani Corporis cum. 105. fig. illust. 1685. Diemerbroeck Opera omnia Anatom. & Med. Ʋltrajecti 1685. Bibliotheca Anatomica 2 vol. cum siguris Genevae. 1685. Boneti (Theo) Sepulchretum sive Anatomia pract. 2 vol. Gen. 1679. — Thesaurus medico-practicus 3 vol. Gen. 1692. —Medicina Septentrionalis 2 vol, cum figuris. Ibid. 1685. — Mercurius compitalitius sive index med. pract. Ibid. 1683. Dioscoridis Opera Gr. Lat. ex interp. J. Saria. Gen. Lacunae-Epitome Operum Galeni. Lugduni Theoph Paracelsi Opera Omnia 2 vol. 1658 Riverii Opera Omnia Medica. Gen. 1679. Zacuti Lufitani Opera 2 vol. Lugduni. 1647. Fabr. Hildani Opera Med-Chyrurg. cum Severino. 1682. Sennerti. Opera omnia 5. tom. in 3 vol. Ludg. 1666. Aquapendente Opera Anatom. & Phys. cum fig. 1687. Malpighil Opera omnia. Londini. 1686. Schenkli Observationes Med rariores 1665.
Pharmacopaeia Collegii Reg. Londini. — Augustana Aucta & renovata. —Bruxellensis. Zwelseri Animad▪ in Pharmacop. August 2 vol. Pisonis & Margravii Hist. Indiae cum fig. 1658. Jonstoni Hist. Animlium 2 vol. cum figuris. Charleton de differentiis Animalium. 1677, Matthiolus in Dioscoridem de plantis cum fig. 1674. Breynii Plantarum Exoticarum Centuria cum fig. Horti Indici Malabarrici tom. xi. cum fig. 1692. Bauhini Historia Plantarum 3 vol. cum fig. Morisoni psantarum historia universalis cum fig. Hernadez historia plantarum, Animalium, & Mineralium Mex∣icanorum cum fig. Spigelii Anatomia Corporis humani cum figuris. Mentzelii Index Plantarum cum fig. Rivini ordo Plantarum cum figuris. 1691. Chabraei Stirpium Sciagraphia & Icones. 1678, Etmulleri Opera omnia 2 vol. 1688. Horstii Opera omnia Medica. Forresti Opera omnia 2 vol. Fernelii Universa Medicina. 1680. Lipenii Bibliotheca Medica. 1679. Plucknetii Phytographia 3 vol. cum 800 ig-1692. Sylvii (de la Boe) Opera omnia. 1681. Zeidlern Anatomia humani Corporis. 1686. Libri Medici Quarto. ACta Eruditorum Lipfiae ab An. 1682. ad An. 1693. The Philosophical Transactions, published by the Royal Society, in 8 vol. which are continued from Jan. 1693. and published Monthly. Miscellanea curiosa medico-phisica Anni xx▪ 1692. Willisii Opera Medica. Amst. 1680. — De Anima Brutorum oxon. Harderi Apiarium Observat. Med. 1687. Munnick Chirurgia 1689. Dolaei Encyclopaedia-Chyrurgica. 1689. — Encyclopaedia Medica. Waltheri Sylva Medica opulentissima. Spindleri Observat. Med. 1691. Blegny Zodiacus Medico Gallicus Anni 5. 1980.
THE TABLE OF DISEASES. A. ABortion, Child in the Womb to strengthen. Aq. Embryon. A. Horm. c. A. Lamii c. | Caudel. Nenuph. | Ce∣rev. Embryon. | Emp. Smect. | Emuls. Dactyl. | Sacch. Torm. | Sp. Embryon. | Tab. Embryon. | After Birth to expel. See Dead Child. After pains to ease. Aq. Chamaem. c. See Carmi∣natives. Alopecia. See hair falling. Analepticks. See Restorers. Anodyns. See easers of pain. Antimonials, see Preparations of Antimony. Apoplexy to cure. Bals. Apop. | Bez. Lunar. | Calx Lunae. | Catapl. Apop. | Elix. Vi∣tae. Elix. Vitriol. | Garg. Apoplëct. | Pom. Ambrae. | Sp. Sal. coag. Sp. Sang. | Apostems to cure. Aq. Chalybeat | Bals. Sulph. A∣nisat. & Terebinthinat. | Pil. Matth. | Appetite to cause. Aq. Pneumon. | Elect. Caryo∣phillat. | Nitrum Cachect. | Arthritis, & Arthriticks. See Gout. Asthma to cure. Allium condit. | Aq. Behic. Aq. Bened. c. Aq. Cinnam. cum Ox. Sq. Aq. Digitalis. Aq. Pector. | Bal∣sama Sulphurata. | Cerev. Butl. | Cons. Nicot. | Elect. Asthmat. | Elix. Salutis. | Extr. Petic. | Flor. Benz. Fl. Sulph. alb. | Infus. Ca∣chect. | Julap. Asthmat. | Lac Am∣mon. Lac. Benz. Lac. Sulph. | Li∣quam. Sulph. | Nitr. Saturn. | Ol. Sacch. simp. &c. | Pasta Hippiatri | Pil. Sinap. Pil. Styracin. | Pul. Asthmat. Pul. Epidem. aur. | Serum Sinap. | Sp. Hyssop. Sp. Milleped. Sp. Nitri. d. | Syr. Balsam. S. de Myrrh. S. de Peto S. Sulph. S. Tolut. magist. | Tab. Divin. T. Helen. T. Sapon. | Tinct. Asthmat. T. Melamp. T. Sulph. | Vic. Hy∣drop. | Ung. Solear. | Astringents, Stypticks. Aq. Styptica. | Bez. Martial. | Calcanth rubef. | Ol. Mart. | Pil. restring. | Pul. Uvular. | Stypt. Re∣gis. | Syr. Chalib. corallat. Ter. Vi∣triol. d. |
Arophia. See Consumption, and Restorers. B Back pained, and weak. Aq. Lamii comp. | caudel. Ne∣nuph. Emp. Smect. | Emuls. Da∣ctyl. | Barrenness to take away. Aq. Prolif. | Cliss. vitriol. | Ge∣lat. c. c. | Miv. Satyr. | Sp. Ambrae. Sp. junip. | Test. equi praep. | Tinct. Sassafr. | Vin. Viper. | Ung. Viri∣litat. | Ol. Formicar. | Bait for Fishes. Ol. Polypod. | Pasta Halieut. | Belching and Wind. Aq. Pneum. | Elaeos. Foenic. | Sp. Ambrae. | Tinct. Hier. | Belly to loosen. Bals. Tart. | Dec. Rhab. | Elix. Salut. | Ol. Aloët. | Pass. Laxat. | Pl. Ctarrh. | Ptis. Cathart. Sacch. Persic. | Sal. Polych. | Suppos. A∣lum. | Tart Laxat. | Tinct. Hier. T. Prop. T. Rhab. T. Stom. | See Purgers. Beautifiers. See Cosmeticks, Preparations of Alum, Nitre and Tartar. Bezoarticks, Alexitericks. See resisters of oyson. Biting of mad dogs. Dec. ad mors. can. rab. | Extr. Datessar. | Birth to hasten and facilitate. Bals. Foeminar. Bals. Nacist. | Pul. Oxytoc. | Secundin. praep. | Testes equi praep. | Bloody flux. Butyr. Cerae. | Chalcanth. ru∣bef. | Dec. dysenteric. | Enem. Dy∣senteric. Eem. Balsamic. | Pl. Matth. Pil. Pacif. | Sal Litharg. | Terr. Vitriol. d. | Tinct. Ros. | Trag. gran. Actes | See Astrin∣gents and Opites. Blood to retifie or purifie. Antim. diaph. &c. | Cath. Cae∣sar. | Cerev. Butl. C. Cataps. C. Vernal. | Cerus. Antim. | Dec. Ant. Dec. Polychr. | Elect. alb. | Infus. sant. | Mag. Ant. diaph. | Merc. vitae corr. | Nitr. Sulph. | Panac. Hartm. | Sal Corall. Sal. Tart. | Sp. Corall. Sp. Vitr. diaph. | Tab. Antim. | Tinct. Corall. | See pre∣parations of Antimony, Mercury, and Tartar, Purgers, Scurvy. Blood coagulated to dissolve. Aq. Chalyb. | Cryst. miner. | Nitr. fix. | Sp. Vitriol. tart. | Bleeding at Nose, &c. Bals. magistr. | Chalcanth. ru∣bef. | Stypt. Regis. | Ter Vitrioli dule. | Tinct. Haematit. | See Astringents. Breathing difficult. See A∣sthma. Breath stinking. Cathart. Caesar. & Corp. sine anima. | Breasts swelled hard. Emp. Diagalb. & Emp. Mam∣mil. Brest or Thorax wounded. Dec. astacor. Burnings, Inflamations. Bals. Magistr. B. Lucat. | Ma∣gist. Saturni. | Mel. Sapon. | Ol. Cremor. Ol. Pomos. | Tinct Ce∣russ. | Ung. Albumin. Ung. Anti∣pyret. | C Cachexia. Antim. diaph. Ant. diaph. fix. Ant. Medicam. | Dec. amar. | Ce∣rev. Butl. | Elect. alb. | Essent. Mart. | Extr. Diatess. | Infus. ca∣chect. | Magist. Ant. diaph. | Mars potab. | Nitr. cachect. | panis de Viper. | Pil. de Ammon. mag. | Pul. Martial. c. | Sal. Urin. Volat. Syr Jovial. | Tab. Antim. | Tart. Chalybeat | Tinct. Antim. purg. T. Armon. T. Hierae. T. Martis. |
Cancers. Arc. Corall. | Bals. Saturn. | Ce∣rev. Scroph. | Croc. Jov. | Linim. simp. | Magist. Saturn. | Merc. su∣blim. rub. & flav. | Ol. Bufon. Ol. Ranar. | See Preparations of An∣timony, Mars, Hepaticks. Cardiacks, or Cordials. Aq. Caryoph. Aq. Cinnam. Car. diac. Aq. Cordium c. Aq. Lact. card. | Cardiac. coelest. | Elaeosac∣ch. card. | Elix. Vitae. | Flos Cor∣dial. & Cardiac. magn. | Jul. per∣lat. Jul. Vitae. | Lap de Goa. | Miv. Borrag. | Nitr. Corall. Nitr. per∣lat. | Pul, Cardiack. corallat. Eo∣rât. & perlat. Pul. Pannon. rub. Pul. purp. | Rosa Solis. | Sacch. Am∣barat. & Caryoph. | Sal. Corall. | Sp. Ak. Sp. Corall. | Syr. Cardi ac. aurat. Syr Sambuc. c. | Tab. de Angel. | T. de Aurant. T. Di∣ambr. T. gris. T. de styrac. | Tinct. Bezoart. T. Corall. T. Meliss. T. Perlar. T. Virgin. | Vin. Hippo∣crat. Aq. Cordial. & Tinct. Cor∣dial. D. G. | Cardialgia. Diacreta | Emuls. Cretac. | Jul. Cretac. | Pul. Anticardialg. Pul. Griseus. Pul. Cardiac. rub. | Tab. Cardialgic. | Carminatives, Discussers or Ex∣pellers of Wind, &c. Aq. Chamaem. c. | Cons. Au∣rant. | Elaeosacch. Carmin. & Foe∣nic. | Elix. Salut. Elix. Vitae. | Ol. Balsam. | Pul. Lateral. Pul. Pep∣tic. | Rosa Solis. | Sp. Ceras. Sp. Embryon. Sp. Junip. | Tab. de Au∣rant. T. Carmin. T. Foenic. T. de Piper. | Tinct. Asthmat. T. Car∣dam. T. Carui. T. Chamaem. T. Piper. T. Rhab. | Aq. Abs. c. & Aq. Chamaem. c. D. G. | Catarrhs to cure. Bals. Sulph. anisat. Benzoïnat. &c. | Cashew. | Dec. Antim. | Elix. Vitriol. | Emp. Bargund. Emp. catarrhal Emp. nuchal. | Extr. Pareger. | Flo. Benz. Fl. Sulph. alb. | Lach. Sulph. | Laudana omnia. | Mag. Benz. | Mixt. Tubul. | O. Vitriol. d. | Pil. Catarrh. P. Matth. P. Pacif. P. Styracin. | Pul. epi∣dem. aur. Pul. Pect. | Sulph. Vi∣triol. narcot. | Syr. de Croco. S. de Rapis. S. de Sulph. S. Tolut. mag. | Tab. Amygd. T. Ros. T. de styrac. | Tinct. Amygd. T. Gjac. T. Sulp. | Extr. Catarrhal. D. G. Catarrhs suffocative. Cons. Nico.. | Pil. de styrac. | Syr. de Peto. | Cephalicks. Aq. Cephal. | Bals. Aoplect. | Bez. Vener. | Catapl. Cephal. | Cerev. Btl. | Emp. Catarrhal | Pil. Vatican. | Sacch. Ambarat. Sacch. Caryoph. Sp. Ceras. Sp. Vini succinat. | Sp. Vitrioli Philos. | Tab. diambr. Tab. de Pper. | Tinct. Succin. | T. Melamp. T. Serpyll. Vitriol Lunae. Chalybeats. See Preparations of Mars. Chaps and Clifts to heal. Ol. Tritic. | Syr. ad Fissuras | Ung. ad Fissuras. | Chilblains to cure. Ung. famil. & Ung. paregor. Child in the Womb to strngthen. See Abortion. Colick, Illiac Passion. Allium. condit. | Aq. Chamaem. c. Aq. Pneum. | Bals. magistir. B. Sulph. anisat. & succinat. | Cathart. Caesar. | Cons. Aurant. Croc. Ven. Elect. Piper. | Enem. colic. & ole∣os. | Fl. Sulph. alb. | Lac. sulph. | Mag. Saturn. Mixt. Antiolic. | Ol. Balsam. | Pil. Anticol. Pil. de Sa∣gap. | Pul. Anticol. Pul. Lateral. | Sacch. Samb. | Sal. Arm. volat. oleos. | Sp. N tri d. Sp. Sal. coag. | Suppos. alumin. | Test. equi praep. | Tinct. Junip.. T. Succin. See A∣nodyns, Carminatives, Opiats. Consumption. Emuis. Dactyl. | Liq. Limac. | Dec. Limac. Syr. Lumbric.
Contractures. See Spasms. Contusions. Aq. Chalyb. | Bals. Lucatel. Bals. magistr. | Emp. Smect. | O. Sapon. | Pal. ad casum. | Convulsions. See falling sick∣ness. Corns and Warts to cure. Bals. magistr. | Cauter. Lunar. | Emp. Diagalb. | Liquor. Limac. | Ol. virid. aeris. | Cosmeticks. Aq. Cosmet. Aq. Venust. Arc. Comet. | Cerat. alb. | Fo. Bis∣muth. & Zinci | Lac. Merc. | Mag. Bismuth. | Mel. Sapon. | O. Cos∣met. Ol. Talch. O. Tritic. O. Vi∣per. | Pae odor. | Savan. osmet. | Sp. Benz. | Tinct. Absinth. See r parations of Alum, Nitre, Tar∣tar. Coughs. Aq. Bch. Aq. Pect. | Bals. Sulph. anis. & tereb. | Dec. ad Tussim. | Elect. Pect. | Laudan. | Liq. Limac. Loh. alb. &c. | Mixt. tub. | Ol. Sacch. | Past. Hypoglot. | Pil. Ca∣tarrh. P. Matth. & Pacif. P. Sinap. | Serum. Sinap. | Syr. de rapis, & de Sulph. | Tab. Amygd. Dialth. Dia∣trag. Farf. Lenth. & Ros. | Troch. pect. | Ung. Solear. See Expecto∣rators, Asthmaticks, Pectorals. Courses to provoke. See Pro∣vokers of the Termes. D Dandrif to remove. See Mor∣phew. Dead Child, and secundine, or aftr birth. to expel. Bals. Nacist. | Testes equi prep. | &c. Diabetes to cure. Aq. Bened simp. & comp. Diaphoreticks. See Sudorificks. Diarrhea. See Fluxes of the Blly. Dness of sight. See Opthal∣micks. Diureticks. See Urine to pro∣voke. Dropsie to cure. Aethiop. miner. Antimon. di∣aph. Ant. d. fix. Ant. Medicam. | Aq. bened. Aq. Ceras. c. | Arcan. Corallin. Bez. Solar. | Cerev. But∣leri. C. Hydrop. C. Vern. | Dec. Ambros. | Elect. alb. El. Chalyb. Enem. Urinos. | Essent. Mart. | Extr. Ahand. Extr. Diatess. | Infus. Ireat. Infus. sanct. | Luna potab. | Mag. Ant. diaph. | Mag. Git. Mars potab. Merc. praecip. alb. &c. Nitr. Antim | Ol. Bufon. Pil. Pil. Aethi. op. | Sacch. sambuc. | Sal. diuret. Silic. praep. | Sp. Sal. coag. | Syr. Lumbric. | Tab. Antim. | Tinct. Chochlear. c. T. Junip. T. Mart aur. T. Scorbut. | Vin. Chalyb Vin. Hydrop. purg. | Vitriol. Lu∣nae. Drunkenness. See Surfeits. Dysenteria. See Bloody-flux. E Easers of Pain, Anodyns, Pa∣regorgicks. Aq. Pneumat. | Bals. Anod B Magistral. B. Nucist. B. Sulph Rul. B. Tartari, | Bz. Lunar. Butyr. Amygd. | Cerat. Alb. | Cry∣stal. min. | Dec. Pacisic. | Emp. Diagalb. Emp. Opiat. Emp. Smect. | Ens Vener. | Extr. Paregor. | In∣ject. alb. Inject. ben. | Laudana omnia. | Liquor. Limac. | Ntr. fixat. Nitr. sulph, | Ol. Chartae. Ol. Heracl. Ol. Sapon. Ol. Tabac. | Pil. Pacif. | Sal Urin. Volat. | Sp. Camph. | Sulph. Vitriol. narcot. | Ung. Paregor. | Eccoproticks. See Purgers. Elephantiasis. See Leprosie. Emeticks. See Vomitories. Emmenagogicks. See Provokers of the terms.
Empyema to cure. Aq. Bened. Aq. Tussil. c. | Tab. Saponac. See Pectorals. Epilëpsie. See Falling-sicknes. Erysipelas, Rosa. Bez. Lunar. | Lap. Medicam. Lap. Salutis. | Linim. simp. | Ol. cremor. Ol. Ranar. | Ung. Hae∣morrhoid. Expectorators, Coughs to cure. Apoz. potenter. Expector. Aq. Digital. | Bals. Sulphuris. Knaeph. | Linct. Bened. Linct. expect. | Loh. alb. Loh. Domest. | Mixt. Tubu∣lar. | Pil. de Pice. | Syr. de Myrrh. | Tab. Saponac. | Masticator. | Pil. Masticator. See Asthma, Pecto∣rals. Eyes diseased. See Ophthal∣micks. F Fainting. See swooning. Falling-sickness, Convulsions. Aq. Hirundin. Aq. Picar. c. | Bals. Succin. Bals. Sulph. anisat. | Bez. Lunar. | Calx Lunae. | Cin∣nab. Antim. | Corv. Epilept. | Dec. D gital. | Elect. Epilept. | Elix. Vitriol. Elix. Vitae. | Emuls. Paeon. | Luna potab. | Ol. Heracl. Ol. Milvin. Ol. Sapon. | Pul. Cinuab. c. Pul. Epilept. | Ranar. Hepat. praep. | Regul. Lunar. | Secundin. praep. | Sp. Ceras. Sp. c. c. succi∣nat. Sp. Embr. Sp. Sang. Sp. Ve∣ner. Sp. Vini succinat. | Sulph. Vi∣triol. Sulph. Vitriol. narcotic. | Syr. de Peto. | Testes Apri, & Equi praep. | Tinct. Succin. Tinct. Ven. | Vitriol. Lunae. See Preparations of Antimony Vitriol, Cephalicks. Fellons, Whitloes to cure. Catapl. ad Paronych. | Ung. Familiar. Ung. Paregor. | Fevers to cures, febrifuges. Alum. Febrif. | Antifebr. Con∣char. | Aq. Febrif. Aq. Formicar. | Arcan. dupl. | Dec. Bez. Jov. Bez. Solar. | Catapl. Solear. Croc. Ven. | Ambros. | Diatess potab. | Emp. Febrific. | Epicarp. febrif. | Extr. febrif. | Febrifug. River. | Flo. Sal. Arm. Martiat. | Lac. Alum. | Lap. C. yerv. Lap. de Goa. | Merc. praecip. per se. | Mixt. simp. | Ni∣tr. Antim. Nitr. Corallat. Nitr. Hermaph. Nitr. Perlat. Ol. Antim. saccharat. Pil. Antim. Pil. Matth. Pil. Pacif. Pil. de Sagap. | Potio febrif. | Pul. Antipyr. Pul. Febrif. certus. Pul. Pannon. rub. | Sal. Alum. Sal. diuret. Sal. Febrif. Sal. Litharg. Sal. Viperar. | Sedativ. Arch. | Serum Alum. | Sp. Alum. Sp. Caph. Sp. Mann. Sp. Nitr. Sp. Sal. Am. Sp. Sal. coag. Sp. Saturn. Sp. Viper. Sp. Vitriol. coag. Sp. Vitriol. Philosoph. | Sulph. Aurat. | Tartar. Antim. T. Chalyb. T. Vi∣triolat. Antimoniale. T. Vit. Eme∣tico-purg. | Tinct. Cathart. T. Hierae. T. Ros. T. Saturn. T. Sto∣mach. Fissures. See Chaps. Fistula's, Ulcers to cure. Aq. Alum. Aq. chalyb. | Bals. Saturn. Bals. Sulph. Antim. Bals. Vener. | Croc. Jov. | Magist. Sa∣turn. Fistula Lachrymalis. Aq. Ophthal. Sapph. See Oph∣thalmicks. Fluxes, or Loosness of the Belly, Whites in Women. Alum. dulc. Alum. Febrif. | Bez. Animal. B. Mart. | Caudel. Amygd. | Laudana. | Sal. Litharg. Tinct. Ros. Freckles, Lentils, &c. to take away. Aq. Bened. | Ol. Talch. See Cosmeticks, Preparations of Tar∣tar. French-Pox. Aeth. min. | Antith. Pot. | Aq. Sarsae c. Aq. Siphyl. | Arc. coral∣lin. | Aur. Vitae. | Bez. Merc. Bez. Sol. | Cerus. Antim. | Cinnab. Ant. | Croc. Jov. | Elect. alb. | Emp. Ti∣bial.
Emp. Opiar. | Infus. sanct. | Jup. diaph. Jup. Nitrat. | Mag. Sa∣turn. M. Turpeth. | Merc. praecip. alb. Merc. subl. | Nitr. Antim. Nitr. Cachect. | Panac. Aur. P. Cath. P. Hartm. | Panis Diasars. & de Vi∣per. | Pil. Aethiop. Pil. Balsam. | Pul. Liliac. Regul. Mart. | Sp. Sa∣turn. | Sulph. aurat. | Tab. Antim. | Tinct. Guajac. See Preparations if Antimony and Mercury. Fruitful to make. See Barren∣ness to take away. G Gangreens to prevent. Ol. Ranar. | Tinct. Myrrhae. Gonorrhaea to cure. Caudel. Nenuph. | Emuls. de Avellan. Emuls. Dactyl. | Gelat. Irchthyoc. | Inject. alb. Inject. ben. | Lac. Alum. | Merc. praecip. virid. | Pil. Castitat. P. cretac. P. de creta Palm. P. Restring. | Potio alba. Green-sickness Elect. Chalybeat. | Essent. Mar∣tis. | Infus. Cachect. | Sp. Vitriol. Martial. | Syr. Jovial. | Tinct. An∣tim. purg. T. Armon. T. Martis aur. | Tin. Chalyb. See Cachexia, preparations of Mars, Antimony. Griping of the Guts. Bt. Amygd. | Elaeos. Nucist. E∣nem. Vinos. | Gout, Arthriticks. Allium condit. | Aq. Hungar. Aq. Omn. flor. | Bals. Anod. B. Sulph. miner. B. Tartar. | Catapl. Podagric. | Cicer. Tartari. | Cin∣nab. Antim. | Dec. Ambros. Paci∣fic. | Diatart. | Elect. Duc. Sab. | Emp. Opiat. Emp. Podagric. Emp. Smect. Emp. Solear. | Fotus Ar∣thrit. | Infus. Arthrit. Infus. sancta. | Jup. diaph. Jup. nitrat. | Laudana. | Liquor. Limac. Magnes praep. | Mel. Sapon. | Ol. Sapon. Ol. Ta∣bac. | Pedilav. Podagric. | Pil. An∣tipodagr. Pil. Matth. Pil. Pacific. | Pul. Arthrit. Pul. Hermod. c. Pul. Lateral. Pul. Solear. Pul. Sternutat. | Sal. Arm. volat. Sp. Salis coag. | Vinum Arthrit. Vin. Arthrit. purg. See Anodyns, Opiates. Gums, Tophs, Nodes, to dissolve. See Nodes to dissolve. H Haemorrhoids. See Piles. Hair falling. Aq. Crinal. | Ol. Chartae. | Ol. . | Pul. Crinal. | Ung. Crinific. Hair to take away. Ung. Depilatorium. Hearing to help. Aq. Crinal. | Inject. Auricul. | Masticat. | Ol. Balsamic. | Pil. Ma∣stichat. | Sp. Milleped. | Turund. acoustic. Head medicines. See Cepha∣licks. Head-ach to cure. Aq. Cephal. | Bals. Magistr. | Emp. Burg. | Frontal. Cephalalg. | Ol. Sapon. | Pil. Matth. & Pacific. | Pul. Cucuph. Pul. Sternut. | Ros Vitrioli. | Rosa Solis. | Tab. Di∣amb. | Tinct. Melamp. Ung. Ce∣phalalg. See Gephalicks. Hecticks. See Phthisis. Hernia. See Ruptures. Herpes, Serpigo to cure. Aq. Bened. Aq. Herpet. | Ol. Chartae. Ol. Tritic. | Ung. Her∣pet. Hepaticks, Spleneticks. Bals. Splenet. | Cerev. Batl. Ce∣rev. Jov. | Cons. hepatic. corallit. | Elect. Diarrhod. | Extr. Diatess. Extr. Ephract. | Pil. de Ammon. Mag. Pil. Tartar. Bont. | Serum. hepatic. | Sp. Cochlear. | Tab. Abs. | Tinct. Abs. Tinct. Rosar. See Cha∣lybeats. Hicket, or Hiccough. Elix. Prop. | Laudana. | Sal Ar∣mon. vol. | Tab. Diambr. | Tinct.
Hier. T. Stomach. See Stomaticks. Hoarsness and Wheezing. Pil. Styracin. | Emp. Solear. | Pil. Solear. Horses Asthmatick, and wasted. Pasta Hippiatri. Hypnoticks, inducers of sleep. See sleep to cause. Hystericks. Bals. Succini. | Bez. Jov. Bez. Saturn. | Calx. Jovis & Lunae. | Cerev. Jovial. | Cliss. Vitriol. | Croc. Jov. Croc. Ven. | Elix. Caph. El. Prop. dul. El. prop. Pe∣stilent. & Tartar. | Emp. Camph. Emp. Diagalb. | Enem. Hyster. | Ens Vener. | Flor. Jovial. | Jul. Hyst. camphorat. farinac. foetid. mithridatic. moschat. | Junip. Bacc. candef. | Jup. diaph. Jup. nitrat. | Mag. Jov. | Nod. Hyst. | Ol. Camph. | Pil. Hyst. | Pul. Hyst. | Regul. Jov. Reg. Solar. | Sal. c. c. succinat. Sal. Jov. | Secundin. praep. | Sp. ceras. Sp. c. c. Sp. Suc∣cin. Sp. Samb. Sp. Ven. | Suffim. Hyst. | Syr. Samb. c. | Testes. equi praep. | Tinct. Asae foet. T. Galbanet. T. Propriet. T. Serpyll. T. Succin. T | Veners. J Jaundice yellow. See Yellow Jaundice. Iliack Passion. See Cholick. Impetigo. See Ringworms, and Leprosy. Impotency to cure. Miva Satyr. | Sacch. Ambarat. | Testes Apri praep. | Vin. Viper. Ung. Virilit. Inflamations. See Burnings. Inflamation of the Eyes. Aq. Camphorat. | v. Ophthal∣micks. Issues. Emp. Adhaesiv. | Pisa Luteae, rubra, & Viridia. Itch to cure. See scabbiness. K Kibes and Chilblains to cure. Ung. famil. & Ung. paregor. Kings Evil. Aq. Bened. | cerev. schrophul. Dec. ad Strum. | Emp. Diagalb. | Emp. ad Strum. | Mag. Turpeth. | Pul. ad Strum. | Sal Spong. | Ung. Digital. See preparations of An∣timony, Mercury. L Lethargy. Pul. Sternutat. See Cepha∣licks. Leprosie, Elephantiasis. R. Bez. Ven. | Dec. Ulmi. | Ol. Viper. Pan. de Viper. | Pil. Balsa∣mic. | Vin. Viperin. See scabi∣ness. Lice to kill. Ol. Heraclein. Liver Medicines See Hepa∣ticks, Chalybeats, preparations of Tartar. Loches supprest. See Emmena∣gogicks. Lues Venerea. See French-Pox. Lust to abate. Elect. Castit. | Pil. Castit. See Preparations of Champhir. M Madness to cure. Elleb. alb. praep. | Extr. Me∣lamp. | Pul. coronat. | Tinct. Sa∣turni. Mad Dogs biting. See biting. Marks, or pittings of the Small pox to prevent. Bals. verum. | Cerat. alb. | Nod, facial. | Ung. ad foveas. Measles, Small-pox▪
Dec. rubicund. Emuls. expuls. | Lap. c. Yerv. L. de Goa. | Pul. Ae∣thiop. P. Alb. P. Cantian. P. purp. | Sulph. aur. Melancholy to cure. Arcan. dupl. | Cardiac. coelest. | Extr. Melamp. | Mars diaph. | Miv. Borrag. | Pil. Melanch. Pil. Pavii. Pul. Coronat. | Sal. Viper. | Sp. Saturn. | Syr. Jov. | Tart. cha∣lyb. | Tinct. Armon. T. Mart. T. Melamp. T. Saturn. See prepara∣tions of Mars and Tin. Memory to refresh. Pul. cibar. Pul. Crinal. Milk curdled to dissolue. Emp. Diagalb. Emp. mam∣mill. | Ung. famil. Ung. Parego∣ric. | Morphew, Scurfe, Dandrif. Bals. Saturn. | Aq. Merc. | Lac. Merc. Mouth stinking. See Breath stinking. Mouth Ulcerated. See Ulcers in the mouth. N Nephriticks, stone breakers. Alkek. cond. | Aq. Cucum. c. Aq. Cynosb. c. Aq. Lact. nephrit. Aq. Persic. c. Aq. Senel. c. | Cons. Cep. coralit. | Elect. Lithontript. | Liquam. Silic. | Miv. Dialth. | Nitrum Cachect. | Pi. Lithontrip. P. Matth. P. Pacif. | Sacch. Sam∣buc. | Sal. Spong. Vol. Sal. Urin. | Silic. praep. | Sp. Alum. Sp. Corall. Sp. Junip. Sp. Spong. Sp. Ven. | Tinct. Junip. | Syr. Tereb. comp. D. G. Nodes to dissolve. Emp. Diagalb. | Ol. Viper. Noise in the Ears. See pain in the Ears. O Openers of Obstructions, or Ec∣phracticks. Ens Vener. | Extr. Ecphract. Infus. Sancta. | Nitr. Cathart. Nitr. Hermaph. | Sp. Alum. d. Sp. Mil∣lep. Sp. Nitr. d. Sp. Sal. Arm. Chalybeat. Sp. Sal. Martial. Sp. Viperar. Sp. Vitriol. Diaph. Sp. Vitriol. Mart. Sp. Vitriol. Philo∣soph. Sp. Vitriol. Tart. | Sulph. Vitriol. Martial. | Syr. Lumbric. Syr. Sider. Tart. Antim. Tart. Chalpbeat. | Tinct. Antim purg. T. Arm. T. Ferri. T. Mart. | Vin. Ecphract. | Vitriol. Mart. Ophthalmicks, dimness of sight, Diseases of the Eyes. Aq. Camph. Aq. Ophth. Aq. Ophth. sapphirin. | Cerev. Oxy∣dorc. Elect. Oxydorc. | Emp. Bur∣gund. Emp. Nuchal. | Ol. Linte∣or. | Pul. cibar. Pul. ophth. | Sp. Millep. Syr. de Peto. | Vitriol. camph. Ung. Ophthalm. Opiates. Bals. Anodyn. | Emp. Opiat. Emp. Podagric. | Extr. Paregor. | Laudana. Pil. Catarrh. Pil. Matth. Pil. Pacif. | Syr. de croco. | Tinct. Bez. | Ung. Haemorrh. | Extr. Hpyn. D. G. | Syr. Hypn. pect. D. G. | Syr. Hypn. Balsamic. D. G. | Syr. Hypn. Balsamic. D. G. | Tinct. Opii. D. G. | Ung. Hae∣morrh. D. G. | P Pain and Noise in the Ears. Cons. Nicot.. Pil. styrac. | Syr. de Peto. Pain of the Stomach. Elect. Caryoph. | El. Piper. | Pul. Stom. | Syr. de Peto. | Tinct. Hier. T. Rhab. T. Stom.
Pain of the side. Bals. Magistr. | Emp. Lateral. | Pul. Lateral. See Pleurisie. Palsie to cure. Bals. Apop. B. Paralyt. B. Suc∣cin. | Cinnab. Ant. | Elect. Para∣lyt. | Emp. Paral. | Extr. Diatess. | Galbanet. | Mastichat. | N tr. ca∣chect. | Ol. Balsam. Ol. Lumbr. Ol. Paralyt. | Pil. Masticat. | Sp. Sang. | Tinct. Galbanet T. Paral. T. Succin. Palsie of the Tongue. Catapl. Apopect. C. Cephal. See Apoplexy, Cephalicks. Palpitation of the Heart. Pul. Griseus | Cardiac. Coelest. | Elect. Caryoph. | Sal. Arm. volat. oleos. | Tinct. Meless. Pectorals, Pulmonicks. Aq. Bechic. Aq. Caryoph. Aq. Lactis. pect. Aq. Pector. Aq. Tussil. c. | Extr. Pector. | Liquam. Sulph. | Pil. Matth. Pil. Pacif. | Pul. Pect. | Sp. Hyssop. | Syr. Bals. S. Limac. S. de Rapis. S. Tolut. mag. | Tab. Burg. T. Dialth. T. Diatrag. Tab. Farfar. T. Lenth. T. de styrac. | Tinct. Sulph. | Troch. Pector. | Aq. Lenit. D. G. Aq. Pect. & Pro∣pect. D. G. | Syr. Pect. Balsam. D. G. | Perfumes, and sweet scented Me∣dicines. Aq. Odorif. | Bals. Apop. | Ca∣ryoph. odor. | Corp. sine. Anima. | Diachyl. Odor. | Diapalm. odor. | Pilae odorat. | Pom. Ambr. | Pul. odorat. Sp. Ambrae. | Sp. Benz. Pestilence or Plague to cure. Acet. Pestil. | Amul. pestil. Bals. Sulph. | Bez. Jov. miner. B. solear. | Catapl. Dec. praeserv. | Elect. Ma∣cis. | Elix. Caph. Elix. Prop. | Lap. e. yerv. | Orviet. | Pul. Cant. | Sal. Viper. | Sp. Saturn. Sp. Ther. camph. Viper. | Syr. de Sulph. | Tinct. Bez. T. Prop. T. Virgin. | Elect. Antepidem. & Syr. Antepid. D. G. Phthisis, Hectick, Tabes, Con∣sumption of the Lungs. Aq. Antiphth. Aq. Ben. Aq | Dact. pect. | Bals. Sulph. anis. Dec. Antiphth. Dec. Limac. | Extr. Malt. c. | Flo. Sulph. alb. | Lc. Sulph. | Liquam. Sulph. | Mag. Saturn. | Pil. de Pice. | Rosa solis | Syr. Bals. S. Limac. S. de Rap. S, Pepon. S. de Peto. S. Tolut. mag. | Tab. Sapon. | Tinct. A∣mygd. T. Saturn. See Pectorals, Restorers. Piles or Hemorrhoids to cure. Aq. Chalib. | Bals. Momord. | Emp. Haemorrh. | Ol. cremor. | Suppos. haemorrh. | Tab. Divin. | Ung. Haemorrh. & Ung. Hemorrh. D, G. Pining to cure. See Phthisis, Restorers. Pissing Blood. Aq. Chalyb. | Cons. Hep. Coral∣lit. | Testes Apri. Pleurisie to cure. Aq. Animal. Aq. Tussil. c. | Bals. Sulph. | Emp. Lateral. | Ens. Ven. | Liq. Sulph. | Nitr. Sulph. | Po∣tio Pleurit. | Pul. Lateral. Pul. Pleurit. | Sp. Ntri. Sp. Rhaead. crap. See Pectorals. Preparations of Alum. Alum. dulc. Alum. Febrif. | Alu∣minatum. | Aq. Alumin. Aq. fort. aluminata. Aq. Herpet. | Arc. A∣lum. | Lac. Alum. | Lap. Medi∣cam. L. Salut. | Pul. sine pari. P. Uvular. | Sal. Alum. | Serum. A∣lum. | Sp. Alum. d. | Suppos. Alu∣minos. Preparations of Antimony. Antihect. Poter. | Ant. diaph. Ant. diaph. fix. Ant. Medicam. Ant. Reuscit. | Aq. Stim. sulph. | Bals. sulph. antim. | Bez. Jov. B. Lunar. B. Mart. B. miner. B. Solar. | Cerev. Cataps. | Ceruss. Mart. | Cinnab. Antim. | Dec. Antim. | Elect. Alb. | Febris. Riv. | Fl. Antim. Fl. Ant. diaph. | Magist. Ant. diaph. | Merc. Vitae. corr. & purg. Nitrum. Antim. | Ol. Ant.
saccharat. | O ysacch. emet. | Pa∣nac. ur. Pan. cathart. Pan. Hartm. | Pil. Atim. P.l. Basil. | Pul. Cantian. P. omach. P. Liliac | Regul. Jov. Rg. Ln. Reg. Mart. Reg. Solar. Reg. Vener. | Sulph. Antim. Sulph. Ant. Comb. Sulph. aurat. | Tab. Antim. | Tart. Ant. Tart. E∣met. Tart. vitriolat. antimoniale. Tart. Vitriolat. Emetico-purg. | Tinct. Ant. Emet. T. Ant. purg. Preparations of Camphir. Aq. Camphorat. | Bals. Anodyn. | Eix. Camph. | Ep. Camph. | Eem. Hyst. | Front. cephalalg. | Julap. Hyst. camph. | Lq. Cephalaig. | Mixt. simp. | Pil. Castitat. Pil. Hyster. | Sp. Camph. Sp Theriac camph. | Tinet. Cerus. | Vitriol. Camph. | Ung. Antipyr. Ung. Facial. Preparations of Copper, or Ve∣nus. Bals. Vener. | Bez. Ven. | Croc. Vn. | F. virid. aeris. | Ol. Virid. aeris. | Regul. Ven. | Sp. Ven. | Tinct. Vneris. Preparations of Lead or Sa∣turn. Bals. Saturn. | Calx. Sat. | Bez. Sat. | Emp. Sat. | Mag. Sat. | Ntr. Sa. | Pil. Cstitat. | Sal. Sat. | Sp. Sat. | Tinct. Sat. Preparations of Luna, or Sil∣ver. Bz Lunar. Calx. Lunae. | Cau∣stic. Lnar. | Lna potab. | Re∣gu. Lmar. Vtriol. Lunae. Preparations of Mars, or I∣ron. Aq. Chalib. | Bals. Mart. | Bez. Mart. | Cerus. Mart. | Chalyb. sine Acid. Chal. Tart. | Ciss. Vi∣triol. | Elect. Chalyb. | Ens Ven. | Ess. Mart. | Extr. chalyb. B. Ec∣phr. E Icter. | Fo. Sal. Arm. Martiati. | Julap. Antiscorb. | Mars. diaph. Mars. potab. | Ntr. Ca∣chect. | Ol. Mart. | Pil. Pavii. P. Restring. | Pul. Icter. Pul. Mart. c. | Regul. Mart. | Sal. Chalyb. Sal. Mart. Cathart. Sp. Viriol. Mart. | Sulph. Vitrioli Mart. | Sulph. Vitr. narcot. | Syr. chalyb. S. chal. corallat. S. Jovial. S. Si∣der. | Tart. chalyb. Tinct. Ar∣mon. T. Ferri. T. Mart. T. Mart. aur. T. tartarisat. | Vin. Chalyb. Vin. chal. Purg. | Vitriolum Mar∣tis. | Preparations of Mercury, or Quick-silver. Aeth. miner. | Arc. Corallin. Arc. Jov. Aur. Mosaïc. Aur. po∣tab. Aur. Vitae. | Bz. Merc. Bez. min. Bez. Solar. | Cnnab. Ant. | Croc. Jov. | Emp. opit. Emp. ad Strum. Emp. Tibial. | Inject. ben. | Lac. Merc. | Mag. Turpeth. | Merc. praecip. | alb. &c. Merc. | sublim. rub. ëc flav. Merc. Vitae. Cor. Merc. Vitae purg. | Panac. ur. Panac. cath. | Pil. Aethiop. Pil. Balsam. Pil. de creta. Palm. | P I. Hydrop. | Pul. Basil. | Tab. Infant. Preparations of Nitre. Aq. fort. dupl. Aq. fort. alumi∣nat. Aq. Reg. | Arc. due. | cryst. miner. | Ess. Mart. | Nitr. Antim. N tr. Cachect. N. Cathart. N. o∣al. N. fixat. N. Hermaph. N. Jov. N. Nitrat. N. Perlat. N. Sa∣turn. N. Sulph. N. Vitriolat. | Reg. Mart. Reg. Ven. | Sal. Alkal. Sal. Polychr. | Sp. Nitri. Sp. Nitri. Bez. Sp. Nitri d. Tab. Prunell. | Ung. depilator. Preparations of Sol, or Gold. Aur. Fulm. Aur. potab. Aur. Vi∣tae. Bez. Solar. | Regul. Solar. Preparations of Sulphur. Bals. Sulph. Anisat. &c. | Elect. Asthmat. | Emp. Diasulph. Rul. | Emp. Lateral. | Fl. Sulph. alb. | Hep. Sulph. | Lac. Sulph. | Liquam. Sulph. | Pil. Styracin. | Pul. Asth∣mat. P. Pect. P. Pleurit. | Sal. Po∣lychrest. Sal. Sulph. | Syr. de Sulph. | Tab. Amygd. Dialth. Divin. & Sa∣pon. | Tinct. Sulph. | Ung. depi∣lat. Facial. de Beton. aq. & Piperin.
Preparations of Tartar. Bals. Tart. | Cicer. Tart. | Dec. Pacif. | Jul. Tart. | Mag. Tart. | Mel Sapon. | Mix. simp. | Nitr. Herm. | Ol. Cosm. | Pil. Mtth. & Pacif. P. Tart. B. | Pul. Buil. Cornach. & Icter. | Sal. A m. Vol. Sal. Tart. | Sapo Tart. | Sav. Cosm. | Sp. Sal. Arm. tart. Sp. Vitr. diaph. Sp. Vitr. tart. | Sulph. Vitriol. | Tab. Cath. & Tart. | Tart. Ant. T. Chalyb. T. E∣met. T. Laxat. T. Vitrioli antim. T. Vitr. Emetico-purg. | Tinct. Bz. T. Cerus. T. Mart. tart. Preparations of Tin, or Jupi∣ter. Antihect. Poter. | Arcan. Jovial. | Aur. Mosaïc. | Bez. Jov. | Calx. Jov. | Cerev. Jov. | Croc. Jov. | Dec. ad. mors. canis. rab. | Fior. Jov. | Jup. diaph. Jup. Nitrt. | Mag. Jov. | Regul. Jov. | Sal. Jov. | Syr. Jov. Preparations of Vitriol. Aq. fort. dupl. Aq. Herpet. | Arc. Dupl. | Chalc. rubef. | Clis. Vitr. | Eliz. Vitr. | Ess. Mart. | Flo. Vitr. | Gil. Theoph. | Jul. purp. | Lap. Medic. & Salut. | Mixt. simp. | Nitr. Vitr. | Ol. Vitr. d. | Panac. H. | Pil. Vom. | Pul. sine pari. P. Sympath. | Ros. Vitr. | Sp. Vitr. Coag. & diaph. & Tart. Stypt. Reg. | Sulph. Vitr. & S. Vitr. nar∣cot. | Tart. Vitriolat. Antim. | Terr. Vitr. d. | Tinct. Antim. purg. T. Bez. | Vitriolum camph. | Ung. Fuscum. Priapism to help. See Lust to abate. Provokers of the Terms. Aq. Chamaem. comp. | Essent. Mart. | Extr. Fellis. | Mars. fulm. | Pedilav. emmenag. | Pul. Oxy∣toc. | Sp. Junip. Sp. Sal. Arm. chalyb. See Chalybeates, Hyste∣ricks. Purgers. Cath. Caesar. | Cerev. Cataps. Cerev, Vern. Dec. Amar. D. P∣lychr. D. ad strum. | Datart. | E∣muls, cath. | Ext. Alhand. E. Drast. E. Fll. E lap. | Infus. ben. | Lac. Scam. | Mag. . M. Tart. | Merc. precip. alb. c. M. sublm. rub. & v. M. Vitae purg. | Mixt. Anticolic. | Nitr. Cath. | Panac. Cath. | Pil. Am∣mon. mag. P. Angel. P. Bls. P. Cpul. P. de Ct. Palm. P. Hydrop. P. maracost. P. Melanag. P. Pavii. P. de Sagap. P. Tart. Bont. P. Vatic. P. Vermif. | Potio alb. Potio hydrop. | Pris. cath. | Pul. Athr. Turn. P. Athm. P. Bl. P. Cornach. P. Coronat. P. Hrm. c. | Sal. Mart. Cath. | Scam. cydon. Lymon. Rsat. | Syr. be∣ned. Syr. de Scam. Tab. Cathart. | Tinct. Antim. purg. T. Asthmat. T. aurea. T. Cath. R. T. Scorb. | Vin. Arthrit. purg. Vin. Hydrop. | Ung. ad Lumbric. Pustles to cure. Aq. Mellum. Aq. Ophth. Sap∣phir. | Ol. ufen. See Redness of the Face. Pustles in the face. See redness of the face. Q Quartan Agues, Tertians to cure. Aur. Vitae. Emp. febrif. | Ep∣carp. febrif. | Flo. Sal. Arm. mar∣riat. | Lac. Alum. | Mag. Saturn. Mars diaph. | Ol. Antim. sacch. | Pil. de Ammon. mag. Pil. de Sa∣gap. | Pul. Antipyr Pul. febrif. cert. | Ranar. Hepat. praep. | Sp. Camph. Sp. Viper. | Sulph. au∣rat. | Tart. chalyb. | Tinct. Armon. T. Hier. T. Mart. T. Saturn. T. Stom. | Vin. chalyb. Quinsey, Ulcers in the Mouth. Catapl. Cynanch. | Emp. Sy∣nanch. | Garg. Synanch. | inct. Synanch. | Tab. Antisynanch.
R Redness of the Face, Pustles, &c. Acer. Litharg. | Aluminat. | Aq. Bened. Aq. Mercur. | Cerev. Cataps. | Dec. Rubrae. Tinctor. | Lac. Mercur. | Mag. Saturn. | Ol. Ranar. | Ung. Facial. See Cosmeticks. Resisters of Poyson. Aq. Epidem. A. Lact. Alexit. Aur. potab. Aur. Vitae. | Bez. A¦nimal. Bez. min. | Bolus Alexiter. | Emuls. expuls. | Enem. Alex. | Flor. Salis | Infus. Sanct. | Lap. c. yerv. L. de Goa. | Mixt. simp. | Pulv. Albus. P. Cantian. P. Pan∣non. rub. P. Purpur. | Sal. Tart. Volat. Sal. Viper. | Sp. Sal Arm. Sp. Sambuc. Sp. Ther. camph. Sp. Viper. Sp. Vitriol. diaph. | Salph. Aurat. | Tab. de Angel. | Tinct. Bez. T. Virgin. | Aq. Alex. & Pro∣alex. D. G. Restorers. Aq. Cordium c. Aq. Lact. pect. | Crem. Hord. | Dec. Analept. Dec. Limac. | Gelat. c. c. Jul. Vitae | Jusc. Galli. | Put. Cardiac. perl. | Syr. Limac. S. Pepon. | Tinct. Mellis. Rest and Sleep to procure. R. Laudan. | Hypnotica. | Opia∣ta. | Pedil. Hypnot. Revivers of the Spirits, See Cordials. Rickets to cure. Bals. Spinal. | Dec. ad Rachit. | Ens. Ven. | Jul. ad Rachit. | Pul. Pul. ad Rachit. | Regul. Ven. | Sp. Millep. Sp. Vitriol. Mart. Ringworms, Tettars, &c. Bz. Ven. | Flo. Bismuth. & Zinci. | Magist Bismuth. | Ol. Chart. Ol. Ranar. Ol. Viper. Roughness or dryness of Tongue and Fauces. Medetur Dec. Ulmi. See Thrush. Rheumatism to cure. Aq. Animal. Aq. Omn. For. | Dec. Rhab. | Pan. Diasars. Running of the Reins. See Gonorrhaea. Ruptures to cure. Miv. Consolid. | Sp. Sal. coa∣gul. See Astringents. S Salivating Medicines. Aq. Salival. | Mastichat. | Mixt. Tubul. | Panac. aur. | Pil. Ma∣sticat. See Preparations of Mer∣cury. Scald head, or Tinea. Lap. Medicam. L. Salut. | Mag. Turpeth. | Ol. Sapon. Sciatica to cure. Aq. Hungar. Scabbiness, and Scabs, Itch, &c. Aq. Camph. | Arc. Corallin. | Cerev. Cataps. C. Scrophul. C. Vernal. | Dec. Antim. | Lap. Sa∣lut. & Medicam. | Mag. Git. | Merc. praec. alb. &c. Merc. sub∣lim. | Panac. Hartm. | Sal. Tart. Sal. Tart. Volat. | Sp. Vitriol. di∣aph. Sp. Vitr. tart. | Tab. Divin. | Ung. de Aurant. Ung. de Beton. aq. Ung. Piperin. Scrophula, Struma. See Kings Evil. Scurf to remove. See Mor∣phew. Scurvy to cure. Acetar. scorb. | Antihect. Po∣ter. | Antim. diaph. &c. | Aq. An∣tiscorb. Aq. Lact. scorb. | Arcan. dupl. | Bez. Jovial. | Cerev. Butl. C. Scorb. | Cerus. Ant. | Cons. hepat. corallit. | Dec. Scorb. | Dentif. Scorb. | Elect. alb. | Emp. Scorb. | Extr. Ecphr. | Fot. scorb. | Garg. Scorb. | Infus. Ireat. Inf. fanct. | Jul. Antiscorb. | Mars po∣tab. | Nitr. cachect. | Ol. scorb. |
Pedil. scorb. | Pil. Aethiop. | Sal. diuret. Sal urin. Vol. | Serum scorb. Ser. de Sedo. | Sp. Cochl. Sp. Corall. Sp. Vin. tart. | Succ. scorb. | Syr. Antiscorb. Syr. samb. c. | Tab. Antim. | Tinct. Armon. T. Cochl, c. T. Mart. aur. T. Scorb. T. Virgin. | Vin. scelotyrb. | Aq. Cochl. c. Sp. Raph. c. D. G. See Preparations of Antimo∣ny, Mars. Serpigo. See Herpes. Sight weak or depraved. Aq. Ophthalm. Sapph. See Ophthalmicks. Skin rough and filthy, or de∣formed. Ol. Tritic. Ol. Viper. | Pilae o∣dor. Sleep to cause. Laudana omnia. | Nitr. ca∣chectic. | Pedilav. hypnot. | Sulph. Vitriol. narcot. | Syr. de croco. See Opiates, Rest. Small Pox, See Measles. Spasm, Contractures. Bals. Paralyt. | Emp. spasm. Lap. de Goa. | Nitr. Cachect. | Ol. Balsamic. Ol. Lumbr. chym. | Sp. Vitr. diaph. | Syr. Lumbric. See Palsie, Convulsion. Splenetick Medicines. See He∣paticks. Spots called Ephelides, to cure. Aq. Bened. | Savan. Cosmet. Spitting blood. Linct. haemopt. | Miv. Conso∣lid. | Pul. haemopt. | Syr. haemopt. | Tab. haemopt. | Tinct. Haematit. See Astringents. Stone in Reins and Bladder. Aq. Omn. flor. Aq. Persic. c. | Bals. Lucat. B. Magistr. B. Tart. | Enem. colic. Enem. oleos. Enem. terebinth. | Nitr. Hermaphrod. | Ol. Ludi. Ol. Vitriol. d. | Pul. ad Calcul. | Sal. Viper. | Testes Apri praep. Stitches in the side. See pain in the side. Stone breakers. See Nephri∣ticks, Stomaticks, and diseases of the Stomack. Aq. Pneumon. Cerev. Batl. | Dec. Amar. | Elect. Caryoph. E∣lix. Junip. | Elix. Prop. El. Vitae. El. Vitriol. | Etr. Datess. | Flo. Sal. Arm. mart. | Pil. de Ammon. mag. P. Angel. P. Capular. P. Marocost. P. Vatic. | Pleres Arch. Pul. Stom. | Rosa Solis. | Sacch. | Caryoph. | Sal. Arm. Vol. Oleos. | Sal. Philos. | Sedat. Arch. | Sp. Junip. Sp. Ven. Sp. Vitr. coag. | Tab. Abs. Tab. de aurant. Tab. Diambr. Tab. de Piper. | Tinct. Abs. T. Hier. T. Prop. T. Ros. T. Serpyll. T. Stom. | Aq. Abs. c. & Tinct. Amar. D. G. Stypticks. See Astringents, Preparations of Alum, Vitriol. Surfeits, Drunkenness. Pil. crapular. P. Matth. P. Pa∣cif. | Sp. Rhoead. crapular. | Tinct. Absinth. Suppression of Urine, Heat and Pain in making Urine, Strangu∣ry. Emuls. de Avell. | Mucil. nephr | Pul. Liliac. | Aq. omn. flor. | v. see Nephriticks, Diureticks, Sudorificks, Diaphoreticks, or sweating Medicines. Alum. febrif. | Antifeb. Conch. | Antim. diaph. &c. | Aq. Stim. Sulph. | Arc. Jov. | Aur. fulm. Mos. & potab. | Bez. Animal. B. Jov. B. Lun. B. min. B. Sol. | Cerus. Ant. & Mart. | Cinnab. Ant. | Croc. Jov. | Dec. Ambros. D. Ul∣mi. | Fl. Ant. Fl. Benz. Fl. Sal. Arm. | Jup. diaph. & nitrat. | Lap. c. yerv. L. de Goa. | Mar. diaph. | Merc. praec. rub. | Mixt. simp. | Nitr. Cachect. | Ol. Camph. | Panac. Hart. | Phosph. | Pil. Matth. & Pacif. | Pul. alb. P. Cant. | Sal. Acet. essent. S. Alum. S. Arm. Vol. S. Philos. | Sedat. Arch. | Sp. Camph. Cochl. c. c. Dra∣cunc. Mann. Ntr. Sal. Arm. Samb.
Saturn. Succin. Ther. Camph. & Vi∣triol. diaph. | Sulph aat. | Tart. Atim. | Tinct. Bez. Gajac. & Virgin. Sooning and fainting. Aq. Cinnam. cardiac. | Julap. perlat. Vitae. | Sp. Alk. p. Ambrae. Sp. Embryon. | Tab. gris. T Tabes to cure. See Pining or Consumption. Teeth to breed easily. Dentifric. Infant. & Torquis In∣fant. Teeth to whiten. Dentisrie. Dominar. Tooth-ach to case. Alum. dulc. | Arc. Alum. | Emp. Nchal. | Mict. | Ol. Chartae. O. Hral. Ol. Tabac. | Pil. Matth. P. Pacif. P. Masticar. | Sp. Tabace. | Tinct. Guajac. Tinct. Odontalg. | Torq. Infant. See A∣nodyns, Opiates. Terms to provoke. See Provok∣ers of the Terms. Tertian Agues to cure. Emp. febrif. | Epicarp. febrif. | Lac. Alum. | Pul. Antipyr. P. Fe∣brif. cert. | Sp. Camph. | Sulph. aurat. Tint. Hier. T. Stom. Thirst to quench. Bez. Animal. | Crem. Hord. | Cryst. miner. | Dec. alb. Dec. ad Sitim. | Jul. Frag. Jul. Idaeum. Jul. purp. | Nitr. sixat. Nur. Sulph. | Serum de Sedo | Sp. Vitriol. coag. | Tab. prunel. Tab. Tart. Thrush. Ulcers in the Mouth. Aq. Mellum. | Dec. Ulmi. | Garg. alb. G. synanch. | Linim. Mellum. | Tab. Antisynanch. Tophs, Nodes, Gums, to dis∣solve. Emp. Diagalb. | Ol. Viper. Traumaticks, Vulneraries. Aq. Chalyb. Aq. Vuln. | Bals. Luat B. Magistr. B. Sulph. An∣im. B. Sulph. Bt. | Crev. sero∣phul. | Dec. Antiphth. Dec. Astac. Dec. Traum. | Pil. Matth. | Tab. de Angel. | Tinct. Asae foet. T. O∣cul. caner. Timpany to cure. Aq. Ceras. c. | Sp. Sal. coag. V Vertigo to cure. Elect. Epilept. | Emp. Camph. | Emuls Pon. | Sacch. Caryoph. | Sulph. Vitriol. Vnreal Nodes to dissolve. Emp. Tibile. Ulcers, Wounds, Fistula's to ure. Aq. Alum. Aq. Ben. | Aq. Camph. Aq. Vulner. | Arc. C∣rallin. | Bs. Lucat. B. Mag. B. Mart. B. Momord. B. Saturn. | B. Sclop. B. Sulph. Ant. & Bat. B. Ven. | Bz. Ven. | Croc. Jov. | Elix. Prop. | Emp. diasulph. R. Ep. Saturn. | Merc. praec. & su∣blim. Ol Tritic. | Pil. Matth. | Pul. sine pari. P. Sympath. | Sal. Litharg. Sal. Tart. & Tart. Vol. | Tinct. Myrrh. T. Ocul. c. T. Pre∣priet. | Ung. Fusc. U. famil. U. Pareg. Ung. Sympath. Ulcers in the Mouth. Ctapl. Cynanch. | Emp. Sy∣nanch. | Garg. Synanch. | Linct. Synanch. | Tab. Antisynanch. See Thrush. Ulcers in the Head. See scald Head. Vomitories, Emeticks. Antim. refuse. | Apoz. potent. expect. | Aq. Formic. | Dec. Digital. Dec. Regul. | Extr. Petic. | Mag. Gt. | Merc. praec. per se. Merc. praec. rub. | Oxysacch. Emet. | Pil. Antim. Pil. Vom. | Serum. Alum. | Sp. Tabac. | Sulph. Ant. & Ant. combust. | Tab. Emet. | Tart. An∣tim.
Tart. Emet. | Tinct. Antim. Emet. Urine to provoke. Alkek. cond. | Aq. Cacum. comp. Aq. Cynosb. c. Aq. oma. Flor. Aq. stim. sulph | Bals. Lu∣cat. Bals. Succin. | Cons. Hepat. corallit. | Crem. Hord. | Crot. Ven. | Dec. Det. Augen. | Elect. Junip. | Fo. Sal. Arm. | Ju. Fragor. | Mars dph. Mars. Fulm. | Ntr. Hermoph. | Pil. Matth. Pil. Pacif. | Sal. Dret. S. Martis Cathart. S. Polychr. S. Tart. S. Tart. Volat. | Silic. praep. | Sp. Alum. d. Sp. Ceras. Sp. Junip. Sp. Misleped. Sp. Nitri. Sp. Nitri duc. Sp. Sal. Arm. Sp. Sal. Arm. succinat. tarta∣risat. & Chalybeat. Sp. Sal. Cong. Sp. Sal. Mart. | Syr. Lumbric. | Tinct. Antim. T. Coral. T. Junip. T. Serpyll. | Vin. Ecphract. Vulneraries, See Traumaticks. Uvula relaxt. Pulv. Uvularis. W Warts to cure. See Corns. Wheezing. See Hoarsness. Whitloes to cure. Catapl. ad Paronych. | Ung. fa∣miliar. Ung. Paregor. Whites in Women. Aq. Bened. Aq. Horm. c. Aq. Lam. c. | Caudel. nenuph. | Gelat. Itchthyoc. | Lac. Alum. | Pil. cre∣rac. Pil. de Cret. Palm. See Fluxes. Wind to Expel. See Carmina∣tives. Womb Medicines. See Hyste∣ricks. Worms to kill. Aeth. min. | Aq. Vermif. | Aur. Vitae. | Bals. magist. | Bez. Ani∣mal. | Elect. Vermif. | Elix. Prop. Emp. Vermif. | Es. Ven. | Merc. | or ecip. | Ol. Alet. O Heracl. Ol. Tabac. | Pil. Vermif. | Pul. Vermif. | Sacch. Persic. | Sal Sulph. | Syr. Vermif. | Tab. In∣fant. Tab Vermif. | Tinct. Abs. T. orall. T. Her. T. Prop. | T. Ung. ad Lumbric. Womens breasts, swelled. See Breasts swell'd. Worms to cure. Pul. Sympath. & Ung. Sym∣path. See Ulcers. Wound healers. See Trauma∣ticks. Wounds of the Breast, or Tho∣rax. Dec. astacor. Y Yellow Jaundice. Dc. Icteric. | Elect. Alb. | Extr. Iter. Ifus. Iter. | Jul. Tart. | Pul. Iter. | Sal. diuret. Sal. Urin. | Sp. Sal. coag. | Syr. Jov. Sy Lm∣ric. | Tab. Antim. | Tart. cha∣lyb. Tart. Vitriolat. antim. | Vn. Chalyb. See preparations of Mars and Tartar. FINIS.
ERRATA. PAge 24. b. Line 25. read, A. ℥iv. p. 25. b. l. 15, 16. dele [for two days.] and r. [with the second degree of fire.] p. 108. a. l. 9. r à ʒii. p. 112. a. l. 17. r. Wine q. s. p. 124. b. l. 9. r. of those ill. p. 133. b. l. 16. r. from them all. p. 160. b. l. 31. dele [in fine pouder.] l. 34. r. dissolve the Wax. p. 139. a. l. 17. r. sena. ℥x. l. 31. r. a Gallon. l. 33. r. it with syrup of. p. 367. a. l. 33. for Sal ☿, r. Sal Tartari. p. 369. a. l. 30. r. Flowers of Salt of. p. 417. b. l. 33. r. it has not all. p. 449. b. l. 17. 18. r. à ʒss. ad ʒii. p. 458. a. l. 25. r. given à gut. 10. p. 504. a. l. 25. r. twenty four hours the. p. 516. b. l. 12. r. Oil of Sulphur ℥iii. p. 540. a. l. 26. r. How this. p. 583: b. l. 30. r. contrive for outward applications. p. 653. b. l. 25. r. Sal. Cornu Cervi. p. 669. b. l. 12. r. than any of the. p. 700. a. l. 1. r. Tartarum Vitriolatum. p. 706. b. l. 26, 27. dele [by abstracting with the Spirit therefrom.] p. 735. a. l. 3. dele [Bate.] and add [†] p. 837. b. l. 3. r. Oxydorcicum. p. 840. a. l. 16. r. Cicera Tartari. p. 882. b. l. 10. r. compare. ADVERTISEMENT. AT the sign of the Archimedes and Spectacles, in Ludgate-street, near the West-End of St. Pauls, lives John Marshall, who both Turns and Grinds, makes and sells all sorts of Glass Instruments, as Perspe∣ctive Glasses, Telescopes, Microscopes single and double, Horoscopes, Sky Opticks, Reading Glasses, from the smallest size to 12 Inches Di∣ameter, Concaves, which burn by Reflection, from the least size to 20 Inches Diameter, Concave Cylinders and Cones of Metal. He has invented, a Pocket Microscope, more useful than any yet made, opprov∣ed of by the Royal Society, and a large double Microscope; Micro∣scopes according to Mr. Lewenhoek: Also Microscopes of the said Mar∣shals designing, a singular Invention for the advantage of Light, the like of which was never done before. Also a Tripple Perspective, or Wheel Perspective, having Three Concaves in one single Eye Glass, accommodated to all sights, Ages, Airs, and Places, never thought of by any other Man. He has also Speaking Trumpets, Crystal Prisms, and Spectacles fit for all Ages in Silver Tortoise-shell, Horn, or Lea∣thern Frames by whole sale or retail; with many other sorts of Op∣tick Instruments (for brevity sake) not here named.
