B3315 11512501 47882
The Sale of Esau's Birth-right; Or, the New Buckingham Ballad, To the Tune of the London Gentlewoman, or Little Peggey Ramsey. A Wondrous Tale I will relate, The like was never told you, Of English men that England hate, The Town of Bucks has sold you. To serve in Parliament they chose Two men I fear to name them; For if I did, you would suppose I told a Lye to shame them. That Beef and Ale should yet prevail You need no longer wonder; For men of wit, must still submit To Fools of greater number. The D—, the Pope, and Tyranny, Need never fear a Down-fall, For Tiege and Wakeman both would be Elected for a Town-hall. These Loyal men of Buckingham, (True only to their Purses,) Would sell the Crown t'Inrich the Town, And laugh at all your Curses. When they have sin'd, and damn'd their souls, Or to the Devil gave them; Their friend the Pope in him they hope, VVell knowing he can save them. If Sc—s would take off Oats's head, He need not fear succeeding; But send him down unto this Town, He soon might see him bleeding. Of Thirteen men there are but Six VVho do not merit Hemp-well, The other seven play their Tricks For L— and T— The Father is a Reprobate, And yet the Son's Elected: The Gawdy Youth comes down in State, And must not be rejected. Our prating Knight doth owe his Call To Timber, and his Lady, Though one goes longer with Town-hall, Then t'other with her Baby. These men do to their choosing trudge With all the speed that can be, And make the Son the Father's Judge, To save great Tom of D— The Bailiff is so mad a Spark (Though lives by Tanning Leather) That for a Load of Temple's Bark, He'd Sacrifice his Father. His Horns do shine, his Wife kept fine, All men would blame him had he Not made him stand, whose helping hand Must make him be a Daddy. He huffs and rants, and calls to Hall, But will not give men warning: When drunk o're night, he takes delight To play the Rogue i'th' morning. Next comes the Barber, who will do Whatever you desire him; He for a Groat, will cut your Throat, A Lowsie, perjur'd hireling. God damn and rot his Arm, he cries, And swears like any Lover, For to be true, to three in two, Poor Iudas younger Brother. Of late he huff'd and drank with Lords, But since a sad Disaster Hath summon'd him to Wash and Trim, A Rev'rend Owl his Master. Another he hath kiss'd a hand, Which puts him in a Rapture; So have I known a Miss o'th' Town, Adore the Fopp that Clapt her. Since kissing hands can so prevail, There's no man need want Riches; If they'l be kind, and come behind, They're welcome to our Breeches. Thus Buckingham hath led the way To Popery and sorrow; Those seven Knaves who make us slaves, Would sell their God to morrow. A List of those who Voted for their King and Country, Protestant Religion, and Sir P.—T— Mr. Rogers Draper, Mr. Brown Gent. Mr. Mason Apothecary, Mr. Eversay Draper, Mr. Robinson Laceman, Mr. Walter Arnot Ironmonger. Honest men and True, be not weary of Well-doing. Mr. William Hartly was absent at the Election, nor was there any need of his Company. Those who Voted for the L—d. L—. for the E. of D—, for Popery, and for their Town-hall. George Dincer Tanner and Bayliff, Thomas Sheen Farmer, Pellam Sandwell Maulster, Henry Hayward Knight of the Post, and Shaver in Ordinary to her Excellency Madgl Owlet, — Stevens Maulster, George Carter Baker, Good Lord deliver us from. Those who Voted for Sir R. T. his Timber, Chimny-mony and Court, were the same with the L. L s. not worth— ☞ The Charter of this Town was given them by Queen Mary for their good Service in the propagation of Popery; Therefore (to give the Devil his due) they are but true to the old Cause.
