C781 R4133 12375925 60602
THE NATURE AND PRINCIPLES OF LOVE, As the END of the Commandment. Declared in some of the last Sermons OF Mr. Joseph Caryl: With an Epistle prefixed by John Owen, D. D. London, Printed, and are to be sold by John Hancock, Senior and Junior, at the Sign of the Three Bibles in Popes-head-Alley in Cornhill. 1673.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Christian Reader, THese Sermons were preach∣ed by the Reverend Au∣thor of them a little while before his Entrance into Rest. I cannot learn that the oc∣casions of them were extraordinary,
or that he had any design in them be¦yond that which accompanied the or¦dinary course of his Ministry; muc¦less a purpose to publish them, a conceiving them either more useful or more needful, or more laboured than the rest of his constant and frequent Exercises in the same kind. Neither did he leave any such Copy of them as might be helpful towards such an end. But they were taken from his mouth by the diligence of a Dexterous Hand, who at first designed nothing but his own use and edification by them; untill observing how soon after the preaching of them, God was pleased to call him off from his Painful Labour in his Vineyard, and so to cut short all expectations of farther administrations of Truth and Grace, by the Trust and Dispensation com∣mitted unto him; he resolved to make them publick, for the good and benefits of others. And as herein
he followed his own Inclination and Judgement; So if any thing be found in these Discourses as to Phrase of Speech, or manner of Expression, not answering that Accuracy, which this Author was known to have used in all his Writings published by himself; he alone must bear the blame of it, from them who think such defects blame worthy. These things I could not but acquaint the Reader withal, that he may look for no more in these Sermons, but what he might have found in the Con∣stant Ministry of the Reverend Au∣thor. But yet I must say, upon their perusal, that take them under the Circumstances mentioned, they give no ill or disadvantageous Ac∣count of the Ordinary Labours and Endeavours of this Eminent Mini∣ster of the Gospel. Thus did Mr. Caryl use to preach, sometimes twice, sometimes thrice in the Week, alwayes shewing himself a
Workman that needed not to be ashamed. And if I mistake not; whoever shall consider these Sermons with Sobriety, Candour and Judge∣ment, as part of his Constant La∣bours, will readily acknowledge, what rich and excellent Talents he was entrusted with, and how the great Reputation which his Ministry had for so many years in the Church of God, was no way undeserved. For my Accession to this Work in a Pre∣fatory Discourse, it arose meerly from the importunity of the Pub∣lisher and Bookseller, as they both well know, and will acknowledge; wherein I see nothing my self of use or advantage, but only that I may tender satisfaction to the Reader, that he is not Imposed upon by any Spurious Offspring fathered on so great and worthy a Name. Some∣what also I was inclined unto a Compliance with their desires, that I might make use of this Advantage
a little, to declare, How I have been Treated by others in things of this Nature. Not long since came forth some Sermons of a Worthy Person now also at rest with God, with an Epistle prefixed unto them, whereunto some Letters of my Name were subscribed. This occasioned a Person at that time (for I hope he is since grown wiser) designing a Reputation in Buffoonry, to pub∣lish a Reviling Letter to me, or against me about that Epistle, which I wrote no more than he did him∣self; nor do believe had known to this day, either of Book or Epistle, had I not heard of it from him, and some other like minded with him. But he seemed to have had a design, towards whose accomplishments, that practice was judged necessary. Late∣ly also, the Importunate Solicitations of a Bookseller prevailed with me to write a short Epistle to an En∣glish Concordance which he had
newly published; and no sooner had I done it, but in the Catalogue of Books Printed the last Term, the Concordance it self is Represented as Compleated, Finished, and Pub∣lished by me, who never added nor altered one word or syllable to it, nor in it. And having now thus far diverted from the present Occasion, I shall crave leave of the Reader, to proceed a little further in an Ac∣count of one or two other Disingenu∣ities of the like kind, taken out from a numberless heap of impu∣dent Untruths and Calumnies. A∣mong those many false and fierce Accusations which one of Late hath stuffed his Scandalous Writings with∣al, there is none which seems more Accommodated to his purpose, than my Composing or Subscribing a Pa∣per published about the Year 1658. containing the proposals and desires of the Subscribers with respect to publick affairs. This Paper the man
lighting on, supposing he had obtain∣ed a mighty Advantage by finding the Letters of my Name, or my Name it self set unto it, he ra∣geth, and challengeth, and Trium∣pheth in somewhat a peculiar man∣ner, though that be difficult for him to do. Yet all this while I have just reason to believe, that he knew the Paper was none of mine, that in∣deed I had no concernment in it; for as the things contained in it were directly contrary to my known and avowed Principles both then and now: So it was alwayes notoriously known, that it was another Person who without any forgery could use that Name, whose subscription it was, as will be acknowledged by the survivors of the Subscribers. I confess when the Paper it self was first brought to me (as it was by a Learned Person now in the Uni∣versity of Oxford) I expressed some Indignation against it; as supposing
that I had been then dealt withal, as I have been of late, by putting my Name unto what I was no way concerned in. But quickly hearing that he who had subscribed that Name, had right so to do; it be∣ing his own as well as mine, (though I find since also that there was in it, some intention to deceive) I gave neither him nor my self any trouble about it. In like manner the same Author affirms, that some Persons at their return from their Conquest at Ireland, were made Do∣ctors at Oxford by J. O. whereas one of the Persons mentioned, never came out of Ireland; and the other ne∣ver came to Oxford after his return; but had indeed with another person that Ceremony of Respect shewed unto him sometime before in that University, not by J. O. but by E. R. now Lord Bishop of Norwich. But I crave the Rea∣ders pardon for this diversion espe∣cially, having turned aside into a
dirty Rode, wherein there is not any thing of Christian Sobriety, or com∣mon Ingenuity from first to last to be found. Yet what Violences have been offered unto the Sacred Truths of the Gospel in Important Articles of Faith, and other things scanda∣lous to Christian Religion, will in another way be called to an Account, as some of them have been already; whereunto a Return may be expe∣cted of raging and bestial Calum∣nies, and no other. Here I shall not farther Indispose the Reader unto the serious perusal and Im∣provement of the ensuing Spiritual Discourses, wherein there is more Worth and Use, more that will turn unto a Refreshing Account at the last day, than in a thousand Cla∣morous Contests managed with Pride and Passion, what ever pretences they may be gilded withal. That he who ministred this seed to the Sower, would multiply the
seed sown, and give it an Encrease in the fruits of Righteousness among them that through his Providence shall be made partakers of it, is the Prayer of Thy Servant in the Work of the Gospel, John Owen.
1 TIM. 1. 5. Now the end of the Command∣ment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. THE holy Apostle St. Paul, as appears in the begin∣ning of the Chapter and Epistle, finds some at E∣phesus, who troubled the Church with needless, and with fruitless Do∣ctrine; and therefore if you consult the third and fourth Verses of this Chapter, you will find he besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, when he went into Macedonia, that he might charge some, that they teach
no other Doctrine : Teach Doctrines contrary to what he had taught; or Doctrines contra∣ry to the General Tenour of the Go∣spel. Such Teachers he calls ac∣cursed, Gal. 1. 8. He would have him warn them at the fourth Verse, Not to give heed to Fables, and endless Genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly edifying, which is in Faith. Timothy was besought by St. Paul, to give this charge to, and concerning the Teachers at Ephesus. And because those Fabulists and Genealogists, were great pretenders to the Law, therefore the Apotle tells them, That the Law leads to the embracing of one another in love; not to the imbroyling of one another in needless questions, or in the venting of them: and this he speaks in the Verse now Read, The end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfained. In
which words we have two things. First, An Assertion laid down. Secondly, We have a limitation to the Assertion. The Assertion is laid down in the beginning of the Verse, The end of the Commandment is Charity. The Assertion is limited in the close of the Verse, 'Tis Charity, not Charity at large, but Charity thus qualified, or thus circumstantiated—'Tis Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. I shall first explicate the Assertion, and then shew its Connexion with the limitation, and give at the present one General Point of Doctrine from the whole Verse. The end of the Commandment is Charity. For the explication of this As∣sertion, I must shew three things. 1. What's meant here by the Com∣mandment.
2. What's meant by the end of the Commandment. 3. What that Charity in special is, which is the end of the Command∣ment. And when I have briefly done these three things, we shall come to a Point. The end of the Commandment is Charity, but what's this Command∣ment? The word which we here tran∣slate Commandment, is , not the ordinary word , which signifies a Commandment; but ; and the word properly sig∣nifies, as Criticks tell us, A charge given by Judges or Superiours, con∣cerning somewhat to be done, or for∣born; and thus 'tis used in Acts 5. 28. where the High Priests tell the Apo∣stles, Did not we straitly command you, that you should not teach in this Name? Did not we straitly Command you? The Greek there is an Hebra∣ism, in which St. Luke doth there ex∣press the minds of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Did not we straitly com∣mand you? , Did not we command you with a Command? which we very well render according to the sense of the Idiom, Did not we strictly command you? Or as Mr. Beza renders it, Did not we command you again and again? And in the very same sense doth the Apostle use the word  as the 18th Verse of the first of Timothy: This charge I com∣mit unto thee. Why now if we should take the word Commandment in this strict sense, it may have a special reference to the third and fourth Verses going before the Text, whereas I toucht before, St. Paul be∣sought Timothy to charge some, that they teach no other Doctrine, To charge them, or to Command them. 'Tis , which is the root of the word which we render Com∣mandment. I charge thee to lay this Commandment upon them. So we may well render it, I command
they teach no other Doctrine. As if he had said, the end why I besought thee to give that charge, or Com∣mand, was to promote charity: whereas those other Doctrines, did but breed questions, and those que∣stions breed Contentions among the Churches, and among the Brethren, the End of the Commandment, the reason why I gave them that Com∣mandment, was to maintain love among Brethren. Yea for as much as the Apostle at the 7. vers. speaks of those who desire to be Teachers of the Law, and in the 8. and 9. verses, proceeds to speak of the nature and use of the Law, I conceive the Word Com∣mandment may be extended to the whole Law of God, or to the whole Revelation, or the mind of God con∣cerning things to be done, or for∣born by us. And so here is a figure, here's a change of number, the sin∣gular is put for the plural, Com∣mandment, for Commandments,
and indeed, as the Doctrine of Grace is nothing else but a Collection of promises, so the Law is nothing else, but a Collection of precepts, and in this sense saith Mr. Calvin here, by the word Commandment, we may take in all the Command∣ments of God. Not only those that are exprest in the Decalogue, but those which are scattered quite through the Holy Scriptures. The end of the Commandment, or of the Com∣mandments, the whole Revealed will of God, concerning the Agenda, or things to be done, It is charity, or it is Love; and so much for the first thing, what we are to understand by the Commandment. Secondly, what is the end of the Commandment, the end of the Com∣mandment is charity.  end, may be taken in a threefold notion. First, The end, it notes the con∣clusion, and Period of a thing, the conclusion of all things; so the Apo∣stle Peter in his 1 Epist. 4. 7. The
end of all things is at hand, and it's well for us to Remember that, If the end of all things were at hand in the Apostles time, how near is the end now, the end, the Period of all this visible world, it is at hand, Be ye therefore watchful, and sober. Secondly, End, notes as much as the Aim, design, plot, scope of any Action, what it is that we drive at; and in that sense 'tis well said, That the desire of the end is endless, that is, men Appetitus finis est in∣finitus. will never end their desi∣rings till they have attain∣ed their desired end, namely, that which is the scope, and Aim, which they have set up to themselves in any undertaking: the end of a thing is the Aim, or the scope of it. Thirdly, End is taken in this notion, It notes the accomplishment, or the fulfilling and Compleating of a thing, and in that sense it is used in Rom. 10. 4. Christ (saith the Apostle,) is the end of the Law for
Righteousness. The end of the Law, he hath brought the Law to its end—what end? why to its ac∣complishment, to its fulfilling, so that we are not to seek for righteous∣ness by the Law for our Justification, for Christ hath made an end of the Law, or accomplished the Law, as to that point, for righteousness, Christ hath fulfilled the Law, both in doing the precepts of it, and he hath fulfilled the Law by enduring the penalty of it, and so he is the end of the Law, the fulfilling end of the Law; It hath no more to require than that we obey the precept, or endure the penalty of it, and both these Christ hath fully done, and so he hath fulfilled the whole Law, and Indeed, Christ having done so in his own person, having been the end of the Law in his obedience, both active and passive, I may say, He is the Abolishing end of the Law, he hath taken it away as to that use, for Justification by our own works, the
Law is quite out of doors, as to that point, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, and no more are we to seek for righteousness by the Law. Why now in the text, the word end, when 'tis said that the end of the Commandment is charity, the word (end) is to be taken in the two latter senses. First, charity is that which the Law alms at, 'tis the scope of the Law, to bring us into a Love one to ano∣ther, and that we may walk in Love, that's the business of the Command∣ments of God, the Aim, the Scope of them. And then secondly, charity is the end of the Law, that is, 'tis the ful∣filling of the Law, 'tis the accom∣plishing end of the Law, the Law is fulfilled in Love, take it in two Scri∣ptures—Rom. 13. 10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Love it is the Accomplishing end of the Law, as in Gal. 5. 14. The whole Law
is fulfilled in one word, that's a good word Indeed—what is that one word, by which the whole Law is fulfilled? 'tis fulfilled in one word, even in this, thou shalt love they Neighbour as they self: to them, the end here, is to be taken in that sense, charity it is the accomplishing, 'tis the fulfilling of the Law. Thirdly, One step farther, what is that charity which is the end of the Commandment, both the Final end, and the fulfilling end of it? What is this charity? Charity is taken two ways in Scripture. 1. More strictly, as it consists in the relieving of those that are poor, and in the comforting of those that are sorrowful, this is charity, to re∣lieve the poor, to comfort the sor∣rowful. But secondly, charity, is taken in a more large sense, 'tis taken for Love in General, and so some tran∣slate this text, the end of the Com∣mandment,
is Love. For charity is a word of a narrower sense than Love is. The end of the Commandment is Love, and the truth is, the word , which we render in the text, charity, doth Indifferently signifie, and is Indifferently translated Love, or charity, all the New Testament over. I need not stay to quote places. This word  signifies Love to God, Love to Man. Q. Well but what is Indeed the Charity, or Love, here Intended in the Scripture? A. I answer, first, I conceive the Love here Intended, Is not love to God, though that is Love above all things, and the most excellent end of the Commandment, yet I conceive in this place, 'tis Charity, or Love to Man, which is here meant. And my Reason is this, why I restrain it here to the Love of Man, because the Apostle speaks of charity in opposi∣tion to those Fables, and questions which false teachers were like to raise
up in the Church. The end of the Commandment is charity, that all may be peaceable and quiet among the Brethren: and he saith at verse 7. From which some having swerved, (from charity) shot quite beside it, saith he, they are turned aside unto vain Jangling, so that if we consider either the Antecedents of the text, or the consequents, it seems he confines charity, or Love here spoken of to that love or charity which is among men, among Bre∣thren, that's one thing. Secondly, Charity here with re∣spect to Brethren, is not that charity which doth consist in opening our hand to relieve the poor, though that is a most excellent piece of charity, (and I pray Remember it) too pen your hand to the relieving of the poor, yet I conceive that's not the charity here meant, but the charity here meant, is charity in the uniting our hearts, and in the closing of our affections one with another, and then,
Thirdly, The charity here intended, or the Love, is not a lazy habit, for one to say, I have a love for God, I and there it lyes and doth nothing: I say, the charity here intended, is not a lazy habit; but 'tis that which is put forth by vigorous and lively actings, and so some expound this Text; Charity is to be taken Metonymical∣ly, Charity, for all the offices and duties of charity, which we owe one to another. 4 Lastly, As 'tis an Acting, and an active charity, which is here spoken of, so it is not every kind of charity, how vigorously soever acted, which is the end of the Commandment; but 'tis the charity that flows out from, and is fed by those three springs spo∣ken of in the close of the Verse: Namely, 'tis a charity flowing out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. I cannot stay now to discover those springs to you; for that would take up too much of the time. Indeed it may
take up all the time, to make a little discovery of those springs: All that I shall say at present, is only this, That the charity which issues out of these springs: that's the cha∣rity in the Text; and that's the cha∣rity, which is the fulfilling of the Commandment. So that here we have the Genealogy (as I may call it) the Pedegree, the Parentage of Gospel charity. Or to keep to the former Metaphor, here we have the spring of that blessed River called charity, the streams whereof (like the streams of the River spoken of, in Psal. 46. 4. which is the favour of God to his people) will make glad the City of God, in all the Cities of men, where ever it hath an open chanel, and a free course. By what hath been said (beloved) you may perceive, what my work (the Lord assisting) is like to be in handling this Scripture; namely, to discover to you that Love or Charity, which is the end of the Commandment:
and chiefly indeed to discover to you, those blessed springs, A pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, out of which that charity flows, and by which it must be fed day by day. And this will I do, if God permit. But at the present I shall wave all these particulars, and speak to one General Point (as I hinted before) raised from the whole Context, and of this Verse, or from all the parti∣culars of it laid together: and the Point of Doctrine is this, DOCT. Those works of Love, of Love to man, much more of Love to God, which are the end of the Commandment, must flow from a good spring, from a gracious Principle, or a Principle of Grace. This Point is very plain in the Text, plainly collected from it. For saith the Apostle, Love out of a pure
heart (and the like). Now that pure heart, I shall shew clearly af∣terwards (if the Lord bring me to it) that the pure heart, is a gratious heart. So that the Love must flow from a principle of Grace. There are three things especially in which the Completion, the full Constitution and making up of a good work, whether towards God or man doth consist; and they must all three concur in the business. Evil arises out of any single defect in that which is required: Bonum oritur exite ra can∣sa, malum ex qolibet defe∣ctu. But a good action must have a concurrence of all things requisite thereunto. I name only these three. First, That the work may be good, we must What requi∣red to a good work. be sure that the matter of it be good. It must be good in it self, as being according to Rule. And It must be good in the mind and in understanding of him that doth it:
for to do that which is good, we not knowing and understanding it to be good, or not being perswaded that it is good, that action is not good to us. Yea, the Apostle tells you, It is sin, whatsoever is not of faith: and there he speaks not of justifying faith, but of perswading faith: what ever is not of faith is sin: And 'tis possible for one that is in a justified state, or one that hath justifying faith, yet not to do a thing with a perswading faith, and so it may be sin to him. That's one thing. Secondly, The aim, or the end of the work, must be good; and among all ends that are good, the chief, and that which can never be left out, is the glory of God: Matth. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works (your works of Love) may glorifie your Fa∣ther which is in Heaven. Not glorifie your self, not set up self. 'Twas the setting up of self, or the making self the end, which corrupt∣ed
and poisoned all those materially good, very good actions of the Pha∣risees, even their alms giving, their praying, their fasting, as you may read at large in Mat. 6. 1, 5, 16. and those that follow. The End doth denomi∣nate the action. It must have a good end, else though the matter be never so good, the work is not good. Thirdly, (Which is the matter in hand:) The Principle, or spring of the work must be good: 'Tis possible for one to do a work that's good for the matter of it, and to have some good ends in it, and yet not to do it out of a right principle: and this is it which the Text and Doctrine speaks, unless the Principle be good, the work's not good. As the Foun∣tain is, such are the streams that come from it: As the Tree is, such is the fruit that grows upon it. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Matth. 7. 16. Why, the Thorn hath not a Principle in Nature to put forth a Grape, the
Thistle hath not a Principle in Na∣ture to put forth a Figg; and there∣fore saith Christ, A corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Which words of Christ, as they are prima∣rily to be understood concerning false Prophets and their Doctrine, so they may be truly applyed to all false pro∣fessors and their ends; they being corrupt, they cannot bring forth good fruit. If you would draw out of a vessel which is unseasoned, or ill scented, the liquor will taste of the Cask. Now we all by nature are unseasoned; yea, we are ill scented vessels, therefore the liquor, that which passes from us, considered so, must needs have an ill scent, an ill taste. And hence that cutting question of Christ to the Pharisees, Matth. 12. 34. O Generation of Vipers, how can ye being evil, speak good things? They might possibly speak good for the matter. Bad men wil often tip their tongues with good words, and appear Chrysostom's, Golden mouth'd speak∣ers,
when their hearts are nothing but brass and dross. But usually evil men speak evil; that which is evil for the matter. Their throats are an open sepulchre, the poyson of Asps is under their lips, as the Apo∣stle speaks, quoting it from the Psalms, in Rom. 3. 13. And as they usually, and natu∣rally, (for that's their natural Lan∣guage) speak evil, so they always mar the good they speak, either by their ill manner of speaking it, or by their ill meaning in speaking it. As the Devil when he made a con∣fession of Christ, and said, he was the Son of the most high God, it was a confession like that of St. Peter, which Christ calls the Rock upon which the Church is built; the Devil spake it out of a base intent, and the efore Christ threw it away, and rebuked him for it. So evil men, they spoil good speaking with their ill manner of speaking, or their ill meaning in speaking; and therefore
Solomon hath that expression, in Prov. 26. 7. As the leggs of the lame are not equal: so is a Parable in the mouth of fools. A Parable there, notes a Divine saying, a ruling word, a commanding word, that's a Para∣ble, a word that should reign over us, so saith he, a Parable, a divine saying, in the mouth of a fool, are like the leggs of the lame. Good words do (as it were) lisp in the mouth of a bad man, and his heart never keeps pace with his Tongue. Thus you see, Christ saith, evil men cannot speak that which is good, they cannot speak to the purpose fully; now as they that are evil, cannot speak, so neither can they do good things answerable to the rule, or pleasing unto God. I do not say, they cannot do good things, but they cannot do good things, answer∣able to the rule, or pleasing unto God. And that's the Apostles con∣clusion, Rom. 8. 8. after a further discourse, he comes with his so then
here's the conclusion, so then, they that are in the flesh, they cannot please God, every action which comes up to the fulfilling of the Commandment, is pleasing to God, but saith he, they that are in the flesh, they can∣not please God;—they that are in the flesh—what's that? surely not that which two Popes (as Infallible as they Judge themselves to be,) thought to be the meaning; they thought, that by being in the flesh, was meant being in a marriage State. But by being in the flesh, the Apostle means, being in a natural, that is, being in an unregenerate State, they cannot please God, and such do not only not please God when they do that which is evil, but they do not please God when they do that which is good, for the very Sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to him, Prov. 15. 8. and therefore the Apo∣ple says of all men, in their natural capacity, or State, there is none that doth good, no not one, in Rom. 3.
12.—Why none do good? be∣cause none of them have a principle, they have not a spring, though the matter they do may be good, and though possibly they have some good end in doing it, yet they not having a principle, there is none of them that doth good, that is, a compleat good, no not one, there's no excepti∣ons. I need not labour further in the proof of the point, but I would make some use of it, and I would make a threefold use out. Use. The first may be for our Infor∣mation. If those good works, both to God and Man, which are the ful∣filling of the Commandment, must flow from a Gratious principle, then we are Instructed by this truth, how to Judge of their best works who still abide in the State of nature, having neither a pure heart, nor a good Conscience, nor Faith unfeigned.—Why what Judgement are we to make of their works? why
surely they are not the end of the Commandment, they are not the fulfilling of the Commandment; the works of such, even their works of charity, of love, of temperance, Patience, of Justice, were call'd by some of the godly learned Antients, shining sins, and why we may not call them so now, I know no reason. That's the Judgement they give of such mens good actions; for as Christ tells the Pharisees, Luke 16. 15. that which is highly esteemed among men, is an Abomination unto God. Why? because it wants this principle. And to be sure, though their box of ointment, I mean the good things done by Persons who have not these principles, I say though their box of ointment may have a fragrant smell among many men, yet there are many dead flies in it, especially one great one, call'd unbelief, which makes their whole box of ointment very unsavory in the nostrils of God, for so saith the Apostle, Heb. 11. 6.
without faith it is Impossible to please God. And that's one of the springs expresly spoken of in the text; Gospel charity is of a nobler extract than to be found in the whole compass of nature, and Godliness moves in a higher sphere than the best dress that the gayest Moralist ever reacht unto. In Matth. 5. 20. Except your Righ∣teousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God. That's a word for Information. Use. 2. Now upon that, let me take up a second use by way of Lamen∣tation. If this be a truth, then 'tis to be Lamented that the Religious duties, and charitable Acts of many who bear the name of Christ, flow meerly from a natural principle, and doing so, they are not the fulfilling of the Commandment. The most of men Love one another with affe∣ction no more spiritual than Damon and Pithius, and Pilades and Orestes,
or any other who are most memo∣rised, or admired among the Hea∣thens for Love. Yea I may say, they worship God and Jesus Christ with a devotion no more raised, and spiritual, than the old Romans did worship their Jupiter, or the Ephe∣sians their great Godess Diana. And surely this is to be Lamented, that Christian Acts should be done, and not from a principle spiritual, or not from a Christian principle. It is very possible, and very ordinary to follow Christ, yea to call upon Christ, meerly with human affections, with Carnal affections. Jesus Christ did find it so. In John 6. 26. Ye seek me, saith he, not because ye saw the Miracles, but because ye did eat of the loves and were filled. To follow Christ, was an excellent work, but they did it meerly upon a humane principle. Yea, that prayer of theirs in Verse 34. may well be Judged to come meerly from a carnal spirit. When Christ had discourse of the
bread that came down from Heaven, and giveth life into the World, say they, Lord, evermore give us of this bread, and yet this was but from a Carnal desire, not knowing what that bread meant spiritually. And it appears clearly to be so, for in the close of the Chapter, many of his Hearers went quite away, they forsook him. Now certainly to do these excellent things, and to do them but with Carnal principles, this is a thing to be Lamented. So∣lomon doth report it as a thing to be lamented, that often in this world it is done to good men according to the works of the wicked, and it's done to wicked men, according to the works of the righteous: Eccles. 8. 14. This is a thing to be lamented, but I now shall shew you two sights more, much more to be lamented. First, 'Tis a very lamentable thing to see good men do according to the works of the wicked. Thus did David in the matter of Uriah,
2 Sam. 11. Thus did Solomon, when his heart went after strange Gods, and he built High Places to their Abominations, 1 Kings 11. 4, 5. Thus did Asa, a good King, when he imprisoned the Prophet, and in his disease sought to the Physiti∣ans, and not to God, 2 Chron. 16. 10, 12. Yea, thus did St. Peter that holy Apostle, when he deny∣ed, yea, forswore his Master, in Matth. 26. 72, 74. And thus have many other godly men done, under the pressures of Temptation and Corruption. And is not this a sad sight, to see one professing Godli∣liness, yea, one that is really godly, act thus like a wicked man? This is to act (as I have sometimes ex∣prest it) the old Creatures part, in the new Creatures state. This is a very sad thing. I, but now I have another sight to shew you, according to the Te∣nure of this Text and Doctrine, which is very sad also. And what's
that? Why, to see bad men do ac∣cording to the works of good men, still continuing in their bad state. They plod on, and go on doing good things, but never mind to become good themselves: And so bad men do according to the works of the righteous: I say, This is a sad sight. And thus did Saul, when he was among the Prophets: There was a bad man doing good things, 1 Sam. 10. And thus did Ahab, when he humbled himself; a wicked man do∣ing a very good thing, 1 Kings 21. Thus did Jehu, when he destroyed Idolatry: A very good work, but a very bad man, 2 Kings 10. 28. Thus did Judas, when he preacht the Go∣spel; a very good work, but him∣self a Traytor. And thus did De∣mas, when he profest the Gospel, and followed the Apostles: A very good work, but himself an hypocrite, and a lover of the world. And thus in∣deed do all hypocrites, and meer formalists, in their performing of
Gospel worship. And thus Christ will tell them at the last day, as he saith, Matth. 7. 22, 23. when they came upon him so to upbraid him (as it were) with the good things which they had done. We have prophesied in thy name, we have cast out Devils in thy Name; we have done many good and mighty works in thy Name; Saith Christ to them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Though you did these good things, yet you never did them from a sound principle, from a principle of Grace: No, you your selves were secret workers, or lovers of iniquity, while you did all these good things. Now is not this a sad sight? I confess, it is a sad sight, to see a bad man do that which is bad, or a wicked man to do that which is wicked; yet I say, it is a sadder sight to see a bad man continuing in his state, having no spiritual principles, to go on do∣ing good: For what is this, but the
just contrary to what I spake be∣fore. This is the acting of the new Creatures part in the old Crea∣tures state; and what will that avail? And I would say these two things further. God often declares himself very highly against such as do good, them∣selves continuing evil. He declares himself weary of their services, espe∣cially when there is hypocrisie in them. Isa. 1. 14. Prov. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abominati∣on, how much more when he bringeth it with a wicked mind? That is, when he brings it for base ends, hoping by his sacrifice to satis∣fie God for his sin. Some hope by their good works to turn away the wrath of God; and they hope to get Heaven by their good prayers, and by their alms (and the like). I say, when a man doth a good thing, with such an evil mind as this, hoping to satisfie the Justice of God, and
turn away his wrath by his doings; this is now abomination to God. Or when he hopes that God will be well pleased with him, in that he brings him a sacrifice, doth him some out∣ward service, though he goes on in his sin. These are those the Lord doth so often protest against. And I would say to them further: The good you do in that state, not having a spiritual Principle, the good that you do will not profit you, 'twill not advantage you; 'twill be no plea in the great day. All the profit you can have by it at most, when you have had the utmost that it comes to, it is but some external or outward mercy. As Ahab, he hum∣bled himself: why, he had some∣what for it; he had his penny: and therefore saith the Lord, Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself? The Judgement shall not come in his dayes. A deliverance from an outward Judgement: but here was no delive∣rance from wrath, and from eternal
Judgement. And so Jehu, for the good works that he did, he had some∣what; but alas, what was it? Indeed a great thing in the eyes of the world, a Kingdom; and a Kingdom for several Generations. But the truth is, A poor thing, for that was all indeed he had for his zeal in de∣stroying Idolatry. He had the King∣dom for four Genenerations; but he abiding a wicked man, while he did that good thing, himself was cut off for ever. And you see the Ruler in Mark 10. 21. who came to Christ, and told him, how he had done al∣most all the matters of the Law: why, Jesus Christ saw indeed he had done them, but he knew he had not done them from a right principle; and therefore what was it that Christ gave him? Saith he, he beheld him, and loved him. A love of pity, as some expound the place. O it's a pity that such a person as thou art, that thou hast been a keeper of the Law, yet hast not done it upon a
right principle. And that he did not, it is plain; for when Christ put him home he went away sorrowful. Now all that he had for it, Christ gave him some approbation: and as he did to that other in Mark 12. 34. Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. I, but he was so far, as he should never come there, unless he changed his state. So that I say, The Condition of those that do good things, not out of a good principle, is indeed very lamentable, upon these and many other accounts. But possibly you will say, If it be so, That they who do good, not out of a right principle, their work will not turn to their profit, and there∣fore their case is to be lamented. If it be so, Were it not best to ad∣vise those who yet remain unconvert∣ed, to forbear doing good till them∣selves are better? I answer, No, by no means. We give no such advice in the matter: but let all men do all the good they
can. And I would exhort the worst of men to do good: To hear the Word preacht, to pray, to give alms. Daniel gave that counsel to Nebuchadnezzar a Heathen King, Dan. 4. 27. The Apostle Peter gave that counsel to Simon Magus, whom he saw to be in the gaul of bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity. And that the good that he had done, his receiving Baptism, and outward pro∣fession of faith, it was so far from coming from a good principle, that he was in the very gall of bitterness; yet saith he, pray, if it may be, thy sins may be forgiven thee. Though men are evil, yet let them do good as far as they can: and I would say these three things about it. First, They are under an obligati∣on to do good. For mans inability to perform a duty rightly, doth not take off the obligation which is up∣on him to perform it. And though a bad man sins in his manner of do∣ing it, yet his refusing to do it, would be more sinful.
And I would say further, Though he please not God in doing it, yet he displeases God in not doing it: So that indeed, man naturally consider∣ed, or in his fallen state, is fallen in∣to a very sad Dilemma. If he neg∣lect to do good, he sins. If he doth good, he spoils it in the doing of it. But notwithstanding all this (I say) I am far from discouraging the worst of men to do good, or to advise any to forbear to do good. No, I would convince all, that their present state is bad; and exhort all to apply them∣selves to all means whereby them∣selves may be made better. And that's the third Use which I shall briefly make of this point, and so I shall conclude. Use 3. Is it so, That those good works that flow from a good Princi∣ple are pleasing to God? Why then we see the necessity of Regeneration. Christ saith in 3 John 3. Verily, verily. There's a strong and a double
asseveration: Verily, verily, I say un∣to you, except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. We are not born with this pure heart, with this good conscience, with this faith unfeigned, which are the requisites to a good work in the Text. We are not born with these: for Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. Not one among the sons of men. Job 14. 4. A pure heart, a good conscience, faith un∣feigned, are the issues of the new birth. Education cannot make the heart pure; It must be Revelation which makes the heart pure. Good Education it may change the Life and the Conversation. As they say, To study Arts and Philosophy, it takes off the roughness that is in mans nature, -didicisse fi∣deliter dtes Emollit mo∣res and doth smooth them, and frame them very much for excellent uses. Good literature and education, it may civilize, but it cannot spiritualize:
It may change a mans course, but it cannot change his nature, that's only done by Regeneration. Now I say, a mans state, his nature must be changed; he must have a pure heart, which we never have till our natures are changed. He must be good be∣fore he can do good spiritually. Mark that word of the Apostle, Ephes. 2. 10. We are his workman∣ship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordain∣ed that we should walk in them. Mark it, here are good works. But how do we come to these good works? Why, We are his workman∣ship, saith he, we are his . God works us, before we can work for him: he makes us good, before we can do good. Saith he, We are his workmanship. And then, created, or so created in Christ Jesus to good works. We by union to Jesus Christ, come to have a spiritual prin∣ciple to carry us out in the doing of all good works. Here's your way.
You must be Gods workmanship, be∣fore you can do Gods work: You must be new creatures, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, be∣fore you can do them. A Crab-tree will never yield plea∣sant fruit, untill you change the na∣ture of it. Take a Crab-tree and plant it in the best soil that you have, and water it, and dress it, and prune it as much as you can, yet this Crab∣tree will bear nothing but Crabs, sowre fruit, till you come to graft it; and then your grafting of it, doth change the nature of the stock, and it hath another principle, and so then it brings forth good fruit. So it is in this case. Take the best natured man in the world plant him in the best soil, in the best ground, in Church-ground, plant him in the house of God, and there let him be watered by the ain of holy Doctrine, and let him be dt and cultivated eve∣ry day▪  ill bing forth no∣thing , nothing but unsa∣voury
fruit, till he himself be changed. Though he be under all those spiritual means, yet till those means have wrought effectually in him, his actions are all unsavoury. 'Tis only by our implantation into Jesus Christ, that we become fit to do good, so as is acceptable unto God. 'Tis this that makes the change. For as in nature, the graft doth change the stock; so in grace, the stock doth change the grafted branch. As we are grafted into Christ, he changes the branch; be∣ing planted into Christ, by the pow∣er of the Spirit, we are then made like him; and then we bring forth fruits of righteousness, which are to the glory of God by him. Mark the expression, Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Christ. That is, by vertue of union with Christ, of implantation and ingraf∣ture into Christ. When once it is thus, then all your fruits are sweet fruit, and pleasant fruit, it is well
tasted. Why, it is done First, From a principle of life in Christ. And Secondly, It is done from a principle of Love unto Christ: and then when your works, whether respecting God or man are thus done, then they are the fulfilling, and the final end of the Commandment. For then they come from the pure heart. Of which hereafter (if God will, I may speak). And so much at the present of the point in General, That until there be a good Principle, there cannot be a good work.
SERMON II. Jan. 6. 1672. 1 TIM. 1. 5. Now the end of the Command∣ment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. HAving shewed that every good work which is to answer to the Command∣ment of God, must flow from a good spring, I shall now come to speak of the
springs from whence they flow. Be∣ginning with that which is first in the Text, A pure heart. The end of the Commandment, is charity, out of a pure heart. A pure heart is the point I am now to speak to, and the matter I am to make discovery about. It being in order, in this Text, the first of those three most blessed springs, out of which all duties well pleasing unto God must proceed. A pure heart. Two things are here to be spoken to. First, What is meant by heart. And, Secondly, What by purity of heart: And so put both together, A pure heart. For the first I need not stay to spend time to shew you, what is meant by the heart: It being that which you have so often heard. By heart, the Scripture often in∣tends the whole inner man. And sometimes it intends some
special faculties of the inner man. The understanding is noted by the heart; the will by the heart; the affections by the heart; the consci∣ence by the heart. And in this large sense we are to take the word heart here: only bating the reference of it unto Conscience, which is spoken of as the second distinct spring from whence good actions flow. The heart then here, is the un∣derstanding, the will, the affections. Indeed what ever lyes in the bosome of man, you may call his heart. Yet I shall not prosecute the point in this distinctness of these particu∣lar faculties of the soul; shewing how the understanding is pure, which is by its freedome from error, and clear light in divine truths. How the Will is pure, which is, by its freedom from the bondage, from the obstinacy and rebellion, which doth naturally, wholly possess it: and by having a freedome in choos∣ing good, and refusing that which
is evil. Nor shall I stay strictly to shew what the purity of the affe∣ctions is; namely, their freedom from all inordinacy and irregulari∣ty, either as to the object upon which they are fixt; or as to the measure and degree in which they are fixt upon those objects. That which I shall do indeed, shall be to speak to the Heart, and so of the purity of it in a general notion, as it concerns the whole in∣ner man. And the heart as to purity, may be considered two wayes, First, As Made, Secondly, As Re-made. The heart of man as made, was pure; I mean, in its primitive Con∣stitution. So Adam had a pure heart; his understanding pure, his will pure, his affections pure. God made him upright; but he lost his pure heart, or the purity of his heart. Sin did impure his whole inner man; and he being our Re∣presentative,
lost purity of heart, not only for himself, but for us. All mankind lost that made purity of heart when Adam fell. And therefore the very first Complaint which the Lord made of the Fallen World, was concerning the pravi∣ty and impurity of their hearts, in Gen. 6. 5. God saw that the wick∣edness of man was great in the earth, [that's wickedness of Life,] and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. By this we see to pur∣pose, That the first made purity of the heart was lost. Here are so ma∣ny particulars setting forth the evil of mans heart, as plainly shews, that it is nothing but evil. Here's the evil of his Imaginations, The Imagination of the Thoughts of his heart. And not here and there one, but every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, it was evil. And not evil with some mixture of good, but purely evil. It was evil with∣out
any goodness in it: and there∣fore saith he Only evil. Nor was it in this impure state, only for a fit, or now and then: but saith the Text, Continually evil; or as the Hebrew is, every day. Day by day, which we render Continually. So that now the made pure heart was lost; and no man hath a pure heart by nature; nor hath any man a heart less impure by nature, than another man hath. Our hearts in na∣ture are all of a make; and that's stark naught. So spake the Pro∣phet Jeremy likewise in Jer. 17. 10. The heart of man is deceitful above all things. The heart of man is the greatest cheat in the world, and the greatest Impostor in the world: and saith he, 'tis desperately wick∣ed; and 'tis so wicked, that the wickedness of it is beyond Humane Comprehension: The wickedness of it is beyond the knowledge of man; who knows it? Neither he that hath the heart, nor any other that sees
him that hath it, knows how wick∣ed the heart of man is. And pray take notice, That the Prophet doth not speak there of some sort of vile, base, debauched, wicked men, whose hearts were so deceitful and wicked; but he speaks of men in general, as they are in nature: And much of that deceitfulness and wickedness re∣mains, even when they are in Grace. We may therefore con∣clude, (at least in this matter) alluding to that of Solomon in the Proverbs, Chap. 27. 19. As in wa∣ter, face answereth to face; so the heart of man to man. There are some that do trouble the water in that Text, with various Interpreta∣tions, I shall not stay upon them. But all that I alledge the Text for, is to shew, That look what there is in one mans heart naturally, the same is in anothers. Just as he that looks into the water; the face in the water upon which he looks, an∣swers his own face looking into it: So
doth the heart of man to man. The hearts of all good men, of per∣sons regenerate, do answer one ano∣ther in the main. Look what the heart of one godly man is, the same is the heart of another godly man in the main, though there may be particular differences. And so, take all men in their natural condition. Look what the heart of one man is, the same is the heart of another; and all stark naught. So then, there's now no pure heart in nature. See∣ing the made pure heart is lost, we must then consider the heart as re∣made pure. Here is a pure heart in the Text: 'Tis a heart re-made pure. A heart made pure by a gracious Restitution. And mark it, I say, it is a heart re∣made. It is not a heart mended; that will not serve the turn. The heart of man received such a crack in the fall, that there is no mending of it: It must be new made. There∣fore I say, the pure heart is a heart
re-made, new made. As we com∣monly say of a Bell, if a Bell re∣ceive a crack, there is no mending of it: You cannot mend a Bell, as you may mend a Brass Pan, by put∣ting a piece to it: There is no way to mend a crackt Bell, but by new casting it; it must to the Founder. Truly thus it is with mans heart; there is no mending it, no putting a patch to it; no repairing it, as you may repair a house that is delapi∣dated. No, it must be new made: and therefore the pure heart which is here spoken of in the Text, in other Texts is called a new heart, Ezek. 36. 25, 26. It is not a mend∣ed heart, but it is a new heart. I will take away the heart of stone. The former heart is an heart of stone; a heart that hath no more of re∣morse in it; no more of softness or tenderness in it, than a stone: I will take away the heart of stone. He doth not say, I will mend the heart of stone, but I will take it away.
That is, I will take away the heart, so far as it is stony; And I will give you an heart of flesh: that is, a new heart, an heart of flesh. The re∣made heart is a heart made wholly new: It is made wholly new by the power of God; and I may give it you in these four things. This pure heart, of which I am speaking, is purified or made new. First, Meritoriously by the blood of Christ. For it is by blood that things are purified and purged; as the Author to the Hebrews doth di∣scourse at large, especially in the ninth Chapter of the Epistle, Ver. 22. Almost all things are by the Law purged with blood; and without shed∣ding of blood is no Remission. The heart is made pure, First, By the blood of Christ, that cleansing blood: The blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin. Secondly, It is purified or made pure, by the Spirit of Christ; there∣fore
we find these two put together, 1 Pet 1. 2. Through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprink∣ling of the blood of Jesus Christ. As we are purified through the sprink∣ling of the blood of Jesus Christ; so through the sanctification of the Spi∣rit. The Spirit is pure, and the Spi∣rit is a purifier. The Spirit is com∣pared to water: the Spirit is com∣pared to fire, that purifies, that fetches out the dross and the filth, and makes all pure. And indeed, the impurity which is in the heart of man, is such, as nothing less than the blood of Christ, and therefore of the Spirit can purge it out. The fire of afflictions will not purge out the impurities of the heart. The fire of Hell will not fetch out the dross that is in the hearts of the damned. Nothing but the blood of Christ, nothing but the Spirit of Christ, are able to do it. The blood of Christ meritoriously, the
Spirit efficiently, and efficaciously. And then, Thirdly, The heart re-made pure, is so made Instrumentally by the Word. The Word of God is pure, it is as Silver purified in the fire seven times. And the Word of God is a purifier instrumentally; and the usual way by which the heart is re-made pure, is by the Word. Christ saith, John 15. 3. Ye are clean: How? Through the Word that I have spoken. And in general, the Apostle in Ephes. 5. 22, 26. saith, That Jesus Christ doth sanctifie and cleanse his Church, with the washing of water, by the Word. With the washing of water, that is, with the Spirit. But what's the in∣strument? By the Word. This way is purity of heart commonly and usu∣ally wrought by the Word. And, Fourthly, The heart is made pure applicatorily by Faith, Acts 15. 9. He put no difference between us and them (saith the Apostle) that is,
between Jews and Gentiles, having purified their hearts by faith. God works faith in the heart, and then faith purifies the heart by applying the blood of Christ, and by re∣ceiving the Spirit, and by working the soul to a submission to the holy Word and Will of God. So that thus in these wayes the heart is re∣made pure: and of this re-made pure heart, it is that the Text speaks. That's the spring out of which holy and acceptable works to the Lord doth flow. Obj. But some may say, Is there any such thing as a pure heart? We find those questions somewhat rife in the Book of Job, What is man, that he should be clean? So in Chap. 15. 14. Or how can he be clean, that is born of a woman? Chap. 25. 4. And Solomon saith ex∣presly, in Prov. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? It is plain then by these Scriptures, that there
is no such thing as a pure heart. Answ. I answer briefly, in three things to these Scriptures, and to all Scriptures of a like Import. When the Scripture speaks thus, It doth teach us, either, First, that no man is born with a pure heart; or it teaches us, Secondly, That no man by his own power hath made his heart pure; or, Thirdly, it teaches us that no heart is made pure in this world with an absolutely perfect purity. Indeed the best purity which the heart at∣tains to in this world, hath a mix∣ture of much impurity in it: so that thus indeed there is no heart pure. That is, there is no heart Legally pure, strictly pure; but there are thousands of hearts through Grace, that are sincerely pure, that are Evange∣lically pure, and so esteemed in the thoughts of God, and so exprest in his word. If any shall say, you tell us there
is an Evangelical purity, what mean you by it? when may the heart be said to be Evangelically pure? I answer thus, the heart is Evangelically When the heart may be said to be Evangeli∣cally pure. pure, though there be sin dwelling in us, or an in-dwelling sin, and though sin is stirring, hath strong motions in us, makes war in our souls from day to day, though sin doth some times prevail, and give us that foil; yet notwithstanding all this, when, First, the soul in free from the Command of every sin, Secondly, When the soul is freed from the customary practice of every sin; and, Thirdly, When the soul is free from the love of any sin, then the soul is Evangelically pure. Indeed sin will hide, sin will stirr, and I cannot warrant any man in the world, that is a man of the purest heart in the world, but that his sin may
possibly give him a foil. But this is certain, he that hath an Evangelical purity, is free from the commanding power of sin, and from that con∣stant, and customary practice of sin; and from the love of sin. A man of a pure heart, may have a special sin, that is, a sin to which he is more inclined than to any other. Some∣times through the constitution of his body, sometimes through his occa∣sions, and in the way of his calling; there are many things which do in∣danger men to some special sin, now though I say a good man may have a special sin, a sin that he finds his heart most running out after, in which sense David call's some ini∣quities, his Iniquity, Psal. 111. 23. I have kept my self (saith he) from mine Iniquity, that is, from the Ini∣quity that did most beset him. A good man then, may have a special sin, which haunts him, which dogs him, and besets him, but yet he hath not a beloved sin; Evangelical
purity, and the love of sin, cannot consist together, he that hath a pure heart, cannot play with his sin, cannot sport with his sin, cannot take content in thinking of sin, ei∣ther past, or what may be to come. As they in the Prophet, this day is thus with us, and to morrow shall be more abundant. No, he cannot please himself thus, in reference to any sin. So that I conclude it, the pure heart is freed, (if he be Evan∣gelically freed) from sin in all these notions, and so he is the Person here meant in the text, from whom all holy actions may proceed accepta∣bly to the Lord; and that may serve for the opening of this point, for I intend to dispatch it at this time. I shall make some use of it. Use. First, To stir up all to con∣sider, whether they have this pure heart yea or no. You see the impor∣tance of it, it is one of the springs out of which every action that is
pleasing to God, according to his appointment must flow, therefore it stands us much upon, lest we loose all things that we work, To have a good assurance in our own bosoms, that we have a pure heart in our bo∣soms; and we had need consider it. For, First, 'tis most sure that many think they have pure hearts, and have them not. Solomon hath an expression; saith he, there are a Generation that are pure in their own own eyes, and yet are not cleansed from their wickedness, Chap. 30. 12. It's an easie matter to be pure in our own eyes, and yet remain altogether unclean? A Generation pure in their own eyes. And St. Augustin speaks of a sort of people; who would needs be called Cathorists, and (saith he) they do call themselves so, they most proudly, and odiously call them∣selves, the pure ones. But accor∣ding to his discovery of them, they were not cleansed from their wicked∣ness;
and how many are thus indeed, clean in their own eyes, and yet are unclean. And, Secondly, There are many that are clean, not only in their own eyes, but in the eyes of other men, yea possibly in very good men, Godly men, clean in their eyes, and yet for all this, they are not cleansed from their filthness. Our Lord Jesus Christ detecting the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, saith, that they were like whited sepulchers, which ap∣pear fair to men, but within are full of dead mens bones, and rottenness. Thus it is with many, very many in the world, they appear very beautiful, like a brave sepulcher, painted, and gilded, have possibly a very pure hand, you can see no evil they do; they have possibly a very pure Tongue, you can hear of no evil they speak. Speak even as they in Deut. 5. 28, 29. of whom the Lord saith, they have well said in all that they have spoken, saith God to Moses,
they have well done indeed, in all that they have spoken? I but they did little of that which they had spoken. Many are very good in the sight of other Men, but not so in the sight of God, he doth easily discover their Impurities, and let me tell you, their are many that discover their own Impurity, and of whom we may conclude, that they have no pure heart, while we consider the gross Impurities of their lives. In∣deed some carry it closely, and others profainly, and as the Lord speaks in Jer. 2. 34. Their sin is in their skirts, you need not dig for it, saith, God; I have not found it by secret searching, or by digging, their sin is in their skirts. It is so with many, their sin is in their skirts, and you need not dig to find it out, the impu∣rities of their life do plainly shew the impurity of their hearts. The Pro∣phet Micha puts the question, Chap. 6. 11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked ballances, and with the
bag of deceithful weights? shall I count them pure? do you think he hath a good heart, who hath such a life as this, willing to deceive, and willing to wrong his Brethren, or those that he deals with? so we may carry on the Prophets chiding que∣stion to many and many. Shall we count them pure whose eyes are full of Adultery? Shall we count them pure whose hands are full of blood? Shall we count them pure whose houses are full of oppression? Shall we think them pure whose mouths are full of cursing and oaths, of scurility? Shall we count them pure whose mouths and Tongues are often tipt with scofs against purity? why the impurity of these mens hearts breaks out, the shew of their countenance doth testifie against them, that they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. You see then there are a number that want this purity of heart. Consider them first, who are pure in their own eyes, and have
great thoughts of their own purity. Consider, secondly; those that have a great opinion for purity among men, they appear to others so, and yet the Lord sees they are not so. And then, if you go abroad to the profain world, who proclaim their impurities, and glory in their im∣purity. And therefore to urge that a little further, How may we know where there is purity of heart, that Evangelical purity which I spake of before? In opening the words, take a few touches as to the discovery of a pure heart. First, he that Indeed hath a pure heart, is very Discoveries of a pure heart. sensible that once he had an impure heart, as Da∣vid in Psal. 51. In sin was I con∣ceived, and brought forth in Iniquity. David was a man of a pure heart. He was very sensible that once his heart was very impure. And, Secondly, He that hath a pure heart is sensible that to this day there
remains much impurity in his heart, and the purer any ones heart is, the more doth he mourn under his heart impurities. And, Thirdly, He that hath a pure heart, loves every thing that is pure, and the more pure it is, the more he loves it, the more he approves it. Here's a pure heart; Phil. 1. 10. He approves the things that are ex∣cellent. Things that differ, so the word is. That is, things that differ in a way of excellency, not only things that differ, as good, and bad differ, but things that differ as good and good differ; for there's a gradual difference between good and good, as there is a specifical difference between good and evil; as there is a difference between wheat and cockle, so there is a difference between wheat & wheat: As there is a difference between Gold and Copper, so there is a diffe∣rence between Gold and Gold. There's the Gold of Ophyr, the most pure
Gold. Now I say, he that hath a pure heart, he loves all that is pure, and the more pure any thing is, the more he loves it. That's the mea∣ning of the Apostle, he approves things that differ in a way of excel∣lency, not only as good differs from evil, but as one good differs from another. If there be any thing which is more excellent than ano∣ther, he is for that. Here's your pure heart then. And, Fourthly, A pure heart will be full of pure thoughts, or you will be sure that no impure thoughts shall have any welcome in you; a pure heart converses chiefly with God in purity of thoughts, and good thoughts; as the wicked are discribed, Psal. 10. to be such as have not God in all their thoughts, they have not the pure God, nor the holy God in all there thoughts, that is, God is not at all in their thoughts to any purpose. So we may say of the pure heart, God
is in all his thoughts, or he would fain have his thoughts always upon God. And so those that the Lord accounts his Jewels are discribed, Mal. 13. 16. Saith he, I will deal thus and thus with them that fear me, and that think upon my name. Mark, that think upon my name. A great part of our spiritual purity, is to the often thinking upon the pure God: The pure heart (I say) is often full of pure thoughts, and you may take measure of the purity of your hearts very much, by considering what your thoughts are. And, Fifthly, your heart is full of pure and good desires, thoughts and single acts and puttings forth of the soul upon such and such objects and sub∣jects, but desires they are wrought up into such or such a special point: a pure heart is full of good desires, and especially he desires to be more good, to be better, he desires to know more of God, and to honour
God more, he desires to enjoy God more, he hungers and thirsts after God. And what's the hunger and thirst of the soul? 'Tis spiritual desire: desire is the hunger and thirst of the soul. Now a pure heart is full of these desires, and these are the most spiritual discoveries of him that hath a pure heart. Let him consider what his desires are, what he would have: Isa. 26. With my soul have I desired thee. Mark your desires. And then, Sixthly, If you you have this pure heart, you will not only have ma∣ny pure desires, but you will have purposes, pure resolves, you will be full of good resolves, and by re∣solves the heart is fixt, fastened, settled, resolution is the stablish∣ment of the soul; now a pure heart is full of pure resolves, and pur∣poses. The resolves and purposes are of two kinds. First, He purposes and resolves
to adhere and cleave to that which is good. Thus he doth resolve with himself, fall back, fall edge, let the winds blow high or low, this I am resolved, this is my pur∣pose, to cleave to Christ, and that which is good, as that good man Barnabas is said to exhort the people, Acts. 11. 23. He exhorted them, that with purpose of heart they would cleave to the Lord, with purpose of heart. Holy purposes they are are as the Glew, by which our hearts are fastened to the Lord Jesus Christ, I exhort you with purpose of heart that you would cleave to Christ. And then there is a purpose in a pure heart, against all that is evil, against all that is Impure: Daniel 1. That holy man Daniel, Verse 8. saith the Text, Daniel purposed in his heart, that he would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat; he was resolved
of that, now he hath a pure heart indeed, who purposes that he will never defile himself, his heart, nor his life neither. And indeed, such purposes have they that have pure hearts, of one kind or of ano∣ther. Yea sometimes we find holy ones heigthening their purposes to vows, yea to oaths, I have sworn, saith David, that I will keep thy righteous Judgements; here were strong purposes indeed. And then, Seventhly, He that hath this pure heart, certainly hath pure ends in all that he doth, He hath a holy Aim, he hath a single eye, this is a great evidence of a pure heart, when we have pure Aims, Christ calls that the single eye, Matth. 6. 23. If thine eye be single, that is, If thy ends, and Aims, that which thou lookest at, If they are single, sincere, pure, the whole body shall be full of light. A pure heart, the ends that he
proposes, are not self, not self-profit, not self-applause, not plea∣sure; But he purposes the profit of many that they may be saved, or the good of all with whom he converses. He proposes these great ends, which he carries quite through all unto the end. And that is, that he may exalt the name of the Lord by all. O look to your ends, the purity of your hearts, will appear in the purity of your Aims, and of your ends: and so much for that first thing, for conviction, and discovery about this purity of heart. Use. 2. Secondly, Let it be a word of exhortation, and that in two branches. First, If there be such a thing as a pure heart, and that be of such importance, then weigh it well, whether you have this pure heart, consider it by all that hath been
forespoken concerning an Evange∣lical pure heart, and the evidences thereof; and I would say this for the urging of it, that we all should look to this matter, the purity of our hearts. First, The hardest thing that we have to do, is the purifying of our hearts, and the greatest kind∣ness which God can do us, is to cleanse our hearts. The cleansing of the heart is the hardest piece of work, it is comparatively an easie thing to cleanse the hand, com∣paratively an easie thing to cleanse the Tongue, and to have that pure, but to have the heart purified, there's the great stick. And then, Secondly, Look to the purity of your hearts, for they have cer∣tainly need of purifying. They whose hearts are still in their first natural state, they have need indeed, and they who are in a spiritual state, have need of daily purifying, look
(I say) therefore to the purifying of your hearts, for they have need to be purified, they are the filthiest part of us: If there be impurity in the hand, there's much more in the heart; and then, 'Tis indeed a vain thing, to go about to purify the hand, or Tongue, or life, if the heart be Impure. 'Twere a vain thing for any one to go and cleanse a stream, while he know's that there is a Fountain above that sends forth filthy, and unclean, and poysonous water. 'Tis just so in this case; till the heart be made pure, nothing can be pure. And the great esteem which God hath of us, is with respect to this purity of heart. He is a friend indeed to those who have a pure heart, he hath a great respect for them. There is an expression, in Prov. 22. 11. He that loveth pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips
the King shall be his friend, mark there, the pureness of heart, and grace of lips. By grace of lips, he means, not only graceful speech, but gracious speech. Now grace in the lips you see hath its depen∣dance upon the pureness of the heart, and saith he, he that hath such a pureness of heart, as that from it he hath a graceful lip, the King shall be his friend. Doubtless So∣lomon spake this with reference to himself, shewing what a friend he would be to those that appeared be∣fore him in pureness of heart, and this graciousness of their lips. But this is much more true in reference to the King of Heaven. He that loveth pureness of heart, for the grace of of his lips, the King of Heaven shall be his friend, he shall be accepted of God. And what grace soever that is, gracefulness of speech any one hath, if there be not pureness of heart, he shall have no favour with
the King of Heaven, what ever he may find among any of the Kings of the Earth. O this therefore is the great thing, my Son saith So∣lomon, give me thy heart. That's it which the Lord doth so much delight in, Prov. 23. 26. My Son, give me thy heart. What heart must it be? Not an unclean heart, not a filthly heart, not a proud heart, not a covetous heart, not a mali∣tious heart, not an uncharitable heart, but my Son give me thy heart, give me thy heart purified, purged, cleansed. Or thus, give me thy heart, resign it up to me to be purified, to be purged, to be cleansed, to be made holy. Indeed we may give our proud hearts up to God, and beg of him that he would humble them, But we must not think to keep our hearts proud, and give them up to God proud; and we may give our unclean hearts to God, begging of him that he would cleanse
them, but we must not keep unclean hearts in our bosoms, and then say, we give up our hearts to God. The heart in which God is pleased, and in with he takes delight, is the pure heart; therefore upon all these Considerations, let us be much look∣ing after the purity of our hearts. And then. Secondly, Do you find that accor∣ding to Scripture rule, you have a pure heart, Then I have a second word to say. Pray do what you can to keep your hearts pure: For they who have pure hearts may quickly find their hearts very impure, unless they look narrowly to it. A heart that is made pure, will be greatly impured unless we watch, and keep it pure. Solomon hath that expression, in Prov. 4. 23. keep thy heart with all diligence, saith he, For out of it are the Issues of life: keep thy heart, keep it with all diligence, with all manner of keeping; you
see then, it is not enough to get a pure heart; but we must keep our hearts, and keep them clean. As 'tis in this case with your houses, you do not only make them clean, but you keep them clean: and if a house be made never so clean, yet it will contract defilement. Dust will be upon it, unless it be kept clean, unless it be watcht that none throw dirt into it. Indeed we had need in keeping our hearts, to watch them continually: and that's the great business of keeping our hearts, for the Devil if we do not watch our hearts, he will do one of these two things. He will either steal away our heart: for the Devil comes a heart∣stealing continually; and especially when you are at a Sermon, or a holy duty; and if he can but steal away your hearts, he cares not how many Bodies there are here.
Or he will be throwing dirt in∣to your hearts, suggesting wicked∣ness: He will throw dirt into the inner closet of your hearts, by his Temptations, by his Injections. There∣fore if you would keep your hearts clean, you must watch them. I, and you must often wash your hearts, if you would keep them clean; for your hearts will contract filth, do what you can, unless they are daily washt, and duly searcht. As it is with a Garden, let a Gar∣den be drest, and made very exact, so that there is not any thing amiss, not a Weed to be seen in it: I, but the Garden must be kept thus, or else in a little time it will be over-run with Weeds again. It is so in our hearts: Suppose we have weeded out this, and that, and the other evil, if we do not keep a continual care of our hearts, the Weeds will grow again; and there∣fore our hearts must be continually
weeding, and our hearts must be con∣tinually washt. We must go daily to the Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness: We must wash our hearts by the renewed Acts of Re∣pentance, confessing our sins, be∣wailing our sins, mortifying our sins. This is a great work for us. If you have pure hearts, look to it that you keep them pure; you may quickly be defiled: David, a man that had a pure heart; yet got so much defilement upon his heart, that he could not tell what to make of it, but begs of God to create him a new heart, and all because he did not watch his heart, but gave way to Temptation, and so was overtaken: then you will find if you do not daily sweep your houses, they will defile; and the cob-webs they will grow; the Spi∣ders will be at work; and though your hearts be never so pure, Spi∣ders will creep into them, this Lust,
and that Corruption, and they will be weaving their Webs there. O what sad Webs we have in the hearts of men, and all because they look not after them! You must sweep down the Cob-webs, and throw out the dirt every day, if you would keep your hearts clean. And I would press all I have said, by these four Considerations. Look to it that you have pure hearts, and that you keep your hearts pure. First, Upon this Consideration which you find in Psal. 18. 26. With the pure, thou wilt shew thy self pure: with the merciful, thou wilt shew thy self merciful: with an up∣right man thou wilt shew thy self upright. With the pure thou wilt shew thy self pure. I, but if a man be not pure, Will God shew himself impure towards him? No such thing. Let us be what we will, God is ever the same. No∣thing
can turn him out of his pu∣rity. But the meaning is, If we are pure, pure in heart, God will shew himself pure to us: that is, he will perform all things; he will be that to us which he hath pro∣mised. He will be all that to us which we can desire. With the pure, thou wilt shew thy self pure. And he saith, With the froward, thou wilt shew thy self froward. As God knows how to deal with men in wayes of evil, to hit them ac∣cording to what they are: With the froward thou wilt shew thy self froward. Not that there is any frowardness or passion in the Lord; but men shall be dealt with accord∣ing to their way. They that will wrestle with God, as the word there signifies, he will pay them in their own coin: And so with the pure, thou wilt shew thy self pure. And then, Secondly, Look to this purity,
for then all things are pure to you. As God will shew himself pure to you: So if you are pure, all things will be pure to you, Titus 1. 15. Unto the pure, all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing pure. Here is a very strong Argument to press you to this purity of heart: To the pure, all things are pure. To the impure, nothing is pure. Why is it that to the pure all things are pure? What are evil actions pure to them? Is sin pure to them? No: God forbid that any should have such a thought. This liberty have some taken to themselves, as if there were no difference to be made in actions: But, to the pure, all things are pure. They need not trouble themselves about sin, or this or that. No, but to the pure all things are pure: that is, all things are blessed to them: All their enjoyments, all the Ordinances
of God, all their outward comforts, all their relations, all their duties, all things are pure to them. Where∣as, saith he, To them that are de∣filed, there is nothing pure. The very holy Ordinances are not pure to them: Their Callings, though honest, are not pure to them: their riches, their great possessions in the world, are not pure to them: They have not a pure, nor a holy use of any of these things. This is an awake∣ning consideration, to look after a pure heart, To the pure, all things are pure; but to the undefiled there is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled. And then, Thirdly, The pure in heart, are only fit for Communion with God, 2 Tim. 2. 22. saith he, With them that call on the Lord, out of a pure heart. They only are fit to call upon God, who have a pure heart. The Apostle would have them lift
up clean hands, in 1 Tim. 2. 8. (much more then, pure hearts, who call upon God out of a pure heart.) And when the Apostle James had exhorted them to draw nigh to God, with this Promise of Assu∣rance, that he would draw nigh to them, presently he adds, Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purifie your hearts ye double minded. You are no wayes fit for Communion with God, for drawing near to God, unless your hearts are thus purifi∣ed, thus purged, thus cleansed. And then, Fourthly, Lastly, The pure in heart are those that have that great promise, the promise which con∣cludes all good; namely, To see God. Matth. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart. Why? Saith he, They shall see God. God is a Spi∣rit, God is Invisible, How shall they see him? Him no man hath seen, nor can see. How shall the
pure in heart see him? Why, they shall see him; that is, they shall enjoy him, they shall have sweet communion with him; they shall ascend into the Holy Hill, Psal. 24. 3, 4. Who shall as∣cend into the Holy Hill? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart. They shall be admitted nigh to God, they shall see him, they shall enjoy him. I may conclude with that of the Prophet, Hab. 1. 13. he saith, that God is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. And the truth is, Im∣pure eyes cannot behold God: They cannot bear the Glory, the Excellency of his presence: They cannot enjoy God. There is a stop in the very nature of the thing, as well as there is a stop by a Divine Law. Thus the Imposture shall not come into the presence of God; that's the Divine Law. And there is a stop in the very nature of the
thing: they cannot abide in the presence of God. As he is of purer eyes, than to behold evil: so evil ones have such impure eyes, that they cannot behold him, they can∣not see God. Now then, let this be conside∣red, and lay it to heart, what rea∣son you have to look after this pure heart, which is the first of those three springs, out of which saith the Apostle, all those holy actions, which are the end, and the fulfil∣ling of the Commandment of God must flow, and with which only it is that you may come to have ac∣ceptance. And so much now of the first of the Springs, The Pure Heart. The second is, a Good Conscience. FINIS.
PSAL. 92. 12. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm-tree. He shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. VVE see commonly that opposites, either per∣sons or things, being laid together, illu∣strate and set off one another. (To touch at no other things in this Psalm) Here are two of the greatest oppo∣sites in this world laid together, and they do wonderfully illustrate each other. The opposites are, the Wicked and the Righteous. And indeed, those two divide the whole world.
The state of the wicked, is set down at the seventh Verse, They may spring as the Grass, they may flourish. But what's the issue of it? It is that they shall be destroyed for ever. They shall spring, but they shall spring▪ but like Grass, which is Green for a while, and quickly wi∣thers. Now the Righteous at this twelfth Verse, (For I shall not enlarge fur∣ther upon the state of the wicked; but only to set off the state of the Righteous.) The Righteous shall flourish too. But how? Not like the Grass, but like the Palm-tree. And indeed, they shall abide for ever: whereas the wicked, they shall be destroyed for ever. Who the Righteous are, I shall not stay to speak of at large. They are such as are righteous in their state, being in the righteousness of Jesus Christ. And they are such as are righte∣ous in their course, and in their
life, walking answerably to such a state. These Righteous ones shall flourish. They shall not only Live and Conti∣nue, but they shall have a flourish∣ing life. David saith, Mine ene∣mies live, and are mighty. 'Tis true, they do so for a time, many times. The Righteous live, and they have a mightiness too. For they flourish. And how do they flourish? Not as the Grass, but as the Palm-tree. I shall only open that a little, and touch only upon one point, from the Paralel. They shall flourish as the Palm-tree. The Palm-tree is an excellent tree, and the praises of God are often re∣sembled by it: Nay, they are said in the Revelation to have Palms in their hands. And they are shadow∣ed by the Palm-tree, in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Chap. 40. 31. in the de∣scription of the New Jerusalem. Now when it is said, They shall
flourish like a Palm-tree: We must consider how the Palm-tree flou∣rishes. The Palm tree, (only to touch that) is the Date-tree, that's the Palm-tree. And so the Meeter, or Singing Psalms expresses it. There it is rendred thus, The Just shall flourish up on high, As Date-trees bud and blow. Now there are five things which are observed in the Date-tree, I shall name them all, but speak only a little to one to carry on this point of the flourishing of the Righteous like the Palm-tree. First, The Date, or the Palm-tree grows in the purest soil: it will not grow in filthy places, in dungy places, but it loves a very pure soil. And thus the Righteous flourish: They flou∣rish in a very pure soil: for they are planted in that which is the purest soil of all: They are planted in
Christ: They grow in Christ; and they grow in the Church, which is a pure soil. They are planted in the house of God, as it follows in the Psalm. Not in the world, the un∣clean and polluted world, which lyes in wickedness, and smells like a dung∣hill, but in the Garden of God. And, Secondly, The Palm-tree is a Tree whose branches do shoot all upwards: there's none grow out of the side, as other Trees have. And thus the Righteous flourish as the Palm-tree: their affections are set upon things above: they grow up Heaven-ward. They do not shoot out their branches this way, or that way to the world, but all to Heaven. So it is while they act according to their state. Thirdly, The Palm-trees are those Trees which are alwayes green: Green in Winter as well as in Sum∣mer. It doth not cast its leaf, nor fade; as the expression is in Psal.
1. 3. The godly man is like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season, His leaf also shall not wither. They hold up their profession: they are green, not only in the Summer of prosperity, but in the very Winter of adversity; and maintain their verdure, and their beauty in the hard∣est times. Fourthly, The Palm-tree is a Tree that doth not only keep its greenness, the beauty of its leaves; but it is a Tree that is full of fruit; and that good fruit, pleasant fruit, sweet fruit. a kind of Cordial fruit, which you know the Date is. The Righteous have the greenness of a profession: and besides that, they have the fruit∣fulness of their Conversation; and 'tis pleasant fruit, fruits of Righte∣ousness, fruits of Faith, fruits of Love, the fruits of the Spirit. They are fruitful Trees, such a one as the Palm. Fifthly, (Which I shall a little
insist upon.) They flourish like the Palm-tree. It is so far noted, that it is made an Emblem. The Palm-tree doth grow up, when it is most prest down. When there are the heaviest weights hung upon the Palm-tree, then the Palm-tree rises up highest. It grows highest, when it is (as it were) kept down. Thus it is with the Righteous; they flou∣rish like the Palm-tree: And that's the Note that I shall give you, and speak a little to. DOCT. That Righteous persons, such as are righteous in their state, in a ju∣stified state; and Righteous in their course, walking in holiness, they do improve and grow under great∣est pressures. When they meet with the greatest pressures in the world, they thrive and grow Hea∣ven ward.
This only I shall speak a little to. When the world would crush the Righteous, press them down to the earth, yea, press them down to Hell if they could, yet like the Palm-teee, they grow up more and more. It is said of the people of Israel, who were the Church of God in Exod. 1. that when Pharaoh put weights upon them, the weights of very heavy oppression; when he set over them Task-masters to afflict them with their burthens at ver. 11. it is said ver. 12. But the more they afflicted them, the more they multi∣plyed and grew. This was just like the Palm-tree. Pharaoh burthened them, but they multiplyed and grew. And surely we are to under∣stand this, not only of their multiply∣plying in number, but of their mul∣tiplying in goodness too, or their in∣crease in goodness: they multiplyed and grew (Doubtless there is that sense in it) not only that they had a greater company, and more fruit∣ful
as to the production of persons, but that they were more fruitful in their lives. And that's it which hath been said of the Church at all times, when under pressures and burthens. Saith One, They were bound, they were beaten, they were burnt, and yet they multiplyed and increased. And doubtless, it was with the two∣fold increase I spake of before. The more persons were added to the Church; and those persons that were added, advanced more in wayes▪ of Grace, in wayes of Holiness. And so that other saying of the Antients upon this very point; That the blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church. It was like seed indeed, and it brought forth, as the seed spoken of in Matth. 13. The good seed falling upon good ground, brought forth, in some thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundred fold. This is flourishing like the Palm-tree. And that we find in Dan. 11. 35. And some of them of
understanding shall fall. Shall fall! How? Shall fall into the hand, and under the hands of persecuting Ty∣rants; they shall fall into trouble; like that in the Proverbs, The Righte∣ous falleth seven times a day. That is, he falls often into trouble, yet God helps them up again. Now saith he, some of them of under∣standing; that is, of a spiritual un∣derstanding, of a holy understand∣ing: they shall fall into afflictions: for them of understanding, we may explain it by Dan. 12. 10. None of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand. The godly wise, they shall understand. Now of these men of understanding: Ma∣ny shall fall: Well, what shall be the effect of it? To try them. That's the First. And not only so, but to purge, and to make them white. To purge out their corruptions, and to make their Graces very conspicuous. You see the improvement they made of their
afflictions and sufferings for the truths of God: and that in Zach. 13. 9. teaches the same thing. I will bring the third part through the fire: through the fire of persecution. And what, shall they be burnt there? No, saith he, I will refine them as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tryed: and they shall call on my Name, and I will hear them, I will say, it is my people; and they shall say, The Lord is my God. Thus they shall grow up in the actings of their faith to an assurance. Faith shall come to an appropriating act; they shall say, The Lord is my God. And when? Even when I bring them through the fire. I will re∣fine them so, that their faith shall be exceeding transparent: and they shall say, The Lord is my God. And we know what the Apostle Paul found by the sufferings which befell him; and in him the Church of God, Phil. 1. 12. saith he, I would you should understand, Brethren, that the thing
which happened unto me—Why, what things were these that hapned to Paul? What was it some great preferment, (as we say) some great Benefice, some great honour? No, the things that befell him, were trou∣bles and afflictions; Bonds, as he doth express it in ver. 13. Now saith he, These have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel. How, to the furtherance of the Go∣spel? Why, because persons by this affliction upon me, which threatned them also; and 'tis like took hold of some of them: why, saith he, They waxed confident by my bonds, and are much more bold to speak the Word without fear, ver. 14. They grew up like the Palm tree; they grew to a confidence. They were not only honest and faithful, but they were confident and bold. They had not only integrity for Christ, but a great increase of strength for Christ; and all upon his sufferings: They flourish like the Palm-tree.
And that in Rom. 5. will reach it too: saith he, We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation worketh pa∣tience, and patience experience, and experience hope. Why, tribulation did not hinder their Graces, but did further them. Tribulation did work patience. It seem's to be a very strange sting. Tribulation doth ex∣ercise patience indeed: But how? It did work patience, or make them more patient: for that's the mean∣ing of it. Now it seems very strange, yet thus it doth. And then Patience experience, and experience hope. Here's a flourishing, and a growing up in all Graces, even in a time of tribulation. And it's the same thing that we have too in 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. That is, it works us into a greater fitness for glory, the afflictions that are upon us. We grow more up into Heaven,
more into glory. Our hope doth (as it were) rise up into glory by our affliction: And this is flourish∣ing like the Palm-tree. Affliction will make us the fitter for Heaven: they will make us better than we were, and so fitter for Heaven, fitter for glory. Grace improved is very near to glory. Thus we see how the Scripture holds out this thing, that the righteous flourish as the Palm-tree. They are bettered, and made fitter by their afflictions for glory. I will give you an account in some grounds of it, why it is so, how it comes to pass. First, The pressures and weights that are upon the Righteous from the world, do wean them from the world, takes them off from the world. Why now the love of the world, and cleaving to the world, and desires going after the world, are a mighty impediment to our growth in grace, to our flourishing in the world. You see what's said in Matth. 13. the
cares of the world, the pleasures of the world, the deceitfulness of riches, choke the Word, and make it become altogether unfruitful. And truly the love of the world, and pursuit of worldly things, do exceedingly hin∣der grace in the fourth Ground, in those that are truly godly, it is a great hindrance to them till they get their hearts mortified to the world, and weaned from the world. Now certainly the pressures that we meet withal in the world, are an exceed∣ing great means to take us off from the pleasures of the world, and the profits of the world. We are morti∣fied to the world: as Paul saith of the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of Christ. What's the Cross of Christ? Why, the suf∣ferings which I have for Christ, the weights which are laid upon me for Christs sake. What was the effect of this? Why, whereby I am cruci∣fied unto the world, and the world un∣to
me. Now when the soul is de∣livered from this world, this evil world, it must needs flourish up to the other world. Secondly, By the afflictions and troubles we meet with in this world, we get much light, and grow into a clearer knowledge of those things which makes for our increases Hea∣ven-ward. It hath been antiently said, That affliction gives under∣standing; and the School of the Cross, is the School of light. Light comes in while we are in the School of the Cross. And indeed there is a fourfold light doth come in to us while we are under the Cross, and under sufferings. A light, First, Which discovers more to us the vanity of the world, than ever we saw before, and the baseness of the world, and the wickedness of the world: and this is a great advantage to us. And, Secondly, A light to see more of of the Mind of God, and of the
Word of God. So David in Psal 119. 71. It was good for me that I have been afflicted, for thereby I have learned thy Statutes. Saith he, learn∣ed them? I have more of thy Sta∣tutes, and I have learned every Sta∣tute more. There hath come in a clearer light into my soul now by my afflictions. A state of affliction is in it self called in Scripture, A state of Darkness: it is a time of darkness: and yet it is wonderful, that out of this Darkness there comes a light; a spiritual light: so that we see more of the Word of God, and of the wonderful things of the Law. Thirdly, It must needs follow, that by affliction we have a clearer light to see the worth of grace, and of an interest in Jesus Christ, what an ex∣cellent thing that is. And then, Fourthly, A clearer light to see the excellency of Jesus Christ him∣self. As of an Interest in Christ, so of the person of Christ, how glori∣ous,
how choice a one Jesus Christ is. I do but touch this now: By affliction a light comes into the soul: Upon all these, or upon other ac∣counts, we must needs improve Hea∣ven-ward, and grow up like the Palm-tree. In 2 Pet. 3. 18. saith the Apostle, Grow in Grace. Why how should we come to grow in grace? Why saith he, And in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. In proportion to our growth in the knowledge, in the true knowledge; I speak not of a notional knowledge, a meer brain knowledge, but of an experimental knowledge of Jesus Christ. As we increase in this know∣ledge, so we increase and grow in grace: and so of the rest. As we grow in the knowledge of the vanity of the world: as we grow in the knowledge of the Word of God; as we grow in the knowledge of the worth of grace, and of an interest in Christ; as we grow in the knowledge of the excellency of the knowledge of
the Person of Christ, so we must needs grow in grace. Now then, the Cross and affliction giving us an ad∣vantage for all these things, you see the ground of it. And then, Thirdly, The weights and pressures which are upon these Palm-trees, up∣on the Righteous, they do draw them more into their own hearts, to con∣verse more at home, to search them∣selves more, to be acquainted more with their own bosomes, and this will make us flourish, and grow up∣wards: for indeed the reason why we grow up so little in acquaintance with Christ, lyes much in this, be∣cause we grow so little in acquaint∣ance with our selves. Now in an afflicted condition (if ever) the soul is upon its return to it self. In Lam. 3. when the whole Church was in that sad condition, under those grievous weights of Captivity, and all manner of trouble they were in: say they, Let us search and try our selves. Come, now let's go in to
our selves; let us search for our cor∣ruptions; search for our lusts, which lye in the secret corners of our hearts; let us search our selves, and let us search how it is with us as to Grace; what faith we have, what love we have, what patience, and so of the rest. Indeed, afflictions do put us upon this search of our selves, to find out the state of our graces; how it is with us, what condition they are in, how they fare. Now this the troubles we meet with in the world, give us an advantage for, and so an advantage of spiritual growth, of growing Heaven-ward, as the Palm∣tree. And then, Fourthly, These afflictions and pressures we have from the world, drive us nearer to God. As to a more acquaintance with our selves, so to a more acquaintance with God, and more communion with Christ. They do (as it were) force us to Christ, when the world deals so un∣kindly with us. Many times when
the world is kind to us, sail with us, and flatters us, and huggs us, and embraces us, we begin to for∣get, and to slight communion with Jesus Christ; and to say as they in Jer. 2. We are Lords, we will come no more at thee. It is spoken of the people of Israel, when they were in a very flourishing condition. I, but when they were slaves, and in cap∣tivity, and in a sad condition, truly then they saw reason to come to Christ, to come to him by prayer. The very Mariners in Jonah, when they were in the storm, every one went to his God. Isa. 26. In their trouble they have visited me. To be sure I shall hear of them then, In their affliction they will seek me early. It is so in evil men, much more is it so in the righteous, and in those that have walkt with God▪ If they have had a constant communi∣on with God and Jesus Christ in a time of peace and prosperity, surely in a time of pressures they have
much more communion with him. Now this must needs cause the soul to increase and flourish. For the nearer we are to God, the more we have of God, and receive impressions from him; as Moses, when he was with God in the Mount, his face did shine. But in times of outward peace, and when all is well, O we are very ready to neglect communi∣on with God. Fifthly, Lastly, While the righte∣ous are under weights and prestures, like a Palm-tree, they have a special promise of the presence of God with them; and this is that which makes them flourish indeed. It is not our being in affliction, which will make us better, and make us grow Hea∣ven-ward; but it is Christ being with us in affliction. It is Gods ma∣nifesting himself to us in affliction which makes us grow, and flourish like a Palm-tree. Now I need not stay to tell you how many promises there are of the special presence of
God to his people while they are un∣der the Cross, that in Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. I will be with thee. And truly the pre∣sence of God with us, it is not only for this end (Though that be there exprest) that we shall not be quite swallowed up, that the water shall not drown us, nor the fire consume us; but that the fire and water shall not consume us as to our soul state. That we shall not suffer loss or de∣triment in our spiritual state, by be∣ing in the fire or water; but that we shall increase there, and grow there. So in 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye be reproach∣ed for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God resteth on you. It doth not on∣ly come to you, and visit you, but it rests upon you. Now when the
Spirit of God is, especially when the Spirit of God rests, and doth abide, there must needs be a growth, and an increase in our spiritual state. But so it is, while we are under these afflicting dispensations, when the weights are upon us, we have promises of more of the presence of God, and of the pre∣sence of his Spirit, and of the rest∣ing of his Spirit; and therefore we shall flourish, flourish spiritually, flou∣rish in our inner man: That may serve for the clearing of the Point, That the Righteous flourish as the Palm-tree, under weights and pressures. Application. First, This may con∣firm us in a twofold Scripture-truth. First, That there is no wisdom, nor counsel against the Lord. That's a Scripture assertion, which receives a mighty confirmation by this point. Prov. 21. 30. This point doth migh∣tily confirm it. Why, what's the Counsel, what's the purpose of the world, when they hang their weights upon the Palm-trees, upon the righte∣ous,
what's the meaning? You shall understand their meaning: when the first weights that we read of in the Scripture were ever hung upon these Palm-trees, in the place before quo∣ted, Exod. 1. 10. Come on, saith he, Let us deal wisely with them. The Wise man saith in the Proverbs, There is no wisdom, nor counsel against the Lord. Well, saith he here, Let us deal wisely with them. To what purpose? Why, saith he, Lest they multiply. We will keep them down; keep them down, that their persons multiply not; and we will keep them down too, that their Graces multiply not. Truly this is the design of the Counsels of men, in hanging their weights upon the Palm-trees; and so it hath been all along in the sufferings of the Church. What hath been their wisdoms? They thought by their sufferings to keep down those truths which they profest, which it may be they call'd Heresie: As Paul saith, After the
way which you call Heresie, so worship I the God of my Fathers. Heresies, they thought to suppress them as Errors and Heresies. And they thought again to dis∣courage the professors: yea, they thought not only to discourage them in matters of truth, of faith and worship; but they thought to turn them quite aside; to make them re∣nounce it, to forsake it, to apostatize, to backslide, to deny the faith. This is the thing which they have had in their eye, in all the pressures which they have laid upon the people of God from one time to another, to strip them of their faith, and to strip them of the truth; to break them in the things of God. Now I say, this is their Counsel. And mark what the Scripture saith, There is no wisdom, nor counsel against the Lord. They thought to hinder them in all these things, to suppress the truth, to discourage the professors of the truth, and to cause them to turn
away, and to deny the truth. But they have fail'd in it: for they mul∣tiplyed; and the truth multiplyed; and they flourisht more by the weights and burdens that were upon their backs. So that we may say in this case, as the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 44. 25. That the Lord turns the Counsels of the wicked hackward. Turneth wise men backward: that is, their wisdom which they have been exercising, that hath produced a quite contrary effect to what they intend∣ed: they thought to hinder the truth; and they have been rather a furtherance to it, as Pauls word is in the first of the Philippians. These things have hapned to the furtherance of the Gospel, which they thought should have ruined the Gospel. And this indeed is so notorious, that the enemies of the Gospel have been forced many times to acknowledge, and to confess it with grief, That the righteous have flourisht like Palm-trees. In Exod. 1. 12. when it
is said, the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplyed and grew. And what follows? And they, that is, the Aegyptians, were grieved be∣cause of the children of Israel. We see we cannot bring them down: their Counsels went quite backward. And you have the like in John 12. 19. The Pharisees when they had done all that they could to hinder the peo∣ples receiving of Jesus Christ, they said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Behold, the world is gone after him. You see they were fain to make an acknow∣ledgement of this thing their own selves. We have been labouring to stop the progress of this man, but we find it quite otherwise; we pre∣vail nothing at all. Not only, not much, but nothing. And behold, the world is gone after him. He will get all the world shortly, they multi∣ply so fast. So that we see from this, the truth of the Scripture, that there is no Counsel against the Lord.
And it may give you a further confirmation by way of Instruction, concerning that great truth, in Rom. 8. 28. All things shall work together for good to them that serve God, and are the called according to his purpose. All things work together for good. What things? Troubles, afflictions, pressures, burdens which are laid up∣on them, they work for good. Why, this is one of the greatest goods that can be, to have grace flourish and grow. Faith and Humility, and Love to Jesus Christ, if one increase in these things. What is worthy the name of good, in comparison of an increase of these things. That's one thing we may take notice of from it. Secondly, We should be hence raised up in our hearts, to magnifie the power, wisdom and goodness of God, who doth thus over-rule these things for his people: for certainly this doth declare the wonderful work of God. In Isa. 28. where he hath a
notable Allegory, and speaks of the troubles and sufferings of the faith∣ful people of God: For all that that is spoken of the Plowman, and of the Thresher, and of the bruising of the Corn with threshing Instruments, they do respect affliction and troubles which come upon the people of God, (as is clear.) But now, saith he, in the close of that Chapter, This also cometh from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. We may wonder at the counsel and wisdom of God, who doth his people good by threshing them, and bringing the wheel over them. Here are several sorts of af∣flictions and sufferings, some lesser, and some greater. Now all this is but to separate the good seed from the chaff, and to make it more fit for use: for while the Corn is in the ear, it is not fit for use, and we cannot make bread of it untill it be thresht. Now the Lord hath seve∣ral wayes to do it. But saith he,
This cometh forth from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. Truly we may say, How wonderful is the counsel of the Lord! How excellent is his working, that he makes the Righteous to flourish like the Palm-tree; to grow upwards, by that which one would think should bring them down! As when we see the Corn laid at, and thresht with a Flail, one would think there were great hurt intended to the Corn; but it is only to separate it from the chaff, that it may appear in its own beauty and usefulness. So the Lord hath a flail of tribulation, to sepa∣rate the Chaff from the Wheat. Those acts of Providence towards Gods people, which seem to be for their hurt and undoing, when they are thresht as it were by the world, it is only to make them appear what they are. That which we find in Psal. 69. 22. concerning the wicked, by that we may observe the wonder∣ful
difference, and dealings of God with the wicked, who flourish as the Grass, and the righteous. David speaks there of such, and saith he, Let their table become a snare, and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap: that is, the Lord doth curse their Com∣forts. By Table, he means the good things upon their table: when they have a full table, a plentiful table. And so all outward prosperity, saith he, it shall be a snare to them. And that which should have been for their good: that is, that which in the na∣ture of it is for their good, It shall be an occasion for their falling: they shall grow more hardned by it, more proud by it, and more impeni∣tent by it, and more strangers to God by it. But now when the Lord speaks of a righteous man, here the thing which was appointed for his snare, as the troubles and persecutions which lye upon him in the world, shall be a table to him; his very
snares shall be a table to his Inner man, where his Graces shall come and feed, and grow fat, and flourish, and increase. The things which the men of the world have devised for his falling, they shall be to him an occasion of good. This is wonder∣ful, and we are to bless the Lord for it, when we find such effects of it: when we see it so in others, or have any experience of it in our selves, that our afflictions do not snare us, but are a table to our Graces. That's another thing, to give God the glo∣ry of it; for it is not in the nature of these things to do it. No, things would work quite otherwise, but that God is wonderful in his Counsels, and excellent in his workings towards his people: they would rather drive us from God, and destroy our graces. Thirdly, Seeing it is so, that righ∣teous ones do flourish as the Palm-tree, then when any weights of af∣fliction,
either personal or publick, or persecution, or whatsoever are upon any of us, let us mind the pur∣pose of God towards us. Let us not think that he comes to hurt us, but to make us grow and flourish like a Palm-tree. Let us mind this, and joyn with God in this Counsel, in lay∣ing such things upon his people: Let us joyn with God, and promote the Counsel of God in our own hearts and lives, and in the hearts and lives of others, that they may be bettered by their sufferings, and be encouraged by their sufferings, to believe more in God, and more for God, than ever they were. God doth not in∣tend us hurt, but good by it; and so we should find it, if we were wise to joyn with him in his Pur∣poses. Fourthly, And then I would say yet further, This may be mat∣ter of Tryal to us. We may take a tryal of our selves, both as to
the state of our persons, and as to the state of our graces. First, As to the state of our persons: Why, how is it with us under suf∣ferings? Do we improve by them? Do we grow, do we flourish, though we have these weights upon us? Why, truly it is an argument and evidence that our state is good: for a bad man is not made the better by the evils that are upon him. I know God may use afflictions to change a man; but unsound hearts, they that have been unsound and false in the profession of the Go∣spel, they do discover themselves in such a time, shew their rotten∣ness, and their naughtiness. And it is a very great question, whether they that are not bettered by affli∣ctions, were ever good. Though I would not speak it to lay a trou∣ble upon any. Our betterings some∣times under afflictions, is not very dicernable, at least at present. But
I say, it may put us much upon a doubt▪ whether we, or any were ever really good, if we are not bettered by afflictions, and by try∣als, and by the troubles that are upon us, and by our fears, and by our dangers. And likewise, we may hence have a great tryal, as to the state of our graces, whether our graces are in good plight, yea, or no. For in∣deed, if faith be down (and the like) we shall make little improve∣ment of all our afflictions and crosses. If love to Christ be down, we shall rather be upon the losing side. But now if we find that we are increased, and are growing and flourishing in spirituals, when the weight and pressure is upon us, it is an argument that our graces are in a good state: and grace is in a good state when it thrives, and thrives by such means, as seem ra∣ther for the quenching of grace,
and the hinderance of grace; and therefore truly we should consider our selves at this day: for certainly the Palm-trees are now with their weights upon them, and many have discovered themselves sadly as to their persons, states, and the state of their graces, that they have very little love to, and faith in Jesus Christ, because they have not flou∣risht in such a day; but rather have declined, and withdrawn, and been ashamed of what they have former∣ly been. And therefore let us re∣member that which the Apostle speaks in Heb. 12. speaking of af∣flictions, which are sufferings for Christ, (that's taken in the Chap∣ter) not only those afflictions, which are fatherly chastisements from the hand of God; but those which are from men, for righteousness sake. Certainly that is the purpose of God; it is all for our profit. There∣fore let us consider, whether we
profit, yea, or no. We have had Fa∣thers of our flesh which corrected us; and we gave them reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjecti∣on to the Father of Spirits, and live? Submit to the will of God, if he will lay any tribulation upon us for his Name sake; for he hath done all for our profit. What profit? For the profit of our purses, and estates in this world? No, for a better profit than all that; for our profit, that we might be made par∣takers of his holiness. And truly that is another thing, with which I shall conclude. We say this, That we have no reason to be impatient under afflictions and persecutions, under the troubles we meet with in this world for the Name of Christ. Why? for they are for our profit, for our grow∣ing; and that we may be made more partakers of the holiness of God: That we may be better
while we live, and fitter to dye, and to glorifie him both living and dying. And thus I have only toucht these things, That the Righteous do flou∣rish like the Palm-tree, with their weights and pressures upon them. FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by John Hancok, Senior and Juni∣or, at the first Shop in Popes-Head-Alley, at the Three Bibles; Who sells all sorts of Divinity-Books, &c. to Chapmen, or others. TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel at Margarets New-Fish-street. 1. Precious Remedies against Satans de∣vices; Or, Salve for Believers and Unbe∣lievers sores; being a companion for those that are in Christ, or out of Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a pre∣tence of living above them; that are growing in Spirituals, or decaying; that are tempted, or deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have assurance, or want it; on 2 Cor. 2. 11.
2. Heaven on Earth; Or, a serious Discourse touching a well-grounded▪ As∣surance of mans everlasting happiness and blessedness, &c. 3. The Ʋnsearchable Riches of Christ: Or Meat for strong Men, and Milk for Babes, held forth in two and twenty Ser∣mons, from Ephes. 3. 8. Preached on his Lecture-nights at Fish-street-hill. 4. His Apples of Gold for young Men and Women; &c. With the Young Mans Objections an∣swered, and the Old Mans Doubts re∣solved. 5. A String of Pearls: Or, The best things reserved till last; delivered in a Sermon preached in London, June 8. 1657. at the Funeral of that Triumphant Saint Mrs. Mary Blake, late Wife to his wor∣thy Friend Mr. Nicholas Blake, Merchant. 6. The Mute Christian; with Soveraign Antidotes against the most miserable Exi∣gents: Or, a Christian with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under the great∣est afflictions, the sharpest and sorest try∣als and troubles, the saddest and darkest Providences and Changes. 7. An Ark for all Gods Noahs in a stormy day. Wherein is shewed the tran∣scendent
excellency of a Believers porti∣on; on Lam. 3. 24. 8. The Crown and Glory of Christianity: Or, Holiness the only way to happiness discovered in 48 Sermons on Heb. 12. 14. 9. The Privy Key of Heaven; Or, a Discourse of Closet-Prayer, twenty Argu∣ments for it, with the Resolution of se∣veral considerable Questions, &c. 10. A Heavenly Cordial for all that have had, or have escaped the Plague, &c. 11. There is now published an excel∣lent new Book of Mr. Brooks, Enti∣tuled A Cabinet of Choice Jewels, or a Box of Precious Oyntment, Containing eighteen special Maxims, Considerations, Rules and Directions, that are seriously to be minded and observed in order to the clearing up a mans interest in Christ, the saving-work of God upon his own soul, and his Title to all the glory of another world. Also declaring several Evidences and Marks of True saving Grace. 12. There is now printed Londons La∣mentations: Or, a sober serious discourse concerning the late fiery dispensation, wherein the procuring causes, and the final causes of that dreadful dispensation
are laid open, both upon those who hav been burnt up, and upon those who have escaped those consuming Flames. Bridges Remains: being eight Ser∣mons, viz. Of Mans Blessedness: 2. A∣fections Rightly placed. 3. How to walk with God in our Calling. 4. O Good and Bad Company. 5. The Car¦nality of Professors. 6. What our Work is and how to be done. 7. Soul Resignati¦on into the hands of God. 8. Th Dignity and Duty of Gods Called Ones Which was the last that ever wa preacht by that Learned and Judiciou Divine Mr. William Bridge, late Preach of the Word of God at Yarmouth. A Discourse of Christs coming: And the Influence, which the Expectation there∣of hath on all manner of holy Conver∣sation and Godliness. By Theophilus Gale. There are some other Pieces of the Re∣verend Author of these Sermons preparing for the Press.
