d1310a 12264669 57972
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Father Petre's, and the Devil. Father Petre's to the Devil. OH are you come 'tis more then time, Your Tardiness is no Small Crime, All our Proceeding's at a Stand, They've got again the upper hand, Yet like true Jesuit I have wrought, My charge up to the height I sought, Both Sence and Reason quite o're thrown For those we deal with must have None. The Devil's Answer. Is this a Conquest to relate Worthy a Jesuitick Pate; I have more trouble with you had Then all the Orders I have made, Besides I Joyn'd in the design, One whose Fell Malice Equals mine, One so ambitiously Enclin'd, Of such an uncontrouled mind, That Let the Gulph be ne're so deep, Or Piramid Prodigious Steep,
If in th' Extreams thou canst disclose, Any that does their will oppose, (Though on just grounds) they meet their Fate, In violent and unbounded hate. Father Petres. I did not call you to discourse, We must do something now by force, Our whole Society is Sham'd, And we in our first Founder damn'd, Did I though to my Soul's Perdition, Act things more black than my Commission, Gaining beliefe amongst the Great, Who forc'd upon themselves the Cheat, While the Good man I kept at th' Oar, No Gally slave e're labour'd more, Nor durst I let him Pause upon't, Least if he thought, he shou'd recant: With Puzling Notions still posest him, At once Tormented and Carres'd him, Hood winck'd the Pilot, that shou'd steer us, With our Infallible Chimera's, The Devil. Boast not as if you'd Conquest won, You've started much, but nothing done, Your Order wheresoe're they come, Have set whole Kingdoms in a Flame, Nor Hell nor Rome can give you thanks, For acting thus a Madmans Pranks; Did I not always to you Preach, The English wou'd you over reach, They'l be convinc'd e're they believe, Not Pin their Faith upon your Slieve: Your Publicke Chappels, have o're thrown us, Our very Proselites disowne us, And Face about to th' other side, Exclaming 'Gainst the Roman Pride.
Father Petres. What do you now Complain on me, For over acting Villany? I still consulted you in all, Did dayly for your conduct call, And though 'tis true I nam'd the Saints, Yet 'Twas to you I made my plaints: I owne about the French we fail'd, But in the Irish we prevail'd; Propose once More, and I'll obey't, It shall be done if you but say't, You know in such a Holy Juggle, My seared Conscience ner'e did Boggle, We must not Flag, not sit down here, That wou'd declare Remorse or Fear, Which Jesuits do more decline, Then e're the Rechabites did Wine, But I have something to Impart, Which does oppress my Tender Heart, And made me now Invoke you hither, Though 'gainst your Principles to gather. The truth of these Important Queries, Most needful in this dubious Seris. First if it in your Power does lye, Tell me what death Im doom'd to Die, I dare not hope t' must be in Bed, That suits not with the Life I've led; But if I must be Hang'd and Quarter'd, Let me be Cannoniz'd and Martyr'd With holy Harcourt and his Fellows, Like them be Sainted ar the Gallows. And next I do this favour Crave, Since I have ever been your Slave, Unfold the Mistick Book of Fate, And Read me Englands future State,
Who next shall to the Throne Succeed, The English or Italian Breed. The Devil answering, Laught out right, Wou'd I these Secrets bring to Light, I shou'd not half that Harvest gain, For which Iv'e taken all this pain, Nor wou'd I if I cou'd reveal, That which my Interest bids Conceal; Yet I will Answer the in Part, Since I've a Title in thy Heart. The first Peculiar is to thee, For which thou need'st not touble me, 'Tis what thy self did Long fore see, Nor is it Reason to believe, Thou should'st the Mobile deceive, But whether Martyr, or as Traytor, Thy Ballad will be truths Relator. The Consequence oth' other draw, By the success of Great Nassaw. This sayd the Devil left the Father, The Meaning of his Words to gather, And Vanish'd from him down the stayrs, While he Proceeded in his Prayers. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1688.
