D1710 14919550 102931
Divers Questions upon His Majesties last Answer, concerning the Militia, Resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament. Resolved upon the Question by both Houses of Parliament. THat this Answer of His Majesty is a denyall to the desires of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the Militia. Resolved, &c. That those that advised His Majesty to give this Answer, are Enemies to the State, and mischievous Projectors against the defence of the Kingdom. Resolved, &c. That this denyall is of that dangerous Consequence, that if His Majesty shall persist in it; It will hazard the peace and safety of all His Kingdomes, unlesse some speedy remedy be applyed by the Wisedome and Authority of both Houses of Parliament. Resolved, &c. That such Parts of this Kingdom as have put themselves into a Posture of defence against the common danger, hath done nothing but what is justifiable, and is appro∣ved by the House. Resolved, &c. That if His Majesty shall remove into any remote Parts from His Parliament, it will be a great hazard to the Kingdom; and a great prejudice to the Proceedings of the Parliament. Resolved, &c. That these Houses holds it necessary, That His Majesty may be desired, That the Prince may come unto Saint James, or to some other convenient place neer about London, and there to continue. Resolved, &c. That the Lords be desired to joyn with this house in an humble request unto His Majesty; That he will be pleased to reside neer his Parliament; That both houses may have a convenience of Accesse unto him upon all occasions. Resolved, &c. That the Lords be moved to joyn with this house in some fit course of examina∣tion, to finde who were the Persons that gave his Majesty this advice, That they may be removed from his Majesty, and brought to condigne punishment. Resolved, &c. That no Charter can be granted by the King, to create a power in any Corporati∣on, over the Militia of that place, without consent of Parliament. Resolved, &c. That the Lords shall be moved to joyn with this house in these Votes. Resolved, &c. That the Lords shall be desired to appoint a select Committee, that may joyn with a Committee of a proportionable number of this house; to consider, and pre∣pare what is fit to be done upon these Votes, or upon any thing else that may arise upon this Answer of his Majesty concerning the Militia, and concerning the Prince. March 1. London, Printed for Ioseph Hunscott. 1641.
