D2321 12796624 93984
AN ODE, ON THE DEATH OF Mr. Henry Purcell; Late Servant to his Majesty, and Organist of the Chapel Royal, and of St. Peter's Westminster. The Words by Mr. Dryden, and Sett to Musick by Dr. Blow. LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford, at his Shop in the Temple Change Fleetstreet, or at his House in Arundelstreet over against the Blew Ball. 1696.
The ODE. I. MArk how the Lark and Linnet Sing, With rival Notes They strain their warbling Throats, To welcome in the Spring. But in the close of Night, When Philomel begins her Heav'nly lay, They cease their mutual spight, Drink in her Musick with delight, And lift'ning and silent, and silent and list'ning, and lift'ning and silent obey. II. So ceas'd the rival Crew when Purcell came, They Sung no more, or only Sung his Fame. Struck dumb they all admir'd the God-like Man, The God-like Man, Alas, too soon retir'd, As He too late began. We beg not Hell, our Orpheus to restore, Had He been there, Their Sovereigns fear Had sent Him back before. The pow'r of Harmony too well they knew, He long e'er this had Tun'd their jarring Sphere, And left no Hell below. III. The Heav'nly Quire, who heard his Notes from high, Let down the Scale of Musick from the Sky: They handed him along, And all the way He taught, and all the way they Sung. Ye Brethren of the Lyre, and tunefull Voice, Lament his lott: but at your own rejoyce. Now live secure and linger out your days, The Gods are pleas'd alone with Purcell's Layes, Nor know to mend their Choice. FINIS.
Flutes MArk, mark, mark how the mark, mark, mark how the Lark and Linnet Sin—g, Sin—g; mark, mark,
Lark and Linnet Sin—g, Sin—g; mark, mark, mark, mark, mark how the Lark and Linnet Sin—g, Sin—
mark, mark, mark how the Lark and Linnet Sin—g, Sin—g, —g; mark, mark, mark how the Lark and Linnet Sing, mark, mark, mark how the Lark and Linnet Sin—g, mark, mark, mark how the Lark and Linnet Sin—g,
with Ri—val Notes they strain their war— with Ri—val Notes they strain their war— —bling Throats, they strain their war— —bling Throats,
—bling, war—bling they strain their war— Throats with ri—val Notes, they strain their war— —bling, warbling Throats, with ri—val Notes they strain their war—
—bling, war—bling Throats; to —bling, war—bling, war—bling Throats; to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to
welcome, to welcome, to welcome, welcome in the Spring; they strain their war— welcome, to welcome, to wel—come in the Spring; they strain their war— —bling, war—bling Throats, to —bling, war—bling, war—bling Throats, to
welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, to welcome to welcome, to welcome, to welcome, welcome in the Spring. welcome, to welcome, to wel—come, in the Spring.
But in the close, in the close of But in the close, in the close of Night, but in the close in the Night, but in the close, in the close of Night, when close of Night, when Philomel, when Philo-mel be-gins her Heav'n— Philomel, when Philomel begins her Heav'nly, Heav'n— —ly, Heav'nly Lays; they cease their mutual, mu-tual spight, —ly, Heav'nly Lays; they cease their
they cease their mutual, mu—tual spight, their mu—tual mutual, mu—tual spight, they cease their mutual, mu—tual spight, their mu—tual spight; they cease their mutual, mu—tual spight; spight. they cease their mutual their mu—tual spight. they cease their mutual, mu—tual spight, their mu—tual spight.
Drink in her Mu— —sick with delight, with de-light, drink in her Musick, Drink in her Mu—sick with de—light,
drink in her Mu—sick, drink in her Mu— drink in her Mu—sick with de—light, drink in her —sick, drink in her Mu—sick with delight; and listning, and Mu—sick with de—light, with delight; and
silent, and silent, and listning, and listning, and silent, and listning, and silent, and silent, and listning, and listning, and silent, and listning, and listning, and silent, and list—ning, and silent, and silent, and listning, and list—ning, and silent, o—bey;
silent o—bey; o—bey, o—bey, and silent, and lest— o—bey, obey, o—bey, and list—ning, and silent o—bey, —ning, and silent o-bey, and list—ning, and silent o—bey, o— and list—ning, and si-lent, and listning, and silent o-bey, o—
—bey, o-bey, and list—ning, and si-lent o—bey, obey, o—bey. —bey, o—bey, and listning, and si—lent, and listning, and silent o—bey, o-bey, o—bey. 2d. Countertenor. So ceas'd the Ri—vall Crew when Pur—cell came, so ceas'd the Ri—vall Crew when Purcell
came, they Sung no more, no more, they Sung no more, or on-ly, on-ly, or on—ly Sung his Fame, or on—ly Sung his Fame, or on—ly Sung his Fame; struck dumb they all admir'd, all, they all admir'd the matchless, the match—less Man, the matchless, matchless Man; a—las, a—las, a—las too soon re- —tir'd, the matchless, matchless Man, a—las, a—las too soon retir'd, as he—
—too late, as he too late, too late began, he too late, as he too late, too late began. 2d. Countertenor. We beg not Hell our Or—pheus to restore, we beg not Hell our Or—pheus, we beg not Hell our
Or—pheus to re—store; had he been there, had he been there, their Sov'raigns fear had sen—t him back before, had he been there, had he been there, their Sov'raigns fe—ar had sent
him back be—fore: we beg not. The pow'r of Har— As before. —mony too well they know, the pow'r of Har—mony, of
Har—mony, the pow'r of Har—mony too well they know; He long e'er this had turn'd the jarring, jarring, jarring,
jarring Spheres, he long e'er this had turn'd the jarring, jarring, jarring, jarring Spheres, and left no Hell be—low: He long e'er this had turn'd the jarring, jarring, jarring, jarring Spheres, the jarring, jarring,
jarring, jarring Spheres, and left no Hell be—low: he long, The Heav'nly, Heav'nly Quire, who heard his The Heav'nly, Heav'nly Quire, who heard his Notes from high, the Notes from high, the Heav'nly, Heav'nly Quire, who heard his Notes from Heav'nly, Heav'nly Quire, who heard his Notes from high, let down, let
high, let down, let down the Scale of Musick from on high, down the Scale of Musick, of Musick from on high: The Heav'nly, Heav'nly, The Heav'nly, Heav'nly Quire who heard his Notes from high, let down, let Quire, who heard his Notes from high, let down, let down, let down the Scale of down, let down the Scale of Musick; let down the Scale of Musick, of Musick, of Musick from on high, from on high; let down the Scale of Musick, of Musick from on Musick from on high. They handed him along, alon—g, high, from on high. They handed him a—long, a—lon—
and all the way The taught, a-lon—g, —g, they handed him a—long, a-lon— and all the way he taught, and all the way they Sung, and all, all the way they —g, and all the way he taught, and all the way they Sung; they handed him along, and all the way he taught, and Sung; they handed him along, they handed him along, and all the way they Sung, and all, all the way they Sung, all, all, they handed him along, and all the way he taught, and all the way they Sung, all, all, they handed him along
all the way he taught, and all the way they Sung, and all, all the way they Sung. and all the way he taught, and all the way they Sung. Ye Brethren, ye Brethren of the Lyre, and tunefull, Ye Brethren, ye Brethren,
tunefull, tunefull Voice; ye Brethren, ye Brethren of the Lyre, and tunefull, tunefull, tunefull Voice; ye ye Brethren lamen—t, lamen—t; ye Brethren, ye Brethren, lamen—t, lamen—t; ye Brethren,
Brethren lamen—t, lamen—t his Lott, but lamen—t, lamen—t his Lott, but at your own re— at your own re—joyce, re—joy—ce, —joy—ce,
now live secure and now live se—cure and lin—ger out your lin—ger out your days, now live se—cure and lin—ger days, now live se—cure, now live se—
out your days, now live se—cure and lin—ger out your days; the Gods are —cure, now live secure and lin—ger out your days; the Gods are pleas'd, are pleas'd a—lone, a—lone with Purcell's Lays, nor know, nor pleas'd, are pleas'd a—lone, a—lone with Purcell's Lays, nor know, nor
know, nor know to mend their choice. know, nor know to mend their choice. FINIS. Vocal and Instrumental Musick lately Printed and Reprinted with large Additions, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet. HArmonia Sacra, in 2 Books, containing Divine Hymns and Dialogues lately set to Musick by Dr. Iohn Blow; and Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters. Price Bound of both Books 15 Shillings, the Second Book Sticht 4s. Deliciae Musicae, in 4 Books, with Three Elegies on our late Queen, being the first Volume, Contains most of the Newest and Best Songs, by the late Famous Mr. Henry Purcell. The Price of the Volume Sticht, 5s. The whole Book of Psalms in 3 Parts, by Iohn Playford, as they are Sung in Churches: Printed for the use of several Masters in most Countries, who teach the same. The 2d. Edition in 8o. Price Bound 5s. The Introduction to Musick, with Mr. Purcell's Addition, being the best Rules for Composition, Price bound 2s. The New Treasury of Musick, in Fol. being the best Collection of Song-Books for this 20 Years last past. Price Bound 25s. The 2d. Book of the Pleasant Musical Companion, being a Choice Collection of Catches in 3 and 4 Parts, to which is added several Songs for Two Voices, by Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters. Price Stitcht 2s. INSTRUMENTAL. Apollo's Banquet, the First and Second parts containing above 300 of the Choichest Tunes, with the plainest In∣structions for beginners. The First and Second Parts of the Division Violin. The First and Second Consorts of Mr. Tho Farmers, in 4 Parts. The Dancing Master, with the Tunes to each Dance, and Directions for each Coun∣try Dance, the 9th. Edition. The Sprightly Companion, for the French Hautboy being all the Foreign Marches. Price 6d. ADVERTISEMENTS. The Second Part of the Dancing Master, containing 24 New Country Dances never before Printed and sold by themselves Sticht 1s. or Bound with the first Part 3s. The 2d. Book of the 2d. Vol. of Deliciae Musicae. A New Book for the Flute, being the plainest and easiest In∣structions for beginners with the newest and properest Tunes yet Printed. By reason of the small Incouragement, and for the more Compleat Printing of that Excellent Master, Mr. Henry Purcell's Vocal Musick in 2 and 3 Parts, a longer time is given to Subscribers, hoping between this time and the 12th. of October next, to meet with great Incouragement; Subscriptions will be taken till then, and the Book may be delivered to all Ladies and Gentlemen at Michaelmass Term next. Proposals also by Madam Purcell for Printing the Instrumental Musick by her late Husband Mr. Henry Purcell, are to be had by Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet. A General Catalogue of all the Musick-Books sold at the said place will be speedi∣ly published in print. A Pastorall on Mr. Purcell, by I. G. M. A. Price Sticht 6d. The Parallel, an Essay on Friendship, Love and Mariage, by Sir H. S. Price Sticht 6d.
