E1117A 14878749 102826
Anno XII. Car. Regis II. AN ACT FOR THE NECESSARY Maintenance of the WORK of DREINING the Great LEVELL OF THE FENNS. BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by the Advice and with the consent of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament: That for Maintenance and Preservation of the Great Levell of the Fens, Extending it self into the Coun∣ties of Northampton, Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincolne, Cambridge and Huntington, and the Isle of Ely or some of them; and for laying and levying of Taxes, and securing the said Levell from drowning onely, That all Taxes already made and Asseassed, or to be made or Asseassed onely upon the 95000. Acres given by one pretended Act of Parliament of the 29th. day of May 1649. unto William Earl of Bedford, Edward Russell' Esquire, Robert Henley Esquire deceased, and Robert Castle Esquire; and their Heires and Assignes in Trust for the said Earl, his Participants and Adventurers for dreining of the said Great Levell before the 29th day of May next coming, by colour of or according to the intent of the said pretended Act shall stand in force, and shall and may be col∣lected and gathered; so as the said Taxes to be hereafter set upon the said 95000. Acres exceed not 3. s. the Acre: And that all Ar∣rears of Rents already incurred upon or out of any part of the said 95000. Acres, or that shall incur and grow due before the said 29th. day of May next coming, upon any Contract or Lease of the Premises, or any part or pacell thereof; shall be received and recover∣ed, as if the said pretended Act had been a good and Effectual Act, And the Possession of the 95000. Acres is setled and quieted, as the same now is, untill the said 29th. day of May next, any thing to the contrary thereof, Notwithstanding. Provided alwaies, And it is further Enacted and Declared, that this Act nor any thing therein contained shall extend, or be construed to extend to preclude the Kings Majesty, or any other Person or Persons from and after the said 29th. day of May 1661. From any Right, Title, Claim or Interest, which His Majesty, or any other Person or Persons had, hath or may have, or pretend to have to any part of the said 95000. Acres mentioned in the said pretended Act. But that all such Right and Title shall be preserved to His Majesty, and to all such other Persons after the expiration of this Act, as fully as if this Act had not been made, or accor∣ding to such determination as shall be thereof made by the Parliament before the said 29th. day of May 1661. Provided also that this Act shall not be Construed or made use of to Countenance or Confirm any Sales, Forfeiture or other Dispositions, Con∣veyances or Estates of Land made for not payment of Taxes and Assessements or otherwise, or to make good any Act or Thing whatsoever, that hath been or shall be done in pursuance or colour of the said pretended Act, after the said 29th. day of May 1661. But that all Persons concerned, and all Things and Estates shall be, and remaine in the same State and Condition from and after the said 29th. of May, as if this Act had never been made. Provided alwaies, And be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That all such differences as now are or shall arise between the former Adventurers and the said Earl of Bed∣ford and his Participants; And all things in difference and dispute between the said Earl and Participants, and the Countries with∣in or Bordering upon the said Levell, are not at all Concluded or over-ruled by this Actor any thing therein contained: But all the said differences are left to be determined according to Law and Equity. Provided alwaies, And be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That if by occasion of the Adventurers Works, the Waters shall be raised higher on the ancient Country Banks then formerly, to the dammage of the Country: That then the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, the Judges of the one Bench and other, and Barons of the Exchequer, or any two of them, or the Judges of the Assizes in the Respective Counties, are hereby impowered upon hearing of parties and Judgement of the Cause or Causes, to award dammages, open Sluces, and to apply such reme∣dies as shall be just. Provided alwaies, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Arthur Anntsley Esquire, Sir William Playters, Sir Jo. Hewett Barronets, Richard Fienes, Samuel Sandys, Ro: Phillips, William Terringham, William Dodson and An∣thony St. John Esquires, Claiming a fourth part of the said 95000. Acres, be and are hereby constituted Commissioners to joyne with the Earl of Bedford and his Participants for the more orderly support and carrying on the work of the said Levell, during the conti∣nuance of this Act.
