E2737 11205284 46759
Die Martis 10 Novemb. 1646. Resolved, &c. THat the Committee of Sequestrations in the severall Counties, doe returne to the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall, all the names of Papists and Delinquents which are, or have been sequestred by them respectively in their severall Counties; and a parti∣cular List of all the Estates of such persons, and to whom they have been let during the sequestration thereof, and what the values thereof were before the Warre. Resolved, &c. That the Estates reall and personall of all Papists and Delinquents within the Ordinances of sequestrations, not yet sequestred, and not compounded for at Goldsmiths-Hall, bee speedily sequestred, and the names of such Delinquents sent up to the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall. Resolved, &c. That the Lands and Estates of such persons as are excepted in the first three Qualifications of the Propositions, or any part thereof, shall not be let or demised to the Owners thereof, or to their Bailiffs or servants, or to any person or persons in trust for them, or to their use or behoof. Resolved, &c. That the Lands and Estates of other Delinquents capable to be admitted to Composition, sequestred, or which shall bee sequestred in the severall respective Counties, or any part there∣of, shall not in any case bee let or demised unto the Owners thereof, or to their Bayliffes or Ser∣vants, or to any other Persons in trust for them, or to their use or behoofe, unlesse such Delin∣quents shall by Certificate from the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall make it appeare, that they are in their actuall prosecution of their Compositions, and do proceed therein without delay on their parts. Die Martis, 8 Decemb. 1646. Resolved, &c. That no Committee-man, Sequestrator, Collector, or other Officer imployed in the Seque∣strations in the severall respective Counties, shall by himselfe, or any other in trust for him, or to his use, take to Farme or Rent, any Lands or Estates sequestred, or to bee sequestred in the said severall Counties where he is a Committee-man, Sequestrator, Collector, or other Officer imployed in the sequestrations as aforesaid. Resolved, &c. That all the Lands and Estates of Papists and Delinquents sequestred, and to bee sequestred in the severall and respective Counties, shall be let out at the utmost improved yearly values that any man will give for the same: And that all Leases and Graunts made to any Delinquents or Papists, the owners of the said Lands and Estates, or to their Servants, or any in trust for them, at a lower rate and value then the same were truly worth, and might have been demised for to others, at the time the said Lease shall be void. Resolved, &c. That all persons in the severall and respective Counties who have been in Arms, or left their habitations, and resided in the Enemies garisons, and are lyable to Sequestrations, and have not tendred themselves to a Composition for their estates, and prosecuted it with effect at Goldsmiths Hall, and are at liberty, and not comprised within any Articles, whereby they are protected, shal be forthwith apprehended and committed to safe custody by the Committee of Parliament residing in the severall Counties, and their names certified to the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall. Provided that such persons whose Estates reall or personall are not worth two hundred pounds be hereby pardoned and discharged from Sequestration, they comming in according to the time limited in the Propositions, and taking the Negative Oath and Covenant. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1646.
