E2920 19341986 108731
OXFORD, this 19th of August, 1645. WHEREAS by a former Order of the second of Iuly last, it was directed, That in respect of the necessity of perfect∣ing the Fortifications of this Garrison, all Strangers, Inha∣bitants, and resiant within this Vniversity and City, being above the age of sixteene, (except such as should be upon the Guards) should upon the foure severall dayes therein appointed, worke at the said Fortifications, behind Christ-Church; or in default thereof, find one sufficient able person to labour for him, or send towards providing other La∣bourers for every such Person, other then Servants, twelve pence, and for Servants, sixe pence. To which Order, very many of the said Strangers (Inhabitants) did not conforme themselves, upon pretence they had no notice thereof. It is therefore now Ordered, and for avoyding all excuse whatsoever; The Governour is hereby desired to give directions, that by sound of Drumme, and also by the Bell-man, notice be given to all the said Strangers Inhabiting, and Lodgers within the said Vniversity and City, above sixteene yeares of age, and except such as are upon the Guards, or as have since the date of the former Order worked at the Fortifications upon the North line. That upon Thursday next, being the 21th of this instant August, by seven of the Clock in the morning of the same day, they re∣paire to the Meadowes at Christ-Church, there to worke upon the said Fortifications, and so to continue all that day, at the usuall houres; and so to worke three other dayes, viz. on Friday, Saturday, and Munday then next following: And (according to the directions in the former Order) that in default thereof, every such Person find one sufficient able person to labour for him; or then send towards the providing of other Labourers for every such Person, other Servants, twelve pence, and Servants, six pence. And order shall be given, for taking the names of all such as doe worke; And those who shall not worke, or send others in their places, are required to pay their money at the Audit House in Christ-Church, before eight every morning, where Mr Dugdale is appointed to attend and receive the same, whereby others may be hired o labour in their places. And whosoever shall be discovered, either to be absent him∣selfe, or neglect to send another in his roome, or money for providing of another (where the necessity is so great) must both expect to have these Rates herein mened doubly leaved upon him; Besides, to be looked upon, as Persons not de he protection of the Garrison. Cottington. F. Seymour. Hertford. Chr. Hatton. Ch Ed. Printed at OXFORD, by LEONARD LI Printer to the Ʋniversity. 16
