E3725A 12363865 60344
THE EXAMINATION OF THE CAPTAINS and other OFFICERS OF THE REBELS in SUSSEX: Late of the Lord DƲNBARTON's Regiment, Before the most HONOURABLE The Lords of the Privy Council. Licensed, according to Order. HE that rightly weighs the Interest of our present Gracious King, in the Hearts of English-men; and reflects on the Audacious and Insolent Attempt, of so inconsi∣derable a handful of Murmurers and Mutineers, as the late Rebels of the Lord Dunbarton's Regiment, in so daring an Essay, against the Peace of our Kingdom, and the Dignity of our Soveraign Lord and Lady; must look upon their Folly and Frenzy, as a matter of greater Wonderment, then the Impudence of their Crime. And as their Endeavours have been as Impotent, as the Injustice of their Cause; so there wanted no more, than the Breath of a King to dispel so feeble a Cloud. After their Surrender upon Discretion, their whole Party being taken Prisoners; the common Soldiers were brought up, and secured in Edmunton and Islington Churches; and the Officers (whose Names are as follows) Conducted up by a Body of Horse, for their Guard, on Wednesday Night, were Committed all close Prisoners in Newgate. Captains. Lord John Morray. — Johnson. John Auckmoaty. VVilliam Dean. — Rutherford. John Levingston. Mongo Morray. Alexander Gaune. Agent. Lieutenants. Peter Robinson. Isaac Trachall. VVilliam Morray. VVilliam Cuningham. Ensigns. Patience Morray. George Chaine. VValter Auckmoaty. James Daton. Alexander Tunnis. John Carr. Peter Cooke. Their Behaviour since their Committment, whether through the sence of their Guilt, or their Apprehension of the Punishment that hangs over it, has (as in good Reason) been very Melancholy; and, though seen by none but their Keepers, they are observed to be much dejected. On Thursday night about eight of the Clock, four of the Captains were (under strong Guard) carryed before a select Committee of Lords of the Privy Counsel, and continued some time before them under Examination: and on Friday about 11 in the forenoon three more Captains and the Agent, under the Custody of their Keepers in several Coaches, were had before the Committee of the Privy Council also; and after Examination were remanded back to their former Close Confinement, and they all continue now in the Press Yard, in several Rooms apart, without permission of Access to'em by any Person of what Quality soever. It is not doubted but this Insurrection has some Farther Ground and Original then their Bare Refusal of obeying His Majesties Commands, in their intended Transportment to Hol∣land; for to the Honour of that Nation, of which that Regiment is mostly composed, though they have been much complain'd of for their Rudness, and Misdemenours in most parts, wherever they Quartered: However, they have had the Reputation of that true Courage, which is Justly their Due. And therefore, as it could not be any Disgust against that Vigorous Ser∣vice they must expect in the Dutch Cause, against so Formidable an Enemy as the French, that made them mutiny; it is not to be question'd, but there has been other Engines and Bellows at Work, amongst their Ring-Leaders, that blew up these late Coals amongst them; which lyes now under Inquiry. London, Printed for William Tracy:
