E417A 15609850 104106
AN ELEGY ON THE GLORIOUS DEATH OF Col. John Okey; Who Suffered at TYBURN, the 19th. of April, 1662. TIs best seen at Sun-set, whose the Day was. Though sev'ral Acts of thy Life (John) might pass Musters for good and brave; yet, who could tell That thou wouldst carry't thorow half so well? Thou were retreated, and (forc'd to rally) Didst out-do all thy former Chivalry. Thy Friends then have more cause to sing, than groan; For, sure, as when thou wert wont to go on, GOD was with thee; so, art thou now with Him, In being thus brought off, though Limb by Limb. But why are not thy Quarters perch'd, like theirs, Who prov'd i'th'close thy Fellow-Souldiers? The Cabbs would seem kind; but were wise, and did Know they were safest, when OKEY was hid. Nor did Sir Georg Downing. thy Lay-Chaplain bewray poor Delf For the discov'ry of thee, but himself To be The Hang∣man. Squire Duns small factor, & the High And Mighty Lords o'th Low Lands to be nigh The honour of making their Countrey free, By giving't up (like ours) to Monarchie. Next, how came thy last Harangue to disown The Horridness, though not the Action? The sence of that Guilt, which once made thee fly, Did ill to leave thee, when thou wert to dye. Methinks I see thee busling up to say, In spight of both the Sh'riffes (where, by the way, VVhen any Malefactor comes to bleed For Theft, or what else is a Crime indeed, Shall we reade of an Executioner Capitulating with the Thief, for fear He should perswade the People that he dy'd For that, which Reason would have justify'd?) If to have fled, be a Confession Of Guilt, the Regicide (that now is grown The only right) heretofore many a time To Fields, Brooks, Walls, and Woods confest a crime. Methinks I hear thee again say, If to be Condemn'd, make a man guilty, What was he Whom we condemn'd? Or, if be unjustly Did suffer, though condemn'd, why might not I? He had (I'm sure) fairer play for's Life, then Any of us three, being heard, and heard agen: While all that I was try'd upon, amounted To this, Whether the twelve pickt men, accounted Me the same Okey, which was of that Gang, Such an Act meant, without hearing, to hang. Well, let 'um hang (John) such as are fast ty'd, And mangle such, as are first mortify'd: Let 'um persume the Roads with Garbage broil'd, And feast the Fowls with Flesh they never foyl'd; Shewing by their moderated Greatness, How nobly they obtain'd what they possess. Bless'd (mean-while) be those early Buds, that met By thousands to attend thy Body; yet Were fain to be mockt, lest, i'th' very Grave Thy Mock-attainder should true Honour have. England shall want Trees for Gibbets, before Those Trees shall want the Fruit they lately bore, Or, that Fruit Kernels, or those Kernels Earth Wherein to roar, and whence to take new birth: Till our Posterity arrive to th' Fame Of be'ng born in an Orchyard of the same. From such Beginnings GOD was pleas'd to bring That Gospel, which now through the World doth ring In Sanguine Semen. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662. 45.
