G1031 99826076 30468
To the Right Honorable, the Right Worshipful, and the Reverend, the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Clergy, of the Diocess and County of Worcester; The humble proposal of a Native of that County, in the behalf of In∣genious Young Scholars, that have a serious desire to be Educated in good Li∣terature. Rgiht Honble, Worshipful, and Reverd. I HAVE had many sad thoughts concerning the unhappiness of my Native Country; really very unhappy in this; that whereas almost all Counties in England and VVales have con∣venient Maintenance allotted for the Educa∣tion of young Students in one of the two Fa∣mous Vniversities of Oxford or Cambridge; VVorcester-shire is altogether destitute of any considerable Encouragement for Ingenious Scholars; whereby many that have had parts worthy of higher employment, have been condemn'd to inferiour Callings; and others who might have been eminent in their generation,2 Sam 10.5. have been snatch'd away from those famous Nurseries unto poor Country Curacy's before their Beards were grown;Canon. 74. where their lean and scandalous Sallaries have scarely afforded them a short Canonical Coat to cover their nakedness; which is a great reason (if not the only one) why our County has not been so happy as others in many eminent Divines, Lawyers, or Physitians of VVorcester-shire extraction. Truly Right Honourable, Worshipfull and Reverend 'tis some reproach to the memory of your worthy Auncestors, that our Country is more unfortunate in this particular then almost any o∣ther in the whole Kingdome, for 'tis an evident demonstration that there has been a great scarcity of such noble and publick spirits as in other Counties have been a blessing to the respective places of their Nativity, by their Liberal Munificence for the Educati∣on of ingenious youth. May it please your Honours, and you Right worshipfull and Reverend to take the premises into your serious consideration, and to consult together about the setling of two, or more Fellowships and Scholarships in Baliol Colledge, (commonly known by the name of the VVorcester Colledge) for the Education of young Schollars, of that County: In so doing your Memories will be pretious in after ages, which will have just reason to celebrate your praises, and to bless Almighty God for such truly noble Bene∣factors and Patriots. Oxon Febr. (16) 1674. Right Honble, Worshipful, and Reverd, Your very humble Servant, THO. GOOD▪ D.D. Master of Baliol Coll.
