H1336 12697102 65909
A New Book OF LOYAL English Martyrs AND CONFESSORS, Who have endured the Pains and Terrours of Death, Arraignment, Banishment, and Imprisonment, for the Maintenance of the Just and Legal Government of these Kingdoms, Both in CHURCH and STATE. By James Heath, Gent. Psal. 112.6. The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance. LONDON, Printed for R. H. and are to be Sold by Simon Miller at the Star in St. Pauls Church-Yard.
A List of the Martyrs contained in this Volume. THomas Earl of Strafford Proto-Martyr. M. Yeomans of Bristol, Mart. M. Bowcher of Bristol Martyr. M. Tompkins of London Mart M. Chaloner of Lon. Martyr. M. Kniveton, Martyr. William Laud L. Archbishop of Canterburie, Martyr. Sr. Charles Lucas, Martyr. Sr. George Lisle, Martyr. Major Pitcher, Martyr. Our Dread Soveraign KING CHARLES the First, the Glorious Martyr. Arthur L. Capel, Martyr. Henrie Earl of Holland, Mart. M. Beaumont, Minister, Mart. Major Morris, Martyr: Cornet Blackburne, Martyr. Col. Eusebius Andrews, Mart: S. Henrie Hide, Martyr. M. Benson, Martyr. Capt. Brown Bushel, Martyr. M. Love, Ministe, Martyr: Capt. Gibbons, Martyr. James, Earl of Darbie, Mart. S. Tim. Fetherston Haugh, Martyr. Col. Benbow, Martyr. Col. John Gerrard, Martyr. M. Vowel, Martyr. Col. Penruddock, Martyr. Col. Grove, Martyr: Sr. Henrie Slingsbi, Martyr: Dr. Huit, Martyr: Col. Ashton, Martyr: M. John Bettelie, Martyr. M.  Martyr▪
ENGLANDS NEW BOOK of Loyal Martyrs; Being a perfect Account of all those Loyal Persons that suffered the pains and Terrours of Death; By colour of any Sentence, during the Late Rebellion. The Introduction. NO sooner was the Marian Persecution ceased, and the Flames thereof extinguish∣ed (in which, so many of the most able and faithful Assertors, as well as weaker Professors of the Protestant Religion, were sacrificed
to the Rage and Pride of Romes Revenge) by the most happy and auspicious Assump∣tion of Queen Elizabeth, of Famous Me∣mory, to this Crown and Kingdom, whose Blessed Influences enlivened those dying Embers of the Reformation to a most bright Profession; but a strange and a new kind of Fire, like a subterraneous Confla∣gration, as indiscernably, as irresistably smothered and kindled in the minds of some Factious Persons, pretending to a more holy and severer Discipline of Life, until the Eruption of it, in the times of Arthington and Hacket, (the last of which, deservedly suffered in the gainsaying of Co∣rah) and persecuted this but just escaped Church (like Vertue betwixt two Extreams) afresh. The Pretence of those men was a Refor∣mation of that which so lately had been re∣formed, taxing it of retaining the Faeces and Dregs of Romish Superstition, as being but superficially and slightly purified of those grosse corruptions which yet their own ees had observed to have passed through more then 70 times 7 fires in that hot Martyr∣dom. This Male-contented Opinion and Hu∣mour, was first vented in secret whispering
and murmuring against the Government, which amounted in short time after, to se∣veral Conventicles and Meetings of the dissatisfied Brethren, as they were humbly pleased to term themselves, into sundry Invectives and publick Expostulations with the Queen, her Councils and Parliaments, so that the Party grew so formidable, that particular Lawes were made against them, and the aforesaid Hacket thereupon execu∣ted. For a while after this Justice, the Fa∣ction slunk into Corners, and hid them∣selves in the Dens and Retreats of their own shame, till the Coming in of King James, towards whom they assumed, out of some confidence of his present advance∣ment to this Crown, to obtrude the same irreverend Postulata, complaining among other things, chiefly of the Common Pray∣er, and of the extraordinary Power of Bi∣shops, in restrayning the Violence and Fu∣ry of their Libelling and pragmatical Books and Lectures, whose main Design and aim was the same with the Complices of Corah, Ye Sons of Levi take too much upon you, when their Conspiracy was to take all; a Truth most lamentably confirmed in these out Late Reforming Times.
For from that Conference that King vouchsafed their impertinencies, at Hamp∣ton-Court (where his Learning had the good Fortune of reducing and reclaiming one of their most able, but ingenuou Cham∣pions, by name, D. Reynolds) they never desisted from underminining the Policy and Government of the Kingdome. Nor was that wise King unsensible of their Ser∣pentine waies and Proceedings, but yet was loath to discover such a fear of them, as might render them confident and bold, to attempt any thing. You may see in his Character of them by the name of Puritan in his  to Prince Henry, what he thought of them. The Lenity and good Nature of his Son and Successor, Charles the Martyr, afforded them the Advantages they had long expect∣ed and waited for. It is incredible what a number of Proselytes they had gained by their crosse grain'd Sanctity, into how ma∣ny Families they had insinuated themselves in so short a time; so that now they had gain'd almost an equal Voyce in the Parli∣ament, where, without Petitions or Suppli∣cations, intermixed with some doubtful Menacings (their ordinary style, and con∣tinued to this day) they brought about
their long projected Device of Rebellion and Sacedge. Omne malum ex Aquilone; the wind that first tempested the Calm and Serenity of a long Series and Tract of Peace, which this Nation had enjoyed, was conjured up by these evil Spirits out of the North, from Scotland, which had never been freed from such tumultuous Boutefews in the Clergy, (since their Reformation) as our Zealots here; but the prize of a Sedition (Church-Lands) was not competent enough there to the hazard (as for the share the Mini∣sters might expect) as to engage and em∣broyl them, without some Assurances and Augmentations from abroad, to which, how industriously and passionately many of our beginning Reformists in this King∣dom, consented and contracted, 'twil be impertinent to reeat here, being so fully cleared by subsequent Proofs of mutual As∣sistance, by several Treaties, by the Cove∣nant, by advance of Money and joynt Counsels. Indeed the Scotch Nobility were mainly concerned: for by an Act of Revocation, passed in that Kings Reign, the Church-Lands were to revert again to the right Proprietors, which the Nobility were then
possessed of, and though the King after∣wards out of some prudent Considerations, had indulged them a longer tenure, yet, as there is no security safe enough to a cove∣tous mind, they could not rely on that Fa∣vour; so that the Scotch Rebels fought for that they had sacrilegiously got, and the English Rebel for what sacrilegiously he should get. The Event of that unlucky War, or ra∣ther Preparations to it, soon inflated and pust up the Non-Conformist in England, the Quarrel (as the Grave Lecturers de∣ceived, and imposed on the people) being thought to be the same, against Bishops, against the Liturgy, against Ceremonies, and such like; but it was clearly against the Bishops-Lands, against Loyalty and Obe∣dience, and against the indispensable du∣ties of a good Conscience, things more in∣different to these strict Disciplinarians, then a Reverend Decency in holy Performan∣ces; Their way being thus made (the un∣searchable Providence of God) all hands were set to work to demolish and throw down that goodly structure and Fabrick of Government, under which this Nation had so long flourished upon the Support and B∣sis
of the Three Estates, The King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. To the Ruine of all which, these New Modellers proceeded in this Method, most propheti∣cally foretold, by that in∣comparable M. Hooker, Hook. Eccles. Pol. Lib. 8. init. un∣der the Embleme of a stately and well-spreaded Tree, consisting chiefly of 3 great Boughs, to all which, it seemed not at first expedient to offer the Edge of the Axe at once, but rather to sin∣gle them, and strike at the weakest first, making shew that the Lop of that one, Dolus Inter∣valla scele∣rum poscebat. Tacit. shall draw the more abundance of Sap to the other two, that there∣by they may the better prosper. This was put in practice by our Deformers, and the Bishops first designed to the Fatal Stroke, the weighty Fall of whom, was sure to draw down the other two, with any the least touch, together with them. For a Parliament being called in Nov. 1640, with as much Clamour, as Impu∣dence, did these Factious Incendiaries of the Puritan Party, affront and assault the Members of both Houses, thrusting their Demands into the Two Houses, under the
Title of Petitions, being backt with armed Force and Violence; several tumultuous Rabbles came swarming down to Westmin∣ster, by the Kings Gates at White-Hall, o∣thers in Boats and Barges, armed likewise, by water; obtruding their unknown Ca∣prichio's and conceits upon the Parlia∣ment, many of whom, were so far from checking or resisting so dangerous a Tor∣rent, which had overflowed the Banks of either Modesty, Loyalty or Christianity, that they rather abetted, sided with, and countenanced those treasonable Attempts, nor did these Tumults cease, till the King was forced to abandon his own House, to save Himself, His Honour and Consci∣ence. But before they began this great Enter∣prize upon a whole Order so rooted and setled by the Laws, their Dignities and Revenues, so reverenced and esteemed for their individual Persons and Worth, by all men of Wisdom and Honour, so support∣ed and defended by the King and his Au∣thority (which at first they durst not grap∣ple with) his chief Ministers of State, his Judges, and for the greatest part of the No∣bility; they cast about how to effect their Tragical Intentions and Designs, another
more cruel, but plausible way; and indeed otherwise then so, they could not possibly, or at least probably, have accomplished their Mischiefs. Therefore they began with the Terrible Outcries of Justice, of calling Delinquents and the Kings evil Counsellers (words of course with Traytors) to condigne punish∣ment. Many there were whom they had put down in their black List for such, and many violent Speeces were made by the Faction in the House of Commons concer∣ning them, that what they wanted in the matter & substance of the Charge or guilt, they might make up in the number & qua∣lity of those whom they pretended to be guilty. Divers of them, to avoid the po∣pular Fury, knowing themselves to be mark∣ed out by the chief of the Faction, for Ru∣ine, and withal, that the grearness of their places could not consist without some little Offences, which their enemies had oppor∣tunity to aggravate, withdrew themselves, out of a wise confideration of the prevalen∣cy and overbearing power of those men. But some, whose Honour and Innocency could endure no such Eclipses, and betwixt whose greatness and Verrue, they scorned the Vulgar and hopeless peopes Oblequy
should so interpose, as to darken and ob∣scure their Glory and Lustre, stood still in their Orbs and Stations, and shone with the same brightness of Integrity. The pretended Crime was a dutiful Ob∣servation of the Fifth Commandment, which lay in the way to their designed ab∣solutenesse; the Faction was engaged a∣gainst all Power or Authority but that of their own Wils, and could allow no ren∣der Consciences to the Second Table, which having prophaned in the first and most im∣portant Command, they easily contrave∣ned and abrogated the rest, in murdering, plundering, and adulterating the Affecti∣ons, perjuring and insaiably covering the Goods and Lives of their Fellow-Subjects, who may deservedly be canonized for Mar∣tyrs, for Confessing and Maintaining to their death, so precious and so commanded a Duty of Loyal Obedience. Amongst the first of these, was the Earl of Sirafford, a Person, whom the Faction knew to be a firm Friend to the Bishops, and a great Lover of that Sacred Function and Order, one that had manifested that Affection to them, in his Administration of the Government of Ireland; a wise, yea the wisest Subject in the Kingdom, who
stood as a Bulwark and Defence against all Invasions, Plots and Conspira∣cies, against either Church or State, and without whose Removal, they well knew, they should effect nothing. The King had summoned this very Par∣liament by his Advice, concurring with o∣thers of his Council, having called him out of Ireland, somtime before, to assist him in the War, against the aforesaid Rebelli∣ous Scots, as LGen. to his Army, then up∣on the Borders; from whence he was no sooner come to London, and at the opening of the Parliament, taken his Place in the House of Lords, but a Charge of High Treason was exhibited against him by the Commons, and thereupon he was commit∣ted to the Black Rod, and from thence to the Tower of London. This was the first Parliament wherein the Faction was predominant; not that their particular number made them so, but they closed with all Interests, that were any way offended at the Government; and some well-meaning men there were too, that were led by the Nose by these (for∣sooth) good Patriots; but having by these means got the Vote of the Commons in their own management, they resolved, no
to abate the least Ace of that Power. The King in the beginning of the Parli∣ament, to remove all Distrust and Jealousie of him, had granted them whatever they had demanded, had signed the Bill for a Triennial Parliament, had Encted, that he would not dissolve this, without the Consent of the Lords & Commons them∣selves; so that there rested nothing of the Kings part, which Reasonable men could desire, for him more to grant, or they to ask; therefore he took it very unkindly, that in the midst of these Favours and Grants, they should so unhansom∣ly affront him, in challenging his Prime Minister of State, in so high a manner. But they were resolved to passe the Limits of all Duty and Obedience, and having the King so engaged, as beforesaid, and ne∣cessitated also for Money, to put and im∣pose any thing upon him, though never so disagreeable to his honour and Conscience, nay to common Reason. To this purpose, after the Charge was exhibited, the Faction in the House, and their Agents and Partisans in the City (who had their Correspondents also in the Coun∣try, as appeared afterwards by several Pe∣titions brought out of divers Counties of
England) drew down a confused Rbble of Apprentices, Seamen, and others, in∣termingled with so me of the leading Gran∣dees, who were to instruct this many-head∣ed Monster, what they should cry out for, or what they should do upon any emergen∣cy, who coming to Westminster-Hall, made a violent cry for Justice against Strafford, which continued so many dayes together, till at last, not seeing the businesse go on, with that disparch they wished, and being informed by their Members of the Faction in the House, that the Bill of Attainder stuck with the Lords, and that they refu∣sed to passe it, they proceeded to that Im∣pudence, as to stop the Lords Coaches as they went to the House, and threaten them if they would not consent to his Condem∣nation, to hinder them from entring into the House, and that they would turn them back; withal, they posted up the Names of those Lords, who would not consent to this cruel and barbarous way of proceeding against the said Earle, calling them Straf∣fordians, and enemies of their Country, with this menacing Subscription, This, and more shall be done unto them, &c. If this had been meerly the Rage of the Multitude, the Fate of this worthy and
Noble Person had been something the lesse lamentable, by how much injuries of vio∣lence are lesse terrible and imputable then those of Deliberation; but here was the bloudy hand of the Puritan Preacher, most apparently concerned, who now thought to wreak himself of all those Silencings had been put upon their Seditious Mouths, by this cry for bloud, which no Horseleech ever more greedily sucked; so by these Prophets the Word was put into the mouth of the multitude. Many Enemies, and those the ablest Lawyers of the Kingdom, and Eloquent Orators also, this Noble Earle was com∣bated with, against whom neverthelesse, he most rationally, politely, and learnedly, without any the least Passion (confidence, or Fear, being alike distant from them both, but in an even and excellent temper of mind) so well defended himself, that his Peers could not find where to fasten his Charge; which because of the extraordina∣ry manage of it, and that he is the Proto∣martyr, take a view of in this short Ac∣count.
An Account of the Life, Tryal, and Death of that Loyal PROTO-MARTYR, THOMAS, Earle of Straf∣ford, Lord Deputy of Ire∣land, Beheaded, May 12. 1641. VVHat was tauntingly said by the French, concerning this great and prudent Statesman, that the English were mad, having but one wise Head, to cut it off, was Truth enough, and too sad∣ly experienced: All Essaies of describing those great Abilities, and comprehensive∣ness of his mind, are therefore unfeasable, because none but himself could pourtraict them to any Appearance or Semblance of that Life and Quicknesse which manifested it self, even in that unsearchable and pro∣found depth of his Counsels and Actions; so that he hath left nothing transmittible to our Imitation, but his Loyalty; where∣in
we and his Enemies agree in this, that we have nothing else to lay hold on, his other superexcellent qualities being above our and their reach and understanding. The Reason undoubtedly why he was assaulted, with the new Engine of accumulative and constructive Treson. He hath for his honour and glory a most illustrious character given him by King Charles of blessed memory, in his  in these words, — I look upon my Lord of Strafford, as a Gentleman whose abilities might make a Prince rather a∣fraid than ashamed to employ him in the greatest affaires of State, &c. so that all that can be added to his memory and renown by any other pen, will be but a superfluous labour; but because that good Prince only considered him in his setting, wherein he was as unhappily concernd, as he was happily in the raising of him, it is thought requisie to take a farther view of him, and deduce him from his Ancestry, to whom he hath contributed more honour, than he recei∣ved from them. He was born in Yorkshire, of the illu∣strious Family of the Wentworths, and edu∣cated according to the greatnesse of his Fa∣mily, which had brought forth many fa∣mous
men. As soon as he came of age he was chosen a Parliament Man, where he presently gained the reputation of a States-Man, and good Patriot, by stickling against the Prerogative, which mist not the Courts observation. By King Charls the First, out of honour to his merit and great parts, he was made Bron Wentworth of Raby, and soon after other Titles were conferred on him, together with places of trust, which he discharged to the Kings great content, the services he received from him ballancing his favours bestowed on him, which he ne∣ver abused, but continued to his death a most prudent Councellour, Loyal Subject, and faithful Friend, being taken into the Kings bosom and most retired secrets. Soon after he was created Earl of Straf∣ford, he was made also Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in which Government he exceed∣ed in policy and good Laws, and careful management in advancing the Kings re∣venue and ascertaining it for the future, all that went before him. He did also take care for the Church, established the Pro∣testant Religion, countenanced learned men, and preferred them, and setled a constant revenue for them in that King∣dom, of which prudent and pious action
the now Clergy there do reape the fruit. Some offences were taken at him, by the Irish, whom he kept in a very hard but orderly subjection, suppressing their out∣laws and Tories, and reducing them to a perfect entire obedience to the Kings Au∣thority and the Laws. Unlesse the strings be wound up hard, we cannot look for good Musick: he repressed and beat down the insolent Lordings of the great ones o∣ver the Commons, whom he sweetned and arctized into the English from their wild and barbarous Customs, which caused him no great Love from the Irish Nobility, who understood the design was by such ar∣tifices to take from them the absolute pow∣er they had over their poor Vassals and Te∣nants, when they should find the diffe∣rence between the English Manners and Laws, and those of their own Country. Herein notwithstanding the great opposi∣tion he me in the obstinacy and indocibi∣lity and prejudice of that opinionated Na∣tion he made a good procedure, and no doubt, had he continued longer in the Go∣vernment, and those times had not fallen out, which soon put all into a confusion, had obtained his end. The Scotch War breaking out first, as a∣foresaid,
he was called out of Ireland to assist the King with his Counsel in those Exigencies which had so unpreparedly sur∣prized him; to which work, like a Noble Friend, he set his head, his hands, and his purse, advancing by subscription (which the rest of the Nobility followed, accor∣ding to their estate) twenty thousand pounds, with which aid, and the large sup∣ply of the Clergy, who granted the King four shillings in the pound for six years to∣gether, which was effected by his influ∣ence; that King raised that Army against the Scots. The Earl of Strafford was sick at the De∣feat given the English at Newburne, under my Lord Conway, whereupon, an overture was made by other Lords then about the King for a Peace with the Scots, which soon after taking effect, the King returned to Westminster, where he had summoned his Parliament according to the advice of this Lord, and the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, both whom they rendred odious to the People, upon the very account of being Enemies to Parliaments. The very first thing of consequence done at the first Sessions, was a charge exhibited by the House of Commons against this
Earl, which consisted of 28. Articles of high Treason, Feb.16. 1640. The substance of them all was, That he had endeavoured to subvert the fundamental Laws and Govern∣ments of the Realms of England and Ireland; that he had done ill Offices betwixt the King and the Scots, and betwixt the King and his Subjects of this Kingdom; that he had advi∣sed the King to bring up the Army out of the North, and overawe the Parliament, and that he had informed his Majesty that he had an Army of 10000 men in Ireland ready to be transported for the same Service. His Tryal thereupon April 13. ensued, which was done with all solemnity, a Court being made for the purpose, with seats for both Houses, and a Canopy for the King, with a Terrasse before it; The Earl of Arundel was Lord High Steward; his Accusers were Pym, St. Johns, Whit∣lock, Sr. Walter Earles, Serjeant Glyn, May∣nard, Stroud, Mr. Selden, Hambden, &c. The Lieutenant warded all their blows, de∣fending himself bravely and learnedly, so that there was no hopes of prevailing a∣gainst his innocence by the Law, before the Lords that were his Judges. But the implacable fury of the House of Commons, since chey could effect nothing
this way, put them upon another, which was to draw up a Bill of Attaindor and present it to the Lords, whereby the mat∣ter of Fact was declared to have been suffi∣ciently proved, and then as to Law that he had incurred the censure of Treason, the Lords stumbled at this way of proceed∣ing, as a path leading to their own destru∣ction, it being a course unsuitable to the practice and state of the Kingdom, and their own safety, and against Common Ju∣stice. To this it was replied by the Com∣mons, that if the Lords would not joyn with them in this way, they feared a rup∣ture might follow, for that the People would not be satisfied without Justice done upon the Earl, as the Author of all their grievances. The Lords stood for a while to their first determination, and heard the Earl by his Council at their Bar as to matter of Law; this made the House of Commons (though the King in a set speech to them, had cleared the Earl, from any design of Treason or consulting to any arbitrary Go∣vernment, nor could he concur to punish him as a Traitor) the more eager. Whereup∣on the Londoners came down in Tumults, crying Justice, and threatning the Lords as
aforesaid, so that at last the said Bill, usher∣ed in by a Protestation, passed the whole House of Commons nemine contradicente, but the Lord Darby and one or two more; and presently after the House of Lords, where were present 45, 26 against him, and 19 for him, most of his friends absent∣ing themselves for fear of the multitude. Immediatly the Kings assent was requi∣red to the Bill, who consulted with the Bishops, who, all but the Bishop of London, now his Grace of Canterbury (and who as the King observed in his Book, fared the best of all) advised him against it, but that which most swayed the King, to sign it, which he bitterly afterwards repented, was a Letter of the Earls to his Majesty, which being too long here to insert, I shall only give you that Passage wherein he desires his Majesty to passe the Bill. And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the Honour and Justice of my Peers, so clearly as to beseech your Majesty might please to have spared that Declaration of yours, on Saturday last, and intirely to have left me to their Lordships, so now to set your Majesties Conscience, &c. at liberty, I do most humbly beseech you, for the prevent∣ing of such mischief as may happen by your re∣fusal
to pass the Bill, by this means to remove praised be God, I cannot say this accursed, but I confess this unfortunate thing forth of the way towards that blessed agreement, which God I trust shall for ever establish betwixt you and your Subjects. Sir, my consent herein shall more acquit you to God than all the World can do besides; to a willing man there is no injury done, &c. I have also here inserted for their excel∣lency and elegancy, these two following Speeches, the first at Westminster Hall to the Lords at the conclusion of his Trial, the other at the Scaffold, which are as fol∣low. MY Lords! There yet remaines ano∣ther Treason, that I should be guilty of; the endeavouring to subvert the funda∣mental Laws of the Land, that they should now be Treason together, that is not Trea∣son in any one part of Treason accumula∣tive, that so when all will not do, it is woven up with others, it should seem very strange. Under favour, my Lords, I do not con∣cieve that there is either Statute Law, nor Common-Law, that doth declare the endeavouring to subvert the fundamental Laws, to be high Treason.
For neither Statute-Law, nor Common-Law written, that ever I could here of, de∣clareth it so. And yet I have been diligent to enquire, (as I believe you think it doth concern me to do.) It is hard to be questioned for life and honour upon a Law that cannot be shewn. There is a Rule which I have learned from Sir Edward Cooke, De non aparenti∣tibus & non existentibus eadem ratio: (Jesu) where hath this fire lain all this while, so many hundred of years, without any smoak to discover it, till it thus burst out to con∣sume me and my children; extreme hard in my opinion, that punishment should precede promulgation of Law! punish∣ment by a Law subsequent to the Acts done. Take it into your considerations: for cer∣tainly it is now better to be under no Law at all, but the will of men, than to con∣forme our selves under the protection of a Law, as we think, and then be punished for a crime that doth precede the Law: what man can be safe, if that be once ad∣mitted? My Lords, it is hard in another respect, that there should be no token set upon this
offence, by which we should know it, no admonition by which we should be aware of it. If a man passe down the Thames in a Boat, and it be split upon an Anchor, and no booy be ser, as a token that there is an Anchor there, that party that ows the An∣chor, by the Maritine Laws shall give sa∣tisfaction for the damage done; but if it were marked out, I must come upon my own peril. Now where is a mark upon this crime? Where is the token, this is high Treason. If it be under water, and not above wa∣ter, no humane providence can avail nor prevent my destruction. Lay aside all humane wisdom, and let us rest upon Divine Revelation, if you will condemn before you forewarn the danger. Oh my Lords! may your Lordships be pleased to give that regard unto the Peer∣age of England, as never to suffer our selves to be put on those nice points, upon such contractive interpretations; and these are where Laws are not clear, or known. If there must be a tryal of wits, I do humbly beseech you, the subject and matter may be somewhat else than the lives and ho∣nours of Peers.
My Lords, we find that the primitive times, in the progression of the plain Do∣ctrine of the Apostles, they brought the Books of curious Arts, and burned them. And so likewise, as I do conceive, it will be wisdom and providence in your Lord∣ships, for your Posterity and the whole Kingdom, to cast from you, into the fire, these bloudy and most mysterious Vo∣lumes of Constructive and Arbitrary Trea∣son; and to betake your selves to the plain Letters of the Law and Statute, that telleth us where the crime is, and by tel∣ling what is, and what is not, shews us how to avoid it. And let us not be ambitious, to be more wise and learned in the killing Arts, than our Forefathers were. It is now full two hundred and forty years since ever any man was touched for this alledged crime (to this height) before my self; we have lived happily to our selves at home, and we have lived glorious∣ly to the World abroad. Let us rest contented with that our Fa∣thers left us, and not awaken those sleepy Lions to our own destructions; by raking up a few musty Records that have lain so many Ages by the walls, quite forgotten and neglected.
May your Lordships be nobly pleased, to add this to those other mis-fortunes befal∣len me for my sins, not for my Treasons, that a president should be derived from me of that disadvantage (as this will be in the consequent to the whole Kingdom) I be∣seech you seriously to consider it, and let not my particular Cause be looked upon as you do; though you wound me in my in∣terest in the Commonwealth, and there∣fore those Gentlemen say, that they speak for the Commonwealth, yet in this par∣ticular I indeed speak for it, and the in∣conveniencies and mischiefs that will hea∣vily fall upon us: for as it is in the first of Henry the Fourth, no man will after know what to do, or say for fear. Do not put, my Lords, so great diffi∣culties upon the Ministers of State, that men of wisdom, honour and vertue, may not with chearfulnesse and safety be im∣ployed for the Publick, if you weigh and measure them by grains and scruples, the publick affaires of the Kingdom will be laid wast, and no man will meddle with them, that hath honours, issues, or any fortunes to lose. My Lords, I have now troubled you lon∣ger than I should have done, were it not
for the interest of those dear pledges a Saint in Heaven left me; I should be loath, my Lords, (there he stopped.) What I forfeit for my self it is nothing, but that my indiscretion should forfeit for my child, it even woundeth me deep to the very Soul. You will pardon my infirmitie, some∣thing I should have said, but I am not able, (and sighed) therefore let it passe. And now, my Lords, I have been, by the blessing of Almighty God, taught, that the afflictions of this life present, are not to be compared to the eternal weight of that glory that shall be revealed to us here∣after. And so, my Lords, even so with tran∣quility of mind I do submit my self freely and clearly to your Lordships judgments, and whether that Righteous judgment shall be to life or death.
The Earl of Straffords Speech on the Scaf∣fold, immediatly before his Execution on Tower-hill, May 12, 1641. My L. Primate of Ireland, IT is my very great comfort that I have your Lordship by me this day, in re∣gard I have been known to you these many years, and I do thank God, and your Lord∣ship for it that you are here; I should be very glad to obtain so much silence, as to be heard a few words, but I doubt I shall not, the noise is so great. My Lords, I am come hither by the good will and pleasure of Al∣mighty God, to pay that last Debt I owe to sin, which is death, and by the Blessing of that God, to rise again through the Merits of Jesus Christ, to Righteousnesse and Life Eternal. [Here he was a lit∣tle interrupted.] My Lords, I am come hither to submit to that Judgment which hath passed against me; I do it with a very quiet and content∣ed mind, I thank God I do freely forgive all the world, a forgivenesse that is not spoken from the teeth outwards (as they say) but from the very heart, I speak it in the presence of Almighty God, before
whom I stand, that there is not a displeas∣ing thought arising in me towards any man living. I thank God I can say it, and tru∣ly too, my Conscience bearing me witness, that in all my employment, since I had the honour to serve his Majesty, I never had any thing in the purpose of my heart, but what tended to the joynt and indivi∣dual prosperity of King and People; al∣though it hath been my ill fortune to be mis-construed. I am not the first that hath suffered in this kind, it is the common portion of us all, while we are in this life, to erre, righ∣teous Judgment we must wait for in ano∣ther place, for here we are very subject to be mis-judged one of another: There is one thing that I desire to free my self of, and I am very confident (speaking it now with so much chearfulnesse) that I shall obtain your Christian Charity in the belief of it. I was so far from being against Parliaments, that I did alwaies think the Parliaments of England were the most happy Constituti∣ons that any Kingdom or Nation lived un∣der, and the best means under God to make the King and People happy. For my Death, I here acquit all the world, and beseech the God of Heaven
heartily to forgive them that contrived it, though in the Intentions and Purposes of my heart I am not guilty of what I die for: And my Lord Primate, it is a great comfort for me, that his Majesty conceives me not meriting so severe and heavy a punish∣ment as is the utmost Execution of this Sentence; I do infinitely rejoyce in this Mercy of his, and I beseech God return it into his own bosom, that he may find mer∣cy when he stands most in need of it. I wish this Kingdom all the Prosperity and Happinesse in the world, I did it li∣ving, and now dying it is my wish; I do most humbly recommend this to every one who hears me, and desire they would say their hands upon their hearts, and consider seriously whether the beginning of the hap∣piness and Reformation of a Kingdom should be written in Letters of Blood: con∣sider this when you are at your homes, and let me be never so unhappy, as that the last drop of my Bloud should rise up in Judg∣ment against any one of you, but I fear you are in a wrong way. My Lords, I have but one word mre, and with that I shall end. I prosesse that I die a true and obedient Son to the Church of England, wherein I was born, and in
which I was bred. Peace and Prosperity be ever to it. It hath been objected (if it were an Objection worth the answering) that I have been enclined to Popery, but I say truly from my heart, that from the time that I was one and twenty years of age, to this present, going now upon forty nine; I never had in my heart to doubt of this Religion of the Church of England: Nor ever had any man the boldnesse to suggest any such thing to me, to the best of my Remembrance: and so being recon∣ciled by the Merits of Jesus Christ my Sa∣viour, into whose bosom I hope, I shall shortly be gathered, to those Eternal happi∣nesses which shall never have end: I desire heartily the forgivenesse of every man, for any rash or unadvised words, or anything done amisse: And so my Lords and Gen∣tlemen, Farewel: Farewel all the things of this world. I desire that you would be silent, and joyn with me in Prayer, and I trust in God we shall all meet and live eternally in hea∣ven, there to receive the Accomplishment of all happinesse, where every Tear shall be wiped away from our eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts; and so, God
blesse this Kingdom, and Jesus have mercy on my Soul. Then turning himself about, he saluted all the Noble-men; and took a solemn leave of all considerable Persons upon the Scaf∣fold, giving them his Hand. After that, he said, Gentlemen, I would say my Prayers, and entreat you all to pray with me, and for me; then his Chaplain laid the Book of Common-prayer upon the Chair before him, as he kneeled down, on which he prayd almost a quarter of an hour, and then as long or longer without the Book, & concluded with the Lords Prayer. Standing up he espies his Brother, Sir George Wentworth, and cals him to him, saying, Brother, we must part, remem∣ber me to my Sister, and to my Wife, and carry my Blessing to my Son, and charge him that he fear God, and continue an o∣bedient Son to the Church of England, and warn him that he bears no private grudg or revenge toward any man concerning me: & bid him beware that he meddle not with Church-Livings, for that will prove a Moth & canker to him in his Estate, and wish him to content himself to be a Servant to his Country, not aiming at higher preferments. Aliter] To his Son Mr. Wentworth he
commends himself, and gives him charge to serve his God, to submit to his King with all Faith and Allegiance in things tempo∣ral, to the Church in things Spiritual, chargeth him again and again, as he will answer it to him in Heaven, never to med∣dle with the Patrimony of the Church, for if he did, it would be a Canker to eat up the rest of his Estate. Carry my blessing also to my Daughter Anne and Arabella, charge them to serve and fear God, and he will blesse them; not forgetting my little Infant, who yet knows neither good nor evil, and cannot speak for it self, God speak for it and blesse it; now said he, I have nigh done, one stroke will make my Wife husbandlesse, my dear chil∣dren fatherlesse, and my poor Servants masterlesse, and will separate me from my dear Brother, and all my Friends. But let God be to you, and them all in all. After this, going to take off his Doubler, and to make himself unready, he said, I thank God I am not afraid of death, nor daunted with any discouragement rising from any fears, but do as chearfully put off my Doublet at this time, as ever I did, when I went to bed; then he put off the Doublet, wound up his hair with his hands,
and put on a white Cap. Then he called, where is the man that is to do this last Office? (meaning the Executioner) call him to me: when he came and asked him forgivenesse, he told him he forgave him and all the world: then kneeling down by the Block, he went to Prayer again himself, the Primate of Ire∣land kneeling on the one side, and the Mi∣nister on the other: To the which Mini∣ster, after Prayer, he turned himself, ha∣ving done Prayer, and spoke some few words softly, having his hands lifted up, and closed with the Ministers hands. Then bowing himself to lay his Head up∣on the Block, he told the Executioner, that he would first lay down his Head to try the fitnesse of the Block, and take it up again before he would lay it down for good and all: And so he did; and before he laid it down again, he told the Executioner, that he would give him warning when to strike by stretching forth his hands: And present∣ly laying down his Neck upon the Block, and stretching forth his Hands, the Execu∣tioner struck off his Head at one blow, and taking it up in his hand, shewed it to all the People, and said, God save the King. His Body was afterwards embalmed; and
appointed to be carried into Yorkshire, there to be buried among his Ancestors. He lift these three Instructions for his Son in Writing. First, That he should continue still to be brought up under those governors, to whom he had committed him; as being the best he could pick out of all those within his knowledge, and that he should not change them, unlesse they were weary of him; that he should rather want himself, then they should want any thing they could de∣sire. Secondly, He chargeth him as he would answer it at the last day, not to put himself upon any publick Employments till he was Thirty years of age at least: And then if his Prince should call him to Publick Ser∣vice, he should carefully undertake it, to restifie his Obedience, and withal to be faithful and sincere to his Master, though he should come to the same end that him∣self did. Thirdly, That he should never lay any hand upon any thing that belonged to the Church: He foresaw that Ruine was like to come upon the Revenues of the Church, and that perhaps they might be shared amongst the Nobility and Gentry.
But if his Son medled with any of it, he wished the Curse of God might follow him and all them, to the destruction of the most Apostolical Church upon Earth. Epitaph on the Earl of Strafford. HEre lies Wise, and Valiant Dust, Huddled up 'twixt Fit and Just. STRAFFORD, who was hurried hence, 'Twixt Treason and Convenience. He spent his time here in a Mist; A Papist, yet a Calvinist. His Princes nearest Joy and Grief, He had, yet wanted all Relief. The Prop and Ruine of the State; The Peoples violent Love and Hate: One in Extreams lov'd, and abhorr'd, Riddles lie here; or in a word, Here lies Bloud; and let it lie Speechless still, and never cry.
The Life and Death of that Great Prelate and Martyr, the most Reverend William Laud, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England, Beheaded, Ja∣nuary 10. 1644. THE Fate of this Learned and Magni∣ficent Prelate first and signally verified that Presage of King James, No Bishop, no King, he being the Usher to that misera∣ble calamity, which in the same manner and method, the same way of death, befel that most Blessed Prince; for that Prophe∣tick Saying was to be accomplished in eve∣ry Point, not only of Regiment, but in the concerns of natural Life, like Hippocra∣tes his Twins, to live and die together. His Originals were from an honest and well-reputed Parentage, of good esteem and credit in the Town of Reading, the place of his Nativity; his Father a Clothi∣er, his Mother of the Family of the Souths,
of a gentile extraction, by which side, Sir John Robinson is related to him; The Estate they had, was such, as neither so low, to cloud or obscure his promising natural Endow∣ments, or so advanced as to serene them, and shew them to the world in that Pomp and Lustre, to which at some distances they exerted themselves, and by degrees moun∣ted to the top &  of Ecclesiastical Pro∣motion and Dignity in this Kingdom. From his Seed-place and Nursery of Reading, he was transplanted to St. Johns Colledge in Oxford, where he gave present signs of his Future Glory, being observed by all men, as the Ornament of the House, and whole University. He continued here, having passed through all the Honourable Employments of his Colledge, till his worth could be no longer concealed; and much beholding was he to that his Mode∣sty of Nature, which so long hid him from publick employment, and gave him time and opportunity of laying in that Stock and Provision of all kind of Learning, which his unwearied diligence did so freely spend in the several Places and Provinces he so wisely discharged, being Chaplain first to the Earl of Devonshire, and Proctor of his University. From Batchelor of Divinity,
he proceeded Doctor, became Chaplain to Dr. Neat, then Bishop of Rochester; after∣wards translated to York, who preferred him to King James, who made him Prebend of Bugden and Westminster, Dean of Glocester, and Archdeacon of Huntington, and lastly, President of his own Colledge. Soon after he was made Bishop of St. Davids, by the same bountiful Master, but King Charles finding his great abilities, took him into more especial favour, giving him the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells, made him Dean of his Chappel, and one of his Privy Council, then Bishop of London and Chan∣cellor of Oxford, and in conclusion, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. Dr. Abbots (his Predecessor in that See) Remisseness and Indifferency con∣cerning the ceremonies used in the Church of England, was the cause that the Gangren of Non-conformity was so far spread, that it was no lesse trouble, then it raised Envy and Obloquy against him, to strive to en∣joyn and take order for the strict Observa∣tion of the said Rites, being every where called Innovations. By this means Epis∣copal Government was by many traduced, many Books and Libels printed against them, wherein this Prelate was sure to
bear the greatest burthen, the chief of those Writers were Bastwick, Burton, and Mr. Pryn, who were afterwards sentenced in the Star-Chamber, and suffered in the Pillory. But that which mainly, and chiefly helped forward his ruine, was his recommending or enjoying the use of the English Liturgy in the Scotch Church, which was received there with so much exasperation, that it mightily promoted the Wars then in in∣tention and designment by the Faction in that Kingdom. Soon after Libels were thrown about, full of sedition, and railing, and scurrilous jeers against him, which were seconded, with a Tumult and rabble of Londoners assaulting his House at Lambeth, for which one of the chief Thomas Bensted, was hanged in St. Georges Fields in South∣wark. He was falsly by such People reported for a Papist, whereas what stronger proof can be brought for his firmnesse in the Pro∣testant Religion, than that Book of his a∣gainst Fisher the Jesuit, which like a Ham∣mer hath beaten all the Romish Arguments into pieces, an unanswerable Work, and of which, they will never clear them∣selves,
brag and vapour what they please. As to his Religion this will suffice; for the morality and integrity, constant tenour of life, let him be judged by his Diary, pub∣lished in part by Mr. Prin. He had little intermission of his pen or intention of mind against the Roman Faction, whatsoe∣ver his Enemies have reported of him to the contrary, having before his eyes, as his main aim, the glory and prosperity of this Church, in the right and solemn Worship of God. He first began the reedifying of that rui∣nous and decayed Cathedral of St. Pauls London, towards the charge whereof, he expended great sums of money out of his own purse, and this was reckoned to him as Superstition, though in the account of sober and wife men, it was a noble zeal to Gods House. The North-door of that Church he repaired wholly with his own money, the Workmen not knowing whence their wages came. In sum, for these joynt Graces and Ver∣tues, Piety, Learning, magnificence, pru∣dence, and humility, he is hardly to be pa∣ralled by any of his Predecessors; many have had one or two of them, but wanted the other, in him they were a bright con∣stellation,
whose lustre made this Church glorious, to the envy and wonder of the Nations about us. But the time of Gods visitation being come, for the unfruitfulnesse, negligence and unthankfulnesse of the Clergy, a gene∣ration of men were raised up as scourges, to inflict the Divine Judgments. For in the beginning of our dissentions, as soon as the businesse of the Earl of Strafford was over, the mad multitude fell a raving and crying no Bishops, no Bishops. In the be∣ginning of the year 1641, and the latter end of 1640, this Reverend Prelate was committed from the Black Rod to the Tower, whither not long after ten more of that sacred Order, were sent after him; He continued in the Tower four years, be∣fore any charge was brought against him, though he all along petitioned and desired the Parliament he might come to his trya, which could not be obtained till the year 1644, a full account whereof, 2s also of his death we have here subjoyned. It would trouble Plutarch, (if he were alive,) to find out a fit Parallel with whom to match him. All therefore I shall do at the present time, (and tis the last publique Office I shall do him) is, to lay
down the story of his death and sufferings, together with a view of those plots and pra∣ctises which were set on foot, to pluck a few years from a weak old man, and bring him to an unnatural calamitous end. For though that maxime in Philosophy is most true and certain; that corruptio est in instan∣ti, that death comes to us in a moment, or in the twinckling of an eye, as the Scriptures phrase is; yet are there many previous dis∣positions which make way unto it; all which are comprehended in the name of death. And in that latitude of expression do we take the word, in laying down the story of his death before you; which being writ out of an honest zeal to truth, and a sincere af∣fection to his name and memory, shall either be approved of, or at least ex∣cused. It was the practice and position of the antient Donatists, (the Predecessors and Progenitors of the modern Puritan) occi∣dere quemcun qui contra eos fecerit; to kill and make away whoever durst oppose their doings, or was conceived to be an hin∣drance to their growing faction. And by this Card their followers in these King∣doms have been steered of late, imprison∣ing and destroying all who have stood
against them. It is long since they enter∣tained such desperate purposes against the life and person of the Lord Arch-Bishop, threatnig his death in scattered Libels, tel∣lig him that his life was sought for, that nei∣ther God nor man could endure so vile a Coun∣sellor to live any longer. This was about the end of March 1629, and was the Prologue to those libels, full of threats and scandals, which year by year exasperated and infla∣med the People, till they had made them ripe for mischief, and readily prepared to execute whatever their grand Directors should suggest unto them. Saint Paul did never fight more frequent and more terri∣ble combats with the beasts of Ephesus, for the promotion of the Gospel, then he with these untractable and fiery spirits, who most seditiously opposed his religious pur∣poses of setling unity and uniformity in this Church of England. And in this state things stood till the year, 1640, in which not only many factious and seditious Peo∣ple in and about the City of London, made an assault by night on his House at Lam∣beth, with an intent to murther him, had they found him there: but the whole fa∣ction of the Scots declared in a Remon∣strance to the English Nation, that one of
the chief causes which induced them to in∣vade this Realm, was to remove him from his Majesty, and bring him to the punish∣ment which he had deserved. The man∣ner of their coming hit her, and the great entertainment given them by the faction here, shewed plainly that they were not like to be sent away without their Errand: and makes it evident that his ruine was re∣solved on in their secret Councils, before the Parliament was called, or that they had de∣clared so much by their will revealed. The Parliament had not long continued, but he is named for an Incendiary by the Scottish Commissioners, and thereupon ac∣cused of Treason by the House of Commons. And although no particular Charge was brought against him, but only a bare pro∣mise to prepare it in convenient time; yet was he presently committed to the custody of the Gentleman Ʋsher, and by him kept in durance till the end of February, (be∣ing full ten weeks; about which time his Charge was brought unto the Lords, but in generals only, and longer time required for particular instances. And yet upon this Lydsord law, by which they used to hang men first, and endite them after∣wards,) was he committed to the Tower,
being followed almost all the way by the Rscal multitude, who barbarously pursu∣ed him with reproaches and clamours to the very gates; and there detained, con∣trary to all Law and Justice, almost four years longer. This was the first great breach which was made by Parliament in the liberties of the English Subject; (save that their like proceedings with the Earl of Strafford, was a preparative unto it;) and was indeed the very gap, at which the sla∣very and oppression, under which this misera∣ble Nation hath for many years pined and languished, did break in. What right could meaner persons look for, when as so great a Peer was doomed to so long imprison∣ment, without being called to his Answer? But yet the malice of his Enemies was not so contented. For though some of the more moderate (or rather the lesse vio∣lent) Lords, who did not pierce into the depth of the design, gave out that they in∣tended only to remove him from his Maje∣sties eare, and to deprive him of his Arch-Bishoprick, (which resolution notwithstan∣ding being taken up before any charge was brought against him, was as unjust though not so cruel, as the others:) yet they
shewed only by this Ovonture, that they did reckon without their Hosts, and might be of the Court, perchance, but not of the Counsel. The leading and predominant party thought of nothing lesse, then that he should escape with life, or go off with li∣berty Only perhaps they might conceive some wicked hopes, that either the tedi∣ousnesse of his restraint, or the indignitie; and affronts which, day by day, were offer'd to him, would have broken his heart, not formerly accustomed to the like oppres∣sions. And then like Pilate in the Gospel they had called for water, and washed their hands before the multitude, and said, that they were innocent of the blood of that righteous per∣son: thinking that by such wretched figg∣leaves, they could not only hide their wic∣kednesse, and deceive poor men; but that God also might be mocked, and his All∣seeing eie deluded, to which all hearts lye open, all desires are known, and from which no secrets can be hidden. To this end not content to immute him up within the walls of the Tower, they robb him of his me∣nial servants, restrain him to two only of his number, and those not to have conse∣rence with any others, but in the presence of his Warder: and in conclusion make
him a close Prisoner, not suffering him to go out of his lodging to refresh himself, but in the company of his Keeper. And all this while they vex his Soul continually with scandalous and infamous Papers, and set up factious and seditious Preachers to in∣veigh against him in the Pulpit to his very face; so to expose him to the scorn both of boyes and women, who many times stood up and turned towards him, to observe his countenance, to see if any alteration did appear therein. And to the same ungod∣ly end, did they divest him of his Archi∣episcopal and Episcopal jurisdiction, confer∣ring it on his inferiour and subordinate Of∣ficers; sequester his rents under pre∣tence of maintenance for the Kings young∣er Children (as if his Majesties Revenues which they had invaded, were not suffi∣cient for that purpose,) convert his House at Lambeth into a Prison, and confiscate all his coals and fewel to the use of their Gaoler; deprive him of his right of Pa∣tronage, and take into their own hands the disposing of all his Benefices; seize upon all his goods and books which they found at Lambeth; and in conclusion, rifle him of his notes and papers, not only such as were of ordinary use and observation, but such
as did concern him in the way of his just defence. In which they did not any thing from the first to the last, but in a proud de∣fiance to the Laws of the Land, which they most impudently violated in all these par∣ticulars: and more than so, they had pro∣ceeded step by step, to this height of ty∣ranny a whole year almost, before they had digested their general charge into particu∣lar Accusations; or ever called him to his Answer in due form of Law. 5. But God had given him such a mea∣sure both of strength and patience, that these afflictions, though most great and irksome, did make no more impressions on him, than an Arrow on a rock of Adamant. For at his first commitment he besought his God, (as Master Pryn observes out of his Manual of devotions) to give him full patience, proportionable comfort, and con∣tentment with whatsoever he should send; and he was heard in that he prayed for. For notwithstanding that he had fed so long on the bread of carefulnesse, and drank the wa∣ter of affliction: yet, as the Scripture tel∣leth us of the four Hebrew children, his coun∣tenance appeared fairer and fatter in flesh, than any of those who ate their portion of the Kings me at, or drank of his wine. And he was
wont to say to his private friends, that, he thanked God, he never found more sweet con∣tentment in his greatest liberty, than in the time of that restraint. And certainly it was no wonder that it should be so, he being con∣scious to himself of no other crimes, which drew that fatal storm upon him, than a re∣ligious zeal to the honour of God, the hap∣pinesse of the King, and the preservation of the Church in her peace and patrimony, as he professed at his death before all the Peo∣ple. So that despairing of successe in the way intended, his Enemies fell upon ano∣ther, but more desperate course, which was to ship him for New-England, and make him subject to the insolencies of Wels and Peters, two notorious Schismaticks. But this being put to the question in the House of Commons, was rejected by the major part: not out of pity to his age, or consideration of his quality, nor in respect unto the Laws so often violated; but to preserve him yet a while, as a stale or pro∣perty, wherewith to cheat the Citizens of some further sums, and to invite the Scots to a new invasion, when their occasion so required. For it was little doubted by discerning men, but that the Scots, who made their first invasion on a probable hope
of sequestring the Lord Arch-bishop and the Earl of Strafford from His Majesties Counsels; and sped it so well in their de∣sign, that they were recompensed already with the death of the one, would easily be tempted to a second journey, upon assu∣rance to be glutted with the blood of the other. 6. And this appears more plain and e∣vident, in that about the coming on of the Scots, which was in the middest of Janua∣ry 1643. they did again revive the busi∣nesse, which had long lain dormant; caus∣ing the Articles, which they had framed in maintenance of their former Accusa∣tion, to be put in Print about that time, as is apparent by the Test of John Brown their Clerk, dated the 17 of that moneth. And as the Scots advanced or slackned in their marches Southward, so did they either quicken or retard the work: till hearing of the great successes which they had in York∣shire, they gave command to Master Pryn to prosecute the charge against him, and bring him to his long expected trial; as he reports it of himself, who, having rifled him of his Papers, and thereby robbed him of those helps, which he had purposely reserved for his just defence; and having personal
quarrels of his own to revenge upon him, was thought to be the fittest blood-hound in the whole kennel, to pursue the scent. And now there was no talk but of quick dispatch. When hatred doth accuse, and ma∣lice prosecute, and prejudice and prepossessi∣on sit upon the Bench, God help the inno∣cent; There's nothing but a miracle can preserve him then. And so it proved in the event. They called him after to the Bar, both before and after, caused a strict inquisition to be made into all his actions: they winnowed him like wheat, and sifted him to the very bran, (which was you know the Devils office;) they had against him all advantages of power and malice, and wit∣nesses at hand upon all occasions: but still they found his answers and his resolutions of so good a temper, his innocence and in∣tegrity of so bright a die, that as they knew not how to dismisse him with credit, so neither could they find a way to condemn him with Justice. And though their Con∣sciences could tell them, that he had done nothing which deserved either death or bonds; yet either to reward or oblige the Scots, who would not think themselves se∣cure whil his head was on, they were re∣solved to bring him to a speedy end. Only
they did desire, if possible, to lay the Odium of the murther upon the common People. And therefore Serjeant Wilde in a speech a∣gainst him, having aggravated his supposed offences to the highest pitch, concluded thus, that he was guilty of so many and noto∣tious treasons, so evidently destructive to the Commonwealth, that he marvelled the People did not tear him in pieces as he passed between his barge, and the Parliament Houses. Which barbarous and bloudy project, when it would not take, and that though many of the Rabble did desire his death, yet none would be the executioner; they then im∣ployed some of their most malicious and most active instruments, to go from door to door, and from man to man, to get hands against him; and so petition those to hasten his condemnation, which must, forsooth, be forced to their own desires: (whereof, and of the Magistrates standing still, and suffering them to proceed without any check, he gave them a memento in his dying Speech.) This being obtained, the businesse was pursued with such heat and violence, that by the beginning of Novem∣ber, it was made ready for a Sentence; which some conceived would have been given in the Kings Bench, and that their
proofs (such as they were) being fully ripened, he should have been put over to a Middlesex Jury. But they were only some poor Ignorants which conceived so of it. The leading members of the plot thought of no such matter; and to say truth, it did concern them highly not to go that way. For though there was no question to be made at all, but that they could have packed a Jury to have found the Bill; yet by a clause in the Attainder of the Earl of Strafford they had bound the Judges not to declare their facts for Treason in the time to come, for which they had con∣demned and executed that Heroick Peer. And therefore it was done with great care and caution to proceed by Ordinance, and vote him guilty first in the House of Com∣mons; in which being parties, witnesses, and Judges too, they were assured to passe it as they would themselves, which was done accordingly, about the 20 of No∣vember. But yet the businesse was not done, for the Lords stuck at it. Some of which ha∣ving not extinguished all the sparks of ho∣nour, did by the light thereof discover the injustice of so foul a practice; together with the danger might befal themselves,
if once disfavoured by the Grandees of that potent Faction. A thing so stomacked by the Commons, that after some evapora∣tions of their heat and passion, which broke out into open threats, they present∣ly drew, and sent up an Ordinance to the Lords, tending to dispossesse them of all power and command in their Armies. But fearing this device was too weak to hold, they fall upon another and a likelier pro∣ject, which was to bring the Lords to sit in the Commons House; where they were sure they should be inconsiderable both for power and number. And to effect the same with more speed and certainty, they had recourse to their old Arts, drew down Sir David Watkins with his general muster of subscriptions, and put a petition in his hands, to be rendred by him to the Hou∣ses, that is, themselves: wherein it was re∣quired among other things, that they would vigorously proceed unto the punish∣ment of all Delinquents; and that for the more quick dispatch of the publick busines∣ses of the State, the Lords would please to vote and sit together with the Commons. On such uncertain terms, such a ticklish Te∣nure do they now hold their place and pow∣er in Parliament; who so officiously com∣plied
with the House of Commons, in de∣priving the Bishops of their Votes and the Churches birth-right. And this was it which helped them in that time of need. For by this (though stale and common) Stratagem did they prevail so far upon some weak spirits, that the Earls of Kent, Pembroke, Salisbury, and Bullingbrooke, the Lords North, Gray of Wark and Brews, (a Scotchman, but an English Baron, and ge∣nerally called the Earl of Elgin) resolved to yield unto the current of so strong a stream: and thought they had made a gain∣ing voyage, if by delivering the Lord Arch-Bishop to the Peoples fury, they might pre∣serve themselves in the Peoples favour. And we know well, both who it was, and what end he came to, who though he knew that the accused party was delivered him out of envy only, and that he found no evil he was guilty of; yet being wearied with the clamours and the Crucifiges of the common people, and fearing that some tumult would be made about it, delivered him unto his ene∣mies to be put to death. And for those o∣ther Lords who withdrew themselves, and neither durst condemn nor protect the inno∣cent; (though far the major part, as it is reported) it is not easie to determin, whe∣ther
their consciences were more tender, their Collusion grosser, or their courage weaker. All I shall say is only this, that Claudius Lysias in the Acts, had been as guilty of Saint Paul's death, as any of the forty who had vowed to kill him; if upon notice of the Plot which was laid to mur∣ther him, he had brought him down unto the people, or not conveied him with a strong guard to the Court of Felix. The journies end must needs be foul, which such lewd and crooked waies do conduct unto. And it is worth your observation, that the same day, the fourth of January, in which they passed this bloody Ordinance, (as if therein they would cry quittance with his Sacred Majesty, who on the same accused the six guilt Members) they passed another for establishing their new Directory; which in ef∣fect was nothing but a total abolition of the Common-Prayer-Book: and thereby shew∣ed unto the World, how little hopes they had of setling their new form of Worship, if the foundation of it were not laid in blood. The Bill being thus dispatched in the House of Lords, (if still they may be called Lords, which are so over-loaded by the Common-people) there wanted yet the
Kings Assent to give life to it: which they so far contemned, (they had more reason to despair of it) that they never sought it. They had screwed up their Ordinances to so high a pitch, that never Act of Parliament was of more authority: and having found the Subjects so obedient, as to yield unto them in matters which concerned them in their goods and liberties; it was but one step more to make trial of them, whether they would submit their lives to the self∣same tyranny: And this they made the first experiment in this kind, both of their own power, and the peoples patience; he being the first man, as himself noted in his Speech (which words are purposely omitted in Hindes Copy of it;) that was ever put to death by Ordinance in Parliament; but was not the last, as we have too sadly ex∣perienced. Certain it is, that by that Ordinance they then made themselves the absolute Master of the Subjects lives, and left them nothing that they could call their own, but ruine and destruction. Just as it was observed by our Gracious Soveraign, upon occasion of the Ordinance for the 20th part, that the same power which robbed the Subject of the twentieth part of their
Estates, had by that only made a claim and entituled it self to the other nineteen, when soever it should be thought expedient to hasten on the general ruin. In which His Majesty proved but too true a Prophet. And though perhaps some of the people were well pleased with this bloody Ordinance, and ran with joy to see it put in execution: yet all wise men did look upon it as the last groan or gasp of our dying liberty. And let both them and those who passed it, be as∣sured of this, that they who did so gladly sell the blood of their fellow Subjects, sel∣dom want Chapmen for their own in an open Market. And here, as it was once observed, that the predominant Party of the United Pro∣vinces, to bring about their ends in the death of Barnovelt, subverted all those fundamental Laws of the Belgick liberty; for maintenance whereof they took up Arms against Philip the Second, so would I know which of those Fundamental Laws of the English Government have not been viola∣ted by these men in their whole proceed∣ings; for preservation of which Laws (or rather under colour of such preservation) they did bewitch the people unto that Rebellion: It is a Fundamental Law of the
English Government, and the first Article in the Magna Charta, that the Church of England shall be free, and shall have her whole Rights and Priviledges inviolable: yet to make way unto the condemnation of this innocent man, and other the like wicked and ungodly ends, the Bishops must be Voted out of their place in Parliament, which most of them had held far longer in their Predecessors, than any of our noble families in their Progenitors. And if the Lords refuse to give way unto it (as at first they did) the people must come down to the House in multitudes, and cry, No Bishops, no Bishops, at the Parliament doors, till by the terror of their tumults they extort it from them. It is a Funda∣mental Law of the English liberty, that no Free-man shall be taken or imprisoned without cause shewn, or be detained without being brought unto his Answer in due form of Law: yet here we saw a Freeman imprisoned ten whole weeks together, before any Charge was brought against him; and kept in pri∣son three years more, before his general Accusation was by them reduced into par∣ticulars; and for a year almost detained close prisoner, without being brought unto his answer, as the Law requires. It is a
Fundamental Law of the English Govern∣ment, that no man be disseised of his Free∣hold or Liberties, but by the known Laws of the Land: yet here was a man disseised of his Rents and Lands, spoyled of his Goods, deprived of his jurisdiction, de∣vested of his Right and Patronage; and all this done, when he was so far from being convicted by the Laws of the Land, that no particular charge was so much as thought of. It is a Fundamental Law of the En∣glish Liberty, that no man shall be condemned, or put to death, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, i. e. in the ordinary way of a legal tryal: and sure an Ordinance of both Houses, without the Royal Assent, is no part of the Law of Eng∣land, nor held an ordinary way of trial for the English subject, or ever reckoned to be such in the former times. And finally, it is a Fundamental Law in the English Go∣vernment, that if any other case (than those recited in the Statute of King Edward 3.) which is supposed to be Treason, do happen be∣fore any of his Majesties Justices, the Justi∣ces shall tarry without giving judgment, till the cause be shewn and declared before the King, and His Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason or not: yet here we
had a new found Treason, never known before, nor declared such by any of His Majesties Justices, nor ever brought to be considered of by the King and His Parlia∣ment, but only voted to be such by some of those few Members which remained at West∣minster, who were resolved to have it so for their private ends. Put all which hath been said together, and then tell me truly, if there by any difference (for I see not any) between the ancient Roman slaves and the once Free-born Subjects of the English Nation, whose lives and liberties, whose goods and fortunes depend on the meer pleasure of their mighty Masters. But to return unto our Story, the passing of the Ordinance being made known unto him, he neither entertained the news with a Stoical Apathy, nor wailed his Fate with weak and womanish Lamentations (to which Extreams most men are carried in this case) but heard it with so even and so smooth a temper, as shewed he neither was afraid to live, nor ashamed to die. The time between the Sentence and the Execu∣tion, he spent in Prayers and applications to the Lord his God; having obtained, though not without some difficulty, a Chap∣lain of his own, to attend upon him, and to
assist him in the work of his preparation: though little preparation needed to receive that Blow, which could not but be welcom, because long expected. For so well was he studied in the Art of dying (especially in the last and strictest part of his Imprison∣ment) that by continual Fasting, Watch∣ing, Prayers, and such like Acts of Chri∣stian Humiliation, his flesh was rarified into Spirit, and the whole man so fitted for eternal Glories, that he was more then half in heaven, before death brought his bloudy (but triumphant) Chariot to con∣vey him thither. He that had been so long a Confessor, could not but think it a release of miseries to be made a Martyr. And as it is recorded of Alexander the great, that the night before his best and greatest Bat∣tel with Darius the Persian, he fell into so sound a sleep, that his Princes hardly could awake him when the Morning came; so is is certified of this great Prelate, that on the Evening before his Passeover, the night be∣fore the dismal combat betwixt him and death, after he had refreshed his spirits with a moderate Supper, he betook himself unto his rest, and slept very soundly, till the time came, in which his Servants were appointed to attend his Rising, a most as∣sured
sign of a Soul prepared. The fatal morning being come, he first applied him∣self to his private Prayers, and so continu∣ed, till Penington, and other of their publick Officers came to conduct him to the Scaf∣fold: which he ascended with so brave a courage, such a cheerful countenance, as if he had mounted rather to behold a triumph, then to be made a Sacrifice, and came not there to die, but to be translated. And to say Truth, it was no Scaffold, but a Throne, a Throne whereon he shortly was to receive a Crown, even the most glorious Crown of Martyrdom. And though some rude, uncivil people reviled him, as he passed a∣long, with opprobrious Language, as loath to let him go to the Grave in peace, it ne∣ver discomposed his thoughts, nor disturbed his patience. For he had profited so well in the School of Christ, that when he was re∣viled, he reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatned not, but committed his cause to him that judgeth righteously. And as he did not fear the Frowns, so neither did he cover the applause of the vulgar Herd, and there∣fore rather chose to read what he had to speak unto the People, then to affect the Ostentation either of memory or wit in that dreadful Agony; whether with greater
Magnanimity or Prudence, I can hardly say. As for the matter of his Speech, be∣sides what did concern himself and his own purgation, his great care was to clear His Majesty, and the Church of England from any inclination unto Popery; (with a per∣sivasion of the which, the Authors of our then miseries, had abused the People, and made them take up Arms against their Soveraign.) approving himself a faith∣ful Servant to the last. By means whereof, as it is said of Samson, in the Book of Judges, that the men which he slew at his death, were more then they which he slew in his Life: so may it be affirmed of this famous Prelate, that he gave a greater blow unto the enemies of God and the King at the hour of his Death, then he had given them in his whole life before; But this you will more clearly see by the Speech it self, which followeth here, according to the best and most perfect Copies.
The Speech of the L. Archbishop of Can∣terbury, spoken at his Death, upon the Scaffold on the Tower-hill, Jan. 10. 1644. Good People, THis is an uncomfortable time to preach, yet I shall begin with a Text of Scripture, Heb. 12.2. Let us run with pa∣tience that Race which is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Crosse, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God. I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to Jesus the Author and Fi∣nisher of my Faith, he best knowes: I am now come to the end of my Race, and here I find the Crosse, a death of shame, but the shame must be despised, or no coming to the right hand of God; Jesus despised the shame for me, and God forbid but I should despise the shame for him: I am going apace (as you see) towards the Red Sea; and my feet are now upon the very Brink of it; an Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me into the Land of Pro∣mise,
for that was the way through which he led his People: But before they came to it, he instituted a Passeover for them, a Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with sour herbs; I shall obey, and labour to di∣gest the sour herbs, as well as the Lamb. And I shall remember it is the Lords Passeover; I shall not think of the herbs, nor be an∣gry with the hand which gathereth them; but look up only to him who instituted that, and governs these; For men can have no more power over me, then what is given them from above. I am not in love with this passage through the Red Sea, for I have the weaknesse and infirmities of flesh and bloud plentifully in me: and I have prayed with my Saviour, ut transiret Calix iste, that this Cup of Red Wine might passe from me: But if not, Gods will (not mine) be done, and I shall most willingly drink of this Cup, as deep, as he pleases, and en∣ter into this Sea, yea and passe through it, in the way that he shall lead me. But I would have it remembred (good people) that when Gods Servants were in this boysterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them (and did in a manner drive them in∣to that Sea) were drowned in the same
waters, while they were in pursuit of them: I know my God whom I serve, is as able to deliver me from this Sea of Bloud, as he was to deliver the Three Children from the Furnace; and (I most humbly thank my Saviour for it) my Resolution is now, as theirs was then: They would not worship the Image the King had set up, nor will I the Imaginations which the people are setting up; nor will I forsake the Temple and the Truth of God, to follow the bleat∣ing of Jeroboams Calf, in Dan and Bethel. And as for this People, they are at this day miserably misled (God of his mercy open their eyes, that they may see the right way) for at this day the Blind lead the Blind, and if they go on, both will cer∣tainly fall into the Ditch. For my self, I am (and I acknowledge it in all humility) a most grievous sinner many waies, by thought, word, and deed, and I cannot doubt, but that God hath Mercy in store for me (a poor Penitent) as well as for other sinners; I have now upon this sad occasion, ransacked every Corner of my heart, yet (& I thank God) I have not found (among the many) any one sin which de∣serves death by any known Law of this Kingdom: And yet hereby I charge no∣thing
upon my Judges; for if they proceed upon Proof (by valuable Witnesses) I, or any other Innocent, may be justly condem∣ned: And (I thank God) though the weight of the Sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet within, as ever I was in my life. And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever di∣ed by an Ordinance of Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have gone this way, though not by this means; For El∣phegus was hurried away, and lost his Head by the Danes; and Simon Sudbury in the Fury of Wat Tyler and his Fellows: Be∣fore these, St. John Baptist had his Head danced off by a Lewd Woman, and St. Cy∣prian Archbishop of Carthage, submitted his Head to a persecuting Sword. Many ex∣amples (great and good) and they teach me Patience: For I hope my Cause in Hea∣ven will look of another Dye, then the co∣lour that is put upon it here. And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great men in their several ge∣nerations, but also that my Charge (as foul as 'tis made) looks like that of the Jews against St. Paul, (Acts 25.3.) For he was accused for the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion: And like that of S. Stephen,
(Acts 6.14.) for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law and Religion, the holy place and the Temple (v. 13.) But you will say, do I then compare my self with the Integrity of St. Paul, and St. Stephen? No, far be that from me; I only raise a Comfort to my self, that these great Saints and Servants of God were laid at in their times, as I am now. And 'tis memorable, that S. Paul, who helped on this Accusation against S. Stephen, did after fall under the very same himself. Yea, but here is a great Clamour, that I would have brought in Popery: I shall answer that more fully by and by: In the mean time, you know what the Pharisees said against Christ himself, If we let him alone, all men will believe in him, & venient Romani, and the Romans will come, and take away both our Place and the Nation. Here was a causelesse Cry against Christ that the Romans will come: And see how just the Judgment of God was; they crucified Christ, for fear lest the Romans should come, and his death was it, which brought in the Romans upon them; God punishing them with that which they most feared: And I pray God this Clamour of venient Romani, (of which I have given no cause) help not to bring
them in; for the Pope never had such a Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he hath now upon the Sects and Divisi∣ons that are amongst us. In the mean time, by honour and dishonour, by good and evil re∣port, as a Deceiver, and yet true, am I pas∣sing through this world, 2 Cor. 6.8.—Some Particulars also I think it not amiss to speak of. And first, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our Gracious Soveraign, He hath been much traduced for bringing in of Popery; but on my Conscience, (of which I shall give God a very present account) I know Him to be as free from this Charge, as any man living: and I hold him to be as sound a Protestant (according to the Religion by Law established) as any man in this Kingdom; and that he will venture his Life as far and as freely for it; and I think I do, or should know, both His af∣fection to Religion, and His Grounds for it, as fully as any man in England. The second Particular is concerning this great and Populous City, (which God bless.) Here hath been of late, a fashion taken up, to gather hands, and then to go to the Great Court of this Kingdom (the Parliament) and clamour for Justice, as
if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which are unknown to the many) could not, or would not do Justice, but at their appointment. A way, which may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his bloud upon their own heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also: And this hath been lately practised against my self; [the Magistrate standing still, and suffering them openly to proceed from Parish to Parish without check;] God forgive the setters of this (with all my heart I beg it) but many well meaning People are caught by it. In St. Stephens case, when nothing else would serve, they stirred up the people against him; and Herod went the same way, when he had killed St. James, yet he would not venter upon St. Peter, till he found how the other pleased the people. But take heed of having your hands full of bloud, for there is a time (best known to himself) when God (above other sins) makes In∣quisition for bloud, and when that Inquisi∣tion is on foot, the Psalmist tells us, That God remembers (but that's not all) He re∣members and forgets not the Complaint of the Poor, that is, whose bloud is shed by op∣pression, vers. 9. take heed of this, 'Tis a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, but then especially, when he is mak∣ing Inquisition for bloud; And (with my Prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to remember the Prophesie that is ex∣pressed, Jer. 26.15. The third particular is the poor Church of England. It hath flourished and been a shelter to other neighbouring Churches, when storms have driven upon them. But, alas, now 'tis in a storm it self, and God only knows whether, or how it shall get out: and (which is worse than a storm from without) its become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and at every cleft prophanenesse and irreligion is entring in, while as Pro∣sper speaks (in his second Book De vit a con∣temptu, cap. 4.) Men that introduce pro∣phanenesse are cloaked over with the name Re∣ligionis Imaginariae, of Imaginary Religion: for we have lost the Substance, and dwell too much in Opinion, and that Church which all the Jesuits machinations could not ruine, is fallen into danger by her own. The last particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self: I was born and baptized in the bosome of the Church of England established by Law; in that pro∣fession
I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to dye: This is no time to dis∣semble with God, least of all in matter of Religion, and therefore I desire it may be remembred. I have alwaies lived in the Protestant Religion, established in Eng∣land, and in that I come now to dye. What Clamours and Slanders I have endured for labouring to keep a Uniformity in the ex∣ternal service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church, all men know, and I have abundantly felt. Now at last I am accused of High Trea∣son in Parliament: a Crime which my Soul ever abhorred; this Treason was charged to consist of these two parts, An endeavour to subvert the Laws of the Land, and alike Endeavour to overthrow the true Protestant Religion Established by Law. Besides my answers to the several Charges, I prote∣sted my Innocency in both Houses. It was said, Prisoners Protestations at the Bar must not be taken. I can bring no wit∣nesse of my heart, and the intentions there∣of, therefore I must come to my Protest∣ation not at the Bar, but my Protestation at this hour, and instant of my death; in which I hope all men will be such charita∣ble
Christians, as not to think I would dye and dissemble, being instantly to give God an account for the truth of it: I do there∣fore in the presence of God, and his holy Angels take it upon my death, That I ne∣ver endeavoured the subversion either of Law or Religion: and I desire you all to remember this Protest of mine for my In∣nocencie, in these, and from all Tresons, whatsoever. I have been accused likewise as an Enemy to Parliaments: No, I un∣derstand them and the benefit that comes by them too well to be so: But I did mis∣like the misgovernment of some Parlia∣ments many waies, and I had good reason for it: For Corruptio optimi est pessima, there is no corruption in the World so bad, as that which is of the best thing in it self; for the better the thing is in nature, the worse it is corrupted. And that being the highest Court, over which no other have Jurisdiction, when 'tis mis-informed or mis-governed, the Subject is left without all remedy. But I have done, I forgive all the World, all and every of those bitter Enemies which have persecuted me, and humbly desire to be forgiven of God first, and then of every man, whether I have of∣fended him or not, if he do but conceive
that I have. Lord do thou forgive me, and I beg forgivenesse of him. And so I heartily desire you to joyn in Prayer with me. Oeternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches and fulnesse of all thy mercies look upon me; but not till thou hast nailed my sins to the Crosse of Christ, not till thou hast bathed me in the bloud of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ: that so the punishment due unto my sins may passe over me. And since thou art pleased to try me to the utmost, I hum∣bly beseech thee, give me now in this great instant, full Patience, proportionable Comfort, and a heart ready to dye for thy Honour, the Kings happinesse, and this Churches preservation. And my zeal to these (far from arrogance be it spoken) is all the sin (humane frailty excepted, and all in∣cidents thereto,) which is yet known to me in this particular, for which I now come to suffer; I say in this particular of Treason; but otherwise my sins are many and great: Lord pardon them all, and those especially (what ever they are) which have drawn down this present Judgment
upon me: and when thou hast given me strength to bear it, do with me as seems best in thine own eyes: and carry me through death that I may look upon it in what visage soever it shall appear to me, Amen. And that there may be a stop of this issue of bloud, in this more than mise∣rable Kingdom, (I shall desire that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my self) O Lord, I beseech thee, give grace of re∣pentance to all Bloud thirsty people; but if they will not repent, O Lord, confound all their devises, Defeat and Frustrate all their designs and endeavours upon them, which are or shall be contrary to the Glory of thy great Name, the truth and sinceri∣ty of Religion, the establishment of the King and His Posterity after Him in their just Rights and Priviledges, the Honour and Conservation of Parliaments in their just power, the Preservation of this poor Church in her Truth, Peace, and Patrimo∣ny, and the settlement of this distracted and distressed People under their ancient Laws, and in their native Liberties. And when thou hast done all this in meer mercy for them, O Lord, fill their hearts with thankfulnesse, and with Religious dutiful-obedience to thee and thy Command∣ments
all their daies: So Amen, Lord Je∣sus, Amen, and receive my Soul into thy Bosome, Amen. Our Father which art, &c. The Speech and Prayers being ended, he gave the Paper which he red unto Dr. Sterne his Chaplain, now Lord Bishop of Carlisle, desiring him to shew it his o∣ther Chaplains, that they might know how he departed out of this World, and so prayed God to shew his mercies and bles∣sings on them. And noting how one Hinde had employed himself in taking a Copy of his Speech as it came from his mouth; he desired him not to do him wrong in publishing a false or imperfect Copy, Which as Hinde promised him to be areful of, calling for punishment from above if he should do otherwise, so hath he reasonably well performed his promise: he next applied himself to the fatal Block, as to the Haven of his rest. But finding the way full of people, who had placed themselves upon the Theatre to behold the Tragedy, he desired he might have room to dye, beseeching them to let him have an end of his miseries, which he had endured very long. All which he did with so serene and calm a
mind, as if he had been rather taking or∣der for another mans funeral, then making way unto his own. Being come near the Block, he put off his doublet, and used some words to this effect. Gods will be done, I am willing to go out of this World, no man can be more willing to send me out of it. And seeing through the chinks of the boards that some people were got under the Scaffold, about the very place where the Block was seated, he called on the Officers for some dust to stop them, or to remove the people thence, saying it was no part of his desires, that his bloud should fall upon the heads of the People. Never did man put off mortality with a braver courage, not look upon his bloudy and ma∣litious Enemies with more Christian cha∣rity. And thus far he was gone in his way towards Paradise with such a Primitive magnanimity, as equalled, if not exceed∣ed the example of ancient Martyrs. Then he turned towards his Executioner and gave him money, saying, without the least distemper or change of countenance, here, honest friend, God forgive thee, and do thy office upon me with mercy, and having given a sign when the blow should come, he kneeled down upon his knees, and pray∣ed as followeth.
The Lord Arch-Bishops Prayer, as he kneeled by the Block. LOrd, I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of death, before I can come to see thee. But it is but umbra mortis, a meer shadow of death, a little darknesse upon nature; but thou by thy merits and passion hast broke through the jaws of death. So, Lord receive my Soul, and have mercy upon me, and blesse this King∣dom with Peace and Plenty, and with brother∣ly love and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood amongst them, for Jesus Christ's sake, if it be thy will. Then laying his head upon the Block, and pray∣ing silently to himself, he said aloud, Lord receive my Soul, which was the signal given to the Executioner, who very dextrously did his office, and took it off at a blow, his Soul ascending on the wings of Angels in∣to Abrahams bosome, and leaving his Body on the Scaffold, to the care of men, after he had lived 71 years, 13 weeks, and 4 dayes, which was interd in Alhollows Bar∣kin Church, with the decent Ceremonies of the Church of England.
On the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. I Need no muse to give my passion vent, He brews his tears that studies to lament. Verse chymically weeps; that pious raine Distill'd with Art, is but the sweat o'th brain, Who ever sob'd in numbers? can a groan Be quaver'd out by soft division? Tis true, for common formal Ellegies, Not Bushels Wells can match a Poets eyes In wanton water-works: he'l turn his tears From a Geneva Jig up to the Sphears, But when he mourns at distance, weeps aloof. Now that the Conduit-head is our own roof, Now that the fate is publick we may call It Britaines Vespers, Englands Funeral. Who hath a Pensil to express the Saint, Put he hath eyes too, washing off the paint? There is no learning but what tears surround Like to Seths Pillars in the Deluge drown'd. There is no Church, Religion is grown From much of late, that she's increast to none; Like an Hydropick body full of Rheumes, First swells into a bubble, then consumes. The Law is dead, or cast into atrance, And by a Law dough-bak't, an Ordinance. The Lyturgie, whose doom was voted next, Died as a Comment upon Him the Text.
There nothing lives, life is, since he is gone, But a Nocturnal Lucubration. Thus have you seen Deaths Inventory read In the sum total — Canterburies dead. A sight would make a Pagan to baptize Himself a Convert in his bleeding eyes. Would thaw the rabble that fierce beast of ours, (That which Agena-like weeps and devours) Tears that flow brackish from their Souls within Not to repent, but pickle up their sin. Mean time no squallid grief his look defiles, He guilds his sadder fate with noble smiles. Thus the worlds eye with reconciled streams Shines in his showers, as if he wept his beams. How could success such villanies applaud? The State in Strafford fell, the Church in Laud: The twins of publick rage adjudg'd to dye, For Treasons they should act by Prophecy. The facts were done before the Laws were made, The trump turn'd up after the game was plaid. Be dull great spirits and forbear to climbe, For worth is sin and eminence a crime; No Church-man can be innocent and high, 'Tis height makes Grantham steeple stand awry.
Master Robert Yeomans and Master George Bowcher, Ci∣tizens of Bristol, murdered there, May 30, 1643. THere were few cities in the Kingdom, for all the Artifices and popular cheats of those at Westminster, who had debauch∣ed a great number of the Kings good Sub∣jects, wherein his Majesties Cause had not an equal share in the Affection and Opini∣on of the Inhabitants; if in some places it went lesse, in others it was paramount, as the Difference was visible, in the neigh∣bouring Cities of Glocester and Bristol. In the last whereof, we shall present you with a very sad and deplorable example of Loy∣alty and cruelty, in the persons of Mr. Yeo∣mans and Mr. Bowcher, intending it as a sweet Oyntment to embasm their Fune∣rals; that though with their Saviour (the Ignominy of whose Crosse sanctified even the death of that accursed Tree) in their death they were numbred among the Transgressors, yet (Loyalty being their
Epitaph) they may make their Graves a∣mongst the Honourable. When the Long Parliament first sate, these two Gentlemen, with the rest of the Kingdom, rejoyced to see that day, and stood at gaze, as greedily as any, expecting what acts of Bounty, what Relief of Grie∣vances the King would through their hands convey unto his Subjects. And while they kept in the Sphere of their Duty and Alle∣giance, were as forward to applaud them as any, but after the Publication of the Re∣monstrance, wherein the Parliament so abo∣minably slandered the Kings Government, which was the Ground-work of the Rebel∣lion, and the Critical time being come, in which men must either declare themselves, either for, or against their Soveraign, though the City was deeply leavened with disloy∣al Principles, yet these Gentlemen, and the major Part of the Citizens, of whom they were chief, were the Kings most faith∣ful Subjects. They were men of good esteem, plentiful estates, known Integri∣ty, and true Children of the Church of Eng∣land, who seeing the miserable condition of those places where the Rebels bore sway, and beginning to be sensible of the same Bondage under Col. Essex, entred into a Con∣sultation,
how to put the City of Bristol into the Kings Possession and Protection. To this purpose, they dispatcht an Agent to the Court, to inform the King, that he had many good Subjects in Bristol, and withal, to signifie their desire to deliver up his own City to himself, if he would send some of his Forces thither, to take it: The Inducements and Reasons of this De∣sign, were these; First, Conscience to God, not to resist the King, knowing they that do, shall receive unto themselves Damnation. Detesting that abominable Sect of the Hothamites, those State-Hereticks, who accounted it their duty to keep the Kings Towns for the Kings use, by shutting the Gates against the Kings Person. Secondly, the frequent Affronts given to His Majesty by scandalous and disloyal Speeches on all Occasions belched out a∣gainst him, by Protestations, Declarations, Messages, Contempt of his Gracious Of∣fers, before the Face of his Messengers, as to instance in Sr. Baynham Throckmorton, whom the King sent to Bristol, requiring the Mayor and Aldermen, not to give ad∣mittance to any of the Parliament Forces, promising, that he himself would not im∣pose
any on them, together with tender of the promise of his Favour; yet did the Mayor and Sheriffe, two Boutefews in that City, send 4 Pieces of Ordnance at that very instant to Marleborough, to be employed against the King. Lastly, Out of regard to their own secu∣rity, and to quit themselves of (those Op∣pressions and Grievances under which they suffered, and these were many; 1. The often repeated Taxations and Loans of Money unto the King and Parliament, as they were pleased to twist them upon the thredbare Security of the publick Faith, the illegal exactions employed for repairing the Castle, building of Forts, and main∣taining a Garrison against the King. 2. By urging upon them new and treasonable Votes and Protestations, if not fully in words, yet in the use and interpretation of them, directly opposite to the Oath of Al∣legiance, the Oath of every Citizen, when made a Freeman, with a paticular Engage∣ment, to resist Prince Rupert, the Lord Ge∣neral, the Earl of Forth and Brainford, the Lord Marquesse Hertford, the Earl of New∣castle, Sr. Ralph-Hopton, and their Forces. 3. By their disarming all such as were any way suspected to bear duty and Affection
to his Majesty, unlesse they would take the aforesaid Protestations. 4. The perpetu∣al Scorn and Obloquy to which they were exposed, being reproached every day, as they passed the streets, with the names of Malignants and Papists. 5. The General Contempt and Prophanation of Gods holy Worship and Service, tearing the Com∣mon-Prayer-Book, &c. Lastly, Because upon the Point, they were confined to Bristol, not daring to go out of the City; for in all places where the Commands and Ordinances of the Two Houses prevailed, they had given a List of the Names of those that durst appear for the King, to the end, that if any of them came thither, they might be apprehended, and sent Prisoners to Taunton, Barkley Castle, as Delisquents to the Parliament. It was no wonder therefore, that a City thus robbed of its Wealth and Liberty, groaning under an insupportable Yoke of Bondage and Tyranny, should endeavour, by restoring the King to his Rights, to re∣store themselves to their former Freedom. Upon these Motives therefore they enga∣ged in a Loyal Confederacy, to deliver the City from its Captivity, into his Majesties Protection, if possible, without any blood∣shed,
as afterwards by their Examination appeared. 'Tis therefore true, that these two Gen∣tlemen with their Associates, had an In∣tention to cast out the Rebels, and to se∣cure Bristol for the King, and ro seize the Governour, and some of the Chief Rebels, but not to kill them; and to that end, a Commission was got, and sent to Mr. Yeo∣mans, to raise Forces, and constitute Com∣manders for the Kings Service; whereup∣on a Protestation was drawn by Mr. Bow∣cher, to be taken by all the Partakers in this businesse, which fully exprest their Inten∣tions in this undertaking; which being in general Terms, for the Assistance and De∣fence of the King, against all Forces raised without his Command, need not here be inserted. After Communication of Counsels, and many Messages interchanged between Ox∣ford and Bristol, drawing to the Design, some of the Parliament Officers under Co. Essex, who loathed and condemned them∣selves for being in their Service, in was re∣solved, that upon Monday, Mar. 7. 1642. Prince Rupert with a Party of the Kings Forces, should face the City on Durdan-Down, distant not a full Mile from the Ci∣ty,
while they within, should possesse and make good Froom Gate and Newgate, seize the Court of Guards, open the Gates, and give the Signal thereof, for the Kings For∣ces to make their Approach, by Ringing of St. Johns and St. Michaels Bels. Ac∣cordingly, Prince Rupert came, expecting the Signal by Five of the Clock in the morning, and the Ports to be opened, but the Combination was discovered, and these two Gentlemen, with others, apprehend∣ed, there being found several Armed men with them in their Houses, which being signified to the Prince, he marched pre∣sently away. Having them thus in their power, they clap Irons upon them, tie them Head and Feet together, make them close Prisoners, deprive them of all Comfort to be admini∣stred by their Wives, Children, or Friends, and used them with that Barbarousness and Inhumanity as is not imaginable could be practised by one Christian upon another; and after 11 weeks hard Imprisonment, frequent Examination, barbarous insulting over them, especially by Nathaniel Fiennes, they were brought to their Trial at a Coun∣cil of War, where, upon the Articles ex∣hibited against them, by Advocate Walker,
they were condemned to die; but first Mr. Yeomans received this Judgment. The Judgment upon Robert Yeomans. Upon due Consideration of the Articles exhibited on May the 8th. by Clement Wal∣ker, Esquire, Advocate to this Council of War against Robert Yeomans, and others, the late conspirators in this City, and upon due hearing of the Answers, and defence of the said Robert, to the several Articles, and also upon Proofs and Examination before them taken upon Oath; It is unanimously adjudged by this Court, That the said Ro∣bert Yeomans is guilty of Trayterous Intelli∣gence and correspondency with the Ene∣my, and of a trayterous and wicked conspi∣racy, to betray this Town into the hands of the Enemy, and thereupon this Court doth adjudge and passe Sentence of death upon him, as a Traytor and Conspirator, and accordingly doth order, That the said Robert Yeomans shall be returned to the place of his former Imprisonment, and from thence be brought before the main Court of Guard, there to be hanged by the Neck till he die. Mr. Robert Yeomans being thus most un∣justly
condemned, May the 8th. in the same Moneth, Mr. George Bowcher was con∣vened before them, where were present, and sitting in Council 3 or 4 mean rascally Fel∣lows, one of whom, by name Robert Baugh, a Sheep-skin-Dresser, who in times of peace durst not come near Mr. Yeomans, but uncovered, at a distance, as his duty was, now plucked off Mr. Yeomans Hat (he be∣ing brought before them again) command∣ing him to stand bare before him; the Ar∣ticles were the same which were exhibited before against Mr. Yeomans, and are now not material to be inserted; but upon the matter of them drawn out of his own Con∣fession, or deposition of others, at the La∣dy Rogers her House, he received the like Sentence of Condemnation. When the News of this came to Court, though many men did not think that their bold Insolency would so far dare as to put the Sentence in execution, yet at last consi∣dering, that they were not in the hands of honourable Enemies, but Rebel Sectaries, under such a Governour, the General of his Majesties Forces resolved to write unto Fiennes, and that by way of Threat, that by the menace of the like punishment on the Prisoners with him, he might deter
them from their intended Cruelty on the Kings good Subjects there. The Letter was this: I Having been informed, that lately at a Court of War, you have condemn∣ed to death Robert Yeomans, late Sheriffe of the City of Bristol, who hath his Majesties Commission for raising a Regiment for his Service, William Yeomans, his Brother, George Bowcher, and Edward Dacres, all for ex∣pressing their Loyalty to his Majesty, and endeavouring his Service, according to their Allegiance, and that you intend to proceed speedily against divers others in the like manner, do therefore signifie unto you, that I intend speedily to put M. George, Mr. Stevens, Capt. Huntley, and others ta∣ken in Rebellion against his Majesty at Cy∣rencester, into the same condition; do fur∣ther advertize you, that if you offer by that unjust Judgment to execute any of them you have so condemned, that these now in custody here, especially those men afore∣specified, must expect no Favour or Mercy. Directed to the Commander in Chief, and Council of War in the City of Bristol. Forth.
Fiennes having received this Letter by a Drum, and knowing the great advantage they had by the Meanness and Baseness of the Prisoners in the Kings hands, put in the Ballance with those of the Kings in their hands, while Earls, Barons and the Flow∣er of the Nobility were exposed to Tinkers and Coblers, returned a most petulant and sawcy Letter; which for the Irreverence and baseness of it, we will not daign to insert. Whereupon, the King pitying the di∣stress of those his Loyal Subjects, and per∣ceiving, no Reason or Justice could prevail with Fiennes (his Bowels yearning over his worst Subjects) put him upon a pious con∣sideration of those that were to suffer for him, which by a Trumpeter, in his Roy∣al Letter he exprest to the Mayor, Alder∣men, and Sheriffes of Bristol, in these words; CHARLES R. TRusty and Beloved, We greet you well: Whereas We are inform∣ed, that by the Power and Authority of certain Factious and Rebellious Persons in
that Our City of Bristol, divers of Our good Subjects (as namely, Robert Yeomans, George Bowcher, William Yeomans, Edward Dacres, and others) of that Our City are imprisoned, for preserving their Duty and Loyalty to us, and for refusing to joyn in, or assist this Horrid and odious Rebellion against Us, and that the said wicked and trayterous Persons have presumed to con∣demn the said Innocent men to die, and upon such their Sentence, notoriously a∣gainst the Laws of God and man, they in∣tend to execute and murder our said Sub∣jects. We have thought fit, to signifie to you, the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffes, and the rest of the Body of Our Common-Council of that Our City, That if you suf∣fer this Horrid and Execrable Murder to be committed upon the Persons aforesaid, and thereby call the Judgment of God, and bring perpetual Infamy upon that Our Ci∣ty; We shall look upon it as the most bar∣barous and Inhumane Act, that hath yet been committed against Us, and upon you, as the most desperate Betrayers of Us, and of the Lives and Liberties of your Fellow-Subjects. And We do therefore Will and Command you, not to suffer any Violence to be done upon the Persons aforesaid; but
that if any such be attempted against them, that you raise all the Power and Strength of that Our City for their Rescue. And to that purpose, We Command all Our Good Subjects of that Our City, to ayd and assist you, upon their Allegiance, and as they hope for any Grace or Favour at Our Hands. And that you and they kill and slay all such who shall attempt or endeavour to take away the Lives of Our said Subjects. And for so doing, this shall be your War∣rant. And hereof, you may not fail at your utmost Peril. Given at Our Court of Ox∣ford, May 29. 1643. To Our Trusty and Well-Belo∣ved, the Mayor, Aldermen Sheriffs, and Common Coun∣cil of Our City of Bristol. This Letter arrived at Bristol, the very day of the Execution of these Gentlemen: but Fiennes either imagining or knowing of such a thing, kept the Gates shut all the day, so that none could come in or out, and when the Murder was perpetrated, and the Messenger admitted, contrary to the Law
of Arms and Nations, he was sent to Pri∣son, where he continued a long time. What could a Gracious Prince do more? but having not Power to compel, what he could not perswade, they persisted in their bloudy Purposes. For after Sentence of Death passed on them, they pursued them with Threats, and used no other Language to them, but death and Hanging, often me∣nacing what they could but once inflict: So that every hour they expected death. Having thus languished some dayes under these bloudy Insultations, being frequently de∣prived of their necessary Comforts, by the Guards that stood at the Prison doors, for no other purpose. If Execution had not been hastned, Famine would have pre∣vented their publick despight. For Mr. Yeo∣mans, whom of the Two, they most hated, being loaden with Irons, and stifled with the Nastiness of the Dungeon, wasted, and consumed through want of Food, but filled with the scornful Reproofs of the Proud, by reproaches, and such like rancorous Lan∣guage, was ready to die that Morning of his Execution: For being a man of a mag∣nanimous Spirit, a large Soul, and of great employments, was more sensible of Indig∣nities, so that fitting by his Wife that
Morning, and leaning on her Breast, he fell into a swoon, and probably had then departed, but that the shrieks and outcries of his Wife recalled him to a more Glori∣ous Death, that so Posterity might read his Name with Mr. Bowchers, not in the Ca∣talogue of Confessors, but enrolled in the Noble Army of Martyrs. The time of their Execution was con∣cealed, for fear the City should oppose so bloody a Fact; but when the Fatal day was come, Fiennes drew his Forces into the Marish, the common place where they make their Musters, and then suddenly caused the Gates to be shut, & drew Horse and Foot into every street of the City, to awe the Citizens, and to suppress Insurre∣ctions, which the Indignity and affront of∣fered to two of their most eminent Fellow-Citizens, whose Crime was nothing else but Loyalty, might incite them to; especi∣ally if they should consider, that an Issue of Bloud was that day opened, that might in the end prove fatal to them, and involve them in the same condition, if they should see those Persons led to the slaughter, and they stand like Sheep, and not oppose it; for if Fiennes and his Blood-hounds should for any other Vertue, as well as Loyalty
pass the same Sentence on any of them, who should defend them, who having re∣fused the Kings Protection, are grown so tame, as not to venture their Lives for themselves. All things being thus made secure, the Prisoners are brought from the Castle, to the Main Court of Guard, being saluted all the way thither, by the people, who pres∣sed with hazard enough to see and take leave of these Martyrs, who would have as∣serted their Liberty; they likewise return∣ed hearty thanks for their dangerous Ex∣pressions of their Affections, it being a sin next to Malignancy, to own them, or pray for them. To fit themselves for their ends, they desired they might have the assistance of Mr. Toogood, and Mr. Standfast, two Or∣thodox and pious Ministers of that City, to sweeten the Cup they were ready to drink, but this Christian Request was most unchri∣stianly denied them, and two Ministers of the Faction designed for their miserable Comforters. When they were at the foot of the Lad∣der to that Tree which was presently to bear fruit to Eternal Life, it was observed by some of the Murderers, that knew the
knack of it, that the Halters were either too long or short, or some fault, which made the Executioner go and take them off, whereupon the People that were Spe∣ctators of this bloudy Tragedy, that stood at a distance, and knew not the reason of their so doing, conceiving, that Fiennes had sent a Reprieve, suddenly expressed their Joy, by loud Acclamations; but the deaths∣man making his Fatal Instruments fast a∣gain, and the Guards continuing still upon the place; as if they were thunder-struck, they stood still astonished, and soon chan∣ged their Joy into Tears and Lamentati∣ons. Being thus ready to be offered up as a Sacrifice to the implacable rage and malice of Fiennes and his fellow-Rebels; Mr. Ro∣bert Yeomans first ascended the Ladder, thence to reach his Crown of Martyrdom; but before he went up, he took care, after the example of our Saviour, to recommend his wife to his father in Law, Mr. Yeomans, in this addresse, that he had left him a Le∣gacy, his VVife then great with child, and eight small children, the Eldest not able to put on his own Cloaths, and so after many Embraces, left him, and set forward on his way to Heaven.
Being thus seated in that place of shame and disgrace (as it is in its own nature, where the Cause doth not change the ac∣cursed Tree into a Theatre of Honour) and seeing himself made a Spectacle to that Ci∣ty, wherein he had lived in plenty and Ho∣nour, being Sheriffe but the Year before, which Office he discharged with as much Magnificence and Bounty as any of his Pre∣decessors. And from that Prospect, taking a view of many friends that could not well look through their Tears to see him again; seeing also others (of a far different temper, that rejoyced in his sufferings, amongst which, was Robert Baugh, one of the afore∣said Council of VVar, in a most devilish cruelty) stand jeering and mocking at him to his face, here flesh and bloud interpo∣sed, which transported him to an Expostu∣lation, bordering between Indignation and Submission, saying, Good God, what have I done to be here? but instantly sorry that humane Frailty should extort any thing from him unbeseeming the Justice of his Cause, or the hardness of Christian re∣solution, silencing the Suggestions, of such evil Counsellors, he composed himself to speak to the People. Being weakned by long and many Suffe∣rings,
he was not able to speak much, or loud, only as to clear himself from the im∣putation of an intent to have massacred all that adhered to the Parliament: Laying his Hand upon his Breast, and fixing his eyes on Heaven, the Habitation of the God of Truth, he made a solemn Protestation of his Innocency from any such thought, and withal, professed a firm perswasion of the Justice of that cause for which he suffered; adding, that if he had more Lives, he would sacrifice them all to his Soveraign in that way. While he was thus speaking, Major Her∣cules Langrish (since dead in Goal, and extream want, having before betrayed his Master, the King, in discovering his Ma∣jesties Coming to the House of Commons, to demand the 5 Members, who by that means had time to shift away) and Clifton call upon the Executioner to hasten his work, they interrupted Mr. Yeomans also, and goaded him in the thighs with their Halberts, bidding him to make an end; for they were yet afraid of his rescue, where∣upon, he desired the Witnesses of his suf∣fering to sing with him the 130 Psalm, which he sung with great Devotion and Fervency; knowing that he should be pre∣sently
translated out of Bochim, the valley of Tears, into that triumphant Quire, where with Angels he should sing Hallelu∣jah for evermore. Having finished the Psalm, and his Prayers, and desired God not to charge his Bloud on that City, and having prayed for his Persecuters, charging his friends not to harbour any revengeful Thoughts against them, and in the close of all, beginning to defend his cause, as words which would leave the deepest impression, this Langrish and Clifton caused him to be thrown off the Ladder, hardly affording him time to recommend his soul unto God. Being thrown off, and his Brother M. Hag∣gat staying his Body that swung with the fall, this Clifton gave the said Mr. Haggat such a Blow with his Cane, that almost struck him to the ground. Oh the barba∣rous Inhumanity of these Villains! After Mr. Yeomans was thus executed, without any resistance of the Citizens, there being no danger of Opposition, they wade on in Bloud, commanding Mr. Bow∣cher to ascend the Ladder. He had writ∣ten what he had intended to speak, being very large, exhorting those who had set their hands to this Plow, meaning the de∣fence of the Kings cause, not to be too ha∣sty,
(as terrified with their Sufferings) to take them off, and words to such purpose, describing the Schismaticks, according to the Character of them, drawn by the Pen∣sil of the Holy Ghost, in Scripture phrase, in which he was excellently well read, be∣ing confest by his very enemies, to be a ve∣ry Religious man; instancing in that re∣markeable place of S. Jude, Proud, Boasters, Heady, Unstable, &c. But it was not per∣mitted him to speak all out, by those men who knew themselves so much concerned; at last pressed on to the acceleration of his end by those who were swift to shed bloud, he desired to sing Psal. 16. which being end∣ed, he began to recommend himself to God by pathetical Prayers and Ejaculations, wherein he was interrupted, by a Factious Levite, one Rosewel, who called him Hy∣pocrite and Apostate, reviling him, that after so strict a conversation and so much time spent in the Profession of Religion, he should render all suspected for hypocrisie, by so obstinate perseverance in Rebellion against the Parliament. This shook not the constancy of this Resolved Martyr, who held up with St. Bernard, Scutum Conscien∣tiae contra Gladium Linguae, the Buckler of a good Conscience against the Blowes of
a malicious Tongue, and so sustaining himself with that comfortable Promise of our Saviour, Blessed are you when men shall revile you, &c. he yielded himself to the will and desire of his Murderers. The Fa∣ctious Priest in his very fall from the Lad∣der, pursuing him with the same odious Names of Hypocrite and Apostate, thereby, if possible, to disturb the Peace of his Soul, in the moment of his Death; a devilish Practise in extending Malice even to the Endeavours of a second Death. These two Glorious Martyrs now lying under the Altar, having thus through their Ignominious deaths, in a Glorious cause, and with a pure Conscience rendred their Souls to God, the sad Spectators smite their Brests, and return. Never was there so general a Face of sorrow, such bitter lamen∣tations heard in that City, as on that day. Their Bodies taken down, were both car∣ried to Mr. Yeomans his House, Father in Law to the Martyr. In the Evening, M. Bowchers Body was conveyed to his own House, a sad Spectacle to his poor Widow, and seven Orphans, and at night both were interred, Mr. Yeomans at Christ-Church, Mr. Bowchers at St. Warburghs, their Fune∣rals being attended by those Orthodox Mi∣nisters
the Persecution had left, and by most of the honest well-affected Citizens, though they knew that they could not ex∣press this Piety to the dead, but to the ha∣zard of losing their Liberties, and plun∣dering their Estates. This most horrid Fact, no History, no not that of the Anabaptists in Germany, comes near, so that, it is miserably and cruelly beholding to a Parallel in the same Kingdom, the deplorable Butchery of Mr. Tompkins and Mr. Challoner in London, which soon after followed; as it doth here, in order of time.
Mr. Tompkins and Mr. Chal∣loner Condemned by a sen∣tence of a Court Martial, and executed in London, July 5▪ 1643. THe rebellious faction having sacrificed those Gentlemen to the Moloch of their disloyal cruelty, under the vizor of a blessed Reformation in one of the chiefest Cities in the West, thereby to strike terror in the minds of all men, who should dare to be honest, and be according to their du∣ty faithful to their Soveraign, to which in spight of all their specious pretences, they saw the wisest and sobrest part of the Na∣tion very much inclined, and to give more flagitious authority to their illegal and sal∣vage proceedings, by perpetrating the same violences in the Metropolis of the King∣dom, before the faces of al the English Courts of Judicature, thereby to amuse the wea∣ker and unintelligent sort of people, upon whom their main design was bottomed, as if they had the Law clearly on their side in
that horrid rebellion, proceeded further in the same manner against these two Mar∣tyrs, the cause of whose Deaths, take as followeth, being upon the same account with their preceding fellow sufferers. After that the Faction had waded so far in their disloyalty against the King, as to levy a War against him, had seized most of his Magazines, Cities, and places of De∣fence, had possest themselves of all his Ships, and therewith infested those pla∣ces, which stood for him, had defied and bid him battle, wherein his Sacred Person was alike endangered with the meanest of his Rebels, in which it pleased God, so to assist the King, that those at Westminster found themselves deceived in the Kings strength; he suddenly after Edg-hill fight marching up to Branford near London, and putting the Members and the tumultuous Cititzens into a deserved consternation and confusion; and yet amidst all these terrors of War, had offered them terms of Peace, laying aside the great advantages his Majesty might promise himself from the state of affairs, in which his successes had placed him, yet notwithstanding all his repeated proposals for an accommodation, nothing could be effected, with those men
whose ears were deaf to the charms of Peace, though never so prudent and ratio∣nal, as being widely distant from those ends and designs, which they had laid in the War, being the spoil of three Kingdoms. When I say, these Gentlemen perceived into what a miserable condition the whole Nation (reflecting tenderly also upon blee∣ding Ireland) was like speedily to be redu∣ced, by the dissembled covetousnesse, re∣bellious obstinacy, implacable malice and devilish cunning and subtilty of their po∣pular cheats upon the multitude; then did several worthy Citizens endeavour to inter∣pose and obviate those growing mischiefs, which they did foresee would inevitably fall upon this Church and State. First of all therefore, they addrest them∣selves by way of Petition, earnestly sueing to the two Houses, that they would vouch∣safe to hear their Soveraign, and not pre∣clude or prejudice, the way to an agree∣ment by a resolute fixednesse in those cour∣ses which they humbly shewed, could not but be dreadful and destructive to the Pub∣lick. A Petition to this effect, with ma∣ny thousand hands and hearts was accor∣dingly tendred, whereunto they received a slight answer, that the Houses would do
what in their wisdom they thought fit, and that the Petitioners were, as their duty was, to acquiesse and rest in their Counsels and determinations, which should provide without their direction, for the safety of the Kingdom. From this Answer to this purport and ef∣fect they soon wel perceived, what the tem∣per of those men was, and that their first whimsie, that dark cloud of jealousies and fears, was big with a tempestuous storm, impending over the lives and estates of the King and his good Subjects. They saw a seditious and pragmatical per∣son continued Lord Mayor, 1. Penning∣ton. a∣gainst the Kings express com∣mand for two years together, who by his Warrants and Officers did plunder, vex and imprison all men but suspected of duty to∣wards the King, so that none of them could promise themselves security for a night. They saw several messengers sent to the City by the King most shamefully abused, imprisoned and threatened with Death, which was afterwards rigorously executed. No man, at their Common Halls and Councils, durst assume the due freedom and liberty of speech, to declare his mind concerning the grievances and
troubles of the time, in order to the remo∣val of them by an amicable composure, but straight he was apprehended, and com∣mitted to some Goal or other, whereof their cruelty had so much occasion, that many noble Houses, the honour and beauty of the City (a shame and grief to see) were converted thereinto. Nor fared it better with the Houses of God, which were stript and despoiled of all their Ornaments, and the impertinencies of mad zealotry, in se∣ditions and railing invectives against the Government established in their room. They saw that goodly and beautiful Fa∣brick, which was the Honour of the City, Cheapside Cross demolished, nor could it be told, how far this rage and violence might proceed, to the overturning and confoun∣ding all things sacred and civil. But that which most feelingly affected them, was the perishing and ruine of Gods living Temples; many, nay most of his faithful Ministers of the Orthodox Clergy, being driven out of their Livings, and reduced to a morsel of bread. Many other the like compassionate matters there were, which kindled in the minds of these Gentlemen, but because they fall in; and agree with what we have related in the Martyrdome
of those two Citizens at Bristol I shall here omit them. Upon these Motives an Association was entred into, by a great many worthy Ci∣tizens, since reason could not work upon the stubborn minds of the Faction, to re∣duce them by other means, that was by putting the City into the Kings hands. To this design some Parliament Members were privy, but none personally ingaged, but Mr. Edmund Waller (who hardly esca∣ped with life, was put out of the House, and fined ten thousand pound) who under∣took the manage of it, as to their parts, and also to make some of the Lords assistant and favourable to the Enter∣prise. Therefore having digested the order and method of their proceedings, they pro∣cured a Commission from the King, dire∣cted to several Citizens and persons of qua∣lity, and amongst them to these two Gen∣tlemen, whereby power and authority was given them, to levy, list, arm, and train, what number of men they should find re∣quisite and convenient for the Service; and to appoint whom they should confide in for Officers and Commanders. This Com∣mission was conveyed to London (as the re∣port
went) by the right Honourable the Lady Aubigney deceased, Mother to his Grace, Charls Duke of Richmond and Lenox, and by her delivered to some of the persons aforesaid. Upon receipt thereof, several meetings and conferences were held, in order to the promoting the said Commission, which was chiefly prosecuted by these two Loyal Persons, who made such progress therein, that they had brought the business into some form; when through the zealous hasting of the work (to the countenancing whereof the power & authority of some of the Parli∣ament Lords then sitting at Westminster was needful and to be expected) which could not be without some bustle by the Spies and Emissaries of the Parliament, and through the inconstancy and treachery, or unhappy discourse of some other engaged persons, the whole affair came to be disco∣vered, and thereupon several Citizens, the said Mr. Waller, with these two Gentle∣men were apprehended, and committed Mr. Waller to the Tower, the other to Newgate, whence after several times exa∣mination to find out the design, and all the parties concerned in it, by confession and confrontation, they were a while af∣ter
brought to their Tryal before a Court Martial (London being then a Garrison) at Guild-hall, and there sentenced to be hanged, which was performed the fifth of July 1643. To shew and point at the hainousness of this crime of Loyalty, they were order∣ed to be executed near their own doors, as more shameful and dreadful to the Priso∣ners, to be hung in the eyes and before the face of their Neighbours, but their Barba∣ritie mist its aim, for they were not a whit daunted, neither at the manner or place of Execution, the worst befel the sorrow∣ful Inhabitants thereabouts, who had these two Gentlemen in very great esteem, and who were deluged in tears at so miserable a Spectacle. Mr. Tompkins finished his Martyrdom in Holborn, Mr. Challoner a∣gainst the Old Exchange in Cornhil; They both maintained their Cause to their last Breath, justifying their intentions, in the businesse they suffered, for to be lawful and honest, especially Mr. Tompkins, who said little, but very resolutely; beseech∣ing God to prosper the King, and bless him in his Armies and Councils, desiring the Spectators not to be offended or deterred from their obedience to him by his suffer∣ing,
which he said, he looked upon as the greatest glory in the World; and so com∣mending his Soul to God, he finished his race, and is now certainly in everlasting bliss. Mr. Challoner at his Execution spake little (being not suffered to have any of the sober pious Clergy with him; but haunted by that stage Divine Hugh Peters) who after he had prayed with him, Mr. Challoner spake as followeth. Gentlemen, I do from my heart forgive you and all the World, desiring you and all the World to forgive me also; and after some small time he Religiously commen∣ded his Soul into the hands of Almighty God, as unto a Faithful Creator.
Master Daniel Kniveton Exe∣cuted against the Old Ex∣change in Cornhil, No∣vember 27. 1643. THis loyal Person was formerly a Ha∣berdasher in Fleetstreet, and at the re∣moval of the King, left the City of Lon∣don, and betook himself to the Service of his Majesty, by whom he was employed in the quality of a Messenger. On this Employment he was sent to London, his Errand was to signifie the Kings pleasure, that the Term of Michael∣mass, should be prorogued, the reason was because the Parliament had caused a new Broad Seal to be made, and issued out Writs and other Processes by virtue of the same, contrary to his Majesties Royal Au∣thority, and beyond all the reaches or pre∣cedents of any former Rebellion. With this message, being a Citizen of the place, he was entrusted, and as bound by his allegiance and duty, delivered it ac∣cording to the tenour of his instructions:
whereupon, contrary to the universal cu∣stome and honourable practise of all Na∣tions, which gives security and free liberty of passage to all such persons, he was ap∣prehended and committed in order to his Tryal by a Court of War; those Barba∣rous Tyrannical States-men, not daring to hazard their authority and the justice of the matter to the decision of the Common Law of England. To this Sanguinous Tribunal, no truly Loyal Person ever was brought, who was within the reach of their griping talents, that ever escaped with his skin; so aptly might that Fable of the Fox to the Lyon be (rather) unmoralized — Vestigia cerno. Omnia te advorsum spectantia, nulla re∣trorsum. It was in vain to move either their Ho∣nour, Conscience or Duty, or to plead ones own, their ambiguous salvo's and re∣serves to themselves, and their forward fa∣cing of others out of reason by their Ja∣nus-like cause, which was for and against the King, like the Basilisk, killed all whom it directly aspected, or were brought be∣fore them.
This Gentlemns fare was huddled up at Essex House, before a Council of War held there, on the walls whereof any man then might have red the Event. The grand pillr, raiser and support of that un∣natural War, being proprietor thereof, and at that present, personally inhabiting it, who was just come from Newbery first Fight, where as yet he had left himself un∣revenged. Without any more adoe therefore, but a setting Mr. Kniveton at their Bar, as the mark and aim of all their impotent malice; he was condemned to be hanged as a Spie, for maintaining and managing intelligence with, and from the Enemy (that was the King whom they said they fought for) but on what Article of War, I never could tell, and I presume the Reader can hardly ima∣gine. Little respit was afforded for the time of Execution, for the Faction were enraged that any man should presume to tell them, that it was Treason to counterfeit the Kings Seal, and if such continual Messages, up∣on every of their actions should be brought and declared, it might in time open the eyes of the people to understand the Law, and leave them in conclusion
to its Justice, and their due demerit. He was brought therefore on the day he suffered, as aforesaid, on foot from New∣gate, being accompanied with Mr. Benson a Bookseller his acquaintance in Fleet∣street, to a Gibbet erected over against the Exchange, where he may most properly be said to have Sealed his Cause with his Blood, being sent of another Message to Heaven, where his Bliss and Happiness shall have no Terme. Captain Burleigh Martyred at Westminster, February 10. 1647. THe Execution of this Person was the absurdity of Law, the contradiction of Magna Charta, the infringment and violation of Nature, and if it could be strained higher, than an affront and Rebel∣lion against the supreme power of the Uni∣verse, it would passe with a lesser ignominy than the merit of this Cause will afford it. That men tyed by their allegiance, by
several Oaths of Fealty, by the benefit of their protection and advantages they re∣ceived under the Government of so excel∣lent a Prince, were to be dispensed, nay must be discharged from that Duty and Obedience they ought him, and that the Parliament as they had subdued their Law∣ful King, might give Law to him, pro∣pound their own insolent terms and de∣mands, and rigidly insist on them, secure his Person under pretence of publick safe∣ty, administer the Kingdom themselves, sequester and seize their Estates who resi∣sted them; in these violent and unheard of outrages; all this I say, might be (as o∣therwise it could not be helpt, as the sad state of the miseries of the Kingdom then was) with some kind of patience endured; but to see and hear, to be upon the place, where so many undutiful unchristian con∣tempts, after the Votes of Non Addresse, were put upon the King, in that place which he had chosen for his refuge and Sanctuary. I can hardly allow any man in this case the glory of Martyrdom, whose frame and temper had but the least ingre∣dients of natural (not to pride it in loyal) compassion, if he durst do that, which bravery and courage prompted him to, the
Law and his obedience required, and God commanded. Yet I do not the less wonder, and stand amazed at this butchery, upon several con∣siderations, which though they be of dif∣ferent respects, yet do center universally in this, that they will make the murder of this person prodigiously infamous to all persons concerned in it. First, not to meddle with the Laws, whose Divine stamp was most treasonably defa∣ced in this act, we will consider this at∣tempt of Captain Burleighs, in the invari∣able latitude of common humanity. His pretended crime was the beating of a Drum in the Isle of Wight (upon the news the Islanders had received, that the Par∣liament had rejected the King upon their Votes of Non addresse, and had resolved to settle the Kingdom without him) when his Majesty was confined a close Prisoner to Carisbrook Castle. This was misconstrued according to the left-handed learning of those times for Treason, whereas had there been any sympathetical Musick in those Drums, they would have made a noyse and Alarm of themselves, borrowed from those groans and sighs the captive Prince made to his more compassionate walls, who
burst to give vent and eccho to those dole∣ful notes. And could men not allow that soft and tender-heartedness to men, to Christians, to Subjects, to a Subject too well reputed and esteemed of in his Island as a good and honest man, one who out of con∣science and integrity, and for no other sini∣ster end whatsoever, had faithfully served his Soveraign abroad, that is, had crost the Sea to do his devoir, and there having we∣ried himself and his fortunes, had retired to his home, as a shelter against his hard pur∣suing destinie, where in privacy he thought to shroud himself. No, he finds death in the place of it; first he is chiefly concern'd in the publick sorrow and distress of his So∣veraign, those breaths of grief soon pierce his ears, and those Royal lamentations heightned by a generous Spirit, quickly transport and possess him, and by this most laudable and glorious action, which signi∣fied only a courage to rescue what villany had captivated, and hindred their wicked attempts no farther, then by affording a brave and imitable example of Loyal mag∣nanimity to all true Subjects, in all exi∣gencies and dangers of their Princes, be becomes a sacrifice to their Moloch of Anarchycal Tyranny.
We will view him in the next conside∣ration, as his case stood in direct opposition to that of Major Rolfe, then an Officer in the Army, and of very great trust and in∣timacy with Cromwell, who was tryed at the same time and Assizes, by the same Commission, Judges and Jury; and then certainly nothing can appear more flagiti∣ous and hainously arbitrary than this Gen∣tlemans condemnation. Contraria juxta se posit a magis elucescunt, contraries oppo∣sed one to another, make each of them ap∣pear the clearer, and so will it prove in the memory of this Noble Person, which will hereby appear in a most venerable splendor. Rolfes Crime was this, he was accused by one Mr. Osborne and another gentleman then attending on the King in the Isle of Wight, where this Rolfe had a Charge, to have consired the death of the King, and that particularly, by assassinating him with a Brace of Pistols; the time and place of this Regicide also proved. This Informa∣tion was first made to the House of Lords, and avowed by the said two Gentlemen; whereupon, Rolfe being apprehended in Bishopsgate (where he had like to have been torn in pieces by the multitude of people,
had it not been for their very strong Guards they sent for him) was carried in a Sedan, to the Gate-house, whence he was sent a∣gainst the Assizes, to Winchester, where, at his Arraignment, the whole matter was pun∣ctually proved against him, yet for all that, both by Judges and Jury, the then Lord Chief Baron, and some packt desperate Wretches of that County, he was, to the wonder and astonishment of all the world, acquitted and freed, and soon after set at Liberty. Next followed the Inditement and Ar∣raignment of this our Martyr, which was layd for levying war against the King, to which, he duly and of Right and Consci∣ence, pleaded Not guilty. Te matter of Fact which was proved against him, was, that he had beaten up Drums in the Isle of Wight, to raise men for to assist the King against the Parliament; such a Contradi∣ction in it self, that had but Reason and Loyalty been at market, there had been no such desperate Chapmen in the Country; for without more ado, these wretched Fel∣lows bring him in guilty of High Treason, and the Judge gave Sentence accordingly; which was presently after executed. We will consider Thirdly, that this man∣ner
of Trial was never offered before, to the Subjects of this Kingdom; those men they murdered upon the Score of Loyalty during the war, were either taken away by their Illegal Ordinances, or Courts Marshal, and Councils of war, they not daring to re∣fer their case to the decision of the Law, but here assoon as they had reduced the King, they thought it an easie work to re∣duce the Laws, and though his Majesty would not comply with their unlimited de∣mands, they would bend the Law to their Lusts, and most absolute will and Tyranny, so that he is the first, who suffered as a Mar∣tyr of the English Freedom. Intercessions were made on all hands for his Life, his poor wife even drowned in tears, imploring their mercy, but there was no Relenting or Compassion to be found among those men. So Feb. 10. be∣ing come, the day of his blessed Exchange, he full of Christian Resolution and Com∣fort, with Earnest Prayers to God, for the King and Kingdoms Restoration to their former and lasting Happiness, willingly re∣signed his Spirit to God; sealing his Glo∣rious Cause, with his last Breath and Bloud.
Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot to death at Colchester, by a Council of War, upon the Rendition of the same Town. THese Gemini of Valour and Honour, as well as exact Loyalty, I could not well divide in this Martyrology, being so joyned in their deaths, honourable Burial, and Funerals, and being both of them so equally eminent in their Generation, for all true worth and Vertue. Sr. Charles Lucas was descended of a very Ancient and Illustrious Family; he who knows not the Name of Lucas, knows nothing of Gentility; but if this Noble Person had derived no Honour from his Ancestors, yet his own purchased Glory, and the Relative Merits of his two Fa∣mous Brethren, the Lord Lucas, and Sir Gervas, formerly Governour of Belvoyr Castle (in which three, Nature and Edu∣cation had summ'd up a Perfection) will
without any other Additaments, transmit him to Posterity as a worthy and English Heroe. He was a Person assisted with a resolute Spirit, of an active disposition, and a sura∣ble discretion to manage it; strict and se∣vere in his Commands, without any pride or surliness, free in his Rewards to per∣sons of Desert and Quality; in his Socie∣ty, and with his Friends, he was affable, and pleasant; in his Charge serious and vigilant; remiss in nothing that might any way improve or expedite his Dispatch in the Affairs of VVar, as he is well character∣ed by a good Pen. We will therefore view him only in the Camp, in which he gloriously lived and died, excusing his Learning and other rare Endowments from the imputation of Crime, and lay all the Load of his miserable Fate, aggravated by the Name of an ene∣my to the Kingdom, upon his Loyal car∣riage, and magnanimity, abstracted from all other Considerations. In the beginning of the Tumults and Preparations for War in Scotland, against their Native & pious Pr. he raised a Troop of Horse in London, and like an Expert and Resolute Commander, behaved himself in
that uncertain Service, being a profest Ene∣my to the Insolencies and Rebellious De∣signs of that Nation. That Broyl ceasing, through the great condescentions of the King, to the unreaso∣nable Demands of that Kingdom, which kindled the Combustions in this, the King being necessitated to take up Arms, to de∣fend his Person, and the Authority of the Laws against the like Rebellion at home, Sr. Charles readily engaged on his Sove∣raigns side against the pretended 2 Houses. The first place where he signally shewed his Valour in that just Cause (omitting Ex∣ployts of less concernment, as not to our purpose) was at Auburn Chase, and New∣berry Field, where the first memorable Bat∣tel was fought; here Sr. Charles Lucas, with many other Gallant Gentlemen, behaved themselves with undanted courage and Re∣solution, which so far engaged him in that dangerous Business, the fight being obsti∣nately maintained, that he received some desperate wounds that fatal day; but the Blood he lost there, was but an Earnest or prognostick stillations & drops of that mass of Bloud which was afterwards to flow out with his Life, for the same Cause. His next Appearance to the terror of his
Enemies, his Valour having gained him a frighting name amongst them, was in his deserting of Cawood Castle, assaulted by the Parliaments Forces, whence with good conduct, and as true Courage, he forced his way through their Quarters, to such places as he thought convenient, and came at last in safety to York. His Bravery in charging at Marston Moor, and enduring the Brunt of his Enemies, when the Fortune of that day declined on the Kings side, as it then challenged the Praise of all men, so it deserves everlasting Remembrance. His discreet and military Management of the Affairs at Newark, where he mani∣fested himself an absolute Souldier, both in Discipline of war, and personal Action, to the great satisfaction of the Governour and Garrison, which alwaies consisted of Gal∣lant and truly Noble Persons, merits a Record to serve as an Example to Future Times. His brave and successeful Attempt in his March from Berkly Castle, with part of his Regiment, betwixt Slymbridge and Bever∣ston Castle, upon Col. Masseys Garrisons, together with his incomparable Gallantry in the pursuit of his Design at Tedbury, was
work for noble Imitation. But all these Particulars signifie nothing to his Heroick Magnanimity in defence of the Town of Colchester, beleaguered by a potent and victorious Army; This was as the Corollary, the summing up of all his Atchievements in the times and circum∣vallations of which place, we shall confine and circumscribe all his Glories. After that the Parliament, by the suc∣cess of their unlawful Arms had reduced the King, his Friends, Armies, Towns, and Forts into their power, it was hoped by all men, that now they would appear, what they had so long fallaciously pretend∣ed themselves, the Assertors of the publick Pece and Liberty, in order whereunto, no other Expedient was visible, then by complying with their reiterated Protestati∣ons of Loyal Obedience to the King, in a present and speedy Resumption of him to the Exercise of his Royal Authority, his Majesty having, and being willing to grant all that in Honour, Justice and Conscience, could be expected from him: But contra∣ry thereunto, they Voted to settle the Kingdom without him (as impossible, as to have day without the Light of the Sun, and so experimented in the dark Confusi∣ons
that followed those Trayterous Re∣solves) which, so much discontented the Generality of the People, who were now, for the most part undeceived, of those prin∣ciples which had been cunningly spread a∣mongst them, of the Kings Averseness to hearken to his Parliaments, that after se∣veral fruitless Petitions for a Composure, and Treaty with the King, from several Counties, in the delivery whereof to the Houses, some of the Petitioners, as of Sur∣ry, were killed, and wounded, and sent home otherwise unanswered; they resolv∣ed to try another way, and have Recourse to Arms. Col. Langhorn, Powel, and Poy∣er rise in Wales, the Scots enter England; but that which most alarm'd the two Hou∣ses, was the Kentish Business, which lookt full of Terrour, the whole County unani∣mously declaring for a speedy Closure with the King, and had formed to that purpose, a very considerable Army, made up with a numerous Company of Volunteers, from London, under the command of the Earl of Norwich; against these therefore, General Fairfax himself was sent, with 6000 men, as requiring his Presence; who was vali∣antly opposed at Maidstone, by part of the Kentish Army, but they being not relie∣ved
by their Body at Rochester, were for the most part cut off, and the Town gain∣ed; whereupon, the Earl of Norwich, with 3000 men, marched hastily to Black heath, and from thence, ferryed and swam over the greatest part of his Army into Essex side, and quartered at Bow and Stratford. Being there, he met with this Noble Heroe Sr. Charles Lucas, and other emi∣nent Persons of Honour and Quality, as, the Lord Capel, Lord Loughborough, with a compleat Body of resolved men, with whom, after they had skirmished with some Parliament Horse at Mile-end, they marched to Chelmsford, where they seized the Committee; and thence, to Colchester, a Town defenceless, and inconsiderable, as was generally supposed, both by the Ene∣my, and the Adjacent Parts of the Coun∣trey, either to receive by a provisional way of Relief any great Force into it, or by reason of the untenable Condition of it, to hold out any time, if they should venture to take up or stay there. Yet so constantly couragious, vigilant, and incredibly indu∣strious, were these Loyally disposed Gen∣tlemen, as this Town, which by reason of the inpreparation of Necessaries, could
not probably hold out against so potent and terrible an Enemy, the space of one week; continued 3 Moneths, in a most resolute Defiance and resistance of a Victorious Ar∣my glutted with such variety of Conquests, and supplied with such fresh and continual Recruits, to accomplish those unjust Tri∣umphs and Trophies, which they had be∣gun to rear upon the Ruines of the whole Kingdom: But at length after many stout Endeavours, in Sallies, Eruptions, and perpetual Firings gallantly performed, the Loyal Garrison having eaten up all their Horses, the Dogs and Cats, and whatsoe∣ver (though most reluctant to Nature, being sweetned with Prunes, and some other Fruit and Spice, whereof some store was found in the Town at their Coming) could afford them nourishment; was compelled to come to a Capitulation (though it was bravely resolved the night before, to at∣tempt breaking through, which was not un∣feasable) by which it was concluded, the Town should be surrendred upon these hard conditions, the Officers at Mercy, and the Souldiery upon Quarter for Life. The Reason of these hard Conditions, and their standing out so long, which oc∣casioned them, was threefold. The first
was, That not only the County wherein they were besieged, but most of the Coun∣ties in England had engaged themselves, that they would joyn with, and Assist them in the business; but all those Mountains of Promise came to nothing, an inconsidera∣ble Party appearing about Saffron Walden, being routed by Major Sparrow. The Se∣cond, and which seemed more probable, was the hopes they had from London, a great many Persons of Quality, and known Roy∣alists therein, having listed themselves un∣der the Earl of Holland, who had with him in that Action, the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Peterborough, the Lord Francis Villers, and others; these appeared at Kingston, in a formidable manner, but were presently supprest by Sr. Michael Livesey, and the aforesaid Lord Francis, bringing up the Rear, was there killed, re∣fusing the Quarter offered from Rebels, the Earl of Holland fled to St. Neats in Bed∣fordshire, where his Quarters were beaten up, by Col. Scroops Regiment of Horse, where Col. Dalbeir was slain; and himself taken Prisoner, and carried to Warwick Castle. The third and chiefest Reason, which induced them to the continuance of the Siege, was their daily Expectation of
the Advance of the Scotch Army, then en∣tred England, and to whom were joyned a number of Gallant Persons, who had ap∣peared for the King, throughout the War, Commanded by Sr. Marmaduke, now Lord Langdale. Over this Kirk-Army, Duke Hamilton was made General, a Person sus∣pected of all hands, and of whom, and his success, his Majesty, it is said, very much desponded, when first he had notice of his Commanding in Chief. And so it fell out; for, at Preston in Lancashire, Lieut. Gen. Cromwel met with this Army, and with 1000 men, totally defeated them; so that Hamilton was forced to fly, and was taken by the Lord Grey of Grooby, at Uttox∣eter in Staffordshire, and brought Prisoner to London, where, as Earl of Cambridge, he was afterwards for this business beheaded. But I venture not to Canonize him a Mar∣tyr. Colchester being thus defeated of all hopes of Relief, rendred it self to the Victors, and 5 hours after the Surrender, according to a Decree of a Council of War, ensued the death of these two Noble Persons, being destined by them to be shot  a military Execution. The only Reason why they were picked out from among the rest,
was nothing else, but their superlative Cou∣rage, and their fixedness of Duty towards the King, in whose Cause and Defence, they assured themselves, they would never be wanting, as long as their Breath would last, were the Difficulties and Dan∣gers of doing it, never so greats, and so ma∣ny. An Honourable Enemy would have scorned so unwarrantable and impotent re∣venge, and for which, the Names of some Persons will stink for ever. But never was the Message of Death en∣tertained by any with more Magnanimity, and undaunted Resolution and Bravery of mind, both the Roman, and Christian con∣fidence striving to Excellency in this harsh Encounter with an unexpected Death: Sr. Charles was the first by designation, to be sacrificed to their Cruelty, who having retired himself a while, to offer up his last Prayers to God, commending his Soul in∣to his hands, presented himself to his Ex∣ecutioners, and tearing open his Doublet, exposed his naked Breast, saying aloud, Now Rebels do your worst; and so by their murdering Bullets was dispatched in the place. Sr. George Lisle was appointed to be next in this Tragedy, of whom, take
this brief Account: He was extracted from a Gentile Family in Surrey, and from the beginning of the Troubles, had strenuously and couragiously assisted the King: The most remarkable place (saving this of his Death) where his great Spirit, and milita∣ry experience most manifested it self, was at the second Newberry Battel, where he made good his ground, being Col. of a Regiment of Foot, against several Charges both of Horse and Foot, of the Enemy, who did all they could, to drive him from some Advantages, which, could they have ob∣tained, by subduing that handful of men, might have facilitated their way to Victo∣ry. This he sustained, with an Invincible Resolution, animating his Souldiers, and leading them on without any Supplies or Reserves, several times, and for the more Encouragement, took off his own Doubler, and charged in his Shirt, bidding them, come on once more for the King, then for the Prince, then for the Duke, till such time as night came, and quitted him from his hot Service and Enemies together. This noble Action was taken notice of by the K. & acknowledged so at Court, which rendred him deservedly famous among the Sword∣men of his own Party, and as dreadful to
the other, so that having him in their hands, by this Surrender, they resolved, to be thus cowardly and basely rid of him. It being, as was said before, his turn to die; seeing and beholding that sad Specta∣cle, the dead Body of his dearest Friend, he fell upon it, and kissed it, as if he meant to breath into it another Soul; and with a free and full, yet true Relation of his Vertues, and Endowments, he did often repeat these words, In how short a moment has a brave Spirit expired! well, this Priority was due to thee, but I shall not be long behind thee, my Death which is now at hand, shall restore thee to me. After this, standing up, and taking five Pieces of Gold out of his Pocket, he gave one to his Executioners, and the other four he sent to four Friends in London, and then addressing himself to the standers by, he said, Oh, how many do I see here about me, whose Lives I have saved in hot bloud, and now must mine be taken away most barba∣rously in cold bloud! Sure the like was ne∣ver heard of among the Goths and Vandals, or the very Barbarians, in any Age. After which words, some short Ejaculations, and some few Invocations upon the name of Jesus, as he stood in an unconquerable Re∣solution
of mind, and in an Heroick Po∣sture, he was also dispatched by the same hands. Thus these 2 stars of the first Magnitude, for valourous Loyalty, were put out and ex∣tinguished, by the malice of their Enemies; but though they shine not here, in that splendor, which their desired Lives would have appeared in, yet they shine in a full Lustre, in that Region of Glory, whither the Violence of their Enemies transplanted them. Most certain it is, that upon the Ground where Sr. Charles Lucas fell when he was shor, there hath grown no grass, where the Print of his Body was, it remaining still bare, though it be green round about; an in∣dignation of the unreasonable, unjust, and cruel usage of so brave a person; and if the Earth be punished, that groan'd at their un∣timely end, how much more heavy will their punishment be, that contrived, and re∣joyced at it? Since the Restitution of his Majesty, the corps of these Worthies have been taken up, and with all due Magnificence, attended by the Gentry thereabouts, and the Mayor, and other principal persons of Colchester, inter∣red in the Repositories of the Right Ho∣nourable
Family of the Lucas's, with a Fu∣neral Oration, and other requisite Solem∣nities, the deserved Honour to their pre∣cious memory. Major Pitcher shot to death in St. Paul's Church-yard, London, December 29. 1648. THis Gentleman nor his Ancestry be∣ing known unto me, I will not pre∣sume to trace him, but as the fruitfulnesse of Nile answers for its original Springs; so the Loyalty and gallantry of this person may satisfie our inquisition after his birth and descent, till his relations will do him the honour, and us the happiness and plea∣sure of a full account. His Death was too lamentably publick, but the cause for which he died was not ge∣nerally known, wherefore we will pay these justs and dues to his memory in a brief na∣rative, of the latter part of his honourable life. In the year 1648, when Major Gene∣ral
Langhorne, Collonel Poyer, and Powel, took up Arms in Wales for the King, this Gentleman out of his Sense of the Kings and Kingdoms misery, the ruine and sacri∣ledge daily committed on the Church, freely engaged with the said persons for the restoration of the Laws, and his Soveraign. But it pleased God not to succeed that en∣terprise; so that at St. Fagon's that Loyal Army of Welch men was defeated by the Parliament Forces, under Collonel Horton, from whence the remaines of that field be∣took themselves to Pembroke Town, which being well fortified and provided, held the Army now recruited with Forces, under Cromwell a three-months Siege, but seeing no hopes of relief, after a hard defence made, the Garrison render'd themselves upon Articles, the main whereof, and to our purpose, were, that the three Collo∣nels above named, should be at mercy, all other Officers to depart the Kingdom for three years, not to return before, upon pain of death, and the private Souldiers to go home, en∣gaging not to bear Arms against the Par∣liament. In the Article of departing the Kingdom, this valarous Gentleman was concernd, who seeing the distracted estate of the King∣dom,
and how odious the Faction at West∣minster were to the generality of the peo∣ple, concluded that there might be some occasion of further service, and that it was base and ungenerous to desert his Prince at those times of exigence which called for, and required every mans helping and assisting hand. Being therefore in London upon the same design (in defiance of those forced Articles, which contrary to all Law, ba∣nisht a Subject from his Country, for do∣ing his duty, and would expose him to the mercy of other Climates for his affection to his own) he was betrayed and appre∣hended, and presently after condemned by a Council of War, for contrarying the said Capitulation, and as a preparatory Offering to that great Sacrifice of the King, which followed in the next moneth; he was shot to death against St. Faith's Door, a good and suitable prop to such constant Loyalty, which he resolutely maintained to his last, and so bravely exposed himself to their bullets.
Collonel Poyer shot to death in Covent Garden. I Cannot deny this Gentleman a room in this Martyrology (those that came the eleventh hour, shall find entertain∣ment) though he was formerly for the Parliament, especially because he was main∣ly concernd in this aforesaid businesse of Pembroke. He rendred at mercy, and by order of a Council of War drew lots with the other two for his life, which fell up∣on him, and thereupon he was shot, as aforesaid.
The execrable and horrid Mur∣ther of our late Martyred So∣veraign King Charls the First, of ever blessed memo∣ry. I Intend not to write the History of this Pious Prince, so excellently and curi∣ously drawn by himself, and those who have traced his memorials and remains, not taking a far prospect of him, which was fair, and beautiful, and pleasant in the beginning of his Reign, but viewing neerer at hand, the black and dismal cloud, which wrapt up and enveloped his setting glories, now by Divine Justice and favour risen again to their full and radiant lustre. We shall retrospect no further than the beginning of the Scotch War, at which time the Symptomes of a general Rebel∣lion first appeared. For what the Scots co∣vertly implyed in their undutiful Papers, Declarations and Remonstrances, was soon after avowedly insisted on, by the pre∣vailing
Faction of the long Parliament. The King was loaded with an heavy im∣putation of being led by evil Councellors, that their design was to introduce Popery, to erect an arbitrary Government, as in the businesse of Ship-money, Patents, and Monopolies. That he declined Parlia∣ments as the boundaries of his unlimited Prerogative, to the great burden and op∣pression of his Subjects. No sooner there∣fore had he composed the Scotch War, but to take away and remove all jealousie and distrust of him in his People (though all along his Reign he had found some popu∣lar leading Grandees to be the untractable and unsatisfiable Enemies of his Kingdoms Peace) he summoned his last, the long Par∣liament in November 1640, which by a gracious Act of his, was not to be dissolved or prorogued without their own consent; and if that should so determine, a Bill also was signed by him for a Tiennial or per∣petual Parliament, that so his Subjects might rest confident and assured in the due manage and administration of the Govern∣ment. But these favours gave the Faction no other satisfaction, then that they saw they might presume to add other demands;
and by how much more gracious his Ma∣jesty was to them, they judged they might be the more impudent towards him; in which they failed not a tittle, dasiring, as their only safety from the danger of the Prerogative, the Militia in their own dis∣posal, the only defence, and the unsepara∣ble right of his Crown. To attain this, they most insolently by their partisans in the City, tumult him at his Court at White-hall, from which to a∣void both the danger and dishonour that rebel rout threatned, he was compelled to withdraw, to see if by his absence that rage and madnesse might be allayed, and the two Houses set at freedom, which by his presence was the more enflamed, and the Priviledge of Parliament prostituted to the licentious and mad frenzy of the mul∣titude. But this afforded them their desired advantage, from hence they calumniate the King, that since he could not dis∣solve the Parliament, he would invali∣date their Authority, and render them uselesse and unserviceable to those great ends, for which they were called, by re∣fusing to concur with them, and departing from that his great Council. With these and
such like suggestions they so filled the minds of men, who were predisposed, by some former discontents, and who had their Authority (through some disuse of it) in great reverence, that every where, but especially in London, parties were framed, intelligencies and correspondencies held; Divers Petitions presented in the pursute of these designs to the Parliament, offering to stand by them with their lives and for∣tunes, to the attainment of those ends held forth in their Declarations and Resolves, which in conclusion were summed up in that unhappy Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, by the Lords and Commons remaining at Westminster; divers of both Houses, either out of fear of the rabble, or conscience of their duty, absenting them∣seves, and retired home, or followed the King's Fortune, who having traversed some ground about London from one of his Royal Palaces to another, in hope the di∣stemper would abate, and the People re∣turn to their reason and obedience toge∣ther; at last finding his hopes frustrated, by more unreasonable demands, every message to him from the two Houses came burdened with, he resolved to go for York, and secure his Magazine at Hull. But
Sr. John Hotham being newly sent thither by the Parliament, refused the Kings ad∣mittance into that Town, unless himself, with some few of his retinue would please to enter; the King passionately complain∣ed of this to the Parliament, but with as little redress, as his demand of Justice a∣gainst the Authors of the Tumults, this was the Inrroduction to those after violen∣ces of his Royal Person and Authority. For the Parliament forthwith raised an Army, under the command of the Earl of Essex, and the County of York humbly professed themselves to the Service of his Majesty; whereupon August the 22, 1642. he set up his Standard at Nottingham, whence, after he had marched into Shrews∣bury, and having raised a considerable Ar∣my thereabouts, was on his way to London, he was overtaken by the Earl of Essex, at a place called Edge Hill, where ensued a fierce Fight, with equal loss on both sides, October 23, 1642. where God was plea∣sed to cover the Kings head in the day of Battel, and permit him to fall by their execrable hands, in the time of Peace, to which he so often solicitously wood them. In their Generals Commission, they had tyed him up with a limitation, the preser∣vation
of the Kings Person, but left their bullets at random. A subtil time-serving distinction between the Cannon and the Axe, which afterwards they trayterously lifted up against his Annoynted and sacred Head. The Parliament, to strengthen their Cause, treat with the Scots, and for the better mutual assurance, and to difference their abettors and fautors from the Kings Leige People, as well as to lay a baite for all sacrilegious and covetous minded men, to invite them to supplies of money in this rebellion, enter into a Solemn League and Covenant, the main design whereof, was the utter extirpation (as previous and ne∣cessary to the Kings destruction) of Epis∣copacy, and the established Government of the Church of England; Popery being added also for the greater colour of this en∣gagement, against which the King issued forth his Royal Proclamation, laying open the mischievous design thereof, being re∣solved to maintain the Religion, so long and so happily professed, and sealed by the blood of so many Martyrs, in this King∣dom, to which glory and Crown far above all his other Diadems, this Defender of the Faith, was through so many future ha∣zards to aspire.
And the better to clear his innocency from those malicious aspersions, it suffered under (though the Sun at noon-day never was brighter or clearer than his entire pro∣fession of the Protestant Religion) of his being in heart a Papist, his Majesty being at Christ-Church in Oxford, in 1643, and prepared to receive the Sacrament from the hands of the Lord Arch-Bishop of Armagh, used these publick expressions just before the receiving of the blessed Ele∣ments. My Lord, I Espy here many resolved Protestants, who may declare to the World the re∣solution I now do make. I have to the utmost of my power prepared my Soul to become a worthy receiver, and so may I receive comfort, by the blessed Sacra∣ment, as I do intend the establishment of the true Protestant Religion, as it stood in its beauty in the happy dayes of Queen Elizabeth, without any conni∣vance of Popery. I bless God, that in the midst of these publick distractions, I have still liberty to communicate, and may this Sacrament be my damnation,
if my heart do not joyn with my lips in this Protestation. But even this most sacred asseveration, and then, which nothing can more oblige belief and confidence, was by these profa∣ners of all holy things, rejected and slight∣ed, and measured by their own perjurious Oaths and Covenants; wherefore the King, to undeceive the Forein Reformed Church∣es (since he could not convince his own Subjects) with whom their Emissaries had tampered, and insinuated the same dete∣stable falshood, and who seemed to be o∣therwise affected to this their noble De∣fender, than their duty required in those his times of affliction, published a Decla∣ration in Latin, and sent it abroad, the tenour whereof being of main concern∣ment to our purpose, is in English as fol∣loweth. CHARLES by the special Providence of Almighty God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To all those who profess the true reformed Protestant Religion, of what Nati∣on, condition and degree soever they be, to whom this present Declaration shall come,
Greeting. Whereas we are given to under∣stand, that many false Rumours, and scan∣dalous Letters, are spread up and down a∣mongst the Reformed Churches in Forein parts, by the politick, or rather the pernici∣ous industry of some ill affected persons, that we have an inclination to recede from that Or∣thodox Religion, which we were born, baptiz∣ed, and bred in, and which we have firmly professed and practised through the whole course of our life to this moment; and that we intend to give way to the introduction and publick ex∣ercise of Popery again in our Dominions, which conjecture, or rather most detestable ca∣lumny, being grounded upon no imaginable foundation, hath raised these horrid Tumults, and more than barbarous Wars throughout these flourishing Islands, under pretext of a kind of Reformation, which would not prove only incongruous, but incompatible with the Fundamental Laws and Government of this our Kingdom; We desire that the whole Chri∣stian World should take notice, and rest assu∣red, that we never entertained in our imagina∣tion the least thought to attempt such a thing, or to depart a jot from that Holy Religion, which, when we received the Crown and Scepter of this Kingdom, we took a most solemn Sacra∣mental Oath to profess and protect. Nor doth
our most constant practise, and daily visible presence in the exercise of this sole Riligion, with so many asseverations in the head of our Armies, and the publick attestation of our Lords, with the circumspection used in the education of our Royal Off-spring, besides di∣vers other undeniable Arguments only demon∣strate this, but also that happy alliance of ma∣riage we contracted between our eldest Daugh∣ter, and the illustrious Prince of Aurange, most clearly confirms the reality of our Intentions herein; By which nuptial engagement it appears further, that our endeavours are not only to make a bare profession thereof in our own Do∣minions, but to enlarge and corroborate it abroad, as much as lieth in our power. This most Holy Religion with the Hierarchy and Liturgy thereof, we solemnly protest, that by the help of Almighty God, we will endeavour to our utmost power and last period of our life, to keep entire and immovable, and will be careful according to our Duty to Heaven, and the tenour of the aforesaid most sacred Oath at our Coronation, that all our Ecclesia∣sticks in their several stations and incumbencies shall preach and practise the same. This came very seasonably into the World, as to the Protestant part of it,
who never imagined or thought Subjects of their perswasion, would take up Arms, or resist without some grievous alteration in Religion, though they condemn it in any case whatsoever, and therefore the Prote∣stant States abroad did wholly decline their owning of them, though they did nothing positively for the Kings assistance, which by this means he could not rationally pro∣mise to himself from the Catholick Prin∣ces, who would not engage without some great advantages for his Popish Subjects, against which his Majesty was so religiously resolved, though he were most dutifully and cordially served by them throughout the War. To resume our narrative, the King∣dom was all in a flame, the Sectaries eve∣ry where finding Friends to their specious Cause, and having the City of London for their inexhaustible Magazine, and supplies of men, money, and Arms. Divers fields were fought, in the chief whereof the King himself was personally present, with various success, till the year 1645, where at Naseby he received that fatal overthrow, which ushered in so many succeeding cala∣mities, most unworthy of his great virtues and piety.
I cannot but observe, before I come to repeat the perpetration of all their com∣plicated mischief in his murder, how gra∣dually his enemies forsook their allegiance; and how the paint of their religious and loyal pretences wore off by time, which will leave their fair-faced impiety indelible. First, their General must go fight with the Kings Army, and rescue him from his evil Councellors, but preserve his Person; this Riddle was resolved in my Lord Fairfaxes Commission (when they had so far engaged their partakers, that there was no way of re∣ceding from those dangerous courses) where there was not such a word, but kill and slay without exception. During the War all their importunate desires were, that he would be graciously pleased to disband his Army, and return to his most dutiful Subjects at Westminster, afterwards towards the expira∣tion of the War, when he urged what they had so vehemently obtested, they were most ungraciously displeased at the proposal; and so proceeded in conclusion to that heighth of impiety, as Tacitus speaks of another cursed caytiffe, Ferox sce∣lerum quia prima provenerant, their suc∣cesse in one wickednesse provoking them to more.
For the King being every where worsted and besieged in his Chief Garrison, the University of Oxford, was advised, and re∣solved to cast himself upon the Scotch Ar∣my, then lying at the Siege of Newark: The News of his Departure from Oxford, was no sooner known to the Parliament, but supposing he would come to London, and rely upon the Affections of the City, (who were reclaimed from those wild Ex∣orbitancies, by having emptied those veins of Wealth which were expended in the War, and at last found themselves never the nearer those things they fought for, but were every day affronted, both by the Par∣liament and Army) therefore they caused it to be proclaimed, that it should be Treason for any to harbour the Kings Per∣son (which makes every place of his Resi∣dence a Court, and a kind of Sanctuary) and thereupon, the Lord Mayors House was searched, as for a Malefactor. Oh un∣heard of Impudence of Subjects to their Soveraign! But they were quickly eased of this fear, by an Expresse from their Commissioners in the Scotch Army, that he was arrived there: This put them upon new Coun∣sels; so they agree, if they could not get
him out of their hands by Treaty, to obtain him by purchase, as our Saviour was sold before by his own. And very satyrical, if true (as it is reported to be) was that Say∣ing of Monsieur Bellieure, the French Am∣bassador (who came to the King, then at Newcastle) upon his dismissing the Con∣voy that brought him into the Parliament Quarters, having a half Crown in his hand, he asked one of the Souldiers, how much it was that Judas sold our Saviour for, who replying 30 Pieces of Silver, just so much, saith he, take among you, for selling your Lord and Master, and therewith gave him the half Crown; in conclusion, for 200000 Pounds the King was bargained for, and brought by the Order of the Parliament, who sent Commissioners to attend him to Holmby, one of his own Houses, where he was so strictly guarded, that none of his Friends, nor his Servants, but who must passe the Allowance of the Two Houses, were permitted to wait upon him, & they were very few, and inconsiderable besides. Being thus lockt up, and waiting the Pleasure of the Parliaments Consideration of him, who minded him no more, then as if he had been one of their Fellow Sub∣jects, he was in the night time hurried a∣way
from thence, by Cornet Joyce, June 4. 1647. to Childersley, thence, to New-Mar∣ket, thence, to Royston, to Hatfield, to Wind∣sor, to Cavesham, to Maydenhead, to Lati∣mer, to Stoke, to Oatlands, to Sion House, and lastly, to Hampton-Court, being forced to shift his Abode at the pleasure of the Army, who near his Person, with feigned Overtures of Loyalty, and as in order to his Safety and Service, kept alwaies their Head Quarters, when the Design was meerly by his Presence with them (of so great Reverence and Concernment are, and ought to be Princes, though devoyded of all Power, both in Rebels and Subjects esteem, as the King himself excellently in his  observed in this juncture) to counterbuffe and balance the unlimited usurped Power of the Parliament, and to shew them that they might not expect to be absolute or masterless, as long as Interest and the Sword could serve them. Thus was the King driven about, having no place to rest his Head in, which present∣ed it not with diversity of sad thoughts and cares, till for some time, the space of three Moneths, he remained, and was continu∣ed at Hampton Court, in some shew of Re∣gality. During which time, several Con∣tracts
and Disputes arose between the Par∣liament and Army, who then appeared as the Kings Friends, but in truth were no such matter, but used his Name (as the Parliament did, in the beginning of the War) to shrowd their Trayterous designs against him, and to strengthen the weak beginning of their Future projected At∣tempts, as the Parliament afterwards in their declination, to bring up themselves, and that Respect, Veneration and esteem they had so wretchedly forfeited, the King serving only as the Beam, to the Scales and Balances of each Faction and Party, which, for a while went up and down, counter∣poysing each other, till at last the heavy and sad weight of the Armies Faithlesse∣ness, and unparallel'd disloyalty, and Re∣bellion, brought him down to his Grave. For the King having staid at Hampton Court, about the time afore specified, de∣bating the Propositions of the Parliament, who were instantly and uncessantly called upon by the People, for a speedy Compo∣sure and Compliance with his Majesty, the Grandees of the Army thought it high time to obviate the happy Opportunities of a Settlement, which they saw all good men so desirous of, by the Kings Residence
any longer near the City of London, with whom they had lately had a Bickering, and through which, they had insolently in tri∣umph marched, to the Affront and Regret of the Citizens, the Grugde whereof, they well knew, was yet fresh and recent, and wanted but the Advantage of the Kings Person and Presence. Therefore with devilish Policy, by an Instrument and Engine of their own, Col. Whaley, they give the King, a kindly (for∣sooth) Notice and Information, of an at∣tempt and Assassinate intended against his Person, if he should venture to stay any time longer at this his Mannour, and there∣fore out of Duty and Affection, earnestly wisht and obtested his Majesty, to consult and provide for his safety elsewhere. This sudden news, weighed with its pro∣bable Circumstances, and the passionate manner of the Discovery, and the King being in the custody of a most perdite sort of men, begot a Resolution of speedily withdrawing himself from the Danger. A∣las, how many Vexations and Miseries did this good Prince pass, in his way and pro∣gress to more! These men that resolve to murder him publickly, make this impudent Essay of his Courage and Patience, by a
counterfeited Parricide to be perpetrated privately. By this Achitophel, the King is wrought out of this secure and advantageous Mansi∣on, and by a swift flight, in company with Two of his Servants, recovered the Isle of Wight, where Col. Hammond (Brother to the most Loyal, and Reverend Dr. Ham∣mond, and whose Father was one of the Physitians to Prince Henry, and therefore the rather confided in) was Governour for the Parliament. At his Departure from Hampton Court, he left behind him a Pa∣per; which for its sad and pensive matter, but yet (as himself in a Cloud) reflected with Majestick Rayes of pietcing Elegance, wherewith the Spirit of that good Prince was over-burdened and distrest) I have thought fit to insert. The Kings Letter left behind him at Ham∣pton Court, in his Flight to the Isle of Wight. C. R. LIberty being that which in all times hath been, but especially now is the common Theam and Desire of all men, common reason shews, that Kings less then any should endure Captivity. And yet, I
call God and the World to witness, with what patience I have endured a tedious re∣straint; which so long as I had any hopes, that this sort of my Suffering might con∣duce to the peace of my Kingdoms, or the hindring of more effusion of Bloud, I did willingly undergoe; but now finding by too certain proofs, that this my continued Patience would not only turn to my perso∣nal ruine, but likewise be of much more prejudice, then furtherance to the publick good; I thought I was bound, as well by natural as political Obligations, to seek my safety, by retiring my self for some time, from the publick view both of my Friends and Enemies: And I appeal to all indif∣ferent men to judge, if I have not just cause to free my self from the hands of those who change their Principles with their condition; and who are not ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the Nobility, taking away their negative voice; and with whom the Levellers Doctrine is rather countenanced then punished: And as for their Intentions to my person, their changing, and putting more strict Guards upon me, with the discharging most of all those Servants of mine, who formerly they willingly admitted to wait upon me, doth
sufficiently declare. Nor would I have this Retirement misse-interpreted; for I shall earnestly and uncessantly endeavour the setling of a safe and well-grounded Peace, wherever I am, or shall be, & that as much as may be without the effusion of more Chri∣stian Bloud; for which, how many times have I desired, prest to be heard, and yet no ear given to me? And can any reaso∣nable man think, that according to the or∣dinary course of Affairs, there can be a set∣led Peace without it? Or that God will bless those, who refuse to hear their own King? Surely no, Nay, I must further add, that, (besides what concerns my self) unless all o∣ther chief Interests have not only a hearing, but likewise just satisfaction given unto them, (to wit, the Presbyterians, Independants, Ar∣my, those who have adhered to me, and even the Scots; I say there cannot (I speak not of Miracles, it being, in my Opinion, a sinful Presumption, in such cases, te expect or trust to them) be a safe or lasting Peace. Now as I cannot deny, but that my per∣sonal security is the urgent cause of this my Retirement; so I take God to witness, that the publick Peace is no less before my eyes: and I can find no better way to ex∣press this my Profession (I know not what
a wiser may do) than by desiring and ur∣ging that all chief Interests may be heard, to the end each may have just satisfaction: As for example, the Army (for therest, though necessary, yet I suppose are not dif∣ficult to content) ought (in my judg∣ment) to enjoy the Liberty of their Con∣sciences, have an Act of Oblivion or In∣dempnity (which should extend to all the rest of my Subjects) and that all their Ar∣rears should be speedily and duly paid; which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard, and that I be not hindred from using such lawful and honest means as I shall chuse. To conclude, let me be heard with Freedom, Honour and Safety, and I shall instantly break through this Cloud of Re∣tirement, and shew myself really to be Pa∣ter Patria. Hampton Court, Novemb. 11. 1647. For the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore, &c. He was no sooner come into the Isle of Wight but Hammond gave notice thereof to the Parl. who were now overawed by
the Army Eleven of their Members being impeached of High Treason, as they called it, for their Loyalty and Affection to his Majesty, many not daring to appear in the House, Cromwel and his Faction, Jan. 30. the black Forerunner of that his day of Martyrdom, the next Year ensuing, voted those destructive and cruel Resolves of no more Addresses, which were published with a Preface, in these words, being the hinges on which the sad Revolutions succeeding, so direfully turned. The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, after many Addresses to his Ma∣jesty, for the preventing and ending of this un∣natural War, raised by him, against the Par∣liament and Kingdom, having lately sent four Bils to his Majesty, which did contain only matter of Safety and Security to the Par∣liament and Kingdom, referring the Compo∣sure of other Differences to a Personal Treaty with his Majesty, and having received an ab∣solute Negative, do hold themselves obliged to use their utmost Endeavours, speedily to set∣tle the present Government in such a way as may bring the greatest security to this King∣dom, in the enjoyment of the Laws and Liber∣ties thereof; and in order thereunto, that the
Houses may receive no Delay or Interruptions in so great and necessary a work, they have ta∣ken their Resolution, and passed these Votes following; Resolved by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That no Ap∣plication or Address be made to the King, by any Person whatsoever, without leave of both Houses. Resolved, That the Person or Persons, that shall make Breach of this Order, shall incur the Penalty of High Treason. Resolved, That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will receive no more any Message from the King. Resolved, That no Person whatsoever do presume to receive or bring any Message from the King to both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, or any other. I shall not descant on the unparalelled unreasonableness of these Votes, but re∣flect only on that story of Ahashuerus, re∣corded in Esther, to whom, no person of what degree soever durst approach or ad∣dress himself, without he held forth his Golden Scepter; whereas here were Sub∣jects, ye Christian Subjects, holding their Soveraign off at the Swords point, denying
him Access to them, and debarting him Converse with any Persons, but the Instru∣ments and Officers of their barbarous dis∣loyalty. Upon these Votes, the Army close with the Parliament, declaring that they would live and die with them in the pursuit of their Resolutions; and now this Pious re∣cluse Prince, all humane hopes failing, being shut up a Prisoner, and none of his friends admitted to come near him, betakes himself to the Divine Assistance, spends his sad hours in meditation & devotion, which heightened and perfected in him that Chri∣stian Courage and resolution, with which, he so nobly triumpht over the utmost ma∣lice of his Enemies. This sweetned and alle∣viated those sorrows and unspeakable di∣stresses he went through; this afforded him a Calmness and Serenity of mind, amidst the Storms and Tempests of his impetu∣ous and angry Fate; this made him infinit∣ly more to prize the Crosse then the crown; witnesse those most incomparable solilo∣quies (which the Prison wals ecchoed to Heaven) such were these, I care not to be reckoned among the unfortunate, so I be not in the black List of sacrilegious Princes. A∣gain, As I have leisure, so have I cause, more
then enough to meditate and prepare for my death; for I know that there are but a few steps between the Prisons & the Graves of Princes. But so great and excellent is his variety of divine Consolation and Instruction, that I will not lose the Reader in my Maze of Collections, but refer him wholly to the Original, particularly, to what he hath writ∣ten concerning this very Subject. But it may be a Question, whether their reiterated Proposals, which contained al∣waies the same unjust and unconscionable Demands, even to nauseate any man of Reason or Honour, were not more regret∣ful and troublesome to him, then this pub∣lick Sullenness, and dumb Solennity of laying him aside, Sure we may be, while that Spirit thus possest the Houses, his con∣finement and restraint was enlarged into an Heavenly Oratory, wherein he main∣tained a constant Intercourse with the Di∣vine Majesty, who soon after revived his Cause, and though it gave him not Victory in the Field, yet made him Conqueror o∣ver the Affections and Prejudices of many his seduced Subjects. For the Loyal Party ceased not still to assert, what they had maintained by Arms, and the Irregular Illegal Proceedings of the
Parliament and Army every day undecei∣ved numbers, who first adhered to them. Petitions upon Petitions are presented to the houses for a Personal Treaty with the King, for the disbanding the Army, and for removal of all other grievances. Major General Langhorn, Collonel Poyer, and Powel, active men formerly for the Parlia∣ment, declare themselves for Him; several Towns, together with the greatest part of the Navy return to their obedience. The Scots with a numerous Army, wherto joyn∣ed Sir Marmaduke Langdale, with a con∣siderable party of English, entred by Ber∣wick. The Kentish men rise in a body of 10000 men, part of which afterwards was beleaguered in Colchester. The Prince, his now Majesty, came into the Downs with a Fleet of War well equipped, so that the King appeared almost as formidable as at any time during the War. But through the unsearchable providence of God, who had ordered a more happy and glorious Crown for him, free from those cares and discontents, which in all probability would have attended his Reign here under the management an administration of his Subjects, which was to be the price of his and his Kingdoms Peace; all those en∣deavours
and Martial Enterprises succeeded not, but in the middle of the year 1648. all things except the fleet were reduced a∣gain under the Parliaments power and command. These dangers however learnt them this wisdom, that it was not safe to trifle long∣er, and rely wholly on the Army, the peo∣ple being generally averse to them, where∣fore it was concluded by them to null those former Votes of Non Addresse, and to make application to his Majesty, which was performed by the Earl of Middlesex and two Commoners, who acquainted the King with the desires of the Parliament, where∣upon a Treaty was agreed on, to be held in the Isle of Wight, whereto five of the House of Peers, and ten Commoners were appointed, the King declared to be in full liberty, and to signifie to the two Houses what place in that Island he would particul∣larize for the Treaty. Here attended him also such persons he sent for, and were of use to him in the management thereof. September the 18. it began at Newport in the said Isle, where the King, valuing the peace of his Subjects above all concernments of his own, except his indispensable obli∣gations of honour and conscience, con∣descended
so far, and with reason so pre∣vaild upon the Commissioners, that they came to some near conclusion, the rest be∣ing referred to the Parliament. The Trea∣ty ended the 27th of November, and on the fifth of December the House of Commons voted the Kings concessions sa∣tisfactory, whereon to ground the settle∣ment of the Kingdom: Hitherto the bright side of that cloud presented it self, which with Funeral black soon overcast the three Kingdoms. For the Army, upon notice of the likely forwardness of the Treity, desired by all good men, who were sensible of the wic∣ked contrivances and machinations of Cromwell and his Complices, drew up a large Remonstrance, which was agreed on at Windsor, and presented it to the Parlia∣ment, wherein they desired that the King might be tryed by the Laws, and brought to (their) Justice, and all further Treaty with him to be forborn; and forth∣with divided themselves, the main body to London, to overcome the Houses, and the rest to seize the King, and take him into their custody. But before that, the General gave order, by his Letters, to Collonel Hammond to ren∣der
up his command to Collonel Eures, who was to take charge of the King, but the Parliament countermanded all those orders, and voted the Kings person to re∣side still in that Island. Whereupon, the very day the Treaty ended, of which they had as sure intelli∣gence as the Houses, they put on their Pha∣risaical vizor of piety, and kept a Fast by themselves, to seek for (that they never found) a blessing in their Counsels, which were in spight of an Oracle to the contra∣ry, to murther and destroy, sacrilegiously, and rebelliously to seize on the goods and Estates of the King, the Clergy, and all Loyal Subjects. The effect of their Prayers shewed to whom they were directed, for immediate∣ly and violently, as if acted by Satanical impulses, (while the House was consider∣ing and debating the Kings condescen∣tions, and were but just come to a resolu∣tion of acknowledging the Kings Grace and favour in his condescentions in the a∣foresaid Treaty, as may be seen at large in Mr. Prins Speech to his eternalhonour;) they fall upon the Parliament December 6, 1648. seclude above 140 Members, drive away through fear of their exorbi∣tancies
many others, and pack up a Juncto of the remaining Members, to serve their own designs and cruel, ignorant Ambi∣tion. Herein how observable is it, that God suffered not the Kings most righteous Cause, to pass unevidenced and justified by its adversaries, that how gloomy soever it were in rising and in its course, yet it should set in glory, and have some kind of acknowledgment, though wrapt up in the ambiguous obscure words of that Treaty from its very Enemies, who having their eyes opened, would, when too late, have found the way to our and their common Peace: and greater Testimony cannot be given. The King, as was partly said before, was now delivered into the hands of Collonel Ewers, Hammond ingratefully as disloyally betraying the bountiful Patron and che∣risher of his family, and contrary also to the orders of Parliament, into the hands of the Army; who conveyed him out of the Isle of Wight to Hurst Castle, where they first began their barbarous and ruder incivilities. From Hurst Castle the King was convey∣ed to Winchester, where the poor loyal In∣habitants,
according to custom, or to hold up the reputation of that Majesty, which those fellows so scornfully and spite∣fully abused, caused the bells to be rung; the Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen going out of Town to meet the King, be∣ing in the midst of a Troop of Horse in the miry way, would have presented him the keys of that his City, with the usual ceremo∣ny, but they were soon put from their duty, thrown in the dirt, and beaten for their af∣fection, December 21. From thence he was conveyed next day to Farnam, with the same Military Guards, and thence to Windsor, where they locked him up, and kept as strickt and severe, as in∣humane Guards upon him, intruding upon his devotions, upbraiding him with his condition, and most irreverently and im∣pudently profaning his Person within his hearing. He continued here untill he had kept his last Christmass, but so privately, in the most retired rooms of that Castle, that no person, but of their appointment to look to him, was suffered to come near him, till after that the Army had furbisht out a new House of Commons, and prepared the design against his Sacred and most precious
Life, he was conveyed by Collonel Harri∣son, sitting covered in the Coach with him, (though by Divine vengeance now bare-headed upon Westminster-Hall) with a strong Guard of Horse to his Palace at St. James's, and there lodged by order from their Juncto at Westminster, there to wait the direful preparations for his Tryal, advanced into some kind of method, and lickt into some ravenous form already. But what words shall we now use, what expiating sense to expresse innocency, and without some taint of guilt, the slagicious∣ness of this villany, we are about to relate? what exaggerations of crimes to signifie and declare this Accumulative Treason, a term first invented and created by the Authors of this mischief, to weary and overburden that noble Earl of Strafford with his pre∣cious and most useful life, and now ac∣complisht? That baneful Prophetical Oracle being without all doubt (and as the immediate direction of God to Fulfil the Measure of the sins of this Nation) ridd∣led in this most detestable wickedness. Herein we may behold at one view, all the miseries and confusions that befel the three Kingdoms, from the commence∣ment of our troubles, whose large circum∣ference
and ambient circles of jealousies and fears centred in this fatal business. That which Caligula most bloodily wisht, that the City of Rome (that extended to the Empire of the World) had but one neck, these cruel and impious persons had the unhappy enjoyment of, for with this Royal Martyr fell the glory and ho∣nour of these Nations, the people where∣of, as if the blow had reached their neck too, stoopt and hung down their heads, as ashamed and afraid to lift up their guilty fa∣ces towards angry Heaven. Never were there so many sorrowful and dejected looks, so many sad and oppressed hearts, as at this deplorable occasion. Every man presaged his private ruine from this of the Publick, except those, whose aimes were upon it, and who had designed to themselves, the profit of this Maxime, Kill and take Possession. Nay, it seemed so barbarous, even to those persons who had instrumentally ser∣ved to the grand design, which they thought reached not to this extent, that the Presbiteryan Ministers in and about London, avowedly remonstrated against it, and subscribed their names, laying the sin and impiety of any prosedure against the
King at their door, declaring the mischief that would inevitably follow thereupon; all which they inforced and urged also from their Covenant. While thus we would clear our selves, and particular men from this horrid blood∣guiltinesse, how shall we wipe off the stain from the Protestant Religion; it being the impious doctrine of the Church of Rome, That Princes by the Popes Authority may be deposed and murthered. Foraign Churches of our profession, have suffered much under this imputation, by the Papists themselves upon this score, & therefore we will not omit this vindication here, wor∣thy to be written upon all our Churches, being this Royal Martyrs words, in his advice to our Soveraign, That he should not be alienated from the Religion established, through any of the injuries and reproaches thrown upon him in this Rebellion, for they were not Protestants that did them. Indeed they lack names and terms for themselves, and those monstrous facts they perpetrated, nor Turk nor Jew nor infidel will reach them, such was the incomparable innocence, sanctity and virtue of this Prince (and Heaven would have none but perfect Sacrifices) I refer the Reader therefore to
that which shews them best, that which themselves dared to publish in this matter, which in short is this. There were three grand Interests that centred and combined in this fatal busi∣ness, The first was that of Oliver Crom∣wel, whose often dreamt-of Soveraignty, egged and provoked his ambition, now propt with the power of the sword, put him upon desperate invasion of his Sove∣raigns Crown and Life. The second, was that of the Republicans or Common∣wealth men, whose great tempting sin to this facinorous act and main ingredient was coverousness, having designed to them∣selves the Kings Revenue, and the Churches Patrimony. The third was the Fifth Monarchy Heresie, in whom mad ambition, and pride, and insatiable appe∣tite of wealth and riches were at strise for superiority, or else so well blended and mixt, that it was hardly discernable which made the fairest shew in their political and pious claim of worldly power. These three Factions thus agreed, hoping when the accursed deed was done to over∣reach one another, and attain their parti∣cular ends, conspired together, and by their joynt Counsels after they had turned
out the Parliament, and erected a select Juncto, by their directions to these men, who were all parties concern'd in the share of the Spoyl. A thing called an Act of Parliament having the Authority of some 50 Commons, some whereof were also dissenters, (the generality of them being new elected Members by Writ of Parlia∣ment in the room of those at Oxford) pas∣sed that House to bring the King to Tryal, having therein appointed a High Court of Justice, consisting of some 80 persons, all interessed Grandees, to be the Court be∣fore which the King should be charged of Divers Crimes, which I abhor to re∣late. This High Court of Justice, the mon∣ster of English Judicature, according to the power given by the said Act, having as∣sembled first in the Painted Chamber, in order to set and braze their countenances, by staring in one anothers faces, then swelled with Devilish guilt and malice, came in formality with their impudent President to their pretended Court, erected at the further end of Westminster-Hall, where the King soon after was brought and placed in his chair against the face of these effront Rebels. There they exhibited the
charge, which the King refused to answer to, or acknowledge that rout for any kind of Authority, which he persisted in all the four times he was convened before them, and in conclusion (as before they had re∣solved) by colour of a judicial proceeding, was most trayterously sentenced to be be∣headed, to the astonishment and unspeak∣able grief of his three Kingdoms, and the horrour and shame of the Christian World. I have thus transiently past over this un∣pleasant business, because it is so lamen∣tably known, and published at large, in the black Tribunal, to which I reser the amazed Reader. His Majesties Reasons against the pretended Jurisdiction of the High Court of Injustice, which he intended to have delivered in wri∣ting on Monday, Jan. 22. 1648. but was not permitted. HAving already made My protestati∣ons, not only against the illegallity of this pretended Court, but also that no Earth∣ly power can justly call Me (who am your KING) in question as a Delinquent; I would not any more open My mouth upon his occasion, more than to refer My self to
what I have spoken, were I alone in this case alone concern'd. But the duty I owe to God in the preservation of the true li∣berty of My People, will not suffer Me at this time to be silent: For how can any free-born Subject of England call Life, or any thing he possesseth his own; if power without Right daily make new, and abro∣gate the old fundamental Law of the Land? which I now take to be the present case. Wherefore when I came hither, I expected, that you would have endeavoured to have sa∣tisfied Me concerning those grounds which hinder Me to answer to your pretended Impeachment; but since I see that nothing I can say will move you to it (though Ne∣gatives are not so naturally proved as Affir∣matives) yet I will shew you the Reason why I am confident you cannot judge Me, nor indeed the meanest man in England; for, I will not (like you) without shewing a reason, seek to impose a belief upon My Subjects. Hereabout I was stopt, and not suffered to speak any more concerning rea∣sons. There is no proceeding just against any man, but what is warranted either by Gods Laws, or the munici∣pal Laws of the Country where he lives. Now I am most confi∣dent,
that this dayes proceeding cannot be warranted by Gods Law, for on the contrary, the authority of obedience unto Kings is clearly warranted and strictly commanded both in the Old and New Testament; which if denied, I am ready instantly to prove: and for the Question now in hand, there it is said, That where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what dost thou? Eccles. 8.4. Then for the Laws of this Land, I am no lesse confident, that no learned Lawyer will affirm, that an impeachment can lye against the King, they all going in His Name; and one of their Maximes is, That the King can do no wrong. Besides the Law, upon which you ground your proceedings, must either be old or new: if old, shew it; if new, tell what Authority warranted by the fundamental Laws of the Land hath made it, and when. But how the House of Commons can erect a Court of Judi∣cature, which was never one it self (as is well known to all Lawyers) I leave to God and the World to judge: And it were full as strange that they should pretend to make Laws without King or Lords-House, to any that have heard speak of the Laws of Eng∣land.
And admitting, but not granting, that the People of Englands Commission could grant your pretended power, I see nothing you can shew for that; for certaintly you never asked the question of the tenth man of the Kingdom, and in this way you manifestly wrong even the poorest Plough∣man, if you demand not his free consent; nor can you pretend any colour for this your pretended Commission without the consent at least of the major part of every man in England, of whatsoever quality or condition, which I am sure you never went about to seek; so far are you from having it. Thus you see that I speak not for My own right alone, as I am your KING, but also for the true liberty of all My Subjects, which consists not in sharing the power of Government, but in living under such Laws, such a Government as may give themselves the best assurance of their lives and propriety of their goods. Nor in this must or do I forget the Priviledges of both Houses of Parliament, which this dayes proceeding doth not only violate, but likewise occasion the greatest breach of their publick Faith, that (I believe) ever was heard of, with which I am far from charging the two Houses: for all the pre∣tended
crimes laid against Me, bear date long before this late Treaty at Newport, in which I having concluded as much as in Me lay, and hopefully expecting the two Houses agreement thereunto, I was suddenly sur∣prised, and hurried from thence as a Pri∣soner, upon which, I account I am against My will brought hither, where since I am come I cannot but to My power defend the an∣cient Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, together with My own just right; Than for any thing I can see the higher House is to∣tally excluded. And for the House of Commons it is too well known, that the major part of them are detained or deterred from sitting, so as if I had no other, this were sufficient for me to protest against the lawfulnesse of your pretended Court. Besides all this, the Peace of the Kingdom is not the least in my thoughts, and what hopes of settlement is there, so long as Pow∣er reigns without rule of Law, changing the whole frame of that Government un∣der which this Kingdom hath flourished for many hundred years, (nor will I say what will fall out in case this lawless un∣just proceeding against me do go on) and believe it, the Commons of England will not thank you for this change, for they will
remember how happy they have been of late years under the Reign of Queen Eli∣zabeth, the King my Father, and My Self, until the beginning of these unhappy Trou∣bles, and will have cause to doubt, that they shall never be so happy under any new. And by this time it will be too sen∣sibly evident, that the Arms I took up, were only to defend the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, against those who have supposed My power hath totally changed the ancient Government. Thus having shewed you briefly the Reasons, why I cannot submit to your pre∣tended Authority without violating the trust which I have from God, for the wel∣fare and liberty of my People; I expect from you either clear Reasons to convince my judgment, shewing me that I am in an Error (and then truly I will readily an∣swer) or that you will withdraw your pro∣ceedings. This I intended to speak in Westminster-Hall on Monday, 22 January; but against Rea∣son was hindred.
After that horrid Sentence his Majesty was hurried from their Bar; As he passed down the stairs, the common Souldiers (laying aside all Reverence to Soveraignty) scoffed at him, casting the smoak of their stinking Tobacco in his face (no Smell more offensive to him) and flinging their foul pipes at his fee; But one more inso∣lent than the rest, defiled his venerable Face with his spittle, for his Majestry was observed with much patience to wipe it off with his Handkerchief, and as he passed, hearing them cry out Justice, Justice, Poor Souls (said he) for a piece of money, they would do so for their Commanders. That Night being Saturday January 27. the King lodged at White-hall; that evening a Mem∣ber of the Army acquainted the Com∣mittee with the desires of the King, that seeing they had passed Sentence of Death upon him, and the time of his Execution might be nigh, that he might see his Chil∣dren, and receive the Sacrament, and that Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, might be ad∣mitted to pray with him in his private Chamber; both which were granted. The next day, being Sunday, January 28. the King was attended by his Guard, to St. James's where the Bishop of London
preached privately before him, his Text was in Rom. 2.16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men, by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. Monday Jan. 29. His Children were permitted to come to him, where passed this following Discourse, as it was set down in writing by his Daughter the Lady Eli∣zabeth, (which Lady Elizabeth some moneths after, being confined to Caris∣brook-Castle in the Isle of Wight, died there with grief for the sufferings of her Dear Father.) A true Relation of the Kings Speech to the Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of Gloce∣ster, the Day before his Death. HIs Children being come to meet Him, He first gave his Blessing to the Lady Elizabeth, and bad her remem∣ber to tell her Brother James, when ever she should see him, that it was his Fathers last desire, that be should no more look upon Charles as his eldest Brother only, but be obedient unto him as his Sove∣raign; and that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers Ene∣mies. Then said the King to her, Sweet∣heart,
you'l forget this: No (said she) I shall never forget it whilst I live; and pouring forth abundance of tears, pro∣mised Him to write down the particu∣lars. Then the King taking the Duke of Glo∣cester upon his knee, said, Sweet-heart, now they will cut off thy Fathers head (upon which words the Child looking very stedfastly on him) Mark Child what I say, They will cut off my head, and perhaps make thee a King: But mark what I say, you must not be a King, so long as your Brothers Charles and James do live; for they will cut off your Brothers heads (when they can catch them) and cut off thy head too at last: and therefore I charge you do not be made a King by them. At which the Child sighing said, I will be torn in pieces first: which falling so unexpectedly from one so young, it made the King rejoyce exceedingly.
Another Relation from the Lady Elizabeths own Hand. VVHat the King said to me, Jan. 29. 1648. being the last time I had the happiness to see Him, He told me, He was glad I was come, and although He had not time to say much, yet som∣what He had to say to me, which He had not to another, or leave in Writing, be∣cause He feared their Cruelty was such, as that they would not have permitted Him to write to me. He wished me not to grieve and torment my self for Him, for that would be a Glorious death that He should die, it being for the Laws and Li∣berties of this Land, and for maintaining the true Protestant Religion. He bid me read Bish. Andrews Sermons, Hookers Ec∣clesiastical Policy, and Bish. Lauds Book against Fisher, which would ground me against Popery. He told me, He had forgiven all His Enemies, and hoped God would forgive them also; and com∣manded us, and all the rest of my Brothers and Sisters, to forgive them. He bid me tell my Mother, that His thoughts never strayed from Her, and that His Love
should be the same to the last. Withal, He commanded me and my Brother to be obedient to her, and bid me send His Blessing to the rest of my Brothers and Sisters, with commendation to all His Friends. So after he had given me His Blessing, I took my leave. Further, He commanded us all to for∣give those People, but never to trust them; for they had been most false to Him, and to those that gave them pow∣er; and He feared also to their own Souls: and desired me not to grieve for Him, for he should die a Martyr, and that He doubted not, but the Lord would set∣tle his Throne upon His Son, and that we should be all happier then we could have expected to have been, if He had lived; with many other things, which at present, I cannot remember. Elizabeth. Tuesday, Jan. 30. (The Fatal Day) He was about 10 of the Clock brought from his Palace at St. James's to Whitehal, march∣ed on foot, (guarded with a Regiment of foot Souldiers) through the Park, with
their Colours flying, and Drums beating, his private Guard of Partizans about him, D. Juxon Bishop of London on one side, and Col. Tomlinson on the other, both bare∣headed, bidding them go faster, saying, That he now went before them to strive for an Heavenly Crown, with less solitude, then he had of tentimes bid his Souldiers to fight for an earthly Diadem. Being come to the end of the Park, he ascends the stairs, leading to the long Gallery in Whitehal, and so in∣to the Cabinet-Chamber, where he former∣ly used to lodge; there his Majesty with the Bishop of London, continued for some time in Devotion, and received the Bles∣sed Sacrament from the hand of the said Bi∣shop; at which time, he read for the se∣cond Lesson, the 27th. Chapter of S. Mat∣thews Gospel, which contained the History of the Death and Passion of our Blessed Sa∣viour, the Communion ended, his Maje∣sty thanked the Bishop for selecting so sea∣sonable and comfortable a Portion of Scrip∣ture. The Bishop modestly replied, no thanks was due to him, for it was the Chap∣ter appointed by the Rubrick of the Church for the second Morning Lesson for that day, being Jan. 30. Here the King con∣tinued at his Devotion, refusing to dine,
only about twelve of the Clock, he eat a a Bit of Bread, and drank a Glass of Cla∣ret; from thence, about one a Clock he was accompanied by Dr. Juxon and Col. Tomlinson, and other Officers, formerly ap∣pointed to attend him, and the private Guard of Partizans, with Musketeers on each side, through the Banquetting-House; adjoyning to which, the Scaffold was erect∣ed, between VVhitehal Gate, and the Gate leading into the Gallery from S. James's: The Scaffold was hung round with Black, the Floor covered with black Bayes, and the Axe and Block laid in the middle of the Scaffold. There were divers Companies of Foot of Col. Prides Regiment, and se∣veral Troops of Horse placed on the one side of the Scaffold towards Kings-street, and on the other side, toward Charing-Cross, and the multitudes of people that came to be Spectators very great. The King being come upon the Scaffold, it was expected he would say somwhat to the Peo∣ple, the which he did.
His Majesty being come upon the Scaffold, looked very earnestly upon the Block, and asked Col. Hacker if there were no higher: and then spake thus (directing his Speech chiefly to Col. Thomlinson.) King. I Shall be very little heard of any body here, I shall therefore speak a word unto you here: indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I did not think that holding my peace would make some men think, that I did submit to the guilt, as well as to the punishment, but I think it is my duty to God first, and to my Country, for to clear my self, both as an honest man, a good King, and a good Christian. I shall begin first with my Innocency. In troth, I think it not ve∣ry needful for me to insist long upon this, for all the world knows that I never did begin a war with the two Houses of Parli∣ament, and I call God to witness, to whom I must shortly make an Account, That I never did intend for to incroach upon their Priviledges, they began upon me, it is the Militia they began upon, they con∣fest that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit for to have it from me: and
to be short, if any body will look to the Dates of Commissions, of their Com∣missions and mine, and likewise to the Declarations, will see clearly, that they began these unhappy Troubles, not I: so that as the guilt of these Enormous crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God, that God will clear me of, I will not, I am in Charity, God forbid that I should lay it upon the Two Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free of this guilt: for I do believe that ill Instruments between them and me, has been the chief Cause of all this bloudshed: so that by way of speaking, as I find my self clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too: yet for all this, God forbid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say that Gods Judg∣ments are just upon me: Many times he does pay Justice by unjust Sentence, that is ordinary. I will only say this, that an unjust Sentence * that I suf∣ferred to take effect, Strafford. is pu∣nished now by an unjust Sentence upon me, this I have said, to shew you that I am an Innocent man. Now for to shew you that I am a good
Christian, I hope there is Pointing to Dr. Juxon. a good man that will bear me witness, That I have for∣given all the world, and even those in particular that have been the chief causers of my death; who they are, God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God for∣give them. But this is not all, my Cha∣rity must go further, I wish that they may repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular. I pray God with St. Stephen, that this be not laid to their Charge, nay, not only so, but that they may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdom; for my Charity com∣mands me, not only to forgive particular men, but my Charity commands me to endeavour to the last gasp the Peace of the Kingdom. Turning to some Gentlemen that wrote. So(Sir)I wish with all my soul (and I do hope there is some here will carry it further)that they may endeavour the Peace of the Kingdom. Now (Sirs) I must shew you both how you are out of the way, and will put you in the way: first, you are out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever have had yet, as I could find by anything, is
in the way of Conquest: certainly this is an ill way: for Conquest (Sir) in my opinion is never just, except there be a good just Cause, either for matter of Wrong, or just Title, and then if you go beyond it, the first quarrel that you have to it, is it that makes it unjust at the end, that was just at first: But if it be only mat∣ter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbe∣ry, as a Pirat said to Alexander, that he was the great Robber, he was but a Pet∣ty Robber: And so, Sir, I do think the way that you are in, is much out of the way. Now, Sir, for to put you in one way, believe it, you will never do right, nor God will never prosper you, until you give God his due, the King his due (that is, my Successors) and the People their due: I am as much for them, as any of you: You must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church (according to his Scri∣ptures) which is now out of order: For to set you in a way particularly, now I cannot, but only this, A National Synod, freely called, freely debating among them∣selves, must settle this: when that every Opinion is freely and clearly heard. For the King, indeed I will not (then turning to a Gentleman that touched the Ax)
said, Hurt not the Axe, that may hurt me Meaning, if he did blunt the edge. For the King, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct you for that, therefore, because it concerns my own particular, I only give you a touch of it. For the People, and truly I desire their Liberty and Freedom as much as any bo∣dy whosoever, but I must tell you, that their Liberty and Freedom consists in ha∣ving of Government, those Laws by which their Life and their Goods may be most their own. It is not for having share in Government (Sir) that is nothing per∣taining to them; A Subject and a Sove∣raign are clean different things, and there∣fore until they do that, I mean, That you do put the people in that Liberty as I say, certainly they will never enjoy them∣selves. Sir, it was for this that now I am come here: If I would have given way to an-Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws chan∣ged according to the power of the Sword, I needed not to have come here, and therefore I tell you (and I pray God it be not laid to your Charge) that I am the Martyr of the People. Introth Sirs, I shall not hold you much
longer, for I will only say this to you, that in truth I could have desired some little time longer, because I would have put this that I have said in a little more Or∣der, and a little better digested then I have done, and therefore I hope you will excuse me. I have delivered my Conscience, I pray God that you do take those courses that are best for the good of the Kingdom, and your own Salvations. Dr. Juxon. Will Your Majesty, though it may be very well known your Majesties Af∣fections to Religion, yet it may be expected that you should say somwhat for the worlds satisfa∣ction. King. I thank you very heartily my Lord, for that I had almost forgotten it. Introth Sirs, My Conscience in Religion I think is very well known to all the world, and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian; according to the Profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by my Father; and this honest man Pointing to Dr. Juxon. I think will witness it. Then turning to the Officers, said, Sirs, excuse me for this same, I have a good Cause, and I have a Gracious God, I will say no
more. Then turning to Col. Hacker, he said, Take care they do not put me to pain. and Sir, this, and it please you. But then a Gentleman coming near the Axe, the King said, Take heed of the Axe, pray take heed of the Axe. Then the King speaking to the Executioner, said, I shall say but very short Prayers, and when I thrust out my hands,— Then the King called to Dr. Juxon for his Night-cap, and having put it on, he said to the Executioner, Does my hair trou∣ble you? who desired him to put it all un∣der his Cap, which the King did accord∣ingly, by the help of the Executioner, and the Bishop: then the King turning to Do∣ctor Juxon, said, I have a good Cause, and a Gracious God on my side. D. Juxon. There is but one stage more, this Stage is turbulent and troublesom, it is a short one: But you may consider, it will soon carry you a very great way: it will car∣ry you from Earth to Heaven; and there you shall find a great deal of cordial Joy and Comfort. King. I go from a corruptible to an incor∣ruptible Crown; where no disturbance can be, no disturbance in the world. Dr. Juxon. You are exchanged from a
Temporal, to an Eternal Crown, a good Exchange. The King then said to the Executioner, Is my Hair well? Then the King took off his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Dr. Juxon, saying, Remember It is thought, to give it to the Prince.. Then the King put off his Doublet, and being in his Wastcoat, put his Cloak on again, then look∣ing upon the Block, said to the Executio∣ner, You must set it fast. Executioner. It is fast, Sir. King. When I put my hands out this way, stretching them out, then— After that, having said two or three words, (as he stood) to himself, with hands and Eyes lift up, immediatly stoop∣ing down, laid his Neck upon the Block: and the Executioner again putting his hair under his Cap, the King said (thinking he had been going to strike) stay for the sign. Executioner. Yes, I will and it please your Majesty. And after a very little Pause, the King stretching forth his Hands, the Executioner at one blow severed his Head from his Bo∣dy, the head being off, the Executioner held it up, and shewed it to the People;
which done, it was with the Body, put in a Coffin covered with black Velvet for that purpose, and conveyed into his Lodgings there: And from thence it was carried to his House at St. James's, where his Body was embalmed, & put in a Coffin of Lead, laid there a Fortnight to be seen by the peo∣ple; and on the Wednesday seven-night after, his Corps embalmed and coffined in Lead, was delivered chiefly to the care of four of his Servants, viz. Mr. Herbert, Cap∣tain Anthony Mildmay, his Sewers; Cap∣tain Preston, and John Joyner, formerly cook to his Majesty; they attended with others, cloathed in Mourning Suits and Cloaks, accompanied the Herse that night to Windsor, and placed it in that which was formerly the Kings Bed-Chamber; next day it was removed into the Deans Hall; which Room was hanged with Black, and made dark, with Lights burning round the Herse; in which it remained till Three in the Afternoon, about which time came the Duke of Lenox, the Marquess of Hertford, the Marquess of Dorchester, the Earl of Lindsey, having obtained an Order from the Parliament, for the Decent Interment of the King their Royal Master, provided the Expence thereof exceeded not five hun∣dred
Pounds; at their coming into the Ca∣stle, they shewed their Order of Parlia∣ment to Col. Whichott Governour of the Castle, desiring the Interment might be in St. Georges Chappel, and by the Form in the Common-Prayer-Book of the Church of England; this Request was by the Go∣vernour denied, saying it was improbable, that the Parliament would permit the use of what they had so solemnly abolished, and therein destroy their own Act. To which the Lords replied, there is a difference be∣twixt destroying their own Act, and dispen∣sing with it, and that no power so binds its own Hands, as to disable it self in some cases: all could not prevail, the Governour persisting in the Negative. The Lords be∣took themselves to the search of a conveni∣ent place, for the Burial of the Corps, the which, after some paines taken therein, they discover a Vault in the middle of the Quire, wherein, as is probably conjectured, lieth the Body of King Henry the Eighth, and his Beloved Wife the Lady Jane Sea∣mor, both in Coffins of Lead; in this Vault there being room for one more, they re∣solve to interre the Body of the King, the which was accordingly brought to the place, born by the Officers of the Garrison,
the four Corners of the Velvet Pall born up by the aforesaid four Lords, the pious Bishop of London following next, and other Persons of Quality, the body was commit∣ted to the Earth with Sighs and Tears, es∣pecially of the Reverend Bishop, to be de∣nied to do the last duty and Service to his Dear and Royal Master; the Velvet Pall being cast into the Vault, was laid over the Body: upon the Coffin was these words set, KING CHARLES, 1648. I cannot let pass this Horrid Act of trea∣son, without letting the world know of the Damnable hypocrisie of that Arch Traytor Oliver Cromwel: The Day assigned for Murdering of the King being come, the Council of War sate, which then managed all. A Letter without name was addres∣sed to the Council, to represent to them by Reasons Conscience of and Prudence, the formidable Consequence of so strange and execrable an Execution, Cromwel seemed to be much toucht at it (which caused some then present, to suspect, that he had a hand in procuring it) and proposed it to the consideration of the Council, many of
which, began to relent, and lean toward Compassion; Cromwel observing it, made a Turn toward the Door, and sent one of his Confidents to those to whom the Exe∣cution was committed, to command them to dispatch the business; then returning to the Council-Table, made a large discourse, shewing the Inconvenience of this Execu∣tion, and advised them so to secure the Person of the King, that he might neither do, nor receive hurt; which Discourse was seconded by others, and re-assumed by himself, with a great many words to leng∣then out the time, until one briskly entring into the Chamber, told them, Gentlemen, you may cease to consult, the Work is done, the King is executed; upon which, Cromwel fell down upon his Knees with great Devotion, and made an Eloquent Prayer, giving Glory to God, and acknow∣ledging his Divine Justice.
A Letter (worthy Perusal) written by King Charles, to his Son the Prince, from Newport in the Isle of Wight, Dated, Nov. 29. 1648. Son, BY what hath been said, you may see how long We have laboured in the search of Peace. Do not you be discoura∣ged to tread those waies in all those worthy means to restore your self to your Right; but prefer the way of Peace: shew the Greatness of your mind, rather to conquer your Enemies by pardoning them, then by punishing. If you saw how unmanly and un∣christianly this implacable disposition is in our ill-willers, you would avoid that Spi∣rit. Censure Us not, for having parted with too much of Our own Right; the Price was great, the Commodity was Se∣curity to Us, Peace to Our People. And We are confident another Parliam. would remember how useful a Kings Power is to a Peoples Liberty. Of how much We have
divested Our self, that We and they might meet again in a due Parliamentary way, to agree the bounds for Prince and People. And in this give belief to our Experience, never to affect more Greatness or Preroga∣tive, then what is really and intrinsecally for the good of your Subjects (not satisfaction of Favorites.) And if you thus use it, you will never want means to be a Father to all, and a bountiful Prince to any you would be ex∣traordinarily Gracious unto. You may per∣ceive all men trust their Treasure where it returns them Interest; and if Princes, like the Sea, receive and repay all the fresh streams and Rivers trust them with; they will not grudge, but pride themselves to make them up an Ocean. These Conside∣rations may make you a great Prince, as your Father is now a low one; and your state may be so much the more established, as mine hath been shaken. For Subjects have learnt (We dare say) that Victories over their Princes, are but Triumphs over themselves, and so will be more unwilling to hearken to Changes hereafter. The En∣glish Nation are a sober People, however at present under some Infatuation. We know not but this may be the last time We
may speak to you, or the world publickly; We are sensible into what hand We are faln, and yet We bless God, We have those inward Refreshments, that the malice of Our Enemies cannot perturb. We have learnt to own our self, by retiring into Our self, and therefore can the better digest what befals Us, not doubting but God can restrain our Enemies malice, and turn their fierceness into his Praise. To conclude, if God give you success, use it humbly and far from Revenge: If he restore you to your Right upon hard conditions, whatever you promise, keep. Those men which have forced Laws which they were bound to observe, will find their Triumphs full of Troubles. Do not think a∣ny thing in this world worth obtaining by foul and unjust Means. You are the Son of our Love: and as We direct you to what we have recommended to you, so we assure you, We do not more affectionately pray for you (to whom We are a Natural Parent) then We do, that the ancient Glory and Renown of this Nation, be not buried in Irreligion and Phanatick humour; And that all Our Subjects (to whom VVe are a
Politick Parent) may have such sober Thoughts, as to seek their peace; in the Or∣thodox Profession of the Christian Religion, as it was established since the Reformation in this Kingdom, and not in new Revela∣tions: And that the ancient Laws, with the Interpretation according to known practises, may once again be an hedge a∣bout them, that you may in due time go∣vern, and they be governed, as in the fear of the Lord. C. R.
The Lord Capel beheaded March 9. 1949. in the Pa∣lace yard, Westminster. THis Noble Lord, Noble in his Life, nobler in his Death and Memory, no∣blest in his Posterity, who fill the trumpet of Fame, that summons all men to render them their deserved honours, though he was not like some of our foregoing Mar∣tyrs, viz. Sr. Charles Lucas, and Sr. George Lisle, murthered in the instant of the rendition of Colchester, having quarter for life given him by the General, yet did not long survive their hard fate, being brought with more solemnity (more perfidiousness) though alike glory to his Death, which he suffered with a Christian and (no Roman but Colchester) Spirit and resolution. He was no great Captain, nor ever un∣dertook such a charge, serving without any signal command in his Majesties Armies, though no doubt sufficient thereto, yet he is no less to be eternized for his indeavours, his courage, constancy and faithful adhe∣rence
to the King, when deserted by a great part of the Nobility, parting with, and hazarding a great and ample Estate, which was sequestred from him, and in conclusion laying down his life, so that he may justly be stiled, one of the Wor∣thies of the English Nobility, and his name ever to be honourably mentioned, according to that of the Psalmist, Psal. 112.6. The Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. He was Son and Heir to Sr. Arthur Ca∣pel of Hadham Hall in Herefordshire, a Gentleman of Great Estate, and who lo∣ved and followed the old mode of our Na∣tion, kept a Noble and bountiful House, and shewed forth his Faith by his charity, extending it in such abundant manner to the poor, that he was bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, eies to the blind, and legs the the same, so that he might justly be stiled Great Almoner to the King of Heaven. As this diffusive charity and bounty spread it self abroad, no less did his Rela∣tive love and Paternal affection bestow it self on this his Son, whom he most libe∣rally educated, to a perfection in Learning, as his rich expressions and elegant stile in
his Book Printed after his death, and in other letters do best evidence. Sr. Arthur dying, as this Noble Lord in∣herited his Estate, so did he his Virtues, his pious bounty appearing so conspicuous, that some envious persons, who hate good works in others, because they will do none themselves, have maliciously traduced him as inclining to Popery. But as such as∣persions amongst persons of understanding, signifie nothing more than the speakers malice, so wrought it in others a deserved commendation of this Noble Person, espe∣cially in those times (and our own are worse) when Charity lay bed-rid, and Faith only and such hungry notions were talkt of, whereas his Faith appeared by his works. From the degree of Knight the ancient Dignity of his Family, now advanced to the Earldom of Essex, he was made Baron Capel, of Hadham, a little before the time the Earl of Strafford received his Tryal, which in this brave Lords conscientious Judgment of himself, was his original con∣demnation in foro coeli. During the Rebellion and those diffe∣rences between the King and Parliament, he constantly and faithfully adhered to
his Majesty, contributing both in purse and person to his aid and assistance, being appointed in that time for his eminent wisdom and prudence Councellour to the Prince by the King his Father, whom he abandoned not till the disbanding of my Lord Hopton's Army in Cornwall, from whence his Highness took shipping to Scilly, giving my Lord an honourable, but sorrowful dismission and conge to return home and attend, (though his heroical mind spur'd him on to pursue) his most unworthy fate. For at his coming home upon those Ar∣ticles, having scarce warmed himself there after his long absence from thence, but some hopes appearing of the King's re∣stauration to his former Authority, by the coming in of Duke Hamilton with a po∣tent Army, as also by the Welch Insurre∣ction, and the rising of several Counties, who declared for the same purpose, he with a select number of his friends, ac∣quaintance, and servants, joyned himself with the Lord Goring, Sr. Charles Lucas, and others, who with a considerable Army were then in Essex, and after a long Siege were forced to surrender their Garrison of Colchester.
In the Articles of that rendition, this right noble Lord was included, and had quarter given him for life, though it was afterwards unhansomly unsaid again by him that gave it, who left him, after his Parol given, to a High Court of Justice; upon this surrender he was committed to the Tower, where whilst he remained, he endeavoured to escape, which he well ef∣fected; but crossing the water, through some discourse he let fall, Jones the Waterman, conceiving what he was, upon his landing discovered him, had him re∣taken, and committed again in order to his Tryal. In the middle of March 1648, he was brought before the said High Court of Ju∣stice, where he said enough in reason and justice to have cleared himself, insisting upon his Priviledge as a Peer, and claim∣ing the benefit of the Laws, which owned no such arbitrary Power as this, against the life of any Subject, especially a Noble Man, and in sum denied their Jurisdiction, and pleaded his quarter given him as a∣bovesaid, but nothing would avail, they proceeded to Judgment, and with Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, Earl of Norwich, and Sr. John Owen, sentenced
him to be beheaded, which was executed accordingly on the ninth of March. We will now take a view of him after the tmie of his Condemnation, when he was to encounter and look Death in the face. He alwaies kept a very chearful and well composed temper of mind, which proceeded from true Christian Prin∣ciples, he would often say, it was the good God he served, and the good cause he had served for, that made him not to fear Death, adding, that he never had the temptation of so much as a thought to check him for his engage∣ment in this quarrel, for he took it for his Crown and glory, and wished he had a grea∣ter ability, and better fortune to engage in it. The afternoon before his suffering, he was a great while in private with a Mini∣ster, where bewailing, with that sense which became a true, and not despairing penitent, the sins of his life past, the great∣est he could remember, was his voting my Lord of Straffords death, which though, as he said, he did without any malice at all, yet he confessed it to be a very great sin, and that he had done it out of a base fear (his own words) of a prevailing party, of which he had very often and very heartily
repented, and was confident of Gods par∣don for it. Then he desired to receive the Blessed Sacrament before he dyed. Af∣ter this (being afraid of some danger to the Minister that attended him, for that work of Love) and some Conference in order to his preparation, both for his pro∣vision and his voyage, the Sacrament and his death, he desired to go to Prayers, which being performed, he returned to his private devotions. The next morning being the day of his death, he desired the Minister, who was with him before, to hear, and joyn with him in Prayers, which he did, for half an hour in an excellent method, very apt Expressions, and most strong, hearty and passionate affections; First confessing and bewailing his sins with strong cries and tears, then humbly and most earnest∣ly desiring Gods mercy through the Me∣rits of Christ alone. Secondly, For his dear Lady and Children with some passion, but for her especially with most ardent af∣fections, recommending them to the Di∣vine Providence with great confidence and affurance, and desiring for them rather the blessings of a better life than of this. Thirdly, For the King, Church and King∣dom.
And Lastly, For his Enemies, with almost the same ardour and affection. After Prayer ended, my Lord of Nor∣wich and Sr. John Owen being sent for, the Minister read the whole Office of the Church for Good Friday, and then after a short Homily for the occasion, he received the Sacrament again, in which action he behaved himself with great Humility, Zeal and Devotion. Being demanded after the receiving thereof how he found himself, he replyed very much better, stronger and cheerfuller for that heavenly repast, and that he doubt∣ed not to walk like a Christian through the vale of death in the strength of it. But he was to have an Agony before his Passion, and that was the parting with his Wife, el∣dest Son, now Earl of Essex, his Son in Law, two of his Uncles, and Sr. T.C. especially his parting with his dearest La∣dy, which indeed was the saddest specta∣cle that could be. In which occasion, as he could not choose but shew and confesse a little of humane frailty, yet even then, he did not forget both to comfort and counsel her, and the rest of his friends; particularly in blessing the yuong Lord, he commanded him never to revenge his
death, though it should be in his power, the like he said unto his Lady. He told his Son he would leave him a Legacy out of David's Psalms, and that was this, Lord lead me in a plain path. For Boy (saith he) I would have you a plain honest man, and hate dissimulation. After this was past, with much adoe his Wife and the rest of his Friends were per∣swaded to begone, and then being all a∣lone with the Minister, he said, Doctor, the hardest part of my work in this World is now past, meaning the parting with his Wife. Then he desired the said Minister to pray preparatively for his death, that in the last action he might so behave himself, as might be most for Gods Glory, for the in∣dearing of his dead Masters memory, and his present Masters service, and that he might avoid the doing or saying of any thing, which might savour either of ambition or vanity. This being done, he was con∣veyed with the other two Lords, who suf∣fered with him to Sr. Robert Cottons, where the Minister staid with him till he was cal∣led to the Scaffold, whither the Guard of Souldiers permitted him not to come, so that my Lord took leave of him there.
The same day he died, he wrote this following Letter to his Wife. My dearest Life; MY Eternal life is in Christ Jesus: my wordly considerations in the highest de∣gree thou hast deserved, let me live long here in thy dear memory, to the comfort of my Fa∣mily, our dear Children, whom God out of mer∣cy in Christ hath bestowed upon us. I beseech thee take care of thy health, sorrow not, afflict not thy self too much; God will be unto thee better than an Husband, and to my Children better than a Father: I am sure he is able to be so: I am confident he is graciously pleased to be so. God be with thee, my most vertu∣ous Wife. God multiply many Comforts to thee and my Children, which is the fervent Prayer of Thy, &c.
He hath also left behind him an excellent Book of Meditations, and some other Miscellaneous things, especially an Exher∣tation to stir up the hearts and endeavours of men to have saved the precious life of the King, &c. which being to be had, will need no other Commendation. When the other two Lords were be∣headed, he was brought last to the Scaf∣fold, where he spake as followeth. His Lordship in the way to the Scaffold, put of his hat to the People on both sides, look∣ing very austerely about him: And being come upon the Scaffold, Lieut. Collonel Beecher said to him, Sir, Is your Chaplain here? CAPEL. No, I have taken my leave of him: and perceiving some of his Servants to weep, he said, Gentlemen, refrain your salves, refrain your selves; and turning to Lieut. Col. Beecher, he said, what? did the Lords speak with their hats off, or no?
Col. Beech. With their Hats off: And then coming to the front of the Scaffold, he said, I shall hardly be understood here, I think, and then began his Speech as follow∣eth. Capel. The conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the cause of this violent death of mine, shall be the beginning of what I shall say to you: When I made an address to them (which was the last) I told them with much since∣rity, that I would pray to the God of all mercies, that they might be partakers of his inestimable and boundless mercies in Jesus Christ; and truly I still pray that Prayer; and I beseech the God of Hea∣ven forgive any injury they have done to me, from my Soul I wish it. And truly, this I tell you as a Christian, to let you see I am a Christian. But it is necessary I should tell you somewhat more, that I am a Pro∣testant: And truly, I am a Protestant, and very much in love with the profession of it, after the manner as it was establish∣ed in England by the Thirty nine Articles; a blessed way of profession, and such an one as truly, I never knew none so good. I am so far from being a Papist, which some body have (truly) very unworthily at
some time charged me withall, that truly, I profess to you, that though I love Good Works, and commend Good Works, yet I hold they have nothing at all to do in the matter of Salvation; my Anchor∣hold is this, That Christ loved me, and gave himself for me; that is that that I rest up∣on. And truly something I shall say to you as a Citizen of the whole World, and in that consideration I am here condemned to die, truly contrary to the Law that go∣verns all the World, that is, the Law of the Sword: I had the protection of that for my life, and the honour of it, but tru∣ly I will not trouble you much with that, because in another place I have spoken ve∣ry largely and liberally about it. I believe you will hear by other means what Argu∣ments I used in that case: But truly, that, that is stranger, you that are English-men, behold here an English-man here before you, and acknowledged a Peer, not con∣demned to die by any Law of England, not by any Law of England; nay, shall I tell you more? (which is strangest of all) contrary to all the Laws of England that I know of. And truly I will tell you, in the matter of the civil part of my death, and
the Cause that I have maintained, I die (I take it.) for maintaining the fifth Com∣mandment, injoyned by God himself, which enjoyns reverence and obedience to Parents: All Divines on all hands, though they contradict one another in ma∣ny several opinions, yet all Divines on all hands do acknowledge, that here is inten∣ded Magistracy and Order; and certainly I have obeyed that Magistracy and that Order underwhich I have lived, which I was bound to obey: and truly, I do say very confi∣dently, that I do die here for keeping, for obeying that fifth Commandment given by God himself, and written with his own finger. And now, Gentlemen, I will take this opportunity to tell you, that I cannot imitate a better, nor a greater in∣genuity than his, that said of himself, For suffering an unjust judgment upon another, himself was brought to suffer by an unjust judgment. Truly, Gentlemen, that God may be glorified, that all men that are concerned in it, may take the occasion of it, of humble repentance to God Almigh∣ty for it, I do here profess to you, that I did give my Vote to that Bill against the Earl of Strafford; I doubt not but God Almighty hath washed that away with a
more precious blood, the Blood of his own Son, and my dear Saviour Jesus Christ; and I hope he will wash it away from all those that are guilty of it: truly, this I may say, I had not the least part nor degree of malice in doing of it; but I must confess again to Gods glory, and the accusation of mine own frailty, and the frailty of my Nature, that truly it was unworthy Cowardize, not to resist so great a torrent as carried that business at that time. And truly, this I think I am most guilty of, of not courage enough in it, but malice I had none; but whatsoever it was, GOD I am sure hath pardoned it, hath given me the assurance of it, that Christ Iesus his Blood hath washed it away; and truly, I do from my Soul wish, that all men that have any stain by it, may seri∣ously repent, and receive a remission and pardon from God for it. And now, Gen∣tlemen, we have had an occasion by this intimation to remember his Majesty, our KING, that last was; and I cannot speak of him, nor think of it, but truly I must needs say, that in my opinion, that have had time to consider all the images of all the greatest and vertuousest Princes in the World; and truly, in my opinion,
there was not a more vertuous, and more sufficient Prince known in the World, than our gracious King CHARLES that died last: God Almighty preserve our King that now is, his Son; God send him more fortunate and longer dayes; God Almighty so assist him, that he may exceed both the vertues and sufficiencies of his Fa∣ther: For certainly, I that have been a Councellour to him, and have lived long with him, and in a time when discovery is easily enough made, for he was young (he was about thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen years of age) those years I was with him, truly, I never saw greater hopes of vertue in any young person than in him; great judgment, great understanding, great apprehension, much honour in his nature, and truly a very perfect Englishman in his inclination; and I pray God restore him to this Kingdom, and unite the King∣doms one unto another, and send a great happinesse both to you and to him, that he may long live and Reign among you, and that that Family may Reign till thy King∣dom come, that is, while all temporal power is consummated: I beseech God of his mercy give much happinesse to this your King, and to you, that in it shall
be his Subjects, by the Grace of Iesus Christ. Truly I like my beginning so well, that I will make my conclusion with it, that is, That God Almighty would confer, of his infinite and inestimable Grace and mercy, to those that are the causers of my coming hither, I pray God give them as much mer∣cy as their hearts can wish; and truly, for my part, I will not accuse any one of them of malice, truly I will not; nay I will not think there was any malice in them: what other ends there is I know not, nor will I examine; but let it be what it will, from my very Soul I forgive them every one. And so the Lord of Heaven blesse you all, God Almighty be infinite in goodnesse and mercy to you, and direct you in those wayes of obedience to his Commands, to His Majesty, that this Kingdom may be an happy and glorious Nation again, and that your King may be an happy King in so good and so obedient a people. God Al∣mighty keep you all, God Almighty pre∣serve this Kingdom, God Almighty pre∣serve you all. Then turning about, and looking for the Executioner (who was gone off the Scaf∣fold) said, which is the Gentleman? which
is the man? Answer was made, He is coming; He then said, Stay, I must pull off my Doublet first, and my Wastcoat: and then the Executioner being come up∣on the Scaffold, the Lord Capel said, O friend! prethee come hither: Then the Executioner kneeling down, the Lord Ca∣pel said, I forgive thee from my Soul, and not only forgive thee, but I shall pray to God to give thee all grace for a better life: There is five pound for thee; and truly, for my clothes, and those things, if there be any thing due to you for it, you shall be fully recompenced: but I desire my be∣dy may not be stripped here, and no bo∣dy to take notice of my body but my own Servants. Look you Friend, this I shall de∣fire of you, that when I lye down, you would give me a time for a particular short Prayer. Lieu. Col. Beecher. Make your own sign my Lord. Capel. Stay a little: Which side do you stand upon? (speaking to the Executio∣ner;) Stay, I think I should lay my hands forward that way pointing (fore-right) and answer being made, Yes; he stood still a little while, and then said, God Almigh∣ty blesse all this people, God Almighty slench this blood, God Almighty stench,
stench, stench this issue of blood; this will not do the business, God Almighty find out another way to do it. And then turning to one of his Servants, said, Bal∣dwin, I cannot see any thing that belongs to my Wife; but I must desire thee and beseech her to rest wholly upon Jesus Christ, to be contented and fully satisfied: and then speaking to his Servants, he said, God keep you; and Gentlemen, let me now do a business quickly, privately, and pray let mee have your prayers at the mo∣ment of death, that God would receive my Soul. L. Col. Beecher. I wish it. Capel. Pray at the moment of striking joyn your Prayers, but make no noise (turning to his Servants) it is inconveni∣ent at this time. Servant. My Lord put on your cap. Capel. Should I, what will that do me good? Stay a little, it is well as it is now. As he was putting up his hair. And then turning to the Executioner, he said, honest man, I have forgiven thee, therefore strike boldly; from my Soul I do it. Then a Gentleman speaking to him, he said, Nay, prethee be contented, be
quiet, good Mr. — be quiet. Then turning to the Executioner, he said, Well; you are ready when I am ready, are you not? and stretching out his hands, he said, Then pray stand off Gentlemen. Then going to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People, Gentlemen, though I doubt not of it, yet I think it convenient to ask it of you, That you would all joyn in Prayers with me, That God would mercifully receive my Soul, and that for his alone mercies in Christ Iesus. God Almighty keep you all. Execut. My Lord shall I put up your hair? Capel. I, I, prethee do; and then as he stood, lifting up his hands and eyes, he said, O God, I do with a perfect and wil∣ling heart submit to thy will: O God! I do most willingly humble my self: and then kneeling down, said, I will try first how I can Lye; and laying his head upon the Block, said, Am I well now? Execut. Yes. And then as he lay with both his hand, stretched out, he said to the Executioner, Here lie both my hands out, when I lift up my hands thus [lifting up his right hand] then you may strike.
And then after he had said a short Pray∣er, he lifted up his right hand, and the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body, which was taken up by his Servants, and put (with his body) into a coffin. I Shall omit Duke Hamilton, not only because of another Nation, though a Peer of this, but because, it is in question, whether he suffered not for obeying the commands of the Scotch Parliament and Kirk, who sent him as General in that Expedition, and that the Kings Interest was but colla∣teral. Let him therefore rest in his honourable grave, while we softly and reverently pass over it to that of the Earl of Holland.
Henry Earl of Holland be∣headed on the Scaffold in the Palace-yard at Westmin∣ster, at the same time. THis Lord in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, was his special favourite and peculiar friend; so that after that assassinate upon the Duke of Buckingham, he was made Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, having been newly before from Baron Rich of Kensing∣ton, raised to the Honour of the Earldom of Holland, and sent Colleague with the Earl of Carlisle in that splendid Embassy in∣to France, about the marriage of the Queen Mother. Notwithstanding all these favours so freely conferred on him, so uncertain, va∣riable and unobligeable are the minds of men (for I cannot impute his siding with the Parliament to have been from any dis∣gust or dislike he received from the King) especially when Religion becomes the bone of contention; he was one of those Lords
that remained at London, and made up a House of Peers, although he never took up Arms, Command or Employment a∣gainst his good Master and Soveraign. About the middle of the War sceing how unreasonably the Parliament persi∣sted in carrying on the War, being so often fruitlesly courted by the King to an accom∣modation, he and the Earl of Bedford for∣sook their part and quarrel, and escaped to the King at Oxford, where finding not that kind and favourable reception they expect∣ed, being looked on shily by the Court there, especially this Lord, he privately de∣parted to London again, having left a fair account of himself to the King. But when the War was ended, and the Parliament had refused to treat with his Majesty, and so to settle the Kingdom, he then took up Arms in earnest in the Kings behalf, being real and cordial on this his last undertaking, and engaged with him the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Peterborough, Lord Francis Villers, and Lord Peter, who with a gallant company of men rendez∣vouz'd at Kingston, where immediately Sr. Michael Livesey set upon them, and routed them. The Earl fled to St. Neets in Bedfordshire, where in his Quarters he
was taken by Collonel Scroop's Regiment of Horse, where Collonel Dolbier was kil∣led, and by order of the Parliament sent Prisoner to Warwick Castle. He continued there for the space of six moneths in pretty good health, both of body and mind, but as soon as he heard of the murther of the King, his heart failed him, and sickness seized on him, so that he never dawed day afterwards, nor could en∣dure to stir out of his chamber, lamenting the loss of his gracious Master, and provid∣ing for his own violent dissolution the same way, which being condemned by the same High Court of Iustice, with my Lord Ca∣pel and Duke Hamilton, he suffered on the same Scaffold.
His Lordships Speech on the Scaffold, immediatly before his Death, March 9. 1649. Holland. IT is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here. Which way must I speak? And then being directed to the Front of the Scaffold, he (leaning over the Rayls) said; I think it is fit to say somthing, since God hath called me to this place. The first thing which I must profess, is, what con∣cerns my Religion, and my Breeding, which hath been in a good Family, that hath ever been faithful to the true Prote∣stant Religion, in the which I have been bred, in the which I have lived, and in the which, by Gods Grace and Mercy I shall die. I have not lived according to that E∣ducation I had in that Family where I was born and bred. I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive it is very much his pleasure to bring me to this place, for the sins that I have committed. The cause
that hath brought me hither, I believe, by many hath been much mistaken. They have conceived that I have had ill Designs to the State, and to the Kingdom; Truly I look upon it as a Judgment, and a just Judgment of God, not but I have offended so much the State, and the Kingdom, and the Parliament, as that I have had no ex∣tream vanity in serving them very extraor∣dinarily. For those Actions that I have done, I think it is known they have been ever very faithful to the Publick, and very particularly to Parliaments. My Affecti∣ons have been ever exprest truly and clear∣ly to them. The dispositions of Affairs now have put things in another posture then they were when I was engaged with the Parlia∣ment. I have never gone off from those Principles that ever I have professed; I have lived in them, and by Gods Grace will die in them. There may be Alterations and Changes that may car∣ry them further then I thought reasonable, and, truly there I left them: But there hath been nothing that I have said, or done, or professed, either by Covenant or Declara∣tion, which hath not been very constant and very clear, upon the Principles that I ever have gone upon; which was to serve
the King, the Parliament, Religion (I should have said in the first place) the Com∣mon-wealth, and to seek the Peace of the Kingdom; That made me think it no im∣proper time, being prest out by Accidents and Circumstances, to seek the Peace of the Kingdom, which I thought was proper, since there was somthing then in Agitation, but nothing agreed on, for sending Propo∣sitions to the King, that was the furthest aim that I had, and truly beyond that I had no Intention, none at all. And God be praised, although my Bloud comes to be shed here, there was I think scarce a drop of Bloud shed in that Action that I was in∣gaged in. For the present Affairs as they are, I cannot tell how to judge of them; and truly they are in such a condition, as (I conceive) no body can make a judgment of them; and therefore I must make use of Prayers, rather then of my Opinion; which are, That God would bless this Kingdom, this Nation, this State; that he would settle it in a way agreeable to what this Kingdom hath bin happily governed under; by a King, by the Lords, by the Commons; a Government that I conceive it hath flou∣rished much under, and I pray God the change of it bring not rather a Prejudice, a
disorder, and a confusion, then the contra∣ry. I look upon the Posterity of the King, and truly my Conscience directs me to it, to desire, that if God be pleased, that these people may look upon them with that Affection that they owe, that they may be called in again, and they may be, not through bloud, nor through disorder, ad∣mitted again into that power, and to that glory, that God in their birth intended to them. I shall pray with all my soul for the happiness of this State, of this Nation, that the Bloud which is here spilt, may even be the last that may fall among us; and truly I should lay down my Life with as much Chearfulness as ever person did, if I con∣ceived that there would be no more Bloud follow us; for a State or Affairs that are built upon Bloud, is a Foundation for the most part that doth not prosper. After the Blessing that I give to the Na∣tion, to the Kingdom, and truly to the Par∣liament, I do wish with all my heart, hap∣piness and a blessing to all those that have been Authors in this business; and truly, that have been Authors in this very work that bringeth us hither: I do not only for∣give them, but I pray heartily and really for them, as God will forgive my sins, so I de∣sire God may forgive them.
I have a particular Relation, as I am Chancellor of Cambridge, and truly I must here, since it is the last of my Prayers, pray to God that that University may go on in that happy way which it is in, that God may make it a Nursery to plant those per∣sons that may be distributed to the King∣dom, that the souls of the people may re∣ceive a great benefit, and a great advan∣tage by them, and (I hope) God will re∣ward them for their kindness, and their affections that I have found from them Looking to∣wards Mr. Bolton. I have said what Religion I have been bred in, what Religion I have been born in, what Reli∣gion I have practised, I began with it, and I must end with it. I told you that my Actions & my Life have not been agreeable to my Breeding. I have told you likewise that the Family where I was bred, hath been an exemplary Family (I may say so, I hope, without Vanity) of much affection to Religion, and of much faith∣fulness to this Kingdom, and to this State, I have endeavoured to do those Actions that became an honest man, and a good Englishman, and which became a good Christian. I have been willing to oblige those that have been in trouble, those that
have been in Persecution, and truly I find a great Reward of it; for I have found their Prayers and their kindness now in this di∣stress, and in this condition, and I think it a great reward, and I pray God reward them for it. I am a great sinner, and I hope God will be pleased to hear my prayers, to give me faith to trust in him, that as he hath called me to death at this place, he will make it but a passage to an eternal Life through Je∣sus Christ, which I trust to, which I rely upon, and which I expect by the Mercy of God. And so I pray God bless you all, and send that you may see this to be the last ex∣ecution, and the last bloud that is likely to be spilt among you. And then turning to the side-rayl, he prayed for a good space of time; after which, Mr. Bolton said, My Lord, now look upon him whom you have trusted. My Lord, I hope that here is your last Prayer, there will no more Prayers remain, but Praises; and I hope that after this day is over, there will a day begin that shall never have end; and I look upon this (my Lord) the Morning of it, the Morning of that day. My Lord, You know where your Fulness lies, where your riches lie, where is your only Rock to anchor on; you know there
is fulness in Christ: If the Lord comes not in with fulness of Comfort to you, yet resolve to wait upon him while you live, and to trust in him when you die; and then say, I will die here, I will perish at thy feet, I will be found dead at the feet of Jesus Christ. Certainly, he that came to seek and save lost sinners, will not reject lost sinners when they come to seek him; He that intreateth us to come, will not sleight us when we come to intreat him. My Lord, there is enough there, and fix your heart there, and fix your eyes there, that eye of Faith, and that eye of Hope; exer∣cise these Grace; now, there will be no exercise hereafter. As your Lordship said, here take an end of Faith, and take an end of Hope, and take a Farewel of Repentance, and all these; and welcome God, and welcome Christ, and welcome Glory, and welcome Happiness to all Eternity; and so it will be an happy passage then, if it be a passage here from misery to hap∣piness. And though it be but a sad way, yet, if it will bring you into the presence of Joy, al∣though it be a Valley of Tears, although it be a shadow of death, yet if God will please to bring you, and make it a passage to that happi∣ness, welcome Lord. And I doubt not, but God will give you an heart to tast some sweet∣ness and Love in this bitter Potion, and to see
somthing of Mercy and Goodness to you, and shew you some sign and token of good, so that your soul may see that which we have had al∣ready experience of (blessed be God for it) ma∣ny Experiences, many Expressions, not only in words, nor tears; God hath not left us without much Comfort and evidence, and I hope (my Lord) you that have given so many Evidences to us, I hope you want none your self, but that the Lord will be pleased to support you, and bear up your Spirit, and if there want Evidence, there is Reliance, my security lies not in my knowing that I shall come to Heaven, and come to Glory, but in my resting and relying upon him; when the Anchor of Faith is thrown out, there may be shakings and tossings, but there is Safety; nothing shall interrupt Safety, although somthing may interrupt Security: my safety is sure, although I apprehend it not: and what if I go to God in the dark? What if I come to him, as Nicodemus did, staggering in the night? It is a night of trouble, a night of dark∣ness, though I come trembling and staggering in this night, yet I shall be sure to find comfort and fixedness in him. And the Lord of Hea∣ven be the strength, stay and support of your soul, and the Lord furnish you with all those Graces which may carry you into the besom of the Lord Jesus, that when you expire this life,
you may be able to expire it into him, in whom you may begin to live to all Eternity; and that is my humble Prayer. Holland. M. Bolton, God hath given me long time in this world; he hath carried me through many great accidents of for∣tune, he hath at last brought me down in∣to a condition, where I find my self brought to an end, for a dis-affection to this State, to this Parliament, that (as I said before) I did believe no body in the world more unlikely to have expected to suffer for that cause; I look upon it as a great Judgment of God for my sins. And truly, Sir, since that the death is violent, I am the less troubled with it, because of those violent deaths that I have seen before; principally my Saviour, that hath shewed us the way, how, and in what manner he hath done it, and for what cause, I am the more com∣forted, I am the more rejoyced. It is not long since the King my Master passed in the same maner; and truly I hope that his purposes and intentions were such, as a man may not be ashamed, not only to fol∣low him in the way that was taken with him, but likewise not ashamed of his put∣poses, if God had given him life. I have often disputed with him concerning many
things of this kind, and I conceive his suf∣ferings, and his better knowledge, and bet∣ter understanding (if God had spared him life) might have made him a Pr. very happy toward himself & this Kingdom. I have seen and known that those blessed souls in Hea∣ven have passed thither by the gate of sor∣row, and many by the gate of violence; and since it is Gods pleasure to dispose me this way, I submit my soul to him, with all comfort, and with all hope, that he hath made this my end, and this my conclusion, that though I be low in death, yet never∣theless this lowness shall raise me to the highest glory for ever. Truly, I have non said much in pub∣lick to the People, concerning the particu∣lar Actions that I conceive I have done by my Counsels in this Kingdom, I conceive they are well known, it were somthing of vanity (methinks) to take notice of them here: I'le rather die with them, with the comfort of them in my own bosom, & that I never intended in this Action, or any acti∣on that ever I did in my life, either malice, or bloudshed, or prejudice to any creature that lives. For that which concerns my Religion, I made my Profession before of it, how I was bred, and in what manner I was
bred, in a Family that was looked upon to be no little notorious in opposition to some liberties they have conceived then to be ta∣ken; and truly, there was some mark upon me, as if I had some taint of it, even throughout my whole waies that I have ta∣ken: every body knows what my Affecti∣ons have been to many that have suffered, to many that have been in troubles in this Kingdom, I endeavoured to relieve them, I endeavoured to oblige them, I thought I was tied so by my Conscience, I thought it by my Charity, and truly, very much by my Breeding; God hath now brought me to the last instant of my time, all that I can say, and all that I can adhere unto, is this, That as I am a great sinner, so I have a great Saviour; that as he hath given me here a Fortune to come publickly in a shew of shame in the way of this suffering (truly I underst and it not to be so) I understand it to be a Glory; a glory, when I consider who hath gone before me, and a glory, when I consider I had no end in it, but what I conceive to be the Service of God, the King, and the Kingdom, and therefore my heart is not charged much with any thing in that particular, since I conceive God will accept of the intention, whatsoever the
Action seems to be. I am going to die, and the Lord receive my Soul; I have no Re∣liance, but upon Christ: For my self, I do acknowledge, that I am the unworthiest of sinners, my Life hath been a vanity, and a continued sin, and God may justly bring me to this end, for the sins I have com∣mitted against him, and were there nothing else but the iniquities that I have commit∣ted in the way of my Life, I look upon this as a great Justice of God, to bring me to this Suffering, and to bring me to this Punish∣ment; and those hands that have been most active in it, if any such there hath been; I pray God forgive them; I pray God there may not be many such Trophies of their Victories, but that this may be (as I said before) the last shew, that this People shall see, of the Bloud of persons of Condition, of Persons of Honour: I might say som∣thing of the way of our Trial, which cer∣tainly hath been as extraordinary, as any thing I think hath ever been seen in this Kingdom; but because that I would not seem as if I made some complaint, I will not so much as mention it, because no body shall believe I repine at their Actions, that I repine at my Fortune; it is the will of God, it is the hand of God, under whom I
fall; I take it entirely from him, I submit my self to him, I shall desire to roul my self into the Arms of my blessed Saviour, and when I come to this Pointing to the Block. place, when I bow down my self there, I hope God will raise me up; and when I bid farewel, as I must now to Hope and to Faith, that Love will abide; I know nothing to ac∣company the Soul out of this world, but Love; and I hope that Love will bring me to the fountain of glory in Heaven, through the Arms, Mediation, and the Mercy of my Saviour Jesus Christ, in whom I believe, O Lord help my Unbelief. Hodges. The Lord make over unto you the Righteousness of his own Son, it is that Treasu∣ry that he hath bestowed upon you; and the Lord shew you the light of his countenance, and fill you full with his Joy and Kindness. O my dear Lord, the Lord of Heaven and Earth be with you, and the Lord of Heaven & Earth bring you to that Safety. Holland. I shall make as much hast as I can to come to that Glory, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth take my Soul; I look upon my self entirely in him, and hope to find Mercy through him, I expect it, and through that Fountain that is opened for
sin and for uncleanness, my soul must re∣ceive it; for did I rest in any thing else, I have nothing but sin and Corruption in me, I have nothing but that, which in stead of being carried up into the Arms of God, and of Glory, I have nothing but may throw me down into Hell. Bolton. But my Lord, when you are cloath∣ed with the Righteousness of another, you will appear Glorious, though now sinful in your self; The Apostle saith, I desire not to be found in my own Righteousness, and when you are cloathed with another, the Lord will own you, and I shall say but thus much: Doubt not that ever God will deny Salvation to sinners, that come to him, when the end of all his death and sufferings was the Salvation of sinners, when as, I say, the whole end, and the whole Design, and the great work, that God had to do in the world, by the death of Christ, wherein he laid out all his Counsels, and infinite wisdom, and goodness, beyond which, there was a non ultra in Gods thoughts, when this was the great de∣sign, and great end, the salvation of poor sin∣ners, that poor souls should come over to him, and live; certainly, when sinners come, he will not reject, he will not refuse: And, my Lord, do but think of this, the greatest work that ever
was done in the world, was the bloud of Christ that was shed, never any thing like it: And this Bloud of Christ that was shed, was shed for them that come, if not for them, for none, it was in vain else: You see the Devils they are out of capacity of good by it, the Angels they have no need of it, wicked men will not come, and there are but few that come over, but a few that come over, and should he deny them, there were no end nor fruit of the Blond and Suffer∣ings of the Lord Jesus: and had your Lord∣ship been with Christ in that bloudy Agony, when he was in that bloudy sweat, sweating drops of Bloud, if you had asked him, Lord, what art thou now a doing, art thou not now re∣conciling an angry God and me together, art thou not pacifying the wrath of God? art thou not interposing thy self between the Justice of God and my soul? Would he not have said, Yea? and surely then he mill not deny it now. My Lord, his Passions are over, his Com∣passions still remain, and the larger and great∣er, because he is gone up into an higher place, that he may throw down more abundance of his mercy and grace upon you, and, my Lord, think of that infinite love, that abundance of riches in Christ: I am lost, I am empty, I have no∣thing, I am poor, I am sinful; be it so, as bad as God will make me, and as vile as I possibly
can conceive my self, I am willing to be: but when I have said all, the more I advance that Riches, and honour that Grace of God. And why should I doubt, when by this, he puts me into a capacity, into a disposition for him to shew me Mercy, that by this I may the better advance the riches of his Grace, and say, grace, grace, to the Lord to all Eternity, that God should own such a Creature that deserves no∣thing; and the less I deserve, the more conspi∣uous is his Grace: And this is certain, the riches of his Grace he throweth amongst men, that the Glory of his Grace might be given to himself; if we can give him but the Glory of his Grace, we shall never doubt to partake of the riches of it; and that Fulness, My Lord, that fulness be your Comfort, that fulness of Mercy, that fulness of love, that fulness of righteousness and power be now your riches, and your only stay, and the Lord interpose himself between God and you, as your Faith hath en∣deavoured to interpose him between God and your soul; so I doubt not there he stands (my Lord) to plead for you, and when you are not able to do any thing your self, yet lie down at the feet of him that is a merciful Saviour, and knows what you would desire, and wait upon him while you live, trust in him when you die, here is riches enough, and mercy enough, if he
open not, yet die at his door, say there I'le die, there is Mercy enough. Holland. And here is the place where I lie down before him, from whence I hope he will raise me to an eternal glory through my Saviour, upon whom I relie, from whom only I can expect Mercy: into his Arms I commend my Spirit, into his bleeding Arms, that when I leave this bleeding bo∣dy, that must lie upon this place, he will receive that Soul that ariseth out of it, and receive it into his eternal mercy, through the Merits, through the worthiness, through the Mediation of Christ, that hath purcha∣sed it with his own most precious Bloud. Bolton. My Lord, though you conclude here, I hope you begin above, and though you put an end here, I hope there will never be an end of the Mercy and goodness of God, and if this be the Morning of Eternity, if this be the rise of Glory, if God pleaseth to throw you down here, to raise you up for ever, say, Welcome Lord, welcome that death that shall make way for life, and welcom any condition that shall throw me down here, to bring me into the possession of Jesus Christ. Hodges. My Lord, if you have made a
Deed of Gift of your self to Jesus Christ, to be found only in him, I am confident you shall stand at the day of Christ, my dear Lord, we shall meet in happiness. Holland. Christ Jesus receive my soul, my soul hungers & thirsts after him, clouds are gathering, and I trust in God through all my heaviness, and I hope through all im∣pediments, he will settle my Interest in him, and throw off all the claim that Satan can make unto it, and that he will carry my soul in despight of all the calumnies, and all that the Devil, and Satan can invent, will carry it into eternal mercy, there to receive the blessedness of his Presence to all Eter∣nity. Hodges. My Lord, it was his own by cre∣ation, it is his own now by Redemption and pur∣chase; and it is likewise his own by resignation: O my Lord, look therefore up to the lamb of God, that sits at the right hand of God, to take away the sins of the world, O that lamb of God! Holland. That Lamb of God, into his hands I commit my soul: And that Lamb of God that sits upon the Throne to judge those 24 that fall down before him, I hope he will be pleased to look downward, and
judge me with mercy that fall down before him, and that adore him, that only trusts upon his Mercy, for his compassion; and that as he hath purchased me, he would lay his claim unto me now, and receive me. Bolton. My Lord, think of this, there is no condemnation to them who are in Christ; who is it that can condemn? it is Christ that justifies: and therefore look now upon this, (My Lord,) upon this Christ, upon this Christ that justifies: Hell, Death, Sin, Satan; nothing shall be able to condemn, it is Christ that justifies you. Holland. Indeed if Christ justifie, no body can condemn, and I trust in God, in his justification, though there is a confu∣sion here without us, and though there are wonders and staring that now disquiet, yet I trust that I shall be carried into that mer∣cy, that God will receive my Soul. Bolton. I doubt not my Lord, but as you are a Spectacle of Pitty here, so you are on Ob∣ject of Gods mercy above. Holland. Then the Earl of Holland look∣ing over among the People, pointing to a Souldier, said, This honest man took me a Prisoner, you little thought I should have been brought to this, when I delivered my
self to you upon conditions: and espying Captain Watson on horse-back, putting off his hat, said to him, God be with you Sir, God reward you Sir. Bolton. My Lord, throw your self into the arms of mercy, and say, there I will Anchor, and there I will die, he is a Saviour for us in all conditions, whither should we go? he hath the words of eternal life: and upon him do you rest, wait while you live, and even trust in Death. Holland. Here must now be my Anchor, a great storm makes me find my Anchor; and but in storms no body trusts to his An∣chor; and therefore I must trust upon my Anchor (Upon that God, said Mr. Bolton, Upon whom your Anchor trusts) ye, God I hope, will Anchor my Soul fast upon Christ Jesus: and if I die not with that clearnesse and heir inesse that you speak of, truly, I will trust in God, though he kill me, I will relie upon him, and in the Mercy of my Saviour. Bolton. There is mercy enough, my Lord, and to spare, you shall not need to doubt; they shall never go begging to another door (my Lord) that come to him. Then the Earl of Holland speaking to Mr. Hodges, said, I pray God reward you for all your kindness, and
pray as you have done, instruct my Family, that they may serve God with faithfulness and holiness, with more diligence, than truly I have been careful to presse them unto: you have the charge of the same place, you may do much for them, and I recommend them to your kindnesse, and the goodnesse of your Con∣science. Dr. Sibbald standing upon the Scaffold, in his passage to Col. Beecher expressed himself thus to his Lordship. Dr. Sibbald. The Lord lift up the light of his Countenance upon you, and you shall be safe. Holland. Then the Earl of Holland em∣braced Lieutenant Col. Beecher, and took his leave of him: After which he came to Mr. Bolton, and having embraced him, and returned him many thanks for his great pains and affections to his Soul, desiring God to reward him, and return his love into his bosom. Mr. Bolton said to him, The Lord God support you, and be seen in this great extremity; the Lord reveal and discover himself to you; and make your death the passage unto eternal life — Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, here, my friend, let my
Cloathes and my Body alone, there is Ten pounds for thee, that is better than my Cloathes, I am sure of it. Executioner. Will your Lordship please to give me a Sign when I shall strike? And then his Lordship, said you have room enough here, have you not? and the Executioner said, Yes. Bolton. The Lord be your strength, there is riches in him; The Lord of Heaven im∣part himself to you, he is able to save to the ut∣ter most: We cannot fall so low as to fall below the everlasting Arms of God; and therefore the Lord be a support and stay to you in your low condition, that he will be pleased to make this an advantage to that life and glory that will make amends for all. Holland. Then the Earl of Holland turn∣ing to the Executioner, said, Friend, do you hear me, if you take up my head, do not take off my Cap. Then turning to his Servants, he said to one, Fare you well, thou art an honest fellow; and to another, God be with thee, thou art an honest man: and then said, Stay, I will kneel down, and ask God forgiveness; and then pray∣ed for a pretty space, with seeming earnest∣nesse.
Bolton. The Lord grant you may find life in death. Holland. Which is the way of lying? (which they shewed him,) and then go∣ing to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People, God blesse you all, and God deliver you from any such accident as may bring you to any such death as is violent, either by War, or by these accidents, but that there may be Peace among you, and you may find that these accidents that have happened to us, may be the last that may happen in this Kingdom; it is that I de∣sire, it is that I beg of God, next the saving of my Soul: I pray God give all happiness to this Kingdom, to this People, and this Nation: and then turning to the Execu∣tioner, said, How must I lie? I know not. Executioner. Lie down flat upon your bel∣ly: and then having laid himself down, he said, must I lye closer? Execut. Yes, and backwarder. Holland. I will tell you when you shall
strike; and then as he lay, seemed to pray with much affection for a short space, and then lifting up his head, said, where is the man? and seeing the executioner by him, he said, stay while I give the sign; and pre∣sently after stretching out his hand, and the executioner being not fully ready, he said, now, now, and just as the words were com∣ing out of his mouth, the executioner at one blow severed his head from his bo∣dy.
The Execution of Mr. Beaumont, a Minister at Pontfract, 15 Feb. 1648. and the like done afterwards to Major Morris, and Coronet Michael Blackburn, at York, 23. August, 1649. FOR the everlasting memory, and the obliging Ruines of this Town and Castle, together with the memory of these Persons, we must repeat from the begin∣ning, and tell the world how far, and how much beyond all other Fortresses and pla∣ces, this Garrison continued for the King; and was valiantly defended, pru∣dently maintained, couragiously and bravely rescued and freed; and in conclu∣sion, made its own glorious Sepulcher and Monument. This place, infamous formerly for the death of King Richard the second, for the Execution of Richard Woodvile Earl of Rivers, and the rest of those unhappy relations to the Wife of Edward the 4th. hath now redeemed it self by the price cur∣rent of Loyal Blood, and is consecrated in its demolitions and ruines to the venera∣tion of an Altar, whereon so many ac∣ceptable
sacrifices to Heaven have been laid and offered. Not to summon the Genius of that place to an account, we will derive the cruelty of those sanguinary perpetrations upon the lives of these men from asstrange and hidden Notions. Nothing but most unexpiable malice contracted from the hardned guilt of rebellion, could have vio∣lenced the insolent Victor into so much inhumanity and baseness, nay, barbarous and detestable cruelty; but some fierce and most compulsive Engines of merciless Tyranny and Ambition, who in this noble and most loyal Garison reared, and dis∣played their compleat Conquest. In the defence hereof many noble persons were concerned at several times, as the advantages and difficulties of that place successively required; many brave exploits and attempts were often perfor∣med to the honour of themselves, and the terrou of their Enemies, partic ularly in that memorable business of Col. Rains∣borough, who quartering ten miles from the Leager (Pontefract being then besieg∣ed by Sir Edward Rhodes, and other Coun∣ty Forces:) and being ordered to com∣mand in chief, and finish that piece of ser∣vice,
was by a resolute small party of Horse, who sallied from thence in spight of the Besiegers, killed in his Inne, having first refused quarter, and fell as an expia∣tory victime to the slaughter, and murder of Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, shot to death a little while before at Col∣chester. Among the rest of such gallant Spirits related to that Garison this Mr. Beau∣mont, a Minister of the Orthodox Prote∣stant Religion, was much noted for his loyal, resolute and constant adherence, and maintenance of the Royal Cause. This his loyaltie was employed as well without as within that Garison; being by the venerable respect to this Order (not so rudely profaned then in those parts of the Nation) more freely permitted, and un∣suspectedly suffered to entertain, and har∣bour and transact with all manner of men according to the unbounded and unlimit∣ed use of his Function: but neither his heart, nor his house were open to any but faithfull Subjects, with such, of whom upon the surprizal of Pontefract the third of July 1648. by Major Morris & others, this Gentleman held correspondency. All this time every good man put to
his helping hand to the restoring of the King; and this being an Important Ser∣vice, making the Royal Interest conside∣rable in the North, much care was taken by the well-affected people adjacent thereto for a supply of that place with all manner of provision of Arms and sustenance. The care whereof Mr. Beaumont reso∣intely took upon himself, and before any formal siege, the Parliament-Forces be∣ing otherwise employed, had several re∣courses thereto, maintained a strict intel∣ligence, was often out upon Parties with them, and had regulated and stated the Contribution from the places therea∣bouts, which was either freely paid, or as couragiously forced, till after the defeat of Duke Hamilton at Preston in Lanca∣shire, they were wholly surrounded, and block'd up. This distress of his Friends further ob∣liged him to their assistance, so far was the danger from detering of him, therefore he adventured in his own person to go and see in what condition they were, and to take a view of the likeliest means of relief, and give an account of the Ene∣mies strength, and advantages, or weak∣ness,
and most attemptible place of their Lines and entrenchment. But in this design he was surprized and taken, and immediately brought before a Council of War, who enraged at the death of Rainsborough, and insolenced by their late many Victories, & Flesh'd with the carnage and blood of so many pre∣ceding Sacrifices, especially that of the King's, they made no bones of him, but condemned him to the Gibbet with such fury and hast, that they would scarce afford him time to recommend himself from their merciless Bar to the merciful and just Tribunal of Heaven, which would ere long judge righteously in his cause between his Enemies and himself. He was not long in preparation for his dissolution, having as well learned as taught the necessity of Death; improved to him into an easie suffering, & undergo∣ing of it by the glory of his cause, so that he quietly submitted to their Sentence; and with Christian resolution, owning his actions in order to his duty, laid down his life the day and year aforesaid, and will therefore deservedly among the rest of his glorious Company be had in precious and everlasting remembrance.
Not long afterwards followed the ren∣dition of Pontefract-Castle, surprized as aforesaid by Col. Morris; they had stood it out to extremity, there being no place in England for the King besides, & there∣fore were forced to accept of very hard Conditions: which were, that six of the garison, whom they should chuse, should be left at discretion. The reason of this calling out this Number was a resolution to Sa∣crifice them to the ghost of the said Rains∣borough, being assured, that those that per∣formed that exploit were then in the Castle, & might be discovered upon view. Among those, or rather for those this Gentleman was taken, being the Governor of the place, and with Cornet Michael Blackbourn, and the others brought to the City of York, and committed to that Goal until the Summer-Assizes held there by Baron Thorp for that County, when an In∣dictment of Treason was brought against them for levying War against the Parlia∣ment; & therupon found guilty by a pack'd Jury and after Sentence of being hanged, drawn, and quartered, they were executed the day and year aforesaid, the rigour of dismembring them being only abated. At their death they spake as followeth.
The Speech of Col. John Morris, Govern∣our of Pontefract-Castle, at the place of his Execution at York, August 23. 1649. WHen he was brought out of prison, looking upon the Sledge that was there set for him, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, knocking upon his breast, he said, I am as willing to go to my death, as to put off my doublet to go to bed; I de∣spise the shame as well as the Cross; I know I am going to a joyful place: with many like expressions, When the Post met him about St. James Church, that was sent to the Parliament to mediate for a reprieve; and told him he could not prevailin it, he said, Sir, I pray God reward you for your pains, I hope, and am well assured to finde a better pardon then any they can give; my hope is not in man, but in the living God: At the place of Execution he made this profession of his faith, his breeding, his cause he had fought in. Gentlemen, First I was bred up in the true Protestant Religion, having my edu∣cation
and breeding from that honorable House my dear Lord & Master Strafford, which place I dare boldly say, was as well governed and ruled as ever any yet was before it; I much doubt, better then any will be after it, unless it please God to put a period to these distracted times: this Faith and Religion, I say, I have been bred in, and I thank God, I have hitherto lived in, without the least wavering, and now I am resolved by Gods assistance to dy in. These pains are nothing, if compared to those dolors and pains, which Jesus Christ our Saviour hath suffered for us; when in a bloody-Sweat he endured the Wrath of God, the pain of Hell, and the cursed and shameful death which was due to our sins; therefore I praise the Lord that I am not plagued with far more grie∣vous punishment, that the like hath be∣fallen others, who undoubtedly are most glorious and blessed Saints with Christ in Heaven. It is the Lords affliction, and who will not take any affliction in good part when it comes from the hand of God? And what? shall we receive good from the hands of God, and not receive evil? And though I desire, as I am carnal, that this Cup may depart from me, yet not
my will, but thy will be done. Death brings unto the godly an end of sinning, and of all miseries due unto sin: so that ater death there shall be no more sorrow, nor cry, nor pain, for God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes; by Death our souls shall be delivered from thraldom; and this corruptible body shall put on in∣corruption, and this mortal immortality. Therefore blessed are they that are de∣livered out of so vile a world, and freed from such a body of bondage and corrup∣tion; the soul shall enjoy immediate Communion with God in evetlasting bliss and glory; it takes us from the miseries of this world, and society of sinners, to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem. I bless God I am thought worthy to suf∣fer for his Name, and for so good a cause; and if I had a thousand lives, I would wil∣lingly lay them down for the cause of my King, the Lords Anointed; the Scripture commands us to fear God and honour the King, to be subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether to the King as supreme, or to to those that are in authority under him. I have been al∣ways faithful to my Trust: and, though I
have been most basely accused for betray∣ing Leverpool; yet I take God to witness, it is a most false aspersion, for I was then sick in my bed, and knew not of the de∣livering of it, till the Officers and Soul∣diers had done it without my consent, and then I was carried prisoner to Sir John Meldrum; afterwards I came down into the Country, and seeing I could not live quietly at home, I was perswaded by Co∣lonel Forbes, Colonel Overton, Lieut-Co∣lonel Fairfax, whom I took for my good friends, to march in their Troops: which I did, but with intention still to do my King the best service when occasion was, and so I did; and I pray God to turn the hearts of all the Souldiers to their lawful. Sovereign, that this Land may enjoy Peace, which till then it will never do: and though thou kill me, yet will I put my trust in thee; wherefore I trust in God he will not fail me nor forsake me. Then he took his Bible and read divers Psalms fit for his own occasion and consolation, and then put up divers prayers, some pub∣liquely, and some privately; the publique was this whih follows:
His Prayer. WElcome blessed hour, the period of my Pilgrimage, the term of my Bondage, the end of my cares, the close of my sins, the bound of my travels, the Goal of my race, and the haven of my hopes; I have fought a long fight in much weak∣ness; I have finished my course, though in great faintness; and the Crown of my joy is, that through the strength of thy grace, I have both kept the true faith, and have fought for my King, the Lora's Anointed's cause without any wavering; for which, and in which I die; I do willingly resign my flesh, I despise the World, and I defie the Devil, who hath no part nor share in me. And now what is my hope? my hope Lord Jesu is even in thee: for I know that thou my Redeemer livest, and that thou wilt im∣mediately receive my soul and raise up my body also at the last day, and I shall see thee in my flesh with these eyes, and none o∣ther. And now, O Lord, let thy Spirit of comfort help mine infirmities, and make supplication for me with sighs, and groans that cannot be expressed; I submit my self wholly to thy will; I commit my soul
to thee as my faithful Redeemer, who hast bought it with thy most precious blood. I con∣fess to all the world, I know no name under heaven by which I may be saved, but thine my Jesu, my Saviour; I renounce all con∣fidence in any merits save thine; I thank fully acknowledge all thy blessings; I unfeign∣edly bewail all my sins: I stedfastly be∣lieve all thy promises: I heartily forgive all my Enemies: I willingly leave all my Friends; I utterly loath all earthly com∣forts, and I entirely long for thy coming. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; Lord Je∣sus receive my Spirit. The private were to himself, his Hat being before his eyes. After this, he put up divers short Ejaculations: As, I know my Redeemer liveth; Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou hast redeemed it; O God, thou God of truth; Lord Jesus receive my spiri, and many of the like: and so he yielded to Death.
The Speech of Coronet Michael Black∣bourn, immediately before his death, August 23. 1649. It is expected I should say something and indeed it is my desire to say something, and but a little. I Am not a Gentleman by birth, but my Parents are of an honest quality and condition. I was brought up in the Pro∣testant Religion, and in that Religion I have lived, and in that I now dy. I have some five or six years since engaged in this War, where∣in I had no other end or intention but to do my King true and faithful service, accord∣ing to my duty and the dictate of my Con∣science. I have not done so much service as I desired, but I have been always faithful to him, and wish I could have done him more; and for his Son the King that now is, I won∣der any man of this Kingdom should have the boldness or impudence to life up his hand against him, to keep him from his Crown whereof he is Heir apparent, and hath as good right and title to it by his Birth-right, as any man living hath of his Inheritance or Possession: I pray God bless him, forgive all my Enmies, and Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.
Dr. Levens executed at the Old Ex∣change, London, the 18. of July 1650. THis learned Gentleman was descend∣ed of an antient family in Oxford-shire, whose chief seat and residence was near Botley, within a mile of the Univer∣sitie. His education was truly generous, his profession the Civil Law, wherein he was graduated a Doctor, and in which he was excellently known before these Wars. But when these uncivil broils began, he laid aside the practice of that Law, which was not onely silenced, by the de∣pression, and annihilation of the Hierar∣chy, in whose Courts it is most general∣ly used, but also despair'd of for any fu∣ture resuscitation during the Troubles; and he took himself to the service of his So∣vereign, then most unlawfully and unci∣villy assaulted and affronted by the Mem∣bers at Westminster. He continued most part of the War in the Garison at Oxford, and his own adjacent dwelling, till such time as the surrender of the said City into the hands
of the Parliament, where he had the same terms, and was concluded in the Articles of that Capitulation; which be∣ing forced to accept, and lay down his arms, he again resumed his wonted studies. From these he was again avocated by those monstrous and horrid actions of those times, which indulged not any man his private concerns in the danger and trouble of the publick, nor could he forsake, or desert his first cause with its fortune, and serve the times by a base and abject indifferency. He had to the infinite distraction of his mind, and trouble of his soul, seen the barbarous Regicide perpetrated upon the life of his Sovereign; the Royal Fa∣mily renounced and banished, all the friends thereof in most eminent danger to be destroyed, and undone for adhe∣hering to them, and the Laws in the late War, the Church and State renversed, and a sad confusion and ruine of the Kingdom (unless obviated by Providence, and means therewith used) to be impen∣dent and unavoidable. Upon these and the like considerations, this Gentleman, very considerable in
his numerous acquaintance, prudence and integrity, became engaged for the Son our present Sovereign, as before for his Roy∣al Father; several consultations, and pri∣vate meetings were held by him, and o∣thers, in order to this service, to which purpose he also received Commissions from the King, then in France, for several Officers of these Forces designed to be raised, and other Instructions, as the af∣fair proceeded. The Common-wealth, as it was then called, was in its infancy, which made its politick Guardians very cautious, and jealous of attempts upon it; the Kings interest was no whit the less formidable, because his person was beyond the Sea, the just indignation, and noble anger of his Subjects being ready to boil over up∣on any sudden motion; they had also so oppressed the generality of the people with grievous & insupportable Taxes, that they might well fear and suspect some more forcible and prosperous enterprise against them, by how much their impe∣ties, and high provocations had further incensed both heaven and earth. Therefore they employed their Emissa∣ries and Spies to give them intelligence,
if any such designs were on foot, and so to countermine all plots against them. Their sagacious industry in this soon an∣swered their expectation: for these flies prying up and down, engaging in all companies, assimulating themselves to their complexion, opinion, and study, light at last upon some glimpses of this busi∣ness, which they followed so close, that at last they made a perfect and full disco∣very of the main businesse, and that this Doctor Levens was the chief Agitator and manager thereof, in whose breast the Cabal was principally lodged and entrusted, and upon whose apprehension they might be informed and satisfied in every circumstance. An Order was thereupon made by the Council of State, and a Warrant signed by Bradshaw the President to seize, and bring him before them, and to search his Chamber, and break up his Trunks for papers, he then being at London, the place most expedient for the design, which accordingly was done, a file or two of Musketeers guarding, and securing the house, where the said Papers were, among which there were blank Commissions signed by the King to the purport afore∣said,
were found with him, and carried to the Council, who thereupon ordered him to be proceeded against as a spie, and referred him to a Council of War. Accordingly he was soon afterwards tried by a Court Martial, where he did not excuse himself, or extenuate his fault, but very modestly & handsomly acknow∣ledged their allegations against him, and the justice of his cause, of which he told them he was no way ashamed, but, if it must be so, would willingly lay down his life in the owning of it. He told them moreover, that he was bound indispensa∣bly by the Laws of God and this King∣dom, to do what he did, and so referred himself to them. They very earnestly pressed him to reveal the other parties engaged with him, and gave him some fal∣lacious hopes of life, if he would freely declare them, but those offers prevailed not with him, being resolved to suffer and take all upon himself, rather then to ruine others, whom they could not fasten upon without his discovery. So the Court proceeded to Sentence, which was, that he should be hanged o∣ver against the Exchange in Cornhill,
in Exchange time, which after some little preparation was executed, he be∣ing brought in a Coach from the Mews, with the Executioner vizarded with him, and a Troop of Horse to guard him to the said place, where the Sheriffs re∣ceived him into their charge. After he alighted, and some words passed be∣tween them concerning the said disco∣very, he told them they should not ex∣pect it, and desired them to forbear any further trouble to that purpose, and so ascended that ladder, which reached un∣to heaven, wherein he prayed very fer∣vently for the King, and the Church, and commended his soul into the hands of the Redeemer, and so concluded his last breath, which at the falling of his body mounted his soul to heaven, in whose blissful mansions he nows sings Hallelujah for ever.
Colonel Eusebius Andrews beheaded on Tower-hill, August 22. 1650. THis Gentleman, a most sincere and religious Protestant, being by pro∣fession a Counsellour of Grays-Inn, and who during the War had followed the Kings fortune out of Conscience of his obedience, and duty, was most wickedly trapand by the said Council of State and their Officers to his lamentable death; a Narative of the whole take as followeth. On Monday the 24 of March, 1649. Collonel Andrews was taken prisoner at Graves-end by Major Parker, and by a Troop of Horse that night conveighed to the George in Kings-street Westminster. The next day he was convented before the President Bradshaw, Sir Henry Mild∣may, and Thomas Scot; three members of the said Council delegated by them for the taking of the Examination of him, and of Sir Henry Chichley, Doctor Henry Ed∣wards, and Mr. Clark, casually found in the same Inne with Mr. Andrews. These Gentlemen examined him so punctually to every action and circum∣stance, that had passed on his part since he
took up Armes, and especially since the render of Worcester, and his return from thence to London, and also concerning his several Lodgings, Names, Acquain∣tances, Removes, Abodes in the Country, correspondencies by Letters, and interests in places, and persons, as if they had kept a Diary for him. Which considered, and that Sir John Gell Baroner, Major Bernard, Captain Smith, Captain Benson, and Capt. Ashley (with whom he had the last and most questionable correspondency) were all in custody; he found himself to be betrayed, but could not at present guesse by whom: but well saw, that he had bet∣ter be fair in his Confession, then to deny what he saw by the perfectness of his Exa∣miners would be proved against him by the discovery of those formerly secured, and examined before his coming up, and so resolved to bear the worst, and not so much to shame himself, or the matter, as to deny things evident, or easily prove∣able, but rather to cast himself upon God; and come off as well as he could with a truth in his mouth. In his Answers he would have been circumstantial, but was kept close to the Question, At his departure he desired he
might set down his own Narrative accor∣ding to his own sense, which was granted him to prepare, and to send, or bring them as there was opportunity. And, ha∣ving totally, and as much as in him lay ex∣cused his fellow-prisoners as to any thing related to his Delinquency, he was with them committed to the Gate-house. Wednesday following he was re-con∣vented and re-examined; and on Friday again convented, and delivered in his Narrative to the Lord President, and by him without further words returned. On Saturday he was re-called, and then as at all times before used and treated with ci∣vility, being only much pressed to disco∣ver some great Persons his supposed Con∣federates; their aym being, as he supposed, at Sir Guy Palms, Sir John Curson, and Sir Thomas Whitmore, &c. But it was a great blessing in his unhappiness, that it was not cumulative, nor fatal to any of his friends and familiars, who yet knew no∣thing of the reason of his imprisonment, more then by common same. On Sunday next he was called out of his bed, and by two Messengers, his kee∣per, and his man, brought into a Boat at Kings-bridge Westminster, and thence car∣ried
to the Tower, The Warrant which was read at the Lieutenants house, impor∣ted, That he was committed close priso∣ner for high Treason, in endeavouring to subvert the present Government, to be kept till delivered by Law. He was designed for a Prison-lodging by Col. West the Lieutenant; but upon notice of his quality he was put into the custody of Mr. Slaidon, one of the War∣ders in his house, equally convenient with the best. At his first coming to the Tower he had but two shillings in his Purse, and supposing he should be provided for at the States-charges, he sent to the Lieutenant to know what he would order for him; who returned, that if he had money he might have what he would, but at his pro∣vision nothing. His keeper was upon his delivery to his charge commanded to keep him safe, and if he escap'd threatned to be hanged, and a Sentinel set immediately at his door; and that day two Gentlewomen, coming to see him, were all imprisoned in the Round-house, and next day carried to the Council of State, and strictly exa∣mined. His Waterman that week brought him
some money, for which, and some affe∣ctionate words spoken of him, he was brought before the President, examined, rebuked, and dismissed, and a Centinel set at Mr. Andrew's window that he might not speak to any without. His Case was this: His Engagement for his late Majesty began in 1642. and continued until the surrender of Worcester 1645. He com∣pounded not for his Delinquency, not having a considerable, and not willing to own an inconsiderable Estate. He took neither Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant, Negative Oath, nor subscri∣bed Engagement. At his return to London to a private practice in his Calling for his necessary support; John Bernard, sometimes a Major under him, by reason of his good parts, and sober demeanor, being in his good opinion frequently visited him, and imparted to him such Occurrences, as he met abroad in discourse, and did intimate the discontents of the Levellers and A∣gitators, and the proceedings of a certain Committee of Officers, to which he was
Clerk, upon a printed charge against some of the Parliament for oppression, &c. By such discoveries he at last obtruded on the Colonel the acquaintance of one Capt. Helmes, who soon after brought with him one Benson, who pretended to have served under Sir John Gell, who fre∣quently produced Letters, transcripts of Letters (with the copying, whereof he pretended to be intrusted by Mr. Rush∣worth) which appeared to purport mat∣ters of State, to be delivered to Mr. Bushel to be sent beyond-Sea. These two insinuated what interest they had in the Reformadoes, and the ad∣vantage would be done by them for the Royal Party, and magnified Sir John Gells interest in his Country; and his re∣gret and reluctancie for what he had done for the Parliament. Barnard then pro∣pounded that a design formerly in the War laid by him for the taking of the Isle of Ely might by the said assistance, and Sir John's aid be revived and executed, but this project failed. In December 1649. Helmes brought the Col. instructions to draw up a Pe∣tition for Sir John Gell for his Arreares: this procured a meeting, where Sir John
took notice of his ill requital for his Ser∣vices, and desired to be represented to his new Majesty as his Loyal Subject for the future, and no more passed. There coming out soon after an Act, commanding Cavaliers to depart the Ci∣ty of London, being in treaty about tran∣splanting himself into Sir Edward Plow∣dens Plantation in New-Album; He was again visited by Major Barnard and Ben∣son, who gave him notice of a cnside∣rable design laid, ond friends and mony to back it; and that he should have 200 pound, and power to draw more by bills of Exchange, if I would go over and pro∣mote the said design with the Prince, and then in general terms acquainted him that it was an easie matter, the Ca∣valiers going out of Town, by correspon∣dence in all Counties, to surprize uhe Horse of the Army in their several Quar∣ters; the Col. answer was, that if the mony were ready, he would entertain the motion. Next day after they came again, and told him that the Gentlemen of Kent, Buckingham and Dorset, would presently be near the Town, and would joyn in an Engagement, and raise mony; that Sir
John Gell would engage likewise, and might easily bring in his Friends Sir An∣drew Knevela, Sir Guy Palmes, Mr. Fieq∣herbert, &c. and therefore desired the Co∣lonel to draw an Engagement (which he did in a loose Paper, according to the sense they instructed him) and to move Sir John Gell in the business, but pressed not the Coll. then to joyn in the same. Accordingly he spoke with Sir John, who refused to joyn, or meddle in the de∣sign, not daring to trust Benson, but re∣newed his desire to the Col. if he went over to possess the King with a good opi∣nion of him. This answer did not alto∣gether unsatisfie Barnards, who appoint∣edthe same few days after a meeting at the Yhree-crane-Tavern in the Savoy, for a meeting where should be present the Gentlemen of the aforesaid Counties, but they met not, only Barnard and Bnson, and one Capt. Ashley. Barnard produced Letters that the Kentish Gentlemen were come to Rochester, and would come, but within 12 miles of London, that night he durst go no further that day for fear of Col. Blunt; and that they did the mony, and had sent for him with a Guide to bring him to them, so he departed to take
Horse, while the other two pressed him again to get Sir John Gell to seal an En∣gagement which Benson had engrossed; which he refused, and told them, he was able to satisfie any body of Sir John Gel's reality, though not actually engaged. That same night comes a Messenger unknown to him from Barnard, highly blaming the Col. and Sir John Gell of backwardness in with-holding their hands from the En∣gagement, and that thereupon his Kentish friends would proceed no further; as this Smith the Messenger took upon him to be informed from them; but the Col. insisting, that Sir John was not to be urg∣ed further. This Smith, and Ashley de∣parted, and promised to pay the mony the next night at the Pals-graves-heads. But failing of their promise, and the next day the Colonel according to the Act being to depart the Town. Ashley delivered him that night a Letter from Barnard, pressing him to subscribe the Engagement which Benson engrossed, and that done he would go the nextday with him to Graves-end, where the Kentish Gentlemen should not fail to mee him. Being come to Graves-end alone, Bar∣nard,
as Benson pretended being at Tat∣tenham Court with the Bucking ham shire Gentlemen, there were none of the Kentish Gentlemen come thither: but two days after comes Barnard and Smith with a Letter from Benson, intimating, that if Sir John Gell would not engage with those whose names were subscribed, they would go over to the King and spoil his Reputation, and the Colonels both there; and that he had Letters from Sir John to produce which should make him repent his refusal, and therefore desired Col: Andrews to write to Sir John Gell, which he did, laying the Case before him; so they parted from the Colonel agree∣ing, if they got Sir John's Seal to come down to Gravesend, and so to Rochester for the mony, and performance of the Confederacy, or else to let the businesse fall, and return the Col. his Seal and En∣gagement. And while the poor betrayed Gentleman was in this suspense, he was seized at his Inn in Gravesend by a party of Horse, and brought prisoner to Lon∣don. This Narrative of his own was postilled with this Address to the three that examined him.
My Lords, IN this Narrative, you will see a be∣lieving Nature wrought upon by treacherous men: such, who cannot be true to any, while false to Parties: The pretended Design vanisht, as never being more then a Phantasme, and not worth the regard, the real Design effected so far, as they had power and opportunity; that is, to bring the Game into the Foil, and there leave them entangled, to be made a Quarry. You will finde me passively A∣stive, being prompted and enticed by their insinuation, and not once, but hearken∣ing to them. It lies in your Lordships power to cut me off, by extending whereof you can arrive at no honour amongst men: and possibly by an Act of Lenity you may do an Office acceptable to God, Cu∣jus fiat volunt as modo in mina mea; Whosoever shall be present at my Tryal, or, into whose hands this Narratiue shall fall, will easily conclude with me, Quo vult perdi Deus hos prius Dementat. Euseb. Andrews.
Shortly after he was called again, and was confronted with Sir John Gell; and avowed what he did neither directly de∣ny, nor was troubled that he did aver. And then declared to Bradshaw, that he looked upon Sir John Gell as upon him∣self, a betrayed man, and so was dismist that time. The noble Colonel, understanding those Gentlemen taken with him were in restraint, writ to Sir Henry Mildmay con∣cerning them in these words: Honour'd Sir, The past Noblenesse I am sensible at your hands, as civilly treating me when before the State, though a great Delinquent, gave me this encourage∣ment, and you the trouble of this Address. It is no small encrease of my proper misfortune, that I see such who were taken with me as Companions to my Person, to share so deep in the punish∣ment, as do those Gentlemen, Mr. Ed∣wards, and Mr. Clark: persons so free from the guilt of my evil, that I am con∣fident they cannot give account for what cause I am deservedly a prisoner, though
it were made the price of their liberty. I am an humble Suitor to you, that you would take them into your favourable consideration, and mediate their enlarge∣ment; and, that you would not let them have a worse place in your thoughts, for that they are recommended to your Fa∣vour by, &c. The Colonel several times took upon him to aver to the Council of State, that they had Spies upon him for some years, and particularly that infamous fellow Barnard, which Bradshaw denyed not, but justified the State, by the practice of all Governments, to set Watches upon persons of ill affection to them. Being in this condition, he was ad∣vised to Petition the Tyrannical Council, which according to some of their own Directions, was this, To the Right Honourable, the Lord President, and Council of State. The Humble Petition, &c. Shews, THat your Petitioner is deeply sensible, and humbly acknowledgeth, that for
his high Delinquency against the State, he is become forfeited to their Justice.— That he hath not in the least prevaricated with your Lordships in the confession of his proper faults and follies, nor hath kept ought reserved concerning himself, or any person, or they which may satisfie your Lordships, and more secure the State; and is not hopeless to be look'd upon as capable of your present favour, and future mercy, which he now, and shall always implore. That his present deserved Condition is made more uncomfortable by his wants, and the exclusion of his Friends and Re∣lations, without a supply, in which, life it self becomes a punishment. Your Petitioner casting himself at your Lordships feet, humbly prays, That his being prosecuted before the High Court of Justice, may be suspended; that by your order his past, and future charges of necessaries may be discharged while he remains your prisoner; That his Friends and Kinrea may have re∣course to him, and that he may have the freedom of his Pen. And, in case your Petitioner shall be found in the last
to misapply these favours; he shall, ad∣judge himself worthy of a total depriva∣tion of them, and your future goodness to∣wards him. And Your, &c. These were seconded with several o∣ther Petitions, especially one to the Parliament, and back'd with Letters to the Speaker, and the Lieutenant of the Tower, in referrence to maintenance, and freedom of persons coming to him, which with great difficulty, and by ex∣press order too of the Council, was hard∣ly obtain'd by a Gentlewoman of quality his friend. Having endured a tedious imprison∣ment of sixteen weeks, having nothing altered from those cruel Statesmen; he was at last in the Month of August brought to his tryal before a High Court of Justice, against whose Jurisdiction, and Authority he learnedly, and bravely spoke, and a; large denyed their power of trying and condemning any Freeman of England; their Erection being con∣trary to all the Laws of the Kingdom; the beginning of his first argument from not pleading to his Charge, was this:
My Lords, and you Gentlemen, Mem∣bers of this Honourable Court. I Have, as becomes me, been attentive to the Charge which hath been read a∣gainst me. It appears in that dress, that it is put alreadly (though I presume it shall be clad in other Apparrel by Mr. Attourny, so specious and great, as that my friends (if I have any here) begin to fear, the in∣different to doubt, and the partial to de∣fire, and joyn in my condemnation, my self (I hope I am not partial to my self) believe, that it will be no more then the Mountains labour, and when it shall come to be opened, will prove inane aliquod, like the Apples of Sodom, that, however they take the first sense, the eye, as this the ear, do rather foul the fingers that touch them, then satisfie the appetite in ex∣pectation upon them. My Lord, I am at an unusual Bar, engaged in a great Cause of a far, and extendible Concernment; my fee is life, and my dutie is self-preserva∣tion; which in it self were less considerable, if by a president of my suffering, the Con∣sequence would not prove mischievously E∣pidemical.
I do not refuse to plead to the Charge, but humbly crave leave to offer my Reasons for the suspending of my Plea. And if I be importunate, yet within the bounds of civi∣lity, I beg Your pardon, that I may have a free, full, and uninterrupted hearing. He proceeded with admirable Elegance and strength of Argument, and Reason throughout his Tryal: But that bloody Court, and cruel Attourney Gen. Prideaux over-ruled them all: telling him, that the Court was not at leisure to take notice of those Law-Cases, but of his Confession; that he had an affection to it though no∣thing acted, and that was sufficient Trea∣son, and for that affection he deserved Death; and thereupon the Court pro∣nounced sentence against him, that he should be beheaded. Thus was the Birth∣right of a Freeman of England denyed by wicked Murtherers, whose will was their only Law. Between Sentence and Execution he received a preparatory Letter to Death from a Dear friend, to which he returned this answer. Friend, Your words sent to me were such, and so seasonable, that I have given them the same entertainment, as becomes
me to afford to Apples of Gold, and Pi∣ctures of silver; and if I be after my de∣collation dissected, you may finde them in my heart, where you always have had a Mansion. If fear were absolutely a necessa∣ry passion by which to denote a man, I must as yet be accounted among some other Species of Animality. The fear of Isaac hath banish'd all other dread∣ings. I look upon Death as upon that Rod in the hand of God, with which he would not have corrected me if less cor∣rection would have serv'd turn; and which he doth now exercise upon me, because he is resolved not to let me be less then a Son beloved; and I am con∣tent to bear the stripes, and kiss the In∣strument. I am sorry that my Rod is bound together with the sin of my Be∣trayer, and wish him Repentance, that when the Rod comes to be burned, he suffer not in the flame. I am proud, and covetous to be re∣leased from the double imprisonment I lie under, of the flesh and bones, and am ready for the opportunity to make an
escape, though in a fiery Chariot. All things betwixt God and me are removed from my sight; and I see him clearly without reflexion on my Judges, and Ac∣cusers: and submit chearfully to His fatherly Dispensation, and Judgement. My Judges have done me no wrong; they have a Law for their Warrant, and my confession for their Evidence; nei∣ther have capacity to be Chancellors in matters of life; Let them go free, and the Law-makers? and inforcers of it, for their errours in constituting them, before the padling in blood grow too customary to be thought a sin worthy their confessi∣on, or sorrow, which I desire for the fakes of their souls, and the lives of the oppressed, and in indeed prescribed Free Christians of the Nation. The God of all goodness hath in mer∣cy hoked upon me, directed, counsel'd me, comforted, and sanctified my afflicti∣to me; and I am ready to fall into his merciful Hands, as soon as the heavy hand of the Executioner shall have given a Nune Dimitis to Yours, &c. E. A.
ABout the same time he made his Will, a taste whereof take in these few following lines. — If it be the un∣alterable and uncontrolable Will of God, that I Eusebius Andrews, Esq shall for my manifold and high Provocations of his Divine Majesty be shipwrackt by that storme which impendeth over my head, I most humbly and chearfully submit unto such his good will and pleasure, and for∣give, &c. and desire, that my body may be privately interred in the Parish Church of Alhallows Bark. in London, as near as may be to the Reverend Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, there with him to expect a joy∣ful resurrection. I beseech God to bless my daughter Mavilda Andrews, and to supply to her, what by my improvidence, and the accidents of the late tempestuous times, as in my being taken away became deficient; and that he would preserve her from want and dishonour, and from being by any evil Counsel, or example, led aside into the foul errors of this Nation in matters concerning her souls health, &c. Here he gave her, and the whole world, an account of his faith, which was equal∣ly distant from Popery, Presbytery, and
Independency, all which he charactered, professing himself a true son of this Church, as governed by Episcopacy, and conluded thus; I desire such, who approve my profession, to cover my faults in their charity, and to let me be sweet in their memory. As for the rest, I wish them a seasonable repentance, but set no price either upon their opinion or report, Vivat Rex, currat Lex, floreat Grex; fiat voluntas Des modo in mina mea. He was shortly after beheaded, and enrolled into the noble army of Martyrs in Heaven, the day and year above∣said. Barnard, his accuser and betrayer was hanged four years after at Tyburn, for robbing Colonel Winthorps house at Westminster; so did God avenge the blood of this Royal and pious person, by signal testimony of his unjust and mercilesse prosecution.
The Speech of Col. Eusebius Andrews immediately before his Execution on the Scaffold on Tower-hill, on Thurs∣day August 22. 1650. being attended on by Dr. Swadling. AS soon as he came upon the Scaf∣fold, kissing the block, he said, I hope there is no more but this block be∣tween me and heaven; and to the Lieu∣tenant of the Tower he said, I hope I shall neither tire in my way, nor go out of it. After he had been a good while upon the Scaffold, turning to the rail, he speaks to the people as followeth; Christian Gentlemen and people, Your business hither to day is to see a sad spectacle, a man to be in a moment unman'd, and cut off in the prime of his years, taken from further opportunities of doing good either to himself, his friends, the Com∣mon-wealth, or especially to God; it seldom happens but upon very good cause. And though truly, if my general known course of life were but inquired into, I may modestly say there is such a moral of honesty upon it, as some may be so sawcy as to expostulate why this
great judgment is fallen upon me; but know, I am able to give them and my self an answer, and out of this breast am able to give a better account of my Judgment and Execution then my Judges themselves, or you are able to give; It is Gods wrath upon me for sins long unrepented of, many Judgements with∣stood, and mercies slighted; therefore God hath whipped me by his severe rod of cor∣rection, that he might not lose me: I pray joyn with me in prayer, that it may not be a fruitless rod, that when by this rod I have laid down my life, by this staffe I may be comforted, and received into glory. I am very confident by what I have heard since my sentence, there is more exception made against proceed∣ings against me then I even made. My tryers had a Law, and the value of that Law is indisputable, and for me to make a question of it, I should shame my self and my discretion. In the strictness of that Law something is done by me, that is applicable to some clause therein, by which I stand condemnable: the means whereby I was brought under that inter∣pretation of that which was in my self intended maliciously, being testimony
given (by persons whom I pity) so false, yet so positive, that I cannot condemn my Judges for passing sentence against me, according to legal Justice; for equity lieth in higher breasts. As for my Accusers, or rather betray∣ers, I pity, and am sorry for them, they have committed Judas his crime, but I wish and pray for them Peters tears, that by Peters repentance they may escape Judas his punishment; and I wish other people so happy, they may be taken up betimes before they have drunk up more blood of Christian men, possibly less deserving then my self. It is true, there have been several ad∣dresses made for mercy, and I will put the obstruction of it upon nothing more then upon my own sin, and seeing God sees it fit, (having not glorified him in my life) I might do it in my death; which I am contented to do. I profess in the face of God, particular malice to any one of State or Parliament, to do them a bo∣dily in jury I had none. For the Cause in which I had long wa∣ded, I must needs say, my engagement or continuance in it hath laid no scruple
upon my Conscience, it was in principles of Law; the knowledge whereof I pro∣fess, and on principles of Religion, my Judgement satisfied, and Conscience re∣ctified, that I have pursued those ways which I bless God I find no blackness up∣on my Conscience, nor have I put it into the bed-roll of my sins. I will not presume to decide contro∣versies; I desire God to honour himself in prospering that side that hath right with it, and that you may enjoy peace and plenty; when I shall enjoy peace and plenty, beyond all you possesse here; in my conversation in the world, I do not know where I have an enemy with cause, or that there is such a person whom I have to regret; but if there be any whom I cannot recollect under the noti∣on of Christian men, I pardon them, as freely as if I had named them by name, I freely forgive them, being in free peace with all the world, as I desire God for Christs sake, to be at peace with me. For the business of death, it is a sad sen∣tence in it self, if men consult with flesh and blood: But truly without boasting, I say it, or if I do boast, I boast in the Lord, I have not to this minute, had one
consultation with the flesh about the blow of the Axe, or one thought of the Axe, more then as my pass-port to glory. I take it for an honour, and I owe thankfulness to those under whose power I am, that they have sent me hither to a place, however of punishment, yet of some honour to die a death, somewhat worthy of my blood, answerable to my birth and qualification, and this courtesie of theirs hath much helped towards the pacification of my mind. I shall desire God that those Gentle∣men in that sad bed-rol to be tried by the High Court of Justice, that they may find that really there than is nomi∣nal in the Act; an High Court of Ju∣stice, a Court of high Justice, high in its righteousness, though not in its seve∣rity. Father forgive them, and forgive me as I forgive them. I desire you now that you would pray for me, and not give over praying till the hour of death, not till the moment of death, for the hour is come already; that as I have a great load of sins, so I may have the wings of your prayers, to help those Angels that are to convey
my soul to Heaven, and I doubt not, but I shall see my Saviour, my gallant Master the King of England, and another Master whom I much honoured; my Lord Capel, hoping this day to see my Christ in the presence of the Father, the King in the presence of him, my Lord Capel in the presence of them all, and my self there to rejoyce with all other Saints and Angels for ever∣more. Doctor Swadling (he being upon the Scaffold) spake as followeth unto the Colonel. You have this morning in the presence of a few, given some account of your Religion, and under general notions or words, have given an account of your faith, charity, and repentance. To those on the Scaffold: if you please to hear the same questions asked here, you shall, that it may be a general testi∣money to you all, that he died in the fa∣vour of God. To the Colonel. Now, Sir, I being to deal with you; do you acknowledge that this stroke that you are to suffer, is a just punishment laid upon you by God for your former sins?
Col. Andrews. I dare not only deny it, but dare not but confess it; I have no opportunity of glorifying God more, then by taking shame to my self, and I have a reason of the Justice of God in my own bosom; which I have put to your bo∣som. Doctor. You acknowledge that you deserve more then this stroak of the Axe, and that a far greater misery is due to you, even the pains and Torments of Hell that the damned there endure. Col. I know it is due in righteous Judgement; but I know again, I have a satisfaction made by my Elder-brother Christ Jesus; and then I say it is not due, is due from me, but quitted by his Righ∣teousness. Doct. Do you believe to be saved by that Mediator, and none other? Col. By that, and that only; renoun∣cing all secondary causes whatsoever. Doct. Are you truly, and unfeignedly sorry before God, as you appear to us, for all those sins that have brought you hither? Col. I am sorry, and can never be sor∣rowful enough, and am sorry I can be no more sorry.
Doct. If God should by a Miracle (not to put you to a vain hope) but, if God should as he did to Ezekiah, renew your days: what life do you resolve to lead hereafter? Col. It is a question of great length, and requires a great time to answer. Men in such straits would promise great things, but I would first call some friends to limit how far I should make a Vow, that I might  make a rash one, and to offer the Sacrifice of Fools; but a Vow I would make, and by Gods help endeavour to keep it. Doct. Do you wish health and happi∣ness upon all lawful Authorities, and Go∣vernment Col. I do prize all obedience to law∣ful Government, and the adventuring a∣gainst them is sinful; and I do not justifie my self, whatever my judgement be; for my thus adventuring against the present Government; I leave it to God to judge whether it be righteous: if it be, it must stand. Doct. Are you now in love, and cha∣rity with all men? Do you freely forgive them? Col. With all the World freely, and
the Lord forgive them, and forgive me, as I freely forgive them. Doct. You have for some late years laid down your Gown, and took up the Sword, and you were a man of Note in those parts where you had your residence. I have nothing to accuse you for want of diligence in hindering the doing of inju∣ries: yet possibly there might be some wrong done by your Officers, or those under you to some particular men: If you had your Estate in your hands, would you make restitution? Col. The wrongs themselves you bring to my mind are not great, nor many; some things of no great moment, but such as they are, my desire is to make re∣stitution, but have not wherewithall. Doct. If you had ability, would you likewise leave a legacy of thankfulness to Almighty God, something to his poor Servants: to his lame Members, to his deaf Members, to his dumb Members? Col. My will hath always been better then my ability that way. Doct. Sir, I shall trouble you very little further; I thank you for all those heavenly Colloquies I have enjoyed by being in your Company these three days
and truly I am very sorry I must part with so heavenly an Associate. We have known one another heretofore, but never so Chri∣stian-like before; I have rather been a Scholar to learn from you, then an Instru∣ctor; I wish this Stage wherein you are made a Spactacle to God, Angels, and the World, may be a School to all about you; for though I will not diminish your sins, nor shall I conceal, nor hypocrize my own, for they are great ones betwixt God and my self, yet I think there is few here have a lighter load upon them then you have; if we consider things well, and I only wish them your Repentance, and that measure of Faith which God hath given you, and that measure of Courage you have attained from God, and that constant perseverance God hath crowned you with hitherto. Col. His Name be praised. Here the Doctor prayed with him al∣most a quarter of an hour: after which the Col. turning himself again to the peo∣ple, spake as followeth: One thing more I desire to be clear in. There lieth a common imputation upon the Cavaliers, that they are Papists; and under that Name we are made odious to
those of the contrary opinion: I am not a Papist, but renounce the Pope with all his dependencies? when the distractions in RELIGION first sprang up, I might have been thought apt to turn from this Church to the Roman, but was utterly unsatisfied in their Doctrine, in point of Faith, and very much as to their Discipline. The Religion which I pro∣fess, is that which passeth under the name of Protestant; though that be rather a name of distinction, then properly essen∣tial to Religion. But the Religion which was found out in the Reformation, purged from all the errours of Rome in the Reign of Edward the sixth, practised in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, that blessed Prince de∣ceased; that Religion before it was defa∣ced, I am of, which I take to be Christs Catholique, though not the Roman Catho∣lique Religion: in the profession and pra∣ctice whereof, I will live and die; that for my Religion. Then he turnd himself unto the Executioner; I have no reason to quarrel with thee; thou art not the hand that throws the stone; I am not of such an Estate to be liberal, but there is three pound for thee, which is all I
have. Now tell me what I lack? Execut. Your hair's to be turned up. Col. Shew me how to fit my self upon the block. After which his doublet being off, and hair turned up, he turned again to the people, and prayed a good while: Before he laid down upon the Block, he spake again to the people, viz. There is not one face that looks upon me, though many faces, and perhaps dif∣ferent from me in opinion and practice, but (methinks) hath something of pity in it; and, may that mercy which is in your hearts fall into your own bosomes, when you have need of it; and may you never find such blocks of sin to stand in the way of your mercy, as I have met with. I beseech you joyn with me in prayer. Then he prayed (leaning on the Scaffold) with an audible Voyce for about a quarter of an hour; having done, he had some private conference with Doctor Swadling; Then taking his leave of his Friends, Sheriffs, and Ac∣quaintance, saluting them all with a courteous valediction, he prepared him∣self for the Block, kneeling down, said, let me try the Block, which he did; after casting his eyes up, and fixed them very intentively upon Heaven;
he said, when I say, Lord Jesus re∣ceive me, Executioner do thine Office; then kissing the Ax he laid down, and with as much undaunted, yet Christian courage, as possible as could be in man, did he expose his throat to the fatal Ax. his life to the Executioner, and com∣mended his Soul into the Hands of a faithful and merciful Creator, through the meritorious passion of a gracious Redeemer: saying the forementioned words, his head was smitten off at one blow. Sir Henry Hide, beheaded over against the Exchance, March 4. 1650. AFter this Rebellion had assumed its various shapes, put all by, and made up with its several interests, till it had quite outed the manner of true Re∣ligion, when there was no Law left but the arbitrary Will and Powers of the Grandees at Westminster: no man can wonder at this Turkish Example in the sad fate of this Honourable Person.
The truth is, he was the noble Brother to that excellently prudent States-man, the Right Honourable Earl of Clarendel, Lord Chancellor of England. But we must de∣tract from this Martyrs merit, if we involve it in his Brothers, whose capa∣cious influence upon the Councels and affairs of this Nation, hath rescued all honest and loyal men from the brinks of misery and ruin ten thousand times worse then Death. It is a sad Subject to Comment on, especially because we may repeat nothing here, but what has been most favourably, and that at his honourable Relations im∣portunity quite forgiven, though I hope that pardon extends not beyond the Memory of the sufferer, whatever it reaches to in the Oblivion of the Actor. He was sent, as he avowedly declared at his death as a Messenger only from our Sovereign King Charles the second, soon after the murther of his Royal Father to the Grand Seignior; that Office he aptly himself termed an Internuncio, which to his and the Kindomes Enemies sounded worse then the jealousie of Popery.
I make use of that term to discover the occasion of this his fate; since it hath its diversity of Names according to the customes and Languages of Na∣tions, as Envoy, &c. in the French, but throughout the World barbarous or ci∣vil, unlesse by sinister and bribed Arti∣fices, the very name of such persons were feared, and had in publique Vene∣ration. He was bred a Merchant, who tra∣ded to the Levant; and who by expe∣rience had gained, not only a conside∣rable Estate therewith, but also a Repute and Estimation amongst the Turkish Company; who, considering him as an intelligent Person in the businesse and management of that Traffique and en∣tercourse, made and constituted him their Consul at the Morea; which place, with what integrity he discharged, and how discreetly and advantagiously for the benefit of the said Company, he went through and performed, we need not offer to the Test, since so universally approved. For the convenience therefore of that concerning which the King had them at
the Port, this Gentleman was pitch upon and sent thither, but what he would have transacted there, if not opposed, is not to be ascertained; only thus far we may be assured, that there was little of pub∣lique matter therein, especially of preju∣dice to this Nation, or that Commerce in particular, as was most falsly and scan∣dalously noised by his Enemies, as may appear by a little instance. For, near the same time, the Right Honourable the Lord Wentworth, being sent Ambassadour from the King to the Emperour of Rus∣sia, to acquaint him with the horrid mur∣ther of our Sovereign his Royal Father; and to desire some assistance from him in order to the reducing of his Revolted Kingdomes; whereunto the Emperour frankly offered, besides what he would disburse of his own, the whole Estates, Goods, Merchandizes of the English re∣siding in his Dominions; my Lord ut∣terly refused the motion, acquainting the Emperour, that the King never had har∣boured any displeasure against his Mer∣chant Subjects, of whose loyaltie and af∣fection to him he was very well satisfied, though it was out of their power and abi∣lity to serve him.
So that it was a groundless and unrea∣sonable calumny framed on purpose to render him odious to the people: that his design and errand to Constantinople was upon the Merchants there in relation to their Estates, and that he was sent in the room of Sir Thomas Bendish, to be his Majesties Leiger there for that purpose; a scandal which obliquely hit Sir Henry to the taking away his life, but was doubly aymed at his Majesty, whom they would render to his Subjects (as they in their Traiterous Papers had called him) an E∣nemy to the Common-wealth. At his going to Constantinople, seve∣ral Messages past betwixt him and Sir Thomas Bendish, in order to his audience, which usually is prepared by the Resident there, which his mistakes and jealousie was a long time delayed, and at last fru∣strated. The Vizier being wrought up∣on to betray him, and to send him away for England by the Ships then bound thither from Smyrna, in one whereof (contrary to his Designation, and rein∣fect with some of Sir Thomas Bendishe men, who sided with him in obedience to the Kings Authority) he arrived at
London, and was presently committed to the Tower, where he past his Examina∣tion. I shall omit any further account, but refer the Reader to that Apology or De∣fence, which Sir Thomas Bendish lately published, in excuse of himself, and to free and clear his Reputation, charged with the guilt of this Martyrs death, and more especially to what Sir Henry himself said: a view whereof you have in the subsequent leaves. After some while imprisonment, he was brought before the High Court of Justice, and heard in defence of his life, wherein he would have used, and desired to speak in the Italian Language, being through long disuse of his Mother-tongue not so ready and expressive, as that impor∣tant matter required he should be; which request, by the folly and madnesse of his Judges was imputed to him as an affected pride and vanity. In conclusion, by a Power intrusted and lodged in that High Court of Justice, by Authority of Parliament, he was sentenced to be be∣headed, and the place and day assigned for the Execution.
The main incentive to this villany was without doubt the nearnesse of his Honourable Brother to the King, at whom this blow glanced; if also they did not remember and reckon their two presumptuous Emissaries, and Agents, Dorislaws and Achtan into the score. However it was, Sir Henry nothing dismaid at this outrage against his Life and Honour, quietly submitted to his doom; and at his death, though accom∣panied thereto with many diseases and Infirmities, couragiously asserted his Cause, owned his Master the King; and cleared them both from any As∣persions, and so rendered his Soul to God.
Sir Henry Hide's speech on the Scaffold near the Exchange, immediately be∣fore his Execution, March 4. 1650. REader, Take notice, that this Speech following is published in those very words that the Gentleman delivered them; and though there be some a∣brupt breakings off, and other ex∣pressions not so smooth as might have been, yet I could not with he∣nesty alter a word, and therefore have I tyed my self to his own ex∣pressions, that I may neither abuse the world, or the dying man, or my self. THe Gentleman came in a Coach to the Scaffold, attended by the Lieutenant of the Tower, and the Sheriffs of London, and also in his company one of his servants, and Dr. Hide. I Am come to put in pra∣ctice the Christian Pro∣fession; Sir Hen. Hide. and as I owe a death to nature and sin, now I pay it upon the score of grace.
Dr. Hide. Blessed be God that hath enabled you to it: God hath and will enable you. Sir H. Hide. Looking round on the People, he said, A populous City, God bless it, and grant they may live to his Grace. Then turning to his Man, he said, John, I pray now, though I have not been a good Master to you, be you a good Servant, and accompany me with your prayers, and help me both in body and mind John; Have you my things a∣bout you John? Then staying for his Servants, they being not on the Scaffold, he said, I had rather have my Servants then strangers. Then the Lieutenant of the Tower coming to him, he said, pray Sir rejoyce with me: I thank Almighty God I am brought hither to suffer for him. Lieut. of the Tower. I am glad you are so comforted: Gods Will be fulfilled in all things. Sir H. Hide. If God call me to him, and I glorifie him, it is well: I seek only the company of your Christian Prayers. Lieut. of the Tower. I shall not be
wanting in that, God willing. Then the Chirurgion coming (but not his Kinsman who was called for) he said, My kinsman is of no use, you may be useful about my body. I hope Mr. Sheriff, that you'l give order I may have a little more room here. Sheriff. Yes, yes, Sir. Sir H. Hide. And likewise for libertie of speech, and that it shall please you (for I am not acquainted with the forms here of England) that I may speak my own sense (I am now going into the presence of Almightie God) a very little, without any disturbance. Sheriff. Why Sir, you shall. Sir. H. Hide. John, where is my Cof∣fin? John. It is here Sir. Sheriff. Sir, it seems these men cannot be found. Sir H. Hide. But if Mr. Barret could be found. After some stay, Mr. Barret being not found, the Sheriff spake to him, saying. Sheriff. You have your libertie, you know your time. Sir H. Hide. Where is the place of standing, that way or this way? point∣ing
towards the Exchange and the Poul∣tery.) Sheriff. Which way you please: you may stand which way you will, but that way you must lie (pointing towards the Exchange.) Sir H. Hide. I am indifferent: it is not the way to heaven where a man stands. One brought word to him that there was no help to be had. Sir H. Hide. That is no hinderance to my felicity. Dr. Hide. God enable you that you may find that joy and comfort, which is due to the glory of his holy Name; he will not forsake you that have put your trust in him. Sir H. Hide. I will open my heart and my mouth with thanksgiving (if this Gentleman please to give way.) Then turning towards the Poultery, he put off his Hat, and said, Glory be to God on high, on Earth Peace, good will to men. CHristian People, I come hither to die; I am brought hither to die; and that I may die Christian-like, I humbly beseech your Christian Prayers, that by
the benefit of them my passage may be the more easie: Yet because men in that condition, which it hath pleased God to reduce me, carry more credit to their Speeches: In the discharge of my Duty towards God, I shall use a few words. and so dispatch. I pray all of you joyn with me to praise this Almighty God, to whom I de∣sire to render all hearty thanks; as for all his mercies, so in particular for this, That he hath brought me hither: That whereas I owe a duty to Sin and to Na∣ture, I can pay it upon the account of Grace. And because it is fit to render an account of the hope that is in me, I shall tell you, to the praise of Almighty God, That I have been born and bred up in the Doctrine of the Church of England, I have no negative Religion, believing to be saved by the onely merits of my Savi∣our Jesus Christ, (putting off his Hat) and whatsoever else is profest in the Do∣ctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, authorized by Law, humbly be∣seeching Almighty God to restore unto this Church her Peace, Prosperity and Patrimony, whereof I have been an o∣bedient and a loving (however an un∣worthy)
Son. And now both my Hope being confident, and my Faith per∣fected, there remains onely Christian Charity; Charity we carry into heaven, Charitie on Earth, and that I leave, be∣seeching all whomsoever I have offend∣ed (whether I have or no) to forgive me, as I from the bottom of my heart do them whomsoever; blessing Almighty God for the happy advantage he takes to bring me nearer to heaven; blessing Almighty God, that he hath given me this advantage, as he hath been merciful, to me before the foundation of the world in my Saviour; so that now he hath in mercy honoured me with suffering for his Name, in obedience to his Com∣mandment. On this day seven night I was sum∣mon'd before that Justice, which con∣demned me on Friday last, praised be Al∣mightie God, that by this way he hath brought me the nearer to himself (put∣ting off his hat) My Charge I presume is publick, as my punishment is visible: if there have been any thing in the ma∣nagement of my part being unskilful, ha∣ving discontinued my own Countrie many
years, I shall beseech the Christian chari∣ty of all you my beloved Country-men, to impute it unto the right part, the ig∣norance that is in this skilful way of ma∣naging: It was objected unto me there, that I had a vanitie of delighting in strange Tongues. I was best skill'd in the Italian (but free from that vanity, I thank Almightie God) and therefore I would in defence of my life (if it had been the Custom here, or the Judges favour) have used that Language. It was objected, That I did not so freely as a thorow-paced Cavalier, own my Master: I was told since I came into England (for other skill I have not in your Laws) that a legal Denial in Law might be tolerable; I hope I did not ex∣ceed the bounds of that in any thing, for God forbid that I should be ashamed of serving so good, so pious, so just a Ma∣ster (putting off his hat) for that I there∣in rejoyce, and I humbly beseech Al∣mightie God to fill my heart and my tongue, and all that hear me this day with thankfulness for it. As to the business, that another con∣struction had been made and believed here, then what was there, the righteous
God knoweth it; if any weakness was in the management, that was mine: I was sent to serve and protect, not to in jure a∣ny: and as God acquits me of the inten∣tion in matter of Fact, as having done a∣ny manner of evil that way, however here understood, blessed be his holy Name, (putting off his hat) so those Gentlemen of the Turkey Company, if they would seriously consider, for they know it very well, the impossibilitie of my doing them any manner of harm. Whereas that of the Embassie objected a∣gainst me, that my Master never honour∣ed me with all, I was never worthy of it, I was his Messenger, an Internuncia for the conservation only of his good Subjects, of all the Merchants, until such time as he could confirm that Gentleman now Resident, or to send any other, and they themselves know that there was im∣possibility in me (as I bless God there was an innocency in me) unto any such inten∣tion to do them any harm; for my Masters Commands were point-blank the contra∣ry; I was onely sent for their good: as I never owned the Title, so the very Let∣ters themselves speaking no other: I ne∣ver did so much as think of any manner
of Address unto the Grand Seigniour, but gave him the Letter from my Master; the rest of the English Nation that were there present, may, when they please, as∣sert so much. This I would insert, That those Gentlemen, as they have been lo∣sers by the miscarriages of others, may now have no breach of their charity with me; but if it be, as it seems it is now in this Country, a Sin to be Loyal, I hope my God hath forgiven that, when it is upon harmless employment, not invading any, according to his just Masters Order; for indeed I have bin alwais bred up in that Religion; my Allegiance hath been in∣corporated into my Religion, and I have thought it a great part of the service due from me to Almighty God, to serve the King (putting off his Hat.) I need not make any Apology for any thing in rela∣tion to the present things in England, for were I (as I spake before my Judges) as evil, as my Sentence hath made me black, it were impossible for me to have prejudiced any body in England, or to England belonging in that employment; but I bless God for his infinite mercy in Jesus Christ (putting off his Hat) who hath brought me home to him here in this
way, it was the best Physick for the cu∣ring of my Soul, and those that have done it, have no more power then that of my body. I leave nothing be∣hind me, but that I am willing to part withal, all that I am going to is desire∣able: And that you may all know that Almighty God hath totally wrought in me a total Denial of my self; and that there is that perfect Reformation of me within, and of my own corruption, by the blessed assistance of his holy Spirit; I desire Almighty God in the abundance of the bowels of his mercy in Jesus Christ, not only to forgive every Enemy, (if any such be in the World, here, or wheresoever) but to bring him into his Bosom so much good and particular com∣fort, as he may at any time, whether the Cause were just or unjust, have wished me any manner of evil; for I take him to be the happy instrument of bringing me to Heaven. It is tedious, but I have an inward comfort, I bless Almighty God; (pray Gentlemen give me leave, speak∣ing to some that prest upon him) I should never do it, but to give satisfaction to all charitable hearts. I have been trouble∣some.
Sheriff. You have your liberty to speak more, if you please. Sir Henry Hide. But as to that part, Master Sheriff, that did concern the De∣nial (as it was affirmed by Master At∣torney General) of my Masters employ∣ment. Truly landing at Whitehall, I told that Council, there was just Commissions to an old Officer by the blessing of God, I have by me; and I have other good things that God hath blessed me withall, more then all the good Christians in the World, that are not the Grand Seigniour's Slaves: And we that are Merchants a∣broad, we allow our selves any sufferance that may conduce to our own safety, en∣largement of Trade, or preservation of what is ours. Why I had by the grace of my gracious Master a confirmation of my old Commission of Consulage in Greece: But as to the Embassie, no more then my Credential Letters did speak, nor no more then that I attempted; an In∣ternuncio they call it in those places, which is a Messenger between the one and the other KING: They both unhappily died of several Deaths, and both violent too. And it is a Custom not unknown to you, Master Sheriff, and other Gentle∣men
that practice in the World, that Princes of course, for the continuance of Amity, do send Messengers where there is Peace, that the transaction of those publique expressiens of reciprocal Affection may be performed; but for Embassie, God forbid I should own it, I never had it; however, they have used it as the happy means to bring me to God this day. I beseech God in the Bowels of my Saviour, to forgive those people that have done it; I owe them no harm, so God pay them home with all the good of this, and an everlasting life. As for power, I have been long ab∣sent here in England, I meddle with none: Sufficient to me is Gods grace to to the salvation of my soul. I have been alwayes fearful of offend∣ing Almighty God, according to the grace he hath given me, but to learn new Re∣ligion, and new Wayes, (that I must say Mr. Sheriff to you, and all others that hear me, I cannot dispence with my Consci∣ence to give offence to Almighty God. I am now (if it may be with your permis∣sion, Master Sheriff) to pour out my soul to Almighty God in two or three words (the place is straitned) if I knew where∣in
to give any satisfaction to any thing whatsoever, wherein I have offended or no, I am here in the fear of God to do it. I forgive them with all my soul, and my forgiveness is clear, as I am now going to receive happiness at the hands of my Sa∣viour: But if I thought it were satisfaction to Sir Thomas Bendish, and all the Com∣pany, or any who think they have offen∣ded me, I am come Mr. Sheriff, to pay that Obedience willingly, that Debt I owe to Nature, to pay it upon the score of a Subject, because Conscience within me, tels me not, that for the intentions of serving my Prince, that I could deserve such a Death, though ten thousand times more other ways. Dr. Hide. There was some suspition that you might impart the way you were upon to some of those servants that were with you. Sir Henry Hide. I humbly thank you for remembring me of it, and if any be here of the Turky Company this day, or any Friend of theirs, I shall desire them from a dying Man, to take this Truth; That neither my Brother, my innocent
Brother that this is with me, not other Gentlemen with me in my Company, have contributed any thing to their di∣sturbance; it was my own business, what∣soever hath been done, that hath been to evil, or loss, though I deny both of them in my intentions: I come not here to accuse any man, not excuse my self, but I praise God for all his deliverances; yet I know I shall do God a great deal of Service, and them a great deal of Justice, in not involving any of my Company in any thing of mischief. I cannot answer Objections: I finde a man may be in Turky, or in any place, all the World o∣ver, where they will give that Language which they hold fitting; but this is be∣neath me. Blessed be Almighty God, that hath called me to the knowledge of him; and this ready Obedience which I pray, and mercifully accepting of my Saviour, and patient death: And I beseech you all, whatsoever you are, that you will ac∣companie me with your Prayers, whereby my Soul may be assisted within me, in that passage to my Saviour whether I am go∣ing. I am weak of body, I have discon∣tinued long from the Kingdom; I am un∣acquainted with new Forms, I have de∣sired
to serve God according to his Com∣mandements after the old way: I have begged mercy of God for all my offences to him, and have had my pardon sealed from Heaven by the blood of my Saviour; I beg pardon of all whosoever, whether I have offended them, or no; I truly for give them, and have besought Almighty God to pour his blessings upon them. I accuse no man; I find fault nor quarrel with no man, neither with the persons that were the occasions, they were but in∣struments; neither  the persons con∣demning; I accept thankfully the Sen∣tence of Death upon my self; and I be∣seech Almighty God, that I may be the last that may suffer upon this score, or up∣on any other. Master Sheriff. If there be any thing wherein I can give any other satisfaction to any Christian whatsoever, in any kind, as I spake in general. I bless God Almigh∣ty from my own Heart, now so assisted by the special Operation, and Motions, and Dictates of the Holy Ghost. If I can know any thing, wherein, or how to be now in my dying (not having served God so well in my life) serviceable to the Church of God, of Christ, and the full satisfaction
of any whatsoever, I am here ready; I am unacquainted, but in my extasies to Heaven, there is that glorie I am going to. I beseech Almighty God, that he will give me grace to bless his holie Name; as for all, as for Jesus Christ, and in him all things, so particularly for this, that he hath thought me worthie to bring me hi∣ther for my faithfulness to my Master, that is the most pious and most just Prince in all the World. My Master hath suffered bitterly in England; and if there be any failing in his service, the fault is only mine. God knows, I have done nothing in the business, but by the instance of the Merchants; I delivered my Letters, and there they lie: To other things I am a stranger. I hope that God will give me the grace of perseverance in that Christian Religion, in that loyaltie to my Prince; in that love to all the World: that now (being to give up my account to him, that) I may with comfort be received into the Arms of his Mercie. If there be any thing, Master Sheriff, that I may give satisfaction in, I am rea∣die to do it according to the poor talent I have. I will receive my punishment in the way God hath prepared for me
nie waies I have been taken up. Truly I am bound to all that see me, and manie thousands more since I came into En∣gland, not an uncivil look; (we had strange Reports aborad) not an uncivil look from anie: God repay them all, and return them from the Throne of his grace into their own Bosoms. And God in par∣ticular bless that honourable Ladie; who was the occasion of the coming of my Lords Grace of Armagh, with the Con∣firmation of those glorious and eternal Messages of Comfort which now I am go∣ing to enjoy: being thankful to all those that know me, and know me not, for since I am come hither, whereas I might have received prejudice in respect to my Loyaltie (which is not the way, now) I have from them all received courtesie, the Lord repay them. I thank God I am o∣therwise bred, and my Allegiance hath been incorporated, embodred into my Religion; and besides the great desires of other Gentlemen, that I might go out of the World; but that the World might see that the Grace of God hath had a perfect Reformation in me, and a willing and thankful submission to his Will, therefore I repent me not of it; but I beseech Al∣mightie
God to bless and prosper all peo∣ple whatsoever that to this Kingdom be∣long. As my Speech is imperfect, so is my health. I have forced my self in this Discourse to give that satisfaction which I could. And I beseech you Mr. Sheriff, if you can hear of any Gentlemen that are wronged, what I offer here, I am to an∣swer it, and I beseech you join with me in your Christian prayers, that I may have a passage whether I am now going to give an account: not only of everie deed, but of everie word. Then turning to his Man, he said, Sir H. Hide. John, which is the Exe∣cutioner? The Executioner being brought to him, he said, Sir H. Hide. Honest Friend, I have no quarrel with you, you are the welcom in∣strument, do your work, only let me set the place, that I may fit my self, for I have an infirm body. Sheriff. You shall when you have pray∣ed; if you please to pray first. Sir H. Hide. I desire to see the Block, I can pray afterwards. Here Mr. Execu∣tioner is that mony that is left; here is four pounds for you.
Then being shewed the Block, he kissed it, saying, Sir H. Hide. It is unworthie for me to put my head where my Masters was; bles∣sed be God, blessed be his holy Name (putting off his Hat) I have an infirmitie in my body, but God hath enabled me in∣wardly. Pray Mr. Sheriff let me have a little more room. Sheriff. Go to prayer, and we will clear the room. Sir H. Hide. I have (I thank Almighty God) done those Christian Offices be∣longing to me at home, I am come hi∣ther only to die. Then kneeling down, he said the Lords Prayer. Then having prayed a short space, he stood up, and turning to the Executioner, said. Sir H. Hide. Honest Friend, I pray give me direction what I am to do, and do your Office: you will cure all diseases pre∣sently; pray direct me. Then the Executioner going to spread the Scarff over the Block, he said, Sir H. Hide. Put it not on now, but by and by. D. Hide. God Almightie strengthen you.
Sir H. Hide. God reward you all. Then the Executioner going to put up his hair under his Sattin Cap, he thought he had been taking of it off; whereupon he said, Sir H. Hide. Must I have my black Cap off? it is very cold; all these diseases will be cured, the Lord be thanked. Then going to lie down, his Man not helping him, he said, Sir H. Hide. John, Help me a little, I pray: Did not I tell you I could neither rise nor fall? Lay me down, and lift me up again, John. Then rising again upon his knees, he spake to the Executioner, having the Ax in his hand. Sir H. Hide. Pray Sir, give me the Ax. And then taking the Ax in his hand, he kissed it, and returned it to the Execu∣tioner again, saying, Sir H. Hide. I will only say, Lord Je∣sus receive my Soul, and when I lift up my right-hand, do your work. And then lying down again, after a lit∣tle space he lift up his right-hand, and the Executioner at one stroke severed his head from his body.
Mr. Benson Executed, Octob. 7. at London 1650. THis person was ingaged and trapan'd into the same unfortunate business with Colonel Andrews, on purpose by his means to draw in also Sir John Gell, of whom before, he having been a ser∣vant and retainer to the said Knight many years before. He had also born office, and had a command under him du∣ring the time Sir John serv'd the Par∣liament, and numbred himself afterwards amongst these, who being uncommissioned, were generally known by the name of Re∣formadoes. Upon these accounts he became ob∣noxious to them, especially of the men at Westminster, who by their instru∣ments searching into his discontents, soon worked him into the Plot. A capacious design it was, which comprehended and included all interests, Cavalier, Presby∣terian, and Leveller, together with those formerly cashier'd Officers under Essex, and which had it taken its wicked in∣tended effect, would have made them appear so cunning and terrible, so dis∣heartned
and terrified all men against op∣posing, or endeavouring against the ty∣ranny, that their new Common-wealth would have been a solitude or wilderness, where like beasts, not men, we should have been afraid one of another. Col. Andrews at his taking, was of o∣pinion that this person was of the gang that betrayed him, but in appeared to the contrary, for Barnard had clearly pos∣sest him with the reality and feasibleness. of the design, into which he was so rati∣onally as he thought, and upon such sure grounds engaged, such and such great persons being nominated as principal therein, that not onely it was his belief, but his confidence, on which he had raised great hopes of advantage to himself, that this meritorious piece of service would take effect. Nay, so certain was he, that in the last trick put upon Colonel Andrews in rese∣rence to the drawing in of Sir John Gell, which was a menace, that if the Colonel did not procure Sir Johns hand and seal, the Confederates would themselves go over to the King in Holland, and give such an account of the affair to his Ma∣jesty, as should tend little to the credi∣and
honour of them both; that Mr. Ben∣son was inveigled in the head he should be the man intrusted with the delivery thereof, and receive the designed mony for the Colonel to defray the manage∣ment of that service. This conceit was so rooted in him, that he quitted it not till he was really surprised and in cu∣stody. Nay, when there, so strong was his fancy, and so set upon the issue of this businesse, that he complained to himself of the Colonel, through whose back∣wardness and slow procedure therein, he thought it only miscarried, not yet dream∣ing that he was made the stalkingly-horse to his as well as their destruction. It was imagined that they would have contented themselves with that industri∣ous service he did them, by so exactly re∣alizing their counterfeit plot, as a bird set to chirp others, by his merry note, into the snare; but no such matter, having mist the great ones they would be sure of the small, to give some satisfaction to their unsatiable thist of blood, and in order to some accomplishment of their design, sacrifice one of a sort, and inte∣rest to their policy and Government, and
him they marked out for a Reformado, of whom by their claim of arrears due to them for service, there was some danger, and this was the most speedy and easie way of paying them. At his Execution he spoke very little, saving of his regret, that he had ever ser∣ved such Masters; wished prosperity to the King and Kingdom, and so was thrown off the ladder, a spectacle more of their shame then his own. Captain Brown-Bushel beheaded on Tower-hill, April 29. 1651. NOw their hand was in, all went to the stake; The High Court of Ju∣stice, proceeded in their blood-bound track, and their huntsmen rowzed their game. An old sault which had been re∣medied long ago, was brought into play again, that these journey men Butchers might not want work, for the preparation whereof they had so often adjourned a∣bout this time their terrible Session.
Captain Brown-Bushel was the next criminal for his Loyalty, being secured in the Guard at White-hall in 1648. and from custody to custody till this time, when he was brought from the Tower to his Trial. The objected offence made up into a Charge of high Treason, was his delivering of Scarborough, where he had some kind of Command from the Parliament to the King, being himself a sea souldier, and then a Captain of a man of War. He was a very expert and valiant per∣son, well esteemed of by all sea-men, as he was well reputed by all honest & loyal people for this his last service, being not inconsiderable for his fortune. At the re∣volt of the Fleet to their due obedience under Sir William Butten to the Prince in the Downs, this Gentleman was in Lon∣don: the War being finished, and like to renew again, where he lay waiting his opportunity of doing further service to his Majesty. The rancour of that business festred in the minds of the party at Westminster, so that not having any of those Commanders and Captains, who were actively diligent in that businesse in their hands, they re∣solved
to wreak their fury and displeasure upon this Gentleman, and to quit scores with him for the trespasses and fractures of others. He had lain so long under restraint, that he was hard put to it for sustenance and necessaries of life, his poor wife run∣ning twice a day from Coven Garden to the Tower, to bring and provide his daily meat, besides a hundred jaunts to the Par∣liament and Council of State with Petiti∣ons to obtain his liberty, or at leastwise get him blotted out of that roll, wherein the just number of those who were to be tried at that high Court, was before as∣certained. But all availed nothing, they had de∣signed more for the slaughter then they or their Engines could bring into the snare, and therefore be must die for num∣ber, that whatever else they wanted, they might not fail in that, so that after some adjournments of the Court, as before is specified, they called him to the Bar, and for that crime aforesaid condemned him, he in vain obtesting and imploring their favour, as in a matter wherein the State and their cause had received little preju∣dice or disadvantage, but seeing their se∣verity
could not be mitigated by words, he frankly told them he was not afraid to die for his cause, and composed himself for his sentence, which was pronounced against him after some aggravations of his fact with more then usual acerbity. Much stir there was made for a reprieve for him by his wife, and friends of hers, then in Authority, but reason of State, as they told her, prevailed against all pleas and arguments for mercy, though she was flattered but the day he died, he should be reprieved and finally pardoned, which glad tidings the poor overjoyed woman carried him about noon to the Tower, where they were merry and solacing toge∣ther, in which pleasantness of mind about two a clock she left him, and at four came the Warrant for his present Execution (a most devilish cruelty) which, as is suppo∣sed, for fear of the sea-men, by whom he was well beloved, was executed at six of the clock the night aforesaid, upon the ground under the Scaffold, where he fear∣lesly and Christianly suffered, and resign∣ed his soul into the hands of his Creator.
Mr. Love, and Mr. Gibbons, beheaded on Towerhill, August 20. 1651. I Know some scruple will be made a∣gainst these persons, as Presbyterians and sufferers upon another account then of the fifth Commandement, as having their own, and the Kings interest inter∣woven with it: but all things consider∣ed, without much reconcilement of the different opinions; in this case we may venture to Register, and enroll them in this Martyrologie. For without all doubt, the bottom of their design was the Kings Restauration and however it was clog'd with Salves and Conditions for themselves and their Par∣tie (which abates something of the lustre, though not of the worth of this Crown) yet the main was Loyaltie, which they hoped to vindicate and evince to the World, who had hard thoughts of them in the matter of the Kings Death in the previous Method thereunto. This Confederation was therefore be∣gun just upon the conclusion of that hor∣rid murther, that what they could not re∣medy in that, they might compensate in
this, and by a timely application to his present Majestie; redeem themselves into his good opinion and favour, for∣feited by their former aversenesse to their dutie towards him. To this purpose, most of the eminent Ministers of that way in London, had se∣veral meetings and Conferences: in consultation and debate of the manner of their proceeding in this Affair. Among them Mr. Love appeared to be most active and stirring, whether out of Con∣science of some unwarrantable, unduti∣full demeanour towards the King duing the War, I take not upon me to deter∣mine. The rest were Mr. Jenkins, Mr Robinson, Doctor Drake, Mr. Watson, and others. Of the Lay-part Captain Titus, Mr. Potter, an Apothecary in Black-fryers, Mr. Gibbons, and some else. These held intelligence both with the King and the Parliament of Scotland, then not agreed, but in expectation of a Treaty, which was the first thing endea∣voured by these men here to be promo∣ted, and with desired Effect Conclu∣ded.
Their chief meeting-place was Mr. Love's, where their intelligence was communicated, Letters read, and advice given upon the several Emergencies of that Businesse; which proceeded so far, that the King and his Subjects of Scot∣land, having ended the Treaty, and his Majestie arrived in Scotland, whether Cromwel with the English Armie was al∣so advanced, and had worsted the Kirks Armie at Dunbar; They concluded of raising an Armie in this Kingdom to the assistance of that Nation, and the recove∣ry of this from the slavery and Tyrannie it suffered under. This passed through so many hands, engaged in it, and was so publiquely own∣ed, that the Council of State had very early notice of the whole Design, so that they dained most part of the while in the Net; information being given of every daies proceedings, and of what ad∣ditions or accesses of persons to the Design: which soon after, when they had let it run as far, as without danger they might trust it, they drew the Curtain, and apprehended most of the aforesaid per∣sons, and brought them to Trial before a
High Court of Justice, which was yet standing, and had not yet put off their blood-died Robes, in expectation of this Grand Contrivance, which should make them farther work. Mr. Love being one of the chief, was first Tried, afterwards some others, who recanted, and humbly besought the Par∣liaments mercy, as Mr. Jenkins and Pot∣ter, but Mr. Love's submission (such as it was, for they required Confession and discoverie too) came too late, and to no purpose; so that he, and this Ms. Gibbons a Taylor, was condemned by that High Court for the same businesse, lost their Heads on Tower-hill, as afore∣said.
The Earl of Derby, beheaded at Bol∣ton in Lancashire, Octob. 15. 1651. WHosoever shall look upon the sad Historie of this Princely person must be armed against all humanitie; if he condole not this miserable Traggedie: e∣very circumstance whereof is a Scene of sorrow, which alike moves indignation and compassion. If we deduce him from his glorious ori∣ginals, we see him descended from a most ancient and illustrious Family, in which Loyaltie was one of the Gentilitions in he∣rent vertues, derived in the succession of those Heroes, who to this day adorn'd the noble name of Stanley, so memorated and famed in our Annals, especially in the Reign of Henry the 7th. direct Ancrestor to his present Majestie. The signal Services done at that time to this Crown and Kingdom, both by Victo∣rie and Advice in the blessed union of the Houses of York and Lancaster; were so placed, that they seem to have directed only the imitation of their most Honou∣rable Posteritie, without the affectation of any thing but duty. For those He∣roick
actions have been ever since as Spurs and Incentives to the same Gran∣deurs of Loyaltie, manifested in all oc∣casions and Affairs of the Crown through the whole current of Succession. But this Noble Earl, whose unworthie Fate we now deplore, came nearest that great Pattern; the Times, concurring with the activity of his mind, afforded him the advantage of employing and ex∣ercising that stock of Prudence and Va∣lour, which had so long been treasured up in the loines of his Princely Progeni∣tors; and yet to the scandal and reproach of that Age, rewarding all his Honourable Attchievements with a most lamented Catastrophy. If we also consider therefore his great and personal merit and obligations upon this Kingdom, we shall find his Services, not to come short of those of his Ance∣stors, (though clog'd with the burden∣some glory of giving a Crown) in de∣signment and attempt; however they failed of their most probable effects. But to mitigate the Envy of his Fate to innocent Posteritie, I will not presume with so rude a Pen to write their Monu∣ment, and at large relate them. He that
hath heard of a Latham-House, and Mar∣ston-Moor (as I suppose all men have) will easily confess his glories, which shone brightly in the Sphear of all Military worth to the setting of Charles his Wain. In those gloomy and black dayes, he withdrew himself to a shelter in his Roy∣altie of the Isle of Man, awaiting a new opportunity of serving his present Ma∣jestie, which not long after offered it self, and was with all readiness of duty en∣certained by him. For the King having resolved (Crom∣wel being gotten into Fife in Scotland) to pass into England over Sterling-bridge by the advantage of three daies march, gave present intimation thereof to the Earl, who in order to some other design had some forces in readiness: with these according to his instructions upon the Kings advance that way he landed, in Lancashire where his Interest and Power lay, and joined with his Majestie, who leaving him some forces to aid and assist him in his new Levies, against the Parlia∣ments Forces then marching thitherward to suppress them, marched directly for Worcester.
As soon as the King was departed, Col. Lilburn was upon him, and at Wiggon in that County, with thrice his number fell upon the Earls small party, not amounting to above 600 men, and after a sharp en∣counter (which favourably promised Vi∣ctory at the first, but through want of Re∣serves failed the Earl in conclusion,) put him to the rout, where a many gallant Noble men and Gentry were slain and ta∣ken: as my Lord Widdrington and others, and the Earl himself hardly escaping to the King at Worcester, being in the way forced to shelter at Boscolet, the recepta∣cle afterwards by my Lords direction of the King himself; who being worsted at Worcester by the Rebels under Gromwel, (where his Majestie and his Nobilite dis∣charged the place of brave Captains and Warriours, particularly, this undaunted Earl not yet wearied with his ill fortune) was constrained to abandon that City, and betake himself to a swift flight, in Com∣panie with this faithful Lord, and other Honourable Persons. At White-Ladies, whither by the dire∣ction of the Earl the King was guided; he took his leave of his Majestie, having first taken care of his security, where also
he himself might have found a subterfuge, but that he would not hazard his Maje∣sties safty, by a divided care of his Guar∣dians for two, and that number though but so small might not betray him. At his departure he fell on his knees and wept, and then conjured the Pendants to be faithfully careful of his Majesties person, dearer to him then ten thousand lives; and so betook himself again to flight in company of the same retinue, who made after the road the Scotch horse they had taken under David Leshly. At Newport in Shropshire they over∣took them, but with the same Col. Lilburn at their heels, who fell into the Town, and after a short dispute, dispersed and took most of the party, among the prin∣cipal whereof was this Noble and unfortu∣nate Earl, the Earl of Landerdale, Lord Sinclare, and others, the Duke of Buck∣ingham strangely making his escape. Becoming thus the prey of those bar∣barous rebels, he was a while detained there till at last Orders came for his re∣moval to Chester, where shortly after he was convented, by instructions of them at Westminster, where the Earl desired to be heard in person, before a Council of War,
all of them base and mechanick fellows, and of no great Command in their army, a barbarous shame, that the Honour of so great a personage, in a Country, where he was so well esteemed, reputed and reverenced, both for his own superlative vertues of liberality and bounty, and the continued obligements of his Ancestry, should be so violenced and profaned by a rascally sort of men, who assumed to themselves, and arrogated the power of life and death upon a Peer of such mag∣nitude and veneration; an indignity worse by far then those outrages commit∣ted and perpetrated by Jack Cade, and Wat Tyler, and the rest of those rabbles, who in their mad fury did such-like pranks, whereas here ths murther was countenanced by a colour of Law Martial, and done in the form and process thereof, but in this he imitated his dearly beloved Soveraign, who was reviled, contemned, and mocked in the same manner at their irreverent High Court of Justice, which no question did much sweeten that bitter Cup, which by the triumphant malice and revenge of his enemies, was given him bim full to drink. But that which chiefly conduced to the
quiet and composure of his spirit, was the lense and acknowledgement of Gods de∣termination and good pleasure in the disposing of him, and bringing into that sad condition, which he meekly and hum∣bly underwent, submitting to that hand which so afflicted him; And questionless great was that heavenly support which God ministred unto him, many the al∣terations of those contumelies intended against him, as we may see in the time, and in his way to his Execution, of which I shall say no more, but onely in∣sert an omission in the black cribunal, and which I had from unquestionable credit, that the souldiers themselves, who were upon the Scaffold, could not refrain from weeping, but shed rears abundantly, and that this other passage also, that having laid down his head, and given the sign, the Executioner being not ready, he lift up his head again, and with a soul-pier∣cing accent said to the Headsman, Thou hast done me a great deal of wrong, thus to disturb and delay my bliss; and then sub∣mitted it to the fatal stroke, and was re∣ceived into glory.
A true Copy of the Speech of the Right Honourable James Earl of Derby, upon the Scaffold at Bolton in Lanca∣shire, together with his Deportment and Prayer before his death, on Wednes∣day the 15. day of October, 1651. THe Earl of Derby (according to the order of the Court-Marshal held at Chester, by which he was sentenced to die at Bolton in Lancashire) was brought to that Town with a Guard of Horse & Foot of Col. Jones's, commanded by one South∣ley, who received his Order from Col. Robert Duckefield, betwixt 12 and 1 of the clock on Wednesday the 15 of Octo∣ber, the people weeping, praying, and be∣wailing him all the way from the Prison at Chester, to the place of his death. He was brought to a House in the Town near the Crosse, where the Scaffold was raised: and as he passed by, said, [VENIO DOMINE] I am prepared to fulfil thy will, O my God: this Scaffold must be my Cross: Blessed Saviour, I take it up wil∣lingly, and follow thee.] From thence going into a Chamber with some Friends
and servants, he was advertised by the Commander in Chief, that he had till three a clock allowed him to prepare for death, for indeed the Scaffold was not ready: the people of the Town & Coun∣try generally refusing to carry so much as a plank, or strike a nail, or to lend any assistance to that work, their cry being generally in the streets: O sad day, O woful day! shall the good Earl of Derby die here? Many sad losses have we had in this War, but none like unto this; for now the Ancient Honour of our Coun∣try must suffer here: And to add to his trouble, most of the Timber that built the Scaffold, was of the ruines of Latham-House; but nothing could alter his Lord∣ships resolution and courage: for with a stedfast composed countenancy, and a chearful, he called the company which were present to prayers with him, where∣in he shewed admirable servence, and a kind of humble importunity with Al∣mighty God, that he would pardon his sins, be merciful to his Soul; and be gra∣cious to this Land, in restoring the King, Laws and Liberty; and that he would be a Husband to his Wife, a Father to his Children, and a Friend to all those that
suffered by his Losse, or that had been Friends to him. Rising from prayer, he sat down with a very pleasant countenance; and assured the standers by, that God had heard his prayers, which the blessed Spirit of God witnessed unto him, in the present Com∣forts he now felt in his Soul. Then he entered into a discourse of his life, and beseecht God to forgive him the dayes and time he had mis-pent; and said, it was his Comfort, that although he had not walked so circumspectly as he ought to have done, yet he ever had a sense of his sins, and a tender respect to all the Services, Servants and Ordinances of his God; and that he knew God had mercy for him, that he had strengthened and comforred him against all the terrours of death. After these, and some other words to this purpose, he desired his Friends and the people by to pray with him again; which when he had ended, rising from his knees, he appeared fully satisfied of a gracious return to his prayers, and never after shewed any sadness in his countenance. His next business was with his Son the Lord Strange, whom he publiquely char∣ged
to be dutiful to his sad Mother, affe∣ctionate to his distressed Brothers and Si∣sters, and studious of the Peace of his Country: But especially (said he) Son, I charge you upon my blessing, and upon the Blessings you expect from God, to be e∣ver dutiful to your distressed Mother, ever obedient to her Commands, and ever tender how you in any thing grieve or offend her: She is a Person well known to the most e∣minent Personages of England, France, Germany and Holland, noted for Piety, Prudence, and all Honourable Vertues; and certainly the more you are obedient to here the more you will encrease in favour with God and Man. Then desired to be private in the room himself; where he was observed to be about half an hour upon his knees with frequent interjections of groans and sighs before his God. Then when he called the company in again, his eyes witnessed to us, that he had abundantly mixed Tears with his Prayers; he told us that he was very willing to leave the World, bering assured by the Testimony of Gods Spiit, that he should be carried from Troube, to Rest and Peace, from Sorrow to Joy, from Life to Death, and that Death
had no other bitterness in it to him, but that it took him from his dear Wife and Children; whom he humbly commend∣ed to the Protection and Providence of a better Husband, and a better Father; and that he did not doubt, but that the Ge∣neral, and they who sat in the Seat of Au∣thority, would make provision for them, hoping that his death might satisfie all those who sought his life, whom he free∣ly forgave, and desired God to do the like. Then calling for his Son, he took his leave of him, and blessed him; which indeed would have grieved any ones heart (though never so hardened) to see the parting of him now with his Son, and with his two Daughters, the Lady Kathe∣rine, and the Lady Amely Stanley, upon the Road betwixt Chester and Bolton the day before. This ended, he called the Officer, and told him he was ready. In his way to the Scaffold, the people prayed, and wept, and cryed aloud; to whom his Lordship with a chearful countenance, and courte∣ous humbleness said, Good people, I thank you, and I beseech you still pray for me, and our blessed God return your prayers back into your own bosomes: The God
of Mercies blesse you, the Son of God e∣stablish you in righteousnesse, and the Ho∣ly Ghost fill you with all comforts.— Coming near the Scaffold, he looked up and said, God I thank thee, I am not a∣fraid to go up here, though I am to dye there; there are but these few steps to my Eternity: Then kissing the Ladder, he went up and saluted the people: he walked a turn or two upon the Scaffold then went to the East-end of the Scaf∣fold, and pulled off his Hat again and saluted the people with a chearful coun∣tenance, said—I am come by the will of my heavenly Father to dye in this place; and I thank God I do with all willingnesse and readinesse submit to his most blessed will. 'Tis a place I desired to see when I was last in the Country, both for the mutual Obligations that have been betwixt this Town and my Family, as also for your particular respects to me, whom I have understood to be ready to clear me from that oul imputation, That I was a man of blood; and that particularly, I kil∣led one Bootle here in cold blood; I doubt not but there are here many men present, both that day this Town was
taken, and divers other times during this War, that can justiie I preserv'd ma∣ny lives, but I know there is not any one present, that can lay the blood of any man whatsoever to my charge, unlesse what might casually happen in the fury and heat of a Battel; and why I die in this Town, I know not, unless it be to perswade the Nation that I fall as a Sa∣crifice for that blood, which some said I shed here, from which I am acquitted before you, and from which I had also cleared my self before my Grand Judges at Westminster, had they pleased to hear me, before they had destroyed me; that  ing hastily brought up among  by some that I hoe God hath fo∣gi and too readily drunk in by o∣thers, whom I pray God to forgive. As for my Crime (as some are pleased to term it) which was objected against me by the Council of War (for Bootle's death, was never mentioned against me there, that being only secretly used to raise a prejudice against me in the judgements of such as old not know me) my Crime (I say) though I hope it deserves a far better Name, was, That I came into my own Country with my own lawful King;
I came in obedience to his Majesties call whom both by the Lawes of God, and the Lawes of this Land, I conceived my self obliged to obey; and according to the Protestation I took in Parliament in the time of that blessed Prince his Father; so, if it be my Crime, I here confess it again before God, Angels, and Men, That I love Monarchy as the best Govern∣ment, and I die with Love and Honour: and for the Love and Honour I bear to my Master that now is, Charles the Se∣cond of that Name, whom I my self in this Country proclaimed King; the Lord bless and preserve him, and encline the hearts of those that have power in this Nation, to accept him to his Fathers Throne with Honour and Peace, for cer∣tainly, as I believe, this Nations will never be well contented, never throughly hap∣py without a King; so I believe also, that King Charles the Second, our now law∣full King, were he a stranger to this Crown, were the most fit, and most accomplisht Prince that this day lives, to take the Go∣vernment of this People; his admirable Piety, Vertue, Justice, great Valour and Discretion, far above so few years, doth now make him in all places he comes high∣ly
beloved, and will hereafter make him honourable among all Nations: and I wish the people of this Nation so much hap∣piness (when my eyes are closed) that he may peaceably be receiv'd to the enjoy∣ment of his just Right, and then they shall never want their just Rights, which till then, they will alwayes want. As for my being in Arms in the begin∣ning of this War, I profess here in the pre∣sence of my God, before whom in a few minutes I must make an account for this profession, I only fought for peace, & set∣ling the late King my Master in his just Rights, and the maintenance of the laws of this Land, and that I had no other design, intent or purpose for my then taking up Arms: and for this last engagement. I pro∣fess here again in the presence of the same God, that I did it for the restoring of my lawful Sovereign into that Throne, out of which his Father was most unchristianly & barbarously taken, by the most unjust sen∣tence of a pretended Court of Justice, and himself against Law & all Justice kept out and disposest of; and this was all my rea∣son. For as for estate and quality, I want∣ed not a sufficient competency, neither was I ever ambitious to enlarge either for
by the favor of my Kings Predecessors, my family was raised to a condition well known in this Countrey; and now it is as well known, that by his enemies I am adjudged to die, and that by new and monstrous Laws, as making me an enemy to my Country; as fighting for my Country, as a Traitor to the Laws, for endeavouring to preserve Lawes: But, Oh! God give me grace to consider him who suffered such contradictions of sin∣ners, and O my God, assert the King to his Fathers Throne, assert the Laws to their former honour, and restore thy own Religi∣on in its purity, that all these shadows and false pretences of Religion may vanish a∣way, and our childrens posterities may serve thee in Spirit and in Truth. Good friends, I die for the At which words King and Laws, a Trooper said aloud, we will neither have King, Lord, nor Laws; and upon a sudden the souldiers being either surprized with fear at a strange noise that was heard, or else falling into mutiny, pre∣sently fell into a tumult, riding up and down the streets, cutting and slashing the people, some being killed and
many wounded; his Lordship looking upon this sad spectacle, said thus, Gentlemen it troubles me more then my own death, that others are burt, and (I fear) die for me; I beseech you stay your hands, I flie not, you pursue not me, and here are none to pursue you. But be∣ing interrupted in his speech, and not permitted to go on further, (for which the Officers were much troubled) he turn'd aside to his servant, and gave him the speech into his hand, saying, I will speak to my God who I know will bear me, and when I am dead, let the world know what I would have said. Here his Lordship was  errupted; but it was as follows, in his own copy un∣der his own band. King, the Laws of the land, and the Protestant Religion maintained in the Church of England, all which as I was ready to maintain with my life, so I cheerfully suffer for them; in this welcome death.
I am sentenced to death by a Council of War, after quarter for life, and assu∣rance for honourable and safe usage by Captain Edge. I had reason to have ex∣pected the Council would have justified my Plea, which hath been Ancient, Ho∣nourable, Sacred and Ʋnviolable, until this time that I am made the first suffer∣ing Precedent; for 1 dare affirm it, that never Gentleman before in any Chri∣stian Nation was adjudged to death by a Council of War after quarter given; I am the first, and I pray God I may be the last Precedent in this cae: I must die, and I thank God I am ready for it; Death would now be my choice, had I the whole world in competition with it. I leave nothing behind me which I much
care for, but my King, my Wife, my Chil∣dren, my Friends, whom I trust (the ne∣ver-failing mercies of my God will pro∣vide for: I beseech God shew mercy to those, who neither had mercy nor justice for me: My blessed Saviour taught him by his example and command, both to pray for my enemies, and to forgive my enemies: I forgive them freely, even those that contrived my ruine, and pur∣sued to death; I thank God never persinally offended them to my knowledge in my life, and let me not offend against them at my death; I forgive them freely, and pray God for Christs sake to forgive them also. Of my Faith and Religion, I shall not (hope)need to say much, herein I hope my enemies (if now I have any) will speak for me. I profess my faith to be in God onely, from whom I look for my sal∣vation through the precious merits and sufferings of my blessed Saviour, Je∣sus Christ which merits and sufferings are applied to my soul, by the bles∣ed spirit of comfort, the Spirit of God, by whom I am assured in my own Soul, that my God is reconciled unto me in Jesus Christ my blessed Redeemer. I die a dutiful son the Church of En∣gland,
as it was established in that bles∣sed Prince my late Masters Reign, which all my of learning and temperance will acknowledge to be the most pure, and agreable to the Word of God, and primi∣tive Government of any Church within 12. or 1300. years since Christ, and which (to my great comfort) I left established in the Isle of Man; God preserve it there, and restore it to this Nation. And O blessed God; I magnifie thy Name, that thou gavest me the hap∣pinesse and mercy to be born in a Christian Nation, and in a Nation where thy truth was professed in purity: With honour to thy Name, and comfort to thy people, I ascribe the comforts of the Holy Spirit which I feel in my bosome, to the Ministry of thy Word and Sacra∣ments conveyed unto me in thy Church, and made effectual by the operation of the same blessed Spirit. In this faith, good people, I have lived, and in this I die: pray for me, I beseech you, and the God of mercies hear your prayers and my prayers, for mine and your salvation. Presently after the tumult was over, Here his Lord∣ship began to speak again. his Lordship called for the Headsman, and asked
to see the Axe, and taking it in his hand, said, Friend, I will not hurt it, and I am sure it cannot hurt me; and then kissing it, said, Methinks this is as a Wedding Ring, which is as a sign I am to leave all the VVorld, and eternally to be married to my Saviour. Then putting his hand in his pocket, said to the Headsman, Here Friend, take these two pieces, all that I have, thou must be my Priest, I pray thee do thy work well and effectually; Then handling the rough furr'd coat the Heads∣man had on, This (says he) will be troublesome to thee; I pray thee put it off, and do it as willingly as I put off this gar∣ment of my flesh, that is now so heavy for my soul; then some of the standers by bid the Heads-man kneel, and ask his Lordship pardon; but he did not, but was surly and crabbed: but his Lordship said, Friend, I give thee the pardon thou wilt not ask, and God forgive thee also: Then turning up his eyes to heaven, said a∣loud, How long Lord? how long? then gently passing over the Scaffold, and seeing one of his Chaplains on horseback among the people, Good Sir (said he) pray for me, and the Lord return your prayers into your own bosome, and I pray
remember me kindly to your Brother, and God remember him for his love to me and mine. Then turning towards his Coffin, Thou art (said he) my bridal Chamber, in thee I shall rest without a guard, and sleep with∣out souldiers. Then looking towards the block, he asked if all were ready, That (said he) methinks is very low, and yet there is but one step betwixt that and heaven; then turning his eyes to the people he saluted them, and desired again their prayers; then said, I see your tears, and hear your sighs and groans, and prayers: the God of heaven hear and grant your supplications for me, and mine for you, and the Mediation of Christ Jesus for us all. Here his Lordship caused the block to be turned, that he might look upon the Church, saying, Whilst I am here, I will look towards thy holy Sanctuary, and I know that within a few minutes, I shall behold thee my God and King in thy San∣ctuary above, under the shadow of thy wings shall be my rest till this calamity be over∣past; then he pulled off his blew garter, and sent it to his Son, and pulling off his doublet, with a very religious chearful∣ness,
he said, I come, Lord Jesus, and O come thou quickly, that I may be with thee for ever: upon this he said, Pray tell me how must I lie, I have been called a bloody man, yet truly I never yet had that severe curiositie to see any put to death in peace; then laying himself down on the block, after a few minutes he rose again, and caused the block to be a little remo∣ved; then said to the Headsman, Friend, remember what I said to thee: and be no more afraid to strike then I to die; and when I put up my hand, do thy work; so looking round about his friends and the people, he said, The Lord blesse you all, and once more pray for me and with me; at which words he kneeled down, and prayed privately within himself, with great sighings, about half a quar∣ter of an hour, concluding with the Lords Prayer, then rising up again, he said, (smi∣lingly) My soul is now at rest, and so shall my body be immediately. The Lord bless my King, and restore him to his right in this Kingdom, and the Lord bless this Kingdom, and restore them to their rights in their King, that he and they may joyn hand in hand to settle truth and peace; and the Lord bless this County, and this Town,
and this People. The Lord comfort my sad wife and children, and reward all my friends with peace and happinesse, both here and hereafter; and the Lord forgive them who were the cause and authors of this my sad end and unjust death, for so it is as to mankind; though before God I deserve much worse, but I hope my sins are all bathed in the blood of Jesus Christ. So laying his neck upon the block, and his armes stretcht out, he said these words. Blessed be Gods glorious Name for ever and ever. Let the whole Earth be fil∣led with his glory. Amen, Amen. At which words, he gave the Heads∣man the sign; but he either not obser∣ving it, or not being ready, stayed too long, so that his Lordship rose up again; saying, Why do you keep me from my Sa∣viour? what have I done that I die not, and that I may live with him? Once more I will ay my self down in peace, and so take my everlasting rest. Then saying, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, he stretched out his arms, and gave the sign, repeating the same words:
Blessed be Gods glorious Name for ever and ever. Let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen, Amen. Then lifting up his hand, the Executi∣oner did his work at one blow, all the people weeping and crying, and giving all expressions of grief and lamentation. When the corps were carried off the Scaffold, they carried them to a house in the Town, where was thrown into his Coffin in a piece of paper these two lines. Upon James, Earl of Derby. Bounty, Wit, Courage, all (here) in one lie dead. A Stanleys hand, Veres heart, and Cecil's head. The sentence of the Council of VVar. Resolved by the Court upon the Question, That James Earl of Derby is guilty of the breach of the Act of the 12. of August 1651. last past, entituled, An Act pro∣hibiting
correspondence with Charles Stu∣art or his party, and so of High-Treason against the Common-wealth of England, and is therefore worthy of death. Resolved by the Court. That the said James Earl of Derby, is a traytor to the Common-wealth of Eagland, and an abettor, encourager and assister of the declared Traytors and enemies thereof, and shall be put to death by severing his head from his bo∣dy, at the Market place in the Town of Bolton in Lancashire, upon VVednes∣day the 15. day of this instant October, about the houre of one of the Clock the same day.
Sir Timothy Feverston Haugh, be∣headed at Chester, Octob. 22. 1651. HAving nothing but the History of the War for my direction to this Gentlemans memory, I will confine my self within the compass of that dis∣covery, and venture not to derive him any further, hoping his honourable Re∣lations, will for their own, as well as his sake be pleased to vouchsafe a full and perfect account of him hereafter to the embalming his fame to Posterity. He was engaged in the unhappy Defeat at Wiggan with theafore said noble Earl, to whose assistance, whether he came with the King, and was left by him there with those small Forces could be spared, or that he voluntarily joyned, or came from the Isle of Man with that Party I cannot determine; this is for certain, he was ta∣ken prisoner at that unlucky overthrow in Lancashire, and secured afterwards till the Grand Business was over at Worce∣ster.
Upon the coming back of the Forces assigned to Cheshire for their stationary Quarters, and the bringing of the Earl of Derby thither, they were both impri∣soned at Chester: and after the Trial and Condemnation of the Earl of Derby, was likewise brought before the said Court-Martial; and as no better was, or could be expected by him or any o∣ther person, had likewise the said Sen∣tence, only differing in time and place. He behaved himself at his Death cou∣ragiously and Christianly; telling those Monsters of men the foulness of their faults: and confidently averring, that the Justice of God would at last overtake them, if they timely returned not to their duty; and after some few prayers, and among them one for the Kings preserva∣tion, which yet was in doubt, he resign∣ed his Soul to God, and hath added one to the glorious Company of Mar∣tyrs.
Colonel Benbow shot no death at Shrewsbury, Octob. 1651. I Must confess my self at a losse here but though I could receive nothing else but his Name; yet to that there is so much due on this account of Martyr∣dome that I durst not omit him, putting hereby an occasion into the hands of this Gentlemans Relations, to rescue his, and perpetuate their Name to after Ages. I conceive him to be one of those loyal Gentlemen, who came in with the Earl of Shrewsbury, then Lord Talbot, or Colonel Howard, my Lord Howard of Esericks Son to the King at Worcester; and, who for his former Services done the King in the War before, was obnoxi∣ous to their malice. Most certain it was, he was taken no∣tice of, and observed to be very active in that Engagement at Worcester, in the flight from whence he was taken, though most of the other English escaped by the favour and concealment of the Country; (nor did ever the Scots finde civiller usage after a Defeat) save those who
through their glorious valour fell, and e∣scaped the better way to Heaven. After he was taken he was conveigh∣to Shrewsbury, a place which the King from Worcester had summoned by a Let∣ter to Colonel Mackworth the Gover∣nour, which Royal Command they thought fit to question with loyal Blood: as they pretended to expiate the storm∣ing of Bolton by Prince Rupert with the murder of the Earl of Derby. Whatever the reasons of their pro∣ceedings there against him might be, I cannot ascertain; thus much from all hands we have, that he went not lesse in his death then in his life, maintaining his Religion to God, his Duty to the King, and his Innocency to the World, to the last minute of his breath: which found se∣veral wayes to expire by their Bullets, and to ascend with his Soul to Heaven with a Quinque Domine, &c.
Colonel John Gerhard, and Mr. Vowel, the one beheaded at Tower-hill, and the other hanged at Charing-Crosse, July 10. 1654. OLiver Cromwel, that Monster of En∣glish production, had but newly invaded the Magistracy over these Na∣tions, when, as the Hydra before him had done; he commenced his Tyrannical Re∣giment with a Sacrifice of Loyal blood, which all along cemented the frame of his five yeares Usurpation, as the Walls of Babylon were said to be mortar'd. A cursed Rule it was among those State-Innovators, that there was no surer way of establishing their Tyrannie, and bring their Models to any sound constitu∣on, but by profusely letting blood, especi∣ally in the Plurisie of so many dangers, which their evil and abominable actions did daily threaten them. This they termed Preventional Cure; for suspecting all hands to be about their eares, they resolved to be before hand with some: that the terror of the Example, being contrary to all reason, Justice and Law, and a perfect avowing of their Ty∣ranny,
might reach to every man, that who with the sense of so apparent dan∣ger and destruction out of which, once engaged, there was no rescue or delive∣rance but by death, might be stupified into a degenerous fear, and abject servility of mind, to endure whatever their insup∣portable Domination should load upon them. To this purpose His Engines were em∣ptied at once upon all sorts of men, though finding it impossible to engage or set any of the Nobility who had a small tast of what usage they might expect by the Death of 4 eminent Lords: they at Last confined themselves to the middle rank of the people, Gentry and Citizens, and of those, not the puny and weak, but the resolute, learned and couragious, whose blood being of price and value might be of some religsh to them, how∣soever bitter and abominable soever to all the World besides, being the thing they intended. A High Court of Justice is therefore e∣rected by the novel Authority of a Pro∣rector, and to keep even pace, with the setting of it up, divers persons are apprehonded and Committed; amongst
others this Noble Gentleman, Colonel John Gerhard, his Brother Mr. Charles Gerhard, Brothers to the Honourable Sir Gilbert Gerhard; Mr. Vowel a School∣master of the Free-School at Islington, Mr. Somerset Fox, and others; these were brought before that Bar of the High Court, where bloody Lisle was then President. Their Crime was an offence count∣ed in one of those forty two Articles of the Instrument of Government, which O∣liver swore to at Westminster-Hall at his first seizure of the Government, being a design against the Life of that Usur∣per. This was feizible to the belief of all men, for few there were that owed him not that kindnesse, and therefore the colour of Truth was enough, and onely requisite to blanch out the defor∣mities and odiousnesse of the illegall proceedings and other barbarous dresse of mischief and villany. But these Gentlemen were no way con∣cerned in any such design, save only as they were prompted, and had some transi∣ent suggestions which they never enter∣tained by some trapanning words to that purpose, which had their danger not re∣called
to their memory, had been utter∣ly forgot by them, though made records against them by those who were hired deeply to swear against them, what they had by the by, but whispered to them. See more in Mr. Gerhards Speech. But to strengthen and second this Device, and to six their plot upon them, they do not onely relye on their Wit∣nesses for evidence, but with promise of life and pardon to one of the pre∣tended Complices in the businesse, they undermine his integrity, and blow up the lives of the other. They tell him they can sufficiently prove it, and that the onely way to save himself is by a free Confession and desiring the clemency of the Court; thereupon Mr. Somerset Fox acknowledgeth the pretended Crime, and referred himself to them for mercy, and Mr. Gerhard the younger, being not above the age of nineteen yeares gives some such like Testimony against his own Brother, being not of that mature resolution to withstand the fear of Death, which menaced himself; whereupon this Noble Colonel was condemned by the said pretended Court for Treason in conspiring the death of Cromwel, which
he undauntedly (having made a very excellent Defence against the supposed Fact, and at last denyed their Authority) and very chearfully received. Mr. Vowel was the next, against whom they had suborned a blind Minister, one that had been fed and sustained by the charity of this Martyr. The frequent converse this man used with him, gave Cromwel's Spies a fit opportunitie of effecting their projected Design upon him; for seeing the indigence and ne∣cessity of that blind, wretched man, they forthwith closed with him, and with great promises of Pensions and such like proditory Reward, drew the unwary man into the guilt of a most shamefull Treachery. For having sounded the mind of his Benefactor and good Friend in reference to the Fines, and particularly about the Protectors Usurpation, by which the Com∣monwealth being now reduced to a kind of Monarchical Government, and the people discerning thereby the Cheats put upon them by the Reformation; it was not to be doubted, but if the Ty∣rant were removed, or otherwayes laid aside, the Royal interest would be glad∣ly
embraced, and without any difficulty reassumed to its Authority; he caught hold of some words by way of discourse, which as the judgement and inclination of Mr. Vowel led him, were something to the purpose of their Design. These words were presently taken hold of, and upon this blind mans Ex∣aminations more enlarged, with several Circumstances inserted, which their In∣struments had furnished them with out of their strict watch and observation of all his Company, Wayes and Actions, which at his Trial were instanced, and the Examinations produced to prove them. At the recitals whereof, the blind man, whether prickt in conscience for his de∣testible ingratitude, or some present cou∣rage infused into him for to evidence the oppressed innocence of the prisoner at Bar, who had a sad and numerous Family at home, denyed and disowned the sad Examination, and the words or Narrative therein set down to be his, but that he was abused thereby, and so persisted, to the great confusion and puzzle of the Court, till such time as Frontlesse Lisle averred it was his volun∣tary
Act, and that it appeared he had been since tampered withal, and that the Court would take no notice of such pre∣varication. So this proceeded to Sentence against him, which was, that for his Treason, &c. he should be hanged, and so was re∣moved to prison again. On the 10th. day of July, 1654. Co∣lonel Gerhard was brought to the Scaffold on Tower-hill, where imme∣diately after Don Pantaleon Sa the Pör∣tugal Embassadours Brother (for a Riot committed at the new Exchange in Lon∣don, where this unfortunate Gentleman valiantly opposed him, and his assistance to the hazard of his life) was executed. They both agreed in this fatal determi∣nation of their lives, though not in the manner of parting with them, the Por∣tugal with some kind of reluctancy; this with the bravest and most Christian wil∣lingnesse imaginable, which he manifest∣ed in his dying gesture and words, sub∣joyned hereunto, Mr. Vowel, on the 10th. day of July was likewise brought to Charing-Crosse, where he was readier for his death then that for him; the Gibbet being not fixed
he was conveighed to the Charing-Cross Tavern, where he like a true Christian Souldier behaved himself, (having be∣fore prepared himself for his departure) freely discoursing of the Kings indubi∣table and unconquerable Right to his Crownes; and that though for a time it might be suppressed, yet most certainly God in his righteous Judgement would not long delay his vindication to the Mind and confusion of his rebellious E∣nemies; and that they could take no speedier course to bring it down upon their heads then by murthering his Sub∣jects; and that though it were a sad in∣fliction on him in regard of his distressed Family, yet he doubted not but it would prove to his everlasting glory, and a bet∣ter support of his Relations then he could provide for them. [And I hope his words with the latter part thereof be as happily verified as in the former] Being called again to his Execution, he took leave of a number of people, who pressed in to comfort him, and to pray God to strengthen him; whom with like gracious and Christian expressions he chearfully thanked. At the Gibbet there was no Ladder set, not any for that pur∣pose
brought: so retrograde and averse had Providence disposed of things to the most abominable murther, as if it had in∣dignitated its detestation thereof; nor could any be procured from the Neighbours thereabouts, or any other place, all men denying to be the least accessary to that infamous business; thereupon a Joyn-stoo was fought from the Mews, and upon that he was put; that by how many degrees he was nearer the Earth at his fall by so many degres he might be higher in glory in He∣ven at his ascending, by an equal parallel. Having devoutly prayed for himself, the King, Church and Kingdom, and for the consummation of this life into bliss, he ad∣drest some few words to the people (which were too harsh for the eares of the Soul∣diers, to whom they were principally di∣rected) but was soon silenced, and not suf∣fered to speak out the remainder. Then after a short permission of some few Eja∣culations wherewith he recommended his departing Soul to God, the stool was drawn from under him, and so he quietly past hence to a glorious state of Immorta∣lity. Major Henshaw, now Major of the City Regiment of Horse, was said to be
concerned in this business. Much discourse there was then about him, but he timely withdrew himself beyond the Sea, and e∣scaped that storm that would have over∣whelmed him, and now honourably sur∣vives to reap the fruit and reconpence of those Services he hath done his King and Country. Nothing can better express the noble gallantry and Christian bravery of these two men, then what is left behinde of their own recorded by some of their wor∣thy and intimate Friends, to whom I should have rendred the obligation, if I could have had a perfect account from them, which so nearly concerns my de∣sign as it doth their deceased Friends, Memory and Honour. I do therefore willingly refer the Reader to what fol∣lowes, extracted from such Copies as are true and Authentique, where he may be more fully satisfied.
The Speech and manner of putting to death Col. John Gerhard, who was behead∣on Tower-hil, July 10. 1654. IT was thought needle sse by the friends of Col. Gerhard, to declare any thing concerning his sufferings unto the World, more then in their sight, had not the sacrilegious malice of the last weekly Pamphlet thrown some stains upon his name, and so incensed them to a vindica∣tion as pious as his death was. 'Tis most certain, that there can no blots stick up∣on true honour, which such weak fellows endeavour against it: These are cursed beasts, but their horns are short; sepulchral dogs! that scrape up graves, and violate the dead, and are fierce and ravenous, but yet dogs still. And all worthy people will call their railing, praise, and what they intend a barking infamy the greatest merit. Yet because every understanding is not of the same brightness, and those putrid libels may by ill chance fall into some innocent hand hereafter (and yet sure such vermine should not be endured long) therefore let wise and good men pardon him that hath undertaken this justice for that Gentle∣man,
and be pleased to read this sad sto∣ry, not for their satisfaction sake, but their sorrows: It may dry up a friendly tear perhaps, and still a murmuring groan to see the comely posture of his passion, how well all was carried by him, and how honourably, and the honest circumstan∣ces may not improbably take off from the sadnesse: Why should I grieve that death which had such a living glory in it? Or dishonour that blood with feeble tears, which was shed so like the holy Martyrs? All that knew this person cannot but wit∣nesse his generous resolution, and whe∣ther his great courage fell lesse then it self (as that viper hisseth) or did not ra∣ther rise greater now, when the Christi∣an was twisted with the Gentlemen, let this faithful relation witness. In which, though all terms and syllables may not be exactly the same, yet if there be a materi∣al falshood, or a wilfull flattery, may his neck that wrote it feel a viler destiny then axes or halters. Amicus Gerardus, sed magis amica veritas. From the first day of his imprisonment he foresaw the heavy sentence hovering upon him, and therefore gave all dili∣gence to secure himself against it; that
however he underwent a temporal con∣demnation, he might escape an eternal. But after that sad doom was pronounced then he bestirred himself amain, and made double hast for heaven, it was for his life, and therefore he would loose no minute, but the same night gave directions to a dear friend for a Minister (whom he knew to have long honoured his family) to be brought unto him early next morn∣ing; and it pleased Authority to gratifie him in this great desire, so that an order was sent freely for the quiet admission of any such person to him. With this spi∣ritual friend he spent some hours every day in prayer, and other ghostly refresh∣ments, which (God be praised) were not without sweet effect and impressions upon his soul. There were some other Ministers of great observation for gravity and godlinesse, who visited him, and who I am confident will put their seal to this truth with me, that they found him meek, humble, modest, penitent, com∣forted, not far from the Kingdom of God, if not already in it: but I have good hope he was in possession, and so had he, through grace. Upon the morning (which was the last he must see till that
of the Resurrection) he submitted to some wholsome orders of the Church, and received her comforts by them. That done, he proceeded to the (highest en∣joyment of grace that can be administred upon earth) the holy Communion, whereof with his brother Sir Gilbert Gr∣hard he was a partaker, with as much re∣verence, zeal, thankfulnesse, holy sor∣rows, and holy joys, as a devout soul could evidence. He wept as if he would have washed his Saviours wounds, which his faith presented in his tears; and yet he said he was admirably ravished with all inward peace and comfort in his own conscience. This passed, he had now no∣ing to do but to die, which he expected that morning very speedily; But by the pleasure of Authority, both the time and the place of his execution was altered, so that he was to wait a little longer, untill evening for his release. Many friends and persons of Honour came to take their last leave of him, who can gladly witness his undisturbednesse and civill chearful∣nesse to every one of them. His bro∣ther tarryed continually with him and though some eruptions of passion could not be restrain dnow and then, where
nature was so much concerned, yet they were generally pleasant, and at last par∣ted (about half an hour before he was led forth to death) with as much calmnesse and placednesse, as if they had been to meet again anon sase and unhurt as they had done formerly. So have I seen a win∣dy and stormy day concluding in stilness and Sunshine, as if weary and desiting to rest without any breath of trouble, The Minister only waiting on him to the last; and about five a clock enters the Lieut. of the Tower, and the Sheriff of London: Two sure friends, that will not leave him as long as he hath life remaining in him: They told him a sowr message, that they were come to conduct him to his death's blow: He reply'd they were very wel∣come, and received them so fearlesse and untroubled, that the Sheriffe told the Minister, He was sorry to see him so ukfit for that condition; but (under fa∣vour) he mistook his condition, That which he accounted fitness to die, our Pamphlet-monger would have called flag∣ging and cowardise. So a hard thing it is to satisfy all curiosities, even with our blood, and nothing more ingenious then to carry this bitter cup even, when so many mis∣constructions
shake it. At his lodging he desired the Sheriffe that he would per∣mit the Minister and three others that were his friends and servants to go upon the Scaffold with him, which as it was seasonable wisdome in him to desire, so was it a fortunate kindnesse from them that granted it, else it may be their testi∣mony might have been wanting to his injured reputation. He took leave par∣ticularly on the Houshold where he was as a prisoner, and was so clearly collect∣ed in every thing he did, that he went out of his way into the kitchin to bid his Lanlady farewell, giving thanks for her respects during his bonds, which he said he should die in to her. As he passed by the Guards in the Tower, he gave them mony twice, and told them; he should trouble them no longer, being on his remove to better Guards. He walked along to the Scaffold on Tower-Hill, shewing a great deal both of hu∣mility and respect to the people, who ge∣nerally lamented him, and prayed for him. As he went he was bare-headed for the most part, carrying his hat in his hand; and sometimes resting it in a care∣lesse bravery on his left side. When he
came to (or rather leap'd upon the Scaf∣fold) for he was so far from flagging when to tread that Tragical stage, that many observed how sprightfully he seem'd to skip up the steps to it, as if he had gone to dance there rather then to die) his grim executioner presented himself to him, to whom with a chearfull smile he said, Wel∣come honest friend: And desiring to see his Ax, he took it into his hands, and kissing it, with a pretty glance of his eye (which was a natural lovelinesse in him) towards the Minister, he said, This will do the deed I warrant it. The Scaffold was very much crowded with people; yet as well as he could he made some turns to and sro upon it, with a paper (which he had taken out of his pocket) in his hand, wherein it seemes he had prepared some heads of a speech which he intended to have delivered: but the Sheriff and Lieu∣tenant told him, if he spoke any thing it must be very brief, and that they must not suffer him to speak any thing that was seditious; Well Gentlemen (said he) your will be done; but (God be praised) I never yet had to do with any thing that was sedi∣tious! I would fain have spoken something to clear my self to the world, according to the
custom, if it might have been, But come Sir, saith he, turning to the Minister, Let you and I speak to him that will give us leave: and so kneeling down together in a corner of the stage, the Minister pray'd with him a short time, which done they stood up again. Then turning himself to the people, and putting off his hat, he told them, That he was not permitted to speak a few words according to his intention, yet he doubted not but what he would have said would come to their eyes, though it must not come to their ears: But this I desire all to take notice of, and this he spoke (with a double vehemence) that I die a faithful subject and servant to King Charles the se∣cond, whom I pray God to bless and rstore to his rights; and had I ten thousand thousand lives, I would gladly lay them all down thus for his service. Here he was interrupted, and the Sheriff wish∣ed him rather to confess what he knew concerning the horrid Plot he was con∣demned for: He answered, That he had confessed all that he knew concerning any Plot, that he thought they knew more of the Plot that condemned him, then he did; but he heartily forgave them. The Minister told him it was well done to forgive and pardon those that persecute us: That was
an act of true Christian love, but as his case stood, love was not enough; He ought to deal in this business (upon which his life lay) with all candour and sincerity, not concealing any thing of that nature as was charged against him, as far as he might glorisie God, and serve the publick good. Upon which lifting up his eyes towards heaven, and laying his hand upon his breast, Oh Sir, sayes he, if there had been any such thing in this breast, would I not have revealed it before this time! I pro∣test in the sight of Almighty God, I know no more of any such design, but only what I have often acknowledged, that it was moti∣oxed to me by Major Henshaw, (who I confi∣dently believe is in their hands) and debated twice or thrice when I was with him: but I never enertaived it at all, and at the last flatly disown'd it, and told him I would have nothing to do in it. He was many times pressing me to nominate what persons I knew I could bring, & to have their names; but let them shew any such thing if they can against me. But I am certain he is in their hands. Pawsing here a little, and fetching a turn or two upon the Scaffold, being very hot (as he had baen all that morning) he call'd for some small beer, which he had
given order to be ready, and was brought thither in a stone bottle, of which he drank a little once or twice. Then the Minister went to him, and minded him that something might be expected from him as to his Religion, and disposition to dye. To which gathering up an ex∣traordinary resolution in his face) he re∣plyed, I dy a Christian, a true Christi∣an, according to that Faith and Religion which was professed by the Church of Eng∣land, in the time of our late King of blessed memory. And I praise God I am so fitted and ready to dye, that I am confident by the merits of Christ Jesus, that my sins are par∣doned, and my salvation is at hand. Then turning about he called for his wast-cote and cap, and throwing off his doub∣let, put them on, whilst his servants help∣ed to put up his hair. His wast-coat was not very clean, which he took notice of to his man: but 'tis no great matter saith he, if the heart be clean, alis well enough. Being thus prepared, he calls for the Block: and viewing it (as with delight) laid himself down upon it to see how it would fit, and was so far from sinking at the sight of it, that he almost play'd with it: and rising quickly pulls a little paper-book
out of his pocket, which he gave to the Minister, willing him to find that particu∣lar Prayer which was proper for that oc∣casion, but the crowd being great, he could not quickly find it, so that he kneel∣ed down with the book open a while in his hand as if he had read; but quickly shut it, and prayed with great expressions of fervency by himself. When he had done, the Lieutenant said something to him (as it seems) concerning his Brother Charles that had witnessed against him; I know not what the Lieutenant said, (for he spake low) but Mr. Gerhard spake aloud, and replyed passionatly O Christ Sir! I love my poor brother with all my heart, he is but a youth and was terrified, I know how he was dealt with; tell him I love him as well as ever I lov'd him in my life. And commend me to my brother Sir Gilbert, whose release I beseech you Sir to assist: there being no more cause, that I know of for im∣prisonment then only that he was found in the same bed with me, which sure is no capital crime. Having said this, he took his leave of him and the Sheriff, and all he knew on the stage: and turning about once more to the people, desired them to pray for him, himself kneeling
down with the Minister, laid his hand in his bosom, and they prayed together the last time. After this he bids them all fare∣well again, and besought them to remember they had a poor Soveraign abroad who deser∣ved to be remembred. Then forgiving the Executioner and saluting the Minister with his last embrace and kisses, he bow'd him∣self to the stroak of death, with as much Christian meeknesse and noble courage mix'd together, as I beleive was ever seen in any that had bled upon that Altar. And this all the people that were Spectators, did seem to understand and acknowledge: beholding his fatal blow with an universal sadness and silence; whereas, when the other Gentleman fell quickly after upon another score of blood and ryot, they gave a great and general shout, as applau∣ding the Justice of the Portugals death; but pittying and bewailing the untimely fall of so brave and magnanimous a spirit as did (through all the clouds of death) shine gloriously in this unfortunate Gen∣tleman.
His Speech Gentlemen, AS this kind of spectacle is no new enter∣tainment to your eyes, for you hav∣had a late glut of such objects: So is it no strange thing to me to be made such a spectacle; for I have been bred upon the Theatre of death, and have learned that part so well, though I confess a very hard one, as to perform it pretty handsom∣ly, both as becomes a Gentleman and a Christian. Only I must desire you to expect no fine Prologue, or Speech from me; I never studied to make Orations: a very unfit man to lay plots against a State, who am scarce able to lay a few lines of plain Eng∣lish together, as I ought: But though I cannot speak happily; I doubt not but I shall die happily. I confesse my self a great sinner. Who is innocent? God be mercifull to me a miser∣able sinner. I adore the justice of God in all this that is come upon me: I have deserved to die long since; and blessed be God who hath given me such time to prepare. But for this Crime I stand condemned for to day, I
do protest mine own innocency, as to any consent or ingagment to act in it. I hope you will believe me, when you con∣sider upon what slender proofs and testimo∣nies I suffer; none of them legal, or positive, but circumstantial. For my brother Charles; Alas poor youth! how he was wrought upon! but I desire all my friends to think honour ably of him. For my Brother Sir Gilbert. This imagination of a Plot is said to be hatched in France, but I fear the nest was at Whitehall. As for the King, — so far from con∣curring to such a Deed, that I am only un∣satisfied in this, whether I shall dye right in his favour, because suspected of any thing so unworthy of him. I fear he lost his Kingdom by such pra∣ctices, but whether he would recover them so, is a question: God hath better ways when it shall be good in his sight to plead his cause. I was lately in France, but on my own score; for I have commanded there and probably might. For my past life it hath been but a trouble∣some one, but now I hope I shall rest! Since I was any thing, I have served the King, as I was bound: And I wish all that did so,
had done it as faithfully! He was condemned for a tyrant, but God— For my Religion, though a Souldier, I am able to profess I am a Christian souldier, a true Son of the Church of England, as con∣stituted under Queen Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charles of blessed memory. Her Doctrine and Government I embrace. Her Truth and Peace I pray God to restore. I humbly give thanks to God Almighty for providing me the comfort of a Mini∣ster, on whose fidelity I might repose my soul. And I pray God to bless the poor faithfull Ministers of this Church, and give you hearts to esteem them, the want whereof is no small cause of our misery. My dayes have been few and evil, yet God be blessed in all the vanities and folly of youth, I have been far from Atheism, or concempt of Gods worship: I had always awfull impressions of Gods honour and ser∣vice, which is now my comfort. And now dear Countrymen, fare you well, I pray God blesse you all, his whole Nation. Alas poor England? When will these black days be over! When will there be blood enough! I wish mine might fill up the mea∣sure, I forgive all.
Once more fare you well, Commend me to all my friends, Pray for me. I pray God make you as faithfull and loy∣al as I have lived, and as happy as I shall be by and by, when I am dead. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Father of mercies, have mercy on me! Saviour of the world, save my soul. O lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, hear my prayers. Into thy hands O Lord I commend my pirit. Lord Jesus receive my soul. The last Speech of Mr. Peter Vowell, which he intended to have delivered (had he been permitted) upon Munday the 10th of July 1654. (on which day he suffered death in the place where Charing Crosse stood) as from the Original paper written with his own hand appear∣eth. Gentlemen, AT this earthly Bar from them that pretend to have a great measure of sanctity, I had hard measure: but to that Bar I am now going, the Bar of
heaven, I shall have Justice, yea one day Justice against them, except they water their beds and couches with tears of Repentence. The court gave severe and rash Judg∣ment on my body, and sent a pitifull fellow (bur a pitiless fellow) that gave as rash a Judgment of my soul; but that precious Jewel none of them could touch to hurt. The souls under the Alter cry loud for vengeance long ago; how many more of late years have been added to them to help the cry? the cry is loud of those late∣ly whose blood hath been unlawfully spilt; but vengeance is Gods, and I will leave it to him. The Court at my Tryal said, I was con∣fident, and held it as a fault; He also whom they sent to the Tower (I know not if to intrap me) under pretence to comfort my soul, told me also, I was confident; I say the same: and the same confidence I bring with me now, and by Gods assistance, I hope I shall carry it out of this world with my inno∣cency. Gentlemen Souldiers, Among the ancient and savage sort of Heathen, they
had a Law once every three, six, or twelve moneths to offer up a sacrifice of humane blood to their god; and that their god was a Devil: Among us, whe∣ther Heathen or not, you best know; of late years we have had a fatal custome, once in three, six or twelve moneths to make not only a sacrifice, but many sacrifices of humane Christian blood, our Scaf∣folds have reek'd and smoak'd with the choisest sort of blood. But unto what God do you judge? What God is he that delights in the blood of man? Ba∣al, the god of Ekron, Blzebub, the god of Flyes. Amongst the Primitive Christians that lived nearest the time of our Saviour Christ, the greatest Tyrants and perse∣secutors of the Christians lived; the persecution was great, and yet the courage of those persecuted Chri∣stians was so great, that it excelled the fury of the persecutors; that they came in faster to be killed, then they could kill; they offered their bodies and throats so thick unto the slaughter, that the hands of Tyrants were weary with kil∣ling; and yet Sanguis Martirum, was Semn Ecclesie, and many Heathens
came in with the Christians, seeing their chearfull constancy, turned Chri∣stians, and dyed Christians, and dyed with them; the Christians still encreased the more. Of late years here hath been a great persecution in this Nation, and yet the sufferers have been so many, and present themselves so thick in the vindication of their King, Country, and Laws, that they startled the very enemy himself; their constancy so great, that the eyes of their Judges dropped tears, whether reall or true, let the Judge of Judges judge; They still stand amazed at their constancy, though they exceed the old Heathens; are not weary of kil∣ling. Oh Souldiers! How many of you have been brought up, and led on by blind principles, wronged in your education, or seduced by your indiscreet, heedless and heady Teachers? How many of you young men have for some small discon∣tent departed from your loving Masters, dear Friends, or tender Parents, and fled into the Army? how many of you driven by Tyranous oppression, poverty, or cruelty, have left your dear wives and
children? And some for novelty or wantonness adhere to this employment, not considering the great danger of spil∣ling innocent blood. How many of you have drawn your Swords, you do not know for what? How many of you keep drawn your Swords, you do not know for what? You have put to death a pious and just King, and in his stead have rear∣ed up, even another Jeroboam, that makes Israel to sin: What his good∣nesse is, you best know: You have put down a good old Law, and rear∣ed up another of your own to judge the people by; my calling for the benefit of the former, and for the equity even of your own Law, I am in part condemned here to die. Be you Judge of the proceedings. How many of you have had a hand in putting down the ancient true Church, and raised up in your own imaginations a new one? But alas! You know not what you do; if you did, you would grieve to see what a glorious Church you have ruind: You would never have pulled down the hedges, and broken down the fences, that the wild beasts of the Forrest should come
in, that the little foxes should devour; and the wild Boar should root out so stately a Vine. When the Jewes were led into cap∣tivity; their goodly and magnificent Temple was burnt; but in process of time, they obtained favour amongst the Heathen KINGS they dwelt amongst, and had liberty therewith to re-build: re-build they did, and finished a second Temple, at which fight all the young men rejoyced to see so gallant a Tem∣ple, but the old men wept to see how far different and short the second Temple was from the glory of the first: So you young men rejoyce at your imagi∣nary Church, but the old men methinks I see some weep, (Oh weep not so: me) weep for your Country, weep to see Religion, Liberty and Laws taken from you, weep to see so many good men snatcht a way; but indeed from the miseries to come, and weep for what your unhappy selves will suffer. Souldiers, however you flourish for a∣time, and perhaps many of you may re∣joyce at our deaths; but believe it, as Sampson pull'd the house of the Philistims
down when he fell: so shall we give you and your Cause a greater blow by our deaths, than living we possibly could have done. You may for a time flourish, but remember what our Saviour said, All you that make use of the sword, shall perish by the sword, you shall be cut down like the grass, and whither away like the green herbs. But do you behold yonder glorious place? Do you behold the spangled Heavens, where the holy Angels dwell, where God himselfe is rounded with Thrones, Principalities, Powers and the Celestial Spirits of just men, when the Trump shall blow, when the dead shall rise at the dreadful day of Judgment How will you answer all your Rapes and Murthers? Do you think your hands that have been bathed in the blood of your King, the blood of so many of your eminent Country-men so unjustly, that have been bathed in the blood of many of your friends, your kindred, per∣haps your Parents, can ever reach yon∣der glorious place without repentance? Oh no! Repent now therefore, it is
not too late, shake off your bloody Protector, rescue your ancient Laws, and call in your Royal young Prince, whom you have long enough wronged, Make your Add esses to the great Pro∣tector of Heaven and Earth, as I now do my self for a Pardon, for all your former and present transgressions. I dye an obedient Son of the Church of England, and with a dutifull heart to the KING, and desire that none present that love him, will he disheart∣ned by my death, but continue faith∣full to the end. And so farewell, I forgive all the world, &c.
Colonel Penrudock, Colonel Groves and others, are taken at Southmolton in Devonshire in their Quarters: some of them beheaded at Exeter and Salis∣bury: others hanged there, & at Chard in Somersetshire, May 16. 1655. THe restlesse Feares and Disturbances which attended the ambitious head of this bloody Protector; some drave him to the same facinensious courses and practices, upon the Lives and Estates of other Loyal and honest persons, who by the like Artifices fell into his Clut∣ches. It was but just a year past since his but∣chery committed upon the two afore∣said Gentlemen: and now the Axe is whetted again, against the lives of many more innocent persons. He had called a Parliament by vertue of his Instrument in September 1654. This continued five lunary Months without any mutual fa∣isfaction, or scarce entercourse betwixt them and Oliver, therefore by the same Power he dissolved them: at which time he gave them an account, that by their sullennesse, and disaffection to the settle∣ment
of the Common-wealth in Him, the Common-Enemy, meaning his Majesties Loyal Subjects, were hatching and raising new troubles, which he was well satisfied were fomented by some of them then present. This was fair intimation for the Con∣federates to desist: but, believing this spoken by him out of a real fear of their Power; the Designe being universally laid; and that it was beyond his power to prevent it, and no doubt some coun∣tenance and foundation of this enter∣prize they also had from the Parliament, they resolved to proceed to the Execu∣tion thereof. But Oliver had all along countermined them: for by intelligence he held with one Maning (whose Father was a Co∣lonel in the Kings Army, and slain in the service at Alesford fight) then with the King at Colen, in the quality of one of his Majesties private Secretaries near servants, he understood the whole Cabal of that bu∣siness, from the beginning to the end, and accordingly managed them whose Coun∣sels were intended wholly against him, but as it proved were aymed at them∣selves.
Maning at last came to be discovered to the King, when his Friends in Eng∣land were betrayed and undone, and the whole design frustrated, and was deser∣vedly shot to Death at a Castle in the Duke of Newburghs Country. But this, as I said, was too late; for, the Western Association which was to be commanded by Sir Joseph Wagstaffe, according to the time agreed on, rose in part at Salis∣bury, at such time as the Judges were come thither in Circuit. Here appeared to the number of two or three hundred Horse on Monday morning in Maxch, where we having seized some of the Lawyers Horses, and taken away the Judges Commissions: they marched to Blandford, where Col. Penruddock pro∣claimed the King, and so on Westward: some leaving, but none joyning with them. Cromwel had so ordered his businesse, that his Troops were ready in every quar∣ter; but knowing that this rising would be the first and most general, gave them fair time and opportunity of Rendesvouz∣ing, no more but onely two Troops un∣der Butler, then upon their march thither from Bristol, being near thereabouts;
but as soon as ever they were up Forces were drawn together from several places to prevent their dispersing and return∣ing. The Royalists having marched day and night, came at last wearied and tyred to Southmolton in Devonshire, where they took up Quarters for that night, intend∣ing for Cornwall, where they expected an additional strength, both from that Coun∣ty, and from Forreign parts there to be landed: But about ten a clock that night, Captain Ʋnton Crook, with a Troop of Horse entred the Town, and beset the Innes and Houses where they were quar∣tered, and presently sell a storming of them. After some two houres sharp Dis∣pute, where few were killed, they came to a Capitulation, which was, that they should render themselves prisoners, Cap∣tain Crook promising them quarter for life. Colonel Penruddock, and Col. Groves submitted on these terms; but Joseph Wagstaffe, Sir Robert Mason, and Mr. Tho∣mas Mmpesson escaped away and got o∣ver Sea, leaving their Estates to the dis∣posal of the Usurper; the rest of the par∣ty became Prisoners, and were carried
into Exeter Goal, where lay while the next Assizes. In the mean time, several other persons engaged in the same fatal busi∣nesse, were apprehended at Salisbury, and other places, and secured in the several Goals, till such time, as Cromwel to make himself more absolute, had per∣verted and forced such Judges as he had designed for the Summer Circuit to com∣ply with his instructions, and by the re∣spective Sheriffs, upon pains of the same displeasure, had empannelled Juries for his turn. I omit wilfully the names of both Judges and Juries, not so much for their sakes, as the memory of that obtrusion upon the Lawes, being that murther was countenanced by them while a High Court of Justice was ready at hand, and it portended some ill irrecoverable mis∣chief to the generality of the Nation, where that passed by legal Verdict. So great a shame to us that challenge English Freedom, and have contested so often with our Princes for Magna Charta, that it cannot pass our Pen without burning our fingers: not onely stygmatize that age, but set a mark on the future. In the Summer Assizes, as before is said,
the Judges went their Circuit; but before that time, Cromwel had caused Col. Pen∣ruddock, and one Mr. Jones related to his Highness-ship, to be brought up to be examined before him, which, they being in the custody of the Serjeant at Armes, several times underwent in reference to a further discovery of other persons en∣gaged in the business: but that took not with them, who had founded their loyal∣tie upon a Rock, which some gusts and violent storms might batter, but never pierce nor enter. They were not wanting in an honour∣able way to their own preservation, while they had this seeming advantage, (as knowing how grievous to their Fa∣milies this their destruction would prove) of staying here; Mr. Jones got off in∣deed afterwards, but Mr. Penruddock suf∣fered the extremity of their own Law, the Sword, which had given him quarter for life at his taking. Colonel Penruddock being removed to his prison at Exeter, after they had finished their Inquisition with him, at his departure desired the prayers of several Congregations in London, for a supply of comfort to him in his distressed conditi∣on,
(being then bound for his last home, and assuredly knowing his near and in∣evitable dissolution) which was earnestly and loyally endeavoured, even in those dangerous times. They were both presently re-guarded to their former Prisons to expect their Doom, which not long awaited them and their partakers; for, at the Assizes held in the County of Devonshire in the City of Exeter, they were indited for Treason, in levying War again the Protector, and by a perjured Jury found guilty, according to that precedent newly brought to them from Salisbury, where the same Charge was exhibited, and for Example prosecu∣ted to Effect. In fine, Judgement was given against them upon this Conviction, and some 16 suffered the pains and penalties thereof: whose Names we refer to an ensuing Ca∣talogue: only desiring you to be satisfied with the brief account of the principal persons here, because it will be not only some trouble to write their particular sto∣ries involved in the general design of this Service, but by reason the whole was trans∣acted by these mens Purses & Authority, and more signalized by their life & death.
I presume not neither to be punctual in the matter of Colonel Penruddock; for that he himself was abused in the hopes of the publishing his Examinati∣ons and Tryal, wherein the high injustice offered him would most plainly appear, especially in the business of Capt. Crook, and therfore shall transmit the memory of this noble and Heroick Royalist, with as much honor & solemn veneration, as in∣dignation & zeal against those Times and Persons, that envied us the Retrospect of this his glory, by forbidding & suppressing any account thereof to be published, that they might thereby conceal their base treachery and unlawful proceedings. Colonel Penruddock thus butchered, Colonel Groves, a somewhat antient and very grave man, was brought upon the reaking Scaffold, he had been an Officer of that Dignity and Command in the Kings Armies before; and therefore that honourable solemnity of murther was af∣forded him. He spoke at his Trial little to his Judges, whose enjoyned business and meritorious Service with Oliver, he well knew was to bereave him of his life; but addrest himself wholly to the Jury, who were a packt number of Schis∣maticks,
and, who, Serpent like, were deaf to his Charmes of Reason and Law, though pressed and tenacioufly urged by him. As he said little at the Bar, so he said less at the Block, but piously and fervent∣ly recommended his Soul to God, desiring him to forgive his Enemies, and so laid down his life, and slept in the Lord; their Speeches follow. After this Execution was past, they pro∣ceeded (not because they saw it pleased the people, for the Royal people of Exe∣ter never beheld the like detestable sight) in their violence against others of the meaner sort, who were taken in that same business at Southmolton, who by their dis∣criminating malice were destined to the Gibbet, nine of whom suffered thereat, averting their most righteous Cause, and telling the Sheriff, a Knight of Olivers, that another account and estimate would not long after be made of them, to the shame and confusion of their Enemies. After they were dead, they were all ho∣nourably buried in that City, all sorts of persons in great numbers following them to their Graves, which was highly resented, and stuck deeply in
Cromwels stomack, but he knew not which way to punish the City for that piety; no more then he could brook or prevent their charity; the Citizens from the time of the imprisonment of them, being above fourscore in number, main∣taining them with all necessaries, even to abundance and superfluity. But though he could not stop the giver, he found a way to hinder the receiver, for after the Assizes (wherein many more were condemned besides them that were Executed, and the others still kept in du∣rance, in expectation of future tryal) he caused them to be transported to the Bar∣bado's, selling them as slaves to some of those Turkish Merchants, who trade in the lives of men, as this Butcher Crommwel in their deaths, who sold and employed them in those Plantations, where the Pa∣gan clowns, or more properly villains, used and worked them beyond their strength and endurance, which soon after the Tyrant was gone to his place, came to a hearing in Parliament, in Richards non-age. The same Judges at their return back held another Assize at Chard in Somerset∣shire, where Cromwells Scouts had gleaned
up a few of those scattered persons, two whereof they murthered there, but Ma∣jor Hunt, whom they had principally de∣signed for the gorge, gave them the slip in the habit of one of his Sisters, who staid behind in his Chamber in bed, which they discovered not till morning, to the un∣speakable, intolerable vexation of the ty∣rant, who threatned all manner of deaths to the Jaylor. I had almost forgot their errand at Salisbury, where they likewise beheaded on Mr.  of Hungerford, and one Mr. Kency, and three others were hanged for the same matter; much stir was made, and many addresses were pre∣sented to Cromwel, in the behalf of them, but all proved ineffectual, onely one Mr. Dean, the only son of a widow, and he not actually in arms, was after sentence reprieved; The sufferers dyed constantly and assured in their just actions, as the rest, and gave glory to God, and received it again in their eternal recompence.
The Speech of the Honourable Colonel Pen∣ruddock, the greatest part whereof he delivered upon the Scaffold in Exon. Castle the 16. day of May 1655. the whole he left with a Gentleman and friend of his, written with his own hand; which is as followeth. Together with the manner of his being beheaded. As he was ascending the Scaffold, baring his knees, and bowing himself, he used these words: This I hope will prove to be like Jacobs ladder; though the feet of it rest on Earth, yet I doubt not but the top of it reacheth to Heaven. When he came upon the Scaffold, he said, O wretched man that I am, who shall deli∣ver me from this body of death? I thank God who hath given me victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Then with abundance of Christian cheer∣fulnesse he spake to the people as fol∣loweth. Gentlemen, IT hath ever been the custom of all per∣sons whatsoever when they come to
die, to give some satisfaction to the world, whether they be guilty of the fact of which they stand charged. The crime for which they stand charged, the crime for which I am now to die, is Loyalty, (but) in this age call'd high Treason. I cannot deny but I was at Southmolton in this County: but whether my being there, or my actions there amount to so high a crime as high Treason, I leave it to the world and to the Law to judge. Truly, if I were concious to my self of any base ends that I had in this un∣deraking, I would not be so injurious to my own soul, or disingenuous to you as not to make a publique acknowledgment thereof. I suppose that divers persons, according as they are biassed in their se∣veral interests and relations, give their opinions to the world concerning us. I conceive it is impossible therefore so to expresse my self in this particular, as not to expose both my judgement and repu∣tation to the censure of many, which I shall leave behind me. Because I will not put others (therefore) upon a breach of Charity concerning me or my actions, I have thought fit to decline all discourses which may give them a capacity either
to enjure themselves or me. My tryal was publick, and my several examinations (I believe) will be produced when I am in my grave. I will refer you therefore to the first, which I am sure some of you heard, and to the later, which many of you (in good time) may see. Had Cap∣tain Crook done himself and us that right which a Gentleman and a Souldier ought to have done, I had not now been here. The man I forgive with all my heart; but truly Gentlemen, his protesting against those Articles he himself with so many protestations and importunities put upon us, hath drawn so much dishonour and blood upon his head, that I fear some heavy judgement will pursue him. Though he hath been false to us, I pray God I do not prove a true prophet to him. Nay, I must say more, that coming on the road to Exon, he the said Captaine Crook told me, Sir Joseph Wagstaff was a gallant Gentleman, and that he was sorry he was not taken with us; that then he might have had the benefit of our AR∣TICLES, but now (said he) I have beset all the Country for him so that he cannot escape, but must be hanged.
He also questioned me as I passed through Salisbury from London, whether he had given me conditions: Which I en∣deavouring to make appear to Major Butler, he interrupted me, and unwilling∣ly confest saying, I profered him four hundred pounds to perform his Articles; which had been a strange proffer of mine, had I not really conditioned with him. And I told him then (having found him unworthy) I would have given him five hundred pounds, believing him to be mer∣cenary. To make it yet farther appear, I injure him not by stiling him unworthy, after these Articles were given, he prof∣fered to Pistol me, if I did not per∣swade another house to yeeld, which then were boldly resisting. To which my ser∣vanr John Biby (now a prisoner) replyed. I hope you will not be so unworthy as to break the Law of Arms. Thus much I am obliged to say to the honour of the souldiery, that they have been so far from breaking any Articles given to others, that they have rather bettered them then other∣wise. It is now our misfortune to be made presidents and examples together: But
I will not do the Protector so much in∣jury, as to load him with dishonour; since I have been informed, that he would have made our conditions good, if Crook, that gave them, had not abjur'd them. This is not a time for me to enlarge up∣on any subject, since I am now become the Subject of death: But since the Ar∣ticles were drawn by my hand, I thought my self obliged to a particular Justificati∣on of them. I could tell you of some souldiers which are turned out of his Troop for defending those conditions of ours: but let that pass; and henceforward, instead of life, liberty, and estate, (which were the Articles a∣greed upon) let drawing, hanging, and quartering, bear the Denomination of Cap. Crooks Articles. However, I thank the Protector for granting me this honourable death. I should now give you an account of my Faith. But truly Gentlemen this poor Nation is rent into so many several opi∣nions, that it is impossible for me to give you mine without displeasing some of you. However if a man be so criti∣cal, as to enquire of what faith I die,
I shall refer him to the Apostles, Atha∣nasius & the Nicene Creed, and to the te∣stimony of this Reverend Gentleman, Dr. Short, to whom I have unbosomed my self: and if this do not satisfie, look in the thirty nine Articles of the Catho∣lick Church of England; to them I have subscribed, and do own them as au∣thentick. Having now given you an account con∣cerning my self; I hold my self obliged in duty to some of my friends, to take off a suspition which lies upon them: I mean as to some persons of Honour, which upon my examination, I was char∣ged to have held correspondency with. The Marquess of Hartford, the Mar∣quess of Winchester, and my Lord of Pem∣brook were the persons nominated to me. I did then acquit them, and do now se∣cond it with this protestation, That I never held any correspondency with ei∣ther or any of them, in relation to this particular businesse, or indeed to any thing which concern'd the Protector or his Government. As for the Marquess of Winchester, I saw him some twelve years since, and not later; and if I should see him here present, I believe I should
not know him. And for the Earle of Pembrook, he was not a man likely, to whom I should discover my thoughts, because he is a man of a contrary Judg∣ment. I was examined likewise concerning my Brother Freke, my Cousin Hastings, Mr. Dorrington, and others. It is proba∣ble their estates may make them liable to this condition: but I do here so far acquit them as to give the World this farther protestation that I am confident they are as innocent in this business as the youngest child here. I have no more to say to you now, but to let you know that I am in charity with all men, I thank God I both can, and do forgive my greatest persecutors, and all that ever had any hand in my death. I have offered the Protector as good security for my future demeanor as I sup∣pose he could have expected: if he had thought fit to have given me my life, certainly I should not have been so un∣grateful as to have imployed it against him. I do humbly submit to Gods plea∣sure, knowing that the issues of life and death are in his hand. My blood is but
a small sacrifice, if it had been saved, I am so much a Gent. as to have given thanks to him that preserved it; and so much a Christian, as to forgive them which take it. But seeing God by his providence hath called me to lay it down, I willing∣ly submit to it, though terrible to na∣ture: but blessed be my Saviour, who hath taken out the sting: so that I look upon it with terrour. Death is a debt, and a due debt; and it hath pleased God to make me so good a husband, that I am come to pay it before it is due. I am not ashamed of the Cause for which I die, but rather rejoyce that I am thought worthy to suffer in the defence and cause of Gods true Church, my law∣full King, the liberty of the Subject, and Priviledge of Parliaments. Therefore I hope none of my Aliance and Friends will be ashamed of it; it is so far from pulling down my Family, that I look, upon it as the raising of it one story hi he Nei∣ther was I so prodigal of nature as to throw away my life, but have used (though none but honourable and honest) means to preserve it. These unhappy times indeed have been very fatall to my family: two of my
Brothers already slain, and my self go∣ing to the slaughter: it is Gods will, and I humbly submit to that provi∣dence. I must render an acknowledgement of the great civilities that I have received from this City of Exon, and some per∣sons of quality, and for their plentiful provision made for the prisoners. I thank Mr. Sheriff for his favour towards us, in particular to my self; and I desire him to present my due respects to the Prote∣ctor, and though he had no mercy for my self, yet that he would have respect to my family. I am now stripping off my clothes to fight a duel with death, (I conceive no other duel lawful) but my Saviour hath pulled out the sting of this mine ene∣my, by making himself a sacrifice for me: And truly I do not think that man deserving one drop of his bloud, that will not spend all for him in so good a cause. The Truth is Gentlemen, in this Age, Trea on is an individium vagum, like the wind in the Gospel, it bloweth wher it list∣eth: So now Treason is what they please, &
lighteth upon whom they will. Indeed no man, except he will be a Traytor can avoid this Censure of Treason. I know not to what end it may come, but I pray God my own, and my Brothers blood that is now to die with me, may be the last upon this score. Now Gentlemen, you may see what a condition you are in without a King: you have no law to protect you, no rule to walke by; when you perform your duty to God, your King and Country you displease the Arbitrary power now set up; (I cannot call it government.) I shall leave you to peruse my tryal, and there you shall see what a condition this poor Nation is brought into; and (no question) will be utterly destroyed, if not restored (by loyal Subjects) to its old and glorious Government. I pray God he lay not his Judgements upon En∣gland for their sluggishness in doing their duty, and readiness to put their hands in their bosoms, or rather taking part with the Enemy of Truth. The Lord open their eyes, that they may be no longer lead, or drawn into such snares: else the Child that is unborn will curse the day of their Parents birth.
God almighty preserve my Lawful K. Charles the second, from the hands of his Enemies, and break down that wall of Pride and Rebellion, which so long hath kept him from his just Rights. God preserve his Royal Mother, and all his Majestys Royal Brethren, and in∣cline their hearts to seek after him. God incline the hearts of all true En∣glismen to stand up as one man to bring in the King; and redeem them∣selves and this poor Kingdom out of its more then Egyptian slavery. As I have now put off these garments of cloth, so I hope I have put off my garments of sin, & have put on the Robes of Christs Righteousnesse here; which will bring me to the enjoyment of his glo∣rious Robes anon. Then he kneeled down and kissed the block, and said thus, I commit my soul to God my Creator, and Redeemer. Look upon me, O Lord, at my last gasping: Hear my prayer, and the pray∣ers of all good people. I thank thee, O God, for all thy dispensations towards me. Then kneeling down, he prayed most devoutfuly, as followeth.
O Eternal, Almighty, and most mer∣cifull God, the Righteous Judge of all the world, look down in mercy on me a mise∣rable sinner. O blessed Jesus, Redeemer of Mankind, which takest away the sins of the world, let thy perfect manner of o∣bedience be presented to thy Heavenly Fa∣ther for me. Let thy precious death and bloud be the ransome and satisfaction of my many and heynous transgressions. Thou that sittest at the right hard of God make in∣tercession for me. O holy and blessed Spirit which art the Comforter, fill my heart with thy consolations. O holy, blessed, and glo∣rious Trinity, be mercifull to me, con∣firm my faith in the promises of the Gospel revive and quicken my hope and expectati∣on of joys prepared for true and faithfull servarts. Let the infinite Love of God my Saviour, make  love to him steafast, sin∣cere, and constant. O Lord consider my condition, accept my tears, aswage my grief, give me comfort and confidence in the: impute not unto me my for∣mer sins, but most mercifull Fathr receive me into thy favour, for the merits of Christ Jesus. Many and grievous are my sins, for I have sinned many times against the light of knowledge, against remorse of conscience, a∣gainst
the motions & opportunities of grace. But accept I beseech thee, the sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, in and for the perfect sacrifice, oblation, and satisfacti∣on of thy Son Jesus Christ. O Lord re∣ceive my soul after it is delivered from the burthen of the flesh, into perfect joy in the sight and fruition of thee. And at the general resurrection, grant that my body may be en∣dowed with immortality, and received with my soul into glory. I praise thee O God, I acknowledge thee to be the Lord, O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy on me. Thou that sittest at the right hand of God, hear my prayer. O Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man, Mediator betwixt God and Man, I have sinned as a Man, be thou mercifull to me as a God. O holy and blessed Spirit, help my infirmities with those sighs and groans which I cannot expresse. Then he desired to see the Axe, and kissed it, saying, I am like to have a sharp passage of it, but my Savior hath sweetned it unto me. Then he said; If I would have been so unworthy as others have been, I suppose I might by a lye have saved my life, which I scorn to purchase at such a
rate. I defie such temptations, and them that gave them me. Glory be to God on high: On Earth peace: Good will towards Men. And the Lord have mercy upon my poor soul. Amen. So laying his Neck upon the Block, after some private Ejaculations, he gave the Heads-man a sign with his hand, who at one blow severed his head from his body. The true Speech of that Valiant and pious∣ly resolved Hugh Grove of Chisenbu∣ry, in the Parish of Enford, and County of Wilts Esquire, beheaded the 16th. of May, 1655. in the Castle at Exon. Good people, I Never was guilty of much Rhetorick, nor ever loved long Speeches in all my life, and therefore you cannor ex∣pect either of them from me now at my death. All that I shall desire of you, be∣sides your hearty prayers for my soul, is,
That you would bear me witnesse, I die a true son of the Church of England, as it was established by King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charls the first of blessed mem∣mory: That I die a Loyall Subject to King Charls the second, my undoubted Sove∣raign, and a lover of the good old Laws of the Land, the just priviledges of Parlia∣ments, and Rights and Liberties of the People; for the re-establishing of all which I did undertake this engagement, and for which I am ready to lay down my life. God forgive the bloody-minded Jury and those that procured them: God forgive Captain Crook for denying his Ar∣ticles so unworthily: God forgive Mr. Dove, and all other persons swearing so maliciously and falsely against me: God forgive all my enemies; I heartily for∣give them. God blesse the KING and all that love him, turn the hearts of all that hate him; God blesse you all, and be merciful to you, and to my soul, A∣men. And so meekly laying his Neck to the block, and giving a sign, his head at one blow and a draw of the axe, was severed from his body.
Sir Henry Slingsby, and Dr. Hewyt, beheaded on Tower hill, June 8. 1658. THis was the last Act of Cromwel's Tragedies; Death putting soon af∣ter a period to his Usurpation, and Epi∣logizing other mens fate with his own, his life had been attended, and his hours measured with stillation of blood; now they were determined: this full pomp of slaughter went before, and ushered his long desired Funerals to his usurped Grace. He never stirt'd a Plot, but money stuck at the bottom. He had an Army of Janizaries, which without constant pay could never be kept at his beck and obe∣dience, and all the design he practised could not raise him money without the tricks of Jealousies and Fears; that State-Device, serving by fondness and force to bring in mony for the Cause from the beginning to the very ending; and this was the original of this horrid Plot. For nothing else can be made out; he had lately so frighted all men by his known intelligence at the Kings Court,
that none but mad-men, except the con∣dition of the Tyrannie were altered, would venture upon any new Contri∣vance; the Usurper being stronger and farther seated in his Domination then ever before, and the severity of his Re∣venge against those whom he took in such practices was so fresh and recent in me∣mory, that nothing but Desperation could thrust men upon such Pikes. Therefore ho had recourse to his old Artifices, and because no body would be dealing with him, he would be dealing with others, to make the people believe and apprehend danger, and afterwards pay for the delivery from, (that is to say, for the perpetration of) it. The Design was laid in all quarters, North, East, West and South, but centred in the City of London; 'twas a General Conbination betwixt him and his Secre∣tary, and so e not dive in it further, but leave those parties who are concerned in the death's of these and some prece∣ding persons, to consider of the rest, and proceed to the Narrative. The first man that was produced in this Plot (which was to subvert the Usurpation, till the Tyrant introduce and
restore our Sovereign, with a particu∣lar kind reference to the City, which should be fired (by its former Incen∣diaties) was Sir Henry Slingsby, a Gentleman of a very Noble Family in York shire, of an ample and large Re∣venue and Estate in York shire, but ex∣hausted and wasted in the Kings Service, and afterwards wholly sequestred for the Parliament. This Knight, for some time be∣fore had been a prisoner in Hull, in order to the security of the Peace, as their Tyrannie termed it, but for many∣yeares together no stranger to such de∣meurances. In that Garrison he became acquainted, as the solace of misery, and life necessirated him, with some of the Officers; they likewise insinuating and ingratiating with him, but more parti∣cularly, when instructions were given them of trapanning him into some de∣sign, against their Sultan Cromwel. This engaged them into a nearer fa∣misiarity, Sir Henry's case and hard usage is lamented, the state of the Kingdome laid open, and the oppression of the people aggravated, with many the like overtures, to feel if the pulse
of Sir Henry would beat an Alarm to an insurrection, which for their part truly they feared, but should not draw a Sword against any, who should so at∣tempt the regaining and recovery of their liberty. To these Discoveries Sir Henry gave some pleasant, but not serious eare, though he did not utterly disbelieve the discontents of those men: knowing, if it was absolute truth they spoke, and might in time be accomplished, and therefore let fall some words tending to that purpose; on which they replying, and professing their serious service to the King if occasion presented it; drew some further matter from Sir Henry; which was, the offering of a Commission to them to secure that place for the King. This was an old Commission, and which had lain by him a long while: o∣remote and distant were his thoughts from effecting any thing; Before they had thus brought him on, and had then produced upon the sudden and unexpect∣ed hopes of gaining that Town. The producing of this Commission was enough for their Tyrants satisfacti∣on,
who straight gave Order that he should be sent up to London, who after some Examination, he was sent to the Tower, and finally brought before a High Court of Justice, where he manifested the Juggle by which he was brought into the snare; and demonstrated the im∣possibility of his doing any prejudice to the State, but that was no Argument there; so that he was sentenced to be beheaded, by vertue of a late Act of one of Olivers Conventions, whereby it was made Treason to hold intelligence with the Kings Majesty. Much application was made to save his life by the Lord Viscount Faucon∣bridge his Nephew, who had lately mar∣ried one of the Usurpers Daughters; but as Sir Henry said at the Scaffold, he was inexorable; the truth is, the Tyrant sup∣posed, that his not sparing a person so re∣lated to him, would make all the World believe there was a reality of some horrid design, which could not be dispensed with, without extream danger to the publique. He said very sittle at his death, not caring to busy the world with his concerns, having spoken largely to his Charge at his Trial, before the said High Court, the substance on the Scaffold was this.
The fatal Execution of Sir Henry Slingsby on Tuesday the 8. of June, 1658. upon Tower-Hill: With the substance of his speech before his Death. ABout Eleven of the Clock Sir Henry Slingsby was brought from the Tow∣er to the Scaffold on Tower-Hill; whi∣ther being come he fell upon his knees, and for a short space prayed pri∣vately. Then standing up, he did with a very low voice, address himself to that noble Gentleman Mr. Sheriff Robinson, tel∣ling him that what he had to say he would speak to him; which was to this purpose. That he had received a Sentence to die, upon account of his endeavouring to betray the Garrison of Hull; But said, All that be did in that businesse he was drawn into by others. That the Officers of that Garrison did believe he had some greater Design in hand, and therefore they would needs pump him to the bottom: But what he spake to them in private was brought into evidence against him. He likewise said, That he did no
more than any person would have done that was so brought on. That he had made many applications (by his Friends) for a Reprieve, but found his Highnesse was inexorable. He did confess that he did deliver a Com∣mission (as it was charged against him:) But said, that it was an old Com∣mission, and what he meant was well known to himself; but what construction others had made of it, might appear by his present con∣dition. He dscovered little sense of sorrow, or fear of Death; but said, He was ready to submit, or words to like pur∣pose. Then he addressed himself to private prayer again; and kneeling down to the Block, he prayed privately for a short space: Then laid his head upon the Block, and at the sign given, the Executioner severed His Head from his Body at one Blow: And his Friends put his Body into a Coffin, and removed it into a close Coach prepared neer the place.
Doctor Hewyt. THis Venerable Doctor was next brought upon the Stage, and baited to Death by their Belial President Lisle. His objected Crimes, were for conspiring against the Government, with divers o∣thers, and holding intelligence with the King, branched out into several Articles. After the Charge exhibited, he demur∣ted to their Jurisdiction, citing divers Law-Cases and Presidents to back the Reasons he alledged against their Autho∣rity, but withal, prayed the Court he might not be taken upon the nicety & punctilio of their Law; & that, if they would please to evince the legality of their Court to him, he would instantly plead to his Charge, and leave himself to them. While he thus disputed with them, they took advantage of three times de∣manding his Plea, after which they would not admit of it, though he thrice petitio∣ned them, that they would please to ac∣cept thereof; but it seems they were more contented without it, being not able to prove their Charge, their Witnesses failing them, as it appeared after wards in
other mens cases, whom they had ap∣pointed for the slaughter. They were also the more peremptory and untractable to this reverent person, because of his great Esteem and Abilities, which he had a long while employed at St. Gregories in the service of this Church, King, and Kingdom, whose cause he for∣bore not to plead in the worst of those times, till he was taken from his Ministry by the Tyrant, and his Eloquent Tongue silenced in the Grave. And if Cromwel had any particular malice to any person, in the contrivance of their death, this good Doctor was one, whom he upbraided with railing and un∣becoming language at his Examination before him, as may appear in the Doctor's Speech on the Scaffold, to which we refer the Reader, and with the rest of this Ta∣per-light, now expiring, bring him down to his Monument. He prayed very fer∣vently & earnestly for the space of almost half an hour, and then sealed his Martyr∣dom, by having his head severed from his body with much Christian Magnanimity; where we leave him, till his appearance with the Lamb, with his white Robes, and Crown of Martyrdom.
The Horrid Execution of the reverend Doctor John Hewyt D. D. on the same Scaffold, on Tuesday the same 8. of June 1658. with his speech before his Death. AS soon as Sir Henry Slingsby's body was removed, as is aforesaid. Dr. Hewyt was brought upon the Scaffold, whether being come (together with Dr. Wild, Dr. Warmstry, and Mr. Barwick) he fell upon his knees, and prayed private∣ly for the space of a quarter of an hour; After that he prayed audibly for a good space. After which prayer he addressed him∣self to the people in a speech which continued above the space of an hour, the substance of which speech was as fol∣loweth, I am now become a publick Spectacle to Men and Angels (I hope) God, who is Omniscient, is now beholding me with much pity, and great mercy and compas∣sion; and the more, because I am now come to that end that his own Son came into the world to, To bear witness to the truth: he himself said, For this end was I born, for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness to the Truth: I was brought into the world (the Christian world) for to bear witness to the truth of the Gospel, as a common Chri∣stian; I was brought into the world (the Church) as a Minister of his blessed Word and Sacraments; [Blessed be his name for that great honour and dignity] and I came into the world to die more imme∣diately for the testimony of JESUS, which God hath now called me to. I came into this world (this Common-wealth) to be a member thereof, to bear witnesse to the truths of the Customes, the Laws, the Liberties, and Priviledges thereof, So I am a member of the Common∣wealth? And me thinks it seems to me a strange thing, that in as much as we all plead for Liberty, and Priviledges, and I pleading for the Priviledges, the Laws, the Statutes, and the Customes of this Land, yet I should die by those that should stand for the Laws, the Statutes, and Priviledges of the Land: And I am here beheld by those that plead for their Liberties, and I hope I am pitied, be∣cause I here give up my self willingly and freely to be a State Martyr for the publick good; and I had rather die many
deaths my self, than betray my fellow freemen to so many inconvences, that they might be like to suffer by being sub∣ject to the wills of them that willed me to this death. And it is worthy remembrance, that Mr. Solicitor having impeached me of Treason to the Commissioners of the Court against his Highnesse, I did often (when brought before those Commissi∣oners) plead for the Liberties of the peo∣ple of England, though I had not the know∣ledge of the Law, yet I had instruction from those that were learned in the Law, and had several Law-Cases and presidents put into my hand, though not by them, and urged several Law-Cases, and made my Appeal, First for the Judicature that I was to be tryed by, whether it were according to Law? whether it were ac∣cording to the Act? and whether it were according to the words of the said Act? I did appeal to have the said Act argued by learned Lawyers on both sides, and then to be resolved by his Highnesse own Councel, which was denyed me, [This by the by] I pressing the Argument made a second appeal, that those Judges, if they would give singly their several judg∣ments
that it was a just and lawfull Court of Judicature, I would answer to my Charge, I did make another Appeal to those that were his Highness's Council, and pleaded against me. That if they would deliver it to me under their hands to be according to Law I would then go on to plead and answer to the Charge. What was then said further, my spirits being faint, I shall not say much, but only this, I was taken in three defaults, upon formality of the Court: It seems it is a custome in all Courts, (which I did not know before) that if they answer not the third time, speaking by the Clerk, that then they are guilty of three defaults, and proceeded against as mute: [I had no such knowledge of the Law.] So they found me guilty of those defaults; and when I would have pleaded, and resolved to begin to plead, I was taken from the Bar. I did the next day make my Petition to the Court in the Pain∣ted-Chamber, two Petitions were pre∣sented the same in effect; the former the Title was mistaken: Yet because the title was mistaken, and no answer gi∣ven, therefore it was that another pe∣tition was drawn up to the same effect,
with a new Title given, (as I remem∣ber) presented by the Serjeant at arms, and one writ it over in such hast, lest they should be drawn out of the Painted-Chamber into the Court, that I had not time to read it over, only I subscribed my name, and there was in the front of the Petition a word left out, but what the word was I know not; and this was taken so ill, as if I had put an affront or contempt upon the Court; And it was thought they would have heard me plead; and then be∣cause of that mistake, they sent word, I should have my answer when I came in∣to the Court; and my answer was the sentence of condemnation. And there∣fore I pray with all my sonl, that God would forgive all those that occasioned the charge to be drawn against me: to give such unjust things against me: I pray with all my soul, that God would forgive all those upon so slender and small, grounds adjudg'd me to die, taking ad∣vantage of such simple ignorance as I was in. And I had at the very beginning of my pleading engaged their honours, no ad∣vantage should be taken against me to my prejudice, that in as much as I understood nothing of the Law, And having heard
that a man in the nicety of the Law might be lost in the severity thereof, meer∣ly for speaking a word out of simple ignorance, I made it my prayer to them, that no advantage might be taken against me to the prejudice of my person; and there was to me a seeming consent; for the President told me, there should be no advantage taken against me; and up∣on these considerations I am afraid there was too great uncharitableness. But I pray God forgive them from the very bot∣tom of my soul, and I desire that even those that shed my blood, may have the bowels of the God of mercy shed for them. And now having given you the occa∣sion of my coming hit her, it is fit I should give you somewhat as concerning my self, as I am a Christian, and as I am a Clergy-man. First, as I am a Christian, I thank God I was baptized to the holy Church, so I was baptized to be a Mem∣ber of the holy Catholique Church, that is the Church of England, which I dare say for purity of Doctrine, and or∣derly Discipline, till a sad reformation had spoiled the face of the Church, and made it a query, whether it were a Church, or no? I say it was more pure∣ly
Divine and Apostolical, then any o∣ther Doctrine or Church in the Christi∣an world, whether National, or Classical, or Congregational: And I must tell you That as I am a Member of this Church, so I am a Member of the holy Catholick Church, & shall give a most just confession of my Faith, both negatively and affirma∣tively. Negatively, I am so a Member of the Catholick Church, that I abhor all Sects, Schisms, Sedition, and Tyranny in Religion. Affirmatively so, that as I hold Communion with, so I love and ho∣nour all Christians in the world, that love the same Lord JESUS in sincerity, and call on his Name, agreeing with those truths that are absolutely necessary, and clearly demonstrated in the Word of God, both in the Old and New Testa∣ment, though in charity dissenting from some others, that are not necessary. And I, as I am thus a Christian, I hope for salvation through the Merits of Christ Je∣sus, his blood I relie on, his merits I trust to for the salvation of my own soul: though to this Faith good Works are ne∣cessary; not meritorious in us, but one∣ly made meritorious by Christ his death, by his alsufficiency, by his satisfaction,
and his righteousness, they become meri∣torious, but in us they are no other than as defiled Rags. And truly, as I am a Mem∣ber of the Church, so I told you I was a Member of this Community, and so pleaded for the Liberties and Priviledges thereof. I must now answer something I am aspersed withal in the World. They talk of something of a Plot, and a Treasonable design, and that I had a great interest in the knowledge and pra∣ctise thereof, and that, for the saving my life, I would have discovered and betrayed I cannot tell what. I hope my conversation hath not been such here in this City, where I have been a long time very well known, as to make one imagine I should intermedle in such an action, and go so contrary to the practice of my profession: and I hope there are none so uncharitable towards me, as to believe I had a knowledge of that design. Here I must come to particulars for a Plot, of having a design upon the City of London, for the firing of it. I so much tremble at the thought of the thing, that should have been done, as they say, for the carrying on of such a design, (if my heart deceive me not) had I known it,
I so much abhorre the thing, I should have been the first discoverer of it: Nor ever had I had correspondency or meer∣ings with such persons as would have car∣ried on such a design. It is said likewise I entertained the Earl, the Marquess of Ormond: To my remembrance I never saw the face of that honourable person in my life. It is said, one Lords day I did preach at Saint Gregories, and the next Lords day I was at Brussels or Bruges, and kist the Kings hand, and brought I cannot tell what Orders and Instructions from him. This I shall say, For these three years last past together, I have not been sixty miles from this City of London, and I think it is somewhat further to either of those places than threescore miles. It is said that I kept correspondency with one Mallory and Bishop: They are persons I have heard of their names; but never saw their faces: and to my knowledge I do not know they know me: nor do I know them at all, but only as I have heard of their names. And whosoever else hath suggested such things against me, I know not. His Highnesse was pleased to tell me, I was like a flaming Torch in the midst of a
sheaf of Corn: He meaning, I being a publick Preacher, was able to set the City on fire by sedition and combustions, and promoting designes. Here truly I do say, and have it from many of those who are Judges of the High-Court, that upon examination of the business they have not found me a medler at all in these Affairs. And truly I must needs say therefore, That it was a very uncharitable act in them (whoever they were) that brought such accusation against me, and irritated his Highness, against me. I will not say it was malice, it might be zeal, but it was rash zeal which caused me to be sen∣renced to this place: The God of mercy pardon and forgive them all. And truly as I am a Member of the Church, and as a member of Community where on behalf I have been speaking, I cannot but do as our Saviour himself did for his Disciples, when he was to be taken from them, he blessed them, and ascended up to heaven. My trust is, in the mercy of the most High I shall not miscarry; and however my daies are shortned by this unexpected doom, and shall he brought untimely to the Grave I cannot go without my pray∣ers, for a blessing upon all the people of
this land, and cannot but blesse them all in the name of God, and beseech God to blesse them all, the blessing of the Al∣mighty be upon them. Colonel Edward Ashton, John Bettely, and Edward Stacy, Executed July 2. 1658. THese persons being all Arraigned to∣gether at the same High Court, with four more, being concerned in one Sentence, and one pretended Crime, I have put together, and briefly will give you an account of them. They were charged to have conspired the raising of a new War, the firing of the City, and the Death of Cromwel, to which they all pleaded not guilty, as all the World did judge them, who sensibly understood the detestable practice against them. Colonel Ashton was then a prisoner for Debt in Newgate, but by the Keepers favour, having liberty to go abroad, one day fell into Company with some of Cromwel's Trapan's: who finding, or per∣haps knowing him to be a Cavalier, utter∣ed
in his Audience, such dangerous words as those, and without amy more ado delated him to the Secretary, as con∣scious and partaker to the design, which was all his guilt, as he justified it upon his Death, which he suffered in Tower∣street, by being hanged, drawn and quar∣rered, where he declared his Loyalty to the King; but took it upon his approach∣ing salvation, he was innocent of any the Crimes charged against him. John Bettely suffered next, being brought from the Tower to Cheapside, in the same Sledge that drew Colonel Ash∣ton from Nawgate; (their Executions being divided into several quarters of the City, as their pretended Plot was of firing it: the old Cheat, of picking out places to attend the guilt, and to col∣logue with the City, by the dissembled care thereof) and near the Crosse Exe∣cuted in the same manner, where he like∣wise protested his Innocency, being meer∣ly betrayed by those Ruffian Emissaries of Cromwels. After he had hung a long while, that every one concluded him dead, in a strange miraculous way, as might serve to the confusion of his Blood-thir∣sty Enemies, he pulled off his Cap, and
held it in both hands, staring with his eyes as if alive: but the Executioner quickly after dispatcht him, and concluded his Martyrdom. Mr. Edward Stacy was hanged onely two dayes after, where he said the like, and suffered with patience the losse of this temporal, to enjoy with unspeakable happinesse Life Everlasting. The others Were Reprieved, and by the Death of Cromwel, soon after set at Liberty, which was consummated at the Restauration of his Sacred Majesty, whose benign Rayes of Peace and Security, have dryed up all our Teares of sorrow and mourning into Teares of Joy, and is leaving us to forget our past miseries, and losses of our Liberties, Estates, and Relations.
CAROLO SECƲNDO TER Maximo Britanniarum & Franciae Regi Precibus Martyrum Revocato, restituto, Restitutori. In sacrosanctam & Beatissimam Memoriam TAM Pientissimi Patris ac Principis QUAM Fidelium Heroum ac Procerum Caeterorumque Subditorum Qui pro Rege & Lege mortem sunt perpessi HOC OBLATUM Humillime vovet Dicatque F. H.
To the most Illustrious TRIUMVIRATE The Heirs of Martyr'd LOYALTY and HONOUR, Charles Earl of Derby, &c. William Earl of Strafford, Knight of the most Ho∣nourable Order of the Gar∣ter, &c. and Arthur Earl of Essex, &c. My Lords; THis Piece directs it self into your hands, for without a greater pre∣sumption it could not pass them.
Your Noble Families, were the resplendent Triones that accompanied the Devex of Charles his Wain, his Mor∣ning and Evening attendants, that portended and extended his Declination, (for in two of them He suffered beyond His own Fate) being plunged with Him in the depths of the same Red Sea, and are now risen again in a full and most radient lustre. They were that Constellati∣on, that directed three wan∣dring Kingdoms into their way of Loyalty, and pointed out the due veneration to the King their Redeemer.
It was their all-powerful Influence of Duty and Obedi∣ence that hath serened these Times. The dark Obscurity of that Cloud that hid them in their death, soon revealed it self in Glory. This storm which tempested these Kingdoms, being laid by their Bloud, which was poured out like water in the streets, hath brought again our Halcyon dayes, and turned our Miseries into Jubilees. This is the supererrogated Merit, of your Illustrious Pa∣rents, whom this Age and Po∣sterity shall reverence and ad∣mire; That your Lordships may surmount their Vertues,
as well as their difficulties, as you have exceeded their Titles; that you may, as the Branches of those Vines, which being made to bleed, produce more generous and abundant Fruits, that you may be the delight and Joy of these Nations, and flourish for ever, is, and shall be the inces∣sant prayers of, My Lords, Your Honours most obedient and Devoted Servant, James Heath.
THE AUTHOUR TO THE READER. THis is only to inform you, that I have used my best endea∣vors to be punctually true in these Collections; but in such Distractions of the times, and Di∣visions of the mind and opinion, in which they were registred, I hope to be excu∣sed, if there be any uncertainty found therein. If I have omitted any out of this Martyrology, or have slightly pas∣sed them over, it is for want of fuller Information. I likewise desire all the Persons Related to them, would be pleased
to give me a better Account, then our Re-searches could arrive at, and I shall insert, rectifie, and enlarge their Nar∣rative as occasion shall offer, For the Confessors, I acknowledge, I have not been nice, nor yet have I been uncurious in their Catologue: I suppose I have set down the most Noted and Publick Persons; but if there be more to add, I shall be very ready to do their Memory the Honours that duly appertain to them. Vale. Courteous Reader, BE pleased to pass by the Errours of the Press, where-ever you meet with them; and Pag. 119. Title. for Wesiminster, read Winchester.
A CATALOGUE AND Brief Account of the Confessors of the Royal Cause. I Should undertake a volume∣nous and as difficult a labour, were it my purpose here to re∣gister all those gallant persons, that have suffered in their liberty & estates for their Loyalty. But I confine my self to the chief of those only who by particu∣lar Orders of Parliament, their pretended Courts of Law, and High Courts of Justice, were vexed, oppressed, and persecuted e∣ven to the brinks of death, leaving the other to the reward of a good Conscience, and the faithful record thereof in Heaven.
These ensuing illustrious and Noble Pat∣terns as well for imitation as information, I thought fit to propose, and do humbly crave their pardon, if this weak and mean endeavour, cannot reach that grandeur of Spirit, with which they constantly endured their fiery tryals, and dreadful and doleful sufferings. I observe the order of time, and not of Dignity, and shall begin with the right Ho∣nourable, the Lord Finch of Fordwich, who being. Lord Keeper of the Seal, upon their arbitrary proceedings against the life of the Earl of Strafford, wisely withdrew himself, and endured banishment and exile from his own Country for sixteen years, and then returned, and died in Ho∣nour. His faithful serving his Soveraign in that great employment, being all his charge and accusation. Mr. Secretary Windebanke, who pursued the same course, to avoid the Popular fury, and died abroad. The Right reverend Father in God Mat∣thew
Lord Bishop of Ely, who with eleven more of his Sacred Order, were committed to the Tower, in 1641, from which im∣prisonment he never irred, till the end of the year 1659, at which time, by the means of the ever renowned Lord General the Duke of Albemarle, he was set at liberty from thence, in kind remembrance of those fatherly counsels and happy advice, the said noble Duke had, during his restraint in the same place, for the same account of Loyal∣ty, received from this reverend Bishop, who is now reestablished in this same Dio∣cesse, to the Honour and support of this restored Church. Doctor Featly, a very Learned Religious and grave Divine, to whom this Church oweth much for his accurate defences of its Doctrine and Discipline, being for no other cause committed to Peter House by an Order of Parliament, languished there a year and a half, and with much importu∣nity was at last removed to Chelsey Col∣ledge for the aire, but he died there within three weeks after his coming, being too far spent by his barbarous misusage.
Sir Robert Heath Lord Chief Justice of England, known so well for his integrity and moderation, and as famous for his constant Loyalty, of whom quarrelsome John Lilburn, a sworn Enemy to the Royal Party, gave so noble a character before his Judges at Guild-hall, forced to abandon his Country, fled over, towards the expiration of the War, into France, being by the bloo∣dy prevalent Faction at Westminster excep∣ted from mercy; not long after the Kings death, with grief and anxiety of mind, to see the miseries and ruines of the King and his Country, he himself died at Caen in Normandy, and was received no doubt in∣to mercy. Judge Bartlet who weathered the same Storm, being the first committed of that reverend Robe, and long survived their high and insignificant charge and accusa∣tion; This gives us an Evidence of the in∣tended Justice of the Reformers, who would first put out the eyes of the Law, that the Subject might see the better. Sir Ralph, afterwards Lord Hopton, who
so couragiously, and prudently, and as an Expert Captain, commanded for the King in the West, and had so many notable suc∣cesses; after his disbanding in Cornwall, he took Shipping with the Prince, our now So∣veraign, into the Island of Scilly, and from thence into France, following the Kings hard Fortune in all his peregrinations, till Death arrested him at Paris, and put an end to his Travel. Judge Jenkins, one of his Majesties Justi∣ces in Wales, brought to the Chancery Bat for some misdemeanours of Loyalty, where he denied the Authority of the Court, for that the Seal was contrary to Law, as well as the Commissioners; whereupon he was sent to the Tower, where he persisted in his integrity, published several Presidents and Statutes, and argued them Rebels, and owned the same again at other bars, did what he could to set the Army and the Par∣liament together by the ears, desied them and their threats, and asserted the King and the Laws against their usurpation; was continued a close Prisoner, till they were weary of him, and then was sent to Windsor in the same quality, where he continued
of the same mind, till without thanks he was permitted the liberty of the Town. This brave stout person is yet living, but when dead, his memory shall endure for evermore. Mr. Secretary Sir Edward Nicolas, who constantly abode with the King from the beginning of his troubles, and afterwards, continued the same Service and Office to his present Majesty, in all his troubles a∣broad, by no less trouble than Honour, having faithfully and prudently managed that employment, to the happy effect of his Majesties Restitution. Sir Edward Hide now the Right Ho∣nourable Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancel∣lour of England, the Counsel-Favourite of his late Martyr'd Majesty, and therefore no wonder so hated by the Faction at West∣minster, and traduced by their scandalous Votes, being excepted likewise out of their mercy. He not only continued the same advice, but also saw it in conclusion attain that successe to which it had alwaies been directed, but had missed of approbation till the general applause and shouts of our Deliverance.
The Lord Wilmot, afterwards by King Charles the Second made Earl of Rochester, who throughout the War, particularly at Roundway Down neer the Devizes, so vali∣antly behaved himself, passed over with the Prince, and my Lord Hopton into Scilly, and accompanied his Highnesse in all those dif∣ficulties he passed, more especially at Wor∣cester, and in his Majesties happy conveyance from thence, which he principally manag∣ed. And here I must not omit the Duke of Buckingham, with an honourable refe∣rence also to his noble Brother my Lord Francis Villers, who young at Kingston (as in the primitive times) gave early testimo∣ny to this cause, the valiant Earl of Cleve∣land, the Lord Wentworth his Son, and o∣ther Gentlemen in that Expedition, who suffered for their assistance and obedience to his Majesty in those commands. As also my Lord Gerard, now Captain of his Majesties Life-guard, who bore part after∣wards as well as before, in the calamity and misfortune of the Kings adventures in forrein parts. My Lord Wilmot unhappily died a little before the Kings restitution, and hath left behind him the sweet favour
of a most Loyal affection to his Majesty. Nor without due observation can I pass by the Earl of Norwich, my Lord Lough∣borough, Bernard, Gascoign, Col. Far, Squire Hales and the rest engaged in that design at Colchester, nor Sr. John Owen, for the same endeavour in Wales, being con∣demned with the said Earl of Norwich by the High Court of Justice; but must give their names and memories their venera∣tion. Nor likewise the right reverend Dr. Shel∣den now Lord Bishop of London, and the famous Dr. Hamond, who were a long while in restraint, and threatned with more cruelties, at the same time, expe∣cting to have been transported to some for∣reign plantations. Dr. John Berkenhead, who so hazar∣dously and in so very great dangers, and se∣veral imprisonments, asserted his Maje∣sties cause in its lowest extremities; this Gentleman is so deservedly well reputed, that this mite will signifie nothing.
Sr. Marmaduke Langdale, now Lord Langdale, a Person not inferiour to any of his Majesties Subjects for industry and per∣sonal Valour, which he for the desence of his Sacred Majesty and his Restauration, deserves to be had in everlasting Remem∣brance. But above all, the sad visitations of the Universities deserves remembrance, that the guilt and danger of such barbarity may make posterity to tremble at the thought of it; being the comprehensive design of all those evils they after perpetrated, making those Sources and Fountains of Learning and Piety, as broken Cisterns, that should hold no water, and the place become a meer puddle a mare mortuum, that should send forth pernicious sents, as might in∣sect the Kingdom. To enumerate all those excellent per∣sons who were forced out of their Fellow∣ships and other Collegiate Emoluments, and places, will require a Work of it self, and so I pass that sad Story and beadrol, though with that due compassion to those,
who though now Augas stable be swept, yet cannot find the Manger. After the two Universities, which affor∣ded sufferers enough to make up a Cata∣loge as big as this whole Book, the next place is due to the Martyr'd City of Worce∣ster, the Scene of ruin'd Loyalty, which would fill many pages with Red Letters, whose Citizens might all be transcribed in∣to this Cannon, who besides their constant adherence to the Royal Cause from the first, when the honest Mayor Mr. Soles hardly escaped a gallows, set up for him at his own door, held out to the last for King Charles the First, not rendring with∣out his Order, and had the honour to en∣tertain King Charles the Second in Fifty one, where he was with great solemnity and greater joy proclaim'd, and in that fa∣tal defeat suffer'd with him and for him, devoting their estates and lives as a ransom for his Majesties safety; whilest the streets at the Rebels entrance resounded with the Peoples cries, Oh! save the King; save the King. Sr. John Stowel a Somersetshire Gentle∣man,
and Knight of the Bath, of a very great estate and as much loyalty, who ad∣hered vigourously to the King during the War, till the surrender of Exeter, upon whose Articles he came to London, to make his composition, where contrary to that ca∣pitulation, the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall tendred him the Negative Oath before any admission to compound. He with∣standing this unjust and perfidious dealing, and pleading the benefit of the said Arti∣cles, was reported to the Parliament as a Contemner of their Authority, and an Enemy, and thereupon committed to the Serjeant at Armes, thence to New-gate, from whence he was brought to their High Court of Justice, where with much adoe he escaped with life, being remanded to the Tower, and all his Estate amounting to seven or eight thousand 1. per Annum, sold by a pretended Act of Parliament as for∣feited for Treason. He now survives all those losses and miseries, and may he like Job be rewarded trebble in the future of his life for his constant and stout integrity. And here I could make a record of that black Bill and List that passed for Acts of
Parliament against several of the Nobility and Gentry, by which their estates were forfeited, and sold by Trustees thereunto appointed, for this only fault of Loyalty; but shall forbear. Let the Purchasers blush at their shame and folly, while honest Loyalty keeps its countenance, and wears out the sudden braves of staring Rebellion. I must also pass over the old Earl of Kingston, Father to the right Honourable Lord the Marquesse Dorchester, who being surprized by the Parliaments Forces, and by them put in a Vessel disigned for Hull, was shot by some of the Kings Forces at his passing by Gainshorough, the Rebels offer∣ing him (if the Royalists would venture to shoot) upon the Deck to their Bullets, by which he sell immediately. The noble Marquesses of Winchesters Newcastle, and Worcester, deserve a more durable Register than the scantling and shortnesse of this little breviary, having di∣vided all the sorrows of life, viz. impri∣sonment, distresse, banishment, depri∣vation
of Estate, and other discommodi∣ties of those wretched times, among them, without any Intermission of that, which weak men term insupportable mi∣sery. Dr. Barwick, now the Reverend Den of Sr. Pauls, who lay Prisoner in the Tow∣er of London, while he was near famished, by the cruel Order of the Long Parliament, soon after the Kings death, and was scarce able to stand, when Col. West, the then Lieutenant, gave him his Liberty, on Pa∣rol, to render himself at a certain time soon after, which he performed, but the Lieut, dying, his wife set him at perfect Freedom, and gave him his Conge, it being the me∣thod of those Tyrants, to bury men in their Prisons, unless they had that against them, which would presently reach their Lives. And upon this Account, I hope to be excu∣sed, if I cannot retrive other Loyal Persons from those Obscurities and Dungeons, and the Depths of Villany, and bring neither them, nor their Memories into Light. What should I mention the general ca∣lamity of the Clergy, Loyal and Orthodox,
more especially the Fathers of the Church, since nothing can be more evident to us, and Posterity; but yet I cannot forget that most cruel Edict of Oliver, which by restri∣ction of their Function, nay, their particu∣lar Abilities, took clearly away from them all hopes of sustentation and Maintenance of Life. The Honourable Col. John Russel, Bro∣ther to the Earl of Bedford, who served all along his Majesty in his Armies, and suf∣fered all along afterwards in the Usurpers Prisons, being one of the first, that, upon any the least occasion of their fear, was pre∣sently secured, and tossed from one Custo∣dy to another, till the happy Revolution of his Majesties Return. Col. John and William Ashburnham, the former so well known in our Annals, both signally Loyal and honest, were served in the same manner, and in conclusion, sent away to remote Castles and Islands, and there debarred of any Intercourse or Cor∣respondence with their Friends, meerly upon suspition, as to proof of any thing, whatever was in the bottom.
The Right Honourable, the Lord Bella∣sis, in the very same Predicament, no where more resident or constant then in their cu∣stody, nor could go or travel any where, without a Passe, or safe Conduct from the next Officer, to the place of his Abode, for many years together, and perpetually in danger of being betrayed out of his Life. Sr. Humphrey Bennet, formerly a Briga∣deer in the Kings Army, an eminent Person for his Loyalty, seized, and secured as a par∣taker and confederate in that unfortunate business of Col. Penruddock, at Salisbury, (being of that Country) as aforesaid, was kept in Prison at the Tower of London, from the time of that Rising, till Olivers next Plot in 1658. upon Sr. William Slingsby, &c. which was near 3 years, and then brought before the High Court of Justice, with those Gentlemen, where, after some dayes attendance, their preparations of his Charge not taking with their Intentions, he was superseded from his Trial, and re∣mitted again to his Confinement. For the Honour of the City of Lond. S. Abr.
Reynoldson, Sr. John Gaire, Ald. Adams, Ald. Bunch, and Major Gen. Brown, who suffered a sharp and tedious Imprison∣ment. The Right Honourable, John, now Lord Viscount Mordant, Brother to the Earl of Peterborough, who indefatigably laboured in the Kings Business, being really enga∣ged in the matters wherewith he was accu∣sed, and came off but by one saving voyce, at his Trial before the said Court, when o∣thers not concerned at all, were there con∣demned, no sooner got his Liberty by the death of Oliver, but he was as earnestly bu∣sie as before against the Rump, and by Pro∣clamation commanded to render himself by such a time, or else be reputed a Tray∣tor. He now lives, and hath seen some of them suffer the Reward of such, and is Go∣vernour of Windsor Castle. Mr. now, Sr. Thomas Woodcocke, a Con∣federate in the same Design with my Lord Mordant, so wisely managed his Defence at the aforesaid Bar the same time, that he was fairly acquitted by those bloudy Justices, and soon after set at Liberty, which by his
Majesties Gracious Favours is improved into Honour. Mr. Christopher Pits, Brother to M. Pits of Hampshire, who married the Lady Chan∣dois; I the rather mention his Noble Fa∣mily, because of the Nobleness of this sub∣sequent Action: He was apprehended with Mr. Garrent, and other Citizens, for the same business of the Lord Mordant, and committed to New-gate; after his Exami∣nation taken, they would have made use of him (having not enough against his Life) as a witness against his Associates, and in order thereunto, brought him down to the High Court, where he refused, and reso∣lutely denied to give any Evidence con∣cerning, or against the Prisoners; where∣upon, after many vain Threats and Me∣naces, he was by the Court sent back to Newgate, there condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, and fined 1000 l. which he willingly submitted to, rather then be guil∣ty of the Bloud of his Friends, though a kind of forcible necessity would have seemed to warrant such an Action. He continued a Prisoner, but at large, after Olivers death,
till the Coming of the General, when he forsook that Station, and recommenced his Freedom, with the Kingdoms. Mr. William Garrent, who was tried be∣fore the same Court, for the same business, escaped, as is generally believed, through the want of that Evidence they relied upon from Mr Pits, with much ado he was quit∣ted, and soon after set at Liberty. Henry Friar, who was one of those also, was condemned at the said Court, and was brought afterwards to West-Smithfield, where in the Rounds a Gibbet was erected, upon the Ladder, and ready to die, the Reprieve was produced, and he carried back again to the Tower, whence, not long after, he was dismist. John Sumner, and Oliver Allen, the like, the one drawn on a Hurdle to Bishopsgate, and the other to Grace-Church street, the places of their appointed Execution, but were both there reprieved, and afterwards freed.
Sr. George Booth, now Lord Delameres who in 1659. rose against the Rump, and was proclaimed Traytor, with Major Gen. Egerton, Col. Worden, and Sr. Thomas Middleton, being defeated near Northwich in Cheshire, fled in disguise to Newport Pag∣nel, and was there taken, and sent Prisoner to the Tower of London, and soon after his Estate was Ordered to be sequestred, and sold; and Preparations to be made for his Trial: but upon the division of his, and their fore-gotten Spoyles, betwixt that Rem∣nant at Westminster, and their Commander Lambert, which brought about, through the Prudence and Loyalty of our Noble Gene∣ral, the Re-admission of the Secluded Mem∣bers, he was set at Liberty, and his Estate freed likewise, which is now mounted to the Honourable Revenue of a Barony. Sr. Thomas Middleton, ingaged in the same Quarrel, after this Defeat, was forced to flee, leaving his Sons to defend Chirke Castle, which rendred soon after to Col. Zanchy, but the happy Revolution afore∣said, restored him, and his Estate toge∣ther.
I do here also leave out all Persons, who condemned by Courts Martial, with others that suffered, or alone were afterward re∣prieved, because it is an undertaking of so wide a circumference, that is impossible, without much Errour and Uncertainty, par∣ticularly, I passe by the Names of those, who were kept so long in Durance at Exe∣ter, and were afterwards sent away to the Barbadoes. for the Rising with Col. Pen∣ruddock, because of the Prosixity of that Roll, and I would not be partial. Lastly, It were an infinite Task to par∣ticularize the several Sequestrations, Plun∣derings, and Rapines committed on the Kings good Subjects; the Product of which Spoyles amounted to a vast sum of Trea∣sure, and might be sister to the Publick Faith-Money, as Violence and Fraud are seldom asunder. But what is herein defe∣ctive, would indeed be redundant, and
therefore I refer every Particular of those sufferers to the General Day of Account, when they shall receive full Recom∣pence. FINIS.
Courteous Reader, THere is now Pub∣lished, the Recon∣ciler of the Bible Inlar∣ged: wherein above three thousand seeming Contradictions through∣out the Old and New Testament are fully and plainly Reconciled: be∣ing a very useful Work for all such as desire to understand the Sacred
Scriptures aright unto Salvation. And sold by Simon Miller at the star in S. Pauls Church Yard.
Courteous Reader, These Books fol∣lowing, are Printed for Simon Mil∣ler, or Sold by him at the Star in St. Pauls Church Yard. Small Folio. THe Reconciler of the Bible Enlarged: wherein above Three Thousand seem∣ing Contradictions throughout the Old and New Testament, are fully and plainly re∣conciled. A like work never yet extant, and may serve for the Explanation of the most difficult Places of the Bible: being useful for all such as desire to understand the Sacred Scriptures aright unto Salvation. Humbly presented to the Censure of the Sons of the Prophets. By J. T. and T. M. Ministers of Gods Holy Word and Sacra∣ments. Astrology restored; or an Introduction to the Language of the Stars, in four Books, by William Ramsey, Gent. The Civil Wars of Spain, in the Reign of Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, and
King of that Nation, wherein our Late un∣happy Differences are paralell'd in many Particulars. A General History of Scotland, from the Year 767. to the death of King James, &c. by David Hume of Godscroft. The History of this Iron Age, wherein is set down the true state of Europe, as it was in the Year 1500. also the Causes of all the wars and Commotions that have happened to this present time; with the memorable Sieges and Battels, together with the live∣ly Effigies of the most Renowned Persons. Mr. Paul Baine his Practical Commen∣tary on the whole Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians, The most pleasant and profitable Histo∣ry of Francion, wherein all the Vices that usually attend youth are plainly laid open, that the Misfortunes of some may teach o∣thers to abandon Vice; done into English by a Person of Honour. Eighteen Books of the Secrets of Art & Nature, being the sum and substance of Natural Philosophy, first designed by Do∣ctor John Weeker, and now much enlar∣ged by Dr. R. Read. The Queen of Arragon, a Play in Folio.
In Quarto Large. Jo. Barkley his Argenis, Translated by Sr. Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late Ma∣jesties special Command; with Figures, or without. Quarto small. An Experimental Treatise of Surgery, by Felix Wortz. Abrahams Faith, or the good Old Reli∣gion, &c. by John Nicholson, Minister of the Gospel. The Anatomy of Mortality: by George Stroud. Attersols three Treatises. Universal Husbandry improved, or di∣vers rare and choyce Experiments and Se∣crets in Husbandry, Gardening and Plant∣ing, with divers Rarities of Gabriel Plat, and others, by Sam. Hartlib. Aynsworth on the Cantic. Gralle against Appolonius. A Treatise of Civil Policy, &c. By Sam. Rutherford Professor of Divinity of St. An∣drews in Scotland. Politick and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government, contain∣ing
the Birth, Encrease, Decay of Monar∣chies, the Carriage of Princes and Magi∣strates. Mr. Pinchin his Meritorious Price of mans Redemption, cleared. Astrology Theologized, shewing what Nature and Influence the Stars and Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided. Wells his Souls Progress. Christ tempted, the Devil conquered; Being a plain Exposition on the Fourth Chapter of St. Matthews Gospel: By John Gumbleden, Minister of the Gospel. The Saints Society. D. Stoughtons thirteen choyce Sermons, with his Body of Divinity. The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren, concerning the Presbyterian Government, together with the Answer of the Assembly of Divines. The Doctrine of mans Redemption, by Edward Holioke. Of the Doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land, sweetly harmonizing with the Con∣fessions of Faith of all the Protestant Re∣formed Churches. The Philosophical Touchstone; or Ob∣servations upon Sr. Kenelme Digby's Dis∣courses
of the Nature of Bodies, and of the reasonable Soul, by Alexander Ross. The Saints Triangles of Dangers, delive∣rances, and Duties, by Nathanael Whiting Minister of the Gospel. The Confession of Faith, of all the Con∣gregational Churches of England, agreed upon at the Savoy, 1659. An History of Angels, being a Treatise of our Communion and War with them: by Henry Lawrence. The Description of the Universal Qua∣drant, &c. by Tho. Stirrup, Mathem. The whole Art of Drawing, Painting, Limning and Etching: collected out of the choycest Italian and German Authors, by Alex. Brown, Practitioner. Several Pieces of Mr. Edward Bagshaw, Student of Christs-Church. 1. Exercitationes duae de Presbyt. & E∣piscop. 2. A Discourse of Christ and Antichrist. 3. Signs of the Times, or Prognosticks of Future Judgments, with the way how to prevent them.
Large Octavo. A Treatise of the Divine Promises: by Edw. Liegh Esquire. The Rights of the Crown of England, as it is established by Law, by Edward Bag∣shaw Esquire, of the Inner Temple. Florus Anglious, with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens since the Con∣quest, cut in brass. The Life and Reign of King Charls, from his Birth to his Dth, bp Lambert Wood. The Night-search, the second part: by H. Mill. A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies. Useful Instructions for these Evil times, held forth in Twenty two Sermons, bp Nicholas Lockier, Provost of Eaton Col∣ledge. The Nllity of Church-Censures, or Ex∣communication, not of Divine Institution, but a meer humane Invention: Written by the Famous Tho. Erastus, and never be∣fore Englished. Merry Drollery in two Parts, being a Collection of Jovial Poems, Merry Songs, and Witty Drolleries, intermixt with plea∣san Catches.
Small Octavo. Edw. Waterhouse Esquire, His Discourse of Piety and Charity. Panacea, or the Universal Medicine; be∣ing a Discourse of the admirable Nature & Vertues of Tobacco, by Dr. Everard, and others. A View and Defence of the Reformati∣on of the Church of England, very useful in these times. Mr. Pet. du Moulin, his Antidore against Popery; published on purpose to prevent the Delusions of the Priests and Jesuits, who are now very busie among us. Vinditiae Gratiae Sacramentalis duobus Tractatulis comprehensae. 1. De Efficacia Sacramentorum in genere. 2, De Efficacia Baptismi, quantum ad parvulos quibus praesi∣gitur. Epistola Reverendissimi Patris Johannis Davenanti nuper Episcopi Sarisburiensis. Dr. R. Record his Urinal of Physick. Rare Verities: or the Cabinet of Venus unlockt, and her Secrets laid open. Ovid de Ponto, in English. The Loves of Clerrio & Lozio, a Romance. Herberts Devotions.
Mr. Knowles his Rudiment of the He∣brew Tongue. Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of William the Conqueror, to the death of the Late King. Lingua, or the Combate of the Tongue: and five senses for superiority; a serious Comedy, acted by Oliver Cromwel the Late Usurper. The Spirits Touchstone, being a clear Discovery how a man may certainly know whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not. The poor mans Physitian and Chyrurgi∣on, now Printing. Physical Rarities, containing the most choyce Receipts in Physick and Chyrurge∣ry, for the cure of all Diseases Incident to mans Body: by R. VVilliams. To which is added the Physical Mathematicks, by Her∣mes Tris-megistus. The Idol of Clowns, or the Relation of VVat Tylers Rebellion. The Raconian Catechism in English. The Life of that incomparable man Fau∣stus Socinus Senensis, described by a Polonian Knight. The Golden Fleece, or a Discourse of
the Cloathing of England. Dr. Sibbs his Divine Meditations. Vigerius Precepts of Idiotismes. Grotii Poemata. Three Books of M. Matthews, Minister at Swansey in South-Wales. Duodecimo. Dr. Smiths Practise of Physick. Proverbs, English, French, Dutch, Itali∣an and Spanish, all Englished, and Alpha∣betically digested. The London Distiller, or the whole Art of Distillations laid open. Fryer Bacon his Discovery of the Mira∣cles of Art, Nature and Magick. The Grammar War. Posselius Apothegmes. Fasciculus Florum. Crashaws Visions. The Juniper Lecture. Helvicus Colloquies. The torments of Hell shaken; or a dis∣course with many proofs, shewing that there not is a punishment after this Life for any to endure that shall never end, by Sam. Richardson. The understanding Christians duty, often
to commemorate the death and Passion of our Lord and Saviour Jesus; with the neces∣sary preparatives thereunto. The Christian Souldier, his Combat with the three Arch Enemies of Mankind, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Seasonable Advice to the Apprentices of the Honourable City of London, touching their duty to God, and their Masters. Heinsius de Crepundiis. The History of Russia, or the Govern∣ment of the Emperour of Muscovia, with the Manner and Fashions of the People of that Countrey. Drexelius his School of Patience. Drexelius his right Intention of every ones Action. A School or Nurture for Children or the Duty of Children to Parents, very useful for all that intend to bring up their Children in the Fear of God. A Help to Prayer, being the duty of eve∣ry man and Woman that intends to be sa∣ved. Viginti Quarto. The New Testament. The third Part of the Bible. Sr. Richard Bakers Meditations and
Prayers for every day of the Week. All the Works of that Great and Glori∣ous Monarch and Martyr King Charles the first, Collected into one Volumn. The London Chanticleers, a Play.
