H1399 12159448 55253
FONS SALUTIS, OR THE Fountain of Health OPENED: In the Wonderful Efficacy, and almost incredible Virtue of true Oyl, which is made of Sulphur Vive, set on fire, and called commonly, Oyl of Sulphur per Campanam. Faithfully Collected out of the writings of the most excelling Philosopher, and unparalel'd Physitian of this last age, John Baptist Van Helmont, lately de∣ceased; and confirmed by the experience of Thomas Moulson, Operator in Chymistry. and Med. Lond. LONDON, Printed by Andrew Coe, and are to be sold at Thomas Moulson's House, in Tenter Ally in Little Moor-Fields, at the signe of the Golden Key.
To the Reader. TO let you know I have not spent all my dayes in speculative notions only, I have appeared in this Publication to have some practical experi∣ence also; yet this is neither Inducement, nor is there any Obligation as I am cautious of lies upon me to enforce it, but only one; and that is, pura lex Charitatis; the undefiled Law of Love, as one Christian, and every one ought to exercise towards another, in assisting one another in every gradual motion, tending to the benefit one of another; and as one Tree yeelds not all kinds of fruit, but every one several, gratefully yeelding the more various contentment applicable to every use; so by the Di∣vine Providence, my Talent being bestowed on me this way, lest I should hide it in a Napkin, and incur the deserved sentence of the barren Figg-Tree, I freely make it Communicable to the good and salubrity of all, and shall always be studious there∣of, while I am, Thomas Moulson. From the Golden Key in Tenter-Alley, in Lit∣tle Morefields. July 20th, 1665.
FONS SALUTIS. The Wonderful efficacy, and almost incredible Vir∣tue of true Oyl which is made of Sulphur Vive, set on fire and called commonly Oyl of Sulphur per Campanam. Of this most noble Liquor, and not vulgar Medi∣cine, the excelling Philosopher Helmont writeth thus in his Excellent Discourse concerning the Tree of Life. IN the year 1600 a certain man belonging to the Camp, whose office was to keep account of the provision of Victuals, which was made for the Army, being charged with a numerous Family of small Children, unable to shift for themselves, himself being then 58 years of age, was very sensible of the great care and burden which lay upon him to provide for them while he lived, and concluded that should he dye, they must be inforced to beg their bread from door to door, whereupon he came (saith Helmont) and desired of me something for the preservation of his Life; I then (being a young man) pittyed his
sad condition, and thus thought with my self, the fume of burning Sulphur, is by experience found powerfully effectual to preserve Wines from cor∣ruption; Then I collecting my thoughts, con∣cluded that the acid Liquor or Oyl, which is made of Sulphur Vive, set on fire, doth of ne∣cessity containe in it self this fume, yea, and the whole odour of the Sulphur in as much as it is indeed nothing else but the very Sulphurous fume imbibed or drunk up in its mercurial Salt, and so becomes a condensed Liquor. Then I thought with my self, our blood being (to us) no other then as it were the Wine of our Life, that being preserved, if it prolong not the life, at least, it will keep it sound from those many Diseases which proceed originally from corruption, by which means the life being sound and free from diseases, and defended from paines and grief, might be in some sort spun out to a further length then other∣wise; upon which meditated resolution, I gave him a Viol glass with a small quantity of this Oyl, distilled from Sulphur Vive burning, and taught him (moreover) how to make it as he should af∣terward need it; I advised him of this Liquor, he should take two drops before each Meale in a small draught of beer, and not ordinarily to ex∣ceed that Dose, nor to intermit the use of it, taking for granted that two drops of that Oyl contained a large quantity of the fume of Sulphur. The man took my advice, and at this day in the
year 1641. he is lusty and in good health, walks the streets at Brussels without complaint, and is likely longer to live; and that which is most re∣markable, in this whole space of forty one years he was not so much as ill, so as to keep his bed, yea, although (when of a great age) in the depth; of Winter, he broke his Legg near to his ancle∣bone, by a fall upon the Ice, yet with the use of this Oyl he recovered, without the least Symptome of a Fever; and although in his old age, Poverty had reduced him to great straits and hardship, and made him feel much want of things necessary for the comfort and convenien∣cy of life; yet he lives healthy and sound, though spare and lean. The old mans name is Iohn Mass, who wait∣ed upon Rithovius, Bishop of Ypre in his Cham∣ber, when the Earls of Thorne and Egmont were beheaded by the Duke of Alva, and he was then twenty five years of age; so that now he is com∣pleat 99 years of age, healthy, and lusty, and still continues the use of that Liquor daily. Thus farr Helmont, which relation, as it is most remarkable, so it gives the Philosophical reason of his Advice, on which it was grounded: And elsewhere the same Authour relates, how by this Liquor he cured many dangerous deplorable Fevers, which by other Physitians had been given over for desperate. And in other places he commends it as a peer∣less
remedy, to asswage the insatiable thirst which accompanies most Fevers. so which relation and testimony, of this most learned Physician, and excelling Philoso∣pher, I shall add my own experience. I find it a sure Preservative against corruption, not onely in living creatures, but even in dead Flest, Beer, Wine, Ale, &c. a recoverer of dying Beer, and Wines that are decayed, a cure for Beer when sick and ropeing; flesh by this means may be preserved so ncorruptible, as no imbalming in the world can go beyond it, for the keeping of a dead Carkase, nor Salting, come near its effi∣cacy, as to the conserving Meat, or Fowles, or Fish, which by this means are not onely kept from corruption, but made a mumial Balsom, which is it self a Preservative from curruption, of such as shall eat thereof; which being a curi∣ous rarity, and too costly for to be made a vulgar experiment, I shall pass it over, and come to those uses which are most Beneficial and Desire∣able. It is an excellent cleanser of the Teeth, be∣ing scoured with it, they will become as white as the purest Ivory, and the mouth being wash∣ed with this Oyl, dropped in water or white Wine, so as to make it onely of the sharpness of Vineger; it prevents the growing of that yel∣low scale, which usually adheres to the Teeth, and is the fore-runner of their putrifaction; it
prevents their rottenness for future, and stops it (being begun) from going further; takes away the pain of the Teeth, diverts Rhumas, and is a lure help for the strongest savour of the Breath, making it very sweet. In a word, There is not a more desirable thing can be found, for such who would have clean or found Teeth, or sweet breath, or to be free from Rheums; for which use, let the water be made, by dropping this Oyl into it, as sharp as vineger, as I said be∣fore. Against a tickling Cough and Hoarsness, it is an excellent Remedy; not onely taken two or three drops twice or thrice a day in∣wardly, in the usual drink one useth before each meal, but also by gargling the Throat with it; and (so used) it is excellent against swelled Throats-Squinances, Wenns, Swellings or Knobs like Kernels in the flesh, all infla∣mations in the mouth, whether it be the Vuu∣la extended by an afflux of humours vulgarly said to be the falling of the Palate, or inflama∣tions of other Muscles, causing the Almonds of the ears to swell, which compress the Weasand, and consequently cause extream dolour. It is excellent also against the Head-ach,
and to divert Rheums from the eyes, to wash the Temples therewith; likewise to take away Tetters, Morphew, Itch, or Scabs: This dropped in water is a pleasant, safe, and effectual Remedy. Besides which Outward application, it is an amicable Balsom to the Internal parts. And Internally taken, preventing corruption, root∣ing out the seeds thereof, though never so deeply concealed in the body, and by that means it openeth inveterate Obstructions, eradicating old Pains, and preventing other∣wise usual relapses into Stranguretical, Coli∣cal, or Arthritical pains. It is Abstersive, cleansing all excrementi∣tious settlings in the Mesaraick, or Mesente∣rial Vessels, and so cutting off the Original Sourse, and taking away the cause of putri∣factive corruption, which is the productive beginner of very many diseases. On this account it lengthens the life, and frees the body from many pains and evils, to which otherwise it would be sub∣ject. It is a pleasant Remedy, having onely a little sharpness, which to the Palate is most grateful, and yet this accidity is contra-di∣stinct
from that accidity, that is the fore-run∣ner of putrefaction, which it kills and de∣stroys, as the accidity of the spirit of Vitriol, is destroyed by the fixed Acrimony of its own Caput mortum; or that of Vinegar, by the touch of Crusse or Minium. Preternatural heat and thirst in Fevers, is no way allayed so speedily and easily, as by this; nor is there any thing that for a constant continuance may be more safely and profita∣bly taken. Spirit of Salt (such as the Noble Helmont speaks of) alone may be joyned with this, for its safety, and continual use with profit; especially in the Stone, in the Bladder, and gravel in the Kidneys, and other distem∣pers in the Reines, as heat and sharpness of Urin. Likewise it is a most effectual preservative against all Corruption, and indeed there is no remedy more prevalent then this against con∣tagious Fevers, small Pox, and Measels: It is also a most soveraign Antidote and Remedy against the Plague or Pestilence, being a singu∣lar preserver of the body against all contagion and putrifaction whatsoever. Also it wonderfully prevaileth against all diseases coming of putrifaction, cold or wind; against all Feavers and Agues, the Quotidian,
Tertian, and Quartin; as also the foul disease, Wounds, and Ulcers; the several defect; and infirmities of the Brain, Mouth, Teeth, Liver, Stomack, Spleen, Matrix, Bladder, Entralls, and Arteries. And outwardly applyed, it helpeth Fistulaes, Ulcers of the mouth, and Gangrenes. Now as this is so Noble a Medecine, so there is none in the world more basely adul∣terated and counterfeited; therefore it be∣hooveth all persons that shall make use there∣of, to be well satisfied first of the ingenuity, honesty, and ability of the Artist, before they presume to make use of it. Now as to its goodness, and great care ta∣ken in its preparation, I could have had ma∣ny both honest and learned Attestators, who have had the experience of it upon several of their Patients, and still daily use it in their pra∣ctice with good success. Those now, who know not by sad expe∣rience the difficulty of gaining credit to truths of this kind, might well suppose enough had already been expressed to perswade at least a Tryal of so noble a medicine, if not a fair and clear acceptation, but so great a prejudice against new discoveries, remaines upon the minds of the most by abuse of Deceivers; that what hath been said in its behalf will
hardly prevail for such a reliance upon its use, as its vertues really deserves; therefore to silence all opposers, and to obtaine its chearful embracement; take here the sure testimony of some instances of its happy Victories and successes in divers remarkable cases and con∣flicts; wherein though the Operator of it hath much to say for daily benefits to him∣self and relations (too numerous to recount) yet knowing, who ever duly weighs the other instances, will easily conclude, it must needs have been most serviceable, where it hath been most imployed: I refer you wholly to its o∣ther performances and cures elsewhere. The first of which shall be of a Gentlewo∣man about twenty years of age, that by much weakness, sickness, and an empty dry Cough, haveing withall past through the whole course of Physick, and even hopeless of recovery, being recommended to the use of this Oyle (by one who had received much good by it) using of it about three moneths continually day by day according to former directions, recovered beyond expectation, and still is resolved to continue the use of it. The second shall be of an Ancient, weak woman, fallen into a tedious fit of sickness, Feverish, and so fluft in her breast, as she was
even breathless, much means of Physick by councel of Physicians she had used, but left helpless of all. She hearing of my Oyl, sent for an ounce, I sent it with directions how to use it, and a while after that, another; and so after that another, by the use whereof, continually a little and a little, she became hearty and well againe; but near upon a Twelve-moneth after fell sick againe, and then timely betaking her self to the same Remedy, she with somewhat a less quantity recovered: and againe, about a year after that falling ill againe, by the very same meanes againe recovered and continued well for about twelve or fourteen moneths, as well as her years considered could be expected. 3. The third I shall instance, is of a young man which for a long time had an Ague and a Fevour, and had used all the means that he could possible, and all in vaine, in so much that he was past hope of recovery, but at last was adivsed by a Physician to use the Oyle of Sulphur according to the direction that is in this book, the man took his advise, and in a short time his Ague and Fever left him, and he re∣stored to his former strength. 4. The fourth experiment is of a man of middle age, who had been along time under
an extream sickness, with a great pain in his stomack and bowels, and had used much means with advice in Physick, but still became worse and worse; a friend of his who had made use of my Oyle, recommended its use unto him, as what was likely to do him good; so he sent for two ounces of my Oyle, with directions, how to use it, which I readily sent him, and before it was half taken, he sent me word he had received so much benefit by it, that he would never be without it. 5. A fifth instance, is, of a Woman about the age of thirty, which was very often trou∣bled with pain in her Teeth, by reason they were so much wasted and corrupted, and her gums ulcerated: I advised her to make use of my Oyle of Sulphur, and gave her directions how to use it, and in a short time it scaled her teeth, and made them as white as Ivory, and also perfectly cured the Ulcers in her mouth, which gave great content to the party. 6. A sixth proof hereof, is, of a Girl about ten years old, in an extream Fever, with thirst, shortness of breath, Cough, with tough flegm, and vehement paines in her side, yet in this sad condition found no releif, like to what she had by continual use of my Oyle of Sulphur day and night, for it cooled and quenched her
thirst, stayed her Cough, ripened her flegm, re∣moved her paines, and she recovered without bleeding, which every one that saw her thought impossible. 7. One for many years troubled with a ve∣ry stinking breath, and continual Head-ach, by reason of Vapours ascending from putrified Lungs; by often using this Oyle in the di∣stilled water or decoction of Egrimony, and in common drink, in a short time recovered to perfect health, and all ill scents of the breath totally seased. 8. A man aged 60 and odd years, who for a long time had laboured under the great paine of the Tysick, and difficulty of breathing, so that he could not lye down, but always slept upright in a Chaire for fear of stopping his breath; he was directed to me, and by a few dayes use thereof, it so opened the passages, that he breathed perfectly, and the Tysick or or wheesing troubled him no more. 9. A Gentlewoman in the Country being very much troubled with Rising of the Lights, so that every night she feared dying in her sleep, was by providence of a friend, who had good testimony of my oyle, directed to send to me for some of it; I sent her two ounces which
she daily using, according to my directions, soon became very well to her great comfort. 10. In the Pleurisie, and all pains and Sti∣ches in the Sides, it hath wonderful effects; one violently taken with pain in the side, rea∣dy to stop his breath, sent to me for an ounce, which I immediately furnished him with, and following the directions how to use it, was perfectly healed in 24 hours, when nothing but death was expected. 11. A Child of three years old, suddenly surprized with Convulsion-fits, in thrice taking hereof was well, and the fits came no more. 12. A Gentlewoman violently oppressed with the Pangs of the ascention of the Matrix, using this Oyl in Aqua partheine, was in a few times taking perfectly cured. 13. One grievously vexed with Belchings and loathing of meat, having a depraved and lost Appetite by a foul stomack, was by taking hereof, in a few days brought to a good appe∣tite; all belchings and risings of the Stomack ceased, without vomiting or purging. 14. A man having by cold got a grievous
Horseness, Cough, and Sorenest of his throat and stomack, so that he could swallow no meat; by taking hereof in his drink and broth, in six days was cured. 15. One much troubled with griping in the guts, being that distemper vulgarly called the Plague in the guts and having his bowels grievously excoriated, sent to me for some of my Oyl of Sulphur, after all other means were tryed in vain; which I directed him to take, two or three drops at a time in Plantane-wa∣ter, and gave him present ease. 16. One who was much troubled with scalding Urin, and pissing by drops, with much pain and anguish; by taking hereof according to my directions found ease in one night, and by a little use, a perfect cure. 17. A woman grievously labouring with shortness of breath, filthy scents arising to her mouth, from her lower parts inwardly, often ascertions and grievous pangs in her Matrix; after much misery, and wasting both of body and Purse upon Physitians, Providence direct∣ed her to me, and by use hereof, according as I prescribed, found a remedy beyond hopes or expectation.
18. A young man, after some Venerial Combates, having some Pustulaes and Pruri∣tus about his Penis, scrotum, and between the Glans and Preputium, so that he could not rest▪ nor sit still ini quiet; by using this in a proper vehicle I gave him, in a few hours gave ease, and put a speedy period to his distem∣per, freeing him from the worst of fears, the amputation of that most affected member. 19. One using to make bloody water, espe∣cially if he did but a little walk or exercise himself and not without some dolour; in a few weeks use hereof, was quite eased, and made urine clear and freely. 20. The Author hath also a most excellent sweating Medicine, which doth powerfully drive forth all pestilential infection, and by this means presorves the heart and brain, and also the natural spirits from the malignity of the PLAGUE. It most pleasantly frees the bodys of men, women, and children from all impu∣rities of the blood, casting forth all manner of Fevers. Not one that hath taken this Medi∣cine in time, bua God hath blessed it with the success of cure, or in some where nature hath been weak, and not able to throw out (her enemy) the poysonous matter, with two or three (at most) times taking of this Medi∣cine,
it hath both forced out, and broken the swolling in the Groynes, and (other emun∣ctuaries) the Arm-holes being but continued to five or six takings, it infallibly clears the blood, wherein all diseases take their begin∣ning; so upon this account I can do no less then wish all that regard their health, to the use of this most admirable and unequallized Medicine in these contagious times. 21. Many more examples of rare and won∣derful Cures herewith by me performed I could assert, but I hope Semel dictum sapien∣ti sat est. I'll name but one more, and con∣clude; which is of a Woman so grievously troubled with worms, both great and small, that she endured grievous pains in her belly, and continually voided very small worms in her Excrement: by a little use hereof, was well to her singular comfort. To prevent any Sophistication, or deceit in any of my Medicines by counterfeits, they shall be always sealed up with this Coat of Arms, as is in the Tittle Page.
Postscript. THose who desire this so pleasant, so effi∣catious and profitable a remedy, let the Reader be informed, That at Tho. Moulson's house in Tenter-Alley in little Moor-fields, at the sign of the Kolden-Key, this Oyl is to be had, truly and faithfully made without any ad∣dition; made onely of the Sulphur it self. And likewise you may have at the same place, Spirit of Salt, prepared after the best way, or any Chymical Salts, Oyles, and Spi∣rits. Besides which Oyl or Spirit of Sulphur, se∣veral other admirable and effectual Medicinal secrets, not onely for Preservation against all contagious and infectious diseases, but appro∣ved for the certain, safe, and speedy cure of most, if not all diseases; as hath been proved by many hundred Patients (adjudged rather incurable, or desperately dangerous by other Physitions,) are here to be had, being the more then ordinary Secrets and Preparations, of THOMAS MOULSON, Operator in Chymistry, and Licensed Physician.
From my House in Tenter-Alley, at the signe of the GOLDEN KEY, in Little MOOR-FIELDS, July 20th. 1665. THO. MOULSON.
