H2345 11150864 46434
A SHORT EXAMINATION OF A Discourse CONCERNING EDIFICATION. By Dr. HASCARD. Where it is inquired, how well the Author of the said Discourse hath proved, That it is not lawful for a Man to go from his Parish Church to Meetings, that he might better Edifie. In a Letter to a Friend. 2 Cor. 12. 9. But we do all Things (Dearly Beloved!) for your Edifying. LONDON, Printed: And are to be Sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms Inn, in Warwick-Lane. 1700.
Advertisement, THere is lately Published, A Letter of Advice to the Churches of the Nonconformists in the English Nation: Endeavouring their Satisfaction in that Point, Who are the True Church of Eng∣land? Short Animadversions upon Dr. Calamy's Discourse (in the Con∣formists Cases against Dissenters) concerning a scrupulous Conscience. An Answer to Dr. Scot's Cases against Dissenters, concerning Forms of Prayer. And the Fallacy of the Story of Commin plain∣ly Discovered.
A SHORT EXAMINATION OF A Discourse CONCERNING EDIFICATION. Honoured Sir, I Have received your exceeding Civil Letter, with the Dis∣course that you favoured me to send along with it, which was doubly acceptable to me. First, As a New Book, few of which come to us (living at such a Di∣stance from your Metropolis.) Secondly, With respect to the Argument of it. A Discourse concerning Edification, must be acceptable to every one who knoweth it to be his Duty, 2 Pet. 3. 18. To grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Which is in English Edification. You desire my Thoughts concerning it, which I shall freely give you.
Whether it is lawful for any Man to forsake the Communion of the Church of England, and to go to the seperate Meetings, because he can better Edifie there. This he saith is Unlawful, and to make it plain, he saith Two Things must be first considered. 1. What sort of Person this is that asketh this Question. 2. What he meaneth by Edification. As to the First, He supposeth the Person, not to Judge any Thing unlawful in the Communion. This Sir will make his Que∣stion to concern very few (not one of an Hundred amongst Dissenters.) By Edification, he means, he saith, An Improvement of his spi∣ritual Condition in the full Latitude of it. These are Words large enough, comprehending Knowledge in the Understanding, Faith and Obedience respecting the Will, and Warmth, or Zeal, in the Affections, we agree that Edification indeed is nothing else. The Apostle calls us Gods Temple, his Building; and Edificati∣on signifies nothing else, but a building up in Christ, in Faith, and Love, in Zeal and Hiness; and is the same Thing with what St. John calls the Souls prospering, 1 John 3. 1. An increasing with the Increase of God, Col. 2. 19. (Sir) I cannot under∣stand, how it should be unlawful for a Man to do any Thing for this End; for his Soul can never prosper, nor increase, nor grow by any sinful Act without doubt: I do conceive therefore, the Author hath mistaken his Question, which should have been of what is lawful to do, not for better edifying, but upon pre∣tence of it; for there is no doubt, but any Thing is lawful for better edifying, God can be by nothing more glorified, nor can any Thing more tend to the saving of our own Souls (which are the two great Ends of a Christian.) But Sir, to State this one Question, he hath begged two others.
1. That Dissenters Meetings are Separate Meetings. Suppose Sir, People meet together in the Church of St. Andrews in Hol∣born, and another Congregation meet at St. Giles in the Fields, a Third in Cheapside, and that none of these People ever go to any but their own Church, are they therefore Separate Meetings, when they all hear the same Scriptures Read, Sing the same Psalms, hear the same Doctrine (though in other Words) and Worship God by the same Acts of Worship, Prayer, Praise, Preaching and Hearing, Administring and Receiving the same Sacraments; how are they Separate Meetings? Did ever any call the Dutch, and French Churches meeting oft-times in the Parish of Broad-street, Separate Meetings, because they go not to hear the Minister in Broadstreet? 2. He also assumes, That they forsake the Communion of the Church of England; how doth that appear, many of them oft-times come to the Parish Churches, and join with the Con∣gregation in Prayer, Praise, Hearing, Receiving the Sacrament, those that do not, yet holding the same Faith, and performing the same Specifical, though not the same Numerical Acts of Wor∣ship, that the Parochial Churches do; do no more forsake the Communion of the Church of England, than the Parishioners of St. Andrews Holborn forsake the Communion of the Church of England, because they never are at Bow-Church, or that at Ludgate. But (Sir) we will for once admit, that the Meetings the People go to are Separate Meetings. 2. That they wholly for sake the Church of England, yet if they do it, because they can edi∣sie there better, I do think it not lawful only, but necessa∣ry also; for that Man doth not believe there is a God, or doth not know he hath a Soul; or doth not know his Chief End is to Glorifie God, and that his Souls Interest is his most valuable Interest, that doth not believe he may Separate from any par∣ticular Church, that he may better edifie elsewhere.
I must confess Sir, when I read the Question, as it is stated by the Author, I was quite startled at his Negative Determinati∣on of it, and very desirous to see the Arguments by which he could prove it. But when I came to consider them, p. 2. I was satisfied; for his first Reason is, Because there is no better Edification to be had in the Separate Meetings, than in the Communion of the Church of England. This he proveth, 1. Because Her Articles of Faith are those which our Dissenters themselves allow: Upon this he enlargeth, Page 3, 4. 2. Because she laies a necessity upon a good Life, p. 4, 5. 3. Because she is fitly constituted to excite Devotion, p. 7, 8. 4. Because she hath an excellent Order, and Discipline, p. 8, 9. But Sir, all this will not do, nor will prove more than half a Reason. But Page 10. He adds, This Constitution is used, and mana∣ged in the best way by the Pastors of our Church to edifie the Souls of Men. This he proves. 1. Because the Pastors of our Church have strict Commands laid upon them so to do, p. 11. 2. That these commands are obeyed by the Pastors of our Church, and they do all things in it to Edification, p. 11, 12. Before I come to speak to this distinctly, &c. we must con∣sider, What Communion it is with the Church of England, which is required; and for the withdrawing of which Dissenters are stigmatized with the unintelligible Names of Schismaticks and Separatists. Is it for their not agreeing with the Doctrines of
Faith expressed in the Thirty Nine Articles? Or because the Doctrine of our Church presseth a Necessity of an Holy Life in Order to Salvation? Or because she is fully constituted for De∣votion? &c. There is nothing less true. Do they Separate so as they will have no Communion with any of the Ministers of the Church of England, in Praying or Hearing, &c Neither is any thing of that true, as to Multitudes of ? But the Communion required, Is a Communion with the Parish Minister in all Ordinances; if they will not, they are counted Schismaticks and Fanaticks. So that admit all he saith to be true, as to the sirst Head, yet if every Parish Minister doth not Pray, Preach, administer Sacraments, manage his Pastoral Charge, &c. to the best Edification, his Argument holds no more, than if one should argue, that because a Carpenter lives in a Parish, hath admira∣ble Timber laid by him, therefore I am bound to use him and no other, to build my House, whether he knows how to use it yea or no, yea though I plainly see he doth not. 2. Again Sir, they that know any thing of Souls, know that though they be equal, as to their Faculties yet they are not so as to their improved Capacities and Abilities; one Minister may be the fittest to improve me in Knowledge, Faith, Love, &c. that is the most unfit Man in the World to improve ano∣ther, the Apostle hath taught us, that some need Milk, others strong Meat. A Learned Man may be the fittest to improve another Mans Soul in Knowledge (which by the way is the Foundation of Faith, Love, Obedience, orderly Zeal) who is as Learned as himself, that may be the most unfit to improve a poor Countrey Mans Soul, that cannot apprehend his Depth of Reasoning, nor his Latinized Stile, or his Concealed Method, nor is able to carry away Three Lines of his Discourse. So as this Author hath a very hard Task to prove; viz. That every Parish Minister, obeyeth the commands of the Church, and doeth a things in Prayer, Preaching, &c. to the Edification of all the Pari∣shioners. But Sir, I shall not prejude him, this is only to tell you, what we must expect from the Author,    to prove his great Undertaking, this being Premise, let me now go back to his Third and Fourth Page.
1. I said Sir before, that we own all the Doctrines of Faith, contained in our Creed and Thirty Nine Articles; we grant them Short and Plain, but that they are so fully explained, that nothing can be done further, to make them intelligible to the meanest Souls. I cannot say, if you look Sir into the Systeme of Confessions, you will scarce find any so short as ours is. The People had need have a very able, and painful Minister, that shall improve sufficiently in Knowledge by them. 2. We like very well Sir, of what our Church determineth, as to Good Works in the Eleventh, and Twelfth, and Thir∣teenth of Her Articles of the Thirty Nine, in these Words, ART. 11. We are accounted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works and Deservings. Wherefore, that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine and very full of Comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification. ART. 12. Albeit good Works, which are the Fruits of Faith cannot put away our Sins, and indure the Severity of Gods Judgments, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true, lively, Faith, insomuch that by them, a lively Faith may be as evidently known as a Tree discerned by the Fruit. ART. 13. Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School-Authors say) deserve Grace of Congruity. Yea rather, for that they are not done, as God willed, and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the Nature of Sin. Sir, I think it not worth my Time, to examine how well what the Author saith, p. 4, 5, 6. agrees with this, here is not
a word of Vertue, but the Grace of Christ, and the Inspi∣ration of the Spirit; and what makes some Men so fond to change the old Term of Grace into the newer Term of Vertue (hardly Four Times mention'd by the Apostles) I cannot tell, unless it be to let us know, they mean no other Things by good Works, but such Things as may be done by common Graces. In the Articles is not a Word of Good Works being the Soul of our Faith, the Articles say, they are only the Daughters, and inseparable Fruit of our Faith; and calls none Good, done before the Grace of Christ, and Inspiration of the Spirit. But Sir, we do agree, that our Articles speak our Hearts as to good Works, and we hope we may withdraw from such as teach otherwise than these Articles, and yet hold Communion with the Church of England; because such Sons have themselves no Communion with Her in that Matter. 3. Neither do we say, but that our Church is consti∣tuted fitly enough to excite Devotion. Nor shall I say here any Thing about Her Order, and Discipline; be∣cause all that is said under this Head signifies nothing, if the Second Thing be not made Good, viz. That this Constitution is used, and managed in the best way by the Pastors of our Church to edifie the Souls of Men. For Sir, you will easily understand, that the building of a Soul in Knowledge, Faith, Love, Zeal, doth not so much depend upon the Articles of a Church, its Rubricks or Rules for Worship and Canons, as the Gifts which God hath given his Ministers, by which they press the Doctrines of Faith, and Rules of Holy Life contained in the Scrip∣ture, and pour out Prayers for People suited to all their Necessities; their diligent and constant Practice in instru∣cting People, and their putting in Execution such Rules as are given for the ordering of People in their Church Seties; neither will what the Author saith, p 11. make good his Proposition.
That there are strict Commands under great Penalties laid upon the Pastors of our Church to do this. What of all this. So that all lies upon his Second Particular, p. 11. That all these Commands are obeyed by the Pastors of our Church, and they do all Things to such Edification, he should have added what was in his Proposition, p. 2. That there is no better in the Separate Meetings, than in the Communion of the Church of England. So that Sir, if you observe, he must prove, 1. That every Parish Minister preacheth as diligently, and profitably; for the generality of his Hearers Im∣provement in the Knowledge of God, in Faith, Love, Ho∣liness, Zeal, &c. as the Ministers do in their Meetings. Or else Sir, he concludes no more than this. That it is not lawful for meer Edification-sake, for any Parishioners to Separate from the Communion with his Parish Minister, if he doth Preach as soundly, intelligibly, and profitably, for Peoples remembrance in Order to their Knowledge, Faith, Love, Holiness, Zeal, as Ministers do in Private Meet∣ings. Indeed Sir, I am of his Mind, for I am for a near∣ness of Members of the same Church in Cohabitation, where it can be, without a Prejudice to Edification; but if Christians cannot ordinarily communicate in all Ordi∣nances with their Parish Ministers, and be equally in∣structed in the Truths of God, or Hear what they un∣derstand, or in such Methods as they can remember or so confirm'd in Scripture, that they can search the Scrip∣tures and find, that Truth which they say, or cannot hear the whole Counsel of God, or be warmly pressed by Arguments to a truly, holy Life in all Conversation, as they can at another Meeting. I think it is worth their while, and no Sin against God to go where they may.
The saving and edifying Souls is of more Consequence than keeping the Limits of Parishes. Now as to this Sir, It is matter of Demonstration, that every one must judge for himself; for who preacheth most profitably for one, must be determined of by him who knows the Capacity of the Hearer, which I am sure none doth but himself; we need not judge of the Learning and Abi∣lities of any Person. For he that preacheth most learned∣ly, usually preacheth least to the Capacity of three Parts of his Hearers; and to a Learned Auditory, the plain Preacher preacheth most unprofitably as to his Improve∣ment in Knowledge. I remember Sir, a Story out of Chrysostome, who tells us, that he heard a Christian and an Heathen disputing ridiculously. The Matter in debate was, whether Paul or Plato was the best Schollar. The Christian maintain'd Paul was, the Heathen maintained Plato was. Thus saith Chrysostom, The Christian stood to prove what was the Pagans Part, and the Pagan un∣dertook to prove the Christians Part, For the Christian might have said, if Plato were the best Schollar, it is no wonder he had more Disciples then Paul, and the Heathen might have said, if Paul were so much the best Schollar, it is no wonder he made the Gospel abound so far. The Excellency of a Preacher, or his fitness to edifie Souls, is not to be determined from his Learning, but from his Pains, and Diligence, and Eye to the End of his Work, as to those People (or the generality of them) to whom he preacheth and his wise accommodating Means fit for his End. This requireth the Knowledge of the Circum∣stances of the generality of his Auditory, and none but the particular Person can judge of him, who preacheth most to his particular Edification, plain Scriptural, practi∣cal Preaching is undoubtedly for most general Edification; because Nine Parts of Ten of the most Auditories are unlearned, and understand not rational Deductions unless made easie, nor Scholastical Niceties, or Criticisms, and for those few that can, they are more edified by them in
their Head, than in their Heart; but he that preacheth solidly, plainly, scripturally, and practically, may edifie the best Hearers in their Faith, Love, and Obedience, and Zeal, which is the best Edification; for Men may have a great deal of Notion, and yet perish eternally. Sir, That there is generally in our Parish-Churches, more solid, plain, scriptural, and practical Preaching, fitted for the Capacity and Remembrance of the generality of Men and Women that come to hear, than there is in the Nonconformists Meetings, will not easily be allowed by any that commonly heareth both. Let, Sir, Men be never so learned, if in popular Discourses, where they are speaking to Five hundred Men, will speak to Five; that is, to the Understanding of a very few: I do not believe, but the rest may go away and hear such as they understand better, and remember what they say. But there need no more words in this Case, it is most apparent, that he must know another very well, that can know what Discourse will edi∣fie him best, and that no Body can possibly understand, or judge that, but himself; so as this Argument is at its length. Sir, he cometh p. 13. to what he calls his Second Ar∣gument to prove this Proposition, p. 2. That it is unlawsul for any Men to forsake the Communion of the Church of England, and go to the separate Meet∣ings, because he can better edifie there. Because that those who usually make this pretence for Sepa∣ration, do commonly mistake better Edification. This is, Sir, a way of Reasoning, which I cannot under∣stand. I cannot imagine how any Person should ever be able to prove, that a Man may not go to another Church that he may better edifie. Because some, or many mistake the na∣ture of Edification, doth it follow, Sir, that because some
mistake it, therefore none knoweth it, or none can know it, or none that truly know the Nature of it may pursue it? But really Sir, the Author of that Discourse seemeth to know it so well, that I think we may all take his own No∣tion of it, and agree with him, p. 2. That it is an improvement of our spiritual Condition in its full latitude. Let us build a little, Sir, upon so good a Founda∣tion. The Edification of a Soul, Sir, is, as a noble, so a very large Building, and comprehends an increase in Faith, Love, Obedience to the Will of God, with an increase in holy Affections, &c. The Foundation of this large Building must be Know∣ledge, a knowledge of the Will of God revealed in Scri∣pture, both as to things to be believed, and to be done. Hence the wise Man, Prov. 19. 2. tells us, That the Soul should be without knowledge, is not good. The Apostle saith, Rom. 20. 14. How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And Col. 3. 10. he tells us, The new Man is renewed in knowledge. And 1 Col. 9. the Apostle prayeth, That Men may be filled with the knowledge of the Will of God in all Wisdom, and spiritual Understanding. And this to that end, that they may walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. And we are commanded in 2 Pet. 3. 18. to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. How, Sir, Men should mistake an increase in knowledge, (which is the first Stone in this Spiritual Building) for an healing of Fancy, and a stirring of Humours, I leave to you, Sir, to judge: It is as bad a Mistake as that of an Apple for an Oyster.
In his thirteenth Page he seemeth to think, that the Duty of keeping an ordinary Communion with the Parish-Minister, (for that, or nothing, he must mean by his Phrase of our Church-Communion) is a plainer and greater Duty, than attending our Edification, because he thinks that is disputable, doubtful, &c. Of this, Sir, I hope he shall never perswade me, nor you, until he hath perswa∣ded us, that it is better for us to keep to a piece of Ci∣vil Order, than to look after the Salvation of our own Souls; and if this were true, an easie exchange might be made for a Soul. In his 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, he hints us of three Mi∣stakes Men may have as to Edification. 1: When they take nice and speculative Notions, for great edifying Truths: Such as conjectural Notions about the Si∣tuation of Paradise of old, or Hell now; or about the Length of the Sword that guarded Paradise; or how the Spirits a∣bove spend their time, of Behemo, Wranglings of the Schools, &c. To make this Business short, Sir, Go to your Parish-Church a-while, and to the next Meeting as long, and let this be the Test; conclude, that where you hear most of these Discourses, there your Soul is least edified. What this Author saith here, is a great Truth, where there is most of these Disquisitions, there is least Edifica∣tion. 2. A second Mistake he thinks is, When Men take the O∣pinions of Parties, for undoubted Truths, essential to Salva∣tion. What here the Author means, I cannot imagine: Certainly there is no Truth necessary to Salvation, but what is the Opinion of some Party or other. If no Truth be necessary to Salvation, but what is agreed by all Par∣ties, I am afraid we shall find nothing at all necessary, or very little. Possibly the Doctrine of the Trinity (if we shut out the Socinians from the number of Christians) hardly any
thing else. But, Sir, to make this Business also short, our Author saith, p. 16. That the Notion or Explication of Faith and Spirit, Church and Grace, Justification, Regeneration, Conversion, Adoption, and other things of like nature, are generally deficient in our Church, from those of the Separation. And indeed he saith true, that these are the Doctrines wherein Ministers that preach at Meetings, differ from many of those that preach in Parish-Churches, (yet not from all, but the most of them) but not from the Church of England. (Sir) again, make your Ears your Judges, read over di∣stinctly the 39 Articles, and the Irish Articles, and our Homilies, particularly those about Justification, and Good Works, and Images, then hear Minsters on both sides, and conclude, that those are to be preferred as to Edification, that most truly and faithfully preach according to those Articles and Homilies, we will abide by that Test. His last Mistake is, 3. In taking sudden Heats and Warmths for Edification: As to that, let them answer that are concerned, p. 18. that whole Page is but reflexive, and upon so false a Foundation, as I am not willing to trouble my self with considering it, or to foul my Fingers with such a Dunghill of meere words. In his 19th Page he comes to what he calls a third Argu∣ment to prove it unlawful for Persons to leave their Pa∣rish-Churches for better Edification: Because (as he pre∣tends) it will cause endless Divisions. Here, Sir, we must examine, 1. The Truth of the thing. 2. The proper Cause of the Effect, uch an Effect will certainly follow.
Admit, Sir, that in the same Family, several Persons should find it better for the Improvements of their Souls in Knowledge, Faith, Love, Obedience, holy Zeal, to go to several Parishes to hear their Ministers, or to several Meetings, what division is here? It is this Day done in a thousand Families, all the Members of which yet live in a perfect Unity one with another; the Wife dearly loves the Husband, and he again his Wife; the Children truly honour the Parents, and the Parents as truly love their Children; the Servants honour and obey their Masters, they are as tender of their Servants. I pray, Sir, as to this point, let your Eyes again here be your Judges: See what Families are more decently u∣nited, than those in which you will observe this different Motion when they go to hear. And, Sir, there is obvi∣ous Reason for it; it speaks Men to use some Conscience and Reason of their own, when they cannot be guided by the meer Dictates and Examples of others; and it is most certain, that those who live most up to the Rule of Scri∣pture, and Square of Reason, make the best Correlates in any Relation; and those the worst, who are led by Humour, or the meer Dictates and Wills of others. But admit, Sir, Division be the consequent of Persons (in the same Parish) going to hear in several places, for better Edification (as we see it is) will this prove it unlaw∣ful for People to go? Just as much as it argueth, Christ's coming into the World (necessary for the Salvation of Mankind) unlawful, because himself tells us, Mat. 20. 34, 35. That he came not to send Peace, but a Sword: For I am come to set a Man at variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter-in-Law a∣gainst her Mother-in-Law.
Suppose a few particular Persons in a Parish, (who tho' themselves blind, yet will undertake to judge of Colours) through their Peevishness or Ill-Nature, or their Pride and Ignorance, will have all Men to be of their Last, and to do as they do, or they will quarrel with them, nick-name them, pursue them in all Courts of Judicature, never let them be quiet, &c. doth this conclude, that those who are thus hunted, do any sinful thing? It will rather be a pre∣sumption of the contrary. Division is no necessary Conse∣quent of Peoples not going to their Parish-Church. What hath my Neighbour to do with my Soul, further than to admonish me, if he seeth Sin upon me? Must every Man cut his Hair, or Beard, in the same Fashion, because else his Neighbour will call him Prick-ear, or Roundhead, and strike him over the Face: Or if he doth not, must he sin? I am not to be charged with a sinful Effect of my Action, (or Consequent rather) which floweth from the Malice and Corruption of another's Heart, upon my doing what I believe to be my Duty. I cannot, Sir, but I must observe to you, that strange passage of his, p. 20. where he calls it a fatal Day, when—Liberty should be given to every Man to choose his Pastor. A thing he knows so evident in Scripture, so plain in all the Practice of the Primitive Church, and so conso∣nant to all Reason and Religion, as nothing can be more. It is an Argument that Men and Women are debauch∣ed into a lamentable Opinion of their Souls, that can possibly think, that they ought not to have as much Li∣berty to chuse Pastors for themselves, as they will challenge for a Shooe-maker to fit their Feet with Shooes, or for a Taylor to fit their Bodies with a Suit of Cloaths.
4. Sir, The Author's last Argument is fetched from the Discouragement this would give to an honest, truly Chri∣stian Minister. This, Sir, supposeth, that all who inhabit within such a Parish, are properly that Ministers Flock, who preacheth in that Parish-Church. How is that proved? Nor can it be true, 'till the Right of another be proved, to choose a Pastor for my Soul. But, Sir, I have been young, and now am old; I ne∣ver yet knew a faithful and profitable Preacher, want an Auditory. I have indeed known many a learned and ho∣nest Man, want the Company of his own Parishioners, but his Church hath been filled up with others. I have also known many a learned and good Man, who want∣ing Elocution, or an happy Method, or being weak in preaching Parts, hath wanted an Auditory, but let a Man be Conformist, or Nonconformist, if he were a Man sound in Matters of Doctrine, holy in his Life, and but of tolerable Preaching Parts and Abilities, I never knew him want an Auditory. I dare say, no such Person this Day wants, none especially that is chosen by the People; either by a first Election, or an after Submission. There ever was, and while this World stands there will ever be difference in the Ministers Auditories, 'till God makes all Ministers equal in Gifts and Abilities. Neither do I much understand the Discouragement of a small Flock (supposing the Minister to have a Livelihood) the fewer Souls a Minister hath under his Charge, the lesser his Ac∣count will be at the Day of Judgment: To whom many Souls are entrusted, of him will many be re∣quired. But (saith our Author) what if our Pastor be idle, or re∣miss in his Duty, or corrupt in the Faith, and teacheth
Error instead of sound Doctrine, and we have no means of Edification: What must we do? Must we take in Poi∣son instead of Food, or not be fed at all? A very considerable Question; to which might have been added: What if he be of an unholy Life, who builds with one Hand, and destroyeth with the other? To whom People are ready to say when he reproveth one, Physitian heal thy self. How can we think you believe, as you speak, when we see you do not live as you speak? But to the Questions as formed by himself, (Sir) the Author replies, To be sure you must not run into Schismatical Separation. It is more tolerable to go to other Congregations of our Communion, that may be irregular, but it is not schis∣matical. What doth he mean by a schismatical Separation? Shall the following Words expound him? It is more tole∣rable to go to other Churches of our Communion. What is the meaning of that? Are not all Congregations, where the same Doctrine is preached, and the same Worship, I mean Acts of Worship, performed, of the same Communion? Doth the Difference in the Ministers Habits, and Words in Prayer, make a different Communion? But is it lawful to go to other Parish-Churches? No, saith our Author, that is irregular; and if it were not so, surely Men should not be made such deep Sufferers for that venial Sin. But he thanks God, We have a Government, which upon a just and modest Complaint, will quicken the Lazy and Negli∣gent, correct the heretical Pastor, and restore to you true Edifi∣cation. I have not a Word, Sir, to say against this: Judge as you see what is true or false in these Things, is Mat∣ter of Demonstration, and therefore there need no Words about it.
The Author, Sir, concludes his Discourse with the Re∣commendation of two things to us. 1. That if we fancy any Defects in our Government, we should not hence conclude, that we have not sufficient Edification in the Church to save our Souls. I know, Sir, you cannot but observe, 1. How the Au∣thor hath forgot his Question, which he, p. 1. stated con∣cerning better Edification. Sir, I do not think any sober Dissenter will deny, that Men and Women may be saved in the Church of England. I know many of them do think, that many will be saved in the Popish Communion, where they have no better Light to make use of, than they have in Spain and Italy, and live up to their Light; doth it therefore follow, that they must not withdraw Communion from Rome? I do not here compare the Church of England with the Romish Synagogue, I only bring this as an Instance, that a Sufficiency of the Means of Grace to bring Men to Heaven, is not enough for pious Souls to look after; if it were, there needed no Exhortations to grow in Grace. How comes the Question to be altered here, p. 22. Or this to be used as an Argument not to seek for further Edi∣fying; that in the Church of England there is sufficient Edi∣fication, (Means of Edification, I presume he means) to save Souls, have Christians no more to do, doth this Au∣thor think, than to look just to get to Heaven? Surely their Business is in the first place to glorifie God; and that can be no otherwise, than by bringing forth much Fruit; John 15. 8. Herein, saith our Saviour, is my Father glorified, if you bear much Fruit. There are some whose Work shall be burnt, and they shall suffer loss, but yet they themselves shall be saved; yet so as by Fire, 2 Cor. 3. 15.
Every good Christian will think himself concerned so to live, so to walk as he may most glorifie God, and be saved, yet not so, as by Fire. He goeth on, If upon a nice search, and critical enquiry, they think they have found some little Flaws and Defects, improper Phrases, doubtful Sentences, and some small Omissions in the Matter of our Prayers and Discipline; yet let them not conclude, that these can weigh in the Ballance against the black Sin of Schism and Separation; and all its sad Consequents, which is ex∣cused by nothing else, but Terms of Communion plainly sin∣ful. Sir, We must give them leave to load Practices, they do not like hard Names, when they are not able to con∣vince the Authors of them of any Sin. I could wish, that we could hear more of the black Sins of Drunkenness and Whoredom, and prophane Cursing, and Swearing; but they can never Name Schism and Separations, but they must represent that as a black Sin, yet they will never tell us in any intelligible Dialect, what this same Sin un∣to Death is? Wherein it lies? Which of the Ten Com∣mandments it opposeth, &c? Let them first tell us, What the Church is, and open how we ever were united to it, and then shew as plainly, how we are separated from it, and we will cry Peccavimus, if we cannot shew them, that the Terms upon which we must have had Communi∣on with it, were such as we had just Reason to believe sinful. But Sir, when Dissenters plead Separation lawful for better Edification, it is not so much with respect to the Worship, and Government, as to the Preaching most ordina∣ry in it; not that there are not excellent Preachers that do Conform to the Church of England; but with all there
are others, many of which also may be very Learned and good Men; but yet not have the Gift of Preaching. Edification is much more concerned in the Doctrine and Preaching, which Men ordinarily hear and attend, than it is in the Form of a Churches Government, and in the Prayers used there (though they also influence it) in a much lower Degree doth, for a Knowledge of the Things of God, being the Foundation of all Faith, Love, Obe∣dience, or any sanctified Affection; that Ordinance which most contributes to that, must necessarily most contribute to Edification. It is therefore the Preaching in most Parish Churches, which People look at, as less tending to Edification, than what they hear elsewhere, being less fitted to their Un∣derstandings, and Memories; less awakening and Opera∣tive upon their Affections; if any of them assign any thing in the Publick Worship, or the Government of the Church, as giving them Cause to withdraw their Presence from the former, or Concurrence with the lat∣ter; it is ordinarily of another Nature, not for further Edification meerly. Whereas Sir, our Author saith, p. 24. That he doth not understand, what it is to be better saved, or more saved? We cannot help that, the Apostle 1 Cor. 3. 15. Will teach him what he pretends to be so unin∣telligible. His next Councel is p. 24. Let Edification be placed in the substantial Parts of Religion. Sir, We have our Religion yet to seek, if Faith and Holiness, be not the substantial Parts of it. There is none that denieth, that a right Faith, and an honest Con∣versation is taught in our Church. The Question is, Whe∣ther they be ordinarily taught in all Parish Churches in the best Manner for Peoples Understanding either, or Improvement in either? They are certainly taught in
the best manner with Reference to Edification, when they are taught so plainly as all the Hearers may under∣stand them; and what is said, is so proved and justified from Holy Writ; that their Faith (whose Object, 'tis not possible should be any Thing, but a Divine Revela∣tion) can be founded not in the Wisdom of Mens fine Words, or fallible Ratiocinations; but in the Power of God, and in the Wisdom of the Divine Will revealed in his Word. If the Author Sir means, that these Things are taught in our Thirty Nine Articles, and in some particular Churches, all that he can infer is, That it is not lawful for us to divide our selves from the Doctrine of Faith in those Articles; nor from such Places where we dwell, where those Doctrines are so Preached, if ever we were united to them. If he means, that in all Parish Churches, Faith, and Holiness are so pressed, and preached; he will find it denied by many, and impossible by himself to be proved. I see Sir, nothing more in all the Book you sent me (unless Words.) To draw up all in short Sir. If all the Ministers and Christians on the Earth (not apostatized to Idolatry) be but one Church, her Do∣ctrine, and Worship, one and the same; how is it possible, that any should separate from it, who adhereth to the Doctrine of it, and lives in the performance of the same Acts of Worship, that God is honoured by in every Part of it? For it is certain, that all such Persons as are Mem∣bers of it, neither do, nor ever did Worship God in the same Place, nor by the same Numerical Acts; nor are under the same external Form of Church-Government, and Order: So as there is no pretence of Separation from the Catholick Visible Church. I know no other Church, but the particular Church of which an individual Person is a Member.
Let us consider that, as signifying the whole Body of Christians wherein we live (upon which Account we some∣times speak of a National Church) how can a Person more separate from that, than from the Catholick Church (Sir) who adhereth to the Doctrine of Faith owned in it, and serveth God in any Part, or corner of it by the same specifical Acts of Worship, that whole Body of Peo∣ple serveth God by, and in? For neither do all the Peo∣ple in any Nation meet in the same Place to Worship God; nor do the Ministers use the same Words, in all their Prayers, or Sermons, nor do People use the same Habits and Postures in their Acts of Worship: Do they mean the Particular Congregation of which Men are Members? It is impossible a Man should separate from a Church in that Sense who never was a Member of it, and as impossible that any should sinfully withdraw Com∣munion from a Church in that lowest Notion, that can∣not without Sin, have Communion with it, in that, or those Acts in which he withdraweth his Communion. Neither is he to be called a Separatist, that only with∣draweth his Communion from it as to an human Tradi∣tion, and is yet ready to have Communion with it in eve∣ry Divine Institution. It is most certain that Christ did so, as to the Jews, and also kept a Communion distinct from them, though he did not wholly cast off Communion with them. John Baptist kept a Communion with the Jewish Church, yet sufficiently reflected on the Corruptions of it; and nei∣ther restrained his Preaching, nor Baptizing to the Sy∣nagogues or Temple. This same thing so clamour'd on, under the Notion of the black Sin of Schism and Separa∣tion, if it signifieth any thing more, than a withdrawing frome some Rites, and Ceremonies of no Divine Instituti∣on, no Necessity, the Imposition of which, and a Compli∣ance with which some Persons judge sinful; I must pro∣fefs my self not in the least Degree to understand it, and
if it signifies no more, which of the Ten Commandments it is opposed to. I cannot understand, nor how to ex∣cuse him from it, who did the like, yet was Holy, Un∣defiled, Separate from Sinners. But Sir, as to what is said in this Discourse, That it is sinful for a Man (agreeing in all the Points of Faith, in all the substantial Parts and Acts of Worship with all Christians in the World, and more especially with all those in the Nation, or in the Parish wherein he Lives) not ordinarily to join in those Numerical Acts of Wor∣ship which the rest of the Parishioners, or many of them join in; because the Preaching and Praying, or other Administrations of Holy Things in that Place, is not such, as he by Experience findeth most conducive to the Profit of his Soul, either to convey to him the Knowledge of the Things of God, or to affect his Heart with Love to, and Zeal for God. It is of all Things, that which I least understand, And (Sir) I hope it is the last Thing any shall beat into my Head. If any hath a Design upon me (Sir) let him attempt if he can to prove, that I have Soul, or if any, yet that Soul (or Thing called so) is but the Crsis of my Bo∣dy, no distinct Being from it, but shall with it Die and Putrifie, and never with it rise more, to hear of what I have done in the Flesh. Or let him attempt, if he can to perswade me, that I am not with this Soul to endea∣vour to my utmost to Glorifie God. But I hope he shall never, so long as I believe that there is a God, or that I have an Immortal Being within me, with which I ought to glorifie this God (the Eternal Concern of which I am above all Things to mind) and in Order to it, to obey God by doing his Will. Perswade me, that it is sinful for me to leave my Pa∣rish Church, and go to hear the Word of God, and join in his Holy Institutions in another Place, that I may more
build up my Soul in the Knowledge of God, in the Faith of God, or Love to him. Nor indeed (to give this Author his due) (though in his first Lines he pretended to do some such Thing) hath he in his Book at all pursued it; but only proved, that I ought not to go from my Parish Church that I may Edifie more; when as there is no Place I can go to, where it is possible I should Edifie more; and suggested that we do not know what Edification meaneth, Having there∣fore as to the Latter satisfied him, that if himself knows what Edification means, we also do; for we understand the same Thing by it, that he means; I hope he will give us leave to judge of the former, as being the most competent Judge of what we best understand, and feel the best Effects of; and no more pretend to know bet∣ter, what Preaching I best understand, and is most sui∣ted to my Soul, than he can pretend to know what Food best agreeth with my Stomack, and Digestion, and serveth best for my Nourishment. As to this Business of Edification, what is said of the Phy∣sitian, is true of the Divine, as the one gives Physick, so the other preacheth, Non ad bominem, sed ad Socratem, the same Matter, and Method, and Phrase, and Stile, is not for the same Edification of all that may go to hear. And this, Sir, is enough, I think, to have spoken of this matter: For it is certain, that all things spoken now-a-days edifie not, nor do all things which may in some de∣gree edifie some, in the same, or indeed in any degree edi∣fie others. Let therefore us have the favour that Daniel obtained of Matzar, Dan. 1. 11. let us have that Pulse to eat, and that Water to drink, which we find best agreeing with our Stomachs, Concoction, and Digestion; and let it ei∣ther be judged by God at the end of the World, or by any reasonable Man, after a determinate Number of Years, whether those who are fed with the King's Meat, or we
that have been fed with that Pulse and Water, be more full of the Knowledge of the Things of God, more full of Love to God, more pious in our Acts of Devotion, more full of Acts of Justice and Charity, more exercised in a good Conscience both towards God and Man, from whence this Edification will be best concluded. The Sum of all which this Author hath said, lies in Four Things. 1. What is impossible to be had, is unlawful to be attempted. By this Medium, he proves, going to Meetings for further Edification unlawful. But, Sir, did ever any Man before him reason from impossibility, to unlawfulness of endeavour? I always thought the Question, (as stated by him) supposed the possibility of such a thing, as further edifying: Besides, that there are many things lawful enough to be endeavoured, which yet cannot be obtained. Secondly, If it be not lawful to go to Meetings for mistaken Edification, then it is not lawful to go thither, for true and real Edification. This is the Sum of his Reasoning, p. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Thirdly, That which will cause endless Divisions is not law∣ful: Which is no further true, than those Divisions neces∣sarily arise out of the pretended Cause. The Gospel hath caused Divisions, ever since it was preached, now more than 1600 Years; and, for ought I see, is like to do so still: Yet, I hope, it is neither unlawful to preach it, nor to live up to the Rule of it. This is his Argumentation, p. 19, 20. Fourthly, That which is a discouragement to an honest and truly Christian Ministry, is unlawful. If he means by an ho∣nest Christian Ministry, all Ministers, or many such Mini∣sters as the Apostle speaks of, that live well, being Exam∣ples to the Flock of Christ, such as are described, 1 Tim. 3. 3,
4. and 1 Titus 6, 7, 8, 9. (and such the Apostle saith Mi∣nisters must be, 1 Tim. 3, 2.) and such as Rule well, shewing it first in the Government of their own Families, 1 Tim. 3, 4, 5. Labouring in the Word and Doctrine. He speaks true, for the Apostle saith, such are worthy of double Honour, and to discourage such, is unquestionably sinful: But if he means others, it is far easier to prove it sinful to countenance and incourage, than to discourage them. By this time, Sir, I need not tell you my Thoughts, that the Hypothesis of this Author, had need of better Arguments than what he hath brought to prove it, and you may be judge of the Truth, of what can be no better proved. FINIS.
