H3230 12171856 55429
THE RECORD OF SUFFERINGS FOR TYTHES IN ENGLAND. The Sufferers are, The Seed of God, or, The assembly of his First-born, or, The First Fruits un∣to God in England, in this Age, who are called to be faithful, and have been found faithful; therefore have we suffered willingly the spoi∣ling of our Goods, for to us the Truth is more precious then our E∣states, Lives, or outward Liberties, and therefore hath the Lord accounted us first worthy to suffer for his Name sake, and to be as Lights in this deceitful Generation. Those which our sufferings is a testimony against, is that Priest∣hood which is light and treacherous, which in all Ages the Lord raised up faithful witnesses against; for Isaiah said, That they were all blind and igno∣rant, and dumb dogs, and never had enough, Isa. 56. 10, 11. And Ieremiah said, That the Prophets prophesied falsly, and the Priests did bear rule by their means, Jer. 5. And Ezekiel said, They fed themselves, and not the flock, Ezek. 34. Mica said, They preached for hire, and divined for money, Mic. 2. 11. and Hosea said, That they were as a Troop of Robbers that did wait for a man, so the company of Priests did murther in the way by consent, Hos. 6. 9. And in these dayes we may say, that they are worse then any troop of Rob∣bers, or any that preached for hire, that ever went before them, as wil ap∣pear in this Book following, by their devouring VVidows Houses, spoil∣ing mens goods, and destroying mens persons. Given forth from those whom the Lord regards, who do tremble at his word, for which cause we are in scorn called Quakers, whom the Lord hath raised up as his army, before whom the Nations shall tremble, Ioel 2. and bow down their backs always before the truth. London, Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth neer Aldersgate, 1658
To the READER GOD hath a great work to do in this generation, to pull down the abominations which hath long reigned, and many are straitned till it be accomplished; and onely such must be exercised in this work, who are called, chosen, and faithful; many have been called, but have not been faithful, but have destroyed in their works, that which they seemed to have established by words, and was not faith∣ful to witness the life of their words by their works; so that by a true search we have found the words of righteousness in many, but we have found the works of righteousness but in few; and though God hath shined into the hearts of many by his light, yet there are but few children of it, in comparison of the disobedient: The eye of God hath looked into the world, and he sees men differ more in words then in life and conversation; and some in words do witnesse for God, but in their works deny him: As for example, How many of late yeers had a zeal stirred up in them by the spirit of the Lord against the abominations of the Priests, and the oppression of tythes, preaching both down, even as that which denyed Christ to be come in the flesh: So that if words had ben that which would have finish∣ed the work, the Land had been clensed before this time of that a∣bomination; but the Lord hath brought a tryal upon such spirits, whether they will own their testimony through the spoiling of their Goods, and imprisonment of their bodies and therefore hath God suffered an earthly power, and a Law to try them, and now they do rather deny their Testimony, then suffer by that Law which gives the Priests tythes; as for Witnesses, most of the baptized people in Eng∣land have betrayed their testimony and profession in that thing: And how are you worthy to be called Saints which bear such a testimony? can this equally be compared with the testimony of the Saints of old? Did they cry down false worships and false teachers in words? and did they uphold them by giving them wages? Have you not herein sinned against light? Did you not once see that they were ne∣ver sent of God? And will you now uphold them because you can∣not suffer for your testimony? Is not your paying them wages, and giving them tythes, a greater witness for them then your preaching them down in words is against them, and may they not herein re∣joice over you? Christ is not herein your example, which for this end was born, and for this end came into the world, to bear witness
to the truth, and did finish the work which the Father had given him to do, and was made perfect through sufferings; but such never need suffer who preach down deceit in words, and hold it up in works. And the Apostles is not your example, for they were in works that which they declared in words: therefore hath God cast you by, as not fit to be Labourers in his Vineyard: But a people is the Lord raising up, whom he is giving his holy spirit unto, whose witness to him must stand as well in works, as in words, who love the truth more then their lives or liberties, goods or estates, and are valiant for it upon the earth, which cannot be subject to the powers of darkness, nor the Rulers of the darkness of this world, but believeth that what∣soever they deny for Christ in this life, they shall receive a hundred sold, & in the world to come life everlasting. And these are they whom the Father will exercise with his holy spirit, in the gathering his seed from the ends of the earth, and for the turning of many to righteous∣ness; and such shall shine as the stars in the firmament of Heaven, when as the false and deceitful witnesses shall be turned into dark∣ness, because their testimony is not able to endure the tryal; for the Lords House must be built with tryed stones, that the winds of perse∣cutions cannot blow it down: and upon such wil his light arise, who when they are tryed, are found faithful, and who are counted wor∣thy to bear a testimony in this work, though it be through sufferings, in this day, when the powers of the Earth have set themselves to wear out the Saints of the most High God, by changing times and Laws, whereby to restrain the liberty of the Lords people, whose worship stands in the spirit, and in the truth. Times they have changed by a Law, in making the first day of the week to be their Sabbath, but that day is more profaned then any of the seven. And Laws they have changed, to get a ground to stop the word of the Lord from ha∣ving free course and free utterance among the people. These seek to scatter the power of the holy people, and to cast the truth to the ground by their acts of cruelty, and decrees of unrigh∣teousnesse, and by a tollerating cruelty and oppression among a com∣pany of Priests, which are worse then those in Hosea's dayes, who then were, As a Troop of Robbers that wait for a man, even so the compa∣ny of Priests murther in the way by consent, Hos. 6. 9. and saith the Prophet, I have seen a horrible thing in the House of Israel; but now may we say, VVe have seen a more horrible thing in the Land of England, even a company of Priests taking mens Horses from their work, their Corn off their field, driving away their Oxen and Kine out of their pasture, taking their wool out of their Barns, taking a∣way their Brasse and Pewter out of their Houses, taking away their Bedding off their Beds, even off the childrens Beds: Such a horri∣ble thing was never seen in Israel, for the Priests Robbery was not so
great then, as now; for they did never so spoile mens goods, nor de∣stroy mens Estates, nor imprison mens bodies, as now in England the priests have done; so that they do not onely exceed the false pro∣phets of Israel, but also all the Robbers both in Israel and in Eng∣land, hath not spoiled so much Goods and Cattel as they have done within these five yeers, some without any Law, or pretence of Laws and others by false oaths and false witnesses, and the Law not per∣mitting a man to give in a true witnesse except he will swear, con∣trary to Christs command, who saith, Swear not at all: which swear∣ing is as great a sin as bearing of a false witness. And by these things do they seek to wear out the Saints of the Most High God, first take∣ing away a mans Goods, and then casting him into prison; as Christ said to the Saints, so is it come to pass in these dayes also amongst us, The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, and you shall have tribu∣lation ten dayes: If the Devil now, or his Ministers or Messengers of Satan, be permitted to cast some into prison, or bring tribulation upon others, do they therefore think that we will yeild to the devil, or to his Messengers, that we may be free from tribulation and impri∣sonment? Nay, that is not the price of our redemption; nor way of deliverance; for that which was written before-time, was written for our learning, which through suffering, and patient continuing in wel doing, we have learned; without which we could never have learned nor known Christs words fulfilled as they are; therefore happy is that day wherein the everlasting love of God is broken forth unto us, in bringing us his children, prophets, & holy apostles, to rejoice over the false prophets, and false teachers, though they spoil our Goods, and imprison our bodyes, yet we can rejoice over them, and suffer the spoiling of our Goods with joy, knowing that this is for a testimony against them, by which the reproach which the Lord will bring up∣on them, will appear to all men. And this is so far from silencing our testimony against them, that it doth daylie renew it; so that if all that which is past were forgotten, their daylie abominations doth so increase, that a testimony must be continued against them; for of them the Scripture is true, which saith, Evil men and deceivers wax worse and worse; for the deceivers in former ages was never so bad, as by force to take away the goods of those that would not heare them, and take away their lives by imprisonment, as some have done, because they could not pay them tythes, as this Record of the unjust sufferings will make manifest. Our Brethren the prophets have given their testimony concern∣ing such prophets and priests which was profane, and that the Lord found folly amongst them, as Ieremiah saith, Ier. 23. he had seen a hor∣rible thing amongst them, they strengthened the hand of evil-doers, that none did return from their inquity; and it is so now for these reasons.
How can a drunkard return from his drunkenness when he sees his priest drunk? and how can a swearer return from his swearing when he sees his priest swear, and hire men to swear falsly, as many have done in this Nation? And how can a covetous man return from his covetousness when he sees his priest so covetous that he taketh away mens goods by vio∣lence, which he hath no right unto, but onely through covetousness makes merchandize of people? So how should any return from such things who are taught by them? and how can a proud man return from his pride, when he sees his teacher lead him into it by example? How can an envious man turn from his envie, seeing his teacher en∣vious, and provoking others to wrath and envy? So these Reasons proves that the prophet's words are true, that none can return from their iniquity by following the practise of their Priest; and Christ's words are fulfilled also, Matth 23. which saith, they lay heavy burthens upon people, grievous to be born, and devoures Widowes Houses, as many in this Nation can witnesse, who have their Goods spoiled and taken from them, as this following Record doth make mention, abounding all the cruelty and wickedness which ever was heard of, or read of; exceeding all the false prophets in Israel; although they had a price, and preached for hire, yet they never did use such cruelty for their Hire, as these have done; and exceeding all the false teachers among the Gentiles, which never was known to sue any at the Law that would not hear them, muchlesse to take from them se∣ven times the value of what they demanded; but the Lord doth for a time let his children deeply suffer, to fulfil the testimony of truth in this thing, that it may be recorded for ages to come, the faithful∣ness of their testimony, and the cruelty of their oppressors; and then will the Lord finish the testimony of their sufferings, and will give them an Inheritance among the Seed which he hath blessed; and all their persecutors shall be ashamed, for God will bring an everlasting reproach upon them, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be for∣gotten, Jer. 23. Richard Hubberthorne.
THE RECORD OF SUFFERINGS FOR TYTHES IN ENGLAND. Westmorland. William Hebson for Tythe-Corn of the value of two pound eleven shillings, had goods taken from him to the value of eight pounds, six shillings, and eight pence. William Holme for Tythe-Corn of the value of one pound, four∣teen shillings, and eight pence, had goods taken from him to the va-lue of four pounds fifteen shillings. Rowland Smith for Tythe-corn of the value of six shillings, had goods taken from him to the value of one pound, six shillings and eight pence. Richard Holme for Tythe-corn of the value of one pound seven shillings, had goods taken from him to the value of three pounds, four shillings. Agnes Teasdell for Tythe-corn of the value of one pound, eleven shillings, had goods taken from her worth five pounds. Edward Robinson for tythe corn of the value of sixteen shillings and nine pence, had goods taken from him worth four pounds six shil∣lings and eight pence.
Richard Smith for Tythe-Corn of the value of eight shillings and six pence, had goods taken from him worth one pound. These Goods were taken from them upon Warrants from Robert Branthwait and Francis Sisson Iustices, for the use of Peter Mawson of Peureth. Iohn Sutton for tythe of the value of one pound four shillings, had goods taken from him worth three pounds, ten shillings. John Camme for tythe of the value of one pound, eight shillings and six pence, had goods taken from him worth three pounds. The same for tythes of the value of about one pound nine shil∣lings, had goods taken from him worth four pounds. Margret Camme for tythe worth eight pence, had goods taken worth eight shillings. Cumberland. Richard Robinson of Blencoge, for one pound eight shillings de∣manded by William Grainger Priest of Brumfield, had two Oxen ta∣ken from him worth four pounds ten shillings. Widow Ayket, a poor woman, left in much Debt when her Hus∣band dyed, more then all his Goods would pay, so that the Credi∣tors both gave time, and abated, had taken from her for the said mercilesse priest, (who no way considered her need) one Milch-Cow, and one Oxe, she having no more but one other Cow, and one Oxe, for tythe-corn valued but to one pound eight shillings. So here you may see that the Widowes and Fatherlesse that were to be maintanied by tythes, are now robbed of their goods to pay tythes. Iohn Wilkinson for tythe-corn which his neighbors did prise at two shillings six pence, had taken from his children upon a Warrant from Thomas Craister and Cuthbert Studdam, a Mare worth three pounds, for the use of Iohn Forward Priest of Boulton. Thomas Porter for tythe prised at two pounds, had taken from him upon the said Justices VVarrant for the use of the said priest, three Stots worth six pounds. Iohn Pattison for three shillings, had five pecks of Barley and a Sack, taken from him for the said priest, worth eight shillings and nine pence. Tho. Wilson, alias Stumper, for twelve shillings demanded for tythes, had a Horse taken from him for the use of the said priest, worth two pounds. Hugh Tickell for six shillings four pence claimed by Percivel Radcliff priest of Crosthwaite, had goods taken from him by a war∣rant from Lancelot Fletcher and Iohn Barwes, worth one pound, one shilling and seven pence.
Iohn Wilson for seven shillings claimed by the said priest, had taken from him upon the said Justices warrant, goods worth one pound ten shillings. Christopher Scot for nineteen shillings claimed by the said priest, had goods taken from him upon the said Justices warrant, worth two pounds. Anthony Tickell for four shillings demanded by the said priest, had goods taken from him upon the said Justices warrant, worth four∣teen shillings. Iohn Ardel of Areleby, was sued by Guwen Eglesfield, priest of Plumland, for tythe, which his servant swore was worth fifteen shil∣lings, and had taken from him by the Sheriffs Bailiff, one Steer worth one pound seven shillings. These had their Goods taken from them because they could not pay to∣wards the repair of the popish Steeplehouses. John Bouckell in Graystock-parish, for two shillings and eight pence, had goods taken worth seven shillings. William Bowman of Lamplough parish, for nine shillings, had goods taken worth sixteen shillings. Elinor Dicson for seven shillings and six pence, had goods taken worth nine shillings. Iohn Hodgson for two shillings, had goods taken worth four shil∣lings and seven pence. Lancelot Fearon for sixteen shillings and three pence, had goods taken worth eighteen shillings. VVidow Ayket for ten pence demanded for tythe, had a pot and a pewter dish taken from her, worth above four shillings. Henry Lowthet for three shillings four pence for tythe, had taken from him one Sack and Barley worth six shillings and eight pence. These had their goods taken away because they could not swear. At John Dalstons Court at Vldel. John Fell was fined, and had goods taken worth eight shillings. Thomas Fell was fined, and had goods taken worth eight shillings and four pence. John Caipe was fined, and had goods taken worth nine shillings and six pence. At the Earle of Northumberlands Court, so called. John Senhouse was fined, and had a horse taken worth one pound ten shillings.
Henry Lowthet was fined three shillings and four pence, and bad goods taken worth sixteen shillings. Iohn Richardson was fined at the Sheriffs County-Court, because he could not swear, and had goods taken from him worth eleven shil∣lings. Edmund Hunter of Gisbrough in Yorkshire, because he could not swear as a Jury-man, was fined twenty shillings, for which he had a Cow taken away worth four pounds. BEDFORD. James Taylor of Asply Guyse, about the nineth month, 1656. was arrested upon an Attachment, prosecuted by Thomas Arkesden priest, for not swearing to his answer unto a Bill exhibited into the Exche∣quer by the same priest, against him for tythes, and thereupon im∣prisoned in Bedford Goal: VVhere did ever any of the Ministers of Christ do so? CAMBRIDGE. John Feast, and Edward Wright, of the Isle of Ely, about the third month, 1656. were arrested upon an Attachment prosecuted by William Hunt, priest of Sutton, for not swearing to their Answers which they tendered to the Barons of the Exchequer, unto a bill ex∣hibited into the same Court by the said priest, against them for tythes, and thereupon imprisoned, and Irons put on their legs in Cambridge Goal. William Grounds of Sutton, in the Isle of Ely, being summoned to appear at a Court held there, upon his appearing was fined forty shillings because he could not sweare, and afterwards had a Mare worth about five pounds, taken and distrained, and disposed of for the said fine, to the use of one Haman Ward. The same William had one Kettle worth ten shillings, taken from him for two shillings and a peny, which he was taxed to pay towards the reparation of the Steeplehouse. Robert Letchworth of Soham, had taken from him two Cowes worth five pounds, for tythes of the value of twenty shillings, pre∣tended to be due to John Gyles, priest there; and now is in prison at Ely, for tythes by the same priest. Stephen Wilson of the same, had taken from him one Cowe for tythes of the value of twelve shillings, for the same priest. William Crayne of the same, had three stone of Hemp worth ele∣ven shillings and six pence, taken from him for tythes valued at six shillings, for the same priest.
Daniel Peachy of the same, had two dozen of Yarn taken from him for tythes, of the value of two shillings, for the same priest. Robert Crabb of Littleport in the Isle of Ely, for tythes, or other pre∣tended dues to Martine Dallamore, priest there, of the value of one shilling and a peny, had taken from him one Kettle worth seven shil∣lings. Clement Crabb of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, valued at seven shillings six pence, had a vessel of But∣ter taken from him, worth twenty shillings. James Vipen sued to the Exchequer by William Hunt, priest o Sutton in Ely. Henry Place of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value of one shilling and six pence, had taken from him goods to the value of three shillings. James Peachy of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value of twelve shillings, had one Cow taken from him worth forty shillings. John Love of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value of fifteen shillings, had one Cow taken from him worth forty shillings. Samuel Caser of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value of ten pence, had taken from him one Kettle worth five shillings. Robert Asplan for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value of eleven shillings six pence, had taken from him one Cow worth thirty shillings. Thomas Dorman of the same, for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value of one shilling eight pence, had taken from him one brass pot worth six shillings eight pence. William Johnson for the like pretended dues to the same priest, to the value of nine shillings ten pence, had taken from him one vessel of butter worth three and twenty shillings, and one Kettle worth ten shillings. The aforenamed Robert Asplan for tythes pretended to be due to the Impropriator, to the value of three pounds fifteen shillings, had taken from him five Cows and three Steers, worth fourteen pounds. The afore-named Robert Crabb for two Rates of one shilling ten pence towards the reparation of the Steeple-house, had taken from him goods to the value of four shillings and ten pence. The afore-named Henry Place for one Rate of five pence towards repairation of the Steeple-house, had goods taken from him to the value of ten pence. Thomas Haukes of the same, for a Rate of four pence towards re∣pairation of the Steeplehouse, had taken from him one platter worth four shillings.
The afore-named John Love for two Rates towards repairation of the Steeple-house, and for the parish-Clark, in all amounting to one shilling eight pence, had taken from him one Warming-pan worth six shillings eight pence, and two platters worth four shillings. The afore-named Robert Asplan for one Rate of one shilling four pence towards the repairation of the Steeple-house, had taken from him goods to the value of five shillings. Thomas Jobson, and William Holmes, both of Swasy in the Coun∣ty of Cambridge, were indicted, fined and imprisoned upon pretence of entertaining Ranters, and idle wandering persons, at their Hou∣ses, but there was not any such thing proved; but it was onely for entertaining Friends, called forth from their own Countries, as A∣braham was from his; and as the Apostles were, to forsake all, and follow Christ, and preach his Gospel, the glad tydings of peace and reconciliation. And after about six moneths imprisonment, were set at liberty; and for their Fines (being then abated to six pounds, six shillings and eight pence a piece) tooke away from them four Horses, Beasts worth eighteen pounds. Jeremiah Rose, imprisoned in Ely for tythes by Peter Franklin priest of Marry, after he had taken away more of his goods then the value of the tythe came to. ESSEX. Thomas Mumford at the suit of John Cooper of great Sailing, for tythes, which when he was summoned up to London by Writ, would not suffer him to make his appearance, but committed him to prison contrary to the Writ. Anthony Page, junior, at the suite of the said Cooper for tythes, was in like manner not suffered to make his appearance according to the Writ, but was sent to prison, and there remains in sufferings, and his Wife and three children left to suffering, they having been main∣tained onely by his labour. Francis Marrige at the suit of John Sorell Impropriator, for tythes, was not suffered to make his appearance according to the Writ, but sent to prison onely because he refused to set an Attorneys Name up∣on the back of the writ, and so remains in prison. Robert Nicholl of Colne-Engaine, for tythes pretended to be due to John Clerk, priest of the parish, to the value of about nineteen or twenty pounds, for four years tythe, as was pretended, had judgement given him by Dionicius Wakering, and William Harleakenden, Justices, for fifty five pounds, nine shillings and six pence, and upon their war∣rant had taken from him nine Cows, one Horse, and two Colts, worth near fifty pounds; and for the rest, when he had taken away all his goods, threatned to send him to prison, and got a warrant for it.
John Pollard after he had appeared in the Exchequer, was arrested upon an Attachment at the Suit of Priest Robinson, and now remains a prisoner in Colchester-Castle. Robert Adams of Fearing, for some pretended dues to one Pur∣chase a Priest there; and for damages, and costs allotted: him by some called Justices, all amounting to sixteen shillings, had taken from him one Horse worth five pounds ten shillings. GLOCESTER. William Atward sued in the Exchequer for tythes, after he had had a bible and several other goods taken from him; and after one Phi∣lip Langley an Impropriator had greatly abused him, calling him our of his House, and threw a great stone at his head, which if he had not kept off, might have slain him. William Wooley because he could not pay tythes, had a Horse ta∣ken from him (worth about five pounds) by Souldiers. Samuel Bampton sued in the Exchequer by Robert Dowle Impro∣priator, for about two shillings six pence. John Kathaby had goods taken away by Souldiers to the value of thirty shillings for an Impropriator, for tythe of a small value, and is also sued into the Exchequer. NORFOLK. William Barker of Gissing, for tythes pretended to be due to Ro∣bert Proctor, priest there, for which the Priest demanded but twenty six shillings, had taken from him on Horse worth six pounds. Richard Cosen of Baningham, for tythes demanded by one Thomas Knevet, and for costs assessed to him by two Justices, Robert Wood, and Henry King, all amounting to two pounds, seven shillings and six pence, had taken from him a Mare, and a Colt of two yeers old, worth three pounds ten shillings. Benjamin Lynes of Bramplingham; for tythes pretended to be due by Jonathan Clapham priest there, and costs assessed to him, all a∣mounting to two pounds, three shillings and four pence, had taken from him two Cows worth four pounds. Robert Jacob, late of Wymondham, aged about eighty yeers, about the sixth Month, 1656. being summoned thereunto, to appeare be∣fore Rob. Ward, Rob. Wilton, and Thomas VVeeld, called Justices, who informed him he was chosen to be a Constable, & required him to be sworn to execute the same Office; he acquainted them of his age and inability to execute the said Office, and said he was willing to do what service he could; but much could not be expected from him in respect of his age, and the inability of his body; but he could not
swear at all, it being contrary to the command of Christ; whereup∣on they committed him to prison in Norwich Castle, where he con∣tinued [not able to put off and on his own clothes] for about eight weeks, and then was released. About the third Month, called May, next before his aforementi∣oned imprisonment; the same Jacob was summoned to appear before the Barons of the Exchequer at Westminster, being about eighty miles from his outward abode, for not paying tythes; whereupon he travelled to VVestminster, and upon an Attachment, as for want of an Answer, which would not be accepted without an Oath, and thereupon was sent to the prison aforementioned, where he continu∣ed until he dyed, bearing a faithful testimony for the Lord against tythes and swearing. Thomas Berrier of Vpwell, being summoned by a Warrant from the Steward Outwell, had a Horse taken from him for tythes of a small value, worth seven pounds, when he had but one more in his plough, without either appearance or Judgement. Peter Gill had taken from him a pewter platter for Clarkes wa∣ges. SVFFOLK. John Smith of Kniten, being summoned to appear before the Ba∣rons of the Exchequer at VVestminster for not paying tythes, ap∣peared accordingly, and tendered his Answer to the Barons, who could not accept thereof unless he would be sworn thereunto, which for conscience-sake he could not do, the Son of God having com∣manded his Disciples not to swear at all; whereupon he was arrested, and imprisoned at Melton Goal, as for not swearing. Nicholas VVhite of VVestmstie, for tythes pretended to be due to one Austine Gobbel Priest, and costs and damages assessed him in all, to the value of about three pounds, had taken from him three Cows worth about twelve pounds. George Sherwine of Kiten, being twice summoned to appeare in the Exchequer at VVestminster, once at the Suit of one Edmund Moure priest another time at the Suit of one cal'd Lady Gandy for not pay∣ing tythes, appeared accordingly, and tendered his Answers there in several Bills unto the Barons, who refused to receive them unlesse he would be sworn thereunto; and thereupon was presented as for not answering, and afterwards arrested and imprisoned at Melton up∣on an attachment presented by the said Lady, and remains priso∣ner. Anthony Kittel of Edwardston, for a Rate of ten shillings towards repairation of the Steeplehouse, had several goods taken from
him, to the value of about two pounds, and was also sent to pri∣son. Tho. Iudge for the tythe of one Close of Pasture-ground, was ar∣rested by two Warrants (at the suit of two Priests of Stainton, John Burrowes, and Gamaliel Capell) out of the Exhequer, and carryed to the prison, where he remains a close prisoner; and the tythe is claimed for the yeeres 1647. 1648. the Rent of the Close being yeerly nine pounds. Anthony Kittell was summoned before two Justices, Joseph Brand, and Robert Gardon, for tythes at the Suit of one priest Pretty; and after they had given judgement against him for his tythes, they sent him to prison for saying the Priest was a lyar, and told him they had now a Law by which they hoped to curb the Quakers. SVSSEX. Robert Adams being sued in the Exchequer for tythes by John Wor∣thing Priest, was cast into prison upon an Attachment, because he could not put in Answer upon Oath, and hath remained in Horsam Goal since the first day of the third Month, 1657. Richard Adams being sued in the Exchequer for tythes by John Fage, he appeared, and tendred his Answer, which they would not accept without Oath; but he was taken by an Attachment and cast into the Goal at Horsam, where he remains since the twentieth day of the fifth Month, 1657. Minion Brocket because he could not swear to selve the office of a Constable, was put in the Common-Goal at Horsam above a yeer since, where he now remains a prisoner. Margery Coulstock was sent to prison upon the first day of the fift Month, 1657. by one William Freeman Justice, for saying the priests were Hirelings; and being brought to the Sessions, and there falsly accused by some priests, she reproved them for it, and that was cal∣led a Breach of the Peace, and the Bench sent her back to the Goal. KENT. Edward Noake is imprisoned at the Kings Bench in Southwark London, because he cannot pay tythes to the priest. William Beane of Brayburne, near Ashford, had one Hog taken away prised at thirteen shillings four pence, for the repairing of a Steeplehouse and Bells, which they sold for ten shillings, and retur∣ned nothing again. Thomas Housigar for ten shillings for repairing the Steeplehouse, they took from him a Cow worth three pounds.
VVARWICK. George VVyat lyes there imprisoned because he cannot pay tythes. VVILTS. John Jay of Castlecombe, had taken from him for Roger Flower, Priest of that parish, by order of two Justices, fourteen Sheep, for the tythe of two Loads of Hey, and the Wool and Lamb of seven∣ty sheep. The same John Jay for tythe-corn valued at three pounds four shil∣lings, had taken from him by the said priest, two Oxen worth twelve pounds. Roger Haukins for tythes of the value of ten shillings, had a Mare taken from him for Thomas Pichard, priest of the parish of Ginsling∣ton, which was sold for fifty shillings. Roger Smart for tythe of the value of eighteen shillings and odde money, had taken from him for the said priest, two Cows sold for three pounds. VVilliam Player for tythes of the value of nine shillings, had ta∣ken from him for the said priest, eight sheep, and six or seven lambs, worth fifty shillings. Another man of the said County, and his Tenant, for tythes of the value of twelve shillings, for VVilliam Stump priest of Yeaton-Cavell, had taken from them eleven sheep worth five shillings a piece, and seventeen shillings from the Tenant; and the same man lyes now in prison at Fisherton, because he cannot give his Answer to a priests Bill upon Oath. YORKSHIRE. Liverton. Robert Parret for tythes valued at forty shillings, had goods taken from him for Richard Smelt priest of Easington, worth five pounds ten shillings. The same man for refusing to contribute towards the repair of the po∣pish Steeplehouse, had goods taken from him worth sixteen shillings. The same man for not paying five pence, claimed by the parish-Clark for wages, had goods taken from him worth two shillings. The same man for refusing to swear, had goods taken from him worth one pound eight shillings. VVilliam Tiplady for tythes valued at two pounds, two shillings and eight pence, had taken from him for the aforesaid priest Sets, Goods worth four pounds ten shillings.
The same man for refusing to repair the popish Steeplehouse, had goods taken from him worth twelve shillings. More for not paying five pence to the parish-Clark, had taken from him Goods worth two shillings and four pence. The same man for tythe of the value of two pounds, six shillings and eight pence, had Goods taken from him for the said priest Smelt, worth eight pounds. Robert Tiplady for tythes of the value of four pounds, had taken from him for the said priest Smelt, goods worth fifteen pounds, thir∣teen shillings and eight pence. More for the popish Steeplehouse, goods worth thirteen shillings four pence. More for ten pence Clarks wages, goods worth twelve shillings ten pence. Nicholas Tiplady for tythes valued at one pound ten shillings, had goods taken from him for the said priest Smelt, worth two pounds, thirteen shillings four pence. More for the popish Steeplehouse, goods worth twelve shillings. Robert Stonehouse for tythes valued at three pounds, had goods ta∣ken from him for the said priest Smelt, worth fourteen pounds, four shillings and six pence. More for the Steeplehouse, goods worth five shillings. More for not paying five pence Clarks wages, goods worth two shillings and six pence. More for refusing to swear, goods worth ten shillings. James Stonehouse for not paying five pence to the Clark, had goods taken worth three shillings. Rowland Thorp for refusing to repair the popish Steeplehouse, had goods taken from him worth five shillings More for refusing to sweat, goods worth five shillings. Elizabeth Carcrost for not paying two pence for Clarks Wages, had goods taken worth eight pence. More for the popish Steeplehouse, goods worth one shilling. This was done by Warrants from Leonard Smelt, Benjamin Nor∣cliffe, George Marwood, and Matt. Beckwith, orsome of them. E. ASTRIDING. Thomas Leemeing of Wighton, was sued in the Weapontack-court by Robert Musgrave, for tythes of the value of nine shillings, and had taken from him a Cow worth one pound, thirteen shillings four pence. Thomas Leemeing for two pounds two shillings demanded for tithes,
was sued by Farmers of the tythe-Corn, and had taken from him by Execution out of the said Court, two Mares worth seven pounds. Thomas Leemeing for tythes of the value of fourteen shillings, de∣manded by VVill. Kidder priest of VVighton, by Execution out of the said Court, had a Horse taken worth three pounds. Marmaduke Stephenson for two shillings which the said priest Kidder demanded for tythes, had taken from him by the bailiff of the said Court, a brasse pot, and other vessels, worth one pound. Jo. VVilson for six shillings ten pence pretended to be due by Iohn Peables, priest of Barmeby, for Easter-Reckonings, procured a War∣rant from Rich. Robinson and Rich. Darley, Justices, for eleven shil∣lings ten pence, and sent two Bailiffs, that took a Cow worth one pound ten shillings. John VVilson for two pounds four shillings and eleven pence, pre∣tended to be due for tythes to Jo. Silburne Impropriator, procured a Warrant from the said two Justices for two pounds, nineteen shillings and eleven pence, and took two Oxen and one Cow, worth about six pounds ten shillings. The said Jo. VVilson was fined six shillings eight pence at the She∣riffs Turn, by Jo. Hewley a Lawyer, because he could not swear; and the bailiffs took from him for it two Kettles. Walter Hall for two pounds eleven shillings claimed by Jo. Peables priest, and Jo. Silburne Impropriator, for tythes and Easter-Reckon∣ings, by Warrant from the said two Justices, three Cows, one Mare, and two Colts; of which goods they said they spared one Cow, but never brought her again. Io. Cook for fifteen shillings claimed by Ioseph Picket Impropria∣tor for tythes, had taken from him upon a Warrant from the said two Iustices, two Oxen worth about four pounds ten shillings. Christopher Hurdsman for one shilling three pence claimed by priest Cooper of Fridaythorp, had taken from him a Cow worth two pounds. Christopher Hutton for one shilling eight pence claimed for repair∣ing the Steeplehouse, had two pewter Dishes taken from him worth four shillings. Iames Turner for five shillings ten pence demanded for repairing the Steeplehouse, had a Kettle and two pewter dishes taken from him, worth two pounds fifteen shillings, by Order from the said two Iustices. Christopher Wilson for three shillings four pence demanded for re∣pairing the Steeplehouse, had a Kettle taken from him worth about ten shillings by the said Order. Henry Wilson for ten pence demanded by the Clark, had a brasse Pot taken from him worth four shillings six pence.
Io. Smith for two pounds two shillings demanded for tythes by the Impropriator, had two Cows and a Sweath-Rake worth three pounds, thirteen shillings four pence. Also for four pence demadned of him for repairing the Steeple-house, had taken from him three Dublers worth four shillings. Also for ten pence demanded for Clarks wages, they took away from him a brasse pot worth seventeen shillings. Alexander Harland for three shillings demanded by Priest Stather, had a Mare taken away worth two pounds ten shillings. And four bushels of Barley more, worth twelve shillings, for re∣pairing the Steeplehouse. Richard Bayly of Wilton for Tythe-wool and Lamb, pretended due to Richard Darley for about thirty sheep, had taken from him by war∣rant from the said Richard Darley and Richard Robinson, six sheepe, which they sold. Christopher Walkinton for six pence demanded for repairing of the Steeplehouse, had goods taken from him worth one shilling and six pence. William Losthouse of Hampton for twelve shillings demanded by Iohn Dawson, had taken from him upon a Warrant from George Smithson, and Io. Waistell, goods prised to five pounds. The same William Losthouse for eighteen shillings seven pence, de∣manded by Robert Wivall, Impropriator of the parish of Downholm, was sued in the Court at Midlam, and there judgement was given a∣gainst him, though they had no Authority to hold plea of any such matter; and they took a Horse from him worth three pounds, and since they have taken from him two Dublers for a Tythe-Calse. YORKSHIRE. George Robinson because he could not pay tythe to the priest, was turned out of his House and Land, of which he and his Ancestors had been possessed above one hundred years, by Charls Cornwallis Landlord. The said George Robinson for riding to a Meeting four miles off upon a first day, had a Mare taken from him worth six pounds, and nothing restored back. William Iackson for tythes of ten shillings value, had sixteen shil∣lings taken by a judgment in the Weapontage-Court for a scandalous Priest. Millison Legg, a poor Widow, having five or or six children, was sued in the said Weapontage-Court by William Baxter a scandalous Priest, fortythes valued to five shillings, for which the bailiff took
eight shillings besides charges of Court: As soon as the Priest had got it, he went to an Ale-house, and made himself drunk, staying there above twenty four hours. Eliz. Whitehead for not paying eighteen pence towards repair of a Steeplehouse, had a new covering taken from her which cost eight shillings six pence; a pewter platter worth three shillings; and a Candlestick worth two shillings six pence; here is for one shilling six pence, taken away fourteen shillings. Tho. Tanfeild for not paying one shilling towards repairing of a Steeplehouse, had taken from him one Ewe and a Lamb worth seven shillings. Iohn Nickolson for eight shillings demanded for tythes, was sued by Francis Cobb, and ran to an Outlawry, and had three cowes taken from him worth nine pounds. Richard Hancock for two pounds five shillings demanded for tythes, was run to an Outlawry by the said Fran. Cobb, and had taken from him two Oxen and two Horses worth fourteen pounds. Iohn Bird for one shilling demanded by a priests clark, was sued by the clark, and had a Horse taken from him worth three pounds. Marmaduke Storr for three shillings nine pence demanded for re∣pair of a Steeplehouse, had taken from him two Bacon-flitches worth thirty shillings, and a Weather sheep worth ten shillings. Michael Simpson of Boythrop, a Farmer in the county of York, sued for tythes by Charles Reane priest of Foxholes, in the said coun∣ty; the tythes demanded, twelve pounds, nineteen shillings and four pence; an Execution was given out against him for trebble damage, which came to thirty eight pounds, eighteen shillings, which indeed is trebble principle. One Richard Whitehead came to the said Michael Simpson's House on the priests behalfe, and the said Richard opened the Stable-doors, and brought forth five Horses; likewise he tooke twenty three beasts, six score and eleven old sheepe, and forty three young sheep, and the next morning prised the said goods; Five Hor∣ses at ten pounds; twenty three beasts at a mark a beast; six score and eleven old sheep, at three shillings a sheep; and the yong ones at one shilling a sheep; in all they came to forty seven pounds, two shillings and eight pence; but they sold them at Molton for fifty six pounds, twelve shillings and four pence, but were worth ninety one pounds, seven shillings. Thus in brief, For twelve pounds nineten shillings four pence, goods was taken away worth ninety one pounds, seven shillings. Iohn Hutton in the couny of York, nine pence being demanded of the said Iohn Hutton for repair of the Steeplehouse, goods taken from him to the value of two shillings and six pence, and nothing returned.
The said Iohn Hutton for Clarks Wages, one shilling eight pence which they demanded, had took away a Cow worth two pounds eight shillings Likewise Iohn Hopper in the foresaid Town and County, for Clarks Wages, demanded the sum of four pence, had took away a Cow which was worth two pounds. Tho. Thompson of Maulton, Draper, had taken from him a piece of Cloth, near four yeards: the sum demanded was two shillings for the repair of the Steeplehouse, they took away goods worth eight shillings eight pence. Thomas Aldam of Warmsworth, in the County of York, by the means of Thomas Rooksby Priest, and Thomas Vincant of the same, Farmer to an Impropriator; the same Tho. Aldam was cast in prison by their means in York Goal, and there kept two years & six months, in which time both the said parties sued him at the Law for not set∣ting forth his tythes, which the Priests party swore to be worth five pounds ten shillings; and Richard Nudigate Judge gave an Order to the Priest to take sixteen pounds ten shillings. By this you may know he is a Deceiver and a false Prophet. Again in the same year Tho. Vincant Tythemonger, procured his servants, Tho. Marshal, and Timothy Brigham, to swear the value o Tho. Aldams tythes, to be worth six pounds two shillings, for which Tho. Vincant had a Judgment from the said Nudigate, Judge, for eighteen pounds six shillings; and for the said eighteen pounds six shillings, was taken four Oxen, seven Kine, one Steer, one Heifer, one Horse, one Mare, valued by Neighbors to be worthsorty two pounds; distrained by Henry Worrell, bailiff, and sold by the said bai∣liff, and nothing returned again to Tho. Aldam, nor by him recei∣ved. Again the said Tho. Rooksby Priest of Warmsworth, did sue Tho. Aldam for tythes, which he pretended to be due unto him in the year 1653. & 1654. and did get a Judgement from 10. Parker Judge, for twelve pounds out of the Lands and Goods of Tho. Aldam; upon whose Goods Distresse was made by Godfrey Burton, bailiff, which took fifteen Loads of white Wheat out of Tho. Aldams Chamber, ready dressed, valued to be worth sixteen shillings six pence a Load, which in all is thirteen pounds, and nothing was returned again; the spoil of these goods was taken in the year 1656. If this be not a heavy burden, grievous to be born, let all of understanding judge, to take from one man seventy one pounds for that which themselves swore to be but fourteen pounds twelve shillings, which is above five∣fold the value. Iohn Kilam of Balby had taken from him for the repairing of the Steeplehouse, by the Order of Richard Bradforth then Mayor, a fat Bullock worth two pounds, six shillings and eight pence, in the
year 1654. Again taken from Tho. Kilam for repairing of the same Steeplehouse at Doncaster, a Bullock worth one pound ten shillings by Order from the aforesaid Mayor; the sum demanded was but se∣venteen shillings, in the year 1654. Again, taken from Tho. Kilam of the aforesaid place, half a quar∣ter of Barley worth thirteen shillings, for the repairing of the afore∣said Steeplehouse, by Iohn Ward, Will. Patison, Iohn Creakehill, Col∣lectors for the House of their god, in the year 1656. SVMMERSET. Vpon the 23. day of the first Month, 1657. late in the Evening, William Amoss, and Iohn Mead, (called Churchwardens in the pa∣rish of Streat) with two men more, (called Bailiffs) came to the Houses of the persons hereafter mentioned, and tooke away their goods (as they said) for the House which they called the Church; and because for conscience-sake we could not repair their Bells, or uphold their Church, we suffer the spoiling of our goods, as appears by the Relation following. From Henry Gundry for ten shillings eleven pence demanded, they took away thirty one pounds of Bacon, worth six pence the pound; and since the said Henry Gundry was arrested for non-pay∣ment of tythes, and taken by Iohn Midlehem as he was going with a draught of Oxen the first day of the fourth month, and carried a∣way forthwith to the Goal at Ivelchester, where he remains prisoner to this day. From Iasper Bat they demanded eight shillings nine pence, and they took away a brasse pan, one pewter Flaggon, and two brasse. Candlesticks, to the value of about twenty shillings; and she said Iasper Bat was the 24th. day of the 6th. moneth, 1657. arrested by the foresaid bailiff, and carryed him four miles towards the Goal; but the bailiff being very civil towards him, then freed him on his giving a Note under his hand to appear at the upper-bench at Westminster, on the day called Saturday next after the morrow of All-souls, (so called) where he did accordingly appear, and offered a Note to one Judge Waberton, signifying the cause of his being there; but the Iudge said he would receive nothing from him unlesse he would put off his Hat; so the said Iasper Bat went to the upper-Bench-Of∣fice in the Inner-Temple, & desired to have his appearance recorded, and he would pay for it, but the men there present refused to record his Appearance without an Attorney, which he refused to have, and so left them. He was arrested for non payment of tythes. From Iohn Pittman they demanded six shillings three pence, and took away four Dishes worth about twelve shillings; and since the said Iohn Pittman was summoned to appear at the Exchequer at West∣minster
in eight dayes after the day called St. Martine, in the yeere 1657. where he did appear accordingly; but they refused to record his appearance unlesse he would see an Attorney. His summons was for non-payment of tythes From Edward Tayler they demanded one shilling six pence, and took away three pewter Dishes worth about six shillings and eight pence. From Agnes Barrat a poor widow, who for her meannesse was never rated to the poore, although the charge in that parish for the poore is great, yet they demanded one shilling and six pence of her, and took away a pewter Dish of her Grandchilds, worth about three shillings four pence: So that they neither spare poor VVidows, nor fatherlesse children, but devours their Houses, spoiles their Goods, and makes their prey upon them. Also William Shephard of Walton, in the same County, was sum∣moned to appear that sixth day of the third month, 1657. at the Exchequer, where he appeared, and there was nothing charged a∣gainst him, although he waited several dayes. From Iohn Dundo of Hollowtrow in the same County, for se∣venteen shillings ten pence demanded for tythes, was taken from him one pound seventeen shillings ten pence, by Order of Iohn Hippesley and Richard Ioanes, two of those in Commission to do justice in the same County. From Iohn Cole of Farrington, for one shilling six pence demand∣ed for mending of the Steeplehouse, had taken a brasse Kettle worth six shillings, in the year 1656. Likewise Thomas Loscombe for two shillings eight pence demanded of him for the redairing of the Steeplehouse at Queene Camell, the Church wardens [so called] took away one brasse pan to the value of thirty shillings; and since the said Thomas Loscombe was commit∣ted to prison, because for conscience sake he could not take an oath when appointed as a Surveyor for the high-wayes in the foresaid parish of Queen Camel, and hath continued a Prisoner neere eight Moneths, where he remains to this day. And all these sufferings are sustained by us who cannot be confor∣formable to the heathenish customes, and traditional worships of the world, neither can we give them our gold or silver to repair or up∣hold the Idols temple, where the unknown God is ignorantly wor∣shipped by them whose idolatry and superstition is made manifest to, and denyed by the children of Light, whose souls are subject [for conscience sake] to the higher power. At Striate in the county of Sommerset, at a court held for Iohn Whi∣tington, in the yeer 1657. there were present Iohn Pittman, and Iasper Batt, who are called Quakers, who for conscience sake could not swear, and also one VVill. Amoss, who is no Quaker, likewise refused
to swear; and the said Pittman and Batt were by the Steward fined twenty shillings a piece, but Will. Amoss was not fined at all. Christopher Pittard and George Taylor, riding through Ilchester to a Meeting to worship the Lord, (about six miles from their dwel∣lings) had their Horses taken from them. On the first day of the Week likewise, Thomas Buds wife riding to the aforesaid Meeting four miles from her dwelling, Rob. Hunt, and John Cary, called Justices, directed a Warrant for the levying ten shillings by distresse on Tho. Buds goods for riding four miles to the VVorship of God. Hillary Term [so called] the 11th. Month, 1655. I made my personal appearance at Westminster before tBe Barons of the Exche∣quer, to answer a Bill exhibited against me for non-payment of tythes, at the Complaint of Thomas Ladd, Priest of Salford, in the County of Sommerset. To which Bill I answered; but because I could not for conscience sake swear, and so return my Answer upon Oath, a VVrit or Warrant was issued forth against me, signed by Ro∣bert Hunt, being then high Sheriff of the County aforesaid; by ver∣tue whereof I was apprehended in a Meating at Kainsham the 26. day of the first Month, 1656. and so carryed to Ivelchester prison, where I have been kept, and remains a prisoner to this day. John Doget. Vpon the first day of the fourth Month, 1657. Henry Gundry was committed to the Goal at Ivelchester, where he now remains a prisoner for non-payment of tythes at the Complaint of one Josi∣ah Primet, or in the behalf of the priest of Streate, neer Glastonbu∣ry in the County of Sommersec: and although the VVarrant to the keeper [signed by William Helliard Sheriff of the County] expres∣sed that he the said William Helliard was to have his body before the Protector the Tuesday three weeks of the Holy Trinity, [so called] yet he remains a Prisoner in the Common-Goal at Ivelchester. Likewise Edmund Beackes was committed to the Goal at Ivelche∣ster upon the first day of the seventh Moneth, 1657. where he is to re∣main in safe custody, as saith the VVarrant to the Keeper signed by William Helliard high Sheriff of the County of Sommerset) so that he may have his body before the Protector eight dayes after the time called St. Martines, to answer one Thomas Edwards Priest of King∣son-Samor, in a common plea of Trespasse, which the said priest have declared to be for non-payment of tythes; and although the VVar∣rant to the Keeper expressed that he the said William Helliard was to have his body before the Protector eight dayes after St. Martins, yet he remains a prisoner to this day.
Also William Serjant of Bathford was taken prisoner at Bath the third day of the eight Moneth, 1657. and kept prisoner in Bath twelve dayes, contrary to the expresse words of the VVarrant, and afterwards sent to the Goal at Ivelchester at the Complaint of one Philip Elice of Bathford, for non payment of tythes; and although the VVarrant expressed that he was to be at London within eight days of St. Martine, [so called] to answer the said Philip Elice in a plea of Trespass; yet he is kept a prisoner at Ivelchester with the persons above-mentioned unto this day, being the nineth day of the tenth Month, 1657 NORFOLK. In the yeer 1656. Jonathan Clapham priest of Wramplingham in Norfolk, summoned one Benjamin Lynes to appear before several Ju∣stices in the said County, to thew the cause why he the said Benjamin did refuse to pay tythes to the said priest; so he did appear: And the priest brought one John Benton of Wramplingham, and Thomas Park of Melton, to be his witnesses; and both of them were so apparent∣ly forsworn, that the Justices did not accept of their testimony; so another witnesse was examined, and he did testisie the tythes of the said Benjamin for one Meadow, to the value of twelve shillings, and no other tythes that he knew due from the said Benjamin: And for that twelve shillings which this one witnesse did testifie to be due to the said priest, Ralph VVooliner and one Richard Brown, (two ap∣pointed to do Justice in the County) signed a Judgement for above forty shillings; and the said priest Clapham went himself with a man or two with him, & fetched out of the said Benjamin Lynes's ground, two Cows better worth then four pounds; since which the said John Benton did get into the Steeplehouse at VVramplingham, and there hanged himself in a Bell-Rope; and after he had so done, the said prieft Clapham [as divers that were present have affirmed] did to the Coroner and the Jury testifie upon his Oath, that the said John Benton had been a distracted man, or not composmentes, for three or four years before, yet the said priest brought him for his witnesse, and caused him to be forsworn; so that this priest Clapbam is not onely a false teacher, but a false swearer; for the man John Benton, was ne∣ver known to be distracted, but was of a good reputation amongst his Neighbors, until the priest caused him to forswear himself for his dishonest gain. VVitnesse, John Lawrence, and Ben. Lynes.
The said priest Clapham summoned John Lawrance to appear be∣fore several Justices, to shew the cause why he would not pay tithes: the said Lawrance did appear according to the summons, and the priest also with two false witnesses, Matthew Hawke, and Iohn Corn∣hil, who swore that John Lawrance had more acres of Corn then he had, as Iohn Lawrance did make appear before the Iustices; neverthe∣lesse the Iustices, Will. Steward, Iohn Bowrman, Ralph VVolmer, sign∣ed a Iudgement against the said Lawrance for five pounds sixteen shil∣lings, which was eighteen shillings more then the witnesses swore, although they did swear falsly; and the priest took for the five pounds sixteen shillings, three cowes, which was better worth then nine pounds. This priest Clapham hath caused four men to forswear themselves, one of which hath since hanged himselfin the priests Steeplehouse in a Bell-Rope, which is for an example for all false teachers, hirelings, and false swearers. VVitnessed by Iohn Law∣rance, and Benjamin Lynes. NORFOLK. The Farmers of the Impropriation at Shottesham, Iohn Mingay, and Thomas Bransby, having gotten a warrant from them called Iu∣stices, to take of Henry Halls forty five shillings for tythes, and fif∣teen shillings for costs, went the eighth month last to the Family of Henry at Shottesham, and took from them two cows worth about se∣ven pounds. SVFFOLK. Ioseph Lawrence at the suit of Sam. Habbargham priest of Silham, for tythes for the value of two pounds fourteen shillings, did take from him two Kine worth ten pounds. Iames Norton for the value of one pound five shillings demanded as due, had taken from him three Firkins of Butter worth three pounds eighteen shillings. Iohn Frier for thirteen shillings four pence demanded as due, had taken away a cow worth three pounds six shillings. Again two called Iustices of peace, Rob. Knowles, and Iustice E∣lington, granted out a Iudgement against Ia. Norton for seven pounds ten shillings, besides what charges should be required; whereas the yearly Rent is but seventeen pounds, six shillings six pence: So for the tythe he hath almost half the prise of the Rent.
Again another Iudgement is given out by the same Iustices against Iohn Frier for six pounds ten shillings, besides what charges should be required, and the yeerly Rent of the Farm is but eighteen pounds eight shillings. Thomas Iudy is imprisoned because he could not swear to the gi∣ving in his Answer at the Exchequer, and so remains a prisoner in Edmundsbury. Richard White sued by Augustine Gobbit priest, for the value of two pounds ten shillings for tythes, for which they took away three cows worth twelve pounds. Tho. Bond being a Souldier in the Garrison at Langardforld-fort, had his corn taken away off his ground by a Souldier which the priest hired to do so, contrary to the Law. Geo. Sherwine is prisoner at Melton in Suffolk, and hath been long, because he could not pay tythes. Arthur Gorroud was not suffered to make his appearance accor∣ding to the writ, but was cast into prison at Ipswich, and there re∣mains, not onely without the transgression of a Law, but also contrary to the Law. And other two is in prison at Ipswich for deny∣ing tythes. NORFOLK. Richard Cousius for tythes at the suit of Tho. VVorts priest of Be∣ningham, for the value of one pound eight shillings, took two Hor∣ses, and being not satisfied, the Constable came again, and took the clothes off a Bed, a covering, blankets and sheet, two pillowes, and brought them to the house where the priest was; but the priest being not yet satisfied with two horses, and bed-clothes, came again the third time, and took another bed-clothes where upon the chil∣dren lay, a Covering, two Blankets, and a paire of Sheetes, one boulster, and bid the constable take notice that he took them in his Lord Protectors Name; and he carryed them where the priest was; so for the value of one pound eight shillings, they tooke away goods worth eight pounds. Thomas Palmer at the suite of the same priest for tythes of the va∣lue of four pounds thirteen shillings demanded as due, had taken from him four horses worth more then twelve pounds. George Howles of Glaptan in the county of Suffolk, was sub∣poened up to London by Richard Rogers, Priest of the same town, for eight pence tythes, and the said George's wife would have agreed with the priest, and he said he would not take under nineteen shil∣lings, and she consented to have given him nineteen shillings; then he said he would not take it unless she would set her hand to give him nineteen shillings every yeer; and so denying his unreasonable de∣mands,
the said George came up to London to make his appearance according to the Subpoena. Christopher Bisbrown for tythes which was claimed as due, eleven shillings, they took an Ox worth three pounds five shillings, and re∣stored nothing. Again for the tythe claimed to be due, which came to one pound thirteen shillings, they took away a Yoke of Steers, worth three∣pounds, seven shillings and six pence. CHESHIRE. Great Budworth Parish; Ephraim Elcock Priest. Thomas Buckley for tythes to the value of twelve shillings, had a Horse taken from him for the use of the said Priest, worth four pounds. George Veakin for the value of four pence half penny, which he claimed for smoke and Easter-Reckonings, had one brasse pot ta∣ken worth eight shillings. Likewise George Veakin for the value of six pence, which they∣demanded for two yeers payment to the priest, had Tools taken from him worth seven shillings. Runkorn Parish, William Finmoore Priest. Henry Burtonwood for tythe of the value of five shillings, had one Cow taken from him worth two pounds thirteen shillings four pence, for the use of the said Priest. At another time Henry Burtonwood for tythe-corn to the value of two pounds, one shilling and a penny, had taken from him two Cows and one Heifer which was sold for seven pounds, for the use of the said priest. John Burtonwood for tythe-wool and lamb of the value of eight shillings and three pence, had taken from him two young beasts, which they sold for one pound five shillings. Tho. Boulton for tythe-corn of the value of thirteen shillings, had taken from him Corne worth five pounds, for the use of Hen∣ry Brookes. Sisley Cleaton had taken from her one Warming-Pan worth six shil∣lings, for tythe-Flax, and she had none; being sued at the Law, and cast by a false Oath, for the use of Collonel Brooks. Widow Royle for tythe-corn of the value of one pound three shil∣lings, had taken from her one Cow worth three pounds ten shillings, for the use of Collonel Henry Brooks; likewise she had taken from her one Load of Beans: Likewise she had one Bed-covering taken for Collonel Brooks.
Fradsham Parish. Widow Milner for tythe-corn of the value of two pounds ten shillings, had taken from her one Mare and one Cow worth seven pounds ten shillings. And likewise for tythe-Oats of the value of eleven shillings, had taken from her one Cow worth two pounds, besides she lay in prison seven weeks for the same thing, for the use of the Earl Rivers. Tho. Hill for tythe-corn of the value of one pound ten shillings, for which he suffered fourteen weeks imprisonment, had taken from him five Load of Wheat out of the field worth five pounds; for the use of the Earl Rivers. James Brown for tythe-corn of the value of one pound ten shil∣lings, had goods taken from him worth five pounds thirteen shillings four pence by valuation, for the use of the Earl Rivers. William Sarrat for tythe-corn of the value of one pound six shil∣lings eight pence, had goods taken from him worth five pounds ten shillings, and was in prison for the same seven Weeks. James Brown for tythe of the value of thirteen shillings four pence (according to their own valuation) had taken from him one yoke of Oxen worth seven pounds. Wilinslow Parish; John Brewerton Priest. Tho. Janney for tythe-corn of the value of seven shillings six pence, had taken from him one Mare, out of which they took trebble da∣mage. Tho. Janney for tythe-corn of the value of sixteen shillings six pence, had taken from him for the said priest two young Cows, bet∣ter worth then six pounds. Thomas Janney for tythe-corn of the value of one pound eight shil∣lings, had taken from him by Justice Writs one young Horse worth four pounds. Thomas Potts for tythe-corn for the value of one pound six shillings and eight pence, had taken from him two Heifers which they sold for three pounds ten shillings. John Worthington for tythe-corn of the value of three pounds six shillings, had taken from him one Mare and one young Horse, worth twelve pounds, for the use of the said priest. Thomas Burrows in the parish of Budworth, for tythes of the value of one pound three shillings, had taken from him one Heifer worth three pounds ten shillings. Richard Burges for tythe-corn of the value of nineteen shillings, had taken from him two Kine worth five pounds.
Richard Burges for tythe-corn valued by the priests servants to six∣teen shillings, had taken from him one yong heifer worth two pounds six shillings and eight pence. Lawrence Pearson for tythe of the value of eight shillings, had ta∣ken from him one Horse worth three pounds. Anne Janny of Handford for tythe of the value of thirteen shil∣lings, had taken from her one Cow and one Heifer which were worth six pounds. Most of this cruelty hath been done by Writs from two Iustices, to wit, Tho. Standley, and Tho. Brearton, being servants to this Priests lusts. Moberly Parish, Robert Barlow Priest. Tho. Heale for tythe-corn of the value of fourteen shillings six pence, valued by the priests man, had taken from him one Hei∣fer worth one pound thirteen shillings and four pence. Hugh Stretten for tythe-corn of the value of eleven shillings and six pence, had taken from him two Sacks of Oats worth one pound eight shillings. And the Constable of the town being troubled at it, asked the Priest why he took so much, seeing he professed not to take trebble damage of any; the priest answered him, It cost him so much in Ju∣stices Dinners, and their men. CLARKS Wages, and repairing of STEEPLE∣HOVSES. Thomas Buckley for seven shillings two pence demanded, had taken from him a brasse pot worth ten shillings. Thomas Buckley for seventeen shillings demanded, had taken from him eleven measures of Oats worth one pound two shillings and eight pence. Henry Burtonwood for two shillings demanded, had goods taken worth five shillings. Henry Burtonwood for two shillings six pence, had taken from him four pewter Dishes worth seven shillings. Ell. Boulton for three shillings, had taken from him four pewter Dishes and a Bowle, and one Candle-stick, worth one pound three shillings, which is neer seven times the value, for the House of their God. Widow Royle had taken from her one brasse pan, and one pot, and a Dripping-pan, worth two pounds ten shillings, for repairing of the Steeplehouse at Runkorn.
James Brown for two shillings, had taken from him goods worth six shillings. Thomas Hill for two shillings, had taken from him one pot worth sixteen shillings. And at another time he had one pot taken from him worth six shillings, because he could not pay one shilling. William Sarret because he could not pay two shillings six pence for the repair of the Steeplehouse, had taken from him one pot worth twelve shillings. John for two shillings demanded, had goods taken from him worth five shillings. Thomas Janny for six pence demanded, had goods taken from him worth five shillings. Again the said Janny had taken from him four Joynt-stools worth six shillings eight pence, for repairing of the Steepleplehouse. Thomas Pots for two pence, had taken from him a brass pot and a skimmer worth ten shillings, which is threescore times the da∣mage. Again Tho. Pots for six shillings nine pence demanded, they took from him his Coat, which they sold for one pound. John Worthington for seven shillings demanded, had a brass pan, and two pewter Dishes taken from him, worth one pound. Iohn Worthington at another time had taken from him a paire of Cart-wheels bound with Iron, for repairing the Steeplehouse. Richard Burgges for three shillings demanded, had one brass pan taken worth seventeen shillings. Again Richard Burgges for six shillings, had taken from him a Gun worth ten shillings. Robert Milner for two shillings, had taken from him three pewter dishes worth seven shillings. At another time Robert Milner for two shillings, had a Gun taken from him worth nine shillings. Robert Pearson and his son for two shilling six pence, had taken two pewter dishes worth three shillings four pence. Iames Harrison for two shillings eight pence demanded, which were due to be paid by another man upon their account, had his coat ta∣ken from him. Robert Pearson for three shillings four pence, had taken from him one brass pan worth twelve shillings. Iohn Falkner for one shilling four pence, had goods taken from him worth five shillings. Thomas Lieuzley for six shillings, had taken from him one pot worth sixteen shillings. All these Sums before-mentioned, was taken for repairing of the Steeplehouses.
Concerning Swearing. Thomas Lieuzley because he could not swear, had a Cow taken from him worth two pounds ten shillings, and suffered six weeks and five days imprisonment for the same thing. And likewise seven of these Friends above-mentioned, viz. Tho. Ianny, Tho. Potts, Rich. Burgges, Rob. Milner, Ia. Harrison, and Edw. Elcock, suffered the spoiling of their Goods to the value of eleven pounds ten shillings, for passing to a Meeting but two Miles from their own Houses; and this was done by two Justices, Edw. Hide, and Tho. Stanlay. A true Relation of a part of the sufferings in WALES for tythes. RADNARSHIRE. RIchard Morre for the value of ten shillings, pretended to be due for tythe-corn, by a Warrant from Richard King and Iohn Yardlay, which was executed by Tho. David, Rees David, and Will. Steven, for Edward Looyd tythe-monger, did violently come in∣to Richard Morres ground, and drave away a Cow worth two pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. Again Richard Morre had taken from him for the same thing, one Mare worth three pounds eight shillings. In all, taken for ten shillings, six pounds and four pence, which is twelve times the value of the tythe. And again Hugh ap Iohn, and Will. Stephen, did come violently with one Evan Moras, into Richard Morres field, and carryed away his hard Corn, (what they liked) in the sight of three Witnesses. Iohn Watson, Tho. Watson, Evan Oliver. Witnesses hereof, Margret Watson, a poor Widow, which had no Land but a little piece which was given her upon a Common by her Neighbors; the said Hugh ap Iohn, and Will. Stephen, swore that her tythes was worth one shilling four pence, did take away from her two pewter Dishes worth three shillings four pence. Likewise the aforesaid idle persons, Hugh ap Iohn, and Will. Ste∣phen, did take away from Iohn Pearke for six shilling eight pence pretended to be due, a Colt worth one pound ten shillings.
Likewse the aforesaid idle persons did without a warrant come in∣to Evan Stevens ground, and for four shillings pretended to be due, took away a Mare worth two pounds. Again the said idle persons without a Warrant did go into Oli∣ver Houls ground, and for five shillings pretended due, took away a Heifer which was worth one pound, for the use of the said Loyd a∣bove said. Witnesse, Meredith Evens, and Tho. Watson Likewise the said idle persons went into Iohn Bevandavids ground where he was plowing, and for three shillings four pence pretended to be due, did unyoke one Cow, the best the poor man had for plow∣ing and other uses, among motherlesse children, which same Cow he had bought of the said Loyd, which was worth two pounds, thirteen shillings four pence. Again these five men before-mentioned, were summoned up to appear before the Barons of the Exchequer. Iames Miles summoned to appear at the Exchequer at the suit of Evan Daves. Charles Daves had taken from him for four shillings, pretended due by John Richards of the County of Radnar, a beast worth one pound ten shillings. More sufferings in Cumberland by Richard Hutton Priest of Calbeck. THo. Mark for the value of thirteen shillings six pence, had taken from him by a Justice Writ for tythes, two Oxen and three Kine worth ten pounds, which is above fourteen times the value. William Stalker for the value of nine shillings tythes, had taken from him two Oxen, and two Kine, worth nine pounds, which is twenty times the value. Tho. Buly for fourteen shillings tythes, had taken from him one Cow worth two pounds. Iohn Nickolson for nine shillings tythes, had taken from him one Oxe worth one pound thirteen shillings six pence. Rich. Williamson for five shillings nine pence tythe, had taken from him one Heifer worth one pound fifteen shillings, which was near seven times the value. Iohn Stricket for ten shillings tythes, had taken from him one Cow worth one pound ten shillings, which is three times the value. Mungo Arcock for twelve shillings tythe, had taken from him one Ox worth one pound six shillings eight pence. John Pattison for eight shillings four pence, had taken from him one Cow worth one pound.
Iohn Askue for three shillings ten pence, had taken from him one Cow worth one pound ten shillings, which is above eight times the value. Tho. Askue for three shillings five pence, had goods taken from him worth seven shillings. Iohn Pattison for sixteen shillings eleven pence, tythe, had taken from him seven bushels of Oats, and two bushels of Barley, which was worth one pound five shillings and six pence. Iohn Stricket for sixteen shillings four pence, had taken from him one Cow worth three pounds sixteen shillings eight pence, which was above four times the value. Iohn Askue for fifteen shillings ten pence, had taken from him Barley and Sacks worth two pounds four shillings ten pence. William Stalker for fifteen shillings two pence, had goods taken from him worth one pound four shillings. Iohn Nickolson for eighteen shillings four pence, had taken from him one Cow worth two pounds. Iohn Peacock for one pound five shillings, had taken from him goods worth one pound eighteen shillings. Tho. Buly for thirteen shillings, had taken from him one Cow worth two pounds ten shillings. All these suffered by Richard Hutton Priest, who hath sued four of them up to London by a Subpoena, to appear before the Barons of the Exchequer, to answer for the same thing for which he hath sued them in the County-Court; and this Priest hath summoned to the County-Court at one time twenty three honest people, as followeth. Thomas Bewly, Iohn Nickolson, Iohn Simson, Widow Peccastom, Richard Nickolson, William Pearson, Richard Williamson, Iohn Sowerbee, Hugh Peacock, Tho. Mark, elder. Tho. Mark, yonger. Iohn Stricket. Mungo Arcock, Richard Wilson, William Scot, Iohn Pattison, Tho. Askue, Iohn Askue, elder. Iohn Askue, yong. John Peacock, William Stalker, George Scot, Rich. Scot. All these have suffered by one Priest whom they do not hear. The sum demanded is, ten pounds nine shillings & five pence. The sum taken is, thirty five pounds one shilling & two pence.
Graystock Parish. Richard Peacock had taken from him one Iron pot, three pans, two pewter dishes, worth eighteen shillings, for repairing of Graystock Steeplehouse. Rich. Peacock younger, for repairing of the same House, had ta∣ken from him one pan and three pewter dishes, worth nine shil∣lings. Deacar Parish. Edward Walker of Soulby for the value of sixteene shillings six pence, pretended as due for tythes, had taken from him twenty Wea∣ther-sheep worth two pounds thirteen shillings four pence. Edw. Walker for the value of six pence for Clarks wages, had taken from him two pewter Dishes worth five shillings, by Tho. Robinson, Clark. John Mark for the value of three shillings four pence for the re∣pairing of the Steeplehouse, had Goods taken from him worth thirteen shillings. John Todhunter for the value of six shillings eight pence, had ta∣ken from him one pot and two pans, worth twelve shillings and six pence. Iohn Mark because he could not swear, was fined six shillings eight pence. Matthew Robinson for the value of three pounds eight shillings eight pence, as the Farmers themselves did value, and were the wit∣nesses in their own cases, contrary to Law, had taken from him four Oxen, and they sold them for twelve pounds two shillings and six pence. Again this said Matthew Robinson being coming from the Market, Richard Lingard one of the murtherous Priests did strive to ride over him in the high-way, and caused one that was with him to take away his hat from him, and went away with it, and never gave him it again, and so caused Matthew Robinson to go bare-headed home, which is theft according to the Law. John Head for two shillings ten pence, pretended as due for tythe, had taken from him one Iron pot and two pewter dishes worth ele∣ven shillings. John Gill for the value of two pounds ten shillings demanded as due, had taken from him four beasts worth six pounds. Henry Johnson for tythe of the value of one pound one shilling, had taken from him one Cow and Calf worth three pounds two shil∣lings.
Richard Fawcet for the value of one pound one shilling, had ta∣ken from him two beasts worth four pounds. Iohn Fearon for the value of one pound four shillings and four pence, had taken from him two Kine worth five pounds. Iohn Dickson had taken from him one tythe-Hen for the use of the Priest. Christopher Burket for the value of one pound five shillings, had taken from him two Beasts worth three pounds fifteen shillings. A tax for the Parish-Church, so called, Goods distrained, as followeth. Robert Swift for two shillings eight pence, had goods taken worth ten shillings. Tho. Farnworth for three shillings five pence, had goods taken worth six shillings. Tho. Farnworth Senior, for six pence, had goods taken worth four shillings six pence. Ioan Lamber for four shillings eight pence, had goods taken worth eight shillings. Ben. Nickolson for two shillings four pence, had goods taken worth eight shillings. Will. Bell for four pence, had goods taken worth four shillings. For tythes for the Priest of Tixal. Robert Swift for fifteen shillings, had goods taken worth one pound eighteen shillings. Joane Lambart for eight shillings, had goods taken worth one pound ten shillings, Ben. Nickolson for four shillings, had goods taken worth sixteen shillings. Isaac Smith for one pound, had goods taken worth three pounds. And again, for one pound ten shillings, had good taken worth three pounds. The total sum demanded, 13 l. 17 s. 1 d The total sum recovered, 26 l. 13 s. 00.
More in ESSEX. Giffine Pery for the value of two pounds ten shillings tythes, had taken from him five Cows worth eighteen pounds. Moses Davie for the value of six pounds, had taken from him four Mares and sixteen Ewes, worth above twenty eight pounds. Iohn Crosier for the value of five pounds, had taken from him for the Earl of Warwick six Cows, and a Bull, and a Heifer, which was worth twenty three pounds. And the said John Crosier and Moses Davie is carryed to prison for tythes, notwithstanding all these goods was taken away. Stephen Davy, Sam. Skillingham, Iohn Child, are sued for tythes in the Vpper-bench. Iohn Chopper sued for tythes at the Exchequer.
An Abstract of the sufferings of the innocent mentioned in this Book, for not paying Tythes, for not repairing Steeplehouses, and not swear∣ing, which gives a brief view of the sadness of their sufferings, and weight of their op∣pressions. CAMBRIDGESHIRE.   Value of tythes demanded. Value of goods taken.   l. s. d. l. s. d. RObert Letchworth for 01 00 00 05 00 00 Stephen Wilson for 00 12 0 02 10 00 William Crane for 00 06 00 00 11 06 Robert Crabb for 00 01 01 00 07 00 Clement Crabb for 00 07 06 01 00 00 Henry Place for 00 01 06 00 03 00 Iohn Peachy for 00 12 00 02 00 00 Sam. Cater for 00 00 10 00 05 00 Robert Asplan for 00 11 06 01 10 00 Tho. Dorman for 00 01 08 00 06 08 Will. Iohnson for 00 09 10 01 13 00 Robert Asplan for 03 15 00 14 00 00 Robert Crabb for 00 01 10 00 04 10 Henry Place for 00 00 05 00 00 10 Thomas Hawks for 00 00 04 00 04 00 John Love for 00 01 08 00 10 08 Robert Asplan for 00 01 04 00 05 00 Will. Grounds for 00 02 01 00 10 00 ESSEX. Robert Nicholl for 19 00 00 50 00 00 Robert Adams for 00 16 00 05 10 00 GLOCESTERSHIRE. William Wooley for 00 00 00 05 00 00 John Cathaby for 00 08 00 01 10 00 NORFOLK. Villiam Barker for 01 06 00 06 00 00 Richard Cosin for 01 10 00 03 10 00 Benjamin Lynes for 01 10 00 04 00 00 SVFFOLK. Nichol. VVhite for 01 10 00 12 00 00
Antho. Kittel for 00 10 00 02 00 00 KENT. VVilliam Beane for 00 00 00 00 13 04 WILTSHIRE. John Jay for 03 04 00 12 00 00 Roger Haukins for 00 10 00 02 10 00 Robert Smart for 00 18 00 03 00 00 VVill. Player for 00 09 00 02 10 00 Yorkshire, Liverton. Robert Parret for 02 00 00 05 10 00 The same man for 00 00 00 00 16 00 The same man for 00 00 05 00 02 00 William Tiplady for 02 06 08 05 04 04 The same for 02 06 08 08 00 00 Robert Tilady for 04 00 10 16 19 10 Nichol. Tiplady for 01 10 00 03 05 04 Robert Stonehouse for 03 00 05 14 12 00 James Stonehouse for 00 00 05 00 03 00 Rowland Thorpe for 00 00 00 00 05 00 Eliz. Carcroft for 00 00 02 00 01 08 Eastriding. Thomas Leeming for 00 09 00 01 13 04 Thomas Leeming for 02 02 00 07 00 00 More for 00 14 00 03 00 00 Marmaduke Stephenson for 00 02 00 01 00 00 Iohn Wilson for 00 06 10 01 10 00 More for 02 04 11 06 10 00 Walter Hall for 02 11 00 10 00 00 Iohn Cook for 00 15 00 04 10 00 Christopher Hurdsman for 00 01 03 02 00 00 Christopher Hutton for 00 01 08 00 04 00 James Turner for 00 05 10 02 15 00 Christopher Wilson for 00 03 04 00 10 00 Henry Wilson for 00 00 10 00 04 06 Iohn Smith for 02 03 02 04 14 04 Alexander Harland for 00 03 00 03 02 00 Christopher VValkington for 00 00 06 00 01 06 VVilliam Loftus for 00 12 00 05 00 00 More for 00 18 07 03 00 00 VVilliam Iackson for 00 10 00 00 16 00 Millison Legg for 00 05 00 00 08 00 Eliz. VVhitehead for 00 01 06 00 11 00
Thomas Tanfield for 00 01 00 00 07 00 Iohn Nicholson for 00 08 00 09 00 00 Richard Hawcock for 02 05 00 14 00 00 John Bird for 00 01 00 03 00 00 Marmaduke Storr for 00 03 00 02 00 00 Westmorland. William Hebson for 02 11 00 08 06 08 William Holme for 01 14 08 04 15 00 Rowland Smith for 00 06 00 01 06 08 Richard Holme for 01 07 00 03 04 00 Agnes Teasdell for 01 11 00 05 00 00 Edw. Robinson for 00 16 09 04 06 08 Richard Smith for 00 08 06 01 00 00 John Sutton for 01 04 00 03 10 00 John Cam for 01 08 06 03 00 00 More for 01 09 00 04 00 00 Mabel Camme for 00 00 08 00 08 00 Cumberland. Richard Robinson for 01 08 00 04 00 00 Widow Ayket for 01 08 00 04 00 00 Iohn Wilkinson for 00 02 06 03 00 00 Thomas Potter for 02 00 00 06 00 00 Iohn Pattison for 00 03 00 00 08 09 Thomas Wilson, alias Stamper for 00 12 00 02 00 00 Hugh Tickell for 00 06 04 01 01 07 Iohn VVilson for 00 07 00 01 10 00 Christopher Scot for 00 19 00 02 00 00 Anthony Tickell for 00 04 00 00 14 00 Iohn Ardell for 00 15 00 01 07 00 Iohn Bounskill for 00 02 08 00 07 00 VVilliam Bowman for 00 09 00 00 16 00 Elinor Dixon for 00 01 06 00 09 00 John Hodgson for 00 02 00 00 04 07 Lancelot Feron for 00 16 03 00 18 00 Widow Ayket for 00 00 10 00 04 00 Henry Lowthet for 00 03 04 00 06 08
Sufferings for not swearing. ISLE of ELY.   l. s. d. WIlliam Grounds 5 0 0 YORKSHIRE. Robert Parret 1 8 0 Robert Stonehouse 0 10 0 Rowland Thorp 0 5 0 Iohn Wilson 0 6 8 CUMBERLAND. Iohn Fell 0 8 0 Thomas Fell 0 8 4 Iohn Caipe 0 9 6 Iohn Senhouse 1 10 0 Henry Louthaite 0 16 0 Iohn Richardson 0 11 0   11 12 6 Edmond Hunter 4 0 0 The total summe demanded is, 95 16 10 The total summe recovered is, 366 16 9 Which is almost four times the full value, viz. Fourfold damage. More sufferings, as followeth. SVFFOLK.   Value of tythes demanded. Value of goods taken.   l. s. d. l. s. d. Ioseph Lawrance for 2 14 0 10 0 0 Iames Norton for 1 5 0 03 18 0 Iohn Frier for 0 13 4 03 6 0 Again, James Nortons Farme being but 17 l. 16 s. 6 d. Rent, for tythes of which Farm had taken from him— 7 10 0      
John Frier, his Farm being but 18 l. 8 s. hath taken from him for the tythe of it, 6 l. 10 s.             Richard White for 02 10 00 12 00 00 NORFOLK. Richard Cousine for 01 08 00 08 00 00 Thomas Palmer for 04 13 00 12 00 00 SOMMERSET. Henry Gundry for 00 10 11 00 15 06 Jasper att for 00 08 09 01 00 00 John Pittman for 00 06 03 00 12 00 Edward Taylor for 00 01 06 00 06 08 Agnes Bratt for 00 01 06 00 03 04 John Vando for 00 17 10 01 17 10 John Coll for 00 01 06 00 06 00 Thomas Loscomb for 00 11 08 01 10 00 An Abstract of some of the sufferings of the Peo∣ple of God in scorn called QUAKERS for tythes, and other things mentioned in another Book formerly printed. Graystock Parish, Richard Gilpin Priest.   Value of tythes demanded. Value of goods taken.   l. s. d. l. s. d. RIchard Peacock for 00 08 04 02 06 08 Iohn Slee for 00 06 00 00 16 00 The same for 00 14 00 01 02 06 Margret Slee, Widow, And Rich. her sonne. for 00 00 00 00 18 00 Agnes Buckbarrow, Thomas Buckbarrow, Richard Buckbarrow, for 00 16 00 01 16 00 John Mark for 00 06 00 00 11 00 The same for 01 03 00 01 10 00 Iohn Todhunter for 00 01 10 00 10 00 The same for 00 04 00 00 18 00 Iohn Slee for 00 08 00 00 14 00 Iohn Bewley for 00 19 00 04 10 00 Iohn Sowerby for 00 06 00 00 12 00
John Vdal for 00 04 00 00 13 08 Richard Peacock for 01 00 04 02 00 00 Tho. Barker for 00 14 02 02 00 00 John Goodhowse for 00 09 00 02 00 00 Caldbeck Parish, Richard Hutton Priest. William Stalker for 00 09 00 08 10 00 Richard Williamson for 00 05 09 01 15 00 Richard Nicholson for 00 10 00 02 10 00 John Nicholson for 00 09 00 01 13 04 Thomas Bewley for 00 14 00 02 00 00 Iohn Stricket for 00 10 00 01 10 00 Mungo Arcock for 00 10 00 01 06 08 John Pattison for 00 08 04 01 00 00 John Askue for 00 03 10 01 10 00 John Bewley for 00 19 00 02 10 00 Richard Banks for 00 10 00 01 01 00 Thomas Mark for 00 13 00 10 00 00 Bolon Parish, John Forward Priest. Thomas Porter for 00 06 08 02 13 04 John Wilkinson for 00 04 00 02 10 00 John Pattison for 00 06 00 01 18 00 John Wilkinson for 00 11 00 02 00 00 Vidal Parish, Henry Fallowseild priest. VVilliam Caipe for 01 05 10 03 00 00 Thomas Fell for 00 10 04 02 05 00 John Caipe for 00 05 00 00 13 00 Matthew Caipe for 00 17 00 03 00 00 Thomas Fell for 00 16 00 01 10 00 John Fell, elder, for 01 03 00 04 00 00 Thomas Fell for 00 10 00 01 10 00 John Caipe for 00 12 08 01 04 00 George Scott for 00 09 00 00 13 04 Skelton Parish, George Tiball Priest. Thomas Harrison for 00 09 01 01 01 06 John Banke for 00 18 00 01 06 08 Priest Jackson of Hutton Richard Ireland for 00 08 00 02 19 00 The called Lady Fletcher. Mungo Bewley for 00 14 00 03 00 00 James Steward, priest of Westward: Henry Louthaite for 00 01 00 00 04 00
Priest Nicholls of Aicton. James Barne for 00 12 00 01 05 00 Priest Pattison of Kirkbride. Matthew Kirkbride for 00 01 00 00 12 00 Peter Head for 00 12 00 03 00 00 For Sir George Fletcher, so called. Widow Head for 01 02 00 06 10 00 Mungo VVilson for 00 07 00 02 00 00 Rich. Whiney for 00 07 00 01 17 00 William Allison for 00 07 00 01 16 00 Antho. Scrugham for 00 03 04 01 04 00 James VVilson for 01 02 00 06 10 00 Jo. Salkeld of Threpland. Alex. Stamper for 02 00 00 05 00 00 Tho Walker for 02 00 00 20 00 00 Leo. Fisher for 00 05 00 01 00 00 Iohn Fell for 00 00 07 00 05 00 Geo. Rothery for 00 01 09 00 06 00 Priest Egglesfeild of Plumland. John Iredell for 00 06 08 01 00 00 William Bowman for 00 16 00 02 16 04 Tho. Head for 01 04 00 10 00 00 William Pearson for 00 02 08 03 00 00 The same for 00 03 00 01 02 00 John Richardson for 00 12 00 02 05 00 Graystock Parish, another yeer for priest Gilpin. Iohn Slee for 00 18 00 02 00 00 The same for 00 01 00 00 10 00 10. Mark, elder, for 00 17 00 04 00 00 10. Mark, younger, for 01 01 04 02 18 04 John Sowerby for 00 04 00 00 10 06 GRAYSTOCK. John Todhunter for 00 09 11 01 00 00 VVidow Buckbarrow and her Sons for 00 18 0 02 05 00 Iohn Bewley for 00 19 0 02 05 00 VVidow Slee, & Rich. Slee for 00 11 02 01 08 00 Thomas Slee for 00 07 00 01 00 00 Cuthbert Hodgson for 00 14 00 01 15 00 Iohn, Sowerby for 00 14 00 04 00 00 Caldbeck parish. John Strickes for 00 16 00 02 10 00 Rich. Wilson for 00 01 00 00 07 00
Thomas Haskin for 00 02 04 00 06 08 Iohn Haskin for 00 12 07 02 00 00 Iohn Peacock for 01 02 02 01 17 00 George Scot for 00 15 00 00 18 08 Iohn Relfe for 00 05 03 01 10 00 William Stalker for 00 08 03 01 00 00 Thomas Mark for 01 02 04 02 14 00 Iohn Nicholson for 00 12 08 02 00 00 Richard Scot for 00 04 10 00 07 00 VVidow Preistman for 00 08 03 01 00 03 Thomas Bewley for 01 08 06 03 06 00 Thomas Rickaby for 00 00 05 00 02 06 Brigham parish. William Richardson for 01 10 04 03 10 00 Henry Iohnson for 00 13 09 02 13 04 John Gill for 00 13 04 02 10 00 Cockermouth parish. Richard Nucomb for 00 03 06 02 13 04 Deane parish. Isabel Head, VVidow, for 01 04 00 11 00 00 Peter Head for 00 12 00 04 00 00 Christopher Manser for 01 04 10 05 00 00 Caldbeck parish, Richard Hutton priest. Thomas Mark for 00 17 00 02 14 00 The same for 00 16 00 08 00 00 John Pattison for 00 16 11 01 05 06 Richard Scot for 00 04 04 00 07 04 Iohn Stricket for 00 16 04 03 06 08 Thomas Haskin for 00 03 05 00 07 00 Iohn Haskin, elder, for 00 15 02 02 04 10 William Stalker for 00 15 02 01 04 00 Iohn Nicholson for 00 13 04 02 00 00 Iohn Peacock for 01 00 00 01 10 06 Bolton parish. John Pattison for 01 02 00 02 10 00 John Wilkinson for 00 04 08 02 15 00 THRE PLAND. Thomas Walker for 01 03 00 10 00 00 Richard Robinson for 01 10 00 20 00 00 YORKSHIRE. Iames Gurnell for 00 05 10 01 07 06 Robert Everat for 01 11 00 03 00 00 Iohn Iayher for 00 06 06 00 16 04 Alexander Harland for 00 03 00 00 15 00 William Sharpe for 00 16 00 03 06 08 Matthew Maire for 00 14 00 05 00 00
Thomas Agar for 00 01 01 04 17 00 William Thorpe for 00 01 01 00 15 06 Robert Bell for 00 00 07 00 16 00 George Matthew for 00 02 00 00 19 00 Edward Guy for 00 02 09 00 13 08 Richard Guy for 00 06 04 01 07 00 George Bland for 00 00 02 00 16 00 More for 00 00 08 00 15 00 Richard Wickinton for 01 14 08 10 00 00 John Wilson for 03 10 00 08 15 00 Walter Hall for 01 13 00 07 00 00 Alexander Harland for 03 10 00 08 10 00 Michael Simpson for the tythe of Land which he farmed for 42 l. per an.       54 00 00 William Pearson for 10 00 00 33 06 08 Christopher Hutton for 04 12 06 07 00 00 Jeffrey Nicholson for 01 14 00 08 00 00 Richard Simpson for 00 00 01 00 15 00 Iohn Goodrick for 00 00 02 00 15 00 Iohn Pickering for the tythe of four Calves.       00 04 11 Iames Cookeson for 00 70 09 02 00 00 William Peart for 01 06 08 03 00 00 Valentine Iohnson for 00 05 08 02 00 00 Josias Cookeson for 00 12 09 02 00 00 Thomas Scot for 00 11 06 06 00 00 Thomas Johnson for 01 14 00 02 12 00 Iohn Walker for 00 18 04 01 05 00 Thomas Thurnham for 00 16 00 01 03 00 Richard Thomlinson for 00 01 06 05 00 00 Yorkshire, Sedberge, and thereabouts. Thomas Aldam for 14 12 00 71 00 00 Thomas Blaikeling for 01 00 03 03 10 00 Edward Atkinson for 00 09 03 04 00 00 Richard Speight for 00 05 11 03 00 00 Antho. Willan for 00 15 00 03 00 00 Tho. Willan for 00 10 03 04 00 00 George Maison for 00 05 00 02 13 04 Thomas Bankes for 00 19 06 04 00 00
Caike parish, Iames Williamson priest.   Value of tythe demanded. Value of goods taken.   l. s. d. l. s. d. Iosias Cookeson for 00 00 0 00 10 07 Iames Cookeson for 00 00 1 00 10 10 Iohn Walker for 00 01 00 00 11 00 Tho. Iohnson for 00 04 0 00 14 08 Westmorland, Jo. Vaux, priest of great Musgrave. Edmond Whitwell for 00 00 06 02 18 04 John Sutton for 01 01 00 06 13 04 John Wilkinson for 01 11 00 20 00 00 Iohn Wilkinson for 01 10 00 05 00 00 Jo. Fallowfeild for 00 15 00 05 00 00 Henry Laycock for 00 02 00 00 18 00 Iohn Thompson for 00 16 00 02 10 00 VVilliam Hebson for 03 09 04 07 00 00 William Holme for 01 03 00 02 04 00 Thomas Alexander for 00 01 08 00 05 00 Iohn Smith for 00 04 06 00 08 00 Thomas VVharton for 00 00 06 00 02 00 Henry Laycock for 01 06 00 03 00 00 More for 00 02 00 01 00 00 Richard Smith for 00 05 06 00 17 00 John Wilkinson for 00 09 03 01 02 00 Alice Wilson for 00 08 00 00 16 00 Edmond VVhitwell for 00 04 06 00 09 00 Agnes Tarne for 00 10 00 01 04 00 Musgrave Parish. Iohn VVilliamson for 00 13 00 0 00 00 His son for 01 10 00 20 00 00 LANCASHIRE. Richard Ashburner for 01 00 00 02 18 04 More for 01 03 04 04 00 00 VVilliam Greenbanke for 06 00 00 22 00 00 Alice VVoodhead for 01 01 00 05 00 00 DVRHAM. Iohn Richmond for 08 00 00 40 00 00
Clarks VVages, and repair of Steeplehouses.   l. s. d. l. s. d. RIchard Peacock for 00 01 00 00 01 06 Thomas Barker for 00 00 06 00 01 00 Iohn Marke for 00 00 06 00 01 00 Iohn Dixon for 00 10 00 00 16 00 Tho. Fletcher for 00 00 04 00 01 00 Iohn Tison for 00 00 04 00 00 09 Iohn Pattison for 00 00 00 00 05 06 James Wilson 00 07 00       Mungo Wilson 00 05 00       Richard Whiney 00 03 00       Anthony Scrugham 00 02 03       William Iackson 00 09 00       More Sufferings for not swearing.   l. s. d. EDward Peacock 01 10 00 Michael Nicholson 00 17 00 William Pearson 02 00 00 More 03 00 00 Matthew Kirkbride 01 17 00 Iohn Peacock 01 10 00 Iohn Stainton 01 06 00 Hugh Tickell 00 14 00 Thomas Pyle 00 10 00 Christopher Manser 03 10 00 William Stamper 03 10 00 Iohn Fell 00 05 00 Thomas Fell 00 06 08 Iohn Caipe 00 04 00 Thomas Fletcher 01 11 04 The same 00 06 08 The same 01 10 00 Iohn Dixon 00 16 00 George Burden 00 13 00
CHESHIRE.   Value of tythes demanded. Value of goods taken.   l. s. d. l. s. d. Great Budworth parish. Thomas Buckley for 00 12 00 04 00 00 George Veakine for 00 00 04 00 08 00 George Veakine for 00 0 06 00 07 00 Runkorn Parish. Henry Burtonwood for 00 05 00 02 15 04 Henry Burtonwood for 02 01 01 07 00 00 John Burtonwood for 00 08 03 01 05 00 Tho. Boulton for 00 13 00 05 00 00 Sisley Cleaton for 00 00 00 00 06 00 Widow Royle for 01 03 00 03 10 00 Frodsome parish. Widow Milner for 02 07 00 07 10 00 Widow Milner for 00 11 00 02 00 00 Thomas Hill for 01 10 00 05 00 00 James Brown for 01 10 00 05 13 04 William Sarret for 01 06 08 05 10 00 James Brown for 00 13 04 07 00 00 Wilinslow parish. Tho. Janney for 00 07 06 01 02 06 Tho. Janney for 00 16 06 06 00 00 Tho. Janney for 01 08 00 04 00 00 Tho. Potts for 01 06 08 03 10 00 John Worthington for 03 06 00 12 00 00 Thomas Burrowes for 01 03 00 03 10 00 Richard Burgges for 00 19 00 05 00 00 Richard Burgges for 00 16 00 02 06 08 Lawrance Pearson for 00 08 00 03 00 00 Anne Janney for 00 13 00 06 00 00 Mobberley parish. Thomas Heale for 00 14 06 01 13 04 Hugh Strettle for 00 11 06 01 08 00
For repairing STEEPLEHOVSES.   l. s. d. l. s. d. THo. Buckley for 00 07 02 00 10 00 Tho. Buckley for 00 17 00 01 02 08 Henry Burtonwood for 00 04 06 00 12 00 Ellihu Boulton for 00 03 00 01 03 00 Widow Royle for 00 10 00 02 10 00 James Brown for 00 02 00 00 06 00 Thomas Hill for 00 02 00 00 16 00 Thomas Hill for 00 01 00 00 06 00 William Sarret for 00 02 06 00 12 00 John Burtonwood for 00 02 00 00 05 00 Thomas Janney for 00 00 06 00 11 08 Thomas Pots for 00 00 02 00 10 00 Thomas Pots for 00 06 09 01 00 00 Tho. Worthington for 00 07 00 01 00 00 Richard Burges for 00 09 00 01 07 00 Robert Miller for 00 02 00 00 07 00 Robert Miller for 00 02 00 00 09 00 Robert Pearson for 00 02 06 00 03 04 James Harrison for 00 02 08 00 10 00 Robert Pearson for 00 03 04 00 12 00 John Falkner for 00 01 04 00 05 00 Tho. Lieuzley for 00 06 00 00 16 00   02 07 09 21 18 00 Concerning swearing. Tho. Lieuzley 02 10 00 Thomas Janney, Thomas Potts, Richard Burges, Robert Miller, James Harrison, Edward Allcock, 11 00 00
VVALES.   Value of tythes demanded. Value of goods taken.   l. s. d. l. s. d. RIchard Morre for 00 10 00 06 00 00 Margret Waison for 00 01 04 00 03 04 Iohn Pearke for 00 06 08 01 10 00 Evan Stevans for 00 04 00 02 00 00 Oliver Hould for 00 05 00 01 00 00 John Bevan-david for 00 03 04 02 13 04 Charles Davise for 00 04 00 01 10 00   01 14 04 14 16 08 The summe demandedis, 01 14 04       The summe recovered is, 14 16 08       VVhich is fourteen times the value. The total summe of all demanded, 373 l. 12 s. 00 The total summe recovered, 1568 l. 14 s. 8 d.
More sufferings in Lancashire by Thomas Show Priest of the Parish of Aldingham. RIchard Myers for the value of three pounds tythe, demanded as due to Priest Show, was by a Writ cast into prison, & there remain∣ed prisoner two years and five months, and in that time of imprison∣ment for the same thing was sued up to London to answer it, and thereupon he had liberty from the Sheriff to go to make his appear∣ance; & after that he had made his appearance at London, & was freed from his imprisonment by Order, he was again summoned to appear at the Assise at Lancaster, to answer to the same thing; & the priest got a Judgement against him, and for the value of three pounds, took a∣way from him five Beasts worth fifteen pounds; and the Bailiff for six pence (which he demanded as due for warning him to the Sessions) took from him a pan worth ten shillings. So the Priests and Bailiffs, and all Covetous Oppressors agree in causing the harmless to suffer, who ows no man any thing but love. Richard Ashburner for two pounds one shilling and three pence, had taken from him a Horse and a Cow worth six pounds eighteen shillings four pence; and when they had taken this, they said they wanted seven shillings three pence of their sum, and for that the priest Show caused the body of Richard Ashburner to be taken within ten dayes after, and to be put in close prison, and there to be kept until he dyed. Thomas Fell for one pound four shillings, had taken from him two Horses worth four pounds. Iames Chambers for the value of one pound six shillings eight pence, had taken from him a Horse worth four pounds. William Simpson for the value of seventeen shillings, had taken from him a Mare worth four pounds, for the priests use. Again Thomas Fell by the same priest had his Corn taken away off his ground; for the priests servants carries peoples corn away up∣on their backs, and breaks down their Hedges and Walls like thieves, and yet is not punished; and when they had taken away his Corn off his ground, they took from him a young Oxe worth two pounds se∣ven shillings. Again, Tho. Fell had three Sheepe taken from him for the same priest, for the like things.
Edm. Cleoeton (for three shillings six pence demanded as due for tythes) was summoned to answer at Lancaster, where he cast the priest; and the priest did again renew the suit, and by the Oath of a false Witness, one Symond Mount, who did swear to that which he did not see, as was confessed in the Court afterwards; upon which Evan Walls Steward of the County-Court, gave out a Iudgement for ten shillings six pence, for which they took a Mare worth six pounds. So here is six pounds taken for three shillings six pence tythe, which is thirty four times the value, and more. Cartmal Parish. Iames Taylor, Tho. Atkinson, Richard Britten, Richard Roper, Iohn Barrow, Alexander Rigge, Lawrance Newton, George Garnet, William Pull, for denying to pay tythes, was sued up to answer in the Com∣mon-Pleas, in the year 1655. where they appeared to bear a true wit∣ness for the Lord against them, and their adversarie not bringing in his Bill against them, was by the Court ordered to pay them four pounds ten shillings, which was brought unto them▪ but they denyed his money, that so their innocent and clean lives might stand a wit∣nesse against their Enemies cruelty. But again the next Term their E∣nemy (Tho. Priston of Houlcar, Esq) sued them again into the Ex∣chequer, and all, excepting Rich. Roper, for the same thing, where they did appear to give their testimony against tythes, and also against his lying Declaration against them; but they were not permitted to give in their true testimony except they would swear, and so transgress the command of Christ, who saith, Swear not at all. And again for the same tythes in the yeer 1656. they were sued in the Court in the said Parish of Cartmal, and there proceeded against them; and from James Taylor took a Horse, and from Richard Brittan another Horse, and apprehended the bodies of Thomas Atkinson and Iohn Barrow, by a Warrant from Ioh. Starkey, and so was cast into prison, and when they were in prison, they took away a cow from Iohn Barrow; so that he was both imprisoned, and had his goods taken for the same thing. Mighaels Parish. VVilliam Brewer for the value of three shillings tythe, had taken from him goods worth one pound three shillings. Kellat Parish. Thomas Leaper for denying to pay tythes, was sued at the County-Court at Lancaster, by William Atkinson, who brought four Witnes∣ses
to swear for him, one of which was Priest Jacques, who was the first priest that swore against the truth, and the Ministers of it in its appearance in Lancashire, and hath continued in swearing and lying against the truth ever since, and so (as the Scripture saith of evil men) is grown worse and worse and by his Oath, and the rest that joyned with him in the Devils work, viz. to swear, and that falsly, have cau∣sed to be taken from the said Thomas Leaper, four beasts worth four∣teen pounds, and the value of the tythes was but four pounds four shillings. Robert Walker, Tho. Commin, Geo. Styth, Tho. Green, Richard Wea∣ver, was all fined ten shillings a piece at a Court holden at Lancaster, by the Mayor and Bailiffs, because they could not swear, and two of the first had goods taken from them worth one pound ten shillings; And thus may all see how they make havock of the Church. Tho. Pearson for tythe of the value of one pound thirteen shillings four pence, had taken from him a Cow worth four pounds. And again the said Tho. Pearson was summoned to the Court at Kendall by William Garnet, who brought with him a man for a wit∣ness, which swore that Tho. Pearson had four acres of Corn that year, but afterwards confessed in the open Court that he had sworn falsly, and that T. P. had but two acres and a half; yet notwithstand∣ing Iohn Archer, and Tho. Brathwaite, called Iustices, gave forth a Iudgement to distrain his goods upon this false evidence. Edw. Harrison for the value of one pound seventeen shillings, had taken from him a Horse and forniture worth six pounds ten shil∣lings. Again the said Edward for tythe of the value of sixteen shillings, had taken from him a Horse worth foure pounds seven shil∣lings. Croswhaite Parish. Iohn Pearson for tythes of the value of two shillings, had goods ta∣ken from him worth nine shillings, for the priests use Tho. Pearson had goods taken from him by the same priest, worth seven shillings, and they did not tell him what they demanded, nor by what Authority they took his goods. VVill. Seaman summoned to a Court at Brumswell in Suffolk, and because he could not swear, had a Mare taken from him worth six pounds, by Order from Iohn Sayer Steward of the Court. Saul when he was a persecutor, never made such havock of the Churches as these priests do, nor any that we read of did ever so spoil the Saints Goods as these have done; but this is a time in which the Lord is making them manifest unto all men, as the Scripture saith.
The Priests and Teachers hath told people, and perswaded them, and made them believe they did not make it their end to teach for money and for tythes, for Easter-Reckonings and Midsummer-Dues; but now they have shewed themselves to all sorts of people, and made manifest themselves to the whole Nation that that is their end, for preaching for tythes, for money, for Easter-reckonings, Midsummer-dues, and Offerings; they have long laid covered under that cover∣ing, and covered themselves with that, in saying that that was not their end; but now have they declared it in the Courts of the Nation in haling people before Magistrates, and summoning them up to their Courts a hundred or two hundred miles, and casting them into pri∣son for tythes and maintenance till death; yea, such as they do not preach to, and do no work for, which the like was never heard of a∣mongst the false prophets and false apostles since the world began, driveing away poor mens Cattel, distraining their goods, taking a∣way their Horses, and Oxen, and Plow-geere, with which they should plow the Land, and their Cows which should give their children milk, many having not a Cow left to give their poor children milk for sustenance; and some have had their barns broken open, and have had their Corn thresht out, and made spoil on at the Priests pleasure; and others that have had something to kill for the use of their Fami∣lies, which the priests have taken away also at their pleasure, and made havock of; and such as have a better Horse, Bullock or Cow then ordinary for their own use, such the priests makes choice of for their spoil, and take them from people whom they do no work for, at their pleasure, that the good savor is lost, and their profession and religion is become loath some to all the sober and moderate people that fears God; that the Teachers of the Nation are become the grea∣test troublers of the people in the Courts of the Nation, and the greatest casters into prison in the Nation for their bellies and mainte∣nance, such as they do no work for, or for speaking to them; and there is but a few Magistrates in the Nation that truly fears God, that are brought to take notice of these things and doings; the Lord open their eyes and understandings that they may see it, and themselves; for the cry of the oppressed hath long been in our Land; so unlike the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, have the Teachers of this Nation been, that they have turned against them that have been sound in the life of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles Doctrine. THE END.
