H3274 11889345 50405
A HUE and CRY after Dr. T. O. O Yes! O Yes! O Yes! IF there be any Man, Woman, or Child in City, Town, or Countrey, that can tell Tale or Tidings of a Salamanca Doctor, stolen, stray'd, banish'd or kidnapp'd out of White-hall on Tuesday last. His marks are as followeth; The off Leg behind something shorter than the other, and cloven Foot on the nether side; His Face Rain-bow-colour, and the rest of his Body black: Two slouching Ears, ready to be cropp'd the next Spring, if they do not drop off before; His Mouth is in the middle of his Face, exactly between the upper part of his Forehead and the lower part of his Chin; He hath a short Neck, which makes him defie the Pillory; A thin Chin, and somewhat sharp, bending up almost to his Nose; He hath few or no Teeth on the upper Jaw, but bites with his Tongue; His voice something resembles that of the Guinney-Pigs; His Habit is covered with a black Gown, which was made at Salamanca and Oxford both at once, because he took his Degrees at both places at one time; His eyes are very small, and sunk, and is suppos'd to be either thick-ey'd, or Moon-blind, by reason he did not know C—m by Candle-light, tho' he had be∣fore sworn Treason against him; He has a natural Bob-tail, because he never was dock'd nor gelded; He seldom frequents the Company of Women, but keeps private Communication with four Bums, to make good the old Proverb, Lying together makes Swine to love; His Food is the Intrals and Bloud of Loyalists; His Drink the Tears of Widows and Orphans; He is one that hath endeavoured to make the King Great, by taking away the Lives of his Friends by Perjury; which by consequence must expose His Sacred Majesty to the Fury of the Mobile; He is one that brought 40 Commissions from St. Omers, and distributed them all for old Hats and old Shoes to the Papists, tho' no body ever saw one of them but himself; He hath 40000 Black Bills under his Gown, which he hath concealed these 3 years, and no body ever saw them but himself; His usual haunts are Dick's Coffee-House. Aldersgate-street, B—'s Conventicle, and St. Lobb's Convent in Swallow-street; He is one that preached B—y before the Weavers, in respect to his Father being one of the same Trade and Tribe; He is one that swears quite thorow B—l's Conscience, or the thick Basis of the Monument; He is one whose ingratitude to his Benefactors calls them Rogues and Rascals, and endeavours to swear their Lives and Estates away by Perjury; He is one that brought nothing but Rags and Lice into White-hall, but carried away Cart-loads of Goods, whereof part was his Famous Library, (viz.) That Famous History of Tom Thumb, Guzman, The Spanish-Rogue, French-Rogue, Don Thomazo Dangerfieldo, English-Rogue, All the Famous Histories of Robin Hood and Little-Iohn, The History of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, All the Infamous Works of Smith, Janeway, Curtis, and Care; As also the great Works of that Unreverend Divine R. B—r, and another brave Book, much admired by the Doctor, called, Hobbs's Leviathan; also two brace of Bums, with a Masculine Chamber-maid, which he keeps to scour his Yard: All which, and a great deal more, he hath purchased by the price of Bloud and Damnation, since he creep'd into White-hall, and created himself Saviour of the Nation; He is one that has sworn it to be his duty to the Devil to make the K—to prosecute the Qu—, and to dis-inherit his Royal Brother, and to make the Son rebel against the Father.—'Tis suppos'd he herds somewhere in the C—. These are some part of the Marks of the Beast; Whoever can give any a count of him, let them repair to Dick's Coffee-House, Lying Curtis, Elephant Smith, or Mrs. Richard, and they shall have the Doctor's Wheel of Fortune for their pains, and perhaps be called as many Rascals to boot as the Doctor used to call the King's Life-Guards. LONDON: Printed for Alex. Banks, 1681.
