H3790 12224760 56472
ΑΓΝΟΙΑ , OR, THE INABILITY of the Highest Improved NATƲRALL MAN to attaine a Sufficient and Right Knowledge of INDVVELLING SINNE. Discovered in three SERMONS, Preached at St MARIE's in OXFORD. By HENRY HURST M.A. and Fellow of Merton Coll. in OXON. 1 Cor. 2.14. But the Naturall man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse unto him: nei∣ther can he know them, because they are spiritually dis∣cerned. OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall Printer to the University, for Richard Davis. 1659.
TO THE REVEREND AND Learned my Honoured Father Mr HENRY HURST, Minister of the Gospel at Mickleton in Glouc:shire. Much honoured Father, BOoks claim a just title to a Dedicatory commen∣dation, whether this title be just jure naturali, or by Prescription, I intend not to dispute with this small piece which cals it selfe mine, and claimes the same portion which o∣thers have beene sent into the world with; I will not deny it's request, though I might have so done, since it
appeares in the world without my ple∣nary consent) it shall have it's Due: Nor will I be unjust, or unthankfull to you who have the clearest, and fairest title to this Homage; for if either Greatnesse or Goodnesse be a just claime, your's is the justest; if Great∣nesse of obligations be a good title, None may contend with you; a Fa∣ther's obligations on a Sonne are confes∣sedly greatest. If Goodnesse, and Bene∣ficence be the best claime, I must tell the world, your right to this is such, There cannot be a better Patron then a Good Father. If I adde no more to set out your worth, (besides I prevent the losing my selfe in the Dedication, and the disproportioning the Frontispice to the building,) I shall cut off the jea∣lous surmises of an uncharitable world (which will suspect there is none so good, because they are so few.) And (which I most intend) reserve more roome for the Practicke part of that
ho∣nour and obedience which I owe you. I cannot more doubt your reception of this, then I can your reception of my selfe, and to entreat for this, (I thinke) were to detract from the repute of a tender Father which you deserve. What it wants of worth, in it selfe, will be more fully, and easily made up, whilest it hath the rising advantage of a Sonne's affections, (whose willingnesse makes his lest essay of thankfulnesse worth accep∣ting,) and whilest it hath the graines of allowance which a Fathers kind∣nesse will cast in to make up the weight. Sr, these first fruits being judged ripe sooner then I thought, and so gathered (much against my will.) and having been offered first in the Tem∣ple for the honour of God, and the service of his spirituall Temple, are now in this handfull left to you, as that portion
which I might not with∣hold from you, and as the first fruits duly offered did procure a blessing on the offerer, so I hope it will fare with your Sonne, who nothing doubts your blessing will be on his head, and doubts it will, as Jacob's, prevaile a∣bove the blessings of your Progeni∣tours, for the abundant encrease of Grace, Mercy, and Peace on Your Obedient Sonne HENRY HURST. From Merton Coll. July 6. 1659.
AN EPISTLE TO THE READER. MY request is to thee (least I deceive thy expectation) not to expect from me, (who affect plainnesse of speech and actions) any tedious Apolo∣geticall Preface, much lesse any superfluous flattering Panegyricks. Onely let me acquaint thee with the ingagement that lies upon me, to premise a few things concerning the publication of this Learned and elaborate Worke. The Author sufficiently known to my selfe and many others, to be a Godly, Lear∣ned, and Orthodox Divine through his modesty and low opinion of himselfe, denyed for a long time his consent to the makeing of these Ser∣mons of publick use, and had supprest them altogether but
that through importunity I prevailed with him. That ancient relation I have, as of a Tutor to a Scholar (which in him and such who prove so well is my glory and re∣joiceing) and those deare affectins I beare to∣wards him at length made him to yeeld to my frequent sollicitations, that this worke might be Printed for the publick good. And I never had yet (neither do I think ever shall) enter∣taine the least repenting thought for causing such choice Sermons to be made of common use and benefit. Concerning the Sermons having heard two of them from the Pulpit, and since deliberately read them all over: two or three particulars I observe in an especiall manner, as appeares by the account that followeth. 1. The seasonablensse of the preaching on this subject against the blindnesse of a natu∣rall man, and concerning the sinfulnesse of Sin, both Originall and Actuall both which are words spoken in season, considering that now adaies Pelagius, Arminius, Socinus, and o∣ther Hereticks of the same litter are revived and their followers (as if they had get a facul∣tie in the Court of augmentation) strip and gee beyond their masters in errors and heresies. But as in Zacharies Vision there
were foure Carpenters to fray the soure hornes which scattered Judah: so God raiseth up many vali∣ant Champions of his truth who Zech. 1.21.crie aloud and spare not lifting up their voices like Trumpets against the abomination of the times. What was judicious Carthwrights Motto for Zion's sake I will not hold my peace abides upon the hearts of the faithfull Ministers of the Gospell: Thy dare not be silent in God's cause: but they make it their bu∣sinesse (as the Apstle exhorts) Tit. 1.9.to convince Gainsayers: Tit. 1.11.To stop their mouthes, Ti. 1.13 .to re∣buke them sharply or cuttingly: Which Scriptures doe not in the least countenance a Toleration, nor any other Scripture that I know of: now the Lord hath raised up the spirit of this Learned Brother, to lop off the Hydra of Heresies to stand for the truth at such a time as this is, I cannot let passe without speciall Ob∣servation. When Originall sin is denyed by some with great confidence, naturall mens abi∣lities too highly advanced, the Pagan's debt and dowry pleaded for, and charity lavisht upō such beyond all Scripture rule surely a confutation now must needs be beautifull in its season, and a word so fitly spoken may be esteemed like Ap∣ples of Gold in pictures of Silver. 2. Adde hreunto the singular usefulnesse of the Doctrine delivered That men of
grea∣test acutenesse and abilitie for naturall parts, and of best improvement by education cannot make a right and full discovery of indwelling Lust without the Spirit of God revealing it by the Law. This Doctrine is of great use, and serves to pluck down the crst of the proudst Scholar who is a stranger from the life of God. Men may attaine unto as great parts as Aristotle and Plato, and yet be meere ignoramussesses in Originall sin; How Adam's sin is ours, how we were in his loines, and that sin committed in his person was like∣wise committed in our nature, and propagated and derived upon all his posterity: This no man can learne in Aristotle or Platoe's Schoole. We must have recourse unto the Law of God The Apostle's determination is infallible For I had not known Lust except the Law had said, Thou shalt not covet.Rom. 7.7. 3. Ʋpon perusall of the whole there's dexterity of judgment: This Author gives a rationall ac∣of the truth by evidence of reasons solid and sinewous as 1. Because a Naturall man makes use of a crooked rule: His own rea∣son is his rule, and that perverted and blinded: And if the blind lead the blind both must fall into the ditch, 2. Because this sinful∣nesse of indwelling lust
consists much of spi∣rituall wickednesse, and the naturall man in his highest improvement remaines carnall and sensuall. A naturall man wants his eye∣sight: He is Eph. 5.8 darknesse it selfe in the abstract: and 1 Cor. 2.14.receiveth not the things of the spirit of God. Other more weighty Arguments are urged: But by these mentioned you have a taste of the rest: And I will not praeoccupate my Reader. 4. In the fourth and last place, I take notice of the Candor, Modesty, and Moderation of the Author Though hee is zealous in Gods cause, yet meeke in his own as Moses was. I see not in any particular where he gives ground, or relin∣quisheth his colours: But as farre as I can apprehend, he hath beaten his adversaries out of the field: yet he hath learned from the Apostle to Eph. 4.14.speak the truth in love, & to Gal. 6.1.restore, such as are overtaken, in the spirit of meeknesse. He useth soft words, and hard Arguments, as knowing that a flint is sooner broken upon a pil∣low then on an anvil. Ʋpon a serious review of the whole I find no bitternsse, no revileing lan∣guage nor personall reflexions: He discardeth all such waies of arguing, fearing least such dead flies might marre the whole box of oyntment. Wherefore upon this consideration of the Pre∣misses (I
commend to thee Reader) a serious Perusall of these excellent Sermons following. And if I mistake not (unlesse it be thy own fault) thou wilt reap much spirituall advantage, and wilt be more established in the truth. I must professe what I think (be it to the disparagement of none) that by reading these Sermons and a∣nother in Latine Homogeneous to this sub∣ject, of a Reverend Doctor eminent for Godly∣nesse and Learning,Dr Edward Reynolds Sermon intitled Animalu Homo I have found more satis∣faction, and confirmation, then by other Sermons or Treatises I have yet met with upon that Ar∣gument. I adde no more but commend thee (Reader) to the gracious providence of God, heartily desireing that thy soule may thrive the better for what is here published, so pray∣eth, Thy servant for Christs sake HENRY WILKINSON. OXFORD From Magdalen Hall July 6, 1659.
SERMON I. Rom. 7. v. 7. latter part. For I had not knowne Lust, except the Law had said Thou shalt not Covet. THe Great Doctrine of our Gospell freedome from the Law (which the mistaken Jew did dangerously stum∣ble at) being laid downe by the apostle, in that apt simili∣tude of a woman freed from the Law of her husband, to which she was obliged during his life, in the five first verses of this Chap∣ter and being summarily concluded in that positive assertion of the Apostles, in the 6. verse, former part of it, Now we are delivered from the Law: The Apostle might here have ended his Sermon, and the Chapter, but that it was necessary he should vindicate this Do∣ctrine
of our freedome from the Law, from two great objections, which the Jew thought he might reasonably, and which he did continually cast in the Apostle's way against this Doctrine. The first of these ob∣jections, is intimated Proleptically, and an∣swered solidly, in this 7. verse of the Chap∣ter: so that the Text read is the Jewes ob∣jection against the Apostle's doctrine, and the Apostle's solution of it; The Objection is thus proposed, If we are (as you Paul a∣verre) delivered from the Law, then the Law is evill; for deliverance is onely from that which is evill, were we removed from a good, it would not be a deliverance, but a losse and dammage; if then the Law be evill, what evill is it? Is it sinne? Here is the Ob∣jection, intimated in the former part of this 7. verse. The Apostles answer is full of holy indignation at the impiety, and wickednesse of the Objection; God forbid; and full of clearnesse and solidity against the seeming strength of it, The Law cannot be sin, and why.discovering the right use of this Law which cannot be sin, though Sin tooke occasion from the Law to be exceeding sinfull. And this the Apostle confirmes, because, 1. The Law discovers and manifests this
worke of darknesse, I had not knowne sinne, but by the Law, saith Paul. 2. The Law prohibits all sinne, even Lust it selfe, it saith, Thu shalt not Covet: In this latter part of the Apostle his answer, assi∣gning the right, proper, & genuine use of the Law, lyeth my worke; and ere I can set to it, I must premise three or foure things by way of Explication, or at least point them out, (for they are very obvious of them∣selves.) Explic. 1. The Spea∣ker Paul.1. Who speaketh, I Paul, a man of ripe naturall parts, and of as well improved, ac∣quired parts, as any, yet still a Pharisee, and Zealous of the Law, according to their prin∣ciples, and interpretation of the Law. 2. How be expresseth himselfe.2. How he expresseth himselfe, I had not knowne; in a tense that look's somewhat more then to what is past, having an eye to the future, and what would have been; it carries in it 1. His Past ignorance, I did not then know. 2. His future ignorance, he should not yet have knowne, if the Law, &c. 3. The Spi∣ritual sense exprest.3. Had not said, i. e. if it had not at last, spoken in other language then the Scribes, and Pharisees made it speake in, they made it speake in the literall sound; but now
God hath made it speake, and hath made Paul heare, in the Spirituall sense and mea∣ning of it; in that voice which God causeth a convinced, and converted soule to heare; in other kind of speech then any of the Pha∣risees (who made void the Law) would heare, Paul had often (no doubt) read the Law, and this very prohibition too, yet now he understands what then he did not, that the Law said, 4. What it meant by the Low, saying, Thou shalt not Covet.Thou shalt not Covet: The Apostle useth first a word of more Generall signification, I had not knowne sinne. and then Exegetical∣ly, and proleptically addeth, what might il∣lustrate his meaning, and prevent an objecti∣on: for sin is discoverable by the light of nature, that Starre light which they had who yet were darknesse. Q.How then is it appropriated to the Law? A. 1.1. Sin in the full extent, and compasse of it, as actuall, is onely discovered by the Law; for many sins they accounted vertues, and many they excused with harmlesse in∣differency, which yet the Law condemned. 2.2. But indeed the Apostle principally in∣tendeth the sinning sinne in first moti∣ons, and workings, and in it's indwelling: That corrupt
principle of lust, and sin, which is rooted in the soule and work's in our life, and is ordinarily known by the name of Originall sin, or corruption of nature, thus peccatum vocabit vi∣tium ori∣ginis pec∣catorum aliorum sontem & mortis cau∣sam Pareus in Loc. Doctrine.Pareus on the place: this praemised I gather up the Doctrine from the words, That men of greatest acutenesse, and a∣bility for naturall parts, and of best improvement by education, cannot make a right, and full discovery of Originall sin, of indwelling lust, without the spirit of God revealing it by the law. Lust or sinning sin is a mysterie of iniqui∣ty, which the most peircing naturall eye, with best humane advantages never did, never could yet, or ever will be able to discover. Concupisence is sufficiently discoverable by no other eye, nor by other light then that the holy spirit of God giveth us to see with: The knowledge of sinne as here Paul knew it, as a Regenerate soule doth know it, is not within the compasse of the highest improved naturall man; he cannot take the height, nor mete out the length, and breadth, nor fathome the depth of that corruption which is in our natures; he can∣not tell how this old man was conceived formed
and produced in us he cannot derive the Pedigree of this antient infamous house. It is onely and peculiarly the worke of the spirit, and word of God to discover this to a man. Method of Proceeding.In handling this truth I will 1. Shew it to be the Doctrine of this text and of others in the Scripture. 2. Farther confirme it by the exemplary mistakes of the severall sorts of men who have pretended (and might if any could pre∣tend) most to all knowledge, and to this also 3. Enquire what particularly they never did, or could ever discover &c. 4. Rationally demonstrate why they could not or ever will be able without the especiall sanctifying, and enlightning vertue of the spirit of God to discerne it. 5. Point out some considerable differen∣ces between the knowledge which a naturall improved man as Paul before conversion, and a regenerate sanctifyed soule, as Paul after conversion, hath of this sin. And then 6. Close the whole matter in a practicall and usefull application. 1. This is the Doctrine of the Text and other Scriptures. 1. I say then that this is the Doctrine of the text, That the best naturall parts, highest improved without the spirit of God
enlight∣ning him by the law cannot now, could not ever, nor ever will be able to discover the corruption of our natures. I must then evidence this whole matter from Paul's ex∣ample, and cleare confession, I said [The greatest acutenesse, and ability of nature,] such was Paul's naturall ability, he was a man of most pregnant, and ripe parts, for he assures us that he profited above many his equalls:Gal. 1.14. his outstripping them (if any doubt it) assureth us, he was befriended with a large portion of naturall abilities, he had not so outrun those who started with him in the race; if a greater strength and speed had not fitted him for the race. If I farther said that such parts [with best improvement,] I said no more then I might well warrant from Pauls example, for he wanted not the advantage of education; he had a Master whose learning had set him high in the esteeme of the people, Acts 5.34. and at his feet Paul was brought up, nor was he a dunce in this schoole, he made such progresse that he was eminent for his lear∣ning, whence Festus charitably interprets the Apostle pleading his own cause, and the truth (which Festus understood not) as the discourse of one to be pittied for overstudy∣ing himselfe; and who
had more learning then he could manage, Acts 26.24. Did I say such parts so improved [never did?] I say but what Paul saith of himselfe, for time past he did not, if I adde [nor ever can] I ground it on the Apostle his expre∣ssion, which includes more then the past time, I had not known, and looke's to time to come for 'tis in the Plusquam perfectum. If I adde [Without the spirit enlightning the soule] none I hope will doubt it: but if I say [without more then common illumination] I have proofe from Paul, who had no doubt the common illumination of the spirit while a Pharisee, yet, did not then understand, as now he doth, the corruption of nature: He did while unregenerate heare the law, but now regenerate he heare's the voice of the law, and spirit, jointly informing, and in∣structing him; & without this the best parts, with the best improvement, though both equall to Paul's will never fully discover sinning sin. Doctrine proved from other Scrip∣tures.Nor do we want other testimony from Scripture: The Law and Prophets beare wit∣nesse to this truth, view what was Ezekiel's message and errand to the Jewes. Ezek. 16.2,3,4. He must declare to them, that their
Birth and Nativity was of the land of Canaan that their father was an Amorite and their mother an Hittite &c. In which allegorie, the sinfullnesse, & cursednesse of their natu∣rall state is set forth as is the opinion of In∣terpreters, and others: So Junius on the place on those words thy navell was not cut, vers. 4. Thou wast by nature dead, defiled with the pollution of sin, full of weaknesse and vanity.A natura in morte, in Sordibus peccato∣rum, infit∣mitate & vanitate e∣ras. Jun. in loc. And much to this purpose Peter Martyr in his common places: Never did man marry such a wife, so much below, so much unworthy of him as did Christ when he marryed the Church: for her state, and what she was before she came into Christ's hand, is described by Ezekiel in the 16. chap. 1]Nec ullus uxorem unquam ram dispa∣rem, & suo conju∣gio indi∣gnamduxit ar{que} Chri∣stus Eccle∣sian: cu∣tusmodi e∣nim ea fu∣erit, ante∣quam Chri∣sto in ma∣num con∣veniret, ab Ezech. de∣scribitur 16. cap. Pet. Martyr loc com. cl. 2. cap. 17. I adde to this Essenius contra Crelli∣um de satisfact. l. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 3. Causa procatarctica una est miseria nostra quae Dei mi∣sericor diam movit—Huc pertinet graphica illa descriptio Ezech. 16.3,6. Their sinfull and wretched state untill grace timely prevent, freely act, and powerfully change it, is that which is represented by this Allegoricall description of a wretched, helplesse, infant borne in it's blood, and cast out to the loa∣thing of its person. And all this the pro∣phet must declare to Jerusalem, and he must declare it, as a man declares what before was not known, or not sufficiently known; there∣fore
the Lord sends him with this command make them know () as if he had said they are ignorant, it must be told, and decla∣red to them, they'l not know it else; nay far∣ther they are incredulous, they will not be∣lieve it, unlesse thou prove it to them; so much the Caldee Paraphrast intimates in his glosse on the text () Disceptavit probavit, radarguit. Now it is Jerusalem, saith the He∣brew text, they are the inhabitants of Jeru∣salem, saith the Paraphrast, persons which lived where God was known, where the te∣stimony of the Lord was, whither the Tribes did goe up; they were the persons who pro∣fessed to know God, and which boasted in the law, which were Jewes instituted in the knowledge of the Law (as Paul was before conversion) yet these persons are ignorant, and know not; are incredulous, and believe not, untill the Prophet declare that they may know, and prove it that they may be∣lieve their birth to be of the land of Canaan: So the Prophet Jeremiah c. 17. roundly as∣sert's that the Sin which is graven on the ta∣ble of their heart, vers. 1. which makes the heart desperately wicked. v. 9. makes it also deceit∣full above all things, It is a riddle which none can read; who can know it? the
Prophet challengeth the whole world of men to say whether any among them can understand it? Againe St Paul who understood this Do∣ctrine as well as any, laies down the sinful∣nesse of our natures, Rom. 3.10. there is none righteous no not one, none that understan∣deth or that seeketh after God, &c. A very high charge such as proud Philosophy will not beare, and weak eyed Phylosophy can∣not see: How then is this known? how is it proved? why it is written, v. 10. former part, And by the Law is the knowledg of sin, v. 20. surely what David saith of that providence which suffer's ut sit benè malis & malè bonis, Ps. 73.16,17. is very eminently true of this sin; when men think to know this with∣out going into the Sanctuary of God, it is too painfull for them: Nay if they goe into the Sanctuary, and enquire as the Pharisees, as the carnall Jew, did enquire, they will come out as very fooles, and as ignorant as they went in: Erant enim Pharisaei in illâ opinione, tantùm il∣los in peccato conceptos & natos esse, quo natura insigniter notasset Chem. Harm. and it is a mea∣suring cast, they'l proudly boast that others were borne alto∣gether in sin, but not they, John 9.34. For the Pharisees were of opinion that none were
con∣ceived or borne in sin but such as nature had Branded. The same doth Aegidius Hunni∣us in loc. observe too:Ab agnatâ pravitate se pulch è Immunes esse sentie∣bant Phari saei, Hunni∣us in loc. & Joh: Hoornbeck Sum: controvers. l. 2. which is against the Jewes, and their Judaisme hath ranked this Question, An Peccatum Adami primum fuit commune totius naturae humanae, unde omnes homines nas∣cuntur cum peccato originali? among one of the controversies between us and them in which they defend the Negative, and we maintaine the Affirmative. Thus will every man mistake who hath not the spirit of God whose office it is to con∣vince of sin,John 16.8. especially of those sins which are not easily discerned. It is more then evi∣dent, that before conviction we doe not see, or consider of many notorious and habituall sinnes; such as formall and loose profession, prophane and secure Libertinisme, Grosse Idolatry in the Heathen: How much more evident is it then that we shall never be able to discover secret, heart sinnes, the under∣ground and deep fountaine and spring of them. In a word, David a man well acquainted with his own heart, who was much in the search of it, who was wont to commune with it, Psal. 4.4. diligent to hide the word in it, Psal. 119.11.
taken up with meditating on that word which discovers sin, Ps. 119. v. 97. Wiser then his teachers, Psal. 119. v. 99. used to learne of his reines in the night sea∣sons, when others were either securely sleep∣ing, or (if awakened) Politiquely contriving the speediest & surest way of accomplishing their secular, and worldly designes, then was David lighting his candle, i. e. his under∣standing at the Lamp of God: then was he searching the darke recesses, and deep vaults of that heart which he knew was profound to devise and do wickedly. And now, one would think that such diligent search should leave nothing undiscovered, and that a man after this might say, that there was no guile in his heart, but his eye saw it & watched over it; But however a bold: and ignorant foule might possibly so thinke, and say; yet David dareth not thinke, nor say so, but af∣ter all this distrusting his owne heart (which he knew too well to trust it much) he brings it to God the searcher of hearts, and tryer of Reines with earnest suits that he would deliver him from his guilefull heart, Psalm. 139. v. 23,24. Search mee O God, and know my heart, try mee, and know my thoughts: and see if there be any way of wickednesse in mee, and lead mee in the way everlasting. Note David's
earnestnesse, five times together he prayeth that God would discover himselfe, his heart to himselfe, and deliver himselfe from him∣selfe: for after all this diligence he is jealous there is, he knoweth possibly there may be, some what of this guile, and hypocrisie. And now having heard such witnesses, what far∣ther need have wee? Christian, doth not thy soule heare it selfe confessing this truth? Say, if it be so difficult for David, a man enlightned, by the Spirit of God internally, by the word of God externally, and awa∣kened by both joyntly, to find out his sin∣full heart, and nature, can it be lesse then impossible for men who are Blind spiritually, having no eyes, In the darke, having no light, Securely sleeping in sin, not awakened, to discover, and find out sufficiently that indwelling sinne, this universall pravity in∣hering in his nature? Let it then stand a truth according to Scripture, that indwel∣ling concupiscence, this sinning sin, is a my∣stery of iniquity which the best naturall parts, highest improved cannot now, hath not yet, never will be able to discover; which is the first thing proposed: next let us come to the
second which will be ano∣ther confirmation of this truth, when we see all sorts of best improved naturall men have mistaken in it. 2 Generall proposed, Best im∣proved Na∣turall men are mista∣ken in this knowledge. 1. Heathens mistake the knowledge. 1. Then, as for the Gentile and Heathen world, when it was at its height of learning, and most noted for inquisitivenesse after, and acutenesse (with successe) in new dis∣coveries, yet never came to the discovery of this sinne; Indeed they did discerne a ve∣ry great Ataxie, and disorder; they knew there was much a misse in their life, and that this also had infected the mind, and soule; but that deepe silence which every where may be observed among the croud of their morall Writers, who speake very little of the spring and fountaine of vice, when they have spent many sheets on the streames and branches of it, is an undoubted witnesse of their ignorance, and if it were not a worke too great to be dispatched within the compasse of a Sermon, I might bestow some more labour, then now I will, to evince this by undeniable instances, yet take one or two. How little doth Homer speake? or is he not wholly silent in this? and yet he is preferred to some of the best morall Philo∣sophers, Stoicks, or Academicks, for in Horace's judgement he better tels us
Quid sit Pulchrum, quid Turpe, quid Ʋtile, Quid non, Plenius & melius Chrysippo aut Crantore dicit. He that should read Homer, and hope to find any fatisfactory account of this, will surely cast him off at last; & say, he hath lost his labour, and knowes now as little as Ho∣race himselfe did of this by his reading, and revolving Trojani Belli Scriptorem. Well Chrysippus the second Stoick Philosopher for eminency, Qui fulcire putatur Porticum (as Cicer. Acad. l. 4. quoted by Mr Gataker in Praelog. ad Annot. in M. Antonin.) and of whom Laërtius say's .Laert. l. 7. He hath falne short of Homer in the Discovery, Quid Pulchrum, Quid Tur∣pe &c. Crantor also, who was no small babe in morality, if either our Poët may be judge, who citeth him as one very eminently be∣fore others in his discouse of vertue and vice, or if Cicero and Panaetius (Master or friend to Tubero) may be judge, who tell us of a booke of this Crantor, which was, Non magnus at Aureolus—& qui ad verbum est ediscendus, and yet Homer speakes, Plenius & melius, Quid Pulchrum, Quid Turpe, &c. So that now we may hope either Homer,
or Horace from Homer is able to give us the best account of this matter: either of which I assure you, are farre from a competent measure of knowledge, and from any con∣siderable progresse in the enquiry and dis∣course of this matter.What these menkew is breifely mentioned by Mr Auth: Burgesse of Origin: Sin. part. 2. cha. 20. which I met with since this was finished. And where these, or such as these do speake of this (besides that it is little) they do generally resolve it into a pronesse springing from worser constitution of that matter, of which we are formed, or a pronesse soonest to imitate what is worst: A Doctrine which may passe with the favourable name of an excusable errour in these men, (who were without the Law,) but is no lesse then Abo∣minable heresie in Pelagians, who (as right sonnes of erring Fathers) have walked in the same way of folly, and approved these men's sayings. From this first sort of well improved men, let us next consider. 2 Pelagians mistake this knowledge. 2. The well improved naturall man in a Pelagian dresse, and on Pelagian principles, proceeding in the enquiry, and pretending to have made the discovery of this indwel∣ling concupiscence, and boasting
themselves as who rightly know it; But how much they were mistaken, a very briefe recoun∣ting of the opinions, and Positions concer∣ing this matter will evince. Chemnitius (then whom scarce a more learned divine can be found among the Lutherans) tell's us that the Pelagians deny the whole doctrine touching Originall sin, and blot out the very name of it also: Nor is he single in this re∣port of them. Pet: Martyr tel's us as much:Pelagiani universam doctrinam de Peccato originali negant, nc∣mincetiam sublato. loc. com. de Pec∣cat. orig. Pet. Martyr loc. com. cl. 2 nay who is there that send's us intelligence from the Armies of the living God, that doth not assure us, that this is one, a princi∣pall strong hold, which these men have for∣tified against Grace, and the truth of Christ; but let us give you a transient view of what they teach their disciples, and would obtrude on us. Pelagius at Rome (whither he came, after he was discovered in the East) began to maintaine the opinion of Sinlesse perfection,Histor. Pe∣lagian. l. 1. c. 3. Defendere Coepit , saith Vessius: A Doctrine which floweth from a proud heart, which knows not its own sinfulnesse, a corrupt stream which ran through the stoicke Philosophers, tain∣red Origen, and overflowed Pelagius and his followers, as Hiereme hath observed (as he is cited by
Joh:Ger:Vossius) and the evident connexion of the conclusions to the princi∣ples of those men, and the undeniable con∣formity of their dictates, which any one may see, who will be at the paines to compare them, in their Paradoxes gathered together by Justus Lipsius,Just. Lipsi∣us in suâ manduct. ad stoicam Philoso∣pham. with the Doctrine of the Pilagians, mentioned and refuted by St Au∣gustine, collected into one by the learned paines, both of Vossius and Cornel: Jansenius in his large and learned Book called Augu∣stinus, seu Doctrina St Augustini &c. In a word it is well known how highly these men advanced nature, cryed up the sufficiency and power of it which cannot be but where first there is a great degree of ignorance or errour and mistakes in the doctrine of O∣riginall sin:and what these mistakes (if here∣sy may be so called) were, beside, the Au∣thors mentioned. Dr Featly will give us an account in his Pelagius Redivivus &c. to which Authors I referre Scholars who can examine and compare these together, and hope others will take it on the word of one, who is willing to be tryed by such as are able to judge in this cause, and therefore cannot be suspected of a purpose to impose upon them, briefely when we read that these men taught their Disciples.
Pelagian Haeresies. 1. That there was no Originall sin or cor∣ruption of humane nature. 2. That Adam's sin endammaged himselfe onely properly; us onely if we imitate him. 3. That we are borne as perfect (age onely excepted) as Adam was created, &c. When we read these, and such like Do∣ctrines, we evidently see and need no farther proofe to demonstrate, that these men have not discovered this sinning sinne, and yet they were men of naturall, and improved parts: so was Pelagius, a man excellent for learning, as August: cited by Vossius.Augustin-Epist. ad Paulinum subinitio. So was Caelestius a man of acute Judgment and well improved; for he wrote whilest young, three Epistles, of which Gennadius affirmeth they were omni Deum desideranti necessariae so was Julian Ingenii, doctrinae, facundiae prae∣cellentis, saith Vossius, a man acer ingenio saith Gennadius, yet how brutish were these Pastours in their understanding of this point! 3 Semi-Pe∣lagians mis∣take in this knowledg. 3. Neither are they more happy in their discovery, who in succeeding ages were somewhat more refined in their heresy, such as the elder and later Semipelagians, whose ignorance of this enough appeare's in
that which they oppose against efficacious Grace, for an account of which I referre you to Cornelius Jansenius his Parallel of the errors of the Massiians and some late teachers, in the second chapter of that Parallel, and the third chapter which is annexed to his Augustinus, &c. With these are to be ranked Arminians, who consent with these erring Doctors, Socinians, and some of our Anabaptists too, as is evident from that which Mr Stephens cite's as one of the Doctrines owned by the 30 seperate Congregations in their confes∣sion (these I adde not for their eminency in parts, or learning, few of them that I have met with being such, but as witnesse of the universall mistake and error into which the naturall man with his highest pretences doth inevitably runne) nor is Pigghius better acquainted with this doctrine, as is evident from his Controv. de Peccat. originali; And our English confident Dr Taylor, both in his unum necessarium, and in his Answer to the Reverend Bishop of Rochester's letter, with the whole heard of Jesuites that follow Lewis Molina in his opposition to the Domi∣nicans, and whoso will consider what is taught by these men will see how little they are acquainted with
the true nature of this inhering concupiscence, and whoso will consider who they are, what kind of Persons, will see they are men of notable naturall, and improved parts and so see notable evi∣dence to this truth, ignornace in the Doct∣rine of Originall sin, or indwelling lust, like a thick cloud lying on the minds of men of such naturall and improved abilities, that vve may rationally suppose, if any could, these had been the men vvho vvould have discovered it: and seeing they have not, vve may by a warrant from a logicall argumen∣tation conclude à frtiori others cannot, nor will ever be able; for some of these have been men (I will not say) of the highest na∣turall and improved parts possible; but I may, and will say of the highest probable; and yet they have not attained a right dis∣covery of this Sin, of this mystery of ini∣quity: These men speak of it in such a man∣ner as evidenceth they never, either 1. Felt the strength and power of Sin as a King reigning in their mortall bodies, Rom. 6. Nor 2. Had observed the wisedome and Po∣licy of this old man, which must be cruci∣fed, Nor
3. Had known the obligatory vertue of this Law of our members, Nor 4. Had seen the forge, where the evill, and sinfull imaginations of thoughts were framed and wrought of. Now if there be after so long tampering with it, so little harmony and concent in the Doctrine of these men with the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and the experience of re∣generate sanctified soules concerning this sin: we may very justly conclude they know not withall their skill to set their doctrines in tune with the Scriptures, nor make a spi∣rituall, Scripturall discovery of this sinne: but passe we on to another sort of naturall improved men, who if reason could have reached this, would have bidden faire for it, These are 4. School∣men mistake in this knowledg. 4. The Schoole-men whose notions, though sometime very sublime, and daring, as if they would presently discover the very height of all that is knowable, yet in this ve∣ry point, as in many others, are very jejune, and empty; very uncertaine, and in many things unsound, especially those among them who have proceeded upon that unsound foundation of pure naturalls, and thence stated our fall and sinfull state to
be the reduction of us to our pure naturals, the letting loose of the reines to a high me∣led courser, which was before curbed and not the laming, and spoiling of a sound one, or as the stripping off a man's clothes, lea∣ving him naked who before was cloathed. This way Bellarmine, and the Papists (who have gone a step farther then the bounds prescribed by the Councill of Trent) have generally gone. Chemn. loc.com. de Peccat. Orig. p. 202. b. edit Francof. 1653. And sure on this it was that Recentes, ut Occam, & multi alii nomen retinent Peccati Originalis, rem extenuant: This extenuating of this sin, was in that they denyed it to be an evill repugnant to the Law of God, Nec culpam esse, nec poenam as Lombard 2. dist. 30. c. 5. Scotus in 4. dist. 14. q. 1. art. 1, boldly averre's that which will inferre necessarily (if what he affirmes were a truth) that this originall sinne is but the guilt of Adams first transgression; so Biel, Durandus, and others; farther when you shall find many of them as Hugo Victo∣rinus, Thomas 2.4. dist. 28. art. 4. Biel. 2. dist. 28. and Bonaventure 2. dist. 28. &c. Assert nature preparing it sfe for grace and professedly teaching that a man may ex naturae viribus love God above all, and do his commandments, Quoad substantiam actûs: is
not this an evi∣dence that they did not understand how corrupt our natures were? How weake and unable to Good? How full of enmity to God? I feare not to averre it, That man knoweth not the sinfulnesse of his na∣ture, that dares say a man may by the strength of nature love, quoad substantiam actus, God above all; He understand's not that his naturall mind is enmity to the law of God, who sayeth he can love God above all by the power of nature, nor knoweth he that his carnall mind is not subject to the law of God, who dares say he can viribus naturae obey the Law of God. He hath not a right knowledg of Originall sin, who dares affirme either of these: And Dr Whi∣taker in that peice de Peccato origin. l. 2. c. 4.Cajetan, Scotus, Richard Durandus Bellarmine cited by Dr Whitaker in that l. 2. c. 4. against Thom. Stapleton who affirmes Scholasticos tribuere humanae naturae vires integras ad diligendum deum super omnia & ad facienda praecepta Dei secundum substan∣tiam actuum. And adding farther that some other of the Schoolmen taught praepa∣rationem esse in homine ante gratiam, & homini facienti quod in se est non deesse Gratiam pas∣seth this censure on both jointly Quod nun∣quam dicerent, si originalem naturae deprava∣vationem
intelligerent. But I leave these men and next come to an other sort of men, who though greatly improved, yet have not rightly understood this sin: They are such, Who 5. Some plead an ex∣emption of the Virgin Mary from Originall Sin. 5. Have pleaded an exemption for some from the common calamity of mankind to be borne into the world full of sin, and stai∣ned with Originall corruption; though the greatest part by farre, nay though all ex∣cept one be tainted with this sin, Bellarm. de amiss. gri. l. 4. c. 15.16. & 17. yet one at least (and this is the Virgin Mary) must needs be exempted from this common lot, of whose conception and birth with this freedome from Originall sin, a zealous Dominican will by no means heare, and a Franciscan is (to him) little lesse then an Heretick for af∣firming it; Chier loc. com. de Vivgi l. 4. c. 14. in this difference of judgment, it is evident that the Franciscans (and they are not few, nor yet contemptible for their parts, or learning) grossely erre in this Do∣ctrine, and yet a whole councill viz. that at Basile 1431 give their approbation to this error, Session the 36. And since that the jugling Concell of Trent hath thought it fit to leave it indetermined, as in their Appen∣dix, to the fifth session of that Councill. So that now either these must be accounted men not learned, nor of naturall parts, or
else that they did not understand this Do∣ctrine, which is that we affirme of the best naturall man, or else if learned, and such as knew but did not own it, but chose rather to dissemble it, their practice condemne's them, and every one who shall so dissem∣ble, proveth that he hath not a right know∣ledge of that or other divine truth, if it be of such import and concernment as this is: he doth not know the truth of Christ, and the Doctrine of the Gospell aright, who is ashamed of either Christ or the Gospell. 6. The best parts and Learning of Papists are ignorant in this par∣ticular. 6. I might adde and enlarge on this, that the best parts, and greatest learning of the Papall world, did bewray their ignorance of this important truth, when they did pur∣posely contrive the decree concerning Ori∣ginall sinne, so, that, it might be free for any man to think what he would concerning it, as Andradius, a man well acquainted with the Councill, doth very ingeniously confesse concerning the Fathers, and Divines of the Councill of Trent, as Chemnitius doth re∣port in his Examen Concilii Trident: ad sess: 5. de Pecc: Origin: Nor will I pursue the discovery of this Councill's mistake of the remainders of concupiscence after Baptisme, which would be a full proofe
that they did not rightly apprehend and understand this lust the Apostle here speaketh of. 7. Where the word is plainly prea∣ched a∣mongst us many are ignorant of this truth. Neither is this to be (though we could wish it might be) confined within the bounds, either of the heathen world, or the Papall apostate Church, and that it were not true, (which, yet it is, and we lament the certainty of it,) that among us where the word of God is permitted to every one, so that every one may enquire into the truth, by direction from the word, among us, where the word and Law of God is so plainly preached, and so frequently, yet many thousands among us do evidently de∣clare by their unaffectednesse with this sin∣full state that they have no right knowledg of it. Are not the greatest part of men stupid and senslesse under a Sermon of Ori∣ginall sin? where are their affections? how few groane? where is he that cries out with Paul? O wrethed man that I am &c. And can you think these know aright the very great sinfulnesse of our nature? if a Souldier should tell you he had lost the day to a mor∣tall enemy, and yet rejoice in it, or not be troubled for it, would you not conclude he knew not the worth of a victory, the dan∣ger of a
captivity, the misery of a captive? you have as little reason to believe our hea∣rers rightly understand this sin, while they say they do, and are yet merry and jocund in the losse of their liberty, and under the captivity of this sin. Then you may suppose a man rightly knowes his disease, when apprehension of the danger makes him look after a remedy; and feares under the danger, and groanes under the paine make him earnestly desirous to be cured, and recovered, but that man knows it not, who looketh not out for hea∣ing, who is not affected with it. No more are our hearers acquainted with this dan∣gerous disease of the soule, who if they will bear us down in it that they know it, yet consesse to us at least by their security and deadnesse, if not in words, that they are not grieued or troubled at it. These are another sort, the best of our hearers, as to naturall parts, and highest Improved by Education remaining Carnall and unrege∣nerate are not affected, because not truly acquainted with this sin: and yet I suppose our hearers ordinarily of as good ripe parts as any, and as well helped with outward ad∣vantages. 8. The expe∣rience of Saints is witnesse to this.
Lastly, in a word or two, the experience of Saints, Reall Christians, sincere, and well improved Christians, is witnesse to this. Their experience of the difficulty of first getting a due sense of this sin: How many convictions, how many serious meditations, How many prayers upon their knees, that God would discover it, and shew them how vile they are, ere they have gotten any measure of abiding Knowledge, any degree of soule-affecting knowledge of this sin? How often are the promises pleaded to God, wherein he hath promised to give his Spirit, and to enlighten? and before this hath been done, no due and right know∣ledge of this sin hath been gotten: and when they have gotten it, how much have they to do to keep up due apprehensions of this sin? how prone are they to relapse into sleight thoughts of it? how soon and easily do they many times lose that tendernesse of heart, that melting frame of spirit, that mourned over this sinfull nature? All that a regenerate soule can do, is little enough to keep open, all that the best improved natu∣rall man can do, is not enough to lay open and disclose this indwelling sin, this mystery of Iniquity. These do then make Good the charge of the naturall mans
actuall and invincible Igno∣rance and unacquaintednesse with this in∣dwelling lust: and I hope by these it ap∣peareth to be a truth. But yet for farther satisfaction, I proposed to enquire what in particular they never did, or ever could discover of this sin: and now to that. 3 Generall pro∣posed. 1 The impro∣ved naturall man cannot discover the exceeding great sinfulnesse of the habituall frame of his na∣turell heart. 1. The best Improved naturall man can∣not discover the exceeding great sin∣fulnesse of the habituall frame of his na∣turall heart: the sinfulnesse of the heart disposed and bent towards unrighte∣ousnesse and sin, the uncleanenesse of this Leprosie, the loathsomnesse of this putrifying wound, this he cannot see, who seeth with the best naturall eye. As for men without the law, no wonder if they under∣stand not this spreading scab to be a lepro∣sie, they have not the Law, and rule by which they might discerne it: no wonder if they paint over the Sepulcher, and neither see the rottennesse, nor smell the stench of that which is within: for they have neither eye to see, nor sense to discerne it. I know none can be ignorant who have ability and can, who have opportunity and do, read, or have read, the Partiall and unequall judg∣ment they make of, the favourable & smoo∣thing words they give, to
hide this sin. The better and softer name of their Genius must be the name of this sin; Their making pro∣vision for the flesh to fulfill it in the lusts thereof was with them nothing but curare Genium. Their living in the height of sin, was with them nothing but Piare Genium vino & flo∣ribus. And a severer course of life was ac∣counted a fraud put upon their Genius. Thus the whole sinfull frame of the heart passed under the name of Genius: now if their Mythologists understand them, Occulta vis, quâ ad singulas res geren∣das impel. limur. Nat. Com. This Genius was A secret or occult power, by which we are moved to each thing we do. And if you enquire what this Power or vertue is, some of them will tell you it is the Symmetry of the Elements. So that in briefe, the sinfulnesse of the frame or disposition of the heart of man with these persons, is no more then an un∣happy temperature of the Elements, com∣pounding the body, and swaying the mind according to their prevalency. Now who ever did, or justly could apprehend much sinfulnesse in this, that our bodies are com∣pounded of the Elements, or that such or such a temperature doth most prevaile? whoever thought it an exceeding great sin that he was of a Sanguine
Complexion? or how much blame worthinesse is there in a Phlegmatick Constitution? barely as such. I know the different tempers do different∣ly promote and further sin, do much facili∣tate the workings of this sin: but this is an effect ex accidenti, no direct naturall effect of this or that constitution, but it is an ef∣fect of that sin which dwells in us, and which observing that the temper of the bo∣dy doth sway us more one way, then other, taketh hold of that advantage, and worketh powerfully by this constitution, to the hur∣rying of the sinner on to sin. In the mean time, while they thus put all upon their Genius, and resolved this into the Symme∣try of the Elements, they must be thought to have had no right knowledge of the ex∣ceeding sinfulnesse of their heart propen∣ding, and inclining to sin: but I dwell too long with these persons, who might be men of choicest naturall parts, but wanted the best Improvement; being without the Church, and so without the externall ad∣vantages and helpes, which might heighten their reason to a clear and full discovery of this: but did not Best improved naturall men within the Church ordinarily, or at
least might they not (by the improvement of Reason and parts, though they remained unregenerate, and naturall men) have come to a sight of this sinfull frame of heart in its great sinfullnesse? well, view we, and ob∣serve the Pharisees (and consider what may be judged, and ought to be answered to this) choicest men for learning and educa∣tion before Christ his comming in the flesh; yet they took a view of this sinfull frame with a false glasse, which represented scarce the one halfe of this body of sin, and what was so represented was varnisht over with colours of their own mixing, that it appea∣red, not what it was, but what they would have it be: as is evident from their corrupt exposition of the Law, which our Lord notes and condemnes in the 5th. ch. of Matthew. They saw not the sinfulnesse of a malitious heart, or of a heart ready to boile with causleste anger: witnesse their grosse corru∣pting that precept, thou shalt not kill, either saying it was a prohibition of murthering an Israelite, or that only murther which was done prepriâ manu. Heare what they say in their Talmud, (as I find it in Dr. Lightfoot's Epistle to the Reader of his Har∣mony of the New Testament.) A murtherer is he that kills his
neighbour with a stone, or with Iron, or thrusts him into water or fine, out of which it is impossible to get our againe, he is guilty: but if he thrust him into fire, or water, out of which it is possible to get out a∣gaine, though he die, yet is he quit. If he sets a dog or a serpent on him, he is quit &c. of like nature with this. And now can you sup∣pose these generations of men to know the sinfulnesse of a murtherous frame of heart, who so fouly mistated the externall act, and acquitted that as no murther, which is one of the highest degrees of it? will you say that the man knowes, or believes any sinfulnesse in a bloody revengefull disposi∣tion? who can say That he who hireth another to kill his neighbour, or sends his servants, and they kill him &c. is Guilty as a blood-shedder, to be punished by the hand of heaven onely, not by man? yet this was ordinarily a received doctrine among them, as appeares by what is farther added by Dr. Lightfoot in the forecited place. Their Expositions of the rest of the Law are much of the same na∣ture. Actuall externall uncleannesse, and defiling their neighbours wife they thought to be a sin, but never accounted the habitu∣all bent, and propension of the heart
to this, to be a sin, or forbidden in that Law. They were not troubled at the thoughts of any secret reluctancy to the holy commands of God: It was nothing with them to have natures full of 1. Unholinesse, and opposition to God's holinesse. 2. Rebellion, and contradiction to the Law of God. 3. Dislike, and backwardnesse to every good. 4. Pronenesse to, & delight in every evill. 5. Folly, and inability to do that Good they ought. 6. Craft, and subtilty to consummate that evill, which the Law of God forbids, These and such like abominations, rivetted in our natures, they took no notice of, therefore of the Pharisees and Scribes, those Improved naturall men (though within the Church) we doubt not to say they knew not the sinfulnesse of the habituall frame of the heart. The same must be granted of men in succeeding latter ages, let the end∣lesse disputes maintained by the Orthodoxe against Corrupt teachers, be witnesse to this; and of latest yeares these, and such like Positions.
That men are not disabled to Good, by the fall of Adam, which the six Dispu∣tants men of parts and learning asserted, and owned at the Hague. And others (much of the same stature for their parts, and lear∣ning) have owned the same position, as Se∣cinus Praelect. Theol. c. 4. f. 13. 14. (cited by John Peltius) where among other passages, he quoteth this) Nec vis naturalis Liberi Arbitrii ab eo tempore imminuta fuit. And in his second Epistle to Dudithius, pag. 18,19. where I read this passage. As concerning the wickednesse of men; this is all that may be said, that God willeth that man by his own free will should be no lesse able to be good then bad.de malitiâ ho∣minum nibil a∣liud dicendum venit—vult de∣us, ut homo pro suo ipsius arbi∣trio non minùs improbus quàm probus esse possit. Cum possēt dagitiosè vivere virtuti stu∣dere malue∣runt. Soc. 2 Ep. ad Dudith. And here he speaks of the fallen state of men, affirming it in their power to be Good, and as easily if they will themselves, as to be bad, and devolving all the goodnesse of those who are good in a bad world to this, That when they could have lived Flagitiously rather chose to follow vertue. And as the Master, so the Scholar Valent Smalcius, both in his Racovian Ca∣tech: c. 10. at once denies all the vitiousnesse which we affirme to be in us, proudly aver∣ring, Peccatū originis nullū pror. sus est. resp. ad 2 Quaest. there is not any such thing as Originall
sin, and that this hath not depraved our Free will. And in his Di∣sputations against Frantzius. 2. disput. which is de peccato Originis: calling it Com∣mentum humanum & peccatum confictum, so pag. 60. where by the way he seemes to in∣timate what he thought to be in us (instead of that Originall sin which we affirme) viz. Proclivitas (quaedam) ad peccatum. I adde quaedam, for this Author supposeth it to be such, as yet possibly a man may not actually sin, though he be prone to sin.Potest fie∣ri, ut is qui ad peccan∣dum pro∣clivis est, ramen non peccet. Whosoever hath such apprehensions of our inhaerent proclivity to sin, hath not a full acquaintance with, nor discovery of the sin∣fulnesse of the frame of the naturall man's heart. Nor any who dare, as these men do, assert. 1. That the will of man is not vitiated by the fall: or else who dare to contend 2. That what is now a more vehement was before the fall a more moderate incli∣nation to evill; as these, and others who are Roman Catholicks.Becanus o∣pusc. 6. de institiâ o∣perum. 3. That Concupiscence is not properly a sin, or not after Baptisme, or a very little sin, as some in the Schooles, and many a∣mong the Romanists. Now these and such like disputes and as∣sertions
do plainly bespeak these men unac∣quainted with the great sinfulnesse of a na∣turall heart, and the universall opposition which is in the flesh to the spirit: Catholici docent concu∣piscentiam in actu pri∣mo non esse peccarum o∣riginis:sed natura ē quan∣dam pronicatem, quae pet se enlpabilis non sit. Becanus opusc. 6. de justit. operum. and yet they are men of great parts, and great learning, & within the Church, but discerne not, because they are naturall, this sin, which the spirit of God convinceth of, and which is not discerned, till the soule be enlightned with more than common illumination. But next 2. The best Im∣proved naturall man cannot discover the sinfulnesse of the first, secret, unpublished, and unformed tions of this corrupt nature. The best Improved naturall man cannot discover the sinfulnesse of the first, secret, unpolished, and unformed motions of the corrupt nature. The sinfulnesse of those motions (which by the Schoolmen are called primo primi) was never disco∣vered by all the light that nature, and education, have at any time afforded to the most quick sighted of Adam's offspring. They never did detect the sinfulnesse of the first ebullitions, and anomalous workings of that Lust, which dwells in us. Indeed, when this corrupt sountaine hath so stirred, that some of the grosser vapours have risen up
with a stench offensive to the naturall con∣science they have discovered, and acknow∣ledged an uncleanuesse in the fountaine, and in these grosser eruptions of lust: If the irregular passions did obtaine from the will an assent, or approbation, to somewhat that was dissonant to the more sober, and resi∣ned precepts of reason; and if these motions were so farre formed, that either a conveni∣ent opportunity or an assurance of impuni∣ty, would immediately, and with ease, mid∣wise them into the world by an actuall pa∣tration of that, which Passion had suggested, the will had somented, and Reason had disli∣ked; then they would perhaps (as many have) acknowledg the irregularity of them, and be troubled at it though mostly the trouble was this That convenience of executing did lesse favour their desires, and you may write on the doores of this nursery —Lateat malim, dum tempera dentur latitiae mistos non habitura metus.Ovid Epist. Paridead Helen. But alas all this is farre from a right sight of these first motions in their sinfulnesse, farre from a sight of hatred against them, repentance for them, opposition to them, destruction and
mortifying of them, and cleansing the heart from them, farre from such a sight as convinced them, that death was due for these first motions, that they de∣filed, and rendred best actions sinfull, and such as need pardon, this they have not seen; I doubt this is too true of these men, & the knowledg of sin in the motions, and pas∣sions of the mind. That if at any time a word hath dropt from them, which seemed to condemne the extra∣vagancy of their thoughts, it is to be referred Either to Thoughts perfected, and con∣sented to, Or To a Rhetoricall eloquence, which shewed us, how well they could speak, not how well they did think. Neither were they the onely men, thus perswaded of the innocency of these first motions of a depraved heart, but also that generation of men, the scribes, and Phari∣sees, were so perswaded whose traditions made the Law of God void, whose dictates, and expositions of the law, never did en∣danger or affright a secret lust with a pro∣bability of discovering it; the speculative Murtherer, the lascivious wanton fancy, never did fall under the lash of their Ser∣mons, on those command's, which forbid murther, and Adultery.
None of their doctrines were shuts to the eye, that it should not behold; nor checks to the fancy, that it should not hover a∣bout, or sit hatching this Cockatrice. It was one of the Rabbines who did bewray the prevalency of his secret speculative un∣cleannesse In that speech, he delighted to con∣template handsome women that he might praise God; a faire excuse for his foul fault, and I cannot perswade my charity to mis∣take the man so much, as to thinke he spake the whole truth: Besides this sort of men. The generality of the Schoolmen making to themselves an inadequate, & uncertaine rule, or standard for the measuring of sin, have also inevitably entangled themselves in a great mistake, and grosse ignorance of the sinfulnesse of the first motions of concu∣piscence: For laying aside the Law of God, or at least interpreting it according to their own apprehensions, and applying it onely to what may voluntarily be done by us, have at last shifted aside the Law, and substituted voluntarium into its place, by which they will measure, and judge of sin, both deter∣mining what is sin, by what is voluntary; and how great sin is, by how much of
voluntari∣nesse there is in it: Hence such conclusions as these concerning concupiscence. Motus appetitiss circa rem illicitam, non accedente consensis voluntatis, non est pecca∣tum.Gregor: de valent. in prim. sec. Ratio non tenetur reprimere primos mo∣tus.Thom. dis. 6. q. 2. pu. 2 Saith Alexander Alensis Q. 125. memb. 7. whose short sight could not see how little there is in his distinction of direct and indi∣rect prohibition, and that concupiscence (I suppose by what he saith memb: 6. & 7. that he takes in these first motions, as well as con∣cupiscence whence they rise) is not directly, but indirectly forbidden. If the heart (both frame, and first motions of it) were not open to the eye of God, and if he were not searcher of reines, if he either could not judge the heart, or else would not: I then would begin to think there were some likelihood it might so be, but hee that hath a purpose directly to judge, hath surely given a law directly to him, whom he will judge; and will not God thus judge the secrets of the heart? To these men We may adde (and though we doe them no credit yet we do them
no injury in ad∣ding them) Lindanus. Panopl. l. 4. c. 34. Al∣phonside castro her. 4. Tapper in Expl. art 2. Gregor: de valent, &c. Becanus o∣pusculo sexto de Justitiâ o∣perum. Bellarmine, with others among the Papists, who have not seen the vilenesse of the first motions of a naturall heart; hence it is that these are accounted by them. The greife of a wounded nature, but not the guilt of a sinning nature; let Becanus be heard Ca∣tholici docent, motus concupiscentiae rationem praevenientes non esse peccata, nec prohiberi hoc praecepto, Non concupisces, sed solum consensum. He speake's it as the Doctrine of the Papists, and not as his own private opinion Docent Catholici &c. saith he and well he might when he seeth the Trent Councell own this, both its their fifth session de Pecc: origin: and in their sixth session de justific: & de bonis ope∣ribus. And the rest of this society are (no doubt) of the same mind, they have very charitable thoughts of the innocency of these first motions, but we cannot so judge, and yet will hope, we have the mind of the Lord. These are pregnant instances of the igno∣rance of great Scholars in this point of grea∣test concernment, but they are Forreigne, I wish we had no domestick, examples: but indeed how many among us either plead with argument, or affirme by practice, that they judge the first
Motions of concupis∣cence to be innocent? and who are they? what kind of men? I mistake much, if they re not usually, the men of great parts, and of considerable improvement by learning oo, who perswade themselves, and others also that nothing is a sin, or a great sin, but what is explicitly voluntary. They are mostly the wise men of the world (whom God passeth by while he chooseth the foolish, 1 Cor. 1.27.) who will lodge, reteine, and delight in these thoughts of vanity notwith∣standing convincing demonstrations of the sinfulnesse of such thoughts, In a word the 1. Seldome and superficiall confession of this in most, 2. Little degree of contrition, and sor∣row of heart, 3. Difficulty of keeping the heart contrite for this 4. Frequent, and renewed relapses into almost habituall insensiblenesse of this, which the Regenerate observe in themselves (though they have all externall advantages to helpe them, with saving Grace and internall helpes also) do undeniably confirme, that it is im∣possible for best improved naturall parts to attaine this sight of the sinfulnesse of first motions.
3 Best im∣proved na∣turall parts cannot dis∣cover the guile of this sin. 3. As their knowledg reacheth not to a sufficient discovery of these two, so neither can best improved naturall parts discover the policie, and wisedome: the deceitfulnesse, and cursed guile, of this sin, the superlative craft of this lust runneth in veines that lie too deep for any naturall eye to discover. It's policy and wisedome cannot be disco∣vered by any that is not wise, and exercised in counter-working to its wisedome; as in laying, and carrying on a plot at chesse or a stratageme in warre, none can disco∣ver the handsome contrivance of it, but one who is well skilled in them, so it is here, none but he which is well skilled (by ex∣ercise of that wisedome which is from a∣bove,) and this skill is only gotten by a con∣stant, and wise exercise of it against this sin, and its wisedome, (none but such a one) can discover this part of it's nature. We observe that he, who shall be able to discerne the policy in which a wise man acteth, and carryeth on his designes, must be either equall, or at least not very much in∣ferior to him, in wisedome: a foole, or any one over matched in politicks, can never find out the right key, nor read the characters in which he writes who very much outgo∣eth him.
This is the case before us, the naturall man is wise to doe evill, very subtile, and politick to frame mischiefe, but he hath no undere∣standing to doe good; he is of weak intelle∣ctuals, indeed a very foole as to any good to be done; he is ever contriving, promoting, and perfecting evill, and doth it craftily; but he cannot discerne this craft, for he cannot either prudently designe, or propose, or pro∣mote, or perfect that which is good. Sin rules, and reignes by waies of profoun∣dest policy, over the hearts of naturall men, and they perceive not the mystery of its go∣vernment; In this sin you shall observe the wisedome of one who plodds and contrives the framing of a lie, or falsehood into a see∣ming truth, that a Judge may not find it out, who laies a lie closely & cunningly together as a false witnesse doth; whence it hath one name in the Hebr:  from cogi∣tavit machinatus est whence  the or∣dinarie name of a forger of a lie, to the pre∣judice of truth, and justice; as the learned John Buxtorfe observeth in his Lexic. Rabbin. in . It is a plotting evill as is rendred in Psal. 37.12, It is wise, as one who undermines, and circumvents by frau∣dulent waies, (it is  Ps.
10.7.) as under pretence of friendship Lam. 1.19. as Israel was deceived by his lovers, or as a man is deceived by his neighbour; Prov. 26.19. Albeit the regenerate soule make these crafty Gibeonites Hewers of wood, and draw∣ers of water for the spirituall temple, and its service, yet they still reteine the Policy, and wily disposition of Gibeonites, as ready, and subtile to deceive after, as before they were subjugated to the Law of the Spirit of life. This sin is wise, as one who seduceth with the craft of an harlot, or the subtlety of a crafty disputer there is Rom. 8.7. there are 2 Cor. 10.4. Mark 7.21. It deceiveth, with baits there is James 1.14. and there are , Eph. 4.22. which I doubt not is an Hebraisme much the same with that of Jer. 7.9. setting forth the superla∣tive fraud of this sin, by reason of which the heart is unsearchable to any but the Lord: briefely whilest that little good which sur∣vives our fall is as a negligent, remisse, and carelesse, raw souldier, this indwelling lust is as an old experienced commander, resolute, and vigilant also in carrying on what he hath
politiquely contrived. Now look o∣ver the life of a man wise in his generation, & consider what he thinks of that the Apostle calls wisdome of the flesh, & whether he appre∣hends there can be any great sinfulness in it, whilest he judgeth it a desirable & high part of perfection; so that part of this wisdome of the flesh, which is subserviēt to his covetous∣nesse, and provides satisfaction for that lust, is accounted by him a very good quali∣fication, an excellent ability to improve his estate: though Ephraim be a merchant, in whose hands are the ballances of deceit, yet he sees no iniquity in it, nor will he believe it is any.Hos. 12.7. That fleshly wisedome which is subser∣vient to Revenge, and sinfull, returning evill for evill, and doing this secundum artem too, may not (with the naturall man's good leave) be judged by us, and he will never judge it, a sin, and culpable; but it, must be accounted, and called a good, and excellent fitnesse to live in an injurious world, a ne∣cessary requisite to secure, and protect our selves: that devillish wisedome which sub∣serveth to Ambition, (proud in it's aimes, and insatiable in it's acquisitions,) is reckon∣ed by such men an excellency, fitting them for noble employments, to mannage the af∣faires of great States, and to raise their fa∣milies: but it never was truly stated
by any other then the holy Law of God, and a re∣newed heart: None other but such a rule, and such a hand applying it, ever discover∣ed the sinfull crookednesse, and perversnesse of this wisedome. Other instances I forbeare, since you may make a judgement of the rest by these, and I will not insist on the parti∣culars in which much of this wisdome is seen to a spirituall eye; as it is crafty 1. To put falfe Glosses on that Good which it opposeth, to hinder it lest it should be done; and on evill, to promote, and facili∣tate it, that it may be done, though the Law forbid it. 2. If it cannot quite hinder, then it will oppose one good with another, to the over∣turning and marring of both: it will justle out one duty with another: or, 3. Vigorously carry on the designe of one lust by a saint offer to resist, and prevent it by a contrary: enraging lust by seeming to intend the chaining of it up, and cunningly awakening it's strength, by an attempt to curbe it: or. 4. Improving lusts interesse by a crafty re∣ceding at one time, or in one case, that it may with more certainty, & vigour obtain at another time, or in other cases: yeelding
to the losse of a penny, that it may get advan∣tage of gaining a pound, Or 5. Enlarging its kingdome over men by a seeming rationall uniformity, and even∣nesse in all it's designes, and actings; thereby obteining a more uncontrolled authority o∣ver them, and fortifying this against what attempts may be made to shake its govern∣ment. These are the methods (though but few of those many) which continue, and improve the kingdome of sin but are not discerned, nor can be discerned, by the sinner how well soever improved in his naturall parts; Again fourthly 4. Naturall parts can never dis∣cover the strength and power of this sin. Best naturall improved parts never did or can discover the strength, and power, of this sinne the unregenerate, (though as excellent for naturals as Paul was, & as well improved as he, yet) cannot make a discovery of the strength of this body of sin, of the power of it, swaying to sin, and carrying him captive, and deteining him captive to his sinfull passi∣ons, and lusts. It must be granted indeed, that such a one may find out, and easily de∣monstrate a very high degree of strength; and power in all naturall inclinations: So great a strength, that
none can conquer, or change it but by destroying the subject of it, or changeing it in it's being. You may moulder a clod to dust, or grind a stone to smallest sands, you may scatter it into the ayre, and force it upward, but in the mean time you have not, nor can you turne the streame of its affection, nor alter the natu∣rall inclination, of the least of those sands, or dusts that they shoud not propend, & hasten to their rest, you may destroy the greatest quantity of fire you ever saw but you can∣not alter the least sparke of it, that it should not fly upward. So invincibly strong are naturall affecti∣ons; and such like strength naturall light may now (for it formerly hath) discover, in the passions of men, in whom they are so strong that they cannot be dispossessed of their hold, though they may be reduced to some moderate exercise of their power: upon which discovery many very excellent discourses have been raised by some of these men, many Morall Treatises of the Rise, Na∣ture, Manner of working, strength, &c. which are, in the various passions, of men, yet all these are farre short of a full enarra∣tion of the sinfull strength which is in these
Passions (to use their common language) in these lusts to use the Scripture words, nor is this spoken without book: for this is evident from 1. Their Boasts of a conquest, and Victo∣ry over their lusts while they are servants to most, or all of them, the best of our Mo∣rall Philosophers being such who lived in a servitude to those Passions, which, they boa∣sted were subjugated to their Reason; this is the case of our carnall professours, generally they boast of a conquest over those sinnes, which are not yet broken in their strength, but onely abated a little in their violence; as in all our loose, and prophane livers upon their civillizing, and growing lesse notori∣ous in sinne. But that man hath not know∣ledge of his enemies power that triumphs upon repelling some few of his stragling, extravagant parties: Thy lust it may be broke out, and disturbed the more sober Morall part of the neighbourhood, and now thou hast repelled them, and taught them to keep closer in, but yet their strength re∣maines intire: And canst thou upon this rea∣sonably suppose thou hast tryed the utmost power of them? 2. It is evident our carnall improved men
have not full, and sufficient knowledge of this mighty power of indwelling lust, from those sleight, contemptuous thoughts they have of the strength of this sin; they are bold, and confident that they can soone subdue it, that they may be in this expedi∣tion a Caesar and at once, view and conquer them; Did that commander ever truly know thestrength of his enemy who contemned, and sleighted his match? who made nothing in his thoughts of such an enemy who will make nothing of him in the encounter? And can the naturall improved man, who is eve∣ry way inferiour to, and overmatched by, his lusts, who is worsted (with ease) in the encounter, with a single lust, yet sleights the combined force of all his lusts, can he be thought to know the power, and strength of them? Yet 3. The directions to helpes, and means for subduing these passions which best im∣proved naturall men have given, the Auxi∣liaries they advise us to, the armour they prepare for us, in this warre, beeing so excee∣dingly disproportioned, and unsuitable to the nature of the enemy, and his strength, do evidently declare their unacquaintednesse with his strength.
Can strong holds be battered down with an empty sound, or with Pot-Guns? can you hope he knowes his enemies strength who is perswaded to venture his thousands against the enemies ten thousands? yet such is this mistake of the naturall man concer∣ning the strong holds of sin, which he at∣tempts to reduce by weake, morall directi∣ons, which at best do but better discipline his naturall lusts, no way destroy their pow∣er. 4. The manageing & ordering that power which they have gotten together against this enemy is farther witnesse to this, they employ their strength chiefely (I might say onely) against the impetuous violence of their Passions, and against the extravagant eruptions of them (to the view of men,) leaving the main strength of lust unattaqued, they set not on the reforming of the heart first, and the destroying the methodicall, and disciplined part of this sin. Together with 5. Their presumptions that they have strength enough in themselves to conquer it at last, though it should be long ere they effect it. He loseth ground & strength every day, yet
hopes to conquer at last, and he might so, if he had helpe from another to undertake for him, but that he hath not, neither seeke's it; Now the case standing so, Who sees not that the naturall man how ever improved knowe's not the strength of indwelling sin? View farther and consider in the worke of mortification, how sadly our teachers who are carnall (though excellently impro∣ved) have mistaken in their doctrines, our hearers in their apprehensions, and both hearers and teachers in their practice, and exercise of mortification. It is very hard to perswade them there is more strength in this sin then in a habit, or custome; they'l be∣lieve that an unhappyer imitation of what was worst hath twisted a cord which strong∣ly fetters them; but they see not, nor consi∣der, they were borne captives, and the chaines are strong as naturall affections, and inclinations. The most of our carnall Hea∣rers, will venture, so desperately, upon giving their naturall lusts advantage against them∣selves that we cānot but cōclude: That their Running on many, dangerous, & strong temptations Provoking and awaking (even sleeping) lusts
Casting away their armes, as faith, love, feare, the Word &c. Refusing that aid which is offered to them in the Gospell Praying seldome, faintly, cursorily a∣gainst this sin Neglecting to watch over each other &c. Are I say, (and you cannot but say they are) evidences clearer then can be excepted against, that they see not the strength of this Powerfull adversary, which warres a∣gainst our soule, 1 Pet. 2.11. Triumphing conquerour, which leads us captive, Rom. 7.23. Ruling Lord, to whom we yeeld our selves servants, Rom. 6.17. Law of our members which we obey, Rom. 7.23. King which rules in our mortall body, Rom. 6.12. In a word, He onely knowes what his ene∣my can do, and the utmost strength of him, who enters the lists, who declares an irre∣concileable warre against his enemy, who resolveth to be victorious in
the utter ruine of his enemy: Now this the naturall man never doth, he never so encountreth with sinne. Others may heare of Carthag's strength it was Rome that best, and fullyest knew it: or as a man who swimmes with the streame may guesse at it's strength, but he knowes it who swimmes against it: so here the best naturall man with all his improvements re∣sist's, and opposeth this sin but very little, and therefore cannot know much of its strength for this is a fruit of an experienced soule that is exercised in warring against his flesh∣ly lust, whilest Sampson slept bound in the twists of his own haire he knew not that strength, which he found in them when he was awakened: secure naturall men are thus ignorant of sin's strength. 5. The best improved naturallman can never discover the first rise O∣riginall and spring of Lust. 5. The best improved naturall man with all the helpes you can suppose (except the law, or divine revelation) never did, or ever will be able to discover the first Rise, ori∣ginall, and spring of that lust, which doth dwell in the naturall man, and reigneth over him. I will not enquire how long the men before the floud (who lived without the Church, and were not among those that were accounted the sons of God, and
who called on his name) might reteine some broken traditions concerning the fall of Adam: nor will I now consider, how long the degenerating sons of Cham might re∣taine some confused, traditionall know∣ledge of this: sure it was not long, but in succeeding ages, it was quite forgotten, and the best improvements of the heathen, who were , could never recover it. Dr Kellet Misces. l. 1. c. 6. p. 104. Search their Archives, analize their pro∣foundest disquisitions, revolve their naturall Theologists, observe whether they ever came neer the discovery of this sin, in its first spring and fountaine. The Question unde malum? puzzelled all the Philosophers, and though some of them enquired onely the originall of the evill of suffering, and affliction, (which is more easily found out then the evill of sin, and whence it springs) yet were at a losse Maximus Tyrius the Platonick Philosopher in his 25 serm: thus enquires, ; which he principally states (as appeares by what he there saith) in reference to the evills we suffer, which he calls . In discoursing of which he much mistaketh, though of an ea∣sier discovery then the originall of morall evill. Affectus (and you
must note these speake of affections which need to be recti∣fied and moderated by vertue) sunt à natu∣râ, was the opinion of Plato, Aristotle, and their followers: and they generally con∣cluded Perturbationes seu affictus à naturâ dari, & ad virtutem esse utiles.Lips. ma∣nuduct, ad stoic. Phil. l.3. dis∣ser. 7. The best and soberest wits among them, after a long and successelesse enquiry, have prudently defisted from farther enquiry, resolving to content themselves, that the cause of all evill in man was to be sought onely in man; though how to find out which was the first cause of the inordinate passions of the mind they knew not particu∣larly, and distinctly, but a confused, and generall notion they had, that it was from man himselfe. How little did the Mani∣chees understand of this? whose irrationall absurd conceptions of this tell us they infi∣nitely mistook the truth. It was a foule mi∣stake of the Pelagians too, which they for∣merly, and others of late have fancied tou∣ching the irruption of sin into the world. That which cruciated Augustin: so much Quoniam Deus fecit omnia haec, bonus bona, majus quidem, & summum bonum minora fecit bona; sed tamen & creans, & creata bona sunt omnia: unde malum? confess. l. 7.
c. 5. § 2. which place he bestowes on the disputes, which were ordinary in this mat∣ter, concluding nothing there; but else where he concludes, Non erat exitus, quaere∣bam aestuans, unde malum? quae illa tormenta parturientis cerdis mei? qui gemitus? Deus meus! l. 7. conf. c. 7. §. 1. This I say which so troubled him, was undiscovered to them without the Church, they could not, and it is much undiscerned by naturall men with∣in the Church, because they will not see the truth: so when Pelagians might have known the originall of sin from Rom. 5.12. they chose rather to corrupt the text (as Chemnit. observesChemniti∣us Loc. de peccat, orig: p. 213. b. et p. 214 a fol. edit. 1653.) and so hath Pighius de∣clined from the truth in this point, as who will may observe in his controversy de Pec∣cat: origin: passim. And the Papists know not, or else they would professe it, sure: (for right knowledge of such a truth, in a councell, and gathered for such an end as a councell should be, would have engaged them to own the truth, and openly declare it. What ever they think of it, I know that God, and our Lord Jesus, (who will be ours, and their Judge) will account such know∣ledge to
be no knowledge. In a word, the  Endlesse disputes of men who enquire in∣to this beyond what is necessary, and in the enquiry lose what knowledge they seemed to have had, and grow either sceptickes, or hereticks, are sull proofe that they cannot with best improved naturall parts discover the spring and fountaine of that sinfulnesse which is in our nature. But 6. The best improved naturall men could never discover the finfull frame of beart in its deserts. 6. Lastly (though I might adde more) the best improved naturall man never did, or ever could he discover the desert, of this sinfull frame of his heart; it was a thing they never could perswade themselves to believe that such a punishment might be justly inflicted on them so soone as ever they were borne into the world: Indeed on their principles it was impossible they should discover this for they acknowledged not the sinfulnesse of nature, or else that this was not great, and therefore no obligation to punishment, or but to a small punishment. It is an unquaestioned part of Justice to pro∣portion the penalty to the crime, and true state of it, ut in parvis leviora in magnis gravi∣ora supplicia irrogentur:Justitiae distributi∣vae est suū cuique tri∣buere. So that they who accounted this a small fault could not think it worthy of so sore a punishment as we know it deserveth: if you should hear a Phi∣losopher
reading a lecture of the innocency of man, of the blamelesse, (though weake) state of an infant, and it should be told him, that yet, there were who held this opinion that such might be justly condemned for e∣ver, and cast into that place of misery where offenders suffer for their offences, he would dispute the case and denie the justice of the proceedings. Thus doe very many within the Church, view the Schoolmens determi∣nation, that infants shut out of Heaven lie under the Punishment of losse, not sense, that they onely misse of the enjoyment of God, but fall not under a punishment of Paine, and Griefe, a de∣termination which savours much of a nesci∣ence and ignorance of the desert of indwel∣ling lust: on the same generall mistake doe Both Socinians, Remonstrants, and Anabap∣tists deny that any are, or justly may be pu∣nished for that sin we call originall sin, or in∣genite lust which dwell's in us: hence they load the orthodoxe with many reproachfull exclamations of curelty, and injustice, and brand the truth with unheard of harshnesse, with in∣credible severity and Adamantine mercilesnesse against poore innocents, such like charges we know are laid upon the teachers of the
Doct∣rine, touching the demerit of our sinsull na∣ture: & it is no wonder for they judge by the mistaken nature of the cause, and erring in their apprehensions of the merit of the cause, do as widely erre in their assigning the pu∣nishment due to it. But we who are taught by the Law, and enlightned by the spirit of God, so that we can see, and do know that we are all transgressors of that Covenant, which promised life to perfect obedience, threat∣ned death to the first sin (which is ours, and brought death into the world) that we are children of wrath, Eph. 2.3. Under the curse having not continued in all things written in the Law to doe them, Gal. 3.10. that in Adam we all died, 1 Cor. 15.22. that we are borne so, that Joh. 3.3.unlesse we be new born we cannot enter in∣to the kingdome of Heaven; we who are instru∣cted by the spirit in such truths, as these which are confessedly above the reach of the best naturall eye, do see that desert of hell, and eternall separation from the presence of God, which is due to this sinfull nature of ours: though others do not discover it nor will believe it: we see that by reason of this Lust our life is sull of sin and our persons (from the wombe) obnoxious to the wrath of God.
SERMON II. Rom. 7. v. 7. latter part. For I had not knowne Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shalt not Covet. 4 Generalls propound∣ed, viz. a Rational account of this truth. I Now come to the Fourth Generall proposed, viz: a ratio∣nall account of this truth; However proud selfe-admi∣ring men do thinke that Wisedome is with them; And such perfect wisdome too, that a matter of such import and weight, as this, cannot be hid from them; yet certainly if they will consider, and duely weigh, what reason sug∣gesteth, in such like cases,) they will see, that as truth affirmes they cannot, so reason shews us why they cannot discover this Sin. For, Looke what reason suggesteth, a cause of difficulty, or impossibility hindering us in the enquiry, and fearch, after the full
disco∣very very of what we do but imperfectly, and ob∣scurely know in things of another nature: The same, (proportionably applyed to this businesse in hand,) will evidently manifest the Difficulty of Getting any considerable mea∣sure, and the impossibility of attaining any full, and perfect knowledge of this sinne, by the best improved Naturall man in the world: And this I hope to make Good to you: Reas. 1. Be∣cause a Na∣turall man makes use of a crooked Rule. 1. Because in that enquiry which the na∣turall man maketh into sin in the Generall, and in that enquiry he maketh into this in particular, he proceedeth to make the disco∣very by a Distorted, and Crooked Index, or Rule, indeed there is both a distorted and crooked faculty which judgeth, and a crook∣ed rule by which it judgeth: The Reason or judgement of a naturall man is perverted by sinne; So the Scripture which is the truth of God, and speaketh ouely truth, assures us one while that naturall men are a crooked and perverse generation, Phil. 3.15. of reprobate mind, Rom. 2.28. And froward in their paths, Prev. 2.15. that They have no understanding, Psal. 14.2. no rectified understanding to seeke, apprehend and judge of the things of God, and to walke with him: but a perver∣ted understanding (which turneth them
aside) they all have as is intimated in the third verse. Otherwhile the Scripture saith they are of a froward heart, Prov. 11. v. 20. wise and crafty in their Councels, but yet these Coun∣cels are still froward, Job 5. v. 13. and they are (to a man) of a perverse heart, Prov. 12.8. whose conceptions and disputes are perverse also, they are  1 Tim. 6.5. There is a crook∣ednesse and obliquity in the understanding of this naturall man, which (not the Scrip∣tures onely, but) reason it selfe also confir∣meth to us, and complaineth of; both which are with admirable, yet Aenigmaticall inge∣nuity expressed Tabula Cebetis.by a beautifull woman, sit∣ting within, or by the Gate, at which we enter into this life, who deceiveth with a faire shew, and her name is . , in her hand a Cup, in which the drinke,  (as my Author recites it) and of this , whence it is (saith the Author) that they . But why do I put you to the
trouble of ghessing at the truth from Riddles, when Max. Ty∣rius Serm. 34. others speake plaine, . It is no easie thing to find out truth, the soule of man is in danger to misse it by it's over readinesse to judge or doubt of that it apprehends; like a warpt or shaken beame in a ballance, never gives an exact difference of weights, so reason Pecca∣tum per∣turbatio rationis at∣que ordinis Vid. Fr. Pi∣cum Mi∣rand. de vanit. doct. disturbed or distorted by sin. Humanum est errare, nescire labi, is a testimony we need not be ashamed of in a Pulpit, though we first learn't it in a Grammar Schole. Indeed the many errours of the best Philosophers in many plain cases; the many Assertions of the Pecca∣tum per∣turbatio rationis at∣que ordinis Vid. Fr. Pi∣cum Mi∣rand. de vanit. doct. uncertainty of all things (whence it came to passe that some undoubted truths were censured for the Bold determinations of rash men.) These I say are proofe, that the most indulgent Fa∣thers, and strenuous Patrons of Nature's a∣bility, did see and confesse an uncertainty at least, or a perversnesse and crookednesse in the mind of man. Now if there be such an obliquity in the mind, it cannot be, that it should rightly and fully discover this sin, for a crooked and oblique thing can never be fully discovered by that which is crooked, and this stands on this bottome,
Rectum est Index sui & obliqui. The mind then of a na∣turall man best improued, most refined, and rectified, remaining still in greatest part vi∣tiated and corrupted with such a pravity can be at best but a partiall, weake, and in∣adequate discerner of the vitiousnesse and evill of this sinne. Every sinne is an unrighteous∣nesse, and every naturall man's mind is , or he is & unrighteousnesse, doth not unvaile unrighteousnesse: every sin is an irregularity, and every na∣turall man is  without a perfect rule, and he is called  in respect to that part in him which is capable of, and subject to a Law; which is either solely the Ratio∣nall part, or principally at least; the sensuall and brutish being under a Law by concomi∣tance or affinity to the rationall. The ratio∣nall directly, immediately, and per se: The sensitive indirectly, remotely, & per accidens. The best improved  cannot possibly be a sufficient judge of that which is , because both are irregular; you ever lost your labour, and missed finding the obliqui∣ty of that line which you measured by a crooked line, indeed if your measuring line be
somewhat straiter then your measured line you may find out somewhat of its croo∣kedness but not all, you may find a degree of obliquity more in the one then in the o∣ther But not justly how much more: as you cannot find out justly the capacity of an un∣known vessell by measuring it with a lesse vessell, once to be filled, whence you'l soon see that the unknown conteines more, but you remain uncertaine how much more, so some Naturall improved men walking by a strai∣ter line then the loose and viler sort of them, bringing these men to be tryed by their better & straiter life have found a crooked∣nesse and deflection from rectitude, but have not found how great this deflection is. A Scipio, A Cato or a Drusus Germanicus parallel∣ling themselves with a lascivious Poet, with an incontinent Clodius can see there is much of this sin, indeed much more of the fruit of this sin (but they cannot see absolutely or certainly how much more) in these persons, then in themselves. C. Fabritii continentia M. Curiite∣nuites vi∣ctûs Cicer. Parad, 1.The examples of some eminent among them for gratitude & temperance may con∣vince and shame others ungratefull and
in∣temperate men, but such examples disclose all the ingratitude & intemperance which lyeth in such breasts; The Piety, and religious observance of the Deities in such as Lucius Albanus who preferred his Countrey Gods and their Priests to his own wife and Children.Val. Max∣im l. 1. c. 1. Or in a Metellus who forbad the consul to goe out of the Citty towards Africa before he had sacrificed and so began his journey with the good leave of the Gods, &c. The Piety of such men being made the standard to measure some others who contemned all re∣ligion did find out some what, (but not how much) of Atheisme and irreligion was in these men. In a word the Scribes, and Pharisees (who sate in Moses chaire and thought it easier so to do then to walke in Moses his Law) judging the life of a Publican or barlot by the strictnesse of a Pharisaicall holynesse, soon saw much wanting in these persons, and so judged them sinners with a witnesse; but they could neither declare how great sinners they were, nor could they detect their own inhaerent wickednesse, because their judgment perverted already could not
give a right sentence; as an uncertaine bal∣lance into which you cast different weights may shew there is a difference, the one ligh∣ter then the other but cannot shew how much difference, how much one is lighter then the other: So here The best improved understanding while naturall onely is an uneven ballance, into which cast you the naturall heart and life at one end and the law at the other. It will discover a want of weight in the heart and life bui because it knowes not exactly how much the law outweigheth them there can∣not be a certaine discovery what and how great want of weight there is in such a heart and life let this then stand, the first demon∣stration, Rectum est index sui et obliqui, what∣ever is not perfectly strait cannot be a perfect measure to find out the obliquity of that which is crooked, but now the best im∣proved naturall man is not strait, nay he is very crooked, (his unsanctified improve∣ments make him more perverse, and croo∣ked) and the naturall heart is (by it's sinful∣nesse) distorted, which should be measured therefore I doubt not to conclude, this per∣verted understanding cannot discerne fully the sinfulnesse of a perverted heart.
2. Reason, because there is much spi∣rituall wic∣ednesse in this sin. 2. The best improved naturall man can∣not attaine a right and full discovery of the sinfulnesse of his nature, or carnall heart; because this sinfulnesse consists much of a spirituall wickednesse and the naturall man in his highest improvement remaines car∣nall and sensuall. There is indeed a spirituall deformity or wickednesse in every sin, though not equally in every sin, some sins are more sensuall, and brutish as riot, in use of meats, and drinkes; uncleannesse in the abuse of our bodies, and such like sins which are committed by us principally with the parts, and appetite which in us is common with the bruit beasts called by Hierocles unreasona∣blenesse of those who are wholly immersed in matter. Other sins proceed from more sublima∣ted affections, and those which are refined from the drosse, and lees of matter and sense; as being immediately from the rationall soul without the intervention of bodily organs as Atheisme, Idolatry, &c. The first irregular passions of the minds which are not onely spirituall wickednesse because originally springing from the
mind which is a spirit, but also because contrary to a holy spirituall law, for so the Apostle speakes of the Law, that it is spirituall and if sin be a transgression of this law there must needs be somewhat of spirituall wick∣ednesse in every particular sin, were it need∣full to confirme this it might be fully confir∣med from. Sin's contrariety to a Lawgiver who is a spirit and commands spirituall obedience to every command, and also in every act of obedience, as also from Sin's affecting, or inhaering in a spirituall substance as in the prime, immediate and proper subject of it which is the rationall soule. This then is certaine that there is a high degree of spirituall wickednesse in the frame of our carnall hearts, now a naturall man highest improved in his parts can never be more or better then Naturall or Carnall in his Apprehension, and judgment of things; his understanding proceed's in a carnall manner, is indeed, as now weakned by sinne proportioned onely to a low, sensuall, and carnall object, or if it lift up it selfe towards what is spirituall it is not in a spirituall man∣ner, view and consider well the Notions which Reason (left to it selfe) hath
framed of a Deity its Being, Attributes, Providence, and Happinesse, Religious worship of the De∣ity both as to things it selfe and manner of it, Future world and just judgment with the Consequences of it, &c. how have, These spirituall objects been debased in the apprehensions of these men, and presen∣ted to us in either absurd, or (at best) in a manner suited to our senses? a sufficient discovery of the carnall and sensuall facul∣ties of a sinfull mind. Had we no other evidence to prove this, it were enough, and more then enough, which we have from their Poets concerning the just punishments of soules for sin, which being spirituall substances, and convicted and condemned for spirituall offences (as sinnes are) should be supposed punished with spirituall punishments by that judge who is a spirit, but will you heare what the Pu∣nishments are? How described? Primis in faucibus Orci Luctus & ultrices posuere cubilia curae. Pallentesque habitant morbi, tristisque se∣nectus, &c.Virg. 6. Aend.
And another Poet who is beholding to the charity of some one or two that would report him a Christian converted from Heathenish ignorance (though there be more charity in their good wishes then there is of truth in their story,) This Poet as others became vaine in his imagination of future judgment, and is right onely in this Generall that the judge Exaequat damnum meritis in the particulars how vaine and carnall! Muta ferarum Cogit vincla pati, truculentos ingrit ur∣sis. Praedonesque lupis; fallaces vulpibus ad∣dit, &c. The best improved naturall man then, is very carnall in his judgment and apprehen∣sion; therefore not able to judge of, or find out, that spirituall wickednesse which is in it selfe; and this I bottome on these two un∣doubted truths. Mensura & mensuratum sunt ejusdm Ge∣nris Extensions must be measured by Ex∣tension else you will never find them out. Likewise
Sense must be tryed by sense, and reason cannot be judged but by reason. Spirituall's whether in gener Boni as faith, hope, love, repentance; all the graces of the spirit, or whether in Genere mali as unbeliefe, despaire &c. which are contrary to grace can be discerned by none but a spirituall fa∣culty for Inter objectum & organnm proportio sit opor∣tet which is the other undoubted maxime on which this second demonstration is grounded: Now the evill to be discerned is a spirituall object, the best organ, a Na∣turall improved man can possibly use to dis∣erne it, is Carnall, and Sensuall and as there is no proportion between this obiect, and this organ, so there will be as little propor∣tion between the reall true nature of the obiect and this Judgwent which is made of it. In one word as we know certainly that the naturall man doth easily find out, strong∣ly convince himselfe, (to an ingenuou ac∣knowledgment and deep resentment) of that part in this sin which is proportioned to his apprehensions so we know he cannot find out the other (which is the greater) part of it being so much above his apprehensions.
3 Demon∣stration. The best improved naturall man can make no further dis∣covery then the light of his received maximes reach. Thirdly, the best improved naturall man without a divine revelation, can make a dis∣covery no farther then the light of his re∣ceived maximes diffuse themselves, as a man of quickest sight cannot see at any time be∣yond that space which is enlightned; and though many times he doth not see to the utmost bound of it, yet he never sees beyond it; though many times, he fall short and his sight is over-run by the longer race which the Sun beame run's, yet it never out-runs the shortest ray of light; but keeps even with it, taking up where the Ray first with∣drawes it's light. So the naturall man walking in his search after this sinfull frame of nature by a light that runs not farre enough to discover this whole mystery of iniquity, must needs give over his search, and fall so farre short of the discovery, as his light fal's short of pene∣trating the darke corners, and recesses o this sinne: Now the greatest and clearest light with which these naturall men entered this profound deep heart, was this, Omne pec∣catum est contra naturamSo some of the School∣men Pecca∣re nihil a∣liud est quārecede∣re ab eo, quod est secundūna∣turam. Aq. 1.2. q. 109. art. 8. c.. And having light∣ed up this lamp, they made some shift to discover some little, and indeed it was com∣paratively but little to what lay hidden, they
could tell us that Bonum was secundùm natu∣ram, Senec. Epist. 118. and else-where o∣thers could tell us, Bonum est quod naturâ est absolutum, Cicer. de finib. citing Diegen. Ba∣bylon. And Laertius . Hence indeed it followes, that since contrariorum contraria est ratio; Malum, must be, quid prater vel contra naturam. . Now let us take up this darke Lanthorne, and see how farre this could likely guide them in this enquiry I say it could guide them but very little in judging of any, but lesse in judging of this sinne; for this Maxime of theirs occasioned their mistakes, as is evident. The early springing of corruption occasion of the naturall mans igno∣rance of this sin. 1. The very early springing of this bitter root was an occasion of their errour in judg∣ing of this sinne, though they proceed by this undoubted maxime, for be it, Peccatum est ontra naturam; yet what is contra naturam is also later then nature, and of some after seed time, and springs up afterward. The Gardner sowes good seed, the weeds spring up afterwards; the Statuary beautifieth the Statue, wormes and blemishes are the un∣welcome birth of injurious time, and rough∣er usage: Diseases are the rust of the body, and a rust is contracted by some after ma∣ligne influence.
In this manner then, the naturall ma best improved, seduced, and drew him∣selfe into an errour touching this sinne: He lookes to the early budding of nature ob∣serves what the first fruits are: And finding them so early, concludes they are not  but . And so rather acquits them as innocent or commends them as lau∣dable, then suspects them as culpable, o condemneth them as guilty. He knoweth and there is much truth in it, that primum i quovis genere est maximè conformè producenti if Nature then lying open to his view, and observation first produceth such effects (as we by the Law know to be sinne.) If the workings of this sinfull frame be judged the first fruits of nature, as indeed they are ap∣prehended, and judged by some men, no wonder if they conclude them as farre from being contra naturam, and blame worthy in their morall consideratiō, as they observe they are before others in their naturall spring and birth. This indeed is the of the Naturall best Improved man, that these moti∣ons are sundum naturam (which is true on∣ly of corrupted nature to which these moti∣ons are consonant) therefore not vitious in
themselves, nor from a Vitious fountaine. In one word this light Omne vitium est contra naturam could not discover what that nature is which thus is made the law con∣demning vice; but it needed another light to discover that, viz: the word, and spirit of God, by which we know what that nature is to which sin is a contrariety, and so we can discover by this rule more of its sinful∣nesse, because we know more of the holy∣nesse of primitive created nature in a con∣trariety to which it is true that sin seconda∣rily doth consist, (I say secondarily) for sin is primarily a contrariety to the holy nature of God, and so farre as this is copyed out in us, and remaines in our nature so farre it is true to say Qud cntra naturam, est pea∣tum, but the truth is A naturall man can no more discover the deformity of this sinfull frame by comparing it with his notion of nature, then a man can discover the great unlikenesse of a picture from the first patterne of it, by comparing it with a draught of the same picture taken by the copy that is already greatly defa∣ced. Could the naturall man come to a sight of that excellent
frame in which our nature was first modelled, he might probably dis∣cerne how much we are unlike our selves, how much contrariety there now is, to that holynesse which once we had, and so how much sinfulnesse there now is in us, but He cannot do so, the glasse in which he beholds this naturall frame is full of spots, and darke pieces which hide, and dissemble the greatest part of those spots and blemishes which are in us. But beside this mistaken notion of Na∣ture, and its first visible actings. 2. Graduall increase of this sins strength is occasiō of na∣turall mans ignorance of this sin. 2. There is another thing that occasions the naturall man's error and renders it im∣possible he should discover this sin fully; That is, the Graduall increase, and constant growth in the soule which keeps even pace with his improvement in his naturall, and acquired abilities. It is a sin that loseth not it's strength by its long continuance; its vigour abates not in old age; and this occasions this conclusion that it is not contra but secundùm naturam and the naturall man thinks his conclusion rationall, I see saith he All preternaturalls are still in the waine and lose as much of their strength as they get of age.
A winter floud is not (after a month or six weeks faire weather) like what it was be∣fore, But I see a faire river increaseth its stock by running and the same beares up a gallant ship, before it loseth it selfe in the ocean, which would hardly beare the smal∣lest fishers boat a mile, or two from its spring head A Glaring Comet shines brighter then, Venus, or any of the brightest starres; but it grows dimme and fades quickly; Because these are not from naturall causes working orderly and per se but are the effects of a cause that acts per accidens to the producti∣on of them. And by this piece of Sophistry deceives himselfe arguing from the graduall increase of this sins strength to a denyall or a dimi∣nution of it's sinfulnesse, and he will not entertaine at any hand a thought that it can be sinfull which he apprehends to be na∣turall. But it is so much the more sinfull for this, as those are greater diseases which in∣crease by their continuance on us, or those deadlyest poisons whose violence awakeneth & strengtheneth it selfe by its own working. This being a truth and unquestionably
cer∣taine that this sin is still on the increasing hand and though the naturall man sees it not as a sin, yet he doth see it and its growth as a Naturall affection or Passion; and the best of naturall men that ever lived or boasted himselfe of perfection never did, or could diminish the strength of this sin, or do any more in order to this, then a rider doth breake, and diminish the strength of the horse which he intends to man for his ser∣vice. I know that this streame did not run, nor now doth it run, with equall violence, and impetuousnesse in every channell: but I know withall, the calmer stream was ever the deepest, and strongest to beare a bur∣then, and hath gradually increased: so it is here, some naturall mens lusts have been violent, and run like an Eager to the over∣whelming all that was like to impede them from satisfying their lusts: others have made lesse noise, but their lusts have runne with more sober strength and borne up the vessel that was laden with a weightier fraught and carried them strongly to seek themselves, and their own glory. Briefly then the Naturall man best impro∣ved takes this for his principle quae indies augesunt sunt â naturâ next observes
that these Passions do grow daily, & if not in vi∣olent rage: yet in even strength: and therefore passes them for the genuine offspring of nature, both lovely and commendable farre from that sinfulnesse which the law assureth us is in them. And how should such a one ever discover the sinfulnesse of that he so strongly imagines to be of no worse ori∣gine then nature. 3. Universall extent oc∣casion of the naturall mans igno∣rance and error. 3. Beside there is a third consideration evinceth the impossibility of the Naturall man's discovering the sinfulnesse of this sin, viz: It's universall extent over all men per∣swades him to an opinion that it is secundum naturam, if this were in some few, not in the most of men, or if in the most yet not in all men; perhaps improved reason might suspect, and discover it's unwarranted In being, and that this were preternaturall and culpable: diseases (I see) are not the same in all men, but reason and risibility are, (I observe also that) learning is not equally dispensed to all, but it is not questionable what all (to a man) have is to be accounted naturall, of such nature are those motions and their principles which the Scripture cals lusts of the flesh; but Philosophy and a Natu∣rall man would call Passions of the mind.
If there were no other vaile upon the eyes of the naturall man, but this, it would be too thick for him to see through it the foul∣nesse of this sin. He knowes too, beside this universality of subject that there is an uni∣versality of time also, according to which it is evident that it comes neare to a likenesse with naturall causes and effects which are perpetually the same in all times, and ages. The Sun ever shined and warmed in the same manner it now doth, the nearer accesse to us ever wrought the same change in the season, &c. Now if in all ages the same passions have appeared in man's nature, how can it be (saith the naturall man) they should be preternaturall or sinfull here he stumbles, fall's, and is not able to rise and recover himselfe. 4. Uniformity of its acting in all occa∣sion of this ignorance and errour. 4. To these three a fourth thing being added makes yet the third demonstration more cleare and discovereth farther the im∣possibilitie of a discovery of this sin by im∣proved nature, now this is, the uniformity of the actings of this sinfull frame of nature, which is such, that there is no variation at all in its actings, unlesse from some accidentall cir∣cumstances: as to the
maine of its actings they are now, as they have been formerly, and they will be (while men are borne the sonnes of Adam) uniforme to themselves in those men who are in other cases equall, and alike. Indeed the temper, strength, and health of body (in some greater, in others lesse,) may somewhat alter the visible part of this sin, or perhaps Birth, Education, and Company, may somewhat heighten the unlawfull pro∣jects, and designes of the naturall man, and be occasion to this sin to attempt greater things; & Satan may possibly adventure to tempt one to a greater wickednesse then he will another, and so in these extrinsecall considerations, there many times is a great unlikenesse, and difformity in mens sins: but in those very men which now were so un∣like, you shall observe as great a likenesse, if you'l give them the same opportunity, the same meanes &c. and make them equall in their advantages to execute, as they are in their natures to contrive. And if we could see the inside of mens plots we should see it may be the same con∣texture in the Ambition Of him that aimes at a Crowne, And
Of him that aims at a pet∣ty Constable's place onely the designe is greater, and the materialls different, but the mind of each equally bent upon them, and alike contriving how to get them. 5. Unweaied and perpe¦tual delight in this sin, and it's a∣ctings occa∣sion of this ignorance. 5. To these take in that delight where∣with unweariedly the naturall best impro∣ved man provideth for his lusts and satisfy∣eth them and you shall observe how greatly this occasioneth his errour and mistake in this enquiry: Thus he argueth, were the na∣turall mans heart so sinfull as the Scripture bespeaks it to be, it seemeth not likely that so much delight could be taken in serving it, in all its projects, and designes: for what is praeternatur all, as all sinne is, must be bur∣thensome and irkesome too, and could not be with pleasure and delight constantly followed, though sometime a more violent exercise for a quarter of an houre be a de∣light, and peasure to us: yet a longer time would make us weary of it, because all vio∣lence is against nature: if the naturall incli∣nations of the heart were sinfull, and pre∣ternaturall the man would be weary of the
pursuit, but unweariednesse argues natural∣nesse of the motion to the movent: And delight bespeakes suitable faculty and object; so that In this manner the best impro∣ved Reason deceives it selfe, and by a mis∣application of a truth, which he understan∣deth not, entangles himselfe in an impossibi∣lity of finding out what he enquireth after as is evident in the particulars mentioned. He that supposeth his owne Notion of na∣ture to be the genuine and adaequate noti∣on of it, but leaves out a maine part of it, and then measureth and judgeth all to be good which suits with that Notion; and that only evill which is contrary to it must needs greatly mistake in his judgement both of good and evill. Thus the naturall man frames a notion of his owne, and represents nature, but considers not its corruption, and thereby calls evill good, and judgeth that small or none, which is an exceeding great sinne. 4. Reason. Because is unwilling to appeare otherwise then as he may beast, and glory in himselfe. A naturall unwillingnesse that he should, and a strong resolution that he will not ap∣peare in other colours, then those he can de∣light in, and which he judgeth beautifull: The naturall man is unwilling to walke a∣broad in his owne cloathes, which are filthy, and to be set forth in
his owne colours: He hateth the light, Joh. 3.20. because his na∣ture, and his workes are indeed, and will ap∣peare in the light to be evill. He is a crafty, and deceitfull tradesman, who will not shew his indifferent, and bad wares, but with the advantage of a darke shop: if there be a par∣cell better then other, he perswades you to take thē to the light; he is willing to own thē, they will prove enough to his intended ad∣vantage: so let what seems good, and such as he thinks may approve it selfe upon a tri∣all, be done by a naturall man, And the neighbourhood shall ring of it, he will walke abroad in that dresse, in it he admires Sinners dote on their sins Ezek. 23.5,7. him∣selfe, and hopes others will do so too, for he would faine be . Therefore hee'l stand it out with Preachers, and dispute the conviction, and maintaine while he can, with Saul, 1 Sam. 15.20. I have obeyed the commandement of the Lord, my wayes are equall, as the proud selfe justifying Jew said, Ezek. 18.25. Naturall men trust they are righteous, and seek this righteousnesse in themselves, Luke 18.9. they establish their owne righteousnesse, Rom. 10.3. they will either find or make roome for boasting: the multitude of Pharisees in our Saviour's time, and all men before and
since (of this stamp) servants to their' lusts, and estranged from the life of God, all our proud merit mongers: all our selfe-charitable, lazy, professours who do not indeed so much as others, but they thinke as well, for they themselves are perswaded, that God loves them, accepts of them, and in this cloathing they will appeare to us (I say) the multitude of such persons, are very evident, and undenyable arguments of the Naturall man's unwillingnesse he should, and resolution that he will not ap∣pear (if he can help it) in his right colours: and this indeed is both a fruit of sinne, and a punishment of it: that though the sinner loves, and embraceth it, yet he would not see the thing he loves; He would not court that with eye which he adores with his heart, He will not part with his sinne, for price bet∣ter then all the world, he will not leave it for heaven; and yet he would not for all the world have a full sight of it, though the enjoyment of his sinne be dearer to him then Heaven, the sight of it is unwelcome to him as hell. A cleare testimony of the base∣nesse both of sin, and of the sinner. Now certainly he will rather turne his eye from prying after sinne, then by a farther search
discover what he is unwilling to find. So that could you suppose him able to find out; yet his unwillingnesse would hinder him, that he never should put forth that ability to the utmost, nor make any discovery of sinne, farther then his unwillingnesse would give him leave; for never did any sinner see more of his sinne then he was willing to see of it, unlesse when God brought him to suf∣fer in some kind or other for his sinne, then he seeth more of it indeed: but let him be quiet, and secure from the hand of the Almighty, and hee seeth no more then he is willing to see of it. Hell hereafter, and punishment now, will convince a sinner, and make him looke on sinne, and see somewhat more then he could desire to see in it: but in the case before us, in an ordinary enquiry after sinne, in order to detect it, and in or∣der to a right knowledge of it; His sight of sinne is never greater then his willingnesse: Nor will be ever see more then he desires to see of it: if the spirit of renovation power∣fully change the sinner, and make him a Saint, it will change this frame of heart, and make him earnestly desirous, and truly willing to see his sinne, and to have a full, and cleare sight of it: The sinner who is enamoured with, and espoused to his sinne,
will deale well with his Beloved in the search, as Mi∣chal did with David, when her father sent to apprehend him, 1 Sam. 19.16,17. when a messenger from God in his Word, or pro∣vidence is sent to search for the beloved lust of a sinner, then 'tis either sick, (as one that needs not now be feared it is dying) or if this serve not, but the lust must be brought out, and so endangered: then 'tis conveyed away, and secured from the stroke of the word and rod, Naturall men will deny the abode of their sinne, as Rahab the Spies: And they have a deepe and darke well to hide their lust in when it is enquired after, as the woman had to hide Jonath: and Ahimaaz, 2 Sam. 17.21. and Bread-corne to spread over it, a faire pretence, that, what (we sup∣pose) is a sinfull lust and working to sinne, is but a necessary provision for the life, and welfare of the man. Nor doth the Scripture onely tell us that men are thus selfe admirers, and unwilling to appeare to themselves in any cloud which might darken this lustre: but also Reason, or Nature. Hence the proud boasts of our vain Philosophy, Neque est ullum bonum de quo non is qui id habeat honestè possit gloriari:Cicer. Pa∣do. 1. and yet higher
then this, they boast of a soule that trusts to his own good and abilities Animus suis bnis viribús{que} fidens,Seneca ci∣ted by Lip∣sius Stoic. Phil. l. 1. dis. 5. and else where Benum mansurum-nullum est nisi∣quod animus ex se sibi invenit Senec. 27. Epist. Best improved nature seeks after what good may be gotten hold on arising from its own soile, and manuring, for the quieting and satisfying of it's mind, and willingly heares no other language then that the Stoicks were wont to speak in, that the wise man (and he is that wise man for every natu∣rall man though vaine would be accounted this wise man) is to be reputed 1. without passion, the soft name which they give to a sinfull and inordinate principle of the soule and so the man must be thought not diminutively bad, but per∣fectly good as Senec, 85. Epist: And Zeno. referente Cicerone 1. Academ. 2.  too so much elevated in his own opinion that he thinks himselfe infalli∣ble in judging. 3. undesectible in acting, so steady in his aime, and drawing the bow that he never misseth the marke and yet this were little unlesse he were, 4.  in the possession and enjoy∣ment of himselfe, and so equall to a
deity, as who so will may see if he will but observe the proud dictates of these vaine men and their swelling Paradoxes, gathered together by Lipsius.Lipsius Stoica Phi∣los. l. 3. tot. Now can it be supposed ratio∣nally probable or possible? that men so strangely possessed with an opinion of such high perfections, should ever be willing to own, or able to discover, such a redundancy and fulnesse of evill in their nature. But fifthly and lastly, 5 Reason. The best improved naturall man cannot reflect upon his soule ac∣cording to the Law of God. 5. Therefore the best improved Naturall man cannot discover the sinfulnesse of his nature because this discovery must be made by a due reflection of the soule on it selfe according to the Law of God, now the na∣turall man cannot reflect thus duely on his nature or on the frame of his heart, for sin under which the Naturall man is (however highly improved) seiseth on that part of the soule which should reflect thus, and slupifies it, and so impedes it; Not from all kind of reflection, and reciprocall observation, on it selfe, but from such a reflection as might produce this knowledg of concupiscence in the Apostle's sense. It is true a Naturall man may looke back upon his outward actions, in particular, or generall, and discover much of
the irregula∣rity of them, he may also reflect upon him∣selfe in a froward fit of violent passion, or when his heart hath been disordered by somewhat that opposed, chwarted, & rebel∣led against his reason, though his opposition were more calme and sedate: thus he may reflect, but he cannot turne his eye inward so as to see that close enmity, universall op∣position, and innate dislike, which his heart beares to every spirituall good, in which consists much the truth, and reality of this knowledge. Sin is a disease that strongly affects both the head, and the heart at once, and so, (a such diseases usually do) it depriveth the sinner of all sense of his Danger & Sicknesse It is not seldome compared in Scripture to these diseases: It is a spirit of slumber, Rom. 1.8. It is a Delirium, or aotage, Ezek. 23.5.7. whereby they are continually entan∣gled in the thoughts, and desires of the sinn they love: sinners are love-sick, and perpe∣tually meditating on the pleasant part e∣sinne, are not able (in this like love-sick persons, to note and observe the faults, an blemishes of that they are enamoured with thus the understanding, and mind are disa∣bled to judge aright. It is a Phrensie,
o madnesse in them, Eccles. 9.3. which cau∣seth them to do not like men but fooles, Ps. 94.8. and Jer. 10.8. like creatures that are acted by sense, and by principles which cannot reflect on themselves. They have no heart, Hos. 4.11. for sin, which is spirituall whoredome, takes away the heart, robs the sinner of his understanding, which is a refle∣xive power; They have no knowledge Ps. 53. to say is there not a lye in my right hand, Isa: 44. Nor doth the Scripture only say this, but you shall find this verified by hu∣mane testimonies touching the maligne in∣fluence of sin: so the Poet,Sophoc. — speaking of the issue of sinfull pride in Ajax, it bereft him of his wits. Likewise Tully tells us Peccatum est perturbatio rationis,Cic. Parad. 3. and what he saith of pleasure is true of every sin, mentem è suâ sede & statu demovet.1 Parad. And however you may doubt the truth of the story, yet the morall of it is very full and to purpose, that Bacchus strook Lyeurgus with blindnesse,
because Lycurgus had contemned him, I say the morall is good. Such a story tells Leon He∣braeus, of Homer & Scho∣rus for con∣tēning God Love or, Cupid. Sin which is a contempt of God, blinds the sinner, and he having lost his eyes can neither see the staines of his garment, or the blemishes in his face. In a word you may as soon expect, and receive a sober account from a madman of his di∣stractednesse, as from the sinner a good ac∣count of his sinfull state. Reason will tell us, that every sin is the turning of the mind from the light, either of Reason within us, or from the light of that su∣preme reason which is without us, which is the fountaine of all that Reason which is in us; and be it from either, still we are turned from it, and so in the darke, and how should darknesse discover darknesse? It being then certaine and an acknowled∣ged truth according to Scripture and rea∣son also, That sin hath a very maligne, and strong influence on the mind, to the stupi∣fying and blinding it, to the destroying the ability (it otherwise might have) to bring it selfe to a tryall and examination of it selfe. It cannot be reasonably denied, that an un∣regenerate man who is altogether under the power of sin, is also under this inability, and unfitnesse to be a judge of himselfe in a matter,
which will require such exactnesse and strictnesse as this will; for it lyeth deep and (as hath been intimated) seemeth like that which is not culpable; seemeth to come neare to that nature, which is not blameworthy, and it must be a good eye which distinguisheth Colours of near like∣nesse; a good tast that discerneth meats that seeme to be the same for favour. Well be it so, Reason improved to the highest, cannot discover this sinfull sin without the Law of God: but may not that reason which (besides the improvement of Education, and learning) hath the Word, and Law of God, to heighten it, though not renewed by the spirit of Sanctification and regeneration, at∣taine to some knowledge of this sinne? Have not many learned men within the visible Church, come to great measures of know∣ledge of this sinne? Do you thinke that all who have been able to dispute about it, to defend the truth, and to overthrow the con∣trary errours, have beene Regenerate, and borne againe, and seen with the eye of Saint Paul, the sinfulnesse of their natures? Do not we heare Sermons and discourses stating this point from men that are sensuall, and carnall, who live to that Lust, which in the Pulpit, in their discourses they condemne?
5th Gene∣rall propo∣posed. The diffe∣rence be∣tween a learned re∣generate▪ and a lear∣ned unre∣generate mans know∣ledge &c. Therefore to prevent this objection, or at least to satisfie it by answering to it, I pro∣posed a fifth thing, viz: What is the difference between a learned, unregenerate improved Scho∣lar his knowledge of this sinne; and the know∣ledge of a regenerate, spirituall sanctified soule: For this doubt must be answered, not by Denying these men to have any or but little knowledge of this sinne; I thinke I should manifestly injure the truth, and be unjust to their memory, and unthankfull to their la∣bours, who have written for the truth in this particular, and I might easily be con∣vinced of a falsehood, if I should deny them to be knowing men, and well studied in these Questions. An sit? Quid sit? Quale & unde sit, &c. which they are able to de∣termine according to truth, and defend when they have determined it. And for ought I know in this they may go farther then some enlightned sanctified foules, who have not the helps of so much learning, or such acute judgments and Insight into controversies. But yet for all this there is a vast difference between these two know∣ledges, the one may be termed, and will one day appear to be an Ignorant knowledge, (pardon the expression) a
knowledge, and yet as good as no knowledge, when the o∣ther knowledge will appear the onely right, and true knowledge: and at present we may observe a great deale of difference in these, as 1. The know∣ledge of a Regenerate soule is a spirituall knowledge. 1. The Knowledge of a regenerate soule is a spirituall knowledge, that of the highest improved unregenerate man is but Rationall at best, and so they differ toto genere; there is not, nor can be a more wide difference be∣tween things and things, persons and per∣sons, then that which is thus founded in what is spirituall and its opposite, and such is the difference in these two sorts of men, one doth see the spirituall wickednesse of this sin, the contrariety that is in it to a spirituall Law, to spirituall obedience, to the spirituall manner of performing it. The other seeth the unreasonable wicked∣nesse of this sinfull nature, the contrariety and incongruity of such a frame of heart to refined Reason; Reason tells the man that there is but one God, that he is only to be worshipped: hence he discovers how un∣suitable to reason it is to have more, or worship more Gods: the spirituall regene∣rate soule sees the spirituall as well as the unreasonable wickednesse of such
Idolatry &c. the like may be said of all the commands of the law, which have both a conformity to reason (all God's precepts are highly rationall) and to that which is higher then now reasnis, and which the Scripture calleth spirituall. All the precepts are of a spirituall nature. Now the learned unre∣generate man compareth this frame of the heart with that part of the Law which is thus proportioned to reason, and seeth how far this frame is dissonant to it, and concludes it so far out of order; it is reaso∣nable he seeth, that the law which is just, and should rule the whole man, should also bind the whole man to be readily disposed, and duly framed to the observance of that Law, and if a part, or the whole frame be not so disposed, he concludes it Peccant and culpable. It is but a reasonable thing that the Law which is so just and good, should be uniformely observed, as well in the first forming of our thoughts, as in the ultimate, and last perfecting of them, and so con∣cludes some unreasonablenesse in the swer∣ving of the first motions. In a word these Learned, Improved natural men in this whole matter see nothing, but what is the object of their
reason, either to be approved, or disallowed, The regenerate foule seeth and considereth, that this law is very spiri∣tuall, and measureth the sinfulnesse of his heart, and the sinfulnesse of its first wor∣kings by this law as spirituall, and so con∣cludes that there is a wickednesse in it, which is of a higher nature then a bare con∣trariety to Reason. As an Artist seeth the excellency or the rarity of a discourse which he heareth, or of an experiment which he feeth, and accordingly judgeth the one consonant to, the other dissonant from the naturall, regular, and certaine consequen∣ces of the Principles and Hypotheses of his art; which discourse a man who is no artist heareth, and understandeth the Grammati∣call construction of the whole, seeth the materialls of the experiment, and the effect wrought, yet falls exceedingly short of that knowledge which the artist hath, and he gets but a Grammaticall knowledge, or such as his sense (with which he perceived the experiment) can help him to, while the Artist hath gotten a cleare, certaine, artifi∣ciall knowledge: 'tis not much unlike in this case, and as the objects of their knowledge thus differ, so likewise the faculties, dispo∣sition, or qualification
differeth, the one knowing by common illumination, the other by a speciall and more then common illumi∣nation of the spirit: but I will not insist on this, it being for ought I know a matter which we cannot so evidently and clearly state, as to make of this any plaine discrimi∣nating note, by which we may cause others to see and understand what the difference is. I know that there is such a difference, and that it is great; I know that one seeth with an eye enlightned by especiall light from the spirit, the other doth not, but I know it is not easie to describe these; and what might be gathered from the effects of each, by which alone they can be discerned, will fall in my way, before I have done with these particulars, therefore I say no more of this now. The first difference is in the Generall laid down by the Apostle in that of 1 Cor. 2.12. for the pardon of, and deliverance from this sin, is one of those things which are , and understood by him only who hath the spirit of God, and being spirituall compa∣reth spiritualls with spiritualls. Who hath the spirit of the world doth not so under∣stand them, because he cannot spiritually discerne
them. v. 14. And it is plainly e∣nough intimated to us by the Apostle in this very chapter, Rom. 7.14. I know (saith he) that the Law is spirituall, though whi∣lest I was carnall and judged carnally of the Law I thought of my selfe as righteous, as blamelesse, Phil. 3.6. because I had not fai∣led of the strictest outward observance of the command, Phil. 3.5. yet now I see the law is spirituall and so there is a spirituall obe∣dience due which I carnall could not give and in defect of this obedience there is a spi∣rituall wickednesse which while I was a Pha∣risee (though learned and as much impro∣ved as any) I did not see; Thus St Paul and the experience of every Saint will confirme to us, how great a difference there is, be∣tween the sight and knowledge he now hath, and that he once had of sinne as it is contrary to the Spirituall Law of God. 2. An un∣regeueraie mans know∣ledgeis a logicall con∣clusion from soeculative principles: The rege∣nerates is from pra∣cticall pre∣mises. 2. A second difference between the know∣ledg which an improved reason with the helpe of the letter of the Law may have of this sin, and the knowledge which a regene∣rate sanctifyed soul hath of this sin, is this, The knowledge of the one is the result, or con∣clusion which ariseth from speculative princi∣ples and truths compared with their naturall, and necessary consequences or deductions: The
knowledg of the other, is a conclusion from the same truths compared with their consequences, and with his own heart and conscience; The regenerate soule knowes this sin by a Practi∣call and experimentall observance of him∣selfe compared with those truths in the word which do containe this doctrine; The unre∣generate man know's it by a bare Logicall and Rationall deduction of a conclusion from such premises which he apprehendeth to be truths in his judgment, though he never found them confirmed by any observed correspondence to his conscience, or Practi∣call judgment. The whole Syllogisme of the one is made up of premises which doe onely float in the head and do not affect the heart: The other maketh up the Syllogis∣me with one proposition at least from his own heart, from that which he hath noted in himselfe, and which he can experimen∣tally averre, this may be seen in these diffe∣rent Sillogismes. The unregenerate man thus proceeds to evince first motions, or frame of heart propending to Atheisme, or unbeliefe &c: To be a sin, because it is of the same species or kind, and differeth onely gradually from Atheisme, or unbeliefe in it's perfected fruit, and product: and therefore
concludes it a rationall inference that Mo∣tions first irritated are breaches of the same Pythag. Sa∣nae mentis ruio dictat, u babere in me convenit ca Volkel. l. 4. c. 20. precept of which the motion perfected is, and so a sinne. The regenerate soule goeth more practically to worke: what hinders or abates my love to, or faith on God, and disposeth me to either staggering in my saith or flagging in my affections is sinfull, but now I find saith the regenerate soule) that such motions such a frame of heart do thus shake my dependance on God, they abate and quench my affections to him, and therefore I know they are sinne. As the knowledge of a redeemed captive who the weight of his chaines, the misery of his state, the drudgery he was put to, the con∣tinuall danger he was in; differeth much from the knowledg which another man who never was in slavery, and captivity hath, (or may have) upon report or reading the story. It is one thing to sit and heare (as Dilo the Carthaginian Queen) the story of fallen and wasted Troy, another thing to see and behold it with Aeneas, querum pars mana fut, yet both she knowes it as well as he, but how different is their knowedge! The children and grandchildren of Captive Jewes in Babylon knew, but yet not
equally and alike with their Fathers or Grandfa∣thers the misery of a strait and tedious siege, of a sore and long famine; My Physician knowes my disease which yet he never felt, but I know it in an other manner, he can talke more of it in generall, but I can tell more feelingly what I suffered and what is the paine: So is it in this case. The learned scholar destitute of Grace, and the spirit of God, can discourse of a blind understanding, of an erroneous judgment, of an inadequate apprehension: So likewise a regenerate soule can speake of these, and when he doth mention them his own heart beares him wit∣nesse, and enformeth him what these sinfull imperfections are, he is acquainted with the dimnesse of his best sight, the mistakes, or pronenesse to mistake, in his clearest, di∣stinctest, and certainest apprehension and (though these apprehensions are not false, yet) he knowes how inadequate, how farre they are from commensurate apprehensions of those things he should be better acquain∣ted with, and all this from a heart affected really, and exercised constantly with the working of this erroneous, blind, rash and heady mind. The selfe-observing experi∣enced
soule seeth this when he heares a Ser∣mon of Heaven and the things of it: when they are laid as open to the view as those things can which were never seen by that eye which could returne to tell us what they are, when they are thus set before us: How little is it we see of them? how prone are we to judge carnally of them? to mea∣sure them by two short a rule? In a word such a one thinkes certainly either his know∣ledge of these is the least of any ones or else that few know lesse then he doth and is most∣ly troubled he cannot know more, it is not so with one who discourseth of these things as of things at distance not within him. In a word the unregenerate mans knowledge is a Logicall discovery of what he can prove by an Artificiall improvement of argumentative dis∣course, not what he is acquainted with by ex∣perience: The Regenerate (if a scholar) can do that, plead for and confirme the truth by a syllogisticall arguing and so convince a gaine sayer; beside this, He can also by his expe∣rience of the indwelling of this sin, by his experience of its wisedome and power in working (to the impeding him from good and the provoking him to evill) affect him∣selfe with it. Againe
Differ. 3. A regene∣rate man seeth this sin inter∣mixt in his duties: An unregene∣rate man doth not. 3. You shall observe there is this diffe∣rence farther between the knowledge o these two forts of persons in this thing, That the sanctified regenerate soule knowes this sin in such manner that he seeth, brveth, and consider's it's perpeta and uncessant inter∣mixture in all his duties. The nr genera naturall man knowes this sin but in sch Nationall, generall way, that he never observ or seeth how it intermixeth it selfe with his d∣ties: he noteth not how it overspreads all h actions, and if the more studied knowledg he hath of this sin do informe, that it do not lie sleeping while he is doing dutie, b acteth to the impedeing and perverting dutie yet he is not able to see really, and par∣ticularly how it hath stirred, and acted i this and that duty, sill he keeps in the gene∣rall perswasion comes not to the particula application. The unregenerate man pray∣eth, heareth, giveth aimes, dealeth justly payeth even to the tithe of Mint, Anise Cummin, and though he is confessedly a ∣ner in his own speculative apprehension, a judgment, yet when he cometh in particula to the Temple to pray or heare, He thanks G he is not as other men, and his duties are no as theirs, whereas the regenerate soule see
and observeth how each particular part of his services are certainely unworthy accep∣tance according to the holynesse of the law, and he feares they are not as other mens, not so spirituall, not so pure as theirs; he tasteth the bitternesse which renders his sacrifices unsavory to himselfe, and how much more to God; he smelleth the leven which sowreth the whole masse, he seeth 1. The distracting, wandering, worldly thoughts that croud in upon him, and presse on him for admission, and will disturbe him, (if they cannot get entertainment) while he prayes and heares, 2. The coldnesse, deadnesse, and formality of the heart in prayer, in reading, in hearing, in all he doth. 3. The misplaced order giving earthly, dy∣ing, empty things the precedence to heaven∣y, eternall, satisfying objects, and either see∣ing first in time, what might well, be either not sought, or last sought; or first in affectio∣ate desire of them in highest prizing of them, and in ardentest love to them, though all these be mixed with the prayer, or indeed though the Prayer of a naturall man be no∣thing else but an abominable heap of such isordered and sinfull
suites, yet he doth not see or observe it. Shall we view him in hearing? and observe how he differeth from a holy sanctified knowing person in this also? though the unregenerate man knowes much, as hath been said, of this sinne yet he seeth not how it either makes him deafe, and stoppeth his eare, or dull and slow to heare or erroneous and mistaken in hea∣ring he seeth not how it fills him with preju∣dices against the word, with dislike of it, and opposition to it, nor will he be made sensi∣ble of it, but the regenerate though perhaps he hath lesse of that speculative direct, he hath more of an observing, reflex and par∣ticular knowledg, and he observeth all these in his duties: he observeth how this sin da∣sheth his Most Perfect knowledge of God with ig∣norance. Most Stedfast faith in the promises with unbeliefe. Most Sincere love to the Lord with selfe love Most Pervent zeale for the Lord with in differency. Most Strong desires after Christ with care∣lesnesse. Most Sweet enjoyments of the hope set be∣fore him with some bitternesse o other.
In one word he seeth that it is by this sin∣ning sin that neither habituall grace in the scule, nor actuall grace in the life can be perfect, but, as Paul,Rom. 7.21.23. so he seeth another law in his members which leadeth him captive, and that when he would doe good evill is present with him that what good he would he cannot do, and in that good which he doth, he doth also that evill which he neither would, nor should doe: but this the most knowing scribes, me∣riting justiciaries and formall professours do not observe. 4. Differ. The regene∣rates know∣ledg is a soule a base∣ing know∣ledg so is not that of the unrege∣nerate. 4. The regenerate soul's knowledge, and the knowledge an unregenerate man may have of this sin differ in this, that the knowledge of the one is a soule abaseing, humbling knowledg he cannot looke on this sin, but it layeth him low in his own eyes, the other lookes on this sin and yet keeps up as high thoughts of himselfe as ever, he is proud and beasteth both of his duties and of his person: He is not as other men, neither yet are his workes as other men's works are, the one as an ingenuous and re∣lenting child looketh on this sin, the root of all that rebellion he hath acted against his Father, and blusheth at the sight; what such a heart in me still! is there yet remaining any thing of that treasenable disposition? Doth my heart still entertain any part of
that enemy which would pull the crowne from my father's head? Oh wretch! undutiful and disloyall soule! canst thou thinke of this and not loath thy selfe? canst thou see this and see any thing to boast of? Hast tho but one thing in which God delighteth, which he chiefely desireth, and is that so defiled so pollu∣ted with sin? that his glorious and holy eyes can∣not delight in it? wherewith wilt thou the come before God? what canst thou offer to him? Think on it thou who castest thine eyes on these lines, and seriously consider it. The regenerate soule (and so thine if thou art borne againe) which longs to have the match consummate between Christ and i selfe, which longs to be married to the Lord in an everlasting Covenant is, and cannot but be, ashamed to see that her dearly belo∣ved spouse, her Highly honoured her onely desired Lord should find her ever, at all time in such defiled garments, with such raggs, polluted raggs hanging upon her; it is a humbling consideration, that its best dress is a menstruous cloth, that its cleanest hand is leprous; this affecteth the heart with griefe and sorrow, whereas the knowledge which the Pharisees had of this sin, and the
knowledge which the unregenerate man now hath of it, doth not either affect the heart with sorrow, or abase it with holy shame, for it. If that hellish fire which burneth inwardly, do violently breake out and send up such thick and black clouds as do darken the lustre of their Credit, and benight their fame, and glory among men; if it do beesmoot and discolour a naturall conscience; that the man cannot confidently converse with men, least they upbraid him; nor peaceably converse with himselfe, be∣cause conscience dares not looke on it selfe, then he is grieved and troubled, he is a foole then in his own judgment because he hath so lost his credit, or his peace: and so he is ashamed of the sad effect, not grieved for the sinfull cause; sorry for his losse, not ashamed of this sin∣ning sin, which I might set forth by this fa∣miliar Similitude: As an adulterous wife which hath not cast off all sense of honour among her neighbours, nor all desire of peace with her husband, hath some kind of trou∣ble and shame too, upon her spirit in the discovery of her loose, and wanton practi∣ces; but her trouble and shame is for her dishonour in the eyes of those she would have think well of her, and for her losse of peace with him she would seeme to love; but
not for a treacherous heart whence all that wantonnesse and unfaithfulnesse did arise: so it is in this case there is a sense of honour, and desire of peace in the naturall heart, and the breach of either affecteth it, but not the cause of this breach. In one word the rege∣nerate man is constant in his griefe for, and in his abasementon thought of this: That a mix∣ture of water with his best wine, that an al∣loy of dross with his purest gold, that a misty darknesse with his clearest light, should de∣base them upon an examination and tryall; the unregenerate man upon tryall casteth all off with such like recrimination, there are none without their faults, no grape but hath or had his sharpnesse, no wheat ever grew with∣out its chaffe, men are but men and can be no more then men, and this is all he cares for in dwelling sin, he hides himselfe in the croud of men like himselfe and is not ashamed to be as they, if he appeare not worse he dareth to boast in himselfe. 5. Differ. A regene∣rate man opposeth sin vigorously so doth not an unrege∣nerate man. 5. Againe in the next place the difference lyeth in this, That the knowledge of a regenerate soule awakeneth, and excites the soule to a vigo∣rous opposition of it; the unregenerate learned man knows, but this knowledge doth not engage him to oppose it vigerously
with all his power; The sanctifyed soul's knowledge, and oppo∣sition of this sin, do equally thrive and grow; it is not so with the unregenerate his know∣ledge is greater then his opposition of it; if he be acquainted with the power, or wise∣dome of this sin, and if he do apprehend it an enemy to be opposed, yet he thinketh it enough to represse, and abate it, he intends not an exterminating and destroying of it. Whereas the regenerate soule presently pro∣claimes an open warre, and maketh it a mor∣tall warre a bellum internecinum which shall end upon no other termes then the utter ruine of one party: sin, this sinning sin shall have no capitulation no termes of peace whereas a truce is soone granted by the na∣turall man how learned or how well impro∣ved soever, and if a divided kingdome will sa∣tisfy this sinning sin, there is presently a re∣conciliation and peace between them, if this sin will content it selfe with those limits and bounds which either a naturall conscience (of what is honest and to be done or of what is evill and to be avoided) prescribeth: or with those bounds, which a more civill education and happyer improvement of reason hath prescribed, if this sin will neither breake out & waste the peaceable possessions
which na∣turall conscience would willingly maintaine: nor make an inroade and spoile the beau∣ty, and glory of his credit: nor demolish the stately structure of his externall, visible, see∣ming Piety: he is content that the Kingdome be sin's. The unregenerate improved man is ever on the defensive warre, and careth onely to keep this sin within the limits, and bounds which he willingly allotteth it, Now it is no so with the regenerate soule, he is ever engaged in an offensive warre against this sin: and though he cannot cast it out of his soule, yet he will be sure to cast it out, and keep it out of the throne: though he knowes, it will have a foot∣ing in him, yet it shall not keep this footing, but with danger of loseing it by the conti∣nuall attempts which grace maketh upon it; it will dwell here with us while we dwell in houses of clay, but it dwelleth in the unregene∣rate as the master in a family, with respect, and rule: but it dwels in the regenerate as an un∣welcome guest, who shall receive no favour, nor beare any sway in him: when this sinne prevaileth or is likely to foyle him, he cryeth out as Paul, who shall deliver me? Not as a carnall man what termes of peace? how should I satisfie this or that Lust? A man who knoweth this sin as
Paul knew it, ta∣keth thought how he may destroy it: a man that knowes it as an unregenerate man, doth ast about with himselfe how he may patch it up. The one laboureth to cast out that rottennesse, and loathsomnesse which lyeth hid in the Sepulchre: the other contriveth and studyeth rather how to bedeck the se∣pulchre and paint the outside that it ap∣peare not, not offend the eye of more refi∣ned morality. In a word all the opposition the unrege∣nerate make, is against the violent excursi∣ons of this sin, not against the Being of it. And their aime is to mannage these passi∣ons of this indwelling sin, as a Horseman would mannage an unruly colt, which he curbeth and aweth with bit and voice, that he may readily, safely, and with delight use him. The regenerate mans opposition is like that of a man against a devouring Lion which he knoweth cannot be brought to good service, and is harmelesse but onely when he is dead, therefore he knowes the sin∣fulnesse, and determines the death of this sin at once. 6th. Diffe∣rence. A Rege∣nerate man hateth the sinfull frame of heart, so doth not an unregene∣rate man. Another difference between the Know∣ledge of these men is this, The one know∣eth and hateth this sinfull frame of heart, the
other knowes, but neither doth exert any true perfect hatred of it, nor doth he see, or believe there is any such cause to hate it. The unrege∣generate man thinketh, that it's connate, close, and inseparable manner of Being in him, may be good excuse for his not hating it. Hatred where ever its terminated to that which it cannot utterly destroy, is no better then a selfe disturbing vanity and weaknesse, is the thought of a naturall man: and in many cases it proveth true, that he doth dis∣quiet and torment himselfe, who hateth what he can by no meanes rid himselfe of. And on these principles he judgeth it un∣reasonable to professe or entertaine hatred against this sin: he is perswaded it will ad∣here to him, so long as he liveth, and there∣fore will contentedly permit it to live. The regenerate man doth perfectly hate it, and makes that very reason one incitement to more perfect hatred of it, which the unre∣generate would have accounted a good rea∣son to represse, or abate his hatred. Indeed here is seen the most absolute and irrecon∣cileable hatred, which a created Being can exert on just grounds, because it doth so soon defile our persons, and so soon
render us unfit, and unworthy of communion with God, who is our life; so soon rob us of our onely treasure, make us beggars so soon as men, therefore we in reason ought to hate it, and the sanctified soule doth abhorre it. Because it so closely adheres to us, that whither so ever we go, it is our trouble∣some attendant, which we cannot shift our selves of, its company is most unwelcome to us, yet most unavoidable: and this moves our Indignation against it, because it is so inseparable from all we undertake and in∣gage in for performance of our Duty, and service due to our God; because what we most heartily wish we could, that we most certainly find we shall not be rid of; because in our best performances, when we are best prepared for them, and hope to be imployed without much disturbance from this enemy to all good, because then we find it cannot be cast off, it will not be so dispossessed of its hold, or suppressed in its actings, we do the more irreconcileably hate it: for, these and such like considerations heighten the regenerate man's hatred of this sin, where∣as the Naturall improved man rather hence resolves not to trouble himselfe for that he could not prevent, nor spend
his thoughts on that he cannot remove. He accounts it scarce prudence to be troubled at that he cannot be handsomely eased of; what cannot be cured must be endured. Just like a man that will rather expresse a seeming welcome to a troublesome guest, then let him know he is a debtour for that only which could not be with holden from him But now the frame and disposition of a regenerate soule and his behaviour is quite contrary, he hates the more for this inseparable close adhesion of this sin. This may be evidently seen in St Paul, Rom. 7.15. who hated that which he did, and surely if he hated what he had done, he could not do lesse then hate that which had already, and continually would, put him upon doing the same. When a man reflects on what is done, and justly hateth it, he cannot but hate that person, those a∣bettors and counsells, which did designedly engage him to it, and will farther prompt, and sollicite him to do the like. If undutifull Absalom had lived to see the hatefulnesse of his unnaturall rebellion, and been in any measure recovered to a childlike dutiful∣nesse and obedience, he would doubtlesse have hated both his former rebellion, his counsellour Achitophel, and the abettours of it. So when a man
is renewed, & through Grace acquainted with, and sensible of, his forepast rebellions against the Lord, when he is reduced to the right disposition of a Son and Dutifull child, he doth entirely hate his former courses, and especially that which entangled him, and ingaged him in them. The soule renewed to holinesse, and received into the favour of a son, begins to consider the hatefulnesse of that corrupt nature which engaged him against the Lord, and will not be reconciled to it. But an un∣regenerate man will not hate nor dislike it. 7th. Diffe∣rence. A regene∣rate man loves the law, which discovers, forbids, and condemnes lust, so doth not the un∣regenerate. 7 Another considerable difference between the knowledge of this sin in a regenerate soule, and the unregenerate how highly so ever you can suppose him improved, lyeth in this, That the sanctified, Regenerate soul hath a strong, entire, and constant love to the command, by which this sin is discovered and forbidden, attending on, & flowing from the knowledge of this sinne: whereas the unregene∣rate man in his best improvements cannot well relish that Law which forbids the sinne, and dis∣covers the sinfulnesse of it. The one loves that Law from which this sin takes occasion to be more sinfull, and to orke more violently, and his love to the Law growes, as doth his knowledge of the
abominable contrariety in this sin to the Law, whereas the other lo∣veth his lust, and dislikes the law which condemnes it, and could heartily wish there were no Law to restraine the power of his sin, or to condemne the sinfulnesse of it. The one rejoyceth that Sin cannot rule without controule, the other wisheth that there might be an uninterrupted exercise of it's power in him. The unregenerate, though best improved with naturall and morall helps, do boldly (though secretly) wish there were no Law to forbid the sin, or no justice to punish the sinner; if any of the Learned worldlings would speak out their observations of them∣selves, which either they do, or might gather from the workings of this sin, we should have them confessing this a truth. The learned Atheist, reading the first Commandment, seeth that as he should have but only the true God for his God, and that he should onely love, delight, and serve him, not his owne lusts, will sooner be induced to wish there were not, or to flatter himselfe, that there is not a God, and that he is not so obliged to duty towards him. The same might be observed in the rest of the Com∣mands, still the unregenerate mans love is towards his naturall sinfull inclinations, in
dislike of the spirituall, holy and just Law of God. But the Regenerate and renewed soule is well pleased, and in love with the holy Commandment in opposition to his na∣turall lusts and corruptions: Just like as it is with a chaste wife and faithfull, so is it with a gracious renewed heart: as it is with a treacherous & lewd wife, so is it with an un∣sanctified and naturall heart. The chast and loyall spouse highly valueth, dearly loves, and intirely closeth with that law which binds her to fidelity and constancie in her affecti∣ons to her husband. The Adulterous and unfaithfull disliketh, quarrels with, and se∣cretly wisheth the law were not yet in be∣ing which confines her affections and embra∣ces to that single person whom she calls hus∣band, whilest the regenerate soule loves that law which maketh his choice duty and disli∣keth onely the boundlesse, and unreasonable freedome which lust aimeth at: the best im∣proved naturall man in the meane time hath an adulterous soule and complaines of the strictnesse of that Law which requires that all his strength, and all his soule, and all his might should entirely and solely be termi∣nated to God, and his will: It is too severe a precept
to the naturall man to cast off every rivall lust, and cleave to the Lord alone and his best improvements by education or lear∣ning without renewing grace do not alte this frame of his heart, but it is an easy, a equitable a very excellent Law to the saint which bind's the saint to chuse that which he would not for ten thousand worlds re∣fuse. Me thinks I see this in Paul (so evi∣dently that I need no other instance,) who did heartily and sweetly close with that per∣fect holy Law which he seigne would have perfectly obeyed though he could not, He accounteth it good in the, Rom. 7.12.13. assenteth to the beauty and comelinesse o it vers. 16. what the Law commendeth he approveth, what the Law commandeth he would performe, not as a taske and unplea∣sant worke, but as that in which he deligh∣teth: For that which the Law comman∣deth, is that which he would do and what it forbid's is that he would not doe, and so he delighteth vers. 22. (saith Paul)  Hoc desiderio manifestè se ab incontinen∣tibus Philosophorum discernit (saith Pareus in loc.) is there in a carnall, in an unregenerate man such a complacency in the Law of God? Oh! nothing lesse, there is an unsuitable∣nesse in the heart of every carnall man, and
he judgeth the waies, and the lawes of God unaequall, too strict and he cannot, nor will he close with them. A traitour may know what is treason and by what law, enacted such a session of Parliament in such a King's reigne, and wish there never had been any such made, A loyall and obedient subject may know this too and love the law approve the Justice and wisedome of his Sovereigne. Who now see's not the palpable difference between these two men in their knowledg of the same thing? just so it is in this case: But in the last place. 8. Differ. There is a difference in the certainty evidence & assurance of their know∣ledge. 8. These two sorts of men have a know∣ledge of this same sin very much differing in the certainty, assurance, evidence, and firme∣nesse of their assent to the conclusion of that de∣monstration in which it is proved a sin. The unregenerate man looks on it as a Problema∣ticall Question which may be disputed and brought into the Schooles in an affirmative or negative state of the question, so did that conventicle gathered together at Trent in the yeare 1545 in the 5th Session on the 17 of June 1546. Leave it to every mans liber∣ty to think or teach what liked him touching this Provided he thought and maintained, that it was, and that it was propogated, and what were
the effects of it. But an experienced Chri∣stian is more firmely and immoveably set∣led in his knowledge, and apprehension of it, he will never be beaten out of this That it is an evill allwaies present, impeding what is good and impelling and putting us upon what is evill, that it is a law of our members warring against the law of the mind; and though all the world withall its learning and skill, should conspire, and club wits, and reason to overthrow this truth; yet they should never perswade him to a beliefe, that possibly there may be no such thing as evill Concupiscence, or Originall sin. His experience is instar mille testium, and he would repe all their arguments with this answer, that he sees the plots and contrivances, that he feeleth the power, and strength of this sinning sin withholding him, and drawing him back from that good, which he desires he may, which he knowes he ought to doe. The world may as soone perswade him that fire is not hot, which hath burnt his fingers, as perswade him that lust within is not a fire of Hell which inflames him, and sets him on fire with rageing passions, or wanton desires. Let this old man appeare under what vizard he will, for the deceiving pur∣blind
nature, let him plead his originall, ex conditione materiae and appeale to Pelagian, or Semipelagian or Socinian Heralds to assert his pedigree; yet he cannot so escape a re∣generate savingly enlightned soul; who seeth and knoweth that it is of the Divell, and our own abuse of free will. Though this old man walke up, and downe among us, and ex∣patiate it selfe in the larger walkes of a Scep∣tick, and seeme onely to enquire rationally touching the Beeing, and Providence of a Dei∣ty, and in this garbe passe for a more pene∣trating inquisitive head, and judgment with an unsanctifyed Scholar; yet the regenerate soul know's (and is so perswaded that he will ne∣ver be brought to think the contrary) that this is a branch of Atheisme, sprouting out of this bitter root. I think I need not hesitate in pronouncing it. An unregenerate man improved to the highest pitch that externall, morall advantages can raise him to, never did or ever will be able to come to such a degree of certainty in his Knowledge of this, as the experienced soule which observeth the stirrings, and motions of this sin in him∣selfe doth come to; I am sure there is a great difference between the certainty to which the one attaines by speculative
prin∣ciples and discourses, and the certainty t which the other atteines by experience you may possibly perswade a man to ta Poyson who onely knowes the nature of i from his book and speculation and perhap you may prevaile with him to hope, and be∣lieve it is not deadly, because his knowledge is not confirmed by experience; but do you think it possible? to perswade that man into an opinion that it may not, or into hope that it is not, or into an adventurous tryal whether that be deadly poyson which had undoubtedly destroyed him long before if the admirable skill of some eminent Phy∣sician had not cured him and prevented the working of the Poyson? so it is, in one word▪ The regenerate soule knowes he had dyed of this deadly poyson, if the compassion o an infinitely mercifull, and the skill of an in∣finitely wise Physician, had not healed him, he knowes he was sick unto death, and he is as certaine of it, as experience can make him and will not doubt it though all the world deny it, here he sixeth immovedly, I Know that in me dwels nothing good, Rom. 7.18. Find evill present when I would do good 21 See an other law leading mee captive, 23.
The unregenerate finds it not experimen∣tally in himselfe for he is blind and seeth not, he is dead and feeleth not, the workings of this sin; and therefore is not so immoveable in his knowledg as the regenerate soule: not so constant in his beliefe of it's indwelling and overspreading the whole man.
SERMON III. Rom. 7. v. 7. latter part. For I had not knowne Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shalt not Covet. THE Inabilitie of Nature, best improved by learning and education, or what other means you will suppose; (short of Grace and the renovation of the heart by the spirit of God,) to make a right discovery of the sinfull∣nesse of our nature, that indwelling sin, (which here the Apostle calls, Lust;) being observed as one of the Doctrines the Apostle layes down in this verse, and being confirmed, and prosecuted so farre, that nothing farther remaines of what was proposed, but an application and close of the whole: I now proceed to that, and so first Use. 1. Insorma∣tion. If the best improved naturall man be not able to discover the sinfulnesse of his nature, we may hence learne, and informe our selves.
Sin of very dangerous consequence to all but specially to Scholars on account that it blinds their under standing. 1. That there is in sin that which is of a ve∣ry dangerous tendency, to all, but especially to Scholars. It is not to be sported with: we never dally with this serpent, but it sting's and empoyson's us: we never come into the hands of these Philistines, but they put out our eyes; If we had our eyes before, we lose them after, our closeing with a temp∣tation to sin: This is the cause why we are not able (so long as we are carnall) to see our sinfulnesse, because we are sinfull as there need no other reason be given, why we are not acquainted with the pollutions of our garments; but this, because we are blind: so neither needs there any other reason be demanded why a sinner is not acquainted with his sinfulnesse, after you have once said and proved that he is a sinner: For sin is a violence offered to the soule, Prov. 8. ult. vers. It is a violence by which the soule is wounded, and maimed, as it were with the stroke of a sword, or other instrument of cruelty as I observe signifys, now the soule is a tender thing like the eye: it beares not a wound, without losse of its sight and being once wounded by sin it cannot any more rightly discover sin: or if you read that his life still it
speaks that danger danger which is in sin on the account of its disableing the sinner from seeing it, that wound that reacheth the life that reacheth the heart kills dead, and bereives the man of the sense of his condition: he knowes not, nor can he, that he is dead, so it was with the first sinners among the creatures, Angels sinned and lost that perfect knowledge in which they were created, and had not known their sinfull state if an immediate, and winged ven∣geance had not overtaken them if the weight of those fetters the dismall noise of those chaines in which they are reserved to the Judgment of the great day had not awakned them, they had surely continued unacquain∣ted with that sinfulnesse, which, their just pu∣nishment convinced them of: though it may perhaps admit a doubt, whether the fallen Angels may not have an adequate, specula∣tive knowledge of their sinfull natures: yet it is beyond a doubt, they have not a Practi∣call, and right knowledg of it, whilest they adde to the number of their sins and trea∣sure up wrath to the day of wrath. Non con∣temnenda Quaestio de Daemonum cognitione post peccatum proponi solet, nempe, an penitus post pecca∣tum excaetati sunt & omni cum Dei & Christi, aequi & ini∣quitum aliarum rerum cognitione destituti an vero adhue aliquam harum omnium teneant Cognitionem Hieron; Zanch: de oper: Dei l. 4. c. 7. part.
1.It is no contemptible question which is usually pro∣pounded concerning the knowledg of Devills since they sinned viz: whether they are not quite blinded as to have no knowledg of God and Christ, of equity and iniquity, or whether they yet retaine some knowledg of all these, though they know much, so much as con∣victions of the beeing, and justice of a Deity extort from them a beliefe of both, and strike them with terrour of the latter: yet it's undoubtly true, Daemones ita post & propter pec catum ex∣caecati sunt ut neque eam omnem amve erū omnium re∣ineane sa∣ientam qum & quaruman e pece tum babue∣runt. They are since they sinned and for their sin so judicially blinded that they have not all that knowledg which they had be∣fore their sinne. The just judg of all the world through his infinite wisedome hath made darknesse, and the blacknesse of darknesse, chaines to fetter them, who would not walke at liberty in the knowledg and obedience of the Father of lights: whoso will please him∣selfe in the farther discussion of this, may consult the learned Author cited; The com∣mentators on Thom pri. mpimae Q 64. Lombard Sent l. 2. Q. 7. §. 14 Thom & Lomb: this the ill con∣sequence of Sinne in these. It was no lesse on Adam and his sinfull off-spring, if we will perpend, and view the sad change which was introduced immediately upon his sinning: how soon did this spirituall Apoplexy seise on his understanding? how soone did he
fall into a deep sleep, out of which none but the voice of the son of God can awaken him! Scholars (for you should most consider this, you are most concerned in it) I presse you especially with this consideration to take heed of sin; other considerations of e∣quall concernment to others, as well as to you, and of highest concernment to both, as Certaine ruine of their immortall soules. Enkindling the fury and displeasure of the Almighty. Heaping up wrath against the day of wrath. Deare rate you, and all who heare of Christ sin at &c. I passe over, my discourse leads me di∣rectly to consider this peculiar malignity which is in sin. For having proved that the best Improved naturall parts cannot make a discovery of Lust, and having given some answer to the Enquiry why, or whence it is that he is so ignorant of it? and seeing it is because it hath so overspread him, Nothing could be more genuine and pro∣per to the precedent discourse, then to mind you, that sin is extreamely dangerous to such whose excellency is to know more then others. Nothing should bee a more
rousing and awakening consideration to such an Audience then this, would you be content to spend your time, to wast your strength, to lay out your moneyes, to dis∣apoint the hopes of the Church, to sadden the hearts of your friends, to breake the hearts and shorten the life of Parents, to gratifie the Divell, dishonour God, and lose your own soule for ever? Scholars would you be thus contented? I am perswaded better of you, and therefore hope to prevaile on some of you, to cast off sin, and to make hast so to do, because it is an evill which directly leads to a disappoint∣ment of you in your professed aimes, in your principall end, and in your peculiar excel∣lency; you are Scholars, and you professed∣ly aime at knowledge, therefore you came hither; you professe to aime at the best knowledge too, therefore you spend your time in comparing the severall pretences which are made, that you may find out which are , (as the Apostle1 Tim. 6.20. calls all knowledge, which is not an effect of Gospell light, and usefull to Gospell ends) and that on this discovery you may make the wisest choice, that you may avoid those which are , and
employ your thoughts on the more excel∣lent way, Phil. 3.8. viz. on the excellency of the know∣ledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. Now it is sin alone which will disappoint, it is sin a∣lone that will befoole you, for this onely at first did, this onely now doth, obscure the mind, infatuate the judgment, and delude poor mistaken mortalls to the embraces of an empty shaddow of knowledge. Believe it Sirs, for at last it will appeare, that the largest extended knowledge of a sinner un∣der the power of sin (however he may boast of it, as the fruit of a long and diligent search) is but the longer shaddow of one, who lives in a vicinity to the Sphere, in which the Sun of righteousnesse shines glo∣riously, and enlightens others, whilest no more light shines on him, then serves to cast the shaddow, and this, because his espoused sins keep him at a distance from the true light. The farther we are from the Sun, the greater shaddow we cast, but the lesser we see, so the more we are distant from God shining on us in the face of Christ, The greater shaddow of knowledge we may seem to cast, but really we see so much the lesse; our knowledge is still but a shaddow, darke, and vaine, onely fitted to
seduce, and make us lose our waies, like a darke and misty day to a traveller; onely fitted to encrease our sorrow and vexation, like an empty cisterne to a thirsty traveller in a tedious drought and heat. If you'l be Scholars indeed, and know much, and if you'l know with best knowledge too, you must not be sinners, i.e. not live to this sin. If you'l be thriving merchants in these intel∣lectuall treasures, you must take heed you 1. Craze not your vessell, and make it unfit for so long a voyage, as you are to make. 2. Clogge it not, and make it saile slow; your greatest speed will be too little. 3. Straighten it not, and make it capa∣ble of holding little, when you come to lade it, so you must take heed of sin. It crazeth, and weakens, it clogges and retards, it strai∣teneth and contracts the understanding. This dangerous malignity of sin should, and I hope it will provoke you to abhorre it; you shall see farthest in a cleare and faire day. Let your daies be cleare from the black clouds of sin, and you shall see what others cannot 2. Inform. The natu∣rall man's inevitable ruine and misery, be∣cause he cānot know his danger and disease. 2. If the best improved naturall parts can∣not discover
the sinfulnesse of that nature in which Lust dwelleth: Then see the certaine and inevitable misery of the naturall man, how well soever he may be accomplished with externall and common endowments. If you would suppose him to know as much as all the Philosophers did, and if you adde to this all the knowledge of these carnall men, who have now, or ever had a forme of know∣ledge in the Law; and suppose all this cen∣tring in the breast of one man; yet this man (without a spirituall saving illuminati∣on from the holy Ghost) would remaine in∣evitably miserable (because unacquainted with his sinfull state) a dying man, as much without hope of recovery, as he is without sense of his disease. And this misery appeares in that such a one 1. A naturall man obno∣xious to wrath, but knows it not. 1. Is now obnoxious to wrath, and lyable to the just sentence of God, but knowes not, or considers it not. He is guilty before God, but believes it not: he is in danger of Hell, ready to drop into the lake of sire, and sees not his danger: he considers not that a weak, single thread of life already scorch't, and that hath felt the fire, is the surest hold he yet hath to keep him out of unspeakable misery. Nay he never will believe this, for he cannot discover his sin, which hath
brought him into this condition: and if mer∣cy (preventing mercy) do not give him sight of it here, (timely) for his escape, Natu∣rall and Improved parts cannot before it be t∣late to hope for an escape. If you know a traitour guilty of a piece of treason against a King, who can convict him, who will ar∣rest, arraigne, and condemne him, an then execute the sentence; and yet th man all this while secure and carelesse, nei∣ther able to discover his danger by himselfe nor willing to see, and believe it discovered by another: would you not conclude him a lost man, without recovery? There's both the vilenesse, and uncleanenesse of treason and the guilt and obnoxiousnesse of it unto punishment, radicated in our natures, and we are to answer it to a King, who knowe the heart, and can convince us; who rules th world, and will judge us; who proceeds with ju∣stice, and must condemne us; who governe the world in truth, and doth execute his sen∣tence: for his Government is no scare-crow but a reall one; no scenicall Pageantry, but a solid constituted regiment, in which all his judgments are truly and really executed. And how then can such escape the condem∣nation of this judge, or the execution
o this sentence? Farther yet 2. Natu∣rall man ig∣norant of this sin, adds sin to sin, runs far∣ther into debt, and ruines him∣selfe. 2. This Naturall man in his best Impro∣ved abilities is inevitably miserable if left to himselfe, because this undiscerned sinfull nature is still proceeding to farther wickednesse, is ever adding sin to sin, and the man is not sensible of it: like a man that blowes the fire, which burnes the house over his head in stead of quenching it, enrageth it: Nor is it a small degree of unhappinesse at this pre∣sent, But the time will come, when it will be found in truth the saddest unhappinesse of the grossest selfe murderer; if you should see a poor distracted man stabbing himselfe, or cutting himselfe with swords, and laying at such as offer their skill and paines to cure him: what would you suppose were like to be the end of this man? would you not give him over for a lost man? what hope could you have that he might be preserved? And this is directly the case of the best Improved naturall man, who not seeing his sinfull state, nor knowing his sinfull inclinations, doth securely rest in the one, and uncessantly fol∣low the other. Needs must he dye, who flies in the face of his Physitian: and best improved naturall men never yet
acted more soberly and orderly to their own safe∣ty, they know not the misery of their state yet are adding to it, and this in a word 3. Impro∣ved parts miserable, because they sin more pertinaci∣ously and soberly. 3. With more pertinaciousnesse then other men, with more resolved, fixed, and sober mad∣nesse, such do cum ratione insanire. Poo men! they take themselves (and seem to others) to be the men, whose state should deserve admiration, not need pitty, wh should rather be our Patternes for our imi∣tation, then objects of our compassion; and thence it is they are fortified against those convincing Demonstrations, which conque others, but scarce shake them. He is inevi∣tably lost, whose Improvements do ren∣der him more obstinate in his opposition to his own safety, this is the case of a Natural man in his highest Improved naturalls with∣out grace. The more these unsanctified ac∣complishments are increased in him, the more firmely he bottomes himselfe upon them, and stands out against renewing grace. It is a worke for omnipotence to conve∣any, but it is a worke both of omnipotence an infinite wisdome to convert an Improved man, or a Scholar. Grace seemes to conquer an Ignorant sinner only by Power, a Power∣full light shines on the
understanding, and he receives the light, a powerfull heat fal on the hard heart, and melts it, a Powerfull hand then frames the heart to a right mould, without any long, rationall, or subtile dispute against the worke: but a learned sinner, an improved naturall man, seems to put grace to an exerting; as well its wise∣dome, as it's power for subduing him. He is ready to oppose, and dispute every beame of light, to harden himselfe against every softning consideration, in all which through this Ignorance he is wise and crafty to un∣doe himselfe, his carnall wisdome so dispo∣sing his opposition, that his pertinacy seems to him a well ordered and rationall con∣stancy to his principles. Inform. 3. Highest im∣proved parts cannot dispose themselves to seek and prize Christ. 3. If the best improved naturall man cannot discover his sinfull state, as hath been already proved, Then it cannot be, that he should dispose himselfe to desire, seek, or prize Christ and that grace which is dispensed in the Gospell. He can never strongly desire, who doth not apprehend he needs the good he desireth. Desire seemeth the first-borne of the needy and apprehensiue soule. When a mortally sick man is fast asleep, though he need a Physitian, yet he desireth him not, because he is not apprehensive of his need. The poor
man who knowes his debts, and what he needs to pay them hath strongest desires of a surety sufficient to prevent hi Imprisonment, and these desires are pro∣portioned to his apprehended need. Now so it is, that our sinfulnesse is the reall ground of our need of Christ, and grace, our knowledge of this sinfulnesse is the immediate ground our desire: we therefore need him, because we are sinfull, we therefore desire him, be∣cause we know we are sinfull. Now where we cannot come to a due and right know∣ledge of our sinfulnesse, it is not possible we should come to a right or due desire o Christ, who is pretious onely to the soule that needs, and is sensible he needeth grace Whence it is that the spirit of God in draw∣ing the sinner to close with Christ, doth still manifest and exert his power in illumi∣nating and convincing the soule. All tru desires of Grace are wrought in the soule by the spirit of God, shewing, and clearing it up to that we need grace. If the best Improved naturall man cannot see how sinfull he is, he cannot see how much he needeth a Jesus and he never desired him entirely and e∣nough, who knew not this. Naaman had ne∣ver desired to make a tryall what the Pro∣phet could do for his recovery, if he had not
been apprehensive of his urgent necessity to be healed of his leprosy. That man who knows not that his nature is disposed and stands bent to depart from God, and to leave the way of holinesse, cannot prepare himselfe to seek after that Grace which may powerfully change this sinfull nature. There is both a merall and naturall impossibi∣lity in it: a morall impossibility on this ac∣count, that he believes there is no need of such a change. Now it is Morally impossi∣ble that a man should apprehend his condi∣tion, such, as needs no change, and yet di∣spose himselfe to the change of it. Indeed a man may have wavering, unconstant, and imperfect apprehensions that his state is indifferently good, and there is no absolute necessity of a change; yet that it might be better if it were changed. And such a man may at once seeme content and perswaded that he needs not change, and yet attempt it: but where a full, constant, and fixed ap∣prehension in the mind, that there is no need at all to change, and that (it is doubted by him) the change will not better him, it is morally impossible he should dispose him∣selfe to change it: which is the case of a well improved carnall man,
whose apprehensi∣ons of his selfe sufficiency and present per∣fect condition are fixed and constant: and though he desires an addition of more de∣grees of naturall excellencies, yet he is un∣willing to that change, which now would alter the very nature of them, and make his carnall wisdome, spirituall; his common rationall perfections, especiall, saving con∣version, his earthly, worldly mind, Heaven∣ly, and suited to the Gospell. There is also a Naturall cannot, or Impossibility in this thing. A highly improved naturall man remaines naturall still, and standeth entirely bent to∣ward this his naturall estate, much delighted in it, and satisfied with it: and it is natural∣ly impossible that nature should desire that change which will destroy it: and since sin hath so incorporated it selfe into our natures, that it is in a sense become naturall to us, and we cannot savingly receive grace but with the destruction of naturalized sin, it will be a truth that it is naturally impossi∣ble, that a naturall man, however well im∣proved, should dispose himselfe to a desire of heart-changing and renewing grace. Though the carnall mind know not its need of Grace to desire it, yet it knows there is a contrariety in grace to sin, to destroy it,
and therefore he opposeth it; as a man in a Phrensy, through the violence of a fever doth not know his need of suitable applica∣tions to desire them, yet may know the smart, trouble, and bitternesse of the appli∣cations to rage against them, and thrust them from him; or as we observe it in chil∣dren more frequently, the knowledge of that sensible unpleasantnesse which is in Physick maketh them strongly dislike it, so the naturall man knowes by report so much of the nature and working of grace, so much of ap∣parent unpleasantnesse to the flesh, as to reject it, but he knowes not so much of his own need, as to desire it. Nor can the Naturall man raise himselfe to an esteeme of Christ and Grace through him; which appeares most evidently from the consideration of his utter inability to discover his need of Christ and grace. Need enhaunceth the price of every good and apprehended need, raiseth our value of it. These two, sense of want, and apprehension of worth go hand in hand, equally increasing in us; and when the former abateth, the latter cannot but sink also. How doth the hungry Esau prize a meane dinner, when his sense is so prevalent, that it suggests a necessity of a
present, speedy supply, or an inevitable certainty of death, sense of his want raiseth a contemptible dish of Pottage to a value equall to his Birth-right. Pro∣phane Esa! How meanly wouldst thou have thought of such a charity (in the mid∣dest of thy venison feast) at another time, if thou mightest have had it of gift then thou wouldst not have accounted it worth thine acceptance: now in want upon sale, thou thinkest it worth thy choicest excellen∣cies: surely as each suppe abated somewhat of his hunger, and the sense of his need, s it abated his esteeme and value of the pur∣chase, and the last of his dish was least  value to him. It is much so in all presen outward good we stand in need of, our use of them abates our need, and this sinks the price of them. Now though the more we have of Christ and grace, the more we prize them, and reasonably may, justly ought to improve our value of them. In which respect there is a difference between our value o externall, common good, which decreaseth o∣dinarily as our use of them is free, continu∣ed, and full, and these spirituall and heaven∣ly goods, whose value Improves upon their use, and is raised as we are acquainted with them. The more free, continued, and full
our enjoyment of Christ is, and the Im∣provement of grace is, the more we shall prize them: but though here be a difference in the issue, or event of Enjoyment, yet there is a very great likenesse and agree∣ment between them in the motive and en∣ducement to value and esteem them. Though the event of a full meale, and the event of a full communication of grace be so different, that the hungry one filled loaths the sweetnesse of a honey combe, re∣fuseth and sleights it, whilest the gracious soule so filled desires more, and Pray's to be continued in this, or taken into fuller banqueting roomes, and highly prizeth such farther spirituall feastings: yet both were induced by the same generall and common argument at first to value, and prize these different Goods. An apprehension of our need, and a sense of the suitablenesse in these to our need, raiseth our esteeme of them. So that if best improved parts cannot see sin, nor can they see their need of grace, nor the high value and price of Grace. Inform. 4.  highest im∣parts cannot puri∣fy, and make themselves really holy. 4. If the naturall man with best Improve∣ments and advantages, short of saving re∣newing grace, cannot discover that
mystery of iniquity which dwells in his nature, Then certainly it is not a thing possible for him by all his naturall improved parts to purify and cleanse himselfe, to make himselfe holy in the esteeme, and judgment of the heart-searching God; when he hath done what he can (and it may be done very much in our account) yet still his worke is short of effecting any true reall holynesse; sanctification and reno∣vation of sinfull nature is the worke onely of one who is acquainted aright with his own heart which is to be cleansed and the word of God by which it is to be cleansed; and it is his worke not originally, and prin∣cipally, as an efficient, first producing cause of it, for this is the spirit of God, powerfully changing the heart & continually promoting & carrying on the change to perfection; yet it's the work also of the quickned, renewed soule, which having received principles of life and a power to act spiritually doth co∣worke with the spirit to the perfecting of that holinesse which is begun: in the first mighty change of the heart, God gives a power, and actuates it to the finishing of this glorious worke. Through grace we are what we are; what we are of Saints, all that beeing which we have as new creatures is the product of a cause infinitely
greater then the highest, and best improved nature. Improved parts may indeed, lop off some luxuriant boughes, and cut off the outer∣most branches which would prove hurtfull to himselfe, improved parts may bind up the more stragling branches, that they should not impede, and offend others and yet the tree will be still corrupt and bring forth no better fruit then what is the fruit of Sedome and clusters of Gomorrah, it is not the neat tri∣ming of the thorne that will make it a figge∣tree, the root and stock must be chan∣ged, or it abide; the same, and brings forth fruit like it selfe: uselesse and corrupt vessels must have an other kind of cleansing then an outside washing, or wipeing them. If you did see a man painting a Sepulchre, and so doing should tell you he hoped to make it cleane, and fit for another tenant then rottennesse, and dead mens bones, would you not soone tell him that if he drew all the goodly colours that art could surnish him with, yet he would never be able to do this since he either knowes not, or else doth not consider that there is unseen rottennesse within, which must he cast out: He that knowes not how sinfull the frame of his heart is, will
not make it his businesse to pu∣rifie his heart, And an unclean heart neve yet was accounted by a righteous judge con∣sistent with holinesse much lesse can it b a prin∣ciple of holinesse: Now then so it is that af∣ter all the paines a naturall well improve man hath taken in pursuance of his seeming holynesse, there remaines in him an unclean heart which is the spring of all his actions and how can they be clean or holy then the method which Christ prescribes Mat. 11▪33. is this to begin with that which is hidde from the naturall man, to make a bad hea good, and then a bad life will be good. Un∣till this be done there will be no true real holynesse, All the glorious appearances, an outsides without arenewed heart are in account of God nothing, better then glittering sins, so farre then, as the naturall improved man i from holynesse of heart so farre is he from truth of holinesse, and so farre as he is from knowing his sinsull heart, so farre is he from purifying it, for cleansing of the heart is that work which requireth a knowing of the heart in order to the cleansing it. There i never more sanctity of heart, then there is know∣ledg of the heart, though there is many time more knowledg, then there is sanctity: Now i it be, (as hath been proved,) a worke
grea∣ter then a naturall improved man can do to know, it is certainly a greater worke to pu∣rify the heart then his best parts can either beginor ever finish, this wound must be throughly searched ere it will be soundly cu∣red, Naturall men do but skin it over, when they have applyed all the healing playsters they can. I beseech you, Scholars (you are most in danger to be deceived with this see∣ming holynesse) consider this, your ripe parts, your advantages of learning, and education are not of themselves sufficient to make you holy: but they may be dangerously managed by a deceitfull heart, and a malitious Devill to cheat you and make you rely on a broken reed which will assuredly pierce you through instead of supporting you: I am perswaded friends, who ever you are that either heare, or read the proofe and confirmation of the Doctrine, you believe it is a truth, and I doubt not, you do see how closely these two are knit together, ignorance of our sinfullnesse and inabilitie to cleanse our selves, as ignorance of the disease and inability to cure it: I there∣fore desire you but to consider it, with this seasonable admonition, that if thou who viewest these lines art a man of parts, and education by which a
blamelesse morality hath been thy more constant course (if thou are such a one consider) thou art in very great danger of concluding this to be reall holynesse, and sufficient to the end thou in∣tendest, and thy danger is the greater seeing thy parts and education make thy life come neerer and seeme liker to reall holynesse: and it is hee cheates most unavordably who doth counterfeit most exactly: the greater thy parts are, the better thy education is, if still thou remaine carnall, the more artifici∣ally thou mayest play the hypocrite, and the more certainly deceive thy selfe, and assu∣redly thou dost so, if thou wilt be thine own Physitian, and heale a spirituall disease with a course of Physick so disproportioned to it, this disease hath seised the heart, it affecteth the most inward, and vitall parts primarily, and it doth thence affect the outward parts the tongue indeed is affected, as appeares by the oaths, curses, railings of some, by the las∣civious, wanton, and unsavoury discourse of others, the impertinent, vaine and unprofita∣ble words which we daily heare, so are all mbers of the body affected with this disease, which the Apostle calls by the name of yeel∣ding them weapons of unrighteousnesse and ser∣vants unto sin, yet the roote,
and spring of it, is in the most secret and inward of the man which must be cured, or else we lose our la∣bour as he certainly doth whose sicknesse is seated in the vitall and inward parts, but he useth onely externall and outward appli∣cation of medicines for his cure. Use. 2. For Cauti∣on. A second use, of the Doctrine of naturall men's ignorance of their sinfull nature and their utter inability of discovering it by the best improvement of parts, without renew ing grace, shall be a caution and warning to all but especially to Scholars that they takeheed. 1. Caut. 1. Attemp∣ting to dis∣cover or concluding you havedis∣covered it by meere naturall light. 1. Lest they attempt, and set upon the discove∣ry of this sin by meere Naturall improvements, and lest they conclude they have made a disco∣very of it by such: beware of the attempt as you would beware of that which is certain∣ly unfeiseable in the course that is taken, as you would beware of venturing on an im∣possibility; losse of labour (which I fore∣tell you will be the end of your attempt) me thinks should warne you of this, take heed of concluding you have discovered it as you would take heed of being mistaken in a matter of weight and moment: If you rest upon it, and determine that you have discovered this when indeed you have not what an errour will you runne your
soules into? How dangerously will you deceive your selves? How inevitably do you un∣doe your selves? If thou who readest thes lines should'st as cleerely see it proved to thee that thou couldst not discover a false title from a true one, as it hath been prove thou can'st not discover a desperately de∣ceitfull heart, a very sinfull nature, would'st thou venture on a great purchase? and lay out all thy wealth on it? and runne the hazard of being deceived? would'st thou ex∣amine the title by no better helpes then thy owne naturall wit and sagacity? would'st thou do so? I know thou would'st not And yet wilt thou run this hazard? and ven∣ture all the happynesse thou expectest? and ar capable of thus? dost thou dare to lay the stress of thy eternall welfare on such a foundation a is sure in nothing but to deceive thee! O that all would, and I beseech you Scholars (whose parts I highly prize and value whose danger in this I partly know) that you will consider a while. Can you goe to Heaven with uncleane hearts? with sinfull natures? can any thing that is uncleane? or that defileth enter there? shall any who worketh iniquity dwell in the holy hill? And how can such un∣cleane things as the naturall heart
enter? How shall that which defileth the whole life? that Polluteth every action? whose wrke is nothing else but to increase abomination? how shall this dwell in his presence who hateth sin with an in∣finite hatred who knowes, and will judg, in ano∣ther kind of manner thn now men judge them∣selves? I confesse if God never would rip up the breasts of men, if he would never anatomize them, nor turne their inside out∣ward, if he would never search the heart, and try the reines, then might I have spa∣red this Admonition, for it were then no great matter whether men did enquire into themselves, or upon enquiry whether they discovered any thing, or not: But since God hath purposed to try, and discover the very secrets of the heart, since his judgment will be according to truth, (be our judgment of our selves what it will) it is of highest concernment to us, that we proceed in judg∣ing our selves (so neere as we can) by the same rule, and make the same discovery, which God will make when he judgeth. And this he never will, or can do who makes no farther enquiry then his best improved parts can discover. In a word thou who makest this enquiry, and restest satisfyed in it, wilt find thy
selfe as farre mistaken, as that ma∣lefactour, who in the prison makes a sleight businesse of his selony, and examines it with a voluntary hideing of that which his judge knowes and which is undoubtedly enough to hang him, and upon this pronounceth him∣selfe guiltlesse. Tremble at the thoughts of that soul's amazement which here de∣ceives it selfe with such insufficient search; which relyeth on this deceit, and finds the greatnesse of it at last, when God discovers it to him, that he is not fit for an undefiled inheritance who hath so defiled a heart, and uncleane nature: be not deceived thou must be cleansed or eternally perish, if thou wilt be cleansed thou must know thy unclean∣nesse, and vilenesse, in other manner then yet any naturall, (though improved) man ever knew upon enquirie into it by his best naturall abilities, and therefore as thou ten∣derest the issue of thy soule, which will be of eternall and infinite moment to thee, be∣ware of this light which cannot discover, beware of resting in this partiall and false knowledg which thou mayest possibly get by more refined naturals. Take heed thy knowledg be no more then of the unreaso∣nablenesse of thy sinfull frame, and moti∣ons: endeavour to get a knowledg of the
spirituall wickednesse of them, and of that contrariety that a naturall heart hath in it to a spirituall law: Hell is full of the know∣ledg of sin's unreasonablenesse, and the way to bell may be full of this knowledg too, and I would not thou shouldst rst in that knowledge which is not the direct and certaine way to es∣cape hell, take heed of resting in that know∣ledg of this sin to which the improvement of naturall parts may carry thee, in the ge∣nerall, whilest thou do'st not in particular see how it intermixeth with every duty, so that thou needest grace to pardon and ac∣cept it, and a mediatour to procure both: it is a dangerous mistake which the naturall man runnes himselfe into when he seeth not the iniquity which is in his duties when he seeth not how sinfull he is in all his religious services: it is a mistake, that exposeth him to proud thoughts of himfelfe, and of his duties, that excites him to rest in himselfe, that can∣seth him to keep at greater distance from Christ, to undervalue pardoning mercy, and free grace, to increase his sins (for resting on duty re∣dound's much to the encrease of sin,) to ren∣der him hatefull in the account of God, who is a professed enemy to every proud person: Now such are the fruits of this knowledg we
warne you of, take heed of it. 2. Caution. Against re∣lying on the opinion of men in their assertions contrary to the experi¦ence of Saint, and witnesse of Scripture. 2. Thē we have very good reason to beware how much we give to the judgment & opinions of lear∣ned & improved men in this point which never any of them whilst naturall couldfully discover, and in which they have ever been prone to ad∣vance nature, and debase grace, in which they have generally set the crowne on Nature's head which they admired, in the meane while robbing grace which they knew not. Me thinks I need not say much to advise you in this, would any of you rely much on the judgment of a boasting ignoramus? when thou art sick thou advisest (not with one that never did, or ever will be able to find out that disease but) with one who is known, either to have already discovered it, or that is known to have skill so as to do it, if any can. When thou travellest, and needest a guide, thou wilt not take him, thou art sure will mislead thee, but cannot direct thee; it is no whit lesse folly to rest on the opinion of those learned men who speake of this without an experienced observation of this sin in their hearts, it is of much mo∣ment in this point that we have somewhat of assurance, that the man is a Saint and re∣newed in the Spirit
of his mind whose judg∣ment we take concerning this, it is I hope so fully proved that great measures of unsanc∣tifyed learning and grosse ignorance of this sinne may be both in the same person, that I do not need insist on farther proofe; I onely desire you not to trust to the opinions of them in matters they do not understand; I do not disswade you from valuing them, and expres∣sing your value of them by giving what is due to their opinions, in the things they are learned in. But I warne you to take heed, that you do not rely on their judgment, and opinions though seemingly backed with strong probabilities, and reasons in this and other points which are known aright onely by a sanctifyed and regenerate soule. Ma∣ny of those who have erred in this doctrine have been men of great parts and abilities, so are many of those who at this day do mi∣stake this whole doctrine and it is (beside what we have said allready) to be accounted among the hidden things which are not re∣vealed to the wise and prudent.Math. 11.25. For whether you referre the relative to the whole chapter, or to the 20th verse, and those which follow onely: yet still you'l find that the doctrine of Repentance, and Remission of sins: the doctrine of Salvation,
and redem∣ption from wrath which we deserve, from sin under the power of which we are by na∣ture: compriseth the things here intended. And if retance and the doctrine thereof in its full extent, and latitude be the com∣prehensive summe which is here aimed at, and which is hidden from the wise, and pru∣dent then we have ground to beware how farre we rely on the opinions and assertions of these men, who cannot discover the truth which lyeth hidden under a vaile which 1. Their impotence and inability hath drawn over it, (they are not able to discover it) 2. Their unwillingnesse to know, hath brought on them (they are loth to be ac∣quainted with it) 3. Judiciall blindnesse hath drawn over it (that they shall not, because they will not) It is safer much to heare the opinion of a saint experienced in his own heart, and well versed in the Scripture, touching this then any of the learned naturall men, who are unacquainted with the continuall oppo∣sition their naturall hearts do make against the Law of God: I had rather heare a soul∣dier who was not onely an eye witnesse but a chiefe
combatant give the relation of the fight, then one who (though never so well skilled in the speculative part of military discipline) speaks onely according to the rules of his art, I shall rather trust a conflict∣ing soule, and believe his relation, both that, there is such an enemy, and that, he is within us continually levying warre against us: then trust the seeming reasons of learned men against it, or the determinations of those who speake onely their speculations. The seeing eye is to be trusted in the judgment of Colours, before the learned head which onely dis∣courseth over his blind studies: the enlight∣ned soule sees what it reports and is to be credited. The learned naturall man wan∣teth eyes to see and speaks by hearesay what this sinne is, the right knowledg of which is one of the things of the spirit of God, which he receiveth not, nor can he untill changed from naturall, to spirituall. In a word the whole doctrine of the crosse of Christ (i.e.) our deliverance from sin, and the consequents of sinne, by the death of Christ: The doctrine of our fall, and mi∣sery: of our sinfulnesse, and inability to good: of our restauration, and renovation, &c. are in the whole contexture of them accounted
foclishnesse by the wise among the Greeks and Jewes (i.e.) by the choicest men for naturall Parts, and the improvement of them, both within and without the Church, And can it be expected? that a man who thinks him∣selfe a wise man should strictly enquire into that, which he accounteth folly, or care to have an insight in any part of that, which he esteemes as much below him and his thoughts, as a foole is below a wise man? and solly it selfe, below excellent wisedome and understanding? if you would then choose you a master to teach you more fully this doctrine leave the Schooles of Pharisees, Seribes, disputers of this world (whose wise∣dome God hath infatuated) and go to the convinced, humbled, and sanctifyed soule, and aske him concerning it. Scholars whose businesse lies among the volumes of writers, whose various positions, and doctrines divide from the truth, as well as from each other, be you especially advised to try, before you trust, every thing you meet with in men's writings, which are accounted profound and learned; and be perswaded to enquire what experience, (arising from the conflict be∣tween grace and corruption, between holy principles and remaining lusts,)
will informe you in this weighty truth: Prize and keep close to the sound Doctrine which ho∣linesse and learning jointly improved have delivered to us from the Scriptures, and which you may meet with up and downe in the writings of our English Practicall Di∣vines, whom you may trust whilest you must dissent from others that are accounted more learned. 3. Caution. Learned men's slighting grace be a stumbling block to us. 3. Then let it not be a stumbling block to us, that so many men, of choicest parts, of highest improvements, do so little regard, so little desire, and labour after: So little value, and esteem sanctifying, and renewing grace: take not an offence at the thinnesse of learned men, that they croud not towards the fountaine opened for sinne and for uncleannesse to the house of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,Zec. 13 1. were no other reason at hand which might be given, this which ariseth from their igno∣rance, and unbeliefe of the sinfulnesse, and uncleannesse of their nature were abun∣dantly sufficient to satisfy us why they doe not throng after that Grace, which might cleanse, and purifie them. Why shouldest thou wonder that blind men walke up and downe in garments all over foule, and dirty and never goe to the river where they might
be washed? And why shouldest thou wonder then, that blind souls, possessed with opinion of their own purity, and ho∣linesse; being ignorant of that masse of cor∣ruption, which lyeth hidden in their heart should stand at distance, farre off from Christ, and grace, which might cleanse them. Thou wouldst not be offended to see a company of desperate sick persons insen∣sible of their danger go by, and neither call at, or go into the Physician's house to be healed. This should not (I am very confi∣dent) beat thee off from going thy selfe to be healed since thou knowest thy disease. Now then why should it be a scandall? or a dis∣couragement to thee? because few learned men go to Christ, especially now that thou art warned of it, and hast heard this reason given thee; thou hearest, that they cannot see their need of Christ with the best helpes of nature, and education, and therefore they keepe off from him. But observe it, Who do more readily? more speedily close with grace then these men when once they are enlightned and savingly convinced? I think no men make more haste to the city of refuge then these men, when once the spirit of God doth convince them,
that ju∣stice pursues them, and when the conviction is set home, so that they have reall appre∣hensions of their dangsr; and there is a good reason for this haste they make before others viz: Usually they have clearer, di∣stincter, and deeper apprehensions of their state, and condition then other men, and the cleerer and deeper our apprehensions are the speedier our attempt will be to escape those dangers which we apprehend are likely to fall on us. Now there are two things which do render these men's apprehensions more cleare and distinct viz: 1. Greater measure of light shining into the understanding, and overpowring all its false lights which the man (proud once of his parts) did before set up, for as a man who walk's by a weake, and glimmering light would refuse that light for his guide which another that was wholy in darknesse and knew himselfe so to be in the darke, would readily embrace; so is it here, many that have great parts and abilities shining in them like starres, or comets in the night will put off that weaker convincing light of the truth, which one who findeth himselfe all benighted rejoyceth to see though but a starre, the least degree of light, and is con∣vinced soundly; whereas more and stronger
light is needfull to convince a learned sinner throughly and savingly. Hence it is that they so much differ in so little time in their apprehensions of impending danger, the na∣turall learned man had apprehensions of the ex∣cellency of his soule, of the power of a God to punish, of the great misery and unhappinesse, which the soule must needs lie under, if this God proceed to punish: he can discourse of the insupportable paine which Immateriall soules endure, this he can do upon maximes of Rea∣son, so that the man doth see somewhat be∣fore the saving illumination of the spirit of God doth enlighten him with a better light, but so soone as this shines in upon him, he doth with the advantage which the other affords him, see much more of these things, and his own danger: and accordingly ha∣steneth his escape from it. Thus acquired Improvements under a through worke of conviction hasten men from the danger they were in. Againe 2. Improved parts lie usually in a soule that is of larger and vaster capacity, so that it sooner receives much of spirituall light, and hath larger and more extensive appre∣hensions of the excellency of Grace and mercy in a Jesus. And so upon through
Convictions flyeth more speedily to Christ, and riseth higher in it's value of Christ. So that if you needs will eye, and take example by learned men, then look on those who are under a saving worke of the spirit of God, and judge by their apprehensions and value of Grace Now, what will be the apprehen∣sions and value which the rest so enlightned will have of the same grace: if you will re∣solve to weigh Grace in the scales of lear∣ned and improved men, then borrow St: Paul's scales and weights, which be used after conversion, or under the worke of conviction, and judge as he did of Grace, when he 1 Tim. 1.14,15.had obteined mercy through exceeding abundant grace in our Lord. When he came to judge of things aright, and esteemed what was once his gaine now Phil. 3.to be lsse and dung for the excellency of Jesus his Lord. There are none can better esteeme grace, then learned Saints, and yet none more vilify it then lear∣ned ungodly men, stumble not at these, but be perswaded to follow the other. Use 3. of Tryall. Try then what your knowledge of this sin is. 3. If the best improved parts cannot disco∣ver the sinfulnesse of our polluted natures, and if there be so different a knowledge of this in the regenerate and unregenerate, as we have already
endeavoured to evince, Then, I intreat you, try what is your know∣ledge of the sinfull nature you carry about you. Put the Question to your selves, Do I know this indwelling lust as Paul knew it? if I might at any time presse this use, I may now, for no men are so much in danger of taking a false and insufficient knowledge of this for true and sufficient, as are Scholars who know much, as of other things so of this also, in the speculative part of it. And I know a deceitfull heart is apt to suggest to us scholars, that what we know of this is enough. But we must not trust our own hearts much in this, or in any thing else of weight and moment: and therefore I take the boldnesse to renew my request, to rein∣force the advice to you scholars, try your knowledge. And I do this, (beside the weighty considerations equally obliging us with others) on some more speciall conside∣rations obliging us Scholars more then o∣thers, and I in treate you to weigh them. 1. Greater pronesse to mistake. 1. You are in a more apparent danger of being deceived with a common superficiall knowledge of this then others are, whose imployments do not engage them to a search after all knowledge. We are prone to aime at knowledge for its own sake, and think it enough that we
know, though this knowledge have no influence upon our heart and life; when we have attai∣ned some knowledge of this, we haste many times to the attainement of some farther knowledge; and so by an eager pursuit of what is not yet attained, we are in danger of contenting our selves with a generall spe∣culative knowledge of this, that we may speed on to the discovery of other things, whereas other men once getting a discove∣ry of this sin are usually, or may be more intent, and dwell longer on the considera∣tion of it. Many things make it more easie for us to be mistaken in the knowledge of this: as 1. Pronesse to measure the knowledge of this by that we have of other things, which are not of such weight and moment, and that have not so much influence on our soules in the matters of grace and holynesse. 2. Frequent temptations with which Satan fol∣low's us, to render this knowledge unprofi∣table, and uselesse to us. If this doctrine be well understood and soundly preached, it shakes the very foundations of his King∣dome, therefore he will corrupt it. 3. Precellence and greater measures of
spe∣culative knowledge, then others have of it. A scholar is able to discourse more largely in the whole doctrine of it, perhaps than ano∣ther, and tell you what apprehensions hea∣then Philosophers had of it, what doctrines the Pelagians delivered in this matter, what the Schoolmen, Remonstrants, Socinians, Anabaptists, or others teach concerning it; yet who knowes none of these, but only the naked truth of this doctrine, and improves it to holinesse, knoweth more truly then such a learned scholar. 4. A Scholars knowledge is usually a more common and generall worke of the spirit of God in carrying him on in his ordinary and professed intendment of getting knowledge; whereas in others, there is more of the speciall worke of the spirit of God, now it is more easie to mistake under a common, then speciall work of the spirit of God. 5. Farther yet scholars may more easily mis∣take in their Knowledge of this then other men, in regard they apprehend many times more strength in the opposition men make to the truth, then indeed there is, and so do with lesse cer∣tainty and with more wavering hold this truth. Let us then bring our knowledge to the tryall, lest we certainly be deceived, where we so easily may be deceived.
2. Greater danger to themselves in mistake∣ing. 2. Let us do it next the rather, because if we be deceived in this; it is of dangerous conse∣quence to us, and to our eternall concernment, of much more dangerous consequence then unto others, for it exposeth us scholars to a grea∣ter danger of continuing in a formall, super∣ficiall, externall, and insufficient course of obedience, and seeming purity. And who is engaged in this with any competent mea∣sure of knowledge to hide, or defend, or excuse himselfe, is in one of the greatest dan∣gers of undoing himselfe; is armed most un∣happily against convictions of the word and spirit of God, and is like to stand out against all meanes of a reall, heart, spirituall, and saving change and sanctification. We may in all likelyhood sooner convince a pro∣phane, loose, and wicked sinner, that is as yet ignorant of his sinfulnesse by nature, than we can a Morall, temperate, and sober scholar, who knows much of this with a speculative knowledge, and suppresseth much the working of this sin by his morall principles and advantages. Scholars who are outwardly blamelesse, but not inward∣ly sanctified, and who have somewhat of the knowledge of this sin in their heads, but no∣thing of the
experienced heart knowledge of it in their soules, are the men most in danger to live and dye in a formall seeming holinesse, in an outside glorious shew, with insides full of corruption and rottennesse: they are most in danger to pase among men, and with themselves for Saints, while there is nothing at all of the saint in their heart, nor any thing, but the hypocrite, and painted Sepulcher in their life. Your danger is greater, let your search be stricter then other men's. 3. Greater endange∣ring of o∣thers. 3. Try your knowledge of this, because it is a truth of Generall influence on the heart and life of men: and either doth much promote their reall holynesse, when it is rightly unfolded and set home upon them, or else much impede & re∣tarde it, when it is not rightly apprehended by us, and unfolded to them. A learned man erring in this, endangers his hearers, and though I intend not particularly to insist on these dangers, yet this I say in the generall, That the preacher who hath no other knowledge of this sin, then the Pharisees had, shall have no better disciples then they had. If you would not then expose them to the dangerous mi∣stakes of seeming holynesse, of counterfeit regeneration &c. look to it, and see that your knowledge be right in this
particular, Consider the safety and welfare of pretious soules is concerned in this, they may perish through a mistake of their naturall condition, into which mistake yours may lead them, and it is dreadfull to have blood of soules lying on your head. Scholars seldome are single in their errors, and the more eminent they are, the more dangerously do they erre: and I know not a point, wherein there is much more danger attends our mistake, then doth attend our errour in this, and the do∣ctrines depending on it. What more dan∣gerous and destructive, then that errour which leads us from powerfull and irresisti∣ble Grace? then that which hath direct ten∣dency to undervalue Grace? what more pernicious then that mistake which leaves a heart secretly corrupt and unholy? and rends to the binding up the soule under this untill the heart-searching God discovers and judges it? It is a soule-damning errour, which doth ensnare the soule in a partiall, out∣side, and insufficient renovation. Now of such tendency is this to our persons, and of such sad consequence will it be to others who may possibly be hearers, blind leaders of the blind untill both fall into the ditch, will be the finall and last issue
of us, and our followers, if we mistake such weighty necessary truths as these are. 4. Expected eminence before o¦thers in ho∣lynesse. 4. Consider next, if you have not cause to enquire and examine your knowledge of this, whether you had not need be more diligent by much then others, on account of more eminent and exemplary holynesse expected from you Men do (and reason good they should) expect more perfect and exact holynesse from you then from others. You know more of your master's will then they, you know more of the excellency of holynesse, you know more of the reward to holynesse, you know more of the vilenesse of sin, of the unsuitablenesse of sin to your admired and noble soule, and reason &c. on these and many other accounts it is expected that you should be more holy then others. Now if you mistake in this doctrine, which right∣ly understood hath notable influence on the soule in order to exemplary holynesse, you will certainly fall farre short of your Duty, and your friends expectation. Now an ingenious spirit is very solicitous not to fall short of his friends rationall and just hopes, I speak to many such now I hope, and therefore I promise my selfe of you a seri∣ous tryall of this.
5. Mistaken knowledge cannot lye still and do no harme: it will mis∣chiefe us by 5. Lastly that I may perswade you to try consider your knowledge mistaken through want of due tryall and examination, will be an consider your knowledge mistaken through want of due tryall and examination, will be an advantage which Satan and your own corrupt hearts will take, and improve to further hard∣ning you in sin, and estranging you from con∣version. Mistaken knowledge will not re∣maine a thing of indifferent nature, but it will eventually prove a great 1. Embold∣ning us to sin.1. Ewholdning you to cherish and foster those thoughts, that frame of heart, which should be mortified and subdued, and the Di∣vell will be ever animating you to venture so far, as your doubts or mistaken know∣ledge can suggest you, possibly may venture, 2. Enabling us to colour over our fins, and so improve this.2. Beside the Divell will improve your mi∣staken knowledge in this point to a craftinesse and subtlety of improving this sin, under a staken knowledge in this point to a craftinesse and subtlety of improving this sin, under a pretence and colour of innocency and sinlesse pleasing or humouring our naturall desires, we must not neglect the search after one, who lurkes in our family, and cannot but cut our thtoats, if we suffer him under any disguise whatever; this old man mistaken will murder sonles, therefore &c. Try whe∣ther you have discovered him, be diligent in the tryall of your knowledge concerning your sinfull natures. But you will
enquire, how may we discerne the nature of the knowledge we have of this sin? How may we find whether our knowledge be true, right, and such as the enlightned soule, such as St Paul, had? well then, hoping thou who so enquirest art in good earnest, I will re∣ferre thee to the differences which are as∣signed already, by which thou mayest know what kind of knowledge the unregenerate hath of this sin, and what the regenerate man hath, and then comparing thy know∣ledge with those differences, thou mayest most certainly judge what thy knowledge is. Consider, is it a spirituall knowledge? canst thou discerne the spirituall iniquity, as well as the unreasonable iniquity of thy sinfull na∣ture? Canst thou make out the sinfulnesse of thy nature, and prove it by Practicall and experienced premises? Canst thou discerne how it intermixeth it selfe with all thy du∣ties? dost thou really see this? canst thou heartily grieve for thy sinfull nature? dost thou see reall cause of humbling thy soule for this? Canst thou set thy selfe with all thy soule to oppose this sin? canst thou spend thy time, and lay out thy paines to throw him out of doors, which will (in spite of thee) keep possession, untill the
house be pulled down? Doth thy knowledge of this indwelling lust provoke thee to hate and de∣test it? canst thou truly say, thou dost loath it, that it is that which thou canst not on any account be reconciled to? And tell me what are thy affections to that holy law which forbids this sin? doest thou heartily embrace that commandement which prohi∣bits thy soule, lest it should fulfill the inor∣dinate desires of this lust? or couldest thou wish there were no law to forbid thee? con∣sider what certainty thou hast in thy know∣ledge? dost thou waver, or art thou fixed in thy judgment? and feest what all the proud world will not see or believe? dost thou as St. Paul, see another law in thy mem∣bers? and is this seeing thy believing? An∣swer these Queries in singlenesse of heart, and do not either deceive us, or flatter thy selfe, and thou mayest come to know what thy knowledge is of this sinfull frame of heart. For farther examination, I referre you to the perusall of those differencing and distinguishing notes laid down already, to which I will adde two or three more now, and so 1. Note of Tryill. Right knowledge of this advan∣ceth grace. First, Observe what tendency thy knowledge hath to
the advancement of Grace, to the exal∣ting free and powerfull Grace; or what tendency it hath toward the debasing of Grace; by this thou mayest give a good Ghesse at thy knowledge; so much as in it is working to the exalting of Grace, so much there is of the true and right kind of knowledge, the more thou givest of glory to the grace of Christ, the more thou demonstratest thy thorough acquaintance with thy sinfull nature. Doest thou with Paul see cause to praise God through Jesus Christ, for setting thee free from this spirituall bondage? doest thou see thy uncleane nature with an eye which prizeth and valueth that Grace, which hath in part already, and will in full and perfect manner ere long cleanse thee. The leper under the Law never knew his leprosie aright, untill this knowledge made him seek the remedy for cleansing, and thankfull that he was cleansed from it. So likewise it is never right Knowledge of our spirituall leprosie, untill it tend to an apply∣ing our selves to Grace for healing it, and end in admiration and praise of Grace, that we are healed. 2 Note. Right knowledge relyes on powerfull grace to op∣pose lust. 2. Next look well whither doth thy know∣ledge send thee for power and strength to oppose and subdue thy strong
lusts? If thy Knowledge of thy sinfull nature be such, that it doth convince thee of thine inability to conquer thy lusts, of thine insufficiency to perfect any good change wrought in thee, it is a very good signe thy Knowledge is a right, and sufficient Knowledge of this Lust. And if this conviction tend to a serious applicati∣on of thy soule to Christ, for a present sup∣ply of strength to oppose it; thou mayest surely conclude, that thou knowest more, then any unregenerate man in the world doth, of this sin: for if he can truly say, that he sees a disclosure of so much sinfulnesse in man's nature, that he concludes man can∣not conquer it's power, yet he never see∣keth, or goeth to Christ for strength, by which he may conquer it; but all his attempts are made in his own strength Now then deale truly and faithfully with thy own soule, and consider whose strength thou u∣sest, and in what power thou hopest to sub∣due thy lusts: for by this it may appeare what thy Knowledge is. 3. Note. True right knowledge directs to the right method of subduing it. Thirdly, thou mayest know, whither thy Knowledge be right, by observing what course and method it puts thee on in order to a holy and blamelesse conversation. How doth it direct thee in order to
mortification, and crucifying thy lusts and sins. True and right Knowledge of this lust doth incline and guide the soule, to set to a worke of refor∣ming the soule first. Who knowes the un∣cleanenesse of the streames aright, and would cleanse them, set's to the cleansing of the fountaine first; and who hath right knowledge of a disease, endeavours a cure by taking away the cause of it. Well then, tell me, doest thou know that this sinfull na∣ture is the cause of all thy sinfulnesse in thy life? doest thou then see those polluted streames do run from this polluted foun∣taine? Perhaps thou wilt say yes, (and with truth enough too,) but man (tell me) in thy attempts to cut off these streames, to re∣forme and purifie this life, where hast thou begun? hast thou cleansed the spring? He that begins not sanctification in the heart, knows not aright the sinfulnesse of his nature. 4. Note Right knowledge aggravates particular fins by this. 4. Right knowledge of our sinfulnesse will allwaies account it, an aggravavation of every sin. If thou knowest this sin aright, thou wilt see really a great deale of heinousnesse, inexcusablenesse, and vilenesse in every sin which thou examinest, on account of thy extreame sinfull nature. Consider then with
Davids words in thy mouth I was conceived in sin, and ask thy soule can'st thou (as he did) see how much, this aggravates thy particular transgressions? how it add's weight to thē? this make's thē voluntary, delightful, per petuall? this makes them strōger, & enraged, when the holy law of God doth restraine and forbid them: Try then by these notes, who can truly, and experimentally answer to these queries, may certainly conclude his knowledg of indwelling lust is a knowledge better and farre above, the highest degree of knowledg in men meerly carnall, though of highest improved parts. And here I might have advised them to give glory to free grace which hath revealed this unto them for flesh and blood could not, and so have closed the Sermon, but then I seare, I should leave some unsatisfyed, who would gladly get a right knowledg of this sinfull frame of their nature, and would be willing to see more of it. For their sakes I adde Use 4. A fourth Ʋse of Direction. If thou wouldest get, and keep up a more full and cleare knowledg of this sinfull frame of thy nature, then let it be thy care Direction 1. Directi: Study tho∣roughly, and and affect thy heart with, the na∣ture and ex∣tent of Gods Law. First, To study well the nature of the Law of God, endeavour to know much of this perfect Law, and then thou wilt know much of thy
im∣perfect heart; Study throughly, and determine clearely the maine Questions touching the obligatory power of the Law of God, by which it bindeth the very mind, and soule in its habituall disposition, and first motions; he that doth not stedfastly, believe that the Law of God doth lay an engagement on the inward frame, and bent of the heart will ne∣ver stedfastly believe there is so much wick∣ednesse in the frame of the mind; as he seeth there is, who hath well and clearely stated this point: It is the Law by which we have the knowledg of sin, Rom. 3.20. (so the Apostle assures us) when we know the just extent of the Law of God, we do discover the ex∣tent of that Lust which is contrary to it, and so when we see the Law extends to the frame of the heart, and first motions we shall see what sinfulnesse there is in both. When we know the holynesse of the Law of God; we then shall discover the sinfulnesse, and vilenesse of sin, of this sin: the known purity of God's Law, will disclose the unknown im∣purity of sin, and lust. Study well the spi∣rituall nature of all the commands of God, when the soul seeth (as Paul) that the Law is spirituall, it will also be able to see the spiri∣tuall
wickednesse, which is in lust that is con∣trary to it. And remember, in thy studying of these points, that thou do not onely store thy head with demonstrative arguments, that the Law is thus perfect in the extent, and holynesse and spirituality of its precepts; but with demon∣strative arguments joyne also affecting motives, that may worke on thy heart, as well as informe thy head. Want of these two, (I perswade my selfe,) are the great cause (at least they are one great cause among others) of the sad learned, ignorance and mistake of great improved parts; For whilest learned men mistake in the extent of the Law of God, and determine that it bindeth no more then out∣ward acts, or perfected, consented to, and de∣liberate Motions and purposes of the mind, it is impossible but that they should presently acquit both the frame and first motions of sinfull hearts, and pronounce them under no law, therefore contrary to none, and there∣fore not sinfull. This is the grand fundamentall errour on which the rest are built, and which necessari∣ly induceth us into many, and great both Practicall, and speculative errours; This is the of the severall learned erring men, and parties which I have reck∣oned up in the confirmation of the
Do∣ctrine; if therefore thou wouldst avoid a dangerous errour and get a true right knowledg touching thy sinfull nature, be diligent to understand the truth, of the affirmative state, of that Quaestion whether the inward, habituall, and secret frame of the heart, and the first, unformed, indelibe∣rate, and unconsented motions be, and ought to be under the Law of God? to this adde the second part of this direction viz: the affecting moving considerations that worke upon the heart, the defect whereof, hath been the cause of the uselesse, and unprofi∣table knowledg of this Lust in those unrege∣nerate learned men among us, who have been sound in their opinions, and determi∣nations of this doctrine, and who have main∣teined in their disputes the contrariety of the Naturall heart, and it's first motions to the holy Law of God, and consequently the great sinfullnesse of them, so that they have been in part right in their knowledge, Even so far as a speculative judgment was to act, they have acted their parts aright; but then they have failed in that other, which is the practicall part of this knowledge, which should worke upon the affections,
and heart; and endline the heart to close with the Law of God in opposition to the stirrings, and actings of this sin; which should engage the heart to love the Law, and to hate that sinfull frame, those sinfull projects, and tendencies which are contrary to the Law. In a word then, right knowledg of this sinfull nature consists in such a thorough, full, and ade∣quate, discovery of it, and its workings, to∣gether with a hearty, affectionate, and well grounded dislike of it and opposition to it; the first part of it thou wilt attaine by a tho∣rough studying of the speculative part of the question, touching the Law of God its nature and extent; The other part thou wilt get, by engaging the affectionate part of the soule, with those moving considerati∣ons which will perswade thee to close pra∣ctically with the Law, as understood in it's full extent. 2. Be dilgent in compa∣ring thy heart, its frame and inclinations with the Law so known. 2. If thou wouldest get, and keep a right and due knowledge of the sinfulnesse of thy nature: Then be often, diligent, and humble too, in comparing thy heart and its tendencies with the Law of God. Let not thy selfe-ex∣amination be onely taken up with the out∣ward, visible part of thy life: she may ap∣peare neat and cleanly abroad who may
possible be found a very slut at home, within doores: follow thy selfe into thine heart and search well the secrets of thy soule, neither be thou seldome in this worke, doe it often, for there is danger in little inter∣missions of our watch, the waters which silently glide from this fountaine will rise to an undiscerned depth in a little time. He that seldome searcheth, hardly ever comes to a just discovery of his heart: It is an often repeated search that is likelyest to dis∣cover a notorious cheate: and when thou tryest be not negligent, and carelesse in it, do it diligently, make it thy businesse, and then thou wilt find what now lies hidden out of sight, a dangerous Fistulating tumour, must be searched with much diligence, or the chirurgion will never know either it's depth, or danger: This spirituall corrup∣tion of our natures hath many, and very deep pipes: and all our skill is little enough to find out its secret conveyance, and there∣fore in thy search be not slothfull, and sleight. And remember to take humility along with thee in the tryall, for pride will never be content to let the heart appeare as it is, a proud man is never an upright judge of himselfe, he ever accounteth himselfe bet∣ter in the scales,
then he is: whereas the humble man either judgeth exactly, or wise∣ly suspects himselfe to be defective, and wan∣ting of weight. Whoso hath gotten such knowledg of the nature of God's Law, and doth thus search, may hope, that, he shall in due time discover this sinfulnesse, which ap∣peare's in it's fruits, not all at once, but some time more, sometime lesse, as provocations, and opportunities set it on worke. Now thy frequent search will discover it in this part of it: The enemy that makes his ex∣cursions often must be as often observed & watched: and if thou would'st know him throughly thou must not sleep securely and let him make inroades upon thee at his plea∣sure. This sinfulnesse is wise and politique it doth not allwaies appeare in the same garbe in the same method, it varies it's man∣ner of working, and thou must enter the search after it with wifedome and diligence both, or it will be too crafty, and subtile for thee: The more various it is, the more dili∣gent thou ought'st to be, and deave with this as men doe with cunning cheaters, that shift their lodgings, change their habits, alter their carriage and Proteus like appeare to you in a thousand shapes, keep your eyes on them, follow them to their very lodgings,
& retiring roomes, so do you keep your eye diligent in the watch of your sinfull nature, that you may see it in it's retiring roome where it prepares to change it's shape. Men, that stand without, see not what base fellow act's the part of a King on the stage, or how uncleane a villaine act's Jo∣seph's part, but he that goe's off' the stage and see's them behind the courtaine in their retiring place discover's all this, so may we by a diligent observance of this. 3. Direction Keep thy heart tender and easily affected with sin as it is contra∣ry to God and his Law 3. Thirdly, if thou would'st get and keep more cleare apprehensions, and knowledg of the sinfulnesse of thy nature; Then be carefull to get, and keep a tender heart, that soone feele's, and is easily grieved for sinne as it beareth a contrariety to the Law of God, and the holynesse of his nature: what ever thou do∣est, be sure to take heed thy heart doe not grow hard, and insensible; least it contract a brawny and callous hardnesse under sinne, it must be a considerable cut that bring's blood, or paineth a man in that part of his body which is much hardned, whereas the least scratch will draw blood, and bring griefe with it to one who hath a tender cu∣ticle. A hardned heart will not be sensible
of sin, unlesse it be some great one, which wound's deep, and then perhaps it may be somewhat sensible of it, but yet not duely affected with it. Naturallists tell us that those creatures which are are not so perfect and acute in their sight, they cannot see so well and clearely. It is most undoubtedly true of the soule, that soule which through sin hath it's eye either darkned, or thus af∣fected with dura lippitudineIt's disease marring the sight through a horny filme growing on the eye. can never clear∣ly, and fully discover sin. Looke abroad in∣to the croud of men, who call themselves Christians, see how they differ in their ac∣count of sin, proportionably to their different degrees of tendernesse of heart: Reall Saints under a defect of this have (and I wonder not at it) fallen into a defect of judgment con∣cerning the greatnesse of sin, they have ac∣counted that a little sin, when their hearts have been somewhat hardned which in a tender frame of spirit they more rightly esteemed a great sinne. And observe it, as you have lost of your tendernesse, so your sin hath lost of it's heinousnesse in your ac∣count: recovered backsliders among Saints will beare me witnesse to this truth. Tell me diddest thou rightly see the great
sinfullnesse of an earthly mind of a formall and hypocriticall heart, of a carelesse and loose heart, of a vaine and foolishly wanton heart? Diddest thou not think there was lesse evill in them when thy heart was somewhat hard, and had lost of it's wonted tendernesse? How hath thy boldnesse to sinne, and thoughts that it was but a little sinne which thou art now about to commit, gotten ground on thee upon such a decay? time was, when thou who art a tradesman sawest a great deale of sinne in a lie, or equi∣vocation to cheate, in a little too much gaine; Time was when thou who art a Scholar sawest a great deale of sinne in mis∣pending a day, or a few houres of thy time; what is now the cause thou doest not so judg? Is the sinne changed? Or is the Law changed? No, but thou art changed, thou wast then of a tender frame of spirit, but now hast lost it, and thence it is thou so mis∣judgest: once thou couldest not step a step in those rough and thorny waies but thou did'st bleed, and smart for it: why doest thou without sense of smart now runne long in them? is not this the cause? thou hast har∣dened thy selfe in them, and canst not see the evill of them. In a word our sight, and knowledg of the sinfulnesse of our nature,
is a knowledg of Spirituall sense, and very much resemble's our knowledg which have by our bodily sense in this, that due, and just tendernesse is a very necessary, and con∣venient disposition of the organ to discerne the object; so let our spirituall senses be ex∣ercised in judging of sin with this conveni∣ent disposition in the faculty, and wee shall certainly judge more rightly of it. Direct. 4. Oppose sin, especially begin the oposition a∣gainst first stirrings of it. 4. In order to which farther, take this as a fourth direction, Give a vigorous opposition to sinne universally, and begin your opposition at the very first spring, and root of it; let no sinne dwell peaceably in your sonles, and let not any sin have a season to grow, but cut it off' so soone as it sprouts forth; No man ever came to a right knowledg of sinne by indul∣ging it, for it still appeareth other then what it is to him, who is unwilling to sup∣presse it. As to the power, and strength with which it worketh, and as to the wise∣dome, policy wherein it contrive's it's works, it is more then evident, that the best way to discover them is by opposeing our selves to them; the encounter of an enemy is a meanes to draw forth his power, and craft which had otherwise lay hidden. And it will appeare also a very suitable,
and congru∣ous way to discover both the sinfulnesse and the guilt; the uncleanesse, and the danger of sinne, both in the branches and in the rootes of it by a timely and vigorous opposition of it. For whilest we oppose it in the power of the spirit of God, and by the word which is holy and directeth us in an opposition, there is an increase both of an internall light in the mind, & of an externall light in the word, the one as the light of the eye which seeth the other as the light of the sun by which it seeth, the foule∣nesse and blacknesse of sinne. The word and law enlighten the soule which before was in the darke, and blind; and then the more the enlightened soule adheres to this word in opposition to sinne, the more it seeth of the purity of the word, and the vilenesse of sin. There is in the word a native fitnesse to pro∣duce this effect, and a kind of naturall con∣nexion between these termes. Contraries illustrate, and disclose each other, and whi∣lest wee lay the word of God before us commanding one thing and our sinfull hearts suggesting an other, sinne becomes in our sight exceedingly sinfull, so it did to Paul, Rom. 7.13. Beside this, God doth delight to discover how sinfull a naturall heart is to those, who would really have
a deliverance from it, and blessed them in this opposition to this end; and farther, thy opposition to it will be a meanes to take off the temptation to like and plead for that which thou should'st, but hast not disliked and opposed; and it is a dangerous temptation to overlooke some∣what of evill in that we have done when it is done, since wee opposed it not when it was in doing; men would faine be found not so guilty, where they are sure to bee found somewhat guilty. Thou wilt be the more willing to see the sinfulnesse of a natu∣rall heart, when thou so opposest it, because thy opposition to it make's it cease to be thine in a great measure, no more I, but sin that dwelleth in me, no more I, but Satan that take's advan∣tage of a sinfull heart, &c. Thou who canst oppose sin vigorously, and heartily, needest not be so much ashamed of it, and thou wilt the more certainly discover that fully which thou mayst without shame, when another will not (if he could) because he cannot but with shame. But why stay I on these? Chri∣stian who ever thou art that hearest or rea∣dest these lines, tell me didst thou ever see the sinfulnesse of thy heart propending to sin so clearely, as thou hast upon a victory
over it? presently after a strong opposition to it? In a word either thy resistance hath foiled sin, then on serious view of it, with all its circumstances, thou hast seen what vilenesse was in it; or if thy resistance hath failed of the successe thou desiredst, and thou hast fallen, yet upon recovery thou hast seen, and abhorred that sinning sin which hath so defiled thee, who fall's unwillingly into the mire, usually sees the more, and is the more affected with that uncleanesse which he hath contracted. 4. Direct. View it with a wee∣ping eye, & mourning heart. 5. Would'st thou know aright the sin∣fulnesse of thy nature? then be not a stranger to, nor seldome in a serious and deep humiliati∣on, and sorrow for this sinfull frame; though he cannot see bodily objects well, whose eyes are full of teares, yet he seeth these spi∣rituall objects best, who seeth them with eyes filled with teares. He that was never duely grieved at an unkindnesse done by him to his friend, never knew how great that unkindnesse was: and he that never grieved, that he carryeth about him a sin∣full heart, never knew yet how sinfull his heart is which he carrieth in his breast. For these well regulated affections and passions are very sagacious, and quick-sighted
in the discovery of that which is their proper ob∣ject. Thus well guided sorrow (such as I now speak of) can find out the nature and aggravations of that, for which the soule grieveth: and if once thou canst bring thy soule to weep in secret over this sinning sin, thou mayest be assured thou already hast some degree of true right knowledge of this sin, and ere long (holding on thus) wilt get greater degrees and measures of it. E∣very tear thou sheddest will be a glasse to represent somewhat more of it, and every sigh will be a blow at the door of this char∣nell house, or house of corruption, untill it be broken open, that thou mayest see and cleanse it. Christian, view all the remark∣able seasons in which thou hast had any sight and knowledge of this sin more then ordinary, thou that hast seen much of it in thy reading the law, in thy hearing the law preached, in thy meditating on it, or whilest thou hast been conferring about it. Didst thou ever see more of it at such times, or ever so much, as when thy soule hath been ready to melt into teares for it, whilest thou hast fixed thine eye upon it and wept? Call to mind what Improvements thou hast gotten to thy Knowledge at any times, I know little, if thou sayest not that Mour∣ning
times have been the seasons, and weeping eyes have been the organs which have made the fullest discovery of this sin, and added the most considerable improvement to this Knowledge. Job was a mourner when he saw, and left it for our instruction, that Job. 14.4.none can bring a cleane thing out of an un∣cleane: And David was broken-hearted, wholly immerst in teares, when he breathed out that confession, that full and clear de∣scription of our sinfull natures, which are shapen in iniquity &c. In a word, get thee a vessell of Chrystall teares, if thou wilt see how great the unhappy Eclipse of thy glo∣ry is. Men who would see the Eclipse of the Sun, choose to see it in a vessell of clear wa∣ter, and enlightned soules see the greatnesse of their Eclipse best in the vessell filled with teares of Godly sorrow. 6. Directi∣on. Joyne lear ning and experience together, study it joyntly in thy heart, & other men's books. 6. Wouldst thou get, and keep up a right Knowledge and apprehension of this sinning sin, of this indwelling lust? then joyne the Practicall Divine, the experienced Christian, and thy own observation to thy study of those authors who are accounted highly for their great learning. Do not seek a right Know∣ledge of this onely from the learned, nor yet promise thy selfe a full Knowledge of it
without them. I know others may have a Knowledge full and sufficient for them (be∣cause they are not Scholars, nor must be preachers) without enquiry into it, by the directions of learned men, but you are Scho∣lars, who may possibly be teachers of o∣thers, you must in order to a full discovery examine what learned men have said in this: but yet consider that somewhat else beside learning is requisite to make them meet guides to you: joyne therefore Lear∣ning and Experience together in those Au∣thors you study touching this, their Lear∣ning enables them to discover the truth in the more speculative, & notionall parts of it; their Experience enables them to discover the truth in the more Paracticall part, which hath most influence on the life. And if thou canst, (as I am sure thou mayest) find both Learning and Grace happily meeting in the same persons, and sweetly flowing from their pen, in what they have wrote touching this matter, Prize and study them: but forget not to study thine own heart at the same time, who so wisely joynes these together for the information of a teachable soule, is not (I think) in much danger of
mistaking a false, and unprofitable for a true and advantageous Knowledge of this doctrine. In which there are some things difficult and not obvious to every one, which must be sought in the Schooles: and o∣ther things Experimentall, and spirituall, which must be sought at the mouth of a gratious and sanctified person. Their lear∣ning will be a glasse to represent the one, their Experience will be a glasse to repre∣sent the other part to you. Their learning will informe your judgments, and their experi∣ence will discover your hearts to you, while you shall observe that your hearts answer to theirs in those Motions and Pronesse to sin, which are now the matter of your daylie exercise and complaints, as they once were the matter of their dayly exercise and complaints. In one word, in such a com∣bination, thou hast the skill of a Physitian, and the experience of a sick recovered pa∣tient to informe thee, and direct thee in the very same case and disease. His skill can tell thee the cause, with the danger, and cure: His experience can tell thee the man∣ner of this disease in its workings, and the sure method of applying the meanes, that will not faile to heale thee. And thou wilt
say, who so knowes his disease thus, knowes it aright: Be you then diligent in using their learning as Scholars, and their Experience as Saints, and you may well hope to get a suf∣ficient insight into this, both as it is a knowledge Profound and deep, fit to be searched after by Scholars, and as it is Spirituall, Experimentall, and practicall in its nature and right tendency, onely ob∣teined by Saints. FINIS.
A Catalogue of Bookes printed for, and to be sold by Richard Davis at his shop neer Oriell Colledge in Oxford. A Paraphrase, and Annotations on the whole Book of Psalms, by Hen: Ham∣mond, D.D. in folio. —A Paraphrase, and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament, in folio: the second Editition. —The Practicall Catechisme, with all other his English Treatises, in two volumes in 4o. —Differtationes quatuor quibus Episco∣patus Jura ex S. Scripturis & Primaeva An∣tiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam Blondelli & aliorum, 4o. —A Review of the Paraphrase and Annota∣tions on the New Testament. 8o. —Some profitable directions both for Priest and People, in two Sermons. 8o. —A Collection of severall Replies and vindi∣cations. Published of late most of them in de∣fence of the Church of Engl: in 4 volumes 4o. —The Dispatcher dispatch't, in Answer to a Roman Catholick's book, entituled, Schisme dispatcht. 4o. new. —A Letter of Resolution to six Quaeries, 12o,
—Of Schisme. A defence of the Church of England against the exceptions of the Roma∣nists. 12o. —Of Fundamentals in a Notion referring to Practice. 12o. —Paraenesis, or a seasonable exhortation to all true sons of the Church of England, 12o. A view of the Threats and Punishments re∣corded in Scripture, Alphabetically composed, with some briefe Observations upon severall Texts, by Zach: Bogan of C.C.C. in Oxon. 8o. —The Mirt of a Christian Life, and the sorrowes of a Wicked Life, 8o. Fides Apostolica, or, A Discourse asserting the received Authors and Authority of the A∣postles Creed: together with the Grounds and Ends of the Composing thereof by the Apostles, the sufficiency thereof for the Rule of Faith &c. With a double Appendix, 1. Touching the A∣thanasian, The Nicene Creed: by George Ashwell, B.D. 8o. Ailmeri Musae Sacrae, seu Jonas, Jeremiae Threni, & Daniel Graecè redditi carmine, 8o. Ad Grammaticen ordinariam supplemen∣ta quaedam. Editio 2. multis auctior. 8o. A Guide to to the Holy City, or Directions and Helps to an Holy life, by John Reading B.D. 4o
Theses quadragesimales Philosophiae No∣vae, in Scholis Oxonii Publicis, à Carolo Potter. 12o. Contemplationes Metaphysicae, Authore Georg. Ritscheli Bohemo, 8o. Aditus ad Logicam, Authore Samuele Smith, 8o. Elementa Logicae, Authore Edwardo Brerewood, 12o. Johan. Buridani Questiones in octo Li∣bros Politicorum Aristotelis, 4o. Robert Baronii Philosophia Theologiae Ancillans, Edit. nova. 12o. Rob: Baronii Metaphysica. Edit:nova, 12o. The hurt of Sedition, by S. John Cheek, 4o. The Christian Race, a Sermen on Heb. 12.1. by Tho. Barton, 4o. A Sermon on 2 of Timothy, chap. 3. v. 1,2,3,4,5. by Will: Chillingworth, 4o. A funerall Sermon on Phil. 1.23. by John Millet, 4o. A Funerall Scrmon on 1 Cor. 7.29,30,31. by Tho: Hauskins. 8o. A Nomenclator of such Tracts and Sermons as have been printed or translated into English upon any place or book of the Holy
Scripture, now to be had in the Publick Library in Oxf. by Jo. Vernevill. 12o. The Vaulting-Master, or the Art of Vaul∣ting, illustrated with Sixteen brasse figures, by William Stoaks. 4o. Ramus Olivae, Concio habita ad clerum in Templo Beatae Mariae Oxon, 8o. Junii pro inchoando Termino. A Joh. Wall, T. D. & Col. Aedis Chirsti Praebendario. 8o. A briefe Treatise touching the preservation of the Eye-sight by Walter Baley, sometimes Fellow of N. Colledg, Regius professor in Phy∣sick, and Physitian to Queen Elizabeth. 8o. Essaies and Observations, wherein many of the humours and diseases of the age are discove∣red and characterized, by a student in Theolo∣gy. 8o. Porta Mosis, sive Dissertationes aliquot à R. Mose Maimonide. Nunc primum Ara∣bicè prout ab ipso Autore conscriptae sunt, & Latinè editae. Unà cum Appendice No∣tarum Miscellanea, operâ & studio Edvardi Pocockii, Linguae Hebr: & Arab: in Acad. Oxon. Professoris. 4o. Idea Trigonometriae Demonstratae. Item Praelectio de Cometis. Et Inquisitio in Bul∣lialdi Astronomiae Philolaicae Fundamenta,
Authore Setho Wardo, in Acad. Oxon. Astronomiae Professore Saviliano. 4o. —In Thomae Hobbii Philosophiam exer∣citatio Epistolica, 8o. Delphi Phoenicizantes, &c. Authore Edm. Dickinsono, Med. Doc. & Mertonensis Colleg. Socio, in 8o. Logicae Artis Compendium, Autho∣re Rob Sanderson, Coll. Lincoln. in al∣mâ Oxoniensi quondam Socio, & in Eadem Academia Sacrae Theologiae postea Professo∣re Regio, Edit. 5a. 12o. A Paraphrase on Habbakuk, by Dr. Stoakes. 4o. A Christian Legacy; viz. 1. A Preparation for Death &c. 2. A Consolation against Death &c. by Edw. Hyde, D.D. 12o. Christ and his Church: or Christianity ex∣plain'd under 7. Evangelicall and Ecclesiasti∣call Heads: with a Justification of the Church of England according to the true principles of Christian Religion and Christian Communion. 4o. 1658. —A Christian Vindication of Truth a∣gainst Errour, concerning 7 Controversies; most between the Church of England, and the Romanists, in 12o. new. Ric: Gardiner Herefordensis, Specimen Oratorum. 12o.
The City Match. 4o. The Amorous War. 4o. both long since written by I. M. St: of Ch: Ch: Oxon. Ovid's Invective against Ibis, translated into English Verse, and the Histories therein breifly explained, with Naturall, Morall, Poe∣ticall, Politicall, Mathematicall, and Theolo∣gicall Applications: by Jo: Jones, Teacher of a Priuate Schoole in Hereford. 8o. Two Assize Sermons, preached at Reading and Abingdon in Berks: with two others prea∣ched at St. Maries in Oxford: by Jo: Hinck∣ley, Minister of the Gospell at Colsehill in Berks. 12o. The Devill of Mascon, or a true Relation of what an Ʋncleane Spirit did and said at Mascon in Burgundy, attested by severall per∣sons of Eminency, both for Learning and Piety: the 3d. Edition. 8o. Burgesditii Metaphysica. 12o. Directions for a Godly Life: especially for Communicating at the Lords Table, by H. To∣zer: the 6th. Edition. 12o. Hen: Savilii Oratio coram Reginâ Eliza∣bethâ Oxoniae habita, &c. 4o. Juelli Apologia Ecclesiae Anglican: Grae∣colat. 8o.
Enchiridion Botanicum: or a Complete Herball, conteining the summe of what hath been hitherto published either by Ancient or Moderne Authors, both Galenicall and Chy∣michall, touching Trees, Shrubs, Plants, Fruits, Flowers, &c. in an Alphabeticall or∣der, in which are distinguish'd all that are in the Physick Garden in Oxford, shewing their Place, Time, Names, Kindes, Temperature, Vertues, Ʋse, Dose, Danger, and Antidotes, &c. by Ro: Lovell, St: of Ch: Ch: Oxon. in 12o. The Circles of Proportion, and the Horizon∣tall Instrument &c. both invented, and the u∣ses of both written in Latine by W. Oughtred, Aetonensis. Transtated into English, and set forth for the publique benefit by W. F. And now by the Authors consent revised, cor∣rected, and freed from all mistakes in the for∣mer edition: and also much amplified and ex∣plained by A. H. Gent. with brasse figures. 8o. New. A Treatise proving the necessity of a Lear∣ned Ministry, by H. Th. St: Ch: Oxon. 8o. New. Exercitationes duae. Prima de Hystericâ Passione: secunda de Affectione Hypochon∣driacâ. Authore Nathaniele Highmoro, Artium & Medicinae Doctore. 8o. New.
