I336C 99825877 30268
AN ASSESMENT for IRELAND For three Months; at Ten Thousand Pounds by the Month. Commencing the 12th. day of Ianuary 1654. and Determining the 12th. of April following. Dublin this 1. of Ianuary 1654. ORdered by the Lord Deputy and Council, That this Order and Commission for the Assesment, be forthwith Printed and Published. Signed by Order of the said Lord Deputy and Council. THO: HERBERY. Clerk of the Council. DƲBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1654.
IRELAND BY THE LORD DEPVTY AND COVNCIL. WHereas by an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord Protector of the Common-wealth of Eng∣land, Scotland. and Ire∣land, and the Domini∣ons thereunto belong∣ing, with the advice of his Council, bearing date the 23th. of Iune, 1654. Entituled, An Or∣dinance for the further en∣couragement of the Adven∣turers for Lands in Ire∣land, and of the Souldiers, and other Planters there. It is,
Ordained (amongst other things) that from and after the 24th. day of Iune 1654 For and during the space of two years, then next ensuing, there shall be Taxed, Assessed, and , upon all the Counties, Towns, and places in Ireland, and all the Estates real and personal therein, the  of  thousand pounds by the month, for every month, during the said two years: It is therefore hereby Ordered, and Declared, that towards the pay of the forces of the Common-wealth in Ireland, and other publick charges, the Counties, Cities, and places, be charged for three months, with the sums hereafter named, respectively, by the several sums, and according to the several Rates, and proportions, and in manner and form hereafter expresed, viz. The Countie of Dublin, the sum of thirteen hundred and eighty pounds for three months, being four hundred and sixty pounds each month. The City and Countie of the Citie of Dublin, the sum of six hundred and ninety pounds, for three months, being two hundred and thirty pounds each month. The Countie of Kildare, the sum of six hundred and sixty pounds, for three months, being two hundred and twenty pounds each month. The Countie of Catherlagh, the sum of two hundred sixty four pounds, for three months, being eighty eight pounds each month. The Kings County, the sum of two hundred and forty pounds, for three months, being eighty pounds each month. The Queens Countie, the sum of three hundred and ninety pounds, for three months, being one hundred and thirty pounds each month. The County of Longford, the sum of sixty nine pounds, for three months, being twenty three pounds each month. The Countie of East-Meath, with the Town of Dio∣ghedah, the sum of two thousand three hundred twenty and two pounds, for three , being seven hundred twenty four pounds each month. The County of West-Meath, the sum of three hundred
and ninety pounds for three months, being one hundred and thirty pounds each month. The Countie of Kilkenny, with the Town thereof, the sum of one thousand seven hundred eighty five pounds, for three months, being five hundred ninety five pounds each month. The Town and County of Wexford, the sum of eight hundred and forty pounds, for three months, being two hundred and eighty pounds each month. The County of Wicklo, the sum of eighteen pounds, for three months, bing six pounds each month. The Countie of Limerick, with the City and Countie thereof the sum of nine hundred forty five pounds, for three months, being three hundred fifteen pounds each month. The Countie of Corke, with the Citie and Countie thereof, the sum of four thousand one hundred eighty and eight pounds, for three months, being one thousand three hundred ninety six pounds each month. The Countie of Waterford, with the Citie and County thereof, the sum of one thousand one hundred twenty two pounds, for three months, being three hundred seventy four pounds each month. The Countie of Kerry, the sum of two hundred fifty five pounds, for three months being eighty five pounds each month. The Countie of Tipperary, including Holicross, the sum of two thousand three hundred and forty pounds, for three months, being seven hundred and eighty pounds each month. The Countie of Donegal or Tirconel, the sum of thirteen hundred and fifty pounds, for three months, be∣ing four hundred and fifty pounds each month. The Countie of Tirone, including upper and nether Tirone, the sum of four hundred seventy and one pound, for three months, being one hundred fifty seven pounds each month. The County of Fermanath, the sum of four hundred forty seven pounds, for three months, being one hundred forty nine pounds each month.
The County of Cavan, the sum of seventy two pounds for three months, being twenty four pounds each month. The Countie of Monaghan, the sum of ninety pounds, for three months, being thirty pounds each month. The Countie of Antrim, with the Town and Countie of Carrickfergus, the sum of two thousand and seventie pounds, for three months being six hundred and ninetie pounds each month. The Countie of Downe, the sum of seventeen hun∣dred and forty pounds, for three months, being five hun∣dred and eighty pounds each month. The County of Ardmagh, the sum of two hundred twenty five pounds for three months, being seventie five pounds each month. The Countie of London-Derry, with the Citie and Countie thereof, and the Town and Barony of Colerane, the sum of one thousand and fifty pounds; for three months; being three hundred and fifty pounds each month. The County of Lowth, the sum of six hundred and eighteen pounds, for three months, being two hundred and six pounds each month. The Countie of Clare, the sum of four hundred thirty five pounds, for three months, being one hundred forty five pounds each month. The Countie of Rolcomon, the sum of five hundred and ten pounds, for three months, being one hundred and seventy pounds each month. The Countie of Mayo, the sum of three hundred and thirtie pounds, for three months, being one hundred and ten pounds each month. The Countie of Sligoe, the sum of two hundred and seventy pounds, for three months, being ninety pounds each month. The Countie of Letrim, The sum of eighty four pounds, for three months, being twenty eight pounds each month. The Countie of Gallway, with the Town thereof, the sum of two thousand three hundred and forty pounds,
for three months, being seven hundred and eighty pounds each month. And it is further Ordered and Declared, That the persons hereafter named, shall be Commissioners of the several and respective Counties and places here∣after nominated; for the Assessing Leavying and Colle∣cting the Assesment aforesaid. Viz. For the County of Dublin, with the Citie and Coun∣tie of the City of Dublin.] Charles Lord Lambert Sir Hardress Waller, Sir Gerard Lowther, Sir Edward Bol∣ton, Sir William Vssher, Sir William Parsons, Sir Iohn Temple, Sir Robert Meredith, Sir Robert King Knights, Iohn Reynolds, Iohn Hewson, Hierom Sankey, Richard Law∣rence, Philip Ferheley, Iohn Blackwel, Iohn Vernon, Theo∣philus Iones, Nicholas Bolton Iunior of Brasill, the Maior of Dublin for the time being, Doctor Henry Iones, Dudley Loftus, Isaac Dobson, Thomas Richardson, Henrie Porter, Raphael Hunt, Richard Tigh, Daniel Hutchinson, Iohn Price, Timothy Avery, Robert Moulsworth, Iames Standish, Tho∣mas Boles, Iohn Preston, William Franklin, William Got∣tington, Iohn Smith of Drumconra, William Arnop, Iohn Percival, Chidley Coote, Arthur Anslow, Iohn Bysse, Ralph Wallis, Henry Iones, Thomas Walcor, William Blackwell  Taylor, Iohn Blewet, Robert Hasles, Iohn Swan, William Ivory, Henry Iohnson, Robert Percival, Iohn Gay Esquires. For the Countie of Kildare.] Sir Iohn Temple, Sir Paul Davis, Sir Robert Meredith, Sir Iohn Hoey Knights, Iohn Hewson, Iohn Perceval, Iames Peisley, Edward Davis; Henrie Alland, Henry Sankey, Robert Warnefore, Iohn Black∣well, Iohn Hewerson, Henry Pretty, Richard Andrews Wil∣liam Meredith, Ioshuah Carpenter, Iohn Ponsonby, Daniel Hutchinson, Richard Tigh. Iohn Hughes, Theophilus Iones, Iohn Iordon, William Dixon, William Walker, Henry Crookhorn, Hugh Chamberlane, Thomas Richardson, Io∣seph Wray, William Smith, William Sands, Raphael Hunt, Brian Iones; Thomas Cheek, Philip Ferne Iey Esquires.
For the Countie of Catherlogh.] Sir Iohn Temple, Knight, Henrie Prittie, Oliver Iones, Iames Peisley, Henrie Sankey, Richard Andrews, William Skinner, Sir Iohn Hoey Knight, Iohn Benner, Daniel Hutchinson, William Walker, Iames Stopford, Henrie Nichols, Henry Crookhorn, Wil∣liam Bolton, Sampson Twogood, Iames Shepheard, Iohn Iordon, William Huler, Francis Bolton, Raphael Hunt Es∣quires. For the Kings Countie] Sir William Parsons, Sir George Blundel Knights, Henry Owen, Iohn Bysse, Willi∣am Duckenfield, Henry Sankey, Edward Birtles, Edward Herbert, William Hamilton, Henry le Strange, Iohn War∣ren, Randolph Sparrow, Alexander Staples,  Bish∣op, Henry Waddington, Iames Shaen, Cary Dillon, Alex∣ander Brayfield Esquires, Charles Lord Lambert, William Handcock, Peter Stubbard, Francis Hurd, Thomas Davies Esquires. For the Queens County.] Sir Charles Coot Knight, Daniel Axtel, Henry Pretty, Richard Stephens, Henrie Owen, Thomas Rawlins, Thomas Adams, Edward Feak, Oliver Wheeler,  Farrer, Henry Gilbert, Iohn Weaver Iu∣nior, Richard Laghlin, Martin Iubbs, Francis Barrington, Philip Bigo, Thomas, Evans, Henry Baker, Thomas New∣men, William Walker, William Scot, Vincent Kidder, Fran∣cis Bolton, Robert Busbridge, Gilbert Rawson, William Bol∣ton, William Burges, Ben. Woodward, Samuel Gardner, William Walker Iunior, William Whaley, Henry Eans, William Skinner, Peter Stubbar, Francis Hurd, Thomas Da∣vies, Raphael Hunt Esquires. For the County of Longford.] Adam Molineux, Hen∣rie Packenham, William Pelham, Iohn Tench, Iohn Ken∣nedy, Samuel Price, Iohn Edgworth, Henry Waddington, Iames Shaen, Henry Sankey, Alexander Brayfield, Patrick Cary, William Handcock Esquires. For the Countie of East-Meath, with the Town of Droghedah.] Sir Charls Coot, Knight, Doctor Henry
Iones, Iohn Fowk, William Cadogan, Cadwallader Winne Simon Crane, Thomas Stanley, Iosceline Usher, Thomas Ash, Henry Puckenham, Robert Cusack, Alexander Iephson, William Summers, Thomas Vincent, Iohn Baxter, Thomas Cook, Richard Edmunds, Bartholomew Fowk, Iames Mor∣timer, Iohn Edgworth, Thomas Blood, Arthur Purefoy, William Markham, Joseph Fox, Patrick Cary, Edward Mar∣tin, Rowland Trolly, Edmund Hoyl, Thomas Fugil, Doc∣tor Ionathan Edwards, Iohn Pierce, Iames Smalwood, Wil∣liam Parkinson, William Web Esquires. For the County of West Meath.] Charles Lord Lam∣bert, Iohn Reynolds, Richard Edmunds, Ridgely Hatfield; William Handcock, Alexander Iephson, Henry Baker, Robert Smith, Henry Iones, Henry Pierce, Walter Staplehill, Peter Stern, Denis Brown, Alexander Brayfield, Iames Shaen, Hen∣ry Waddington, Sebastian Brigham, Patrick Cary, Peter Stub-Francis Hurd, Thomas Davies, William Parkinson, Arthur Purefoy Esquires. For the County of Kilkenny with the Town of Kilken∣nie.] Iohn Reynolds, Daniel Axcel, Richard Stephens, Hen∣ry Owen, Thomas Rawlins, Thomas Adams, Thomas Evans, Thomas Wilson, Abel Warren, William Burges Esquires. Sir Hdress Waller, Sir Patrick Wemys Knights. Ri∣chard Smith, Thomas Butler, Marmaduke Tailor, Iohn Brawn,  Ridgeway, Thomas Newman, William Bolton, Henry Pretty, Edward Fe William Whaley, Hicrom San∣key, Ben Wory, Philip Peak, Oliver Wheeler,  Farrar, William Warden, Iohn Woodcock, Thomas Squth∣well, William Halsey, Thomas Fog, Henry Baker, Thomas Chesshire, Stephen Squib, Arthur Swanwick, Iohn Campbel Esquires. For the County of Wrford] Sir Charles Coote Knight, Thomas Sadler, Arthur Anslow, Iohn Overstreet, Iohn Padle, William Halsey, William Moo, Bartholomew Hussey, Edward Tomlins, Ambrose Andrew,  o ∣by, Iohn Winworth, Thomas Brereton, Thomas Dancr, Sampson Twogood, Matthew , Edward With, , William Walker Iui, Thomas , ∣bell Warren, William Cleburn, Christopher Dobson, Peter
Wallis, Thomas Betts, Samuel Sheir, Whomas Richardson  Murphy, Henry Pretty, Nicholas Loftus, Nicholas odd, Richard VVilbore,  of Kilbride, Nicho∣las Deverox, Edward Brading, Iohn Kett, VVilliam Wood∣ald, Constantine Neal, Thomas Low, Robert VVilkinson Esquires. For the County of Widdow.] Iohn Hewson, Richard Lawrence, Thomas Brereton, VVilliam Arnop, Iohn Iecpel, Iohn Boswell, George Phillips, Edward Hoar, Robert Ken∣nedy, Iohn Ponsonby, Divid Fleetwood, Henry Iones, Ed∣ward Carter, Thomas Richardson, Bartholomew Hussey, Richard Neale Esquires. For the County of Limerick, and the City and County of the City of Limerick.] Sir  VValler Knight, Henry Ingoldsby, William Purefoy, Thomas Southwell, William Piggot, Edward Southwell, Francis Courtney, Ro∣bert Cox, Samuel Clerk, Thomas Iackson, Walter VValler, Ralph VVilson, VVilliam Hartwell, Robert VVilkinson, Iohn Taylor, Richard , VVilliam Yarwell, Iames Harri∣son, VVilliam King, Iohn Friend, Robert Staard, Benja∣min Lucas, Edward VVarren, VVilliam VVood, Robert , Ioseph Bennet, Daniel Bowman, Ieremiah Howard, Iohn Parkinson, VVilliam Riall,  Robinson Esquires. For the County of Cork, and the City and County of the City of Cork.] Roger Lord Broghill, Sir Hardress VValler, Sir VVilliam Fenton Knights, Iohn Brodrick, Maurice Fenton, Robert Phayre, Richard Hodden, Tristram VVhitcomb, VValter VValler, Abraham Savage, Iohn Ba∣ker, Peter VVallis, Robert Sanders, Robert Southwell, Io∣seph Dan, Vincent Goki, Iohn Perceval, Iohn Hoddar, VVilliam Hall, Ioseph Murdock, Nicholas Purd, Iohn VVidenham, Francis Fowk, Simon Eaton, Esay Thomas, Thomas Wood, Richard , Iohn , Peter Ca∣rey, Robert Gookin,  Bunell, Iohn Iephson, Thomas , Iohn Dennison, Samuel , Benjamin Croft, Charls , William Iephson, Philip , Iohn , Iohn Harding, Thomas Cly, Thomas Mosse, Henry , Robert Hedges, Robert Cuppage, Peter , Iohn , Valentine , Esquires.
For the County of Waterford, with the Town of Wa∣terford.] Richard Lawrence, Thomas Sadler, William Leigh, William Halsey, Samuel Wade, Thomas VVatts, Robert Fawcett, Thomas Bolton, Andrew Rickard, George Caw∣dron, Iohn Veon, Iohn VVilliams, Samuel Sheers, Henry Slade, Iohn Cooke, Henry Smithwick, Richard Osborn, Ni∣cholas Osborn, Francis Foulke Esquires. For the County of Kerry.] Sir Charles Coot Knight, Iohn Nelson, Richard Ousley, Iohn Carrick, VVhitehall Brown, Arthur Denny, Iohn Hasser, Thomas Barrington, Thomas Holmes, Henry Whittle, Peter Purefoy, Iohn Per∣ceval Esquires. For the County of Tiperary, including Holy-cross.] Sir William Fenton Knight; Iohn Reynolds, Hierom San∣key, Daniel Abbot, Solomon Richards Senior, Solomon Richards Iunior, Iohn Godfrey, Elias Green, Ri∣chard Le-hunt, Charles Blunt, Robert Thornhill. Iohn Per∣ceval, Henry Paris, Thomas Batty.  Folio, Iohn Booker, Iohn Ioyner, William Walters of Cuin, Wal∣ter Waller, Maurice Fenton, William Halsey, Walter Car∣wardin, Martin Dix, Francis Vaughan, Iohn Blackwel, George Clarke Esquires Sir Thomas Meredith Knight. For the County of Donegall.] Sir Robert Many, Sir George Atcheson, Sir Paul Davis Knights, Wil∣liam Basil Atturney Generall, Thomas Newbrough, Henry Brooks, Arthur Gore, Iames Linsey, Archibald Sprowle, Ralph King, Hugh Edwards, Owen Winn, Charles Hamilton, Edward Husset, Iohn Folliot, George Cary, Richard Perkins, Iohn Hill, Francis Zachery, Iohn Zachery, William Squire, Richard Ask, Iohn Bae, Francis Bolton, Iohn Galland, Iohn Salt, Henry Skevington, Iohn Wilton, Henry Alland, Francis Leg, William Dutten, Thomas Dut∣ten Alexander Staples Esquires. For the County of Tirone, including upper and nether Tirone.] William Lord Gawfield, Sir Henry Tchburne, Sir George Atcheson Knights, Ralph King, Owen Winn, Thomas Newbourgh Senior, Christopher Cpley, Nicholas , Edward Hill, Francis Zachery, Iohn Zachery, Oliver Anl, Iohn Foster, William Moore,
Young, William Squire, Richard Ask, Iohn Barret, Francis Bolton, Iohn Galland, Iohn Salt, Henry Skevington, George Wilton, Francis Leg, Samuel Hill Alexander Staples Esquires. For the County of Fermanagh.] Samuel Batteley Lewis Northcort, Richard Nun, Francis Cole, Iohn Cole, Ste∣phen Allin, Arnold Cosby, Henry Brook, Hugh Ross, Adam Rathcart, Iohn Cheslin, Robert Cole, Henry Langford, Sa∣muel Powel, Iohn Read, Thomas Seagrave, Ralph Fenwick, Cadwallader Winne, Iames Gerrard, Iohn Hardier, Chidley Coote, Nicholas Willoughby, Edward Philpot, Oliver An∣ctil,  Gilbert, William VVinckworth, Iohn Car∣mich Esquires. For the County of Cavan.] Charles Lord Lambert, Sir Charles Coote, Sir George Atcheson Knights, Iohn Read, William Morris, Iohn Winckworth, Edward Philpot, Thomas White, William Moore, Thomas Seagrave, Charles Hamilton, Thomas Coote, William Kempson, Ralph Fen∣wick, Iames Gerrard, Iohn Hardier, Chidley Coote, Lewis Northcot, Richard Nun, Iohn Matthews, Tobias Peak, Fran∣cis Brereton, Thomas Burton, Richard Lewis, Richard Ay∣let,  Gun, Thomas Guilliams, Thomas Richardson, Thomas Hart, Iohn Bernard, Samuel Townly Esquires. For the County of Monaghan.] Alderman Vincent, Ralph Fenwick, William Sands, Iohn Matthews, Henry Pon∣sonby, Robert Aldridge, Robert Barclay, Iohn Read, Willi∣am Morris, Thomas Coot, Hugh Barclay, Robert Sanderson, Thomas Seagrave, Cadwallader Winne, Lewis Northcot, Richard Nun, Iames Gerrard, Iohn Hardier, Chidley Coote, Edward Cary, Francis Cole,  Lane, Iohn Iackson, Walter Cary Esquires. For the Countie of Antrim, including the Towns and County of Carigfergus.] Lord Chichester, Sir Iohn Clotworthy Knight, Arthur Hill, Robert Venables, Daniel Redman, Thomas C, Alexander Colvil, Robert Colvil, Roger Lyndon, Henry Flower, Brian Smith, Iohn Barret, Phi∣lip Ebzury, Richard Ak, Edward Conway, Robert Cusack. George Rawdon, Iames Trayle, Thomas Walt, Francis Meek, Richard Bickerstaff, the  of Carigfergus for the time being, Arthur Lipton, Hercules Langford, Iohn Dalway
Philip Pinchon, Henry Ellis, Iohn Duckenfield, Iohn Reading, Richard Done, Samuel Bonnel, William Williams, William Loe, George Talbot, Thomas Harpar, Richard Peirce, Mi∣chael Harrison, Alexander Cornwal, Francis Richardson, Iohn Frank, Robert Preston, Richard Franklin, Ioseph Stroud, Iohn Matthews, Iohn Collins, William Disney, Samuel Powell, William Kuningham, Archibald Stewart, Iohn Clerk, Iames Shaw, Iohn Donnaldson, Alexander Donnaldson, Adam Boyd, Thomas Church, William Huetson, Henry Marsh, Thomas Howard, Iohn Orpin, Edmund Davis, Iames Adaire, Iohn  Dowel of Six-Mile-Water, the Soveraign of Belfast, Thomas Warning, Iohn Bush, William Lees,  Haddington, Iohn Waring, William Waring, Alexander Sta∣ples Esquires. For the Countie of Down.] Sir George Blundell Knight, Robert Venables, Philip Pinchon, Arthur Hill, Robert Barrow, Robert Cusack, Roger West, Iames Trayle, Tobias Norris, William Bingley, Iohn Lucas, Iames Shaen, Hugh Savage, George Rawden,  Perrot, Tobias Pointz, Andrew Graham, Alexander Slowan, Fergus Ken∣nedy, Francis Keyth, William Hawkins, Colin Max∣well, Hans Hamilton, Francis Bolton, Iohn Duckenfield, Iohn Reading, Richard Done, Samuel Bonnel, William Williams, William Loe, George Talbot, Iohn Frank, Robert Preston, Richard Franklin, Ioseph Stroud, Iohn Matthews, Iohn Col∣lins, William Disney, Samuel Powel, Iohn Peson, George Augustine, Iohn Baily, Iohn Turner, Provost of New Town,  Matthews,  Bagnal, Iohn Waring,  Preston, Iohn Verner, William Hamilton of Rowbane, George Rol, Alexander Stuart, Robert Maxwel, Robert Fenwick, Miles Ienkinson, Iohn Dob, Thomas Williams, George Low, Alexander Staples Iohn Barret Esquires. For the County of Ardmagh.] William Lord Caw∣field, Sir William Brownlow, Sir George Acheson, Knights, Robert Venables, Hans Hamilton, Thomas Cham∣bers, Arthur Annesley, Henry Dillon, Anthony Cope, Ro∣bert Cusack, Roger West, Tobias Points, Edward Richard∣son, Iames Trail, Iohn Duckenfield, Iohn Reading, Richard Done, Samuel Bonnel, William Williams, William Loe, George Talbot, Iohn Frank, Robert Preston, Richard Frank∣lin, Ioseph Stroud, Iohn Matthews, Iohn , William Disney, Samuel Powel, George Blacker; Iohn Erp, William
Arthur, Iohn Iones, Francis Richardson, Iohn Lord, Iohn Ry, William Wey, Edward Atcheson, Alexander Gill,  Richardson, Robert Fonwick Esquires. For the Countie of London-derry, and the Citie and Countie of the Citie of London-derry.] Sir Charls Coot, Sir Robert  Knights, The several Mayors of London-derry and Colerane for the time being, Dudey Phillips, George Phillips, Ralph King, Hugh Edwards, Phi∣lip , Henry lower, Bryan Smith, Iohn Barret, Ri∣chard  worthy, Robert , Owen Winne, Thomas Newbourgh, Henry Finch, Tristram Berisford, George Cary, Robert Smith, Thomas Mucreee, Francis Bolton Francis Zechery, Iohn Zechery, William Squire, Iohn Galland, Iohn Salt,  Shevingto, George Wilton, Fran∣cis Leg, Michael Berisford, William Cuningham Esquires. For the Countie of Lowth.] Iohn Fowl, William Aston, Robert Winne, William Armitage, Iohn , Samuel Stan∣bridge, Rowland Trolly, Edward Martin, William Cadogan, Thomas Stanly, Henry Gilbert, Ioseph Fox, Thomas Fugill, Simon Crane, Cadwallader Winne, Henry Ponsonby, Henry Bellingham, VVolstan Dixy, Samuel Lawon, Samuel Ire∣land, VVilliam Neve, VVilliam Shaw, Patrick Cary, VVil∣liam Disney, Richard Coote, Robert Boyle, VVilliam Low, Thomas Fugill, Doctor Ionathan Edwards, Iohn Peirce,  wood, Iohn Bernard, Samuel Townely. Esquires. For the County of Clare.] Sir Hardress VValler Knight, VVilliam Purefoy, Iohn Cooper, Thomas Southwell, Fran∣cis Courtney, Robert Cox, Samuel Clerk, Thomas Iackson, VValter VValler, Ralph VVilson VVilliam Hartwell, Robert VVilkinson, Iohn Tailor, Richard Hart, VVilliam Yarwell,  Harrison, VVilliam King, Iohn Friend, Robert Stan∣, Philip , Benjamin Lucas, Edward VVarren, VVilliam VVood, Robert Chae, Ioseph Benner, Daniel , Ieremiah Howard, Henry Greenway, VVilliam , VVilliam Piggot, Edmund Southwell, William Rum∣sey, Robert Sear, George Pur, Thomas Cullen, Thomas Battington, Thomas Graham, George Rosse, Thomas , Iohn  Esquires.
For the Countie of Roscomon.] Arthur Lord Ranne∣lagh, Sir Charls Coote, Sir George St. George, Knights, Alexander Brayfield, Iohn King, Henry Waddington, Iames Shaen, Richard St. George, Robert Ormsby, Iohn Disbrow, Iohn Boswell, Theophilus Sandford, Iames Synnock, Rich∣ard Cracon, Edward Crofton, Iames King, Iohn Nelson, Sebastian Brigham, Charls Coot, VVilliam Handcock Esqu∣ires. Charles Lord Lambert, Oliver St. George, Arthur Ormsby, Charles Ormsby, George Ormsby, Charles Car∣et  Esquires. For the Countie of Mayo.] Sir Charls Coote, Sir George Bgham, Sir Robert Hny, Knights, Iohn Rey∣nolds, Peter Stubber, Iohn Swanwic, Iames , Charls Ormsby, Arthur Ormsby, Robert Boyle, Robert Oliver, Robert Ormsby, Iohn Bolwell, Thomas Hart, Thomas Bring∣, Iohn Eyre, Arthur Swanwick, Philip Bowen, William Edwards, Charls Holcroft, Henry Waddington, Stephen Squib, Henry Greenway, Gabriel King, Esquires. For the Countie of Sligo.] Sir Charls Coote, Sir Robert King, Knight, Samuel Shepherd, Richard Coote, Robert Park, Arthur Gore, Iohn Bowell, Owen Vaughan, Owen Floyd, Edward Crofton, Thomas Crofton, Iohn King, William Ormsby, Robert Ormsby, Thomas Ormsby, Henry Wadington, Philip Ormsby, Anthony Ormsby, Gil∣bert Crre, Thomas Cartwright, Lewis Iones, Robert Oliver, Francis Iackson, Francis King, William Boswell, Lewis Wink∣field, Richard Woods, Edward , Iohn Lang, Robert Boyle, Esquires. For the Countie of .] Sir Charles Coot, Sir George  Sir George St. George Knights, Richard Coot, Owen Winn, Robert Park, William St. George, Na∣thaniel Evanson, Henry Crofton of Moghil, William Hand∣cock, Charles carte, Oliver St. George, Henry fold, Owen , Henry Waddington  Iones, Iames Shaen Esquires. For the Countie of Galway with the Town of Galway] Sir Charles Coot Knights, Iohn Reynolds, , William Edward, Francis , Francis ores, William Moore, Oliver St. George, Thomas Davis, Henry Greenway, Iohn
Boswel, Iames Cuff, Stephen Squib, Robert ace, Charls Holcroft, Iohn Eyre, Iohn Winn, Robert Clerk, Iohn Des∣brough, Philip Bigo, Robert Clerk, Robert Ormsby, Henry Wadington, Gilbert Carter Esquires. And it is further Ordered and Declared, that the se∣veral and respective Commissioners hereby appointed for the several and respective Counties and Cities afore∣said, shall within eight daies or sooner (if it may be) next ensuing the publication hereof, meet together in the chief Towns in each of the said Counties or some other convenient place by the said Commissioners for that pur∣pose to be appointed, or any two or more of them giving notice to the rest, of the time and place of such their meeting which said Commissioners are hereby required, and authorized in Order to the effectual and timely put∣ting in execution of the contents hereof, to divide and apportion the said Assesments, in as equal and impartial manner as they can, according to the manner and form hereafter expressed, that is to say; The said Assesment is to be Raised, Assessed, and Leavied, for three months aforesaid commencing the twelfth day of Ianuary instant, and determining the twelfth day of April next, and shall be forthwith Taxed and Assessed by a pound rate equal∣ly on the several Divisions, Baronies, and Parishes, in the respective Counties, Cities, and Places aforesaid, for all and every the Lands. Tenements, and Heredita∣ments, Goods, Chattels, Monies, Stock or Estate, yeilding any profit or increase according to the value thereof, that is to say as much upon every twenty shil∣lings Rent or yearly value of Land and real Estate, as upon Money Stock and other personal Estate by an equall Rate wherein every six pound in Money, Stock or other personall Estate shall bear the like charge as shall be said upon every twenty shillings yearly Rent, or yearly value of Land as will raise the Monthly sum or sums charged upon the respective Counties or Places aforesaid; for the better effecting whereof. It is hereby further Ordered and Declared, that the several  Commissioners hereby appointed in the several and respective Counties and Cities shall meet together as occasion shall be, from time to time once every week, or fourteen daies at least at the chief
Town in each County, or some convenient place as afore∣said, And the said Commissioners or any three or more of them shall (after the publique reading hereof) there chuse, nominate, and appoint, two or three, or more if they shall think fit, of the honest and able Protestant English inhabitants (if it may be) in ye several & respective Baro∣nies, Towns, Parishes, or Cities aforesaid, and them to appoint to take a particular & exact enquiry, Survey, or Estimate, of each mans Land, Tenement, rent, & stocks, in every respective Citie, Town, Vilage, or place, together with the yearly value & profits of the same, and to return the said inquiry, Survey, or Estimate, under their hands in writing to the said Commissioners, or to such Person, or Persons of them, as shall be by the said Commissi∣oners appointed, to receive the same. And to the end an equal rate throughout the whole Couny and every part thereof, may be obtained, the said Commissioners, or any two or more of them, may and are hereby authorized, to administer an Oath, (if they see cause) to the respective Persons aforesaid, for their faithful discharge of the trust reposed in them, and for their just and impartial dealing in the same, such Enquiries, Surveys, or Estimates, to be deliver∣ed in writing, within one and twenty daies after the said day of the said Commissioners first meeting and the said Commissioners or any three, or more of them then pre∣ after the said return, upon the view, and perusal of the said several inquiries, Surveys, or Estimates, shall truely cast up the total Revenue, and yearly profits of the whole Counties Cities and Towns aforesaid to the  equal pound rate may be apportioned upon every Baronie, Citie, Township, or Parish according to the proportion and sum of money charged upon the said County by vertue of this present Order (if the said Commissioners shall not see just cause to alter the said returns) and the said Commissioners or any three or more of them assembled are by vertue hereof authori∣zed and appointed to apportion each mans share or pro∣portion due according to the said return, or as they shall iudge most equall and indifferent and shall forthwith send forth their Warrants to the several Conales, or other Person or Persons  each Barony or Parish  they shall ee  requiring them forthwith to collect the
several and respective sums of Money, to each mans Name annexed, which sums are to be expressed not in  but in words at length, for which purpose the said Commissioners are with the said Warrants like∣wise required to send a particular of what each mans Ses (under the charge of the said Constable or other Person or Persons in each Baronie appointed as afore∣said) is, rateable to his Land, Tenement, Rent, or Stock, &c. returned as aforesaid, requiring the said Constable,  other Person or Persons so intrusted, to make payment of the Monies so Collected, into the hands of the Receivers for th purpose appointed, or to be ap∣pointed, and in Order to the writing the Duplicates aforesaid, the said Receivers Clerks, are, for that pur∣pose from time to time to attend on the said Commissi∣oners at the time and place of their meeting, and the said Commissioners are likewise to cause the said Asses∣ments to be fairly Written and Subscribed by them, and delivered to the respective Receivers aforesaid, and to certifie  Writing the true State thereof, together with the total, both of the Profits of Land, Houses, Rent and Stock, &c. in each County and Baronie, and what respectively is charged on every twenty shillings  in Land. Tenements, Rent, and on every ex∣pound Stack unto Henry Markham, Edward Roberts, and Richard Kingdon Esquires, Commissioners General for the publick Revenue Stores of Ireland, their Office in Dublin. And it is hereby further Ordered, That if any Per∣son or Persons shall refuse or neglect to pay the respective sums of Money on him or them Taxed, that it shall and may be lawful for the said Constable, or other Person or Persons appointed as aforesaid, to Collect the , to break open any House, Chest, Trunk or Box, and to Leavy by distress of Goods or other wise, the said Tax, bringing the said Goods so distrained unto the respective  aforesaid, or the next Commissioners herein for such County , or Iustice of the Peace for such Countie, and in case the said Owner  shall neglect to pay his or their Tax,  or their Goods ( distrained) within four days after such distress  the said Respective  or Iustices of the Peace, are too  the  dis∣tress
to be sold by publick canting, or otherwise in some publick Market, causing such Persons Assesments to be paid there out, and the overplus to be returne to the Owner, allowing the Constable reasonable considerati∣on (not exceeding two shillings in the pound) for his destraining for the said Tax, And the said Constable or other Person or Persons appointed for Collecting the same; are hereby authorized to call to his or their Assis∣tance any Officer or Souldier of the Army or any other Person or Persons whatsoever in the due prosecution of the premises, which Assistance the said Person or Per∣sons so required are not to refuse at their peril. And if the said Constable or other Person or Persons appointed as aforesaid shall neglect the duty hereby re∣quired from them, and shall suffer the said Assesment to run in Arrear after the same shall grow due; having received Warrant for Collecting the same as aforesaid; then the said Commissioners, or any two of them, re∣ceiving certificate hereof in writing from the aforesaid respective Receivers, may and are hereby anthorized (if they see cause) to give Order and Direction to any Officers or Souldiers of the Army to Quarter upon such Person or Persons so neglecting his or their duty to Collect the Assesment as aforesaid or to impose such Fine or Fines under the said Constable, or Person, or Persons appointed as aforesaid; as they shall think fit, not ex∣ceeding for any one Offence five pounds, Leavying the same by distress of Goods or otherwise (as is before directed) and causing the same for  to be paid into the hands of said respective Receivers for the use of the Common-wealth, and if any Person, or Persons, employed or required to take a particular and exact en∣quiry Survey, or Estimate, of the profits of Lands, Tenements, Rents and Stock as aforesaid, shalt neglect or refuse to make his or their returns without the time, and according to the manner as is before diverted, or  knowingly or willingly make any false or short return of the real or personal Estate of any Person or Persons, the said Commissioners for the Assesment or any three  of them being fully satisfied of the  thereof; are hereby  to impose such fine or fines on small Offender as they shall think fit not exceeding for any the  Ten Pounds, causing one Moiety of
the same to be paid into the hands of the respective Re∣ceivers for the use of the Common-wealth, and the o∣ther Moyety to the Discoverer or Discoverers, to be Leavied by distress of Goods as is before directed. And to the end no obstruction may be in the timely paying in of the aforesaid Assesment: It is hereby fur∣ther Ordered, That the Goods and Stock of each re∣spective Tenant or Holder shall be able to be Taxed, as well for any Rent or Profit due, which ought to be paid by the Farmer, Tenant or Occupier, to the Land-Lord, or any other person or persons whatsoever claim∣ing the same; as for his own Stock or Holding. And the said Assesment to paid by the Farmer, Tenant or Occupier of Land by virtue of this Order, for any in respective of such Rents and Profits, and which in  ought to be paid by the Land-Lord; the said Far∣mer, Tenant or Occupier of the said Land shall be ac∣quitted and discharged for so much thereof as the said Tax or Assesment shall amount unto, as effectually to all intents and purposes as if the same had been actual∣ly paid unto his Land-Lord, or any other person or persons, unto whom his Rent shall become due and pay∣able. And if any person or persons shall refuse or neglect to pay his or their Assesment, and convey away his or their Goods or other personal Estate, whereby the sum of Money Assessed on him cannot be Leavied as is be∣fore expressed, that then the aforesaid Commissioners or any two or more of them, are hereby authorized to im∣prison the said persons and sequester the Estate of every such person to the use the Common-wealth; or if any person or persons shall conceal his or their goods, or re∣move their Goods or Cattle from one County to the o∣ther, or any part of them, thereby endeavoring to avoid the hearing a due proportion of the aforesaid Assesment. Vpon the discovery thereof, and due proof made before any two or more of the aforesaid Commissioners, it shall and may be lawful for them to sequester such Goods or Cattle, and to cause the same to be Canted or Sold  some Publick Market, paying one Moyety of what Money shall be raised by Sale of the said Goods or Cattle into the hands of the respective Receivers aba∣ting the same out of the Applotment of the Monthly Sess of the Barony in which the said Goods or Cattle
ought to have paid: and the other Moyety to pay or cause to be paid unto the Owners of such Goods or Cattle; and the said Commissioners of the Assesment in the respective Counties, are to cause due and Pub∣lick Notice hereof to be given. And it is also further Ordered, That if it shall so hap∣pen that any of the aforesaid Tax be laid on any insol∣vent person that is not able to pay the same, so much as shall be so charged shall be re-Applotted by the said Com∣missioners equally on the Barony wherein such insol∣vency shall happen. And it is further hereby Ordered, That if any que∣stion or difference shall arise for or concerning the afore∣said Assesments that the aforesaid Commissioners are hereby authorized to hear and determin the same, and to do thereinto the relief of the party grieved, according to  and Iustice. And if any difference shall be be∣tween any of the said Commissioners concerning the ex∣ecution of the Trust to them committed, they are (in such cases) to have recourse to the aforesaid Commis∣sioners General for the Publick Revenue, who are hereby authorized and impowered to hear and determin the same, or to Report the state thereof unto Vs. And whereas several complaints have been made a∣gainst several Commissioners of Applotment, alledging that they have raised other and greater sums of Money (under pretence of the power and Trust reposed in them by the late Commissioners of the Revenue) than of right they ought to have raised, or have been paid into the Publick Treasury, to the great wrong and oppression of the Countrey: It is therefore further Ordered and Declared, That the said Commissioners for Assesment or any three or more of them shall have Power and Au∣thority to examin upon Oath all such matters as shall be objected against the said Commissioners of Applot∣ment, and upon full hearing of both Parties, if by clear and good proof it shall appear, That the said Com∣missioners of Applotment have (under pretence of their Authority aforesaid) raised more Moneys, than by In∣structions from the said Commissioners of Revenue, they were impowered to raise, they are to cause such Commissioners forthwith to pay all such Money (as they or any of them have so raised and not paid into the
Treasury) into the hand of the respective Receivers, as  the present three  the same but of the County or Barony out of which such Moneys by the said Commissioners of applotment was so raised; Except the said County or Barony be in Ar∣rear of former Assesments; and in  Moneys are to be paid and  as so  paid to∣wards discharge of  Arrears  the said Com∣missioners for the Assesment are also to certify from time to time their proceedings herein past  to the  Commissioners General, that such Offenders may be further proceeded against according to the nature of their offence. And to the end all Arrears of former Assesments may be timely paid into the hand of the aforesaid respe∣ctive Receivers, in order to the supply of the , and other publick Charges: The said respective Recei∣vers are hereby  to summon all Commissioners of Applotment, or other persons formerly entrusted or employed by the Commissioners of the Revenue for the Assesing and Leavying the said Assesments, requiring them forthwith to pay into the  all such Arrears, and in default thereof, the said respective Receivers are to assign those Arrears for  pay of the Forces, accord∣ing to such  they shall, for that purpose  from Our , or the aforesaid Commission∣ers General for the Publick Revenue. And it is further hereby Ordered and Declared, That no other sum or sums of Money, be by any per∣son or persons whatsoever charge  any Countie or place in Ireland, in consideration of any Publick  or Assesment whatsoever, either for , ree-Quarter of any sort, Caage, -Money, Salt, , Small , Bedding, Bed Cloaths, or other Charge whatsoever. And if any Officer or Souldier shall offend herein, the person or persons  are to make their  to the Of∣ficer  fo the respective Precincts, or to the Authority-General  the Army or his  at the  Quarters; who are  to proceed against such Offenders according to Martial Law▪ Provided nevertheless, That no Rents for Monies, , Tenements and Hereditaments, or Reve∣nues
belonging to Colledges, Hospitals, Alms-houses or given to any charitable or pious use be charged towards the payment of the several sums and pro∣portions aforesaid, save onely for so much as the said Mannors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, are, and shall be respectively worth by the year, over and above the Rent and Revenue thereof, respectively due and payable to the said Colledges, Hospitals, Alms-Houses, Charitable and pious use, and every of them respectively. Provided also, And it is hereby further Ordered and Declared, That no waste Houses, or Lands unplanted, unimployed or unmanured, shall, during their being un∣planted, unimployed, or unmanured, be charged to pay any part or proportion of the said Monthly Tax and Assesment. Provided further, That where any person hath taken any Estate at a certain yearly Rent, to be paid for the same in liew of Assesments, and other Publick Taxes, and the said Grant to such persons continueth in being, pursuant to such Orders, Rules, and Instructions as have been given by the late Commissioners of the Com∣monwealth for the setting and letting of Lands, such person or persons are to enjoy the benefit of his or their said Grant, and the proportions of Assesments, falling of right upon such Lands so lett, is to be supplied out of the Rents of the said Lands; and the Baronie or place in which the said Lands do lie, is to be freed and dis∣charged from so much of the said Assesments, as shall be supplyed or discharged out of the Rents of the Lands aforesaid, and the remainder of Rent due to the Com∣mon-wealth, above the said Contetion, is to be paid into the hands of the respective Receivers afore∣said. Provided notwithstanding, That if any person or persons have taken any Lease from the Common∣wealth, at a certain yearly Rent, and the Rents reser∣ved upon the same, fall short of the present Contribution said upon Lands of equal value in the same Baronie, Town-ship, Will, or Parish by virtue of this Order; all such Lands, are hereby Ordered and Declared, to be liable and subject to the payment of Contribution, for the Stock and Tillage upon the same, equal in propor∣tion
to the rest of the Inhabitants of the Countrey re∣spectively according to Iustice & equitie: And in such case the aforesaid person or persons, who have taken Land at a certainty as aforesaid, shall be and are hereby dis∣charged from the Rents payable in pursuance of such Contracts made with the Common-wealth as afore∣said, Yet so as to have the Benefit of such Lands,  contribution falling due for the same, during the term of their aforesaid Leases, according to the In∣structions given for making such Leases. Provided also, That none of the Commissioners herein nominated, shall in any thing relating to their own Estates, or the Estates of any of their Fathers, Brothers, Tenant or Tenants give their votes there∣in, or shall  or apportion the respective Sum or Sums of Money, payable for his or their Tax in  hereof. And all Officers, Civil and Military, and all other persons whatsoever, are hereby strictly required to be aiding and assisting in the due execution of the Power and Trust hereby granted, as they shall be thereunto required. Dated at Dublin, Ianuary the first 1654. Tho. Herbert, Clerk of the Council: ORdered by the Lord Deputy and Council, That this Order and Commission for the Assesment, be forthwith Printed and Published. Signed by Order of the said Lord Deputy and Council. THO. HERBERT, Clerk of the Council. By the Lord Deputy and Council. ORdered, That the several persons hereunder named, be and are hereby added to the Commissioners for Assesment in the several Coun∣ties to their names annexed; and are hereby impowered to act as Com∣missioners as fully to all intents and purposes, as any the Commissioners named in an Order and Commission of the 12o instant. For the Kings County.] Iohn Eyre. Esq For the Barony at Dlik, and County of Meath] Iohn Hetch, Esq For the County of Derry.] Iohn Barret, Alexander Staples, Esqs For the County of Kerry.] Thomas Herbert, Esq For the County of Typerary.] Robert Knight, Matthew Iacob, Esquires. For the County of Waterford] Edward Higate, Robert Thorn∣hill, Iohn Ioy Iohn Houghton Iohn Pike, Senior, Esquires. Dated at Dublin, Jan. 18o 1654. THOMAS HERBERT, Clerk of the Council.
