L1782A R30961 11748145 48554
LETTERS FROM THE LORD GENERALL HIS QVARTERS, AND THE particulars thereof. ALSO, A great Victorie at Malpesse, against 1000. of the VVestmerland Forces, of the Duke of Yorks Regiment, and others; where were taken prisoners: The Major of the Duke of Yorks Regimen: of Horse. 2 Serjeant Majors more. 2 Captains, and other Officers. 3 Collonels slain upon the place. 2 Serjeant Majors, and 40 Gentlemen, and other Officers slain. 200 Armes taken, and all the pillage of the Field. And all the rest Routed, and fled. AS ALSO, A Parley about the surrendring of Leverpoole, and the particulars thereof. And 2 Ships of Irish Rebels expected there: with other matters of great concernment. The particulars being examined, and printed ac∣cording to Order. LONDON: Printed by Jane Coe. 1644.
A GREAT VICTORY obtained by Sir William Bruertons For∣ces, against the Westmerland Forces, at Malpesse in Cheshire, August 26. 1644. SIR, IT hath pleased God to give us a fur∣ther victorie against the Enemie, by a small handfull of Sir William Bruertons Forces; On Saterday last, being the 24. of August, 1644. there came a Trumpeter from the Enemie hither to Nantwich, Sir William Bruerton being then here in the Town: which Trumpeter coming to our Court of guard, and there it being demanded of him whither he went, and from whence he came: told the Of∣ficer that he came from Prince Ruperts Forces, and had been Trumpeter to him, and was come to submit to the Parliament; and had a businesse of consequence to declare to the Governor; and accordingly he was brought to Sir William Bruerton. And he declared unto Sir William Bruerton, that a party of the Westmerland forces were marched with Collonel Baynes, Collonel Conniers, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, the Princes Troop, and others, towards Chester by Malpesse, about 1000 men in all, to joyn with Prince Puperts forces there; whereupon Sir William Bruerton sent out Scouts, and entertained this Trumpeter, and as you shall under∣stond found this Relation true.
So Sir William Brueron called a Councell of Warre to consider upon this businesse, and it was agreed, that what horse and foot could be drawn forth, should pre∣sently be sent towards the Enemie; for the most of the horse were at that present out upon another designe: and accordingly 8 Troops of Horse, and 7 Colours of Foot Companies were drawn out on Sonday the 25 of Aug. at night, and the Horse carried each of them a Musketeir behind them, and marched towards Malpesse: and on Monday morning at break of day, when they came with in 2. miles of Malpesse or thereabout, our foot alighted, and our Horse drew themselves into a bodie, and march∣ed in batalia before the Foot. In the mean time the Enemie having intelligence here∣of, sent out a forlorn-hope: but our Horse wheeling a∣bout, appeared not on that side of the Town which they expected; who discovering them, endeavoured to get be∣tween the town and them, which they did: and falling upon them, killed, and took them all, and had their arms and pillage. Then our horse gave them an Alarm in the Town: whereupon the Enemie issued out, and marched against ours. Then Lieutenant Collonel Iones, and Captain Zan∣chy led on Sir William Bruertons own Troops upon the forlorn hope, who charged the Enemie gallantly, and with great courage drew on the rest. The Enemie came upon them first with 2. or 3. Charges, and indeed fought furiously; & Sir Williams horse made good their ground in despight of the Enemie. In which Collonel Iones was so valiant, that he was shot in the thigh, and his horse shot under him, and had like to have been taken, but that George Parker, servant to Sir William Bruerton did valiant∣ly fetch him off; and Captain Zanchy had his horse shot under him: the Enemies losse we beleeve was great.
Then the Enemy sent out a party to ambuskado the hedges, on both sides the forlorne hope: which being discovered, Captaine Zanchy all this while making good a Lane, which hee held very advantageous, did hereupon leave the lane and made way for the rest of our Forces to march up in a full body▪ Then the Enemy appeared in 5 severall Brigads, who being ex∣treamly vext that they had bin so baffled with such a small party, their Command marched up against us with a great deale of fiercenesse, but few of them returned backe againe; for we kil∣led, tooke, and totally routed them, as you may see by this inclo∣sed list which I hrve sent you of the particulars thereof, we have taken Prisoners Serjeant Major Cromwell, who Commanded as Maior the Duke of Yorkes Regiment of Horse, and also Serieant Maior Maxie of Sir Charles Lucas his Regiment, we have also taken Serieant Maior Crathorne of Collonel Ferhars Regiment, and Captain Thomas Clavering brother to Coll: Clavering of the North, who is dead at Kendall, Captain Barker, Lieutenant Mountain, and other Officers besides about 20 other Prisoners, and two of the Maiors, and Lieutenant Mountain, are wounded, Collonel Baines and Coll: Conyers are both slaine, and also Ser∣jeant Maior Heskey, and one of their Lieutenant Collonels, and some 40 Gentlemen and other under Officers, and betweene 30 or 40 common Souldiers; and we heare by one that is come from Chester, that one Serieant Maior that was slaine is brought to Chester to be buried, & that Sir Marmaduke Langdale is there wounded with a shot in the back very dangerously, and also that Captain Harris is brought thither wounded, and divers others; and we heare that there are two other Serjant Majors of theirs flame, but that I cannot affirme, we have taken many Armes that were scattered up and down by the Enemy, and gained all the pillage in the field, to God be the praise. Sir VVilliam Brereton had provided us more horse if we had had need which came up that very night, but God be thanked we had no need of them, for God was pleased to give us this happy Victory before they came up to us.
Prince Rupert wee heare is gone over the Forrest of Deane, and so to Bristoll, where no doubt Sir Iohn Winter will doe him the best assistance he can, and we heare that 2000 Welch are following of Prince Rupert, but of these these things we shall heare more hereafter. In the meane time I cannot omit to declare the valour not onely of Lieutenant Collonel Iones and Captaine Zanchy as be∣fore, but also how Captaine Church, and Captain Finch, behaved themselves very gallantly in this Fight, and in∣deed generally all our Forces to God be the praise who so blessed them, that with the said 8. Troopes of Horse, and 7 Companies of Foot, did kill, take, and rout 1000 of the Enemies, and they had a good mind to have fol∣lowed them, but that it was too dangerous an attempt with so few Horse to straggle from our Foot, who in this businesse did very good service, in all this we had but one slaine, and the Enemy took not one Prsoner of our men. We heare that Sir Iohn Meldrum still proves Victori∣ous in Lancashire, and hath againe taken 140 horse and their riders; and that Liver-poole is now closely beseid∣ged, and the Town being summoned, the Lancoshire for∣ces before it had a very great expectation that it would be presently surrendred, but it fell out otherwise, for the Malignants of the Town, with the Governour and Officers perswaded the people to beleeve that there were 2. Ships with souldiers from Ireland comming thither, who would certainly be there in few days to strengthen the Town, and so for present they stand out, but are closely beseiged; and it is hoped will be forced in short time to yeeld. Sir William Brereton, our Generall his care in this and all o∣ther businesse is exceedingg great, and with good discreti∣on and judgement. He is to to call a Councell of Warre, and you will shortly heare further, if god be pleased to
blesse us, as he hath done wonderfully already, even above our expectation, to him be the praise. Dated at Nantwich the 29 of August 1644. A List of the particulars of that great Victory obtained against the Westmorland Forces at Malpasse on Munday the 26 of August, 1644. Taken Prisoners in this Fight. MAjor Cromwell. Major Maxie. Major Crathorne. Captaine Thomas Clavering. Captaine Barker. Lieutenant Mountaine. Some other inferiour Officers, Twenty common Souldiers. Wounded in this Fight. Sir Marmaduke Langdale. Two Serjeant Majors. Captaine Harris. One Lieutenant, and other Commanders. Slaine of the Enemies party. Collonel Baines. Collonel Conyers. One Lieutenant Collonel. Serjeant Major Heskit. One Serjeant Major besides.
Forty Gentlemen, and other Officers. Besides divers common Souldiers. Taken also about 200 Armes, and all the Pillage of the Field. Yesterday there came letters from my Lord Generals quarters, which certfie that his Excellency doth still make good his ground, and is in a very good condition, and expects Sir William VValler to fall in the reare of the Kings Army; as also that the Kings forces are very ma∣ny, and the Gountry very base to my Lord Generall, yet notwithstanding my Lord is very couragious, and his for∣ces cheerfull, and make good the advantages still which they had gained of the Enemy, and that they have many continued skirmishes, and for a battell, God of his infinite goodnesse protect them.
FINIS.
