l20 27210024 110035
THE Gentleman's New Jockey: OR, FARRIER'S Approved Guide. CONTAINING The exactest Rules and Methods for Breeding and Managing HORSES, &c. in order to bring them up in the best manner, for Profit, Pleasure, or any kind of Service or Recreation: Especially in what relates to Racing or Running, Coursing, Travel, War, &c. With Directions for Heats, Dieting, Dressing, and the several Paces requisite on any of the like occasions. Also Approved Receipts and Remedies for all manner of Diseases, Sorrances, Hurts or Grievances, incident to HORSES, according to the Opinions of the best Farriers of all Countries and Ages: With Di∣rections for preventing Sicknesses and Griefs, and the Symptoms whereby they are known. To which is added a Second Part, Containing many rare and new Secrets, ne∣ver before made Publick, relating as well to Ma∣nagement as Cure, and what else may contribute to the advantage of Buying or Selling; and many other Things and Matters: highly necessary to be known by all Lovers of good Horses. Illustrated with sundry curious and necessary Cutts. LONDON, Printed by W. W. for Nicholas Boddington at the Golden Ball in Duck-lane. 1687.
Licensed and Entred accor∣ding to Order. Advertisement. AN Alarme to Unconverted Sinners in a se∣rious Treatise: Shewing, 1. What Con∣version is not, and correcting some Mistakes a∣bout it. 2. What Conversion is, and wherein it consisteth. 3. The Necessity of Conversion. 4. The Marks of the Unconverted. 5. The Miseries of the Unconverted. 6. Directions fo Conversion. 7. Motives to Conversion. Where unto are annexed divers Practical Cases of Con science Judiciously Resolved. By Joseph Alleine late Minister of the Gospel in Taunton in Some setshire. Sold by Nicholas Boddington at th Golden Ball in Duck-lane.
The Preface to the Reader. Reader, THough sundry persons of no small Experience, have undertaken to give Mankind an insight into the Manner and Method of bringing Horses to the hight of perfection, in what relates to their Rule and Management on those occasions, or services to which they are properly in∣tended or designed; as likewise to know and distinguish them in all their capaci∣ties, with Directions for discovery and ure of distempers, grievances and defects ncident to them. Yet let me tell you, here are many things Material of that ind that have not as yet been made pub∣ck; all, or most of them, so necessary be known by the curious Inquires into is Mystery, that without knowing them Man can be an excellent Jockey, or a
expert Farrier, nor consequently have his Judgment approved in any thing mate∣rial relating to Horses or Horsemanship. Great indeed have been the Studies and Travel of the Industruous of many King∣doms and Provinces in this Affair, whose Labours have Worthily found acceptance: The Consideration of which has imboldned me to make this Essay, hoping it will turn to a General advantage, being rightly con∣sidered put in practice, and applied, since that by a more than usual curiosity, what has been contained in this, has been searched out through all the revealed and (till now) unrevealed Mysteries of this kind, so that the Reader may with easie prospect or sur∣vey find out whatever he can wish, relating to a good Horse, good Management, know¦ledge in the Craft, and means to preserv his Beast from a multitude of infirmitie nay rescure him from death and utter d¦struction, near and into which, throug neglect or ignorance, he is fallen; a thereby not only give themselves sat is f¦tion in the prolonging the days and heal of so Noble a Creature for service a
imployment sundry ways, but always re∣dound to their profit and advantage in ca∣pacitating them to sell and dispose of at a considerable rate, the Horse that they perhaps deemed lost, and of no value: In order to which, beside the Mystery of Breeding Horses to the best advantage and regard that is to be observed in diet, dressing and preparing them for Racing and other the like undertakings, with Habit of body, knowledge of Goodness or Badness; and in general and particular, all things of that or any other kind whatsoever that is requisite to be known, I have set down such ready and easie ways and methods to discover diseases and other grievances joyntly and severally; as also speedily, and with little charge, labour or trouble to prevent, redress or cure them, that what is written must undoubtedly satisfie the largest expectation as to things of this na∣ture, or at least give that satisfaction, that the most penurious or critical may find nough to make him confess that time and ost were not imployed in vain. Some in∣eed may upon the first sight object against
the smallness of this Book, and imagin a sub∣ject so copious allowing such variety, is un∣likely to be cramped in so narrow a corner: But let me tell them, that when at great expence and pains they have searched lar∣ger Volumes, as also into the unpublished Practices of those who are famous at this day, they will find that they have wearied themselves in vain in travelling the long∣est way about, when in all that tedious pro∣gress they found nothing material but what is comprehended in this Treatise. But not longer to gloss upon what is able to speak for it self, I shall only say that of this kind, Nothing exceeds it; and so submit it to the Censure of the Ingenious Reader, and remain, Yours further to oblige you, G. L.
To his very good Friend, The ingenious G. L. upon the perusal of his Book, intitu∣led, The Gentleman's New Jockey, &c. SIR, I have view'd the Authors of this kind, That did pretend or seem'd to this inclin'd: (This Art I would have said) such as have wrote Unskill'd themselves; and would have others taught: But prove in all their large Pretence defect, Either the cause of Weakness or Neglect. But in the Work you to the World propose, I find to th' Essence of those, numerours those, Who vainly built on a Foundation bad; Which from ill structures of old times they had; You have Additions in strange measure made, Such as those Ages never knew: So when, Light from the Chaos sprung, those things were seen, That brooding Darkness spread her wings upon, And long obscur'd beneath her gloomy Throne. In Epitome, the noble Creature you Have in perfection, given all his due: From his beginning to his end, and done What has in Ages past, attention wone By all the Brave, the Wise, when in a Cloud, It dimly shone, but you remove the Shroud; And give unscreen'd a prospect of what may Avail Mankind and your own worth display: Whilst those who hunt, who Travel or in War, At Home seek Fame or in the Regions far; Aided by your advice, are ever free From Danger great, or Ill-conveniency. And could a Creature made Irrational, Arrive to that Discretion which we call The Sence of Mankind; he far more then they Would for this Work, a humble Tribute pay And at your feet himself an Off'ring lay. Sir, Yours to serve you, J. D.
THE CONTENTS OF THE First PART. CHAP. I. Excellent Rules and Instructions, highly necessary to be observed in the Election and Choice of goo Breeders, how, and at what time, &c. a Mar ought to be Covered; how ordered being with Foal, and after Foaling: With many other things of the like nature. Page CHAP. II. HOw to Manage a good Colt to bring him to be  excellent Horse; and what is to be observed in th timely knowledge of what he will be when come to M∣turity; with the season of Weaning, Cutting and , &c. p.
CHAP. III. WHen and how to Break a Colt, and render him tame and gentle; with the Art of Management on that occasion: And many other things necessary and requisite to be known. p. 8 CHAP. IV. THe Art of Dressing in General; and may serve upon all occasions for bringing a Horse to perfection, and render a Groom or Horse-keeper acceptable to Persons of Quality, &c. p. 10 CHAP. V. HOw to render any tollerable good Horse an excellent Racer; And how Running-Horses ought to be managed in Diet, Physick and Exercise, in order to their being capable of Running a Match with suc∣cess, &c. p. 12 CHAP. VI.A Continuation of what is to be done to the Running or Race-horse, relating to his Election, Dres∣sing, Feeding, and other Ʋsage, &c. p. 14 CHAP. VII. HEats; what they are, and how to be managed to the best advantage, in Racing and all other Recreato∣ry undertakings. p. 17
CHAP. VIII. How to make the Bread of the first Make; and what ought to be observed in the distribution thereof, With many other things. p. 19 CHAP. IX. OTher things to be taken notice of, in regard to the Running-Horse, in the second Fortnights Dyet and Ordering, p. 22 CHAP. X. THe Running-horse's third and fourth Fortnight; and what is to be observed therein as to Diet, Ʋsage, and bringing the Horse to the Weighing-Post, &. p. 23 CHAP. XI. WHat the Rider ought to be; and what by him is to be considered in order to Backing and good Manage∣ment; as also the Office and Duty of a Groom, &c. p. 26 CHAP. XII. INfallible Rules for Buying a good Horse; and how so well by sundry marks and tokens to distinguish good from bad, as well in case of soundness as diseases, as thereby to prevent being imposed on or cheated, &c. p. 30. CHAP. XIII. EXact and Infallible Rules to know the Age of a Horse by the perfections or imperfections of his Teeth in al their particular and general Marks; as also by the Tail; when the Mark is out of the Mouth, &c. p. 39
CHAP. XIV. HOw exactly to know the state or condition of a Horse's Body, relating to Fatness or Leanness, Health or Sickness; with many other things worthy of note. p. 34 CHAP. XV. OBservations to be taken as to the state of a Horse's Bo∣dy, from the Privy-parts, Limbs, Feeding, and many other Matters and Discourses, worthy to be taken notice of by the Curious, &c. p. 47 CHAP. XVI. OF the Elementary parts of a Horse's Body, and of the Agreement of the Humours therewith. A discourse of Corruption and Generation; in which is set forth all things of that kind, relating to Goodness or Badness, Health or Sickness, &c. p. 49 CHAP. XVII. HOw a Horse ought to be used in general and particu∣lar, as to his Physick, Diet, and Looking to, for the preservation of him even to old Age. p. 53 CHAP. XVIII. AN exact Description of the Veins of a Horse, how scituate in the Body; as also of Blood-letting; and how, and upon what account of Sickness, or other defect, the Veins are to be opened, for the prevention of death or danger. p. 58
CHAP. XIX. A Discourse of the Sinews, and their Scituation; to∣gether with their Ʋse and Office; and what farther in that kind is to be observed as to the state of a horse's Body, &c. with the Description of the Bones, &c. p. 61 CHAP. XX. OF Blood-letting in general; and how to know by sundry signs and tokens the state of a horse's Body, when and where it is convenient to let him Blood, for the pre∣venting of sickness, or recovery of health. p. 64 CHAP. XXI. A Description of Diseases, Grievances or Sorrances, incident to Horse's, &c. to foresee them by sundry signs and tekens, and know whence they arise; with the ways and methods of Preventing, Redressing and Cu∣ring them, by Approved Rules and Remedies, according to the Practice of the best Farriers in all Ages, &c. p. 68 CHAP. XXII. EXcellent Receipts for the Cure of Diseases, &c. in Hor∣ses or Mares, according to the best Experience of skilfull Practitioners: Many of which were never before made publick. p. 70 The Glaunders; from what it proceeds, and how to Cure it. p. 71 The Quinzey in a Horse, &c. what it is; and how to Cure it. ibid. A Horse's Bleeding at the Nose, how to stay or prevent it. p. 72
For Pains in the Teeth or Jaws. ibid. The Canker in the Nose, what it is, and the Remedy. p. 73 A Remedy for the Collick, Belly-ach, or Belly-binding. ibid. The Lasks or Bloody-flux, and its Remedy. ibid. The Botts, what they are, and their Cure. p. 74 For the Shoulder-strain, a good remedy. ibid. Broken-wind; what it is, and to remedy it if not past Cure. p. 75 A Horse burnt by a Mare, how to Cure. p. 76 For a dry Cough, cold Pursiveness, broken Wind, or short∣ness of Breath, an excellent Remedy. ibid. To restore decayed and putrefied Lungs. p. 77 A dry Consumption, its Remedy, &c. ibid. The Breast-pain; from whence it proceeds, and how to Cure it. p. 78 Heart-sickness, or the Antecor; whence it proceeds, and how to remedy it. p. 79 Foundering in the Body or Surfeiting, how occasioned; to∣gether with the Remedy. ibid. The greedy Worm or hungry Evil; what it is, and how to be remedied or prevented. p. 80 Yellow and Black Jaundice in a Horse, the Cause and Cure, &c. p. 81 Constiveness; from whence it proceeds, amd its Reme∣dy. p. 82 The Cramp, or Convulsion in the Nerves or Sinews, how occasioned; together with the Remedy, &c. p. 83 The Mourning of the Chine, its Cause, and the means to Cure it. ibid. Irenzy or Madness, its Original; with the means to re∣medy it according to the Experienced way. p. 84 The falling-Evil, its Cause and Remedy. p. 85 The sleeping-Evil; what it is, and the vvay to remedy it. ibid. The Horse-Pestilence, and its Cure. p. 86 For Chest-foundering, the Remedy. ibid. For an Obstruction in the Bladder, or Windiness in the Bovv∣els, &c. p. 87
The Pole-Evil, hovv to knovv and cure. ibid. The Fistula, hovv to discover and cure. p. 88 Hard Kernels under the Throat, hovv to remove. p. 89 For the Navel-gall, the Remedy. ibid. For a Blovv, Bruise, or the like misfortune that causes a Svvelling or Tumour, the Remedy. ibid. The Scratches, their Remedy. p. 90 For Foot-foundering, a Remedy. ibid. For a Canker in the Head, a Remedy. p. 91 For the Mangey or dry Scurvey, a Cure. p. 92 The Vives, and their Remedy. ibid. For swanking in the Back, or a strain in the Kidnies, cau∣sed by indiscreet Riding or over-burthening. p. 93 For any pain or foulness in the Reins or Kidnies, an excel∣lent Scowring, &c. ibid. A present relief for an Attaint or Over-reach on the Heel, or the like. p. 94 A Cure for the Sorranee, called the Ring-bone. ibid. For the Water-Farcion, a Remedy. p. 95 For the Ives, a Remedy. ibid. To take off the Film or Skin from a horse's Eye. p. 96 A Mallender, the Remedy to cure it. ibid. For the Palsey or Apoplexy, a Remedy. ibid. A Farcion in the Head and Neck, to cure. p. 97 A Linnament to cleanse a Wound, new or old. ibid. For Kib'd-heels, commonly called the Mules, a Remedy ibid. The Quitter-bone, what it is, with its Remedy. p. 98 An excellent Cure for the Blood-spavin, &c. p. 99 For a Neather, Attaint, or Over-reach in the Paster Joynt. ibid. For a putrefied Frush, the Cure. ibid. To dissolve the Humours, and thereby anticipate Diseases p. 100 To soften any hard swelling or contracted hardness. ibid. For the Splint, Wind-gall, or Bladders of Gelly in or about any of the Joynts subject thereto. p. 101 To cleanse any putrefied, or other Sore, the safest way. ibid.
A Horse Planet-struck, how to Cure. ibid. For the Poze or excessive Cold, a Remedy. p. 102 To remedy or cure Hide-boundness in a Horse. ibid. For a wet inward Cough, a Remedy. p. 103 For a dangerous Cough, commonly called the dry Cough. ibid. For the Yard of a Horse falling, a Remedy. p. 104 To prevent the Mattering of the Yard. ibid. Of the Diseases incident mostly to Mares, and known by the name of the Pestilent-consumption. p. 105 How a Mare that is subject to cast her Foal ought to be used. ibid. How to oblige a Mare to cast her Foal. p. 106 Of the several Feavers in a Horse, and how to Cure them, &c. ibid. For any disease and stoppage in the Liver. p. 108 For a Botch or Sorrance in the Groin of a Horse, a good Cure. p. 109 For a general Manginess, the remedy. ibid. The Barbs, what they are, and how removed. p. 110 For Blood-shot Eyes, an excellent Remedy. ibid. For any Film, Bite or Blow in the Eye, a Remedy. p. 111 To kill Lice, or remove Flies from offending your Horse. ibid. To rid a Horse from any foulness or disorder in the Body. ibid. For an extraordinary Bruise or Bite. ibid. For a Horse that is troubled with the Strangling, a Cure. p. 112 To remedy the Swelling of a Horse upon having eaten any infectious thing in his Grass or Provender, that may, if not remedied, prove dangerous. ibid. For a Heart-burning or Wasting, occasioned thereby. p. 113 To prevent staling Blood, a remedy. ibid. Another excellent Remedy for the Farcy, vulgarly called the Fashion. ibid. An approved Cure for any Sinew-strain or Over-reach. ibid.
Diseases in the Hoof, how to remedy, &c. p. 11 Hoof-bound; what it is, and how to remedy it. ibid. To soften or harden a hoof the best way. p. 11 To harden a hoof as occasion requires. ibid. For any hurt or Cankerous sore in or on the hoof. p. 11 To oblige a horse to carry his Ears well, &c. ibid. For the grievance called the Frounce, a Cure. p. 117 For a heat, which sometimes occasions a breaking out in th Mouth and Lips, the Cure. ibid. Wolf-teeth, what they are, and how to ease their Pains th ready way. p. 118 To staunch any Bleeding, a speedy way. ibid. To supply the defect of the falling of the Crest, &c. ibid. To cure Manginess, or the like disorder, in the Crest. p. 119 The Navel-gall, what it is, and its Remedy. ibid. For a Sitfast or horney Excressence under the Saddle, where∣by the horse is disabled from carrying it in good order  he ought. p. 12 For any Knob or Wen near the Saddle-skirt, or the Sides  the horse, a Remedy. ibid. For Weakness in the Back, a strengthning remedy. ibid. For the Swelling in the Cods of a horse naturally, or occa∣sioned by any Bruise, &c. p. 12 For Burstenness, or the Rupture in a horse. ibid. The Art of discovering hidden Griefs or Ailments in a horse and from what they proceed. p. 12 The Bone-spavin, what it is, &c. p. 12 For a Haw in the Eye. ibid. For the falling out of the fundament, a remedy. p. 12 To preserve a hoof from decaying, &c. ibid. Interferring, what it is, and the remedy. ibid. A false Quarter, what it is. p. 12 The Melt on the heel. ibid. An excellent remedy for any Strain or Swelling. p. 12 How to remedy the harm done a horse by unadvisedly and un∣skilfully letting Blood. ibid. For the Leprosie in horses, a remedy, with the cause. ibid. For any disease in the Lungs, an excellent remedy. p. 12
For the Swelling of the horse's Legs, the Cure. p. 128 The flying Worm, what it is, and how to Cure it. p. 129 Excellent Directions for the prevention of Diseases in hor∣ses, at sundry times, &c. ibid. A Cure for a sore or defective Mouth. p. 130 For the Mellet in the heels. p. 131 The Stavers, their signs, cause and cure. ibid. For the Stone, a very good remedy. p. 132 To take away a Wen in the Neck, or any part of the horse's Body, without danger. ibid. The Crownet-Scab, what it is, together with the Cure. p. 133 To draw out a Thorn or Stump, or any Iron or sharp thing gotten into the flesh. ibid. For a Strain in the Coffin-joynt, &c. p. 134 For a horse that is perpetually sick or out of order. ibid. For a Cold in the Summer, &c. p. 135 A Through-splint or Screw-pin, what it is. ibid. To render a brittle hoof firm and serviceable. p. 136 To cure the Anbury. ibid. To prevent a horse's pissing Blood. ibid. For a broken Knee. ibid. For the Dropsey in a horse. p. 137 To joyn a Sinew that is cut. ibid. For a Wound or hurt in the Tongue. p. 138 For the Itch in the Tail, or any other part. ibid. Another excellent Remedy for the Tetter. ibid. For a hurt or Wring in the Withers. ibid. Forms of any sort in the Body of a horse, how to kill and remove them. p. 139 An excellent Salve for any sort of Wound, how to make and apply it. ibid. n Imposthume to ripen and cure. p. 140 For any Internal sickness, &c. ibid. For the Ach, weakness or numb'dness of the Joynts. p. 141 How to stay any violent Looseness. ibid. he Lampas, what it is, and how to cure it. p. 142 For the Fig in the foot of a horse. ibid.
For the Flanks, a disease so called, and the way to remedy it. P. 143. The Shackle-gall, and its cure. ibid. A Horse that is Gravelled, how to remedy. P. 144 Of Cataplasms or Poultises. P. 145 For any Swelling, Aposthume, Rankling, Wound or broker Bone. ibid. For a Swelling in the Throat or under the Ears. ibid. To draw or break a Boyl or Ʋlcerous Sore, &c. ibid. An excellent Poultis to asswage any Pain or superate Tu∣mour. P. 146 A Poultis to break any Infectious Sore. ibid. To disperse the Flux or Oppression of Blood in any part. ibid. For an Imposthume or sudden Swelling in any part of the Body. P. 147. In case of the Palsey in the head, &c. ibid. To heal and contract any Wound. ibid. An inward Balm to destroy Worms, and heal Interna Bruises. P. 148 An excellent Balm in case of any Sprain, Internal Bruise, Swelling, Blasting, old Sore or Gun-shot. ibid. An excellent Balm to be given a Horse inward, in case of a Consumption. ibid. An excellent Red Water to cure Ʋlcers. P. 149 An excellent Water to allay any Internal heat or feaverish Indispondency. ibid. In case a Horse be troubled with the Stone, an excellent Water. ibid. For any disease in the Eyes, &c. P. 150 An excellent Purgation for Gravel in the Bladder or Kid∣nies. ibid. For the Ʋlceration of the Yard, an excellent Water, ibid An excellent Powder for the falling-sickness or falling-evi in a Horse. P. 151 A Powder for the Ague, which frequently happens, espe∣cially to young Horses. ibid. To purge Choler and Phlegm, an excellent Powder. ibid.
An excellent Bath to allay any Swelling or such-like dis∣order, especially diseases in the Legs, occasioned by the descending of evil humours, &c. P. 152 A Bath to soften and mollifie the Skin. ibid. To stanch Blood in any Vein or Artery. ibid. An excellent Medicament to provoke a Horse to Vomit, as also to purge his Belly. P. 153 An excellent Purge, good on sundry occasions. ibid. or a Joynt-sickness. ibid. For an Internal Ʋlcer. ibid. An excellent Electuary for a dangerous Cough or ratling Cold. P. 154 CHAP. XXIII. THE Symptoms of Diseases, Sorrances, Distempers, Grievances, or the like, in general and particular, how to foresee them and prevent them; as also to know when they happen, &c. P. 155 CHAP. XXIV. DIrections for making and preparing Oyntments, Oyls, Salves, Waters, Purgations, Poultises, Charges, Supplements, Pills, Powders, &c. singular good in case of any Distemper or Sorrance, &c. P. 159 n Oyntment to search any Wound or Ʋlcerated Sore, or any thing of the like nature. ibid. n Oyntment excellent good in case of Botches, Boils, Scabs, or the like Sorrances. P. 160 skin any Wound, an excellent Oyntment. ibid. mollifie and asswage any Swelling, an excellent Oynt∣ment. ibid.
An excellent Oyntment to cool and allay any Inflamation ibid. An excellent Oyntment, or rather Balsom, to be inward given a Horse for Obstructions, Bruises, and othe Ailments and Grievances. P. 16 To make a green Oyntment, proved by Experience, mor effectual than what has formerly been published. ibid. An excellent Remedy for the Staggers, or any Pain tha suddenly takes a Horse, sometimes to the loss of h life. ibid. An excellent Salve for any Wound. P. 16 An approved Salve to draw any stub, thorn, or splinter  Bone or Wood out of the flesh. ibid. To fill a Wound, Ʋlcer, or the like, with good flesh, an ex∣cellent Plaster. P. 16 A Salve to draw Corruption from the bottom of a Wound, or to draw a Swelling, or any such grievance to a head. ibid. To ripen a Tumour, or asswage any Swelling, not aboun∣ing with extraordinary humours. ibid. An excellent Poultis for a Tumour or Swelling. ibid. A Charge to ease a pain in the Back, or for any Sprain P. 16 To mollifie any Chap or rough Sore. ibid. For the Eyes of a Horse, afflicted by any means, an ap∣proved Water to cure or ease them. ibid. A Water to Wash the Mouth in case of any Sorrance  defect. P. 16 A Pill good for any Internal disorder, &c. ibid. A Supplement exceeding good for any strain or grief  the Sinews, &c. ibid. A Vomit for a Horse that has a Queesy stomach, there  to render him a good Appetite. ibid. To purge Melancholy. P. 16 To purge Phlegm. ibid.
CHAP. XXV. CLysters, how to make them, and on what occasion they ought to be applied in order to their effectual working and bringing away bad humours. P. 167 case of any Pestilential disease, occasioned by a cholerick or firey humour. ibid. For any Internal distemper proceeding from Melancholy. P. 168 For any distemper Internal, occasioned by sanguine, corrupt Blood, or wary Humours, by means of bad concoction or obstruction, &c. ibid. For Sickness in general, an approved Clyster. ibid. n case of Restringency or hard Binding. P. 169 CHAP. XXVI. Cordials, Cordial-Powders, Drinks and Drenches, Pur∣gations and Suppositories, wonderfully conducing to the health and strength of a horse. P. 170 Diapente, an excellent Powder in case of any cold or Pe∣stilential diseases. ibid. An excellent Cordial-Ball to be given in case of any Inter∣nal distemper, and especially to prevent the Consumption, or wasting of any part, &c. ibid. An excellent Drench to cure any Internal distemper pro∣ceeding from any of the four Humours of the Body, &c. especially such as are Pestilential. P. 171 uppositories, and their Ʋse. ibid.
CHAP. XXVII. PErfumes, Baths and Purgations; what they are, and to what end they serve: with the Manner how, and under what Considerations they ought to be ap∣plied. Page 173 Directions for Purging, according to the estate and con∣dition of Your House. Page 174 CHAP. XXVIII. COsticks, Corrosives, and Rowelling; what they are; for what causes, and in what manner to be ap∣plied. Page 176 Rowelling; what it is, and how to be performed. Page 177
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second PART. CHAP. I. THE Manner of Breaking a Horse the best way, and perfecting him in his Paces, &c. and preserving him from danger, &c. Page 181 CHAP. II. HOW the Jockies made Old horses look young; A lean horse artificially and naturally; how fatned by Jockies. A Remedy for Restiffness, Neighing, and the vice of Lying down in the Water: The Art of making Stars, Snips, Blazes, setting on false Ears, Tails, Manes, &c. Page 189 A Horse subject to lye down in the Water, how to reme∣dy it. Page 190 A Tired or Restiff Horse, to remedy. Page 191 To prevent the Troublesomeness of a Horse's Neighing, which may prove disadvantageous to the Master, especi∣ally in time of War. ibid. If a Horse be dull, and will not feel the Spur without much wounding, &c. Page p. 192 To make a lean Horse artificially far, or to seem so to the Buyer. ibid. To make a lean horse really fat, the best and cheapest way. Page 193
To make the hair of a Horse that stands rough and staring, smooth and sleek. 194 To make Hair come where it is thin, or to take it away where it is thick. ibid. Stars, Blazes, Snips; what they are, and how to make them for Ornament or Disguise in any part of the Horse where they may be conveniently scituate. 195 To make a Black Star in a white horse. 196 To make a Blaze-Royal. 198 The loss of Ears, how to supply. 190 CHAP. III. HOw to set a horse off for Sale to the best advantage by Trimming, Washing, &c. As also directions for the Management of a horse in Hunting, relating to his Leaping, &c. 200 How to make a Ball, wherewith a horse being well La∣thered and smoothed down, shall look exceeding slee and comely. 20 How to Manage a Horse in Leaping, taking a Hedge Gate, Stile, Ditch, &c. 20 CHAP. IV. WHat the Stable to keep a good horse in ought to be and how he ought to be regarded; the hoofs ho to be corrected and minded in Shooing, &c. 20 Critical Days, and the Observation thereon. 20 Some further Considerations upon the Cause of Diseases, a how to Remove them, &c. 21 The Spirits, what they are, with their Office, &c. 21 A further Description of the External Parts, &c. 21
The Gentlemans New Iockey or Farriers Approved Guid Impostume Falling Evill Head ach Staggers Eye Water Film in ye eyes Diseases in ye Eyes Pearl Pin or Web Bleeding at Nose Glanders Cold Canker in ye Mouth or Horse ye Mouth diseases Kernells Stangles Pole Eril Crick in Neck Falling of ye Cresst Mangines Stains in ye Shoulder Windgall or Strains in ye Shoulder Fistula Knobs old & hard Pain in ye Wither Back swancked Narell Gall Fundament or Moth fallen out Glister & their use Itch in the Tail Lask or Bloody Flux Laxativeness or Loos Pitges Scowring Blood Spain Shacklegand Ringbone Tough hoof Brittle hoof Founder & Frettize Back sinue Strain Cut or heweing Enterfaring Hurts in Cronet Quitter bone or Maltlong Stub or Hurt Prick in foot Surbated Sinnu Spraine Sprain Splinter Spain Facion Over reach Legs swelled Grease fallen Dropsy Scratches Founder Garget Belly ach Collick Pissing blood Burnt by a Mare Cod bruised or bitten Stiff in bone Reader the minde of this Cutt is readily to direct you to ye London. printed for Nicholas. Boddington. in Duck Lane.
THE Gentleman's New Jockey: OR, FARRIER'S Approved Guide. CHAP. I. Excellent Rules and Instructions, highly necessary to be observed in the Election and Choice of good Breeders, how, and at what time, &c. a Mare ought to be Covered; how ordered being with Foal, and after Foaling: With many other things of the like nature. WHEN any Gentleman or other Person is de∣sirous of a good Breed of Horses or Mares, that may redound to his Pleasure and Pro∣fit, the chief thing is to Elect a Stallion and Mare, or Mares, in whom Nature has not been defective, but rather fitted and framed for Beauty, and promising service of what kind soever, shall be premeditated or proposed by the Master: And in this ase Instructions, how unerringly to chuse such as may nswer the largest expectation, will not be amiss; for s the Sire and Dam are, such will the Colts prove.
Those that have been Curious in these matters, gene∣rally agree, That the Mare for breed ought to be about four years old, altogether free from Diseases and Sor∣rances, clear limbed and well proportioned, her Eyes lively and sparkling, standing somewhat out of her Head, her Ears standing direct, her Buttocks broad and well fleshed, with a large Womb, little Head, well-set Shoul∣ders, and an Arched Neck; her Legs even, and her Neighing sharp and clear, with fair Hoofs and large Ribs, one that is not used to trip, stumble, interfere, or given to any untowardly vice. And to answer her, The Stal∣lion ought to have a little Head, inclining to leanness, a swelling Forehead, full Ears, with Eyes quick and standing out, being somewhat speckled with Blood, his Nose crookt, or bending, his Nostrils wide, and Neck arch∣wise, with a large throple and curling Mane, broad and well-set Shoulders, large Knee-joynts and lean Legs, a well-set Chest, broad Back, large Ribs, a gaunt Belly, Straits, Fillets and good Pasterns well knit and well pro∣portioned; of Colour bright Bay or Cole black, though in this case other Colours may prove good both as to the Mare and Stallion, as will appear when I come to describe the Goodness by the Colour, &c. A good choice thus made, it will be altogether con∣venient to feed your Stallion for a time in the Stable with heartning Provinder, as Splent-beans, Oats or sod Bar∣ley, to render him lusty and mettlesome; yet let him feed on good green Pasture, at least a day before you suffer him to back your Mare, for fear that by reason o the stiffness of his Limbs and pursiveness, he brake hi Wind by over-straining himself in the Action. If th Mare, who must be suffered to Run in good warm Pa∣sture, appear averse, and by her striking, or other way seeming-unwilling, decline the company of the Stallion then will it be convenient to put some little Stone Na∣to woo her, taking away the Stallion; and when he ha brought her to a complyance, take him away withou suffering him to leap her, and bring the Stallion to he
again about Sun-rise, the Ground being well fenced a∣bout, and, no doubt, she will suffer her self to be Cover∣ed; and if the Horse be very head-strong and unruly, it will not be amiss if two strong Men lead him to her, and manage him according to their discretion, for fear he injure himself or the Mare: Then let a third stand ready with a Bucket of Water to cast upon the Mares Shape with all his force, so soon as the Horse dismounts her, thereby to make her shrink up her Body, and sud∣dainly close the Womb for the better Retention of the Seed; and in fifteen days after, if you imagine she has not thorowly conceived, which will appear by her turn∣ing her back-part to the Wind, pricking up her Ears of∣ten, scenting the Air and Neighing, you may put the Horse to her again, and order her in the like manner. But if the Mare be notwithstanding defective in concep∣tion, to remedy that fault, occasioned mostly by two much Blood, take a pint of Blood from either side her Neck four or five days before your Horse Covers her; and the day after bleeding, take a quart of warm Milk, half a pint of the Juyce of Mugwort, London-Treacle and sweet Butter, of each two ounces: dissolve them toge∣ther; and being well mixed, give them to her in a Drenching-horn luke-warm, and you will find the effects answer your expectation, especially if twice or thrice re∣peated the succeeding mornings when she is fasting. Now if she has conceived well, her Belly within four or five days will appear gaunt, her Hair more bright and shining, her regard of Horses or noises will be little, her Ears will flag, and she will decrease in flesh. Ways there are to oblige either Stallion or Mare, in case of A∣versness, by rubbing a Spunge in the Mares Shape, and ith it rubbing the Horses Noses; as likewise by rubing the hape of the Mare with Aquavitae, Cow-Itch, Nettle-seed,  the like. But these being vulgarly known, I shall ave them, and proceed to what is more material to e known.
Some are of opinion, that knitting the right Stone of the Horse with a List or silken Cord, will occasion a Fe∣male Colt, and the contrary a Male; but how often that has failed, there are few Horse-keepers ignorant. Where∣fore to follow Experience, the best Mistriss, observe, that if you would be sure of a Stone-Colt, to let your Mare be covered when Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer or Leo, are predominant, which are called Masculine Signs, and as well rule Irrational as Rational Creatures; and if your desires are contrary, then let Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces be your Rule: For as Heat and Moisture are the great distinguishers of the Sex, so the Signs influencing more or less, are not a little concerned as Second Causes, in the production of things participating of their temperature. For the space of three weeks, or somewhat longer, after Covering, she must or ought to be kept in a warm House and Dieted, least the Conception happen to be impaired before the Colt be well formed; and after that she must not be hard rid nor laboured, neither come in∣to any Ground or Stable where unruly Cattel are, or where, by attempting to leap, she may injure her self, least thereby her Masters expectation be frustrated by Miscarriage, or the Colt's being bruised and distorted in the Womb; observing the Ground she runs in be dry, well sheltered with spreading Trees, Barns, Quick∣sets or Out-houses, under or into which she may retire at leasure; nor will it be unnecessary to have Racks with Provinder placed where she may advantageously come at them. The time that a Mare goes with Fold, unless some mischance happen, is, by the most curious Observers, a year and ten days, though some will have it twelve months within eleven days, and some a shorter time. This, I confess, as to a young Mare, in her first Teem∣ing, does often fall out; but upon the second Foaling rarely or never: For if your Mare be Covered about the middle of December, which is the best time that she may
have the advantage of the Summer to run in, and the following Spring to bring up her Colt; she will be sure to Foal about the latter end of December in the following year, as has been frequently observed. When the time of her Foaling is at hand, let those whose charge it is be assisting to her in case of emergency, she being conti∣nued in a warm House without any Halter or other cum∣bersome thing about her whereby she may be hindred or caused to slip or stumble, being eased in her lying down with clean Litter, or layed to receive the Colt, if she cast it standing, as often it happeneth; and when she has dryed the Colt with licking, let the Milk be drawn from her Teats before he be suffered to suck her, to prevent it's clotting in the Udder; and if she be scan∣ty of Milk, to prevent dryness and encrease it, give her warm Mashes, with some Powder of Brimstone and Wa∣ter, wherein Scabeous or Vervine have been boiled, a∣nointing her Dugs with the Decoction of Lavender and Spike; and so a Month or two after you may work or ride her gently: But beware if she return hot, let her cool before the Colt take the Teat, least the humours being too much stirred, the heat of the Milk being too greedily taken, surfeit him. And thus a good Mare will bring forth able Colts till ten years, and a Stallion get them till twelve; but those that on either part happen beyond, will prove weaklings, and not worth the rearing. And thus much for procuring a Colt; which if carefully reared, will unquestionably make a good Horse or Mare. Wherefore to leave nothing of that kind in the dark, I shall proceed to direct in the following Chapter what is necessary to be done till the time of Backing, &c. and from thence onward to the rest, more materially to be known by the Reader.
CHAP. II. How to Manage a good Colt to bring him to be an excellent Horse; and what is to be observed in the timely knowledge of what he will be when come to Maturity; with the season of Weaning, Cutting and Usage, &c. Though what has been said be exactly observed and performed, yet a Colt, after it is brought forth, may be spoiled by neglect, or for want of Management in his tender Age; which is the next thing requisite to be taken notice of, that proceeding gradually in pas∣sing through the several Stations of so accurate a mat∣ter, I may be easily traced in my Method, and thereby the better and more exactly understood, plainness and brevity being the marks at which I aim; and yet that in so accomplishing my design, nothing may be wanting that may conduce to the advantage of any. The first thing necessary to know, whether a Colt will make a Horse, and when arrived to Maturity, is the Observation of his Linaments; the measures in that kind to be taken thus: Viz. Observe whether the Shin∣bones be strait and even, of a convenient thickness, ac∣cording to a durable or firm proportion, that thereby his tallness and ability may be perspicuous or apparent; for in consideration of the proportion between the Wi∣thers and the Knee you may expect a duplicity, or as much more in the hight, when at full growth: Observe likewise that his Joynts be large, and that he be full boned, his Head small, lean, and his Ears of a moderate size, standing upright; and that when he stands in due proportion, or at ease, his hinder Legs stand rather back∣ward, than crimpling forward; or even which denotes
speed: Then consider by his frisking or playing up and down, his shaking his Ears or Tail, staring in your Face, or the like, his mettlesomeness, and consequently there∣by his other properties, as far as his tender age will give an insight; for in this Creature, as in all others of what kind soever, there remains no certainty without industry as to the reducing them to the Service of Man∣kind: And to prevent his pining when weaned, let him by all means be out of the hearing of his Dam; and that he may the better brook her absence, make a mix∣ture of the best Butter you can get, and Ruburb, Rue or Savine, and give him nourishing diet; as Mashes, Splent-beans, boiled Oats and hot Bran, with somewhat that is green and juycey for the space of three Months after: Nor indeed ought he to be used to hard Provin∣der altogether till three years after his weaning, least thereby he be induced to neglect his feeding, and so by pining hinder his growth and activity. If it be a Stone-Colt, separate him from that of the other Kind at the expiration of a year, least he spoil himself in attempting what he is not capable of perform∣ing; and the better to prevent the endangering of either, is to put them into different Pasture, well fenced, to prevent leaping, and secured by Quick-sets, Trees, Barns or other Out-houses from heat and cold. If you design to make Geldings of your Stone-Colts, the proper time to Cut or Delapidate them is, when they are between nine and twelve Days old, if the Sign of Life, which may be gathered from the Course of the Moon in her Wain, being either in Aries or Virgo, espe∣cially in the Spring or Fall, which are accounted the sa∣fest seasons, though by those that well understand this affair it may be done at any time, the Weather being dry, and not too hot or cold. And what now remains as to the bringing a Colt to perfection, is the Art of the Breeder, which may be, as the Vulgar term has it, the principal Verb; for if he neglect his charge, all that has been mentioned may prove ineffectual. Which
Breeder I also term the Manager; for it is not enough to feed a Horse well, that thereby he may be able limb∣ed and high-mettled, but to bring him up to those de∣grees of Exercise, that may fit him for any imployment. And seeing many are ignorant in this affair, it will be highly necessary to give Directions after the best and most approved Manner and Method: which take from Experience, the best of Masters, as followeth. CHAP. III. When and how to Break a Colt, and render him tame and gentle; with the Art of Management on that occasion: And many other things ne∣cessary and requisite to be known. VVHen your Colt comes to be of the Age of five years, which is a good time to oblige him to endure Backing, or the like, having before made your self familiar with him, by stroaking, feeding and shaking the Bridle at his head, laying your hand on his back, smacking the Whip or cheriping, with such other signs as are commonly used to create a sufferance; lay your Saddle, not being over weighty, on his Back, con∣tinuing, as you observe his patience, either to increase the weight by a greater Saddle, or by placing on the lesser somewhat that is ponderous, stroaking and rub∣bing him the mean while that he may not be intent on what you are doing; and when you have brought him to a moderate sufferance, Girt the Saddle with soft Girts, and that by degrees, loosening them as you find occasi∣on, by his winching or untowardness, or straitning them according to his patience or sufferance: And so
in case of your Bridle, which ought to be the second thing applicable in reducing a Colt or young Horse to obedience and observance of what tends to his Accom∣plishment; but if you perceive a Colt, before he arrive at any convenient Maturity, to be over-mettlesome, it will be prudent to make him familiar, though at a year old, yet not to press his Back with weights for fear of swaying it; and so by a timely taming him, render the Men of other Nations mistaken, who account the Spa∣nish, Turkey, Barbary, Pelopoenesian, Flanders, Friesland, Holiand and Artois Horses and Mares the best: And the Reason they give is, that they may be made gentle at any Age; which the English Horses, &c. whom they term of a stubborn nature, cannot be brought to: And indeed the taking them up too soon, without due Management, is the occasion of stunting, and other-ways spoiling, of many a brave Colt or Horse. If you find your Endeavour, in the manner aforesaid, fail you in bringing a young Horse or Mare to your bent; then consider Loanliness may be the occasion, or fear more than obstinacy: To remedy which, oblige him or her to accompany those that are Tame, and of a gentle nature already reduced to, what you design them, or at least flexible on that occasion; and by of∣ten observing, you handle them, a mildaess will be created, and a familiarity will increase to a desire of the like; nor will moderate Rubbing and Picking the Feet be the least means to introduce what else you de∣sire. Some indeed, and those the most curious in this affair, will not attempt to Back a Horse which they intend for Travel or Racing, till the sixth year: But, in my opinion, they lose a years service thereby to no manner of purpose; for the difference as to the one and the other in this kind, is inconsiderable, unless in case of extraordinary labour; for consequently the longer the Horse remains in good feeding undisturbed, the stronger he grows in Joynt or Member, though less in swiftness.
And seeing I have thus far proceeded, it will not be amiss to give the Breeder an insight into what more materially relates to his Duty and Office as to Diet and Dressing; in order to which he may apply him∣self to the following Chapter. CHAP. IV. The Art of Dressing in General; and may serve upon all occasions for bringing a Horse to per∣fection, and render a Groom or Horse-keeper acceptable to Persons of Quality, &c. As the old Proverb is, The Eye of the Master makes the Horse fat; so his care in this case is necessary, (if he cannot be present as he would wish) to chuse such a one, who may as well in his absence as in his pre∣sence, perform his duty to the benefit of his Master and his own credit, by rising early and tending the Horse or Horses within his charge; and the best Diet in this case to bring him to perfection is, in general, a quart of Splent-beans, and two quarts of Oats sweet and well sifted; and so, if more than one, the like quantity. Then Curry him well with an Iron Comb, after that Dust him over with a Dusting-cloth, and pass a French Brush upon him, and smooth him with your hands to sleekness, passing over him beside a Woollen, and then innen cloth, cleansing his Eyes, Ears, Sheath, and pick∣ing his Feet, placing his Mane decently, and smoothing his Forehead after it's being ruffled, to loosen the Skin when putting on the Saddle, with Wisps under the Girths: Ride him gently to Water, suffering him to dung or stale as you see him inclined; and in case of de∣fect,
provoke him thereto by letting him scent Horse-dung, musty Hay, cast Straw, or entring into Stubble or Brakes; and so in a gentle motion return him to your Stable, which ought rather to be Paved than Planked, to prevent dampness and unwholsome scents arising from the Urine, &c. that Stagnates between the crevises or chinks of the Plank, be they layed ne∣ver so close; of which I shall say more when I come to give Directions for a convenient Stable, fitting for choice Horses. Your Horse being in the Stable, rub him down in all Points, as before directed, ever observing to be∣gin at the Head, and so proceed backwards, till every part be decently passed over, not taking off the Cloaths, or removing the Bridle under the space of an hour; and in the mean while let him have the same quantity of Provinder as before, adding, as he has dispatched the Grain, a bottle of sweet Hay bound up hard and cast into the Rack, that with some labour he may pull it thence. These are General Rules, and no way to be contemned. But from hence I shall proceed to those that come nearer to the purpose, and have been the best Ap∣proved ones that this Age can afford, giving in the Experiment a general satisfaction to the Ingenious.
CHAP. V. How to render any tolerable good Horse an excel∣lent Racer; and how Running-Horses ought to be managed in Diet, Physick and Exercise, in order to their being capable of Running a Match with success, &c. SEeing Racing is highly in esteem, and a good Horse of that kind much coveted by the Gentry of all Nations, I shall in this Chapter give an insight into that affair: And first in chusing a Horse for Running; Consider he be well managed, tractable, and no ways skittish, familiar with his Keeper or Master, and free in eating what is given him; lively and sprightfull in his looks and action: Let him be one of an indifferent large reach, well set in the shoulders, and fairly hipped, gaunt and smooth backed, his legs and thighs standing in due proportion, his head small and lean, with fast or firm cheek-bones, a sharp, or Hawks Nose, wide No∣strils and wide Throple, and not exceeding twelve years old, nor under six being of a good breed: Nor is this all, for the main point of bringing him into a condition to Run successfully is yet behind, which consists in Dy∣eting, Dressing▪ and carefully Ordering, before he un∣dertake such a business: And in that case, if you would have him answer your expectation, observe these Rules, which are by the great Searchers into these Mysteries held to be the best and most exact that ever were. Resolving to Run, and having matched your Horse, the first thing you ought to do is, to have a regard to the state and condition wherein he is, as to what relates to his Body in case of health, sickness, or any other ad∣vantage
or disadvantage, and especially to what fol∣lows: As whether he be newly taken from Grass or Soil, and by that means his Body rendred foul and un∣wieldy, over-burthened and incumbred with unnecessa∣ry fatness or crudy humours; or, on the contrary, whe∣ther by bad usage he is become poor and feeble, or that some hidden infirmity occasion leanness or a pi∣ning away: And, lastly, whether he be in good liking or state for your purpose, by having been moderately exercised and carefully regarded. These Considerations weighed, if you find your Horse in the first Estate, let him not be matched, if it will any way stand with your conveniency under six Weeks, or at least not in less than a Month, that so he may be prepared by regular Diet and Applications for what he is to undertake. In the second Estate, unless your Horse be neglected, six Weeks or a Month may suffice, for that his Exer∣cise may be suted to his Feeding, and in that case no time lost, if he that looks after him be carefull and industrious. As for the last Estate, it being a Medium between what has been mentioned, a Month with care is a suffi∣cient time to bring him to perfection, though many allow six Weeks; but that is, as he is more or less in∣clining to fatness or gross humours, contracted in rank Pasture, or by cating foul Provinder. Now if it so happen, that any of these kinds be of a free and firey nature, apt to excess in Exercise, thereby to spend the flesh he has got in Dieting; he that has the charge, must, as he sees convenient, restrain him with a hard hand; and if he be defective in feeding, let him use what devices he can to prompt him to it, as by whist∣ling, singing, stroaking, clapping, rubbing, tosing his Provinder, and the like; though in the fat Horse this ought chiefly to be observed; for the lean one, and that in good case, if not indisposed by any distemper or grievance, will eat freely, and may be better exercised,
not needing any restriction, unless upon extraordinary occasions, though a tender regard must be had to ei∣ther. And because the way of Dieting and Preparing is much desired, I shall now descend to treat of it in the Estate of the Fat Horse, in whom the rest may be comprehended; for he being the most difficult to ren∣der thus serviceable, the rest with more ease, though by the same method, may be rendred capable. CHAP. VI. A Continuation of what is to be done to the Run∣ning or Race-Horse, relating as to his Election, Dressing, Feeding, and other Usage, &c. THE Horse you chose, though naturally a good one, having contracted fatness or foulness by the means of too rank a Pasture or bad feeding; having put him into a dry and warm Stable, though somewhat darkish, to render him the better feeder, lead him out by the rising of the Sun, suffering your Boy or Servant to give him a Turn or two till you have cleansed the Stable of what is offensive; then return him, and ha∣ving your Bridle dipped in Beer, put it on, and tye him up to the Rack; at what time Curry him in every part, beginning with his Head, and ending with his Pasterns; then with a Horse-tail, or clean Dusting-cloth, dust him over: That done, take your French-Brush and rub him decently over in all parts by such degrees as he may be sensible of your kind usage: As, first the Forehead, then the Cheek, so down the Neck on either side, after that the Shoulders, Fore-legs, Back, Sides, Belly, Buttock, Rump, Thighs, Cambrils, and the very Fetlocks, beat∣ing
and sounding the Hoof to make it sit the firmer: This done, pass over him again with your wet hand to settle the Hair, and render him sleek and shining; the wet being dried by a repetition, cleanse his Sheath, Cods and Tuel, his Ears, Eyes and Nostrils, his Mane, Fore∣top and Tail, and rub the moisture, if any remain, from between his hinder Thighs, picking his Hoofs, and run∣ning over his Legs with dry Wisps, or a clean Woollen-cloth, which, if you see convenient, pass over his Body, combing his Mane, Tail and Foretop. Having thus far proceeded, take a large Body-cloth of Kersey, or the like thick Woollen, and spread over him, if it happen in the Winter; but if in the Summer, that of a lighter Make will suffice; on that lay a light Saddle, girting it pretty strait, yet let a wisp or two stick on each side to give him the better breathing room, bra∣cing the Cloth likewise about his Breast and Shoul∣ders. Thus having dressed and attired your Horse, spurt a little warm Beer into his Mouth, and lead him forth, and mount him, leaving one to order the Stable and provide good Litter against your return. Wheat-straw being the best of that with which your Stable must al∣ways be sufficiently provided for; other Straw is not only unseemly, but unwholsome; the Oat-straw breed∣ing dislike, and the Barley-straw, if your Horse be sub∣ject to eat it, a scowring. Being abroad, ride your Horse for some time a foot-pace, which, by the curious, is termed Racking; and after you have so managed him for the space of a Mile or more upon firm ground, advance to a Hill that gently rises, if the scituation of the place afford it; and mending by degrees his pace, bring him to Gallop up; the which when he has performed, lead him, or Rack him down to the best advantage, suffering him to cool and contract an equal temperature of body. Thus ha∣ving done, as you see your Horse without over-straining will conveniently bear it, lead him a Mile or thereabout
to some pleasant River or Spring, and suffer him to drink moderately, and then Exercise him as before: Which done, give him a second Watering; and after that another Exercise, ever observing to Exercise him before and after watering; which done, ride him easily home; and coming to the Stable-door, alight, suffering your Horse to stale or dung in the foul litter; the which if he refuse freely to do, provoke him to it by whistling, clapping or waving your Switch, raising the Straw under him, and reaching him upon it; which will often, if not always, oblige him to it, Custome giving him an insight into what you would have him to do. This done, lead him in, and fix him upon the clean Litter, take off the Saddle and Body-cloth, rub∣bing him down, and cleansing him as before; after which put on the Cloths, girt them gently with Sir∣singles; and for the easement of his lying down, put wisps between of loose and soft Hay or Straw: Being thus cloathed, pick his Feet, and stop them with Cow∣dung, casting into the Rack a small bottle of Hay well tyed up, it being well dust, and let him tear it out at leasure, whilst he stands on his Bridle. Your Horse having stood for the space of an hour, rub his head well with a Hempen-cloth; and having cleansed the Manger, draw his Bridle, and take about three pints of large white Oats well dressed, sweet and dry, free from light Oats, or such as are defective; for the preparing of which, you ought to have a small Wire Sieve. These being given to your Horse and if with a good stomach he eat them, you may give him a quart more, and suffer him to rest till towards noon; at what time run over those parts the Cloth covers not, with a Rubber; and having cherished him with your hand and voice, give him a quart of Oats more, doing the like at one and three of the Clock in the Afternoon; or if it be in the Summer-time, you may stay till four; and when it is near Sun-set, having rubbed and clad him at all points; as in the Morning lead him forth and Air
him upon hard level ground, not too subject to stones; Gallop him gently; Water him in due order, as has been observed, and bring him home. In like manner, when you have obliged him to stale and dung, dress him, cloath him and suffer him to stand on the Bridle till such time as he has torn out of the Rack a small bottle of Hay; at what time give him another quart of Oats, the Manger being made clean, and leave him till about nine of the clock the same Evening; at what time coming to him again, cheer him with hand and voice; Rouse up his Litter, and giving him another quart of Oats, leave him to his repose till the next Morning; and so order him every day for the first fort∣night, daily increasing his Exercise and Keeping, the Stable as dark as may be, both for his quiet, and the better obliging him to feed; and by so doing you will find the advantage. CHAP. VII. Heats; what they are, and how to be managed to the best advantage, in Racing and all other Recreatory undertakings. IN consideration of Heats and Exercise, they are some∣what different, the former being a more violent course than the latter, and therefore twice a week is sufficient for Heats, the days being as equally distant from each other as may be, one of them being observed to on the day of the week, answering the day whereon the Race is to be run: Observing likewise not to give any Heat in rainy weather, unless necessity compel you thereto; for it is better to vary hours or days than so
to do; and on such emergent occasions you must pro∣vide your Horse a linnen Hood made of thick Can∣vass, with a Bearing on the Nape of the Neck, and covering over the Ears, so that none but the Eyes and Nose appear. The Heats you give, in case of whol∣some weather, being to be given an hour before it is dark, and as soon as day springs, but not in the dark; for two Causes: As first to prevent unwhol∣some Airs; and, lastly, stumbling, tripping, slipping or falling. The manner of Heating thus observed, the next thing to be considered is the manner of Usage and Diet for the second Fortnight. Touching the first of these, there needs no great distinction between it; and what has been premised only before his Bridle be put on in the Morning, you must give him about three pints of the best Oats well sifted; after the eating of which, dress him up and Bridle him, Cloath, Saddle, Air, Water, and return him in like manner; only what Hay you give, suffer him to take it out of your hand, and let him eat a pretty quantity if he desire it; and while he does so, let him stand upon his Bridle; as al∣so, draw not the Bitt till an hour after; then having rubbed him all over, give him a quart more of well-sifted Oats; and from this time forward make a Diet∣bread to give him with his Oats, &c. according to di∣rection.
CHAP. VIII. How to make the Bread of the first Make; and what ought to be observed in the Distribution thereof: With many other things. TAke to the quantity of three pecks of good Beans, Splent and well cleansed from the Husks, a peck of good Wheat; mix them well, and grind them into fine Flowre or Meal; and having bolted and dressed them, make them into Dough, with store of Yest and hot Water; break and tread it, that thereby it may prove the shorter, which ought to be done in a Knead∣ing-trough; after that cover it with a warm cloth, and set it by the fire till it swell; then knead it again, and being well moulded, make it up into the bigness of three peny Loaves: soak them well, and when they are drawn from the Oven, turn the botms upwards and suffer them to cool; and at the end or three days pa∣ring off the crust, the Loaf being dry and in good or∣der, crumb it amongst the Oats; but if it be too moist or clammy, you must dry it in slices before the fire, or suffer it to grow staler, always putting a third part of Bread, small crumbled, to the Oats: And on this quan∣tity of Provinder suffer him to rest till about eleven of the clock, at what time renew the quantity of Bread and Oats, and leave him again till one in the After∣noon or longer, if the next day be not his Heating-day. But if the next day you intend to give him a Heat, then give him only a quart of the best Oats; and when he has eaten them, put on his Bridle and tye him up, not forgetting to rub him, and do what else is convenient; as Dressing, Airing, Watering, bringing him home and putting him into the Stable; where having let him
stand a while, give him a quart more of Oats; and then having a clean Muzzle, wash it in Beer, Ale or White-wine, put it on to prevent his eating the Litter, or gnawing the Manger or Rack-staves, if he be prone to such Vices, and let him stand till nine of the clock at night. The best Muzzle for Summer is that which is made of smooth large Pack-thread or Whip-cord, well knit, yet so that the Horse may freely breathe through the Lat∣tice: And the Winter-Muzzle, the best is of Canvas, with a square Lattice of Tape at the bottom, both of them having convenient Loops and Strings to fasten them about the Napes of the Horse's Neck. The hour of nine being come, having well rubbed your Horses Head, and other convenient parts, as have been often mentioned, give him a quart of clean sifted Oats; and when he has eat them, put on his Muzzle, toss his Lit∣ter, and leave him to rest till the next Morning; and then coming to him, if you find him lying, give him a quart of Oats, not disturbing him till you find him disposed to rise, which he may be obliged to by the further Allurements of Provinder; and these Oats you may wash in Ale or Beer, and afterward dry them by rubbing between a Cloth, and then dress him, and put∣ting on the Bridle and Body-cloth, lead him forth, after by drawing up his head to the Rack, you have obliged him to swallow a new-laid Egg, and washed his Mouth with a small quantity of Beer; and after he has dunged or staled upon the foul Litter, Rack him gently to the place you intend to course him, suffering him, as you find him disposed, to smell at Horse-dung or Straw, if any lye in the way, which will oblige him to empty himself; and then finding him somewhat warm, take off the Cloaths, and send them away, Racking him gently to the starting-post, and beyond it, obliging him to smell to it, and then by degrees put him on to a three-quarters speed, obliging him, if you find him able, to hold it throughout; that is, from the weighing-post,
to the Post at the other end of the Race: But in this case do not force him above his strength and wind, but bear with his yielding, which will make him take pleasure in what he does; and so by degrees he will come to perfection, observing upon what ground he takes most delight to run, and carries his legs best, whether moist or dry, sandy or stony, hilly or smooth, which may turn to your advantage in the Race. Having heated your Horse, breathe him again by gentle Galloping about the Field, till you find he be∣gins to cool; at what time your Servant bringing the Cloaths, put them on under some warm Hedge, to shelter him from the Wind, and ride him gently home; or you may, if he sweats, much scrape off the moisture with a broken Sword-blade, or piece of a Scithe, before you cover him, and rub him with dry cloaths, not bringing him to the Stable till you find he is thorowly dry, and moderately cool, and that he have well emp∣tied himself, and then suffer him to stand upon his Bridle tyed to the Rack; and having the following Scowring ready prepared, give it him in a Drenching-horn, viz. Take a pint of the best Mallaga, and pulverizing an ounce of Per-rosin, put it therein: which being incor∣porated, add six ounces of Olive-oyl, and an ounce and a half of brown Sugar-candy beaten to Powder, with an ounce of the Juyce of Savin, or Powder of Ruburb: heat them over a gentle fire, and then by that means mixing them well, draw up his head to the Rack, and oblige him to take it: by which means he will be eased of the Molten grease and foulness.
CHAP. IX. Other things to be taken notice of, in regard to the Running-Horse, in the second Fortnights Dyet and Ordering. YOur Horse being thus used, great care must be taken that he catch not cold; to prevent which, you must rub him well, and keep him warm clad, comb∣ing out his Mane, his Tail, and the like; keeping the Stable close, and putting large Wisps under his Sir∣singles, and over them a loose Blanket or Coverlet, if the weather be any thing cold; and let him fast two hours or better after he has taken the Scowring, keep∣ing him stirring or moving all the time to prevent his sleeping; which in this case he will be apt to do, and thereby prejudice himself. Your Horse having stood the space of two hours, &c. give him some Ears of Wheat to chew upon, and so by the extraordinary beating and motion of his Body, the shortness of his Breath, and dulness of his Eyes, you may perceive that the potion has met with abundance of bad Humours and gross Crudities, with which it strugles; and if so, you must forbear till the Sickness it will occasion be over; at what time take off his Bri∣dle, turn up his Litter, and suffer him to lye down and ease himself for the space of an hour; then rouse him, and let him tear a small bundle of Hay out of the Rack; in the mean while dress him a quart of Oats, and a pint of Splent-beans: mix them together, crumbling a∣mongst them a slice or two of the before-named Bread, and then suffer him to rest for the space of three hours; and in the Evening, before you dress him, give him a∣gain the like quantity of Beans and Oats, cloathing him
up warm, but neither Saddle nor ride him forth that Evening, nor give him any Water till the potion has thorowly done working, only let him have another parcel of Beans and Oats washed in Beer, and so conti∣nue till Morning. When day appears, dress him, and let him have a quart of Oats only, then cloath, Saddle, and gently ride him abroad to Air him, and let him drink, but not over-much, least after so long a drouth he swell himself: And when you return him, let him be fed with Oats, Splent-beans and crumbled Bread, in all to the quantity of two quarts, suffering him afterward to tear a little Hay out of your hand; and so continue him the second Fortnight, and he will increase in firmness, flesh and strength. CHAP. X. The Running-Horses third and fourth Fortnight; and what is to be observed therein as to Diet, Usage, and bringing the Horse to the Weighing-Post, &c. THE third and fourth Fortnights Management be∣ing material, I shall therein come closer to Par∣ticulars: And in this case your care must be to make him a second Bread, finer then the former, but after the same manner in all respects; which being well dried and chipped, crumble it into his Oats and Beans; and that it may exceed the other in fineness, you may add as much Wheat as Beans, viz. half a bushel of each, suffering him to take his Heats on the proper days with ease and pleasure, not over-straining him, thereby to ren∣der him stiff on the Racing-day.
The thing to be next observed, is to omit the fur∣ther Scowring, after you have given him other Heats; and in lieu thereof, give him a Ball made after the following manner, viz. Take Fenegreek and Carda∣mum-seeds, Anniseeds and those of Cummin, Colts-foot and Elecampane-Root, of each two ounces: and having bruised them, and sifted off the Husks and grosser part, add two ounces of the Flower of Brim∣stone, and one of Licorish Powder: moisten them with White-wine, and add more an ounce of the Chymical∣oyl of Anniseeds, Molossus and Olive-oyl, of each half a pint, and incorporate them with as much Flower as will make them up into balls as big as Pullets Eggs, and keep them in a thick Glass or well-glazed Pot for your use, they being good for a Horse on sundry other occasions; as for Colds, Coughs, Glanders, Stoppage of the Stomach or shortness of Breath, in case of mol∣ten Grease or crudy Humours. And thus you may pass him over the third Fortnight with good looking to, and a due observance of Heats, Airs and Diet; From which I proceed to the fourth and last Fort∣night, for so much time is sufficient to bring any Horse to perfection. In the fourth Fortnight observe to let his Bread be yet finer, as allowing three pecks of Wheat to one of Beans, reducing it to the most imaginable fineness by bolting and other ways dressing, lightning it up with a sufficient quantity of new Ale Yest, Whites of Eggs and new Milk: working them to the best advantage, and baking them as the former, and give it him crum∣bled amongst the best Oats well sifted, and well rubbed between your hands; as also Splent-beans freed from the Husks: Nor must you give him any Scowring, nei∣ther augment the potion of his Meat. As for his Heats, the first week you may give him two, but the second week one is sufficient, and that some five days before he is to Run; yet to supply the defect of the
other Heat, you may give him strong Airings for the etter preservation of his Wind, and to render him he cheerfuller; as also to remove gross fumes and apours, you may Morning and Evening burn any sweet Perfume on a Chafing-dish of Wood-coles in the Stable; as Benjmine, Storax, Frankincense or Olibanum, and often wash his Oats in Ale or Beer: And the better to corroborate him, give him every other day a new-laid Egg in a Glass of Muscadel, and debar him from Hay, unless his Belly be very loose. The last week observe, if he be a foul feeder, to Muzzle him, unless at such times as you are with him, least by eating his Litter, biting the Manger or Rack-staves he injure him, or neglect his Diet; and above all, let your Stable be so kept, that neither Pigeons, Hens, or any Fowl can come to dung in it; and the day before he is to Run, let him have his proportion of Meat in the Morning; but in the Afternoon, take away a third part, and Shooe him to advantage; as like ise dress him well, breading his Mane, Tail, and do er necessary things of ornament, but with that cauon that he may not take distast thereat. The Morning the Match is to be Run, come to your Horse before it is well day, and give him a quart or three pints of Oats sprinkled with Muscadel or Whites of Eggs; but if he refuse to take them, then you may give him dry Oats, with a third part Wheat, well sifted and ordered, and intice him what you can to empty himself; and so putting on his Muzzle, let him remain till you have notice to bring him forth in order to Run the Match. The warning being had, take off the Muzzle, and put on the Snaffle, it being washed in Muscadel; then rub him sleek, and cast a white Linnen-cloth over him next to his Body, and over that the Horse-cloths; lay on them the Saddle well pitched with Shoomakers Wax, of which the Girths must likewise participate, and Girt it gently, so that he may not be straitned;
Give him after that a mouthfull or two of Oats, an pour down his throat half a pint of Muscadel, wit the yolk of a new-laid Egg, and so draw him out  the Stable, leading him to the Course, using by th way your endeavour to make him empty. When h is arrived at the Weighing-post, wash his Mouth with fair water, rub his Legs and other parts, and then u cloath him, and clap on your Saddle; then mou and wait the Signal; when starting fair, observe we your ground, and commit the rest to the goodness  your Horse. And thus, Reader, have I laid down th most approved Rules and Methods of this kind, which being put in practice and well observed, will doubtle turn to great advantage, and may indifferently serv in preparing a Horse for any other occasion or em∣ployment. And seeing the Management of the Ride is very material in this and other cases, I shall no think it amiss to give directions of that kind in the following Chapter, with other matters. CHAP. XI. What the Rider ought to be; and what by him  to be considered in order to Backing and go Management; as also the Office and Duty  a Groom, &c. AS it is not every one that is fit for a Rider, re∣lating to management and curious occasions so it ought to be considered who is, and what his chi care must be, that he neither spoil nor baulk a Hor in his first Breaking, or in Racing; for such thing too frequently happen, and thereby render altogethe
fruitless the care, pains and cost of the Breeder, and create such Vices in the Horse as will not easily be re∣moved; and therefore your Rider must be a tempe∣rate and patient person, not given to fury nor anger, one of a strait upright body, of an indifferent weight, not too heavy nor too light, by reason the one may render young Horses in Breaking sway-backed, and he other regardless of him that sits him; he must in his Function be laborious and diligent, a lover and cherisher of Horses; one who rises early to practice, and is not given to immoderate Exercising; and when the Horse maketh a default, he must use his diligence to let him see it, and thereby render him tractable; for if the person be hasty, rash and cholerick, soon provoked to impatience, he can never make a perfect Horse-man, neither can he be able to make a Horse perfect, as otherwise he might. If a young Horse of the right strain for shape, breed and colour, be well handled, he seldom fails to answer the expectation of his Master; when on the contrary, he may be spoiled, and be found good for nothing but the Plow and Cart. And this is often occasioned in a young Horse by the too much rigor of the Rider or Breaker, by which the Horse is so confounded and over-feared, that he is not capable of understanding; or else Breaking through that fear, grows restiff and sullen; when, on the con∣trary, sweet words and mild behaviour wins so far up∣on a good-natur'd Horse, that in a short time he will take pleasure and pride in performing the Will of his Master; and when he readily does so, or at least of∣fers as far as his understanding will reach, he ought to be cherished and encouraged, not only with words, but with some pleasant and heartning morsel, which the Rider ought for that purpose to carry about him; at least let him spurt some Wine, or other comforta∣ble liquor, into his Mouth; and never correct him but when he is in a fault; always considering to strike him in a convenient place, but not about the Head, least
he dull him, or give him opportunity to be hardned in the Vice of going backward; nor with your Legs and Thighs press his Ribs too hard, least his burthen become uneasie and unpleasant, ever considering in a strait Course to keep a steady and even Rein, not inclining to the right nor to the left; and also an up∣right Body, unless in a full Course; at what time a little stooping forward, but not so as to press your weight on the Horses shoulders, will not be amiss, for that will prevent gathering the Wind; the which, though it be unperceived by many, is a great hin∣drance to the speed of the Horse. As for your Switch in such cases, it must be carried upright, or over the Horse's head, that he may not see it, to affray him; nor decline your Body from the one side to the other to over-sway him, but in all things observe a mode∣ration and meen, being ever sure to have your ground in your eye, and thereon manage your Horse to the best advantage; as also which Ground he delights to tread, which in a Race may profit much; for it has been seen that many a good Horse has been baulked by not being managed in such Ground as they naturally affect. As for the Office of a good Groom, it chiefly con∣sists in keeping his Stable sweet, clean and warm stored, with fresh Litter, by frequently renewing the old, having your Horses Cloaths, Furniture and Materials ever in a readiness; in being expert in the conveni∣ent times and manner of Airing and Feeding; know∣ing what Provnder, and what quantity is seasonable and sufficient; and above all, to be exact in Dressing and Furnishing out for Ornament, as occasion re∣quires, minding what Saddles and what Bridles are most fitting and convenient, and taking care to place them in due order, that they may be in a readiness when ever they are to be used: He must be a Man temperate, and free from passion; one who aims at his Masters interest and his own credit; such a one
as has skill in Horses, and can discern the Grievan∣ces or the Symptoms of Diseases, always having In∣struments ready to search the Horses feet, or Blood him upon necessary or emergent occasions; and in case he see any imminent danger, he must not de∣lay giving notice thereof to his Master or the Far∣rier, least by neglect the Horse may grow past cure; nor when a Horse is returned from a Journey heated, or the like, must not neglect him, but ever be care∣full to Rub him well down; give him good Litter, Cloath him well, and let his Provender be proportio∣nable and seasonable: For if a Horse be newly taken up from Grass or Soil, an excess of dry Meat will prove injurious by subjecting him to Lasks, shortness of Breath, Costiveness and Pains in the Stomach, as his suddainly being turned from hard Meat into rank Pasture will cause Laxativeness, Scowrings, Pains in the Belly, Rawness of Stomach and offensive Rheums. And thus much may suffice for the Office of the Groom, who, as to the feeding of a Horse, may take further Directions from what has been spoken of the Dieting the Race-Horse. And now seeing every Gentleman has not the conveniency of Breeding good Horses or Mares, by reason of the Scituation of his Dwelling, or want of opportunity to regard them as he ought, I ink it highly necessary to give such Instructions and in∣sight, as may render every Judicious Man capable of purchasing without being defrauded.
CHAP. XII. Infallible Rules for Buying a good Horse; and how so well by sundry marks and tokens to distinguish good from bad, as well in case of soundness as diseases, as thereby to prevent being imposed on or cheated, &c. In the Election of a good Horse many things are to be observed, and especially to what end you design him when purchased; for certain it is, that no one Horse, how perfect soever, can serve to all ends and purposes. Then for the goodness of his breed, it is very difficult to be known but by speculation, unless you will take it upon the credit of those that had the breeding of him, in which you run a hazard, for few Sellers will disparage their own: However, this you may observe, that according to the Country this di∣stinguishment is infallible: If he be of a Spanish breed, then is he small and neat limb'd; if Neapolitan, hook-nosed, if Dutch, rough-leged; if Barbary, neat bodied and headed; if Flemish, full and smooth buttocked; if English, well-set and strongly joynted; and so for others. Now the Colours are various, according to the constitution of the Horses Body, and by those elected according as it likes the fancy of the Buyer, though there is difference in Goodness, to be known by the Colours, as the Horse participates more or less of the several Elementary humours: And thus they are held. The Cole-black, without any mixture of other co∣loured Hairs, is subject to Choler, and the heat there∣by occasioned, inclines him to Pestilence, Feavours, Inflamation of the Liver, and other hot Diseases:
To prevent which, Purges that correct the Cholerick humours are very convenient; and Horses of this complection are of a fierce and firey nature, good for War and Travel; but by reason of the heat, which consumes the moisture that should support them, they live not, or at least last not long. A Horse of a bright Bay or dark Bay, with a clear and cheerfull countenance, and a well-proportioned Mouth, is counted a lasting one, and fit for Racing, Hunting or Travel, and is of a sanguine constitution; as also are the white-flanked or flea-bitten, white Loyard, with hairs like Silver, or black, with a white Star, white Foot, or white Rash; and the Diseases these are most subject to, are Consumption of the Li∣ver, Glaunders, Leprosie, and such like disorders as are taken by Infection or Contagion; wet and foul feeding in damp weather, and the like; and will en∣dure stronger Medicines than the former, without any danger, if they be not compounded of such Ingredi∣ents as will over-heat the blood. A Horse that is very white, py-bald, yellow, dun∣kile-glew'd, and the like, are Flegmatick, and fittest for Cart and Plow, or to labour in Mills, &c. not being capable of speed, or at least not forced to hold it long; and are subject not only to loose their flesh, but to Staggars, Coughs, Catarrhs, cold Distillati∣ons. Rheumatisms, and the like disorders proceeding from watery humours; and therefore in case of such disorders, hot Medicines are accounted the best and most successfull. The Dark Bay, with long white hairs, Russet, Ash∣colour, Chesnut, Grey or Mouse-Dun, are accounted Melancholicks, and are subject to Inflamations of the Spleen, Dropsies, Frensies, Oppression of the Heart, and Pains in the Stomach. Wherefore being of a dry constitution, cold moist Medicines are requisite to be Administred, and are generally heavy and lumpish; but if it happen you find a Horse with
some or all of the Colours, the latter being very rare; then conclude, that the four Humours predo∣minate by turns. And though these Observations are made for distinction sake, yet it is found by expe∣rience, which is the best Master, there are good Hor∣ses, or at least tollerably good of all these kinds: Therefore not any ways to discourage the Buyer, or prejudice the Seller, that which follows ought duly to be considered. If you purchase a Horse for ease and gentleness, though to Travel considerably, then the most fitting is an Ambler; then observe in the moving of his Legs, that he performs it equally, smooth, large, just and nimble; for if he tread false, he will prove uneasie; Treading short rids little ground; if he tread rough or uneven, he seems to rowl or tumble along. If Hunting be your aim, especially that of the Buck, or for the riding Post, or the like, wherein a large Pace is required; the running or swift Amble, as some call it, is very necessary and expedient, differing from the other Amble only in the swiftness, and is altogether easie and delightfull. As for the Trot, or as some call it, the Lofty pace, it most properly belongs to War-Horses, though indeed it may indifferently serve to any other end; and those that Trot well, seldom fail to Gallop: In which case, observe that the Horse take up his Legs nimbly from the ground, yet not raising them over high, nor rowl∣ing his Body from side to side, that he beat not him∣self, if he forcibly laboured, or do it in pain, but that stretching out his fore-leg, he nimbly follow with the hinder; nor by any means Cut under the Knee, which is called the Swift-cut: Further observing, that he neither crosseth one foot over or upon another, but with his far fore-foot ever leadeth, and not with the other. If these qualities are found, then is the Horse good for speed; but if he Gallop roundly, rai∣sing strongly his fore-feet, he is fittest for a Charging-Horse,
or one to be trusted in carrying his Master through a dangerous Attack. If his Gallop be slow, so it prove sure, he may make a good Traveller; but if he handle his Legs confusedly or shufflingly, then beware of some defect, especially if he Gallop painfully. As for the Stature, that I leave to every Man's dis∣cretion, as his occasion sutes or requires; the largest being for strong and solid labour; the middle-size for swiftness and long Journeys, if not over-burthened; and the lesser size for ease and moderate Recreation. And what more remains materially to be known of this kind, is the deformities and imperfections; That is, how to discover them; and these are contained in natural and accidental deformities, inward and out∣ward; many of them hidden, and so secretly couched, insomuch that they may well deceive the skilfull: And of these, especially of such as are most dangerous or material to be known, I shall acquaint you. First observe and inform your self what you can as to the Breed and Paces of the Horse; when having taken off the Saddle and Bridle, leaving a Halter only upon his head, cause him to be rubbed down well, and stand just before him, earnestly beholding his countenance, whether it be cheerfull and sprightly, free from cloudiness or scowling; That his Ears be small, sharp, thin and plyable; and though they be inclining to longness, yet if they be well proportio∣ned and well set on, it is not much amiss, for his freeness, beauty and goodness of meettle are thereby declared; when, on the contrary, if they be loleing, thick, heavy, dull and clouterly, weakly set on, and seldom moving, dullness and a heavy disposition are denoted. If the Forehead of the Horse swell, and the feather or mark stand high above his Eyes, or on the top of his Eyes; if it happen he have a white Star, or white Blaze, even∣ly placed, of an indifferent size; or if it be a snip on his Nose, it is a mark of Beauty; but if his Face and
Forehead be flat and cloudy, they are tokens of dull∣ness and defect; if the Star or Ranch be awry, or low, it is unseemly; or the Nose, instead of a snip, be bald, it signifies badness, and a Horse not fit for any con∣siderable service; if the Eyes be brown, black, shi∣ning, staring or standing out, and move with an equal motion, the black of the Eye filling the fleshy Orb, so that little or nothing of the white appear, then is it a sign of goodness, and a well-mettled Horse; but, on the contrary, if the Eyes move flow and uneven, and the white greatly appear; if they seem cloudy or dull, then is it a sign of badness, and the like, if they seem wrinkled, or are very small; if they be of a firey red, they incline to Moon-blind or Moon-eyes, which are but a remove from blindness; if the Eyes be white and walled, it denotes a weak sight; if very bloody, inclining to blackness, bruises are thereby signified; Red, dull Eyes, and a hollowness, fore-run blindness; if the Eyes Matter, and much Rheum flow from thence, then the Horse has been extremely a∣bused by over-riding, or else is very old; and so of the rest. When you come to handle the Horse's Cheek or Chaps, if there you find the Bone thin and lean, the Wind-pipe or Throple full and large, even, and free from Knobs or Keruels, and the Jaws standing even, so that the Teeth shut like a Box; and above so pla∣ced, that the Neck may seem to shut or sink into them, it is a sign of a free Horse, and one of great Wind and Courage; but, on the contrary, if his Chaps and Cheeks be thick, fat, and sullenly inclined, the Throple small, and muffled up with a thick gross substance of fat, then (especially if it appear much kernelly) it not only signifies short Wind, but threatens the Glaunders, Strargles, and other Diseases incident to straitness and pursiveness; and more particularly dangerous Colds of many natures.
If it happen the Jaws be so strait, that the Neck swell over them as it were; yet if it be occasioned by no distemper, it matters not much as to the ser∣vice of the Horse, though it is very unseemly; but if it swell out long, and end taper, then the Horse may be subject to the Vives, Tumours, Imposthumes, or the like: Then observe that his Nostrils be wide, large, open and dry, and that the Redness naturally appears without any forcing or straining: If the Lips are even, the Mouth deep, and the Muzzle small, they signifie good wind, speed and courage; but if on the contrary, dullness and infirmity; as also by the shortness of the upper Lip, and wrinkles on the side of the Mouth old age; and above all, observe his Teeth be clean, even, firm, and well proportioned. But of them more particularly hereafter, when I come to speak of the Horse's Age, though in general, un∣seemly and uneven Teeth are a sign of badness. Observe the Breast of your Horse; and if it appear broad, bowing outward and well feather'd, it denotes health and strength; when, on the contrary, a small Breast ridged or flat; as also the Shoulders standing in, denotes stoppage, weakness in travel, pains of the Heart and Liver, and the like, with stumbling and interfering; as also does a Breast that is narrow and imbowed inward, those being generally the marks of a Horse, weak and unfit for labour. Next cast your Eyes from the Elbow to the Knee, and see his fore-thighs be well proportioned, strait and well clad, with flesh and sinews; by which strength is signified, and by the contrary weakness. Observe the Knees, that they are carried even, that they be well joynted, close knit and fixed, with Sinews and Ligaments free from Scabs or Scars, not over round, but well joynted and boned; for if they appear contrary to these marks as round, and swel∣ling of a more than ordinary bigness; if they be scabbed, broken, or the hair off, then it betokens an
uneven treader, and one that is apt to stumble, or subject to the swift cutt. Having thus far taken notice, the next thing to be observed materially, is from the Knee to the Pasterns; and there consider, if the Legs be clean, well fleshed and well sinewed, bowing somewhat inward, which shews strength and a firm treader; but if on the in∣side you find any fleshy Excressences or Scabs a little beneath the Knee on the inside, likewise then is the Horse subject to interfering; but if a general Scab, &c. then the cause is foul keeping; if on the inner bow∣ing of the Knee you perceive Seams, or the hair broke disorderly, a cankerous Mallender is denoted, or Ulcer. Observe that the Pasterns be clean and well knit together, especially the first, and the other short and strong, standing upright; if the first be large or swel∣led, then is the Horse frequently subject to the Sinew, strain and twitching girds; or if the other be weak or bending, it will hardly support the body in any long Journey or uneasie way. As for a good hoof, it ought to be black, tough, and much inclining to roundness; for a long, white, rough or brittle hoof, denotes an uneven tread, a tripping or loosing the Shooe upon every occasion, and is altogether unseemly, and fore-shews the Horse subject to foundering: As for the Crownet of the hoof, observe if the flesh swell a little, and that the hair lye decently and in good order, that no Scabs nor boney Excressences happen there; for if those ap∣pear, ten to one but the Ring-bone will afflict it. Thus having observed your Horse in the front, place your self on the right side of him, and observe that his head be neither too high nor too low; that his neck at the setting on be small, and indifferently long, growing deeper by degrees, till it arrive at the moulder; Then for the Crest, let it be high, strong,
and somewhat thin; his Mane somewhat curling, thin, long and soft. These are not only signs of a good Horse, but a Beauty also; and consequently the contrary of deformity. In the next place have a regard to the Chine of his Back, that he have a due proportion of even, broad and strait; his Ribs somewhat large, and bend∣ing outwards like a bow; his Fillets short, strong and upright, about four fingers distance from his last Rib and his huckle-bone; his Body being well let down, yet hidden as it were within his Ribs; his Stones round and even hanging; and these are marks of beauty and perfection: Whereas, on the contra∣ry, a narrow Chine will subject the Saddle to wound the Horse, and bending or Saddle-back'd denotes weakness; to have the Ribs over fat, makes the Horse breathe painfully, when hard laboured. If his Fillets hang long and thin, they denote him weak, and not capable of performing a Journey in a hilly Country; and if his Stones hang down, as in long bags or purses, uneven and unseemly, it denotes a defect in nature, occasioned either by sickness or a feeble constitu∣tion. As for his Buttocks, note that they be round, full and plump, and that the Tail be well set on, the best observance being the evenness of the Buttocks with the Body; and that although they are something long, that they spread well behind, and are not in∣clining to make a ridge of the Crupper-bone, nor stand long and narrow; for in such cases neither a Pillion nor Pad-saddle can sit easie nor conve∣nient. The hinder Thighs, commonly called Gascoins, are likewise to be regarded; and the observation is, that they be well let down in an evenness to the middle joynt, thick, brawney, full and swelling, by which strength and goodness are to be observed; whereas a lean and lank Thigh, not will gristed, but
very slender, denotes weakness: Then observe the middle joynt behind, and see that it be somewhat lean, well knit and ligamented, and Sinews well vein∣ed, and moderately bending, which shews perfection in that part; but if it have any Chops or Sores in the inward bending, then it threatens a Sellender; and if it have a general swelling, then some blow or bruise has happened again; if the swelling be parti∣cular in the pot or hollow part, or on the inside, and there it happen the Vein be full and proud, and the swelling moreover short, then is it the blood-spavin; if hard, the Bone-spavin; but if it happen behind, on the Knuckle, then is it a Kerb or Curb. After this look on the hinder Legs, observing whe∣ther they are clean, well fleshed, and supported with Sinews: If so, it is a good sign; but if they be fat, they will not endure labour; and if they swell, it is a sign the grease is molten in the body of the Horse, and that he is foul: If scabbed above the Pasterns, then beware the Scratches; if under the Pasterns, Chaps appear, then it is the Pains: All which are infectious and dangerous to the Horse, and render him far from being good. As for the Tail, it seldom sits amiss upon a good pair of Buttocks; and, on the contrary, never well upon ill ones; but the best setting on is broad, high and flat, a little couched inward. And these Rules for knowing and chusing a good Horse, may generally and particularly suffice, though in the se∣quel many more will occur.
CHAP. XIII. Exact and Infallible Rules to know the Age of a Horse by the perfections or imperfections of his Teeth in all their particular and general Marks; as also by the Tail; when the Mark is out of the Mouth, &c. TO know the Age of a Horse, there are sundry things and matters to be observed besides his Teeth, though by them most take their Rules, though not altogether infallible; yet that nothing may be wanting on this occasion, I shall deliberately dis∣course of Particulars, beginning with the Teeth, the better to comply with custome. The full number of a Horse's Teeth are computed forty, and seldom, when he has all that he will have, prove less: And thus they are distinguished, viz. On either side, above and beneath six great wang Teeth, which compute at twenty four, generally termed Grinders; Then six above, and the like number be∣low, in the fore part of his Mouth, which, with the other, make thirty six, these latter being properly called Geatherers: and moreover four Tushes, two above, and the like number below, generally called Bite-teeth: And from these the Considerations are as follow. In the first year only the Grinders and Geatherers, commonly called Colts-teeth, only appear small, white and smooth. The second year two of those Teeth are changed in the middle of the Geatherers, viz. one above, and another below; and as for those that come up in the room of the shead ones, they are generally darker or
browner, though they may be distinguished other ways by the largeness. The third year, the next to those before-mentio∣ned, are changed, leaving the rest to be changed the successive years, so that after the fifth year no Colts-teeth, and then likewise his Tushes are compleat; and those that succeed the last Foal's Teeth will be hollow, having in the midst of them small black specks, of which many take singular notice, shaping their Judgment thereby; though if they take not heed, they may be imposed upon by Artificial as well as Natural specks or spots, though indeed by these Na∣tural Spots a Horse's Age may be known till eight years are past, and no longer. The sixth year being come, his new Tushes arise at the bottom, of which young flesh will appear, the Tushes being small, white, short and sharp, and so continue to the seventh year; in which year they are of full growth, and the Mark very plain to be seen and observed. The eighth year all the Teeth will appear plain and smooth, but the Specks, generally called the Marks, will decrease by degrees, till they are seen no more, ending as it were with or before this year; nor will the Tushes continue longer white, but incline to a yellowish. The ninth year being come, and the Mark con∣sequently no more to be seen, consider the fore-teeth will be broader and longer than usual, their Colour inclining to a yellowish paleness, and the Tushes to bluntness. The tenth years age may be known by the filling up of the holes within side the Tushes, which were before like cells or hollow pits; as also his Temples will be crooked or distorted. The Horse being arrived at the eleventh year of his age, the most material thing to be known by the Teeth is their distortion, yellow colour and unseem∣liness;
as also their more than ordinary length. Now as for the twelfth, and generally held to be the last year a Horse's Age can be known by the Teeth, your observation must be taken from their largeness, foulness, and hanging over each other; and though some have held that by the close wearing of his Tushes to the chops, his Age may be further known; yet let me advise the Buyer, that he may be deceived therein, that, being no certain Rule or Mark, espe∣cially to rely on. And thus much as to what relates to the knowing a Horse's Age by the Teeth; from whence I proceed to his Mouth in general: And that which I infer from thence is this. If upon having regard to a Horse you perceive his Teeth and Lips hang over, uneven or unpleasant, unless it proceed from some distemper in the Head, or disorder in the Body, then is that Horse old. Observe you find not too deep a burning for the Lampus, that so the Provender may be apt to stick therein to his hindrance in feeding; and that the spaces between the barrs are not too deep and hol∣low of themselves, for that denotes Age, but that they be pleasantly fixed, smooth and soft. As the Eyes are, if sprightly and well fixed, a great ornament to the Horse, so if other ways, they ren∣der him uncomely and deformed; Wherefore the defects ought to be considered, viz. If upon view you perceive the Eyes to be sunk, dim or hollow-pitted, the Temples crooked or wrinkled, then old Age is signified: But if the contrary, viz. If the pits be full, the Eyes lively, bright and sparkling, the Temples strait and smooth, then is the Horse young. If you mistrust a Horse's Age, and cannot well find it according to the former directions, then ap∣ply your feeling to the Tail; and if there you find two knobs near the Setting-on, each about the big∣ness of a Musket-bullet, then you may conclude your
Horse to be very young; but if the Joynt thereabout be plain and smooth, no such sign or token appear∣ing, then conclude him to have passed the tenth year; and so by those knobs, proportionable to the bigness, consider his years. Other Considerations there are to be had from the Hair and Skin, as if you perceive any Hairs that are grisly about the Eye-brows, especially if the Horse be of a dark or contrary colour; or if such be found underneath, the main Age thereby is signified: The like if a white Horse, or one very light-coloured, hap∣pen to have black or red Mannals. As to what is to be observed from the Skin, let this be a Rule: If the Horse be old, the Skin you raise between your thumb and finger will stand in a pucker, and not suddainly return to its place: But if young, it will fall flat almost as soon as let go. Nor is the Hoof to be altogether neglected in this case; for if you cast your Eyes upon a Horse whose Hoofs are crink∣led, seamed, rough or unseemly; or if they be brittle, and subject to break or crumble, then is the Horse old or infirm. And thus much may suffice as to Age, unless somewhat that will occur by the way in handling other matters of the like nature.
CHAP. XIV. How exactly to know the state or condition of a Horse's Body, relating to Fatness or Lean∣ness, Health or Sickness; with many other things worthy of note. Having bred up or purchased a good Horse, there is nothing more necessary than to keep him well; but especially look narrowly to the state of his Body; so well informing your Judgment in the symptoms of Diseases, as at all times to be able to discover the least defect as to what relates to his health, or hinders his flourishing: And the better to enable such as are minded to turn their Studies this way, I shall lay down such Rules as have upon all, or most emergent occasions, proved effectual: which take as followeth. If you find your Horse in a drooping condition, if he refuse his Meat, and be heavy or dull-eyed, seem uneasie, standing, or restless lying down, then con∣clude some inward grief or defect afflicts him, not to be so easily discovered as some have conjectured. Wherefore I shall first point my Directions at the state of a Horse's Body in General, and from thence to Particulars; beginning, the better to give the Rea∣der an insight into the rest, with the strong Estate or healthfull Constitution of a Horse, &c. As for some Horses, though they are in health and good temper, yet by reason of their roundness and well-compacted body, the Buyer may have a lean one put upon him instead of fat one, unless he be skilfull in handling and trying, thereby to discover his want
of flesh or feeble constitution; and so a Horse that is long and full-made may seem lean to the Eye at a distance, when really he is in good case; or a fat Horse may likewise deceive the expectation of the Buyer, by having contracted inward fatness and foul∣ness, which will require time and labour to avoid and bring away; when, on the contrary, some Horses will be fat without, and in good case, yet be clean within, and free from gross humours; and others a∣gain, though outwardly appearing lean, will be in∣wardly gross and foul; and these proceed from the Order and Constitution of the Horse, &c. And this is to be known upon search, by demonstration, sundry ways, as to what is outwardly to be taken notice of. First feel the Horse's Body in all the advantageous places, but especially upon the Ribs; and in so do∣ing, if you perceive a general softness of the flesh or looseness, so that your fingers easily sink into it, then conclude a foulness within; or if it be hard and firm upon all but the hindmost Ribs, then suspect Molten-grease within, which must be voided by Purging or Scowring, though at the same time the Horse appear poor and lean, or else he cannot well be reduced to a good state of body; and the better to make the potions opperate, is to prepare him for them by Ex∣ercise, that being moved and stirred, it may the easier be brought away. If so it happen, as has in some manner been said, that the Horse appear so fat and thick, that the space between his Chaps is as it were closed up, or the Jaws upon handling prove fleshy and full, then much foulness in head and body is signified; but if upon handling he happen to be thin and clean, though some hard knobs or kernels be contracted, yet that may rather proceed from a cold taken, than from foul∣ness, &c. But to come to Particulars.
If the Horse's Dung appear of a pale, whitish, yellow Colour, not too hard, yet so that in falling at only flats a little, but does not break in sunder nor crumble, and be not of a rank noisome scent, then is the Body of the Horse free from inward foul∣ness: but on the contrary, if it be of a black or nuddy colour, hard like pellets, yet hot and greasy, it betokens foul feeding, and a neglect in the keeper of not giving him a due proportion of Corn, but rather feeding him with Hay in over-abundance, or suffering him to feed foul by eating his Litter, &c. denoting he has likewise Molten-grease within him that cannot come away without some Artificial helps. If the Dung be of a reddish colour, and hard, it signifies the Horse has been over-heated or over∣strained, and therefore ought to have a Clyster of cooling Simples to cool and open his Body, thereby preventing Sickness, or at least Costive∣ness. If the Urin be of an Amber colour, somewhat in∣clining to thickness, of a strong, yet not offensive scent, then it denotes a healthfull constitution; but if it be ruddy or high-coloured, hot and scalding, so that the Horse makes water with pain, or does it by degrees, then has the Horse taken hurt by being over-heated, or in being ridden too soon upon being taken up from Grass: If so it happen the Urin be of a high colour, yet very clear, like Beer well settled, then is it occasioned by Heat or Inflamation, caused by a surfeit. If a white film or scum happen to be upon the Urin after settlement, it denotes the Horse weakned by too much Venery; and a Mare by too often Breed∣ing, too furious a Lust, and consequently not very fit for service, by reason of the weakness of the back. Green Urin denotes a Consumption of the Body; and that with bloody streaks or specks, not much unlike to a mattery substance, denotes an Ulcer, or
the like defect, in the Kidneys: And further, a Lead▪ coloured, gross and cloudy Urin, denotes a dange∣rous sickness, if not Death it self. And thus much as to what is to be known in relation to Health and Sickness by these Excrements. And now let us consider a little if a Horse be out of order, how those that attend him ought to carry themselves towards him in relation to his Diet. Let him observe in this case the disposition of the Horse, and not violently thrust or intrude the Pro∣vender upon him, but consider to give him what h best likes, and that at leasure and by degrees, win∣ning him with mildness and sweet behaviour; and bewaring, above all things, not to give him any of∣fence, encreasing the quantity as you perceive him desirous to take it, giving him white Water to drink and ply him, as you see occasion, with warm Mashes warming his Water with a little Bran dusted over it if the weather be cold; and be sure to suffer him to be in a warm Stable, with clean Litter and good Dressing. If your Horse be any ways subject to Lameness, beware in your Coursings or Heats you avoid craggy or stoney Ground, or forcing him too much against a Hill. Other things there are to be observed of this or the like kind, relating to the state of a Horse's Body, as to the knowing by sundry other matters and tokens: But as for them, I refer you to the follow∣ing Chapter.
CHAP. XV. Observations to be taken as to the state of a Horse's Body, from the Privy-parts, Limbs, Feeding, and many other Matters and Dis∣courses, worthy to be taken notice of by the Curious, &c. THE Privy-parts of a Horse, as to sickness and health, are much to be observed; and this espe∣cial notice to be taken, viz. That if he be a Stone-horse, his Cods hang even, and his Stones well trussed up, firm and round, which shews him in good heart, and fit for business; when, on the contrary, if they hang long, or bagging down, a weak constitution is thereby implied: Nor is it less to be observed by the Yard of a Gelding, or Shape of a Mare. But, for brevities sake, waving further Particulars, I shall proceed to take Observations from the Limbs, and what, in case of defect, ought to be done on that occasion. In case you intend to Run or Travel your Horse, if you find his Limbs stiff, or not so plyable as you would have them, or as ordinarily they happen to be; Then to render them supple and plyant, Melt Hog's-grease and Oyl of Chamomile, and dipping a Wollen-cloth hot into the Liquids, anoint or bathe therewith the Legs or Thighs from above the Knee, and from the Cambrels downwards; or, for want of these, Neats-foot Oyl; after which chafe it in with your hands; and in often so doing in all places where you see occasion, you will wonderfully restore his Limbs, rendring them supple and plyable.
There are many things to be observed from the Sweating of a Horse, especially from that which proceeeds without External force, occasioned by hard labour, or the like; for then is the Horse faint, foul fed, or wanteth Exercise to evaporate the abun∣dance of watery humours which he hath contract∣ed: And especially this is to be noted, when his Sweat is white and frothy, like a Lather of Soap; but in case of Heats, and other considerable labour to create Sweat; if it appear black and pearly, like clear water, then is the Horse in a good plight o habit of Body, especially if he be lively and brisk, not in the least afflicted with any shaking or trem∣bling, for that infers the Sweat forced out by some Internal disorder, rather than naturally evapora∣ted. And now seeing the Causes of Sickness are very material to be known, that is, from whence they arise, that so the Skill in Curing may be the grea∣ter, and the Remedies to be applied more power∣full and certain in their Operation; as also the causes of health and long life. Take for your bet∣ter Experiment what you find in the subsequent Chapter.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Elementary parts of a Horse's Body, and of the Agreement of the Humours therewith. A discourse of Corruption and Generation; in which is set forth all things of that kind, re∣lating to Goodness or Badness, Health or Sick∣ness, &c. CErtain it is, that no Man can truly pretend to Experience of this kind, unless he duly weigh the Nature of Generation and Corruption, for on them, as on the Collumns of this Art, stand what is material of this kind. These two being ever conso∣nant in the main, though one Horse's body may dif∣fer in Constitution from the other; for these being the Suparlative of Elementary subsistance or matter, fail not to operate in their turns, or as Nature dispo∣ses them in their places and degrees; and therefore it will be highly convenient to discover them in their Parts and Particles. As for the Body of a Horse, it differs not in Ele∣mentary composition from that of a Man; for of all the Elements it consists, viz. Fire, Air, Earth and Wa∣ter, which are indeed the Generatives and Consumers of all Mortal things and beings: And although these Elements are different in themselves, yet are frequently agreeable in the Composition; for the Fire, though hot and dry in it self, yet compounded with the other Elements in a Mortal frame, or bodily composition, diffuses a gentle heat to nourish and support life. Though the Air is hot and moist, but more partici∣pating of the latter, yet does it temperate the heat of the former, and gives a kind respiration and gen∣tle
breathing to refresh and exhilerate each Part and Particle. The Earth, though it is in it self gross and ponderous, yet in this composition is it rarified, and by its substantial matter composes the frame wherein the rest of the Elements cohabit; and being cold and dry, serves to temperate the hot and moist. The Water, though cold and moist in it self, serves in this case to moisten and render plyable the Sublunar works of Nature, and enabling them to subsist: And of these four, Mothers of Creation participate more immediately the four humours, of which the Bodies of Animal and Rational Creatures are composed, as Choler, Blood, Melancholy and Phlegm; the first of Fire, the second of Air, the third of Earth, and the fourth to Water. And as these more or less operate, so, ac∣cording to their qualities, is the Body moved and exposed to heat, cold, moisture or dryness, and con∣sequently to the effects they produce; for these have their principal Dominion in the Seats of Life, and from thence extend their power and force to every part and member. As thus Phlegm possesses the Brain, Choler and Blood the Liver and Heart, and Melancholy the Spleen, which is the Recepticle and Conveyancer of the Excrements of the Liver, all of them having distinctly and conjunctly their proper office assigned. As thus the Blood is the principal nourisher of the natural frame, Phlegm or Moisture renders the Mem∣bers flexible and complyant in motion and use. Cho∣ler causeth digestion by its Operative heat; and Me∣lancholy disposes to an Appetite, and attracteth the grosser parts of Nutrimental Elements, and occasion∣eth the disburthening of Nature. It is generally agreed on by the Learned, That every Organical-body is supported by four principal instrumental Members; and these are held to be the Brain, Heart, Liver and Genitors, these performing their particular offices and functions: Por as the Si∣news are supported by the Brain, the seat of Animal
Spirits; the Arteries from the Heart, or seat of Vital Spirits; the Veins, which are natural parts, from the Liver; so the Seminal Vessels are supported by the Genital Parts or Instruments of Generation; and these conjoyntly operating, are the Elementary Sub∣stitutes, as participating of their Nature, and con∣sequently the Materials of Generation. Thus having briefly discoursed of the Elementary parts of the Bodies of Creatures, I now proceed from the four Humours, Elements and Instrumental Mem∣bers, to the Natural faculties; which in this case are the next things to be considered, which are Eating, Retaining, Concocting and Expelling; and though all the Humours are Instrumental in promoting these, yet principally Nature serves her self but of only one to work upon, and that is a wheyish kind of Blood, generated in the Liver, or attracted thereby from the purest part of such nutriment as has been concocted in the stomach, and from thence conveying it self to the Liver, and through the great Vein, conveying nu∣triment into all its branches, and consequently into all the parts of the Body, by dispersing the Rarified blood into every part, which, by the help of the other Hu∣mours, supports the frame of Nature. As for the watery part of nourishment, and that of the grosser substance; the one is carried into the Bladder, and the other passing into the Bowels, are in the end cast out of the Body to make room for more of the like nature. But moreover, there are two Veins that conduct part of the purest and rarified matter into the Seminal Vessels, where, by the operation and con∣tractions of the Generative parts, it is refined by a gentle heat to a more spirituous quality, and so in the end becomes Seed, which, according to the good∣ness or badness mixed in the Womb, proves effectual or ineffectual; for note, that if the thin and subtil Blood be wanting to support the Seed, and enliven it
with heat, it frequently fails in performing its office, and the Horse becomes frigid and uncapable of perfor∣mance, and is often subject to moist diseases; as the Glaunders often proceeding from the Liver and Lungs when they are infected with putrefaction, occasioned by moist Rheums, and other indigested Moistures de∣descending on them, or Inflamations occasioned by Lumps, Knots or Kernels under the Chaul, proceeding from cold or immoderate labour, and many times the Mourning of the Chine by a Horse's immoderate Leap∣ing a Mare, or over-straining himself in the action: And this may likewise happen by his eating too much raw meat, or drinking upon a suddain heat, and ma∣ny other ways; which, when I come to treat of Disea∣ses, I shall largely discourse on. But first, I shall pro∣proceed to let you know how. Horses ought to be used, to prevent their contracting Diseases, as much as in the superficial Schemes of Art the greatest Artists of this kind have allowed; and the means are chiefly five, as Cleansing, Blood-letting, Purging, Sweating and Vomiting. The first of these may be said to be twofold, as out∣ward and inward; the first being by cleansing his ex∣ternal Parts by care and good dressing, which ought the more diligently to be observed upon his being taken up from Grass; and the time limited for that, by the curious, is Bartholomew-tide, for then the heart of the Grass beginneth to decline. And this may be done in the manner which I have often recited in what relates to Dressing; nor is it at all inconsistent with Reason, that the cleansing the Skin from dust and dirt, and loosening it in every part by gentle rubbing, should enliven the Horse, and render him more sprightly; so that Nature having her free course and progress without restraint, may opperate in dis∣persing kind refreshment to every part, and keep those gross humours from setling, that are frequently the origial of Diseases and Grievances; and if so it
happen that your Horse be mirey and foul, then may you use Fulling-earth, Soap, and other scowring Ma∣terials, especially with warm Water; but then having an especial care he catch not cold thereupon, keep∣ing him warm, and well drying him till he be thorow∣ly cold; and in so doing you will prevent those moist Diseases wherewith he is otherwise afflicted: And the better to effect this, cut away all the superfluous hairs that any way anoy the body, or other parts, &c. And so being shooed and neatly dressed, I leave him to the Second Part, which consists in the Internal clean∣sing and purging Directions; for which, in considera∣tion of more immediate or particular Directions, take in the following Chapter. CHAP. XVII. How a Horse ought to be used in general and particular, as to his Physick, Diet, and Look∣ing to, for the preservation of him even to old Age. THough I have named what I intend to propose in the foregoing Pages; yet let not the Reader, considering the consequence and validity of what I shall here propose, think it amiss that I select a Chapter for no other purpose; and that the ad∣vantage may neither be delayed, nor appear small in the Eyes of the Reader or Practitioner, take a prospect of it in the following Directions. As for inward Purging, the measures ought to be taken from the temperature of the Horse's body, and
more especially in case of his retirement at such a time, that no hard labour or immoderate exercise has been imposed on him: And in this case, if you find him costive, or that in case of Evacuation, nature help not, as in usual cases, let some one with a small Arm penetrate his Fundament, and draw thence the Dung that obstructs, or at least clogs the fluent or natural passage, that so both the natural and artificial Motions and Causes proceeding from Drugs, or composition of Purgation, may opperate and perfect their intended design, and may be best administred Clyster-wise: But then consider the constitution of your Horse; If he be fat, and somewhat inclining to foulness, it must be a strong potion that will effectually opperate; but not so if the Horse be weak and melancholy. But waving 'em here, I shall speak more particularly of them in due place; as also of Drinks which ought to be made, and seasonably given for the preventing sickness, and preservation of health; and if you find the Blood coagulated, which may be perceived by the trembling of the Veins, and the working of it there∣in, then it is requisite to let him Blood, and give him a gentle Vomit to carry the foulness from off the stomach, that may be the occasion of bad digesti∣on, and consequently of the naughtiness of the Blood; Dieting him with Mashes and fine Provender, from which may spring such wholsome nutriment, as may create a thin and airy Blood; rubbing and often a∣nointing his Body with Hogs Lard, or Ointment of Marshmallows. And now to be satisfied what things mostly contribute to health, take the following Opi∣nions of the Learned, viz. A good natural constituti∣on, good digestion, good nourishment, moderation in feeding and diet, moderation in labour and sleep∣ing, moderation in leaping Mares. Again, wholsome Airs, not laboured too soon after Grass, to be kept from raw Meats, not to drink nor eat being hot, ever observing to walk him at the end of any Journey, and
not to Physick him unless you find occasion. And these observances being the occasion of long life, I shall endeavour, for the better satisfaction of the Reader, more fully to demonstrate them. As for Nature, good Digestion, and sound Nutri∣ment, they ought to be consonant, and indeed they are well proportioned, when neither the moisture with its humidity is not so predominant as to quench and over-power the heat, nor the extraordinary heat too suddainly consume the moisture, though of necessity the latter must be of force above the former, or else Digestion cannot be perfected as it ought; and in that case seasonable nourishment must consequently fail. Moderation in Eating is another main cause of long life, as immoderate Eating is of a short one: For as excess in Eating, though the Provender be never so good and wholsome, obstructs good digestion, and contracts crudities with a bad habit of stomach; so on the contrary, spare Diet weakens and decays Na∣ture, and infeebles the natural powers and faculties of Life, giving the heat by that means a power ab∣solutely to subdue and conquer the Radical moisture, and gives Diseases an opportunity to break in upon the infeebled body, which prove many times too hard for the Farrier; for in all Creatures observe, that the weaker Nature is, the stronger is the distemper. Another cause of health and long life proceeds from moderate and kind labour, for by indifferent motion digestion is much forwarded, and the humours disper∣sed, being by that means prevented from setling more than is requisite in any one place; besides, it is the cause that Excrements are sooner voided, which by lying long in the body might occasion sickness. And further observe, that he be not laboured upon a full stomach, so as by over-straining, digestion may be hindred, which should turn to nutriment; and lay a foun∣dation for Diseases by indigested Crudities, being too
suddainly drawn into the Veins, and by that means dispersed into all parts of the Body. Another cause there is of the like nature that de∣pends upon the moderateness of sleeping and waking, for too much waking is an enemy to health, by spend∣ing the vital spirits that should support and maintain life, and a decaying that moisture that should refresh the several parts of the body, causing thereby Lean∣ness and Barrenness, a dulling of the Brain, and a de∣fect in the Lungs and Liver, whose offices it weakens by decaying the vigor in the performance; and con∣trary to this excessive sleeping, dozes the brain, hin∣ders digestion, and obstructs nature in the perfor∣mance of her offices, contracting noxious vapours and a foulness of the stomach. Another thing to be considered is, that your Horse be not admitted to spend himself too much upon Mares, because such immoderate exercise weakens the Brain, Back and Eyes, wastes the Vital Spirits, and often shortens the days of many a brave Horse; and therefore if you would have your Horse last long, let him not cover above three or four Mares in a year at the most; or if your conveniency will not at all times admit you to keep him from them, then Geld him whilst young; for it is ever observed, that a Gel∣ding lives longer naturally than a Stoned-horse, and a Mule than them both, because he is not subject to ge∣neration. Wholsome Air, above all things, is to be chosen, for that rarifies the blood, helps digestion, and comfor∣teth the Vital spirits; when-as gross Air or evil scents not only make the Horse loath his Provender, but corrupt the Blood, and subject the whole body to dis∣eases. Travelling after Grass too soon, without purging and cleansing the Horse's body, cause the bad hu∣mours to incorporate, or by spreading themselves, to afflict each part with pains and disorders, reducing
the Horse to a dullness of temper and disposition, and so raw meats engender raw flegmatick humours, af∣flicting the Stomach and Brain, occasioning the Glaun∣ders, Coughs, Catarrhs, Stavers, Yellows, Anticors and Morfoundring, not only disable the Horse, but if neglected, become incurable but by death. Another cause there is, and that not to be lightly regarded, which is, not to suffer your Horse to eat or drink when hot, and to stand thereon, for by so doing the Blood will corrupt and putrifie, occasion∣ing Surfeits, Feavers, Obstructions, and many the like Maladies and Grievances frequently occasioning death: But as soon as you bring him home in that condition, put him into a warm Stable without wash∣ing; Rub, or cause him to be well rubbed down; Cloath him well, and let him have a sufficient quan∣tity of warm Litter to stand on; and if he be subject to eat it, put on his Muzzle, and so let him stand an hour or more till his grease be sufficiently cooled, and you'l find him in a fit condition to give him his Provender: And lastly, that he may be well breathed, and sound winded thereby, being enabled to hold out as occasion shall require, you may at seasonable times mix with his Provender the Powder of these follow∣ing Seeds and Drugs, &c. viz. Cummin and Anni∣seeds, Powder of Licoris and Ellecampane-Roots, Farberries, Brimstone, Flower, and the Roots of white Lillies, Hysop, Horehound, Savin, Coltsfoot, the Seeds of Marshmallows, Rue, and Polipodium of the Oak, and any of the like quality that will occasion good Wind, and prevent Infections, purifie the Blood, and help the Liver in the performance of its office, that is, to rarifie the nutriment by a good digestion; but you must not mix over-much at a time, especi∣ally when you first begin it, least he take disgust at the scent or taste, and so reject his Provender; but increase the quantity by degrees, not giving him any above twice a week, and then let it be Morning and Evening.
CHAP. XVIII. An exact Description of the Veins of a Horse, how scituate in the Body; as also of Blood-letting; and how, and upon what account of Sickness, or other defect, they are to be opened, for the prevention of death or danger. HAving thus far discoursed in Generals and Parti∣ticulars of what relates to a good Horse or Mare of any sort or kind, that thereby the Reader might instruct himself; I shall proceed to what yet remains material to be known, especially to Farriers, and such who undertake the Cure of Horses; which is to give an account of the several parts of the Body, so as they may be distinguished as occasion shall re∣quire, but especially of such parts as shall be found most usefull on immergent matters, and the Veins be∣ing the pipes or conduits that carry off Blood, and con∣sequently nutriment to all parts of the Body; I think it highly convenient to say something in the first place of them. From the Liver note there ariseth one large Vein, which, like a conduit, supplies the rest of the bran∣ches, which are many in number, and spread them∣selves throughout the Body like little Rivolets or streams: And of these, two material ones are found in the Palate of the Mouth, above the first and third Barrs, which ought to be opened by a discreet Farrier, when the Horse is afflicted with any Malignant pain, or disease in the Head or Stomach. Two more there are that descending▪ which from the lower part of the Eyes, descend to the Nostrils, and are best opened when the Eyes are afflicted with any distemper or
grievance. Two others there are above his Eyes, which are called Temple-Veins, because they run cross the Temples; and these are generally opened for cold dis∣eases in the Head. Two great ones there are like∣wise that run along the Wind-pipe, by the sides of it, from the uppermost Joynt of his Chaps, to the Breast, commonly called Neck-Veins; and these are opened for sundry diseases, being the most usual Veins that are opened. There are two other Veins that arise from between the fore-legs, and are called Breast-Veins, because they end on the top of the Breast; and these are opened in case of Surfeits, Feavers, or Heart-sickness. Two others there are which ascend from the fore-legs, but rise not so high as those be∣fore mentioned; and these rest upon the fore∣most bough of the fore-leg, and are generally called Plat-Veins; and are opened in case of Founder∣ing, or any other grief or grievance in the Legs or Limbs. Other two there are that pass from the El∣bow of the fore-shoulder, down along the inside of the fore-legs, being known by the name of Shank-Veins, which are generally opened in case of Splents, Spavins, Mallenders or Sallenders, &c. Then are there four Veins which run along the Fetlocks of the Horse, known by the name of Shackle-Veins; and these, al∣though they are small, are yet important ones, and by bleeding cure the stiffness of the Joynts, and pre∣vent Foundering. Then are there four more about the Corronets in his Hoofs, called Corronet-Veins, and are opened for the Ring-bone and Surbating. In the Hoof are four more, which circle his Toes, call∣ed Toe-Veins; and are opened for fretting and foun∣dering. Two great Veins there are, that descending from his Stones, pass along the inside of his Thighs, to his Cambrels; and these are called Kidney-Veins, and are opened with success for diseases in the Reins and Kidneys. Two others there are which, descending from above the hinder Cambrils, pass along on the
inside of the hinder-legs, down to the Fetlocks, being called the Spavin-Veins, and are seldom opened, un∣less in case of the Blood-spavin. Two Veins are like∣wise found in his Flanks, from whence they take their denomination, and are opened successfully for any pain or grief in the Fillets or Reins. Two Veins he has in his Haunches, called by the name of Haunch-Veins, and are opened in case of falling away, or con∣sumption of the Flesh, Hideboundness, or the like. Two there are that run along the side of the Belly, from the Elbow to the Flank, and are called Spur-Veins; and in case of fretting, belly-foundring, spur∣gall, festring, or swelling of the belly or flank, they are opened with success. In his Tail is one single Vein, called the Tail-Vein, which is opened in case of sheading the Hair; so that in all there are found, as a compleat number of principal Veins, or as from which Blood is taken on sundry occasions, thirty se∣ven; in knowing which, any Man may understand how to let his Horse blood, in case of the before-men∣tioned Distempers, at such times as a Farrier is not at hand. Many other small Veins there are, but so inconsiderable to our purpose, that I shall not under∣take them in this place, but proceed to speak some∣what of the Sinews: which is another Material part of this noble Creature, worthy to be inspected.
CHAP. XIX. A Discourse of the Sinews and their Scituation; together with their Use and Office; and what further in that kind is to be observed as to the state of a Horse's Body, &c. with the Descrip∣tion of the Bones, &c. SEeing the Sinews are the principal Ligaments that support the frame of a Horse's Body, and so con∣venient to be known, in order to the remedying sun∣dry griefs and disorders, it will be highly necessary to speak of them in their order, and especially of so many of them as are the principal movers of the Body. As for the fountain or source from whence the Si∣news spring, and by which they are nourished, it is the Brain, for there passes through the hollow of the Neck one large Tendon or Sinew, which running a∣long the back-bone, continues its course even to the end of the Tail: And from this proceeds two small branches, which passing through the Scull, fall down along the Horse's cheeks to the points of the Nostrils. Two other branches there are which pass through holes in the neither Chap, knitting it with the other, and so pass along by the great Teeth, meeting just beneath the neither lip. Then are there twenty eight small strings, that running through the seven Bones that compose the Neck, knit them together; and passing from thence, use their office in knitting; likewise the Chine even to the Strunt. Then are there two great ones that stretch themselves over the Spade-bones, and then dividing into divers branches, spread in a descending manner into the Legs, even
into the Hoofs, and in their progress knit every Joynt together. Besides what I have named, there are two main Sinews coming through two holes to the flat bones of the Hips or Huckle; and from thence being divided into many branches, pass down into the hin∣der-legs, even into the coffin of the Hoofs, binding all the Joynts firmly together. Now above all these, there is one main Sinew or Ligament proceeding from the setting-on of the Horse's Neck, which passes along the Chine, and is one entire Sinew of near three inches broad, being in its nature flat, and not having any branch proceeding from it: And this is the great strength∣ener of the Back and Neck of any Horse, and holdeth the Shoulder-blades firm; so that in all it is reckoned, a Horse hath no less than thirty principal Sinews, whence a great number of other Sinews do proceed of lesser note. But these which I have named are so usefull in supporting the frame of the body, that if any one of them are afflicted, the Horse will be much afflicted, &c. And now the next thing material to be known of this kind is the number of Bones, and their scituation; which, according to the best account that has been given, take as followeth. The full number of Bones found in the body of a Horse are a hundred and seventy, viz. the upper part of the Head are computed two bones; from the Fore∣head to the Nose are two more; the neither Jaws are computed two Bones; the four Teeth are found to be twelve; the Tushes four, and the Grinders twenty four; the Bones in the Necks, from the Spade-bone to the Huckle-bone eight; from the Huckle-bones to the end of the Tail are ac∣counted seven: Next, or at least next to be consi∣dered, is a broad bone, in which are found twelve Seams or Joynts: Then the two Spade-bones, and after them the Forcales or Canale-bones, and subse∣quent to these those that are commonly called the
Marrow-bones, and from thence to the Knees; two called the Thigh-bones, next to them two others, proceeding from thence to the Pasterns, called the Shank-bones, and so downward into the Hoof; other Bones, called the Supporters, in all sixteen, though some of them are very small. In the Breast there is a great Bone, whereunto thirty six Ribs, great and small, are appendances; and to the Colume behind are afixed two Bones, and from the Molars to the Joynts you will find other two Bones, and two more towards the bending of the Ribs; from the bending of the Ribs, unto the Ribs, are two Bones, though very small in comparison of those we account Ca∣pital ones; and from the Legs to the two Focils of the Legs, are to be found other two little Bones. And moreover observe, that from the Pasterns to the Hoof, and in the Hoof are sixteen little Bones: All which are ruled and governed by Ligaments, and tends on to the best advantage or complacency in the frame of nature, and are necessary to be known as to the frame and station wherein they reside, or are scituate. From which I proceed to the Art of Phlebotomy, or letting Blood, and the seasons and distempers that require it, &c.
CHAP. XX. Of Blood-letting in general; and how to know by sundry signs and tokens the state of a Horse's Body; when and where it is convenient to let him Blood, for the preventing of Sickness, or recovery of Health. IN consideration that Bleeding is held by many, and those none of the worst Experienced, to prevent distempers and disorders in Horses, if the times and seasons are rightly observed, and the Disease accord∣ing to what has been mentioned, I shall not fail to give Instructions of all kinds any way tending or re∣lating to this matter, so far as may consist with any purpose, or what thereby is intended to the good or advantage of a Horse: And of these Directions in their order. To let a Horse Blood too often, decays Nature, and much weakens the Horse; when, on the other side, too long to defer it, gives corrupt Blood an opportu∣nity to create Diseases that infect and afflict him; if it be done for healths sake, without any sign of ap∣parent danger, then is twice in a year sufficient: The times best approved of for this office, are the end of December, and the beginning of May. Now some are of opinion, that there is no need of letting a Stone-horse Blood, if he be used to cover Mares, un∣less some disease be apparent; and the reason they give is, that his spending does exhaust his Blood sufficiently: But such a reason is very weak, considering the Blood of which the Seed is made, by the working and ope∣ration of the Genital Parts, is the most spirited, and and pure of all other; and that which ought to be
taken away by Blood-letting, is commonly the most gross and offensive, so that it will never turn to Seed, but corrupt by continuing in the Body, and create Diseases; and therefore ought it to be drawn off, that the Veins being emptied, may fill with better Blood; nay, Blood-letting is coveted naturally by some Horses; for the Horses of Poland often let them∣selves blood by often rubbing against a sharp Post or Rock: And so does the River Horse in Niius, from whose Example 'tis held, that Phlebotomy or Blood-letting came in use. Others there are that will not have Geldings let Blood; and the reason they give is, that his Body, through the loss of his Genitors, be∣ing infeebled, wants the Blood to support and cor∣roborate it; and that it consumes faster in him than in a Stone-horse: But this bears no weight, for the Blood will increase according to the constitution of the Horse and his feeding, and according to the heat or coldness of the Country the Horse is bred in, the less or more Blood is found in him. The next Material matter to be regarded, is the exact time when it ought to be performed; and most hold it best in the Morning, when the Horse is fast∣ing, an hour after he wakes or rouses up: And then again have regard to the Moon, it being in the en∣crease, if possible, but by no means in the Sign where the Vein is scituate that you open, least thereby your Horse be weakned, for then the Vital spirits will issue with the blood. And another regard is to be had to his Age; for if he be very old, you must not bleed him, unless upon some emergent occasion, but suffer his Blood to nourish him, that his Flesh may not wain or decrease. And in all these cases you must have regard to a Horse's constitution, for some are more capable of losing three pound of Blood, than others are two or one; or in case of a Disease, according as more or less is required, as the Blood is more or less infected; and in such a case no time nor season is to
be regarded, but as necessity requires; for many times Blood-letting in such cases is a means to save the Horse, as deferring of it is to the destroying of him: And in these or the like cases it ought to be known in what Diseases it is requisite, and that it may in the general be discovered by these Signs, Viz. If the Horse's Eyes look red, and his Veins rise and swell beyond the ordinary bounds, then is he op∣pressed with too much Blood, or at least that which is not good. If you perceive by his Itching, scrub∣bing himself, and uneasiness, that there is a salt firey humour contracted in the Veins, then let him Blood; which is more immediately known by the extraordi∣nary itching of the Mane and Tail; by rubbing of which, the Hair frequently sheds, and the Skin peels off. If his Urin be red and high-coloured, and his Dung very hot, black and hard. If on his Back there appear little Bubles or Inflamations red and angry; or if his Meat be not well digested, then they denote the Horse to abound with Blood, and stand in need of having it drawn off to a degree, that his health may be preserved or restored. If the Whites of his Eyes are tainted with yellowness, or the like happen to his upper or neither Lip, it is requisite to bleed him, for upon the happening of any of these Signs the Blood is disordered, super-abundant or corrupted, and some fatal sickness is threatned: To prevent, or at least mittigate which, there is no better way than bleeding. And in the manner of letting Blood, when you have corded your Horse conveniently, that the Veins may appear full and fair, you may strike your Fleam in the Neck-Veins four Inches on this side the setting-on of the Head; but the other Veins being small, you must open them with a Lancet, for fear of cutting them through, and so consequently injure the Nerves that support them. And thus much for Blood-letting, and the Signs of Bleeding, &c. From which
I shall proceed to what relates to Cures of all kinds, whether Internal Diseases, or External Sorrances, af∣ter the best and easiest manner and method, accord∣ing to the approved Rules and Directions of the ablest Farriers and Horsleeches that are, and have been ren∣dred famous for their Skill, not only in this, but in divers other Nations; and withall let you plainly understand the cause of the most Chronical diseases, as well as the means to Cure them, rendring the method and manner easie to the Practitioner, and advanta∣geous to those that trade in Horses, and keep them for their profit or pleasure. But before I absolute∣ly enter upon them, there are a few things necessary to be considered, and especially five, Viz. (1.) To inform ones self to what grief or distem∣per a Horse is inclinable. (2.) The cause from whence it proceeds, whether External or Internal. (3.) The tokens and symptoms by which the di∣stemper is known. (4.) By what means the Causes accrue that create the distemper. (5.) How to apply Remedies fitting to the di∣stempers and disorders. And these are so absolutely necessary, that without such knowledge a perfect cure cannot be wrought by any Farrier. And now as for the Diseases and Grievances inci∣dent to a Horse, they are not a few, those that rec∣kon the least, consent to sixty of different natures; and, to be plain, there are many more which may be called dependants on these, or indeed some of them, no less dangerous. But submitting to the Judgment of the Learned, I now come to another Material Point, which relates mostly to the Chyrurgical part, or Me∣thods to be taken and known in the curing Sorran∣ces, &c. which indeed are the most difficult; and then I shall proceed in order.
CHAP. XXI. A Description of Diseases, Grievances or Sorran∣ces, incident to Horses, &c. to foresee them by sundry signs and tokens; and know whence they arise; with the ways and methods of Preventing, Redressing and Curing them; by Approved Rules and Remedies, according to the Practice of the best Farriers in all Ages, &c. MAny are the terms and names given to Grie∣vances and Sorrances, and these frequently take their denomination from the place of their sci∣tuation, relating to the parts of the Body, and chiefly arise or proceed from the evil state or habit of the Body, and defect of the Members, especially when there happens a loosning and division of the Unity, or a Dissonance in the temperature; and so we say when any division or loosning happen in the Bone, it is a Fracture; if it happen in the Veins, it is a Rupture; and in the Flesh a Wound or Ulcer; in the Sinews it is termed the Cramp or Convulsion; and in the Skin an Excoriation. And now observe, that in Cauterizing or Burning, which may be done two man∣ner of ways, viz. with hot Oyls or Water, or with a hot Iron; as also in making Incision, or the like, that they ever be done with caution above or be∣neath the Vein or Sinew, and never upon them, least by the discommodity that may arise, the Horse be ra∣ther damaged than furthered: And again, observe never to apply to Veins or Sinews any extraordinary Corrosives; and these we reckon so, are Arsnick, Sub∣limate-Mercury, Resalgar, Oyl of Vitriol, Tartar, &c.
In case of Cauterizing, ever observe rather to Launce with a hot Iron, than a cold one; and ra∣ther cauterize than cut, because by the heat the hu∣mours are driven back, which would otherwise ren∣der the Sore or Grief of long continuance; and by the product of a Sore in the Original, you may know the constitution of a Horse; for if he be sanguine, a whitish watery Excressence will flow of an indifferent thickness; if Cholerick, a thin salt one, inclining to greenish; if Flegmatick, a kind of a gellied-water; and if Melancholick, then a gross blackish moisture, attended by a dry Scab or Scurf. In case of Swelling or Tumors, it will be necessary with heed to mark the place they begin in, as also their progress and ending, that so the part of the body afflicted with bad humours may have Applicati∣ons sutable to remove them. Now if it so happen that the Swellings or Tumors be not upon any master Vein or Sinew, or too near the Vital parts, then may Repercussive Medicines be used: but if so, then those that are mollifying, to raise it gently by degrees, that so being ripened, it may break of it self; or if necessity require it, be Lanced, that the Corruption passing away, such things may be applied, that with a Lenitive softness may heal the grief. In case the swelling be hard, it is generally Corro∣sive, and must have such Medicaments applied: but if soft, those of a more supple nature will prevail, though many happen to be of a long continuance. And now to know whether a Swelling has been of a long continuance, press it with your finger; and if the dint continue after you have taken your finger away, then is it old, and of a long standing; but if the flesh suddainly return, then is it newly taken. If a Swelling or Sore be broken, and moderately mat∣ter, then it signifies a good constitution, and that it mends apace; but if the Putrefaction greatly encrease,
then it denotes a mass of bad humours there contract∣ed which must by degrees be brought away; and many times in this or the like cases is Cauterizing actually or potentially used, that is, with hot Irons, or with Liquids, &c. of which I have before spoken above or beneath the Sore, to divert or keep back the humour. And now to that which relates to Cures, &c- CHAP. XXII. Excellent Receipts for the Cure of Diseases, &c. in Horses or Mares, according to the best Ex∣perience of skilfull Practitioners: Many of which were never before made publick. AS the Causes of Sickness are many, so are the Cures or Medicines wherewith they are redres∣sed, and the Signs that fore-run and attend them, which I have given in Generals and Particulars. Yet seeing something of this kind may remain untouched, I shall take them in the way as I proceed. Now of Sick∣nesses there are two kinds; one that possesseth the whole body, as Convulsions, Feavers, Pestilence, and such-like general disorders and contagions infecting the Blood; and others but a part of the Body, as Vertigoes, Head-ach, Yellows, and the like; yet both many times prove equally dangerous and destruc∣tive.
The Glaunders; from what it proceeds; and how to Cure it. The Glaunders is a distemper often gotten by over∣riding, and suddain cooling upon heats; eating too much raw food at unseasonable times, or continuing in wet moorish ground, proceeding from a flegma∣tick constitution: And this you may perceive before it take too firm a possession by a white matter issu∣ing from the Horse's Nostrils, and his unseasonable snorting: And this Disease having its seat properly in the Head, Take of the green Leaves of a Box-tree, an ounce of Anniseeds, and the like quantity of Licorish-pow∣der: steep them in Ale or new Milk, to the quantity of a quart; adding Treacle four ounces, and the like quantity of Olive-oyl: heat them well over a gentle fire, and with a horn give the Horse the liquid part to drink in the Morning fasting, as hot as may be well endured; then give him a moderate Course, and bringing him home, let him have a warm Mash; Cloath him up, and leave him in a warm Stable for the space of two hours before you feed him. The Quinzey in a Horse, &c. what it is; and how to Cure it. The Quinzey is a distemper, occasioned by flegma∣tick humours, setling in the Neck or Throat, so that the passage of the breath is in a manner stopped, and the beast obliged to breathe with a more than ordi∣nary pain and labour: To remove them then, and redress the grievance, after having bled him in the Neck-vein, Take Marshmallows, Groundsel, Cammomoil and Harts-Tongue; bray them with a like quantity of Smallage, and fry them with Hogs-grease; so being
very hot, apply them to the place which ought to be under the Chaul, and they will mollifie the swel∣ling, and by degrees remove the obstruction of the passage: Then take Roach-Allum, Honey, and white Dogs-turd: dissolve them with brown Sugar-candy in a quart of Milk, give it him hot; and so continue to do for a week together, Morning and Evening; re∣newing likewise the Poltis once a day. A Horse's Bleeding at the Nose; how to stay or pre∣vent it. This happens, especially amongst young Horses, through the abundance of Blood, that through the free passage of the large Veins, ascends into the Head; and passing to the thin Veins within the Nostrils, ei∣ther by its violent motion forces them, or by its cor∣rosive quality eats them in sunder; or it may acci∣dentially happen by a stroak or violent straining: To remedy which, Take the Juyce of Nettles, mixed with Loaf-sugar▪ and squirt it up the Horse's Nostrils, using at conve∣nient times to burn under his Nose Storax, Frankin∣cense, or Linnen dipped in Aquavitae, in a Chafing-dish; the fume of which will oblige the Blood to retreat: or instead of Nettle-juyce, you may use that of Gar∣lick, blowing up after it the Powder of dried Ru∣barb. For Pains in the Teeth or Jaws. Pains in the Teeth or Jaws of a Horse are created by Wind or cold Rheums that often afflict the Mar∣row or Sinews which support them; and are often known by the Horse's Drivelling, holding open his Mouth, and defect in feeding: And in this case, Take a good handfull of the Herb Bettony, seeth it in a quart of White-wine Vinegar till half be con∣sumed,
then add an ounce of the Powder of Elecam∣pane: wash with the liquid part, his Teeth and Gums, anointing his Jaws with Oyntment of Tobacco, Lan∣cing the Gums, and opening the Temple-vein on the side where the pain is most predominant. The Canker in the Nose; what it is, and the Remedy. The Canker in the Nose proceeds from a virilent humour contracted there, occasioned by Inflamation. To cure this, or indeed one in any part of the Body, Take of White-wine Vinegar a quart, Roach-Allom two pounds, a pint of the Juyce of Plantane, and as much of that of Rue, with four ounces of Honey: boil them to the consumption of a third part, and wash the grieved part therewith as hot as the Horse will well endure it morning and evening, and the Canker within a fortnight will decay. A Remedy for the Collick, Belly-ach, or Belly-binding. The two first of these proceed from cold, raw, slimy humours setled in the Bowels, there occasioning a fretting or shrinking up of the Bowels, or by a con∣traction of Windiness, which stretcheth them out; and the latter by excessive heat or bad digestion. Now to remedy these, Take four ounces of Dill-seed, or the Herb it self, if it may be gotten; as also two handfulls of May∣weed: boil these in a gallon of small Beer, with a pound of brown Sugar, and give the Horse a quart at a time each morning fasting for the space of four days, suffering it to be luke-warm. The Lasks or Blood-flux, and its Remedy. This distemper is an unnatural Loosness of the Bo∣dy, contracted either by raw feeding, or a fretting
of the Bowels caused by cholerick and firey humours, and a superfluity of bad blood; which not being stay∣ed in time, will, for want of other Excrements, cause the Horse to void Blood. To cure this, Take a good handfull of the Herb called Shepherds-purse, and two ounces of the Seeds of Woodroof: stamp them, and boiling them in three pints of Ale till it come to a quart; strain out the Liquid part, and give it him hot in a Drenching-horn, conti∣nuing so to do for three or four Mornings succes∣sively. The Botts; what they are, and their Cure. The Botts are a short thick Worm, like a Maggot, having black heads, and are engendred through the corruption of heat and moisture in the Maw or Bow∣els of a Horse, where they gnaw and afflict him in a grievous manner, and may be discerned by his lifting up his feet to strike at his Belly, and the small sto∣mach he has to feed. The way to destroy them is thus: Take Rue, Savin, Nightshade, the Seeds of Ameos, each two ounces: bruise them well, and with Honey and Roach-Allum make them up into little balls; and buttering them over, suffer him to swallow two of them in the Morning fasting, and about an hour after give him of Salad-oyl and Aquavitae, each a quarter of a pint, very hot; and after that let him stand another hour before you give him any Provender: and this Rule observe for a week together. For the Shoulder-strain, a good Remedy. Having tied up the lame Leg, drive your Horse till by his striving to go on three Legs the Plat-vein appear; then let down his Leg, and bleed him on that side, having in a readiness a bason with Salt in
it to receive the blood, stirring it to keep it from clotting: then having likewise an ounce of the Oyl of Turpentine, put it into half a pint of Beer or Ale, warm them well; and when he has bled a quart or more, as you see occasion, nip the Orifice with a piece of Lead made in form for that purpose, and chafe the place grieved with the Oyl and Beer, and afterward with the Blood and Salt; then putting him into a warm Stable, draw the two fore-legs to an evenness with a Lift or Girt, binding them strait, and so per∣mitting him to stand; or if you think convenient, to keep his feet the firmer and evener, wedge them be∣tween the Shooe and the Hoof with a flat stick, con∣tinuing to anoint and bathe him as often as occasion requires, unbinding his Legs, and leading him each Morning till you find the Lameness decrease. And thus you may do for a Wrench or Distortion of the Shoulder. Broken-wind; what it is; and to remedy it, if not past Cure. The Breaking of the Wind is occasioned by exces∣sive riding or straining, or by bad usage after much labour, or excessive Rheums falling upon the Lungs, and hindering them in the performance of their office, to that degree, that the closures of the Wind-pipe shrink up, or are restrained from their former plyable∣ness: And to remedy this, if not too far gone, Take the Soil or Dung of a Boar or Barrow-Pig dried, that it may be reduced to Powder, and of An∣niseeds an equal quantity: boil them in Milk or Whey, and give him a pint of it hot to drink every third Morning, causing him to Exercise moderately there∣upon: or it would be better if you could get the Dung of a Hedge-hog, usually called an Urchin; the Dose to the pint of Milk is two spoonfulls of each of the Ingredients.
A Horse burnt by a Mare, how to Cure. This grief is to be observed by the Mattering of the Yard, &c. and the dullness of the countenance of the Horse; which perceived. To remedy the grie∣vance, Boil a quarter of a pound of Roach-Allom in a pint of White-wine; and being reduced to a thinness, squirt part of it blood-warm up the Horse's Yard with a Syringe: and by doing so once a day for a week to∣gether, the Cause will cease, and the Effects be no more. For a dry Cough, cold Pursiveness, broken Wind, or short∣ness of Breath, an excellent Remedy. These distempers being occasioned by cold gross hu∣mours, rawness of diet, over-much labour, unseason∣ably gross feeding, and unwholsome Airs which in∣fect the Lungs: Take an ounce of Rue Seeds, Tarr two ounces, and as much fresh Butter: mix them well together with the Powder of Licorish, Anniseed, Nutmeg and brown Sugar-candy, and make them into three balls in equal potions; and when your Horse is warm with motion or riding, having put into each ball three or four Cloves of Garlick, oblige your Horse to swallow them when he is fasting; and bringing him home, let him stand without Meat for the space of an hour in a a warm Stable. If the former fail, as rarely it does, Take of Bacon-Lard a piece to the breadth of four fingers, and every way as thick as long, if you can get it: But as for the thickness, two fingers may serve: then stop it with Cloves and Garlick, dusting it over with Pow∣der of Licorish, Anniseeds, Sugar-candy, and Flower of Brimstone, and cause him in two long slices to swal∣low
it fasting, and ride him thereupon, that he cast it not up: and do so every other Morning for a week together, giving him after it a Glass of Mal∣laga. Now to make a Horse in this case swallow, though against his will, Draw forth his Tongue as far as is convenient, and put the potion down his Throat be∣yond the roughness; and then suddainly letting go his Tongue, he will swallow it down without tasting or scenting: and in so doing you must ever draw up his Head to the Rack, that it may descend the bet∣ter. To restore decayed and putrefied Lungs. The Sign of the Lungs being in this disorder, is to be known by a faint Cough, and the casting of pu∣trefied matter out of his Mouth like small pieces of red Flesh. eating his Provender with greediness. To redress this, Take of the Juyce of Purslain; or, for want of it, that of Housleek, half a pint; Steel-dust two ounces; Oyl of Roses four ounces; of Tragcauthium one ounce: Add to them a quart of Goat's Milk, and give it him hot at three times, keeping him for a while after fast∣ing and in motion: And this you may use till you find his Breath become sweet, and the Cough allayed; the which, if it be not too far gone, will be in a weeks time. And the better to refresh the Vital parts, Burn under his Nose Sterax, Galbamm or Myrrh. A dry Consumption, its Remedy, &c. This Disease is occasioned by sharp corroding hu∣mours descending from the Head, and falling upon the Lungs, by which they are many times ulcerated, and by their bad effects, cause a Macerating or Wasting
of the Body; yet sendeth forth no Corruption at the Nose, because the moisture is consumed by the heat. To remedy which, Take a pint of the Juyce of Comfory, half a pint of Oyl of Roses, the Juyce of four Lemons, and an ounce of the Juyce of Rue: Let them simper over a gentle fire, and add the Powder of Round Bithwort-Roots two ounces, and an ounce of that of Ruburb; and give him these in two equal potions Morning and Evening. The Breast-pain; from whence it proceeds, and how to Cure it. This disorder of the Body proceedeth from a super∣fluity of blood which presses the Heart, and gross in∣digested humours that make the like unnatural In∣vasion upon the Liver; and the signs to know when he is so afflicted, are a stiff staggering and keeping to∣gether the fore-legs as it were, and but weakly pro∣ceeding in his pace▪ &c. his gate distorted and uneven, stifly, for the most part, holding up his Head and Neck, as not being well able to reach the ground; and moreover, you will observe him to groan and strain in his eating and drinking. To cure this, which frequently ends in death, if not timely regarded, let him Blood in both the Breast-veins; and when he has bled sufficiently, two quarts at least, chafe his Breast and Fore-body with Oyl of Peter, that the Blood may be drawn into the empty Veins, and so ease the Vital parts of their op∣pression, and give him a pint of warm White-wine, with two ounces of Diapente: or if the Pain after∣ward continue, which is very rare, you may Rowel him.
Heart-sickness, or Antecor; whence it proceeds, and how to remedy it. This distemper being an enemy to the Heart, seems from thence to take its denomination, and is caused by a superfluity of Blood in Horses that feed high, and are put to little or no labour: which Blood, for want of motion, being corrupt, infects the Heart, and renders it sickish and languishing. The signs are a small swelling rising at the bottom of the Breast, encreasing upward to the top of the Neck; whether if it arrive before it be prevented, death frequently issues: It is known also by his hang∣ing his head, loathing his food, and groaning through the oppression of pain. These things being ob∣served, Let your Horse Blood on either Plate-vein, or in the Neck, if the Swelling be risen high; and having bled him freely, Take of the best Malmsey a quart, add to it two ounces of Sugar, and an ounce of beaten Cinamon: give it him to drink blood-warm, and it will revive and cherish the heart by dispelling the evil vapours from the seats of Life; and after that wisp him well over his Cloth, and let him rest, giving him the next Morning the like dose, and riding him gently. Foundering in the Body or Surfeiting, how occasioned; to∣gether with the Remedy. This disease, according to the Skilfull, is occasioned by a contraction of Molten-grease and evil humours, which oppress the frame of the Body, and is taken by the bad management of those that use the Horse indiscreetly, watering him when hot, or letting him up∣on a heat suddainly cool in a bad air or moist place: by which means the dispersed humours, together with
the Molten-grease, have opportunity to contract them∣selves into one Mass, to that degree of Consolidation, that Nature, without extraordinary helps, is not capa∣ble of dispersing or dispelling them. The signs demonstrating this distemper or grie∣vance, are the staring of the hair, hanging the head, an unusual Cough, staggering, belching; the cling∣ing up of the Belly, and rising of the Back. To remedy this distemper, Take a handfull of Mal∣lows, as much Smallage, Cammomoil and Groundsel, an ounce of Alloes, two quarts of new Milk, and half a pound of brown Sugar: boil them together, and strain out the liquid part, giving it the Horse Clyster∣ways; and when it has caused him to empty suffici∣ently, Take a quart of Malmsey, or, for want of it, Canary, of Licorish, Anniseeds and Cinamon beaten to Powder, each half an ounce: put them, with two ounces of beaten Sugar-candy, into the Wine, and give it the Horse warm, keeping him afterward in motion, though in the Stable, for the space of two hours, well cloathed and littered; after which give him two quarts of Oats and a quart of plent-beans well sifted, and sprinkled with Beer, &c. The greedy Worm or hungry Evil; what it is, and how to be remedied or prevented. This distemper, or rather defect in a Horse, has deceived many; for whereas they take it for a good sign to see a Horse feed hastily, and be voracious, yet is it the cause of sickness, and decay in the end, if not prevented; for the cause a Horse is so hasty and large a feeder, is either by reason he has been a long time debarred from Meat, and so the Veins being open and empty, crave nutriment: or from too excessive a heat in the stomach, that consumes the moisture and nu∣triment faster then it can be reasonably expected to digest: The first of these, if not prevented, creates
diseases, and other disorders, by the Veins, drawing in the crude digestion not perfected, and filling their Cavities with a gross watery humour, rather than good blood; and the latter by feeding the heat (which otherwise would decay) that consumes the Radical moisture. The help for this is, first feeding the Horse by de∣grees, suffering a regular digestion; and the latter by giving him cooling things to allay the heat, and moderate the Appetite, are the best things to reduce him to a due temperature and managed diet, as has been said; but more particularly, give him a quart of Cream, a pint of White-wine boiled with a hand∣full of Wood-sorrel, and the like quantity of Scabe∣ous or Mugwort, the liquid part only: Let him take it cold, and rest upon it, and it will close the Veins to that degree, that the digestion may be made perfect; as also it will allay the heat. Yellow and Black Jaundice in a Horse, the Cause and Cure, &c. The Yellow Jaundice generally arises from the a∣bundance of cholerick humours contracted, which oc∣casion the over-flowing of the Gall, and are great op∣pressors of the body, and obstructors of health; and the signs are the yellowness of the Mouth-skin, in∣sides of the Lips and Eyes. There is another kind of this disease that proceeds from Melancholy; and these are called the Black Jaundice, and have their original from Obstructions in the Liver-vein, which passeth to the Spleen, and consequently hinders the Spleen from doing its proper office, by receiving only cor∣rupted Blood from the Liver; and so is obliged, by reason of its being surcharged, to cast it back into the Veins: And this latter, in case of death, as indeed being most dangerous, mastereth the former; but a timely regard may remove them; as thus:
Take, after you have blooded your Horse in the third Barr of the Mouth, an ounce of Turmerick, and half an ounce of Saffron, four or five Cloves, and six spoonfulls of strong Vinegar, Long-Pepper and Li∣coras, beaten fine, of each an ounce, with the like quantity of Burdock-roots: boil them in two quarts of Ale till a third, or at least a fourth part be consu∣med, and give it him to drink very hot; and in so doing you will find the bad humours disperse, and by degrees losing their force by the opperation of na∣ture, and the conquering quality of the Medicament; but if it be too long delay'd, it many times runs be∣yond the help of Art. Costiveness; from whence it proceeds, and its Re∣medy. This disorder is a hardning of the Excrements in the body, so that without great pain the Horse can∣not evacuate or void his Dung; and this is often oc∣casioned by excess of Provender, insomuch that na∣ture forces it into the Bowels before it be well digest∣ed in the stomach: or again, it happens by feeding al∣together upon dry Meats; the which, though whol∣some and nourishing, contract notwithstanding the Excrements by the extraordinary heat they occasion; and it may likewise happen by excessive fasting. To remedy which, you may give him a Clyster made in this manner: Take a handfull of Marshmallows, decoct them in Spring-water, not exceeding a quart: add to these half a pint of Salad-oyl, and six ounces of fresh But∣ter; of Benedicta Laxativa an ounce, and force them warm up his Fundament, holding or tying close his Tail, by bringing it with a cord between his Legs, obliging him to keep it in for the space of an hour: And the beteer to make it work, give him a warm Mash, and as soon as he has discharged it, give him
in a Drenching-horn a potion made after this man∣ner: Take two ounces of Castle-soap, dissolve it in a pint of warm White-wine, and with it a quarter of a pint of Linseed-oyl; sweetning them all with Sugar∣candia, and give it him as hot as he can drink it. The Cramp, or Convulsion in the Nerves or Sinews, how occasioned; together with the Remedy, &c. These generally proceed from some bruise, wound, or other hurt on the Nerves or Sinews, or excessive straining, especially where the Horse after a great heat by riding or servile labour suddainly cools. This grievance is known by the trembling of the Joynts, Nerves or Veins, or by their contracting to such a stubbornness or stiffness, that, for a time, nei∣ther the Horse, nor those that attempt to help him, are capable of bending them. To cure this, Take Cammomoil, Primrose-leaves, the Roots of Crowfeet and Cowslips, with the Bran∣ches of Fennel, Rosemary and Pimpernel: boil them in Running-water, and having pressed out the liquid part, bathe the place grieved with it exceeding hot, binding on the Herbs Poltis-ways with course Linnen, or bands made of Straw or Hay, and keeping him in a warm Stable, with good Provender, his Limbs will be restored, and rendered as before; and the better to hearten him, let him receive for a Morning or two the Yolk of an Egg in a Glass of Canary. The Mourning of the Chine, its Cause, and the means to Cure it. This grievance is caused by suddainly cooling upon excessive heats standing in damp or wet places, or eating such things as turn to raw humours; which falling upon the Liver and Lungs, frequently inflame
or putrefie them, so that they occasion the Horse by defect of their office to fall down suddainly and dye. Therefore when you by any trembling or dullness sus∣pect this grievance, let your Horse blood; and ha∣ving chafed him well, Take Olive-oyl and Verjuyce, of each two ounces; the Juyce of Sellendine, and Powder of Elecampane-Roots, of each an ounce: warm them a little, and tying his head up to the Rack, pour them into his Nostrils, stopping them close after it, that he may be forced to sneeze and strain to cast it out; after which, having an ounce of the Powder of Ruburb heated in a pint of Canary, give it him in a Drenching-horn as hot as he can well endure it; and so use him each Morning for a week together, and the bad humours will be worked off. Frenzy or Madness, its Original; with the means to re∣medy it according to the Experienced way. This disease is very dangerous, and often terminates in death, and is occasioned by hot and firey humours unseasonably mixing with the blood, which by its as∣cending Inflamation afflicts the Brain, that principal seat of life: And this is known by the staring of the Horse, the distorting of his Eyes, hanging of his Ears, Staggering and Giddiness, his often crying and for∣saking his Mean; and if it be wrought to a hight, his often beating himself against the Post, Manger, or other places he can conveniently come at; biting, stamping, and flying about; with many the like dis∣orders. To remedy this, speedily let him Blood in the Tem∣ple-veins; and if he bleed not freely, there strike him in the Neck-veins; when having bled sufficiently, Take the Roots of Gourds or wild Cucumers, Black Helebore, Rue and Mint, with Virgo Pastoris, each a handfull: boil them in Beer or fair Running-water,
and give him the liquid part very warm; and doing so three or four times, it will purifie and purge the Blood: but if you suppose it too weak for the Horse's constitution, you may dissolve in it an ounce of well-washed Alloes: And observe in this case, above all things, to keep him warm. The falling-Evil, its Cause and Remedy. This distemper is caused by a vapour that oppresses or anoys the Vital parts, rendering the frame of the body for a time sensless, and altogether unable to di∣stinguish what befalls it, and has its original from an evil habit of body; and its approach is frequently known by the coldness of the Nose and Gristles there∣about. The speedy, at least the best Remedy, is to let him Blood on both the Neck-veins in the Morning when he is fasting, and then prepare a dose of the Powder of dried Berries of Misletoe, and the Powder of Harts∣horn, each an ounce; of the Oyl of Nutmeg and Pepper, each a dram: compound them in half a pint of Canary, and give it the Horse, when you perceive the grief to be coming on him, as warm as may be. The sleeping-Evil; what it is, and the way to remedy it. This is a distemper, frequently occasioned by the over-moistness of the Brain, or rather a watery cold∣ness contracted within the cells, which chills and numbs the Brain, whereby the Horse becomes dozed, heavy and stupid, ever desirous to sleep, yet still troubled with restless dreams and disorders, and owes its origi∣nal to moist feeding in Marshey-grounds, whereby a∣bundance of phlegmatick and watery humours have been contracted: And in this case likewise letting Blood
in both the Neck-veins is much available: But fur∣ther to perfect the cure, Take Cammomoil and Motherwort, of each a like quantity: boil them in a Gallon of Running-water, with a pound of Treacle, and a handfull of Bay-leaves, and give the Horse a pint each Morning fasting as hot as he can endure it, keeping him warm, and fasting for the space of an hour after; and then of Malt or scalded Bran make him a warm Mash. The Horse-Pestilence, and its Cure. The Pestilence in Horses is either contracted by bad feeding, which occasions a corruption or inflamation of the Blood whereby the Heart is afflicted, or it hap∣pens by being in foggy and infectious Airs, or catched by contageon: And in any of these cases, Take Lavender a handfull, the like quantity of Rue and Wormwood; as also of Walnut-tree Leaves, and an ounce of Alloes: boil them in a quart of Water, or three pints of Milk, till half be consumed; then add half a pound of fresh Butter, or rather, if you can get it, half a pint of the sweetest Olive-oyl, and straining out the liquid part, give it the Horse fasting in the Morning blood-warm, repeating a fresh dose every o∣ther Morning for the space of a week. For Chest-foundering, the Remedy. To know whether your Horse be Chest-foundered, or not, observe him standing; and if then he do as it were stand drawn up, or crimpling with his body, or stradling, and covet much to lye down, running some∣times backward in his going, then is it apparent he is afflicted with this grievance: To cure which, Take Oyl of Peter half an ounce, mix it with an ounce of the Oyl of Cammomoil; and so proportiona∣bly a greater quantity, as you see occasion, and bathe
the Breast with a hot Woollen cloth; and when you have in that manner chafed it as well as you can, run a hot Iron over it to make it sink into the Skin: Do this twice or thrice, and give the Horse a quar∣ter of a pint of Salad-oyl, and the like quantity of Aquavitae, warmed and well mixed together over a gentle fire. For an Obstruction in the Bladder, or Windiness in the Bowels, use this Approved Medicine. Of Cake or Castle-soap take twelve ounces, scrape it so that it may be rendered very small, adding two ounces of Dialthaea: Incorporate them well, and make them up into balls as big as Pigeons Eggs; and when you find your Horse afflicted, as aforesaid, dissolve one of them in a pint of Ale or Beer, and give it him scalding-hot, or so hot as he can take it without dan∣ger, and it will force a passage for the Urin without much difficulty: This is also good for the Stone, or Gravel in the Kidneys. sword and shield The Pole-Evil, how to know and Cure. The Pole-Evil is known by its grow∣ing bigger than ordinary on the top of the head; where, if you find it large, take a hot Iron, and sear it in a circle after the form of the Figure, till the Skin become as it were of a yellowish colour; then with a sharp Iron make holes in it, one large, one in the middle, small ones circling it within the first Circle; the form of the Iron which must not penetrate a∣bove half an Inch, you have in the Margin. The holes made as directed, Take a piece of yellow Arsnick, to
the bigness of a Pea, and divide that, or a some∣what larger quantity, that a part may be ap∣plied to every hole made, as aforesaid, and cover it over with black Soap; then with Hog's Lard and Ver∣degrease anoint the rest of the place seared, and cover it all over with a cloth dipped in the Oyl of Turpen∣tine; and so by the corrosive nature of the Arsnick the contracted swelling will be so loosened, that with a little cutting or drawing off the bottom the core or cause of the grievance may be drawn out or taken a∣way; and this frequently, especially according to the constitution of the Horse, may be attempted in a week or ten days after the application; and having washed the wound with Plantane-water, wherein a small quan∣tity of Allom has been dissolved, anoint it with Oyl of Roses, or Ointment of Tobacco, and cover it up close from the Air, anointing it once a day till the flesh fill up the hollowness; and if proud flesh appear notwithstanding, scald it with Salt and Butter. The Fistula, how to discover and cure. sword and shield A Fistula is the contraction and set∣tlement of bad humours, or infection into one place, occasioning an Ulcerous Tumour, and is best suppressed by Cau∣terizing in circling it round to prevent its further spreading, and likewise to deny the humours that feed its access; and when you have with a hot Iron circled it as the former, prick it full of holes with a three-square sharp Instrument: the Fi∣gure of which, and of the Circle, take notice of in the Margin; and so use it in all respects, as that of the Pole-Evil, if you find it very corrupt; but if it ap∣pear shallow, mitigate the Corrosives to half the quantity, and search it in a
shorter time, letting out the Corruption, if it will come forth by applying Lenitives, &c. And when you find it begin to heal, anoint it first with Oyl of Cammomoil, and after that to take the effects of the fire quite away with Oyntment of Marshmallows, beaten with the White of an Egg or Spermaceti. Hard Kernels under the Throat, how to remove. Take half a pint of Brandy or Aquavitae, put into it a quarter of a pound of common Soap; boil them till they become thick as a Plaster, and apply it Pla∣ster-wise to the place grieved; and if no store of cor∣ruption, or a contraction of evil humours attend those Kernels, then will it sink them, so that they will not be offensive; and if there be humours, it will break and disperse them. For the Navel-gall, the Remedy. Take an indifferent fine Rag. dip it in Brandy and Sallad-oyl, well incorporated over a gentle fire: bathe and supple well the place grieved; and to make it penetrate the better, run it over afterward with an exceeding hot cloth; and in often so doing the Cure will be wrought. For a Blow, Bruise, or the like misfortune that causes a a Swelling or Tumour; the Remedy. If the swelling be about the Head, let the Horse blood in the Neck-vein, on that side the misfor∣tune befell: which done, to prevent the Farcy, or the like, Take of Anniseeds, Rue, Turmerick and red Sage, each about an ounce: shread them into a quart of Beer or Ale, and suffering them to infuse therein for the space of a night: press out the next morning the
liquid part very hard, and give it him cold to drink, surfering him to fast after them for the space of four hours; then having in readiness a charge made of Aquavitae and Soap, spread it upon a Leather, so much as will cover the swelling, and your expectation will be answered. The Scratches, their Remedy. The Scratches are a troublesome Sorrance found upon the hinder heels of a Horse, on the Pasterns, and somewhat above, and are caused by the breaking out of evil humours setling there: To cure which, Take of Hen's-dung and black Soap, each two oun∣ces: incorporate them with Hog's-grease, or Neats-foot-oyl, over a gentle fire, till they become an Oynt∣ment: then having dried and rubbed the Horse's heels, anoint them with it, and bind on the Oyntment, or Swathe the Legs with a warm cloth, not suffering the Horse to come into the water: And if this prove not a sufficient Remedy at several times using, try this more powerfull: Take Beef-broth, and bathe his Legs well there∣with over night; and rubbing them clean the next morning, take two ounces of Deer's Suet, the like quantity of Speck-oyl, and an ounce of Verdegrease: beat them well together in half a pint of Train-oyl; put them into an Earthen-pot on a gentle fire, and stir them well together, and anoint the place grieved, chafing it in with a hot cloth, keeping him out of the water and dirty ways. For Foot-foundering, a Remedy. Having found by the lameness or crimpling of your Horse that he is foundered, which mostly happens by unseasohably travelling in dirty ways, and not being well regarded upon his setting up; bleed him a little
in the Thigh, or if you can conveniently, in the Fet∣ock-vein, and set on his Shooe hollow, the Wool or Cotton may be thrust between, as occasion requires it; then Take Venice, Turpentine, and spread it upon a Lock or Wad thereof, putting it with a flat stick between the Shooe and the Hoof, the latter being well pared, keeping it in with a piece of Leather, and renewing it every three days; and as you see his Hoof grow again, pare him even to the quick, applying the Plaister, and suffering him to run in soft, though not in dirty or mirey ground. For a Canker in the Head, a Remedy. When you find by the rawness and yellow matter that this grievance has seized your Horse; to remedy it before it grow desperate, Take a pint of Olive-oyl, of Burgundia-Pitch three ounces, and an ounce of washed Turpentine: put them all into a Pipkin, and mix them together over a gen∣tle fire; and when they are well mixed, add an ounce of Verdegrease, and boil them up to the thickness of a Salve, ever keeping the matter stirring; and ma∣king a Plaister, apply it to the Canker, according to the advantage of the place where it is scituate, ha∣ving first rubbed off the Scurf or Scales; and if so it happen to be in the Nostrils, having washed it with a Spunge at the end of a stick, dipped in Salt and Vi∣negar: to cleanse it, wet the Salve, and dipping a fea∣ther therein, anoint the place grieved with it when warm, and capable of sticking, by the like applica∣tion.
For the Mangey or dry Scurvey, a Cure. Having cleansed the place by scraping off the Scurf or Scabs, that it may lye open to the opperation of the Medicament or Application: Take a quarter of a pint of strong Beer, with two ounces of the Oyl of Turpentine, and well mixing them by shaking in a Viol-glass; anoint the place grieved with a feather, tying up your Horse to pre∣vent his unruliness: during your so doing, and till the sharpness of its opperation be over with a strong cord to the Rack; then blow upon it Powder of Bole-armo∣rick, and bind the Sorrance gently with a cloth: this you may repeat once a week, as often as you see occa∣sion; and when it heals, which will be signified by the returning of the hair, then may you supple it with Oyntment of Marshmallows, and wash it with water wherein Charvil has been concocted or boiled. The Vives, and their Remedy. The Vives are a troublesome distemper or grie∣vance that frequently happen under the Ears of a Horse, and many times endanger his life: For which, in the first place, let your Horse blood in both the Neck-veins; Then placing your Ber∣nacles upon his Nose to make him less sensible of pain; Shape an Iron, as you see the form in the Margin, suffering the edge to be about the thickness of a half Crown: Heat it red
hot, and scarrifie the place upon the middle of the swelling, from the root of the Ears, downwards to the lowest part thereof, in the form annexed, till you per∣ceive the Skin of a yellowish colour, then desist: And having passed over the place with a cloth, anoint it with Oyl of Roses: or for want of that, fresh Butter or Hog's Lard, keeping the place supple by often repeating it; as also the Horse in a warm Stable, with good diet. For swanking in the Back, or a strain in the Kidneys, caused by indiscreet Riding or over-burthening. Your Horse being under these circumstances, mix well together two ounces of Nerve-oyl, and the like quantity of the Oyl of Turpentine, over a gentle fire; and having a Sheeps-skin newly stripped off, rub it with a brush or cloth all over the fleshey side, and clapping the Skin upon the Horse's back, especially where the grief is, bind it on with broad Sursingles very strait, bracing it with a Crupper behind, and Straps before; and give the Horse the Juyce of Pele∣tory, sweetned with Sugar-candy, half a pint warm in a pint of Ale. For any pain or foulness in the Reins or Kidneys, an ex∣cellent Scowring, &c. Take Treacle-Jean two ounces, and Ruburb in Powder half an ounce, with an ounce of the Juyce of Hysop to qualifie them: put these into a pint of Beer or Ale when very hot, and give it the Horse fasting.
A present relief for an Attaint or over-reach on the Heel, or the like. This mis-hap cometh to pass when the Horse with the Toe of his hinder Shooe strikes the Heel just at the setting on of the Hoof, commonly called the Over∣reach; and if not timely regarded, may prove dan∣gerous, for being not only a breaking of the flesh, but a strong bruise, it sometimes by its Rankling perishes the Sinews, or otherwise renders the Horse lame or disabled: And in this case clip away the hair, and the batter'd skin or flesh, which you will find hang loose and useless: And having so done, wash the dirt out of it with Water and Salt; after which anoint it with Neats foot Oyl or Mutton-suet, and then dip a wad of Flax in the Whites of Eggs, and bind it hard with a list or soft string to the place, and renew it till you find the Sorrance healed, which will be in a week or thereabouts. A Cure for the Sorrance, called the Ring-bone. This Ring-bone is an Excressence, generally grow∣ing upon the Instep, just above the Hoof, on the fore∣part of the hinder-leg, and is many times as big as a Pigeon's Egg: To remove this, Tye up the contrary Leg of your Horse, and strike with a sharp Bod∣kin, according to the form in the Mar∣gent, five or six holes in the Ring-bone, at the edge of it, suffering the holes to be of an equal distance, and put into them Arsnick or White Mer∣cury, beaten into fine Powder, and with the Skin of Mutton-suet bind the Sorrance up for the space of a day and a night, and it will eat it away
by its corrosive quality the foundation; so that the Ring-bone being anointed with Supplements, will fall off or crumble away. For the Water-Farcion, a Remedy. This distemper is occasioned by the Horse's un∣wholsome feeding in low wet ground, where the moi∣sture is great, insomuch that with the Grass the Horse takes in extraordinary quantities, which frequently occasions soft swellings under the belly and chaps. To cure this work, A piece of Iron in the fashion of a Fleam, and having heated it red hot, strike it through the Skin of the Swellings, and the contracted humours will flow thence, being an oyly-water, of colour yellowish, and sometimes greyish; and then there needs no more than to wash it with Chamber∣lye as hot as can be well endured, having mixed with it the infusion of Tobacco-stalks, and Powder of Bole∣armorick. For the Ives, a Remedy. This distemper is found to grow like a Roll be∣tween the Neck, and the hinder-part of the Jaw∣bone, and is of dangerous consequence if it ascend to the roots of the Ears. The speediest Remedy for these, is to let the Horse bleed well in the Neck-vein; then take Pepper, Hog's Lard and Vinegar, each half an ounce, with a spoon∣full of the Juyce of Savin: make them up as thick as may be; put one half of them into one Ear, and the rest into the other; stop them in with Lint, stitch∣ing up the Ears so fast, that he cannot shake them out for the space of twenty four hours, and they will di∣still into the Head an opperative quintessence, that will dissolve the swelling.
To take off the Film or Skin from a Horse's Eye. To remove this Obstruction to the sight, Take a piece of lean hung Beef, or other salt Beef: dry it in an Oven to that degree, that it may be reduced to Powder; and do the like by a stick of Licoris: so take of them an equal quantity, and a third part of Burnt Roach-Allom: mix them well, and each morning blow with a Quill about a peny weight into the Horse's Eye, drawing the lids together, if he will suffer it the better to keep in the Powder; and in so doing every other day, for five or six days together, the Film will vanish. This likewise will remove the Pin and Web. A Mallender, the Remedy to Cure it. Having rubbed it well with a cloth, mix Soap, with red Mercury precipitate; and having anointed the place grieved therewith, take away the hair; and having four days successively anointed it in the same manner, afterward use mollifying Oyls or Oyntments to take away the heat of the former unguent; and then wash the place with Urin or Vinegar till it be restored. For the Palsey or Apoplexy, a Remedy. These distempers are occasioned by the Nerves and Sinews, as also the Brain, being afflicted with bad hu∣mours or ascending vapours; and the signs are the stiffness of the Neck and hinder parts, the hardness of his Flanks, and the dullness of his Eyes. To remedy which, Take the Oyl of Peter, and chafe it into those parts you perceive to be afflicted; force it, for its more speedy penetration, with an Iron indifferently
hot, and after that give him half a pint of Peneroyal-water, sweetned with Sugar, and cover him up warm: you may, if you can oblige him to lye down, cover him with the reeking Litter, and gently twist a thumb-band of the same all over his Neck. A Farcion in the Head and Neck to Cure. For this distemper proceeding from corrupt hu∣mours, the Neck-veins must be breathed: Then mix the Juyces of Housleek and Hemlock a like quantity, not exceeding two spoonfulls; adding a spoonfull of Olive-oyl, and dividing them into equal potions: put a half into each Ear, stopping it in with Cotton or Lint, and tye up the Ears for twenty four hours, giving him at the end of three hours a warm Mash, with a few Coreander-seeds in it. A Linnament to cleanse a Wound, new or old. Take Elder-roots dry, and beat them to Powder, and boil the Powder with Honey, and a little Allom∣water, and make a Pessary or Linnament; and dip∣ping it therein when blood-warm, wrap it round your Proble, and gently cleanse the Wound; Washing it likewise with water, and it will cause it to fill with flesh. For Kibed-heels, commonly called the Mules, a Remedy. These Sorrances are no other than dry Scabs breed∣ing upon the Horse's heels, and so inward to the fet∣lock in long chinks, chops and creases, &c. and the occasion is going in wet and dirty ground, and then heated, without any regard or good looking to, which makes even a good Horse, when so afflicted, stiff and unfit for service: To remedy which,
Take Calcined Tartar, and dissolve it in Water and when it is congealed in the nature of Salt, mix it with Soap, and the Oyl of Tobacco, and with it anoint the Sorrance, washing it before and after with strong Beef-broth; and in four or five days, with this continuance, they will be well, especially if the Chops or Rifts are not exceeding deep. The Quitter-bone; what it is, with its Remedy. The Quitter-bone is either occasioned through the fretting or corroding of Gravel under the Shooe, or by an unfortunate or careless prick with a Nail left unregarded amongst the Sinews, which causes the humour thereby contracted to move upward, and break out in a round hard swelling on the corrone of the Hoof, and in four or five days will it break, and send forth matter from a deep hole like an Ul∣cer, and is in it self very dangerous and troublesome the best way to sink or destroy it, is to Cauterize i with a hot Iron, made in the fashion of a half-moon; as thus: Let it be done almost round, and quite cross the middle overthwart, then prick it full of holes and equal distance from each other, and put in Arsnick or Mercury, covering it over with Soap or Butter, bind∣ing it down with a Linnament for the space of two days; and then, if you find it black, the ef∣fects are wrought by the Poyson, insomuch that you may venter to take away the core, though it hang a little by the grisle, and lint the hole with a lint dipped in Verdegrease and Honey well boiled to∣gether, anointing the parts about it with Hog's Lard as a supplement till it be well.
An excellent Cure for the Blood-spavin, &c. Take up, and knit the Vein above the grievance; and having divided it, take of Linseed a pint, bruise it well, and fry it in a Pan with new Cow-dung; and add more, four ounces of Hog's Lard, and two of the Juyce of Hemlock: and so in the form of a Cataplasm apply it, renewing it every day, and it will cause the Sore to come to a head, and then by breaking it brings away the corruption. For a Neather, Attaint, or Over-reach in the Pastern-Joynt. This Sorrance is known by a little gellied bladder on the hollow of the Pastern-Joynt, not much differ∣ing from a Wind-gall; which though many times not to be seen at a distance, yet may it be found and known by feeling. To cure or remove this, Take a small cord or list, and rowl it somewhat strait from the Knee to the Neather-Joynt, and then with a Fleam let out the corrupt matter: which being pressed out, Take the Whites of four Eggs, a handfull of Bay∣salt, and two ounces of the Juyce of Hemlock: mix them well together, and dipping a Rag into them, or rather a wadd of Flax, having first unbound the string, lay it on the place where the swelling was, and bind it softly on; and so continue to renew it for the space of four or five days. For a putrefied Frush, the Cure. Having well washed and cleansed the Foot with Man's Urin, Take of beaten Allom a pound, and put it into a quart of the same Urin; and gathering a good quantity of green Nettles, dry them, so that
they may without difficulty be beaten into a Powder: do the like by Pepper; and when you have after Tra∣vel, or any Exercise, washed the place grieved with the Urin, in which the Allom is dissolved, blow the Powder upon it, and so bind it up: And by this doing frequently, you will find the effects answerable to your expectation. To dissolve the humours, and thereby anticipate Diseases. Take Sage, Rosemary, Wormwood, the Bark of the root of an Elm, or the leaves of the Pine and Wormwood, of each a handfull: stamp or shread them, and then boil them in the Oyl of Linseed till they, being pressed, become the thickness of an Oynt∣ment, and with it as hot as may be: chafe and rub the place where you perceive the humours to settle or begin to draw together: and by often so doing they will disperse. Figs and Salt boiled to Gelly, with the Juyce of Nettles and Elder, have in many cases the same effects. To soften any hard swelling or contracted hardness. Take of Neatsfoot-oyl a quart, of the Juyce of Coleworts half a pint, of the Marrow of Hog's feet two ounces, and an ounce of the Oyl of Cyprus, with half a handfull of the roots of Mallows bruised: boil or heat them over a gentle fire till they incorporate, and become an oyntment: then the roots being ta∣ken away, put it up into a Gally-pot, and as often as you see occasion use it hot to the grieved place.
For the Splint, Wind-gall, or Bladders of Gelly in or a∣bout any of the Joynts subject thereto. Take Bees-wax a pound, Per-rosin half a pound, Galbanum two ounces, Sol-Armoniack an ounce, Costus three ounces, Myrrh Secundary a pound: bruise and melt them together till they are well incorporated; and so being made into a Salve or thick Oyntment, use it Plaster-wise, by applying it to the grievance, and you will soon find it effectual. To cleanse any putrefied, or other Sore, the safest way. Take Salad-oyl and tryed Hog's Lard, of each a pound; Turpentine and White-wax, of each four ounces, and six ounces of Allom-powder, and a quar∣ter of a pint of the Juyce of Rue: make them into an Oyntment over a gentle fire, and dress the Wound therewith, as you see occasion, and it will not only cleanse it, but fill it with sound flesh. A Horse Planet-struck, how to Cure. This distemper takes a Horse's limbs away on a sud∣dain, so that they remain for a good time in the same posture they did at the time of the seizure, he not being able to move them: And this, though it is by the English called Planet-struck, and by the French Sur∣prius, yet it is no other than the effects of heat and cold; and whether of these it is, may be thus per∣ceived. If it be cold, then is it discerned sometime before by his snuffling and ratling in the head, which de∣notes that cold phlegmatick humours do assault the brain: And if from heat, then it may be perceived by the dryness of the Tongue, the scorching of the Breath, clear breathing, and the like, then is the
Malady in the blood, composed of crudities and gross humours: For the first, anoint his Temples with the Oyl of Petrolum, and give him an ounce of Leserpitum in a pint of Canary, and half a pint of Olive-oyl, as warm as may be: And for the latter, having blooded your Horse, give him Water and Honey, with an ounce of Leserpetum, and two ounces of Mellion-seed bruised to Powder, and let his diet be moderate, especi∣ally if his body abound with gross humours, that by a spare diet they may waste and consume; though sometimes indeed by extream fasting this distemper happens, and then good feeding, though by degrees, is the best remedy. For the Poze or excessive Cold, a Remedy. Take Conserve of Ellecampane, or else the herb, bruise or dissolve it into a pint of Mallaga: then add an ounce of beaten Ginger, and Powder of Rosemary; and having well warmed them over a fire, give them the Horse to drink: and so continue to do every o∣ther Morning for a week. To remedy or cure Hideboundness in a Horse. This disorder of body you shall know by finding the Skin of your Horse cleave to his Ribs and Back-bone, so that you cannot without much difficulty take it up: And this proceeds from a pining or wasting, by reason of some inward distemper of body, or by ha∣ving been bad kept, bad rid, or suffered upon a heat to stand much in rainy weather, and be afterward unseasonably dried: To remedy which defect, and render his Skin loose and plyable, so that he may thrive and recover his strength, Take of Cummin and Anniseeds each two ounces, the Powder of Licoras an ounce, Flower of Brimstone half an ounce, and Oyl of Roses a quarter of a pint:
mix these together, and heating them well in a quart of Ale, give them the Horse to drink Morning and Evening for the space of a week, and the Remedy will prove its sufficiency. For a wet inward Cough, a Remedy. This disorder proceeds from the Horse's being too much in damp foggy Airs, whereby gross humours are ingendred; which converting to Rheums, fall in such abundance upon the Lungs, that they as it were stifle and overwhelm them in such a manner, as renders them almost uncapable of performing their office; so that the sound by that means seems to be inward: Now to remedy this, and prevent the danger, Boil a peck of Barley to a Mash or Pulp; then add to it Licoras-powder two ounces, Anniseed and Car∣roway-seeds, of each an ounce; sliced Dates or blew Figs half a pound, Sugar-candy a pound, Turmerick three ounces, and two Roots of Garlick, with a quart of Olive-oyl: and when they are boiled to a Mash, press out the Liquid part between two Cheese-fatts, and give him a pint of it hot for six Mornings toge∣ther; and soon after Exercise him smartly, the wea∣ther being dry, and the ground good. For a dangerous Cough, commonly called the dry Cough. This distemper proceeds from bad feeding or un∣seasonable labour, which causes the Cholerick humour to abound, and fall upon the Lungs in a hot, tough, yellow phlegm, which clungs them up as it were, so that the Horse cannot breathe without pain; and though he seldom coughs, yet when he does it. it is performed with a hollow sound and much violence. Now to remedy this, Take a handfull of Cammomoil, and the like quan∣tity of the herb Melliot, two ounces of Licoras-powder,
and three ounces of the Conserve of Red Roses, a quarter of a pound of Honey, and two ounces of Allom: boil them in Water wherein four ounces of Cam∣phire has been dissolved, and give him the liquid part to drink as hot as he may well endure it; keeping him for two hours after fasting, and beware he catch not cold. For the Yard of a Horse falling, a Remedy. This happens to a Horse when he is grown feeble, either by over-labouring or bad feeding, which cause a bad resolution in the Muscles and Tendons, so that they refuse their office of support: And in this case, Take a gallon of Water, boil in it two handfulls of Bay-salt, half a pound of Carrot-seed, a good hand∣full of Mugwort, and the like quantity of Bay-leaves: then strain out the Liquid part, and add a quart of Old Mallago: and give him this to drink hot, rub∣bing his Yard with Vinegar, wherein Nettle-seed and Burdock-seeds have been concocted To prevent the Mattering of the Yard. This happens to Horses of a hot constitution, espe∣cially after covering: And first appears by the swel∣ling of the end of the Yard, and his being thereby rendred uncapable of drawing it into his Sheath, when soon after you will perceive much filthy Matter issue from thence; At what time dissolve half a pound of Allom in a pint of White-wine, and with a Syringe inject it warm into the Yard, whereby the Yard will not only be scowred and cooled, but the humours be driven back and dispersed.
Of the Diseases incident mostly to Mares, and known by the name of the Pestilent-consumption. This distemper happens to a Mare when she is near her Foaling-time, by reason of a Flegmatick humour that contracts about the Matrix, occasioned by gross feeding, and is known by her dullness, pining, and desire to be Laid, and the like: To redress which, Take a pint of Aquavitae, half an ounce of Tobac∣co, and a sprig or two of Spurg-lawrel: boil them together, and then straining out the Liquid part, give it her fasting, and it will oblige her to cast out the Mass of Phlegm, or at least the Cause that di∣sturbs her: But by reason she will be somewhat sick∣ish when she has cast, Give her half a pint of Salad∣oyl, and the like quantity of Canary, and keep her in a warm Stable with Mashes and good dry Meat a day or two. How a Mare that is subject to cast her Foal ought to be used. In this case there is more than one Cause to be ta∣ken notice of, which subjects a Mare to cast her Foal untimely, sometimes dead, and sometimes alive; as hard Wintering, unwholsome Lodging, over-riding, suddain strains or unhappy blows on the back, leap∣ing hedges, or the like; together with too much fatness, or subjection to gross humours, many times to the endangering of their lives: Therefore when you perceive her near her time, bring her into a warm Stable, and Take an ounce of Diapente, an ounce of Sarsaparilla, three grains of Musk, and a peny-worth of Fennel-seeds: infuse them in a pint of Muscadel, and give them a heating over a gentle fire, and suffer the Mare to drink the Liquid part fasting: then dip your
hand in the Oyl of Myrrh, and thrust it into her Shape, and give her wholsome Diet and good Litter: or this may be done with success at the time of her Foaling, especially if you perceive difficulty therein, and it will be much available in rendering her an easie delivery. How to oblige a Mare to cast her Foal. Now, on the contrary, if you imagine the Foal your Mare goes with is not worth your rearing, or that she has taken Horse contrary to your desire: Then boil a good quantity of Savin in two quarts of new Milk, adding an ounce of Ruburb, and a small quantity of Wood-ashes: and when they are suffici∣ently boiled, strain out the Liquid part, and give it the Mare to drink very hot, and then give her a con∣siderable heat; and in so doing two or three Morn∣ings the business will be effected. But consider with∣all, that you look well to your Mare, least you lose both, for she must for a week afterward be kept in the Stable, and that very warm, and with Mashes of sweet Malt-bran and Barley every other Morning. Of the several Feavers in a Horse, and how to Cure them, &c. There are divers Feavers that frequently possess the Body of a Horse, and that at different times; as the Quotidian, Tertian and Quartan; and these are occasion∣ed by gross humours contracted in the blood, that in∣flame and disorder the frame, and happen according to the circulation of the Blood, or domination of Humours. As for the first of these, it is ever the most violent, but never lasteth long, and most frequently it com∣eth in the Spring, when the Blood begins to encease, especially to Colts and young Horses.
The signs that fore-run this, are the watering of the Eyes, and a redness as if they were blood-shotten, short pantings, hot breath, a loathing or leaving of Provender, stiffness in the Joynts, and unwillingness to labour; And if it so happen that it befall him at eight of the clock the one day, you may expect it at four the next day; and the reason that is given, is the ebbing and flowing of the blood, and its circu∣lation. To rid him of this troublesome companion, give him, as soon as you perceive it to begin, a warm Mash, and keep him in motion, though in the Stable, for the space of an hour or more; then rub him ex∣ceeding well, and Take two quarts of Ale, a good handfull of Worm∣wood, an ounce of Long-Pepper, Venice-Treacle two ounces, and of Grains an ounce: add to these an ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, and as much Rue dried and rubbed into Powder: heat it hot, and give him it at twice, about the space of two hours differ∣ence between each other. The Tertian Feaver is much the same in quality and condition with what I have named, and the Sym∣tomps the same, though it somewhat more than the other participates of the Ague, for it at first takes him with a kind of a shaking: Wherefore when you observe its approach, Take of Stone-crop, an Herb so called, two handfulls; bruise it, and strain the Juyce into two quarts of Ale; drop into it then an ounce of the Oyl of Myrrh, and an ounce of Ginger beaten into Powder: make them hot, and give them the Horse to drink, sweetned with Sugar-candy; and then Rack him a round pace in wholsome Air, but do not sweat him that he thereby may be endangered by contracting a cold; observing to let him drink no cold water till such time as you find the Fit entirely gone, and that he has setled his Body by eating two quarts of the best dried Oats.
As for the Quartan Feaver, it is much of the nature of the two former, only it alters the day, and often continues longer; for if a speedy remedy be not had, it frequently continues, at divers times, for the space of half a year or longer: And if this happen in the Fall of the Leaf, it will be necessary to let Blood; which done, give your Horse what is hereafter di∣rected: Take Oyl of Bays an ounce; Coltsfoot, the Herb, a good handfull; Knot-grass roots, or Scurvey-grass roots, the like quantity; Lavender flowers, or dried Lavender, a handfull: boil them in Ale or White∣wine, and give him the Liquid part, ordering him as for the former. For any disease and stoppage in the Liver. The Obstructions in the Liver frequently happen through excess of humours, that not capable of be∣ing digested into good and wholsome blood, clog and hinder the cavities of the passages, and by that means cause pains and sickness. Now to remove these humours, known by the dullness of the countenance, hanging of the head, often straining, and inward groaning, Take Agremony, Cammomoil, Eumetory, Pursley, Woormwood, Succory, Endive, the Seeds of Lupins, and Flowers of Mayweed, a handfull; Licoris, Gentian and Spikenard, of each an ounce: bruise them well, and boil them in a quantity sufficient of Syder or Perry, and give it the Horse very warm, and let him walk thereupon for the space of an hour after; and for a fortnight after be sparing in his diet, that the humours by this means may disperse and consume.
For a Botch or Sorrance in the Groin of a Horse, a good Cure. When by the Tumourousness of the flesh you per∣ceive a swelling to arise in the Groin of a Horse, Take Shoomakers Wax, the white sort, add to an ounce of it half an ounce of the Powder of Bilthwort∣roots, and as much Amoniacum, and over a gentle fire make them into a Plaster: which being spread upon a feather, apply it to the place till the swelling is ripe for breaking; then Lance it, and take out the putrefaction; after that wash the Sorrance with Wa∣ter wherein Allom and Honey have been dissolved, till you find it begin to heal; then anoint it with Ʋnguen∣tum Aegyptiacum, and bind it up. For a general Manginess, the Remedy. This happens through the corruption of the blood, and grossness of humour, occasioned by over-labour∣ing, over-heating, and bad feeding, or any of these, and may be sometimes catched by contagion from o∣ther Horses; the sign is an extraordinary itching, which you may observe by his scrubbing, and the ri∣sing of little Knots within the Skin: which being per∣ceived, Take Verdegrease two ounces, common Soap a pound, Oyl of Spike two ounces, Linseed-oyl a pint, Red-wine half a pint: incorporate them over a gen∣tle fire, reducing them to the thickness of an Oynt∣ment: having first let the Horse Blood, anoint him with the Oyntment, after the Scurf and Scabs are like-likewise rubbed off: and so continue to do for a week, or so long, till you perceive the distemper to cease by the dying of the Scabs, and the coming of good flesh.
The Barbs, what they are, and how removed. This troublesome Sorrance happens under the tongue of the Horse, being composed of too long bags of flesh, like Paps or Nipples, growing as they abound with humour more or less, and hinder the Horse much in his feeding, putting him to no small trouble. Now to remedy it, clip them off close to the Jaw, and Take of Allom an ounce, Honey the like quantity, Bay-salt a handfull, and the Juyce of Mint a quarter of a pint: dissolve and boil these in a quart of fair water, and wash the roots of the Barbs till they heal. Some there are that advise Burning them off; but in my opinion, by reason of their scituation, that is neither so easie to be done, nor safe, least the Tongue-string or small Veins be thereby rendred useless, and consequently the Horse defective in his feeding. For Blood-shot Eyes, an excellent Remedy. The Eyes by straining, blow, or super-abundance of corrupt blood becoming red and rheumy; so that unless speedily cured, they may turn to further pre∣judice, if not to blindness. To cure this, Take the Juyce of a Lemon, the crumbs of White-bread, Bole-armorick and a rotten Apple: bruise them together, and make of them a Cattaplasm or Plaster: Then take the Powder of the Roots of Mallows, with that of a crust of brown Bread, and blow into the Eyes, binding over them the Plaster, or rather Poultis: and in so doing three or four times, the Blood and Rheum will be driven back and dispersed: but if it be so great that this cannot conquer it, then bleed your Horse in the Temple-veins.
For any Film, Bite, or Blow in the Eye, a Remedy. Take Copras, that which is white, a quarter of an ounce, and the like quantity of Verdegrease: beat them to Powder, and dry them well upon a Plate or Spatula; and after that take of it to the quantity of half a dram, and blow it into the Eye with a quill; then close the Horse's Eye a quarter of an hour, and after that wash it with Eye-bright-water; and so con∣tinue to do till all your Powder is wasted, and then you will perceive a brightness in your Horse's Eye, all grievances being vanished. To kill Lice, or remove Flies from offending your Horse. Take the Flower of Brimstone an ounce, Quick∣silver, well killed, the like quantity; the Oyl of Spike two ounces: mix them with the Whites of two Eggs, and then boil them in two quarts of strong Urin, and anoint the Horse therewith, and it will prevent either the annoyance, or cure it when contracted. To rid a Horse from any foulness or disorder in the Body. Take of Groundsel half a handfull, red Sage the like quantity, Smallage and Wormwood each a hand∣full: shread them small, and boil them well in a pint and a half of Ale, into which put a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, and an ounce of the Powder of Me∣chocan, give the Liquid part to your Horse to drink as warm as possible, and feed him with Mashes for a day afterward. For an extraordinary Bruise or Bite. Take of Caliminaris, quenched in White-wine, two drams; an ounce of the Juyce of Housleek, and two
ounces of the Seeds of Mallows, with an ounce of Venice-Treacle: make them up into balls as big as Walnuts, and give them the Horse in a quarter of a pint of Salad-oyl; and at the same time apply a Pla∣ster of Hemlock and Barrows-grease well stamped and mixed together: And this being done for a week together, will work strange effects in relation to a cure. For a Horse that is troubled with the Strangling, a Cure. Take of Elder-buds, or the Bark of the Root of that Tree, a good handfull; Wormwood, and the herb Mercury, of each half a handfull, and as much wild Tansey: boil them well in two quarts of Vinegar, and give them the Horse, that is, the Liquid part as hot as may be, fasting. To remedy the Swelling of a Horse upon having eaten any Infectious thing in his Grass or Provender, that may, if not remedied, prove dangerous. This grievance is known by the slavering of the Beast, the staring of the Eyes, and the rising of the Belly, the beating of the Flanks, and a cold sweat: which perceived, Take of the Juyce of Rue one pint, two quarts of Milk and a pint of Olive-oyl: boil them together till a third part be consumed; and then sweetning it it with brown Sugar, give it the Horse.
For a Heart-burning or Wasting, occasioned thereby. Take the Juyce of Wood-sorrel or Field-sorrel a pint, Allom-powder two ounces, Hart's-horn an ounce, the Seeds of Pomgranets two ounces, and Spring-water a quart: boil them well together, and strain out the Liquid part, give it the Horse as hot as may be. To prevent staling Blood, a Remedy. Take of Ale a quart, the Roes of two red Herrings, and three or four Cloves of Garlick: boil them to∣gether, and give them the Horse Morning and Even∣ing, that is, the Liquid part. Another excellent Remedy for the Farcy, vulgarly called the Fashion. Take Rue, Garlick and Cloves, of each half a hand∣full: bruise them well, and boil them in half a pint of Aquavitae; then dip Wool or Lint into the Liquid part, and stop it into the Horse's Ears, binding it in: after that bruise the Bark of the Elder, and making an in∣cision in the Forehead, and raise the Skin with your Peg∣ging-horn, and stop it in under the Skin, being first dipped in Oyl of Rosemary; then give the Horse a dose of the Juyce of Liverwort, mixed with half a pint of Canary, and after that warm Mashes. An Approved Cure for any Sinew-strain or Over∣reach. Take Oyl of Bays an ounce, Linseed-oyl two ounces: put them into half a pint of Aquavitae, and being well incorporated, add Wine-Vinegar half a pint, and boil them to the consumption of a third part, then with
your hand chafe it in, or with a warm cloth swathing it afterward to the best advantage; and in so doing you will soon find the effects. Diseases in the Hoof, how to remedy: And first for a Horse, that upon sundry occasions is apt to cast his Hoof. The cause of the Hoofs falling off is various, for sometimes it proceeds from Gravel, and another time from the pricking of an Nail: and in these cases it cleaves downward as the humour settles; but if it happen by any grievance on the top of the Hoof, as the Quitter-bone, and the like, then must you look to the top of the Hoof; and when you there perceive it begin to divide from the flesh, or to open at any part, then take off the Shooe, open the Hoof, and pare it as near as may be to the Sole; after which steep the foot in Neatsfoot-oyl, and the Juyce of Hem∣lock, in which Allom has been dissolved: then make an Oyntment after this manner: Take of Virgins-Wax two ounces, of Verdegrease an ounce, of Per-rosin three ounces, and Hog's Lard a quarter of a pound: to these add the Juyce of green Tobacco a quarter of a pint: make them into an Oyntment, and pour it into the divided place: which done, bind it up close with a thick Linne-cloth; and in so often doing the flesh will be obliged to cleave to the Hoof, and render it firm, unless it be too far gone before you attempt it. Hoof-bound; what it is, and how to remedy it. This grievance proceeds from some defect in the Hoof, or harm taken in the Colt-age whilst it was tender, or by the falling down of a humour; and the Symptoms are the flesh growing over it more than usual; the straitness or narrowness in disproportion
o the Leg, and the sound of hollowness being struck with a Hammer, or other material Instrument: which being well understood, Take Hog's Lard a pound, Soap the like quantity, he Juyce of Baum a pound, Bay-leaves a handfull, he Juyce of Rue a quarter of a pint: Incorporate or concoct them well over a gentle fire, and steep he Hoof in the Liquid part for the space of an hour every morning: then dip a cloth in the Oyl of Petro∣lum, and bind it about it. To soften or harden a Hoof the best way. This Experiment is fitting to be known by all Far∣riers, not only for the advantage of Shooing, but for the Travel more or less of the Horse. Wherefore in the first place, if you perceive the Hoof to be hard and brittle, standing out, uncomly, then try it with a Butress; and if you find it brittle, and not plyable to be pared or cut: then Take of Lime unshaked an ounce, Common Soap the like quantity: dissolve these into a Lye made of Ashwood-ashes; and having prepared a Cataplasm or Poultis of Groundsel, Marshmallows, Smallage, Suc∣cory and Sallendine fryed in Neatsfoot-oyl, after the Horse's hoofs have been steeped in the Lye for the space of an hour as warm as may well be endured, clap the Poultis to them, and stop the bottom of the foot well with Flax dipped in Tarr. To harden a Hoof as occasion requires. If by going in moist ground or moist feeding the Hoof happen to be softned, so that it will not well bare a Shooe, or be prejudicial in Travelling: then to render it capable for either,
Take the Coles of burnt Leather a pound, the wa∣ter wherein Lime has been shaked, and hot Flint-stones quenched, two quarts; add to them a quart of Lime-juyce, and a pound of Bay-salt, and in the Liquid part either let the Horse stand, or with it bathe his Hoofs: after which, Take Oyl of Tartar, or that of Brim∣stone, and anoint them, binding a cloth over them, and suffer the Horse to stand dry: And by thus often doing you will by experience find your expectation answered. For any hurt or Cankerous sore in or on the Hoof. Take, if the season permit, a pound of black Snails; if not, other Snails of any kind may serve the purpose; of Burdock-roots sliced the like quantity; Oyl of Cam∣momoil four ounces, and Olive-oyl a quart: boil them together till they are plyable to be layed Plaster-wise to the place grieved: To which, after you have washed the Sorrance with water wherein Elder has been boiled, apply them, supplying those first layed with fresh every day, till you find the effects. To oblige a Horse to carry his Ears well, the way. This defect happens either for want of a true pro∣portion, or by a defect of the Nerves, which refuse to administer so great a supply of strength as may sup∣port the Ears as they ought to stand for the sake of Ornament. Now to strengthen the Nerves or Si∣news to that degree, Take of Bear's Fat an ounce, Comfry-juyce the like quantity, Oyl of Amber a dram, the Root of black Helebore, beaten into Powder, an ounce, and with Bees-wax half an ounce, and the Oyl of Roses half a pint: make these into an Oyntment, and anoint the roots of the Horse's Ears as hot as may be well endu∣red, repeating it for a week together.
For the grievance called the Frounce, a Cure. This Sorrance is also called by some a Cameroy, and is not other than small Knobs or Bladders on the roof of the Mouth, or upon the Tongue; and the cause, for the most part, is the Horse's feeding in wet or low Marshes in frosty weather, or by eating unsavory Hay in which Vermin have pissed or dunged: And further, some hold it to proceed from the Horse's licking up unsavory things, tending to a Venomous quality. To remedy which, Take Vinegar and Bay-salt, with the Juyce of Sage, and with them, after having let the Horse Blood in the Veins under the tongue, rub the place grieved till the Knobs or Pimples bleed; and by often so do∣ing they will disappear. For a Heat, which sometimes occasions a breaking out in in the Mouth and Lips, the Cure. This disorder is accompanied with dryness, and pro∣ceeds from the heat of the stomach, by surfeits, over∣heating, or a consuming quality; and if not timely taken notice of, produces the infectious humour that creates the Canker: To redress which, Bleed the the Veins in the Lips, which you may cause to appear by bending them the contrary way: and then wash them with Salt and Vinegar, giving the Horse water to drink wherein Coltsfoot has been boiled, or Fene∣greek-seed, with his Provender.
Wolf-teeth, what they are, and how to ease their Pair the ready way. These Teeth are too commonly growing in the upper Jaw, next the grinders, which many times oc∣casion such pain, that the Horse is frustrated in hi eating, by being obliged to let his Provender fall ou of his mouth; and the cause they are mostly subjec to this is, by reason they have frequently a hollow∣ness within subject to receive the Rheums that settle in the Jaw: To remedy which, either draw them or Launcing the Gumms that they may bleed: wast the Mouth each morning with Hysop-water and Al∣lom, the latter being dissolved in the former. To staunch any Bleeding, a speedy way. If by occasion of Wound or Sorrance your Horse happen to bleed excessively, so that thereby, if not timely stopped, he may be weakned, or other ways endangered, Take the Wool of a Hare or Coney, dip it in Vine∣gar, and then strew upon it the Powder of Calcined Egg-shells, and apply it to the place: or you may for want of the former, dip it in Nettle-juyce and Bay∣salt; or apply to the Wound or Sorrance a Poultis of Hemlock, and the Eark of Elder-root. To supply the defect of the falling of the Crest, a Remedy. This uncomeliness in a Horse is the leaning of the upper part of the Neck on which the Mane grows, to one or the other side, which is caused by weakness of the Sinews or Nerves, through a contraction of cold, or some flegmatick humour there engendred; or, on the other hand, upon the rising of the flesh through extraordinary fatness. To remedy which,
Take the Oyl of Petrolum two ounces, Linseed-oyl half a pint; and having well washed the Crest with Water wherein the Roots of Mallows have been boil∣ed, and Allom dissolved, anoint it with the Oyl; and in so continuing to do for a month, the Skin will con∣tract; and more especially, if upon every Application you clap two broad pieces of Deal, or other Board, on each side; and so bind it up in due order, and let the Horse blood in the contrary Neck-vein. To Cure Manginess, or the like disorder, in the Crest. Take Hog's Lard a pound, Verdegrease four oun∣ces, Flower of Brimstone four ounces: add to these a pint of Beef-broth very salt, and dissolve what is to be dissolved therein: Then having rubbed off the Scabs and Scurf till they bleed, wash the place grieved therewith as hot as may be well endured for a week together; and lay after that a cloth dipped in green Oyntment thereon. This will also hinder the Hair from falling off, especially the former. The Navel-gall, what it is, and its Remedy. This grievance is no other than a bruise or hurt with an unfit or uneasie Saddle, or that part of the back that is opposite to the Navel, and for that cause only is so called; it is known by a soft swelling in the place bruised; and its Cure is as followeth: Take the Whites of two Eggs, an ounce of Cop∣ras, two ounces of the Oyl of Bays, and of Marsh∣mallows, Smallage, Groundsel and Cammomoil, each a handfull: stamp them in a Mortar, and pour the Liquids on them; by which means make them into a Poultis, and frying them, lay them as hot as may be to the place grieved.
For a Sitfast or horney Excressence under the Saddle, whereby the Horse is disabled from carrying it in good order as he ought. This Sorrance appears like a piece of old Leather upon the Horse's back, and is commonly the relick of some old bruise or desperate Saddle-gall not well cu∣red, and obligeth the Skin to stick fast to the flesh. To cure which, Take Oyl of Vitriol, and anoint the place till it has loosened the Excressence: after which take it off by incision, and anoint the place with Verdegrease and Hog's Lard hot, and wash it after with the Juyce of Mint till it be new skinned: and to make the Hair come, wash it with the Juyce of Cardus Benedictus, or that of Hemlock. For any Knob or Wen near the Saddle-skirt, or the Sides of the Horse, a Remedy. To remove this, Wash it first with hot Wine-Lees, and afterward bathe it with Oyl of Cammomoil or Marshmallows: Then to draw it to a head, lay on a Plaster of Stone-pitch and Turpentine; which being done, Lance it with your sharp-pointed Fleme, and apply a Plaster of Oxecrotium to draw out the putre∣faction, and then with Hog's Lard supple it; and if the Sore be deep, Tent it with a Linnen Tent, dip∣ped in Bees-wax and Honey melted together. For Weakness in the Back, a strengthning Remedy. This happens frequently through Coldess, or wa∣tery humours afflicting the Sinews, or in gelly'd mat∣ter setling in the Joynts, or by his too often covering the Mares or such-like. Now to corroborate a Horse defective herein,
Take Horse-radish Roots a pound, Bay-leaves two handfulls, the Bark of Elder the like quantity: boil them in Man's Urin, and with the Liquid part bathe the Back as hot as is convenient, giving him for diet Oats and Splent-beans; and each morning fasting a ball made in this manner: Take Licorish-powder two ounces, Hart's-horn beaten to Powder an ounce, Fenegreek and Hysop∣seed stamped, of each two ounces; wet them with as much Mallaga-wine as will make them up into balls about the bigness of Pigeon's Eggs. For the Swelling in the Cods of a Horse naturally, or oc∣casioned by any Bruise, &c. Take Dill-seeds or Fennel-seeds an ounce, the Juyce of Orpin a quarter of a pint, Bole-armorick two oun∣ces, the Juyce of Garlick the like quantity: make these, with Hog's Lard, into an Oyntment, and anoint the place grieved therewith as warm as may be well endured. For Burstenness, or the Rupture in a Horse. This grievance is the breaking of the Rim or Film that holds up the Bowels from falling into the Cods, and either happens by over-straining in riding upon a full belly, or the Horse's leaping beyond his strength, and is by most Farriers held incurable. But since it so happens, that a bursten Horse may, notwithstanding in some measure, be fit for service, I shall give such directions as may the better inable him for it. Take your Horse to whom this misfortune is be∣fallen, and fasten Ropes with running Nooses to his feet; then putting Ropes through them, cast him up∣on soft straw, and draw him up by casting the Ropes over a Beam in the Barn or Stable; then with your hands gently separate the Bowels from the Stones,
putting the former in their proper place, and re∣taining the latter; withall, anointing the Cods with Hog's Lard and the Juyce of Endive, gent∣ly chafing them till they begin to shrink up: Then with a soft List tye the Cod as near to the Belly as may be, and cut out the Stone where the Film is broken, sewing up the Cod with thread dipped in the Oyl of Turpentine; and so keep your Horse for the space of a fortnight, in a warm Stable, with heartning Diet; anointing his Cods with Hog's Lard and Allom-pow∣der, melted together over a gentle fire. The Art of discovering hidden Griefs or Ailments in a Horse, and from what they proceed. The better to be the least couzened in Horse-flesh, is to see one leade him before you in a string to seve∣ral paces; and though you cannot so know his grief or ailment, yet if you well observe how he takes up his Legs, the defect will appear by his favouring one more than the other: but if nothing of that appear, then back him and ride him at all paces, so that you or your friend who stands by may be convinced by his going how he stands affected. Now if so it happen he sets out stiff, and handles his Legs confusedly, then does his grief proceed from cold settlements of watry humours in or near the Joynt; for which chafe his Legs morning and evening with Aquavitae and Oyl of Turpentine: But if it proceed from heat, as Surfeits, and the like, then he will halt the more he is ridden or chafed, by being heated; and then anoint his Limbs with Neatsfoot-oyl, the Marrow of a' Swine: or wash them with Water wherein Copras has been dissolved, and look he be kept in a clean warm Stable.
The Bone-spavin, what it is, &c. This Excessence or Sorrance is a Knob of a boney substance growing under the Joynt, on the inside the hoof, as big sometimes as a Pullets Egg; and either proceeds from the too early pressing the little bones in those parts by hard labour, or from the settlement of bad humours fed by the master Vein that descends to those parts. This many times is so troublesome to a Horse, that it makes him go down lame. Now the best way to remove and cure this Sorrance, is this: Take a Pen-knife and lay open the Skin about the boney Excressence; and having a Chisle or Knife for that purpose, strike off or pare away the bone till you come as near as may be to the quick; Then having ready a Plaster of Bees-wax and Verdegrease well mixed by melting, bind it on, but so that it may not afflict the Vein, and renew it every other day for the space of a week; then with Hog's Lard cleanse and anoint it for two or three days more; and finally, wash it with Vinegar, and bind it up that it may heal. For want of Verdegrease, you may take the Powder of burnt Allom. For a Haw in the Eye. This happens most commonly by a blow or over∣riding, and greatly impairs the sight: To remove which, Take burnt Allom, and the Powder of Juniper-ber∣ries, and blow them into the Eye, keeping it close for a quarter of an hour: and so by often doing you will perceive the Haw loosened by its wrinkling up, then with your nails take hold of it, and draw it forth: or if you cannot so do, continue the Powder till it is eaten off.
For the falling out of the Fundament, a Remedy. The falling out of the Fundament often happens by an extraordinary Laxativeness, or a coldness con∣tracted in the Bowels, which creates a slimey matter: And in this case anoint it with Oyl of Spike, and sprinkling on it the Powder of Turmerick, put it up in order, and binding a string about the Tail, bring the string between the Legs, and by fastening it to a strap cross the shoulders, keep in the Fundament, suffering the Tail to continue so fastened for the space of twelve hours. And this method may be used in case of the Womb, of a Mare's falling out, &c. To preserve a Hoof from decaying, &c. Take half a pound of Tarr, a quart of Vinegar, half a pound of Hog's grease, a quarter of a pint of the Juyce of Garlick, two ounces of Olibanum, and as much Bees-wax: boil them together till the moisture be so far consumed, that it becomes the thickness of an Oyntment, and with it at seasonable times anoint the Hoof; and dipping Flax into it, stop the hollow part if you find any defect there, or suspect any will happen. Interferring, what it is, and the Remedy. This happens when by the unevenness of a Horse's steps, or the bad shooing; he cuts his fore-fetlock Joynt on the inside with his hinder shooe; which by its not being well looked to, many times festers and becomes a sore Scab: To cure which, Take fresh Butter half a pound, Rosin the like quantity, Nerve-oyl half a pint: melt them to∣gether, and when they are of a thickness, spread a Plaster, and lay it to the place grieved, suppling
it before with Hog's grease, or the Oyl of Cam∣momoil. A false Quarter, what it is. This is a defect in the Hoof, in such a manner, as if a piece was put in, having on either side it a Seam or Rift, which frequently obliges the Horse to halt on that part, and is generally caused by some prick or hurt when a Colt: To remedy which, at least to give the Horse ease, Take off the Shooe, and pare the Hoof on that side as much as may be, and then supply the defect with Toe dipped in melted Turpentine and Bees-wax, not over travelling, or using your Horse to dirty ways. The Melt on the Heel. This is no other than a dry Scab growing on the heel, occasioned sometimes by the Horse's standing wet and dry over-long or unseasonably, and at other times through corrupt blood setling there: To re∣medy which, Take of black Soap a quarter of a pound, Honey the like quantity: dissolve them in a pint of Vinegar, then add the Powder of burnt Allom two ounces, and Rye-meal a like quantity: wash the Sorrance well with water and salt, and then spread the before men∣tioned materials, and apply them Plaster-wise, ha∣ving first taken off the Scurf or Scab as clean as may be; and so for a week together continue the supple∣ment.
An excellent Remedy for any Strain or Swelling. Take of Aquavitae a pint, melt into it a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, and mix with them a quar∣ter of a pint of the Juyce of Helebore: then with the Liquids make a Plaster of Rye-meal, and apply it as hot as may well be endured to the place grieved: This will likewise asswage any swelling, or the like disorder. How to remedy the harm done a Horse by unadvisedly and unskilfully letting Blood. Many times a Horse being let Blood by an unskil∣full hand, or suffered thereupon to take cold, or the wind to possess the empty Veins which causes swel∣lings in the Neck, or other disorders. To reme∣dy it, Take Sheeps-suet half a pound, the Juyce of Hem∣lock half a pint, and four ounces of the Oyl of Cam∣momoil: which being made into an Oyntment, rub and chafe his Neck with them, as hot as may be, morn∣ing and evening, giving him warm water to drink wherein Fennel-seeds are scattered, and cover his Neck over with a warm cloth, giving him gentle heats. For the Leprosie in Horses, a Remedy, with the Cause. Take Resalgar, otherwise called Arsnick, and Hog's Lard well tryed: incorporate them to an Oyntment over a gentle fire; and having drawn the Horse's head up strait to the Rack, to prevent his disorders, anoint the place with a feather, and suffer it for the space of two hours to soak in; and after that boil the Roots of Burdocks in Chamber-lye, and wash with it the Oyntment clean away: which done, give the Horse
meat of the best to hearten and encourage him to en∣durance; and so proceed to do every other day for six days successively. This grievance, or dangerous Malady, befalls a Horse by extraordinary riding, and suffering the Horse to cool, and consequently surfeit: or from the rank∣ness of blood, which produces evil humours, and they not timely let out, force their way in Botches and dry Sorrances, which upon dressing must be rubbed off to prepare the way for the Oyntment. For any disease in the Lungs, an excellent Remedy. The Diseases in the Lungs proceed frequently from extraordinary cold and flegmatick humours, or, on the contrary, from hot Inflamations, caused by Surfeits, or the like; either of which, if not timely remedied, tend to consumption and rottenness, and are known by the working of the Ribs, and beating of the Flanks; but more especially by his coughing weakly, and the slow beating of what has been before mentioned, with o∣ther the like signs. To cure these, Take of the herb Melliot, common∣ly called Horse-Lungwort: bruise it in a Mortar, and squeese out the Juyce to the quantity of two ounces; of Fenegreek-seeds and Madder, each an ounce, with as much of Rosemary-seed, and give him them, the latter being well bruised in a quart of warm Ale, eve∣ry other day, for the space of fourteen days, fasting; and after the dose, let him have Oats washed in warm Beer and warm Mashes, keeping him in a close Stable, without exercising him, unless in a fair clear day: Or for want of these, Take a young Snake, open it, and put into the belly Rue and Snakeweed; shred, with the fat of a Hedge-hog, as much as the belly of the Snake, being embowelled, will hold; and let it be roasted before a gentle fire, saving the Oyl or Dripping that falls from
it carefully in an Earthen-pan; and having shaved off the hair on the breast, anoint it with this Oynt∣ment, chafing it in with your hot hand: and so do by renewing the Oyntment as often as you see it convenient. For the swelling of the Horse's Legs, the Cure. The cause of the swelling in the Legs comes through cold humours setling therein, or over-much riding in foul or dirty ways, over-heats or over-strains, or by Molten-grease falling down into the Legs: And in this case having let blood in the most convenient Veins, as near as may be to the swelling; to take away the corrupt blood, then Take the Lees of White-wine or Rhenish-wine half a pint, Cammomoil half a handfull, Cummin-seeds an ounce, Wheat-flower two handfulls: boil them all together, adding in the boiling half a pint of Ver∣juyce, and so lay them hot as a Poultis to the place grieved, renewing it till you find it draws the swel∣ling to a head: which being done, Take Shoomakers Wax an ounce, the like quanti∣ty of Virgins Wax; half an ounce of Bole-armorick, and half a pint of Olive-oyl; the Yolks of two Eggs, and half a quartern of Honey: beat these well toge∣ther over a gentle fire, till you perceive them well incorporated into the thickness of a Salve; and then spreading part of it upon Sheeps-leather, apply it Plaster-wise till the corruption, by often renewing it, be drawn away: then wash the place with Balm-water, and heal it up with Hog's-grease and Honey, incorpo∣rated over a gentle fire.
The flying Worm, what it is, and how to Cure it. This is known generally by the name of a Tetter or Ringworm, occasioned by an extraordinary heat in the Blood, and other foul disorders creating a vir∣rilent or sharp firey humour, and for the most part seizes upon the Rump or Crupper of the Horse, and frequently, by not being regarded, turns to a Canker, though indeed it will seize; and so is found to do up∣on any part of the body that is subject to flesheyness or abundance of blood, and cause the Horse to rub himself in an extraordinary manner: and is known by the falling away of the hair, and the Horse's con∣tinual rubbing. To cure this, let the Horse blood as soon as may be in that part where it has seized him; and then Take an ounce of Verdegrease, two ounces of Bur∣dock juyce two ounces of Soot, a quarter of an ounce of the Oyl of Tartar: and with the weght of all these in Hog's Lard, make them up into an Oynt∣ment, bathing it with it as hot as may be endured: and so continue to do till the Malady ceases to spread, and consequently dies. Excellent Directions for the prevention of Diseases in Horses, at sundry times, &c. Observe in this case to bleed your Horse the begin∣ning of April in the Neck-veins, when the sign of Life is not in that part; and so every day in the Month of April. give him what I order: As thus; Take old Rye, not musty, nor any ways disordered, impaired by shrivelling up, nor any way foul with dirt, Lome-stones, or the like, take to the quantity of a Bushel; and having sprinkled it with the Juyce of Baum, and again dried it by spreading in the Sun; put it into an Iron boiling-pot without water, and
there by perpetual stirring, parch it to that degree that it becomes black and hard: then take it out, and put it into a close dry place, and each day give your Horse a quart of it, beaten to Powder, amongst his Oats: and so do in the Month of October, likewise remembring to let him Blood: And by this means his blood will be so well tempered, that unless some ex∣traordinary matter happen, as exceeding heats occa∣sioning surfeits, too rank feeding or damp lying, the Horse will undoubtedly be kept in a good temper of body during the whole year: And the better to confirm him, give him this drink as soon as he is let blood, viz. Take of White-wine a pint, infuse into it Cina∣mon, Cloves and Saffron, of each three drams; Cassa and Myrrh, of each the like quantity: let them simper over a gentle fire for the space of an hour; and then being sweetned with Sugar-candy or fine Sugar, give it him blood-warm fasting, and keep him warm with a cloth for the space of two hours after without Meat. A Cure for a sore or defective Mouth. The sores or disorders in the Mouth are occasioned either by bad blood or excessive colds, creating rheums and noisome vapours that afflict the pallate, for there they generally begin; and from thence descending to the Jaws, do in a great measure obstruct the feed∣ing, and hinder the shutting of the Mouth: Now when it happens in the Palate only, the best expe∣dient is to let blood in the Mouth, by cutting the third barr, or as your discretion leads you. The Horse being let blood, Take of strong old Cheese four ounces, and a Root of Garlick: bruise them well, and boil them in water wherein Plantane has been concocted, and with the Liquid part wash the Mouth and Tongue of the Horse as hot as it may
well be endured; so continuing often to do, till you find the grievances to decrease; and if it be so far gone, that this proves not effectual, Take a pint of Verjuyce, a handfull of Bay-salt, a quarter of a pint of the Juyce of Housleek, and a penyworth of Diascordium: boil them well, and ha∣ving washed his Mouth with Savin-water, or water wherein Savin has been concocted, give him the be∣fore-mentioned potion to drink luke-warm. For the Mellet in the Heels, a Cure. Take three ounces of Casteel-soap, a pound of En∣glish Honey, Allom two ounces, and of Lime-juyce or Verjuyce a quarter of a pint, with half a handfull of Bean-flower: incorporate them over a gentle fire, and having reduced them to a convenient thickness, bind a part of it with Leather or thick Linnen upon the place grieved, suffering it without renewal, to continue there for the space of five days; and between each renewal wash the place well with Beef-broth, keeping his Leg moist, and roped up, for some days after. The Stavers, their signs, cause and cure. This distemper is known by a dizziness in the Head, a dullness of the Eyes, and disorderly hanging of the Jaws, and proceeds, in chief, from corrupt blood and infectious vapours that affect the brain, and conse∣quently put the whole frame out of order. And this disease few Horses altogether escape. The cure is, to let him Blood in the Temple-veins or Neck-veins; and having a potion made after this manner, give it him hot. viz. Take a handfull of Savin, the like quantity of Rue, an ounce of Ruburb, and an ounce of Methridate:
give him these Ingredients, the Liquid part well boil∣ed in a quart of Spring-water, sweetned with brown Sugar or Molossus. For the Stone, a very good Remedy. This distemper is occasioned by gross humours, which setling in the Reins or Bladder, do, in process of time, by the help of heat and moisture, grow to a hardness, and so obstruct the passage of the Urin; and by grating those tender parts, cause exceeding pain and disorder to the creature so afflicted. To dissolve or remove the Stone so contracted, Take the Roots of Nettles, Parsley, Fennel and Sperage, of each four ounces; of Saxafrage and Dod∣der, each a handfull: bruise and boil them in a quart of White-wine, and a pint of Vinegar, untill a third part be wasted: then add a handfull of Bay-salt, and half a pint of Olive-oyl, with half a pound of Ho∣ney; and having strained out the thin part as hot as may be, let him drink it fasting: and so continue to to do for the space of a week together, and you will find the pains will cease. To take away a Wen in the Neck, or any part of the Hor∣se's Body, without danger. These Sorrances are generally caused by the assem∣bling of bad humours to one place, and their con∣tracting into a Tumour: To remove them there∣fore, Take the Oyl of Bays, Water of Tartar, and Soap-boylers-Lees, mix them well; and being very hot, dip a cloth therein, and lay it upon the place grieved; continuing often so to do, and the humours thereby being dispersed, the swelling will sink and disappear▪
The Crownet-Scab, what it is; together with the Cure. This is a troublesome Sorrance, being a Scab round the corners of the hoof, very cankerous and dange∣rous, and frequently comes by a Horse's running in wet and mirey ground, especially in Winter-time, whereby the cold has power to contract the gross and disordered humours; and is known by the hairs stand∣ing up, the unevenness of the Crownet, and the wa∣try humour that proceeds from thence: Wherefore to cure it, Take Verdegrease an ounce, Rusty Bacon-fat two ounces, Powder of Hart's-horn an ounce: wash the place with Beef-broth; and having made the before-mentioned materials into an Oyntment, anoint the place hot as may be endured; and continue so to do for a week together: after which anoint it with Oyl of Bays or Rosemary. To draw out a Thorn or Stump, or any Iron, or sharp thing gotten into the flesh. If you cannot come at the cause of this kind of Sor∣rance, so as to draw it out with your fingers or Pin∣cers; then mollifie the swelling or part where you conceive it to be; and, Take of Burgundy-pitch an ounce, and of black Soap two ounces: stamp the Roots of Water-lillys to the quantity of both the former; and spreading them Plaster-wise, lay them to the place a night and a day, and thereby the swelling will not only be sunk or de∣pressed, but the head of the Thorn or Iron will ap∣pear to that degree, that it may be easily taken out: after which apply a Plaster of Diaculum or Oxicrotium to bring away the festered matter, if any be found there, and so heal it with green Oyntment.
For a Strain in the Coffin-Joynt, or Socket of the Hoof. This Sorrance happens by a sudden short slip, and is not thought of by many Farriers, who are of the opi∣nion, That under the hoof there can be no slip or strain, though the contrary appears: and this is found out by taking up the foot, and bowing the hoof from side to side; and on that side you perceive the Horse to be pained in so doing, on that side is the danger. This being perceived, Take of Beef-brine a pint, and as much tried Suet; set them on the fire, and let them consume to a third part; then add Wheat-meal and the Juyce of Ale∣hoof or Ground-ivy half a pound, or so much that they may be made up into the thickness of a Poultis; when having pared the hoof at the bottom to the quick, spread some of it very hot, and stop it in with Flax: and so renew it every other day, till you per∣ceive by your Horse's going the grief removed; and the better to keep it on, you may clap a cross stick under the shooe, or cover the whole foot with a pitched cloth, or a thick sole of Leather, will do the same office; but observe, that during the cure, you suffer him not to go in wet and dirty ground. For a Horse that is perpetually sick or out of order, by re∣taining a spice of former surfeits, not perfectly cured. Having let your Horse blood, take him up into a warm Stable, and prepare two ounces of Alloes Suca∣trina finely beaten to Powder; Rowl them up in But∣ter that has been tempered with the Juyce of Rue, and give him the composition in pellets as big as Walnuts in the morning fasting, having prepared his body for the reception thereof, by dieting him some days before with scalded Bran and boiled Barley,
refusing on this occasion to give him hard meats till three days after, suffering his drink to be White-wa∣ter, and that very warm. Now this White-water is no other than water wherein Flower or Bran is scat∣tered, or Bread finely grated and sifted, &c. For a Cold in the Summer, when the Horse is defective in filling, or by too rank feeding. Take of the Powder of the Root of Scabeous an ounce and a half, of red stone Sugar half a pound, and of Olive-oyl four ounces: add to these half a pint of Canary, or as much as will dissolve them to a thin∣ness, that the Horse may easily swallow them; and so give them to him luke-warm in a Drenching-horn; and after them a gentle heat, in such manner, that the humours may be stirred and brought away by Excrement, of Sweat, Urin, &c. And this may be gi∣ven in case of any extraordinary over-heating, by Racing, and the like. A through Splint or Screw-pin, what it is; together with the Cure. This Sorrance happens on both sides of the Legs so opposite one to the other, as if it riveted it; and from thence takes the denomination of Screw-pin, and is a kind of a sinewy Excressence: Wherefore to remove it, for it is very troublesome to the Horse, Take the handle of a Hammer, or the Blood-stick, and beat it therewith on either side, till you have re∣duced it to a softness: then having an ounce of the Oyl of Riggrum, or by some called Reggium, anoint it therewith, and bind a cloth about it; and by fre∣quent dressings the Excressence will sink, and restore the Leg to a flatness: for want of the before mentio∣ned
Oyl, Take that of Petrollium, and it will work much the like effects. To render a brittle Hoof firm and serviceable. Take of the Juyce of Garlick and Rue, or Herb-a-grace, of each four ounces; Powder of burnt Roach-Allom, half a pound; Hog's-grease and new Cow-dung, of each a pound: mix them altogether, and being made into a Poultis over a gentle fire, apply it hot to the hoof, binding it about it, and stuffing it in under the shooe; and in often renewing it the cure will be perfected. To Cure the Anbury. Sear it off with a sharp hot Iron, and having Hog's-grease and Verdegrease well tempered together, a∣noint the Roots therewith at sundry times, &c. To prevent a Horse's pissing Blood, an excellent Remedy. Take the herb called Harts-Tongue half a hand∣full, Piony-roots sliced an ounce, the Juyce of Bet∣tony half a pint: boil them in stale Beer, and give them him as hot as he is capable to endure, the Liquid part only: and so continue to do in the morning fast∣ing for a week together, and the defect will cease. For a broken Knee, the Remedy. Take Urin, heat it well, and wash the Sorrance, easing it of the Gravel, if any be contracted, by fall∣ing, or the like: Then take Turpentine an ounce, Rosin the like quantity, Hog's Lard two ounces, and the blades of Leeks a handfull, with two ounces of
the Powder of burnt Allom: bruise the Leeks, press out the Juyce, and melt it, with the rest, to the thick∣ness of a Salve: and then spreading it Plaster-wise, apply it to the place grieved, anointing it between whiles with Oyl of Coreander-seeds or Anniseeds. For the Dropsey in a Horse. This distemper proceeds from the looseness of the flesh, occasioned by moist and unwholsome feeding, whereby flegmatick and watry humours are ingendred in the blood, which sweating as it were through the Veins, are retained between the skin and the flesh, or in the spongy flesh, occasioning Tumours and un∣seemly swellings: To remove which, Take two handfulls of Parsley-seeds, the like of An∣niseeds and Bay-berries, with one handfull of Juniper-berries: bruise them together in a Mortar, and boil∣ing them in Verjuyce, sweetned with brown Sugar; give the Horse to the quantity of a pint to drink, first and last chafing the swelled or tumorous places with your hand, or hard wisps of Hay: and so conti∣nuing them for a week together, you will find the flesh become firm, and the watry humours disperse. To joyn a Sinew that is cut. Cleanse the Wound with the Juyce of Nettles and white Sugar; then take the Oyntment of Tobacco, and a Plaster of Diaculum: apply them, and bind up the Wound very strait.
For a Wound or Hurt in the Tongue, a Remedy. This Sorrance being occasioned by the Halter o Bitt, in having to do with too hard a hand: To cure it, Take of the Juyce of Sallendine half a pint, as much of that of Bugloss: heat them over a gentle fire, adding two ounces of Honey of Roses, and as much Allom; and with them anoint the grieved place, and you will find it quickly heal. For the Itch in the Tail, or any other part. This disorder proceeds from rank blood, through foul feeding: Therefore having bled your Horse well, Take Wood-ashes a peck, Burdock-roots a handfull or two, Man's Urin two gallons, and the like quan∣tity of water wherein Tobacco-stalks have been steep∣ed: boil them up into a Lye, and with it wash the grieved part, when it is very hot. Another excellent Remedy for the Tetter. Take of the Roots of Elecampane and red Dock, of each a handfull: steep them a week in Urin, adding two handfulls of Bay-salt: boil them in the Urin till from two quarts it become one, and with it wash the Sorrance, after it has been well rubbed and chafed, that the Liquids may the better sink in. For a Hurt or Wring in the Withers. This commonly happens by the straitness of the Saddle, or indiscretion of the Rider; and is known by a Swelling or Tumour on the Back, &c. To remedy this, Take a handfull of Wheat-flower, wet it, with half a pint of White-wine Vinegar, adding three ounces
of Honey, and an ounce of Juyce of Hemlock: mix them well over a gentle fire, and apply them Plaster-wise to the place grieved: Or for want of these, Take Water wherein Barley and Fennel have been boiled, and wash the places with it as warm as may well be endured. Worms of any sort in the Body of a Horse, how to kill and remove them. Take a handfull of the tops of Broom, and of Sa∣vin the like quantity: bruise them together with as much Featherfew, then with fresh Butter and Trea∣cle make them up into balls the bigness of Pigeon's Eggs; and when he is fasting in the Morning, give him three of them, and let him fast three hours af∣ter; then give him Oats, but refrain giving him Wa∣ter till the Evening: and in this doing four or five times, the Worms will be destroyed and evacuated. An excellent Salve for any sort of Wound, how to make and apply it. Take of clarified Rosin a pound, the like quantity of Bees-wax, Sheeps-suet half a pound, Frankincense and Storax, of each half an ounce; Gum-arabick four ounces, Hog's Lard a pound and a half, and of the Juyce of green Tobacco half a pint: dissolve and melt them over a gentle fire, adding in the melting four ounces of Turpentine, and the like quantity of Red-wine; and so boil them up into the thickness of a Salve, by drawing off the watry part, if any remain, and apply it Plaster-wise on Leather or thick Linnen, in case of any Wound, Sorrance, Bruise, or other af∣fliction.
An Imposthume to ripen and cure. The greater or lesser quantity of matter relating to the Imposthumation, may be discerned by the heat, being more or less; as also the throbbing and beating: Then to break it, apply the Roots of white Lillies and Marshmallows, the Flowers or Roots of Mare∣blabs: bruise them, in the best wise, in a Mortar with Hog's Lard and Wheat-flower, and Poultis-wise ap∣ply them to the swelling: which being thereby brought to a head, Lance it; and having drained the corruption, apply a Plaster of the before-recited Salve; and by often renewing the Plaster, it will draw the corruption from all parts, and render the Horse sound and safe. For any Internal sickness, another good Remedy, never be∣fore published. If you would have your Horse be mostly exempted from infirmities, especially such as are Internal; after having let him Blood in due season, or as the Malady requires it, and given him, if need require it, an open∣ing Clyster made of Cammomoil, Marshmallows, the Flowers of Archangel and Comfory, boiled in Milk or Ale: Take round Aristolochia, Gentian, and the Roots of Three-leav'd-grass, of each two ounces; Race, Gin∣ger, and Nutmegs, of each an ounce; the Seeds of Cardamoms, and Juyce of Hysop, of each two ounces; Indian Spikenard two drams; Licoris an ounce; Dia∣scordium two ounces; Raisins in the Sun a pound, and twelve blew Figs: boil these in a Pottle of White-wine till a third part be consumed, and give it the Horse to drink warm.
This is successfully given in case of Surfeit, Feaver, Pestilence, Pains in the Belly or Stomach, Internal bruises, Inflamations of the Liver, or Consumption of the Lungs, and the like. For the Ach, weakness or numb'dness of the Joynts. The occasion of this grievance comes either from an unhappy strain, or a contraction of gellied watry humours, caused by cold, and too much moisture: To cure and remove which Aches and Pains, &c. Mix Acopium with Canary; and when you find it very warm, anoint the place grieved therewith, cha∣fing it in with your hand, or a hot cloth, and in a weeks time it will remove the disorder, especially if it proceed from cold: but if from a strain, Then take Aquavitae and the Flower of Brimstone, with a small quantity of the Oyl of Spike: heat them hot, and with a hot cloth anoint the place grieved, ba∣thing and suppling it in, swathing the place about with a Rowler dipped in melted Bees-wax and Hog's Lard. How to stay any violent Looseness. This disorder in the Body happens many ways, but especially by raw and unwholsome feeding: To remedy which, Take of the Juyce of Sloes a pint, half a pint of the Juyce of Sennegreen; Bean-flower and Bole-armo∣rick, each two ounces; Allom one ounce: boil them together to the consumption of a third part; and then making that up with Milk, give it the Horse fasting; and so do for three days successively.
The Lampas; what it is, and how to Cure it. The Lampas is no other than a swelling that pro∣ceeds from rank blood, and appears in proud flesh on the inside of the Lips: the way to destroy it is, when you have gaged the Horse's mouth that he cannot shut it, take an Iron with a flat top, the shape of which you find in the Margin; and heating it red-hot, burn away the flesh; and then rub the place with a roasted Onion and Bay-salt, and in a short time the swelling will disappear, and the Horse be better able to eat his meat. For the Fig in the foot of a Horse, the Cure, &c. This Sorrance is a lump of unnatural flesh that grows upon the Frush of the heel, in the shape of a Fig, and is fre∣quently caused by the defect of those that under∣take to cure a wound or hurt in that part, occasio∣ned by a stub or thorn. And now to remove this, Cut away so much of the hoof, that by the means of the Incision there may be a space or difference be∣tween the Frush and the Sole: Then dip a Spunge in an Oyntment made of Verdegrease, Bees-wax and Hog's Lard; and binding it hard on, it will in three or four times so doing destroy the proud flesh, and render the Horse's foot sound and well.
For the Flanks, a disease so called, and the way to reme∣dy it. This proceeds from a wrench, stroak, or pain in the Back, which causes a swelling, &c. And to pre∣pare it for the remedy, shave away the hair where you find the grief: Then make a charge, and apply it; which may be made with success after this man∣ner: Take Bole-armorick, Consolida Majora, Galbanum, Mastick, Per-rosin and Apoponax, of each two ounces, or less, according to the more or lessness of the place grieved: bruise them well to a Powder, adding of Sanguis Draconis and Sol-Armoniack, of each three drams; Wheat-meal, and the Whites of Eggs, with so much Vinegar as will make them into a Cataplasm or Plaster, commonly called a Charge, and lay it warm to the place grieved, being spread upon a Sheep-skin: And this being renewed four or five times, will effect the cure. The Shackle-gall, and its Cure. This is generally occasioned by the fretting of the Shackle or Fetlock, and sometimes by Ropes with which the Horse is Teaded: To cure which, Take a good handfull of Plantane, and boil it in Milk to a softness: then take six ounces of Allom, and two ounces of Sugar-candy, and put them in beaten to Powder, then add as much Vinegar as will make a hard curd come on the top: then the curd being taken off, vash the place with what remains; and then the hair being clipped away, anoint the place with Hog's Lard, and the Powder of Turmerick: or you may do it with the Oyntment of Tobacco, or Honey, Verdegrease and Red-wine made up into an
Oyntment. And this likewise is good for a gall'd back, or a gall in any part of the Horse's body, A Horse that is Gravelled, how to remedy. When by the Horse's crimpling and lameness you perceive he is gravelled by travelling in foul ways, take off his shooes, and search well his feet, clearing away all the Stones or Sand you can find there: Then, to restore him, Take Bees-wax an ounce, Deers-suet, Rosin and Boar's-grease, of each an ounce, and four ounces of the Juyce of Housleek: make them into an Oynt∣ment, and apply it hot on a wad of Flax, stopping it in.
Of Cataplasms or Poultises. NOtwithstanding what has been mentioned, there are divers Cataplasms or Poultises of singular use, and as the best of this kind, Take the subse∣quent. For any Swelling, Aposthume, Rankling, Wound or broken Bone, a Cataplasm or Poultis. Take of new Milk one pint, crumble into it white-bread, and boil it till it becomes thick; add then the White of an Egg, and an ounce of Olive-oyl: mingle them well together, and apply them Poultis-wise to the place grieved as hot as conveniently may be en∣dured. For a Swelling in the Throat or under the Ears. Take Neetsfoot-oyl a pint, of the leaves of Mari∣golds a handfull, Saffron a dram, and of white Bread four ounces: boil them together till they become the thickness of a Poultis, and apply them hot to the place grieved. To draw or break a Boyl or Ʋlcerons Sore, &c. Take the flowers of Lady-cups, the roots of Cuc∣cowpintle, the leaves of Burdock, and the flowers or roots of Water-lillies, of each half a handfull: boil them in a quart of Linseed-oyl, and Mash them into a smallness: which done, apply them Plaster or Poul∣tis-wise, binding them hot to the place grieved as conveniency directs.
An excellent Poultis to asswage any Pain or superate Tumour. Take the leaves of Mallows half a handfull, of Groundsel one handfull: boil them in Running-water till they may be made into a Mash, then add to them a pint of Cream and two ounces of crumbled Wheaten-bread, of Mutton-suet half a pound, Oyl of Roses two ounces, and the Whites of two Eggs: boil them all till they become the thickness of a Poultis; and in that manner apply it to the place grieved, renewing it as you see occasion. A Poultis to break any Infectious Sore. Take of Lilly-roots two ounces, Marshmallows and Violet-roots, of each the like quantity; Rye-meal and Linseed-oyl, of each four ounces; of Barley and Wheat∣meal, each an ounce: to these add two blew Figs; of the flowers of Cammomoil half an ounce, and the bark of Elder-roots the like quantity: boil them stamped and well bruised till they may be strained in∣to a pulp; then add again Barrows-grease and Oyl of Almonds, of each two ounces, and apply it to the place till you perceive it drawn to a head: after which you may Lance it, and with a Plaster of Diacu∣lum draw out the Infectious matter, and heal the grie∣wed part. To disperse the Flux or Oppression of Blood in any part. Take Frankincense, Alloes, Dragon's blood and Bole-armorick, of each half an ounce, the Whites of two Eggs, and the Wool of an old Hare: mingle them well in a pint of Aquavitae, and let them boil till they come to a thickness; then Plaster-wise apply them to the place grieved as hot as may be endured.
For an Imposthume or sudden Swelling in any part of the Body. Take French Barley a pound, bruise it with the like quantity of Linseed, shread to them a handfull of Marshmallows, and seeth them together in a quart of new Milk till they come to a solid thickness; then, as hot as may be endured, apply them to the Swelling; and so continue to do for four or five days succes∣sively. In case of the Palsey in the Head (a disease seldom hap∣pening to Horses) apply this Poultis, viz. Take a large Onion, roast it well, then put to it an ounce of the Oyl of Spike, Olive-oyl and Laven∣der-flowers, of each two ounces; Marjorum and Win∣ter-savory, of each half a handfull well shread: boil these, and apply them as a Poultis, hot as may be well endured. And thus much, in brief, of things in this kind. AS for Balms and Balsoms, seeing they are won∣derfull usefull on sundry occasions, I think it not amiss to speak something more of them and their use by way of Receipt. And first, To heal and contract any Wound. Take of Mummy three ounces, Alloes Epatick half the quantity, Stone-pitch two ounces, Sarcol half an ounce, Gum-arabick and Mastick, of each a quarter of an ounce; add to these half a pint of Aquavitae: melt and order them over a gentle fire till they be∣come a Balm; and then, as occasion serves, dipping a Linnament in the contracted Medicament, apply it to the Wound as often as is convenient.
An inward Balm to destroy Worms, and heal Internal Bruises. Take Oyl of Turpentine half a pound, Myrrh, Storax and Galbanum, of each an ounce; Cloves and Cinamon in Powder, of each half an ounce; Deer's-suet half a pound, and of Amber-grease a dram: make them into a Balm over a gentle fire, and give the Horse in warm Ale the quantity of a Walnut fasting. An excellent Balm in case of any Sprain, Internal Bruise, Swelling, Blasting, old Sore or Gun-shot. Take of Turpentine an ounce, Galbanum two oun∣ces, Cicatrine, Mastick, Cloves, Galingal, Cinamon, Nutmegs, Cubebs, of each an ounce, Gum of Jope half an ounce: beat them, and well incorporate them, then distill them over a gentle fire in a Glass; and when the thinest part is drawn off, the next will be a Red Oyl, and that is it which is to be applied with the greatest success, though the first is wonderfull efficacious and usefull on many occasions. An excellent Balm to be given a Horse inward, in case of a Consumption. Take of the best Turpentine a pound, Pine-Rosin a fourth part, Myrrh, Frankincense and Mastick, of each two ounces; Sarcoco, Mace, Wood of Alloes, of each an ounce, and of Saffron half an ounce: put them in a Glass, retort in hot Embers; and after the Water, or the clearer part is drawn off, there will come forth a redish Oyl, which may be given him four drams in a morning fasting, suffering him to take it in half a pint of warm Ale.
An excellent Red Water to cure Ʋlcers. Make a Lye of Ashwood-ashes, that a gallon of the liquid part may be drawn from it; and add to it a gallon of Tanners Ousey, in which no Leather has been steeped; steep in these two pounds of Madder, and dissolve half a pound of Roach-Allom, then let them simper over a soft fire till a third part be consumed; after which run it through a fine Sieve, and dust into it Bole-armorick: which done, set it again over the fire till it come to half the quantity: and so, as you see occasion, you may wash the place grieved with it. An excellent Water to allay any Internal heat or feaverish Indispondency. Take of Savory, Sorrel, Bugloss, Burrage and En∣dive, of each a handfull: chop them small, and boil them in two quarts of Running-water, scuming it till half be consumed, and add as much Verjuyce as will make it up the first quantity: sweeten the Li∣quid part with brown Sugar, and reserve it for your use, giving the Horse half a pint at a time fasting. In case a Horse be troubled with the Stone, an excellent Water. Take two quarts of new Milk, and of Saxafrage, Parsley, Mint, Fennel, Pellitory of the Wall, Mother, Thyme, green Sage and the roots of Radishes, each an ounce: bruise the latter, adding two quarts of White-wine; and so, if your conveniency will admit, distill them, if not boil them, and strain out the Liquid part, and give him half a pint at a time, having first scraped into it the Powder of a roasted Nutmeg.
For any disease in the Eyes, another excellent Water, &c. Take of Maiden-hair and Ground-ivy, a handfull of each, the flowers of Arch-angel the like quantity, the powder of Alablaster two ounces, and of the roots of Wormwood dried and beaten into powder an ounce: distill or well concoct these; and when you have so done, wash the Eye grieved by dipping a feather into the Liquid part. An excellent Purgation for Gravel in the Bladder or Kidnies. Of Parsley-roots take a handfull, white Saxafrage and Ashen-keys, or the bark of the Ash-tree root, of each an ounce; of Paristone, a herb so called, half a handfull; Eringo-roots sliced two ounces: boil them with half a pound of Coreander-seeds in a gallon and a half of new Ale, and give the Horse a pint of the Liquid part of drink as hot as he can well endure it. For the Ʋlceration of the Yard, an excellent Water. Take Spring water a gallon, quench in it a hot Iron and Flint-stones very often: infuse into it the leaves of red Roses, or Rose-cakes, four ounces; Pom∣granet-pills, and the flowers of the same, each half an ounce; add of the Juyce Plantane and Housleek, each half a pint; of Allom and white Copras, each half an ounce: boil them over a gentle fire, and inject the Liquid part into the Yard with a Syringe, and it will effect in often using the Cure.
An excellent Powder for the Falling-sickness or Falling-Evil in a Horse, &c. Take the roots of Elder, dry them in an Oven till they may be beaten into a Powder; add the Powder of a roasted Nutmeg and Storax, each an ounce; the Ashes of the Wool of a Fox, half an ounce; and of the Powder of Calamint a dram: mix these well, and give him half an ounce at a time in a quarter of a pint of Canary. A Powder for the Ague, which frequently happens, especi∣ally to young Horses. Take the herb Mercury, Plantane-leaves, Cardus Benedictus and Rue, of each half a handfull: dry them that they may be beaten to Powder, and give the Horse an ounce of it in a quart of Ale, wherein two handfulls of Centaury have been boiled, as hot as he can well endure it: and so renew the Dose as you shall find occasion. To purge Choler and Phlegm, an excellent Powder. Take of Turbith an ounce, Ginger, Cinamon, Ma∣stick, Gallinga and Alloes. Epatick, of each half an ounce; Diagredium, Ruburb and Seney, of each a dram: dry, bruise, and make them into a Powder, gi∣ving the Horse the whole quantity at two Doses in warm Ale or Milk.
An excellent Bath to allay any Swelling or such-like dis∣order, especially diseases in the Legs, occasioned by the descending of evil humours, &c. Take the roots and bark of Pomgranet, the flowers of Comfory, and of Acorns, each a handfull; Cammomoil and Fumitory, of each a handfull; black Helebore and Hysop the like quantity: boil them in a gallon of Water, and when a third part is consu∣med, apply with a Woollen-cloth the remainder to the place grieved as hot as may be well endured. A Bath to soften and mollifie the Skin. Take the roots of Marshmallows and white Lillies: bruise them with Penegreek-seeds, Peletory of the Wall and Violet-leaves; the flowers of Cammomoil and Melliot, each an ounce: Neatsfoot-oyl, the Oyl of Lillies and Hog's Lard, each four ounces; add to them all a quart of Water, boil and strain out the Liquid part, using it as hot as may be by way of Applica∣tion, &c. To stanch Blood in any Vein or Artery. Take Alloes Epatick and Olibanum, of each half an ounce, and the Wool of an old Hare: bruise them with the White of an Egg, and spread them on Cotton∣wool, binding them to the place, and there suffering them to continue till such time as you find the Blood is turned back, and the Film knit together, which will be within the space of two or three days.
An excellent Medicament to provoke a Horse to Vomit, a also to purge his Belly. Take Elder-root Rind, bruise it small, to the quan∣tity of two ounces, the like quantity of Spurge-law∣rel and Turmerick: let them steep in a pint of White-wine a night and a day, and give the Liquid part to the Horse very warm. An excellent Purge, good on sundry occasions. Take Senne, Coriander-seeds, Alloes, and the Juyce of Savin, of each an ounce; steep and bruise them in a quart of Ale, then give him the Liquid part fasting as hot as may be well endured for two mornings suc∣cessively, ordering him well as to his Dressing and Diet, that he neither over-feed nor catch cold. For a Joynt-sickness, Take Ant's Eggs, together with some of the Ants, a small quantity; add the Keys of an Ash-tree, the Roots of Briony, and those of Burdock: boil them in Whey, and with the Liquid part anoint the Joynts as hot as may be well endured, binding up and keeping your Horse warm, &c. For an Internal Ʋlcer. Take of Bees-wax four ounces, Turpentine the like quantity, Conserve of Red Roses an ounce, Deers-suet two ounces, Storax half an ounce, Myrrh the like quantity, and Oyl of sweet Almonds, as much as will make them into a Balsom, and give it the Horse an ounce at a time in a pint of warm Ale.
An excellent Electuary for a dangerous Cough or ratling Cold. Take Germander, Horehound, Hysop, Agremony, Bittony, Liverwort and Hart's-tongue, of each a hand∣full, clean stripped and washed: boil them in three pints of Water till they are very soft, and till the Wa∣ter be consumed, that they may be mashed into a thickness; then add the Powder of Licoris, Elecam∣pane-roots and Honey, so much as will make it into an Electuary: and by so doing and giving each morn∣ing the quantity of a Walnut to your Horse fasting, it will wonderfully help him. Many may be farther taken notice on of this kind, but these being the rarest, newest, and the best Ap∣proved, I hope the Practitioner will have such satis∣faction herein, that he will need no more.
CHAP. XXIII. The Symptoms of Diseases, Sorrances, Distem∣pers, Grievances, or the like, in general and particular, how to foresee them and prevent them; as also to know when they happen, &c. HAving passed over all the Material Diseases and Sorrances any ways incident, hurtfull or dange∣rous in the plainest, safest, and easiest Method; It now remains that I speak something of the Symptoms of Diseases and Distempers in general, that they may be the brieflier comprehended, and afterward give directions for making Unguents, Salves, Poultises, Clysters, Suppositories, Purging-potions, &c. which ought always to be kept in a readiness for sundry uses and emergent occasions, with such reasonable directi∣ons as may add to what has been already treated of: And of these in their order. The Curious, as I have formerly hinted, have ever had a great regard to the Complexion of a Horse, thereby to draw from thence more than bare conjec∣tures of the bodily state or constitutions relating to health or sickness. And since too much of this kind cannot be well laid down, nor more than sufficiently handled, I shall make these further Observations than what hitherto I have made. The Strangles are signified by the hanging out and unseemly colour of a Horse's Tongue, and by the faintness of his breathing.
When a Horse is very thirsty, and seems very little affected towards his Provender, then has he the sym∣toms of a Feaver, or some hot disease that afflicts the Heart and Liver, or else it may signifie the Putrefac∣tion of the Lungs: but when he eats largely, and de∣sires not much water, it denotes a cold Liver, and that the Horse is subject to gross humours, by reason the heat cannot concoct the quantity of nutriment as it ought; and therefore it is not amiss to restrain him from eating altogether so much as he requires, or at least to give it him by degrees, that it may leasurely digest. If with exceeding greediness he devour his Meat and Drink, then beware he be not troubled with the diseases of the Spleen, or putrefaction of the Lungs. If the Breath of a Horse, without travelling or other force or violence, be found very hot, or so much as is more than usual, it denotes the symptom of some fea∣verish disease approaching. If the left side be much swelled, and there be no apparent cause, then proceeds it from the disorder of the Spleen; And if the Legs on that side be likewise swelled, then it commonly proceeds to the Dropsey. Drivelling or noisome water descending or issuing from the Mouth or Nostrils of a Horse, denotes the wet Cough; and if it be gellied, or the like, then it threatens him with the Staggers. The dullness of the Countenance, lolling of the Ears, and hanging of the Head, are signs of the Me∣grim, or extraordinary pain in the Head. If disorderly pantings appear on the Breast Sides, or any part of the Body, then does the Horse labour under some sickness that afflicts the Heart or Liver. If the Mouth be foul and furred, and the Tongue look yellowish, then the Lungs are defective, and ten∣ding to a Consumption.
The hollowness of the Temples denotes either the Strangles, or that the Horse is very old. Shortness of Breath, hanging of the Eye-lids, and beating of the Flanks, denote a Feaver. A cold swelling under the Throat, with a ratling in the Head, signifie the approaching of the Glan∣ders: If about the Tongue-roots small knobs appear, then it signifies Cold, &c. If the Horse offer to cough, and be faint in so do∣ing, as not throughly able to bring up what he offers at, then is it occasioned by the swelling or rising of the Lungs, or oppressive Phlegm setled there, which obstructs the Lungs in the performance of their of∣fice. The stairing up of the hair, and hardness of the skin, with dejected looks, and lankness of the belly, denote the Horse foundered in the body, and sometimes the Wind, Colick, or Stone, is signified thereby; as also the Yellows; which are all dangerous distempers in a Horse. If the skin stick to the Ribs, so that it cannot be well raised, then the Horse is troubled with that in∣firmity which we commonly call Hidebound. An uneven stiffness in going, denotes some Strain, Wrench, cold Swelling in the Joynts, or foundering in the feet, &c. If a Horse have a spongy Wart full of blood, it is an Anbury; If a knotty Ulcer creeping along the Vein, it is a Farcy; If scabby or ulcerous on the body, and about the neck, it proceeds from the Mangy; If it singly spread abroad, and that but in one place, then is it held to be the Canker. The Botts, or such-like Insects in the paunch or belly of a Horse, you shall know by the Horse's en∣deavouring to strike thereat with his feet, his lying down and wallowing himself, and his often turning his head back and looking upon his sides.
If the Horse be over-covetous to lye down on th right side, it signifies corrupted blood setled in th Cavas of the Liver, and occasions extraordinary heat, which by the pressure of the Liver is augmen∣ted. A Horse's spreading, when laid down, generally denotes the approach of the Dropsey, and his ofter groaning the Colick, or the Heart's being oppressed with bad blood: And thus of other signs and symp∣toms, most, or the most part whereof, I have in this Chapter; and what has been before mentioned, is effectually discussed according to the best Experimental observances that have been made. From whence I shall proceed to give Directions for sundry choice Oyntments and Salves, highly necessary to be kept in store, and used on sundry occasions, as necessity re∣quires; and other matters altogether as Material.
CHAP. XXIV. Directions for making and preparing Oyntments, Oyls, Salves, Waters, Purgations, Poulti∣ses, Charges, Supplements, Pills, Powders, &c. singular good in case of any Distemper or Sor∣rance: Many of them never before made publick. ALthough I have mentioned many famous Oynt∣ments and Salves in the course of the Cures, yet some there are which may indifferently serve for most Sorrances and Griefs of any kind; and these I shall chiefly name, and direct how to make them, be∣cause they may be gotten in a readiness, and thereby the party not be to seek them, nor his Ingredients, when the urgency of the Horse's distemper or grief requires the Application. An Oyntment to search any Wound or Ʋlcerated Sore, or any thing of the like nature. Take of Bees-wax four ounces, Turpentine the like quantity, the Juyce of Spurg-lawrel two ounces, Deer's-suet half a pint, Verdegrease an ounce, Al∣lom calcined two ounces, and Hog's Lard as much as will make it into an Oyntment over a gentle fire: This, by often using, will not only search the Wound, and discover dead, proud, or putrefied flesh, but cleanse it, and cause it to heal, restoring the good flesh, and rendering it easie to cure.
An Oyntment excellent good in case of Botches, Boils, Seab or the like Sorrances. Take the Juyce of green Tobacco half a pint, of Deer's-suet a pound, the Powder of Dandely on∣roots two ounces, as much of Soap-makers Ashes, and half a pint of the Lees of Wine: make them up into an Oyntment with half a pint of Olive-oyl, and an ounce of the Oyl of Petrolum. To skin any Wound, an excellent Oyntment. Take of Dog's-grease two ounces, half the quan∣tity of black Soap, of the Powder of calcined Roach-Allom two drams, the Juyce of Mugwort an ounce: make them into an Oyntment over a gentle fire; and when the Wound begins to fill with flesh, anoint it over. To mollifie and asswage any Swelling, an excellent Oynt∣ment. Take of Nut-oyl a quarter of a pint, Neatsfoot∣oyl half a pint, and Linseed-oyl the like quantity: add to these the Juyce of Plantane a quarter of a pint, and four ounces of the Oyl of Earthworms: boil them over a gentle fire to a convenient thickness, and ap∣ply the Oyntment to the place grieved as warm as may be well suffered, and chafe it in with your warm hand when it begins to cool. An excellent Oyntment to cool and allay any Inflamation. Take of the Oyl of Marshmallows half a pint, the Juyce of Mandrake-root two ounces, Dog's fatt four ounces: or instead thereof that of Hog's lard, Sperma∣cei two ounces, and fresh Butter a quarter of a pound:
make them into an Oyntment over a gentle fire, and, as occasion serves, apply them to the place grieved till you find the extraordinary heat abate. An excellent Oyntment, or rather Balsom, to be inwardly given a Horse for Obstructions, Bruises, and other Ailments and Grievances. Take of Refined or rarified Turpentine two ounces, Stag's-suet the like quantity, Amber-grease two scru∣ples, Olibanum an ounce, Oyl of Roses two ounces, and a dram of the Oyl of Amber: heat these gently till they incorporate, and then take a small quantity, and with fine flower make a Paste to the bigness of a Walnut, and give it the Horse to swallow; giving him after it half a pint of warm Mallaga. To make a green Oyntment, proved by Experience, more effectual than what has formerly been published. Take the Juyce of Sage two ounces, as much of that of Rue, an ounce of Verdegrease, and of Aqua∣vitae half a quartern: mix these over a gentle fire, and add of the Powder of Elecampane-roots an ounce, with the Powder of white Copras calcined half an ounce: make them into an Oyntment with Olive∣oyl, and half an ounce of the Oyl of Turpentine. An excellent Remedy for the Staggers, or any Pain that suddenly takes a Horse, sometimes to the loss of his life. Take the fat of the Guts of a Capon two ounces, Oyl of sweet Almonds two ounces, of Olive-oyl half a pint: incorporate them well over a gentle fire,
then drop into them the Chymical Oyl of Nutmeg a dram, and the like quantity of that of Spicknard and Bay-berries; and having incorporated them farther into an Oyntment, when you perceive your Horse afflicted, dip a feather in the Oyntment, and thrust it up the nostrils of the Horse, and anoint them as high as may be; then burn under his nose Storax on a Chafing-dish of Charcole, placing a Tunel so over it, that the smoak may ascend into the nostrils only. This is likewise good for any cold Rheum that afflicts the head, and will bring away the superfluous hu∣mour. An excellent Salve for any Wound. Take Hog's Lard half a pound, Bees-wax a pound, Stone-pitch six ounces, unslacked Lime beaten into Powder an ounce, the Powder of dried Foxes Lungs an ounce: make them into a Salve with two ounces of Turpentine, and apply it Plaster-wise to any Gan∣green, ulcerous Sore, Botch, Strain, Slip, Spavin, after its being opened, or other Sorrance, and by due ap∣plication it will answer your expectation. An approved Salve to draw any stub, thorn, or splinter of Bone or Wood out of the flesh. Take of Burgundia-pitch four ounces, the like quantity of Per-rosin, Nut-oyl two ounces, and the like quantity of Linseed-oyl, and an ounce of the Juyce of Hemlock: make them into the thickness of a Salve, and apply it Plaster wise to the grieved part till you find the head of the offensive matter; and then with your Instrument delate the flesh, and draw it out.
To fill a Wound, Ʋlcer, or the like, with good flesh, an ex∣cellent Plaster. Take Mutton-suet half a pound, the Juyce of Baum a quarter of a pint, the Oyntment of Marshmallows and Groundsel, of each two ounces; burnt Allom in Powder two ounces; Rosin half a pound, and Bees∣wax as much as will make it up into a Salve. A Salve to draw Corruption from the bottom of any Wound, or to draw a Swelling, or any such grievance, to a head. Take Turpentine half a pound, Linseed-oyl half a pint, Chalk beaten to Powder an ounce, the Juyce of Orpin half a quartern, Galbanum two ounces, and Oyl of Vitriol a dram: make them into a Salve, and apply them to the place grieved: and in so doing you will find your expectation answered. To ripen a Tumour, or asswage any Swelling, not abound∣ing with extraordinary humours. Take the fat of an Urchin or Hedge-hog four oun∣ces, Tarr two ounces, old Cheese well beaten in a Mortar four ounces, the Juyce of Garlick half a quar∣ter of a pint, Bees-wax six ounces, and Stone-pitch six ounces: make them into a Salve, and apply the Plaster on a piece of Sheeps-leather. An excellent Poultis for a Tumour or Swelling. Take Linseed-oyl half a pint, the Whites of six Eggs, Bole-armorick two ounces, Groundsel and Smal∣lage, of each a handfull well bruised in a Mortar, Ce∣lendine and Comfory the like quantity so ordered: fry them together, and lay them on as hot as may be.
This either allays the swelling, if only fleshly, occasion¦ed by a stroke or Saddle-pinching, or brings it to head, in case it proceeds from humours gathering o contracting in one place. A Charge to ease a pain in the Back, or for any Sprain. Take new Cow-dung four ounces, the roots o Burdock two ounces, washed and sliced; Borage and Bugloss, of each a handfull; Oyl of Bays six ounces: bruise them well together, and heating them over the fire, suffer them to be as hot as may be well en∣dured, and apply them as a Poultis. To mollifie any Chap or rough Sore. Take Comfory, the roots of Scabeous, and the leaves of Plantane; boil them in Olive-oyl, being first well bruised to a softness; then add Neatsfoot-oyl, half the quantity of the Olive-oyl; and then strain off the Liquid part, and with it anoint the place grieved. For the Eyes of a Horse, afflicted by any means, an ap∣proved Water to cure or ease them. Take of the Juyce of Pimpernel and Eyebright, of each a like quantity, both consisting of half a pint; add to them the Powder of Lapis Calaminaris, quenched in White-wine, an ounce, and as much of the Powder of burnt Allom; two drams of the Calcine of Crabs∣eyes, and as much of the powder'd pith of Oysters: dip a feather in them, well mingled by stirring, and rub it so dipped into the Eyes.
A Water to Wash the Mouth in case of any Sorrance or defect. Take Spring-water a pottle, Roach-Allom a pound, and English Honey the like quantity: dissolve them nto the Water over a gentle fire, and add half a pint of the Juyce of Hysop, and the like quantity of that of Celendine or Vervine: boil them to the consump∣tion of a third part, and with the Water wash the Horse's mouth as you see occasion. A Pill good for any Internal disorder, &c. Take of Alloes Epatick half an ounce, Powder of Ruburb the like quantity, the Juyce of Water-cresses half a quarter of a pint, and the Berries of Juniper dried and beaten into Powder an ounce: make these, with the Oyl of Myrtle, into Pills as big as hazle∣nuts, and give him four at a time successively in warm Ale or new Milk every morning. A Supplement exceeding good for any strain or grief in the Sinews, &c. Take Bacon Lard half a pound, the Oyl or Oynt∣ment of Smallage two ounces, black Snails a handfull, the Powder of Mastick two ounces: bruise and in∣corporate them, and so apply them to the place grieved. A Vomit for a Horse that has a Queesy stomach, thereby to render him a good Appetite. Take Spurg-lawrel a handfull, Briany-root an ounce; boil them in a quart or three pints of Water, then strain out the Liquid part; and having sweetned it
with Sugar-candy, give it him hot, and tend him that he catch not cold. To purge Melancholy. Take Scammony a dram, the Juyce or Seeds of black Helebore two ounces: dissolve the former in, and min∣gle the latter with a pint of warm Ale, and give it him to drink fasting. To purge Phlegm. Take of the Juyce of Ivy-leaves or berries, half an ounce; or the Decoction of them being very strong, add the grains of Cochneal two ounces, the roots of Fern washed and sliced two ounces, Colocinthius an omnce: make of these a drench with White-wine; give it the Horse warm, and keep him two hours after fasting.
CHAP. XXV. Clysters, how to make them, and on what occa∣sion they ought to be applied in order to their effectual working and bringing away bad humours. SInce Clysters, in case of Internal distempers, are very necessary, I cannot omit them, but proceed, amongst other things, to speak of such as cannot but be usefull, and especially those that are capable of purging the several humours, or at least ways to cause an evacuation of those crudities they have contracted in the bowels. And in this case, if your Horse is very laxative, which frequently is occasioned by flegma∣tick humours: Take of the Juyce of Pelletory of the Wail a quar∣ter of a pint, add to it Verjuyce and Olive-oyl, of each half a pint, and of stale Beer a quart: boil them together to the consumption of a sixth part, and be∣ing warm, put them into your Glister-bag, and force them up the body of the Horse; and by binding down his Tail, suffer them to remain there, if possible, for the space of an hour, and give him thereupon Water wherein Scabeous has been concocted. In case of any Pestilential disease, occasioned by a cholerick or firey humour. Take of the Seeds of Colloquintida, cleared from the husks, half an ounce; the Juyce of Centaury and Wormwood, of each an ounce; Castoreum half the like quantity; Juyce of Wood-sorrel two ounces, and half a pint of Olive-oyl: concoct them in two quarts
of Water, a little sweetned with brown Sugar, and force it into the Horse's body, using him as before is mentioned. For any Internal distemper proceeding from Melancholy. Take Anniseeds, and the Seeds of Mallows beaten to Powder; of each an ounce: boil them with a small quantity of Savin in a quart of Whey or Skim-milk, then add a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter: and so having well strained out the Liquid part, give it him in his Fundament luke-warm. For any distemper Internal, occasioned by sanguine, corrupt Blood, or watry Humours, by means of bad concoction or obstruction, &c. Take of the leaves and roots of Marshmallows a handfull, Violet-leaves double the quantity, Linseed and Coriander-seeds, of each a handfull, white Lilly∣roots an ounce, the Juyce of Senne the like quantity with the latter: boil them in two quarts of Water to the consumption of a third part; and then add Oyl of Olives a pint, and give it him warm Clyster-wise. For Sickness in general, an approved Clyster. Take of the Oyl of Dill and Cammomoil, of each an ounce; the Oyl of Cassa half an ounce, the Juyce of Violet-leaves two ounces: Then having concocted a good quantity of Mallows in two quarts of Water, strain out the Liquid part, and put the fore-mentioned Ingredients therein, and administer them blood-warm. This, in all violent diseases especially, is singular good.
In case of Restringency or hard Binding. Take the Juyce of Fumetory a quarter of a pint, the Syrup of Roses two ounces, and as much of the Oyl of Bays; Neatsfoot-oyl half a pint, and of the Juyce of Mulberries two ounces; add to these a pint of new Milk, and force them up the Horse's Fundament very warm; and so upon other the like occasions. Observe in giving of Clysters, that the quantity must in all probability be reduced or augmented ac∣cording to the quality or temperature of the Horse. Now note, that if the Horse be never so large, and in good case, three quarts is an extraordinary dose, and one quart an indifferent one; so that I leave it to the discretion of the Practitioner to regulate the Liquid part as he sees convenient, least by over-char∣ging the Horse's bowels it burst forth before it has opportunity to work as it ought, or by being under∣charged it wants of its force to stir the humours, and cause such an evacuation as is required. And so sub∣mitting this to the discretion or judgment of those that shall make experiment, I proceed to other mat∣ters altogether as necessary to be understood, both as to what relates to the preservation of health, and remedy of sickness.
CHAP. XXVI. Cordials, Cordial-Powders, Drinks and Drenches Purgations and Suppositories, wonderfully con∣ducing to the health and strength of a Horse. Diapente, an excellent Powder in case of any cold or Pe∣stilential disease. To make it: TAke Gentia Baccalani, Round Aristolochia, Myrrh and the Powder of Storax, of each an ounce: bruise them distinctly, and pass the Powder through a fine Sieve; and when you see occasion, give the Horse from two to four drams in Muscadel, or other sweet Wine, as warm as may be, and keep him from catching cold: or for want of Wine, give it him in strong Ale, but Wine is better. An excellent Cordial-Ball to be given in case of any Inter∣nal distemper, and especially to prevent the Consumption, or wasting any part, &c. Take dried Foxe's Lungs an ounce, Methridate two ounces, Powder of Licoris and that of the Seeds of Coriander, of each an ounce; the Powder of Ci∣namon and Pomgranet-seeds, of each an ounce; Spruce∣beer, or the Lees of Claret, half a pint: Thicken it with Allom-flower till the whole mass be infused there∣in, and may be made up into balls as big as Walnuts; and then give him one at a time, as you see occasion, sending after it a hot Drench of Ale or new Milk. This and the former being put into a glass or gally∣pot, and close stopped up, will keep in a dry place a twelve month.
An excellent Drench to cure any Internal distemper pro∣ceeding from any of the four Humours of the Body, &c. especially such as are Pestilemial. Having let your Horse blood, if necessity, by the Symptoms I have named in the foregoing part of the book, requires it: Take a handfull of Baum, and as much Worm∣wood; dry them till they may be rubbed into a Pow∣der; mix with the Powder the Juyce of Rue four ounces, the Powder of grated Nutmeg, well dried, an ounce, four grains of the Oyl of Amber, and two of Bezora-stone: dissolve these in a quart of Ale, and give the Drench to the Horse as hot as is convenient, and let him stand fasting two hours in a dry Stable after them. For want of what is before mentioned, Take Anni∣seed, and the Seeds of Cardamums, of each an ounce; Bay-berries and Fenegreek-seed the like quantity, the sifted Powder of the Roots of Elecampane two oun∣ces, Olive-oyl half a pint, and a pint of new Milk: mix them well together, and sweeten the Liquid part, whilst it is seething over the fire, with white Sugar, and give it him as warm as is convenient, ordering him as before. Suppositories, and their Ʋse. This word speaks the intention of the thing, which is no other than a preparing before-hand the Horse's body to receive a Purge or Clyster. Now for the former, Take Water wherein Wood-sorrel and Maiden-hair, a herb so called, has been boiled, and give it him to drink with his Provender a day before, or Water wherein Deal Saw-dust has been boiled or steeped: the like you may do with the Leaves of Bays or
Holley, or any thing that may either open the Veins, or fix the humour, so that it may be in a readiness for the purgation to work on. The other is to be put up into the Horse's Funda∣ment, after he is well raked, to prepare him for a Cly∣ster; as a large Candle, a roasted Onion, Garlick and Rue, bruised and made up into a Ball with white Flower, or a Wash-ball; and these must be suted ac∣cording to the humour predominant: And in this case some hold what I shall name to be authentick. Take, say they, for Choler, bruised Staveacar and Savin, made into a Ball as big as a Tennis-ball, with Honey and Bean-flower: If for Phlegm, Castle-soap, a piece as big as a two-peny Wash-ball rowled in Pow∣der of Ginger: If for Melancholy, a red Onion roast∣ed and stuck with Cloves: And lastly, for Sanguine, or over-flowing of bad humours, proceeding from the naughtiness of the blood, make a Suppository of Ho∣ney, Bole-armorick, sweet Butter and bruised Sper∣mint: make them up (with Oat-meal small, ground and sifted) into a Paste: And to keep any of these in, which must be done for the space of an hour, you must bind down the Tail, and gently Trot your Horse; and when you perceive him sweat, bring him into the Stable; and drawing forth what remains undissolved in his Fundament, give him the Clyster you have pre∣pared, and expect the success.
CHAP. XXVII. Perfumes, Baths and Purgations, what they are, and to what end they serve; with the manner how, and under what considerations they ought to be applied. PErfumes are much available to remove bad scents, or noisome vapours, from the head or stomach of a Horse; and being moderately and seasonably ap∣plied, greatly contribute to his health: And in this case, if the Horse be afflicted with cold diseases, or those that proceed from cold raw humours, Take Storax and Benjamin, of each half an ounce; Olibanum and Frankincense, of each a quarter of an ounce; Oyl of Petrolum an ounce: bruise the Drugs, and make them up in small balls as big as a pea; burn them upon a chafing-dish of Coles, so that the smoak may affect the mouth and nostrils of the Horse, and that he may draw it in with his breath; and to make him the better so to do, put a gag in his mouth that it may stand open. If the Horse be troubled with giddiness in his head, which is known by the dullness of the Eyes, burn Feathers under his nose, shavings of Leather or Camel's Hair, or the Seeds of Fennel and Anniseeds. The Roots of Horse-radish or Ruburb will have the same effect, or any thing of strong scent, whether Gums, Oyls, Roots, Herbs, or other things of the like nature and quality. In case of Bathing a Horse, commonly called the Horse-Bath, it is no more than the concocting divers,
herbs that are cooling and supple; and with the Li∣quid part wash and supple the place grieved, to ren∣der a limberness of the Joynts, or remove dirt, or any the like disorder or grievance, and may many times upon a Journey be used with success to restore or refresh a tired Horse, being applied warm to his Limbs: And the best of this kind take as follow∣eth: Take Sorrel, Mallows, Groundsel, Cammomoil, Sperage, Sow-thistle, Comfory and Scabeous, Endive, Bugloss and Featherfew: boil them in two gallons of Running-water, and when you find they are suffici∣ently feethed, strain out the Liquid part: or if you find your Horse much given to coldness, you may boil them in Chamber-lye. Directions for Purging, according to the estate and con∣dition of your Horse. If you perceive your Horse of a strong constitution, not impaired by disease or want, then may you give him strong provocatives, that by a conquering qua∣lity may prevail against the distemper; but if he be weak and infeebled, then nature being unable to keep her station, and the potion being strong, great inju∣ry may happen, by reason of the fixation or settle∣ment of the gross humours and crudities: Where∣fore the sudden and violent operation not being capa∣ble of removing them, will prey upon, and evacuate those good humours that should strengthen and sup∣port the body: And therefore in case of weakness, a weaker potion must be given, that by long continu∣ance and easie working, it may by degrees loosen and attract what is offensive. And now for a gentle Purge: Take two ounces of Turnsole, and half an ounce of the Powder of Alloes: dissolve them in a quart of
Ale, wherein half a dozen Lawrel-leaves have been concocted: give it him warm, and attend the working of it; giving him, the better to hearten him, a Toast dipped in Canary about half an hour after: But if the Horse be so strong, that he will dispence with a violent Purge; then, Take of Colloquintida three ounces, Ruburb in Pow∣der an ounce, Scamony two grains: dissolve them in half a pint of the Juyce of Hysop, and the like quantity of Canary: give them the Horse very warm, and keep him stirring in a warm Stable two hours, at least without giving him any thing; and when by a conquering quality they prevail over the distemper, give him a warm mash, but no hard meat till six hours after, by which time it will have done work∣ing; And in case of cold distempers you may some∣what augment the Dose. And now as to the Hu∣mours, if we take them distinctly, Alloes and Cassia purge Melancholy, Colloquintida Phlegm, Ruburb San∣guine, and Scamony Choler. Nor are these the on∣ly things that do it, but there are are divers others; yet seeing I have largely directed on that occasion, I shall wave them in this Chapter.
CHAP. XXVIII. Costicks, Corrosives, and Rowelling; what they are; for what causes, and in what manner to be applied. AS for Costicks and Corrosives, they are potable Cauterizings or Burnings, with Oyl, Water or Mineral, Chymically prepared, and sometimes con∣tracted by making a Wound, or breaking the Skin, with Roots and Herbs participating of a firey nature; and these are used in eating away dead flesh, boney or spongy Excressences; and in case of the Farcy, Mangy, Ringworm, or the like loathsome dangerous distempers: And the chief these are, Aqua-fortis, Aqua-regis, Vitriol, Oyl of Tartar, Quick-lime, Oyl of Spike, Arsnick or Resalgar, Aegyp∣tiacum, Crocus-martis, Mercury, Sublimate, Copras, Ver∣degrease, Allom, Recordal, and of roots and flow∣ers. Burdock-roots, Horse-radish roots, the roots of white Lillies, Garlick, Onions, Cuccow-pintle, Fea∣therfew, Briany; the leaves of Coleworts, Celendine, the great Suthernwood, Butter-flowers, Ground-ivy; the flowers of Mare-blabs, Senna, Saxafrax-water, Lil∣lies, Hollyhawks, Scabeous, Rue, Baresfoot or Ele∣bore, &c. The Application of which I leave to the discretion of the Practitioner, to make it as he sees convenient, or consistent with the nature of the di∣stemper: And so proceed to speak something of Row∣elling, another necessary thing to be known.
Rowelling; what it is, and how to be performed. Rowelling is no other than making an Incision in the flesh, or rather skin, by taking it up with a bod∣kin or other instrument, so that a ring of hair, cord or leather may be fastned in it, anointed with grease, oyl, or other things thereby to keep the skin from closing upon it, that in the nature of an Issue the corrupt humour may be voided: And this is commonly fixed in the breast or shoulder of a Horse for a strain, slip, or swelling. And for your better instruction, observe as thus: Take a Pen-knife, or other sharp knife, and slit the skin right down for the length of an Inch, or more, gently raising it with a flat stick; and so do on the other side, about half a fingers breadth distant; so that the skin being parted from the flesh, you may run your finger quite through, and so put your Rowel in well anointed, and turn it about every other day, freshly anointing it. And though this be the gene∣ral way of Rowelling, yet the French make a slit or hole only, and hollow the skin from the flesh, in cir∣cle like a Crown piece; and then cutting a piece of stiff unallom'd Leather to the bigness, with one in∣different big hole in the middle, and four smaller ones, as the Fi∣gure in the Margent, then a∣noint it with Lard or Oyl of Marshmallows, and put it in so that the Orifice may be left open for the corruption to issue out through a short quill which they fasten therein; running likewise a Needle and Thread through the four small holes to prevent its turning about, or wearing downwards; and so by raising up the skin, and blowing the wind into the spongy flesh,
cause the putrefaction to gather and descend, that so by the evacuation of the humours the grievance may find a cure; and that it may lye the closer, draw two strong stitches over∣thwart, as you perceive in the second Figure, and let it con∣tinue till you perceive the humours well evacuated; and then cutting the stitches, take it out. And thus have I dis∣cussed the Material things rela∣ting to this Science. From whence I proceed to other things highly necessary to be known, as in the Second Part of this Book your discretion may direct you, &c,
The Compleat MANAGERS. The Compleat FARRIER.
THE SECOND PART. Containing many Rare Experiments relating to Horses and Horseman∣ship, &c. in such exactness and varie∣ty as has not hitherto been made publick to the World. The Manner of Breaking a Horse the best way, and perfecting him in his Paces, &c. and pre∣serving him from danger, &c. HAving thus far advanced in this great un∣dertaking, as I well hope with success; I now think it highly necessary, for the better encouragement of the Reader, to add such rare Secrets, and other matters, as I doubt not but will confirm him in the sincere endeavour I use to render him in the practice both Profit and Plea∣sure. Having Back'd your Horse in the latter end of the fourth, or beginning of the fifth year, and by gentle means rendred him easie and complyable, which by
rating, beating, and haring, cannot be so well brought to perfection, as by cherishing and encouraging him, though sometimes it must be with gentle correction, that he may be the better brought to understand him∣self. Then the next thing materially to be considered, is to what use you design him, that to the same end you may reduce him to Pace, Amble, Trot, Gallop, or the like, as either of them may best concur to his advan∣tage. Wherefore, that none may plead ignorance herein, I shall treat of them in their order briefly and effectually. When you mount a Horse with the intention be∣fore mentioned, you must, if he be an unmanaged Horse, observe chiefly the correction or encourage∣ment of the Voice, Bridle, Switch, Spur, Calves of the Legs, Stirrops and the Ground; all of these being pro∣perly used in the true Management of a Horse. But being to be observed, as the discreet Rider shall see occasion for the best advantage, it would be impossi∣ble for me to set down directions of this kind; though in general I must say, that they must be done with discretion, and in season; or else instead of redound∣ing to the facilitating of Management, they may turn much to its disadvantage in rendring the Horse restiff, or hardning him in the Vice of going backward. And now as the true Amble is the justest measure a Horse can take to ground him in, and render him sensible of all other motions; I proceed in the first place to give directions how, and by what means he must be brought to undertake it with ease and cheerfulness, for if the contrary happen, he will hardly be brought to the perfection you wish. Observe when your Horse is well broke, that he will patiently endure the Bitt and the Rider; that you take him into Plough'd land, not too deep nor cloggy, by reason of Clay or lying low; nor must it be done in wet weather, nor suddenly after a showre: And here Rack him a good going pace, till he begins to
be a little warm, and feels his Legs well: And so do often morning and evening, straining and forcing him ever now and then beyond that pace, when as you will in a short time perceive him to fall into a kind of an Amble, but so shuffling, that it is not fit for him long to continue it in this manner, least by custome it becomes habitual; though in ancient times this was the way both held and practiced, whereby the Horses were brought to the motion of Ambling. But since time and experience has furnished us with better, it would be ingratitude not to embrace them: And therefore, for brevity sake, passing over the vari∣ous discourses and opinions of some that hold it best for a Horse to fall out of a Gallop into an Amble, of others that would oblige him to it by Loading him with excessive weights; and some again, and those not a few, that would have him brought to it by hand between two Rails; Others there are, and they more erronious than any I have named, who would have the Horse loaded with shooes of extraordinary weight to force him thereto, which by often using he must consequently be disabled to perform any motion as he ought: And indeed opinions in this case are so many and various, that it would be endless in a manner to trace them; many of which, though guilded with seeming possibility, I willingly omit, and proceed to that which my Experience tells me cannot fail▪ if rightly mana∣ged. Directions in performance of which, take as followeth. Having trained your Horse, by the help of the Ploughed Land, or other gentle means, upon a con∣siderable Rack-pace, to fall into an Amble, though he presenty leave it again, and fall to any other motion: Then take strong new Lines made of Hemp or Flax, about the thickness of a Jack-line, well shrunk and dried, that they may neither reach nor shrink in using. Let them have Nooses wrought in them at either end of these Lines; there must be two in number of so even a
length, that the least disproportion imaginable must not be found in them, their lengths not by any means exceeding thirty seven Inches, or being under thirty five: This done, make a soft pare of Hose or Shackles of Girthweb, lined for that purpose, with Wool, Cot∣ton, or soft Linnen; fasten them about the Fetlock-places of the fore and hinder Legs, or places in which Horses are cross-barred, to prevent their leaping, and fasten them by Aglet-holes with Leather Tabs of equal length, and let the end of a Tab so fastned come from them about the length of eight or nine Inches, punched full of holes, to receive the Tongue of a Buckle fit for each of them; then having buckled on your Cords even on both sides, to the distance, or as I may term it, the Reach of the Horse, when he stands even with his feet, and proportionably upright, that by no means they may slip or reach. Then take Girth-web, as much as will reach over his back, and come down to reach the cords on both sides, exactly in the middle, wrap it round the cords, but so as it may not strain or lift them up, nor suffer them to sink lower than their just evenness; and then fasten them ei∣ther by running a Tag through Aglet-holes made for the same purpose, or by Pack-thread with a Pack∣needle; And this, called a Tramel, being one of the best and exactest for this purpose that can be made. Your Horse being accounter'd in the manner before mentioned, on a plain firm ground, not over stony, move him at first gently, that he may have oppor∣tunity to feel the Tramel, the better to avoid twit∣ching; and so by degrees let him fall into his Amble by moderately managing the Bridle, and holding your Switch between his Ears that he wreth nor wry not his Neck, cherishing him with your Voice, and giving him, when he has done well, some pleasant morsel; but by no means put him to it beyond his ability, least it become tedious to him, and create in him an irksomeness and dislike; and in so using him several
ays, that is, every other day in the week; if your orse be sure and good footed, he will take plea∣ure in it, and perform it without your forcing him o it. But by the way observe, that if your Horse e of a long reach, and when he first undertakes it, s consequently subject to twitches; then you may, without offence, when he is first put to it, give him a little more liberty, least you subject him to those twitches by sometimes forgetting himself when the Tramel is off, which, by the Ignorant, will be taken for the String-halt; but being well used and brought to the feeling of them, you must come to a perfect length, least having more liberty at one time than at another, he proves a shuffler, or varies in his Am∣ble. Having brought your Horse pretty well to Amble by the Tramel, insomuch that he does it not confused∣ly, or against his will, either by hand or backing, you may take him into uneven ground, and try him in such ways as you imagine you may have occasion to Ride him in, never standing to pick or chuse your ground, but Ride him as far as is safe, according as your fancy leads you, yet not without the Tramel fixed on one side, which you may shift as you see oc∣casion; and when you find him perfect, you may Ride him without, only carry the Tramel with you, in case he make a default; the best way is to bring him back to that default, and make him sensible that he has committed an error, which can be no better done than by demonstration; and in so often using him, the time will come, and that within three months at farthest, that he will be perfect in his exercise. There is to be considered next to what has been spoken, the Trot; and that consists in two parts, viz. the lofty and swift Trot; and although to the latter a good Amble is naturally given, yet the former re∣quires deliberation and judgment. And since Expe∣rience has afforded a Rule, I think not convenient to
conceal it: which, as the best Experiment, I deliver as followeth. In this case a Horse used to the great Saddle, is the fittingest to be undertaken, or one you design for that or the like purpose. Wherefore having chosen your Horse, fasten on him the War-Saddle, girting it indifferently strait; then put on a Kerb-bridle, and fastning to the Chain thereof a Leather-strap, bring it by a Buckle to bear on the Breast-plate or Girths under the Horse's Legs, or which of them you shall perceive most convenient, till you bring the Neck of the Horse to bend or bear Arch-wise like the neck of a Swan: which done, mount your Horse, and move him a Racking-pace till you find him begin to take up his Legs round and clever, moving his Knees in a manner to his Breast, or bringing the upper and lower spaces between the Joynts to an equal bearing; and so continue to exercise him till you find him move in that manner according to your expectation: And then you may try him without the Straps, and by that means perfect him as you see occasion. Now some there are, that upon the first Backing use to Log their Horses with broad and heavy Shooes: But these I disapprove, and chiefly for two Reasons: First, because they greatly endamage the Hoof; and not so only, but by their weight strain and dis∣order the Sinews, that a Horse must of necessity be ob∣liged to take up his Legs with pain, which will after∣ward subject him to stiffness and stumbling. Secondly, they will endanger the Sinews by bruising and cutting, and thereby cause the Bone-spavin, Screw-pin, Ring-bone or Quitter-bone; All which, for the most part, proceed from the like ill Ma∣nagement, and defect of Judgment in Managing, &c. But if you would perfect him to the great Saddle, consider farther, that it is highly necessary to manage him at the Ring, that he may be capable of stop∣ping
and turning upon the least motion; and this Ring must be upon soft sandy ground, where having gently circled him till you have trod out a Ring be∣tween fifty and sixty Paces in compass, oblige him to trace it, resting him on the right, and cherishing him on the left; stopping him likewise upon the lat∣ter, as you see occasion; sometimes in the midst of the circle, and at other times where he began; shift∣ing likewise, as you see convenient, your hand, and mending your pace, obliging him upon a full stop to retire a pace or two backward; and so from a Trot you may fall to the Gallop, ever observing that Gal∣loping to the right, he leads with his left foot; and so consequently Galloping to the left, that he leads to the right; and in so doing he will perform it with ease and delight; when, on the contrary, if he carrys both his feet even, leading with neither, he must do it with pain, and be apt sometimes to strike: and this is ever best in case of a full speed upon a straight Course; and so in using convenient Bitts and Furni∣ture, and keeping a steady hand, you may stop him upon a full career, and oblige him suddenly to re∣tire, if any imminent danger be apparent, or some∣times for your pleasure; and by such-like manage∣ment you may bring him to the Turnings and strait Turns with little difficulty, and indeed perfect him for any considerable Exercise; in the performance of which, he ought likewise to be considered more than what I have formerly mentioned. When you intend your Horse for Travel, Sport, or the like, more than what I have already given directi∣ons as to Managing, that he may well endure, and an∣swer your expectation. Observe to dress him over∣night in the same manner as has been directed for the Running-horse; and having by you Dog's-grease or Neatsfoot-oyl, anoint him therewith, especially his Joynts, suppling it in with your warm hands, or a warm cloth; and in so comforting the Nerves and
Sinews, you will oblige the Horse to hold out much the better; and in the morning give him three quarts of well-sifted Oats, sweet and good, with a quart of Beans split, and the husks taken off, and after them a quart of Ale: And so being Accoutered to your mind, Ride him forth a Racking-pace, till you find his Joynts very plyable, which will be within a Mile or two Riding; then mend his pace, and by degrees put him to either Amble, Trot or Gallop, as best shall please you till you come to your Inn. Being come to the end of your Stage, if the Horse sweat, take off his cloaths by degrees, and with a piece of broken Sword, Scithe or edged Lath, scrape him all over, and after that rub him with dry wisps or woollen cloths; then pass your hand over him, cleanse his Pasterns and Fetlocks from dirt and gravel, pick his feet, and cast a cloth over him, and give him his potion of meat, which must be a third part more at least than what his usual allowance is when he stands still; and if you find him very hot within, you may give him Water and Ale a like quantity, both being a little warmed, especially in Winter∣time, and anoint his Limbs with the same materials, and in the same manner I have before mentioned; and if you find his breath short, give him an ounce of Hemp-seed well bruised in a glass of Canary or warm Ale, ever forbearing to wash your Horse when he is hot, that is, to Ride him into a Pond, or the like; but rather, if he be exceeding dirty, warm a Pail full of Water, and with wisps rub him gently clean; or having first rubbed off the dirt with dry wisps, you may cleanse the rest with a Brush. And thus much I thought fit to lay down as a supplement to what has been formerly spoken, not much different in the cases of Ordering and Management; and so proceed to Particulars and Generals of another nature, though tending to the same center.
CHAP. II. How the Jockies make old Horses look young; A lean Horse artificially and naturally; how fatned by Jockies. A Remedy for Restiffness, Neighing, and the vice of Lying down in the Water; the Art of making Stars, Snips, Bla∣zes, setting on false Ears, Tails, Manes, &c. with a discovery of many other secrets. To make a Horse that is really old seem young. RUb his Teeth with a Pumice-stone, and the Pow∣der of burnt Allom; which rendring them white, take a small Iron, which being crook'd for the purpose, burn in the tops of the two foremost Teeth small holes, so big, that a Wheat-corn may enter on each side the neither Jaw; and on the Tushes do the like, fining them with a Bodkin till the black Scale come off, and the Teeth in that place look brighter than in another: which done, if the pits above the Eyes be hollow, with a sharp Pen-knife or Lancet slit the skin, being before raised, and hollowing it as much as you can by the working of your fingers: put into the slit a Duck or Crow-quill, and blow them up one after another, that the hollowness may fill with wind; which entring into the Cavities of the skin, will▪ after having been stopped up for a time with a Plaster of Diaculum or Bees-wax fix there, till by sweat or ex∣traordinary labour it works out: If the Temples are crooked, which is a sign of Age, lay to either of them a Poultis of Hemlock and Cammomoil fryed in Lin∣seed-oyl; and it will so far contract the blood to fill
them, that for many days they will appear strait And then for the Hoof, which in case of Age will b seamed or rugged, Take a Rasp or File, and havin well smoothed it, anoint it well with Oyl of Turpen¦tine for a day or two, and it will look very comely But in this case the Horse must be disposed of withi a week at the farthest, or else the defects will re¦turn. A Horse subject to lye down in the Water, how to reme∣dy it. In this case you must consider the Horse to be of  hot constitution, begotten or produced under the fire Signs of Leo or Scorpio, or else much overflowed with Choler, and therefore ever desirous to cool himself and thereby rendred in a manner unserviceable: which Vice to remedy, Ride him into a water up to his Knees, and suffer him to lye down; then having three or four lusty fellows ready with Boots on, let them seize his head, and hold it under water whilst another beats and belabours him: And this do till you find the Horse almost stifled; and in repeating it three or four times, the terror of it will so work, that the Horse will fly from the water more than ever he co∣veted it, and hardly suffer himself to be watered, un∣less in a Pail or Trough. This likewise may be re∣medied by Bleeding and Purging your Horse Spring and Fall, whereby the Humours that occasion the extraordinary heat and disorder may not be wanting whereon to feed or contract, having the power and force of inflaming his body, &c.
A Tired or Restiff Horse, to remedy. For the first of these, being subject to Tire without ny extraordinary cause, stamp a handfull of Nettles, and pour the Juyce into either of his Ears; and then take a couple of small peble-stones, and put in after t, tying or sewing up the Ears as advantageously as may be, and with keen Nettles rub his Fundament; aying Hemlock or Ars-smart, called by many Hounds-tongue, under his Saddle, next to his back. If a Horse be Restiff, and refuses to go, but will run on one side, or go backward, cramp his Stones with a cord, and bring it up between his fore-legs, giving him a twitch when you perceive him froward, and it will oblige him to advance, especially if you keep his Reins even with a steady hand; but if a Mare or Gelding, which yields no such advantage, be troubled with any such Vice, you must have a Crup∣per with a Brass or Iron-plate fastned a little above the Tail, through which may come two or more sharp points, like Needles, at such time as the Crupper is moved or strained; and then when you find your beast practice the Vice, strain the Crupper with your hand, and it will enter the flesh, and force the beast to leap forward. This Vice generally comes by a Horses not being backed in time, or through the ill management of the Breaker or Rider. To prevent the Troublesomeness of a Horse's Neighing, which may prove disadvantageous to the Master, especi∣ally in time of War. Take a long slip of Red cloth, dip it in the Oyl of Linseed, and strew on it the Powder of Elecampane∣roots, and on that burnt Allom: fasten it round the Horse's Tongue, as near to the Root as may be; and so long as it there remains, you may secure your self,
your Horse can make no noise. And this Art Darius the Great Persian King, was said to use to the Horse of his Competitors for the Kingdom, by Bribing thei Grooms when the Election depended upon the Neigh¦ing of the first Horse. If a Horse be dull, and will not feel the Spur withou much wounding, Take the following Directions t make him go very nimble with or without a Spur. Scrape off the hair in the Spurring-places on either side, lay a Plaster of Rosin and Bees-wax to soften the skin, then prick it full of holes, so that they may just pass through it: which done, take burnt Allom and Copras, and rub therein: or you may do it with Pow∣der of Glass beaten very fine; and these entring the holes, will, by a little festring, cause such a soreness, that he will run forward upon the least touch with your heel: which having a while used him to, you may heal the Sore with Hog's grease, Bees-wax and Olive-oyl made into an Oyntment, with the Powder of Alloes. To make a lean Horse artificially fat, or to seem so to the Buyer. Take a Horse lean, but not extraordinary old, rub and comb him will, put him into a warm Stable; Then, Take a pound of Anniseeds, the like of the Powder of Licorish, half a pound of the Flower of Brimstone, and half a pound of Dates stoned, with six ounces of the Powder of Elecampane-roots: bruise them well together till they may be reduced to what fineness you think convenient; then with a peck of fine Flower, two quarts of Milk, and the Yolks of a dozen Eggs, make them up into balls as big as Pullet's Eggs: give him four of these in a morning, and
after them a quart of new Wort, then give him half a peck of Oats, and after that a Mash made of Bran, boiled Barley and Lupins; giving him, in all circum∣stances, the like in the evening, blowing up his Flanks, and the hollowness of his Eyes, with quills, suffering him to drink but very little, and so in a week or ten days he will look very plump and fair to the eye; but being afterward neglected, or kept at hard meat, the spungy kind of flesh or fat so gotten, will suddenly fall away, and leave perhaps the unskilfull buyer pos∣sessed with an opinion, that his Horse is bewitched. To make a lean Horse really fat, the best and cheapest way. In this case, as in many other people are generally wedded to their opinions; but Experience being the best Master, I shall deliver therefore what has been faithfully proved and found effectual: And so to bring your expectation to a period, Take your Horse from Grass or Soil; and if the sea∣son admit, Blood and Purge him gently, that so the crudities that hinder the kindly operation of the nu∣triment may be removed: which done, rub and loosen his skin, and wash him all over with the Decoction of Hysop, Savin, Rue and Fumitory; which will not only cleanse him from Scurf, and other contracted filth, but render him a kindly heat and breathing: Then give him each morning, before his hard meat, a Ball as big as a Tennis-ball, or such a one as he can con∣veniently swallow, made of Honey, Rye-flower, the Powder of Licorish, burnt Allom-powder, and the Powder of Hart's-horn: And after his hard meat, which must be given in due proportion, Water where∣in Dandelyon-roots, Rosemary and Fennel have been concocted, and in it Bran or Flower dusted; and let his hard meat be Oats, Splent-beans and sweet Hay,
Airing him morning and evening, and accommoda∣ting him with fresh Litter and good Dressing; by which means, in a Month, he will be fat and lusty, have sound and solid flesh, and be fitting for any company. To make the Hair of a Horse that stands rough and staring, smooth and sleek. If you would have your Horse smooth and hand∣some, so that your self and others may take delight in him, Take a French Brush and rub his hair the contrary way, fetching out by that means the dirt and scurf; so that the Horse being freed therefrom, the hair may lye closer and smoother; then draw your Brush and Curry-comb the right way, and having laid the hair as smooth as it will be; then, if the weather be sea∣sonable, let him Blood in the Neck-veins; and after that pass over him with your hand, or a cloth dipped in Oyl of Bays, and at convenient times wash him with the Decoction of Cammomoil, and keep him well dres∣sed, and at good diet. To make Hair come where it is thin, or to take it away where it is thick The hair being thin, which is uncomely in a Horse, Take the Ashes of Fern four ounces, the Oyntment of Marshmallows two ounces, a dram of the Oyl of Petrolum, and an ounce of the Powder of Bithwort∣roots: wash or anoint the place with them, mixed with a like quantity of Oyl and Wine, adding thereto an ounce of the Honey of Roses; and continue so to do for a month together: Or for want of these, you may wash the Horse with a Lye made of the Ashes of
Pease-straw, wherein the green husks of Walnuts and Red Sage have been concocted. To take off hair, Take Soot of Wood two ounces, Oyl of Tartar two drams, the Calcine of Egg-shells half an ounce, with an ounce of unslaked Lime: make them into a Plaster with Oyl of Spike, and ap∣ply it to the place you design to have bare or thinner, the hair at that time being close clipped. Stars, Blazes, Snips; what they are, and how to make them for Ornament or Disguise in any part of the Horse where they may be conveniently scituate. These are held, by the Curious, to be great Orna∣ments to Horses; and therefore many have studdied how to make them, and left sundry directions as their Opinions, how they ought to be made. But since they vary, and many of them upon tryal have proved frivolous and ineffectual; therefore I shall only give the approved manner and method of making things of this kind. First then, if you would have a white Star in a Horse of a different colour, take up the skin, where you endeavour to scituate it, with a Bodkin or fine Lancet round about, or as you design the mark; and making a piece of Lead, or divers pieces, the better to get them into the hole, that you within side the hollowed skin may be framed to the proportion, dip∣ping those pieces in Oyl of Spike or Turpentine; by which means the skin being separated from the flesh, and receiving no manner of Alumentary moisture, will shead the hair: which when you perceive, take out the Lead, and clap it close to the flesh, having anointed the Wound with Honey of Roses, and the next hair that comes will be of a perfect White. Now there are those that take up the skin by running two Pins or Bodkins cross-ways, and binding them about
with a Pack-thread till the skin be drawn up like a Purse, that so the skin may mortifie: but I hold the first the best. To make a Black Star in a white Horse. Take of Souters Ink half an ounce, four scruples of Oliander-wood beaten to Powder, the Juyce of Hemlock half an ounce, Oyl of Ebony two drams, and Vitriol two drams: often with these, well incor∣porated, anoint the designed place. Or for want of these, Take Galls, the Rust of Iron, Oyl of Tartar, and the Ashes of Fern-roots, of each a like quantity: bruise them well together, and apply them Plaster-wise till the hair sheads; and then observe the next that comes will be black. If you are desirous of a Red Star, then, Take Aqua∣vitae and Aquafortis, of each an equal quantity; adding two-peny weight of Quick-silver: incorporate them as well as may be with two drams of Tartar, and as much of the Flower of Brimstone; and by anointing the place designed therewith, the hair will become Red, but will continue no longer so than till the cast∣ing of the Coat; at what time you may in like man∣ner renew it. As for Blazes and Snips, the one is made generally on the middle of the Forehead descending, and the o∣ther on the Muzzle, between the two Nostrils, or some∣what higher; and may be made by the means afore∣said, in what manner and form you shall think conve∣nient, to imitate those that are natural ones: and so you may change Saddle-spots. And seeing those that commonly pass for Stars are only round spots, I have thought fit to give further directions on this occasion.
If you intend to make an extraordinary Adorn∣ment in the front of your Horse, you may make a star Star, as the form in the Mar∣gen, by shaping fine, flat, though taper pieces of Lead, so that the points extending every way under the skin, when gently raised, the basis or broad ends may meet in a center just in the middle of the forehead, the Lead being anointed with Oyl of Spike or Tartar, and so suffer it to remain till the hair is fallen away; and then ta∣king out the Lead, suffer it to close, having well a∣nointed the inside with Dear's-suet and Oyl of Roses; and so continue to do till you perceive the hair well closed, and the white hair will come undoubtedly in the form of the Figure, which you may make lesser or bigger at your discretion: And in this form you may make a black Star, according to the directions for black Stars. Some are of opinion, that a black, or any dark-co∣loured Horse, may for Ornament-sake have four white feet, as they usually are termed, made artificially; and they say it may be done by the Application of the following Cataplasm, or rather Plaster, viz. Take Resalgar a dram in Powder, put to it a dram of the Oyl of Tartar or Vitriol, with an ounce of the Oyl of Harts-horn, and two ounces of the Juyce of the Roots of Lillies, as much of that of Celendine, made up to a thickness, with the grease of a Hedge. hog or Urchin, applied Poultis or Plaster-wise: by which means the hair being taken up by the roots, and the flesh for a time mortified; which may be re∣stored by suppling Oyntments, the hair will come a∣gain as white as Milk: Nor am I much different in opinion; but this being a thing rarely required, and
seldom experienced, I leave it to be tried by those that desire it, and proceed to other matters: But by the way I shall say thus much, that if the feet by the aforesaid Experiment can be changed in Colour, then consequently the Tail, Ears, or any other part of the Body, by the like application, may be the same. To make a Blaze-Royal. In this case, by reason of the intricacy, Lead being very difficult to frame, or at least ways to put into the skin, so that one part may touch, and the other not; for so it must do, or the Mark will be all of a colour, with a fine pair of Scissars cut the Figure in the Margin as near and exact as may be, to the skin; and having made a Lye of Urin and Soap-boylers Ashes, those which ap∣pear for the black stroaks in the Figure, and which you must only cut down, a∣noint; and so do three or four days, which will stay the hair in the root: Then take Aquafortis half an ounce, Oyl of Sulphur the like quantity; add to them two drams of the Powder of Crabs-claws calcined, and with it a∣noint the places with a small Pencil for four or five days successively, and the next hair that comes in a white Horse will be inclining to black, and that in a black Horse to white; and so in any co∣loured Horse it will alter or change the colour pro∣portionably. But if you would have this plain, it may be done with Lead, as the Star will make appear; and will not only prove an excellent mark to know a Horse by from others when at Grass, or the like, but infallibly to describe him by when lost, that without much difficulty or charge he may be found.
The loss of Ears, how to supply. If your Horse has lost his Ears and thereby becomes uncomely, you may supply them with those of a dead Horse, by sewing and glewing them on so artificially, that the Horse by moving the roots of his Ears, shall move them as if they were naturally his own. But as a farther mystery, some have held, and indeed it bears the face of a possibility, that the stump of the Ears being pared, so that being taken off to the Quick, as near the roots as may be, and the Ears of another Horse new cut off, clapped on warm, and sewed down whilst the blood issues from the stumps, they will by being anointed with Oyl of Juniper or Bays, by a kind of Inoculation graft themselves to the stumps or roots, and become natural. And this they hold likewise may be done by Teeth, in putting a Tooth just drawn in∣to the place from whence a stump is just drawn like∣wise. This also they hold may be done by the Tail of a Horse; but not having been proved by me, I leave the Experiment to the discretion of the Reader. False Manes there are likewise to supply such as fall off; and are not altogether improper, because they serve for Ornament as well as the best; and these are taken off from dead Horse's skin and roots; and being Tanned or dried, so that the Leather becomes plyable, and may be shaved so thin on the fleshy side, that it will sit close to the live Horse's crest, off from which the hair is shaved or taken by the roots, with Applications, it being first clapped on with Glew or Pitch, may be sewed to the Horse's skin, in such a manner, that the hairs of the one, and the other ri∣sing over the seams, it will hardly be discerned, espe∣cially at a distance.
And thus have I laid down such things as I though convenient of this kind, not to deceive the buyer but to the end, that he knowing them, may not be deceived: And as a caveat, bid him farther beware of Loging a lame Horse with Lead to make him go as if he was sound: As also the Spring-saddle, which by the Rider's leaning forward pricks the Horse so intolle∣rably upon the bearing between the shoulders, that if he be never so dull, he will caper and jump as if it proceeded from his high mettle; which hidden cause frequently deceives the unskilfull. CHAP. III. How to set a Horse off for Sale to the best ad∣vantage, by Trimming, Washing, &c. as also directions for the Management of a Horse in Hunting, relating to his Leaping, &c. with other things and matters worthy of note. YOur Horse being repleat with hair on the Mane, Tail, and sometime, especially if he be of the Dutch breed, on the Legs or Pasterns, so that there∣by he appears rough or unseemly to the eye; I say, if it so happen whereby sometimes the unskilfull Buy∣er without a cause is discouraged, having your Scis∣sers, Razor, Comb, Brush and Sponge in a readiness, as also your Tweezers or Curling-iron, comb well his Foretop, Mane and Tail, and with your Brush and Comb settle his Legs, if occasion require it: Then dust him over, and do the like again after that, be∣ginning
at the Foretop with your Razor, shave away the short bristling hairs underneath it, that cause it by the means of their stubbornness to brustle and stand staring; as likewise those that grow unsightly about the roots of the Ears: which done, divide the Fore∣top into two equal parts, and then clip it with your Scissers aslope between, and so turn it waving up in two divisions with your Tweezers, and fasten it with a Skewer; and so do by his Mane and Tail, clipping off the ends of those hairs that hung unseemly, long, or out of order, so that in a short time they will ap∣pear comely in Waves or Ringlets; and thus, although the Mane falls two ways, you may reduce it to one side, &c. As for the Legs, having clipped away the superfluous hairs, smooth them down with Oyl of Bays as hot as may be endured; and in doing so two or three times, you will afterward find the hair lye close. How to make a Ball, wherewith a Horse being well La∣thered and smoothed down, shall look exceeding sleek and comely. Take of Cake-soap a pound, of Fulling-earth four ounces, the Lye of Wood-ashes a pint, and Almond-flower two ounces: boil them together over a gentle fire till they become a gellied thickness, then suffering the Mass to cool, make it up, by drying it in an Oven or Stove, into a Ball, and with it make a Wash or La∣ther of new Wort, if it may be had; or else with warm Water, and Lather him over with it, being be∣fore well brushed down, and so suffer him to stand till the frothy part sink of it self; and then with your hand dipped in Water wherein Gum-arabick has been dissolved, pass over his body, and after that with a fine Woollen-cloth, and then with your hand again till
he be dry; and he will not only appear wonderfull sleek, but continue so for many days. How to Manage a Horse in Leaping, taking a Hedge, Gate, Stile, Ditch, &c. Many have held this a difficult piece of Horseman∣ship, as indeed it is; for by ill management in this affair, either the Horse or Man has been often spoiled; and sometimes both of them together; and such ac∣cidents fall out through the carelesness of the Rider, or ill management of the Horse. Wherefore to re∣medy it, and prevent danger, let the Rider observe, that he not only sit fast himself upon the motion of Rise, but that bearing somewhat forward to give the Horse the more sway, he keep the Reins even and steady on either hand; but not too hard, least the Horse rising too high, may happen to over-set or lose by such a motion the force of the spring of his hinder Legs, and by that means be rendred less able to cant his body, or draw them nimbly after him, which frequently occasions a strain or slip, especially at a Ditch. And the best way on this occasion to hold your Rod or Whip, is either between his Ears, or somewhere out of sight, least it cause him to boggle, by inclining more to the one hand than to the other; or for fear of being corrected, force himself beyond his reach. As for your Legs, you ought to keep them moderately close to his Sides, but not so close as to press his Ribs, for that will oblige him to bate of his strength. At a Gate or Stile ever observe your distance be∣fore you suffer your Horse to take it, which ought to be somewhat more than a Man's pace from it, least by the over-reaching of the fore-legs the hin∣der-legs either strike or stick in the barrs, which
through the sudden motion occasions an extraordinary bruise, if not the Leg to snap short off. As for a Ditch, rather chuse to leap against a mo∣derate rising bank, than upon a decent or low place, because in doing the latter the Horse comes down with so great a force, that he will be either apt to stumble on his nose, if not well supported by a steady hand, or else to sprain or slip his shoulder. As for the Hedge-leaping, the greatest care required is to shun the Stakes, and the like to be done by the sharp ends of Pails, least the Horse by an Over-reach gore himself: And in this case consider both the Bank and the Ditch, if any there be, least you force your Horse upon a thing too hard for him, and by that means be both together left in the mire, or in a wor∣ser condition. Nor is it convenient in Hunting to ride a Horse in places where these things are requi∣red, unless he be managed at leasure before hand, for being upon full-speed your Horse seeing others who are managed, undertake these matters of difficulty; and thereby prompted to imitate them, will in spite perhaps of your utmost endeavour to the contrary, resolutely attempt to follow them; for indeed no Creature desires more to Emulate his like than a ge∣nerous Horse, nor, according to his understanding, is more proud of winning praise and applause: For, as the Poet has it, When to the Barrs the Foaming Steeds are lead, They Prancing, seem to scorn the Ground they tread: And when the Signal's given, either flies Like Lightning Emulous, to gain the Prize; Whilst with their Thund'ring Hoofs the Earth does shake, As when the strugling Winds a War within it make:
Nor less when loud the Bloody blast it sounds, Do they refrain o're Spears, o're Death and Wounds; Through Smoak and Flame, and every Dire attack't, To Rush by the enraged Warriours Back't, And face the boldest things that they dare act. Nay, in the Noble strife each one does press, Where Danger may his Courage most express, To render each his Competitor less. So that the Lawrel, Conquerors put on More by their Horses, than themselves is won. So Great Bucephalus made it appear, Who Alexander on his Back did bear About the World, scattering his Bloody War. Nor have good Horses been less famed and esteemed in all Ages. But having thus passed over what I hope in this kind cannot be amiss, but, on the con∣trary, prove profitable and necessary; I shall proceed to other Experiments, and things that may yet add to what has been said, that no variety may be want∣ing in so necessary a Work, nor any thing material be omitted.
CHAP. IV. What the Stable to keep a good Horse in ought to be; and how he ought to be regarded; the Hoofs how to be corrected and minded in Shoo∣ing; and upon other occasions. AS for the Stable wherein a good Horse ought to be kept, let it ever be paved with flat hard Stone, so well laid, that no wet can get in between to occasion, by its long continuance, unwholsome Airs; and let it be likewise laid slantwise shelving, or as it is vulgarly called, down hill, that so the stale may run into a channel, provided to carry it away, having a covering of Canvass even with the Rack, to prevent the falling of Mortar amongst the Horse's Provender: or some are of the opinion to have it ceiled, if it be boarded over head, to prevent the dust or hay-seeds, and many other ill-conveniences: but above all, keep Swine and Poultry from coming into it, the scent of the one, and the dung of the other, being very offen∣sive. The Rack ought to be made of firm Oak, both the Bearings and the Staves, that the Horse may have the less power to bite them, if he be so inclined; and the Mangers be likewise made of firm Plank, well sea∣soned and dried, having Pins or Wooden-pegs conveni∣ently placed to hang the Bridles, Saddles, Girths, Cloths, Rubbers, Combs, Brushes, and the like ma∣terials on; observing, if conveniency will permit, to have a couple of Windows to open, one to the North, and the other to the South; opening the first in Sum∣mer to let in the cool Air, as occasion requires; and
the last in dry Sun-shiny days in Winter, to let in the cherishing heat, or fresh and gentle gails, which will contribute to the vivacity of the Horse, and render him more sprightfull; and ever give him for his Lit∣ter Wheat or Rye-straw; but of these two, the for∣mer is the best; and if you perceive him subject also to eat his Litter, you must Muzzle him after that he has ended his Provender, least he otherwise do con∣tract an ill habit of body; ever giving him his Pro∣vender in due time, with convenient opportunity to take his rest at seasonable times: And if it so hap∣pen, as in many cases it is necessary, that you Shooe him your self: or if done by another, in giving di∣rections to the best advantage, you may take the following Rules. If it happen to be the hinder feet you undertake, then consider the Toe is ever the tenderest part, and must be pared with a gentle hand, being left of a convenient thickness, that it may be capable of de∣fending the Quick from Gravel, Sand, or being hurt by striking against hard stones; suffering the Shooe likewise to be thicker at the Toe than in any other part; which Shooe must be set on even and cleaver, not inclining to one part more than another, which you must consider after your having pared the hoof to an evenness, and struck a Nail on each side, not only by narrowly viewing it, but by suffering the Horse to set his foot on the ground; and if any un∣evenness happen that is not over-great, it may be re∣medied by striking the hoof with the Hammer, with∣out the trouble of drawing the Nails, both your Shooe and Nails being made of tough Iron, that they may in no-wise be subject to break, and so in a Journey de∣ceive your hope, the holes for the Nails being made mostly towards the Heels, because of the weakness of the Toe.
In case the Foot has a false quarter, which looks in a manner like a piece put in, then must the Shooe have on that part a Button, or be a little more rai∣sed than the other on the inside, a small space from the quarter nearer to the Toe, that thereby the stress may be taken off the quarter so defective, and the Horse thereby rendred uncapable of limping. If by reason of the swelling or standing of the hoof inward the Horse be apt to interfeer, then must so much of it as is convenient be taken away with a Rasp; and in paring the outside, suffer the inside to be somewhat of the highest, that it may oblige the Horse to tread a little outward: or if it cannot be so well done in paring the hoof, let it be in the thick∣ness of the shooe on that side more than on the other, fixing the edges so close to the hoof, that it may have no opportunity to cut or interfeer; and in case the Horse be hoof-bound, anoint his hoofs with Oyl of Turpentine, and stop his feet with new Cow-dung fryed in Olive-oyl or Hog's Lard, making him a shooe in the form of a Half-moon, that by its open∣ness it may be no obstruction to the increase or stret∣ching of the hoof: And this may suffice for the hin∣der-feet in case of any reasonable hoof; From which I shall proceed to those of the fore-feet. In case the hoofs of the fore-feet be well placed and sound, even, firm and tough, then any reasona∣ble shooe will serve the turn; yet in this case must it be pared, and kept from running to disorder; and when you have occasion to Travel much in Winter, or in any wet season, it will not be amiss, to prevent its fretting and expanding, to seer the edges with a Barr, or other piece of Iron, suffering the shooe to swell no more on the toe than on the heel, because, in this case, the heel is the tenderest part, and must, the rather of the two, rise higher than the toe; and if the Horse be not subject to interfeer, you may
suffer the shooe, for the preservation of the hoof, to stand a straws breadth beyond it, even every way; Nailing it on in such wise, that the points of the Nails may stand in an even round, and seem upon their ringing off and clenching to sink somewhat into the hoof; ever observing to keep Gravel from under the shooes. Now there are divers sorts of unnatural and offensive hoofs, hapning through neglect or ac∣cident; some of them that will never bear a shooe well, and others that cannot be brought to it with∣out much pain and industry: And the principal of these are, The rugged hoof, the brittle hoof, the narrow heels, the flat hoof, the broad frush, and the crooked hoof; and to these shooes must be purposely made and fitted, and the paring be shaped accordingly: The Particulars of which being uncertain, or at least too tedious for this discourse, I refer them to the Skilfull Farrier, whose proper business it is to order and reduce them, so as they may become practicable and usefull. If the hoof be damaged by reason of any Nail that lurks therein, not easily to be found, it must by all means be looked after, and taken thence; and the place of its aboad or lodgment may be found by sun∣dry means and ways, but chiefly by the heat of that place more than any other, or by the Horse's shrink∣ing up his foot, or strike thereon, or pinch it with your Pincers. The place being found, pull off the shooe, and open the foot gently with a Buttress or Drawing-knife; and if you can come at it, pull it out; if not, apply the Plaster I have mentioned for drawing out Thorns, Stubs or Splinters: Or, for your more readi∣ness, this: Having in the best manner laid open the Wound, Take of Stone-pitch, Tar, Turpentine and Bees∣wax,
of each an ounce, and half a quarter of a pint of Juyce of Garlick: make them over a gentle fire into a Plaster, and apply them as hot as may be en∣dured. And sometimes it so happens, that by long continuance the Nail in working breaks out above the hoof; and in such a case apply Honey, Burgundy∣pitch, and Powder of burnt Allom: or a Poultis of Mallows, Cammomoil and Groundsel fryed in Hog's Lard, and beaten up with the Whites of Eggs and Rye-meal, and applying it as hot as may be endured; and in so often doing it will break the Skin, so that the cause of the grievance may be removed; but by the addition of half an ounce of Verdegrease it will bring away the Corruption, and heal the Wound. Critical Days, and the Observation thereon. AND now since it may not be amiss to say some∣thing of the Critical Days, observed by many as to Health and Sickness; which relate not only to humane Constitutions, but those of all Creatures; I shall here incert them. These days are accounted such wherein are mani∣fested Alterations in relation to Sickness or Health, Life or Death: And as for the Critick-day, it is ever principally to be observed after the beginning of the sickness, as the 3.5.7.9.11.14.17.21.28. In which days so cursarily to be observed, no strong Medicines or Purgations ought to be given: Nor is it convenient to let Blood, unless great necessity require it; And other days there are in which many Learned Men hold. If Man or Beast fall sick, he shall
hardly escape, and that not without much difficulty, which are noted to be these, viz. January 1.7. Fe∣bruary 3.4. March 1.4. April 8.10. May 2.7. June 10.15. July 11.13. August 3.2. September 3.10. November 3.5. December 7.10. And many add, that if any dangerous disease happen on the 10th of Au∣gust, 1st of December, or 6th of April, it will go very near to terminate in Death. Now there are on the contrary, other days held to be good days; and that if a disease happen on them, there is great hopes of recovery; nay, there is great hopes of succeeding in taking a Journey, or any Labour wherein Man or Beast is concerned; and these are held to be the 3d and 13th of January. The 5th and 28th of February. The 3d, 22d and 30th of March. The 5th, 22d and 29th of April. The 4th and 28th of May. The 3d and 8th of June. The 12th, 13th, and 15th of July. The 12th of August. The 1st, 7th, 24th, and 28th of September. The 4th and 15th of October. The 13th and 19th of November. The 23d and 26th of December. And these indeed, by the Antients, were held in wonderfull esteem, they generally taking their measures thereby as to what I have said in relation to them; nor are they to be neglected or slighted by Practitioners in Physical or Chyrurgical matters, either in relation to Man or Beast; no, nor in their undertaking, relating to Labour, or the like, but have Some further Considerations upon the Cause of Diseases, and how to Remove them, Physically discussed, &c. The cause of a Disease proceeds principally from an effect against Nature, and happens either Exter∣nal or Internal; the External is that which is out∣wardly visible, and consists generally of what comes by Strokes, Bruises, Wrenches, Scalds, Shot, or any
manner of Wound; Those Internal are occult, or hid within the body, and consequently the less discernable, and are divided into an Antecedent and Conjunction. The Conjunction is that which is near∣est, and immediately causes the Disease, and is gene∣rally held to be the Blood which causes the Phlegm; nor is it reckoned the Antecedent doth actually cause the disease, but procures matter, and stirs it up al∣most to the creating a disease; but between it and the disease are some Causes placed, viz. abundance of humours and ill digestion; and therefore these things ought to be chiefly considered before any one absolutely attempts to dispell the disease, by reason diseases are first cured by removing the Cause Ante∣cedent, and after that the Cause Conjunct: And as for the External diseases, they ought to be known, because they breed diseases Internal, and very much change the blood, and with much diligence are there∣fore to be sought out, that so the Practitioner may be brought to the perfect knowledge of Internal dis∣eases; and these External diseases are not either to be avoided or amended, but necessarily penetrate the body, as Air infected, Meat, Drink, Labour, Sleep, Watching or Wakefulness, Repletion and Evacuation, and some disorders that frequently happen, or to be avoided as unnecessary; as Bruises, Strains, Slips, Wounds, Strangling, or the like. As for the true cause of a disease, it sometimes proceeds from corrupt matter whereof they are gene∣rated: or when either the Sire or Dam is infected with any disease, the corrupt quality of which flowing in∣to the Seminal-vessels, and transmitting the like to the creature generated making it hereditary; and at other times it proceeds from bad usage, bad feed∣ing, heats, colds, and many more which I have na∣med in the first Part. And again, as I have here hin∣ted, Internal diseases may proceed from External
strokes, bruises, or the like. And thus much for Phy∣sical Observations of this kind: From whence I pro∣ceed to give an accurate relation of the Spirits, by which the frame of Life is supported: which take as followeth. The Spirits; what they are, with their Office, &c. The Spirit is the Aerious and subtil substance of a Body generated of the most pure and thin Blood, and is the Original mover and supporter of the Mem∣bers, giving them power to perform their office, and is seated chiefly in the Brain and Heart, from whence it delates it self by the means of the Nerves and Ar∣teries into all parts of the body, and is divided into three parts, viz. Animal, Vital and Natural; the Animal peculiarly claims the Brain for its seat, for there it is prepared and made, and from thence defu∣ses it self insensible ways to the Eyes, Ears, and the like. The Vital Spirit is chiefly seated in the left Ventri∣cle of the Heart, and has its passage through the Arteries, being made of the Evaporation or sweet-breathing of the purest blood, and is furnished with matter to rarifie it from the Air that is drawn in by the Lungs, and by its motion through the frame of the body is the conservation of natural heat. The Natural Spirit is ingendred in the Liver and Veins, and is wonderfully instrumental in the concocti∣on of the nutriment, and turning it into blood, and then is farther imployed in distributing it through the Veins that branch from the Vena cava, into every part of the Body. And if any of these are wasted or expulsed from its proper seat, unless it speedily return, there is no hopes of life: And so in case of Famishing, viz. When the nutriment in the stomach is spent, then nature preys upon the Blood, and after that upon
the Humour; and lastly, upon the Vital Spirits; at what time the Body, though alive, is past recovery. A further Description of the External Parts, &c. And now, the better to describe, or at least make the Reader more sensible of the Chyrurgecal part of this Book, I proceed to give a brief Relation of the Material parts of a Horse's Body. As, 1. The Members are bodies, ingendred of the first commixion of the Elements, Humours and Spirits, be∣cause they are found to consist of a solid, fleshy, and spirituous Substance; and these are distinguished by, or divided into Eight principal Parts, as Bones, Sinews, Ligaments, Tendons, Fibers, Membranes, and simple Flesh and Skin; to which may be joyned Veins, Fat, Marrow, Arteries, Hair, Hoofs, and the like. Now to come nearer the purpose, a Bone is of substance Earthly, dry and hard, the better to support the frame of the Body, and is it self nourished through little pores, by the purest fat converted through heat into Marrow. A Gristle is likewise termed a soft and ply∣able Bone, the better to strengthen and move the Members. A Ligament is a tough and more plyable kind of a Gristle, holding or binding the Bones toge∣ther. A Tendon is the end and tail of the Arbitrary Muscles by which the Members are more easily moved. A Fiber is a small thread, firm and strong, which Na∣ture places in the Muscles to create a right motion, or a motion every way; for as the right Fibers draw forward, the Transverse put back, and the oblique hold fast. A Membrane and a Coat differ only in this, viz. A Membrane is the name of a Substance, and the Coat the name of an Office; for where a Membrane invests any part, it is called a Coat. As for the Skin, it is generally called the great Membrane, covering
the whole Body, and over-casting the frame or struc∣ture thereof, and is made spongy or porus, the better to purge out the Excremental moisture by sweat. As for the Flesh and Fat increased by nourishment, it is raised and produced from and by the purest sort of blood and nutriment: And when between all these there is a concordance and agreement, then is there a cheerfulness in the spirits, and a harmony throughout the frame of nature. As for the Materials you ought to furnish your self withall, for the performance of the sundry Cures I have mentioned, if you are unskilfull in knowing them, or any of them. As for the Herbs and Roots, a Herbal will direct you; and for the Minerals, Gums, Seeds, Barks, Oyls, and the like, you may consult some Druggist: For should I go about to describe them particularly, they would take up a large Volume; and when that was done, you not perhaps much the wiser, unless the Portraictures were likewise display∣ed. Wherefore let it suffice that I have spoken intel∣ligibly of all things which I conceived necessary or de∣pendant on this Subject; and have, according to my promise, exposed to your view, and left to your con∣sideration sundry rare Receipts and Experiments, ne∣ver before in Print; and such as, I doubt not, will be Approved by those that vouchsafe to try them, and turn not only to their Pleasure, but Advantage, and be a means to preserve this Generous Creature in a state of health and strength, and render him tracta∣ble and obedient to his Owner: And in such hopes I remain further to serve you, as opportunity or oc∣casion will admit. FINIS.
Advertisement. There are lately Printed for, and Published by, Nicholas Boding∣ton, at the Golden Ball in Duck-Lane, the Three usefull Books following, Viz. THE Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet of Rarities, or the Ingenious Gentlewoman and Servant-Maids delightfull Companion: Containing many Excellent things for the Accom∣plishment of the Female Sex, after the exactest manner and method, Viz. (1) The Art of Di∣stilling. (2) Making Artificial Wines. (3) Ma∣king Syrups. (4) Conserving, Preserving, &c. (5) Candying and Drying Fruits, &c. (6) Con∣fectioning. (7) Carving. (8) To make Beauti∣fying-Waters, Oyls, Pomatums, Musk-balls, Per∣fumes, &c. (9) Physical and Chyrurgical Re∣ceipts. (10) The Duty of a Wet Nurse, and to know and cure Diseases in Children, &c. (11) The Compleat Chamber-Maids Instructions in Pick∣ling, making Spoon-meats, Washing, Starching, taking out Spots and Stains, Scowring Gold and Silver-Lace, Washing Lace and Point, &c. (12) The Experienced Cook-Maids Instructions for Dressing, Garnishing, making Sawces, ser∣ving up together, with the Art of Pastery. (13) Bills of Fare for all seasons in the Year. (14) The Accomplished Dairy-Maids Directions
for making Junkets, &c. (15) The Judicious Midwives Directions, how Women in Travail, before and after Delivery, ought to be used; as also the Child; and what relates to the preserva∣tion of them both. To which is added a Se∣cond Part, Containing Directions for the Gui∣dance of a Young Gentlewoman as to her Beha∣viour and seemly Deportment, from her Childhood to her Marriage Estate. The Second Edition, with many curious Additions. Illustrated with Cutts. Price Bound One Shilling. The Pilgrim's Progress; from this World to that which is to come: Delivered under the Si∣militude of a Dream. Wherein is discovered the Manner of his setting out his dangerous Journey and safe Arrival at the desired Countrey. By John Bunnian. Price Bound One Shilling. The Pilgrim's Progress; from this World to that which is to come. The Second Part. Deli∣vered under the Similitude of a Dream. Where∣in is set forth the Manner of Christian's Wife and Children setting out their dangerous Journey and safe Arrival at the desired Countrey: By John Bunnian. Price Bound One Shilling. At Nicholas Bodington's, the Publisher here∣of, Country Chapmen, or others, may at very Reasonable Rates be furnished with all sorts of Books, as Bibles, Testaments, Com∣mon-Prayer, and all manner of School∣books, &c.
