M1284C 99833098 37573
A NOVELTY: Or, a Government of WOMEN, DISTINCT FROM MEN, Erected amongst some of the People, call'd QUAKERS. DETECTED In an Epistle, occasionally written to a Man-Judge, upon a Young Man's refusing (for good Conscience sake) to submit to their Authority in Marriage, seeing that Relations and Friends were already satisfied. To which is added, A Lamentation for the Fall of so many of that People. Published for no other end, but to deter all honest Hearts of the said People, from erecting the like Unscriptural Government. Tho' this may not so far prevail with such Women as has a secret Command of their Husbands Purses; together with those Preachers that reap Profit by such a Female Government, as to consent to the Disanulling the same. Written by William Mather, a dear Lover of the said People, who has for several Years been much troubled, that some of them should fall from their Primitive In∣stitution, as to set up Women's and Men's Meetings, as Guides in Government, seeing God has placed the civil Magistrates over us, Rom. 13. MIRROR of POLICY, No honest Married Wife is to deal in the Affairs of the Common-wealth, much less to meddle with the making of Marriages, unless for her own Children and Servants, wherein she must also refer her self to the discretion of her Husband, lest she incur the name of a Harebrain. Cease ye from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of. Isa. 222. LONDON: Printed for Sarah Howkins, in George-yard, Lumbard-street.
A NOVELTY, &c. Reader, TO use as few Words as I can, behold a Copy of the Certificate, or Letter from one of the Judges, from a Monthly Meeting in Huntington-shire, where the Young Man dwelt, to a Monthly Meeting in Bedford-shire, where the Maid dwelt. Ramsey, 3d. of the 5th. M. 94. Friends in Bedford-shire, HERE came Stephen Scarborrow,Who kee a little Grose Shop at Bran∣ton, a Mile  Huntington. to acquaint Friends of his Intention of Marriage with Marry Samm, Daughter of Natha∣niel Samm of Litlington, in Bedford-shire; as also he did to our Quarterly Meeting about a Month ago, and Friends did tenderly advise him to acquaint our Women Friends therewith, who attend Meet∣ings to serve Truth in their Day Age, and Generation, and to enquire, and see that things be clear on all parts on so weighty a Concern as Mar∣riage; but he refusing to follow Friend's Advice herein, I know not what the Women-Friends may have to say in this Matter: Now I being one that have had some Exercise and Concern in these our Meetings, I do testifie, That that Spirit that doth oppose the good Order in publishing Marriage in Men and Women's Meetings, is not of God, and am sorry for the Young Man, and desire he may live to see his Weakness, and amend; so with Love to all Friends of Truth, rest a Friend to the same Truth. Tobias Hardmeat. After the Young Man had carried the Letter above, with a Certificate, to a Monthly Meeting in Bedford-shire, with other Hands to it, which Tobias would not sign with his Brethren, (he not being at Unity with them in that;) my House being in the Young Man's way home, call'd at my House, and there happen'd to take it out of his Pocket, said to me, Friends gave it me again, and he laid it down; he being gone, I perused it pritty
well, and soon perceived it came from an Imposing Spirit, such a one as has bred all the Division and Troubles amongst Friends: Therefore in hopes to a little moderate this severe Judge, I write the following Letter unto him, (except the Margent,) viz. Friend Tobias Hardmeat, Communicate this to thy Brethren of the Monthly Meeting in Huntington. WHEN thou was at my House, the 17th day of the last Month,. E. and his ife being at Meeting at  House. thou said'st to me; There was no imposing upon any Person that came into your Meetings of Government, or words to that purpose; if you are not Imposers, I must confess I am mistaken. Thy Certificateor Letter to onthly Meet∣ing in Bedford∣re; who ere also wed their wer, bid∣ng the young n come xt Monthly Meeting, when they knew, or might have known that day, the Couple was innocent; but me he must, tho' he dwells about sixteen Miles off, and must hire a Horse. of the 3d. Instant makes it more manifest concerning a young Man's refusing to mention his Intention of Marriage first of all to the Judgment of your Women's Meetings; and because (for good Consci∣ence sake) he could not do it, thou judgeth him weak, and need of Amend∣ment; judging also all other People that do oppose, or that submit not to a Female Authority in Marriage, Not to be of God, then of the Devil: An uncharitable Sentence. Can there be greater Imposers in the World, than those that judge all People, Not to be of God, for not submitting to a Female Government in Marriage? A thing never heard of, but of late Years, except the Govern∣ment of the Amazons, who were not so Censorious upon the account of Marriage. The Words in the Certificate.Or Letter. I do testifie, That that Spirit that doth oppose the good Order in publishing Marriages in Men and Womens Meeting, is not of God. Again, And am sorry for the young Man, and desire he may live to see his Weakness, and amend. Again, saist thou, I know not what the Women-Friends may have to say to this Matter; (that is) his Non submission to a Meeting of Women, di∣stinct from Men. I do greatly desire to hear how they do to bear it, that a Young Man should refuse to submit to their Authority. Yet should be very glad to hear also, that a Meeting of VVomen had received power from God, so as to prevail with a Maid, or Married Woman (that comes to them for Counsel) to forsake Pride,Oh! The de of Wo∣en-Judges, especially at London, that has not yet prevailed with Maids, to hide those hollow places they ve, as room for Topknots on their Foreheads. and Excess in Meat, Drink, Apparel, and Furniture.
And whether such Women-Judges ever did any Good, who come into the Seat of Counsel, rusling in gaudy flower'd Stuffs, or Silks, from Top to Toe, mincing with their Feet, &c. except their Gifts to the Poor. But to be brief, because I am not for raising Chollar in any,He that's built on the Rock Christ, nothing will move to Passion. yet I hope I need not fear it in thee, and am sure thou wilt not be angry with me, if thou art built upon that Rock, that neither Storms, nor any other thing can move to Passion. Therefore, to ease me of the Burthen which now is upon my Spirit,And has been some Years. I shall give thee my Opinion and then cease at this time; for it is not becoming a true Christian to delight in Contending, or be troublesom to a Congregation; yet those that shall force me to confess that I err in what I write, (before I see it my self) are the Imposers. My Opinion is this, by way of AdviceFrom a weak one; yea, one of the most de∣spised in Israel, being not a Conformist.; When a Couple shall come to your private Monthly Meeting in Huntington, to acquaint you of their Intentions of Marriage, say to them, as to the antient Christian Quakers. Friend, Who made us Judges over you? Go, if you find freedom of Spirit, and publish your Intentions at the end of the Publick Religious Meeting for Worship, to which you belong, or nearest to your Dwel∣ling;The ancient Practice of Friends. for they best know whither or no you are clear from all other En∣gagements in this kind, where you may have a sufficient number of Witnesses at your Certificate. And that we now let you know, this was the Innocent Practice of our dear deceased Friends in the beginning, when God sent among us, to turn our Minds to Christ's Inward and Spiritual Grace,Mention'd in the Church of England's Ca∣techism, to be the Substance, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, being but signs thereof. in each Soul, to be our Guides, not Man. Likewise, on the other Hand, say unto this Couple, in the fear of God, Friends, If you have freedom, and find it's not contrary to the Teachings of Christ's Inward and Spiritual GraceMention'd in the Church of England's Ca∣techism, to be the Substance, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, being but signs thereof. in your own Souls. Publish your Intentions of Marriage twice in our Women's Meetings; and when all the VVomen-Judges think you a fit Match, then you must men∣tion it also twice to us of the Men's Meeting, which we think necessary.This Decree was made at the Yearly Meeting, 1657: and also in a Quarterly Mee∣ting in the Isle of Ely. And that when we, who are most commonly Strangers to your Pro∣ceedings, (tho' we are well informed by a Friend, all things are clear on both sides) yet you are to come and wait on us Monthly or Quarterly, until such time, as all the VVomen and Men of both Meetings say you may joyn in Marriage, for fear you should bring a Scandal upon the Truth, tho' your Dwelling be Twenty Miles off, or more, from hence.Not caring how it hinders their Business, & Horse-hire. These two manner of ways of Marriage, we lay before you, chuse which of the two, that answers best to the witness of God in your own Souls; for we are not to be Judges of that. So we freely leave you to your Choice,The want of this has brought much Confusion. so as you come together in the fear of God, and we shall think never the worse of you.How have you hated those that conform'd not.
For we seek God's Glory, not our own; which is according to our first Institution, when first we became a People. For our Labour is to perswade People to submit to Christ's Spiritual Government in their own Souls. So that as we are not to answer for your Miscarriges, neither are you for ours. If thou believest I write this to thee, in Enmity to any Person or Per∣sons whatsoever, thy diserning is but weak, so not fit to sit as a Judge in Israel. But hope better things of thee, to whom my true Love is, and to all that do faithfully return to the Truth, as it was amongst Friends, when first the Mockers called us Quakers. Bedford, 11d. 5m. 94. I am thy Friend, William Mather. To which Letter no Answer hath yet been given. A Lamentation for the Fall of so many, once Worthies, in Spiritual Israel. OH!The Author's Sorrow. what shall I say, or write unto you, that once run to and fro on Foot from place to place, spending your Time and Strength to turn Peoples Minds into the Centre of their Souls, to Christ's Inward and Spiri∣tual Grace, to be their Teacher and Leader into all Truth. But now, that you should contradict your former Advice, by setting up VVomen and Men Guides over an Innocent People, is greatly to be lamented. How are you fallen, what Lamentation shall I take up for you? Oh! that mine Eyes were as a Fountain of Water, that I might weep Day and Night for the Fall of so many, once Worthies in Spiritual Israel; who were once in that Spirit and Love of Jesus, that they could lay down their Lives to win Souls to God; loved their very Enemies, yea, could forgive the Trespasses of a Brother,Matth. 18.22. seventy times seven. But alas, this true Love, or Lamb's Patience is not now to be found on Earth,O Truth, art thou fled to Heaven again? Is Man's Souls too straight to contain thee? except amongst a few upright Hearts, that has chosen Christ's In∣ward and Spiritual Grace for their Guide, such can wash the Feet of their Enemies. Deceive not your selves, for you cannot save your selves; by saying you are in the Light, when you envy any Man; for whoever doth, is in Darkness, even until now, 1 Joh. 1.9.
Now let me a little reason with you, Was there not true Love and Charity in general amongst the Professors of the Truth (when all thought themselves Poor and Low in their own EyesHave you not forgotten that good Day.) before Ambitious Wo∣men, and Ambitious Men, crept in among you, such I mean that thirsted for Honour and Rule over an Innocent People, Absolon like, saying in Heart, O that I was a Judge in Israel, when alas, most of such Judges,The Heart of Man is deceit∣ful; none can know it, but by the Grace of God. What is not of Faith is Sin. have and do busie themselves in judging others for the Moats in their Eyes, when the Beam is still in their own Eyes. These Lordly Spirits in Women's-Meetings, and Men's Meetings, would have an Innocent People submit to their Rules, Orders and Ceremonies, whither the Parties see it their Duty to obey, or not. Holding those Meetings Monthly and Quarterly in private Rooms (where sometimes there are not above four Persons that take upon themselves to RuleAnd alas most of them Ignorant ones, not knowing who gave them their usurped Power, yet will be as an∣gry as a Wo∣man, if you obey not their Wills, when you come be∣fore them.) and there dispose of such Monies as they collect at the end of Religious Meetings (where the most Givers are) where they ought also to give a publick Account how they disposed of the Money unto the general Givers; but this I never see them do, except the Collection was for a Fire, &c. It's true, Monies for the Poor were at first (that is) when first God raised us to be a People, (who discovered more of his Love to us, than too many before us in this latter Age.) I say, then Moneys were collected, or freely given always at the end of a Monthly Religious Meeting, where also Marriages was proposed, and there finished in time. Then why do you (in many places) still hold up the one, and leave the other to the Judgment of Women's Meetings, &c. Whence sprung all the Divisions, Controversies, and separate Meet∣ings for Worship among you. If not from the severity, acted in the said Meetings for Government,The Root from whence Contest rises among you. whereby have you not attained to such an outward Power and Authority over Innocent People, as to cast a good Man, (that confirms not) out of the favour of your People, and to slight his Testimony for God, and can retain a bad Man (a Conformist to your Womens Meetings) in favour with your People, yea, and to preach too, tho' a Cast-away. To bring Presidents, for this would spend too much Time and Paper, (I thank God he has hitherto kept me from bowing to any sort of Image of Man's making.) But did St. Paul's Enemies say,Would you not have him so, by calling before you more than twelve times, to answer at your Court in London. See his Tryals in Pensilvania, Sold by R. Baldwin. The most hidden way to defame a Nonconformist, as has been yet heard of. that much Learning had made him mad? Did not the Pope say so by John Parrot (when you owned him in the Prison of mad Men at Rome) and did not one of your Preachers say to me, that much Learning has made Geo. Kieth mad.
Will you take up those envious Peoples Arguments, to render whom you please odious in the Minds of the Innocent. But his Works and Service for the Truth, as it is in Jesus, will out live your Malice against him. Oh! That he, and every one, that truly fears God, may so keep to the measure of Grace,In what may an be pre∣rved from nemies, that  shall not be rt. e that dwells  Love to all, wells in God. given them of God, that no Tryals, of what na∣ture soever, may ever separate them from the Love of God; (if so) then I am sure they will envy none, tho' a great Enemy; I say, God has kept me in the Spirit of Love to all (praised be his Name for it) tho' I have been convinced about forty Years, that the Quaker's Fundamental Principle of Christ's Light and Grace, being the chief Leader and Guide into all Truth, is a Truth, which will abide for ever. And no Man, either by Conversation or Preaching, made me joyn with them; it was God alone that shewed me that they were in the right way then, for I often prayed to GodBeing young, d then dwelt  Holdenly, in Northampton∣hire, knowing f none, call'd Quaker. to discover to me which was the right way to Heaven, and he directed me to them, when I knew nothing of them, but the name Quaker, whom I sought outBy enquiring f Labourers, at I set to work, who old me there was none fol∣owed them but poor Men, s Weavers, &c. The Author could never oyn with their outward Government., and found them, and suffered many Buffittings and Stonings, and Imprisonments with them, which was Joy unspeakable unto me, that I had found a People, whose Trust was alone in God. Oh! how my Soul was knit unto them; I could have died at a Stake with them then, if it had been the Will of God. Oh! my Heart is broken, as into Tears, that this People should so soon let go their true Guide, Christ's Inward and Spiritual Grace, and set themselves up as Guides. I must confess, I have been at two of these Meetings of Government, but it was accidentally; the one was in Huntington shire, the other in Bedford∣shire; in both which, I saw so much of the Imperiousness òf those that made themselves Judges, that I could never after find Freedom in Spirit to go to any more, and did largely write a Testimony against it, but ne∣ver had an Answer, and rested in the Will of God; but now I am con∣strained to write, in hopes the Innocent may see to the beginning, and the danger of any People, that swerves from their first Institution.See the Ep. of J. Crook. and Tho. Green, to the Young, convinced, and Truth's Pro∣gress. By J. Crook. Again, From whence arise all the publick Clashings of one Minister against another, if not from those Lordly Spirits, that will rule in such Meetings, too publickly known, both to Profess or Prophane? that a Priest once writ to me, That the Light was not new the Quaker's Guide, it's their Meeting at Devonshire House, the Rise too of those Arbitrary Meetings in the Country. Oh! Ye degenerate from your first Institution; you I say, that are resolved to govern Arbitrarily, and not leave the honest Souls among you,Arbitrary Go∣vernment. to be ruled by Christ's Inward and Spiritual Grace, to which you have so often advised them to follow, as a most sure Guide, and will not suffer them, by the Leadings of that, to choose who shall be their Arbitra∣tors, for them in Marriage, if you can hinder them.
If you resolve to carry it by a Ruling Hand over the Innocent, (con∣trary to your Principles.) Take no more upon you the Name of Children of the Light,For that leads to Peace on Earth, and Good-will to all Men. as G. F. and E. H. calls you in their Primmer, seeing you are fallen into the same Snare (in Church-Government) as others before you, whom you did condemn for such things. Oh! How dare you the positive Judgment against any person (in things, not sinful against God) seeing that one of the greatest Writers,He that is without sin let him cast the first Stone. to promote your Authority, (otherwise was a very worthy Man,) had not yet attained to infallibility or Perfection, saying, Others may per∣haps speak more certainly of this State (Perfection) as have arrived to it; for me, I shall speak modestly, as acknowledging my self not to have arrived to it. See R. B.'s Works. p. 389.Perfection is attainable in this Life, thro Obedience to God's Grace. Oh! Will you continue to be so Censorious to Judge all People, not to be of God, that take not Counsel of Women's Meetings, before Mar∣riage. My Soul has often mourned for you, and often desired of God, That he would be pleased to discover to me, Whether or no,☞ I am to blame in thus writing to you, and have found nothing but peace therein, and good Will to all Men, and can (through God's Mercy) give my Bread freely to mine Enemy, and serve all mine Enemies,The Author is constrained to write, having borne long. (if I have any) in what I can, GOD knows I ye not; for I truly Love all the Works of his Hand, and am very sensible, that those that do envy any Man, (let his Transgressions be never so great) is not of God, profess what they will in Religion.Gods Love is unto all the Works of His Hand. Had not our dear Saviour Love and Mercy for one that had Seven De∣vils? And shall not those that profess to be his Disciples have the same Love to all? Because no Man dwell in God, no longer than he dwells in Love to all; overcoming Evil by the good Grace of Christ Jesu. But to come somewhat  not God  your  Then why do you set Self-Exaltation before it? For the Love you have to Rule, by your means over Innocent Hearts. But I still hope that the young Convinced will  (by  Gods Grace, he has given them) to the beginning  a harmless and Innocent People, and was not for Oh! ye arbitrary Judges, what think you? Was not  Man, W. P. ashamed to mention this  in Page 31. of his Key? Wherein he  not your  Government (to please you that Love Dominion)  wise in that, fearing (I suppose) the World  ∣deed well they might, having never heard before  Women must be advised with, before Marriage,  of Men and Women together, and the Resui to be  Devil.
And the greatest wonder of all is, That such a Government should be practised amongst a People that profess,Do not you yet see your Apostane. that every Individual Man and Woman should have no other Guide, besides Christ's Inward and Spiritu∣al Grace. But if you now say to me, as G. F. said to me and T. H. in a Discourse with him, till near Mid-night, about the said Arbitrary Government, You do not deserve to have Wives, (saith he)The best Ar∣gument that ever they could give for Womens Meetings. you speak so much against Women. To say the Truth, this was the best Argument he could give us, for his unscriptural Female Government. Though its well known, we love our Wives as true Christians ought to do. Nor are we against a Woman's Declaring in a Religious Meeting, what God has done for her Soul, by silently waiting at the Feet of Jesus, as Mary did, (that is) in his Inward and Spiritual Grace. Nor are we against Women meeting by themselves, upon a particular occasion, but not monthly for Government. Nor are we against Men's Meetings upon urgent Occasion, between themselves, so as they Judge no other Person or Persons, who has not chosen them Judges or Arbitrators. Seeing God has placed the Civil Magistrates over us,The Civil Ma∣gistrates are not to be re∣iected, who in∣deavour to preserve us in Peace. to whom we are to submit in all things, that's not contrary to the Conscience, which is Rectified by God's Grace, Rom. 13. Oh! Call to mind the Severity of that Spirit, that has, and still doth act in too many of you. How many Souls have you, as it were, slain by Judging, and thereby driven into the troubled Sea of Man's Wrath,You create Opposers, by your unfaith∣fullness. and being so driven by you thither (you laying aside Christ's Love) can do no other than oppose you, then you do truly call them Apostates, when you were the Cause for want of Love. Though the Truth is,None can no longer stand faithful, than their Ever to God's Grace. Your Ags have barr'd many Souls from owning the Truth, and has given strength to the Atheists. The present Civil Magi∣strates have out done you in Love to all, The  imposing Spirit. they were to blame also themselves, because they let go the Strength they had in God's Grace, and so suffered Man's Wrath and Envy to separate them, from the Love of God in Christ Jesus, through your Censors. Likewise, how many Souls, by your Imperious Government, have you barr'd from Inquiring after the Truth, is too well known to some. Oh! unnatural, not to give that Liberty to some, called with you Quakers, (in things not sinful) as the present Civil Magistrates gives us all. This is not doing as you would be delt by. Think you, that God will not Judge you for these things? Let Self-Interest no longer blind your Eyes. Oh! the Cruelty of this imposing Spirit (when God does not chain it down) how many Thousands of Souls and Bodies has it destroyed, which no Man can number; being yet lodged in the hearts of Ambitious
Women, and Ambitious Men: the same Spirit it is, that now judges  of the Devil, that conforms not to their Wills, Orders, Ceremonies, Will you not yet say, that such Priests are more to be commended, than you, who do not impose upon a Couple (that are about to marry) any Ceremonies against their Consciences.some Priests out-do you in Love. How often have you troubled a Couple, for refusing to submit to a Female Government in Marriage, and enjoyning some, scarce of Ability to travel many Miles, and often (at their own charge) to your private Women's Meetings, and Men's Meetings, which have been so wearied with Journeys, and needless Delays, (tho' Relations were satisfied) who to rid themselves of the trouble of waiting upon you any longer,Judging all not of God, as conform not to Women's Meetings in Marriage; when the Scri∣ptures enjoyns not your Ce∣remony. have gone to a Priest upon the account of Marriage. Then have you not presently judged them gone from the Truth, ha∣ving recorded some (as I am inform'd) Apostates to Generations to come, for so doing, that obeyed not your Wills in Men's Meetings, (when you were the cause for their so doing) and will not own them of the Truth, until such time as they condemn themselves for so doing. Oh! what a mighty Stress you lay upon the Ceremony of Women's Meetings in Marriage, as to account all that oppose, or approve not of it, fallen from God. When some of you will sometimes say, why do you scruple such an indifferent thing, as to propose your Intention of Marriage to a Woman's Meeting, and a Man's Meeting,Jesus did not hate his Bre∣thren that did not believe in him. Joh. 7.5. without Women. And some again do say, That the Scriptures leaves all People free, as to the manner of their Marriage, so as they enter into that Estate in the fear of God, before sufficient Witnesses. I do remember, that a Person, one of the greatest Sticklers for the pro∣moting of your Government of Women and Men's Meetings, once said to me, It was the everlasting Government, of which there would be no end;Were you not blind, to say your Govern∣ment would stand for ever. but since (thro' God's Mercy) his Eyes are opened, and now plainly sees it has been the Root, from whence so many Divisions has sprung among you the said Person, has not yet lost, being call'd a Quaker. I have asked some Couples, newly married, why they did propose their Intention of Marriage to a Meeting of Women, and then to a Meeting of Men, knowing the trouble that others have gone through, by so doing, seeing you knew you were clear from all Engagements to any other in this Kind, and that your Relations and Friends had been long satisfied?The weakness of such Cou∣ples as go to marry at a pri∣vate Women's Meeting, and Mens Meeting. Did not you know it was Friend's Practise in the beginning, to mention their Intentions at the end of several Religious Meetings, and if none oppose justly, then might enter into that State, by speaking fit Words at the end of another Publick Religious Meeting.
There Answer was always to me to this effect: We thought it a very hard Tryal,For fear of dis∣pleasing you, how many Couples has conformed a∣gainst Consci∣ence. that after all things was agreed on for Marriage, to begin again to mention it to a Woman's Meeting; (most Stran∣gers) and after they were satisfied, then to go to a Man's Meeting, to wait for the  But this we did, contrary to our Freedom, that they might not think ill of us. You can  one Couple among you, but will give an Answer much to the same effect; Your own Bi∣gots see the trouble of waiting upon you.  which by this may easily be seen what Domi∣nion you exercise over the Innocent, that to keep favour with you, must leave their Inward Guide to please you. But to plead for your new Arbitrary Government, some of you do say, A frivilous Ar∣gument. That in the beginning, a Couple has come rudely into a Meeting, and said they took each other as Man and Wife, and so brought a Scan∣dal upon us. What then? Is there never a wise Man among you, or Woman, in a Religious Meeting, that can say to such a Couple, you ought to give the Meeting time to make inquiry whether you are clear from all Engage∣ments in this Kind to any other Person or Persons, and we shall do our Endeavour to resolve you next first day;See the true Christians Rules, as to Church-Go∣vernment in the 4th. Edi∣ of The Young Man's Compa∣nion, not writ∣ten to enjoyn others to obey, but left to the witness of God in all People. for here's none that desire; to put you off from time to time, by needless Delays; and as soon as w find you are honest, and are for coming together in the fear of the Lord, we shall freely set our Hands to a Certificate of the Lawfulness of your Marriage; at the end of a Religious Meeting, the more publick the better, nor will we send you many Miles to a Meeting of a few Women, (who may be strangers to you) and they to send you, when they think Good to a private Man's Meeting, who may tell you, that if you will not submit to our Orders, we shall not stand by you in Tryals, &c. but shall begin and end your Marriage at the nearest Religious Meeting, where you are best known, which was the innocent Practice of our dear deceased friends at rest? I was married so,☞ without any Opposition; for then,How I was married, and many others. neither Woman-Judges, nor Men-Judges in private Rooms was set up. Now, because some may be ready to say, we know of no such Law or Decree that injoyns a Couple to go twice to propound their Marriage to a private Women's Meetings, and twice to a private Men's Meeting, here folllows the Copies of two of them. From a Yearly Meeting in London, the 27th. of the 3d. Mon. 1675. IT is our Judgment,Two new Laws established. that for better Satisfaction to all Parcies, that there may be due time for Inquiry of clearness of the Persons concerned, it is convenient that Marriage be at twice propounded to the Meetings that are to take care therein, both to the Men's and Women's Meetings, where
both are established before they are accomplished; and when things are cleared, that the Marriage be accomplished in a Grave, and publick As∣sembly of Friends and Relations. Anther Decree upon Record. THat for Time to come, no Friends may permit, or suffer Marriages, without the Cons;ent of Friends at two Men's, and two Women's Meet∣ings, being , and apart each from other. To mention more Decrees to this purpose, is needless. But the Women in London you may be sure w glad of their Exalta∣tion (in finding that the Men had pred  upon the account of Marriage.) And finding the sweetness of Ruling did (together with Men) judge all in the Country as Libertines, that conformed not to the Deeree, and do judge such to this day, as one of their  Preachers, T. R. One of late G. F.'s Priest-Threshers said to me; I w this Country are of a Libertine Spirit, and an indifferent  only because (for good Conscience like) we did not set up Womens Meetings. (Our Women are wiser here.) Tho' it is true, some of this County has so far conform'd to the De∣crees, as to set up Men's Meetings, Monthly and Quarterly for Govern∣ment, (which is one in Nature, to the other Yet thoDid not a∣ lament, that the Dames of Rome became Governors of their husbands. It is strange (saith he) that these ks com∣manded the World  to  to Women. See  P. . some say such Meetings are very  in the City (where the Women dwell near together) tho' not so  in the Country, dwelling so far asunder. I say, they are needful nowhere to be observed Monthly, because thereby they become proud of the Authority.Wmen's Meet∣ Monthly no where . Which is the  of the Ambitious that . For if a Marriage is intended to be propounded at the end of a Religious Meeting, (to prevent Lordship) and the Meeting happen to be a great one, (as is commonly in London, the Man him self, or he may dsire a Friend to declare at the end of the Meeting, that here is one that desires to publish his Intention of Marriage; and if the People are  going away, you may call as many People as are free to draw into the next Room, and there publish it, both Men and Women being together. This done, some of the Meeting may tell the Man, that if he  next first Day, they will resolve him according to what Inquiry they have made, and as soon as we find you are clear from all Engagements of this Kind to any other Person or Persons you may take each other as Man and Wife, before as many Witnesses as you please, the more, the better; for such Concerns cannot be too publick, &c. This I write from the Innocency of my Soul, (not as a Law for o∣thers) but this way may prevent the Insulting  Ambitious Men and Wo∣men, (who do pretend better things in Words) who delight in Domini∣on,
and are so confident as to say, We dispise Dignities or Government, in not submitting to these unscriptural Government of Woman and Men's Meetings. Obs. Some may say, What art thou also against our Men's meeting Monthly for Government; for did not the Apostles advise to choose El∣ders? &c. Ans. I am not against the Meetings of such Elders, for the innocent to advise with, as the Apostle would have chosen; that is, such as are Meek in Heart,What an El∣der is, and how to be qua∣lified. Lowly in Spirit, Chaste in Life, Virtuous in all Con∣versation, full of Self denial, Long-Suffering, and Patient, not only forgiving, but loving their very Enemies; one that rules his Children, and his own House well; his Wife (if any) grave, (not proud, nor slan∣derous) sober and faithful in all things, 1 Tim. 3.4. 2 Tim. 2.24. Now I appeal to every Conscience that is cleansed by God's Grace, whither if any Man take upon himself to be an Elder, or Teacher in a Meeting,Good Morality is more accep∣table to God than Formalists. See P. 58. in the fourth E∣dition of my Young Man's Companion. Also see a Character of a True Christian, P. 74. and is not qualified as aforesaid, be not a Usurper. God, in Mercy to the Innocent, has often curb'd the said Imposing Spirit, and will more and more, I doubt not, chain it down for ever; which he has already (in Mercy) done out of many Souls, praised be his Name for it. God is a zealous God, he will not give his Honour to a Meeting of VVomen, or Men Judges, (having committed all Judgment in things re∣lating to a good Conscience unto his Son Christ Jesus) and so fas has be∣gun to open the Eyes of his faithful People, People will not much longer be blinded by Man; for a great Assembly may err as well as a little one.that they shall not be so blind to believe that a very large Meeting of VVomen or Men, can give an In∣fallible Judgment in things that others shall be bound to believe and obey, as to a Ceremony, or the Judging of a Man, Not to be of God, when they have not proved he has sinned against God. For if the greatness of the Assembly must carry it (as one of your Preachers said to me, how could such a number be mistaken?) Then the Turks or Papists cannot number you in Assemblies. But have you not a way beyond all others to exercise your Authori∣ty, most hiddenly,A hidden Pow∣er to blow up a Man's Repu∣tation. or in the Dark, by sending abroad your Formal Preachers,Who you ig∣norantly think all is Gospel they utter, though it is true in public, they declare good Words. that do whisper (where they think they can be credited) into the Ears of poor innocent People, that such a Man or Men is not right, he doth not own our VVomen's Meetings, &c. then Prejudice enters. So that Man or Men, however Just, cannot have their Testimonies for God enter into those prejudiced Spirits, or scarce entertained friend∣ly in some places, upon their travel for poor Soul's sake. Oh! the Ig∣norance of those People, that has not chosen Christ Grace in them for their Guide, but Man.
So that by this Secret way of whispering, how soon can you blow up an honest Man's Reputation.Report, and we will report it. Good God! How long, I pray thee, will it be before the Professors of the Grace that came by thy Son Jesus Christ, be obeyed by them, which teaches true Love to all thy Creation?A Prayer for the Innocent that we love one an other, as God loves us all. And as thy Love is to all People, (tho' Sinners) so are thy Followers. Lord, give them to see that they dwell not in the Light, when they envy any People; and al∣so that they may see, that Man is no more to be rely'd on for a Guide, but only thy Inward and Spiritual Grace; this I beg of thee, for thy dear Son's  is to whom be given all Honour, Rule and Dominion, now, and for ever, Amen. If God withdraws from such as cloath themselves with his Gifts, to serve Self Interest, how much more doth he withdraw his Love from such Ministers, as sordidly conform (against their Consciences) to a Fe∣male Government,Such a Test, to try Ministers by, as was ne∣ver heard of before. that you the Judges might not inscence their Hearers against them, when they travel to win Souls to Righteousness; that the Scriptures might be fulfilled in this Age, (in this) The Leaders of the Peo∣ple cause them to err. I say, Such Conforming MinistersConforming Ministers (that is) such a one that designs to take up the whole time of a Meeting, in Speaking, and is offended it another Person takes up some of the time in Speaking; by which the first manifests him∣self to be out of the Apostle's Practice, 1 Cor. 14.3. If any thing be reveal∣ed, &c. G. Whis saw much of an Imposing Spi∣rit in . against good Conscience, may possibly win some Souls (by their Preachings) to the Form, but not to the Power of Godliness, which Power all do deny, that believe that Christ's Inward and Spiritual Grace is not a sufficient Guide to all, with∣out VVomen's Meetings and Men's Meetings, to guide the People by, ex∣cept the Civil Magisirates. Oh! what do you advise People to this Grace for, if it must not be their only Teacher; then if the Grace of Christ in them teaches them not conform to your VVomens Meetings, &c. Can you blame them then? To draw towards a Conclusion, being it is in vain to spend too much Time and Paper, to discover the Vanity of a Female Government, and the Imposing Spirit that now Rules and Reigns in such os you as set up your selves Judges over Innocent People; which thing you condemned in Pro∣fessors before you. What was the Reason think you that caused our English Poetical Pro∣phet J. Wither, from joyning to any Religious Society being asked by a Friend of mine, he said, Why  Minds and Consciences of their Brethren. Then it seems  several sorts of Professors before (since the Re∣formation) were  Imposing, upon their Brethren's Conscience, yet it
Therefore,All ye that ove Righte∣ousness, Christ has given you, (and all men) Talent of his Grace to lead you into all Truth, so need not give Gifts to Men to teach you. Tit. 2.11 O ye honest and upright Hearts (where-ever dispersed upon the Face of the Earth) who hunger and thirst after Righteousness, that ye might be filled therewith, and that it might fill the Earth, I say, let it be your Cry, as of Old, To thy Tents, O Israel! Trust no more in Women or Men as Guides, trust only to that Talent of Christ's Grace in you, that will never deceive you, its always stirring up the mind to good. That will truly teach you your Duty both to God and Man, and to love those that hate you; It brings Salvation, Tit. 2.11. unto all that obey its Reproofs. Oh! trust not Man, whatever he whispers into your Ears, to prejudice your Minds against any Person upon the Earth. The Mind going abroad from watching in this Inward an Spiritual Grace,Let no Man beget Preju∣dice in thee a∣gainst another. is the cause that the Devil gets into the Heart to raise hatred one against another. But he that keeps his Mind upon the Watch, in this Tent, or strong Tower, the Name of the Lord,Wherein thy strength lies, O Man, 2 Cor. 12. 9. As it was for Paul when buffeted by Satan. neither Men nor Devils can deceive him; and he will truly Love all People, though they are of a different Persua∣sion to him in points of Religion. And will the truly Faithful to the Grace of God in themselves, be ad∣vising People to obey the same Grace in their own Souls, and will not seek by any means to draw their Minds from the Obedience thereof; fearing they may fall as the young Prophet did, which obeyed the old Prophet, contrary to his own Gift from God, or Message, 1 K. 13.18. These honest Souls, that has chosen the good part, God's Grace for their Guide,Oh! the Love of an honest Heart to all People is to be praised above Rubies, &c. will envy no couple, that do from a free and willing Mind propound their Intention of Marriage twice to a Woman's Meeting, and twice at least to a Man's Meeting. Nor will envy a Couple that does, and thinks is more agreeable to Truth, to propose their Intentions at the end of several Religious Meet∣ings, where Men and Women are met together, seeing the more publick the better satisfaction to all People; that a Judge did once acknowledge, that such publick Marriages was lawful. Oh!Oh! that all Imposers might obey God's Grace, and no longer preach from Head-know∣ledge, making People believe it is as God's Spirit gives ut∣terance. that you Imposers would obey, as well as preach up God's Grace, for Peoples Guide; then would you come into the Lamb's patience, in∣to that Love, that overcomes Anger, and forgive your Brethren's Tres∣passes, as you hope God will forgive yours. Preach no more of such Love until you witness it. I am your Friend, and God knows my heart, I write in love to you: Though some of you, no doubt, will account me your Enemy, for thus telling (in part) how you are fallen from your first Institu∣tion.
If I am to blame, pray blame no body else,If the Au deserves Blame, he  take all to ∣self; for  Eyes are  come Di  weeping f you with true broken Heart, and contrite Sp∣rit, God o knows, no  else at this time. for no person dictated any thing to me, or put me upon this Work; I do not see that I Err therein. Yet have I long seen and known, that many honest Hearts have been much grieved to see such an alteration in the Professors of the Truth, to what they were in the beginning, when Innocence and true Love to each other had dominion in the Souls of God's People (that is) be∣aore Women and Men set themselves up as Judges in the Meetings foresaid. That you maysee your Error, and return to the Truth, as in the be∣ginning, is the desire of your Loving Friend, William Mather. I do not take you to be mine Enemies, because I am no Man's Enemy, (praised be God for it,) and that I continue as I have hither been, a Friend to all, a Foe to none. To conclude, If you say I have been some-what too sharp upon you,I write n these things because I think you ha me, but be∣cause I love you, so do no hate you. If  want love, then let me lose life, if i be the Will of God. I say I have not been so sharp as the Matter of Fact requires. Have you not trampled under your Feet many Epistles of Love, sent to you, scorning to bait an inch of your Authority, where you can over∣rule. Therefore, If you are designed to Answer me, then I desire you to let some Ancient Honest Friend do it, from the Gift of God in himself; and go not down to AEgypt for help. That is, go not to the Logicians, whose cunning Sophistry can make a good Cause seem bad, and a bad Cause seem good; I mean such an one as T. E.one skilled in the Art of Reasoning or Disputing. who can by Sophistry so multiply Words, as to darken his innocent Readers, who is too often made to believe, his Cause must needs be good, his Matter is so long. Alas! How are men deceived in that? The fewer Words, the more Truth. And if he, or such as say, I have Tautologiesa repeating the same thing in other words herein, (a thing most of the Formal Preachers are guilty of, if it be a fault)The Author desires that a Friend in the Truth may Answer his Writing, but no Sophister: blame me not for that. For I do not profess my self a Schollar in the Languages, and therefore most fit, that such a Schollar as I should answer me. But if its come to that with you, that Scholarship, Man's Wisdom and Reason must be Judge over such Consciences, as are rectified by God's Spirit, never more blame those cunning Men, that drown'd the Text, in the Comment. Likewise, Have you not often declared to the People, and do daily,Man must lay down their Crowns at the feet of Jesus. that this is the day that — The loftiness of Man shall be bowed down, and the Haughtiness of Man shall be made low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted, Isa. 2.17.
What Eyes thou read'st with, Reader, know I not, Mine were not dry, when I these Failings wrote. Take ye heed every one of his Neighbour, and trust ye not in any Brother; for every Brother will utterly supplant, and every Neighbour will walk with Slanders, Jer. 9.4. Was this Jeremiah's Complaint in his day, the same may be taken up this day. Read his 9th. Chapter. Oh! that all may fear before the Lord, by obeying his Grace, or Gifts in themselves, that we may all say with Holy David, Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peac have kissed each other. Truth shall spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven, Psal. 85.10, 11. Amen.
Postscript. ABOUT the 9th. of this Month of September came to my hand, from Tobias Hardmeat, the Letter I sent him (above Print∣ed) with several little Sentences he wrote on the Margent thereof, in Answer to which, take as follows. T. H. It's not Imposition, but Advice to good Order. Answer. Is it not Imposition to brand all as Libertines, Apostates, and not of God, that conform not to your Unscriptural Orders? If you did not compel, none would oppose you. Though I may ask you, From whence you had your Authority, (without Offence, I hope) as you have asked other Religious Societies before you, Why they enjoyn'd un∣scriptural Orders? T. H. That Spirit that opposeth Truth, is curst. Answ. Dost thou curse me, for opposing a Female Government? If that Authority be thy Truth, thou so often speaks of, then am I an Op∣poser, and thou an Imposer. T. H. Having learned, Therefore I speak and testifie. Answ. What Spirit has learned thee, to call Women  Truth, and to Curse and testifie, That all those that oppose a Female Go∣vernment, is not of God? T. H. To desire a Man's amendment, is to desire his good. Answ. True. But had the young Man any fault, besides his non submission to a Female Government?
T. H. A Scoff, not solid enough, for one professing Truth. Answ. What, because I desired thee to let me know how the Wo∣men Judges, did to bear it, that a young Man could not own their Au∣thority? T. H. Its well they do some good, (meaning the Women Judges.) Answ. That is, their Gists to the Poor, yea its good in rich Widows, and also in married Women, when their Husbands are uncapable to do it themselves; and if that's all the good they do, they had better lay down their Authority, and not leave their business Monthly and Quarterly, to no purpose? T. H. Its well thou hast so much Charity, cherish it, and it may grow. Answ. Thou praises me for my Charity, in not desiring to ir up Wrath or Choler in thee; but my Charity extends further, for I have all along been very free to entertain any of your formal Preachers, re∣joyeing at the exaltation of Christ's Grace in each Soul, when they de∣clare the power and virtue thereof, in this dark Town of Bedford; but if they build up with one hand, and throw down with the other hand, by setting up other Guides, besides Christ's Grace, they are returned into Babylon. But to the great grief of my Soul, I find, that most of such Teachers, are for Preaching chiefly to such People, as do already witness their true Teacher in themselves, when our dear Saviour respected neither Time or Places, who did instruct the People where they were most Congregated together. And those he now sends forth, would certainly be of the same mind, if his good Spirit was their Guide. If you are not for the Exaltation of Men Judges, why was there about 10 Preachers at one Meeting in Huntington, lately, to the grief of some, because Geo. White∣head was there that day. T. H. I know not any such imposers amongst us; but submission to the Coun∣ , is good. Answ. I admire thy Confidence, to say, Thou knowest no such Im∣posers amongst you. Can you inflict greater punishment upon a Non∣Conformist to Women Counsel, than to tell their Friends such are Liber∣tines, Atheists, and not of God? Could ever any Imposers go further?
Except they had power to cast into Prison: What is more dear to a Man than a good Name, as to this World? And I further ask thee, Whether there be any other Truth, besides the Grace of God, in our own Hearts, which we are to submit to? T. H. Opinions are too numerous, Truth is one in all. Answ. If my Opinion, in advising thee and thy Brethren (in the Letter above,) to come to that good Order or Practice of Friends, as in the beginning, was not according to the Truth, (or Grace of God,) why didst thou not disprove it, in this thy pretended Answer. And as Truth is one in all (as thou sayest) Why do you Judge it in others? But rather leave every one to stand or fall, as they obey it, and if any disobey the Truth, or Grace in themselves; you that are Spiritu∣al, should tell them of it; but force by scandalizing the Disobedient, is not the way to win them to Obedience, to the Truth in themselves? T. H. Look into Bedfordshire Paper of Prescription for Order, and there thou may find good Advice many Years since. Answ. I know nothing of what's in it: But if any Persons has taken upon themselves to draw Prescriptions or Orders (contrary to the Holy Scriptures) as a Bond upon all others to obey the same, that's nothing to me; I am not to follow a Multitude into Innovations. Our Preachers has already told us, That God's Grace in each Soul, is to be the only Leader into all Truth, which (through God's great Love) is witnessed to be so. So that if they are gone from that, and design to exalt them∣selves as Guides, we know better things; therefore it is more safer to follow our true and inward Teacher, than weak Man, who is so apt to degenerate from their Primitive Institution. T. H. Friend, William Mather, my Advice to thee for Truth sake is, be still and quiet. Answ. Who can hold their peace, while Women and Men-Judges exalt themselves in Authority, above all that is called good in the Innocent; and while you have your Formal Preachers, (or ) to travel through the Nation, whispering into the Ears of poor people, that such and such Persons are fallen from the Truth; when in reality you can find no fault in them, but their Non-conformity to a Female Govern∣ment, &c.
T. H. And what it is in thee, that Judgeth others. Answ. As I hear, I Judge. Now every Man ought to compare the Doctrine of that Age, wherein he lives; with no other Doctrine, than that which was out of all question spotless, which is the Doctrine of the Apostles. W. S. Ad. to Protestants, p. 162. T. H. I love not Controversie, but Peace and Truth, and desire therein to grow. Answ. Neither do I love Controversie; my labour only is that all may lay down their honour at the Foot-stool of Christ's Grace. T. H. Our Labour and Travail, in attending our Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, is to preserve and keep, and bring into Order, Christ's Spiritual Government. Answ. Who was it first that put poor Innocent VVomen upon Tra∣vail several Miles Monthly and Quarterly; was it not Ambitious Men? If thou wast not ashamed of their Authority, sure thou wouldest have given me one Scripture proof for it, if thou could. Dost thou think that the VVisdom of VVomen or Men, can bring in Order Christ's Spiritual Government? No, no, It's his Spirit that can only do it. T. H. That all may be preserved out of Miscarriages (you set up this Go∣vernment) and the precious Truth set over all. Answ. That Christ, the precious Truth, may be set over all, is all that I labour for: If over all, then over all your Meetings of Govern∣ment. Can any thing preserve out of Miscarriages, besides God's Grace, the precious Truth? VVhat is there never a Spiritual-minded Man or VVoman in a Reli∣ous Meeting, that sees a Fault in another, that cannot tell the party thereof privately at the end of the Meeting, or go to their  to tell them , Matt. 18. but must Summon him, or her, to  little private Meeting Monthly, I know not how many Miles off their Dweings? T. H. Wait in God's Fear, to know thy self.
Answ. I praise God, he has kept me in his Fear, from my Child∣hood, and have so far denyed self, that I could not enter into Self-Ex∣altation, by joyning with your Authority in Government, though I have been often invited so to do. So that many of you that have Reigned so long, scorn to be told of your Arbitrary proceedings; yea, he that shall but tell you how you err, you will account him an Imposer, though the Name most properly be∣long to you, as I have before proved it. Good God! Can we put no Trust in Man? Hast not thou raised up one Religious Society after another, who begun well, whilest they took Counsel only of thy good Spirit in their Hearts, kept their first Love? But its greatly to be lamented, to behold most Societies choose other Go∣vernours besides Thy Spirit, and so come to divide, in about Thirty Years after thou hast raised them. O Lord, I pray Thee, look upon this People with an Eye of pity, (to whom thou hast given large gifts,) turn their hearts to Thy Grace, more and more, that they may no longer take Glory to themselves, and pride themselves with thy Jewels, that another People take not their Crowns; for thy dear Son's sake. To whom be all Honour, &c. FINIS.
