M1844 12770109 93631
Imprimatur, Novemb. 13. 1669. SAM. PARKER.
A SHORT VIEW OF THE FRAƲDS, and ABƲSES Committed by APOTHECARIES; As well in Relation to PATIENTS, as PHYSICIANS: AND Of the only Remedy thereof by PHYSICIANS making their own MEDICINES. BY CHRISTOPHER MERRETT Dr. in Physic, Fellow of the College of Physicians, and of the Royal Society. —Fingunt se Medicos omnes, Idiota, Sacerdos, Nutrix, & Tonsor, Pharmacopaeus, Anus. The Second Edition more correct. LONDON, Printed for James Allestry, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1670.
A Short View of the Frauds and Abuses com∣mitted by Apothecaries, as well in Relation to Patients, as Physicians; and of the only re∣medy thereof by Physicians making their own Medicines.
DOubtless it will seem strange to most men, that after 30 years not unsuccessful pra∣ctice in this great City, I should now at last forbear sending my Bills to the Apo∣thecaries, knowing that hereby a whole Company of men interessed in the World (who by their number, noise, and tricks, may be able to decry any Physician) will become my implacable adversaries, and by their private whispers of untrue tales, will en∣deavour to their utmost, either to keep me from any new, or shuffle me out of my fixt imployment. But not fearing the utmost their malice can invent, or pro∣claim; I shall publickly assert what I privately pra∣ctise, preferring the publick good, and the honour of my profession before my own private profit. And al∣though I have had some experience what their groundless anger can do, when they some years since proclaimed me in their publick Hall their Enemy, for  acting the
College Interest, and of late for saving my Patients lives and purses, by dispencing gratis my Me∣dicines. Yet I hope no indifferent person, when he knows that I have thus long slighted their weak endea∣vours, will believe I can now at length have so poor an end as revenge; especially when they shall consider on the one hand, the universal and daily complaints of both Patient and Physician, the great cause they have to do so, and the little hope of a remedy, and on the other, besides that general obligation all men have of doing their Country-men good, and the par∣ticular necessity I have of justifying my actions, by leaving the World their judg upon the account I shall here deliver of them. And lastly, that which will leave my Enemies not any objection, I take upon me not only a great trouble, but charge, without any other design then doing mankind good, by endeavour∣ing to restore my profession to its ancient and deserved honours. And had I none of these inducements, I am sure the vulgar excuse of friends importunities may be satisfactory to all persons for my publishing what I here do, when I must acknowledge that many of my Col∣legues and other Practisers in several parts, upon read∣ing these papers furnished me not only with some bad practices of their own experience, but thereupon en∣joyned the publishing of them. So that in these papers I do but speak the common language of all Physicians, and of very many Patients. Neither are all their frauds and abuses here inserted, the rest (perhaps more in number) being reserved to another opportunity. I shall only add by way of preface; that the last year a Book was printed on the same argument, by an inqui∣sitive  person, now Dr. in Physic, which might have spared me this labour, but that it was too large for eve∣ry ones reading, and in some things short. It was his fate to be called by them Fool, Ass, and Simple Fellow, and much worse language, bragging that some of their Boys should answer him. But upon more serious thoughts, the whole Company have suffered it to find the credit it well deserves, without the least reply but that of revilings. In these ensuing papers, I hope to prove, that these abuses complain'd of by all sorts of persons, arise from this only cause, that Physicians dispence not themselves such Medicines, they use for the relief of their Patients, but commit this work to the Apothecaries, or rather their Servants. Now the Apothecaries abuses generally relate either to the Medicines, Patients, or Physicians; which three do comprehend all I shall say on this subject. But the Reader is to take notice, that all here charged on the Apothecaries, is not meant of every sin∣gle one, but of some, or more of them, and may in a short time in all probability be verified of them all, according as their number, cajoling the ignorant, and bold daring in Physic increase.
But before I descend to particulars, I shall first lay down this Proposition, their own confession, and in their own Language, viz. That they may be the veriest Knaves in England. Because they may put in bad ingredients, and more or less then the composition requires, they may substitute one thing for another; and all this with∣out being detected, and consequently not be punished for such misdemeanors; but more especially in Medi∣cines  for private mens uses, wherein they may do what they please without the least discovery of the Patient, and from this general confession of theirs, it clearly follows, that whatsoever deceit, covetous wits can invent, may at least be suspected to be used by them, and whatsoever is here alledged may find easier belief. And Secondly, Most men wonder, that this Cor∣poration, being but of few years standing, and to the setting up of whose Trade so small a Stock is necessary; should live so high, spend so freely, gain so great Estates, by their return of so little money yearly, which how 'tis done every man may conceive to be effected by the following Artifices. More particularly, the Frauds by them committed relate either to their falsifying of Medicines, or se∣condly, to the number of their Bills, and prescriptions, or thirdly, to the prices of them. First, They use Medicines quite contrary to the prescription, Myrtle-leafs shewed the Censors for Sena, a Binder for a Purger. Mushroms of the Oak, &c. rub'd over with Chalk for Agaric, which Mr. Evelyn in his late publisht Book of Forest Trees, pag. 27. observes, to the great scandal of Physic as he adds; Hemlock-Drop∣wort Roots for Paeony Roots, Poysons for wholsome re∣medies; Privet by some, by others Dog-berries, for those of Spina Cervina, no Purgers for a strong one. Sheeps Lungs for Fox Lungs, the Bone of an Oxe Heart for that of a Stags Heart, Damsons for Damasc Prunes, Syrup of Limons, for that of Citrons, Bryony Roots for Me∣choacan, &c. Secondly, They falsify the grand Compositions of
the London Dispensatory. It being a common trade with them to buy unsound, and decayed Simples of some Druggists, and to return them back so much of the composition as will pay for the Simples. Secondly, whereas Apothecaries are bound to shew publickly to the Censors of the College, and the Master and Wardens of their Company, Mithridate, Diascordium, Alkermes, &c. Yet for all this some of them privately make a great deal more of the Composition then is shewed, of unsound Drugs, and some without any view at all; others put in the Scrapings that ought to be thrown away; and by these Arts they under-sell, and ruine one another, selling the Composition at a lower rate then good Ingredients cost them; and with these complaints they daily mutiny amongst themselves. Thirdly, 'Tis very common for them to load Medi∣cines with Honey, and other cheaper ingredients, and to leave out in whole or in part, those of greater value; viz. Saffron in Ruffus Pills, and in Oxycroceum Plaster, which latter, they colour of a Saffron colour with Tur∣meric, Sanders, &c. Ambergrise in Alkermes, Diascordium was found by the Censors in their search made only of Honey, and Bole-Armeniac. Which false composition was taken away by the then Master of the Company.
Such Chymists which sell preparations honestly made complain, that few Apothecaries will go to the prices of them. Whence it comes to pass, that most of the pre∣parations found in the Shops are sophisticated, to the great abuse of City and Country. These abuses daily increase since the Censors, discouraged by the multi∣tude of Empirics swarming in every Corner, have omitted their wonted searches, being to their loss of  and expences out of their own Purses for the publick good only. Now since the
Chymical Oyls, by reason of their great prices are most of them adulte∣rated, and very few of them right good, and that no∣thing hath been published on this matter, and to leave the buyers of them unexcusable, I shall here add briefly, yet sufficiently the ways to discover these Cheats. First for sweet-scented Chymical Oyls, viz. those of Cloves, Cinnamon, and Sassaphras. Only drop a little of them into fair water, and that part which is true good will sink under the water, but the adultera∣ted part will swim on the top of it. Some others draw deep tinctures from the said Spices with Spirit of Wine highly rectified, and sell them for the Oyls; but these mix with the water throughout, neither swimming, nor sinking. Others more craftily digest with the said tin∣ctures some of the true Oyls, which compound being put into water, will for a time render it white. Ano∣ther way of sophisticating is with Oyl of Turpentine mixed in great quantity with that which is adultera∣ted; You may easily discover the Oyl of Turpentine, by setting it on fire, for it yields abundance of ill∣scented smoak, with very little savour of the Herb, Flour, or Seed, &c. and soon takes fire. To correct the ill smell of the Turpentine, they digest it with, and distilit off with Spirit of Wine. Those sophisticated with Turpentine, fired in a Silver Spoon colour it, and quickly diffuse themselves upon a Knife, or Paper. The best way to try by iring, is to put a drop or two of these Oyls on the end of a broad pointed Knife, which being first heated, and then thrust into a lighted Can∣dle, presently take fire, and break out into a flame  with much dark smoak; but if you will try them in a Spoon, heat it first over a Candle, and then blow the flame of lighted paper, or of a Wax Candle on them. To try the scent, blow out the flame of the good Oyls, and your smell will soon discover the ill scent of the Turpentine from that of the good Oyl. But on the con∣trary, all Oyls drawn from Plants by distillation hardly flame, and the flame soon goes out, and the smoak gives a full flavour of the Plant it self, whereas those sophisticated as before, differ from the true in both. The same Oyls are also sophisticated with cheap ones drawn from decayed Oringes, and Limons; Your smell on firing will soon discover these mixtures. A third way of sophisticating Chymical Oyls is, by mix∣ing with them such Oyls as are made by expression, which are easily discovered by rubbing them on white paper, which being held and dryed at the fire, the Chy∣mical part soon flyes away, and leaves the paper tran∣sparent, looking no otherwise then oyled paper; but pure Chymical Oyls totally fly away, leaving the pa∣per white as 'twas before, and not transparent, and in this way Oyl of sweet Almonds and Spike have a great share. As for Oyls drawn by Retort, they all of them smell so strong of the ire, that neither smell nor tast can well discover any fraud in them. Now for the fixed Salts, most of them are made of the Ashes of Tobacco-stalks, &c. More might be said for the disco∣very of the Cheats of other Chymical preparations, which shall be reserved to another opportunity, and had Physicians just encouragement, they would spend both their time and moneys on the like discoveries for the publick Utility.
Fifthly, Add to the former (though perhaps 'tis an error of ignorance only) that if such Simples are pre∣scribed they know not, they fetch from the Herb-wo∣men what they give them, true or false; for many of these Women give to very many Plants false names; Now if the Apothecary be so careful to consult an Her∣bal, which few have, and fewer know how to make use of, yet they too frequently mistake the thing by reason of several names given to the same thing, or of one name to several things, and many of them consult the com∣mon Dictionaries only, which are most erroneous in the names of natural things; insomuch that in my first practice (being curious of these particulars) I have found two or three mistakes in one prescription, a Cata∣logue of which mistakes, and names ill given, I had collected, but the late fire consumed it, though many of them my memory hath reserved. Sixthly, Many of the London, and most of the Coun∣try-Apothecaries, buy of the whole-sale men, who affirm of one another, especially of such who gain great Estates in short time, that they cannot sell their Medicines honestly made at so low a rate as they do. Seventhly, I shall need to say little of such distilled waters, as discover themselves neither to smell, nor tast, but shall only recite a known Story of an Apothe∣cary, who chid his man for sending away a Customer that came for Plantan water, telling him there was enough at the Pump. Eighthly, As for Ointments, and Plasters, they are sold by some at so low a price,
viz. 3d. per l. for Ointments, as I have been informed, that 'tis not possible to make  them at, and yet such however falsifyed maintain a trade amongst Country, and low-priced City-Apothe∣caries, and the Chirurgeons profess they cannot effect their Cures with the Shop-Medicines, and that this is the reason why they make their own Oyls, Oyntments, &c. as the Apothecaries Charter allows them to do; and why may not Physicians think this to be the cause why they sometimes fail in their Cures, as well as Chi∣rurgeons? and also make their own Medicines as well as they, especially since the Apothecary may as easily falsify, and to greater profit in the one, then in the other? Ninthly, As to their use of bad or decayed
Drugs, 'tis so common a practice that I shall need to give but one notorious instance of it, and 'tis this; I having oc∣casion to use some Seeds, sent for them to a Seeds∣man, the Messenger desiring to have those of the same Year. The Tradesman knowing him to live with me, asked, if they were for Physical use, he replyed in the affirmative, whereat he presently shewed him others, which were of 6 or 7 years old (as he confessed) af∣firming them to be as good for that use as the newest, which he sold only for sowing, and that he kept the others, though never so old, for the Apothecaries only, who still asked for them, buying them though 20 years old, not regarding if they were decayed and wholy effete (for no Seed will preserve its vegetative faculty above 7 years much less its Physical) so they could but have them cheap. Besides their pretty knacks (as they call them) of making their Compounds fair to the eye, more vendible, but worse for use, by re∣storing them to their colour and consistence, that  they may pass for good, which perhaps 'tis better to pass over in silence, lest by confuting I should teach the younger Fry, who may better be honestly ignorant of them. Now for their substituting one thing for another, and detracting where they please, I shall add but one Story of an Apothecary, who com∣manded his man (who told him they had no good Rhabarb in the house) that he should put in dou∣ble quantity of what they had. Nay I have known one simple of a quite different nature used for a whole composition. Tenthly, I shall conclude this ungrateful Discourse, with saying that by reason more frauds may be com∣mitted by the Apothecaries, then by any other Trade, and by supposition that gain will tempt most men to dishonest actions, especially where they may act undis∣covered; I say, that this seems to be the cause why they have two Supervisors set over them more then any Company that I know of, viz. the Censors of the College of Physicians, and the Master and Wardens of their own Company. The next thing is the inlarging and multiplying their Bills and Medicines. First, When in Chronical Diseases a Physician is consulted, they go on of their own heads with the same prescription, frequently enough to the Patients great disadvantage, both of health and purse. Secondly, By giving and intermixing Medicines of their own Phancy, with the Physicians prescriptions, viz. some pleasing Medicine, whereby too often the Physicians intention is quite crost, and the effect made uncertain, and hazardous.
Thirdly, By giving Medicines themselves on small accounts, and such as require only a good ordering, and no more. Fourthly, By repeating long courses of Physic unad∣visedly, and needlesly, when either nothing, or very little is needful to be done. Fifthly, By creating diseases in easie mens Phansies, and so decoying them into courses of Physic. Sixthly, Some of them get private and worthless receipts, and sell them at what rate they please; Mr. Delaune by one Pill alone, though not a very safe one, got some thousands of pounds. Seventhly, If one of them get a private receipt from a Physician called by the inventor his Nostrum, if ano∣ther Apothecary have occasion to use it, he shall be sure to pay sawce for it. Eighthly, Another trick is when the Patient is cured, and the Physician therefore hath given over his Visits, then comes the Apothecary and insinuates by his words and passions, either some danger of relapse, or some other present distemper, and repairs to the Physician for a Bill to cure the imaginary disease. Ninthly, But their principal Art of all is, to cry up, and bring in to Patients such Physicians, who through design must comply with the Apothecaries Interest, and such Practisers they extol and cry up for good Physi∣cians, which some of them call more expresly good Apothecaries Physicians, and such without doubt, the whole Company will endeavour to raise unto a fame and practice. But such as write only for the good of the
Patient, and not at all for the benefit of the Apothecary (as all honest men ought to do) they will endea∣vour  to prevent their calling in, or to shuffle them out. Now this good Apothecaries Physician, they describe by his frequent though needless visits, but especially by the multitude of his Bills, by his visiting twice a day, or oftner (a very careful and painful Doctor) and by still writing new Medicines, when half the former, or perhaps none of them have been taken, making an Apothecaries Shop in the Patients House, planting the Cupboards and Windows with Glasses and Gally-Pots, and not a quarter of the whole made use of. He prescribes a Medicine for every slight complaint, and never goes away from the Patient, or the Patient from him, without a Bill, for fear of the Apothecaries grumbling. And from this burdening the sick with multiplicity of Medicines, too often contrary to, and destructive one of another, it proceeds that in the Small Pox, and Measles, many are afraid to use Physicians, and com∣mit the care of the sick to Nurses, and Old Women, and perhaps sometimes not without cause, for by continu∣al multiplication of Medicines, the humours of the body may be made, or kept in too great a state of flui∣dity, whence the Flox followeth. Whereas a Me∣dicine or two duly administred, may suffice to bring them well forth, and then there needs no more but good ordering, unless perhaps some accident arise, which may require further care. And here as well as in other Cases, the Patient is to be rectified, who re∣quires the
Physicians Visits, and yet dismisseth him without a reward, unless he writes a Bill, whereas it might have been better if nothing at all had been pre∣scribed,  and the Physician left to his own judgment; and hence it is that many enlarge their Bills, that the Patient may think he hath enough for his money, whereby the Apothecary is gratified, who ought to commend the Medicines as necessary for the sick per∣son, and singular in themselves, whereas in truth this great farcy proves ungrateful to the tast and stomach; inconvenient to health, by curing one disease, but creating more; and by this means keeping them con∣tinually in a way of Physic. A third abuse of the Apothecaries relates to the pri∣ces of their Medicines; first they put what rates they please on their Simples, Compounds, and Receipts, and none are judges of them, but those of their own Trade; insomuch that they gain a 11d. in the Shilling, if they say true of themselves. Whereas the Colleges of Physicians beyond Sea, yearly set a tax upon the Simples, and Compounds of the Shops. So that the Customer can tell the price of what he hath oc∣casion to use, and not stand at the mercy of the Apothecary to rate them as he lists, and to this pur∣pose they put in print the prices of them every year. Secondly, Suppose a Physician hath prescribed a Pint of Juleb, &c. to be taken at four several times, some Apothecaries carry not the whole pint at once, but divide it into four parts, and carry but one at a time, and so of other Medicines, and then will charge their Bill for every single Potion, or Draught, as they ought the whole Pint; so that by this Art they gain four times as much for the whole Medicine as in Con∣science they ought; and a
Juleb, which cost them six  pence, will be rated at 10, 12, or more Shillings. But perhaps 'tis fit they should be paid for their created Visits; and for this unnecessary officiousness, persons of great estates may be contented to pay roundly, if they please. Thirdly, When a Physician hath prescribed 20 Pills, some of the Apothecaries will make 30 of them, under pretence the Patient cannot swallow them else; now reckoning each Pill at a certain rate (as they usually do) they gain a third part more then they ought. Fourthly, To advance the prices, you shall hardly ever see a Bill without Bezoar, or Pearls in it, to make people think them very chargeable; whereas some∣times there is not above a grain or two of these dear ingredients in the prescription, and a few grains of these or Ambergrise doubles or trebles the prices of the Medicines, and are sure never to be omitted in their Bills, besides the guilding of the Pills, and covering their Bolusses, and Electuaries with Cold (which have only an imaginary and no real use in Medicines so used) much inhanseth their prices, and a rich Cordial inserted exceedingly advanceth most of their Bills; or if China or any other dear ingredient be in the re∣ceipt 'tis not omitted. Fifthly, Some Apothecaries offer, and perhaps some Physicians have taken presents to help them to Cu∣stomers, which must necessarily be squeazed out of their higher-rated Medicines.
Sixthly, I have heard some prudent persons com∣plain of their bringing in their Bills but once in a year, or two; supposing they made them pay Lombards  Usury for their forbearance. And through this neglect they sometimes lose their money, and whether they raise other Mens Bills to make up these losses, I affirm not. Seventhly, Another cause of raising their prices is a necessity of keeping in their Shops such Medicines as are seldom used, or such as must upon necessity decay, and grow useless. Now suppose they throw such away, this reason is good, but you will find a remedy for this hereafter. To conclude this second Complaint. By reason of the dear Bills of the Apothecaries, many are deterred from going to the Physician, and run to common Moun∣tebanks, and I think this to be the reason (as some disabused persons have confessed to me) why they have so much cryed up the abilities of Apothecaries for pra∣ctice, because they would save their credit in taking Physic of them. St. Augustine candidly in his Book of Confessions declares, that through covetousness he repeated a course of Physic, without consulting the Physician (who had before cured him of the same di∣sease) to his greater charge, danger of his life, and offence against God. Having done with the Apothecaries abuses re∣lating chiefly to the Patients Health and Purse, and such as are willfully committed (though all of them reflect on the Physician) I shall now touch on a few neglects, and mistakes proving often very mischievous. First, They frequently mistake the Physicians di∣rections, which of what dangerous consequence it is, every one can tell.
Secondly, They carry a Medicine appointed for one sick person to another. Thirdly, They often neglect the sending of Medi∣cines in due time, especially such as have no Servants, or but raw ones, when the Master is out of Town, or upon long visits. Having now done with the Apothecaries as they re∣late principally to the sick, I shall in the next place speak of them, as they relate to Physicians, and that either to the profession in general, or to the particular practisers of it. As to the Physicians in general, they endeavour to extirpate them, and some have been so bold to say, they hope in few years to see never a Physician in Lon∣don, and to profess they will scramble with them for practice. And that this hath been and is their inten∣tion, the following particulars will clearly demon∣strate. First, They have always endeavoured and aimed at the depression and ruine of the College of Physici∣ans, the only Corporation of that Art in England, con∣sidering rightly, that the depression of the College is their interest and rise, and that the total subversion of it will make them absolute Masters in Physic, and Physi∣cians their Servants. In Order hereunto they have constantly, both publickly and privately opposed the College in whatsoever hath been offered to setle the liberty of practice on them, their only priviledg and subsistence, though they have been offered all they could desire for the security of their Trade, and legal employment, and far beyond whatsoever any Corpo∣ration of
Apothecaries in all, or in any forreign part  enjoy, yet nothing would ever content them, but an unlawful, unreasonable, dangerous, and destructive Usurpation of liberty to some pretended practice, that thereby they might gain the whole. Secondly, They have continually traduced the Col∣lege, and troubled them in Parliaments, at the Council-Board, &c. to their great charge and molestation. And for such their great demerits against the College, the King and his Council, Anno 1639. granted a Quo Warranto to the Attorney General (the Judges having first heard the whole matter) to take away their Charter, which doubtless had been effected, had not the troubles, and long civil War immediately ensued. Thirdly, And in this present Parliament, how did they endeavour to prepossess the Members of the House of Commons with strange, and false prejudices and assertions drawn from irrational, and groundless suppositions, making us the greatest Tyrants in the World, inferring ridiculously that a Lady, or Charita∣ble
Gentlewoman (for in that believing Sex they have gain'd a great deal of ground by their falsities) might not give the Poor a Cordial, &c. without being que∣stioned by the College; whereas they know in their Consciences, that the College hath power enough by their first Charter to act as much in this kind against themselves, and all other persons, as they desired of this present Parliament; And yet neither Apothecary, or any other who practised charitably, were ever trou∣bled for so doing. They pretended also they were abridged wholy from their Trade, and might not sell a penny-worth of Mithridate, &c. without a Doctors  Bill. Whereas there's not a word in the Charter to that purpose; the sole intent whereof was to keep them as well as other Mountebanks, from prescribing (which they call selling) the Physicians only lively∣hood. And as to the Bill it self so much railed on by them in Westminster-Hall, Coffee-Houses, Ale-Houses, &c. 'tis easie to make it out, that this Charter as pro∣posed gives the Apothecaries more liberty and freedom of exercising their lawful Trade, then is enjoyed in any other Nation, where both Corporations are erected; and that it doth in nothing infringe, or dimi∣nish their freedom as Citizens, or their Charter as Apo∣thecaries; and that our Charter was compiled by some, and perused and approved by others the most eminent Lawyers in England for Worth and Place; and yet none of these could find any thing in it either Illegal, Tyrannical, or unfit to be desired of the Parliament. Nay many mis-informed Members being rightly in∣structed in the true state of the matter, have ac∣knowledged the justice of it; And was no more then King James by his Letters Patents, dated the 18th of October, in the 15th year of his Reign, granted to the said College; near about the same time the Apotheca∣ries Charter was granted; and being almost nothing else but a supply of what was short in their former Grants, viz. That whereas their Charter granted by King Henry the Eighth, gave power to punish offen∣ders in the practice of Physic; and because there was no power given to summon, nor penalty imposed for non-appearance of such offenders; therefore by their non-appearance, the said power of the Censors was eluded; for no such offenders would appear be∣fore
them, and consequently no punishment could be inflicted on them, according to the true meaning of the said Act. Now this Charter so much declaimed against, prayed only a supply of this defect, and also better and more necessary ways and means, without which, such and all other offenders against the lives and healths of his Majesties Subjects could not be disco∣vered; and they had reason not to doubt a grant of the said power, since by the said Charter a power was granted them to imprison offenders, whom the Keepers of the Prisons would not receive, because no command, nor penalty was imposed on them, for not receiving such offenders sent by the Censors (a thing ridiculous to our present Lawyers) however this de∣fect was supplyed by an Act in the first of Queen Mary. Now whereas since the making of the said Acts and Powers, granted to the College, several other Trades, besides the
Apothecaries, relating to Physic (being then all Members of the Grocers Company) viz. Druggists, Chymists, Sellers of Strong-waters and Oyls, have arose distinct from each others, and many abuses have been and are committed in each of them, as they all confess. The said Charter prays for the publick good only (there being the same reason of all) they might have the same power of Surveying them also, as they have of the Apothecaries, which most of the Judicious, and sober of the said Companies, as well in relation to their own private profit, and also the publick, by having all Medicines good, did not oppose, but liked well of. Nay there was nothing in the said Charter, but what was judged good by all or most of the Judges of England, several times conve∣ned  by Order of the King and his Council, to deliver their opinions concerning some Quaeries, which com∣prised the main of what was desired and petitioned for by the College, of this present Parliament. But be∣fore the Committee could make report to the House, the Parliament was adjourned, whereupon Apothecaries falsly gave out, and made people believe our Charter was taken from us. And in this transaction before the Committee, one Cocket an Apothecary exhibited in the name of the Chymists such a Scandalous Libel, as the Committee would not suffer to be read; drawn as some conceive by the assistance, and countenance, if not contrivance of his Company. Lastly, The Company of the Apothecaries are bound by their Charter to bring their Servants (before they make them Free) to be examined by the Censors of our College, and to have their approbation of their fitness to exercise their Art, and set up their Trade. Now that they have herein neglected their duty, and con∣sequently may be dis-franchised and lose their Free∣doms for this omission, 'tis manifest not only by the vapours of some of them to some members of our Body, that they never underwent this examination; but also by comparing of our Register (wherein are recorded the names of all such as have been exami∣ned) with theirs, if they keep any for this purpose. Sure I am, that in two years together, when I was Censor, very few, if any, did appear to their examina∣tion, whereas yearly a very great number set up their Trades. Nay since the firing of London not one Apo∣thecaries Servant hath been examined by the Censors, for more then these three Years last past, in which time
perhaps no less then 100 have been made free by the Company. Before our presenting this Charter to the Parliament, they would admit no Arbitrators betwixt our Corpo∣ration, and Theirs, not contenting themselves with their Charter lately granted in King James's Reign, and that by the procurement of some of our College for these unthankful persons. For they would not refer themselves (as the Chirurgeons without many words or dispute did) to the most upright, and most knowing Sir Orlando Bridgeman then Lord Chief Justice, and now Lord Keeper, for a clause to be by him drawn, in order to preserve their immunities and Charter; which they refused, fearing belike he would exclude them from the Practice of Physic, which the Law hath already done, and which is all they could doubt of; but the Corporation of Chirurgeons did acquiesce in the clause drawn by the said Lord Chief Justice, and never appeared before the Committee against the said Charter. Their increasing dis-respect, and undervaluing the College, appears in this, that of late years they place our Censors invited to their new Masters Dinner, at their second Table; whereas always heretofore they were seated at the first Table, next to the Master of the Company.
And to hinder the building of a New College, a the Contribution of the Honorary Fellows thereunt they tell them that we deceived them in their adm¦on, and never intend the building of a New College▪ though a large contribution hath been made, and  ground purchased in order thereunto by the Members of their Corporation. And their further design appears in their great tri∣umphing, and rejoycing when any illiterate person hath gained any reputation for a Cure performed, especi∣ally where Physicians have been concerned, though the Patients neglect or obstinateness, have been the sole cause of this non-performance, and by their continu∣ed detraction from Physicians, and applauding them∣selves, hoping by the former, that people will think such Mountebanks able to do better Cures then learned Physicians, and then they can easily insinuate them∣selves superior to such Mountebanks, and consequently to Physicians. By the latter, they seek to depress, and level us to themselves, being conscious they can never rise to that worth and ability, required in a Physician. Another manifest sign of their endeavour to usurp our Practice is, their absurd calling the sick their Pati∣ents, for 'tis most certain that in all reason and lan∣guage the Physician and Patient only have relation to each other, but not to the Apothecary, who is but a Tradesman, and manual Operator. Now a Trades∣man and his Customer, or Chapman, are Relatives each to other, but those Apothecaries who intrude themselves and usurp on our profession, may call their Customers Patients, and that in a true literal sence, when by their ignorance they make them really suf∣ferers under them; and if they deny Apothecary and
Patient to be non-sence, they shew themselves pitifully ignorant in the Laws, and Rules of Reason, or else  profess themselves Physicians. And the like non-sence they commonly utter by calling Physicians that make their own Medicines, Mountebanks and Quacks, whereas none can be such but those who practise without Lawful Authority, as the Apothecaries, &c. do; and they are not ignorant in this their malice, that the Law of England would punish them roundly for so saying; And were I troublesome or vindicative, I could make some of them examples, but I freely re∣mit their slanders in this kind that are past. Having done with the main part of the Disease, next follows the Remedy; and the only firm and proper one will appear to be, that Physicians make their own Medicines; the benefit whereof to the publick, the reasonableness of the thing it self, the necessity in re∣lation to the Physician, will be manifest by that which follows. And First, All that hath been said demonstrates this last proposition. Secondly, The desire of most persons, and the cen∣sure of all wise men, who say we are wanting to our own interest, if we make not use of the remedy in our own hands, performing our Art in all its members, whereof making of Medicines is a chief one. Thirdly, The common practice, and constant usage of all former and antient Physicians in all other Nati∣ons, and in England also (for 'tis easie to say when there was not one Apothecary in this Kingdom) the Laws of our Nation, nay even the Apothecaries Charter allow it, the Language of all
Physicians, our College voting it honourable so to do, nay Apothecaries themselves com∣mending  it in such Physicians as buy their Medicines of them. Fourthly, The Kings Physicians have formerly made the Kings Medicines, as 'tis manifest by my Lord Coke, in his 4th. Book of the Institutes, part 4. pag. 251. where he comments on Rot. Pat. 32 H. 6. m. 17. He there first recites the Roll it self, where∣in are appointed (the King being then sick) 3 Physi∣cians and 2 Chirurgeors, to freely minister and execute Physic about the Kings Person, and there are also re∣cited in general, Medicines external, and internal. And on this Roll Coke among other things infers, that the Physicians may use the aid of those Chirurgeons named in the Warrant, but of no Apothecary, but to prepare and do all things themselves, &c. And the reason of all this is, the precious regard had of the health and safety of the King, who is the head of the Common-wealth. And I am told by one of his pre∣sent Majesties Physicians, that the King himself affirm∣ed heretofore we are unwise in neglecting our duty herein, and lately of these papers, that 'twas the pub∣lick interest so to do. Fifthly, Chirurgeons (as before) will not trust them to make external Remedies; and the King, and East-India Company commit the making of their Chests for their Fleets to the Chirurgeons. Sixthly, Have not Ladies and Charitable Gentle∣women their Closets well furnished with various Me∣dicines for the Poors use, and for their own also, when Physicians are called to their houses in the Country? Distillers of Strong-waters, Makers of Plaisters, Con∣fectioners make Medicines bought by the Apothecaries,
Ale-Houses sell purging Drinks, and Book-sellers sell Chymical Medicines, and all this without much regret of the Apothecaries. But if a Physician intermix a Me∣dicine with theirs, though the Patients life be saved thereby, what noise, and murmuring, and proclaim∣ing of it the next Market-day to the rest of their Com∣pany? to what purpose any one may judg. Seventhly, Why should not Physicians, being law∣fully authorized thereunto, practise with their own Medicines, as well as the Apothecaries with theirs, though against Law, and incurring thereby the penalty of 5l. per Month, which the College never troubled them for, or exacted of them? Eighthly, Physicians will be necessitated to it for their subsistence and honour, and to preserve their Art from being prostituted to illiterate persons, the Apo∣thecaries becoming now their Competitors. Ninthly, By this means Physicians will avoid multi∣tudes of inconveniencies, proceeding from writing of Bills, and the Apothecaries Visits. First, The mistakes, and frauds in the Ingredients, especially committed by the great practising Apotheca∣ries, who may, as appears by the following story, be suspected to send, instead of what was prescribed, the remains of his own practice, or else some cast-by Me∣dicines; for else how could it be when a Medicine was prescribed to stand in Infusion or steep a whole night, that it should be brought two hours after the Bill was written, even the very same Evening? Which by acci∣dent the Patient confessed, wanting the expected success. Secondly, By this course Physicians will avoid the ma∣ny opprobrious terms cast upon them by Apothecaries:
As First, In saying that if he had not omitted or added something, the Patient might have miscarried; which he may say at pleasure without any contradicti∣on, though doubtless many have been killed by this means. Secondly, By saying the Bill could never have been made without some alteration of the Apothecary, thereby insinuating the Doctors ignorance in com∣pounding. Thirdly, In saying the Doctor is not versed in Me∣dicines, because forsooth he varieth not at every Visit, and multiplieth not new Bills for the Apothe∣caries profit. Fourthly, In saying they teach Physicians, and help them to, and in their practice. The first and last are vile and foolish Scandals; as to the Second, 'tis true indeed, that younger Apothecaries recommend Physi∣cians to their acquaintance; but 'tis no longer then they have learned enough (as they think) to set up for themselves. Fisthly, In saying, they knew before-hand what such a Doctor would prescribe, and hence it is they have nick-named some Physicians of no mean practice, by the Medicines they frequently use, which names in respect to the persons, I shall conceal; and of such Physicians, they brag they can prescribe as well as they. But if a Physician advise things unknown to them, or out of the common tract, then they say the Doctor intends to puzzle them.
Sixthly, He will avoid the censure of his Bills, which every pitiful fellow, nay their very Boys will absolve or condemn at pleasure, and that openly too, nay some∣times  to the Patient himself, and thereby call in his good Apothecaries Physician. Now what a shame is it, that a Physicians credit and livelihood, should stand at the mercy of such pitiful ignorant, and self-ended Souls? I have heard one of them say of the now most Eminent Practiser in London, that his Boy could write as good a Method as he, and that he understood the practice of Physic as well as any Physician in London, except 2, or 3, though the same person was soon made to confess, he neither knew the Disease, Cause, nor Cure of a Pleurisy, pretended to be throughly under∣stood by him. Thirdly, He will avoid the trouble put upon him after he hath writ his Bill, by the Apothecaries ig∣norance in not understanding it, who to be inform∣ed came to the Doctor heretofore, with their Hats off, but now send their Boys, who soon put theirs on. Such respect do they give Physicians, when they come to them as to their Masters to teach them. Fourthly, He will avoid the impertinent Visits of the Apothecaries, and non-sensical, troublesome, and discouraging, frightful discourses to the Patient, of whom no man can expect more then the Common Proverb gives to Praters, and impertinent Speakers, That they talk like Apothecaries. Fisthly, He will avoid the mischiefs from their Vi∣sits, who by their shrugs, signs, or words, may diminish the Physicians reputation, and good opinion, whether in his skill, or Medicines, whereby good Medicines are neglected, and the expectation of a good success upon the use of them taken away, or at least causing an
averseness to them; which actings do exceedingly pre∣judice the Patient, in reference to his Cure. Sixthly, He will avoid this inconvenience, that some Apothecaries have attributed the Cure to some of their intermixed Medicines, or alteration of the Doctors Bill. Seventhly, He will avoid that incivility of such of them, who in the Physicians presence, will feel the Pulse, judg of the Urine, discourse the Cause, Na∣ture, what the Disease is, and what will be the issue of it, propose Medicines, nay sometimes endeavour to advise with the Physician, to contradict and dispute with him, to compare and set himself above the Phy∣sician; and to say truth, these odious and intolerable Comparisons and intrusions daily complained of by my Collegues, were a great cause of my departing from them. Eighthly, He will avoid those Scandals they have opportunity to raise, that such a Physician is Cove∣tous, Proud, Negligent, and minds not his practice, and the like without the least ground, and are fre∣quently by such Artifices, the Cause of introducing another Physician, knowing that thereby more Bills will come to their File, and many times the former Medicines be layed aside, and in this shuffling in and out of Physicians, they have commonly a great share. Ninthly, Apothecaries being now Competitors with
Physicians for practice, and down-right Enemies to such as make their own Medicines; why should not we suspect them of this false Play, by telling the Patient the Doctors Medicine will not work (which  he knows well enough how to effect) and then to tell him he will prepare him one of his own that will work, when perhaps that he calls his own preparation, was nothing but what the Doctor had prescribed before; and by this Artifice to advance himself above the Physician. Another mischief in sending Bills to the Apothecaries is, that though the Apothecaries be honest (and who can tell which of them is so?) yet the Servants neg∣lect, or ignorance (to whom they commit the whole care of dispensing, and are intruth the Apothecaries (and not their Masters) may mar all in their Masters absence, who is visiting abroad, or at his recrea∣tions. And now I have done with the unpleasant task of raking into the faults of the Apothecaries, and with discoursing how Physicians may save themselves from their devices, I shall next shew the advantages that will come to the Patient, the Physician, and people, by this way of remedy proposed. As for the Patients, they may hereby save most of the great charges of Apothecaries Bills, which in long Cases amount to very great sums in a year, although the Physician hath received very few Fees; the Physi∣cian may so order his business as to take his Fee for his Visits only, and at home such competent Fees for his advice alone, as are usually given, and in both Ca∣ses take nothing for his Medicines, and so save the Patient the whole charge of the
Apothecaries Bill, which very seldom comes short, and for the most part manifoldly exceeds the Physicians Fees. And this he may very well do by making fewer, less chargable,  more effectual, and durable Medicines then the Shops afford, and suffer nothing in the non-use, or decay of his Medicines; because he need make no more then will serve his own practice: and I must here profess, that which I intended not to have published, that this is the course I have generally taken, for the four Months last past, since I made my own Medicines, but that some Apothecaries have given out most falsly, that I have sent in Bills to Patients for money; but to con∣vince such of their wonted lying, I do hereby oblige my self to give 100 pound to any of them that shall produce such a Bill. Secondly, This way will not clog the Patient with more Medicines then are need∣ful, nor will omit any thing may conduce to his reco∣very, for if he fails in either, 'tis to his prejudice, ei∣ther in spending more Medicines which cost him mo∣ney, or in not performing his Cure, which loseth his practice. But I do not propose this course of mine as a general rule to all Physicians, but leave this to every mans pri∣vate judgment; Neither do I hereby bind my self to the same practice, because some few Cases may fall out (though to an equal advantage to the Patient) may perswade me to the contrary. For I find some persons of that perswasion, as to think they have not given satisfaction, unless they have payed for the Medicines; but to such persons, I have always allowed them to give me what they pleased themselves, for the cure only, to the full satisfaction of both parties. Though I will not deny but some persons out of gratitude for their Cure, have rewarded me beyond this proposal. Some of my acquaintance have desired me to be more
plain in this last Paragraph, especially in that part of it where I say I do not bind my self to the said pra∣ctice; and to declare more fully the Cases that may perswade me to the contrary; which are these and such as these. First, Where Patients of their own free offers will contract with the Physician, or have for∣merly too meanly rewarded him for his Cure, in both which the Statutes of our College allow a contract to be made with Patients. Another case is, if a Physician be consulted once, and for his Fee hath given Medi∣cines gratis, if the Patient frequently send for his Me∣dicines without the least reward at all. Or if the Pa∣tient living far in the Country, having (as before) once consulted the Physician, as in the last case, and shall for weeks, nay months, send for the same Medicines. Or if the Patients friend shall recommend a Medicine to another friend of his unknown to the Physician; and where he gives no Counsel, if a Physician in the Coun∣try shall desire some of his Medicines, which are all the cases that occur at present; I say in some of these, the Physician must needs be payed for his Medicines; but in other, 'tis rational he should be payed for his advice, as he desireth new Medicines, which charge will be far short also of the Apothecaries Medicines, whether repeated or prescribed upon new advice.
Now the great charge of Apothecaries Bills, and nauseousness of their Medicines, appears to be the cause why long habitual diseases, as the Kings Evil, Falling-Sickness, Convulsions, Melancholies, and Winds in the Bowels, Gouts, &c. become seldom re∣lieved, though they may with a constant, facile way, be perfectly cured, where neither the great charge,  not unpleasantness of Medicines, deterr them from a continued necessary use of Remedies. And for the same reasons many will be kept from relapses, who being tired out with taking variety of Medicines, give over before the tone and strength of their parts is restored, which is necessary to be done in all long Di∣seases. He may so contrive his Medicines, first, That they may be taken in small quantity, and be made more grateful to the tast, and stomach, and perform more then those of the Apothecaries, commonly slovenly made, and of themselves Fulsom, Nauseous, and Slug∣gish. Secondly, His Medicines made for particular persons, may last Weeks, Months, nay Years, whereas the Apothecaries Drinks, especially in the Summer time, must be renewed once, or twice every day, to the ex∣cessive charge of the Patient. That his Medicines may be fewer, is evident in Phy∣sicians that practise in the Country, who ride far to Pa∣tients, and carry in their Mans Cloak-bag, Medicines enough, not only for the person he is sent to, but also for most other persons, and Cases he meets with in his Travels, and therefore his Closet needs contain but few, yet noble and generous Medicines, and such as may serve him upon all occasions, supplying what's defective from the Fields or Gardens. He may avoid all pom∣pous, useless, chargable Medicines of the Shops, and substitute in their place, cheaper, and more conducible to health; He may very well lay aside the precious Stones, Saphir, Emerals, &c. the high priced Magi∣strals of Coral, and Pearl, made worse by their pre∣paratious, or rather destroyed thereby in their Virtue,
as also Unicorns Horn, and Bezoar, all which are now rarely used alone, but in the received Compositions; He may also spare the charges of leaf-gold, for guild∣ing Pots, Glasses, Pills, Electuaries, Boles, &c. which serves only to raise the Bill. He may teach the Patients facile and easie Reme∣dies, as to make a Clyster, apply Blisters, or Medicines to the feet, where they are needful, &c. and in many Cases may cure by well ordering his Patient only, without any Remedies at all, or but very few, being free to act for the Patients Health, without the grum∣bling of the Apothecary; and many other ways he may daily meet with, very advantageous to the Patient. He will have little use of Conserves, Syrups, Lo∣hocks, &c. a greater part whereof Sugar makes up, which doth more hurt to most persons, then the other ingredients do good. As for Infusions and Decoctions, he will find by ex∣periment, how much liquor, or Mensiruum will suffice to extract the full vertue of the ingredients, and what are helps, or hinderances thereunto, and thereby neither suffer loss in the quantity, or quality of them.
He will discover the inefficacy of many of the Sy∣rups and other Medicines in the Shops, made of such ingredients, the qualities whereof, what with boiling, what with the great quantity of Sugar necessary to keep them, are either made useless, or opposite to the ends they are proposed for. Especially in such Plants, Seeds, and Flowers, which consist of fine vo∣latil parts, and even in drying and pounding, or the  least boiling exhale and evaporate, and therefore in the common way of ordering them, lose their whole ver∣tue or most of their efficacy, and alter in their proper∣ties. From which by several methods known to some Physicians, very generous and singular Medicines may be produced. He need not use so large Compositions consisting of such confused and contrary ingredients, and will find good reason to lay aside those unintelligible and unrea∣sonable Compositions of Mithridate, and Treacle, and the so much magnified Treacle-water, and will substi∣tute better in their places, of smaller charge, and less trouble; and this all Physicians I have conversed with, and the College it self, by their Book published for the common good, in the year before the Plague, and all those Physicians in this City, who make or intend to make their own Medicines, do con∣fess. But here Apothecaries open wide, and cry out that the Physicians are great Cheats, and envious persons, for continuing such flat Medicines, and not recommen∣ding to the World, or rather their Shops, our greater secrets. The answer is easie, that the Medicines in our Pharmacopaea, are the best of any other Pharmacopaea in the World, both for their goodness, and well pre∣paring of them, whether they be Chymical, or Gale∣nical; and therefore the same scandal will ly on all Pharmacopaea's whatsoever. Secondly, I say that with∣in these few last experimental years, the practical part of Physic hath been much improved (as well as Ana∣tomy) especially by such as have put their hands to work; and therefore till such improvement, this could
not be well amended. Furthermore, in making new Dispensatories, a full consent must be had, and 'twere not fit to move where the motion were not like to take place, for though private men invent new ways of compounding and preparing, and using their own invented Medicines, yet 'twill require a long time to make them publickly known, and brought into com∣mon use, and till that be done 'tis not possible to have them brought into a common Dispensatory; besides, no man would make a motion for such a reformation, unless he were well furnished with specificks, and then 'twill be required of him to expose them to the whole World, which how incongruous it will be, every man may easily conceive; hereto add, that the
Apotheca∣ries think themselves able enough by this present Dis∣pensatory, to out-beard Physicians, and do publickly profess (as hath been said) that they understand the practice of Physic as well as they; how much more would they have said so, if they had been made Ma∣sters of these secrets? And here I shall admonish those of my own Faculty, who have devoted their Studies, Labours, and Purses, for the improvement of their Art, to consider, that as natural things have their bounds and limits, and that there is no new Creation of them, and besides, that these things have their bounds also of improvement, beyond which 'tis im∣possible for man to go; and that by a good method and industry, that end may be attained; (though at present I must confess, no Art is more capable of en∣largement then ours:) I say let all consider, and they will find, what a vast encouragement they have to im∣prove their knowledg so far, that they shall not only be  able to leave mankind destitute of no remedy Nature did ever produce; but also restore and setle those Honours ignorant men would usurp, upon the Learn∣ed Professors of this Science; and I see no reason why Physicians should communicate their secrets to such persons, who will make use of them, to the ruine of the Inventors, which is indeed a failer of trust, for when a Physician writes his Bill, he trusts the Apothe∣cary only with making the Medicine for a particular occasion, and not to make use of it as his own when he pleaseth for his own profit, and the Inventor have no further benefit by it, then perhaps one single advan∣tage. Lastly, When Dispensatories were first made, the Apothecaries were really Physicians Servants, and wholy at their command, not in the least intrenching on their business, and the rates of Medicines were rea∣sonable; which superiority over them still continues only in their prescriptions, the forms whereof are al∣ways commanding to take this and that, and to mix them, &c. but within these few last years they have set up for themselves, and advanced the rates beyond all reason; and to be sure, the more we teach them by our Books, the more they will trangress in both. He may receive encouragement from what he disco∣vers, that is more then ordinarily useful, whereas by writing Bills, he soon communicates to the ignorant and lazy, who will neither spend time nor money to advance the Art, but while the one is at work to his great charge, loss of time, much pains and trouble, the others seek by petty tricks and Arts to gain a name,
and profit from the industrious. Nay some Mounte∣banks have been set up by purchasing receipts of the Apothecary or his Servants. And one of them told me, he set up a Quack by selling and commending to him a Medicine he had long kept in his Shop and could not otherwise put off, and that by degrees he made him a famous practiser among the ignorant and poor people. An Act quite contrary to the interest of the Company. Hence also will arise an emulation amongst Physici∣ans, who shall exceed each other in noble remedies, and from thence a full and happy improvement of whatsoever God hath created for the recovery of mans health impaired; for from the Physician alone the ad∣vancement of Physic is to be expected. How many simples of unknown properties have been brought in∣to use, to the great comfort of the sick? and many more may be, as also many preparations, both simple and compound, both in the Galenical, and Chymical practice, and by this means the Art will be advanced to its just dignity, now much diminished, dishonoured, and near to be lost by the intrusion of ignorant persons.
Greater respect will be given to such Physicians, as being the immediate instruments of life and health, who will derive unto themselves that which is now given to the Apothecaries, which proceeds chiefly from fear lest they should do the Patient hurt; and so their honour will be doubled, which every Physician looks principally at; but the Apothecary being not so far concerned, looks chiefly at his own profit, and re∣gards not the Patients charge. For the greater the Pa∣tients  charge, the greater must needs be the Apotheca∣ries gain; whereas on the contrary, 'tis the Physi∣cians Interest to cure the Patient with the greatest ease. He may proceed on safely and securely in his well experienced Medicines, having before him not only what he hath prescribed for the same Patient, but for all others in the like Case, and thereby keep in me∣mory what he would have forgot, if his Bill had re∣mained on the Apothecaries File; viz. the Medicines and their success. By means whereof Physicians do not advance their knowledg so far as they might; for how is it possible they should remember the particu∣lars of their Bills writ some days before? and there∣fore know not how to proceed so well. But the Apo∣thecaries having before them the whole series of Me∣dicines, brag they can do more then the Physicians, and by this means insinuate the same opinion into people. The Physician will be consulted in the beginning of Diseases, to the safety and little expence of the Patient, who will not go first to the Apothecary, who practiseth on him till the Case is desperate, and then calls in a Physician when 'tis too late; and if he dyes, the Phy∣sician must carry away the disgrace alone; but if he recover, the Apothecary, if he be so minded, by some trick will share with him in the honour: and by this resort of people to the Apothecaries in beginning of Di∣seases, we meet with few Cases of easie Cure, but are chiefly made use of in dangerous Diseases, or those of short period, or such as are accompanyed with great pains and torments, to our great and continual anxiety.
The Physicians experience hereby as 'tis surer, so 'twill be greater. He will make use of no Medicines but the choicest, and when they are in their full vigour, and such as are durable, and after once or twice Tryal of them, will seldom fail in his expected success; which cannot be certainly had without some tryal. For though a man buy the choicest ingredients, viz. Sena, which may ap∣pear to the Senses very good, yet he cannot positively say, how well, nor yet what quantity of it will work, till he hath made use of it. But afterwards he may confidently apply the whole parcel he hath bought to his purpose. The like may be instanced in a crop of Wheat or Barley, which the skillfullest Husband-man cannot tell how they will yield for Bread, or Malt, till he hath used them. Now how is it possible that a Phy∣sician can with any certainty make use of several Shops, since there is so great difference in the ingredi∣ents? and 'tis certain the same Medicine made by se∣veral Apothecaries, shall differ much in colour, smell, and tast, and consequently effect too; which cannot proceed from any other cause then the difference of the ingredients themselves, or by omitting some in∣gredients, or by substituting one thing for another; or by distinct ways of preparing them. The same also may be said of Compositions, much more of Chymi∣cal Medicines so much sophisticated, and of so much danger and hazard, if not well prepared, which he cannot discover till he hath seen the effect of them, unless it be such as he makes himself, nor those nei∣ther till he hath made some tryal of them. He will much inlarge Materia Medica, Chymistry
and Pharmacy, and discover the grounds of them, and wherein the efficacy of remedies lyes, and thereby lay open a whole Ocean for new discoveries, and by the by observe many useful products and Phaenomena of Nature, to the great improvement of his Art, and sound Natural Philosophy, which are not taken notice of by Apothecaries, and their Servants; for all which they have neither will nor skill. As to the improvement of Medicines, this may be added, by the experimenting Physician, that in di∣still'd waters he will consider and find which of them will afford any virtue, which only phlegm equivalent but to Conduit-water, which of them will keep long, and in perfection, which soon or in what time decay, and spend them accordingly, and in compound di∣still'd waters, will find cause to lay aside many simples as nothing conducing, or rather weakning the effi∣cacy of the Medicine designed; whereby much charge and trouble will be spared, and better compositions be made. He will gain and keep to himself Patients, who have diseases they are unwilling should be known by Apo∣thecaries and their Boys, and all such as have a mind to turn over their File. The Patient will have better opinion of the Medi∣cines, and confidence in the use of them, and the Phy∣sician be more satisfied in his Conscience, and better assured of the success. He will gain reputation to his Art, by restoring it to its first institution and practice, by the Founders and Heroes of Physic.
'Tis convenient to adjoin here the old way of educa∣ting young men into the practice of Physic, and surely the safer for the Patients health; and I could wish 'twere restored to its former usage, which was this. The Se∣nior Physician carried his Son, or such as he intended to succeed him in his practice, along with him when he visited his Patients, discovering, and discoursing with them the disease, cause, method of cure, and what re∣medies were fit to be applied to the present Case, and to try them what they would do in that or the like Case. And when his occasions would not permit him to visit himself, he then sent one of his Scholars to in∣form him of the condition of the sick person, and the effect of his Medicines; and also when the said Scho∣lars had leisure, they were employ'd to help to gather, prepare, and make, or oversee the compounding of Medicines. And such Scholars they call'd filii Artis, sons of Art. Some of the Professors in Foreign parts practise the most of this to this very day, with such Gentlemen as travel thither to study Physic, confirm∣ing their reading with experience. By constantly practised Medicines he will find out a better method of Cure, and may hereby arrive at the true causes of diseases. He will observe what Medicines by precipitation or other ways, alter, destroy, or weaken one ano∣ther, whereby of good ingredients singly used, a bad Composition may be made, and therefore fail in the success expected. Many more things might be here added, which a skillful observer, and versed in the way to make experiments (no easie matter) will daily find, and at present I do not so much as give hints of them,
but shall hereafter, as occasion and opportunity re∣quire▪ He will have more scope to be charitable to the poor, and more civil and obliging to his friends, by curing them gratis, of at small charges. He need not trouble himself with ways of conceal∣ing the use of his Medicines, by setting down no di∣rections in his Bill, but giving them to the Patient, which the Apothecary soon learns; nor with giving some of his own Medicines at a pinch, which if they succeed not, to be sure the Apothecaries will cry down in all places, but will conceal all eminently good suc∣cesses, as disadvantageous to themselves; nor by placing their Arcana's in the Shops of those Apo∣thecaries they commonly make use of; nor by re∣commending their Patients to such Apothecaries they intrust their secrets with. For then great complaints are made that the Physicians carry away their Custom∣ers, and take away their livelyhood, affirming they are willing to fetch them from the prescribing Doctors Apo∣thecaries. To which I answer, that they do fetch them, but perhaps not always; since I have heard them often say, these secrets were but the Medicines of the Lon∣don Dispensatory disguised under new names, to the discredit of the Physicians that prescribed them. And I well remember some of them have neglected to fetch from my house, not far from their own, some of my preparations, though they had them gratis, for the fetching; whereby the
Patients have suffered, and thought I neglected them, 'till they were rectified by another Visit. Nay one of them told me, he had ra∣ther dy with his own Shop-Medicines, then be cured  with my Magistrals: much more would he have said of Patients, manifestly preferring his own profit before their lives; a most Unchristian saying! One singular advantage such a Physician will have, that the slanders of the Apothecaries will appear to be malicious, as being raised against such as act contrary to their profit. By this means Physicians will unite against the com∣mon Enemy, will contribute mutual assistance, and communicate more freely to one another their practice and remedies; and also the frauds and unlawful pra∣ctices of the Apothecaries, will conceal the counsels, and act whatsoever may tend to the advance of their Art; and Patients also will discover the Apothecaries censures, and practices against the Physicians and their prescriptions. Hereby that great interest will decay Apotheca∣ries have in Families for their petty officiousnesses (which Physicians not to displease them have put them upon) these will be taught Nurses, and the assistants, and which are by some of these as well, certainly more diligently performed then by the Apo∣thecaries. Hereby the filii Artis, or younger Physicians, will sooner come into a better and more setled practice, and not be beholden to Apothecaries to bring them Pa∣tients wherewith they often upbraid them, and glory amongst themselves and to other persons, that they in∣troduced such and such a Physician.
Hereby Chirurgeons will be restored to some of their employment now usurped by the Apothecaries, as let∣ing of blood, applying Leeches, Plasters, Cupping-Glasses,  Syringing and Salivation, wraping up bodies in Cere-Cloaths, &c. which indeed do more pro∣perly belong to them then to the Apothecaries; hereby also haply many occasions of quarrel betwixt Phy∣sicians and the Apothecaries will cease, each party act∣ing according to his own way. By this means Pseudochymists, and other Mounte∣banks mouths and revilings will be stopped, only ex∣claiming for this, that Physicians make not their own Medicines. But since the publication of these papers I am informed that the said Pseudochymists and Moun∣tebanks rail against me, this Book, and the way pro∣pounded, as much as the Apothecaries, though before e∣qual Enemies each to others. So that they have fulfil∣led the Proverb, of like to like. And no wonder since hereby their Kingdom of darkness is brought to light, and they are obliged to oppose it, as the Copper-Smiths were to revile St. Paul for speaking against the Idol of Diana of the Ephesians, whereby their trade was lost. And as for the reasonableness of it, that the Physician ought to support himself by all lawful ways and means, and to have praeeminence above those ignorant persons that incroach upon his profession, 'tis confessed by all that have considered the great charge, study, and la∣bour, before he can arrive at any benefit from it; for he must take the chargeable degrees of Batchellor, and Master of Arts, Batchellor of Physic, and after 14 years standing, the degree of
Doctor; besides his bare expences for his maintenance in the University, Charges in Anatomies, knowledg of natural things; Travels abroad, Chymistry, and Experiments; his  Library, Habit, his more free way of living in a sui∣table house, and Attendants, greater Taxes, &c. in∣somuch that a Doctor of Physic spends more before he comes to practise, then will set up perhaps a dozen Apo∣thecaries in a way of livelihood; and besides, great sums of money before he can put himself in a fitting Equipage: whereas on the contrary, many young men before their time of Apprenticeship is out, pro∣vide well for themselves by Quacking; and certainly the Study of Physic, and consequently the knowledge of Nature, must bid farewel to the Universities, if Shops be permitted to make practisers, for such the peo∣ple will soon create Doctors, which title the Apotheca∣ry takes upon him, though he understand not the reason of the name, to the great shame of the Universities, and Faculty, when ignorant people shall give, and they challenge the same title for nothing, attained by the Physician at a great rate and long study, the vulgar ta∣king Practiser and Doctor to signifie the same thing. And which no persons of knowledge and education do, and perhaps most other persons give them in way of Jeering. From the handsom support of Physicians these bene∣fits will accrue to the publick, that thereby the honour all Nations yield to the English Physicians will be kept up, who in the late times, when the reputation of the Nation was well neer forfeited abroad, the
Physicians then in being, most whereof are now living, and Members of the College, maintained the credit, for learning and value, of this Kingdom, and since his Majesties happy return, some of them have kept up the honour of the Faculty; which manifestly appears  by the great esteem Foreigners have of their Books, by often printing them, and translating into Latin what hath been published in English, though they are no where so depressed as in England. A second benefit to the publick is, that men of com∣petent Estates will breed up their Sons in the Art of Physic, giving them such education as is necessary, and will not vouchsafe to place them out to Apothecaries, though now adays want of learning and degrees are adjudged as needful a qualification for the exercise of Physic, as formerly 'twas for Preaching, and the Shops fit to supply both. I will conclude this part of my discourse with this observation; that the Laws of England in all their Acts of Parliament, have granted the practice of Physic to Physicians and them alone, and in no clause thereof put in any restraint at all upon them, but every where, either new priviledges, or a confirmation of the old, have been granted, by the said powers. Whereas on the contrary, the Law supposeth cheats in the Apothe∣caries Shops, and therefore impowers our Censors to destroy and burn what they find bad and corrupt. The next thing to be treated of, shall be the ways of Apothecaries creeping into practice, and their unfitness thereunto. As to the first, heretofore when they were Members of the Company of Grocers, and dispersed in place, as well as in counsel, they then were wholy subordinate to the Physicians, only keeping in their Shops, and faithfully making the prescriptions they received from the
Physician, and when made, sending them to the Patient by their men (as they still continue to do in Foreign Countries) and not committing the  preparation to raw Boys, or Apprentices, which is the true interest of the Patient they should do here like∣wise. But in process of time, Physicians in acute di∣seases having taught them somewhat, sent them to visit their Patients, to give them the best account they could of the estate of their health, and effect of their Medicines. And of later years some Physicians took them along with them in their Visits, whereby they acquired a little smattering of diseases, by which means, and their continual officiousness, they insinua∣ted themselves into Families, and by applying (right or wrong) the terms of Art they had learned from the Physicians, they made people believe they had ac∣quired some skill in the Art, and afterwards began to venture a little at practice, and but until these 10 years last past kept themselves within some bounds and li∣mits; but since that time have daily more and more incroached upon our Profession, being assisted by a greater familiarity of conversation with younger Phy∣sicians. And in the Plague time they took upon them the whole Practice of Physic, which ever since they have continued, being much helped also therein by the dispersing of Physicians into places unknown to their Patients, by the Fire, but above all by the burning of the College, by means whereof their Government and view of their Shops have been omitted, insomuch that now they are past all restraint, having insinuated and (as they think) rooted themselves by the aforesaid Artifices, so that there remains now no other real re∣medy but that proposed.
Now here I shall take occasion in a short digression, to discourse briefly the reason, why in all Ages there  have been so many pretenders to Physic, and why some of them have got reputation in the World. One hath been mentioned before, viz. the great charges sick men are put to, caused by the separation of the Physician from the Apothecary. But the principal reason is, the want of knowledge in most persons, both of the materials used, and the grounds for which they are applyed. Insomuch that there are but few that can judg, and distinguish rightly of either, and no won∣der therefore that in their reasonings they commit more absurd mistakes, or Paralogisms then in any other Art whatsoever, and censure Physicians by the success alone. Which my Lord Verulam accounts the great unhappiness both of the States-man and the Physician, both being alike censured by those that know not the bottom and rise of their Actions and Counsels. For how can any man in either make a sound Judgment without a full knowledge of the bu∣siness it self, and of all the circumstances thereunto belonging; nor in Physic without the concurrent knowledg of the sick mans habit, disease, cause, re∣medies, and many other particulars necessary to make a clear judgment upon the success? Yet notwithstand∣ing, many will censure and grumble at the actions of he States-men, though their proceedings have been never so wise, and prudent, and oft-times from mutter∣ing and whispering, fall to down-right distast, and mu∣tiny against their Superiors. So that the good success, in State-affairs, of rash and imprudent undertakers, have been extolled and preferred before the wary, and prudent management, and guidance of the so∣berest and wisest States-men. The same likewise
happens between the bold Empiric, and learnedst Phy∣sician. But in this way of censuring, the States-man hath this advantage above the Physician, that 'tis possible he may meet with a series of Business so cir∣cumstantiated, as seldom or never to miscarry, espe∣cially having a greater power over subordinate per∣sons then Physicians have. But the irreversible statute of Heaven forbids us to expect a constant recovery of our Patients, for 'tis appointed, that all men must die. 'Tis sufficient therefore for us, to employ those remedies God hath given to the Sons of men, to the utmost vertue the Creator hath endowed them withal: since his eternal decree hath limited their efficacy from ma∣king man immortal. Now since (if men judg by the success alone) it cannot be otherwise, but that the most learned Physician, and most sottish Empiric must be thought equal in skill, by those that are not able to make a right judgment and difference betwixt them on other principles. Hence it comes to pass, that where some ignorant person hath cured accidentally a slight disease, and a Physician hath a Patient dye of an irrecoverable Case, here the Empiric shall be applau∣ded, and the Physician decryed. Nay many will say the disease is the same in both, whereas we daily see most gross mistakes in such opinions, when the Cases differ totally in their Nature, agreeing in one sign only common to both the Cases proposed, nay to many other also. Furthermore, if a Patient dy under an Empirics hand, the friends willingly conceal their Names, lest some discredit should befal them for using such worthless practisers; but if under the hands of a known
Physician, he shall be sure to be named, and  sometimes his attendance falsly fathered on him, when Mountebanks only have been employed: but to besure if an Empirie hath first been made use of, and after∣wards an able Physician called in (when all opportu∣nity of doing good was past) and the Patient dy, the Mountebank hath never been mentioned, but the Physi∣cian perhaps condemned, though he hath done whatso∣ever could have been thought on, rational in that Case. Add to the former reasons, the bold and confident brags, and promises of Empirics, that they have cured worse diseases, and will in few hours free them from their maladies, especially where sober Physicians have pronounced doubtfully of the event. No wonder that these pleasing promises to persons in danger and distress bring them into employment even with a re∣jection of the former sober Physician. Besides, a foolish opinion prevails with some igno∣rant persons, that they will deal only with such as will undertake the Cure, (that is) contract with them for a sum of money, one half whereof to be payed in hand, and the other the Cure being done, and so are usually cheated of one half of their money; and such peo∣ple will have nothing to do with such Physicians as will not undertake them in this sence. Another Stratagem is, to give strange and hard names to their Medicines, such as are Pilulae radiis Solis extractae, and in English is no more then Pills dryed to that consistence by the Sun-Beams, which ignorant people have thought were made of the Sun Beams. Others commend their Extract of the Soul of the Heathen Gods. One sets up with a receipt re∣ceived from Van Helmonts own hands; Another hath
received from a Jew the shining of Moses Face; nay I have heard a Pseudochymist blasphemously brag, he saw in the making of a grand Elixir, the Quintessence of the Trinity in Unity, and infinite other pitiful cap∣tivations of silly people, to be seen on every Gate and Post of this City; such as are the Spirit of the Salt of the World, Panchymagogon, and other ten-footed Greek names, and some other Mongrel non-sensical ones compounded of several Languages; promising certain, speedy, and concealed Cure of incurable Di∣seases. And no less ridiculous and absurd to considering persons are, their cantings of themselves, wherewith they no less befool, amuse, and beguile the people; as that by long prayer, and seeking of God, they have had many secrets revealed to them from Heaven. Another by long Travels through Hungary, Poland, &c. hath attained great secrets from Kings and Empe∣rours. Another a Gentleman lately come from Ox∣ford, or Cambridg, Cures the Pox, Running of the Reins, &c. in Capital Letters, at all which what sober man cannot but laugh? Yet such as these are in∣ducements to many to resort to them; moreover some of them are Astrologers, Physiognomers, Fortune∣tellers, Professors of Palmistry and such other vain Arts, much applauded by the weaker sort of people. Besides, the former they have their Emissaries, Scouts, and Setters up and down, to cry up the skill and feigned Cures done by them, Nurses, Good-fel∣lows, Midwives, &c. to make up the cry and full noise. Now it being natural to most people to admire what
they understand not, and for Admiration to infer Love, and Love Praise, and Praise the use especially of such things as are set off with high and lofty expressions, it necessarily follows that such persons will cry up, and make use of, those that by these means captivate their understandings, especially their credits being ingaged also; but above all, if they proceed from meaner persons, of whom they are most credulous, having in suspition wisermen, believing the former are not able, and that the wiser are able; and therefore will de∣ceive them. All which appears in some with us cry∣ed up above any Physician that ever was in England, though for pitiful, dangerous, nay sometimes mortal Medicines, whereby great sums of money have been gained in a short time. I shall instance first in Lockyers Pills made of Antimony, discovered to be so by some of my Collegues, and my self, at the first selling of them. A Medicine as ill made as any of that Mineral, and no Physician though meanly versed in Chymistry, but could have excelled it. Yet so great a Vogue this Pill had for some time, that infinite people resorted to him, and purchased them for their lives, both for them∣selves, and Families, and (as I have heard) for their posterities too. Though a common Chimney in a little time would have made enough of it to have served the whole Nation for some years to come, and that at very small charges. But Experience, the Tutor of too many, hath in a short time brought these Pills into a dis-use, if not a total Oblivion, even amongst the vulgar. A second cryed up Medicine was Mathews's Pills, made of
Opium (to which the virtue of the whole  Composition must be attributed) of white Hellebor Roots, and Oyl of Turpentine, whereto some add Salt of Tartar, which will puzzle the most knowing Naturalist to declare why these should be thus jumbled together; unless to obscure the Opium. 'Tis indeed a very cun∣ning Composition, for by giving rest and ease it may ea∣sily decoy people into the use of them, though by long taking of them, diseases become far more uncurable then they are in their own Nature. A third Universal Medicine was Hughes's Powder, sold by him at 10s. the Grain, and 3l. 10s. the Dose, made doubtless of Gold and Quicksilver. The tast and weight of it manifestly discover the former to be an ingredient into it, and the effect, viz. Salivation proves the latter to be part of the compound. Besides I have made of these two dissolved, and digested in their peculiar Menstruums, in no long space of time, a Medicine that had the same effect with his, and in the same Dose; and having a View of his Cabinet left after his Death, containing a large quantity of the said Powder (being all he left behind him) there was found crude Gold, and Quicksilver in the same Cabinet. Now these three Notorious Universal Medicines were put to sale by most ignorant persons. Add here∣unto the forementioned Mr. De-laun's Pill, whereof I shall say nothing, being mentioned under the Name of the Pilulae ex duobus, in the London Dispensatory, though some make them of the Extract of Coloquintida. The last of any Fame with us, were Dr.
Goddard's Drops, a good Medicine, but not so universal, and superla∣tive as he would have made the World believe, and was nothing else but what some Physicians many years  since enjoyed. I well remember that in the late troubles, a Person then in great Authority, having cryed up this above all the Medicines in the World, a round wager was offered, that the Doctor should not distinguish his own from two others that should be brought him, both which were but Spirit of Harts∣horn. But the wager would not be accepted of. Furthermore, that this Medicine of his was Spirit of Harts-horn, some relations plainly argue; One where∣of was the following. A certain person in Norfolk having sent for as much as came to a 11l. and dying upon the 2d. dose of it, and by accident most part of the remainder being spilt; there comes in a friend to the House, of some skill, who supposing it to be Spirit of Harts-horn, told the Widow he would endeavour to gain back the money for her. And thereupon went to a Chymist, and bought as much of the said Spirit, as would make up the quantity purchased of Dr. Goddard, who after Tryal of it by smell, and tast, acknowledged it to be his, and honestly payed back the sum 'twas first sold for; which I think few of the Mountebanks do. Sure I am that a Quack sold 21 Pills for 20l. whereof the Patient took 4 at two doses, to the great hazard of his life, who then repairing to me for my advice, I by Tryal of one of them sound them to be Mercurial, and wished him to return them back, but the Quack would not give him 10s. for the 16 remaining. The inference and sum of what hath been said, is to shew briefly by what Artifices people are deceived in their Healths, and Purses, and how easily the ignorant are couzened, and such practices used, that
Physicians,  men of honesty and repute, would be ashamed to own, and must by using them in a short time be ruined and discredited. And such Cheats as these, the College of Physicians are bound by the Laws of the Land to decry, and punish (though by so doing it hath often incurred the censure and clamor of the vulgar) Besides the Sta∣tute of the 14th. and 15th. of Henry the Eighth in∣joyns us to it, declaring that 'tis good for the Com∣mon-wealth of this Realm, and therefore expedient, and necessary to provide that no person of the College of Physicians (for all practisers then were of the said body) be suffered to exercise, and practise Physic, but only those persons that be profound, sad, and dis∣creet, groundly learned, and deeply studyed in Phy∣sic. Now certain it is, that none of the said body did or dare use any of the forementioned frauds and de∣ceits, but will constantly indeavour (since 'tis impossi∣ble but there will be Cheatees; (according to the old Proverb, Populus vult decipi, The People will be de∣ceived) to abridge the number of the Cheaters, who answer to the former part of the Proverb, Deci∣piatur, Let them be couzened. I shall end this discourse by returning from my di∣gression to the Apothecaries, who may and do use some of the tricks before-mentioned, and shall here briefly recite some great advantages they have, and make use of above Physicians. One is, that they live in this City 7 or 8 years as Apprentices, as also by their retail Trade, and by living in open Shops, by frequent converse with their fellow Citizens, whether in Commerce or Offices, by many friendly and Neigh∣bourly mutual kindnesses and actions, wherein they
spend their whole lives, and are never diverted by stu∣dies, and ingenuity from their proposed way of gain, by all which means they get into a fixed familiarity and good opinion with their Neighbours, and a large acquaintance in the World. Now for their skill, be∣sides what hath been before-mentioned, and common to them with the Mountebank, viz. Vapouring and braging of their skill, and decrying Physicians, by talk∣ing above the Capacity of those they converse with, who therefore take all they say to be authentick, though never so absurd, and trivial, and many times to set off themselves they will venture to speak Latine commonly as false as the matter, although some of them at Coffee-Houses, and in other mixt Companies, by venturing so boldly have been met with and baffled, and made to depart thence with shame and discredit enough, which their friends and acquaintance take little notice of. Add hereunto their exposing to view their Compositions of Treacle, Mithridate, Diascor∣dium and Alkermes, which all their friends, and neigh∣bours one time of another must see; (being set off by some very curiously) and seeing cannot but admire the great charge, art, and labour of the Apothecary, and perhaps hear his learned Lecture upon them, whereby they imply their great skill, knowledg in the virtues of these ingredients, and consequently an ability to pra∣ctise with them; all which are below the digni∣ty of a Physician; and therefore a long time is ne∣cessary for him to gain acquaintance, wanting the fore-mentioned opportunities the Apothecaries enjoy. Lastly, Their painted Pots and Glasses, with false
Titles on them, more win the vulgar then a Physicians Library of far greater value. As to their incapacity for Practice, 'tis manifest by their education, and ignorance of all those things which are required in an able Physician, viz. the know∣ledg of Arts and Languages; by the former whereof men learn the way and rules of observing, and im∣provements to be made thereon; by the latter, what the learned searchers of Nature have in all Ages ta∣ken notice of, necessary, and little enough in an Art so difficult as that of Physic. They are wholy igno∣rant also of all Philosophy, and the very Elements of the Art, and therefore unskillful in knowing disea∣ses; and more surely their causes, whereto respect is to be had, as well as to the diseases, to which, fit remedies are to be applyed. For want of Anatomy know neither the part affected, nor how 'tis affected; much less any thing of Chirurgical directions. And through their ignorance in Philosophy, and Arts, they have not skill enough to advise a diet sutable to disea∣ses, a thing most necessary, as well in curing diseases as in preserving of health, and which requires a great insight into the nature of things; nor the true grounds and reasons of compounding, practising their way ra∣ther by rote then by rule; with better reason may a Brick-layer or Carpenter pretend to be a Mathemati∣cal, or a Common Fidler to be a Musick Reader in the Universities, or Gresham-College, since both these have the practical part of those Sciences, which Apothecaries have not in Physic, in the least mea∣sure. And to conceal their mis-actings, they generally do
all by word of mouth, and not enter their pre∣scriptions into their Books, being haply ashamed any knowing men should discover their sins of omis∣sion, as dangerous many times in point of life and health, as those of their commission. Whereas Physicians Bills are on the File, or registred in Order in their own Books, which is their justification from all mis∣representations. Again, they sufficiently confess their ignorance, by calling in Physicians when their own, or any of their relations healths are concerned, and the same all peo∣ple acknowledge, when they are in distress and dan∣ger. And very few understanding persons, and none that are learned and knowing, will trust them at all. But I shall refer the Reader to the forementioned Writer against the Apothecaries, viz. Dr. Daniel Coxe, who permitted me to name him here; by whom this and many other things here but briefly touched, are judiciously handled, and more largely. And as for their skill in practice, we daily see their gross errours and omissions, being called where they have given Medicines. I shall instance only in one that hapned at the writing hereof; viz. that an Apo∣thecary gave strong Purging Pills on the Fit day of a gentle Quartan Ague, which turned it into a violent Fever, to the great hazard of the Patients life. And at how easie rates they practise, many of their Bills brought and complained of to our College, (in some whereof I have seen Fees set down for Vi∣sits) witness, wherein upon a slight disease 5l. hath been demanded for four days practice. And I have
heard one of them brag, that he commonly had from 20 to 100l. besides presents, for cure of a Clap (as they call it) which might have been more speedily and securely performed for a manifold lesser sum. I now come to answer some slight objections; as first, that Physicians are unskillful in the Art of ma∣king Medicines; but sure those that thus object can∣not deny them that ability which Ladies, and almost all ordinary women have; viz. of distilling of waters of all sorts, making of Syrups, Conserves, Preserves, Powders, Trochises, Electuaries (and what not) and as many think, more cleanly and neatly then the Apo∣thecaries; and some of them Ointments, and Plasters, in which two lyes their main skill. Some where∣of, to those that understand not the way of disso∣lution of bodies, and the nature of their mixture may be difficult. Yet this defect they may supply by lessening the number of ingredients, and may perform more with 2, or 3 Simples, then with the larger Compositions, as 'tis manifest in the use of Galbanum alone, now used and found better then Emplastrum Hystericum, consisting of 21 ingre∣dients. And though as matters now stand, Physicians have not the honour to be counted superiour to Apothecaries in their Art, yet every one knows that they alone are the prescribers and directors of the
Apothecaries in what they know, and are able to puzzle them in infi∣nite things that concern their Trade, besides in Chy∣mical preparations, whereof most of them are totally ignorant; and should Physicians withdraw themselves  from their conversation, few pretenders to Physic would appear more unskillful then they, neither know∣ing how to deal with a new Simple, nor a new disease. And for all their pretences of skill in Drugs, 'tis most certain that the State makes Physicians, not Apotheca∣ries, Judges of them; and the Statute of Henry the VIII. appoints the College Censors upon Oath, not the Apothecaries, to judg, and condemn false and sophisti∣cated Medicines. A second objection wherewith they flatter them∣selves, is, that the great expence of time in preparing Medicines will keep Physicians from this course. I answer, that the Physician needs not spend much more then half an hour in a day, one with another, on this work, and may faster dispense them then the Apotheca∣ries to Hospitals, who in an afternoon can provide for 100, nay sometimes 200 sick men, and carry them to the Hospital, and dispose them to each single person, which takes up much time, which the Physicians Ser∣vants need not be put to. A third objection is, that this course, which before 'twas put in practice they derided, now used is railed at, will undo them. I answer, that if needs, one or the other must be ruined, 'tis more reasonable that the Apothecary should suffer then the Physician, because the one acts but his duty, and for the publick good, but the other are transgressors of the Law, and act above the Sphere of their skill, and do many prejudices to the precious lives, and healths of men; and the rather because 'tis in their own power to prevent this mis∣chief, by stinting the number of their Servants (as 'tis in foreign parts, and in
England also, in very many if  not most other Trades. Nay our State allows but a set number of Printers) for they acknowledg them∣selves, that the exceeding increase of their number must necessarily in a short time bring them all to shift∣ing and beggery, and a greater want of skill then what they now pretend to. But to answer this Objection more fully, I affirm Apothecaries have made and do make use of several other ways of subsistence; be∣sides their bare trades (none of which Physicians can use) viz. some of them in this City as well as in the Country, sell Grocery-wares, and by both together, gain Estates. Secondly, They barter in Drugs and other Commodities, selling them amongst themselves, and to other Tradesmen. Furthermore, they are now building a Laboratory to make all sorts of Chymical Medicines, intending to supply the whole Nation with them, which must necessarily undo all the Chymists in London; and whether in time they will not distil Strong-waters, &c. (an easie thing for them to un∣dertake) and by this means to ruine the Corporation of Distillers of Strong-waters, I leave to the said Com∣pany to conceive as they please. However, this I have heard several of them say, that they resolve to buy all sorts of Drugs, and make a Magazine of them, as well as of the greater Compositions, at their own Hall; and to sell them to the Members of their Company, whereby the Trade of the Druggist, must be much lessened, if not totally over-thrown. So little regard have they of any other employment but of their own, yet all these things they may do without any offence against the Laws of the Land. Why then should they, who have so many ways of subsistence, envy, and  usurp unlawfully over the single and lawful way grant∣ed Physicians for their livelihood? Or why should they repine, and revile them for advancing their Art, the publick health and profit, and for maintaining their profession by their Pens, and actings against themselves, who are the first aggressors in this division? Which I profess to be the sole end of these present papers, and heartily wish they may thrive and prosper as long as they conform themselves to the Laws of Honesty, Reason, and of the Land. Besides, why may not the Plaisterer more reasonably pretend the same to the Painter, and many other Trades against one another, as the Brick-layer to the Stone-Cutter, &c. that they understand the Trade, and that truly too, and that they cannot subsist without this incroachment? And why should not Chirurgeons keep open Apothecaries Shops? but that the same Law limits those Trades∣men, as well as prohibits the Apothecary from the pra∣ctice of Physic. And surely the Law and State have no consideration of those persons subsistence, who conform not to them; and why should we have of those, subordinate to us, who against all good Con∣science take away from us all that is our due, and continually traduce and slander us very untruly and designingly? The last objection (and a strange one) is, that in this private way of giving Medicines, Physicians may poy∣son their Patients. But this is easily retorted upon the Apothecaries, who may themselves or their Servants do the like, as
'tis known in the poysoning of Sir Thomas Overbury; besides, since it cannot be otherwise, but that the Patient must trust somebody, 'tis better to trust one  then many; and if one, better him whose education will teach him better Morality, (and who hath given his Faith (equivalent to an Oath) twice to the Body of the College; viz. once at his admission as Candidate, and a second time at his admission as Fellow; whereby he promiseth in these words, That he shall give no∣thing to cause miscarriage, or to destroy, or hinder Conception, nor Poysons (for of such, good Medicines may be made) to an evil purpose; nay that he shall not even teach them where there is any suspicion of ill using of them. Which promise is nothing else but the Oath proposed by Hippoc. to Physicians, in the en∣trance to his Books) then such as want these qualifica∣tions; and this seems to be the reason why our Common Law makes it Felony, for any person to have any one dy under his hand, unless he were a lawful Physician. More noble and generous was the opinion of Alex∣ander the Great, concerning his Physician, who confi∣dently drank off that Medicine which cured him, though he was before informed by some friend that 'twas poysoned. Neither can History it self to my knowledg produce any example, that ever any such foolish Villany was acted; Though doubtless many lives might have been saved if the Apothecaries would have complyed with the College, in their proposed Or∣ders for selling Rats-bane.
In the next place I shall recite some few of their de∣vices against those Physicians in particular that make their own Medicines, as to tell the Patient that is averse to Chymical Medicines, that the Doctor is Chy∣mical, and that because for sooth he makes his own Me∣dicines; but to those that affect Chymical, that the  Doctor is but a Galenist, and useth only dull and in∣effectual remedies, as best suits to the sick mans Pa∣lat. A second is, that if this Physician be called into a Patient, the Apothecary will pretend present danger, and in his absence call in another, or pretend he is abroad when he is not, or else that the Case requires the counsel of two Physicians; and what other de∣vices they use, I have not well learned. Now briefly follow some small Scandals they cast upon the said Physicians, as first that they do it for want of practice; the falsity whereof is known by those few that do act this way already, and shortly 'twill be more apparent, when many more of good practice, singular parts and honesty will do the like, and certainly nothing but lazyness, ignorance, or want of will to do the utmost good they are able for the sick, can hinder them from so doing, except age, infirmity of body, or want of convenience. But suppose 'tis so as they alledg, doubtless every man may and ought to use all lawful means for his own subsistence; and do not our adversaries say they are inforced to it, affirm∣ing that unless they give Medicines of themselves, their acquaintance will go to another Apothecary who will do it, though one of their Company told me, they had power by their Charter to restrain practice? Whence (if true) it clearly follows that the whole Company allows it. But those Physicians, that for the reasons above, cannot nor will not take this course, are to be ad∣monished, to do here as the Physicians did in France, for the good of people,
viz. to tell their Patients the prices of Medicines, and to write their Bills in Eng∣lish,  that thereby the Patients may not pay too un rea∣sonable for them. I now conclude, having performed this ungrateful task with as much brevity, mildness of Spirit, and lan∣guage, as the business would permit (and what the prudent Statutes of our College require of each of their members, that we shall by all honest and lawful ways and means prosecute all illiterate Mountebanks and Im∣postors, &c. and is no more then the Laws and Charters granted to us allow, and what we twice faithfully pro∣mise (as much an Oath as we can give) viz. at our ad∣mission as Candidate and as Fellow) being obliged to another work of greater difficulty, and concern, long since promised, having been too long diverted with sit∣ting my self for my intended practice, and several other unavoidable Occasions.
Postscript. REader, There intervening so small a space from the publication of the first Edition of these Papers to this second; I thought to have ad∣ded nothing to it, but to have put it out only more correct, as the Title intimates; but since some Sheets were printed off, I have had the opportunity to be in∣formed of some exceptions taken to them, which be∣ing but few, I shall give the Objectors full satisfaction in. Though one answer might serve for all; viz. that an Apothecary in the presence of two Physicians, said, that he had told me of all these Cheats, and indeed they are so common, that whosoever shall be conversant with them, may observe most of these to be a great part of their discourse. The First exception against Myrtle-leafs, that they were not shewed the Censors for Sena, a Binder for a Purger; the time I have forgot; the Censors then were, Sir George Ent, Dr. Goddard, Dr. King, and my Self; the places, Tut-hill∣street, and some Shops in King-street; Mr. Shellberry being then Master of the Company. Secondly, As for Mushrooms rubbed over with Chalk for Agaric; this was found by the Censors in the Oid-Baily, at the Shop of one now dead, and therefore I shall say no further of it, it being taken notice of by Mr. Evelyn, as is intimated before. p. 8. A Third is
Diascordium made of Honey and Bole-Armeniac, this was discovered in a  Shop at the end of Drury-lane near Holborn, conclu∣ded to be so by Sir George Ent, My Self, and Mr. Rich∣ardson then Master of the Company, and the rest of the Censors and Wardens, easily to be remembred, and was by them taken away to their Hall; a pound whereof I had, and by dissolution found it to be no otherwise; what the Apothecaries did with the large Pot of the remainder I know not. Besides these, I have heard no exception to the whole concerning frauds. Now since the Cheaters with the Cheatees, most insist on the objection of Poyson; I add to what hath been formerly said, that Poysons are not necessarily to be given in Medicines alone, but may be given in Broaths, Beer, or any other thing taken into the Body, and that without the consultation or knowledg of any Physician, and surely if any one had a mind to Poyson his Relations (an Action abominable to the English Nation) he would rather Act privately himself, ha∣ving many opportunities offered to him, rather then by communicating it to others, make himself obnoxi∣ous to their discovery. But if he should communi∣cate to others, 'tis more probable he would commu∣nicate it to meaner, and more Mercenary persons, as Apothecaries and Nurses, at a smaller rate and with more security, then reveal such secrets to Physicians, Men of Honour, and Honesty. Furthermore, if any mans life be suspected to be taken away with Poyson, and by opening the body it should appear so (and without which it cannot well appear) the Physician is doubtless as lyable to the Law as any other person whatsoever. So that the Patient hath as much moral
security from this mischief, as possibly can be had, or wished in humane affairs. Nay suppose the Physician might be so corrupted (as to take away his Patients life) he might effect it without the least suspition; either by neglecting, or omitting what was necessary, or by giving him unproper Medicines, for which he could be accused of ignorance or errour only; be∣sides, if he had a mind to poyson, he as well as others, assistants of Visitors, might do it securely enough, by conveying into a singular Cordial, or any Medicine made by the Shops, and often taken by the Patient before with good success, a mortal dose without any knowledg or surmise of any such horrid practice. Add hereunto what an able Chirurgeon suggested, that Apothecaries taking upon them the wrapping up, and Embalming of Bodies (whereby they gain more money then by several years practice upon them; for their embalming amounts to very great sums) may upon better reason be suspected of poysoning then any other persons whatsoever conversant among the sick; since both a particular interest and convenience of concealing may induce them to it. Lastly, did this Objection carry any weight in it, then neither Physicians, Chirurgeons, Apothecaries, Nurses, nor Friends, might administer to the sick; because all these, as well as Physicians, may clandestinely poyson their Relations. And therefore that an Objection should be raised by such persons that have more op∣portunities and advantage (in a thing never proved to be done, because 'tis possible only) to hinder so manifest and publick a profit as hath been proved; appears to be very weak and absurd.
And having done with the Objections made to others, and to my self also by some of the Company, with whom I have conversed, who huff'd exceedingly at my first discourse with them, but departed (seem∣ingly at least) well satisfied, I am sure fully and without reply answered, and with addition of many other Cheats besides, which I shall not here mention for the reasons above specified: I shall here transcribe one gratulatory Letter amongst many sent me by a Divine well known in Physic, being very compre∣hensive of most I have said, to the end the Univer∣sities and all learned men may see what is like to be∣come of one of the three of their noble professions: The words of the Letter are these. "Your design all ingenious persons approve highly, to whom I have communicated it. 'Tis frequent with a Master Apothecary that hath served but 2, or 3 years, nay some scarce one, to take Apprentices for as little, or less time, with a little more money then ordinarily; and presently they assume the Title of Doctors, though they understand no more then only to write to a whole-sale Apothecary in your City. And truly their couzenages here in the Country do exceed those in the City. For I have known 2s. 6d. taken for a little Plaster of Galba∣num, and it is usual to make one pectoral Syrup serve for all; as having occasion to enquire for Syrup of Jujubs, one of them ingenuously confessed (not knowing what Jujubs were) that he used one pecto∣ral Syrup for all, a little varying the colour some∣times, and this a peculiar receipt of his own, some∣thing differing from any in the Dispensatory."
As for their opposition also in the Country, take this one Example. An eminent Physician of Glou∣cester by reason of the Apothecaries Frauds, &c. betook himself to make his own Medicines, taking for his Servant one that was not a Freeman of the said City. Who in his Masters absence, and contrary to his command, sold to an Apothecary a Medicine not to be had, or at least pretended not to be had in the Town, for a most urgent and necessary use; where∣upon the Apothecaries conspiring together, exhibited a complaint to the Mayor and Court of Aldermen, re∣quiring of them, that the said Physician (who was a Freeman, and had lately born the Office of Mayor) might be dis-franchised. Which being not granted them, they set the whole City into such disorder, that they refused to attend the Mayor on a Solemn day (as their Custom is, and are bound to do) with their Flags from their Town-Hall to the Church, which the pru∣dence of the Magistrates for the present qualifi∣ed. This relation I had from the then Mayor my Kinsman, in the presence of a London Apo∣thecary. Next as to the Lyes and Scandals of my self, I shall take notice only of those that concern practice (the rest being but generally false and non-sensical revilings.) One is, that they most untruly entitle me to have been Physician to the Lady Anderson, and many others which I never saw or heard of; and that I soon dispatched them. Another wherewith they make great noise, is, of one Mr. Staples in Co∣vent-Garden, whom they say also I dispatched in few days. The true relation whereof was this. An able
Physician of the College had him in hand for the Jaun∣dice, about two Months before I was called, where∣upon we consulted and writ a note to the Apothecary; a week after the consultation I was sent for, and desired to take care of him alone; he was then, be∣sides the Jaundice, troubled with continual Torments in his Bowels, which were as hard as a Board (as they say) his Stomach gone, his nights restless, a vehement Cough joyned with a Hectick Fever, ha∣ving long before had an ill Habit of Body. In this Case I found him, and in a Months time or thereabouts, I cured his Jaundice, relieved his Tor∣ments, removed the hardness of his Bowels, miti∣gated his Cough, but the Hectick Fever continuing he declined; at length another Physician was called in, who can witness the truth of what was done, and up∣on the whole we had good reason to think his Liver to be Apostemated. After which consultation he had no more of me, telling me he would rely on Kitchin Physic, and after that I never saw him. Now this being the only relation I have heard in this kind, I have been the larger to recite it, that thereby the Reader may take an estimate of their dealing with me in the like reports. The like or worse, some of them have said of other Physicians, which perhaps hereafter shall be more fully related with all the Cir∣cumstances. As for their malicious anger, and disadvantageous to themselves, take this one example; I having pre∣scribed a Plaster for the Head, an Apothecary would not make it, because prescribed by me; and I have been informed that many of them agreed they would
make nothing for such Physicians as made their own Medicines; a poor and pitiful revenge, to their own loss and discredit. Another Scandal is, the fewness of my Medicines. 'Tis true my Closet is not open to every bodies Eye, nor have I so many and large Pots and Glasses, or fill'd with as good as nothing, or the same Medicine, in se∣veral with different Titles, neither are any of mine guilded to make a shew with; yet I dare offer to view with the best of their Shops, for number of good and really useful Medicines fit to answer presently any Physicians intentions, for internal remedies. And this will be attested by some of my learned Collegues, who have seen and perused them. Whereas the Shops contain only some general Medicines, whereof few single Physicians make use of one quarter in their practice, and upon most particular cases are compell'd to prescribe what is not readily dispensed in the Shops. Others infinuate my seldom change of Medicines. To which I answer, that where all circumstances are the same, and a good success follows; I neither do, nor will much vary, the easiest thing in the World to be done, both to colour and tast. For such changes (ne∣cessary to be used in Shop-practice) without manifest reason, clog a Patients Purse and Stomach, may not suit with the Patients Disease nor Constitution. And doubtless every
Physician writes at first what he con∣ceives most fit, and proper in the Case proposed; and if this agrees fully to his expectation, runs some ha∣zard in the alteration, which he is necessitated to do in the Shop-way, for many reasons before-mentioned. Besides, who scruples to take the Medicinal Waters of  Epsom, Barnet, and Tunbridge, many weeks together? or who refuseth a constant unalter'd Diet-Drink for some Months, or Years together? And do not Apo∣thecaries in all Diseases of the Lungs, fly to their pectoral decoction for all persons, and for the same per∣son at all times, unless perhaps with the addition of a little China to it? Some Patients of the middle rank have by these and such like Artifices been drawn from me, but have soon returned, being undeceived by the fulsomness, charge, and the non-success of the Shops. Now these things I have here published to this end alone, that both Physician and Patient may take no∣tice of them; the former to neglect and slight such poor Calumnies, and the other to avoid the inconve∣niencies thence arising. The care I had not to injure any particular person, by naming him in my first Edition, or this (although I had so many witnesses of credit, as appears by the Postscript, to justifie any thing they can object against) makes me hope they will leave off their personal ani∣mosities, or redress their Crimes, their Vanity of threatning me with
20000l. Actions, and affrighting my publishing this, together with my further pro∣ceedings, by their intended assaults and batteries; which make them appear so ridiculous, that I smile at the first, and pardon the last, wishing them to con∣sider seriously how the expectation some have of what they can say for themselves, together with the ne∣cessity that obliges them to it (if possible) were enough one would think, besides their many large brags of a speedy and full answer (which they have a  long time buzzed about the Town as a present remedy in this exigence) this I say were enough to make any man conclude them guilty, but 'tis hoped this Edition will either work in them an amendment, or bury their confident presumptions, leaving no man a belief of their innocency. If their promised answer be any thing else but Libelling, or a Ballad without rhime or reason, stuft with falsities and revilings, such as was only given to Dr. Coxe's Book; I shall return it a speedy and full answer, and with an addition of far greater Frauds and Abuses, if they therein de∣sire it. Feb. 20 69/70. Hatton-Garden. PAg. 35. l. 6. read Physician, pag. 67. l. 12. read then to trust. FINIS.
