N1288 10750000 45642
A True Looking-Glass FOR All the Oppressed Free-born People OF ENGLAND. Wherein they may behold and see, How to chuse the next, and all future PARLIAMENTS, If ever they intend to be free indeed. WITH A CATALOGUE and CHARACTER OF THE Enemies of their Liberty and Freedom, that so they may be avoided. By John North. Printed at London, 1654.
A true LOOKING-GLASS for all the oppressed free-born people of Eng∣land, &c. 1. YOu are to remember, that our old Parliament declared the late King to be a tyrannical Pharaoh (for which (you know) he since has paid his utmost farthing) and that all the people of this Nation, in times of King∣ship, were in an Egyptian state. And are not we so still? But the Lord of hosts never delivered the Heads and El∣ders of a people, (Hampdens or rich men) from a tyrannical Pharaoh, (that we read of) but he delivered the Jacobs or common people from their cruel oppressing Taskmasters al∣so. Exod. 3. 7. So that this is one Cheat. 2. That they declared us to be all free-born, and the yeer 1649. the first yeer of Englands freedom. Were not these sweet words? Jer. 6. 13, 14, 15. but where are their deeds? This is the second Cheat. Now to prevent the like Cheats for time to come, observe these Directions following. 1. Let all those that have any ways assisted the Parliament against the late King and his party, appear personally, both in Cities and Country, at the next Election, and challenge their free Votes unanimously, equal with any other, as free∣born men: and see who will deny us it. And howbeit there is now risen up a new King among us, which knows not Joseph, Exod. 1. 8, 9, 10. (for if he did, he
would be grieved for the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.) who hath said unto his Councel, Come on, let us deal wise∣ly with them, (as they know the former Pharaohs of this Na∣tion, and their Councels did with our predecssors) left they chuse some Moses's, which have looked upon their burdens, Exod. 2. 11. or some godly valiant Nehemiahs, Neh. 5. which will deliver them from their Taskmasters and Oppressors, and so we shall have none to be our servants and slaves, to work and make brick, or fight for us; but (perhaps) rather fight against us: Exod. 9, 10, 11. Therefore, they have put forth a late Ordinance (not to set Taskmasters over us, because they know that is done to their hands already; but) that none shall have a free Vote in the next, or any other election of Parliaments, except every one of us have 10 l. per an. in lands, or 200 l. in personal estate: which not one of a hundred of us hath, or is ever like to have, as they deal with us. But let them remember, that howbeit they would chuse Parliaments without us, and have divided Traitors and De∣linquents estates amongst them without us, yet they did not nor could not have conquered them without us. And if they please to forget this, we shall remember it against the next time they stand in need of us. 2. Remember, that Authority ought to be given to such as care least for it, and kept from them that press fastest to∣wards it; (which you know has been the common and con∣stant practice of all our late Parliament-men, by making friends, and sending to their tenants to chuse them: a base abuse, and a corrupt practice:) for he that desireth it, would have it for his onely commodity and honour; he that look∣eth not for it, considereth that he is chosen for others neces∣sity: therefore how diverse is their administration, where both happeneth? Beware of such men. 3. That to all future Parliaments in this Nation, may be added others to be elected by you, which may officiate as did the Tribunes among the Romanes, termed Sacro-sancti, if thought fit.
4. That there may be a months space, or more, if need be, between their designation unto their Office, and their entry into it; to enquire whether there were no indirect and un∣lawful means used about their said Election, and to be exa∣mined in the respective Cities and Counties: and if any such shall be proved, that then all such Elections may be null; and that some considerable Fine may be imposed on every one, for such corrupt practices. 5. That some determined period of time (not exceeding one whole yeer) may be set, for continuance of the next and all future Parliaments, and Tribunes as aforesaid, beyond which none to continue, upon penalty of Treason, and upon which new Writs of course may issue out, and new Elections successively may take place, according to the Bill for Trien∣nial Parliaments: And that all members of the next and future Parliaments, and Tribunes (if any such shall be) and all others to be employed or intrusted under them, may give a strict Engagement to the people, (as by their Electors shall be thought fit) for the true and faithful discharge of that great and supreme trust reposed in them for publike good, before they or any of them shall presume or be allowed to exercise any power or authority (by vertue of any such Election to be made as aforesaid) over our persons or estates: considering, and also remembring, that our obsolete (but true) Adage, That none are deceived, but where they trust. 6. That at the sitting down of the next Parliament to be chosen as aforesaid, all the Officers of the Army may resigne and deliver up unto the said Parliament all their Commissi∣ons and powers received, together with all the Ships, Gari∣sons, Horse, Arms, and Ammunition, belonging to this Com∣monwealth. 7. Beware of chusing any of these persons in general terms hereafter mentioned and expressed: for they are use∣less and dangerous, as to the common peoples interest, as by sad experience we have found too true. That is to say, Great Landlords, (by what other names or titles soever they be called;) Dives's, or rich men; Usurers, Tythe-mongers,
improvers of Commons (for their own private be∣nefit and advantage) churlish Nabals, Ingrossers, Judges, (such as have been silent St. Johns in the poor mens case and cause) Lawyers, (of all sorts, Commissioners for the constant month∣ly Assesments, nor any of their Collectors or sub-Collectors, Commissioners for raising the Militia-Forces, Commissioners for taking and subscribing that late new (but needless) En∣gagement; Sir John Goalers, (nor any of their Mastiffs, Bear∣dogs, or Blood-hounds) Excise-men, nor Custom-takers, nor any belonging to them) Justices of the Peace or Quorum, our late Trustees, Keepers of our Liberties, nor any of their close Committees; rebellious Sauls, nor mercenary Souldiers. Brethren in evil, stand together, & hearken to your Charge. Landlords. These are they, that (notwithstanding all our sufferings and losses sustained by Free-quarter, and Plunder of our horses and other goods, in these sad times of War) for payment of their Fines for Delinquencie, and recruiting of their losses otherwise, (voluntarily contracted and occasioned by them∣selves, not us) by Fines, Loans, together with one moyety, or one third part at the least, of all Assesments paid to the Souldiery, exacted from us, over and above our ancient Rack∣rents, have beaten us to pieces, and do grinde our faces; contra∣ry to the express minde of the Lord, even the Lord of hosts, Isai. 3. 15. wherein they deal worse with us, then Egyptian Pharaoh did with the oppressed Israelites: for they have in∣creased the tale of our bricks or rents which we paid in times past, yet give us no more land or straw, but by them∣selves or osficers, bid us, Go, get more land or straw where we can finde it: for we be idle, therefore we cry, saying, Let us go free. Exod. 5. 6, 8, 9. These are they that lay more work upon us, that we may labour therein, to maintain their pomp, pride, and idleness, which were the sins of Sodom; saying, Let them not regard their late Parliaments Declarations, which declared them to be free-born; and the yeer 1649. the first year of Englands freedom; for those were but vain words, Exod. 5. 9. like that
Proclamation or Declaration which King Zedekiah in his time made to the Jews. Read Jer. 34. from vers. 8. to the end. These are they, that still joyn house to house, and Lay field to field, as mad as ever: the wo long since pronounced against such by the Lord of hosts, not at all regarding. But the wo in time may overtake them. In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth, many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without inhabitant, Isai. 5. 8, 9. And I will smite the winter-house, with the summer-house; and the houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, saith the Lord, Amos 3. 15. And have we not seen this fulfilled upon many of them, in all the three Nations, since these Wars? (though under some other notion) and assuredly, their fellows must follow, and dance after them, except their great Masters repent; which we see small hopes of. But must White-hall (think you) be spoiled, now after so much cost spent about tricking and trim∣ming it, at the Commonwealths charge? (that would be pi∣ty.) Yea: we do not finde it excepted, no more then Theobalds and the rest: And why so? what is the matter or cause? Their great Masters have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in their houses, Isai. 3. 14. But some perhaps will be ready to say, This is but a poor cause that is shewed, therefore we will not believe it. Who can help it? These are they, that Saul-like take our sons, and appoint some to ear their ground, and reap their harvest; others to drive their Coaches; and some to run before their Coaches; and others to be their Postilions; which is a trick of state more then Saul had, that we read of, 1 Sam. 8. 11, 12. and they take our daughters, and appoint some to be their Cooks, Bakers, and Brewers; others to empty their Foisting-curs and Monkeys. (Yet our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, and our children as theirs, Neh. 5. 5.) These are they, whose bond-slaves we are in times of peace, and vassals in times of war; and for whom we must fight, and adventure our lives, limbs, and blood, at our perils of being
turn'd out of our houses under old hedges, in case of refusal, let the Cause be right or wrong: so verifying our Adage, They must needs go, that the devil drives: and if we be maim∣ed and lamed, then we may go beg for our selves and fami∣lies; which is all they care for us. But sure we shall grow older and wiser, when days grow longer. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite them, and awake that shall vex them? And they shall be for booties unto them, Hab. 2. 7. and serve them as they have served others, Isa. 14. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Look to it, Tyrants and Oppressors. Dives's, or rich men. These are they that are clothed in purple and fine linen, not knowing what new French cut or French fashion to put on; and fare deliciously every day, not knowing what to eat or put in; whilst poor Lazarus lies in the streets, (for they will not (now) let him lie at their gates) the dogs shewing more com∣passion towards him, then their Masters. But Dives, thou shalt be tormented, and Lazarus one day be comforted. Luke 16. from vers. 19. to the end. For if Princes and Kings children be punished, for wearing strange apparel, Zeph. 1. 8. do ye think to escape? No, I'll warrant you. These are they that despise the poor. Do not the rich men op∣press us, and draw us before the judgement-seats? James 2. 6. Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl, for your miseries that shall come upon you: your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten. Your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped up treasure together for the last days. Can ye believe this? Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaugh∣ter. James 5. 1, 2, 3, 5. Can ye deny this? Zeph. 1. 18. Usurers. These are they that oppress us by usury, vantage and in∣crease, for money, meat, clothes, corn, cattel, and everything we stand in need of: positive Laws of God to the contrary, notwithstanding, nor at all regarding. Levit. 25. 36, 37. These are they that have taken usury and the increase, and
have greedily gained of their brethren and neighbours, and have forgotten me, saith the Lord, Ezek. 18. 8, 12, 13, 16, 17. But the Lord will remember you for it, doubt not. Legal Priests, and Tythe-mongers. These are they, that walk in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. These are they, that devour not widows houses onely, but now, even all poor mens houses also; inforcing us by hu∣mane Laws to pay Tythes of all things which we possess, yea Offerings for bread and wine, provided at our own proper cost and charges; with Harth-peny, and Garth-peny, and Eggs at Easter; and for a pretence, make long whining hypocritical prayers, and Legal Sermons, teaching for doctrine the command∣ments of men: therefore they shall receive the greater damnation. These are they, that appear righteous outwardly unto men, but within they are full of all hypocrisie and iniquity. These are blinde guides, leaders of the blinde, which are al∣ways teaching both silly men and silly women, but never able to bring them to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Tim. 3. 7. Can they teach that to others, which they are ignorant of them∣selves? These are they that teach for hire; and if a man put not in∣to their mouthes, they even prepare war against him. Pybald Impropriators. These are dumb dogs, that bite, but bark not at all; greedy dogs, that can never have enough; creatures never heard nor read of in Scripture: yet these must have Tythes also, or treble damages in case of non-payment; when by the Le∣vitical Law the poor should receive Tythes of them rather, Deut. 14. 28, 29. These are they that take the tenth of our Corn, the tenth of our hay, the tenth of our cattel, and of our sheep, or tre∣ble damages in case of non-payment, without any colour of right, more then a thief hath to a stoln horse; when thou∣sands of poor people, for far less offences, are hang'd still like dogs; but these steal (cum privilegio) by authority.
Improvers of Commons. These are they that in compassing the earth are worse then the devil: for it is written, He did but walk to and fro in it; he did not ditch it, hedge it, and inclose it to himself, as our Common-improvers have done, not leaving Christ in us, where to rest his head. These are the fat bulls and kine of Bashan, which encompass us on every side, both on high-lands and low-lands, which op∣press the poor, and destroy the needy, and say to their Ma∣sters, Bring, and let us drink, Amos 4. 1. These are they whose teeth are as swords, and their jaws as knives, to eat up the afflicted out of the earth, and the poor from a∣mong men. Prov. 30. 14. Churlish Nabals. These are they that answer us in our need roughly, saying, Shall I then take my bread, and my drink, and my victuals, that I have provided for my self and servants, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they be? Such sons of Belial are they, that we dare not speak to them, for any justice. For the weapons of the Churl are wicked; he deviseth wicked counsel to destroy the poor with lying words, and to make empty the hungry soul, and causeth the drink of the thirsty to fail, and to speak against the needy in judge∣ment. Ingrossers. These are they that first catch up all the inclosed grounds in a Parish, to feed and graze upon, and then with their great herds of young beasts, and flocks of sheep, eat and de∣vour up all the Common grounds from us also, that we can scarce keep a Cow alive to give our children milk; and yet nevertheless, they cause us to do as much, nay more, at every Common-days work, then they do. These are they that say, When will the New-moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat? making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsi∣fying the balance by deceit: denying the poor a Peck of corn
at home, for their money, unless they give them more for it then the market will afford. These are merchants: the balance of deceit is in their hands, and they love to oppress. Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the land to fail. Amos 8. 4, 5. Judges. These are they, whose mouthes and tongues the Hamp∣dens and rich mens golden key could open and unty, to speak on their behalf, against the late King and their predecessors, in the Case of Ship-money, and other illegal proceedings then complained of; which was the cause of their preferment: but, then their preferment struck them dumb in the poor mens Case and Cause concerning constant monthly Assesments, polling money, Engagement-money, and Excise, imposed by the Parliament and others upon the poor; besides the illegal imprisonment of many: against which, no justice can be ob∣tained from them. Do not they now deserve the same sen∣tence of a Hurdle and a Halter, which they threatned their predecessors withal? These are they, that when they do their office in delivering some of our poor brethren out of the tyrannical Norman Gaols, as much as in them lieth, endeavour constantly to hang them all, many of which had been instruments to pre∣serve them, and their quondam great Masters, from the block, or gallows, in case their late dread Soveraign, or his son (now call'd Charles Stuart) had prevail'd. But the fear of God is more to be seen in Egyptian Pharaoh's Midwives, (though Heathens, and Women) then in our old Men-Mid∣wives, which deliver us indeed of both sexes, (without re∣spect either to youth or age) but it's to their Officers, to be hang'd like dogs, till we have paid our utmost farthing: con∣trary to any positive Law of God, Humanity, or Christia∣nity. These are they, that judge for reward and hire: they are evening-wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the morrow: they abhor judgement, and pervert all equity. Yet will they
lean upon the Lord (as their great Masters do) and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. Micah 3. 9, 10, 11. Therefore the law is slacked, and judgement doth never go forth: for the wicked doth compass about the righteous; therefore wrong judgement proceedeth. Hab. 1. 12, 13. Lawyers. These are they that lade men with heavie burdens grievous to be born, and they themselves touch not the burdens with one of their fingers. These are they that have violently oppressed by spoiling and robbing, and have vexed the poor and needy; yea, they afflict the just, they take reward, and oppress the poor in the gate. Wo unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievous things which they have prescribed, to turn aside the needy from judgement, and to take away the right from the poor of my people; that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. As a cage is full of birds, so are their Offices full of deceit: thereby they are become great, and waxen rich. Jer. 5. 27. Commissioners for the Monthly Assesments, with their Col∣lectors and sub-Collectors. These are they, that when for want of money we fail at any time to pay our own or our great Landlords Assesments, (for they make us pay them, long before any rent be due) then by their commands we have our Cows driven away, or our clothes taken from our backs and beds, with great violence, by their Collectors or sub-Collectors, and either sold for half or a third part of their worth, or otherwise forced to pay most grievous exactions for distraining, over and above our Asses∣ments; and some mens goods carried quite away, worth 20 l. when the Assesment was under 4 l. without giving any ac∣count at all for the same. Thus we are pill'd and poll'd on all sides most intolerably, and no law or justice can be had or obtained against them. These are they that obstruct the regulated course of justice,
so much heretofore complained of in times of Kingship, as unlawful then; but now all things must be lawful, agreeable with their arbitrary wills and pleasures. These are they that cause us to go naked, without clothing: they have risen up as an enemy; they pull off the robe with the garment, from them hat pass by securely, as a man averse from war. Mic. 3. 8. Commissioners for the Militia. These are they, that, for saving their own and fellows e∣states, have imposed a great part of the charge thereof, by way of a general Assesment, upon every Parish; whereby, e∣ven the poorest, which had but a Cow, were forced to con∣tribute towards the same, contrary to all equity and consci∣ence. Commissioners for taking and subscribing the late new needless Engagement. These are they, that by themselves or Clerks have exacted many thousands of pounds from us, for cheating Certificates about the same, sold at 6 d. if not 12 d. apiece: which would not be allowed of, when we had them. Excise-men, and Custom-takers. These are they that have their Spaniels and Beagles hunt∣ing in Packs and Grayn-tubs. These are they that make us drink our water for money, Lam. 5. 4. and enflame the reckoning for all things we stand in need of; Excise being a common name for all Monopolies (so much heretofore also complained of) as homo is a com∣mon name to all men. Besides, who is able to number up the many thousands of pounds that have been exacted from us by them and their agents, upon that account? And yet no justice can be had against them for it. Our necks are under persecution: we labour and have no rest, by reason of these tyrants our oppressors. Lam. 5. 5. Servants have ruled over us: there is none that doth deliver us out of their hand. Lam. 5. 6.
Sir John Gaolers. These are they that like Cannibals live upon mans flesh and blood. Oh the tyranny, cruelty, violence, and villany, that hath been (and, for ought we know, still is) committed up∣on poor prisoners (if not inhumane murthers) so much com∣plained of, even in print, and yet no justice can be had against them for it! Men groan out of the City and Country, and the soul of the wounded crieth out; yet they pass un∣punished. Justices of the Peace and Quorum. These are they that still put in due execution all the tyran∣nical Laws, and Roguish Statutes heretofore made against the Poor by the late King Pharaohs of this Nation, and their great Councels of Taskmasters. These (and their great Masters) are they, that hate the Tray∣tors, but love the Treason. For, are not all the statutes of Omri kept in force against us at this day? Mica. 6. 16. Our late Trustees. These are they that we long looked up at, as the brazen Serpent, which would have healed all our grievances: when alas! they were more ready, by far, to hang us, then heal us of the biting of these fiery Scorpions our Oppressors. For, did not these wicked men lay wait, as he that setteth snares? They set a trap to catch poor complaining men: witness their several Ordinances and Acts of Treason made for that purpose. But the pit they digged for others, they may come to fall into it themselves. These are they, that (like the false Rulers of the Jews) healed our hurt slightly, with sweet words, saying and de∣claring us to be all free-born, and the yeer 1649. the first yeer of Englands freedom: Jer. 6. 14. when there is no freedom to us, other then what shews faces without blush∣ing, like that freedom which perfictious King Zedekiah also in his time promised and proclaimed to the Jews then. Read Jer. 34. 8. and there you shall see what that was, and what judgements the Lord pronounced against him and his Great ones for the same; which afterwards came to pass, and were
executed upon Zedekiah and his Princes, as you may read in the 39 Chapter of Jeremiah. And do these false perfidious men of our times think to escape, because they have stopt the Officers mouthes? No, we'll warrant them. These are they, that are waxen fat and shining, they overpass the deeds of the wicked: they executed no judgement, no, not the judgement of the fatherless. Yet they prosper'd, though they executed no judgement for the poor. Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Jer. 5. 26, 27, 28, 29. These are they that devised wicked counsel in this city, which said, It is not near: let us build houses, (besides many built to their hand:) this city is the caldron, and we be the flesh. But let them take a little pains to read the 11 Chapter of Ezekiel, from the beginning to vers. 13. and then tell us what they think of it. These are they that kept their hypocritical monthly Mock∣fasts, as did the false Jews aforesaid, (whose steps they have trod in, as one would trace a Hare in snow. Read Ezek. 7. 5. to the end of that Chapter; and tell us also what you think of it. But that true fast which the Lord of hosts hath chosen, Isai. 58. 6, 7. they could not like of: they were deaf to that fast; and so are their successors. These are they that sate guarded with Souldiers at the Commonwealths charge; whereas in truth, and of right, they ought to have had no other Guards allowed them but Justice and Righteousness, which would have been a Safe∣guard, a Robe and a Crown unto them, as it was to upright Job, if they had acted accordingly. Therefore Tyrants and Oppressors have need of strong Guards, they know. These are they that by their own arbitrary wills, without the free consent of the people first had and obtained, Resolved upon the Question, and made an Act to sit three yeers longer; which in all would have been Fourteen yeers; and by the same Law, would not no doubt have resolved further upon the Question to have sitten three hundred yeers longer, if they
had lived, and the world continued so long. Wot ye not the reason why? But their Servants took an order with them: but who may now say unto them, What do ye? These Rehoboams little fingers have been heavier upon us then the late Kings loyns. Keepers of our Liberties. These were they, that, under a pretence of keeping our Liberties for us, kept them from us: and when we spake a∣gainst them for it, then did they commit us to one Preroga∣tive-prison or other, till they pack'd Juries, and pick'd Judges to hang us all: And when the honest Juries could finde no just cause to condemn us, then by their arbitrary wills endea∣voured to murther us, by perpetual imprisonment, (which is worse then death.) And is not this in fashion still? Innumerable Close Committees. These were they, that, under a pretence of redressing our grievances, aggravated them above measure, by tedious de∣lays, and endless attendance upon them, with charges and expences insupportable: which many honest men can wit∣ness. Ask but the inhabitants of the Isle of Axholm, and they shall tell you as sad a story as any as in England: nor yet can finde justice from any other. Rebellious Sauls, and mercenary Officers of the Army. These are they, that, instead of obeying the commandment of the Lord of hosts, have turned to the prey, and sought Kingly Houses, Mannors, Lands, and large Possessions, with high Ti∣tles of Honour for themselves; wholly neglecting the ho∣nour of Jesus Christ, and the good of his oppressed people; and suffered the old Parliament to cheat the poor common Souldiers with desperate Debenters, which they were since forced to sell for 2 s. per li. to those that knew the Plot, and lay upon the lurch and catch. These are they that sold our poor brethren the Scots (if not English) for silver, (and the needy for a pair of shooes, for slaves) at 6 d. or 8 d. a man; else there's lyers. Amos 2. 6. We wish them read 2 Chron. 28. 8, 9, 10, 11. and consider it. O Lord, thou hast ordained them for judgement; and O mighty
God, thou hast established them for correction: wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously? and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then he? Hab. 1. 12, 13. The best of them is as a bryer, and the most upright sharper then a thorne-hedge, Mic. 7. 4. These are they, joyntly and severally, that eat our flesh, and fley our skin from off us, and they break our bones, and chop them to peices, as for the pot, and as flesh within the Cauldron, Mic. 3. 1, 2, 3. These are they, that Simeon and Levi-like, are all brethren in evil, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. Cursed be their wrath, for it is cruel: the Lord divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Amen. Gen. 49. 5, 6. What will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? Isa. 10. 3. Ye shall have no more of our help, we promise you. And now we shall hear the Great ones and Rich men whet their tongues at this, and say, It would be a wise Par∣liament, that should consist of none but Farmers, Shep∣herds, Herds-men, Labourers in the field, Brick-makers, Mechanicks, and such-like fellows and fools, that understand nothing of such matters. The rich man (saith Solomon) is wise in his own conceit, but the poor (which they account fools) that hath understanding could search out the Ks. might they have liberty to do it, Prov. 28. 11. And this is the cause why they use all their craft to keep us out of such elections. Had these men lived in those daies, (no doubt) they would have condemned the wisdom of God, in chusing Mo∣ses and David, which were Shepherds, for such imployments; and the Prophets which were Herds-men, and inferiour men in respect of the Grandees of those times: and the wisdom of Christ, for chusing such for poor fisher-men, and despised ones, to preach the Gospel, before the great Rabbies and Doctors of those dayes. But let them remember, that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called. For God hath chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen; yea, and things that are not, to bring to nought things that are. That no flesh should glory in his presence: that according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28, 29, 31. Therefore ye despised ones, stand fast to your tackling, for set∣ting up the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and delivering the oppres∣sed from the hand of all their oppressors, Jer. 21. 11, 12. Then shall there be no more leading into captivity, nor such complaining in our streets: but our sorrows have An End.
