p1682 99832754 37228
A DESCRIPTION OF THE VENEREAL DISEASE: DECLARING THE CAUSES, SIGNS, EFFECTS, And CURE thereof. With a DISCOURSE of the most Wonderful ANTIVENEREAL PILL. Prepared onely by CHARLES PETER, Chyrurgeon, and Practitioner in Physick. And are to be sold at his House in St. Mar∣tins-lane, near Long-acre, over against the Sign of the Castle. LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1678.
READER, I Have, for the Common Good, made pub∣lick my Antiveneral Pill. I doubt not but some will cavil at my Endeavours, and those prehaps some of my own Profession; though themselves either cannot, or will not, advantage the Good of the Publick. The great number of People which I have seen in many Parts of this Kingdom to have perish∣ed (for want of Help) by the Venereal Dis∣ease, hath occasioned me to unfold to the World what I never did intend to do, as touching the Disease: For the confidence of many Persons, that pretend to cure this Di∣stemper, and the ignorance of those Persons that adventure their Lives into the Hands of such Impostors, who, without fear of God, or compassion to Mankind, promise Cure (let the Distemper be never so bad) taking Mo∣ney in hand, and giving many ineffectual Doses, either destroy the Patient, or make him worse, perhaps throw him into a dange∣rous Salivation, and so to his Grave. The which while I have often deplored, I thought my selfe bound in Conscience to inform the People of a nearer and a better way of Cu∣ring
than is too commonly practised by many bold Ʋndertakers. What Mischiefs many illiterate Persons have caus'd, by their ill-prepared Doses, many miserable Patients can witness, (the greater the shame) while we live in a Kingdom so well Furnished with Learned Physicians and Skilful Chyrurge∣ons, whose Knowledge in Anatomy, and daily Experience, make them the onely Per∣sons capable of undertaking so dangerous a Malady. A Disease not to be trifled with: For, although generally we find in our Week∣ly Bills of Mortality, that Consumption is intituled the greatest Executioner of Deaths Commands; yet I am of the opinion, that the Venereal Distemper is the greater De∣stroyer of Mankind. I will therefore give thee an Account of the Nature of this Hydra, with a Discourse of my Pill, which, I assure thee, is the choicest Remedy that can be used in all Effects of the Venereal Distemper. COncerning the Original of the Venereal Dis∣ease, Authours are various, and differ much in the Name of it: The Italians call it Morbus Gallicus; the French call it Scabiem Hi∣spanicam, and Morbum Italicum; in Spain they call it Morbum Neopolitanum; and several other Names it has, which for brevity I do omit. The French say, that the Italians first brought it among them;
the Spaniards they lay it on the French; and both Italians and French accuse the Spaniard, and say, that Columbus brought home his Men infected with it from the Indies. But I think it matters not from whence it came, or what 'tis called, since 'tis known we have it in England as much as any where: The Common People here call it The French Pox; and I shall treat of it by the Name of Lues Venerea, un∣der which Name I shall comprehend the Grand Pox; and the Gonorrhaea, and all Effects of either of them. The Causes of the Lues Venerea. THE Causes of this Distemper are twofold: The first of an occult Quality, being as a Scourge laid on Mankind (by the Almighty) to re∣strain our too wanton Lusts; the other is by an im∣pure touch or contagion, especially in copulation; a Man receiving of an infected vapour or filthy sanies into the pores of the skin, or into the Ʋrethra (which is the Conduit of the Yard) in the time of copulation, as well before the ejecting of the seed, as after; the Woman having either a Gonorrhaea, or else an Ʋlcer▪ from the latter of which I have known to proceed so virulent an ichorous matter, that it hath penetrated the Yard immediately, and caused an Ʋlcer. There are several other ways by which this Dis∣ease may be gotten; as by Sodomy, &c. I have known some to get it by kissing: for if either party have an Ʋlcer in the Throat, or in the Mouth, from which a slimie juyce proceeding, and the lips being moistned thereby, may very easily infect. Children are very subject to be infected this way: for, by reason the pores of their skin being open and apt to attract, they are soon injur'd by an unwholesom kiss.
The venom is very, often communicated from Nur∣ses to Children, and as often Nurses are infected by Children; therefore Parents ought to be careful in chusing Nurses, and Nurses ought to take heed whose Children they suckle; for a very small matter is able to infect either, and many Families have been un∣done by receiving the Distemper this way. 'Tis dan∣gerous to sweat in a Bed with one that has the Pox, or to sit over a Close-stool where the excrements of a pockie person are. For drinking with them, 'tis not dangerous, unless their Mouths being ulcerated, they leave a pockie slime on the edges of the Cup; nor can their breaths infect, I am sure, though some are of a contrary opinion. There is a great deal of va∣riety in Bodies, some being far more easily infected than others, as sanguine and phlegmatick persons; but are more easily cured than cholerick or melancholy persons are: as for example, I have known several Men to be concerned with one Woman, one soon after the other, and some to come off without being hurt, and the others dangerously pepper'd. The Signs of the Lues Venerea. THe signs of this Distemper are various, accord∣ing to the strength and constitution of the Pati∣ent. The general signs are these; viz. A great debi∣lity of the whole Body, as if wearied by much labour, stiffness of all the Joynts, espeecially about the Hips and Thighs, great pulsation of the Arteries, a shoot∣ing pain in the Groins, pain in the Cod, itching about the root of the Yard, sherpness of Ʋrine, a pricking pain in erection, a flowing of yellow sanies from the Yard, and oft-times pain in the Back, and in the Head. These are the infallible signs of a Gonorrhaea, some of
them hapning to one, and some to another; and I have known all of them to happen to one person, and at one time. Sometimes Caruncles do stop up the Ʋrethra, sometimes Buboes do arise in the Groins, which if once suppurate and opened handsomly, the Cure is performed with much ease; but if they are drove back into the body, they make the Distemper more inveterate, seise the Liver, and confirm a Pox. Some persons immediately after the receiving of the Infection are taken with a giddiness in the Head, and most terrible pains in the Eyes and Ears, and break out with small red pimples, which presently return into the Body, and a while after break out with foul scabs, some moist and spreading, though generally they are dry and hard, and very nearly represent the cup of an Acorn, both in shape and colour: Some have Ʋlcers upon the head of the Yard, and upon the Fore-skin; some are troubled with Warts upon the Yard, and a∣bout the Fundament: These are certain symptoms of the Pox.—Note, That this Distemper doth vary much in its times, many times shewing it self in one, two, or three days, sometimes lying hid a month, two, or three, and sometimes a year, or more; but it lieth not idle, for the longer it lies hid, the more inveterate it proves when once it appears; and oft-times disguised under another name, it tyranniseth in the Body, to the de∣struction of the Patient. I therefore advise all per∣sons, That so soon as they find themselves touched with this venomous dart, they straightway repair to such persons as are able to help them. The Effects of the Lues Venerea. TO demonstrate all the effects of this raging Di∣stemper, would take me up much time; there∣fore
as briefly as possible, I will acquaint thee how great a Tyrant this Disease is to those People who ei∣ther scorn to own they have it, or those who being ashamed to confess their condition, rather venture to undergo it, than wisely to seek for help. I have known some so sordidly foolish, that having had Ʋlcers on the Head of the Yard, have so long slighted the Dis∣ease, until their Yards have been mortified even to the Belly, upon which ensued immediate death; and some escaping with their lives, have lost all the Member. Others I have known to be almost eaten up with this Disease, before they have known so much as the name of their Malady. I have seen some that have been taken with a violent pain in the Head, and in all the Joynts, have fallen into a Fever, and died mad. Some have sharp and continual pains in all the Joynts, especially in the Shoulders and Shins, and Nodes affix∣ed to the Bones in many parts of the Body, insomuch that the very Bones become rotten; for this Humour is so penetrating, that it will creep between the Bone and the Flesh, and consume both. Some have the Yard so stopped with Caruncles, that they cannot make Water: Some have the Ʋvula and the Palat of the Mouth eaten away by Ʋlcers; and many you see lose their Noses by this violent Disease. Some have the Tip of the Nose and Nostrils eaten away; some lose their Eyes, and many their Hearing, and some their Mouths drawn awry: And indeed I could quote multitudes of Examples of the fury of it. Oh, how intolerable are the pains that many poor wretches endure by this Distemper, especially in the night, at which time it most boldly walks its Rounds to afflict poor Mortals! For indeed all Pains are worse in the night than in the day, by reason that the exercising of the Body doth divert the pain in the
day, but the warmness of the Bed at night doth stir up the malignity; and the very thoughts of the Pati∣ent in the night being fixed on the object of pain, doth make the misery more intolerable. Many years have some undergone the tyranny of this Distemper, till at last, it having enervated all the parts of the Body, and consumed the Flesh to the Bones, it surrenders them to the Grave; whom perhaps, had they but used such Medicines as had been proper in such cases, they might soon have eradicated the venom out of their Bodies: But, as I have said before, 'tis not a few, but many thousands, that have perished for want of such noble Medicines as have force to overcome the ma∣lignity of this Disease. How many Consumptions, Catarhs, Asthmaes, and innumerable more Diseases, proceed from nothing else but this Fountain? I tell thee, Reader, 'tis this that is the domineering Distemper of our Age, though people are of opinion that the Scurvie is more prevailing, which indeed is a very destructive Malady, incident to most Men, especially to those that eat over-much Flesh, or lead sedentary Lives, and to Sea-men in long Voyages: for the re∣liques of the Lues Venerea doth many times convert into the Scurvie and Dropsie, and not seldom into the Gout. And I pray observe this, That whereever any Distemper happens to be complicated with the Vene∣real Disease, or any Relique of it, it always proves very stubborn, and will not yield to ordinary Means, and indeed cannot be perfectly cured without the use of good Antivenereal Medicines. Concerning the Cure of the Lues Venerea. IT may be expected I should be large on this sub∣ject, since 'tis so generally known, that I have
had so great an experience of it; but should I relate the many Observations I have made of this Distemper, they would fill a Volume: But, Reader, since per∣haps thou art a stranger to my Name, I shall ac∣quaint thee with some few particulars, that thou mayst know I am no Youngster at the Cure of this Disease. Among the great number of those that pre∣tend to the Cure of this Distemper, I have found very few that could give any rational Account of it, most of them following the Methods of ancient Au∣thors, which in former Ages undoubtedly were very knowing in their way; but the Disease is so much al∣tered in this our Age, that he which depends on for∣mer prescriptions will find his Medicines invalid. There have been used, and still are, many ways for the curing of this Malady: Some use Fumigations; some Salivation, either by Medicines given inwardly, or by Ʋnction outwardly: Some use Bathing and Sweating; others work by Diet, and others by pur∣ging; some make Issues in many parts of the Body, to evacuate the offending Humour. The way by Fu∣migations I am against, and the use of them is now out of doors, being found to be very dangerous. I cannot approve of Salivation, for many Reasons; for whoever he be that undergoes a Salivation (which ought to continue at least twenty one days) must have the patience of Job, or else he will never endure the torture that attends it; and I am of the opinion, that if Cases were equally balanced, you would find as many to be destroyed by Salivating, as ever were re∣lieved by it: as for example, 'Tis certain, that no Salivation can be raised but by Mercurial Medicines, which I have often seen many to lament the rash use of; for by overcharging the Tonsillae (which are the glandulous Bodies through which the Spittle cometh)
and Amygdales (commonly called the Almonds of the Ears) with the virulent Matter which they strive to evacuate by spitting, I have often known such In∣flammations, and after them Ʋlcerations to happen, that the patient has been near choaked, and the acri∣mony of the Humor lodged among the parts, until not onely it have eaten away the Ʋvula, but fouled the palat of the Mouth, and oftentimes the bones of the nose; and I am certain, that most of those bridg-fallen Noses that we daily see, are occasioned by Sa∣livation. But suppose the patient to escape all these Accidents, do but consider, how this way fouls the Teeth, beyond the help of any Medicine to cleanse again; and many times it leaves a stinking Breath, or perhaps it only leaves them a pain in their Joynts. Methinks, these things considered, People should not easily be persuaded to this sort of Cure, especially if they did but know what Spasmaes (or Convulsions of the Nerves) have been occasioned by it: I have seen Mouths drawn awry, and squinting caused by it; Limbs contracted, and innumerable more mischiefs to arise from it: and I have been more troubled to help those Accidents that have hapned by reason of Sali∣vation, than ever I was to cure the Distemper it self. Sweating I approve of, and likewise of Bathing; for being used in due time and place, they are very be∣neficial: for they attenuate the Humours, make the Body lively, and help to evacuate the Matter; espe∣cially if any viscous Matter have possessed the Joynts, they by their moderate heat do help to discuss it. As for Issues, they serve well enough to attract and discharge the Humour, therefore very proper where the Eyes are affected, or in any distillation of the Humour, or in a Catarrh or Asthma, they help much; but have no power of themselves to overcome the
Malignity. But of all ways imaginable, there is none like Diet and Purging, which if rightly prepared, and carefully used, do infallibly eradicate the Distemper. I can by many years experience say, That Purging is the most exeellent way of Curing; I mean, purging with such noble Medicines as have the power to cor∣rect the Malignity of so virulent a Disease: for 'tis not every of those common Purgers that have power to overcome the Malignity; but such Specificks which not onely purge the offending Humour, but by their admirable Qualities cleanse the Blood, fortifie the Heart, Liver, and Brain, and clearly extirpate the Disease from the Body. And indeed, the onely Medi∣cine that ever I have found prevalent in these Cases, is my Antivenereal Pills, which work so safely and so surely, that I never knew them fail, if taken carefully. I never use any other Medicine in all manner of Claps; and I could quote vast numbers of People that have been cured by them, to my great pleasure and profit (but Silence in such cases is and always shall be my resolution). In the Pox there have been such strange Cures wrought by this Pill, that have made many of my own Profession to admire the Vertues of it. Wherefore since it hath pleased God to grant me the knowledge of so wonderful a Medicine, I could not rest satisfied in my mind until I published it for the good of the World. And now, Reader, pray be so charitable in thy Opinion of me, as not to judge me guilty of encouraging of Lust, by my acquaint∣ing the World with the Effects of it, and the way to get out of the Labyrinth which it generally leaves Men in; neither think that I desire more to gain by my Labours, than to do good to my Country: Quia, Nos non nobis nati sumus.
The ANTIVENEREAL PILL. THese Pills are of most wonderful Vertue; they work by Stool and Urine, and gently move Sweat: They work most by Urine; for 'tis but ra∣tional the Distemper should be cast out the same way it was received. They work by Stool pleasantly, without any gripings or tortions of the Guts. They do most admirably correct the virulency, and take away the sharpness of Urine, in three or four times taking; and I assure thee, upon the Faith of a Chri∣stian, that I have many times cured a fresh Clap with eight or nine Doses of them, and sometimes with fewer, and that safely, without any relapse, and with∣out any use of Restringent Medicines; (for 'tis a com∣mon trick among rash Practitioners, that having given half a dozen or more Purges, they presently admini∣ster Restringents, and so stop the Humour, which will not lie still, but returning into the Body, seises the Li∣ver, corrupts the whole mass of Blood, and conse∣quently confirms a Pox in the Body, perhaps to the utter ruine of the Patient. These Pills are balsa∣mick, as well as cathartick, and therefore do all the Intentions of Curing. They are to be taken two, three, or four at a time, still observing to alter the Dose, ac∣cording to the strength of the Patient. Two may be taken by any one for the first Dose; and if they do not work by Stool seven or eight times, then increase the Dose the next day. They ought to be taken two days together, and the Party to rest the third, and then to fall to them again; but if the Distemper be inve∣terate, let the Patient continue taking them without intermission; for they will work onely on the offend∣ing
Humour. The best way of taking them is early in the morning, and to lie in Bed and sleep two or three hours after the taking of them. Sometimes I order them to be taken at night, when the party goes to bed; but then the dose must not exceed two, or three at the most. And note, That the party which takes them at night, ought to eat no supper, but early in the morning to drink something that is warm; for they will work by Stool so soon as the party rises. Those who take them in the morning, whether they lie in bed or not after they have took them, they ought in three hours after them to take a draught of warm Ale, Posset-drink, Water-grewel, or Mutton or Veal-broth, which will much help the working of them. Any one may safely go abroad after they have taken them, but it would be better if they keep within till near Noon: at Dinner they may eat heartily of fresh Meats, and drink Wine, provided they exceed not one pint a day; for I have found by experience, that Wine, moderately drank, is beneficial in most Disea∣ses; and I find, that in Claps, or any Distemper where the Ʋrinary passages are affected, Wine helpeth much, especially White wine. This Pill is so safely prepared, that it may be ta∣ken by any person without danger, (as Women with Child, &c.) and the operation of it is so free and easie, that it is pleasant, as well as profitable. It hath no cor∣roding quality, nor doth it cause any unsavoury belch∣ings, as loathsom Boles and Potions do. There is no person but may take it, and go about their Business as if they ailed nothing; nor can any one perceive that the party has taken any thing▪ for it exhilerates all the vital Faculties, it being as much cordial as purgative. It not onely cures safely, pleasantly, and quickly; but 'tis a great preservative against the In∣fection:
A Dose taken immediately after the Act, ei∣ther carrieth away all venom with it, or causeth it forthwith to shew it self, whereby a more speedy Cure is acquired. In a word, I am certain there is no Medicine in the World mor efficacious (in all Ef∣fects of the Foul Disease) than these most excellent Pills are. In all manner of Poxes I have found them most admirable: I have cured people which have been afflicted with all the varieties of the Pox, by these Pills onely: as for example, In an old consumptive Pox, where the parties have been so weakned by continual pains that they could scarce stir, I have ad∣ministred these worthy Pills, which have worked so effectually with correcting the Cause, and evacuating the offending Humour, and by their nutritive quality corroborating the vital parts, they have soon restored the Patients to perfect health. Others whose Privy-parts have been covered with Warts (which is an absolute demonstration that the Distemper hath taken root in the Body) I have given them of these Pills, which have eradicated the Di∣stemper, that the Warts have consumed without any local Applications. I have cured many of large Nodes by the use of these Pills; for they dissolve them, and purge away the dregs of the Disease. These Nodes are caused by the phlegmatick part of the Venom left behind in ill managed Cures: they are very painful Swellings, sometimes on the Shins onely, and many times in many parts of the Body; and the Bones are often fouled by them, if not great care taken. I have met with many rebellious Ʋlcers in the Privy-parts, and in many other parts of the Body, which have resisted the force of many good Medi∣cines
outwardly applied: In all such cases I have used these Pilla, which has so changed the ill habit of the Body of the Patients, that their Sores have easily yielded to the same Medicines, and incarnated hand∣somly, and have been cured without any relapse. Reader, I could relate much more of the Virtues of these excellent Pills: but I suppose, what I have al∣ready said may be satisfactory enough: but if thou art dubious of any thing that thou hast read here, I shall be very willing to satisfie thee in it, and I questi∣on not but to justifie what I have here published to the World. Those to whom Pills are troublesom to swallow; may take them in the pulp of an Apple, a stew'd Prune, a Raisin, or a preserv'd Cherry; or they may put them into a piece of Leaf-Wafer, and take them in a spoonful of Ale; or any other Liquor, as they best like. These Pills are put up in Tin Boxes, and sealed with my Coat of Arms; each Box containing Thirty Pills, and are sold for Four shillings the Box. They are sold at my own House, and the following places. Mr. Thomas Burrell's Book-seller, at the Golden Ball under St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street. And at the Sign of the Printing-Press, in the Piazza on the South-side of the Royal-Exchange. I have in my House most convenient and cleanly Bathes, likewise very good Conveni∣encies of Sweating, by all the several ways used here, or in Foreign Parts.
