p2213a 14994141 103049
AN ACCOUNT OF K. Williams Royal heading OF THE Men of Inniskillin. And of His Victorious March from Dublin to Athlone, With the LATE K. James's Taking, &c. His way to that Place. JUST now an Express is ar∣rived from Our Royal Ma∣ster's Camp, giving an Ac∣count of the Affairs in Ire∣land, as followeth: That the late King James, after his grand Defeat at the Boyne, finding his Affairs in a desperate condition, retired from Dublin, with his Followers, on Wednesday Morning by two a Clock, taking his way directly by the great Road for Athlone, which is some Miles from Dublin, leaving Orders for the Keys of the Castle, and Gates of the City of Dublin, to be deli∣vered upon Summons; which was accordingly performed the next Day to the Duke of Ormond, whome the King sent with Six Hundred Foot, and Three Hun∣dred Dragoons, to take Possession of it, having Orders to release all Protestant Prisoners, and to make a strict search for Mines, &c. Which Orders, His Grace the D. of Ormond, immediately upon his entrance into Dublin, put in Ex∣ecution, but after a very strict search was made in all suspected places throughout the whole City,
there was not the least appearance of a Mine found. The Irish Garrison in Dublin were so fearful, that they clapt up all the Protestant-men into the Chur∣ches, as soon as their King went to the Boyne; but on Wednesday-morning hearing of the Defeat, they discharged them, and scow∣red off, and all the Mischief they did, was to cut the Bell-Ropes, that they might, in some measure, prevent their Friends rejoicing there. As soon as King James left Dub∣lin, taking the Irish Inhabitants with him, our English Friends en∣tred the Popish Houses that were deserted; and thence took Arms that they had left: With which, they went six Miles from the City, to meet the King, being led by Lieut. Gen. Roger Moore. The King on Thursday-night lay encamped in the Park, two Miles from Dublin 3 and early on Saturday-morning his Majesty entred the City; and 'tis hardly to be expressed with what expressions of Joy he was received by the poor Protestants, the Par∣ticulars of which, would contain a whole Sheet. Our Army followed the Irish Rebels to Munster: The King de∣signs to set forward from Dublin towards Athlone, on Monday-mor∣ning. The famed Town of Droghedah, though Garrisoned by Three Thousand Irish Souldiers, finding the Late King's Army was beaten from the very Pass that should co∣ver the Town, on which account they could have little hopes of Re∣lief, capitulated on Friday, The Officers to go out with their Swords only, and the common Souldiers to go home with their Hand in their Pockets, leaving their Arms behind them. His Majesty was pleased to tell the Inniskilling-Men that He had heard a great Character of them, and therefore would do them the Honour to Head them Himself, which accordingly he performed; for aftet they had passed the Foard, He Charged at the Head of them, and they faught like Tygers, du∣ring the whole Action, His Maje∣sty encouraging them by his own Example; and most that were kil∣led were of that Party, they losing above a Hundred Men. The Irish, assisted by the French, fought above Three Hours after their King ran from them to Dub∣len; for after their Ranks were broke at the Foard, the late K. James ran; but they got together in se∣veral Bodies, and made a small Re∣sistance; and the French of the Irish Army behaved themselves extreme∣ly well, forming themselves into a Body, so as the Horse could not break in on them, till some Field-Pieces were brought to bear on them, which put them to the Rout also. Yours T. Pierson. London, Printed for T. Church, near Smithfield, 1690.
